
Subject : Biology 
Class : X (CBSE )
 
CONTENSTS
 
 
S.No.
Topics
Page No.
1.
Nutrition
2 - 18
2.
Transportation & Excretion
19 - 36
3.
Respiration
37 - 51
4.
Control and Co-ordination
52 – 68
5.
Reproduction
69 - 91
6.
Heredity & Inheritance
92 - 108
7.
Our Environment
109 - 126
8.
Origin and Evolution of life
127 - 141

 
NUTRITION
1.1
NUTRITION :
“Nutrition” is a process of intake as well as utilization of nutrients by
an organism. It is the process of breakdown of nutrients into smaller
molecules and their absorption. Food provides us nutrition and energy.
It contains different types of nutrients in varying amounts according to
the need of our body.
1.1
(a) Nutrients :
These are the substances required by our body for its growth, repair,
work and maintenance of the body. Different types of nutrients are
carbohydrates, fats, proteins, vitamins, mineral etc. Our  daily energy
need may vary according to our occupation, age, sex and under some
specific conditions.
1.2
MODES OR NUTRITION :
There are several modes of nutrition on the basis of which organisms
are classified as follows :
 
Nutrition
 
 
 
        Autotrophic                                                    
Heterotrophic
       - They are able to synthesize
-                            
They are not able to synthesize
                                                  their own food.
                their own

food.
1.2
(a) Autotrophic :
(Auto = self, trophic = food) It is a mode of nutrition in which
organisms prepare their own food. Inorganic molecules like CO2 and
H2O are converted into organic molecules like carbohydrates in the
presence of sunlight and chlorophyll. e.g. Green plants. Autotrophs are
further categorized. as :
(i) Photoautotroph : Those which utilize sunlight for preparing their
food
(ii) Chemoautotroph : Those which utilize chemical energy for
preparing their food.
1.2
(b) Heterotrophic :
(Hetero = different ; trophic = food) It is a mode of nutrition in which
organisms derive their food fro some other animals or plants. They
cannot prepare their own food e.g. human being. Heterotrophs are
further categorized depending on the nature of food they consume :
(i)  Herbivores : Animals which eat only plants, e.g. Cow, goat etc.
(ii) Carnivores : They feed on flesh of other animals, e.g. Lion,
vulture etc.
(iii) Omnivores : T hey feed on plants and animals both e.g. Dog,
human etc.
(iv) Detritivores : Feed on detritus or dead organic remains, e.g.
Earthworm etc.
(v) Sanguivorous : Feed on blood e.g. Leech, female mosquito etc.
(vi) Frugivorous : Feed on fruits, e.g. Parrot etc.
(vii) Insectivores : Feed on insects, e.g. Bats etc.
1.2
(c) On the Basis of Mode of Feeding Organisms are
Categorised As :
(i) Holozoic : They ingest mostly solid but sometimes liquid food. e.g.,

Amoeba, human etc.
(ii) Saprotrophic : they absorb organic matter from dead and decaying
organisms with the help of their enzymes. e.g., Bacteria, fungi etc.
(iii) Parasitic : They derive their nutrition from other living plants or
animals e.g. Plasmodium round worms etc.
Nutrition can be divided into two
categories on the basis of occurrence
              Nutrition in plants
                                         Nutrition
in animals
1.3
Nutrition in Plants:
•
Plants are autotrophic in nature. They prepare their own food hence
they are called as producers.
•
They contain a green pigment called chlorophyll which can
entrap solar energy which is then converted into chemical energy in the
form of food and the process is called as “Photosynthesis”.
1.3 (a)Photosynthesis :
(i) Definition : The synthesis of organic compounds like glucose from
simple inorganic molecules like CO2 and H2O by the cells of green
plants having chlorophyll in the presence of sunlight is called as
photosynthesis.
(ii) Equitation of photosynthesis : Photosynthesis is a two step
process.
6CO2 + 12H2O
 C6H12O6 + 6O2 + 6H2O
(A) Light reaction : AT, NADPH2 and O2 are produced.
(B) Dark reaction : CO2 & H2O are converted into glucose.
• Photosynthesis essentially requires two things :
1.3 (b) Sunlight :
•
For plants sun the basis source of radiant energy.

•
Plants utilize the light in the visible region of solar spectra
(electromagnetic spectrum) which comes under the range of 390 nm
- 780 nm.
•
Visible region consists of white light which is a mixture of 7 lights
of different wavelengths.
 
 
•
Maximum photosynthesis occurs in red region.
•
There  is minimum photosynthesis in green region because
green parts of plants reflect whole of the green light.
 
 
1.3 (c) Chlorophyll :
These are the green pigments present in chloroplast. They are found in
green leaves in a maximum amount as well as in other green aerial parts
of plant. There are six different types of chlorophyll, they are
chlorophyll a,b,c,d,e and bacteriochlorophyll, amongst them chlorophyll
a and chlorophyll b are the most commonly occurring chlorophylls.
• Besides chlorophyll certain other pigments are also present in plants
like.
(i) Carotenes : Orange in colour e.g. Carrot.
(ii) Xanthophylls : Orange yellow in colour e.g. Maize.
(iii) Phycobilins : Different colour like red, violet e.g. Blue-green
algae, brown algae etc.
1.3(d) Raw Materials of Photosynthesis :
(i) Carbondioxide : Terrestrial plants obtain carbon dioxide from the

atmosphere through the small openings present on leaves called as
stomata. ‘Stomata’ are the small pores present on the surface of leaves.
They help in exchange of gases and water. Stomata opening is guarded
by the presence of guard cells (kidney shaped). Aquatic plants obtain
CO2 dissolved in water through their general body surface so they
perform more photosynthesis than terrestrial plants.
(ii) Water : Plants absorb water from the soil by the process of osmosis.
This water is transported to leaves by a special type of tissue called as
xylem.
• Plants utilize carbon dioxide during photosynthesis, the intensity of
light at which amount of CO2 used during photosynthesis becomes
equal to the amount of  CO2 released during respiration by plants in
called as Compensation point.
• Compensation point occurs at low light intensity that is during
morning and during evening hours.
1.3 (e) Site Photosynthesis :
Site of photosynthesis is different in prokaryotes and eukaryotes.
• In prokaryotes : Photosynthesis occurs in lamellar chromatophores.
• In eukaryotes : Photosynthesis occurs in chloroplast.
• Exception : Fungi ( It lacks chlorophyll so no photosynthesis occurs
here).

• In higher plants chloroplast in the main site of photosynthesis.
• Chloroplast is also called as green plastid.
• Plastid was first observed by Haeckel.
• Plastids are of 3 different types on the basis of pigments present in
them.
(i) Leucoplast : White in colour, found in underground parts, lacks and
coloured pigment. Helps in storage of protein (Aleuroplst), oil
(Elaioplast), starch (Amyloplst)
(ii) Chloroplast : Colour other than green found in aerial parts on the
plants
(iii) Chloroplast : Contain green pigment, called as chlorophyll.
• Chloroplast was discovered by Schimper.
• Number of chloroplasts is variable in different species of plants.
• In lower plants like algae they are 1 or 2 number.
• In higher plants their number varies from 40 -100 per palisade cell or
more.
• Chloroplast also have variable shapes, for example cup shaped, ribbon
shaped etc. in algae while it is discoidal in higher plants.

 
-
• A typical structure of chloroplast is a double membranous structure
having two parts.
(i) Grana : It is a lamellar system consisting of stacks of granum
lamella each bounded by a membranous box called as thylakoid. They

are 40 - 60 per cell. Number of thylakoids per grana is 50 or more
Chlorophyll molecules are found inside the thylakoid membrane where
they trap solar energy in the form of small energy packets called
‘photon’ or ‘quanta’. Grana are interconnected to each other by a
channel called as stroma lamellae or Fret’s channel.
(ii) Stroma : It is a non pigmented proteinaceous matrix in which grana
remain embedded. It contain enzymes for dark reaction.
1.3 (f) Mechanism of Photosynthesis :
         (i) Light reaction :
• It is also called as photochemical process.
• It was discovered by 
 ‘Robert Hill’ therefore it is also called as
Hill’s reaction/
•Site : Grana of chloroplast.
• Raw materials : Light and water.
• Regulation : This process is regulated by chlorophyll molecules.
• It consist of 3 steps :
(A) Photo excitation of chlorophyll molecule : During this process
chlorophyll molecule receives sunlight in the form of small energy
bundles called as photons and become excited to higher energy level.
 
(B) Photolysis : It is also called as photoxidation of water, this takes
place in presence of Mn+2 and Cl- ions.

O2 is liberated as by product and H+ ions are used for reduction of
NADP
2NADP + 4H+ 
 2NADPH2
(C) Photophosphorylation : During this process ATP are produced. It
takes place in quantasomes.
Mg+2 ions and inorganic phosphate is required to convert ADP 
ATP, ADP + iP  
 ATP.
(ii) Dark reaction :
• It is also called as thermo chemical reaction.
• It was discovered by Melvin calving and benson therefore it is also
called as Calving cycle Site = Stroma of chloroplast.
• Raw materials : They require CO2, NADPH2, ATP and Enzymes.
• Regulated by : Light reaction and enzymes.
• It involves three basic steps :
(A) Carboxylation : In this step CO2 is captured by CO2 acceptors like
RUBP (C3 Plants) PET (C4Plants) with the help of carboxylase
enzyme i.e. RUBISCO & PEPCO respectively.
(B) Synthesis : This phase cap true CO2 is assimilated into glucose in
the presence of phosphatase and isomerease enzymes and RUBP is
regenerated back.
(C) Regeneration of RUBP
1.4
FACTORS AFFECTING PHOTOSYNTHESIS :
1.4
(a) Light ;

Normally plants utilize sunlight but marine algae can perform
photosynthesis even in the moon light. Plants can also perform
photosynthesis in the artificial lights.
• Highest rate of photosynthesis : Red light
• Minimum photosynthesis : Green light
• Very high light intensity can cause reduction in the rate of
photosynthesis by causing
(i) Decrease in transpiration rate
(ii) Denaturation of chlorophyll molecule
1.4
(b) Temperature :
Optimum range = 250 C to 300 C
It ranges from 100 - 400 C
In some forms like algae of hot spring 
 600 - 700  is normal
1.4
(c) Carbon dioxide :
It is the first limiting factor 0.03 - 0.1% is present in the atmosphere
concentration of CO2  rate of photosynthesis.
above 0.9% 
between 0.1 to 0.9%, it is constant and it is called as saturation point.
1.4
(d) Oxygen :
O2 acts as competitive inhibitor of CO2. Over concentration of O2 stops
photosynthesis.
1.4
(e) Chlorophyll :
Chlorophyll content is directly proportional to rate of photosynthesis.
No photosynthesis occurs in etiolated cells, In variegated leaves it
occurs only at places where chlorophyll is present.
1.5
SIGNIFICANCE OF PHOTOSYNTHESIS :
Photosynthesis is a boon to the nature and to the human beings. It has

following significance :
(i) Production of food material
(ii) Atmospheric control and purification of air.

DAILY PRACTIVE PROBMES # 1
OBJECTIVE QUESTION
1.
The raw materials for photosynthesis are
(A) CO2 & O21
(B) sunlight and CO2
(C) water and
chlorophyll
(D) CO2 and water.
2.
Most of the photosynthesis (80%) which takes place on this earth is
carried out by
(A) green plants on land
(B) algae present in fresh water
(C) algae found in ocean
(D) algae present in ocean and fresh
water sources.
3.
Which of the following ahs no digestive enzyme ?
(A) Saliva
(B) Bile
(C) Gastric juice
(D)
Intestinal juice
4.
Plants are green in colour because
(A) they absorb green light only
(B) they reflect green light
(C) they absorb green light but reflect all other lights
(D) none of the
above are correct.
5.
Full  name of N ADP is
(A) Nicotinamide dinucleotide phosphate
(B) 
Nicotine
adenine dinuceotide phosphate
(C) Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
(D) None of the
above

6.
Wavelength of visible light is
(A) 200 - 400 nm
(B) 400 - 700 nm
(C) 700 - 900
nm
(D) 100 - 200 nm
7.
The presence of sugar in onion leaves can be tested with
(A) iodine
(B) copper sulphate solution
(C) lime water
(D) benedict’s solution
8.
Chemical reaction takes place during dark reaction of photosynthesis is
(A) photolysis
(B) hydrolysis
(C) carbon dioxide is bonded with RUBP
(D) nitrogen
fixation
9.
Dark reaction and light reaction of photosynthesis takes place in
(A) stroma and grana of chloroplast respectively
(B) grana and
stroma of chloroplast respectively
(C) grana only
(D) stroma only
10.
CO2 acceptor during dark reaction of photosynthesis is
(A) RUBP
(B) PEP
(C) NADPH
(D) ATP

SUBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
VERY SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
1.
Define photosynthesis ?
2.
Name the different modes of nutrition and classify them with one
example of each ?
3.
Name the site of light and dark reaction of photosynthesis ?
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
4.
Explain how water and temperature influence the rate of
photosynthesis ?
5.
Describe the structure and role of chloroplast along with a well
labelled diagram ?
6.
Describe the mechanism of photosynthesis ?
7.
Explain the process of ‘Photosynthesis’ in plants. List four factor
which influence this process and describe how each of them affects the
rate of the photosynthesis.                                                                     
[Delhi, 2005]
8.
Explain the following aspects of photosynthesis in plants :
(i) The role of chlorophyll
(ii) Dark reaction
(iii) Calvin - Benson Cycle.

 
NUTRITION
2.1
NUTRITION IN ANIMALS :
•
Animals have highly evolved digestive mechanism that includes
two basic components :
•
Alimentary canal : Long, hollow, tubular structure consisting of
various organs for digestion.
• Digestive glands : They secrete enzymes/hormones which help in
digestion.
•
Digestion in animals consist of following steps :
•
Ingestion
:
The process of intake of food.
•
Digestion 
:
It is the breakdown of large and
complex molecules into simpler, smaller
and soluble forms.
•
Absorption
:
Taking up of the digested food through
intestinal wall to blood.
•
Assimilation
:
In this process absorbed food in taken by
body cells.
•
Egestion
:
The process by which undigested matter is
expelled out.
•
Digestive system is regulated by various hormones secreted by
some endocrine glands.
•
Alimentary canal was first of all developed in the phylum
Platyelminthes but only mouth was present in them.

•
Coiled and well developed alimentary canal was developed in
annelida till mammals.
2.2
NUTRITION IN LOWER ANIMALS :
2.2
(a) Nutrition in Amoeba :
It is a unicellular organism living in water.
• Mode of nutrition of holozoic.
• The process of obtaining food is the phagocytosis (cell eating)
• Steps involved in digestion of amoeba are :
(i) Ingestion : Since it is unicellular so a single cell is responsible for
carrying out all the vital activities. Food is ingested with the help of
pseudopodia. Animal engulfs the food particle lying near it by forming
pseudopodia around it and forming a food vacuole while is considered
at its temporary stomach.
(ii) Digestion : The enzymes from surrounding cytoplasm enter the
food vacuole and break down the food into smaller & soluble forms.
(iii) Absorption : The digested food is now absorbed by cytoplasm by
simple diffusion and then the food vacuole disappear.
(iv) Assimilation : The food absorbed in amoeba is used to obtain
energy from respiration, for its growth and reproduction.
(v) Egestion : Undigested food is thrown out of the cell.

 
2.2
(b) Nutrition is Grasshopper :
• It has a well developed digestive system having an alimentary canal
and digestive glands.
• The various organs of digestive system of grasshopper are
Mouth 
 Oesophagus 
 Crop 
 Gizzard 
 Stomach 
 Ileum 
Colon 
 Rectum.
• Glands associated with it are :
(i) Salivary glands
(ii) Hepatic caeca
• Digestive system of a grasshopper can be divided into three parts.
(i) Foregut
:
mouth to gizzard
(ii) Midgut
:
gizzard to ileum (actual stomach)
(iii)
Hindgut:
stomach to anus.

• The process involves:
(i) Ingestion : If feeds on green leaves so it takes food through its
mouth with the help of it’s forelegs and mouth parts.
(ii)
Digestion:
(A) It starts from the mouth.
(B) A pair of salivary glands secretes saliva and release it into the
mouth through the salivary duct.
(C) Saliva mixed with food and lubricates and soften the food.
(D) Digestion of starch begins here.
(E) This slightly digested food enters into the crop through a food pipe
i.e. esophagus.
(F) Crop stores the food temporarily.
(G) Now the food moves to gizzard. Here it is finally crushed and
masticated an then moves to stomach.             

(H) In stomach hepatic caeca release its secretions in the form of
digestive enzymes, thus the food is then completely digested at this site.
(iii) Absorption : The digested food moves to small intestine (ileum)
and absorbed through its walls.
(iv) Assimilation : Nutrients are assimilated whenever required by the
cells for the fulfillment of the growth, energy and repair of the body.
(v) Egestion : Undigested food is then passed through hindgut (where
H2 O absorbed) and expelled out through anus in the form of elongated
dry faecal pallets.
• The excretory organ of the grasshopper is malphigian tubules present
at the junction of hindgut and midgut.
2.3
NUTRITION IN HUMANS :
•
Humans have highly evolved and complicated digestive
system consisting of an alimentary canal and different types of
digestive glands.
•
Alimentary canal consist of following organs :
2.3 (a) Mouth :
It is small slit through which food is ingested.
2.3 (b) Buccal Cavity :
Mouth opens into a chamber called as buccal cavity. Roof of buccal
cavity is called hard palate. At the floor of this cavity thick muscular
structure is present called tongue. it helps in chewing swallowing,
testing and speaking. Tongue has various types of papilla having taste
buds.
• Jaws present in buccal cavity are provided with four different types of
teeth :
(i) Incisors
:
For cutting
(ii) Canines
:
For tearing

(iii)
Premolars
:
For grinding
(iv) Molars
:
For grinding
• Dental formula of humans :
(A) Milk teeth 
 These are temporary, arise at 6 - 11 month age, 20 in
number
(B) Permanent teeth 
 arise at   6 – 12 years, 32 in number
• Three pairs of salivary glands are found in mouth which release their
secretions into the buccal cavity.
2.3 (C) Oesophagus :
Also called as food pipe. It leads the food from mouth to stomach,
Oesophagus has highly muscular walls, no digestion occurs here.
2.3 (b) Stomach :
It is a ‘J’ shaped bag present on left side of abdomen. It contains several
branched and butular glands present on the inner surface of its wall,
which secret gastric juice.
23 (e) Small Intestine :
It is a coiled and narrow tube having 3 regions : Duodenum , jejunum,
ileum.
• On the inner wall of small intestine numerous finger like projections
are found which are called as villi, they increase the surface area of
absorption.
• Duodenum is proximal part of small intestine receives secretion from
liver and pancreas.
2.3 (f) large Intestine :
Small intestine opens into large intestine from w here the undigested

food material is passed to anus through rectum. It is divided into three
parts:
(i) Caecum
(ii) Colon
(iii) Rectum
2.3 (g) Digestive Glands :
(i) Salivary glands : 3 pairs of salivary glands are found in mouth
cavity. It helps in chemical digestion. They secret at enzyme called
salivary amylase or ptyalin. It helps in digestion of starch.
(ii) Gastric glands : Present in stomach. They secret hydrochloric acid,
protein digesting enzymes and mucus.
(iii) Liver : It is the largest gland, secrets bile into the small intestine.
Bile contains bile juice and bile pigments. Bile is alkaline in nature and
it is temporarily stored in gall bladder and helps in digestion of fats, it
also helps in absorption fats.
(iv) Pancreas: It lies parallel to and below the stomach. It secrets
pancreatic juice into small intestine. Pancreatic juice contains tyrosine
and pancreatic amylase. Besides these 2 enzymes pancreas secretes 2
hormones also i.e. :- insulin and glucagons so it has both exocrine as
well as endocrine functions. Both bile and pancreatic juice are released
into the duodenum by a common duct.

DAILY PRACTICE PROBLESMS # 2
OBJECTIVE QUSTIONS
1.
Compensation point refers to the intensity of light at which
(A) Rate of respiration  = rate of photosynthesis (B) Rate of respiration
> rate of photosynthesis
(C) Rate of respiration < Rate of photosynthesis
(D) None of the
above is correct
2.
Among the following which is a parasitic plant ?
(A) 
Plasmodium (B) 
Cuscuta
(C) 
Amoeba
(D)
Rhizobium
3.
The nutrition in mucor is
(A) parasitic
(B) autotrophic
(C) saprophytic
(D)
holozoic
4.
In amoeba the digestion is intracellular because
(A) amoeba is unicellular
(B) amoeba is multicellular
(C) amoeba is found is pond
(D) amoeba is microscopic animal
5.
Digestion of food in human starts from
(A) duodenum
(B) small intestine
(C) mouth
(D)
large intestine
6.
The digestion of food is completed in the
(A) ileum
(B) duodenum
(C) stomach
(D)
large intestine
7.
The most important function of villi in the small intestine is
(A) to provide strength to the intestine
(B) to provide space for capillaries and lacteals
(C) to provide increased surface area for absorption of digested food
(D) to provide habitat for bacteria
8.
Which of the following sections does not contain enzymes ?
(A) Bile
(B) Pancreatic juice (C) Intestinal juice
(D)
Saliva

9.
Chewing is an example of
(A) chemical digestion (B) mechanical digestion(C) involuntary
action
(D) hydrolysis
10.
The final product of digestion of carbohydrates and proteins are
(A) glycerol and amino acid respectively
(B) glucose and
amino acids respectively
(C) amino acids and glycerol respectively
(D) amino acids and
glucose respectively
SUBEJCTIVE QUESTIONS
VERY SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
1.
Name the different steps involved in digestive process.
2.
Name the excretory organ of grasshopper.
3.
Give the importance of bile during digestion process, also write
from where it is secreted, what is its site of action ?
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
4.
Draw a well labelled diagram of human alimentary canal. Mention the
functions of liver in digestion.
5.
Describe the digestive system of grasshopper with the help of a well
labelled diagram ?
6.
Explain how does the major nutrients in chapatti eaten by you in
your food get digested and finally absorbed by the alimentary canal ?

 
NUTRITION
3.1
INTESTINAL GLANDS :
They secrete intestinal juice and mucus.
3.1 (a) Digestive System :
This system involves following processes :
(i) Ingestion : Intake of food is done through mouth, food is then

chewed and masticated and sent to esophagus through pharynx by
swallowing.
(ii) Digestion : Saliva secreted in buccal cavity starts digestion of starch
into maltose. This partly digested food is then passed to stomach by
esophagus through peristaltic movement. Food is churned in stomach
for about three hours and broken down into smaller pieces. Due to
presence of hydrochloric acid, medium of stomach becomes acidic. In
acidic medium protein digestive enzyme pepsin breaks down proteins
into peptones. Gastric Lipase is also secreted here which partially
breaks down lipids.
• Secretion of gastric juice is stimulated by the sight, smell or thought
of food.
• Now the partly digested food moves to small intestine i.e. in the
duodenum. Duodenum receives the secretion from liver and pancreas
through a common duct they are bile and pancreatic juice, and
alkaline in nature. So the digestion and emulsification of facts occurs
at this place.
• Here in the duodenum fats are emulsified by bile, remaining proteins
are digested by trypsin and starch by pancreatic amylase.
NOTE : Duodenal wall secretes bicarbonate ions which make the
medium alkaline.
• This partially digested food now enters in the ileum where intestinal
juice i.e. “Succus entericus” is secreted. At this place digestion is
completed.
Carbohydrates 
 Glucose
Proteins 
 Amino acids
Fats 
 Fatty acids and glycerol
(iii) Absorption : After digestion molecules are broken down into

simpler water soluble forms now they are to be utilized, so they pass
through the wall of small intestine which contains blood capillaries and
enters into the blood. For absorption of fat lymph capillaries are present
called as lacteals.
NOTE : Wall of small intestine have tiny finger like projections called
villi, they increase the surface area for absorption.
(iv) Assimilation : The process of utilizations of food is called
assimilating. The nutrients dissolved in blood are carried to all parts of
the body where they are utilized.
(A) For building up and replacement of cells.
(B) For obtaining energy. This energy is released by the process of
oxidation during respiration.
(v) Egestion : The undigested food is then collected in large intestine
where water is absorbed and remaining waste is expelled out or egested
through anus.

                   DAILY PRACTICE PROBLEMS # 3
OBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
1.
In amoeba the digestion of food is
(A) 
extracellular
(B) 
intracellular
(C)
intercellular
(D) none of the above
2.
Through mastication of food is essential because
(A) mastication of food makes the teeth stronger
(B) it makes the process of swallowing the food easier
(C) by this process bigger pieces of food are broken down into smaller
pieces.
(D) bigger pieces of food are broken down into smaller pieces and
saliva is properly mixed with it
3.
The wave of contractions that pushes the food through the alimentary
canal is called
(A) peritoneum
(B) peristalsis
(C) cyclosis
(D)
polarisation
4.
In amoeba absorption of the digested nutrients occurs in
(A) 
contractile 
vacuole
(B) 
plasma 
membrane
(C)
cytoplasm
(D) pseudopodia
5.
Coiled and well developed alimentary canal first developed in
(A) Protozoans
(B) Mammals
(C) Arthropods
(D)
Poriferans
6.
Digestion of starch starts from
(A) stomach
(B) intestine
(C) esophagus
(D)
mouth
7.
The path taken by food material after ingestion is represented by

(A) Mouth 
 Pharynx 
 Oesophagus 
 Stomach
(B) Mouth 
 Pharynx 
 Oesophagus 
 Small Intestine
(C) Mouth 
 Oesophagus 
 Stomach 
 Pharynx
(D) Oesophagus 
 Mouth 
 Pharynx 
 Stomach
8.
Teeth involved in cutting of food material are called
(A) 
canines
(B) 
incisors
(B) 
molars
(D)
premolars
9.
Ptyalin enzyme is secreted by
(A) salivary glands
(B) mouth
(C) esophagus
(D)
stomach
10.
Villi are present on
(A) stomach
(B) large intestine
(C) small intestine
(D)
mouth
SUBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
VERY SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTION
1.
What is the product formed during C3 cycle of dark reaction of
photosynthesis ?
2.
Where does the absorption of food takes place ?
3.
Name five different types of glands involved in human digestive
system
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
4.
Explain various digestive glands present in man along with their
secretions & functions.
5.
Explain dark reaction of Photosynthesis.
6.
What is photophosphorylation ? Explain cyclic and monocyclic
photophosophorylation in brief.

7.
What are the various factors that affect photosynthesis explain each of
them in brief ?
8.
(i)  Explain why the rate of photosynthesis in plants is low both at
lower and higher temperatures ?
(ii) Is green light most or least useful in photosynthesis and why ?
(iii) Describe and activity to show that chlorophyll is necessary for
photosynthesis in plants.
[CBSE, 2005]
9.
What is the function of gizzard in grasshopper. Draw a labelled
diagram showing the digestive system of grasshopper ?             
                                                                                                               
              [CBSE, 2005]
10.
What is the importance of the following process occurring during
photosynthesis in plants ?
(i) Emission of electrons from chlorophyll (ii) Photolysis of
water
[CBSE 2004]
11.
What is meant by utilization of food ? Name the digestive gland of
grasshopper.
ANSWERS
DAILY PRACTIVE PROBELSM # 1
Qus.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Ans.
D
D
B
B
C
B
D
C
A
A
DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS # 2
 
Qus.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Ans.
A
B
C
A
C
A
C
A
B
B
DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS # 3
 
Qus.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Ans.
B
D
B
A
C
D
A
B
A
C

 
TRANSPORTATION
 
4.1
INTRODUCTION  :
All living bodies need nutrients and oxygen in every cell of its various
tissues to sustain life. The transport of different material and gases is
essential both in plants and animals. Unicellular organisms e.g. Amoeba
and Paramecium do not require the transport of any material. These are
in direct contact with their surroundings from where they obtain these
nutrients. These substances are distributed in the cytoplasm due to the
streaming movements of cytoplasm called as cyclosis. They exchange
gases from the external environment directly by diffusion due to the
difference in the concentration in and outside their body. In higher
organisms both plants and animals,  digested food, oxygen, hormones,
waste nitrogenous substances etc. are to be carried from one place to the
other. So transportation of materials is essential. It is done through
circulatory system.
4.1 (a) Transportation in Higher Plants :
The higher plants have specialized system for the transportation of
materials inside the body. The transportation of material is carried out
by means of vascular tissues of the plants. The vascular tissues act as
pipes or vessels. Through these vessels or pipes, water, minerals, salts,
food etc. are transported in the plant body. In plants the medium of
transportation is water. Water and food flows through the xylem
(tracheids and vessels are the constituents of xylem) and phloem (sieve
tubes and companion cells) for various metabolic activities. Tracheids
and vessels are nonliving parts of xylem while sieve tubes and
companion cells from the living parts of phloem. The terrestrial (land)

plants absorb water and mineral salts through their roots. The area of
young roots where most of the absorption takes place is the root hair
zone. Root hair are the extensions of the epidermal cells. Root hair
are delicate and do not live more than two days. The root hair have
sticky walls by which they adhere tightly to soil particles. The root hair
absorb water from soil by the process of osmosis but take in mineral
salts by diffusion. The water and mineral salts are transported from the
roots to the leaves, flowers and other parts of the plant. The upward
movement of cell sap (water and minerals) through the xylem is called
“ascent of sap”.
4.1 (b) Translocation :
Phloem Translocates the manufactured food (sugar) or starch from the
leaves to the leaves to the different parts of the plant including the roots.
4.1 (c) Transpiration :
Most of the water absorbed is lost through the aerial parts of the plant
into air by a process called “transpiration”. Two percent of total water
absorbed is used up in various metabolic activities in the plant body.
Transpiration is the loss of water from the living tissues of the aerial
parts of the plant in the form of water vapours. There are three types of
transpiration :
(i)  Cuticular transpiration (through cuticle)
(ii) Lentiular transpiration (through lenticels)
(iii) Stomatal transpiration (through stomata)
• Importance of transpiration :
(A) It controls the rate of absorption of water from the soil.
(B) It is responsible for ascent of sap.
(C) It regulates the temperature of the plant.
(D) Mostly water absorbed by roots is lost by transpiration
without serving any purpose.
The energy spent by the plants in transpiration is wasted. So
transpiration is a necessary evil.
4.1 (d) Differences in Function of Xylem and Phloem :

Xylem
Phloem
(i) Functional xylem ells are dead.
(i)
Functional
phloem cells are alive.
(ii)It carries mineral salts, water and (ii)
An organic
solution of sugars and amino acids is
traces of organic molecules
translocated.
(iii)
The movement is only upward.
(iii)
The movement
can be upward or downward.
4.2
TRANSPIRATION COHENSION THEORY :
The main loss of water is through stomatal transpiration. Turgor
pressure in the mesophyll cells of the leaf forces water outwards
through the cell wall. Water evaporates from the surface of the cells into
the air spaces of the spongy tissues and then passes into the outer
atmosphere through the pores or stomata. The cell sap of mesophyll
cells becomes concentrated by losing water and causes ad drop in turgor
pressure. As a result water is sucked from adjoining mesophyll cells and
ultimately from vascular tissues. This tension is transmitted all the way
down to the unbroken column of water through the stem to the
absorbing parts of the root. The molecules of the water show cohesion
(mutual attraction) and molecules of water and vessel wall show
adhesion (affinity for water). Due to these adhesive and cohesive forces,
water column does not break but pulled upward by the force called as
“transpiration pull”. The whole process  can be compared with a
person (transpiration pull) pulling a bucket full of water (forces on
water column) from a well with a rope (column of water due to
cohesion).
4.3
TRANSPORTAION IN HUMANS :
In humans there is a circulatory system that uses blood or lymph as
carries of materials (fluid exchange medium) and the heart as the
pumping organ to help in circulation. Circulatory system consists of
blood vascular system (blood as carrier) and lymphatic system (lymph

as carrier).
4.3 (a) Blood Vascular System :
The higher multicelluar animals with  higher metabolic rates posses a
well developed blood vascular system. This system helps in the quicker
supply of nutrients and oxygen to the body tissues and also in the rapid
disposal of toxics waste material and carbon dioxide. The blood acts as
the circulatory fluid. Blood vascular system consist of blood, blood
vessels and heart.
(i) Blood : The blood is a specialized kind of living connective tissue
which is made to circulate, by the muscular pumping organ called as the
heart. In adult human beings there is 5.5 to 6 liter of blood. The blood
consists of fluid part, the plasma. The red blood corpuscles (RBSs),
white blood corpuscles (WBCs) and blood platelets are present in the
plasma. The formation of blood is called “Hempieces”.
(ii) Plasma : The plasma consist of water (90% & above)
inorganic substances. In the plasma RBCs, WBCs and blood platelets
float. Inorganic salts (09%) are also present. The organic substances are
glucose, amino acids, proteins, hormones, digested and waste excretory
products. The blood proteins (7%) are fibrinogen, albumin, globulin
and prothrombin.
NOTE : Serum is plasma from which fibrinogen is removed.
(A) Red Blood Corpuscles (RBCs) or Erythrocytes : The number of
RBCs is about 5.5 million in 1 ml of blood. The total number of RBC is
about 30 billion. Each RBC is a biconcave disc-like structure devoid
of nucleus. The mammalian erythrocytes do not possess nuclei,
mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum. The erythrocytes contain
hemoglobin. Hemoglobin consist of globin (protein) and F2+ porphyrin
compels (haeme). 100 ml of blood contains 15 mg of hemoglobin. if the
amount of hemoglobin in blood is less, the person suffers from anemia
The hemoglobin carries oxygen to the different cells of the body and
brings carbon dioxide from the cells. The life span of a RBC is 120
days.
(B) White Blood Corpuscles (WBCs) or Leucocytes : The number of

leucocytes is comparatively fever i.e. one ml of blood contains 5000 -
10000 leucocytes in humans. The total number of WBCs is about 75
millions. The number of leucocytes increases in infections like
pneumonia, blood cancer (Leukemia) etc. These are large in size and
contain nucleus. White blood corpuscles are of two types :
• Granulocytes : In granulocytes the cytoplasm contains granules and
the nucleus is multliobed. Bosophils, Eosinophils and Neutrophils are
three different types of granulocytes.  Eosinophils and neutrophils are
phagocytic (engulf and kill harmful microbes ) in nature and this
process is called as “phagocytosis”. The function of basophils is to
release histamine and Heparin.
• Agranulocytes : Monocytes and lymphocytes are two different types
of agraulocytes. Lymphocytes secrete antibodies which destroy
microbes. The monocytes are phagocytic in nature.
(C) Blood platelets : These are small and without nuclei. Their number
various from 0.15 to 0.45 million in 1ml of blood. Their normal life
span is one week. These help in blood clotting at the site of injury by
liberating thrombosplastin.
4.3 (b) Functions of Blood :
Blood performs the following functions :
• Transpiration of nutrients : The digested and absorbed
nutrients like glucose, amino acids, fatty acids are first transported
to the liver and then to all the tissues for their storage, oxidation
and synthesis of new substance.
• Transportation of respiratory gases : The respiratory gases
(oxygen, carbon-dioxide) are transported by the blood. Oxygen is
transported from the respiratory surface (lung, skin and buccal
cavity) to the tissues and carbon dioxide from the tissues is taken
to the respiratory organ for its removal.
• Transportation of excretory products : Different wastes from
the different parts of the body are collected by the blood and then
taken to the organs (kidneys, lungs, skin and intestine) from where
they are exerted.

• Transportation of hormones : Hormones are produced by
endocrine glands. These hormones have target organs (p lace to
act). These are carried by the plasma of blood and bring about the
coordination in the working of the body.
• Maintenance of pH : the plasma proteins act as buffer system
and maintains required pH of the body tissues.
• Regulation of body temperature : The blood flows in all the
parts of body, so it equalizes the body temperature. It carries heat
from one place to another place in the body.
• Transportation of metabolic intermediates : The blood carries
metabolic intermediates from one tissue to another for further
metabolism. In the muscle cells due to anaerobic respiration lactic
acid is produced. This lactic acid is carried to the liver for further
oxidation.
• Water balance : The blood maintains water balance to constant
level by distributing it uniformly in the body.
• Protection from diseases : The WBCs (eosinophils, neutrophils,
monocyts) engulf the bacteria and other disease causing organisms
by phagocytosis. The lymphocytes produce antibodies to
neutralize the action of toxins produced by pathogens.
• Clotting of blood : Blood forms a clot at the site of injury and
thus prevents the further loss of blood.
• Support : Blood flows under pressure in arteries. Due to this
tissues become stiff as in the case of erection of nipples, clitoris
and penis.
4.3 (c) Blood Clotting :
At the site of injury of the blood vessels, the platelets induce blood
coagulation through the release of thromboplastin (thrombokinase).
Thromboplastin changes prothrombin of blood plasma into thrombin.
Thrombin converts soluble protein fibrinogen to insoluble fibrin. Fibrin
forms a network which entangles RBCs and blood platelets to form plug
or clot over the inured area. Blood clotting is usually completed within
2-3 minutes.
Injured tissue + Blodd platelets                                           Thromboplastin released

Prothrombin                                                   Thrombin
Fibrnogen                                                        Fibrin
(soluble)                                                         (Insoluble )
Fibrin +Red blood corpuscles                                      Clot of blood
4.3 (d) Blood Groups :
Land Steiner discovered that blood of different individual did not
match each other but there were biochemical differences. He discovered
Antigens A and B and blood groups (ABO systems). Antigen
(agglutinogen) is a glycoprotein present on RBCs. For each antigen
there is a corresponding antibody. Thus there are two antibodies
(agglutinin) a and b occurring in the blood plasma. There are four types
of blood groups depending on the presence or absence of these antigens.
Table : Blood Group : Antigen and Antibody
Body
Group
Antigen
present on
RBCs
Antbody in
plasma
A
A
b
B
B
a
AB
AB
None
O
None
a,b,
Blood is a life saving fluid. It is often needed during accident and
operation. The transfusion of blood is only done when blood group is
known. These groups are A,B,AB and O. Blood of O group is a
universal donor i.e. it an donate blood to any group (a, AB, B and O)
but it can receive blood from O blood group. A B group is universal
recipient (receiver). It an receive blood from any group (A, B, AB, O)
but it can donate to AB group only.
 

 
4.3 (e) Blood Transfusion :
The transfusion of blood from a healthy person to a patient suffering
from blood loss due to injury or surgical operation is called a “blood
transfusion”. For this all major hospitals have blood banks where
blood is collected from voluntary and professional donors. Before
preservation the blood is tested for its blood group and Rh factor.
Though theoretically a patient may be able to receive blood of two or
more types, it is always advisable to have the donor blood of the same
group as that of the recipient. Rather the blood of donor is always
crossmatched 
before 
transfusion 
to 
exclude 
any 
change 
of
incompatibility. When blood from a donor is added is added to blood of
the recipient, it is necessary to avoid bringing together corresponding
antigen and antibody. This causes clumping of RBCs. Thus antigen A in
RBCs of group A individuals reacts with antibodies of plasma of group
B individuals. This phenomenon is called “agglutination”.
 
Table Human blood groups and transfusion
Blood
group of
donor
Blood group of recipient
O
O
A
B
AB




A
x

X

B
x
X


AB
x
X
x

 Compatible
x
Incompatible
Rh factor (in blood) can be genetically determined. Most of the people

(more than 85%) are Rh positive (Rh+) while a few are Rh negative (Rh-
). Both people lead normal life. If an Rh-  woman marries with an Rh+
man then Its pregnancy is normal but in 2nd pregnancy the mother with
Rh- blood may lose the baby due to incompatibility of Rh factor. By
new techniques and procedures now the child can be saved.

DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLES # 4
OBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
1.
Osmosis is the movement of :
(A) solute particles from higher concentration to lower concentration
(B) solvent particles from higher water potential to lower
water potential through a semi permeable membrane
(C) solute particles from higher concentration to lower concentration
through a semipermeable membrane
(D) solvent particles  from lower water potential to higher water
potential.
2.
The ultimate cause for the movement of water against the gravity in a
tree is
(A) 
osmosis
(B) 
transpiration
(C)
imbibitions
(D) photosynthesis
3.
Which one of the following is connected with transport of water in
plants ?
(A) Phloem
(B) Xylem
(C) Epidermis
(D)
Cambium
4.
Which of the following contributes most to transport of water from the
ground to the leaves of a tall tree ?
(A) Breakdown of ATP
(B) Capillary rise of water is xylem
(C) Cohesion of water and transpiration pull
(D) Root
pressure.
5.
The process of transpiration in plants helps in
(A) opening of stomata
(B) absorption of CO2 from

atmosphere
(C) upward conduction of water and minerals
(D) absorption of
O2 from atmosphere
6.
Opening and closing of stomata is due to
(A) pressure of gases inside the leaves
(B) changes of turgor
pressure in guard cells
(C) effect of hormones
(D) their genetic constitution
7.
The carbohydrates synthesized in the leaves are transported
through sieve tubes most commonly in the form of
(A) 
glucose
(B) 
starch
(C) 
sucrose
(D)
cellulose
8.
In a closed circulatory system, blood is completely enclosed with in
(A) 
sinuses
(B) 
vessels
(C) 
heart
(D)
skeleton
9.
An artery is a vessel that carries blood
(A) with high concentration of oxygen
(B) with high
concentration of CO2
(C) away from the heart
(D) both A & C
10.
Values are found in veins to check the backflow of blood flowing
under
(A) 
low 
pressure
(B) 
high 
pressure
(C) 
no
pressure
(D) atmospheric pressure.

SUBEJCTIVE QUESTIONS
FILL IN THE BLANKS :
(i) .......... is the flow of water molecules from the region of
higher water potential to the region of lower water potential through a
semipermeable membrane.
(ii) The osmotic entry of water into a cell is called ......
(iii)
Other name for blood platelets is .....
(iv) The process of production of erythrocytes is known as ..........
(v) Heart is protected by a covering known as ......
VERY SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
1.
Explain the importance of transportation.
2.
Distinguish between diffusion and osmosis.
3.
How does blood clot ?
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
4.
Explain the composition of blood. Also give functions of all it’s
components.
5.
Explain various components of xylem and phloem.
6.
Comment upon :
(i) Translocation in plants
(ii)
Xylem
(iii)
Phloem
(iv)
Excretion in plants
7.
What is clotting of blood’ ? Write a flow chart showing major events

taking place in clotting of blood.             
[CBSE, Delhi 2005]
8.
Name the constituents of blood. Why are white blood corpuscles called
‘soldiers of the body ?
[CBSE, Delhi 2005]
9.
Draw a diagram of human heart and label the following on
it
[CBSE, Delhi 2005]
(i) Aorta
(ii) Pulmonary trunk
(iii) Superior vena
cava
(iv) Coronary arteries
10.
(a) List any four blood groups found in human beings.
[CBSE, 2005]
(b) People of which blood group can
(i) donate blood to all groups ?
(ii) receive blood from all
groups ?
11.
List two vital functions of the human kidney. Draw a labelled diagram
of an artificial kidney
[CBSE, 2005]

 
TRANSPORTATION
5.1
STRUCTURE OF HEART
 

 
• Heart is a hollow muscular organ that lies obliquely in the
thoracic region in a cavity between the two lungs that is pericardial
cavity. It is lined by 2 layers outer and inner pericardial membranes.
These are filled with a fluid called “pericardial fluid”. It protects
the heart from shock and injury.
•
Heart is made up of 4 chambers : upper 2 chambers are
auricles and the lower 2 chambers are ventricles. Auricles are the
receiving chambers and ventricles are the pumping chambers. Walls
of ventricles are thicker as they have to pump the blood.
•
Partition between right and left auricle is called
“interauricular septum” and between right and left ventricles is
“inter ventricular septum”.
•
Four pulmonary veins enter into left auricle, two from each
lung bring oxygenated blood. There is one auriculoventricular
aperture with a bicuspid or mitral valve in left auricles which opens

into left ventricle.
•
Left ventricle has aortic valve having 3 semilunar cusps for
large artery i.e. dorsal aorta which takes the oxygenated blood to all
body parts.
• 
Right auricle has openings for superior venacava that
brings deoxygenated blood from head, neck and upper limbs,
inferior venacava receives deoxygenated blood from rest of the
body and lower limbs. Blood enters into right ventricle through
tricuspid valve. A coronary sinus that drains venous blood from
heart muscles.
•
Right ventricle has pulmonary valve having 3 semilunar
cusps for pulmonary artery carrying deoxygenated blood to lungs.
•
The series of events which occur during one heart beat is
called as cardiac cycle.
•
NOTE : During foetal condition a flap valve called
“foramen ovale” is present at interauricular septum having a
depression called as fossa ovalis. If it remains after birth it results “a
hole in the heart”.
5.1
(a) Blood Pressure :
It is the pressure of the flow of blood in the aorta and its man arteries.
The blood pressure varies according to the contraction and relaxation of
the heart. In the condition of contraction or systolic phase (Lubb sound)
it is about 120 mm of Hg. This is called “systolic pressure”. In the
relaxation or diastolic phase (Dub sound) it is about 80 mm of Hg and is
called “diastolic pressure”. The normal blood pressure of man (20
years) is 120/80. Fats and anxiety increase the blood pressure, the
maximum normal blood pressure should into exceed 150 in males and
140 
in 
females. 
The 
blood 
pressure 
is 
measured 
by
“sphygmomanometer”.
5.1 (b) Detection of Normalcy of Heart Beat :

The muscle fibres of heart are specialized at certain parts generate tiny
electrical currents which cause the normal heart heats. The
“electrocardiograph” (E.C.G.) is the device to record these electrical
changes. Electrocardiogram is a record of electrical behaviour of heart
and remains constant in a normal man. Doctors use the E.C.G. for
detection of various heart diseases. Sometimes the sinoatrial node (SA
node or pacemaker) gets damaged and fails to generate cardiac impulses
at normal rate it becomes abnormally slow and irregular and ventricles
fail to pump the required  amount of blood. It can be corrected by the
surgical grafting of an artificial pacemaker instrument in the chest of
the patient. This instrument stimulates the heart electrically at regular
intervals to maintain the beats.
 
5.2
LYMPHATIC SYSTEM :
The lymphatic system comprises the lymph, lymphatic capillaries
(simply lymphatic), lymphatic vessels and nodes. Lymph severs as the
middle man between the blood and organ for exchange of any material.
The lymph is the tissue fluid present in the intercellular spaces in the
tissues. So it is also called as “extracelluar fluid”. The lymph
resembles the blood except that the lymph is devoid of R.B.Cs, blood
platelets and some plasma proteins. Lymphatic system runs parallel to
the veins. The lymphatic capillaries are present in the form of network
under epithelial surface. The ends of lymphatic capillaries are blind.
The lymphatic capillaries unite to form lymphatic vessels and these
vessels resemble with the veins. The lymphatic vessels posses the
valves which prevent back flow of lymph. Neighboring body muscles
help in the flow of lymph. The small lymphatic vessels unite to form
large vessels. Larger lymphatic vessels unite to form large ducts i.e.
right lymphatic duct and thoracic duct. Right lymphatic duct opens
into right subclavian vein and left thoracic duct open in to left
subclavian vein. Before the lymph reaches the blood, it always passes
through the lymph nodes. The lymph’s nodes are enlargements of the
lymphatic vessels. Lymphocytes and other plasma cells are present in

the lymph nodes. The lympis is cleaned or filtered by lymph nodes.
These cells also kill the germs and produce antibodies.
5.2(a) Functions of Lymph :
(i)  It provides immunity through lymphocytes.
(ii) Fats are absorbed through lymph vessels in the intestine
(iii) It supplies digested food and oxygen to various parts of the body.
(iv) It helps in removal of waste products like parts of dead cells.
(v)  It returns proteins and excess tissue fluid to the blood from the
tissue spaces.

DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS  # 5
OBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
1.
The phenomena non of uptake of water at the expense of energy
by the cells and usually against the osmotic gradient is known as
(A) 
active 
absorption (B) 
passive 
absorption
(C)
osmosis
(D) diffusion
2.
Water will be absorbed  by root hair when
(A) concentration of solutes in the cells sap in high
(B) plant in rapidly respiring
(C) they are separated from soil by a permeable membrane
(D) concentration of salts in the soil in high.
3.
Root cap has no role in water absorption because
(A) it has no direct connection with the vascular system
(B) it has no cells containing chloroplasts
(C) it has no root hairs
(D) it has loosely arranged cells.
4.
Which of the following is used in measuring transpiration ?
(A) Photometer
(B) Cobalt chloride paper
(C) Bell -
jar
(D) None of the above
5.
Translocation of solutes primarily takes place through
(A) phloem
(B) xylem
(C) cortex
(D) pith.
6.
A mature human erythrocyte has the typical characteristic of
(A) a eukaryotic cell
(B) a prokaryotic cell
(C) both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cell
(D) neither eukaryotic
nor prokaryotic cell
7.
Removal of calcium from freshly collected blood will
(A) result in clotting
(B) prevent clotting
(C) prevent oxidation of hemoglobin
(D) cause hemolysis
8.
In the cardiac cycle, diastole is

(A) the number of heart beats per minute
(B) the relaxation period after contraction of the heart
(C) the forceful pumping action of the heart
(D) the contraction period after relaxation of the heart.
9.
One of the difference between blood and lymph is that
(A) blood has RBCs and WBCs while lymph has Lymphocytes.
(B) blood has RBCs while lymph has no WBCs
(C) blood has WBCs while lymph has RBCs
(D) blood has dissolved organic salts while lymph has no such
inorganic salt.
10.
Blood vessel carrying blood from lung to heart through
(A) Pulmonary artery (B) Pulmonary vein
(C) Coronary
artery
(D) None of these.

SUBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
FILL IN THE BLANKS
1.
The series of events which occur during one complete beat of the heart
is known as ..... cycle.
2.
Depression in the interauricular septum is known as .......
3.
Normal blood pressure is ........
VERT SGIRT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
1.
Write short note on leucocytes.
2.
Distinguish between open and closed circulatory system.
3.
What is double circulation ?
4.
Distinguish between arteries and veins.
5.
Why AB+ blood group is considered as universal recipient ?
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
6.
Explain the structure of human heart with the help of diagram.
7.
Define cardiac cycle. Explain the changes occurring in heart during
cardiac cycle..
8.
What is lymph ? Explain its important functions. Write about its
circulation.
9.
Draw a diagram showing how blood in the capillaries,
surrounding tissues exchange respiratory gases with cells of the tissues.
Label the following on this diagram :

(i) Red Blood Corpuscle
(ii) Tissue Cell
[CBSE, 2005]
10.
Why is it essential to match the blood groups of the ‘donor’ and
the ‘receiver’ persons before arranging transfusion of blood ? A person
tests as ‘universal donor’. which group of blood will be acceptable to
him for receiving blood transfusion ?

 
EXERETION
6.1
EXCRETION :
There are various metabolic activities which take place inside the living
organisms. All these activities are chemical reactions. As a result in
animal body several end products are formed which are of no use to the
cells. These are called as wastes. These must be removed from the body
for proper functioning of the body. The elimination of these waste
nitrogenous products form the body is called as excretion. Waste
material is ammonia, urea, uric acid, carbon dioxide, pigments, salts
digestive wastes, excess of water etc. Ammonia, urea uric acid are
waste nitrogenous products, The excretory produces are both volatile
and non-volatile. These are removed from the body by different
methods.
6.1(a) Excretion in Amoeba :
Amoeba is an ammonotelic organism since the principal excretory
product is ammonia. Special excretory organelle in Amoeba is lacking.
CO2 and ammonia are exerted by diffusing is solution through plasma
membrane. The concentration of ammonia is always higher in Amoeba
than in the surrounding water. The water enters through plasma
membrane by “endosmosis”. Ammonia is formed in cytoplasm by
metabolism. Surplus water enters contractile vacuole. This surplus
water can rupture the animal’s body. Thus size of contractile vacuole
increases, when the contractile vacuole is fully expanded with water, it
moves towards the periphery. As it comes in close contact with the
plasma membrane, the contractile vacuole bursts. Thus excess of water
(surplus water) is discharged in the surrounding water, this phenomenon

of controlling the amount of water in the body is called as
“osmoregulation”.
6.1
(b) Excretion in Earthworm :
In earthworm, the excretory organs are nephridia. The internal funnel-
like opening is called as “nephrostome”. The waste material from body
cavity (coelom) enters the nephridium through nephrosome. In the inner
lining of nephridium, the cells absorb useful substances like glucose.
6.2S
TRUCTURE OF A TYPICAL NEPHIRIDIUM :
A typical nephridium consists of three pars : nephrostome, body and
terminal duct. The nephridium communicates with the coelom (body
cavity) through internal nephrostome. Nephrostome is a ciliated funnel
which leads into body of nephridium through the neck. The body of
nephridium consists of short straight lobe, a long spiral lobe with
narrow apical part. Spiral lobe consists of proximal limb and distal limb.
Neck of the nephridium leads into proximal part of spiral lobe and
terminal duct leaves the proximal limb. The tubule of the neck enters
the body of the nephridium and leaves the body as terminal duct. These
tubules have ciliated tracts inside. The number of ciliated tracts depends
upon the number of coils of the tubules. The terminal duct may open
outside by nephridiopore or into the gut (alimentary canal).

6.2
(a) Functioning of Nephridium :
Nephridia are highly vascular and extract nitrogenous wastes from the
blood. The nitrogenous wastes and useful substances (glucose) enter the
body of nephridium through internal neprostome in the fluid form. The
cilia present in the tubule beat to move the fluid. Useful substances like
glucose are reabsorbed by cells, lining the tubule and is passed into the
blood. The remaining waste is discharged into the alimentary canal or to
exterior through nephridiopore. According to the position of nephridia
in the body of earthworm, nephridia are of three types :
(i)  Septal nephridia are attached on septa. Nephridiopore is missing.
(ii) Integumentary nephridia are attached on inner side of the skin.
Nephridiopore is present.
(iii) Pharyngeal nephridia are present as three p airs of groups of
nephridia, on both sides of alimentary canal. Nephridiopore is absent.
Septal and pharyngeal nephridia are endonephric as these open in the
alimentary canal. Integumentary nephridia are ectonephric. Excretion is
an adaptation to conserve water. Earthworm is ammonotelic (excrete
ammonia) in excretion, in sufficient water while it is ureotellic (excrete
urea) on land.
6.3
HUMAN EXCRETORY SYSTEM :
As a result of various metabolic process going on in our body a number
of waste products are formed. These have to be eliminated as they are
toxic to the body.
• The waste products include :
(i)  Carbon dioxide which is liberated during respiration; and is
eliminated by the lungs.
(ii) Nitrogenous metabolic wastes, such as urea and uric acid produced
in the liver from excessive proteins.
(iii) Bile pigments : Bile pigments (e.g., billrubin) derived by the

breaking down of hemoglobin of the erythrocyte.
(iv) Excess salts, water and vitamins : Concentration of these
substance above the required level, is harmful to the body. Elimination
of all metabolic nitrogenous wastes from the body is callers as
excretion.
6.4
ORGANS OF EXCRETION :
(i) Lugs : Carbon dioxide produced by the oxidation of glucose or other
food substances in the tissues is removed by the blood. This carbon
dioxide is carried to the lungs through the blood vessels (veins) where it
diffuses into the alveoli and out through the respiratory tract. Water
vapour in small amount is also exhaled during expiration from the
lungs.
(ii) Skin : Substances like soluble food mater, oxygen, water dissolved
mineral salts, traces of urea and uric acid diffuse from the thin walls of
capillaries into the walls of the sweat glands. Oxygen and food
substances are used for metabolic activities of the cells of seat glands
but the remaining metabolic wastes are excreted out of the gland
through the sweat duct which opens on the surface of the skin through
sweat pore. Sweat contains 99% water, traces of urea and uric acid.
However, after heavy exercise, lactic acid forms a major constituent of
seat. Profuse sweating may lead to sodium deficiency, leading to muscle
cramps. An adaptation of prevention of water loss is the impermeability
of our skin to water. However, in aquatic animals, skin is the major
excretory organ. They excrete ammonia through their skin by diffusion
as ammonia is highly soluble in water.

6.5
INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF KIDNEY :
(i) Bowman’s capsule : It is a single-cells thick, double walled cup-
shaped structure present in the cortex region of the kidney. The cup-
shaped capsule contains a network of capillaries called Glomerulus’s.
Glomerulus’s and Bowman’s capsule are together called as Renal
corpuscle.
(ii) Proximal convoluted tubule (PCT) : It starts after the Bowman’s
capsule and is greatly twisted. The whole P              CT lies in the cortex
region.
(iii) Henle’s loop : Henle’s loops is a U-shaped tubule located in the
medulla region. it consists of
(A) a thin-walled descending limb in the medulla
(B) a thick-walled ascending limb in the cortex. Henle’s
loop is long in those animals which pass hypertonic urine.
(iv) Distal convoluted tubule : The ascending limb continues into the
distal convoluted tubule which forms several coils in the cortex.
(v) Collecting duct : Collecting tubule receives distal tubules of several
uriniferous tubules. Several such tubules  unite to form a large

collecting duct. The collecting ducts are held together and converge to
form a pyramid. The pyramid opens into the pelvis which leads into the
ureter.
6.6
BLOOD SUPPLY TO NEPHTRONS :
Inside the kidney, the renal artery branches into a  number of renal
arterioles. A branch from a renal arteriole enters each Bowman’s
capsule, and is called the afferent arteriole. It breaks up into a network
of capillaries which reunite to form a efferent arteriole. (Glomerulus is
a mass of network of capillaries in the Bowman’s capsule). The efferent
arteriole after emerging from the Bowman’s’ capsule runs a short
distance and breaks up into a capillary network which surrounds the
renal tubule and rejoins to form a vein. By reuniting again and again
with other veins of the kidney it forms the renal vein which drains into
the posterior venacava.

6.7
CHEMICAL COMPOSITON OF URINE :
Normal human urine consist of about 95% water and 5% of solid
wastes. Besides the normal constituents , certain hormones and
medicines like the antibiotic and excess vitamins are passed out with
urine. Organic compounds (gm/l): Urea - 2.3; Creatinine - 1.5; Uric acid
- 0.7; Ammonia - 0.6 Inorganic Compounds (gm/l) Nacl - 19.0; KI -
12.5; H2SO4 - 1.8; NH3 - 0.6. Normally a man excretes 1000 - 170 ml of
urine daily, depending upon the water intake, diet, climate, mental state
and physiological condition. Tea, coffee, alcohol and other beverages
increases the formation of urine.
6.7 (a) Working of Nephron :
Main function of nephron is to form urine. There are three main 

process involved in the urine formation :
(i) Glomerular ultrafiltration : If is the filtration of body fluids and
solutes from the blood, out of he glomerular capillaries into the
Bowman’s capsule due to the pressure in the glomerulus. All substances
from the blood are filtered out except the large protein molecules. This
fluid in the glomerular capsule is called as glomerular filtrate. It
consists of water, urea, salts, glucose and other plasma solutes. Blood
coming out of the efferent arteriole is therefore thick.
(ii) Tubular reabsorpiton : Glomerular filtrate contains a lot of useful
materials like glucose, salts such as that of sodium and water. These
substances are reabsorbed from the renal tubule at various levels and in
varies proportions. Glucose is reabsorbed completely from the proximal
convoluted tubule. More than 85% of water is  reabsorbed from the
proximal, distal and even in collecting tubules. Sodium chloride is
reabsorbed in the proximal and distal tubules. Potassium and
phosphate is completely reabsorbed from the proximal tubule. Other
substances reabsorbed are uric acid, sulpahtes, vitamin C, amino acids
etc.
(iii) Tubular secretion : This occurs mainly in the distal convoluted
tubule and the collecting duct of the nephron. It is an active, vital
process performed by the cells of the cuboidsl epithelium lining the
tubules which excrete additional wastes from the blood stream into the
filtrate by active transport. In this process substances like potassium,
hydrogen, creatinine and certain drugs like phenol, penciling etc. are
directly exerted by the tubular cells from the blood. The fluid which
now flows through the last parts of the tubule is urine which consist of
water, urea, uric acid, mineral ions like sodium, potassium, chlorides,
phosphates etc.
6.8
ARTIFICIAL KIDNEY :
In case of loss or damage of one kidney, the other kidney performs the

function of both the kidneys and the person can lead a normal life. But
the failure of both the kidneys leads to death. Artificial kidney is a
dialysis machine which cleans blood of waste products, thus acting like
a kidney. The patients’ blood is led from the radial artery of the arm
through the machine where urea and other salts are removed and pure
blood is returned to vein in the same arm. In case of permanent damage
to the kidneys, dialysis has to be performed for about twelve hours,
twice a week. Patients with chronic kidney failure have   been recorded
to survive for more than 12 years on dialysis. Now a days, diseased
kidney may be replaced with healthy one by kidney transplantation.
To lead a normal life, one healthy kidney is more than enough.
Therefore, a healthy person can donate his one kidney to patient who
has both kidneys impaired.

DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLESMS # 6
OBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
1.
Which of the following parts of a kidney contains the lowest
concentration of urea ?
(A) Lop of Henle
(B) Branches of renal vein
(C) Bowman’s capsule
(D) Glomerulus
2.
Uriniferous tubules of a kidney are concerned with formation of
(A) glucose
(B) amino acids
(C) hormones
(D)
urine
3.
Excretion is removal of
(A) CO2
(B) harmful and useless ingredients
(C) extra water
(D) metabolic wastes
4.
Main function of kidney is
(A) passive absorption
(B) ultrafiltration
(C) selective reabsorption
(D) Both B and C
5.
Ammonia is converted into urea in
(A) 
kidney
(B) 
spleen
(C) 
liver
(D)
nephron
6.
Function of loop of Henle is
(A) conservation of water
(B) formation of urine
(C) filtration of blood
(D) passage of urine
7.
Urea is transported through
(A) RBCs
(B) WBCs
(C) Plasma
(D)
All of the above
8.
Major function of contractive vacuole is
(A) excretion
(B) circulation
(C) osmoregulation
(D) all
the above
9.
Which one is a accessory excretory organ

(A) 
Liver
(B) 
Stomach
(C) 
Intestine
(D)
Heart
SUBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
VERY SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
1.
Name of excretory organs of amoeba.
2.
How wastes diffuse out from body of Sponge and Hydra ?
3.
Flame cells are excretory organs of which group of animals.
4.
Name the major excretory product of human beings.
SHORT ANSWR TYPE QUESTIONS
5.
What is meant by excretion and osmoregulation ?
6.
How excretion takes place in amoeba ?
7.
Draw a diagram of nephron and label its various parts.
8.
What is meant by osmoregulation ? How it is achieved in different
groups of animals ?
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
9.
Name the excretory organs of earthworm.
10.
Draw diagram of human excretory system, label its pars.
11.
Draw a labelled diagram of nephron and explain how urine is formed.
ANSWERS
DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS # 4
Qus.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Ans.
B
B
B
C
C
B
C
B
D
B

DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS # 5
 
Qus.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Ans.
A
A
C
A
A
D
B
B
A
B
DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS # 6
 
Qus.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Ans.
B
D
D
D
C
A
C
C
A

 
                                RESPIRATION
7.1
RESPIRATION :
The sum total of all the vital activities is called as  metabolism. Vital
act ivies refer to all the physiochemical activities of a cell. It has two
aspects :
(i) Anabolism : It includes metabolic process by which complex
cellular compounds are synthesized from simpler compounds, .e.g.
Photosynthesis
(ii) Catabolism : It includes metabolic processes by which larger
molecules are broken down into simpler molecules, e.g. Respiration.
Respiration is an important catabolic process responsible for the
production of energy.
7.1 (a) Definition :
The process by which assimilated food is oxidized and energy is
released is called as respiration. In this process oxygen from air is taken
in, this oxygen reacts with food molecules present in the body cells and
burn them slowly to release energy. This energy is stored in the form of
ATP molecules inside the cell for further use and the waste products i.e.
CO2 and H2O are eliminated out of the body.
Food + oxygen 
 CO2 + H2O + Energy
It is called as aerobic respiration.
NOTE : The process by which organisms obtain oxygen from environment
and release carbon dioxide produced
during oxidation of food to the outer environment is called as
breathing. It is a part of respiration.

7.1
(b) Difference Between Breathing and Respiration :
(i) Breathing involves taking in  of oxygen and releasing out of carbon
dioxide so it is a physical process while respiration is a biochemical
process which, along with breathing involves oxidation of food.
(ii) Breathing involves lungs so it is an organ system level process while
respiration besides being at organ system level, also occurs at cellular
level.
(iii) Breathing itself do not release energy while respiration results in
the release of energy which is then stored in from of ATP.
(iv) Breathing is a part of respiration while respiration is not a part of
breathing but it involves breathing.
7.1
(c) Types of Respiration :
(i) External respiration : Exchange of gases between an organism and
its environment.
(ii) Internal respiration : Exchange of gases between tissue cells and
extra cellular environment.
(iii) Aerobic : When oxidation of food takes place in presence of
molecular oxygen.
 
it is called as aerobic respiration.
(iv) Anaerobic respiration : When oxidation of food material does not
require molecular oxygen or it occurs in absence of molecular oxygen,
it is called as anaerobic respiration.
Food 
 
Pyruvecacid 
7.1
(d) Respiration :
Respiration in divided in three parts :

(i) 
Cellular 
respiration
(ii)
Respiration in plants
(iii) Respiration in animals
7.1
(e) Respiration Plants :
• In plants exchange of gases takes
place from leaves, stems and roots
individually.
• Transfer of respiratory gases from
one part to another is very less.
• Exchange of gases in plants occurs
by simple diffusion.
(i) Respiration in roots :
• In young roots, the epidermal cells are extended to form root hair.
These root hair remain in direct in contact with the air present in
between the soil particles. The oxygen from this air enters into the root
hairs by simple diffusion and reaches  to other cells of root for
respiration.
• In older roots a protective layer of dead cells is present which have
tiny openings called as lenticels. Diffusion of oxygen takes place
through these pores and carbon dioxide is released out through the
same.
(ii) Respiration in stem :
• In herbaceous plants, stem have small openings in their epidermal
cells called as stomata, the oxygen from air enters through stomata and

carbon dioxide is released from the same.
• In hard and woody stems of big plants and trees, lenticels are present
in place of stomata through which exchange of gases takes place.
(iii) Respiration in leaves :
• Surface of leaves possess numerous tiny pores called as stomata in
their epidermal cells, exchange of gases takes place through stomata and
when CO2 concentration in cell increases stomata opens and CO2 is
released out.
• An experiment to show that plants take oxygen and evolve carbon
dioxide during respiration :
• Experiment : To demonstrate the plants take oxygen and evolve
dioxide during respiration set the apparatus according to figure by
taking KOH in U-tube, lie-water in two wide mouth bottles, one potted
plant, bell jar and black-cloth. During day time the potted plant is
covered with black-cloth to check photosynthesis. Make the apparatus
airtight and start the aspirator. After sometime you will find that the
lime water of second bottle turns milky. The explanation for this is that
when the water comes out from aspirator, the atmospheric air enters into
the apparatus through the second end and passes through the U-tube
containing caustic potash into the tube containing lime water. The
caustic potash absorbs the CO2 of the air. Thus, CO2 free air reaches
into lime water so it does not turn milky. If indicates the air does not
contain even trace of CO2. When this air reaches into the lime water of
second tube through a bell jar having potted plant covered with black
cloth to check photosynthesis, it turns milky. It proves that CO2 is
evolved during respiration.

7.2
RESPRITAIN IN ANIMALS :
• Respiration in animals takes place as a single unit, the have different
types of organs for respiration due to which mode of respiration also
varies according to the organism but the basic mechanism is same.
• From phylum Protozoa to Ctenophore respiration is by generally body
surface, in phylum Plathyelminthes to Nematodes are mostly anaerobic
and endoparasites, in phylum Annelida cutanous membrane occurs and
then from phylum Arthropoda till Mammals various respiratory organs
were developed like trachea, gills and lungs.
Type 
of 
respiration
Organs
involved
Example
1. 
Cell 
surface 
respiration
General 
body
surface
Amoeba, Paramecium
2. 
Tracheal 
respiration
Trachea 
and
tracheoles
Insects
3. Branchial respiration
Gills
Fishes
4. Cutanous respiration
Skin
Frog
5. Pulmonary respiration
Lungs
Amphibians, reptiles,
birds
6. Buccal respiration
Buccal cavity
From
Some important characteristics of respiratory organs of animals
are :

• They have large surface area to get enough oxygen.
• They have thin walls for easy diffusion and exchange of gases.
• They have rich blood supply for transport of respiratory gases.
7.2(a) Respiration in Amoeba :
In unicellular organisms like amoeba and in some lower multicellular
animals likes sponges and cnidarians, respiration or exchange of gases
occurs through general body surface as these cells are in direct contact
with an aquatic environment so the oxygen dissolved in water diffuses
into the cell and brings about oxidation of food, at the same time carbon
dioxide released is expelled out of the cell by the same process.

7.2(b) Respiration in Earthworm
In organisms like earthworm and leech exchange of gases occur through
their skin as their skin is very thin and most. It is rich in blood supply so
the oxygen is absorbed by moist skin of earthworm and is transported to
all the cells of body through blood. The carbon dioxide from body cells
diffuses into the blood and expelled out through skin.
7.2 (c) Respiration in Fish :
• In fish exchange of gases occurs through gills so the respiration is
said to be branchial.
• Gills are present on both the sides of its head, they are covered by gill
covers.
• During breathing fish takes in water through its mouth and pass it over
the gills, the oxygen present in water extracted by gills and water is
removed out through gill slits. This oxygen is now absorbed by blood
and carried to all parts of the body and at the same time carbon dioxide
is released into the blood and comes back to the gills and is expelled out
into the surrounding water.
• Same type or respiratory pattern is followed in some other aquatic
organisms like prawns.

7.2 (d) Respiration in Grasshopper :
• In insects there occurs a system of tiny
holes and air tubes all over the body these
tiny holes or openings are called as
spiracle. This whole system facilities the
exchange of gases and is called as tracheal
system.
• During breathing oxygen of air enters the
spiracle and reached to each and every part
of grasshopper’s body through trachea and
tracheoles and carbon dioxide produced
during respiration is carried back by trachea
and tracheoles to the spiracles and is
expelled out of the body of insect.
• The same mechanism is followed in other
insects like houseflies, mosquitoes, bees etc.
7.2 (e) Respiration in Humans :

• Human respiratory tract
(i) External nostrils : First part of
respiratory system. It opens into nasal
cavity and is meant for inhalation of air
from outside.
(ii) Nasal cavity : This cavity is separated from oral cavity by means of
a hard and bony palate. It is lined by ciliated columnar epithelial cells
that are rich in mucus; it brings about warming, moistening and
sterilization of air. It contains hair and mucus which entrap the dust
particles.
(iii) Internal nares : Nasal cavity opens into it and it leads to pharynx.
(iv) Pharynx : It is a common part between both alimentary canal and
respiratory system.
(v) Larynx : It is an enlarged part of trachea which is also called as

‘voice box’. It produces voice by passage of air between vocal cords. It
contains four different types of cartilages among them a ‘c’ shaped
thyroid cartilage protruding out  in neck region is called Adam’s apple.
(vi) Trachea : also called wind pipe. It is 10-12 cm long tube. It’s walls
are supported by 16 - 20 ‘c’ shaped cartilaginous rings which percent
them to collapse when air is absent in them
(vii) Bronchi : Trachea is branched into two bronchi left and right each
of which enters into the lungs.
(viii) Lungs : These are two light weight spongy pouches covered by a
membrane called Pleura. Bronchi are further branched into several
bronchioles, at the end of bronchioles alveolar sacs or alveoli are
present which are rich in blood capillaries and thin walled.
(vi) Diaphragm : It is a sheet of muscles that lies below the lungs and
separates thoracic cavity from abdominal cavity.
• Mechanism of breathing  : It includes
(i) Inhalation : When air is breathed in, the diaphragm and muscles
attached to the ribs contract due to which there occurs expansion of
chest cavity, it results increase in volume of chest cavity thus the air
pressure decreases and air from outside rushes into the lungs and
alveolar sacs get filled with air containing oxygen. The oxygen present
in air diffuses into the blood and CO2 from blood diffuse out into
alveolar sac.
(ii) Exchange between blood and tissues : CO2 is taken by blood and
O2 diffuses into tissues.
(iii) Exhalation : When air is breathed out the diaphragm and muscles
attached to ribs relax, which brings about contraction in chest cavity, its
volume gets reduced and CO2 is pushed out from lungs into the air

through trachea and nostrils.
 
 
                  DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS # 7
OBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
1.
The  process of respiration is concerned with
(A) liberation of oxygen
(B) liberation of carbon dioxide
(C) liberation of energy
(D) intake of oxygen
2.
The common immediate source of energy for cellular activity is
(A) NAD
(B) ATP
(C) DNA
(D) RNA
3.
The tissue respiration refers to
(A) 
inspiration
(B) 
external 
respiration
(C) 
internal
respiration
(D) expiration
4.
If the CO2 concentration in the blood increases, the rate of breathing
will
(A) decrease
(B) stop
(C) increase
(D) have
no effect
5.
Vocal cards occur in
(A) pharynx
(B) glottis
(C) bronchial tube
(D)
larynx
6.
In man, which of the following structures is analogous to the spiracles
of cockroach ?
(A) Alveoli
(B) Lungs
(C) Bronchioles
(D)
Nostrils
7.
Which of the following prevents collapsing of trachea ?
(A) Diaphragm
(B) Ribs
(C) Cartilaginous ring (D)
Muscles
8.
Which of the following gases makes the most stable combination with

the hemoglobin of red blood cells.
(A) CO2
(B) CO
(C) O2
(D) N2
9.
Volume of air inspired or expired with each normal breath is called
(A) tidal volume
(B) inspiratory capacity
(C) total lung capacity
(D) residual volume
10.
Most of the carbon dioxide in the blood is carried in the form of
(A) carbonic acid
(B) bicarbonates
(C) carbaminohaemoglobin
(D) dissolved CO2
SUBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
1.
Define respiration. Name the different types of respiration.
2.
Write three common features of respiratory organs.
3.
What are the characteristics of respiratory structure present in animals
?
4.
What is the function of epiglottis in man and where it is situated ?
5.
How does exchange of gases takes place in the following :
(i) Roots
(ii) Stem
(iii) Leaves
6.
Draw a labelled diagram of human respiratory system.
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
1.
What do you mean by inhalation and exhalation ? Explain the
mechanism of both in brif ?
2.
List out the differences between breathing and respiration.
3.
Describe the mechanism of breathing in human beings.
4.
Explain the process of respiration in different parts of plant.
What are the various structures involved in respiration in plants ?
5.
Draw the respiratory system of human beings. What happens to

the rate of breathing during vigorous exercise and why ?
6.
List three differences between respiration in plants and
respiration in animals. Describe with a well labelled diagram how
gaseous exchange occurs through root hair in plants                           
[C.B.S.E., Delhi - 2005]
7.
How is respiration differs from breathing ? Explain the process
of aerobic respiration and anaerobic respiration.                           
                                                                                                               
[C.B.S.E - 2005]
8.
Draw a diagram showing human respiratory system. Label its
following parts :
(i) Larynx
(ii) Trachea
(iii) Primary bronchus(iv) Lungs
9.
Name the respiratory organs in the following :
(i) A fish
(ii) A bird
(iii) An earthworm
10.
Draw a diagram showing how blood in the capillaries
surrounding tissues exchange respiratory gases with cells of the tissues.

 
RESPIRATION
 
8.1
MACHANISM OF GASEOUS EXCHANGE BETWEEN
TISSUES AND BLOOD :
When the air enters into the lungs through nostrils, trachea and bronchi
it enters into the bronchioles, from bronchioles it moves into thin walled
alveolar sacs or alveoli. Alveoli are rich in blood capillaries, at this
place oxygen from air diffuses into the blood and reaches to all the cells
and tissues of body this oxygen now diffuses into the cell and is utilized
for the oxidation of food and production of energy in mitochondria as a
result of this carbon dioxide is produced in cells, due to this increased
concentration of CO2, it diffuses into the blood and is brought back to
alveoli and expelled out of the lungs through trachea and nostrils.

 
8.1 (a) Control of Respiration :
Respiration is controlled by the respiratory centre situated in medulla
oblongata of brain.
(i) Breathing occurs involuntarily.
(ii) Under normal conditions rate of breathing is 15-18 times per
minute. During vigorous exercise the demand for oxygen increases due
to which rate of breathing increases by about 20-25 times.
(iii) The total area for gas exchange covered through 300 million
alveoli is about 36-72 m2 in each lung.
(iv) Respiratory quotient : It is defined as the ratio of the volumes of
CO2 liberated and O2 used during respiration.
 
 
8.1 (b) Some Respiratory Disorders :
• Emphysema : It occurs due to infection, smoking etc. It occurs due to
obstructions in bronchioles caused by breaking of alveolar septa.
Bronchodilators and O2 therapy are used, for curing this disease.
• Asthma : Air passages are narrowed and lead to obstruction in
breathing.
• Pneumonia : Lymph and mucous accumulate in alveoli and
bronchioles. It occurs due to bacterial and viral infection.
• Bronchitis : Swelling in living membranes of respiratory tract due to
excessive smoking.
• Tuberculosis : Bacterial infection in lungs.
• Pleurisy : Inflammation of lung membrane called as pleurisy.
• Sudden contraction of diaphragm along with loud closure of glottis
causes Hiccough.
• Sudden and violent expulsion of air through mouth and nose is called

a sneezing.
• Fermentation : the slow decomposition of organic matter into simpler
substances in the presence of enzymes is known as fermentation. This
process is used for preparation of alcoholic beverages in presence of
yeast in the absence of oxygen. Glucose and fructose are converted to
ethanol by this process. It is a type of anaerobic respiration.
8.1 (c) Difference Between Aerobic and Anaerobic Respiration
:
Aerobic
Anaerobic
(i) It occurs in all living cells of higher
plants.
It occurs in bacteria, certain fungi,
germinatin seeds and fleshy fruits muscles.
(ii) It requires oxygen.
Oxygen in  not required
(iii) The end products are CO2 and H2O.
The end products are alcohol or lactic acid
and CO2.
(iv) The oxidation of one molecules of
glucose produces 38 ATP molecules.
The number of ATP molecules produced is
only 2.
(v) All the reactions except the reaction
of glycolysis take place inside
mitochondria.
All the reactions take place in cytoplasm.
(vi) Organic compounds are completely
oxides and high amount of energy is
realesed.
Organic  compounds are incompletely
oxidized and very small amount of energy is
realesed
(vii) Non toxic to plants.
Toxic to higher plants.
8.1 (d) Differences Between Respiration and Photosynthesis :
Respiration
Photosynthesis
(i) It is a catabolic process.
(ii) Carbohydrates are oxidized.
(iii) Energy is liberated in the form
of ATP.
(iv) The amount of CO2 in the air
increases during respiration.
(v) It takes place in all the living
cells, both green and non-green
(vii) Dry weight of plant decreases.
(viii) 
Oxidative 
phophorylation
It is an anabolic process.
Carbohydrates are synthesized.
Light energy is stored in the 
glucose or chemical energy.
The amount of CO2 in the air 
during photosynthesis.
It takes place only in chloro
cells.
Dry weight of plant increases.
Photophosphorylatin occurs.

occurs
(ix) O2 is utilized and CO2 and H2O
are formed C6H12O6 + 6O2 
 6O2 +
6H2O + energy
CO2 and H2O are used whil
evolved.
6CO2 + 12H2O 
 C6H12O6 +
6H2O.
.1 ( e) Differences Between Respiration and Combustion :
Respiration
Combustion
(i) It is a biological process
It is a chemical process.
(ii) It takes place at normal
temperature.
It takes place at high temperature.
(iii) Respiration is a slow
process completed I n several
steps. Thus, the energy is also
liberated in several steps and
remains stored in the form of
ATP.
Combustion is fast process in
which the energy is liberated only
in one step resulting in increase in
temperature and production of fire.
8.1 (f) Cellular Respiration :
If refers to the oxidation of food taking place inside the cell. As this
process is at cellular level so it is called cellular respiration. It takes
place in three steps :
It refers to the oxidation of food taking place inside the cell. As this
process is at cellular level so it is called cellular respiration. It takes
place in three in 3 steps :
(i) Glycolysis
(ii) Kreb Cycle
(iii) Electron Transport
System
Carbohydrates
During digestion
Glucose
Glycolysis
   Pyruic acid

inabsence of O2 
in presence of O2
Aneerobic respiration 
Aerobic respiration
C2H5OH + CO2 + 2ATP
                                Kreb
Cycle
                          CO2+H2O+38ATP
8.1 (g) Glycolysis :
Glycolysis also called EMP pathway, site-cytoplasm of cell.
(i)  In this cycle glucose is converted into pyruvic acid in presence of
many enzymes and co-enzymes.
(ii) Oxygen in not required during glycolysis.
(iii) 1 molecule of glucose gives rise to 2 molecules of pyruvic acid.
(iv) In this process 4 molecules of ATP are formed among them 2ATP
molecules are utilized thus net gain of ATP is two molecules.
(v) 2NADP molecules are reduced to 2NADPH2 , which later produces
6ATP molecules.
(vi) Overall production of ATP in glycolysis is 2ATP + 6ATP = 8ATP
(vii) There is no production of CO2 during this process.
NOTE : After glycolysis, pyruvic acid is converted into acetyl Co-A with the
release of CO2 and the process is called
as ‘oxidative decarboxylation’. It occurs in mitochondria of the cell.
Besides this 6ATP are also formed during this step.
8.1 (h) Kreb Cycle :
Site : Mitochondria of cell
(i) Also called aerobic oxidation.
(ii) Discovered by Sir Hans Kreb.
(iii) Another name TCA cycle (tricarboxylic acid cycle) or Citric acid
cycle.
(iv) It brings about the conversion of pyruvic acid, fatty acids, fats and
amino acids into CO2 and water by oxidation.
(v) It is the common path for oxidation of carbohydrates, fats, proteins.
(vi) it accounts for 24ATP molecules.

(vii) It starts with acetyl Co-A which is then converted into several
intermediate compounds with the release of NADPH2, FDH2, ATP,
hydrogen atoms and then Acetyl Co-A is regenerated back.
8.1 (i) Electron Transport System or ETS :
(i)  In this hydrogen atoms produced during oxidation of various
intermediates during Kreb cycle are first broken into protons and
electrons.
(ii) These protons and electrons after passing through a series of
coenzymes and cytochromes combine with oxygen to form water
molecules.
(iii) During these series of events 1NADPH2 releases 3ATP molecules
and 1FADH2 gives 2ATP molecules which were produces during kreb
cycle and glycolysis.
NOTE : The net gain of ATP molecules during respiration in 38ATP
molecules among them,
8ATP from glycolysis
6ATP from conversion of pyruvic acid into acetyl CO. A
24ATP from kreb cycle
besides this CO2 and H2O are also released.
Some important points :
(i)  Diaphragm becomes flat during inspiration and becomes convex
during expiration.
(ii) Tidal volume : Volume of air inspired or expired in relaxed
position. It is around 500 ml.
(iii) Residual volume : Air left in the whole reparatory tract after
forceful expiration. It is 1.5 liters.
(iv) Total lung capacity : Maximum amount of air the lungs can hold
after forceful inspiration. It is about 5-6.0 litres.
(v) Vital capacity : Maximum amount of air which can be breathed out
through forceful expiration after a forceful inspiration. It is 3.4-4.8
litres.
• Vital Capacity is more in athletes, mountain dwellers, non smokers.
• The total area for gas exchange provided by our 750 million alveoli in

two lungs in 100 S. m.
• In the cycle of inhalation and exhalation, repeated 15 to 18 times in a
minutes about 500 ml of air is breathed in and out. In 24 hours, we
breadth in 1500 litres of air.
• Blood is the medium for the transport of oxygen from the respiratory
organ to the different tissues and carbon dioxide from tissues to the
respiratory organs. As much as 97 percent of the oxygen is transported
from the lungs to the tissues in combination with hemoglobin and only
2 percent is transported in dissolved condition by the plasma.
• A normal person has about 15 grams of hemoglobin per 100 ml of
blood. One gram of hemoglobin binds about 1.34 ml of O2. Thus, 100
ml of blood carries about 20 ml of oxygen.
• Carbon dioxide is also transported by hemoglobin. When a respiring
tissue release carbon-dioxide, it is first diffused in the plasma. From
here it diffuses into the red blood cells. Carbon-dioxide is transported
from the tissues to the lungs in the form of bicarbonates dissolved in
water.
• About 23% of carbon dioxide entering into the erythrocytes combines
with 
the 
globin 
(protein) 
part 
of 
haemogloin 
to 
form
carbaminohaemoglobin, which is transported to the lungs.
• Carbon monoxide binds with hemoglobin about 230 times more
readily than oxygen. When a person inhales carbon monoxide, it
diffuses from the alveolar air to the blood and binds to haemoglobin
forming carboxyhemoglobin. The latter is a relatively stable compound
and cannot bind with oxygen molecules. So, the amount of hemoglobin
available for oxygen transport is reduced. The resulting deficiency of
oxygen cases headache, dizziness, nausea and even death.
• Mountain sickness : It is also known as altitude sickness. At sea level
the concentration of oxygen is about 21% and the barometric pressure
averages 760 mm Hg. As altitude increases, the concentration remains
the same but the number of oxygen molecules per breath is reduced. AT
12,000 feet the barometric pressure is only 483 mm Hg, so there are

roughly 40% fewer oxygen molecules per breath. In order to oxygenate
the body effectively, breathing rate (even while at rest) has to be
increased. This extra ventilation increases the oxygen content in the
blood, but not sea level concentration. The fall in oxygenation of blood
produced the symptoms of mountain sickness. These symptoms include
breathlessness, headache, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, mental fatigue
and a bluish tinge on the skin, nails and lips.

DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS # 8
OBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
1.
Breathing rate in mammals in controlled by a part of the brain called
the
(A) 
thalamus
(B) 
hypothalamus
(C) 
medulla
oblongata (D) cerebellum
2.
In anaerobic respiration
(A) O2 is taken in
(B) CO2 is taken in
(C) O2 is given
out
(D) CO2 is given out
3.
Disease called pleurisy is due to
(A) inflammation of pleura
(B) inflammation of trachea
(C) inflammation of alveoli
(D) none of these above
4.
Leaves respire with the help of
(A) lenticles
(B) stomata
(C) plasmodesmata
(D)
cuticle
5.
Correct statement is
(A) roots of plant respire through lenticles and stomata.
(B) stem of plant respire through lenticles
(C) both A and B are correct
(D) both A and B are incorrect
6.
Which of the following is not a characteristic of good respiratory
surface ?
(A) Thin and moist
(B) Large surface area
(C) Close to oxygen and gas transport
(D) Thick and dry
surface
7.
Respiration in yeast
(A) takes place in the presence of oxygen
(B) yields lactic acid
and carbon dioxide

(C) in anaerobic and produces carbon dioxide
(D) takes place only
in darkness
8.
Muscle cells engaged in vigorous activity build up a high
concentration of
(A) 
lactic 
acid
(B) 
pyruvic 
acid
(C)
alcohol
(D) cholesterol
9.
Exchange of respiratory gases takes place in an earthworm through
(A) moist skin
(B) gills
(C) trachea
(D) lungs
10.
Oxygen is transported in blood mainly by
(A) 
leucocytes
(B) 
erythrocytes
(C)
thrombocytes
(D) blood plasma
SUBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
1.
Write any two points of difference between respiration in plants and
respiration in animals.
2.
What do you mean by fermentation ?
3.
Describe the mode of respiration in an insect with a diagram.
4.
What are the functions of respiratory system ?
5.
Why do walls of trachea not collapse when there is less air in it ?

LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
6.
Write the differences between photosynthesis and respiration.
7.
Explain the following in brief :
(a) Emphysema
(b) Asthma
(c) Pneumonia
(d)
Bronchitis
8.
Describe the structure of lungs.
9.
Explain in brief all the organs involved in respiratory system.
10. 
Explain in brief the cellular respiration.
11.
Explain the process by which inhalation occurs during breathing in
human beings.
12.
A farmer floods his field every day thinking that watering in this
manner will result in a better yield of his wheat crop. What will be the
result of this action of the farmer ?                                          [C.B.S.E,
All India 2004]
13.
What is the function of epiglottis in man ? Draw labelled diagram
showing the human respiratory system.
[All India C.B.S.E. -2004]
14.
Distinguish between aerobic and anaerobic respiration in terms of end
products and energy ?
[C.B.S.E. - 2004]
               ANSWERS
 
DAILY PRACTICE PROBLEMS # 7
 
Qus.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Ans.
C
B
C
C
D
D
C
B
A
B

DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS # 8
 
Qus.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Ans.
C
D
A
B
B
D
C
A
A
B

 
CONTROL & CO-ORDINATION
 
9.1
INTRODUCTION :
All the living organisms show the irritability or sensitiveness. It is the
property to give response to the stimulus. The stimulus can be external
or internal. The living organisms adapt themselves to the external and
internal factors with proper adjustment. This adjustment of the vital
activities of life is called co-ordination. The working of one system is
co-ordinate with that of other system .e.g., During eating our body
performs several kinds of coordinated activities. The  nose differentiates
the smell of food and hand serve as the organs of ingestion. the
alimentary canal and glands help in the digestion of food. Thus various
organs perform co-ordinate activities.
9.1 (a) Control and Co-ordination :
Control and co-ordination also help to maintain a steady state of
stability and steady state within an organism in constantly changing
environment. The mechanism of maintaining internal steady state is
called homeostasis. A mountaineer feels lack of oxygen  a high
altitudes In order to cope with this condition, more number of RBCs are
produced. It is the internal environment (physiologically) that adjusts to
the external stress i.e. lack of oxygen. Similarly mammals are capable
of maintaining a constant body temperature. The vital activities of an
organism are controlled by endocrine system and nervous system. There
are two types of co-ordinations i.e., nervous and hormonal co-
ordination. In animals both hormones and neurons (structural and
functional unit of nervous system) are involved in regulating and
coordinating the various vital activities. In plants only chemical

(phytohormones) co-ordination is present.
9.2
CHEMICAL CO-ORDINATION IN PLANTS :
9.2
(a) Movements in Plans :
The plants are fixed in the soil so they cannot avoid various stimuli by
moving away. There is no ‘brain-like’ structure in plants to adapt
themselves according to the changes in their surroundings. Still the
plants show the positive or negative responses to light, water, gravity,
touch etc. The movements of plants due to stimuli are called the tropic
or curvature movements. The response of a part of the plant to light is
called phototropism. The stem is positively phototropic (grown
towards light) while the root is negatively phototropic. The growth
response of a part of plant to gravity (attraction force of the earth) is
called geotropism. The shoot is negatively geotropic while the root is
positively geotropic. Chemotropism is due to the chemical stimulus
e.g. growth of pollen tube. The Response to a stimulus, independent o
direction, is called nastic movement. The Leaves of Mimosa pudica
(Touch-me-not) droop own (bend) on touching.
9.2 (b) Effect of Light :
Flowering and seed germination are regulated by the duration of light,
This phenomenon called photoperiod sum. Plants respond to this
stimulus (light duration) with the help of phytochorme pigment.
Phytochrome is a proteinacesous pigment and controls several light
dependent developmental processes like germination, growth and
flowering. Phytochrome exists in two forms Pr and Pfr . Pfr is active
form and both are intervconvertible.
 
9.2 (c) Photoperiodism and Flowing :
It is a physiological change occurring in plants in response to relative
length of the day and light. The term photoperiodism was used by
Graner and Allard for the response of plants to photoperiods
expressed in the form of flowering. On the basis of photoperiod there
are three classes of plants.

(i) Shor day plants
(ii) Long day plants
(iii) Day neutral
plants
9.2 (b) Vernalization and Flowering :
The term vernalization was coined by Lysenko for promotion of
flowering by a previous cold treatment. For flowering in winter
varieties, winter cold treatment is necessary. In nature, plant requiring
cold treatment usually behaves as biennial. The germinate and grow
vegetatively in first season and produce flowers during second seasons
after getting the cold treatment. The suitable temperature for
vernalizatin is 40C and time period varies from 4 days to 3 months.
 
Table : Difference between phototropism and photoperiodism
Phototroplsm
Photoperiodism
(i) It is a tropic movement
(ii) The stimulus is perceived by
apical meristem
(iii) It is due to differential
growth in elongation zone
(i) It is physiological response to
relative lengths of day and night
(ii) The stimulus is perceived by
the leaves
(iii) It is due to the replacement of
vegetative buds by reproductive
buds.
9.3                GROWTH REGULATORS :
The growth regulators are the important chemical affecting growth.
Growth hormones (phytohormones) are the natural growth substances
which are produced in any part of the plant and are transferred to
another part and there they influence the growth of plant. The growth
regulators consist of auxins , gibberellins, cytokinins, ethylene and
abscisic acid. Except abscisic acid, ethylene the three are called growth
hormones and ethylene, abscisic acid are growth inhibitor.
 
9.3 (a) Auxins :

Auxins are the growth hormones which were first discovered by Charls
Darwin. Auxins are the weak organic acids which can promote
elongation and growth. These are produced in the apical meristem (tips
of root and stem), young leaves, flower  buds and fruits. The first
discovered plant hormone was identified as indole acetic acid (I.A.A.).
(i) Functions of auxins :
(A) Cell enlargement and elongation : Auxins loose the cell wall,
increase membrane permeability and synthesis wall microfibirlls. All
these activities result in the cell enlargement and elongation.
(B) Tissue culture
(C) Apical dormancy : The presence of terminal or apical bud involves
the failure of lateral bud growth. It is due to the secretion of IAA.
Removal of apical bud results in the growth of lateral buds.
(D) Root formation : Auxins can induce adventitious roots in stem
cuttings.
(E) Cell division
(F) Parthenocarpy : Application of synthetic as well as natural auxins
to unpollinated pistils produces parthenocarpic fruits (seedless fruits).
Parthenocarpy is the phenomenon of development of seedless fruits
without pollination and fertilization. This phenomenon is applies in seed
bearing fruits like grape, banana, papaya, tomato etc.
(G) Curvature movements
(H) Abscission
(I) Lead and fruit fall : 2, 4 -D (2, 4- dichorophenoxy acetic acid) is
applied to avoid pre-harvest fruit drop in oranges and apples.
(J) Flowering : Auxins generally inhibit flowering but in pineapple it
cause flowering.
(K) Weedcides : The auxins play important role in weed control.
(L) Storage : Applied for potato storage.

9.3 (b) Gibberallins :
Gibberellins have a unique property of increasing the height of plants
but they do not cause curvature. The gibberellins were firs discovered in
Japan by Yabuta and Sumuki. E. Kurosawa obtained extracts from rice
plants which were infected with fungus Gibberella fujikuroi. These
rice plants were taller and sterile.
(i) Functions of gibberellins : The physiological effects of gibberellins
on plant growth are as follows :
(A) Cell elongation : Gibberellins cause stem elongation and
expansion of leaves in intact plants.
(B) Stem elongation : These induce stem elongation in genetically
dwarf varieties (pea, maize & Cabbage) It is called bolting.
(C) Seed germination
(D) Flowering
(E) Parthenocarpy
(F) Counteract dormancy : Natural dormancy of buds, tubers,
rhizomes and some seeds can be over come by gibberellins.
(G) Induction of maleness : GA3 induces the formation of male
flowers on genetically female plants in Cucurbits.
(H) Induction of aerial stem
(I) Increase in size of fruits : Application of gibberellins increase
bunch length and fruit size in grapes.
9.3 (c) Cytokinins :
The cytokinins are chemically basic growth hormones which promote
cell division in plants. This group of phytohormones was discovered

when Carlos Mille isolated the crystalline substance from degraded
DNA material. This substance was named as kinetin.
(i) Function of cytokinins : The important physiological effects of
these cytokinins on plant growth are as follows :
(A) Cell division : One of the main functions of cytokinins is in cell
division and more particular cytokinesis.
(B) Secondary growth : Cytokinins overcome apical dominance and
promote the growth of lateral bunds.
(D) Senescence : Cytokinins can inhibit or delay senescence (ageing).
Leaves treated with cytokinins, retain chlorophyll for longer period i.e.,
they remain green for a longer period.
(E) Morphogenesis : A natural balance between auxins and cytokinins
is responsible for differentiation of stems and roots (morphogenesis).
When cyntokinins are in excess, lateral buds develop while roots are
formed if relatively more auxins are present.
(F) Induction of flowering
(G) Callus growth
9.3
(d) Ethylene :
This is a gaseous plant hormone which is produced by almost all the
fleshy fruits during ripening. Ethylene is autocatalytic in nature. Higher
concentration of auxins induce ethylene formation.
(i) Functions of ethylene : The important function of ethylene are as
follows :
(A) Fruit ripening : It is used for artificial ripening of fleshy fruits in
the shops.
(B) Abscission layer : Ethylene accelerates the abscission of leaves,
flowers and fruits.
(C) Senescence : Ethylene induces yellowing of leaves and downward

bending. This results in the senescence in the plants.
(D) Growth : It promotes transverse expansion but it inhibits
longitudinal growth.
(E) Flowering : It induced flowering in pineapple.
(F) Dormancy : It breaks the dormancy of several organs of plants
except lateral buds.
(G) Induction of femaleness : If has feminizing effect. This increases
the number of female flowers in Cucurbits.
9.3 (e) Abscisic Acid (A.B.A.) :
Stress hormone of plants is called as abscisic acid. It is also known as
dormin. Addicott and his co-workers isolated as substance from young
cotton bolls and named it as Abscisic acid. This acid is now isolated
from dormant seeds, buds and other parts of the plants. Abcisic is a
growth inhibitor. Abscisic acid has no stimulating effect on any aspect
of growth.
(i) Functions of abscisic acid :
(A) Growth : A.B.A. has antagonistic property to growth promoting
hormones (auxins, gibberellins and cytokinins). Thus it keeps the
growth under check.
(B) Dormancy : A.B.A. induces dormancy in buds towards the
approach of unfavorable conditions. it causes natural dormancy in seeds
and tubers.
(C) Abscission : It promotes abscission in leaves, flowers and fruits
and causes ageing in plants.
(D) Wilting : During drought it closes the stomata and checks loss of
water by transpiration. This ensures the survival of plant undergoes
wilting.
(E) Resistance : It promotes cold hardiness.

(F) Flowering and seed development : It is known to inhibit the
process of flowering, fruit formation and seed development.
9.4
CHEMICAL CO-ORDINATION IN ANIMALS :
Coordination in animals is brought about by the secretions of endocrine
glands. Endocrine glands are ductless glands which secrete the
chemical substances called hormones, Directly pour into the blood. Any
chemical substance which is formed is the tissues of endocrine glands
are carried by the blood the other parts of the body for its specific
actions is termed as hormone. As organ which responds to such a
hormone is known as target organ.
9.4 (a) Characteristics of Hormones :
(i)  They are the secretions of endocrine glands.
(ii) They are produced at a place and act on target organs which are
mainly away from their source.
(iii) They are poured directly into the blood steam.
(iv) They are required in very small quantities.
(v) they are specific in function.
(vi) Chemically they are mainly proteins.  Some of them may be amino
acids, steroids etc.
(vii) They are harmful if present in less or excess amounts.
Viii) Hormones are immediately destroyed after their action is over.
9.4 (b) Feedback Mechanism :
Endocrine glands interact with each other, so that secretion of one gland
may stimulate or depress the activity of another. The amount of
hormone released by an endocrine gland is determined by the body’s
need at any given time e.g. The hypophysis produces a hormone that

stimulates the thyroid to produce its hormone; in turn the thyroid
secretion induces the hypophysis to produce less thyroid stimulating its
hormone; in turn the thyroid secretion induces the hypophysis to
produce less thyroid stimulating hormone. This is known as the
‘negative feedback’. This feed-back helps bring about a steady state in
the body which is called as homeostasis.
9.5
VARIOUS ENDOCRINE GLANDS PRESENT IN THE
HUMAN BODY ARE :
(i) Pituitary 
gland 
(or 
Hypophysis) (ii)
Pineal
gland
(iii)
Thyroid gland
(iv) Parathyroid 
gland
(v)
Thymus
gland
(vi)
Adrenal gland
(vii)
Pancreas
(viii) Ovaries
(ix)
Testes
9.5 (a) Pituitary Gland (or Hypophysis):
It is a small ovoid structure attached to the base of brain (hypothalamus)
by a short stalk called infundibulum placed just behind the optic
chiasma where the optic nerve from each eye meet. Pituitary gland is
also known as the master gland as it controls other endocrine glands.
This gland consist of three lobes-anterior, middle and posterior. Each
lobe of the pituitary gland secretes different sets of hormones.
(i) Hormones of anterior pituitary :
(A) Growth hormone (GH) : This hormone promotes and regulates the
process of growth in the body. It’s deficiency during childhood lead to
dwarfism and over secretion leads to gigantism.
(B) Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) : This regulates the
activities of adrenal cortex. It mainly stimulates the adrenal cortex to
secrete corticosteroid hormone which defends the human body under
stress.
(C) Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) : As is clear from its name it

controls the functioning of thyroid gland. It stimulates thyroid gland to
secrete thyroxin.
(D) Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) : It stimulates the production
of gametes, stimulates the development of ovarian follicles in females,
and its equivalent in the males stimulates sperm production.
(E) Luteinising hormone (LTH) : In causes ovulation and formation
of corpus luteum, which secretes progesterone in females and stimulates
the testis to produce testosterone in males.
(F) Luteorophic hormone (LTH) : This is also known as prolactin.
This hormone stimulates growth of mammary glands during pregnancy
and promotes lacation after deliver. Prolactin level rise during
pregnancy and is very high during lactation.
(ii) Hormones of middle pituitary:
(A)  Melanocyte stimulating hormone (MSH) : This is the only
hormone secreted by middle pituitary which controls the growth and
development of melanocytes responsible for skin colour.
(iii) Hormones of posterior pituitary :
(A) Vasopressin or Antidiuretic hormone (ADH): This causes the
reabsorption of water into the blood from the collecting tubules of the
kidney’s thereby concentrating the urine and reducing it volume.
(B) Oxytocin : This hormone stimulates uterus contractions as the time
of child birth and causes release of mil from mammary glands. It is also
known as birth hormone or milk ejecting hormone.
9.5 (b) Pineal Gland :
It is a small gland reddish-grey in colour, about the size of a pea,
attached to the roof of the third ventricle of the brain. It contributes in
regulating 
gonadal 
development. 
It 
control 
development 
&
concentration of melanin.
9.5 (c) Thyroid Gland :
The thyroid gland consist of two lobel joined together by an isthmus. It

is situated in the lower part of the neck and when enlarged it forms
goitre. Two hormones secreted by the thyroid gland are :
(i) Thyroxine : It is the principal hormone secreted by the thyroid gland
and its main role is to increase the metabolic rate of he organs and
tissues of the whole body. 60% of thyroxine consists of iodine, an
element which is essential for the gland to enable it to synthesize its
hormone. The basal metabolic rate (B.M.R.) is increased in
hyperthyroidism and reduced in hypothyroidism.
(ii) Calcitonin : This hormone lowers the calcium level in the ways :
(A) By inhibiting renal tubular calcium reabsorption.
(B) By inhibiting bone calcium reabsorption.
• Hypothyroidism : This results from lack or deficiency of thyroid
hormone secretion. It is manifested differently in children as
compared with adults. Cretinism affects children and is due to
congenital defect of either absence or defect of the gland. In this
disease growth is stunded, the features are coarse, frequently the
child has a protruding tongue and an enlarged abdomen; the
mentality of the child is low and retarded. Myxoedema is the
condition caused by thyroid deficiency in adults. It affects woman
more frequently than men. It is characterized by puffy face, thick
skin, dry cough, cold and loss of hair. There is a deposition of mucin
and fluid retention in extracelluar spaces. B MR is lowered Iodine
deficiency causes simple goitre.
• Hyperthyroidism : This results from excessive secretion and over
action of thyroid hormones, As excessive amount of thyrozine is
poured into the blood and the metabolism of the body is speeded up.
The person starts loosing weight, has an increased pulse rate, suffers
from nerves excitement and there is protrusion of eye balls. These
toxis sings and symptoms are responsible for the condition being
known 
as 
toxic 
goitre. 
Other 
names 
are 
thyrotoxicosis,
exophathalamic goiltre and grave’s disease.

9.5 (d) Parathyroid Gland :
These are small ovoid pea shaped glands. They lie on the posterior
surface of the thyroid gland. Usually there are two pairs of parathyroid
glands, a superior pair and an inferior pair. The parathyroid secretion,
parathormone has two main functions.
(i) It regulates the balance between the calcium in bones and in
extracellular tissue fluid, thus affecting the amount of calcium in the
blood.
(ii) It also controls the excretion of phosphates in the urine, probably by
reducing tubular reabsorption of phosphorus by the kidney tubule.
9.5 (e) Thymus Gland :
This gland is situated in the thorax in midline under the sternum in front
of trachea. It has two lobes which are further divided into many lobules.
it secretes a hormone namely thymosin. It is one of the sites of
lymphocyte formation in children. Recently thymus has assumed
importance because of its role in immunological process. It helps in
producing antibodies.
9.5 (f) Adrenal Glands :
These are two small semilunar structure lying one each on upper pole of
the kidneys. That is why they are also known as supra renal glands.
Each gland consists of two structurally and physiologically separate
parts known as cortex and medulla. The cortex occupies outer
peripheral portion which is yellowish in colour and medulla is inner
brownish part. Cortex secretes three different kinds of hormones known
as corticosteroids. They are :
(i) Mineral corticoids : These regulate sodium and potassium balance
in the body.
(ii) Glucocorticoids : These derive their name from their influence on
carbohydrate metabolism e.g. Glycogenesis is promoted in liver.
(iii) Sex hormones : Small quantities of sex hormones as androgens
and oestrongen are produced by adrenal glands which influence sexual

development and growth.
• Adrenal medulla is important in raising defence mechanisms and
supplementing sympathetic action in the body. It secretes two
hormones.
(i) Adrenaline : It is a stress hormone causes increases in systolic
blood pressure, dilation of coronary
blood vessels, increased sweating and increase in metabolic rate. It
brings restlessness, muscle fatigue and anxiety.
(ii) Noradrenalin : It is a general vasoconstrictor, Increases both
systolic and diastolic pressures. Both of these hormones are helpful
in emergency conditions. Thus are called as “fight or flight
response”.
9.5 (g) Pancreas :
Pancreas is the only heterocrine gland in the human body. It acts as
exocrine as well as endocrine gland. It acts as exocrine as it secretes
pancreatic juice which is poured into the duodenum with the help of
pancreatic duct. The endocrine tissue of the pancreas is in the form of
clumps of secretory cells known as the islets of langerhans. he islet
cells are of three-alpha, beta and delta.
(i) Insulin is secreted by the beta cells and like other hormones, passes
directly into the blood. Insulin is required to convert glucose into
glycogen (glycogensesis) and store it in  liver. Deficiency of insulin due
to defect in islets of Langerhans results in diabetes mellitus, a
condition in which blood glucose in high and is passed in the urine.
(ii) The alpha cells of pancreas secrete glucagon, the metabolic effects
of which are opposite to those of insulin. It causes the breakdown of
liver glycogen, thereby releasing glucose into the blood stream.
(iii)
The third hormone somatostating is secreted by the delta
cells of the islets of Langerhans. It is able to inhibit the secretion of
many hormones. As it inhibits the release of growth hormone of

pituitary gland, it is also known as growth hormone release inhibiting
hormone (GHRIH).
9.5 (h) Ovaries :
Ovaries secrete three hormone :
(i) Oestrogn : FSH from the anterior pituitary controls the secretion of
oestrogen by acting on the Graffain follicles. This hormone effects the
development of female sex characters. The oestrogen secretion
influences the follicular phase. Its secretion in maximum during
evaluation period. Moreover during pregnancy the oestrogen secretion
by placenta keeps of increasing till full term.
(ii) Progesterone : It is secreted by corpus luteum. This hormone in
contrast to oestrogen which is produced continuously during the
reproductive years, is secreted only after ovulation. Progesterone
prepares the uterus for receiving the embryo. It prepares inner lining of
the uterus i.e. endometrium to receive the in implanting embryo for
about a week. If ovum gets fertillized, the corpus luteum continues to
play a role in maintaining the pregnancy for the first three months, after
which the placenta takes over the role of corpus luteum by secreting
progesterone itself. This hormone is essential for the maintenance of
pregnancy and is therefore called pregnancy hormone. If pregnancy
does not follow ovulation, corpus luteum degenerated and breaks down
due to the lack of progesterone.
(iii) Relaxin : This hormone is secreted during later stage of pregnancy
and leads to relaxation of muscles of the pelvic area to enable easy child
birth and reduce the pressure on the foetus.
 
9.5  (i) Testes :
Testosterone is the main testicular hormone secreted by interstitial cells
of the testis. It is mainly concerned with the development an
maintenance of male sex characters and enhancing the process of

spermatogenesis.
9.6 NERVOUS CO-ORDINATION IN ANIMALS :
In animals two kinds of co-ordination -nervous & chemical are present.
The nervous co-ordination is brought about by the nervous system and
the chemical co-ordination by hormones. Both the systems work an
integrated system. Infect such a control and coordination requires.
(i) Gathering information about changes in the external environment.
(ii) Transmitting this information to the internal cells located away
from the body surface and.
(iii)
Exchange of information between the ells situated away from
each other
• Nervous system in animals : Except, Sponges, all multicellular
animals posses simple or complex nervous system. Ina all these
animals, nervous system is comprised of specialized cells called
neurons or nerve cells to respond to stimuli and coordinate animal
activities. Nerve cells are the structural & Functional units of nervous
system.
• Nervous system of Hydra : Hydra belongs to phylum Cridaria
(Coelenterate) of the group invertebrate. The nervous system in
hydra is merely a network of nerve cells joined to one another and
spread throughout the body between the two gem layers, outer
epidermis & inner gastrodermis. This network is called as nerve
net. When the body of hydra receives certain stimulus at a particular
region from the environment, the nerve cells present at the region
send impulses in all the direction through the network of nerve call
spread throughout the body. In this way, nerve network coordinates
responses to different stimuli in Hydra without the existence of
central control region i.e. brain.
• Nervous system is grasshopper (as Insect) : In insets, the nervous
system consist of a brain, ganglia (singular ganglion) & nerve cord.
A mass of nerve cells is called ganglion. The nerve cord run along
the entire length of the body. At interval, it has ganglia. Small nerves
are given out from each ganglion. Near the anterior end of the insect
body, a large bilobed ganglion, called the brain, is present. Thus the
nervous system of grass hopper consist of a rain, a long nerve cord,

the ganglia and nerves spreading form the nerve cord.
Nervous system of Grass hopper
DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS # 9
OBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
1.
Phytohormones are
(A) hormones regulating growth from seed to adulthood
(B) hormones regulating secondary growth
(C) growth regulators synthesized by plants and influencing
physiological processes
(D) hormones regulating flowering.
2.
The natural plant hormones were first isolated from
(A) cotton fruits, spinach leaves, rice plant(B) avena coleoptiles,
fungus gibberella
(C) corn germ oil, human urine
(D) human urine, rice plant.
3.
If the tip of a seeding is cut off, growth as well as bending ceases
because it hampers
(A) perception of light stimulus
(B) transpiration

(C) respiration
(D) photosynthesis.
 
4.
A plant bends towards the source of light when exposed to the
light on only one side. Which of the following is the best explanation of
the phenomena ?
(A) It needs light for photosynthesis
(B) The apices of their stems are attracted by light
(C) Some auxin accumulates on the shaded side to induce greater cell
elongation on that side
(D) Light stimulates the cells on the illuminated side to increase in
length
5.
The movement of plant organs in response to the force of gravity is
called
(A) hydrotropism
(B) geotropism
(C) heliotropism
(D)
phototropism
6.
A high concentration of synthetic auxins is generally used for
(A) wee control
(B) enhancing root initiation
(C) controlling of cell enlargement
(D) preventing the growth of
the lateral buds.
7.
Gibberellic acid has been successfully employed to induce flowering
(A) in long day plants under short day conditions (B) in short day
plants under long day conditions
(C) for some plants
(D) none of the above
8.
Cytokinins are known to
(A) inhibit cytoplamic movement
(C) help in retention of
chlorophyll
(C) influence water movement
(D) promote abscission layer
formation
9.
Ethylene is a
(A) 
solid 
hormone
(B) 
gaseous 
enzyme
(C) 
gaseous

hormone
(D) liquid gas mixture
10.
Pineapple an be made to flower if off season by
(A) 
zeatin
(B) 
ethylene
(C)
temperature
(D) short days
SUBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
VERY SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
1.
What do you mean by receptors and effectors ? Name the different
types of receptors.
2.
Define hormones. What do you mean by phytohomones ?
3.
What do you mean by tropic and nastic movements ? Give one
example of each.
4.
What are the functions of nervous system ?
5.
What do you mean by photoperiodism ?
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
6.
Describe the forebrain of a mammal.
7.
Write a short note a chemical co-ordination in plants.
8.
Dedifferentiate between endocrine and exocrine hormones. Write the
characteristics of hormones.
9.
Mention the effects of sympathetic and parayasympathetic nervous
system on the following :
(i) Heart
(ii)
Urinary bladder
(iii)
Eye
(iv) Gastric secretions
(v) 
Bronchi
10.
Name the different type of hormones secreted by pituitary. Also
mention their functions.
11.
Draw a diagram of human brain and label the following part on it :

(i) 
Cerebrum
(ii) 
Meninges (iii) 
medulla 
oblongata
(iv)
Cerebellum
[CBSE Delhi 2005]
12.
Draw a diagram of nervous system in an insect. Label the following
pars on it
(i) Brain
(ii) Ganglion (iii) Nerve Cord
13.
Write the functions of hormone ‘thyroxine’ in our body.
[CBSE
Delhi 2004]
14.
We suddenly withdraw our hand when a pin pricks. Name the type of
response involved in this action.
[CBSE Delhi 2004]
15.
Name the part of hind brain which takes part in regulation of
respiration.
[CBSE Delhi 2004]

 
CONTROL & CO-ORDINATION
 
10.1
NERVOUS SYSTEM IN HUMAN :
The nervous system of human beings consists of central & peripheral
nervous systems. Neuron is the structural & functional unit of nervous
system. It is the longest cell found in the body. They unit the receptor
and effector organs with each other. The nervous system is composed of
neurons. These are surrounded by a connective tissue called neuroglia.
Impulses from recptors run through neurons. The number of neurons are
almost fixed for a particular species.

10.1 (a) Struture :
Each neuron consist of  a cell body called cyton and a number of
branches (nerve fibres) arising from the cyton. Neuron does not divide.
Cyton contains a nucleus within the cytoplasm & Nissl’s granules
(formed of RER with ribosomes) and fine thread like  fibres, called
neurofibrils.
(i) Dendrites : These are short, several, much branched & contain
granules. They carry impulse towards the cyton.
(ii) Axon : It is a large, single and unbranched structure. It has not
nissl’s granules. It carries impulses from cyton to the effector organs
like glands, muscles etc. It is a typical nerve fibre consisting of a central
thin cytoplasm cylindrical axis continuous with the body. It’s cytoplasm
is called axoplasm. Axis cylinder is enclosed in a thin permeable
membrane called axolemma or nerve membrane. A layer of fatty
material called myelin or medullary sheath is found outside the
axolemma. Such fibres are called myelinated (medullated) fibres. They
seems to be white. Nerve fibres lacking myelin sheath are called non-
myelinated & appear grey in colour. Myelin in interrupted at intervals
by circular constrictions called Nodes of Ranvier. Terminal branches of
axon are called telodendria. Each telodendron ends in a swollen knob
called synaptic knob or terminal button. Synaptic knob of one serve
fibre (axon) forms synapse with the dendrites of another neuron.
Synapse is a very fine gap between two neurons. Thus, in the entire
nervous system neurons are linked together.
10.1
(b) Types of Neurons or Nerve Fibres :
(i) Motor : It carries impulses from brain and spinal cord to effector
organs.
(ii) Sensory : It transmits impulse from sensory organs to central
nervous system.

10.1 (c) Types of Nervous System :
(i) Central nervous system : It consists of the brain and the spinal
cord. The brain is covered by cranium & spinal cord is covered by
vertebral column Both are also surrounded by three membranes of the
connective
tissues called meninges.
• Outer most Duramater
• Middle Arachnoid
• Inner most Piamater. The space between the membrane is filled with a
fluid called cerebrospinal fluid that protect the brain from mechanical
shocks. The brain can be differentiated into three main regions fore
brain, mid brain & hind brain.
(A) Fore brain : It consists of olfactory lobes, cerebrum and
diencephalon.
• Olfactory lobes : These are a pair of small, solid, cube shaped bodies.
They are fully covered by cerebrum. They receive impulse for smell.

• Cerebrum : It is the largest part of the brain. It consists of two
cerebral hemispheres joined by a band of nerve fibres called corpus
callosum. Surface of cerebral hemisphere is made up of gray metter,
called cerebral cortex. It becomes highly folded to increase area for
accommodation of more neurons. The folds are called gyri & depression
between them, are called sulci. Deep and wide sulci are called fissures.
Fissures divide each cerebral hemisphere into four lobes
(i) Occipital lobe
:
Region for visual perception
(ii) Frontal lobe
:
For muscular activities
(iii) Parietal lobe
:
For touch, smell, temperature and conscious
association.
(iv) Temporal lobe
:
For auditory reception
Cerebrum has sensory areas where impulses are received from sense
organs (receptors). Similarly it has a general motor area from where
impulses are sent to effector organs (Muscles & glands)
• Diencephalon : It encloses a cavity called third ventricle. It consists
of thalamus and hypothalamus. Thalamus serves as a relay centre for
sensory and motor impulses from spinal cord and medullaoblongata to
cerebrum. It recognizes sensory impulses of heat, cold, pain, light &
pressure. Floor of third ventricle is called hypothalamus. It possesses
control centres for hunger, thirst, thermoregulation, sleep, sex, stress
etc.
(B) Mid Brain : It consists of two heavy fibre called Crura cerebri.
These tracts connect fore brain to the hind brain. These are the centres
for control of eye movement and hearing responses.
(C) Hind brain :
• Cerebellum : Very large & well developed. It controls coordination
and adjustment of movements (equilibrium) and posture.

• Pons varolii : it lies above the medulla oblongata. It controls some
aspects of respiration.
• Medulla oblongata : It is the posterior most part of the brain and
continues into the spinal cord. It controls involuntary functions of the
body such as heart beat, rate of breathing, secretion of saliva,
swallowing, coughing, sneezing, vomiting etc.
• Spinal Cord : It lies in the vertebral column. It starts from medulla
oblongata and extends downward. It is also protected by three
meninges and cerebrospinal fluid. It also acts as a centre for spinal
reflexes.
(ii) Peripheral nervous system : It included cranial nerves and spinal
nerves. It mainly controls the voluntary activities of the body. Cranial
nerves also called cerebral nerves arise from brain. There are 12 pairs of
cranial nerves in man and 31 pairs of spinal nerves arise from spinal
cord.
(iii) Autonomic nervous system : It controls Involuntary activities of
internal organs such as hear, blood vessels, glands & smooth muscles of
alimentary canal & uterus. It is subdivided into
• Sympathetic
• Parasympathetic system.
Organs receive nerves from both sympathetic and parasympathetic
nerve fibres. They have opposite effects on the organs if one is
stimulatory, the other is inhibitory.
 
10.1 (d) Effect of Sympathetic and Parasympathetic System :
Organ
Sympathetic System
Parasympathetic
system
Heart
Increase heart beat
Decreases heart beat
Blood vessels
Constricts arteries &
raises blood pressure.
Dilates arteries & lowers
blood pressure
Brochi
Dilates bronchi making
breathing easier
Constricts bronchi
Eye
Dilates pupil
Constricts pupil

Gastric secretion
Inhibits secretion
Stimulates secretion
Salivary glands
Inhibits 
secretion 
of
saliva
Stimulates secretion
Urinary bladder
Relaxes urinary bladder Contracts 
urinary
bladder
Liver
Reduces bile secretion
Promotes bile secretion.
10.1
(e) Reflex Action :
Reflex action is the name given to the response which is at the
level is spinal cord itself. It is a rapid automatic response to a stimulus
by an organ or a system of organs, which does not involve the brain for
its initiation. A reflex action is an unconscious (without will) and
involuntary response of effectors (muscles or glands) to a stimulus.\
 
10.1 (f) Reflexes are of Two Types :
Simple or unconditioned and continued reflexes.
(i) Simple reflex : It is an inborn response to a stimulus. Where
learning is not required. These are mostly protective in function  e.g.
knee jerk occurred immediately when patella tendon of leg is sharply

tapped, quick closing of eyelid when an object suddenly comes in fort
of eyes (corneal reflex) etc.
(ii) Conditioned reflex : These are not inborn. They are acquired by
experience, training & learning. e.g. Learning of cycling or driving of
scooter etc.
10.1
(g) Electro Encephalogram (EEG) :
An instrument called electro encephalograph can record electrical
activity of brain. The activity of brain is recorded as electrical potentials
such a record is called Electro Encephalogram. By placing two
electrodes on the scalp and leading via suitable amplifier to ink writing
device, record of four different types of waves is obtained. These waves
are named as alpha, beta, delta and theta and vary in frequency. These
waves give the characteristic activity of brain which is very useful for
clinical purposes.
 
DAILY PRACTICE PROBLES # 10
OBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
1.
The effect of daily light period on flowering is called
(A) photooxidation
(B) phototropism
(C) photoperiodism
(D)
photorespiration
2.
Brain stem is formed by the union of
(A) optic lobes
(B) cerebellum with optic lobes
(C) corpora striate
(D) mid brain, ponsvarolli and medulla
oblongata
3.
Number of spinal nerves in man are
(A) 11 pairs
(B) 13 pairs
(C) 6 pairs
(D) 31
pairs

4.
Third ventricle occurs in
(A) cerebrum
(B) cerebellum
(C) medulla oblongata (D)
diencephalon
5.
The pineal body is considered as
(A) an endocrine gland
(B) an organ concerned with voluntary
actions
(C) an organ concerned with vision
(D) a vestige of third eye
and endocrine gland
6.
Part of brain involved in interpretation, storage of information
and initiation of response on the basis of past experience is
(A) 
motor 
area
(B) 
cerebellum
(C) 
sensory
area
(D) association area
7.
Autonomic nervous system controls
(A) reflex action
(B) sense organs
(C) internal
organs
(D) skeletal muscle
8.
The study of nervous system and its disorders is called
(A) neurogenesis
(B) hematology
(C) neuroglia
(D)
neurology
9.
In reflex action the reflex arc is formed by
(A) brain 
 spinal cord 
 muscles
(B) receptor 
 spinal
cord 
 muscles
(C) muscle 
 receptor 
 brain
(D) muscles 
 spinal cord 
receptor
10.
The sensation of sight in human brain is perceived by
(A) 
optic 
lobe
(B) 
occipital 
lobe
(C) 
frontal
lobe
(D) parietal lobe
SUBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
VERY SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
1.
Systematically represent the path of a reflex action. From where it is

controlled ?
2.
What are the functions of the following endocrine glands?
(i) 
Pancreas
(ii) 
Thyroid
(iii) 
Adrenal
(iv)
Ovaries
(v) Tastes
3.
Name the parts of endocrine system called as super master and master,
also write their functions.
4.
Write a short note on electroencephalography (EEG).
5.
Write a short note on forebrain ?
6.
Distinguish between cerebrum & cerebellum.
7.
What are the functions of hindbrain ?
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
8.
Write a short note a nerves. Also write about the different types of
nerves found in human body.
9.
What is hypothalamus ? Where it is situated? What are its main
functions and secretions ?
10.
Describe the structure of neuron with the help of a well lablled
diagram.
11.
Write down the source, site of action and functions of the following.
(i) 
Auxins
(ii) 
Progesterone
(iii) 
Thyroxin
(iv)
Ethylene
(v) Insulin
12.
Write a short note on secretory nature of.
(i) 
Pancreas
(ii) 
Liver
(iii) 
Testes
(iv)
Ovaries
(v) Adrenals
13.
Define ‘nerve impulse’. Which structure in neuron helps to conduct a
nerve impulse ?
(i) 
Towards 
the 
cell 
body
(ii) 
Away 
from 
the 
cell
body
[CBSE, 2004]

14.
Which hormone is responsible for the development of moustache and
beard in men. [CBSE, 2004]
15.
What is the difference between sensory and motor neurons.
Which parts of human brain are responsible for auditory reception and
sensation of smell ?
16.
Which type of glands in human body secrete hormone ? State any one
location for them. [CBSE, 2004]
ANSWERS
DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLESM # 9
Qus.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Ans.
C
B
A
C
B
A
A
B
C
B
DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLESM # 10
 
Qus.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Ans.
C
D
D
D
D
D
C
D
B
B
           
REPRODUCTON                            
                    
 
11.1
MEANING OF REPRODUCTION :
Reproduction is the ability of living organisms to produce new living
organisms similar to them. It is one of the important characteristic of

life.
11.1 
(a) Purpose of Reproduction :
Reproduction is aimed sat multiplication and perpetuation (stability) of
the species. In other words it proves group immortality by replacing the
dead individuals with new ones.
11.1
(b) Basic Features of Reproduction :
The modes of reproduction vary is different organisms. However all the
these have certain common basic features. These are -
(i) replication of DNA
(ii) cell division
(iii) Formation of reproductive bodies or units
(iv) development or
reproductive bodies into offspring
11.2 FORMS OF REPRODUCTION :
Animals reproduce in a variety of ways. Which are categorized in two
categories i.e. Asexual and sexual reproduction.
11.2 (a) Asexual Reproduction :
Definition : Production of offspring by a single parent without the
formation and fusion of gametes is called as asexual preproduction. It
is more primitive type or reproduction. If ensures rapid increase in
number.
Occurrence : Asexual reproduction occurs in protozoans and some
animals such as sponges, coelentrates, certain worms and tunicates. It is
absent among the higher invertebrates and all vertebrates.
Type of Asexual Reproduction: Asexual reproduction takes place in
the following principal ways :
(i) Fission : it is the simples form of reproduction in which unicellular
organism either devised into two or many organisms.
• It is also divided into two types :
(A) Binary fission : It is a type of reproduction in which nuclear
division is followed by the appearance of a constriction in the cell
membrane, which gradually deepens inward and divides the

cytoplasm into two parts, each with one nucleus. Finally two
daughter cells are formed.
e.g. Amoeba
(B) Multiple fission : Sometimes the nucleus several times into
many daughter nuclei. The daughter nuclei arrange at the periphery
of the parent cell, and a bit of cytoplasm around each daughter nuclei
is present. nucleus develops an outer membrane. Finally the
multinucleated body divides into many daughter cells. e.g.
Plasmodium.
(ii) Budding : Formation of daughter individual from a small projection
which is called as bud, arising on the parent body is called as budding.
Budding is also of two types :
(A) Exogenous budding : [External budding] In this, bud arises
from the surface of parent body, e.g., Hydra.
(B) Endogenous budding :  [Internal budding] In this, bud arises
inside or within the parent body e.g., Sponges.
NOTE : During the process of budding, the bud remains attached to the
parent body so as to derive it’s nutrition from the parent but as it
matures, it get’s detached form the parent body.
(iii) Fragmentation : It is a type reproduction or the regeneration
ability of the organisms to replace their lost part. In this process an
entire new organism can grow from certain pieces or cells of the
parent organisms. e.g. Flatworm.
(iv) Spore formation : It is a process of reproduction most
commonly found in fungi, some cocci and bacillus bacteria. During
this process a structure called as sporangium is formed. In this
structure nucleus divides several times and each nucleus with a little
trace of cytoplasm forms a spore. These spores are then liberated out
and develop into a new hyphen, e.g. Rhizopus.
(v) Vegetative propagation : This is a type of reproduction found in
higher plants in which a new plant is formed from vegetative part of
the plant such as roots, stems or leaves.

It is of following types :
(A) Cutting : This is the very common method of vegetative
propagation practised by the gardeners all over the world. It is the
process in which a vegetative portion from plant is taken and is
rooted in the soil to form a new plant e.g. Grapes, Sugarcane etc.
(B) Layering : In this process the development of adventitious
roots is induced on a stem before it gets detached from parent
plant, e.g, Mango, roses etc.
It is of three types :
• Mound layering : In the process of layering the lower stem
branch of plant is used. Leaves are removed from this stem. Then
it is bent close to the ground, pegged and covered with the moist
soil in such a way that it’s rowing tip remains above the solid
surface. This pegged down branch is called as layer. After a few
days the covered portion of stem develops roots. This stem is then
detached from the parent plant and is grown separately from the
parent plant and is grown separately into a new individual .e.g
Jasmine
NOTE : The formation of adventitious roots in a layer can be
hastened by injuring the ’layer’ by tonguing, ringing or notching.
• Air layering : It is adopted in those plans where stem cannot be
bent to the ground. In this process the stem is girdled (i.e. ring of the
bark is removed). then it is covered with moist moss or cotton and
wrapped with a polythene sheet to preserve the moisture. After few

weeks adventitious roots develop from the injured part. The branch
along with roots in then separated from the parent plant and planted to
grow into a new plant. e.g. Orange, Pomegranate etc.
• Grafting : The process of joining together of two different plants
in such a manner that they live as one plant is called as grafting.
Out of the two plans one is rooted in the soil and is known as the
stock. The other part consist of a small shoot bearing one or more
buds, it is known as scion. Their union is carried out in such a
way that their cambium must overlap each other e.g. Mango,
roses etc.
(vi)Micro propagation : It has now become possible
due to recent techniques to produce a large number of plantlets
from a small piece of tissue taken from the shoot tip or other
suitable plant parts. This method of propagation  is called as
micropropagation. It involves the process of tissue culture.
e.g., Orchids, ornamental plants etc.
• Significance of vegetative propagation
(A) It is used to propagate a plant in which viable seeds are
not formed or very few seeds are  produced e.g. Orange,
pineapple, banana etc.
(B) Vegetative propagation helps us to introduce plants in
new areas where the seed germination fails to produce
mature plant due to change in environmental factors and the
soil.
(C) Vegetative propagation is a more rapid, easier and

cheaper method of multiplication  of plants.                           
             
(D) By this method a good quality of a race or variety can
be preservers.
(E) Most of the ornamental plants are propagated through
vegetative propagation. e.g. Rose, Tulip etc.
(vii) Parthenogenesis : It is a modification of sexual reproduction in
which an egg develops into a
complete offspring without fertilization. It is monoparental (i.e.
fusion of gametes does not occur, only a single parent gives rise to
a new individual).
• Significance of asexual reproduction : It brings about
multiplication of the species only. It does not play a role in
evolution as no variation is introduced into the new
individual formed by it.
11.2 (b) Sexual Reproduction :
• Definition : Production of offspring by formation and fusion of
special haploid cells called as gametes. These are contributed generally
by two parents. i.e. ,male gamete and female gamete is called as
sexual reproduction.
• Occurrence: Sexual reproduction occurs nearly in all animals
including those which reproduce asexually. In most animals there are
two sexes male and female, and the differences between them are
genetically determined.
• Types of sexual reproduction :
(i) Syngamy : It involves the complete and permanent fusion of two
gametes to form a composite cell called as zygote. This is a common
mode of sexual reproduction.
(ii) Conjugation : It involved temporary pairing of two parents which
exchange their pronuclei and then undergo the process of separation .e.g
Paramecium etc.
• Characteristics of sexual reproduction :
(i) It is generally biparental [i.e. it involves two parents ]

(ii) It involves formation and fusion of gametes.
(iii) Cell divisions are both meiotic & mitotic during gamete formation
and mitotic during development of zygote  into an offspring.
(iv) The offspring’s are not genetically identical to the parents.
(v) Fertilization in case of humans is internal.
(vi) Infects can be fed on mother’s milk.
(vii) Parental care is very well developed,
• Significance of sexual reproduction :
(i) It results in multiplication and perpetuation  of species.
(ii) It contributes to evolution of the species by introducing variation in
a population much more rapidly than asexual reproduction.
• General Terms :
(i) Fertilization : It is the process of fusion of gametes.
(ii) Unisexual organism : In case of humans male and female sex
organs are separate and therefore called as unisexual.
(iii) Bisexual : In plants and some organisms like tapeworm, earthworm
etc. both male an female organs are present in the same individual and
therefore called as bisexual.
(iv) Gonads: Organs which are involved in the formation of gametes
are called as gonads.
(v) Copulation or mating : The process of transfer of male gametes
into female body.
11.3
REPRODUCTION IN A FLOWERING PLANT :

 
11.3 (a)A flower Consists of Following Parts :
(i) Calyx: The sepals collectively are called as calyx. They
are usually green in colour and protect the inner whorls of a flower
especially during bud formation.
(ii) Corolla : It consists of coloured petals. They are normally
large often fragrant and bright coloured. Their primary function is to
attract animals and insects for pollination.
(iii) Androecium / stamen/male reproductive organ : The stamens
are referred to as the male reproductive organ. A typical stamen is
differentiated into three parts, they are filament connective and anther.
(A) Filament : It forms the stalk that bears more or less cylindrical
or avoid anther.
(B) Connective : It connects anther to filament.
(C) Anther : It is present on the top of filament. Each anther consists
of two lobes that is why it is called as bilobed. Bed anther lobe has
two pollen sacs which contain millions of tiny microscopic grains,
called as microspores. The pollen grains are like yellow dusty
powder in appearance.

             (A)                                  (B)                                             (C)
Fig. :(A) ventral view showing connective 
        (B) dorsal view          (C) t.s. of
fanther showing pollen chambers
(vi) Gynoecium / pistil / female reproductive organ :
• It is located in the center of a flower.
• It is composed of one or more carpals.
• The freely occurring units of the carpals in a flower are called
pistils.
• Each pistil usually consist of three distinct parts - ovary, style and
stigma.
(A) Ovary : It is a basal, swollen part of the pistil The ovary has one
or more chambers called the loculi which is distributed in a special
cushion like parechymatous tissue called the placenta, from which
the ovule develops.
(B) Style : From the top of the ovary arises a long, elongated
structure called as style.
(C) Stigma : The terminal end of style is called as stigma. The
stigma is normally rough, hairy or sticky to hold pollen grains during
pollination process.
11.3 (b) Pollination :

The transfer and deposition of pollen grains from the anther to the
stigma of a flower is called as pollination.
• Types of pollination : Pollination is of two type -
(i) self pollination : It is the process of transfer of the pollen grains
from the anther to the stigma of either the same or genetically similar
flower. It is further divided into two types :
(A) Autogamy: It is a type of self pollination in which the pollen
grains are transferred from the anther to stigma of the same flower
e.g. Wheat, rice pea etc.
(B) Geitonogamy : It is a type of self pollination in which the pollen
grains are transferred from the anthers of one flower to the stigma of
another flower borne either on the same plant or a genetically
identical plant.
• Significance of self pollination :
• It maintains purity of race.
• It also maintains the superiority of variety once developed.
(ii) Cross pollination : it is the process of transfer of the pollen
grains from the anther of one flower to the stigma of another flower
borne on a different plant of the same species.
POLLINATION
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig : Flow diagram showing the types of pollination

• The transfer of pollen grains  occurs through various ways, which
may be biotic or abiotic.
(i) Abiotic factors
Technical terms
Wind
Anemophily
Water
Hydrophily
(ii) Biotic factors
Insects
Entomophily
Birds
Ornithophily
Bats
Chiropterophily
Snails
Malacophily.
• Significance of cross pollination :
(i) Increase in yield and adaptability.
(ii) It eliminates defective traits and produces new varieties.
(iii) It also leads to the hybrid production.
11.3 (c) Fertilization is a Flowering Plant :
•
Fertilization is a process of fusion of male gamete with the female
gamete.
•
The process of formation of male gametophyte in case of plants is
called as microsporogenesis.
•
The process of formation of female gametophyte in case of plants is
called as megasporogenesis.

•
The process of pollination occurs, due to which the anther get stuck
up to the stigma.
•
After reaching to stigma pollen grains develops a pollen tube.
•
This pollen tube grown through the length of style, from where it
reaches to ovule.
•
Pollen tube comprise of two male gametes, which is later
on released in the embryo sac through an opening called as
micropyle.
•
Here one male gamete fuses with the egg to form a diploid
zygote and the other male gamete fuses with the polar bodies to
form a triploid nucleus which later on produces the structure called
as endosperm.
•
The process of fusion of one of the male gamete with egg
and the other male gamete with polar bodies is called as “double
fertilization.”
•
The fusion of one male gamete with the two polar bodies
to form endosperm is called a “triple fusion” (at it involves one
male gamete and two polar bodies).
NOTE : The endosperm is meant to provide nourishment to the
developing embryo.
• After fertilization sepals and petals fall and zygote undergoes a series
of mitotic division to from a
multinuclear embryo.
•
At maturity wall of ovules changes to seed coat of which
outer one is hard and is known as testa, while inner one is called as
tegnum.

•
Ovule change into seed and ovary wall change into fruit wall.
FIG: SHOWING FERTILIZATION IN A FLOWER
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

DIFFERENCES BETWEEN SELF POLLINATION AND CROSS
POLLINATION
S.NO.
SELF POLLINATION
CROSS POLLINATION
1.
Pollen grains are transferred
from the anther to the stigma
of 
the 
same 
flower
(autogamy) or another flower
on 
the 
same 
plant
(geitonogamy)
Pollen grains are transferred from
the anther of one flower to the
stigma of another flower borne
on a different plant of the same
species (allogamy).
2.
Both the anther and stigma
mature at the same time.
The anther and stigma of a flower
generally mature at different
times.
3.
It can occur even when the
flowers are closed
It occurs only when the flowers
are open.
4.
External agent is not required
for self-pollination.
An external agent abiotic or
biotic, is essential for cross-
pollination
5.
It is economical for the plant.
Cross-pollination 
is 
not
economical at the plant has to
produce a lot of pollen grains,
nectar, scent and bright-coloured
corollas etc.
6.
Self-pollination 
ultimately
results in progenies which are
pure lines i.e. homozygous.
Cross-pollination produces the
offspring which as hybrids i.e.,
heterozygous. 
They 
show
variations in characteristics.

7.
In cannot eliminate useless or
harmful characters.
It 
can 
eliminate 
useless 
or
harmful characters.
8.
Highly useful characters get
preserved in the race.
Useful 
characters 
cannot 
be
preserved in the progenies.
9.
Self-pollination 
does 
not
introduce any variations and
hence 
the 
offspring 
are
unable 
to 
adapt 
to 
the
changed environment.
Cross-pollination 
introduce
variations 
in 
the 
offsprings.
These variations make these
plants to adapt better to the
changed environment for the
struggle for existence.
10.
Immunity of the race towards
disease falls in the succeeding
progenies.
Immunity of the race towards
disease is usually marinated in
the succeeding progenies.
11.
Yield of the plant gradually
falls with time.
Yield of the plant usually does
not fall.
12.
Self-pollination never helps
in the production of new
varieties and species.
Cross-pollination is a mechanism
of roducing new varieties and
species among plants.

DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS # 11
OBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
1.
Cleistogamous condition is present in
(A) Brassica oleracea
(B) Solanum tuberosum
(C) Arachis
hypogea
(D) Allium cepa
2.
Which of the following regenerated with the help of layering?
(A) Cactus
(B) Rose
(C) Mango
(D)
Jasmine
3.
Development of egg without fertilization is
(A) parthenocarpy
(B) polyembryo
(C) parthenogenesis
(D) adventive embryony
4.
Anemophily is pollination by
(A) air
(B) water
(C) insects
(D) animal
5.
Pollination between different flowers of same plant is called
(A) 
autogamy
(B) 
geitonogamy
(C)
allogamy
(D) xenogamy
6.
Double fertilization is
(A) fusion of two male gametes with egg
(B) fusion of one male gamete with egg and the other male gamete with
the polar bodies
(C) both are correct
(D) both are incorrect
7.
The structure meant for the nourishment of developing embryo in case

of plant is
(A) pollen tube
(B) endosperm
(C) both A & B are correct
(D) none of these
8.
The embryo sac of a typical dicot at the time of fertilization is -
(A) 8 called
(B) 7 celled
(C) 6 called
(D) 5
celled
9.
The genetic information is stored in -
(A) DNA
(B) RNA
(C) Ribosome
(D) ER
10.
Each female flower consist of
(A) ovary
(B) stigma
(C) ovary, style and stigma
(D) thalamus

SUBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
VERY SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
1.
What is reproduction ?
2.
What is the basic requirement of sexual reproduction ?
3.
What is the difference between binary and multiple fission ?
4.
What is a spore ?
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
6.
What is budding ? mention it’s types.
7.
What are accessory sex organs ?
8.
What is gonad and what are it’s functions ?
9.
Define implantation.
10.
Differentiate between vas deferens and vasa efferentia.

           
REPRODUCTION
                                                   
                    
 
BL-12
12.1
SEXUAL REPRODUCTION IN HUMANS :
• Mammals are unisexual.
•
Reproductive system of each organism consists of many
reproductive organs.
•
These can be primary sex organs or secondary sex organs.
•
The primary sex organs are called as gonads. They
produce sex cells or gametes and also secrete sex hormones.
•
The gonads of males are called a testis, which produce sperms.
•
The gonads of females are called as ovaries, which produce ova or
female gametes.
•
Secondary sex organs include the reproductive ducts
which transport gametes and reproductive glands which help in
process of reproduction. These organs do not produce gametes.

•
e.g., In males : Vasa efferentia, epididymis, seminal
vesicles, ejaculatory duct, urethra etc. In females : Fallopian tube,
uterus, vagina, mammary glands etc.
•
Accessory or external sec characters help to distinguish the two
sexes of a species externally.
•
e.g., In male : Muscular body, more height, low pitched voice,
moustaches etc.
In female : High pitched voice, breast development, lateral pubic
hairs etc.
•
Puberty : Beginning of sexual maturity is known as puberty.
•
At this stage primary sex organs start functioning.
•
Secondary sex organs develop dully under the influence of
sex hormones produced by primary sex organs.
•
In the stage of puberty body growth is very rapid.
•
It occurs at the age of 10 - 14 years in girls and 13 - 15 years in
boys.

12.1 (a) Male Reproductive System :
Fig : Male reproductive system.
• Male reproductive system comprises of following parts :
(i) Testis
(ii) Scrotum
(iii) Vasa efferent
(iv) Epididymis
(v) Vas deference
(vi) Ejaculatory
duct
(vii) Urethra
(viii) Accessory sex glands
(ix) Penis
(i) Testis :
• They are soft, smooth, pinkish, oval organs. They are housed
[present] in a sac like structure called as scrotum. Outer covering
is called as as tunicavaginalis.
• It’s inner covering is called as tunica albuginea.
• Ingrowths of tunica albuginea are called as septa, that divide
the testis into 200-300 lobules.

Fig : Longitudinal section of mammalian testis .
 
• It also consist of convoluted somniferous tubules.
• These somniferous tubules at one end join to form tubules which
open into a network of irregular cavities known as rete testis.
• This rete testis comes out from a dorsal surface of the testis
with the help of vesa efferentia.
This vasa efferentia combines to form a single tube which
becomes highly coiled and from epididymis.
• This vasa efferentia combines to form a single tube wihich
becomes highly coiled and form epididymis.

• Epididymis peon into a narrow tube vas deferens.
• Somniferous tubules from the spermatogenic tissue of the
testis.
• It consists of a germinal epithelial layer at the periphery.
Spermatogenesis occurs at the center.
• It forms spermatogonia which grows and form spermatocytes
which further grow to form primary spematrocytes, which
undergo meiosis to form secondary spermatocytes and then
spematids.
• The later (i.e. spermatids) metamorphose into spermatozoa.
• This process of formation of spermatozoa from spermatogonia
is called as spermatogenesis.
• These spermatozoa are nourished during the development by
nurse cells.
Epithelial layer
Cuboidal cells
Mitosis
Spermtogonia
Primary spematocytes
Secondary spermatocytes
Spermatid
Spermatozoa
these are then nourished by nurse cells
 
Flow chart showing the process of Spermatogenesis
 

• In between somniferous tubules, there are interstitial cells known
as Leydig cells which secrete male hormone called as
testosterone. This hormone helps in the growth and development
of male sex hormone.
(ii) Scrotum : It is a pouch of pigmented skin arising from the lower
abdominal wall and hanging between the legs.
• It is divided internally into two compartments by a muscular partition
called as septum scroti.
• Scrotum possesses smooth involuntary dortus muscles.
• Scrotum sac is connected to the abdominal cavity through inguinal
canal.
• Function of dortus muscle is to change the position of testis to keep
them at proper temperature.
• Scrotum has temperature 1 - 3 lower than body temperature which
favours the formation of sperms.
• Duct system :
(iii) Vasa efferentia : Rete testis is connected to epididymis through a fine
tubule called as vasa efferentia. They help in conduction of sperms.
(iv) Epididymis : They are long tubules which lie compacted along the testis
from their upper ends to lower back side. Its walls are muscular and glandular
to provide or secrete nutritive fluid which provides nourishment to the
sperms.
(v) Vas deference :
• Vasa efferentia from epididymal duct finally opens into vas deferens.
• It comes out through inguinal canal passing over urinary bladder to
receive ducts from seminal vesicles.
• They are thick walled and muscular and conduct sperms.
(vi) Ejaculatory duct : They are short, straight, muscular tubes, each formed
by the union of vas deferens and duct of seminal vesicles.
(vii) Urethra : it arises from urinary bladder forming a urinogenital canal. It
carries urine, sperm and secretion of seminal vesicles, prostrate and cowper’s
gland.

(vii) Accessory glands: They consist of prostrate gland, a pair of seminal
vesicles, and a pair of cowper’s gland.
(A) Prostrate gland : It is a large pyramidal gland that encloses a part of
urethra including it’s junction with the ejaculatory duct. It contains 30 - 40
alveoli which open separately into urethra by fine ducts. Secretion is thick,
milky and alkaline which continue 20 - 30% semen.
(B) Cowper’s glands “ These are a pair of small glands, present below the
prostrate and consist of separate opening. Their secretion provide
lubrication to the reproductive track.
(C) Seminal vesicle : It is paired and present between urinary bladder and
rectum. It’s secretion from a major part of semen (60-70%). It is thick,
viscous, alkaline having proteins, fructose and prostaglandins.
(ix) Penis : It is a male copulatory organ which also passes urine. It consists
of highly sensitive covering of skin called prepuce.
12.1 (b) Semen :
it is milky, viscous and alkaline fluid, ejaculated by reproductive
system of males during copulation
• It’s quantity is 2.5 - 4.0 ml at a time having about 40 million sperms.
• Semen has chemical for nourishment of sperms neutralizing the
acidity of urethra and vagina, stimulating their movement in female
tract.
•
Spermatogenesis starts at puberty under the influence of
gonadotropin secreted from anterior pituitary gland.
12.1 (c) Structure of Sperm :
Each sperm consists of following parts :
(i) Head(ii) Neck
(iii) Middle piece
(iv) Tail
(i) Head : It is oval in structure. It is composed of a large nucleus and a
small acrosome. The nucleus is compact. It consists of DNA and basic

proteins. Acrosome lies at the tip of nucleus. It is formed of golgi
complex. It consist of hydrolytic enzymes and is used to contact and
penetrate the egg during fertilization.
(ii) Middle piece: It is cylindrical in human sperms. It consists of ATP
and mitochondria in a thin layer of cytoplasm. Mitochondria is coiled
round the axial filament, it provided energy and it is said to be the
power house of the sperm.
(iii) Neck : It is very short and constrains two centrioles. These play an
important role during the first cleavage of the zygote.
(iv) Tail : It is very long, slender and tapering. It is formed of
cytoplasm. It’s main function is to provide mobility to the sperm. End
piece consists of the exposed axial sheath, which forms a fine filament.
 
Fig : Mammalian spam
12.2
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM :
Female reproductive system comprises of following parts :
(i) Ovaries
(ii) Fallopian tube
(B) Uterus

(iv) Vagina
(v) Glands
(i) Ovaries : These are oval shaped lying near the kidney.
• Ovary is covered by two layers outer is made up of germinal
epithelial cells.
• Inner layer is called as tunica albuginea which is made up of fibrous
connective tissues.
• The ovary consists of inner part called as stroma.
• It’s outer peripheral pat is called as cortex while inner part is called a
medulla.
• Medulla consists of connective tissues containing numerous blood
vessels, lymphatic vessels and nerves.
• Cortex consists of graffian follicles in all the stages of development.
The developing oocyte is called as primary oocyte
 
This primary follicle undergoes maturation to form
secondary follicle or secondary oocyte
 
It later on forms follicular layer
 
This follicular layer undergoes mitotic
division to form secondary egg membrane.
 
This stage is called as secondary follicle
 
This is called as graffian follicle
FLOW CHART SHOWING THE FORMATION OF GRAFFIAN
FOLLICLE
• Cortex also consists of large mass of yellow cells termed as corpus
luteum, formed in an empty graffian follicle after the release of it’s
ovum.
• The cells of corpus luteum secrete the hormones
(A) progesterone during pregnancy.
(B) Relaxing at the end of

pregnancy.
• Oestrongen is secreted by graffian follicle and intestinal cells. It’s
secretion is maximum during ovulation. It is also secreted during
pregnancy.
Fig : structure of ovum .
(ii) Fallopian tube : It is about 10 cm. long muscular tube. It shows 4
regions :
(A) Infundibulum : It is the broad, funnel shaped proximal part of
fallopian tube. It’s margin bears finger like processes called as
fimbriae. This is meant to carry ovum by ciliary movement to the
uterus.
(B) Ampulla : It is a long, wide part of the fallopian tube next to the
Infundibulum.
(C) Isthmus : it is the narrow part that follows ampulla.
(D) Uterine part : It is also narrow and passes through the uterine
wall.
(iii) Uterus : It is large, highly elastic sac specialized for the
development of the embryo.
• It is situated in a pelvic cavity.
• It is attached to the fallopian tube from the sides and below it
opens into vagina through cervix.
• This uterus undergoes cyclic changes during phases of menstrual
cycle.
(iv) Cervix : Lower narrow cervix that projects into the vagina. The
cervix communicates above with the body of the uterus and below with
the vagina.
(v) Vagina : It is a large, median, elastic, muscular tube. This canal

opens externally into labia minora and labia majora. It’s folds consist
of stratified squamous epithelium which has mucous lining It secretes a
lubricant fluid. Labia majora is the innermost, thin, moist fold. Labia
minora is outer large and hair covered. pH of vagina is 4.3 It is also
called a “Birth canal”.
 
Fig : Female reproductive system.
(vi) Gland :
• Bartholin’s gland : it secretes a clear, viscous fluid under sexual
excitement.
• The fluid serves as a lubricant during copulation or mating.
12.2 (a) Menstrual Cycle :

FIG :  SHOWING VARIOUS PHASES OF MENSTRUAL CYCLE
• It is a cyclic phase of the flow of blood with mucus and tissues etc.
from the uterus of a woman at monthly interval.             
• It occurs on average of 28 days interval.
• It starts at the age of 12-14  years and stops at 45-50 years of life.
• This cycle stops during pregnancy.
• The menstrual cycle consists of following phases :
(i) Bleeding or menstrual phase :
• It is the first stage of menstrual cycle.
• It’s duration is of 5 days but normally bleeding is found for 2-3
days.
• In this stage hormones estrogen, progesterone, follicle
stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone are found in
minimum quantity.
• Total 100 ml, of blood flows in a complete bleeding phase.
(ii) Proliferative phase :
• In this phase F.S.H. stimulate development and maturation of
graffian follicles.
• In this phase oestrogen level rises which leads to formation of new
endometrium.
• It lasts for about 10 - 14 days. Thinnest endometrium is found in

this phase.
• It is also called as follicular phase.
(iii) Ovulation phase :
• At this phase ovulation occurs.
• Ovulation occurs in the presence of FSH and LH.
• Thicket endometrium found in this stage.
• It also lasts for about 14 days.
(iv) Secretory phase : In this sage both oestrogen and progesterone
levels are high.
• If fertilization takes place, this stage extends till to the parturition
(giving birth to a child)
• If, fertilization  does not take place, this stage completes on 28th
day of menstrual cycle.
• The commencement of menstruation of puberty is called as
menarche.
• It’s stoppage around the age of 50 years is called as menopause.
• The period between menarche and menopause is the reproductive
phase in human female.
12.2 (b) Ooganesis :
Oogenesis is a process of formation of ovum. the ovum is a rounded,
non-motile cell. It’s size varies in different animals depending upon the
amount of yolk in it.
Ovum consists of two types of coverings :
(i) Inner thin, transparent, non-cellular, covering called as zona
pellucida. it is composed of protein and sugars. It is secreted y by

follicle cells.
(ii) Outer thick covering is called as corona radiata.
Germinal epithelial cells
 
Primary Oocyte
 
division 
 
 
 
(i) Secondary 
(ii) Polar
Oocyte 
     body
[23 chr.]
 
Futher division 
occurs 
Polar body 
Polar body
Mature
 Polar body
oocyle
   or
ovum
 
FIG : THE PROCESS OF OOGENESIS
 
12.3
FERTILIZATION :
•
It included release of ovum from the ovary, where it remains viable
for 12 - 24 hours.
•
At the time of sexual intercourse the sperm enters in to the vagina.
•
Only one sperm is required for fertilization of the ovum.
•
The head of the sperm penetrates the corona radiate layer of ovum
and then the zona pellucida layer.
•
This process if facilitated by acrosome and proteolytic enzymes.
•
After penetration the tail and body of the sperm is lost, only head
remains inside the ovum.
•
It’s head begins to swell and forms male pronucleus.
•
Here the pronuclei of sperm and ovum fuse to from a new

resultant nucleus each contributing 23 chromosome, so that the
resultant may have 46 chromosomes.
 
Sperm
 
With the help of acrosomes & proteolytic
enzymes enter the ovum
 
Tail & body of the sperm is
lost after it’s entry in the ovum
 
Head of sperm swells up to form male pronucleus
 
This male pronucleus fuses with female pronucleus
 
Forms a new resultant nucleus with 46 chr. Each
contributing about 23 of chromosomes.
 
Zygote
 
Embryo
 
Fig : Showing process of fertilization
 
•
Fusion of male & female gametes is called as fertilization. Zygote
starts developing in fallopian tube
and forms embryo, this later on moves to uterus. It gets attached to
uterine walls and the whole process is called as implantation
•
Placental formation occurs between uterine wall and the
foetus, which provides nourishment to the foetus.
•
The time period for which a developing fetus remains
inside the mother’s womb is called as gestation period. it extends
for about 9 months or 40 weeks or 280 days.
•
The process of giving birth to baby is called as parturition.

12.4
ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION :
•
It is a technique to make a female pregnant by artificially
introduction semen into vagina.
•
In this process semen from a good quality male is
collected, preserved by freezing and used when required.
•
In case of humans it is also being used for improving the chances of
fertility.
•
A man may be infertile due to insufficient number of
sperms, weak or premature ejaculation, inability of penis to undergo
and enter the vagina or nonmotile sperms.
•
In this case husband’s semen is collected, concentrated and
introduced artificially into the wife’s vagina. this is called as
artificial insemination.
•
If the husband’s sperms are faulty, some donors sperm can
be used. This is called as artificial insemination donor.
•
Artificial insemination has following two advantages.
(i) Semen of good quality male animal is used to inseminate a
number of females.
(ii) Preserved semen can be transported to distant places, excluding
the need for sending the male animal there.
Differences between asexual and sexual reproduction
Asexual reproduction
Sexual reproduction
1. It is always unipraental
It is generally bipraental.
2. Gametes are  not formed.
Gamete are formed
3. There is no fertilization.
Fertilization occurs in it.
4. In involves mitotic cell division.
It involves meiotic cell division.
5. 
Daughter 
individual 
are
genetically identical to the parent
Daughter individual are different
from theparents.
6. It does not contribut to the
evolution.
It contributes to the evolution by
introduction 
variation 
in 
the
offspring

12.5
POPULATION GROWTH:
•
The term population refers to the total number of
individuals of a species occupying particular geographical area at a
given time.
•
The 
scientific 
study 
of 
human 
population 
is 
called 
as
“demography”.
•
Factors that lead to increase in population are :
(i) Increase in protection from risk
(ii) Illiteracy
(iii) Desire of son
(iv) Decline in death rate
(v) Desire for more earning hands
(vi) Unawareness of various birth control measures
12.6
METHODS 
ADOPTED 
FOR 
POPULATION
CONTROL
(i) Planned control of population :
(A) By educating people about the advantages of small family.
(B) Raising the age of marriage can help in reducing population
growth.
(C) By family planning.
(ii) Temporary methods :
(A) Safe period : A week before and after the menstrual cycle is
considered to be infertile and fertilization, does not occur during this
period.
(B) Coitus interrupts : It involves withdrawal by males before
ejaculation so that semen is not deposited, in vagina.
(C) Chemical means : These includes certain jellies, paste, foam tables
which when introduced into vagina cause immobilization of sperms and

kill them. They also include contraceptive pills which inhibit secretion
of F.S.H. and L.H. ovulation is inhibited.
(D) Mechanical means :
• They involve use of condoms.
• Use of cervical or diaphragm cap which is fitted in the vagina that
checks the entry of sperms.
• IUD (intrauterine device) called as copper-T is also fitted in the
uterus which prevents fertilization.
(E) Surgical methods: It involves tubectomy in females which
involves cutting of fallopian tube, and vasectomy in males which
involves cutting of vas deference from both the sides. However, surgical
removal of ovaries also occurs which is called as ovariectomy and in
males removal of testis called as castration.
• Abortion : Medical termination of pregnancy is called as abortion.
DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS # 12
OBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
1.
In mammals, the testes lies in scrotal sacs due to
(A) presence of urinary bladder
(B) presence of rectum
(C) long vas-deference
(D) requirement of low temperate for
spermatogenesis
2.
Graffian follicles are found in
(A) testis of mammas 
(B) ovary of frog
(C) ovary of
cockroach
(D) ovary of mammals
3.
Site of fertilization in mammals is

(A) 
ovary
(B) 
uterus
(C) 
vagina
(D)
fallopian tube
4.
The process of reproduction which involves only a single parent to
form an individual
(A) sexual reproduction
(B) asexual reproduction
(C) none of these
(D) Both A & B are correct
5.
Cowper’s glands are found in
(A) 
male 
mammals
(B) 
female 
mammals
(C) 
male
amphibians
(D) female amphibians
6.
Loss of reproductive capacity in women after age of 45 years is
(A) menstruation
(B) ageing
(C) menopause
(D)
menarche
7.
Release of oocytes from ovary is
(A) 
gestation
(B) 
ovulation
(C) 
parturition
(D)
implantation
8.
Acrosome is made up of
(A) 
mitochondria
(B) 
centrioles
(C) 
golgi
bodies
(D) ribosomes
9.
Acrosome aids the sperm to
(A) penetrate vitelline membrane of ovum
(B) find ovum
(C) swim
(D) higher activity
10.
Progesterone is secreted by
(A) corpus luteum
(B) thyroid
(C) thymus
(D)
testis

SUBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
1.
Why regeneration is considered to be a method of reproduction ?
2.
When an organism is called as bisexual, what does it indicate ?
3.
Define fertilization.
4.
What happens to the ovule and the ovary after fertilization?
5.
Define the term puberty.
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
6.
What is name the sexual cycle in human females called ? Explain the
sexual cycle in human female.
7.
What do you understand by gestation period and what is it’s time
duration ?
8.
In case of self-pollination there are two possibilities. State them.
9.
What is the function of fallopian tube ?
10.
What is semen ?
               ANSWER
 
 
DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS # 11
 
 

Que.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Ans.
C
D
C
A
B
B
B
B
A
C
DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS # 12
 
Que.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Ans.
D
D
D
B
A
C
B
C
A
A

           
HEREDITY & INHERITANCE
                                                   
                    
 
BL-13
13.1
HEREDITY :
In includes those traits or characters which are transmitted from
generation to generation and are therefore fixed for a particular
individual.
•
Genetics : Study of Heredity and variation is said to be
known as genetics. The term genetics was first of all used by W.
Bateson in 1905. An Austrian monk namely Gregor Johann Mendel
was the first person to study genetics. He was therefore regarded at the
‘Father of Genetics’.
13.2
VARIATIONS :
Variation is concerned with the difference between the individuals of
same species and also between the offspring of the same parents.
•
Variations could be of two types :
(i) Somatic variation
(ii) Germinal variation
(i) Somatic variation : Somatic variation affects the somatic
cells of an organism. It is neither inherited from parents nor transmitted
to next generation. It is acquired by individual during it’s own life and
is lost with it’s death. It is therefore also called a acquired variation or

blastogenic variation.
•
Somatic variations are due to :
(A) Environment : This includes the factors that affect the
organisms such as food, air, pressure, humidity, after etc. Environment
affects all the organisms however they also affect the plants because
they cannot move or hide themselves.
•
Light : Strong sunlight affects the human skin by increasing
the dark pigment melanin in the epidermal cells. Melanin protects the
underlying cells by absorbing the ultra violet rays of the sun. Plants
grown in shade become weak and pale and acquire long internodes and
broad leaves.
•
Habitat : It also affects the genetic make - up of an individual and
leads to variations.
•
Nutrition : It is also one of the various factors that cause variations.
(B) Use of disuse of organs : Continuous use of an organ makes
it better developed whereas constant disuse makes it reduced.
(C) Conscious efforts : Conscious efforts by man produce
somatic variations in humans themselves, in domestic animals and
plants.
(ii) Germinal variation : This variation affects the germ cells of
an organism and is consequently inheritable. It is received by the
individual from the parents and is transmitted to the next generation.

•
Germinal variation could be of two types :
(A) Continuous variations : [Fluctuating variations] The
continuous variations are very common in nature. These are found in
all animals and plants and affect all of their organs. These various are
unstable and do not contribute to the formation of new species.
•
Causes of continuous variations :
• New combination of character
•
Crossing over [recombination of genes]
(B) Discontinuous variations : This variation refers to large
conspicuous differences of the offspring from the parents. This
variation is also known as mutation and the individual with this kind
of variation is called as mutant. This is not common in nature. It
appears suddenly. It is stable and inheritable.
•
Causes of discontinuous variations :
•
Modification in structure of  chromosomes.
•
Alteration in the chemical nature of genes.
•
Change in the number of chromosomes.
•
Radiations and chemicals may also cause mutation.
•
Significance of Variation :
•
Variation enables the organisms to adapt themselves to the changing
environment.
•
If forms raw material for evolution.
•
It enables the organisms to face the struggle for existence in a better
way.
•
It helps men in improving the races of useful animals and plants.
•
It is the basis of heredity.
•
It also leads to the existence of new traits.
13.3
HEREDITY 
AND 
VARIATION 
IN 
ASEQUAL
REPRODUCTION :
There are organisms in which reproduction occurs by asexual means.

These include Bacteria, Amoeba, Euglenas, fungi etc. many plants such
as rose and sugarcane, lower animals namely Hydra, planaria etc.
This asexual reproduction is monoparental and the organism produced
by it inherits all the traits of it’s single parent. It is almost a carbon copy
of the parent and is known as it’s clone. It is also called as clonal
reproduction. Here, one thing to the noted is the term ‘offspring’ is
not used in case of asexual reproduction.
•
The clones may develop variations :
•
By environmental factors
•
By mutation
The variations causes due to environmental factors are not transferable
but these variations which are caused by mutation are stable and
inheritable.
13.4
HEREDITY 
AND 
VARIATIONS 
IN 
SEXUAL
REPRODUCTION :
Variation is very much common in animals and plants which carry
reproduction by sexual means. The reason for this is the sexual
reproduction is biparental and the offspring receives some traits from
one parent and some traits from other parent. Interbreeding of closely
related individuals reduces the occurrence of variations in the
offspring’s produced by the sexual reproduction.

13.4
(A) Earlier Views of Heredity :
Different theories have been put forward to explain in what physical
form the traits pass from the parents to the offspring’s.
(i) Vapour theory: This theory was proposed by a Greek
Philosopher Pythagoras. he states that each organ of an animal
body emitted some kind of water vapour and that a new individual
was formed by the combination of these vapours from different
organs.
(ii) Fluid theory : Another Greek Philosopher Aristotle [384 - 322
B.C.] stated that
(A) Man’s semen is highly purified blood.
(B) Woman’s menstrual fluid is the female semen, which was not as
pure as man’s semen.
(C) The two combines during intercourse and female semen
provides substance for embryo formation and male semen provides
from and vitality to embryo. This is called as Blending theory of
inheritance.
(iii)
Preformation theory : This theory was proposed by
Anton Von Leeuwenhoek who was the first to observe human
sperm. He called them “animalcules”. He states that each sperm
has a potential to develop into a new individual when introduced
into the woman’s womb where it could get nourishment. This theory
was rejected because it failed to explain the inheritance of maternal
characters by offsprings.
(iv) Particulate theory : A French biologist Maupertius
proposed that each animal produces minutes particles for
reproduction and a new individual is formed by the union of the
particles of the two parents. Then a famous English Naturalist
Charles Darwin forwarded the theory of pangenesis for the
inheritance of characters. He assumed that tiny particles called
pangenes or gemmules by his were formed in the various parts of
the body and migrate to the reproductive cells and hence to the
offsprings to guide the formation of the respective parts. Thus the
young one has a blend (mixture) of the pangenes hence here is a

presence of the characters of both the parents.
Mendel was the first to give the particulate theory of heredity. He
had experimented on pea plants to study how traits are transferred or
inherited. He unfortunately failed to explain the cause of inheritance.
He also proposed various principles to explain the inheritance. Later
on other scientists led to the discovery of genes and chromosomes.
13.5
MENDEL’S 
EXPERIMENTS 
AND 
LAWS 
OF
INHERITANCE :
Gregor Johann Mendel is appropriately called as Father of genetics.
With the help of his experiments on garden pea, he was able to
formulate laws which explain the manner of inheritance of characters.
Although Mendel described his results in 1866, his work was
recognized only in 1900, when Mendel’s laws were rediscovered
simultaneously y Hugo de varies a Dutch biologist, Carl Correns a
German botanist and Erich von Tschermak as Austrian botanist.
•
Some general terms used by him are :
•
Dominant trait : The trait which appears in F1 generation
is called as dominant trait. It is denoted by capital letter. e.g. TT
(tall).
•
Recessive trait : The traits which does not appear in F1
generation is called as recessive trait. It is denoted by small letter,
e.g. tt (dwarf)
•
Monohybrid cross : It involves the study of inheritance of
one pair of contrasting character. e.g. Inheritance of tall and dwarf
characters.
•
Dihybrid Cross : It is the inheritance of two pairs of contrasting
characters.
•
Trihybrid cross : it is the inheritance of three pairs of contrasting
characters.

•
Back cross : The cross between F1 generation with any of the
parents is known as back cross.
•
Test cross : The cross between F1 generation and the recessive
parent is called as test cross.
•
Genotype : It is the genetic representation of a trait. e.g. TT or Tt
for a tall plant.
•
Reciprocal cross : The reciprocal cross involves two
crosses concerning the same characteristic but with reverse sex. It
means if in the first cross A is female and B is male then in the
second cross A will be male and B will be female.
•
Phenotype : it is the expression of a trait e.g. Tall pea
plant, it can be noted by direct observation of an individual.
•
Allele : Term allele refers to each of the members of a genetic pair.
•
Homozygous traits : They have similar alleles for specific
trait (TT or tt). They produce only one type of gametes.
•
Heterozygous traits : They have dissimilar alleles for a
specific trait (Tt). They produce two types of gametes
13.6
MENDEL’S EXPERIMENT
Mendel chose garden pea as plant material for his experiments, since it
has following advantages.
•
Well defined characters
•
Bisexual flowers
•
Predominantly self-fertilization
•
Easy hybridization
•
Cross fertilization is possible
13.6 (a)Crossing Technique Employed by Mendel :
Since garden pea is self- fertilizing, the anthers have to be removed
before maturity. This operation is called as emasculation. The stigma is
protected against any foreign pollen with the help of a bag. The pollens
then at the dehiscence stage, is brought from the plant to be used as
male parent and is dusted on the feathery stigma of the emasculated
flower. At the time of pollination, the pollens should be mature and the

stigma should be receptive.
Emasculation
 
Bagging [for protection]
 
Dehiscence [by dusting pollens]
 
Pollination
 
(i) Traits choosen by Mendel for his experiment : There are
seven traits which Mendel has choosen, they are as follows :
S.No.
Characters
Dominant
Recessive
1.
Stem height
Tall
Dwarf
2.
Flower
colour
Violet
White
3.
Flower
position
Axial
Terminal
4.
Pod shape
Inflated
Constricted
5.
Pod colour
Green
Yellow
6.
Seed shape
Round
Wrinkled
7.
Seed colour
Yellow
Green

(ii) Mendel performed experiments in three stages :
(A) he made sure that, the plant which he had choosen must
be true breeding plant, by letting the plant to undergo self-
fertilization.
(B) He performed the process of cross palliation of alternate
forms of traits. The resultant generation obtained was termed as
hybrid, and these hybrids formed are called as F1 generation i.e.
First filial generation.
(C) He allowed the hybrid to self pollinate upto five
generations and these generations are subsequently termed as F2,
F3, F4 and so on.
(iii) Result’s of Mendel’s Experiments :
(A) When the self pollination was made and F1 generation
was obtained, it was found that the resultant generation would
express only one of the trait and not the other. The trait which is
being expressed is called as dominant, whereas the one which is not
expressed is called as recessive trait.
(B) In the F1 generation obtained by self p
ollination, the dominant and the recessive traits obtained
were in the ratio of 3 : 1 i.e. 75% of the offsprings which appeared
in F2 generation had dominant trait, while 25% had recessive trait.
This ratio of 3 : 1 is also said to be known as Mendelian
monohybrid
ratio .
 
T
T

t
Tt
Tt
t
Tt
tt
In F1 all are tall
 (F1 Ï F1)
 
 
 
T
t
T
TT Tt
t
Tt
Tt
In F2 we will get  3 : 1 ratio.
 
Homozygous tall : Heterozygous tall : Homozygous dwarf
1  
:
2
:
1

(C) Mendel further found that the phenotypic ratio of 3 : 1 of
dominant to recessive form of a trait was actually a genotypic ratio
of 1 : 2 : 1 of pure dominant, hybrid and pure recessive forms.
The traits which remain hidden in F1 generation got expressed in F2
generation. This was later on proved in F3 generation.
(iii) Reasons from Mendel’s success :
(A) He selected true breeding [pure] pea plant for his experiment.
(B) He studies single trait at  time.
(C) He kept an accurate mathematical record of his breeding
experiments and noted down the number of each type of offspring
produced in each cross.
(D) He was lucky enough to select the seen traits, as the gene
for these traits are located on four different chromosomes.
13.7
MENDEL’S LAWS OF INHERITANCE :
On the basis of the experiments performed and the result obtained
Mendel formulated four laws. They are :
13.7 (a)The Principle of Paired Factors :
Each character in a n individual is governed by two factors called as
gene. The alternative form of gene is called as alleles or allelomorphs.
If an individual consists of similar types of alleles, they are called as
homozygous e.g. TT, tt while those having different types of alleles are
called as heterozygous e.g. Tt etc.
13.7 (b) The Principle of Dominance or Law of Dominance :
When two homozygous individuals with one or more sets of contrasting
character are crossed the characters that appear in the F1 hybrids are
dominant characters and those which do not appear in F1 are recessive
characters.
13.7 (c) The Principle of Segregation of Law of Segregation :
[Law of purity of gametes] The law of segregation states that when a

pair of contrasting factors or genes or allels are brought together in a
heterozygous condition, the two remains together without being
contaminated but when gametes are formed form them the two separate
out from each other. This is also known as Mendel’s first law of
heredity.
13.7
(d) The Principle of Independent Assortment or Law of
Independed Assortment:
If the inheritance of more than one pair of characters is studied
simultaneously, the factors or genes for each pair of characters assort
out independently. It is called as Mendels second law of heredity.
13.8
DIHYBRID CROSS :
In dihybrid cross Mendel crossed genetically pure yellow round seeded
(YYRR) pea plant with green wrinkled (yyrr) pea plant. All the plants
of F1 were all yellow and round seeded (YyRr). In F2 generation four
types of plants appeared as :
•
Yellow rounded - 9
•
Yellow wrinkled - 3
•
Green round-3
•
Green wrinkled - 1
So here phenotypic ratio is 9 : 3 : 3 : 1

 
yr
yr
YR YyRr YyRr
YR YyRr YyRr
All F1 plants are yellow and round seeded
 
 
YR
Yr
yR
yr
YR
YYRR
Yyrr
YyRR YyRr
Yr
YYRr
Yyrr
YyRr
Yyrr
yR
YyRR
YyRr
yyRR
yyRr
yr
YyRr
Yyrr
yyRr
yyrr
13.9
GENES :
The term ‘gene’ was introduced by Johansson for Mendelian factor.
Gene determines the physical as well as physiological characteristics.
They are transmitted from parents to their offsprings generation after
generation. Genes are located on chromosomes where they occupy
specific position called as locus. This was proved experimentally by
T.Bovery and W.S. Sutton in 1902. They are responsible for
characteristic features.

13.9
(a) Molecular Structure of Gene :
Chemically gene is formed of DNA. If consists of following parts :
(i) Recon : It is the smallest unit of DNA capable of undergoing
crossing over and recombination.
(ii) Muton : It is also the smallest unit of DNA capable of undergoing
mutation.
(iii) Cistron : It is a gene is real sense, which consists of number of
nucleotides and which is capable of
synthesizing a polypeptide chain of enzymes.
(iv) Replicon : It is a unit of replication.

DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS # 13
OBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
1.
When a red flower homozygous pea plant is crossed with a
white flower plant what colour is produced in F1 ?
(A) Red
(B) White
(C) Pink
(D) Red
and white
2.
Mendel formulated the law of purity of gametes on the basis of
(A) 
dihybrid 
cross
(B) 
monohybrid 
cross
(C) 
back
cross
(D) test cross
3.
A cross between AaBB X aa BB yields a genotypic ratio of
(A) 1 AaBB : 1 aaBB
(B) 1 AaBB : 3 aaBB
(C) 3AaBB : 1
aa BB
(C) All AaBb
4.
In monohybrid cross what is the ratio of homozygous dominant
and homozygous recessive individual in F2 - generation ?
(A) 1 : 2 : 1 
(B) 2 : 1 / 1 : 2 
(C) 3 : 1 / 1 :
3
(D) 1 : 1
5.
Back cross is a cross between
(A) F1 × F1
(B) F1 × Recessive
(C) F1 ×
Dominant
(D) F1 × any parent
6.
A white flowered mirabilis plant rr was crossed with a red
coloured RR, if 120 plants are produced in F2 generation. The result
would be
(A) 90 uniformly coloured and 30 white
(B) 90 Non -
uniformly coloured and 30 white
(C) 60 Non-uniformly coloured and 60 white
(D) All coloured
and No white
7.
Which one caries extra nuclear genetic material ?
(A) Plastids
(B) Ribosomes
(C) Chromosomes
(D)
Golgi - complex
8.
The ratio of phenotype in F2 generation of a dihybrid cross is

(A) 3 : 1
(B) 1 : 2 : 1 
(C) 2 : 1 
(D) 9 : 3 :
3 : 1
9.
Branch of biology deal s with heredity and variation is called
(A) Palaentology
(B) Evolution
(C) Genetics
(D)
Ecology
10.
The factors which represent the contrasting pairs of characters are
called
(A) Dominant
(B) Recessive
(C) Determinants
(D)
Alleles
SUBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
SHORT ANSWERT YPE QUESTIONS
1.
What are autosomes ?
2.
Name the four nitrogen bases of a nucleotide.
3.
Define the term genetics.
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
4.
What does the science of genetics deals with ?
5.
Differentiate between submetacentric and metacentric chromosomes
with diagram.
6.
Explain the structure of a gene.
7.
What is genetic engineering ?
8.
Why did Mendel choose pea (Pisum sativum) for his experiment ?

           
HEREDITY & INHERITANCE
                                                   
                    
 
BL-14
14.1
CHROMOSOMES :
E.Strasburger discovered chromosomes in 1875. They are thread like
structure and are called as chromosomes due to their affinity towards
dyes [chroma = colour]. Genes are located on chromosomes and the
genetic material of chromosomes is DNA. These are also called as
“hereditary vehicles “ as they are capable to transmit hereditary
material to the next generation.
•
Chromosomal theory of Inheritance: Sutton and Boveri
Proposed this theory in 1902. This theory              consists of following
salient features :
•
Somatic cells are diploid in number i.e. these consist of
two sets of chromosomes, one set from the mother and other set
from the father.
•
The chromosomes retain their structural uniqueness, identity and
continuity.
•
The paired condition of chromosomes is resorted during
fertilization.
•
The behavior of chromosomes during meiosis at the time
of gamete formation provides an evidence that genes are located on
chromosomes. This also explain the mechanism of segregation of
characteristic at the time of gamete formation.

14.1
(a) Structure of chromosomes :
Each chromosome consists of two strands which are called as
chromatids. The two chromatids of a chromosome are joined together
at a point called as centromere.
 
(a) Structure of chromosome (b) Metaphase chromosome.
 
•
Depending on the position of centromere a chromosome
can be of different types and attain different shapes during
anaphase. They are :
(i) Metacentric : They are V - shaped. These have centromere in the
middle of chromosome so that the two
arms are almost equal.
(ii) Sub metacentric : They are L shaped. In this centromere
is slightly away from the mid point, so that the two arms are
unequal.
(iii)
Acrocentric : They are J-shaped with centromere at subterminal
position.
(iv) Telocentric : They are rod shaped, having terminal centromere.

Types of chromosomes.
 
14.1
(b) Size and Shape of Chromosomes :
Size of chromosomes greatly very during cell cycle.
(i) Interphase : It forms long thread like structure called as
chromatin.
(ii) Metaphase : Chromosomes are thickest and shorted and
therefore have definite shape and size. At this stage chromosomes
can be counted easily.
(iii)
Anaphase : They have rod like J-shaped or V- shaped structures
during this phase.
(iv) Telophase : They have thread like structure.
Fig : To show condensation of chromatin network.
 
 
 

14.1 (c) Number of Chromosomes :
Each species has a fixed number of chromosomes in it’s cells. In case of
human beings, there are 46 number of chromosomes in each body cell.
46 chromosomes in an ordinary human cell are of 23 different types. So,
there are two chromosomes, of each kind. The two chromosomes of
each kind are called as homologous chromosomes. A cell which has the
full number of chromosomes with two of each kind is called as diploid
cell. In other words a diploid cell has two sets of each type
chromosomes. The gametes (or sex cells) of human being are different
from their other body cells because they contain only half the number of
chromosomes.
 
A cell which has half the number of chromosomes, with one of each
kind, is called as haploid cell. In other words a haploid cell has only one
set of each type of chromosomes e.g. sperm and eggs have only 23
chromosomes each, which is half the number of chromosomes of other
body cells. So, the gamete is a haploid cell. Females consists of two
similar gametes and therefore called as homogametic and males consist
of dissimilar gametes and therefore called as heterogametic. The term
homomorphism and heteromorphy are also used for females and males
respectively. During spermatogenesis two types of sperm cells will be
produced one which contains X chromosome and the other which
contains Y chromosome. During oogenesis each egg will produce two
X chromosomes. If X-chromosome of male fuses with X-chromosome
of female it will produce a female child. If Y-chromosome of male fuses
with X-chromosome of female it will produce a male child.
14.1 (d) Properties of Chromosomes :
The chromosomes must poses five important properties :
(i) Replication : Synthesis of new DNA molecule which is identical to
the parent DNA molecule.
(ii) Transcription : Synthesis of RNA molecule from DNA molecule.
(iii)
Change in appearance.
(iv) Repair : It means repair of damaged parts of DNA.
(v) Mutation : Development of genetic changes.

14.1
(e) Functions of Chromosomes :
(i) They carry hereditary characters from parents to offsprings.
(ii) They help the cell to grow, divide and maintain itself by synthesis
of proteins.
(iii)
They undergo mutation and thus contributed to the evolution of
animals.
(iv) They guide cell differentiation during development.
(v) They also help in metabolic processes.
(vi) They bring about continuity of life.
14.2
SEX DETERMINATION :
•
Chromosomes are of two types :
•
Autosomes or Somatic chromosomes : These regulate somatic
characters.
•
Allosomes or Heterosomes or Sex chromosomes : These
chromosomes are associated with sex determination. Sex
chromosomes were first discovered by “Mc Clung” in grasshopper.
X chromosome was discovered by Henking.
14.2 (a) X X - XY Type or Laygaues Type :
This type of sex determination is first observed by Wilson and Stevens
in Laygaeus insect.  It is of two types :
(i) X X female and XY male : In this type of sex determination
female is homogametic while males is heterogametic e.g. Humans
(ii) 
XY female and XX male : In this type of sex determination

female is heterogametic while males is
homogametic. e.g. Butter flies, moth and vertebrates like birds,
fishes and reptiles.
14.2 (b) XX Female and XO Male or Pronetor Type :
sIn this type of sex determination there is a deficiency of one
chromosome in male. In this type female is homogametic and male is
heterogametic. e.g. Grasshopper and Cockroach
14.3
GENETIC ENGINEERING :
In recent years, techniques for manipulation of prokaryotic as well as
eukaryotic DNA have witnessed a remarkable development. This has
allowed breakage of a DNA molecule at two desired places to isolate a
specific DNA segment and than insert it in another DNA molecule at
the desired position. The product thus obtained is called as
recombinant DNA and the process is called as “genetic engineering”.
14.3 (a) Tools of Genetic Engineering :
The various biological tools used in the synthesis of recombinant DNA
are :
(i) Enzymes
(ii) Vehicle or vector DNA
(i) Enzymes :
(A) Lysing enzyme : These are used to open up the cells to get DNA
for genetic experiment.
Lysozyme is commonly used to dissolve the bacterial cell wall.
(B) Cleaving enzymes : These are used to break DNA
molecule. Three types of cleaving enzymes are known. They are :
•
Exonuclease : Which cut off nucleotides from 5’ or 3’ ends of

DNA molecules.
•
Endonuclease : Which cleaves the DNA duplex at any point except
ends.
•
Restriction endonucleases : Restriction endounucleases
are the enzymes which recognize specific nucleotide sequence and
cut the DNA molecules. Restriction endonuclease was discovered
by Arber in Eschrichia coli. Nathans (USA), Smith, Arber won
the Noble prize for Physiology and Medicine in 1978 for the
discovery of restriction endounuclease.
(C) Synthesizing enzymes : These play an important role in
the synthesis of DNA strands on suitable templates. They are of two
types :
•
Reverse transcriptase : These help in the synthesis of
complimentary DNA strands on RNA templates.
•
DNA polymerase : This helps in the synthesis of complimentary
DNA strands on DNA templates.
(D) Joining enzymes : These help in sealing gaps in DNA
fragment which are joined by complimentary base pairing e.g. T4 -
ligase.              
(E) Alkaline phosphatase : These cut off phosphate groups from
free ends of linearized vehicle DNA to prevent recircularization.
(ii) Vehicle or vector DNA : The DNA used as carrier for
transferring a fragment of foreign DNA into a suitable host called as
vehicle DNA. e.g. Plasmid and Bacteriophage DNA.
14.3
(b) Application of Genetic Engineering :
(i) It is applied for modification of plant colours.
(ii) It helps in cloning of transgenic plants.

(iii)
It can be proved beneficial in case of plants e.g. “nif”
gene is transferred in plants which is responsible for N2 fixation.
(iv) It is used for curing various genetic disorders.
(v) It can be proved beneficial for synthesis of insulin growth,
hormone etc.
(vi) It can be used to delay ripening of fruits.
14.4
DNA : (DEOXYRIBOSE NUCLEIC ACID)
DNA was first isolated by Frederick Meischer from the nucleus of pus
cells and called as nuclin. Watson and Crick gave the double helix
model of DNA. They also won a noble prize for it. Chromosomes
consist of nucleoprotein which are made up of nuclei acid and proteins.
14.4 (a) Composition of DNA :
DNA molecule consists of following three components :
(i)     Deoxyribose sugar
(ii) Phosphate group
(iii)
Nitrogen bases : They could be purines or pyrimidines.
(A) Purines are : Adenine [A] and Guanine [G]
(B) Pyrimidines are : Thymine  [T] and Cytosine [C]
•
One DNA molecule consists of a u nit called nucleotide.
•
Nucleotide = nucleoside + phosphate
•
Nucleoside = nitrogen base + deoxyribose sugar

14.4 (b) Structure of DNA :
Structure of a DNA molecule
(i) It consists of two helical polypeptide chins which are coiled around
each other.
(ii) Both the chains are antiparallel to each other.
(iii) Both chains have complementary base pairing i.e. A = T and G C.
(iv) The two strands are held together, by hydrogen bonds.
(v) The diameter of a DNA molecule is 20 Å.
(vi) One helix consists of about 10 bp.
(vii) It’s helicle length is 34 Å and the distance between two nearest
base pairs is 3.4Å.
(viii) It also consists of major and minor grooves.
(ix)Each strands consists of a backbone made up of
alternating deoxyribose sugar and phosphate, they are joined by
phosphodiester bonds.

14.5
SOME IMPORTANT TERMS :
•
Karyotype : In includes the details of the number of
chromosomes of an organism, their size and shape. It is better
achieved in metaphase stage.
•
Idiotype : It is a diagrammatic representation of a karyotype.
•
Banding technique : For the purpose of identification
chromosomes a special staining technique is sued. It is called as
banding technique.
•
In the process of genetic engineering the gene that is
transferred into an organism is called as transgene. An organism
that contains and express a transgene is called as transgenic
organism or generically modified organism [GMO].

•
Hirudin is a protein that prevents blood clotting. The gene
encoding hirudin is chemically synthesized. This is then transferred
to Brassica napus, where hirudin is accumulated in seeds. It is then
purified and used as medicine.
•
A soil bacterium Bacillus thuringenesis, produces a
crystal “cry” protein. This protein is toxic to the larvae of certain
insects. There are various types of cry protein each resistant to
specific type of insect.
•
Viral chromosomes consist of proteins and one nucleic
acid i.e. DNA or RNA. Nucleic acid may be single or double
stranded, may be circular or linear. Virus with RNA as genetic
material is called as retrovirus e.g. HIV [Human Immuno
Deficiency Virus]
•
Replication : DNA is the only molecule capable of self
duplication so it is termed as “living molecule”. All living beings
have the capacity to reproduce because of this chrematistic of DNA.
DNA replicates in the “S” phase of cell cycle. In the process of
replication a new DNA is synthesized in the form of strands.
•
These strands are of two types :
(i) Leading strands : Formation of new strands always takes
place in 5’ - 3’ direction. It is a continuous strand.
(ii) Lagging strand : it is formed as small fragments known
as okazaki fragments. These fragments are later on joined by
ligase enzymes.
DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS # 14

OBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
1.
The main aim of plant breeding is
(A) to produce improved varieties
(B) to make soil fertile
(C) to control pollution
(D) to become more progressive
2.
Plants having similar genotypes produced by plant breeding are called
(A) 
clone
(B) 
haploid
(C)
autopolyploid
(D) genome
3.
Two allelic genes are located on
(A) 
the 
same 
chromosome
(B) 
two 
homologous
chromosomes
(C) 
two 
non-homologus 
chromosomes
(D) 
any 
two
chromosomes
4.
Mendel’s law of segregation is based on separation of allels during
(A) gamete formation (B) seed formation
(C) pollination
(D)
embryonic development
5.
What is the effect of sexual reproduction ?
(A) Offspring is weak
(B) Offspring is like the parent
(C) Offspring is more vigorous
(D) Offspring is diseased
6.
Disease resistant varieties can be produced by
(A) crossing a plant with wild variety
(B) treating with
colchicine
(C) crossing with hormones
(D) treating with low temperature
7.
Heterozygous tall plants were crossed with dwarf plants, what
will be the ratio of dwarf plants in the progeny
(A) 50%
(B) 25%
(C) 75%
(D) 100%
8.
A pure tall plant can be differentiated from a hybrid tall plant
(A) by measuring length of plant
(B) by spraying gibberellins

(C) if all plants are tall after self-pollination
(D) if all plants are dwarf after self-pollination
9.
Allel is the
(A) alternate trait of a gene pair
(B) total number of genes for a
trait
(C) total number of chromosomes of haploid set
(D) total number of
genes present a chromosome
10.
In animals sex determination is due to
(A) 
X-chromosome
(B) 
Y 
- 
chromosome
(C) 
A 
-
chromosome
(D) B - chromosome
SUBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
1.
What  is karyotype ?
2.
What is meant by chromosomes ?
3.
Who is known as the father of genetics ?
4.
What determines the functional property of a gene ?
5.
What was transgenic organisms ?
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUETIONS
6.
What does the law of segregation states ?
7.
What do you understand by the term nucleoside and nucleotide ?
8.
How it was established that genes are located on chromosomes ?
9.
Explain the importance of variations.
10.
Explain the law of dominance.

ANSWERS
DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS # 13
Que.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Ans.
A
B
A
D
D
B
A
D
C
D
DAILY PRACTICE PROBLEMS # 14
Que.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Ans.
A
A
B
A
C
A
A
C
A
B

           
OUR ENVIRONMENT
                                                   
                    
 
15.1
ECOSYSTEM :
• The term Ecosystem was coined by Tansley. According to
him Ecosystem is a symbol of structure and function of nature.
•
The term Ecology was coined by Reiter.
•
The term Ecology was first of all described y  E.Haeckel.
•
Father of India Ecology - Prof. Ramdas Mishra.
*8 The boundaries of ecosystem are indistinct and have an
overlapping character with each other.
•
“The total group of living things and environment of
factors present in a particular place is called as ecosystem/”
•
It means any structural and functional unit of the
environment that can be identified and studied is called as
ecosystem.
•
Ecosystem may be natural or artificial, permanent or
temporary. Large ecosystem is called as biome such as desert, forest
etc.
•
Homeostasis : Self maintainable characteristic is found in
ecosystem. It means an ecosystem maintains the balance between
the different trophic levels. Each trophic level controls the other
trophic level in an ecosystem.
•
Cybernetics : A science of self control [homeostasis] in an

ecosystem is called as “cybernetics”
15.1 (a) Types of Ecosystem :
Natural (e.g. lake, forest, grassland etc.) or man made (e.g. an aquarium
crop field etc.)
(i) Temporary
:
e.g. rain-fed pond etc.
(ii) Permanent
:
e.g. lake, forest etc.
•
An ecosystem may be as small as a drop of pond water. Such
small ecosystem is called as micro ecosystem. Human activities may
modify or convert natural ecosystem into man made ecosystem. Cutting
tree or forests and the conversion of land for tree plantation or
agriculture etc. are some of the examples of conversion of natural
ecosystem to man made ecosystem.
15.1 (b) Components of Ecosystem :
Ecosystem consists of two components :
(i) Biotic component
(ii)
Abiotic component (environment,
soil etc.
(i) Biotic components : Different biotic components are
connected, through food chain or other relations. That is why it is
said that all the living organisms comes under biotic components.
Food available for biotic components can be synthesized, from
inorganic raw material by the autrophs only.

Ecosystem
 
Biotic component
Abiotic component
 
Producers
Consumers
   Decomposers
Primary consumers
Secondary consumers
Top consumers
•
Biotic components are of thee types which are essential for
ecosystem.
(A) Producers : All the autotrophs of ecosystem are called as
producers. The green plants are the main producers. Green plants
absorb solar energy and convert it into chemical energy. It means
energy enters into the ecosystem through the produces. The solar
energy is the only ultimate source of energy in ecosystem. This
energy is available to the remaining living organisms through the
medium of food.
(B) Consumers: All the heterotrophy of the ecosystem are
known as consumers. Animals are the main consumers. They
directly (herbivorous) or indirectly (carnivorous) depend upon the
producers. There are various types of consumer which are as follows
:
• Primary consumers : They are also known as secondary
producers because they synthesize complex materials in the cells
by the digestion of food which they obtain from the plants. Such
living organisms which obtain food form the producers are known
as primary consumers. Such as all the herbivores of ecosystem.

• Secondary consumers : Animals which feed upon primary
consumers and obtain their food. It means those carnivorous which
kill and eat the herbivorous. So that they are called as predators
e.g. Dog, Cat, Snake etc. In aquatic system whale fish is a
secondary consumer.
• Top consumers : Those animals which kill other animals and
earth them by they are not eaten by other animals in the nature .e.g
Lion, Vulture, Peacock and Man (human) in our ecosystem. Man
and peacock may be omnivorous.
(C) Decomposers or Microconsumer : Those living organisms which
decompose the dead bodies of producers and consumers and release
mineral substances again into the soil which are present in the dead
bodies. So that decomposers help in mineral into the soil which are
present in the dead bodies. So that decomposers help in mineral cycle.
Only because of this land is the main source of minerals. The main
decomposers in ecosystem are - bacteria and fungi which decompose
continuously dead animals and dead plants.
(D) Scavengers : Vulture never kills any animal so that vulture is a
scavenger, not a decomposer. The process of decomposition takes place
outside the body of bacteria. The break down of the food materials takes
place in the body of vulture and minerals are released into the soil in the
form faecal material. They are also called as reducers because they
decomposes and remove the dead bodies of the organism.
15.1 (c) Structure of an Ecosystem :
The structure of an ecosystem is characterized by the physical
organization of biotic & abiotic components. The major structural
features of an ecosystem are species composition, stratification, trophic
organization and nutrients.
(i) Species composition : Each ecosystem has its own type of
species composition. Different ecosystems have different species
composition. A great variety of species is found in forest ecosystem,

whereas a few species occur in a desert ecosystem.
(ii) Stratification : The organisms in each ecosystem from
one or more layers or strata, each comprising the population of
particular kind of a species.
(iii)
Trophic organization : Food relationship of producers
and consumers is another way to predict ecosystem structure. In an
ecosystem there an be only 4 - 5 successive trophic levels because
(A) All the food available in one tropic level is not being eaten by
another animal in the next trophic level.
(B) All the food eaten by an animal is not useful, thus a part of
energy containing food is passed out as
waste products.
(C) A large amount of energy is lost in respiration to drive organisms
metabolism and thus, there is not much energy left to support higher
trophic levels.
                   Fig : Trophic  levels in Ecosystem
 
• The amount of nutrients such as nitrogen, phosphorus and calcium
present in the oil at any given time is termed as standing state.
15.1 (d) Functions of an Ecosystem :
(i) Productivity : Ecosystem helps of maintain the
productivity, of the system. The rate of organic matter or biomass
production is called as productivity. The study of biomass
production in the ecosystem is called as production ecology.
(ii) Energy flow : Energy flow in an ecosystem is a key
function of an ecosystem. It determines the following two laws of
Thermodynamics :
(A) First law : It states, that energy can neither be created nor

destroyed, but can be transferred from one from to other.
(B) Second law : It states, that every energy change involves the
degradation or dissipation of energy,
from concentrated to the dispersed form due to metabolic functions,
so that only a small part of energy is stored in the biomass.
(iii)
Nutrient cycles : All living organisms get matter from
the biosphere component i.e. lithosphere, hydrosphere and
atmosphere. Essential elements or inorganic substances are provided
by earth and are required by organisms for their body building and
metabolism, they are known as biogeochemical  or biogenetic
nutrients.
(iv) Development and stabilization : This function is
necessary for the development and giving stability to various life
form’s by undergoing certain modifications.
15.2
FOOD CHAIN :
•
The chain of organisms which involves transfer of energy
from one trophic level to next trophic level is called as food chain.
•
The flow of food or energy is an ecosystem  is called Food
chain. Those organisms which join with the food chain are termed
as Trophic levels.
•
Usually, there are four trophic levels present in the
ecosystem because level of energy decreases during the flow of
energy from one trophic level to the another trophic level.
First trophic level [T1]
:
Producers
Second trophic level [T2]
:
Primary consumers
Third trophic level [T3]
:
Secondary consumers
Fourth trophic level [T4]
:
Top consumers
•
The flow of energy occurs in an ecosystem from the first
trophic level to the fourth trophic level in the food chain. These are
five trophic levels also found in a highly complex ecosystem in
which tertiary consumers are present in between the secondary
consumer and top consumers, then fifth trophic level (T5) formed by
the top consumers.

Food chain in nature (a) in forest , (b) in grassland & (c) in a 
pond
15.2
(a) Types of food Chain :
There are three types of food chains which are found in nature.
(i) Predator 
food 
chain
(ii) 
Parasitic 
food 
chain
(iii)
Saprophytic food chain
•
Predator food chain extends from producers through
herbivores to carnivores, parasitic food chain stat from producers
but ends with parasites and saprophytic food chain starts with
decomposers. Producers are autotrophic organisms which synthesize
organic food from simple inorganic raw material through
photosynthesis by utilizing solar energy. A part of food synthesized
by the producers is used in their body building, while the rest is
utilized in providing energy for various life activities.
 
•
Some common predator food chains are given below :
•
Vegetation 
 Grasshopper 
 Shrew 
 Hawk
•
Vegetation 
 Rabbit 
 Wolf 
Tiger
•
Vegetation 
 Frog 
 Snake 
 Peacock

•
Plant 
 Rat 
 Snake 
 Hawk.
•
Aquatic food chains :
•
Phytoplanktons 
 Zooplanktons 
 Small crustacians
 Predator insect 
 Small fish 
 Large fish 
 Crocodile
•
Phytoplanktons 
 Zooplanktons 
 Small fish 
 Large fish
Shark
•
Phytoplanktons 
 Zooplanktons 
 Fish 
 Crane 
 Hawk.
15.3
FOOD WEB :
In nature, the food chins are not isolated sequences but are rather
interconnected with one another. “A network of food chains which are
interconnected at various trophic levels, so as to form a number o
feeding connection amongst different organisms of a biotic community
is called as food web. The food web opens several alternate pathways
fro the flow of energy. Generally, food web operates according to test
and food performances of the organisms at each trophic level, yet
availability of food source and other compulsions are equally important.
The concept of food web appears to be more real than that of simple
food chain. The food web increases the stability of an ecosystem by
providing alternate source of the food and allowing endangered
population to grow in size. Many food chains are interlinked together to
form  food web in a big ecosystem in which flow of food takes place
through many directions such as forest. A food web which is present in
forest ecosystem is a highly complex and permanent (stable) type of
food web.

•
As much as food web complexes are there as much
ecosystem is permanent or stable, such type of ecosystem does not
degenerate naturally and continues for longer time period.
•
The ecosystems which have simple food webs are not
more stable. It means that this type of food web can be finished at
nay time. Any attack or cutting of plants can causes the destruction
of while ecosystem e.g. Gondwana forest is converted into the
desert by the activity of men. this is the example of desertification
by men.
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN FOOD CHAIN AND FOOD WEB
Food chain
Food web
1. Food chain is the straight single
path of transfer of food energy in
the ecosystem.
1. t consists of a number of inter –
connected food chains through
which food energy is passed in the
ecosystem.
2. Members of higher trophic level
feed upon a single type of
organisms of lower trophic level.
2. Members of higher trophic level
can feed as a number of alternative
organisms of the lower trophic
level.
 
3. Presence of food web increases
the stability of the ecosystem.
15.4
ECOLOGICAL PYRAMIDS :

An ecological pyramid is a graphical representation of an ecological
parameter like number of individuals or amount of biomass or amount
of energy present in various trophic levels of a food chain with
producers forming the base and top carnivores from the tip. Ecological
pyramids could be upright, inverted or spindle shaped. There are three
important parameters of each trophic level in a food chain i.e. number
of individual, amount of biomass and amount of energy.
15.4
(a) Pyramid of Number :
In this type of pyramid the number of individual organisms in various
trophic levels is shown. These pyramids may be upright or inverted.
The number of organisms of any trophic level depends upon the
availability of organisms which are used as food on lower level so that
availability of food is the main factor. These producers are of two types
:
(i) Phytoplanktons : They are the inactive floating plant,
because hey do not have locomotors organs e.g. Diatoms.
(ii) Phytonektons : These plants swim actively in water,
because in them locomotary organs are present. Usually flagella are
preset in these plants. e.g. Chamydomonas and dinoflagellates. The
number of phytoplanktons and phytonketons are higher per unit area
of water because they are unicellular.
Producers
Pyramid of Number in Aquatic Ecosystem
• In a tree ecosystem the pyramid of number is inverted. This is called
as parasitic ecosystem because bird depend upon tree and parasites
depend upon birds. Therefore with the increase in the number of trophic
levels, the number of the organisms increases sequentially.

Pyramid of number in tee ecosystem
• Pyramid of number shows biotic potential of an ecosystem.
• The number of members of any particular species in a favorable
condition is called as their biotic potential.
• When the number of the members of any species increases then it is
called as population explosion.
15.4 (d) Pyramid of Biomass :
The biomass of each trophic level is shown by this pyramid. Mostly
these pyramids are also upright (erect). e.g. Tree ecosystem.
•
Pyramid of biomass in aquatic ecosystem is inverted,
because in this producers are micro organisms and their biomass is
lesser than other trophic levels.
•
Pyramids of biomass show the standing crop of ecosystem.
It means total amount of living matter at a particular time in an
ecosystem is called as standing crop.
•
Total amount of nonliving matter in an ecosystem is called as
standing state.
15.4 (c) Pyramid of Energy :
It always remains erect, because flow of energy is not cyclic. i.e. during
the flow of energy at each trophic level goes on decreasing.
•
According to the 10% law of Linderman the 90% part of

obtained energy of each organism is utilized in their various
metabolic activities and only 10% energy  transferred to the next
trophic level. So that 90% energy is lost at each trophic level
therefore, top consumers like lion etc., are weakest ecologically.
•
Pyramids of energy show the productivity of any ecosystem.
•
Plant community : All types of plants present at a
particular place to form a community, is called as plant community.
The distribution of any species at a place depends upon social nature
of the species which indicates cooperation between them.
• Synecology : The ecological study of any plant community is called
as “gynecology”.
•
Phytosociology : The study of structure of plant community is
known as “phytosociology”
•
Phytogeography : The study of distribution of the plants
on the earth is called as “phytogeography”. Some characteristics of
plant community are as follows :
(i) Species diversity : There are many verities of organisms found in
a community. The total number of species of plants called as
population. The ecological study of population is called as
Autecology’s. The maximum species diversity is found in tropical
forest. The plants are called as flora and animals are termed as
fauna. The lowest species diversity is found in Tundra biome or
Arctic desert.
(ii) Dominant species : The highest number of plants of a species
present in a community is called as dominant species and whole plant
community is knows as the name of the species. Such as Prosop is
community on Aravali hills and Aravali hills and Pinus
community on Himalaya.

• B.O.D. It shows the deficiency of oxygen in the water. Daphnia is the
indicator of B.O.D.
15.5
OZONE LAYER DEPLETION :
Between 20 and 26 km above the sea level ozone layer is present and
the part of atmosphere containing it is called ozonosphere
(Stratosphere). This layer is established due to an equilibrium between
photo dissociation of ozone by UV - radiations and regeneration of
ozone. The thickness of this ozonosphere averages 5 km. The ozone
layer acts as an ozone shield and absorbs the harmful UV - radiations of
the sunlight so protect the earth’s biota form the harmful effects of
strong UV - radiations. So this layer is very important for the survival
and existence of life on earth.
15.5 (a) Causes of Thinning of Ozone Layer :
The decline in spring - layer thickness is called ozone hole. Ozone
hole is largest over Antarctica and was just short of 27 million sq.
km. during September 2003. Main chemicals to be responsible for
destruction of ozone - layer are : chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs),
halogens (used in fire extinguishers), methane and nitrous oxide. Out
of these, most damaging is the effect of CFCs which  are a group of
synthetic chemicals and are used as collants in refrigenratorsare a
group of synthetic chemicals and are used as collants in refrigerators
and air conditioners; as cleaning solvents, propellants and sterilant
etc. These CFCs produce “active chlorine” in the presence of UV -
radiations. These active chlorine radicals catalytically destroy ozone
and convert it into oxygen. Ozone at the higher levels of the
atmosphere is a product of UV radiation acting on oxygen (O2)
molecule. The higher energy UV radiations split apart some
molecular oxygen (O2) into free oxygen (O) atoms. These atoms
then combine with the molecular oxygen to form ozone as shown -
In 1987, the United National Environment Programme (UNEP)

succeeded in forging an agreement to freeze CFC production at 1986
levels.,
•
Nitrous oxide: is produced in industrial processes,
forest fires, solid waste disposal, spraying of insecticides and
pesticides, etc. Methane and nitrous oxide also cause ozone
destruction.
15.5
(b) Effects of Ozone Layer Depletion :
The thinning of ozone layer results in increase in the UV radiation (in
the rage of 290 - 320 nm) reaching the earth’s surface. It is estimated
that 5 percent loss of ozone results in 10 per cent increase in UV -
radiations. These UV - radiations can :
(i)  Increases in incidences of cataract and skin cancer.
(ii) Decrease in the functioning of immune system.
(iii) Inhibit photosynthesis in most of phytoplankton so adversely
affecting the food chains of aquatic
ecosystems.
(iv) Damage nucleic acids of the living organisms.
15.6
MANAGEMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES :
15.6
(a) Introduction :
We often hear or read about environmental problems. These are often
global-level problems and we feel helpless to make any changes.
There are international laws and regulations, and then there are our
own national laws and acts for environmental protection. There are
national and international organisations also working towards
protecting our environment. The multi crore project of Ganga
Action Plan came about in 1985 because the quality of water in the
ganga was so poor.

15.6 (b)Pollution of the Ganga:
 
The Ganga runs its course of over 2500 km from Gangotri in the
Himalayas to Ganga Sagar in the Bay of Bengal. It is being turned into a
drain by more than a hundred towns and cities in Utter Pradesh, Bihar
and West Bengal that pour their garbage and excreta into it. Largely
untreated sewage is dumped into the Ganga every day. In addition
pollution is caused by other human activities like bathing, washing of
clothes and immersion of ashes or unburnt matter also. And then,
industries contribute chemical effluents to the Ganga’s pollution load
and the toxicity kills fishes in large section of the river.
        • Three R’s to save the environment :
(i) Reduce : This means ‘to use less’. We van save electricity by
switching off unnecessary lights and fans. We can save water by
repairing leaky taps.
(ii) Recycle : This means that we can collect plastic, paper, glass and
metal items and recycle these materials to make required things instead
of synthesizing or extracting fresh plastic, paper, glass or metal. In order
to recycle, we first need to segregate our waste so that the material that
can be recycled is not dumped along with other waste.
(iii) Reuse : This is actually even better than recycling because the
process of recycling uses some energy. In the ‘reuse’ strategy, we can
simply use things again and again.
15.6 (c) need of Manage Our Resources :
Our natural resources are limited with the rapid increase in human
population. Due to improvement in health care, the demand for all
resources is also increasing. Management of natural resources requires
long term perspective to meet the needs and aspirations of future
generations. Natural resources should be managed in such a way that
every one of the society is benefited from its development. The waste
generated from exploration of natural resources should be disposed off
safely. For instance, mining causes pollution due to discard of large
amount of slag during metal extraction.

15.7
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT :
It is the development which can be maintained for a long time without
undue damage to the environment. The objective of sustainable
development is to provide the economic well being of the present and
the future generations and to maintain a healthy environment and life
support system. It encourage forms of growth that meet current basic
human needs, thus sustainable development implies a change in all
aspects of life. It depend upon the willingness of the people to change
their perceptions of the socio economic environmental conditions and
use of natural resources.
15.8
BIODIVERSITY :
It is the existence of a wide variety of species of plants, animals and
microorganism in a natural habitant within a particular environment.
Biodiversity of an area is the number of species or range of different life
forms found there. Forests are ‘biodiversity hotspots’.
15.9
PRACTICES 
FOR 
CONSERVATION 
AND
PROTECTION OF ENVIRONMENT :
Conservation means ‘to keep safe’ whereas preservation means ‘to
maintain the environment at it is’. Various practices which can help in
conserving and protecting our environment are as follows :
•
The practice of crop rotation helps in conserving soil.
•
Judicious use of fertilizers, intensive cropping, proper
irrigating and drainage help in the conservation of soil.
•
The treatment of sewage prevents pollution of water bodies
and helps in conserving fishes and other aquatic life forms.
•
National parks and wildlife sanctuaries should e
established throughout the country in order to protect and conserve
will animals, birds and plant species.
•
New trees should be planted in place of those cut for
various purposes, which will protect the earth from excessive
heating.

•
Harvesting of rain helps in the conservation of groundwater.
•
Composting of solid organic waste for biogas and manure.
15.10 WILDLIFE :
It means all those naturally occurring animals, plants and their species
which are not cultivated, domesticated and tamed.
15.10 (a)Conservation :
It is the sensible use of the earth’s natural resources in order to avoid
excessive degradation and betterment of the environment. It includes -
the search for alternative food and fuel supplies when these are
endangered, an awareness of the dangers of pollution and the
maintenance and preservation of habitats and its biodiversity.
(i) Steps for conservation of wildlife :
(A) Laws should be imposed to ban poaching or capturing
of any animal or bird belonging to an endangered species.
(B) The natural habitats of wild animals and birds should
be preserved by establishing National Parks, Sanctuaries and
Biosphere reserves throughout the country.
(C) The Government Department should conduct periodic
surveys of National Parks, Sanctuaries and Biosphere Reserves to
have a knowledge of all the species of wild animals and birds.
(D) More attention should be given to conserve the
endangered species of wild animals and birds to prevent their
extinction.
(E) Unauthorized cutting of forest trees should be stopped.
15.11
STAKEHOLDERS OF FORESTS :
The conservation of forests depend on its forest resources or its various
stakeholder, who are as follows :
15.11 (a) People Who Live in or Around Forests :

(i) They depend on forest produce, for various aspects of their life.
(ii) The local people need large quantities of firewood, small timber.
(iii)
Bamboo is used to make slats for huts and baskets for collecting
and storing food.
(iv) Implements for agriculture, fishing and hunting are largely made of
wood.
(v) People collect fruits, nuts and medicines from forests, their cattle 
also graze in forest.

15.11 (b) Forest Department of the Government :
(i) Which owns the land and controls the forest resources.
(ii) People develop practices to ensure that forest resources are used in
a sustainable manner.
(iii)
The forest resources were overexploited after the British took
control of the forest.
(iv) Forest department of independent India then owned the
land and control the resources of the forest but local needs such as
herbs, fruits and fodder were ignored.
(v) Monoculture of pine, teak or eucalyptus have been started
which can destroy the bio-diversity of the area.
15.11 (c) Industrialist :
(i) Industries consider the forest as a source of raw material for its
factories.
(ii) These industries are not interested for the sustainability of
the forest in one area as they go to a different area after cutting
down all tree in one area.
15.11 (d) Wildlife and Nature Enthusiasts :
(i) They are not dependent of the forest but conserve nature and take
part in its management.
(ii) Conservationists started with conserving large animals but are now
preserving biodiversity as a whole.
(iii)
The local people, for instance the Bishnoi community
in Rajasthan worked for conservation of forest and wildlife as a
religious act. Thus management of forest resources has to take the
interests of various stakeholder into account.
15.12 TRADITIONAL USE OF FOREST :
•
Alpine grasslands in Himalayas were grazed by sheep in summer.

•
Nomadic shepherd drove their flock every summer in this area.
15.12 (c) Causes of Damages to Forests :
(i) Local people damage forest to fulfill their daily needs.
(ii) Deforestation caused by industrial needs.
(iii)
Deforestation caused for development projects like building
roads or dams.
(iv) By tourists or in making arrangements for tourists.
15.12 (b) Conservation of Forests :
•
it includes the following methods :
(i) Afforestation . It is the practice of transforming an area into forest
have not grown  there, it involves
three types of forestry programmes.
(A) Social and Environmental forestry. It involves raising of trees
for firewood, fodder and agricultural implements for the benefit of
rural and trial community.
(B) Agro forestry. It is an absolute commercial forestry developed
to fulfill the need of various forest based industries. It is done on the
fallow land or free-grazing lands.
(C) Urban forestry. In involves growing of ornamental
trees along roads, vacant lands and common parts of urban areas.
(ii) People participation in forest management :
(A) The Sal forests in West Bengal got reduced alarmingly in 1972.
(B) Surveillance and policing to protect resulted frequent clash
between forest official and the villagers.
(C) The department then changed its strategy and in Asabari forest,
villagers were involved in
protection of the badly damaged Sal forest.
(D) In return, villagers were given employment and were allowed to
collect firewood and fodder at
nominal fee.

(E) By 1983, the Asabari forest showed a remarkable recovery.
(iii) Economic growth and Ecological conservation :
(A) Forest resources should be used in an environmentally and
developmentally sound manner.
(B) The benefit of controlled exploitation of resources goes to the
people and the environment is also preserved.
(C) If the exploitation is too high, economic and social development
will be faster but the environment will further deteriorate.
(D) We should use natural resources cautiously so that economic
growth and ecological conservation go hand in hand.
(E) Amrtia Devi Bishnoi National Award. In 1731, Amrita Devi
Bishnoi sacrificed her life along with  63 persons for the protections
of ‘Khejri’ trees in Khejrali village near Jodhpur in Rajasthan. In the
memory Government of India have recently instituted this award for
Wildlife Conservation.’
(F) Chipko Movement : During 1970, In Reni village of Garhwal, a
contractor was allowed to cut trees in a forest near the village. When
the contractor’s workers went to the forest to cut trees the woman of
the village hug the tree trunks to prevent the workers from cutting
trees, Chipko means ‘hug’ and the movement started by the villagers
by hugging tees is called Chipko Andolan’.
15.13 WATER AS A BASIC NATURAL RESOURCE :
•
It is a valuable national asset.
•
It is the main requirement of human being.
•
Water is of two types - salt water and fresh water.
•
Fresh water is an unlimited natural resource, it can be
obtained from three natural resources - rain water, surface water and
ground water.
•
Human intervention pollutes  water and also changes the availability
of water in various regions.
15.13 (a) Water Sources :
(i) Rain in India re due to monsoon.

(ii) Failure to sustain underground water due to loss of vegetative cover,
development of water demanding crop and pollution from industrial
effluents.
(iii) Small dams, canals and tank were used for irrigation purpose and
to fulfill the basic minimum needs.
(iv) Large dams and canals were made by British as well as our own
government.
(v) Due to the mega project, local irrigation methods got neglected and
the local people lost control over management of local water sources.
(vi) Large dams and canals were made by British as well as our own
government.
13.13 (b) Management of Water Resources :
It includes :
(i) Interacted water-shed plan for drinking, irrigation and industrial
uses.
(ii) Flood control
(iii) Transfer of surplus water to water deficit basins by inter-linking of
rivers.
(iv) Hydro geological survey to identify over-exploited areas.
(v) Artificial recharging of the ground water.
(vi) Mass awareness programmes through public or private agencies.
(vii) Dams : They are massive barriers built across rivers and streams to
confine and utilize the flow of water for human purposes such as
irrigation and generation of electricity.
• Large dams can also ensure the storage of adequate water.
• Canal system leading from dams transfer large quantity of water
upto great distances, e.g. Indira Gandhi Canal or Rajasthan brought
greenery to considerable areas.
• Purposes for building a dam :
• Generation of electricity

• Irrigation
• Control of flood which either stops or slows the amount of water
in the river.
• Criticism about large dams :
• Social problems : They displace large number of farmers and
tribals.
• Economic problems : They consume huge amount of public
money without proportionate benefit.
• Environmental problems. As they cause deforestation and loss of
biological diversity.
15.13 (c) Mismanagement of Water Distribution :
Due to mismanagement in distribution of water, the benefit of
contracting a dam goes to few people only. For example, people close
to the water source grow water intensive crop like sugarcane and rice
while people farther downstream do not get any water. This resulted in
discontentment among the people who has been displaced by building
of dam.
(i) Watershed management : It means scientific conservation of
soil and water to increase the biomass production.
• Watershed management not only increases the production and
income of the watershed community but also overcomes drought
and flood.
• It increases the life of downstream dam and reservoirs.
(ii) Water harvesting : It means capturing rainwater where it falls or
capturing the runoff water in a local area and talking measures to
keep the water clean by not allowing polluting activities to take
place.
(A) Techniques of water harvesting : Water harvesting
techniques are mainly location specific. It is an age - old concept in
India.

• Khadins, tanks and nadis in Rajasthan.
• Bandharas and tals in Maharashtra
• Ahars and Pynes in Bihar
• Kulhs in Himanchal Pradesh
• Ponds in kandi belt of Jammu.
• Eris (tanks) in Tamilnadu.
• Suragams in kerala.
• Kattas in Karnataka.
• Due to own control of the local population over exploitation of the
local water resources in reduced.
(B) Some of the water harvesting techniques are :
• Capturing of runoff water roof tops.
• Capturing of runoff water from local catchments.
• Capturing seasonal flood water from local streams.
(C) Benefits of water harvesting :
• Provide drinking water.
• Provide irrigation water.
• Increase in ground water resources.
• Reduces storm water discharge, urban flood and overloading of
sewage treatment plants.
(D) Advantages of ground water :
• It does not evaporate.
• It spreads out to recharge wells.
• It provides moisture for vegetation.
• It does not provide breeding grounds for mosquitoes.
• It is relatively protected from contamination by human and animal

waste.
(E) Traditional water harvesting system :
• The water harvesting structures are mainly crescent shaped.
• Monsoon rains fill ponds behind the structures.
• The large structure hold water throughout the year while most dry up
after monsoon.
• The main purpose of this system is to recharge the ground water and
not to hold surface water.
Traditional water harvesting system
 
15.14 FOSSIL FUELS :
These fuels are obtained from the remain of plants and animals, which
got buried beneath the earth millions of years ago, changed into coal,
petroleum and natural gas due to excessive heat and high pressure inside

the earth.
15.14 (a) Non-Renewable Energy Sources :
These are energy sources which cannot be replaced easily when the get
exhausted and are also called conventional sources of energy. They are
used traditionally for many years and take millions of years to form e.g.
Fossil fuels.
(i) Coal : It contains carbon and its compound mainly with nitrogen,
oxygen, sulphur and hydrogen. It also consists of inorganic matter.
(ii) Petroleum : ‘Petro’ means rocks and ‘oleum’ means oil, petroleum
is therefore the oil found in rocks. It is a complex mixture of solid,
liquid and gaseous hydrocarbons. It also contains small amounts of
other compounds of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen and sulphur.
Large reservoirs of petroleum have been preserved by nature for
millions of years between porous rocks beneath the earth.
15.14 (b) Formation of Non-Renewable Energy Sources :
(i) Formation of coal. Coal is formed organic matter which got buried
under the earth 300 million years ago. Due to high pressure and
temperature inside the earth, this organic matter changed into coal, that
is why, coal is called fossil fuel.
(ii) Formation of petroleum. It is formed by the decay of very small
(tiny) marine animals and plant buried under the earth about 400 million
years ago. Due to excess of heat and pressure it changed into oil called
petroleum. It is a fossil fuel.
15.14 (c) Conservation of Coal and Petroleum :
It means more efficient use with regard to economic, social and
environmental cost and benefits which result in attainment of higher
efficiency, minimisation of wastage and protection of the environment.
• We can conserve coal and petroleum by their judicious use and
substituting them by other resources wherever feasible. Conservation of
coal and petroleum is a joint responsibility of the industries, citizens and

government where each one has significant role in Management of
Natural Resources.
15.14 (d) Necessity of Judicious Use of Coal and Petroleum :
The fossil fuels, coal and petroleum get exhausted and their combustion
pollutes our environment, so a judicious use of these resources is
necessary. When combustion take place, oxides of carbon, hydrogen,
nitrogen and sulphur are formed. Carbon monoxide is formed instead of
carbon dioxide if there is insufficient are. The oxides of sulphur,
nitrogen and carbon monoxide are poisonous at high concentrations.
Carbon dioxide is a green-house gas which leads to global warming.
15.14 (e) Uses of Fossil Fuels :
(i) In thermal power plants and steam engines.
(ii) Petroleum products like petrol and diesel are used as fuel in motor
vehicles and ships. Other products like kerosene and LPG are used for
cooking purpose.
15.14 (f) Management of Fossil Fuels :
The natural gas is a good alternative to fossil fuels like coal and
petroleum. The use of alternative source of non-conventional energy
such as solar energy, which energy, biomass energy, etc., should be
promoted to save the reserves of fossil fuels. Biogas can also be used
for various purposes.

DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS # 15
OBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
1.
Ecosystem term was coined by
(A) Odum
(B) Mishra
(C) Reiter
(D)
Tansley
2.
Pyramids of biomass are
(A) upright or inverted 
(B) always inverted
(C) mostly
upright
(D) mostly inverted
3.
Vultures in an ecosystem are
(A) predators
(B) scavengers
(C) consumers
(D)
top carnivores
4.
In which of the following trophic levels in any ecosystem the
maximum energy is stored ?
(A) Producers 
(B) Herbivores
(C) Carnivores
(D)
Top carnivores
5.
In an ecosystem the
(A) primary producers are more than that of primary consumers
(B) secondary consumers are largest, because they are powerful
(C) primary consumers are out of number
(D) primary consumers are least dependent upon primary producers
6.
In an ecosystem the function of the produces is to
(A) convert organic compounds into inorganic compounds
(B) trap solar energy and convert in into chemical energy
(C) utilize chemical energy
(D) release energy
7.
The importance of ecosystem lies in
(A) flow of energy
(B) cycling of materials
(C) both of the
above (D) none of the above
8.
In other to maintain proper ecological balance
(A) the existing forests should be cleared and new ones should be

planted
(B) some quick growing annuals should be planted if a tree must be cut
for other uses
(C) tree must be curt whenever necessary because the underground part
performs the useful purpose
(D) a tree should be planted in place of one to be cut
9.
A biosphere is composed of
(A) living organisms
(B) living organisms and lithosphere
(C) living organisms, lithosphere and atmosphere
(D) living organisms, lithosphere, atmosphere and hydrosphere
10.
Pyramid of energy in a forest ecosystem is
(A) always inverted
(B) always upright
(C) both upright and inverted
(D) first upright then inverted

SUBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
1.
How is ozone formed in the stratosphere ?
2.
What is the function of ozone layer ?
3.
Write a note on ozone depletion.
4.
What is the significance of wildlife ?
5.
What are fossil fuels ?
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTONS
6.
What is ecosystem ? Explain the food chain and food web.
7.
Explain the different components of ecosystem.
8.
What is meant by management and conservation of natural resources ?
9.
What is significance of biodiversity ?
10.
What is the name of the award given in  honour of the movement
started for protection of ‘Khejri’ trees ?
11.
Why is the management of forest and wildlife resource considered as
a challenging task ?
               ANSWERS
DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS # 15
Que.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Ans.
D
A
B
A
A
B
C
D
D
B

           
ORIGIN AND ECOLUTION OF
LIFE
 
16.1 INTRODUCTION :
All living organisms have arisen through the evolutionary process and
show diversity, yet some similarities exist among them. e.g.
Amphibians, reptiles and mammals have limbs for locomotion in water,
fishes have fins for swimming in water and birds have wings for flying.
•
A close examination reveals that the limb, fins and wings are
formed on the same basic structural plan.
•
All such examples can be explained if we consider that the
diverse groups of organisms share a common ancestor from who
they have diverged and formed two different species. Such process
of change in biological system is called as evolution.
•
The Doctrine of the Organic Evolution state that the
organisms existing at present are the descendants of much simpler
ancestors.
16.2
EVOLUTION :
The term ‘Evolution’ means “unrolling or unfolding” change from
one condition to another. It means members of a species change
generation after generation with environmental requirements to turn into
better organized and more complex new species. The changes in the
properties of population of organisms or groups of such populations
over the course of generations are considered as organic evolution. It is
a process of cumulative change of living populations and in the
descendant populations of organisms. In other words, it is “descent
with modifications.” Evolution is a change in the genetic composition
of a population. There is an inbuilt tendency of variation during

reproduction, both because of errors in DNA copying and as a result of
sexual reproduction.
 
Variations in a population –inherited and otherwise
 
•
Illustration. Let us consider a group of twelve red beetles,
which reproduce by sexual reproduction and lives in the bushes with
green leaves. They are preyed upon by crows. As we know that
more the crows eat, the fewer beetles are available to reproduce.
Now let us consider various causes of variation in the population of
red beetles.

• Case I. The process of sexual reproduction results in the
formation of few green beetles instead of red beetles. These green
beetles were able to pass the colour on to its progeny, so that all it
progeny beetles are green. These green beetles cannot be seen by
crows so, they are not eaten. As a result, with passage of time there
will be more number of green beetles than red beetles. In this case,
natural selection is directing evolution in the beetle population. The
natural section is exerted by the crows. The more crows there are,
the more red beetles would be eaten and more the proportion of
green beetles in the population would be. So, natural selection
brings about improved adaptive relative between organisms and
environment by favouring the reproduction and survival of those
individuals which are found more suited to the given environment.
 
•
Case II The process of reproduction again results in the
formation of another colour variant i.e., blue colour beetles. These
beetles were also able to pass the colour on to its progeny, so that all
its progeny beetles are blue. These beetles can be seen by crows, so
they are eaten. in initial stages there are more number of red beetles
in comparison to blue beetles in a population. But at this point, an
elephant comes by and stamps on the bushes where the beetles live
This kills most of the beetles. But by change free beetles that have
survived are mostly blue. These beetles (blue) will  now slowly
increase their number. In this case, the colour change gave no
survival advantage. It is simply a matter of accident survival of
beetles of one colour that changed the common characteristics of the
resultant population. The elephant would not have caused such
major havoc in the beetle population if the beetle population had
been very large. This random change in the gene frequency
occurring by change irrespective of its being beneficial or harmful is
called genetic drift. For this reason, is small population, some
unfavourable characters may also be fixed or beneficial characters
may be lost.
•
Case III. In this case, beetle population goes on increasing

but, the bushes stat suffering from a plant disease. The amount of
leaf material for the beetles is reduces so that average weight of
adult beetles is reduced. The average weight of adult beetles
decreases because of scarcity of food. After a few years, when
bushes once again become healthy due to the absence of disease,
then the average weight of beetles should once again increase, due
to adequate availability of food.
16.3
SPECIATION :
•
Speciation is Origin of New Species : A species
comprises of several populations. Interbreeding is very frequent
among the individuals of a population and is occasional among the
populations of a species whereas inter breeding is absent among the
individuals of different species. There is a free gene flow within the
members of a population and a free gene flow could be maintained
among the members of different population of a species, provide an
opportunity to interbreed. But free gene flow between two species
does not occur on account of marked difference in their genotype, it
means new species arise by the establishment of reproductive
isolation (intrinsic barrier to interbreeding of natural population)
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
The separation of  species populations in due course of time

Consider that beetle population has become very large and has
spread over a mountain range. The individual beetles feed mostly on
a few nearby bushes throughout their life time. So, in this huge
population of beetles, there will be sub-populations in neighborhood.
The process of reproduction will occur mostly within these sub
populations or rarely between two different sub-populations. So,
gene flow will take place between two different sub populations. If,
however between two such  sub-populations a large river or a
creeping glacier or a mountain cut develops then the two populations
will be further isolated. The levels of gene flow will further decrease
between two populations. Over generations the process of natural
selection and genetic drift will further isolate two sub-populations of
beetles. Now, members of these two sub-groups will be incapable of
reproducing even after they meet each other.
There can be a number of ways by which interbreeding between two
beetles of two subgroups stop. The changes in DNA structure or
number of chromosomes will make the gametes incompatible and
prevent fertilization. The morphology of reproductive organs may
change, which prevents compatibility and fertilization. The
difference in the Behaviour of male and female will also prevent
mating. The organisms may have developed different breeding
periods.
16.3 (d) Evolution by Stage:
The evolution in an organism or its  organs from simple to
complex forms has taken place in stages. It is has taken bit by bit
over generation. The evolution cannot takes place by a single
DNA change. Let us take few examples.
(i)
Feathers 
were 
firstly 
developed
dinosaurs, but they could not fly. Probably, it was
developed to provide insulating in cold weather. Later on
feathers developed in birds, where they were used for

flight. This indicates that birds are closely related to reptiles
(dinosaurs were reptiles). Also indicates that the character
which developed for one function is late on used for
different function.
(ii)
Eyes for the first
time developed in Planaria. Rudimentary eyes present in
Planaria and just photosensitive eyespots. Simple as well as
compound eyes have developed in insects and crustaceans.
Eyes have also developed in Octopus and vertebrates. The
structure of the eye in each of these organisms is different
enough for them to have separate evolutionary origins.
 
                                                       Planarian has very simple eyes
(iii)
Man has been taking the advantage of
genetic 
variations 
for 
improving 
the 
qualities 
of
domesticated plants and animals. He selected the
individuals with desired characters and separates them from
those which do not have such characters. The selected
individual are interbred. This process is termed as artificial
selection. If it is repeated for many generations it produces
a new breed with desired  characters.

Some crop plants produced by selective breeding
 
(iv)
By 
this 
selections 
process, 
very
dissimilar looking structures may evolve from a common
ancestral design. One of the classical examples is wild
cabbage plant. Humans have cultivated wild cabbage as a
food plant, and generated different vegetables from it by
selection even more than two thousand years ago. The
various crop plants developed from wild cabbage plants are
:
•
Cabbage : it is selected for its
terminal buds, where there is a very short distance
between leaves.
•
Kohlrabi : It is selected for its swollen stem
position.
•
Broccoli : It is selected for its flowers (arrested
flower development) and stem.

•
Cauliflower: it is selected for its
flower cluster (sterile flowers). The other way of
tracing 
evolutionary 
relationship
depend on the changes in DNA during reproduction.
If we compare the DNA of different species then we
can directly estimate how much DNA has changed
during the formation of these species.
16.4
ORIGIN OF LIFE :
Several theories have been put forward to explain the origin of life.
16.4 (a)
Theory of Special Creation :
According to this theory life was created by some Super Natural
Power (God). This theory has not evidence, hence it is a rejected
theory.
16.4 (b) Theory of Spontaneous Generation :
According to this theory life is originated repeatedly from nonliving
materials, automatically from time to time. This theory was supported
by Thales and Aristotle.
16.4 (c) Theory of Biogenesis :
Scientist like Redi, Lazzaro Spllanazani, Louis Pasteur proposed and
proved the biogenesis concept of Huxley and Harvey that new
organism arises from pre-existing ones.
16.4 (d) Cosmozoic Theory :
It states that, life came to earth from some heavenly bodies in the form
of spores and seeds.
16.4 (e) Modern Theory (Naturalistic Theory) :
Life originated upon earth by a long series of physiochemical changes
which brought about a gradual evolution of first inorganic and then
organic compounds (chemical evolution). It results in the formation of
protoplasm. This includes -
(i) Oparin - Haldane Theory.

•
It independently proposed the origin of life by chemical
evolution.
•
Oparin’s views were later on published in his book “The origin
of life”.
•
According to this theory earth was formed about
4600 million years ago. The atoms of nitrogen, hydrogen,
oxygen, argon, carbon etc. formed the primitive atmosphere.
•
The atmosphere was reducing because hydrogen
atoms were most numerous and most reactive in the primitive
atmosphere.
•
As, the earth began to cool, it’s matter began to
condense. But still it was so hot that water could exist only in
vapour form.
•
Large quantities of H2, N2, water vapours, CH4 and
NH3 were present, but free oxygen was not present in significant
amount.
•
Further fall in temperature allowed H2O to remain in
liquid form so that oceans and water bodies were formed
containing large amounts of dissolved NH3, CH4, HCN, nitrides,
carbides and various gases.
•
Reacting with water and it’s oxygen, simple saturated
hydrocarbons such as CH4 formed unsaturated hydrocarbons like
ethylene, acetylene. Later aldehydes, ketones, alcohols and
organic acids were formed.
•
Abundant energy was available in the form of heat,
cosmic rays and lightening. Using this energy, the organic
molecules of ocean water formed complex compounds like amino
acids, sugar, glycerol, fatty acids, nitrogenous organic bases etc.
•
These 
molecules 
further 
formed 
large 
linear
polymers, or macromolecules like protein, carbohydrates, and
fats, the oceanic water became a rich mixture of organic
compound called “Prebiotic soup”.

(ii) Stanley Miller and H.C. Urey Experiment [Experiment for
verification of prebiotic soup] :
•
This experiment verified the Oparin Haldane
theory by creating [stimulating] in their laboratory the probable
conditions on the primitive earth.
•
They built an apparatus of glass tubes and flasks and
created as atmosphere containing H2, CH4, NH3, H2O in one
chamber - energy was also supplied by electric sparks.
•
The resultant mixtures were allowed to condense.
Experiment was run for one week. Chemical composition of the
liquid revealed glycine, alanine and aspartic acid.

•
Thus biotic synthesis of organic molecules was confirmed
Fig : Miller’s Experiment
16.5
ORGANIC EVOLUTION :
(i) Though life originated by chemical evolution on the
primitive earth. It was later replaced by organic evolution.
(ii) Organic evaluation states “Descent with modification”
i.e. present day complex living organism have evolved from earlier
simpler organisms by small but gradual changes which have
occurred over million of years.
(iii)
Though living organisms show great diversity in size,
structure, function, Behaviour etc. They also show basically similar
metabolic process indicating some common ancestors.
16.6
FOSSILS :
•
The plants and animals that lives in remote past have in
many cases left proofs of their existence in the form of remains in
the rocks. These are called as fossible.
•
Paleontology is the study of fossils.
•
Leonardo-a-vinci is called as the father of Paleontology.
•
Founder of modern paleontology is George Cuvier.
16.6
(a) Fossils Can be of Three Different Types :
(i) Petrified : Replacement of some of the organic parts by mineral

deposits is called as petrification.
(ii) Moulds and casts : Moulds are hardened and fossilized
mud that surrounds a dead organism. Sometimes the moulds are
found with petrified fossils of the organisms and then they are called
as casts.
(iii)
Prints : Foot prints or prints of wings, skin, leaves,
stem etc. made in soft mud which subsequently became fossilized.
16.6 (b) Dating of Fossils :
It is also called as the “clock of fossils”. It is the process of determining
the age of fossils. This include the  following 3  methods.
(i) Lead method
(ii) Radio Carbon method
(iii)
Potassium-Argon method

How do fossils form layer by layer ?
 
Let us start 100 million years ago. Some invertebrates on the sea
bed die, and are burred in the sand. More sand accumulates, and
sandstone forms under pressure.
 
Millions of years later, dinosaurs living in the are die, and their bodies,
too, are buried in mud. This mud is also compressed into rock, above
the rock containing the earlier invertebrate fossils.
Again millions of years later, the bodies of horse-like creatures dying in
the area are fossilized in rock above these earlier rocks.
 
Much later, erosion by, say, water flow ears away some of the rock and
exposes the horse-like fossils. As we big deeper, we will find older and
older fossils.

.
16.7
MORPHOLOGICAL EVIDENCES :
16.7
(a) Homologous Organs or Homology :
[Same structure but different function] Homology can be defined at the
relationship between the structures which have similarity due to
common ancestors, although these structures may show difference in
their function. .e.
(i) fore limbs of vertebrates having pentdactyl limbs of similar origin
and similar arrangement of bones,
muscles etc.
(ii) 
Legs of different insects.
(iii) Teeth of man.
                             Whale               birds            Bat          Horse
        Man
16.7 (b) Analogous Organs or Analogy :

[Different structure but similar function] Analogy can be defined as a
relationship between structures, which though differ anatomically but
would have superficial similarity due to similar function.
e.g.
(i) Wings of insects and wings of birds
(ii) Sting of
bee and scorpion.
(iii) Find of fishes and flipper of whales.
16.7 (c) Vestigial organs :
Those organs which have no longer function are known as vestigial
organs. These organs have reduced structurally as well as functionally.
•
It appears that these organs were well developed in
ancestors but due to their reduced or less use they became
functionless.
Vestigial organs of man
•
There are many vestigial organs in human body e.g.
(i) Vermiform appendix in man
(ii) External ear in man
(iii)
Nictitating membrane
(iv) Wisdom teeth

16.8
Common Ancestry and Inter-relationship :
•
Various organisms are interconnected.
•
Their resemblance suggest a common ancestry e.g.
•
(i) Heart of fish is two chambered
(ii) Heart of amphibian is three chambered
(iii) Hearts of birds and mammals are four chambered
16.9
CONNECTING LINKS:
Animals are sharply differentiated and classified into phyla and classes
but there are some existing animals which represent an intermediate
position between the two groups. Such organisms are called as
connecting links e.g.
(i) Lung fish shows connection between fishes and amphibians.
(ii) Amphibian show connecting links between fishes and reptiles.
(iii) Virus shows connecting links between living and non-living.
(iv) Euglena shows connecting link between and animals.
(v) Protopongia between protozoa and porifera.
16.10 Embryological Evidences :
•
Embryology 
can 
be
defined as a branch of science
that 
deals 
with 
study 
of

development of an organisms
from zygote to an adult form
inside the egg or mother’s
womb.
•
The study of embryo’s
form various organisms reveals
similarity in the early stages of
embryo development and this
theory 
suggests 
that 
these
organisms have evolved from
common ancestors.
e.g. Embryos of fish, tortoise,
child, rabbits and m an show the
similarity 
during 
embryo
development.
16.11
PALENTOLOGICAL EVIDENCES :
•
Palaentology is a branch of science that deals with the study of
fossils.
•
The study of fossils of some of the organisms show
similarity between the two groups, e.g. Fossils of Archaeopteryx
shows characteristics of both reptiles and birds.
16.12 EVIDENCES FROM ATAVISM (REVERSION) :
Sometimes in some individuals such characters appear which were
supposed to be present in their ancestors but were lost during the course
of development. This phenomenon is known as atavism or reversion.
Atavism proves that animals developing atavistic structures have
evolved from such ancestors in which these structures were fully
developed e.g.
(i) Human baby with tail
(ii) Cervical fistula
(iii) Long and pointed canine teeth represent carnivorous accentors.

(iv) Large and thick body hair reflect our relationship with apes.
(v) Presence of extra nipples (more then two)
16.13 EVIDENCES 
FROM 
PHYSIOLOGY 
AND
BIOCHEMISTRY :
Different organisms show similarities in physiology and biochemistry.
Some clear examples are-
(i) Protoplasm : Structural and chemical composition of protoplasm is
same from protozoa o mammalia.
(ii) 
Enzymes : Enzymes perform same functions in all animals like
trypsin digests protein from Amoeba to
man, amylase digests starch from porifera to mammalia.
(iii) Blood : Chordates show almost same composition of blood.
(iv) 
ATP: This energy rich molecule is formed for biological
oxidation in all animals.
(v) Hormones : Secreted in different vertebrates perform same
functions.
(vi) 
Hereditary material : Hereditary material is DNA in
all organisms and is basic structure is same in all animals.
(vii) Cytochrome C: It is a respiratory protein situated in the
mitochondria of all organisms. Physiology
and biochemistry thus prove that all animals have evolved from
some common ancestor.
16.14
DARWINISM 
OR 
THEORY 
OF 
NATURAL
SELECTION :
“Darwinism” or Theory of natural selection was proposed jointly by
Charles Darwin and Alffred Wallace in 1859. This theory was later on
explained by Charles Darwin in his Book “The origin of species” by
means of “Natural Selection” (1859)
16.14 (a) Postulates of Darwinism :
He had proposed six important postulates namely
(i) Multiplication of individual of species in a geometric proportion.
(ii) 
Existence of variation.

(iii) 
The operation of natural selection on the existing variability in
order to select the best fitted variations.
(iv) 
Due to geometric multiplication and due to the availability of
limited food and space for these
individuals the struggle for existence is seen. Since the requirement
of the members of the same species would be similar, such a struggle
would be more intense amongst the members of the same species.
(v) Variations : They are rule of nature and proved to the beneficial
for between existence.
(vi) 
Natural selection : Natural selection is the principle element of
Darwin’s theory. The principle by
which the preservation of useful variations is brought about was
called as natural selection.
16.14 (b) Merit of Darwinism :
(i) The major achievement of Darwin was to recognize one of the major
factor in adaptation i.e. natural selection.
16.14 (c) Demerits of Darwinism :
(i) In Darwin’s natural selection principle the death of the unit and the
survival of the fittest was conceived.
(ii) Darwin’s also believed that the natural selection operates on
variations but he did not consider the possibility of the origin of new
hereditary variations, which are really responsible for origin of species.
(iii) Darwin also did not distinguish between hereditary and
environmental variations.
16.14 (d) Neo-Darwinism :
•
It is a modified form of Darwinism,
along with the recent researches of Weisman, Mendel,
Huxley, Gates, Devries etc.
•
They performed various experiments to remove objections
against Darwin’s Theory.
•
Neo - Darwinism comprises three important postulates :

(i) Genetic variability : It means the variation that occur
in the genetic constitution of an organism. They cold be of
following types :
(A) Chromosomal aberrations [deletion, duplication,
translocation and inversion]
(B) Chromosomal numbers [haploidy, polyploidy
etc.]
(C) Gene mutation
(D) Hybridization
(ii) Natural selection : According to Neo - Darwinism the
organism which is more adapted towards environment
matures first and produces more progenies, as compaired
to less adapted organism.
• It shows positive selection method.
• It can overcome environmental stress.
• It produces greater progeny than others
(iii) Reproductive isolation : it is the failure of
interbreeding between the related groups of living
organisms and is essential to prevent the dilution of
differences between the genetically different species.
16.15 LAMARCKISM :
First theory of evolution was proposed by Jean Baptiste de Lamarck
(1744 - 1829) Book Philosophie Zoologiuie (1809). The term Biology
was given by Lamarck & Treviranus.
16.15 (a) Basic Concepts of Lamarckism :
(i) Internal Vital Forces : Some internal forces are present in all
organisms. Bu the presence of these forces organisms have the
tendency to increase the size of organs or entire body.
(ii) 
Effect of environment and new needs : Environment
influences all types of organisms. Changing environment gives rise

to new needs. New needs or desires produce new structures and
change habits of the organism.
(iii) 
Use and disuse of organs : If an organ is constantly used, it
would be better developed whereas disuse of organ results in its
degeneration.
(vi) 
Inheritance of acquired characters :  During the life time of
an organism new characters develop due to internal vital forces,
effect of environment, new needs and use and disuse of organs.
These acquired characters are inherited from one generation to
another. By continuous inheritance through many generations these
acquired characters tend to make new generation quite different
from its ancestors resulting in the formation of new species.
• Examples in support of Lamarckism :
(i) Long neck and large fore limbs of Giraffe.
(ii)Aquatic birds stretch their toes and developed webs.
(iii)
Snakes have lost their legs.
(iv)Deer become a good runner by the development of strong limbs
and streamlined body.
(v) Retractile claws of carnivorous animals.
16.16 (b) Criticism of Lamarckism :
(i) According to first concept organisms tends to increase
their size but it is not a universally truth, e.g. Among angiosperms
the trees seem to have been primitive and the shrubs, herbs and
grasses evolved from trees but the size is reduced during evolution.
(ii) Second concept is false as we can’t have a sprout wings wishing to
fly like birds.
(iii)
The third concept have some truth like the well
developed biceps of black smith and less developed wings in
flightless birds. But this concept also have many objection like the
eyes of regular reader do not increase in size and power with
increasing age, the constantly beating heart maintains a constant size
through generations.
(iv) Forth concept is completely false because acquired characters are
not inherited.

16.17 WEISMANN :
Weismann cut off tails of rats for about twenty two generations but
there is no reduction in the size of the tail. On the basis of this
experiment Weismann proposed the theory of continuity of
germplasm.
16.17 (a) According to Weismann :
•
Two types of mattes are present in organisms, sometoplasm and
germplasm.
•
Sometoplasm in somatic cells and germplasm in germinal cells.
•
Sometoplasm dies with the death of an organism
while germplasm is transferred into next generation.
•
If any variation develops in germplasm it is inherited
while if variation develops in sometoplasm it is not transmitted.
16.18 NEOLAMARCKISM :
Although Lamarckism remained controversial but some scientists gave
following evidences in favour of Lamarckism they are called as neo-
lamarckians. According to neolamarckism environment affected the
inheritance of acquired characters. According to it changing
environment gives rise to some physical and chemical changes in
organism which effect germplasm, and these acquired characters are
definitely inherited.

DAILY PRACTICE PROBLEMS  # 16
OBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
1.
Which one of these is likely to have been absent in free form at the
time of origin of life ?
(A) Oxygen
(B) Hydrogen
(C) Ammonia
(D)
Methane
2.
The famous book “Origin of Species” was written by Charles Darwin
in
(A) 1809
(B) 1859
(C) 1885
(D) 1871
3.
Charles Darwin toured in a ship for five years it was
(A) Vikrant
(B) Phillips
(C) Alexander
(D)
Beagle
4.
The term evolution in Biology means that
(A) fossils are old
(B) life began in Sea
(C) living things constantly change
(D) none of the above
5.
The theory of Natural selection of Darwin to explain organic evolution
was based on
(A) modification in organs through used and disuse
(B) probability of reproduction, struggle for existence and survival of
the fittest
(C) Inheritance of acquired characters
(D) appearance of sudden large variations, then inheritance and
survival of those having these variations
6.
Homologus structures have
(A) similar origin & dissimilar function
(B) dissimilar origin

but similar function
(C) structurally as well as functionally similar
(D) normally
non-functional
7.
Analogous organs are those which are
(A) structurally similar
(B) functionally similar
(C) structurally as well as functionally similar
(D) normally
non-functional
8.
The idea of “Survival of fittest” was given by
(A) 
Darwin
(B) 
Herbert 
Spencer
(C)
Lamarck
(D) Devries
9.
Evolution is the best defined by
(A) inheritance of acquired characters
(B) descent by
modifications
(C) spontaneous generation
(D) struggle for existence
10.
Which one is not a vestigial organ in man ?
(A) Vermiform appendix  (B) Plica seminualris
(C) Ear
muscles
(D) Epiglottis
11.
Who wrote the “Origin of Species” ?
(A) G.J. Mendel
(B) Lamarck
(C) De-Vries
(D)
Charles Darwin
12.
When as organ is used it will develop and it is not used, it
weakens to become vestigial. Who could have said this theory ?
(A) Darwin
(B) De-Vries
(C) Lamarck
(D)
Mendel
13.
Fossils are
(A) fovea in the retina of vertebrate eye
(B) remains of
organisms presents in the rocks

(C) the fossa present in the bones
(D) foramens through which
nerves pass
14.
An experiment to prove that organic compounds were the basis of life,
was performed by
(A) Oparin
(B) Miller
(C) Melvin
(D) Fox
15.
Connecting link between Reptiles and Birds is
(A) dimetrodon
(B) dodo
(C) archaeopteryx
(D)
sphenodon
16.
According to the Neo-Darwinian theory which of the following is
responsible for the origin of new species?
(A) Mutations
(B) Useful variations
(C) 
Mutations 
together 
with 
natural 
selection
(D)
Hybridization.
17.
Fossils are dated now by
(A) stratigraphic position
(B) amount of calcium residue
(C) association with other animals
(D) radioactive carbon
contents
18.
Nucleoprotein gave most probably the first sign of
(A) life
(B) amino acid
(C) soil
(D) sugar
 
19.
According to one of the most accepted theory the earth
atmosphere before any life has originated consisted of water vapour,
hydrogen, NH3 and
(A) methane
(B) nitrogen
(C) oxygen
(D)
carbondioxide

20.
Origin of life is due to
(A) spontaneous generation
(B) God’s will
(C) effect of sun rays on mud
(D) chemical evolution
SUBJECTIVE QUESTIONS
SHORT ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
1.
What are the different ways in which individuals with a particular trait
may increase in a population ?
2.
Why are traits acquired during the life-time of an individual not
inherited ?
3.
Why are the small numbers of surviving tigers are cause of worry from
the point of view of genetics ?
LONG ANSWER TYPE QUESTIONS
4.
Explain how sexual reproduction gives rise to more viable
variations that asexual reproduction ? How does this affects the
evolution of those organisms that reproduce sexually ?
5.
How is the equal genetic contribution of male and female parents
ensured in the progeny ?
6.
Only variations that confer an advantage to an individual
organism will survive in a population. Do you agree with this
statement  ? Why or why not ?
ANSWERS

DAILY PRACTIVE PROBLEMS # 16
 
Que.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Ans.
A
B
D
C
B
A
B
A
B
D
Que.
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Ans.
D
C
B
B
C
C
D
A
A
D

