Andriy A. Sibirny    Editor 
Biotechnology 
of Yeasts and 
Filamentous 
Fungi

Biotechnology of Yeasts and
Filamentous Fungi

Andriy A. Sibirny
Editor
Biotechnology of Yeasts
and Filamentous Fungi

Editor
Andriy A. Sibirny
National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine
Institute of Cell Biology
Lviv, Ukraine
University of Rzeszow
Poland
ISBN 978-3-319-58828-5
ISBN 978-3-319-58829-2
(eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-58829-2
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017943864
# Springer International Publishing AG 2017
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of
the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or
dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt
from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained
herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Preface
The reader is referred to the new Springer book Biotechnology of Yeasts and
Filamentous Fungi. The proposed topic is quite important as biotechnology of
yeasts and ﬁlamentous fungi is apparently the largest branch of biotechnology in
terms of annual sales. It is enough to tell that yeast is responsible for the production
of nearly 100 billion liters of fuel ethanol per year and much more of alcoholic
beverages. Fungal antibiotics have the largest market among all anti-infectives.
A huge market relies on the traditional use of S. cerevisiae for baking. Yeasts and
fungi are responsible for production of glycerol, lipids, organic acids, vitamins, and
other low-molecular-weight compounds as well as enzymes. There are several
popular yeast platforms for expression of heterologous proteins of pharmaceutical,
food, agricultural, and industrial importance, which have a large and steadily
growing market. Finally, yeast and fungal enzymes and intact cells are widely
used for analytical purposes as components of enzymatic kits and biosensors. This
book contains 14 chapters which cover the latest achievements in the traditional and
modern use of yeasts and ﬁlamentous fungi. The authors are leaders in their
research ﬁelds. They represent 12 countries from the continents of Europe, Asia,
North and South Americas, and Oceania. The reviews describe the history and
current state of the particular ﬁeld of yeast and fungal biotechnology; moreover,
perspectives of further development of research and implementation into industry
are also discussed. It became clear that new achievements in yeast and fungal
biotechnology are possible and they largely depend on the search for new, still
unknown species of yeasts and ﬁlamentous fungi with some novel features, as well
as on the development of the new tools of molecular research.
The ﬁrst two chapters deal with yeast alcoholic fermentation and describe
construction of efﬁcient producers of ﬁrst- and second-generation ethanol as well
as high-temperature alcoholic fermentation. The next two chapters describe modern
approaches to the traditional use of yeast for baking, including stress-tolerant yeast
and yeast dehydration. Yeast metabolic engineering was developed a 100 years ago
by Carl Neuberg and was directed for glucose conversion to glycerol instead of
ethanol production. Consequently, one of the chapters of this book describes
modern approaches of metabolic engineering of S. cerevisiae for anaerobic glycerol
production. Yeasts and ﬁlamentous fungi are known as the industrial producers of
low-molecular-weight metabolites, so the book contains comprehensive reviews
v

describing using these organisms for production of lipids and carotenoids. It is not
surprising that the book also offers chapters on the production of organic acids and
riboﬂavin by native and recombinant strains of yeasts and ﬁlamentous fungi. An
interesting review is dedicated to psychrophilic yeasts as the source of cold-active
enzymes. Methylotrophic yeasts are considered in another chapter as convenient
expression platforms and promising industrial producers of recombinant proteins.
Finally, three chapters are dedicated to yeast and fungal cells and enzymes or other
proteins isolated from these organisms as components of the analytical tools for
assaying various chemical substances.
I hope that this book will be useful to biotechnologists, microbiologists,
geneticists and biochemists.
Lviv, Ukraine
Andriy A. Sibirny
vi
Preface

Contents
1
Genetic Improvement of Conventional and Nonconventional Yeasts
for the Production of First- and Second-Generation Ethanol . . . . .
1
Kostyantyn V. Dmytruk, Olena O. Kurylenko, Justyna Ruchala,
Charles A. Abbas, and Andriy A. Sibirny
2
High-Temperature Bioethanol Fermentation by Conventional and
Nonconventional Yeasts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Hisashi Hoshida and Rinji Akada
3
Construction of Baker’s Yeast Strains with Enhanced Tolerance to
Baking-Associated Stresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Hiroshi Takagi
4
Anhydrobiosis and Dehydration of Yeasts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
Alexander Rapoport
5
Biotechnology of Glycerol Production and Conversion in Yeasts . . . . .
117
Marta Semkiv, Kostyantyn Dmytruk, Charles Abbas,
and Andriy Sibirny
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for
Biotechnology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
149
Volkmar Passoth
7
Production of Organic Acids by Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi . . . .
205
Danilo Porro and Paola Branduardi
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts . . . . . . .
225
Javier Avalos, Steffen Nordzieke, Obdulia Parra, Javier Pardo-Medina,
and M. Carmen Limo´n
9
Molecular Studies of the Flavinogenic Fungus Ashbya gossypii and
the Flavinogenic Yeast Candida famata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
281
Oleksiy O. Lyzak, Rodrigo Ledesma-Amaro, Kostyantyn V. Dmytruk,
Andriy A. Sibirny, and Jose Luis Revuelta
vii

10
Cold-Active Enzymes from Cold-Adapted Yeasts . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
297
Marcelo Baeza, Jennifer Alcaı´no, Vı´ctor Cifuentes, Benedetta Turchetti,
and Pietro Buzzini
11
Methylotrophic Yeasts as Producers of Recombinant Proteins . . . .
325
Oleh Stasyk
12
Biosensors Based on Yeast/Fungal Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
351
Alexandre Chamas, Ha Thi Minh Pham, Kim Baronian,
and Gotthard Kunze
13
Yeast-Based Systems for Environmental Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
373
Galina Gayda, Mykhailo Gonchar, and Andriy Sibirny
14
Yeast-Based Biosensors for Clinical Diagnostics and Food
Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
391
Mykhailo Gonchar, Oleh Smutok, Maria Karkovska, Nataliya Stasyuk,
and Galina Gayda
viii
Contents

Genetic Improvement of Conventional
and Nonconventional Yeasts
for the Production of First- and Second-
Generation Ethanol
1
Kostyantyn V. Dmytruk, Olena O. Kurylenko, Justyna Ruchala,
Charles A. Abbas, and Andriy A. Sibirny
Abstract
Production of fuel ethanol is one of the largest ﬁelds of industrial biotechnology.
Currently, most of fuel ethanol is produced from conventional feedstock (ﬁrst-
generation ethanol); however, lignocellulose-derived (second-generation) etha-
nol has great future. Current review describes achievements in construction of
the advanced strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae with increased yield and
productivity of ethanol synthesis from glucose. Among producers of second-
generation ethanol, review presents data on three species, conventional yeast
S. cerevisiae, and two nonconventional yeast species: one of the most efﬁcient
natural xylose-fermenting yeast Scheffersomyces stipitis and the thermotolerant
yeast Ogataea polymorpha. Improvements of the available strains using
methods of rational metabolic engineering and classical selection are discussed.
K.V. Dmytruk • O.O. Kurylenko
Department of Molecular Genetics and Biotechnology, Institute of Cell Biology, NAS of Ukraine,
Drahomanov Street, 14/16, Lviv 79005, Ukraine
J. Ruchala
Department of Biotechnology and Microbiology, University of Rzeszow, Cwiklinskiej 2, Rzeszow
35-601, Poland
C.A. Abbas
Archer Daniels Midland Co. Research Center, 1001 N Brush College Road, Decatur, IL 62521,
USA
A.A. Sibirny (*)
Department of Molecular Genetics and Biotechnology, Institute of Cell Biology, NAS of Ukraine,
Drahomanov Street, 14/16, Lviv 79005, Ukraine
Department of Biotechnology and Microbiology, University of Rzeszow, Cwiklinskiej 2, Rzeszow
35-601, Poland
e-mail: sibirny@cellbiol.lviv.ua
# Springer International Publishing AG 2017
A.A. Sibirny (ed.), Biotechnology of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-58829-2_1
1

Contents
1.1
Introduction .................................................................................
2
1.2
Saccharomyces cerevisiae ..................................................................
3
1.3
Scheffersomyces (Pichia) stipitis ...........................................................
15
1.4
Ogataea polymorpha .......................................................................
21
1.5
Concluding Remarks .......................................................................
27
References ........................................................................................
28
1.1
Introduction
Global energy and environmental problems have stimulated an increase in efforts
for biofuels production from renewable resources as a drop in replacements for the
currently used fossil fuels such as gasoline produced from oil (Lennartsson et al.
2014). Due to the current political instability in oil-producing nations, and the
concerns about global warming (attributed to harmful greenhouse gas emissions),
there has been a call for greater reliance on domestic energy sources for the
development of economically viable and environmentally friendly biofuels.
Fuel ethanol is a promising renewable liquid transportation fuel that is expected
to become a dominant renewable biofuel in the transport sector within the next
20 years (Hahn-Ha¨gerdal et al. 2006). This can be documented by the worldwide
exponential in ethanol production during the last decade, reaching 97 billion liters
in 2015 (http://www.afdc.energy.gov/data/10331). Ethanol can be blended with
gasoline or used as a neat alcohol in dedicated engines, taking advantage of the
higher octane number and higher heat of vaporization. Furthermore, it is considered
as an excellent fuel for advanced ﬂexi-fuel hybrid vehicles.
The current review summarizes the recent progress in the construction of more
robust efﬁcient yeast producers of ethanol from conventional and nonconventional
feedstocks or what is referred to as ﬁrst- and second-generation ethanol (1G, 2G).
Saccharomyces cerevisiae is considered as the major industrial producer of 1G
ethanol. Construction of the producers of 2G ethanol will be described for three
organisms: S. cerevisiae, one of the best natural xylose fermenters, Scheffersomyces
(Pichia) stipitis, and the most thermotolerant yeast known that also ferments
xylose, Ogataea (Hansenula) polymorpha. Each of these organisms has some
advantages and drawbacks. S. cerevisiae is the primary industrial 1G ethanol
producer and is the most ethanol-tolerant natural yeast known. However, this
yeast cannot metabolize xylose at all. S. stipitis can effectively ferment both
glucose and xylose; however, it has much lower ethanol tolerance than
S. cerevisiae and requires oxygen for growth. O. polymorpha can grow and ferment
glucose and xylose at temperatures of up to 50 C and for this reason can be
promising for use in the process of simultaneous sacchariﬁcation and fermentation
(SSF). This yeast also shows relatively high ethanol tolerance, but the wild-type
strains of O. polymorpha produce very low amounts of ethanol from xylose. The
drawbacks of all three yeasts that are discussed can be successfully overcome by
2
K.V. Dmytruk et al.

combining metabolic and evolutionary engineering in some cases with classical
mutation and selection approaches.
1.2
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Today, industrial-scale production of fuel ethanol uses primarily conventional
food-based feedstocks such as glucose (derived from starch) and sucrose and is
known as the ﬁrst-generation (1G) ethanol.
The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is the organism of choice for the industrial
production of ethanol. The production of ethanol by fermentation represents the
largest
industrial
biotechnological
application
of
yeast.
S.
cerevisiae
is
characterized by several desirable industrial properties which include fast growth,
efﬁcient glucose anaerobic metabolism, high ethanol productivity, high yield, and
high tolerance to several environmental stress factors, such as high ethanol concen-
tration, low pH, and low oxygen level. In addition to this, yeast is insensitive to
bacteriophage infection, which is particularly relevant in large industrial processes
that use bacteria as the production microorganism. During alcoholic fermentation,
S. cerevisiae produces ethanol with a yield close to the theoretical maximum (0.51 g
ethanol per g of consumed glucose) (Gombert and van Maris 2015). At industrial
scale, ethanol is produced with a yield that is higher than 90% of the theoretical
maximum yield possible from glucose (Della-Bianca et al. 2013). Taking into
account the large worldwide ethanol production, an increase of ethanol yield of
even 1% can provide an additional estimated proﬁt that approaches hundreds of
millions of dollars annually.
The yeast S. cerevisiae catabolizes glucose via the Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas
(EMP) pathway yielding anaerobically of 2 moles ATP per mole of consumed
glucose. The efﬁciency of this pathway for anabolic processes is low with a
maximal biomass yield of around 7% and an ethanol yield in the range of
90–93% from the glucose consumed (Ingledew 1999). In contrast to S. cerevisiae,
the bacterium, Zymomonas mobilis, ferments glucose through the Entner-
Doudoroff (ED) pathway. This pathway provides only 1 mole of ATP per mole
of glucose and consequently directs only 3% of glucose used to biomass production,
while the remaining 97% is converted to ethanol at almost the possible theoretical
value (Sprenger 1996). When ATP is used for growth, cell biomass is formed at the
expense of glucose that is not converted to ethanol. In other words, cell biomass is a
by-product that is produced during alcoholic fermentation. Therefore, the lowering
of ATP yield during alcoholic fermentation increases ethanol yield with reduced
substrate conversion to cell mass. To achieve this goal several strategies can be
applied such as (1) substitution of EMP pathway in yeast by ED pathway, (2) acti-
vation of energy-consuming plasma membrane sugars symporters, (3) generation of
futile cycles, and (4) elevation activity of ATP-degrading enzymes (De Kok et al.
2012). An alternative possibility to increasing ethanol yield during alcoholic fer-
mentation is based on decreasing production of glycerol, which is another major
by-product of ethanol production in yeast (Gombert and van Maris 2015).
1
Genetic Improvement of Conventional and Nonconventional Yeasts for the. . .
3

Notwithstanding the former patent application of Lancashire et al. (1998) which
describes the functional integration of the ED pathway to bypass glycolysis in
S. cerevisiae with positive impact on ethanol yield, more recent work demonstrates
the inability to express in this yeast one of the two unique enzymes to the ED
pathway, namely, 6-phosphogluconate dehydratase (PGDH) (Benisch and Boles
2014). Several attempts to improve the availability of iron-sulfur clusters in the
yeast cells and to attract the iron-sulfur cluster assembly machinery to PGDH
protein did not result in improved enzyme activities (Benisch and Boles 2014).
The impact of the disaccharide-proton symport on biomass and ethanol yields
was studied in S. cerevisiae by comparing anaerobic growth on maltose, which is
transported by a maltose-proton symporter and intracellularly hydrolyzed by malt-
ase, to that of glucose (Weusthuis et al. 1993). It was demonstrated that biomass and
ethanol yields in anaerobic maltose-limited cultures were 25% lower and 8%
higher, respectively, than that of glucose-limited cultures. Relocation of sucrose
hydrolysis from the extracellular space to the cytosol with additional evolutionary
engineering resulted in a strain that had elevated sucrose uptake kinetics with a 30%
decrease in the biomass yield and an 11% increase in the ethanol yield relative to
the reference strain. Such evolved strain was characterized by increased transcript
level of AGT1 gene encoded sucrose-proton symporter (Basso et al. 2011). There-
fore, in principle the improved kinetics of sucrose transport with concomitant ATP
reduction can be achieved by targeted overexpression of AGT1 or the heterologous
genes encoding sucrose-proton symporters from yeasts that naturally hydrolyze
sucrose intracellularly (Kaliterna et al. 1995). Replacement of S. cerevisiae
facilitated diffusion systems by heterologous proton symporters for the other
industrially relevant sugars (viz., glucose and fructose) presents an opportunity to
explore the energetic impact on the biomass accumulation and ethanol yield from
the introduction of such heterologous transporters in S. cerevisiae (De Kok et al.
2012).
A futile cycle is a set of biochemical reactions of at least two metabolic pathways
that run simultaneously in opposite directions which result in energy dissipation.
Phosphofructokinase is a glycolytic enzyme that phosphorylates fructose
6-phosphate to fructose-1,6-bisphosphate in an ATP-dependent manner. Fructose-
1,6-bisphosphatase (FBPase) is one of the gluconeogenesis enzymes. This enzyme
hydrolyzes
fructose-1,6-bisphosphate
to
fructose-6-phosphate
in
an
ATP-dependent reaction. The simultaneous action of both enzymes—phosphofruc-
tokinase and fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase—leads to a futile cycle generation
between fructose-1,6-bisphosphate and fructose-6-phosphate with ATP dissipation.
Phosphofructokinase is primarily regulated at the level of activity and the
differences in the amount of the enzyme in glycolytic and gluconeogenic conditions
do not exceed twofold (Bafuelos and Gancedo 1978; Clifton and Fraenkel 1981). In
contrast, the FBPase activity is tightly regulated by catabolic repression, inactiva-
tion through ubiquitination, and inhibition by AMP and fructose-2,6-bisphosphate
(Navas et al. 1993; Navas and Gancedo 1996). Therefore, intracellular FBPase
activity level is maintained at basal level in cells grown in media containing
fermentable carbon sources. To overcome the tight regulation of the yeast FBPase,
4
K.V. Dmytruk et al.

the bacterial FBPase from E. coli, that is, insensitive to fructose-2,6-bisphosphate
inhibition, was constitutively expressed in yeast (Navas and Gancedo 1996; Semkiv
et al. 2016). The resulting recombinant strain was characterized by a threefold
increase of FBPase activity, a 30% reduced intracellular ATP level, and up to 9%
increase of ethanol production relative to that of parental strain (Semkiv et al.
2016).
An alternate futile cycle was generated via the simultaneous activation of two
enzymes, pyruvate carboxylase and the gluconeogenic enzyme, phosphoenolpyr-
uvate carboxykinase (Semkiv et al. 2016). Pyruvate carboxylase catalyzes the
conversion of pyruvate into oxaloacetate in an ATP-dependent reaction, and phos-
phoenolpyruvate carboxykinase uses ATP energy to convert oxaloacetate into
phosphoenolpyruvate. ATP is also synthesized when phosphoenolpyruvate is
converted into pyruvate by pyruvate kinase. Therefore, the resulting total loss in
ATP is one molecule for each one turn of the cycle. The speciﬁc activity of pyruvate
carboxylase was increased three- to ﬁvefold via substitution of target gene promoter
with a strong constitutive one.
The activity of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase is carefully regulated at the
posttranslational level (Wilson and Bhattacharjee 1986). In order to avoid such
regulation, a heterologous gene coding for the corresponding enzyme from E. coli
was overexpressed. As a result, the speciﬁc activity of phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase was elevated six- to sevenfold. Ethanol production by the
constructed recombinant strains revealed a twofold increase over the parental strain
by the end of the ﬁrst day of fermentation (Semkiv et al. 2016).
Potential futile cycle based on the interconversion between glucose and treha-
lose, which theoretically could lead to ATP dissipation in cells of S. cerevisiae, was
generated by the activation of trehalose-6-phosphate synthase and the neutral
trehalase responsible for the synthesis and degradation of trehalose (Semkiv et al.
2016). Despite the increase in the activities of both enzymes, biomass accumulation
remained unchanged.
Lowering of intracellular ATP content in yeast cell with concomitant increase in
ethanol yield can also be achieved by the activation of some of the cytosolic
ATPases. A decrease in cellular ATP pool and activation of alcoholic fermentation
was achieved by the overexpression of the soluble part (F1) of H+-ATPase or a
portion of F1 exhibiting ATPase from different origin in S. cerevisiae (Jensen et al.
2006). Similar results were obtained after the overexpression of PHO5 coding for
acid phosphatase which is a non-speciﬁc enzyme that also hydrolyzes ATP (Rogers
and Szostak 1993). Overexpression of the vacuolar alkaline phosphatase Pho8 leads
to an increase in yield and ethanol production from glucose in both a laboratory and
an industrial strains of S. cerevisiae (Fig. 1.1), whereas the expression of the
truncated cytosol localized form is detrimental to cell growth (Semkiv et al. 2014).
The galactose-induced expression of ATP hydrolysis region of the ribosome-
associated molecular chaperon encoded by gene SSB1 of S. cerevisiae and the ATP
diphosphohydrolases also known as apyrases from E. coli resulted in an increase in
ethanol yield of 39 and 29%, respectively, during fermentation of the corresponding
1
Genetic Improvement of Conventional and Nonconventional Yeasts for the. . .
5

recombinant S. cerevisiae strains in galactose-containing media (Semkiv et al.
2016).
Glycerol is the second primary by-product after cell biomass during the ethanol
production. Glycerol is formed at the expense of sugar that is not converted to
ethanol (Gombert and van Maris 2015). In yeast, the reduction of glycerol forma-
tion can most probably result in an increase in ethanol yields. Therefore, signiﬁcant
research efforts were directed to reduce glycerol formation during fermentation.
This can be accomplished by deletion of one or both genes GPD1 and GPD2,
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
C
Ethanol g/l
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
AS400
AS400/Pho8vac
A
Cell mass g/l
B
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Glucose g/l
Time h
Fig. 1.1 Growth, glucose
consumption, and ethanol
production during alcoholic
fermentation of recombinant
strains overexpressing
vacuolar form of alkaline
phosphatase. Strains were
cultured under semianaerobic
conditions in YNB medium
with 200 g/L glucose.
Cultures were incubated at
30 C, with limited aeration
using a gyratory shaker at a
setting of 120 rpm. AS400–
WT, recipient strain. AS400/
Pho8vac—strain containing
vector pUC57-delta1_2-
ADHpr-PHO8-CYCt-
kanMX. (a) Biomass
accumulation (g of biomass/L
of medium); (b) glucose
consumption (g of glucose/L
of medium); (c) ethanol
production (g of ethanol/L of
medium)
6
K.V. Dmytruk et al.

coding for glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (Ansell et al. 1997). Deletion of
both genes affected anaerobic growth. Deletion of GPD2 resulted in an increase in
ethanol yield with concomitant decrease of glycerol production; however, such a
mutation also reduced growth and ethanol productivity (Valadi et al. 1998). Glyc-
erol formation is caused by the oxidation of the excess NADH, which is produced
from glycolysis under anaerobic conditions. In order to decrease cytosolic NADH
formation, the gene GDH1, encoding NADPH-dependent glutamate dehydroge-
nase, was deleted, while GLN1 and GLT1 coding for glutamine synthetase and
NAD-dependent glutamate synthase were overexpressed. During ammonium
assimilation that is linked with NADH and ATP consumption, a recombinant strain
showed a decrease in the glycerol yield to 38%, while ethanol yield was increased
by 10% (Nissen et al. 2000). Another approach for reducing the intracellular pool of
NADH and ATP production consisted of replacing the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase gene by that of the non-phosphorylating heterologous NADP-
dependent analog from Bacillus cereus or Streptococcus mutans (Guo et al. 2011;
Zhang et al. 2011). The combination of this approach with the overexpression of
NAD-dependent fumarate reductase or acetaldehyde dehydrogenase in both cases
increased ethanol yield to 95% of the theoretical maximum (Zhang et al. 2011).
Other work has also demonstrated that the expression of the NAD-dependent
acetaldehyde dehydrogenase from an E. coli in gpd1Δ gpd2Δ strain supports the
growth in the medium with glucose supplemented with acetate under anaerobic
conditions (Guadalupe Medina et al. 2010). The constructed strains can be used for
alcoholic fermentation of acetate-containing substrates, as they are able to convert
acetate into ethanol. The main drawback of these S. cerevisiae strains is that the
reduced glycerol production resulted also in reduced osmotolerance and overall
viability (Hohmann 2002). This ﬁnding imposes certain restrictions on the applica-
tion of these strains in industrial fermentation processes that normally run at high
concentration of fermented substrate. Signiﬁcant other research efforts have
focused on improving the stress resistance of yeast strains with reduced glycerol
production. Osmotolerance, thermotolerance, and tolerance to high concentrations
of ethanol of several target strains were elevated by applying methods of metabolic
engineering and genomic shufﬂing (Wang et al. 2012; Hou 2010). The combination
of the deletion of the GPD1 gene with the overexpression of the nadF gene from
B. cereus that encodes for an NADP-dependent glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehy-
drogenase with the derepression of homologous genes of trehalose synthesis TPS1
and TPS2 (encoding trehalose-6-phosphate synthase and trehalose-6-phosphate
phosphatase) resulted in increased ethanol production and reduced glycerol forma-
tion but did not exhibit a negative inﬂuence on strain viability during alcoholic
fermentation (Guo et al. 2011). Trehalose protects cells from stress and its intracel-
lular concentration correlates with resistance to high temperatures and high
concentrations of ethanol in the medium (Tao et al. 2012). Overexpression of the
TPS1 gene in S. cerevisiae resulted in increased thermotolerance, thereby allowing
for the possible reduction in energy costs for cooling of fermentation vessels as well
as for savings in energy used for heating due to reduced temperature difference
between fermentation and distillation processes (An et al. 2011). Moreover,
1
Genetic Improvement of Conventional and Nonconventional Yeasts for the. . .
7

high-temperature fermentation has advantages during the process of simultaneous
sacchariﬁcation and fermentation, as high temperature (around 50 C) is optimal for
hydrolytic enzymes involved in substrates sacchariﬁcation (Shahsavarani et al.
2012).
The development of improved ethanol-producing strains can be achieved by
applying traditional selection and adaptive evolution as a useful alternative to
metabolic engineering approaches. The mutants that are resistant to toxic
concentrations of oxythiamine, trehalose, 3-bromopyruvate, glyoxylic acid, and
glucosamine have been isolated. Some of these are characterized by 5–8% increase
in ethanol yield when compared to the parental industrial ethanol-producing strain
(Table 1.1) (Dmytruk et al. 2016). By applying adaptive evolution, useful yeast
strains with enhanced maltose utilization and osmotolerance (Higgins et al. 2001)
and increased ethanol tolerance (Stanley et al. 2010) and yeast with improved
ethanol production rate and decreased formation of acetate were selected (Cadiere
et al. 2011).
In contrast to 1G, the 2G ethanol is an ethanol produced from nonfood
feedstocks such as plant biomass. The utilization of lignocellulosic biomass for
2G ethanol production would be preferable over sugar and starch-based 1G ethanol
production because of the absence of competition with food production and mini-
mal changes to land use (Sa´nchez and Cardona 2008; Nigam and Singh 2011). 2G
ethanol can utilize a range of different types of lignocellulosic materials substrates.
Currently, a limited amount of 2G ethanol is produced at several demonstration
plants around the world, but due to higher cost the large-scale ethanol production
from lignocellulosics is not yet commercially feasible (Lennartsson et al. 2014).
The technologies to produce 2G ethanol do exist; however, there are many
improvements that are needed. The production of 2G ethanol from lignocellulosics
will require the development of robust microbial strains that can grow and produce
ethanol from at least glucose and xylose, which are the major fermentable sugars
produced from the hydrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass. Other sugars that are
produce during hydrolysis include the hexoses fructose, mannose, galactose, and
the pentose sugar arabinose.
The yeast S. cerevisiae efﬁciently ferments the hexoses glucose, fructose, and
mannose but to a lesser extent galactose. In this yeast, galactose transporters are
subjected to catabolic repression by glucose thereby limiting co-fermentation of
these sugars. In contrast, mannose enters yeast cells using the glucose transport
system allowing glucose/mannose co-fermentation to ethanol (Madhavan et al.
2012). The combined deletion of the genes GAL6, GAL80, and MIG1 involved in
negative regulation of galactose catabolism in a laboratory S. cerevisiae strain
resulted in a partial co-consumption of glucose and galactose in aerobic batch
cultures (Ostergaard et al. 2001). Normally, galactose metabolism in S. cerevisiae
requires respiration. However, a cox9Δ gal80Δ double mutant has been isolated
which effectively fermented galactose anaerobically (Quarterman et al. 2016). A
natural strain of S. cerevisiae (NRRL Y-1528), which catabolizes galactose more
effectively than glucose or mannose and able to simultaneous fermentation of all
hexose presented in the hydrolyzed biomass was described. This strain may have a
8
K.V. Dmytruk et al.

Table 1.1 Growth rate, ethanol production, productivity, speciﬁc productivity, and yield of S. cerevisiae mutants resistant to oxythiamine, trehalose,
bromopyruvate, glyoxylic acid, glucosamine, and initial industrial strain AS400 during alcoholic fermentation on YNB medium supplemented with 20%
glucose and corn steep liquor (CSL) medium with hydrolyzed meal indicated in brackets
Strain
Selective agent
Speciﬁc growth
rate, g l1h1
Ethanol, g l1
Ethanol
productivity,
g l1h1
Speciﬁc ethanol
productivity, g g1
biomass h1
Ethanol yield, g g1 of
consumed glucose
AS400
–
0.133  0.003
80.3  1.5
(84.6  1.0)
4.46  0.08
(3.53  0.03)
1.86  0.03
0.402  0.007
(0.423  0.005)
AS400-567
Oxythiamine
0.133  0.004
85.2  1.6
(90.5  0.9)
4.73  0.09
(3.77  0.04)
1.97  0.04
0.426  0.008
(0.453  0.004)
AS400-543
Trehalose
0.083  0.002
84.3  1.6
(88.8  0.9)
4.68  0.09
(3.70  0.03)
2.75  0.06
0.422  0.008
(0.444  0.005)
AS400-617
Bromopyruvate
0.133  0.003
84.1  1.5
(89.7  1.0)
4.67  0.09
(3.74  0.03)
1.95  0.03
0.421  0.007
(0.449  0.005)
AS400-510
Glyoxylic acid
0.133  0.004
85.1  1.6
(91.4  0.9)
4.73  0.09
(3.81  0.03)
1.97  0.04
0.426  0.007
(0.457  0.005)
AS400-128
Glucosamine
0.117  0.003
84.6  1.7
(89.6  0.9)
4.70  0.09
(3.73  0.04)
2.24  0.04
0.423  0.008
(0.448  0.005)
AS400-510-
42
Glyoxylic acid,
glucosamine
0.133  0.004
86.7  1.7
(93.0  0.9)
4.82  0.09
(3.88  0.03)
2.01  0.04
0.434  0.008
(0.465  0.004)
AS400-510-
42-214
Glyoxylic acid,
glucosamine,
bromopyruvate
0.117  0.003
88.4  1.5
(94.8  1.0)
4.91  0.08
(3.95  0.04)
2.34  0.04
0.442  0.008
(0.474  0.005)
()—absolute error
For alcoholic fermentation, cells of AS400 strain and its derivatives were grown overnight in 100 mL of YPD medium in 300 mL Erlenmeyer ﬂasks and then
used to inoculate 20 mL aliquots of mineral YNB medium supplemented with 200 g/L glucose or CSL medium supplemented with hydrolyzed meal in 50 mL
Erlenmeyer ﬂasks. An initial biomass concentration of 8 g (dry weight)/L was used for fermentation in YNB medium. For CSL medium, an initial biomass
concentration of 10 g (dry weight)/L was used. Fermentation was carried out at a temperature of 34 C with limited aeration using a gyratory shaker at a setting
of 120 rpm. Samples were taken every 3 h for YNB medium or 12 h for CSL medium
1
Genetic Improvement of Conventional and Nonconventional Yeasts for the. . .
9

defect in carbon catabolic repression which alleviates glucose repression of galac-
tose utilization (Keating et al. 2004).
Wild-type strains of S. cerevisiae are unable to catabolize and ferment pentoses
(xylose or arabinose) which are major constituents of hydrolysates of plant bio-
mass. This physiological feature of S. cerevisiae is due to the lack of enzymes that
catalyze the initial stages of the pentose catabolism. Since the xylose content in the
plant biomass hydrolysates is signiﬁcantly higher than that of arabinose, most of the
work has been directed to the construction of S. cerevisiae strains which are capable
of xylose fermentation. These efforts have focused on the functional expression of
heterologous genes for xylose catabolism. Some efforts have focused on the
expression of the gene encoding xylose isomerase (XI) from different microbial
origins. This enzyme does not require cofactors and catalyzes the isomerization of
xylose in xylulose (Fig. 1.2). Several successful attempts to express XI from the
bacteria
Thermus
thermophilus
(Walfridsson
et
al.
1996),
Clostridium
phytofermentans (Brat et al. 2009), and Bacteroides stercoris (Ha et al. 2011) or
from the anaerobic fungus Piromyces sp. E2 (Karhumaa et al. 2007) or from
Orpinomyces sp. (Madhavan et al. 2009) were performed. Expression of the codons
optimized XI of C. phytofermentans in S. cerevisiae resulted in a 46% increase in
speciﬁc growth rate on xylose as compared to the strain expressing a non-optimized
version of the gene (Brat et al. 2009).
Other research effort have focused on the expression of genes encoding xylose
reductase (XR) and xylitol dehydrogenase (XDH), which catalyze the conversion of
xylose into xylitol and subsequently to xylulose (Fig. 1.2). XR is encoded by gene
XYL1 and requires the cofactors NADH or NADPH with higher afﬁnity to NADPH.
XDH is an NAD-dependent enzyme that is encoded by XYL2. The co-expression of
both genes results in an imbalance of cofactors with a deﬁciency in NAD and an
excess of NADP. It is assumed that this imbalance causes the low efﬁciency of
xylose alcoholic fermentation, primarily due to the xylitol accumulation (Krahulec
et al. 2012). A genome-wide scale model of S. cerevisiae was used to predict the
maximal achievable growth rate for cofactor-balanced xylose utilization pathway.
By applying the use of dynamic modeling with experimental results, it was shown
that a balanced cofactor system XR/XDH stimulated an increase in ethanol batch
production of 24.7% while simultaneously reducing the predicted substrate utiliza-
tion time by up to 70% (Ghosh et al. 2011). The combination of computational
design (Khoury et al. 2009) and site-speciﬁc mutagenesis of domains responsible
for binding these cofactors (Watanabe et al. 2005) resulted in a modiﬁcation of the
cofactor speciﬁcity of XR and XDH and for balanced action. The co-expression of
NADH-dependent mutant forms of XR from S. stipitis (K270M, K270R, K270R/
N272D, N272D/P275Q, R276H) in part with a native NAD-dependent XDH,
increased productivity and ethanol yield with concomitant reduction of xylitol
yield in recombinant strains of S. cerevisiae (Bengtsson et al. 2009; Lee et al.
2012). A decrease in xylitol yield and an increase in ethanol yield were also
reported as a result of co-expression of the native XR with the modiﬁed NADP-
dependent XDH (D207A/I208R/F209S/N211R). Xylose consumption was also
32% faster when compared to the strain expressing wild-type alleles of XR and
10
K.V. Dmytruk et al.

XDH (Matsushika and Sawayama 2008). The ratio between XR and XDH activities
is essential to improve xylose alcoholic fermentation. The low level of XYL2 gene
expression is the main reason for the accumulation of xylitol in strains expressing
XYL1, XYL2, and XYL3 (Kim et al. 2013a).
Xylulokinase (XK) catalyzes the ATP-dependent phosphorylation of xylulose
and is an important enzyme in xylose catabolism (Fig. 1.2). XK catalyzes the
limiting step in xylose alcoholic fermentation as S. cerevisiae strains expressing
XR/XDH or XI have a signiﬁcant reduction in xylitol accumulation when XK was
overexpressed (Parachin et al. 2011). The activation of XK was accomplished by
the derepression of the homologous gene XKS1 S. cerevisiae or heterologous XYL3
S. stipitis (Jin et al. 2003). However, an extreme increase in XK activity has a
acetaldehyde
NAD
D-xylulose-5-p
Gl-6-p
pyruvate
D-xylulose
D-xylitol
NАDPH
NАDP
NADH
ETHANOL
GLUCOSE
D-ribulose-5-p
XI
XK
XDH
XR
DHA-p
GLYCEROL
NAD
NADH
D-XYLOSE
1,3-bpG
NАDP
NАDPH
G3PDH
NADH
NAD
NАDPH
NАDP
CO 2
CO2
ribose-5-p
GA-3-p
Sh-7-p
Еt-4-p
Fr-6-p
Fr-6-p
Fr-6-p
GА-3-p
PDC
ADH
ribulose-1,5-bp
L-ARABINOSE
L-ribulose-5-p
L-ribulose
L-arabinitol
L-xylulose
NАDPH
NАDP
NАD
NАDH
NАDPH
NАDP
PRK 
RCO 
RKI 
RPE 
TKL 
TKL 
TAL 
AI 
RK 
RPE4 
AR
ArDH
XYR
Fig. 1.2 Pathways of xylose, L-arabinose, and glucose fermentation to ethanol in yeasts. Gl-6-p is
glucose-6-phosphate; Fr-6-p is fructose-6-phosphate; GA-3-p is glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate;
SH-7-p
is
sedoheptulose
7-phosphate;
ET-4-p
is
erythrose
4-phosphate;
1,3-bpG
is
1,3-bisphospho-glycerate; DHA-p is dihydroxyacetone phosphate; XR is xylose reductase; XDH
is xylitol dehydrogenase; XI is xylose isomerase; XK is xylulokinase; AI is arabinose isomerases;
RK is ribulokinase; RPE4 is ribulose-5-phosphate-4-epimerase; AR is aldose reductase; ArDH is
arabinitol dehydrogenase; XYR is xylulose reductase; RKI is ribose-5-phosphate ketol-isomerase;
RPE is ribulose-5-phosphate-3-epimerase; TKL is transketolase; TAL is transaldolase; PRK is
phosphoribulokinase; RCO is ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase; G3PDH is glyc-
eraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; PDC is pyruvate decarboxylase; ADH is alcohol
dehydrogenase
1
Genetic Improvement of Conventional and Nonconventional Yeasts for the. . .
11

negative impact on the growth of recombinant strains on xylose, which is probably
due to a rapid depletion of ATP that is used in xylulose phosphorylation (Du et al.
2010).
Two different L-arabinose catabolizing pathways were identiﬁed in bacteria
(Wisselink et al. 2007) and fungi (Richard et al. 2001, 2002). In the bacterial
pathway, arabinose is isomerized to ribulose by arabinose isomerase (araA), and
then ribulose is phosphorylated to ribulose-5-phosphate with ribulokinase (araB)
that in turn is converted to xylulose-5-phosphate by ribulose-5-phosphate-4-epim-
erase (araD) (Wisselink et al. 2007). Arabinose fermentation was observed when
araA, araB, and araD from Lactobacillus plantarum were co-expressed in
S. cerevisiae (Wisselink et al. 2007). In fungi, L-arabinose is reduced to L-arabitol
by aldose reductase and then converted to L-xylulose with arabinitol dehydroge-
nase. L-xylulose is reduced to xylitol by xylulose reductase, which in turn is
oxidized to xylulose by xylitol dehydrogenase. The expression of the fungal
arabinose utilization pathway (aldose reductase Gre3 from S. cerevisiae, arabinitol
dehydrogenase and xylulose reductase from Trichoderma reesei, XDH from
S. stipitis, and XK from S. cerevisiae) in S. cerevisiae resulted in low ethanol
with substantial arabinitol production, which is apparently due to the imbalance
caused by the cofactor mismatch among used reductases/dehydrogenases (Richard
et al. 2001, 2002; Bettiga et al. 2009). Based on published results, the expression of
genes of the bacterial redox-independent pathway for L-arabinose utilization in
S. cerevisiae is a more promising approach (Zhang et al. 2015a).
To increase the ethanol production, xylose-fermenting strains of S. cerevisiae
that expressed the genes for xylose catabolism were subjected to other metabolic
modiﬁcations. In particular, the heterologous expression of sugar transporters Sut1
and Sut2 from S. stipitis was carried out (Du et al. 2010; Hector et al. 2008). A
system for the selection of glucose transporters with high afﬁnity for xylose was
also developed. As a result, a modiﬁed version of Gal2 S. cerevisiae transporter that
is able to transport only xylose was selected (Farwick et al. 2014). It was also shown
that endogenous S. cerevisiae hexose transporters (Hxt) can be engineered into
speciﬁc xylose transporters (Farwick et al. 2014; Nijland et al. 2014). However, the
expression of these genes remains subjected to glucose-regulated protein degrada-
tion. As a result, some Hxt proteins with high xylose transport capacity that are
rapidly degraded in the absence of glucose or when glucose is exhausted from the
medium (Nijland et al. 2016). The N-terminal lysine residues of the Hxt proteins
were predicted to be the target of ubiquitination. The substitution of N-terminal
lysine residues in the hexose transporters Hxt1 and Hxt36 that are subjected to
catabolite degradation, resulted in an improved retention of these transporters at the
cytoplasmic membrane in the absence of glucose and causes improved xylose
fermentation upon the depletion of glucose and when cells are grown in xylose
alone (Nijland et al. 2016).
In order to achieve efﬁcient glucose/xylose co-fermentation, a modiﬁed xylose-
speciﬁc, glucose-insensitive transporter Mgt05196 (N360F) from Meyerozyma
guilliermondii was
expressed
on
the
background
of
a
xylose-fermenting
S. cerevisiae strain overproducing XI, xylulokinase Xks1 and the non-oxidative
12
K.V. Dmytruk et al.

pentose phosphate pathway (PPP), and the inactivation of the aldose reductase
Gre3p and the alkaline phosphatase Pho13. These rationally designed genetic
modiﬁcations, combined with alternating adaptive evolution in xylose and ligno-
cellulosic hydrolysates, resulted in a ﬁnal strain, with excellent xylose fermentation
that had an enhanced resistance to inhibitors (Li et al. 2016).
The co-expression of genes of non-oxidative part of PPP (RKI1, RPE1, TKL1,
and TAL1, encoding ribose-5-phosphate isomerase, ribulose-5-phosphate epimer-
ase, transketolase, and transaldolase, respectively) (Fig. 1.2) on the background of a
S. cerevisiae strain expressing XI and XK showed improved growth on xylose
(Karhumaa et al. 2005). However, expression of genes of the non-oxidative part of
PPP in a S. cerevisiae strain expressing XR, XDH, and XK did not improve its
growth on a medium supplemented with xylose (Bera et al. 2011).
It is known that the regeneration of NADPH mainly occurs in the oxidative part
of PPP. A series of studies were directed to reduce the activity of the enzymes
participating in the oxidative branch of PPP. This approach will facilitate the
reaction catalyzed by XR using NADH instead of NADPH, with a reduced produc-
tion of CO2. The deletion of genes ZWF1 (encoding glucose-6-phosphate dehydro-
genase) and/or GND1 (decarboxylating 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase) with
the simultaneous expression of the genes XYL1 and XYL2 increased ethanol yield
during xylose fermentation (Jeppsson et al. 2002; Verho et al. 2003). Another
successful approach describes the combination of fungal NADP-dependent glycer-
aldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase overexpression in part with the deletion of
the ZWF1 gene, resulted in an increase in ethanol yield and productivity during
xylose fermentation (Verho et al. 2003). To reduce xylitol production and increase
ethanol yield during fermentation of glucose/xylose mixture, a modiﬁcation of the
redox balance of recombinant strains of S. cerevisiae was carried out by the deletion
of gene GDH1 (coding for NADPH-dependent glutamate dehydrogenase) and the
overexpression of GDH2 gene (NADH-dependent glutamate dehydrogenase)
responsible for ammonium assimilation (Roca et al. 2003). The reduction of xylitol
accumulation was achieved by the overexpression of the noxE gene from L. lactis,
coding for the water forming NADH-oxidase (Zhang et al. 2012). The modiﬁcation
of the acetate biosynthetic pathway that involved the deletion of the ALD6 gene
encoding NADP-dependent aldehyde dehydrogenase, increased the efﬁciency of
xylose alcohol fermentation (Lee et al. 2012).
To increase the production of ethanol during xylose fermentation, recombinant
strains of S. cerevisiae were subjected to adaptive evolution and genome shufﬂing
(Kim et al. 2013a; Jingping et al. 2012; Ren et al. 2016). Sequencing of the genomes
of these strains after long-term culturing in xylose-containing media revealed new
potential target genes for metabolic engineering approach, e.g., XKS1, SOL3
(6-phosphogluconolactonase),
GND1
(6-phosphogluconate
dehydrogenase),
TAL1, TKL1, YCR020C, YBR083W, and YPR199C (Wahlbom et al. 2003). The
genes for TAL1 and PHO13 (non-speciﬁc alkaline phosphatase) were identiﬁed by
transposon mutagenesis as a new targets. The truncation of these genes increased
production of ethanol during xylose alcoholic fermentation (Ni et al. 2007).
1
Genetic Improvement of Conventional and Nonconventional Yeasts for the. . .
13

Carbon dioxide is a major by-product of carbohydrate alcoholic fermentation.
It will be very attractive if the fermentation process becomes carbon conservative
via re-assimilating the carbon from the carbon dioxide released from the decarbox-
ylation step of pyruvate into acetaldehyde in last stages of the ethanol-producing
pathway. This approach was recently described by the introduction a synthetic
reductive PPP into a xylose-fermenting S. cerevisiae strain to achieve simultaneous
lignocellulosic ethanol production and carbon dioxide recycling. The heterologous
enzymes
phosphoribulokinase
from
Spinacia
oleracea
and
ribulose-1,5-
bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase from Rhodospirillum rubrum were introduced
into the S. cerevisiae strain harboring XR/XDH pathway, upregulated PPP, and
knocked out ALD6 and PHO13 genes (Kim et al. 2013a). The phosphoribulokinase
enzyme catalyzes ribulose-5-phosphate conversion to ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate,
and the ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase converts one ribulose-
1,5-bisphosphate and CO2 to two molecules of glycerate-3-phosphate (Fig. 1.2).
The constructed strain with the synthetic reductive PPP revealed a higher yield of
ethanol with lower yields of xylitol and glycerol than that of the parental strain.
Moreover, a reduced release of CO2 by the engineered strain was observed during
xylose fermentation, suggesting that the carbon dioxide generated by pyruvate
decarboxylase, was partially reassimilated through the synthetic reductive PPP
(Xia et al. 2016). The strategy of carbon dioxide recycling from the ethanol
fermentation pathway in yeast has a great potential in alleviating greenhouse gas
emissions during the production of 2G ethanol.
Fermentation of biomass-derived hydrolysates is accompanied with the inhibi-
tion of ethanol production due to the presence of toxic compounds produced mainly
during lignocelluloses pretreatment, e.g., furfural, hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF),
weak acids, and phenols (Palmqvist and Hahn-Ha¨gerdal 2000). To overcome this
limitation, the strains of S. cerevisiae that are able to produce ethanol in the
presence of these inhibitors have been selected through directed evolution and
adaptation (Hawkins et al. 2013; Parreiras et al. 2014). Other alternative molecular
approaches were also applied. Furfural and HMF were converted to less toxic
furfuryl alcohol and furan dimethanol, respectively, by the overexpression of the
endogenous S. cerevisiae oxidoreductases such as alcohol dehydrogenases (ADH1,
ADH6, and ADH7) (Almeida et al. 2008; Liu et al. 2008; Petersson et al. 2006) and
aldo-keto reductases (GRE2) (Moon and Liu 2012). It was shown (Gorsich et al.
2006) that tolerance to furfural-induced stress is associated with genes of the
pentose phosphate pathway ZWF1, GND1, RPE1, and TKL1. The overexpression
of the gene PAD1 encoding phenylacrylic-acid decarboxylase in S. cerevisiae
resulted in improved growth rate and ethanol productivity in dilute-acid
hydrolysates (Larsson et al. 2001). An original approach to improve tolerance to
fermentation inhibitors and ethanol was proposed by modulation of the polyamine
(spermidine) content in S. cerevisiae (Kim et al. 2015). Intracellular spermidine
contents was increased by a double gene deletion OAZ1 (ornithine decarboxylase
antizyme) and TPO1 (polyamine transport protein) genes and the overexpression of
SPE3 (spermidine synthase) (Kim et al. 2015).
14
K.V. Dmytruk et al.

In summary, 1G ethanol production is a proﬁtable technology that can be further
improved by increasing ethanol yield and productivity by applying molecular and
classical techniques to industrial ethanol-producing strains of S. cerevisiae. Despite
signiﬁcant efforts, existing technologies of 2G ethanol production are still
non-proﬁtable. Although recombinant S. cerevisiae strains capable of hexoses/
pentoses co-fermentation were developed, none of the engineered strains are able
to ferment glucose/xylose mixture as fast as the rate of glucose fermentation by the
parental strain (Zhang et al. 2015a). Another important limitation is the sensitivity
of ethanol-producing strains to inhibitors in lignocellulosic hydrolysates. Further
studies are needed to develop recombinant S. cerevisiae strains that are capable of
rapid fermentation of mixed sugars with improved resistance to fermentation
inhibitors.
1.3
Scheffersomyces (Pichia) stipitis
Scheffersomyces (Pichia) stipitis belongs to the group of naturally xylose-
fermenting yeasts that is characterized by rather low amounts of accumulated
by-products from this fermentation-like xylitol (Kurtzman and Suzuki 2010).
Other known representatives of the group of native xylose-fermenting yeasts are
Candida shehatae, Pachysolen tannophilus, Spathaspora passalidarum, and
Ogataea (Hansenula) polymorpha (Schneider et al. 1981; du Preez and van der
Walt 1983; Ryabova et al. 2003; Nguyen et al. 2006). As a rule, most natural
xylose-fermenting yeasts inhabit the guts of passalid beetles that degrade white-
rotted hardwood (Nigam 2001; Nardi et al. 2006 with the exception of
O. polymorpha strains that have been isolated from other natural habitats (Gellisen
2002). S. stipitis is closely related to other yeast endosymbionts of passalid beetles
(Suh et al. 2003). This yeast has one of the highest native capacities for xylose
fermentation among yeast species described so far (du Preez et al. 1989). In
addition to utilizing xylose, S. stipitis has the capability to use all of the other
major sugars found in wood. It also transforms low-molecular-weight lignin
moieties, reduces acyclic enones to the corresponding alcohols, and forms various
esters and aroma components. It has been recently engineered to produce lactic acid
or xylitol in high yield (Lee et al. 1986; Targonski 1992; Kim et al. 2001; Conceicao
et al. 2003; Ilmen et al. 2007). The published fermented sugar yields from ligno-
cellulose hydrolysates by this yeast approach 80% of theoretical yield (Nigam
2001). The availability of genetic tools and capability for fermentation of
hydrolysates has made S. stipitis an attractive microorganism for bioconversion
of lignocellulose to fuels and chemicals. The major drawbacks of S. stipitis are the
low fermentation rates, low ethanol tolerance, and the inability to grow anaerobi-
cally (du Preez et al. 1989; Grootjen et al. 1990; Shi and Jeffries 1998).
S. stipitis is a predominantly haploid, homothallic, hemiascomycetous yeast that
forms buds along with pseudomycelia during vegetative growth and two hat-shaped
ascospores from each ascus (Kurtzman 1990). Genetic manipulation of S. stipitis is
much more complicated relative to those of S. cerevisiae. This is because S. stipitis
1
Genetic Improvement of Conventional and Nonconventional Yeasts for the. . .
15

is resistant to most common antibiotics and the number of strains with convenient
auxotrophic markers is limited. This yeast uses an alternative codon system that
decodes CUG for serine instead of leucine as common in the classical genetic code.
Thus, the expression of foreign proteins, including those used as drug resistance
markers, requires codon modiﬁcation. Unfortunately, random (nonhomologous)
integration prevails in S. stipitis which makes targeted deletions much more difﬁ-
cult to obtain (Jeffries and Van Vleet 2009). Nevertheless, many efﬁcient genetic
methods have been developed for S. stipitis that include methods of sexual mating
and sporulation (Melake et al. 1996). Auxotrophic strains have been created and
methods for high-efﬁciency transformation have been developed for the auxotro-
phic mutants ura3, leu2, trp5, and his3 of S. stipitis (Yang et al. 1994; Lu et al.
1998; Piontek et al. 1998). Genetic tools based on a loxP/Cre recombination system
and the dominant marker for zeocin resistance have been developed for S. stipitis
(Laplaza et al. 2006). Deletion of the KU80 gene that is responsible for nonhomol-
ogous end joining signiﬁcantly increases the fraction of homologous recombinant
transformants, albeit at the expense of transformation frequency (Maassen et al.
2008).
The 15.4-Mbp genome of S. stipitis was sequenced (Jeffries et al. 2007).
S. stipitis CBS 6054 is known to have eight chromosomes, of which two pairs are
very similar in size, accounting for the earlier results that suggested the presence
only of six chromosomes (Passoth et al. 1992). S. stipitis genome annotation
predicted that 5841 genes are present in this of which a majority of 72% have a
single exon. The average gene density is 56% and the average gene, transcript, and
protein lengths are 1.6 kb, 1.5 kb, and 493 amino acids, respectively. Expressed
sequence tags (ESTs) conﬁrmed the identity of 40% of the predicted genes with
84% showing strong similarity to proteins in other fungi (Jeffries et al. 2007). So
far, protein function can be tentatively assigned to about 70% of the genes. Synteny
analysis of P. stipitis with its nearest completely sequenced yeast genome neighbor,
Debaryomyces hansenii, shows extensive recombination and shufﬂing of the
chromosomes, which appear to be a common feature. S. stipitis and D. hansenii
share 151 gene families that are not found in the other genomes. The S. stipitis gene
set is missing 81 gene families (442 proteins) relative to the other yeast genomes in
the analysis.
The most frequent domains characterized so far include protein kinases,
helicases, transporters (sugar and MFS), and domains involved in transcriptional
regulation (fungal-speciﬁc transcription factors, RNA recognition motifs, and
WD40 domains). A majority of these is shared with other hemiascomycota.
These range from 1534 domains in common with Schizosaccharomyces pombe
and 1639 domains with D. hansenii. One of the few S. stipitis-speciﬁc domains
belongs to one of glycosyl hydrolase families, a subgroup of cellulases and
xylanases. All of the genes for xylose assimilation, including the oxidative PPP,
glycolytic cycle, the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA), and ethanol production, were
present in isoforms similar to those found in other yeasts (Jeffries et al. 2007).
Genes of ﬁrst three enzymes of xylose metabolism, XYL1, XYL2, and XYL3, and that
of PPP (ZWF1, GND1, TKL1, TAL1, RPI1) are also induced by xylose, and the
16
K.V. Dmytruk et al.

expression of XYL2 yields one of the most abundant transcripts in xylose-grown
cells (Jeffries and Van Vleet 2009). Another interesting pattern of the regulation of
gene expression was found by oxygen limitation. Such limitation led to strong
derepression of some glycolytic genes that include two genes of glyceraldehyde-3-
phosphate dehydrogenase TDH1 and TDH2, of pyruvate decarboxylase PDC1 and
PDC2, and of the secondary alcohol dehydrogenase SAD2 (the function of the last
gene/enzyme in metabolism is not known) (Jeffries and Van Vleet 2009). Genome-
displayed genes for sensing and regulatory proteins (<200 putative Zn-ﬁnger
regulatory proteins) are similar to that in S. cerevisiae. The genome S. stipitis
also revealed many gene clusters representing either pairs/clusters of nonhomolo-
gous genes in which each cluster has a single function such as galactose metabo-
lism, or tandem repeats of paralogous genes. Gene clusters seem to be particularly
abundant in S. stipitis as there are at least 35 clusters of functionally related genes
(Jeffries et al. 2007). The studies of structure, function, and regulation in S. stipitis
genome are likely to have important impact on understanding its physiology and
could be used for metabolic engineering of this organism.
The study of S. stipitis has attracted scientists and technologists primarily due to
its natural ability to produce large amounts of ethanol during xylose fermentation
with small or no production of xylitol. It was found that fed-batch cultures of
S. stipitis produce around 47 g/L of ethanol with yields of 0.36 g/g xylose at 30 C
(van Dijken et al. 1986). However, S. stipitis fermentation rate on xylose is low
relative to that of S. cerevisiae on glucose, so increasing the rate of fermentation of
xylose by S. stipitis could greatly improve its usefulness in commercial applications
(Jeffries and Van Vleet 2009). Another drawback to using S. stipitis is that it is
much more susceptible to ethanol inhibition relative to S. cerevisiae (Shi and
Jeffries 1998).
There are many detailed publications on the physiology of S. stipitis. Oxygen
plays an important role in cell growth, redox balance, functioning of the
mitochondria, and generation of energy for xylose transport in S. stipitis (Skoog
and Hahn-Hagerdahl 1990). Fermentation in S. stipitis is activated by oxygen
limitation (Passoth et al. 1996, 2003; Klinner et al. 2005). It is interesting to note
that S. stipitis can metabolize xylose anaerobically, even though it does not grow
under anaerobic conditions (Wijsman et al. 1985). The optimal temperature for
S. stipitis fermentation is between 25 and 33 C, and the optimal pH is in the range
of 4.5–5.5 (du Preez et al. 1986). The nutrients in the fermentation media play an
important part in the growth and ethanol production in S. stipitis. Ethanol produc-
tion increased with the addition of amino acids and nitrogen was required for
non-growth associated ethanol production (Slininger et al. 2006). Ammonium
salts increased the ethanol productivity and the ethanol to biomass yield in
S. stipitis (Guebel et al. 1992; Agbogbo and Wenger 2006). Magnesium has also
been shown to play an important role in redox balance and therefore has an effect on
xylitol production (Mahler and Nudel 2000). Low levels of Mg2+ resulted in xylitol
accumulation and a high intracellular NADH content. Corn steep liquor is a viable
nutrient source for S. stipitis fermentation when used as a sole nitrogen source
compared to amino acids, vitamins, and other nutrients (Amartey and Jeffries
1
Genetic Improvement of Conventional and Nonconventional Yeasts for the. . .
17

1994). The initial xylose concentration has an effect on the fermentation parameters
of S. stipitis with maximum ethanol productivities occurring at a xylose concentra-
tion of 50 g/L (du Preez et al. 1985).
The conversion of xylose to ethanol in P. stipitis consists of three stages:
(1) xylose transport and the initial reaction to enter the PPP, (2) non-oxidative
reactions of PPP, and (3) glycolysis (Fig. 1.2). Little is known about xylose
transport in S. stipitis. The low-afﬁnity transport system is shared between glucose
and xylose for sugar transport. Glucose inhibits xylose transport by noncompetitive
inhibition in the low-afﬁnity proton symport system (Kilian and van Uden 1988).
The low-afﬁnity transport is used when sugar concentrations are high, and the high-
afﬁnity systems are used when sugar concentrations are low. Repression of xylose
uptake occurs in fermentation media containing glucose and xylose. Therefore,
glucose is the preferred sugar by S. stipitis in ethanol production. The rate of
glucose consumption is higher than xylose under similar growth conditions
(Agbogbo et al. 2006). The transport of sugars into the cells is the rate-limiting
step in the utilization of sugars for ethanol production in S. stipitis (Legthelm et al.
1988. A high-afﬁnity xylose-transporting system has been described that is speciﬁc
for xylose in this yeast (Hahn-Ha¨gerdal et al. 2001). Three genes, SUT1, SUT2, and
SUT3, have been characterized that encode glucose transporters in S. stipitis
(Weierstall et al. 1999). Sut2 and Sut3 are highly similar to the S. cerevisiae glucose
transporter family, and the Sut2 and Sut3 transporters have a higher afﬁnity for
glucose than for xylose. Transcription of SUT1 is induced in S. stipitis indepen-
dently of oxygen supply, whereas SUT2 and SUT3 are expressed only under aerobic
conditions but independently of the carbon source. Disruption of SUT1 eliminates
the low-afﬁnity xylose transport system in S. stipitis (Weierstall et al. 1999).
Initial metabolism of xylose in S. stipitis is similar to other natural xylose-
fermenting yeasts (Fig. 1.2). Xylose ﬁrst is reduced by xylose reductase (aldose
reductase, gene XYL1) to xylitol (Veduyn et al. 1985; Hahn-Hagerdal and
Pamment 2004). This enzyme has afﬁnity to both NADH and NADPH but
shows much higher afﬁnity toward NADPH. By comparison, S. stipitis xylitol
dehydrogenase (gene XYL2), which converts xylitol to xylulose, has afﬁnity only
for NAD (Metzger and Hollenberg 1995). The third reaction of xylose metabolism
is catalyzed by xylulokinase (gene XYL3), which converts xylulose to the PPP
intermediate xylulose-5-phosphate (Jin et al. 2002). The cofactor unbalance,
resulting from the ﬁrst two reactions involving xylose reductase and xylitol dehy-
drogenase, leads to xylitol accumulation in most natural xylose-fermenting yeasts
but not in S. stipitis (Skoog and Hahn-Hagerdahl 1990). In P. stipitis there are
efﬁcient systems for NADH reoxidation to NAD and NADPH regeneration
(Balagurunathan et al. 2012). One particular pathway that has been observed for
xylose metabolism that is induced under oxygen limited conditions is effective in
tackling the cofactor imbalance caused by the ﬁrst two steps in xylose utilization
(Jeffries et al. 2007; Jeffries and Van Vleet 2009). This pathway involves the four
enzymes: NAD-dependent glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH2), which converts
2-oxoglutarate to
L-glutamate consuming NADH; glutamate decarboxylase
(GAD2), which decarboxylates L-glutamate to 4-aminobutyrate; 4-aminobutyrate
18
K.V. Dmytruk et al.

aminotransferase (UGA1), which transaminates 4-aminobutyrate to succinate
semialdehyde; and succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase (UGA2), which oxidizes
succinate semialdehyde to succinate using NADP. The net result of the four
reactions is the conversion of NADH to NADPH.
The PPP plays an important role in xylose fermentation (Fig. 1.2), and the
corresponding genes (ZWF1, GND1, TKL1, TAL1, RPI1) are known to be induced
by xylose (Jeffries and Van Vleet 2009). Alcohol dehydrogenase is also an impor-
tant enzyme in ethanol production with the deletion of either ADH1 or ADH2 gene
signiﬁcantly reducing ethanol formation, and the deletion of both entirely abolishes
ethanol production (Cho and Jeffries 1998; Passoth et al. 1998).
Relatively little is known about the rate-limiting steps in ethanol production
from xylose. It has been shown that XR and XDH are repressed by glucose and are
induced during growth on xylose. Xylose is generally not consumed in the presence
of glucose; hence, under glucose repression, these activities, along with xylose
transport, are rate limiting (Bicho et al. 1988). The XK does not, however, appear to
be rate limiting in S. stipitis once its activity is induced by xylose (Jin et al. 2002).
In addition to the ultimate goal of using S. stipitis for ethanol production from
lignocellulosic feedstock, this yeast can also be successfully used for xylitol
production from xylose using a mutant defective in XYL2 that codes for xylitol
dehydrogenase (Kim et al. 2001; Rodrigues et al. 2008). Efﬁcient producers of
lactic acid have also been constructed on S. stipitis after expression of the lactate
dehydrogenase LDH gene from Lactobacillus helveticus under control of the yeast
ADH1 promoter. It is interesting to note that xylose was more efﬁcient substrate for
lactate synthesis than glucose (Ilmen et al. 2007). A strain of S. stipitis
hyperaccumulating S-adenosylmethionine has been isolated (Križanovic´ et al.
2015). Other S. stipitis recombinant strains have been constructed that produce
fumaric acid from xylose after acquiring heterologous reductive pathway from
Rhizopus oryzae (Wei et al. 2008).
In spite of the fact that S. stipitis is one of the best natural xylose-fermenting
yeasts with no xylitol accumulation, it has several drawbacks which include a low
rate of fermentation, low tolerance to ethanol, and requirement of oxygen for
growth. When grown on lignocellulosic hydrolysates, other limitations to the use
of this yeast are observed. Among these is the need for simultaneous fermentation
of glucose and xylose and the poor tolerance to inhibitors that are present in
hydrolysates. Additionally as oxygen is required, S. stipitis has a tendency to utilize
the ethanol produced with a considerable amount of xylose remaining in the
medium (Harner et al. 2015). One of the most popular methods used to increase
S. stipitis tolerance toward inhibitors is adaptation by repeated subculturing or
recycled of yeast cells while increasing concentrations of the inhibitor(s) in a
stepwise fashion by adding more concentrated lignocellulosic hydrolysate solutions
(Amartey and Jeffries 1996; Huang et al. 2009; Watanabe et al. 2011; Yang et al.
2011). Strains adapted to inhibitors present in a speciﬁc hydrolysate may exhibit
cross-tolerance to other hydrolysates. Adaptation has been done to individual
inhibitor(s) as well as to mixtures of inhibitors, with the latter approach being
most common. Ability to tolerate inhibitory compounds in lignocellulose
1
Genetic Improvement of Conventional and Nonconventional Yeasts for the. . .
19

hydrolysates could reduce the need for detoxiﬁcation procedures, and this can
decrease the overall production cost of ethanol. Adaptation is frequently substituted
by random mutagenesis (Bajwa et al. 2009) or by using genome shufﬂing via
protoplast fusion of strains with different genotypes (Bajwa et al. 2010, 2011). To
improve ethanol tolerance and production, similar approaches of random mutagen-
esis and genome shufﬂing were combined and used (Harner et al. 2015). Selection
of higher ethanol tolerance P. stipitis strains has been accomplished by using UV
mutagenesis has also led to improved ethanol production (Watanabe et al. 2011).
Protoplast fusion of S. stipitis with S. cerevisiae has allowed the isolation of a
hybrid strain with higher ethanol productivity from xylose relative to the S. stipitis
parental strain; however, such hybrid was unstable (Yoon et al. 1996). A popular
method for genetic improvement that consist of genome shufﬂing uses transforma-
tion of a yeast strain with total DNA isolated from another strain of the same species
or even from different yeast species. In one series of experiments, total DNA of
S. stipitis was introduced in S. cerevisiae by electroporation, and the best xylose-
fermenting strain isolated was used as the source of DNA for the next round of
transformation. This strain showed improvement in ethanol production from xylose
and higher ethanol tolerance (Zhang and Geng 2012). To isolate S. stipitis strains
with improved growth and fermentation characteristics on the xylose/glucose
mixture, several fast-growing mutants were isolated on a xylose medium with
respiration inhibitors antimycin A and salicyl hydroxamate. Several other mutants
have also been isolated which produced more ethanol on xylose/glucose mixture
(Sreenath and Jeffries 1997). In another approach, mutants of S. stipitis which grow
anaerobically on xylose plates were isolated. In contrast to the wild-type strain,
these isolated mutants grew and fermented xylose and glucose anaerobically though
very slowly (Hughes et al. 2012).
Glucose prevents xylose utilization as it competes with xylose for transport, and
its use is subject to glucose catabolite repression. To obtain strains of S. stipitis that
can ferment simultaneously glucose and xylose, 2-deoxyglucose-resistant mutants
were isolated (Sreenath and Jeffries 1999). This was also accomplished by deletion
of the gene HXK1 coding for hexokinase I (Dashtban et al. 2015). No strains with
glucose-insensitive xylose transport have been reported for S. stipitis. The last
experiment could be considered as the only one in which a metabolic engineering
approach was applied (Dashtban et al. 2015). As a rule, experiments in metabolic
engineering of S. stipitis are hampered by our limited knowledge of the limiting
steps of the fermentation process. In another approach, the mutant of S. stipitis with
disruption of cytochrome c was isolated. Due to defects in respiration, this mutant
appeared to be superior when compared to the wild-type strain in xylose alcoholic
fermentation as it accumulated elevated amounts of ethanol (Shi et al. 1999).
In order to determine the gene(s) affecting S. stipitis fermentative capabilities,
insertional mutants with altered ethanol production from glucose and xylose have
been isolated (V. Passoth, K. Berezka, K. Dmytruk, A. Sibirny, unpublished).
Mutants obtained by random insertional mutagenesis were screened for their
growth abilities on solid media with different sugars and for resistance to the
glycolysis inhibitor, 3-bromopyruvate. Fermentations in shake ﬂask agitated
20
K.V. Dmytruk et al.

cultures were carried out in order to measure sugar consumption and ethanol
formation rates. Subsequently, the most interesting strains were analyzed to deter-
mine the genetic background of the observed alterations. Of more than 1300
screened mutants, 17 were identiﬁed that have signiﬁcantly changed ethanol yields
during the fermentation. In one of the best fermenting strains, a single insertion
event resulted in the enhancement of ethanol formation in the media with both
glucose and xylose. This strain had to have within the ORF a gene homologous to
S. cerevisiae gene YDL119C, that encoded for a not yet described mitochondrial
transporter and was designated TMI1 (Transport to MItochondria). Wild-type
phenotype was restored via complementation of the insertional mutation of the
wild allele of TMI1 gene Thus, gene TMI1 is apparently involved in the control of
hexose and pentose alcoholic fermentation in S. stipitis.
In summary, S. stipitis remains as one of the most efﬁcient organisms for xylose
and in general, lignocellulose fermentation. Access to genome sequence and the
development of methods of molecular genetics have been used to alleviate some of
the shortcomings of this yeast (low tolerance to ethanol, glucose inhibition of
xylose metabolism, inability to grow anaerobically). This can be accomplished by
using the combination of rational design methods of metabolic engineering and
random selection. Once the aforementioned shortcomings have been addressed, this
organism yeast has the potential for use in industrial fermentation.
1.4
Ogataea polymorpha
Ogataea (Hansenula) polymorpha is one of the most thermotolerant species of
yeast known. This yeast has the ability to grow up to a temperature of 50 C. Wild-
type strains of this yeast are able to ferment glucose, xylose, mannose, maltose, and
cellobiose into ethanol but are not able to ferment galactose and L-arabinose
(Ryabova et al. 2003). Sugar fermentation in this yeast is most efﬁcient under
conditions of limited aeration, and even at 45–48 C it is still sufﬁciently vigorous.
At industrial scale high fermentation temperature can reduce cooling costs and the
risk of contamination with more energy efﬁcient removal of ethanol. Several
successful attempts have been made to improve this yeast thermotolerance even
further (Ishchuk et al. 2009). It is known that, similar to other fungi, O. polymorpha
accumulates trehalose and expresses heat shock proteins (Hsps) under heat shock
conditions (Guerra et al. 2005). The increase in the intracellular level of trehalose in
O. polymorpha following the knockout of acid trehalase gene ATH1 resulted in a
sixfold higher ethanol production of xylose fermentation at 50
C. The
overexpression of the heat shock proteins Hsp16 and Hsp104 have also led to
three to six times improved ethanol production at 50 C (Ishchuk et al. 2009).
High ethanol tolerance is another important feature of ethanol producers for
industrial applications. O. polymorpha appear to be more resistant to the toxic
concentrations of ethanol when compared to S. stipitis; but it was more sensitive
than S. cerevisiae (Dmytruk and Sibirny 2013). The overexpression of the endoge-
nous ETT1 gene (a homolog of S. cerevisiae MPE1 gene) signiﬁcantly increased the
1
Genetic Improvement of Conventional and Nonconventional Yeasts for the. . .
21

resistance of H. polymorpha to ethanol, resulting in ten- and threefold
improvements in the growth on agar and in liquid media with ethanol, respectively.
The resistance of O. polymorpha to ethyl alcohol was also enhanced by the
overexpression of the heterologous S. cerevisiae MPR1 gene that codes for
acetyltransferase (Ishchuk et al. 2010).
Direct microbial conversion of carbon polymers into ethanol is a promising
technology for the production of alcohols from lignocellulosic raw material. The
optimal temperature for the activity of hydrolytic enzymes used during microbial
conversion of polymers into ethanol is about 50 C. Recombinant O. polymorpha
strains that fermented starch were constructed by the expression of heterologous
secretory α-amylase and glucoamylase that code for the SWA2 and GAM1 genes of
Schwanniomyces occidentalis (Wang et al. 1989). The heterologous expression of
XYN2 gene of Trichoderma reesei and xlnD of Aspergillus niger that code for
secretory endoxylanase and secretory β-xylosidase was successfully performed in
O. polymorpha resulting in strains with ability of direct xylan fermentation at high
temperature (Voronovsky et al. 2009).
O. polymorpha has a good potential to be used for the efﬁcient process of
simultaneous sacchariﬁcation and fermentation (SSF) due to its temperature toler-
ance and ability to ferment xylose to ethanol (Radecka et al. 2015). However, the
ethanol yield and productivity from xylose of wild-type strains of O. polymorpha
are very low. Identiﬁcation of rate-limiting enzymes for xylose conversion to
ethanol is necessary for rational strain modiﬁcation to improve the fermenting
efﬁciency.
The molecular tools for this yeast species are well developed (Gellisen 2000),
and a complete genome sequence of the strain NCYC495 of O. polymorpha is
publically available (http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Hanpo2/Hanpo2.home.html). As a
consequence, a combination of metabolic engineering and classical selection
approaches were successfully used for improvement of the pathway for xylose
alcoholic fermentation in O. polymorpha (Kurylenko et al. 2014).
The difference in cofactor speciﬁcity in the ﬁrst steps of xylose metabolism
results in cofactor imbalance causing a substantially reduced ethanol production
with accumulation of xylitol as a by-product in yeasts. The problem arises during
consecutive action of NADPH-dependent XR and NAD-dependent XDH that
catalyze the reduction of xylose to xylitol and the oxidation of xylitol to xylulose
(Fig. 1.2). To avoid the cofactor imbalance, XR and XDH were replaced with
bacterial XI, which immediately converts xylose into xylulose with no cofactors
required. The bacterial gene xylA from E. coli or Streptomyces coelicolor coding for
XI was successfully expressed in O. polymorpha strain with a knockout of XYL1
gene coding for XR and two paralogs XYL2A and XYL2B of XDH. The recombinant
strains were able to grow on xylose as carbon source; however, the amount
of accumulated ethanol remained at the level of the wild-type strain CBS4732
(0.15 g/L) (Voronovsky et al. 2005). The overexpression of E. coli xylA together
with O. polymorpha XYL3 that codes for XK has led to fourfold increase of ethanol
production, but still the maximal ethanol accumulation did not exceed 0.6 g/L at
48 C (Dmytruk et al. 2008b).
22
K.V. Dmytruk et al.

The XR of O. polymorpha can use both NADPH and NADH as cofactors.
However, the afﬁnity of XR to NADH is signiﬁcantly lower than that to NADPH.
Therefore, another approach to eliminate the imbalance of these two cofactors
consists of engineering of the actions of XR and XDH using an O. polymorpha
XR with reduced afﬁnity toward NADPH. Using site-speciﬁc mutagenesis, a
modiﬁed XR was constructed by the substitution of lysine and asparagine for
arginine and aspartic acid at amino acid positions 341 and 343. As a result of the
modiﬁcation of the primary structure of the protein, the afﬁnity of XR to NADPH
was 17-fold decreased as compared to the native enzyme, while the afﬁnity of
modiﬁed
XR
to
NADH
remained
unchanged.
A
recombinant
strain
of
O. polymorpha with enhanced expression of modiﬁed XR and a native XDH and
XK was characterized by a ﬁvefold decrease of xylitol accumulation as compared to
the wild-type strain and twofold higher ethanol production reaching 1.3 g of
ethanol/L (Dmytruk et al. 2008a).
The wild-type O. polymorpha strain NCYC495 was shown to be a more efﬁcient
xylose fermenter relative to the strain CBS4732 as this strain can accumulate up to
0.5 g of ethanol/L during high-temperature xylose alcoholic fermentation. Pyruvate
decarboxylase (PDC) is one of the key enzymes of the ﬁnal steps of alcoholic
fermentation, catalyzing the conversion of pyruvate into acetaldehyde and CO2.
Subsequently, acetaldehyde is reduced to ethanol by alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH)
that is coded by the ADH1 gene (Fig. 1.2). Under conditions of limited aeration, a
sufﬁcient activity of PDC is important for redirection of pyruvate toward ethanol
formation instead of respiration. Overexpression of endogenous PDC1 gene under
control of the strong constitutive promoter using a plasmid with multicopy integra-
tion has led to a twofold increase in ethanol production from xylose in the wild-type
strain NCYC495 (Ishchuk et al. 2008; Sohn et al. 1999). Overexpression of both
PDC1 and ADH1 genes in O. polymorpha have resulted in an additional twofold
activation of xylose alcoholic fermentation when compared to the strain expressing
solely PDC1 (Kurylenko et al. 2016b).
The O. polymorpha mutant 2EthOH unable to utilize ethanol as a sole carbon
source was isolated from strain NCYC495 and characterized by a threefold increase
in ethanol production from xylose. Subsequently, the overexpression of the gene
PDC1 in this mutant resulted in further improvement of ethanol accumulation,
reaching 2.5 g of ethanol/L at 48 C (Ishchuk et al. 2008). To achieve higher
amount of ethanol from xylose, several successful metabolic engineering
approaches were combined to modify the genome of the 2EthOH mutant. The
overexpression of the genes XYL1m, XYL2, and XYL3 that code for the modiﬁed XR
and native XDH and XK, on the background of non-identiﬁed mutation in the strain
2EthOH, led to a substantial increase in ethanol accumulation during xylose
fermentation (7.4 g/L at 45
C relative to 0.6 g/L in the wild-type strain
NCYC495) (Kurylenko et al. 2014). The additional activation of PDC did not
lead to any further improvement of xylose conversion to ethanol though the
overexpression of PDC1 on the background of XYL1m and XYL2 overexpressed
strain, increased ethanol production. The impact of XK on ethanol production
during xylose alcoholic fermentation is more pronounced relative to PDC
1
Genetic Improvement of Conventional and Nonconventional Yeasts for the. . .
23

suggesting that PDC does not limit xylose conversion in strain with higher activities
of XR, XDH, and XK.
An additional increase in ethanol production from xylose (to 10 g/L at 45 C)
was obtained in mutants selected on a medium supplemented with toxic
concentrations of 3-bromopyruvate (BrPA), as described for ethanol accumulation
from glucose in S. cerevisiae (Dmytruk et al. 2015).
While mutation(s) causing resistance to BrPA in the ethanol overproducing
strain remain to be identiﬁed, a corresponding mutation was mapped in the strain
with the wild-type background. Insertional mutagenesis was used for NCYC495
strain of O. polymorpha with subsequent selection of transformants using a mineral
medium supplemented with 25 mM of BrPA. Sequencing of the ﬂanking regions
revealed that the insertional cassette disrupted the ORF of a gene homologous to the
S. cerevisiae autophagy-related gene ATG13. This gene encodes a regulatory
subunit of the Atg1 signaling complex, stimulating Atg1 kinase activity, which is
required for vesicle formation during autophagy and the cytoplasm-to-vacuole
targeting pathway. Identiﬁed mutation led to a 40% increase in ethanol production
from xylose as compared to the parental strain. However, the mechanism of such
regulation remains unknown (Kurylenko et al. 2016a).
Further possible increase in ethanol yield and productivity from xylose in
O. polymorpha is hampered by the lack of the knowledge of the regulation of
xylose metabolism and fermentation. Therefore, it is important to identify the
corresponding genes and, depending on their functions, activate or repress them.
Xylose is a unique carbon source that can be fermented to ethanol, similarly to
glucose, and simultaneously able to be converted to glucose and other hexoses,
mostly in PPP though partial contribution of gluconeogenesis in hexose synthesis
from xylose cannot be neglected.
The CAT8 gene codes for a zinc-ﬁnger cluster protein that regulates at least
30 genes that are involved in gluconeogenesis, ethanol utilization, glyoxylate cycle,
and diauxic shift from fermentation to respiration (Haurie et al. 2001). The roles of
CAT8 gene in the regulation of cell metabolism are well understood in S. cerevisiae.
It was shown that the deletion of this gene in S. cerevisiae and P. guilliermondii
activated glucose alcoholic fermentation though maximally achieved level of
ethanol in the latter species was still very low (Watanabe et al. 2013; Qi et al.
2014). The role of CAT8 in regulation of xylose metabolism was poorly understood.
Transcriptome analysis of the natural xylose-metabolizing yeast O. polymorpha did
not ﬁnd changes in CAT8 expression between xylose- and glucose-containing
media (Kim et al. 2013b).
To deﬁne the role of Cat8 transcriptional factor in xylose fermentation, cat8Δ
knockout mutants in O. polymorpha were constructed and analyzed from either
wild-type or ethanol overproducing (from xylose) (Kurylenko et al. 2016a). In
O. polymorpha, CAT8 deletion did not lead to any signiﬁcant changes in ethanol
production from glucose, while a considerable increase in xylose alcoholic fermen-
tation was observed (Fig. 1.3). The cell respiration of cat8Δ mutants on xylose was
impaired to a much higher extent relative to that on glucose as a substrate.
Moreover, the impaired ethanol and glycerol utilization in cat8Δ mutants were
24
K.V. Dmytruk et al.

observed, suggesting the involvement of CAT8 in the regulation of gluconeogenesis
in O. polymorpha, similar to that described for S. cerevisiae. Remarkably, growth
on xylose of the cat8Δ mutant strain was also partially impaired which suggests that
xylose can be considered, at least partially, as a gluconeogenic substrate. The slight
decrease in the speciﬁc activity of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase in cat8Δ mutants
was observed suggesting differences in Cat8 action between S. cerevisiae and
O. polymorpha. The drop in other enzymes of gluconeogenesis, e.g., phosphoenol-
pyruvate
carboxykinase,
quite
possibly
determines
growth
impairment
of
O. polymorpha cat8Δ mutants on gluconeogenic substrates. Overexpression of
CAT8 had opposite effect on xylose alcoholic fermentation as compared to that in
cat8Δ mutants, as transformants overexpressing CAT8 gene were characterized by a
decrease in ethanol production from xylose (Fig. 1.3).
Thus, the CAT8 gene is one of the ﬁrst identiﬁed genes that is speciﬁcally
involved in the regulation of xylose alcoholic fermentation in natural xylose-
fermenting yeasts. Mutant O. polymorpha cat8Δ isolated from an advanced ethanol
producer accumulated 30% more ethanol relative to the parental strain, reaching
12.5 g ethanol/L at 45 C, which is the highest ethanol titer for high-temperature
xylose fermentation (Kurylenko et al. 2016a). The ethanol yield of the constructed
O. polymorpha recombinant strain (0.34 g/g xylose) is close to that described for
S. stipitis (0.35–0.44 g/g xylose) (Jeffries et al. 2007) and Spathaspora
passalidarum (0.42 g/g xylose) (Long et al. 2012). However, this was achieved
for O. polymorpha at 45 C, whereas the compared organisms are mesophilic and,
therefore, unable to grow and ferment at such a high temperature. Among the
thermotolerant ethanol-producing strains, the most promising one is engineered
Kluyveromyces marxianus strain with ethanol yield 0.38 g/g xylose at 42 C but
lower yield at 45 C (0.27 g/g xylose). The additional advantage for O. polymorpha
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
1
2
3
Ethanol, g/L
Days
WT
cat8∆
WT/CAT8
Fig. 1.3 The ethanol production during xylose fermentation of O. polymorpha WT, cat8Δ, and
WT/CAT8 strains. Alcoholic fermentation of yeast strains was fulﬁlled by cultivation in liquid
mineral medium at oxygen-limited conditions at 45 С. The conditions were provided by agitation
at 140 rpm. Nine percent xylose was added into the medium used for the fermentation. The cells
were pregrown in 100 mL of liquid YPX medium (1% yeast extract, 2% peptone, and 4% xylose)
in 300 mL Erlenmeyer ﬂasks at 220 rpm till the mid-exponential growth phase. Then the cells were
precipitated by centrifugation, washed by water, and inoculated into 40 mL of the fermentation
medium in 100 mL Erlenmeyer ﬂasks covered with cotton plugs. The initial biomass concentration
for fermentation experiments was 2 g (dry weight)/L
1
Genetic Improvement of Conventional and Nonconventional Yeasts for the. . .
25

recombinant strain in contrast to recombinant K. marxianus was that no xylitol
accumulation can be observed (Zhang et al. 2015b).
О. polymorpha belongs to the methylotrophic yeasts that are capable for growth
on methanol as sole source of carbon and energy. To enable methanol utilization
these organisms have evolved highly specialized metabolic pathways that are partly
compartmentalized in peroxisomes. The ﬁrst enzyme of methanol catabolism,
alcohol oxidase, catalyzes oxidation of methanol into the two reactive compounds,
formaldehyde and hydrogen peroxide. Alcohol oxidase is localized in peroxisomes
together with catalase, which decomposes hydrogen peroxide into water and oxy-
gen. A third peroxisomal enzyme of methanol metabolism is dihydroxyacetone
synthase (DHAS). DHAS is a component of the xylulose-5-phosphate cycle and
catalyzes the transfer of two-carbon moieties from xylulose-5-phosphate to form-
aldehyde with the production of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (an intermediate of
glycolysis) and dihydroxyacetone, which after phosphorylation is converted to a
glycolytic intermediate (van der Klei et al. 2006). DHAS can also display classical
transketolase activity using aldose phosphates (such as ribose 5-phosphate) as the
acceptors for the glycolyl group from the donor substrate xylulose 5-phosphate,
therefore playing role in xylose utilization through PPP (Lindley et al. 1981).
Screening for other enzymes that are putatively involved in xylose utilization in
O. polymorpha have revealed a peroxisomal transaldolase coded for the gene TAL2.
The functional roles of peroxisome localized transaldolase and the speciﬁc peroxi-
somal transketolase in xylose utilization and fermentation in O. polymorpha remain
unclear. To investigate the role of these enzymes in ethanol production during
xylose fermentation, the corresponding genes DAS1 and TAL2 were overexpressed
in O. polymorpha NCYC495 strain under control of the strong constitutive pro-
moter of GAP1 gene (encodes glycerol-3-phospate dehydrogenase) using a plasmid
for multicopy integration pGLG61 (van der Klei et al. 2006). The recombinant
strains overexpressing DAS1 and TAL2 revealed 4.6- and 1.5-fold increase in the
speciﬁc activity of the corresponding enzymes. The overexpression of TAL2 gene
resulted in a 1.5-fold increase in ethanol production at fourth day of xylose
fermentation as compared to the wild-type strain (Fig. 1.4). The effect of the
overexpression of DAS1 gene was more pronounced. A strain overexpressing
DAS1 gene synthesized 2.3-fold higher amount of ethanol than that of the parental
strain after 4 days of xylose fermentation (Fig. 1.4) (Kurylenko et al. 2015). Both
das1Δ and tal2Δ mutants did not show growth retardation on xylose as carbon
source but were impaired in xylose alcoholic fermentation as compared to the wild-
type strain (Fig. 1.4). Overexpression of DAS1 and TAL2 genes in O. polymorpha in
an advanced ethanol producer increased ethanol production by 40% up to 16 g
ethanol/L during xylose alcoholic fermentation at 45 C. As a consequence, it was
shown for the ﬁrst time that peroxisomal enzymes Das1 and Tal2 are involved in the
xylose alcoholic fermentation in O. polymorpha; however, the functions of
peroxisomes during alcoholic fermentation of xylose requires further investigation.
Nevertheless, the ethanol yield in the best obtained O. polymorpha advanced
ethanol producer obtained by metabolic engineering and classical selection
approaches is not high enough for economic feasibility. Further improvement of
26
K.V. Dmytruk et al.

the parameters of alcoholic fermentation of xylose in O. polymorpha could be
obtained by optimization of the transport of this pentose into cells, ampliﬁcation
of the limiting genes of glycolysis and the PPP, as well as that of the genes
determining the resistance to toxic and inhibitory compounds derived after
pretreatment
of
lignocellulosic
biomass.
At
present,
the
resistance
of
H. polymorpha to toxic products (aldehydes, phenols, acetic, and formic acids)
accumulated in lignocellulose hydrolysates under the conditions of acidic hydroly-
sis has not been precisely studied.
1.5
Concluding Remarks
Commercial strains of S. cerevisiae which are characterized by increased ethanol
yield from glucose and sucrose (1G ethanol) have been deployed extensively in
industrial production. However, apparently all of these strains have some
drawbacks. Strains of S. cerevisiae, which accumulate more ethanol by cost of
biomass, typically show lower robustness and cannot compete with wild-type
contaminants during non-sterile production process. Strains that accumulate more
ethanol due to lower glycerol production display worse performance being more
susceptible to osmotic stress relative to the wild-type strains. Such shortcomings
could be overcome by additional metabolic changes.
S. cerevisiae strains constructed for production of 2G ethanol efﬁciently ferment,
in addition to glucose, abundant pentose sugars of lignocellulosic hydrolyzates,
xylose, and L-arabinose. Strains fermenting galactose have also been isolated. There
are also known strains which could ferment different sugars of hydrolyzates
simultaneously due to elaboration of speciﬁc xylose transporters and expression
of genes responsible for xylose catabolism under control of strong constitutive
promoters. Strains resistant to inhibitors of lignocellulosic hydrolyzates are also
known. Pilot-plant production of 2G ethanol using engineered S. cerevisiae strains
has been started.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
1
2
3
4
WT
das1Δ
tal2Δ
Day
Ethanol g/l
Day
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
WT
WT/DAS1
WT/TAL2
Ethanol g/l
Fig. 1.4 The ethanol production during fermentation of H. polymorpha WT, das1Δ, tal2Δ,
WT/DAS1, and WT/TAL2 strains on xylose-containing medium. The fermentation conditions
were the same as described in Fig. 1.3
1
Genetic Improvement of Conventional and Nonconventional Yeasts for the. . .
27

S. stipitis strains with further improvements of xylose fermentation on lignocel-
lulosic hydrolyzates have been constructed. Such strains have defects in glucose
catabolite repression and are more resistant to inhibitors present in hydrolyzates.
Still low ethanol tolerance and the need in oxygen for growth are major drawbacks
of S. stipitis that need to still be addressed. Plans to start pilot plants for 2G ethanol
production based on S. stipitis are known. If so, such plant could be good platform
for further development of S. stipitis strains.
O. polymorpha also looks as another promising organism for 2G ethanol pro-
duction especially as it could ferment at temperatures of 45 C and higher which is
compatible with SSF process. However, level of ethanol production from xylose is
still low, glucose inhibits xylose utilization, and fermentation characteristics of
glucose and xylose from the real lignocellulosic hydrolyzates are not known. L-
arabinose and galactose are not metabolized or fermented by O. polymorpha. These
questions and problems need to be addressed prior to commercial deployment of
this yeast.
Acknowledgment This work was supported in part by grant of Polish National Scientiﬁc Center
(NCN) Opus UMO-2016/21/B/NZ1/00280 and FEMS Research Grant FEMS-RG-2015-0096.R1
awarded to J. Ruchala; National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine (Grants 5-17, 6-17 and 35-17);
and Science and Technology Center in Ukraine (STCU) (Grant 6188).
References
Agbogbo FK, Coward-Kelly G, Torry-Smith M, Wenger KS (2006) Fermentation of glucose/
xylose mixtures using P. stipitis. Process Biochem 41(11):2333–2336
Agbogbo FK, Wenger KS (2006) Effect of pretreatment chemicals on xylose fermentation by
P. stipitis. Biotechnol Lett 28(24):2065–2069
Almeida JR, Roder A, Modig T, Laadan B, Liden G, Gorwa-Grauslund MF (2008) NADH- vs
NADPH-coupled reduction of 5-hydroxymethyl furfural (HMF) and its implications on prod-
uct distribution in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 78(6):939–945
Amartey S, Jeffries T (1996) An improvement in Pichia stipitis fermentation of acid-hydrolysed
hemicellulose achieved by overliming (calcium hydroxide treatment) and strain adaptation.
World J Microbiol Biotechnol 12(3):281–283
Amartey SA, Jeffries TW (1994) Comparison of corn steep liquor with other nutrients in the
fermentation of D-xylose by Pichia stipitis CBS6054. Biotechnol Lett 16(2):211–214
An MZ, Tang YQ, Mitsumasu K, Liu ZS, Shigeru M, Kenji K (2011) Enhanced thermotolerance
for ethanol fermentation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain by overexpression of the gene
coding for trehalose-6-phosphate synthase. Biotechnol Lett 33(7):1367–1374
Ansell R, Granath K, Hohmann S, Thevelein JM, Adler L (1997) The two isoenzymes for yeast
NAD+-dependent glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase encoded by GPD1 and GPD2 have
distinct roles in osmoadaptation and redox regulation. EMBO J 16(9):2179–2187
Bafuelos M, Gancedo C (1978) In situ study of the glycolytic pathway in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Arch Microbiol 117(2):197–201
Bajwa PK, Phaenark C, Grant N, Zhang X, Paice M, Martin VJ, Trevors JT, Lee H (2011) Ethanol
production from selected lignocellulosic hydrolysates by genome shufﬂed strains of
Scheffersomyces stipitis. Bioresour Technol 102(21):9965–9969
Bajwa PK, Pinel D, Martin VJ, Trevors JT, Lee H (2010) Strain improvement of the pentose-
fermenting yeast Pichia stipitis by genome shufﬂing. J Microbiol Methods 81:179–186
28
K.V. Dmytruk et al.

Bajwa PK, Shireen T, D’Aoust F, Pinel D, Martin VJ, Trevors JT, Lee H (2009) Mutants of the
pentose-fermenting yeast Pichia stipitis with improved tolerance to inhibitors in hardwood
spent sulﬁte liquor. Biotechnol Bioeng 104(5):892–900
Balagurunathan B, Jonnalagadda S, Tan L, Srinivasan R (2012) Reconstruction and analysis of a
genome-scale metabolic model for Scheffersomyces stipitis. Microb Cell Fact 11:27
Basso TO, de Kok S, Dario M, do Espirito-Santo JC, Müller G, Schl€olg PS, Silva CP, Tonso A,
Daran JM, Gombert AK, van Maris AJ, Pronk JT, Stambuk BU (2011) Engineering topology
and kinetics of sucrose metabolism in Saccharomyces cerevisiae for improved ethanol yield.
Metab Eng 13(6):694–703
Bengtsson O, Hahn-Ha¨gerdal B, Gorwa-Grauslund MF (2009) Xylose reductase from Pichia
stipitis with altered coenzyme preference improves ethanolic xylose fermentation by recombi-
nant Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biotechnol Biofuels 2:9
Benisch F, Boles E (2014) The bacterial Entner-Doudoroff pathway does not replace glycolysis in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae due to the lack of activity of iron-sulfur cluster enzyme
6-phosphogluconate dehydratase. J Biotechnol 171:45–55
Bera AK, Ho NW, Khan A, Sedlak M (2011) A genetic overhaul of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
424A(LNH-ST) to improve xylose fermentation. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 38(5):617–626
Bettiga M, Bengtsson O, Hahn-Hagerdal B, Gorwa-Grauslund MF (2009) Arabinose and xylose
fermentation by recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae expressing a fungal pentose utilization
pathway. Microb Cell Fact 8:40
Bicho PA, Runnals PL, Cunningham JD, Lee H (1988) Induction of xylose reductase and xylitol
dehydrogenase activities in Pachysolen tannophilus and Pichia stipitis on mixed sugars. Appl
Environ Microbiol 54(1):50–54
Brat D, Boles E, Wiedemann B (2009) Functional expression of a bacterial xylose isomerase in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl Environ Microbiol 75(8):2304–2311
Cadiere A, Ortiz-Julien A, Camarasa C, Dequin S (2011) Evolutionary engineered Saccharomyces
cerevisiae wine yeast strains with increased in vivo ﬂux through the pentose phosphate
pathway. Metab Eng 13(3):263–271
Cho JY, Jeffries TW (1998) Pichia stipitis genes for alcohol dehydrogenase with fermentative and
respiratory functions. Appl Environ Microbiol 64:1350–1358
Clifton D, Fraenkel DG (1981) The gcr (glycolysis regulation) mutation of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. J Biol Chem 256(24):13074–13078
Conceicao GJA, Moran PJS, Rodrigues JAR (2003) Highly efﬁcient extractive biocatalysis in the
asymmetric reduction of an acyclic enone by the yeast Pichia stipitis. Tetrahedron-Asymmetry
14:43–45
Dashtban M, Wen X, Bajwa PK, Ho CY, Lee H (2015) Deletion of hxk1 gene results in
derepression of xylose utilization in Scheffersomyces stipitis. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 42
(6):889–896
De Kok S, Kozak B, Pronk J, Van Maris A (2012) Energy coupling in Saccharomyces cerevisiae:
selected opportunities for metabolic engineering. FEMS Yeast Res 12:387–397
Della-Bianca BE, Basso TO, Stambuk BU, Basso LC, Gombert AK (2013) What do we know
about the yeast strains from the Brazilian fuel ethanol industry? Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
97:979–991
Dmytruk K, Kshanovska B, Abbas C, Sibirny A (2016) New methods for positive selection of
yeast ethanol overproducing mutants. Bioethanol 2:24–31
Dmytruk K, Kshanovska B, Sibirny A (2015) New methods for selection of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae ethanol overproducing mutants resistant to oxythiamine, trehalose, bromopyruvate,
glyoxylic acid and glucosamine. In: Sibirny A, Fedorovyvh D, Gonchar M, Grabek-Lejko D
(eds) Living organisms and bioanalytical approaches for detoxiﬁcation and monitoring of toxic
compounds. University of Rzeszow, Rzeszow, pp 237–246
Dmytruk KV, Sibirny AA (2013) Metabolic engineering of yeast Hansenula polymorpha for
construction of efﬁcient ethanol producers. Tsitol Genet 47(6):3–21
1
Genetic Improvement of Conventional and Nonconventional Yeasts for the. . .
29

Dmytruk OV, Dmytruk KV, Abbas CA, Voronovsky AY, Sibirny AA (2008a) Engineering of
xylose reductase and overexpression of xylitol dehydrogenase and xylulokinase improves
xylose alcoholic fermentation in the thermotolerant yeast Hansenula polymorpha. Microb
Cell Fact 7:21
Dmytruk OV, Voronovsky AY, Abbas CA, Dmytruk KV, Ishchuk OP, Sibirny AA (2008b)
Overexpression of bacterial xylose isomerase and yeast host xylulokinase improves xylose
alcoholic fermentation in the thermotolerant yeast Hansenula polymorpha. FEMS Yeast Res 8
(1):165–173
Du J, Li S, Zhao H (2010) Discovery and characterization of novel D-xylose-speciﬁc transporters
from Neurospora crassa and Pichia stipitis. Mol Biosyst 6(11):2150–2156
du Preez JC, Bosch M, Prior B (1986) The fermentation of hexose and pentose sugars by Candida
shehatae and Pichia stipitis. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 23(3):228–233
du Preez JC, Bosch M, Prior BA (1985) Xylose fermentation by Candida shehatae and Pichia
stipitis: effects of pH, temperature and substrate concentration. Enzyme Microb Technol
8:360–364
du Preez JC, van der Walt JP (1983) Fermentation of D-xylose to ethanol by a strain of Candida
shehatae. Biotechnol Lett 5:357–362
du Preez JC, van Driessel B, Prior BA (1989) Ethanol tolerance of Pichia stipitis and Candida
shehatae strains in fed-batch cultures at controlled low dissolved-oxygen levels. Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 30:53–58
Farwick A, Bruder S, Schadeweg V, Oreb M, Boles E (2014) Engineering of yeast hexose
transporters to transport D-xylose without inhibition by D-glucose. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 111(14):5159–5164
Gellisen G (ed) (2002) Hansenula polymorpha – biology and applications. Wiley VCH,
Weinheim. 347 p
Gellisen G (2000) Heterologous protein production in methylotrophic yeasts. Appl Microbiol
Biotechnol 54:741–750
Ghosh A, Zhao H, Price ND (2011) Genome-scale consequences of cofactor balancing in
engineered pentose utilization pathways in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. PLoS One 6(11):
e27316
Gombert AK, van Maris AJ (2015) Improving conversion yield of fermentable sugars into fuel
ethanol in 1st generation yeast-based production processes. Curr Opin Biotechnol 33:81–86
Gorsich SW, Dien BS, Nichols NN, Slininger PJ, Liu ZL, Skory CD (2006) Tolerance to furfural-
induced stress is associated with pentose phosphate pathway genes ZWF1, GND1, RPE1, and
TKL1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 71(3):339–349
Grootjen DRJ, van der Lans RGJM, Luyben KCA (1990) Effects of the aeration rate on the
fermentation of glucose and xylose by Pichia stipitis CBS 5773. Enzyme Microb Technol
12:20–23
Guadalupe Medina V, Almering MJH, van Maris AJA, Pronk JT (2010) Elimination of glycerol
production in anaerobic cultures of a Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain engineered to use acetic
acid as an electron acceptor. Appl Environ Microbiol 76(1):190–195
Guebel DV, Cordenons A, Cascone O, Giulietti AM, Nudel C (1992) Inﬂuence of the nitrogen
source on growth and ethanol production by Pichia stipitis NRRL Y-7124. Biotechnol Lett 14
(12):1193–1198
Guerra E, Chye PP, Berardi E, Piper PW (2005) Hypoxia abolishes transience of the heat-shock
response in the methylotrophic yeast Hansenula polymorpha. Microbiology 151:805–811
Guo ZP, Zhang L, Ding ZY, Shi GY (2011) Minimization of glycerol synthesis in industrial
ethanol yeast without inﬂuencing its fermentation performance. Metab Eng 13(1):49–59
Ha SJ, Wei Q, Kim SR, Galazka JM, Cate JH, Jin YS (2011) Cofermentation of cellobiose and
galactose by an engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain. Appl Environ Microbiol 77
(16):5822–5825
Hahn-Ha¨gerdal B, Galbe M, Gorwa-Grauslund MF, Lide´n G, Zacchi G (2006) Bio-ethanol–the
fuel of tomorrow from the residues of today. Trends Biotechnol 24(12):549–556
30
K.V. Dmytruk et al.

Hahn-Hagerdal B, Pamment N (2004) Microbial pentose metabolism. Appl Biochem Biotechnol
113–116:1207–1209
Hahn-Ha¨gerdal B, Wahlbom CF, Ga´rdonyi M, van Zyl WH, Cordero Otero RR, J€onsson LJ (2001)
Metabolic engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for xylose utilization. Adv Biochem Eng
Biotechnol 73:53–84
Harner NK, Wen X, Bajwa PK, Austin GD, Ho CY, Habash MB, Trevors JT, Lee H (2015)
Genetic improvement of native xylose-fermenting yeasts for ethanol production. J Ind
Microbiol Biotechnol 42(1):1–20
Haurie V, Perrot M, Mini T, Jen€o P, Sagliocco F, Boucherie H (2001) The transcriptional activator
Cat8p provides a major contribution to the reprogramming of carbon metabolism during the
diauxic shift in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Biol Chem 276:76–85
Hawkins GM, Ghose D, Russel J, Peterson J (2013) Production of ethanol from high dry matter of
pretreated loblolly pine by an evolved strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Bioremed Biodegr
4:195
Hector RE, Qureshi N, Hughes SR, Cotta MA (2008) Expression of a heterologous xylose
transporter in a Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain engineered to utilize xylose improves aerobic
xylose consumption. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 80(4):675–684
Higgins VJ, Bell PJL, Dawes IW, Attﬁeld PV (2001) Generation of a novel Saccharomyces
cerevisiae strain that exhibits strong maltose utilization and hyperosmotic resistance using
nonrecombinant techniques. Appl Environ Microbiol 67:4346–4348
Hohmann S (2002) Osmotic stress signaling and osmoadaptation in yeasts. Microbiol Mol Biol
Rev 66(2):300–372
Hou L (2010) Improved production of ethanol by novel genome shufﬂing in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 160(4):1084–1093
Huang CF, Lin TH, Guo GL, Hwang WS (2009) Enhanced ethanol production by fermentation of
rice straw hydrolysate without detoxiﬁcation using a newly adapted strain of Pichia stipitis.
Bioresour Technol 100:3914–3920
Hughes SR, Gibbons WR, Bang SS, Pinkelman R, Bischoff KM, Slininger PJ, Qureshi N,
Kurtzman CP, Liu S, Saha BC, Jackson JS, Cotta MA, Rich JO, Javers JE (2012) Random
UV-C mutagenesis of Scheffersomyces (formerly Pichia) stipitis NRRL Y-7124 to improve
anaerobic growth on lignocellulosic sugars. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 39:163–173
Ilmen M, Koivuranta K, Ruohonen L, Suominen P, Penttila¨ M (2007) Efﬁcient production of
L-lactic acid from xylose by Pichia stipitis. Appl Environ Microbiol 73:117–123
Ingledew WM. Alcohol production by Saccharomyces cerevisiae: a yeast primer. In: Lyons TP,
Kelsall DR, editos. The alcohol textbook, 3rd ed. Nottingham University Press: Nottingham.
1999, pp. 49–87.
Ishchuk OP, Abbas CA, Sibirny AA (2010) Heterologous expression of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
MPR1 gene confers tolerance to ethanol and L-azetidine-2-carboxylic acid in Hansenula
polymorpha. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 37(2):213–218
Ishchuk OP, Voronovsky AY, Abbas CA, Sibirny AA (2009) Construction of Hansenula
polymorpha strains with improved thermotolerance. Biotechnol Bioeng 104(5):911–919
Ishchuk OP, Voronovsky AY, Stasyk OV, Gayda GZ, Gonchar MV, Abbas CA, Sibirny AA
(2008) Overexpression of pyruvate decarboxylase in the yeast Hansenula polymorpha results
in increased ethanol yield in high-temperature fermentation of xylose. FEMS Yeast Res 8
(7):1164–1174
Jeffries TW, Grigoriev IV, Grimwood J, Laplaza JM, Aerts A, Salamov A, Schmutz J, Lindquist E,
Dehal P, Shapiro H, Jin YS, Passoth V, Richardson PM (2007) Genome sequence of the
lignocellulose-bioconverting and xylose-fermenting yeast Pichia stipitis. Nat Biotechnol 25
(3):319–326
Jeffries TW, Van Vleet JR (2009) Pichia stipitis genomics, transcriptomics, and gene clusters.
FEMS Yeast Res 9(6):793–807
Jensen P, Snoep J, Westerhoff H 2006 Method of improving the production of biomass or a desired
product from a cell. US Patent, 20060094078, A1
1
Genetic Improvement of Conventional and Nonconventional Yeasts for the. . .
31

Jeppsson M, Johansson B, Hahn-Ha¨gerdal B, Gorwa-Grauslund MF (2002) Reduced oxidative
pentose phosphate pathway ﬂux in recombinant xylose-utilizing Saccharomyces cerevisiae
strains improves the ethanol yield from xylose. Appl Environ Microbiol 68(4):1604–1609
Jin YS, Jones S, Shi NQ, Jeffries TW (2002) Molecular cloning of XYL3 (D-xylulokinase) from
Pichia stipitis and characterization of its physiological function. Appl Environ Microbiol
68:1232–1239
Jin YS, Ni H, Laplaza JM, Jeffries TW (2003) Optimal growth and ethanol production from xylose
by recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae require moderate D-xylulokinase activity. Appl
Environ Microbiol 69:495–503
Jingping G, Hongbing S, Gang S, Hongzhi L, Wenxiang P (2012) A genome shufﬂing-generated
Saccharomyces cerevisiae isolate that ferments xylose and glucose to produce high levels of
ethanol. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 39(5):777–787
Kaliterna J, Weusthuis RA, Castrillo JI, van Dijken JP, Pronk JT (1995) Coordination of sucrose
uptake and respiration in the yeast Debaryomyces yamadae. Microbiology 141:1567–1574
Karhumaa K, Hahn-Ha¨gerdal B, Gorwa-Grauslund MF (2005) Investigation of limiting metabolic
steps in the utilization of xylose by recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae using metabolic
engineering. Yeast 22:359–368
Karhumaa K, Garcia Sanchez R, Hahn-Ha¨gerdal B, Gorwa-Grauslund MF (2007) Comparison of
the xylose reductase-xylitol dehydrogenase and the xylose isomerase pathways for xylose
fermentation by recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Microb Cell Fact 6:5
Keating JD, Robinson J, Cotta MA, Saddler JN, Mansﬁeld SD (2004) An ethanologenic yeast
exhibiting unusual metabolism in the fermentation of lignocellulosic hexose sugars. J Ind
Microbiol Biotechnol 31(5):235–244
Khoury GA, Fazelinia H, Chin JW, Pantazes RJ, Cirino PC, Maranas CD (2009) Computational
design of Candida boidinii xylose reductase for altered cofactor. Protein Sci 18(10):2125–2138
Kilian SG, van Uden N (1988) Transport of xylose and glucose in the xylose fermenting yeast
Pichia stipitis. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 27:545–548
Kim MS, Chung YS, Seo JH, Jo DH, Park YH, Ryu YW (2001) High-yield production of xylitol
from xylose by a xylitol dehydrogenase defective mutant of Pichia stipitis. J Microbiol
Biotechnol 11:564–569
Kim SR, Skerker JM, Kang W, Lesmana A, Wei N, Arkin AP, Jin Y-S (2013a) Rational and
evolutionary engineering approaches uncover a small set of genetic changes efﬁcient for rapid
xylose fermentation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. PLoS One 8:e57048
Kim OC, Suwannarangsee S, Oh DB, Kim S, Seo JW, Kim CH, Kang HA, Kim JY, Kwon O
(2013b) Transcriptome analysis of xylose metabolism in the thermotolerant methylotrophic
yeast Hansenula polymorpha. Bioprocess Biosyst Eng 36:1509–1518
Kim SK, Jin YS, Choi IG, Park YC, Seo JH (2015) Enhanced tolerance of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae to multiple lignocellulose-derived inhibitors through modulation of spermidine
contents. Metab Eng 29:46–55
Klinner U, Fluthgraf S, Freese S, Passoth V (2005) Aerobic induction of respiro-fermentative
growth by decreasing oxygen tensions in the respiratory yeast Pichia stipitis. Appl Microbiol
Biotechnol 67:247–253
Krahulec S, Klimacek M, Nidetzky B (2012) Analysis and prediction of the physiological effects
of altered coenzyme speciﬁcity in xylose reductase and xylitol dehydrogenase during xylose
fermentation by Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Biotechnol 158(4):192–202
Križanovic´ S, Butorac A, Mrvcˇic´ J, Krpan M, Cindric´ M, Bacˇun-Družina V, Stanzer D (2015)
Characterization of a S-adenosyl-l-methionine (SAM)-accumulating strain of Scheffersomyces
stipitis. Int Microbiol 18(2):117–125
Kurtzman CP, Suzuki M (2010) Phylogenetic analysis of ascomycete yeasts that form coenzyme
Q-9 and the proposal of the new genera Babjeviella, Meyerozyma, Millerozyma, Priceomyces,
and Scheffersomyces. Mycoscience 51:2–14
Kurtzman CP (1990) Candida shehatae – genetic diversity and phylogenetic relationships with
other xylose-fermenting yeasts. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 57:215–222
32
K.V. Dmytruk et al.

Kurylenko O, Ruchala J, Dmytruk K, Sibirny A (2015) New targets for improvement of xylose
alcoholic fermentation in the methylotrophic yeast Hansenula polymorpha. In: Sibirny A,
Fedorovyvh D, Gonchar M, Grabek-Lejko D (eds) Living organisms and bioanalytical
approaches for detoxiﬁcation and monitoring of toxic compounds. University of Rzeszow,
Rzeszow, pp 247–257
Kurylenko O, Semkiv M, Ruchala J, Kshanovska B, Abbas C, Dmytruk K, Sibirny A (2016a) New
approaches for improving the production of the 1st and 2nd generation ethanol by yeast. Acta
Biochim Pol 63(1):1156
Kurylenko OO, Ruchala J, Hryniv OB, Abbas CA, Dmytruk KV, Sibirny AA (2014) Metabolic
engineering and classical selection of the methylotrophic thermotolerant yeast Hansenula
polymorpha for improvement of high-temperature xylose alcoholic fermentation. Microb
Cell Fact 13:122
Kurylenko O, Vasylyshyn R, Kata I, Ruchala J, Semkiv M, Dmytruk K, Sibirny A (2016b)
Improvement
of
high-temperature
xylose
and
glucose
alcoholic
fermentation
in
methylotrophic yeast Ogataea (Hansenula) polymorpha by overexpression of PDC1 and
ADH1 genes. Visnyk Lviv Univ 73:147–153
Lancashire WE, Dickinson JR, Malloch RA (1998) DNA encoding enzymes of the glycolytic
pathway for use in alcohol producing yeast. US Patent, 5786186 A
Laplaza JM, Torres BR, Jin YS, Jeffries TW (2006) Sh ble and Cre adapted for functional
genomics and metabolic engineering of Pichia stipitis. Enzyme Microb Technol 38:741–747
Larsson S, Nilvebrant NO, Jonsson LJ (2001) Effect of overexpression of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae Pad1p on the resistance to phenylacrylic acids and lignocellulose hydrolysates
under aerobic and oxygen limited conditions. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 57:167–174
Lee H, James AP, Zahab DM, Mahmourides G, Maleszka R, Schneider H (1986) Mutants of
Pachysolen tannophilus with improved production of ethanol d-xylose. Appl Environ
Microbiol 51:1252–1258
Lee SH, Kodaki T, Park YC, Seo JH (2012) Effects of NADH-preferring xylose reductase
expression on ethanol production from xylose in xylose-metabolizing recombinant Saccharo-
myces cerevisiae. J Biotechnol 158(4):184–191
Legthelm ME, Prior JC, du Preez JC, Brandt V (1988) An investigation of D-xylose metabolism in
Pichia stipitis under aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 28:293–296
Lennartsson PR, Erlandsson P, Taherzadeh MJ (2014) Integration of the ﬁrst and second genera-
tion bioethanol processes and the importance of by-products. Bioresour Technol 165:3–8
Li H, Shen Y, Wu M, Hou J, Jiao C, Li Z, Liu X, Bao X (2016) Engineering a wild-type diploid
Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain for second-generation bioethanol production. Bioresour
Bioprocess 3(1):51
Lindley ND, Waites MJ, Quayle JR (1981) Simultaneous assay of dihydroxyacetone synthase and
transketolase in a methylotrophic yeast grown in continuous culture. A cautionary note. J Gen
Microbiol 126(2):253–259
Liu ZL, Moon J, Andersh BJ, Slininger PJ, Weber S (2008) Multiple gene-mediated NAD(P)H-
dependent aldehyde reduction is a mechanism of in situ detoxiﬁcation of furfural and
5-hydroxymethylfurfural by Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 81
(4):743–753
Long TM, Su YK, Headman J, Higbee A, Willis LB, Jeffries TW (2012) Cofermentation of
glucose, xylose and cellobiose by the beetle-associated yeast Spathaspora passalidarum. Appl
Environ Microbiol 78(16):5492–5500
Lu P, Davis BP, Hendrick J, Jeffries TW (1998) Cloning and disruption of the beta-
isopropylmalate dehydrogenase gene (LEU2) of Pichia stipitis with URA3 and recovery of
the double auxotroph. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 49:141–146
Maassen N, Freese S, Schruff B, Passoth V, Klinner U (2008) Nonhomologous end joining and
homologous recombination DNA repair pathways in integration mutagenesis in the xylose-
fermenting yeast Pichia stipitis. FEMS Yeast Res 8:735–743
1
Genetic Improvement of Conventional and Nonconventional Yeasts for the. . .
33

Madhavan A, Srivastava A, Kondo A, Bisaria VS (2012) Bioconversion of lignocellulose-derived
sugars to ethanol by engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Crit Rev Biotechnol 32(1):22–48
Madhavan A, Tamalampudi S, Ushida K, Kanai D, Katahira S, Srivastava A, Fukuda H, Bisaria
VS, Kondo A (2009) Xylose isomerase from polycentric fungus Orpinomyces: gene sequenc-
ing, cloning, and expression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae for bioconversion of xylose to
ethanol. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 82(6):1067–1078
Mahler G, Nudel C (2000) Effect of magnesium ions on the fermentative and respirative functions
in Pichia stipitis under oxygen-restricted growth. Microbiol Res 155:31–35
Matsushika A, Sawayama S (2008) Efﬁcient bioethanol production from xylose by recombinant
Saccharomyces cerevisiae requires high activity of xylose reductase and moderate
xylulokinase activity. J Biosci Bioeng 106:306–309
Melake T, Passoth V, Klinner U (1996) Characterization of the genetic system of the xylose-
fermenting yeast Pichia stipitis. Curr Microbiol 33:237–242
Metzger MH, Hollenberg CP (1995) Amino acid substitutions in the yeast Pichia stipitis xylitol
dehydrogenase coenzyme-binding domain affect the coenzyme speciﬁcity. Eur J Biochem 228
(1):50–54
Moon J, Liu ZL (2012) Engineered NADH-dependent GRE2 from Saccharomyces cerevisiae by
directed enzyme evolution enhances HMF reduction using additional cofactor NADPH.
Enzyme Microb Technol 50(2):115–120
Nardi JB, Bee CM, Miller LA, Nguyen NH, Suh SO, Blackwell M (2006) Communities of
microbes that inhabit the changing hindgut landscape of a subsocial beetle. Arthropod Struct
Dev 35:57–68
Navas MA, Cerdan S, Gancedo JM (1993) Futile cycles in Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains
expressing the gluconeogenic enzymes during growth on glucose. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
90:1290–1294
Navas MA, Gancedo JM (1996) The regulatory characteristics of yeast fructose-1,6-
bisphosphatase confer only a small selective advantage. J Bacteriol 178:1809–1812
Nguyen NH, Suh SO, Marshall CJ, Blackwell M (2006) Morphological and ecological similarities:
wood-boring
beetles
associated
with
novel
xylose-fermenting
yeasts,
Spathaspora
passalidarum gen. sp. nov. and Candida jeffriesii sp. nov. Mycol Res 110:1232–1241
Ni H, Laplaza JM, Jeffries TW (2007) Transposon mutagenesis to improve the growth of
recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae on D-xylose. Appl Environ Microbiol 73:2061–2066
Nigam JN (2001) Development of xylose-fermenting yeast Pichia stipitis for ethanol production
through adaptation on hardwood hemicellulose acid prehydrolysate. J Appl Microbiol
90:208–215
Nigam PS, Singh A (2011) Production of liquid biofuels from renewable resources. Prog Energy
Combust Sci 37:52–68
Nijland JG, Shin HY, de Jong RM, de Waal PP, Klaassen P, Driessen AJ (2014) Engineering of an
endogenous hexose transporter into a speciﬁc d-xylose transporter facilitates glucose-xylose
co-consumption in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biotechnol Biofuels 7:168
Nijland JG, Vos E, Shin HY, de Waal PP, Klaassen P, Driessen AJ (2016) Improving pentose
fermentation by preventing ubiquitination of hexose transporters in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Biotechnol Biofuels 9:158
Nissen TL, Kielland-Brandt MC, Nielsen J, Villadsen J (2000) Optimization of ethanol production
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by metabolic engineering of the ammonium assimilation. Metab
Eng 2(1):69–77
Ostergaard S, Walloe KO, Gomes SG, Olsson L, Nielsen J (2001) The impact of GAL6, GAL80,
and MIG1 on glucose control of the GAL system in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEMS Yeast
Res 1:47–55
Palmqvist E, Hahn-Ha¨gerdal B (2000) Fermentation of lignocellulosic hydrolysates. I: Inhibition
and detoxiﬁcation. Bioresour Technol 74:17–24
34
K.V. Dmytruk et al.

Parachin NS, Bergdahl B, van Niel EWJ, Gorwa-Grauslund MF (2011) Kinetic modelling reveals
current limitations in the production of ethanol from xylose by recombinant Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Metab Eng 13:508–517
Parreiras LS, Breuer RJ, Avanasi Narasimhan R, Higbee AJ, La Reau A, Tremaine M, Qin L,
Willis LB, Bice BD, Bonfert BL, Pinhancos RC, Balloon AJ, Uppugundla N, Liu T, Li C,
Tanjore D, Ong IM, Li H, Pohlmann EL, Serate J, Withers ST, Simmons BA, Hodge DB,
Westphall MS, Coon JJ, Dale BE, Balan V, Keating DH, Zhang Y, Landick R, Gasch AP, Sato
TK (2014) Engineering and two-stage evolution of a lignocellulosic hydrolysate-tolerant
Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain for anaerobic fermentation of xylose from AFEX pretreated
corn stover. PLoS One 9(9):e107499
Passoth V, Cohn M, Schafer B, Hahn-Ha¨gerdal B, Klinner U (2003) Analysis of the hypoxia-
induced ADH2 promoter of the respiratory yeast Pichia stipitis reveals a new mechanism for
sensing of oxygen limitation in yeast. Yeast 20:39–51
Passoth V, Hansen M, Klinner U, Emeis CC (1992) The electrophoretic banding patterns of the
chromosomes of Pichia stipitis and Candida shehatae. Curr Genet 22:429–431
Passoth V, Schafer B, Liebel B, Weierstall T, Klinner U (1998) Molecular cloning of alcohol
dehydrogenase genes of the yeast Pichia stipitis and identiﬁcation of the fermentative ADH.
Yeast 14:1311–1325
Passoth V, Zimmermann M, Klinner U (1996) Peculiarities of the regulation of fermentation and
respiration in the crabtree-negative, xylose-fermenting yeast Pichia stipitis. Appl Biochem
Biotechnol 57/58:201–212
Petersson A, Almeida JR, Modig T, Karhumaa K, Hahn-Ha¨gerdal B, Gorwa-Grauslund MF, Lide´n
G (2006) A 5-hydroxymethyl furfural reducing enzyme encoded by the Saccharomyces
cerevisiae ADH6 gene conveys HMF tolerance. Yeast 23(6):455–464
Piontek M, Hagedorn J, Hollenberg CP, Gellissen G, Strasser AW (1998) Two novel gene
expression systems based on the yeasts Schwanniomyces occidentalis and Pichia stipitis.
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 50:331–338
Qi K, Zhong JJ, Xia XX (2014) Triggering respirofermentative metabolism in the Crabtree-
negative yeast Pichia guilliermondii by disrupting the CAT8 gene. Appl Environ Microbiol
80:3879–3887
Quarterman J, Skerker JM, Feng X, Liu IY, Zhao H, Arkin AP, Jin YS (2016) Rapid and efﬁcient
galactose fermentation by engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Biotechnol 229:13–21
Radecka D., Mukherjee V, Mateo RQ, Stojiljkovic M, Foulquie´-Moreno MR, Thevelein JM
(2015) Looking beyond Saccharomyces: the potential of non-conventional yeast species for
desirable traits in bioethanol fermentation. FEMS Yeast Res 15(6). pii: fov053
Ren X, Wang J, Yu H, Peng C, Hu J, Ruan Z, Zhao S, Liang Y, Peng N (2016) Anaerobic and
sequential aerobic production of high-titer ethanol and single cell protein from NaOH-
pretreated corn stover by a genome shufﬂing-modiﬁed Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain.
Bioresour Technol 218:623–630
Richard P, Londesborough J, Putkonen M, Kalkkinen N, Penttila M (2001) Cloning and expression
of a fungal L-arabinitol-4-dehydrogenase gene. J Biol Chem 276(44):40631–40637
Richard P, Putkonen M, Vaananen R, Londesborough J, Penttila M (2002) The missing link in the
fungal L-arabinose catabolic pathway, identiﬁcation of the L-xylulose reductase gene. Bio-
chemistry 41(20):6432–6437
Roca C, Nielsen J, Olsson L (2003) Metabolic engineering of ammonium assimilation in xylose-
fermenting Saccharomyces cerevisiae improves ethanol production. Appl Environ Microbiol
69(8):4732–4736
Rodrigues R, Lu CF, Lin B, Jeffries TW (2008) Fermentation kinetics for xylitol production by a
Pichia stipitis D-xylulokinase mutant previously grown in spent sulﬁte liquor. Appl Biochem
Biotechnol 148:199–209
Rogers DT, Szostak JW (1993) Strains of yeast with increased rates of glycolysis. US Patent,
5268285, A1
1
Genetic Improvement of Conventional and Nonconventional Yeasts for the. . .
35

Ryabova OB, Chmil OM, Sibirny AA (2003) Xylose and cellobiose fermentation to ethanol by the
thermotolerant methylotrophic yeast Hansenula polymorpha. FEMS Yeast Res 4(2):157–164
Sa´nchez O´ J, Cardona CA (2008) Trends in biotechnological production of fuel ethanol from
different feedstocks. Bioresour Technol 99(13):5270–5295
Schneider H, Wang PY, Chan YK, Kurtzman CP (1981) Conversion of d-xylose into ethanol by
the yeast Pachysolen tannophilus. Biotechnol Lett 3:89–92
Semkiv MV, Dmytruk KV, Abbas CA, Sibirny AA (2016) Activation of futile cycles as an
approach to increase ethanol yield during glucose fermentation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Bioengineered 7(2):106–111
Semkiv MV, Dmytruk KV, Abbas CA, Sibirny AA (2014) Increased ethanol accumulation from
glucose via reduction of ATP level in a recombinant strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
overexpressing alkaline phosphatase. BMC Biotechnol 14:42
Shahsavarani H, Sugiyama M, Kaneko Y, Chuenchit B, Harashima S (2012) Superior
thermotolerance of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for efﬁcient bioethanol fermentation can be
achieved by overexpression of RSP5 ubiquitin ligase. Biotechnol Adv 30(6):1289–1300
Shi NQ, Davis B, Sherman F, Cruz J, Jeffries TW (1999) Disruption of the cytochrome c gene in
xylose-utilizing yeast Pichia stipitis leads to higher ethanol production. Yeast 15:1021–1030
Shi NQ, Jeffries TW (1998) Anaerobic growth and improved fermentation of Pichia stipitis
bearing a URA1 gene from Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 50
(3):339–345
Skoog K, Hahn-Hagerdahl B (1990) Effect of oxygenation on xylose fermentation by Pichia
stipitis. Appl Environ Microbiol 56(11):3389–3394
Slininger PJ, Dien BS, Gorsick SW, Liu ZL (2006) Nitrogen source and mineral optimization
enhances D-xylose conversion to ethanol by the yeast Pichia stipitis NRRL Y-7124. Appl
Microbial Cell Physiol 72(6):1285–1296
Sohn J, Choi E, Kang H, Rhee J, Agaphonov M, Ter-Avanesyan M, Rhee S (1999) A dominant
selection system designed for copy-number-controlled gene integration in Hansenula
polymorpha DL-1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 51:800–807
Sprenger GA (1996) Carbohydrate metabolism in Zymomonas mobilis: a catabolic highway with
some scenic routes. FEMS Microbiol Lett 145:301–307
Sreenath HK, Jeffries TW (1999) 2-deoxyglucose as a selective agent for derepressed mutants of
Pichia stipitis. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 77:211–222
Sreenath HK, Jeffries TW (1997) Diminished respirative growth and enhanced assimilative sugar
uptake result in higher speciﬁc fermentation rates by the mutant Pichia stipitis FPL-061. Appl
Biochem Biotechnol 63–65:109–116
Stanley D, Fraser S, Chambers PJ, Rogers P, Stanley GA (2010) Generation and characterisation
of stable ethanol-tolerant mutants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol
37:139–149
Suh SO, Marshall CJ, McHugh JV, Blackwell M (2003) Wood ingestion by passalid beetles in the
presence of xylose-fermenting gut yeasts. Mol Ecol 12(11):3137–3145
Tao X, Zheng D, Liu T, Wang P, Zhao W, Zhu M, Jiang X, Zhao Y, Wu X (2012) A novel strategy
to construct yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae for very high gravity fermentation. PLoS One 7
(2):e31235
Targonski Z (1992) Biotransformation of lignin-related aromatic-compounds by Pichia stipitis
Pignal. Zentralbl Mikrobiol 147:244–249
Valadi H, Larsson C, Gustafsson L (1998) Improved ethanol production by glycerol-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase mutants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 50
(4):434–439
van der Klei IJ, Yurimoto H, Sakai Y, Veenhuis M (2006) The signiﬁcance of peroxisomes in
methanol metabolism in methylotrophic yeast. Biochim Biophys Acta 1763(12):1453–1462
van Dijken JP, van den Bosch E, Hermans JJ, de Miranda LR, Scheffers WA (1986) Alcoholic
fermentation by ‘nonfermentative’ yeasts. Yeast 2:123–127
36
K.V. Dmytruk et al.

Veduyn C, Van Kleef R, Frank J, Schreuder H, Van Dijken JP, Scheffers WA (1985) Properties of
the NAD(P)H-dependent xylose reductase from the xylose-fermenting yeast Pichia stipitis.
Biochem J 226(3):669–677
Verho R, Londesborough J, Penttila¨ M, Richard P (2003) Engineering redox cofactor regeneration
for improved pentose fermentation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl Environ Microbiol 69
(10):5892–5897
Voronovsky AY, Rohulya OV, Abbas CA, Sibirny AA (2009) Development of strains of the
thermotolerant yeast Hansenula polymorpha capable of alcoholic fermentation of starch and
xylan. Metab Eng 11:234–242
Voronovsky AY, Ryabova OB, Verba OV, Ishchuk OP, Dmytruk KV, Sibirny AA (2005)
Expression of xylA genes encoding xylose isomerases from Escherichia coli and Streptomyces
coelicolor in the methylotrophic yeast Hansenula polymorpha. FEMS Yeast Res 5
(11):1055–1062
Wahlbom CF, Cordero Otero RR, van Zyl WH, Hahn-Ha¨gerdal B, J€onsson LJ (2003) Molecular
analysis of a Saccharomyces cerevisiae mutant with improved ability to utilize xylose shows
enhanced expression of proteins involved in transport, initial xylose metabolism, and the
pentose phosphate pathway. Appl Environ Microbiol 69(2):740–746
Walfridsson M, Bao X, Anderlund M, Lilius G, Bülow L, Hahn-Ha¨gerdal B (1996) Ehanolic
fermentation of xylose with Saccharomyces cerevisiae harboring the Thermus thermophilus
xylA gene, which expresses an active xylose (glucose) isomerase. Appl Environ Microbiol 62
(12):4648–4651
Wang PM, Zheng DQ, Liu TZ, Tao XL, Feng MG, Min H, Jiang XH, Wu XC (2012) The
combination of glycerol metabolic engineering and drug resistance marker-aided genome
shufﬂing to improve very-high-gravity fermentation performances of industrial Saccharomy-
ces cerevisiae. Bioresour Technol 108:203–210
Wang TT, Lin LL, Hsu WH (1989) Cloning and expression of a Schwanniomyces occidentalis
α-amylase gene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl Environ Microbiol 55:3167–3172
Watanabe D, Hashimoto N, Mizuno M, Zhou Y, Akao T, Shimoi H (2013) Accelerated alcoholic
fermentation caused by defective gene expression related to glucose derepression in Saccha-
romyces cerevisiae. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 77:2255–2262
Watanabe S, Kodaki T, Makino K (2005) Complete reversal of coenzyme speciﬁcity of xylitol
dehydrogenase and increase of thermostability by the introduction of structural zinc. J Biol
Chem 280(11):10340–10349
Watanabe T, Watanabe I, Yamamoto M, Ando A, Nakamura T (2011) A UV-induced mutant of
Pichia stipitis with increased ethanol production from xylose and selection of a spontaneous
mutant with increased ethanol tolerance. Bioresour Technol 102:1844–1848
Wei P, Li Z, He P, Lin Y, Jiang N (2008) Genome shufﬂing in the ethanologenic yeast Candida
krusei to improve acetic acid tolerance. Biotechnol Appl Biochem 49:113–120
Weierstall T, Hollenberg CP, Boles E (1999) Cloning and characterization of three genes (SUT1-3)
encoding glucose transporters of the yeast Pichia stipitis. Mol Microbiol 31:871–883
Weusthuis RA, Adams H, Scheffers WA, van Dijken JP (1993) Energetics and kinetics of maltose
transport in Saccharomyces cerevisiae: a continuous culture study. Appl Environ Microbiol 59
(9):3102–3109
Wijsman MR, Bruinenberg PM, van Diken JP, Scheffers WA (1985) Incapacity for anaerobic
growth in xylose-fermenting yeasts. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 51:563–564
Wilson AJ, Bhattacharjee JK (1986) Regulation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and
pyruvate kinase in Saccharomyces cerevisiae grown in the presence of glycolytic and
gluconeogenic carbon sources and the role of mitochondrial function on gluconeogenesis.
Can J Microbiol 32(12):969–972
Wisselink HW, Toirkens MJ, del Rosario Franco Berriel M, Winkler AA, van Dijken JP, Pronk JT,
van Maris AJ (2007) Engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for efﬁcient anaerobic alco-
holic fermentation of L-arabinose. Appl Environ Microbiol 73(15):4881–4891
1
Genetic Improvement of Conventional and Nonconventional Yeasts for the. . .
37

Xia PF, Zhang GC, Walker B, Seo SO, Kwak S, Liu JJ, Kim H, Ort DR, Wang SG, Jin YS (2016)
Recycling carbon dioxide during xylose fermentation by engineered Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. ACS Synth Biol 6(2):276–283
Yang VW, Marks JA, Davis BP, Jeffries TW (1994) High efﬁciency transformation of Pichia
stipitis based on its URA3 gene and a homologous autonomous replication sequence, ARS2.
Appl Environ Microbiol 60:4245–4254
Yang XS, Zhang SJ, Zuo Z, Men X, Tian S (2011) Ethanol production from the enzymatic
hydrolysis of non-detoxiﬁed steamexploded corn stalk. Bioresour Technol 102:7840–7844
Yoon GS, Lee TS, Kim C, Seo JH, Ryu YW (1996) Characterization of alcohol fermentation and
segregation of protoplast fusant of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Pichia stipitis. J Microbiol
Biotechnol 6:286–291
Zhang GC, Liu JJ, Kong II, Kwak S, Jin YS (2015a) Combining C6 and C5 sugar metabolism for
enhancing microbial bioconversion. Curr Opin Chem Biol 29:49–57
Zhang GC, Liu JJ, Ding WT (2012) Decreased xylitol formation during xylose fermentation in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae due to overexpression of water-forming NADH oxidase. Appl
Environ Microbiol 78(4):1081–1086
Zhang J, Zhang B, Wang D, Gao X, Sun L, Hong J (2015b) Rapid ethanol production at elevated
temperatures by engineered thermotolerant Kluyveromyces marxianus via the NADP(H)-
preferring xylose reductase-xylitol dehydrogenase pathway. Metab Eng 31:140–152
Zhang L, Tang Y, Guo ZP, Ding ZY, Shi GY (2011) Improving the ethanol yield by reducing
glycerol formation using cofactor regulation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biotechnol Lett 33
(7):1375–1380
Zhang W, Geng AL (2012) Improved ethanol production by a xylose-fermenting recombinant
yeast strain constructed through a modiﬁed genome shufﬂing method. Biotechnol Biofuels
5:46–57
38
K.V. Dmytruk et al.

High-Temperature Bioethanol
Fermentation by Conventional
and Nonconventional Yeasts
2
Hisashi Hoshida and Rinji Akada
Abstract
Fuel ethanol production has dramatically increased in the world. Ethanol fer-
mentation for alcohol beverage is a traditional and mature technology. However,
the fermentation technology for fuel ethanol should be reconsidered because it
must be large scale and low cost. High-temperature fermentation is the most
promising approach for efﬁcient fuel ethanol production from the viewpoints of
cost reduction and robustness. In addition, high temperature makes it possible to
establish simultaneous sacchariﬁcation and fermentation process because
enzyme activities can be enhanced. For the high-temperature fermentation,
thermotolerant ethanol-producing yeasts are necessary. In this chapter, yeast
strains suitable for high-temperature bioethanol fermentation are reviewed.
Among these, Kluyveromyces marxianus achieved sufﬁcient ethanol production
in a pilot-scale high-temperature fermentation from starch contained in waste
cassava pulp. Studies of the thermotolerant mechanisms will help to construct
genetically engineered yeasts for further cost-effective high-temperature ethanol
fermentation.
Contents
2.1
Introduction ...............................................................................
40
2.2
Advantages of High-Temperature Fermentation .........................................
41
2.2.1
Cooling Cost ......................................................................
41
2.2.2
Contamination and Sterilization ..................................................
41
H. Hoshida (*) • R. Akada
Department of Applied Chemistry, Graduate School of Sciences and Technology for Innovation,
Yamaguchi University, Ube 755-8611, Japan
Research Center for Thermotolerant Microbial Resources, Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi
753-8315, Japan
Yamaguchi University Biomedical Engineering Center, Ube 755-8611, Japan
e-mail: hoshida@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp
# Springer International Publishing AG 2017
A.A. Sibirny (ed.), Biotechnology of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-58829-2_2
39

2.2.3
Viscosity of Fermentation Broth .................................................
41
2.2.4
Robustness Against Accidental Temperature Elevation .........................
42
2.2.5
Enzyme Activity ..................................................................
42
2.3
Isolation of Natural Thermotolerant Ethanol-Producing Yeasts ........................
42
2.4
Yeast Immobilization for High-Temperature Fermentation .............................
47
2.5
High-Temperature SSF ...................................................................
48
2.6
Pilot-Scale High-Temperature SSF Using K. marxianus ................................
50
2.7
Consolidated Bioprocessing by Genetically Engineered Yeasts ........................
52
2.8
Strain Improvement for High-Temperature Fermentation ...............................
53
2.9
Thermotolerant Mechanism of Yeasts ...................................................
55
2.10
Conclusion ................................................................................
56
References ........................................................................................
57
2.1
Introduction
Fermentation is a biological process of microorganisms to convert carbohydrates to
ethanol or other chemical compounds. Humans have used yeasts for fermentation
since ancient times to produce beer, wine, and bread; however, only since the late
nineteenth century has the nature and mechanism of yeast fermentation been started
to be understood. Louis Pasteur’s and Eduard Buchner’s ﬁndings led to a complete
understanding of the enzymatic reactions in the fermentation pathway. Glucose is
metabolized to pyruvate by the enzymes in the glycolysis pathway, and the pyru-
vate is used by the fermentation pathway to produce ethanol under anaerobic
conditions or in the presence of high concentrations of sugar. These ethanol
fermentation studies have been performed unexceptionally using the yeast Saccha-
romyces cerevisiae because S. cerevisiae is commonly used in traditional yeast
fermentation.
In addition to the traditional fermentation, ethanol has become one of the most
important industrial products in these days because ethanol can be used as an
alternative fuel for automobiles instead of gasoline. Ethanol produced via fermen-
tation from biomass is called bioethanol. The bioethanol is a renewable energy
because plant biomass is produced by ﬁxation of carbon dioxide. The carbon
dioxide generated by combustion of bioethanol is the material originally ﬁxed by
plants. Therefore, bioethanol will be the best alternative liquid fuel. Ethanol
fermentation has been studied based on brewing and bread fermentation, which
require taste and ﬂavor considerations. Instead, fermentation of bioethanol as fuel
only requires efﬁcient production. Therefore, bioethanol fermentation for fuel
should be reconsidered from the viewpoint of cost, speed, type of biomass, location,
and operation conditions. New technologies are being developed in order to
increase ethanol production in more economically and environmentally favorable
manners, in which nonconventional yeasts will play important roles in addition to
the conventional yeast S. cerevisiae. Especially, in the bioethanol production
process, fermentation at high-temperature environment will be the most desirable
process. In this chapter, we describe the advantage of high-temperature
40
H. Hoshida and R. Akada

fermentation, the yeasts capable of high-temperature fermentation, simultaneous
sacchariﬁcation and fermentation (SSF) at high temperature, genetic engineering
for consolidated bioprocess (CBP), and development of more thermotolerant strains
for further efﬁcient high-temperature fermentation.
2.2
Advantages of High-Temperature Fermentation
2.2.1
Cooling Cost
During fermentation, heat is released from microorganisms and reactors. As a
result, the fermentation temperature of the broth raises above the optimal tempera-
ture as fermentation progresses. Optimal temperatures for various kinds of fermen-
tation depend on the microorganism used in the reactors. In the case of
S. cerevisiae, the optimal temperature for ethanol fermentation is 30–35 C. For
stable and efﬁcient ethanol production, the reactor must be cooled to maintain the
temperature below 35 C. The biomass used for ethanol fermentation is rich in
tropical and subtropical areas, where environmental temperature is not cold enough
for cooling. Therefore, fermentation plants require an expensive refrigerant system
using additional energy. High-temperature fermentation is deﬁned as fermentation
conducted at 5–10 C higher than the conventional fermentation temperatures. If
the bioethanol fermentation is conducted at 45 C, various costs in fermentation
process could be reduced, including investment for refrigerant systems and the
cooling energy.
2.2.2
Contamination and Sterilization
Most microorganisms in the environment prefer 25–35 C for growth, which is also
the conventional fermentation temperature for S. cerevisiae. Contamination of
other microorganisms leads to loss of ethanol production. Complete sterilization
of huge amounts of biomass and fermentation facilities for bio-ethanol production
is usually impractical. The high temperature in bioethanol fermentation will reduce
contamination risk.
2.2.3
Viscosity of Fermentation Broth
Some types of biomass containing high concentrations of carbohydrate, such as
starch and cellulose, show high viscosity. This decreases thermal diffusion and
dissipation and requires more energy for mixing and cooling. By fermenting at a
higher temperature, the viscosity of the broth can be reduced compared to the
conventional fermentation.
2
High-Temperature Bioethanol Fermentation by Conventional and. . .
41

2.2.4
Robustness Against Accidental Temperature Elevation
During longtime fermentation process, unexpected problems, such as an electricity
outage and operation mistake, may happen. Generally, the fermentation system is
operated at the maximum temperature to achieve optimal production. Therefore,
accidental temperature elevation impairs yeast cell activity and decreases or halts
ethanol production. High-temperature fermentation using a thermotolerant micro-
organism would have a higher limiting temperature than using general S. cerevisiae
strains, resulting in the robust fermentation process.
2.2.5
Enzyme Activity
Temperature affects enzyme activities. Biomass consisting of polysaccharides,
such as starch and cellulose, must be degraded to glucose by enzymes. In the case
of starch, it is digested by α-amylases and glucoamylases and the resulting glucose
is used for fermentation. In the case of cellulose, end-type cellulases and
β-glucosidases are used to generate glucose. Generally, the optimal temperatures
for these enzymes are more than 50 C, which is much higher than the optimal
fermentation temperature of the yeast S. cerevisiae. The degradation process of
oligosaccharides to glucose is called sacchariﬁcation. To conduct sacchariﬁcation
and fermentation in the optimal conditions, these processes are generally separated.
In contrast to this, sacchariﬁcation and fermentation can be performed simulta-
neously in the same reactor, which is called simultaneous sacchariﬁcation and
fermentation (SSF). However, the ability of the enzymes to catalyze sacchariﬁca-
tion is suboptimal because activities of the enzymes are generally about half of their
maximal activity at 30–35 C compared with their optimal temperature. In high-
temperature fermentation, the temperature is closer to the optimal temperature for
the sugar-degrading enzymes. In high-temperature SSF, sacchariﬁcation proceeds
faster or needs a lower concentration of enzyme (Matsushita et al. 2015). Increased
enzymatic activity at high temperatures provides additional value.
The concept of high-temperature fermentation for ethanol production was pro-
posed by Hacking et al. (1984), but it is not yet used in commercial ethanol
fermentation. To establish high-temperature fermentation, thermotolerant and
ethanol-producing yeasts are essential.
2.3
Isolation of Natural Thermotolerant Ethanol-Producing
Yeasts
Many natural isolates, including strains from culture collections, have been tested
for thermotolerance and high-temperature ethanol fermentation. In these studies,
primary screening conditions to select strains were categorized into four groups:
thermotolerant yeast, ethanol-producing yeast, ethanol-producing yeast at high
temperature, and one of these with a speciﬁc condition. Regardless of the primary
42
H. Hoshida and R. Akada

condition, strains of K. marxianus and S. cerevisiae were often isolated as ethanol-
producing yeast at high temperatures, likely because K. marxianus is a highly
thermotolerant yeast and S. cerevisiae is an efﬁcient ethanol-producing yeast. We
summarized the ethanol production of thermotolerant ethanol-producing yeasts in
Table 2.1.
Hacking et al. (1984) compared 55 efﬁcient ethanol-producing strains from
seven genera and found that K. marxianus was more thermotolerant, but
S. cerevisiae, Saccharomyces uvarum, and Candida pseudotropicalis produced
much higher amounts of ethanol at 40 C. Hughes et al. (1984) evaluated ethanol
fermentation ability of a K. marxianus strain at 30–48 C because K. marxianus was
found to be a thermotolerant strain. The strain showed maximum ethanol produc-
tion (approximately 65 g/L from approximately 150 g/L glucose) at 30–40 C.
Anderson et al. (1986) isolated K. marxianus strains from sugarcane mills, and
these strains produced 5.50–6.26% (w/v) ethanol at 45
C. Szczodrak and
Targon´ski (1988) isolated K. marxianus strain (former Fabospora fragilis)
CCY51–1-1 as the best ethanol producer at high temperatures from 58 yeast strains
belonging
to
the
genera
Aureobasidium,
Candida,
Cryptococcus,
Pichia,
Schizosaccharomyces, Hanseniaspora, Fabospora, Pachysolen, Saccharomyces,
Trichosporon, and Torulopsis. The strain produced 5.6% (w/v) ethanol at 40 and
43 C from 14% (w/v) glucose. On the basis of these studies, K. marxianus is
considered a good thermotolerant ethanol-producing yeast. Limtong et al. isolated
K. marxianus strain DMKU 3–1042 in Thailand and found to produce ethanol well
at 40 C (2007). In the study, strains were enriched in a condition supplemented
with 4% ethanol (v/v) as a ﬁrst step of screening. The ethanol fermentation ability
of K. marxianus DMKU 3–1042 was compared with those of K. marxianus strains
NCYC587, NCYC1429, and NCYC2791 (Nonklang et al. 2008). Among the four
strains, DMKU 3–1042 was the best ethanol producer at 45 C. Kumar et al. (2009)
isolated Kluyveromyces sp. IIPE453 as an ethanol-producing yeast at high
temperatures from a soil sample in a sugar mill. The strain showed highest ethanol
production rate (g/g/h) at 45–50 C. The strain was reported to produce ethanol
from various types of biomasses, such as sugarcane juice, molasses, and bagasse
hydrolysate at 50 C (Kumar et al. 2010). Rodrussamee et al. (2011) and Nonklang
et al. (2008) reported that K. marxianus grows by utilizing various types of sugar.
However, there was little ethanol production from xylose and none from arabinose
as carbon sources.
Several S. cerevisiae strains were also isolated for high-temperature fermenta-
tion. D’Amore et al. (1989) screened 65 yeast strains containing S. cerevisiae,
Saccharomyces byanus, K. marxianus, Kluyveromyces lactis, Candida shehatae,
Hansenula wingei, Saccharomyces rouxii, and Phichia stipitis. The fermentation
ability was tested at 40 C, and a S. cerevisiae (former Saccharomyces diastaticus)
strain showed the highest ethanol production at 40 C. Kiran Sree et al. (2000)
isolated four S. cerevisiae strains from a thermal power plant in India. Among the
strains, VS1 and VS3 grew at 44 C. Ethanol production by the strains was highest at
30 and 35 C but decreased over 40 C. Nuanpeng et al. (2016) isolated S. cerevisiae
strain DBKKU Y-53 in Thailand. In the screening process, yeast strains were ﬁrst
2
High-Temperature Bioethanol Fermentation by Conventional and. . .
43

Table 2.1 Ethanol production of yeast species at high temperature
Species
Strain
Initial
sugar
conc. %
(w/v)
Type
of
sugars
Ethanol productiona (%)
Unit of
ethanol
Refs.
Temperature (C)
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
50
Kluyveromyces marxianus
NCYC587
14.5
Glc
6.3
v/v
Hacking et al.
(1984)
974
15
Glc
6.3
w/v
Anderson
et al. (1986)
FT23b
14
Glc
5.4
5.6
3.2
w/v
Szczodrak and
Targon´ski
(1988)
FT5b
14
Glc
5.0
3.6
2.4
w/v
Szczodrak and
Targon´ski
(1988)
CCY51–1-1c
14
Glc
5.6
5.6
3.5
w/v
Szczodrak and
Targon´ski
(1988)
2713
5
Glc
2.1
2.2
2.0
w/v
Ballesteros
et al. (1991)
2671b
5
Glc
2.1
2.1
2.1
w/v
Ballesteros
et al. (1991)
DMKU3–1042
18
Sucd
7.4
7.2
4.9
w/v
Limtong et al.
(2007)
NBRC1777
10
Glc
(4.5)
(4.6)
(4.2)
(2.0)
w/v
Yanase et al.
(2010)
IIPE453e
20
Glc
8.2
w/v
Kumar et al.
(2009)
44
H. Hoshida and R. Akada

Saccharomyces cerevisiae
YSa86
13.5
Glc
8.0
v/v
Hacking et al.
(1984)
FTJa(a)
14
Glc
4.3
3.7
1.9
v/v
Szczodrak and
Targon´ski
(1988)
LB62f
15
Glc
6.4
(4.8)
(1.2)
w/v
D’Amore et al.
(1989)
VS1
15
Glc
6.6
5.5
5.0
4.0
w/v
Kiran Sree
et al. (2000)
VS3
15
Glc
7.5
6.0
5.8
5.8
w/v
Kiran Sree
et al. (2000)
DBKKU Y-53
22
SSJg
7.1
5.8
3.2
0.91
w/v
Nuanpeng
et al. (2016)
C3867
10
Glc
3.0
3.9
w/v
Auesukaree
et al. (2012)
Saccharomyces uvarum
YSa85
14.5
Glc
8.2
v/v
Hacking et al.
(1984)
Saccharomyces carlsbergensis
FT14
14
Glc
5.4
2.1
1.5
w/v
Szczodrak and
Targon´ski
(1988)
Ogataea polymorpha
356
4
Glc
1.3
1.3
0.79
0.24
w/v
Ryabova et al.
(2003)
(continued)
2
High-Temperature Bioethanol Fermentation by Conventional and. . .
45

Table 2.1 (continued)
Species
Strain
Initial
sugar
conc. %
(w/v)
Type
of
sugars
Ethanol productiona (%)
Unit of
ethanol
Refs.
Temperature (C)
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
50
Candida pseudotropicalis
YCa9
14.2
Glc
8.6
v/v
Hacking et al.
(1984)
Candida acidothermophilum
ATCC 20381
5
Glc
(2.2)
(2.5)
(2.3)
(0.6)
w/v
Kadam and
Schmidt
(1997)
Pichia kudriavzevii
KVMP10
10
Mixedh
3.9
4.0
5.4
1.0
w/v
Koutinas et al.
(2015)
DMKU
3-ET15
18
Glc
7.5
7.9
7.7
3.8
w/v
Yuangsaard
et al. (2013)
Unknown
RND13
15
Glc
6.6
6.0
w/v
Ueno et al.
(2002)
aBold—maximum ethanol production was achieved at the temperature, parentheses—value was read from a graph, underlined—data was shown only at the
temperature
bK. fragilis
cFabospora fragilis
dSugarcane juice supplemented with sucrose
eKluyveromyces sp.
fSaccharomyces diastaticus, Labatt Brewing culture number
gSweet sorghum juice
hGalactose, fructose, glucose, and sucrose
46
H. Hoshida and R. Akada

enriched at 35 C in the presence of 4% ethanol. The strain grew well and produced
ethanol at ~42 C, but maximum production was achieved at 37 C in sweet
sorghum juice.
Several other thermotolerant ethanol-producing strains were also identiﬁed from
culture collections or isolated from various environments. Ogataea polymorpha
(former Hansenula polymorpha) is a thermotolerant yeast. From six O. polymorpha
strains tested, several strains produced over 9 g/L ethanol from 2% sucrose at 37 C
(Ryabova et al. 2003). Candida species also produced ethanol at relatively high
temperatures. C. tropicalis strain TH4 was isolated from an Indonesian traditional
beverage as an ethanol-producing yeast and produced 4.6% (v/v) ethanol at 42 C.
However, the production was decreased by 30% compared with fermentation at
30 C (Hermansyah et al. 2015). Candida acidothermophilum is reported as a
thermotolerant yeast and produced ethanol at 70–80% of the theoretical yield
from 5% glucose at 37–45 C (Kadam and Schmidt 1997). Pichia kudriavzevii
strains were recently isolated as a thermotolerant ethanol-producing yeast. Strain
DMKU 3-ET15 was isolated from traditional fermented pork sausage in Thailand
through an enriched process at 40 C in a medium with 4% ethanol. The strain
produced ethanol at approximately 7.7% (w/v) from 18% glucose at 35–42 C
(Yuangsaard et al. 2013). Strain KVMP10 was isolated for orange peel fermenta-
tion and was reported to produce 5.4% (w/v) ethanol at 42 C in a model medium
containing ~10% total sugars (Koutinas et al. 2015). From a hot spring drainage in
Japan, a thermotolerant yeast was isolated and produced ethanol 6.6% (w/v) from
15% glucose at 40 C (Ueno et al. 2002). The species was not determined, but
rDNA sequence suggested that the strain was similar to Candida glabrata and
Kluyveromyces
delphensis.
Strains
of
Kluyveromyces
lactis,
Cryptococcus
neoformans, Candida albicans, and Debaryomyces hansenii are reported to be
thermotolerant yeasts (Nedeva et al. 1993; Arguelled 1997; Takashima et al.
2009; Prakash et al. 2011). However, these species have little or no ethanol
fermentation ability and have not been studied with regard to high-temperature
ethanol fermentation. However, resources in the world remain to be investigated for
the isolation of thermotolerant ethanol-producing yeasts.
In Table 2.1, optimum ethanol production temperatures of each strain were
shown in bold numbers for comparison between species. The optimum fermenta-
tion temperature for the strains is approximately 40 C. Some K. marxianus strains
showed best ethanol production ability or kept fermentation ability at higher
temperatures than 40 C, suggesting that K. marxianus is a better species for
high-temperature ethanol fermentation.
2.4
Yeast Immobilization for High-Temperature Fermentation
To perform high-temperature fermentation, cell immobilization has been studied. A
thermotolerant strain (RA-74-2) of S. cerevisiae was immobilized in alginate gel
beads. Ethanol production of the immobilized cells was higher than that of free cells
at 26–42 C (Sohn et al. 1997). The immobilized cells also produced ethanol
2
High-Temperature Bioethanol Fermentation by Conventional and. . .
47

efﬁciently in three rounds of fermentation at 40 C. Interestingly, some cells in
beads were lost during 40 h of fermentation at 43 C, but the number of cells
increased during the following fermentation at 37 C. By decreasing the fermenta-
tion temperature, fermentation activity of the immobilized cells can be recovered.
Ylitervo et al. (2011) encapsulated S. cerevisiae CBS 8066 into alginate-chitosan
capsules. The encapsulated cells consumed almost 3% of glucose in the medium
and converted it to ethanol at more than 85% yield at 42 C over seven repeated
fermentation cycles, although free cells completely lost glucose-consuming activity
after two rounds. In addition, the maximum temperature of ethanol fermentation
increased from 42 to 45 C by encapsulation. In another study, S. cerevisiae AXAZ-
1 was immobilized in brewer’s spent grains, and the immobilized cells were used
for fermentation 37 times repeatedly at various temperatures (Kopsahelis et al.
2009). For comparison, free cells were also tested in repeated fermentations. In the
repeated fermentations, molasses at 12% (w/v) of initial sugar concentration was
used as a substrate. Ethanol concentration and conversion rate in each batch
fermentation were similar between immobilized cells and free cells at 30–35 C.
In contrast, fermentation time required to consume the sugars with immobilized
cells was around half that of free cells. In addition, the effect of immobilization
against temperature was also observed. Immobilized cells produced 5.5–6.8% (v/v)
ethanol during 14 rounds of fermentation at 38 and 40 C. In free cells, ethanol
production decreased and fermentation time was extended during repeated
fermentations at 38 C. These reports indicate that immobilization protects yeast
cells in high-temperature fermentation.
2.5
High-Temperature SSF
SSF can make ethanol in more simple way and shorter time, but the different
optimal temperatures between sacchariﬁcation and fermentation is a barrier to its
industrial application. Attempt of high-temperature SSF is summarized in
Table 2.2.
S. cerevisiae NKU5377 produced ethanol from waste paper in SSF, and ethanol
production was higher at 40 C than at 30 and 37 C (Park et al. 2010). Liu et al.
(2014) demonstrated that ethanol production and fermentation speed in a SSF
system using corn stover increased on elevating the temperature from 30 to
39 C. However, a high concentration of glucose remained at 36 and 39 C,
suggesting that sacchariﬁcation was enhanced but glucose consumption by
S. cerevisiae is not fast enough at high temperatures. In SSF with S. cerevisiae
VS3 strain using starchy materials as feedstock, ethanol production at 42 C was
lower than that at 37 C, likely due to the lower thermotolerance of S. cerevisiae at
42 C (Sree et al. 1999).
SSF with K. marxianus L. G. strain at 42 C produced 37.6 g/L ethanol from
10% of a microcrystalline cellulose in 78 h, but later reducing sugars released by
enzyme hydrolysis started to accumulate in the medium (Ballesteros et al. 1991).
Castro and Roberto (2014) compared ethanol production (g/L/h) between
48
H. Hoshida and R. Akada

Table 2.2 Ethanol production in high-temperature SSF
Strain
Biomass
Temp. (C)
Ethanol
production
Enzyme
Remarks
Refs.
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
80000012a
Corn stover
39
33.1
g/L
30
FPU/g
glucan
With pre-hydrolysis
Liu et al. (2014)
KNU5377
Waste
newsprint
250 g/L
50!40
8.4
% (v/v)
140
FPU/g
paper
With pre-hydrolysis
Park et al. (2010)
VS3
Sweet
Sorghum
100 g
37
8.2
g/g
substrate
1300
U/g
enzyme
Sree et al. (1999)
Kluyveromyces marxianus
L. G.
Solka-ﬂoc
10%
42
37.6
g/L
15
FPU/g
Ballesteros et al.
(1991)
NRRL
Y-6860
Rice straw
8%
45
11.5
g/L
6.25
FPU
þ6.25 U β-glucosidase/
g substrate
Castro and Roberto
(2014)
NCIM
3358
Solka-ﬂoc
10%
43
3.0
% (w/v)
40
FPU/g
Hari Krishna et al.
(2001)
Y. 01070
Spruce chip
5%
42
7.5
g/L
37
FPU/g
þ381 U β-glucosidase/g
cellulose
Bollo´k et al. (2000)
IMB4
Switchgrass
41 g/L
45
16.6
g/L
15
FPU/g
glucan
Suryawati et al.
(2008)
Candida glabrata
NFRI3164
Avicel
5%
42
14
g/L
500
CMC U/g
Avicel
Watanabe et al.
(2010)
Candida acidothermophilum
ATCC
20381
Poplar
6% (3.5%
cellulose)
42
18
g/L
25
FPU/g
Kadam and
Schmidt (1997)
aAngel Yeast Co. Ltd
2
High-Temperature Bioethanol Fermentation by Conventional and. . .
49

K. marxianus and S. cerevisiae in SSF of rice straw. Maximum ethanol concentra-
tion was similar, but only in the case of K. marxianus, productivity was enhanced at
45 C than at 30 C. In addition, glucose remained in the medium of S. cerevisiae at
45
C. Higher temperature is preferred for SSF but 45
C is too high for
S. cerevisiae. K. marxianus IMB4 strain was used for SSF of switchgrass at
37, 41, and 45 C. Ethanol production increased by elevating the temperature,
and the highest ethanol production was achieved at 45 C with initial pH at 5.5
(Suryawati et al. 2008). K. marxianus NCIM 3358 also showed better ethanol
production than S. cerevisiae NRRL-Y-132 in high-temperature SSF (Hari Krishna
et al. 2001). NCIM 3358 produced 3.0% (w/v) ethanol from microcrystalline
cellulose at 43 C in the presence of cellulase while NRRL-Y-132 produced 2.3%
(w/v) ethanol. In addition, ethanol production was enhanced by the addition of
β-glucosidase to 3.5% with the K. marxianus strain, suggesting that efﬁcient
conversion to glucose is required for a higher ethanol yield.
Candida yeasts were also examined for high-temperature SSF. A Candida
glabrata wild-type strain produced 14 g/L ethanol in SSF at 42 C using 5%
microcrystalline cellulose as a substrate with agitation at 150 rpm. A respiratory-
deﬁcient strain produced 17 g/L ethanol in the same condition (Watanabe et al.
2010). C. acidothermophilum produced ethanol faster at 40 C than 37 C from
acid-treated poplar (Kadam and Schmidt 1997). In the study, it was estimated that
cellulase-related cost reduction by increasing temperature in SSF was 16% at 40 C,
35% at 45 C, and (if the yeast produces ethanol efﬁciently) 51% at 50 C compared
with 37 C.
A xylose-fermenting genetically engineered S. cerevisiae (strain RWB222) was
used for SSF of paper sludge containing a signiﬁcant amount of xylan as well as
glucan. The ethanol production was 45.2 g/L at 37 C and 4.01 g/L at 30 C. The
paper sludge used in the study contained 82 g/L glucan and 22 g/L xylan. Final
ethanol yield was higher than the theoretical complete conversion of the glucan,
indicating that xylose released from xylan was also utilized for ethanol production
(Zhang and Lynd 2010). High-temperature SSF has been studied in many
thermotolerant yeast strains. However, if the ﬁnal production level was low, the
following distillation cost becomes much higher. Therefore, high performance of
yeasts and suitable process are required for practical high-temperature SSF.
2.6
Pilot-Scale High-Temperature SSF Using K. marxianus
These days, cornstarch and sugarcane are major feedstock for bioethanol produc-
tion. However, consumption of these “food” biomass for ethanol production causes
an economic problem. Therefore, lignocellulosic material has received much atten-
tion as feedstock because it is nonedible. However, industrially efﬁcient ethanol
production from lignocellulose is still under development.
Cassava pulp is nonedible waste in tapioca starch factories. It is very cheap and
used as a fertilizer and is an additive in feed. However, cassava pulp contains
approximately 50% starch and has the potential to be used for fermentation. In
50
H. Hoshida and R. Akada

Thailand, up to 2.6 million tons of cassava pulp is produced per year. It accounts for
approximately 10% of the total cassava production in Thailand. Cassava is also
cultivated in tropical areas, such as Nigeria and Indonesia. Annual production in the
world is more than 200 million tons. If 10% remains as cassava pulp by-product, as
is the case in Thailand, approximately 10 million tons of starch is remained to be
used as a feedstock in the world. To produce ethanol from cassava pulp efﬁciently,
we developed a high-temperature SSF process using the thermotolerant yeast
K. marxianus.
First, we isolated thermotolerant yeast strains (Hoshida et al. 2012). Samples
such as fruits, ﬂowers, waste from alcoholic beverages, and a ﬁlter cake in a
sugarcane factory were collected in Thailand. After enrichment in sugarcane
broth at 45 C, thermotolerant yeasts growing at 50 C were isolated. Among the
isolates, seven strains showed better growth compared with K. marxianus DMKU
3–1042, which was previously isolated as a good ethanol-producing yeast at high
temperatures (Limtong et al. 2007; Nonklang et al. 2008). Ethanol production
abilities of the seven strains at 45 C in molasses were also comparable with
DMKU 3–1042. As a result, strain UBU 1-1 was selected. The draft genome
sequence of UBU 1-1 strongly suggested that it is a K. marxianus strain.
In laboratory-scale experiments, minimum amounts of enzymes for efﬁcient
ethanol production from cassava pulp in SSF were determined. Cassava pulp was
hydrated, treated with α-amylase (0.50 g/kg-pulp of Liquozyme® SC, Novozyme),
and autoclaved. The liqueﬁed cassava pulp was mixed with 0.23 g glucoamylase/kg
pulp (Spirizyme® Fuel, Novozyme) and 6.67 g cellulase/kg pulp of (Accellerase®
DUET, Genecor). Cellulase was added mainly to loosen cellulosic ﬁbers and to
improve the access of glucoamylase to starch. The amounts of glucoamylase and
cellulase were lower than the levels recommended in the instructions, and increased
amounts of glucoamylase and cellulase to twofold and tenfold, respectively, did not
enhance ethanol production speed or ﬁnal ethanol concentration. By using
K. marxianus UBU 1-1 strain, cassava pulp (25% w/w water) was fermented in a
2-L SSF system at 40 C. As a result, 7.8% ethanol was produced in 42 h. In a 20 L
scale, 8.5% (w/v) was produced in 48 h of fermentation at 40 C. The viscosity of
the cassava pulp slurry was very high (24,000–200,000 mPa s) at the fermentation
start point. During fermentation, the viscosity of the fermentation broth became
lower than we expected. In addition to the degradation of starch and cellulose,
polygalacturonase activity produced by K. marxianus helped to lower viscosity by
hydrolyzing pectin in the cassava pulp. In a larger scale fermentation, high viscosity
of the fermentation broth in the early phase might have been a problem, causing low
heat diffusion and inefﬁcient mixing of enzymes.
To demonstrate that high-temperature SSF of cassava
pulp by using
K. marxianus UBU 1-1 is possible in more large-scale fermentation, a 10 kL size
reactor was built in Thailand. The average maximum temperature in the environ-
ment is approximately 33 C in Thailand. Even in such a climate, temperature of the
reactor was controlled via circulating water, which was circulated through a cooling
tower but not chilled. Wet cassava pulp is easily utilized for fermentation, but its
starch contents were not enough for an economically enough concentration of
2
High-Temperature Bioethanol Fermentation by Conventional and. . .
51

ethanol production. Therefore, wet and dry cassava pulp were mixed and used as a
substrate. Utilization of dried pulp is preferable for whole-year production because
wet pulp is easily spoiled by contamination of microorganisms. Starch contents of
cassava pulp used in the pilot tests were sometimes lower than 50% (w/dry weight).
In such cases, dried cassava contents were increased. We conducted over 68 rounds
of
batch
fermentations
to
optimize
ethanol
fermentation
conditions
and
pretreatment. Optimum fermentation conditions were determined as follows: Dry
and wet cassava pulp was pulverized to an average particle size of approximately
200 μm. Pulverized pulp was mixed with water and steamed at 100–105 C for
hydration. After cooling, glucoamylase and cellulase were added, and fermentation
was carried out at 40 C with K. marxianus UBU 1-1. At the end of fermentation,
the viscosity of the broth decreased to 100 mPa s. Typical ethanol production during
the high-temperature SSF is shown in Fig. 2.1. More than 8% ethanol, which was
the target concentration for this proof-of-concept study, was produced within 60 h.
2.7
Consolidated Bioprocessing by Genetically Engineered
Yeasts
The cost of enzymes in SSF is a signiﬁcant consideration, especially for cellulose
utilization. The fermentation process, in which polysaccharides are degraded by
enzymes secreted by the organism for fermentation and resulting sugars are used for
fermentation, is called consolidated bioprocessing (CBP). The concept of CBP may
be ﬁrst used in K. marxianus, because K. marxianus produces a large amount of
inulinase, which degrades inulin to fructose (Margaritis and Bajpai 1982). Inulin is
a polysaccharide mainly composed of fructoses, which bind via β2,1 glycosyl
bonds. Inulinase degrades the β2,1 glycosyl bonds and releases fructose efﬁciently
from inulin. The Jerusalem artichoke is a plant that accumulates inulin in its tuber.
Margaritis and Bajpai (1982) reported CBP producing 46 g/L ethanol from
Jerusalem artichoke juice (10% total sugar) using K. marxianus at 35 C. This













(WKDQROFRQFHQWUDWLRQ>99@
7LPH>K@
Fig. 2.1 Ethanol production
in a 10 kL scale SSF at 40 C
using K. marxianus and
cassava pulp as feedstock
52
H. Hoshida and R. Akada

report was published prior to the identiﬁcation of K. marxianus as a thermotolerant
yeast for high-temperature fermentation in 1984 by Hacking et al. Charoensopharat
et al. (2015) reported high-temperature CBP of Jerusalem artichoke by a newly
isolated K. marxianus DBKKU Y-102. The strain produced 90.6 and 85.4 g/L
ethanol from 230 g/L of total sugar of tuber mash at 37 and 40 C, respectively.
To produce hydrolyzing enzymes by yeasts, genetic engineering was applied. First,
S. cerevisiae was engineered to express a glucoamylase gene. A strain produced
19.6 g/L ethanol from 58.5 g/L carbohydrate in feed and with a yield 0.39 g/g
consumed glucose from soluble starch in continuous fermentation at 30 C (Inlow
et al. 1988).
Genetic engineering for high-temperature CBP has often been performed in
thermotolerant yeasts. In K. marxianus, three genes encoding thermostable secre-
tory cellulases, endo-β-1,4-glucanase, cellobiohydrolase, and β-glucosidase, were
introduced. The resulting strain secreted these cellulases but resulted in little
ethanol production from carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC). On the other hand,
cellobiose was a good sugar for the strain to produce ethanol; a maximum ethanol
concentration of 43.4 g/L was achieved from 10% cellobiose at 45 C (Hong et al.
2007). Yanase et al. (2010) expressed cellulases on K. marxianus cell membrane by
fusing the 30 region of the α-agglutinin gene. As a result, the resulting K1 strain
produced 4.25 g/L ethanol from 10 g/L β-glucan at 48 C in 12 h by using a large
number of pre-cultured cells. Similar amounts of ethanol were also produced at
40 and 45 C in 24 h fermentation.
Other thermotolerant yeasts were also engineered for CBP at high temperatures.
An α-amylase gene and a glucoamylase gene of yeast Schwanniomyces occidentalis
were expressed in O. polymorpha in order to utilize starchy material directly. An
engineered strain produced 10 g/L ethanol from 3% soluble starch at 47 C
(Voronovsky et al. 2009). A strain of O. polymorpha expressing xylan-hydrolyzing
enzymes was also constructed. It grew by utilizing xylan as a sole carbon source,
but ethanol production was low (Voronovsky et al. 2009). Kitagawa et al. (2010)
developed a transformation and heterologous expression system and expressed a
β-glucosidase in Issatchenkia orientalis. The engineered strain produced 29 g/L
ethanol in a CBP at 40 C using 10% microcrystalline cellulose as a substrate.
S. cerevisiae has also been engineered for CBP, but it is not practically high
temperature. Engineered strains expressing endo-/exo-glucanase and β-glucosidase
were reported by Cho and Yoo (1999), Den Haan et al. (2007), Wen et al. (2010), and
Hu et al. (2016) for CBP using cellulosic substrates. However, CBP temperature of
the studies were lower than 38 C, therefore we do not describe them in this chapter.
2.8
Strain Improvement for High-Temperature Fermentation
S. cerevisiae is used for industrial ethanol fermentation due to its high ethanol
production in conventional fermentation. Taking advantage of this ability in high-
temperature fermentation, strain improvements of S. cerevisiae strains have been
conducted (Table 2.3). Sridhar et al. (2002) treated S. cerevisiae VS1 and VS3
2
High-Temperature Bioethanol Fermentation by Conventional and. . .
53

Table 2.3 S. cerevisiae strain improvement by mutagenesis and laboratory evolution
Strain name
Mutagenesis
Screening
condition
Improvement of high-temperature ethanol production
Refs.
Parent
Mutant
Parent
(g/L)
Mutant
(g/L)
Condition
VS1
UV-VS1 40
UV
42 C
50
58
42 C, 250 g/L glucose
Sridhar et al. (2002)
ATCC
26602
MT15
UV
45 C
55a
72
40 C, 150 g/L glucose
Rajoka et al. (2005)
FAS
MLD10
UV, gray
45 C, deoxy-
glucose
48
85
43 C, 180 g/L sugars
Arshad et al. (2014)
S288C
Y43
HEPEBb
45 C
0
79
43 C, 200 g/L sugars
Zhang et al. (2011)
IR2
IR2-9a
Evolution
42 C
16
28
40 C, SSF of 10%
substrate
Edgardo et al. (2008)
p1 (D3)
S1
Evolution, UV,
EMS
50, 55 C
–
46
40 C, 100 g/L glucose
Balakumar et al.
(2001)
WW
AT
Evolution, mating
42 C
52
66
41 C, 150 g/L glucose
Mitsumasu et al.
(2014)
aValue was read from a graph
bHigh-energy-pulse-electron beam
54
H. Hoshida and R. Akada

strains with ultraviolet (UV) radiation and selected mutants growing well at 42 C.
Growth of a mutant named UV-VS1 100 was improved under high concentrations
of glucose, and the strain produced 5.8% (w/v) ethanol from 250 g/L glucose at
42 C. UV mutagenesis of S. cerevisiae ATCC 26602 generated a mutant showing
1.45-fold higher productivity (7.2 g L1 h1) compared with the parental strain
(4.4 g L1 h1) (Rajoka et al. 2005). Zhang et al. (2011) used high-energy-pulse-
electron beam for mutagenesis of S. cerevisiae S288C. Strain S288C did not grow
or produce ethanol at 43 C, but a mutant strain Y43 produced approximately 8%
(w/v) ethanol. Arshad et al. (2014) combined and repeated mutagenesis with UV
and γ-ray to obtain thermotolerant and catabolite-resistant mutants. Ethanol pro-
duction of the most productive mutant strain (MLD10) reached 8.5% (w/v) from
18% fermentable sugars at 42 C, while the parental strain produced 4.8% (w/v) in
the same condition.
Another approach is laboratory evolution at high temperatures. Edgardo et al.
(2008) conducted laboratory evolution by culturing yeast cells repeatedly from
40 to 48 C. As a result, a mutant strain was obtained that showed higher ethanol
yield at 40
C in SSF. Balakumar et al. (2001) combined UV and ethyl
methanesulfonate (EMS) mutagenesis with laboratory evolution. The ﬁnally
obtained mutant strain (S1) produced ethanol 4.6% (w/v) at 40 C within 36 h
from 10% glucose. Mitsumasu et al. (2014) used a strain for laboratory evolution at
high temperature and low pH, and evolved strains were mated. The resulting
thermo- and acid-tolerant strain (AT) produced 6.58 g/L of ethanol at 41 C within
24 h, though the parental WW strain produced 5.19 g/L.
UV mutagenesis was also conducted on K. marxianus. The K. marxianus strain
8–1 was obtained from NRRLY-1109 after UV-C radiation and produced 2.25%
(w/v) ethanol at 46 C, though the parental strain produced 1.75% (Hughes et al.
2013). Sakanaka et al. (1996) applied protoplast fusion of K. marxianus and
S. cerevisiae. Ethanol production by the strain F-1 obtained was higher than that
by the parental K. marxianus strain at 43 C; at this temperature, the parental
S. cerevisiae did not grow and produce ethanol. These approaches have enhanced
high-temperature ethanol fermentation ability of yeast strains, but the improvement
has not been drastic.
2.9
Thermotolerant Mechanism of Yeasts
It is well known that heat shock proteins protect proteins and cells from stress
conditions, including high temperature. Trehalose accumulation and its protective
effect against heat is also known in yeast (De Virgilio et al. 1994). In
O. polymorpha, a signiﬁcant increase of ethanol production from xylose at 50 C
is achieved by overexpression of HSP104 and disruption of the trehalase gene
ATH1 (Ishchuk et al. 2009). S. cerevisiae overexpressing the trehalose-6-phosphate
synthase gene accumulated larger amounts of trehalose and produced a twofold
higher concentration of ethanol (60 g/L) at 38 C compared with nonengineered
strains (An et al. 2011).
2
High-Temperature Bioethanol Fermentation by Conventional and. . .
55

Thermotolerance is a quantitative trait which determined by several alleles
called quantitative trait locus (QTL). A QTL analysis by repeated mating and
sporulation of thermotolerant and thermosensitive strains of S. cerevisiae found
alleles involved in growth at high temperature (Steinmetz et al. 2002). An allele of
END3, a gene involved in actin cytoskeletal organization, contributes to the
thermotolerance. Benjaphokee et al. (2012) revealed that an allele in the CDC19
gene of a thermotolerant strain is required for thermotolerance. Recent whole-
genome sequencing by next-generation sequencers has become an alternative
strategy for thermotolerance analysis. Caspeta et al. (2014) found ergosterol com-
position change as a common phenotype among high-temperature evolved strains
of S. cerevisiae based on genome sequencing. As another approach, transposon
insertion was used to isolate thermotolerant disruptants in S. cerevisiae. However,
the relation between the transposon-inserted positions and thermotolerance is not
clear (Kim et al. 2011).
Genome-wide analysis using microarray and sets of yeast knockout strains have
been conducted to elucidate the genes involved in heat shock of S. cerevisiae. When
we analyzed the growth of diploid nonessential-gene knockout strains at 37 C
(high-temperature growth) and viability after exposure to 49 C for 60 min (heat
shock), the identiﬁed genes were not overlapped with each other (unpublished
results). For high-temperature growth, genes involved in vesicle and protein trans-
port, RNA metabolism, cell cycle and cell division, and DNA repair account for
63% of the total genes identiﬁed. In contrast, mitochondrial genes account for 50%
of genes identiﬁed in the heat shock condition. Auesukaree et al. (2009) identiﬁed
178 genes required for high-temperature growth using a S. cerevisiae knockout
collection. Chen et al. (2013) analyzed gene expression in high-temperature fer-
mentation and identiﬁed four upregulated and ﬁve downregulated genes at 40 C
compared with 30 C. Three heat shock genes were upregulated, and ERG9, which
affects cell membrane structure and integrity, was downregulated. In K. marxianus,
transcription start sites analysis revealed transcriptional differences between
growth at 45 and 30 C. The number of up- and downregulated genes at 45 C
compared with 30 C were 199 and 508, respectively, and grouping the genes in GO
terms suggested that K. marxianus copes with high temperature by reducing central
metabolism and increasing protein turnover and DNA repair (Lertwattanasakul
et al. 2015). To establish strains suitable for high-temperature fermentation via
genetic engineering, intensive studies to reveal the genes required for robustness
under fermentation conditions at high temperature are desired.
2.10
Conclusion
Many thermotolerant yeast species have been isolated. However, it seems that
K. marxianus is the practical high-temperature ethanol fermentation species at
present. In our high-temperature fermentation using molasses as well as cassava
pulp, a K. marxianus strain repeatedly produced more than 8% ethanol at 40 C
within 24 h. High-temperature ethanol fermentation has the potential to be used in
56
H. Hoshida and R. Akada

commercial ethanol production in the near future. For nonconventional and con-
ventional yeast species, fermentation conditions and genetic improvements should
be further considered for high-temperature SSF using nonedible biomass. To
enhance the performance of ethanol fermentation at high temperatures, understand-
ing of thermotolerance mechanisms is essential. Various genetic approaches must
be
employed
to
elucidate
thermotolerance
mechanisms
and
to
improve
thermotolerance of yeasts.
References
An MZ, Tang YQ, Mitsumasu K, Liu ZS, Shigeru M, Kenji K (2011) Enhanced thermotolerance
for ethanol fermentation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain by overexpression of the gene
coding for trehalose-6-phosphate synthase. Biotechnol Lett 33:1367–1374
Anderson PJ, McNeil K, Watson K (1986) High-efﬁciency carbohydrate fermentation to ethanol at
temperatures above 40 C by Kluyveromyces marxianus var. marxianus isolated from sugar
mills. Appl Environ Microbiol 51:1314–1320
Arguelled JC (1997) Thermotolerance and trehalose accumulation induced by heat shock in yeast
cell of Candida albicans. FEMS Microbiol Lett 146:65–71. doi:10.1016/S0378-1097(96)
00455-7
Arshad M, Ahmed S, Zia MA, Rajoka MI (2014) Kinetics and thermodynamics of ethanol
production by Saccharomyces cerevisiae MLD10 using molasses. Appl Biochem Biotechnol
172:2455–2464. doi:10.1007/s12010-013-0689-x
Auesukaree C, Damnernsawad A, Kruatrachue M, Pokethitiyook P, Boonchird C, Kaneko Y,
Harashima S (2009) Genome-wide identiﬁcation of genes involved in tolerance to various
environmental stresses in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Appl Genet 50:301–310. doi:10.1007/
BF03195688
Auesukaree C, Koedrith P, Saenpayavai P, Asvarak T, Benjaphokee S, Sugiyama M, Kaneko Y,
Harashima H, Boonchird C (2012) Characterization and gene expression proﬁles of
thermotolerant Saccharomyces cerevisiae isolates from Thai fruits. J Biosci Bioeng
114:144–149. doi:10.1016/j.jbiosc.2012.03.012
Balakumar S, Arasaratnam V, Balasubramaniam K (2001) Isolation and improvement of a
thermotolerant Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 17:739–746.
doi:10.1023/A:1012952809273
Ballesteros I, Ballesteros M, Caba~nas A, Carrasco J, Martı´n C, Negro MJ, Saez F, Saez R (1991)
Selection of thermotolerant yeasts for simultaneous sacchariﬁcation and fermentation (SSF) of
cellulose to ethanol. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 28–29:307–315. doi:10.1007/BF02922610
Benjaphokee S, Koedrith P, Auesukaree C, Asvarak T, Sugiyama M, Kaneko Y, Boonchird C,
Harashima S (2012) CDC19 encoding pyruvate kinase is important for high-temperature
tolerance in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. N Biotechnol 29:166–176. doi:10.1016/j.nbt.2011.
03.007
Bollo´k M, Re´czey K, Zacchi G (2000) Simultaneous sacchariﬁcation and fermentation of steam-
pretreated spruce to ethanol. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 84–86:69–80. doi:10.1385/ABAB:84-
86:1-9:69
Caspeta L, Chen Y, Ghiaci P, Feizi A, Buskov S, Hallstr€om BM, Petranovic D, Nielsen J,
Caspeta L, Buijs NAA, Nielsen J, Chu S, Majumdar A, Abreu-Cavalheiro A, Monteiro G,
Nielsen J, Larsson C, van Maris A, Pronk J, Peralta-Yahya PP, Zhang F, del Cardayre SB,
Keasling JD, Caspeta L, Nielsen J, Abdel-Banat BMA, Hoshida H, Ano A, Nonklang S,
Akada R, Kristensen JB, Felby C, Jørgensen H, Caspeta L, Caro-Bermu´dez MA, Ponce-
Noyola T, Martinez A, Piper PW, Lindquist S, Dettman JR, Rodrigue N, Melnyk AH,
Wong A, Bailey SF, Kassen R, Yona AH, Manor YS, Herbst RH, Romano GH, Mitchell A,
2
High-Temperature Bioethanol Fermentation by Conventional and. . .
57

Kupiec M, Pilpel Y, Dahan O, Piper PW, Ortiz-Calderon C, Holyoak C, Coote P, Cole M, Moy
TI, Boettner D, Rhodes JC, Silver PA, Askew DS, Tkach JM, Yimit A, Lee AY, Rifﬂe M,
Costanzo M, Jaschob D, Hendry JA, Ou J, Moffat J, Boone C, Davis TN, Nislow C, Brown
GW, Smith RL, Johnson AD, Lingwood D, Simons K, Simons K, Gerl MJ, Dufourc EJ, Parks
LW, Smith SJ, Crowley JH, Thompson ED, Parks LW, Watson K, Arthur H, Morton H,
Ycˇas M, Sherman F, O¨ zcan S, Johnston M, Sabina J, Johnston M, Koga Y, Gentleman RC,
Carey VJ, Bates DM, Bolstad B, Dettling M, Dudoit S, Ellis B, Gautier L, Ge Y, Gentry J,
Hornik K, Hothorn T, Huber W, Iacus S, Irizarry R, Leisch F, Li C, Maechler M, Rossini AJ,
Sawitzki G, Smith C, Smyth G, Tierney L, Yang JY, Zhang J, Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y,
Va¨remo L, Nielsen J, Nookaew I, Chen H, Boutros PC, McKenna A, Hanna M, Banks E,
Sivachenko A, Cibulskis K, Kernytsky A, Garimella K, Altshuler D, Gabriel S, Daly M,
DePristo MA, Solis-Escalante D, Kuijpers NG, Bongaerts N, Bolat I, Bosman L, Pronk JT,
Daran JM, Daran-Lapujade P, Agren R, Liu L, Shoaie S, Vongsangnak W, Nookaew I,
Nielsen J, Bordel S, Agren R, Nielsen J (2014) Altered sterol composition renders yeast
thermotolerant. Science 346:75–78. doi:10.1126/science.1258137
Castro RCA, Roberto IC (2014) Selection of a thermotolerant Kluyveromyces marxianus strain
with potential application for cellulosic ethanol production by simultaneous sacchariﬁcation
and fermentation. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 172:1553–1564. doi:10.1007/s12010-013-0612-5
Charoensopharat K, Thanonkeo P, Thanonkeo S, Yamada M (2015) Ethanol production from
Jerusalem artichoke tubers at high temperature by newly isolated thermotolerant inulin-
utilizing yeast Kluyveromyces marxianus using consolidated bioprocessing. Antonie van
Leeuwenhoek Int J Gen Mol Microbiol. doi:10.1007/s10482-015-0476-5
Chen Q, Fang Y, Zhao H, Zhang G, Jin Y (2013) Transcriptional analysis of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae during high-temperature fermentation. Ann Microbiol. doi:10.1007/s13213-013-
0606-0
Cho KM, Yoo YJ (1999) Novel SSF process for ethanol production from microcrystalline
cellulose using δ-integrated recombinant yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae L2612δGC.
J Microbiol Biotechnol 9:340–345
D’Amore T, Celotto G, Russell I, Stewart GG (1989) Selection and optimization of yeast suitable
for ethanol production at 40 C. Enzyme Microb Technol 11:411–416. doi:10.1016/0141-0229
(89)90135-X
De Virgilio C, Hottiger T, Dominguez J, Boller T, Wiemken A (1994) The role of trehalose
synthesis for the acquisition of thermotolerance in yeast. I. Genetic evidence that trehalose is a
thermoprotectant. Eur J Biochem 219:179–186. doi:10.1111/j.1432-1033.1994.tb19928.x
Den Haan R, Rose SH, Lynd LR, van Zyl WH (2007) Hydrolysis and fermentation of amorphous
cellulose by recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Metab Eng 9:87–94. doi:10.1016/j.
ymben.2006.08.005
Edgardo A, Carolina P, Manuel R, Juanita F, Baeza J (2008) Selection of thermotolerant yeast
strains Saccharomyces cerevisiae for bioethanol production. Enzyme Microb Technol. doi:10.
1016/j.enzmictec.2008.02.007
Hacking AJ, Taylor IWF, Hanas CM (1984) Selection of yeast able to produce ethanol from
glucose at 40 C. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 19:361–363. doi:10.1007/BF00253786
Hari Krishna S, Janardhan Reddy T, Chowdary GV (2001) Simultaneous sacchariﬁcation and
fermentation of lignocellulosic wastes to ethanol using a thermotolerant yeast. Bioresour
Technol 77:193–196. doi:10.1016/S0960-8524(00)00151-6
Hermansyah N, Sugiyama M, Harashima S (2015) Candida tropicalis isolated from Tuak, a North
Sumatera-Indonesian traditional beverage, for bioethanol production. Korean J Microbiol
Biotechnol 43:241–248. doi:10.4014/mbl.1506.06002
Hong J, Wang Y, Kumagai H, Tamaki H (2007) Construction of thermotolerant yeast expressing
thermostable cellulase genes. J Biotechnol 130:114–123. doi:10.1016/j.jbiotec.2007.03.008
Hoshida H, Phong TT, Nonklang S, Ano A, Yarimizu T, Tokuda S, Yagi Y, Shite Y, Murashige S,
Nakagawa T, Pukahuta C, Sutthikhampa S, Lorroengsil S, Hung LT, Cha-aim K, Akada R
(2012) Isolation of thermotolerant ethanologenic yeasts and improvement of fermentation
58
H. Hoshida and R. Akada

ability by using breeding and genetic engineering. In: Yamada M et al (eds) Summary Book
Asia Core Program (2008–2013) on “Capacity building and development of microbial poten-
tial and fermentation technology towards new era”. International exchange core program in
Yamaguchi Univeristy, isbn 978–4–9906826-0-6
Hu ML, Zha J, He LW, Lv YJ, Shen MH, Zhong C, Li BZ, Yuan YJ (2016) Enhanced bioconver-
sion of cellobiose by industrial Saccharomyces cerevisiae used for cellulose utilization. Front
Microbiol 7:241. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2016.00241
Hughes SR, Bang SS, Cox EJ, Schoepke A, Ochwat K, Pinkelman R, Nelson D, Qureshi N,
Gibbons WR, Kurtzman CP, Bischoff KM, Liu S, Cote GL, Rich JO, Jones MA, Cedeno D,
Doran-Peterson J, Riano-Herrera NM, Rodriguez-Valencia N, Lopez-Nunez JC (2013)
Automated UV-C mutagenesis of Kluyveromyces marxianus NRRL Y-1109 and selection for
microaerophilic growth and ethanol production at elevated temperature on biomass sugars. J
Lab Autom 18:276–290. doi:10.1177/2211068213480037
Hughes DB, Tudroszen NJ, Moye CJ (1984) The effect of temperature on the kinetics of ethanol
production by a thermotolerant strain of Kluveromyces marxianus. Biotechnol Lett 6:1–6.
doi:10.1007/BF00128221
Inlow D, McRae J, Ben-Bassat A (1988) Fermentation of corn starch to ethanol with genetically
engineered yeast. Biotechnol Bioeng 32:227–234. doi:10.1002/bit.260320213
Ishchuk OP, Voronovsky AY, Abbas CA, Sibirny AA (2009) Construction of Hansenula
polymorpha strains with improved thermotolerance. Biotechnol Bioeng 104:911–919. doi:10.
1002/bit.22457
Kadam KL, Schmidt SL (1997) Evaluation of Candida acidothermophilum in ethanol production
from
lignocellulosic
biomass.
Appl
Microbiol
Biotechnol
48:709–713.
doi:10.1007/
s002530051120
Kim HS, Kim NR, Yang J, Choi W (2011) Identiﬁcation of novel genes responsible for ethanol
and/or thermotolerance by transposon mutagenesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 91:1159–1172. doi:10.1007/s00253-011-3298-z
Kiran Sree N, Sridhar M, Suresh K, Banat IM, Venkateswar Rao L (2000) Isolation of
thermotolerant, osmotolerant, ﬂocculating Saccharomyces cerevisiae for ethanol production.
Bioresour Technol 72:43–46. doi:10.1016/S0960-8524(99)90097-4
Kitagawa T, Tokuhiro K, Sugiyama H, Kohda K, Isono N, Hisamatsu M, Takahashi H, Imaeda T
(2010) Construction of a β-glucosidase expression system using the multistress-tolerant yeast
Issatchenkia orientalis. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 87:1841–1853. doi:10.1007/s00253-010-
2629-9
Kopsahelis N, Nisiotou A, Kourkoutas Y, Panas P, Nychas GJE, Kanellaki M (2009) Molecular
characterization and molasses fermentation performance of a wild yeast strain operating in an
extremely wide temperature range. Bioresour Technol 100:4854–4862. doi:10.1016/j.biortech.
2009.05.011
Koutinas M, Patsalou M, Stavrinou S, Vyrides I (2015) High temperature alcoholic fermentation
of orange peel by the newly isolated thermotolerant Pichia kudriavzevii KVMP10. Lett Appl
Microbiol 62:75–83. doi:10.1111/lam.12514
Kumar S, Singh SP, Mishra IM, Adhikari DK (2009) Ethanol and xylitol production from glucose
and xylose at high temperature by Kluyveromyces sp. IIPE453. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol
36:1483–1489. doi:10.1007/s10295-009-0636-6
Kumar S, Singh SP, Mishra IM, Adhikari DK (2010) Feasibility of ethanol production with
enhanced sugar concentration in bagasse hydrolysate at high temperature using Kluyveromyces
sp. IIPE453. Biofuels 1:697–704. doi:10.4155/bfs.10.51
Lertwattanasakul N, Kosaka T, Hosoyama A, Suzuki Y, Rodrussamee N, Matsutani M, Murata M,
Fujimoto N, Suprayogi, Tsuchikane K, Limtong S, Fujita N, Yamada M (2015) Genetic basis
of the highly efﬁcient yeast Kluyveromyces marxianus: complete genome sequence and
transcriptome analyses. Biotechnol Biofuels 8:47. doi:10.1186/s13068-015-0227-x
2
High-Temperature Bioethanol Fermentation by Conventional and. . .
59

Limtong S, Sringiew C, Yongmanitchai W (2007) Production of fuel ethanol at high temperature
from sugar cane juice by a newly isolated Kluyveromyces marxianus. Bioresour Technol
98:3367–3374. doi:10.1016/j.biortech.2006.10.044
Liu Z-H, Qin L, Zhu J-Q, Li B-Z, Yuan Y-J (2014) Simultaneous sacchariﬁcation and fermentation
of steam-exploded corn stover at high glucan loading and high temperature. Biotechnol
Biofuels 7:167. doi:10.1186/s13068-014-0167-x
Margaritis A, Bajpai P (1982) Continuous ethanol production from Jerusalem artichoke tubers.
I. Use of free cells of Kluyveromyces marxianus. Biotechnol Bioeng 24:1483–1493
Matsushita K, Azuma Y, Kosaka T, Yakushi T, Hoshida H, Akada R, Yamada M (2015) Genomic
analyses of thermotolerant microorganisms used for high-temperature fermentations. Biosci
Biotechnol Biochem 8451:1–14. doi:10.1080/09168451.2015.1104235
Mitsumasu K, Liu Z-S, Tang Y-Q, Akamatsu T, Taguchi H, Kida K (2014) Development of
industrial yeast strain with improved acid- and thermo-tolerance through evolution under
continuous fermentation conditions followed by haploidization and mating. J Biosci Bioeng
118:689–695. doi:10.1016/j.jbiosc.2014.05.012
Nedeva TS, Savov VA, Kujumdzieva-Savova AV, Davidov ER (1993) Screening of
thermotolerant yeasts as producers of superoxide dismutase. FEMS Microbiol Lett 107:49–52
Nonklang S, Abdel-Banat BMA, Cha-aim K, Moonjai N, Hoshida H, Limtong S, Yamada M,
Akada R (2008) High-temperature ethanol fermentation and transformation with linear DNA in
the thermotolerant yeast Kluyveromyces marxianus DMKU3-1042. Appl Environ Microbiol
73:1090–1095. doi:10.1128/AEM.01854-08
Nuanpeng S, Thanonkeo S, Yamada M, Thanonkeo P (2016) Ethanol production from sweet
sorghum juice at high temperatures using a newly isolated thermotolerant yeast Saccharomy-
ces cerevisiae DBKKU Y-53. Energies 9:253. doi:10.3390/en9040253
Park I, Kim I, Kang K, Sohn H, Rhee I, Jin I, Jang H (2010) Cellulose ethanol production from
waste newsprint by simultaneous sacchariﬁcation and fermentation using Saccharomyces
cerevisiae KNU5377. Process Biochem 45:487–492. doi:10.1016/j.procbio.2009.11.006
Prakash G, Varma AJ, Prabhune A, Shouche Y, Rao M (2011) Microbial production of xylitol
from D-xylose and sugarcane bagasse hemicellulose using newly isolated thermotolerant yeast
Debaryomyces hansenii. Bioresour Technol 102:3304–3308. doi:10.1016/j.biortech.2010.10.
074
Rajoka MI, Ferhan M, Khalid AM (2005) Kinetics and thermodynamics of ethanol production by a
thermotolerant mutant of Saccharomyces cerevisiae in a microprocessor-controlled bioreactor.
Lett Appl Microbiol 40:316–321. doi:10.1111/j.1472-765X.2005.01663.x
Rodrussamee N, Lertwattanasakul N, Hirata K, Suprayogi, Limtong S, Kosaka T, Yamada M
(2011) Growth and ethanol fermentation ability on hexose and pentose sugars and glucose
effect under various conditions in thermotolerant yeast Kluyveromyces marxianus. Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 90:1573–1586. doi:10.1007/s00253-011-3218-2
Ryabova OB, Chmil OM, Sibirny AA (2003) Xylose and cellobiose fermentation to ethanol by the
thermotolerant methylotrophic yeast Hansenula polymorpha. FEMS Yeast Res 4:157–164.
doi:10.1016/S1567-1356(03)00146-6
Sakanaka K, Yan W, Kishida M, Sakai T (1996) Breeding a fermentative yeast at high temperature
using protoplast fusion. J Ferment Bioeng 81:104–108. doi:10.1016/0922-338X(96)87585-4
Sohn HY, Park W, Jin I, Seu JH (1997) Characterization of ethanol fermentation using alginate
immobilized thermotolerant yeast cells. J Microbiol Biotechnol 7:62–67
Sree NK, Sridhar M, Suresh K, Rao LV (1999) High alcohol production by solid substrate
fermentation from starchy substrates using thermotolerant Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Bioprocess Eng 20:561–563. doi:10.1007/s004490050629
Sridhar M, Kiran Sree N, Venkateswar Rao LV (2002) Effect of UV radiation on thermotolerance,
ethanol tolerance and osmotolerance of Saccharomyces cerevisiae VS1 and VS3 strains.
Bioresour Technol 83:199–202. doi:10.1016/S0960-8524(01)00221-8
60
H. Hoshida and R. Akada

Steinmetz LM, Sinha H, Richards DR, Spiegelman JI, Oefner PJ, McCusker JH, Davis RW (2002)
Dissecting the architecture of a quantitative trait locus in yeast. Nature 416:326–330. doi:10.
1038/416326a
Suryawati L, Wilkins MR, Bellmer DD, Huhnke RL, Maness NO, Banat IM (2008) Simultaneous
sacchariﬁcation and fermentation of Kanlow switchgrass pretreated by hydrothermolysis using
Kluyveromyces marxianus IMB4. Biotechnol Bioeng 101:894–902. doi:10.1002/bit.21965
Szczodrak J, Targon´ski Z (1988) Selection of thermotolerant yeast strains for simultaneous
sacchariﬁcation and fermentation of cellulose. Biotechnol Bioeng 31:300–303. doi:10.1002/
bit.260310404
Takashima M, Sugita T, Toriumi Y, Nakase T (2009) Cryptococcus tepidarius sp. nov., a
thermotolerant yeast species isolated from a stream from a hotspring area in Japan. Int J Syst
Evol Microbiol 59:181–185. doi:10.1099/ijs.0.004515-0
Ueno R, Urano N, Kimura S (2002) Effect of temperature and cell density on ethanol fermentation
by a thermotolerant aquatic yeast strain isolated from a hot spring environment. Fish Sci
68:571–578. doi:10.1046/j.1444-2906.2002.00463.x
Voronovsky AY, Rohulya OV, Abbas CA, Sibirny AA (2009) Development of strains of the
thermotolerant yeast Hansenula polymorpha capable of alcoholic fermentation of starch and
xylan. Metab Eng 11:234–242. doi:10.1016/j.ymben.2009.04.001
Watanabe I, Nakamura T, Shima J (2010) Strategy for simultaneous sacchariﬁcation and fermen-
tation using a respiratory-deﬁcient mutant of Candida glabrata for bioethanol production. J
Biosci Bioeng 110:176–179. doi:10.1016/j.jbiosc.2010.02.003
Wen F, Sun J, Zhao H (2010) Yeast surface display of trifunctional minicellulosomes for
simultaneous sacchariﬁcation and fermentation of cellulose to ethanol. Appl Environ
Microbiol 76:1251–1260. doi:10.1128/AEM.01687-09
Yanase S, Hasunuma T, Yamada R, Tanaka T, Ogino C, Fukuda H, Kondo A (2010) Direct ethanol
production from cellulosic materials at high temperature using the thermotolerant yeast
Kluyveromyces marxianus displaying cellulolytic enzymes. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
88:381–388. doi:10.1007/s00253-010-2784-z
Ylitervo P, Franze´n CJ, Taherzadeh MJ (2011) Ethanol production at elevated temperatures using
encapsulation of yeast. J Biotechnol 156:22–29. doi:10.1016/j.jbiotec.2011.07.018
Yuangsaard N, Yongmanitchai W, Yamada M, Limtong S (2013) Selection and characterization of
a newly isolated thermotolerant Pichia kudriavzevii strain for ethanol production at high
temperature from cassava starch hydrolysate. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek Int J Gen Mol
Microbiol 103:577–588. doi:10.1007/s10482-012-9842-8
Zhang Q, Fu Y, Wang Y, Han J, Lv J, Wang S (2011) Improved ethanol production of a newly
isolated thermotolerant Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain after high-energy-pulse-electron
beam. J Appl Microbiol 112:280–288. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2672.2011.05209.x
Zhang J, Lynd LR (2010) Ethanol production from paper sludge by simultaneous sacchariﬁcation
and co-fermentation using recombinant xylose-fermenting microorganisms. Biotechnol
Bioeng 107:235–244. doi:10.1002/bit.22811
2
High-Temperature Bioethanol Fermentation by Conventional and. . .
61

Construction of Baker’s Yeast Strains
with Enhanced Tolerance to Baking-
Associated Stresses
3
Hiroshi Takagi
Abstract
In dough fermentation and baker’s yeast production, yeast cells are exposed to
numerous stresses, including freeze-thaw, high-sucrose, and air-drying, collec-
tively referred to as baking-associated stresses. These conditions can also induce
oxidative stress in yeast, leading to increases in reactive oxygen species levels
probably due to damage to the mitochondrial membrane and respiratory chain
components and denaturation of antioxidant enzymes. To prevent lethal damage,
baker’s yeast employs a number of stress tolerance mechanisms, such as the
expression of stress proteins, accumulation of stress protectants and compatible
solutes, changing the composition of the membrane, and repression of transla-
tion via stress-associated signal transduction pathways to regulate the expression
of particular genes. As proline and trehalose play important roles in stress
tolerance in baker’s yeast, altering their metabolism via genetic engineering is
a promising approach for the development of more stress-tolerant strains.
So-called “omics” approaches, such as comprehensive phenomics and func-
tional genomics, can be used to identify novel genes that affect stress tolerance.
Further improvements in the fermentation capability and production efﬁciency
of yeast strains, however, will require elucidation of the mechanisms underlying
the stress response, adaptation, and tolerance. We believe that the engineering of
not only baker’s yeasts but also other important industrial yeasts exhibiting
greater stress tolerance would enhance the production of yeast-based products
such as bread doughs and alcoholic beverages and facilitate breakthroughs in
bioethanol production.
H. Takagi (*)
Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, 8916-5
Takayama-cho, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192, Japan
e-mail: hiro@bs.naist.jp
# Springer International Publishing AG 2017
A.A. Sibirny (ed.), Biotechnology of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-58829-2_3
63

Contents
3.1
Introduction .................................................................................
64
3.2
Baking-Associated Stresses ................................................................
65
3.2.1
Freeze-Thaw Stress .................................................................
66
3.2.2
High-Sucrose Stress ................................................................
71
3.2.3
Air-Drying Stress ...................................................................
72
3.3
Novel Approach and Mechanism for Baking-Associated Stress Tolerance ..............
74
3.3.1
Omics Approach to Identify the Genes Required for Stress Tolerance ..........
74
3.3.2
Nitric Oxide-Mediated Stress-Tolerant Mechanism Found in Yeast .............
75
3.4
Conclusions and Future Perspective .......................................................
78
References ........................................................................................
80
3.1
Introduction
Baker’s yeast, which generally is comprised of strains of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, is an essential ingredient in baked food and beverage products produced
by fermentation (Linko et al. 1997; Randez-Gil et al. 1999). Approximately two
million tons of baker’s yeasts are produced annually worldwide, based on 30% dry
weight (Attﬁeld 1997; Evans 1990). In bread making, baker’s yeast serves to
(1) increase the dough volume by gas generation during fermentation, (2) impart
structure and texture to the dough, and (3) add distinctive ﬂavors to the dough
(Burrows 1970). Baker’s yeast is produced in one of three forms: cream
(an aqueous suspension that consists of approximately 20% cells by dry weight),
compressed, or dried. Compressed yeast production involves partial dehydration,
and the product contains approximately 30% cells (dry weight). Most baker’s yeasts
produced in Japan are in the cream or compressed forms. However, dried yeast
(consisting of <5% water) is imported from other countries and used in home
baking and bakeries because it is convenient to use and easy to store.
Flavor is an important factor that determines bread quality. Consumers prefer
breads that have a characteristic delicious ﬂavor. The ﬂavor of bread is affected by a
variety of compounds produced during the fermentation and baking processes,
including alcohols, diacetyl compounds, esters, organic acids, and carbonyl
compounds (Pence and Kohler 1961; Wick et al. 1964). Both isobutyl alcohol
(i-BuOH) and isoamyl alcohol (i-AmOH) also affect the ﬂavor of baked goods
and thus could be utilized in making new types of bread. In Japan, 4-aza-DL-leucine-
resistant mutant baker’s yeast, which produces large amounts of i-BuOH, is used to
enhance the ﬂavor of breads, but high levels of i-AmOH are considered undesirable
(Watanabe et al. 1990). The i-BuOH- or i-AmOH-overproducing mutants have
been released from inhibition of the key branched-chain amino acid synthesis
enzymes acetohydroxy acid synthase and α-isopropylmalate synthase, respectively.
Other molecules targeted in the breeding of baker’s yeast are enzymes involved
in the utilization of melibiose (a disaccharide converted from rafﬁnose in molasses
and used in the production of baker’s yeast) and maltose (a free sugar found in ﬂour)
(Dequin 2001). Because they lack the enzyme α-galactosidase (melibiase), which
64
H. Takagi

catalyzes the hydrolysis of melibiose into the fermentable sugars galactose and
glucose, baker’s yeast cannot utilize melibiose. Baker’s yeast expressing the
α-galactosidase-encoding gene MEL1 from bottom-fermenting brewing yeast was
shown to utilize all of the available melibiose in a beet molasses medium, however,
resulting in higher yeast yield. (Liljestr€om et al. 1991; Liljestr€om-Suominen et al.
1988). Fermentation continues due to the release of maltose from starch by the
activity of amylases present in the dough. The utilization of maltose, which requires
the glucose-repressible enzymes maltose permease and maltase (Needleman 1991),
results in a lag in carbon dioxide production. To avoid this problem, enzymes
involved in maltose utilization can be derepressed by replacing the native maltase
and maltose permease promoters with constitutive promoters (Osinga et al. 1988).
Baker’s yeast cells are exposed to a numerous stresses during the bread-making
process, including freeze-thaw cycles, high sucrose concentrations, and air-drying
treatment. These conditions induce oxidative stress in the cells, resulting in the
generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and potential mitochondrial damage.
This chapter examines the mechanisms through which yeast cells respond to and
tolerate baking-associated stresses. In addition, the chapter discusses the construc-
tion of stress-tolerant baker’s yeast strains for use in commercial applications.
3.2
Baking-Associated Stresses
Although the history of bread making dates back many centuries, modern consumer
demands have necessitated the development of new baking technologies. An
important focus in this regard is the development of baker’s yeast strains that
exhibit high fermentation capabilities in addition to durability under harsh baking
conditions. For example, dried yeast strains are widely used because of their longer
storage shelf life and lower transport costs compared with compressed yeast. Sweet
dough (high-sugar dough) contains up to 40% sucrose by ﬂour weight. The devel-
opment of frozen dough technology has greatly expanded consumer access to oven-
fresh bakery products. As discussed above, baker’s yeast cells are exposed to a
variety of stresses during production and the fermentation of dough (baking-
associated stresses) (Attﬁeld 1997; Shima and Takagi 2009) (Fig. 3.1). These
stresses can occur together or in a sequential manner (e.g., exposure to freeze-
thaw cycling plus high-sucrose levels) (Attﬁeld 1997). Exposure to freeze-thaw,
high- sucrose, and air-drying treatments is thought to induce oxidative stress in
yeast cells. (Ando et al. 2007; Attﬁeld 1997; Landolfo et al. 2008; Sasano et al.
2010, 2012a; Shima et al. 2008). This in turn results in the generation of ROS due to
the severe damage that might occur to the mitochondrial membrane and/or respira-
tory chain components and denaturation of proteins such as antioxidant enzymes.
Most microorganisms are capable of adapting to environmental stress to some
degree. Yeast cells used in baking applications must have a variety of stress
adaptation mechanisms (e.g., induction of stress protein expression, accumulation
of stress protectants or compatible solutes, changes in membrane composition, and
repression
of
translation).
These
mechanisms
involve
regulation
of
the
3
Construction of Baker’s Yeast Strains with Enhanced Tolerance to. . .
65

corresponding gene expression networks via stress-triggered signal transduction
pathways. Under conditions of severe stress that induce protein denaturation and
ROS generation with subsequent growth inhibition or cell death, the fermentation
capability of yeast can be drastically inhibited. The most important characteristic of
yeast used in industrial applications is high stress tolerance. The construction of
yeast strains exhibiting high tolerance to a variety of stresses is thus critical in the
development of economically viable commercial processes for fermentation and
baker’s yeast production.
3.2.1
Freeze-Thaw Stress
Baking with frozen dough is less labor intensive and increases the access of
consumers to oven-fresh bakery products. However, freezing and subsequent
thawing can severely damage yeast cells, and this damage can decrease the fermen-
tation capability of the yeast cells and lead to their death. Freeze-thaw cycling also
induces oxidative stress in yeast cells, particularly the generation of free radicals
and ROS, which cause oxidative damage to cellular components (Park et al. 1997,
1998). As such, baker’s yeast strains tolerant to freeze-thaw stress are highly
desired in the baking industry. Though some freeze-thaw-tolerant yeast strains
Air-drying
High-sucrose
Freeze-thaw
Cream yeast
Compressed yeast
Dried yeast
Lean dough
Sweet dough
Dough mixing
Fermentation
Cultivation (molasses)
molasses
“Oxidative stress”
Regular baking
Frozen dough baking
Various types of bread
Fig. 3.1 Schematic view of the processes for baker’s yeast production and bread making. During
these processes, baker’s yeast cells are exposed to baking-associated stresses, such as air-drying,
high-sucrose, and freeze-thaw. These treatments also induce oxidative stress in yeast cells
66
H. Takagi

have been isolated from natural sources (Hahn and Kawai 1990; Hino et al. 1987)
and culture collections (Oda et al. 1986), others have been constructed using
conventional mutation or hybridization technologies (Nakagawa and Ouchi
1994a). One possible way to minimize freeze-thaw damage to cells is to subject
fermented doughs to heat treatment before freezing (Nakagawa and Ouchi 1994b).
Compared with yeast strains intolerant to freezing, strains of Saccharomyces
used in frozen dough accumulate more trehalose in the cells (Hino et al. 1990; Oda
et al. 1986). The synthesis of trehalose, which functions as a stress protectant, can
be induced under a variety of stress conditions (Kaino and Takagi 2008; Van Dijck
et al. 1995). Levels of trehalose within the cell are controlled metabolically by
regulation of the balance between synthesis and degradation. Neutral trehalase,
Nth1, is a trehalose-degradation enzyme; disruption of the NTH1 gene in baker’s
yeast leads to increased levels of intracellular trehalose and an increase in freeze-
thaw tolerance (Shima et al. 1999).
In many plants and bacteria, proline accumulates in response to osmotic stress
and functions as an osmoprotectant (i.e., a compatible solute) (Csonka 1981;
Verbruggen and Hermans 2008). Glycerol or trehalose synthesis can be induced
under stress conditions, but this does not lead to increases in the intracellular level
of proline (Kaino and Takagi 2008). Extracellular proline also exhibits cryoprotec-
tive activity, to a degree nearly equal to that of glycerol or trehalose (Takagi et al.
1997). Proline plays a number of roles in vitro, including stabilizing the proteins
and membranes during freezing and dehydration, decreasing the melting tempera-
ture of DNA during salinity stress, and scavenging of hydroxyl radicals under
oxidative stress conditions (Takagi 2008). In plants, elevations in the level of
proline in response to osmotic stress have been correlated with lower levels of
free radicals (Hong et al. 2000). Increases in the degree of oxidation following
alcohol exposure in wild-type cells are indicative of ROS generation. Notably,
proline accumulation following exposure to ethanol signiﬁcantly reduces ROS
levels and increases the survival rate of yeast cells in the stationary phase (Takagi
et al. 2016). The extremely high water solubility of proline suggests that it inhibits
the formation of intracellular ice crystals and subsequent dehydration by forming
strong hydrogen bonds with intracellular free water. However, the mechanisms
underlying this phenomenon in vivo are poorly understood. The Takagi laboratory
reported the construction of proline-accumulating S. cerevisiae strains. These
engineered strains exhibited enhanced tolerance to many stresses, including
freeze-thaw cycling, desiccation, and exposure to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and
ethanol (Matsuura and Takagi 2005; Morita et al. 2002, 2003; Takagi et al. 1997,
2000a, 2005; Terao et al. 2003).
γ-Glutamyl kinase (encoded by the PRO1 gene) is the ﬁrst enzyme of the proline
synthesis pathway via glutamate in S. cerevisiae, whereas proline oxidase (encoded
by PUT1) catalyzes the ﬁrst step of the proline degradation pathway (Fig. 3.2). Pro1
activity is regulated by feedback inhibition by proline, indicating that Pro1 is the
rate-limiting enzyme in the regulation of intracellular proline levels (Sekine et al.
2007). Interestingly, Asp154Asn and Ile150Thr variants of Pro1 are less sensitive to
3
Construction of Baker’s Yeast Strains with Enhanced Tolerance to. . .
67

feedback inhibition and exhibit excessive proline synthesis. Yeast cells expressing
these Pro1 variants accumulate proline and exhibit a higher tolerance to freeze-thaw
stress (Sekine et al. 2007). Recent research has shown that Pro1-mediated stress
tolerance is independent of proline biosynthesis (Tatehashi et al. 2016). PRO1
interacts
with
the
genes
BRE5
and
UBP3,
which
are
required
for
de-ubiquitination activity during ribophagy, the process of selective ribosome
degradation. The γ-glutamyl kinase activity of Pro1 plays a role in ribophagy,
which is important for ensuring cell survival during nitrogen starvation.
In the industrial yeast strains used in the production of Japanese sake, cells with
disruption of the PUT1 gene or a PRO1D154N mutant allele accumulate proline and
exhibit higher tolerance to ethanol stress than control strains (Takagi et al. 2005).
The fermentation proﬁles of proline-accumulating diploid sake yeast strains have
also been analyzed (Takagi et al. 2007). With respect to commercial applications of
recombinant baker’s yeast, consumers might be more accepting of self-cloning
(SC) yeast that does not harbor foreign genes or DNA sequences (except for yeast
DNA), compared with genetically modiﬁed (GM) yeasts. Kaino et al. (2008)
constructed SC diploid baker’s yeast strains by disrupting PUT1 and replacing
wild-type PRO1 with the PRO1D154N or PROI150T allele. In commercial baking
Glutamate 
N-Acetylglutamate 
Ornithine 
Arginine 
Δ1-Pyrroline-5-carboxylate (P5C) 
Glutamate-γ-semialdehyde (GSA)
Proline
Ornithine 
Glutamate-5-phosphate
Glutamate
N-Acetyl-ornithine  
Arg2 
Arg8 
Arg6,5 
Arg7 
Acetyl CoA
Proline
Arg3,1,4
Pro2 
Pro3 
Spontaneous 
Put2 
Cytoplasm
Mitochondria
H2O
Car1 
Car2 
Put1
N-Acetyl GSA 
P5C/GSA 
Nitric oxide
Tah18
Pro1
Mpr1
Stress
tolerance
Fig. 3.2 Metabolic pathways of proline and arginine in Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells. Nor-
mally, both amino acids are synthesized from glutamic acid. In response to oxidative stress, nitric
oxide (NO) is produced from the increased arginine through the Mpr1- and Tah18-dependent
manner
68
H. Takagi

involving frozen dough, pre-freezing fermentation can produce beneﬁts in terms of
texture and taste (Teunissen et al. 2002). Yeast cells activated during pre-freezing
fermentation produce metabolites such as alcohols and organic acids that can affect
the taste and ﬂavor of the bread. Why this process results in a loss of gas production
remains unclear; however, it is possible that prolonged pre-freezing fermentation
seriously damages the membranes of the yeast cells in the dough (Kline and
Sugihara 1968). To overcome this problem, dough was fermented for 120 min at
30 C before freezing and then kept frozen for 9 days. Gas production by wild-type
cells declined dramatically, to 40% of the pre-freezing level (Fig. 3.3a). It is
noteworthy that the fermentation capability of proline-accumulating cells was
approximately 50% greater than that of wild-type cells (Fig. 3.3a), suggesting
that proline-accumulating baker’s yeast is more tolerant of freeze-thaw stress and
thus suitable for use in frozen-dough baking.
A diploid baker’s yeast strain that simultaneously accumulates proline and
trehalose was constructed in order to further enhance tolerance to freeze-thaw stress
(Sasano et al. 2012c). The mutant strain exhibited greater tolerance to freeze-thaw
stress and fermentation capability in frozen dough than strains that accumulate only
proline or trehalose. Breads exhibiting enhanced post-freezing swelling, reduced
freezing periods, and lower manufacturing costs can be produced using the diploid
baker’s yeast strain. Engineering novel yeast strains that simultaneously accumu-
late proline and trehalose could be very useful in frozen-dough baking.
In response to oxidative stress, heat shock, and high ethanol concentrations, the
transcriptional activator Msn2 induces the expression of approximately 180 genes
(Causton et al. 2001; Estruch 2000). Under the abovementioned stress conditions,
Msn2 (which typically forms a heterodimer with Msn4) is translocated into the
nucleus, where it binds to the stress-responsive element within the promoter region
and activates the transcription of numerous genes encoding stress-related proteins
(Marchler et al. 1993; Martinez-Pastor et al. 1996). A number of cellular functions
depend upon Msn2-regulated genes, including the oxidative stress response (CTT1,
SOD2), molecular chaperones (HSP12, HSP104), and trehalose synthesis (TPS1,
TPS2) (Boy-Marcotte et al. 1998). Msn2-overexpressing yeast strains can tolerate
oxidative stress due to the high level of transcription of genes associated with
antioxidant functions (Cardona et al. 2007; Sasano et al. 2012e; Watanabe et al.
2009; Zuzuarregui and del Olmo 2004). Sasano et al. (2012b) recently constructed
an Msn2-overexpressing SC diploid strain of baker’s yeast. This strain exhibited
enhanced tolerance to freeze-thaw stress and higher intracellular trehalose levels
than the wild-type strain. In addition, the fermentation capability in frozen dough of
the Msn2-overexpressing strain was approximately 2.5-fold greater than that of the
wild-type strain. These data suggest that Msn2-overexpressing baker’s yeast strains
could also be useful in frozen-dough baking.
The POG1 gene encodes a transcription factor involved in cell cycle regulation
(Leza and Elion 1999) and functions as a multi-copy suppressor of the mutant
S. cerevisiae E3 ubiquitin ligase Rsp5 (Demae et al. 2007). The pog1 mutant is
stress sensitive, suggesting that POG1 is involved in stress tolerance. Interestingly,
deletion of POG1 results in a drastic increase (55–70%) in the fermentation
3
Construction of Baker’s Yeast Strains with Enhanced Tolerance to. . .
69

capability in bread dough after freeze-thaw stress, whereas overexpression of this
gene enhances the fermentation capability in dough containing high sucrose
concentrations (Sasano et al. 2013). Thus, engineering yeast strains with the
objective of controlling the expression of POG1 represents a potentially useful
approach for breeding yeast strains applicable to baking.
Fig. 3.3 Fermentation abilities of baker’s yeast strains under baking-associated stresses. (a) The
doughs were pre-fermented for 120 min at 30 C and then frozen for 9 days at 20 C. The frozen
dough was thawed for 30 min at 30 C, and the remaining CO2 gas production was measured. The
gassing power before freezing was deﬁned as 100% (Kaino et al. 2008). (b) Fermentation ability in
sweet dough (30% sucrose per weight of ﬂour) was monitored by CO2 gas production. The total
amounts of CO2 production after 2 h were measured. The gassing power of wild-type strain
(WT) was deﬁned as 100% (Sasano et al. 2012d). (c) Compressed yeast was treated with air-drying
stress for 4 h at 37 C. The dough containing the stress-treated yeasts was fermented for 3 h, and
the remaining CO2 gas production was measured. The amount of CO2 production of WT after
air-drying stress treatment was deﬁned as 100% (Sasano et al. 2010)
70
H. Takagi

3.2.2
High-Sucrose Stress
During the dough fermentation process, baker’s yeast cells encounter differences in
sucrose concentration to which they must adapt (Tanaka et al. 2006). Doughs can be
classiﬁed as either lean or sweet based on the sugar concentration. Lean dough
contains no sugar (sugar-free dough) or small amounts of sugar (<5% per weight of
ﬂour). Sweet dough (high-sugar dough) generally can contain up to 40% sucrose
per weight of ﬂour. Such high sucrose concentrations exert severe osmotic stress
upon yeast, and this stress can seriously damage a variety of cellular components
(Verstrepen et al. 2004) and reduce their fermentation capability. Baker’s yeast
exhibiting osmotolerance would be less susceptible to potentially lethal injury, but
development of such yeast will require elucidation of the mechanism underlying
high-sucrose (HS)-stress tolerance. The mechanism could involve the induction of
stress-related proteins, the accumulation of stress protectants or compatible solutes,
and changes in membrane composition (Shima and Takagi 2009).
Upon sensing high osmotic pressure, S. cerevisiae cells accumulate glycerol and
trehalose (Cronwright et al. 2002; De Virgilio et al. 1994; Hino et al. 1990;
Hirasawa et al. 2006; Shima et al. 1999). Microarray and genome-wide screening
analyses of a collection of deletion mutant strains revealed that metabolism of the
osmoprotectants glycerol and trehalose plays an important role in tolerance to high
sucrose concentrations (Ando et al. 2006; Tanaka-Tsuno et al. 2007). Many bacteria
and plant cells accumulate proline as an osmoprotectant in response to osmotic
stress (Csonka 1981; Verbruggen and Hermans 2008). Under conditions of high
osmotic pressure (1 M NaCl), a proline oxidase-deﬁcient strain that accumulated
high levels of proline was markedly more osmotolerant than other strains (Takagi
et al. 1997). Proline-accumulating baker’s yeast exhibits greater fermentation
capability in frozen dough than wild-type yeast (Kaino et al. 2008).
These observations suggest that proline confers tolerance to HS stress. Sasano
et al. (2012d) constructed proline-accumulating SC diploid baker’s yeast strains and
determined their viability after inoculating cells into HS liquid fermentation
medium in order to examine the effect of proline accumulation on HS-stress
tolerance. The proline-accumulating strains were more viable than wild-type cells
under these conditions, providing additional data suggesting that proline accumu-
lation confers tolerance to HS stress.
In a study involving wine yeast, Landolfo et al. (2008) reported that during
fermentation of medium containing high concentrations of sugar, ROS accumula-
tion caused oxidative damage to the cells, probably as a result of denaturation of
antioxidant proteins or damage leading to mitochondrial membrane dysfunction.
Inoculation of baker’s yeast cells into the HS liquid fermentation medium produced
similar results, with an approximately twofold increase in ROS levels in all of the
strains tested. Exposure to high sucrose concentrations leads to ROS accumulation
in baker’s yeast. Proline accumulation appears to confer tolerance to HS stress by
inducing a reduction in ROS levels. Compared with wild-type yeast, the speciﬁc
activity of superoxide dismutase is reportedly signiﬁcantly higher (approximately
3
Construction of Baker’s Yeast Strains with Enhanced Tolerance to. . .
71

1.7-fold) in proline-accumulating strains. These data indicate that intracellular
proline protects antioxidant enzymes from high osmotic pressure.
The tolerance of proline-accumulating strains to high sucrose concentrations
was also assayed in sweet dough containing 30% sucrose per weight of ﬂour.
Stationary-phase cells were cultivated in cane molasses medium for 48 h and
used for sweet-dough fermentation. Interestingly, the gassing power of the
proline-accumulating strains was approximately 40% greater than that of the
wild-type strain, indicating that proline accumulation enhances the leavening effect
of baker’s yeast in sweet dough (Fig. 3.3b). It has also been reported that the stress-
protective effect requires an appropriate intracellular proline level (approximately
9%) (Fig. 3.3b). These data demonstrate convincingly that proline-accumulating
baker’s yeast strains are suitable for use in the production of sweet breads. The use
of such yeast enables the production of breads exhibiting greater swelling with a
shorter fermentation period and at less manufacturing cost.
3.2.3
Air-Drying Stress
The dried yeast manufacturing process exposes the cells to air-drying stress, which
can have a number of harmful effects, including the accumulation of misfolded
proteins, mitochondrial dysfunction, and vacuolar acidiﬁcation (Nakamura et al.
2008; Shima et al. 2008), all of which lead to a decrease in fermentation capability.
Thus, air-drying stress tolerance is a necessary characteristic of baker’s yeast strains
in dried yeast preparations. The ﬂow of hot air during the drying process increases
the temperature of the cells to around 37 C. As such, air-drying stress involves the
stresses of both high temperature and dehydration, which reportedly induces the
intracellular accumulation of ROS (Franca et al. 2007; Nomura and Takagi 2004).
A variety of antioxidant enzymes scavenge the ROS produced as by-products
during normal respiratory metabolism in all aerobic organisms, including yeast.
However, transient heat shock and loss of water can lead to dysfunction in
ROS-detoxifying enzymes. The resulting increased ROS levels can damage cellular
components and negatively impact fermentation capability and even induce cell
death.
Mpr1 is an N-acetyltransferase that detoxiﬁes the proline analogue L-azetidine-
2-carboxylate (AZC) in the S. cerevisiae strain Σ1278b (Nasuno et al. 2013;
Shichiri et al. 2001; Takagi et al. 2000b). The Σ1278b background strain has two
MPR isogenes: MPR1 on chromosome XIV and MPR2 on chromosome X (sigma
1278b gene for proline-analogue resistance). The products of these genes (Mpr1
and Mpr2) play similar roles in AZC resistance (Takagi et al. 2000b). Genes
homologous to MPR1 have been identiﬁed in the genomes of a number of yeasts
and fungi, and AZC acetyltransferase activity has been detected in numerous yeast
strains, suggesting that the Mpr1 homologues are widely conserved in both yeasts
and fungi (Kimura et al. 2002; Wada et al. 2008). Mpr1 confers tolerance to
oxidative stresses such as heat shock, exposure to H2O2, freeze-thaw cycling, and
ethanol exposure by mediating a reduction in intracellular ROS levels (Du and
72
H. Takagi

Takagi 2005, 2007; Ishchuk et al. 2010; Nomura and Takagi 2004). Nishimura et al.
(2010) proposed a mechanism for the antioxidant effect mediated by Mpr1 that
involves a novel arginine synthesis pathway. Two Mpr1 variants (Lys63Arg and
Phe65Leu) exhibiting enhanced enzymatic activity were isolated via PCR random
mutagenesis of MPR1 (Iinoya et al. 2009). Compared with wild-type Mpr1,
overexpression of the K63R variant led to a decreased intracellular ROS levels
and enhanced cell viability under oxidative stress conditions. In addition, the F65 L
variant exhibited greatly enhanced thermal stability. Recently, two novel thermo-
stable variants, Asn203Lys and Asn203Arg, were constructed using a structure-
based molecular design approach. It was hypothesized that overexpression of the
stable Mpr1 variants leads to increased arginine synthesis in yeast (Nasuno et al.
2013, 2016). It was hypothesized that overexpression of the stable Mpr1 variants
leads to increased arginine synthesis in yeast. Based on the observation that the
addition of arginine to the medium increases the fermentation rate of yeast
(Gutie´rrez et al. 2012), the development of thermostable Mpr1 variants could be
useful in constructing industrial yeast strains capable of enhanced arginine synthe-
sis and fermentation capability (Nasuno et al. 2016).
Interestingly, among yeast strains used industrially, Japanese baker’s yeast
strains harbor one copy of the MPR2 gene on chromosome X (Sasano et al.
2010). In order to examine the role of MPR2 in air-drying stress, the viability and
intracellular ROS levels of diploid industrial baker’s yeast strains were examined
(Sasano et al. 2010). After exposure to air-drying stress, wild-type cells exhibited a
signiﬁcant increase in ROS levels. The Δmpr2 strain was more sensitive to
air-drying stress than the wild-type strain. Interestingly, the ROS levels in the
Δmpr2 strain were approximately 40% higher compared with the wild-type strain,
suggesting that MPR2 protects baker’s yeast from air-drying stress by mediating a
reduction in intracellular ROS levels.
The fermentation capability of the Δmpr2 strain in dough following exposure to
air-drying stress was also examined. No signiﬁcant differences in gassing power
were observed between the wild-type and Δmpr2 strains prior to exposure to
air-drying stress. The fermentation capability of the air-drying-stressed Δmpr2
strain was only approximately 60% of that of the wild-type strain, however,
indicating that MPR2 affects the dough fermentation performance of air-drying-
stressed baker’s yeast. Interestingly, after air-drying stress, the fermentation capa-
bility of cells expressing the K63R and F65 L Mpr1 variants was greater than that of
cells expressing wild-type Mpr1 (Fig. 3.3c). In particular, the gassing power of the
F65 L-expressing strain was approximately 1.8-fold greater than that of the strain
expressing wild-type Mpr1, most likely due to the greater thermal stability of the
F65 L variant (Fig. 3.3c).
The effect of proline accumulation on tolerance to air-drying stress in baker’s
yeast has also been examined. Proline accumulation was found to signiﬁcantly
enhance the fermentation capability of baker’s yeast after air-drying stress
(Fig. 3.3c). Furthermore, Mpr1 variant-expressing yeast exhibited an approxi-
mately 40% increase in fermentation capability after air-drying stress as compared
with cells expressing wild-type Mpr1 (Fig. 3.3c). Hence, the antioxidant enzymes
3
Construction of Baker’s Yeast Strains with Enhanced Tolerance to. . .
73

Mpr1/2 appear to be promising targets in the breeding of novel yeast strains
exhibiting enhanced tolerance to air-drying stress.
3.3
Novel Approach and Mechanism for Baking-Associated
Stress Tolerance
3.3.1
Omics Approach to Identify the Genes Required for Stress
Tolerance
To identify as yet uncharacterized genes that play roles in stress tolerance in yeast,
both comprehensive phenomics and functional genomics analyses have been car-
ried out under various stress conditions simulating the commercial baking process.
The results of these analyses indicate that numerous genes mediate stress tolerance
in baker’s yeast.
To identify the genes that mediate freeze-thaw tolerance in yeast, genome-wide
screening was performed using a complete deletion strain collection of diploid
S. cerevisiae (Ando et al. 2007). A total of 58 gene deletions that confer freeze-thaw
sensitivity were identiﬁed in this screening, and these genes were then classiﬁed
according to cellular function and localization of the gene product. The results of
these analyses revealed that many of the genes involved in freeze-thaw tolerance
are associated with vacuole functions and cell wall biogenesis. The greatest number
of gene products was found to be components of vacuolar H+-ATPase. The cross-
sensitivity of freeze-thaw-sensitive mutants to oxidative and cell wall stress (both
of which are closely related to freeze-thaw stress) was also examined. Ando et al.
(2007) reported that vacuolar H+-ATPase dysfunction confers sensitivity to both
oxidative and cell wall stress. By contrast, defects in the products of genes involved
in cell wall assembly confer sensitivity to cell wall stress but not oxidative stress.
Collectively, these results suggest that at least two different mechanisms mediate
freezing injury in yeast: (1) oxidative stress generated during the freeze-thaw
process, and (2) defects in cell wall assembly.
The HS-tolerant and maltose-utilizing (LS) yeasts used in modern industrial
baking were developed using breeding techniques and are now used commercially.
Sugar utilization and HS tolerance differ signiﬁcantly between HS-tolerant and LS
yeasts. Tanaka-Tsuno et al. (2007) characterized the gene expression proﬁles of
HS-tolerant and LS yeasts in media of different sucrose concentrations. The overall
gene expression patterns were obtained using two-way hierarchical clustering.
These analyses demonstrated that HS-tolerant and LS yeasts exhibit different
gene expression patterns. Clusters of genes that are upregulated (cluster 1) or
downregulated (cluster 2) under HS conditions were identiﬁed using quality thresh-
old clustering analysis. Clusters 1 and 2 contained a number of genes that play roles
in carbon and nitrogen metabolism, respectively. Genes involved in metabolism of
the osmoprotectants glycerol and trehalose were expressed at higher levels in LS
yeast than in HS-tolerant yeast at sucrose concentrations of 5–40%. No clear
74
H. Takagi

correlation between the expression levels of genes involved in osmoprotectant
biosynthesis and the intracellular levels of osmoprotectants was observed.
Nakamura et al. (2008) examined how gene expression changes in baker’s yeast
exposed to the type of air-drying stress encountered during dried yeast production.
They reported that intracellular accumulation of trehalose contributes to dehydra-
tion tolerance (Gadd et al. 1987). However, the expression of genes involved in
trehalose synthesis did not increase during the air-drying process, which could
account for the high concentration of intracellular trehalose in the compressed
yeast. By contrast, the expression of genes related to molecular chaperone
functions, proteasome, and autophagy was transiently upregulated in the early
stage of the process, suggesting that proper folding of cellular proteins and the
removal of denatured proteins play important roles in the adaptation of cells to
air-drying stress. The expression of genes involved in β-oxidation was constitu-
tively upregulated during the air-drying process. One hypothesis holds that yeast
cells acquire the energy needed for adaptation to air-drying stress through the
degradation of intracellular fatty acids. This hypothesis is supported by the obser-
vation that yeast cells are unable to take up nutrients during the air-drying process.
These gene expression data could aid efforts to both improve dried yeast production
and breed strains with enhanced tolerance to air-drying stress.
The results of the abovementioned studies suggest that vacuolar H+-ATPase
plays an important role in yeast cells subjected to baking-associated stress, particu-
larly air-drying stress (Shima et al. 2008). The results of gene expression and
phenotypic analyses suggest that copper ion homeostasis is critical for freeze-
thaw stress tolerance in yeast (Takahashi et al. 2009). Moreover, the endoplasmic
reticulum membrane protein Eos1, originally identiﬁed as being necessary for
tolerance to oxidative stress, could be involved in zinc homeostasis (Nakamura
et al. 2007, 2010).
In order to gain a more comprehensive understanding of the mechanism under-
lying oxidative stress tolerance, essential genes were screened in a collection of
heterozygous deletion mutants (Okada et al. 2014). Classiﬁcation of the genes
according to function and localization suggested that nuclear functions, such as
RNA synthesis, play critical roles in the oxidative stress response.
3.3.2
Nitric Oxide-Mediated Stress-Tolerant Mechanism Found
in Yeast
Nitric oxide (NO) is a ubiquitous signaling molecule in pathways that regulate
numerous cellular functions in microorganisms including bacteria, yeast, and fungi
as well as in higher eukaryotes such as plants and mammals (Astuti et al. 2016). In
mammals, NO confers tolerance to oxidative stress by enhancing the intracellular
antioxidant status, primarily through cGMP-mediated signaling pathways by
activating soluble guanylate cyclase. NO also functions through posttranslational
activation of proteins via S-nitrosylation. In unicellular eukaryote yeasts, low NO
levels have been linked with various stress response pathways, including responses
3
Construction of Baker’s Yeast Strains with Enhanced Tolerance to. . .
75

to high hydrostatic pressure, copper metabolism, and H2O2-induced apoptosis
(Almeida et al. 2007; Domitrovic et al. 2003; Shinyashiki et al. 2000). However,
the mechanism of NO synthesis and its physiologic role in S. cerevisiae remain
unclear, primarily due to the absence of mammalian NO synthase (NOS)
orthologues in the genome. In several recent studies involving a laboratory yeast
strain, Nishimura et al. (2010, 2013) described a novel antioxidant mechanism
involved in stress-induced NO synthesis mediated by proline and arginine metabo-
lism via Mpr1 (Fig. 3.2).
Expression of the Pro1 I150T variant, which is less sensitive to proline feedback
inhibition, and the thermostable Mpr1 F65 L variant was shown to result in
enhanced fermentation capability in baker’s yeast exposed to the stress of freeze-
thaw cycling and air-drying, respectively (Kaino et al. 2008; Sasano et al. 2010).
Sasano et al. (2012a) constructed a SC diploid baker’s yeast strain exhibiting
enhanced proline and NO synthesis due to co-expression of the Pro1 I150T and
Mpr1 F65 L variants. Higher intracellular NO levels in response to air-drying stress
were observed in the engineered strain, which was tolerant of not only oxidative
stress but also air-drying and freeze-thaw stress due to lower intracellular ROS
levels (Fig. 3.4a). Compared with the wild-type strain, the engineered strain also
exhibited higher leavening activity in bread dough after air-drying and freeze-thaw
stress (Fig. 3.4b). These data suggest that baker’s yeast synthesizes NO in response
to types of oxidative stress that induce ROS generation and that the increase in NO
synthesis plays an important role in the mechanism of baking-associated stress
tolerance. Engineering yeast strains with enhanced proline and NO synthesis
capabilities is thus a potentially promising approach in the breeding of novel
baker’s yeast strains.
Nishimura et al. (2013) reported a novel NO-mediated antioxidant mechanism in
yeast, although the details of the underlying mechanism were not elucidated. The
Takagi group recently identiﬁed a downstream NO pathway involved in stress
tolerance in yeast (Nasuno et al. 2014). The results of microarray and real-time
quantitative PCR analyses revealed that exogenous NO treatment induces the
expression of copper metabolism genes under control of the transcription factor
Mac1. These genes include CTR1, which encodes a high-afﬁnity copper transporter.
Under conditions of high-temperature stress, NO induced increased transcription of
CTR1, leading to Mac1-dependent increases in the intracellular copper concentra-
tion, activity of the Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase Sod1, and cell viability. NO had
no effect on expression of the MAC1 gene, indicating that NO activates Mac1 via
posttranslational modiﬁcation. These results led to the proposal of a novel
NO-mediated antioxidant mechanism involving activation of Mac1.
The ﬂavoprotein Tah18 transfers electrons to the iron-sulfur cluster protein Dre2
and exhibits NOS-like activity in S. cerevisiae (Nishimura et al. 2013). Tah18 also
reportedly promotes apoptosis of yeast cells exposed to H2O2. Yoshikawa et al.
(2016) demonstrated that Tah18-dependent NOS-like activity induces the apoptosis
of cells treated with H2O2. Tah18-dependent NO production and subsequent cell
death are suppressed in cells exhibiting enhanced interaction between Tah18 and its
molecular partner, Dre2. These data suggest that in response to deleterious
76
H. Takagi

environmental changes, the Tah18-Dre2 complex induces cell death by acting as a
molecular switch via Tah18-dependent NOS-like activity. NO acts as a ﬁgurative
double-edged sword due to its highly diffusible and reactive nature, exerting
opposing effects on cells (Pacher et al. 2007). The apoptosis of S. cerevisiae cells
following exposure to high levels of H2O2 is dependent on an NOS-like activity
requiring Tah18. By contrast, yeast cells are protected from high-temperature stress
by NO produced via NOS-like activity (Liu et al. 2015; Nasuno et al. 2014). These
observations raise the possibility that the Tah18-Dre2 complex regulates many
more biological functions than previously thought (including cell survival and
death) by acting as a NO-dependent molecular switch that responds to environmen-
tal changes.
The observation that NO plays an important role in the stress response of
industrially important yeast strains suggests that targeting NO production at both
the physiologic and genetic levels could aid in the development of additional useful
+ Air-drying
+ Air-drying
A
B
Fig. 3.4 Intracellular NO and ROS levels and fermentation abilities of baker’s yeast strains under
baking-associated stresses (Sasano et al. 2012a). (a) Intracellular NO (left) and ROS (right) levels
after air-drying stress (at 42 C for 90 min) were measured. For ROS level, the ﬂuorescence
intensity before stress treatment of each strain was deﬁned as 100%. (b) After exposure to
air-drying stress, baker’s yeast strains were mixed with dough and fermented. The remaining
CO2 gas production after 2 h was measured. The gassing power of the wild-type strain (WT) is
relatively taken as 100% (left). The doughs were pre-fermented for 2 h at 30 C and then frozen at
20 C for 3 weeks. The frozen dough was thawed for 30 min at 30 C, and the remaining CO2 gas
production after 2 h was measured. The gassing power before freezing of each strain was deﬁned
as 100% (right)
3
Construction of Baker’s Yeast Strains with Enhanced Tolerance to. . .
77

yeast strains. Modulating NO biosynthesis as a means of enhancing the fermenta-
tion capability of baker’s yeast has been reported (Sasano et al. 2012a, b, c, d, e). As
such, producing industrially useful yeast strains tolerant of a wide variety of
environmental stresses during fermentation that simultaneously exhibit enhanced
fermentation rates will require the development of more advanced engineering
strategies (Astuti et al. 2016).
3.4
Conclusions and Future Perspective
As described in this chapter, baker’s yeasts used in industrial and commercial
baking applications are exposed to multiple environmental stresses, including
freeze-thaw cycling, high sucrose concentrations, and air-drying. Yeast cells
employ a wide variety of strategies to cope with these potentially deleterious
environmental conditions. However, fermentation rates can decline signiﬁcantly
if the stress level increases beyond that to which the yeast cells are capable of
adapting. When discussing applications of yeast strains, stress “tolerance” is the
key characteristic. For example, proline and trehalose play important roles in
mediating the stress tolerance of baker’s yeast. In fact, targeting proline and
trehalose metabolism is a promising approach in the development of more stress-
tolerant baker’s yeast strains. To further improve the fermentation capability and
production efﬁciency of yeast, however, the details of the mechanisms underlying
the response, adaptation, and tolerance to a variety of stresses must be fully
elucidated at the molecular, metabolic, and cellular levels. We believe that baker’s
yeast used in bread baking as well as other important industrial yeasts [such as those
used in the brewing of alcoholic beverages (e.g., beer, wine, sake, and shochu) and
bioethanol production] that exhibit enhanced tolerance to a variety of stresses could
greatly expand these endeavors.
A number of issues aside from scientiﬁc and technologic problems need to be
addressed to expand the potential practical uses of engineered baker’s yeasts. First,
breeding industrial baker’s yeast strains with a higher stress tolerance than labora-
tory strains can be difﬁcult. Approaches involving the exogenous addition of stress
protectants or antioxidant compounds to cultures or dough are too laborious for
practical application. However, the use of Pro1 variant-expressing baker’s yeast
strains that accumulate proline or strains that express the Mpr1 variant and exhibit
improved antioxidant activity could negate this problem. Second, Japanese govern-
ment guidelines specify that it is not necessary to treat SC yeast as GM because SC
processes are considered equivalent to naturally occurring gene conversion events
such as recombination, deletion, and transposition (Fig. 3.5) (Hino 2002). However,
neither the baking industry as a whole nor consumers have accepted this technol-
ogy. We therefore propose an alternative method for consumers to construct baker’s
yeast strains exhibiting the same stress tolerance mechanisms (Fig. 3.6). The toxic
proline analogue AZC is taken up by cells via proline permease and causes
misfolding of the proteins into which it is incorporated, competitively with proline,
thereby inhibiting cell growth. By introducing favorable mutations in the PRO1 or
78
H. Takagi

MPR1 genes, cells capable of efﬁciently accumulating large quantities of proline or
acetylate AZC would be rendered tolerant to AZC due to the incorporation of
proline into the proteins. After treatment with a conventional mutagen, desirable
strains derived from AZC-resistant mutants could be isolated.
Tsolmonbaatar et al. (2016) recently reported the isolation of AZC-resistant
mutants derived from diploid S. cerevisiae. Of those mutants that accumulated
more intracellular proline, ﬁve were more viable than the parent wild-type strain
under freeze-thaw or HS-stress conditions. Two of the strains carried novel
mutations in the PRO1 gene (encoding the Pro247Ser and Glu415Lys variants of
Pro1 [γ-glutamyl kinase]). Interestingly, these mutations were found to impart AZC
resistance in the yeast cells and desensitize the cells to proline feedback inhibition
of Pro1, leading to intracellular proline accumulation. Moreover, baker’s yeast
Parent strain
PRO1
PRO1
PUT1
PUT1
Gene
replacement
Improvement 
of PRO1
Gene
disruption
Inactivation 
of PUT1
Self-cloning diploid baker’s yeast
(Non-recombinant microorganism)
New strain 
PRO1
PRO1
䖩
䖩
URA3
URA3
Fig. 3.5 Construction of self-cloning diploid baker’s yeast strain with proline accumulation
N-Acetyl AZC
Abnormally misfolded 
proteins
AZC-incorporation 
into proteins
Growth
Proline permease 
(Gap1, Put4)
Growth 
arrest
Correctly folded 
proteins
Proline-incorporation 
into proteins
AZC
Proline
L-AZC
L-proline
Mpr1
-
AZC-resistant mutants 
Pro1
Fig. 3.6 Construction of commercial baker’s yeast strains. By introducing a favorable mutation in
the PRO1 or MPR1 gene, yeast cells that accumulate large quantities of proline or acetylate L-
azetidine-2-carboxylate (AZC) efﬁciently are tolerant to AZC, respectively
3
Construction of Baker’s Yeast Strains with Enhanced Tolerance to. . .
79

strains expressing the PRO1P247S and PRO1E415K genes were more tolerant to
freeze-thaw stress than strains expressing wild-type PRO1. The approach described
here thus represents a practical method for breeding proline-accumulating baker’s
yeast strains exhibiting enhanced tolerance to baking-associated stresses.
In summary, in this chapter we have proposed novel sophisticated “omics”
strategies using both rational and reverse engineering approaches for constructing
baker’s yeast strains exhibiting desirable properties (Fig. 3.7).
Acknowledgements This work was mainly funded by grants for the Program for Promotion of
Basic Research Activities for Innovative Biosciences, the Program for Promotion of Basic and
Applied Researches for Innovations in Bio-oriented industry. This work was also in part supported
by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research (A) (25252065) from the Japan Society for the Promo-
tion of Science, a Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research on Innovative Area (Oxygen Biology)
(14430289) from the Ministry of Education, Science, Culture, Sports and Technology of Japan,
and Institute for Fermentation, Osaka (IFO) to H.T.
References
Almeida B, Buttner S, Ohlmeier S, Silva A, Mesquita A, Sampaio-Marques B, Osorio NS,
Kollau A, Mayer B, Leao C, Laranjinha J, Rodrigues F, Madeo F, Ludovico P (2007)
NO-mediated apoptosis in yeast. J Cell Sci 120:3279–3288
Ando A, Tanaka F, Murata Y, Takagi H, Shima J (2006) Identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of genes
required for tolerance to high-sucrose stress revealed by genome-wide screening of Saccharo-
myces cerevisiae. FEMS Yeast Res 6:249–267
Ando A, Nakamura T, Murata Y, Takagi H, Shima J (2007) Identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of
genes required for tolerance to freeze-thaw stress revealed by genome-wide screening of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae deletion strains. FEMS Yeast Res 7:244–253
Astuti RI, Nasuno R, Takagi H (2016) Nitric oxide signaling in yeast. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
100:9483–9497
Rational engineering
Reverse engineering
Metabolic models,
enzyme (protein)
and gene database
Self-cloned strains
with desired genotype
Homologous 
recombination
Omics sciences 
and technologies
Natural isolate
Parent strain
(lab/industrial)
Strains with
desired phenotype
Screening 
Mutagenesis
Optimized baker’s yeast strains
Genome sequence / Mutation (SNP) analysis
Transcriptome / Proteome / Metabolome analysis
Genotype
Phenotype
Fig. 3.7 Schematic view of omics-based baker’s yeast breeding
80
H. Takagi

Attﬁeld PV (1997) Stress tolerance: the key to effective strains of industrial baker’s yeast. Nat
Biotechnol 15:1351–1357
Boy-Marcotte E, Perrot M, Bussereau F, Boucherie H, Jacquet M (1998) Msn2p and Msn4p
control a large number of genes induced at the diauxic transition which are repressed by cyclic
AMP in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Bacteriol 180:1044–1052
Burrows S (1970) In: Rose AH, Harrison JS (eds) The yeast volume 3 Yeast technology.
Academic, London, pp 349–420
Cardona F, Carrasco P, Perez-Ortin JE, del Olmo M, Aranda A (2007) A novel approach for the
improvement of stress resistance in wine yeasts. Int J Food Microbiol 114:83–91
Causton HC, Ren B, Koh SS, Harbison CT, Kanin E, Jennings EG, Lee TI, True HL, Lander ES,
Young RA (2001) Remodeling of yeast genome expression in response to environmental
changes. Mol Biol Cell 12:323–337
Cronwright GR, Rohwer JM, Prior BA (2002) Metabolic control analysis of glycerol synthesis in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl Environ Microbiol 68:4448–4456
Csonka LN (1981) Proline over-production results in enhanced osmotolerance in Salmonella
typhimurium. Mol Gen Genet 182:82–86
De Virgilio C, Hottiger T, Dominguez J, Boller T, Wiemken A (1994) The role of trehalose
synthesis for the acquisition of thermotolerance in yeast. I. Genetic evidence that trehalose is a
thermoprotectant. Eur J Biochem 219:179–186
Demae M, Murata Y, Hisano M, Haitani Y, Shima J, Takagi H (2007) Overexpression of two
transcriptional factors, Kin28 and Pog1, suppresses the stress sensitivity caused by the rsp5
mutation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEMS Microbiol Lett 277:70–78
Dequin S (2001) The potential of genetic engineering for improving brewing, wine-making and
bread making. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 56:577–588
Domitrovic T, Palhano FL, Barja-Fidalgo C, DeFreitas M, Orlando MT, Fernandes PM (2003)
Role of nitric oxide in the response of Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells to heat shock and high
hydrostatic pressure. FEMS Yeast Res 3:341–346
Du X, Takagi H (2005) N-acetyltransferase Mpr1 confers freeze tolerance on Saccharomyces
cerevisiae by reducing reactive oxygen species. J Biochem 138:391–397
Du X, Takagi H (2007) N-Acetyltransferase Mpr1 confers ethanol tolerance on Saccharomyces
cerevisiae by reducing reactive oxygen species. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 75:1343–1351
Estruch F (2000) Stress-controlled transcription factors, stress-induced genes and stress tolerance
in budding yeast. FEMS Microbiol Rev 24:469–486
Evans IH (1990) In: Spencer JFT, Spencer DM (eds) Yeast Technology. Springer, Berlin, pp
13–45
Franca MB, Panek AD, Eleutherio EC (2007) Oxidative stress and its effects during dehydration.
Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol 146:621–631
Gadd GM, Chalmers K, Reed RH (1987) The role of trehalose in dehydration resistance of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEMS Microbiol Lett 48:249–254
Gutie´rrez A, Chiva R, Sancho M, Beltran G, Arroyo-Lo´pez FN, Guillamon JM (2012) Nitrogen
requirements of commercial wine yeast strains during fermentation of a synthetic grape must.
Food Microbiol 31:25–32
Hahn YS, Kawai H (1990) Isolation and characterization of freeze- tolerant yeasts from nature
available for the frozen-dough method. Agric Biol Chem 54:829–831
Hino A (2002) Safety assessment and public concerns for genetically modiﬁed food products: the
Japanese experience. Toxicol Pathol 30:126–128
Hino A, Takano H, Tanaka Y (1987) New freeze-tolerant yeast for frozen dough preparations.
Cereal Chem 64:269–275
Hino A, Mihara K, Nakashima K, Takano H (1990) Trehalose levels and survival ratio of freeze-
tolerant versus freeze-sensitive yeasts. Appl Environ Microbiol 56:1386–1391
Hirasawa T, Nakakura Y, Yoshikawa K, Ashitani K, Nagahisa K, Furusawa C, Katakura Y,
Shimizu H, Shioya S (2006) Comparative analysis of transcriptional responses to saline stress
3
Construction of Baker’s Yeast Strains with Enhanced Tolerance to. . .
81

in the laboratory and brewing strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae with DNA microarray. Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 70:346–357
Hong Z, Lakkineni K, Zhang Z, Verma DPS (2000) Removal of feedback inhibition of Δ1-
pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase results in increased proline accumulation and protection
of plants from osmotic stress. Plant Physiol 122:1129–1136
Iinoya K, Kotani T, Sasano Y, Takagi H (2009) Engineering of the yeast antioxidant enzyme Mpr1
for enhanced activity and stability. Biotechnol Bioeng 103:341–352
Ishchuk OP, Abbas CA, Sibirny AA (2010) Heterologous expression of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
MPR1 gene confers tolerance to ethanol and L-azetidine-2-carboxylic acid in Hansenula
polymorpha. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 37:213–218
Kaino T, Takagi H (2008) Gene expression proﬁles and intracellular contents of stress protectants
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae under ethanol and sorbitol stresses. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
79:273–283
Kaino T, Tateiwa T, Mizukami-Murata S, Shima J, Takagi H (2008) Self-cloning baker’s yeasts
that accumulate proline enhance freeze tolerance in doughs. Appl Environ Microbiol
74:5845–5849
Kimura Y, Nakamori S, Takagi H (2002) Polymorphism of the MPR1 gene required for toxic
proline analogue resistance in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae complex species. Yeast
19:1437–1445
Kline L, Sugihara TG (1968) Factors affecting the stability of frozen bread doughs. I. Prepared by
the straight dough method. Bakers Dig 42:44–69
Landolfo S, Politi H, Angelozzi D, Mannazzu I (2008) ROS accumulation and oxidative damage to
cell structures in Saccharomyces cerevisiae wine strains during fermentation of high-sugar-
containing medium. Biochim Biophys Acta 1780:892–898
Leza MA, Elion EA (1999) POG1, a novel yeast gene, promotes recovery from pheromone arrest
via the G1 cyclin CLN2. Genetics 151:531–543
Liljestr€om PL, Tubb, RS, Korhola MP (1991) Construction of new α-galactosidase producing
yeast strains and the industrial application of these strains. US Patent 5,055,401
Liljestr€om-Suominen
PL,
Joutsjoki
V,
Korhola
MP
(1988)
Construction
of
a
stable
α-galactosidase producing baker’s yeast. Appl Environ Microbiol 54:245–249
Linko Y, Javanainen P, Linko S (1997) Biotechnology of bread baking. Trends Food Sci Technol
8:339–344
Liu WC, Yuan HM, Li YH, Lu YT (2015) CKA2 functions in H2O2-induced apoptosis and high-
temperature stress tolerance by regulating NO accumulation in yeast. FEMS Yeast Res 15:fov051.
doi:10.1093/femsyr/fov051
Marchler G, Schuller C, Adam G, Ruis H (1993) A Saccharomyces cerevisiae UAS element
controlled by protein kinase A activates transcription in response to a variety of stress
conditions. EMBO J 12:1997–2003
Martinez-Pastor MT, Marchler G, Schuller C, Marchler-Bauer A, Ruis H, Estruch F (1996) The
Saccharomyces cerevisiae zinc ﬁnger proteins. Msn2p and Msn4p are required for transcrip-
tional induction through the stress-response element. (STRE). EMBO J 15:2227–2235
Matsuura K, Takagi H (2005) Vacuolar functions are involved in stress-protective effect of
intracellular proline in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Biosci Bioeng 100:538–544
Morita Y, Nakamori S, Takagi H (2002) Effect of proline and arginine metabolism on freezing
stress of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Biosci Bioeng 94:390–394
Morita Y, Nakamori S, Takagi H (2003) L-proline accumulation and freeze tolerance of Saccha-
romyces cerevisiae are caused by a mutation in the PRO1 gene encoding γ-glutamyl kinase.
Appl Environ Microbiol 69:212–219
Nakagawa S, Ouchi K (1994a) Construction from a single parent of baker’s yeast strains with high
freeze tolerance and fermentative activity in both lean and sweet doughs. Appl Environ
Microbiol 60:3499–3502
Nakagawa S, Ouchi K (1994b) Improvement of freeze tolerance of commercial baker’s yeasts in
dough by heat treatment before freezing. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 58:2077–2079
82
H. Takagi

Nakamura T, Ando A, Takagi H, Shima J (2007) Eos1, whose deletion confers sensitivity to
oxidative stress, is involved in N-glycosylation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 353:293–298
Nakamura T, Mizukami-Murata S, Ando A, Murata Y, Takagi H, Shima J (2008) Changes in gene
expression of commercial baker’s yeast during an air-drying process that simulates dried yeast
production. J Biosci Bioeng 106:405–408
Nakamura T, Takahashi S, Takagi H, Shima J (2010) Multicopy suppression of oxidant-sensitive
eos1 mutation by IZH2 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the involvement of Eos1 in zinc
homeostasis. FEMS Yeast Res 10:259–269
Nasuno R, Hirano Y, Itoh T, Hakoshima T, Hibi T, Takagi H (2013) Structural and functional
analysis of the yeast N-acetyltransferase Mpr1 involved in oxidative stress tolerance via proline
metabolism. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110:11821–11826
Nasuno R, Aitoku M, Manago Y, Nishimura A, Sasano Y, Takagi H (2014) Nitric oxide-mediated
antioxidative mechanism in yeast through the activation of the transcription factor Mac1. PLoS
One 9:e113788. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0113788
Nasuno R, Hirase S, Norifune S, Watanabe D, Takagi H (2016) Structure-based molecular design
for thermostabilization of N-acetyltransferase Mpr1 involved in a novel pathway of L-arginine
synthesis in yeast. J Biochem 159:271–277
Needleman R (1991) Control of maltase synthesis in yeast. Mol Microbiol 5:2079–2084
Nishimura A, Kotani T, Sasano Y, Takagi H (2010) An antioxidative mechanism mediated by the
yeast N-acetyltransferase Mpr1: oxidative stress-induced arginine synthesis and its physiolog-
ical role. FEMS Yeast Res 10:687–698
Nishimura A, Kawahara N, Takagi H (2013) The ﬂavoprotein Tah18-dependent NO synthesis
confers high-temperature stress tolerance on yeast cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
430:137–143
Nomura M, Takagi H (2004) Role of the yeast acetyltransferase Mpr1 in oxidative stress:
regulation of oxygen reactive species caused by a toxic proline catabolism intermediate.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101:12616–12621
Oda Y, Uno K, Ohta S (1986) Selection of yeasts for breadmaking by the frozen-dough method.
Appl Environ Microbiol 52:941–943
Okada N, Ogawa J, Shima J (2014) Comprehensive analysis of genes involved in the oxidative
stress tolerance using yeast heterozygous deletion collection. FEMS Yeast Res 14:425–434
Osinga KA, Beudeker RF, van der Plaat JB, de Hollander JA (1988) New yeast strains providing
for an enhanced rate of the fermentation of sugars, a process to obtain such strains and the use
of these strains. Eur Patent 0306107A2
Pacher P, Beckman J, Liaudet L (2007) Nitric oxide and peroxynitrite in health and disease.
Physiol Rev 87:315–424
Park JI, Grant CM, Attﬁeld PA, Dawes IW (1997) The freeze-thaw stress response of the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae is growth phase speciﬁc and is controlled by nutritional state via the
RAS-cyclic AMP signal transduction pathway. Appl Environ Microbiol 63:3818–3824
Park JI, Grant CM, Davies MJ, Dawes IW (1998) The cytoplasmic Cu, Zn superoxide dismutase of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae is required for resistance to freeze-thaw stress. J Biol Chem
273:22921–22928
Pence JW, Kohler GO (1961) Investigations of bread ﬂavor in the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Brot Gebaeck 15:129–134
Randez-Gil F, Sanz P, Pietro JA (1999) Engineering baker’s yeast: room for improvement. Trends
Biotechnol 17:237–244
Sasano Y, Takahashi S, Shima J, Takagi H (2010) Antioxidant N-acetyltransferase Mpr1/2 of
industrial baker’s yeast enhances fermentation ability after air-drying stress in bread dough. Int
J Food Microbiol 138:181–185
Sasano Y, Haitani Y, Hashida K, Ohtsu I, Shima J, Takagi H (2012a) Enhancement of the proline
and nitric oxide synthetic pathway improves fermentation ability under multiple baking-
3
Construction of Baker’s Yeast Strains with Enhanced Tolerance to. . .
83

associated stress conditions in industrial baker’s yeast. Microb Cell Fact 11:40. doi:10.1186/
1475-2859-11-40
Sasano Y, Haitani Y, Hashida K, Ohtsu I, Shima J, Takagi H (2012b) Overexpression of the
transcription activator Msn2 enhances fermentation ability of industrial baker’s yeast in frozen
dough. Biosci Biotech Biochem 76:624–627
Sasano Y, Haitani Y, Hashida K, Ohtsu I, Shima J, Takagi H (2012c) Simultaneous accumulation
of proline and trehalose in industrial baker’s yeast enhances fermentation ability in frozen
dough. J Biosci Bioeng 113:592–595
Sasano Y, Haitani Y, Ohtsu I, Shima J, Takagi H (2012d) Proline accumulation in baker’s yeast
enhances high-sucrose stress tolerance and fermentation ability in sweet dough. Int J Food
Microbiol 152:40–43
Sasano Y, Watanabe D, Ukibe K, Inai T, Ohtsu I, Shimoi H, Takagi H (2012e) Overexpression of
the yeast transcription activator Msn2 confers furfural resistance and increases the initial
fermentation rate in ethanol production. J Biosci Bioeng 113:451–455
Sasano Y, Haitani Y, Hashida K, Oshiro S, Shima J, Takagi H (2013) Improvement of fermenta-
tion ability under baking-associated stress conditions by altering the POG1 gene expression in
baker’s yeast. Int J Food Microbiol 165:241–245
Sekine T, Kawaguchi A, Hamano Y, Takagi H (2007) Desensitization of feedback inhibition of the
Saccharomyces cerevisiae gamma-glutamyl kinase enhances proline accumulation and freez-
ing tolerance. Appl Environ Microbiol 73:4011–4019
Shichiri M, Hoshikawa C, Nakamori S, Takagi H (2001) A novel acetyltransferase found in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae Sigma1278b that detoxiﬁes a proline analogue, azetidine-2-carbox-
ylic acid. J Biol Chem 276:41998–42002
Shima J, Takagi H (2009) Stress-tolerance of baker’s-yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) cells:
stress-protective molecules and genes involved in stress tolerance. Biotechnol Appl Biochem
53:155–164
Shima J, Hino A, Yamada-Iyo C, Suzuki Y, Nakajima R, Watanabe H, Mori K, Takano H (1999)
Stress tolerance in doughs of Saccharomyces cerevisiae trehalase mutants derived from
commercial Baker’s yeast. Appl Environ Microbiol 65:2841–2846
Shima J, Ando A, Takagi H (2008) Possible roles of vacuolar H+-ATPase and mitochondrial
function in tolerance to air-drying stress revealed by genome-wide screening of Saccharomy-
ces cerevisiae deletion strains. Yeast 25:179–190
Shinyashiki M, Chiang KT, Switzer CH, Gralla EB, Valentine JS, Thiele DJ, Fukuto JM (2000)
The interaction of nitric oxide (NO) with the yeast transcription factor Ace1: A model system
for NO-protein thiol interactions with implications to metal metabolism. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 97:2491–2496
Takagi H (2008) Proline as a stress protectant in yeast: physiological functions, metabolic
regulations, and biotechnological applications. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 81:211–223
Takagi H, Iwamoto F, Nakamori S (1997) Isolation of freeze-tolerant laboratory strains of
Saccharomyces
cerevisiae
from
proline-analogue-resistant
mutants.
Appl
Microbiol
Biotechnol 47:405–411
Takagi H, Sakai K, Morida K, Nakamori S (2000a) Proline accumulation by mutation or disruption
of the proline oxidase gene improves resistance to freezing and desiccation stresses in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEMS Microbiol Lett 184:103–108
Takagi H, Shichiri M, Takemura M, Mohri M, Nakamori S (2000b) Saccharomyces cerevisiae
sigma 1278b has novel genes of the N-acetyltransferase gene superfamily required for
L-proline analogue resistance. J Bacteriol 182:4249–4256
Takagi H, Takaoka M, Kawaguchi A, Kubo Y (2005) Effect of L-proline on sake brewing and
ethanol stress in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl Environ Microbiol 71:8656–8662
Takagi H, Matsui F, Kawaguchi A, Wu H, Shimoi H, Kubo Y (2007) Construction and analysis of
self-cloning sake yeasts that accumulate proline. J Biosci Bioeng 103:377–380
84
H. Takagi

Takagi H, Taguchi J, Kaino T (2016) Proline accumulation protects Saccharomyces cerevisiae
cells in the stationary phase from ethanol stress by reducing reactive oxygen species levels.
Yeast 33:355–363
Takahashi S, Ando A, Takagi H, Shima J (2009) Insufﬁciency of copper ion homeostasis causes
freeze-thaw injury of yeast cells revealed by indirect gene expression analysis. Appl Environ
Microbiol 75:6706–6711
Tanaka F, Ando A, Nakamura T, Takagi H, Shima J (2006) Functional genomic analysis of
commercial baker’s yeast during initial stages of model dough-fermentation. Food Microbiol
23:717–728
Tanaka-Tsuno F, Mizukami-Murata S, Murata Y, Nakamura T, Ando A, Takagi H, Shima J (2007)
Functional genomics of commercial baker’s yeasts that have different abilities for sugar
utilization and high-sucrose tolerance under different sugar conditions. Yeast 24:901–911
Tatehashi Y, Watanabe D, Takagi H (2016) γ-Glutamyl kinase is involved in selective autophagy
of ribosomes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEBS Lett 590:2906–2914
Terao Y, Nakamori S, Takagi H (2003) Gene dosage effect of L-proline biosynthetic enzymes on
L-proline accumulation and freeze tolerance in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl Environ
Microbiol 69:6527–6532
Teunissen A, Dumortier F, Gorwa MF, Bauer J, Tanghe A, Loı¨ez A, Smet P, Van Dijck P,
Thevelein JM (2002) Isolation and characterization of a freeze-tolerant diploid derivative of
an industrial baker’s yeast strain and its use in frozen doughs. Appl Environ Microbiol
68:4780–4787
Tsolmonbaatar A, Hashida K, Sugimoto Y, Watanabe D, Furukawa S, Takagi H (2016) Isolation
of baker’s yeast mutants with proline accumulation that showed enhanced tolerance to baking-
associated stresses. Int J Food Microbiol 238:233–240
Van Dijck P, Colavizza D, Smet P, Thevelein JM (1995) Differential importance of trehalose in
stress resistance in fermenting and nonfermenting Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells. Appl
Environ Microbiol 61:109–115
Verbruggen N, Hermans C (2008) Proline accumulation in plants: a review. Amino Acids
35:753–759
Verstrepen KJ, Iserentant D, Malcorps P, Derdelinckx G, Van Dijck P, Winderickx J, Pretorius IS,
Thevelein JM, Delvaux FR (2004) Glucose and sucrose: hazardous fast-food for industrial
yeast? Trends Biotechnol 22:531–537
Wada M, Okabe K, Kataoka M, Shimizu S, Yokota H, Takagi H (2008) Distribution of L-
azetidine-2-carboxylate N-acetyltransferase in yeast. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 72:582–586
Watanabe M, Fukuda K, Asano K, Ohta S (1990) Mutants of baker’s yeasts producing a large
amount of isobutyl alcohol or isoamyl alcohol, ﬂavor components of bread. Appl Microbiol
Biotechnol 34:154–159
Watanabe M, Watanabe D, Akao T, Shimoi H (2009) Overexpression of MSN2 in a sake yeast
strain promotes ethanol tolerance and increases ethanol production in sake brewing. J Biosci
Bioeng 107:516–518
Wick EL, De Figueiredo M, Wallace DH (1964) The volatile components of white bread prepared
by a preferent method. Cereal Chem 41:300–315
Yoshikawa Y, Nasuno R, Kawahara N, Nishimura A, Watanabe D, Takagi H (2016) Regulatory
mechanism of the ﬂavoprotein Tah18-dependent nitric oxide synthesis and cell death in yeast.
Nitric Oxide 57:85–91
Zuzuarregui A, del Olmo ML (2004) Expression of stress response genes in wine strains with
different fermentative behavior. FEMS Yeast Res 4:699–710
3
Construction of Baker’s Yeast Strains with Enhanced Tolerance to. . .
85

Anhydrobiosis and Dehydration of Yeasts
4
Alexander Rapoport
Abstract
Anhydrobiosis is a unique phenomenon of nature which gives possibility to
various live organisms to survive during very hot and dry seasons of the year. It
is the state in which all processes of metabolism are temporarily reversibly
suspended as the result of strong dehydration of the cells. The state of
anhydrobiosis is used for industrial production of active dry yeasts. Results of
detailed studies of mechanisms of anhydrobiosis and of changes in the cells
which take place during their drying by different methods help to improve the
dehydration resistance of yeast strains necessary in traditional and nonconven-
tional biotechnologies. The progress which has been made in these researches
within the last decades has led to a formulation of the major factors inﬂuencing
the maintenance of yeast viability during their drying. It was revealed that all
intracellular organelles are subjected to deﬁnite changes during dehydration and
rehydration procedures. A number of earlier unknown intracellular protective
reactions which can be artiﬁcially activated for the improvement of cells’
resistance have been found. These results are used also at the construction of
new biotechnologically efﬁcient yeast strains which are very resistant to dehy-
dration process.
Contents
4.1
Introduction .................................................................................
88
4.2
Inﬂuence of Dehydration Treatment upon Yeast Cells ...................................
91
4.2.1
Cell Wall ............................................................................
91
4.2.2
Plasma Membrane ..................................................................
92
4.2.3
Mitochondria .......................................................................
94
A. Rapoport (*)
Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Microbiology and Biotechnology, University of Latvia,
Jelgavas Street, 1, Riga 1004, Latvia
e-mail: rapoport@mail.eunet.lv
# Springer International Publishing AG 2017
A.A. Sibirny (ed.), Biotechnology of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-58829-2_4
87

4.2.4
Nucleus ............................................................................
95
4.2.5
Other Intracellular Organelles ....................................................
96
4.2.6
Intracellular Protective Reactions ................................................
97
4.3
Some Aspects of Industrial Drying and Use of Dry Yeasts .............................
99
4.3.1
Fluidized Bed Drying .............................................................
100
4.3.2
Spray-Drying ......................................................................
101
4.3.3
Air-Drying of Yeast ...............................................................
103
4.3.4
Rehydration Stage .................................................................
104
4.3.5
Construction of New Strains ......................................................
106
4.3.6
Application of Active Dry Yeasts ................................................
107
4.4
Conclusions ................................................................................
108
References .......................................................................................
109
4.1
Introduction
Since the last century, more and more popular in various branches of biotechnology
is the use of active dry yeast. Active dry yeast is yeast in the state of anhydrobiosis
in which their metabolism is temporarily reversibly suspended (with the mainte-
nance of yeast cells’ viability) as the result of their strong dehydration. The
increased interest of industry to this state use for practical goals is linked with
many reasons, and main of them is economical one. It is much cheaper and more
convenient to transport the dry yeast containing only 5–8% of water than fresh ones
in which the content of water can reach 75–80%. On the one hand, in this case the
same amount of dry yeasts takes considerably smaller volume, but on the other
hand, refrigeration is not necessary for dry yeast transportation. The use of active
dry yeasts is much more convenient also for customers because refrigerators are not
necessary for their storage, and they can be stored for very long periods of time
which can reach 2–3 years if the quality of active dry yeast is good enough. To
achieve such high quality of active dry yeast, ﬁrst of all clariﬁcation of the major
factors promoting preservation of their viability at dehydration is necessary. It
means that we have to understand what happens with yeast cells at their dehydration
and subsequent rehydration/reactivation as well as to reveal the effects of various
factors of different industrial dehydration methods. Then it is necessary to ﬁnd the
possibilities to improve the resistance of biotechnologically important yeast strains
to dehydration–rehydration treatments and to diminish the negative effects of
damaging factors of industrial drying procedures. Our current knowledge of these
problems is the main topic of this review.
The history of research of anhydrobiosis starts at the beginning of the eighteenth
century in 1701 when great Dutch naturalist Antonie van Leewenhoek discovered
this state using his own very simple handmade microscopes. He studied the sand
taken from the roof gutter of his house after very hot summer and added a drop of
water to the sample of this sand. Unexpectedly, he found in this preparation a
number of moving organisms which he called as “animalcules.” He was very
surprised that there were live organisms in such dry sample. He repeated this
88
A. Rapoport

procedure a lot of times, and every time he has seen the restoration of active life of
small organisms when the water was added. Now we know that these organisms
were rotifers. Only in 1743 appeared a new paper of T. Needham which revealed
similar effect in other conditions for other organisms—nematodes. Then a number
of well-known researchers of the eighteenth century including H. Backer,
L. Spallanzani, and others continued the experiments in this direction. In the
twentieth century, results of experiments of W. Preyer were published which
once more evidenced the maintenance of viability by dry rotifers, tardigrades,
and nematodes and gave the term for this phenomenon—“anabiosis.” From this
time the studies of anabiosis were actively continued in different countries. Another
term, synonym of anabiosis—“cryptobiosis”—was proposed by Keilin (1959).
D. Keilin has written that it is “the state of an organism when it shows no visible
signs of life and when its metabolic activity becomes hardly measurable or comes
reversibly to a standstill” (Keilin 1959). New stage of the studies of anabiosis
(cryptobiosis) started at the second half of the twentieth century because of the
development of powerful techniques for cytological, biophysical, biochemical
research, and accumulation of new more-less modern knowledge. This new stage
in the studies of anabiosis (cryptobiosis) was started mainly by the experiments of
John Crowe in the USA, Folkert Hoekstra in the Netherlands, and some research
groups in Russia and Latvia.
Today following the proposal of Keilin (1959), we distinguish some kinds of
anabiosis (cryptobiosis), which correspond to the various ways how it can be
reached by live organisms. These forms are the following:
•
Anhydrobiosis—the metabolism is suspended by the water evaporation from the
cells.
•
Osmobiosis—caused by extraction of water by solutions with high osmotic
pressure.
•
Cryobiosis—when liquid water, the medium for metabolic reactions is
eliminated by freezing.
•
Anoxybiosis—caused by the decrease of oxygen concentration below critical
limits.
Now, on the basis of the results of active studies of G. El-Registan’s group, it is
possible to discuss one more form which conditionally can be called as
“autochemoanabiosis.” It can be reached under the inﬂuence of chemical factors
produced by the cells themselves and which are the autoinducers of anabiosis—
alkylhydroxybenzenes (Mulyukin et al. 1996, 2001; Bespalov et al. 2000;
Stepanenko et al. 2004; El-Registan et al. 2005; Nikolaev et al. 2006 etc.) .
There is a number of live organisms belonging to completely different groups
which are able for the transition into the state of anhydrobiosis at the unfavorable
conditions of the environment. They are seeds of many plants, mosses, cysts of
crustaceans, and microscopic animals such as rotifers, tardigrades, and nematodes,
as well as the majority of microorganisms.
4
Anhydrobiosis and Dehydration of Yeasts
89

There are a number of different factors which may determine microorganisms’
viability at their dehydration. One of the attempts to summarize these factors was
made by Morgan et al. (2006). In accordance with this classiﬁcation the main
factors are:
•
Resistance of microorganisms to dehydration treatment
•
Growth media taken for the cultivation of microorganisms
•
Growth phase of microbial culture
•
Concentration of the cells taken for drying
•
Protective substances which are used at dehydration stage
•
Methods of dehydration which are used
•
Conditions at rehydration/reactivation stage
At the same time, all these factors are rather conditional ones, and here are some
data which may evidence such postulate. For example, if we are thinking about
resistance of microorganisms to dehydration, usually it is supposed that yeasts are
more resistant to dehydration treatments comparing with bacteria. Nevertheless, the
comparison of genetically closely related yeasts Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Sac-
charomyces mikatae, and Naumovia castellii showed that they very signiﬁcantly
differ in their resistance to dehydration treatment. The viability of the cells after
dehydration–rehydration was 84, 20, and 40% correspondingly, but in the case
these yeasts were dehydrated in the presence of trehalose, their viability increased
approximately for 20% for the case of each of these three species (Lopez-Martinez
et al. 2014). Also the resistance to drying of various strains of the same species can
be rather different. And what is more, the resistance of the same strain differs rather
considerably depending on the conditions of cultivation, rehydration, and reactiva-
tion. For example, the viability of yeast strain Saccharomyces cerevisiae 14 grown
in molasses containing medium after dehydration–rehydration may reach 95% and
higher, whereas after growth in the ethanol-containing medium, this ﬁgure reaches
only 30% (Beker and Rapoport 1987). At the same time, viability of Lactobacillus
reuteri dehydrated after their growth at pH 5 was at the level of 90% whereas after
their growth at pH 6—about 65% (Palmfeldt and Hahn-Hagerdal 2000). Another
example may be linked with the inﬂuence of microbial culture growth phase upon
the resistance to dehydration–rehydration. Usually microbial cells (both bacteria
and yeasts) are the most resistant to dehydration in stationary growth phase, but in
exponential growth phase, their viability after dehydration–rehydration only in the
best cases can reach 30% (Beker and Rapoport 1987). Some recent studies showed
that this postulate also is not common rule. Very high resistance to dehydration–
rehydration treatment was shown for yeast Debaryomyces hansenii in exponential
growth phase too (Khroustalyova et al. 2001). High resistance to dehydration in
exponential growth phase was found for S. cerevisiae thermoresistant strain
(Rapoport et al. 2014). If to think about optimum cell concentration for the highest
viability at dehydration–rehydration, it depends from the used protective medium.
When taking optimum protective medium, optimum cell concentration depends
from the concentration of protective medium (Morgan et al. 2006). The conclusion
90
A. Rapoport

which was made on the basis of analysis of all these factors was that the mainte-
nance of high viability of microorganisms at their drying “appears to be still a
science based on empirical testing rather than facts and tested theories. Major
problem to overcome seems to be the lack of generic theories” (Morgan et al.
2006). Current review is devoted to the attempt to make an additional step toward
generation of such theories. It is linked only with one kind of anabiosis
(cryptobiosis), the form which was discovered by Antonie van Leeuwenhoek—to
anhydrobiosis and will discuss the information received only for one group of
microorganisms—for yeasts.
4.2
Influence of Dehydration Treatment upon Yeast Cells
Main studies of structural-and-functional changes of yeast cells during their dehy-
dration were performed in 1970–1987 and were summarized in the review
published 30 years ago (Beker and Rapoport 1987). Therefore, in this review they
will be described rather brieﬂy, but the main attention will be paid to the results of
later studies in this direction.
4.2.1
Cell Wall
Studies of this surface structure response to dehydration treatment which have been
performed using different methodological approaches have shown that in these
conditions, there are changes both in its main components—mannoproteins and
glucans. In the case of mannoproteins, its changes were revealed using scanning
electron microscopy; there were ﬁbrils on the surface of the cells instead of the
smooth cell wall in native cells (Rapoport et al. 1983; Ventina et al. 1984). These
changes were accompanied with the increase of negative and positive charges of
cell wall (Rapoport and Beker 1985; Rapoport and Muter 1995). It can be explained
by disruption of certain connections between the molecules. As a result “free ends”
of mannoprotein molecules with negative and positive charges may be formed and
appear on the cell wall surfaces. The conclusion on the changes of glucan compo-
nent of the cell wall was made on the basis of revealed changes of the shape of the
cell (Rapoport et al. 1986a) which mainly depends from the structure and stability
of glucans. It is important to mention that all these changes of the cell walls were
revealed for the viable dehydrated and rehydrated after dehydration yeast cells. So,
the conclusion was made that these changes are reversible and do not inﬂuence cell
viability. More recent studies of mannoprotein importance for the stability of yeast
cell at its dehydration showed that it deﬁnitely was underestimated. It was shown
recently that the absence of some mannoproteins (GPI-anchored cell wall protein
Ccw12) in the cell wall unexpectedly may have very positive effects upon the
higher resistance of yeast to dehydration. At the same time, mutants lacking
proteins belonging to two structurally and functionally unrelated groups (proteins
non-covalently attached to the cell wall and Pir proteins) possessed signiﬁcantly
4
Anhydrobiosis and Dehydration of Yeasts
91

lower cell resistance to dehydration-rehydration than the mother wild-type strain
(Borovikova et al. 2016). On the basis of these results, the conclusion can be made
that the cell wall structure and mannoprotein composition are characteristics which
may be very important for the resistance of yeasts to drying procedure. It simulta-
neously means that possible damages of cell wall proteins during yeast dehydration
can be an unfavorable factor for cell resistance and viability. Besides that, the
hypothesis was proposed that increased amounts of chitin may have positive effects
for the stabilization of yeast cell walls in the conditions of dehydration–rehydration
(Borovikova et al. 2016). Recently additional rather interesting indirect information
was received specifying the deﬁnite changes of glucan component in the cell walls
during dehydration of the cells. It appeared that β-glucans isolated from dry yeast
cells possess higher immunogenic activity comparing it with β-glucans isolated
from native yeast biomass (Liepins et al. 2015). The reasons of this effect of yeast
cells’ dehydration procedure, of course, have to be found in the future studies. As
one of the working hypothesis, the idea that dehydration treatment leads to essential
weakening of chemical bonds between mannoproteins and glucans in yeast cell
walls can be proposed. As a result it facilitates to the easier isolation of β-glucans
from dry yeast biomass, and obtained preparations of β-glucans have higher level of
purity.
4.2.2
Plasma Membrane
Essential changes were found also for plasma membrane of yeast cells at their
dehydration–rehydration. Because of signiﬁcant decrease of cells sizes during this
treatment to maintain its integrity, plasma membrane becomes strongly folded
(Fig. 4.1) (Biryusova and Rapoport 1978). These structural changes are
accompanied with essential increase of its permeability characteristics at the rehy-
dration stage (Beker et al. 1984; Novichkova and Rapoport 1984). It is supposed
that the changes of molecular organization of plasma membrane which lead to the
increase of membrane permeability and signiﬁcant leakage from the cells of various
intracellular compounds at their rehydration may be one of the main reasons of their
losses of viability (Beker and Rapoport 1987). A model which describes the
changes in membranes at the dehydration and subsequent rehydration of the cells
was developed (Crowe et al. 1989). In the accordance with this model, dehydration
leads to the phase transitions of membrane lipids from liquid crystalline phase to gel
phase. If back phase transition at dry cell rehydration takes place in the water
medium, it can be rather dangerous for the state of membrane and accompanied at
least by its high permeability. This model postulates that to decrease such damage,
it would be necessary to increase the rehydration temperature above the phase
transition temperature or to reach this phase transition in waterless conditions, for
example, in the vapors of water. The correctness of these postulates was conﬁrmed
also for dehydrated yeast cells (Leslie et al. 1994; Rapoport et al. 1995, 2009). It is
already known for many years that to have the resistance to dehydration, yeast cells
have to accumulate rather signiﬁcant amounts of trehalose (Panek 1985, 1995;
92
A. Rapoport

Eleutherio et al. 2015; etc). The water replacement hypothesis was proposed to
explain its role in the protection of the cells (Crowe 2008; Crowe et al. 1992). In
accordance with the developments of this hypothesis, trehalose hydrogen bonds to
polar residues in dry phospholipids (mainly the phosphate of the headgroup) and
maintains their lateral spacing similar to substituted water thereby preserving
membrane native structures (Crowe 2008). It is supposed also that besides interac-
tion with lipids, trehalose can form also glassy matrix with high glass transition
Fig. 4.1 A scheme of several structural transformations in yeast cell during its dehydration (1–3)
and subsequent rehydration/reactivation (4–6). (1) Initial cell; (2–3) formation of plasma mem-
brane invaginations (folds) during dehydration, chromatin condensation, its localization at one of
the poles of the nucleus, and separation of chromosome containing part of the nucleus;
(2a) formation of new intracellular plasma membrane during yeast dehydration which separates
irreversibly damaged part of the cell from the viable one; (4–6) rehydration and reactivation of dry
cell, further degradation of the part of the nucleus to be separated and its elimination by
phagosomes during autophagy; (5a) autolysis in the separated irreversibly damaged part of the
cell; (6, 6a) division of a reactivated cell (Beker and Rapoport 1987, modiﬁed)
4
Anhydrobiosis and Dehydration of Yeasts
93

temperature (Crowe et al. 1998) which prevents phase separation in membranes
during drying of live organisms and maintains existing phases or rafts (Ricker et al.
2003). A number of the papers appeared during last years which show that yeast
cells can survive desiccation treatment also in the absence of trehalose (Ratnakumar
and Tunnacliffe 2006; Petitjean et al. 2015; etc.). It is possible that in this case the
trehalose for the membrane and macromolecules protection may be substituted by
other compounds, for example, with sugar alcohols (Rapoport et al. 1988: Krallish
et al. 1997). Recently water replacement hypothesis has been additionally devel-
oped on the basis of the results of molecular dynamic simulation. Up to these new
ideas, trehalose interaction with membrane phospholipids at dehydration of the
cells results in increased spacing between lipids and disordering of the hydrocarbon
chains in concentration-dependent manner (Golovina et al. 2009, 2010). It was
shown recently that the kinetics of both processes—dehydration and rehydration—
may very signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the level of plasma membrane possible damages.
The lowering of both processes facilitates to more safe reorganization of its lipid
components (Dupont et al. 2010; Lemetais et al. 2012). It was also shown that
essential importance in the maintenance of plasma membrane integrity during yeast
cell dehydration has ergosterol (Dupont et al. 2011, 2012). It provides the mechani-
cal and structural stability to membrane and also protects yeast cells from oxidation
damages (Dupont et al. 2011, 2012). Another new direction in the studies of plasma
membrane changes is directed to the understanding of the role of membrane
proteins in the maintenance of cell viability at dehydration–rehydration treatments.
First experiments have been performed using a collection of deletion mutants, the
strains lacking deﬁnite membrane proteins—transporters of potassium and glyc-
erol. Their results clearly showed the importance of potassium transporter Trk2
which is responsible for the accumulation by cells of relatively high intracellular
potassium content and that it is crucial for the maintenance of yeast cell viability
during their transfer into the state of anhydrobiosis and subsequent reactivation to
active life (Borovikova et al. 2014c). Similar results were received also regarding
glycerol transporters Stl1p (glycerol importer) and Fps1p (glycerol exporter). It
appears that both of them contribute to the cell ability to survive during the transfer
into the state of anhydrobiosis (Duskova et al. 2015). It means that damages of at
least these membrane proteins at the dehydration–rehydration of the cells may be
very dangerous for their viability. These results are the ﬁrst indication that not only
lipid components of plasma membrane but also its protein components play impor-
tant role at yeast transfer into the state of anhydrobiosis and subsequent restoration
and return to active life.
4.2.3
Mitochondria
In spite of the importance of mitochondria for the life of any eukaryotic organism,
there is still too small information regarding these organelles’ role and possible
changes at the cells’ transition into the state of anhydrobiosis and subsequent
restoration of their normal physiological activities. At the same time, it is necessary
94
A. Rapoport

to keep in mind that besides production of energy necessary for reactivation of cells
and repair processes during oxidative phosphorylation, there appear also reactive
oxygen species (ROS) as the by-products. ROS can be rather dangerous for the cells
and especially when they are in such weakened state after anhydrobiosis. It is well
known that oxidative stress processes are one of the reasons of cell death during
dehydration–rehydration treatments (Espindola et al. 2003; Franca et al. 2005;
Dupont et al. 2014). It means that any information about these organelles is not
only interesting but is also important for the further understanding of the ways for
the increase of yeast resistance to dehydration. Nevertheless, our knowledge about
their changes is at the moment too scarce. It is known that mitochondria are the
organelles which restoration from inactive state in anhydrobiosis may be revealed
earlier than of any other organelles. Their multiplication by dividing was found by
electron microscopy at the very early stages of yeast reactivation from the state of
anhydrobiosis (Rapoport and Kostrikina 1973). Studies of possible mitochondrial
DNA changes as the result of cells’ dehydration have not revealed them till the
moment. There was not revealed any increase of petite mutants occurrence after
dehydration treatment as well as mtDNA copy number changes, sequence
rearrangements, and resistance to mutagen challenge (Finn and Stewart 2002;
Jenkins et al. 2010). At the same time, it was shown that yeast cell viability after
dehydration–rehydration correlates with mtDNA resistance (Picazo et al. 2015).
This fact was revealed by comparing the viability of hybrid strain clones which
contained mtDNA of S. cerevisiae or of S. uvarum. In the ﬁrst case, viability of
yeast after dehydration was signiﬁcantly higher (Picazo et al. 2015). Electron
microscopy studies showed also that during yeast dehydration the condensation
of mitochondrial genome takes place (Rapoport and Kostrikina 1973). It deﬁnitely
speciﬁes on the attempts of the cells to protect mtDNA from possible damages
during this treatment and transfer into the state of anhydrobiosis. Additional studies
in this direction are undoubtedly necessary.
4.2.4
Nucleus
Studies of the changes in yeast nucleus during yeast transition into the state of
anhydrobiosis ﬁrst of all revealed the condensation of chromatin which makes it
inactive and more resistant to extreme factors of the environment (Rapoport et al.
1973). Now it is supposed as the main protective reaction in the cells, and without it
cells cannot maintain their viability during dehydration–rehydration processes.
Electron microscopy investigations showed also the changes of nucleus shape as
well the existence of opened areas of nucleus which are not covered by nuclear
membrane (Rapoport et al. 1973). Such pictures are interpreted now as the
evidences of the considerable changes of lipid components of nuclear membrane
which are the targets for ﬁxing agents used at the preparation of the samples for
electron microscopy studies (Dupont et al. 2014). Usually in these areas are located
mitochondria and lipid droplets which most probably are necessary as the sources
of energy and lipids for the restoration of changed areas of nuclear membranes
4
Anhydrobiosis and Dehydration of Yeasts
95

during reactivation of cells from the anhydrobiosis (Rapoport et al. 1973). Further
studies have not revealed any changes of the size and numbers of chromosomes as
well as sequence changes in the DNA of brewer’s yeast at their dehydration–
rehydration (Jenkins et al. 2010). It was revealed that all the genes needed for
desiccation tolerance are already transcribed and translated prior to desiccation
(Calahan et al. 2011). Studies of gene expression after rehydration of dry yeast
revealed activation of some genes linked with the fermentation pathway and with
the nonoxidative branch of the pentose phosphate pathway. The induction of genes
linked with ribosomal biogenesis and protein synthesis was shown too (Novo et al.
2007). Observations made at transcriptomic and proteomic levels showed that after
rehydration of dry yeast cells very quickly there can be revealed the start of protein
synthesis and expression of various genes including those which are responsible for
the assimilation of various nutrient compounds (Singh et al. 2005; Rossignol et al.
2006; Novo et al. 2007; Vaudano et al. 2009, 2010; Noti et al. 2015). All these
results lead to the conclusion that if the transition of yeast cells into the state of
anhydrobiosis takes place in adequate conditions, there are no serious damages of
the cellular genome and nucleus.
4.2.5
Other Intracellular Organelles
Rather limited amount of information was accumulated till the moment regarding
reactions of other intracellular organelles during dehydration–rehydration as well
as on their changes during these processes in spite that some of them have very
important roles in the maintenance of yeast cell physiological activities. One of
such important organelles is vacuole which has a lot of functions including the
regulation of cellular homeostasis. Besides, it is a storage organelle, and what can
be very important for the cases of cell transfer into the state of anhydrobiosis is it is
linked with degradation, turnover of various intracellular molecules, and processes
of autophagy. It was revealed that at dehydration–rehydration, yeast cell vacuoles
can diminish in their sizes as well as fragment. There takes place also redistribution
of protein molecules at least at some limited areas of vacuolar membrane that
speciﬁes changes in molecular organization of membrane (Rapoport et al. 1986b).
It is clear that such changes can be rather dangerous for the cell if extrapolating our
knowledge about plasma membrane changes and strong increase of plasma mem-
brane permeability. Vacuoles contain a lot of lytic enzymes which leakage from
these organelles can lead to the death of the cells. The increase of the permeability
of vacuolar membranes has been already shown at least for the Mg2+ and Ca2+ ions
(Rapoport et al. 1982). Electron microscopy studies revealed also the activation of
autophagy during rehydration and reactivation of yeast cells from the state of
anhydrobiosis (Beker and Rapoport 1987). It deﬁnitely can be supposed that
autophagy is an important protective reaction of the cells at these processes because
it gives the possibility to isolate from actively functioning organelles in the rest of
the cell and subject to degradation (and further recycling) irreversibly damaged
molecules and structures which can be dangerous for the cell.
96
A. Rapoport

The only information which we have at the moment about changes of
peroxisomes at yeast cell dehydration–rehydration was obtained in the experiments
with yeast Candida boidinii. Their cells contain the packets of peroxisomes.
Electron microscopy studies showed obvious changes of lipid components of
their membranes. Such conclusion was made because in dehydrated-rehydrated
cells, it was not possible to visualize peroxisomal membranes inside the packet of
peroxisomes. Similar observations were made also at the studies of changes of
membranes of nuclei (they have been discussed above). Such effects revealed in
electron microscopy investigations are linked with bad chemical ﬁxation of these
membranes at the preparation of the samples for the studies by standard methods
used also for the native (not subjected to dehydration treatment) yeast samples.
Because ﬁxation procedure is linked on the chemical interaction of the ﬁxing agent
with membrane lipids, the differences in the ﬁxation results may be explained only
by the changes of lipid components of membranes during dehydration of yeast cells
(Rapoport et al. unpublished).
One more interesting organelles are lipid droplets (Klug and Daum 2014). Lipids
which are located in lipid droplets are linked with energy production via
β-oxidation, intracellular membrane synthesis, protein modiﬁcation, signaling,
secretion within lipoproteins, and cell reactions upon stress treatments (Klug and
Daum 2014; Barbosa et al. 2015; Wang 2016). In spite of the recently essentially
increased attention of researchers to these organelles, we still have too scarce
information regarding their changes at yeast dehydration–rehydration. Electron
microscopy studies revealed that dehydration treatment may result in the merging
of lipid droplets in baker’s yeast cells. At the reactivation stage, sometimes there
can be found the existence of the direct contacts between lipid droplets and
vacuoles as well as intrusion of merged lipid droplets into the vacuole in the
yeast cells (Ventina et al. 1986). These observations give the possibility to think
about active participation of lipid droplets in the processes of repair and restoration
of membrane structure. Experiments performed with yeast species which geneti-
cally are closely related to S. cerevisiae—with S. paradoxus and S. bayanus—
revealed
the
correlation
between
higher
amount
of
phosphatidylcholine
accumulated by cells in lipid droplets as the result of special cultivation conditions
and increased resistance of these cells at the dehydration treatment (Rodrıguez-
Porrata et al. 2011). It was shown also that lipid droplets may be linked with the
storage or inactivation of misfolded or aggregated proteins which can appear during
dehydration–rehydration (Wang 2016).
Unfortunately, we still have no information about possible changes of endoplas-
mic reticulum membranes as well as about Golgi complex.
4.2.6
Intracellular Protective Reactions
To survive in the constantly changing conditions of the environment, under the
inﬂuence of its various unfavorable physical and chemical factors, all live
organisms including yeasts have worked out during their long evolution period a
4
Anhydrobiosis and Dehydration of Yeasts
97

lot of special protective reactions. In principle, the suspension of metabolism and
transfer into the state of anhydrobiosis also is the protective reaction which helps
live organisms to maintain their viability during very dry periods of the year.
Sometimes it happens that it is rather difﬁcult to separate the protective reactions
and just the changes of organisms or cells at the inﬂuence of extreme conditions of
the environment. Such example is the changes of plasma membrane which becomes
strongly folded at the dehydration of the cells (Fig. 4.1). Taking into account that
cells during dehydration process considerably diminish their volumes, to maintain
its integrity plasma membrane has to become strongly folded, and it is reached by
the formation of folded net from the small folds which existed in the membranes of
native cells. So, it can be supposed that such changes also are one of protective
reactions. Similar situation is with already abovementioned autophagy. It also can
be supposed as protective reaction because its role is deﬁnitely linked with the
necessity to eliminate damaged molecules and structures, such as proteins,
membranes, or in some cases also organelles which can be toxic to actively
functioning cells (Ratnakumar et al. 2011). Besides that, electron microscopy
studies revealed some other protective reactions. The main of them most probably
is the condensation of chromatin in the nucleus and of mtDNA in mitochondria
which makes DNA molecules inactive and protect them from the damages. For the
nucleus there was found the possibility to be diminished signiﬁcantly in its sizes
with the formation of new nuclear membrane covering condensed chromatin-
containing part of the nucleus (Fig. 4.1) (Rapoport et al. 1973). In some cases,
the possibility of the formation of new intracellular plasma membrane which
separates two parts of the cell was discovered—dead and viable (Fig. 4.1)
(Rapoport 1973). A number of chemical compounds have protective functions.
The most well known of them is trehalose which can protect the membranes and
macromolecules by substitution of water which is necessary for the maintenance of
their structure and conformation (Panek 1995; Eleutherio et al. 2015). In spite a
number of researchers have showed the possibility of mutant yeast cells to maintain
their viability also in the case of trehalose absence, most probably it evidences only
that cells have the alternatives how to survive in these conditions. It was found that
one of alternatives to trehalose can be the group of sugar alcohols (Rapoport et al.
1988, 2009; Krallish et al. 1997). A number of substances including catalase,
glutathione, and proline protect cells from the oxidative stress during dehydration–
rehydration (Takagi et al. 2000, 2016; Takagi 2008; Espindola et al. 2003; Franca
et al. 2005). The information on the protective function of proline is discussed in
detail by H. Takagi in this book chapter “Construction of baker’s yeast strains with
enhanced tolerance to baking-associated stresses.” It was revealed that higher
amounts of a thioredoxin enhance oxidative stress resistance in wine yeast strains.
The thioredoxin and also the glutathione/glutaredoxin system constitute the most
important defense against oxidation. Both these antioxidant systems are very
important at various stages of active dry yeast production starting from biomass
propagation (Grant 2001; Herrero et al. 2008; Go´mez-Pastor et al. 2010). Proteins,
such as thioredoxins and glutaredoxins, participate also in the protection of protein
activity against oxidative damage by repairing chemically modiﬁed proteins or by
98
A. Rapoport

modulating the redox state of protein sulfhydryl groups (Grant 2001). In accordance
to these effects of the protection mechanisms against oxidative stress, lower levels
of molecular damage were revealed, and both lipid peroxidation and protein
carbonylation were diminished at yeast dehydration if its cells contained higher
amounts of these protective proteins (Go´mez-Pastor et al. 2010, 2012). Some
researchers showed the protective role of heat shock proteins and especially of
Hsp70 (Guzhova et al. 2008; Dupont et al. 2014; Capece et al. 2016) which can be
important in the facilitation of endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation of
damaged proteins. Recently it was shown that extremely important compound is
ergosterol which as it is believed can increase the mechanical resistance of plasma
membrane (Dupont et al. 2011, 2012, 2014). The most recent discovery in this
direction is the function of one more important protein trehalose-6P synthase which
in addition to its catalytic function in trehalose synthesis is a sensing/signaling
intermediate with regulatory function(s), at least in energy homeostasis. Such
function in preventing energy depletion deﬁnitely may be very essential to with-
stand adverse conditions (Petitjean et al. 2015). This short list of different intracel-
lular protective reaction is not complete, of course, but it deﬁnitely shows how
complex and various reactions of the cells are in the unfavorable conditions of the
environment. Such conclusion can be supported by recent research results which
showed that mutants defective in trehalose biosynthesis, hydrophilins, responses to
hyperosmolarity, and hypersalinity, reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging, and
DNA damage repair nevertheless retain these strain desiccation tolerance (Calahan
et al. 2011). It means that there are a lot of various alternatives which give the
possibility to substitute one protective reaction by the other. It is also clear that
further studies of mechanisms of anhydrobiosis in yeasts will lead to new
discoveries of earlier unknown for us intracellular protective reactions. Some of
them may appear very important not only for basic biology and industrial biotech-
nology but also for the goals of medicine. It can be expected that this new
knowledge will give the possibilities for the development of new approaches for
the protection of human organisms and artiﬁcial increase of their resistance which
can be necessary, for example, in the cases of complicated medical procedures and
treatments.
4.3
Some Aspects of Industrial Drying and Use of Dry Yeasts
Different methods of dehydration are used for the obtaining of active dry yeast
preparations as well as for the production of dry starter cultures for various
biotechnological processes. There are freeze-drying (Lodato et al. 1999; Abadias
et al. 2001; Ale et al. 2015), drum dryers, ﬂuidized bed drying (Bayrock and
Ingledew 1997), spray-drying (Luna-Solano et al. 2005; Isono et al. 1995), convec-
tive dehydration, or air-blast processes between these approaches. All these
approaches have their advantages and disadvantages. For example, disadvantage
of freeze-drying is linked with rather high expenses necessary for this method
application. Fluidized bed drying and spray-drying sometimes can give rather low
4
Anhydrobiosis and Dehydration of Yeasts
99

viability of yeast cells in the preparations obtained after dehydration (Lee et al.
2016). Therefore, a lot of studies during the last years were devoted to the attempts
to improve and optimize these drying methods to get the possibility to use them
rather efﬁciently. Just as the examples below will be discussed, several results are
obtained during the last 15–20 years using some drying approaches—ﬂuidized bed
drying, spray-drying, and air-drying.
4.3.1
Fluidized Bed Drying
Fluidized bed technology has been used in industry already for many years.
Between different products which were dehydrated with this technology, there
are various wet solid products including also yeasts (Turker et al. 2006). The
main advantages of this technology are linked with large contact surface area
between solids and gas, good degree of solids mixing, and rapid transfer of heat
and moisture between solids and gas that shortens drying time as well as the level of
damaging of heat-sensitive biological materials. At the same time, the main prob-
lem of industrial ﬂuidized bed dryers is scaling up of the processes developed in the
laboratory conditions. The most important issues linked with the application of this
technology and constructions of various possible ﬂuidized bed dryer models are
discussed in detail by Daud (2008). It is reported that multistage ﬂuidized bed
drying process can be used as a commercial effective method for yeast drying
(Akbari et al. 2012).
Some researchers suppose that ﬂuidized bed technologies have signiﬁcant
advantages comparing them with other ways of industrial yeast dehydration
(Grabowski et al. 1997; Bayrock and Ingledew 1997). Bayrock and Ingledew
(1997) showed that the viability of yeasts in the ﬂuidized bed dryer was not
signiﬁcantly affected by the drying temperature used during the warming-up and
constant-rate drying periods (when moisture contents were greater than 15%). On
the basis of obtained results, these researchers stated that the mechanisms of death
for ﬂuidized bed drying are very different from those for spray-drying. It is
suggested that factors other than thermal destruction inﬂuence the viability seen
during ﬂuidized bed drying.
Studies directed to the understanding of possible role of oxidative stress in the
case of ﬂuidized bed drying of yeasts showed that it is a critical one (Grant 2001;
Herrero et al. 2008; Go´mez-Pastor et al. 2010). It was shown in these studies that
one of the factors which provide yeast strains resistance at their dehydration in
ﬂuidized bed dryer is the accumulation of glutathione. In the experiments with the
simulation of industrial growth conditions, yeast cells accumulated more than 1%
of glutathione, and this percentage increased during the ﬁrst period of drying,
reaching approximately 2%. Such results led to the low level of lipid peroxidation
in dry biomass (Garre et al. 2010), and it was ﬁve- to tenfold lower than in other
experiments with laboratory dehydration conditions (Espindola et al. 2003).
Mathematical modeling has been used for the analysis of drying processes, and a
number of more or less complex empirical or theoretical models are available (see:
100
A. Rapoport

Debaste et al. 2008). The operating conditions such as temperature, loading rate of
compressed yeast granules, and hot air humidity had direct effects on both yeast
activity and viability. The most important factors that affected the quality of the
product were loading rate and the operational temperature in each zone of the bed.
Compared with the normal operating conditions at the plant, the optimization
resulted in more than 12% and 27% improvement in the yeast activity and viability,
respectively (Akbari et al. 2012). A model has been developed for the drying of
granular baker’s yeast in ﬂuidized bed dryer. The model was applied to the drying
of granular baker’s yeast with different granular dimensions. Good correspondence
was found between model predictions and experimental measurements for small
granule sizes. As a result, up to the opinion of this model authors, it may be
successfully used in the technologies linked with the drying of relatively small
particles where diffusion is not the limiting step (Turker et al. 2006). Current
models take into account several simultaneous mechanisms of heat, liquid, and
vapor diffusion (Turker et al. 2006). Comparatively recent modeling of yeast drying
in a ﬂuidized bed led to the construction of mathematical model in which a deep
physical meaning was developed, using Fick’s law to model molecular diffusion of
vapor inside the tortuous porous medium (Debaste et al. 2008).
The important aspects in the control and optimization of drying processes are the
energy cost, drying time, the product quality, and the moisture content in material at
the end of the process (Koni et al. 2009). The optimal control algorithm is proposed
to improve the drying process of baker’s yeast in batch ﬂuidized bed. The devel-
oped model helps to reach smaller energy consumption and quality loss at the end of
the drying process using proposed optimization procedure (Koni et al. 2009).
4.3.2
Spray-Drying
Spray-drying is another process for the production of active dry microbial
preparations including yeasts at industrial scale (Luna-Solano et al. 2005; Aponte
et al. 2016). This approach gives the possibilities of high production rates with low
operating costs. It is commonly used for the production of various stable dry food
products (Silva et al. 2011; Aponte et al. 2016). The following advantages of this
process are usually mentioned: (1) heat-sensitive materials can be dried under
atmospheric pressure and at low temperatures, (2) it allows pilot-scale and large-
scale productions in continuous operation with relatively simple equipment,
(3) spray-dried products are usually homogeneous, and (4) different types of
carriers and protective compounds can be used to enhance the microbial survival
(Fu and Chen 2011; Aponte et al. 2016).
Similar to other industrial processes directed to the dehydration of yeast, also
spray-drying may lead to rather serious changes and damages in DNA, RNA, cell
wall, plasma membrane, and other organelles (Labuza et al. 1970; Santivarangkna
et al. 2008; Aponte et al. 2016).
In a number of studies, there were investigated optimal conditions of spray-
drying process for several kinds of yeast. For example, for the obtaining of dry
4
Anhydrobiosis and Dehydration of Yeasts
101

brewer’s yeast with rather high viability, it was recommended to use the addition of
10% of maltodextrins and the following temperatures: inlet, 145 C and outlet,
60 C (Luna-Solano et al. (2000, 2003, 2005). Another study resulted in the
obtaining of high quality of dry yeast when a soluble starch was used as a protective
compound, but inlet temperature was lowered to 120 C with the same outlet
temperature (60 C). Further decrease of inlet/outlet temperatures to 110/45 C
also gave rather high viability of dry preparations, but the level of remaining water
in these powders was higher than is usually recommended, and as the result it can be
unfavorable for long-term storage of such dry preparations (Gomez-Pastor et al.
2011).
Some researchers separate thermal and dehydration inactivation at their studies
of main factors affecting yeast damages during drying procedure. It was shown by
them that yeast fermentative activity was lost very sharply if drying temperature
was over 40 C, but when it was at the level of 30 C, thermal inactivation was
negligible. At the same time, dehydration inactivation occurred also at such low
temperature. It was concluded also that in spite it is not easy to control drying rate
for spray-drying; low dehydration rates result in higher activities of dried yeast
preparations (Fujii et al. 2011).
The possibilities for the optimization of spray-drying process are discussed in a
number of papers (Luna-Solano et al. 2000, 2003, 2005). A combination of simula-
tion with experimental treatments of spray-drying process was developed in order
to minimize the energy resources required to obtain a production of spray-dried
brewer’s yeast at given viability and moisture. Cost function, viability, output
moisture, and production were related with process variables, both empirically
and by simulation with a nonlinear space state. This developed methodology is
not speciﬁc for the deﬁnite technical construction of the dryers but is rather general
for yeast spray-drying (Luna-Solano et al. 2005). An approach to determine the
kinetics of degradation of the substances, as a function of the current state of the
material (temperature, residual moisture content, and rates of their changes) during
the spray-drying process of yeasts, is described by Gordienko et al. (2015). The
obtained kinetic equations were used to predict the quality of yeast biomass dried in
a pilot-scale spray equipment (Gordienko et al. 2015).
Studies of efﬁcient storage of dry yeast preparations produced using spay drying
method showed that there can be the losses of viability from 10 to 25% per year at
20 C, but at the same time, there was no revealed signiﬁcant changes in viability of
dry yeast preparations during 3 years if they have been stored at 4 C in a dry
atmosphere (Gomez-Pastor et al. 2011).
Spray-drying is used for the microencapsulation process in the food industry.
Microencapsulation is necessary to cover bioactive compounds with protective
materials which can protect bioactive core from various environmental stress
factors (Huq et al. 2013). In the case of yeast Saccharomyces boulardii, this process
gives the possibility for their safe passing through gastrointestinal system of
humans and animals and for this yeast use as an efﬁcient probiotic. It can be used
also as preventative and therapeutic agent for the curing of diarrhea (Holzapfel and
Schillinger 2002; Kuhle et al. 2005; Czerucka et al. 2007; McFarland 2010;
102
A. Rapoport

Rajkowska et al. 2012). S. boulardii was microencapsulated by spray-drying in a
number of studies (Joshi and Thorat 2011; Duongthingoc et al. 2013a, b). Gelatin
and gum arabic are recommended as promising protective “wall” materials for
S. boulardii microencapsulation. An inlet temperature of 125 C should be pre-
ferred in this spray-drying microencapsulation process (Arslan et al. 2015).
4.3.3
Air-Drying of Yeast
Some researchers prefer to use air-blast drying which up to their data can lower the
cost ﬁvefold, decrease cell damage during drying procedure, as well as provide
easier control of moisture of yeast preparations comparing with other drying
methods (Santivarangkna et al. 2007; Lee et al. 2016). In spite of these advantages,
rather small amount of studies related to the air-blast dried yeast have been
performed. One of them was directed to the optimization of production of Saccha-
romyces
cerevisiae
and
non-Saccharomyces
(Hanseniaspora
uvarum
and
Issatchenkia orientalis) yeast starters at the industrial level using this method
(Lee et al. 2016). The tasks of this work included also the selection of efﬁcient
excipients and protective compounds for the dehydration treatment which are very
important because intracellular accumulation of the appropriate solutes can signiﬁ-
cantly improve microbial cells survival during and after drying procedure (Kets
et al. 1996; Champagne et al. 2012; Lee et al. 2016 etc.). Seven types of sugars were
studied in this work with the goal to improve the viability of air-dried yeast cells.
The best results were obtained at the use of 10% trehalose, 10% sucrose, and 10%
glucose. The viability of these dehydrated yeasts was at the level of 80–97%. Also
after 3 months of storage, S. cerevisiae and H. uvarum still had good survival rates,
whereas the viability of I. orientalis decreased rather signiﬁcantly. Dried
S. cerevisiae and H. uvarum also after their storage at 4 C showed metabolic
activities similar to those of non-dried yeast cells (Lee et al. 2016).
Air-drying or convective drying was used at the development of novel approach
for yeast cell immobilization (Rapoport et al. 2011). As the result of this technology
stable in technological processes, biotechnologically active and economically efﬁ-
cient immobilized yeast preparations were obtained. It was shown that their use
might also be more efﬁcient than the use of free microbial preparations, for
example, in such biotechnological processes as the puriﬁcation of wastewaters
from heavy metals (Rapoport et al. 2011). Yeast preparations immobilized by this
method with drying procedure on hydroxylapatite or chamotte were tested also in
bioethanol production. In these experiments it was shown that immobilized
preparations produced the same amount of ethanol as free cells after 36 h of
fermentation. At the same time during the early stages of fermentation,
immobilized yeast cells produced ethanol at a higher rate than free cells. Yeast
preparations immobilized on both supports (hydroxylapatite and chamotte) were
successfully used at least in six sequential batch fermentations without any loss of
biotechnological activity (Borovikova et al. 2014a). Special study was performed
with the goal of revealing if the dehydration procedure used in this new
4
Anhydrobiosis and Dehydration of Yeasts
103

immobilization method noticeably decreases the viability of yeast cells in
immobilized preparations. Various yeasts were used in this research: S. cerevisiae
cells that were rather sensitive to dehydration and had been aerobically grown in an
ethanol-containing medium, a recombinant strain of S. cerevisiae grown in aerobic
conditions which was completely nonresistant to dehydration, and an anaerobically
grown bakers’ yeast strain S. cerevisiae, as well as a fairly resistant Pichia pastoris
strain. Performed experiments showed that immobilization of all these strains
essentially increased their resistance to a dehydration-rehydration treatment. The
increase of cells’ viability (compared with control cells dehydrated in similar
conditions) was from 30 to 60%. It is concluded that a new immobilization method,
which includes a dehydration stage, does not lead to an essential loss of yeast cell
viability. Correspondingly, there is no risk of losing the biotechnological activities
of immobilized preparations. At the same time, this research showed new interest-
ing possibility of producing dry, active yeast preparations also for those strains that
are very sensitive to dehydration and which can be used in biotechnology in an
immobilized form. Finally, the immobilization with drying approach can be used
also for the development of efﬁcient methods for the long-term storage of biotech-
nologically active recombinant yeast strains (Borovikova et al. 2014b).
Similar approach of yeasts immobilization with dehydration stage was recently
used in other studies, and it was found that ﬁve yeast strains representing
S. cerevisiae, Hanseniaspora uvarum, and Issatchenkia orientalis entrapped in
2% air-blast-dried Ca-alginate beads with protective agents had rather high survival
rates after storage at 4 C for 3 months. The protective agents efﬁciently used in this
research were 10% skim milk containing 10% sucrose or 10% rafﬁnose or 10%
trehalose or 10% glucose. In all these cases, the initial viability of immobilized
dried yeasts was at the level of at least 87% and higher. After storage during
3 months at 4 C, survival rate of these yeast preparations were maintained at the
level of at least 51% (Kim et al. 2017).
4.3.4
Rehydration Stage
It is well known that rehydration process is one of the most important stages of
reactivation of dehydrated organisms which can help to restore their active state as
well as in non-adequate conditions increase their cells’ damages which can lead
also to their death. Therefore, it is important to ﬁnd the ways how to promote the
repair of the conformation of macromolecules, state of membrane lipids and
proteins, molecular organization of membranes which in its turn will lead to the
decrease of membrane permeability, and losses of intracellular compounds during
this rehydration stage (Crowe et al. 1984, 1989, 1992; Beker and Rapoport 1987).
Such studies were performed in laboratory conditions also with dehydrated yeast
cells (Beker and Rapoport 1987; Beker et al. 1984; Rapoport et al. 1995). To
understand what should be recommended for the industrial use of active dry yeast
preparations at the production of wine, the best yeast rehydration conditions for
ensuring good cell viability and vitality before their inoculation into the must were
104
A. Rapoport

revealed. In this study the biochemical and biophysical behaviors of dehydrated
yeast after their rehydration in the various media under oenological conditions
(incubation at 37 C for 30 min) were investigated. It was shown that the addition of
magnesium into rehydration medium provided the highest vitality rate as well as
signiﬁcantly diminished the period necessary for the reactivation of the cells and
beginning of their biotechnological activity (approximately for 60%) (Rodrı´guez-
Porrata et al. 2008). The magnesium rehydrating conditions revealed in this study
deﬁnitely may have a broad industrial application.
There are also some other additives to the rehydration media which can inﬂuence
the restoration of high viability and of vitality which up to some recent data
(Vaudano et al. 2014) better corresponds to the fermentation activities of active
dry yeast preparations. They include ergosterol (Soubeyrand et al. 2005), addition
of inactive dry yeast which contains a lot of active compounds (Vaudano et al.
2014), ammonium (Vaudano et al. 2014), and ascorbic acid which most probably is
efﬁcient due to its antioxidant activity (Dı´az-Hellı´n et al. 2013).
It is known that there are a lot of factors which can inﬂuence the viability of the
cells at the rehydration stage. They include duration of the rehydration period,
rehydration temperature (Poirier et al. 1999), and pH of the medium (Zikmanis
et al. 1984). These factors probably affect the structure of the yeast membrane by
altering the permeability and ﬂow of molecules and ions, resulting in higher or
lower vitality/viability of the rehydrated cells (Attﬁeld 1997; Poirier et al. 1999).
Up to some results, mechanical stirring of dry yeast preparations during rehydration
may lead to the decrease of the number of vital cells by 5–7% and the consumption
of sugars in fermentation by 18–26%. Other studies revealed the possibility of weak
positive effect of a slight stirring during rehydration (reviewed by Ferrarini et al.
2007), but the experiments of Attﬁeld et al. (2000) showed that an increase in the
number of viable cells may be reached without pre-soaking and stirring. The
detailed study performed by Ferrarini et al. (2007) showed that dispersion
procedures play an important role in the recovery of dry yeast preparations. The
authors of this research suppose that the stirring is necessary for breaking the
clusters of yeast cells that in its turn would facilitate an easier water absorption,
positively inﬂuence the decrease of osmotic pressure in cells cytoplasm, and avoid
leakage of cell material. The other proposal or recommendation of these researchers
is linked with the elongation of traditional duration of rehydration procedure (till
30 min) to 120 min at 38 C. At the same time, it is necessary to keep in mind that
these conditions may be suitable just for the strains used in this study, and therefore
most probably such conclusions should be conﬁrmed also in other conditions and
with other strains of dry wine yeast preparations.
Some researchers suppose that additional procedure of “propagation” or “condi-
tioning” of active dry yeast may reduce lag times of fermentation and correspond-
ingly the overall fermentation duration. This issue was studied by Bellissimi and
Ingledew (2005). These researchers introduced also a new term—metabolic
acclimatization—to describe the events which took place during the procedure of
conditioning. At the same time, their research showed that metabolic acclimatization
was not necessary at least prior to alcoholic fermentation. Lag times were reduced,
but overall fermentation times were unaffected (Bellissimi and Ingledew 2005).
4
Anhydrobiosis and Dehydration of Yeasts
105

4.3.5
Construction of New Strains
Another direction of the studies linked with the improvement of the quality of
industrially produced active dry yeast preparations is the construction of new
biotechnologically efﬁcient yeast strains which are very resistant to dehydration
process. One of the successful examples of this approach is recent development of
new strain for the production of bioethanol (Zheng et al. 2013). In this work
researchers applied the method of whole genome shufﬂing in which gene recombi-
nation is achieved at different positions throughout the whole genome by recursive
protoplast fusion or crossing (Gong et al. 2009; Zheng et al. 2013). In this process,
genetic diversity is generated, and resultant mutants with the desired phenotypes
can be selected using speciﬁc screening methods (Patnaik et al. 2002; Zhang et al.
2002; Zheng et al. 2013). Application of this approach gave possibility to this work
authors to obtain novel yeast strain with high resistance to dehydration treatment.
During the following analysis of this novel strain and its differences from the initial
strain, there were a lot of revealed proteomics and physiological changes in this new
strain. In total 479 genes were with different expression levels. The further studies
showed that 299 upregulated genes in new strain are linked with ribosome biosyn-
thesis, proteasome, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, and secondary metabolite biosyn-
thesis. At the same time, 180 downregulated genes were enriched in pathways for
oxidative phosphorylation, endocytosis, RNA transport, and vitamin B6 metabo-
lism (Zheng et al. 2013). Besides that it was revealed also that this new strain
accumulates higher amounts of trehalose which can protect macromolecules con-
formation and molecular organization of various intracellular membranes including
also plasma membrane. As it was shown earlier in this review, it is one of the main
factors which may determine the stability of the cells at dehydration–rehydration.
Very interesting features of the new strain were revealed at the comparison of fatty
acid content in initial and new strains. It appeared that in normal conditions there
were no distinct differences in the four main fatty acid ratios between these two
strains. At the same time, after the treatment there was found an increased content
of unsaturated fatty acids (palmitoleic acid, oleic acid, and linoleic acid) in both
strains, resulting in 17.6% and 24.6% increases in the unsaturation ratios of the
initial and new strains, respectively. New strain had a higher proportion of C16:1
and a lower proportion of C18:1. It is supposed that higher amount of palmitoleic
acid (C16:1) contents may be important for the maintenance of the membrane
ﬂuidity (Zheng et al. 2013). New strain accumulated also 14.6% more ergosterol
(Zheng et al. 2013) which as it was shown earlier stabilizes the molecular organi-
zation of plasma membrane at the dehydration–rehydration of yeast cells (Dupont
et al. 2011).
One more interesting attempt to construct new efﬁcient and dehydration-
resistant strain was performed by Kotarska with colleagues (Kotarska et al.
2011).
These
researchers
using
electrofusion
between
S.
cerevisiae
and
S. diastaticus constructed new strain with rather high amylolytic activities for the
industrial use in the ethanol production. They checked the technological efﬁciency
and stability of biotechnological application of this strain after its dehydration.
106
A. Rapoport

Very good results were obtained in these experiments. This dry distillery yeast
showed high fermentation activity and yield of ethanol production. It was
concluded that application of this new strain in the form of active dry yeast in
distillery practice signiﬁcantly lowers the costs of spirit production by saving 30%
of glucoamylase preparations used for starch sacchariﬁcation. Besides that authors
of this research conﬁrmed that the use of active dry yeast preparation considerably
simpliﬁes the technological process in distillery. The application of this strain in the
form of dry preparation makes the starting of the fermentation at optional time
easier as well as eliminates the possibility of mash infection which sometimes takes
place when conventional yeast culture was applied (Kotarska et al. 2011).
4.3.6
Application of Active Dry Yeasts
The most traditional application of active or instant dry yeasts is linked with classic
technologies and biotechnologies. They include the production of bread, beer,
ethanol, and wine (Fig. 4.2). The simplicity of transportation and storage and
long shelf life are the main reasons why dry yeast becomes more and more popular
in these areas of industry. Several reviews describe different issues relating to these
classical technologies (Strumillo and Kudra 1986; Adamiec et al. 1995; Beker and
Rapoport 1987; Schmidt and Henschke 2015; etc.).
TRADITIONAL
BIOTECHNOLOGIES  
NON-CONVENTIONAL
BIOTECHNOLOGIES  
DRY YEAST
BREAD 
BEER
WINE
ETHANOL
IMMOBILIZATION
PROCEDURES   
BIOSORPTION
AGENTS
WINEMAKING
DRUG DELIVERY
SYSTEMS
SOURCE OF 
β-GLUCANS
BIOCHEMICAL
ANALYTICAL
METHODS 
ANIMAL FEED
BIOCONTROL
SELECTIVE 
BIOTRANSFORMATIONS
PROBIOTICS
Fig. 4.2 Use of dry yeasts in traditional and non-conventional biotechnologies (Rapoport et al.
2016, modiﬁed)
4
Anhydrobiosis and Dehydration of Yeasts
107

During the last two decades, there appeared a number of new interesting ideas
and proposals for the additional, non-conventional use of dry yeast preparations
(Rapoport et al. 2016). They are linked with biomedical, pharmaceutical, agricul-
tural, environmental, and chemical possible applications of dry yeasts (Fig. 4.2).
One of such biomedical applications was already mentioned above, and it is the use
of dry microencapsulated yeast S. boulardii as efﬁcient probiotic in medicine
(Arslan et al. 2015). Another biomedical application of dry yeast is their use as
drug delivery systems. This idea is based on the use of dry recombinant yeasts
which can either carry out a bioconversion reaction or produce compounds of
interest directly in the digestive environment (Blanquet et al. 2005). One more
interesting example is the possibility to use dry yeast as a source of efﬁcient
immunomodulators—β-glucans (Liepins et al. 2015). Dry yeasts are already used
in animal feed because yeast biomass has a good composition of amino acids; high
levels of lysine, threonine, and leucine; and high levels of B-complex vitamins
(Rapoport et al. 2016). Because of the changes of cell wall surface characteristics
during yeast dehydration, it appears that they become much more active in sorption
of various pollutants including such dangerous substances as heavy metals. This
makes various dry yeasts a very promising agent for the protection and/or puriﬁca-
tion of the environment (Muter et al. 2001a, b, 2002; Muter and Rapoport 2014). It
was already mentioned above the use of drying procedure for the obtaining of very
stable and active immobilized preparation of dry yeasts (Rapoport et al. 2011; Kim
et al. 2017). Some yeast possesses biocontrol activities against various diseases of
fruits and cereal grains. Dry preparations of these yeasts give the possibility of their
long-term storage without losses of activity as well as decrease expenses for their
transportation to various countries and regions (Melin et al. 2007, 2011; Rapoport
et al. 2016). An interesting application of dry yeasts was recently proposed at the
development of new efﬁcient yeast model system for the rapid evaluation of
possible efﬁciency of various chemical compounds (Borovikova et al. 2015). Dry
yeasts can be used also in some biochemical analytical methods and in selective
biotransformations (Mowshowitz 1976; Buzzini et al. 2012; Tsuda et al. 2012; Forti
et al. 2015; etc.). Then, in the winemaking besides the already classical use of dry
yeasts as the starter cultures, they can be successfully applied also for other goals.
This nonconventional application can improve the sensorial characteristics of wines
and may be efﬁcient for the removal of unpleasant smells of volatile phenols. They
have effects on wine fermentation, composition, and organoleptic characteristics, as
well as on wine safety that depends from various antioxidant compounds produced
by the yeast (Pozo-Bayon et al. 2009a, b; Rodriguez-Bencomo et al. 2016).
4.4
Conclusions
The last four decades have given a lot for the beginning of our understanding of
general mechanisms of anhydrobiosis and correspondingly of events which take
place at the dehydration of yeasts during which they can be transferred into this
state. Especially big progress was reached recently, already in the twenty-ﬁrst
108
A. Rapoport

century. An accumulated knowledge helps producers of active dry yeast
preparations to ﬁnd new interesting approaches for the improvement of the quality
of their products. In spite of very high quality of baker’s active (or instant) dry yeast
produced now by leading yeast companies, this problem still is very actual for the
case of brewer’s, ethanol, and wine yeasts. In addition to the undoubted value of the
acquired information for the purposes of practical biotechnology, it is very impor-
tant also for basic science. We know now much more than earlier about the role of
water for the maintenance of biological systems, structures, and macromolecules.
Studies of anhydrobiosis considerably developed our knowledge on the molecular
organization of biological membranes and on the intracellular protective reactions
which sometimes are rather unexpected for us. We understood that there are a lot of
various alternatives for the protection of the most important functions of live
organisms in the unfavorable conditions and that the losses of some protective
compounds are not critical because they may be substituted by the rapid synthesis
of other ones which will perform necessary protection. And what is more, theoreti-
cal ideas obtained in the studies of anhydrobiosis in yeast (which is the optimal
model of any eukaryotic cell) can be extrapolated to the higher organisms including
animals and people. They can be used, for example, for medical purposes for the
special artiﬁcial increase or improvement of organisms’ resistance in the case of
various diseases or complicated therapeutic treatments and surgical procedures. At
the same time, it is necessary to underline once more that we are now still at the
early stages of the understanding of the mechanisms of anhydrobiosis and potential
of live organisms in the unfavorable conditions of the environment or physical and
chemical treatments. John H. Crowe, the most well-known world leader in the
studies of anhydrobiosis, in 1971 and in 2015 published two big reviews with
similar titles—“Anhydrobiosis: an unsolved problem” —indicating a number of
problems which still have to be solved by the researchers of this unique phenome-
non of live nature (Crowe 1971, 2015). And it is clear that already in some next
years, we have to expect very rapid progress in this direction.
Acknowledgments This work was supported by Taiwan-Latvian-Lithuanian Foundation for
Scientiﬁc Cooperation grant 2016–2018.
References
Abadias M, Benabarre A, Teixido N, Usall J, Vinas I (2001) Effect of freeze-drying and
protectants on viability of the biocontrol yeast Candida sake. Int J Food Microbiol 65:173–182
Adamiec J, Kaminski W, Markowski AS, Strumillo C (1995) Drying of biotechnological products.
In: Mujumdar AS (ed) Handbook of industrial drying. Marcel Dekker, New York, pp 775–808
Akbari H, Karimia K, Lundin M, Taherzadeh MJ (2012) Optimization of baker’s yeast drying in
industrial continuous ﬂuidized bed dryer. Food Bioprod Process 90:52–57
Ale CE, Otero MC, Pasteris SE (2015) Freeze-drying of wine yeasts and Oenococcus oeni and
selection of the inoculation conditions after storage. J Bioprocess Biotech 5:248
Aponte M, Troianiello GD, Di Capua M, Romano R, Blaiotta G (2016) Impact of different spray-
drying conditions on the viability of wine Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains. World J Microbiol
Biotechnol 32:13
4
Anhydrobiosis and Dehydration of Yeasts
109

Arslan S, Erbas M, Tontul I, Topuz A (2015) Microencapsulation of probiotic Saccharomyces
cerevisiae var. boulardii with different wall materials by spray drying. LWT – Food Sci
Technol 63:685–690
Attﬁeld PV (1997) Stress tolerance: the key to effective strains of industrial baker’s yeast. Nat
Biotechnol 15:1351–1357
Attﬁeld PV, Kletsas S, Veal DA, Van Rooijen R, Bell PJL (2000) Use of ﬂow cytometry to
monitor cell damage and predict fermentation activity of dried yeasts. J Appl Microbiol
89:207–214
Barbosa AD, Savage DB, Siniossoglou S (2015) Lipid droplet–organelle interactions: emerging
roles in lipid metabolism. Curr Opin Cell Biol 35:91–97
Bayrock D, Ingledew WM (1997) Fluidized bed drying of baker’s yeast: moisture levels, drying
rates, and viability changes during drying. Food Res Int 30:407–415
Beker MJ, Blumbergs JE, Ventina EJ, Rapoport AI (1984) Characteristics of cellular membranes
at rehydration of dehydrated yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Eur J Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
19:347–352
Beker MJ, Rapoport AI (1987) Conservation of yeasts by dehydration. Adv Biochem
Eng/Biotechnol 35:127–171
Bellissimi E, Ingledew WM (2005) Metabolic acclimatization: preparing active dry yeast for fuel
ethanol production. Process Biochem 40:2205–2213
Bespalov MM, Kolpako AI, Loiko NG, Doroshenko EV, Mulyukin AL, Kozlova AN, Varlamova
EA, Kurganov BI, El-Registan GI (2000) The role of microbial dormancy autoinducers in
metabolism blockade. Microbiology 69:217–223
Biryusova VI, Rapoport AI (1978) Cryofractographic investigation of the structure of yeast cells in
an anabiotic state. Microbiology 47:245–251
Blanquet S, Garrait G, Beyssac E, Perrier C, Denis S, Hebrard G, Alric M (2005) Effects of
cryoprotectants on the viability and activity of freeze dried recombinant yeasts as novel oral
drug delivery systems assessed by an artiﬁcial digestive system. Eur J Pharm Biopharm
61:32–39
Borovikova D, Herynkova P, Rapoport A, Sychrova H (2014c) Potassium uptake system Trk2 is
crucial for yeast cell viability during anhydrobiosis. FEMS Microbiol Lett 350:28–33
Borovikova D, Muiznieks I, Rapoport A (2015) New test-system based on the evaluation of yeast
cells resistance to dehydration-rehydration stress. Open Biotechnol J 9:49–53
Borovikova D, Rozenfelde L, Pavlovska I, Rapoport A (2014b) Immobilisation increases yeast
cells resistance to dehydration-rehydration treatment. J Biotechnol 184:169–171
Borovikova D, Scherbaka R, Patmalnieks A, Rapoport A (2014a) Effects of yeast immobilisation
on bioethanol production. Biotechnol Appl Biochem 61:33–39
Borovikova D, Teparic R, Mrsa V, Rapoport A (2016) Anhydrobiosis in yeast: cell wall
mannoproteins are important for yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae resistance to dehydration.
Yeast 33:247–353
Buzzini P, Goretti M, Ponzoni C, Caselli E, Branda E, Cramarossa MR, Turchetti B, Forti L (2012)
Asymmetric reduction of (4S)-(+)-carvone catalyzed by enoate reductases (ERs) expressed by
non-conventional yeast (NCY) whole-cells. In: Whittall J, Sutton P (eds) Practical methods for
biocatalysis and biotransformations. Wiley, New York, pp 104–108
Calahan D, Dunham M, DeSevo C, Koshland DE (2011) Genetic analysis of desiccation tolerance
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genetics 189:507–519
Capece A, Votta S, Guaragnella N, Zambuto M, Romaniello R, Romano P (2016) Comparative
study of Saccharomyces cerevisiae wine strains to identify potential marker genes correlated to
desiccation stress tolerance. FEMS Yeast Res 16:fow015
Champagne CP, Raymond Y, Simon JP (2012) Effect of water activity and protective solutes on
growth and subsequent survival to air-drying of Lactobacillus and Biﬁdobacterium cultures.
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 95:745–756
Crowe JH (1971) Anhydrobiosis: an unsolved problem. Am Nat 105:563–574
110
A. Rapoport

Crowe JH (2008) Trehalose as a “chemical chaperone”: fact and fantasy. Adv Exp Med Biol
594:143–158
Crowe JH (2015) Anhydrobiosis: an unsolved problem with applications in human welfare.
Subcell Biochem 71:263–280
Crowe JH, Carpenter JF, Crowe LM (1998) The role of vitriﬁcation in anhydrobiosis. Annu Rev
Physiol 60:73–103
Crowe JH, Crowe LM, Chapman D (1984) Preservation of membranes in anhydrobiotic
organisms: the role of trehalose. Science 223:701–703
Crowe JH, Hoekstra FA, Crowe LM (1989) Membrane phase transitions are responsible for
imbibitional damage in dry pollen. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 86:520–523
Crowe JH, Hoekstra FA, Crowe LM (1992) Anhydrobiosis. Annu Rev Physiol 54:579–599
Czerucka D, Piche T, Rampal P (2007) Yeast as probiotics – Saccharomyces boulardii. Aliment
Pharmacol Ther 26:767–778
Daud WRW (2008) Fluidized bed dryers – recent advances. Adv Powder Technol 19:403–418
Debaste F, Halloin V, Bossart L, Haut B (2008) A new modeling approach for the prediction of
yeast drying rates in ﬂuidized beds. J Food Eng 84:335–347
Dı´az-Hellı´n P, U´ beda J, Briones A (2013) Improving alcoholic fermentation by activation of
Saccharomyces species during the rehydration stage. LWT – Food Sci Technol 50:126–131
Duongthingoc D, George P, Gorczyca E, Kasapis S (2013a) Studies on the viability of Saccharo-
myces boulardii within microcapsules in relation to the thermomechanical properties of whey
protein. Food Hydrocoll 42:232–238
Duongthingoc D, George P, Katopo L, Gorczyca E, Kasapis S (2013b) Effect of whey protein
agglomeration on spray dried microcapsules containing Saccharomyces boulardii. Food Chem
141:1782–1788
Dupont S, Beney L, Ferreira T, Gervais P (2011) Nature of sterols affects plasma membrane
behavior and yeast survival during dehydration. Biochim Biophys Acta 1808:1520–1528
Dupont S, Beney L, Ritt JF, Lherminier J, Gervais P (2010) Lateral reorganization of plasma
membrane is involved in the yeast resistance to severe dehydration. Biochim Biophys Acta
1798:975–985
Dupont S, Lemetais G, Ferreira T, Cayot P, Gervais P, Beney L (2012) Ergosterol biosynthesis: a
fungal pathway for life on land? Evolution 66:2961–2968
Dupont S, Rapoport A, Gervais P, Beney L (2014) The survival kit of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
for anhydrobiosis. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 98:8821–8834
Duskova M, Borovikova D, Herynkova P, Rapoport A, Sychrova H (2015) The role of glycerol
transporters in yeast cells in various physiological and stress conditions. FEMS Microbiol Lett
362:1–8
Eleutherio E, Panek A, De Mesquita JF, Trevisol D, Magalh~aes R (2015) Revisiting yeast trehalose
metabolism. Curr Genet 61:263–274
El-Registan GI, Mulyukin AL, Nikolaev YA, Stepanenko IY, Kozlova AN, Martirosova EI,
Shanenko EF, Strakhovskaya MG, Revina AA (2005) The role of microbial low-molecular-
weight autoregulatory factors (alkylhydroxybenzenes) in resistance of microorganisms to
radiation and heat shock. J Adv Space Res 36:1718–1728
Espindola AS, Gomes DS, Panek AD, Eleutherio EC (2003) The role of glutathione in yeast
dehydration tolerance. Cryobiology 47:236–241
Ferrarini R, Bocca E, Cavazza A (2007) Mechanical dispersion procedures improve the rehydra-
tion of active dry yeast. Enzym Microb Technol 40:1251–1255
Finn DA, Stewart GG (2002) Fermentation characteristics of dried brewers yeast: effect of drying
on ﬂocculation and fermentation. J Am Soc Brew Chem 60:135–139
Forti L, Di Mauro S, Cramarossa MR, Filippucci S, Turchetti B, Buzzini P (2015)
Non-conventional yeasts whole cells as efﬁcient biocatalysts for the production of ﬂavors
and fragrances. Molecules 20:10377–10398
Franca MB, Panek AD, Eleutherio ECA (2005) The role of cytoplasmic catalase in dehydration
tolerance of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Cell Stress Chaperones 10:167–170
4
Anhydrobiosis and Dehydration of Yeasts
111

Fu N, Chen XD (2011) Towards a maximal cell survival in convective thermal drying processes.
Food Res Int 44:1127–1149
Fujii S, Sakamoto Y, Aso T, Aktas T, Yoshimoto N, Yamamoto S (2011) Drying of yeasts—
factors affecting inactivation during drying. Dry Technol 29:1981–1985
Garre E, Raginel F, Palacios A, Julien A, Matallana E (2010) Oxidative stress responses and lipid
peroxidation damage are induced during dehydration in the production of dry active wine
yeasts. Int J Food Microbiol 136:295–303
Golovina EA, Golovin AV, Hoekstra FA, Faller R (2009) Water replacement hypothesis in atomic
detail – factors determining the structure of dehydrated bilayer stacks. Biophys J 97:490–499
Golovina E, Golovin A, Hoekstra F, Faller R (2010) Water replacement hypothesis in atomic
details: effect of trehalose on the structure of single dehydrated POPC bilayers. Langmuir
26:11118–11126
Go´mez-Pastor R, Pe´rez-Torrado R, Cabiscol E, Ros J, Matallana E (2010) Reduction of oxidative
cellular damage by overexpression of the thioredoxin TRX2 gene improves yield and quality of
wine yeast dry active biomass. Microb Cell Fact 9:9
Gomez-Pastor R, Perez-Torrado R, Cabiscol E, Ros J, Matallana E (2012) Engineered Trx2p
industrial yeast strain protects glycolysis and fermentation proteins from oxidative carbonyla-
tion during biomass propagation. Microb Cell Fact 11:4
Gomez-Pastor R, Perez-Torrado R, Garre E, Matallana E (2011) Recent advances in yeast biomass
production. In: Matovic MD (ed) Biomass-detection, production and usage. InTech, Rijeka
Gong JX, Zheng HJ, Wu ZJ, Chen T, Zhao XM (2009) Genome shufﬂing: progress and
applications for phenotype improvement. Biotechnol Adv 27:996–1005
Gordienko MG, Voynovskiy AA, Menshutina NV (2015) Design of a kinetic model for degrada-
tion of substances during spray drying using yeast biosuspension, oil-in-water emulsion, and
alumosilicate suspension. Dry Technol 33:24–36
Grabowski S, Mujumdar AS, Ramaswamy HS, Strumillo C (1997) Evaluation of ﬂuidized versus
spouted bed drying of baker’s yeast. Dry Technol 15:625–634
Grant CM (2001) Role of the glutathione/glutaredoxin and thioredoxin systems in yeast growth
and response to stress conditions. Mol Microbiol 39:533–541
Guzhova I, Krallish I, Khroustalyova G, Margulis B, Rapoport A (2008) Dehydration of yeast:
changes in the intracellular content of Hsp 70 family proteins. Process Biochem 43:1138–1141
Herrero E, Ros J, Belli G, Cabiscol E (2008) Redox control and oxidative stress in yeast cells.
Biochim Biophys Acta 1780:1217–1235
Holzapfel WH, Schillinger U (2002) Introduction to pre- and probiotics. Food Res Int 35:109–116
Huq T, Khan A, Khan RA, Riedl B, Lacroix M (2013) Encapsulation of probiotic bacteria in
biopolymeric system. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 53:909–916
Isono Y, Araya G, Hoshino A (1995) Immobilization of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for ethanol
fermentation on γ-alumina particles using a spray-dryer. Process Biochem 30:743–746
Jenkins DM, Powell CD, Smart KA (2010) Dried yeast: impact of dehydration and rehydration on
brewing yeast DNA integrity. J Am Soc Brew Chem 68:132–138
Joshi VS, Thorat BN (2011) Formulation and cost-effective drying of probiotic yeast. Dry Technol
29:749–757
Keilin D (1959) The problem of anabiosis or latent life: history and current concept. The
Leeuwenhoek lecture. Proc R Soc Lond B150:148–191
Kets EPW, Teunissen PJM, de Bont JAM (1996) Effect of compatible solutes on survival of lactic
acid bacteria subjected to drying. Appl Environ Microbiol 62:259–261
Khroustalyova GM, Adler L, Rapoport AI (2001) Exponential growth phase cells of the
osmotolerant yeast Debaryomyces hansenii are extremely resistant to dehydration stress.
Process Biochem 36:1163–1166
Kim D-H, Lee S-B, Park H-D (2017) Effect of air-blast drying and the presence of protectants on
the viability of yeast entrapped in calcium alginate beads with an aim to improve the survival
rate. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 101:93–102
Klug L, Daum G (2014) Yeast lipid metabolism at a glance. Yeast FEMS Res 14:369–388
112
A. Rapoport

Koni M, Yuzgec U, Turker M, Dincer H (2009) Optimal quality control of baker’s yeast drying in
large scale batch ﬂuidized bed. Chem Eng Process 48:1361–1370
Kotarska K, Kłosowski G, Czuprynski B (2011) Characterization of technological features of dry
yeast (strain I-7-43) preparation, product of electrofusion between Saccharomyces cerevisiae
and Saccharomyces diastaticus, in industrial application. Enzym Microb Technol 49:38–43
Krallish I, Jeppsson H, Rapoport A, Hahn-Hagerdal B (1997) Effect of xylitol and trehalose on dry
resistance of yeasts. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 47:447–451
Kuhle AVDA, Skovgaard K, Jespersen L (2005) In vitro screening of probiotic properties of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae var. boulardii and food-borne Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains. Int
J Food Microbiol 101:29–39
Labuza TP, Le Roux JP, Fan TS, Tannenbaum SR (1970) Engineering factors in single-cell protein
production. Spray drying and cell viability. Biotechnol Bioeng 12:135–140
Lee S-B, Choi W-S, Jo H-J, Yeo S-H, Park H-D (2016) Optimization of air-blast drying process for
manufacturing Saccharomyces cerevisiae and non-Saccharomyces yeast as industrial wine
starters. AMB Express 6:105
Lemetais G, Dupont S, Beney L, Gervais P (2012) Air-drying kinetics affect yeast membrane
organization and survival. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 96:471–480
Leslie SB, Teter SA, Crowe LM, Crowe JH (1994) Trehalose lowers membrane phase transitions
in dry yeast cells. Biochim Biophys Acta 1192:7–13
Liepins J, Kovacova E, Shvirksts K, Grube M, Rapoport A, Kogan G (2015) Drying enhances
immunoactivity of spent brewer’s yeast cell wall beta-D-glucans. J Biotechnol 206:12–16
Lodato P, Segovia de Huergo M, Buera MP (1999) Viability and thermal stability of a strain of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae freeze-dried in different sugar and polymer matrices. Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 52:215–220
Lopez-Martinez G, Borull A, Poblet M, Rozes N, Cordero-Otero R (2014) Metabolomic charac-
terization of yeast cells after dehydration stress. Int Microbiol 17:131–139
Luna-Solano G, Salgado-Cervantes MA, Garcia-Alvarado MA, Rodriguez-Jimenes G (2000)
Improved viability of spray dried brewer’s yeast by using starch (grits) and maltodextrin as
processing aids. J Food Process Eng 23:453–462
Luna-Solano G, Salgado-Cervantes MA, Ramirez-Lepe M, Garcia-Alvarado MA, Rodriguez-
Jimenes GC (2003) Effect of drying type and drying conditions over fermentative ability of
brewer’s yeast. J Food Process Eng 26:135–147
Luna-Solano G, Salgado-Cervantes MA, Rodrı´guez-Jimenes GC, Garcı´a-Alvarado MA (2005)
Optimization of brewer’s yeast spray drying process. J Food Eng 68:9–18
McFarland LV (2010) Systematic review and meta-analysis of Saccharomyces boulardii in adult
patients. World J Gastroenterol 16:2202–2222
Melin P, Hakansson S, Schnurer J (2007) Optimization of liquid and dry formulations of the
biocontrol yeast Pichia anomala. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 73:1008–1016
Melin P, Schnurer J, Hakansson S (2011) Formulation and stabilization of the biocontrol yeast
Pichia anomala. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek 99:107–112
Morgan CA, Herman N, White PA, Vesey G (2006) Preservation of micro-organisms by drying; A
review. J Microbiol Methods 66:183–193
Mowshowitz DB (1976) Permeabilization of yeast for enzyme assays: an extremely simple
method for small samples. Anal Biochem 70:94–99
Mulyukin AL, Demkina EV, Kozlova AN, Soina VS, El-Registan GI (2001) Synthesis of anabiosis
autoinducers by non-spore-forming bacteria as a mechanism regulating their activity in soil and
subsoil sedimentary rocks. Microbiology 70:535–541
Mulyukin AL, Lusta KA, Gryaznova MN, Kozlova AN, Duzha MV, Duda VI, El-Registan GI
(1996) Formation of resting cells by Bacillus cereus and Micrococcus luteus. Microbiology
65:683–689
Muter O, Lubinya I, Millers D, Grigorjeva L, Ventinya E, Rapoport A (2002) Cr (VI) sorption by
intact and dehydrated Candida utilis cells in the presence of other metals. Process Biochem
38:123–131
4
Anhydrobiosis and Dehydration of Yeasts
113

Muter O, Millers D, Grigorjeva L, Ventina E, Rapoport A (2001a) Cr(VI) sorption by intact and
dehydrated Candida utilis cells: differences in mechanisms. Process Biochem 37:505–511
Muter O, Patmalnieks A, Rapoport A (2001b) Interrelations of the yeast Candida utilis and Cr(VI):
metal reduction and its distribution in the cell and medium. Process Biochem 36:963–970
Muter O, Rapoport A (2014) Some physiological aspects of chromium sorption by yeasts. Lambert
Academic Publishing, Saarbrucken
Nikolaev YA, Mulyukin AL, Stepanenko IY, El-Registan GI (2006) Autoregulation of stress
response in microorganisms. Mikrobiologiya 75:420–426
Noti O, Vaudano E, Pessione E, Garcia-Moruno E (2015) Short-term response of different
Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains to hyperosmotic stress caused by inoculation in grape
must: RT-qPCR study and metabolite analysis. Food Microbiol 52:49–58
Novichkova AT, Rapoport AI (1984) State of the intracellular pool of free amino acids in
dehydrated yeast organisms. Microbiology 53:1–4
Novo M, Beltran G, Rozes N, Guillamon J-S, Sokol S, Leberre V, Francois J, Mas A (2007) Early
transcriptional response of wine yeast after rehydration: osmotic shock and metabolic activa-
tion. FEMS Yeast Res 7:304–316
Palmfeldt J, Hahn-Hagerdal B (2000) Inﬂuence of culture pH on survival of Lactobacillus reuteri
subjected to freeze-drying. Int J Food Microbiol 55:235–238
Panek AD (1985) Trehalose metabolism and its role in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Biotechnol
3:121–130
Panek AD (1995) Trehalose metabolism – new horizons in technological applications. Braz J Med
Biol Res 28:169–181
Patnaik R, Louie S, Gavrilovic V, Perry K, Stemmer WPC, Ryan CM, Del Cardayre S (2002)
Genome shufﬂing of Lactobacillus for improved acid tolerance. Nat Biotechnol 20:707–712
Petitjean M, Teste M-A, Francois JM, Parrou J-L (2015) Yeast tolerance to various stresses relies
on the trehalose-6P synthase (Tps1) protein, not on trehalose. J Biol Chem 290:16177–16190
Picazo C, Gamero-Sandemetrio E, Orozco H, Albertin W, Marullo P, Matallana E, Aranda A
(2015) Mitochondria inheritance is a key factor for tolerance to dehydration in wine yeast
production. Lett Appl Microbiol 60:217–222
Poirier I, Mare´chal PA, Richard S, Gervais P (1999) Saccharomyces cerevisiae viability is strongly
dependant on rehydration kinetics and the temperature of dried cells. J Appl Microbiol
86:87–92
Pozo-Bayon MA, Andujar-Ortiz I, Alcaide-Hidalgo JM, Martin-Alvarez PJ, Moreno-Arribas MV
(2009b) Characterization of commercial inactive dry yeast reparations for enological use based
on their ability to release soluble compounds and their behavior toward aroma compounds in
model wines. J Agric Food Chem 57:10784–10792
Pozo-Bayon MA, Andujar-Ortiz I, Moreno-Arribas MV (2009a) Scientiﬁc evidences beyond the
application of inactive dry yeast preparations in winemaking. Food Res Int 42:754–761
Rajkowska K, Kunicka-Styczynska A, Rygala A (2012) Probiotic activity of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae var. boulardii against human pathogens. Food Technol Biotechnol 50:230–236
Rapoport AI (1973) Rejection of areas of damaged cytoplasm by microorganisms in a state of
anabiosis. Microbiology 42:317–318
Rapoport AI, Beker ME (1985) Changes in the surface charge of yeast cells during their dehydra-
tion and rehydration. Microbiology 54:362–365
Rapoport AI, Berestennikova ND, Yanovsky KA, Beker MJ (1986a) Changes in the shape and size
of yeast cells upon their dehydration followed by reactivation. Microbiologiya 55:881–882
(in Russian)
Rapoport AI, Birjusova VI, Meissel MN (1973) The structure of the yeast cell nucleus in an
anabiotic state. Rep Acad Sci USSR 213:708–710 (in Russian)
Rapoport AI, Biryusova VI, Svetlichnaya TP (1986b) Freeze-fracture study of changes in vacuoles
during dehydration of Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells. Microbiology 55:835–839
Rapoport AI, Biryuzova VI, Beker ME (1983) Effect of dehydration on the surface structure of the
yeast cell wall. Microbiology 52:204–207
114
A. Rapoport

Rapoport A, Borovikova D, Kokina A, Patmalnieks A, Polyak N, Pavlovska I, Mezinskis G,
Dekhtyar Y (2011) Immobilisation of yeast cells on the surface of hydroxyapatite ceramics.
Process Biochem 46:665–670
Rapoport AI, Khroustalyova GM, Camanis GJ, Beker MJ (1995) Yeast anhydrobiosis: permeabil-
ity of the plasma membrane. Mikrobiologiya 64:275–278
Rapoport AI, Khroustalyova GM, Crowe LM, Crowe JH (2009) Anhydrobiosis in yeast: stabiliza-
tion by exogenous lactose. Microbiology 78:624–629
Rapoport AI, Kostrikina NA (1973) Cytological investigation of an anabiosis state of yeast
organisms. Proc Acad Sci USSR Biol 5:770–773 (in Russian)
Rapoport AI, Markovskii AB, Beker ME (1982) Increase in the permeability of intracellular
membranes on dehydration and rehydration of Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast. Microbiology
51:707–710
Rapoport A, Muter O (1995) Biosorption of hexavalent chromium by yeasts. Process Biochem
30:145–149
Rapoport AI, Puzyrevskaya OM, Saubenova MG (1988) Polyols and resistance of yeasts to
dehydration. Microbiology 57:269–271
Rapoport A, Rusakova A, Khroustalyova G, Walker G (2014) Thermotolerance in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae is linked to resistance to anhydrobiosis. Process Biochem 49:1889–1892
Rapoport A, Turchetti B, Buzzini P (2016) Application of anhydrobiosis and dehydration of yeasts
for non-conventional biotechnological goals. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 32:104
Ratnakumar S, Hesketh A, Gkargkas K, Wilson M, Rash BM, Hayes A, Tunnacliffe A, Oliver SG
(2011) Phenomic and transcriptomic analyses reveal that autophagy plays a major role in
desiccation tolerance in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol BioSyst 7:139–149
Ratnakumar S, Tunnacliffe A (2006) Intracellular trehalose is neither necessary nor sufﬁcient for
desiccation tolerance in yeast. FEMS Yeast Res 6:902–913
Ricker JV, Tsvetkova NM, Wolkers WF, Leidy C, Tablin F, Longo M, Crowe JH (2003) Trehalose
maintains phase separation in an air-dried binary lipid mixture. Biophys J 84:3045–3051
Rodriguez-Bencomo JJ, Andujar-Ortiz I, Sanchez-Patan F, Moreno-Arribas MV, Pozo-Bayon MA
(2016) Fate of the glutathione released from inactive dry yeast preparations during the
alcoholic fermentation of white musts. Aust J Grape Wine Res 22:46–51
Rodrıguez-Porrata B, Lopez-Martinez G, Redon M, Sancho M, Mas A, Rozes N, Cordero-Otero R
(2011) Enhancing yeast cell viability after dehydration by modiﬁcation of the lipid proﬁle.
World J Microbiol Biotechnol 27:75–83
Rodrı´guez-Porrata B, Novo M, Guillamon J, Rozes N, Mas A, Cordero-Otero R (2008) Vitality
enhancement of the rehydrated active dry wine yeast. Int J Food Microbiol 126:116–122
Rossignol T, Postaire O, Storaı J, Blondin B (2006) Analysis of the genomic response of a wine
yeast to rehydration and inoculation. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 71:699–712
Santivarangkna C, Kulozik U, Foerst P (2007) Alternative drying processes for the industrial
preservation of lactic acid starter cultures. Biotechnol Prog 23:302–315
Santivarangkna C, Kulozik U, Foerst P (2008) Inactivation mechanisms of lactic starter cultures
preserved by drying processes. J Appl Microbiol 105:1–13
Schmidt SA, Henschke PA (2015) Production, reactivation and nutrient requirements of active
dried yeast in winemaking: theory and practice. Aust J Grape Wine Res 21:651–662
Silva J, Freixo R, Gibbs P, Teixeira P (2011) Spray-drying for the production of dried cultures. Int
J Dairy Technol 64:321–335
Singh J, Kumar D, Ramakrishnan N, Singhal V, Jervis J, Garst J, Slaughter S, DeSantis A, Potts M,
Helm R (2005) Transcriptional response of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to desiccation and
rehydration. Appl Environ Microbiol 17:8752–8763
Soubeyrand V, Luparia V, Williams P, Doco T, Vernhet A, Ortiz-Julien A, Salmon JM (2005)
Formation of micella containing solubilized sterols during rehydration of active dry yeasts
improves their fermenting capacity. J Agric Food Chem 53:8025–8032
4
Anhydrobiosis and Dehydration of Yeasts
115

Stepanenko IY, Strakhovskaya MG, Belenikina NS, Nikolaev YA, Mulyukin AL, Kozlova AN,
Revina AA, El-Registan GI (2004) Protection of Saccharomyces cerevisiae against oxidative
and radiation-caused damage by alkylhydroxybenzenes. Microbiology 73:163–169
Strumillo C, Kudra T (1986) Drying: principles applications and design. Gordon and Breach
Science Publishers, New York
Takagi H (2008) Proline as a stress protectant in yeast: physiological functions, metabolic
regulations, and biotechnological applications. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 81:211–223
Takagi H, Sakai K, Morida K, Nakamori S (2000) Proline accumulation by mutation or disruption
of the proline oxidase gene improves resistance to freezing and desiccation stresses in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEMS Microbiol Lett 184:103–108
Takagi H, Taguchi J, Kaino T (2016) Proline accumulation protects Saccharomyces cerevisiae
cells in stationary phase from ethanol stress by reducing reactive oxygen species levels. Yeast
33:355–363
Tsuda H, Matsumoto T, Ishimi Y (2012) Time reduction of vitamin B6 and inositol assay by using
lyophilized Saccharomyces cerevisiae ATCC 9080. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol 58:149–151
Turker M, Kanarya A, Yuzgec U, Kapucu H, Senalp Z (2006) Drying of baker’s yeast in batch
ﬂuidized bed. Chem Eng Process 45:1019–1028
Vaudano E, Costantini A, Cersosimo M, Del Prete V, Garcia-Moruno E (2009) Application of
real-time RT–PCR to study gene expression in active dry yeast (ADY) during the rehydration
phase. Int J Food Microbiol 129:30–36
Vaudano E, Costantini A, Noti O, Garcia-Moruno E (2010) An RT-qPCR approach to study the
expression of genes responsible for sugar assimilation during rehydration of active dry yeast.
Food Microbiol 27:802–808
Vaudano E, Noti O, Costantini A, Garcia-Moruno E (2014) Effect of additives on the rehydration
of Saccharomyces cerevisiae wine strains in active dry form: inﬂuence on viability and
performance in the early fermentation phase. J Inst Brew 120:71–76
Ventina EJ, Saulite LA, Rapoport AI, Beker ME (1984) Electron-microscopic study of yeasts in a
state of anabiosis and reactivated from this state. Microbiology 53:536–541
Ventina EJ, Saulite LA, Rapoport AI, Beker ME (1986) Lipid inclusions in cells and changes in
them during dehydration and reactivation of yeasts. Microbiology 55:99–104
Wang C-W (2016) Lipid droplets, lipophagy and beyond. Biochim Biophys Acta 1861:793–805
Zhang YX, Perry K, Vinci VA, Powell K, Stemmer WPC, Del Cardayre SB (2002) Genome
shufﬂing leads to rapid phenotypic improvement in bacteria. Nature 415:644–646
Zheng D, Zhang K, Gao K, Liu Z, Zhang X, Li O, Sun J, Zhang X, Du F, Sun P, Qu A, Wu X
(2013) Construction of novel Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains for bioethanol active dry yeast
(ADY) production. PLoS One 8:e85022
Zikmanis PB, Auzan SI, Kruche RV, Zikmane MA, Auzinia LP (1984) Rehydration conditions for
dehydrated Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeasts and cell viability. Mikrobiologiia 53:208–212
116
A. Rapoport

Biotechnology of Glycerol Production
and Conversion in Yeasts
5
Marta Semkiv, Kostyantyn Dmytruk, Charles Abbas,
and Andriy Sibirny
Abstract
Glycerol is widely used in the cosmetic, paint, automotive, food, and pharma-
ceutical industries and for the production of explosives. Currently glycerol is
available in commercial quantities as a by-product of biodiesel production, but
its puriﬁcation is cost prohibitive. The industrial production of glycerol from
glucose by fermentation using Candida sp. and Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeasts
has been described. This review covers in depth the biosynthesis of glycerol by
yeast as well as glycerol bioconversion to different useful chemical compounds.
Contents
5.1
Introduction ................................................................................
118
5.2
Glycerol Metabolism in Yeast Cells ......................................................
118
5.2.1
Glycerol Synthesis ................................................................
118
5.2.2
Glycerol Utilization ...............................................................
121
5.2.3
Glycerol Transport Across Plasma Membrane ..................................
123
5.3
Glycerol Role in Yeast Cells .............................................................
126
5.3.1
Osmoregulation ...................................................................
126
5.3.2
Redox Sink During S. cerevisiae Growth Under Anaerobic Conditions . . . . . . .
129
M. Semkiv • K. Dmytruk
Department of Molecular Genetics and Biotechnology, Institute of Cell Biology, NAS of Ukraine,
Drahomanov Street, 14/16, Lviv 79005, Ukraine
C. Abbas
Archer Daniels Midland Co. Research Center, 1001 N Brush College Road, Decatur, IL 62521,
USA
A. Sibirny (*)
Department of Molecular Genetics and Biotechnology, Institute of Cell Biology, NAS of Ukraine,
Drahomanov Street, 14/16, Lviv 79005, Ukraine
Department of Biotechnology and Microbiology, University of Rzeszow, Cwiklinskiej 2, Rzeszow
35-601, Poland
e-mail: sibirny@cellbiol.lviv.ua
# Springer International Publishing AG 2017
A.A. Sibirny (ed.), Biotechnology of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-58829-2_5
117

5.4
Methods of Glycerol Production .........................................................
130
5.5
Glycerol Production by the Yeast S. cerevisiae ..........................................
132
5.6
Glycerol Production by Osmotolerant Yeasts ............................................
136
5.7
Glycerol Application in the Industry .....................................................
137
5.8
Glycerol Bioconversion to High-Value Chemicals ......................................
137
References .......................................................................................
140
5.1
Introduction
Glycerol or propane-1,2,3-triol (also known as glycerine or glycerin) is a simple
polyol that is colorless, odorless, highly viscous, sweet tasting, and a nontoxic
liquid. Glycerol is a constituent of neutral fats (triacylglycerides). Glycerol is
widely used in the food industry as a sweetener and humectant, in pharmaceutical
industry, and for production of cosmetics, toothpastes, paints, drugs, paper, textiles,
leather, and explosives (Wang et al. 2001). It was discovered in 1779 by the Swiss
pharmacist, K. W. Scheele, who was the ﬁrst to isolate this compound by heating a
mixture of litharge (PbO) with olive oil (Quispe et al. 2013). Glycerol could be
produced chemically from oils (triacylglycerides) or from propylene or by micro-
bial synthesis in large concentration by some osmophilic yeast. Most recently
glycerol has been readily available commercially in low purity as a by-product
from the biodiesel industry. This glycerol is contaminated by methanol, salts, and
other impurities, so its puriﬁcation is quite expensive. In this review we describe
pathways of glycerol biosynthesis and catabolism in different yeast species and the
construction
of
yeast
strains
capable
of
aerobic
and
anaerobic
glycerol
oversynthesis as well as strains which effectively convert glycerol to valuable
compounds.
5.2
Glycerol Metabolism in Yeast Cells
Glycerol is very important for living cells as it forms the backbone of phospholipids
(common constituents of cell membranes) and triglycerides (widespread storage
lipids). The free form of glycerol is both utilized and produced by many living
organisms, in particular, yeasts. Glycerol metabolism is most comprehensively
described for laboratory strains of the conventional yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
(Fig. 5.1), but for other yeasts available information is rather fragmentary.
5.2.1
Glycerol Synthesis
In the yeast S. cerevisiae, glycerol is synthesized from the glycolysis intermediate
dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) in two consecutive reactions catalyzed by the
cytosolic enzymes glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and glycerol-3-phosphate
118
M. Semkiv et al.

phosphatase. DHAP originates from the split of fructose-1,6-bisphosphate into
DHAP and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GAP). These two compounds are the
starting point of two metabolic pathways, which lead to the ﬁnal products: ethanol
from GAP and glycerol from DHAP. DHAP can be converted into GAP and vice
versa by the action of the enzyme triose phosphate isomerase. Cytosolic NAD+-
dependent glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GPDH) catalyzes the reduction of
DHAP to glycerol-3-phosphate with simultaneous oxidation of NADH to NAD+.
This is the “rate-limiting” step in glycerol production (Remize et al. 2001). In
S. cerevisiae this enzyme is encoded by the two isogenes GPD1 and GPD2. The
GPD1 gene was ﬁrst discovered by Larsson et al. (1993) and Albertyn et al. (1994);
GPD2 gene was discovered later by Eriksson et al. (1995) and Ansell et al. (1997).
The amino acid sequences of Gpd1 and Gpd2 are 69% identical (Eriksson et al.
1995), and the kinetic properties of the two isoenzymes are similar. Despite the
similar physical and catalytic properties of their gene products, the GPD1 and
GPD2 genes are regulated differently at the transcriptional level. Also, the mutant
phenotypes indicate that Gpd1 and Gpd2 fulﬁll different roles in metabolism. The
growth of a gpd1Δ mutants was clearly inhibited at high osmolarity (in the presence
Fig. 5.1 Glycerol metabolism in S. cerevisiae. G-6-P glucose-6-phosphate; F-6-P fructose-6-
phosphate; F-1,6-P fructose-1,6-bisphosphate; DHAP dihydroxyacetone phosphate; DHA dihy-
droxyacetone;
GAP
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate;
G-3-P
glycerol-3-phosphate;
1,3-P-glyc
1,3-bisphosphoglycerate; PEP phosphoenolpyruvate; Ac-CoA acetyl coenzyme A; TCA tricarbox-
ylic acid cycle; Tpi1 triose phosphate isomerase; Adh1-5 alcohol dehydrogenases; Pdc1,5,6
pyruvate decarboxylases; Ald3 aldehyde dehydrogenase; Gpd1, Gpd2 cytosolic glycerol-3-phos-
phate dehydrogenases; Gpp1, Gpp2 glycerol-3-phosphate phosphatases; Gut1 glycerol kinase;
Gut2 glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; Gcy1 glycerol dehydrogenase; Dak1, Dak2 dihydroxy-
acetone kinase; Hxt, Stl1, Fps1 membrane transporters
5
Biotechnology of Glycerol Production and Conversion in Yeasts
119

of 0.7 M NaCl), whereas a gpd2Δ mutant exhibited a growth rate similar to the wild
type under these conditions. The transcription of GPD1 gene is strongly induced by
MAPK Hog1, which plays a central role in the cell response to osmotic stress
(Albertyn et al. 1994). However, glycerol production following osmotic stress
increases almost instantly, before the transcriptional regulation can inﬂuence
enzyme production (Klipp et al. 2005). This fact led to the suggestion that the
activation of the existing Gpd1 pool may be the mechanism by which rapid glycerol
production is achieved. Indeed, there is some recent evidence that indicates the
activity of the Gpd1 enzyme is regulated at the posttranslational level by phosphor-
ylation (Lee et al. 2012; Oliveira et al. 2012). The two TORC2-dependent protein
kinases Ypk1 and Ypk2 phosphorylate Gpd1 at the four adjacent serine residues.
Change of all these four sites to alanine results in GPDH that is twofold more active
than the original wild type (Oliveira et al. 2012). Following hyperosmotic shock,
Ypk1 and Ypk2 are apparently no longer stimulated by TORC2, and Gpd1 becomes
dephosphorylated by an unknown protein phosphatase, leading to its activation
(Lee et al. 2012).
The transcription of the GPD2 gene has been shown not to be affected by
changes in external osmolarity; however, gpd2Δ mutants showed poor growth
without oxygen supply, because Gpd2 activity is important for maintenance of
cellular redox balance under anaerobic conditions. The mRNA level of GPD2, in
contrast to GPD1, was ninefold upregulated after a shift of S. cerevisiae from
aerobic to anaerobic conditions (Ansell et al. 1997). During prolonged anaerobic
growth, expression of GPD2 decreased, and in steady-state anaerobic chemostat
cultures, the mRNA concentration stabilized at 1.5 times the aerobic level (ter
Linde et al. 1999). A gpd1Δ gpd2Δ double mutant was totally unable to produce
glycerol and did not grow at all under anaerobic conditions, unless an NADH-
oxidizing agent, such as acetaldehyde or acetoin, was added (Bjorkqvist et al.
1997). At high osmolarity, the double mutant does not grow either (Ansell et al.
1997).
Genes encoding NAD+-dependent GPDH have also been characterized in other
yeast species such as Candida magnoliae (Lee et al. 2008), Candida glycerinogenes
(Chen et al. 2008), and Debaryomyces hansenii (Thome 2004) and in the ﬁlamen-
tous fungus, Aspergillus nidulans (Fillinger et al. 2001). In addition, NADP+-
dependent GPDH activity has been discovered in other yeast species, such as
Candida versatilis (Watanabe et al. 2008).
The second step in the glycerol synthesis is the irreversible hydrolysis of the
phosphate group from glycerol-3-phosphate, a reaction catalyzed by glycerol-3-
phosphatase (G3P) (Norbeck et al. 1996). Similarly as for the dehydrogenase, two
structural genes encoding isoenzymes of the phosphatase have been identiﬁed:
GPP1 and GPP2. The sequences of these corresponding proteins are 95% identical
(Norbeck et al. 1996). Both isoenzymes have a high speciﬁcity for DL-glycerol-3-
phosphate and have an optimum pH of 6.5. The expression of GPP1 and GPP2
genes is regulated differently as is the case for GPD genes. Mutants lacking Gpp1
activity showed poor growth under anaerobic conditions and GPP1 expression
seemed to be induced upon switch to anaerobic conditions (Pahlman et al. 2001).
120
M. Semkiv et al.

The expression of GPP2 is strongly activated through the high osmolarity glycerol
(HOG) pathway in the presence of hyperosmotic stress (Norbeck et al. 1996;
Pahlman et al. 2001). Single mutant gpp1Δ or gpp2Δ did not reveal growth
impairment during osmotic stress, indicating that the two paralogs can substitute
well for each other (Pahlman et al. 2001). However, the deletion of both genes in the
gpp1Δ gpp2Δ mutant caused a growth inhibition under anaerobic conditions and
increased sensitivity to osmotic stress. The gpp1Δ gpp2Δ mutant accumulated
increased amounts of glycerol-3-phosphate and produced only minor amounts of
glycerol (Pahlman et al. 2001).
In ﬁlamentous fungi and in the ﬁssion yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe,
another possible pathway for glycerol synthesis through dihydroxyacetone (DHA)
has been proposed. The ﬁrst step in this pathway is assumed to be catalyzed by an
uncharacterized enzyme that dephosphorylates DHAP to DHA. The second step is
catalyzed by an NADP+-dependent glycerol dehydrogenase. This pathway has been
suggested based on the fact that NADP+-dependent glycerol dehydrogenase
activities converting DHA to glycerol have been identiﬁed in S. pombe (Marshall
et al. 1989) and species of ﬁlamentous fungi belonging to the Aspergillus genus
(Redkar et al. 1995; Schuurink et al. 1990; Ruijter et al. 2004). More precisely this
pathway was studied in A. nidulans (Fillinger et al. 2001; de Vries et al. 2003).
Mutants with disruption of the gene gldB encoding NADPþ-dependent glycerol
dehydrogenase had a signiﬁcant reduction in glycerol amounts and showed a severe
growth defect under hyperosmotic conditions (de Vries et al. 2003), while the
deletion of gfdA encoding cytosolic GPDH did not abolish glycerol biosynthesis
(Fillinger et al. 2001). Expression of the A. nidulans paralog gldB gene was strongly
induced under conditions of hyperosmotic shock. These studies suggested that
glycerol formation through DHA is the major pathway responsible for glycerol
accumulation under osmotic stress in A. nidulans, and the pathway through glyc-
erol-3-phosphate does not play a signiﬁcant role in this organism. But in order to
clearly establish this alternative pathway for glycerol production, the “DHAPase”
activity needs to be allocated to a certain enzyme, which so far has not been
demonstrated.
5.2.2
Glycerol Utilization
As glycerol is relatively abundant in nature, there is no wonder that many
microorganisms can use it as a source of carbon and energy. Similarly as glycerol
production, glycerol utilization can occur through glycetol-3-phosphate or through
dihydroxyacetone. The dihydroxyacetone phosphate metabolically produced can
either enter into central catabolism via the transformation to glyceraldehyde-3-
phosphate by a triose phosphate isomerase or can serve as a substrate for lipid
synthesis. The pathway through glycetol-3-phosphate involves a glycerol kinase
and a FAD+-dependent glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase that is located at the
outer surface of the inner mitochondrial membrane. The latter enzyme directly
transfers the electrons via FADH2 to the respiratory chain. In S. cerevisiae, this
5
Biotechnology of Glycerol Production and Conversion in Yeasts
121

pathway represents the main route for glycerol utilization. In S. cerevisiae, glycerol
kinase is encoded by the GUT1 gene (Sprague and Cronan 1977; Pavlik et al. 1993)
and glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase is encoded by gene GUT2 (Ronnow and
Kielland-Brandt 1993). S. cerevisiae mutants that are defective in GUT1 or GUT2
are unable to utilize glycerol as a sole carbon source (Sprague and Cronan 1977).
Mitochondrial Gut2 glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase together with the cyto-
solic glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenases Gpd1 and Gpd2 also contributes to the
“glycerol-3-phosphate shuttle” of yeast, which serves for the conversion of mito-
chondrial NADH into NAD+ during anaerobic growth of S. cerevisiae (Larsson
et al. 1998). The route of glycerol dissimilation through glycerol-3-phosphate
intermediate has also been observed in a number of other yeasts, e.g., D. hansenii
(Adler et al. 1985), Zygosaccharomyces rouxii (van Zyl et al. 1991), and
C. glycerinogenes (Wang et al. 2000). A number of yeasts are thought to dissimilate
glycerol via the second pathway with dihydroxyacetone as an intermediate. The
ﬁrst step in this pathway is the oxidation of glycerol to dihydroxyacetone by
glycerol dehydrogenase followed by the phosphorylation of dihydroxyacetone by
dihydroxyacetone kinase. These enzymes are encoded by the genes GCY1, DAK1,
and DAK2. In S. cerevisiae, the existence of this pathway was proposed by Norbeck
and Blomberg (1997). Jung and coworkers recently conﬁrmed that Gcy1 is the
NADP+-dependent glycerol dehydrogenase (Jung et al. 2012). The function of this
pathway in S. cerevisiae is unclear but most probably does not involve utilization of
glycerol as a carbon source, because it cannot substitute nonfunctioning glycerol-3-
phosphate catabolic route in gut1Δ or gut2Δ mutants. The dihydroxyacetone path-
way in this yeast might play a role in the regulation of the glycerol concentration
during hyperosmotic stress (Blomberg 2000) or for redox regulation (Costenoble
et al. 2000). However, in other yeasts, this pathway may be more signiﬁcant.
Overall, the information about the role of one or another route for glycerol utiliza-
tion in certain yeast species is not well understood. Based on the presence of
glycerol kinase or NAD+-dependent glycerol dehydrogenase activity in cell-free
extracts, Tani and Yamada (1987) divided the yeast species they investigated into
three groups: (1) the ﬁrst group being assumed to exclusively use the glycerol-3-
phosphate pathway (e.g., Candida boidinii); (2) the second group that used only the
dihydroxyacetone pathway (e.g., Hansenula ofunaensis); and (3) the third group
where both pathways were considered to be functional (e.g., Candida valida).
However, the evidence they provided for the presence of activities of the enzymes
attributed to the speciﬁc pathways is not sufﬁcient to establish the functionality of
these metabolic pathways. More explicit evidence is needed that demonstrates that
the deletion of the gene that encodes a key enzyme in a particular catabolic pathway
leads to the reduction or total elimination of yeast growth on glycerol, as was shown
for gut1Δ or gut2Δ mutants of S. cerevisiae (Sprague and Cronan 1977). This type
of strong evidence was provided for the dihydroxyacetone pathway for glycerol
utilization in the yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe (Matsuzawa et al. 2010). An
S. pombe strain with deletion of the gene gld1 had reduced NAD+-dependent
glycerol dehydrogenase activity and was not able to grow in media containing
glycerol as the sole carbon source.
122
M. Semkiv et al.

Different yeast species and even different strains of the same species show high
diversity with regard to ability for growth on glycerol as the sole source of carbon
(Kurtzman et al. 2011). Most strains of the conventional yeast S. cerevisiae have
low growth on a medium with glycerol as the sole carbon source, but their growth
can be improved by the addition of amino acids, nucleotide bases, or complex
supplements to the cultivation medium (Merico et al. 2011; Swinnen et al. 2013).
Among 52 S. cerevisiae strains that were compared, a strain with the fastest
biomass accumulation on glycerol was chosen and compared to common laboratory
strain in respect to its genetic features (Swinnen et al. 2013). It turned out that better
biomass accumulation was caused by three genetic determinants—speciﬁc alleles
of genes UBR2, SSK1, and GUT1 (Swinnen et al. 2016). The role of the GUT1 gene
in glycerol utilization is obvious, but the role of the genes UBR2 and SSK1 is
uncertain, and they encode, respectively, a ubiquitin ligase (Finley et al. 2012) and a
component of HOG pathway (Maeda et al. 1994). Two independent studies have
reported that wild-type S. cerevisiae strains that were not able to grow in a synthetic
glycerol medium can be relatively easily evolved by repeated batch cultivations in a
glycerol medium to reach better growth levels under these conditions (Ochoa-
Estopier et al. 2011; Merico et al. 2011). These results may imply that
S. cerevisiae ancestors were able to utilize glycerol more efﬁciently, but this feature
was lost during evolution. Such “loss of function” might occur due to the fact that
S. cerevisiae has evolved to overgrow other competing microorganisms through
fast sugar utilization and rapid ethanol production caused by the strong Crabtree
effect. In this way, potential competitors for the consumption of the fermentation
products ethanol and glycerol during the post-diauxic growth phase have already
been outcompeted during the sugar-consuming phase.
Some other yeast species show much better ability to grow on glycerol than
S. cerevisiae. For example, when the ability of 42 different yeast species to grow on
glycerol was tested, the yeasts Pichia jadinii and P. anomala showed the highest
growth rate, which was approximately three times higher than for S. cerevisiae
(Lages et al. 1999). Current industrial applications employing glycerol-based
cultivation media use such yeasts as Yarrowia (Candida) lipolytica, Komagataella
(Pichia) pastoris, and Pachysolen tannophilus. When their growth performance on
glycerol was tested, these species showed 1.3–3.3 higher growth rates than that of
the best glycerol-utilizing S. cerevisiae strain (Klein et al. 2016).
5.2.3
Glycerol Transport Across Plasma Membrane
In order to be used as a carbon source, glycerol must be transported into the cell. By
comparison the excessive amounts of glycerol that are produced from NAD+
re-oxidation must be exported from the cell. The molecular details of the glycerol
ﬂux through a plasma membrane have been best studied in S. cerevisiae; in other
yeasts and in ﬁlamentous fungi, the available information is fragmentary. In
S. cerevisiae the process of identiﬁcation of the glycerol transport mechanisms
5
Biotechnology of Glycerol Production and Conversion in Yeasts
123

was not straightforward, so all possible hypotheses have been considered which
include passive and facilitated diffusion and active transport.
For example, previously glycerol was generally regarded as a molecule that is
able to permeate a plasma membrane by passive diffusion that is driven by a
concentration gradient (Gancedo et al. 1968; Heredia et al. 1968; Romano 1986).
But Oliveira et al. (2003) based on the comparison of olive oil/water partitioning
coefﬁcient with that of other molecules, speculated that glycerol is unlikely to
signiﬁcantly diffuse through biological membranes, although they indicated that
some passive diffusion across the lipid bilayer cannot be completely excluded.
Since plasma membrane is mostly impermeable to glycerol, then any detectable
passive glycerol diffusion into the cell must be mediated via a channel-like facili-
tator protein. Several experimental studies demonstrated a saturable glycerol uptake
component in S. cerevisiae, which was believed to be connected with the protein
Fps1, a member of the major intrinsic protein (MIP) family of channel proteins
(Luyten et al. 1995; Sutherland et al. 1997). This protein shows a high sequence
homology to the glycerol facilitator GlpF from E. coli (Heller et al. 1980), the only
transporter responsible for glycerol uptake in this bacterium. Subsequent
experiments showed that the previously detected saturable glycerol uptake kinetics
was an artifact caused by considerable Gut1 activity that interfered with the
experimental setup (Oliveira et al. 2003). The deletion of GUT1 gene eliminated
such effect. It has also been shown that S. cerevisiae fps1Δ mutants were able to
grow on glycerol as sole carbon source (Luyten et al. 1995). Further studies
conﬁrmed that Fps1 in S. cerevisiae is involved rather in glycerol export during
osmoregulation than in glycerol uptake (Tamas et al. 1999).
The existence of a glycerol active transport system in S. cerevisiae was predicted
based on the observation of simultaneous uptake of glycerol and protons
accompanied by intracellular glycerol accumulation (Sutherland et al. 1997).
GUP1 and its paralog GUP2 had been suggested to encode the proteins responsible
for glycerol active transport (Holst et al. 2000). These authors showed that the Gup1
protein is essential for the alleviation of the osmotic stress-induced cell death of
gpd1Δ gpd2Δ mutants: deletion of GUP1 in a gpd1Δ gpd2Δ double deletion mutant
suppresses the rescuing effect of glycerol supplementation during hyperosmotic
shock (Holst et al. 2000). However, further studies did not provide support for this
theory. It has been shown that glycerol uptake activity was enhanced after switch to
a medium with glycerol or with high salt concentration, whereas GUP1 and GUP2
expression was found to be constitutive (Oliveira and Lucas 2004). Also, a double
deletion mutant gup1Δ gup2Δ still showed active glycerol uptake under salt stress
(Neves et al. 2004). Therefore, proteins Gup1 and Gup2 probably are involved in
glycerol uptake only indirectly.
Ferreira et al. (2005) revealed that a crucial role for glycerol uptake is played by
the glycerol/H+-symporter Stl1. The deletion of STL1 gene completely abolished
active glycerol transport and prevented S. cerevisiae growth on glycerol as a sole
carbon source. The pattern of STL1 gene expression is consistent with aforemen-
tioned features of glycerol uptake; in particular, transcription of STL1 is transiently
induced after the shift to hyperosmotic medium (Posas et al. 2000; Ferreira et al.
124
M. Semkiv et al.

2005) and then decreased gradually to initial state following glycerol production
activation. This downregulation does not occur in a gpd1Δ gpd2Δ mutant, which is
unable to synthesize intracellular glycerol (Ferreira et al. 2005). Other similar roles
for H+- but also Na+-glycerol symporters have been described for the halotolerant
yeasts D. hansenii (Lucas et al. 1990), Pichia sorbitophila (Lages and Lucas 1995),
and Z. rouxii (van Zyl et al. 1990).
As mentioned before, S. cerevisiae shows relatively low growth rates on glyc-
erol. Gancedo et al. (1968) speculated that glycerol uptake velocity might be a
major rate-limiting step for growth on glycerol in this yeast. Homologs of STL1 and
FPS1 genes have been identiﬁed for yeasts with the best growth performance on
glycerol, which include Y. lipolytica, P. tannophilus, and K. pastoris (Dujon et al.
2004; Mattanovich et al. 2009; Liu et al. 2013). The contribution of Stl1 and Fps1
homologs to glycerol utilization in other yeast species is not yet clear. There is
evidence that, in contrast to S. cerevisiae, in other yeasts Fps1 homologs might
actually play a role in glycerol uptake. For example, Liu et al. (2013) showed that
the expression of FPS2 gene from P. tannophilus in S. cerevisiae was able to
suppress the growth defect on glycerol of a stl1Δ deletion mutant, whereas
overexpression of the homologous S. cerevisiae FPS1 gene was unable to achieve
this task. ScFps1 and PtFps2 orthologs are also different with regard to their protein
structure. They both have a core region with six putative transmembrane domains
(TMDs), but PtFps2 is much shorter as it does not have long N- and C-terminal
extensions. Overexpression in the S. cerevisiae strain of PtFPS2 and similar FPS1
homologs from different non-conventional yeast species (C. jadinii, P. pastoris and
Y. lipolytica) resulted in a signiﬁcant improvement in growth rates on glycerol.
These high growth rates were retained even after STL1 gene deletion (Klein et al.
2016). However, in order to conﬁrm the role of these glycerol facilitators, they
should be functionally studied in the original organisms.
In S. cerevisiae, glycerol export from the cells as previously mentioned occurs
through the channel protein Fps1 (Luyten et al. 1995). At high osmolarity, this
glycerol efﬂux aquaglyceroporin is closed and the glycerol produced is retained
inside the cells (Luyten et al. 1995; Tamas et al. 1999). In silico and the experimen-
tal data suggest that the Fps1 closure is one of the ﬁrst events following osmoshock
(Petelenz-Kurdziel et al. 2013). After a shift from high to low osmotic strength, the
Fps1 channel opens and the cells release the accumulated glycerol within a few
minutes. A fps1Δ deletion mutant was extremely sensitive to such a shift from high
to low osmolarity, indicating that the Fps1 channel is important to protect the cells
from a hypo-osmotic shock (Luyten et al. 1995; Tamas et al. 1999). In anaerobic
cultures, the FPS1 expression level is higher than under aerobic conditions, as it is
needed to expel the excessive glycerol produced during NADH re-oxidation (ter
Linde et al. 1999). The molecular structure of Fps1 has been extensively studied in
order to understand the mechanisms of its opening and closure. Fps1 has two long
230 and 250 amino acids extensions, one at the N- and the other at the C-terminal of
the core domain, that have been shown to be required for Fps1 closure. Strains that
have modiﬁed Fps1 with deletion of either domain become hyperactive with poor
glycerol accumulation, constant excretion of glycerol into the medium, and
5
Biotechnology of Glycerol Production and Conversion in Yeasts
125

glycerol overproduction as cells attempt to compensate for continued glycerol loss
(Ahmadpour et al. 2014). This effect can also be caused by a mutation in Thr231 in
the
long
N-terminal
extension
of
Fps1
which
renders
that
location
unphosphorylatable as well as certain other mutations in the well-conserved motif
around this residue (Ahmadpour et al. 2014). Recent work (Lee et al. 2013) has
shown that the mechanism of Fps1 closure is triggered by the phosphorylation of
Rgc2, which in its unphosphorylated state binds to the C-terminal extension of Fps1
and keeps the channel open. The fast opening of Fps1 channel after hypo-osmotic
shock was suggested to be mediated by the Slt2 MAPK, which is stimulated by
hypo-osmotic shock, cell wall stress, and morphogenic changes (Levin 2011;
Baltanas et al. 2013). It is interesting that this elaborate regulation of Fps1 opening
or closure is restricted to yeasts closely related to S. cerevisiae (Pettersson et al.
2005). Probably it has evolved as a mean for adaptation to rapid changes in the
osmotic pressure in growth medium. For a more detailed review on glycerol
metabolism and transport in yeast cells, the reader is referred to Klein et al. (2017).
5.3
Glycerol Role in Yeast Cells
5.3.1
Osmoregulation
The maintenance of the cellular water balance is fundamental to all living
organisms. Rapid changes in the extracellular osmolarity and water activity can
be detrimental for cells, for example increased osmolarity of the environment
causes water efﬂux and hence cell shrinkage. The accumulation of compatible
solutes to compensate for water loss is a universal strategy for survival under
these conditions (Yancey et al. 1982). As implied by their name, such molecules
are compatible with intracellular processes and either replace water or/and revert
the water concentration gradient and drive water back into cells. The most abundant
compatible solutes in microorganisms are small uncharged molecules such as
(1) polyols (glycerol, arabitol, trehalose, or sucrose), (2) amino acids (proline,
glutamate, or glutamine), and (3) ectoines (β-hydroxyectoine) (Grant 2004). In
yeast and other fungi, glycerol is the most prominent solute that regulates cell
turgor under high extracellular osmolarity condition (Brown 1978; Blomberg and
Adler 1992). For instance, during initial phase of a wine fermentation, S. cerevisiae
produces increased amounts of glycerol in response to osmotic stress because of the
high sugar concentration in the must. Also in S. cerevisiae, glycerol production
increases in a medium containing high concentrations of NaCl (Blomberg and
Adler 1989). Moreover, a marked rise in the level of cytoplasmic glycerol-3-
phosphate dehydrogenase activity has been observed under these conditions
(Blomberg and Adler 1989; Andre et al. 1991). In S. cerevisiae the adaptation to
hyperosmotic stress is accomplished via increased glycerol accumulation and its
retention inside cells. Mutants that block the synthesis of glycerol (e.g.,
gpd1Δgpd2Δ) or that cause leakage of glycerol out of the cell (e.g., with hyperactive
Fps1) exhibit an osmo-sensitive phenotype (Hohmann 2002). Other yeasts might
126
M. Semkiv et al.

employ slightly different mechanisms to increase intracellular glycerol concentra-
tion. For example, xerotolerant yeasts, such as Z. rouxii, retain and accumulate
glycerol against a concentration gradient (Edgley and Brown 1983; Lages et al.
1999).
In yeast, glycerol accumulation during osmo-adaptation is controlled mainly by
the high osmolarity glycerol (HOG) pathway (Fig. 5.2). Mutations that inactivate
the HOG pathway render yeast cells highly sensitive to hyperosmotic stress, while
mutations causing constantly activated HOG pathway are lethal. The HOG pathway
is a typical example of a mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway that is
regulated by a three-tiered cascade of kinases. Central in the HOG pathway is the
MAPK, Hog1 (Brewster et al. 1993), which is activated by the MAP kinase kinase
(MAPKK), Pbs2 (Brewster et al. 1993). The two independent upstream osmo-
sensing pathways, the Sln1 branch and Sho1 branch, activate MAPKK Pbs2
Fig. 5.2 High osmolarity glycerol (HOG) pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Hog1 MAPK;
Pbs2 MAPKK; the Sln1 branch and Sho1 branch the two independent upstream osmo-sensing
pathways; Sln1 transmembrane protein; Sho1 transmembrane protein with C-terminal elongation;
the SH3 domain, which anchors Pbs2 to the membrane, where it interacts with the MAPKKK;
Ste20 component of the pheromone-response and ﬁlamentous MAPK pathways; Hot1 transcrip-
tional activator; Ptp2, Ptp3, and Ptc1 phosphatases that inactivate Hog1; Gpd1, Gpd2 cytosolic
glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenases; ? unknown protein phosphatase that dephosphorylates and
activates Gpd1; Gpp1, Gpp2 glycerol-3-phosphate phosphatases; Tdh1, Tdh2, Tdh3 glyceralde-
hyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenases; Pfk26 phosphofructo-2 kinase; Tpi1 triose phosphate isomer-
ase; Stl1, Fps1 membrane glycerol transporters; GPD1/GPP2 genes encoding glycerol-3-
phosphate dehydrogenase and glycerol-3-phosphate phosphatase; F-6-P fructose-6-phosphate;
F-1,6-P fructose-1,6-biphosphate; DHAP dihydroxyacetone phosphate; GAP glyceraldehyde-3-
phosphate; Gly-3-P glycerol-3-phosphate; 1,3-P-glyc 1,3-phosphoglycerate
5
Biotechnology of Glycerol Production and Conversion in Yeasts
127

(Hohmann 2002; O’Rourke et al. 2002). These two branches of the HOG pathway
appear to function independently and respond to different types of stimuli. After a
hyperosmotic shock, Hog1 is activated by phosphorylation in Thr174 and Tyr176
positions. The period of Hog1 phosphorylation correlates with the degree of
osmotic stress and with the time it takes to initiate volume recovery after the initial
volume loss (Babazadeh et al. 2013). Mutants with decreased ability in the accu-
mulation of glycerol show prolonged HOG pathway activation, while mutants with
increased glycerol accumulation show shorter periods of HOG pathway activation
(Klipp et al. 2005; Krantz et al. 2004), so pathway downregulation is clearly linked
to glycerol accumulation. The inactivation of the HOG pathway occurs via the
dephosphorylation of Hog1 by the negative regulators Ptp2, Ptp3, and Ptc1
(Warmka et al. 2001; Wurgler-Murphy et al. 1997). The HOG pathway has been
described in great detail in several recent reviews (Chen and Thorner 2007;
Hohmann 2002; Saito and Posas 2012).
The pathway is activated through dual phosphorylation with MAPK Hog1
interacting with cytosolic and nuclear targets to provide cellular adaptation to
osmotic stress (Westfall et al. 2004). Westfall et al. (2008) showed that cells
deﬁcient in the nuclear import of Hog1 are still capable of adapting to hyperosmotic
stress, thereby highlighting the importance of cytosolic targets. The interaction of
Hog1 with cytosolic targets prevents glycerol efﬂux and induces metabolic shift
toward glycerol production at the expense of biomass formation (Petelenz-Kurdziel
et al. 2013; Bouwman et al. 2011; Westfall et al. 2008).
Glycerol efﬂux is prevented by closure of the Fps1 channel. Although there is
clear evidence that Hog1 directly interacts with Fps1 to acquire tolerance against
arsenite (Thorsen et al. 2006) or acetic acid (Mollapour and Piper 2007), during a
hyperosmotic shock, Hog1 appears to regulate Fps1 indirectly through phosphory-
lation and inhibition of the Fps1-activating proteins Rgc1 and Rgc2 (Beese et al.
2009).
Hog1 also stimulate the increase of glycolytic ﬂux which may help in compensat-
ing for the ﬂux that is redirected toward glycerol (Petelenz-Kurdziel et al. 2013). This
is achieved via upregulation of the key glycolytic enzyme, phosphofructokinase.
This enzyme is allosterically controlled by AMP and fructose 2, 6-bisphosphate,
as both increase phosphofructokinase activity. The latter, fructose-2,6-bisphosphate,
is the product of the phosphorylation of fructose-6-phosphate by 6-phosphofructo-2-
kinase, which is encoded by PFK26 and PFK27. Dihazi et al. (2004) demonstrated
that Hog1 activates Pfk26 which in turn leads to higher fructose-2,6-bisphosphate
production and consequently phosphofructokinase activation. Westfall et al. (2008)
postulates that Hog1 triggers a decrease in activity of Tdh1 and Tdh3 that catalyze
the conversion of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate into 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate. The
decrease of these two enzyme activities partially redirects the glycolytic ﬂux to
DHAP, the ﬁrst intermediate of glycerol synthesis.
The rapid activation of glycerol overproduction after hyperosmotic is also
caused by increased activity of Gpd1. Gpd1 is activated via dephosphorylation by
an unknown protein phosphatase, in a Hog1-independent manner (Lee et al. 2012).
Also hyperosmotic stress causes changes in redox status due to liberation of
128
M. Semkiv et al.

protein-associated NADH. This, in turn, may trigger shifts in the cellular distribu-
tion of Gpd1 and hence its activity (Jung et al. 2010).
In the nucleus, Hog1 stimulates initiation of transcription by interacting with
DNA-binding proteins, such as the activators Hot1 (Alepuz et al. 2003; Rep et al.
2000) and Smp1 (de Nadal et al. 2003) or the repressor Sko1 (Proft et al. 2001; Proft
and Struhl 2002), and is also involved in subsequent steps of transcription (de Nadal
et al. 2011). Changes in gene expression lead to increased amounts of glycerol
biosynthetic enzymes as well as an increased capacity for glycerol uptake, espe-
cially in the absence of glucose as carbon source. Hog1 directly or indirectly
stimulates expression of more than 100 genes (O’Rourke et al. 2002); among
them are the genes GPD1 and GPP2, and to a lesser extent also GPP1, as well as
STL1. The activation of the genes GPD1 and GPP2 increases the cells’ capacity to
produce glycerol, which may play a role at later stages of the adaptation to
hyperosmotic conditions, especially in sustaining the growth of the adapted cells.
For more detailed review on osmoregulation in yeast cells, the reader is referred to
Hohmann (2002, 2015).
5.3.2
Redox Sink During S. cerevisiae Growth Under Anaerobic
Conditions
The coenzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) is an important electron
transport carrier. Only catalytic amounts of this pyridine nucleotide are present in
yeast and thus it must be continuously cycled between its oxidative and reduced
form. The total ratio of NAD+/NADH is approximately 3:1 in yeast (Anderson et al.
2002), including the free and bound forms of the coenzyme. Stable intracellular
redox state is achieved by an accurate balancing of the NAD+ reduction and NADH
oxidation.
In a glucose medium, cytosolic reduction of NAD+ is mainly catalyzed by the
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. The mitochondrial NADH originates
from the reactions of TCA cycle. Also biosynthetic reactions during yeast growth
lead to a net NADH production. The generated NADH is re-oxidized in
S. cerevisiae via ﬁve main mechanisms, which are (1) ethanol production by the
alcohol dehydrogenase, Adh; (2) glycerol production by cytosolic glycerol-3-phos-
phate dehydrogenase Gpd1/2; (3) respiration of cytosolic NADH via the external
mitochondrial NADH dehydrogenases, Nde1/2; (4) respiration of cytosolic NADH
via the glycerol-3-phosphate shuttle; and (5) oxidation of intramitochondrial
NADH via a mitochondrial “internal” NADH dehydrogenase, Ndi1 (Bakker et al.
2001).
Assimilation of glucose into biomass involves formation of “excess” NADH.
Most of the NADH generated in biosynthetic reactions originates from the synthesis
of amino acids in the cytosol and in the mitochondrial matrix (Albers et al. 1998).
As redox neutral ethanol production cannot serve as a redox sink for excess NADH,
it has to be re-oxidized by other means. During growth in the presence of oxygen,
this can be achieved by the respiratory chain. The external NADH dehydrogenase
5
Biotechnology of Glycerol Production and Conversion in Yeasts
129

(Nde) and internal NADH dehydrogenase (Ndi), both localized in the mitochondrial
inner membrane, directly transfer the reducing equivalents of their compartment to
the respiratory chain. But under anaerobic conditions, respiration is not possible. So
under these conditions, S. cerevisiae re-oxidizes NADH in the glycerol-3-phos-
phate dehydrogenase reaction. Genes GPD2 and GPP1 are upregulated after a shift
to anaerobic conditions, which leads to the increased glycerol production. Deletion
of these genes results in a strain that is unable to grow in the absence of oxygen
(Ansell et al. 1997; Bjorkqvist et al. 1997). To ensure constant activity of this route
for NADH re-oxidation, the synthesized glycerol is exported from the cells via Fps1
channel.
Since the cytosolic glycerol formation is the exclusive route for NADH
re-oxidation under anaerobic conditions, NADH that is produced in the mitochon-
drial matrix during amino acid synthesis has to be somehow transported to the
cytosol. However, the mitochondrial inner membrane is virtually impermeable to
pyridine nucleotide coenzymes (Von Jagow and Klingenberg 1970). That is why
the anaerobic re-oxidation of intramitochondrial NADH requires a shuttle mecha-
nism that exports redox equivalents to the cytosol. Bakker et al. (2001) proposed the
possible involvement of the ethanol-acetaldehyde shuttle in the export of
intramitochondrial NADH. Other existing glycerol-3-phosphate shuttles serve for
transfer of redox equivalents from cytosolic NADH to the respiratory chain under
aerobic conditions. This shuttle consists of two components: cytosolic NAD+-
linked glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (Gpd1 and Gpd2) and mitochondrial
glycerol-3-phosphate, ubiquinone oxidoreductase, often referred to as mitochon-
drial glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (Gut2) (Dawson 1979).
It should be mentioned that attempt to increase glycerol production by
S. cerevisiae (e.g., by overexpression of the gene GPD1) violates the redox balance
in the cell and causes the production of additional oxidized by-products such as
pyruvate, acetate, acetoin, 2, 3-butanediol, and succinate (Michnick et al. 1997;
Roustan et al. 1999). For a more detailed review on NADH metabolism in yeast
cells, the reader is referred to Bakker et al. (2001).
Because glycerol production involves dephosphorylation, it may also be
involved in replenishment of the cytosolic pool of inorganic phosphate during the
switch from gluconeogenic to glycolytic metabolism (Thevelein and Hohmann
1995; van Heerden et al. 2014). It has been shown that overexpression of the ﬁrst
enzyme in glycerol biosynthesis suppresses the growth defect of a tps1Δ mutant,
which suffers from accumulation of sugar phosphates and depletion of inorganic
phosphate pool (Thevelein and Hohmann 1995).
5.4
Methods of Glycerol Production
Glycerol can be produced either by chemical synthesis from petrochemical
feedstocks or by microbial fermentation or can be recovered as a by-product of
soap or biodiesel manufacture (Wang et al. 2001). The oldest among these is the
process of soap production, which is known since 2800 BC when soap was obtained
130
M. Semkiv et al.

for the ﬁrst time by heating fats in the presence of ash (Hunt 1999). In 1811, the
French chemist M. E. Chevrel deﬁned the chemical formulas of fatty acids and the
formulas of glycerin in vegetable oil and animal fat. His work was patented. It was
known as the ﬁrst industrial method to obtain glycerin soap by reacting fatty
material with lime and alkaline material (Gesslein 1999). The process of saponiﬁ-
cation is now of lesser importance in industrial nations and many developing
countries, because of the replacement of soap with detergents (Rehm 1988;
Agarwal 1990). Glycerol production by microbial fermentation was discovered
by Louis Pasteur (Pasteur 1858). Pasteur showed that glycerol was formed at a
quantity of 2.0–3.6% (g g1) from sugar during alcoholic fermentation. That makes
glycerol an important constituent of alcoholic beverages produced by fermentation
(wine, beer, and others). Increasing the glycerol concentration in wine is considered
desirable, as glycerol contributes to the smoothness and overall pleasant mouthfeel
particularly of red wines (Eustace and Thornton 1987). But glycerol yield during
fermentation was considered too low for industrial applications, so alcoholic
fermentation was not considered as a source of glycerol until World War I when
demand for glycerol for the manufacture of explosives exceeded the supply from
the soap industry (Prescott and Dunn 1959). To meet the increased demand for
glycerol, Neuberg and Reinfurth developed the so-called second form of fermenta-
tion which implies addition of steering agents (Neuberg and Reinfurth 1918).
Steering agents, such as bisulﬁte ions, were added to the fermentation broth forming
a complex with acetaldehyde. Ethanol formation, which consumes glycolytic
NADH, was therefore impaired, lacking the intermediate acetaldehyde; conse-
quently the re-oxidation of the cofactor was managed through glycerol production.
Neuberg’s second form of fermentation increased glycerol synthesis, reaching
conversion efﬁciencies from 23 to 28% depending on the process conditions
(Wang et al. 2001), but large amounts of sulﬁte-acetaldehyde complex were
accumulated as a by-product (Agarwal 1990). Another process that was developed
at that time consisted of running the fermentation at high pH (around 7 or above),
and with this method glycerol yield was improved signiﬁcantly (Connstein and
Ludecke 1919). However, these wartime processes were unable to compete with
chemically synthesized process developed after World War II as yields of glycerol
from sugar by fermentation were low and recovery by distillation was inefﬁcient
(Vijaikishore and Karanth 1986). Chemical synthesis was responsible for consider-
able part of world glycerol production during the second half of the twentieth
century. Since the late 1940s, and following the discovery of synthetic surfactants,
glycerol has been produced chemically from epichlorohydrin that is obtained from
propylene (and thus from fossil oil) as large chemical companies forecasted a
glycerol shortage that stimulated more glycerol production by chemical synthetic
production routes (Frost and Sullivan 2006). A signiﬁcant amount of glycerol was
also synthesized from allyl alcohol. But the route of glycerol production by the
oxidation or chlorination of propylene has declined in relative importance since the
early 1970s (Hester 2000) due to environmental concerns and the increase in cost
and decrease in availability of propylene, especially in developing countries. The
decline in the chemical glycerol production led to the renewed interest in glycerol
5
Biotechnology of Glycerol Production and Conversion in Yeasts
131

production by microbial fermentation. To fulﬁll this task, new strains of
S. cerevisiae and new species of yeasts were proposed. These will be discussed in
greater detail in the next sections.
In recent years, the increased focus on renewable and sustainable energy has
boosted the production of biodiesel from rapeseed oil, cooking oil, and animal fats.
Biodiesel is a viable fuel and as a replacement for sulfur containing diesel serves as
an additive to reduce sulfur content and emissions that are progressively being
lowered to meet tighter environmental legislation. Glycerol as a by-product of
biodiesel production has also seen a dramatic increase in production. Approxi-
mately 10% of the reaction volume in a given biodiesel production process ends up
as raw or crude glycerol (Johnson and Taconi 2007). This low-grade glycerol also
contains water, salts, and other organic materials, including residual methanol as
well as free fatty acids. These components vary quite a bit in content depending on
the raw material used (Thompson and He 2006). Puriﬁcation of the crude glycerol
fraction from biodiesel production to obtain food-grade glycerol is quite expensive
(Yang et al. 2012). More preferable is bioconversion of crude glycerol into liquid
biofuels, green chemicals, and bioenergy on the basis of fermentation processes,
which can provide an efﬁcient solution for sustainable management of glycerol and
help improve the economics of biodiesel industries (Lynd et al. 2005).
5.5
Glycerol Production by the Yeast S. cerevisiae
As already mentioned, during both World Wars, wild-type strains of S. cerevisiae
were used on an industrial scale to produce glycerol from carbohydrate-containing
feedstocks using a sulﬁte-based process (Agarwal 1990; Rehm 1988). But this
process is inefﬁcient and causes environmental problems. Rapidly developing
metabolic engineering tools offer new means for redirecting carbon ﬂux toward
glycerol instead of ethanol production. In general, ﬁve different approaches for
metabolic engineering of S. cerevisiae for improvement of glycerol production can
be distinguished: (1) enhancement of glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase activity,
(2) improvement of glycerol efﬂux from the cells, (3) impairment or reduction of
triose phosphate isomerase activity, (4) cutoff or attenuation of the route that leads
to ethanol production, and (5) shifting of NAD+/NADH ratio in order to increase the
amount of NADH available for glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase or changing
cofactor speciﬁcity of glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. Most of the published
studies have combined several or all of these approaches.
To enhance the activity of glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, the GPD1 gene
was overexpressed resulting in a fourfold increase in glycerol production at the
expense of ethanol (Michnick et al. 1997). The substitution of all four phosphory-
lation sites renders glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase twofold more active than
that of the wild type (Oliveira et al. 2012). The evolutionary engineering of
bicistronic artiﬁcial operon containing both yeast GPD1 and GPP2 genes in a
heterologous system of Escherichia coli resulted in obtaining of a fused gene
GPD1-GPP2 (Salles et al. 2007). The product of this gene had both of the catalytic
132
M. Semkiv et al.

sites of glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and glycerol-3-phosphate phosphatase
and was able to convert DHAP into glycerol faster than separated glycerol-3-
phosphate dehydrogenase and glycerol-3-phosphate phosphatase that is more likely
due to substrate channeling between the two active sites.
Increase of glycerol production could be also achieved by elevation of its
outﬂow from yeast cell. It was shown that a modiﬁed form of the Fps1 protein
from which 76–230 amino acid residues were removed failed to retain the produced
glycerol inside the cell under hyperosmotic stress (Karlgren et al. 2004). The
corresponding strain with an engineered Fps1 glycerol channel showed poor growth
and enhanced glycerol production during fermentation. Overexpression of the
GPD1 in this strain further increased the amount of the produced glycerol, however,
with pronounced growth impairment (Remize et al. 2001).
Decreased ethanol formation was achieved by the deletion of one or several
ADH genes coding for alcohol dehydrogenases (Drewke et al. 1990; Cordier et al.
2007) or PDC1 and PDC5 genes coding for pyruvate decarboxylases (Nevoigt and
Stahl 1996). Mutants that are defective in alcohol dehydrogenase, however, accu-
mulate large amounts of acetaldehyde and acetic acid, which are toxic to cells.
Acetaldehyde could be partially detoxiﬁed by the overexpression ALD3 coding for
aldehyde dehydrogenase (Cordier et al. 2007). The mutants defective in pyruvate
decarboxylase cannot grow without adding exogenous ethanol or acetate as the last
enzyme is the only source of the cytosolic two-carbon compounds that are required
primarily for lipid biosynthesis (Pronk et al. 1996). The most promising results have
been reported for mutants of S. cerevisiae with a deletion of the TPI1 gene coding
for triose phosphate isomerase (Overkamp et al. 2002). Unfortunately, such mutants
had a severe growth defect, especially on glucose (Compagno et al. 2001). This
growth defect was later attributed to an accumulation of DHAP, which has been
shown to inactivate myoinositol-3-phosphate synthase and thereby renders the cells
auxotrophic for inositol (Shi et al. 2005). Addition of inositol partly restored growth
of the tpi1Δ mutant. The growth defect was also partly overcome by the additional
deletion of the two isogenes NDE1 and NDE2, encoding mitochondrial external
NADH dehydrogenase, and GUT2, encoding the FAD+-dependent mitochondrial
glycerol dehydrogenase (Overkamp et al. 2002). As these enzymes are primarily
responsible for mitochondrial re-oxidation of cytosolic NADH, their deletion
increased the availability of cytosolic NADH. The tpi1Δ nde1Δ nde2Δ gut2Δ
quadruple mutant was able to grow on glucose but with a very low speciﬁc growth
rate. Evolutionary engineering of the quadruple mutant in glucose-containing
medium partially relieved this growth defect and resulted in a strain with glycerol
yield which is very close to the theoretical maximum (Overkamp et al. 2002).
Another approach, which was also based on a tpi1Δ mutant, involved also the
overexpression of GPD1, the deletion of ADH1, and the overexpression of ALD3
(Cordier et al. 2007).
An original approach to increase glycerol production, with a simultaneous drop
in ethanol titer, was described by the expression of the cytosolic acetolactate
synthase Ilv2. The constructed strain has a decrease in intracellular pyruvate
concentration and a fourfold increase in glycerol production, with a concomitant
5
Biotechnology of Glycerol Production and Conversion in Yeasts
133

1.8-fold decrease in ethanol production when compared to that of parental strain
(Murashchenko et al. 2016) (Fig. 5.3). We constructed strains with a constitutively
decreased expression of TPI1 and overexpression of a fused gene for GPD1-GPP1,
the modiﬁed gene FPS1, and a truncated gene ILV2. The constructed strain com-
bining the above genetic manipulations grew on glucose as the sole carbon and
energy source under anaerobic conditions and accumulated up to 9 times more
glycerol under microaerobic conditions and up to 4.7 times more glycerol under
anaerobic conditions relative to the parental wild-type strain (unpublished data)
(Fig. 5.4).
The theoretical maximum for glycerol production in S. cerevisiae is limited by
the fact that only half of the glucose carbon can be used for NADH-consuming
glycerol production, whereas the other half is required for NADH regeneration via
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase in the “pyruvate branch” of glycolysis.
This problem was addressed by Geertman et al. (2006). They used a pdc1Δ pdc5Δ
pdc6Δ nde1Δ nde2Δ gut2Δ deletion mutant strain and combined GPD2
overexpression with overexpression of the gene FDH1, encoding a NAD+-
Fig. 5.3 Glycerol production by S. cerevisiae recombinant strain with overexpression of a
truncated gene ILV2 (Murashchenko et al. 2016). Due to less pyruvate and ethanol production,
NADH predominantly directed in the reaction catalyzed by Gpd instead of the Adh reaction,
resulting in increased glycerol production. DHAP dihydroxyacetone phosphate, GAP glyceralde-
hyde-3-phosphate, G-3-P glycerol 3-phosphate, 1,3-bisPG 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate, Fba aldolase,
Tpi triose phosphate isomerase, Gpd glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, Gpp glycerol-3-phos-
phate phosphatase, Ilv2 acetolactate synthase, Pdc pyruvate decarboxylase, Adh alcohol
dehydrogenase
134
M. Semkiv et al.

dependent formate dehydrogenase. The cells supplied with an additional source of
cytosolic NADH achieved a glycerol yield that exceeded the theoretical maximum;
however, this strategy required formate co-feeding. In order to avoid co-feeding,
they proposed to switch the redox factor speciﬁcity of glycerol formation in
S. cerevisiae from NADH to NADPH by introducing an NADPH-dependent
DHAP reductase and redirecting the main carbon ﬂux through the pentose phos-
phate pathway by reducing phosphoglucose isomerase activity. The Bacillus
subtilis gpsA gene, encoding a NADPH-dependent DHAP reductase, was success-
fully introduced into an S. cerevisiae pgi1 mutant but that resulted in only 35%
Fig. 5.4 Glycerol production in microaerobic and anaerobic conditions by S. cerevisiae recom-
binant strain with decreased expression of TPI1 and overexpression of a fused gene for GPD1-
GPP1, the modiﬁed gene FPS1, and truncated gene ILV2. Red arrows depict steps of glycerol
metabolism that were targeted in the study. G-6-P glucose-6-phosphate, F-6-P fructose-6-phos-
phate, F-1,6-P fructose-1,6-biphosphate, DHAP dihydroxyacetone phosphate, GAP glyceralde-
hyde-3-phosphate,
Gly-3-P
glycerol-3-phosphate,
1,3-P-glyc
1,3-phosphoglycerate,
PEP
phosphoenolpyruvate, Ac-CoA acetyl coenzyme A, TCA tricarboxylic acid cycle, Gpd1,2 cytosolic
glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, Gpp1,2 glycerol-3-phosphate phosphatase, Adh1-5 alcohol
dehydrogenases, Ald3 aldehyde dehydrogenase, Ilv2 acetolactate synthase, Hxt, Stl1, Fps1 mem-
brane transporters
5
Biotechnology of Glycerol Production and Conversion in Yeasts
135

increase of glycerol formation, probably due to the low speciﬁc activity of the
bacterial gpsA gene product in the yeast transformant (Nevoigt 2008).
5.6
Glycerol Production by Osmotolerant Yeasts
Glycerol production by osmotolerant yeasts was ﬁrst described by Nickerson and
Carroll (1945) for the yeast Zygosaccharomyces acidifaciens. This study together
with the following reports on the production of glycerol and other polyols (e.g.,
erythritol, D-arabitol, and mannitol) by Spencer and Shu (1957) and Onishi et al.
(1961) stimulated a comprehensive investigation of osmotolerant or osmophilic
yeasts with the expectation that an organism producing glycerol without a need for
a steering agent might be found. However, these investigations did not lead to
commercialization due to the difﬁculties in recovering glycerol from the fermenta-
tion broth and the availability of less expensive chemical synthetic sources for
glycerol from petroleum sources. Later, the development of separation techniques,
such as reverse osmosis, ultraﬁltration, ion exchange, and ion exclusion, provided
the means
for the economic industrialization of glycerol production by
osmotolerant yeast fermentation.
Most osmotolerant yeast species considered for glycerol production belong to
the
genera
Candida,
Debaryomyces,
Hansenula,
Pichia,
Saccharomyces,
Schizosaccharomyces,
Torulaspora,
and
Zygosaccharomyces
(Onishi
1963;
Zhang et al. 1963; Zhuge 1973; Kumar et al. 1989; Petrovska et al. 1999). All of
these yeasts require oxygen for growth, which considerably increases production
costs due to additional expenses needed for bioreactor aeration and cooling (Cueto-
Rojas et al. 2015).
Glycerol yields as high as 40% have been reached using a strain of C. magnoliae
(Hajny et al. 1960). C. magnoliae is isolated from honeycomb and also known as an
erythritol producer (Kim et al. 1996). C. magnoliae is able to grow in the presence
of up to 50% (w/v) sugars and produces erythritol, mannitol, and glycerol in
response to high sugar concentrations (Yu et al. 2006). When C. magnoliae was
grown in high concentrations of fructose, it produced a signiﬁcant amount of
glycerol comparable to the amount of erythritol (Yu et al. 2006). Similarly,
intracellular glycerol accumulation is also critical for C. magnoliae to maintain
osmolarity as is the case for S. cerevisiae.
An intensive effort has been made in China since the 1970s to develop a glycerol
process based on osmotolerant yeasts. Zhuge (1973) isolated a strain from among
5000 osmotolerant yeast isolates with considerable promise for glycerol produc-
tion. This strain isolated from glazed fruit in Southern China was later identiﬁed as
C. glycerinogenes (Wang et al. 1999). C. glycerinogenes has been commercially
exploited to produce glycerol (Zhuge et al. 2001). Compared with other yeasts,
C. glycerinogenes has several useful properties, such as tolerance to high glucose
concentration, rapid growth, and the ability to accumulate high extracellular glyc-
erol concentration.
136
M. Semkiv et al.

Z. rouxii and Hansenula anomala are other osmotolerant yeasts that produce a
signiﬁcant amount of glycerol under high osmotic conditions (Groleau et al. 1995;
Parekh and Pandey 1985).
5.7
Glycerol Application in the Industry
The applications of glycerol in industry are linked primarily to its physical
properties: for example, owing to its humectant property, glycerol is used in the
preparation of gels and ointments. Glycerol can also be used as in formulations that
require a plasticizer to enhance the dispersion of the coat over beads, granules, and
tablets in cosmetics and pharmaceutics. Glycerol is widely used in preprocessed
tobacco to prevent tobacco from crumbling. It is also used in the healthcare industry
to maintain pressure in the eyeball and central nervous system. Glycerol is hygro-
scopic in nature and therefore is extensively used in glues and adhesives to prevent
them from drying too fast. Glycerol is also used in the textile industry for softening
of ﬁbers, in ﬂexible foams, and related applications. At low temperatures, glycerol
tends to super cool instead of crystallize. This is why aqueous glycerol solutions
resist freezing and is widely used as antifreeze in cooling systems. Glycerol is also
used as a stabilizing agent for storage and shipment of cells, organs, and proteins.
5.8
Glycerol Bioconversion to High-Value Chemicals
In the past decade, the world production of biodiesel as an alternative to petroleum
has signiﬁcantly increased (Chen and Liu 2016). This increase has resulted in large
amounts of glycerol being generated as a by-product from biodiesel production
(about 10% by weight) through transesteriﬁcation with methanol that is catalyzed
by the addition of NaOH or KOH (Garlapati et al. 2016). As a by-product, glycerol
can contribute a signiﬁcant revenue stream to the biodiesel producers (Willke and
Vorlop 2008). Chemical uses of glycerol have also increased demand for this
chemical. Of interest is the use of glycerol as a central raw material for the
production of the ﬁne chemicals: glyceric acid, dihydroxyacetone, ketomalonic
(or mesoxalic) acid, poly(ketomalonate), 1,2,3-tri-tert-butyl glycerol, propylene
glycol (1,2-propanediol), acrolein, and epichlorohydrin (Pagliaro et al. 2007). But
chemical synthesis is often accompanied by the using of hazardous compounds and
contributes to environmental pollution. Due to these considerations, the microbial
conversion of glycerol, especially as a cheap by-product of biodiesel industry, to
value-added compounds represents a more environmentally-friendly approach.
Some existing or plausible biotechnological applications that use glycerol as a
substrate for conversion or as a source of carbon and energy for growth of the
microorganisms are listed as follows:
1. Production of dihydroxyacetone (DHA). DHA is predominantly used as coloring
agent in sunless tanning creams and lotions (Levy 1992). Its chemical synthesis
is expensive and involves dealing with hazardous reactants (Hekmat et al. 2003).
5
Biotechnology of Glycerol Production and Conversion in Yeasts
137

Biotechnological production of DHA employs the bacterium Gluconobacter
oxydans, which has a membrane-bound pyrroloquinoline quinone-dependent
glycerol dehydrogenase that catalyzes the oxidation of the secondary hydroxyl
group
of
glycerol
to
DHA
(Matsushita
et
al.
1994).
Other
bacteria
Gluconobacter melanogenus (Flickinger and Perlman 1977) and Acetobacter
xylinum (Nabe et al. 1979) have also been reported to synthesize DHA from
glycerol.
2. Production of 1,3-propanediol. 1,3-Propanediol (1,3-PDO) is used for the pro-
duction of polyesters, polyethers, polyurethanes, adhesives, composites,
laminates, coatings, and moldings. In addition, 1,3-PDO and terephthalic acid
are
widely
used
for
production
of
valuable
biodegradable
polymer
polytrimethylene terephthalate. Chemical synthesis of 1,3-PDO has many
issues, such as high energy consumption, toxic intermediates, and expensive
catalysts. Fortunately, 1,3-PDO can be biosynthesized from glycerol in two
sequential reactions: ﬁrst, glycerol dehydratase or diol dehydratase converts
glycerol into 3-hydroxypropionaldehyde (3-HPA) (Schneider and Pawelkiewicz
1966; Toraya et al. 1978); in the second step, 3-HPA is reduced to 1,3-PDO by
NADPH- or NADH-dependent 1,3-PDO dehydrogenase. The production of
1,3-PDO has already been demonstrated for strains of Klebsiella pneumoniae,
Clostridium butyricum, and Clostridium acetobutylicum (Forage and Foster
1982; Biebl 1991).
3. Production of ethanol. Fuel ethanol can be used as an additive to gasoline for
biofuel for car engines. In the past decade, an exponential growth in the
production of fuel ethanol has occurred worldwide (Schubert 2006). Fuel etha-
nol is primarily produced from sugarcane, corn, or sugar beets (da Silva et al.
2009). Considerable efforts have been made toward the development of proﬁt-
able technology for ethanol production from lignocellulosic feedstocks
(Dellomonaco et al. 2010). Raw glycerol (by-product of biodiesel production)
is also considered as an inexpensive feedstock for fuel ethanol production (Licht
2010). Unfortunately, the most frequently used ethanol producer S. cerevisiae
does not exhibit acceptable growth rates in a synthetic glycerol medium if no
growth-supporting medium supplements (such as amino acids and nucleic bases)
are added (Swinnen et al. 2013). The growth of S. cerevisiae on glycerol may be
considerably improved, by the selection of glycerol-adapted S. cerevisiae strains
(Ochoa-Estopier et al. 2011), expression of heterologous glycerol transporters
(Klein et al. 2016), etc. Also raw glycerol can be converted to ethanol by
engineered strains of methylotrophic yeast Hansenula polymorpha (Hong et al.
2010; Kata et al. 2016). Elementary mode analysis and metabolic evolution of
E. coli mutants have led to substantial improvement of ethanol production from
glycerol (Trinh and Srienc 2009). Also some new microorganisms with good
ability to grow and produce ethanol on crude glycerol have been recently
isolated, e.g., bacterium Kluyvera cryocrescens (Choi et al. 2011) and yeast
P. tannophilus (Liu et al. 2012).
4. Production of 2,3-butanediol. 2,3-Butanediol (2,3-BDO) is used as a fuel,
solvent, and for the production of polymers (Perego et al. 2003; Saha and
Bothast 1999). Biosynthesis of 2,3-BDO occurs from pyruvate in three steps.
138
M. Semkiv et al.

First, acetolactate synthase catalyzes the condensation of two pyruvate
molecules to form acetolactate and CO2. Then, acetolactate is decarboxylated
to acetoin by acetolactate decarboxylase. And ﬁnally acetoin is reduced to
2,3-butanediol by 2,3-BDO dehydrogenase or acetoin reductase (Juni 1952).
Thus for 2,3-BDO production, all substrates have to be converted to pyruvate.
Many substrates have been used for the production of 2,3-BDO, e.g., starch
hydrolysates, raw and decolored molasses, and corncob hydrolysates (Perego
et al. 2000; Ma et al. 2010). Glycerol might also be a good carbon source for
2,3-BDO
production,
because
2,3-BDO
is
a
known
by-product
of
1,3-propanediol production from glycerol by K. pneumoniae (Biebl et al.
1998). Production of 2,3-BDO from glycerol by K. pneumoniae G31 resulted
in high product yields under intense aeration and alkaline pH conditions (Petrov
and Petrova 2010).
5. Production of glyceric acid. Glyceric acid is an expensive promising chemical
used for pharmaceutical purposes. Glyceric acid is a known by-product of
dihydroxyacetone production from glycerol with G. oxydans. The biosynthesis
of glyceric acid is funneled from glycerol via two dehydrogenases: ﬁrst, glycerol
is oxidized to glyceraldehyde which is subsequently oxidized further to glyceric
acid (Habe et al. 2009b). Among various acetic acid bacteria, Acetobacteri
tropicalis was identiﬁed as the best glyceric acid-producing organism (Habe
et al. 2009a).
6. Production of biosurfactants. Surfactants are used as cleaners, emulsiﬁers, laun-
dry detergents, or in paints. Biosurfactants consist of a hydrophilic part (consists
of a sugar, peptide, or protein) and a hydrophobic/lipophilic part (contains fatty
acids or fatty alcohols). The biosurfactants have advantages over chemically
produced detergents because they are biodegradable, less toxic, and can be
produced from renewable resources. Natural biosurfactant producers are bacte-
ria, yeast, and fungi (Mulligan 2005). Pure or raw glycerol is often used in
biosurfactant production, as it constitutes the backbone of the lipid component of
biosurfactants. Among microorganisms that can carry out the production of
biosurfactants using glycerol are the yeast Pseudozyma antarctica (Morita
et al. 2007), Candida bombicola (Ashby and Solaiman 2010), and the bacterium
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Wu et al. 2008).
7. Several more or less successful attempts have been done to use raw glycerol as a
source of carbon for the production of succinate, citrate, and amino acids. For
more details, the reader is referred to an excellent recent review (Wendisch et al.
2011).
Thus, glycerol is the valuable compound with important role in nature and vast
application in different branches of the industry. It can be obtained in several ways
including biotechnological processes, yeast alcoholic fermentation and biodiesel
production. Glycerol is widely used in the cosmetic, paint, automotive, food, and
pharmaceutical industries and for the production of value-added compounds. In
yeast cells, glycerol production plays a role in protection against osmotic stress,
maintenance of redox balance, and pool of cytoplasmic inorganic phosphate.
Glycerol also can be used by yeast cells as a carbon and energy source.
5
Biotechnology of Glycerol Production and Conversion in Yeasts
139

Acknowledgment This work was supported in part by Polish grant of National Scientiﬁc Center
Opus UMO-2016/21/B/NZ1/00280 awarded to A. Sibirny; National Academy of Sciences of
Ukraine (Grant 35-17).
References
Adler L, Blomberg A, Nilsson A (1985) Glycerol metabolism and osmoregulation in the salt-
tolerant yeast Debaryomyces hansenii. J Bacteriol 162:300–306
Agarwal GP (1990) Glycerol. In: Fiechter A (ed) Advances in biochemical engineering/biotech-
nology 41: microbial bioproducts. Springer, Berlin, pp 95–128
Ahmadpour D, Geijer C, Tamas MJ, Lindkvist-Petersson K, Hohmann S (2014) Yeast reveals
unexpected roles and regulatory features of aquaporins and aquaglyceroporins. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1840:1482–1491
Albers E, Liden G, Larsson C, Gustafsson L (1998) Anaerobic redox balance and nitrogen
metabolism in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Recent Res Dev Microbiol 2:253–279
Albertyn J, Hohmann S, Thevelein JM, Prior BA (1994) GPD1, which encodes glycerol-3-
phosphate dehydrogenase is essential for growth under osmotic stress in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae and its expression is regulated by the high-osmolarity glycerol response pathway.
Mol Cell Biol 14:4135–4144
Alepuz PM, de Nadal E, Zapater M, Ammerer G, Posas F (2003) Osmostress-induced transcription
by Hot1 depends on a Hog1-mediated recruitment of the RNA Pol II. EMBO J 22:2433–2442
Anderson RM, Bitterman KJ, Wood JG, Medvedik O, Cohen H, Lin SS, Manchester JK, Gordon
JI, Sinclair DA (2002) Manipulation of a nuclear NAD+ salvage pathway delays aging without
altering steady-state NAD+ levels. J Biol Chem 277:18881–18890
Andre L, Hemming A, Adler L (1991) Osmoregulation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae: studies on
the osmotic induction of glycerol production and glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (NAD+).
FEBS Lett 286:13–17
Ansell R, Granath K, Hohmann S, Thevelein JM, Adler L (1997) The two isoenzymes for yeast
NAD+-dependent glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase encoded by GPD1 and GPD2 have
distinct roles in osmoadaptation and redox regulation. EMBO J 16:2179–2187
Ashby RD, Solaiman DK (2010) The inﬂuence of increasing media methanol concentration on
sophorolipid biosynthesis from glycerol-based feedstocks. Biotechnol Lett 32:1429–1437
Babazadeh R, Adiels CB, Smedh M, Petelenz-Kurdziel E, Goksor M, Hohmann S (2013)
Osmostress-induced cell volume loss delays yeast Hog1 signaling by limiting diffusion
processes and by Hog1-speciﬁc effects. PLoS One 8:e80901
Bakker BM, Overkamp KM, van Maris AJ, Kotter P, Luttik MA, van Dijken JP, Pronk JT (2001)
Stoichiometry and compartmentation of NADH metabolism in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
FEMS Microbiol Rev 25:15–37
Baltanas R, Bush A, Couto A, Durrieu L, Hohmann S, Colman-Lerner A (2013) Pheromone-
induced morphogenesis improves osmoadaptation capacity by activating the HOG MAPK
pathway. Sci Signal 6:ra26
Beese SE, Negishi T, Levin DE (2009) Identiﬁcation of positive regulators of the yeast fps1
glycerol channel. PLoS Genet 5(11):e1000738
Biebl H (1991) Glycerol Fermentation of 1,3-Propanediol by Clostridium butyricum—measure-
ment of product inhibition by use of a Ph-Auxostat. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 35:701–705
Biebl H, Zeng AP, Menzel K, Deckwer WD (1998) Fermentation of glycerol to 1,3-propanediol
and 2,3-butanediol by Klebsiella pneumoniae. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 50:24–29
Bjorkqvist S, Ansell R, Adler L, Liden G (1997) Physiological response to anaerobicity of glycerol
3-phosphate dehydrogenase mutants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl Environ Microbiol
63:128–132
Blomberg A (2000) Metabolic surprises in Saccharomyces cerevisiae during adaptation to saline
conditions: questions, some answers and a model. FEMS Microbiol Lett 182:1–8
140
M. Semkiv et al.

Blomberg A, Adler L (1989) Roles of glycerol and glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (NAD+)
in acquired osmotolerance of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Bacteriol 171:1087–1092
Blomberg A, Adler L (1992) Physiology of osmotolerance in fungi. Adv Microb Physiol
33:145–212
Bouwman J, Kiewiet J, Lindenbergh A, van Eunen K, Siderius M, Bakker BM (2011) Metabolic
regulation rather than de novo enzyme synthesis dominates the osmo-adaptation of yeast.
Yeast 28:43–53
Brewster JL, de Valoir T, Dwyer ND, Winter E, Gustin MC (1993) An osmosensing signal
transduction pathway in yeast. Science 259:1760–1763
Brown AD (1978) Compatible solutes and extreme water stress in eukaryotic micro-organisms.
Adv Microb Physiol 17:181–242
Chen Z, Liu D (2016) Toward glycerol bioreﬁnery: metabolic engineering for the production of
biofuels and chemicals from glycerol. Biotechnol Biofuels 9:205
Chen RE, Thorner J (2007) Function and regulation in MAPK signaling pathways: lessons learned
from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biochim Biophys Acta 1773:1311–1340
Chen X, Fang H, Rao Z, Shen W, Zhuge B, Wang Z, Zhuge J (2008) Cloning and characterization
of
a
NADþ-dependent
glycerol-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
gene
from
Candida
glycerinogenes, an industrial glycerol producer. FEMS Yeast Res 8:725–734
Choi WJ, Hartono MR, Chan WH, Yeo SS (2011) Ethanol production from biodiesel-derived
crude glycerol by newly isolated Kluyvera cryocrescens. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
89:1255–1264
Compagno C, Brambilla L, Capitanio D, Boschi F, Ranzi BM, Porro D (2001) Alterations of the
glucose metabolism in a triose phosphate isomerase-negative Saccharomyces cerevisiae
mutant. Yeast 18(7):663–670
Connstein W, Ludecke K (1919) Uber Glycerin-Gewinnung durch Garung. Ber Dtsch Chem Ges
52:1385–1391
Cordier H, Mendes F, Vasconcelos I, Francois JM (2007) A metabolic and genomic study of
engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains for high glycerol production. Metab Eng
9:364–378
Costenoble R, Valadi H, Gustafsson L, Niklasson C, Franzen CJ (2000) Microaerobic glycerol
formation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 16:1483–1495
Cueto-Rojas HF, van Maris AJ, Wahl SA, Heijnen JJ (2015) Thermodynamics-based design of
microbial cell factories for anaerobic product formation. Trends Biotechnol 33(9):534–546
da Silva GP, Mack M, Contiero J (2009) Glycerol: a promising and abundant carbon source for
industrial microbiology. Biotechnol Adv 27:30–39
Dawson AG (1979) Oxidation of cytosolic NADH formed during aerobic metabolism in mamma-
lian cells. Trends Biochem Sci 4:171–176
de Nadal E, Casadome L, Posas F (2003) Targeting the MEF2-like transcription factor Smp1 by
the stress-activated Hog1 mitogen-activated protein kinase. Mol Cell Biol 23:229–237
de Nadal E, Ammerer G, Posas F (2011) Controlling gene expression in response to stress. Nat Rev
Genet 12:833–845
de Vries RP, Flitter SJ, van de Vondervoort PJ, Chaveroche MK, Fontaine T, Fillinger S, Ruijter
GJ, d’Enfert C, Visser J (2003) Glycerol dehydrogenase, encoded by gldB is essential for
osmotolerance in Aspergillus nidulans. Mol Microbiol 49:131–141
Dellomonaco C, Fava F, Gonzalez R (2010) The path to next generation biofuels: successes and
challenges in the era of synthetic biology. Microb Cell Fact 9:3
Dihazi H, Kessler R, Eschrich K (2004) High osmolarity glycerol (HOG) pathway-induced
phosphorylation and activation of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase are essential for glycerol accumu-
lation and yeast cell proliferation under hyperosmotic stress. J Biol Chem 279:23961–23968
Drewke C, Thielen J, Ciriacy M (1990) Ethanol formation in adh0 mutants reveals the existence of
a novel acetaldehyde-reducing activity in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Bacteriol 172
(7):3909–3917
5
Biotechnology of Glycerol Production and Conversion in Yeasts
141

Dujon B, Sherman D, Fischer G, Durrens P, Casaregola S, Lafontaine I, De Montigny J, Marck C,
Neuve´glise C, Talla E, Goffard N, Frangeul L, Aigle M, Anthouard V, Babour A, Barbe V,
Barnay S, Blanchin S, Beckerich JM, Beyne E, Bleykasten C, Boisrame´ A, Boyer J,
Cattolico L, Confanioleri F, De Daruvar A, Despons L, Fabre E, Fairhead C, Ferry-Dumazet H,
Groppi A, Hantraye F, Hennequin C, Jauniaux N, Joyet P, Kachouri R, Kerrest A, Koszul R,
Lemaire M, Lesur I, Ma L, Muller H, Nicaud JM, Nikolski M, Oztas S, Ozier-Kalogeropoulos-
O, Pellenz S, Potier S, Richard GF, Straub ML, Suleau A, Swennen D, Tekaia F, We´solowski-
Louvel M, Westhof E, Wirth B, Zeniou-Meyer M, Zivanovic I, Bolotin-Fukuhara M,
Thierry A, Bouchier C, Caudron B, Scarpelli C, Gaillardin C, Weissenbach J, Wincker P,
Souciet JL (2004) Genome evolution in yeasts. Nature 430:35–44
Edgley M, Brown AD (1983) Yeast water relations: physiological changes induced by solute stress
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Saccharomyces rouxii. J Gen Microbiol 129:3453–3463
Eriksson P, Andre L, Ansell R, Blomberg A, Adler L (1995) Characterization of GPD2, a second
gene encoding sn-glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (NAD+) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
and its comparison with GPD1. Mol Microbiol 17:95–107
Eustace R, Thornton RJ (1987) Selective hybridization of wine yeasts for higher yields of glycerol.
Can J Microbiol 33:112–117
Ferreira C, van Voorst F, Martins A, Neves L, Oliveira R, Kielland-Brandt MC, Lucas C, Brandt A
(2005) A member of the sugar transporter family, Stl1p is the glycerol/Hþ symporter in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol Biol Cell 16:2068–2076
Fillinger S, Ruijter G, Tamas MJ, Visser J, Thevelein JM, d’Enfert C (2001) Molecular and
physiological characterization of the NAD-dependent glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase in
the ﬁlamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans. Mol Microbiol 39:145–157
Finley D, Ulrich HD, Sommer T, Kaiser P (2012) The ubiquitin-proteasome system of Saccharo-
myces cerevisiae. Genetics 192:319–360
Flickinger MC, Perlman D (1977) Application of oxygen-enriched aeration in the conversion of
glycerol to Dihydroxyacetone by Gluconobacter melanogenus IFO 3293. Appl Environ
Microbiol 33:706–712
Forage RG, Foster MA (1982) Glycerol fermentation in Klebsiella pneumoniae: functions of the
coenzyme B12-dependent glycerol and diol dehydratases. J Bacteriol 149:413–419
Frost and Sullivan (2006) R&D creating new avenues for glycerol. https://www.frost.com/prod/
servlet/market-insight-top.pag?docid¼77264824. Accessed 4 Aug 2006
Gancedo C, Gancedo JM, Sols A (1968) Glycerol metabolism in yeasts. Pathways of utilization
and production. Eur J Biochem 5:165–172
Garlapati VK, Shankar U, Budhiraja A (2016) Bioconversion technologies of crude glycerol to
value added industrial products. Biotechnol Rep 9:9–14
Geertman JM, van Maris AJ, van Dijken JP, Pronk JT (2006) Physiological and genetic engineer-
ing of cytosolic redox metabolism in Saccharomyces cerevisiae for improved glycerol produc-
tion. Metab Eng 8:532–542
Gesslein BW (1999) Humectants in personal care formulation: a practical guide. In: Schueller R,
Romanowski P (eds) Conditioning agents for hair and skin. Marcel Dekker, New York, pp
95–96
Grant WD (2004) Life at low water activity. Philos Trans R Soc Lond Ser B Biol Sci
359:1249–1266; discussion 1266–1247
Groleau D, Chevalier P, Yuen TLSTH (1995) Production of polyols and ethanol by osmophilic
yeast Zygosaccharomyces rouxii. Biotechnol Lett 17:315–320
Habe H, Fukuoka T, Kitamoto D, Sakaki K (2009a) Biotransformation of glycerol to D-glyceric
acid by Acetobacter tropicalis. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 81:1033–1039
Habe H, Shimada Y, Yakushi T, Hattori H, Ano Y, Fukuoka T, Kitamoto D, Itagaki M,
Watanabe K, Yanagishita H, Matsushita K, Sakaki K (2009b) Microbial production of glyceric
acid, an organic acid that can be mass produced from glycerol. Appl Environ Microbiol
75:7760–7766
Hajny GJ, Hendershot WF, Peterson WH (1960) Factors affecting glycerol production by a newly
isolated osmophilic yeast. Appl Microbiol 8:5–11
142
M. Semkiv et al.

Hekmat D, Bauer R, Fricke J (2003) Optimization of the microbial synthesis of dihydroxyacetone
from glycerol with Gluconobacter oxydans. Bioprocess Biosyst Eng 26:109–116
Heller KB, Lin EC, Wilson TH (1980) Substrate speciﬁcity and transport properties of the glycerol
facilitator of Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 144:274–278
Heredia CF, Sols A, DelaFuente G (1968) Speciﬁcity of the constitutive hexose transport in yeast.
Eur J Biochem 5:321–329
Hester A (2000) Microbial glycerol. Ind Bioprocess 22(4):3–5
Hohmann S (2002) Osmotic stress signaling and osmoadaptation in yeasts. Microbiol Mol Biol
Rev 66:300–372
Hohmann S (2015) An integrated view on a eukaryotic osmoregulation system. Curr Genet 61
(3):373–382
Holst B, Lunde C, Lages F, Oliveira R, Lucas C, Kielland-Brandt MC (2000) GUP1 and its close
homologue GUP2, encoding multimembrane-spanning proteins involved in active glycerol
uptake in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol Microbiol 37:108–124
Hong WK, Kim CH, Heo SY, Luo LH, Oh BR, Seo JW (2010) Enhanced production of ethanol
from glycerol by engineered Hansenula polymorpha expressing pyruvate decarboxylase and
aldehyde dehydrogenase genes from Zymomonas mobilis. Biotechnol Lett 32:1077–1082
Hunt JA (1999) A short history of soap. Pharm J 263(7076):985–989
Johnson DT, Taconi KA (2007) The glycerin glut: options for the value-added conversion of crude
glycerol resulting from biodiesel production. Environ Prog 26:338–348
Jung S, Marelli M, Rachubinski RA, Goodlett DR, Aitchison JD (2010) Dynamic changes in the
subcellular distribution of Gpd1p in response to cell stress. J Biol Chem 285:6739–6749
Jung JY, Kim TY, Ng CY, Oh MK (2012) Characterization of GCY1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
by metabolic proﬁling. J Appl Microbiol 113:1468–1478
Juni E (1952) Mechanisms of formation of acetoin by bacteria. J Biol Chem 195:715–726
Karlgren S, Filipsson C, Mullins JGL, Bill RM, Tamas MJ, Hohmann S (2004) Identiﬁcation of
residues controlling transport through the yeast aquaglyceroporin Fps1 using a genetic screen.
Eur J Biochem 271:771–779
Kata I, Semkiv MV, Ruchala J, Dmytruk KV, Sibirny AA (2016) Overexpression of the genes
PDC1 and ADH1 activates glycerol conversion to ethanol in the thermotolerant yeast Ogataea
(Hansenula) polymorpha. Yeast 33(8):471–478
Kim SY, Park SS, Jeon YJ, Seo JH (1996) Analysis of fermentation characteristics for production
of erythritol by Candida sp. Korean J Food Sci Technol 28:935–939
Klein M, Z-u I, Knudsen PB, Carrillo M, Swinnen S, Workman M, Nevoigt E (2016) The
expression of glycerol facilitators from various yeast species improves growth on glycerol of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Metab Eng Commun 3:252–257
Klein M, Swinnen S, Thevelein J, Nevoigt E (2017) Glycerol metabolism and transport in yeast
and fungi: established knowledge and ambiguities. Environ Microbiol 19(3):878–893
Klipp E, Nordlander B, Kruger R, Gennemark P, Hohmann S (2005) Integrative model of the
response of yeast to osmotic shock. Nat Biotechnol 23:975–982
Krantz M, Nordlander B, Valadi H, Johansson M, Gustafsson L, Hohmann S (2004) Anaerobicity
prepares Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells for faster adaptation to osmotic shock. Eukaryot Cell
3:1381–1390
Kumar J, Agarwal SC, Basu SK, Spivastava OP (1989) Isolation, evaluation and taxonomic
characterization of some glycerol producing osmotolerant yeasts. Biol Membr 15:129–135
Kurtzman CP, Fell JW, Boekhout T (eds) (2011) The yeasts—a taxonomic study. Elsevier,
Amsterdam
Lages F, Lucas C (1995) Characterization of a glycerol/Hþ symport in the halotolerant yeast
Pichia sorbitophila. Yeast 11:111–119
Lages F, Silva-Graca M, Lucas C (1999) Active glycerol uptake is a mechanism underlying
halotolerance in yeasts: a study of 42 species. Microbiology 145(9):2577–2585
Larsson K, Ansell R, Eriksson P, Adler L (1993) A gene encoding sn-glycerol-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (NAD+) complements an osmosensitive mutant of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Mol Microbiol 10:1101–1111
5
Biotechnology of Glycerol Production and Conversion in Yeasts
143

Larsson C, Pahlman IL, Ansell R, Rigoulet M, Adler L, Gustafsson L (1998) The importance of the
glycerol 3-phosphate shuttle during aerobic growth of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast
14:347–357
Lee DH, Kim MD, Ryu YW, Seo JH (2008) Cloning and characterization of CmGPD1, the
Candida magnoliae homologue of glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. FEMS Yeast Res
8:1324–1333
Lee YJ, Jeschke GR, Roelants FM, Thorner J, Turk BE (2012) Reciprocal phosphorylation of yeast
glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenases in adaptation to distinct types of stress. Mol Cell Biol
32:4705–4717
Lee J, Reiter W, Dohnal I, Gregori C, Beese-Sims S, Kuchler K, Ammerer G, Levin DE (2013)
MAPK Hog1 closes the S. cerevisiae glycerol channel Fps1 by phosphorylating and displacing
its positive regulators. Genes Dev 27:2590–2601
Levin DE (2011) Regulation of cell wall biogenesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae: the cell wall
integrity signaling pathway. Genetics 189:1145–1175
Levy SB (1992) Dihydroxyacetone-containing sunless or self-tanning lotions. J Am Acad
Dermatol 27:989–993
Licht FO (2010) World ethanol and biofuels report, vol 8
Liu X, Jensen PR, Workman M (2012) Bioconversion of crude glycerol feedstocks into ethanol by
Pachysolen tannophilus. Bioresour Technol 104:579–586
Liu X, Mortensen UH, Workman M (2013) Expression and functional studies of genes involved in
transport and metabolism of glycerol in Pachysolen tannophilus. Microb Cell Fact 12:27
Lucas C, Da Costa M, van Uden N (1990) Osmoregulatory active sodium-glycerol cotransport in
the Halotolerant yeast Debaryomyces hansenii. Yeast 6:187–191
Luyten K, Albertyn J, Skibbe WF, Prior BA, Ramos J, Thevelein JM, Hohmann S (1995) Fps1, a
yeast member of the MIP family of channel proteins, is a facilitator for glycerol uptake and
efﬂux and is inactive under osmotic stress. EMBO J 14:1360–1371
Lynd LR, van Zyl WH, McBride JE, Laser M (2005) Consolidated bioprocessing of cellulosic
biomass: an update. Curr Opin Biotechnol 16:577–583
Ma CQ, Wang AL, Wang Y, Jiang TY, Li LX, Xu P (2010) Production of 2,3-butanediol from
corncob molasses, a waste by-product in xylitol production. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
87:965–970
Maeda T, Wurgler-Murphy SM, Saito H (1994) A two-component system that regulates an
osmosensing MAP kinase cascade in yeast. Nature 369:242–245
Marshall JH, Kong YC, Sloan J, May JW (1989) Puriﬁcation and properties of glycerol: NADP+
2-oxidoreductase from Schizosaccharomyces pombe. J Gen Microbiol 135:697–701
Matsushita K, Toyama H, Adachi O (1994) Respiratory chains and bioenergetics of acetic acid
bacteria. Adv Microb Physiol 36:247–301
Matsuzawa T, Ohashi T, Hosomi A, Tanaka N, Tohda H, Takegawa K (2010) The gld1 gene
encoding glycerol dehydrogenase is required for glycerol metabolism in Schizosaccharomyces
pombe. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 87:715–727
Mattanovich D, Graf A, Stadlmann J, Dragosits M, Redl A, Maurer M, Kleinheinz M, Sauer M,
Altmann F, Gasser B (2009) Genome, secretome and glucose transport highlight unique
features of the protein production host Pichia pastoris. Microb Cell Fact 8:29
Merico A, Ragni E, Galafassi S, Popolo L, Compagno C (2011) Generation of an evolved
Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain with a high freeze tolerance and an improved ability to
grow on glycerol. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 38:1037–1044
Michnick S, Roustan JL, Remize F, Barre P, Dequin S (1997) Modulation of glycerol and ethanol
yields during alcoholic fermentation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains overexpressed or
disrupted for GPD1 encoding glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase. Yeast 13:783–793
Mollapour M, Piper PW (2007) Hog1 mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphorylation targets the
yeast Fps1 aquaglyceroporin for endocytosis, thereby rendering cells resistant to acetic acid.
Mol Cell Biol 27:6446–6456
144
M. Semkiv et al.

Morita T, Konishi M, Fukuoka T, Imura T, Kitamoto D (2007) Microbial conversion of glycerol
into
glycolipid
biosurfactants,
mannosylerythritol
lipids,
by
a
basidiomycete
yeast,
Pseudozyma antarctica JCM 10317(T). J Biosci Bioeng 104:78–81
Mulligan CN (2005) Environmental applications for biosurfactants. Environ Pollut 133:183–198
Murashchenko L, Abbas C, Dmytruk K, Sibirny A (2016) Overexpression of the truncated version
of ILV2 enhances glycerol production in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 33(8):463–469
Nabe K, Izuo N, Yamada S, Chibata I (1979) Conversion of glycerol to dihydroxyacetone by
immobilized whole cells of Acetobacter xylinum. Appl Environ Microbiol 38:1056–1060
Neuberg C, Reinfurth E (1918) Natürliche und erzwungene Glycerinbildung bei der alkoholischen
Ga¨rung. Biochem Z 92:32
Neves L, Lages F, Lucas C (2004) New insights on glycerol transport in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. FEBS Lett 565:160–162
Nevoigt E (2008) Progress in metabolic engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Microbiol Mol
Biol Rev 72:379–412
Nevoigt E, Stahl U (1996) Reduced pyruvate decarboxylase and increased glycerol-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase [NAD+] levels enhance glycerol production in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Yeast 12:1331–1337
Nickerson WJ, Carroll WR (1945) On the metabolism of Zygosaccharomyces. Arch Biochem
7:257–271
Norbeck J, Blomberg A (1997) Metabolic and regulatory changes associated with growth of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae in 1.4 M NaCl. Evidence for osmotic induction of glycerol dissimi-
lation via the dihydroxyacetone pathway. J Biol Chem 272:5544–5554
Norbeck J, Pеhlman AK, Akhtar N, Blomberg A, Adler L (1996) Puriﬁcation and characterization
of two isoenzymes of dl-glycerol-3-phosphatase from Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Identiﬁca-
tion of the corresponding GPP1 and GPP2 genes and evidence for osmotic regulation of
Gpp2p expression by the osmosensing mitogen-activated protein kinase signal transduction
pathway. J Biol Chem 271:13875–13881
O’Rourke SM, Herskowitz I, O’Shea EK (2002) Yeast go the whole HOG for the hyperosmotic
response. Trends Genet 18:405–412
Ochoa-Estopier A, Lesage J, Gorret N, Guillouet SE (2011) Kinetic analysis of a Saccharomyces
cerevisiae strain adapted for improved growth on glycerol: implications for the development of
yeast bioprocesses on glycerol. Bioresour Technol 102(2):1521–1527
Oliveira R, Lucas C (2004) Expression studies of GUP1 and GUP2, genes involved in glycerol
active transport in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, using semi-quantitative RT-PCR. Curr Genet
46:140–146
Oliveira R, Lages F, Silva-Graca M, Lucas C (2003) Fps1p channel is the mediator of the major
part of glycerol passive diffusion in Saccharomyces cerevisiae: artefacts and re-deﬁnitions.
Biochim Biophys Acta 1613:57–71
Oliveira AP, Ludwig C, Picotti P, Kogadeeva M, Aebersold R, Sauer U (2012) Regulation of yeast
central metabolism by enzyme phosphorylation. Mol Syst Biol 8:623
Onishi H (1963) Osmophilic yeasts. Adv Food Res 12:53–94
Onishi H, Saito N, Koshiyama I (1961) Studies on osmoplilic yeasts. Part XI. Various factors
affecting on polyalcohol production by Pichia miso. Agric Biol Chem 25:124–130
Overkamp KM, Bakker BM, Kotter P, Luttik MA, Van Dijken JP, Pronk JT (2002) Metabolic
engineering of glycerol production in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl Environ Microbiol
68:2814–2821
Pagliaro M, Ciriminna R, Kimura H, Rossi M, Della Pina C (2007) From glycerol to value-added
products. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 46:4434–4440
Pahlman AK, Granath K, Ansell R, Hohmann S, Adler L (2001) The yeast glycerol 3-phosphatases
Gpp1p and Gpp2p are required for glycerol biosynthesis and differentially involved in the
cellular responses to osmotic, anaerobic, and oxidative stress. J Biol Chem 276:3555–3563
Parekh SR, Pandey NK (1985) Production of glycerol by Hansenula anomala. Biotechnol Bioeng
27:1081–1091
5
Biotechnology of Glycerol Production and Conversion in Yeasts
145

Pasteur ML (1858) Production constante de glyce’rine dans la fermentation alcoolique. C R Acad
Sci 46:857
Pavlik P, Simon M, Schuster T, Ruis H (1993) The glycerol kinase (GUT1) gene of Saccharomy-
ces cerevisiae: cloning and characterization. Curr Genet 24:21–25
Perego P, Converti A, Del Borghi A, Canepa P (2000) 2,3-butanediol production by Enterobacter
aerogenes: selection of the optimal conditions and application to food industry residues.
Bioprocess Eng 23:613–620
Perego P, Converti A, Del Borghi M (2003) Effects of temperature, inoculum size and starch
hydrolyzate concentration on butanediol production by Bacillus licheniformis. Bioresour
Technol 89:125–131
Petelenz-Kurdziel E, Kuehn C, Nordlander B, Klein D, Hong KK, Jacobson T, Dahl P, Schaber J,
Nielsen J, Hohmann S, Klipp E (2013) Quantitative analysis of glycerol accumulation,
glycolysis and growth under hyper osmotic stress. PLoS Comput Biol 9:e1003084
Petrov K, Petrova P (2010) Enhanced production of 2,3-butanediol from glycerol by forced pH
ﬂuctuations. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 87:943–949
Petrovska B, Winkelhausen E, Kuzmanova S (1999) Glycerol production by yeasts under osmotic
and sulﬁte stress. Can J Microbiol 45:695–699
Pettersson N, Filipsson C, Becit E, Brive L, Hohmann S (2005) Aquaporins in yeasts and
ﬁlamentous fungi. Biol Cell 97:487–500
Posas F, Chambers JR, Heyman JA, Hoefﬂer JP, de Nadal E, Arino J (2000) The transcriptional
response of yeast to saline stress. J Biol Chem 275:17249–17255
Prescott SC, Dunn CG (1959) Industrial microbiology, 3rd edn. McGraw-Hill, New York, pp
208–217
Proft M, Struhl K (2002) Hog1 kinase converts the Sko1-Cyc8-Tup1 repressor complex into an
activator that recruits SAGA and SWI/SNF in response to osmotic stress. Mol Cell
9:1307–1317
Proft M, Pascual-Ahuir A, de Nadal E, Arino J, Serrano R, Posas F (2001) Regulation of the Sko1
transcriptional repressor by the Hog1 MAP kinase in response to osmotic stress. EMBO J
20:1123–1133
Pronk JT, Yde Steensma H, van Dijken JP (1996) Pyruvate metabolism in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Yeast 12(16):1607–1633
Quispe C, Coronado C, Carvalho J Jr (2013) Glycerol: production, consumption, prices, charac-
terization and new trends in combustion. Renew Sust Energ Rev 27:475–493
Redkar RJ, Locy RD, Singh NK (1995) Biosynthetic pathways of glycerol accumulation under salt
stress in Aspergillus nidulans. Exp Mycol 19:241–246
Rehm H-J (1988) Microbial production of glycerol and other polyols. In: Rehm H-J, Reed HJ (eds)
Biotechnology, vol. 6B. Special microbial processes. VCH, Verlagsgesellschaft, Weinheim, pp
51–69
Remize F, Barnavon L, Dequin S (2001) Glycerol export and glycerol-3-phosphate dehydroge-
nase, but not glycerol phosphatase, are rate limiting for glycerol production in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Metab Eng 3:301–312
Rep M, Krantz M, Thevelein JM, Hohmann S (2000) The transcriptional response of Saccharo-
myces cerevisiae to osmotic shock. Hot1p and Msn2p/Msn4p are required for the induction of
subsets of high osmolarity glycerol pathway-dependent genes. J Biol Chem 275:8290–8300
Romano AH (1986) Microbial sugar transport systems and their importance in biotechnology.
Trends Biotechnol 4:207–213
Ronnow B, Kielland-Brandt MC (1993) Gut2, a gene for mitochondrial glycerol-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 9:1121–1130
Roustan JL, Salblayrolles JM, Barre P, Dequin S (1999) Glycerol overproduction by engineered
Saccharomyces cerevisiae wine yeast strains leads to substantial changes in by-product
formation and to a stimulation of fermentation rate in stationary phase. Appl Environ
Microbiol 65:143–149
146
M. Semkiv et al.

Ruijter GJ, Visser J, Rinzema A (2004) Polyol accumulation by Aspergillus oryzae at low water
activity in solid-state fermentation. Microbiology 150:1095–1101
Saha BC, Bothast RJ (1999) Production of 2,3-butanediol by newly isolated Enterobacter cloacae.
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 52:321–326
Saito H, Posas F (2012) Response to hyperosmotic stress. Genetics 192:289–318
Salles IM, Forchhammer N, Croux C, Girbal L, Soucaille P (2007) Evolution of a Saccharomyces
cerevisiae metabolic pathway in Escherichia coli. Metab Eng 9:152–159
Schneider Z, Pawelkiewicz J (1966) The properties of glycerol dehydratase isolated from
Aerobacter aerogenes, and the properties of the apoenzyme subunits. Acta Biochim Pol
13:311–328
Schubert C (2006) Can biofuels ﬁnally take center stage? Nat Biotechnol 24:777–784
Schuurink R, Busink R, Hondmann DH, Witteveen CF, Visser J (1990) Puriﬁcation and properties
of NADP(+)-dependent glycerol dehydrogenases from Aspergillus nidulans and A. niger. J Gen
Microbiol 136:1043–1050
Shi Y, Vaden DL, Ju S, Ding D, Geiger JH, Greenberg ML (2005) Genetic perturbation of
glycolysis results in inhibition of de novo inositol biosynthesis. J Biol Chem 280:41805–41810
Spencer JFT, Shu P (1957) Polyhydric alcohol production by osmophilic yeasts: effect of oxygen
tension and inorganic phosphate concentration. Can J Microbiol 3:559
Sprague GF, Cronan JE (1977) Isolation and characterization of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
mutants defective in glycerol catabolism. J Bacteriol 129:1335–1342
Sutherland FC, Lages F, Lucas C, Luyten K, Albertyn J, Hohmann S, Prior BA, Kilian SG (1997)
Characteristics of Fps1-dependent and -independent glycerol transport in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. J Bacteriol 179:7790–7795
Swinnen S, Klein M, Carrillo M, McInnes J, Nguyen HT, Nevoigt E (2013) Re-evaluation of
glycerol utilization in Saccharomyces cerevisiae: characterization of an isolate that grows on
glycerol without supporting supplements. Biotechnol Biofuels 6:157
Swinnen S, Ho PW, Klein M, Nevoigt E (2016) Genetic determinants for enhanced glycerol
growth of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Metab Eng 36:68–79
Tamas MJ, Luyten K, Sutherland FC, Hernandez A, Albertyn J, Valadi H, Li H, Prior BA, Kilian
SG, Ramos J, Gustafsson L, Thevelein JM, Hohmann S (1999) Fps1p controls the accumula-
tion and release of the compatible solute glycerol in yeast osmoregulation. Mol Microbiol
31:1087–1104
Tani T, Yamada K (1987) Glycerol metabolism in methylotrophic yeasts. Agric Biol Chem
51:1927–1933
ter Linde JJ, Liang H, Davis RW, Steensma HY, van Dijken JP, Pronk JT (1999) Genome-wide
transcriptional analysis of aerobic and anaerobic chemostat cultures of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. J Bacteriol 181:7409–7413
Thevelein JM, Hohmann S (1995) Trehalose synthase, guard to the gate of glycolysis in yeast?
Trends Biochem Sci 20:3–10
Thome PE (2004) Isolation of a GPD gene from Debaryomyces hansenii encoding a glycerol
3-phosphate dehydrogenase (NADþ). Yeast 21:119–126
Thompson JC, He BB (2006) Characterization of crude glycerol from biodiesel production from
multiple feedstocks. Appl Eng Agric 22:261–265
Thorsen M, Di Y, Ta¨ngemo C, Morillas M, Ahmadpour D, Van der Does C, Wagner A,
Johansson E, Boman J, Posas F, Wysocki R, Tama´s MJ (2006) The MAPK Hog1p modulates
Fps1p-dependent arsenite uptake and tolerance in yeast. Mol Biol Cell 17:4400–4410
Toraya T, Honda S, Kuno S, Fukui S (1978) Coenzyme B12-dependent diol dehydratase: regula-
tion of apoenzyme synthesis in Klebsiella pneumoniae (Aerobacter aerogenes) ATCC 8724. J
Bacteriol 135:726–729
Trinh CT, Srienc F (2009) Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli for efﬁcient conversion of
glycerol to ethanol. Appl Environ Microbiol 75:6696–6705
5
Biotechnology of Glycerol Production and Conversion in Yeasts
147

van Heerden JH, Wortel MT, Bruggeman FJ, Heijnen JJ, Bollen YJ, Planque´ R, Hulshof J,
O’Toole TG, Wahl SA, Teusink B (2014) Lost in transition: start-up of glycolysis yields
subpopulations of nongrowing cells. Science 343:1245114
van Zyl PJ, Kilian SG, Prior BA (1990) The role of an active transport mechanism in glycerol
accumulation
during
osmoregulation
by
Zygosaccharomyces
rouxii.
Appl
Microbiol
Biotechnol 34:231–235
van Zyl PJ, Prior BA, Kilian SG (1991) Regulation of glycerol metabolism in Zygosaccharomyces
rouxii to osmotic stress. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 36:369–374
Vijaikishore P, Karanth NG (1986) Glycerol production by fermentation—a review. Process
Biochem 21:54–57
Von Jagow G, Klingenberg M (1970) Pathways of hydrogen in mitochondria of Saccharomyces
carlsbergensis. Eur J Biochem 12:583–592
Wang Z-X, Zhuge J, Fang H-Y (1999) A new osmotolerant glycerol-highly-producing species of
Candida sp.—Candida glycerolgenesis Zhuge sp. nov. Acta Microbiol Sin 39:68–74
Wang Z-X, Zhuge J, Cao Y, Chen J, Fang H-Y (2000) The key enzymes of metabolism of glycerol
in Candida glycerolgenesis. Acta Microbiol Sin 40:180–187
Wang Z-X, Zhuge J, Fang H, Prior BA (2001) Glycerol production by microbial fermentation: a
review. Biotechnol Adv 19:201–223
Warmka J, Hanneman J, Lee J, Amin D, Ota I (2001) Ptc1, a type 2C Ser/Thr phosphatase,
inactivates the HOG pathway by dephosphorylating the mitogen-activated protein kinase
Hog1. Mol Cell Biol 21:51–60
Watanabe Y, Nagayama K, Tamai Y (2008) Expression of glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase
gene (CvGPD1) in salt-tolerant yeast Candida versatilis is stimulated by high concentrations of
NaCl. Yeast 25:107–116
Wendisch VF, Lindner SN, Meiswinkel TM (2011) Chapter 18: Use of glycerol in biotechnologi-
cal applications. In: Montero G, Stoytcheva M (eds) Biodiesel—quality, emissions and
by-products. ISBN 978-953-307-784-0, Published: 16 Nov 2011
Westfall PJ, Ballon DR, Thorner J (2004) When the stress of your environment makes you go
HOG wild. Science 306:1511–1512
Westfall PJ, Patterson JC, Chen RE, Thorner J (2008) Stress resistance and signal ﬁdelity
independent of nuclear MAPK function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105:12212–12217
Willke T, Vorlop K (2008) Biotransformation of glycerol into 1,3-propanediol. Eur J Lipid Sci
Technol 110:831–840
Wu JY, Yeh KL, Lu WB, Lin CL, Chang JS (2008) Rhamnolipid production with indigenous
Pseudomonas aeruginosa EM1 isolated from oil-contaminated site. Bioresour Technol
99:1157–1164
Wurgler-Murphy SM, Maeda T, Witten EA, Saito H (1997) Regulation of the Saccharomyces
cerevisiae HOG1 mitogen-activated protein kinase by the PTP2 and PTP3 protein tyrosine
phosphatases. Mol Cell Biol 17:1289–1297
Yancey PH, Clark ME, Hand SC, Bowlus RD, Somero GN (1982) Living with water stress:
evolution of osmolyte systems. Science 217:1214–1222
Yang F, Hanna MA, Sun R (2012) Value-added uses for crude glycerol—a byproduct of biodiesel
production. Biotechnol Biofuels 5:13
Yu JH, Lee DH, Oh YJ, Han KC, Ryu YW, Seo JH (2006) Selective utilization of fructose to
glucose
by
Candida
magnoliae,
an
erythritol
producer.
Appl
Biochem
Biotechnol
129–132:870–879
Zhang S-Z, Yang X-W, Wang H-L (1963) A study on production of glycerol and arabitol by
osmophilic yeasts: II. The condition for production of arabitol by Hansenula arabitolgenes.
Fang Acta Microbiol Sin 9:134–139
Zhuge J (1973) A study on glycerol production by fermentation with a new strain of osmophilic
yeast. Kexue Tongbao (Sci Bull Sin) 18:188–189
Zhuge J, Fang HY, Wang ZX, Chen DZ, Jin HR, Gu HL (2001) Glycerol production by a novel
osmotolerant yeast Candida glycerinogenes. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 55:686–692
148
M. Semkiv et al.

Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi
and Their Importance for Biotechnology
6
Volkmar Passoth
Abstract
Lipids are essential for any organism. They are hydrophobic compounds and
include, for instance, acylglycerides, free fatty acids, sterols and isoprenoids.
Their synthesis starts from acetyl-CoA, which is converted to lipids by a variety
of complex biochemical reactions. Lipids consist of highly reduced molecules,
and the redox factor providing electrons for their synthesis is NADPH, which is
mainly produced by the pentose phosphate pathway and malic enzyme. There
are a variety of fungi that can accumulate lipids; oleaginous fungi can accumu-
late 20 to more than 80% of their biomass as lipids. Many of them can convert
carbon sources derived from second-generation substrates or low-value residues,
such as lignocellulose hydrolysate or crude glycerol from biodiesel production.
There are also substantial efforts to genetically manipulate fungi to produce
lipids or lipid-derived compounds with high-efﬁciency and from low-value
substrates. Lipids have broad potential in biotechnological applications. Poly-
unsaturated fatty acids are essential for human nutrition, and they can be
produced in high amounts by certain zygomycetous species or by genetically
modiﬁed yeasts. Acylglycerides can be converted to biodiesel and high-value
chemicals. It is possible to obtain biodiesel, jet fuel, speciﬁc chemicals and
carotenes as chemicals and food and feed additives from isoprenoids. Lipids can
be combined with other biomolecules. Glycolipids have a high biotechnological
potential as biosurfactants. Lipoproteins are essential for the viability of any
eukaryotic cell and can be the target for developing novel antifungal drugs. As
most lipids are stored intracellularly, there is also a high demand for process
development towards a sustainable production of lipid-derived fuels and
V. Passoth (*)
Department of Molecular Sciences, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences (SLU), Uppsala
Biocentrum, Box 7015, 75007 Uppsala, Sweden
e-mail: volkmar.passoth@slu.se
# Springer International Publishing AG 2017
A.A. Sibirny (ed.), Biotechnology of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-58829-2_6
149

chemicals. Lipid metabolism of fungi and its biotechnological utilisation has
recently obtained huge attention and is a rapidly developing ﬁeld.
Contents
6.1
Introduction ................................................................................
150
6.2
Oleaginous Fungi ..........................................................................
151
6.3
Biochemistry of Lipid Synthesis .........................................................
155
6.4
Production of Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids (PUFAs) by Fungi .........................
162
6.5
Lipid Modiﬁcation of Other Biomolecules ...............................................
164
6.5.1
Fungal Glycolipids as Biosurfactants ............................................
164
6.5.2
Lipid Modiﬁcation of Proteins ...................................................
170
6.6
Microbial Biodiesel Production by Yeasts ...............................................
172
6.6.1
Lipid Production from Lignocellulose and Crude Glycerol .....................
172
6.6.2
Manipulating Yeasts for Improving Lipid Production ...........................
176
6.7
Production of Speciﬁc Chemicals and Fuels Derived from Lipid Metabolism .........
178
6.7.1
Fatty Alcohols .....................................................................
179
6.7.2
Free Fatty Acids ...................................................................
180
6.7.3
Hydrocarbons .....................................................................
183
6.7.4
Isoprenoids ........................................................................
185
6.8
Lipid Extraction ...........................................................................
190
6.9
Conclusions ................................................................................
192
References .......................................................................................
192
6.1
Introduction
Lipids are regarded as one of the three macronutrients, apart from carbohydrates
and proteins. They are important as energy storage substance and essential for cell
integrity as the cell membrane and all membranes of organelles are mainly formed
by lipids. From this background it might be surprising that there is no real com-
monly accepted deﬁnition of the term “lipid”. Usually lipids are just deﬁned by
their solubility in organic solvents such as chloroform, hydrocarbons, alcohols, etc.
There are a variety of lipid classes, including acylglycerols, free fatty acids,
hydrocarbons (including isoprenoids), sterols and phospholipids (Akpina-Bayizit
2014). In terms of potential biotechnological applications of microbial lipids, the
term “microbial oils” is frequently used, which refers to intracellular storage lipids
mainly comprising triacylglycerols (Ochsenreither et al. 2016). A variety of fungi,
so-called oleaginous fungi, have the ability to accumulate lipids to large amounts,
i.e. more than 20% up to 80% and more of the total biomass (Ratledge and Wynn
2002). The ability of accumulating lipids is attracting growing attention, as these
lipids can be used in a broad range of biotechnological applications, for instance, to
generate biofuels, chemicals or food and feed additives. Speciﬁc chemicals such as
Ω-3 fatty acids, fatty alcohols, alkanes or carotenes can be derived from the lipid
metabolism (Mata-Gomez et al. 2014; Sitepu et al. 2014; Be´ligon et al. 2016;
150
V. Passoth

Ochsenreither et al. 2016; Passoth 2017). Lipids can be bound to other
biomolecules, for instance, carbohydrates or proteins, forming glycolipids and
lipoproteins, respectively. Lipoproteins are essential for cell viability of all
eukaryotes and may represent novel targets for antifungal drugs (Santiago-Tirado
and Doering 2016). Glycolipids form biosurfactants, which have a broad potential
of applications, for instance, in bioremediation of polluted soils and as antimicro-
bial agents (Paulino et al. 2016).
Oleaginous organisms have been isolated to enable production of lipid-derived
compounds from a variety of substrates. Methods have been established to geneti-
cally modify lipid-accumulating fungi to improve lipid accumulation from different
substrates or to convert non-oleaginous fungi to oil-accumulating organisms
(Beopoulos et al. 2009; Chen et al. 2013). Production of high-value compounds
from low-value residues, such as lignocellulose hydrolysate or residual glycerol
from biodiesel production, would be an important step towards a sustainable society
that is largely independent on fossil fuels. This chapter aims to summarise recent
progress in understanding fungal lipid metabolism and its biotechnological
application.
6.2
Oleaginous Fungi
A number of fungi have been identiﬁed that are able to accumulate more than 20%
of their biomass as lipids. These fungi are quite diverse and belong to at least three
fungal phyla: asco- and basidiomycetes (mainly yeasts) and zygomycetes.
Lipomyces starkeyi, Lipomyces lipofer and Yarrowia lipolytica are examples of
ascomycetous oleaginous yeasts. Basidiomycetous yeasts belong, for instance, to
the
genera
Rhodosporidium/Rhodotorula,
Phafﬁa,
Sporobolomyces
and
Solicoccozyma (Flores-Cotera et al. 2001; Jin et al. 2015; Ochsenreither et al.
2016). There are ongoing activities to identify novel oleaginous fungi. Recently,
oleaginous yeasts have been found among cryophilic yeasts, with Leucosporidium
creatinivorum being the most promising one, accumulating lipids to more than 70%
of the cell dry weight with a yield of 0.2 g lipids per gram consumed glucose
(Filippucci et al. 2016). Accordingly, these organisms also have a broad diversity in
utilising substrates for lipid accumulation, including glucose, xylose, glycerol,
organic acids and polymers such as starch, and hydrophobic compounds such as
alkanes (Tanimura et al. 2014; Jin et al. 2015). Filamentous fungi usually are able to
produce longer polyunsaturated fatty acids, whereas yeasts can accumulate more oil
in their cells; in fact, oleaginous yeasts are among the highest known producers of
lipids and can reach lipid proportions of more than 85% of their dry weight
(Ochsenreither et al. 2016). Table 6.1 provides some examples of oleaginous fungi.
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
151

Table 6.1 Examples of oleaginous fungal species
Phylum
Taxonomic placement
Species
Lipid
content
(% DM)
Remarksa
Zygomycetes
Order Mucorales
Cunninghamella
echinulata
24–54
17–22% of total FA GLA
Cunninghamella
blakesleeana
41
22% of total FA PUFA
Mucor circinelloides
15–36
15–26% of total FA PUFA
Thamnidium elegans
71
Chatzifragkou et al. (2011)
Order Mortierellales
Mortierella elongata
24
58% of total FA ARA, 13% EPA
Mortierella alpina
50
43% of total FA ARA
Order Umbelopsidales
Umbelopsis isabellina
(syn. Mortierella
isabellina)
71
11% of total FA ALA, 2.5 GLA
Basidiomycetes
Subphylum Pucciniomycotina Class
Cystobasidiomycetes Order
Cystobasidiales
Rhodotorula minuta
25
Class Microbotryomycetes Order
Leucosporidiales
Leucosporidium
creatinivorum
49–61, 70
The latter value was obtained at 20 C in a
test of cryophilic yeasts (Filippucci et al.
2016)
Order Sporidiobolaceae
Rhodotorula colostri
27
Rhodotorula mucilaginosa
28–33
Rhodosporidium
paludigenum
31
Rhodosporidium
sphaerocarpum
15–43
Rhodosporidium babjevae
65
Rhodosporidium
diobovatum
20–41
152
V. Passoth

Rhodosporidium
toruloides
20–60,
67.5
67.5% in high cell-density culture (Li et al.
2007)
Rhodotorula glutinis
35–57
Rhodotorula graminis
40
Rhodosporidium ﬂuviale
25
Rhodotorula glacialis
68
Order uncertain
Rhodotorula terpenoidalis
27
Subphylum Agaricomycotina
Class Tremellomycetes
Order Filobasidiales
Solicoccozyma terricola
(syn. Cryptococcus
terricolus)
69
Solicoccozyma terreus
(syn. Cryptococcus
terreus)
51
Naganishia adeliensis
53
Obtained at 20 C in a test of cryophilic
yeasts (Filippucci et al. 2016)
Order Cystoﬁlobasidiales
Phafﬁa rhodozyma
37
Flores-Cotera et al. (2001)
Order Trichosporonales
Cutaneotrichosporon
cutaneum
31
Liu et al. (2013)
Ascomycetes
Subphylum Saccharomycotina Class
Saccharomycetes Order
Saccharomycetales Family
Lipomycetaceae
Myxozyma melibiosi
23
Lipomyces lipofer
40
Lipomyces tetrasporus
66
Lipomyces starkeyi
62
Lipomyces doorenjongii
72
Lipomyces kockii
78
Family Metschnikowiaceae
Kodamaea ohmeri
53
Metschnikowia
pulcherrima
30
(continued)
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
153

Table 6.1 (continued)
Phylum
Taxonomic placement
Species
Lipid
content
(% DM)
Remarksa
Family Wickerhamomycetacaea
Cyberlindnera jadinii
20–30
Cyberlindnera saturnus
25
Family Debaryomycetaceae
Schwanniomyces
occidentalis
23
Candida diddensiae
37
Kurtzmaniella cleridarum
33
Family Dipodascaceae
Geotrichum histeridarum
34
Galactomyces candidus
50
Family Saccharomycetaceae
Torulaspora delbrueckii
40
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
45
A strain engineered in multiple genes of lipid
metabolism (Kamisaka et al. 2013)
Uncertain family
Yarrowia lipolytica
55, 85
85% in a mga2-G643R mutant strain
overexpressing DGA1 (Liu et al. 2015a, b)
If no other reference is given, information was compiled from Sitepu et al. (2014) for oleaginous yeasts and from Be´ligon et al. (2016) and Bellou et al. (2016)
for oleaginous zygomycetes
aFA fatty acids, ARA arachidonic acid, EPA eicosapentaenoic acid, ALA α-linolenic acid, GLA γ-linolenic acid, PUFA polyunsaturated fatty acids
154
V. Passoth

6.3
Biochemistry of Lipid Synthesis
Fatty acids for microbial oils of oleaginous fungi are synthesised in the cytoplasm
from acetyl-CoA, following a reversed β-oxidation. Acetyl-CoA carboxylase
synthesises ATP-dependent malonyl-CoA from acetyl-CoA, which is the substrate
of the fatty acid synthase (FAS)—enzyme complex. FAS elongates the acyl-CoA
chain by two carbons in each step, consuming NADPH. Usually, synthesis starts
with acetyl-CoA, resulting in even-numbered fatty acids. However, it is also
possible that propionyl-CoA is used in the ﬁrst condensation, which results in
odd-numbered fatty acids (Tehlivets et al. 2007). Odd-numbered fatty acids have
been observed in some yeast strains (e.g. Olstorpe et al. 2014). Two NADPH are
consumed per elongation step to reduce the acetyl groups; thus, for the synthesis of
1 mole of C18 saturated fatty acid (stearic acid), 8 mole ATP and 16 mole NADPH
are required (Ratledge 2014). When glucose is the carbon source, the acetyl-CoA is
derived from citric acid, which is exported out of the mitochondria. This happens
when there is a surplus of carbon and energy for the cell, which implies that there is
a limitation for another essential compound, such as nitrogen, phosphorus or
sulphur (Ratledge and Wynn 2002; Wu et al. 2010, 2011). Under those
circumstances, AMP, which is an essential cofactor of isocitrate dehydrogenase
(ICDH), is degraded, and thus ICDH is no longer able to perform the conversion of
isocitrate to α-ketoglutarate. As a result, isocitrate accumulates and levels out with
citrate, which is then exported, usually in exchange with malate, to the cytoplasm.
In the cytoplasm, citrate is converted to oxaloacetate and acetyl-CoA by ATP
citrate lyase (ACL), consuming ATP and coenzyme A (Tang et al. 2015). ACL
has up to now been found in all known oleaginous fungi (Ratledge and Wynn 2002).
It has been pointed out that supply of NADPH is the limiting factor in lipid
synthesis. The major pathways for NADPH generation are the pentose phosphate
pathway (PPP) with the two NADPH-generating enzymes glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase (G6PDH) and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (6PGDH) and
the pyruvate-oxaloacetate-malate (POM) or transhydrogenase cycle. In this cycle,
pyruvate is carboxylated to oxaloacetate by pyruvate carboxylase (PC), and then the
oxaloacetate is reduced to malate, which consumes one mole NADH per mole
oxaloacetate, and then malic enzyme (ME) converts the malate to pyruvate, CO2
and NADPH. There is also a cytoplasmic, NADP+-dependent ICDH in many
eukaryotic organisms, which may have a role in generating NADPH during lipid
synthesis (Ratledge 2014).
Malic enzyme has been suggested to be the major provider of NADPH for lipid
production. A physical interaction between malic enzyme and other lipid synthesis
enzymes has been proposed (Ratledge and Wynn 2002; Ratledge 2014). However,
in many oleaginous yeasts, no cytoplasmic malic enzyme has been found.
Lipomyces starkeyi possesses a putative cytoplasmic malic enzyme, but it has a
preference for NAD+ instead of NADP+ (Tang et al. 2010; Vorapreeda et al. 2013).
Y. lipolytica contains only a mitochondrial ME, and its overexpression did not
affect lipid accumulation (Beopoulos et al. 2011). Similarly, the overexpression of a
NADP+-dependent ME from Mortierella alpina did not result in increased lipid
production in this yeast (Zhang et al. 2013). Metabolic ﬂux analysis showed that
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
155

there is no NADPH production by ME in this yeast and that the PPP, although not
signiﬁcantly upregulated under lipid accumulation conditions, was obviously sufﬁ-
cient for the production of reducing cofactors for lipid synthesis. This might also be
due to the fact that Y. lipolytica accumulates rather low amounts of lipids compared
to other oleaginous fungi (Zhang et al. 2016a). On the other hand, by
overexpressing genes of acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC1) and diacylglycerol
acyltransferase (DGA1), the ﬁnal step of triacylglyceride synthesis, the lipid content
in Y. lipolytica could be increased to more than 60% of cell dry weight, without
further manipulation of NADPH-generating enzymes (Tai and Stephanopoulos
2013).
However, in other fungi a clear impact of NADPH-generating enzymes on lipid
synthesis has been shown. In the oleaginous yeast Cutaneotrichosporon cutaneum
(syn. Trichosporon cutaneum, Liu et al. 2015b), ME was upregulated under lipid
accumulation conditions (Liu et al. 2013). Overexpression of a ME from Mucor
circinelloides
resulted
in
substantially
increased
lipid
contents
both
in
M. circinelloides (Zhang et al. 2007) and in Rhodotorula glutinis (Della-Bianca
et al. 2013). On the other hand, overexpressing a native ME gene in R. toruloides
did not have a large effect on lipid accumulation (Zhang et al. 2016b). In
M. circinelloides, both PPP and ME contribute to NADPH formation during lipid
synthesis (Tang et al. 2015; Zhao et al. 2015). M. alpina, which accumulates
signiﬁcantly more lipids than M. circinelloides, has a substantially higher and more
constant ME activity than M. circinelloides. Most probably, oxaloacetate, which is
formed in the cytoplasm as a result of the ACL reaction, is NADH dependently
reduced to malate, which is then converted to pyruvate, CO2 and NADPH by
ME. Pyruvate is subsequently transported into the mitochondrion by the pyruvate/
malate/citrate shuttle system. In M. circinelloides, a substantial part of the malate is
also transported back to the mitochondria, since there is an accumulation of cyto-
plasmic malate due to the low activity of ME (Zhao et al. 2016). Conversion of
cytoplasmic malate to pyruvate by ME and transport of pyruvate back to
mitochondria would, however, result in a lack of oxaloacetate in the mitochondria
of ﬁlamentous fungi, as there is obviously no mitochondrial PC (Wynn et al. 2001),
and thus pyruvate can only be converted to acetyl-CoA by pyruvate dehydrogenase
(PDH). Additional OA can, however, be generated by the glyoxylate cycle, where
isocitrate is ﬁrst converted to glyoxylate and succinate by isocitrate lyase (ICL).
Glyoxylate can then be condensed with acetyl-CoA, resulting in malate, which can be
transported out from the mitochondria, serving as additional substrate for ME,
generating more NADPH (Vongsangnak et al. 2013). Indeed, increased activities
of the glyoxylate cycle have been demonstrated in M. circinelloides under lipid
accumulation conditions (Zhao et al. 2015). Yeasts have both cytoplasmic and
mitochondrial PC activities, and in T. cutaneum, an increased amount of mitochon-
drial oxaloacetate synthesized by mitochondrial PC has been observed, while cyto-
plasmic oxaloacetate was mainly produced by ACL (Liu et al. 2013).
When all NADPH has to be provided by the PPP, as it is possibly the case in
yeasts lacking NADP+-dependent cytoplasmic ME activity, the maximum lipid
yield per gram glucose would be 0.276 g lipids (Ratledge 2014), and, indeed, in
one study a yield of 0.27 g lipids was reported in engineered Y. lipolytica (Tai and
156
V. Passoth

Stephanopoulos 2013). Recently, the simultaneous overexpression of a glyceralde-
hyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase with a preference for NADP+ instead of NAD+
and a ME from M. circinelloides and overexpression of a NAD+/NADH kinase
resulted in a maximum lipid yield of 0.28 g/g glucose (Qiao et al. 2017). This is,
however, still not reaching the maximum theoretical lipid yield from glucose, when
NADPH is not exclusively generated by PPP, which was calculated to be 0.316 g
per gram consumed sugar (Ratledge 2014). Still, it is considerably higher than the
yields that have been obtained until now, where values higher than 0.22 g/g
seldomly were obtained (Ratledge 2014; Jin et al. 2015).
However, it has been pointed out that NADPH availability is not necessarily the
only limiting factor in lipid synthesis. Rodrı´guez-Fro´meta and colleagues discov-
ered that a M. circinelloides strain overexpressing a gene encoding cytosolic ME
produced more lipids than the original mutant strain but not more than a control
strain, which was only transformed with the selection marker LeuA, encoding
α-isopropylmalate isomerase, a step in leucine biosynthesis. Adding external leu-
cine to the growth medium did not have a positive effect on lipid synthesis,
indicating that the leucine synthesis pathway itself is activating lipid synthesis
(Rodrı´guez-Fro´meta et al. 2013). A similar phenomenon has been observed in
S. cerevisiae, where complementing of a LEU2 mutation resulted in a higher lipid
content of the cells (Kamisaka et al. 2007). The mechanism behind this activation of
lipid production by an active leucine synthesis pathway is not completely clear. It is
possible that acetyl-CoA is released from leucine degradation, which can serve as
substrate for lipid synthesis. The substrate of α-isopropylmalate isomerase,
α-isopropylmalate, which accumulates in leuA mutants, plays a pivotal role in
leucine metabolism in yeasts. It binds to Leu3p, which turns this protein from a
transcriptional repressor to an activator of leucine biosynthesis. One may speculate
that similar regulatory phenomena also occur in M. circinelloides and that accumu-
lation of α-isopropylmalate in the leuA mutants activates synthesis and prevents
degradation of leucine and by this supply of acetyl-CoA from this pathway
(Rodrı´guez-Fro´meta et al. 2013).
Other substrates than glucose have also been considered for single cell oil
production. This includes, for instance, xylose, which is the major component of
hemicellulose and the second most abundant sugar in nature. Xylose is present in
lignocellulose hydrolysates in considerable amounts. Substantial efforts have been
taken to engineer strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to perform ethanol produc-
tion from xylose; however, only recently strains capable of surviving the harsh
industrial conditions have been obtained. Alternative to ethanol production, the
natural ability of many oleaginous fungi could be harnessed to generate lipids from
xylose (Passoth 2014). Xylose is metabolised via the PPP. To achieve this, the sugar
is ﬁrst converted to xylulose, which in most fungi occurs in a two-step reaction. At
ﬁrst, xylose is reduced to xylitol by xylose reductase (XR). In most fungi, this
reaction is NADPH dependent; only few yeasts, those that can form ethanol from
xylose, have a dual NADPH-/NADH-dependent activity. In the second step, xylitol
is reoxidised by xylitol dehydrogenase (XDH) to xylulose, which is then
phosphorylated and enters the PPP. Due to the demand for NADPH in the ﬁrst
step, cells grown on xylose would need more NADPH, and thus, more hexose
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
157

generated in the PPP would have been recycled through the PPP to generate this
NADPH. Under those circumstances, 1 mole acetyl-CoA would be formed out of
100 g xylose (about 0.66 moles, thus, about 1.5 moles would be formed per mole
xylose). Therefore, an alternative pathway of xylose utilisation has been postulated,
phosphorolytic cleavage of xylulose-5-P by phosphoketolase. This enzyme
generates
acetyl
phosphate
and
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.
Indeed,
the
corresponding enzyme has been found in a variety of yeast species grown on xylose
medium without glucose, including oleaginous species such as Lipomyces starkeyi
and Rhodosporidium toruloides (Evans and Ratledge 1984). Via this pathway, lipid
yield on weight basis from xylose would be slightly higher than from glucose. For
xylose, 1.2 moles acetyl-CoA would be formed out of 100 g xylose, corresponding
to 0.34 g lipids per gram sugar. For glucose, 1.1 moles acetyl-CoA would be formed
out of 100 g (0.56 moles) of glucose, corresponding to 0.32 g lipids per gram sugar
(Evans and Ratledge 1984; Papanikolaou and Aggelis 2011; Jin et al. 2015). There
are varying results about the real yields obtained from xylose; however, there are
examples where higher lipid yields have been obtained from xylose compared to
those on glucose (Fakas et al. 2009). Glycerol is another interesting substrate for
lipid production, as it is generated as a side product of transesteriﬁcation in
biodiesel production. Glycerol is phosphorylated by glycero-kinase and then
oxidised to dihydroxyacetone phosphate or glyceraldehyde phosphate, which are
further assimilated following the glycolytic pathway. The theoretical lipid yield for
glycerol has been estimated with 0.3 g/g, but in practice, usually values of 0.1 g/g
are obtained (Papanikolaou and Aggelis 2011). In two cases, for Aspergillus sp. and
Thamnidium elegans lipid yields of about 0.2 g/g were obtained (Andre´ et al. 2010;
Chatzifragkou et al. 2011). Organic acids, especially acetic acid, have also been
considered as potential substrates for lipid production. Acetic acid is a side product
of a variety of processes and also frequently found in lignocellulosic hydrolysate
(Papanikolaou and Aggelis 2011; Passoth 2014). Acetic acid is converted to acetyl-
CoA and can be assimilated via the assimilatory glyoxylate cycle (Barnett and
Kornberg 1960). The pathways of lipid formation from different carbon sources are
summarised in Fig. 6.1.
From the initially saturated, mainly C16 and C18 fatty acids, unsaturated fatty
acids are synthesized at the endoplasmic reticulum by the action of desaturases and
elongases (Bellou et al. 2016). Eukaryotic systems use an aerobic pathway of
desaturation (Fig. 6.2). This pathway consists of three membrane-bound proteins,
NAD(P)H-cytochrome b5 reductase, cytochrome b5 and the terminal cyanide-
sensitive desaturase. The desaturase complex is bound to the endoplasmic reticu-
lum (Certik and Shimizu 1999). It has been stated that in fungi, the desaturases are
dependent on NADPH (Kendrick and Ratledge 1992; Ratledge 2014); however, for
the yeast Y. lipolytica and the ﬁlamentous fungus M. circinelloides, a dual cofactor
dependency of NADH and NADPH has been found, for the latter even a higher
activity with NADH (Pugh and Kates 1979; Jackson et al. 1998).
Desaturation starts with palmitic (C16) and stearic (C18) acids and the ﬁrst
double bound is generated at the Δ9 position, i.e. palmitoleic acid (C16:1 cis 9) and
oleic acid (C18:1 cis 9) are generated. From oleic acid, further desaturations may
occur (Fig. 6.3), at Δ12 position to generate linoleic acid (C18:2), which may be
158
V. Passoth

Fig. 6.1 Simpliﬁed scheme of fatty acid biosynthesis from glucose, xylose and glycerol. Acetyl-
CoA is provided from the ATP citrate lyase (ACL) reaction, NADPH from malic enzyme
(ME) and the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) enzymes, glucose-6-P dehydrogenase (G6PDH)
and 6-P-gluconate dehydrogenase (6PGDH). Citrate-malate can be transported by citrate-malate
translocase (CMT) or speciﬁc transporters, pyruvate by monocarboxylic acid transporter (MCT).
DHA-P dihydroxyacetone-P, GA-P glycerol aldehyde-P, GAPDH glycerol aldehyde-P dehydro-
genase, PC pyruvate carboxylase, OA oxaloacetate, MDH malate dehydrogenase, FAS fatty acid
synthetase, ACC acetyl-CoA carboxylase, PDH pyruvate dehydrogenase, IL isocitrate lyase, IDH
isocitrate dehydrogenase
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
159

further desaturated at Δ15 position, generating the Ω-3 fatty acid α-linolenic acid
(ALA, C18:3, cis 9,12,15). Oleic, linoleic and linolenic acid can be converted
further by Δ6 desaturase, leading to the Ω-9, Ω-6 and Ω-3 series of fatty acids
(Certik and Shimizu 1999). Yeasts usually have a limited ability to form a great
variety of fatty acids. The major fatty acids are usually C16:0 and C18:1, and fatty
acids longer than C18 are only produced in traces. Usually low amounts of C18:2
and C18:3 are produced (dependent on culture conditions, up to 10% of the total
fatty acids), in basidiomycetes such as R. toruloides usually a bit more than in
ascomycetes; still, C18:2 and C18:3 have also been found in ascomycetous yeasts
(Ratledge 2004; Olstorpe et al. 2014; Brandenburg et al. 2016). However, some
ﬁlamentous zygomycetes can also synthesise longer polyunsaturated fatty acids
(PUFA). In the Ω-9 series of fatty acids, after the Δ6 desaturase step, one elongase
and Δ5 desaturase reaction result in the production of mead acid (MA, 20:3 cis
9,12,15). In the Ω-6 and Ω-3 series of fatty acids, elongase and Δ5 desaturase
reactions generate arachidonic acid (AA, 20:4 cis 5,8,11,14) and eicosapentaenoic
acid (EPA, 20:5 cis 5,8,11,14,17), respectively. EPA can also be synthesised from
AA by a Δ17 desaturase, which especially happens at low temperatures (Certik and
Shimizu 1999). Up to now, no fungi are known which are able to further elongate
the fatty acids to produce the longer-chain Ω-3 fatty acid docosahexaenoic acid
(DHA, 22:6 cis 4,7,10, 13,16,19). Thraustochytrids, a group of heterotrophic
marine microbes originally classiﬁed as fungi but now aligned with heterokont
algae (Be´ligon et al. 2016), are commercially used to produce DHA as a food
additive and produce fatty acids by using a different pathway, based on the
polyketide synthase route (Metz et al. 2001; Ratledge 2012).
Free fatty acids are then converted to triacylglycerides (TAG) in a series of
enzymatic steps starting from glycerol phosphate or dihydroxyacetone phosphate,
which are in several steps converted to phosphatidic acid, which is then
NAD(P)H-
Cytoplasm
ER-lumen
+2H++O2
R-CH2-CH2-R’-CoA
ER-
membrane
2e-
NAD(P)H
Desaturase
R-CH=CH-R’-CoA
+2H2O
Fig. 6.2 Aerobic desaturation of fatty acids in fungi. Electrons from NAD(P)H are transported
along a membrane-bound electron transport chain at the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) and, ﬁnally, together with two electrons from the saturated binding, transferred to O2 as ﬁnal
electron acceptor, generating an unsaturated fatty acid and H2O
160
V. Passoth

dephosphorylated to diacylglycerol and then acylated to triacylglycerol (Sorger and
Daum 2003). Storage lipids are localised in lipid bodies in the cell, and recent
research has demonstrated that lipid body formation is a highly organised process.
In yeasts, lipid bodies are generated between the two leaﬂets of the lipid bilayer of
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (Garay et al. 2014). There are a variety of proteins
associated with lipid bodies, most of them involved in lipid metabolism, and many
of them also associated with the ER. Among them there are the enzymes for TAG
synthesis, which are essential for lipid body formation (Wang 2015; Zhu et al.
2015). A lipid body-speciﬁc protein has been identiﬁed in R. toruloides, and its
overexpression in S. cerevisiae resulted in giant lipid bodies (Zhu et al. 2015). Lipid
Ω-
Stearic acid (C18:0)
Oleic acid, C18:1 (9)
C18:2(6, 9)
C20:2 (8, 11)
MA, C20:3 (5, 8, 11)
 
LA, C18:2 (9, 12)
ALA, C18:3 (9, 12, 15)
GLA, C18:3 (6, 9, 12)
C18:4 (6, 9, 12, 15)
C20:4 (8, 11, 14, 17)
DGLA, C20:3 (8, 11, 14)
EPA, C20:5 (5, 8, 11, 14, 17)
ARA, C20:4 (5, 8, 11, 14)
C22:5 (7, 10, 13, 16, 19)
DHA, C22:6 (4, 7, 10, 13, 16, 19)
Ω-6 series
Ω-3 series
Fig. 6.3 Biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids. Production of C18 and longer unsaturated fatty
acids starts by Δ9 desaturation of stearic acid by an according desaturase (Desat.). Δ17 desaturase
is activated by low temperatures. By a series of desaturations and elongations, fatty acids of Ω-9,
Ω-6 and Ω-3 series are generated. MA mead acid, LA linoleic acid, GLA γ-linolenic acid, DGLA
dihomo-γ-linolenic acid, ARA arachidonic acid, ALA α-linolenic acid, EPA eicosapentaenoic acid,
DHA docosahexaenoic acid. Currently, no fungi are known that can naturally produce DHA
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
161

bodies seem to have a variety of important cellular functions, including protecting
cells from lipid toxicity and allowing lipid mobilisation in a coordinated way
(Wang 2015).
6.4
Production of Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids (PUFAs) by
Fungi
Yeast oils are quite similar to vegetable oils in their composition. Oleaginous yeasts
grown on residues from the paper industry (spent sulphite liquor) were used to
produce fat for food purposes (fat for baking or as butter replacement) in Germany
during both World Wars. However, these processes were too expensive and were
stopped immediately when vegetable lipids could be imported (Sitepu et al. 2014).
Currently, microbial oils are regarded as an alternative source of PUFA for
human nutrition. Higher plants cannot produce fatty acids longer than C18, and thus
they can only provide the essential fatty acids linoleic acid (C18:2) and ALA
(C18:3). In principle, animals including humans can synthesise the longer PUFAs
AA, EPA and DHA from linoleic and linolenic acid, but very slowly. Speciﬁc
PUFAs have been demonstrated to have positive effects on the prevention of
cardiovascular and inﬂammatory diseases, cancer, brain disorders, obesity and
diabetes. A variety of studies have shown that there should be a balanced relation
between Ω-6 and Ω-3 fatty acids in a healthy diet. Currently, the Ω-6/Ω-3 ratio is
usually very high in modern diets. This should be reduced to avoid negative effects
on health (Simopoulos 2006; Bellou et al. 2016).
Traditionally, ﬁsh oils have been the main sources of Ω-3 fatty acids. However,
there are several limitations to extensive utilisation of ﬁsh as the main source of Ω-3
fatty acids. Caught ﬁsh is a limited resource, and wild ﬁsh populations are declining
(Golden et al. 2016). Farmed ﬁsh requires the addition of Ω-3 fatty acids to the feed,
since ﬁsh, like most animals, have a limited capacity to generate longer-chain fatty
acids. In their natural habitats, ﬁsh take up PUFAs from aquatic microorganisms,
which have the ability to synthesise long-chain PUFAs. For cultured ﬁsh, those
PUFAs have to be added to the feed. These PUFAs are mainly derived from ﬁsh oil;
aquaculture currently consumes about 70% of all globally produced ﬁsh oil, and
about 90% of the available ﬁsh oil is obtained from caught ﬁsh. It is clear that,
against a background of growing demand for seafood, this is not a sustainable
practice (Tocher 2015). Fish oils also have an undesirable odour and may contain
contaminants such as mutagenic compounds and heavy metals (Bellou et al. 2016).
This implies that there is a crucial demand for alternative sources of PUFA,
especially of the longer-chained Ω-3 fatty acids EPA and DHA.
Microbes, especially fungi and microalgae, have been regarded as potential
PUFA
producers.
As
mentioned
above,
certain
ﬁlamentous
oleaginous
zygomycetes are able to produce EPA. However, yeasts have also been regarded
as resources of PUFAs. Although yeasts usually do not produce longer-chain fatty
acids, they are able to accumulate lipids to much higher amounts compared to
ﬁlamentous fungi, and thus they are promising hosts to be genetically engineered
162
V. Passoth

towards production of long-chain PUFAs (Be´ligon et al. 2016). If PUFAs are
produced by ﬁlamentous fungi, production systems are frequently based on solid-
state fermentations, implying speciﬁc parameters to be optimised (Asadi et al.
2015). For the production of unsaturated fatty acids, temperature plays a key role.
An increase in desaturation upon decreasing temperatures has been observed in a
variety of yeasts, although there are obviously different processes at work in the
low-temperature response, which can in some cases even result in a lower degree of
desaturation at lower temperatures (e.g. Olstorpe et al. 2014). However, for several
fungi belonging to the genus Mortierella, low cultivation temperature (12 C)
during lipid accumulation signiﬁcantly increased EPA production, because Δ17
desaturase was activated by cold (Shimizu et al. 1988; Certik and Shimizu 1999).
The addition of certain precursors can also increase the production of long-chain
PUFAs. If ALA was added, EPA was produced even at standard growth
temperatures, due to the temperature-independent activity of the Ω-3 desaturation
route; however, lower temperatures additionally increased the production to 1.88 g/l
of culture broth (Shimizu et al. 1989).
As already mentioned above, a variety of genera of Zygomycota have a tremen-
dous ability to produce commercially interesting PUFAs. Among them, the genus
Mortierella has been found to have a great potential to produce a variety of different
PUFAs. The strain M. alpina 1S-4 was originally isolated because of its high
production of AA. A range of desaturase mutants have been generated from this
strain by random mutagenesis, e.g. in the Δ12 desaturase, overproducing MA; Δ6
desaturase, overproducing dihomo-γ-linolenic acid (DGLA, C20:3 cis-8, 11, 14), a
fatty acid of the Ω-6-series; or Δ5 desaturase, overproducing AA. These strains are
not only interesting from a commercial point of view but also for general under-
standing of lipid metabolism. Methods for metabolic engineering of this fungus
have been developed, including transformation systems based on complementation
of an URA3 mutation or on resistance markers. Transformation could be achieved
using
biolistic
methods
or
an
Agrobacterium
tumefaciens-based
system
(Sakuradani et al. 2013). Overexpression of elongases increased the production of
AA, supporting the ﬁnding that its production is limited in the elongation step from
C18:3 to C20:3 (Wynn and Ratledge 2000; Takeno et al. 2005a). Moreover, RNA
interference was also introduced in M. alpina, and inactivating Δ12 desaturase
indeed resulted in a change in the fatty acid proﬁle, demonstrating that it is possible
to inﬂuence the fatty acid proﬁle by molecular methods (Takeno et al. 2005b).
A variety of fungi have already been commercialised for the production of
PUFAs. From 1985 to 1990, γ-linolenic acid (C18:3, Ω-6) was produced with
M. circinelloides by J&E Sturge (UK), with a volume of 5–10 tons per year.
DHA is commercially produced by a dinoﬂagellate alga, as well as by certain
species of thraustochytrids. Upon application of DHA to food, it has been observed
that portions of DHA can lose a C2 unit, resulting in EPA. EPA, although in general
regarded positive for health, was contraindicated for having positive effects on
babies. However, it has been discovered that the presence of AA can prevent the
degradation of DHA to EPA. AA is produced using M. alpina, and the process has
been commercialised by Gist-brocades (the Netherlands), now taken over by DSM
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
163

(the Netherlands). AA-rich oil is also produced by Suntory (Japan) and Cargill
Alking Bioengineering Co. Ltd (China) (Ratledge 2013). EPA is produced by some
companies using algae as production organisms. However, an alternative has been
developed by DuPont (USA), using genetically modiﬁed Y. lipolytica (Ratledge
2013; Xue et al. 2013). For reaching this aim, a Δ9 elongase, a Δ8 desaturase, a Δ5
desaturase and a Δ17 desaturase were expressed in the yeast, and β-oxidation was
impaired by inactivating a peroxisomal gene (PEX10). The ﬁnal strain was able to
produce EPA to 15% of the cell dry weight, and the total oil content was 56.6%
(Xue et al. 2013).
6.5
Lipid Modification of Other Biomolecules
6.5.1
Fungal Glycolipids as Biosurfactants
Glycolipids are derivatives from the lipid metabolism, and they have biotechnolog-
ical potential as biosurfactants. They consist of a long-chain fatty acid, representing
the hydrophobic part, and a carbohydrate moiety, which is hydrophilic. The carbo-
hydrate component can be glucose, trehalose, mannose, galactose, sophorose,
cellobiose or rhamnose (Roelants et al. 2014; Paulino et al. 2016). Both rhamno-
and sophorolipids are produced commercially; however, rhamnolipids are produced
by the opportunistically pathogenic bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa, whereas
sophorolipids are produced by non-pathogenic yeast strains (Van Bogaert et al.
2011; Paulino et al. 2016).
Sophorolipids (Fig. 6.4) are synthesised from C16 or C18 fatty acids, with a
single or a twofold desaturation. At ﬁrst, the fatty acid is hydroxylated at Ω-1 or Ω-2
position by cytochrome P450 monooxygenase. Then, by two glycosyltransferase
steps, glucose is connected to the molecule, consuming one UDP-glucose per step.
These glycosylations are performed by two different glycosyltransferases, UgtA1
and UgtB1 (Saerens et al. 2011a, c). The ﬁrst glucose is β-glycosidic bound to the
hydroxyl group. The second glucose is bound β-1,2 glycosidic to the ﬁrst glucose,
forming
sophorose.
The
resulting
molecule
can
be
acetylated
by
an
acetyltransferase (Saerens et al. 2011b). Acetylation usually happens at the 60
and/or the 600 position of the sophorose (Van Bogaert et al. 2011). The sophorolipid
is then transported out of the cell by an ABC transporter (Mdr) into the extracellular
space (Van Bogaert et al. 2013), where it can be further lactonised by a cell wall-
bound lactonesterase. Interestingly, this enzyme has homology to a biotechnologi-
cally interesting lipase of Pseudozyma antarctica (Ciesielska et al. 2014).
Sophorolipids can have a free fatty acid tail (acid form), or an internal esteriﬁcation
can happen between the carboxyl group of the fatty acid and the 400 of the sophorose
(lactonic form). In some cases, lactonisations can also happen between the carboxyl
group and the 60 or 600 position of the sophorose. Sophorolipids are synthesised as a
mixture of all these different forms. To some extent the proportion of these forms
can be inﬂuenced by the fermentation conditions (Van Bogaert et al. 2011);
however, a clear species dependency in the production pattern has also been
164
V. Passoth

demonstrated, with production of the lactone form by Starmerella bombicola and
Candida apiculata and production of the acid form by Candida stellata and other
closely related strains (Kurtzman et al. 2010).
Biosurfactants have a number of biotechnological applications. Initially,
biosurfactants were mainly applied for bioremediation of polluted soil and water
(Mulligan 2005). However, a variety of novel applications are now possible. In the
food industry, they can serve as emulsiﬁers, for foaming and wetting, and as
solubilisers. They also have antimicrobial activities and can act against bacteria,
fungi and even viruses. Apart from this, they are less toxic than synthetically
synthesised surfactants, are biodegradable and are even more effective than chemi-
cally synthesised surfactants, as their critical micelle concentration (CMC) is about
10–40 times lower (Nitschke and Costa 2007; Mnif and Ghribi 2016).
A variety of yeast species are able to produce sophorolipids. The current major
producer of sophorolipids is S. bombicola, usually designated by its anamorph
name Candida bombicola. There are a variety of other yeast species, which are
closely related to S. bombicola, including C. stellata, Candida ﬂoricola, Candida
riodocensis, Candida apicola and Candida batistae. However, sophorolipids have
also been found to be produced by phylogenetically more distant species, including
Wickerhamomyces anomalus and Wickerhamiella domercqiae, and even the
O
O
H
O
H
OH
O
OH
O
H
O
H
OH
O
O
CH2
O
OH
O
O
H
O
H
OH
O
OH
O
H
OH
O
O
CH2
O
O
O
O
H
O
H
O
OH
O
H
O
H
O
O
CH2
O
OH
O
O
H
O
H
O
OH
O
H
O
O
CH2
O
O
O
H2C
O
O
H2C
O
O
H2C
O
O
H2C
O
A
B
C
D
Fig. 6.4 Sophorolipids are formed from sophorose (hydrophilic part), a β-1,2 diglucose and a
terminal or subterminal hydroxylated fatty acid (hydrophobic part), often hydroxyoleate or
hydroxystearate. The fatty acid is β-glycosidically linked to the sophorose via its hydroxyl
group. Sophorolipids can have an acidic form (A, C) or a lactonic form (B, D); both these forms
can be mono- or diacetylated (C, D)
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
165

basidiomycetous yeasts Rhodotorula bogoriensis and Cryptococcus spp. C. apicola
was the ﬁrst yeast species in which sophorolipid production was discovered, and
similar ﬁnal concentrations and product yields have been obtained compared to
S. bombicola; however, research and commercialisation efforts have mainly
focused on the latter species during the last years (Van Bogaert et al. 2011; Paulino
et al. 2016).
S. bombicola generated lipid concentrations of more than 400 g/l, and 70% of the
substrate was converted to sophorolipids. Accordingly, S. bombicola has been
commercialised, and a range of patents have been ﬁled (Van Bogaert et al. 2011).
For the production of sophorolipids, usually a sugar and a hydrophobic com-
pound are used as carbon sources. Standard substrates consist of 100 g/l glucose,
taking into account that S. bombicola tolerates quite high sugar concentrations and a
fatty acid or a triglyceride (Van Bogaert et al. 2011). Alkanes have also successfully
been used, as this yeast can also assimilate alkanes, and their presence triggers the
production of sophorolipids (Inoue and Ito 1982). Glucose can be kept in excess,
while the hydrophobic substrate is usually added in a controlled fed-batch mode
(Davila et al. 1992). Alternative substrates have also been regarded. When
non-glucose sugars are used, sophorolipids are still produced but much less than
on glucose. Using fatty acids or alkanes with the right chain length (C16–C18)
greatly increases surfactant production. Free fatty acids are better converted than
their respective oils, but methyl esters of the free fatty acids are better converted
than the corresponding free fatty acids (Asmer et al. 1988; Van Bogaert et al. 2011).
Cheaper, alternative substrates can also be used for sophorolipid production,
including molasses to replace the sugar or glycerol as hydrophobic substrate;
however, production of sophorolipids is rather low (Van Bogaert et al. 2011).
Waste products such as biodiesel waste streams, used frying oil or restaurant
waste have also been tested to replace the standard hydrophobic compounds. The
results were difﬁcult to evaluate, as comparison with standard substrates were
missing; nevertheless, a better yield has been obtained compared to fermentations
without adding the hydrophobic substrates, and, thus, a potential valorisation of
these waste products seems possible (Nitschke and Costa 2007; Van Bogaert et al.
2011; Paulino et al. 2016).
Nitrogen sources usually include yeast extract or corn steep liquor; however,
other N sources such as ammonium or urea are also possible. Some minerals should
also be present. Similar to lipid accumulation, sophorolipid production starts when
the cells enter stationary phase due to nitrogen limitation. Stationary phase can be
maintained for about 20 days, but typical fermentations last for 10 days. The
process tolerates a broad temperature range; typical fermentations are running at
25–30 C, although 21 C has been determined as optimal. In contrast, C/N ratio,
pH and oxygenation have to be controlled carefully. At low C/N ratio, the formed
sophorolipids are metabolised, indicating that they are formed as a kind of external
storage material (Van Bogaert et al. 2011). Indeed, the genes encoding sophorolipid
synthesis are induced by nitrogen limitation. This is also true for gene clusters
encoding mannosylerythritol and cellobiose lipids (Roelants et al. 2014). The pH
decreases during fermentation to 3.5 and should thereafter be held at this value.
166
V. Passoth

Oxygen is required by the cytochrome P450 monooxygenase, and the oxygen
transfer rate should be kept between 50 and 80 mM O2 per litre and hour (Van
Bogaert et al. 2011). The highest production of sophorolipids (422 g/l) was obtained
in a two-step process, where whey was initially converted to oily biomass by the
oleaginous yeast Cryptococcus curvatus, and in the second step, the disintegrated
yeast biomass was used as nutrient source for S. bombicola (Daniel et al. 1999).
This represents also a way of introducing residues into the production process,
which are usually not metabolised by S. bombicola (such as lactose from whey).
The genes involved in sophorolipid production in S. bombicola have been
identiﬁed. Similar to the synthesis pathways of many other secondary metabolites,
they are organised in a subtelomeric cluster (Van Bogaert et al. 2013); only the gene
for lactonisation is located elsewhere in the genome (Ciesielska et al. 2014).
Moreover, a few years ago, techniques have been established for genetic engineer-
ing of S. bombicola. Transformation was possible both by electroporation and Li
acetate
treatment;
two
selection
markers
have
been
established,
URA3,
complementing the corresponding auxotrophic mutation, and a resistance marker
against hygromycin (Van Bogaert et al. 2008a, b). This enables the production of
tailored sophorolipids, for instance, cells can be manipulated to produce
non-acetylated sophorolipids by deleting the acetyltransferase gene (Saerens et al.
2011b). Non-acetylated sophorolipid forms have, for instance, been shown to have
antiviral activity (Shah et al. 2005). The majority of patents on yeast-based
glycolipids are on sophorolipids, probably due to a highly efﬁcient production
system. Apart from occasional applications for bioremediation of hydrocarbons
and aromatic compounds in soil and liquids (Mulligan 2005), sophorolipids are
used, for instance, in cosmetics, ecological cleaning products or dishwasher
products (Paulino et al. 2016). They also have a pronounced antibiotic effect and
have been shown to inhibit bacteria (Dı´az De Rienzo et al. 2015), fungi (Haque
et al. 2016) and cancer cells (Van Bogaert et al. 2011; Paulino et al. 2016, and
references therein). Further experiments have shown that S. bombicola can be
manipulated to produce other compounds, such as a cellobiose lipid and the
bioplastic polyhydroxyalkanoate. Although there are still many factors to optimise,
S. bombicola has obviously a great potential for the production of high-value, lipid-
related compounds (Roelants et al. 2013).
Apart from sophorolipids, also other glycolipids are produced by fungi, includ-
ing mannosylerythritol lipids (MEL) and cellobiose lipids (CBL) (Roelants et al.
2014). MEL consist of a mannosylerythritol disaccharide, which is acetylated in the
positions R4 and R6 and acylated with short-chain (C2–C8) and medium-chain
(C10–C18) fatty acids in the positions R2 and R3 (Fig. 6.5). A variety of different
MEL has been originally identiﬁed, called ustilipids, as they are produced by fungi
belonging to Ustilaginales (Kurz et al. 2003). In a recent review, four different
MEL have been distinguished, MEL-A (fully acetylated), MEL-B (acetylated in
R6), MEL-C (acetylated in R4) and MEL-D (completely deacetylated). A variety of
fungi
can
produce
MEL,
including
Schizonella
melanogramma,
several
Pseudozyma species, the dimorphic fungus Ustilago maydis and Geotrichum
candidum (Roelants et al. 2014). The highest-produced concentrations of MEL
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
167

have been obtained with Pseudozyma aphidis and Pseudozyma antarctica (165 and
140 g/l, respectively) (Kitamoto et al. 2001; Rau et al. 2005). In some fungi of the
order Ustilaginales, special MEL have been found. The species Pseudozyma
churashimaensis formed, apart from “usual” MEL-A, also a speciﬁc MEL-A2,
which was triacetylated at R2, R4 and R6 (Morita et al. 2011). In Pseudozyma
antarctica, even novel glycolipids were identiﬁed, where the erythrose moiety was
replaced by mannitol, arabitol or ribitol (Morita et al. 2009, 2012).
The genes involved in biosynthesis of MEL have been identiﬁed in U. maydis; it
was actually the ﬁrst gene cluster responsible for the production of glycolipids
identiﬁed in fungi. Five genes encode the whole pathway. The ﬁrst gene (emt1)
encodes a glucosyltransferase, which performs a stereospeciﬁc mannosylation from
GDP-mannose of meso-erythritol at the C4 position. The second gene (mat1) is an
acetyltransferase gene, which results in the acetylation at the R4- and R6 positions
of mannose. Acetylation of R4 happens after acylation at R2 with a short-chain fatty
acid (performed by an acyltransferase encoded by mac1) or with a medium- to long
(C10–C18)-chain fatty acid (catalysed by an acyltransferase encoded by mac2).
Both acyltransferases are highly speciﬁc, both in terms of the regioselectivity and in
terms of the fatty acid chain length. Acylation was obviously essential for MEL
secretion. The ﬁfth gene (mmf1) encodes a protein of the family of the major
facilitators, which is essential for the secretion of the glycolipid (Hewald et al.
2006). Gene clusters in different species of Ustilaginales encoding for MEL seem
to be very similar, as a MEL biosynthesis gene cluster with a high degree of identity
to the U. maydis cluster has also been found in P. antarctica (Morita et al. 2013).
MEL are highly valued in a range of applications, from the treatment of
schizophrenia and/or diseases caused by dopamine metabolic dysfunction to the
utilisation as chemical tools for the puriﬁcation of proteins or as anti-agglomeration
agents of ice slurry (Kitamoto et al. 2000, 2001; Im et al. 2003; Roelants et al.
2014). A variety of forms with different degrees of acetylation or acylation with
uncommon fatty acids have been generated and resulted in a number of additional
potential applications (Roelants et al. 2014 and references therein). MEL with
antifungal activities have also been identiﬁed (Kitamoto et al. 1993).
Cellobiose lipids (CBL) are produced by a small number of basidiomycetous
yeasts, mainly belonging to Ustilaginales, a few also to the Trichosporonales.
Ustilagic acid (Fig. 6.6) contains a cellobiose moiety, esteriﬁed with an acetyl
group (at 60) and a short-chain (C6 or C8) β-hydroxy fatty acid (at 200). The
O
O
R3
O
R4
O
R6
O
R2
O
OH
OH
OH
Fig. 6.5 Structure of
mannosylerythritol lipids
(MEL). R2, R3—fatty acid
(C2–C18); MEL-A, R4, R6—
COCH3; MEL-B, R4—H,
R6—COCH3; MEL-C, R4—
COCH3, R6—H; MEL-D no
acetylation in R4 and R6
168
V. Passoth

cellobiose is O-glycosidically linked to the terminal hydroxyl group of (2, 15, 16)
tri- or (15, 16) dihydroxy palmitic acid (Kulakovskaya et al. 2010; Roelants et al.
2014). Decoration of the sugar and hydroxylation of the fatty acid may vary
between different species. Pseudozyma ﬂocculosa produces ﬂocculosin, a cellobi-
ose lipid with antifungal activity. Flocculosin (Fig. 6.6) consists of (3, 15, 16)
trihydroxy palmitic acid as lipid component. The cellobiose is acetylated at the 60
and 300 positions; the short-chain fatty acid is exclusively C8 β-hydroxy fatty acid
(Teichmann et al. 2011). Similar to the MEL synthesis genes, the genes for CBL are
organised in clusters, and the clusters in U. maydis and P. ﬂocculosa are highly
similar: the former has a size of 40 kb and the latter 60 (Teichmann et al. 2007,
2011). They contain two genes responsible for double hydroxylation of palmitic
acid and a glycosyltransferase gene for glycosylation of the terminal hydroxyl
group of the hydroxy fatty acid by two subsequent additions of glucose from
UDP-glucose. It is also possible that one cellobiose moiety is added in a single
step, but this is still not proven. There are genes encoding acetyl- and
acyltransferases, and there are genes for the synthesis of the short-chain fatty acid
and its β-hydroxylation. There is an additional acetyltransferase in P. ﬂocculosa,
which does not have a homologue in U. maydis. This gene is responsible for the
additional acetylation in ﬂocculosin. In U. maydis, α-hydroxylation of the fatty acid
is the last step of glycolipid synthesis. In P. ﬂocculosa, α-hydroxylation is already
performed before the other hydroxylations, and the gene responsible for this step is
still unknown. Both clusters also contain an ABC transporter (in contrast to the
MEL clusters, which contain a major facilitator), which is required for secretion of
the glycolipid (Teichmann et al. 2007, 2011; Roelants et al. 2014).
Cellobiose lipids have pronounced antifungal activities and are regarded as
alternative fungicides. Many species of the genus Pseudozyma have been shown
to have antifungal activities (Passoth and Schnürer 2003), and a biocontrol product
based on P. ﬂocculosa for the treatment of powdery mildew has been
commercialised. The involvement of a cellobiose lipid in antifungal activity of
P. ﬂocculosa has been demonstrated (Cheng et al. 2003).
O
O
H
O
H
OH
O
O
OH
O
H
O
OH
OH
O
O
O
CH3
O
O
HO
R
A
B
C
Fig. 6.6 Structure of the
cellobiose lipids (CBL)
ustilagic acid and ﬂocculosin.
Ustilagic acid:
(A) β-hydroxyhexanoic or
octanoic acid, B-OH, C-H or
–OH. Flocculosin:
(A) β-hydroxyoctanoic acid,
B-acetyl, C-H
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
169

The ﬁeld of glycolipids is an excellent example of the huge biotechnological
potential of fungal lipid metabolism. It is rapidly evolving towards novel potential
applications in cleaning, pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, food and agricultural indus-
try; novel strains with high potential for glycolipid production are isolated, and
novel glycolipids are identiﬁed and synthesised (Mnif and Ghribi 2016; Van
Bogaert et al. 2016).
6.5.2
Lipid Modification of Proteins
Lipid modiﬁcation of proteins plays an essential role in all kingdoms of life.
Adding hydrophobic groups to proteins can inﬂuence their folding, function
and localisation. Four main classes of lipid modiﬁcation have been found
in
fungi,
including
myristoylation,
isoprenylation,
S-acylation
and
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) modiﬁcation (Santiago-Tirado and Doering
2016).
N α-myristoylation is the binding of myristate, a saturated C14 fatty acid, to an
N-terminal glycine, which has been exposed to the N-terminus by removal of the
initial N-terminal methionine. Binding occurs via an amide bond to the α-amino
group of the glycine and is irreversible. It is found in a variety of fungal proteins, for
instance, at the Rpt2 subunit of the 26S proteasome of S. cerevisiae. When the
glycine is removed or replaced by another amino acid, protease activity is not
inﬂuenced,
but
localisation
is
disturbed.
Corresponding
mutants
showed
phenotypes consistent with reduced degradation of misfolded proteins. In the case
of the S. cerevisiae proteasome, the probable role of myristoylation is nuclear
anchoring
(Hirano
et
al.
2016).
Myristoylation
is
catalysed
by
N-myristoyltransferase, which is present from yeast to humans, and it has been
shown to be essential in a variety of fungi (Santiago-Tirado and Doering 2016).
Isoprenylation (also called prenylation) is the addition of isoprenoids (farnesyl
or geranylgeranyl, see below) to a cysteine residue in a C-terminal CAAX consen-
sus sequence, where C stands for cysteine, A for any aliphatic amino acid, and X for
any amino acid. The AAX is removed after prenylation. Prenylation is performed
by protein prenyltransferases, and the reaction is irreversible. The protein is addi-
tionally capped by methylation (Nguyen et al. 2010). Isoprenylation is an essential
process, and a variety of proteins have been found to be prenylated. Farnesylated
proteins were ﬁrstly discovered when studying mating pheromones in the basidio-
mycetous yeast R. toruloides (Kamiya et al. 1978). Prenylated pheromones are
common among both basidio- and ascomycetes. The S. cerevisiae a-factor is the
best-studied prenylated fungal pheromone. Prenylation makes the resulting mole-
cule highly hydrophobic, requiring a speciﬁc secretion mechanism, involving an
ABC transporter (encoded by STE6). Secretion of the a-factor is thus completely
different from that of the α-factor, which is hydrophilic and exported using the
“classical” protein secretion pathway via endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Golgi
apparatus.
Basidiomycetes
produce
exclusively
hydrophobic
pheromones,
indicating that their mating mechanism is different from that of ascomycetes
170
V. Passoth

(Michaelis and Barrowman 2012). GTP-binding proteins of the Ras family are
another example of isoprenylated proteins, indicating that isoprenylation plays an
essential role in cell signalling, stress response and signal transduction (Omer and
Gibbs 1994).
Protein S-acylation is the binding of a fatty acid residue, in most cases palmitate
(palmitoylation), to a cysteine residue of the polypeptide. There is no known
recognition sequence for S-acylation, and both soluble and membrane-bound
proteins can be palmitoylated. Palmitoylation of soluble proteins can mediate
interaction with plasma membranes, sometimes in connection with other lipid
modiﬁcation of the protein. For membrane-bound proteins, it regulates the protein
stability and the intracellular trafﬁcking (Santiago-Tirado and Doering 2016).
GPI modiﬁcation, or GPI anchoring, is the transfer of a glycolipid to a protein at
its C-terminus by transamidation. The glycolipid is synthesised at the membrane of
the ER and consists of a phosphatidylinositol linked to a linear glycan composed of
glucosamine, three mannose residues and a phosphoethanolamine, the latter being
required for binding to the protein. Further species-speciﬁc modiﬁcations with
additional ethanolamine, sugars or lipid groups may occur (Mu~niz and Zurzolo
2014; Santiago-Tirado and Doering 2016). GPI modiﬁcation is evolutionarily
conserved and essential in all eukaryotes. GPI-anchored proteins are placed on
the outer surface of the cell. Those proteins have two signal sequences, one signal
sequence at the N-terminus targeting it to the ER and one GPI-attachment site at the
C-terminus (designated the ω-site). Both signal sequences are removed during
processing (Orlean and Menon 2007). GPI anchoring is irreversible, but under
certain
circumstances,
the
protein
can
be
released
by
the
action
of
a
phosphatidylinositol-speciﬁc phospholipase. GPI proteins may also be transferred
from the membrane to the cell wall, which may be determined by additional
sequences surrounding the GPI anchor site (Frieman and Cormack 2004). Patho-
genic fungi use GPI-anchored proteins to attach to tissues, and they are involved in
resistance to the immune response of the host (Santiago-Tirado and Doering 2016).
As lipid modiﬁcation is essential for eukaryotic cells, it is regarded as potential
target for developing antifungal drugs. Prenylation is essential for the activation of
small G proteins, including several oncogenic Ras proteins. Therefore, a variety of
prenylation inhibitors, especially farnesyltransferases, have been developed, origi-
nally for anticancer treatment. The structure of the farnesyltransferase of the
pathogenic dimorphic fungus Cryptococcus neoformans has been studied in detail,
and, for instance, a substrate-induced conformational change has been observed,
which does not occur in human farnesyltransferases and may thus represent a
potential therapeutic target (Hast et al. 2011). Palmitoylation is also a potential
therapeutic target. Many of the proteins potentially involved in pathogenesis are
palmitoylated by the protein S-acyltransferase encoded by PFA4, including Ras1,
which enables high-temperature growth. Pfa4 thus seems to be a promising target
for novel anti-C. neoformans drugs, especially from the background that the closest
human homologue, DHHC6, is to only 21% identical to C. neoformans Pfa4 on the
amino acid level (Nichols et al. 2015; Santiago-Tirado and Doering 2016).
N-myristoylation
is
another
potential
target
for
antifungal
drugs.
In
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
171

C. neoformans, there is one N-myristoyltransferase, and the deletion of its gene is
lethal. N-myristoyltransferases from different origins have been shown to be
conserved regarding their acyl-CoA substrates; however, they have very speciﬁc
peptide substrates. Based on this, N-myristoyltransferase inhibitors have been
developed,
mimicking
the
N-terminal
structure
of
one
of
the
N-myristoyltransferase targets, the ADP-ribosylation factor Arf1 (Lodge et al.
1998). As mentioned above, the GPI core structure is conserved among eukaryotes,
but there are species-speciﬁc modiﬁcations, which include additional sugars, lipids,
phosphoethanolamines or acylation of the inositol ring. Accordingly, speciﬁc
inhibitors of fungal GPI anchoring have been identiﬁed that may have a great
potential in antifungal therapy (McLellan et al. 2012; Watanabe et al. 2012;
Mann et al. 2015). Another potential application of the GPI-anchoring system is
to display enzymes on the surface of fungal cells. S. cerevisiae was manipulated to
display cellulose- and hemicellulose-degrading enzymes on its surface by
connecting those enzymes to a GPI anchor. Such so-called armed strains were
able to directly produce ethanol from lignocellulose (Hasunuma and Kondo 2012).
6.6
Microbial Biodiesel Production by Yeasts
6.6.1
Lipid Production from Lignocellulose and Crude Glycerol
Biodiesel is currently the second most abundant biofuel in the world, after ethanol.
It is produced from oil plants, such as soy, oil palms or rapeseed. For generating
biodiesel, the triglycerides of the vegetable oils are in a transesteriﬁcation reaction
esteriﬁed with methanol, replacing the glycerol and generating fatty acid methyl
esters (FAME). Transesteriﬁcation with ethanol instead of methanol is also possible
but is currently less applied. Glycerol is thus a side product of the biodiesel process.
Biodiesel utilisation has increased in Europe during the last years, and there is
potential for further growth especially in Europe, because of the expanding use of
diesel engines for transportation ﬂeets (Gnansounou 2010). However, oil plants are
grown on arable land, and their energy yield per hectare is relatively low. Thus, a
substantial area of arable land is required for the replacement of large proportions of
mineral oil-derived diesel. Moreover, oil plants are grown on areas of cleared rain
forest, and deforestation to enable cultivation of oil plants has been reported
(Azo´car et al. 2010; Graham-Rowe 2011).
Oils from oleaginous fungi, especially yeasts, may represent an alternative to
biodiesel from oil plants. Most oleaginous yeasts can convert a variety of substrates
to lipids, including sugars and acids from lignocellulose hydrolysates and glycerol
(Sitepu et al. 2014). On glucose, fairly high lipid concentrations have been reached.
In high cell-density cultures of R. toruloides on glucose, a ﬁnal lipid content of
72 g/l was obtained (Li et al. 2007). Metabolically engineered R. toruloides reached
89 g/l (Zhang et al. 2016b), and in engineered Y. lipolytica, even 99 g/l was reached
(Qiao et al. 2017). These values are close to theoretical limits, which, according to
the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) have to be reached for
172
V. Passoth

obtaining economically viable biodiesel production by oleaginous yeasts (http://
www.nrel.gov/docs/fy15osti/62498.pdf). However, sustainable biodiesel produc-
tion should be performed preferably using residual substrates such as lignocellulose
or crude glycerol from biodiesel production.
The C/N ratio of lignocellulose is high (Hyv€onen et al. 2000; Reinertsen et al.
1984), which triggers lipid accumulation in fungi (see above). However, lignocel-
lulose hydrolysate contains inhibitors that are toxic for microbes cultivated in it
(J€onsson et al. 2013). Hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) had a slight impact on oleagi-
nous yeasts; it inﬂuenced lipid accumulation only at higher concentrations and only
in some strains. Nevertheless, a prolonged lag phase upon exposure to HMF has
been observed in several strains. Furfural and vanillin showed a strong inhibition of
oleaginous yeasts (Chen et al. 2009; Hu et al. 2009). Acetic acid at a concentration
of 5 g/l completely inhibited growth of strains belonging to L. starkeyi, R. glutinis
and R. toruloides. Trichosporon cutaneum showed some growth at this concentra-
tion (Chen et al. 2009). However, the effect of acetic acid and other weak organic
acids depends on the pH of the medium. Different degrees of inhibition have been
observed in cultures of L. starkeyi in hemicellulose hydrolysate at pH 5 and
6 (Brandenburg et al. 2016).
Inhibitors in lignocellulose may be one important reason why fermentations of
lignocellulose hydrolysates in the best case reach only values slightly above 10 g/l.
On sugar cane bagasse, 15.7 g/l lipids were obtained using Trichosporon
fermentans (Huang et al. 2012), on rice straw 11.5 g/l (Huang et al. 2009). On
corn cob hydrolysate, 12.3 g/l was achieved by Trichosporon cutaneum (Gao et al.
2014). Recently, the ability of a variety of yeast strains to convert corn stover
hydrolysate [hydrolysed by ammonia ﬁbre expansion (AFEX)] and switchgrass
hydrolysate (hydrolysed by dilute acid hydrolysis) was tested. Switchgrass hydro-
lysate was more inhibitory, and only a few of the tested strains could grow on
it. Three strains, belonging to Lipomyces kononenkoae, Lipomyces tetrasporus and
Rhodosporidium toruloides, were able to convert the acid hydrolysate to lipids
(at 15–20% solid load at pH 6–7 and some amendments with nitrogen) yielding
ﬁnal lipid concentrations of 25–30 g/l. Similar values were reached by these strains
as well as a Saitoella coloradoensis strain on corn stover hydrolysate. The achieved
yields were 0.13–0.15 g lipids per consumed carbon source, and the production
rates 0.12–0.22 g per litre and hour (Slininger et al. 2016).
These values are still far below those identiﬁed as minimum to obtain competi-
tive fuel production (ﬁnal lipid concentration 90 g/l, yield 0.28 g lipid/g carbon
source, production rate 1.3 g/l h, http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy15osti/62498.pdf).
System analysis calculated a minimum selling price of $ 9.55 per gasoline gallon
equivalent (about $ 2.50 per litre gasoline equivalent), when only producing fuel. In
this scenario, a lipid yield of 0.24 g/g available sugar was assumed, a lipid
productivity of 0.34 g/l h and a cellular lipid content of 60%. Conversion of the
pentose fraction of the lignocellulose to succinate had a great impact on the total
costs and could decrease the minimum selling price to $ 5.28 per gasoline gallon
equivalent (about $ 1.40 per litre gasoline equivalent). Increasing lipid yield,
decreasing extraction costs and obtaining higher lipid contents of the biomass
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
173

were some critical factors to improve the process (Biddy et al. 2016). On the other
hand, conversion of the hexose fraction to ethanol is an established process; thus,
lipid production from only the hemicellulose fraction may be another strategy to
make biofuel production more efﬁcient. Acid pretreatment generates a liquid and a
solid fraction, and the hemicellulose is almost completely present in the liquid
fraction. Thus, it can be separated relatively easily from cellulose/lignin. Since the
liquid fraction also contains most of the inhibitors released during pretreatment, its
conversion to lipids can be complicated. This problem might be circumvented by
establishing fed-batch cultivation. Recently, the hemicellulose fraction of birch
wood hydrolysate was converted to lipids using L. starkeyi. The yeast
co-consumed acetic acid and xylose, enabling establishment of a pH-regulated
fed-batch fermentation. A ﬁnal concentration of 8 g/l and a yield of 0.1 g/g carbon
source were obtained, which are currently the highest values achieved with the
hemicellulose fraction of lignocellulose (Brandenburg et al. 2016). If one takes into
account biogas production from the residues, i.e. connects biolipid production to
another biofuel production process, lipid yield and proportion of the yeast biomass
become less critical for the total energy efﬁciency of the process. However, since an
aerobic fermentation process requires more energy than, for instance, the more or
less anaerobic production of ethanol, rapid fermentation of the sugars is one of the
crucial issues to improve the efﬁciency of microbial lipid production (Karlsson
et al. 2016). Isolation of rapidly lipid-accumulating strains is, therefore, one of the
important tasks of current research on oleaginous organisms. Another approach
may be represented by remodelling the metabolism towards producing more
NADPH at the cost of NADH, which, apart from providing redox equivalents for
fatty acid synthesis, decreases the demands for oxygen in respiration (Qiao et al.
2017).
Utilising cheap, locally available substrates can also reduce the price of
biodiesel. In a recent study, sugar cane juice was tested as substrate for
R. toruloides-based biodiesel production in Brazil. Final production costs were
estimated to about $ 0.50 per litre biodiesel. Interestingly, the amount of biodiesel
produced per hectare when converting sugar cane juice using the oleaginous yeast
was more than six times higher than the biodiesel production per hectare obtained
from soybean oil (Soccol et al. 2016).
Another approach for improving the energy efﬁciency of biodiesel production
would
be
utilisation
of
the
crude
glycerol
which
is
produced
during
transesteriﬁcation (Karlsson et al. 2016). Although pure glycerol is a high-value
compound, used, for instance, in production of foods, beverages, pharmaceutics or
cosmetics, crude glycerol is highly problematic: it contains salt, methanol and other
toxic compounds, which prevent any direct use of the crude glycerol as platform
chemical and are inhibitory to any fermentation process. Crude glycerol is produced
at about 10% (w/w) of the generated biodiesel, and the increase in biodiesel
volumes has saturated the marked for crude glycerol, making expensive cleaning
procedures for this side product economically unfavourable (Haas et al. 2006;
Johnson and Taconi 2007). Consequently, a variety of attempts have been made
to utilise crude glycerol as carbon source for biolipid production. Cultivation of
174
V. Passoth

Cryptococcus curvatus was optimised in terms of temperature, pH and crude
glycerol concentration. Based on these parameters, fed-batch cultivation was
designed, and a ﬁnal lipid concentration of 22 g/l was obtained after 12 days of
cultivation (Cui et al. 2012). In another attempt, glycerol from recycled restaurant
oil (yellow grease) was tested as substrate for C. curvatus, and a ﬁnal lipid
concentration of 17.1 g/l was obtained after 12 days of fed-batch cultivation
(Liang et al. 2010). Uc¸kun Kiran et al. tested crude glycerol and rapeseed meal,
another problematic residue from biodiesel production, as nitrogen source. The
rapeseed meal was pre-fermented with the proteolytic fungus Aspergillus oryzae, to
make the nitrogen available for the oleaginous yeast in the subsequent fermenta-
tion. Lipid production was tested with R. toruloides Y4, and after 120 h of fed-batch
cultivation, a maximum lipid concentration of 13 g/l was obtained, corresponding
to a lipid yield of 0.19 g/g glycerol. When yeast extract was used as nitrogen source,
ﬁnal lipid concentration was only 9.4 g/l. This may indicate that rapeseed meal is a
better nitrogen source, or that it provides some additional carbon source. Interest-
ingly, higher ﬁnal lipid contents and yields were obtained with 50 g/l glycerol
compared to 100 g/l glycerol, potentially due to some inhibitory effects of the
glycerol on the yeast (Uc¸kun Kiran et al. 2013). Another study showed that thin
stillage has superior characteristics as nitrogen source compared to yeast extract.
Lipid production by R. glutinis resulted in 5.4 g lipids per litre, compared to 2.3 g/l
on yeast extract (Yen et al. 2012). Tchakouteu et al. tested a variety of strains
belonging to C. curvatus, Y. lipolytica, R. toruloides and L. starkeyi. They found
both R. toruloides and L. starkeyi to be best for lipid production, generating more
than 12 g/l lipids in shake ﬂask cultures. This was reached after 395 and 470 h,
respectively, at an initial glycerol concentration of 120 g/l. The lipid yields were
about 0.1 g/g consumed glycerol. At a lipid concentration of 50 g/l, R. toruloides
reached a ﬁnal lipid concentration of 7.9 g/l after 195 h and a lipid yield of 0.17 g/g.
L. starkeyi did not have an increased lipid yield at lower initial glycerol
concentrations (Tchakouteu et al. 2015). The potential of R. glutinis to
co-produce lipids and carotenoids on crude glycerol was investigated. In an
optimised fermentation (optimised in terms of C/N ratio, initial glycerol concentra-
tion and Tween 20 addition), maximum concentrations of 6 g lipid per litre and
135 mg carotenes per litre (yields of 0.033 g/g and 0.7 mg/g, respectively) were
obtained after a fermentation time of 72 h (Saenge et al. 2011). Recently, crude
glycerol conversion to lipids was tested using R. toruloides ATCC 10788. In these
experiments, a lipid yield of 0.44 g/g consumed glycerol was obtained. This is
beyond the theoretical maximum, which was explained by the consumption of
additional carbon sources from the crude glycerol, such as fatty acid methyl esters,
soap, diglycerides, monoglycerides and residual triglycerides (Uprety et al. 2017).
The results obtained so far indicate that a variety of strains are able to metabolise
crude glycerol from biodiesel production. However, huge differences with regard to
growth rate, lipid production rate and yield indicate that not all factors of lipid
accumulation from crude glycerol are well understood. Yields and production rates
are far from those that would enable commercially viable lipid production; thus,
there is an urgent demand for further research in this ﬁeld.
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
175

6.6.2
Manipulating Yeasts for Improving Lipid Production
Until recently, for most of the above-mentioned oleaginous yeast species, methods
for genetic engineering were unavailable or only poorly developed, with the
exception of Y. lipolytica (Beopoulos et al. 2009). Y. lipolytica can convert a variety
of carbon sources to lipids, including glucose and glycerol, but not xylose (or only
to a small extent by certain strains), the major sugar of hemicellulose. However,
recent efforts have been directed to generating xylose-assimilating strains. By
complementing the corresponding Escherichia coli mutants, Rodriguez et al.
(2016) identiﬁed a cryptic xylose assimilation pathway in Y. lipolytica. Obviously,
the genes for xylose assimilation are present in the yeast but expressed only at a
very low level. This obstacle could be overcome by expressing the genes from a
strong promoter. In another attempt, xylose reductase and xylitol dehydrogenase
from the xylose-fermenting yeast S. stipitis and the native xylulokinase were
overexpressed in Y. lipolytica. Resulting strains were able to grow and produce
lipids on xylose; in a bioreactor fed-batch cultivation, a ﬁnal lipid concentration of
20.1 g/l was reached, with a lipid yield of 0.08 g/g and a production rate of 0.19 g/l h.
On mixed carbon source (xylose and glycerol), a ﬁnal lipid concentration of 50.5 g/l
was achieved, the lipid yield was 0.12 g per gram consumed carbon source and the
production rate is 0.23 g/l h. Apart from lipids, citric acid and some xylitol were
also produced (Ledesma-Amaro et al. 2016b). A variety of genetic engineering
efforts to improve the growth on further carbon sources such as glycerol,
disaccharides, starch or inulin, and their conversion to lipids and other valuable
compounds by Y. lipolytica have been performed (summarised in Ledesma-Amaro
and Nicaud 2016).
Several attempts have also been made to increase the central lipid metabolism of
Y. lipolytica. Inactivation of GUT2, which encodes for a glycerol-3-P dehydroge-
nase converting glycerol-3-P to dihydroxyacetone phosphate, and peroxisomal
genes involved in β-oxidation of fatty acids, signiﬁcantly increases lipid production
by Y. lipolytica (Beopoulos et al. 2008). Recently, further improvements have been
achieved. Overexpression of DGA1, encoding diacylglycerol acyltransferase, and
ACC1, encoding acetyl-CoA carboxylase, resulted in a lipid content of 62% of
biomass dry weight, a lipid yield of 0.27 and a production rate of 0.253 g/l h during
the lipid production phase. Overexpression was achieved by using an intron-
containing TEF promoter, which ensured a 17-fold overexpression compared to
the intron-less promoter (Tai and Stephanopoulos 2013). Comparison of gene
expression in lipid-accumulating human tissues resulted in the identiﬁcation of
Δ9 stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD) as a potential target for manipulation towards
higher lipid concentrations. Indeed, overexpressing this protein in Y. lipolytica (in a
background overexpressing ACC1 and DGA1) resulted in a ﬁnal lipid concentration
of 55 g/l and a lipid yield of 0.266 g/g glucose. Sugar uptake rate was enhanced in
the transformant strain. The metabolic background of this effect was probably the
removal of the saturated fatty acids, palmitic and stearic acid, which can act as
inhibitors of ACS (Qiao et al. 2015). A similar effect was discovered in a mutant
with a modiﬁed regulator protein mga2-G643R, in which the glycine at the amino
176
V. Passoth

acid residue 643 is exchanged by an arginine. The resulting mutant had an increased
production of unsaturated fatty acid on the expense of the corresponding saturated
fatty acids. MGA2 is a transcriptional activator of the Δ9 desaturase, and it was
demonstrated that Δ9 desaturase was upregulated in a strain expressing the mga2-
G643R variant. Moreover, also glycolytic genes were upregulated but not those of
the citrate cycle. This was probably generating an imbalance between glycolysis
and citric acid cycle, resulting in the higher production of precursors for lipid
production. When expression of the mga2-G643R variant was combined with the
overexpression of DGA1, a ﬁnal lipid titre of 25 g/l, a productivity of 0.145 g/l h, a
yield of 0.213 g lipids per gram glucose and an intracellular lipid content of about
85% could be reached (Liu et al. 2015a). In another attempt, Y. lipolytica, apart
from overexpressing DGA1 and ACC1, was engineered to generate NADPH instead
of NADH during glycolysis by introducing a NADP+-dependent glyceraldehyde
phosphate dehydrogenase (Qiao et al. 2017). NADH kinase, generating NADPH
out of NADH, was also overexpressed. The resulting strain had a similar yield as
the strain constructed by Tai and Stephanopoulos (2013). However, its production
rate (1.2 g/l h) was substantially higher. The ﬁnal lipid concentration in a bioreactor
was 99 g/l, which comes close to the values that are postulated to be required for
commercial production (Qiao et al. 2017).
The red yeast R. toruloides has been identiﬁed as a potential production organ-
ism for biodiesel, as it can grow on a broader range of carbon sources than
Y. lipolytica, and because it can accumulate much more lipid than the wild type
of Y. lipolytica. Until recently, very limited molecular tools for genetic engineering
of this yeast were available. However, genetic manipulation is now possible based
on an Agrobacterium tumefaciens system. Overexpressing DGA1 and ACC1
enabled signiﬁcantly increased lipid production. Interestingly, overexpression of
DGA1 had a relative reproducible effect of increased lipid formation, whereas
ACC1 expression in some transformants caused a signiﬁcant increase in lipid
production, while others showed no difference to the wild type. Nevertheless,
highest lipid production was demonstrated in a strain overexpressing both genes,
i.e. on glucose and xylose, respectively; ﬁnal concentration was 16.4 g/l and 9.5 g/l,
cellular lipid contents 61.1% and 43.4%, lipid production rates 0.28 g/l and 0.11 g/l
and lipid yields 0.23 g/g and 0.14 g/g (Zhang et al. 2016c). Further attempts
overexpressed a variety of enzymes, malic enzyme, pyruvate carboxylase, glyc-
erol-3-P dehydrogenase and stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD). Additionally, genes
involved in β-oxidation were inactivated. However, only overexpression of
stearoyl-CoA desaturase and malic enzyme had an effect on lipid production. In a
background where DGA1 and ACC1 were overexpressed, only overexpression of
SCD enabled further increased lipid production. The ﬁnal lipid concentration
reached by this strain was 89.4 g/l (cellular lipid content 75.6%), a productivity
of 0.62 g/l h and a yield of 0.22 g/g (Zhang et al. 2016b).
Procedures for manipulating oleaginous yeasts are currently rapidly developing.
Recently, novel strong promoters have been identiﬁed in R. toruloides. These
promoters contain introns, and obviously these introns can substantially increase
gene expression. These are valuable tools for gene overexpression in R. toruloides
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
177

and other red yeasts (Liu et al. 2016). For Y. lipolytica, a CRISPR-Cas9-mediated
system for markerless targeted gene integration has been developed, enabling the
stable integration of several genes into the genome (Schwartz et al. 2016). Genetic
manipulation of L. starkeyi seems to be difﬁcult; however, a transformation system
has been established (Calvey et al. 2014).
Methods for manipulating oleaginous yeasts other than Y. lipolytica became
available only recently. Therefore, much effort has gone into generating a lipid-
producing S. cerevisiae. S. cerevisiae is a non-oleaginous yeast; but it is an
established industrial organism that is stress tolerant and can perform well in
industrial fermentations. Molecular manipulation is very well developed in this
yeast, so it may have potential for production of biodiesel and other lipid-derived
chemicals. In S. cerevisiae, the precursor of lipid synthesis, acetyl-CoA, cannot be
transferred from the mitochondria to the cytoplasm via the citrate-oxaloacetate
shuttle (Beopoulos et al. 2011); it is produced in the cytoplasm by the reactions
of pyruvate decarboxylase (PDC), aldehyde dehydrogenase (AlDH) and acetyl-
CoA synthase (Holzer and Goedde 1957). In Pdc mutants, C2-compounds such as
ethanol or acetate have to be provided to enable growth on glucose (Pronk et al.
1996). S. cerevisiae is a fermentative yeast, which means that its metabolism is
directed towards converting the ﬁnal products of glycolysis to ethanol rather than to
acetyl-CoA. Redirecting the metabolic ﬂux from ethanol towards acetyl-CoA
production is thus one of the major challenges when manipulating S. cerevisiae
for high lipid production (Buijs et al. 2013; Lian and Zhao 2015). When ALD6,
encoding aldehyde dehydrogenase, and a modiﬁed ACS from Salmonella enterica
were expressed, the level of acetyl-CoA was increased (Shiba et al. 2007). Addi-
tional overexpression of ADH2, encoding the assimilatory alcohol dehydrogenase
of S. cerevisiae, also increased the availability of acetyl-CoA (Chen et al. 2013). By
overexpressing FAS1 and FAS2, ACC1 and DGA1, encoding FAS, acetyl-CoA
carboxylase and DAG, a strain was obtained that could accumulate up to 17%
lipids per dry matter (Runguphan and Keasling 2014). By further manipulations,
including expression of ACL, disruption of isocitrate dehydrogenase genes,
overexpression of a fatty acyl-CoA synthetase, overexpression of a modiﬁed
DGA1 and disruption of the transcription factor SNF2 (which is involved in
activation of glucose-repressed genes), S. cerevisiae could be converted to an
oleaginous yeast, accumulating up to 45% lipids per cell dry matter (Kamisaka
et al. 2006, 2013; Tang et al. 2013; Zhou et al. 2014).
6.7
Production of Specific Chemicals and Fuels Derived from
Lipid Metabolism
Apart from producing triglycerides, and thus a biodiesel replacement, generation of
advanced lipid-derived chemicals and biofuels has been investigated. These
compounds include free fatty acids, fatty alcohols, fatty acid ethyl esters and
alkanes (Lian and Zhao 2015). Another important class of compounds are terpenes,
which have potential as high-value chemicals and biofuels (Ye et al. 2016).
178
V. Passoth

6.7.1
Fatty Alcohols
About two million tons of fatty alcohols are currently produced worldwide, and
their production is expected to grow. The major demand is for short-chain fatty
acids (C11–C14), which are key intermediates for surfactants present in detergents,
lubricants, cosmetics, personal care products and pharmaceuticals. There is also a
growing demand for longer-chain fatty alcohols (C16–C22), which are used as
lubricant bases, emollients and thickeners in cosmetics and foods. Moreover, they
are used as polymerisation agents in plastics. Unsaturated fatty alcohols can also be
used for the mentioned purposes, and they have some advantages compared to
saturated fatty alcohols; since they have a lower melting point, a higher solubility in
water and functional groups can be introduced (Fillet and Adrio 2016). Several
approaches have been used to enable and increase the fatty alcohol production in
yeasts. In all studies, a fatty acid reductase was expressed in the yeasts. When
manipulating S. cerevisiae, enzymes improving lipid production were also
overexpressed, for instance, Runguphan and Keasling (2014) overexpressed
ACC1, FAS1 and FAS2 from S. cerevisiae, a thioesterase (tesA) from E. coli,
which releases the fatty acid from CoA and a ME from M. alpina. At the same
time, genes involved in β-oxidation were disrupted. The resulting strain produced
98 mg fatty alcohols per litre. In another study with S. cerevisiae, apart from
overexpressing a fatty acid reductase from barn owl (Tyto alba), ACC1 (from
S. cerevisiae) and ACL (from Y. lipolytica) were overexpressed, and RPD3, a
negative regulator of the INO1 gene involved in phospholipid synthesis, was
disrupted. The resulting strain was able to produce 1.1 g/l 1-hexadecanol (Feng
et al. 2015). In the same background, a xylose pathway (XR from Scheffersomyces
shehatae, XDH from Candida tropicalis and XKS from Komagataella pastoris)
was expressed. Promoter engineering and evolving the strain by serial cultivation
on xylose as sole carbon source resulted in 1.2 g/l 1-hexadecanol from xylose (Guo
et al. 2016). In a strain engineered for the overproduction of free fatty acids (see
below), further manipulation also enabled fatty alcohol production. Overexpressing
a fusion protein of carboxylic acid reductase (CAR) from Mycobacterium marinum
and yeast ADH5, and another copy of the CAR gene, deletion of HFD1, encoding
long-chain fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase and deletion of ADH6, resulted in
increased titres of fatty alcohols. In a fed-batch culture, 1.5 g/l fatty alcohol was
produced. This is in the order of magnitude of what is attained using E. coli;
however, the yield in yeast is still lower (Zhou et al. 2014).
Oleaginous yeasts have also been manipulated to produce fatty alcohols. For
Y. lipolytica, for a long time, only patents were available, describing fatty alcohol
production up to 0.8 g/l (Fillet and Adrio 2016). Recently, Y. lipolytica was
manipulated to produce fatty alcohol by expressing a fatty aldehyde reductase
from the bacterium Marinobacter aquaeolei (encoded by Maqu_2220). The
resulting strain produced 167 mg fatty alcohols per litre. The same gene was also
expressed in L. starkeyi, resulting in 770 mg/l fatty alcohol. Overlaying the culture
with dodecane resulted in extraction of a major part of the formed fatty alcohols
into the dodecane overlay (Wang et al. 2016). In another study, Maqu_2220 was
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
179

co-expressed with an E. coli fatty acyl-CoA synthetase in Y. lipolytica, and the
resulting strain produced 2.15 g/l fatty alcohols in a bioreactor fermentation
(Xu et al. 2016). Maqu_2220 has been expressed before in R. toruloides, resulting
in the best known fatty alcohol production by yeasts observed so far. The resulting
strain was able to produce fatty alcohols from glucose, fructose, sucrose and xylose,
as well as from a medium with mixed carbon sources and inhibitors (glucose,
xylose, acetic acid, furfural and formic acid). In fed-batch cultivation with sucrose
and corn steep liquor, 8 g/l was obtained. Interestingly, the major proportion of the
fatty alcohols was excreted into the medium, making it easy to extract the fatty
alcohols (Fillet et al. 2015).
Fatty acid ethyl esters (FAEE) can be directly used as biodiesel. For producing
biodiesel, triglycerides from plant oil are transesteriﬁed to usually fatty acid methyl
or ethyl esters (FAME or FAEE), which are then used as biodiesel. Direct produc-
tion of these esters by the production organism would therefore be advantageous.
Moreover, FAEE are naturally excreted from yeast cells, and thus no lipid extrac-
tion would be required. In a variety of attempts for manipulating S. cerevisiae to
produce FAEE, most of them were based on episomal plasmids, resulting in
unstable production patterns (summarised in Lian and Zhao 2015). Based on
multicopy integration of a heterologous wax ester synthase, 34 mg/l could be
produced. Loss of the FAEE phenotype in non-selective conditions could be
prevented by deleting RAD52, which is crucial for homologous recombination.
Overexpressing acetyl-CoA-binding protein, which is important for the transport of
acyl-CoA esters and the reduction of feedback inhibition of acyl-CoA on FAS,
ACC and long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase, and a NADP+-dependent glyceralde-
hyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase increased FAEE production to 48 mg/l (Shi et al.
2014). The highest concentrations obtained to date with S. cerevisiae have been
generated on glycerol and oleic acid as carbon sources. The glycerol assimilation
pathway and a glycerol transporter were overexpressed. Moreover, genes for
dihydroxyacetone phosphate degradation and glycerol export were deleted. This
forced ethanol production from glycerol. Overexpressing a bacterial acyltransferase
(from Acinetobacter baylyi) resulted in the condensation of the formed ethanol and
the externally added oleic acid, with a ﬁnal ethyl oleate concentration of 0.52 g/l
(Yu et al. 2012). Y. lipolytica was also engineered to produce FAEE, and the results
demonstrated that targeting the enzymes to the respective compartments greatly
inﬂuences the ﬁnal product formation. When the Acinetobacter baylyi wax ester
synthase was expressed in the cytoplasm, only 7.1 mg/l FAEEs was synthesised.
However, FAEE production was signiﬁcantly increased, when the gene was
targeted to ER or peroxisome, achieving FAEE concentrations of 136.5 and
110.9 mg/l, respectively (Xu et al. 2016).
6.7.2
Free Fatty Acids
Free fatty acids are another example of advanced chemicals that can be derived
from lipid metabolism. Similar to fatty alcohols, they have a broad potential to be
180
V. Passoth

converted to chemicals that can replace oleochemicals derived from fossil
resources, including high-energy fuels such as diesel or jet fuels. They can also
be used for the production of cleaning agents, agrochemicals, biocidal agents,
agents for textile processing or polymer additives (Lennen and Pﬂeger 2013). It
has been discovered that after inactivation of acyl-CoA synthetases and FAA1 and
FAA4, yeast cells start to secrete free fatty acids into the growth medium
(Scharnewski et al. 2008). Acyl-CoA synthetases (ACS) are enzymes that generate
acyl-CoA from free fatty acids, which is essential to further metabolise them. In
S. cerevisiae, there are four long-chain ACS, encoded by FAA1-4 (Black and
DiRusso 2007). Very recently, a number of studies have been performed to engi-
neer S. cerevisiae for overproduction of free fatty acids. Simultaneous disruption of
FAA1 and FAA4, the genes of the major acyl-CoA synthases, together with
overexpression of an acyl-ACP thioesterase from E. coli and a general enhancement
of fatty acid synthesis by overexpressing FAS and ACC increased free fatty acid
production up to 400 mg/l (Runguphan and Keasling 2014). Recently, 13C ﬂux
analysis of lipid production in this constructed strain revealed further limitations.
ACL overexpression alone did not result in a large improvement in lipid produc-
tion. This was due to the action of malate synthase, which diverted acetyl-CoA to
malate synthesis. Knocking out the respective gene (MLS1) resulted in a very
slowly growing mutant. In contrast, when the gene was only downregulated
(under control of a mutated version of the TEF1 promoter), the cells grew well,
and lipid production was signiﬁcantly enhanced. Further improvement of lipid
production could be reached by inactivating GPD1, encoding glycerol-3-P dehy-
drogenase, which catalyses the conversion of dihydroxyacetone phosphate to glyc-
erol-3-P. This reaction is required for triglyceride synthesis but competes with the
fatty acid synthesis pathway for acetyl-CoA. Knocking out this gene also increased
the ﬂux towards fatty acid production. Together, these manipulations based on ﬂux
analysis increased the secretion of free fatty acids from the original amount to
780 mg/l (Ghosh et al. 2016). In another approach, the ACS genes FAA1 and FAA2
were inactivated. Moreover, genes involved in β-oxidation, FAA2, PXA2 and
POX1, were disrupted. Faa2 is the ACS in the peroxisomes, Pxa1 is the fatty acid
transporter into the peroxisome, and Pox1 degrades fatty acids inside the peroxi-
some. The resulting strain produced 1.3 g/l of fatty acids. In this mutant strain,
DGA1 and TGL3 were overexpressed. TGL3 encodes the major triglyceride lipase.
The resulting strain produced 2.2 g free fatty acids per litre (Leber et al. 2015).
Recently, further improvement of free acid production has been reported. A strain
with deleted long-chain fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase (HFD1) was further
engineered. Additional genes involved in fatty acid degradation were disrupted,
including FAA1 and -4 and POX1. A truncated E. coli thioesterase (tesA) was
expressed, to release free fatty acids from CoA. To increase the amount of acetyl-
CoA, a chimeric pathway was expressed, consisting of Mus musculus ACL,
R. toruloides ME, endogenous malate dehydrogenase with removed peroxisomal
signal and a citrate transporter. All overexpressed genes were integrated into the
genome. The resulting strain produced 7 g/l free fatty acids in a shake ﬂask
fed-batch culture and 10.4 g/l in a glucose-limited fed-batch culture in a bioreactor
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
181

(Zhou et al. 2016). To identify additional genes that can boost lipid production, a
high-throughput method based on the ﬂuorescent dye Nile red for the detection of
intracellular lipids has been developed. A S. cerevisiae strain, defective in storage
lipid production and β-oxidation, was transformed with a cDNA library of
Y. lipolytica, and high lipid producers were identiﬁed using the Nile red-based
method. By this method, a variety of genes were discovered, including a putative
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored protein, malate dehydrogenase, glyc-
eraldehyde-3-P
dehydrogenase,
fatty
acid
hydroxylase,
farnesyltransferase,
anoctamin,
dihydrolipoamide
dehydrogenase
and
phosphatidylethanolamine-
binding protein. The highest increase in lipid production was found by expressing
the GPI protein. GPI proteins have several functions in the plasma membrane; it is
not clear in which way they inﬂuence the lipid synthesis. Further research is
required, and the high-throughput screening methodology may reveal novel
pathways for increasing lipid production by yeasts (Shi et al. 2016).
Recently, the oleaginous yeast Y. lipolytica was also manipulated to produce free
fatty acids. Genes involved in triglyceride and sterol ester synthesis (DGA1, DGA2,
ARE1 and LRO1) and in β-oxidation (MFE1) were deleted. Overexpression of
several thioesterases increased free fatty acid excretion. Best results were obtained
with a codon-optimised thioesterase (TEII) from Rattus norvegicus. When the cells
were cultivated in the presence of 10% decane or dodecane, the excreted fatty acids
accumulated in the alkane phase and were thus removed from the cells, preventing
toxic effects of the free fatty acids on the cells. The yeast easily tolerated the
alkanes, probably because Y. lipolytica is a yeast able to assimilate alkanes. In this
study, however, alkanes were not assimilated, possibly because the high sugar
concentration in the medium repressed alkane assimilation. In optimised bioreactor
cultivation, the engineered strain produced 4.3 g/l free fatty acids. When 15%
dodecane was added to the fermenter, the resulting strain produced 10.4 g/l. Most
remarkably, the amount of secreted lipids was higher than the dry cell weight in the
fermenter (120%). Thus, by enabling excretion of the free fatty acids, the maximal
limit of lipid production being 100% of the biomass was exceeded. The fatty acid
yield was 0.2 g per gram glucose (Ledesma-Amaro et al. 2016a). In another
approach, the oleaginous yeast C. curvatus was grown on glucose, and the ﬁnal
biomass was hydrolysed via a hydrothermal treatment. Collected triglycerides were
almost completely hydrolysed by the treatment. For this study, ﬁnal concentrations
and yields were not presented, but according to my own calculations of the ﬁnal
biomass and recovery ratios, the ﬁnal amount of free fatty acids was about 3–4 g/l
(Espinosa-Gonzalez et al. 2014).
The majority of the above-mentioned fatty acids have a chain length of C16–
C18. From an industry point of view, especially for the production of biofuels,
shorter chains of C6–C10 would be more attractive as they can serve as precursors
for gasoline and jet fuel production (Peralta-Yahya et al. 2012). However, yeasts
naturally mainly produce fatty acids with a chain length of C14–C18, and there is a
certain cytotoxic effect of short-chain fatty acids, making their microbial produc-
tion quite challenging (Jarboe et al. 2013). Production of short-chain fatty acids
may be achieved, when a short-chain thioesterase (TE) removes the growing fatty
182
V. Passoth

acid from the FAS. Fungal FAS has a scaffold structure, making it kinetically
efﬁcient but rather inﬂexible for interactions with other enzymes. Thus, TE activity,
which removes the growing fatty acids already in a premature stage of synthesis, is
difﬁcult to introduce into fungal FAS. In contrast, animal FAS are quite ﬂexible and
are less scaffolded (Leibundgut et al. 2008). Therefore, to achieve short-chain fatty
acid production, a Homo sapiens fatty acid synthase (hFAS), from which the native
TE subunit was removed, was expressed. hFAS lacks a 40-phosphopantetheinyl
transferase (PPT), which is required to activate the acyl carrier protein (ACP).
Therefore, heterologous PPT, either from E. coli (AcpS) or Bacillus subtilis (Sfp),
were expressed in the yeast. When rat TEII was expressed together with the mutated
hFAS and the bacterial PPTs, short-chain fatty acids were produced. Best produc-
tion was obtained in a strain expressing Sfp, where in total 20 mg/l short-chain fatty
acid were produced, 17 mg/l of them being C8 (Leber and Da Silva 2014). In this
background, further optimisations were investigated. Inactivating β-oxidation
resulted in increased short-chain fatty acid production. However, speciﬁc inactiva-
tion of short-chain fatty acid β-oxidation increased short-chain free fatty acid
production, compared to the strain with complete inactivation of β-oxidation.
Speciﬁc inactivation of short-chain fatty acid β-oxidation was achieved by
disrupting FAA2, ANT1 and PEX11 (Leber et al. 2016). These genes encode
peroxisomal ACS (FAA2); adenosine nucleotide transporter (ANT1), which
exchange peroxisomal AMP with cytoplasmic ATP; and the peroxisomal mem-
brane protein Pex11 (PEX11), which is suggested to be involved in the transport of
medium-chain free fatty acids (i.e. fatty acids up to a chain length of C12) into the
peroxisome. All three genes have been shown to be involved in the degradation of
medium-chain free fatty acids but not long-chain free fatty acids (Hiltunen et al.
2003). Apart from inactivating these genes, the hFAS gene was partially codon
optimised (the ﬁrst 834 bp from the N-terminus; surprisingly, codon optimising the
whole protein rather decreased the amount of short-chain free fatty acids). More-
over, proteinase B, encoded by PRB1, was inactivated, with the aim to improve the
synthase stability. The resulting ﬁnal strain produced 119 mg/l short-chain free fatty
acids (Leber et al. 2016).
6.7.3
Hydrocarbons
Production of hydrocarbons such as alkanes and alkenes would be especially
attractive, as they are the major components of fossil gasoline and diesel, and
could thus be used as drop-in fuels. Apart from plants, several microorganisms,
including fungi, can naturally produce hydrocarbons. The ability of some yeast
species to produce long-chain (C10–C31) and volatile (C2–C5) n-alkanes was
already discovered during the 1960s. Among those are several Saccharomyces
species, including S. oviformis and S. ludwigii, which accumulated long-chain n-
alkanes up to 10.2% of their cell dry weight; Candida tropicalis (up to 0.031%),
R.
glutinis,
Brettanomyces
bruxellensis,
Saccharomyces
octosporus
and
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, which produced ethane in the range from 21.5 to
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
183

11.4 ml/l and h; and Rhodotorula minuta var. texensis, which produced 16.4 ml
isobutene per litre and hour (Ladygina et al. 2006; Fu et al. 2015). These ﬁndings
have not received much attention, probably because of the rather low amounts of
hydrocarbons produced. However, recently an isolate from a mangrove ecosystem,
identiﬁed as Aureobasidium pullulans var. melanogenum, produced 32.5 g/l heavy
oil when grown on glucose/corn steep liquor. About 60% of this oil consisted of
alkanes—mainly
tetradecane
(C14),
tetracosane
(C24),
hexacosane
(C26),
heptacosane (C27), octacosane (C28) and tetratetracontane (C44) (Liu et al.
2014). Not much is known about the metabolic pathways for natural n-alkane
production in yeasts (Fu et al. 2015). Head-to-head condensation of fatty acids
has been assumed, where two fatty acids are condensed at their carboxylic groups.
Another possibility is a process similar to that in Arabidopsis thaliana, where
alkanes are produced from very long-chain acyl-CoA (VLC-acyl-CoA), which are
reduced to aldehydes by VLC-acyl-CoA reductase and then converted to alkanes by
VLC-aldehyde decarbonylase (summarised in Passoth 2017). Interestingly, genes
similar to the plant genes encoding VLC-aldehyde decarbonylase have been found
in the genome of A. pullulans var. melanogenum (Gostincar et al. 2014).
Due to the attractiveness of alkanes, there are growing activities to manipulate
yeasts to produce hydrocarbons. The A. thaliana alkane synthesis pathway was
expressed in S. cerevisiae. Genes encoding VLC-acyl-CoA reductase and
VLC-aldehyde decarbonylase were expressed, in a strain with a modiﬁed fatty
acid elongase, which produces elongated (C28 and C30) fatty acids. Additionally,
long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase I and CYTB5-B, a hemeprotein that serves as
electron-transporting factor, were expressed. The resulting strain produced 86 μg
per gram yeast biomass (dry weight), mainly nonacosane, C29. This was the ﬁrst
example of engineering yeast towards alkane production (Bernard et al. 2012).
However,
those
long-chain
n-alkanes
as
produced
by
A.
pullulans
var.
melanogenum or the engineered S. cerevisiae strain are less attractive as biofuels,
due to their chain length. A synthesis pathway for shorter-chain alkanes was
therefore introduced. A fatty acyl-ACP-reductase (FAR) gene and a fatty
aldehyde-deformylating oxygenase (FADO) gene from the cyanobacterium
Synechococcus elongatus were expressed in S. cerevisiae. FAR reduces fatty
acyl-CoA to fatty aldehyde, and then FADO converts the fatty aldehydes further
to alkanes or alkenes. E. coli ferredoxin and ferredoxin reductases were also
expressed, to provide the required redox cofactors for FADO in the cytoplasm.
HFD1, encoding a hexadecanal dehydrogenase, was disrupted, because it competed
with FADO for the fatty aldehydes. The resulting strain produced 22 μg
heptadecane per gram dry weight (Buijs et al. 2013). To further improve alkane
production by S. cerevisiae, a carboxylic acid reductase from M. marinum was
expressed instead of the FAR in a strain overproducing free fatty acids (see above).
To activate this enzyme, a 40-phosphopantetheinyl transferase from Aspergillus
nidulans was expressed. Deletion of POX1 further increased alkane production, and
deletion of ADH5 resulted in a lowered production of fatty alcohols and increased
alkane production. Overexpressing aldehyde-deformylating oxygenases from
S. elongatus and the cyanobacterium Nostoc punctiforme ﬁnally increased the
184
V. Passoth

alkane production to 0.82 mg/l (Zhou et al. 2016). Higher amounts of alkanes have
been obtained by manipulating Y. lipolytica. A soybean lipoxygenase I (encoded by
a codon-optimised Gmlox1 gene) was expressed converting linoleic acid into
13-hydroperoxylinoleic acid. This acid can be converted to pentane and
13-oxo-cis-9, trans 11-tridecadienoic acid, either spontaneously or catalysed by
lipoxygenase I and/or a hydroperoxide lyase. Expression of this gene resulted in the
production of 3.28 mg/l pentane. Optimising the growth medium and knocking out
genes involved in β-oxidation further increased the production to 4.98 mg/l
(Blazeck et al. 2013). The ﬁlamentous fungus Aspergillus carbonarius has the
natural ability to produce a variety of hydrocarbons, including dodecane,
tetradecane and hexadecane (Sinha et al. 2015). Codon-optimised fatty acyl-ACP-
reductase (FAR) and fatty aldehyde-deformylating oxygenase (FADO) from
S. elongatus were also expressed in A. carbonarius. Shake ﬂask cultivations in
different media were tested, and on oatmeal medium, 2.7 mg/l pentadecane and
10.2 mg/l heptadecane were found after 6 days of cultivation (Sinha et al. 2017).
Production of alkenes has also been demonstrated in S. cerevisiae. The cyto-
chrome P450 fatty acid decarboxylase (encoded by OleTJE) of the gram-positive
bacterium Jeotgalicoccus spec. ATCC 8456 directly converts fatty acids to terminal
alkenes. Expression of a corresponding codon-optimised gene in S. cerevisiae
resulted in alkene production (total ﬁnal concentration 54.5 μg/l). Deletion of
FAA1 and FAA2 further increased alkene production. To improve the cofactor
supply of the cytochrome P450 enzyme, HEM3 was overexpressed. Since the
cytochrome P450 fatty acid decarboxylase is known to be most active in the
presence of H2O2, several genes involved in its degradation were deleted. Deletion
of CTT1, encoding cytoplasmic catalase T; CTA1, encoding peroxisomal catalase
A; and CCP1, encoding a mitochondrial cytochrome c peroxidase, had a positive
effect on alkene production. Fine-tuning of gene expression by choosing appropri-
ate promoters and plasmids and optimisation of the fermentation conditions in a
bioreactor enabled alkene production with a ﬁnal concentration of 3.7 mg/l after
144 h of cultivation (Chen et al. 2015). Attempts have also been made to establish
S. cerevisiae as a whole-cell catalyst to convert free fatty acids to alkanes. Expres-
sion of a fatty acid α-dioxygenase from Oryza sativa and an aldehyde-
deformylating oxygenase from S. elongatus enabled conversion of free fatty
acids. When the pH in the medium was increased to 7.0, hereby increasing the
solubility of the added fatty acids, conversion of free fatty acids was observed: out
of a mixture of 200 mg/l even chain length saturated fatty acids (C12–C18) ﬁnal
titres of dodecane, tetradecane and hexadecane of 28.7, 304 and 5.1 μg/l, respec-
tively, were obtained. The two genes were also expressed in a strain overproducing
free fatty acids (Δfaa1, Δfaa4), and ﬁnal concentrations of 42.4 μg/l tetradecane and
31.1 μg/l hexadecane were attained from glucose (Foo et al. 2017).
6.7.4
Isoprenoids
Terpenes, also called isoprenoids or isoprenes, are built up from derivatives of the
ﬁve-carbon compound isoprene (CH2¼C(CH3)CH¼CH2). The precursors of all
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
185

isoprenoids in fungi are synthesized via the methylmalonate (MVA) pathway. In
the ﬁrst step of this pathway, two cytosolic acetyl-CoA are condensed to
acetoacetyl-CoA by acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase (in S. cerevisiae encoded by
ERG10). Acetoacetyl-CoA is then condensed with another acetyl-CoA to
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) by HMG-CoA synthase
(encoded by HMGS). HMG-CoA is reduced to mevalonate by HMG-CoA reductase
(HMG1), consuming two NADPH. Mevalonate is phosphorylated by mevalonate-
5-kinase (ERG12) to mevalonate-5-P, which is further phosphorylated to
mevalonate pyrophosphate by phosphomevalonate kinase (ERG8). Mevalonate
pyrophosphate is then decarboxylated to isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) by
mevalonate pyrophosphate decarboxylase (MVD1), and IPP is converted to
dimethylallyl pyrophosphate (DMAPP) by IPP isomerase (IDI1) (Lv et al. 2014;
Paddon and Keasling 2014; Ye et al. 2016). All terpenoids in fungi are derived from
IPP and DMAPP.
Isoprene (C5H8; 2-methyl-1,3-butadiene) is the simplest compound of the iso-
prene family. It has a broad range of industrial applications, including the produc-
tion of synthetic rubber, adhesives and speciality elastomers. It also has a potential
as fuel additive for gasoline, diesel or jet fuel. Currently it is mainly produced from
mineral oil. It is produced by a variety of plants and microorganisms. Fungi also
produce terpene compounds (see below); however, current knowledge suggests that
they are not able to produce isoprene, since they lack the isoprene synthase, which
converts DMAPP to isoprene (Ye et al. 2016). Hong and colleagues introduced a
codon-optimised IspS gene encoding an isoprene synthase from Pueraria montana
(kudzu vine) into the S. cerevisiae genome. Multicopy integration resulted in the
production of about 0.5 mg isoprene and isoprene derivatives in the headspace gas
of a 1 l culture (Hong et al. 2012). A variety of attempts have been made to improve
isoprene production by S. cerevisiae, including overexpressing of the rate-limiting
HMGR, downregulating or deleting of metabolic pathways competing for DMAPP
or overexpressing a global transcription factor (summarised in Ye et al. 2016). In a
recent study, several of the above-mentioned approaches were combined with
overproduction of acetyl-CoA. An isoprene synthase gene (ispS from Populus
alba) was overexpressed in S. cerevisiae. Then, truncated HMG1 (tHMG1) was
overexpressed (Lv et al. 2014). It has been demonstrated that feedback inhibition
can be avoided when only the catalytic unit of HMG1 is expressed (Donald et al.
1997). The activity of farnesyl pyrophosphate synthetase, which removes IPP from
the pathway, was decreased by expressing the corresponding gene (ERG20) under
control of a weak promoter. Attempts to enhance the supply of acetyl-CoA by
increasing the activities of assimilatory alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH2) and cyto-
solic aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALD6) indicated that the limiting step in acetalde-
hyde production is the conversion of acetate to acetyl-CoA. Therefore, acetyl-CoA
synthetase (ACS2) and acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase (ERG10) were overexpressed.
Further ﬁne-tuning of expression by using appropriate promoters and modifying
regulation of some metabolic pathways (deletion of the repressor GAL80, since the
GAL1 promoter was used for the expression of some genes), optimising carbon
sources (glycerol and sucrose were more conducive than glucose) and oxygen
186
V. Passoth

supply, yielded a ﬁnal production of 37 mg/l isoprene (Lv et al. 2014). In a
subsequent study, the isoprene synthase gene was placed under control of the
GAL1 promoter; at the same time, the activator GAL4 was overexpressed, and
native GAL1, GAL7 and GAL10 promoters were deleted to diminish competition for
the transcription factor. Further improvements were obtained by directly selecting
enzymes with higher activity. DMAPP has a cytotoxic effect, and cells carrying a
very active isoprene synthase would develop a certain resistance to DMAPP. A
mutant library of isoprene synthase was generated by error-prone PCR, and, ﬁnally,
enzymes with enhanced activity were isolated. These enzymes were expressed in
the background described above. Cultivation of the resulting strain in a high cell-
density bioreactor resulted in an isoprene production of 3.7 g/l (Wang et al. 2017).
Since acetyl-CoA supply is crucial for high production of isoprene, and since
cytoplasmic acetyl-CoA production is limited in S. cerevisiae, the MVA pathway
and the isoprene synthase were expressed in mitochondria, by fusing the genes with
a corresponding mitochondrial import signal sequence. Resulting strains produced
more isoprene than strains with manipulated cytoplasmic isoprene synthesis; how-
ever, this strain did not achieve high cell-density in fed-batch cultivation. Best
performance was obtained when strains with mitochondrial and cytoplasmic iso-
prene synthesis were crossed, forming a diploid strain containing the pathway both
in the cytoplasm and mitochondria. The resulting strain produced 2.5 g/l isoprene in
a
high
cell-density
fed-batch
cultivation,
demonstrating
the
potential
of
manipulating the metabolism in different cell compartments (Lv et al. 2016).
Apart from isoprene, other, long-chain isoprenoids also have immense biotech-
nological potential. Synthesis of those isoprenoids is achieved by condensation of
IPP and DMAPP to the prenyl pyrophosphates, geranyl pyrophosphate (GPP, C10),
farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP, C15) and geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP,
C20). From these compounds, monoterpenes (C10), sesquiterpenes (C15) or
diterpenes (C20) are formed (Zhang et al. 2011; Buijs et al. 2013). A variety of
terpene-derived compounds are produced by yeasts, including the membrane sterol
ergosterol (Parks and Casey 1995) and carotenoids (Mata-Gomez et al. 2014). A
very prominent example of an isoprenoid-derived compound is the antimalaria drug
artemisinin. Artemisinin is a sesquiterpene with a lactone endoperoxide. This
compound is naturally produced by a plant, Artemisia annua, commonly known
as sweet wormwood. Artemisinin production starts with the conversion of FPP to
amorphadiene by amorphadiene synthase (ADS). A. annua accumulates, probably
by the action of cytochrome P450 monooxygenase (also called amorphadiene
oxidase),
two
oxidation
products
of
amorphadiene,
artemisinic
acid
and
dihydroartemisinic acid. The latter is the precursor of artemisinin, and it is thought
that its conversion occurs spontaneously in the presence of sunlight (Paddon and
Keasling 2014). By engineering the MVA pathway, expressing ADS and a cyto-
chrome P450 monooxygenase from A. annua up to 100 mg/l artemisinic acid could
be produced in S. cerevisiae S288C (Ro et al. 2006). Artemisinic acid can easily be
converted to artemisinin by chemical methods. Further improvements were
achieved by additional metabolic engineering and by using a more appropriate
yeast strain. The whole MVA pathway, including tHMG1, and ERG20 were
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
187

overexpressed in CEN.PK2. Three copies of tHMG1 were integrated into the
genome, as this step had previously been identiﬁed as limiting for production of
artemisinic acid. As the genes were expressed under control of the GAL1 promoter,
galactose metabolism was also manipulated, by deleting the GAL gene cluster and
the repressor GAL80. Strains were then constructed containing either the whole
pathway for artemisinic acid (ADS, cytochrome P450 monooxygenase and its
cognate reductase, A. annua cytochrome P450 reductase) or only ADS. Production
of amorphadiene was more strongly enhanced in the latter strain than production of
artemisinic acid. Therefore, the next study focused on the production of
amorphadiene and its subsequent conversion to artemisinin by chemical methods.
After optimising fermentation conditions, 41 g/l amorphadiene was produced, and
the overall yield of converting amorphadiene to dihydroartemisinic acid was 48.4%
(Westfall et al. 2012). Further investigation showed that the low ability of
engineered cells to produce artemisinic acid was due to oxidative stress, which
was generated due to poor coupling between the cytochrome P450 enzyme and its
reductase. This was overcome by ﬁne-tuning their expression and by expression of
an A. annua cytochrome b5, which has been shown to improve the activity of
cytochrome P450 enzymes. The resulting strain, although improved, still did not
produce sufﬁcient amounts of artemisinic acid. Moreover, artemisinic aldehyde, an
oxidation intermediate, was accumulated, which is probably toxic to the cell. To
overcome this, A. annua artemisinic aldehyde dehydrogenase was expressed,
resulting in substantial increase of artemisinic acid. Expression of an NAD+-
dependent A. annua artemisinic alcohol dehydrogenase further increased the
artemisinic acid concentration and yielded a ﬁnal concentration of 25 g/l
artemisinic acid, the highest obtained titre so far (Paddon et al. 2013).
Isoprenoids also have great potential as biofuels. Hydrolysis of IPP, GPP and
FPP results in alcohols, which can be used as fuel additives (Zhang et al. 2011).
These alcohols and especially isopentanol have been suggested as gasoline
additives; they have all advantageous features of ethanol, i.e. increasing the octane
number and reducing the concentration of harmful pollutants in the exhaust, but
lack the negative characteristics; they do not increase the vapour pressure, have
better tolerance to water and do not increase fuel consumption (Hull et al. 2006).
Farnesol and farnesene have been suggested as diesel fuels (Zhang et al. 2011).
S. cerevisiae was engineered to produce bisabolene. This was achieved in a strain
with overexpressed FPP production pathway and reduced activity of a competing
synthesis pathway (squalene synthesis), as well as overexpression of bisabolene
synthase. The resulting strain produced more than 900 mg bisabolene per litre.
Bisabolene is a sesquiterpene that can be chemically hydrogenated to bisabolene, a
biosynthetic alternative to D2 diesel (D2 diesel is usually used as fuel in cars),
which has similar or partially even better characteristics compared to D2 diesel
(Peralta-Yahya et al. 2012). Recently, it has been discovered that bisabolene and
α-farnesene provide resistance against the detergent Tween 20, which has been
used to isolate mutants with higher production of these compounds (Kirby et al.
2014). Further improvements of isoprenoid production are possible by, for instance,
isolating appropriate enzymes, such as terpene synthases (Tippmann et al. 2016).
188
V. Passoth

Carotenoids are another group of isoprene-derived compounds. Astaxanthin is
one example of a biotechnologically interesting carotenoid that is produced by a
yeast. Astaxanthin is used in a variety of cosmetics and other products, and it
provides the characteristic colour of salmon. It is naturally produced by marine
microbes. As the ﬁsh cannot synthesise astaxanthin, it has to be added to the feed of
farmed salmon and is actually one of the most expensive ingredients. Currently,
most astaxanthin is produced from fossil resources; a little is produced by microbial
fermentations using, for instance, the green alga Haematococcus pluvialis or the
yeast Phafﬁa rhodozyma. This yeast was for several years designated with its
teleomorph name Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous, but recently, the priority of
the name P. rhodozyma has been pointed out (Liu et al. 2015b). Only few yeast
species are able to produce astaxanthin; this includes the heterobasidous yeast
P. rhodozyma and close relatives (Colabella and Libkind 2016). In fermentation
experiments, up to 420 mg/l astaxanthin were produced. However, astaxanthin
produced by fermentation costs more than three times the price of synthetic
astaxanthin would cost. Economic production would require production of 4 mg/g
cell dry weight and a ﬁnal concentration of at least 60 g/l (Rodriguez-Saiz et al.
2010; Schmidt et al. 2011). There are three speciﬁc genes responsible for
astaxanthin synthesis in P. rhodozyma (Schmidt et al. 2011). Two GGPP are
fused to form phytoene, by the protein encoded by the fusion gene crtYB. This
gene encodes a bifunctional enzyme, which acts both in the condensation of two
GGPP and later in the cyclisation of lycopene. Then, two double bonds are stepwise
introduced into the phytoene molecule by the enzyme encoded by crtI, generating
neurosporene and ﬁnally lycopene. Lycopene is, as mentioned above, converted to
β-carotene by a cyclisation catalysed by crtYB (Verdoes et al. 1999a, b). In a side
reaction of the pathway, lycopene can be converted by crtI to 3,4-dehydrolycopene,
which is then converted by crtYB to torulene. β-carotene is then converted by
insertion of 3-hydroxyl and 4-keto groups into the ionone rings of β-carotene. This
multistep conversion is achieved by astaxanthin synthase, which is a cytochrome
P450 monooxygenase. Cytochrome P450 enzymes usually require an electron-
donating system, and this activity is performed by a speciﬁc cytochrome P450
reductase (Schmidt et al. 2011) (and references therein). Astaxanthin production by
P. rhodozyma requires sophisticated regulation of fermentation, as the yeast,
although showing a high activity of the pentose phosphate pathway and thus more
similar to respiratory yeasts and ﬁlamentous fungi, exhibits a Crabtree effect, i.e. it
produces ethanol under aerobic conditions, when there is a surplus of glucose
(Cannizzaro et al. 2004; Liu and Wu 2008). Moreover, methods for metabolic
engineering of this yeast have been recently developed, e.g. a system for multiple
overexpression of genes. Simultaneous overexpression of the genes of the MVA
pathway resulted in a 2.1-fold increase in astaxanthin production compared to the
parental strain (Hara et al. 2014). Further improvement could be achieved by
deleting both copies of CYP61 in the diploid genome, encoding C-22 sterol
desaturase, which is involved in sterol biosynthesis. Ergosterol has been shown to
exert feedback inhibition on the MVA pathway (Yamamoto et al. 2016).
Astaxanthin production has been shown to be under glucose repression, and it has
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
189

recently been demonstrated that a homologue of the S. cerevisiae MIG1 is involved
in this repression. A strain mutated in P. rhodozyma MIG1 showed enhanced
astaxanthin production (Alcaino et al. 2016).
6.8
Lipid Extraction
Apart from the above-mentioned examples of glycolipids and free fatty acids,
neutral lipids are usually produced and stored intracellularly. Therefore, they
have to be extracted from the cells. Extraction is one of the major downstream
processes, which may substantially contribute to the cost of implementing lipid
production as bioprocess. While a variety of studies have been performed on algae,
not much is known about efﬁcient lipid extraction from fungi (Ochsenreither et al.
2016). Analytical lipid extraction is often performed with the help of solvents,
which both disintegrate the cell and extract the lipids. Chloroform, often mixed
with methanol, has been shown to be very efﬁcient for lipid extraction (Folch et al.
1957). Soxhlet extraction is another classical extraction method that has originally
been used to extract lipids from milk powder. It is currently mainly used as a
standard method against which other extraction methods are compared. The method
involves drying and grinding the sample, which is then placed on a porous thimble
in an extraction chamber. Extraction occurs in several washing steps with an
organic solvent under reﬂux (Soxhlet 1879). A variety of automated Soxhlet
systems are commercially available. However, Soxhlet extraction requires large
amounts of solvents and is time-consuming. Furthermore, extensive use of chloro-
form and organic solvents is environmentally problematic and should be avoided
for food and feed production, due to potential toxic effects. To reduce the utilisation
of organic solvents, cell disruption is usually required for lipid extraction, due to the
robust cell walls of fungi. One can largely distinguish between mechanical and
nonmechanical cell disruption methods. Mechanical methods include bead milling,
homogenisation and ultrasound treatment; for lipid extraction they are often com-
bined with solvent extraction. Nonmechanical methods can be divided in physical
methods, such as decompression or microwave treatment, or drying, or chemical
methods such as the application of solvents or acid treatment. Enzyme treatment is
also possible (Ochsenreither et al. 2016). In one study, several of these different
methods were applied to disrupt cells of the yeast C. curvatus and the ﬁlamentous
fungus M. isabellina. Lipid was then extracted using a methanol/chloroform solu-
tion. The tested cell disruption methods were autoclaving, microwave treatment,
ultrasonication, bead beating, HCl digestion and Soxhlet, which included disruption
of freeze-dried cells with mortar and pestle and a subsequent methanol/chloroform
extraction. All these methods had been tested in other studies for lipid extraction
from oleaginous algae. Results showed that for M. isabellina, Soxhlet gave the best
results, and HCl digestion and bead beating were still acceptable, whereas
ultrasonication, microwaving and autoclaving gave poor extraction results. For
C. curvatus, HCl digestion, bead beating and ultrasonication performed best;
Soxhlet enabled similar extraction efﬁciencies to the three other, whereas
190
V. Passoth

microwaving and autoclaving gave poor yields. Differences are due to different cell
structures of yeast and ﬁlamentous fungi. Nevertheless, HCl extraction performed
well for both organisms; because it is relatively simple and the fatty acid composi-
tion was not impaired by the method (i.e. there was no signiﬁcant decrease in the
nutritionally valuable non-saturated fatty acids), HCl cell disruption may be the
method of choice in the future for extracting lipids from fungi (Yu et al. 2015).
High-pressure homogenisation (800 bar at 4
C for several passages) and
subsequent hexane extraction have been applied for cell disruption of C. curvatus
and an oleaginous strain of Pichia kudriavzevii. The extraction yield was not
directly compared to other methods; however, lipid recoveries of 20% of dry matter
(P. kudriavzevii) and about 50% (C. curvatus) indicate an acceptable efﬁciency of
the method (Thiru et al. 2011; Sankh et al. 2013). Ultrasonic treatment may be
another option for cell disruption; however, large-scale cell disruption does not
seem to be possible due to difﬁculties of energy transmission in larger volumes. It
may also generate heat, which can inﬂuence the quality of the resulting lipids, and it
was shown not to be the most efﬁcient method when compared to other methods in
fungi (Yu et al. 2015; Ochsenreither et al. 2016). Hydrothermal treatment was used
to extract lipids from C. curvatus, grown in a 5 l pilot scale reactor (the lipid content
of the yeast biomass was 53%). The biomass was treated at 280 C and 500 psi for
1 h, and after hexane washing, 43% of the solids, corresponding to 70% of the initial
total lipids, was recovered in the hexane fraction. The resulting lipids were free of
sulphur and low in salts and nitrogen and were thus appropriate for further
processing to biofuels. The energy demand of this technique is quite high; thus, it
would be essential to integrate it into a process, whereby the energy is recovered via
heat circulation systems (Espinosa-Gonzalez et al. 2014). Treatment with super-
critical ﬂuids, especially CO2, is another option for lipid extraction. Supercritical
CO2 enables good recovery, has a high selectivity to non-polar substances (i.e. salt,
water, proteins, polysaccharides and sugars are not extracted) and can be easily
removed after extraction. It is non-toxic, non-ﬂammable, non-polluting, inexpen-
sive and inert. Extraction with supercritical CO2 can be performed at relatively low
temperatures due to the low critical temperature of CO2 (31.1 C). It also protects
against oxidation, making it a gentle extraction method, e.g. for polyunsaturated
fatty acids (Ochsenreither et al. 2016). When using supercritical CO2 extraction of
oil from the zygomycete Cunninghamella echinulata, the best performance was
achieved at 30 MPa, 50 C, an incubation time of 180 min and a mass ﬂow of 50 kg
CO2/kg dry biomass, and when fungal particles smaller than 0.5 mm were used.
Interestingly, CO2 extraction resulted in a higher recovery of γ-linolenic acid and
total lipids than all other tested methods, including Folch and Soxhlet with different
solvents (Certik and Horenitzky 1999). In S. cerevisiae, good recovery and separa-
tion of triglycerides from phospholipids was obtained by CO2 extraction at 2 MPa
and 40 C with 9% (w/w) ethanol as co-solvent. However, pretreatment was
required, and acid hydrolysis followed by methanol maceration was found to be
the best method to ensure high lipid extraction efﬁciency (Hegel et al. 2011).
Enzyme-assisted cell disruption may also be an option for lipid extraction.
R. toruloides was treated with β-1,3-glucomannanase, after a heat pretreatment
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
191

with microwaves. Lipids were extracted with ethyl acetate, at room temperature and
without dewatering. Enzyme treatments may save energy costs, as they can often be
performed at room temperature and at atmospheric pressure (Jin et al. 2012). On the
other hand, enzymes may be expensive so sophisticated methods to recycle enzyme
will be necessary.
Lipid extraction is one of the factors that are crucial for obtaining sustainable
biolipid production from fungi (e.g. Karlsson et al. 2016). A variety of lipid
extraction methods have been tested during the last years. Investigations about
the energy efﬁciency of the different cell disruption and lipid extraction methods
would probably help to identify the most appropriate methodology for isolating
lipids from fungi.
6.9
Conclusions
Lipid metabolism in fungi has been studied for many years. However, huge
progress has been achieved during the last decade, promoted by a growing interest
for biotechnological utilisation of products from lipid metabolism and to identify
novel targets for antifungal therapy. Techniques of metabolic engineering and
omics analyses in oleaginous and model organisms provided novel insights into
lipid metabolism, which was shown to be amazingly complex in terms of biosyn-
thesis pathways and their regulation. Given the necessity to generate fuels,
chemicals and food from non-fossil, sustainable resources, and the growing avail-
ability of molecular manipulation and analysis techniques even in non-conventional
oleaginous organisms, one can easily predict that the already rapid development in
this ﬁeld will continue to accelerate in the coming years. Moreover, as lipid
metabolism is one essential component of cellular metabolism, research in lipid
metabolism in fungi will greatly contribute to understanding general eukaryotic
metabolism and thus have a strong impact on fundamental biological research, with
implications for human and animal medicine as well as plant production.
Acknowledgement Biofuel related research in my group was funded by the Swedish Energy
Authority (STEM), the MicroDrive programme at the Swedish University of Agricultural
Sciences, the Swedish Research Council for Environment, Agricultural Sciences and Spatial
Planning (Formas) (LipoDrive programme) and the Visby programme of the Swedish Institute. I
thank Dr. Su-Lin Leong for linguistic advice and the members of my group, especially
Dr. Ievgeniia Tiukova and Jonas Ohlsson, for valuable discussion.
References
Akpina-Bayizit A (2014) Fungal lipids: the biochemistry of lipid accumulation. Int J Chem Eng
Appl 5:409–414
Alcaino J, Bravo N, Cordova P, Marcoleta AE, Contreras G, Barahona S, Sepulveda D, Fernandez-
Lobato M, Baeza M, Cifuentes V (2016) The involvement of Mig1 from Xanthophyllomyces
192
V. Passoth

dendrorhous in catabolic repression: an active mechanism contributing to the regulation of
carotenoid production. PLoS One 11:e0162838
Andre´ A, Diamantopoulou P, Philippoussis A, Sarris D, Komaitis M, Papanikolaou S (2010)
Biotechnological conversions of bio-diesel derived waste glycerol into added-value
compounds by higher fungi: production of biomass, single cell oil and oxalic acid. Ind Crop
Prod 31:407–416
Asadi SZ, Khosravi-Darani K, Nikoopour H, Bakhoda H (2015) Evaluation of the effect of process
variables on the fatty acid proﬁle of single cell oil produced by Mortierella using solid-state
fermentation. Crit Rev Biotechnol 35:94–102
Asmer H-J, Lang S, Wagner F, Wray V (1988) Microbial production, structure elucidation and
bioconversion of sophorose lipids. J Am Oil Chem Soc 65:1460–1466
Azo´car L, Ciudad G, Heipieper HJ, Navia R (2010) Biotechnological processes for biodiesel
production using alternative oils. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 88:621–636
Barnett JA, Kornberg HL (1960) The utilization by yeasts of acids of the tricarboxylic acid cycle.
Microbiology 23:65–82
Be´ligon V, Christophe G, Fontanille P, Larroche C (2016) Microbial lipids as potential source to
food supplements. Curr Opin Food Sci 7:35–42
Bellou S, Triantaphyllidou IE, Aggeli D, Elazzazy AM, Baeshen MN, Aggelis G (2016) Microbial
oils as food additives: recent approaches for improving microbial oil production and its
polyunsaturated fatty acid content. Curr Opin Biotechnol 37:24–35
Beopoulos A, Mrozova Z, Thevenieau F, Le Dall MT, Hapala I, Papanikolaou S, Chardot T,
Nicaud JM (2008) Control of lipid accumulation in the yeast Yarrowia lipolytica. Appl Environ
Microbiol 74:7779–7789
Beopoulos A, Cescut J, Haddouche R, Uribelarrea JL, Molina-Jouve C, Nicaud JM (2009)
Yarrowia lipolytica as a model for bio-oil production. Prog Lipid Res 48:375–387
Beopoulos A, Nicaud JM, Gaillardin C (2011) An overview of lipid metabolism in yeasts and its
impact on biotechnological processes. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 90:1193–1206
Bernard A, Domergue F, Pascal S, Jetter R, Renne C, Faure J-D, Haslam RP, Napier JA, Lessire R,
Joube`s J (2012) Reconstitution of plant alkane biosynthesis in yeast demonstrates that
Arabidopsis ECERIFERUM1 and ECERIFERUM3 are core components of a very-long-
chain alkane synthesis complex. Plant Cell 24:3106–3118
Biddy MJ, Davis R, Humbird D, Tao L, Dowe N, Guarnieri MT, Linger JG, Karp EM,
Salvachu´a D, Vardon DR, Beckham GT (2016) The techno-economic basis for coproduct
manufacturing to enable hydrocarbon fuel production from lignocellulosic biomass. ACS
Sustain Chem Eng 4:3196–3211
Black PN, DiRusso CC (2007) Yeast acyl-CoA synthetases at the crossroads of fatty acid
metabolism and regulation. Biochim Biophys Acta 1771:286–298
Blazeck J, Liu L, Knight R, Alper HS (2013) Heterologous production of pentane in the oleaginous
yeast Yarrowia lipolytica. J Biotechnol 165:184–194
Brandenburg J, Blomqvist J, Pickova J, Bonturi N, Sandgren M, Passoth V (2016) Lipid produc-
tion from hemicellulose with Lipomyces starkeyi in a pH regulated fed-batch cultivation. Yeast
33:451–462
Buijs NA, Siewers V, Nielsen J (2013) Advanced biofuel production by the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Curr Opin Chem Biol 17:480–488
Calvey CH, Willis LB, Jeffries TW (2014) An optimized transformation protocol for Lipomyces
starkeyi. Curr Genet 60:223–230
Cannizzaro C, Christensen B, Nielsen J, von Stockar U (2004) Metabolic network analysis on
Phafﬁa rhodozyma yeast using 13C-labeled glucose and gas chromatography-mass spectrome-
try. Metab Eng 6:340–351
Certik M, Horenitzky R (1999) Supercritical CO2 extraction of fungal oil containing γ-linolenic
acid. Biotechnol Tech 13:11–15
Certik M, Shimizu S (1999) Biosynthesis and regulation of microbial polyunsaturated fatty acid
production. J Biosci Bioeng 87:1–14
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
193

Chatzifragkou A, Makri A, Belka A, Bellou S, Mavrou M, Mastoridou M, Mystrioti P, Onjaro G,
Aggelis G, Papanikolaou S (2011) Biotechnological conversions of biodiesel derived waste
glycerol by yeast and fungal species. Energy 36:1097–1108
Chen X, Li Z, Zhang X, Hu F, Ryu DY, Bao J (2009) Screening of oleaginous yeast strains tolerant
to lignocellulose degradation compounds. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 159:591–604
Chen Y, Daviet L, Schalk M, Siewers V, Nielsen J (2013) Establishing a platform cell factory
through engineering of yeast acetyl-CoA metabolism. Metab Eng 15:48–54
Chen B, Lee DY, Chang MW (2015) Combinatorial metabolic engineering of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae for terminal alkene production. Metab Eng 31:53–61
Cheng Y, McNally DJ, Labbe C, Voyer N, Belzile F, Be´langer RR (2003) Insertional mutagenesis
of a fungal biocontrol agent led to discovery of a rare cellobiose lipid with antifungal activity.
Appl Environ Microbiol 69:2595–2602
Ciesielska K, Van Bogaert IN, Chevineau S, Li B, Groeneboer S, Soetaert W, Van de Peer Y,
Devreese B (2014) Exoproteome analysis of Starmerella bombicola results in the discovery of
an esterase required for lactonization of sophorolipids. J Proteome 98:159–174
Colabella F, Libkind D (2016) PCR-based method for the rapid identiﬁcation of astaxanthin-
accumulating yeasts (Phafﬁa spp.) Rev Argent Microbiol 48:15–20
Cui Y, Blackburn JW, Liang Y (2012) Fermentation optimization for the production of lipid by
Cryptococcus curvatus: use of response surface methodology. Biomass Bioenergy 47:410–417
Daniel H-J, Otto RT, Binder M, Reuss M, Syldatk C (1999) Production of sophorolipids from
whey: development of a two-stage process with Cryptococcus curvatus ATCC 20509 and
Candida bombicola ATCC 22214 using deproteinized whey concentrates as substrates. Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 51:40–45
Davila A-M, Marchal R, Vandecasteele J-P (1992) Kinetics and balance of a fermentation free
from product inhibition: sophorose lipid production by Candida bombicola. Appl Microbiol
Biotechnol 38:6–11
Della-Bianca B, Basso T, Stambuk B, Basso L, Gombert A (2013) What do we know about the
yeast strains from the Brazilian fuel ethanol industry? Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 97:979–991
Dı´az De Rienzo MA, Banat IM, Dolman B, Winterburn J, Martin PJ (2015) Sophorolipid
biosurfactants: possible uses as antibacterial and antibioﬁlm agent. New Biotechnol
32:720–726
Donald KA, Hampton RY, Fritz IB (1997) Effects of overproduction of the catalytic domain of
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase on squalene synthesis in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Appl Environ Microbiol 63:3341–3344
Espinosa-Gonzalez I, Parashar A, Bressler DC (2014) Hydrothermal treatment of oleaginous yeast
for the recovery of free fatty acids for use in advanced biofuel production. J Biotechnol
187:10–15
Evans CT, Ratledge C (1984) Induction of xylulose-5-phosphate phosphoketolase in a variety of
yeasts grown ond-xylose: the key to efﬁcient xylose metabolism. Arch Microbiol 139:48–52
Fakas S, Papanikolaou S, Batsos A, Galiotou-Panayotou M, Mallouchos A, Aggelis G (2009)
Evaluating renewable carbon sources as substrates for single cell oil production by
Cunninghamella echinulata and Mortierella isabellina. Biomass Bioenergy 33:573–580
Feng X, Lian J, Zhao H (2015) Metabolic engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to improve
1-hexadecanol production. Metab Eng 27:10–19
Filippucci S, Tasselli G, Scardua A, Di Mauro S, Cramarossa MR, Perini D, Turchetti B, Onofri A,
Forti L, Buzzini P (2016) Study of Holtermanniella wattica, Leucosporidium creatinivorum,
Naganishia adeliensis, Solicoccozyma aeria, and Solicoccozyma terricola for their lipogenic
aptitude from different carbon sources. Biotechnol Biofuels 9:259
Fillet S, Adrio JL (2016) Microbial production of fatty alcohols. World J Microbiol Biotechnol
32:152
Fillet S, Gibert J, Sua´rez B, Lara A, Ronchel C, Adrio JL (2015) Fatty alcohols production by
oleaginous yeast. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 42:1463–1472
194
V. Passoth

Flores-Cotera L, Martı´n R, Sa´nchez S (2001) Citrate, a possible precursor of astaxanthin in Phafﬁa
rhodozyma: inﬂuence of varying levels of ammonium, phosphate and citrate in a chemically
deﬁned medium. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 55:341–347
Folch J, Lees M, Sloane Stanley GH (1957) A simple method for the isolation and puriﬁcation of
total lipides from animal tissues. J Biol Chem 226:497–509
Foo JL, Susanto AV, Keasling JD, Leong SS, Chang MW (2017) Whole-cell biocatalytic and de
novo production of alkanes from free fatty acids in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biotechnol
Bioeng 114:232–237
Frieman MB, Cormack BP (2004) Multiple sequence signals determine the distribution of
glycosylphosphatidylinositol proteins between the plasma membrane and cell wall in Saccha-
romyces cerevisiae. Microbiology 150:3105–3114
Fu WJ, Chi Z, Ma ZC, Zhou HX, Liu GL, Lee CF, Chi ZM (2015) Hydrocarbons, the advanced
biofuels produced by different organisms, the evidence that alkanes in petroleum can be
renewable. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 99:7481–7494
Gao Q, Cui Z, Zhang J, Bao J (2014) Lipid fermentation of corncob residues hydrolysate by
oleaginous yeast Trichosporon cutaneum. Bioresour Technol 152:552–556
Garay LA, Boundy-Mills KL, German JB (2014) Accumulation of high-value lipids in single-cell
microorganisms: a mechanistic approach and future perspectives. J Agric Food Chem
62:2709–2727
Ghosh A, Ando D, Gin J, Runguphan W, Denby C, Wang G, Baidoo EEK, Shymansky C, Keasling
JD, Garcı´a Martı´n H (2016) 13C Metabolic ﬂux analysis for systematic metabolic engineering
of S. cerevisiae for overproduction of fatty acids. Front Bioeng Biotechnol 4:76
Gnansounou E (2010) Production and use of lignocellulosic bioethanol in Europe: current situa-
tion and perspectives. Bioresour Technol 101:4842–4850
Golden C, Allison EH, Cheung WW, Dey M, Halpern B, McCauley DJ, Smith M, Vaitla B,
Zeller D, Myers SS (2016) Fall in ﬁsh catch threatens human health. Nature 534:317–320
Gostincar C, Ohm RA, Kogej T, Sonjak S, Turk M, Zajc J, Zalar P, Grube M, Sun H, Han J,
Sharma A, Chiniquy J, Ngan CY, Lipzen A, Barry K, Grigoriev IV, Gunde-Cimerman N
(2014) Genome sequencing of four Aureobasidium pullulans varieties: biotechnological poten-
tial, stress tolerance, and description of new species. BMC Genomics 15:549
Graham-Rowe D (2011) Agriculture: beyond food versus fuel. Nature 474:S6–S8
Guo W, Sheng J, Zhao H, Feng X (2016) Metabolic engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to
produce 1-hexadecanol from xylose. Microb Cell Fact 15:24
Haas MJ, McAloon AJ, Yee WC, Foglia TA (2006) A process model to estimate biodiesel
production costs. Bioresour Technol 97:671–678
Haque F, Alfatah M, Ganesan K, Bhattacharyya MS (2016) Inhibitory effect of sophorolipid on
Candida albicans bioﬁlm formation and hyphal growth. Sci Rep 6:23575
Hara KY, Morita T, Mochizuki M, Yamamoto K, Ogino C, Araki M, Kondo A (2014) Develop-
ment of a multi-gene expression system in Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Microb Cell Fact
13:175
Hast MA, Nichols CB, Armstrong SM, Kelly SM, Hellinga HW, Alspaugh JA, Beese LS (2011)
Structures of Cryptococcus neoformans protein farnesyltransferase reveal strategies for devel-
oping inhibitors that target fungal pathogens. J Biol Chem 286:35149–35162
Hasunuma T, Kondo A (2012) Development of yeast cell factories for consolidated bioprocessing
of
lignocellulose
to
bioethanol
through
cell
surface
engineering.
Biotechnol
Adv
30:1207–1218
Hegel PE, Camy S, Destrac P, Condoret JS (2011) Inﬂuence of pretreatments for extraction of
lipids from yeast by using supercritical carbon dioxide and ethanol as cosolvent. J Supercrit
Fluids 58:68–78
Hewald S, Linne U, Scherer M, Marahiel MA, Ka¨mper J, B€olker M (2006) Identiﬁcation of a gene
cluster for biosynthesis of mannosylerythritol lipids in the basidiomycetous fungus Ustilago
maydis. Appl Environ Microbiol 72:5469–5477
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
195

Hiltunen JK, Mursula AM, Rottensteiner H, Wierenga RK, Kastaniotis AJ, Gurvitz A (2003) The
biochemistry of peroxisomal beta-oxidation in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEMS
Microbiol Rev 27:35–64
Hirano H, Kimura Y, Kimura A (2016) Biological signiﬁcance of co- and post-translational
modiﬁcations of the yeast 26S proteasome. J Proteome 134:37–46
Holzer H, Goedde HW (1957) Zwei Wege von Pyruvat zu Acetyl-Coenzym A in Hefe. Biochem Z
329:175–191
Hong SY, Zurbriggen AS, Melis A (2012) Isoprene hydrocarbons production upon heterologous
transformation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J Appl Microbiol 113:52–65
Hu C, Zhao X, Zhao J, Wu S, Zhao ZK (2009) Effects of biomass hydrolysis by-products on
oleaginous yeast Rhodosporidium toruloides. Bioresour Technol 100:4843–4847
Huang C, Zong M-h, Wu H, Liu Q-p (2009) Microbial oil production from rice straw hydrolysate
by Trichosporon fermentans. Bioresour Technol 100:4535–4538
Huang C, Wu H, Li R-f, Zong M-h (2012) Improving lipid production from bagasse hydrolysate
with Trichosporon fermentans by response surface methodology. New Biotechnol 29:372–378
Hull A, Golubkov I, Kronberg B, Marandzheva T, van Stam J (2006) An alternative fuel for spark
ignition engines. Int J Engine Res 7:203–214
Hyvo¨nen R, Olsson BA, Lundkvist H, Staaf H (2000) Decomposition and nutrient release from
Picea abies (L.) Karst. and Pinus sylvestris L. logging residues. Forest Ecol Manag 126:97–
112
Im JH, Yanagishita H, Ikegami T, Takeyama Y, Idemoto Y, Koura N, Kitamoto D (2003)
Mannosylerythritol lipids, yeast glycolipid biosurfactants, are potential afﬁnity ligand
materials for human immunoglobulin G. J Biomed Mater Res A 65:379–385
Inoue S, Ito S (1982) Sophorolipids from Torulopsis bombicola as microbial surfactants in alkane
fermentations. Biotechnol Lett 4:3–8
Jackson FM, Fraser TC, Smith MA, Lazarus C, Stobart AK, Grifﬁths G (1998) Biosynthesis of
C18 polyunsaturated fatty acids in microsomal membrane preparations from the ﬁlamentous
fungus Mucor circinelloides. Eur J Biochem 252:513–519
Jarboe L, Royce L, Liu P (2013) Understanding biocatalyst inhibition by carboxylic acids. Front
Microbiol 4:272
Jin G, Yang F, Hu C, Shen H, Zhao ZK (2012) Enzyme-assisted extraction of lipids directly from
the culture of the oleaginous yeast Rhodosporidium toruloides. Bioresour Technol
111:378–382
Jin M, Slininger PJ, Dien BS, Waghmode S, Moser BR, Orjuela A, Sousa Lda C, Balan V (2015)
Microbial
lipid-based
lignocellulosic
bioreﬁnery:
feasibility
and
challenges.
Trends
Biotechnol 33:43–54
Johnson DT, Taconi KA (2007) The glycerin glut: options for the value-added conversion of crude
glycerol resulting from biodiesel production. Environ Prog 26:338–348
J€onsson LJ, Alriksson B, Nilvebrant N-O (2013) Bioconversion of lignocellulose: inhibitors and
detoxiﬁcation. Biotechnol Biofuels 6:16
Kamisaka Y, Noda N, Tomita N, Kimura K, Kodaki T, Hosaka K (2006) Identiﬁcation of genes
affecting lipid content using transposon mutagenesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biosci
Biotechnol Biochem 70:646–653
Kamisaka Y, Tomita N, Kimura K, Kainou K, Uemura H (2007) DGA1 (diacylglycerol
acyltransferase gene) overexpression and leucine biosynthesis signiﬁcantly increase lipid
accumulation in the Dsnf2 disruptant of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biochem J 408:61–68
Kamisaka Y, Kimura K, Uemura H, Yamaoka M (2013) Overexpression of the active
diacylglycerol acyltransferase variant transforms Saccharomyces cerevisiae into an oleaginous
yeast. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 97:7345–7355
Kamiya Y, Sakurai A, Tamura S, Takahashi N (1978) Structure of rhodotorucine A, a novel
lipopeptide, inducing mating tube formation in Rhodosporidium toruloides. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun 83:1077–1083
196
V. Passoth

Karlsson H, Ahlgren S, Sandgren M, Passoth V, Wallberg O, Hansson PA (2016) A systems
analysis of biodiesel production from wheat straw using oleaginous yeast: process design, mass
and energy balances. Biotechnol Biofuels 9:229
Kendrick A, Ratledge C (1992) Desaturation of polyunsaturated fatty acids in Mucor
circinelloides and the involvement of a novel membrane-bound malic enzyme. Eur J Biochem
209:667–673
Kirby J, Nishimoto M, Chow RW, Pasumarthi VN, Chan R, Chan LJ, Petzold CJ, Keasling JD
(2014) Use of nonionic surfactants for improvement of terpene production in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Appl Environ Microbiol 80:6685–6693
Kitamoto D, Yanagishita H, Shinbo T, Nakane T, Kamisawa C, Nakahara T (1993) Surface active
properties and antimicrobial activities of mannosylerythritol lipids as biosurfactants produced
by Candida antarctica. J Biotechnol 29:91–96
Kitamoto D, Ghosh S, Ourisson G, Nakatani Y (2000) Formation of giant vesicles from
diacylmannosylerythritols,
and
their
binding
to
concanavalin
A.
Chem
Commun
2000:861–862
Kitamoto D, Ikegami T, Suzuki GT, Sasaki A, Takeyama Y-i, Idemoto Y, Koura N, Yanagishita H
(2001) Microbial conversion of n-alkanes into glycolipid biosurfactants, mannosylerythritol
lipids, by Pseudozyma (Candida antarctica). Biotechnol Lett 23:1709–1714
Kulakovskaya TV, Golubev WI, Tomashevskaya MA, Kulakovskaya EV, Shashkov AS, Grachev
AA, Chizhov AS, Nifantiev NE (2010) Production of antifungal cellobiose lipids by
Trichosporon porosum. Mycopathologia 169:117–123
Kurtzman CP, Price NPJ, Ray KJ, Kuo T-M (2010) Production of sophorolipid biosurfactants by
multiple species of the Starmerella (Candida) bombicola yeast clade. FEMS Microbiol Lett
311:140–146
Kurz M, Eder C, Isert D, Li Z, Paulus EF, Schiell M, Toti L, Vertesy L, Wink J, Seibert G (2003)
Ustilipids,
acylated
beta-D-mannopyranosyl
D-erythritols
from
Ustilago
maydis
and
Geotrichum candidum. J Antibiot (Tokyo) 56:91–101
Ladygina N, Dedyukhina EG, Vainshtein MB (2006) A review on microbial synthesis of
hydrocarbons. Process Biochem 41:1001–1014
Leber C, Da Silva NA (2014) Engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for the synthesis of short
chain fatty acids. Biotechnol Bioeng 111:347–358
Leber C, Polson B, Fernandez-Moya R, Da Silva NA (2015) Overproduction and secretion of free
fatty acids through disrupted neutral lipid recycle in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Metab Eng
28:54–62
Leber C, Choi JW, Polson B, Da Silva NA (2016) Disrupted short chain speciﬁc β-oxidation and
improved synthase expression increase synthesis of short chain fatty acids in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Biotechnol Bioeng 113:895–900
Ledesma-Amaro R, Nicaud J-M (2016) Metabolic engineering for expanding the substrate range
of Yarrowia lipolytica. Trends Biotechnol 34:798–809
Ledesma-Amaro R, Dulermo R, Niehus X, Nicaud J-M (2016a) Combining metabolic engineering
and process optimization to improve production and secretion of fatty acids. Metab Eng
38:38–46
Ledesma-Amaro R, Lazar Z, Rakicka M, Guo Z, Fouchard F, Coq AC, Nicaud JM (2016b)
Metabolic engineering of Yarrowia lipolytica to produce chemicals and fuels from xylose.
Metab Eng 38:115–124
Leibundgut M, Maier T, Jenni S, Ban N (2008) The multienzyme architecture of eukaryotic fatty
acid synthases. Curr Opin Struct Biol 18:714–725
Lennen RM, Pﬂeger BF (2013) Microbial production of fatty acid-derived fuels and chemicals.
Curr Opin Biotechnol 24:1044–1053
Li Y, Zhao Z, Bai F (2007) High-density cultivation of oleaginous yeast Rhodosporidium
toruloides Y4 in fed-batch culture. Enzym Microb Technol 41:312–317
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
197

Lian J, Zhao H (2015) Recent advances in biosynthesis of fatty acids derived products in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae via enhanced supply of precursor metabolites. J Ind Microbiol
Biotechnol 42:437–451
Liang Y, Cui Y, Trushenski J, Blackburn JW (2010) Converting crude glycerol derived from
yellow grease to lipids through yeast fermentation. Bioresour Technol 101:7581–7586
Liu YS, Wu JY (2008) Modeling of Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous growth on glucose and
overﬂow metabolism in batch and fed-batch cultures for astaxanthin production. Biotechnol
Bioeng 101:996–1004
Liu Z, Gao Y, Chen J, Imanaka T, Bao J, Hua Q (2013) Analysis of metabolic ﬂuxes for better
understanding of mechanisms related to lipid accumulation in oleaginous yeast Trichosporon
cutaneum. Bioresour Technol 130:144–151
Liu YY, Chi Z, Wang ZP, Liu GL, Chi ZM (2014) Heavy oils, principally long-chain n-alkanes
secreted by Aureobasidium pullulans var. melanogenum strain P5 isolated from mangrove
system. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 41:1329–1337
Liu L, Markham K, Blazeck J, Zhou N, Leon D, Otoupal P, Alper HS (2015a) Surveying the
lipogenesis landscape in Yarrowia lipolytica through understanding the function of a Mga2p
regulatory protein mutant. Metab Eng 31:102–111
Liu XZ, Wang QM, Goker M, Groenewald M, Kachalkin AV, Lumbsch HT, Millanes AM,
Wedin M, Yurkov AM, Boekhout T, Bai FY (2015b) Towards an integrated phylogenetic
classiﬁcation of the Tremellomycetes. Stud Mycol 81:85–147
Liu Y, Yap SA, Koh CM, Ji L (2016) Developing a set of strong intronic promoters for robust
metabolic engineering in oleaginous Rhodotorula (Rhodosporidium) yeast species. Microb
Cell Fact 15:200
Lodge JK, Jackson-Machelski E, Higgins M, McWherter CA, Sikorski JA, Devadas B, Gordon JI
(1998) Genetic and biochemical studies establish that the fungicidal effect of a fully
depeptidized
inhibitor
of
Cryptococcus
neoformans
myristoyl-CoA:protein
N-myristoyltransferase (Nmt) is Nmt-dependent. J Biol Chem 273:12482–12491
Lv X, Xie W, Lu W, Guo F, Gu J, Yu H, Ye L (2014) Enhanced isoprene biosynthesis in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae by engineering of the native acetyl-CoA and mevalonic acid
pathways with a push-pull-restrain strategy. J Biotechnol 186:128–136
Lv X, Wang F, Zhou P, Ye L, Xie W, Xu H, Yu H (2016) Dual regulation of cytoplasmic and
mitochondrial acetyl-CoA utilization for improved isoprene production in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Nat Commun 7:12851
Mann PA, McLellan CA, Koseoglu S, Si Q, Kuzmin E, Flattery A, Harris G, Sher X, Murgolo N,
Wang H, Devito K, de Pedro N, Genilloud O, Kahn JN, Jiang B, Costanzo M, Boone C, Garlisi
CG, Lindquist S, Roemer T (2015) Chemical genomics-based antifungal drug discovery:
targeting glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) precursor biosynthesis. ACS Infect Dis 1:59–72
Mata-Gomez LC, Montanez JC, Mendez-Zavala A, Aguilar CN (2014) Biotechnological produc-
tion of carotenoids by yeasts: an overview. Microb Cell Fact 13:12
McLellan CA, Whitesell L, King OD, Lancaster AK, Mazitschek R, Lindquist S (2012) Inhibiting
GPI anchor biosynthesis in fungi stresses the endoplasmic reticulum and enhances immunoge-
nicity. ACS Chem Biol 7:1520–1528
Metz JG, Roessler P, Facciotti D, Levering C, Dittrich F, Lassner M, Valentine R, Lardizabal K,
Domergue F, Yamada A, Yazawa K, Knauf V, Browse J (2001) Production of polyunsaturated
fatty acids by polyketide synthases in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Science 293:290–293
Michaelis S, Barrowman J (2012) Biogenesis of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae pheromone
a-factor, from yeast mating to human disease. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 76:626–651
Mnif I, Ghribi D (2016) Glycolipid biosurfactants: main properties and potential applications in
agriculture and food industry. J Sci Food Agric 96:4310–4320
Morita T, Fukuoka T, Konishi M, Imura T, Yamamoto S, Kitagawa M, Sogabe A, Kitamoto D
(2009) Production of a novel glycolipid biosurfactant, mannosylmannitol lipid, by Pseudozyma
parantarctica and its interfacial properties. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 83:1017
Morita T, Ogura Y, Takashima M, Hirose N, Fukuoka T, Imura T, Kondo Y, Kitamoto D (2011)
Isolation of Pseudozyma churashimaensis sp. nov., a novel ustilaginomycetous yeast species as
198
V. Passoth

a producer of glycolipid biosurfactants, mannosylerythritol lipids. J Biosci Bioeng
112:137–144
Morita T, Fukuoka T, Imura T, Kitamoto D (2012) Formation of the two novel glycolipid
biosurfactants, mannosylribitol lipid and mannosylarabitol lipid, by Pseudozyma parantarctica
JCM 11752T. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 96:931–938
Morita T, Koike H, Koyama Y, Hagiwara H, Ito E, Fukuoka T, Imura T, Machida M, Kitamoto D
(2013) Genome sequence of the basidiomycetous yeast Pseudozyma antarctica T-34, a pro-
ducer of the glycolipid biosurfactants mannosylerythritol lipids. Genome Announc 1:e0006413
Mulligan CN (2005) Environmental applications for biosurfactants. Environ Pollut 133:183–198
Mu~niz M, Zurzolo C (2014) Sorting of GPI-anchored proteins from yeast to mammals—common
pathways at different sites? J Cell Sci 127:2793–2801
Nguyen UTT, Goody RS, Alexandrov K (2010) Understanding and exploiting protein
prenyltransferases. Chembiochem 11:1194–1201
Nichols CB, Ost KS, Grogan DP, Pianalto K, Hasan S, Alspaugh JA (2015) Impact of protein
palmitoylation on the virulence potential of Cryptococcus neoformans. Eukaryot Cell
14:626–635
Nitschke M, Costa SGVAO (2007) Biosurfactants in food industry. Trends Food Sci Technol
18:252–259
Ochsenreither K, Glück C, Stressler T, Fischer L, Syldatk C (2016) Production strategies and
applications of microbial single cell oils. Front Microbiol 7:1539
Olstorpe M, Pickova J, Kiessling A, Passoth V (2014) Strain- and temperature-dependent changes
of fatty acid composition in Wickerhamomyces anomalus and Blastobotrys adeninivorans.
Biotechnol Appl Biochem 61:45–50
Omer CA, Gibbs JB (1994) Protein prenylation in eukaryotic microorganisms: genetics, biology
and biochemistry. Mol Microbiol 11:219–225
Orlean P, Menon AK (2007) Thematic review series: lipid posttranslational modiﬁcations. GPI
anchoring of protein in yeast and mammalian cells, or: how we learned to stop worrying and
love glycophospholipids. J Lipid Res 48:993–1011
Paddon CJ, Keasling JD (2014) Semi-synthetic artemisinin: a model for the use of synthetic
biology in pharmaceutical development. Nat Rev Microbiol 12:355–367
Paddon CJ, Westfall PJ, Pitera DJ, Benjamin K, Fisher K, McPhee D, Leavell MD, Tai A, Main A,
Eng D, Polichuk DR, Teoh KH, Reed DW, Treynor T, Lenihan J, Jiang H, Fleck M, Bajad S,
Dang G, Dengrove D, Diola D, Dorin G, Ellens KW, Fickes S, Galazzo J, Gaucher SP,
Geistlinger T, Henry R, Hepp M, Horning T, Iqbal T, Kizer L, Lieu B, Melis D, Moss N,
Regentin R, Secrest S, Tsuruta H, Vazquez R, Westblade LF, Xu L, Yu M, Zhang Y, Zhao L,
Lievense J, Covello PS, Keasling JD, Reiling KK, Renninger NS, Newman JD (2013) High-
level semi-synthetic production of the potent antimalarial artemisinin. Nature 496:528–532
Papanikolaou S, Aggelis G (2011) Lipids of oleaginous yeasts. Part I: biochemistry of single cell
oil production. Eur J Lipid Sci Technol 113:1031–1051
Parks LW, Casey WM (1995) Physiological implications of sterol biosynthesis in yeast. Annu Rev
Microbiol 49:95–116
Passoth V (2014) Molecular mechanisms in yeast carbon metabolism: bioethanol and other
biofuels. In: Pisˇkur J, Compagno C (eds) Molecular mechanisms in yeast carbon metabolism.
Springer, Berlin, pp 217–259
Passoth V (2017) Conventional and non-conventional yeasts for the production of biofuels. In:
Satyanarayana T, Kunze G (eds) Yeast diversity in human welfare. Springer Science +
Business Media, Singapore (in press)
Passoth V, Schnürer J (2003) Non-conventional yeasts in antifungal application. In: de Winde JH
(ed) Functional genetics of industrial yeasts. Springer, Berlin, pp 297–329
Paulino BN, Pessoˆa MG, Mano MCR, Molina G, Neri-Numa IA, Pastore GM (2016) Current
status in biotechnological production and applications of glycolipid biosurfactants. Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 100:10265–10293
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
199

Peralta-Yahya PP, Zhang F, del Cardayre SB, Keasling JD (2012) Microbial engineering for the
production of advanced biofuels. Nature 488:320–328
Pronk JT, Steensma HY, van Dijken JP (1996) Pyruvate metabolism in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Yeast 12:1607–1633
Pugh EL, Kates M (1979) Membrane-bound phospholipid desaturases. Lipids 14:159–165
Qiao K, Imam Abidi SH, Liu H, Zhang H, Chakraborty S, Watson N, Kumaran Ajikumar P,
Stephanopoulos G (2015) Engineering lipid overproduction in the oleaginous yeast Yarrowia
lipolytica. Metab Eng 29:56–65
Qiao K, Wasylenko TM, Zhou K, Xu P, Stephanopoulos G (2017) Lipid production in Yarrowia
lipolytica is maximized by engineering cytosolic redox metabolism. Nat Biotechnol
35:173–177. Advance online publication
Ratledge C (2004) Fatty acid biosynthesis in microorganisms being used for single cell oil
production. Biochimie 86:807–815
Ratledge C (2012) Omega-3 biotechnology: errors and omissions. Biotechnol Adv 30:1746–1747
Ratledge C (2013) Microbial oils: an introductory overview of current status and future prospects.
OCL 20:D602
Ratledge C (2014) The role of malic enzyme as the provider of NADPH in oleaginous
microorganisms: a reappraisal and unsolved problems. Biotechnol Lett 36:1557–1568
Ratledge C, Wynn JP (2002) The biochemistry and molecular biology of lipid accumulation in
oleaginous microorganisms. Adv Appl Microbiol 51:1–51
Rau U, Nguyen LA, Roeper H, Koch H, Lang S (2005) Fed-batch bioreactor production of
mannosylerythritol lipids secreted by Pseudozyma aphidis. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
68:607–613
Reinertsen SA, Elliot LF, Cochran VL, Campbell GS (1984) Role of available carbon and nitrogen
in determining the rate of wheat straw decomposition. Soil Biol Biochem 16:459–464
Ro DK, Paradise EM, Ouellet M, Fisher KJ, Newman KL, Ndungu JM, Ho KA, Eachus RA, Ham
TS, Kirby J, Chang MC, Withers ST, Shiba Y, Sarpong R, Keasling JD (2006) Production of
the antimalarial drug precursor artemisinic acid in engineered yeast. Nature 440:940–943
Rodriguez GM, Hussain MS, Gambill L, Gao D, Yaguchi A, Blenner M (2016) Engineering xylose
utilization in Yarrowia lipolytica by understanding its cryptic xylose pathway. Biotechnol
Biofuels 9:149
Rodrı´guez-Fro´meta RA, Gutie´rrez A, Torres-Martı´nez S, Garre V (2013) Malic enzyme activity is
not the only bottleneck for lipid accumulation in the oleaginous fungus Mucor circinelloides.
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 97:3063–3072
Rodriguez-Saiz M, de la Fuente JL, Barredo JL (2010) Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous for the
industrial production of astaxanthin. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 88:645–658
Roelants SL, Saerens KM, Derycke T, Li B, Lin YC, Van de Peer Y, De Maeseneire SL, Van
Bogaert IN, Soetaert W (2013) Candida bombicola as a platform organism for the production
of tailor-made biomolecules. Biotechnol Bioeng 110:2494–2503
Roelants SLKW, De Maeseneire SL, Ciesielska K, Van Bogaert INA, Soetaert W (2014)
Biosurfactant gene clusters in eukaryotes: regulation and biotechnological potential. Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 98:3449–3461
Runguphan W, Keasling JD (2014) Metabolic engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for
production of fatty acid-derived biofuels and chemicals. Metab Eng 21:103–113
Saenge C, Cheirsilp B, Suksaroge TT, Bourtoom T (2011) Potential use of oleaginous red yeast
Rhodotorula glutinis for the bioconversion of crude glycerol from biodiesel plant to lipids and
carotenoids. Process Biochem 46:210–218
Saerens KMJ, Roelants SLKW, Van Bogaert INA, Soetaert W (2011a) Identiﬁcation of the
UDP-glucosyltransferase gene UGTA1, responsible for the ﬁrst glucosylation step in the
sophorolipid biosynthetic pathway of Candida bombicola ATCC 22214. FEMS Yeast Res
11:123–132
Saerens KMJ, Saey L, Soetaert W (2011b) One-step production of unacetylated sophorolipids by
an acetyltransferase negative Candida bombicola. Biotechnol Bioeng 108:2923–2931
200
V. Passoth

Saerens KMJ, Zhang J, Saey L, Van Bogaert INA, Soetaert W (2011c) Cloning and functional
characterization of the UDP-glucosyltransferase UgtB1 involved in sophorolipid production by
Candida bombicola and creation of a glucolipid-producing yeast strain. Yeast 28:279–292
Sakuradani E, Ando A, Shimizu S, Ogawa J (2013) Metabolic engineering for the production of
polyunsaturated fatty acids by oleaginous fungus Mortierella alpina 1S-4. J Biosci Bioeng
116:417–422
Sankh S, Thiru M, Saran S, Rangaswamy V (2013) Biodiesel production from a newly isolated
Pichia kudriavzevii strain. Fuel 106:690–696
Santiago-Tirado FH, Doering TL (2016) All about that fat: lipid modiﬁcation of proteins in
Cryptococcus neoformans. J Microbiol 54:212–222
Scharnewski M, Pongdontri P, Mora G, Hoppert M, Fulda M (2008) Mutants of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae deﬁcient in acyl-CoA synthetases secrete fatty acids due to interrupted fatty acid
recycling. FEBS J 275:2765–2778
Schmidt I, Schewe H, Gassel S, Jin C, Buckingham J, Hümbelin M, Sandmann G, Schrader J
(2011)
Biotechnological
production
of
astaxanthin
with
Phafﬁa
rhodozyma/
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 89:555–571
Schwartz C, Shabbir-Hussain M, Frogue K, Blenner M, Wheeldon I (2016) Standardized
markerless gene integration for pathway engineering in Yarrowia lipolytica. ACS Synth Biol
6(3):402–409
Shah V, Doncel GF, Seyoum T, Eaton KM, Zalenskaya I, Hagver R, Azim A, Gross R (2005)
Sophorolipids, microbial glycolipids with anti-human immunodeﬁciency virus and sperm-
immobilizing activities. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 49:4093–4100
Shi S, Valle-Rodrı´guez JO, Siewers V, Nielsen J (2014) Engineering of chromosomal wax ester
synthase integrated Saccharomyces cerevisiae mutants for improved biosynthesis of fatty acid
ethyl esters. Biotechnol Bioeng 111:1740–1747
Shi S, Ji H, Siewers V, Nielsen J (2016) Improved production of fatty acids by Saccharomyces
cerevisiae through screening a cDNA library from the oleaginous yeast Yarrowia lipolytica.
FEMS Yeast Res 16:fov108
Shiba Y, Paradise EM, Kirby J, Ro D-K, Keasling JD (2007) Engineering of the pyruvate
dehydrogenase bypass in Saccharomyces cerevisiae for high-level production of isoprenoids.
Metab Eng 9:160–168
Shimizu S, Shinmen Y, Kawashima H, Akimoto K, Yamada H (1988) Fungal mycelia as a novel
source of eicosapentaenoic acid. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 150:335–341
Shimizu S, Kawashima H, Akimoto K, Shinmen Y, Yamada H (1989) Conversion of linseed oil to
an eicosapentaenoic acid-containing oil by Mortierella alpina 1S-4 at low temperature. Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 32:1–4
Simopoulos AP (2006) Evolutionary aspects of diet, the omega-6/omega-3 ratio and genetic
variation: nutritional implications for chronic diseases. Biomed Pharmacother 60:502–507
Sinha M, Sørensen A, Ahamed A, Ahring BK (2015) Production of hydrocarbons by Aspergillus
carbonarius ITEM 5010. Fungal Biol 119:274–282
Sinha M, Weyda I, Sørensen A, Bruno KS, Ahring BK (2017) Alkane biosynthesis by Aspergillus
carbonarius ITEM 5010 through heterologous expression of Synechococcus elongatus acyl-
ACP/CoA reductase and aldehyde deformylating oxygenase genes. AMB Express 7:18
Sitepu IR, Garay LA, Sestric R, Levin D, Block DE, German JB, Boundy-Mills KL (2014)
Oleaginous yeasts for biodiesel: current and future trends in biology and production.
Biotechnol Adv 32:1336–1360
Slininger PJ, Dien BS, Kurtzman CP, Moser BR, Bakota EL, Thompson SR, O’Bryan PJ, Cotta
MA, Balan V, Jin M, Sousa Lda C, Dale BE (2016) Comparative lipid production by oleagi-
nous yeasts in hydrolyzates of lignocellulosic biomass and process strategy for high titers.
Biotechnol Bioeng 113:1676–1690
Soccol CR, Dalmas Neto CJ, Soccol VT, Sydney EB, da Costa ES, Medeiros AB, Vandenberghe
LP (2016) Pilot scale biodiesel production from microbial oil of Rhodosporidium toruloides
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
201

DEBB 5533 using sugarcane juice: performance in diesel engine and preliminary economic
study. Bioresour Technol 223:259–268
Sorger D, Daum G (2003) Triacylglycerol biosynthesis in yeast. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
61:289–299
Soxhlet F (1879) Die gewichtsanalytische Bestimmung des Milchfettes. Dinglers Polytech J
232:461–465
Tai M, Stephanopoulos G (2013) Engineering the push and pull of lipid biosynthesis in oleaginous
yeast Yarrowia lipolytica for biofuel production. Metab Eng 15:1–9
Takeno S, Sakuradani E, Murata S, Inohara-Ochiai M, Kawashima H, Ashikari T, Shimizu S
(2005a) Molecular evidence that the rate-limiting step for the biosynthesis of arachidonic acid
in Mortierella alpina is at the level of an elongase. Lipids 40:25–30
Takeno S, Sakuradani E, Tomi A, Inohara-Ochiai M, Kawashima H, Ashikari T, Shimizu S
(2005b) Improvement of the fatty acid composition of an oil-producing ﬁlamentous fungus,
Mortierella alpina 1S-4, through RNA interference with delta12-desaturase gene expression.
Appl Environ Microbiol 71:5124–5128
Tang W, Zhang S, Tan H, Zhao Z (2010) Molecular cloning and characterization of a malic
enzyme gene from the oleaginous yeast Lipomyces starkeyi. Mol Biotechnol 45:121–128
Tang X, Feng H, Chen WN (2013) Metabolic engineering for enhanced fatty acids synthesis in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Metab Eng 16:95–102
Tang X, Chen H, Chen YQ, Chen W, Garre V, Song Y, Ratledge C (2015) Comparison of
biochemical activities between high and low lpid-producing strains of Mucor circinelloides:
an explanation for the high oleaginicity of strain WJ11. PLoS One 10:e0128396
Tanimura A, Takashima M, Sugita T, Endoh R, Kikukawa M, Yamaguchi S, Sakuradani E,
Ogawa J, Ohkuma M, Shima J (2014) Cryptococcus terricola is a promising oleaginous
yeast for biodiesel production from starch through consolidated bioprocessing. Sci Rep 4:4776
Tchakouteu SS, Kalantzi O, Gardeli C, Koutinas AA, Aggelis G, Papanikolaou S (2015) Lipid
production by yeasts growing on biodiesel-derived crude glycerol: strain selection and impact
of substrate concentration on the fermentation efﬁciency. J Appl Microbiol 118:911–927
Tehlivets O, Scheuringer K, Kohlwein SD (2007) Fatty acid synthesis and elongation in yeast.
Biochim Biophys Acta 1771:255–270
Teichmann B, Linne U, Hewald S, Marahiel MA, B€olker M (2007) A biosynthetic gene cluster for
a secreted cellobiose lipid with antifungal activity from Ustilago maydis. Mol Microbiol
66:525–533
Teichmann B, Labbe´ C, Lefebvre F, B€olker M, Linne U, Be´langer RR (2011) Identiﬁcation of a
biosynthesis gene cluster for ﬂocculosin a cellobiose lipid produced by the biocontrol agent
Pseudozyma ﬂocculosa. Mol Microbiol 79:1483–1495
Thiru M, Sankh S, Rangaswamy V (2011) Process for biodiesel production from Cryptococcus
curvatus. Bioresour Technol 102:10436–10440
Tippmann S, Scalcinati G, Siewers V, Nielsen J (2016) Production of farnesene and santalene by
Saccharomyces cerevisiae using fed-batch cultivations with RQ-controlled feed. Biotechnol
Bioeng 113:72–81
Tocher DR (2015) Omega-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids and aquaculture in perspec-
tive. Aquaculture 449:94–107
Uc¸kun Kiran E, Trzcinski A, Webb C (2013) Microbial oil produced from biodiesel by-products
could enhance overall production. Bioresour Technol 129:650–654
Uprety BK, Dalli SS, Rakshit SK (2017) Bioconversion of crude glycerol to microbial lipid using a
robust oleaginous yeast Rhodosporidium toruloides ATCC 10788 capable of growing in the
presence of impurities. Energy Convers Manag 135:117–128
Van Bogaert IN, De Maeseneire SL, Develter D, Soetaert W, Vandamme EJ (2008a) Cloning and
characterisation of the glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene of Candida bombicola
and use of its promoter. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 35:1085–1092
202
V. Passoth

Van Bogaert IN, De Maeseneire SL, Develter D, Soetaert W, Vandamme EJ (2008b) Development
of a transformation and selection system for the glycolipid-producing yeast Candida
bombicola. Yeast 25:273–278
Van Bogaert INA, Zhang J, Soetaert W (2011) Microbial synthesis of sophorolipids. Process
Biochem 46:821–833
Van Bogaert INA, Holvoet K, Roelants SLKW, Li B, Lin Y-C, Van de Peer Y, Soetaert W (2013)
The biosynthetic gene cluster for sophorolipids: a biotechnological interesting biosurfactant
produced by Starmerella bombicola. Mol Microbiol 88:501–509
Van Bogaert IN, Buyst D, Martins JC, Roelants SL, Soetaert WK (2016) Synthesis of bolaform
biosurfactants
by
an
engineered
Starmerella
bombicola
yeast.
Biotechnol
Bioeng
113:2644–2651
Verdoes JC, Krubasik KP, Sandmann G, van Ooyen AJ (1999a) Isolation and functional
characterisation of a novel type of carotenoid biosynthetic gene from Xanthophyllomyces
dendrorhous. Mol Gen Genet 262:453–461
Verdoes JC, Misawa N, van Ooyen AJ (1999b) Cloning and characterization of the astaxanthin
biosynthetic gene encoding phytoene desaturase of Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous.
Biotechnol Bioeng 63:750–755
Vongsangnak W, Ruenwai R, Tang X, Hu X, Zhang H, Shen B, Song Y, Laoteng K (2013)
Genome-scale analysis of the metabolic networks of oleaginous Zygomycete fungi. Gene
521:180–190
Vorapreeda T, Thammarongtham C, Cheevadhanarak S, Laoteng K (2013) Repertoire of malic
enzymes in yeast and fungi: insight into their evolutionary functional and structural signiﬁ-
cance. Microbiology 159:2548–2557
Wang CW (2015) Lipid droplet dynamics in budding yeast. Cell Mol Life Sci 72:2677–2695
Wang W, Wei H, Knoshaug E, Van Wychen S, Xu Q, Himmel ME, Zhang M (2016) Fatty alcohol
production in Lipomyces starkeyi and Yarrowia lipolytica. Biotechnol Biofuels 9:227
Wang F, Lv X, Xie W, Zhou P, Zhu Y, Yao Z, Yang C, Yang X, Ye L, Yu H (2017) Combining
Gal4p-mediated expression enhancement and directed evolution of isoprene synthase to
improve isoprene production in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Metab Eng 39:257–266
Watanabe NA, Miyazaki M, Horii T, Sagane K, Tsukahara K, Hata K (2012) E1210, a new broad-
spectrum antifungal, suppresses Candida albicans hyphal growth through inhibition of
glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 56:960–971
Westfall PJ, Pitera DJ, Lenihan JR, Eng D, Woolard FX, Regentin R, Horning T, Tsuruta H, Melis
DJ, Owens A, Fickes S, Diola D, Benjamin KR, Keasling JD, Leavell MD, McPhee DJ,
Renninger NS, Newman JD, Paddon CJ (2012) Production of amorphadiene in yeast, and its
conversion to dihydroartemisinic acid, precursor to the antimalarial agent artemisinin. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 109:E111–E118
Wu S, Hu C, Jin G, Zhao X, Zhao ZK (2010) Phosphate-limitation mediated lipid production by
Rhodosporidium toruloides. Bioresour Technol 101:6124–6129
Wu S, Zhao X, Shen H, Wang Q, Zhao ZK (2011) Microbial lipid production by Rhodosporidium
toruloides under sulfate-limited conditions. Bioresour Technol 102:1803–1807
Wynn JP, Ratledge C (2000) Evidence that the rate-limiting step for the biosynthesis of
arachidonic acid in Mortierella alpina is at the level of the 18:3 to 20:3 elongase. Microbiology
146(Pt 9):2325–2331
Wynn JP, Hamid AA, Li Y, Ratledge C (2001) Biochemical events leading to the diversion of
carbon into storage lipids in the oleaginous fungi Mucor circinelloides and Mortierella alpina.
Microbiology 147:2857–2864
Xu P, Qiao K, Ahn WS, Stephanopoulos G (2016) Engineering Yarrowia lipolytica as a platform
for synthesis of drop-in transportation fuels and oleochemicals. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
113:10848–10853
Xue Z, Sharpe PL, Hong S-P, Yadav NS, Xie D, Short DR, Damude HG, Rupert RA, Seip JE,
Wang J, Pollak DW, Bostick MW, Bosak MD, Macool DJ, Hollerbach DH, Zhang H, Arcilla
DM, Bledsoe SA, Croker K, McCord EF, Tyreus BD, Jackson EN, Zhu Q (2013) Production of
6
Lipids of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi and Their Importance for Biotechnology
203

omega-3 eicosapentaenoic acid by metabolic engineering of Yarrowia lipolytica. Nat
Biotechnol 31:734–740
Yamamoto K, Hara KY, Morita T, Nishimura A, Sasaki D, Ishii J, Ogino C, Kizaki N, Kondo A
(2016) Enhancement of astaxanthin production in Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous by efﬁcient
method for the complete deletion of genes. Microb Cell Fact 15:155
Ye L, Lv X, Yu H (2016) Engineering microbes for isoprene production. Metab Eng 38:125–138
Yen H-W, Yang Y-C, Yu Y-H (2012) Using crude glycerol and thin stillage for the production of
microbial lipids through the cultivation of Rhodotorula glutinis. J Biosci Bioeng 114:453–456
Yu KO, Jung J, Kim SW, Park CH, Han SO (2012) Synthesis of FAEEs from glycerol in
engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae using endogenously produced ethanol by heterologous
expression of an unspeciﬁc bacterial acyltransferase. Biotechnol Bioeng 109:110–115
Yu X, Dong T, Zheng Y, Miao C, Chen S (2015) Investigations on cell disruption of oleaginous
microorganisms: hydrochloric acid digestion is an effective method for lipid extraction. Eur J
Lipid Sci Technol 117:730–737
Zhang Y, Adams IP, Ratledge C (2007) Malic enzyme: the controlling activity for lipid produc-
tion? Overexpression of malic enzyme in Mucor circinelloides leads to a 2.5-fold increase in
lipid accumulation. Microbiology 153:2013–2025
Zhang F, Rodriguez S, Keasling JD (2011) Metabolic engineering of microbial pathways for
advanced biofuels production. Curr Opin Biotechnol 22:775–783
Zhang H, Zhang L, Chen H, Chen YQ, Ratledge C, Song Y, Chen W (2013) Regulatory properties
of malic enzyme in the oleaginous yeast, Yarrowia lipolytica, and its non-involvement in lipid
accumulation. Biotechnol Lett 35:2091–2098
Zhang H, Wu C, Wu Q, Dai J, Song Y (2016a) Metabolic ﬂux analysis of lipid biosynthesis in the
yeast Yarrowia lipolytica using 13C-Labled glucose and gas chromatography-mass spectrome-
try. PLoS One 11:e0159187
Zhang S, Ito M, Skerker JM, Arkin AP, Rao CV (2016b) Metabolic engineering of the oleaginous
yeast Rhodosporidium toruloides IFO0880 for lipid overproduction during high-density fer-
mentation. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 100:9393–9405
Zhang S, Skerker JM, Rutter CD, Maurer MJ, Arkin AP, Rao CV (2016c) Engineering
Rhodosporidium toruloides for increased lipid production. Biotechnol Bioeng 113:1056–1066
Zhao L, Zhang H, Wang L, Chen H, Chen YQ, Chen W, Song Y (2015) 13C-metabolic ﬂux
analysis of lipid accumulation in the oleaginous fungus Mucor circinelloides. Bioresour
Technol 197:23–29
Zhao L, Ca´novas-Ma´rquez JT, Tang X, Chen H, Chen YQ, Chen W, Garre V, Song Y, Ratledge C
(2016) Role of malate transporter in lipid accumulation of oleaginous fungus Mucor
circinelloides. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 100:1297–1305
Zhou YJ, Buijs NA, Siewers V, Nielsen J (2014) Fatty acid-derived biofuels and chemicals
production in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Front Bioeng Biotechnol 2:32
Zhou YJ, Buijs NA, Zhu Z, Qin J, Siewers V, Nielsen J (2016) Production of fatty acid-derived
oleochemicals and biofuels by synthetic yeast cell factories. Nat Commun 7:11709
Zhu Z, Ding Y, Gong Z, Yang L, Zhang S, Zhang C, Lin X, Shen H, Zou H, Xie Z, Yang F,
Zhao X, Liu P, Zhao ZK (2015) Dynamics of the lipid droplet proteome of the oleaginous yeast
Rhodosporidium toruloides. Eukaryot Cell 14:252–264
204
V. Passoth

Production of Organic Acids by Yeasts
and Filamentous Fungi
7
Danilo Porro and Paola Branduardi
Abstract
Organic acids are broadly distributed in nature, and humans used them in their
natural sources since the early ages, essentially for food and drink preparations.
Organic acids are low-molecular-weight organic compounds with one or more
acidic groups such as carboxyl, sulfonic, alcohol and thiol groups. These func-
tional groups make organic acids key building block chemicals, which have
huge markets and are still commonly reﬁned from petroleum. Indeed, during the
ﬁrst half of the twentieth century, advances in chemical synthesis offered
competitive manufacturing processes. This scenario changed starting from the
1990s when development of the industrial biotechnology ﬁeld, environmental
issues and the integration of biomasses processing industries, fermentation and
downstream procedures, yielded improved economics for the biological
pathways.
In this chapter, we mainly review the aspects of current or piloting large-scale
successful industrial processes for yeast or fungal organic acid productions.
Perspectives are also reported.
Contents
7.1
Introduction ................................................................................
206
7.2
Renewable Yeast and Fungal Organic Acids Commercialization or Demonstration-
Pilot Scale Successes ......................................................................
210
7.2.1
Citric Acid (2 Million Tons/Year) ...............................................
210
7.2.2
Lactic Acid (400,000 Tons/Year) ................................................
211
7.2.3
Fumaric Acid (90,000 Tons/Year) ...............................................
213
7.2.4
Succinic Acid (270,000 Tons/Year) ..............................................
214
7.2.5
Itaconic Acid (41,400 Tons/Year) ................................................
216
D. Porro (*) • P. Branduardi
Department of Biotechnology and Bioscience, University of Milano Bicocca, Piazza della
Scienza 2, 20126 Milano, Italy
e-mail: danilo.porro@unimib.it; paola.branduardi@unimib.it
# Springer International Publishing AG 2017
A.A. Sibirny (ed.), Biotechnology of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-58829-2_7
205

7.3
Renewable Yeast and Fungal Organic Acids ............................................
217
7.4
Conclusions and Perspectives .............................................................
218
References .......................................................................................
221
7.1
Introduction
Building block chemicals as molecules with multiple functional groups having the
potential to be transformed into new families of useful high-value bio-based
chemicals or biomaterials. Organic acids are low-molecular-weight organic
compounds with one or more acidic groups and are considered key building
block chemicals, which have huge markets and are commonly reﬁned from
petroleum.
On 2004, the US Department of Energy (DOE) (Werpy et al. 2004) identiﬁed
12 building block chemicals that can be produced from sugars via biological or
chemical conversions (Box 7.1). Since this ﬁrst report, many studies have been
carried out to develop microbial cell factories and accompanying bioreﬁneries for
their industrial productions. Bioreﬁnery development has two strategic goals: the
displacement of petroleum in favour of renewable raw materials (i.e. mainly an
energy
goal)
and
the
establishment
of
a
robust
bio-based
industry
(an environmental and economic goal).
About 70% of the ﬁrst top 12 building blocks suggested on 2004 are organic
acids. All of them, including succinic acid, 2,5-furan dicarboxylicacid,
Box 7.1: The 2004 DOE’s and Revised 2010 Top Sugar-Derived Building Block
Chemicals
2004 (Werpy et al. 2004)
1,4 Diacids (Succinic acid, Fumaric acid and Malic acid), 2,5 Furan dicar-
boxylic acid, 3 Hydroxy propionic acid, Aspartic acid, Glucaric acid,
Glutamic acid, Itaconic acid, Levulinic acid, 3-Hydroxybutyrolactone, Glyc-
erol, Sorbitol, Aylitol/Arabinitol.
2010 (Bozell and Petersen 2010)
Ethanol, Furans, Glycerol and derivatives, Biohydrocarbons, Lactic acid,
Succinic acid, 3Hydroxypropionic acid/aldehyde, Levulinic acid, Sorbitol,
Xylitol.
206
D. Porro and P. Branduardi

3-hydroxypropionic acid (3-HPA), aspartic acid, glutamic acid, itaconic acid
and levulinic acid, have been already or are being commercialized. Bio-based
production of glucaric acid (included in the top 12 list) has been actively
pursued by Rivertop Renewables, and it is awaiting for commercial announce-
ment like recently declared by BIO (Biotechnology Innovation Organization
2016). Furthermore, among the top ten chemicals revisited in the 2010 report
(Bozell and Petersen 2010), see Box 7.1, also lactic acid has been already
commercialized. In addition to these organic acids, several companies are
currently piloting production of adipic acid from glucaric acid, which is
among the top building blocks. Adipic acid is a precursor to nylon and can be
used in coatings and detergents. In this respect, Rennovia is currently operating
a pilot project at the Johnson Matthey Process Technologies R&D Center in
Stockton, England, converting bio-based glucaric acid to adipic acid. Verdezyne
is also operating a pilot production facility in Carlsbad, California, and
BioAmber has formed a partnership with Celexion to produce adipic acid
from succinic acid. Genomatica, California, began efforts in 2014 to commer-
cialize bio-based production of adipic acid and other nylon intermediates
(reviewed by Biotechnology Innovation Organization 2016). Even if not
included in the top building block chemicals, also acrylic and the aliphatic
diacid 1,18-octadecanedioic acids (ODDA) deserve attention. Acrylic acid is
polymerized and used as an absorbent in diapers and hygiene products as well as
in coatings, adhesives, carpets and fabrics. Cargill is operating a pilot scale
production plant fermenting 3-HPA and converting it to acrylic acid. Cargill
acquired Colorado-based OPX
Biotechnologies and its proprietary of a
fermentation-based process for 3-HPA. The long chain dicarboxylic acid
(ODDA) is also a building block for polyurethanes and polyamides. Elevance
Renewable Sciences is producing Inherent™C18 diacid at a bioreﬁnery in
Gresik, Indonesia, using the company’s proprietary oleﬁn metathesis chemical
technology (Biotechnology Innovation Organization 2016) (Elevance Renew-
able
Sciences
claimed
a
microbial
pathway
too,
see
Conclusions
and
Perspectives).
About 36% (succinic, fumaric, itaconic and lactic acids) of the 2004-DOE’s
and 2010 derived top organic chemicals are produced by yeast or fungi, while the
remaining are essentially still produced by chemical synthesis (about 45%; malic,
2,5 furan dicarboxylic, aspartic, glucaric and levulinic acids) or from bacteria
cells (about 18%; 3 hydroxypropionic acid and glutamic acids) Table 7.1 and
Fig. 7.1.
7
Production of Organic Acids by Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi
207

Table 7.1 Production of the 2004 DOE’s and 2010 revised top organic acids: overview of the
commercialization or demonstration-pilot scale successes
–2,5 Furan dicarboxylic acid
C6H4O5, 156.09 g mol1, pKa 2.28
ADM (USA), Ava Biochem (CH), Avantium (NL), Corbion (NL)
–Chemical (dehydration and oxydation)
–3 Hydroxy propionic acid
C3H6O3, 90.08 g mol1, pKa 4.87
Cargill (USA) and Novozymes (DK), Perstorp (S)
–Fermentation (Escherichia coli)
–Aspartic acid
C4H7NO4, 133.10 g mol1, pKa 3.9
Ajinomoto (J), Grace Fine Chemical Manufacturing (USA)
–Enzymatic conversion from Fumaric acid
–Fumaric acid
C4H4O4, 116.07 g mol1, pKa1 3.03, pKa2 4.44
MBI international (USA), Myriant corporation (USA)
–Chemical (oxydation and isomerization) and Fermentation (Rhizopus oryzae)
–Glucaric acid
C6H10O8, 210.138 g mol1, pKa 2.83
Cargill (USA), Rennovia Inc. (USA), Rivertop renewables (USA)
–Chemical (oxidation)
–Glutamic acid
C5H9NO4, 147.13 g mol1, pKa1 2.10, pKa2 4.07
Many companies
–Fermentation (Corynebacterium glutammicum)
–Itaconic acid
C5H6O4, 130.10 g mol1, pKa1 3.85, pKa2 5.45
Cargill (USA), Itaconix corporation (USA), Qingdao kehai biochemistry Co., Ltd (CHN)
–Fermentation (Aspergillus terreus)
–Lactic acid
C3H6O3, 90.07948 g mol1, pKa 3.86
Blue Marble Biomaterials (USA), Calysta (USA), Cargill (USA), Corbion (NL), Galactic
(USA), Glycosbio (USA), Myriant Corporation (USA), Natureworks (PLA) (USA), Plaxica
(UK), PTT Global Chemical (also PLA) (Thailand), Solegear (PLA) (CAN)
–Fermentation (yeast)
–Levulinic acid
C5H8O3, 116.11 g mol1, pKa 4.78
Arzeda (USA), Avantium (NL), Bioﬁne Technology LLC (USA), GF Biochemicals (IT),
Segetis (USA)
–Chemical (acid treatment—dehydration, hydration)
–Malic acid
C4H6O5, 134.09 g mol1, pKa1 3.40, pKa2 5.20
Different companies
(continued)
208
D. Porro and P. Branduardi

Table 7.1 (continued)
–Chemical and Fermentation (malic acid is currently produced from fumaric or maleic acid,
both derived from maleic anhydride. The conversion from fumaric to malic is done using
fermentation)
–Succinic acid
C4H6O4, 118.09 g mol1, pKa1 4.2, pKa2 5.6
Bioamber (USA), Myriant (USA), Reverdia (NL), Succinity (D)
–Fermentation (yeast)
Sugars
Glutamic acid
Phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP)
Pyruvic acid
-
-
Lactic acid
Acetyl-CoA
3-hydroxypropionic 
acid
Oxalacetate
Citrate
Itaconic acid
α-ketoglutarate
Succinate
Fumarate
Malate
Aspartic acid
Glycerol
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
A
Sucrose
Sugars
Products
Glucose
Fructose
Levulinic acid
Acid 
treatment
Oxidation
Glucaric acid
Dehydration
Hydroxymethylfurfural
Oxidation
2,5-Furandicarboxylic acid
Levulinic acid
Hydration
B
Fig. 7.1 Metabolic and chemical pathways for the production of the 2004 DOE’s and top ten
revised organic acids from biomass [redrawn from Choi et al. (2015)]
7
Production of Organic Acids by Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi
209

7.2
Renewable Yeast and Fungal Organic Acids
Commercialization or Demonstration-Pilot Scale
Successes
From a chronological point of view, citric acid has been the ﬁrst organic acid
industrially produced by wild type/recombinant yeast/fungi followed by lactic acid,
fumaric acid, succinic acid and itaconic acid.
7.2.1
Citric Acid (2 Million Tons/Year)
Citric acid (2-hydroxy-propane-1,2,3-tricarboxylic acid) (C6H8O7, 192.12 g mol1,
pKa1 ¼ 3.13, pKa2 ¼ 4.76, pKa3 ¼ 6.39) is a key intermediate metabolite in the TCA
cycle and derives its name from the Latin word citrus, the citrus tree, the fruit of
which resembles a lemon. Citric acid is a universal intermediate product of metab-
olism, and its traces are found in virtually all plants and animals. The acid was ﬁrst
isolated from lemon juice in 1784 by Carl Scheele, a Swedish chemist (1742–1786).
Citric acid was ﬁrst produced commercially in England around 1826 from imported
Italian lemons (Papagianni 2007). At around 1880, the ﬁrm Charles Pﬁzer devel-
oped a chemical synthesis route. Different synthetic routes using different starting
materials have since been published.
In the early twentieth century, surface culture methods using Aspergillus
niger were implemented and in the middle of the century further developed
towards a submerged process. Global citric acid production has reached 2 million
tons/year (Sauer et al. 2014). The vast majority of this is produced via fermen-
tation using A. niger (Papagianni 2007) although many microorganisms can be
used to produce citric acid (A. wentii, A. awamori, A. foetidus, A. fenicis,
A. fonsecalus, A. fumaricus, A. luchensis, A. saitoi and A. usumii, Candida lipolytica,
C. tropicalis, C. guilliermondii, C. intermedia, C. parapsilosis, C. zeylanoides,
C. ﬁbriae, C. subtropicalix, C. oleophila from the genus Candida, among others).
Speciﬁc strains that are capable of overproducing citric acid have been devel-
oped for various types of fermentation processes. The yield of citric acid from these
strains often exceeds 70% of the theoretical yield on the carbon source (Papagianni
2007). The main companies producing citric acid are ADM (USA), Cargill (USA),
Tate and Lyle (UK) and Vogelbusch Biocommodities GmbH (Austria). Citric acid
is a well-known organic acid that is extensively used in the food and beverage
industry as it combines a pleasant taste with low toxicity and palatability. It serves
several functions in the food formulation, like sterilization, ﬂavour ﬁxation and
enhancement, bacterial stabilization and standardization of acid levels. Further-
more, it can be used as a chelating agent as it efﬁciently complexes metal ions.
Despite a long and successful history of production of citric acid, there is still no
straight explanation for the biochemical basis of the process to consistently explain
the observed behaviour(s) of this fermentation. The critical parameters, which must
be addressed to get an efﬁcient production, include at least (1) high substrate
concentration, (2) low and ﬁnite content of nitrogen and (3) certain trace metals,
210
D. Porro and P. Branduardi

thorough maintenance of (4) high dissolved oxygen and low (5) pH fermentation
broth values. Many of the biochemical and physiological mechanisms underlying
the process remain unknown. As simple sake of example of the complexity of the
biochemical production, in A. niger citric acid itself, is a potent inhibitor of
glycolysis. Citric acid effectively inhibits phosphofructokinase I (Pfk). Until
recently it was generally accepted that a certain, relatively high, intracellular
ammonium concentration would relieve this inhibition (Papagianni 2007; Sauer
et al. 2008). However, Papagianni showed that the intracellular ammonium con-
centration is low throughout the citric acid production process (Papagianni et al.
2005). Legisa and Mattey described post-translational modiﬁcations of Pfk I trig-
gered by a drop of the intracellular pH and a cAMP peak before the onset of citric
acid accumulation (2007). The enzyme is cleaved and phosphorylated leading to a
fragment that is highly active and highly inducible by ammonium, but less suscep-
tible to citrate inhibition, which explains why glycolysis is not repressed. The
ﬁndings described so far relate directly to metabolic pathways and enzymatic
activities. However, the correct morphological appearance of the cells is also a
crucial prerequisite for efﬁcient organic acid production (Dai et al. 2004; Magnuson
and Lasure 2004; Grimm et al. 2005; Berovic and Legisa 2007).
Growth in the form of pellets of <1 mm in diameter is associated with high
production rates and yields (Magnuson and Lasure 2004). To date the conditions for
obtaining such pellets have been determined empirically (Liu et al. 2008; Liao et al.
2007). The regulating signals involved remain unclear, but investigations are
necessary and still ongoing. Because of all this and considering the ever-increasing
demand for citric acid, alternative fermentation processes using high-yield yeast
strains like Yarrowia lipolytica and different Candida species are investigated for
its production (Sauer et al. 2014). Many other yeast species have been proved to
accumulate citric acid. Among these are Hansenula, Pichia, Debaromyces, Torula,
Torulopsis, Kloekera, Saccharomyces and Zygosaccharomyces species (Papagianni
2007).
In contrast with all the organic acid productions analysed in this section, citric
acid production from A. niger is carried out in Air-Lift bioreactor (Vs Stirred Tank).
7.2.2
Lactic Acid (400,000 Tons/Year)
Fermentation processes that involve the production of lactic acid have been used in
food preparation since centuries.
Lactic acid has been included in the promising platform chemicals in 2010, and
it is commercially available and produced by microorganisms (Sauer et al. 2008,
2010). The market size of the lactic acid is about 400,000 tons/year (NNFCC 2010,
NNFCC Renewable Chemicals Fact sheet: LacticAcid, available at: http://www.
nnfcc.co.uk/publications/nnfcc-renewable-chemicals-factsheet-lactic-acid;
Choi
et al. 2015).
Many companies have already commercialized bio-based lactic acid. First
productions have been obtained using bacterial cells. Lactic acid has versatile
7
Production of Organic Acids by Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi
211

properties as a precursor for various chemicals and materials, and about 40% of
produced lactic acid has been used in manufacturing polylactic acid (PLA) (Bozell
and Petersen 2010). Figure 7.2 shows the main compounds that can be obtained
starting from lactic acid. Indeed, one of the earliest renewable chemicals to be
commercialized has been polylactic acid (PLA), which was truly a tipping point for
renewable chemicals. PLA is commonly used in food wrap and utensils and can be
made into textile ﬁbers. Since 2003 NatureWorks has produced PLA at a facility in
Blair, Nebraska, with a capacity of 140,000 metric tons. NatureWorks markets the
product as Ingeo® biopolymer. Corbion more recently announced that it will build a
bio-based PLA plant with an annual capacity of 75 kilotons and expand by
25 kilotons/year its existing lactide plant in Rayong Province, Thailand (Biotech-
nology Innovation Organization 2016). PLA is made through sequential chemical
reactions of lactide formation followed by polymerization, but it has been very
elegantly proved that it can be also produced at intracellular level (Jung and Lee
2011). The costs for the required high degree of lactic acid puriﬁcation still
contribute signiﬁcantly to the overall production costs, and this relates directly to
the choice of the production organism. Lactic acid bacteria are natural producers of
the desired acid. Processes based on lactic acid bacteria have been established long
time ago. High concentrations of lactate (well over 100 g/L) and high volumetric
productivities (10–23 g/L h) can be reached. Metabolic engineering allows the
heterologous production of lactic acid with bacteria and yeasts. However, only the
production from yeasts appears well suited for this task due to their tolerance to low
pH conditions and the possibility to grow them on mineral media. Nevertheless,
volumetric productivities are signiﬁcantly lower compared to bacterial values under
optimal conditions.
Lactic acid
2,3-Pentanedione
Ethyl lactate
Acetaldehyde
Propionic acid
Lactide
1,2-Propanediol
Polylactic acid (PLA)
3-Pentanone
Pentanol
Propyelene oxide
Polyether polyol
Acrylic acid
Pyruvic acid
Fig. 7.2 Lactic acid and derivatives
212
D. Porro and P. Branduardi

For Saccharomyces cerevisiae, production rates of about 1 g/L h, reaching a pH
of about 2.5 (well below the pKa value, Table 7.1), have been published. While data
for industrially achieved productivities are not available, the order of magnitude
can be estimated from the values above.
Information about the properties of the engineered yeast is not available too.
However, high yield and productions deﬁnitely require a strong limitation of the
production of ethanol and the development of robust cell factories (Sauer et al.
2008, 2010).
They remain well behind the values of bacterial production hosts. Nevertheless,
the advantage of the easier downstream processing outweighs this fact, so industrial
production of lactic acid is taking place with recombinant yeasts as production host
(Sauer et al. 2010; Porro and Branduardi 2012).
7.2.3
Fumaric Acid (90,000 Tons/Year)
Fumaric acid is a key intermediate metabolite in the TCA cycle. It was ﬁrst isolated
from the plant Fumaria ofﬁcinalis, from which it derives its name.
The 2008 world’s production of fumaric acid, about 90,000 tons/year, is derived
overwhelmingly from petroleum (Roa Engel et al. 2008; MBI International 2011).
The majority of global fumaric acid production, approximately 60%, is used for
the production of resins and unsaturated polyesters (UPRs). A more modest, though
still signiﬁcant (>30% of global production), portion of global fumaric acid
production is used in food and beverage applications (Roa Engel et al. 2008). The
use of fumaric acid in food applications is based upon its acidulent, preservative,
ﬂavour enhancing and dough improvement characteristics, which differentiate
fumaric acid from other more general purpose acidulates, such as citric acid and
phosphoric acid. The food and beverage application is an attractive initial entry
point for a bio-based fumaric acid as it leads a higher price point and is an
application where the bio-based manufacture can give a natural product a market-
able differentiation over a petrochemical-derived product.
Although the current predominant route to fumaric acid is petrochemical, via
maleic anhydride (using either benzene or butane as a feedstock) at high
temperatures (90–100 C), with high product yield (% w/w) 112 g/g (Lohbeck
et al. 1990; Roa Engel et al. 2008), fermentation processes for the production of
bio-based fumaric acid has been developed and reported in the literature, mainly
using Rhizopus species (Roa Engel et al. 2008). Generally speaking, these ﬁrst
processes were limited in terms of commercial utility due to undesirable
characteristics associated with the requirement for CaCO3 as the neutralizing base
(the process is conducted at close to neutral pH), being the calcium fumarate salt
insoluble. As the insoluble product accumulates during the fermentation, the broth
becomes thixotropic, increasing the viscosity, limiting oxygen mass transfer and
increasing the power input required to keep the culture broth well mixed. Formation
of an insoluble product also complicates the product recovery. A broth heating step
is required to solubilize the calcium fumarate and allows it to be separated from the
7
Production of Organic Acids by Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi
213

biomass and other fermentation broth solids. The use of CaCO3 as the base also
results in the generation of gypsum (CaSO4H2O) during the separation/puriﬁcation
of the fumaric acid. The gypsum by-product constitutes an industrial waste, and the
associated cost of disposal negatively impacts the overall process economics
(Gangl et al. 1990).
More recently, with the desire to replace petrochemical-derived chemicals and
fuels with bio-based, renewable sources (due to economic, energetic and environ-
mental concerns), the possibility of producing fumaric acid via fermentation
became more attractive. This would be especially true if the major detrimental
characteristics of the “traditional” fermentation process could be overcome. Roa
Engel et al. 2011 studied the inﬂuence of the pH, working volume and shaking
frequency on cell cultivation (Rhizopus oryzae) that helped to identify the best
conditions to obtain appropriate pellet morphologies and interesting productions.
Using these pellets, the effects of pH and CO2 addition were studied to determine
the best conditions to produce fumaric acid in batch fermentations under nitrogen-
limited conditions with glucose as carbon source. CO2 was supplied to achieve low
pH instead of supplying carbonate salt. CO2 is also used by the cells for pyruvate
carboxylation. However, it has been shown that the productivity of the fermentation
is not negatively affected when the inlet air is not blended with CO2, suggesting that
the CO2 produced by the cells is sufﬁcient to fulﬁl the CO2 requirements for
pyruvate carboxylation.
Decreasing either the fermentation pH below 5 or increasing the CO2 content of
the inlet air above 10% was unfavourable for the cell-speciﬁc productivity, fumaric
acid yield (g/g) and fumaric acid titer (g/L). However, switching off the pH control
late in the batch phase did not affect these performance parameters and allowed
achieving pH of 3.6. Consequently, relatively modest amounts of inorganic base
were required for pH control, while recovery of the acid is relatively easier at pH 3.6.
Concluding, a novel fermentation and one-step recovery process were developed
that allowed produced titers of >80 g/L with a productivity of 1.8 g/L h and 0.57
(g/g glucose) yield. The process was scaled to 2000 L pilot scale. The economic
analysis projected interesting production costs for an appropriate use in the food
and beverage application.
Recycling and reuse of the base were demonstrated and incorporated into the
process. The ability of the organism to produce fumaric acid from other carbon
sources and biomass hydrolysate was also demonstrated (MBI International 2011).
7.2.4
Succinic Acid (270,000 Tons/Year)
Succinic acid is a chemical building block that replaces petroleum-based maleic
anhydride in polyesters, alkyd resins, polyurethanes, plasticizers and solvents,
also used in the manufacture of food and pharmaceuticals among other products,
Fig. 7.3. The demand is predicted to expand to commodity chemical status
with 270,000 tons/year (Choi et al. 2015). Succinic acid is a key intermediate
metabolite in the TCA cycle and can be produced via the reductive or oxidative
214
D. Porro and P. Branduardi

pathway of TCA cycle or via the glyoxylate shunt (Fig. 7.1). Microbial produc-
tion of succinic acid has been actively studied using diverse microorganisms
including rumen bacteria such as Actinobacillus succinogenes, Mannheimia
succiniciproducens, Basﬁa succiniciproducens and other microorganisms such
as Escherichia coli, Anaerobiospirillum succiniciproducens, Corynebacterium
glutamicum and Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Choi et al. 2015).
Several companies have very recently commercialized bio-based routes to
succinic acid. Companies that are currently producing succinic acid include
Myriant, which is operating a 13,600 metric ton per year facility in Lake Provi-
dence, Louisiana. BioAmber piloted its bio-based process for succinic acid at a
3000 metric ton facility in Pomacle, France, and is now producing 17,000 metric
tons per year in Sarnia, Ontario, Canada. Reverdia, a joint venture between DSM
and Roquette, has built a 10,000 metric ton per year facility in Cassano Spinola,
Italy. And Succinity, a joint venture between BASF and Corbion, is due to start up a
25,000 metric ton per year facility in Barcelona, Spain (Biotechnology Innovation
Organization 2016).
The company Reverdia recently announced that they have produced 100 g/L of
succinic acid by fermentation of engineered S. cerevisiae. The proprietary yeast-
based fermentation process, which operates at a much lower pH than competing
processes, allows succinic acid to be produced with signiﬁcantly higher energy
efﬁciencies compared to the bacteria or chemical traditional method.
Data for industrially achieved productivities are not available; however the
engineering strategy of the S. cerevisiae cell factory includes a combination of
the reductive and oxidative TCA cycle (Raab and Lang 2011). In brief, a yeast was
constructed with deletions for the genes of succinate DH and isocitrate DH, which
redirected carbon ﬂux into the glyoxylate cycle in the cytosol, thus bypassing two
oxidative decarboxylation steps in the TCA cycle; at the same time, this redirection
Succinic acid
1,4-Butanediol
Succindiamide
1,4-Diaminobutane
Succinonitrile
Dimethyl 1,4-Butanedioate (DBE)/
Dimethyl Succinate
Polybutylene succinate (PBS)
N-Methyl-2-
pyrrolidone (NMP)
2-Pyrrolidone
Tetrahydrofuran
(THF)
γ-Butyrolactone
Fig. 7.3 Succinic acid and derivatives
7
Production of Organic Acids by Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi
215

circumvents problems of mitochondrial transport of succinate. The pathways lead-
ing to the accumulation of secondary metabolites like glycerol and ethanol have
been deleted. In the cell factory, the overexpression of the transporter leading to the
accumulation of succinic acid in the culture medium has also been considered.
Remarkably, it should be underlined that the production of succinic acid from
engineered S. cerevisiae cells is also one of the ﬁrst bio-based processes
sequestering carbon dioxide in the production process. The new production facility
will, for the time being, use starch derivatives as feedstock. Of course, in the longer
term, the aspiration is to switch to second-generation feedstocks (lignocellulosic
biomass) (Porro and Branduardi 2012; Sauer et al. 2014).
7.2.5
Itaconic Acid (41,400 Tons/Year)
In contrast with all the organic acids analysed on this section, itaconic acid is used
exclusively in non-food applications. Itaconic acid is not a primary metabolite, so
both the anabolism and catabolism of this acid are relatively rare metabolic
attributes.
This acid was selected as a top building block chemical in the 2004 report, but it
was excluded in the 2010 report because the market size was not expanded as
expected. However, itaconic acid is a building block for adhesives and sealants,
ﬁnishing agents, paint and coating additives, detergents and cleaners, absorbents
and dispersants (Fig. 7.4). Itaconic acid can replace banned chemical phosphates in
detergents, and recently, one company, Itaconix Corporation, has commercialized
the fermentation technology, using Aspergillus terreus for the production of this
organic acid from carbohydrates. This company operates a large-scale production
facility in Stratham, New Hampshire (USA), marketing a growing line of itaconic
Itaconic acid
2-Methyl-1,4-butanediol
3- & 4-Methyl N-Methyl-2-
pyrrolidone
3-Methylpyrrolidine
3- & 4-Methyl-γ-butyrolactone
3-Methyl tetrahydrofuran
Itaconic diamide
2-Methyl-1,4-butanediamine
Fig. 7.4 Itaconic acid and derivatives
216
D. Porro and P. Branduardi

acid applications and polyitaconic acid. Itaconix recently announced its acquisition
through merger by UK-based Revolymer plc, a specialty chemical company.
The market size is relatively small (41,400 tons/year in 2011—Choi et al. 2015),
but it is projected to more than 410,000 tons/year in 2020 through its applications in
producing diverse value-added products. The most promising market is a superab-
sorbent polymer such as poly(acrylamide-co-itaconic acid). This super absorbent
polymer has been used as an absorbent for water and aqueous solutions including
diapers and feminine hygiene products. While these superabsorbent polymers have
been conventionally produced from poly(acrylic acid), the polymerized bio-based
itaconic acid can be a good alternative due to its similar properties (Choi et al. 2015;
see also Weastra sro).
In addition, itaconic acid can be converted to the methylmethacrylate (MMA),
which is the monomer of poly(MMA), commercially known as Plexiglass. The
current market size of MMA is over than 3.2 million tons/year, and thus the market
size of itaconic acid can be potentially increased (Choi et al. 2015; see also Weastra
sro).
7.3
Renewable Yeast and Fungal Organic Acids
In the previous section, we reviewed the commercial aspects of current or piloting
large-scale industrial processes for yeast or fungal organic acid productions. In this
respect, yeast and fungi are workhorses for the production of organic acids by
fermentation. Like already underlined, one of the main reasons of this is the
relatively robustness of these cell factories to low pH values. Yeast and fungi
also found applications in the production of yeast-fungi biomasses, foods, feeds,
enzymes, pharmaceuticals and ﬁne and bulk chemicals (Porro and Branduardi
2012).
Organic acids are broadly distributed in nature and have attracted considerable
attention for their role in natural ecology (Dutton and Evans 1996; Jones 1998;
Liaud et al. 2014) and their potential industrial applications in any sector of a
modern society. They could be produced at industrial level using wild-type or
engineered cells. Yeast and fungi are already producers, even if not at economic
level, of important organic acids like acetic acid, ascorbic acid, butyric acid,
epoxysuccinic acid, formic acid, gallic acid, gluconic acid, isobutyric acid, isocitric
acid, kojic acid, malic acid, oxalic acid, oxaloacetic acid, propionic acid, pyruvic
acid, tartaric acid and α-ketoglutaric acid, to mention the most relevant.
Even prokaryotic cell factories can be used for the production of organic acids.
However, these prokaryotic cells require neutral pH growth conditions and conse-
quently secrete the salt forms of organic acids, which require cost-intensive acidiﬁ-
cation and precipitation for conversion to the desired products.
Advances and improvements in metabolic engineering and bioprocess develop-
ment will make yeasts and fungi the best candidates for environmentally responsi-
ble and economically feasible fermentations processes for the production of organic
acids.
7
Production of Organic Acids by Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi
217

7.4
Conclusions and Perspectives
Analysts predict a rapid expansion of renewable chemical production in the near
future based on planned capacity expansion or new construction. McKinsey &
Co. estimates that there were 204 billion euros in sales of bio-based products in
2012, with biofuels and plant extracts comprising more than half. Sales of renew-
able chemicals represented 9% of the 2281 billion euros in worldwide chemical
sales in 2012. By 2020, McKinsey expects bio-based products to make up 11% of
the 3130 billion euros global chemical market. Sales of bio-based products would
reach 345–406 billion euros by 2020. While biofuels and plant extracts continue to
comprise half of the projected sales of bio-based products in 2020, McKinsey
expects the highest growth rates in sales of new biopolymers and renewable
chemicals, biocatalysts for industrial processes and biologic medicines, as well as
biofuels (Biotechnology Innovation Organization 2016).
In April 2016, the US White House Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy
released a report on Advanced Manufacturing. This roadmap emphasizes that
growth
of
the
bio-based
economy
is
dependent
on
advanced
bio-based
manufacturing and engineering biology. According to the roadmap, synthetic
biology (Glieder et al. 2016) will promote the commercial development of new
renewable chemicals via faster and cheaper methodologies that use appropriate
design of microorganisms.
In this context, the constraints for creating a viable bio-business with the
production of commodities with a low selling price starting from renewable
resources are still tight. In order to establish an economically viable industrial
process, the classical parameters to fulﬁl are titer, yield and productivity (Porro
et al. 2014). Titer (product concentration in the fermentation broth) is important to
keep the puriﬁcation costs as low as possible. Yield (product per substrate ratio) is
important to gain sufﬁcient revenue from the invested substrate costs. Productivity
(product per bioreactor volume and time) relates to the size of the bioreactors and
therefore to the investment costs. Traditionally, to achieve useful values of these
parameters, the focus for strain development was strictly on the metabolic pathway
responsible for the production (Bailey 1991).
Remarkable microbial successful commercial examples outside the yeast and
fungi world are the production of octadecanedioic acid (ODDA) (this C18 diacid is
now commercially available from two pathways, one using microbial fermenta-
tion—no more data are available—and one using metathesis of natural oils,
Elevance Renewable Sciences, USA), acetone (Green Biologics, USA), artemisinin
(Amyris, USA), biofuels (many companies in USA, EU, ASIA), bioisoprene
(DuPont Ind. Biosciences, Goodyear, USA and Ajinomoto, J), hydrocortisone
(Sanoﬁ, F), isoprene (GlycosBio, USA), polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA, Metabolix’s,
USA), polytetrahydrofuran (from renewable 1,4-BDO, BASF, D), resveratrol
(Fluxome, DK), 1,2-propanediol (ADM, USA), 1,3 propanediol (1,3-PDO™,
DuPont Tate & Lyle, USA) and 1,4-butanediol (1,4-BDO) (BASF, D) (Novamont,
It), with many other new compounds at the pilot plant phase (Biotechnology
Innovation Organization 2016; Choi et al. 2015; Chen and Nielsen 2016).
218
D. Porro and P. Branduardi

Analysing all these bioprocesses, it is clear that the rational engineering was ﬁrst
focused on overexpressing genes for enzymes involved in the pathway and
knocking out genes responsible for competing reactions (to abolish by-product
formation). However, in most cases, this is not sufﬁcient to come even close to
industrial relevance. Aspects related to the metabolic balance including (1) stoichi-
ometry, (2) redox and (3) energy household need to be balanced. Furthermore,
(4) ﬂux coupling, (5) irreversible reactions and (6) process and cell factory robust-
ness add to the efﬁciency of the pathway when the balances are fulﬁlled (Table 7.2).
This last property (i.e. cell robustness) deserves a deeper consideration. It is
quite obvious that a functional proteome is a prerequisite for a stable phenotype of
production when a cell factory is challenged during an industrial process. To cite
Prof. Radman: “the proteome sustains and maintains life, whereas the genome
ensures the perpetuation of life by renewing the proteome, a process contingent on
a preexisting proteome that repairs, replicates, and expresses the genome” (Krisko
and Radman 2013). However, very often exactly the conditions of an industrial
process elicit damages to the proteome and of course to the metabolome. In most
cases, oxidative stress plays an important detrimental role. More generally, the
occurrence of free radical is quite common in industrial process conditions, trigger-
ing a cascade of negative effects on different cellular networks. There are a growing
number of examples where engineering cellular components belonging to the
general mechanisms of scavenging activities result in an improved phenotype.
Table 7.2 Metabolic features constituting successful microbial production processes (rewritten
from Porro et al. 2014)
Metabolic feature
Signiﬁcance
Thermodynamic
feasibility
Thermodynamics is ultimately decisive if a chemical reaction or
metabolic pathway is possible
Stoichiometric balance
The theoretical stoichiometric yield—especially of carbon atoms—
deﬁnes the potential economical feasibility of a production process
Redox balance
If substrate and product have a different degree of reduction
re-equilibration of the electron balance leads either to by-product
formation or energy overﬂow
Energy balance
If production requires metabolic energy, part of the substrate is lost
for its supply
Flux coupling
Coupling the product ﬂux to the central carbon ﬂux by a shared
reaction may create a strong driving force towards product
formation
Irreversible reactions
Including an irreversible step, like decarboxylation, creates a
metabolic driving force pulling ﬂux towards the product
Transport
High production must be associated to an efﬁcient accumulation of
the ﬁnal compound at extracellular level. Uptake of the substrate
and transport among different organelles and the cytoplasm are
included
Microbial and bioprocess
robustness
Including tolerance to the ﬁnal product and to adverse bioprocess
conditions (i.e. low pH, high T, low RT, low OTR, high substrate
concentration, etc.)
7
Production of Organic Acids by Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi
219

This is the case of S. cerevisiae strains engineered for ascorbic acid production,
resulting in cells more robust against a series of stressors, among which organic
acids (Martani et al. 2013) or overexpressing gene(s) of the glutathione pathway
resulting in a less sensitive phenotype to toxic compounds released from lignocel-
lulose pretreatment (Ask et al. 2013). Such modiﬁcations determine a complete
reorganization of the cells, inﬂuencing many pathways, not only directly related to
the operated modiﬁcation or to the desired productive pathway. Indeed, altering
master regulators of general cellular rewiring represents a possible strategy to
evoke shaded potential that may accomplish the desirable features. The
S. cerevisiae poly(A) binding protein Pab1, as stress granules component, was
selected in our laboratory as the target for obtaining widespread alterations in
mRNA metabolism, resulting in stress-tolerant yeast phenotypes. Firstly, we
demonstrated that the modulation of Pab1 levels improves robustness against
different stressors, including acetic acid. Secondly, the mutagenesis of PAB1 and
the application of a speciﬁc screening protocol on acetic acid-enriched medium
allowed the isolation of the further ameliorated mutant pab1 A60-9. These ﬁndings
pave the way for a novel approach to unlock industrially promising phenotypes
through the modulation of a post-transcriptional regulatory element (Martani et al.
2015).
A last and important consideration should be dedicated to the transport of the
ﬁnal product. Organic acids in their salt-charged status cannot diffuse across the
cellular membranes, while the lipophilic undissociated form of the acid (RCOOH)
may permeate the plasma membrane by simple diffusion, even if with a very small
efﬁciency (this is the key base principle of a weak organic acid as preservatives).
Consequently, high organic acids productions must be associated to the secretion
and accumulation of the ﬁnal compound at extracellular level, see Table 7.2 and
Fig. 7.5. Surprisingly, of all the industrial organic acid productions described in the
Sect. 7.2, only for succinic acid the transport of the ﬁnal compound at extracellular
level has been taken into consideration during the rational design of the cell factory.
Diametrically opposed is the scenario for the production of lactic acid from recom-
binant yeast cells, where secretion of the organic acid is still based on the activity of
one or more endogenous, probably non-speciﬁc, organic acid transporter(s).
For all the other organic acids, the accumulation at extracellular level is obtained
throughout the endogenous transporter(s), even if in most cases it is still unknown/
uncharacterised. It can be easily anticipated that engineering of the plasma
membranes, as well as the development of synthetic membranes, for improving
the efﬁciency of the transport and reducing the passive diffusion of the undissoci-
ated form back inside the cells, will lead to great developments.
Finally, it might be worthwhile to rethink the organic acid chemistry and to
consider which compounds can be produced efﬁciently by microbial activity (and
which not) and how to use them reasonably. Petrochemistry essentially developed
by the quest to ﬁnd applications for abundant substrates. In most cases, the involved
chemistry is focused on the introduction of functional groups. Today biotechnology
is dedicated to the replacement of current platform chemicals, developed and used
by petrochemistry. Starting from biomass, this generally involves reduction of the
220
D. Porro and P. Branduardi

number of functional groups. In other words, the starting material is completely
different, and the required chemistry is different. Furthermore, most of the classical
building block molecules are not efﬁciently produced naturally. We already suggest
a paradigm shift to produce the right chemicals. This implies looking at chemistry
with an open mind: in many cases the aim is not to substitute existing processes or
molecules but more radically to reimagine them and their possible use (Porro et al.
2014).
Acknowledgement Authors acknowledge the support by FAR (Fondo di Ateneo per la Ricerca)
of the University of Milano-Bicocca. Works were also partially supported by the SYSBIO-Centre
of Systems Biology (SysBioNet, Italian Roadmap for ESFRI Research Infrastructure).
References
Ask M, Mapelli V, H€ock H, Olsson L, Bettiga M (2013) Engineering glutathione biosynthesis of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae increases robustness to inhibitors in pretreated lignocellulosic
materials. Microb Cell Fact 12:87
Bailey JE (1991) Toward a science of metabolic engineering. Science 252:1668–1675
CO2
•
•
•
Metabolic push
Metabolic pull
Flux coupling
Substrate
Irreversible step
O2
Redox and Energy Balance
Radicals •
Robustness
• •
•
•
•
•
Fig. 7.5 General concepts leading to high yield (g/g), productions (g/L) and productivities (g/L/h)
(see also Table 7.2). High yield are depending by the thermodynamic and stoichiometric
balances. Instead, uptake of the substrate and transport of the ﬁnal product in the medium
could strongly limit the productivity of the process. Metabolic push utilizes enhancement of the
main pathway as a driving force, while metabolic pull drives a pathway by depleting intermediate
products towards the end of the pathway. Flux coupling enforces an engineered reaction by
coupling it metabolically to a strong essential pathway. Including an irreversible step into an
engineered pathway creates a strong driving force towards the product. The accumulation of the
product is strongly dependent by the energy and redox balances. High productions and
productivities also require high cellular and bioprocess robustness
7
Production of Organic Acids by Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi
221

Berovic M, Legisa M (2007) Citric acid production. Biotechnol Annu Rev 13:303–343
Biotechnology Innovation Organization (BIO) (2016) Advancing the biobased economy: renew-
able chemical bioreﬁnery, commercialization, progress, and market opportunities, 2016 and
beyond. # 2016 Biotechnology Innovation Organization (BIO)
Bozell JJ, Petersen GR (2010) Technology development for the production of biobased products
from bioreﬁnery carbohydrates-the US Department of Energy’s “Top10” revisited. Green
Chem 12:539–554
Chen Y, Nielsen J (2016) Biobased organic acids production by metabolically engineered
microorganisms. Curr Opin Biotechnol 37:165–172
Choi S, Song CW, Shin JH, Lee SY (2015) Bioreﬁneries for the production of top building block
chemicals and their derivatives. Metab Eng 28:223–239
Dai Z, Mao X, Magnuson JK, Lasure LL (2004) Identiﬁcation of genes associated with morphol-
ogy in Aspergillus niger by using suppression subtractive hybridization. Appl Environ
Microbiol 70:2474–2485
Dutton MV, Evans CS (1996) Oxalate production by fungi: its role in pathogenicity and ecology in
the soil environment. Can J Microbiol 42:881–895
Gangl IC, Weigand WA, Keller FA (1990) Economic comparison of calcium fumarate and sodium
fumarate production by Rhizopus arrhizus. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 24–25:663–677
Glieder A, Kubicek CP, Mattanovich D, Wiltschi B, Sauer M (eds) (2016) Synthetic biology.
Springer, New York
Grimm LH, Kelly S, Krull R, Hempel DC (2005) Morphology and productivity of ﬁlamentous
fungi. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 69:375–384. https://www.bio.org/advancing-biobased-econ
omy-renewable-chemical-bioreﬁnery-commercialization-progress-and-market
Jones DL (1998) Organic acids in the rhizosphere – a critical review. Plant Soil 205:25–44
Jung YK, Lee SY (2011) Efﬁcient production of polylactic acid and its copolymers by metaboli-
cally engineered Escherichia coli. J Biotechnol 151(1):94–101
Krisko A, Radman M (2013) Phenotypic and genetic consequences of protein damage. PLoS
Genet 9(9):e1003810. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1003810
Legisa M, Mattey M (2007) Changes in primary metabolism leading to citric acid overﬂow in
Aspergillus niger. Biotechnol Lett 29:181–190
Liao W, Liu Y, Frear C, Chen S (2007) A new approach of pellet formation of a ﬁlamentous fungus
Rhizopus oryzae. Bioresour Technol 98:3415–3423
Liaud N, Ginie´s C, Navarro D, Fabre N, Crapart S, Herpoe¨l-Gimbert I, Levasseur A, Raouche S,
Sigoillot JC (2014) Exploring fungal biodiversity: organic acid production by 66 strains of
ﬁlamentous fungi. Fungal Biol Biotechnol 1:1–10
Liu Y, Liao W, Chen S (2008) Study of pellet formation of ﬁlamentous fungi Rhizopus oryzae
using a multiple logistic regression model. Biotechnol Bioeng 99:117–128
Lohbeck K, Haferkorn H, Fuhrmann W, Fedtke N (1990) Maleic and fumaric acids. In: Ullmann’s
encyclopedia of industrial chemistry, vol A16. Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany, pp 53–62
Magnuson JK, Lasure LL (2004) Organic acid production by ﬁlamentous fungi. In: Tkacz JS,
Lange L (eds) Advances in fungal biotechnology for industry, agriculture, and medicine.
Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York, pp 307–340
Martani F, Fossati T, Posteri R, Signori L, Porro D, Branduardi P (2013) Different response to
acetic acid stress in Saccharomyces cerevisiae wild-type and l-ascorbic acid-producing strains.
Yeast 30:365–378
Martani F, Marano F, Bertacchi S, Porro D, Branduardi P (2015) The Saccharomyces cerevisiae
poly(A) binding protein Pab1 as a target for eliciting stress tolerant phenotypes. Sci Rep
5:18318
MBI International, Lansing, MI (2011) Bioeconomy initiative at MBI International (ﬁnal report).
Department of Energy, Washington, DC. Ofﬁce of Basic Energy Sciences. Sponsored by
Department
of
Energy,
Washington,
DC.
https://ntrl.ntis.gov/NTRL/dashboard/
searchResults/titleDetail/DE20121034906.xhtml
222
D. Porro and P. Branduardi

NNFCC (2010) NNFCC renewable chemicals fact sheet: LacticAcid. http://www.nnfcc.co.uk/
publications/nnfcc-renewable-chemicals-factsheet-lactic-acid
Papagianni M (2007) Advances in citric acid fermentation by Aspergillus niger: biochemical
aspects, membrane transport and modeling. Biotechnol Adv 25:244–263
Papagianni M, Wayman F, Mattey M (2005) Fate and role of ammonium ions during fermentation
of citric acid by Aspergillus niger. Appl Environ Microbiol 71:7178–7186
Porro D, Branduardi P (2012) Chapter 14: Yeast biotechnology. In: Yeast, 2nd edn. Wiley-VCH,
Weinheim, Germany
Porro D, Branduardi P, Sauer M, Mattanovich D (2014) Old obstacles and new horizons for
microbial chemical production. Curr Opin Biotechnol 30C:101–106
Raab AM, Lang C (2011) Oxidative versus reductive succinic acid production in the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Bioeng Bugs 2:120–123
Roa Engel CA, Straathof AJJ, Zijlmans TW, van Gulik WM, van der Wielen LAM (2008) Fumaric
acid production by fermentation. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 78:379–389
Roa Engel CA, van Gulik WM, Marang L, van der Wielen LA, Straathof AJ (2011) Development
of a low pH fermentation strategy for fumaric acid production by Rhizopus oryzae. Enzym
Microb Technol 48(1):39–47
Sauer M, Porro D, Mattanovich D, Branduardi P (2008) Microbial production of organic acids:
expanding the markets. Trends Biotechnol 26:100–108
Sauer M, Porro D, Mattanovich D, Branduardi P (2010) 16 years research on lactic acid production
with yeast - ready for the market? Biotechnol Genet Eng Rev 27:229–256
Sauer M, Branduardi P, Rußmayer H, Marx H, Porro D, Mattanovich D (2014) Production of
metabolites and heterologous proteins. In: Pisˇkur J, Compagno C (eds) Molecular mechanisms
in yeast carbon metabolism. Springer, Berlin, pp 299–326
Weastra sro, Determination of market potential for selected platform chemicals. Itaconic acid,
Succinic acid, 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid. http://www.bioconsept.eu/wp-content/uploads/
BioConSepT_Market-potential-for-selected-platform chemicals_report1.pdf
Werpy T, Petersen G, Aden A, Bozel J, Holladay J, White J, Manheim A, Eliot D, Lasure L, Jones S
(2004) Top value added chemicals from biomass, Vol. 1: Results of screening for potential
candidates from sugars and synthesis gas. Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory, National
Renewable Energy Laboratory and Department of Energy, Washington, DC, p 76
7
Production of Organic Acids by Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi
223

Carotenoid Production by Filamentous
Fungi and Yeasts
8
Javier Avalos, Steffen Nordzieke, Obdulia Parra,
Javier Pardo-Medina, and M. Carmen Limo´n
Abstract
Carotenoids are widespread pigments in nature, obtained by direct synthesis or
by ingestion in all taxonomic groups, and playing a large diversity of biological
functions. Carotenoid biosynthesis is frequently found in fungi, and the amena-
bility of some producing species to research studies has made them ideal models
to investigate the genes and enzymes involved in the biosynthesis and its
regulation. Best known examples are those for the production of β-carotene by
the mucorales Phycomyces blakesleeanus, Mucor circinelloides, and Blakeslea
trispora, neurosporaxanthin by the ascomycetes Neurospora crassa and Fusar-
ium fujikuroi, and astaxanthin by the basidiomycete yeast Xanthophyllomyces
dendrorhous, formerly Phafﬁa rhodozyma. Because of their coloring and health-
promoting properties, some carotenoids have biotechnological applications,
usually as food or feed additives. In the case of the fungi, the biotechnological
studies have been mostly centered on the productions of β-carotene or its red
precursor lycopene by B. trispora and astaxanthin by X. dendrorhous, extended
to the heterologous expression of the relevant genes in non-carotenogenic yeasts
as potentially favorable industrial producers. Less attention has been addressed
to the synthesis of other carotenoids, with the only exception of torularhodin,
produced by Rhodotorula and other related basidiomycete yeasts, but the genet-
ics of its biosynthesis has not been investigated.
Contents
8.1
Introduction ................................................................................
226
8.2
Carotenoid Biosynthesis in Filamentous Fungi ..........................................
229
J. Avalos (*) • S. Nordzieke • O. Parra • J. Pardo-Medina • M. Carmen Limo´n
Departamento de Gene´tica, Universidad de Sevilla, Apartado 1095, 41080 Sevilla, Spain
e-mail: avalos@us.es; steffen.nordzieke@gmx.de; duly@us.es; jpardo6@us.es;
carmenlimon@us.es
# Springer International Publishing AG 2017
A.A. Sibirny (ed.), Biotechnology of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-58829-2_8
225

8.2.1
β-Carotene Biosynthesis in Mucorales ...........................................
229
8.2.2
Regulation of β-Carotene Biosynthesis in Mucorales ...........................
233
8.2.3
β-Carotene Overproduction in Mucorales ........................................
235
8.2.4
B. trispora as an Industrial Carotene Source .....................................
238
8.2.5
Neurosporaxanthin Biosynthesis in Neurospora and Fusarium .................
241
8.2.6
Regulation of Neurosporaxanthin Biosynthesis ..................................
245
8.3
Carotenoid Biosynthesis in Yeasts .......................................................
249
8.3.1
Astaxanthin Biosynthesis in Xanthophyllomyces ................................
250
8.3.2
Biotechnological Astaxanthin Production ........................................
253
8.3.3
Biosynthesis of Torularhodin and Other Xanthophylls ..........................
256
8.3.4
Use of Yeasts for Heterologous Carotenoid Production .........................
259
8.4
Conclusions ................................................................................
260
References .......................................................................................
261
8.1
Introduction
Carotenoids are natural fat-soluble pigments widely represented in nature, where
they have very diverse functions (Britton et al. 1998, 2004). Carotenoids are
universally present in photosynthetic species, where they play essential roles
associated to photosynthesis. Their functions are better known in higher plants,
where they are responsible of the yellow, orange or reddish colors of many fruits
and ﬂowers. However, their most important roles are related with light harvesting
and photoprotection of the photosynthetic machinery (Domonkos et al. 2013), and
they are present in considerable amounts in green tissues, where their colors are
masked by chlorophyll. These pigments are also found in some animals to provide
their characteristic colors, as some birds and ﬁshes. Irrespective of their sporadic
coloring functions, carotenoids are ubiquitous in animals, which get them through
their food to produce retinoids, as the visual chromophore retinal (vitamin A) and
the signaling molecule retinoic acid (Blomhoff and Blomhoff 2006). However, with
some outstanding exception represented by certain aphids (Moran and Jarvik 2010),
animals lack the genes required for their synthesis and get carotenoids through the
diet. The carotenoids are also produced by non-photosynthetic microorganisms and
are found in many archaea, bacteria, and fungi (Sieiro et al. 2003; Avalos and
Cerda´-Olmedo 2004; Avalos et al. 2014a; Sandmann and Misawa 2002).
From another point of view, several carotenoids are valuable biotechnological
compounds, with diverse commercial applications in cosmetics and food industry,
and some fungi are used as industrial carotenoid producers (Avalos and Cerd-
a´-Olmedo 2004). Carotenoids are used, e.g., to provide color to egg yolks in
poultry, to ﬂesh of some ﬁsh, or to crustaceans’ shells in aquaculture. Different
epidemiological and clinical studies have revealed counteracting effects of the
consumption of carotenoids on several chronic illnesses, resulting in reduced
risks of heart disease, cancer, eye disease, and other health disorders (Krinsky
and Johnson 2005; Stahl and Sies 2005; Rao and Rao 2007), with a positive impact
specially in older people (Woodside et al. 2015). Their health-promoting properties,
226
J. Avalos et al.

attributed to a large extent to their antioxidant properties (Stahl and Sies 2003;
Tapiero et al. 2004), are leading to an expanding interest in the biotechnological
production of carotenoids, which are increasingly used as food and feed additives or
as vitamin dietary supplements.
The carotenoids are terpenoid compounds containing an aliphatic polyene chain
usually composed of eight isoprene units. Terpenoids, also known as isoprenoids,
are a vast family of organic chemicals that derive from the sequential condensation
of 5-carbon (C5) isoprene units. Their heterogeneity comes from variations in the
number of units and in subsequent chemical modiﬁcations, which gives rise to a
large structural diversiﬁcation. Thus, terpenoids cover from small volatile
compounds, as geraniol or limonene, to essential cell components as sterols,
dolichols, or ubiquinone. The C5 precursor in the condensation steps is isopentenyl
pyrophosphate (IPP). Depending on the organism or the cell compartment, IPP may
be synthesized through two different biochemical pathways. The ﬁrst one proceeds
from acetyl-CoA through hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) and
mevalonate (Fig. 8.1), and it is known as mevalonate pathway. The second one,
Fig. 8.1 First steps of the
mevalonate terpenoid
pathway. The branches for
sterol and carotenoids
biosynthesis are indicated
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
227

known as methylerythritol pathway, was discovered later in bacteria (Rohmer et al.
1993) and involves the condensation of hydroxyethyl-thiamin and glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate, via D-1-deoxyxylulose 1-phosphate. The plants have both biosynthetic
pathways, but the available information in fungi, based on labeling of carotenoids
upon addition of radioactive mevalonic acid in different species, indicate the origin
of fungal carotenoids through the mevalonate pathway.
The early steps of terpenoid biosynthesis are shown in Fig. 8.1. The ﬁrst conden-
sation step, between IPP and its isomer dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP), results
in the production of the C10 monoterpene geranyl pyrophosphate (GPP). Subsequent
IPP additions give rise to the C15 sesquiterpene C15 farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP)
and the C20 diterpene geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP). FPP is the source of
sterols, whose connection with cholesterol biosynthesis has attracted considerably
the attention of researchers (DeBose-Boyd 2008). Similarly, this early part of the
pathway is particularly relevant because of the use of FPP and GGPP in posttransla-
tional modiﬁcations of proteins associated to cancer (Zahra Bathaie et al. 2016).
Carotenoids are tetraterpenoids derived from phytoene, a colorless precursor
generated by a head-to-head condensation of two GGPP molecules (Fig. 8.2), a
Fig. 8.2 β-carotene
biosynthesis from GGPP.
Enzymes responsible for each
reaction in Mucorales are
indicated close to the
chemical modiﬁcation from
each enzymatic step (gray
arrowhead)
228
J. Avalos et al.

reaction achieved by the enzyme phytoene synthase. The reaction is very similar to
the condensation of two FPP units to produce squalene, the precursor of sterols.
In all the carotenoid pathways, the phytoene hydrocarbon backbone is object of
several desaturations, which generate a chain of conjugated double bonds that
confers the ability to absorb visible light, typically in the blue region of the
spectrum. This chromophore provides the typical yellow, orange, or reddish
pigmentations to the different carotenoids, depending on their speciﬁc absorption
spectra. In the fungus Phycomyces blakesleeanus, phytoene is synthesized in a cis
conﬁguration, which is isomerized to its trans isomer in the ﬁrst desaturation step
(Fraser and Bramley 1994). Typically, carotenoids contain one or two cycled ends,
known as ionone rings, resulting from a cyclase enzymatic activity. The rings may
be α or β depending on the position of a C¼C double bond, with the β-ionone ring
being predominant in fungi. Additionally, the carotenoids may suffer other enzy-
matic reactions, explaining their wide structural diversity in nature (Britton et al.
2004). In the absence of oxygen in the molecule, the carotenoids are termed
carotenes. However, the carotenoid biosynthetic pathways frequently include oxi-
dative steps, which result in the production of xanthophylls.
Carotenoid biosynthesis is frequent but not universal in fungi. Thus, two well-
known fungal models, the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the mold Aspergil-
lus nidulans, do not produce carotenoids. However, carotenoid production is
present in many fungi, either unicellular of ﬁlamentous, and the genetics and
biochemistry of their biosynthetic pathways have been subjected to detailed atten-
tion in some model systems, which are described in the next sections.
8.2
Carotenoid Biosynthesis in Filamentous Fungi
Carotenoid biosynthesis has been investigated in different ﬁlamentous fungi, but
some of them stand out for the amount of available information. These are the
mucorales (a phylum of Mucoromycotina, formerly known as zygomycetes)
Phycomyces blakesleeanus, Mucor circinelloides, and Blakeslea trispora for
β-carotene biosynthesis and the ascomycetes Neurospora crassa and Fusarium
fujikuroi for neurosporaxanthin biosynthesis. In the next sections, we update the
available information on the production of these carotenoids, with special attention
to the biotechnological production in the case of β-carotene.
8.2.1
b-Carotene Biosynthesis in Mucorales
The yellowish β-carotene, one of the most ubiquitous carotenes in nature, is the one
usually found in mucorales fungi, as shown in P. blakesleeanus (Cerda´-Olmedo
1987), M. circinelloides (Navarro et al. 1995; Fraser et al. 1996), and B. trispora
(Lampila et al. 1985). β-carotene production has been also found in ﬁlamentous
fungi from other taxonomic groups, as the basidiomycetes Sclerotium rolfsii
(Georgiou et al. 2001b) and Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (Georgiou et al. 2001a), the
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
229

ascomycetes Aspergillus giganteus (El-Jack et al. 1988), Cercospora nicotianae
(Daub and Payne 1989), and Penicillium sp. (Han et al. 2005), as well as in the
“imperfect fungus” Aschersonia aleyroides (van Eijk et al. 1979). As cited in later
sections, β-carotene is also present in variable amounts as a secondary product or as
an intermediary molecule of the carotenoid pathway in other fungi.
β-carotene biosynthesis requires four desaturations on the phytoene backbone,
resulting in the reddish intermediate lycopene, and the β-cyclization of both ends of
the molecule (Fig. 8.2). Because of the symmetry of phytoene, the four
desaturations are actually two pairs, one corresponding to internal positions and
another to external positions. In photosynthetic organisms two different enzymes,
typically known as phytoene and ζ-carotene desaturases, achieve each couple of
desaturations (Domonkos et al. 2013). However, a single enzyme carries out the
four desaturations in fungi. Similarly, separate genes encode the phytoene synthase
and the cyclase enzymes in photosynthetic species and non-photosynthetic bacteria,
but both enzymatic activities reside in a single polypeptide in fungi. Therefore, only
two fungal genes are needed to make β-carotene from GGPP, one encoding a
bifunctional
phytoene
synthase/lycopene
cyclase
and
another
encoding
a
desaturase. The desaturase gene has been described in C. nicotianae (Ehrenshaft
and Daub 1994) and in the mucorales P. blakesleeanus (Ruiz-Hidalgo et al. 1997a),
M. circinelloides (Velayos et al. 2000a), and B. trispora (Rodrı´guez-Saiz et al.
2004), where it is known as gene carB. In the three species of the mucorales group
investigated, the phytoene synthase/lycopene cyclase gene, called carRA or carRP,
is linked in the genome with the gene carB and divergently transcribed from a
common upstream region (Velayos et al. 2000b; Arrach et al. 2001; Rodrı´guez-Saiz
et al. 2004), forming a single regulatory unit (Fig. 8.3).
The functions of these genes have been supported by extensive genetic and
biochemical analyses that started with the genetic characterization of their mutant
phenotypes, resulting in the alteration of the wild-type yellow pigmentation. Thus,
the mutants of the gene carB are albino and accumulate phytoene, while the
mutants of the gene carRA are either albino and without phytoene, in the case of
the alteration of the phytoene synthase domain, or reddish because of the accumu-
lation of lycopene in the case of the loss of the lycopene cyclase domain. Such
mutants have been described in P. blakesleeanus (Cerda´-Olmedo 1985, 1987),
M. circinelloides (Navarro et al. 1995; Velayos et al. 1997), and B. trispora
(Mehta and Cerda´-Olmedo 1995; Mehta et al. 2003). The ﬁrst substrate of the
desaturase is 15-cis-phytoene, as shows the accumulation of this isomeric form in
the carB mutants of P. blakesleeanus (Goodwin 1980), and puriﬁed desaturase
enzyme converts it to all-trans desaturated carotene products (Fraser and Bramley
1994). In P. blakesleeanus, all the phytoene-accumulating mutants belong to a
single complementation group (Ootaki et al. 1973), which deﬁnes genetically the
gene carB, and the heterokaryons carrying wild-type and carB mutant nuclei
accumulate partially desaturated intermediates, as phytoﬂuene, ζ-carotene, and
neurosporene. Their amounts, in relation to the proportion of wild-type and carB
mutant nuclei, are consistent with the operation of the enzyme as a four-unit
complex (De la Guardia et al. 1971). The analysis of the carotenes produced by
230
J. Avalos et al.

leaky mutants of the carB gene with different catalytic efﬁciencies for the different
steps, in one case leading to a signiﬁcant overaccumulation of ζ-carotene, provided
further evidence to the participation of a single desaturase in the four reactions
(Bejarano et al. 1987).
In relation to carRA/carRP, the bifunctional role of this gene was conﬁrmed in
M. circinelloides through the phenotypic effects of partial carRP deletions
(Velayos et al. 2000b) and by expression in E. coli strains engineered to produce
carotene but missing phytoene synthase or lycopene cyclase activities (Sanz et al.
2011). Similar conclusions were reached in P. blakesleeanus with the correspon-
dence between albino and lycopene-accumulating mutants of the carRA gene,
called carA and carR, with mutations affecting the phytoene synthase or the
lycopene cyclase in the same gene, respectively (Arrach et al. 2001). These
molecular data corroborated former genetic interpretations of mutations in the
carR and carA domains of the carRA gene, which led to propose the cleavage of
the CarRA polypeptide in separate CarR and CarA enzymes (Torres-Martı´nez et al.
1980). This hypothesis was later supported by the ﬁnding of a conserved proteolytic
cleavage site between both protein domains in P. blakesleeanus (Arrach et al. 2001)
Fig. 8.3 (a) Genomic organization of the carRA and carB genes in M. circinelloides (Mc, data
from strain CBS 277.49, NCBI reference AMYB01000001), B. trispora (Bt, strain NRRL2457,
NCBI reference AY176663), and P. blakesleeanus (Pb, NRRL 1555, NCBI reference
NW_017265138). (b) Schematic representation of the alignment of their sequences with MUS-
CLE (Edgar 2004) and visualization of alignment’s conservation with the CLC sequence viewer
software (Version 7.7.1; CLC bio Inc., Massachusetts, USA). Darker lines indicate most
conserved sequences. Percentages in the genes under the conservation graphic correspond to the
lowest value of the identity matrix between the three sequences of the alignment. In the case of
carRA, the percentages for the carR (left) and carA (right) domains are indicated
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
231

and independent 40-kDa CarR and 30-kDa CarA polypeptides by western blot
analyses in B. trispora (Breitenbach et al. 2012).
The carB or carR mutant phenotypes may be reproduced by speciﬁc chemical
block of the enzymatic activities. In P. blakesleeanus, cinnamic alcohol, thymol,
and diphenylamine inhibit the phytoene desaturase (Bejarano and Cerda´-Olmedo
1989), while CPTA (2-[4-chlorophenylthio]-triethylamine), imidazole, nicotine,
and other nitrogenated compounds obstruct the lycopene cyclase (Elahi et al.
1973a, b). Different lines of evidence, based on quantitative analysis of
heterokaryons between carRA and carB mutants (De la Guardia et al. 1971; Arago´n
et al. 1976), the effect of speciﬁc enzyme inhibitors on carotene proportions
(Candau et al. 1991b), and complementation analysis between null and leaky
carB mutants (Sanz et al. 2002), strongly support the organization of the enzymes
as a complex consisting of four desaturases and two cyclases. In the complex, the
4 þ 2 monomers carry out sequentially the six reactions, and all the desaturase and
cyclase units are able to act on any of their corresponding substrates, which are
transferred internally. However, this scenario may differ between different
mucorales, as indicates the ﬁnding in B. trispora of two different lycopene cyclases,
one similar to the CarR enzyme of P. blakesleeanus, and a second one insensitive to
inhibitors and involved only in the cyclization of lycopene into γ-carotene (Mehta
and Cerda´-Olmedo 1999).
There is very limited information on the physical location of carotene synthesis
in fungal cells. In P. blakesleeanus, it occurs in a distinct cell compartment than
sterol biosynthesis despite the coincidence in the ﬁrst enzymatic steps. This is
evidenced by the different speciﬁc radioactivity found in ergosterol and
β-carotene in the wild type and in a carS β-carotene-overproducing mutant, men-
tioned in the next section, when 14C-labeled mevalonate was added to the culture
medium (Bejarano and Cerda´-Olmedo 1992). Therefore, both pathways are physi-
cally separated and use independent precursor pools. A similar experimental
approach also identiﬁed independent syntheses for ubiquinone, triacylglycerols,
and β-carotene in P. blakesleeanus and B. trispora (Kuzina et al. 2006). Taking
together, the available data are consistent with control mechanisms to locate the
enzymes
for
the
synthesis
of
different
terpenoids,
including
those
of
carotenogenesis, in appropriate cell compartments.
In different zygomycetes it is well established that β-carotene is not an end
product but the source of a large array of apocarotenoid derivatives, which com-
prise at least C18 trisporoids, C15 cyclofarnesoids, and C7 methylhexanoids (Barrero
et al. 2011). C18 trisporoids include a family of chemicals, the trisporic acids
(Austin et al. 1969, 1970), which play the role of sexual hormones in the life
cycle of these fungi (see next sections). β-carotene degradation starts with the
activity of carotenoid oxygenases (CCDs), a family of enzymes catalyzing the
oxidative cleavage of speciﬁc carotenoid substrates to produce apocarotenoids
(Ahrazem et al. 2016). The ﬁrst CCD enzymes in this fungal group where identiﬁed
in Rhizopus oryzae (Tsp3 and Tsp4) and B. trispora (Tsp3), their names coming
from their presumed participation in the production of trisporic acids (Burmester
et al. 2007). The apocarotenoids found in P. blakesleeanus are consistent with the
232
J. Avalos et al.

sequential cleavage of β-carotene at two different internal positions (Polaino et al.
2010) (Fig. 8.4), the ﬁrst cleavage carried out by the CCD enzyme CarS, ortholog of
Tsp3 (Medina et al. 2011; Tagua et al. 2012). The gene carS was formerly
interpreted as regulatory (see next sections) because of the accumulation of large
amounts of β-carotene resulting from its mutation. The second cleavage reaction,
achieved on the CarS product β-apo-120-carotenal, is carried out in P. blakesleeanus
by the CCD AcaA (Medina et al. 2011). The genome of this fungus contains a third
predicted CCD enzyme, but its function has not yet been elucidated. Other genes
and enzymes for trisporoid metabolism are currently under investigation (Avalos
et al. 2014a), but they are out of the scope of this review.
8.2.2
Regulation of b-Carotene Biosynthesis in Mucorales
In the three mucorales that have received more attention, P. blakesleeanus,
M. circinelloides, and B. trispora, the synthesis of β-carotene is stimulated by
light and, depending on the strains, by the interaction with a strain of the opposite
sex. As described above, the three species have the same β-carotene biosynthetic
pathway mediated by the products of a similar set of divergently transcribed genes.
However, the coding sequences of the carB or carRA/carRP genes are more similar
in the three species than their regulatory intergenic sequences (Fig. 8.3), and there
are differences in their responses to external signals.
Surface cultures of wild-type P. blakesleeanus grown in the light contain about
tenfold more β-carotene than those grown in the dark (Bergman et al. 1973;
Bejarano et al. 1991; Salgado et al. 1991), and a comparable induction is found in
M. circinelloides (Navarro et al. 1995; Velayos et al. 1997). Such stimulation was
not initially described for B. trispora (Sutter 1970), but when a dark-grown culture
of this fungus is illuminated, its β-carotene content increases (Quiles-Rosillo et al.
2005). The regulation by light in the mucorales is also associated to the different
developmental stages exhibited by their surface cultures, which include the forma-
tion of asexual fruiting bodies called sporangiophores. This process has been
Fig. 8.4 Cleavage reactions
of β-carotene in
P. blakesleeanus. Dotted gray
lines in β-carotene and
β-apo-120-carotenal indicate
cleavage sites for the CCDs
CarS and AcaA, respectively
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
233

investigated in special detail in P. blakesleeanus, which is able to form two classes
of sporangiophores. Light represses the formation of small ones, called
microphores, and stimulates the formation of large ones, macrophores, in a process
known as photomorphogenesis (Corrochano and Cerda´-Olmedo 1992). Illumina-
tion of this fungus during 12-h periods at different growth times showed that
carotenogenesis is able to respond to light only during a speciﬁc developmental
stage, coinciding with the cessation of growth and the start of sporangiophore
formation (Bejarano et al. 1991). These authors also found two levels of light
sensitivity of photocarotenogenesis in this fungus, with a minor increase of
β-carotene content after a weak illumination and a much stronger response
observed only with a more intense illumination.
Regulation by light of the genes carB and carRA/carRP is achieved at transcrip-
tion level. The magnitude of the photoinduction, referred to the mRNA content in
the dark, is particularly high in M. circinelloides, where 10 s of blue light are
sufﬁcient to produce about a 100-fold increase of the transcript levels during the
ﬁrst 20 min after light exposure (Velayos et al. 2000a, b). Photoinduction is also
exhibited in M. circinelloides in the gene carG, coding for the GGPP synthase
(Velayos et al. 2003) providing the substrate for CarRA phytoene synthase activity.
A similar carRA/carB response is exhibited by B. trispora, but in this case the
photoinduction is ephemeral, and the mRNA content returns to dark levels just
40 min after the light pulse. This feature may explain the lack of increase in
carotenoid content under continuous illumination in this species. In contrast, the
photoinduction rate is not so strong in P. blakesleeanus, probably because of the
presence of higher mRNA amounts in the dark. Thus, the exposure to light in this
fungus results in less than a tenfold increase in carB (Ruiz-Hidalgo et al. 1997b;
Blasco et al. 2001) and carRA mRNA levels (Almeida and Cerda´-Olmedo 2008;
Sanz et al. 2010). The time course of mRNA accumulation shows a clear biphasic
kinetics for both genes in P. blakesleeanus (Sanz et al. 2010), which could be
related with the two different levels of light sensitivity formerly found for
photocarotenogenesis in this fungus (Bejarano et al. 1991).
The analysis of mutants affected in photoinduction has been a valuable tool to
identify the regulatory proteins responsible for the control by light. Mutagenic
searches in P. blakesleeanus led to identify several mutants with reduced
photocarotenogenesis: madA, madB, picA, picB (Lo´pez-Dı´az and Cerda´-Olmedo
1980), carC (Revuelta and Eslava 1983), and pimA (Flores et al. 1998). The madA,
madB, and pimA mutants are also affected in photomorphogenesis, and they were
actually identiﬁed because of this developmental alteration. Photocarotenogenesis
is also modiﬁed by the presence of inhibitors of protein phosphatases and kinases
(Tsolakis et al. 1999), suggesting that at least some of these genes could participate
in a signal transduction mechanism involving phosphorylation events. Mutants with
reduced carotene content in the light have also been described in M. circinelloides
(Navarro et al. 1995; Velayos et al. 1997).
While the mutants of the genes madA and madB are only partially affected in
photocarotenogenesis, the double mutant madA madB is mostly insensitive
(Jayaram et al. 1980; Lo´pez-Dı´az and Cerda´-Olmedo 1980). A combination of
234
J. Avalos et al.

genetic and genomic data led to identify the gene madA in the P. blakesleeanus
genome (Idnurm et al. 2006), encoding a protein similar to the ﬂavin photoreceptor
White Collar-1 (WC-1) of N. crassa, responsible of photocarotenogenesis in this
fungus (described in a later section). Accordingly, the action spectrum of
carotenogenesis in P. blakesleeanus is consistent with the mediation of ﬂavin
photoreceptors (Bejarano et al. 1991). In N. crassa, WC-1 interacts with a smaller
protein, WC-2, to form a photoactive complex. In a similar way, MadB is
orthologous of WC-2 and it interacts with MadA (Sanz et al. 2009). Unexpectedly,
the analysis of the genome of P. blakesleeanus revealed two additional WC-1-like
proteins, named WcoA and WcoB, and three WC-2-like proteins, WctB, WctC, and
WctD (Corrochano and Garre 2010), pointing to a remarkable complexity of the
photosensory systems in this fungus. The action spectra for the two sensitivity
levels of photocarotenogenesis, mentioned above, are consistent with the participa-
tion of ﬂavin photoreceptors, but are not totally coincident (Bejarano et al. 1991),
indicating differences in their respective photoreception systems. This could be
explained by the participation of other WC-1-like photoreceptor or the combination
of MadA with a different WC-2-like protein. Regrettably, at present there is no
methodology available to obtain knockout transformants in P. blakesleeanus, and
therefore the functions of the proteins WcoA, WcoB, WctB, WctC, and WctD
remain to be elucidated. Yet, such methodology is available in M. circinelloides
(Torres-Martı´nez et al. 2012), which contains a similar set of White Collar-1 genes,
called mcwc-1a, mcwc-1b, and mcwc-1c. In contrast to P. blakesleeanus, the
absence of the MadA counterpart, MCWC-1a, does not affect photocarotenogenesis
but
prevents
sporangiophore
phototropism.
On
the
other
hand,
photocarotenogenesis is lost in the mcwc-1c null mutant while no phenotypic
alteration is apparent in the mcwc-1b null strain (Silva et al. 2006). The functions
of the MCWC-1a and MCWC-1c proteins are interconnected: unlike the mcwc-1a
and mcwc-1b genes, expression of mcwc-1c is strongly induced by light, but this
induction requires a functional mcwc-1a gene. Moreover, carB and carRP photoin-
duction is severely reduced in the absence of mcwc-1a (Silva et al. 2006).
8.2.3
b-Carotene Overproduction in Mucorales
The mutagenesis screenings in mucorales allow the isolation of carotenoid-
overproducing mutants, which stand out because of their deeper pigmentation. In
P. blakesleeanus such mutants are affected in three genes: carS (Murillo and
Cerda´-Olmedo 1976), already mentioned because of its role in β-carotene cleavage
(Medina et al. 2011; Tagua et al. 2012), carD (Salgado et al. 1989), and carF
(Mehta et al. 1997). Depending on the mutated gene and the allele, the carotene
content in the dark raises from 10- to 100-fold that of the wild type. This increase is
not accompanied by concomitant increments in carRA and carB transcripts
(Almeida and Cerda´-Olmedo 2008), but at least in the case of the carS and carD
mutants, they exhibit higher capacities of incorporation of mevalonic acid into
carotene in their cell extracts (Salgado et al. 1991), suggesting posttranscriptional
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
235

regulatory effects. The carotene increase is less pronounced, about three- to ﬁve-
fold, in carotene-overproducing mutants of B. trispora (Mehta and Cerda´-Olmedo
1995; Mehta et al. 2003) and in some mutants of M. circinelloides (Navarro et al.
1995; Fraser et al. 1996). However, the null mutants of the gene crgA of this species
reach levels as high as 80-fold the content of the wild type (Navarro et al. 2001),
reminding the phenotype of the carS mutants of P. blakesleeanus.
Despite their similarities, the molecular basis for carotene overproduction is very
different in the mutants of the gene carS of P. blakesleeanus and those of crgA of
M. circinelloides. As already indicated, CarS is a β-carotene-cleaving oxygenase
leading to the formation of apocarotenoid derivatives that are not visually detected
because of their lack of pigmentation. Therefore, β-carotene overaccumulation in
the carS mutants is explained by a block of its CarS-mediated degradation. This
leads to reconsider a former regulatory hypothesis, according to which the carS
mutants were affected in the detection of β-carotene in a feedback control mecha-
nism (Bejarano et al. 1988). However, the occurrence of a feedback regulation
through the detection of an apocarotenoid product is not yet discarded. Moreover, a
mutagenesis screening from a carS mutant led to identify albino mutants with a
second mutation in the carS gene (Salgado and Cerda´-Olmedo 1992), whose
molecular basis remains to be explained.
The CrgA protein of M. circinelloides, which has no sequence relation with
CarS, consists of two amino-terminal RING ﬁnger (RF) domains, two glutamine-
rich regions, a LON protease domain, and a carboxy-terminal isoprenylation site
(Navarro et al. 2000). The RF domains have been described to interact with E3
ligase-type proteins that mediate ubiquitylation of target proteins, usually labeling
them for their degradation. At least one of the RF domains is essential for its
regulatory function in carotenogenesis, suggesting that CrgA may function as an E3
ubiquitin ligase (Lorca-Pascual et al. 2004). β-carotene overproduction in the crgA
mutants is due to a strong increase in the carRA and carB transcript levels, pointing
to CrgA as a negative regulator (Navarro et al. 2001; Lorca-Pascual et al. 2004), a
function in which it seems to play a role in the ubiquitylation-independent degra-
dation of MCWC-1b (Silva et al. 2008). CrgA also regulates vegetative growth and
sporulation in M. circinelloides, suggesting a wider regulatory function for this
protein (Quiles-Rosillo et al. 2003; Murcia-Flores et al. 2007). However, despite the
carotene overaccumulation, the crgA mutants maintain the ability to respond to
light with a further increase in the carotene content and in the transcription of at
least the carB gene (Navarro et al. 2001). The lack of efﬁcient transformation
procedures hinders the study of the function of crgA orthologs in P. blakesleeanus
and B. trispora, but the crgA gene of B. trispora is able to complement the crgA
mutation in M. circinelloides, indicating conserved functions for this protein in both
species (Quiles-Rosillo et al. 2005).
As found with the carS mutants, the loss of either phytoene desaturase in carB
mutants or of lycopene cyclase in carR mutants (R domain of gene carRA) leads to
the accumulation of large amounts of phytoene or lycopene (Ootaki et al. 1973),
respectively, and similar results are obtained by their chemical inactivation
236
J. Avalos et al.

(Bejarano and Cerda´-Olmedo 1989; Candau et al. 1991b). This high carotene
production was interpreted as a clue for the occurrence of feedback or end product
regulation in this species. The increases are more variable, depending on the strain
or culture conditions, in similar mutants of M. circinelloides (Navarro et al. 1995;
Velayos et al. 1997) and only minor in those of B. trispora (Mehta and Cerd-
a´-Olmedo 1995). Despite their large carotene content, light is still able to stimulate
phytoene accumulation in the carB mutants of P. blakesleeanus as well as that of
β-carotene in some carS mutants (Bejarano et al. 1991). However, light is mostly
ineffective on carA or carR mutants, some of them carrying leaky mutations,
suggesting a regulatory role for the CarRA polypeptide before its proteolytic
cleavage. No photoinduction could be detected either in double carA carS mutants,
with a carotene content halfway between those of the two separate mutants
(Bejarano et al. 1991). Other observations point to further functions for the CarA
protein, facilitating substrate transfer between enzymatic aggregates in the cycliza-
tion reactions (Murillo et al. 1981) or participating in the light sensitivity of
photomorphogenesis (Corrochano and Cerda´-Olmedo 1990).
β-carotene accumulation in P. blakesleeanus is stimulated by the presence of
different chemicals, distributed in at least two families of compounds acting
through independent mechanisms (Bejarano et al. 1988). The ﬁrst family consists
of apocarotenoids with a terminal β-ring in the molecule, such as retinol (vitamin A)
or β-ionone (Eslava et al. 1974), which predictably exert their action competing
with β-carotene in the binding to an enzyme or regulatory protein. In the presence of
vitamin A, β-carotene concentration of the wild type rises to levels comparable to
those of phytoene or lycopene in the carB or carR mutants in the absence of the
inducer, but it is still able to increase signiﬁcantly the carotene content of these
mutants (Eslava et al. 1974). As already mentioned, the carA mutants are insensi-
tive to light, but they exhibit a patent β-carotene increase in the presence of vitamin
A. Such increase is similar to that exhibited by the carA carS double mutant, which
hardly responds to vitamin A. According to the available information, it was
proposed a regulatory model in which β-carotene interacts with a carA/carS com-
plex to downregulate the pathway (Bejarano et al. 1988), but such regulatory
mechanism has not been demonstrated experimentally.
The second family of chemicals consists of a series of aromatic compounds
(Cerda´-Olmedo and Hüttermann 1986), with veratrol and dimethyl phthalate
among the most efﬁcient inducers. Their mechanism of action is independent
from that of vitamin A, and therefore their effects are additive (Bejarano et al.
1988). The desaturase inhibitor diphenylamine is a biphenolic compound, and, not
surprisingly, some of the phenolic activators, e.g., cinnamic alcohol, also interfere
with the desaturase activity (Bejarano and Cerda´-Olmedo 1989). The mechanism of
action of the phenolic activators in P. blakesleeanus has not been unraveled.
When two strains of P. blakesleeanus of opposite sex are grown together, the
cultures (known as mated cultures) exhibit a ﬁvefold increase in their β-carotene
levels compared to the respective single cultures (Govind and Cerda´-Olmedo
1986). This stimulation is visualized as a pigmented band when the mycelia of
the two strains meet on an agar surface (see, e.g., Tagua et al. 2012) and does not
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
237

require a physical contact (Burgeff 1924), indicating the mediation of diffusible
products. The stimulations of the synthesis of β-carotene and the formation of
sexual structures in mated cultures are probably independent, as suggest the oppo-
site effect of acetate on both processes (Kuzina and Cerda´-Olmedo 2006). The
sexual stimulation of carotene biosynthesis is the result of a strong induction in the
expression of the carRA and carB genes (Almeida and Cerda´-Olmedo 2008) and in
the corresponding enzymatic activities (Salgado et al. 1991).
The upregulation of carotenogenesis by mating is due to the production of
trisporic acids, sexual hormones already mentioned in Sect. 8.2.1 whose synthesis
requires the collaboration of the two partners (Schachtschabel et al. 2008) and
triggers their sexual differentiation (Sutter 1987). At least in B. trispora, either the
sexual interaction or the addition of trisporic acids stimulates the expression of the
tsp3 gene, needed for the production of these hormones (Burmester et al. 2007).
Actually, addition of trisporic acids to single cultures reproduces the carotenoid
stimulation in P. blakesleeanus (Govind and Cerda´-Olmedo 1986) or in other
related species (Sahadevan et al. 2013), and in P. blakesleeanus it is additive to
the inducing effects of dimethyl phthalate, light, or carS mutation (Govind and
Cerda´-Olmedo 1986). The sexual stimulation is more efﬁcient in sexual
heterokaryons, i.e., those holding nuclei of the strains of the opposite sex in the
same cytoplasm. Such heterokaryons are unstable because of random variations in
the nuclear proportions but may be stabilized through the introduction of recessive
lethal mutations in the partner nuclei (Murillo et al. 1978). The β-carotene content
in surface cultures of these heterokaryons increases considerably if the participating
nuclei hold carS mutations, reaching up to 2.5% of the total dry mass in media
containing cheap industrial subproducts (Cerda´-Olmedo 1989). The carotene levels
are not far from this value in partial sexual diploids with a carF mutation (Mehta
and Cerda´-Olmedo 2001) and may reach about 3% of mycelial dry mass in a carS
carF double mutant (Mehta et al. 1997).
Production of β-carotene has not reached so high levels in M. circinelloides, but
in contrast to P. blakesleeanus or B. trispora, this species is amenable to genetic
transformation, making possible gene-engineered manipulations (Torres-Martı´nez
et al. 2012). This methodology allowed the generation of strains with increased
copy numbers of genes for early steps of the terpenoid pathway, resulting in
improvements of up to ﬁvefold in β-carotene production (Csernetics et al. 2011)
or with modiﬁcations of the carotenoid pathway through the expression of heterol-
ogous genes for β-carotene oxidizing enzymes, leading to the accumulation of
variable amounts of xanthophylls as β-cryptoxanthin, zeaxanthin, echinenone,
canthaxanthin, or astaxanthin (Papp et al. 2006, 2013; Csernetics et al. 2011,
2015).
The
molecular
procedures
for
these
engineered
modiﬁcations
in
M. circinelloides have been recently reviewed (Barredo 2012).
8.2.4
B. trispora as an Industrial Carotene Source
The global carotenoid market has kept growing in the recent years, and β-carotene
is the most commercialized product (Kirti et al. 2014). β-carotene may be obtained
238
J. Avalos et al.

by chemical synthesis or by biotechnological production, with B. trispora and the
alga Dunaliella salina as the preferred microbial sources (Ribeiro et al. 2011). In
the case of B. trispora, the basis of its biotechnological application is the high
β-carotene yields resulting from the sexual interaction in submerged mated
cultures, consistent with increased carRA/carB expression (Schmidt et al. 2005)
and CarRA/CarB enzymatic levels (Breitenbach et al. 2012). The sexual stimula-
tion is accompanied by many other physiological and developmental changes and
affects the expression of many other genes (Kuzina et al. 2008). As a different
approach, addition of trisporic acids to single cultures reveals that these hormones
act as global metabolic regulators, producing changes in total protein patterns and
in metabolism of fatty acids, amino acids, and carbohydrates (Sun et al. 2012). At
industrial level, β-carotene production by B. trispora is based on fermentation
technology, which implies large-scale growth of strains of opposite sex in
submerged conditions and feasible subsequent industrial steps, such as adequate
biomass separation and carotenoid extraction and puriﬁcations procedures.
A major point in the fermentation procedure is the use of suitable mating
partners. Since they may differ in their germination and growth capabilities, the
use of adequate proportions of the spores used to start the cultures is an important
aspect in the process (B€ohme et al. 2006). The production has been improved
trough different experimental approaches. Thus, the comparison of the β-carotene
levels after growth with different carbon and nitrogen sources, trace elements, pH,
or inoculum sizes, as well as the result of combining varying concentrations of
different media components, allowed a 42% yield increase (Choudhari and Singhal
2008). The production increases considerably through the use of β-carotene-
overproducing mutants. B. trispora spores are multinucleate, which hinders the
isolation of recessive mutants, but efﬁcient mutagenesis protocols are available
based on exposure to the potent chemical mutagen N-methyl-N0-nitro-N-
nitrosoguanidine (Cerda´-Olmedo and Mehta 2012). A color screening of
B. trispora colonies derived from spores surviving to this mutagenic agent allowed
the identiﬁcation of “superyellow” mutants, with β-carotene content reaching up to
sixfold higher levels than those of the original strain (Mehta and Cerda´-Olmedo
1995). This yield may be improved further in a new round of mutagenesis from a
superyellow mutant (example in Mehta et al. 2003), a typical strategy in industrial
strain improvements that may be repeated many times. The β-carotene level
increases in the superyellow mutants are not as high as those produced by sexual
stimulation between wild-type strains, but the use of such mutants in mated cultures
results in very high β-carotene productions (Mehta et al. 2003). Recently, alterna-
tive screening protocols and novel mutagenesis methods, as Nþ ion implantation
(Wang et al. 2013) and atmospheric and room temperature plasma (Qiang et al.
2014), proved also efﬁcient to obtain carotene-overproducing strains.
Because of the industrial use of B. trispora, chemical activation of its β-carotene
production has received intense attention. The aromatic chemicals that stimulate
carotenogenesis in P. blakesleeanus are not effective in this fungus, and those of the
retinoid group are less effective. Thus, addition of retinol to the medium results in
only a twofold to threefold increase of β-carotene production (Choudhari et al.
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
239

2008), compared to a 20-fold increase in P. blakesleeanus (Eslava et al. 1974;
Bejarano et al. 1988). Earlier studies found minor stimulatory effects with a large
diversity of chemicals, including certain monoterpenes, as α-pinene (Cederberg and
Neujahr 1969), and different nitrogenated compounds, as succinimide, pyridazyne,
isonicotinoylhydrazine, or some pyridine derivatives (Ninet et al. 1969). More
recent reports described new activators at appropriate concentrations and proposed
putative inducing mechanisms. Addition of sorbitan monolaurate surfactant span-
20 duplicates β-carotene production presumably through the shortening of the
hyphal length and improvement of dispersed growth (Choudhari et al. 2008). The
presence of ketoconazole, an inhibitor of the enzyme converting lanosterol to
ergosterol, results in a threefold increase of β-carotene content, possibly because
of compensatory effects in early steps of terpenoid biosynthesis (Tang et al. 2008).
Addition of arachidonic acid at the appropriate moment during the fermentation
process results in a 1.7-fold rise in the β-carotene content, which correlates with
comparable increases in the mRNA levels of the hmgR, carRA, and carB genes
(Hu et al. 2012) and with metabolic changes leading to increased glycolysis and
fatty acid biosyntheses (Hu et al. 2013a). More predictable stimulatory effects are
those produced by addition of terpenoid precursors, as mevalonic acid, isopentenyl
alcohol, dimethylallyl alcohol, or geraniol (Shi et al. 2012).
Many observations point to a positive correlation between oxidative stress and
β-carotene production in the B. trispora cultures. The fungus protects itself against
reactive oxygen species with speciﬁc detoxifying enzymes, among which play a
major role the catalases and superoxide dismutases (SOD). Addition of H2O2
results in a rise in β-carotene accumulation (Jeong et al. 1999), which is
accompanied by a higher catalase activity (Wang et al. 2014). On the other hand,
chemical inhibition of SOD activity increases the β-carotene content (Gessler et al.
2002). A similar effect is obtained increasing the oxidative stress by raising the
dissolved oxygen concentrations in the medium, either directly (Nanou and Roukas
2011) or with the presence of n-hexadecane (Liu and Wu 2006a), n-hexane,
n-dodecane (Xu et al. 2007), or butylated hydroxytoluene (Nanou and Roukas
2010). In the cases investigated, SOD and catalase activities are simultaneously
increased in parallel to β-carotene concentrations. These enzyme activities also raise
upon addition of liquid parafﬁn to the medium, which enhance oxygen concentra-
tion and β-carotene production (Hu et al. 2013b). However, not all agents producing
oxidative stress induce β-carotene accumulation in this fungus, as showed the lack
of induction upon addition of iron ions (Nanou and Roukas 2013). The endogenous
and exogenous factors producing oxidative stress in B. trispora and the effects on
the fungus under fermentative conditions have been recently reviewed (Roukas
2016).
Considerable
efforts
have
been
dedicated
to
develop
novel
medium
compositions with aim of reducing costs and increasing β-carotene yields. A
detailed scrutiny on the effect of a diversity of media components showed improved
productions in the presence of corn steep liquor, oleic and linoleic acids, kerosene,
and the already mentioned butylated hydroxytoluene (Mantzouridou et al. 2002).
The positive impact of oils in the production has been conﬁrmed in other reports,
240
J. Avalos et al.

such as those based on the use of crude olive or soybean oils (Mantzouridou et al.
2006) or waste cooking oil (Nanou and Roukas 2016). Supplementation of the
medium with industrial glycerol, obtained either from soap manufacturing or
biodiesel production industries, allows up to a tenfold increase in β-carotene levels
(Mantzouridou et al. 2008). Very promising results have been also obtained using
agro-food wastes rich in carbohydrates and mineral salts, as beet molasses
(Goksungur et al. 2004), cheese whey (Varzakakou and Roukas 2010), cabbage,
and peach peels or watermelon husks (Papaioannou and Liakopoulou-Kyriakides
2012). The studies on the use of cheese whey provide a good example of a complete
survey on the effect of different variables in the search of the optimal production
conditions, either in ﬂasks (Varzakakou and Roukas 2010) or in fermentation
reactors (Varzakakou et al. 2011; Roukas et al. 2015). These and other reports are
based on the behavior of wild-type strains, but they might be efﬁcient also with
β-carotene-overproducing mutants.
The conditions developed for the production of β-carotene are also applicable for
the production of lycopene through the block of the cyclase activity, which is
usually achieved by chemical inhibition (Mantzouridou and Tsimidou 2008).
Thus, lycopene is produced in high yields by mated cultures in large-scale
fermentors in the presence of imidazole or pyridine (Lo´pez-Nieto et al. 2004).
Examples on the use of other inhibitors from this group are frequent in the litera-
ture, as reported, e.g., for 2-methyl imidazole (Pegklidou et al. 2008), piperidine,
creatinine (Liu et al. 2012), or nicotine (Shi et al. 2012). Other chemicals used to
block the cyclase activity are some amines, as CFTA (Hsu et al. 1972) and other
amine-derived compounds (Hsu et al. 1974; Wang et al. 2016). A more efﬁcient
approach consists in the use of mutants devoid of cyclase activity. Such mutants are
independent of chemical treatments and allow very high lycopene productions,
especially in the form of heterokaryons with nuclei of both sexes carrying addi-
tional overproducing mutations (Mehta et al. 2003).
8.2.5
Neurosporaxanthin Biosynthesis in Neurospora
and Fusarium
Neurosporaxanthin is a C35 carboxylic apocarotenoid initially discovered in the
fungus N. crassa. Early biochemical analyses of cultures from this fungus revealed
a complex carotenoid mixture, consisting of neutral carotenes and xanthophylls
(Zalokar 1954). This included an acidic carotenoid that was subsequently isolated,
characterized, and named neurosporaxanthin (Zalokar 1957), whose chemical
structure was determined as β-apo-40-carotenoic acid (Aasen and Jensen 1965).
This acidic xanthophyll was later found also in other fungi, as Arthrobotrys
oligospora (Valadon and Cooke 1963), a mutant of Verticillium albo-atrum
(Valadon and Mummery 1969), Podospora anserina (Strobel et al. 2009), and
different Fusarium species (Avalos and Estrada 2010). Analyses of the carotenoid
mixtures
in
N.
crassa
(Harding
et
al.
1969;
Mitzka
and
Rau
1977),
F. aquaeductuum (Bindl et al. 1970), and F. fujikuroi (Avalos and Cerda´-Olmedo
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
241

1987) are consistent with a biosynthetic pathway that shares the ﬁrst steps with that
of β-carotene but differs in the occurrence of an additional desaturation, a single
cyclization, and two ﬁnal oxidative steps (Fig. 8.5). The substrate of the cyclization
may differ between different species. The identiﬁcation of β-zeacarotene,
γ-carotene, lycopene, and 3,4-didehydrolycopene in N. crassa indicates that the
cyclization may occur on substrates with either three, four, or ﬁve desaturations,
while
3,4-didehydrolycopene
has
not
been
described
in
F.
fujikuroi
or
F. aquaeductuum. In some cases, neurosporaxanthin is subject of esteriﬁcation
reactions in the terminal carboxylic group; thus, it is detected as a methyl ester in
Verticillium agaricinum (Valadon and Mummery 1977) and as a glycosyl ester in a
marine Fusarium species (Sakaki et al. 2002a).
The genes and enzymatic activities responsible for all the steps needed for
neurosporaxanthin biosynthesis are known in N. crassa (Avalos and Corrochano
2013) and F. fujikuroi (Avalos et al. 2014b). The ﬁrst genes of the pathway were
identiﬁed in N. crassa by means of the genetic analysis of albino mutants, called in
order of identiﬁcation al-1, al-2, and al-3 (Huang 1964). The gene al-3 encodes the
prenyl transferase responsible for the synthesis of the phytoene precursor GGPP
from FPP (Nelson et al. 1989; Carattoli et al. 1991), as demonstrated the lack of this
activity in al-3 mutants (Spurgeon et al. 1979) or its capacity to replace a bacterial
GGPP synthase in E. coli (Sandmann et al. 1993). This reaction is needed also for
the synthesis of other essential terpenoids derived from GGPP, e.g., ubiquinone,
Fig. 8.5 Neurosporaxanthin and β-carotene biosynthesis in N. crassa and Fusarium sp. Enzymes
responsible for each reaction (AL-1, AL-2, CAO-2, and YLO-1 for N. crassa, and CarRA, CarB,
CarT, CarD, and CarX for Fusarium sp.) are indicated close to the chemical modiﬁcation produced
in each enzymatic step (gray arrowhead). Dotted gray lines in torulene and β-carotene indicate
cleavage sites for the corresponding CCD enzymes. Cleavage of β-carotene has been only found in
Fusarium sp. Reactions and chemical structures up to ζ-carotene are as shown in Fig. 8.2
242
J. Avalos et al.

dolichols or prenylated proteins, and therefore only leaky mutations are isolated for
this gene (Barbato et al. 1996).
The synthesis of phytoene from GGPP is achieved in N. crassa by AL-2, whose
gene was identiﬁed by its capacity to complement the al-2 mutation (Schmidhauser
et al. 1994). The activity of AL-2 was inferred from the albino phenotype of the al-2
mutant and the sequence similarity of its carboxy-end region with phytoene
synthase from bacteria or plants. A similar approach led to clone al-1, encoding
the phytoene desaturase (Schmidhauser et al. 1990), with sequence similarity to
bacterial desaturases and able to complement a mutant of Rhodobacter capsulatus
lacking the desaturase activity (Bartley et al. 1990). As found for CarB in
mucorales, the carotenoids produced by AL-1 in R. capsulatus indicated that this
enzyme is able to catalyze four desaturations. Later in vitro and in vivo studies
demonstrated that AL-1 acts as homomultimeric complex able to catalyze the ﬁve
desaturations needed to convert phytoene to 3,4-didehydrolycopene or torulene in
the neurosporaxanthin biosynthetic pathway (Hausmann and Sandmann 2000).
Likewise, as described for the CarRA/CarRP counterparts in mucorales, AL-2 is
a bifunctional protein whose cyclase activity generates the β-ionone ring of
torulene. The cyclase function of AL-2, initially disregarded because of the lack
of mutants speciﬁcally affected in this enzymatic activity, was later conﬁrmed by
complementation when these mutants became available (Arrach et al. 2002).
Moreover, enzymatic assays expressing AL-2 in appropriate E. coli strains not
only demonstrated the cyclase function of the protein but also its preference to
produce a single cyclization (Sandmann et al. 2006). The knowledge of the al-1 and
al-2 sequences facilitated the cloning of its orthologs in other fungi, including carB
and carRA in F. fujikuroi (Ferna´ndez-Martı´n et al. 2000; Linnemannst€ons et al.
2002). The ability of CarB to carry out the ﬁve desaturations was evidenced by the
isolation of a carB mutant speciﬁcally affected in the ﬁfth desaturation (Prado-
Cabrero et al. 2009). In the case of AL-2/CarRA, in contrast to what was observed
in mucorales, the bifunctional protein is probably not separated in two independent
polypeptides, as suggests the difﬁcult identiﬁcation of mutants affected in the
cyclase activity and the ﬁnding in N. crassa of a mutant of the phytoene synthase
domain that is also affected in the cyclase activity (Dı´az-Sa´nchez et al. 2011a).
Based on the assumption that a CCD enzyme achieves the torulene cleavage step
in neurosporaxanthin biosynthesis, the genomes of F. fujikuroi and N. crassa were
searched for CCD-encoding genes, leading to the identiﬁcation of two candidates in
each species. Torulene-accumulating mutants formerly identiﬁed in F. fujikuroi
(Avalos and Cerda´-Olmedo 1987) facilitated the assignation of torulene cleavage
activity to one of them, that was called carT (Prado-Cabrero et al. 2007). Similar
mutants were also characterized in N. crassa, allowing the identiﬁcation of the carT
ortholog, cao-2 (Saelices et al. 2007). In both species, the complementation of
torulene-accumulating mutants and the analysis of their enzymatic activity in vivo
and in vitro established the function of the CarT/CAO-2 proteins as CCD enzymes
cleaving torulene to produce C35 β-apo-40-carotenal. In the case of CAO-2, the
enzyme was not active on γ-carotene, indicating the need of all the previous
desaturations. The function of carT, together to those of carRA and carB, was
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
243

also conﬁrmed by targeted deletion experiments in Fusarium graminearum, also
known as Gibberella zeae (Jin et al. 2010).
The last reaction of the pathway, the oxidation of the terminal aldehyde group to
a carboxylic group, is achieved by the aldehyde dehydrogenase YLO-1 in N. crassa
(Estrada et al. 2008b) and its ortholog CarD in F. fujikuroi (Dı´az-Sa´nchez et al.
2011b). The name of the ylo-1 mutant comes from its characteristic yellow pig-
mentation resulting from the accumulation of a complex mixture of carotenoids, in
which neurosporaxanthin is missing (Goldie and Subden 1973). Later chemical
analyses showed the presence of unusual carotenoids (Estrada et al. 2008b;
Sandmann et al. 2008), possibly derived from the β-apo-40-carotenal predictably
accumulated in the absence of YLO-1 activity. However, the young colonies of the
carD mutant of F. fujikuroi exhibit an orange pigmentation, as expected from
β-apo-40-carotenal accumulation, but they turn progressively to yellow as they get
older due to its conversion to β-apo-40-carotenol and, possibly, also to derived fatty
acid esters (Dı´az-Sa´nchez et al. 2011b).
Despite the predominance of neurosporaxanthin in N. crassa and F. fujikuroi,
presumably due to the preference of AL-2 and CarRA to introduce a single
cyclization in the pathway, the carotenoid analyses in both species detect minor
amounts of β-carotene (Mitzka and Rau 1977), indicating that these enzymes are
able to carry out a second cyclization. In the case of N. crassa, in vitro studies
showed that γ-carotene is not accepted as a substrate by AL-1 (Hausmann and
Sandmann 2000), and therefore if the cyclization is produced on lycopene instead
of on 3,4-didehydrolycopene, the resulting γ-carotene may be only converted to
β-carotene (Fig. 8.5). The occurrence of a second cyclization might be more
frequent than expected in F. fujikuroi and other Fusarium species, where the
genes carRA and carB are linked in a gene cluster with gene carX, encoding a
β-carotene-cleaving CCD enzyme (Thewes et al. 2005), and with carO, encoding a
rhodopsin (Prado et al. 2004). CarO is a photoactive proton pump that plays a role
in conidia germination (Garcı´a-Martı´nez et al. 2015). The product of β-carotene
cleavage is retinal, used as chromophore by the CarO rhodopsin and presumably by
a second rhodopsin in these fungi, called OpsA (Estrada and Avalos 2009). Retinal
has its maximal absorption in the UV-A region of the spectrum and therefore does
not provide pigmentation. There are no reports on retinal levels in these fungi,
hindering any estimation of the proportion of carotene substrates deviated to the
β-carotene branch. N. crassa has also a gene for a photoactive rhodopsin (Bieszke
et al. 1999a, b), but despite having a second CCD gene, no retinal-forming activity
has been found so far in this fungus (Dı´az-Sa´nchez et al. 2013).
Information on the physical location of neurosporaxanthin biosynthesis in the
fungal cells is very scarce. F. fujikuroi is well known for the production of
gibberellins, a group of growth promoting plant hormones (Tudzynski 2005).
Gibberellins are terpenoids that share with carotenoids their origin from GGPP,
but meanwhile the carotenoids are accumulated in the cell, the gibberellins are
excreted to the medium. Experiments with F. fujikuroi cultures in the presence of 14
C-labeled mevalonate, as mentioned before for P. blakesleeanus (Bejarano and
244
J. Avalos et al.

Cerda´-Olmedo 1992), indicated different cellular locations and independent sub-
strate pools for the synthesis of carotenoids, gibberellins, and sterols (Domenech
et al. 1996). In the case of carotenoids, the majority of the enzymes are associated to
membranes, making difﬁcult their puriﬁcation for in vitro studies (Bramley 1985).
Consequently, the carotenogenic enzymes of N. crassa are partially solubilized by
detergent treatments, and their activities are improved by lipid addition (Mitzka-
Schnabel 1985). In the same fungus, carotenoids have been found associated to the
external membrane of mitochondria (Neupert and Ludwig 1971), suggesting that
they are synthesized in this organelle, but they have been found also in lipid
globules and in membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum (Mitzka-Schnabel and
Rau 1980). Regarding the association of the carotenogenic enzymatic machinery to
membranes, it is particularly relevant that the aldehyde dehydrogenases YLO-1 and
CarD include a terminal transmembrane domain (Estrada et al. 2008b; Dı´az-
Sa´nchez et al. 2011b), very infrequent in this protein family.
8.2.6
Regulation of Neurosporaxanthin Biosynthesis
As already mentioned for β-carotene production by P. blakesleeanus and
M. circinelloides, the synthesis of neurosporaxanthin is stimulated by light in
N. crassa (Avalos and Corrochano 2013) and Fusarium sp. (Avalos and Estrada
2010). This photoresponse has been investigated in especial detail in N. crassa,
currently a leading model in fungal photobiology (Chen et al. 2010). When grown
in the dark, the submerged cultures of this fungus are albino and contain phytoene,
but its exposure to light results in the rapid accumulation of colored carotenoids,
reaching a maximum in about 6 h (Rau et al. 1968) or 12 h (Zalokar 1954),
depending on the culture conditions. Light dosage experiments showed that 1 min
of light (Zalokar 1955) or even less (Zalokar 1955; Schrott 1980) is sufﬁcient to
cause a detectable response, but after the light pulse, the mycelia become tempo-
rarily insensitive to a second light exposure (Schrott 1981). Fluence response
experiments showed a biphasic curve, with a ﬁrst step resulting from just some
seconds of exposure at the highest light intensity and a second one needing at least
16 min of illumination (Zalokar 1955; Schrott 1980). In contrast, at least 1 h is
needed for a signiﬁcant response in F. aquaeductuum (Bindl et al. 1970) and
F. fujikuroi (Avalos and Schrott 1990).
N. crassa photocarotenogenesis is very sensitivity to temperature. The
carotenoids accumulate in much higher amounts when dark-grown mycelia are
illuminated and incubated at low temperature (Harding 1974) than at high temper-
ature, with an optimal response between 6 and 12 C. The effect of low temperature
is not only on total carotenoid production but also on enzymatic efﬁciency, as
indicates the accumulation of a higher proportion of neurosporaxanthin, a feature
that facilitated the characterization of mutants affected in the last reactions of the
pathway (Saelices et al. 2007; Estrada et al. 2008b). Additionally, the analysis of
intermediary carotenoids showed an unexpected change in the order of the enzy-
matic steps depending on the temperature of illumination (Fig. 8.6), with the
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
245

cyclization of apo-40-lycopenoic acid as the last reaction at low temperature
(Estrada et al. 2008a). Therefore, 3,4-didehydrolycopene may be recognized as a
substrate not only by the cyclase activity of AL-2 but also by the cleaving
oxygenase CAO-2, with the latter prevailing under cold conditions. Such effect
has not been described in Fusarium, and, at least in F. aquaeductuum, the synthesis
of carotenoids is less efﬁcient at lower temperatures (Rau 1962).
Action spectrum of photocarotenogenesis in N. crassa reveals an optimal efﬁ-
ciency at light wavelengths ranging from 440 to 490 nm (Zalokar 1955), with peaks
at about 450 and 480 nm (de Fabo et al. 1976). As already mentioned for
P. blakesleeanus, the spectrum shape is consistent with the participation of ﬂavin
photoreceptors. This hypothesis was corroborated by the reduced photoinduction
exhibited by ﬂavin deﬁcient mutants (Paietta and Sargent 1981), although such
deﬁciency was not restored by external supplementation of riboﬂavin or some
analogs (Paietta and Sargent 1983). Conclusive conﬁrmation was attained with
the identiﬁcation of the responsible photoreceptor, which turned out to be a
heterodimeric complex called White Collar (WC), consisting of the ﬂavin photore-
ceptor WC-1 and its partner WC-2. Thus, the wc-1 and wc-2 mutants are unable to
photoinduce carotenogenesis, a defect that was conﬁrmed at the level of phytoene
synthase activity (Harding and Turner 1981), carotenoid accumulation (Degli-
Innocenti and Russo 1984), and mRNA levels for structural genes (Saelices et al.
2007). Upon its activation by light, the WC complex acts directly on the promoters
of the target genes (He and Liu 2005), presumably binding to upstream regulatory
elements as those found in the al-3 promoter (Carattoli et al. 1994). As a result,
there is an increase in the mRNA levels of the structural genes al-1 (Schmidhauser
et al. 1990), al-2 (Schmidhauser et al. 1994), al-3 (Baima et al. 1991), and cao-
2 (Saelices et al. 2007). The response is very fast, reaching top levels after
15–30 min of illumination and decreasing afterward. However, the gene for the
last step of the pathway, ylo-1, is not affected by light (Estrada et al. 2008b).
The regulation by light is basically conserved in Fusarium, as indicates the
similar action spectrum described for F. aquaeductuum (Rau 1967) and the
Fig. 8.6 Alternative pathways for late steps of neurosporaxanthin biosynthesis in N. crassa. The
reactions shaded in gray are predominant under cold conditions. The dotted gray lines in
3,4-didehydrolycopene and torulene indicate cleavage sites for the CAO-2 CCD enzyme
246
J. Avalos et al.

identiﬁcation of the orthologous wc-1 genes wcoA in F. fujikuroi (Estrada and
Avalos 2008) and wc1 in F. oxysporum (Ruiz-Rolda´n et al. 2008). However, the
WC heterodimer is not the only photoreceptor involved in photocarotenogenesis in
Fusarium, since the mutants deprived of either WcoA or Wc1 are still able to
accumulate carotenoids in response to light. Recently, it was shown that
photocarotenogenesis in F. fujikuroi is carried out in two stages, a fast one mediated
by WcoA and a slower one in which participates another ﬂavin photoreceptor, the
DASH cryptochrome CryD (Castrillo and Avalos 2015). The signiﬁcant carotenoid
accumulation in the WcoA mutants under constant illumination may be attributed
to CryD, whose photoactivity has been experimentally demonstrated (Castrillo
et al. 2015). Interestingly, the mutation of either wcoA or cryD also affects the
production of other secondary metabolites (Estrada and Avalos 2008; Castrillo et al.
2013), including in the dark in the case of wcoA, indicating other functions for these
photoreceptors in addition to the control of carotenogenesis.
The photoinduction of carotenogenesis in Fusarium reminds that of N. crassa,
but the maximal levels are reached in this case approximately after 1 h of light, as
observed in F. fujikuroi (Prado et al. 2004; Prado-Cabrero et al. 2007),
F. oxysporum (Rodrı´guez-Ortiz et al. 2012), and F. verticillioides (A´ da´m et al.
2011). In the same way that ylo-1 of N. crassa, carD is not affected by light (Dı´az-
Sa´nchez et al. 2011b), as seems also essentially unaffected the GGP synthase gene
ggs-1 (Mende et al. 1997), in this case in contrast to its N. crassa ortholog al-3
(Baima et al. 1991). Photoinduction of carotenogenesis is also affected by other
regulatory mechanisms, as indicates the lower photoresponse exhibited by the
mutants of the adenylate cyclase gene acyA in F. fujikuroi (Garcı´a-Martı´nez et al.
2012) or the mating-type MAT1-2-1 gene in F. verticillioides (A´ da´m et al. 2011).
The decrease in the mRNA levels for the structural genes that follows the
photoinduction
peak
even
if
illumination
persists,
a
process
known
as
photoadaptation, has been investigated in detail in N. crassa, where it is achieved
though the deactivation of the WC complex by hyperphosphorylation (He and Liu
2005). In this process it plays a central role a small ﬂavin photoreceptor, known as
VIVID or VVD (Shrode et al. 2001; Schwerdtfeger and Linden 2003). In the vvd
mutants, the decrease in the mRNA levels of the al genes after their rapid light
induction is less pronounced, leading to a higher carotenoid accumulation (Youssar
et al. 2005; Navarro-Sampedro et al. 2008). Other proteins presumably collaborate
with VVD in photoadaptation, but although new mutants affected in this process
have been identiﬁed (Navarro-Sampedro et al. 2008), the molecular functions of the
affected genes remain to be elucidated.
In addition to light, other regulatory factors control neurosporaxanthin biosyn-
thesis in N. crassa and Fusarium. In N. crassa the conidia formed by aerial mycelia
are orange because of the accumulation of carotenoids, and the synthesis is coupled
to the process of conidiation in a light–independent manner. Thus, when
conidiation is induced in the wild type in the dark by transferring submerged-
grown mycelia to air, there is an increase in al-1 and al-2 transcript levels about
16 h after their transfer, coinciding with the formation of the conidia (Li and
Schmidhauser
1995).
This
induction
is
also
observed
under
continuous
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
247

illumination, when al-1 and al-2 transcript levels are attenuated by photoadaptation,
and it is absent in regulatory mutants defective in conidiation, such as ﬂuffy or
ﬂuffyoid. However, the wc mutants produce pigmented conidia irrespective of
illumination. The separation of the stimulatory effects of light by the WC complex
and of conidiation by FLUFFY or FLUFFYOID is clearly shown when the myce-
lium is simultaneously exposed to light and air. In this case there are two different
inductions, a rapid and transient one produced by light and a late one after 16 h,
which coincides with the formation of the major constrictions during the
conidiation process. In the case of gene al-3, the separate regulations by light and
conidiation are also proved by the synthesis of speciﬁc transcripts for each inducing
condition from different transcription start sites: with a size of 1.6 kb in the ﬁrst case
that requires a functional WC complex and 2.2 kb in the second, dependent of a
functional FLUFFY protein (Arpaia et al. 1995). The complexity of the regulation
of this gene is also shown by the ﬁnding of more than one translation start site
(Vittorioso et al. 1994).
Different observations indicate that the cAMP signaling pathway, involved in
other biological processes, participates in the regulation of neurosporaxanthin
biosynthesis in N. crassa and F. fujikuroi. During the lag phase preceding caroten-
oid photoinduction, there is a transient increase of the cAMP levels in N. crassa,
and the cr-1 (crisp-1) mutants, defective in adenylyl-cyclase activity, contain more
carotenoids in the dark (Kritsky et al. 1982). A similar phenotype is exhibited by the
mutants of the adenylate cyclase gene acyA of F. fujikuroi in the dark (Garcı´a-
Martı´nez et al. 2012). Moreover, carotenoid photoinduction in N. crassa is reduced
by exogenous cAMP addition (Harding 1973), and artiﬁcial upregulation of the
gene gna-1, coding for a Gα component of a heterotrimeric G complex, exhibited
developmental alterations and contained less carotenoids than the control strain
(Yang and Borkovich 1999). As a later observation, the lack of histidine kinase
DCC-1 increases conidia formation and carotenoid production in N. crassa (Barba-
Ostria et al. 2011), but this effect is reversed by cAMP addition. Taken together,
these observations indicate an inverse correlation between cAMP levels and carot-
enoid production in these fungi.
Neurosporaxanthin biosynthesis in N. crassa and F. fujikuroi is stimulated by
nitrogen starvation. In N. crassa, the mRNA levels for the genes al-1 and al-2 in the
dark are higher when the wild type is grown in a medium with 2 mM NH4Cl
(nitrogen limitation) than with 50 mM NH4Cl (nitrogen excess) (Sokolovsky et al.
1992). The same pattern was found in wc mutants, indicating that the effect of
nitrogen is independent of the regulation by light. Likewise, nitrogen starvation
stimulates carotenoid biosynthesis in F. fujikuroi in the dark, as showed
experiments with either immobilized mycelia (Garbayo et al. 2003) or shake
cultures (Rodrı´guez-Ortiz et al. 2009). In both cases, the transfer from high nitrogen
to low nitrogen conditions resulted in an increased carotenoid production,
corroborated in the case of the shake cultures with an increase in carRA and carB
mRNA levels. As in N. crassa, the induction by nitrogen starvation in F. fujikuroi is
248
J. Avalos et al.

independent of the induction by light, as shown by their additive effects when both
stimulating conditions are simultaneously present (Rodrı´guez-Ortiz et al. 2009).
Neurosporaxanthin-overproducing mutants, called carS, have been described in
F. fujikuroi (Avalos and Cerda´-Olmedo 1987; Rodrı´guez-Ortiz et al. 2013) and
F. oxysporum (Rodrı´guez-Ortiz et al. 2012). Their higher carotenoid content is
consistent with the ﬁnding of an increased carotenogenic activity of their cell
extracts in vitro (Avalos et al. 1988) and higher mRNA levels for the structural
genes carRA, carB (Prado et al. 2004; Thewes et al. 2005), carT (Prado-Cabrero
et al. 2007), and carD (Dı´az-Sa´nchez et al. 2011b). Except for the case of carD, the
mRNA levels for these genes in the dark are as high as those in the wild type after
1 h illumination; however, the carS mutants are still able to respond to light either in
F. fujikuroi (Prado-Cabrero et al. 2007) or in F. oxysporum (Rodrı´guez-Ortiz et al.
2012). The gene carS encodes a protein with RF and LON domains, with clear
similarities with the domain features of CrgA of M. circinelloides despite a consid-
erable sequence divergence (Rodrı´guez-Ortiz et al. 2012, 2013), and the carS
mutant phenotype coincides with that of the crgA mutants. The carS mutation not
only affects the synthesis of carotenoids but also the production of other secondary
metabolites, such as gibberellins or bikaverin (Candau et al. 1991a; Rodrı´guez-
Ortiz et al. 2009). The mechanism of action of the CarS protein in Fusarium is
currently object of detailed investigation.
In contrast to Fusarium, no carS-like mutants are known in N. crassa. Two
mutants of this fungus, ccb-1 and ccb-2, have an increased carotenoid content in the
dark (Linden et al. 1997), but their carotenoid levels are quite low compared to
those of the carS strains of Fusarium (Avalos and Cerda´-Olmedo 1987; Rodrı´guez-
Ortiz et al. 2012). The ccb-1 and cbb-2 mutants are also affected in hyphal
morphology, more severely in the case of ccb-1, which is the only one exhibiting
an increase in al-1 and al-2 mRNA levels. Other carotenoid-overproducing mutants
described in this fungus, as vvd (Shrode et al. 2001) and ovc (Harding et al. 1984),
exhibit this phenotype only under light. In the latter case, the ovc phenotype is
accompanied by osmotic sensitivity (Youssar et al. 2005), and it is due to a large
deletion covering 21 genes (Youssar and Avalos 2007), none of them with a
predictable relation with the regulation of carotenogenesis. Carotenoid production
may be also augmented in N. crassa by genetic engineering, as reveals the visible
increase resulting from the expression of the catalytic domain of 3-hydroxy-3-
methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase from S. cerevisiae under control of a strong
promoter (Wang and Keasling 2002).
8.3
Carotenoid Biosynthesis in Yeasts
The color of many pigmented yeasts, frequently in the phylum of basidiomycetes, is
due to the production of carotenoids. β-carotene biosynthesis has been described in
some species, as Rhodosporidium sp. (de Miguel et al. 1997), Sporidiobolus
pararoseus (Han et al. 2012), Ustilago maydis (Estrada et al. 2010), and other
Ustilago species (Will et al. 1984, 1985). However, yeasts usually produce
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
249

xanthophylls. To this group belong canthaxanthin, found in Cantharellus
cinnabarinus (Haxo 1950), plectaniaxanthin in Dioszegia sp. (Madhour et al.
2005), and phillipsiaxanthin, a lycopene derivative with hydroxyl and keto groups,
in the ascomycete Phillipsia carminea (Arpin and Liaaen-Jensen 1967). The
structures of these xanthophylls are depicted in Fig. 8.7. However, the most
investigated
cases
correspond
to
the
productions
of
astaxanthin
by
Xanthophyllomyces
dendrorhous,
and
torularhodin
by
Rhodotorula
sp.,
summarized in the next sections. The biotechnological production of carotenoids
by yeast has been object of a recent review (Mata-Go´mez et al. 2014).
8.3.1
Astaxanthin Biosynthesis in Xanthophyllomyces
Astaxanthin is a red xanthophyll of economic importance because of its beneﬁting
effects on human health (Ambati et al. 2014). The high antioxidant activity and
health-promoting properties of this xanthophyll have led to an increasing use in the
nutraceutical market, where it is sold as an encapsulated product. Astaxanthin is
also widely used as animal feed additive, especially as a source of pigmentation for
some ﬁshes and crustaceans in aquaculture industries, as those of trouts, salmons, or
shrimps (Higuera-Ciapara et al. 2006). Astaxanthin is produced by different
microorganisms, including algae, bacteria, and fungi (Alcaino et al. 2014), and it
is industrially obtained from the alga Haemematococcus pluvialis (Ambati et al.
2014) and the yeast X. dendrorhous (Rodrı´guez-Sa´iz et al. 2010), also known as
Phafﬁa rhodozyma (the anamorph form) (Johnson 2003).
Astaxanthin is synthesized from β-carotene through the introduction of keto and
hydroxyl groups in the β-rings of the molecule (Fig. 8.8). Therefore, the steps up to
β-carotene coincide with those described in former sections for β-carotene-produc-
ing fungi (Fig. 8.2). All the genes speciﬁcally involved in astaxanthin biosynthesis
are known in X. dendrorhous, as well as some involved in early steps of the
terpenoid pathway, as the one coding for the enzyme that isomerizes IPP to
DMAPP (Kajiwara et al. 1997), the FPP synthase gene fpp (Alcaı´no et al. 2014),
and the GGPP synthase gene crtE (Niklitschek et al. 2008). The phytoene synthase/
lycopene cyclase is encoded by the gene crtYB, the ﬁrst one in fungi where the
Fig. 8.7 Chemical structures
of some yeast carotenoids
250
J. Avalos et al.

double function of the enzyme was discovered (Verdoes et al. 1999a). Between the
synthase and cyclase reactions carried out by CrtYB, the four desaturations are
achieved by the desaturase encoded by the gene crtI (Verdoes et al. 1999b). Albino
mutants accumulating phytoene or no carotenes, affected in crtI and presumably in
crtYB, are readily obtained by mutagenesis (Girard et al. 1994), but no mutants
Fig. 8.8 Astaxanthin biosynthesis in X. dendrorhous. In the reactions achieved by CrtS, the
presumed participation of CrtR is omitted. Reactions and chemical structures up to lycopene and
3-4-didehydrolycopene are as shown in Figs. 8.2 and 8.5. Enzymes responsible for each reaction
are indicated close to the chemical modiﬁcation produced in each enzymatic step (gray arrow-
head). The uncycled end of torulene and derivatives is represented in a folded form, as drawn in
original works (Visser et al. 2003; Martı´n et al. 2008). HDCO 3-hydroxy-3040-didehydro-β,-
ψ-carotene-4-one, DCD 3,30-dihydroxy-β,ψ-carotene-4,40dione
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
251

affected in the cyclase activity have been described. However, such activity is
blocked in the presence of nicotine, resulting in the accumulation of lycopene
(Ducrey Sanpietro and Kula 1998). On the other hand, diphenylamine blocks the
desaturase activity and, at a lower concentration, the activity of CrtS-CrtR on
β-carotene, described below.
The conversion of β-carotene to astaxanthin might result in a diversity of
intermediates depending in the order of introduction of the keto and hydroxyl
groups. However, early chemical analysis of the carotenoids in this yeast revealed
the presence of signiﬁcant amounts of echinenone, 3-hydroxy-echinenone and
phoenicoxanthin (Andrewes et al. 1976), suggesting the order of reactions
displayed in Fig. 8.8. The 3-hydroxylations and 4-ketolations are achieved by a
single enzyme of the cytochrome P450 monooxygenase family. The responsible
gene was simultaneously cloned by two different research groups, that named it
crtS (A´ lvarez et al. 2006) and asy (Ojima et al. 2006), referred to crtS hereafter. The
achievement of both types of oxidations by a single enzyme differs from what was
found in astaxanthin-producing algae and bacteria, where independent ketolases
and hydroxylases are involved in the conversion of β-carotene to astaxanthin
(Fraser et al. 1997). However, the expression of crtS in a heterologous system, as
M. circinelloides, results only in the production of hydroxylated derivatives,
indicating the participation in X. dendrorhous of at least an additional protein
(Martı´n et al. 2008). This turned out to be a cytochrome P450 reductase, encoded
by the gene crtR, that provides the electrons for the oxygenation reactions achieved
by CrtS, as indicates the lack of astaxanthin in crtR deletion mutants (Alcaı´no et al.
2008). When CrtS is expressed in a metabolically engineered S. cerevisiae strain
(see next section), it is only active when co-expressed with crtR; despite this yeast
having its own cytochrome P450 reductase (Ukibe et al. 2009). This indicates a
speciﬁc interaction between CrtS and CrtR for proper activity, a conclusion that has
been supported by protein modeling and molecular dynamics simulations (Alcaı´no
et al. 2012).
The chemical analyses of the carotenoids accumulated in X. dendrorhous
identiﬁed
a
novel
xanthophyll,
3-hydroxy-3040-didehydro-β,ψ-carotene-4-one
(HDCO, Fig. 8.8), that implies the occurrence of a side biosynthetic branch of
monocycled carotenoids in this yeast. More detailed chemical analyses found also
torulene and postulated the origin of HDCO through an additional desaturation on
γ-carotene and the introduction of keto and hydroxyl groups at the only β-ionone
ring of the molecule (An et al. 1999). Thus, as already described for N. crassa and
Fusarium sp., this side pathway in X. dendrorhous shows the capacity of the CrtI
desaturase to carry out a ﬁfth desaturation that impedes the introduction of the
second cyclization in the molecule. Moreover, the detection of minor amounts of
the HDCO derivative 3,30-dihydroxy-β,ψ-carotene-4,40dione (DCD) indicates that
the CrtS-CrtR enzymatic machinery is also able to recognize as a substrate the
uncycled end of HDCO (Fig. 8.8).
252
J. Avalos et al.

8.3.2
Biotechnological Astaxanthin Production
The yeast X. dendrorhous (P. rhodozyma) is the only fungus used for industrial
astaxanthin production. The yields may vary considerably depending on the strain
and the growth conditions (Schmidt et al. 2011), and the biotechnological use of
this yeast implies the improvement of the production through the isolation of
astaxanthin-overproducing strains and the development of more efﬁcient culture
conditions (see, e.g., the study described by Meyer et al. 1993). Despite this fungus
is diploid (Kucsera et al. 1998), deep-pigmented mutants producing more
carotenoids are easily detected after adequate mutagenesis treatments (Visser
et al. 2003), allowing increases in astaxanthin content ranging from 2–3-fold
(Fang and Cheng 1992; Stachowiak 2013; Barbachano-Torres et al. 2014) to
10–15-fold (Miao et al. 2010). In addition, different enrichment methods have
been successfully used to obtain mutants with higher astaxanthin production, as
those based on antymicin resistance (An et al. 1989), β-ionone inhibition (Lewis
et al. 1990), ﬂow cytometry sorting (An et al. 1991; Brehm-Stecher and Johnson
2012), photosensitization (An 1997), DPA resistance (Chumpolkulwong et al.
1997), or low-dose gamma irradiation (Sun et al. 2004). Incubation under continu-
ous illumination has no relevant effect on the accumulation of carotenoids in this
yeast (Johnson and Lewis 1979), or it even has a detrimental effect (An and Johnson
1990), but it results in increase of the carotenoid content in antimycin-treated cells
(An and Johnson 1990), in some astaxanthin-overproducing mutants (Meyer and
Du Preez 1994), and in an industrial strain (de la Fuente et al. 2010).
X. dendrorhous is amenable to genetic transformation (Martı´nez et al. 1998),
allowing to obtain strains with enhanced astaxanthin production through engineered
metabolic alterations (Visser et al. 2003). In this way, different yield improvements
were obtained through the increased expression of early genes of the terpenoid
pathway (Hara et al. 2014), the GGPP synthase crtE gene (Breitenbach et al. 2011),
the bifunctional crtYB gene (Ledetzky et al. 2014), and the crtS gene (Chi et al.
2015) or through the deletion of genes related to ergosterol biosynthesis (Loto et al.
2012; Yamamoto et al. 2016), thus releasing the repression of HMG-CoA reduc-
tase. A similar stimulation was obtained by the targeted deletion of mig1, encoding
the orthologous global regulator of catabolite repression, indicating that glucose
availability plays a regulatory role in carotenoid biosynthesis in X. dendrorhous
(Alcaı´no et al. 2016). Actually, glucose exerts a negative effect on astaxanthin
biosynthesis (Yamane et al. 1997). Recently, the introduction of several vectors to
an overproducing mutant to obtain the combined increased expression of crtYB and
crtS (Gassel et al. 2013), and later with the addition of a truncated version of the
HMG-CoA reductase gene hmg1 from S. cerevisiae and the endogenous crtE gene
(Gassel et al. 2014), allowed to reach carotenoid levels comparable to the extremely
high production obtained with the alga H. pluvialis. However, the modiﬁed expres-
sion of carotenogenic genes may eventually result in undesired effects for
astaxanthin production. Thus, overexpression of crtYB or crtI may lead to increased
proportions of β-carotene and echinone or monocyclic carotenoids, respectively
(Verdoes et al. 2003).
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
253

As described for B. trispora, oxidative stress affects the synthesis of astaxanthin
in X. dendrorhous. A positive correlation has been found between oxygen levels in
the medium and astaxanthin biosynthesis (Yamane et al. 1997). Photochemical
generation of singlet oxygen with rose bengal or alpha-terthienyl results in a higher
astaxanthin accumulation, but H2O2 or the peroxyl radical-generating agent
t-butylhydroperoxide decreases the content of astaxanthin, although it is
compensated by a higher β-carotene accumulation (Schroeder and Johnson
1995a). Other authors, however, found the opposite effect for H2O2, its addition
increasing the astaxanthin proportion at expenses of that of β-carotene (Liu and Wu
2006b). Moreover, the presence of H2O2 under continuous culture renewal
conditions that allow higher astaxanthin yields compared to standard batch cultures
leads to a further improvement in the production (Liu and Wu 2007). The increased
astaxanthin production in the presence of oxidative agents must be related with the
antioxidant properties of this xanthophyll, as indicates the positive correlation
between carotenoid content and survival of the yeast in media supplemented with
H2O2 or under chemical conditions generating superoxide (Schroeder and Johnson
1993) or singlet oxygen (Schroeder and Johnson 1995b). The proteomes in cells at
different culture stages are consistent with a relation of astaxanthin production with
the defense against reactive oxygen species generated during metabolism
(Martinez-Moya et al. 2011).
The composition of the medium exerts a strong inﬂuence on astaxanthin pro-
duction in X. dendrorhous cultures (Johnson and Lewis 1979). The use of a
non-fermentable carbon source, succinate, instead of the fermentable glucose
results in a duplication of the carotenoid level (Wozniak et al. 2011), which has
been associated to an increased acetyl-CoA availability and cellular respiration rate
and presumably also to enhanced oxidative stress (Martinez-Moya et al. 2015). A
signiﬁcant increase in total carotenoid content is also obtained with low nitrogen or
phosphate concentrations and with citrate addition, but changes in astaxanthin are
not so marked (Flores-Cotera et al. 2001). An increase in carotenoid content is also
produced in different genetic backgrounds by addition of ethanol, possibly also
related with enhanced oxidative stress, but the proportion of astaxanthin was not
determined (Gu et al. 1997). In this case, increased HMG-CoA reductase was
detected in the presence of ethanol, which may be the result of a regulatory effect.
In support to this observation, addition of mevalonic acid, the product of this
enzyme, enhances the accumulation of astaxanthin (Calo et al. 1995). In other
cases, the chemical basis of the inducing agents remains to be identiﬁed. The
presence of a fungal contaminant, identiﬁed as Epicoccum nigrum, in Petri dishes
with X. dendrorhous colonies, or the incubation of the yeast in media with ﬁltered
extracts from E. nigrum cultures, results in increased carotenoid production,
suggesting that the contaminant fungus produces a stimulatory metabolite
(Echavarri-Erasun and Johnson 2004). Similarly, unidentiﬁed fungal elicitors
from diverse fungi (Wang et al. 2006) or certain plant extracts (Kim et al. 2007)
have inducing effects.
Considering the variations in astaxanthin content depending on the culture
conditions and media composition, many efforts have been addressed to improve
254
J. Avalos et al.

the culture parameters for optimal production (see, e.g., Ramı´rez et al. 2001; Liu
et al. 2008). The changes in basic fermentation parameters, as pH, temperature,
inoculum, and carbon or nitrogen concentrations, usually done on batch cultures
because of experimental amenability, may lead to tenfold variations in carotene
production (Ramı´rez et al. 2001). As already mentioned for β-carotene production
with B. trispora, the use of cheap substrates contributes to increase the proﬁtability
of astaxanthin production as an industrial activity, and many different substrates
proved useful for industrial growth of X. dendrorhous. The alternative nutrient
sources successfully used include corn wet-milling coproducts (Hayman et al.
1995), peat hydrolysates (Acheampong and Martin 1995; Va´zquez and Martin
1998), sugarcane juice (Fontana et al. 1996), wood hemicellulosic hydrolysates
(Parajo et al. 1998), beet blackstrap molasses (An et al. 2001), raw coconut milk
(Domı´nguez-Bocanegra and Torres-Mu~noz 2004), mustard wastes (Tinoi et al.
2006), pineapple juice (Jirasripongpun et al. 2008), sugarcane bagasse and barley
straw hydroxylates (Montanti et al. 2011), mussel-processing wastewater (Amado
and Va´zquez 2015), and others (Frengova and Beshkova 2009). Although behavior
of this yeast may be similar in aerated fermenters or in batch cultures (Acheampong
and Martin 1995), the growth conditions in industrial fermenters require to optimize
other parameters. A representative example is found in the search for the optimal
pH and dilution rate combination using a response surface methodology (Va´zquez
and Martin 1998).
Contrary to the many efforts dedicated to develop the industrial astaxanthin
production by X. dendrorhous, the regulation of the expression of the carotenogenic
genes has received little attention. The ampliﬁcation of the cDNA products for the
genes crtI and crtYB revealed the occurrence of alternative splicing events, leading
to the formation of predictably nonfunctional proteins (Lodato et al. 2003). Inter-
estingly, the proportion of correctly spliced mRNAs decreased with aging for the
gene crtI, suggesting a possible regulatory mechanism of CrtI levels mediated
through transcript maturation. Some expression studies have focused the attention
on the relation between enhanced carotenoid biosynthetic activity and mRNA
levels for the structural genes. In a comparison between a wild type and two
carotenoid-overproducing mutants, no correlation was found in RT-PCR analyses
between transcript levels for the genes idi, crtE, crtYB, and crtI and carotenoid
production (Lodato et al. 2004). A later detailed study of the kinetics of growth,
carotenoid content, and mRNA levels for the same genes, in this case extended to
crtS, revealed only minor differences between the wild type and one mutant
(Lodato et al. 2007). In both strains, the transcript levels for the genes idi and
crtE were similar at either the exponential or the stationary phase, while those for
crtYB, crtI, and crtS reached maximal levels at the end of the exponential phase and
decreased afterward. On the other hand, RT-qPCR analyses of the expression of the
whole set of genes involved in astaxanthin biosynthesis found increased mRNA
levels for crtE and crtR in an overproducing mutant, but against expected, the
pattern was the contrary for crtYB and crtS in advanced culture stages
(Castelblanco-Matiz et al. 2015). Even so, in this strain crtYB and crtS contained
mutations in their coding sequences, which might result in a higher enzymatic
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
255

activity. However, other overproducing mutants may have a different molecular
explanation, as indicates the much higher levels for genes crtE, crtYB (called in this
case pbs), crtI, and crtS (called here ast) in a particular mutant strain compared to
the wild type, while genes for earlier steps in the terpenoid pathway were basically
unaffected (Miao et al. 2011). The overproducing phenotype in this case was also
related with a decrease in ergosterol and fatty acids production.
Other reports have described the effects on gene expression of culture conditions
leading to a higher carotenoid content. The inducing effect of succinate on
astaxanthin biosynthesis is accompanied by some changes in the expression
patterns of the carotenogenic genes, with a delay in the maximal mRNA levels in
succinate for crtS and for the alternative spliced versions of crtYB and crtI, although
such changes seem insufﬁcient to explain the differences in carotenoid production
(Wozniak et al. 2011). However, the inducing effect of ethanol may be explained by
a transient but signiﬁcant increase in crtYB, crtI, and crtS transcript levels, while the
opposite pattern was found upon addition of glucose (Marcoleta et al. 2011). The
stimulating effect of oxygen on astaxanthin biosynthesis may be at least partially
explained by an effect on gene expression, as indicates the positive correlation
between dissolved oxygen and mRNA levels for crtE, crtYB, crtI, and crtS
(Wu et al. 2011).
8.3.3
Biosynthesis of Torularhodin and Other Xanthophylls
Torularhodin is well known because of its production by the yeasts of the genus
Rhodotorula (Moline´ et al. 2012), but it has been also found in other yeasts, as those
of the genera Peniophora, Cystoﬁlobasidium, Rhodosporidium, Sporobolomyces,
and Sporidiobolus (Buzzini et al. 2007; Iurkov et al. 2008). Torularhodin has a
chemical structure similar to that of neurosporaxanthin, but with 40 carbon atoms
instead of 35 (Sperstad et al. 2006). A ﬁrst biosynthetic pathway for this xantho-
phyll was early proposed for Rhodotorula glutinis, based on the intermediates
accumulated by their cultures under unfavorable biosynthetic conditions, as low
temperature or the presence of methylheptenone and β-ionone vapors, and from
former chemical studies (Simpson et al. 1964). The sequence of reactions to
produce torularhodin (Fig. 8.9) coincides with that of neurosporaxanthin biosyn-
thesis up to torulene (see Fig. 8.5). However, instead of the cleaving reaction
characteristic of this pathway, in R. glutinis, torulene is object of an oxidation
reaction to generate an aldehyde group, which is oxidized further to generate the
ﬁnal torularhodin carboxylic group. Chemical studies in Cystoﬁlobasidium
demonstrated
the
occurrence
not
only
of
the
aldehyde
intermediate,
torularhodinaldehyde, but also of 160-hydroxytorulene, indicating three successive
oxidation steps from torulene to the ﬁnal product (Herz et al. 2007), as depicted in
Fig. 8.9. The chemical analysis of the carotenoids produced by 13 different
Rhodotorula species showed considerable differences in their concentrations and
the presence of variable proportions of β-carotene in addition to torularhodin and its
precursors γ-carotene and torulene (Buzzini et al. 2007). Therefore, as found in the
256
J. Avalos et al.

neurosporaxanthin pathway, the γ-carotene intermediate in torularhodin biosynthe-
sis may be subject of a second cyclization instead of the ﬁfth desaturation (Fig. 8.9).
In contrast to the synthesis of astaxanthin or other fungal carotenoids described
in former sections, no reports are available on the identiﬁcation or characterization
of the genes involved in torularhodin biosynthesis in the producing yeasts. How-
ever, many reports have been dedicated to the improvement of the production of
this xanthophyll in Rhodotorula species. Mutagenesis methods, based in the expo-
sure to either chemical mutagens (Frengova et al. 2004b) or UV-B radiation
(Moline´ et al. 2012), have been successfully employed to obtain torularhodin-
overproducing mutants. Illumination has a retarding effect on growth of
R. glutinis, but blue light stimulates signiﬁcantly the accumulation of torularhodin
biosynthesis (Sakaki et al. 2000, 2001), an effect that is more pronounced in an
overproducing mutant (Sakaki et al. 2000, 2001). Actually, torularhodin exerts a
photoprotective role, as indicates the positive correlation between the presence of
this xanthophyll and the resistance to UV-B in strains of Rhodotorula mucilaginosa
with different carotenoid content (Moline´ et al. 2010). In another report, illumina-
tion of the yeast in a fermentor resulted in a duplication of the carotenoid content,
but in this case β-carotene was predominant (68%) while torularhodin content only
reached 21.5% (Zhang et al. 2014). In contrast, oxidative stress artiﬁcially induced
Fig. 8.9 Proposed
torularhodin biosynthetic
pathway. Reactions and
chemical structures up to
β-zeacarotene are as shown in
Figs. 8.2 and 8.5. Reactions
between torulene and
torularhodin are as proposed
by Herz et al. (2007)
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
257

by addition of chemicals generating reactive oxygen species, as methyl viologen or
methylene blue, increased both the carotenoid content and the torularhodin propor-
tion in R. glutinis (Sakaki et al. 2002b). The protective role of torularhodin against
oxidative stress was formerly observed in R. mucilaginosa, in which the absence of
colored carotenoids produced by addition of diphenylamine resulted in cells more
sensitive to duroquinone or to hyperoxia than those with a normal carotenoid
content (Moore et al. 1989).
Because of its characteristics, torularhodin is a xanthophyll with potential
applications in food and cosmetic industries (Herna´ndez-Almanza et al. 2014a;
Zoz et al. 2015). Recent reports describe different efforts to develop industrial
culture conditions allowing improved carotenoid production with Rhodotorula
species or with other yeasts, usually containing torularhodin mixed with other
carotenoids, as torulene and β-carotene. In a classical optimization work, the effect
of initial pH, temperature, aeration rate, carbon (glucose, molasses, sucrose, and
whey lactose), nitrogen concentration, as well as cotton seed oil and Tween 80 as
potentially activating agents, was investigated in batch cultures of strains of
R. mucilaginosa (Aksu and Eren 2005) and R. glutinis (Aksu and Eren 2007). As
already described for β-carotene and astaxanthin productions, research efforts with
Rhodotorula species have been frequently addressed to check the potential use of
low-cost substrates for carotenoid production, although the torularhodin proportion
in the carotenoid mixtures was frequently disregarded. The cheap substrates tested
include grape must, glucose syrup, beet molasses, soybean or maize ﬂour extracts
(Buzzini and Martini 1999), hydrolyzed mung bean waste ﬂour (Tinoi et al. 2005),
crude glycerol from biodiesel plants (Saenge et al. 2011), and brewery efﬂuents
(Schneider et al. 2013). In a different approach, some Rhodotorula species were
cocultivated with yogurt starter bacteria in media with whey ultraﬁltrates (Frengova
et al. 1994, 2004a). In some cases β-carotene is particularly abundant, leading to
different reports on the potential use of Rhodotorula strains for its biotechnological
production, e.g., in stirred or airlift tanks (Yen and Chang 2015), in solid-state
fermentation (Herna´ndez-Almanza et al. 2014b), or to obtain β-carotene-enriched
biomass with different processed waste substrates (Marova et al. 2012).
In addition to Rhodotorula, other torularhodin-producing yeasts have been
considered as alternative biotechnological carotenoid sources. Glycerol is particu-
larly efﬁcient for torularhodin biosynthesis by Sporobolomyces ruberrimus (Razani
et al. 2007), even using raw glycerol from biodiesel production (Cardoso et al.
2016). Basic fermentation parameters and their effects on carotenoid production
were also investigated in Sporidiobolus pararoseus (Valduga et al. 2009), which
was more recently optimized in a cheap glycerol-based medium (Valduga et al.
2014), but the proportion of torularhodin in the total carotenoid mixtures was not
determined in these studies. Carob pulp syrup and sugarcane molasses proved
efﬁcient for the production of carotenoids by Rhodosporidium toruloides (Freitas
et al. 2014). A particularly innovative strategy to enhance the carotenoid production
by this species was the expression of the Pdr10 multidrug transporter from
S. cerevisiae, adapted for the codon usage of R. toruloides and the culture of this
yeast in two-phase media containing oil (Lee et al. 2016). Unexpectedly, a higher
258
J. Avalos et al.

proportion of torulene was exported when pdr10 was expressed, indicating that
torularhodin export was less efﬁcient. Torularhodin may be also obtained from
Sporobolomyces salmonicolor biomass, as a potential side product in the use of this
yeast for exopolysaccharides production (Dimitrova et al. 2013).
8.3.4
Use of Yeasts for Heterologous Carotenoid Production
Heterologous expression in non-carotenogenic microorganisms, as E. coli and some
yeasts, has been a powerful tool in functional studies of carotenoid biosynthetic
genes and in the development of new carotenoid producing systems (Schmidt-
Dannert 2000; Sandmann 2002). In the case of yeasts, the experimental amenability
derived from its extensive use in basic research and in brewing and fermentative
industries has made S. cerevisiae a favorite system for heterologous expression. The
ﬁrst report on the use of S. cerevisiae for heterologous carotenoid production
consisted in the introduction of a plasmid with the Erwinia uredovora genes crtE,
crtB, and crtI (coding for GGPP synthase, phytoene synthase, and phytoene
desaturase, respectively) under control of yeast promoters. The expression of
these foreign genes led to lycopene production, which was mostly replaced by
β-carotene if the lycopene cyclase crtY was also included (Yamano et al. 1994).
Later, the overexpression of crtI and crtYB from X. dendrorhous in S. cerevisiae
allowed the accumulation of variable amounts of β-carotene and their precursors.
The production was enhanced by increasing substrate supply through the expression
of either the homologous GGPP synthase gene or its ortholog from X. dendrorhous
crtE and a truncated version of the S. cerevisiae HMG-CoA reductase gene hmg1
(Verwaal et al. 2007), mentioned in a former section. Improved production was also
attained by expressing in parallel to ctrI and crtYB from X. dendrorhous the
mevalonate kinase gene mvaK1 from Staphylococcus aureus (Lange and
Steinbüchel 2011), by codon optimization for S. cerevisiae of the crtI and crtYB
genes (Li et al. 2013) or simply incubating at 20 C instead of its usual growth
temperature of 30 C (Shi et al. 2014).
The biosynthesis of β-carotene in S. cerevisiae has been subsequently altered in
different ways. Production of lycopene was also attained with X. dendrorhous genes
through the elimination of the cyclase activity of the crtYB gene of X. dendrorhous,
co-expressed with crtE and crtI (Xie et al. 2015). In this case, the carotene levels
were raised further improving the catalytic activity of CrtE by directed evolution and
varying the copy number of the crt genes. In other study, lycopene production was
particularly efﬁcient by combining the crtE (GGPP synthase) and crtB (phytoene
synthase) genes from the bacterium Pantoea agglomerans with the carB gene from
B. trispora (called BtCrtI in this study), accompanied by other host alterations (Xie
et al. 2015). As an innovative approach, the crtI, crtE, and crtYB coding sequences
were also expressed in S. cerevisiae as a single polycistronic transcript separated by
the T2A sequence of the Thosea asigna virus, resulting in the subsequent separation
in independent polypeptides during mRNA translation (Beekwilder et al. 2014);
the additional expression of the β-carotene cleavage dioxygenase RiCCD1 from
raspberry in these S. cerevisiae cells allowed the production of β-ionone. This
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
259

apocarotenoid was also produced by separate expression in S. cerevisiae of the crtI,
crtE, and crtYB genes in parallel with the Petunia hybrida PhCCD1 gene (Lo´pez
et al. 2015), while the expression of algal β-carotene ketolase genes in similar
S. cerevisiae β-carotene producing strains allowed the accumulation of signiﬁcant
amounts of canthaxanthin (Chang et al. 2015).
The production of carotenoids in S. cerevisiae, presumably at expenses of the
deviation of substrates normally used for sterols biosynthesis, results in stressed
cells. This conclusion is supported by the speciﬁc induction in the carotenoid-
producing cells of genes of the pleiotropic drug resistance response (PDR),
involved in secretion of toxic compounds (Verwaal et al. 2010). Actually, the
addition of an appropriate solvent leads to secretion of carotenoids, indicating
that the cells are unable to secrete it in the usual hydrophilic environment of the
laboratory cultures. Accordingly, the synthesis of different xanthophyll mixtures,
obtained through the expression of crtI and crtYB in combination with crtS and crtR
from X. dendrorhous or with the bacterial ketolase and hydroxylase genes crtW and
crtZ, results in a reduced growth compared to the wild type, although these
xanthophyll-producing strains exhibit a better growth capacity in the presence of
1.7 mM H2O2 (Ukibe et al. 2009). In contrast, the canthaxanthin-producing strains
obtained by expression of algal β-carotene ketolase genes exhibit a slightly faster
growth than the control strain in the absence of artiﬁcially induced oxidative stress
(Chang et al. 2015).
Besides S. cerevisiae, other biotechnological yeasts lacking carotenoid biosynthe-
sis have been used for heterologous carotenoid production. The sequences of the crtE,
crtB, and crtI genes from E. uredovora were modiﬁed for optimal codon usage and
expressed in Candida utilis under control of constitutive promoters from this yeast,
leading to lycopene production (Miura et al. 1998), accumulated in higher levels if
the cells were engineered for increased HMGCoA reductase activity and reduced
squalene synthesis (Shimada et al. 1998). Lycopene was efﬁciently converted to
β-carotene in the same yeast by the additional expression of the cyclase gene crtY
from E. uredovora and to astaxanthin if the β-carotene ketolase (crtW) and hydroxy-
lase (crtZ) genes from Agrobacterium aurantiacum were also expressed (Miura et al.
1998). Another yeast successfully used for carotenoid synthesis is Pichia pastoris,
known as industrial producer of heterologous proteins. Two plasmid combinations,
one with the already mentioned crtE, crtB, and crtI genes from E. uredovora and
another carrying these genes together with the cyclase crtL gene from the plant Ficus
carica, in all cases under control of yeast promoters, led, respectively, to notable
lycopene and β-carotene productions (Araya-Garay et al. 2012b), while the supple-
mentary expression of crtW and crtZ genes from A. aurantiacum added astaxanthin to
the produced carotenoids (Araya-Garay et al. 2012a).
8.4
Conclusions
Because of their easy growth and manipulation, the fungi have been a major choice
by the researchers as a tool to investigate the molecular basis of carotenoid
biosynthesis and its regulation in microorganisms and by biotechnologists as a
260
J. Avalos et al.

source for carotenoids demanded by the market. Usually, depending on their
speciﬁc features, different species have been used for one purpose or the other.
P. blakesleeanus, and later also M. circinelloides, have been extensively used to
learn about the biochemistry and the genetics of β-carotene production, while
N. crassa and F. fujikuroi have been the major sources of information on
neurosporaxanthin biosynthesis. In the case of β-carotene, most of the efforts on
its biotechnological production have been dedicated to B. trispora, which was
beneﬁted from the scientiﬁc background generated with P. blakesleeanus and
M.
circinelloides.
In
contrast,
the
possible
biotechnological
interest
of
neurosporaxanthin
has
not
received
attention.
Regarding
the
yeasts,
X. dendrorhous (P. rhodozyma) has been the major object of attention for
astaxanthin production, both from the scientiﬁc and biotechnological points of
view, while genetics and biochemistry of the carotenoids pathways for the produc-
tion of other xanthophylls have received very limited attention. Torularhodin
production is a notable exception, but the efforts on this xanthophyll were mostly
focused on its biotechnological production. The concentration of the research on
very few species has allowed a deep knowledge on the molecular basis of caroten-
oid biosynthesis of the cases investigated, and the high conservation between the
ortholog genes of the carotenoid pathways facilitates the prediction for the capacity
to produce carotenoids by organisms for which the genome sequences become
available. Nevertheless, the low number of fungi investigated in detail allows
anticipating that novel fungal carotenoids or more suitable carotenoid producers
could be available in the future with more extensive screenings, widening the
biotechnological potential of the fungi.
Acknowledgments We thank the Spanish Government (projects BIO2012-39716 and BIO2015-
69613-R), and Andalusian Government (project CTS-6638) for funding support. The grants
include support from the European Union (European Regional Development Fund [ERDF]).
References
Aasen AJ, Jensen SL (1965) Fungal carotenoids II. The structure of the carotenoid acid
neurosporaxanthin. Acta Chem Scand 19:1843–1853
Acheampong EA, Martin AM (1995) Kinetic studies on the yeast Phafﬁa rhodozyma. J Basic
Microbiol 35:147–155
A´ da´m AL, Garcı´a-Martı´nez J, Szücs EP et al (2011) The MAT1-2-1 mating-type gene upregulates
photo-inducible carotenoid biosynthesis in Fusarium verticillioides. FEMS Microbiol Lett
318:76–83
Ahrazem O, Go´mez-Go´mez L, Rodrigo M et al (2016) Carotenoid cleavage oxygenases from
microbes and photosynthetic organisms: features and functions. Int J Mol Sci 17:1781
Aksu Z, Eren AT (2005) Carotenoids production by the yeast Rhodotorula mucilaginosa: use of
agricultural wastes as a carbon source. Process Biochem 40:2985–2991
Aksu Z, Eren AT (2007) Production of carotenoids by the isolated yeast of Rhodotorula glutinis.
Biochem Eng J 35:107–113
Alcaı´no J, Barahona S, Carmona M et al (2008) Cloning of the cytochrome p450 reductase (crtR)
gene and its involvement in the astaxanthin biosynthesis of Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous.
BMC Microbiol 8:169
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
261

Alcaı´no J, Fuentealba M, Cabrera R et al (2012) Modeling the interfacial interactions between
CrtS and CrtR from Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous, a P450 system involved in astaxanthin
production. J Agric Food Chem 60:8640–8647
Alcaino J, Baeza M, Cifuentes V (2014) Astaxanthin and related xanthophylls. In: Martı´n J-F,
Garcı´a-Estrada C, Zeilinger S (eds) Biosynthesis and molecular genetics of fungal secondary
metabolites. Springer, New York, NY, pp 187–208
Alcaı´no J, Romero I, Niklitschek M et al (2014) Functional characterization of the
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase and geranylgeranyl pyro-
phosphate synthase encoding genes that are involved in the synthesis of isoprenoid precursors.
PLoS One 9:e96626
Alcaı´no J, Bravo N, Co´rdova P et al (2016) The involvement of Mig1 from Xanthophyllomyces
dendrorhous in catabolic repression: an active mechanism contributing to the regulation of
carotenoid production. PLoS One 11:e0162838
Almeida ER, Cerda´-Olmedo E (2008) Gene expression in the regulation of carotene biosynthesis
in Phycomyces. Curr Genet 53:129–137
A´ lvarez V, Rodrı´guez-Sa´iz M, de la Fuente JL et al (2006) The crtS gene of Xanthophyllomyces
dendrorhous encodes a novel cytochrome-P450 hydroxylase involved in the conversion of
β-carotene into astaxanthin and other xanthophylls. Fungal Genet Biol 43:261–272
Amado IR, Va´zquez JA (2015) Mussel processing wastewater: a low-cost substrate for the
production of astaxanthin by Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Microb Cell Factories 14:177
Ambati RR, Phang SM, Ravi S, Aswathanarayana RG (2014) Astaxanthin: sources, extraction,
stability, biological activities and its commercial applications—a review. Mar Drugs
12:128–152
An GH (1997) Photosensitization of the yeast Phafﬁa rhodozyma at a low temperature for
screening carotenoid hyperproducing mutants. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 66:263–268
An GH, Johnson EA (1990) Inﬂuence of light on growth and pigmentation of the yeast Phafﬁa
rhodozyma. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 57:191–203
An GH, Schuman DB, Johnson EA (1989) Isolation of Phafﬁa rhodozyma mutants with increased
astaxanthin content. Appl Environ Microbiol 55:116–124
An GH, Bielich J, Auerbach R, Johnson EA (1991) Isolation and characterization of carotenoid
hyperproducing mutants of yeast by ﬂow cytometry and cell sorting. Biotechnology (N Y)
9:70–73
An GH, Cho MH, Johnson EA (1999) Monocyclic carotenoid biosynthetic pathway in the yeast
Phafﬁa rhodozyma (Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous). J Biosci Bioeng 88:189–193
An GH, Jang BG, Cho MH (2001) Cultivation of the carotenoid-hyperproducing mutant 2A2N of
the red yeast Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous (Phafﬁa rhodozyma) with molasses. J Biosci
Bioeng 92:121–125
Andrewes AG, Phaff HJ, Starr MP (1976) Carotenoids of Phafﬁa rhodozyma, a red-pigmented
fermenting yeast. Phytochemistry 15:1003–1007
Arago´n CM, Murillo FJ, de la Guardia MD, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1976) An enzyme complex for the
dehydrogenation of phytoene in Phycomyces. Eur J Biochem FEBS 63:71–75
Araya-Garay JM, Ageitos JM, Vallejo JA et al (2012a) Construction of a novel Pichia pastoris
strain for production of xanthophylls. AMB Express 2:24
Araya-Garay JM, Feijoo-Siota L, Rosa-dos-Santos F et al (2012b) Construction of new Pichia
pastoris X-33 strains for production of lycopene and β-carotene. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
93:2483–2492
Arpaia G, Carattoli A, Macino G (1995) Light and development regulate the expression of the
albino-3 gene in Neurospora crassa. Dev Biol 170:626–635
Arpin N, Liaaen-Jensen S (1967) Chemotaxonomic research on fungi. Fungal carotenoids.
IV. Carotenoids of Phillipsia carminea (Pat.) Le Gal; isolation and identiﬁcation of a new
natural xanthophyll. Bull Soc Chim Biol (Paris) 49:527–536
262
J. Avalos et al.

Arrach N, Ferna´ndez-Martı´n R, Cerda´-Olmedo E, Avalos J (2001) A single gene for lycopene
cyclase, phytoene synthase, and regulation of carotene biosynthesis in Phycomyces. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 98:1687–1692
Arrach N, Schmidhauser TJ, Avalos J (2002) Mutants of the carotene cyclase domain of al-2 from
Neurospora crassa. Mol Gen Genomics 266:914–921
Austin DG, Bu’Lock JD, Winstanley DJ (1969) Trisporic acid biosynthesis and carotenogenesis in
Blakesleea trispora. Biochem J 113:34P
Austin DJ, Bu’Lock JD, Drake D (1970) The biosynthesis of trisporic acids from β-carotene via
retinal and trisporol. Experientia 26:348–349
Avalos J, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1987) Carotenoid mutants of Gibberella fujikuroi. Curr Genet
25:1837–1841
Avalos J, Cerda´-Olmedo E (2004) Fungal carotenoid production. In: Arora DK (ed) Handbook of
fungal biotechnology, 2nd edn. Marcel Dekker, New York, pp 367–378
Avalos J, Corrochano LM (2013) Carotenoid biosynthesis in Neurospora. In: Kasbekar DP,
McCluskey K (eds) Neurospora: genomics and molecular biology. Caister Academic Press,
Norfolk, pp 227–241
Avalos J, Estrada AF (2010) Regulation by light in Fusarium. Fungal Genet Biol 47:930–938
Avalos J, Schrott EL (1990) Photoinduction of carotenoid biosynthesis in Gibberella fujikuroi.
FEMS Microbiol Lett 66:295–298
Avalos J, Mackenzie A, Nelki DS, Bramley PM (1988) Terpenoid biosynthesis in cell-extracts of
wild type and mutant strains of Gibberella fujikuroi. Biochim Biophys Acta 966:257–265
Avalos J, Dı´az-Sa´nchez V, Garcı´a-Martı´nez J et al (2014a) Carotenoids. In: Martı´n JF, Garcı´a-
Estrada C, Zeilinger S (eds) Biosynthesis and molecular genetics of fungal secondary
metabolites. Springer, New York, pp 149–185
Baima S, Macino G, Morelli G (1991) Photoregulation of the albino-3 gene in Neurospora crassa.
J Photochem Photobiol B 11:107–115
Barbachano-Torres A, Castelblanco-Matiz LM, Ramos-Valdivia AC et al (2014) Analysis of
proteomic
changes
in
colored
mutants
of
Xanthophyllomyces
dendrorhous
(Phafﬁa
rhodozyma). Arch Microbiol 196:411–421
Barba-Ostria C, Lledias F, Georgellis D (2011) The Neurospora crassa DCC-1 protein, a putative
histidine kinase, is required for normal sexual and asexual development and carotenogenesis.
Eukaryot Cell 10:1733–1739
Barbato C, Calissano M, Pickford A et al (1996) Mild RIP-an alternative method for in vivo
mutagenesis of the albino-3 gene in Neurospora crassa. Mol Gen Genet 252:353–361
Barredo J-L (ed) (2012) Microbial carotenoids from fungi: methods and protocols. Humana Press,
New York
Barrero AF, Herrador MM, Arteaga P et al (2011) New apocarotenoids and β-carotene cleavage in
Blakeslea trispora. Org Biomol Chem 9:7190–7195
Bartley GE, Schmidhauser TJ, Yanofsky C, Scolnik PA (1990) Carotenoid desaturases from
Rhodobacter capsulatus and Neurospora crassa are structurally and functionally conserved
and contain domains homologous to ﬂavoprotein disulﬁde oxidoreductases. J Biol Chem
265:16020–16024
Beekwilder J, van Rossum HM, Koopman F et al (2014) Polycistronic expression of a β-carotene
biosynthetic pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae coupled to β-ionone production. J
Biotechnol 192(Pt B):383–392
Bejarano ER, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1989) Inhibition of phytoene dehydrogenation and activation of
carotenogenesis in Phycomyces. Phytochemistry 28:1623–1626
Bejarano ER, Avalos J, Lipson ED, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1991) Photoinduced accumulation of
carotene in Phycomyces. Planta 183:1–9
Bejarano ER, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1992) Independence of the carotene and sterol pathways of
Phycomyces. FEBS Lett 306:209–212
Bejarano ER, Govind NS, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1987) ξ-carotene and other carotenes in a
Phycomyces mutant. Phytochemistry 26:2251–2254
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
263

Bejarano ER, Parra F, Murillo FJ, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1988) End-product regulation of
carotenogenesis in Phycomyces. Arch Microbiol 150:209–214
Bergman K, Eslava AP, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1973) Mutants of Phycomyces with abnormal photot-
ropism. Mol Gen Genet 123:1–16
Bieszke JA, Braun EL, Bean LE et al (1999a) The nop-1 gene of Neurospora crassa encodes a
seven transmembrane helix retinal-binding protein homologous to archaeal rhodopsins. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 96:8034–8039
Bieszke JA, Spudich EN, Scott KL et al (1999b) A eukaryotic protein, NOP-1, binds retinal to
form an archaeal rhodopsin-like photochemically reactive pigment. Biochemistry (Mosc)
38:14138–14145
Bindl E, Lang W, Rau W (1970) Untersuchungen über die lichtabha¨ngige Carotinoidsynthese. VI
Zeitlicher Verlauf der Synthese der einzelnen Carotinoide bei Fusarium aquaeductuum unter
verschiedenen Induktionsbedingungen. Planta 94:156–174
Blasco JL, Roeßink D, Iturriaga EA et al (2001) Photocarotenogenesis in phycomyces: expression
of the carB gene encoding phytoene dehydrogenase. J Plant Res 114:25–31
Blomhoff R, Blomhoff HK (2006) Overview of retinoid metabolism and function. J Neurobiol
66:606–630
B€ohme K, Richter C, Pa¨tz R (2006) New insights into mechanisms of growth and β-carotene
production in Blakeslea trispora. Biotechnol J 1:1080–1084
Bramley PM (1985) The in vitro biosynthesis of carotenoids. Adv Lipid Res 21:243–279
Brehm-Stecher BF, Johnson EA (2012) Isolation of carotenoid hyperproducing mutants of
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous (Phafﬁa rhodozyma) by ﬂow cytometry and cell sorting.
Methods Mol Biol 898:207–217
Breitenbach J, Fraser PD, Sandmann G (2012) Carotenoid synthesis and phytoene synthase
activity during mating of Blakeslea trispora. Phytochemistry 76:40–45
Breitenbach J, Visser H, Verdoes JC et al (2011) Engineering of geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate
synthase levels and physiological conditions for enhanced carotenoid and astaxanthin synthesis
in Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Biotechnol Lett 33:755–761
Britton G, Liaaen-Jensen S, Pfander H (1998) Carotenoids. Birkha¨user Verlag, Basel
Britton G, Liaaen-Jensen S, Pfander H (2004) Carotenoids: handbook. Birkhauser, Boston
Burgeff H (1924) Untersuchungen über Sexualita¨t und Parasitismus bei Mucorineen. Gustav
Fischer, Jena
Burmester A, Richter M, Schultze K et al (2007) Cleavage of β-carotene as the ﬁrst step in sexual
hormone synthesis in zygomycetes is mediated by a trisporic acid regulated β-carotene
oxygenase. Fungal Genet Biol 44:1096–1108
Buzzini P, Innocenti M, Turchetti B et al (2007) Carotenoid proﬁles of yeasts belonging to the
genera Rhodotorula, Rhodosporidium, Sporobolomyces, and Sporidiobolus. Can J Microbiol
53:1024–1031
Buzzini P, Martini A (1999) Production of carotenoids by strains of Rhodotorula glutinis cultured
in raw materials of agro-industrial origin. Bioresour Technol 71:41–44
Calo P, de Miguel T, Vela´zquez JB, Villa TG (1995) Mevalonic acid increases trans-astaxanthin
and carotenoid biosynthesis in Phafﬁa rhodozyma. Biotechnol Lett 17:575–578
Candau R, Avalos J, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1991a) Gibberellins and carotenoids in the wild type and
mutants of Gibberella fujikuroi. Appl Environ Microbiol 57:3378–3382
Candau R, Bejarano ER, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1991b) In vivo channeling of substrates in an enzyme
aggregate for β-carotene biosynthesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 88:4936–4940
Carattoli A, Cogoni C, Morelli G, Macino G (1994) Molecular characterization of upstream
regulatory sequences controlling the photoinduced expression of the albino-3 gene of Neuros-
pora crassa. Mol Microbiol 13:787–795
Carattoli A, Romano N, Ballario P et al (1991) The Neurospora crassa carotenoid biosynthetic
gene (albino 3) reveals highly conserved regions among prenyltransferases. J Biol Chem
266:5854–5859
264
J. Avalos et al.

Cardoso LA, Ja¨ckel S, Karp SG et al (2016) Improvement of Sporobolomyces ruberrimus
carotenoids production by the use of raw glycerol. Bioresour Technol 200:374–379
Castelblanco-Matiz LM, Barbachano-Torres A, Ponce-Noyola T et al (2015) Carotenoid produc-
tion and gene expression in an astaxanthin-overproducing Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous
mutant strain. Arch Microbiol 197:1129–1139
Castrillo M, Avalos J (2015) The ﬂavoproteins CryD and VvdA cooperate with the white collar
protein WcoA in the control of photocarotenogenesis in Fusarium fujikuroi. PLoS One 10:
e0119785
Castrillo M, Bernhardt A, Avalos J et al (2015) Biochemical characterization of the DASH-type
cryptochrome CryD from Fusarium fujikuroi. Photochem Photobiol 91:1356–1367
Castrillo M, Garcı´a-Martı´nez J, Avalos J (2013) Light-dependent functions of the Fusarium
fujikuroi CryD DASH cryptochrome in development and secondary metabolism. Appl Environ
Microbiol 79:2777–2788
Cederberg E, Neujahr HY (1969) Activation of β-carotene synthesis in Blakeslea trispora by
certain terpenes. Acta Chem Scand 23:957–961
Cerda´-Olmedo E (1987) Carotene. In: Cerda´-Olmedo E, Lipson ED (eds) Phycomyces. Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, pp 199–222
Cerda´-Olmedo E (1985) Carotene mutants of Phycomyces. Methods Enzymol 110:220–243
Cerda´-Olmedo
E
(1989)
Production
of
carotenoids
with
fungi.
In:
Vandamme
E
(ed) Biotechnology of vitamin, growth factor and pigment production. Elsevier Applied
Science, London, pp 27–42
Cerda´-Olmedo E, Hüttermann A (1986) F€orderung und Hemmung der Carotinsynthese bei
Phycomyces durch Aromaten. Angew Bot 60:59–70
Cerda´-Olmedo E, Mehta BJ (2012) Isolation of mutants and construction of intersexual
heterokaryons of Blakeslea trispora. Methods Mol Biol 898:75–84
Chang J-J, Thia C, Lin H-Y et al (2015) Integrating an algal β-carotene hydroxylase gene into a
designed carotenoid-biosynthesis pathway increases carotenoid production in yeast. Bioresour
Technol 184:2–8
Chen CH, Dunlap JC, Loros JJ (2010) Neurospora illuminates fungal photoreception. Fungal
Genet Biol 47:922–929
Chi S, He Y, Ren J et al (2015) Overexpression of a bifunctional enzyme, CrtS, enhances
astaxanthin synthesis through two pathways in Phafﬁa rhodozyma. Microb Cell Factories
14:90
Choudhari S, Singhal R (2008) Media optimization for the production of β-carotene by Blakeslea
trispora: a statistical approach. Bioresour Technol 99:722–730
Choudhari SM, Ananthanarayan L, Singhal RS (2008) Use of metabolic stimulators and inhibitors
for enhanced production of β-carotene and lycopene by Blakeslea trispora NRRL 2895 and
2896. Bioresour Technol 99:3166–3173
Chumpolkulwong N, Kakizono T, Nagai S, Nishio N (1997) Increased astaxanthin production by
Phafﬁa rhodozyma mutants isolated as resistant to diphenylamine. J Ferment Bioeng
83:429–434
Corrochano LM, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1992) Sex, light and carotenes: the development of
Phycomyces. Trends Genet TIG 8:268–274
Corrochano LM, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1990) Photomorphogenesis in behavioural and colour mutants
of Phycomyces. J Photochem Photobiol B 6:325–335
Corrochano LM, Garre V (2010) Photobiology in the Zygomycota: multiple photoreceptor genes
for complex responses to light. Fungal Genet Biol 47:893–899
Csernetics A, Nagy G, Iturriaga EA et al (2011) Expression of three isoprenoid biosynthesis genes
and their effects on the carotenoid production of the zygomycete Mucor circinelloides. Fungal
Genet Biol 48:696–703
Csernetics A´ , To´th E, Farkas A et al (2015) Expression of Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous
cytochrome-P450 hydroxylase and reductase in Mucor circinelloides. World J Microbiol
Biotechnol 31:321–336
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
265

Daub ME, Payne GA (1989) The role of carotenoids in resistance of fungi to cercosporin.
Phytopathology 79:180–185
de Fabo EC, Harding RW, Shropshire W Jr (1976) Action spectrum between 260 and
800 nanometers for the photoinduction of carotenoid biosynthesis in Neurospora crassa.
Plant Physiol 57:440–445
de la Fuente JL, Rodrı´guez-Sa´iz M, Schleissner C et al (2010) High-titer production of astaxanthin
by the semi-industrial fermentation of Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. J Biotechnol
148:144–146
De la Guardia MD, Arago´n CM, Murillo FJ, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1971) A carotenogenic enzyme
aggregate in Phycomyces: evidence from quantitive complementation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 68:2012–2015
de Miguel T, Calo P, Dı´az A, Villa TG (1997) The genus Rhodosporidium: a potential source of
β-carotene. Microbiologia 13:67–70
DeBose-Boyd RA (2008) Feedback regulation of cholesterol synthesis: sterol-accelerated
ubiquitination and degradation of HMG CoA reductase. Cell Res 18:609–621
Degli-Innocenti F, Russo VE (1984) Isolation of new white collar mutants of Neurospora crassa
and studies on their behavior in the blue light-induced formation of protoperithecia. J Bacteriol
159:757–761
Dı´az-Sa´nchez V, Estrada AF, Limo´n MC et al (2013) The oxygenase CAO-1 of Neurospora
crassa is a resveratrol cleavage enzyme. Eukaryot Cell 12:1305–1314
Dı´az-Sa´nchez V, Estrada AF, Trautmann D et al (2011a) Analysis of al-2 mutations in Neuros-
pora. PLoS One 6:e21948
Dı´az-Sa´nchez V, Estrada AF, Trautmann D et al (2011b) The gene carD encodes the aldehyde
dehydrogenase responsible for neurosporaxanthin biosynthesis in Fusarium fujikuroi. FEBS J
278:3164–3176
Dimitrova S, Pavlova K, Lukanov L et al (2013) Production of metabolites with antioxidant and
emulsifying properties by antarctic strain Sporobolomyces salmonicolor AL1. Appl Biochem
Biotechnol 169:301–311
Domenech CE, Giordano W, Avalos J, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1996) Separate compartments for the
production of sterols, carotenoids and gibberellins in Gibberella fujikuroi. Eur J Biochem
239:720–725
Domı´nguez-Bocanegra AR, Torres-Mu~noz JA (2004) Astaxanthin hyperproduction by Phafﬁa
rhodozyma (now Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous) with raw coconut milk as sole source of
energy. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 66:249–252
Domonkos I, Kis M, Gombos Z, Ughy B (2013) Carotenoids, versatile components of oxygenic
photosynthesis. Prog Lipid Res 52:539–561
Ducrey Sanpietro LM, Kula MR (1998) Studies of astaxanthin biosynthesis in Xanthophyllomyces
dendrorhous (Phafﬁa rhodozyma). Effect of inhibitors and low temperature. Yeast Chichester
Engl 14:1007–1016
Echavarri-Erasun C, Johnson EA (2004) Stimulation of astaxanthin formation in the yeast
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous by the fungus Epicoccum nigrum. FEMS Yeast Res
4:511–519
Edgar RC (2004) MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and high through-
put. Nucleic Acids Res 32:1792–1797
Ehrenshaft M, Daub ME (1994) Isolation, sequence, and characterization of the Cercospora
nicotianae phytoene dehydrogenase gene. Appl Environ Microbiol 60:2766–2771
Elahi M, Chichester CO, Simpson KL (1973a) Biosynthesis of carotenoids by Phycomyces
blakesleeanus mutants in the presence of nitrogenous heterocyclic compounds. Phytochemis-
try 12:1627–1632
Elahi M, Lee TH, Simpson KL, Chichester CO (1973b) Effect of CPTA and cycocel on the
biosynthesis
of
carotenoids
by
Phycomyces
blakesleeanus
mutants.
Phytochemistry
12:1633–1639
266
J. Avalos et al.

El-Jack M, Mackenzie A, Bramley PM (1988) The photoregulation of carotenoid biosynthesis in
Aspergillus giganteus mut. alba. Planta 174:59–66
Eslava AP, Alvarez MI, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1974) Regulation of carotene biosynthesis in
Phycomyces by vitamin A and β-ionone. Eur J Biochem 48:617–623
Estrada AF, Avalos J (2009) Regulation and targeted mutation of opsA, coding for the NOP-1
opsin orthologue in Fusarium fujikuroi. J Mol Biol 387:59–73
Estrada AF, Avalos J (2008) The White Collar protein WcoA of Fusarium fujikuroi is not essential
for photocarotenogenesis, but is involved in the regulation of secondary metabolism and
conidiation. Fungal Genet Biol 45:705–718
Estrada AF, Brefort T, Mengel C et al (2010) Ustilago maydis accumulates β-carotene at levels
determined by a retinal-forming carotenoid oxygenase. Fungal Genet Biol 46:803–813
Estrada AF, Maier D, Scherzinger D et al (2008a) Novel apocarotenoid intermediates in Neuros-
pora crassa mutants imply a new biosynthetic reaction sequence leading to neurosporaxanthin
formation. Fungal Genet Biol 45:1497–1505
Estrada AF, Youssar L, Scherzinger D et al (2008b) The ylo-1 gene encodes an aldehyde
dehydrogenase responsible for the last reaction in the Neurospora carotenoid pathway. Mol
Microbiol 69:1207–1220
Fang TJ, Cheng YS (1992) Isolation of astaxanthin over-producing mutants of Phafﬁa rhodozyma
and their fermentation kinetics. Chin J Microbiol Inmunol 25:209–222
Ferna´ndez-Martı´n R, Cerda´-Olmedo E, Avalos J (2000) Homologous recombination and allele
replacement in transformants of Fusarium fujikuroi. Mol Gen Genet 263:838–845
Flores R, Cerda´-Olmedo E, Corrochano LM (1998) Separate sensory pathways for photomorpho-
genesis in Phycomyces. Photochem Photobiol 67:467–472
Flores-Cotera LB, Martı´n R, Sa´nchez S (2001) Citrate, a possible precursor of astaxanthin in
Phafﬁa rhodozyma: inﬂuence of varying levels of ammonium, phosphate and citrate in a
chemically deﬁned medium. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 55:341–347
Fontana JD, Guimar~aes MF, Martins NT et al (1996) Culture of the astaxanthinogenic yeast
Phafﬁa rhodozyma in low-cost media. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 57–58:413–422
Fraser PD, Bramley PM (1994) The puriﬁcation of phytoene dehydrogenase from Phycomyces
blakesleeanus. Biochim Biophys Acta 1212:59–66
Fraser PD, Miura Y, Misawa N (1997) In vitro characterization of astaxanthin biosynthetic
enzymes. J Biol Chem 272:6128–6135
Fraser PD, Ruiz-Hidalgo MJ, Lo´pez-Matas MA et al (1996) Carotenoid biosynthesis in wild type
and mutant strains of Mucor circinelloides. Biochim Biophys Acta 1289:203–208
Freitas C, Parreira TM, Roseiro J et al (2014) Selecting low-cost carbon sources for carotenoid and
lipid production by the pink yeast Rhodosporidium toruloides> NCYC 921 using ﬂow
cytometry. Bioresour Technol 158:355–359
Frengova G, Simova E, Beshkova D (2004a) Use of whey ultraﬁltrate as a substrate for production
of carotenoids by the yeast Rhodotorula rubra. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 112:133–141
Frengova G, Simova E, Pavlova K et al (1994) Formation of carotenoids by Rhodotorula glutinis
in whey ultraﬁltrate. Biotechnol Bioeng 44:888–894
Frengova GI, Beshkova DM (2009) Carotenoids from Rhodotorula and Phafﬁa: yeasts of biotech-
nological importance. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 36:163–180
Frengova GI, Simova ED, Beshkova DM (2004b) Improvement of carotenoid-synthesizing yeast
Rhodotorula rubra by chemical mutagenesis. Z Naturforschung C J Biosci 59:99–103
Garbayo I, Vı´lchez C, Nava-Saucedo JE, Barbotin JN (2003) Nitrogen, carbon and light-mediated
regulation studies of carotenoid biosynthesis in immobilized mycelia of Gibberella fujikuroi.
Enzym Microb Technol 33:629–634
Garcı´a-Martı´nez J, A´ da´m AL, Avalos J (2012) Adenylyl cyclase plays a regulatory role in
development, stress resistance and secondary metabolism in Fusarium fujikuroi. PLoS One
7:e28849
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
267

Garcı´a-Martı´nez J, Brunk M, Avalos J, Terpitz U (2015) The CarO rhodopsin of the fungus
Fusarium fujikuroi is a light-driven proton pump that retards spore germination. Sci Rep
5:7798
Gassel S, Breitenbach J, Sandmann G (2014) Genetic engineering of the complete carotenoid
pathway towards enhanced astaxanthin formation in Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous starting
from a high-yield mutant. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 98:345–350
Gassel S, Schewe H, Schmidt I et al (2013) Multiple improvement of astaxanthin biosynthesis in
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous by a combination of conventional mutagenesis and metabolic
pathway engineering. Biotechnol Lett 35:565–569
Georgiou CD, Tairis N, Polycratis A (2001a) Production of β-carotene by Sclerotinia sclerotiorum
and its role in sclerotium differentiation. Mycol Res 105:1110–1115
Georgiou CD, Zervoudakis G, Tairis N, Kornaros M (2001b) β-Carotene production and its role in
sclerotial differentiation of Sclerotium rolfsii. Fungal Genet Biol 34:11–20
Gessler NN, Sokolov AV, Bykhovsky VY, Belozerskaya TA (2002) Superoxide dismutase and
catalase activities in carotenoid-synthesizing fungi Blakeslea trispora and Neurospora crassa
in oxidative stress. Appl Biochem Microbiol 38:205–209
Girard P, Falconnier B, Bricout J, Vladescu B (1994) β-Carotene producing mutants of Phafﬁa
rhodozyma. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 41:183–191
Goksungur Y, Mantzouridou F, Roukas T, Kotzekidou P (2004) Production of β-carotene from
beet molasses by Blakeslea trispora in stirred-tank and bubble column reactors: development
of a mathematical modeling. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 112:37–54
Goldie AH, Subden RE (1973) The neutral carotenoids of wild-type and mutant strains of
Neurospora crassa. Biochem Genet 10:275–284
Goodwin TW (1980) The biochemistry of the carotenoids, 2nd edn. Chapman & Hall, London
Govind NS, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1986) Sexual activation of carotenogenesis in Phycomyces
blakesleeanus. J Gen Microbiol 132:2775–2780
Gu WL, An GH, Johnson EA (1997) Ethanol increases carotenoid production in Phafﬁa
rhodozyma. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 19:114–117
Han JR, Zhao WJ, Gao YY, Yuan JM (2005) Effect of oxidative stress and exogenous β-carotene
on sclerotial differentiation and carotenoid yield of Penicillium sp. PT95. Lett Appl Microbiol
40:412–417
Han M, He Q, Zhang WG (2012) Carotenoids production in different culture conditions by
Sporidiobolus pararoseus. Prep Biochem Biotechnol 42:293–303
Hara KY, Morita T, Mochizuki M et al (2014) Development of a multi-gene expression system in
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Microb Cell Factories 13:175
Harding RW (1974) The effect of temperature on photo-induced carotenoid biosynthesis in
Neurospora crassa. Plant Physiol 54:142–147
Harding RW (1973) Inhibition of conidiation and photoinduced carotenoid biosynthesis by cyclic
AMP. Neurospora Newsl 20:20–21
Harding RW, Huang PC, Mitchell HK (1969) Photochemical studies of the carotenoid biosynthetic
pathway in Neurospora crassa. Arch Biochem Biophys 129:696–707
Harding RW, Philip DQ, Drozdowicz BZ, Williams NP (1984) A Neurospora crassa mutant
which overaccumulates carotenoid pigments. Neurospora Newsl 31:23–25
Harding RW, Turner RV (1981) Photoregulation of the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway in albino
and white collar mutants of Neurospora crassa. Plant Physiol 68:745–749
Hausmann A, Sandmann G (2000) A single ﬁve-step desaturase is involved in the carotenoid
biosynthesis pathway to β-carotene and torulene in Neurospora crassa. Fungal Genet Biol
30:147–153
Haxo F (1950) Carotenoids of the mushroom Cantharellus cinnabarinus. Bot Gaz 112:228–232
Hayman GT, Mannarelli BM, Leathers TD (1995) Production of carotenoids by Phafﬁa
rhodozyma grown on media composed of corn wet-milling co-products. J Ind Microbiol
14:389–395
268
J. Avalos et al.

He Q, Liu Y (2005) Molecular mechanism of light responses in Neurospora: from light-induced
transcription to photoadaptation. Genes Dev 19:2888–2899
Herna´ndez-Almanza A, Cesar Montanez J, Aguilar-Gonza´lez MA et al (2014a) Rhodotorula
glutinis as source of pigments and metabolites for food industry. Food Biosci 5:64–72
Herna´ndez-Almanza A, Monta~nez-Sa´enz J, Martı´nez-A´ vila C et al (2014b) Carotenoid production
by Rhodotorula glutinis YB-252 in solid-state fermentation. Food Biosci 7:31–36
Herz S, Weber RW, Anke H et al (2007) Intermediates in the oxidative pathway from torulene to
torularhodin in the red yeasts Cystoﬁlobasidium inﬁrmominiatum and C. capitatum
(Heterobasidiomycetes, Fungi). Phytochemistry 68:2503–2511
Higuera-Ciapara I, Fe´lix-Valenzuela L, Goycoolea FM (2006) Astaxanthin: a review of its
chemistry and applications. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 46:185–196
Hsu W-J, Poling SM, Yokoyama H (1974) Effects of amines on the carotenogenesis in Blakeslea
trispora. Phytochemistry 13:415–419
Hsu WJ, Yokoyama H, Coggins CW (1972) Carotenoid biosynthesis in Blakeslea trispora.
Phytochemistry 11:2985–2990
Hu X, Li H, Tang P et al (2013a) GC-MS-based metabolomics study of the responses to
arachidonic acid in Blakeslea trispora. Fungal Genet Biol 57:33–41
Hu X, Ma X, Tang P, Yuan Q (2013b) Improved β-carotene production by oxidative stress in
Blakeslea trispora induced by liquid parafﬁn. Biotechnol Lett 35:559–563
Hu X, Sun J, Yuan Q (2012) Improved β-carotene biosynthesis and gene transcription in Blakeslea
trispora with arachidonic acid. Biotechnol Lett 34:2107–2111
Huang PC (1964) Recombination and complementation of albino mutants in Neurospora. Genetics
49:453–469
Idnurm A, Rodrı´guez-Romero J, Corrochano LM et al (2006) The Phycomyces madA gene
encodes a blue-light photoreceptor for phototropism and other light responses. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 103:4546–4551
Iurkov AM, Vustin MM, Tiaglov BV et al (2008) Pigmented basidiomycete yeasts are a promising
source of carotenoids and ubiquinone Q10. Mikrobiologiia 77:5–10
Jayaram M, Leutwiler L, Delbrück M (1980) Light-induced carotene synthesis in mutants of
Phycomyces with abnormal phototropism. Photochem Photobiol 32:241–245
Jeong JC, Lee IY, Kim SW, Park YH (1999) Stimulation of β-carotene synthesis by hydrogen
peroxide in Blakeslea trispora. Biotechnol Lett 21:683–686
Jin JM, Lee J, Lee YW (2010) Characterization of carotenoid biosynthetic genes in the ascomycete
Gibberella zeae. FEMS Microbiol Lett 302:197–202
Jirasripongpun K, Pewlong W, Kitraksa P, Krudngern C (2008) Carotenoid production by
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous: use of pineapple juice as a production medium. Lett Appl
Microbiol 47:112–116
Johnson EA (2003) Phafﬁa rhodozyma: colorful odyssey. Int Microbiol 6:169–174
Johnson EA, Lewis MJ (1979) Astaxanthin formation by the yeast Phafﬁa rhodozyma. J Gen
Microbiol 115:173–183
Kajiwara S, Fraser PD, Kondo K, Misawa N (1997) Expression of an exogenous isopentenyl
diphosphate isomerase gene enhances isoprenoid biosynthesis in Escherichia coli. Biochem J
324:421–426
Kim S-K, Lee J-H, Lee C-H, Yoon Y-C (2007) Increased carotenoid production in
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous G276 using plant extracts. J Microbiol Seoul Korea
45:128–132
Kirti K, Amita S, Priti S et al (2014) Colorful world of microbes: carotenoids and their
applications. Adv Biol 2014:1–13
Krinsky NI, Johnson EJ (2005) Carotenoid actions and their relation to health and disease. Mol
Asp Med 26:459–516
Kritsky MS, Sokolovsky VY, Belozerskaya TA, Chernysheva EK (1982) Relationship between
cyclic AMP level and accumulation of carotenoid pigments in Neurospora crassa. Arch
Microbiol 133:206–208
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
269

Kucsera J, Pfeiffer I, Ferenczy L (1998) Homothallic life cycle in the diploid red yeast
Xanthophyllomyces
dendrorhous
(Phafﬁa
rhodozyma).
Antonie
Van
Leeuwenhoek
73:163–168
Kuzina V, Cerda´-Olmedo E (2006) Modiﬁcation of sexual development and carotene production
by acetate and other small carboxylic acids in Blakeslea trispora and Phycomyces
blakesleeanus. Appl Environ Microbiol 72:4917–4922
Kuzina V, Domenech C, Cerda´-Olmedo E (2006) Relationships among the biosyntheses of
ubiquinone, carotene, sterols, and triacylglycerols in Zygomycetes. Arch Microbiol
186:485–493
Kuzina V, Ramı´rez-Medina H, Visser H et al (2008) Genes involved in carotene synthesis and
mating in Blakeslea trispora. Curr Genet 54:143–152
Lampila LE, Wallen SE, Bullerman LB (1985) A review of factors affecting biosynthesis of
carotenoids by the order Mucorales. Mycopathologia 90:65–80
Lange N, Steinbüchel A (2011) β-carotene production by Saccharomyces cerevisiae with regard to
plasmid stability and culture media. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 91:1611–1622
Ledetzky N, Osawa A, Iki K et al (2014) Multiple transformation with the crtYB gene of the
limiting enzyme increased carotenoid synthesis and generated novel derivatives in
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Arch Biochem Biophys 545:141–147
Lee JJL, Chen L, Cao B, Chen WN (2016) Engineering Rhodosporidium toruloides with a
membrane transporter facilitates production and separation of carotenoids and lipids in a
bi-phasic culture. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 100:869–877
Lewis MJ, Ragot N, Berlant MC, Miranda M (1990) Selection of astaxanthin-overproducing
mutants of Phafﬁa rhodozyma with β-Ionone. Appl Environ Microbiol 56:2944–2945
Li C, Schmidhauser TJ (1995) Developmental and photoregulation of al-1 and al-2, structural
genes for two enzymes essential for carotenoid biosynthesis in Neurospora. Dev Biol
169:90–95
Li Q, Sun Z, Li J, Zhang Y (2013) Enhancing beta-carotene production in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae by metabolic engineering. FEMS Microbiol Lett 345:94–101
Linden H, Rodrı´guez-Franco M, Macino G (1997) Mutants of Neurospora crassa defective in
regulation of blue light perception. Mol Gen Genet 254:111–118
Linnemannst€ons P, Prado MM, Ferna´ndez-Martı´n R et al (2002) A carotenoid biosynthesis gene
cluster in Fusarium fujikuroi: the genes carB and carRA. Mol Gen Genomics 267:593–602
Liu X-J, Liu R-S, Li H-M, Tang Y-J (2012) Lycopene production from synthetic medium by
Blakeslea trispora NRRL 2895 (þ) and 2896 (-) in a stirred-tank fermenter. Bioprocess Biosyst
Eng 35:739–749
Liu YS, Wu JY (2006a) Use of n-hexadecane as an oxygen vector to improve Phafﬁa rhodozyma
growth and carotenoid production in shake-ﬂask cultures. J Appl Microbiol 101:1033–1038
Liu YS, Wu JY (2006b) Hydrogen peroxide-induced astaxanthin biosynthesis and catalase activity
in Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 73:663–668
Liu YS, Wu JY (2007) Perfusion culture process plus H2O2 stimulation for efﬁcient astaxanthin
production by Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Biotechnol Bioeng 97:568–573
Liu Z-Q, Zhang J-F, Zheng Y-G, Shen Y-C (2008) Improvement of astaxanthin production by a
newly isolated Phafﬁa rhodozyma mutant with low-energy ion beam implantation. J Appl
Microbiol 104:861–872
Lodato P, Alcaino J, Barahona S et al (2003) Alternative splicing of transcripts from crtI and crtYB
genes of Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Appl Environ Microbiol 69:4676–4682
Lodato P, Alcaı´no J, Barahona S et al (2007) Expression of the carotenoid biosynthesis genes in
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Biol Res 40:73–84
Lodato P, Alcaı´no J, Barahona S et al (2004) Study of the expression of carotenoid biosynthesis
genes in wild-type and deregulated strains of Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous (Ex.: Phafﬁa
rhodozyma). Biol Res 37:83–93
Lo´pez J, Essus K, Kim I et al (2015) Production of β-ionone by combined expression of
carotenogenic and plant CCD1 genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Microb Cell Factories
14:84
270
J. Avalos et al.

Lo´pez-Dı´az I, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1980) Relationship of photocarotenogenesis to other behavioural
and regulatory responses in Phycomyces. Planta 150:134–139
Lo´pez-Nieto MJ, Costa J, Peiro E et al (2004) Biotechnological lycopene production by mated
fermentation of Blakeslea trispora. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 66:153–159
Lorca-Pascual JM, Murcia-Flores L, Garre V et al (2004) The RING-ﬁnger domain of the fungal
repressor crgA is essential for accurate light regulation of carotenogenesis. Mol Microbiol
52:1463–1474
Loto I, Gutie´rrez MS, Barahona S et al (2012) Enhancement of carotenoid production by
disrupting the C22-sterol desaturase gene (CYP61) in Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous.
BMC Microbiol 12:235
Madhour A, Anke H, Mucci A et al (2005) Biosynthesis of the xanthophyll plectaniaxanthin as a
stress response in the red yeast Dioszegia (Tremellales, Heterobasidiomycetes, Fungi). Phyto-
chemistry 66:2617–2626
Mantzouridou F, Naziri E, Tsimidou MZ (2008) Industrial glycerol as a supplementary carbon
source in the production of β-carotene by Blakeslea trispora. J Agric Food Chem
56:2668–2675
Mantzouridou F, Roukasa T, Kotzekidoua P, Liakopoulou M (2002) Optimization of β-carotene
production from synthetic medium by Blakeslea trispora: a mathematical modeling. Appl
Biochem Biotechnol 101:153–175
Mantzouridou F, Tsimidou MZ (2008) Lycopene formation in Blakeslea trispora. Chemical
aspects of a bioprocess. Trends Food Sci Technol 19:363–371
Mantzouridou F, Tsimidou MZ, Roukas T (2006) Performance of crude olive pomace oil and
soybean oil during carotenoid production by Blakeslea trispora in submerged fermentation. J
Agric Food Chem 54:2575–2581
Marcoleta A, Niklitschek M, Wozniak A et al (2011) Glucose and ethanol-dependent transcrip-
tional regulation of the astaxanthin biosynthesis pathway in Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous.
BMC Microbiol 11:190
Marova I, Carnecka M, Halienova A et al (2012) Use of several waste substrates for carotenoid-
rich yeast biomass production. J Environ Manag 95:S338–S342
Martı´n JF, Gudi~na E, Barredo JL (2008) Conversion of β-carotene into astaxanthin: two separate
enzymes or a bifunctional hydroxylase-ketolase protein? Microb Cell Factories 7:3
Martı´nez C, Hermosilla G, Leo´n R et al (1998) Genetic transformation of astaxanthin mutants of
Phafﬁa rhodozyma. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 73:147–153
Martinez-Moya P, Niehaus K, Alcaı´no J et al (2015) Proteomic and metabolomic analysis of the
carotenogenic yeast Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous using different carbon sources. BMC
Genomics 16:289
Martinez-Moya P, Watt SA, Niehaus K et al (2011) Proteomic analysis of the carotenogenic yeast
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. BMC Microbiol 11:131
Mata-Go´mez LC, Monta~nez JC, Me´ndez-Zavala A, Aguilar CN (2014) Biotechnological produc-
tion of carotenoids by yeasts: an overview. Microb Cell Factories 13:12
Medina HR, Cerda´-Olmedo E, Al-Babili S (2011) Cleavage oxygenases for the biosynthesis of
trisporoids and other apocarotenoids in Phycomyces. Mol Microbiol 82:199–208
Mehta BJ, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1995) Mutants of carotene production in Blakeslea trispora. Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 42:836–838
Mehta BJ, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1999) Lycopene cyclization in Blakeslea trispora. Mycoscience
40:307–310
Mehta BJ, Cerda´-Olmedo E (2001) Intersexual partial diploids of Phycomyces. Genetics
158:635–641
Mehta BJ, Obraztsova IN, Cerda´-Olmedo E (2003) Mutants and intersexual heterokaryons of
Blakeslea trispora for production of β-carotene and lycopene. Appl Environ Microbiol
69:4043–4048
Mehta BJ, Salgado LM, Bejarano ER, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1997) New mutants of Phycomyces
blakesleeanus for β-carotene production. Appl Environ Microbiol 63:3657–3661
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
271

Mende K, Homann V, Tudzynski B (1997) The geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase gene of
Gibberella fujikuroi: isolation and expression. Mol Gen Genet 255:96–105
Meyer PS, Du Preez JC (1994) Photo-regulated astaxanthin production by Phafﬁa rhodozyma
mutants. Syst Appl Microbiol 17:24–31
Meyer PS, du Preez JC, Kilian SG (1993) Selection and evaluation of astaxanthin-overproducing
mutants of Phafﬁa rhodozyma. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 9:514–520
Miao L, Chi S, Tang Y et al (2011) Astaxanthin biosynthesis is enhanced by high carotenogenic
gene expression and decrease of fatty acids and ergosterol in a Phafﬁa rhodozyma mutant
strain. FEMS Yeast Res 11:192–201
Miao L, Wang Y, Chi S et al (2010) Reduction of fatty acid ﬂux results in enhancement of
astaxanthin synthesis in a mutant strain of Phafﬁa rhodozyma. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol
37:595–602
Mitzka U, Rau W (1977) Composition and photoinduced biosynthesis of the carotenoids of a
protoplast-like Neurospora crassa “slime” mutant. Arch Microbiol 111:261–263
Mitzka-Schnabel U (1985) Carotenogenic enzymes from Neurospora. Pure Appl Chem
57:667–669
Mitzka-Schnabel U, Rau W (1980) The subcellular distribution of carotenoids in Neurospora
crassa. Phytochemistry 19:1409–1413
Miura Y, Kondo K, Saito T et al (1998) Production of the carotenoids lycopene, β-carotene, and
astaxanthin in the food yeast Candida utilis. Appl Environ Microbiol 64:1226–1229
Moline´ M, Flores MR, Libkind D et al (2010) Photoprotection by carotenoid pigments in the yeast
Rhodotorula mucilaginosa: the role of torularhodin. Photochem Photobiol Sci 9:1145–1151
Moline´ M, Libkind D, van Broock M (2012) Production of torularhodin, torulene, and β-carotene
by Rhodotorula yeasts. Methods Mol Biol 898:275–283
Montanti J, Nghiem NP, Johnston DB (2011) Production of astaxanthin from cellulosic biomass
sugars by mutants of the yeast Phafﬁa rhodozyma. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 164:655–665
Moore MM, Breedveld MW, Autor AP (1989) The role of carotenoids in preventing oxidative
damage in the pigmented yeast, Rhodotorula mucilaginosa. Arch Biochem Biophys
270:419–431
Moran NA, Jarvik T (2010) Lateral transfer of genes from fungi underlies carotenoid production in
aphids. Science 328:624–627
Murcia-Flores L, Lorca-Pascual JM, Garre V et al (2007) Non-AUG translation initiation of a
fungal
RING
ﬁnger
repressor
involved
in
photocarotenogenesis.
J
Biol
Chem
282:15394–15403
Murillo FJ, Caldero´n IL, Lo´pez-Dı´az I, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1978) Carotene-superproducing strains
of Phycomyces. Appl Environ Microbiol 36:639–642
Murillo FJ, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1976) Regulation of carotene synthesis in Phycomyces. Mol Gen
Genet 148:19–24
Murillo FJ, Torres-Martı´nez S, Arago´n CM, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1981) Substrate transfer in carotene
biosynthesis in Phycomyces. Eur J Biochem 119:511–516
Nanou K, Roukas T (2011) Stimulation of the biosynthesis of carotenes by oxidative stress in
Blakeslea trispora induced by elevated dissolved oxygen levels in the culture medium.
Bioresour Technol 102:8159–8164
Nanou K, Roukas T (2010) Oxidative stress response and morphological changes of Blakeslea
trispora induced by butylated hydroxytoluene during carotene production. Appl Biochem
Biotechnol 160:2415–2423
Nanou K, Roukas T (2013) Oxidative stress response of Blakeslea trispora induced by iron ions
during carotene production in shake ﬂask culture. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 169:2281–2289
Nanou K, Roukas T (2016) Waste cooking oil: a new substrate for carotene production by
Blakeslea trispora in submerged fermentation. Bioresour Technol 203:198–203
Navarro E, Lorca-Pascual JM, Quiles-Rosillo MD et al (2001) A negative regulator of light-
inducible carotenogenesis in Mucor circinelloides. Mol Gen Genomics 266:463–470
272
J. Avalos et al.

Navarro E, Ruiz-Pe´rez VL, Torres-Martı´nez S (2000) Overexpression of the crgA gene abolishes
light requirement for carotenoid biosynthesis in Mucor circinelloides. Eur J Biochem
267:800–807
Navarro E, Sandmann G, Torres-Martı´nez S (1995) Mutants of the carotenoid biosynthetic
pathway of Mucor circinelloides. Exp Mycol 19:186–190
Navarro-Sampedro L, Yanofsky C, Corrochano LM (2008) A genetic selection for Neurospora
crassa mutants altered in their light regulation of transcription. Genetics 178:171–183
Nelson MA, Morelli G, Carattoli A et al (1989) Molecular cloning of a Neurospora crassa
carotenoid biosynthetic gene (albino-3) regulated by blue light and the products of the white
collar genes. Mol Cell Biol 9:1271–1276
Neupert W, Ludwig GD (1971) Sites of biosynthesis of outer and inner membrane proteins of
Neurospora crassa mitochondria. Eur J Biochem 19:523–532
Niklitschek M, Alcaı´no J, Barahona S et al (2008) Genomic organization of the structural genes
controlling the astaxanthin biosynthesis pathway of Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Biol Res
41:93–108
Ninet L, Renaut J, Tissier R (1969) Activation of the biosynthesis of carotenoids by Blakeslea
trispora. Biotechnol Bioeng 11:1195–1210
Ojima K, Breitenbach J, Visser H et al (2006) Cloning of the astaxanthin synthase gene from
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous (Phafﬁa rhodozyma) and its assignment as a β-carotene
3-hydroxylase/4-ketolase. Mol Gen Genomics 275:148–158
Ootaki T, Crafts-Lighty A, Delbrück M, Hsu WJ (1973) Complementation between mutants of
Phycomyces deﬁcient with respect to carotenogenesis. Mol Gen Genet 121:57–70
Paietta J, Sargent ML (1981) Photoreception in Neurospora crassa: correlation of reduced light
sensitivity with ﬂavin deﬁciency. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 78:5573–5577
Paietta J, Sargent ML (1983) Modiﬁcation of blue light photoresponses by riboﬂavin analogs in
Neurospora crassa. Plant Physiol 72:764–766
Papaioannou EH, Liakopoulou-Kyriakides M (2012) Agro-food wastes utilization by Blakeslea
trispora for carotenoids production. Acta Biochim Pol 59:151–153
Papp T, Csernetics A, Nagy G et al (2013) Canthaxanthin production with modiﬁed Mucor
circinelloides strains. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 97:4937–4950
Papp T, Velayos A, Bartok T et al (2006) Heterologous expression of astaxanthin biosynthesis
genes in Mucor circinelloides. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 69:526–531
Parajo JC, Santos VV, Vazquez M (1998) Production of carotenoids by Phafﬁa rhodozyma
growing on media made from hemicellulosic hydrolysates of Eucalyptus globulus wood.
Biotechnol Bioeng 59:501–506
Pegklidou K, Mantzouridou F, Tsimidou MZ (2008) Lycopene production using Blakeslea
trispora in the presence of 2-methyl imidazole: yield, selectivity, and safety aspects. J Agric
Food Chem 56:4482–4490
Polaino S, Herrador MM, Cerda´-Olmedo E, Barrero AF (2010) Splitting of β-carotene in the
sexual interaction of Phycomyces. Org Biomol Chem 8:4229–4231
Prado MM, Prado-Cabrero A, Ferna´ndez-Martı´n R, Avalos J (2004) A gene of the opsin family in
the carotenoid gene cluster of Fusarium fujikuroi. Curr Genet 46:47–58
Prado-Cabrero A, Estrada AF, Al-Babili S, Avalos J (2007) Identiﬁcation and biochemical
characterization of a novel carotenoid oxygenase: elucidation of the cleavage step in the
Fusarium carotenoid pathway. Mol Microbiol 64:448–460
Prado-Cabrero A, Schaub P, Dı´az-Sa´nchez V et al (2009) Deviation of the neurosporaxanthin
pathway towards β-carotene biosynthesis in Fusarium fujikuroi by a point mutation in the
phytoene desaturase gene. FEBS J 276:4582–4597
Qiang W, Ling-ran F, Luo W et al (2014) Mutation breeding of lycopene-producing strain
Blakeslea trispora by a novel atmospheric and room temperature plasma (ARTP). Appl
Biochem Biotechnol 174:452–460
Quiles-Rosillo MD, Ruiz-Va´zquez RM, Torres-Martı´nez S, Garre V (2005) Light induction of the
carotenoid biosynthesis pathway in Blakeslea trispora. Fungal Genet Biol 42:141–153
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
273

Quiles-Rosillo MD, Torres-Martı´nez S, Garre V (2003) cigA, a light-inducible gene involved in
vegetative growth in Mucor circinelloides is regulated by the carotenogenic repressor crgA.
Fungal Genet Biol 38:122–132
Ramı´rez J, Gutierrez H, Gschaedler A (2001) Optimization of astaxanthin production by Phafﬁa
rhodozyma through factorial design and response surface methodology. J Biotechnol
88:259–268
Rao AV, Rao LG (2007) Carotenoids and human health. Pharmacol Res 55:207–216
Rau W (1962) U¨ ber den Einﬂuss der Temperatur auf die lichtabha¨ngige Carotinoidbildung von
Fusarium aquaeductuum. Planta 59:123–137
Rau
W
(1967)
Untersuchungen
über
die
lichtabha¨ngige
Carotinoidsynthese.
I
Das
Wirkungsspektrum von Fusarium aquaeductuum. Planta 72:14–28
Rau
W,
Lindemann
I,
Rau-Hund
A
(1968)
Untersuchungen
über
die
lichtabha¨ngige
Carotinoidsynthese. III Die Farbstoffbildung von Neurospora crassa in Submerskultur. Planta
80:309–316
Razani SH, Mousavi SM, Yeganeh HM, Marc I (2007) Fatty acid and carotenoid production by
Sporobolomyces ruberrimus when using technical glycerol and ammonium sulfate. J Microbiol
Biotechnol 17:1591–1597
Revuelta JL, Eslava AP (1983) A new gene (carC) involved in the regulation of carotenogenesis in
Phycomyces. Mol Gen Genet 192:225–229
Ribeiro BD, Barreto DW, Coelho MAZ (2011) Technological aspects of β-carotene production.
Food Bioprocess Technol 4:693–701
Rodrı´guez-Ortiz R, Limo´n MC, Avalos J (2009) Regulation of carotenogenesis and secondary
metabolism by nitrogen in wild-type Fusarium fujikuroi and carotenoid-overproducing
mutants. Appl Environ Microbiol 75:405–413
Rodrı´guez-Ortiz R, Limo´n MC, Avalos J (2013) Functional analysis of the carS gene of Fusarium
fujikuroi. Mol Gen Genomics 288:157–173
Rodrı´guez-Ortiz R, Michielse C, Rep M et al (2012) Genetic basis of carotenoid overproduction in
Fusarium oxysporum. Fungal Genet Biol 49:684–696
Rodrı´guez-Sa´iz M, de la Fuente JL, Barredo JL (2010) Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous for the
industrial production of astaxanthin. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 88:645–658
Rodrı´guez-Saiz M, Paz B, De La Fuente JL et al (2004) Blakeslea trispora genes for carotene
biosynthesis. Appl Environ Microbiol 70:5589–5594
Rohmer M, Knani M, Simonin P et al (1993) Isoprenoid biosynthesis in bacteria: a novel pathway
for the early steps leading to isopentenyl diphosphate. Biochem J 15:517–524
Roukas T (2016) The role of oxidative stress on carotene production by Blakeslea trispora in
submerged fermentation. Crit Rev Biotechnol 36:424–433
Roukas T, Varzakakou M, Kotzekidou P (2015) From cheese whey to carotenes by Blakeslea
trispora in a bubble column reactor. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 175:182–193
Ruiz-Hidalgo MJ, Benito EP, Sandmann G, Eslava AP (1997a) The phytoene dehydrogenase gene
of Phycomyces: regulation of its expression by blue light and vitamin A. Mol Gen Genet
253:734–744
Ruiz-Rolda´n MC, Garre V, Guarro J et al (2008) Role of the white collar 1 photoreceptor in
carotenogenesis, UV resistance, hydrophobicity, and virulence of Fusarium oxysporum.
Eukaryot Cell 7:1227–1230
Saelices L, Youssar L, Holdermann I et al (2007) Identiﬁcation of the gene responsible for torulene
cleavage in the Neurospora carotenoid pathway. Mol Gen Genomics 278:527–537
Saenge C, Cheirsilp B, Suksaroge TT, Bourtoom T (2011) Potential use of oleaginous red yeast
Rhodotorula glutinis for the bioconversion of crude glycerol from biodiesel plant to lipids and
carotenoids. Process Biochem 46:210–218
Sahadevan Y, Richter-Fecken M, Kaerger K et al (2013) Early and late trisporoids differentially
regulate β-carotene production and gene transcript levels in the mucoralean fungi Blakeslea
trispora and Mucor mucedo. Appl Environ Microbiol 79:7466–7475
Sakaki H, Kaneno H, Sumiya Y et al (2002a) A new carotenoid glycosyl ester isolated from a
marine microorganism, Fusarium strain T-1. J Nat Prod 65:1683–1684
274
J. Avalos et al.

Sakaki H, Nakanishi T, Satonaka K et al (2000) Properties of a high-torularhodin-producing
mutant of Rhodotorula glutinis cultivated under oxidative stress. J Biosci Bioeng 89:203–205
Sakaki H, Nakanishi T, Tada A et al (2001) Activation of torularhodin production by Rhodotorula
glutinis using weak white light irradiation. J Biosci Bioeng 92:294–297
Sakaki H, Nochide H, Komemushi S, Miki W (2002b) Effect of active oxygen species on the
productivity of torularhodin by Rhodotorula glutinis No. 21. J Biosci Bioeng 93:338–340
Salgado LM, Avalos J, Bejarano ER, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1991) Correlation between in vivo and
in vitro carotenogenesis in Phycomyces. Phytochemistry 30:2587–2591
Salgado LM, Bejarano ER, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1989) Carotene-superproducing mutants of
Phycomyces blakesleeanus. Exp Mycol 13:332–336
Salgado LM, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1992) Genetic interactions in the regulation of carotenogenesis in
Phycomyces. Curr Genet 21:67–71
Sandmann G (2002) Combinatorial biosynthesis of carotenoids in a heterologous host: a powerful
approach for the biosynthesis of novel structures. Chembiochem Eur J Chem Biol 3:629–635
Sandmann G, Misawa N (2002) Fungal carotenoids. In: Osiewacz HD (ed) The mycota
X. Industrial applications. Springer, Berlin, pp 247–262
Sandmann G, Misawa N, Wiedemann M et al (1993) Functional identiﬁcation of al-3 from
Neurospora crassa as the gene for geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase by complementa-
tion with crt genes, in vitro characterization of the gene product and mutant analysis. J
Photochem Photobiol B 18:245–251
Sandmann G, Takaichi S, Fraser PD (2008) C(35)-apocarotenoids in the yellow mutant Neuros-
pora crassa YLO. Phytochemistry 69:2886–2890
Sandmann G, Zhu C, Krubasik P, Fraser PD (2006) The biotechnological potential of the al-2 gene
from Neurospora crassa for the production of monocyclic keto hydroxy carotenoids. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1761:1085–1092
Sanz C, Alvarez MI, Orejas M et al (2002) Interallelic complementation provides genetic evidence
for the multimeric organization of the Phycomyces blakesleeanus phytoene dehydrogenase.
Eur J Biochem 269:902–908
Sanz C, Benito EP, Orejas M et al (2010) Protein-DNA interactions in the promoter region of the
Phycomyces carB and carRA genes correlate with the kinetics of their mRNA accumulation in
response to light. Fungal Genet Biol 47:773–781
Sanz C, Rodrı´guez-Romero J, Idnurm A et al (2009) Phycomyces MADB interacts with MADA to
form the primary photoreceptor complex for fungal phototropism. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
106:7095–7100
Sanz C, Velayos A, Alvarez MI et al (2011) Functional analysis of the Phycomyces carRA gene
encoding the enzymes phytoene synthase and lycopene cyclase. PLoS One 6:e23102
Schachtschabel D, David A, Menzel K-D et al (2008) Cooperative biosynthesis of trisporoids by
the (þ) and (-) mating types of the zygomycete Blakeslea trispora. Chembiochem Eur J Chem
Biol 9:3004–3012
Schmidhauser TJ, Lauter FR, Russo VE, Yanofsky C (1990) Cloning, sequence, and
photoregulation of al-1, a carotenoid biosynthetic gene of Neurospora crassa. Mol Cell Biol
10:5064–5070
Schmidhauser TJ, Lauter FR, Schumacher M et al (1994) Characterization of al-2, the phytoene
synthase gene of Neurospora crassa. Cloning, sequence analysis, and photoregulation. J Biol
Chem 269:12060–12066
Schmidt AD, Heinekamp T, Matuschek M et al (2005) Analysis of mating-dependent transcription
of Blakeslea trispora carotenoid biosynthesis genes carB and carRA by quantitative real-time
PCR. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 67:549–555
Schmidt I, Schewe H, Gassel S et al (2011) Biotechnological production of astaxanthin with
Phafﬁa rhodozyma/Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 89:555–571
Schmidt-Dannert C (2000) Engineering novel carotenoids in microorganisms. Curr Opin
Biotechnol 11:255–261
Schneider T, Graeff-H€onninger S, French WT et al (2013) Lipid and carotenoid production by
oleaginous red yeast Rhodotorula glutinis cultivated on brewery efﬂuents. Energy 61:34–43
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
275

Schroeder WA, Johnson EA (1995a) Singlet oxygen and peroxyl radicals regulate carotenoid
biosynthesis in Phafﬁa rhodozyma. J Biol Chem 270:18374–18379
Schroeder WA, Johnson EA (1993) Antioxidant role of carotenoids in Phafﬁa rhodozyma. J Gen
Microbiol 139:907–912
Schroeder WA, Johnson EA (1995b) Carotenoids protect Phafﬁa rhodozyma against singlet
oxygen damage. J Ind Microbiol 14:502–507
Schrott EL (1980) Fluence response relationship of carotenogenesis in Neurospora crassa. Planta
150:174–179
Schrott EL (1981) The biphasic ﬂuence response of carotenogenesis in Neurospora crassa:
temporary insensitivity of the photoreceptor system. Planta 151:371–374
Schwerdtfeger C, Linden H (2003) VIVID is a ﬂavoprotein and serves as a fungal blue light
photoreceptor for photoadaptation. EMBO J 22:4846–4855
Shi F, Zhan W, Li Y, Wang X (2014) Temperature inﬂuences β-carotene production in recombi-
nant Saccharomyces cerevisiae expressing carotenogenic genes from Phafﬁa rhodozyma.
World J Microbiol Biotechnol 30:125–133
Shi Y, Xin X, Yuan Q (2012) Improved lycopene production by Blakeslea trispora with
isopentenyl compounds and metabolic precursors. Biotechnol Lett 34:849–852
Shimada H, Kondo K, Fraser PD et al (1998) Increased carotenoid production by the food yeast
Candida utilis through metabolic engineering of the isoprenoid pathway. Appl Environ
Microbiol 64:2676–2680
Shrode LB, Lewis ZA, White LD et al (2001) vvd is required for light adaptation of conidiation-
speciﬁc genes of Neurospora crassa, but not circadian conidiation. Fungal Genet Biol
32:169–181
Sieiro C, Poza M, de Miguel T, Villa TG (2003) Genetic basis of microbial carotenogenesis. Int
Microbiol 6:11–16
Silva F, Navarro E, Pe~naranda A et al (2008) A RING-ﬁnger protein regulates carotenogenesis via
proteolysis-independent ubiquitylation of a White Collar-1-like activator. Mol Microbiol
70:1026–1036
Silva F, Torres-Martı´nez S, Garre V (2006) Distinct white collar-1 genes control speciﬁc light
responses in Mucor circinelloides. Mol Microbiol 61:1023–1037
Simpson KL, Nakayama TO, Chichester CO (1964) Biosynthesis of yeast carotenoids. J Bacteriol
88:1688–1694
Sokolovsky VY, Lauter FR, Müller-R€ober B et al (1992) Nitrogen regulation of blue light-
inducible genes in Neurospora crassa. J Gen Microbiol 138:2045–2049
Sperstad S, Lutnaes BF, Stormo SK et al (2006) Torularhodin and torulene are the major
contributors to the carotenoid pool of marine Rhodosporidium babjevae (Golubev). J Ind
Microbiol Biotechnol 33:269–273
Spurgeon SL, Turner RV, Harding RW (1979) Biosynthesis of phytoene from isopentenyl
pyrophosphate by a Neurospora enzyme system. Arch Biochem Biophys 195:23–29
Stachowiak B (2013) Efﬁciency of selected mutagens in generating Xanthophyllomyces
dendrorhous strains hyperproducing astaxanthin. Pol J Microbiol 62:67–72
Stahl W, Sies H (2005) Bioactivity and protective effects of natural carotenoids. Biochim Biophys
Acta 1740:101–107
Stahl W, Sies H (2003) Antioxidant activity of carotenoids. Mol Asp Med 24:345–351
Strobel I, Breitenbach J, Scheckhuber CQ et al (2009) Carotenoids and carotenogenic genes in
Podospora anserina: engineering of the carotenoid composition extends the life span of the
mycelium. Curr Genet 55:175–184
Sun J, Li H, Yuan Q (2012) Metabolic regulation of trisporic acid on Blakeslea trispora revealed
by a GC-MS-based metabolomic approach. PLoS One 7:e46110
Sun N, Lee S, Song KB (2004) Characterization of a carotenoid-hyperproducing yeast mutant
isolated by low-dose gamma irradiation. Int J Food Microbiol 94:263–267
Sutter RP (1970) Effect of light on β-carotene accumulation in Blakeslea trispora. J Gen Microbiol
64:215–221
276
J. Avalos et al.

Sutter RP (1987) Sexual development. In: Cerda´-Olmedo E, Lipson ED (eds) Phycomyces. Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, pp 317–336
Tagua VG, Medina HR, Martı´n-Domı´nguez R et al (2012) A gene for carotene cleavage required
for pheromone biosynthesis and carotene regulation in the fungus Phycomyces blakesleeanus.
Fungal Genet Biol 49:398–404
Tang Q, Li Y, Yuan QP (2008) Effects of an ergosterol synthesis inhibitor on gene transcription of
terpenoid biosynthesis in Blakeslea trispora. Curr Microbiol 57:527–531
Tapiero H, Townsend DM, Tew KD (2004) The role of carotenoids in the prevention of human
pathologies. Biomed Pharmacother Biomedecine Pharmacother 58:100–110
Thewes S, Prado-Cabrero A, Prado MM et al (2005) Characterization of a gene in the car cluster of
Fusarium fujikuroi that codes for a protein of the carotenoid oxygenase family. Mol Gen
Genomics 274:217–228
Tinoi J, Rakariyatham N, Deming RL (2006) Utilization of mustard waste isolates for improved
production of astaxanthin by Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol
33:309–314
Tinoi J, Rakariyatham N, Deming RL (2005) Simplex optimization of carotenoid production by
Rhodotorula glutinis using hydrolyzed mung bean waste ﬂour as substrate. Process Biochem
40:2551–2557
Torres-Martı´nez S, Murillo FJ, Cerda´-Olmedo E (1980) Genetics of lycopene cyclization and
substrate transfer in β-carotene biosynthesis in Phycomyces. Genet Res 36:299–309
Torres-Martı´nez S, Ruiz-Va´zquez RM, Garre V et al (2012) Molecular tools for carotenogenesis
analysis in the zygomycete Mucor circinelloides. Methods Mol Biol 898:85–107
Tsolakis G, Parashi E, Galland P, Kotzabasis K (1999) Blue light signaling chains in Phycomyces:
phototransduction of carotenogenesis and morphogenesis involves distinct protein kinase/
phosphatase elements. Fungal Genet Biol 28:201–213
Tudzynski B (2005) Gibberellin biosynthesis in fungi: genes, enzymes, evolution, and impact on
biotechnology. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 66:597–611
Ukibe K, Hashida K, Yoshida N, Takagi H (2009) Metabolic engineering of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae for astaxanthin production and oxidative stress tolerance. Appl Environ Microbiol
75:7205–7211
Valadon LRG, Cooke RC (1963) Carotenoid pigments of the nematode-trapping hyphomycete
Arthrobotrys oligospora (fres.) Phytochemistry 2:103–105
Valadon LRG, Mummery RS (1969) Biosynthesis of neurosporaxanthin. Microbios 1A:3–8
Valadon LRG, Mummery RS (1977) Natural β-apo-40-carotenoic acid methyl ester in the fungus
Verticillium agaricinum. Phytochemistry 16:613–614
Valduga E, Rausch Ribeiro AH, Cence K et al (2014) Carotenoids production from a newly
isolated Sporidiobolus pararoseus strain using agroindustrial substrates. Biocatal Agric
Biotechnol 3:207–213
Valduga E, Valerio A, Treichel H et al (2009) Kinetic and stoichiometric parameters in the
production of carotenoids by Sporidiobolus salmonicolor (CBS 2636) in synthetic and
agroindustrial media. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 157:61–69
van Eijk GW, Mummery RS, Roeymans HJ, Valadon LR (1979) A comparative study of
carotenoids of Aschersonia aleyroides and Aspergillus giganteus. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek
45:417–422
Varzakakou M, Roukas T (2010) Identiﬁcation of carotenoids produced from cheese whey by
Blakeslea trispora in submerged fermentation. Prep Biochem Biotechnol 40:76–82
Varzakakou M, Roukas T, Papaioannou E et al (2011) Autolysis of Blakeslea trispora during
carotene production from cheese whey in an airlift reactor. Prep Biochem Biotechnol 41:7–21
Va´zquez M, Martin AM (1998) Optimization of Phafﬁa rhodozyma continuous culture through
response surface methodology. Biotechnol Bioeng 57:314–320
Velayos A, Blasco JL, A´ lvarez MI et al (2000a) Blue-light regulation of phytoene dehydrogenase
(carB) gene expression in Mucor circinelloides. Planta 210:938–946
Velayos A, Eslava AP, Iturriaga EA (2000b) A bifunctional enzyme with lycopene cyclase and
phytoene synthase activities is encoded by the carRP gene of Mucor circinelloides. Eur J
Biochem 267:5509–5519
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
277

Velayos A, Lo´pez-Matas MA, Ruiz-Hidalgo MJ, Eslava AP (1997) Complementation analysis of
carotenogenic mutants of Mucor circinelloides. Fungal Genet Biol 22:19–27
Velayos A, Papp T, Aguilar-Elena R et al (2003) Expression of the carG gene, encoding
geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase, is up-regulated by blue light in Mucor circinelloides.
Curr Genet 43:112–120
Verdoes JC, Krubasik P, Sandmann G, van Ooyen AJJ (1999a) Isolation and functional
characterisation of a novel type of carotenoid biosynthetic gene from Xanthophyllomyces
dendrorhous. Mol Gen Genet 262:453–461
Verdoes JC, Misawa N, van Ooyen AJJ (1999b) Cloning and characterization of the astaxanthin
biosynthetic gene encoding phytoene desaturase of Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous.
Biotechnol Bioeng 63:750–755
Verdoes JC, Sandmann G, Visser H et al (2003) Metabolic engineering of the carotenoid
biosynthetic pathway in the yeast Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous (Phafﬁa rhodozyma).
Appl Environ Microbiol 69:3728–3738
Verwaal R, Jiang Y, Wang J et al (2010) Heterologous carotenoid production in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae induces the pleiotropic drug resistance stress response. Yeast Chichester Engl
27:983–998
Verwaal R, Wang J, Meijnen J-P et al (2007) High-level production of beta-carotene in Saccharo-
myces
cerevisiae
by
successive
transformation
with
carotenogenic
genes
from
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Appl Environ Microbiol 73:4342–4350
Visser H, van Ooyen AJJ, Verdoes JC (2003) Metabolic engineering of the astaxanthin-
biosynthetic pathway of Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. FEMS Yeast Res 4:221–231
Vittorioso P, Carattoli A, Londei P, Macino G (1994) Internal translational initiation in the mRNA
from the Neurospora crassa albino-3 gene. J Biol Chem 269:26650–26654
Wang GY, Keasling JD (2002) Ampliﬁcation of HMG-CoA reductase production enhances
carotenoid accumulation in Neurospora crassa. Metab Eng 4:193–201
Wang H-B, Luo J, Huang X-Y et al (2014) Oxidative stress response of Blakeslea trispora induced
by H2O2 during β-carotene biosynthesis. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 41:555–561
Wang Q, Luo W, Gu Q-Y et al (2013) Enhanced lycopene content in Blakeslea trispora by
effective mutation-screening method. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 171:1692–1700
Wang W, Yu L, Zhou P (2006) Effects of different fungal elicitors on growth, total carotenoids and
astaxanthin formation by Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Bioresour Technol 97:26–31
Wang Y, Chen X, Hong X et al (2016) Cyclase inhibitor tripropylamine signiﬁcantly enhanced
lycopene accumulation in Blakeslea trispora. J Biosci Bioeng 122(5):570–576
Will OH, Ruddat M, Garber ED, Kezdy FJ (1984) Characterization of carotene accumulation in
Ustilago violacea using high-performance liquid chromatography. Curr Microbiol 10:57–63
Will OH, Ruddat M, Newland NA (1985) Characterization of carotene accumulation in species of
the fungal genus Ustilago using high-performance liquid chromatography. Bot Gaz
146:204–207
Woodside JV, McGrath AJ, Lyner N, McKinley MC (2015) Carotenoids and health in older
people. Maturitas 80:63–68
Wozniak A, Lozano C, Barahona S et al (2011) Differential carotenoid production and gene
expression in Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous grown in a nonfermentable carbon source.
FEMS Yeast Res 11:252–262
Wu W, Lu M, Yu L (2011) Expression of carotenogenic genes and astaxanthin production in
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous as a function of oxygen tension. Z Naturforschung C J Biosci
66:283–286
Xie W, Lv X, Ye L et al (2015) Construction of lycopene-overproducing Saccharomyces
cerevisiae by combining directed evolution and metabolic engineering. Metab Eng 30:69–78
Xu F, Yuan Q-P, Zhu Y (2007) Improved production of lycopene and β-carotene by Blakeslea
trispora with oxygen-vectors. Process Biochem 42:289–293
278
J. Avalos et al.

Yamamoto K, Hara KY, Morita T et al (2016) Enhancement of astaxanthin production in
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous by efﬁcient method for the complete deletion of genes.
Microb Cell Factories 15:155
Yamane Y, Higashida K, Nakashimada Y et al (1997) Inﬂuence of oxygen and glucose on primary
metabolism and astaxanthin production by Phafﬁa rhodozyma in batch and fed-batch cultures:
kinetic and stoichiometric analysis. Appl Environ Microbiol 63:4471–4478
Yamano S, Ishii T, Nakagawa M et al (1994) Metabolic engineering for production of β-carotene
and lycopene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 58:1112–1114
Yang Q, Borkovich KA (1999) Mutational activation of a Gαi causes uncontrolled proliferation of
aerial hyphae and increased sensitivity to heat and oxidative stress in Neurospora crassa.
Genetics 151:107–117
Yen H-W, Chang J-T (2015) Growth of oleaginous Rhodotorula glutinis in an internal-loop airlift
bioreactor by using lignocellulosic biomass hydrolysate as the carbon source. J Biosci Bioeng
119:580–584
Youssar L, Avalos J (2007) Genetic basis of the ovc phenotype of Neurospora: identiﬁcation and
analysis of a 77 kb deletion. Curr Genet 51:19–30
Youssar L, Schmidhauser TJ, Avalos J (2005) The Neurospora crassa gene responsible for the cut
and ovc phenotypes encodes a protein of the haloacid dehalogenase family. Mol Microbiol
55:828–838
Zahra Bathaie S, AshraﬁM, Azizian M, Tamanoi F (2016) Mevalonate pathway and human
cancers. Curr Mol Pharmacol 10:77–85
Zalokar M (1954) Studies on biosynthesis of carotenoids in Neurospora crassa. Arch Biochem
Biophys 50:71–80
Zalokar M (1957) Isolation of an acidic pigment in Neurospora. Arch Biochem Biophys
70:568–571
Zalokar M (1955) Biosynthesis of carotenoids in Neurospora. Action spectrum of photoactivation.
Arch Biochem Biophys 56:318–325
Zhang Z, Zhang X, Tan T (2014) Lipid and carotenoid production by Rhodotorula glutinis under
irradiation/high-temperature
and
dark/low-temperature
cultivation.
Bioresour
Technol
157:149–153
Zoz L, Carvalho JC, Soccol VT et al (2015) Torularhodin and torulene: bioproduction, properties
and prospective applications in food and cosmetics—a review. Braz Arch Biol Technol
58:278–288
8
Carotenoid Production by Filamentous Fungi and Yeasts
279

Molecular Studies of the Flavinogenic
Fungus Ashbya gossypii
and the Flavinogenic Yeast Candida famata
9
Oleksiy O. Lyzak, Rodrigo Ledesma-Amaro, Kostyantyn V. Dmytruk,
Andriy A. Sibirny, and Jose Luis Revuelta
Abstract
Riboﬂavin (vitamin B2) is an important nutrient used as precursor for synthesis
of ﬂavin nucleotides, ﬂavin mononucleotide (FMN), and ﬂavin adenine dinucle-
otide (FAD), which are used as coenzymes in many enzymatic, mostly
oxidoreductive, reactions. Riboﬂavin is widely used in food industry, agricul-
ture, and medicine. Annual market for this vitamin is around 250 million US
dollars. Yeasts and ﬁlamentous fungi are prototrophs for riboﬂavin and mostly
produce small amounts of this vitamin, which correspond to their needs. How-
ever, there is a group of yeasts and ﬁlamentous fungi, known as ﬂavinogenic
organisms, which are able to produce huge amounts of riboﬂavin. Flavinogenic
yeasts overproduce riboﬂavin under iron starvation and ﬂavinogenic fungi did it
during sporulation under stationary phase of growth. Some mutants of the
ﬂavinogenic fungus Ashbya gossypii and the yeast Candida famata belong to
the most effective riboﬂavin overproducers known. This review describes devel-
opment of molecular tools for studying A. gossypii and C. famata and examples
of successful utilization of these approaches for construction of the even more
effective riboﬂavin producers.
O.O. Lyzak • K.V. Dmytruk
Institute of Cell Biology, NAS of Ukraine, Drahomanov Street, 14/16, Lviv 79005, Ukraine
R. Ledesma-Amaro
Micalis Institute, INRA, AgroParisTech, Universite´ Paris-Saclay, 78350 Jouy-en-Josas, France
A.A. Sibirny
Institute of Cell Biology, NAS of Ukraine, Drahomanov Street, 14/16, Lviv 79005, Ukraine
University of Rzeszow, Zelwerowicza 4, Rzeszow 35-601, Poland
J.L. Revuelta (*)
Departamento de Microbiologı´a y Gene´tica, Metabolic Engineering Group, Universidad de
Salamanca, Campus Miguel de Unamuno, 37007 Salamanca, Spain
e-mail: revuelta@usal.es
# Springer International Publishing AG 2017
A.A. Sibirny (ed.), Biotechnology of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-58829-2_9
281

Contents
9.1
Introduction ................................................................................
282
9.2
A. gossypii .................................................................................
283
9.2.1
Transformation ....................................................................
283
9.2.2
Selectable Markers ................................................................
284
9.2.3
Reporters and Promoters ..........................................................
285
9.2.4
Metabolic Engineering to Increase Riboﬂavin Production ......................
285
9.2.5
Other Biotechnological Products of A. gossypii .................................
286
9.3
C. famata ..................................................................................
287
9.3.1
Transformation ....................................................................
287
9.3.2
Selectable Markers ................................................................
287
9.3.3
Insertional Mutagenesis ...........................................................
289
9.3.4
Reporter System and Promoters ..................................................
289
9.3.5
CRISPR-cas9 System .............................................................
290
9.3.6
Regulation of Riboﬂavin Biosynthesis ...........................................
290
9.4
Conclusions ................................................................................
292
References .......................................................................................
293
9.1
Introduction
In most cases, primary metabolites are synthesized in optimal amounts; it is thought
that otherwise organism loses its competitiveness and could be eliminated by
natural selection. There are however several exceptions of this general picture, an
overproduction of glutamic acid by Corynebacterium glutamicum being apparently
the best known example (Kimura 2003). Other examples deal with the ability to
overproduce riboﬂavin (vitamin B2) by several species of ﬁlamentous fungi and
yeasts. Current review describes two such natural riboﬂavin-overproducing
organisms, Ashbya gossypii and Candida famata. Ashbya gossypii is a ﬁlamentous
fungus isolated as a plant pathogen and characterized as a natural riboﬂavin
(vitamin B2) producer (Wickerham et al. 1946). A. gossypii belongs to the group
of the most ﬂavinogenic organisms known (Demain 1972). Riboﬂavin accumulates
in stationary phase (Stahmann et al. 2000), giving mycelium a bright yellow color
(F€orster et al. 1999). Candida famata is an asporogenic yeast and representative of
so named ﬂavinogenic yeasts—group of organisms capable of riboﬂavin
oversynthesis under iron limitation (Tanner et al. 1945; Abbas and Sibirny 2011).
This group also includes alkane-utilizing yeast Meyerozyma (Pichia or Candida)
guilliermondii, starch-utilizing yeast Schwanniomyces occidentalis, pathogenic
yeast Candida albicans, and some others (Knight et al. 2002; Abbas and Sibirny
2011; Papon et al. 2015). They all belong to the so-named CTG clade of yeasts, the
organisms which decode leucine CTG codon to serine. C. famata apparently is the
most ﬂavinogenic yeast as under iron limitation conditions, it accumulates around
500 μg/ml of riboﬂavin in the medium, whereas under optimal concentration of iron
ions for growth, accumulation of riboﬂavin does not exceed 1–1.5 μg of riboﬂavin/
ml, i.e., similarly to that in non-ﬂavinogenic yeasts.
282
O.O. Lyzak et al.

The ﬁrst microbial riboﬂavin production processes developed in the 1940s used
Eremothecium ashbyi and Ashbya gossypii, two natural riboﬂavin-overproducing
ﬁlamentous fungal species, as production strains (Revuelta et al. 2016a, b). Com-
mercial riboﬂavin fermentation production plants were built in the 1960s using
these fungi, but closed them after several years of operation because they could not
compete with the chemical production plants.
A riboﬂavin production process based on Candida famata was developed and
used by ADM Company (USA) for commercial riboﬂavin production using
hydrolyzed cornstarch as feedstock. However, due to genetic instability of the
overproducing strain dep8,
resulting
in non-overproducing
revertants, the
C. famata-based production process was stopped several years ago, and it is not
currently used at the industrial scale. In the early 1970s, an A. gossypii-based
riboﬂavin process was developed, which was later implemented at industrial scale
and used it in parallel with the traditional chemical process for several years
(Revuelta et al. 2016a, b). Since then, the A. gossypii process was continuously
improved with the consequence that the chemical production was shut down in
1996, and the microbial fermentation plant was enlarged to provide sufﬁcient
production capacity.
The one-step A. gossypii fermentation process using highly efﬁcient production
strains is economically advantageous to the chemical production technologies
because of lower technical complexity and reduced consumption of raw materials,
mainly renewable carbon sources like vegetable oils or carbohydrates. It should be
stressed that the microbial riboﬂavin production also is favorable relative to the
chemical synthesis from the ecologic point of view. The riboﬂavin-producing
biotechnological potential of the C. famata is also very high as some mutants of
this species are the most ﬂavinogenic organisms known (Dmytruk and Sibirny
2012). The success of the A. gossypii and C. famata in biotechnological processes
is based on the development of efﬁcient molecular tools that enable the application
of metabolic engineering approaches to improve the productivity of the industrial
strains. In addition, C. famata can also be used as a model organism in studying the
iron metabolism as changes in iron acquisition could be easily detected due to
changes in production of the color substance, riboﬂavin. This chapter describes the
molecular tools developed for A. gossypii and C. famata and their application to the
development of riboﬂavin-overproducing strains. In addition, some features of the
regulation
of
riboﬂavin
synthesis
in
the
ﬂavinogenic
yeasts
C.
famata,
M. guilliermondii, and C. albicans are discussed.
9.2
A. gossypii
9.2.1
Transformation
There are two procedures that achieve efﬁcient transformation of A. gossypii. The
ﬁrst method reported is based in the enzymatic treatment of growing cells to remove
their cell walls and the resulting spheroplasts exposed to DNA in the presence of
9
Molecular Studies of the Flavinogenic Fungus Ashbya gossypii and. . .
283

calcium ions and polyethylene glycol, before being embedded in hypertonic selec-
tive agar to facilitate cell wall regeneration and subsequent colonies formation.
Transformation frequencies of up to 63 transformants per μg of plasmid DNA were
obtained (Wright and Philippsen 1991).
Intact germling cells can be transformed by electroporation, which involves
using a brief voltage pulse to facilitate entry of DNA, plasmid, or PCR products
into the cells (F€orster et al. 1999). Transformation by electroporation is simple and
at least as efﬁcient as the spheroplast transformation (50–100 transformants/μg
DNA). Since A. gossypii grows as multinucleate mycelium, the transformant
colonies are heterokarytic and contain a mixture of transformed and untransformed
nuclei. Therefore, to obtain homokaryotic transformant strains, the primary
transformant colonies are subjected to clonal selection. This is achieved by plating
the uninucleate spores obtained from the primary transformant colonies onto
selectable medium.
9.2.2
Selectable Markers
Selectable markers are one of the important molecular tools because they allow
distinguishing transformed cells from untransformed cells. They generally can be
classiﬁed into three categories: nutritional markers, resistance markers, and bidi-
rectional or counterselectable markers. Besides, a few reporters (see below) also
serve as convenient visual markers to select transformants.
Resistance markers allow the growth of transformants in the presence of
inhibitors (antimetabolite or antibiotic). They are routinely used to transform
wild-type strains because they circumvent the need to create an auxotrophic host
background. The only requirement is that the recipient organism is sensitive to the
selection pressure applied. The most commonly used resistance markers used in
A. gossypii gene manipulations (gene knockout, gene over- or underexpression, and
gene tagging) are kanMX4, natR, and hygR, which confer resistance to Geneticin
(G418®), nourseothricin (Clonat®), and hygromycin B, respectively (Wright and
Philippsen 1991; Revuelta et al. 2016a, b; Jime´nez et al. 2008; Santos et al. 2005).
Whereas antibiotic or nutritional markers are in general dominant and provide only
a tool for positive selection (the gene imparting a survival phenotype to the
recipient on the respective selection medium), counterselectable markers enabling
both positive and negative selection are powerful molecular tools in genetic engi-
neering because they allow selection for loss of a genetic marker rather than its
presence. Interestingly, hsv-1 tk (coding for herpes simplex virus type1 thymidine
kinase) provides for a negative selection—its expression is lethal to the host
organism when grown in the presence of ganciclovir. Lethality is due to the
conversion of ganciclovir into a cytotoxic nucleoside analogue. In combination
with kanMX4, hsv-1 tk was used to provide both positive and negative selection in
A. gossypii (Revuelta JL, personal communication).
The list of markers at our disposal is not extensive and therefore recycling/
reusing a marker is of essence. The issue is particularly problematic when the same
284
O.O. Lyzak et al.

recipient strain has to be transformed repeatedly. A very efﬁcient method for
marker recycling has been developed in a wide variety of fungi based in the
Cre-loxP recombination system adapted from bacteriophage P1. This approach
comprises the excision of a DNA fragment that is ﬂanked by loxP sites by the
catalytic activity of a Cre recombinase, which needs to be expressed in the fungus.
Marker rescue based on the Cre/loxP recombination system has been also devel-
oped for A. gossypii (Aguiar et al. 2014a, b; Ledesma-Amaro et al. 2014a, b, c).
9.2.3
Reporters and Promoters
A. gossypii has been extensively used as a model to study hyphae formation, and
therefore several reporters have been developed. Some of them are LacZ and
ﬂuorescence proteins that can be used and fused to target genes/promoters, such
as yEGFP, yEmCFP, yEVenus, yECitrine, yEMCitrine, mCherry, mStrawberry,
and tdTomoto (Kaufmann 2009).
The wide use of A. gossypii in both basic research (hyphae formation) and
applied research (bioproduction of vitamins and other industrially relevant
compounds) required the identiﬁcation and use of different promoters. Some of
the constitutive promoters are GPD1 and TEF1. Interestingly, AgTEF1 promoter is
also widely used to control gene expression in S. cerevisiae (Monschau et al. 1998).
On the contrary, HIS3, TEF1, TEF2, and PGK1 promoters from S. cerevisiae have
been used to express genes in A. gossypii (Kemper et al. 2011; Ravasio et al. 2014;
Ribeiro et al. 2010). GPD1 is the strongest promoter described so far, and therefore,
it has been used in most of the gene overexpressions carried out for metabolic
engineering approaches. In addition to the constitutive promoters, inducible and
repressible ones such as AgICLp, AgMET3p, and ScTH13p have been developed.
The promoter from AgICL1 is repressed by glucose, derepressed by glycerol,
partially activated by acetate and ethanol, and fully activated by oil (Maeting
et al. 1999). The AgMET3 promoter can be repressed by the presence of methionine
(Dünkler and Wendland 2007) while the ScTH12 promoter is repressed by thiamine
(Kaufmann 2009).
9.2.4
Metabolic Engineering to Increase Riboflavin Production
Ashbya gossypii naturally produces a yellow pigment that was identiﬁed as riboﬂa-
vin. In the last decade, genetic and biochemical studies have determined the
metabolic pathways and the enzymes involved in the production of this vitamin
(Abbas and Sibirny 2011; Revuelta et al. 2016a, b). The pathway has two branches,
each with a precursor, ribulose-5-phosphate and GTP. GTP is synthesized through
the purine nucleotide pathway, which is regulated by the product of BAS1 gene.
GTP and ribulose-5-phosphate are converted into riboﬂavin by the action of the
enzymes encoded by six RIB genes (Ledesma-Amaro et al. 2013a, b; Jimenez et al.
2016).
9
Molecular Studies of the Flavinogenic Fungus Ashbya gossypii and. . .
285

The deep knowledge of the pathway has allowed its manipulation by rational
metabolic engineering in order to increase the production of the vitamin. The
overexpression and deregulation of the ﬁrst two enzymes in the pathway of purine
nucleotide synthesis de novo (phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase and
phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate amidotransferase) increased the amount of riboﬂa-
vin synthesized by A. gossypii (Jime´nez et al. 2005, 2008). In addition, the elimi-
nation of a negative regulatory domain in the Bas1 enzyme further increased
vitamin production (Mateos et al. 2006). The ﬂux toward GTP and, thus, riboﬂavin
was also enhanced by the overexpression of the IMP dehydrogenase (IMD3), an
intermediate gene of the pathway (Buey et al. 2015a, b).
Recently, the RIB genes were found to be limiting riboﬂavin production as well as
the competing gene ADE12, when analyzed in silico using the genome-scale meta-
bolic model iRL776 (Ledesma-Amaro et al. 2014a, b, c). Both, the overexpression
of the RIB genes and deletion of the gene ADE12 lead to an increase of vitamin
production as predicted by the model (Ledesma-Amaro et al. 2015a, b, c).
The combination of such rational engineering approaches with random muta-
genesis and selection has created vitamin B2 overproducer strains, which are
currently in use for the large-scale production of this product by the company
BASF, Germany.
9.2.5
Other Biotechnological Products of A. gossypii
Besides the production of riboﬂavin, A. gossypii has been engineered for the
production of other biotechnological products such as lipids, nucleosides, folic
acid, or proteins. Microbial lipids or single-cell oils are considered to be an ideal
source for biodiesel and chemicals (Ledesma-Amaro et al. 2015a, b, c, 2016a, b;
Ledesma-Amaro and Nicaud 2016a, b). A. gossypii is known to have a very active
lipid metabolism, and this characteristic has been exploited to maximize lipid
production by metabolic engineering. In one work, the capacity of this fungus to
accumulate lipids was increased by blocking beta oxidation and by expressing
genes from the oleaginous yeast Yarrowia lipolytica (Ledesma-Amaro et al.
2014a, b, c, 2015a, b, c). In another work, the proﬁle of fatty acids produced was
tuned by the manipulation of the elongase and desaturase pathways (Ledesma-
Amaro et al. 2014a, b, c) or the expression of hydroxylase (Lozano-Martı´nez et al.
2016a, b). Later on, this host was engineered to enhance lipid production using
low-cost carbon sources such as molasses (Lozano-Martı´nez et al. 2016a, b) or
xylose (Dı´az-Ferna´ndez et al. 2017).
Nucleosides, especially inosine and guanosine, are metabolites with industrial
applications as ﬂavor enhancers or pharmaceuticals (Ledesma-Amaro et al.
2013a, b). These compounds are synthesized from the purine pathway, which is a
very active pathway in A. gossypii used for the production of riboﬂavin, and thus,
metabolic engineering strategies have redirected the metabolic ﬂux toward inosine
and guanosine by overexpression of purine pathway genes and the deletion of
286
O.O. Lyzak et al.

competing pathways, e.g., minimizing riboﬂavin production (Ledesma-Amaro et al.
2015a, b, c, 2016a, b). These works represent the highest nucleoside titer ever
produced in a eukaryote organism, which suggests its potential use as industrial
producer.
A. gossypii also present the capacity to produce and secrete high amount of
proteins. In this regard, A. gossypii has been proposed as a potential producer of
recombinant proteins. As pioneers, our laboratory patented the use of this fungus to
produce proteins speciﬁcally heterologous cellulases (Alth€oefer et al. 2001). After-
ward the expression of cellulases from Trichoderma reesei (Ribeiro et al. 2010) and
a beta-galactosidase from Aspergillus niger (Magalhes et al. 2014) have been
reported. Additionally, the natural capability of A. gossypii to produce proteins
has been improved by both random and targeted mutagenesis (Ribeiro et al. 2013).
Besides, the characteristics of protein N-glycosylation in this fungus has been
studied in detail (Aguiar et al. 2014a, b).
A recent work has generated strains of A. gossypii able to produce substantial
amounts of folic acid. The folic acid or vitamin B9, is an essential compound for
human diet, which, as riboﬂavin, is synthesized from GTP. These overproducing
strains accumulate up to 300 times more folic acid than the wild type, and their
production titers are the highest described so far (Serrano-Amatriain et al. 2016).
9.3
C. famata
9.3.1
Transformation
An efﬁcient transformation method is crucial for genetic engineering of yeasts as a
way to introduce foreign DNA into their cells that is necessary for construction of
new strains. In the case of C. famata, there were adapted a few protocols which
were previously used for other species transformation (Voronovsky et al. 2002).
C. famata can be modiﬁed with both spheroplast transformation and electropo-
ration. The ﬁrst one requires number of various buffers, lyticase as cell wall lysing
agent, and depends on a quality of all components; thereby electroporation is the
main method of C. famata transformation. It requires cells in their exponential
phase of growth to be shortly incubated with DTT and then washed with water and
with 1M sucrose before electroporation. The frequency of transformation is up to
6.3  104 and 1  105 transformants per μg DNA, respectively.
9.3.2
Selectable Markers
Development of selectable markers is an important step of genetic engineering,
because it is usually the main way to select transformants. However, as C. famata is
still a poorly studied yeast, there are only few selectable markers available at the
moment that signiﬁcantly limits research potential of this species.
9
Molecular Studies of the Flavinogenic Fungus Ashbya gossypii and. . .
287

The ﬁrst selectable marker adapted for C. famata was gene LEU2. Using UV
mutagenesis with subsequent growth analysis, the 16 strains unable to grow in
leucine-depleted conditions were isolated among more than 40,000 colonies. The
further analysis using spheroplast transformation with plasmids harboring LEU2
from Saccharomyces cerevisiae allowed to identify among leucine auxotrophs
C. famata leu2 mutants and proved the gene S. cerevisiae LEU2 as a suitable
marker (Voronovsky et al. 2002).
Another auxotrophy-based selectable marker, ADE2 gene, was recently devel-
oped for C. famata using CRISPR-cas9 mutagenesis. Obtained strain has pink/red
colony color and unable to grow without adenine in the medium. Gene ADE2 was
isolated from C. famata using BLAST for identiﬁcation of its sequence based on
homology with the corresponding genes of C. albicans and D. hansenii. Additional
beneﬁt of using this marker is the change to white/light-pink color of transformants
that makes selection easier (Lyzak et al. 2016).
Gene ble conferring resistance to bleomycin family of antibiotics was a ﬁrst
dominant marker used to select the C. famata transformants. It was found that
growth of C. famata is inhibited by phleomycin (2.0 mg/l) in rich YPD medium.
The Staphylococcus aureus version of this gene was used due to the absence of
CTG codons in its sequence, and it was expressed under control of C. famata TEF1
promoter.
A
frequency
of
transformation
obtained
was
approximately
100 transformants per μg of DNA (Dmytruk et al. 2006).
Gene IMH3 which encodes IMP dehydrogenase can also serve as a selective
marker (K€ohler et al. 1997). D. hansenii IMH3 gene homologue and the minimal
toxic concentration of mycophenolic acid (15 mg/l) were used for C. famata
transformation. The transformation frequency was approximately 30 transformants
per μg of DNA. In addition, as IMH3 takes part in purine biosynthesis, it also
provides an additional increase in riboﬂavin synthesis (Dmytruk et al. 2011).
Modiﬁed D. hansenii ARO4 gene encoding 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-
phosphate (DAHP) synthase not sensitive to retroinhibition with tyrosine, which
provides ﬁrst step of aromatic amino acid biosynthesis, also can be used as
dominant selectable marker. It confers resistance to ﬂuorophenylalanine (Cebollero
and Gonzalez 2004). The transformants can be selected on mineral medium
containing 2.5 g/l ﬂuorophenylalanine and supplemented with 0.8 g/l tyrosine.
Transformation frequency for the ARO4m marker was around 100 transformants
per μg of DNA (Dmytruk et al. 2011). In addition, ARO4m could confer a multicopy
plasmid integration when toxic agent concentration is increased (Dmytruk et al.
2014).
Gene SAT1 allows yeasts to grow on medium with nourseothricin as a selective
agent. It encodes nourseothricin acetyltransferase and its sequence was recently
adapted for use in CTG clade of yeasts (Reuss et al. 2004; Millerioux et al. 2011). It
is extremely useful as to allow selection of C. famata transformants at low concen-
tration of antibiotic, 2–4 mg/l.
288
O.O. Lyzak et al.

9.3.3
Insertional Mutagenesis
Insertional mutagenesis is a method for identiﬁcation genes and their functions and
is suitable even for yeasts in which genomes are not sequenced yet. The main idea
of this method is the generation of mutant phenotype library with integration-
insertion cassette, a small nucleotide sequence, into a genome of a host cell that
can lead to changes or full arrest of disrupted gene expression. In addition, the
mutated gene is marked with the insertion cassette. Identiﬁcation of altered gene is
conducted by isolating the insertion cassette with ﬂanking DNA regions. To
achieve good results with insertional mutagenesis, the insertion cassette has to
provide high-frequency transformation and integrate into genome randomly and
in single-copy manner. Thus, the most simple insertion cassette is linearized
plasmid, harboring selectable marker gene, bacterial origin of replication (ori),
and bacterial selectable marker and, preferably, be lacking restriction endonuclease
sites. Transformants with desired phenotype selected after transformation undergo
the next step—veriﬁcation of insertion cassette copy number and localization of
disrupted locus. For this, genomic DNA is cleaved with endonuclease, in which
recognition site is absent in cassette, and then is self-ligated and used for
Escherichia coli transformation. Flanking regions can be identiﬁed with sequencing
(Kahmann and Basse 1999). The last step of this process is complementation of
obtained mutation with wild-type gene or re-obtaining of mutant phenotype with
homologous integration of insertional cassette with ﬂanking regions (Dmytruk and
Sibirny 2007).
In C. famata, insertional mutagenesis was used to identify genes involved in the
regulation of riboﬂavin synthesis using pL2 plasmid as the insertion cassette
(Dmytruk et al. 2006). Only three mutants unable to overproduce riboﬂavin were
obtained after transformation and were picked for further analysis. Although, in one
transformant, the structural gene of riboﬂavin biosynthesis (RIB1) was disrupted,
the other two had mutations in genes MET2 and SEF1.
9.3.4
Reporter System and Promoters
Gene promoters are the main regulators of gene expression. Constitutive promoters
are usually used for expression of genes, in which products are desirable to be in the
cell all the time, whereas inducible ones can be regulated using speciﬁc chemical
compounds. Thus, it is extremely important to have operating promoters from host
cell as they usually are the most efﬁcient. For evaluation of promoter activity, the
report system could be a useful tool.
For C. famata, it was proposed to use gene encoding β-galactosidase as a
reporter gene because activity of this enzyme can be easily detected and measured
(Uhl and Johnson 2001; Fu and Xiao 2006). The ﬁrst step of this work was isolation
of C. famata mutants unable to grow on medium with lactose as a sole carbon
source with UV mutagenesis. One mutant, βg6, was used as parental strain for
report system (Ishchuk et al. 2008). As was already mentioned, C. famata belongs
9
Molecular Studies of the Flavinogenic Fungus Ashbya gossypii and. . .
289

to the yeast clade with alternative genetic code (it reassigns leucine CTG codon as
serine). This fact could be one of the obstacles in search for active variant of gene
encoding β-galactosidase. LAC4 from Kluyveromyces lactis has only two CTG
codons. Hence, it was a suitable candidate for being the report gene. Several
promoters from C. famata and closely relative ﬂavinogenic yeast Debaryomyces
hansenii have been isolated, which are homologues to that previously used in other
yeasts. Only one promoter from D. hansenii demonstrated reasonable level of
expression—DhPGK1—the others, DhPGI, DhPHO5, and DhTPI1, were quite
weak. Promoters from C. famata, CfTEF1 and CfPGI, were active; however, the
activity of CfTEF1 was threefold higher relative to that of CfPGI. Thus, TEF1
promoter was chosen as a strongest promoter for C. famata.
9.3.5
CRISPR-cas9 System
CRISPR-cas9 system is a recently developed method of genome editing and
modiﬁcation. It is based on one of bacterial defensive mechanisms against foreign
DNA and consists of two components: RNA-guided DNA endonuclease cas9 and
small guide RNA (gRNA). Complex cas9-gRNA is able to recognize DNA
sequence complementary to 20 nucleotides on gRNA 50-end followed by NGG.
After recognition of target site, cas9 generates double-strand break (DSB) in this
region, approximately 3–4 nucleotides before NGG. This DSB can be repaired with
host cell via two possible mechanisms: nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) or
homology-directed repair (HDR). In the case of NHEJ, it is possible to generate
only small mutations like mono- or oligonucleotide insertions or deletions which
usually result in premature translation stop or frameshift, so the general outcome is
gene knockout. Although HDR needs additional component—repair template, it
has much more wide capabilities for precise gene editing, tagging, or integration.
CRISPR-cas9 system demonstrates high efﬁciency and ﬂexibility and might be
adapted for various hosts (Gilbert et al. 2013; Xie and Yang 2013; Sander and Joung
2014).
CRISPR-cas9 system becomes available for application in C. famata after its
adaptation from another ﬂavinogenic yeast of CTG clade, the pathogenic yeast
C. albicans (Vyas et al. 2015). It has been demonstrated that CRISPR-cas9 system
works in C. famata by knocking out the model gene ADE2 (Fig. 9.1) (Lyzak et al.
2016). Although currently the frequency of the mutation events is still quite low,
this parameter could be signiﬁcantly improved via promoter modiﬁcation.
9.3.6
Regulation of Riboflavin Biosynthesis
As
was
mentioned
earlier,
some
species
of
Pichia,
Debaryomyces,
Schwanniomyces, Torulopsis, and Candida genera are able to overproduce riboﬂa-
vin under cultivation in iron-depleted medium. The purpose of regulation of
riboﬂavin biosynthesis with iron is unknown. It could be hypothesized that
290
O.O. Lyzak et al.

riboﬂavin secreted by ﬂavinogenic yeasts under iron deﬁciency could reduce
practically insoluble Fe3+ ions to more soluble Fe2+ ions providing iron in such a
way to the cells.
During riboﬂavin overproduction, derepression of riboﬂavin biosynthetic
enzymes (GTP-cyclohydrolase, desaminase, riboﬂavin synthase, etc.) occurs. In
M. guilliermondii, nine groups of mutants, rib80, rib81, hit1, and red1–red6, which
overproduce riboﬂavin under high iron content in the medium, have been described
(Papon et al. 2015). Mutation rib80 is recessive and has pleiotropic effect. It
stimulates not only expression of riboﬂavin biosynthesis genes but also transport
and accumulation of iron. Mutations rib81 and red6 lead to constitutive expression
of RIB1 even in iron-supplemented condition (Boretsky et al. 2005). In addition, it
was shown that mutations rib80, rib81, and hit1, iron deﬁciency, and cell exposure
to Co2+ lead to oxidative stress. Deletion of YFH1 gene encoding frataxin homo-
logue involved in iron storage and transferring also leads to riboﬂavin overproduc-
tion (Pynyaha et al. 2009). Although, YFH deletion had the same effect on the cell,
it was nonallelic to the mutations mentioned above. Probably, mutations in different
genes involved in iron metabolism can cause riboﬂavin oversynthesis. Using
insertional mutagenesis in M. guilliermondii, the role of VMA1 gene in regulation
of riboﬂavin biosynthesis has been proved (Boretsky et al. 2011). On the other
hand, the mutations in RIB83 gene, which lead to loss of riboﬂavin overproduction
under iron deﬁciency, have been selected. The rib83 mutation is epistatic to
mutations, which cause riboﬂavin overproduction, like rib80 or rib81. Later on it
was shown that M. guilliermondii RIB83 is homologous to C. famata SEF1 coding
for transcription activator (Boretsky and Sibirny, unpublished).
Only one regulatory gene, SEF1, involved in regulation of riboﬂavin synthesis
has been identiﬁed for C. famata so far. Apparently SEF1 is involved in the positive
regulation of riboﬂavin biosynthesis. Moreover, its overexpression leads both to
increasing the riboﬂavin production and increasing stability of the industrial
overproducing strain dep8 (Dmytruk et al. 2006). Product of SEF1 gene,
Fig. 9.1 Linear scheme of CRISPR-Cas9 plasmid harboring Cas9 protein under control of
CaENO1 promoter, guide targeting region of CfADE2 gene controlling with SNR52 promoter
from C. albicans, SAT1 and ScLEU2 as selective markers and CfARS-element (a) Growth test of
parental (C. famata L20105, leu2) and selected ade2 strains (#2-5) on YPD (b), on YNB with
leucine (c), and on YNB without leucine (d)
9
Molecular Studies of the Flavinogenic Fungus Ashbya gossypii and. . .
291

transcriptional regulator Sef1, belongs to Gal4 family of transcriptional activators
and possesses zinc ﬁnger domain at its N-terminus. To understand interaction
between Sef1 and its putative DNA targets, one-hybrid system on the base of
non-ﬂavinogenic yeast S. cerevisiae was developed by us as a useful tool.
One-hybrid system is a derivative of the yeast two-hybrid system. This speciﬁc
variation is generated to investigate protein-DNA interactions and uses the follow-
ing scheme: DNA sequence of interest is fused with gene, which encodes reporter
protein and gene of the studied protein under control of the regulated promoter.
Promoters of structural genes of riboﬂavin biosynthesis pathway or of SEF1
promoter were fused with gene LAC4 encoding β-galactosidase and were
co-transformed with plasmid harboring C. famata SEF1 under control of
S. cerevisiae GAL1 promoter. The β-galactosidase activity of the resulted strains
cultivated on glucose- or galactose-containing media represented the strength of
binding of the transcriptional factor with promoter. The strongest level of activation
was observed for promoters of RIB1, RIB6 and RIB7 genes. These genes encode
enzymes of the ﬁrst and last steps of riboﬂavin biosynthetic pathway, so they have
to be tightly regulated. Furthermore, truncation of RIB1 promoter allowed
localizing the speciﬁc region apparently involved in Sef1 binding. In addition, the
evidence on SEF1 autoregulation has been obtained (Lyzak et al. 2015).
To ﬁnd out the mechanisms of SEF1 upregulation, the expression level of this
gene was assayed using qRT-PCR in three yeast species, C. famata, S. cerevisiae, and
Scheffersomyces stipitis, cultivated in the media with high or low content of iron. In
S. cerevisiae, the level of SEF1 expression in the media with low and high iron
content was unchanged. In C. famata, as expected, an inverse correlation between
iron supply and SEF1 expression was observed, i.e., iron deﬁciency led to increasing
SEF1 expression level. It is interesting to note that in the non-ﬂavinogenic yeast of
CUG clade S. stipitis also, an inverse correlation between iron supply and SEF1
expression was found (though expression level was quite low relative to C. famata
even in the cells cultivated under iron limitation) (Lyzak et al. unpublished).
Sef1 is involved in the regulatory system of iron homeostasis in C. albicans,
pathogenic ﬂavinogenic yeast with weak ﬂavinogenic potential. This system
involves two additional transcriptional factors: Sfu1 and Hap43. Sfu1 suppresses
expression of SEF1 and iron uptake; however, Hap43, in turn, inhibits SFU1, and its
expression is activated with Sef1. At least RIB1 gene is under positive control of
SEF1 in C. albicans as it takes place in C. famata (Chen et al. 2011). The role of
orthologs of C. albicans SFU1 and HAP43 in C. famata is currently unknown.
However, it could be suggested that both C. famata and C. albicans have similar
systems for regulation of iron metabolism and connected to it system of riboﬂavin
oversynthesis.
9.4
Conclusions
The A. gossypii and C. famata are intensively studied microorganisms. Advanced
progress on the development of efﬁcient molecular tools promises more complete
realization of biotechnological potential of both species. A. gossypii is an important
292
O.O. Lyzak et al.

industrial riboﬂavin producer. Application of recently developed tools of molecular
research opens possibility for its further improvements. Besides riboﬂavin produc-
tion, A. gossypii has been genetically modiﬁed for production of lipids, inosine and
guanosine, folic acid (vitamin B9), and industrially important proteins. Until now,
ﬂavinogenic potential of C. famata has not been explored extensively. Industrial
riboﬂavin production based on C. famata has been shut down due to instability of
the producer used (Abbas and Sibirny 2011). Much effort still is needed for
elucidation of the molecular mechanisms responsible for iron-dependent regulation
of riboﬂavin synthesis in C. famata. Genetically stable riboﬂavin-overproducing
strains of C. famata are known. Recent molecular studies of C. famata permit to
envisage fast future progress in construction of the robust competitive biotechno-
logical producers of riboﬂavin and its derivatives (ﬂavin nucleotides, antibiotic
roseoﬂavin, etc.).
Acknowledgment This work was partially supported by CRDF STEP BPG Grant UKB1-9047-
LV-10 and by the Science and Technology Center in Ukraine Grant No. 5729 and grant of NAS of
Ukraine 36-17 “Genetic control of biosynthesis and transport of riboﬂavin in the ﬂavinogenic
yeasts.”
References
Abbas CA, Sibirny AA (2011) Genetic control of biosynthesis and transport of riboﬂavin and
ﬂavin nucleotides and construction of robust biotechnological producers. Microbiol Mol Biol
Rev 75(2):321–360
Aguiar TQ, Dinis C, Domingues L (2014a) Cre-loxP-based system for removal and reuse of
selection markers in Ashbya gossypii targeted engineering. Fungal Genet Biol 68:1–8
Aguiar TQ, Dinis C, Magalh~aes F et al (2014b) Molecular and functional characterization of an
invertase secreted by Ashbya gossypii. Mol Biotechnol 56:524–534
Alth€oefer H, Pompeus M, Revuelta JL, Santos M, Jiminez A, Benito R, Santamaria R, Fernandez J
(2001) Protein production using Ashbya gossypii. Publication date: 05-04-2001. International
ﬁlling date: 05-04-2001. Patent WO/2001/023576
Boretsky YR, Kapustyak KY, Fayura LR, Stasyk OV, Stenchuk MM, Bobak YP, Drobot LB,
Sibirny AA (2005) Positive selection of mutants defective in transcriptional repression of
riboﬂavin synthesis by iron in the ﬂavinogenic yeast Pichia guilliermondii. FEMS Yeast Res 5
(9):829–837
Boretsky YR, Pynyaha YV, Boretsky VY, Fedorovych DV, Fayura LR, Protchenko O, Philpott
CC, Sibirny AA (2011) Identiﬁcation of the genes affecting the regulation of riboﬂavin
synthesis in the ﬂavinogenic yeast Pichia guilliermondii using insertion mutagenesis. FEMS
Yeast Res 11(3):307–314
Buey RM, Ledesma-Amaro R, Balsera M, de Pereda JM, Revuelta JL (2015a) Increased riboﬂavin
production by manipulation of inosine 50-monophosphate dehydrogenase in Ashbya gossypii.
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 99(22):9577–9589
Buey RM, Ledesma-Amaro R, Vela´zquez-Campoy A, Balsera M, Chagoyen M, De Pereda JM,
Revuelta JL (2015b) Guanine nucleotide binding to the Bateman domain mediates the alloste-
ric inhibition of eukaryotic IMP dehydrogenases. Nat Commun 6:8923
Cebollero E, Gonzalez R (2004) Comparison of two alternative dominant selectable markers for
wine yeast transformation. Appl Environ Microbiol 70(12):7018–7023
9
Molecular Studies of the Flavinogenic Fungus Ashbya gossypii and. . .
293

Chen C, Pande K, French SD, Tuch BB, Noble SM (2011) An iron homeostasis regulatory circuit
with reciprocal roles in Candida albicans commensalism and pathogenesis. Cell Host Microbe
10(2):118–135
Demain AL (1972) Riboﬂavin oversynthesis. Annu Rev Microbiol 26:369–388
Dı´az-Ferna´ndez D, Lozano-Martı´nez P, Buey RM, Revuelta JL, Jime´nez A (2017) Utilization of
xylose by engineered strains of Ashbya gossypii for the production of microbial oils.
Biotechnol Biofuels 10(1):3
Dmytruk KV, Sibirny AA (2007) Molecular mechanisms of insertional mutagenesis in yeasts and
mycelium fungi. Russ J Genet 43(8):835–845
Dmytruk KV, Sibirny AA (2012) Candida famata (Candida ﬂareri). Yeast 29(11):453–458
Dmytruk KV, Voronovsky AY, Sibirny AA (2006) Insertion mutagenesis of the yeast Candida
famata (Debaryomyces hansenii) by random integration of linear DNA fragments. Curr Genet
50(3):183–191
Dmytruk KV, Yatsyshyn VY, Sybirna NO, Fedorovych DV, Sibirny AA (2011) Metabolic
engineering and classic selection of the yeast Candida famata (Candida ﬂareri) for construc-
tion of strains with enhanced riboﬂavin production. Metab Eng 13(1):82–88
Dmytruk K, Lyzak O, Yatsyshyn V, Kluz M, Sibirny V, Puchalski C, Sibirny A (2014) Construc-
tion and fed-batch cultivation of Candida famata with enhanced riboﬂavin production. J
Biotechnol 172:11–17
Dünkler A, Wendland J (2007) Use of MET3 promoters for regulated gene expression in Ashbya
gossypii. Curr Genet 52(1):1–10
F€orster C, Santos MA, Ruffert S, Kra¨mer R, Revuelta JL (1999) Physiological consequence of
disruption of the VMA1 gene in the riboﬂavin overproducer Ashbya gossypii. J Biol Chem 274
(14):9442–9448
Fu Y, Xiao W (2006) Study of transcriptional regulation using a reporter gene assay. Methods Mol
Biol 313:257–264
Gilbert LA, Larson MH, Morsut L, Liu Z, Brar GA, Torres SE, Stern-Ginossar N, Brandman O,
Whitehead EH, Doudna JA, Lim WA, Weissman JS, Qi LS (2013) CRISPR-mediated modular
RNA-guided regulation of transcription in eukaryotes. Cell 154(2):442–451
Ishchuk OP, Dmytruk KV, Rohulya OV, Voronovsky AY, Abbas CA, Sibirny AA (2008)
Development of a promoter assay system for the ﬂavinogenic yeast Candida famata based
on the Kluyveromyces lactis β-galactosidase LAC4 reporter gene. Enzym Microb Technol 42
(3):208–215
Jime´nez A, Santos MA, Pompejus M, Revuelta JL (2005) Metabolic engineering of the purine
pathway for riboﬂavin production in Ashbya gossypii. Appl Environ Microbiol 71
(10):5743–5751
Jime´nez A, Santos MA, Revuelta JL (2008) Phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase activity
affects growth and riboﬂavin production in Ashbya gossypii. BMC Biotechnol 8(1):67
Jimenez A, Ledesma-Amaro R, Revuelta J (2016) Industrial production of vitamin B2 by microbial
fermentation. In: Vandamme EJ, Revuelta JL (eds) Industrial biotechnology of vitamins,
biopigments and antioxidants. Wiley-VCH, Weinheim
Kahmann R, Basse C (1999) REMI (restriction enzyme mediated integration) and its impact on the
isolation of pathogenicity genes in fungi attacking plants. Eur J Plant Pathol 105(3):221–229
Kaufmann A (2009) A plasmid collection for PCR-based gene targeting in the ﬁlamentous
ascomycete Ashbya gossypii. Fungal Genet Biol 46(8):595–603
Kemper M, Mohlzahn L, Lickfeld M, Lang C, Wa¨hlisch S, Schmitz HP (2011) A Bnr-like formin
links actin to the spindle pole body during sporulation in the ﬁlamentous fungus Ashbya
gossypii. Mol Microbiol 80(5):1276–1295
Kimura E (2003) Metabolic engineering of glutamate production. In: Microbial production of
l-amino acids. Springer, Berlin, pp 37–57
Knight SA, Lesuisse E, Stearman R, Klausner RD, Dancis A (2002) Reductive iron uptake by
Candida albicans: role of copper, iron and the TUP1 regulator. Microbiology 148:29–40
294
O.O. Lyzak et al.

K€ohler GA, White TC, Agabian N (1997) Overexpression of a cloned IMP dehydrogenase gene of
Candida albicans confers resistance to the speciﬁc inhibitor mycophenolic acid. J Bacteriol
179(7):2331–2338
Ledesma-Amaro R, Nicaud JM (2016a) Metabolic engineering for expanding the substrate range
of Yarrowia lipolytica. Trends Biotechnol 34(10):798–809
Ledesma-Amaro R, Nicaud JM (2016b) Yarrowia lipolytica as a biotechnological chassis to
produce usual and unusual fatty acids. Prog Lipid Res 61:40–50
Ledesma-Amaro R, Jimenez A, Santos M, Revuelta J (2013a) Microbial production of vitamins.
In: Microbial production of food ingredients, enzymes and nutraceuticals. Woodhead Publish-
ing Series in Food Science, Technology and Nutrition, Sawston, p 246
Ledesma-Amaro R, Jime´nez A, Santos MA, Revuelta JL (2013b) Biotechnological production of
feed nucleotides by microbial strain improvement. Process Biochem 48(9):1263–1270
Ledesma-Amaro R, Kerkhoven EJ, Revuelta JL, Nielsen J (2014a) Genome scale metabolic
modeling
of
the
riboﬂavin
overproducer
Ashbya
gossypii.
Biotechnol
Bioeng
111
(6):1191–1199
Ledesma-Amaro R, Santos MA, Jime´nez A, Revuelta JL (2014b) Strain design of Ashbya gossypii
for single-cell oil production. Appl Environ Microbiol 80(4):1237–1244
Ledesma-Amaro R, Santos MA, Jime´nez A, Revuelta JL (2014c) Tuning single-cell oil production
in Ashbya gossypii by engineering the elongation and desaturation systems. Biotechnol Bioeng
111(9):1782–1791
Ledesma-Amaro R, Buey RM, Revuelta JL (2015a) Increased production of inosine and guanosine
by means of metabolic engineering of the purine pathway in Ashbya gossypii. Microb Cell Fact
14(1):58
Ledesma-Amaro R, Lozano-Martı´nez P, Jime´nez A, Revuelta JL (2015b) Engineering Ashbya
gossypii for efﬁcient biolipid production. Bioengineered 6(2):119–123
Ledesma-Amaro R, Serrano-Amatriain C, Jime´nez A, Revuelta JL (2015c) Metabolic engineering
of riboﬂavin production in Ashbya gossypii through pathway optimization. Microb Cell Fact 14
(1):163
Ledesma-Amaro R, Buey RM, Revuelta JL (2016a) The ﬁlamentous fungus Ashbya gossypii as a
competitive industrial inosine producer. Biotechnol Bioeng 113:2060–2063
Ledesma-Amaro R, Lazar Z, Rakicka M, Guo Z, Fouchard F, Crutz-Le Coq AM, Nicaud JM
(2016b) Metabolic engineering of Yarrowia lipolytica to produce chemicals and fuels from
xylose. Metab Eng 38:115–124
Lozano-Martı´nez P, Buey RM, Ledesma-Amaro R, Jime´nez A, Revuelta JL (2016a) Engineering
Ashbya gossypii strains for de novo lipid production using industrial by-products. Microb
Biotechnol 10:425–433
Lozano-Martı´nez P, Ledesma-Amaro R, Revuelta JL (2016b) Engineering Ashbya gossypii for
ricinoleic and linoleic acid production. Chem Eng Trans 49:253–258
Lyzak O, Semkiv M, Dmytruk K, Sibirny A (2015) Targets of transcription factor Sef1 in the
ﬂavinogenic yeasts Candida famata. In: Sibirny A, Fedorovich D, Gonchar M, Grabek-Lejko
D (eds) Living organisms and bioanalytical approaches for detoxiﬁcation and monitoring of
toxic compounds. University of Rzeszow, Rzeszow
Lyzak O, Dmytruk K, Sibirny A (2016) Generation of mutations in ADE2 gene using a CRISPR-
Cas9 system in the ﬂavinogenic yeast Candida famata. Visnyk of L’viv Univ. Biol Ser
73:154–159
Maeting I, Schmidt G, Sahm H, Revuelta JL, Stierhof YD, Stahmann KP (1999) Isocitrate lyase of
Ashbya gossypii–transcriptional regulation and peroxisomal localization. FEBS Lett 444
(1):15–21
Magalhes F, Aguiar TQ, Oliveira C, Domingues L (2014) High-level expression of Aspergillus
niger β-galactosidase in Ashbya gossypii. Biotechnol Prog 30:261
Mateos L, Jime´nez A, Revuelta JL, Santos MA (2006) Purine biosynthesis, riboﬂavin production,
and trophic-phase span are controlled by a Myb-related transcription factor in the fungus
Ashbya gossypii. Appl Environ Microbiol 72(7):5052–5060
9
Molecular Studies of the Flavinogenic Fungus Ashbya gossypii and. . .
295

Millerioux Y, Clastre M, Simkin AJ, Courdavault V, Marais E, Sibirny AA, Noel T, Creche J,
Giglioli-Guivarc’h N, Papon N (2011) Drug-resistant cassettes for the efﬁcient transformation
of Candida guilliermondii wild-type strains. FEMS Yeast Res 11(6):457–463
Monschau N, Sahm H, Stahmann K (1998) Threonine aldolase overexpression plus threonine
supplementation enhanced riboﬂavin production in Ashbya gossypii. Appl Environ Microbiol
64:4283
Papon N, Boretsky YR, Courdavault V, Clastre M, Sibirny AA (2015) Genetic manipulation of
Meyerozyma guilliermondii. In: Van den Berg MA, Maruthachalam K (eds) Genetic transfor-
mation systems in fungi, vol 2. Springer, pp 245–262
Pynyaha YV, Boretsky YR, Fedorovych DV, Fayura LR, Levkiv AI, Ubiyvovk VM, Protchenko
OV, Philpott CC, Sibirny AA (2009) Deﬁciency in frataxin homologue YFH1 in the yeast
Pichia guilliermondii leads to missregulation of iron acquisition and riboﬂavin biosynthesis
and affects sulfate assimilation. Biometals 22(6):1051–1061
Ravasio D, Wendland J, Walther A (2014) Major contribution of the Ehrlich pathway for
2-phenylethanol/rose ﬂavor production in Ashbya gossypii. FEMS Yeast Res 14(6):833–844
Reuss O, Vik A, Kolter R, Morschhauser J (2004) The SAT1 ﬂipper, an optimized tool for gene
disruption in Candida albicans. Gene 341:119–127
Revuelta JL, Buey RM, Ledesma-Amaro R, Vandamme EJ (2016a) Microbial biotechnology for
the synthesis of (pro) vitamins, biopigments and antioxidants: challenges and opportunities.
Microb Biotechnol 9(5):564–567
Revuelta JL, Ledesma-Amaro R, Lozano-Martinez P, Dı´az-Ferna´ndez D, Buey RM, Jime´nez A
(2016b) Bioproduction of riboﬂavin: a bright yellow history. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol:1–7.
doi:10.1007/s10295-016-1842-7
Ribeiro O, Wiebe M, Ilme´n M, Domingues L, Penttila¨ M (2010) Expression of Trichoderma reesei
cellulases CBHI and EGI in Ashbya gossypii. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 87(4):1437–1446
Ribeiro O, Magalh~aes F, Aguiar TQ, Wiebe MG, Penttila¨ M, Domingues L (2013) Random and
direct mutagenesis to enhance protein secretion in Ashbya gossypii. Bioengineered 4
(5):322–331
Sander JD, Joung JK (2014) CRISPR-Cas systems for editing, regulating and targeting genomes.
Nat Biotechnol 32(4):347–355
Santos MA, Mateos L, Stahmann KP, Revuelta JL (2005) Insertional mutagenesis in the vitamin
B2 producer fungus Ashbya gossypii. Microb Process Prod 18:283–300
Serrano-Amatriain C, Ledesma-Amaro R, Lo´pez-Nicola´s R, Ros G, Jime´nez A, Revuelta JL
(2016) Folic acid production by engineered Ashbya gossypii. Metab Eng 38:473–482
Stahmann KP, Revuelta JL, Seulberger H (2000) Three biotechnical processes using Ashbya
gossypii, Candida famata, or Bacillus subtilis compete with chemical riboﬂavin production.
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 53(5):509–516
Tanner F Jr, Vojnovich C, Van Lanen JM (1945) Riboﬂavin production by Candida species.
Science (Washington) 101:180–161
Uhl MA, Johnson AD (2001) Development of Streptococcus thermophilus lacZ as a reporter gene
for Candida albicans. Microbiology 147(Pt 5):1189–1195
Voronovsky A, Abbas C, Fayura L, Kshanovska B, Dmytruk K, Sybirna K, Sibirny A (2002)
Development of a transformation system for the ﬂavinogenic yeast. FEMS Yeast Res 2
(3):381–388
Vyas VK, Barrasa MI, Fink GR (2015) A Candida albicans CRISPR system permits genetic
engineering of essential genes and gene families. Sci Adv 1(3):e1500248
Wickerham LJ, Flickinger MH, Johnston RM (1946) The production of riboﬂavin by Ashbya
gossypii. Arch Biochem 9:95–98
Wright MC, Philippsen P (1991) Replicative transformation of the ﬁlamentous fungus Ashbya
gossypii with plasmids containing Saccharomyces cerevisiae ARS elements. Gene 109
(1):99–105
Xie K, Yang Y (2013) RNA-guided genome editing in plants using a CRISPR-Cas system. Mol
Plant 6(6):1975–1983
296
O.O. Lyzak et al.

Cold-Active Enzymes from Cold-Adapted
Yeasts
10
Marcelo Baeza, Jennifer Alcaı´no, Vı´ctor Cifuentes,
Benedetta Turchetti, and Pietro Buzzini
Abstract
Cold-adapted yeasts include psychrophiles or psychrotolerant nonconventional
species able to survive and grow at low temperatures. They represent an impor-
tant source of biological diversity that has developed a set of structural and
functional adaptation strategies to overcome the adverse effects of cold (some-
times associated with other limiting conditions). Among them, the production of
cold-active enzymes is probably one of the most efﬁcient adaptations of the
eukaryotic physiology at low temperatures. Current literature reports that cold-
active enzymes exhibit several advantages than their mesophilic and thermo-
philic homologues and may successfully replace traditional catalysts in a range
of industrial applications carried out at low and moderate temperatures. Due to
their singular traits, some cold-active hydrolases (i.e., lipases, amylases, and
proteases,) isolated from cold-adapted yeasts have been studied since some
decades, while some other, namely, xylanases, chitinases, pectinolytic enzymes,
glycosidases, phytases, and invertases, have recently attracted a rising attention
for their biotechnological potential from the academy and industry for both food
and nonfood exploitations.
Contents
10.1
Introduction .............................................................................
298
10.2
Fundamentals of Cold-Adapted Yeasts ................................................
299
10.3
Fundamentals of Cold-Active Enzymes ...............................................
299
M. Baeza • J. Alcaı´no • V. Cifuentes
Facultad de Ciencias, Departamento de Ciencias Ecolo´gicas, Universidad de Chile, Las Palmeras
3425, N˜ u~noa, Santiago 7800003, Chile
B. Turchetti • P. Buzzini (*)
Department of Agricultural, Food and Environmental Sciences, University of Perugia, Borgo XX
Giugno 74, 06121 Perugia, Italy
e-mail: pietro.buzzini@unipg.it
# Springer International Publishing AG 2017
A.A. Sibirny (ed.), Biotechnology of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-58829-2_10
297

10.4
Cold-Active Yeast Lipases and Other Esterases ......................................
301
10.5
Cold-Active Yeast Amylases ..........................................................
302
10.6
Cold-Active Yeast Proteases ...........................................................
307
10.7
Cold-Active Yeast Xylanases ..........................................................
309
10.8
Cold-Active Yeast Chitinases .........................................................
309
10.9
Cold-Active Yeast Pectinolytic Enzymes .............................................
310
10.10
Cold-Active Yeast Glycosidases ......................................................
311
10.11
Cold-Active Yeast Phytases ...........................................................
312
10.12
Cold-Active Yeast β-Fructofuranosidase (Invertase) .................................
313
10.13
Conclusions .............................................................................
315
References .......................................................................................
316
10.1
Introduction
Cold ecosystems represent one of the largest biospheres of the globe: Arctic and
Antarctica, non-polar cryosphere, and deep oceans cover 70% of the Earth’s surface
(Cavicchioli and Tortsen 2000; Buzzini and Margesin 2014a). Due to the highly
selective pressure exerted by the environmental conditions occurring in cold
habitats, highly specialized microbial communities have developed important
adaptation strategies enabling them either to survive or even grow at very low
temperatures. These adaptations include (Buzzini et al. 2012; Buzzini and Margesin
2014a; Alcaı´no et al. 2015) (1) an increased membrane ﬂuidity (e.g., obtained by
shortening the chain of the fatty acids of the membrane triacylglycerols by increas-
ing their unsaturation degree and by altering methyl branching and changes in their
isomeric distribution), (2) the synthesis of cold-shock (csp) and antifreeze (afp)
proteins that protect the microbial cell against damage caused by low temperatures,
and (3) last, but not lesser important, the production of cold-active enzymes.
Current literature reports that cold-active enzymes exhibit a number of advantages
than their mesophilic and thermophilic homologues. Accordingly, they may suc-
cessfully replace traditional catalysts in a range of industrial applications carried
out at low temperatures (Buzzini et al. 2012; Białkowska and Turkiewicz 2014;
Szczesna-Antczak et al. 2014).
The impact of yeast biotechnology on both traditional fermented foods and
beverages (e.g., wine, beer, bread, etc.) as well as on the synthesis (de novo or
via biocatalytic route) of valuable ﬁne and bulk chemicals has been extensively
documented (Buzzini and Vaughan-Martini 2006; Johnson and Echavarri-Erasun
2011; Steensels et al. 2014). The increasing demand for producing novel molecules
has increased the number of studies on yeasts exhibiting original or improved
metabolic properties. Among them, the use of yeasts as source of enzymes
represents undoubtedly one of the most ancient and renowned yeast-associated
biotechnologies (Buzzini and Vaughan-Martini 2006; Johnson and Echavarri-
Erasun 2011). However, the impact of cold-active enzymes synthesized by cold-
adapted yeasts has been discovered only in recent decades and is nowadays
298
M. Baeza et al.

characterized by a rising biotechnological interest (Buzzini et al. 2012; Białkowska
and Turkiewicz 2014; Szczesna-Antczak et al. 2014).
10.2
Fundamentals of Cold-Adapted Yeasts
Although the correctness of using maximum growth temperatures as the principal
indicator of the thermal afﬁnity of microorganisms is still an open question (Sabri
et al. 2000; Margesin 2009; Rossi et al. 2009), the classical deﬁnition of
psychrophiles, mesophiles, and thermophiles is based on thermal dependence of
their growth kinetic limits (Morita 1975; Cavicchioli and Tortsen 2000). Conven-
tionally the organisms that tolerate low temperatures can be divided in
psychrophiles (frequently labeled as obligate psychrophiles) and psychrotolerants
(facultative psychrophiles). Psychrophiles exhibit a minimum growth temperature
around 0 C, an optimum of about 15 C (or lower), and an upper growth tempera-
ture 20 C. On the contrary, psychrotolerant organisms grow at about 0 C, but
have an optimal growth >20 C (Cavicchioli and Tortsen 2000; Raspor and Zupan
2006; Vishniac 2006; Buzzini and Margesin 2014b).
An apparent relationship between the psychrophilic/psychrotolerant aptitude of
a given organism and its conventional habitat was also observed (Sabri et al. 2000;
Margesin 2009; Rossi et al. 2009). Psychrophiles are common in permanently cold
habitats, while psychrotolerants are dominant in habitats exhibiting ﬂuctuating low
temperatures (Cavicchioli and Tortsen 2000; Buzzini and Margesin 2014a). On the
basis of above deﬁnitions, psychrotolerant organisms evolved their physiology to
tolerate cold, but they are not so specialized as psychrophiles, whose ability to
exhibit a slow growth at low temperatures may be even considered an advantage in
oligotrophic habitats, where a rapid exhaustion of available nutrients (in particular
carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorous) would rapidly lead to cell starvation (Russell
1997; Rossi et al. 2009; Buzzini and Margesin 2014b). Cold habitats are often
characterized by a mixture of stressing factors such as cold, low water activity,
nutrient availability, etc. that make them inhospitable for life. Accordingly, current
literature frequently considers psychrophiles as true extremophiles because they
exhibit adaptation not only to cold but often also to a mix of other limiting
conditions (Friedmann 1982; Yayanos 1995; Margesin and Schinner 2009; Staley
and Gosink 1999; Cavicchioli and Tortsen 2000; Buzzini and Margesin 2014a).
10.3
Fundamentals of Cold-Active Enzymes
Several yeasts are known since decades as enzyme producers (Buzzini and
Vaughan-Martini 2006; Johnson and Echavarri-Erasun 2011). However, the
enzymes produced from mesophilic yeasts sometimes exhibit quite poor
performances at low temperatures. The industrial demand of cold-active enzymes
is rapidly increasing: some hydrolases (i.e., lipases, amylases, proteases, and
xylanases) represent well-known examples of cold-active enzymes produced by
10
Cold-Active Enzymes from Cold-Adapted Yeasts
299

both psychrophilic and psychrotolerant yeasts (Feller and Gerday 1997, 2003;
Gerday et al. 1997; Shivaji and Prasad 2009; Buzzini et al. 2012; Białkowska and
Turkiewicz 2014; Szczesna-Antczak et al. 2014). These enzymes play a key role in
some food and nonfood catalysis carried out at low temperature through substantial
energy savings and allowing the transformation (or reﬁnement) of heat-sensitive
molecules (Margesin and Schinner 2009; Feller and Gerday 2003). Moreover,
because such enzymes are easily inactivated at mild temperature, they may be
exploited in those processes requiring fast, efﬁcient, and selective enzyme denatur-
ation after the treatment (Gerday et al. 1997, 2000; Feller and Gerday 2003).
The superior activity of cold-active enzymes at low temperature and their heat
lability in comparison with their mesophilic homologues are closely correlated with
an increased plasticity and ﬂexibility of their 3D structural components involved in
the catalysis. This is probably due to the selective pressure of temperature
ﬂuctuations, which affects their speciﬁc activity, but not their stability factors,
thus suggesting the weakening of intra-molecular forces, which results in reduced
stability toward denaturing agents (Gerday et al. 1997, 2000; Feller and Gerday
2003; Gerday 2014).
The hypothesis of a close association between the high activity expressed by
cold-active enzymes at low temperatures and a modiﬁcation of their active sites has
been contradicted by the evidence that all amino acid residues involved in the
reaction mechanism are strictly conserved in both cold-active and mesophilic
enzymes, thus suggesting that the molecular basis of cold adaptation should be
found in different places and/or mechanisms. Structural comparisons of cold-active
enzymes with their mesophilic and thermophilic homologues conﬁrmed that only
minor structural modiﬁcations are apparently required to convert a mesophilic or
thermophilic enzyme into a corresponding cold-active homologue, including a
decrease of the density of charges at the enzyme surface and an increase of the
density of hydrophobic residues exposed to the solvent (Gerday et al. 1997, 2000;
Feller and Gerday 2003; Gerday 2014). Based on current literature, the improve-
ment of catalytic efﬁciency of cold-active enzymes at low temperatures could be
the result of different strategies (Gerday et al. 1997, 2000; Feller and Gerday 2003;
Gerday 2014): (1) an increased speciﬁc activity (overall catalytic rate ¼ kcat); (2) an
improvement of substrate afﬁnity, namely, a decrease of Michaelis constant (Km);
and (3) a simultaneous modiﬁcation of both parameters. As above stated, this is
most probably achieved through an increase in the ﬂexibility of either a selected
part or the whole protein 3D structure that enhances its ability to reach the
conformational changes required for optimizing the catalysis at low temperatures
(Feller and Gerday 2003; Gerday 2014).
Such structural modiﬁcations lead to a higher thermosensitivity in comparison
with the mesophilic and thermophilic homologues, which is due to the following
adaptations (Gerday et al. 1997, 2000; Feller and Gerday 2003; Gerday 2014): (1) a
general decrease in the stability of the protein led to an increased overall plasticity
of the molecule, which is probably required to accommodate macromolecular
substrates; (2) a speciﬁc domain of the protein evolves into a highly ﬂexible unit,
whereas another domain remains much more rigid: this led to an appropriate Km of
the protein for small substrates (Feller and Gerday 2003; Gerday 2014).
300
M. Baeza et al.

10.4
Cold-Active Yeast Lipases and Other Esterases
Conventionally, lipases include some esterases that, under thermodynamically
favorable conditions, catalyze the reactions of hydrolysis, acidolysis, alcoholysis,
and aminolysis of esters. Their chemo-, regio-, and stereoselectivity make possible
their broad application (Szczesna-Antczak et al. 2014). Among them the typical
lipases,
i.e.,
triacylglycerol
lipases,
which
catalyze
the
hydrolysis
of
triacylglycerols to free fatty acids and glycerol, are regarded as the key biocatalysts
for a plethora of food and chemical industries, biomedical sciences, detergent
production, and environmental exploitations. A consistent part of the global
enzyme market is covered by lipases (Szczesna-Antczak et al. 2014). Among
them the cold-active lipases are considered an appealing biotechnology showing
a signiﬁcantly rising potential. Both psychrophilic and psychrotolerant yeasts are
becoming a source of cold-active lipases for biotechnological exploitations. Due to
their high activity at very low temperatures, which is a favorable property for the
production of relatively heat-sensitive molecules, these lipases have recently
attracted a remarkable attention because of their rising use as powerful and ﬂexible
catalytic solutions for organic chemists, pharmacists, biophysicists, biochemical
and process engineers, biotechnologists, microbiologists, and biochemists (Joseph
et al. 2008).
The ability to produce cold-active lipases was found to be very widespread
among yeasts inhabiting worldwide cold environments (Buzzini et al. 2012;
Szczesna-Antczak et al. 2014). Advanced studies on cold-active lipases A and B
(labeled as CALA and CALB) isolated from Candida antarctica (currently
Moesziomyces antarcticus), puriﬁed to homogeneity and characterized, were car-
ried out since the 1990s (Patkar et al. 1993; Dominguez de Maria et al. 2005).
CALA and CALB are the ﬁrst two examples of patented cold-active enzymes from
psychrophilic yeasts. They are at present included inside the portfolio of commer-
cial enzymes sold by Novozymes (Denmark). CALA, sold under the commercial
name Novocor® AD L, exhibits an activity range from 30 to 60 C at pH from 5.0 to
9.0 and higher thermal stability (90 C) than other lipases (Liese et al. 2000; Faber
2004; Patel 2004; Dominguez de Maria et al. 2005; Gotor-Fernande´z et al. 2006;
Szczesna-Antczak et al. 2014). On the contrary CALB, synthesized using a recom-
binant fungal strain of Aspergillus niger, is sold under the commercial names
Lipozyme® CALB L (in soluble form) and Novozym® 435 (in immobilized form)
(Margesin and Feller 2010; Szczesna-Antczak et al. 2014). The structural features
and catalytic activity of both CALA and CALB, as well as their heterologous
expression in suitable hosts, have been broadly investigated (Kirk and Christensen
2002; Krishna et al. 2002; Blank et al. 2006; Chen et al. 2008; Ericsson et al. 2008;
Miletic´ and Loos 2009; Emond et al. 2010; Forde et al. 2010; Juhl et al. 2010;
Gutarra et al. 2011; Habeych et al. 2011; Gruber and Pleiss 2012; Kahveci and Xu
2012).
Other cold-active lipases from psychrophilic yeasts were studied. Rashid et al.
(2010) found the production of cold-active lipases by Leucosporidium antarcticum
(now Glaciozyma antarctica), while Zaliha et al. (2012) patented a bifunctional
lipase isolated and puriﬁed from the same species: this lipase exhibited an optimal
10
Cold-Active Enzymes from Cold-Adapted Yeasts
301

temperature of 20 C. Interestingly, at 5 C the enzyme retained 60% of its
maximum activity. More recently, a cold-active lipase from an Antarctic strain of
Mrakia blollopis was isolated, puriﬁed to homogeneity and characterized (Tsuji
et al. 2013).
The production of cold-active lipases from psychrophilic and psychrotolerant
yeasts isolated from worldwide cold ecosystems has been recently reviewed
(Buzzini et al. 2012; Szczesna-Antczak et al. 2014).
In the industrial enzymes market, the esterases have a growing potential to be
used in food, textile, detergent, agrochemical industries, and in bioremediation as
well as in environmentally friendly exploitations. Microbial sterol esterases could
be used as diagnostic reagents for measuring cholesterol in human blood serum and
in paper pulp industry to decrease (or eliminate) the lipid residues (Vaquero et al.
2016). On the other hand, microbial cold-active esterases such as carboxylesterases
could be used for chemical synthesis due to their regio- and stereospeciﬁc mode of
action that is necessary for the production of optically pure ﬁne chemicals (Tutino
et al. 2010). A cold-active monomeric glycosylated 86 kDa benzoyl esterase
isolated from Rhodotorula mucilaginosa showed optimum activity at pH 7.5 and
at 45 C, but retained 20% of residual activity at 0 C. This characteristic makes it a
promising candidate to be used in the synthesis of benzoylated compounds at low
temperatures for pharmaceutical or ﬁne chemical applications (Zimmer et al. 2006).
The list of cold-active lipases produced by psychrophilic and psychrotolerant yeasts
is reported in Table 10.1.
10.5
Cold-Active Yeast Amylases
Amylolytic enzymes exhibiting the ability to efﬁciently hydrolyze starch at low
temperatures have a high potential to be applied in food, detergent, laundry, textile,
and food industries, in wastewater treatment, bioremediations in cold climates, and
in molecular biology applications (Janecˇek et al. 2014). Starch is one of the most
abundant carbohydrates in nature; for this reason, it is highly desired to be used as a
substrate for fuel generation. The complete degradation of raw starch is fundamen-
tal for an efﬁcient industrial microbial production of biofuels, which currently is
accomplished by the supplementation of α-amylase and glucoamylase during the
fermentative process (El-Fallal et al. 2012; van Zyl et al. 2012). The amylolytic
enzymes synthesized by microorganisms are variable: among them, the α-amylases,
which catalyze the hydrolysis of α-1,4-glucosidic bonds in starch and related
α-glucans, are the most characterized and used in baking and textile industries
and in starch sacchariﬁcation (Kuddus et al. 2011; Janecˇek et al. 2014). The
α-amylases commercially available have limited activity at low pHs and
temperatures and display Ca2+ dependency for their activity (Sharma and
Satyanarayana 2013). In this context, the market is evolving toward the discovery
of novel microbial sources of amylases showing high activity at low temperatures
and displaying speciﬁc properties that make them compatible with their application
302
M. Baeza et al.

Table 10.1 Production of cold-active enzymes from cold-adapted yeasts
Cold-active enzymes
Species (synonyms)
Industrial exploitation
References
Lipases
Basidiomycota
Cystobasidium laryngis (Rhodotorula laryngis), Cystobasidium
macerans (Cryptococcus macerans)
Dioszegia crocea, Dioszegia fristigensis
Glaciozyma antarctica (Leucosporidium antarcticum)
Goeffeauzyma gilvescens (Cryptococcus gilvescens),
Goeffeauzyma gastrica (Cryptococcus gastricus)
Leucosporidium creatinivorum (Leucosporidiella creatinivora),
Leucosporidium drummii; Leucosporidium fragarium
(Leucosporidiella fragaria)
Moesziomyces antarcticus (Candida antarctica, Pseudozyma
antarctica)
Mrakia blollopis, Mrakia gelida, Mrakia robertii
Papiliotrema laurentii (Cryptococcus laurentii)
Phenoliferia glacialis (Rhodotorula glacialis)
Rhodosporidiobolus colostri (Rhodotorula colostri)
Rhodotorula mucilaginosa
Solicoccozyma terricola (Cryptococcus terricola)
Sporobolomyces ruberrimus, Sporobolomyces salmonicolor
(Sporidiobolus salmonicolor)
Vishniacozyma victoriae (Cryptococcus victoriae)
Production of food and
beverages, chemicals,
and detergents
Patkar et al. (1993), Dominguez de
Maria et al. (2005), Zimmer et al.
(2006), Brizzio et al. (2007),
Joseph et al. (2008), Juhl et al.
(2010), Margesin and Feller
(2010), Rashid et al. (2010),
Carrasco et al. (2012), Zaliha et al.
(2012), Tsuji et al. (2013)
Amylases
Ascomycota
Clavispora lusitaniae
Geotrichum: Geotrichum sp.
Basidiomycota
Cystobasidium laryngis (Rhodotorula laryngis), Cystobasidium
macerans (Cryptococcus macerans)
Dioszegia crocea, Dioszegia fristingensis
Goeffeauzyma gilvescens (Cryptococcus gilvescens),
Goeffeauzyma gastrica (Cryptococcus gastricus)
Production of food and
beverages, chemicals,
detergents, and
pharmaceuticals;
paper manufacturing
De Mot and Verachtert (1987),
Wanderley et al. (2004), Brizzio
et al. (2007), Li et al. (2007a, b),
Galdino et al. (2011), Carrasco
et al. (2012), de Garcı´a et al.
(2012), Divya and Naga Padma
(2014), Singh et al. (2014),
Carrasco et al. (2016), Ranjan
et al. (2016)
(continued)
10
Cold-Active Enzymes from Cold-Adapted Yeasts
303

Table 10.1 (continued)
Cold-active enzymes
Species (synonyms)
Industrial exploitation
References
Holtermanniella wattica (Cryptococcus watticus)
Leucosporidium creatinivorum (Leucosporidiella creatinivora)
Moesziomyces antarcticus (Candida antarctica, Pseudozyma
antarctica)
Mrakia blollopis, Mrakia gelida, Mrakia robertii
Papiliotrema laurentii (Cryptococcus laurentii)
Phenoliferia glacialis (Rhodotorula glacialis)
Rhodotorula svalbardensis
Saitozyma ﬂava (Cryptococcus ﬂavus)
Solicoccozyma terricola (Cryptococcus terricola)
Sporobolomyces ruberrimus
Dimorphic yeast-like fungi
Aureobasidium pullulans
Proteases
Basidiomycota
Cystobasidium laryngis (Rhodotorula laryngis), Cystobasidium
macerans (Cryptococcus macerans)
Glaciozyma antarctica
Goeffeauzyma gilvescens (Cryptococcus gilvescens)
Itersonilia pannonicus (Udeniomyces pannonicus)
Leucosporidium creatinivorum (Leucosporidiella creatinivora),
Leucosporidium fragarium (Leucosporidiella fragaria)
Mrakia frigida (Leucosporidium frigidum), Mrakia gelida
Naganishia adeliensis (Cryptococcus adeliensis)
Papiliotrema laurentii (Cryptococcus laurentii)
Rhodotorula mucilaginosa, Rhodotorula toruloides
(Rhodosporidium toruloides)
Solicoccozyma terricola (Cryptococcus terricola)
Sporobolomyces salmonicolor (Sporidiobolus salmonicolor)
Udeniomyces megalosporus, U. pyricola
Vanrija humicola (Candida humicola)
Production of food and
beverages
Ray et al. (1992), Ogrydziak
(1993), Pazgier et al. (2003),
Turkiewicz et al. (2003), Brizzio
et al. (2007), Huston (2008),
Carrasco et al. (2012), de Garcı´a
et al. (2012), Duarte et al. (2013),
Alias et al. (2014), Lario et al.
(2015), Chaud et al. (2016)
304
M. Baeza et al.

Xylanases
Basidiomycota
Dioszegia fristigensis
Naganishia adeliensis (Cryptococcus adeliensis), Naganishia
albida (Cryptococcus albidus)
Papiliotrema laurentii (Cryptococcus laurentii)
Pseudozyma brasiliensis
Tausonia pullulans (Guehomyces pullulans)
Production of biofuels
and solvents; paper
and waste
manufacturing
Amoresano et al. (2000), Gomes
et al. (2000), Petrescu et al. (2000),
Scorzetti et al. (2000), Duarte et al.
(2013), Borges et al. (2014)
Chitinases
Ascomycota
Metschnikowia sp.
Basidiomycota
Dioszegia fristigensis
Glaciozyma antarctica
Mrakia psychrophila
Sporobolomyces salmonicolor (Sporidiobolus salmonicolor)
Degradation of chitin-
rich wastes, control of
phytopathogens, and
microbial spoilage of
foodstuffs
Ramli et al. (2011), Carrasco et al.
(2012)
Pectinases
Ascomycota
Metschnikowia pulcherrima
Basidiomycota
Cystobasidium laryngis (Rhodotorula laryngis), Cystobasidium
macerans (Cryptococcus macerans)
Cystoﬁlobasidium capitatum (Rhodosporidium capitatum),
Cystoﬁlobasidium lari-marini
Dioszegia crocea, Dioszegia fristigensis
Leucosporidium drummii
Mrakia aquatica (Mrakiella aquatica), Mrakia frigida
(Leucosporidium frigidum), Mrakia psychrophila, Mrakia
robertii
Phenoliferia glacialis (Rhodotorula glacialis)
Piskurozyma cylindrica (Cryptococcus cylindricus)
Rhodotorula mucilaginosa
Sporobolomyces salmonicolor (Sporidiobolus salmonicolor)
Manufacturing of fruit
and vegetables
Nakagawa et al. (2002, 2004,
2005a, b), Birgisson et al. (2003),
Margesin et al. (2005), Carrasco
et al. (2012), de Garcı´a et al.
(2012), Sahay et al. (2013), Belda
et al. (2016)
(continued)
10
Cold-Active Enzymes from Cold-Adapted Yeasts
305

Table 10.1 (continued)
Cold-active enzymes
Species (synonyms)
Industrial exploitation
References
Glycosidases
Ascomycota
Hanseniaspora uvarum
Pichia membranifaciens
Basidiomycota
Cystoﬁlobasidium capitatum (Rhodosporidium capitatum)
Glaciozyma antarctica (Leucosporidium antarcticum)
Naganishia albida (Cryptococcus albidus)
Rhodotorula mucilaginosa
Tausonia pullulans (Guehomyces pullulans)
Production of food and
beverages, chemicals,
and pharmaceuticals
Pavlova et al. (2002), Turkiewicz
et al. (2005), Nakagawa et al.
(2006), Song et al. (2010), Hamid
et al. (2013), Hu et al. (2016)
Phytases
Ascomycota
Candida carpophila, Candida
tropicalis, Candida parapsilosis
Hanseniaspora uvarum
Kodamaea ohmeri
Pichia kudriavzevii (Issatchenkia orientalis, Candida krusei)
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Saccharomyces pastorianus
Yarrowia lipolytica
Basidiomycota
Papiliotrema laurentii (Cryptococcus laurentii)
Rhodotorula mucilaginosa
Production of feeds
Hirimuthugoda et al. (2006),
Pavlova et al. (2008), Nuobariene
et al. (2011), Ranjan and Sahay
(2013), Yu et al. (2015)
β-Fructofuranosidase
(invertase)
Basidiomycota
Glaciozyma antarctica
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous
Food and beverages
Turkiewicz et al. (2005), Linde
et al. (2009)
306
M. Baeza et al.

in different ﬁelds, such as acid stability for bio-pulping and compatibility with
detergent components.
Starch-degrading activity was detected in psychrophilic and psychrotolerant
yeasts isolated from soils of King George Island (subantarctic region). Isolates
were cultured in media supplemented with both glucose and soluble starch. When
the activity was analyzed using the cell-free protein extracts, the majority of the
yeasts exhibited the highest amylase activity at pH 5.4–6.2 and from 30 to 37 C,
with the sole exception of Rhodotorula glacialis (now Phenoliferia glacialis) that
showed the highest activity from 10 to 22 C. The highest starch-degrading activity
was expressed at pH 5.4 and 30 C by a fungal isolate identiﬁed as Tetracladium
sp., which produced an approximately 70 kDa protein that was identiﬁed as an
α-amylase according to peptide mass ﬁngerprinting analysis (Carrasco et al. 2016).
Although the temperature allowing the highest amylolytic activity of yeasts was
apparently quite high, if compared with that of cold environments from which they
were isolated, it was lower than those reported for amylases produced by
mesophilic yeasts, such as a 75 kDa amylase synthesized by a strain of Cryptococ-
cus ﬂavus (now Saitozyma ﬂava) isolated from Brazilian fruits, which displayed its
highest activity at 50 C (Wanderley et al. 2004).
The strain N13d of the dimorphic yeast-like fungi Aureobasidium pullulans was
isolated from marginal seas of the Paciﬁc Ocean and produced a glucoamylase
when cultured in seawater medium supplemented with 1% peptone and 1% soluble
starch, pH 4.0. The optimal production was at 28 C (Li et al. 2007b). This enzyme
hydrolyzed potato starch granules, but poorly digested raw corn and sweet potato
starch. After hydrolysis, only glucose was detected as product, indicating that the
crude enzyme could hydrolyze both -1,4 and -1,6 linkages (Li et al. 2007a). Divya
and Naga Padma (2014) studied yeasts isolated from diverse sources of cold-stored
spoilt fruits and vegetables, mountain soils, and Himalayan soils. An isolate,
identiﬁed as Geotrichum sp., grew well at 20–25 C and displayed a promising
starch-degrading activity at 5 C, but no further characterization was performed. A
strain of Clavispora lusitaniae isolated from vegetables in a Bhopal market (India)
was reported to produce an amylase showing the highest activity at pH 11.0 and
42 C; however, it maintained 42% of this activity at 4 C. Interestingly, this
enzyme did not show Ca2+ dependency for activity and stability and retained nearly
80% of activity after exposure to various detergents (sodium dodecyl sulfate,
Tween-80, and Triton X-100), oxidizing (H2O2) and bleaching (NaClO3) agents
for 2 h. This noteworthy stability turns this enzyme into a good candidate to be used
in detergent formulations (Ranjan et al. 2016). The list of cold-active amylases
produced by psychrophilic and psychrotolerant yeasts is reported in Table 10.1.
10.6
Cold-Active Yeast Proteases
Cold-active proteases have a wide range of industrial and technological
applications. They are considered as key enzymes in food industry (in particular
in low-temperature and low-moisture cheeses ripening as a microbiological
10
Cold-Active Enzymes from Cold-Adapted Yeasts
307

alternative to rennet), in seafood processing for removing both scales and skin from
ﬁsh as well as for extracting carotenes from shellﬁsh, and in meat processing to give
tenderness to refrigerated products without loss of ﬂavors (Huston 2008).
A few cold-active proteases have been isolated from both psychrophilic and
psychrotolerant yeasts, puriﬁed to homogeneity and characterized. They were often
characterized by maximum activity in environments with relatively low pH
(3.0–4.5). The discovery of a cold-active aspartyl proteinases (molecular
mass ¼ 36 kDa) from an Antarctic strain of Cryptococcus humicola (now Vanrija
humicola) dated back to the early 1990s. This enzyme was active at temperatures
ranging from 0 to 45 C, with an optimum at 37 C, and retained about 15% of its
maximum activity at 0 C (Ray et al. 1992).
The species G. antarctica was shown to be an active producer of cold-active
proteases, in particular of a few subtilases belonging to the proteinase K subfamily
(subtilisin family). The puriﬁed enzymes exhibited very high speciﬁc activity, a
wide speciﬁcity, with the greatest afﬁnity to substrates characteristic of chymotryp-
sin and chymotrypsin-like enzymes. Such high speciﬁc activity exhibited by
G. antarctica subtilases is similar to that found in most other proteases produced
by bacteria as well as by a few mesophilic yeasts and dimorphic yeast-like fungi
(Tobe et al. 1976; Ogrydziak 1993; Białkowska and Turkiewicz 2014).
An extracellular serine proteinase was isolated from an Antarctic strain of
L. antarcticum (now G. antarctica), puriﬁed to homogeneity and characterized.
The sequence of its 35 N-terminal amino acid residues exhibited 31% identity to
that found in proteinase K (Pazgier et al. 2003). Likewise, Turkiewicz et al. (2003)
characterized a glycosylated serine proteinase (molecular mass ¼ 34.4 kDa) pro-
duced by a strain of the same species: a quite low optimal temperature (25 C), a
poor thermal stability, and a high catalytic efﬁciency from 0 to 25 C were found.
Alias et al. (2014) isolated the PI12 protease gene from genomic and mRNA
sequences of G. antarctica and ampliﬁed it by rapid ampliﬁcation of cDNA ends
strategy. The recombinant PI12 protease (molecular mass ¼ 99 kDa) obtained using
Pichia pastoris (now Komagataella pastoris) host at 20 C exhibited over 40%
identity with the subtilisin-like protease synthesized by Rhodosporidium toruloides
(now Rhodotorula toruloides), but no homology with other cold-active proteases.
On the contrary, Lario et al. (2015) isolated an extracellular protease from an
Antarctic strain of R. mucilaginosa. The enzyme was puriﬁed to homogeneity and
characterized. The puriﬁed protease presented optimal catalytic activity at pH 5.0
and 50 C and high stability in the presence of high concentrations of NaCl.
The ability of psychrophilic and psychrotolerant yeasts to produce cold-active
proteases has been extensively reviewed (de Garcı´a et al. 2012; Zaliha et al. 2012;
Duarte et al. 2013; Białkowska and Turkiewicz 2014; Chaud et al. 2016). The list of
cold-active proteases produced by psychrophilic and psychrotolerant yeasts is
summarized in Table 10.1.
308
M. Baeza et al.

10.7
Cold-Active Yeast Xylanases
Xylanases catalyze the hydrolysis of hemicellulose (the main component of plant
cell walls) in xylose. These enzymes are used in biotechnological processes, in
particular in biofuel and paper industries (Amoresano et al. 2000; Borges et al.
2014). Cold-active xylanases may be applied in low-temperature digestion of farm,
industrial, and sewage wastes (Shivaji and Prasad 2009).
A few cold-active xylanases from psychrophilic and psychrotolerant yeasts have
been studied. A glycosylated xylanase synthesized by an Antarctic strain of Cryp-
tococcus albidus (now Naganishia albida) was puriﬁed to homogeneity and
characterized. MS analysis revealed a primary sequence of 338 amino acids and
the occurrence of N-glycosylation only at Asn254, which was modiﬁed by high-
mannose structure (Amoresano et al. 2000). Similarly, a cold-active glycosylated
xylanase produced by an Antarctic strain of Naganishia adeliensis (synonyms:
Cryptococcus adeliensis, Cryptococcus adeliae) was investigated as well. Due to
peculiar changes in the 3D structure, the enzyme exhibited a high catalytic efﬁ-
ciency between 0 and 20 C (Petrescu et al. 2000). Finally, xylanases were isolated
from Pseudozyma brasiliensis (now Kalmanozyma brasiliensis), puriﬁed to homo-
geneity and characterized. The molecular mass was 24 kDa, and the optimal pH and
temperature were 4.0 and 55 C, respectively. The xylanase exhibited a predomi-
nantly ß-sheets secondary structure and a high speciﬁc activity (Borges et al. 2014).
The ability of psychrophilic and psychrotolerant yeasts to produce cold-active
xylanases has been reviewed (Gomes et al. 2000; Duarte et al. 2013; Białkowska
and Turkiewicz 2014). The list of cold-active xylanases produced by psychrophilic
and psychrotolerant yeasts is reported in Table 10.1.
10.8
Cold-Active Yeast Chitinases
Chitin
is
an
insoluble
homopolysaccharide
(containing
ß-1,4-linked
N-acetylglucosamine) and is the second most abundant renewable biopolymer
found in nature, mainly in marine invertebrates, insects, fungi, and algae. The
defense mechanisms of some plants and vertebrates involve the production of
chitinases, which are also produced by some microorganisms that have important
roles in chitin recycling in nature. Chitinases are important for nutrition and
parasitism in bacteria and are involved in the morphogenesis of protozoa,
invertebrates, and fungi (Kumar 2000; Patil et al. 2000; Souza et al. 2011).
Chitinases can be grouped into two broad categories: (1) endochitinases that cleave
chitin randomly at internal sites and (2) exochitinases, which in turn are divided
into chitobiosidases and β-1,4 N-acetyl glucosaminidases that cleave the oligomeric
products of endochitinases and chitobiosidases, generating monomers of N-
acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) (Dahiya et al. 2006). Chitinases are applied in several
ﬁelds, in particular in basic sciences, medicine, and biological control of plant
diseases (Zhu et al. 2008; Guttmann et al. 2014). The current interest in cold active
chitinases falls into their use in biodegradation of chitin-rich wastes at low
10
Cold-Active Enzymes from Cold-Adapted Yeasts
309

temperatures and biocontrol of phytopathogens in cold environments (Bai et al.
2008).
Generally, it has been observed that the addition of chitin to the culture medium
of chitinolytic microorganisms enhances chitinase yields; this induction effect
depends on the different types of chitin sources, being the colloidal chitin as the
best inducer of chitinase enzyme production (Nampoothiri et al. 2004; Sandhya
et al. 2004; Sharaf 2005; Saima et al. 2013). Although the production of a chitinase
of 63 kDa that showed the highest activity at 40–45 C and at pH 7.0 was described
in actinomycetes belonging to the species Streptomyces rimosus (Brzezinska et al.
2013), there are few reports so far on the synthesis of chitinases by fungi, especially
by psychrophilic and psychrotolerant yeasts. In the Antarctic fungus Lecanicillium
muscarium, two chitinases of 61 and 25 kDa with optimal activities at pH 5.5 and
4.5, and at 45 and 40 C, respectively, were isolated and characterized. Both were
cold-active chitinases because they retained high activity at 5 C (Barghini et al.
2013).
Extracellular chitinase activity was found in some Antarctic yeast strains belonging
to Dioszegia fristingensis, Metschnikowia sp., and Sporidiobolus salmonicolor (now
Sporobolomyces salmonicolor), but not further characterization was performed
(Carrasco et al. 2012). On the contrary, the production of cold-active chitinase active
at 15 C and at pH 4.0 was described in a strain of the species G. antarctica; the
corresponding gene was expressed in P. pastoris (K. pastoris). The recombinant
chitinase secreted into the medium was active at 5–25 C and remained stable between
pH 3.0 and 4.5. Its activity was higher in the presence of K+, Mn2+, and Co2+, and
the preferred substrate was colloidal chitin (Ramli et al. 2011). The list of cold-active
chitinases produced by psychrophilic and psychrotolerant yeasts is reported in
Table 10.1.
10.9
Cold-Active Yeast Pectinolytic Enzymes
Pectinases are among the most used groups of enzymes in fruit processing: they
contribute to increase the yield and production of juices by hydrolyzing pectin
occurring of plant tissues. In this way, these enzymes are very useful for
clariﬁcation of fruit juices and wine (Tapre and Jain 2014; Kumar and Suneetha
2016). The pectinolytic enzymes (otherwise labeled as pectic enzymes) are divided
into three broader groups according to their mode of action and substrate:
(1) protopectinases that degrade protopectin, (2) esterases that remove methoxyl
esters from pectin (de-esteriﬁcation), and (3) depolymerases that catalyze the
hydrolytic cleavage of α-1,4-glycosidic bonds in the D-galacturonic acid moieties
of the pectic substances (Pedrolli et al. 2009). Although pectinases are produced by
a number of different microorganisms, industrial pectinases are obtained mainly
from mesophilic ﬁlamentous fungi, in particular from Aspergillus species. These
pectinases are active until 35 C, but below this temperature, the commercial
preparations exhibit poor performances (Gummadi and Kumar 2005). Because of
some processes that need to be carried out at lower temperatures (below 15 C) to
310
M. Baeza et al.

prevent growth of contaminant microorganisms, to retain labile and volatile ﬂavor
compounds, and for energy saving, there is a rising market requirement of cold-
active pectinases. Furthermore, pectinases exhibiting good activity between pH 2.5
and 3.5 are necessary in the case of acidic grape must and fruit juices (Pulicherla
et al. 2011; Adapa et al. 2014).
Pectinase production has been reported in cold-adapted microorganisms such as
bacteria, fungi, and yeast (Birgisson et al. 2003; Nakagawa et al. 2004; Cabeza et al.
2011; Carrasco et al. 2012). The strain PPY-1 of the psychrophilic species
Cystoﬁlobasidium capitatum, isolated from Japanese soil samples, was able to
grow using pectin as a sole carbon source; the cell-free extracts displayed pectin
degradation at 5 C (Nakagawa et al. 2002). Other strains isolated from the same
locality and belonging to the species Cryptococcus cylindricus (now Piskurozyma
cylindrica) and Mrakia frigida exhibited similar pectinolytic ability (Nakagawa
et al. 2004).
Sahay et al. (2013) studied the yeasts capability of utilizing pectin as sole carbon
source at low temperatures and identiﬁed two yeast strains of R. mucilaginosa and
C. capitatum as good candidates to be used in the wine industry; they exhibited the
ability to secrete pectinolytic enzymes active from 6 to 12 C and pH 3.0–5.0. In
cold wine fermentations, the use of Metschnikowia pulcherrima (as a source of
pectinolytic enzymes) in combination with Saccharomyces cerevisiae improved the
results in the terms of ﬁlterability, turbidity, color increment, anthocyanin, and
polyphenol content when compared to fermentations performed using only
S. cerevisiae (Belda et al. 2016). Naga Padma et al. (2011) screened yeasts isolated
from cold-stored spoiled fruits, vegetables, and cold soils for their ability to
hydrolyze pectin at 5 and 25
C and selected a strain of Saccharomyces
sp. exhibiting the highest polygalacturonase activity at 5 C: pectinase activity
was higher using several pectin sources, namely, orange, apple, and mango peel
(21, 20, and 19 U/ml, respectively). The list of cold-active pectinases produced by
psychrophilic and psychrotolerant yeasts is reported in Table 10.1.
10.10 Cold-Active Yeast Glycosidases
Oligo- and polysaccharides play a fundamental role in numerous biological pro-
cesses. In addition, they are applied in many industries such as food ingredients and
pharmacological supplements (Stephen 1995; Patel and Goyal 2011). Accordingly,
there is a strong interest in synthesizing these polymers at both laboratory and
industrial scale. To accomplish this task, glycosidases are pivotal tools, because
these enzymes are quite efﬁcient in the reversible hydrolysis of very stable glyco-
sidic bonds in oligo- and polysaccharides (Cerqueira et al. 2012; Divakar 2013).
Glycosidases and glycosyltransferases are currently used as biocatalysts in the
enzymatic synthesis of oligo- and polysaccharides, as they catalyze the release of
free and new glycosides through their hydrolysis and their polymerization via
transglycosylation,
respectively
(Henrissat
et
al.
2008).
For
instance,
β-glycosidases exhibiting the advantage to work at room temperature, neutral pH
10
Cold-Active Enzymes from Cold-Adapted Yeasts
311

and atmospheric pressure have been patented for synthesizing alkyl-glycosides,
which are molecules used in personal care products (O’Lenick and O’Lenick 2006).
However, the production costs of these enzymes remains high (Rather and Mishra
2013).
In winemaking, the use of β-glucosidases represents a great contribution through
the release of free monoterpenes from their glycosylated form and the formation of
a fruit-like ﬂavor (Maicas and Mateo 2016). High β-glucosidase activity was
reported in strains of Hanseniaspora uvarum, Pichia membranifaciens, and
R. mucilaginosa isolated from some regions of China. A strain of H. uvarum
showed the highest activity when assayed under winemaking conditions, exhibiting
catalytic speciﬁcity for volatile glycosides of C13-norisoprenoids and some
terpenes, thus improving the fresh ﬂoral, sweet, berry, and nutty aroma
characteristics in wine (Hu et al. 2016).
Compared to the number of studies on enzymes degrading polysaccharides, the
study of enzymes that hydrolyzes di- and oligosaccharides, which are valuable
compounds for food processing (in particular for the synthesis of probiotic
oligosaccharides), is far to be fully studied (Asraf and Gunasekaran 2010).
Among them, cold-active β-galactosidases that hydrolyze the lactose at low
temperatures even during refrigerated storage of milk are achieving a rising great
interest (Sheridan and Brenchley 2000; Husain 2010; Horner et al. 2011). Antarctic
strains of the species L. antarcticum (now G. antarctica) exhibited the production
of both intra- and extracellular glucosidases; even though these strains showed an
optimal growth temperature of 15 C, the maximal production of the enzymes was
reached at 5 C. The extracellular glucosidase showed the highest activity at 35 C
and from pH 6.7 to 7.5, while its activity was stable for 30 min at 20 C (Turkiewicz
et al. 2005). The list of cold-active glycosidases produced by psychrophilic and
psychrotolerant yeasts is summarized in Table 10.1.
10.11 Cold-Active Yeast Phytases
Phosphorus is present in cereal grains, legumes, and oilseeds mainly as phytic acid
(inositol hexakisphosphate) or in its salt form (phytate). The presence of phytate in
mammalian diets has adverse effects on mineral uptake and in protein, lipid, and
carbohydrate utilization (Bohn et al. 2008; Kumar et al. 2010). Therefore, a
prerequisite to improve the vegetal nutritional value is the dephosphorylation of
phytate to decrease its adverse effects and, in turn, to increase the availability of
phosphate.
The
enzyme
phytase
(myo-inositol
hexakisphosphate
phosphohydrolase) catalyzes the release of phosphate from phytate, having great
importance for the improvement of nutritional value of vegetables in animal feed
(Pandey et al. 2001; Lei et al. 2013).
Currently, cheap microbial sources of phytases at the lower cost possible are
desirable to be applied in great scale. Phytases from bacteria, including cold-active
phytases (Huang 2009; Park and Cho 2011; Kumar et al. 2013; Jain et al. 2016), and
from yeasts isolated from gastrointestinal animal, ﬁshes, spoiled vegetables, and
312
M. Baeza et al.

from fermentations (Hirimuthugoda et al. 2007; Banerjee and Ghosh 2014; Das and
Ghosh 2014; Nuobariene et al. 2014) have been reported. A high level of extracel-
lular phytase was found in strains of Saccharomyces pastorianus, S. cerevisiae, and
Candida krusei (syn. Issatchenkia orientalis, now Pichia kudriavzevii) isolated
from grain-based food and beer (Nuobariene et al. 2011). Marine yeasts capable
of producing extracellular or cell-bound phytases were described for the ﬁrst time in
the 2000s. These yeasts were isolated from the gut of several ﬁshes and were
identiﬁed as belonging to the species H. uvarum, Yarrowia lipolytica, Kodamaea
ohmeri, Candida carpophila, I. orientalis (now P. kudriavzevii), and Candida
tropicalis (Hirimuthugoda et al. 2006). Likewise, yeasts isolated from the intestine
of the freshwater ﬁshes Cirrhinus mrigala and Oreochromis niloticus produced
phytases showing activities from 0.7 to 1.0 U/ml (Banerjee and Ghosh 2014).
Finally, an Antarctic strain of R. mucilaginosa produced a cold-active phytase of
63 kDa, which was most active at 50 C and pH 5.0. Nonetheless, the enzyme
retained 85% of its activity at 37 C and was stable at pH 3.0–7.0. Interestingly, this
enzyme showed a lower Km (247 mM) and higher kcat (1394 s1) when compared to
mesophilic homologues; its resistance to pepsin and trypsin degradation make it
useful for feed applications (Yu et al. 2015).
A strain of Cryptococcus laurentii (now Papiliotrema laurentii) isolated from
Antarctica showed intracellular phytase activity; the supplementation of the
medium with 5 mg/l of phosphorus (added as KH2PO4) determined an increased
(76%) activity compared to the same yeast cultured in control medium. Interest-
ingly, higher concentrations of phosphorous determined a decrease of enzyme
production, while biomass production remained stable. Maximum production of
phytase by P. laurentii was observed at 24 C, while the optimal phytase activity
was found at 40 C and pH 4.8 (Pavlova et al. 2008).
A strain of Candida parapsilosis was selected as the best phytase producer
among some yeasts isolated from spoiled vegetables, fruits, leaves, and seeds.
Under optimal culture conditions, the phytase activity by C. parapsilosis was
112 U/ml, and the enzyme displayed an optimal activity at 37 C and pH 3.0, but
it tolerated temperatures from 25 to 45 C and pH values from 2.0 to 6.8. Accord-
ingly, this phytase could be applied in animal feed, such as aquaculture and poultry,
to improve feed nutritional value and to reduce environmental phosphorus pollution
(Ranjan and Sahay 2013). The list of cold-active phytases produced by psychro-
philic and psychrotolerant yeasts is summarized in Table 10.1.
10.12 Cold-Active Yeast b-Fructofuranosidase (Invertase)
β-Fructofuranosidases catalyze the release of fructose from the nonreducing termini
of various β-D-fructofuranoside oligomers. In particular, in the case of hydrolysis of
the disaccharide sucrose (dextrorotatory), the release of equimolar concentrations
of glucose (slightly dextrorotatory) and fructose (strongly levorotatory) determines
an inversion of the rotation of the plane of polarized light: accordingly,
β-fructofuranosidases are also commonly labeled as invertases (Nadeem et al.
10
Cold-Active Enzymes from Cold-Adapted Yeasts
313

2015). Invertases are quite appealing for biotechnological purposes as the resulting
mixture of glucose and fructose (otherwise called “inverted sugar syrup”) is sweeter
than sucrose itself due to the higher sweetness of fructose. Currently, inverted sugar
syrup is used in the production of soft-centered candies, jams, and artiﬁcial honey,
among others. On the other hand, some invertases produced by fungi or yeasts may
also
have
fructosyltransferase
activity
producing
short-chain
fructooligosaccharides (FOS) by linking one to three fructosyl moieties to a sucrose
skeleton by different glycosidic bonds depending on the source (Linde et al. 2009;
Kadowaki et al. 2013). FOS are also biotechnologically attractive as they are used
as components of functional foods. Besides, due to their nature of calorie-free and
noncariogenic sweeteners, they can act as prebiotic compounds and exert beneﬁcial
effects on human health contributing to the prevention of colon cancer and reducing
cholesterol, phospholipid, and triglyceride levels in serum (Maiorano et al. 2008).
Although invertases have been found in animals, plants, ﬁlamentous fungi,
yeasts, and bacteria, microbial invertases are highly desirable for industry, also in
view of their higher stability than their plant and animal homologues (Nadeem et al.
2015). However, even though several studies on invertase production by
microorganisms have been published, studies on the potential production of inver-
tase by psychrophilic and psychrotolerant yeasts are still limited.
Turkiewicz et al. (2005) characterized a cold-active invertase from the psychro-
philic yeast G. antarctica. Due to the low invertase activity found in cell-free
culture supernatants, the authors suggested that the enzyme was probably bound
either to cell membranes or to the cell wall. In addition, the puriﬁed enzyme was
extremely unstable, losing its activity within 24 h at 0 C. The invertase synthesized
by G. antarctica displayed the highest activity between 25 and 35 C, with
maximum activity at 30 C and retaining 20% of the maximum activity at 0 C.
The enzyme also showed a weak thermal stability, being completely inactivated
after 30 min incubation at 40 C (Turkiewicz et al. 2005).
More recently, invertase activity was checked on several yeasts isolated from
soil samples collected both in South Shetland Islands and Antarctic Peninsula
(Troncoso et al. 2017) and from sedimentary rocks of Union Glacier in Antarctica
(Barahona et al. 2016). Troncoso et al. (2017) found that 13 isolates displayed
invertase activity when grown in agar plates with YM medium supplemented with
2% sucrose, but only two repeated the same results when cell-free supernatants
were used. Similarly, in the study of Barahona et al. (2016), only two out of ten
yeast isolates exhibited invertase activity using cell-free supernatants. This could be
due to a strict association between enzyme and cell membrane or cell wall, as
previously suggested for G. antarctica (Turkiewicz et al. 2005).
Invertase activity was also found in the basidiomycetous carotenogenic yeast
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous (Linde et al. 2009). This is a psychrotolerant yeast
exhibiting an optimum growth between 20 and 22 C (Andrewes et al. 1976; An
et al. 1989) and a maximum for growth between 23 and 25 C (Golubev 1995).
Interestingly, strains of X. dendrorhous have been isolated in subantarctic soil
samples (Contreras et al. 2015). A noteworthy invertase activity was found in
314
M. Baeza et al.

cell-free culture supernatants of several X. dendrorhous strains. The puriﬁed
enzyme exhibited maximum activity at 65–70 C, which is above the optimum
temperature displayed by most yeast invertases, which is generally close to
40–50 C. However, the X. dendrorhous invertase still represents an attractive
candidate for biotechnological purposes as it was demonstrated that this enzyme
also catalyzes the production of FOS, mainly neokestose, which has prebiotic
effects that may be superior in comparison to those produced by commercial FOS
(Kritzinger et al. 2003; Linde et al. 2009). The list of cold-active invertases
produced by psychrophilic and psychrotolerant yeasts is summarized in Table 10.1.
10.13 Conclusions
Psychrophilic and psychrotolerant organisms (including yeasts) that colonize per-
manently or temporary cold habitats have developed a number of physiological
adaptations to overcome the adverse effect of low temperatures. Among them, the
synthesis of cold-active enzymes represents undoubtedly a key feature of this
adaptation. Their high speciﬁc activity at low and moderate temperatures, which
is higher than those exhibited by their mesophilic homologues under the same
conditions, reﬂects the improvement of its structural ﬂexibility. This is induced by
rather discrete structural modiﬁcations that generally lead to a higher thermal
instability of these enzymes, frequently associated with an even faster heat
inactivation.
The study of psychrophilic and psychrotolerant yeasts as source of cold-active
enzymes represents unquestionably an attractive ﬁeld of research characterized by a
rising biotechnological interest (Buzzini et al. 2012; Białkowska and Turkiewicz
2014; Szczesna-Antczak et al. 2014). Although current research on useful cold-
active enzymes has been so far mainly limited to hydrolases (in particular lipases
and proteases for producing high-value ﬁne chemicals, pharmaceuticals, foods,
polymers, detergents, biodiesel, etc.), other classes of enzymes could be equally
important in the future for both laboratory and industrial applications. Among them,
some redox enzymes could play a rising essential role in biotransformations carried
out in both aqueous and organic solvents (Straathof et al. 2002; Burton 2003;
Goretti et al. 2009, 2011; Hamada et al. 2011; Solano et al. 2012; Białkowska
and Turkiewicz 2014; Forti et al. 2015).
Due to the vast array of engineering techniques currently available, the recom-
binant DNA technology (or even metagenomic approaches to discover new
enzymes from unculturable yeasts) could be proﬁtably used for obtaining heterolo-
gous expression of cold-active enzymes in suitable hosts. It seems worthwhile to
pursue commercial production of recombinant enzymes in heterologous hosts and
their modiﬁcation by chemical or protein engineering methods in view to obtain
higher activity levels and greater catalytic robustness. However, an alternative
approach can be offered by worldwide yeast diversity as source of novel cold-
active enzymes produced by psychrophilic and psychrotolerant yeasts. In recent
years, the isolation of novel strains from extreme habitats enhanced the general
10
Cold-Active Enzymes from Cold-Adapted Yeasts
315

knowledge on both taxonomic and metabolic diversity of non-Saccharomyces
yeasts. Since the market is evolving toward the use of biological approaches to
replace synthetic chemical routes, the availability of new useful enzymes from
yeasts should be considered strategic for developing the future of biotech-oriented
industry. In this context, the availability of large amounts of yeast strains preserved
in public repositories for screening surveys can be considered an important way of
disclosing metabolic diversity of biotechnological interest (Boundy-Mills et al.
2016).
Acknowledgments Grants FONDECYT 1130333, 1160202 and 1140504, and INACH RT_07-13.
References
Adapa V, Ramya LN, Pulicherla KK, Rao KR (2014) Cold active pectinases: advancing the food
industry to the next generation. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 172:2324–2337
Alcaı´no J, Cifuentes V, Baeza M (2015) Physiological adaptations of yeasts living in cold
environments and their potential applications. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 31:1467–1473
Alias N, Ahmad Mazian M, Salleh AB, Basri M, Rahman RN (2014) Molecular cloning and
optimization for high level expression of cold-adapted serine protease from Antarctic yeast
Glaciozyma antarctica PI12. Enzym Res 2014:1–20
Amoresano A, Andolfo A, Corsaro MM, Zocchi I, Petrescu I, Gerday C, Marino G (2000)
Structural characterization of a xylanase from psychrophilic yeast by mass spectrometry.
Glycobiology 10:451–458
An GH, Schuman DB, Johnson EA (1989) Isolation of Phafﬁa rhodozyma mutants with increased
astaxanthin content. Appl Environ Microbiol 55:116–124
Andrewes AG, Phaff HJ, Starr MP (1976) Carotenoids of Phafﬁa rhodozyma, a red-pigmented
fermenting yeast. Phytochemistry 15:1003–1007
Asraf SS, Gunasekaran P (2010) Current trends of ß-galactosidase research and application. In:
Mendez-Vilas A (ed) Current research, technology and education topics in applied microbiol-
ogy and microbial biotechnology. Formatex, Badajoz, pp 880–890
Bai Z, Jin B, Li Y, Chen J, Li Z (2008) Utilization of winery wastes for Trichoderma viride
biocontrol agent production by solid state fermentation. J Environ Sci (China) 20:353–358
Banerjee S, Ghosh K (2014) Enumeration of gut associated extracellular enzyme-producing yeasts
in some freshwater ﬁshes. J Appl Ichthyol 30:986–993
Barahona S, Yuivar Y, Socias G, Alcaı´no J, Cifuentes V, Baeza M (2016) Identiﬁcation and
characterization of yeasts isolated from sedimentary rocks of Union Glacier at the Antarctica.
Extremophiles 20:479–491
Barghini P, Moscatelli D, Garzillo AM, Crognale S, Fenice M (2013) High production of cold-
tolerant chitinases on shrimp wastes in bench-top bioreactor by the Antarctic fungus
Lecanicillium muscarium CCFEE 5003: bioprocess optimization and characterization of two
main enzymes. Enzym Microb Technol 53:331–338
Belda I, Conchillo LB, Ruiz J, Navascue´s E, Marquina D, Santos A (2016) Selection and use of
pectinolytic yeasts for improving clariﬁcation and phenolic extraction in winemaking. Int J
Food Microbiol 223:1–8
Białkowska A, Turkiewicz M (2014) Miscellaneous cold-active yeast enzymes of industrial
importance. In: Buzzini P, Margesin R (eds) Cold-adapted yeasts: biodiversity, adaptation
strategies and biotechnological signiﬁcance. Springer, Heidelberg, pp 377–396
Birgisson H, Delgado O, Garcı´a Arroyo L, Hatti-Kaul R, Mattiasson B (2003) Cold-adapted yeasts
as producers of cold-active polygalacturonases. Extremophiles 7:185–193
316
M. Baeza et al.

Blank K, Morﬁll J, Gumpp H, Gaub HE (2006) Functional expression of Candida antarctica lipase
B in Escherichia coli. J Biotechnol 125:474–483
Bohn L, Meyer AS, Rasmussen SK (2008) Phytate: impact on environment and human nutrition. A
challenge for molecular breeding. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B 9:165–191
Borges TA, de Souza AT, Squina FM, Ria~no-Pacho´n DM, Correˆa dos Santos RA, Machado E,
Velasco de Castro Oliveira J, Dama´sio ARL, Goldman GH (2014) Biochemical characteriza-
tion of an endoxylanase from Pseudozyma brasiliensis sp. nov. strain GHG001 isolated from
the intestinal tract of Chrysomelidae larvae associated to sugarcane roots. Proc Biochem
49:77–83
Boundy-Mills K, Glantschnig E, Roberts IN, Yurkov A, Casaregola S, Daniel HM, Groenewald M,
Turchetti B (2016) Yeast culture collections in the twenty-ﬁrst century: new opportunities and
challenges. Yeast 33:243–260
Brizzio S, Turchetti B, de Garcı`a V, Libkind D, Buzzini P, van Broock M (2007) Extracellular
enzymatic activities (EEA) of basidiomycetous yeasts isolated from glacial and subglacial
waters of northwest Patagonia (Argentina). Can J Microbiol 53:519–525
Brzezinska MS, Jankiewicz U, Walczak M (2013) Biodegradation of chitinous substances and
chitinase production by the soil actinomycete Streptomyces rimosus. Int Biodeter Biodegr
84:104–110
Burton SG (2003) Oxidizing enzymes as biocatalyst. Trends Biotechnol 21:543–549
Buzzini P, Margesin R (2014a) Cold-adapted yeasts: biodiversity, adaptation strategies and
biotechnological signiﬁcance. Springer, Heidelberg
Buzzini P, Margesin R (2014b) Cold-adapted Yeasts: a lesson from the cold and a challenge for the
XXI century. In: Buzzini P, Margesin R (eds) Cold-adapted yeasts: biodiversity, adaptation
strategies and biotechnological signiﬁcance. Springer, Heidelberg, pp 3–22
Buzzini P, Vaughan-Martini A (2006) Yeast biodiversity and biotechnology. In: Rosa CA, Peter G
(eds) Biodiversity and ecophysiology of yeasts. Springer, Heidelberg, pp 533–559
Buzzini P, Branda E, Goretti M, Turchetti B (2012) Psychrophilic yeasts from worldwide glacial
habitats: diversity, adaptation strategies and biotechnological potential. FEMS Microbiol Ecol
82:217–241
Cabeza MS, Baca FL, Puntes EM, Loto F, Baigorı´ MD, Morata VI (2011) Selection of
psychrotolerant microorganisms producing cold-active pectinases for biotechnological pro-
cesses at low temperature. Food Technol Biotechnol 49:187–195
Carrasco M, Rozas JM, Barahona S, Alcaı´no J, Cifuentes V, Baeza M (2012) Diversity and
extracellular enzymatic activities of yeasts isolated from King George Island, the
sub-Antarctic region. BMC Microbiol 12:251
Carrasco M, Villarreal P, Barahona S, Alcaı´no J, Cifuentes V, Baeza M (2016) Screening and
characterization of amylase and cellulase activities in psychrotolerant yeasts. BMC Microbiol
16:21
Cavicchioli R, Tortsen T (2000) Extremophilic. In: Lederberg J (ed) Encyclopaedia of microbiol-
ogy, vol 2, 2nd edn. Academic, London, pp 317–337
Cerqueira N, Brs N, Joo M, Alexandrino P (2012) Glycosidases – a mechanistic overview. In:
Chang CF (ed) Carbohydrates – comprehensive studies on glycobiology and glycotechnology.
InTech, Rijeka, pp 117–134
Chaud LC, Lario LD, Bonugli-Santos RC, Sette LD, Pessoa Junior A, Felipe MD (2016) Improve-
ment in extracellular protease production by the marine Antarctic yeast Rhodotorula
mucilaginosa L7. N Biotechnol 33:807–814
Chen B, Hu J, Miller EM, Xie W, Cai M, Gross RA (2008) Candida antarctica lipase B chemically
immobilized on epoxy-activated micro- and nanobeads: catalysts for polyester synthesis.
Biomacromolecules 9:463–471
Contreras G, Barahona S, Sepu´lveda D, Baeza M, Cifuentes V, Alcaı´no J (2015) Identiﬁcation and
analysis of metabolite production with biotechnological potential in Xanthophyllomyces
dendrorhous isolates. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 31:517–526
10
Cold-Active Enzymes from Cold-Adapted Yeasts
317

Dahiya N, Tewari R, Hoondal GS (2006) Biotechnological aspects of chitinolytic enzymes: a
review. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 71:773–782
Das P, Ghosh K (2014) The presence of phytase in yeasts isolated from the gastrointestinal tract of
four major carps [Labeo rohita (Hamilton, 1822), Catla catla (Hamilton, 1822), Cirrhinus
mrigala (Hamilton, 1822), Hypophthalmichthys molitrix (Valenciennes, 1844)], climbing
perch [Anabas testudineus (Bloch, 1792)] and Mozambique tilapia [Oreochromis mossambicus
(Linnaeus, 1758)]. J Appl Ichthyol 30:403–407
de Garcı´a V, Brizzio S, van Broock M (2012) Yeasts from glacial ice of Patagonian Andes,
Argentina. FEMS Microbiol Ecol 82:540–550
De Mot R, Verachtert H (1987) Puriﬁcation and characterization of extracellular α-amylase and
glucoamylase from the yeast Candida antarctica CBS 6678. Eur J Biochem 164:643–654
Divakar S (2013) Enzymatic transformation. Springer, New Delhi
Divya K, Naga Padma P (2014) Yeast isolates from diverse sources for cold-active
polygalacturonase and amylase production. Int J Sci Technol Res 3:145–148
Dominguez de Maria P, Carboni-Oerlemans C, Tuin B, Bergeman G, Meer A, Gemert R (2005)
Biotechnological applications of Candida antarctica lipase A: state-of-the-art. J Mol Catal B
37:36–46
Duarte AW, Dayo-Owoyemi I, Nobre FS, Pagnocca FC, Chaud LC, Pessoa A, Felipe MG, Sette
LD (2013) Taxonomic assessment and enzymes production by yeasts isolated from marine and
terrestrial Antarctic samples. Extremophiles 17:1023–1035
El-Fallal A, Abou M, El-Sayed A, Omar N (2012) Starch and microbial α-amylases: from concepts
to biotechnological applications. In: Chang CF (ed) Carbohydrates – comprehensive studies on
glycobiology and glycotechnology. InTech, Rijeka, pp 459–488
Emond S, Montanier C, Nicaud JM, Marty A, Monsan P, Andre I, Remaud-Simeon M (2010) New
efﬁcient recombinant expression system to engineer Candida antarctica lipase B. Appl Environ
Microbiol 76:2684–2687
Ericsson DJ, Kasrayan A, Johansson P, Berqfors T, Sandstrom AG, Ba¨ckvall JE, Mowbray SL
(2008) X-ray structure of Candida antarctica lipase B shows a novel lid structure and a likely
mode of interfacial activation. J Mol Biol 376:109–119
Faber K (2004) Biotransformations in organic chemistry. A textbook, 5th edn. Springer,
Heidelberg
Feller G, Gerday C (1997) Psychrophilic enzymes: molecular basis of cold adaptation. Cell Mol
Life Sci 53:830–841
Feller G, Gerday C (2003) Psychrophilic enzymes: hot topics in cold adaptation. Nat Rev
Microbiol 1:200–208
Forde J, Vakurov A, Gibson TD, Millner P, Whelehan M, Marisin IW, O´ ’Fa´ga´in C (2010)
Chemical modiﬁcation and immobilisation of lipase B from Candida antarctica onto
mesoporous silicates. J Mol Cat B 66:203–209
Forti L, Di Mauro S, Cramarossa MR, Filippucci S, Turchetti B, Buzzini P (2015)
Non-conventional yeasts whole cells as efﬁcient biocatalysts for the production of ﬂavors
and fragrances. Molecules 20:10377–10398
Friedmann EI (1982) Endolithic microorganisms in the Antarctic cold desert. Science
215:1045–1053
Galdino AS, Silva RN, Lottermann MT, Alvares AC, de Moraes LM, Torres FA, de Freitas SM,
Ulhoa CJ (2011) Biochemical and structural characterization of amy1: an alpha-amylase from
Cryptococcus ﬂavus expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Enzym Res 30:157294
Gerday C (2014) Fundamentals of cold-active enzymes. In: Buzzini P, Margesin R (eds) Cold-
adapted yeasts: biodiversity, adaptation strategies and biotechnological signiﬁcance. Springer,
Heidelberg, pp 325–350
Gerday C, Aittaleb M, Arpigny JL, Baise E, Chessa JP, Garsoux G, Petrescu I, Feller G (1997)
Psychrophilic enzymes: a thermodynamic challenge. Biochim Biophys Acta 1342:119–131
Gerday C, Aittaleb M, Bentahir M, Chessa JP, Claverie P, Collins T, D’Amico S, Dumont J,
Garsoux G, Georlette D, Hoyoux A, Lonhienne T, Meuwis MA, Feller G (2000) Cold-adapted
enzymes: from fundamentals to biotechnology. Trend Biotechnol 18:103–107
318
M. Baeza et al.

Golubev WI (1995) Perfect state of Rhodomyces dendrorhous (Phafﬁa rhodozyma). Yeast
11:101–110
Gomes J, Gomes I, Steiner W (2000) Thermolabile xylanase of the Antarctic yeast Cryptococcus
adeliae: production and properties. Extremophiles 4:227–235
Goretti M, Ponzoni C, Caselli E, Marchegiani E, Cramarossa MR, Turchetti B, Buzzini P, Forti L
(2009) Biotransformation of electron-poor alkenes by yeasts: asymmetric reduction of (4S)-
(+)-carvone by yeast enoate reductases. Enzym Microb Technol 45:463–468
Goretti M, Ponzoni C, Caselli E, Marchegiani E, Cramarossa MR, Turchetti B, Forti L, Buzzini P
(2011) Bioreduction of α,β-unsaturated ketones and aldehydes by non-conventional yeast
(NCY) whole-cells. Biores Technol 102:3993–3998
Gotor-Fernande´z V, Busto E, Gotor V (2006) Candida antarctica lipase B: an ideal biocatalyst for
the preparation of nitrogenated organic compounds. Adv Synth Catal 348:797–812
Gruber CC, Pleiss J (2012) Lipase B from Candida antarctica binds to hydrophobic substrate –
water interfaces via hydrophobic anchors surrounding the active site entrance. J Mol Catal B
84:48–54
Gummadi SN, Kumar DS (2005) Microbial pectic transeliminases. Biotechnol Lett 27:451–458
Gutarra MLE, Romero O, Abian O, Torres FAG, Freire DMG, Castro AM, Guisan JM, Palomo JM
(2011) Enzyme surface glycosylation in the solid phase: improved activity and selectivity of
Candida antarctica lipase B. Chem Cat Chem 3:1902–1910
Guttmann S, Neumann S, Ringer L, Losche K, Helmke E (2014) Use of enzymes to preserve baked
products. Bak Biscuit 2:70–73
Habeych DI, Juhl PB, Pleiss J, Venegas D, Eggink G, Boeriu CG (2011) Biocatalytic synthesis of
polyesters from sugar-based building blocks using immobilized Candida antarctica lipase B. J
Mol Catal B 71:1–9
Hamada S, Seike Y, Tanimori S, Sakamoto T, Kishida M (2011) Characterization of
D-galacturonate reductase puriﬁed from the psychrophilic yeast species Cryptococcus
difﬂuens. J Biosci Bioeng 111:518–521
Hamid B, Singh P, Mohiddin FA, Sahay S (2013) Partial characterization of cold-active
β-galactosidase activity produced by Cystophallobaidium capatitum SPY11 and Rodotorella
musloganosa PT1. Endocytobiosis Cell Res 24:23–26
Henrissat B, Sulzenbacher G, Bourne Y (2008) Glycosyltransferases, glycoside hydrolases:
surprise, surprise. Curr Opin Struct Biol 18:527–533
Hirimuthugoda NY, Chi ZM, Li XY, Wang L, Wu LF (2006) Diversity of phytase-producing
marine yeasts. Cienc Mar 32:673–682
Hirimuthugoda NY, Chi Z, Wu L (2007) Probiotic yeasts with phytase activity identiﬁed from the
gastrointestinal tract of sea cucumbers. SPC Beche de Mer Inf Bull 26:31–33
Horner TW, Dunn ML, Eggett DL, Ogden LV (2011) β-Galactosidase activity of commercial
lactase samples in raw and pasteurized milk at refrigerated temperatures. J Dairy Sci
94:3242–3249
Hu K, Qin Y, Tao YS, Zhu XL, Peng CT, Ullah N (2016) Potential of glycosidase from
non-Saccharomyces isolates for enhancement of wine aroma. J Food Sci 81:M935–M943
Huang H (2009) Novel low-temperature-active phytase from Erwinia carotovora var. carotovota
ACCC 10276. J Microbiol Biotechnol 19:1085–1091
Husain Q (2010) Beta galactosidases and their potential applications: a review. Crit Rev
Biotechnol 30:41–62
Huston AL (2008) Biotechnological aspects of cold-adapted enzymes. In: Margesin R, Schinner F,
Marx JC, Gerday C (eds) Psychrophiles: from biodiversity to biotechnology. Springer,
Heidelberg, pp 347–363
Jain J, Sapna J, Singh B (2016) Characteristics and biotechnological applications of bacterial
phytases. Proc Biochem 51:159–169
Janecˇek Sˇ, Svensson B, MacGregor EA (2014) α-Amylase: an enzyme speciﬁcity found in various
families of glycoside hydrolases. Cell Mol Life Sci 71:1149–1170
10
Cold-Active Enzymes from Cold-Adapted Yeasts
319

Johnson EA, Echavarri-Erasun C (2011) Yeast biotechnology. In: Kurtzman CP, Fell JW,
Boekhout T (eds) The yeasts. A taxonomy study, vol 1. Elsevier, New York, pp 21–44
Joseph B, Ramteke PW, Thomas G (2008) Cold active microbial lipases: some hot issues and
recent developments. Biotechnol Adv 26:457–470
Juhl PB, Doderer K, Hollmann F, Thum O, Pleiss J (2010) Engineering of Candida antarctica
lipase B for hydrolysis of bulky carboxylic acid esters. J Biotechnol 150:474–480
Kadowaki MK, de Cassia GR, da Conceicao Silva SL, Aoki C (2013) Biotechnological advances
in fungal invertases. In: Rai M (ed) Fungal enzymes. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp 1–30
Kahveci D, Xu X (2012) Bioimprinted immobilization of Candida antarctica lipase A for
concentration of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids. J Am Oil Chem Soc 89:1839–1845
Kirk O, Christensen MW (2002) Lipases from Candida antarctica: unique biocatalysts from a
unique origin. Org Process Res Dev 6:446–451
Krishna H, Persson MM, Bornscheuer UT (2002) Enantioselective transesteriﬁcation of a tertiary
alcohol by lipase a from Candida antarctica. Tetrahedron Asymmetry 13:2693–2696
Kritzinger SM, Kilian SG, Potgieter MA, du Preez JC (2003) The effect of production parameters
on the synthesis of the prebiotic trisaccharide, neokestose, by Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous
(Phafﬁa rhodozyma). Enzym Microb Technol 32:728–737
Kuddus M, Roohi AJM, Ramteke PW (2011) An overview of cold-active microbial α-amylase:
adaptation strategies and biotechnological potentials. Biotechnology 10:246–258
Kumar MNVR (2000) A review of chitin and chitosan applications. React Funct Polym 46:1–27
Kumar P, Suneetha V (2016) Microbial pectinases: wonderful enzymes in fruit juice clariﬁcation.
Int J MediPharm Res 2:119–127
Kumar V, Sinha AK, Makkar HPS, Becker K (2010) Dietary roles of phytate and phytase in human
nutrition: a review. Food Chem 120:945–959
Kumar D, Rajesh S, Balashanmugam P, Rebecca LJ, Kalaichelvan PT (2013) Screening, optimi-
zation and application of extracellular phytase from Bacillus megaterium isolated from poultry
waste. J Mod Biotechnol 2:46–52
Lario LD, Chaud L, Almeida M, Converti A, Sette LD, Pessoa A Jr (2015) Production, puriﬁca-
tion, and characterization of an extracellular acid protease from the marine Antarctic yeast
Rhodotorula mucilaginosa L7. Fungal Biol 119:1129–1136
Lei XG, Weaver JD, Mullaney E, Ullah AH, Azain MJ (2013) Phytase, a new life for an “old”
enzyme. Annu Rev Anim Biosci 1:283–309
Li H, Chi Z, Duan X, Wang L, Sheng J, Wu L (2007a) Glucoamylase production by the marine
yeast Aureobasidium pullulans N13d and hydrolysis of potato starch granules by the enzyme.
Proc Biochem 42:462–465
Li H, Chi Z, Wang X, Ma C (2007b) Amylase production by the marine yeast Aureobasidium
pullulans N13d. J Ocean Univ China 6:60–65
Liese A, Weelbach K, Wandrey C (2000) Industrial BioTransformations, 2nd edn. Wiley,
Weinheim
Linde D, Macias I, Ferna´ndez-Arrojo L, Plou FJ, Jime´nez A, Ferna´ndez-Lobato M (2009)
Molecular
and
biochemical
characterization
of
a
β-fructofuranosidase
from
Xanthophyllomyces dendrorhous. Appl Environ Microbiol 75:1065–1073
Maicas S, Mateo J (2016) Microbial glycosidases for wine production. Beverages 2:20
Maiorano AE, Piccoli RM, da Silva ES, de Andrade Rodrigues MF (2008) Microbial production of
fructosyltransferases for synthesis of pre-biotics. Biotechnol Lett 30:1867–1877
Margesin R (2009) Effect of temperature on growth parameters of psychrophilic bacteria and
yeasts. Extremophiles 13:257–262
Margesin R, Feller G (2010) Biotechnological applications of psychrophiles. Environ Technol
31:835–844
Margesin R, Schinner F (2009) Biotechnological applications of cold-adapted organisms.
Springer, Heidelberg
Margesin R, Fauster V, Fonteyne PA (2005) Characterization of cold-active pectate lyases from
psychrophilic Mrakia frigida. Lett Appl Microbiol 40:453–459
320
M. Baeza et al.

Miletic´ N, Loos K (2009) Over-stabilization of chemically modiﬁed and cross-linked Candida
antarctica lipase B using various epoxides and diepoxides. Aust J Chem 62:799–805
Morita RY (1975) Psychrophilic bacteria. Bacteriol Rev 39:144–167
Nadeem H, Rashid MH, Siddique MH, Azeem F, Muzammil S, Javed MR, Ali MA, Rasul I, Riaz
M (2015) Microbial invertases: a review on kinetics, thermodynamics, physiochemical
properties. Proc Biochem 50:1202–1210
Naga Padma P, Anuradha K, Reddy G (2011) Pectinolytic yeast isolates for cold-active
polygalacturonase production. Innovative Food Sci Emerg Technol 12:178–181
Nakagawa T, Yamada K, Miyaji T, Tomizuka N (2002) Cold-active pectinolytic activity of
psychrophilic-basidiomycetous yeast Cystoﬁlobasidium capitatum strain PPY-1. J Biosci
Bioeng 94:175–177
Nakagawa T, Nagaoka T, Taniguchi S, Miyaji T, Tomizuka N (2004) Isolation and characteriza-
tion of psychrophilic yeasts producing cold-adapted pectinolytic enzymes. Lett Appl Microbiol
38:383–387
Nakagawa T, Nagaoka T, Miyaji T, Tomizuka N (2005a) Cold-active polygalacturonase from
psychrophilic basidiomycetous yeast Cystoﬁlobasidium capitatum strain PPY-1. Biosci
Biotechnol Biochem 69:419–421
Nakagawa T, Nagaoka T, Miyaji T, Tomizuka N (2005b) A cold-active pectin lyase from the
psychrophilic
and
basidiomycetous
yeast
Cystoﬁlobasidium
capitatum
strain
PPY-1.
Biotechnol Appl Biochem 42:193–196
Nakagawa T, Ikehata R, Uchino M (2006) Cold-active acid β-galactosidase activity of isolated
psychrophilic-basidiomycetous yeast Guehomyces pullulans. Microbiol Res 161:75–79
Nampoothiri KM, Baiju TV, Sandhya C, Sabu A, Szakacs G, Pandey A (2004) Process optimiza-
tion for antifungal chitinase production by Trichoderma harzianum. Proc Biochem
39:1583–1590
Nuobariene L, Hansen AS, Jespersen L, Arneborg N (2011) Phytase-active yeasts from grain-
based food and beer: phytase-active yeasts. J Appl Microbiol 110:1370–1380
Nuobariene L, Arneborg N, Hansen ÅS (2014) Phytase active yeasts isolated from bakery
sourdoughs. In: Proceedings of 9th baltic conference on food science and technology,
FOODBALT 2014. Jelgava, Latvia, p 223
O’Lenick AJ Jr, O’Lenick KA (2006) Personal care applications of surfactants based upon alkyl
p lyglycosides. US Patent US 7045506 B1
Ogrydziak DM (1993) Yeast extracellular proteases. Crit Rev Biotechnol 13:1–55
Pandey A, Szakacs G, Soccol CR, Rodriguez-Leon JA, Soccol VT (2001) Production, puriﬁcation
and properties of microbial phytases. Biores Technol 77:203–214
Park I, Cho J (2011) The phytase from Antarctic bacterial isolate, Pseudomonas sp. JPK1 as a
potential tool for animal agriculture to reduce manure phosphorus excretion. Afr J Agric Res
6:1398–1406
Patel RN (2004) Biocatalytic synthesis of chiral pharmaceutical intermediates. Food Technol
Biotechnol 42:305–325
Patel S, Goyal A (2011) Functional oligosaccharides: production, properties and applications.
World J Microbiol Biotechnol 27:1119–1128
Patil RS, Ghormade V, Deshpande MV (2000) Chitinolytic enzymes: an exploration. Enzym
Microb Technol 26:473–483
Patkar SA, Bj€orkling F, Zundel M, Schulein M, Svendsen A, Heldt-Hansen HP, Gormsen E (1993)
Puriﬁcation of two lipases from Candida antarctica and their inhibition by various inhibitors.
Ind J Chem Sect B 32:76–80
Pavlova K, Angelova G, Savova I, Grigorova D, Kupenov L (2002) Studies of Antarctic yeast for
β-glucosidase production. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 18:569–573
Pavlova K, Gargova S, Hristozova T, Tankova Z (2008) Phytase from Antarctic yeast strain
Cryptococcus laurentii ALn. Folia Microbiol 53:29–34
10
Cold-Active Enzymes from Cold-Adapted Yeasts
321

Pazgier M, Turkiewicz M, Kalinowska H, Bielecki S (2003) The unique cold-adapted extracellular
subtilase from psychrophilic yeast Leucosporidium antarcticum. J Mol Catal B Enzym
21:39–42
Pedrolli DB, Monteiro AC, Gomes E, Carmona EC (2009) Pectin and pectinases: production,
characterization and industrial application of microbial pectinolytic enzymes. Open Biotechnol
J 3:9–18
Petrescu I, Lamotte-Brasseur J, Chessa J-P, Ntarima P, Clayessens M, Devreese B, Marino G,
Gerday C (2000) Xylanase from the psychrophilic yeast Cryptococcus adeliae. Extremophiles
4:137–144
Pulicherla KK, Ghosh M, Kumar PS, Rao KRSS (2011) Psychrozymes – the next generation
industrial enzymes. J Mar Sci Res Dev 1:102
Ramli AN, Mahadi NM, Rabu A, Murad AM, Bakar FD, Illias RM (2011) Molecular cloning,
expression and biochemical characterisation of a cold-adapted novel recombinant chitinase
from Glaciozyma antarctica PI12. Microb Cell Fact 10:94
Ranjan K, Sahay S (2013) Identiﬁcation of phytase producing yeast and optimization and
characterization of extracellular phytase from Candida parapsilosis. Int J Sci Nat 4:583–590
Ranjan K, Lone MA, Sahay S (2016) Detergent compatible cold-active alkaline amylases from
Clavispora lusitaniae CB13. J Microbiol Biotechnol Food Sci 5:306–310
Rashid FAA, Rahim RA, Ibrahim D (2010) Identiﬁcation of lipase-producing psychrophilic yeast,
Leucosporidium sp. Int J Microbiol 9(1). doi:10.5580/1215
Raspor P, Zupan J (2006) Yeasts in extreme environments. In: Rosa CA, Peter G (eds) Biodiversity
and ecophysiology of yeasts. Springer, Heidelberg, pp 371–417
Rather M, Mishra S (2013) β-Glycosidases: an alternative enzyme based method for synthesis of
alkyl-glycosides. Sustain Chem Process 1:7
Ray MK, Devi KU, Kumar GS, Shivaji S (1992) Extracellular protease from the Antarctic yeast
Candida humicola. Appl Environ Microbiol 58:1918–1923
Rossi M, Buzzini P, Cordisco L, Amaretti A, Sala M, Raimondi S, Ponzoni C, Pagnoni UM,
Matteuzzi D (2009) Growth, lipid accumulation and fatty acid composition in obligate
psychrophilic, facultative psychrophilic, and mesophilic yeasts. FEMS Microbiol Ecol
69:363–372
Russell NJ (1997) Psychrophilic bacteria: molecular adaptations of membrane lipids. Comp
Biochem Phys A 118:489–493
Sabri A, Jacques P, Wekkers F, Bare G, Hiligsmann S, Moussaı¨f M, Thonart DP (2000) Effect of
temperature on growth of psychrophilic and psychrotrophic members of Rhodotorula
aurantiaca. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 84–86:391–399
Sahay H, Babu BK, Singh S, Kaushik R, Saxena AK, Arora DK (2013) Cold-active hydrolases
producing bacteria from two different sub-glacial Himalayan lakes. J Basic Microbiol
53:703–714
Saima KM, Roohi M, Ahmad IZ (2013) Isolation of novel chitinolytic bacteria and production
optimization of extracellular chitinase. J Gen Eng Biotechnol 11:39–46
Sandhya C, Adapa LK, Nampoothiri KM, Binod P, Szakacs G, Pandey A (2004) Extracellular
chitinase production by Trichoderma harzianum in submerged fermentation. J Basic Microbiol
44:49–58
Scorzetti G, Petrescu I, Yarrow D, Fell JW (2000) Cryptococcus adeliensis sp. nov., a xylanase
producing basidiomycetous yeast from Antarctica. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 77:153–157
Sharaf EF (2005) A potent chitinolytic activity of Alternaria alternata isolated from Egyptian
black sand. Polish J Microbiol 54:145–151
Sharma A, Satyanarayana T (2013) Microbial acid-stable α-amylases: characteristics, genetic
engineering and applications. Proc Biochem 48:201–211
Sheridan PP, Brenchley JE (2000) Characterization of a salt-tolerant family 42 β-galactosidase
from a psychrophilic Antarctic Planococcus isolate. Appl Environ Microbiol 66:2438–2444
Shivaji S, Prasad GS (2009) Antarctic yeasts: biodiversity and potential applications. In:
Satyanarayana T, Kunze G (eds) Yeast biotechnology: diversity and applications. Springer,
Berlin, pp 3–16
322
M. Baeza et al.

Singh P, Singh MV, Tsuji M, Prasad GS, Hoshino T (2014) Rhodotorula svalbardensis sp. nov., a
novel yeast species isolated from cryoconite holes of Ny-Ålesund, Arctic. Cryobiology
68:122–128
Solano DM, Hoyos P, Herna´iz MJ, Alca´ntara AR, Sa´nchez-Montero JM (2012) Industrial
biotransformations in the synthesis of building blocks leading to enantiopure drugs. Biores
Technol 115:196–207
Song C, Chi Z, Li J, Wang X (2010) β-Galactosidase production by the psychrotolerant yeast
Guehomyces pullulans 17–1 isolated from sea sediment in Antarctica and lactose hydrolysis.
Bioprocess Biosyst Eng 33:1025–1031
Souza CP, Almeida BC, Colwell RR, Rivera IN (2011) The importance of chitin in the marine
environment. Mar Biotechnol (NY) 13:823–830
Staley JT, Gosink JJ (1999) Poles apart: biodiversity and biogeography of sea ice bacteria. Annu
Rev Microbiol 53:189–215
Steensels J, Snoek T, Meersman E, Picca Nicolino M, Voordeckers K, Verstrepen KJ (2014)
Improving industrial yeast strains: exploiting natural and artiﬁcial diversity. FEMS Microbiol
Rev 38:947–995
Stephen AM (1995) Food polysaccharides and their applications, 2nd edn. CRC Press, Boca
Raton, FL
Straathof AJJ, Panke S, Schmidt A (2002) The production of ﬁne chemicals by biotransformations.
Curr Opin Biotechnol 13:548–556
Szczesna-Antczak M, Kaminska J, Florczak T, Turkiewicz M (2014) Cold-active yeast lipases:
recent issues and future prospects. In: Buzzini P, Margesin R (eds) Cold-adapted yeasts:
biodiversity, adaptation strategies and biotechnological signiﬁcance. Springer, Heidelberg
Tapre AR, Jain RK (2014) Pectinases: enzymes for fruit processing industry. Int Food Res J
21:447–453
Tobe S, Takami T, Ikeda S, Mitsugi K (1976) Production and some enzymatic properties of
alkaline proteinase by Candida lipolytica. Agric Biol Chem 40:1087–1092
Troncoso E, Barahona S, Carrasco M, Villarreal P, Alcaı´no J, Cifuentes V, Baeza M (2017)
Identiﬁcation and characterization of yeasts isolated from the South Shetland Islands and the
Antarctic peninsula. Polar Biol 40:649–658
Tsuji M, Yokota Y, Shimohara K, Kudoh S, Hoshino T (2013) An application of wastewater
treatment in a cold environment and stable lipase production of Antarctic basidiomycetous
yeast Mrakia blollopis. PLoS One 8:e59376
Turkiewicz M, Pazgier M, Kalinowska H, Bielecki S (2003) A cold-adapted extracellular serine
proteinase of the yeast Leucosporidium antarcticum. Extremophiles 7:435–442
Turkiewicz M, Pazgier M, Donachie SP, Kalinowska H (2005) Invertase and α-glucosidase
production by the endemic Antarctic marine yeast Leucosporidium antarcticum. Polish Polar
Res 26:125–136
Tutino ML, Parrilli E, De Santi C, Giuliani M, Marino G, de Pascale D (2010) Cold-adapted
esterases and lipases: a biodiversity still under-exploited. Curr Chem Biol 4:74–83
van Zyl WH, Bloom M, Viktor MJ (2012) Engineering yeasts for raw starch conversion. Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 95:1377–1388
Vaquero ME, Barriuso J, Martı´nez MJ, Prieto A (2016) Properties, structure, and applications of
microbial sterol esterases. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 100:2047–2061
Vishniac HS (2006) Yeast biodiversity in the Antarctic. In: Rosa CA, Peter G (eds) Biodiversity
and ecophysiology of yeasts. Springer, Berlin, pp 420–440
Wanderley KJ, Torres FAG, Moraes LÄMP, Ulhoa CJ (2004) Biochemical characterization of
α-amylase from the yeast. FEMS Microbiol Lett 231:165–169
Yayanos AA (1995) Microbiology to 10,500 m in the deep sea. Annu Rev Microbiol 49:777–805
Yu P, Wang X-T, Liu J-W (2015) Puriﬁcation and characterization of a novel cold-adapted
phytase from strain JMUY14 isolated from Antarctic: characterization of a novel cold-adapted
phytase. J Basic Microbiol 55:1029–1039
10
Cold-Active Enzymes from Cold-Adapted Yeasts
323

Zaliha RN, Salleh AB, Basri M, Mohamad Ali MSB (2012) Cold active enzyme and method
thereof. US Patent 2012/0058514 A1
Zhu Y, Pan J, Qiu J, Guan X (2008) Isolation and characterization of a chitinase gene from
entomopathogenic fungus Verticillium lecanii. Braz J Microbiol 39:314–320
Zimmer C, Platz T, Cadez N, Giffhorn F, Kohring GW (2006) A cold active (2R,3R)-(-)-di-O-
benzoyl-tartrate hydrolyzing esterase from Rhodotorula mucilaginosa. Appl Microbiol
Biotechnol 73:132–140
324
M. Baeza et al.

Methylotrophic Yeasts as Producers
of Recombinant Proteins
11
Oleh Stasyk
Abstract
Production of food and feed, industrial proteins, and biopharmaceuticals
requires cost-efﬁcient protocols and rationally chosen heterologous production
hosts. Among established production platforms, ranging from bacteria to mam-
malian cells, yeasts combine the advantages of unicellular organisms, such as
fast biomass growth and relatively easy genetic manipulations, with eukaryotic
features such as correct posttranslational modiﬁcations of recombinant proteins
and efﬁcient secretory pathway. Simultaneously, unlike more complex eukary-
otic organisms, yeast expression systems are more economical, and unlike
bacterial hosts, they do not contain pyrogenic or viral inclusions. Yeasts also
offer high diversity of metabolic and physiological adaptations that can be
exploited in biotechnology, including recombinant protein production. Herein,
we overview alternative expression platforms for production of heterologous
proteins based on methylotrophic yeasts, mainly Pichia pastoris and Hansenula
polymorpha.
Contents
11.1
Introduction ..............................................................................
326
11.2
Overview of Yeast Host Species Commonly Used for Recombinant Protein
Production .............................................................................
328
11.3
Pichia (Komagataella) pastoris .........................................................
329
11.4
Toolbox of P. pastoris Expression Platform ............................................
330
11.4.1
Expression Strains ..............................................................
330
11.4.2
P. pastoris Vectors .............................................................
331
11.4.3
Gene Promoters for Governing Recombinant Protein Expression ...........
331
11.4.4
Other Tools .....................................................................
333
O. Stasyk (*)
Department of Cell Signaling, Institute of Cell Biology, NAS of Ukraine, Drahomanov Street,
14/16, Lviv 79005, Ukraine
e-mail: stasyk@cellbiol.lviv.ua
# Springer International Publishing AG 2017
A.A. Sibirny (ed.), Biotechnology of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-58829-2_11
325

11.4.5
Industrial, Pharmaceutical, and Other Applications ..........................
334
11.4.6
Expression System’s Limitations ..............................................
336
11.5
Hansenula (Ogataea) polymorpha ......................................................
336
11.6
Toolbox of H. polymorpha Expression Platform .......................................
337
11.6.1
Expression Strains ..............................................................
337
11.6.2
H. polymorpha Vectors ........................................................
338
11.6.3
Gene Promoters for Governing Recombinant Protein Expression ...........
339
11.6.4
Other Tools .....................................................................
339
11.6.5
Industrial, Pharmaceutical, and Other Applications ..........................
340
11.7
Other Methylotrophic Yeasts ............................................................
341
11.7.1
Candida boidinii ...............................................................
341
11.7.2
Pichia methanolica .............................................................
342
11.7.3
Ogataea minuta ................................................................
342
11.8
Conclusions and Outlook ................................................................
343
References .......................................................................................
344
11.1
Introduction
Production of recombinant proteins is nowadays a sizable multibillion-dollar mar-
ket. As natural sources of proteins of interest are often limited or native protein
concentration is too low to allow for its efﬁcient extraction, production of such
proteins from genetically engineered heterologous hosts provides an alternative.
This option became possible with advent of molecular or recombinant DNA
techniques, and since the 1980s the number of recombinant proteins expressed
and a number of suitable expression hosts have been steadily increasing. Among
host organisms, yeasts occupy a special important place because they offer a
combination of very useful traits. First of all, yeasts are eukaryotic unicellular
microorganisms that share with metazoans such important features as correct
protein folding, processing, and co-translational and posttranslational modiﬁcations
and secretions. This in most cases allows for the synthesis of biologically active
protein products. Importantly, yeast cells are well amendable to genetic
manipulations owing to availability of a well-developed set of expression vectors,
carbon source-regulated gene promoters, and full genome sequences. Additionally,
the personalized design of protein production process can be implemented in yeast
hosts to improve the product yield. Conversely, yeasts do not exhibit several
limitation characteristics of traditional bacterial expression hosts, such as
Esherichia coli or Bacillus subtitis, namely, contamination with pyrogenic
compounds or sensitivity to viral infection (overviewed in Kim et al. 2015;
Meehl and Stadheim 2014; Corchero et al. 2013; Mattanovich et al. 2012; Celik
and Calik 2012).
As a rule, yeasts offer a set of characteristic that make them the host organisms
of choice for production of particular groups of proteins. For instance, monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs) and antibody fragments are today one of the most important
biopharmaceutical
products.
Despite
the
ability
of
mammalian
cells
to
N-glycosylate full length antibodies, they have important limitations with regard
to bioprocessing and scaling-up, what leads to elevated production costs. However,
antibody fragments that exhibit antigen-binding properties can be efﬁciently
326
O. Stasyk

produced in yeasts, taking into account also the availability of yeast hosts with
humanized glycosylation patterns (Spadiut et al. 2014). Some features of particular
yeast species make them speciﬁcally useful, for instance, for production of difﬁcult
to overexpress recombinant membrane proteins for structural studies or required for
food and feed production, lignocellulosic enzymes, or biopharmaceuticals like
recombinant human lysosomal enzymes (Emmerstorfer et al. 2014; Bill 2015;
Ergün and C¸ alık 2016; Mellitzer et al. 2012; Spohner et al. 2015).
The design of the optimal expression system for a given recombinant protein
involves several steps among which selecting the appropriate host organism and
strain is the most crucial. For instance, when proper folding and posttranslational
modiﬁcations are required for physiological activity of a protein product, expres-
sion host must be chosen among eukaryotic organisms. This is accompanied and
followed with selection of the following:
1. A suitable vector (integrative or episomal) with an appropriate promoter
(repressible/inducible or constitutive) and selectable marker (dominant antibi-
otic resistance or auxotrophic) that allows single or multicopy integration of the
expression cassette
2. Deciding whether there will be necessary codon optimization of the recombinant
gene
3. Fusion of the gene to an epitope tag necessary for more efﬁcient afﬁnity
puriﬁcation
4. Fusion to the signal sequence to target the protein product to a speciﬁc intracel-
lular compartment (e.g., peroxisomes) or provide secretion into extracellular
medium
Expression host optimization may also involve the possibility to introduce
further genetic alterations, such as gene deletion of vacuolar proteases to prevent
the proteolytic cleavage of the product, or manipulation with genes that facilitate
secretion, such as co-expression of chaperones. Optimization of an expression
system, depending on the chosen host, may further involve designing the optimal
fermentation mode and medium (as manipulation with carbon and nitrogen
sources), optimizing induction conditions, and incubating parameters (temperature,
pH, aeration conditions, etc.).
Of note, no single yeast expression system can provide all of the desired
properties for a given recombinant protein production. This is especially true
when chemical and physical parameters and the chosen feeding strategy may
critically inﬂuence the yield of the product or its functional characteristics.
11
Methylotrophic Yeasts as Producers of Recombinant Proteins
327

11.2
Overview of Yeast Host Species Commonly Used
for Recombinant Protein Production
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a traditional baker’s yeast, is the ﬁrst and best
characterized yeast expression system, developed yet in the 1980s. It was the ﬁrst
eukaryote for which full genome sequence was established and has been used as a
major host for the production of recombinant proteins. However, its limitations as
production host, such as hyperglycosylation of proteins and glycosylation
terminated via α-1,3-linked mannose residues, which are considered to be aller-
genic, low protein yields, along with cases of plasmid instability, soon became
apparent and have limited the number of marketed protein products from
S. cerevisiae (Gellissen et al. 2005a; Darby et al. 2012). Current industrial popular-
ity of S. cerevisiae continues mostly due to the accumulated in-depth knowledge on
its physiology, genetics, and fermentation techniques and the fact that it has been
generally recognized as safe (GRAS) species. Also, S. cerevisiae is possibly the
organism with the most comprehensive experimental dataset available to date
(Petranovic et al. 2010).
Nevertheless, in the last years, the number of published reports on utilization of
alternative yeasts for recombinant protein production exceeds that of S. cerevisiae.
Also, in the few systematic comparisons between different yeast production
systems, clear advantages of the so-called nonconventional species
over
S. cerevisiae, especially for the production of secreted proteins, have been found
(Mack et al. 2009; Dragosits et al. 2011; Darby et al. 2012). For instance, the
production of the anticoagulant peptide hirudin in different expression systems
demonstrated the signiﬁcantly higher comparative productivities achieved with
P. pastoris and H. polymorpha (Demain and Vaishnav 2009). Therefore, the folding
and secretion pathways are the major sources of advantages of alternative yeasts,
since strong and regulatable promoters and other genetic tools are readily available
for these expression systems (Mattanovich et al. 2012).
Several nonconventional yeast species including methylotrophs Hansenula
polymorpha and Pichia pastoris, two dimorphic yeast Arxula adeninivorans and
Yarrowia lipolytica, the budding yeast Kluyveromyces lactis, and the ﬁssion yeast
Schizosaccharomyces pombe have been proposed and used to a different extent as
recombinant protein expression platforms.
In this review, we focus on characterization of the alternative methylotrophic
yeast species as hosts for recombinant protein production. In contrast to
S. cerevisiae, they belong to the group of so-called Crabtree-negative yeasts
which do not ferment and produce ethanol under fully aerobic conditions. This
enables these yeasts to grow to very high cell densities in bioreactor cultures that
result in turn in higher product yields (Cereghino and Cregg 2000). Methylotrophic
yeasts are characterized by a unique enzymatic machinery involved in utilization of
toxic methanol. Many enzymes, especially those of peroxisomal nature, are highly
overexpressed and strictly regulated by carbon sources and have been used, there-
fore, to drive heterologous protein production (Fig. 11.1). For comparative charac-
terization of non-methylotrophic alternative yeast expression platforms, readers are
328
O. Stasyk

referred to recent reviews on the subject (Gellissen et al. 2005b; Celik and Calık
2012; Corchero et al. 2013).
11.3
Pichia (Komagataella) pastoris
Of note, Pichia pastoris has been reclassiﬁed (Yamada et al. 1995), and the new
species names such as Komagataella pastoris or Komagataella phafﬁi can be found
in the recent literature (for further details, please see Kurtzman 2009; Sturmberger
et al. 2016).
Since the unsuccessful introduction by Phillips Petroleum more than 40 years
ago for the commercial production of single-cell protein (SCP), the methylotrophic
yeast P. pastoris has become nowadays the most frequently used yeast host for
heterologous protein production. This yeast is distinguished for its growth to very
high cell densities, availability of strong and tightly regulated gene promoters, very
efﬁcient protein secretion, and ability to produce recombinant proteins in amounts
CYTOSOL
CH3OH
NАD+
CH3OH
NАDН(Н+)
O2
4
СО2
1
NАDН(Н+)
6
H2O2
NАD+
CH2O
CH2O
НСООН
2
5
3
NАD+
NАDН(Н+)
H2O + 1/2 O2
Xyl5P
Fr6P
Fr1,6PP
1/3GАP
9
DHА + GАP
GАP
8
DHА
DHАP
PEROXISOME
7
АТP АDP
Fig. 11.1 Simpliﬁed schematic representation of the metabolic pathways of methanol oxidation
and assimilation in the methylotrophic yeast cell. Main enzymes are numbered, and names of the
corresponding gene promoters previously used to drive recombinant protein expression in differ-
ent methylotrophic yeasts are listed in the legend : 1 alcohol (methanol) oxidase (H. polymorpha
MOX, P. pastoris AOX1, P. methanolica MOD1/AUG1, C. boidinii AOD1); 2 catalase; 3 dihy-
droxyacetone
synthase;
4
formaldehyde
reductase;
5
formaldehyde
dehydrogenase
(H. polymorpha FLD, P. pastoris FLD1); 6 formate dehydrogenase (H. polymorpha FMD);
7 dihydroxyacetone kinase; 8 fructose-1,6-diphosphate aldolase; 9 fructose-1,6-diphosphatase.
Abbreviations for intermediates: GAP glyceraldehyde, DHAP dihydroxyacetone (phosphate),
Fr1,6PP fructose-1,6-diphosphate, Fr6P fructose-6-phosphate, Xyl5P xylulose-5-phosphate
11
Methylotrophic Yeasts as Producers of Recombinant Proteins
329

of gram per liter of culture (for reviews, see Cereghino and Cregg 2000; Daly and
Hearn 2005; Gasser et al. 2013; Ahmad et al. 2014; Spohner et al. 2015). In basic
research, P. pastoris has been a very popular yeast model in research on molecular
mechanisms of peroxisome biogenesis and degradation (Dunn et al. 2005).
P. pastoris is a homothallic haploid yeast species able of mating, forming diploid
cells, and producing ascospores under nitrogen limitation. Usually haploid auxo-
trophic strains or those harboring antibiotic resistance complementary markers that
allow for selective growth of resulting diploid cells are used in genetic crossings in
strain construction (Cregg et al. 1985, 2009).
As a methylotrophic organism, P. pastoris can use single-carbon compound
methanol as its sole carbon and energy source in the absence of a repressing carbon
source, such as glucose. Since P. pastoris is an obligate aerobe and prefers a
respiratory mode of growth, fermentation products such as ethanol and acetic
acid do not build up in the culture enabling them to reach very high cell densities
of up to 200 g L1 dry weight (Cereghino et al. 2002). Simultaneously, P. pastoris
is the efﬁcient secreting host for recombinant proteins because few of its own
proteins are found in extracellular medium, which allows simple puriﬁcation of
the secreted products. Another advantage of P. pastoris is its less extensive
hypermannosylation as compared to S. cerevisiae and the absence of α-1,3-linked
mannosyltransferase, which produces highly immunogenic terminal α-1,3-linked
mannosyl linkages in S. cerevisiae (Gemmill and Trimble 1999). Of note, yeasts
glycosylate recombinant protein products adding the core (Man)8-(GlcNAc)2-
groups, thus performing only some steps common in metazoans.
11.4
Toolbox of P. pastoris Expression Platform
11.4.1 Expression Strains
All P. pastoris expression strains are derivative of the wild-type strains NRRL-Y
11430 from the Agriculture Research Service Culture Collection (Peoria IL, USA)
and NRRL Y-48124 (X-33, Invitrogen expression kit strains, Carlsbad CA, USA)
(Kurtzman 2009) and are now identiﬁed as Komagataella phafﬁi (Sturmberger et al.
2016). In particular, GS115 his4 auxotrophic mutant lacking the functional gene
encoding the histidinol dehydrogenase (Cereghino and Cregg 2000), KM71 Mut S
strain that exhibits slow growth on methanol (see below), and protease-deﬁcient
strains (e.g., SMD1163, SMD1165, SMD1168) are commonly used as classical
hosts for heterologous protein expression. The SMD1163 strain (his4, pep4, prb1)
lacks both proteinase A which activates other endogenous P. pastoris proteases
(pep4) and proteinase B (prb1) activities, whereas SMD1165 and SMD1168 are
deﬁcient in prb1 and pep4, respectively. Therefore, strain SMD1163 has been
demonstrated to be the most efﬁcient as a host for synthesis of recombinant proteins
sensitive to proteolytic degradation (Cereghino and Cregg 2000). Depending on the
protein of interest and further predicted modiﬁcations of the protein production
process, all abovementioned strains provide certain useful features.
330
O. Stasyk

11.4.2 P. pastoris Vectors
The standard P. pastoris vectors used in biotechnological applications are shuttle
vectors which can be replicated in E. coli and maintained in P. pastoris using a
selectable marker, such as auxotrophic genetic markers (e.g., HIS4, ARG4, MET2,
ADE1, URA3). A set of plasmids for intracellular and secretory protein expression
in P. pastoris based on different auxotrophic genetic markers has been developed
(Lin Cereghino et al. 2001). Selection in P. pastoris can also be provided by the
heterologous genes conferring resistance to drugs, e.g., Geneticin (G418) and
Zeocin.
The distinctive feature of P. pastoris expression system [patented by Research
Corporation Technologies (Tucson, AZ, USA)] is that the basic expression kit with
standard vector systems for intracellular and secretory expression is commercially
available for research use from Invitrogen Corporation (Carlsbad, CA, USA). It
also provides P. pastoris expression vectors and strains for humanized glycosyla-
tion of target proteins (Vogl and Glieder 2013) and can be purchased from
BioGrammatics (Carlsbad, CA, USA).
Of
note,
unlike
in
S.
cerevisiae,
where
homologous
recombination
predominates, in P. pastoris nonhomologous recombination usually occurs upon
transformation with a linearized vector. Also, homologous recombination in
P. pastoris requires elongated homologous regions ﬂanking heterologous DNA in
the expression cassettes (Cereghino and Cregg 2000). Several different transforma-
tion methods and protocols can be applied in P. pastoris to integrate vector DNA
into its genome. The most commonly used transformation method is electropora-
tion, yielding up to 105 transformants/μg of DNA (Cregg and Russell 1998). For
other up-to-date tools of P. pastoris expression system, readers are referred to
recent comprehensive review on the subject by Gasser et al. (2013).
11.4.3 Gene Promoters for Governing Recombinant Protein
Expression
Promoter of the gene of alcohol oxidase, AOX1 gene, encoding a key peroxisomal
enzyme of methanol utilization pathway is known as one of the strongest and tightly
regulated yeast promoters. The classical P. pastoris expression system has been
developed based on this promoter (Cregg et al. 1985). The AOX1 promoter is
repressed in the presence of glucose or glycerol but strongly upregulated in the
presence of methanol, making it tightly controlled by carbon source expression
system. The advantage of catabolite regulation of the AOX1 promoter, especially
important in case a toxic recombinant product is to be expressed, is that the high
biomass growth can be achieved under repressing conditions and afterward the
expression can be induced. The transcriptional regulation of this promoter has been
extensively studied, and cis-acting elements and transacting factors were
characterized (Hartner and Glieder 2006). A wide range of proteins have been
expressed from control of this promoter, with claimed yields of recombinant protein
11
Methylotrophic Yeasts as Producers of Recombinant Proteins
331

up to 20–30 g L1 (Spohner et al. 2015). Of note, one of the recent studies
suggested that protein expression from under AOX1 promoter may occur during
the preinduction phase in cultures grown in bioreactors contrary to shake ﬂask
cultures, tentatively indicating that the corresponding promoter may be leaky under
certain conditions (Bawa et al. 2014).
However, methanol, the AOX1 promoter inducer, is a potential ﬁre hazard and a
toxic compound, which may pose risks under large-scale fermentation conditions.
Therefore, methanol non-utilizing strains have been constructed that utilize alter-
native carbon sources for growth but can be also cultivated on a controlled
methanol concentration at a low growth rate or under mixed feed protocols
(Cereghino et al. 2002). P. pastoris harbors in its genome two genes encoding for
peroxisomal alcohol oxidase, major AOX1 and auxiliary AOX2. Therefore,
depending on these genes’ status, there are three phenotypes for P. pastoris, with
respect to methanol utilization: Mutþ (wild-type or intact methanol utilization),
MutS (slow methanol utilization, disrupted AOX1, intact AOX2), and Mut (deﬁ-
cient methanol utilization, both AOX1 and AOX2 disrupted) (Cereghino and Cregg
2000).
Besides, new alternative promoters have also been identiﬁed in P. pastoris and
characterized with regard to their feasibility for protein production. These include
several constitutive promoters from housekeeping genes (e.g., GAP1, TEF1, PGK1,
TPI1) and regulatable (inducible) promoters from particular biochemical pathways
(e.g., FLD1, PHO89, THI11, AOD) (Prielhofer et al. 2013). Interestingly, applica-
tion of the P. pastoris FLD1 promoter of the formaldehyde dehydrogenase gene
allows induction of recombinant protein expression with methylamine instead of
methanol and repression by glucose (Resina et al. 2005).
GAP promoter provides high-level constitutive expression of foreign proteins on
glycerol and glucose-containing media. This feature is particularly useful for
protein production in large-scale fermenters, since it does not require ﬂammable
and therefore hazardous methanol in the process. In some cases, a constitutive
expression from under GAP promoter yields even higher protein levels relative to
that controlled by the AOX1 promoter (Waterham et al. 1997). Therefore, when
recombinant proteins are not toxic for the yeast host, as in the case of most enzymes
of food industry, constitutive promoters are applicable and are even favorable
because they support more productive continuous modes of fermentation.
For a detailed and comprehensive description of the available P. pastoris
promoters, the readers are referred to the review by Vogl and Glieder (2013).
Several P. pastoris transcriptional factors have been identiﬁed and studied with
respect to their control of host physiology and fermentation-relevant traits. These
include Hac1 involved in the control of unfolded protein response (UPR), Fep1 in
iron uptake, and Yap1 in oxidative stress response (see Gasser et al. 2013; Puxbaum
et al. 2015; and references thereof). Understanding of these transcriptional regu-
latory networks together with synthetic biology and metabolic engineering
approaches forms a solid basis that enables the design of tailor-made hosts for
production of recombinant proteins.
332
O. Stasyk

11.4.4 Other Tools
Genes of interest are often codon and GC content optimized for expression in
P. pastoris. Since the comparison with the non-codon optimized gene is not usually
reported, what difference this makes to the yield of a given protein is not clear.
However, in the case of membrane proteins, as demonstrated in one of the studies
with mouse P-glycoprotein, expression from a codon-optimized P. pastoris gene
not only yielded substantially more protein than expression from the wild-type gene
but also concomitantly correlated with better product stability (Bai et al. 2011). A
positive effect of codon optimization in P. pastoris has been also reported for
endochitinase (Yu et al. 2013), inulinase (He et al. 2014), keratinase (Hu et al.
2013), lignocellulolytic enzymes (Mellitzer et al. 2012), and some other enzymes.
The P. pastoris vectors usually integrate into the host cell genome producing
stably expressing clones. The number of copies [up to 30 in P. pastoris (Cregg et al.
2009)] which are integrated cannot be precisely controlled, so the optimal clone
must be experimentally identiﬁed. Copy number can be roughly estimated via
colony screening in the presence of increasing concentrations of antibiotic when
a corresponding resistance gene is included in the vector as a selectable marker or
by other methods, such as real-time PCR. It has to be stressed that the higher copy
numbers of the integrated vector do not necessarily correlate with higher expression
of protein product, so it is usually necessary to follow copy number analysis with
the direct assessment of protein expression levels. The main approaches of how to
achieve high-expression cassette copy numbers are summarized in Gasser
et al. (2013).
Although untagged recombinant proteins have been successfully isolated from
P. pastoris based on their individual properties, it is more usual to produce tagged
versions of the target proteins to facilitate both their detection and isolation. A
range of different tags is compatible with expression in P. pastoris. The vast
majority of recombinant proteins can and have been expressed as His-tagged
constructs to allow one-step puriﬁcation by afﬁnity chromatography. Besides,
FLAG tags have also been used both for protein analysis and their isolation. GFP
tags can be incorporated on expression vectors to assist in protein visualization. A
number of different protease-cleavage sites have also been employed to success-
fully remove tags after product puriﬁcation if required.
For efﬁcient secretion, P. pastoris expression vectors can incorporate the
S. cerevisiae alpha-mating factor (α-MF) pre-pro leader sequence signal upstream
of the heterologous gene of interest. The alpha-mating factor should be cleaved
following expression by the native Kex2 protease. Recently a novel P. pastoris
strain with increased Kex2 copy number which alters Kex2 endogenous level and
increases production of a secreted protein has been described (Yang et al. 2013).
Recently, some modiﬁcations of the MFα pre-pro leader to further enhance secre-
tion in P. pastoris have been proposed (Lin-Cereghino et al. 2013).
Better understanding of the P. pastoris genetics, promoter regulation, and
physiology was greatly facilitated after full genome sequences have become avail-
able (Küberl et al. 2011). Readers are referred to a recent publication of
11
Methylotrophic Yeasts as Producers of Recombinant Proteins
333

Sturmberger et al. (2016) on P. pastoris genome for more up-to-date details.
Genome Browser database of P. pastoris genome sequences is publicly available
(Sturmberger et al. 2016). Also, new achievements in strain improvement were
recently reported. These concerned intracellular trafﬁcking, protein folding, glyco-
sylation, and proteolytic degradation (Puxbaum et al. 2015; Kim et al. 2004; Yu
et al. 2015).
An expanding toolbox of genetic elements and P. pastoris strains for the
improvement of recombinant protein production is being generated, including
novel promoters, gene copy number-enhancing vectors, and host strains adapted
for efﬁcient secretion. One of the recent reviews highlights established tools for
protein expression in P. pastoris and novel developments in expression vector
design, host strain engineering, and screening for high-level expression strains
(Gasser et al. 2013).
11.4.5 Industrial, Pharmaceutical, and Other Applications
In the last several years, a number of products based on P. pastoris platform got
approval as biopharmaceuticals [for review, see Meehl and Stadheim (2014)].
Several products from P. pastoris like human serum albumin, insulin, interferon
alpha, and hepatitis B vaccine are marketed in India and/or Japan (Shekhar 2008).
The ﬁrst therapeutic polypeptide, ecallantide, expressed in P. pastoris and used for
the treatment of hereditary angioedema received approval from FDA in 2009
(Thompson 2010) and is produced by Dyax Corporation (Cambridge, MA). Suc-
cessful genetic engineering to humanize N-glycosylation in P. pastoris has led to
further improvement of this host as producer of pharmaceutical proteins dependent
on glycosylation pattern for their activity (Puxbaum et al. 2015 and references
thereof). This permitted efﬁcient production of fully active human erythropoietin in
P. pastoris (Hamilton et al. 2006). These features made P. pastoris a remarkably
cost-efﬁcient expression platform. The most important event for the usage of the
P. pastoris expression system in food technology was receiving the generally
recognized as safe (GRAS) status from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
and the FDA approval of recombinant proteins (Ciofalo et al. 2006; Thompson
2010).
One important feature of the P. pastoris system is that it is highly suitable for
large-scale growth and cultivation in bioreactors (Cereghino et al. 2002).
Bioreactors provide precise control over culture parameters including temperature,
pH, and feed rate as well as allow real-time monitoring of changes in cell optical
density and dissolved oxygen. This allows that ultrahigh cell densities (>100 g/L
dry cell weight, >500 OD600 units/mL) can be achieved (Cereghino et al. 2002).
However, usually medium cell density cultures are utilized in bioreactors since this
usually reduces cellular stress and proteolysis associated with high-density cultures
(Mattanovich et al. 2004). This feature combined with inexpensive growth media
makes P. pastoris a highly cost-effective expression system.
334
O. Stasyk

Depending on which promoter is used, different fermentation techniques are
applied in P. pastoris. The standard fermentation procedure for the expression
system based on the AOX1 promoter is a three-stage fed-batch fermentation
(Zhang et al. 2000). Usually the ﬁrst stage, so-called growth phase, consists of
batch fermentation with glycerol as a carbon source to get initial sufﬁcient cell
biomass. The second “transition” stage starts right after all glycerol is exhausted
and is a fed-batch phase aimed at production of more biomass and at metabolic
transition from the glycerol to methanol metabolism. In this phase, sole glycerol
feed or a mixed feed of glycerol and methanol, where glycerol feed progressively
decreases and methanol feed progressively increases, can be applied. For the
“production phase,” different feeding proﬁles can be applied, such as constant
oxygen feeding, constant methanol concentration feeding, constant speciﬁc growth
rate feeding, oxygen-limited fed batch, and temperature-limited fed batch (Potvin
et al. 2012).
The fermentation strategy for recombinant protein production under control of
constitutive GAP promoter differs signiﬁcantly from the ones described above. In
this case, no separate transition and production phases nor methanol induction is
necessary, and the amount of produced protein depends solely on the cell mass.
Therefore, the fed-batch and the continuous fermentation are the modes of choice
for GAP promoter. An example for an efﬁcient large-scale fed-batch protocol using
the GAP promoter is the production of lipase from Candida rugosa, generating up
to 500 g/L wet cell weight and stable lipase activity of 14,000 U/mL (Zhao et al.
2008).
For more details on fermentation process optimization and vector design for
recombinant protein production in P. pastoris, readers are referred to recent
specialized reviews on the subjects (Looser et al. 2015; Celik and Calık 2012;
Potvin et al. 2012). For review on the industrial expression of food and feed
enzymes in Pichia pastoris, see Spohner et al. (2015).
P. pastoris has been particularly successful as an expression platform for various
eukaryotic membrane proteins, especially those required for structural biology
studies. One of the key issues associated with such proteins is the difﬁculty in
expressing the large amounts of the product. This is due to the fact that eukaryotic
membrane proteins require speciﬁc co- and posttranslational processing and mem-
brane lipid composition, meaning that bacterial expression systems are as a rule not
suitable for their production. Although the higher eukaryotic cell-based systems
(e.g., based on insect cells) have a good track record for production of membrane
proteins, they are much more expensive and time-consuming as compared to
microbial hosts. The yeast expression systems combine the advantages of low
production costs with eukaryotic modiﬁcations and ease of manipulation. Although
the bakers yeast S. cerevisiae has a good track record in production of membrane
proteins for structural studies, much better success has been achieved with mem-
brane proteins heterologously produced in P. pastoris. The recent reviews on this
subject summarize successful examples of eukaryotic membrane proteins produced
for structural studies in P. pastoris (Routledge et al. 2016; Byrne 2015;
Emmerstorfer et al. 2014).
11
Methylotrophic Yeasts as Producers of Recombinant Proteins
335

Several genome-scale metabolic models for P. pastoris have been created and
recently updated a consensus model (Toma`s-Gamisans et al. 2016). This will
provide a new efﬁcient tool for manipulations of P. pastoris metabolic networks,
constructing the new generation of host strains and in silico simulations for
optimizing fermentation protocols for more efﬁcient recombinant protein produc-
tion (Nocon et al. 2014). Other applications of yeast synthetic biology for the
production of recombinant therapeutic proteins are summarized in the review of
Kim et al. (2015).
11.4.6 Expression System’s Limitations
Not every protein of interest is produced, especially secreted, in P. pastoris at high
titers. For complex proteins which are membrane bound, hetero-oligomers, or prone
to proteolysis, yields are often lower than usually achieved. Protein folding, glyco-
sylation, and secretion efﬁciency have been identiﬁed among major bottlenecks and
limiting factors for this host, pinpointing major targets for strain optimization.
It is known that P. pastoris can hyperglycosylate recombinant products although
to a lesser extent than what is observed in S. cerevisiae. Comparative analysis of
25 non-glycosylated recombinant G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) expressed
in P. pastoris revealed that loss of glycosylation resulted in many cases in reduced
functional expression as compared to a glycosylated counterpart (Yurugi-
Kobayashi et al. 2009). The data indicated that the effects of deviant glycosylation
need to be assessed for each individual heterologous protein.
For the comprehensive recent review on the subject of the challenges of recom-
binant protein folding, glycosylation, and secretion in P. pastoris expression plat-
form, see Puxbaum et al. (2015).
11.5
Hansenula (Ogataea) polymorpha
(Of note, Hansenula polymorpha has recently been reclassiﬁed, and new species
name synonyms such as Pichia angusta or Ogataea polymorpha can be found in the
recent literature (for further details, please see Yamada et al. 1994, 1995; Kurtzman
2009).)
H. polymorpha is another methylotrophic yeast successfully utilized as an
expression platform for recombinant proteins. Peculiarity of this species is that it
is a remarkably thermotolerant yeast able to grow up to 45 C and even higher and
is resistant to heavy metals and oxidative stress (Gellissen 2002). Therefore, it is
well suited for the production of thermostable enzymes and proteins. Another
peculiarity is that it harbors a nitrate assimilation pathway introgressed from
bacteria that is not present in other yeasts, including methylotrophs (Morales and
Dujon 2012; Morales et al. 2013). H. polymorpha expression system is also known
for remarkable stability of strains-producers, a feature very important for large-
scale production (Kang and Gellissen 2004). The presence of excessive
336
O. Stasyk

peroxisomal membrane in H. polymorpha provides a convenient site for targeting
heterologous membrane proteins when fused with an appropriate signal peptide of
native peroxins (Le~ao and Kiel 2003) (Fig. 11.2). Similarly to P. pastoris,
H. polymorpha is a Crabtree-negative yeast allowing for high dilution rates and
high biomass yields in bioreactors. H. polymorpha efﬁciently secretes foreign
proteins and exhibits a lesser extent of hypermannosylation and no terminal immu-
nogenic α-1,3-linked mannose residues considered to be allergenic as compared to
S. cerevisiae (Kang et al. 1998; Gellissen 2000; Kim et al. 2004). Several recombi-
nant products derived from H. polymorpha expression platform have reached the
market, including the hepatitis B vaccine Hepavax-Gene (Crucell, NL), insulin, and
interferon alpha-2 (Rhein-Biotech, DE). In addition, H. polymorpha has received a
GRAS status as producer of food enzymes (Gellissen et al. 2005a).
For
additional
information
on
H.
polymorpha
expression
system,
see
Mattanovich et al. (2012), Gellissen et al. (2005b), Gellissen (2000), and Sudbery
et al. (1988).
11.6
Toolbox of H. polymorpha Expression Platform
11.6.1 Expression Strains
There are three main strains of H. polymorpha known that have independent origins.
For biotechnological applications, mostly strains derivative of CBS4732 and DL-1
are used, whereas strain NCYC495 is used mainly in fundamental studies. Recently
DL-1 strain has been reclassiﬁed as Hansenula (Ogataea) polymorpha sister spe-
cies—Ogataea parapolymorpha (Ravin et al. 2013; Kurtzman et al. 2011). All
H. polymorpha isolates are homothallic, and reproduction occurs vegetatively by
A
V
N
M
M
P
C
B
P
M
V
N
Fig. 11.2 Induction of peroxisomes in the cells of H. polymorpha (a) grown in glucose-
supplemented batch culture, (b) grown in methanol medium in batch culture, (c) in chemostat
culture on methanol to maximally induce alcohol oxidase (MOX) promoter. Big crystalloids of
alcohol oxidase protein tightly packed in peroxisomes and the intracellular volume they occupy
inform the strength of the MOX promoter. Abbreviations: N nucleus, M mitochondrion,
P peroxisome, V vacuole [Photo “C” adapted from Gellissen et al. (2005b)]
11
Methylotrophic Yeasts as Producers of Recombinant Proteins
337

budding. Methods of classic and molecular genetics are well developed for
H. polymorpha (Gellissen 2002; Kang and Gellissen 2004).
11.6.2 H. polymorpha Vectors
There are many variants of H. polymorpha vectors that provide either replicative or
integrative expression of heterologous genes in the host (Mattanovich et al. 2012).
Among auxotrophic marker genes, the native and heterologous LEU2 and URA3 are
the most frequently used. Recently, we successfully applied a P. pastoris heterolo-
gous
gene
marker
ADE1
for
isolation
of
multicopy
transformants
and
H. polymorpha native FLD1 gene under shortened GAP promoter as a novel
selectable marker in H. polymorpha (Krasovska et al. 2007, 2013). A wide-range
yeast vector system (CoMedTM) has been constructed that provides a versatile
transformation/expression tool for a range of yeasts, namely, H. polymorpha,
S. cerevisiae, P. pastoris, Arxula adeninivorans, and Kluyveromyces lactis. In its
basic form, the vector is composed of genetic modules that are functional in all
mentioned yeasts, namely, a rDNA targeting sequence, an appropriate selection
marker, and an expression cassette under control of a TEF1 promoter from various
sources (Steinborn et al. 2006).
Efﬁcient strategies for gene replacements and marker recycling and introducing
multiple heterologous genes are essential for a developed expression platforms. In
addition to the counterselection strategy using the URA3 marker that has been
conventionally applied in yeasts, more advanced approaches such as the Cre/loxP
and Flp/FRT recombinase-based systems have been also developed. These systems
act via active excision of the marker gene fragments to recycle markers to allow for
sequential rounds of deletions in several yeast species, including H. polymorpha
(Qian et al. 2009).
Of note, the frequency of homologous versus nonhomologous recombination
upon integration of foreign DNA fragments into H. polymorpha genome is much
lower than in S. crevisiae (Kang and Gellissen 2004). It was shown in several
yeasts, including H. polymorpha, that after deletion of KU70 or KU80 homologues
involved in nonhomologous end joining, the frequency of homologous recombina-
tion was signiﬁcantly enhanced (Kim et al. 2015).
Positive selection markers such as Geneticin- or Zeocin-resistant genes are
routinely applied in H. polymorpha for obtaining multicopy transformants with
different vectors harboring expression cassettes. However, it has become apparent
that there is not always a linear correlation between expression cassette copy
number and resulting protein expression level, particularly for the secretory recom-
binant proteins (Aw and Polizzi 2013). For example, a study involving secretory
production of human serum albumin in H. polymorpha showed that the effect of
gene dosage on expression was abolished, and a single copy of the optimized
expression cassette integrated into the MOX locus was sufﬁcient for maximal
expression of human serum albumin (Kang et al. 2001).
338
O. Stasyk

11.6.3 Gene Promoters for Governing Recombinant Protein
Expression
The H. polymorpha expression platform is based on strong, strictly regulated
promoters of the genes of methanol utilization pathway, encoding for methanol
oxidase (MOX) and formate dehydrogenase (FMD) (for a comprehensive review,
see Hartner and Glieder 2006). Unlike the P. pastoris AOX1 promoter-based
expression
system,
which
strictly
requires
methanol
for
induction,
the
H. polymorpha MOX promoter is highly derepressed under glucose exhaustion,
thus supporting a methanol-free fermentation process. H. polymorpha is rather
exceptional hosts among methylotrophic yeasts as its FMD promoter is more
frequently employed for governing recombinant protein production (Kang and
Gellissen 2004). For more details on the regulation of promoters of methanol
utilization pathway in this yeast, see the review of Hartner and Glieder (2006).
Besides methylotrophic promoters, native and heterologous constitutive promoters
of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAP) are used in H. polymorpha
(Kang and Gellissen 2004).
We described the mutations in H. polymorpha putative glucose transporter with
sensing function Gcr1 that affects catabolite repression of MOX promoter in
H. polymorpha (Stasyk et al. 2004). The gcr1 mutants exhibited defects in MOX
promoter regulation only by hexoses and xylose, but not by disaccharides or
ethanol. With derivative gcr1 mutant strains as hosts, we developed a modiﬁed
two-carbon source mode expression platform that utilizes convenient sugar
substrates for growth (sucrose) and induction of recombinant protein expression
(glucose or xylose). Efﬁcient regulatable by sugar carbon sources expression of
three recombinant proteins: a secreted glucose oxidase from the fungus Aspergillus
niger, a secreted miniproinsulin, and an intracellular hepatitis B virus surface
antigen was demonstrated in these mutant hosts (Krasovska et al. 2007, 2013).
Thus, this modiﬁed expression platform preserved the favorable regulatable nature
of MOX promoter without addition of methanol, making a convenient alternative to
the traditional system.
11.6.4 Other Tools
H. polymorpha full genome sequence has been established and is available online
for the strain NCYC495 at http://genome.jgi.doe.gov/Hanpo1/Hanpo1.home.html,
which allows efﬁcient screening for gene homologues and application of different
system biology approaches with this species.
It was recently found that H. polymorpha differs from S. cerevisiae or P. pastoris
in that it has a unique codon usage frequency. Even codon-optimized genes that are
expressed well in S. cerevisiae and P. pastoris may be inefﬁciently expressed in
H. polymorpha; thus, rare codons must be avoided when universal optimized gene
versions are designed for expression in host panel that includes H. polymorpha (Liu
et al. 2014).
11
Methylotrophic Yeasts as Producers of Recombinant Proteins
339

In addition, similar to P. pastoris, initial studies in H. polymorpha have been
conducted for host strain engineering to perform humanized recombinant protein
glycosylation (Oh et al. 2008; Kim et al. 2004). These glycoengineering studies
have yielded glycoproteins in H. polymorpha mainly containing trimannosyl core
N-glycan (Man3GlcNAc2) (Oh et al. 2008). Also, an alternative strategy for
reconstructing the biosynthetic pathway of initial lipid-linked oligosaccharide
synthesis was developed based on deletion of the H. polymorpha ALG3 gene coding
for
dolichyl-phosphate-mannose
(Dol-P-Man)-dependent
α-1,3
mannosyltransferase (Cheon et al. 2012).
It is known that correct protein folding in the yeast ER is very important as it
determines whether the protein enters the recombinant secretory pathway or
whether it is targeted for ER-associated degradation (ERAD), thus affecting the
recombinant protein production. It was reported that an increase of calnexin gene
dosage which controls folding and quality control of glycoproteins boosts the
secretion of recombinant proteins in H. polymorpha (Klabunde et al. 2007).
Recently, an improved processing of secretory proteins in H. polymorpha by
sequence variation near the processing site of the alpha-mating factor pre-pro
sequence was reported (Eilert et al. 2013).
H. polymorpha, similarly to P. pastoris, can reach high cell densities and
efﬁciently secretes recombinant proteins, as exempliﬁed by phytase production
with the yield of 13.5 g L1 (Mayer et al. 1999). Fermentation process development
in H. polymorpha was recently reviewed by Stockmann et al. (2009) and Celik and
Calik (2012). Similarly to P. pastoris, a deﬁned minimal mineral medium com-
posed of salts, vitamins, and trace elements is used to support growth. Based on the
selected promoter (FMD or MOX), fermentation strategies are developed using
either glucose or glycerol in the beginning of fermentation, followed by carbon
source limitation in the second phase (Stockmann et al. 2009). Of note, one
interesting example of comparative analysis of rotavirus VP6 production has been
recently reported where H. polymorpha outperformed both P. pastoris and E. coli
during bioreactor cultivation but not in shake ﬂask cultures (Bredell et al. 2016).
11.6.5 Industrial, Pharmaceutical, and Other Applications
Although not that popular as P. pastoris has been, H. polymorpha was exploited for
the production of a number of recombinant proteins, e.g., enzymes (glucose oxi-
dase) (Hodgkins et al. 1993; Krasovska et al. 2007), phytase (Mayer et al. 1999),
glycolate oxidase and catalase (Gellissen et al. 1996), isopenicillin-N synthase
(Gidijala et al. 2008), novel ﬁbrinolytic recombinant staphylokinase (Moussa
et al. 2012), pharmaceuticals: IFNα-2a (Müller et al. 2002), interleukin-6 (B€oer
et al. 2007), and recombinant human serum albumin (Heo et al. 2008).
As mentioned, the recombinant hepatitis B vaccine produced in H. polymorpha
(Seo et al. 2008) has been commercialized. The H. polymorpha-produced hepatitis
B virus S antigen (HbsAg) was found to be assembled into yeast-derived lipid
membranes. Other studies have indicated that this lipoprotein particle structure is
340
O. Stasyk

essential for the antigenicity of the HBsAg (Petre et al. 1992). The methanol
induction, which is routinely used for high-level production of recombinant
proteins in H. polymorpha, is a favorable condition for lipid membrane formation
(e.g., peroxisomal membranes) and thus advantageous to produce the recombinant
hepatitis B vaccine with desirable antigenicity. Indeed, a codon-adapted HPV 52 L1
gene encoding for recombinant human papillomavirus protein was recently suc-
cessfully expressed in H. polymorpha, which is used as an industrial platform for
economical hepatitis B surface antigen particle production in China. It was found
that the recombinant proteins, similar to HBsAg, could form virus-like particles in
this host (Liu et al. 2014, 2015).
H. polymorpha has recently become a new promising yeast factory for produc-
tion of biofuel ethanol from pentose xylose (see Chap. 1 of this book). Several
heterologous proteins have been successfully expressed in H. polymorpha strains
and improved xylose fermenters, such as bacterial xylose isomerase (Voronovsky
et al. 2005; Dmytruk et al. 2008), amylolytic enzymes alpha-amylase and
glucoamylase from the yeast Schwanniomyces occidentalis, endoxylanase of the
fungus Trichoderma reesei, as well as beta-xylosidase of the fungus Aspergillus
niger (Voronovsky et al. 2009).
11.7
Other Methylotrophic Yeasts
11.7.1 Candida boidinii
The Candida boidinii expression system has been reviewed by Yurimoto and
Sakai (2009).
Using this yeast, several cytosolic, peroxisomal, and extracellular recombinant
proteins have been produced. They included cytosolic human α1-antitrypsin
(Yurimoto and Sakai 2009), Aspergillus niger pectin methylesterase (Kawaguchi
et al. 2014), secretory glucoamylase from Rhizopus oryzae (Sakai et al. 1996),
bovine cathepsin C (Komeda et al. 2002a), and peroxisome-targeted fructosyl-
amino acid oxidase (FAOD) from Penicillium janthinellum (Sakai et al. 1999).
Thus, based on C. boidinii platform, a system has been elaborated for recombinant
toxic protein production which are targeted to peroxisomes. It was also observed
that propeptide of transglutaminase (TGase) from the actinomycete Streptomyces
mobaraensis efﬁciently drives secretion in C. boidiniii (Yurimoto et al. 2004). The
C. boidinii-based expression system also exhibits several characteristics that may
be beneﬁcial for certain application as compared with other methylotrophic yeasts
because different carbon sources provide three different expression levels in the
same C. boidinii system based on repressible alcohol oxidase (AOD1) promoter.
This promoter exhibits a high level of expression in cells grown on methanol or
methanol supplemented with glycerol, an intermediate expression level in cells
grown on glycerol, and a repressed expression in cells grown on glucose or ethanol
(Sakai et al. 1995). As in other methylotrophs, high recombinant protein expression
levels can be obtained in C. boidinii using cheap synthetic salt-based media. In
11
Methylotrophic Yeasts as Producers of Recombinant Proteins
341

addition, like in P. pastoris, a C. boidinii host strain is available in which vacuolar
protease genes, encoding the proteinase A (PEP4) and proteinase B (PRB1), are
disrupted (Komeda et al. 2002b).
11.7.2 Pichia methanolica
Only a few recombinant proteins have been expressed in methylotrophic yeast
Pichia methanolica under the control of the promoter of its alcohol oxidase gene,
AUG1. They included an isoform of human glutamate decarboxylase (Raymond
et al. 1998), hepatitis B virus polymerase (HBV P protein) (Choi et al. 2002),
secreted lignin peroxidase of Phanerochaete chrysosporium (Wang et al. 2004) and
bovine lactoferricin (Wang et al. 2007), and recombinant laccase from Trametes
versicolor (Guo et al. 2006). In Mayson et al. (2003), various methanol
concentrations were investigated in mixed glucose/methanol fed-batch cultures of
P. methanolica expressing the human transferrin N-lobe protein. Of note, lignin
peroxidase expressed under the control of the AUG1 promoter which was followed
by either the lignin peroxidase leader peptide of P. chrysosporium or the
S. cerevisiae alpha-factor signal peptide was efﬁciently secreted (Wang et al. 2004).
It is known that the methylotrophic yeasts P. pastoris and P. methanolica share
the same methanol utilization pathway and have two alcohol oxidase genes:
AOX1and AOX2 in P. pastoris (Cereghino et al. 2000) and AUG1 and AUG2 in
P. methanolica (Raymond et al. 1998). Some studies suggested that MutS strains
may produce higher levels of recombinant proteins than wild-type (Mutþ) strains in
certain applications while utilizing substantially less methanol (Cereghino et al.
2000). Therefore, the system analogous to MutS and Mut phenotypes has been
also developed in P. methanolica (Raymond et al. 1998). AUG1 gene disruptions
resulted in a slow methanol utilization phenotype (MutS); in contrast, a disruption
of AUG2 did not markedly affect methanol-dependent growth, whereas the double-
mutant strains were totally deﬁcient in methanol utilization (Mut) (Raymond
et al. 1998). Of note, P. methanolica and P. pastoris have been shown to produce
similar levels of a recombinant protein when transformed with the analogous
expression cassettes (Raymond et al. 1998).
For additional details on P. methanolica as well as C. boidinii expression
systems, please see the review of Gellissen (2000).
11.7.3 Ogataea minuta
Ogataea minuta (Yamada et al. 1994) is another novel methylotrophic yeast species
recently used as a host for production of human antibodies. In yeast glycosylation
studies, the vectors and host strains of this species were constructed, and the strain
producing a Man5GlcNAc2 high mannose-type sugar chain as a prototype of a
humanized sugar chain was obtained by disruption of the OmOCH1 gene and the
introduction of the α-1,2-mannosidase gene (Kuroda et al. 2006).
342
O. Stasyk

Also, some strategies based on partial suppression of O-glycosylation by addi-
tion of speciﬁc inhibitors of this pathway (e.g., rhodanine-3-acetic acid) have been
successfully tested in the O. minuta-producing IgG (Kuroda et al. 2008). Strains
bearing the OCH1 disruption (thus eliminating the alpha-1,6-mannosyltransferase
initiating the synthesis of the hypermannosylated glycan structures in yeast) and
co-overexpressing one of the genes involved in mannosyl phosphorylation of
N-glycans (e.g., MNN4, MNN6, and PNO1) have been constructed in O. minuta
(Akeboshi et al. 2009). The usefulness of protease-deﬁcient strains in the produc-
tion of antibodies in the yeast O. minuta has been demonstrated as well (Kuroda
et al. 2007). Also, production of recombinant beta-hexosaminidase A, a potential
enzyme for replacement therapy for Tay-Sachs and Sandhoff diseases, has been
achieved in O. minuta (Akeboshi et al. 2007). The therapeutic effect in mice of a
recombinant human lysosomal β-hexosaminidase A (HexA) with terminal M6P
residues on their N-glycans produced in the glycoengineered O. minuta strain has
recently been shown (Tsuji et al. 2011). It remains to be seen whether application
spectrum of alternative methylotrophic yeasts expression platforms will be broad-
ened in the future.
11.8
Conclusions and Outlook
For production of recombinant proteins including biopharmaceuticals, food and
feed enzymes, and proteins for structural studies, various yeast expression systems
have been successfully used over the years. While S. cerevisiae is the best geneti-
cally characterized eukaryotic organism out of all, for quite some time, the most
frequently used yeast species for heterologous protein expression is P. pastoris
(Spohner et al. 2015). For P. pastoris and other methylotrophic yeasts, the avail-
ability of commercial expression kits and large strain collections, wide variety of
integrative vectors and auxotrophic or dominant selectable markers that allow
integration into the genomes in a controlled copy number, strictly regulated by
carbon sources inducible and constitutive promoters, and efﬁcient transformation
protocols, combined with the well-elaborated large-scale fermentation techniques,
make these expression platforms very attractive for biotechnological exploitation.
In addition to such common yeast features as ability to perform complex posttrans-
lational modiﬁcations and being neither pyrogenic nor pathogenic, what is relevant
for pharmaceutical proteins, methylotrophic yeasts are also known to secrete
recombinant proteins more efﬁciently than other yeasts. Some methylotrophic
yeasts already possess a generally recognized as safe (GRAS) status for
applications in food industry. Efforts to humanize the glycosylation pathway
similar to that in P. pastoris will continue with other glycoengineered yeast hosts
to further develop them as producers of biopharmaceuticals. The recent revolution-
ary advances in the next-generation DNA sequencing, systems and synthetic
biology, and comprehensive mathematical genome-scale metabolic models
(GEMs) are predicted to greatly intensify the works on new host construction and
11
Methylotrophic Yeasts as Producers of Recombinant Proteins
343

optimization of high cell density fermentation in methylotrophic yeasts yet in the
near future.
References
Ahmad M, Hirz M, Pichler H, Schwab H (2014) Protein expression in Pichia pastoris: recent
achievements and perspectives for heterologous protein production. Appl Microbiol
Biotechnol 98:5301–5317
Akeboshi H, Chiba Y, Kasahara Y, Takashiba M, Takaoka Y, Ohsawa M, Tajima Y, Kawashima I,
Tsuji D, Itoh K, Sakuraba H, Jigami Y (2007) Production of recombinant beta-
hexosaminidase A, a potential enzyme for replacement therapy for Tay-Sachs and Sandhoff
diseases, in the methylotrophic yeast Ogataea minuta. Appl Environ Microbiol 73:4805–4812
Akeboshi H, Kasahara Y, Tsuji D, Itoh K, Sakuraba H, Chiba Y, Jigami Y (2009) Production of
human beta-hexosaminidase A with highly phosphorylated N-glycans by the overexpression of
the Ogataea minuta MNN4 gene. Glycobiology 19:1002–1009
Aw R, Polizzi KM (2013) Can too many copies spoil the broth? Microb Cell Fact 12:128
Bai J, Swartz DJ, Protasevich II, Brouillette CG, Harrell PM, Hildebrandt E, Gasser B,
Mattanovich D, Ward A, Chang G et al (2011) A gene optimization strategy that enhances
production of fully functional P-glycoprotein in Pichia pastoris. PLoS One 6:e22577
Bawa Z, Routledge SJ, Jamshad M, Clare M, Sarkar D, Dickerson I, Ganzlin M, Poyner DR, Bill
RM (2014) Functional recombinant protein is present in the pre-induction phases of Pichia
pastoris cultures when grown in bioreactors, but not shake-ﬂasks. Microb Cell Fact 13:561
Bill RM (2015) Recombinant protein subunit vaccine synthesis in microbes: a role for yeast? J
Pharm Pharmacol 67:319–328
Bredell H, Smith JJ, Prins WA, G€orgens JF, van Zyl WH (2016) Expression of rotavirus VP6
protein: a comparison amongst Escherichia coli, Pichia pastoris and Hansenula polymorpha.
FEMS Yeast Res 16:fow001
B€oer E, Steinborn G, Gellissen G, Kunze G (2007) Production of interleukin-6 in Arxula
adeninivorans, Hansenula polymorpha and Saccharomyces cerevisiae by applying a wide-
range yeast vector (CoMed™) system to simultaneous comparative assessment. FEMS Yeast
Res 7:1181–1187
Byrne B (2015) Pichia pastoris as an expression host for membrane protein structural biology.
Curr Opin Struct Biol 32:9–17
Celik E, Calık P (2012) Production of recombinant proteins by yeast cells. Biotechnol Adv
30:1108–1118
Cereghino JL, Cregg JM (2000) Heterologous protein expression in the methylotrophic yeast
Pichia pastoris. FEMS Microbiol Rev 24:45–66
Cereghino GPL, Cereghino JL, Ilgen C, Cregg JM (2002) Production of recombinant proteins in
fermenter cultures of the yeast Pichia pastoris. Curr Opin Biotechnol 13:329–332
Cheon SA, Kim H, Oh DB, Kwon O, Kang HA (2012) Remodeling of the glycosylation pathway
in themethylotrophic yeast Hansenula polymorpha to produce human hybrid-type N-glycans. J
Microbiol 50:341–348
Choi J, Kim EE, Park YI, Han YS (2002) Expression of the active human and duck hepatitis B
virus polymerases in heterologous system of Pichia methanolica. Antiviral Res 55:279–290
Ciofalo V, Barton N, Kreps J, Coats I, Shanahan D (2006) Safety evaluation of a lipase enzyme
preparation, expressed in Pichia pastoris, intended for use in the degumming of edible
vegetable oil. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol (ISRTP) 45:1–8
Corchero JL, Gasser B, Resina D, Smith W, Parrilli E, Va´zquez F, Abasolo I, Giuliani M, Ja¨ntti J,
Ferrer P, Saloheimo M, Mattanovich D, Schwartz S Jr, Tutino ML, Villaverde A (2013)
Unconventional microbial systems for the cost-efﬁcient production of high-quality protein
therapeutics. Biotechnol Adv 31:140–153
344
O. Stasyk

Cregg JM, Russell KA (1998) Transformation. Methods Mol Biol 103:27–39
Cregg JM, Barringer KJ, Hessler AY, Madden KR (1985) Pichia pastoris as a host system for
transformations. Mol Cell Biol 5:3376–3385
Cregg JM, Tolstorukov I, Kusari A, Sunga J, Madden K, Chappell T (2009) Expression in the yeast
Pichia pastoris. In: Burgess RR, Deutscher MP (eds) Methods in enzymology. Guide to protein
puriﬁcation, 2nd edn, vol 463. Academic, pp 169–89
Daly R, Hearn MT (2005) Expression of heterologous proteins in Pichia pastoris: a useful
experimental tool in protein engineering and production. J Mol Recognit 18:119–138
Darby RA, Cartwright SP, Dilworth MV, Bill RM (2012) Which yeast species shall I choose?
Saccharomyces cerevisiae versus Pichia pastoris. Methods Mol Biol 866:11–23
Demain AL, Vaishnav P (2009) Production of recombinant proteins by microbes and higher
organisms. Biotechnol Adv 27:297–306
Dmytruk OV, Dmytruk KV, Abbas CA, Voronovsky AY, Sibirny AA (2008) Engineering of
xylose reductase and overexpression of xylitol dehydrogenase and xylulokinase improves
xylose alcoholic fermentation in the thermotolerant yeast Hansenula polymorpha. Microb
Cell Fact 7:21
Dragosits M, Frascotti G, Bernard-Granger L, Vazquez F, Giuliani M, Baumann K et al (2011)
Inﬂuence of growth temperature on the production of antibody Fab fragments in different
microbes: a host comparative analysis. Biotechnol Prog 27:38–46
Dunn WA Jr, Cregg JM, Kiel JA, van der Klei IJ, Oku M, Sakai Y, Sibirny AA, Stasyk OV,
Veenhuis M (2005) Pexophagy: the selective autophagy of peroxisomes. Autophagy 1:75–83
Eilert E, Rolf T, Heumaier A, Hollenberg CP, Piontek M, Suckow M (2013) Improved processing
of secretory proteins in Hansenula polymorpha by sequence variation near the processing site
of the alpha mating factor prepro sequence. J Biotechnol 167:94–100
Emmerstorfer A, Wriessnegger T, Hirz M, Pichler H (2014) Overexpression of membrane proteins
from higher eukaryotes in yeasts. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 98:7671–7698
Ergün BG, C¸ alık P (2016) Lignocellulose degrading extremozymes produced by Pichia pastoris:
current status and future prospects. Bioprocess Biosyst Eng 39:1–36
Gasser B, Prielhofer R, Marx H, Maurer M, Nocon J, Steiger M, Puxbaum V, Sauer M,
Mattanovich D (2013) Pichia pastoris: protein production host and model organism for
biomedical research. Future Microbiol 8:191–208
Gellissen G, Piontek M, Dahlems U, Jenzelewski V, Gavagan JE, DiCosimo R (1996) Recombi-
nant Hansenula polymorpha as a biocatalyst: coexpression of the spinach glycolate oxidase
(GO) and the S. cerevisiae catalase T (CTT1) gene. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 46:46–54
Gellissen G (2000) Heterologous protein production in methylotrophic yeasts. Appl Microbiol
Biotechnol 54:741–750
Gellissen G (ed) (2002) Hansenula polymorpha – biology and applications. Wiley-VCH,
Weinheim
Gellissen G, Strasser AWM, Suckow M (2005a) Key and criteria to the selection of an expression
platform. In: Gellissen G (ed) Production of recombinant proteins — novel microbial and
eukaryotic expression systems. Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, pp 1–5
Gellissen G, Kunze G, Gaillardin C, Cregg JM, Berardi E, Veenhuis M, van der Klei I (2005b)
New yeast expression platforms based on methylotrophic Hansenula polymorpha and Pichia
pastoris and on dimorphic Arxula adeninivorans and Yarrowia lipolytica – a comparison.
FEMS Yeast Res 5:1079–1096
Gemmill TR, Trimble RB (1999) Overview of N- and O-linked oligosaccharide structures found in
various yeast species. BBA-Gen Subjects 1426:227–237
Gidijala L, Bovenberg RAL, Klaassen P, van der Klei IJ, Veenhuis M, Kiel JAKW (2008)
Production of functionally active Penicillium chrysogenum isopenicillin N synthase in the
yeast Hansenula polymorpha. BMC Biotechnol 8:29
Guo M, Lu F, Du L, Pu J, Bai D (2006) Optimization of the expression of a laccase gene from
Trametes versicolor in Pichia methanolica. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 71:848–852
11
Methylotrophic Yeasts as Producers of Recombinant Proteins
345

Hamilton SR, Davidson RC, Sethuraman N, Nett JH, Jiang Y, Rios S, Bobrowicz P, Stadheim TA,
Li H, Choi B-K, Hopkins D, Wischnewski H, Roser J, Mitchell T, Strawbridge RR, Hoopes J,
Wildt S, Gerngross TU (2006) Humanization of yeast to produce complex terminally sialylated
glycoproteins. Science 313:1441–1443
Hartner FS, Glieder A (2006) Regulation of methanol utilisation pathway genes in yeasts. Microb
Cell Fact 5:3
He M, Wu D, Wu J, Chen J (2014) Enhanced expression of endoinulinase from Aspergillus niger
by codon optimization in Pichia pastoris and its application in inulooligosaccharide produc-
tion. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 41:105–114
Heo JH, Ananin V, Kang HA, Rhee SK, Kim CH (2008) Feeding strategies for the enhanced
production of recombinant human serum albumin in the fed-batch cultivation of Hansenula
polymorpha. Process Biochem 43:918–924
Hodgkins M, Mead D, Ballance DJ, Goodey A, Sudbery P (1993) Expression of the glucose
oxidase gene from Aspergillus niger in Hansenula polymorpha and its use as a reporter gene to
isolate regulatory mutations. Yeast 9:625–635
Hu H, Gao J, He J, Yu B, Zheng P, Huang Z, Mao X, Yu J, Han G, Chen D (2013) Codon
optimization signiﬁcantly improves the expression level of a keratinase gene in Pichia
pastoris. PLoS One 8(3):e58393
Kang HA, Sohn JH, Choi ES, Chung BH, Yu MH, Rhee SK (1998) Glycosylation of human alpha
1-antitrypsin in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and methylotrophic yeasts. Yeast 14:371–381
Kang HA, Kang W, Hong WK, Kim MW, Kim JY, Sohn JH, Choi ES, Choe KB, Rhee SK (2001)
Development of expression systems for the production of recombinant human serum albumin
using the MOX promoter in Hansenula polymorpha DL-1. Biotechnol Bioeng 76:175–185
Kang HA, Gellissen G (2004) Hansenula polymorpha. In: Gellissen G (ed) Production of recom-
binant proteins, novel microbial and eukaryotic expression systems, 1st edn. Wiley-VCH,
Weinheim, pp 111–142
Kawaguchi K, Yurimoto H, Sakai Y (2014) Expression of a codon-optimized Aspergillus niger
pectin methylesterase gene in the methylotrophic yeast Candida boidinii. Biosci Biotechnol
Biochem 78:718–721
Kim MW, Rhee SK, Kim JY, Shimma Y, Chiba Y, Jigami Y, Kang HA (2004) Characterization of
N-linked oligosaccharides assembled on secretory recombinant glucose oxidase and cell wall
mannoproteins from the methylotrophic yeast Hansenula polymorpha. Glycobiology
14:243–251
Kim H, Yoo SJ, Kang HA (2015) Yeast synthetic biology for the production of recombinant
therapeutic proteins. FEMS Yeast Res 15:1–16
Klabunde J, Kleebank S, Piontek M, Hollenberg CP, Hellwig S, Degelmann A (2007) Increase of
calnexin gene dosage boosts the secretion of heterologous proteins by Hansenula polymorpha.
FEMS Yeast Res 7:1168–1180
Komeda T, Tazumi K, Shimada H, Kano K, Hayashi T, Saito H, Tsumura H, Kato N, Sakai Y,
Kondo K (2002a) Production of active bovine cathepsin C (dipeptidyl aminopeptidase I) in the
methylotrophic yeast Candida boidinii. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 59:252–258
Komeda T, Sakai Y, Kato N, Kondo K (2002b) Construction of protease-deﬁcient Candida
boidinii strains useful for recombinant protein production: cloning and disruption of proteinase
A gene (PEP4) and proteinase B gene (PRBI). Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 66:628–631
Krasovska OS, Stasyk OV, Nahorny VO, Stasyk OV, Granovski N, Kordium VA, Vozianov OF,
Sibirny AA (2007) Glucose-induced production of recombinant proteins in Hansenula
polymorpha mutants deﬁcient in catabolite repression. Biotechnol Bioeng 97:858–870
Krasovska OS, Stasyk OV, Sibirny AA (2013) Stable overproducer of hepatitis B surface antigen
in the methylotrophic yeast Hansenula polymorpha due to multiple integration of heterologous
auxotrophic selective markers and defect in peroxisome biogenesis. Appl Microbiol
Biotechnol 97:9969–9979
346
O. Stasyk

Küberl A, Schneider J, Thallinger GG, Anderl I, Wibberg D, Hajek T, Jaenicke S, Brinkrolf K,
Goesmann A, Szczepanowski R, Pühler A, Schwab H, Glieder A, Pichler H (2011) High-
quality genome sequence of Pichia pastoris CBS7435. J Biotechnol 154:312
Kuroda K, Kobayashi K, Tsumura H, Komeda T, Chiba Y, Jigami Y (2006) Production of
Man5GlcNAc2-type sugar chain by the methylotrophic yeast Ogataea minuta. FEMS Yeast
Res 6:1052–1062
Kuroda K, Kitagawa Y, Kobayashi K, Tsumura H, Komeda T, Mori E, Motoki K, Kataoka S,
Chiba Y, Jigami Y (2007) Antibody expression in protease-deﬁcient strains of the
methylotrophic yeast Ogataea minuta. FEMS Yeast Res 7:1307–1316
Kuroda K, Kobayashi K, Kitagawa Y, Nakagawa T, Tsumura H, Komeda T, Shinmi D, Mori E,
Motoki K, Fuju K, Sakai T, Nonaka K, Suzuki T, Ichikawa K, Chiba Y, Jigami Y (2008)
Efﬁcient antibody production upon suppression of O mannosylation in the yeast Ogataea
minuta. Appl Environ Microbiol 74:446–453
Kurtzman
CP
(2009)
Biotechnological
strains
of
Komagataella
(Pichia)
pastoris
are
Komagataella phafﬁi as determined from multigene sequence analysis. J Ind Microbiol
Biotechnol 36:1435–1438
Kurtzman CP (2011) A new methanol assimilating yeast, Ogataea parapolymorpha, the asco-
sporic state of Candida parapolymorpha. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 100:455–462
Le~ao AN, Kiel JA (2003) Peroxisome homeostasis in Hansenula polymorpha. FEMS Yeast Res
4:131–139
Lin Cereghino GP, Lin Cereghino J, Sunga AJ, Johnson MA, Lim M, Gleeson MA, Cregg JM
(2001) New selectable marker/auxotrophic host strain combinations for molecular genetic
manipulation of Pichia pastoris. Gene 263:159–169
Lin-Cereghino GP, Stark CM, Kim D, Chang J, Shaheen N, Poerwanto H, Agari K, Moua P, Low
LK, Tran N, Huang AD, Nattestad M, Oshiro KT, Chang JW, Chavan A, Tsai JW,
Lin-Cereghino J (2013) The effect of alpha-mating factor secretion signal mutations on
recombinant protein expression in Pichia pastoris. Gene 519:311–317
Liu C, Yang X, Yao Y, Huang W, Sun W, Ma Y (2014) Diverse expression levels of two codon-
optimized genes that encode human papilloma virus type 16 major protein L1 in Hansenula
polymorpha. Biotechnol Lett 36:937–945
Liu C, Yao Y, Yang X, Bai H, Huang W, Xia Y, Ma Y (2015) Production of recombinant human
papillomavirus type 52 L1 protein in Hansenula polymorpha formed virus-like particles. J
Microbiol Biotechnol 25:936–940
Looser V, Bruhlmann B, Bumbak F, Stenger C, Costa M, Camattari A, Fotiadis D, Kovar K (2015)
Cultivation strategies to enhance productivity of Pichia pastoris: a review. Biotechnol Adv
33:1177–1193
Mack M, Wannemacher M, Hobl B, Pietschmann P, Hock B (2009) Comparison of two expression
platforms in respect to protein yield and quality: Pichia pastoris versus Pichia angusta. Protein
Expr Purif 66:165–171
Mayer AF, Hellmuth K, Schlieker H, Lopez-Ulibarri R, Oertel S, Dahlems U et al (1999) An
expression system matures: a highly efﬁcient and cost-effective process for phytase production
by recombinant strains of Hansenula polymorpha. Biotechnol Bioeng 63:373–381
Mattanovich D, Gasser B, Hohenblum H, Sauer M (2004) Stress in recombinant protein producing
yeasts. J Biotechnol 113:121–135
Mattanovich D, Branduardi P, Dato L, Gasser B, Sauer M, Porro D (2012) Recombinant protein
production in yeasts. Methods Mol Biol 824:329–358
Mayson BE, Kilburn DG, Zamost BL, Raymond CK, Lesnicki GJ (2003) Effects of methanol
concentration on expression levels of recombinant protein in fed-batch cultures of Pichia
methanolica. Biotechnol Bioeng 81:291–298
Meehl MA, Stadheim TA (2014) Biopharmaceutical discovery and production in yeast. Curr Opin
Biotechnol 30:120–127
Mellitzer A, Weis R, Glieder A, Flicker K (2012) Expression of lignocellulolytic enzymes in
Pichia pastoris. Microb Cell Fact 11:61
11
Methylotrophic Yeasts as Producers of Recombinant Proteins
347

Morales L, Dujon B (2012) Evolutionary role of interspecies hybridization and genetic exchanges
in yeasts. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 76:721–739
Morales L, Noel B, Porcel B, Marcet-Houben M, Hullo MF, Sacerdot C, Tekaia F, Leh-Louis V,
Despons L, Khanna V, Aury JM, Barbe V, Couloux A, Labadie K, Pelletier E, Souciet JL,
Boekhout T, Gabaldon T, Wincker P, Dujon B (2013) Complete DNA sequence of Kuraishia
capsulata illustrates novel genomic features among budding yeasts (Saccharomycotina).
Genome Biol Evol 5:2524–2539
Moussa M, Ibrahim M, El Ghazaly M, Rohde J, Gnoth S, Anton A, Kensy F, Mueller F (2012)
Expression of recombinant staphylokinase in the methylotrophic yeast Hansenula polymorpha.
BMC Biotechnol 12:96
Müller IIF, Tieke A, Waschk D, Mühle C, Müller FI, Seigelchifer M et al (2002) Production of
IFNα-2a in Hansenula polymorpha. Process Biochem 38:15–25
Nocon J, Steiger MG, Pfeffer M, Sohn SB, Kim TY, Maurer M, Rußmayer H, Pﬂügl S, Ask M,
Haberhauer-Troyer C, Ortmayr K, Hann S, Koellensperger G, Gasser B, Lee SY, Mattanovich
D (2014) Model based engineering of Pichia pastoris central metabolism enhances recombi-
nant protein production. Metab Eng 24:129–138
Oh DB, Park JS, Kim MW, Cheon SA, Kim EJ, Moon HY et al (2008) Glycoengineering of the
methylotrophic yeast Hansenula polymorpha for the production of glycoproteins with
trimannosyl core N-glycan by blocking core oligosaccharide assembly. Biotechnol J 3
(5):659–668
Petranovic D, Tyo K, Vemuri G, Nielsen J (2010) Prospects of yeast systems biology for human
health: integrating lipid, protein and energy metabolism. FEMS Yeast Res 10:1046–1059
Petre J, Rutgers T, Hauser P (1992) Properties of a recombinant yeast-derived hepatitis B surface
antigen containing S, preS2 and preS1 antigenic domains. Arch Virol Suppl 4:137–141
Potvin G, Ahmad A, Zhang Z (2012) Bioprocess engineering aspects of heterologous protein
production in Pichia pastoris: a review. Biochem Eng J 64:91–105
Prielhofer R, Maurer M, Klein J, Wenger J, Kiziak C, Gasser B, Mattanovich D (2013) Induction
without methanol: novel regulated promoters enable high-level expression in Pichia pastoris.
Microb Cell Fact 12:5
Puxbaum V, Mattanovich D, Gasser B (2015) Quo vadis? The challenges of recombinant protein
folding and secretion in Pichia pastoris. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 99:2925–2938
Qian W, Song H, Liu Y, Zhang C, Niu Z, Wang H, Qiu B (2009) Improved gene disruption method
and Cre-loxP mutant system for multiple gene disruptions in Hansenula polymorpha. J
Microbiol Methods 79:253–259
Ravin NV, Eldarov MA, Kadnikov VV, Beletsky AV, Schneider J, Mardanova ES, Smekalova
EM, Zvereva MI, Dontsova OA, Mardanov AV, Skryabin KG (2013) Genome sequence and
analysis of methylotrophic yeast Hansenula polymorpha DL1. BMC Genomics 14:837
Raymond CK, Bukowski T, Holderman SD, Ching AFT, Vanaja E, Stamm MR (1998) Develop-
ment of the methylotrophic yeast, Pichia methanolica, for the expression of the 65-kilodalton
isoform of human glutamate decarboxylase. Yeast 14:11–23
Resina D, Cos O, Ferrer P, Valero F (2005) Developing high cell density fed-batch cultivation
strategies for heterologous protein production in Pichia pastoris using the nitrogen source-
regulated FLD1 promoter. Biotechnol Bioeng 91:760–767
Routledge SJ, Mikaliunaite L, Patel A, Clare M, Cartwright SP, Bawa Z, Wilks MD, Low F,
Hardy D, Rothnie AJ, Bill RM (2016) The synthesis of recombinant membrane proteins in
yeast for structural studies. Methods 95:26–37
Sakai Y, Rogi T, Takeuchi R, Kato N, Tani Y (1995) Expression of Saccharomyces adenylate
kinase gene in Candida boidinii under the regulation of its alcohol oxidase promoter. Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 42:860–864
Sakai Y, Akiyama M, Kondoh H, Shibano Y, Kato N (1996) High-level secretion of fungal
glucoamylase using the Candida boidinii gene expression system. Biochim Biophys Acta
1308:81–87
348
O. Stasyk

Sakai Y, Yoshida H, Yurimoto H, Yoshida N, Fukuya H, Takabe K, Kato N (1999) Production of
fungal fructosyl amino acid oxidase useful for diabetic diagnosis in the peroxisome of Candida
boidinii. FEBS Lett 459:233–237
Seo HS, Park JS, Han KY, Bae KD, Ahn SJ, Kang HA, Lee J (2008) Analysis and characterization
of hepatitis B vaccine particles synthesized from Hansenula polymorpha. Vaccine
26:4138–4144
Shekhar C (2008) Pichia power: India’s biotech industry puts unconventional yeast to work. Chem
Biol 15:201–202
Spadiut O, Capone S, Krainer F, Glieder A, Herwig C (2014) Microbials for the production of
monoclonal antibodies and antibody fragments. Trends Biotechnol 32:54–60
Spohner SC, Müller H, Quitmann H, Czermak P (2015) Expression of enzymes for the usage in
food and feed industry with Pichia pastoris. J Biotechnol 202:118–134
Stasyk OV, Stasyk OG, Komduur J, Veenhuis M, Cregg JM, Sibirny AA (2004) A hexose
transporter homologue controls glucose repression in the methylotrophic yeast Hansenula
polymorpha. J Biol Chem 279:8116–8125
Steinborn G, Boer E, Scholz A, Tag K, Kunze G, Gellissen G (2006) Application of a wide-range
yeast vector (Comed (TM)) system to recombinant protein production in dimorphic Arxula
adeninivorans, methylotrophic Hansenula polymorpha and other yeasts. Microb Cell Fact 5:33
Stockmann C, Scheidle M, Klee D, Dittrich B, Merckelbach A, Hehmann G, Melmer G, Buchs J,
Kang HA, Gellissen G (2009) Process development in Hansenula polymorpha and Arxula
adeninivorans, a re-assessment. Microb Cell Fact 8:22–31
Sturmberger L, Chappell T, Geier M, Krainer F, Day KJ, Vide U, Trstenjak S, Schiefer A,
Richardson T, Soriaga L, Darnhofer B, Birner-Gruenberger R, Glick BS, Tolstorukov I,
Cregg J, Madden K, Glieder A (2016) Reﬁned Pichia pastoris reference genome sequence. J
Biotechnol 235:121–131
Sudbery PE, Gleeson MA, Veale RA, Ledeboer AM, Zoetmulder MC (1988) Hansenula
polymorpha as a novel yeast system for the expression of heterologous genes. Biochem Soc
Trans 16:1081–1083
Thompson CA (2010) FDA approves kallikrein inhibitor to treat hereditary angioedema. Am J
Health-Syst Pharm 67:93
Toma`s-Gamisans M, Ferrer P, Albiol J (2016) Integration and validation of the genome-scale
metabolic models of Pichia pastoris: a comprehensive update of protein glycosylation
pathways, lipid and energy metabolism. PLoS One 11(1):e0148031
Tsuji D, Akeboshi H, Matsuoka K, Yasuoka H, Miyasaki E, Kasahara Y, Kawashima I, Chiba Y,
Jigami Y, Taki T, Sakuraba H, Itoh K (2011) Highly phosphomannosylated enzyme replace-
ment therapy for GM2 gangliosidosis. Ann Neurol 69:691–701
Vogl T, Glieder A (2013) Regulation of Pichia pastoris promoters and its consequences for protein
production. N Biotechnol 30:385–404
Voronovsky AY, Ryabova OB, Verba OV, Ishchuk OP, Dmytruk KV, Sibirny AA (2005)
Expression of xylA genes encoding xylose isomerases from Escherichia coli and Streptomyces
coelicolor in the methylotrophic yeast Hansenula polymorpha. FEMS Yeast Res 5:1055–1062
Voronovsky AY, Rohulya OV, Abbas CA, Sibirny AA (2009) Development of strains of the
thermotolerant yeast Hansenula polymorpha capable of alcoholic fermentation of starch and
xylan. Metab Eng 11:234–242
Wang H, Lu F, Sun Y, Du L (2004) Heterologous expression of lignin peroxidase of
Phanerochaete chrysosporium in Pichia methanolica. Biotechnol Lett 26:1569–1573
Wang H, Zhao X, Lu F (2007) Heterologous expression of bovine lactoferricin in Pichia
methanolica. Biochemistry (Mosc) 72:640–643
Waterham HR, Digan ME, Koutz PJ, Lair SV, Cregg JM (1997) Isolation of the Pichia pastoris
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene and regulation and use of its promoter. Gene
186:37–44
Yamada Y, Maeda K, Mikata K (1994) The phylogenetic relationships of the hat-shaped asco-
spore-forming, nitrate-assimilating Pichia species, formerly classiﬁed in the genus Hansenula
11
Methylotrophic Yeasts as Producers of Recombinant Proteins
349

Sydow et Sydow, based on the partial sequences of 18S and 26Sribosomal RNAs
(Saccharomycetaceae): the proposals of three new genera, Ogataea, Kuraishia, and
Nakazawaea. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 58:1245–1257
Yamada Y, Matsuda M, Maeda K, Mikata K (1995) The phylogenetic relationships of methanol-
assimilating yeasts based on the partial sequences of 18S and 26S ribosomal RNAs: the
proposal of Komagataella gen. nov. (Saccharomycetaceae). Biosci Biotechnol Biochem
59:439–444
Yang S, Kuang Y, Li H, Liu Y, Hui X, Li P, Jiang Z, Zhou Y, Wang Y, Xu A et al (2013) Enhanced
production of recombinant secretory proteins in Pichia pastoris by optimizing Kex2 P10 site.
PLoS One 8:e75347
Yu P, Yan Y, Gu Q, Wang X (2013) Codon optimisation improves the expression of Trichoderma
viride sp. endochitinase in Pichia pastoris. Sci Rep 3:3043
Yu P, Zhu Q, Chen K, Lv X (2015) Improving the secretory production of the heterologous protein
in Pichia pastoris by focusing on protein folding. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 175:535–548
Yurimoto H, Yamane M, Kikuchi Y, Matsui H, Kato N, Sakai Y (2004) The pro-peptide of
Streptomyces mobaraensis transglutaminase functions in cis and in trans to mediate efﬁcient
secretion of active enzyme from methylotrophic yeasts. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem
68:2058–2069
Yurimoto H, Sakai Y (2009) Methanol-inducible gene expression and heterologous protein
production in the methylotrophic yeast Candida boidinii. Biotechnol Appl Biochem 53:85–92
Yurugi-Kobayashi T, Asada H, Shiroishi M, Shimamura T, Funamoto S, Katsuta N, Ito K,
Sugawara T, Tokuda N, Tsujimoto H, Murata T, Nomura N, Haga K, Haga T, Iwata S,
Kobayashi T (2009) Comparison of functional non-glycosylated GPCRs expression in Pichia
pastoris. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 380:271–276
Zhang W, Inan M, Meagher MM (2000) Fermentation strategies for recombinant protein expres-
sion in the methylotrophic yeast Pichia pastoris. Biotechnol Bioprocess Eng 5:275–287
Zhao W, Wang J, Deng R, Wang X (2008) Scale-up fermentation of recombinant Candida rugosa
lipase expressed in Pichia pastoris using the GAP promoter. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol
35:189–195
350
O. Stasyk

Biosensors Based on Yeast/Fungal Cells
12
Alexandre Chamas, Ha Thi Minh Pham, Kim Baronian,
and Gotthard Kunze
Abstract
Yeast cells can be utilized as whole-cell biosensors for the detection of many
target analytes. This is mainly because the latest molecular biology techniques
allowed modiﬁcation of the yeast genome to give the cells useful metabolic
properties. The production of correctly folded recombinant proteins, and more
particularly receptors, in yeast is nowadays very often successful, and the
implementation of diverse reporting strategies is documented. A number of
yeast whole-cell biosensors are now being used in many laboratories, with
some of them available commercially. One of the major targets of these
biosensors is the endocrine disruptors, a class of organic molecules which can
disturb vertebrate endocrine system and therefore presents a potential threat to
the environment. Recent research has focused on building new biosensors using
other receptors such as the G protein-coupled receptors and the thyroid receptor.
In this chapter, we will present a selection of newly developed biosensors and the
different reporting strategies used to transduce the binding event into a
measureable signal.
Contents
12.1
Introduction ..............................................................................
352
12.2
Utilization of Receptors .................................................................
353
12.2.1
Steroid Receptors ..............................................................
354
12.2.2
Other Nuclear Receptors .......................................................
356
A. Chamas • H.T.M. Pham • G. Kunze (*)
Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research (IPK), Corrensstr. 3, 06466
Gatersleben, Germany
e-mail: kunzeg@ipk-gatersleben.de
K. Baronian
School of Biological Sciences, University Canterbury, Private Bag, 4800 Christchurch,
New Zealand
# Springer International Publishing AG 2017
A.A. Sibirny (ed.), Biotechnology of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-58829-2_12
351

12.2.3
GPCR ...........................................................................
357
12.3
Transduction of Biological Signal: Reporter Proteins ..................................
357
12.3.1
Utilization of Enzymes as Reporter Proteins ..................................
358
12.3.2
Direct Fluorescence Measurement ............................................
360
12.4
Applications of EDCs Targeting Yeast Biosensors ....................................
361
12.4.1
Sensitivity of the Biosensors ...................................................
361
12.4.2
Protocols ........................................................................
364
12.4.3
Applications with Real Samples ...............................................
366
12.5
Emerging Biosensors Strategies .........................................................
367
12.6
Conclusions ..............................................................................
368
References .......................................................................................
368
12.1
Introduction
Measuring concentrations of molecule from the simplest gas to complicated organic
molecules has been the goal of a number studies. The information they give will
have application in diverse areas such as the environment, food production, and
medical science. By analyzing the composition of rivers, the atmosphere, foods, or
body ﬂuids, for example, and by knowing the effective of threshold concentrations
of molecules, this research has allowed the discovery of several compounds with
negative impact on the ecosystem or on animal and human health. These results
were in some cases used by governments to establish recommendations relative to
the production, utilization, storage, or disposal of these compounds. Detection of
natural or artiﬁcial compounds impacting on biological processes increasingly
involves the use of biosensors. A biosensor has the particularity to use a biological
partner, which can be strictly identical or derived from a natural occurring molecule
produced by a living organism or an entire organism and is able to recognize a
target analyte. The second part of a biosensor is the transducer, which should
transform this biological interaction into physically detectable information. This
information can be transported in several states (e.g., light, current, heat) to a
detector who will transform, amplify, and process this information to give a
numerical value.
In this chapter, only the latest advances in the development of transcription-
related whole-cell yeast biosensors will be presented. Since the 1980s, other
biosensors relying on non-transcriptional events have been presented, biosensors
allowing the detection of sugars, alcohols, or lactate, for example (Adeniran et al.
2015; Riedel et al. 2006). These take advantage of yeast metabolic possibilities to
transform these hardly detectable molecules into simple compounds. By monitoring
parameters of the yeast culture such as the amount of dissolved oxygen (BOD) or
the milieu pH, these biosensors can indirectly assess the concentration of the target
analytes. However, few new biosensors relying on these strategies have been
presented in the last decade, probably because analytical detection methods offer
now much better sensitivity and reliability in the results. On the contrary, during the
same period, publications concerning transcription-based yeast-cell biosensors
increased dramatically, and some of these biosensors have been commercialized.
352
A. Chamas et al.

Their success is dependent on the fact that biosensors will assess the biological
activity of compounds, a characteristic which cannot be obtained by analytical
detection methods.
In the ﬁeld of cell-based biosensors, yeast biosensors also present decisive
advantages
in
comparison
to
bacteria-based
biosensors
or
mammal
cell
suspensions. Firstly, it is because most of the target compounds of these biosensors
are interacting with eukaryote organisms by binding to speciﬁc receptors or
disturbing a speciﬁc signal pathway. Therefore yeast, as eukaryotic organisms,
are more likely to mimic what will happen in higher eukaryotes than bacteria.
Additionally, the latest advances in molecular biology tools allow a precise and
easy modiﬁcation of the yeast genome to either modulate the yeast own metabolism
or insert new coding sequences for recombinant proteins, thus reducing the histori-
cal advantage of bacteria-based biosensors in terms of genetic modiﬁcation easi-
ness. Advanced genome editing techniques are nowadays a routine and allow
greater control for knockouts or targeted gene integration. In comparison to mam-
malian cell culture, yeast-based biosensors present mostly practical advantages
such as the fast and cheap propagation of the cells and the possibility to lyophilize
cells for storage or shipment. However, there are applications in pathology where
yeast-based biosensors cannot replicate the responses of mammalian cell cultures
because of the large difference between the metabolism of lower and higher
eukaryotes.
12.2
Utilization of Receptors
A key element for the development of a whole-cell yeast biosensor is the intracel-
lular production of a protein able to bind the target analyte. Even though new in
silico techniques strive to make theoretically possible the design of an artiﬁcial
binding protein for every possible ligand, an easier way is to take advantage of the
millions of years of vertebrate’s evolution and the existence of speciﬁc binding
proteins called receptors. These recombinant proteins can generally be produced in
yeast, a topic which is discussed in other chapters of this book. Because the analyte
is often presumed to have an impact on human health, utilization of recombinant
human receptor appears as the natural choice although other vertebrate receptors
are preferred in some biosensors. Among the receptors, a certain class—the nuclear
receptors—is of particular interest because of its simple signaling pathway, which
does not necessitate extra partner proteins to transform the binding into a transcrip-
tional response. These nuclear receptors contain one domain responsible for ligand
binding and act as a transcription factor by directly binding to speciﬁc DNA domain
in the nucleus. Another large class of receptors, which is utilized for yeast-based
biosensors, is the membrane-bound receptors, known as the G protein-coupled
receptors. Because these receptors cannot directly translocate into the nucleus in
order to induce the transcription of a reporter protein, the presence of a speciﬁc
mobile G protein in the cell or of speciﬁc kinases is mandatory. While in some
cases, the existing endogenous yeast G protein or kinases can be used for signal
12
Biosensors Based on Yeast/Fungal Cells
353

transduction, the majority of these biosensors require the additional production of
recombinant signaling proteins.
12.2.1 Steroid Receptors
The detection of molecules binding to steroid hormones receptors gained increased
importance since the discovery that molecules called endocrine disruptors (EDCs)
can interfere with vertebrate endocrine system and can lead to environmental or
health hazards (Fent 2015; Kabir et al. 2015). Because of animal welfare and cost
considerations in the determination of the potential endocrine disrupting activity of
a molecule, pharmaceutical and cosmetic industries are attempting to replace
classical animal testing. Many companies are now using yeast-cell biosensors to
determine at a very early stage of development if a new compound is worth further
development or if its endocrine disrupting properties make it unsuitable for further
development. Initially receptor-based biosensors focused on the detection of
estrogens, but new biosensors for the detection of androgens (Bhattacharjee and
Khurana 2014; Gerlach et al. 2014), progesterone (Viswanath et al. 2008; Chamas
et al. 2015), glucocorticoids (Bovee et al. 2011; Pham et al. 2016), and
mineralocorticoids (Miller et al. 2010) were recently presented. Because a large
number of research articles describing continuous optimization of the biosensors
have been published in the last years, this chapter will only focus on the latest
version of selected biosensors, and thus fundamental work, which paved the way
for the development of the actual biosensors, will not be discussed. For a more
complete overview of the steroid hormone yeast biosensors history, readers are
invited to consider the following reference (Tag et al. 2006).
Two organisms, S. cerevisiae and A. adeninivorans have been mainly used for
the development of steroid hormone yeast biosensors. However, a hormone
receptor-based biosensor dedicated to the detection of endocrine disruptors has
been recently engineered in Y. lipolytica (Cho et al. 2010). In all organisms, an
integration of a human steroid receptor under the control of a constitutive promoter
is the ﬁrst step of the biosensor design. If a target ligand is present in the cultivation
medium, it can enter the cell by passive diffusion through the membrane and bind to
the receptor. This binding event induces a conformational change that allows the
homodimerization of the receptor in the cytoplasm. The nuclear localization signal
of the receptor will then allow translocation of the receptor homodimer into the
nucleus to bind to its DNA response element, thus initiating transcription factor
activity. This mechanism of hormone recognition is presented schematically in
Fig. 12.1.
In A. adeninivorans, a modiﬁed version of promoter upstream of the reporter
protein gene was constructed to introduce an inducible mechanism of the reporter
gene. This consists of a modiﬁed glucoamylase promoter (GAA) containing two
15 bp sequences acting as the hormone response element (HRE) at position -107 of
the promoter. HRE is a conserved DNA-binding site for the dimerized hormone
receptor and only when this dimerized receptor is bound to the HRE can the
354
A. Chamas et al.

expression of the downstream gene occur. In the case of the estrogen-related assays,
HRE was replaced by the slightly different estrogen response element (ERE)
sequence as it was shown to have higher afﬁnity to the estrogen receptor than
HRE (Hahn et al. 2006). In S. cerevisiae biosensors, PGK, GPD, or ADH1
promoters containing HRE or ERE sequences have been described (Leskinen
et al. 2005; Sanseverino et al. 2005; Routledge and Sumpter 1996), while ALK1,
ICL1, RPS7, or TEF1 promoters have been used in Y. lipolytica (Cho et al. 2010).
The reporter protein utilized will then lead to different variations of the assays with
different sensitivity or practical needs, these aspects will be considered in the
section “reporter proteins” of this chapter.
Besides the mechanism described above, additional research to enhance the
performance of the biosensors has been described recently, notably the expression
of accessory proteins and modiﬁcation of the native hormone receptor. For exam-
ple, the co-expression of the steroid receptor cofactor I (SRC1) has been
implemented in the S. cerevisiae YES assay in order to increase the sensitivity of
the biosensor (Chu et al. 2009). In human, SRC1 is known to bind to a number of
TEF1
pro.
hormone receptor
gene
PHO5
ter.
HR
HR
reporter protein
gene
GAA[HRE]
pro.
PHO5
ter.
HR
HR
hormone
1
4
3
2
nucleus
Fig. 12.1 Schematic representation of a modiﬁed yeast cell in steroid receptor-based biosensor.
In the nucleus, a human hormone receptor gene is constitutively expressed, and the protein can be
found in cytoplasm (1). When a binding hormone is present in the extracellular medium, it can
cross yeast membrane and bind to the receptor (2). After binding-induced receptor dimerization,
this dimer can retranslocate in the nucleus and bind to the hormone response element (HRE) (3),
thus activating a promoter and allowing expression of the reporter protein gene (4). Modiﬁed after
Chamas et al. (2017)
12
Biosensors Based on Yeast/Fungal Cells
355

nuclear hormone receptors in the nucleus and helps stimulate transcriptional activ-
ity. Successful use of the β-isoform of the estrogen receptor (Lee et al. 2007) is also
reported.
Another interesting research is the one performed by Rajasa¨rkka¨ et al. in 2013 to
develop a bisphenol A biosensor (Rajasa¨rkka¨ et al. 2013). Bisphenol A is an
artiﬁcial organic compound which possesses endocrine disrupting properties and
which is extensively used in industry although it has been banned in products such
as baby bottles in several countries. But despite its EDC activity, the yeast estrogen
biosensor cannot detect low concentrations of bisphenol A, probably because the
human estrogen receptor has a low afﬁnity for this compound. Because no speciﬁc
receptor for this pollutant has been found in nature, the bisphenol A biosensor used
a human estrogen receptor with a sequence modiﬁed by targeted mutations to
decrease its afﬁnity toward most estrogens and to increase the afﬁnity toward
bisphenol A.
12.2.2 Other Nuclear Receptors
Newly developed yeast biosensors are also utilizing other nuclear receptors, which
are not steroid receptors such as the human aryl hydrocarbon receptor (hAhR), the
retinoid X receptor (RXR) and the thyroid receptor (TR). AhR-based biosensors
were designed to detect dioxin-like compounds, which can accumulate in the
environment, and some of their members are known to cause health hazards in
humans. As for the development of steroid receptor-based yeast biosensors, most of
the research in the ﬁeld of AhR yeast biosensors were conducted in S. cerevisiae
(Miller 1999; Kawanishi et al. 2013) although A. adeninivorans was also used to
build a similar biosensor (Pham et al. 2015). The strategy to detect dioxin-like
compounds is similar to the strategy used to detect steroid hormones albeit with
some modiﬁcations. To detect dioxin-like compounds, two genes have to be
integrated into the yeast genome to express constitutively hAhR and the human
aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (hARNT). Only the hAhR protein
can bind to dioxin-like compounds, but it has to form a heterodimer with hARNT in
order to translocate into the nucleus. Additionally in A. adeninivorans, the cyp1A1-
derived core sequence replaced the HRE sequence in the GAA promoter which
allowed the interaction of the promoter and the hAhR-hARNT heterodimer.
The construction of a yeast biosensor using the binding properties of RXR is
described in S. cerevisiae by Kabiersch et al. (2013). RXR can bind organotin
compounds, a large family of molecules shown to have a negative impact on
gastropods reproductive organs and on mammal endocrine system. They proposed
a hybrid receptor consisting in the ligand-binding domain of the RXR and the
DNA-binding domain of the estrogen receptor α to function as a transcription
factor.
Recently, yeast biosensors dedicated to the detection of compounds interfering
with the thyroid receptor (TR) were also presented (Li et al. 2008; Shiizaki et al.
2010). TR acts as a transcriptional factor and can be found as a homodimer or a
356
A. Chamas et al.

heterodimer together with RXR. Several molecules present in our environment such
as PCBs, pesticides, or dioxin are believed to bind to the thyroid receptor and have a
negative impact on an organisms’ development.
12.2.3 GPCR
In vertebrates, the largest family of receptors is the family of G protein-coupled
receptors (GPCR). These membrane-bound receptors speciﬁcally bind a diverse
group of molecules from neurotransmitters to hormones and large proteins but,
contrary to nuclear receptors, they cannot directly act as transcription factors. The
binding event induces a conformational change of the receptor, which will release a
multimeric protein known as protein G which will then be able to activate down-
stream effectors. Two GPCR pathways are known in yeast, but their target ligands
are often not of interest for biosensing applications. Additionally, knockout of these
two endogenous GPCRs is often required to avoid interference and improve
biosensor performance. This leads to the fact that heterologous GPCR from verte-
brate origin have to be integrated in yeast genome in order to detect the molecule of
interest. In some cases, these heterologous receptors can interact with the endoge-
nous yeast mating pheromone pathway (Bardwell 2005). In other cases, a heterolo-
gous expression of the mammalian protein G is mandatory, thus adding more
complexity to the system.
Despite the large number of GPCRs and the potentially much larger number of
target ligands than steroid nuclear receptors, only few yeast biosensors have been
developed. Much preliminary work has been performed in order to develop such
biosensors, mostly in S. cerevisiae (Ault and Broach 2006; Dong et al. 2010). The
presence of a GPCR pathway in other yeast species remains obscure but could be a
path to the development of these biosensors.
To explain the relative absence of GPCR-based yeast biosensors compared to
steroid receptor-based biosensors, one reason may be that target ligands have not
been identiﬁed as hazardous to human health and the environment the way that
EDCs have been.
12.3
Transduction of Biological Signal: Reporter Proteins
The second fundamental part of a biosensor is the part responsible for the transfor-
mation of a biological interaction, the binding of a ligand to its receptor, into a
measurable signal. For this, reporter proteins have to be integrated into yeast.
Two main types of reporter protein are used in yeast biosensors: enzymes and
ﬂuorescent proteins. Enzymes were the ﬁrst to be integrated and are still part of a
large number of yeast biosensors. However, their main drawback is that these
proteins have to be transported in the extracellular milieu in order to perform
enzymatic reactions. This implies either the breakdown of the cells or the imple-
mentation of an extracellular signal sequence in the reporter gene coding sequence.
12
Biosensors Based on Yeast/Fungal Cells
357

Fluorescent proteins as reporters are relatively new and allow direct observation
of the reporter production without extracellular localization or cell rupture.
12.3.1 Utilization of Enzymes as Reporter Proteins
ß-Galactosidase, phytase, and tannase are the most common reporter enzymes used
in yeast biosensors. In S. cerevisiae, the use of lacZ and luc reporter genes
responsible for the production of β-galactosidase and the ﬁreﬂy luciferase, respec-
tively, is often reported (Leskinen et al. 2005; Bovee et al. 2004; Balsiger et al.
2010). In A. adeninivorans, the Klebsiella-derived phytase K gene (phyK) and the
A. adeninivorans-derived tannase gene (ATAN1) were used (Kaiser et al. 2010;
Gerlach et al. 2014). Both phyK and ATAN1 genes produce an extracellular located
enzyme with can be then used for enzymatic reaction. Transformation of the
substrate into reaction product can be then followed either by colorimetry,
amperometry, or ﬂuorescence.
It is notable that ATAN1 was solely used in a biosensor for estrogen detection
(Kaiser
et al. 2010), while phyK was then successfully used in other
A. adeninivorans biosensors using enzymatic detection.
12.3.1.1 Colorimetric Detection
Colorimetric detection is generally considered as the easiest and less expensive
method to follow an enzymatic reaction. Chromogenic substrates such as red-ß-D-
galactopyranoside (CPRG) for β-galactosidase or p-nitrophenyl phosphate (pNPP)
for phytase are used, and the appearance of the colored products is monitored using
a spectrophotometer. To measure enzyme activity, the classical protocol
necessitates either collecting the extracellular milieu or lysing the cells in order to
obtain the reporter enzyme. The enzymatic reaction itself generally takes place in a
second plate and is followed in a spectrophotometer. Increase of the reaction
product is then directly linked to the concentration of hormone in the cultivation
medium. This reporting system is used in the S. cerevisiae YES/YAS/YPS/YGS
biosensors and in the A. adeninivorans A-YES, A-YAS, A-YPS, and A-YGS
biosensors.
12.3.1.2 Fluorescence, Chemiluminescence, and Bioluminescence
Detection
One of the major disadvantages of colorimetric detection method is often the
relatively long time the enzymatic reaction requires, which is generally hours,
and the possible estrogenic properties of both CPRG and its enzymatic product.
To overcome this, other substrates have been selected producing chemilumines-
cence, bioluminescence, or ﬂuorescence. There are nowadays a large number of
commercial substrates of the β-galactosidase; the following section will only
present some examples which are used in yeast-based biosensors.
The work of Balsiger et al. (2010) introduces the use of the commercial
chemiluminescent
compound,
Tropix
Gal-Screen,
instead
of
CPRG.
In
358
A. Chamas et al.

chemiluminescence, chemical energy is transformed into light, and the enzymatic
reaction can then be followed in a luminometer. Several new chemiluminescent
substrates are now commercially available, each of them presenting advantages and
disadvantages in terms of sensitivity, duration of light emission, or compatibility
with other reporter systems.
Besides chemiluminescence, it should be noted that substrates producing a
ﬂuorescent products are also used in some yeast biosensors, for example,
4-methylumbelliferyl-b-D-galactopyranoside (MUG), a compound which reacts
with β-galactosidase to form 4-methylumbelliferone. In contrast to chemilumines-
cence, excitation at 366 nm is required to detect the blue ﬂuorescence of this
product. This substrate is used in the recently developed planar YES assay
(p-YES), a variant of the YES assay combining a yeast biosensor and a thin-layer
chromatography (Buchinger et al. 2013).
A third class of enzyme substrate is also described in the literature, namely, the
bioluminescent substrates. An example is the ﬁreﬂy luciferase (luc) enzyme used as
a reporter protein and integrated in the S. cerevisiae genome (Bovee et al. 2004).
The luciferase can accept D-luciferin as substrate and emits in response light in the
visible spectrum. A major drawback of this strategy is that the cells have to be lysed
in order to allow the reaction between the D-luciferin and the luciferase.
12.3.1.3 Electrochemical Detection
Electrochemical yeast-based biosensors use an electrochemical transducer to pro-
duce a signal proportional to the analyte concentration. The electrochemical trans-
ducer eventually converts a biochemical reaction between the reporter protein and a
substrate into a measurable signal such as current, potential, or conductance, which
is then ampliﬁed and processed (Lei et al. 2006; Mulchandani and Rogers 1998;
Riedel et al. 2002; Shantilatha et al. 2003; Turner et al. 1992). Depending on the
type of transducer, electrochemical biosensors are divided into three types: amper-
ometric, potentiometric, and conductometric.
Among electrochemical biosensors, the amperometric biosensor is the most
commonly used. It operates at ﬁxed potential with respect to the reference elec-
trode. Historically, it has been one of the preferred detection methods used for the
construction of BOD biosensors and copper-sensing assays (Riedel et al. 2006). An
interesting new application of electrochemical detection is the development of the
“EstraMonitor” device, which can determine hormonal activities in sewage treat-
ment plants (Pham et al. 2012, 2013). The “EstraMonitor” was demonstrated to be a
rapid detection method for estrogenic activity measurement in a semi-online,
automated, and continuous format. In common with the A-YES assay, the
“EstraMonitor” uses a modiﬁed A. adeninivorans constitutively producing the
estrogen receptor and phytase K as reporter protein. But instead of analyzing the
phytase K enzymatic reaction by colorimetry, it is monitored by amperometry. The
substrate is p-aminophenyl phosphate (pAPP), a compound which can be oxidized
to p-aminophenol in the presence of phytase. This reaction produces electrons,
which can be detected as a current in the EstraMonitor detection chamber.
12
Biosensors Based on Yeast/Fungal Cells
359

Measured current has been shown to be proportional to the level of phytase activity,
thus allowing to a correlation between estrogen concentration and the current.
12.3.2 Direct Fluorescence Measurement
A new development in yeast biosensor reporter strategies is to use reporter proteins
which produce ﬂuorescence or bioluminescence without the need of a substrate.
The advantages are obvious in terms of handling because cell lysis or extra
detection plate is required and cost because chemiluminescent and bioluminescent
substrates are often expensive. Two main strategies have been followed in the past
years to detect direct ﬂuorescence: the utilization of bacterial luciferase (lux) and
the utilization of self-ﬂuorescing proteins such as GFP or DsRed.
12.3.2.1 The Lux System
The lux system is the basis of the S. cerevisiae BLYES and BLYAS biosensors,
which aim to detect estrogens and androgens, respectively (Sanseverino et al.
2008). There are several different bacterial luciferases, which are heterodimers
composed of two subunits, α and β, and which are encoded by two genes in an
operon, luxa and luxb. This protein catalyzes the oxidation of fatty acids, a reaction,
which produces light at a wavelength of 490 nm. Situated in the same operon, three
additional genes, luxC, luxd, and luxE, which are responsible for the synthesis of
three enzymes, are involved in the production and recycling of fatty acids. Having
all ﬁve genes on the same operon allows bioluminescence without the need of an
external substrate. In BLYES and BLYAS, these ﬁve genes have been inserted into
the S. cerevisiae genome, and, with a suitable promoter, translocation of the nuclear
receptor homodimer results in the expression of all ﬁve genes, thus producing
bioluminescence.
12.3.2.2 Self-Fluorescing Proteins
Parallel to the development of the lux system, self-ﬂuorescing proteins also found
application in the development of yeast biosensors. For instance, GFP is a reporter
protein integrated in the estrogen-sensing biosensor developed by Beck et al.
(2005). GFP, which was ﬁrst isolated from the jellyﬁsh Aequorea victoria and
which is nowadays one of the most commonly used proteins in biotechnology, has
the property of undergoing an internal cyclization leading to ﬂuorescence emission
without the need of an external partner. The protein is relatively stable and reliable
ﬂuorescence measurement can be performed after 6 h of incubation.
Another
self-ﬂuorescing
protein,
DsRed,
was
chosen
as
reporter
in
A. adeninivorans-based biosensors dedicated to the detection of progesterone and
glucocorticoids (Chamas et al. 2015; Pham et al. 2016). DsRed was isolated from
Discosoma and ﬂuoresces in the orange-red section of the visible spectrum. The
maturation time of DsRed is known to be longer than for GFP, thus leading to delay
in the signal measurement, but this maturation time can be inﬂuenced via targeted
mutation in order to obtain more rapid maturation and more intense ﬂuorescence.
360
A. Chamas et al.

A major advantage of self-ﬂuorescing proteins over a lux system as reporter is
the extreme simplicity of the reporting strategy necessitating the integration of only
one heterologous protein. The fact that GFP and DsRed have been studied in-depth
for biotechnological application also presents the advantage that several new
variants of these proteins emitting ﬂuorescence at different wavelengths have
been created. Only few amino acid substitutions led to the creation of a large
number of new self-ﬂuorescing proteins detectable in the blue, yellow, orange,
and the UV part of the light spectrum. Targeted mutagenesis also led to the creation
of enhanced version of GFP in terms of ﬂuorescence yield, which have been
incorporated into some yeast biosensors (Bovee et al. 2004).
This diversity of self-ﬂuorescing proteins led to the idea of creating a yeast
biosensor able to simultaneously sense different classes of hormone (Chamas et al.
2017). The A. adeninivorans biosensor is based on three different strains, each of
them producing a different steroid hormone receptor coupled with a different self-
ﬂuorescing protein as reporter. By incubating these three strains as a mix, the
resulting biosensor can detect estrogenic, progesteronic, and androgenic activities
in a sample. The assay requires three ﬂuorescence scans at the emission
wavelengths of the three reporter proteins to be performed.
This example highlights the potential of self-ﬂuorescence proteins as reporter
proteins. In comparison, the lux system needs the integration of a complete operon,
and there are fewer options available to modify the emission wavelength produced
by the luciferase in this system. One of the major limitations of self-ﬂuorescing
proteins as reporter remains the possibility that the sample itself ﬂuoresces at the
same wavelength, thus increasing the noise signal and lowering the sensitivity of
the assay.
12.4
Applications of EDCs Targeting Yeast Biosensors
12.4.1 Sensitivity of the Biosensors
In Table 12.1, two important characteristics for the selection of a biosensor are
indicated, the EC50 value and the limit of detection toward a known ligand. The
EC50 value corresponds to the concentration of ligand responsible for half the
maximum binding to the receptor, whereas the limit of detection (LoD) is the
lowest concentration of ligand, which can be effectively distinguished from the
noise signal and therefore the lowest concentration of ligand a biosensor can detect.
EC50 calculation is usually not contentious, but the method to determine the LoD
varies among researchers and can lead to confusion. For more information about
this thematic, we refer to the article of Shrivastava and Gupta (2011), which gives
an overview of the existing guidelines and recommendations to establish LoD.
Comparison of LoD in different manuscripts is difﬁcult because often the method of
calculation is not clearly given and LoDs should be treated with caution. In
Table 12.1, these values are presented as they given in their manuscript.
12
Biosensors Based on Yeast/Fungal Cells
361

Table 12.1 Description of several estrogen, androgen, progestogen and glucocorticoid yeast biosensors
Target
compound
Organism
Biosensor
Reporter gene
Detection
method
EC50
LoD
Source
Estrogens
S. cerevisiae
YES
β-Galactosidase
Colorimetry
17β-Estradiol:
30 ng/l
17β-Estradiol:
2.8 ng/l
Gehrmann et al.
(2016)
YES
β-Galactosidase
Luminescence
17β-Estradiol:
40 ng/l
n.i.
Balsiger et al.
(2010)
YES
Luc
Luminescence
17β-Estradiol:
54.5 ng/l
n.i.
Bovee et al.
(2004)
BLYES
Lux
Luminescence
17β-Estradiol:
108.8 ng/l
17β-Estradiol:
6.8 ng/l
Sanseverino et al.
(2008)
YES
Gfp
Fluorescence
17β-Estradiol:
163.2 ng/l
17β-Estradiol:
27.2 ng/l
Beck et al. (2005)
p-YES
β-Galactosidase
Fluorescence
17β-Estradiol: 7.5
pg
17β-Estradiol:
1.3pg
Buchinger et al.
(2013)
A.
adeninivorans
A-YES
PhyK
Colorimetry
17β-Estradiol:
17 ng/l
17β-Estradiol:
1.8 ng/l
Gehrmann et al.
(2016)
EstraMonitor
PhyK
Amperometric
17β-Estradiol:
54.6 ng/l
17β-Estradiol:
9.92 ng/l
Pham et al. (2013)
Y. lipolytica
β-Galactosidase
Colorimetry
n.i.
17β-Estradiol:
27.2 ng/l
Cho et al. (2010)
Androgens
S. cerevisiae
YAS
β-Galactosidase
Colorimetry
Testosterone:
1043 ng/l
Testosterone:
189 ng/l
Gehrmann et al.
(2016)
YAS
Luc
Luminescence
5α-DHT: 1.6 μg/l
5α-DHT: 145 ng/l
Leskinen et al.
(2005)
BLYAS
Lux
Luminescence
5α-DHT: 3.2 μg/l
5α-DHT: 290 ng/l
Sanseverino et al.
(2008)
A.
adeninivorans
A-YAS
PhyK
Biochemical
5α-DHT: 277 ng/l
5α-DHT: 56.5 ng/l
Gerlach et al.
(2014)
362
A. Chamas et al.

Progestogens
S. cerevisiae
YPS
Gfp
Fluorescence
Progesterone:
314 ng/l
Progesterone:
31.4 ng/l
Chatterjee et al.
(2008)
A.
adeninivorans
A-YPS
PhyK
Biochemical
Progesterone:
147 ng/l
Progesterone:
40.9 ng/l
Chamas et al.
(2015)
A-YPFS
DsRED
Fluorescence
Progesterone:
231 ng/l
Progesterone:
65.3 ng/l
Chamas et al.
(2015)
Glucocorticoids
S. cerevisiae
YGS
GFP
Fluorescence
Dexamethasone:
120 μM
n.i.
Bovee et al.
(2011)
A.
adeninivorans
A-YGS
PhyK
Biochemical
Dexamethasone:
0.81 μM
Dexamethasone:
0.29 μM
Pham et al. (2016)
12
Biosensors Based on Yeast/Fungal Cells
363

12.4.2 Protocols
Historically, yeast biosensors were developed in a microtiter plate format for the
detection of water samples. It is then not surprising to observe that the majority of
the published works are presenting protocols utilizing this format. Generally, the
yeast cells are undergoing a preliminary cultivation without sample to reach a
certain cell density, which is a critical parameter in order to obtain repeatable
results. Then the cells are incubated with the sample in an incubation plate for a
certain time, and the detection is performed. Depending on the reporter protein
used, the cell suspension is directly utilized without further processing, or an extra
detection protocol is needed. An overview of these different protocols can be
observed in Fig. 12.2.
Direct detection is made possible by the use of self-ﬂuorescing proteins and lux
reporter systems by directly scanning the incubation plate for ﬂuorescence. When
enzymes are used as reporters, these have to be extracted from the cell—either by
Yeast cells 
cultivation
Abs 
Fluo 
Fluo 
A 
B 
C 
Incubation 
with sample
Detection
Fig. 12.2 Overview of three common microtiter protocols for the detection of hormones with
yeast whole-cell biosensors. (a) General colorimetric detection protocol when an enzyme is the
reporter protein. Incubation of cells with the sample takes place in multiwells incubation plates.
For detection, cells are centrifuged, and the supernatant is transferred into new microtiter plate for
enzyme assay. Detection occurs in spectrophotometer. (b) General ﬂuorescence detection protocol
when an enzyme is the reporter protein. Incubation of cells with the sample takes place in
multiwells incubation plates. For detection, cells are centrifuged, and the supernatant is transferred
into new black microtiter plate for enzyme assay. Detection occurs in ﬂuorometer. (c) General
ﬂuorescence detection protocol when a ﬂuorescence protein is the reporter protein. Incubation of
cells with the sample and detection take place directly in black microtiter plate
364
A. Chamas et al.

cell breakdown or extracellular transport—and the enzyme solution is pipetted in a
new microtiter plate for colorimetric or ﬂuorescence measurement. Incubation
parameters such as temperature, shaking, or duration of each step depend on the
organism chosen and the nature of the reporter protein. When working with enzyme
reporter in a microtiter plate format and besides the necessary devices for yeast
incubation, the operator needs to have access to a spectrophotometer, a
luminometer or a ﬂuorometer, depending on the substrate they use. With self-
ﬂuorescing proteins as reporter proteins, only a ﬂuorometer is needed to quantify
the response.
A notable modiﬁcation of the basic microtiter plate protocol can be seen in the
planar yeast estrogen assay (Buchinger et al. 2013; Klingelh€ofer and Morlock
2014). In this assay, the detection of estrogens is coupled with a prior separation
of the sample on a thin-layer chromatography plate. The cells are directly incubated
on the thin-layer chromatography plate, and the reporter activity, in this case
β-galactosidase reaction with MUG, is followed via a ﬂuorescence scan of the
plate. For a complete identiﬁcation of the potential endocrine disruptors, mass
spectrometry can also be performed after the biosensor detection. An overview of
this protocol can be seen in Fig. 12.3.
Fig. 12.3 Overview of
planar YES assay (p-YES)
ﬁrst steps. In step one,
components of the sample are
separated with a high-
performance thin-layer
chromatography (HPTLC).
Then the plate is shortly
immersed in yeast cell
suspension and allowed to
incubate at 30 C. After a
second immersion in a
substrate solution, the
detection of ﬂuorescent of
compounds takes place in a
densitometer. Modiﬁed after
Klingelh€ofer and Morlock
(2015)
12
Biosensors Based on Yeast/Fungal Cells
365

For amperometric detection, another protocol was designed which allows semi-
automatic estrogen detection. For this, a device containing all the necessary ﬂuidic,
heating, and measuring elements was constructed (Fig. 12.4). The immobilized
A. adeninivorans cells used in EstraMonitor are easily handled and can function in
non-sterile conditions and can be reused up to 15 times without signiﬁcant loss of
sensitivity (Pham et al. 2012). Furthermore the use of immobilized cells and
amperometric detection method makes EstraMonitor able to measure the total
estrogenic activity in the sample in 4 h and 10 min. Interestingly, the immobilized
A. adeninivorans cells are fully functional in a wide range of samples, including
samples that contained up to 5% NaCl, and are able to determine the estrogenic
effects in the environmental sample without the need for sterilization, extraction, or
concentration (Pham et al. 2013). These results were also conﬁrmed using GC-MS
analyses.
12.4.3 Applications with Real Samples
The ultimate goal of yeast biosensors is to be trialed with real samples in order to
identify potentially dangerous compounds in the environment or to monitor physi-
ological level in humans and animals. A great majority of these real samples are
wastewater samples because of their relative simplicity in comparison to body
Fig. 12.4 Photography of
the EstraMonitor device.
(1) Amperometric transducer,
(2) pump module for waste
and nutrient exchange,
(3) reservoir, (4) measuring
chamber with immobilized
yeast cells. Modiﬁed after
Pham et al. (2012)
366
A. Chamas et al.

ﬂuids or solid samples, for example. Yeast biosensors are particularly valuable in
analysis of wastewater samples because the cells are particularly robust.
The following table presents some of the researches applying yeast biosensor to
real samples.
Real
sample
Real sample
type
Hormone
activity
Organism
Detection
Source
Water
based
Wastewater
efﬂuent/
inﬂuent
Estrogens
S. cerevisiae
Luminescence
Balsiger
et al. (2010)
Wastewater
efﬂuent/
inﬂuent
Estrogens
A. adeninivorans
Colorimetry
Kaiser et al.
(2010)
Wastewater
efﬂuent/
inﬂuent
Progesterone
A. adeninivorans
Colorimetry
Chamas et al.
(2015)
River water,
wastewater
efﬂuent/
inﬂuent
Glucocorticoids
A. adeninivorans
Colorimetry
Pham et al.
(2016)
Surface water,
wastewater
efﬂuent/
inﬂuent
Estrogens
S. cerevisiae
Fluorescence
(p-YES)
Klingelh€ofer
and Morlock
(2015)
Reservoir
water
Thyroids
S. cerevisiae
Colorimetry
Li et al.
(2014)
Body
ﬂuids
Swine urine
Androgens
A. adeninivorans
Colorimetry
Gerlach et al.
(2014)
Swine urine
Estrogens
A. adeninivorans
Colorimetry
Kaiser et al.
(2010)
Monkey serum
Progesterone
A. adeninivorans
Fluorescence
Chamas et al.
(2017)
Human serum
Androgens
S. cerevisiae
Luminescence
Michelini
et al. (2005)
Solid
sample
Sediment
Organotins
S. cerevisiae
Luminescence
Kabierch
et al. (2013)
Moisturizing
lotion
Estrogens
S. cerevisiae
Luminescence
Leskinen
et al. (2005)
Sunscreen,
sediment
Estrogens
S. cerevisiae
Fluorescence
(p-YES)
Buchinger
et al. (2013)
12.5
Emerging Biosensors Strategies
The ﬁeld of whole-cell biosensors is developing rapidly and many research teams
around the world are proposing new strategies to establish innovative bioassays.
An example of an emerging strategy is the development of glucose sensing using
yeast as the biocatalyst. In fact, because of the frequency of ﬂuctuations in blood
glucose levels, patients need to monitor their glucose levels several times a day
12
Biosensors Based on Yeast/Fungal Cells
367

(Khadilkar et al. 2013; Hammond et al. 2016). Recently, Wang (Wang et al. 2015)
reported a novel electrochemical glucose biosensor based on glucose oxidase
(GOx) displayed on yeast surface. The entire S. cerevisiae cell catalyst (yeast-
Gox) was immobilized with multiwalled carbon nanotubes on the electrodes, which
allowed sensitive and selective glucose determination in a short time (Wang et al.
2015).
Another very interesting strategy is the one followed by Fukuda et al. (2010).
They developed a yeast whole-cell biosensor able to detect organophosphorus
compounds, which are in common use as pesticides. They constructed a
S. cerevisiae strain that co-displays organophosphorus hydrolase (OPH) and
enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein (EGFP) on the cell surface using a Flo1p anchor
system. Organophosphorus compound degradation by the hydrolase releases
protons and causes a pH change. This pH change induces a conformational modiﬁ-
cation of EGFP, which triggers quenching of its ﬂuorescence, thereby making this
cell useful for visual detection of organophosphorus compounds presence.
12.6
Conclusions
Yeast whole-cell biosensors have proven themselves to be very useful for the
detection of bioactive substances. Constant improvements in bioengineering and
biochemistry have allowed the construction of robust biosensors, some of which
have already been commercialized. Most of the yeast biosensors, which have been
commercialized, are biosensors dedicated to the detection of vertebrate hormones.
This is mainly due to the fact that endocrine disruptors gained wide notoriety
because of their negative impact on environment and health. The range of
possibilities is increasing as producing recombinant membrane G protein-coupled
receptor is now not a technical obstacle. The different reporting strategies, which
have been presented in this chapter, also allow the ﬁnal user to select the most
appropriate biosensor for their application. To choose a suitable biosensor, the user
should not only consider the sensitivity of the assay toward one ligand but also take
into account the time needed to perform the assay, which devices are necessary for
the detection and for which the real sample assay have already been trialed with.
References
Adeniran A, Sherer M, Tyo KEJ (2015) Yeast-based biosensors: design and applications. FEMS
Yeast Res 15:1–15
Ault AD, Broach JR (2006) Creation of GPCR-based chemical sensors by directed evolution in
yeast. Protein Eng Des Sel 19:1–8
Balsiger HA, de la Torre R, Lee WY, Cox MB (2010) A four-hour yeast bioassay for the direct
measure of estrogenic activity in wastewater without sample extraction, concentration, or
sterilization. Sci Total Environ 408:1422–1429
Bardwell L (2005) A walk-through of the yeast mating pheromone response pathway. Peptides
26:339–350
368
A. Chamas et al.

Beck V, Pﬁtscher A, Jungbauer A (2005) GFP-reporter for high throughput assay to monitor
estrogenic compounds. J Biochem Biophys Methods 64:19–37
Bhattacharjee GB, Khurana SMP (2014) In vitro reporter assays for screening of chemicals that
disrupt androgen signaling. J Toxicol 2014:701752. doi:10.1155/2014/701752
Bovee TF, Helsdingen RJ, Hamers AR, Brouwer BA, Nielen MW (2011) Recombinant cell assay
for the detection of (gluco)corticosteroids and endocrine-disrupting potencies of several
environmental PCB contaminants. Anal Bioanal Chem 401:873–882
Bovee TF, Helsdingen RJR, Koks P, Kuiper HA, Hoogenboom RLAP, Keijer J (2004) Develop-
ment of a rapid yeast estrogen bioassay, based on the expression of green ﬂuorescent protein.
Gene 325:187–200
Buchinger S, Spira D, Br€oder K, Schlüsener M, Ternes T, Reifferscheid G (2013) Direct coupling
of thin-layer chromatography with a bioassay for the detection of estrogenic compounds,
application for effect-directed analysis. Anal Chem 85:7248–7256
Chamas A, Nieter A, Pham HTM, Giersberg M, Hettwer K, Uhlig S, Simon K, Baronian K, Kunze
G (2015) Development of a recombinant Arxula adeninivorans cell bioassay for the detection
of molecules with progesterone activity in wastewater. Anal Bioanal Chem 407:8109–8120
Chamas A, Pham HTM, Ja¨hne M, Hettwer K, Uhlig S, Simon K, Einspanier A, Baronian K, Kunze
G (2017) Simultaneous detection of three sex steroid hormone classes using a novel yeast-
based biosensor. Biotechnol Bioeng. doi:10.1002/bit.26249
Chatterjee S, Kumar V, Majumder CB, Roy P (2008) Screening of some anti-progestin endocrine
disruptors using a recombinant yeast based in vitro bioassay. Toxicol In Vitro 22:788–798
Cho EM, Lee HS, Eom CY, Ohta A (2010) Construction of high sensitive system for endocrine
disruptors with yeast n-alkane –assimilating Yarrowia lipolytica. J Microbiol Biotechnol
20:1563–1570
Chu WL, Shiizaki K, Kawanishi M, Kondo M, Yagi T (2009) Validation of a new yeast-based
reporter assay consisting of human estrogen receptors alpha/beta and coactivators SRC-1:
application for detection of estrogenic activity in environmental samples. Environ Toxicol
24:513–529
Dong S, Rogan SC, Roth BL (2010) Directed molecular evolution of DREADDs: a generic
approach to creating next-generation RASSLs. Nat Protoc 5:561–573
Fent K (2015) Progestins as endocrine disrupters in aquatic ecosystems: concentrations, effect and
risk assessment. Environ Int 84:115–130
Fukuda T, Tsuchiya K, Makishima H, Tsuchiyama K, Mulchandani A, Kuroda K, Ueda M, Suye
SI (2010) Organophosphorus compound detection on a cell chip with yeast coexpressing
hydrolase and eGFP. Biotechnol J 5:515–519
Gehrmann L, Bielak H, Behr M, Itzel F, Lyko S, Simon A, Kunze G, Dopp E, Wagner M, Tuerk J
(2016) (Anti-)estrogenic and (anti-)androgenic effects in wastewater during advanced treat-
ment: comparison of three in vitro bioassays. Environ Sci Pollut Res. doi:10.1007/s11356-016-
7165-7174
Gerlach TK, Kaiser C, K€orner M, Hettwer K, Uhlig S, Simon K, Baronian K, Kunze G (2014)
Development and assessment of a novel Arxula adeninivorans androgen screen (A-YAS) assay
and its application in analysis of cattle urine. Sci Total Environ 490:1073–1081
Hahn T, Tag K, Riedel K, Uhlig S, Baronian K, Gellissen G, Kunze G (2006) A novel estrogen
sensor based on recombinant Arxula adeninivorans cells. Biosens Bioelectron 21:2078–2085
Hammond JL, Formisano N, Estrela P, Carrara S, Tkac J (2016) Electrochemical biosensors and
nanobiosensors. Essays Biochem 60:69–80
Kabiersch G, Rajasa¨rkka¨ J, Tuomela M, Hatakka A, Virta M, Steffen K (2013) Bioluminescent
yeast assay for detection of organotin compounds. Anal Chem 85:5740–5745
Kabir ER, Rahman MS, Rahman I (2015) A review on endocrine disruptors and their possible
impacts on human health. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol 40:241–258
Kaiser C, Uhlig S, Gerlach T, K€orner M, Simon K, Kunath K, Florschütz K, Baronian K, Kunze G
(2010) Evaluation and validation of a novel Arxula adeninivorans estrogen screen (nAES)
12
Biosensors Based on Yeast/Fungal Cells
369

assay and its application in analysis of wastewater, seawater, brackish water and urine. Sci
Total Environ 408:6017–6026
Kawanishi M, Ohnisi K, Takigami H, Yagi T (2013) Simple and rapid yeast reporter bioassay for
dioxin screening: evaluation of the dioxin-like compounds in industrial and municipal waste
incineration plants. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int 20:2993–3002
Khadilkar KS, Bandgar T, Shivane V, Lila A, Shah N (2013) Current concepts in blood glucose
monitoring. Indian J Endocrinol Metab 17(suppl 3):S643–S649
Klingelho¨fer I, Morlock GE (2014) Sharp-bounded zones link to the effect in planar chromatogra-
phy-bioassay-mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr A 1360:288–295
Klingelh€ofer I, Morlock GE (2015) Bioproﬁling of surface/wastewater and bioquantitation of
discovered endocrine-active compounds by streamlined direct bioautography. Anal Chem
87:11098–11104
Lee HS, Cho EM, Jung JH, Ohta A (2007) Evaluation on antagonist activities of polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons using the yeast two-hybrid detection system for endocrine disruptors.
Environ Monit Assess 129:87–95
Lei Y, Chen W, Mulchandani A (2006) Microbial biosensors. Anal Chim Acta 566:200–210
Leskinen P, Michelini E, Picard D, Karp M, Virta M (2005) Bioluminescent yeast assay for
detecting estrogenic and androgenic activity in different matrices. Chemosphere 61:259–266
Li J, Ma M, Wang Z (2008) A two-hybrid yeast assay to quantify the effects of xenobiotics on
thyroid hormone-mediated gene expression. Environ Toxicol Chem 27:159–167
Li J, Ren S, Han S, Li N (2014) A yeast bioassay for direct measurement of thyroid hormone
disrupting effects in water without sample extraction, concentration, or sterilization.
Chemosphere 100:139–145
Michelini E, Magliulo M, Leskinen P, Virta M, Karp M, Roda A (2005) Recombinant cell-based
bioluminescence assay for androgen bioactivity determination in clinical samples. Clin Chem
51:1995–1998
Miller CA (1999) A human aryl hydrocarbon receptor signaling pathway constructed in yeast
displays additive responses to ligand mixtures. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 160:297–303
Miller CA, Tan X, Wilson M, Bhattacharyya S, Ludwig S (2010) Single plasmids expressing
human steroid receptors and a reporter gene for use in yeast signaling assays. Plasmid 63:73–78
Mulchandani A, Rogers KR (eds) (1998) Enzyme and microbial biosensors: techniques and
protocols. Humana Press, Totowa
Pham HTM, Chamas A, Nieter A, Giersberg M, Rutten T, Gehrmann L, Hettwer K, Tuerk J,
Uhlig S, Simon K, Baronian K, Kunze G (2016) Determination of glucocorticoids using
photometric (A-YGS) and spectroﬂuorometric (A-YGFS) bioassays based on modiﬁed Arxula
adeninivorans cells: applications in environmental analysis. Sensor Actuator B-Chem
223:540–549
Pham HTM, Giersberg M, Gehrmann L, Hettwer K, Tuerk J, Uhlig S, Hanke G, Weisswange P,
Simon K, Baronian K, Kunze G (2015) The determination of pharmaceuticals using a recom-
binant Arxula adeninivorans whole-cell biosensor. Sensor Actuator B-Chem 211:439–448
Pham HTM, Giersberg M, Uhlig S, Hanke G, Simon K, Kunath K, Baronian K, Kunze G (2012)
EstraMonitor – a monitor for amperometric detection of estrogenic activity with Arxula
adeninivorans yeast cells as the biocomponent. Sens Actuator B-Chem 161:137–145
Pham HTM, Kunath K, Gehrmann L, Giersberg M, Tuerk J, Uhlig S, Hanke G, Simon K,
Baronian K, Kunze G (2013) Application of modiﬁed Arxula adeninivorans yeast cells in an
online biosensor for the detection of estrogenic compounds in wastewater samples. Sens
Actuator B-Chem 185:628–637
Rajasa¨rkka¨ J, Virta M (2013) Characterization of a bisphenol A speciﬁc yeast bioreporter utilizing
the bisphenol A-targeted receptor. Anal Chem 85:10067–10074
Riedel K, Kunze G, Baronian KHR (eds) (2006) Biosensors and bioassays based on
microorganisms. Research Signpost, Kerala
370
A. Chamas et al.

Riedel K, Kunze G, Konig A (2002) Microbial sensors on a respiratory basis for wastewater
monitoring. In: Scheper T (ed) Advances in biochemical engineering/biotechnology. Springer,
Berlin, pp 81–118
Routledge EJ, Sumpter JP (1996) Estrogenic activity of surfactants and some of their degradation
products assessed using a recombinant yeast screen. Environ Toxicol Chem 15:241–248
Sanseverino J, Elridge ML, Layton AC, Easter JP, Yarbrough J, Schultz TW, Sayler GS (2008)
Screening of potentially hormonally active chemicals using bioluminescent yeast bioreporters.
Toxicol Sci 107:122–134
Sanseverino J, Gupta RK, Layton AC, Patterson SS, Ripp SA, Saidak L, Simpson ML, Schulz TW,
Sayler GS (2005) Use of Saccharomyces cerevisiae BLYES expressing bacterial biolumines-
cence for rapid, sensitive detection of estrogenic compounds. Appl Environ Microbiol
71:4455–4460
Shantilatha P, Varma S, Mitra CK (2003) Designing a simple biosensor. In: Malhotra BD, Turner
APF (eds) Advances in biosensors: perspectives in biosensors. JAI Press, Elsevier,
Netherlands, pp 1–17
Shiizaki K, Asai S, Ebata S, Kawanishi M, Yagi T (2010) Establishment of yeast reporter assay
systems to detect ligands of thyroid hormone receptors alpha and beta. Toxicol In Vitro
24:638–644
Shrivastava A, Gupta VB (2011) Methods for the determination of limit of detection and limit of
quantiﬁcation of the analytical methods. Chron Young Scientists 2:21–25
Tag K, Hahn T, Riedel K, Kunze G (2006) Assays and microbial biosensors for detection of
endocrine disruptors. In: Riedel K, Kunze G, Baronian KHR (eds) Biosensors and bioassays
based on microorganisms. Research Signpost, Kerala, pp 211–228
Turner APF, Karube I, Wilson GS (eds) (1992) Biosensors: fundamentals and applications. Mir
Publishers, Moscow
Viswanath G, Halder S, Divya G, Majumder CB, Roy P (2008) Detection of potential (anti)
progestagenic endocrine disruptors using a recombinant human progesterone receptor binding
and transactivation assay. Cell Mol Endocrinol 295:1–9
Wang H, Lang Q, Liang B, Liu A (2015) Electrochemical glucose biosensor based on glucose
oxidase displayed on yeast surface. Methods Mol Biol 1319:233–243
12
Biosensors Based on Yeast/Fungal Cells
371

Yeast-Based Systems for Environmental
Control
13
Galina Gayda, Mykhailo Gonchar, and Andriy Sibirny
Abstract
A wide range of dangerous pollutants, namely, heavy and transition metals,
volatile toxicants, pesticides, plasticizers, pharmaceuticals, and natural and
synthetic hormones, have to be tested in different environmental media to
predict potential hazard for humans and nature as well to control the effective-
ness of wastewater treatment. A lot of physicochemical analytical approaches
have been developed, but they are not suitable for high-throughput control of
chemicals in environmental samples. To support environmental safety, micro-
bial analytical systems are considered to be very promising. In this review, the
main achievements in the elaboration of analytical systems based on yeast cells
for environmental monitoring of toxic pollutants are described, and perspectives
of their implementation are discussed.
Contents
13.1
Introduction ..............................................................................
374
13.2
General Remarks ........................................................................
375
13.2.1
The Advantages of Yeast-Based Biosensors ..................................
375
13.2.2
Types of YBBs .................................................................
379
13.2.3
G-Protein-Coupled Receptors in Bioassays ...................................
380
13.3
Monitoring of Organic Pollutants Using Bioreporting Systems in S. cerevisiae ......
380
13.3.1
Recombinant Human Receptors in Assay of Endocrine-Disrupting
Compounds .....................................................................
380
13.3.2
The Main Strategies to Improve Biosensors for Organic Pollutants .........
381
13.4
Other Yeasts in Environmental Control ................................................
383
G. Gayda • M. Gonchar (*) • A. Sibirny
Institute of Cell Biology, NAS of Ukraine, 14/16, Drahomanov Street, Lviv 79005, Ukraine
e-mail: mykhailo1952@gmail.com
# Springer International Publishing AG 2017
A.A. Sibirny (ed.), Biotechnology of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-58829-2_13
373

13.5
Monitoring of Heavy and Transitional Metals .........................................
384
13.6
Conclusion ...............................................................................
386
References .......................................................................................
386
13.1
Introduction
Extensive research over the past decade has found the widespread presence of
wastewater, air, and soil contaminants around the globe. The increasing amount of
pollutants in the environment is an alarming concern to the ecosystem (Fiore et al.
2015). These dangerous pollutants, namely, heavy and transition metals, volatile
toxicants, pesticides, plasticizers, pharmaceuticals, and natural and synthetic
hormones, being chemical spills, may be introduced into surface waters by runoff
from land application of biosolids, through leaking sewer lines and septic systems, or
by incomplete removal from wastewater treatment systems (Eldridge et al. 2011). A
number of organic pollutants, such as polychlorinated biphenyls, polyaromatic
hydrocarbons, and pesticides, are resistant to biodegradation and therefore represent
toxicological threat to wildlife as well as human beings (Fiore et al. 2015). These
chemicals affect on blood, cardiovascular, central nervous, respiratory, endocrine,
reproductive, hormonal, and immune systems, causing even premature mortality
(Rajasa¨rkka¨ 2013; Thurston et al. 2016; Watanabe et al. 2017).
It is obvious that the special methods for environmental safety (monitoring
dangerous chemicals and pollutant detoxiﬁcation or removing) are necessary.
To improve environment quality, various physiological and biological methods
have been employed globally. Several in vivo as well as in vitro assays were
developed; however, as a rule, they are not suitable for high-throughput control
of chemicals in environmental samples. Chemical analysis methods are sensitive,
but they are also laborious and expensive and require specialized instruments.
Consequently, microbiological methods have become valuable tools to test
chemicals in environmental samples. While the European Union chemical legisla-
tion REACH has increased the need of chemical testing methods, one of its targets
is also to decrease the use of animals in these tests. It has been proposed that
inexpensive high-throughput in vitro assays could be used for initial screening of
chemicals for further testing with other methods. To support environmental safety,
microbiological methods based on utilization of yeast cells are considered as very
promising (Chatterjee et al. 2008; Shimomura-Shimizu and Karube 2010; Sibirny
et al. 2011; Eldridge et al. 2011; Rajasa¨rkka¨ 2013; Dragone et al. 2014; Sigawi et al.
2014; Bui et al. 2016; Sun et al. 2015; He et al. 2016; Vigneshvar et al. 2016).
374
G. Gayda et al.

13.2
General Remarks
13.2.1 The Advantages of Yeast-Based Biosensors
Yeast-based biosensors (YBBs) have the ability to accurately detect a lot of
compounds (see Table 13.1). YBBs appear to be quite promising for online
wastewater control; their advantage is that organic compounds in samples can be
directly measured without any pretreatment such as ﬁltration and dialysis
(Shimomura-Shimizu and Karube 2010; Dragone et al. 2014; Gutierrez et al.
2015; Jarque et al. 2016). High-speciﬁcity biosensing can be carried out in a
micron-scale unit (the cell) without power requirements or the need for a highly
trained operator. This can be contrasted with a Western blot or a gas chromatograph
coupled with mass spectrometer, which is orders-of-magnitude larger and requires
power and operators (Adeniran et al. 2015). Biosensors incorporating various yeasts
have been proposed as the effective approach of synthetic biology to detect an
incredibly large range of environmental pollutants including but not limited to
metals, carcinogens, etc. (Hou et al. 2013; Bereza-Malcolm et al. 2015; Yudina
et al. 2015). Although YBBs show promise for environmental monitoring, some
disadvantages, as poor selectivity and low sensitivity, still remain. To overcome
these
limitations,
YBBs
have
been
integrated
with
innovative
micro-/
nanotechnologies and applied to a wide range of detection purposes. Micro-/
nanofabrication showed remarkable potential for YBBs due to enhanced optical
and electrochemical measurements, improved immobilization, and automated cul-
ture environments, as well as high portability and more practical in comparison
with conventional analytical methods (Garcia-Alonso et al. 2011; Lim et al. 2015;
Safarik et al. 2015).
Some yeast species, being facultative anaerobes, are ideal for engineering
biosensors and suitable for online environmental monitoring for a number of
reasons: (1) they can be made in “active dry” form cheaply and stored for long
periods of time; (2) they can serve as a chassis for higher-eukaryotic sensing
modalities (e.g., G-protein-coupled receptors, GPCRs); and (3) they can tolerate
rather harsh environments, especially compared to bacteria. These advantages
combine with the wealth of background information on Saccharomyces cerevisiae
and its role as a model organism with simple genetic manipulations to make yeast
an excellent choice for use in YBBs (Walmsley and Keenan 2000; Benton et al.
2007; Bovee et al. 2007, 2011; Adeniran et al. 2015; Chap. 12).
The most common reporting systems for YBBs are based on optical and electri-
cal methods (Fig. 13.1) as well as cell growth monitoring (Nakamura et al. 2008;
Vigneshvar et al. 2016). The advantages of optical methods are high sensitivity and
simplicity; colorimetric variant is promising due to visible to naked eye results.
Fluorescence and luminescence detection don’t need substrate addition (Shetty
et al. 2004; Leskinen et al. 2005; Garcia-Alonso et al. 2009; Eldridge et al. 2011).
The main advantages of electric methods are high sensitivity and fastness of
procedure (Schwartz-Mittelman et al. 2005; Ino et al. 2009; Chelikani et al. 2012;
Adeniran et al. 2015).
13
Yeast-Based Systems for Environmental Control
375

Table 13.1 Yeast-based biosensors for detection of environmental pollutants
Group
Detected compound(s)
Mode of
detection
Limit of detection,
range (μM)
Yeast
References
Metals
Copper
Amperometry
0.11–500
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Jarque et al. (2016)
Colorimetry
1–100
Fluorescence
0.5
Luminescence
2.0
Vopalenska et al.
(2015)
Shetty et al. (2004)
Roda et al. (2011)
Pulse stripping
voltammetry
0.1–100
Rhodotorula mucilaginosa
Turdean (2011)
Cadmium
Fluorescence
0.2
S. cerevisiae
Matsuura et al. (2013)
1–900
Hansenula polymorpha
Park et al. (2007) and
Jarque et al. (2016)
Methylmercury
Fluorescence
0.44 ng/L
S. cerevisiae
Tafurt-Cardona et al.
(2015)
Endocrine
disruptors
Thyroids
Luminescence
3.7  103
Li et al. (2014) and
Jarque et al. (2016)
Colorimetry
0.5  103 to
0.075
Li et al. (2014, 2008)
and Shizaki et al.
(2010)
Retinoids
Colorimetry
0.01
Shizaki et al. (2014)
and Jarque et al.
(2016)
Luminescence
0.06
Kabiersch et al. 2013
Tributyltin
Luminescence
0.03
Kabiersch et al.
(2013)
376
G. Gayda et al.

Androgens
Colorimetry
0.2  103
Arxula adeninivorans
Gerlach et al. (2014)
Luminescence
0.05  103
A. adeninivorans, S. cerevisiae
Luminescence
0.05  103
Michelini et al. (2008)
Fluorescence
0.01  103
Leskinen et al. (2005)
Estrogens
Colorimetry
0.01  103
Kaiser et al. (2010)
and Jarque et al.
(2016)
Luminescence
(0.052.8)  103
Luminescence
0.03  103
Amperometry
0.01  103
Sanseverino et al.
(2005)
Leskinen et al. (2005)
Schwartz-Mittelman
et al. (2005)
Amperometry
5.3 ng/L
A. adeninivorans
Pham et al. (2012,
2013)
Progestogens
Fluorescence
0.1  103 to 1
S. cerevisiae
Chatterjee et al.
(2008)
Colorimetry
1
Noguerol et al. (2006)
Dioxin-like
Fluorescence
5  103
Noguerol et al. (2006)
Glucocorticoids
Fluorescence
0.510
Bovee et al. (2011)
Bisphenol
Luminescence
0.11
S. cerevisiae
Rajasa¨rkka¨ (2013)
Serotonin
Fluorescence
10
Nakamura et al.
(2015)
Genotoxins
and cytotoxins
Chemicals
Fluorescence
0.1
Bui et al. (2016)
10
50
(continued)
13
Yeast-Based Systems for Environmental Control
377

Table 13.1 (continued)
Group
Detected compound(s)
Mode of
detection
Limit of detection,
range (μM)
Yeast
References
10
Wei et al. (2013)
3–45
Benton et al. (2007)
Luminescence
NA
Leskinen et al. (2005)
Pharmaceuticals
Amperometry
83.65 μg/L
A. adeninivorans
Pham et al. (2015)
Methyl methanesulfonate
Microﬂuidic
system
Saccharomyces, Yarrowia,
Kluyveromyces, Rhodotorula
Safarik et al. (2015)
Fluorescence
0.28 μM ~ 450
S. cerevisiae
Lim et al. (2015)
0.1%
Garcia-Alonso et al.
(2009)
Formaldehyde
Amperometry
100
H. polymorpha
Sibirny et al. (2011)
Inhibitors of respiratory
system
Amperometry
0.8–1.2
S. cerevisiae
Goldblum et al.
(1990)
ROS inducers
Fluorescence
0.1
Yang et al. (2005)
Biodegradable
organics
Chemicals which support
the growth of
microorganisms
Biochemical
oxygen demand
(BOD)
1.24 mg/L
A. adeninivorans
Chan et al. (2000)
2.4–80 mg/L
Artiﬁcial mix: Pichia angusta,
A. adeninivorans, Debaryomyces
hansenii
Yudina et al. (2015)
Fluorescence
2.1 mgL1, till
550 mgL1
(20–70)103
A. adeninivorans
Renneberg et al.
(2004)
BOD
Nakamura et al.
(2007)
378
G. Gayda et al.

13.2.2 Types of YBBs
Two types of YBBs could be differentiated: dependent upon transcription (YBBsDT)
of a reported gene to detect a desired molecule and independent (YBBsIDT) of this
reporting mechanism (Adeniran et al. 2015).
YBBsDT frequently depend on heterologous expression of sensing elements
from non-yeast organisms, a strategy that has greatly expanded the range of
molecules available for detection by these biosensors. YBBsDT recognize the ligand
of interest, typically via a native or heterologous receptor protein. When activated,
the protein interacts with the cell’s transcription machinery, either directly or via a
signaling cascade, to induce (or cease) production of a reporter gene. YBBsDT could
include receptors speciﬁc to organic compounds or heavy metals. In YBBsDT a
ﬂuorescence, luminescence, color, and current signal are usually detected (Eldridge
et al. 2011; Adeniran et al. 2015).
YBBsIDT are promising for sensing difﬁcult-to-detect analytes by modifying the
yeast metabolism to generate easily detected molecules (redox potential, dissolved
oxygen, etc.). YBBsIDT convert signals that are difﬁcult to measure into ones that
can easily be detected, using either by-products of metabolism or reporting systems
triggered directly by analyte recognition. The changes in a ﬂuorescence, lumines-
cence, or current as well as of pH or oxygen signal were detected (Adeniran et al.
2015).
Fig. 13.1 Scheme of pollutant-activated yeast cell responses mediated via speciﬁc (own or
recombinant) reporter system [modiﬁcation of the scheme given by Adeniran et al. (2015)]
13
Yeast-Based Systems for Environmental Control
379

13.2.3 G-Protein-Coupled Receptors in Bioassays
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), being the members of the largest family of
human membrane proteins and having similar basic structure, are able to selectively
detect an incredibly diverse range of molecules including photons, ions, small
organic molecules, and proteins. GPCRs undergo highly dynamic structural
transitions during signal transduction, from binding of extracellular ligands to
coupling with intracellular effector proteins (Jacobson 2015; Miao and McCammon
2016).
GPCRs are promising for development of YBBs, including bionose, due to
(1) key similarities between the yeast mating pathway and the signaling
mechanisms of higher organisms; (2) the fact that yeast has only two endogenous,
non-interacting GPCR pathways; and (3) the ability of GPCRs to mediate intracel-
lular changes in response to extracellular signals.
Many YBBs require expression of heterologous GPCRs that interface with the
S. cerevisiae pheromone mating pathway. The incorporation of GPCRs from higher
organisms with functionalities not naturally available to yeast greatly expands the
capability of YBBs (Adeniran et al. 2015). To develop bionose, two strategies were
proposed: (1) to replace or slightly modify the alpha subunit, which plays a key role
in both activating and resetting the G-protein after a ligand-binding event (Fukutani
et al. 2012); and (2) to replace the portions of the receptor itself, speciﬁcally the
terminal domains and the ﬁrst transmembrane regions (Hara et al. 2012).
13.3
Monitoring of Organic Pollutants Using Bioreporting
Systems in S. cerevisiae
13.3.1 Recombinant Human Receptors in Assay
of Endocrine-Disrupting Compounds
There is a growing need for suitable testing methods to screen compounds that may
activate or inhibit human receptors and/or screen environmental samples for the
presence of exogenous ligands or inhibitors, classiﬁed as hazardous endocrine
disrupting compounds (EDC). The relative ease, portability, and rapidity of the
YBBs’ assay, in addition to chemical methods, make it a cost-effective choice for
preliminary screening EDC potential of chemicals on humans and wildlife. For this
purpose, several S. cerevisiae yeast-cell-based bioreporters (YBBRs) utilizing
different nuclear receptors have been developed (Rajasa¨rkka¨ 2013).
The most proliﬁc class of YBBs is based on heterologous expression of human
receptors: steroid estrogen and its analogs, as well as thyroid, androgen, glucocor-
ticoid, mineralocorticoid and progesterone receptors, have all been recombinantly
expressed, often multiple times with different reporting strategies (Kaiser et al.
2010). To assay estrogens, the sensitive analytical system BioLuminescent Yeast
Estrogen Screen (BLYES) was proposed: the receptor is expressed continuously
with reporter genes induced by the receptor-ligand dimer (Sanseverino et al. 2005).
380
G. Gayda et al.

YBBR assays have several advantages in environmental analytics. In addition to
being inexpensive, they are particularly useful in determining the bioavailability of
contaminants. Yeast is also very tolerant toward toxicity of different sample
matrices. The use of the native human steroid receptors provides the most physio-
logically
relevant
information
when
screening
an
environmental
sample
(Rajasa¨rkka¨ 2013).
13.3.2 The Main Strategies to Improve Biosensors for Organic
Pollutants
The most of YBBR assays are usually not speciﬁc. To determine the total hormonal
activity of wastewater samples, the number of YBBR assays was proposed. To
improve assay speciﬁcity, directed evolution of intracellular receptors has been
performed. The best of resulting mutant was shown to be fourfold more sensitive to
bisphenol A and 166,000-fold less sensitive to the native ligand (Rajasa¨rkka¨ 2013).
The yeast-based bacterial bioluminescent bioreporters were developed and used
for the detection of EDCs (Eldridge et al. 2011; Rajasa¨rkka¨ 2013). In addition to the
major human endocrine receptors, there are organic compounds which inﬂuence
other human nuclear receptors such as the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and retinoid X
receptor. YBBs have been built around both of these receptors. However, two other
strategies have also emerged for engineering: (1) engineering receptor fusions
capable of detecting the desired ligand in yeast and (2) using a functional genomics
approach to identify native yeast promoter activation that correlated with exposure
to the desired ligand (Eldridge et al. 2011; Rajasa¨rkka¨ 2013).
In certain situations, heterologous expression of the receptor system is not
adequate to create an operational biosensor. With the use of a luciferase reporter,
several organotin compounds (Caseri 2014) were detected at nanomolar levels
(Kabiersch et al. 2013; Rajasa¨rkka¨ 2013). This approach thus offers another method
to construct YBBs when no native sensing elements are available. By fusing
heterologous domains to well-characterized transactivators, the range of sensing
domains available in yeast could be greatly expanded (Adeniran et al. 2015).
An alternative approach is to use functional genomics, where native yeast
promoters are identiﬁed that have the desired properties. Organophosphates
(pesticides and chemical weapons) are also a suitable target for YBBs. The appli-
cability of functional genomics for the development of organophosphate-sensitive
YBBs, when speciﬁc receptors are not known, was demonstrated. It is also possible,
at least theoretically, to engineer promoters to get more desirable properties. It has
been demonstrated that simple sequence changes in S. cerevisiae promoters can
lead to a variety of phenotypic effects (Nevoigt et al. 2007). Such techniques will be
promising for further improvement of biosensor performance.
A prototype semiautomated bioassay for genotoxic compounds, based on the
expression of a green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) in genetically modiﬁed yeast cells
in response to DNA damage, has been developed and successfully tested with the
alkylating agent methyl methanesulfonate (0.01%). A ﬂow-through detector has
13
Yeast-Based Systems for Environmental Control
381

been developed for GFP expressed in genetically modiﬁed yeast cells upon expo-
sure to toxic chemicals. The detector forms the basis of a prototype semiautomated
bioassay for genotoxic compounds, by biological ﬂuorescence induction, and
detection. The selection and optimization of the various optical components of
the system are discussed. The complete system was successfully tested with a
known DNA-damaging agent and was able to monitor the expression of GFP
online, in situ, and in real time (Benton et al. 2007; Garcı´a-Alonso et al. 2011).
Innovative microﬂuidic technologies showed many advantages by minimizing
the sample and reagent volumes required, shortening analysis time with high
resolution as well as repeatability, and demonstrating multiple assays on a chip in
a high-throughput manner (Ino et al. 2009; Jarque et al. 2016). Microﬂuidic
biosensor (MFB) containing eight multi-parallel channels has been developed to
enable the screening of chemicals for toxicity. The recombinant yeast S. cerevisiae
used was GreenScreen trademark which expresses GFPs when exposed to
genotoxins. After exposure of the yeast to methyl methanesulfonate, the ﬂuores-
cence emission was detected using an inverted microscope. Qualitative and quanti-
tative comparisons of the ﬂuorescent emission were performed. The device has the
potential for use by industrial manufacturers to detect and reduce the production
and discharge of toxic compounds, as well as to characterize already polluted
environments (Garcı´a-Alonso et al. 2009; Safarik et al. 2015).
To evaluate toxic chemicals that disrupt thyroid hormone (TH), several YBBR
bioassays were developed (Shiizaki et al. 2010; Kabiersch et al. 2013; Li et al.
2014). Four tested compounds, tetrabromobisphenol A, tetramethyl bisphenol A,
2-isopropylphenol, and o-t-butylphenol, which are suspected to have TH-disrupting
activity, were demonstrated to have agonistic activities in both assay yeasts. So,
these YBBR bioassays will be powerful tools for assessing TH ligand activity of
industrial chemicals and environmental pollutants (Kabiersch et al. 2013). For rapid
and sensitive evaluation of TH disruption at the level of thyroid receptor (TR), two
simple and fast modiﬁed bioassays, a colorimetric (CBA) and a chemiluminescent
(ChBA) with the usage of β-galactosidase, were developed. The compounds tested
included the known thyroid hormone 3,30,5-triiodo-L-thyronine, the speciﬁc TR
antagonist amiodarone hydrochloride (AH) and phthalate esters (PAEs), which
potentially disrupt thyroid hormone signaling. None of the tested PAEs induced
β-galactosidase expression, but diethylhexyl phthalate, benzyl butyl phthalate, and
dibutyl phthalate demonstrated TR antagonism. Although TR agonism was not
observed, antagonism was detected in all water samples and is expressed as AH
equivalents. The toxicology equivalent quantity values obtained by the ChBA
ranged from 21.2  1.6 to 313.9  28.8 μg/L AH, and similar values were obtained
for the CBA (Li et al. 2014).
382
G. Gayda et al.

13.4
Other Yeasts in Environmental Control
The number of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)-type biosensors for different
chemicals was proposed (Chan et al. 2000; Ponomareva et al. 2011; Yudina et al.
2015). YBB with thick-ﬁlm oxygen electrode as a transducer contains immobilized
yeast Arxula adeninivorans as bioelement. Agonistic and antagonistic actions of
phenols, phthalates, and organochlorine pesticides were tested by this YBB in the
absence and presence of 5 μM 9-cis RA, at which maximal beta-galactosidase
activity could be induced. The main analytical parameters of the developed YBB
were determined, and domestic wastewater was analyzed (Chan et al. 2000). In the
other variant of YBB, artiﬁcial microbial cocultures of the yeasts Pichia angusta,
A. adeninivorans, and Debaryomyces hansenii were formed to develop the receptor
element. This YBB, containing the cocultures immobilized in N-vinylpyrrolidone-
modiﬁed poly(vinyl alcohol), possessed broad substrate speciﬁcities and enabled
assays of water and fermentation products within a broad BOD range (2.4–80 mg/
L) with a high correlation (R ¼ 0.9988) to the standard method (Yudina et al.
2015).
Yeasts Saccharomyces, Kluyveromyces, Rhodotorula, and Yarrowia modiﬁed
with magnetic micro- and nanoparticles (NPs) were shown to be employed as YBBs
in toxicity microscreening devices as well as efﬁcient adsorbents for removing
different xenobiotics. Magnetically modiﬁed yeast cells can be used as part of cost-
effective microﬂuidic biosensor (MFB) systems (see Table 13.1). One such screen-
ing method used viable yeast cells containing genetically modiﬁed GFP reporter.
Cells were magnetically functionalized by biocompatible positively charged mag-
netic NPs, with diameters of 15 nm and held within an MFB. The GFP reporter
yeast cells were used to detect genotoxicity by monitoring the exposure of the cells
to methyl methanesulfonate; effective ﬂuorescence emitted from the produced GFP
was measured. The magnetically enhanced retention of the yeast cells, with their
facile subsequent removal and reloading, allowed very convenient and rapid
screening of genotoxic compounds (Safarik et al. 2015).
A YBB with cells of A. adeninivorans LS3 immobilized in the hydrogel poly
(carbamoyl)sulfonate has been developed for measurement of biodegradable
substances. The immobilized yeast membrane was placed in front of a BOD with
600 mV versus Ag/AgCl. Arxula is salt tolerant; it can give a stable signal up to
2.5 M NaCl in sample (120 mM in measuring cell). The YBB has a wide linear
range (up to a corresponding BOD value of 550 mg/L) and very high stability
(Renneberg et al. 2004).
The number of other effective YBBs was proposed with recombinant yeast
A. adeninivorans: amperometric sensors for the determination of pharmaceuticals
and chemicals such as omeprazole, lansoprazole, β-naphthoﬂavone, and methyl-
cholanthrene, semi-online operation device, and the EstraMonitor for assay of
estrogenic substances (Pham et al. 2012, 2013, 2015).
Formaldehyde (FA) is a highly reactive compound with a toxic effect on all
organisms due to nonspeciﬁc interactions with proteins and nucleic acids. To
develop effective methods for FA detection, the cells of the thermotolerant
13
Yeast-Based Systems for Environmental Control
383

methylotrophic yeast Hansenula polymorpha were employed (Sibirny et al. 2011).
The cells of recombinant strain Tf-6 and mutant strain C-105 (gcr1 catX) were used
as catalytic elements in amperometric YBBs. The chosen yeast cells were shown to
be resistant to elevated concentrations of FA in the medium due to their ability to
overproduce the corresponding yeast enzymes: formaldehyde dehydrogenase and
alcohol oxidase. Experimental data conﬁrm the possibility of exploiting the devel-
oped YBBs and bioreactors, based on methylotrophic yeast cells, for sensitive FA
assay and its detoxiﬁcation (Sigawi et al. 2011, 2014; Gayda et al. 2015). The
reliability of the proposed analytical approaches was tested on model solutions and
on real samples of FA-containing industrial wastes. A strong cross-correlation was
found between FA content values obtained by the developed methods and routinely
used chemical ones (Sibirny et al. 2011).
13.5
Monitoring of Heavy and Transitional Metals
Environmental sensing of heavy metals through whole cell microbial biosensors,
including YBBs, was described in detail recently by Adeniran et al. (2015), Bereza
et al. (2015), Gutie´rrez et al. (2015), Vopa´lenska´ et al. (2015), Jarque et al. (2016),
and others. The main types of described YBBs and their characteristics are
presented in Table 13.1.
Contamination of water by heavy metals represents a potential risk for both
aquatic and terrestrial organisms, including humans (Teo and Wong 2014). Heavy
metals in water resources can come from various industrial activities, and drinking
water can be ex post contaminated by heavy metals such as Cu2+ from house ﬁttings
(e.g., water reservoirs) and pipes. A new copper biosensor that based on cells of a
speciﬁcally modiﬁed S. cerevisiae strain immobilized in alginate beads was devel-
oped. This optical biosensor was capable of detecting copper ions at concentrations
of 1–100 μM. The YBB was successfully tested in the determination of copper
concentrations in real samples of water contaminated with copper ions. In contrast
to analytical methods or other biosensors based on ﬂuorescent proteins, the newly
designed YBB does not require speciﬁc equipment and allows the quick detection
of copper in many parallel samples (Vopa´lenska´ et al. 2015).
YBBs are well suited to monitor heavy metals due to their availability to
distinguish between bioavailability and concentration—an important distinction,
as only certain forms of ions have biological effects. Bacterial heavy metal
biosensors have seen signiﬁcantly more developed than yeast-based systems,
including biosensors for Cd, Pb, Hg, Cr, Ni, Co, Zn, Cu, and As (Adeniran et al.
2015). This disparity may be due to knowledge about the numerous metal-speciﬁc
resistance operons in Escherichia coli which made it easy to identify speciﬁc metal
responsive promoters. Only two metal-speciﬁc toxicity resistance genes (for As and
Cd) are well characterized in S. cerevisiae (Wysocki and Tama´s 2010). Neverthe-
less, several yeast-based metal biosensors have been developed using either optical
or electrical reporting systems (Bereza-Malcolm et al. 2015; Matsuura et al. 2013).
384
G. Gayda et al.

Two such systems measure copper, which is an essential cofactor for all life
forms at low concentrations, but is toxic and causes an environmental concern at
high concentrations. Both systems take advantage of the Cu2+ inducible promoter
which regulates expression of the CUP1 copper-binding protein. The electrical
method uses the promoter to drive expression of LacZ to enable lactose metabolism
(Lehmann et al. 2000; Tag et al. 2007). The yeasts are incubated with lactose and
the increase in metabolism, and therefore oxygen consumption, associated with
promoter activation, is measured by an electrode, similar to the BOD systems. The
optical approach uses the CUP1 promoter to drive the ﬁreﬂy luciferase gene
(Leskinen et al. 2003). The luciferase gene was modiﬁed from the wild type to
remove peroxisome-targeting peptides, which improved cellular viability and sig-
nal strength. Both systems report a similar detection limit (1 μM). The electrical
system requires cell immobilization and more specialized ﬂow injection analysis
equipment; however, the assay itself is faster as no incubation period is required.
The electrical biosensor demonstrated agreement with chemical analyses on waste-
water samples (Tag et al. 2007), while the optical biosensor was used to demon-
strate copper bioavailability in a series of metal nanoparticle toxicity studies
(Aruoja et al. 2009; Kasemets et al. 2009).
The advantages and disadvantages of using eukaryotic microorganisms to design
biosensors for monitoring environmental heavy metal pollution in soil or aquatic
habitats were discussed. A comparative analysis of the promoter genes used to
design biosensors, based on yeast (S. cerevisiae), microalgae, and ciliated protozoa,
is carried out, and the sensitivity and reproducibility of the main reporter genes used
is calculated (Gutie´rrez et al. 2015).
YBB optical sensing system for copper was developed based on recombinant
S. cerevisiae cells harboring plasmid pYEX-GFPuv. The basis of this system was
the ability of the transcriptional activator protein Ace1 present in S. cerevisiae to
control the expression of the reporter protein, GFPuv. When copper ions are present
in the sample, the Ace1 protein activates the CUP1 promoter located upstream from
the GFPuv gene in plasmid pYEX-GFPuv, thus inducing the production of GFPuv.
The concentration of copper ions in the sample can then be related to the GFPuv
expressed in the yeast. The amount of GFPuv produced in the system was deter-
mined by monitoring the ﬂuorescence emitted at 507 nm after excitation at 397 nm.
This system can detect Cu2+ at concentrations as low as 0.5 μM and is selective for
Cu2+ over a variety of metal ions, with the exception of silver. The applicability of
this sensing system to different analytical platforms and in real samples was
demonstrated (Shetty et al. 2004).
For selective determination of methylmercury (MeHg), S. cerevisiae cells were
used. Cells were immobilized in agarose gel as binding phase and polyacrylamide
as diffusive layer in the diffusive gradient in thin ﬁlms (DGT) technique. Deploy-
ment tests showed good linearity in mass uptake up to 48 h (3276 ng). When
coupling the DGT technique with cold vapor atomic ﬂuorescence spectrometry, the
method has a limit of detection of 0.44 ng/L (preconcentration factor of 11 for 48 h
deployment). Inﬂuence of ionic strength (from 0.5 mM to 0.1 M NaCl) and pH
(from 3.5 to 8.5) on MeHg uptake were evaluated. For these ranges, recoveries of
13
Yeast-Based Systems for Environmental Control
385

84–105% and 84–98% were obtained for ionic strength and pH, respectively.
Potential interference due to the presence of Cu, Fe, Mn, and Zn was also assessed
showing good recoveries (70–87%). The selectivity of the proposed approach was
tested by deployments in solutions containing MeHg and Hg(II). Results obtained
showed recoveries of 102–115% for MeHg, while the uptake of Hg(II) was insig-
niﬁcant.
The
proposed
approach
was
successfully
employed
for
in
situ
measurements in the Negro River (Tafurt-Cardona et al. 2015).
13.6
Conclusion
Yeast cells, specially engineered by introducing speciﬁc receptors and highly
sensitive reporter systems, seem to be very promising and prospective for rapid
and sensitive monitoring of dangerous environmental pollutants. It can be predicted
that after standardization, such systems will be candidates for commercialization
and a broad use in different ﬁelds related to environmental control.
References
Adeniran A, Sherer M, Tyo KEJ (2015) Yeast-based biosensors: design and applications. FEMS
Yeast Res 15:1–15
Aruoja V, Dubourguier H-C, Kasemets K, Kahru A (2009) Toxicity of nanoparticles of CuO, ZnO
and TiO2 to microalgae Pseudokirchneriella subcapitata. Sci Total Environ 407:1461–1468
Benton MG, Glasser NR, Palecek SP (2007) The utilization of a Saccharomyces cerevisiae
HUG1P-GFP promoter–reporter construct for the selective detection of DNA damage. Mutat
Res 633:21–34
Bereza-Malcolm LT, Mann G, Franks AE (2015) Environmental sensing of heavy metals through
whole cell microbial biosensors: a synthetic biology approach review. ACS Synth Biol 4
(5):535–546
Bovee TFH, Helsdingen RJR, Hamers ARM et al (2007) A new highly speciﬁc and robust yeast
androgen bioassay for the detection of agonists and antagonists. Anal Bioanal Chem
389:1549–1558
Bovee TFH, Helsdingen RJR, Hamers ARM et al (2011) Recombinant cell bioassays for the
detection of (gluco)corticosteroids and endocrine-disrupting potencies of several environmen-
tal PCB contaminants. Anal Bioanal Chem 401:873–882
Bui VN, Nguyen TTH, Mai CT et al (2016) Procarcinogens – determination and evaluation by
yeast-based biosensor transformed with plasmids incorporating RAD54 reporter construct and
cytochrome P450 genes. PLoS One 11(12):e0168721. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0168721
Caseri W (2014) Initial organotin chemistry. J Organomet Chem 751:20–24
Chan C, Lehmann M, Chan K et al (2000) Designing an amperometric thick-ﬁlm microbial BOD
sensor. Biosens Bioelectron 15(7-8):343–353
Chatterjee S, Kumar V, Majumder CB, Roy P (2008) Screening of some anti-progestin endocrine
disruptors using a recombinant yeast based in vitro bioassay. Toxicol In Vitro 22:788–798
Chelikani V, Downard AJ, Kunze G et al (2012) Investigating yeast cell responses to oestrogen by
electrochemical detection. Electrochim Acta 73:136–140
Dragone R, Frazzoli C, Grasso G, Rossi G (2014) Sensor with intact or modiﬁed yeast cells as
rapid device for toxicological test of chemicals. J Agric Chem Environ 3:35–40
386
G. Gayda et al.

Eldridge M, Sanseverino J, Umbuzeiro GA, Sayler GS (2011) Analysis of environmental samples
with yeast-based bioluminescent bioreporters. In: Ekundayo E (ed) Environmental monitoring.
InTech, Rijeka. doi:10.5772/27139
Fiore AM, Naik V, Leibensperger EM (2015) Air quality and climate connections. J Air Waste
Manag Assoc 65(6):645–685
Fukutani Y, Nakamura T, Yorozu M et al (2012) The N-terminal replacement of an olfactory
receptor for the development of a yeast-based biomimetic odor sensor. Biotechnol Bioeng
109:205–212
Garcı´a-Alonso J, Greenway GM, Hardege JD, Haswell SJ (2009) A prototype microﬂuidic chip
using ﬂuorescent yeast for detection of toxic compounds. Biosens Bioelectron 24:1508–1511
Garcı´a-Alonso J, Fakhrullin RF, Paunov VN et al (2011) Microscreening toxicity system based on
living magnetic yeast and gradient chips. Anal Bioanal Chem 400:1009–1013
Gayda G, Demkiv O, Klepach H et al (2015) Formaldehyde: detection and biodegradation,
Chapter 6. In: Patton A (ed) Formaldehyde: synthesis, applications and potential health effects.
Nova Science, New York, pp 117–142. ISBN:978-1-63482-412-5
Gerlach T et al (2014) Development and assessment of a novel Arxula adeninivorans androgen
screen (A-YAS) assay and its application in analysis of cattle urine. Sci Total Environ
490:1073–1081
Goldblum DK, Holodnick SE, Mancy KH, Briggs DE (1990) Oxygen transport in bioﬁlm
electrodes for screening of toxic chemicals. AIChE J 36:19–28
Gutie´rrez JC, Amaro F, Martı´n-Gonza´lez A (2015) Heavy metal whole-cell biosensors using
eukaryotic microorganisms: an updated critical review. Front Microbiol 6:48. doi:10.3389/
fmicb.2015.00048
Hara K, Inada Y, Ono T et al (2012) Chimeric yeast G-protein α subunit harboring a 37-residue
C-terminal gustducin-speciﬁc sequence is functional in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biosci
Biotechnol Biochem 76:512–516
He W, Yuan S, Zhong WH et al (2016) Application of genetically engineered microbial whole-cell
biosensors for combined chemosensing. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 100(3):1109–1119
Hou QH, Ma AS, Zhuang XL, Zhuang GQ (2013) Advance in the bioavailability monitoring of
heavy metal based on microbial whole-cell sensor. Huan Jing Ke Xue 34(1):347–356
Ino K, Kitagawa Y, Watanabe T et al (2009) Detection of hormone active chemicals using
genetically engineered yeast cells and microﬂuidic devices with interdigitated array electrodes.
Electrophoresis 30:3406–3412
Jacobson KA (2015) New paradigms in GPCR drug discovery. Biochem Pharmacol 98
(4):541–555
Jarque S, Bittner M, Blaha L, Hilscherova K (2016) Yeast biosensors for detection of environ-
mental pollutants: current state and limitations review article. Trends Biotechnol 34
(5):408–419
Kabiersch G, Rajasa¨rkka¨ J, Tuomela M et al (2013) Bioluminescent yeast assay for detection of
organotin compounds. Anal Chem 85:5740–5745
Kaiser C, Uhlig S, Gerlach T et al (2010) Evaluation and validation of a novel Arxula
adeninivorans estrogen screen (nAES) assay and its application in analysis of wastewater,
seawater, brackish water and urine. Sci Total Environ 408:6017–6126
Kasemets K, Ivask A, Dubourguier HC, Kahru A (2009) Toxicity of nanoparticles of ZnO, CuO
and TiO2 to yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Toxicol In Vitro 23:1116–1122
Lehmann M, Riedel K, Adler K, Kunze G (2000) Amperometric measurement of copper ions with
a deputy substrate using a novel Saccharomyces cerevisiae sensor. Biosens Bioelectron
15:211–219
Leskinen P, Virta M, Karp M (2003) One-step measurement of ﬁreﬂy luciferase activity in yeast.
Yeast 20(13):1109–1113
Leskinen P, Michelini E, Picard D, Karp M, Virta M (2005) Bioluminescent yeast assays for
detecting estrogenic and androgenic activity in different matrices. Chemosphere 61(2):259–
266
13
Yeast-Based Systems for Environmental Control
387

Li J, Ma M, Wang Z (2008) A two-hybrid yeast assay to quantify the effects of xenobiotics on
thyroid hormonemediated gene expression. Environ Toxicol Chem 27(1):159
Li J, Ren S, Han S, Li N (2014) A yeast bioassay for direct measurement of thyroid hormone
disrupting effects in water without sample extraction, concentration, or sterilization.
Chemosphere 100:139–145
Lim JW, Ha D, Lee J et al (2015) Review of micro/nanotechnologies for microbial biosensors.
Front Bioeng Biotechnol 3:61. doi:10.3389/fbioe.2015.00061
Matsuura H, Yamamoto Y, Muraoka M et al (2013) Development of surface-engineered yeast
cells displaying phytochelatin synthase and their application to cadmium biosensors by the
combined use of pyrene-excimer ﬂuorescence. Biotechnol Prog 29:1197–1202
Miao Y, McCammon JA (2016) G-protein coupled receptors: advances in simulation and drug
discovery. Curr Opin Struct Biol 41:83–89
Michelini E, Cevenini L, Mezzanotte L et al (2008) A sensitive recombinant cell-based biolumi-
nescent assay for detection of androgen-like compounds. Nat Protoc 3:1895–1902
Nakamura H, Suzuki K, Ishikuro H et al (2007) A new BOD estimation method employing a
double-mediator system by ferricyanide and menadione using the eukaryote Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Talanta 72:210–216
Nakamura H, Shimomura-Shimizu M, Karube I (2008) Development of microbial sensors and
their application. Adv Biochem Eng Biotechnol 109:351–394
Nakamura Y, Ishii J, Kondo A (2015) Applications of yeast-based signaling sensor for characteri-
zation of antagonist and analysis of site-directed mutants of the human serotonin 1A receptor.
Biotechnol Bioeng 112(9):1906–1915
Nevoigt E, Fischer C, Mucha O et al (2007) Engineering promoter regulation. Biotechnol Bioeng
96:550–558
Noguerol T-N, Boronat S, Jarque S et al (2006) Detection of hormone receptor ligands in yeast by
ﬂuorogenic methods. Talanta 69:351–358
Park JN, Sohn MJ, Oh DB et al (2007) Identiﬁcation of the cadmium-inducible Hansenula
polymorpha SEO1 gene promoter by transcriptome analysis and its application to whole-cell
heavy-metal detection systems. Appl Environ Microbiol 73(19):5990–6000
Pham HTM, Giersberg M, Uhlig S et al (2012) EstraMonitor – a monitor for amperometric
detection of estrogenic activity with Arxula adeninivorans yeast cells as the biocomponent.
Sens Actuators B 161(1):137–145
Pham HTM, Kunath K, Gehrmann L et al (2013) Application of modiﬁed Arxula adeninivorans
yeast cells in an online biosensor for the detection of estrogenic compounds in wastewater
samples. Sens Actuators B 185:628–637
Pham HTM, Giersberg M, Gehrmann L et al (2015) The determination of pharmaceuticals in
wastewater using a recombinant Arxula adeninivorans whole cell biosensor. Sens Actuators B
211:439–448
Ponamoreva ON, Arliapov VA, Alferov VA et al (2011) Microbial biosensors for detection of
biological oxygen demand (a review). Prikl Biokhim Mikrobiol 47(1):5–15
Rajasa¨rkka¨ J (2013) Development of high-throughput yeast-cell-based bioreporter assays for
speciﬁc monitoring of bisphenol A and chemical testing of endocrine disrupting compounds.
Academic Dissertation, Helsinki, 50 p
Renneberg T, Kwan RCH, Chan C et al (2004) A salt-tolerant yeast-based microbial sensor for
24 hour community wastewater monitoring in coastal regions. Microchim Acta 148:235–240
Roda A, Roda B, Cevenini L et al (2011) Analytical strategies for improving the robustness and
reproducibility of bioluminescent microbial bioreporters. Anal Bioanal Chem 401:201–211
Safarik I, Maderova Z, Pospiskova K et al (2015) Magnetically responsive yeast cells: methods of
preparation and applications. Yeast 32:227–237
Sanseverino JA, Gupta RKA, Layton ACA et al (2005) Use of Saccharomyces cerevisiae BLYES
expressing bacterial bioluminescence for rapid, sensitive detection of estrogenic compounds.
Appl Environ Microbiol 71:4455–4460
388
G. Gayda et al.

Schwartz-Mittelman
A
et
al
(2005)
Electrochemical
detection
of
xenoestrogenic
and
antiestrogenic compounds using a yeast twohybrid-17-b-estradiol system. Bioelectrochemistry
65:149–156
Shetty RS, Deo SK, Liu Y, Daunert S (2004) Fluorescence-based sensing system for copper using
genetically engineered living yeast cells. Biotechnol Bioeng 88(5):664–670
Shiizaki K, Asai S, Ebata S et al (2010) Establishment of yeast reporter assay systems to detect
ligands of thyroid hormone receptors alpha and beta. Toxicol In Vitro 24:638–644
Shiizaki K, Yoshikawa T, Takada E et al (2014) Development of yeast reporter assay form
screening speciﬁc ligands of retinoic acid and retinoid X receptor subtypes. J Pharmacol
Toxicol Methods 69:245–252
Shimomura-Shimizu M, Karube I (2010) Yeast based sensors. Adv Biochem Eng Biotechnol
117:1–19
Sibirny V, Demkiv O, Sigawi S et al (2011) Formaldehyde oxidizing enzymes and genetically
modiﬁed yeast hansenula polymorpha cells in monitoring and removal of formaldehyde,
Chapter 6. In: Einschlag FSG (ed) Waste water – evaluation and management. InTech Open
Access Publisher, Rijeka, pp 115–154. ISBN: 978-953-307-233-3
Sigawi S, Smutok O, Demkiv O et al (2011) Immobilized formaldehyde-metabolizing enzymes
from Hansenula polymorpha for removal and control of airborne formaldehyde. J Biotechnol
153:138–144
Sigawi S, Smutok O, Demkiv O et al (2014) Detection of waterborne and airborne formaldehyde:
from amperometric chemosensing to a visual biosensor based on alcohol oxidase. Materials 7
(2):1055–1068
Sun JZ, Peter Kingori G, Si RW et al (2015) Microbial fuel cell-based biosensors for environmen-
tal monitoring: a review. Water Sci Technol 71(6):801–809
Tafurt-Cardona M, Eismann CE, Sua´rez CA et al (2015) In situ selective determination of
methylmercury in river water by diffusive gradient in thin ﬁlms technique (DGT) using baker’s
yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) immobilized in agarose gel as binding phase. Anal Chim
Acta 887:38–44
Tag K, Riedel K, Bauer H-J et al (2007) Amperometric detection of Cu2+ by yeast biosensors using
ﬂow injection analysis (FIA). Sens Actuators B 122:403–409
Teo SC, Wong LS (2014) Whole cell-based biosensors for environmental heavy metals detection.
Annu Res Rev Biol 4(17):2663–2674
Thurston GD, Burnett RT, Turner MC et al (2016) Ischemic heart disease mortality and long-term
exposure to source-related components of U.S. ﬁne particle air pollution. Environ Health
Perspect 124(6):785–794
Turdean GL (2011) Design and development of biosensors for the detection of heavy metal
toxicity review article. SAGE-Hindawi Access to Research. Int J Electrochem, Article ID
343125, 15 pages. doi:10.4061/2011/343125
Vigneshvar S, Sudhakumari CC, Senthilkumaran B, Prakash H (2016) Recent advances in
biosensor technology for potential applications - an overview. Front Bioeng Biotechnol 4:11.
doi:10.3389/fbioe.2016.00011
Vopa´lenska´ I, Va´chova´ L, Palkova´ Z (2015) New biosensor for detection of copper ions in water
based on immobilized genetically modiﬁed yeast cells. Biosens Bioelectron 72:160–167
Walmsley RM, Keenan P (2000) The eukaryote alternative: advantages of using yeasts in place of
bacteria in microbial biosensor development. Biotechnol Bioprocess Eng 5:387–394
Watanabe M, Noma H, Kurai J et al (2017) A panel study of airborne particulate matter composi-
tion versus concentration: potential for inﬂammatory response and impaired pulmonary func-
tion in children. Allergol Int 66(1):52–58
Wei T, Zhang C, Xu X et al (2013) Construction and evaluation of two biosensors based on yeast
transcriptional response to genotoxic chemicals. Biosens Bioelectron 44:138–145
Wysocki R, Tamas MJ (2010) How Saccharomyces cerevisiae copes with toxic metals and
metalloids. FEMS Microbiol Rev 34:925–951
13
Yeast-Based Systems for Environmental Control
389

Yang H-C, Lim B, Lee Y (2005) In vitro assessment of biocompatibility of biomaterials by using
ﬂuorescent yeast biosensor. Curr Appl Phys 5:444–448
Yudina NY, Arlyapov VA, Chepurnova MA et al (2015) A yeast co-culture-based biosensor for
determination of waste water contamination levels. Enzyme Microb Technol 78:46–53
390
G. Gayda et al.

Yeast-Based Biosensors for Clinical
Diagnostics and Food Control
14
Mykhailo Gonchar, Oleh Smutok, Maria Karkovska,
Nataliya Stasyuk, and Galina Gayda
Abstract
Science; medicine; clinical diagnostics; biotechnologies, including those in food
and beverage industries; as well as environmental technologies need highly
selective, sensitive, rapid, and reliable methods of identifying the key
ingredients or metabolites which determine the quality of the product or serve
as markers for diseases, the physiological state of human organism, or environ-
mental safety. Biosensors are the most promising tool for these aims. Although
the most of created biosensors are based on using enzymes as biocatalytic
elements, cell sensors, especially microbial ones, have been actively developed
only in recent years. A microbial biosensor consists of a transducer in conjunc-
tion with immobilized viable or nonviable microbial cells, an economical sub-
stitute for enzymes. The target analyte is usually either a substrate or an inhibitor
of cell metabolism. In this review, the main achievements in the elaboration of
microbial sensors, based on yeast cells, are described, and perspectives of their
usage in clinical diagnostics and food control are discussed.
Contents
14.1
Introduction ..............................................................................
392
14.2
Microbial Sensors for Clinical Diagnostics .............................................
396
14.2.1
Glucose .........................................................................
396
14.2.2
Lactate ..........................................................................
397
14.2.3
Hormones .......................................................................
398
14.2.4
Vitamin B1 .....................................................................
399
14.2.5
L-Lysine .........................................................................
399
14.2.6
Urate ............................................................................
400
14.2.7
Intracellular Metabolites .......................................................
400
M. Gonchar (*) • O. Smutok • M. Karkovska • N. Stasyuk • G. Gayda
Department of Analytical Biotechnology, Institute of Cell Biology, NAS of Ukraine, 14/16,
Drahomanov Street, Lviv 79005, Ukraine
e-mail: mykhailo1952@gmail.com
# Springer International Publishing AG 2017
A.A. Sibirny (ed.), Biotechnology of Yeasts and Filamentous Fungi,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-58829-2_14
391

14.2.8
Toxic Compounds ..............................................................
401
14.3
Microbial Sensors Based on Yeast Cells for Food Analysis ...........................
403
14.3.1
Ethanol Assay ..................................................................
403
14.3.2
Amino Acid Assay .............................................................
406
14.3.3
L-Lactate Assay .................................................................
407
14.3.4
Assay of Contaminants ........................................................
407
References .......................................................................................
408
14.1
Introduction
Modern science; medicine; clinical diagnostics; biotechnologies, including those in
food and beverage industries; as well as environmental technologies need highly
selective, sensitive, rapid, and reliable methods of identifying the key ingredients or
metabolites which determine the quality of the product or serve as markers for
diseases, the physiological state of human organism, or environmental safety
(Turner et al. 1990).
Among different analytical approaches, a special role is attributed to analytical
biotechnology which exploits the principles of biomolecular recognition, highly
developed during the evolution. Biomolecular recognition is responsible for storing
(on molecular level) and reading (on supramolecular level) of information and is
the fundamental characteristic of the life. Such property of biomolecules and their
complexes is used in аnalytical biotechnology. It can be deﬁned as a branch of
biotechnology related with the use of tissues, cells, organelles, biomolecules, their
complexes, and even principles of their functioning for analytical purposes
(Gonchar et al. 2002).
Biosensors are the most novel achievement of analytical biotechnology.
Although up to now IUPAC has not accepted an ofﬁcial deﬁnition of the term
biosensor, its electrochemical representative is deﬁned as “a self-contained
integrated device, which is capable of providing speciﬁc quantitative or semi-
quantitative analytical information using a biological recognition element (bio-
chemical receptor) which is retained in direct spatial contact with an electrochemi-
cal transduction element” (Thevenot et al. 2001). Generally, a biosensor is a hybrid
device containing two functional parts: a bioelement (biorecognition unit)—an
immobilized biologically active material—and a physical transducer (signal
converting unit). Figuratively speaking, biosensors may be called “chemical canar-
ies” based on historical fact about miners using such birds to detect toxic methane.
Basically, biosensors can be regarded as information transducers in which the
energy of biospeciﬁc interactions is transformed into the information about the
nature and concentration of an analyte in the sample. Pieces of tissue, microbial
cells, organelles, natural biomembranes or liposomes, receptors, enzymes,
antibodies and antigens, nucleic acids and other biomolecules, and even biomimet-
ics which imitate structural and functional features of the natural analogue can be
used as biorecognition elements. The bioelement is a recognition unit providing
selective binding or biochemical/metabolic conversion of the analyte that results in
392
M. Gonchar et al.

changes of physical or physicochemical characteristics of the transducer (Schmidt
and Karube 1998). The output from the transducer is ampliﬁed, processed, and
displayed (Fig. 14.1).
The biosensor bioelement is usually prepared in the immobilized form and often
covered with an outer membrane (or placed between two membranes in a sandwich
manner), which either prevents the penetration of interfering substances into a
sensitive bioselective layer and transducer surface or creates a diffusion barrier
for the analyte. Such membrane structures increase the stability of the
biorecognizing element, enhance its selectivity, and provide the diffusion
limitations for biochemical reactions. Electrochemical, optical, piezoelectric, ther-
moelectric, transistor, acoustic, and other elements are used as transducers in
biosensor systems.
The most essential advantages of biosensors are their excellent chemical selec-
tivity and high sensitivity, possibility of miniaturization, and compatibility with
computers. Their drawbacks are limited stability and rather a complicated proce-
dure of preparing the biologically active material.
The enzyme biosensors are the most widespread devices; some of them are
produced commercially. The world market of biosensors was estimated at approx.
$11.39 billion in 2013 and is expected to reach $22.68 billion by 2020 with an
annual growth of 10.00% from 2014 to 2020 (http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/
PressReleases/biosensors.asp).
The commercially produced biosensors are used mostly in clinical medicine
(as points of care), in home diagnostics, in research labs, in biodefense, in environ-
mental monitoring, for online control of biotechnological processes, in food indus-
try, and for military or law enforcement (Fig. 14.2). The use of biosensors for
fundamental research, e.g., in metabolomics, is also very promising (Kraly et al.
2009).
Biocatalytic sensor 
(enzyme- or cells-based)
The biocatalyst (a) converts the substrate to product. 
This reaction is determined by the transducer (b) which converts 
it to an electrical signal. The output from the transducer 
is amplified (c), processed (d) and displayed (e).
Fig. 14.1 Functional units of biosensor (Atta et al. 2011)
14
Yeast-Based Biosensors for Clinical Diagnostics and Food Control
393

Biosensors are characterized by their high selectivity. They also provide fast
output due to high activity and/or high local concentration of catalytic or binding
element in a biosensitive layer. The drawbacks of biosensors are their insufﬁcient
stability and the high price of some puriﬁed biomolecules.
Cell sensors, especially microbial ones, have been actively developed only in
recent years. A microbial biosensor consists of a transducer in conjunction with
immobilized viable or nonviable microbial cells, an economical substitute for
enzymes (D’Souza 2001; Lei et al. 2006). The target analyte is usually either a
substrate or an inhibitor of cell metabolism.
Cell biosensors have a range of considerable advantages when compared to their
enzyme analogues: availability of cells, low price and simple procedure of cell
isolation, possibility to use long metabolic chains, avoiding puriﬁcation of enzymes
and coenzymes, advanced opportunity for genetic manipulations of metabolic
pathways, integrity of the cell response (important in assaying total toxicity and
mutagenic action of environmental pollutants), possibility to retain viability of
sensing cells and even to provide their propagation, and, in some cases, higher
stability of cell elements compared to enzyme ones (Gonchar et al. 2002; Nakamura
et al. 2008; Shimomura-Shimizu and Karube 2010a, b). The main drawbacks of
microbial biosensors are a long response time due to a lower concentration of
Scientific and practical importance of biosensors
Clinical diagnostics
Biomarkers of diseases
and 
treatment process
Biotechnological 
Process Control
Control of 
food quality
Environmental 
monitoring 
Military / Law Enforcement
Research 
(metabolomics)
Analyte
Fig. 14.2 Application of biosensors in practice and research
394
M. Gonchar et al.

enzymes involved in cellular response, as well as low selectivity of cell output (e.g.,
in case of microbial O2 electrode sensors due to the broad substrate speciﬁcity of
cellular respiration).
These drawbacks are not absolute, taking into account recent progress in meta-
bolic and genetic engineering and the possibility to overexpress the key analytical
enzyme in the cell. The most known microbial sensors which exploit genetically
constructed cells and are used for toxicity and bioavailability testing are
bioluminescence-based biosensors created by fusing the lux gene with an inducible
gene promoter(Nunes-Halldorson and Duran 2003; Yagi 2006; Narsaiah et al.
2012).
In recent years, nanotechnology approaches have been successfully used for
improvement of functional properties of microbial sensors (Lim et al. 2015;
Adeniran et al. 2015). The integration of micro- and nanotechnologies seems to
be very promising in further development and production of such biosensors.
Many types of yeast-based biosensors (YBB) have been developed as analytical
tools since the ﬁrst microbial sensors (MS) were proposed by Karube et al. in 1977.
The characteristics of MS are in absolute contrast to those of enzyme sensors or
immunosensors, which are highly speciﬁc for the substrates of interest, although the
speciﬁcity of MS has been improved by genetic modiﬁcation of the microbe used as
the sensing element. MS have the advantages of tolerance to measuring conditions,
a long lifetime, and cost performance, but also the disadvantage of a long response
time (Nakamura et al. 2008; Shimomura-Shimizu and Karube 2010a).
Integrated approaches, including the best advantages of nanotechnology and
synthetic biology, provided a better perspective for developing speciﬁc and sensi-
tive biosensors with high regenerative potentials for diverse usage (Bereza-
Malcolm et al. 2015; Adeniran et al. 2015; He et al. 2016; Vigneshvar et al.
2016; Ponamoreva et al. 2011; Yudina et al. 2015; Jarque et al. 2016). MS appear
to be quite promising for online wastewater control; their advantages lie in the fact
that organic compounds in samples can be directly measured without any
pretreatment such as ﬁltration and dialysis (Dragone et al. 2014; Shimomura-
Shimizu and Karube 2010a).
YBB, based on electrochemical devices, usually contain one of three types of
electrodes: (1) oxygen electrodes (BOD) used for respiration testing (Chan et al.
1999; Shimomura-Shimizu and Karube 2010a); (2) fuel cell electrodes (MFC), self-
powered portable devices of the next-generation biosensing innovative technology
(Sun et al. 2015); and (3) membrane electrodes.
The YBB, based on genetically engineered cells, use a reporter gene under the
control of an inducible promoter. The promoters are activated in the presence of a
ligand of interest, either directly by the ligand/receptor dimer or via a signaling
cascade. Both the receptor and the promoter may be native to yeast or adapted from
other organisms. The most common reporting systems for YBB are based on optical
methods for detection, namely, ﬂuorescence (GFP, RFP, YFP), luminescence (Lux
bacterial and Luc ﬁreﬂy), colorimetry (beta-galactosidase), as well as electrical
methods (amperometry, potentiometry, conductometry, voltammetry) and growth
activity (HIS3, TRP1, LEU2). The advantages of optical methods are their high
14
Yeast-Based Biosensors for Clinical Diagnostics and Food Control
395

sensitivity and simplicity; the colorimetric variant is promising due to the visibility
of its results to the naked eye. Fluorescence and luminescence detection does not
need any substrate addition. The main advantages of electric methods are their high
sensitivity and fastness of procedure (Eldridge et al. 2011; Adeniran et al. 2015).
Many YBB are dependent upon the signaling capabilities of G-protein-coupled
receptors (GPCRs)—the largest family of human membrane proteins that mediate
cellular signaling and represent primary targets of about one third of currently
marketed drugs. Molecular dynamic simulations have been utilized to investigate
GPCR signaling mechanisms, to design novel small-molecule drug candidates and
to develop the methods of its analysis. The incorporation of GPCRs from higher
organisms with functionalities, not naturally available to yeast, greatly expands the
capability of YBB (Jacobson 2015; Miao and McCammon 2016).
In this review, the main achievements in the elaboration of microbial sensors,
based on yeast cells, are described, and perspectives of their usage in clinical
diagnostics and food control are discussed.
14.2
Microbial Sensors for Clinical Diagnostics
Widely used in vitro diagnostic approaches have a number of shortcomings; e.g.,
chemical methods suffer from low selectivity and sensitivity; ELISA is labor-
intensive and challenging to implement multiplex detection; PCR requires a com-
plicated sample preparation and has potential for false positives. When compared to
the described above approaches in clinical diagnostics, biosensors have a number of
advantages which include small sample volume, required for analysis, short assay
time, low energy consumption, low prices, high portability, high throughput, and
multiplexing ability.
Most of the described yeast-/fungi-based biosensors for clinical diagnostics are
of amperometric mode. The measurements are carried out at a ﬁxed potential
regarding a reference electrode and involve the detection of the current generated
by the oxidation or reduction of the substrate, mediators, or products of enzymatic
reaction at the surface of the electrode. Glucose, lactate, and ethanol are the most
frequently detected metabolic substrates in clinical diagnostics.
14.2.1 Glucose
The most well-known example in use today is the glucose sensor, which has a great
effect on the management of diabetes. About 3% of the population worldwide
suffers from diabetes, a leading cause of death, and its incidence is growing fast.
Diabetic individuals are at the greater risk of heart disease, stroke, high blood
pressure, blindness, kidney failure, neurological disorders, and other health-related
complications without diligent monitoring of blood glucose concentrations.
Although glucose oxidase-based sensors are widely used for glucose assay, spe-
cially treated Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells were used in combination with an
396
M. Gonchar et al.

oxygen electrode, to be applied in aerobic conditions, or with a carbon dioxide
sensor, to be used in anaerobic conditions (Mascini and Memoli 1986). To reduce
the interference due to the changes in oxygen and CO2 pressure, a potentiometric
sensor was proposed based on the use of Hansenula anomala for monitoring of pH
change correlating with glucose concentration (Racek 1991). To reduce the inter-
ference due to the changes in oxygen and CO2 pressure, a potentiometric sensor was
proposed based on the use of Hansenula anomala for monitoring of pH change
correlating with glucose concentration (Wang et al. 2013). Microbial sensors for
glucose determination based on co-immobilized Gluconobacter oxydans and Sac-
charomyces cerevisiae and co-immobilized G. oxydans and Kluyveromyces
marxianus cells were also developed (Svitel et al. 1998).
To address the challenges of biosensors with low selectivity and inability to
distinguish
between
substrates,
Ogataea
methanolica
was
combined with
Gluconobacter oxydans to make a biosensor able to determine ethanol and glucose
concentrations in various ethanol–glucose mixtures. The use of an artiﬁcial neural
network to analyze the data provided accurate estimation of ethanol and glucose
concentrations from 1 to 10 mM (Lobanov et al. 2001).
14.2.2 Lactate
Lactate measurement is helpful in respiratory insufﬁciencies, diabetes, shocks,
heart failure, metabolic disorders, intoxiﬁcation, and monitoring the physical con-
dition of athletes.
The earliest analysis of L-lactate in blood plasma and whole blood was carried
out by the sensor based on H. anomala cells. The sensor was based on yeast cells,
suspended in a semipermeable membrane attached to an amperometric electrode
(Racek and Musil 1987a). H. anomala cells have also been used in conjunction with
a carbon paste electrode for lactate determination in serum (Kulys et al. 1992).
The analysis of lactate in blood plasma and whole blood was carried out by
another sensor based on H. anomala cells. The sensor has high reproducibility,
stability, and rate of assay. The analysis results were in agreement with the data
obtained
using
conventional
spectrophotometric
technique
and
lactate
dehydrogenase-based enzyme sensor (Racek and Musil 1987b). There are a few
described microbial amperometric biosensors for
L-lactate analysis based on
baker’s yeast S. cerevisiae (Garjonyte et al. 2006, 2008). Drying temperature was
found to have an effect on lactic acid sensor performance. The K2 killer-type strain
of S. cerevisiae was dried at temperatures as high as 90 C for the use in a sensor
that showed higher sensitivity, lower noise, and quicker response time than previ-
ous S. cerevisiae lactate sensors (Garjonyte et al. 2009).
In recent years, a number of L-lactate-selective amperometric biosensors based
on genetically modiﬁed H. (Ogataea) polymorpha (gcr1 catX/prAOX_CYB2)
overproducing
L-lactate:
cytochrome
c-oxidoreductase
(EC
1.1.2.3,
ﬂavocytochrome b2, FC b2) have been reported (Smutok et al. 2007; Shkil et al.
2009). The usage of permeabilized cells of H. polymorpha containing FC b2 at a
14
Yeast-Based Biosensors for Clinical Diagnostics and Food Control
397

high level in combination with free-defuse electron transfer mediator demonstrated
better sensor characteristics: fast response, prolonged linearity, and operation at low
working potential (Smutok et al. 2007). Another amperometric microbial sensor is
based on the phenomenon of bioelectrochemical monitoring of L-lactate respiration.
It was shown that in the case of H. polymorpha cells, overproducing FC b2, the O2
reduction current is decreased upon the addition of L-lactate to the electrolyte
solution in contrast to the cells from the parental strain (Shkil et al. 2009). Recently,
a new approach based on the additional enrichment of the recombinant yeast cell
H. polymorpha by the FC b2 bound with nanoparticles to improve the analytical
parameters of microbial amperometric sensor has been reported (Karkovska
et al.2015). Moreover, D-lactate-selective amperometric biosensor based on the
cell debris of recombinant yeast H. polymorpha overproducing D-lactate: cyto-
chrome c-oxidoreductase (EC 1.1.2.4, DLDH) in combination with cytochrome
c and OS-contained dye was constructed. The sensor was characterized by high
selectivity to D-lactate due to the deletion of CYB2 gene responsible for the
synthesis of L-lactate: cytochrome c-oxidoreductase (Smutok et al. 2014).
14.2.3 Hormones
It is known that the decreased levels of neurotensin and estrogen are associated with
the occurrence of Parkinson’s disease, as well as with many other disorders. On the
other hand, a deﬁciency in serotonin causes the serotonin syndrome.
The modulation in optical properties such as ﬂuorescence caused by the interac-
tion of the biocatalyst with the target analyte is the basis for optical microbial
biosensors. There are a number of described ﬂuorescent microbial sensors for the
analysis of human hormones based on recombinant yeast cells with incorporated
ﬂuorescent reporters.
Neurotensin receptor type-1 (NTSR1) is a member of the G-protein-coupled
receptor (GPCR) family. The natural ligand of NTSR1 is neurotensin (NT), a
neuromodulator of the central nervous system. Because NT is also involved in
many oncogenic events, the signaling mediator NTSR1 is a signiﬁcant molecular
target in medicinal and therapeutic ﬁelds. It was used to construct a ﬂuorescence-
based microbial S. cerevisiae-based biosensor that can monitor the activation of
human NTSR1 signaling responding to its agonist (Ishii et al. 2014).
The monoamine neurotransmitter serotonin (5-HT) regulates a wide spectrum of
human physiology through the 5-HT receptor family. Yeast-based ﬂuorescent
reporter systems have proven to be especially useful for GPCR assays, since the
detection using a ﬂuorescent reporter considerably simpliﬁes measurement
procedures. A reﬁned yeast-based GPCR biosensor employing S. cerevisiae cells
with both incorporated Gα-engineered receptor and a ﬂuorescent reporter
(ZsGreen) was elaborated (Nakamura et al. 2015).
In addition to ﬂuorescence, there are reports on the construction of amperometric
microbial sensor for estrogen analysis. A phytase under the control of the estrogen-
induced promoter in the yeast Arxula adeninivorans was used as a biorecognition
398
M. Gonchar et al.

element. When the appropriate substrate was added, the induced phytase catalyzed
the formation of p-aminophenol, which can be oxidized at an electrode and thus
monitored amperometrically (Pham et al. 2012).
14.2.4 Vitamin B1
Vitamin B1 (thiamine) is one of the most important members of the B group of
vitamins. Vitamin B1 deﬁciency can be caused by a number of factors and diseases
such as alcoholism, HIV, vomiting, and some gastrointestinal illnesses.
An amperometric whole-cell biosensor based on S. cerevisiae cells immobilized
in gelatin was developed for selective determination of vitamin B1. The biosensor
was constructed using gelatin and cross-linking agent glutaraldehyde to immobilize
S. cerevisiae cells on the Teﬂon membrane of dissolved oxygen (DO) probe used as
the basic electrode system combined with a digital oxygen meter. The cells were
induced by vitamin B1 in the culture medium and used as a carbon source in the
absence of glucose. So, when the vitamin B1 solution was injected into the whole-
cell biosensor system, an increase in the respiration activity of the cells resulting
from the metabolic activity and causing a decrease in the DO concentration related
to vitamin B1 content was observed. Certainly, such a biosensor is unselective and
can be used only for the assay of the target analyte in vitamin B1 pills (Akyilmaz
et al. 2006).
14.2.5 L-Lysine
A naturally occurring amino acid, L-lysine is one of the only 20 amino acids that
serve as building blocks for proteins. The analysis of L-lysine is helpful in the
diagnostics of a variety of health conditions in medicine. As a drug, Lys can be used
to control cholesterol levels, prevent osteoporosis and other age-related bone
density conditions, support growth, and reduce anxiety and stress. The nutrient is
also effective in preventing herpes, treating shingles, relieving pain due to inﬂam-
mation, and maintaining heart health.
An amperometric microbial biosensor for sensitive determination of L-lysine
based on the cells of S. cerevisiae NRRL-12632, producing L-lysine oxidase
(EC 1.4.3.14), was developed. The cells were immobilized on a pretreated
oxygen-sensitive Teﬂon membrane using gelatin and glutaraldehyde. The assay
procedure for the microbial biosensor was based on the determination of the
differences in the respiration activity of the cells using oxygen meter in the absence
and presence of L-lysine (Akyilmaz et al. 2007).
14
Yeast-Based Biosensors for Clinical Diagnostics and Food Control
399

14.2.6 Urate
Uric acid is a ﬁnal purine intermediate of purine nucleotide catabolism in mammals.
Normally, uric acid is not accumulated in human ﬂuids, and its availability in
amounts exceeding the threshold levels in body ﬂuids (e.g., serum and urine) is a
clinically valuable diagnostic indicator. The presence of elevated uric acid levels is
a sign of gout, hyperuricemia, or Lesch–Nyhan syndrome. An elevated uric acid
concentration is related also to increased alcohol and cholesterol consumption,
obesity, diabetes, and kidney and heart diseases. A urate-selective microbial bio-
sensor was developed using cellular debris of recombinant methylotrophic yeast
H. polymorpha overproducing urate-oxygen oxidoreductase (urate oxidase, uricase,
1.7.3.3) as a bioselective element. The cellular debris coupled with peroxidase were
either immobilized onto the graphite electrode by physical entrapment of the
suspension by means of a dialysis membrane or by integration in the electrochemi-
cally generated layer using a cathodic electrodeposition paint as well as an
Os-complex modiﬁed cathodic electrodeposition paint or their combinations. The
uric acid content in urine samples was determined by this sensor, and the values
obtained exhibited a good correlation with the reference method (Dmytruk et al.
2011).
14.2.7 Intracellular Metabolites
Mitochondria play a pivotal role in energy metabolism, programmed cell death, and
oxidative stress. Mutated mitochondrial DNA in diseased cells compromises the
structure of key enzyme complexes and, therefore, mitochondrial function, which
leads to a myriad of health-related conditions such as cancer, neurodegenerative
diseases, diabetes, and aging. Early detection of mitochondrial and metabolic
anomalies is an essential step toward effective diagnosis and therapeutic interven-
tion. Reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) and ﬂavin adenine
dinucleotide (FAD) play important roles in a wide range of cellular oxidation–
reduction reactions (Heikal 2010).
Cellular energy and redox carriers can also be directly monitored by yeast-based
sensors. FRET-based sensors have been employed to monitor cytosolic ATP, using
a subunit from bacterial ATP synthase as the recognition element (Bermejo et al.
2010). The protein can also be targeted speciﬁcally to the mitochondria by adding a
mitochondrial targeting sequence from cytochrome c to the N-terminal, allowing
in vivo monitoring of mitochondrial function (Vevea et al. 2013). Bulk NADH and
NADPH redox states can be monitored electrically with the use of mediator
compounds that shuttle electrons from the cell to an electrode (Baronian et al.
2002; Heiskanen et al. 2004). This technique also allows for nearly real-time
monitoring—for example, monitoring NAD(P)H levels upon substrate addition to
the yeast with an overexpressed reductase enzyme (Kostesha et al. 2009). The
system has even been implemented onto a microﬂuidic platform (Heiskanen et al.
2013). NAD(P)H can also be assayed by autoﬂuorescence, although this method
400
M. Gonchar et al.

has been criticized for a low sensitivity and speciﬁcity (Hung et al. 2011). Recently,
genetically encoded ﬂuorescent NADH sensors with subcellular resolution have
been developed using mammalian cells (Hung et al. 2011; Bilan et al. 2014);
however, to our knowledge they have not, as yet, been implemented in yeast.
Finally, yeast cells have been engineered to report their own pH. This is commonly
achieved through pH-sensitive GFP variants (Miesenb€ock et al. 1998; Ullah et al.
2012), although a new bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET)-based
system can report pH without excitation from an external light source (Zhang et al.
2012).
14.2.8 Toxic Compounds
14.2.8.1 Alcohols
Ethanol determination is of great relevance in clinical toxicological tests. Although
alcohol is used very often in human nutrition, alcoholism is considered an ailment.
Ethanol ingestion could affect nervous, circulatory, or digestive system. On the
other hand, methanol intoxication is an uncommon but serious poisoning. The
consumption of methanol could cause coma or even death.
Besides chemosensors and enzyme-based biosensors, the microbial sensors have
been proposed for alcohol determination. The methylotrophic yeasts of genera
Hansenula, Pichia, and Candida are generally characterized by a high intracellular
content of alcohol oxidase (alcohol:O2 oxidoreductase, AOX, EC 1.1.3.13) which
has rather broad speciﬁcity to primary alcohols. The improvement of AOX selec-
tivity by biochemical or genetic manipulations is very important (Voronova et al.
2008; Akyilmaz and Dinc¸kaya 2005; Korpan et al. 1993). In the papers (Gonchar
et al. 1998, 2002), two microbial alcohol sensors based on recombinant
H. polymorpha (gcr1 catX) cells have been described. The ﬁrst sensor utilized the
cells with highly active alcohol oxidase immobilized on an oxygen electrode, while
the second one was based on catalase-deﬁcient cells and involved a peroxide
electrode as a transducer. A conductometric microbial sensor for ethanol based
on alginate-immobilized yeast cells attached to gold planar electrodes was also
described (Korpan et al. 1994).
The co-immobilization of O. methanolica and Gluconobacter oxydans on chro-
matographic paper and ﬁxation on the Clark-type oxygen electrode was used for the
construction of another alcohol biosensor. Among the tested substrates (ethanol,
methanol, isopropanol, glucose, xylose, xylitol, arabinose, arabitol, glycerol, pyru-
vate, citrate, acetate), the O. methanolica-based sensor demonstrated higher selec-
tivity and was sensitive only to ethanol and methanol and insigniﬁcantly sensitive to
isopropanol (Reshetilov et al. 2001).
An amperometric biosensor based on C. tropicalis cells which contain alcohol
oxidase, immobilized in gelatin by glutaraldehyde, was described for sensitive
determination of ethanol. This microorganism detects alcohol oxidase which is
speciﬁc to several short-chain primary alcohols; therefore, the sensor was
characterized by low selectivity to ethanol (Akyilmaz and Dinc¸kaya 2005).
14
Yeast-Based Biosensors for Clinical Diagnostics and Food Control
401

A microbial biosensor for ethanol determination was prepared by the immobili-
zation of yeast S. ellipsoideus cells on the surface of the oxygen electrode with the
electrolyte in nonaqueous medium. The analytical determination was based on the
respiratory activity of the microorganism in the presence of the analyte (Rotariu and
Bala 2003).
14.2.8.2 Hormone-Active Chemicals (Xenoestrogens)
Endocrine disruptors that act like hormones in the endocrine system might have
toxic effects. The yeast cells were used as biosensors since they were genetically
engineered to respond to the presence of hormone-active chemicals by synthesizing
beta-galactosidase as a reporter. To achieve higher sensitivity, the interdigitated
array (IDA) electrodes were incorporated into the analytical chamber of the
microﬂuidic device. The yeast cells, precultured with a hormone-active chemical,
17-beta-estradiol (E2), were trapped from the main channel of the device to the
analytical chamber by electrophoresis. After trapping in the analytical chamber,
electrochemical detection of beta-galactosidase induced in the yeast cells with the
IDA electrodes was performed. Actually, electrochemical detection was also
performed
on
p-aminophenol,
formed
from
p-aminophenyl-beta-D-
galactopyranoside, with beta-galactosidase. The electrochemical signals from the
yeast cells precultured with 17-beta-estradiol were successfully determined with
the device. Furthermore, the inhibitory effects of antagonists such as tamoxifen
were also detected electrochemically using the device (Ino et al. 2009).
14.2.8.3 Poisons
The microbial sensor for cyanide detection, based on S. cerevisiae cells and the
oxygen electrode, was described. The principle of detection is based on the inhibi-
tion of cell respiration and hence the decrease of oxygen consumption rate in the
presence of cyanide, which is the approach typical for most toxicity sensors
(Nakanishi et al. 1996; Ikebukuro et al. 1996).
14.2.8.4 Toxins
Toxins are classiﬁed according to their mode of action as follows: (1) membrane
pore-forming toxins (hemolysin), diarrheagenic toxins (activating secondary mes-
senger pathways—cholera toxin), superantigens (activating immune responses—
staphylococcal enterotoxin B), neurotoxins (botulinum toxin), and protein synthesis
inhibitory toxins (Shiga toxin). Both prokaryotic (bacteria) and eukaryotic (yeast,
invertebrate, and vertebrate) cells have been used in developing of biosensors. The
biotoxins are usually detected using higher eukaryotic cells (such as insect, ﬁsh,
mammalian, or other vertebrate origins) or bacterial cells (Woutersen et al. 2011).
But in scientiﬁc literature, there is also a description of the biosensor based on yeast
cells. Such biosensor was developed for detection of mycotoxins. Mycotoxins are
compounds produced by mold fungi in moist conditions. Approximately 25% of the
world’s crops are contaminated with mold or fungal growth, and mycotoxins may
be produced both before and after harvest (Bryden 2007). In both humans and
animals ingestion of food or feed contaminated by mycotoxins can lead to
402
M. Gonchar et al.

mycotoxicoses, the possible symptoms of which are acute intoxication, losses in
productivity, reduced weight gain, immunosuppression, and increased risk of
cancer (Bryden 2007; Fink-Gremmels 2008). The mycotoxin zearalenone produced
by Fusarium species as well as its metabolites zearalanone, α-zearalanol, and
ß-zearalanol are harmful for health mainly due to their estrogenic activity. The
estrogenic response was detected by a whole-cell biosensor based on a genetically
modiﬁed Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain that in the presence of an estrogenic
compound produces ﬁreﬂy luciferase enzyme and further light emission within a
system provided with D-luciferin substrate. The results show that the yeast sensor
reacts to mycotoxins with typical sigmoidal response at nanomolar concentrations.
The response differs in different milk products with regards to the fat content of
milk (Valima et al. 2010).
14.3
Microbial Sensors Based on Yeast Cells for Food Analysis
The development of biosensors for food safety applications has been an area of
tremendous activity in recent years. Food safety is of great concern for many
countries; e.g., the European Commission has identiﬁed it as a priority area of
attention. The Commission has formulated a new food policy to ensure human
health and protect consumer health. Testing and identifying foods that are unsafe is
the ﬁrst step for ensuring food safety (Sankarankutty 2014; Mello and Kubota
2002).
The food quality depends essentially on its biochemical composition (Mello and
Kubota 2002). Quick and speciﬁc analytical tools are needed for monitoring of
nutritional
parameters
and
food
contaminants
(D’Souza
2001).
Microbial
biosensors are a rapid and affordable instrument to ensure the quality of products.
There are a lot of described biosensors for the assay of various components in food
samples and during fermentation processes in winemaking and other biotechnolog-
ical processes (Karube and Suzuki 1983; Karube and Tamiya 1987; Karube and
Sode 1989; Lim et al. 2015; Dai and Choi 2013).
14.3.1 Ethanol Assay
Ethanol assays are necessary in many industries and biotechnologies (Otles and
Yalcin 2012; Shimomura-Shimizu and Karube 2010a). The content of ethanol
should be monitored in its production in fermentation processes as well as when
it is utilized as a substrate in different biotechnologies, for instance, in production of
liquors, alcoholic beverages, and some foodstuffs (Rotariu and Bala 2003). The
development of simple and sensitive biosensors for estimating the content of
ethanol is an urgent problem. There are a lot of known biosensors for ethanol
detection, and almost all of them are based on the usage of enzymes in the
bioselective layer, but the construction of biosensors based on yeast cells is also
described (Tkac et al. 2003; Rotariu et al. 2003; Rotariu and Bala 2003; Rotariu
14
Yeast-Based Biosensors for Clinical Diagnostics and Food Control
403

et al. 2004; Korpan et al. 1994). Most of these biosensors exhibit good stability and
a sensitive response to the target analyte. The main analytical characteristics of the
proposed sensors for ethanol and other analytes are presented in Table 14.1.
One of the described biosensors is based on the cells of the yeast Saccharomyces
ellipsoideus immobilized on the surface of an oxygen electrode with electrolyte in
nonaqueous medium. The analytical signal is based on the respiratory activity of the
microorganism in the presence of ethanol. The response time of approximately
5 min for steady-state method and 2 min for kinetic method was registered. The
detection limit of 6 μM of the proposed biosensor was achieved (Rotariu and Bala
2003) (see Table 14.1). The similar mechanism of biosensor functioning was
proposed by Rotariu and coauthors (Rotariu et al. 2004). The biosensor was used
for selective determination of ethanol in the presence of glucose using a Teﬂon
membrane. The biosensor is practically speciﬁc to ethanol, while the interference of
glucose in determination of ethanol for a biosensor with dialysis membrane is about
30%. This biosensor was used to determine ethanol concentration in alcoholic
beverages. Good correlation of the results obtained using the biosensor and by
the spectrometric method with alcohol dehydrogenase was observed (Table 14.1).
Amperometric biosensors for simultaneous determination of glucose, sucrose,
and lactose based on the cells of S. cerevisiae and Kluyveromyces marxianus
immobilized on the surface of an oxygen electrode were proposed too (Svitel
et al. 1998). Selective potentiometric microbial sensors using Pichia methanolica
(Reshetilov et al. 1998) and S. cerevisiae (Rotariu et al. 2002, 2004) cells were
described for the analysis of sucrose in soft drinks (Lobanov et al. 2001) as well as
glucose and ethanol in alcoholic beverages.
To analyze the ethanol level in some alcoholic beverages, a conductometric
biosensor based on immobilized S. cerevisiae cells was constructed (Korpan et al.
1994). To develop the conductometric biosensor, a membrane with yeast cells,
immobilized in 2% Ca-alginate gel, was attached to gold planar electrodes. The
changes in conductivity due to the speciﬁc consumption of ethanol by the yeast
cells were registered by the computer-controlled sensor system. The response time
of the constructed microbial sensor was less than 5 min; the linearity was observed
in the range of 5–100 mM alcohol concentration (see Table 14.1). The minimal
detectable level of ethanol was 1 mM, and the relative standard deviation was found
to be 10–12% for 15 repeated assays. When the system was operated and stored at
20–25 C, the biosensor response was stable for only 3 days. Good correlation
between the results obtained by a conductometric cell biosensor and gas chroma-
tography was observed.
404
M. Gonchar et al.

Table 14.1 Comparison of different types of microbial biosensors based on yeast cells for food analysis
Sample of food
Analyte
Microorganism
Mode of signal
registration
Detection
limit, μM
Linearity range,
mM
Reference
Alcoholic beverages
Ethanol
S. ellipsoideus
Amperometric
6
–
Rotariu and Bala (2003)
S. ellipsoideus
Potentiometric
–
0.02–50
Rotariu et al. (2004)
S. cerevisiae
Conductometric
1000
5–100
Korpan et al. (1994)
L-Lysine
S. cerevisiae
Amperometric
–
1  103–0.01
Akyilmaz et al. (2007)
Wines and juices
L-Arginine
H. polymorpha
Amperometric
85
Till 0.6
Stasyuk et al. (2014)
Milk, sour milk, and
yogurts
L-Lactic acid
S. cerevisiae
Amperometric
–
Up to 1 mM
Garjonyte et al. (2006)
Fruit brandies
Cyanide
S. cerevisiae
Amperometric
8
–
Filipovic´-Kovacˇevic´ et al.
(2002)
Milk
Estrogenic
mycotoxin
S. cerevisiae
Luminescence
–
1  106–
2.6  104
Valima et al. (2010)
14
Yeast-Based Biosensors for Clinical Diagnostics and Food Control
405

14.3.2 Amino Acid Assay
Amino acids serve as the nitrogen source for yeast during the fermentation of wine.
Herna´ndez-Orte et al. (2002) reported that amino acids are also a mark of the
quality of wine because they contribute to wine taste, aroma, and color. Amino
acids serve as the nitrogen source for yeast during the fermentation of wine. The
industry of fermented foods and beverages, especially winemaking, is an important
area of L-arginine (Arg) assay. Urea, a ﬁnal product of L-Arg metabolism in the urea
cycle during juice fermentation and wine maturation, is partly assimilated by the
cells of microorganisms. In case of elevated Arg level in grape juice, urea remains
in the fermentation medium and spontaneously reacts with ethanol to produce ethyl
carbamate (EC) or urethane (Huang and Ough 1989). Citrulline, formed from Arg
metabolism via the arginine deiminase pathway by wine malolactic bacteria, is the
second signiﬁcant precursor of EC in wine (Uthurry et al. 2006; Spayd et al. 1994).
Both urea and citrulline accumulation in the fermentation medium mainly
depend on the Arg level and the type of microorganism. If L-Arg concentration in
juice is higher than 1000 mg L1 (5.0 mM), the potential EC concentration in wine
will be above 15 μg L1, the current voluntary limit in the United States. To ensure
high quality of the ﬁnal product and avoid potential health hazard of urethane, the
determination of Arg content in fruit juices and wine is necessary. The biosensor
approach for Arg determination seems to be perspective. The construction of Arg
biosensor with Hansenula (Ogataea) polymorpha cells in biorecognition layer has
already been reported (Stasyuk et al. 2014). Both urea and citrulline accumulation
in the fermentation medium mainly depend on the Arg level and the type of
microorganism. If L-Arg concentration in juice is higher than 1000 mg L1
(5.0 mM), the potential EC concentration in wine will be above 15 μg L1, the
current voluntary limit in the United States. To ensure high quality of the ﬁnal
product and avoid potential health hazard of urethane, the determination of Arg
content in fruit juices and wine is necessary. The biosensor approach for Arg
determination seems to be perspective. The construction of Arg biosensor with
Hansenula (Ogataea) polymorpha cells in biorecognition layer has already been
reported.
L-Lysine (Lys) is the most easily damaged essential amino acid, and therefore,
Lys is a vital marker for the nutritional value of food. It is abundant in animal
proteins, unlike plant proteins, which are often low in lysine content, making it the
limiting amino acid in most cereal proteins (Kelly et al. 2000). However, lysine is
an indicator of the effect on foods by various industrial processes or during cooking
treatment (Karalemas et al. 2000).
In addition, Lys is an essential constituent of the diet and of great interest in the
nutrition and pharmaceutical ﬁelds. Lys is often added as a dietary supplement to
food and drugs in order to correct possible deﬁciencies of this amino acid in humans
(Saurina et al. 1999). To provide high quality of a food product, it is necessary to
determine Lys content. Recently, a new amperometric microbial biosensor based on
S. cerevisiae cells for Lys determination in alcoholic beverages has been developed
406
M. Gonchar et al.

(Akyilmaz et al. 2007). The proposed amperometric sensor is suitable for the
determination of Lys content in food products in the absence and presence of
other amino acids (see Table 14.1).
14.3.3 L-Lactate Assay
Reliable determination of L-lactate is important in food technology, fermentation,
and wine industries (Garjonyte et al. 2006, 2008). The use of cell-based ampero-
metric biosensors seems to be very promising due to the favorable coupling of the
selectivity of the biological recognition element and the sensitivity of electrochem-
ical transducer (Smutok et al. 2007; Shkil et al. 2009). Most of the proposed
amperometric biosensors for the detection of L-lactate are based on baker’s yeast
S. cerevisiae and H. polymorpha cells (sources of ﬂavocytochrome b2) and different
types
of
mediators
(potassium
ferricyanide,
phenazine
methosulphate,
1,2-naphthoquinone-4-sulfonic acid sodium salt, and p-benzoquinone) (Akyilmaz
et al. 2007; Shkil et al. 2009). The suitability of the developed bioelectrodes for the
determination of L-lactic acid in milk and dairy products such as sour milk and
yogurt was also suggested (Garjonyte et al. 2009).
Recently, the microbial L-lactate-selective sensor based on the recombinant
H. polymorpha cells overproducing ﬂavocytochrome b2 (FC b2), as well as addi-
tionally fortiﬁed by the immobilized FC b2 with gold nanoparticles (nAu), has been
proposed
(Karkovska
et
al.
2015).
The
FC
b2-nAu-enriched
living
and
permeabilized yeast cells were used for construction of a bioselective membrane
of microbial
L-lactate-selective amperometric biosensor. The main analytical
characteristics of the proposed sensor are presented in Table 14.1. The obtained
results conﬁrm that the additional enrichment of the recombinant yeast cell by the
enzyme bound with nanoparticles improves the analytical parameters of the micro-
bial sensor.
14.3.4 Assay of Contaminants
Contaminants should be carefully detected in order to ensure the quality of the food
products. Mycotoxins of zearalenone family are common contaminants in milk
which can cause mycotoxicoses (Bryden 2007). In order to ensure the quality of
milk, genetically modiﬁed S. cerevisiae cells were used as the bioelement of the
microbial biosensor for the detection of zearalenone mycotoxins in milk (Valima
et al. 2010).
S. cerevisiae cells, immobilized on an oxygen electrode, were used for cyanide
detection in fruit brandies (Filipovic´-Kovacˇevic´ et al. 2002). For quality control of
meat freshness, a yeast-based sensor using Trichosporon cutaneum was developed.
The detection of polyamines and amino acids from the meat in washwater was
estimated by this sensor system (Yano et al. 2001).
14
Yeast-Based Biosensors for Clinical Diagnostics and Food Control
407

References
Adeniran A, Sherer M, Tyo K (2015) Yeast-based biosensors: design and applications. FEMS
Yeast Res 15(1):1–15
Akyilmaz E, Dinc¸kaya E (2005) An amperometric microbial biosensor development based on
Candida tropicalis yeast cells for sensitive determination of ethanol. Biosens Bioelectron
20:1263–1269
Akyilmaz E, Yas¸a I, Dinc¸kaya E (2006) Whole cell immobilized amperometric biosensor based on
Saccharomyces cerevisiae for selective determination of vitamin B1 (thiamine). Anal Biochem
354(1):78–84
Akyilmaz E, Erdogan A, Ozturk R et al (2007) Sensitive determination of L-lysine with a new
amperometric microbial biosensor based on Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast cells. Biosens
Bioelectron 22(6):1055–1060
Atta NF, Galal A, Ali S (2011) Nanobiosensors for health care, Chapter 4. In: Serra PA
(ed) Biosensors for health, environment and biosecurity. doi:10.5772/17996
Baronian KH, Downard AJ, Lowen RK et al (2002) Detection of two distinct substrate-dependent
catabolic responses in yeast cells using a mediated electrochemical method. Appl Microbiol
Biotechnol 60(1–2):108–113
Bereza-Malcolm LT, Mann G, Franks AE (2015) Environmental sensing of heavy metals through
whole cell microbial biosensors: a synthetic biology approach review. ACS Synth Biol 4
(5):535–546
Bermejo C, Garcı´a R, Straede A et al (2010) Characterization of sensor-speciﬁc stress response by
transcriptional proﬁling of wsc1 and mid2 deletion strains and chimeric sensors in Saccharo-
myces cerevisiae. OMICS 14(6):679–688
Bilan DS, Matlashov ME, Gorokhovatsky AY et al (2014) Genetically encoded ﬂuorescent
indicator for imaging NAD+/NADH ratio changes in different cellular compartments. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1840:951–957
Bryden WL (2007) Mycotoxins in the food chain: human health implications. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr
16(1):95–101
Chan C, Lehmann M, Tag K, Lung M, Kunze G, Riedel K, Gruendig B, Renneberg R (1999)
Measurement of biodegradable substances using the salt-tolerant yeast Arxula adeninivorans
for a microbial sensor immobilized with poly(carbamoyl) sulfonate (PCS) part I: construction
and characterization of the microbial sensor. Biosens Bioelectron 14(2):131–138
D’Souza SF (2001) Microbial biosensors. Biosens Bioelectron 16(6):337–353
Dai C, Choi S (2013) Technology and applications of microbial biosensor. OJAB 2:83–93
Dmytruk K, Smutok O, Dmytruk O et al (2011) Construction of uricase-overproducing strain of
Hansenula polymorpha and its application as biological recognition element in microbial urate
biosensor. BMC Biotechnol 11:58–66
Dragone R, Frazzoli C, Grasso G, Rossi G (2014) Sensor with intact or modiﬁed yeast cells as
rapid device for toxicological test of chemicals. J Agric Chem Environ 3:35–40
Eldridge M, Sanseverino J, Umbuzeiro GA, Sayler GS (2011) Analysis of environmental samples
with yeast-based bioluminescent bioreporters, environmental monitoring. In: Ekundayo E
(ed) InTech. doi:10.5772/27139. http://www.intechopen.com/books/environmental-monitor
ing/analysis-of-environmental-samples-with-yeast-based-bioluminescent-bioreporters
Filipovic´-Kovacˇevic´ Zˇ, Miksˇaj M, Sˇalamon D (2002) Cyanide determination in fruit brandies by
an amperometric biosensor with immobilised Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Eur Food Res
Technol 215(4):347–352
Fink-Gremmels J (2008) Mycotoxins in cattle feeds and carry-over to dairy milk: a review. Food
Addit Contam 25:172–180
Garjonyte R, Melvydas V, Malinauskas A (2006) Mediated amperometric biosensors for lactic
acid based on carbon paste electrodes modiﬁed with baker’s yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Bioelectrochemisty 68(2):191–196
408
M. Gonchar et al.

Garjonyte R, Melvydas V, Malinauskas A (2008) Effect of yeast pretreatment on the
characteristics of yeast-modiﬁed electrodes as mediated amperometric biosensors for lactic
acid. Bioelectrochemistry 74:188–194
Garjonyte R, Melvydas V, Malinauskas A (2009) Amperometric biosensors for lactic acid based
on baker’s and wine yeast. Microchim Acta 164:177–183
Gonchar MV, Maidan MM, Moroz OM et al (1998) Microbial O2- and H2O2- electrode sensors for
alcohol assays based on the use of permeabilized mutant yeast cells as the sensitive
bioelements. Biosens Bioelectron 139:945–952
Gonchar M, Maidan M, Korpan Y et al (2002) Metabolically engineered methylotrophic yeast
cells and enzymes as sensor biorecognition elements. FEMS Yeast Res 2:307–314
He W, Yuan S, Zhong WH et al (2016) Application of genetically engineered microbial whole-cell
biosensors for combined chemosensing. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 100(3):1109–1119
Heikal AA (2010) Intracellular coenzymes as natural biomarkers for metabolic activities and
mitochondrial anomalies. Biomark Med 4(2):241–263
Heiskanen A, Yakovleva J, Spegel C et al (2004) Amperometric monitoring of redox activity in
living yeast cells: comparison of menadione and menadione sodium bisulﬁte as electron
transfer mediators. Electrochem Commun 6:219–224
Heiskanen J, Saksa T, Luoranen J (2013) Soil preparation method affects outplanting success of
Norway spruce container seedlings on till soils susceptible to frost heave. Silva Fennica 47(1).
http://www.silvafennica.ﬁ/article/893
Herna´ndez-Orte P, Cacho JF, Ferreira V (2002) Relationship between varietal amino acid proﬁle
of grapes and wine aromatic composition. Experiments with model solutions and chemometric
study. J Agric Food Chem 50(10):2891–2899
Huang Z, Ough CS (1989) Effect of vineyard locations, varieties and rootstocks on the juice amino
acid composition of several cultivars. Am J Enol Vitic 40:135–139
Hung KW, Suen MF, Chen YF et al (2011) Detection of water toxicity using cytochrome P450
transgenic zebraﬁsh as live biosensor: for polychlorinated biphenyls toxicity. Biosens
Bioelectron 31(1):548–553
Ikebukuro K, Honda M, Nakanishi K et al (1996) Flow-type cyanide sensor using an immobilized
microorganism. Electroanalysis 8(10):876–879
Ino K, Kitagawa Y, Watanabe T et al (2009) Detection of hormone active chemicals using
genetically engineered yeast cells and microﬂuidic devices with interdigitated array electrodes.
Electrophoresis 19:3406–3412
Ishii J, Oda A, Togawa S et al (2014) Microbial ﬂuorescence sensing for human neurotensin
receptor type 1 using Gα-engineered yeast cells. Anal Biochem 1(446):37–43
Jacobson KA (2015) New paradigms in GPCR drug discovery. Biochem Pharmacol 98
(4):541–555
Jarque S, Bittner M, Blaha L, Hilscherova K (2016) Yeast biosensors for detection of environ-
mental pollutants: current state and limitations review article. Trends Biotechnol 34
(5):408–419
Karalemas ID, Georgiou CA, Papastathopoulos DS (2000) Construction of a L-lysine biosensor by
immobilizing
lysine
oxidase
on
a
gold-poly(o-phenylenediamine)
electrode.
Talanta
53:391–402
Karkovska M, Smutok О, Stasyuk N et al (2015) L-lactate-selective microbial sensor based on
ﬂavocytochrome b2-enriched yeast cells using recombinant and nanotechnology approaches.
Talanta 144:1195–1200
Karube I, Sode K (1989) Biosensors for fermentation process control. In: Ghose TK
(ed) Bioprocess engineering: the ﬁrst generation. Chapman Hall, London
Karube I, Suzuki S (1983) Application of biosensor in fermentation processes, Chapter 8. In: Tsao
GT (ed) Annual reports on fermentation processes, vol 6. Academic, New York
Karube I, Tamiya E (1987) Biosensors for the food industry. Food Biotechnol 1:147–165
Kelly SC, O’Connell PJ, O’Sullivan CK et al (2000) Development of an interferent free ampero-
metric biosensor for determination of L-lysine in food. Anal Chim Acta 412:111–119
14
Yeast-Based Biosensors for Clinical Diagnostics and Food Control
409

Korpan YI, Gonchar MV, Starodub NF et al (1993) A Cell biosensor speciﬁc for formaldehyde
based on pH-sensitive transistors coupled to methylotrophic yeast cells with genetically
adjusted metabolism. Anal Biochem 215(2):216–222
Korpan YI, Dzyadevich SV, Zharova VP et al (1994) Conductometric biosensor for ethanol
detection based on whole yeast cells. Ukr Biokhim Zh 66(1):78–82
Kostesha NV, Almeida JR, Heiskanen AR et al (2009) Electrochemical probing of in vivo
5-hydroxymethyl
furfural
reduction
in
Saccharomyces
cerevisiae.
Anal
Chem
81
(24):9896–8901
Kraly JR, Holcomb RE, Guan Q et al (2009) Review: microﬂuidic applications in metabolomics
and metabolic proﬁling. Anal Chim Acta 653(1):23–35
Kulys J, Wang L, Razumas V (1992) Sensitive yeast bioelectrode to L-lactate. Electroanalysis
4:527–532
Lei Y, Chen W, Mulchandani A (2006) Microbial biosensors. Anal Chim Acta 568:200–210
Lim JW, Ha D, Lee J et al (2015) Review of micro/nanotechnologies for microbial biosensors.
Front Bioeng Biotechnol 3(61):1–13
Lobanov AV, Borisov IA, Gordon SH et al (2001) Analysis of ethanol-glucose mixtures by two
microbial sensors: application of chemometrics and artiﬁcial neural networks for data
processing. Biosens Bioelectron 16:1001–1007
Mascini M, Memoli A (1986) Comparison of microbial sensors based on amperometric and
potentiometric electrodes. Anal Chim Acta 182:113–122
Mello LD, Kubota LT (2002) Review of the use of bio-sensors as analytical tools in the food and
drink industries. Food Chem 77(2):237–256
Miao Y, McCammon JA (2016) G-protein coupled receptors: advances in simulation and drug
discovery. Curr Opin Struct Biol 41:83–89
Miesenb€ock G, De Angelis DA, Rothman JE (1998) Visualizing secretion and synaptic transmis-
sion with pH-sensitive green ﬂuorescent proteins. Nature 394(6689):192–195
Nakamura H, Shimomura-Shimizu M, Karube I (2008) Development of microbial sensors and
their application. Adv Biochem Eng Biotechnol 109:351–394
Nakamura Y, Ishii J, Kondo A (2015) Applications of yeast-based signaling sensor for characteri-
zation of antagonist and analysis of site-directed mutants of the human serotonin 1A receptor.
Biotechnol Bioeng 112(9):1906–1915
Nakanishi K, Ikebukuro K, Karube I (1996) Determination of cyanide using a microbial sensor.
Appl Biochem Biotechnol 60(2):97–106
Narsaiah K, Jha SN, Bhardwaj R et al (2012) Optical biosensors for food quality and safety
assurance – a review. J Food Sci Technol 49(4):383–406
Nunes-Halldorson VS, Duran NL (2003) Bioluminescent bacteria: lux genes as environmental
biosensors. Braz J Microbiol 34(2):91–96
Otles S, Yalcin B (2012) Review on the application of nanobiosensors in food analysis. Acta Sci
Pol Technol Aliment 11(1):7–18
Pham H, Giersberga M, Uhligb S et al (2012) Estra monitor – a monitor for amperometric
detection of estrogenic activity with Arxula adeninivorans yeast cells as the biocomponent.
Sens Actuators Chem 161:137–145
Ponamoreva ON, Arliapov VA, Alferov VA, Reshetilov AN (2011) Microbial biosensors for
detection of biological oxygen demand (a review). Prikl Biokhim Mikrobiol 47(1):5–15
Racek J (1991) A yeast biosensor for glucose determination. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
34:473–477
Racek J, Musil J (1987a) Biosensor for lactate determination in biological ﬂuids. I. Construction
and properties of the biosensor. Clin Chim Acta 162:129–139
Racek J, Musil J (1987b) Biosensor for lactate determination in biological ﬂuids. 2. Interference
studies. Clin Chim Acta 167:59–65
Reshetilov AN, Lobanov AV, Morozova NO et al (1998) Detection of ethanol in a two-component
glucose/ethanol mixture using a nonselective microbial sensor and a glucose enzyme electrode.
Biosens Bioelectron 13:787–793
410
M. Gonchar et al.

Reshetilov AN, Trotsenko JA, Morozova NO et al (2001) Characteristics of Gluconobacter
oxydans B-1280 and Pichia methanolica MN4 cell based biosensors for detection of ethanol.
Process Chem 36(10):1015–1020
Rotariu L, Bala C (2003) New type of ethanol microbial biosensor based on a highly sensitive
amperometric oxygen electrode and yeast cells. Anal Lett 36(11):2459–2471
Rotariu L, Bala C, Magearu V (2002) Yeast cells sucrose biosensor based on a potentiometric
oxygen electrode. Anal Chim Acta 458(1):215–222
Rotariu L, Bala C, Magearu V (2003) Microbial biosensors for ethanol determination in alcoholic
beverages. Ann Univ Buchar XII(I–II):69–76
Rotariu L, Bala C, Magearu V (2004) New potentiometric microbial biosensor for ethanol
determination in alcoholic beverages. Anal Chim Acta 513:119–123
Sankarankutty KM (2014) Biosensors and their applications for ensuring food safety. Global J
Pathol Microbiol 2:15–21
Saurina J, Herna´ndez-Cassou S, Alegret S, Fa`bregas E (1999) Amperometric determination of
lysine using a lysine oxidase biosensor based on rigid-conducting composites. Biosens
Bioelectron 14:211–220
Schmidt RD, Karube I (1998) Biotechnology. In: Rehm HJ, Reed G (eds) Biosensors and
bioelectronics, vol 6b. VCH Verlagsgesellschaft, Weinheim, pp 317–365
Shimomura-Shimizu M, Karube I (2010a) Applications of microbial cell sensors. Biochem
Biotechnol 118:1–30
Shimomura-Shimizu M, Karube I (2010b) Yeast based sensors. Adv Biochem Eng Biotechnol
117:1–19
Shkil H, Stoica L, Dmytruk K et al (2009) Bioelectrochemical detection of L-lactate respiration
using genetically modiﬁed Hansenula polymorpha yeast cells overexpressing ﬂavocytochrome
b2. Bioelectrochemistry 76:175–179
Smutok O, Dmytruk K, Gonchar M et al (2007) Permeabilized cells of ﬂavocytochrome b2 over-
producing recombinant yeast Hansenula polymorpha as biological recognition element in
amperometric lactate biosensors. Biosens Bioelectron 23:599–605
Smutok O, Dmytruk K, Karkovska M et al (2014) D-lactate-selective amperometric biosensor
based on the cell debris of the recombinant yeast Hansenula polymorpha. Talanta 125:227–232
Spayd SE, Wample RL, Evans RG et al (1994) Nitrogen fertilization of white Riesling grapes in
Washington. Must and wine composition. Am J Enol Vitic 45:34–42
Stasyuk NY, Gayda GZ, Gonchar MV (2014) L-arginine-selective microbial amperometric sensor
based on recombinant yeast cells over-producing human liver arginase I. Sens Actuat B Chem
204:515–521
Sun JZ, Peter Kingori G, Si RW et al (2015) Microbial fuel cell-based biosensors for environmen-
tal monitoring: a review. Water Sci Technol 71(6):801–809
Svitel J, Curilla O, Tkac J (1998) Microbial cell-based biosensor for sensing glucose, sucrose or
lactose. Biotechnol Appl Biochem 27(2):153–158
Thevenot D, Toth K, Durst R et al (2001) Electrochemical biosensors: recommended deﬁnitions
and classiﬁcation. Biosens Bioelectron 16:121–131
Tkac J, Vostiar I, Gorton L et al (2003) Improved selectivity of microbial biosensor using
membrane coating. Application to the analysis of ethanol during fermentation. Biosens
Bioelectron 18:1125–1134
Turner AP, Karube I, Wilson GS (eds) (1990) Biosensors: fundamentals and applications. Oxford
University Press, London
Ullah A, Orij R, Brul S et al (2012) Quantitative analysis of the modes of growth inhibition by
weak organic acids in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl Environ Microbiol 78(23):8377–8387
Uthurry CA, Lepe JA, Lombardero J et al (2006) Ethyl carbamate production by selected yeasts
and lactic acid bacteria in red wine. Food Chem 94:262–270
Valima A, Kivisto AT, Leskinen PI et al (2010) A novel biosensor for the detection of zearalenone
family mycotoxins in milk. J Microb Met 80(1):44–48
14
Yeast-Based Biosensors for Clinical Diagnostics and Food Control
411

Vevea JD, Wolken DM, Swayne TC et al (2013) Ratiometric biosensors that measure mitochon-
drial redox state and ATP in living yeast cells. J Vis Exp 77:e50633
Vigneshvar S, Sudhakumari CC, Senthilkumaran B, Prakash H (2016) Recent advances in
biosensor technology for potential applications an overview. Front Bioeng Biotechnol 4
(11):1–9
Voronova E, Iliasov P, Reshetilov A (2008) Development, investigation of parameters and
estimation of possibility of adaptation of Pichia angusta based microbial sensor for ethanol
detection. Anal Lett 41(3):377–391
Wang S, Horn PJ, Liou LC et al (2013) A peroxisome biogenesis deﬁciency prevents the binding
of alpha-synuclein to lipid droplets in lipid-loaded yeast. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 438
(2):452–456
Woutersen M, Belkin S, Brouwer B et al (2011) Are luminescent bacteria suitable for online
detection and monitoring of toxic compounds in drinking water and its sources? Anal Bioanal
Chem 400:915–929
Yagi K (2006) Applications of whole-cell bacterial sensors in biotechnology and environmental
science. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 3(6):1251–1258
Yano Y, Numata M, Hachiya H et al (2001) Application of a microbial sensor to the quality control
of meat freshness. Talanta 54:255–262
Yudina NY, Arlyapov VA, Chepurnova MA, Alferov SV, Reshetilov AN (2015) A yeast co-
culture-based biosensor for determination of waste water contamination levels. Enzyme
Microb Technol 78:46–53
Zhang J, Liu M, Su Y et al (2012) A targeted in vivo RNAi screen reveals deubiquitinases as new
regulators of notch signaling. G3 (Bethesda) 2(12):1563–1575
412
M. Gonchar et al.

