Journal of Literature and Science 11 (2018)                                  Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium”: 1-19 
 
 
 
© Format and design JLS 2018 © All other content – Author. 
 Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND 
Downloaded from <http://www.literatureandscience.org/> 
1
 
Selfridge’s Milton: The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium in Cognitive 
Science and Artificial Intelligence 
 
Olin Bjork 
 
 
John Milton was more forthcoming and meticulous about leaving a record of himself 
than were most other English authors of his own and previous eras. In this current age 
of social media and Big Data, many are following in Milton’s footsteps while lacking 
his curatorial agenda. Increasingly, the task of building narratives from these records 
falls not to scholars in archives or employees at IT companies, but rather to Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) systems. Deep Learning is a new name for a 60-year-old practice of 
using algorithms conceived as artificial neural networks to identify patterns in data. 
According to a 2016 special report in The Economist, the discovery a few years ago 
that graphics processing units designed for gaming systems could dramatically 
accelerate Deep Learning networks, combined with increasingly massive datasets for 
them to process, led to an ongoing surge of development and investment in AI 
(Standage 4–5). But this technical explanation for the success of Deep Learning 
overlooks recent research in cognitive science finding that human brains and insect 
colonies self-organize without central or external control, much as the latest artificial 
neural networks do. 
Some scholars trace the brain-computer analogy back to Thomas Hobbes, 
whom the philosopher John Haugeland credits with “prophetically launching 
Artificial Intelligence” (23). But Hobbes’s famous equation per ratiocinationem 
autem intelligo computationem (translated as “by ratiocination I mean computation” 
in Hobbes 3) reduces thinking to the application of rules to symbols and does not 
account for how these rules and symbols are learned. Artificial neural networks offer 
insight into how brains acquire the equivalent of a computer’s operators and operands 
from sensory experience. Ground-breaking programs of this type were designed in the 
1950s by a British-born American computer scientist named Oliver Selfridge (1926-
2008), the “father of machine perception” (Pieraccini 265) and a grandson of the 
founder of Selfridges, a chain of luxury department stores in England. 
Selfridge was not inspired by Hobbes’s analogy so much as by Milton’s devils 
and their city of Pandæmonium. In an interview with science writer Steven Johnson, 
Selfridge recalls how, when first reading Paradise Lost at school in England, he had 
“been struck by the image of Pandemonium – it’s Greek for ‘all the demons.’ Then 
after my second son, Peter, was born, I went over Paradise Lost again, and the 
shrieking of the demons awoke something in me” (Johnson 54). Although Selfridge is 
correct about the etymology of Milton’s neologism (Pan “all” in Greek + daemonium 
“demon” in classical Latin), Milton does not refer to fallen angels as demons but 
rather as devils, which is how the King James and most other early modern English 
Bibles translate the Latin terms, their plurals, and/or their Greek or Hebrew 
equivalents. In the case of Pandæmonium, however, Milton was probably willing to 
sacrifice consistency for euphony, an analogy to the Pantheon, and homophony with 
the Panionium, an Ionian place of assembly mentioned by Herodotus (Bk. 1, Ch. 141-
43, 148). 
Selfridge’s recollection notwithstanding, Milton’s devils do not shriek – 
perhaps he interpolated the shrieks of his infant son. More likely, his misimpression 
Journal of Literature and Science  
Volume 11, No. 2 (2018) 
ISSN 1754-646X 
Olin Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium in Cognitive Science and AI”: 1-19 

Journal of Literature and Science 11 (2018)                                  Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium”: 1-19 
 
 
 
© Format and design JLS 2018 © All other content – Author. 
 Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND 
Downloaded from <http://www.literatureandscience.org/> 
2
owes to a nineteenth-century shift in the usage of the word Pandæmonium from a 
proper noun denoting the capital of hell to a common noun denoting “a place or state 
of utter confusion and uproar” (OED 2a) or “wild and noisy disorder; a tumult; chaos” 
(OED 2b) while gradually dropping a vowel from the diphthong æ. Another Miltonic 
coinage, “all Hell broke loose” (Paradise Lost 4.918; quotations of Milton’s poetry 
are from Fletcher’s facsimile edition) is now used in roughly the same sense, and the 
two are sometimes conjoined, as in “pandemonium broke out.” An inharmonious 
mixture of raucous voices is strongly implied; hence a flock of parrots is called a 
pandemonium (Woop Studios and Sacher 146-47). 
Combining the Miltonic origin of the word with its modern senses, Selfridge 
envisioned a computer or brain as a space teeming with shrieking demons. Although 
this imaginative leap bespoke his own preoccupations more than Milton’s, for a reader 
so primed, the parallels are evident: Pandæmonium, like a computer or brain, is a site 
for decision-making. Furthermore, as J. B. Broadbent observes, the narrator describes 
the landscape of hell in bodily (or corpselike) terms: scurf, womb, bowels, entrails, 
wound, ribs (Some Graver Subject 84). The devils construct the head(quarters). 
Pandæmonium provided Selfridge with a conceptual foundation on which to 
build his own Pandemonium, a model for computer programs that could learn to 
recognize patterns. This article uses the amalgam Pand(a)emonium to acknowledge 
the 
underreported 
indebtedness 
of 
Selfridge’s 
Pandemonium 
to 
Milton’s 
Pandæmonium and assert their joint legacy in cognitive science and AI. The article 
will endeavour to reveal how this legacy is manifested in Deep Learning systems and 
the work of cognitive scientists studying insect colonies for insights into how the 
human brain operates. To this end, the article will situate Pandemonium in the larger 
context of cognitive science and AI and align it not only with Milton’s government of 
devils but also with his depiction of human information processing and decision-
making, both individual and collective. 
Although there is little evidence that Selfridge was familiar with Milton’s 
views on these matters, the two men faced similar problems and concocted similar 
solutions. Selfridge saw that whereas 1950s-era computers required predictable inputs 
to have reliable outputs, humans responded effectively to stimuli for which they had 
not been explicitly prepared. Human-like intelligence in computers, therefore, would 
require a process of human-like pattern recognition, which Selfridge defined as “the 
extraction of the significant features of data from a background of irrelevant detail” 
(“Pattern Recognition” 91). Selfridge’s efforts to design a program that could 
determine significance in events beyond the foresight of a programmer are 
comparable to Milton’s attempts to outline a government that could regulate England 
without the oversight of a king. Like Selfridge, Milton drew on the analogy of a mind 
distilling prompts from various sources, much as his commonwealth refines the ore of 
raw democracy. In his poetry, he figured the clamour of both public and internal 
voices as a swarm of insects, an association that has been vindicated by modern 
cognitive science. 
Selfridge forged the connection to Milton at the 1958 National Physical 
Laboratory symposium in London, England. In his seminal paper, “Pandemonium: A 
Paradigm for Learning,” he described a computer-program architecture consisting of 
four or more levels, each populated by a different type of “demon,” his metaphor for a 
subroutine and, presupposing that a similar architecture exists in biological brains, a 
neural circuit: data or image demons store and display visual data; computation 
demons (later called feature demons) scan the data and shriek when they spot 
particular features; cognitive demons listen to the feature demons and shriek when 

Journal of Literature and Science 11 (2018)                                  Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium”: 1-19 
 
 
 
© Format and design JLS 2018 © All other content – Author. 
 Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND 
Downloaded from <http://www.literatureandscience.org/> 
3
they find features of particular patterns; a decision demon listens to the cognitive 
demons and decides which of them is shrieking the loudest and therefore which 
pattern is the most likely match. 
In a 1960 Scientific American article, Selfridge and the psychologist Ulric 
Neisser discussed two implementations of Pandemonium at MIT’s Lincoln 
Laboratory, one for transliterating hand-sent Morse code and the other for identifying 
handwritten letters of the alphabet. To explain how the latter program works, they 
offered a simplified example assuming that the data demons can only display images 
of four block capital letters: A, H, V, or Y (65). Figure 1 shows the organization of the 
demonic network Selfridge and his collaborators configured to handle this pattern-
matching task. Above the data demons are three feature demons, each representing a 
feature of one or more of these letters; four cognitive demons, each representing one 
of the letters; and one decision demon.  
 
 
 
The narcissistic feature demons shriek with delight when they recognize 
themselves in the image; otherwise they sulk in silence. The shrieking of each feature 
demon excites or inhibits a given cognitive demon. For example, suppose the data 
demons show an image of the letter A to the feature demons. The crossbar demon 
shrieks, and the A and H demons respond in kind. But since the concave top and 
vertical line demons remain silent, the H demon is not fully stimulated and does not 
shriek as loudly as the A demon does. The decision demon, therefore, sides correctly 
with the A demon. If an H is shown, all three feature demons shriek and are echoed by 
all four cognitive demons. However, the H demon shrieks loudest because it is excited 
by all three feature demons, whereas the Y demon is inhibited by one and the A and V 
demons by two. The decision demon, therefore, sides correctly with the H demon. 
The Pandemonium projects were among the first AI computer programs to 
implement connectionism, a theory holding that intelligence arises from weighted 
connections between simple processing units communicating in parallel (Medler 63–
65). The connectionist archetype is a biological neural network, in which neurons 
excite or inhibit other neurons by sending chemical or electrical signals across the 
synapses that connect them. The strength or weight of a synaptic connection is 
proportional to the frequency with which signals pass from one neuron to the other; 
augmentation and degradation of neural pathways correlate with remembering and 
forgetting respectively. In Pandemonium, the strength of the response of one demon 
A, H, V or Y as Match 
V 
Y 
Vertical Line 
Crossbar 
Concave Top 
Cognitive Demons 
Feature Demons 
Data Demons 
Decision Demon 
A, H, V or Y as Image 
H 
A 
Input 
Output 
Fig. 1. 
Example Pandemonium. Author’s own image 

Journal of Literature and Science 11 (2018)                                  Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium”: 1-19 
 
 
 
© Format and design JLS 2018 © All other content – Author. 
 Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND 
Downloaded from <http://www.literatureandscience.org/> 
4
to another is adjusted based on probabilities derived from pattern-matching outcomes. 
Fittingly, the word demon is a slant rhyme with the word neuron. 
Pandemonium proved superior to other contemporary pattern recognition 
schemes because it compared visual data against features rather than templates. 
Because no template of a given pattern closely matches all instances of that pattern, 
categorizing instances correctly required an impractical amount of pre-processing to 
normalize each instance. The fact that our brains categorize the vast majority of 
instances effortlessly, particularly in the case of written characters, was of little help 
to AI researchers because, even today, psycholinguists do not fully understand the 
mechanics of this process. 
Another innovation of Pandemonium was that, unlike most computer-
programming systems of the 1950s, it used parallel rather than sequential processing. 
In a sequential system, the outcome of one operation, such as a particular demon 
shrieking or remaining silent, determines how and/or if the next is conducted. If, on 
the other hand, multiple demons look for their features/patterns and shriek 
simultaneously, sequence has given way to pandemonium – Selfridge and Neisser’s 
metaphor for parallel processing (66). Though parallel at each level, processing moves 
from lower demons to higher ones – hence the flow of information through the 
hierarchy is bottom-up – and demons only monitor a subset of the other demons 
(those one level below them). 
Selfridge’s eureka moment when rereading Paradise Lost was realizing that 
the word pandemonium fitted the model he was seeking both in Milton’s sense of a 
structure filled with every member of a group (all demons or neurons) and in the 
contemporary sense of a seemingly chaotic situation in which multiple agents act or 
emit uncontrollably, without heeding peers or superiors. As long as decision makers 
were able to distinguish signal from noise, the hierarchy could function efficiently and 
expeditiously. 
In Paradise Lost, the frequent recitation of angelic ranks and titles may have 
inspired Selfridge’s multilevel architecture. But is the decision-making in 
Pandæmonium similarly parallel and bottom-up? It is parallel to the extent that 
Moloch, Belial, Mammon, and Beelzebub offer competing proposals, but these devils 
speak in turn, not all at once. Like Selfridge’s demons, they each have a specialty, 
though not in a feature or pattern but rather in warfare, vice, wealth, and deceit 
respectively. A vote is then taken and Beelzebub, acting as a precursor of Selfridge’s 
decision demon, announces the result. 
For many Miltonists, this seemingly straightforward and democratic process is 
a sham. Two pieces of textual evidence are traditionally cited to support the charge 
that, as David Norbrook puts it, “the council has been rigged” (453). First, the narrator 
implies that Beelzebub serves as a mouthpiece for Satan (2.379-80). Yet a 
representative putting forward a scheme hatched by a more politically threatening or 
divisive member has been a conventional tactic in republics since ancient times. A 
second and stronger proof is that Satan volunteers for the mission to the new world in 
peremptory fashion (380): “Thus saying rose / The Monarch, and prevented all reply” 
(2.466-67). Satan’s aggressive assumption of the role of chief executive, however, 
follows a period in which, according to the narrator, other candidates were silenced by 
fear of the undertaking, not of Satan (2.420-26). It seems probable, therefore, that the 
perception that the voting devils are cowed or beguiled is not engendered by the facts 
presented by the narrator so much as by the presumption that Satan, as archfiend, 
would not subject his designs to the unpredictability of free debate. 

Journal of Literature and Science 11 (2018)                                  Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium”: 1-19 
 
 
 
© Format and design JLS 2018 © All other content – Author. 
 Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND 
Downloaded from <http://www.literatureandscience.org/> 
5
Even if legitimate, the process may not be open to all. The voters are “great 
Seraphic Lords and Cherubim” (1.794) – lower-level devils seem to have no input. 
With that said, one passage that accords with Selfridge’s vision of subordinate 
demons clamouring to be heard is the famous simile comparing the fallen angels in 
Pandæmonium to a swarm of bees: 
 
 
 
but chief the spacious Hall  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Thick swarm’d, both on the ground and in the air, 
Brusht with the hiss of russling wings. As Bees 
In spring time, when the Sun with Taurus rides, 
Pour forth thir populous youth about the Hive 
In clusters; they among fresh dews and flowers 
Flie to and fro, or on the smoothed Plank, 
The suburb of thir Straw-built Cittadel, 
New rub’d with Baum, expatiate and confer 
Thir State affairs. So thick the aerie crowd 
Swarm’d and were straitn’d; till the Signal giv’n.  
Behold a wonder! they but now who seemd 
In bigness to surpass Earths Giant Sons 
Now less then smallest Dwarfs, in narrow room 
Throng numberless . . . (1.762, 767-80) 
 
Whereas in Dante’s empyrean, angel bees pollinate a celestial rose of saved souls with 
messages from the light above (Paradiso 31.4-18), in Milton’s hell, devil bees 
“expatiate and confer / Thir state affairs” as if they are the informed and engaged 
citizens of an ideal polis or democracy.1 However, Broadbent points out that the bees 
resemble “amateur politicians” who “gossip, while the real work of government goes 
on inside” (“Milton’s Hell” 190). These rank-and-file devils are not only “straitn’d” 
(i.e., spatially confined) but also straightened, or put in order, by signals from higher-
ups. All but the worthiest thousand are ordered to reduce their size so that they may fit 
into the “spacious Hall.” The dimensions of the court reinforce power differentials by 
allowing only a select few to remain “in thir own dimensions like themselves” 
(1.793). Among shape-shifting beings, size must be structurally enforced if it is to 
have meaning – all the devils may be “at large” (1.790), but some are more at large 
than others. The swarm has effectively been hived; that is, contained “in narrow 
room.” Their volume probably diminishes aurally as well as spatially, and the “great 
consult” (1.798), which will confirm or dispel the rumours of the crowd, begins after a 
“short silence” (1.797). 
It seems that only the thousand devils gathered in “close recess” (1.795) vote. 
If those in the hall are not privy to the “secret conclave” (1.795), their situation is akin 
to that of Agamemnon’s armies in the Iliad, who can only gossip amongst themselves 
until their king finishes consulting with his ministers and delivers a sentence 
transmuting rumour into fact. Milton’s bee simile is reminiscent of Homer’s in his 
description of the Achaeans assembling to hear Agamemnon’s announcement: 
 
Like swarms of bees, endlessly renewed, issuing from some hollow rock, 
pouring in dense clouds to left and right through all the flowers of spring, 
so from the ships and huts on the level sands, the many tribes marched in 
companies to the assembly. And Rumour, Zeus’ messenger, drove them on 

Journal of Literature and Science 11 (2018)                                  Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium”: 1-19 
 
 
 
© Format and design JLS 2018 © All other content – Author. 
 Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND 
Downloaded from <http://www.literatureandscience.org/> 
6
like wildfire, till all were gathered. Now the meeting-place was in turmoil, 
the ground shook beneath as they were seated, while through the din nine 
heralds shouted to subdue them, quiet them, and grant silence to their god-
given kings. With difficulty the men were seated in their places, and settled 
there in quiet. (2.86-100)2 
 
Rumour (Greek Ossa, Latin Fama), is deployed by Zeus to spur the Achaean soldiers 
on and, despite creating a temporary tumult, ultimately accelerates the process of 
coming to order, just as a honeybee swarm results in the settling of a new nest. 
Milton thus follows Homer in portraying the subduing of a crowd whose 
political gossip seems mere noise, irrelevant to policymaking. Yet rumours can 
indirectly shape policy; Agamemnon’s advisors are attuned to the opinions of the 
troops and Satan’s strategy to target the denizens of the “new Worlds” (1.650) instead 
of Heaven is based on what he terms “a fame” (1.651). This now-archaic usage meant 
“a report, rumour” (OED 1a). Instead of “fame,” Milton’s prose Arguments to the first 
two books have “report,” “Tradition,” and “Prophesie”; although the last word 
implies divine inspiration, it shares with the others the sense of information emanating 
from and/or circulating outside of official channels. When it comes to information 
flow, therefore, the devils’ decision-making is a grassroots process. 
If the “hiss” or buzzing of a swarm suggests public political discourse, what 
does the reference to the “Straw-built Cittadel” or beehive imply about the type of 
government that has its seat at Pandæmonium? In Milton’s time and stretching back at 
least as far as Plato’s Republic (7.520b), the society of bees or ants was often 
compared to a well-functioning church or nation, with the beehive or anthill figured as 
a city, particularly a seat of government. Mid-seventeenth-century political 
philosophy viewed bees and ants as analogous to royalists and republicans 
respectively (Edwards 128–39; Sauer 17–18), due in part to the misimpression that the 
former had monarchs and the latter did not. Charles Butler had popularized the idea 
that the bee monarch was female with his treatise on beekeeping, The Feminine 
Monarchie (1609),3 but the fact that an ant colony also has a queen was not well 
documented, possibly because ants, unlike bees, were not kept and, when their nest is 
disturbed, hide their queen in a secret chamber (Johnson 30–31). 
It is tempting then to view the bee simile as a means of associating devils with 
royalists. On the face of it, however, the devils are rebels against a monarchy. 
Furthermore, although the queen bee is anointed from birth, proponents of a 
Cromwellian Protectorate could argue that she rules by merit rather than 
primogeniture: the only such bee in the nest, significantly larger than the rest, 
apparently deserving of her dominion. Samuel Purchas (the younger) underscored this 
innate superiority: “by nature hath hee the Sovereignity over all, excelling all in 
goodliness, and goodness, in mildness, and majesty” (16–17). The faulty masculine 
pronoun together with Purchas’s republicanism and the timing of his argument (1657) 
indicate that he had Oliver Cromwell in mind as the human equivalent of a queen bee.  
For his part, Milton refrained from endorsing any political insect analogies 
until the Restoration, during which period he evinced a preference for ants over bees. 
With the government that he had so vigorously defended crumbling about him, Milton 
would cite Proverbs 6.6-8 and offer the pismire as a model for the nation in The 
Readie and Easie Way to Establish a Free Commonwealth (1660): 
 
Go to the Ant, thou sluggard, saith Solomon; consider her waies, and be 
wise; which having no prince, ruler, or lord, provides her meat in the 

Journal of Literature and Science 11 (2018)                                  Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium”: 1-19 
 
 
 
© Format and design JLS 2018 © All other content – Author. 
 Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND 
Downloaded from <http://www.literatureandscience.org/> 
7
summer, and gathers her food in the harvest, . . . neither are these diligent 
creatures hence concluded to live in lawless anarchie, or that commended, 
but are set the examples to imprudent and ungovernd men, of a frugal and 
self-governing democratie or Commonwealth; safer and more thriving in 
the joint providence and counsel of many industrious equals, then under the 
single domination of one imperious Lord. (Complete Prose Works 7: 427; 
subsequent citations of Milton’s prose will reference this edition by volume 
and page number only) 
 
In Paradise Lost, the angel Raphael anticipates the commonplace distinction between 
ant democracy and bee aristocracy: 
 
 
 
 
 
First crept 
The Parsimonious Emmet, provident 
Of future, in small room large heart enclos’d, 
Pattern of just equalitie perhaps 
Hereafter, join’d in her popular Tribes 
Of Commonaltie; swarming next appeer’d 
The Female Bee that feeds her Husband Drone 
Deliciously, and builds her waxen Cells 
With Honey stor’d . . . (7.484-92) 
 
The admiration for ants that Milton evinces in these two passages reflects his longing 
for the Good Old Cause – the dream of “a free commonwealth without single person 
or house of lords” (7: 364-65, 429) – during and shortly after the Restoration. The 
“just equalitie” and “Commonaltie” of the seemingly genderless ants clashes with the 
inequitable relations between the “Female Bee” and “her Husband Drone.”  
Raphael conflates the functions of the queen bee and the worker bees under 
the single label “female bee,” but accurately characterizes the role of male honeybees, 
or drones, who attempt to mate with fertile queens rather than gather nectar or pollen 
and are driven out of the nest each fall by the worker bees, a scenario that Virgil 
depicts in his Georgics (4.169). Milton’s contempt for the drones of human society 
can be inferred from Samson’s refusal to become a “burdenous drone” (Samson 
Agonistes 567). As for the worker bee, she not only feeds the drone but also “builds 
her waxen Cells / With Honey stor’d,” language reminiscent of the devil bees who 
prepare “boyling cells” for the smelted gold they will use to fill the “various mould” 
of Pandæmonium (1.700-09). 
Whereas Virgil makes a simile comparing the Tyrians building their city to 
bees making honey (Aeneid 1.423-36), in Paradise Lost it is not humans but devils 
who, despite their self-interest and hierarchies, seem capable of collaborating like 
bees or ants, as is evident in the choreographed efficiency with which they construct 
Pandæmonium and conduct their business within its walls. The narrator contrasts the 
solidarity of the devils’ deliberations with the disunity of humanity’s: “O shame to 
men! Devil with Devil damn’d / Firm concord holds, men onely disagree / Of 
Creatures rational” (2.496-98). 
Should ants or bees be included in the category of “Creatures rational?” 
Milton’s and Selfridge’s analogies are milestones in the enduring quest to answer this 
question. Whereas Milton compared devils to bees, Selfridge compared neurons to 
demons (i.e., devils). It follows syllogistically that neurons should be like bees, and 
such is the hypothesis of twenty-first-century cognitive scientists who examine bee 

Journal of Literature and Science 11 (2018)                                  Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium”: 1-19 
 
 
 
© Format and design JLS 2018 © All other content – Author. 
 Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND 
Downloaded from <http://www.literatureandscience.org/> 
8
and ant colonies for insights into the workings of not only a city or government, as in 
previous millennia, but also the human brain. These scientists have found that ants 
and bees, like neurons, exhibit intelligence collectively rather than individually. 
According to some biologists, a eusocial insect society is a superorganism, which 
Bert Hölldobler and Edward O. Wilson define as “a colony of individuals self-
organized by division of labour and united by a closed system of communication . . . 
that possesses features of organization analogous to the physiological properties of 
single organisms” (84, 513). Scaled up to human dimensions, superorganisms 
accomplish feats of industry that, like those of Milton’s devils, surpass “Babel, and 
the works of Memphian Kings” (1.694). Garden ants, for example, dig underground 
nests proportional to downtown skyscrapers while fire ants make rafts and bridges 
from their own interlinked bodies. They do so by following pheromonal cues and 
obeying simple, innate rules rather than a leader’s orders (Singer). 
The devil bees also labour without central coordination. Although Mammon 
leads the miners (1.678) and Mulciber is “the Architect” (1.732), a hive mind seems to 
be directing the overall project. The teamwork in evidence is reminiscent of that 
practiced by the builders of the Tower of Babel, who, like a biblical superorganism, 
value group unity and notoriety over personal identity and reputability. They share a 
common language and a purpose to, in Michael’s words, “get themselves a name, 
least far disperst / In foraign Lands thir memorie be lost” (12.45-46). Similarly, the 
builders of Pandæmonium have had their names “blotted out and ras’d / By thir 
Rebellion, from the Books of Life” (1.362-63), and temporarily succumb to the notion 
that they can make a name for themselves in heaven again through cooperation with 
each other. This dream is shattered when they are transformed into hissing serpents 
(10.504-47), a pandemonium at Pandæmonium that prefigures the confusion of 
tongues at Babel and lends further support to Selfridge’s reading of a demonic 
cacophony. 
The “dismal universal hiss” (10.508) of the metamorphosed devils echoes “the 
hiss of russling wings” (1.768) from the bee simile. Yet whereas the earlier swarm 
was composed by plebeian devils who seemed to be acting under their own volition or 
at least according to their station, “thick swarming now” (10.522) are the peers of 
Satan, whose actions in their serpentine state are involuntary. Prior to their forced 
transformation into snakes and consumption of bitter ashes disguised as fruit, the 
devils believed that they acted under their own agency. We are left to guess whether 
they will come to regard this humbling experience as the exception that proves the 
rule or as evidence that their free will is as illusory as the fruit. 
Pandæmonium, then, is the site of orderly, turn-taking debate and unruly mob 
action, two examples of decision-making that may not be as different as they appear; 
perhaps Selfridge read them as opposite perspectives on the same mental phenomena. 
In a human brain, sequential processing of thoughts – or of calculations in Hobbes’s 
formulation – may be an illusion fostered by the bottleneck of consciousness, which 
only admits the froth that bubbles up from billions of agitated neurons. Much like 
ants, bees, or Milton’s snaky devils, neurons behave mindlessly, but their unguided 
interactions generate thoughts and, at a more rudimentary level, perceptions of 
patterns. 
Selfridge’s demons did not outperform neurons: the error rate of the Morse-
code program was slightly higher than that of a professional human operator and the 
letter-recognition program made 10 percent fewer correct matches than human readers 
do (Selfridge and Neisser 62, 68). However, the programs came close enough to 
matching human performance on these specific pattern recognition tasks to suggest 

Journal of Literature and Science 11 (2018)                                  Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium”: 1-19 
 
 
 
© Format and design JLS 2018 © All other content – Author. 
 Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND 
Downloaded from <http://www.literatureandscience.org/> 
9
that the brain might have a mechanism for learning and recognition similar in some 
ways to a network of demons. 
Selfridge could have adopted neurons instead of demons as his metaphor for 
the nodes of his network. Had he done so, his role in the history of artificial neural 
networks would be more widely recognized today. But there were reasons to 
downplay the brain analogy. For one thing, evidence for the existence of mental 
feature extractors was inconclusive.4 More importantly, AI researchers disagreed 
about whether their systems should model the physical structure of human brains – the 
connectionist approach – or represent higher-level reasoning processes – the symbolic 
approach. The latter view was consistent with “the computational theory of mind,” 
which characterized thinking as information processing through “rule-governed 
symbol manipulation” (Rescorla). This theory, which Steven Pinker traces back to 
Hobbes (33), dominated cognitive science during the 1960s and 1970s. 
Despite its connectionist orientation, Pandemonium was embraced by some 
computational psychologists. Among them was Neisser, who published the first 
monograph on the topic of cognitive psychology in 1967. This book offers 
Pandemonium as a “feature-analyzing model” of pattern recognition in human “visual 
cognition” (71). Five years later, cognitive psychologists Peter Lindsay and Donald 
Norman published a widely used psychology textbook that not only contains a long 
and heavily illustrated section on Pandemonium as an explanation of cortical signal 
processing (114–31) but also depicts the authors as demons on the cover. It seems that 
Selfridge’s demon metaphor appealed to cognitivists and connectionists alike, perhaps 
because it conjures an entity that is neither organic nor synthetic and therefore 
possesses equivalent qualifications to represent an agent of information processing in 
either a brain or a computer. 
By the time Pandemonium became part of the standard model of human 
cognition, Selfridge had left it and MIT behind to work for Bolt, Beranek, and 
Newman, a private technology firm (Boden 926). His primary goal for Pandemonium 
had not been to offer cognitive science a colourful illustration of visual pattern 
recognition but rather to devise a blueprint and training methodology for programs 
that would learn to improve their own performance.  
The projects that Selfridge oversaw at MIT pioneered a technique that AI 
developers now call supervised learning: a network of demons was trained with 
labelled examples from a character set and then tested with unlabelled characters 
drawn from the same set but differing from the examples in size, proportion, 
orientation, and/or position. During the training phase, the network estimated the 
probability that the presence of each known feature indicates the presence of each 
known character. During the testing phase, the network fine-tuned its estimates based 
on correct and incorrect matches (Boden 900–02). The success of this self-
improvement method, which Selfridge termed feature weighting, only partially 
fulfilled his ambition to create an evolutionary network; Selfridge had anticipated that 
through “subdemon selection” the network would learn how to create replacements 
for unproductive feature demons by mutating and combining productive ones 
(Selfridge, “Pandemonium” 517–23). But the projects failed to initiate these 
adaptations. “The most important learning process of all is still untouched,” lamented 
Selfridge and Neisser, “no current program can generate test features of its own” (68). 
Today, supervised learning algorithms extract features directly from training 
data, eliminating the need for programmers to code these features (Goodfellow et al. 
4). Deep Learning is not merely a buzzword; the rebranding distinguishes deep 
networks from their shallow predecessors. Two decades ago, cutting-edge networks 

Journal of Literature and Science 11 (2018)                                  Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium”: 1-19 
 
 
 
© Format and design JLS 2018 © All other content – Author. 
 Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND 
Downloaded from <http://www.literatureandscience.org/> 
10
had an input layer, two “hidden layers,” and an output layer (Goodfellow et al. 13). 
Like Pandemonium, the earliest precedent for their four-layer architecture, these 
networks required months of training to recognize significant patterns. Now, such a 
network can be trained in less than a day, and networks of 20 or 30 layers are 
common; Microsoft has developed one with 152 layers.5 Each hidden layer consists of 
artificial neurons that, when activated by the detection of a feature, signal neurons on 
the next highest layer to weigh a related but more complex feature of the data. For 
example, if the data is an image of an object, one layer might detect edges, the next 
corners and contours, the next shapes, and so on until the output layer identifies the 
object as a car, person, or animal (Goodfellow et al. 6). This matchmaking process 
typically moves in only one direction, upward from input to output, but news of a 
mismatch 
travels 
downward 
through 
a 
feedback 
technique 
known 
as 
“backpropagation,” updating the weights (Goodfellow et al. 197). With enough 
refinement, the networks can overcome mislabelled data and correctly identify 
malformed inputs, such as a handwritten A that resembles an H. Even the 
comparatively simple autocorrect feature on smartphones provides evidence that 
computers are learning to interpret the intentions behind user errors and render 
obsolete the programming maxim “garbage in, garbage out.” 
In addition to speech recognition, image classification, and optical character 
recognition, practical applications of Deep Learning include automatic translation, 
spam/virus filtering, Internet searching, targeted advertising, fraud detection, and 
autonomous driving. Deep Learning also helps researchers in scientific fields process 
large datasets and make predictions. The accelerated pace of automation has revived a 
long-running debate about the impact of machines on labour, a topic that is beyond 
the scope of this article.6 
Through his own efforts as well as those of others pursuing connectionist AI, 
Selfridge’s “paradigm for learning” has now been fully realized. Unfortunately, 
historians of AI have undervalued the significance of Pandemonium as the first 
implementation of supervised machine learning in a multilayer network modelled on 
the nervous system, and the influence of Milton on Selfridge is all but unknown. This 
neglect is due in no small part to the paucity of Selfridge’s peer-reviewed 
publications; he shared some of his best ideas orally and by circulating unpublished 
work (Boden 898). 
For its legacy in cognitive science to continue, Pand(a)emonium must remain 
compatible with the prevailing theories of learning and cognition. In a 1949 
monograph, the neuropsychologist Donald O. Hebb speculated that the infant brain 
starts out with a randomly connected network of neurons which then forges new 
connections and grows in complexity through environmental interaction. Although 
feature-generating algorithms provide support for Hebb’s theory, the neuroscientist 
Michael S. Gazzaniga reports that “the current view of the brain is that its large-scale 
plan is genetic, but specific connections at the local level are activity-dependent and a 
function of epigenetic factors and experience” (21). Localized neuron circuits called 
modules run in parallel, each with a distinct specialty and a bottom-up hierarchy (69). 
A module, therefore, is comparable to Selfridge’s Pandemonium. 
The theory of a modular brain evokes medieval and renaissance faculty 
psychology, a tradition to which Milton subscribed (T. Butler 95–138). In Paradise 
Lost, Adam assumes that Reason adjudicates between the promptings of the 
imagination, the passions, and many other sources: “in the Soule / Are many lesser 
Faculties that serve / Reason as chief” (5.100-02). To this day, the notion that a 
privileged faculty of choosing exists passes for common sense. Yet neuroscience has 

Journal of Literature and Science 11 (2018)                                  Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium”: 1-19 
 
 
 
© Format and design JLS 2018 © All other content – Author. 
 Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND 
Downloaded from <http://www.literatureandscience.org/> 
11
not uncovered a top-down command centre but rather networks of widely distributed 
decision-making centres (Gazzaniga 44). It appears that the cranium encloses a 
Pandemonium of Pandemoniums, with the output of one becoming the input of 
another. 
In Paradise Regained, Jesus tells Satan that “he who reigns within himself, 
and rules / Passions, Desires, and Fears, is more a King” (2.466-67). Given this 
doctrine of self-control and inner autocracy, how would the finding of a leaderless 
brain have struck Milton? As a monist, he would have been disinclined to postulate 
incorporeal agency (Fallon chapters 3-5). He may have wondered why a state of 
cognitive pluralism is felt as a unified stream of consciousness. While even a mind 
free from the influence of psychoactive drugs or mental disorders can experience 
disunity and multiplicity, such conditions tend to be perceived as aberrant. In his 
poetry, Milton figures an unsettled or agitated mind as a swarm. When Jesus first 
wanders into the wilderness, he thinks to himself: 
 
O what a multitude of thoughts at once 
Awakn’d in me swarm, while I consider 
What from within I feel my self, and hear 
What from without comes often to my ears, 
Ill sorting with my present state compar’d. (1.196-200) 
 
The conflict is not between what Jesus hears and what he thinks, but rather between 
both sources and his “present state.” In Samson Agonistes, Samson describes much 
the same phenomenon:  
 
                                                      I seek 
This unfrequented place to find some ease, 
Ease to the body some, none to the mind 
From restless thoughts, that like a deadly swarm 
Of Hornets arm’d, no sooner found alone, 
But rush upon me thronging, and present 
Times past, what once I was, and what am now. (16-22) 
 
Jesus’s thoughts on the future and Samson’s on the past are incongruent with their 
present states and the cognitive dissonance stirs these thoughts into a swarm. 
Although neither Samson nor Jesus believes that rumination will lead to action – they 
await a sign from heaven – they can no more stop the mental revolution than they can 
stop breathing. Samson refers to his thoughts as “my Tormenters arm’d with deadly 
stings” (623). 
At the centre of these thought swarms, Milton envisions a besieged core of 
identity, what Jesus refers to as “my self” and Samson as “the mind.” Yet Gazzaniga 
reports that most neuroscientists believe that the self, mind, or soul amounts to 
nothing more than a continuous post hoc narrativization of the limited information 
that manages to rise into conscious awareness from the myriad processors below; a 
module in the left brain, “the interpreter,” infers causal connections between thoughts 
and actions determined subconsciously (85–94). The role of the interpreter module, 
therefore, approximates that of Selfridge’s decision demon, who will testify that it 
saw a pattern when all it really did was listen to the reports of cognitive demons, who 
relied in turn on the reports of feature demons. In both man and machine, a putative 
decider turns out to be a mere explainer, liable to be scapegoated for errors committed 

Journal of Literature and Science 11 (2018)                                  Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium”: 1-19 
 
 
 
© Format and design JLS 2018 © All other content – Author. 
 Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND 
Downloaded from <http://www.literatureandscience.org/> 
12
by other parts of the system. Jesus and Samson perceive their swarming thoughts as a 
loss of control over their mental processes, but they never in fact exerted such control. 
The “calm of mind” (Samson Agonistes 1758) that they seek will deaden but not 
silence the cacophony of competing voices. 
Milton’s swarm-of-thoughts metaphor anticipates the colony-as-brain analogy 
in cognitive science. Due to the ethical and practical challenges of brain research, 
some scientists have turned to insect colonies as evidence for the connectionist theory 
that intelligent behaviour emerges from the interactions of relatively simple units. 
From 2013-2016, for example, neuroscientist Mark Goldman joined ecologist 
Deborah Gordon and others in a study of the foraging behaviour of red harvester ants. 
Previous research had shown that ants decide to forage or stay in the nest based on the 
frequency of their antennal contact with ants returning to the nest (Greene et al.). 
Goldman and Gordon hypothesized that a closer investigation of this leave/stay 
decision-making would shed light on the release/don’t release responses of synaptic 
vesicles (Arnold).  
While comparisons between insect and human societies are still common 
today, the traditional distinction between republican ants and royalist bees was 
overturned by the discovery that both have queens and yet, counterintuitively, neither 
has monarchs. A queen’s role is not to give orders but rather to mate with drones from 
other nests and lay eggs. Due to her long life span relative to her offspring, a queen 
often becomes the mother of the entire colony and her daughters dutifully attend her. 
Proto-entomologists and beekeepers from Virgil to Purchas remarked on this devotion 
but failed to note that bees engage in supersedure, smothering an unproductive queen 
when a replacement becomes available (Winston 197–98). Milton would have been 
interested to learn this fact when composing his defences of regicide. 
If the societies of bees are not monarchies, enlightened or otherwise, neither 
are those of ants the communes of pre- and early modern imaginations. In some ant 
species, most of the so-called workers only stand and wait until needed. Gordon finds 
that among red harvester ants, the oldest 25% of the colony performs the four exterior 
tasks (foraging, patrolling, nest maintenance, midden piling) that make up the bulk of 
the colony’s work (27). While this division of labour may be a collective decision, the 
choice of nest site is not. After mating, the queen digs a hole in the ground where she 
will found her colony (Khan 201–202). Honeybees, on the other hand, select nest sites 
by committee. According to biologist Thomas D. Seeley, when a swarm sets out to 
find a new home, a scout committee of several hundred bees assembles from the ranks 
of the foragers and searches for promising sites. The scouts then return to where the 
swarm has bivouacked and perform “waggle dances.” The orientation and duration of 
each dance indicates the direction and distance of the site, respectively. The scouts 
that located the site with the most desirable features dance the longest and recruit 
others to either join their dance or inhibit competing dancers by head-butting them 
until all the dancers are doing the same dance. The swarm then departs for the 
winning site (131–35). Seeley compares this process to mental decision-making 
models in which sets of neurons representing different options inhibit each other to an 
extent proportional to each set’s level of activation (Seeley et al. 108–11). The process 
also resembles a Pandemonium in which demons can change their votes based on the 
relative exuberance of their neighbours. 
Seeley’s findings are evocative of Milton’s association of swarms with a mind 
or society debating how to achieve a life-altering goal; the swarm ends when a course 
of action is decided upon and implemented. But like the devils in the great hall of 
Pandæmonium, non-scout bees do not vote. Seeley finds that only 3-5% of a swarm 

Journal of Literature and Science 11 (2018)                                  Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium”: 1-19 
 
 
 
© Format and design JLS 2018 © All other content – Author. 
 Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND 
Downloaded from <http://www.literatureandscience.org/> 
13
participates (78). That range is high for representative decision-making, but low for 
direct democracy. 
Such limited, qualification-based suffrage is comparable to the elitist franchise 
Milton recommends in the Readie and Easie Way. Although Milton’s admiration for 
ants shows that he favoured equality among equals, he inveighed against plebiscites in 
a commonwealth of unequals: 
 
Another way will be, to wel-qualifie and refine elections: not committing 
all to the noise and shouting of a rude multitude, but permitting only those 
of them who are rightly qualifi’d, to nominat as many as they will; and out 
of that number others of a better breeding, to chuse a less number more 
judiciously, till after a third or fourth sifting and refining of exactest choice, 
they only be left chosen who are the due number, and seem by most voices 
the worthiest. (7: 442-43)7 
 
Don M. Wolfe diagrams the electoral scheme from the above passage as a four-stage 
“sifting” of both voters and candidates (301). In his interpretation, an elector is 
eligible to vote in one, two, three, or all four rounds depending on his merits. The 
most refined electors, therefore, vote four times, and the least (males worth two 
hundred pounds) only once. But Wolfe reads “that number” as referring to the 
nominators, despite “less number” and “due number” clearly referring to the 
nominees. Milton’s stipulation “others of a better breeding” further suggests that he 
envisioned four separate groups of voters, each voting in only one round, with the 
most elite group having the final vote. A precedent for dividing voters into separate 
groups based on their qualifications can be found in the most well-known of the 
commonwealth-era alternative electoral schemes, that of James Harrington’s The 
Commonwealth of Oceana (1656). Such a system would be less conducive to 
oligarchy than that of Wolfe’s interpretation because the patricians who ultimately 
select the representatives would not have the power to nominate those same 
individuals (or themselves). A four-group election also conveys a parallel, bottom-up 
process like Selfridge’s Pandemonium: a data set (candidate pool) is filtered through 
layers (voter classes) based on features possessed by a subset of that data (desired 
qualifications). Either way, a body so formed might well be deemed, like that 
summoned to the “solemn Councel” (1.755) at Pandæmonium, “By place or choice 
the worthiest” (1.759). 
Wolfe attributes Milton’s vision of the franchise to a genuine and long-held 
disdain for the voices of the people, whom Milton terms “the misguided and abus’d 
multitude” (7: 388). The Restoration-era Milton viewed the masses as unfit to discern 
good from bad. In Paradise Regained, Jesus remarks, “what the people but a herd 
confus’d, / A miscellaneous rabble, who extol / Things vulgar, & well weigh’d, scarce 
worth the praise” (3.49-51). This seems a damning judgment, but is there any hope 
that the common people can learn to make the right choices? In this respect, ants and 
bees can hardly serve as models, for their actions appear instinctual and unlearned. 
Milton was unaware, of course, that their behaviour is the product of natural selection. 
He regarded these insects as, in a sense, pre-programmed by God. Selfridge, 
conversely, was a proponent of the theory of evolution who saw that computers were 
being programmed by men. He aspired to invent, in Pandemonium, a way for 
machines to evolve through trial-and-error. 
The learning process that Milton advocates in Areopagitica (1644) is not trial-
and-error but rather trial-by-error: “that which purifies us is trial, and trial is by what 

Journal of Literature and Science 11 (2018)                                  Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium”: 1-19 
 
 
 
© Format and design JLS 2018 © All other content – Author. 
 Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND 
Downloaded from <http://www.literatureandscience.org/> 
14
is contrary” (2: 515). In this idealistic vision, one learns to recognize errors by 
considering them, not by committing or avoiding them, because “the knowledge and 
survay of vice is in this world so necessary to the constituting of human virtue, and 
the scanning of error to the confirmation of truth” (2: 516). For these reasons among 
others, Milton opposes the imposition of a top-down book licensing process in which 
an imprimatur is passed from licensors to stationers to printers. It is important to note 
that Milton defends “the liberty of unlicensed printing” rather than the liberty of 
publishing. In the publication process, information travels upward from printers to 
stationers to readers, the last group including those with the power to censor books 
“found mischievous and libelous” (2: 569). Milton condones post-publication 
censorship as an alternative means of regulating the press, but pre-publication 
obstacles exist with or without licensing. Publishers, booksellers, and readers choose 
which books they will print, stock, and buy respectively. 
It is from this perspective that Pandemonium and the publishing system 
outlined in Areopagitica illuminate each other. At each level, there is an audience that 
analyses data for features or patterns of interest. Only when these are found can the 
data move up the hierarchy. Consequently, any audience that is not receptive to a 
wide spectrum of features/patterns poses a bottleneck. Selfridge found that his 
demons would only recognize those patterns on which they had been trained already; 
similarly, Milton predicts that the licensers will “let passe nothing but what is vulgarly 
receiv’d already” (2: 534). Since licensers have nothing to gain and much to lose from 
authorizing new or uncustomary ideas, they are impediments to the growth of 
knowledge, which depends on “searching what we know not, by what we know” (2: 
551). 
Supervised learning follows a similar procedure – searching for features 
through knowledge of patterns. However, in a budding technique called unsupervised 
learning, artificial neural networks identify patterns in unlabelled data without first 
being trained with labelled examples (Goodfellow et al. 105). Although some if not all 
of the detected patterns will be familiar to researchers, the approach has great 
potential for situations where they may be unaware of a pattern (unknown unknown) 
or fail to acknowledge it (unknown known). For example, networks can alert 
investigators to irregularities that, after further study, may indicate terrorism or 
corruption. 
Selfridge probably did not foresee these and many other applications of 
machine learning, but his colleagues J. C. R. Licklider and Robert W. Taylor credit 
him with being the first to conceive of a computerized personal secretary (38). A 
twenty-first-century virtual assistant can, as Selfridge prophesized in his 1958 paper, 
“adaptively improve itself to handle certain pattern recognition problems which 
cannot be adequately specified in advance” (“Pandemonium” 513). Selfridge’s faith 
that computers, given the proper architecture, could learn without the guiding hand of 
a programmer parallels Milton’s faith that readers, given a free press, could self-
educate without the regulation of a licensor, much less a king. 
Milton’s belief in the autodidacticism of the common people was shaken by 
the Restoration, but even in the midst of that crisis he did not dismiss them entirely. In 
The Readie and Easie Way, he proposes to enlarge the ranks of the electorate and the 
elected by raising educational standards rather than lowering eligibility standards: “To 
make the people fittest to chuse, and the chosen fittest to govern, will be to mend our 
corrupt and faulty education” (7: 443). Through the spread of education, the 
government would become less centralized and hierarchical, gradually coming to 
resemble the pure commonwealth he envisioned ants as inhabiting in contradistinction 

Journal of Literature and Science 11 (2018)                                  Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium”: 1-19 
 
 
 
© Format and design JLS 2018 © All other content – Author. 
 Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND 
Downloaded from <http://www.literatureandscience.org/> 
15
to bees. The election of assemblies at increasingly local levels would result in a 
commonwealth of commonwealths, each with its own legislature and judicature (7: 
383-85, 458-61). These bodies, if not also the Grand Council overseeing them, would 
be accessible to supplicants (7: 383, 458). In An Apology for a Pamphlet (1642), a 
younger and more idealistic Milton had praised the Long Parliament for such 
openness: 
 
the meanest artizans and labourers, at other times also women, and often the 
younger sort of servants assembling with their complaints, and that 
sometimes in a lesse humble guise than for petitioners, have gone with 
confidence, that neither the meannesse would be rejected, nor their 
simplicity contemn’d, nor yet their urgency distasted either by the dignity, 
wisdome, or moderation of that supreme Senate; nor did they depart 
unsatisfi’d. (1: 926)  
 
This parallel between his early and late polemics shows that even as his 
disillusionment with commoners grew, Milton held fast to the belief that non-voters 
should have access to government. This conviction is evident in the rhetorical 
framework he adopted explicitly or implicitly in many of his tracts, most formally in 
Areopagitica: that of a private person appealing to Parliament. Although Milton 
neither expected nor desired decision makers to judge the merits of petitioners and 
petitions separately (2: 489-90), the form of hierarchical government he supported has 
no autocrat at the top and receives input from the bottom, whether that nethermost tier 
be occupied by England’s lower classes, Pandæmonium’s shrunken devils, or, 
presumably, Pandemonium’s data demons. Selfridge’s paradigm reflects Milton’s 
prescription for human information processing and decision-making due to the 
similarities in the problems the two men addressed, albeit in quite different domains, 
and Selfridge’s dual interpretation of the word pandemonium. In its application to 
insect societies and neural networks, Pand(a)emonium’s legacy in cognitive science 
and AI lives on. 

Journal of Literature and Science 11 (2018)                                  Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium”: 1-19 
 
 
 
© Format and design JLS 2018 © All other content – Author. 
 Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND 
Downloaded from <http://www.literatureandscience.org/> 
16
Notes 
 
1. See chapter two of Hollingsworth for an extended treatment of how and 
why Milton inverts Dante’s simile. 
2. For 18 other bee similes prior to Milton’s, see Whaler. 
3. In the late 1670s, the queen bee’s gender was scientifically verified by Jan 
Swammerdam (1637-1680), a Dutch biologist who conducted microscopic 
investigations of dissected bees and other insects (Munz 195-98). 
4. Contemporary experiments had found evidence for feature extractors in the 
brains of frogs (Lettvin et al.) and octopuses (Sutherland). Selfridge’s work on pattern 
recognition is credited with inspiring the former study. For a survey of the evidence of 
feature extractors in humans, see Grainger et al. 
5. In 2015, at the annual ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge, 
an ensemble of Microsoft neural nets surpassed human performance at classifying 
objects in an image (He et al.). 
6. For an account of the debate over the impact of machines on labour in the 
early nineteenth century, see Berg. For a survey of modern opinions about AI, see 
Brockman. 
7. At seventeenth-century elections, votes were often cast orally and, in the 
case of a large crowd of voters, simultaneously. Robert W. Ayers’s note to this 
passage cites an account of a county election from J.E. Neale’s The Elizabethan 
House of Commons (1950), in which everyone at the courthouse shouted the names of 
their preferred candidates at once. Neale writes, “During the pandemonium, the 
Sheriff was supposed to discern the greatest number of voices.” See Milton, Complete 
Prose Works 7: 442 n154. 

Journal of Literature and Science 11 (2018)                                  Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium”: 1-19 
 
 
 
© Format and design JLS 2018 © All other content – Author. 
 Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND 
Downloaded from <http://www.literatureandscience.org/> 
17
Works Cited 
Arnold, Carrie. “Ants Swarm Like Brains Think.” Nautilus, no. 12, Apr. 2014, 
nautil.us/issue/12/feedback/ants-swarm-like-brains-think. Accessed 1 Dec. 
2018. 
Berg, Maxine. The Machinery Question and the Making of Political Economy 1815-
1848. Cambridge UP, 1982. 
Boden, Margaret A. Mind as Machine: A History of Cognitive Science, vol. 2. Oxford 
UP, 2006. 
Broadbent, J. B. “Milton’s Hell.” ELH, vol. 21, no. 3, Sep. 1954, pp. 161–92. 
---. Some Graver Subject: An Essay on Paradise Lost. Chatto & Windus, 1960. 
Brockman, John, editor. What to Think about Machines That Think: Today’s Leading 
Thinkers on the Age of Machine Intelligence. Harper Perennial, 2015. 
Butler, Charles. The Feminine Monarchie or a Treatise Concerning Bees and the Due 
Ordering of them. Joseph Barnes, 1609. 
Butler, Todd Wayne. Imagination and Politics in Seventeenth-Century England. 
Ashgate Publishing, 2008. 
Edwards, Karen L. Milton and the Natural World: Science and Poetry in Paradise 
Lost. Cambridge UP, 2013. 
Fallon, Stephen M. Milton Among the Philosophers: Poetry and Materialism in 
Seventeenth-Century England. Cornell UP, 1991. 
Gazzaniga, Michael S. Who’s in Charge?: Free Will and the Science of the Brain. 
HarperCollins, 2011.  
Goodfellow, Ian, et al. Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016. 
Gordon, Deborah. Ant Encounters: Interaction Networks and Colony Behavior. 
Princeton UP, 2010. 
Gordon, Deborah, and Mark Goldman. “Stochastic Integrator Models of Collective 
Decision-Making.” 
Grantome, 
2015, 
grantome.com/grant/NIH/R01-
GM105024-01. Accessed 1 Dec. 2018. 
Grainger, Jonathan, et al. “Letter Perception: From Pixels to Pandemonium.” Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, vol. 12, no. 10, Oct. 2008, pp. 381–387, 
doi:dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2008.06.006. 
Greene, Michael J., et al. “Interactions with Combined Chemical Cues Inform 
Harvester Ant Foragers’ Decisions to Leave the Nest in Search of Food.” 
PLoS 
ONE, 
vol. 
8, 
no. 
1, 
Jan. 
2013, 
e52219, 
doi:doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0052219. 
Harrington, James. The Common-Wealth of Oceana. J. Streater, 1656. 
Haugeland, John. Artificial Intelligence: The Very Idea. MIT Press, 1985. 
He, Kaiming, et al. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition.” 
arXiv:1512.03385 [cs.CV], arXiv.org, 2015, arxiv.org/pdf/1512.03385.pdf. 
Accessed 1 Dec. 2018. 
Hebb, D.O. The Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological Theory. Wiley, 
1949. 
Herodotus. The Persian Wars. Translated by A. D. Godley, vol. 1, Harvard UP, 2004. 
Hobbes, Thomas. The English works of Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury, edited by 
William Molesworth, vol. 1. Elements of Philosophy, parts I-IV, John Bohn, 
London 1839. 
Hölldobler, Bert, and Edward O. Wilson. The Superorganism: The Beauty, Elegance, 
and Strangeness of Insect Societies. W.W. Norton, 2009. 

Journal of Literature and Science 11 (2018)                                  Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium”: 1-19 
 
 
 
© Format and design JLS 2018 © All other content – Author. 
 Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND 
Downloaded from <http://www.literatureandscience.org/> 
18
Hollingsworth, Cristopher. Poetics of the Hive: The Insect Metaphor in Literature. U 
of Iowa P, 2001. 
Homer. The Iliad. Translated by A. S. Kline, CreateSpace Independent Publishing 
Platform, 2016. 
Johnson, Steven. Emergence: The Connected Lives of Ants, Brains, Cities, and 
Software. Scribner, 2001. 
Khan, Amina. Adapt: How Humans Are Tapping into Nature’s Secrets to Design and 
Build a Better Future. St. Martin’s Press, 2017. 
Lettvin, J., et al. “What the Frog’s Eye Tells the Frog’s Brain.” Proceedings of the 
Institute of Radio Engineers, vol. 47, no. 11, Nov. 1959, pp. 1940–51. 
Licklider, J. C. R., and Robert W. Taylor. “The Computer as a Communications 
Device.” Science and Technology: For the Technical Men in Management. 
no.76, Apr. 1968, pp. 21-31. Rpt. in “In Memoriam: J.C.R. Licklider: 1915-
1990,” Report 61, Systems Research Center, Digital Equipment Corporation, 7 
Aug. 1990, pp. 21-41, memex.org/licklider.pdf. Accessed 1 Dec. 2018. 
Lindsay, Peter H., and Donald A. Norman. Human Information Processing: An 
Introduction to Psychology. Academic Press, 1972. 
Medler, David A. “A Brief History of Connectionism.” Neural Computing Surveys, 
vol. 1, no. 2, 2008, pp. 61–101, web.uvic.ca/~dmedler/files/ncs98.pdf. 
Accessed 1 Dec. 2018. 
Milton, John. Complete Prose Works of John Milton. Edited by Don M. Wolfe, Yale 
UP, 1953-1982. 8 vols. 
---. John Milton’s Complete Poetical Works Reproduced in Photographic Facsimile: 
A Critical Text Edition. Edited by Harris Francis Fletcher, U of Illinois P, 
1943-1948. 4 vols. 
Munz, Tania. The Dancing Bees: Karl von Frisch and the Discovery of the Honeybee 
Language. U of Chicago P, 2016. 
Neisser, Ulric. Cognitive Psychology. Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1967. 
Norbrook, David. Writing the English Republic: Poetry, Rhetoric and Politics, 1627-
1660. Cambridge UP, 2000. 
Pieraccini, Roberto. The Voice in the Machine: Building Computers That Understand 
Speech. MIT Press, 2012. 
Pinker, Steven. The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature. Viking, 2002. 
Purchas, Samuel. Theatre of Politicall Flying-Insects, Wherein Especially the Nature, 
the Worth, the Work, the Wonder, and the Manner of Right-Ordering of the 
Bee, Is Discovered and Described. Thomas Parkhurst, 1657. 
Rescorla, Michael. “The Computational Theory of Mind.” The Stanford Encyclopedia 
of Philosophy, Spring 2017 ed., edited by Edward N. Zalta, The Metaphysics 
Research 
Lab, 
plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2017/entries/computational-
mind/. Accessed 1 Dec. 2018. 
Sauer, Elizabeth M. Barbarous Dissonance and Images of Voice in Milton’s Epics. 
McGill-Queen’s UP, 1996. 
Seeley, Thomas D. Honeybee Democracy. Princeton UP, 2010.  
Seeley, Thomas D., et al. “Stop Signals Provide Cross Inhibition in Collective 
Decision-Making by Honeybee.” Science, vol. 335, no. 6064, 6 Jan. 2012, pp. 
108–11, doi:10.1126/science.1210361. 
Selfridge, O. G. “Pandemonium: A Paradigm for Learning.” Mechanization of 
Thought Processes, Proceedings of a Symposium Held at the National 
Physical Laboratory on 24-27 November, 1958, vol. 1, Her Majesty’s 
Stationary Office, London, 1959, pp. 511–531. 

Journal of Literature and Science 11 (2018)                                  Bjork, “The Legacy of Pand(a)emonium”: 1-19 
 
 
 
© Format and design JLS 2018 © All other content – Author. 
 Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND 
Downloaded from <http://www.literatureandscience.org/> 
19
---. “Pattern Recognition and Modern Computers.” Proceedings of the March 1-3, 
1955, Western Joint Computer Conference, ACM, 1955, pp. 91–93, 
doi:10.1145/1455292.1455310. 
Selfridge, Oliver G., and Ulric Neisser. “Pattern Recognition by Machine.” Scientific 
American, vol. 203, no. 2, Aug. 1960, pp. 60–68. 
Singer, Emily. “The Remarkable Self-Organization of Ants.” Quanta Magazine, 9 
Apr. 2014, www.quantamagazine.org/ants-build-complex-structures-with-a-
few-simple-rules-20140409/. Accessed 1 Dec. 2018. 
Standage, Tom. “From not Working to Neural Networking.” Special Report in The 
Economist, June 2016, www.economist.com/special-report/2016/06/25/from-
not-working-to-neural-networking. Accessed 1 Dec. 2018. 
Sutherland, N. S. “Visual Discrimination of Orientation by Octopus.” British Journal 
of Psychology, vol. 48, no, 1, Feb. 1957, pp. 55–71. 
Whaler, James. “Animal Simile in Paradise Lost.” PMLA, vol. 47, no. 2, June 1932, 
pp. 534–53. 
Winston, Mark L. The Biology of the Honey Bee. Harvard UP, 1987. 
Wolfe, Don M. Milton in the Puritan Revolution. T. Nelson and Sons, 1941. 
Woop Studios, and Jason Sacher, editors. A Compendium of Collective Nouns: From 
an Armory of Aardvarks to a Zeal of Zebras. Chronicle Books, 2013. 
 

