E
EELS
The acronym EELS stands for electronic energy loss spectroscopy. The
technique relies on measuring the energy loss electrons undergo when
they are reflected inelastically from a surface. The changes in energy are
interpreted in terms of the vibrational spectrum of the adsorbate.
Eﬀective Mass
The eﬀective mass is a measure of the mass of the moving bodies that
aﬀect the frequency of a molecular vibration. The vibrational frequency
of a diatomic molecule composed of atoms of masses mA and mB is
o ¼
kf
m

1=2
;
n ¼ 1
2p
kf
m

1=2
;
m ¼
mAmB
mA þ mB
where m is the eﬀective mass. The same expression for m is en-
countered in the separation of the internal motion from the motion of
the centre of mass of the joint system with a centrosymmetric po-
tential, when it is called the reduced mass. The latter name is some-
times applied to the eﬀective mass of a diatomic vibrator. However,
for polyatomic molecules, the eﬀective mass diﬀers from the reduced
mass and depends on the extent to which the atoms move in each
normal mode of vibration. For instance, the eﬀective mass of the
symmetric stretching mode of CO2 is independent of the mass of the
carbon atom, as it does not move.
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
By Peter Atkins
r Peter Atkins 2024
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
83
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Eﬃciency
The eﬃciency, Z, of a heat engine is defined as the work produced
divided by the heat absorbed. The theoretical maximum eﬃciency
depends only on the temperatures of the hot source and cold sink
between which the engine is working:
Z ¼ 1  Tcold
Thot
When considering refrigeration it is common to express the eﬃ-
ciency in terms of the coeﬃcient of performance, c0, the ratio of the heat
transferred from the cold body to the work required to bring it about.
The thermodynamic maximum coeﬃcient of performance is
c0 ¼
Tcold
Thot  Tcold
In each case, the thermodynamic maximum is a consequence of
the Second Law of thermodynamics and the identification of spon-
taneous change with an increase in entropy. Thus, for a heat engine to
generate work, the loss of entropy when energy is lost as heat from the
hot source must be recovered from the gain in entropy when energy is
deposited as heat in the cold sink (Figure E.1). See also enzyme.
Eﬀusion
Eﬀusion is the escape of a gas or vapour through a small hole in a
container. According to Graham’s law, the rate of eﬀusion is inversely
proportional to the square root of the molar mass of the gas. That law is
Figure E.1
The analysis of the eﬃciency of a heat engine.
84
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

explained by Maxwell’s expression for the distribution of speeds, which
implies that the mean speed of molecules is also inversely proportional
to M1/2. Given that the superficial collision rate is ZW ¼ p/(2pmkT)1/2 with
m¼ M/NA, the rate of eﬀusion through a hole of area A is dN/dt¼ ZWA.
Ehrenfest Classification
According to the Ehrenfest classification of phase transitions, a first-
order transition is one for which dm/dT, where m is the chemical po-
tential, is discontinuous across the transition. The implication is that
the enthalpy of transition is nonzero and the heat capacity is infinite
at the transition temperature (Figure E.2). A second-order transition is
one for which dm/dT is continuous but d2m/dT 2 is not. The implication
is that DtrsH ¼ 0 and that the heat capacity is discontinuous but not
infinite at the transition temperature.
Eigenfunction and Eigenvalue
A function f is an eigenfunction of an operator bO if bO f ¼ of, where o is
a numerical factor, the eigenvalue of the operator corresponding to the
eigenfunction f. If the operator is Hermitian, its eigenvalues are all
real and its eigenfunctions are mutually orthogonal. The Schrödinger
equation can be expressed as an eigenvalue equation, as bH c ¼ Ec,
where bH is the Hamiltonian operator and E its eigenvalue corres-
ponding to the wavefunction (the eigenfunction) c. The system is
then said to be in an eigenstate of the Hamiltonian operator (and
likewise for other physical observables). The outcome of any meas-
urement of a system is an eigenvalue of the operator corresponding to
the property of interest. A state can be a simultaneous eigenstate of
Figure E.2
The Ehrenfest classification.
Concepts Beginning with E
85
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

two diﬀerent operators only if they commute (see uncertainty prin-
ciple, commutator).
einstein (the unit)
The non-SI unit 1 einstein ¼ 1 mole of photons.
Einstein Coeﬃcients
The rate of absorption, wabs,stim, is proportional to the energy density,
r(n) at the transition frequency, n, and wabs,stim ¼ Br(n), where B is the
Einstein coeﬃcient of stimulated absorption (Figure E.3). The rate of
emission depends on two processes. One is stimulated emission, with
wemit,stim ¼ B0r(n), where B0 is the Einstein coeﬃcient of stimulated
emission. The other is independent of the radiation density already
present, and wemit,spon¼ A, where A is the Einstein coeﬃcient of spon-
taneous emission. The total rate of emission is therefore wemit¼ Aþ B0r(n).
For transitions between the same two states, B¼ B0 and
A ¼ 8phn3
c3
B
Note the strong dependence on the frequency of the transition. Spon-
taneous emission is not ‘uncaused’: it can be regarded as being stimu-
lated by the zero-point fluctuations of the electromagnetic vacuum.
Elastic Collision
In an elastic collision there is no transfer of energy from translational
motion into the internal modes of motion (rotation and vibration) of
Figure E.3
Processes of absorption and emission.
86
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

the colliding species. The collision is inelastic if there is a transfer of
energy between translation and internal modes.
Elastomer
An elastomer is an elastic polymer. A perfect elastomer is an elastomer
for which extension (and compression) occurs without change of in-
ternal energy. For a perfect elastomer modelled as a one-dimensional
freely jointed chain of N links each of length l and therefore of total
length L0 ¼ Nl, the change in entropy when the elastomer changes
from a random coil to a coil in which the end-to-end separation is L is
DS ¼  1
2 Nk ln
1 þ L
L0

1 þ L=L0
1 L
L0

1  L=L0
(
)
;
L0 ¼ Nl
See Figure E.4.
Electric Dipole Moment
An electric dipole consists of two equal and opposite charges Q and Q
separated by a distance L. The dipole moment is a vector of magnitude
m ¼ QL directed from the negative charge to the positive charge.
A point dipole is the dipole viewed from a distance r such that rcL.
The SI unit of dipole moment is coulomb metre (C m) but dipole
moments are commonly reported in debye (D). A polar molecule is a
molecule with a permanent nonzero electric dipole moment; a non-
polar molecule is a molecule with no permanent dipole moment.
Figure E.4
The conformational entropy of a pefect elastomer.
Concepts Beginning with E
87
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

A very approximate relation between the magnitude of the dipole
moment and the electronegativity diﬀerence, Dw, of a heteronuclear
diatomic molecule or fragment is m/D ¼ Dw. The negative partial
charge is commonly on the more electronegative atom, but that might
not be the case when antibonding orbitals are occupied (CO is an
example). A molecule acquires a contribution to its electric dipole
moment (in addition to one it might already possess) in an electric
field: see polarizability.
The electric field at r from a point electric dipole in a vacuum is
E ¼ l  3(l  br)br
4pe0r3
;
br ¼ r=r
The energy of a second electric dipole with moment l0 in this field is
E ¼  l0E
Electric Dipole Transition
An electric dipole transition is a transition that is accompanied by a
change in electric dipole moment. Specifically, it is a transition be-
tween states i and f with a nonzero electric dipole transition moment,
lfi, with
lfi ¼
ð
cf lcidt
Electric dipole transitions include s - p electronic transitions in
atoms (Figure E.5), rotational transitions of polar molecules, and
vibrational transitions in which the normal mode corresponds to a
changing electric dipole moment (as in the bending and antisymmetric
stretching modes of CO2 but not its symmetric stretch).
Figure E.5
An s - p electronic transition.
88
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Electric Double Layer
An electric double layer consists of two layers of opposite charge.
One of the layers may be diﬀuse. Three models of a double layer are
used to discuss processes at surfaces. In the Helmholtz model
(Figure E.6) it is supposed that the solvated ions are attracted to the
surface but held away from it by their hydration spheres. In the
Gouy–Chapman model, thermal disordering is taken into account by
supposing that the outer plane is replaced by an ionic atmosphere,
as in the Debye–Hückel model of an ionic solution. In the Stern
model there is a rigid outer Helmholtz plane and beyond that there
an ionic atmosphere.
Electrical Conduction
Electrical conduction is the transport of electric charge. It may occur by
the migration of electrons or ions. Electronic conductors are classi-
fied as metallic conductors if the conductivity decreases with increas-
ing temperature (that is, if the resistance rises as the temperature is
increased), as semiconductors if the conductivity increases with tem-
perature, and as superconductors if the current flows with zero
resistance.
Metallic conduction occurs when a solid has an incompletely filled
band of levels (a ‘conduction band’, Figure E.7). Its decreasing
conductivity with rising temperature is due to the disruption of
electron flow by the increasingly vigorous vibrations of the lattice.
Semiconduction arises when an empty band lies above but close to a
filled band (a ‘valence band’); the increasing conductivity with
temperature is due to the increasing population of the upper
band as the temperature is raised (see Fermi–Dirac distribution).
Many solids have such large band gaps between the valence band
Figure E.6
The Helmholtz model.
Concepts Beginning with E
89
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

and an upper empty band that their ability to conduct an electric
current remains very low at all temperatures and are considered to
be electrical insulators.
Semiconduction can be tailored by doping the solid with elements
that either remove electrons from the valence band (to give a p-type
semiconductor, in which the conduction is eﬀectively by ‘holes’ in
the valence band), or with elements that provide electrons to
populate the upper band (to give an n-type semiconductor). Low-
temperature superconduction is due to the formation of Cooper
pairs, in which distortion of the lattice by one electron captures a
second, and the two linked electron travel through the lattice
without being scattered. The mechanism of high-temperature
superconduction remains obscure.
Electrocapillarity
Electrocapillarity is the modification of the surface tension, g, of a
conducting solution in contact with a solid by the passage of an
electric current through the interface. The eﬀect is summarized by the
Lippman equation, that
@g
@Df


n;p;T
¼  Qs
where Df is the interfacial potential diﬀerence and Qs is the superficial
charge density (the charge on region of the surface divided by its area).
Figure E.7
Varieties of electronic conductor.
90
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Electrochemical Cell
An electrochemical cell is device in which either a chemical reaction
generates an electric current or in which an electric current is used to
bring about a chemical reaction. A galvanic cell (or voltaic cell) is an
electrochemical cell in which a spontaneous chemical reaction
generates an electric current. An electrolytic cell is an electrochemical
cell in which the passage of an electric current brings about a non-
spontaneous chemical reaction. A primary cell is a galvanic cell in
which the reactants are built in at manufacture. A secondary cell is a
galvanic cell that must first be charged by acting as an electrolytic cell.
A fuel cell is a galvanic cell in which the reactants are supplied
externally. All types of cells consist of two metallic conductors in
contact with an electrolyte, which may be an ionically conducting
liquid or solid. The electrodes may share a common electrolyte, in
which case the cell is designated M|electrolyte|M0 (Figure E.8, left).
Alternatively, the cell may consist of two compartments. The cell
may then be either M|electrolyte1|electrolyte2|M0 if the electrolytes are
in direct contact, or M|electrolyte1||electrolyte2|M0 if the compart-
ments are joined by a salt bridge to eliminate the junction potential
(Figure E.8, right). If the compartments diﬀer only in the concen-
trations of the same electrolyte, the cell is called a concentration cell.
The electrode at which reduction occurs is called the cathode (and is
the point of entry of electrons into the cell from the external circuit of
a working cell). The electrode at which oxidation occurs is called
the anode (and is the electrode at which electrons leave the cell). Thus,
the cathode is the positive electrode of a galvanic cell and the anode
is the negative electrode. The cell potential, Ecell, is the potential diﬀer-
ence of the cell (M0 – M for the cell as specified as above) when the
progress of the chemical reaction is balanced by an externally applied
Figure E.8
Two typical galvanic cells.
Concepts Beginning with E
91
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

potential diﬀerence and is therefore progressing reversibly. The
Nernst equation expresses how the cell potential depends upon the
composition of the reaction mixture.
Electrochemical Potential
The electrochemical potential, m., of a species of charge number z is a
modification of its chemical potential that takes into account the
presence of an electric potential, f:
m ¼ m þ zFf
Note that if z and f have the same sign (both positive, for instance),
then the electrochemical potential is greater than the chemical po-
tential and the species has more chemical ‘punch’. At equilibrium,
the electrochemical potential of a species is the same wherever it
occurs in a system.
Electrochemical Series
The electrochemical series summarizes the relative reducing power of
redox couples, with the more strongly reducing couples (couples with
the more negative standard potentials) higher in the series.
Electrode
An electrode is a metallic conductor that makes contact with an
electrolyte in an electrochemical cell. If it is the site of reduction, it is
termed a cathode; if it is the site of oxidation, then it is termed an
anode. Examples of electrodes and their notation, where M is a me-
tallic conductor and | denotes a phase boundary, are as follows:
1. Metal–metal ion electrode, M(s)|M1(aq). Example: Cu(s)|Cu21(aq).
2. Metal–insoluble salt electrode, M(s)|MX(s)|X(aq). Example:
Ag(s)|AgCl(s)|Cl(aq).
3. Gas electrode, M(s)|X2(g)|X1/(aq). Example: Pt(s)|H2(g)|H1(aq).
4. Redox electrode, M(s)|Ox(aq),Red(aq). Example: Pt(s)|Fe31(aq),
Fe21(aq).
Each electrode is in its standard state when the reactants are in
their standard states (aJ ¼ 1, fJ ¼ 1 bar). The standard hydrogen
92
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

electrode (SHE) is an important example as it is the basis of the def-
inition and compilation of standard potentials.
Electrokinetic potential
The electrokinetic potential, z (or zeta potential), is the electric potential
at the radius of shear of a colloidal particle relative to the potential in
the distant bulk medium (Figure E.9). The radius of shear is the radius
of the sphere that surrounds a rigid layer of ions attached to the
surface of a colloidal particle.
Electrolyte
The term electrolyte is used in two slightly diﬀerent ways. (1) An
electrolyte is a substance that dissolves to give an ionically conducting
solution. Such an electrolyte may be either strong or weak (see con-
ductivity). (2) The electrolyte of an electrochemical cell is the ionically
conducting medium in contact with each electrode.
Electromagnetic Field
The electromagnetic field is a distribution of oscillating electric and
magnetic fields propagating in a vacuum at a common speed, c,
the ‘speed of light’. Both component fields are perpendicular to
the direction of propagation and are mutually perpendicular. The
field is classified into diﬀerent regions according to its frequency or
its vacuum wavelength (Figure E.10). In its dual character, the field is
treated as a collection of photons, each one of energy hn, the number
of photons in a region determining its intensity there. The evidence
for its particlelike character incudes the photoelectric eﬀect; the evi-
dence for its wavelike character is diﬀraction.
Figure E.9
The radius of shear.
Concepts Beginning with E
93
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

The field may be regarded as a collection of harmonic oscillators
that span the entire and continuous frequency range. The excitation
of an oscillator of frequency n to its first excited state corresponds to
the presence of one photon of energy hn, to its second excited state to
two photons each of energy hn, and so on. This model leaves open the
possibility that the oscillators have a zero-point energy and that the
unexcited electromagnetic vacuum oscillates with electric and mag-
netic fields; that zero-point fluctuation accounts for the process of
spontaneous emission (see Einstein coeﬃcients).
Electron Aﬃnity
The electron aﬃnity, Ea, of an element is the molar energy change
when an electron attaches to a gas phase atom of the element:
X(g) þ e(g) ! X(g); Ea ¼ Em(X)  Em(X)
According to this definition (the opposite convention is sometimes
adopted), the electron aﬃnity is positive if X lies lower in energy
than X. The electron aﬃnity is numerically closely related to the
electron-gain enthalpy, but should be distinguished from it.
Electron Diﬀraction
The wavelike character of electrons implies that they may be dif-
fracted by objects in their path. The resulting diﬀraction pattern can
be interpreted in terms of the structural characteristics of the target.
The technique is confined to a study of the surfaces of solids, when it
is known as low-energy electron diﬀraction (LEED), and gas-phase
samples. In a gas the freely rotating molecules present all possible
Figure E.10
The regions of the electromagnetic spectrum.
94
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

orientations to the electron beam and the diﬀraction system shows
contributions from all such orientations. The dependence of the pattern
of intensity on the scattering angle is given by the Wierl equation:
I(y) ¼
X
i; j
fi fj
sin sRij
sRij
;
s ¼ 4p
l sin 1
2 y
where l is the wavelength of the incident electron (see de Broglie
relation), Rij is the distance between nucleus i and j, and fi and fj are
measures of the scattering strengths of the atoms. The analysis de-
pends on assuming a geometry for the molecule, calculating the in-
tensity according to this equation, and then modifying the bond
lengths and angles until the calculated pattern matches the observed
pattern.
In LEED, the use of low-energy electron beams means that only
surface scattering events contribute to the diﬀraction. The technique
is used to study the distribution of defects on the surface and the
pattern of the attachment of an adsorbate to it.
Electron-gain Enthalpy
The electron-gain enthalpy, DegH-, is the standard molar enthalpy of
electron gain in the gas phase, the process X(g) þ e(g) - X(g). It is
related to the electron aﬃnity at a temperature T by
DegH- ¼ EeaRT
Note that Eea and DegH- have opposite signs but are otherwise nu-
merically very similar. Thus, positive electron aﬃnity corresponds to
exothermic (strictly, exenthalpic) electron gain.
Electronegativity
The electronegativity, w, of an element is the electron-attracting power
of its atoms when they are part of a compound. Thus, highly elec-
tronegative atoms tend to acquire control of valence electrons even to
the extent of becoming anions. See electric dipole moment. There
have been numerous attempts to render the concept quantitative. The
Pauling scale defines electronegativity in terms of bond dissociation
energies:
jwP(A)  wP(B)j ¼ {hc~D(AB)=eV  [hc~D(AA) þ hc~D(BB)]=eV}1=2
Concepts Beginning with E
95
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

The Mullikan scale defined It in terms of the ionization energy and
electron aﬃnity of the element:
wM ¼ 1
2 (I þ Eea)=eV
The ionization energy and electron aﬃnity are those of the valence
state of the atom, its hypothetical state when present in the com-
pound (a combination of spectroscopic states). The two scales are
broadly in line, with
wPE1:35w1=2
M  1:37
The Allred–Rochow scale is in terms of atomic parameters:
wAR ¼ 0:744 þ 3590Zeff
(r=pm)2
where Zeﬀis is the eﬀective atomic number and r is the atomic radius.
electronvolt (the unit)
An electronvolt (eV) is a non-SI unit of energy defined such at 1 eV is the
diﬀerence in potential energy of an electron when it is moved between
locations diﬀering in electric potential by 1 V. Equivalently, it is the
kinetic energy gained by an electron when it is accelerated through a
potential diﬀerence of 1 V. Numerically, 1 eV¼ 1.602 176 634 1019 J,
corresponding to 96.485 kJ mol1. That the ionization energy of a
hydrogen atom is 13.6 eV indicates that when an electron is lost from
the ground state of the atom to infinity it experiences a change in
electric potential of 13.6 V.
Electrophoresis
Electrophoresis is the motion of macromolecules under the influence
of an electric field. In polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) the
migration takes place through a crosslinked polyacrylamide gel. The
technique is used to separate macromolecules and to determine their
molar masses (after calibration).
Electropositive
An element is classified as electropositive if it has a strongly negative
standard potential and hence is thermodynamically a powerful
96
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

reducing agent. Note that ‘electropositive’ is not the opposite of
‘electronegative’: the former is a term in electrochemistry; the latter is
a term relating to electron distributions in molecules.
Elementary Reaction
An elementary reaction is a single step in a proposed reaction
mechanism. It is classified as unimolecular if it involves a single
reactant molecule (A - P) and as bimolecular if two reactant mol-
ecules are involved (A þ B - P and A þ A - P). A unimolecular
elementary reaction has a first-order rate law; a bimolecular elementary
reaction has a second-order rate law. The overall rate law implied by a
proposed mechanism is formulated by combining the rate laws of the
constituent elementary reactions, often by invoking the steady-state
approximation or supposing that there is a pre-equilibrium.
End Point
The end point of an acid–base titration is the stage at which the acidic
and basic forms of an indicator are in equal abundance (and similarly
in other versions of titrations). Distinguish end point from stoichio-
metric point. A well-chosen indicator has an end point at the stoi-
chiometric point of a titration.
Energy
The energy, E, of a system is its capacity to do work. The kinetic energy,
Ek, of a body is the energy due to its motion; for a body of mass m and
speed v, Ek ¼ 1
2 mv2. The potential energy, Ep or V, of a body is the energy
due to its position. The expression for potential energy depends on
the type of field:
Charged particle in electric potential f
Ep ¼ Qf
Coulomb potential energy of charges Q1 and Q2
Ep ¼ Q1Q2/4pe0r
Gravitational potential energy of masses
m1 and m2
Ep ¼ Gm1m2/r
Particle at height h above surface of Earth
Ep ¼ mgh
Harmonic oscillator
Ep ¼ 1
2kfx2
Concepts Beginning with E
97
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

For a system free of external forces, the total energy, Etotal ¼ Ek þ Ep
(sometimes written, when the meaning of the symbols is clear, as
E ¼ T þ V) is conserved (that is, remains unchanged as one form is
converted into another).
Energy Pooling
Energy pooling is the process that occurs when two excited state
molecules encounter one another and the excess energy of one is
transferred to the other, so raising it to an even more highly excited
state: A* þ A* - A** þ A.
Ensemble
An ensemble in statistical thermodynamics is a collection of imaginary
replications of the actual system (Figure E.11). In a microcanonical
ensemble, the number of molecules (N), volume (V), and energy (E), of
each member of the ensemble are the same. In a canonical ensemble
the number of molecules, the volume, and the temperature (T) of each
member are the same and energy can be exchanged between the
members; the total energy of the entire ensemble is constant. In a
grand canonical ensemble the chemical potentials (m) of the com-
ponent, the volume, and the temperature are the same, with energy
and particles able to move between the members, their totals being
constant. The thermodynamic limit of a property is calculated as an
average over the members of an ensemble as the total number of
replications approaches infinity.
Figure E.11
Three varieties of ensemble.
98
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Enthalpy
The enthalpy, H, of a system is defined as H ¼ U þ pV, where U is the
internal energy of the system, p is its pressure, and V is its volume.
Enthalpy is a state function. For a system of constant composition,
the change in enthalpy accompanying a process is equal to the
energy transferred as heat at constant pressure: DH ¼ qp. The isobaric
(constant pressure) heat capacity is the derivative of the enthalpy of
a closed system with respect to temperature at constant pressure:
Cp ¼ (@H/@T)p,n.
The usefulness of the enthalpy is that changes in its value take into
account automatically the work done on the system as it changes its
volume (Figure E.12). An exenthalpic process is one for which DH o 0
and an endenthalpic process is one for which DH40. These processes
are commonly referred to as exothermic and endothermic, respectively,
but such terms should be retained for processes for q o 0 (energy
leaving as heat) and q 4 0 (energy entering as heat), respectively,
regardless of the constraints on the system. In practice, there is rarely
a distinction in the sense that most exothermic processes are ex-
enthalpic. An isenthalpic process is one that occurs at constant en-
thalpy:
see
Joule–Thomson
eﬀect.
The
reversible
isothermal
expansion of a perfect gas is isenthalpic but endothermic.
Enthalpy of Formation
The standard enthalpy of formation of a substance, DfH-, at a
specified temperature is the change in molar enthalpy accom-
panying its formation in its standard state from its elements in their
reference states. The reference state of an element is its thermo-
dynamically most stable state at that temperature. Thus, the
Figure E.12
The flow of energy at constant pressure.
Concepts Beginning with E
99
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

reference state of carbon at room temperature and 1 bar is graphite
and that of hydrogen at 1 bar is the gas. The one exception is white
phosphorus, which is the most reproducible but not the most stable
allotrope of the element. By implication, the standard enthalpy of
formation of an element in its reference state is zero. Compounds
are classified as exenthalpic or endenthalpic according to the sign of
DfH- (Figure E.13). Standard enthalpies of formation are reported
in kilojoules per mole of formula units of the compound and
tabulated values commonly refer to the conventional temperature,
298.15 K (but any specified temperature can be used provided it is
used consistently).
The problem with ions is that in solution cations are always ac-
companied by anions. To isolate the standard enthalpy of formation
of ions in solution, the standard enthalpy of formation of hydrogen
ions in water is defined as zero at all temperatures, DfH-(H1,aq)¼0,
and values for other ions are reported on that basis.
Enthalpy of Reaction
The enthalpy of reaction (or reaction enthalpy), DrH, is defined as the
diﬀerence in molar enthalpies of the products and reactants, weigh-
ted by the stoichiometric coeﬃcients that occur in the chemical
equation:
DrH ¼
X
Products
nHm 
X
Reactants
nHm
More commonly, the standard enthalpy of reaction, DrH-, is used,
in which all reactants and products are in their standard states.
Enthalpy is a state function, so the same outcome is obtained by
supposing an indirect route between reactants and products in which
Enthalpy, H
Endenthalpic, ΔH > 0
Exenthalpic, ΔH < 0
Elements
Compound
Compound
Figure E.13
The thermodynamic classification of compounds.
100
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

the reactants are decomposed into their elements and the products
are assembled from the elements (all in their reference states). Then
DrH- ¼
X
Products
nDfH-
X
Reactants
nDfH-
A more sophisticated version of this expression, which uses (signed)
stoichiometric numbers for the participants J in the reaction is
DrH- ¼
X
J
nJDfH- Jð Þ;
DrH- ¼ v  DfH-
Note that the use of molar values implies that the enthalpy of reaction
is also a molar quantity.
At constant pressure, the enthalpy of reaction can be identified as
the energy as heat required or released by the reaction. The standard
value includes contributions from the mixing of the pure reactants,
the reaction itself (the commonly dominant contribution, except for
reactions involving ions), and the unmixing of the products into their
pure forms. Reactions for which DrH-o0 are classified as ex-
enthalpic; those for which DrH-40 are classified as endenthalpic
(although the less precise terms exothermic and endothermic are
commonly used). An exenthalpic reaction at constant pressure in a
diathermic container releases heat into the surroundings; in an
adiabatic container it causes a rise in temperature. An endenthalpic
reaction does the opposite.
The standard enthalpy of reaction of Reactants - Products is the
negative of the reverse reaction Reactants ’ Products (at the same
temperature). Enthalpy is a state function, so the enthalpy of reaction
is independent of the path by which the reaction can be supposed to
take place. It may therefore be expressed as the sum of a series of
possibly hypothetical reactions. The statement
DrH- ¼
X
steps
DrH-(step)
is the modern version of Hess’s law. All the standard enthalpies of
reaction must refer to the same the temperature unless their variation
is taken into account systematically.
The temperature dependence of the standard enthalpy of reaction
is expressed by Kirchhoﬀ’s law, that
DrH- T2
ð
Þ ¼ DrH- T1
ð
Þ þ
ðT2
T1
DrC- T
ð ÞdT;
DrC- T
ð Þ ¼
X
J
nJC-
p;m(J)
Concepts Beginning with E
101
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

where C-
p;m(J) is the molar isobaric heat capacity of J in its standard
state at a temperature T. If DrC- can be regarded as constant over the
temperature range of interest (a weaker condition than supposing
that the individual heat capacities are constant), then Kirchhoﬀ’s law
simplifies to
DrH- T2
ð
Þ ¼ DrH- T1
ð
Þ þ (T2T1)DrC-
Enthalpy of Transition
The enthalpy of transition, DtrsH, is the change in molar enthalpy that
accompanies a change in phase of a substance such as vaporization. It
can be identified with the energy required as heat at constant pres-
sure required or released as a result of the transition. For this rea-
son, enthalpies of transition have in the past been called ‘latent
heats’. The standard enthalpy of transition is the enthalpy change
accompanying a transition when both phases are in their standard
state (pure, 1 bar), Note that the enthalpy of transition a - b is the
negative of the reverse transition a ’ b (such as vaporization and
condensation). As depicted in Figure E.14, the overall standard en-
thalpy of transition of a - b - g is the sum of the individual
standard enthalpies of transition (at the same temperature), as
in DsubH- T
ð Þ ¼ DfusH- T
ð Þ þ DvapH-(T).
Entropy
The thermodynamic entropy, S, is defined through
dS ¼ dqrev
T
Figure E.14
The composition of enthalpies of transition.
102
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

where dqrev is the energy transferred as heat to the system reversibly.
The statistical entropy is given by the Boltzmann formula
S ¼ k ln W
where k is Boltzmann’s constant and W is the weight of the most
probable configuration of the system, the total number of ways in
which the molecules are the system can be arranged to achieve the
same overall energy. These two definitions turn out to be equivalent
provided the thermodynamic entropy is taken to be zero at T ¼ 0.
Entropy acts as a means of formulating the Second law of thermo-
dynamics and expressing it quantitatively. Thus, the Second law states
that the entropy of an isolated system increases in the course of a
spontaneous change. Therefore, to decide whether a feasible change
(one allowed by the First law) in an isolated system can occur spon-
taneously it is necessary to determine whether the entropy would
increase if it took place. The ‘isolated system’ may consist of the
system of interest and its immediate surroundings. The law opens the
possibility that the entropy of the system of interest might decrease,
for it is the sum of the entropy changes in it and its surroundings that
matter, and the entropy of the system may decrease provided there is
a compensating increase in the entropy of its surroundings.
The entropy of a substance is measured by determining its heat
capacity down to as low a temperature as possible and then ex-
trapolating to T ¼ 0. The data are then used to evaluate
S(T) ¼ S(0) þ
ðT
0
Cp(T)
T
dT
The Third law of thermodynamics is then invoked to set S(0) ¼ 0. If
there are phase transitions below the temperature of interest, the
entropy is of each transition is added to the integral (Figure E.15).
Data are normally reported for the standard molar entropies of sub-
stances. As for the enthalpies of formation of ions, where the
hydrogen ion is ascribed zero standard enthalpy of formation, so the
standard entropies of ions are reported by ascribing S-(H1, aq) ¼ 0 at
all temperatures.
The interpretation of the entropy as a measure of disorder is con-
sistent with its definition in terms of the transfer of energy as heat.
That transfer results in an increase in the thermal disorder of the
system, but the extent of the change depends on the temperature. At
high temperatures there is already a great deal of thermal disorder
and a given transfer of energy results in only a small additional
Concepts Beginning with E
103
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

contribution to it. However, if the temperature is low then there is
little thermal disorder present and the transfer of the same quantity
of energy results in a large increase in disorder. (I have likened this
diﬀerence to sneezing in a busy street or sneezing in a quiet library.)
Entropy of Reaction
The entropy of reaction, DrS, is the change in molar entropy of a system
when reactants become products. The standard entropy of reaction,
DrS-, is that change when all the participants are in their standard
states:
DrS- ¼
X
Products
nS-
m 
X
Reactants
nS-
m
More succinctly
DrS- ¼
X
J
nJS-
m J
ð Þ;
DrS- ¼ m  S-
m
An endenthalpic reaction is spontaneous if the entropy of reaction is
greater than the decrease in entropy of the surroundings as energy
leaves them as heat.
Entropy of Transition
The entropy of transition, DtrsS, is the change in molar entropy of
substance when it undergoes a phase transition. It is common to
report the standard entropy of transition, DtrsS-, when both phases are
Figure E.15
The determination of entropy.
104
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

in their standard states. The standard entropy of transition at the
transition temperature, Ttrs, is
DtrsS-(Ttrs) ¼ DtrsH-(Ttrs)
Ttrs
Enzyme
An enzyme is a protein that acts as catalyst for a biochemical reaction.
Enzymes are very specific and act on a specific substrate molecule.
That specificity is often likened to a lock and key model or, increasingly
commonly, to an induced-fit model in which the protein changes
the shape of the active site in a specific way on the approach of the
substrate. The kinetics of enzyme action are summarized by the
Michaelis–Menten equation and its modifications. The action of
enzymes may be inhibited by kinetic intention (a part of a natural
biochemical process), accident (disease), or therapeutically. In
competitive inhibition a poison competes for the active site. In non-
competitive inhibition the inhibitor attaches to another part of the
molecule so distorting it and inhibiting attachment of the substrate
to the active site. See inhibition.
Equal A Priori Probabilities
The principle of equal a priori probabilities asserts that all states of the
same energy are equally likely to be occupied at thermal equilibrium
regardless of their nature (translational, rotational, and so on). That
is, the only distinguishing feature of a state as far as its probability of
occupation is concerned is its energy. The Boltzmann distribution is
derived on this basis.
Equation of State
An equation of state is a mathematical relation between the pressure,
molar volume, and temperature of a system: p ¼ f(Vm,T). Its existence
implies that these three intensive variables are not independent of
one another. The simplest equation of states is that of a perfect gas
(Figure E.16):
p ¼ RT
Vm
;
commonly written as pV ¼ nRT
Concepts Beginning with E
105
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

A real gas, in which molecular attractions and repulsions cannot be
ignored, is described by the virial equation of state:
p ¼ RT
Vm
f (Vm);
f (Vm) ¼ 1 þ B2(T)
Vm
þ B3(T)
V 2
m
þ   
where B2 is the second virial coeﬃcient, B3 the third, and so on.
A common approximate form of the equation of state of a real gas is
the van der Waals equation of state:
p ¼
RT
Vm  b  a
V2
m
in which a represents the eﬀect of intermolecular attractive forces and
b represents the eﬀects of intermolecular repulsive forces (Figure E.17).
Figure E.16
The surface of existence of a perfect gas.
Figure E.17
van der Waals isotherms.
106
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

The relations of the van der Waals coeﬃcients a and b to the second
and third virial coeﬃcients are
B2 ¼ b  a
RT ;
B3 ¼ b2
The most general form of an equation of state, which is applicable to
condensed phases as well as to gases, is the thermodynamic equation of
state:
p ¼ T
@p
@T


V
 pT;
pT ¼
@U
@V


T
Equilibrium
A system is at equilibrium if it has no tendency to change. The
condition of equilibrium is a reversible state in the sense that an
infinitesimal variation in the conditions results in a change in
direction. An equilibrium state corresponds to a state of maximum
total entropy. Providing the temperature and pressure are held
constant, the system is at equilibrium if the Gibbs energy is at a
minimum. Equilibria in chemistry are dynamic in the sense that
although there is no net change, change continues at a molecular
level.
A system is in mechanical equilibrium with its surroundings if an
infinitesimal variation in the pressure results in a change in volume
of the system. A system is in thermal equilibrium with the surround-
ings if an infinitesimal variation in the temperature results in a
transfer of energy as heat. An open system is in chemical equilibrium if
the infinitesimal change in the amount of the substance present re-
sults in a change in the extent of reaction.
A system produces maximum work if it passes through a series of
steps in each of which it is in equilibrium with the surroundings;
that is, maximum work is produced in a reversible change. Thus,
maximum expansion work is done if the pressure of the surround-
ings is equal to the pressure of the system at all stages of the ex-
pansion. In that case, dw ¼ pdV. The maximum work that a system
can produce is given by the Helmholtz energy, wmax ¼ DA; the max-
imum nonexpansion work that a system can produce at constant
temperature and pressure is given by the change in Gibbs energy:
wnonexpansion,max ¼ DG.
Concepts Beginning with E
107
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Equilibrium Constant
The equilibrium constant, K, of a reaction is the value of the reaction
quotient, Q, at equilibrium:
K ¼ Qeq;
Q ¼
Y
J
anJ
J
where aJ is the (dimensionless) activity of the substance J. Equilibrium
constants are dimensionless. In elementary work, activities aJ are re-
placed by dimensionless molar concentrations, [J]/c-, or dimension-
less partial pressures, p/p-, for gases. For a reaction with K41,
the products are favoured at equilibrium; for a reaction with Ko1, the
reactants are favoured. The precise composition at equilibrium must
be evaluated on the basis of the starting composition and the reaction
stoichiometry. An equilibrium constant is related to the standard
Gibbs energy of reaction by
DrG- ¼ RT ln K
The temperature variation of the equilibrium constant is given by the
van’t Hoﬀequation:
d ln K
dT
¼ DrH-
RT 2
Provided the standard reaction enthalpy can be regarded as constant
in the range of temperature of interest, it follows that
ln K Tf
ð
Þ ¼ ln K Ti
ð
Þ þ DrH-
R
1
Ti
 1
Tf


Equipartition Theorem
According to the equipartition theorem, each quadratic contribution to
the energy of a molecule in a system that is in thermal equilibrium
with its surroundings at a temperature T is the same and equal to 1
2 kT.
A quadratic contribution means a contribution to the energy that is
proportional to the square of a momentum or position variable. The
kinetic energy of a particle of mass m in one dimension is p2/2m, the
average value of its energy is therefore 1
2 kT. In three dimensions there
are three such terms, so the average translational kinetic energy of the
molecule is 3
2 kT. The total energy of one-dimensional harmonic os-
cillator is p2/2m þ 1
2 kfx2, the sum of two quadratic terms, so its average
108
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

energy at a temperature T is kT. The theorem is a classical result and is
invalid when the quantum eﬀects are important.
ESCA
The acronym ESCA stands for electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis.
See photoelectron spectroscopy.
Eutectic
A eutectic mixture is a binary mixture that freezes without change of
composition (Figure E.18). It has the lowest melting point of all such
mixtures. When a series of liquid mixtures are allowed to cool the
temperature remains constant longest for the mixture with the eu-
tectic composition. This pause is known as the eutectic halt.
Excess Function
An excess function, such as the excess volume, enthalpy, entropy, or Gibbs
energy, XE, is the diﬀerence between the change in the property observed
when components are mixed and the change for an ideal solution:
XE ¼ DmixX  DmixXideal
For example, the excess Gibbs energy of a binary mixture is
GE ¼ DmixG þ RT(xA ln xA þ xB ln xB)
A regular solution is one for which HE a 0 but SE ¼ 0. If the excess
enthalpy can be written
HE ¼ nxRTxAxB
Figure E.18
A phase diagram for a mixture that forms a eutectic.
Concepts Beginning with E
109
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

then the activity coeﬃcients of the two components A and B are given
by the Margules equations:
ln gA ¼ xx2
B;
ln gB ¼ xx2
A
The partial vapour pressure of A is then
pA ¼ xAex(1  xA)2pA
Excimer
An excimer is a dimeric species of the form AA* that exists only in the
excited state (denoted *). It is a special case of an exciplex, AB*, in
which the two components are diﬀerent.
Expectation Value
The expectation value of an operator bO is denoted hbOi and is defined as
hbOi ¼
ð
c bOcdt
where c is the normalized wavefunction for the system. The physical
interpretation of the expectation value is that it is the mean value of
a series of determinations of the observable corresponding to the
operator bO.
Explosion
An explosion is an abrupt increase in volume. In a thermal explosion
the energy released by a reaction is unable to escape from the system.
The resulting rise in temperature causes the reaction rate to increase,
so releasing more energy, raising the temperature, resulting in a rapid
growth in the reaction rate and a sudden increase in the volume oc-
cupied by the products. In a chain branching explosion, a branching step
in a chain reaction results in the initiation of an additional chain; that
chain branches, the resulting chain also branches, and so on, leading
into a catastrophic increase in rate and volume of the products.
In a system that reacts by a chain mechanism there are regions of
temperature and pressure in which the explosion occurs by one or
other of these mechanisms and other regions in which reaction
proceeds smoothly (Figure E.19). For a given temperature there is a
110
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

pressure called the lower explosion limit below which reaction is
smooth and above which it is explosive by chain branching until the
upper explosion limit is reached. At that pressure the reaction becomes
steady again. A further increase in pressure may take the reaction into
the thermal explosion regime.
Exponential Decay
Exponential decay occurs when the rate of decay of a reactant is pro-
portional to the concentration of the reactant: d[J]/dt ¼ kr[J]. In that
case, the time dependence of the concentration (or molar concen-
tration) of the reactant J has the form
[J](t) ¼ [J](0)et=t;
t ¼ 1=kr
The parameter t is the time constant for the decay. The decay is fast
when t is short. The time constant is related to the half-life, t1/2, of the
reactant, the time it takes for [J] to fall to half its original value, by
t1=2 ¼ t ln 2
600
700
800
900
1000
log(p/Pa)
2
4
3
5
6
Explosive
Thermal explosion
Steady reaction
Upper limit
Lower limit
Figure E.19
The regions of explosive reaction.
Figure E.20
Exponential decay for a variety of time constants.
Concepts Beginning with E
111
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Exponential decay is a characteristic of first-order elementary pro-
cesses, including radioactivity (Figure E.20).
Extensive Property
Consider a system that can be divided into fragments. If a property of
the original system is the sum of the values of that property of all the
fragments, then the property is extensive. Thus, mass and internal
energy are extensive properties. If the property of the original system
is not the sum of the values of that property of all the fragments, then
the property is intensive. Thus, temperature and mass density are
intensive properties. More loosely: an extensive property depends on
the size of the system; an intensive property does not.
Extent of Reaction
The extent of reaction, x (xi), is a measure of the progress of a reaction
in the sense that if the reaction advances by dx, then the amount of a
substance J changes by dnJ ¼ nJdx , where nJ is the (signed) stoichio-
metric number of J in the chemical equation for the reaction. It
follows that if the initial amount of J is nJ(0), then after the reaction
has proceeded by x that nJ ¼ nJ(0) þ nJx. If the universal rate of a re-
action is defined as v ¼ (1=nJ)d[J]=dt with [J] ¼ nJ/V, then in terms of
the extent of reaction,
v ¼ 1
V
dx
dt ¼
_x
V
The reaction Gibbs energy is defined in terms of the extent of
reaction as
DrG ¼
@G
@x


p;T
¼
X
J
nJmJ;
DrG ¼ vl
112
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1818768/bk9781837674244-00083.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

