R
Radial Distribution Function
In discussions of atomic structure, the radial distribution function,
P(r), gives the probability of finding an electron in the range r to r þ dr
regardless of orientation (in other words, the total probability of
finding the electron between two concentric spherical shells of radius
r and r þ dr) as P(r)dr, where
Pn;l(r) ¼ r2Rn;l(r)2
with Rn,l(r) the radial wavefunction. In the special case of an s electron
(l ¼ 0), the wavefunction itself can be used and
Pn;0(r) ¼ 4pr2cn;0(r)2
Examples are shown in Figure R.1.
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
By Peter Atkins
r Peter Atkins 2024
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
Figure R.1
The radial distribution function of three hydrogenic orbitals.
269
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

In discussions of the structures of condensed phases, the radial
distribution function, g(r), is defined such that g(r)dr is the prob-
ability that a particle will be found in the range dr at the distance r
from another particle.
Radiationless Decay
Radiationless decay is the loss of excitation energy to the surroundings
by the stimulation of thermal motion. In contrast, radiative decay is
the loss of excitation by emission of electromagnetic radiation. See
fluorescence and phosphorescence.
Radioactivity
Radioactivity is the spontaneous emission of particles or electro-
magnetic radiation from nuclei. The three most common forms
of this radiation and its characteristics are summarized in Table R.1.
The unit of activity, A, of a radioactive source is the becquerel (Bq),
which is defined as one disintegration per second. It has replaced the
curie (Ci), with 1 CiE37 GBq (3.7  1010 disintegrations per second),
but the latter is still commonly encountered. The unit of absorbed dose
is the gray (Gy), with 1 Gy ¼ 1 J kg1. The now unoﬃcial unit rad is
also still encountered, with 1 rad ¼ 102 Gy.
The law of radioactive decay asserts that the activity of a radio-
nuclide decays exponentially, and therefore that
A(t) ¼ A(0)ekrt
The radioactive decay constant, kr (the analogue of a first-order rate
constant) is independent of the conditions; the half-life of radiactive
decay, t1/2, is related to it by
t1=2 ¼ ln 2
kr
Table R.1
Three common types of radioactivity.
Type
Composition
Typical
speed
Comment and nuclear transition
a
Helium-4
nuclei, 4
2He2þ
0.1c
Not very penetrating, but damaging;
A - A – 4, Z - Z – 2
b
Electrons, e
0.9c
Moderately penetrating; A - A, Z - Z þ 1
g
Short wavelength
photon
c
Highly penetrating; Often accompanies
other types; Nucleon rearrangement,
A - A , Z - Z
270
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Radius of Gyration
Care must be taken to distinguish between two definitions of the radius
of gyration, Rg, of a body, one in mechanics, the other in polymer sci-
ence. The former is used to establish the rotational characteristics of a
body; the latter is used to interpret light-scattering measurements.
In mechanics, the radius of gyration is the distance from an axis that
a point with the same mass as the body should be placed to emulate the
moment of inertia of the body around that axis (Figure R.2). If the body
consists of a series of discrete mass elements mi at distances (x2
i þ y2
i )1=2
from the axis of rotation, z, and its total mass is m, then
Rg ¼
1
m
X
i
mi(x2
i þ y2
i )
 
!1=2
If the body is a continuum of mass density r(r), then this expression
becomes
Rg ¼
1
m
ð
(x2 þ y2)r(r)dt

1=2
For a solid, uniform sphere of radius R
Rg ¼
2
5
 1=2
R
around any axis through its centre. For a long thin uniform rod of
length L
Rg ¼
1
12

1=2
L
around an axis through its centre and perpendicular to its length.
Figure R.2
The radius of gyration of a body.
Concepts Beginning with R
271
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

In polymer science, the radius of gyration of a polymer composed of
N monomer units each of mass mi at the distance ri from its centre of
mass (not the perpendicular axis to an axis of rotation) is defined as
Rg ¼
1
m
X
i
mir2
i
 
!1=2
If all the monomers are identical, then
Rg ¼
1
N
X
i
r2
i
 
!1=2
¼ hR2i1=2
If the ‘polymer definition’ were used to calculate the radius of gyration
of a uniform sphere of radius R, the outcome would be
Rg ¼
3
5
 1=2
R
Radius-ratio Rule
The radius-ratio rule is the expression of a correlation between the
ratio of cation and anion radii, g, where
g ¼ rsmaller
rlarger
and the likely crystal structure of an ionic solid:
rock-salt structure: 21=2  1E0:432ogo31=2  1E0:732
caesium-chloride structure: g431=2  1E0:732
Deviations from the rule are sometimes taken to be indicative of the
onset of covalence, but the arbitrary character of the values of ionic
radio radii is a contribution to its unreliability.
Rainbow Scattering
As the impact parameter, b, in a molecular collision is decreased, the
angle of scattering increases, passes through a maximum, and then
decreases again (Figure R.3). There is strong constructive inter-
ference, referred to as rainbow scattering, between the neighbouring
paths at the turning point, the rainbow angle, and hence a pro-
nounced peak in the scattering.
272
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Raman Spectra
The Raman eﬀect is the inelastic scattering of electromagnetic radi-
ation by molecules. A Raman spectrum is the record of the frequencies
present in that scattered radiation. Radiation scattered with a lower
frequency than the incident radiation is called Stokes radiation; that
scattered with a higher frequency is called anti-Stokes radiation
(Figure R.4). The eﬀect arises because an incoming photon may either
deposit energy or collect energy from the internal modes of motion of
the molecule in the sample and hence emerge with a diﬀerent fre-
quency. In vibrational Raman spectra in the gas phase, vibrational
transitions are accompanied by rotational transitions, which gives the
vibrational spectrum a branch structure.
The gross selection rule for rotational Raman transition is that the
polarizability of the molecule must be anisotropic. That for vibra-
tional Raman spectra is the the polarization must vary with a normal
mode distortion. In group theoretical terms, the normal mode must
transform in the same way as a quadratic form (xy, etc). The exclusion
rule states that a centrosymmetric molecule cannot be both Raman
active and infrared active (it can be inactive in both).
Figure R.3
Rainbow scattering.
Figure R.4
Stokes and anti-Stokes radiation.
Concepts Beginning with R
273
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

The specific selection rules are:
Rotation (linear molecules): DJ ¼ 0; 2;
Vibration: Dv ¼  1
The O-branch of a vibrational transition is due to DJ ¼ 2, the
Q-branch to D J ¼ 0, and the S-branch to DJ ¼ þ2.
Further information about the symmetry of the molecule is ob-
tained from the depolarization ratio of the scattered radiation. In
resonance Raman spectroscopy, an enhanced intensity is achieved by
using incident radiation that has a frequency close to an electronic
excitation of the molecule. In stimulated Raman spectroscopy the
Stokes and anti-Stokes radiation in a forward direction is strong en-
ough to undergo more scattering. See also CARS.
Random Walk
In a fully general random walk, each step is of random length and in
a random direction. However, the term is normally restricted to a
much simpler case in which all the steps have the same length but
are in random directions. For a one-dimensional random walk along
the x-axis, where each step may be in either direction, the prob-
ability of being at a distance xl from the origin after N steps each of
length l is
P(x) ¼
2
Np

1=2
ex2=2N
In three dimensions, the probability that the ends of the walk are a
distance between r and r þ dr apart after N steps is
dP(r) ¼ f (r)dr;
f (r) ¼ 4p
a
p1=2

1=2
ea2r2;
a ¼
3
2Nl2

1=2
A random coil of identical monomer units with contour length Nl is the
physical realization of a random walk. However, the preceding ex-
pressions are relevant only if the coil is self-transparent in the sense
that the coil may cross and retrace itself and the monomers may
occupy the same region of space. In that case, the mean separation of
the ends, hRi, the root-mean-square-separation of the ends, Rrms ¼
hR2i1/2, and its (polymeric) radius of gyration, Rg, are as follows:
hRi ¼
8
3p

1=2
N1=2l
Rrms ¼ N1=2l
Rg ¼
N
6
 1=2
l
274
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

If the monomers in the chain are constrained to lie at an angle y
between neighbours (Figure R.5), then these average values should be
multiplied by a factor F, where
F ¼
1  cos y
1 þ cos y

1=2
For a tetrahedral angle, F ¼ 21/2.
Rate Constant
The rate constant, kr, of a reaction is the constant of proportionality
between the rate of the reaction, v, and an expression involving the
concentrations of the reactants and products, as in
v ¼ kr[A][B];
v ¼ kr1[A][B]
1 þ kr2[C]
See reaction rate. The rate constants for forward (kr) and reverse (k0r)
elementary reactions are related by the equilibrium constant, K, for
that pair of reactions:
K ¼ kr
k0
r
When the forward and reverse elementary reactions have diﬀerent
orders, care must be taken to ensure that K is dimensionless. Thus,
for A þ B " C,
K ¼ krc-
k0
r
For a multistep reaction the overall equilibrium constant is the
product of these factors for all the steps of the reaction mechanism:
K ¼
Y
i
kr;ic-Dni
k0
r;i
Figure R.5
A random walk with fixed step length and angle.
Concepts Beginning with R
275
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

In this expression Dni is the diﬀerence in orders, forward – reverse, for
the elementary reaction i.
The temperature dependence of a rate constant is expressed by the
Arrhenius equation in terms of the activation energy, Ea:
kr ¼ AeEa=RT
For a first-order reaction, the rate constant is related to the half-life of
the reactant and the time constant, t, for the decay of its concen-
tration by
kr ¼ ln 2
t1=2
;
kr ¼ 1
t
Rate constants may be estimated on the basis of transition-state theory,
collision theory, and molecular reaction dynamics. See also diﬀusion-
controlled reactions, kinetic isotope eﬀect, and kinetic salt eﬀect.
Rate Determining Step
The rate determining step in a proposed reaction mechanism is the
step with the smallest rate constant in a pathway that controls the rate
of the overall reaction. Although it is commonly identified as the
slowest step in the reaction, that criterion must be used with care, for
all the forward steps take place at the same rate. It is the slowest step
in the sense that, as a result of having a small rate constant, when
taking place in isolation the reaction is typically slow.
Rate Law
A rate law is the empirically determined relation between the rate of a
reaction, v, and the concentrations of the reactants and products in
the overall chemical equation. It is a diﬀerential equation for the rate
of change of concentrations. In certain cases it may be integrated
analytically to give the integrated rate law, an expression for the time
dependence of the concentration of a reactant or product. Two ex-
amples are
First-order reaction: d[A]
dt ¼  kr[A];
[A](t) ¼ [A]0ekrt
Second-order reaction: d[A]
dt ¼  kr[A]2;
[A](t) ¼
[A]0
1 þ krt[A]0
276
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Note that these rate laws have been written in terms of d[ J]/dt, and
that they might be diﬀerent if written in terms of v ¼ (1=vJ)d[J]=dt. For
an overall second-order reaction of stoichiometry A þ B - P,
d[P]
dt ¼ kr[A][B];
[P](t) ¼ [A]0[B]0 1  e([B]0  [A]0)krt


[A]0  [B]0e([B]0  [A]0)krt
This integrated rate law applies even if [A]0 ¼ [B]0 provided the limit is
taken as [B]0 - [A]0.
The rate law of an overall reaction can be constructed from
the rate laws of the sequence of unimolecular and bimolecular
elementary reactions proposed for its mechanism. To do so, it is
common to suppose either that there is a pre-equilibrium step or to
invoke the steady-state approximation. It is now increasingly com-
mon for rate laws to be investigated by numerical integration on
computers.
Reaction Coordinate
A reaction coordinate is a notional axis used to represents the course of
a reaction (Figure R.6). If the reaction is elementary, then the reaction
coordinate expresses the reactants on the left, an activated complex
close to the middle, and the products on the right. If the reaction
takes place in a series of steps, then intermediate points represent a
series of reaction intermediates. In certain simple cases it is possible
to give the reaction coordinate a precise analytical significance. For
instance, if the step is a collinear reactive collision of three atoms,
then the reaction coordinate can be identified with a path along the
floor of the valley and across the saddle point of a potential energy
surface.
Figure R.6
The potential energy along the reaction coordinate.
Concepts Beginning with R
277
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Reaction Intermediate
A reaction intermediate is a species that occurs as in an elementary
step in a reaction mechanism but not in the overall chemical equation
for the reaction.
Reaction Quotient
A reaction quotient, Q, for a reaction written as
0 ¼
X
J
nJsJ;
0 ¼ v  s
(with sJ the chemical formula of the reactant or product J) is de-
fined as
Q ¼
Y
J
anJ
J
That is, it has the form
Q ¼ activities of products raised to their powers
activities of reactants raised to their powers
In elementary applications, the activities aJ are replaced by [J]/c-
or, for gases, pJ/p-. Note that Q is dimensionless. The reaction
quotient occurs in the relation between the Gibbs energy of reaction
and its standard value:
DrG ¼ DrG- þ RT ln Q
The value of Q when the reaction mixture has its equilibrium com-
position is called the equilibrium constant, K, of the reaction.
Reaction Rate
The universal reaction rate, v, is defined in terms of the stoichiometric
numbers (the signed stoichiometric coeﬃcients, positive for prod-
ucts, negative for reactants) that occur in the chemical equation for
the reaction written as
0 ¼
X
J
nJsJ;
0 ¼ v  s
278
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

(with sJ the chemical formula of the reactant or product J) and the rate
of change of molar concentration of a participant:
v ¼ 1
nJ
d[J]
dt
With this definition, there is a single reaction rate for the reaction
regardless of the species J used in the expression. It is also common
for the rate to be expressed in terms of the consumption or formation
of specified participant, in which case the specific rate is
vJ ¼  d[J]
dt
with the sign chosen so that the rate is positive. The specific rates for
diﬀerent choices of J may be diﬀerent for the same reaction, de-
pending on its stoichiometry.
Redox Reaction
A redox reaction is a chemical reaction in which the reactants undergo
reduction and oxidation. The reaction involves the transfer of an
electron from the reductant (the reducing agent) and its acceptance by
the oxidant (the oxidizing agent). Thus, the reductant is oxidized and
the oxidant is reduced. As electrons are so intimately involved in
bonding, electron transfer is commonly accompanied by atom
transfer. A redox reaction can be identified by noting a change in the
oxidation numbers of the reactants. In aqueous solution, a reactant is
capable of reducing an oxidant if its standard potential is more
negative than that of the latter.
Reduced Mass
If two bodies are linked by a centrosymmetric force, then their relative
motion can be represented by a point of reduced mass, m, around their
centre of mass (Figure R.7), with
1
m ¼ 1
mA
þ 1
mB
;
m ¼
mAmB
mA þ mB
The term ‘reduced mass’ is sometimes used in other contexts (par-
ticularly the vibration of a diatomic molecule, where the same ex-
pressions apply), but in those contexts a more appropriate and more
general term is eﬀective mass.
Concepts Beginning with R
279
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Reduced Variables
A reduced variable, Xr, is a physical quantity expressed as a multiple of
a related characteristic property of the substance. It is used in the
discussion of the properties of gases, where the characteristic prop-
erties are taken to be the critical constants, pc, Vc, and Tc, of the gas.
Thus, the reduced pressure is pr ¼ p/pc, the reduced molar volume is
Vr ¼ Vm/Vc, and the reduced temperature is Tr ¼ T/Tc. When certain
equations of state (those with two variable parameters, such as the a
and b in the van der Waals equation) are expressed in terms of re-
duced variables, the parameters disappear and the equation becomes
‘universal’, as in
pr ¼
8Tr
3Vr  1  3
V2
r
Reduction
Reduction is the addition of an electron to a species, as in the half-
reaction
Ox(state) þ e ! Red(state)
where Ox is the oxidized form of the species and Red the corres-
ponding reduced form, the two jointly forming the Ox/Red couple.
The electrons are regarded as stateless in this representation.
Many reductions are also accompanied by the transfer of atoms. To
identify reduction, note whether the oxidation number of an
element in a reactant has decreased in the reaction. The potency of
a reactant to bring about reduction in aqueous solution is meas-
ured by the standard potential of the Ox/Red couple: the more
negative this potential, the more potent is the reactant as a
reductant.
Figure R.7
The transformation from actual coordinates (left) to relative and
centre-of-mass coordinates (right).
280
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Reference State
The reference state of an element is its thermodynamically most stable
state at the temperature of interest. The exception is phosphorus,
where the white allotrope is used because it is more reproducible than
its other allotropes. A reference state is used to define the enthalpy
and Gibbs energy of formation of a compound, which refer to the
formation of a compound from its elements in their reference states.
At 298 K and 1 bar, the reference states of hydrogen and carbon are
hydrogen gas and graphite, respectively.
Refinement
In X-ray crystallography, refinement means mathematical techniques
used to improve the electron density obtained from an imperfectly
phased Fourier synthesis.
Refractive Index
The refractive index, nr, of a medium is defined as
nr ¼ c
c0
where c0 is the speed of light in the medium and c its speed in a
vacuum. The refractive index and the relative permittivity at the fre-
quency of the radiation are related by
nr(o) ¼ er(o)1=2
At optical frequencies, only the electronic contribution to the per-
mittivity survives. Provided the frequency is below an absorption
frequency, the refractive index typically increases with frequency;
thus, blue light is refracted more than red light. See dispersion.
Relative Permittivity
The relative permittivity, er, of a medium is the ratio of its permittivity,
e, to the electric constant (the vacuum permittivity), e0:
er ¼ e
e0
Concepts Beginning with R
281
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

The relative permittivity is still often called the dielectric constant of
the medium. For the relation between the relative permittivity and the
polarizability and dipole moment of the molecules, see the Clausius–
Mosotti equation. The practical importance of the relative permittivity
is that the electric potential due to a point charge (and any derived
quantities, such as a dipole interaction) is reduced by a factor of er
from its value in a vacuum:
fvacuum(r) ¼
Q
4pe0r ;
fmedium(r) ¼
Q
4per ¼ 1
er
fvacuum(r)
Relaxation
Relaxation denotes the return to equilibrium. The return is typically
but not universally exponential (Figure R.8), with
X(t)  Xequilibriumpet=t
where t is the relaxation time. In chemical kinetics, a reaction mixture
in which the forward and reverse reactions are both first-order with
rate constants kr and k0r, the relaxation time is given by
1
t ¼ kr þ k0
r
The rate constants are those for the currently prevailing conditions
(such as at the new temperature in a temperature-jump experiment).
If one of the reactions is second-order, the relaxation is exponential
only for small departure from the new equilibrium.
In magnetic resonance, spin relaxation needs to take into account
two aspects of equilibrium: the spin states have both a Boltzmann
distribution of populations and random relative phases (Figure R.9).
Figure R.8
The exponential return to equilibrium for diﬀerent relaxation
times.
282
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

The longitudinal relaxation time (or spin–lattice relaxation time), T1, is
the time constant for the return of the population of spin states to
equilibrium expressed in terms of the z-component of the magnet-
ization, Mz:
Mz(t)  Mz;equilibriumpet=T1
The relaxation to random phases of the spins is equivalent to the
return of the x-component of magnetization to zero. It occurs with
the time constant T2, the transverse relaxation time (or the spin–spin
relaxation time)
Mx(t)pet=T2
It is as a result of the transverse relaxation time that a resonance line
acquires a linewidth, given by
Dn1=2 ¼
1
pT2
Representation
A representation in group theory is a set of matrices that multiply in
the same way as the elements of the group; that is, the relations ex-
hibited by the two sets under multiplication are homomorphic.
A single member of a representation is a representative of the element
in question. The representation is reducible if a symmetry transfor-
mation of the basis can be found that simultaneously converts all the
representatives to block diagonal form. See character. It is irreducible
(an ‘irrep’) if it cannot be so reduced. Irreducible representations are
labelled A or B if the matrices are one-dimensional, E if two-dimen-
sional, and T if three-dimensional. Various subscripts are applied to
these letters according to other features of the matrices.
Figure R.9
Longitudinal (left) and transverse (right) relaxation.
Concepts Beginning with R
283
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Repulsive Interaction
The repulsive interaction between two closed-shell species, the rise in
their potential energy as they come into contact, arises from the overlap
of their wavefunctions and the demands of the Pauli exclusion prin-
ciple. The latter ensures that the four electrons available from the two
occupied orbitals enter both the bonding and antibonding combin-
ations of the two orbitals and therefore result in a net increase in
energy. The Lennard Jones (6,12)-potential energy represents the energy
of interaction by a term proportional to 1/r12 but an exponential
dependence on the internuclear distance r is probably more realistic.
Residual Entropy
The residual entropy of a substance is its nonzero molar entropy at
T ¼ 0. It is commonly identified by noting that the measured Third-
law molar entropy (which is based on the entropy being zero at T ¼ 0)
is smaller than a calculated value. If there is residual orientational
disorder, in which molecules can adopt s orientations with negligibly
diﬀerent energy (Figure R.10), then
Sm(0) ¼ R ln s
The residual entropy of ice (3.4 J K1 mol1) arises from the ran-
domness of the distribution of hydrogen bonds between neigh-
bouring molecules (that is, whether an OHO unit is O–H  O or
O  H–O).
Resonance
Resonance is the strong interaction between two systems with the
same natural frequency, such as two pendulums of the same length
Figure R.10
Residual orientational disorder.
284
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

hanging from a common, torsionally flexible axle. One important case
is the resonance absorption of radiation when its frequency matches
that corresponding to the excitation of a molecule (Figure R.11). All
spectroscopy depends on resonance of this kind, but the term is
commonly reserved for magnetic resonance (NMR and EPR), where
the energy levels of the sample are modified (by the application of a
magnetic field) until they match the frequency of a monochromatic
electromagnetic field, rather than vice versa.
The term resonance is also used in valence bond theory to refer to
the superposition of wavefunctions corresponding to diﬀerent elec-
tron distributions in the same nuclear framework, as in ionic–covalent
resonance:
c ¼ ccovc AB
ð
Þ þ cionc AþB
ð
Þ
Resonance, in this context, results in a variety of eﬀects, one being the
lowering of the calculated energy. That lowering is greatest when the
contributing structures have the same energy (hence the term ‘reson-
ance’), as in the resonance between the two Kekulé structures of benzene.
Figure R.11
Resonance between matching energy separations.
Figure R.12
The impact of resonance and its variation with the energy
separation of the contributing structures.
Concepts Beginning with R
285
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Resonance also distributes double bond character over a molecule and
thereby gives a more accurate description of the molecule and con-
sequently a better approximation to its actual energy. Figure R.12 shows
how the greatest eﬀect on the energies of states is observed when the two
contributing ‘canonical’ structures have similar energies.
Reversible Process
A reversible process is a process that can be reversed by an infini-
tesimal change in an externally controllable variable. Systems that are
reversible in this thermodynamic sense are in dynamic equilibrium.
Thus, a system is in mechanical equilibrium with its surroundings if its
volume responds in opposite directions to opposite infinitesimal
changes in the applied pressure. It is in thermal equilibrium if the flow
of energy as heat responds in opposite directions to opposite infini-
tesimal changes in temperature.
Reversible changes do maximum work. At constant temperature,
the maximum work that a system can do, wmax, is equal to the change
in Helmholtz energy, A:
wmax ¼ DA
At constant temperature and pressure, the maximum nonexpansion
work that a system can do is equal to the change in its Gibbs energy, G:
wmax;nonexp ¼ DG
The work done by the reversible, isothermal expansion of a perfect
gas is
w ¼  nRT ln Vf
Vi
(The negative sign indicates that energy leaves the system as work
when it expands.) The pressure and volume of a perfect gas under-
going a reversible adiabatic change are related by
pV g ¼ constant;
g ¼ Cp;m
CV;m
Rock-salt Structure
The rock-salt structure is illustrated in Figure R.13 in two equivalent
space-filling representations of the unit cell and one image that shows
286
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

the locations of the ions. It consists of two interpenetrating face-centred
lattices of cations and anions. The coordination of the lattice is (6,6).
Rotation
The classical angular momentum, J, and kinetic energy, Ek, of rotation
of a solid body of moment of inertia I about an axis are
J ¼ Io;
Ek ¼ 1
2 Io2
where o is its angular velocity (typically in radians per second). If the
molecule is free to rotate around all three axes, its total kinetic energy is
Ek ¼ 1
2
X
q
Iqqo2
q ¼
X
q
J2
q
2Iq
;
q ¼ x; y; z
In quantum mechanics, the rotational state of a molecule is specified
by three quantum numbers J, K, and MJ (Figure R.14):
J specifies the magnitude of the angular momentum of the mol-
ecule, with J ¼ 0, 1, 2,. . ..
K specifies the component of angular momentum on the principal
axis of the molecule, with K ¼ 0, 1,. . ., J, except for a linear
molecules, when K  0 only.
Figure R.13
Three representations of the rock-salt structure.
Figure R.14
The significance of K and MJ.
Concepts Beginning with R
287
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

MJ specifies the component of angular momentum on a fixed ex-
ternal axis, with MJ ¼ 0, 1,. . ., J.
The energy depends on MJ only if an electric field is present and the
molecule is polar. In the absence of an electric field, the energies of
the rotors are as follows:
Linear rotor: EJ;MJ ¼ hc~B J( J þ 1);
~B ¼ ˉh2
4pcI
Symmetric rotor: EJ;K;MJ ¼ hc~BJ( J þ 1) þ hc(~A  ~B)K2;
~A ¼
ˉh2
4pcIJ
; ~B ¼
ˉh2
4pcI>
Spherical rotor: EJ;K;MJ ¼ hc~BJ( J þ 1);
~B ¼ ˉh2
4pcI
The quantities ~A and B̃ are the rotational constants of the molecule
(here expressed as wavenumbers). The energy levels of a linear rotor
are shown in Figure R.15.
It follows from the preceding expressions for the energy that each
level of a linear rotor is (2 J þ 1)-fold degenerate; for a symmetrical rotor
each level other than the one with K ¼ 0 are 2(2 J þ 1)-fold degenerate;
andforsphericalrotors each levelis (2J þ 1)2-fold degenerate.ThePauli
principle disallows some states: see nuclear statistics.
Rotational Spectroscopy
Rotational spectroscopy is the detection and analysis of the rotational
transitions of molecules. Observations take place in the microwave
region of the electromagnetic spectrum and are applicable only to
polar molecules. The selection rules are as follows:
DJ ¼ 1;
DK ¼ 0;
DMJ ¼ 0; 1
Figure R.15
The energy levels of a linear rotor.
288
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

Note that DJ ¼ þ1 corresponds to absorption and DJ ¼ 1 corresponds
to emission. It follows that the absorptions J þ 1’J occur at the fol-
lowing wavenumbers:
~n ¼ 2~B( J þ 1);
J ¼ 0; 1; 2; . . .
The net intensity of the transition depends on the diﬀerence in
populations of the two levels and the electric dipole transition
moment:
jmJ þ 1; Jj2 ¼ J þ 1
2J þ 1 m2 ! 1
2 m2
for
J441
where m is the permanent electric dipole moment of the molecule.
Therefore, the absorption spectrum consists of a series of lines
separated by 2B̃ and the maximum intensity of absorption occurs
close to
Jmax ¼
kT
2hc~B

1=2
 1
2
Once the rotational constant has been determined, it can be used to
infer bond lengths and bond angles, although in some cases a single
value needs to be augmented by data on isotopomers.
The electric dipole moment of a molecule can be determined by
making use of the Stark eﬀect, the splitting of the lines into com-
ponents by the application of an electric field. The field removes the
degeneracy of the states with diﬀerent values of MJ
2 and gives a
splitting proportional to m2.
When the molecule cannot be treated as a rigid rotor and under-
goes centrifugal distortion the rotational energy levels are closer than
expected and the transitions lie at
~n ¼ 2~B( J þ 1)  4~D( J þ 1)2;
J ¼ 0; 1; 2; . . .
where ~D is the centrifugal distortion constant (a wavenumber; don’t
confuse it with the dissociation energy).
Rotational Temperature
The rotational temperature, yR, is the rotational constant of a molecule
expressed as an equivalent temperature through
yR ¼ hc~B
k
Concepts Beginning with R
289
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

For a collection of rotors at thermal equilibrium at a temperature T,
many rotational states are occupied if TcyR, and for the calculation
of thermodynamic properties the system can be regarded as a col-
lection of classical rotors.
Rotor
A (rigid) rotor is a model of rotating molecule in which it is supposed
that the bond lengths and bond angles remain the same whatever the
rate of molecular rotation. Rotors are classified as follows:
1. An asymmetric rotor has three diﬀerent moments of inertia; it has
no axis of symmetry of order higher than 2.
2. A symmetric rotor has two equal moments of inertia and one
diﬀerent from the other two; it has an axis of symmetry of order 3
or more.
3. A spherical rotor has three equal moments of inertia; it belongs to
the cubic or icosahedral point group.
4. A linear rotor has one moment of inertia equal to 0; the other two
moments of inertia are equal.
For the energy levels of these rotors, see rotation and moment of
inertia.
RRK Theory
In the Rice–Ramsperger–Kassel theory (RRK theory) of rate constants it
is supposed that collision results in the formation of an energized
molecule, A*, which then undergoes a redistribution of the excitation
energy, E0*, and becomes the activated complex, Az. It is supposed
that the initial excitation energy is spread as n quanta of magnitude
hn over s vibrational modes. In the activated complex, m quanta are
localized in the vibrational mode corresponding to the reaction co-
ordinate. It then follows that the rate constant for the overall reaction,
kr, is related to the rate constant kz for the unimolecular decay of Az by
k2 ¼ fkz, where
f ¼ n  m
n

s  1
In the more sophisticated Rice–Ramsperger–Kassel–Marcus theory (RRKM
theory) the total energy of A* is classified as active or inactive; the inactive
290
Concepts in Physical Chemistry: 2nd Edition
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

energy remains in the same quantum state throughout the reaction so
does not participate in bond scission. The limiting high pressure, first-
order rate constant obtained from the theory has the form
kr ¼ kT
h  qa
q  eE0 =kT
where q and qz (for typographical reasons, here qa) are the molecular
partition functions for the initial and activated molecules. This ex-
pression is essentially the same as that obtained from transition-state
theory.
Russell–Saunders Coupling
In Russell–Saunders coupling the orbital angular momenta are coupled
into a resultant with quantum number L and the spin angular mo-
menta
are
coupled
into
a
resultant
with
quantum
number
S. Finally, these two resultant angular momenta are coupled into a
total angular momentum with quantum number J (Figure R.16). At
each stage the result is obtained by using the Clebsch–Gordan series.
This coupling scheme is appropriate for light atoms, those with
weak spin–orbit coupling. The outcome is represented by a term
symbol of structure 2S11{L}J, with {L} denoting S, P, etc.
Figure R.16
Russell–Saunders coupling.
Concepts Beginning with R
291
Downloaded from http://books.rsc.org/books/monograph/chapter-pdf/1819037/bk9781837674244-00269.pdf by guest on 23 May 2024

