CONVERSATIONAL ARABIC
QUICK AND EASY
Lebanese Dialect
YATIR NITZANY
Dedication
Moaz Safi Yousef al-Kasasbeh
May 29, 1988–January 3, 2015
Copyright © 2015
Yatir Nitzany
All rights reserved.
ISBN-10: 1500125652
EAN-13: 978-1500125653
Printed in the United States of America


Foreword
About Myself
For many years I struggled to learn Spanish, and I still knew no more than about
twenty words. Consequently, I was extremely frustrated. One day I stumbled upon
this method as I was playing around with word combinations. Suddenly, I came to
the realization that every language has a certain core group of words that are most
commonly used and, simply by learning them, one could gain the ability to
engage in quick and easy conversational Spanish.
I discovered which words those were, and I narrowed them down to three hundred
and  fifty  that,  once  memorized,  one  could  connect  and  create  one’s  own
sentences. The variations were and are infinite! By using this incredibly simple
technique, I could converse at a proficient level and speak Spanish. Within a
week, I astonished my Spanish-speaking friends with my newfound ability. The
next semester I registered at my university for a Spanish language course, and I
applied the same principles I had learned in that class (grammar, additional
vocabulary, future and past tense, etc.) to those three hundred and fifty words I
already had memorized, and immediately I felt as if I had grown wings and
learned how to fly.
At the end of the semester, we took a class trip to San José, Costa Rica. I was like
a fish in water,  while the rest of my classmates  were floundering and still
struggling to converse. Throughout the following months, I again applied the
same principle to other languages—French, Portuguese, Italian, and Arabic, all of
which I now speak proficiently, thanks to this very simple technique. 
This method is by far the fastest way to master quick and easy conversational
language skills. There is no other technique that compares to my concept. It is
effective, it worked for me, and it will work for you. Be consistent with my
program, and you too will succeed the way I and many, many others have.
Contents
Introduction to the Program 
Introduction to th
 
 e Lebanese Dialect
 
 
Memorization Made Easy 
Arabic Pronunciation 
Note to the Reader 

The Program 
Useful Vocabulary in Lebanese Arabic
Conclusion
Also by Yatir Nitzany
Note from the Author

Sign up for the author's New Releases mailing list and get a FREE copy of the 
latest book Conversational Language Quick and Easy: The Most Innovative 
Technique to Master the World's 27 Most Common Languages.
Click here to get started www.conversational-languages.com/free-ebook/
 .
.
Introduction to the Program
People often dream about learning a foreign language, but usually they never do
it. Some feel that they just won’t be able to do it while others believe that they
don’t have the time. Whatever your reason is, it’s time to set that aside. With my
new method, you will have enough time, and you will not fail. You will actually
learn how to speak the fundamentals of the language—fluently in as little as a few
days. Of course, you won’t speak perfect Lebanese dialect at first, but you will
certainly gain significant proficiency. For example, if you travel to Lebanon, you
will almost effortlessly be able engage in basic conversational communication
with the locals in the present tense and you will no longer be intimidated by
culture shock. It’s time to relax. Learning a language is a valuable skill that
connects people of multiple cultures around the world—and you now have the
tools to join them. 
How does my method work? I have taken twenty-seven of the most commonly
used languages in the world and distilled from them the three hundred and fifty

most frequently used words in any language. This process took three years of
observation and research, and during that time, I determined which words I felt
were most important for this method of basic conversational communication. In
that  time,  I  chose  these  words  in  such  a  way  that  they  were  structurally
interrelated and that, when combined, form sentences. Thus, once you succeed in
memorizing these words, you will be able to combine these words and form your
own sentences. The words are spread over twenty pages. The words will also
combine easily in sentences, for example, enabling you to ask simple questions,
make  basic  statements,  and  obtain  a  rudimentary  understanding  of  others’
communications. I have also created Memorization Made Easy techniques for this
program in order to help with the memorization of the vocabulary. Please see
Reading and Pronunciation of Arabic accents in order to gain proficiency in the
reading and pronunciation of the Arabic language prior to starting this program. 
My  book  is  mainly  intended  for  basic  present  tense  vocal  communication,
meaning anyone can easily use it to “get by” linguistically while visiting a foreign
country without learning the entire language. With practice, you will be 100
percent understandable to native speakers, which is your aim. One disclaimer: this
is  not a grammar book, though it does address minute and essential grammar
rules. Therefore, understanding complex sentences with obscure words in Arabic
is beyond the scope of this book. 
People who have tried this method have been successful, and by the time you
finish this book, you will understand and be understood in basic conversational
Arabic. This is the best basis to learn not only the Arabic language but any
language. This is an entirely revolutionary, no-fail concept, and your ability to
combine the pieces of the “language puzzle” together will come with great ease,
especially if you use this program prior to beginning an Arabic class.
This is the best program that was ever designed to teach the reader how to become
conversational. Other conversational programs will only teach you phrases. But
this is the only program that will teach you how to create your own sentences for
the purpose of becoming conversational.

The Lebanese Arabic Dialect
Lebanese Arabic is a Levantine  dialect.  The term “Levantine” derives from
“Levant,” which is the geographical region of the eastern Mediterranean that
encompasses Cyprus, Lebanon, Syria, Israel, Palestine, Jordan, and the Hatay
Province of southern Turkey. Several languages are spoken in the Levant, one of
which is Lebanese Arabic. Lebanese Arabic descends from the traditional Arabic
language, though there are many variables that affected the development of the
language. Most Lebanese people speak the language, and Arabic remains its
written form, despite past attempts by some to make an alphabet system using
Latin letters. Some people view Lebanese as merely a dialect of Arabic, while
others accept the language as unique. Either way, the word connotations vary in
both languages, as do their syntax and vocabularies. Lebanese Arabic uses a bit of
Turkish and Aramaic vocabulary and a little French. In general keep in mind that
Lebanese Arabic is not an official language but, rather, a colloquial dialect.
Spoken in: Lebanon

Memorization Made Easy
There is no doubt the three hundred and fifty words in my program are the
required essentials in order to engage in quick and easy basic conversation in any
foreign  language.  However,  some  people  may  experience  difficulty  in  the
memorization.  For  this  reason,  I  created  Memorization  Made  Easy.  This
memorization  technique will make  this program so simple and fun that it’s
unbelievable! I have spread the words over the following twenty pages. Each page
contains a vocabulary table of ten to fifteen words. Below every vocabulary box,
sentences are composed from the words on the page that you have just studied.
This aids greatly in memorization. Once you succeed in memorizing the first
page, then proceed to the second page. Upon completion of the second page, go
back to the first and review. Then proceed to the third page. After memorizing the
third, go back to the first and second and repeat. And so on. As you continue,
begin to combine words and create your own sentences in your head. Every time
you proceed to the following page, you will notice words from the previous pages
will be present in those simple sentences as well, because repetition is one of the
most crucial aspects in learning any foreign language. Upon completion of your
twenty pages, congratulations, you have absorbed the required words and gained
a basic, quick-and-easy proficiency and you should now be able to create your
own sentences and say anything you wish in the Lebanese Arabic dialect. This is
a crash course in conversational Arabic, and it works!
For further assistance in the memorization and pronunciation of the vocabulary of
this  program, you may also purchase the audio version of this book, which is
featured on iTunes.

ARABIC PRONUNCIATIONS
PLEASE  MASTER  THE  FOLLOWING  PAGE  IN  ARABIC
PRONUNCIATIONS PRIOR TO STARTING THE PROGRAM
Kha. For Middle Eastern languages including Arabic, Hebrew, Farsi, Pashto,
Urdu, Hindi, etc.,  and also  German,  to properly pronounce the  kh or  ch is
essential, for example, Khaled (a Muslim name) or Chanukah (a Jewish holiday)
or Nacht (“night” in German). The best way to describe kh or ch is to say “ka” or
“ha” while at the same time putting your tongue at the back of your throat and
blowing air. It’s pronounced similarly to the sound that you make when clearing
your throat. Please remember this whenever you come across any word containing
a kh in this program.
Ghayin. The Arabic gh is equivalent to the “g” in English, but its pronunciation
more closely resembles the French “r,” rather than “g.” Pronounce it at the back
of your throat. The sound is equivalent to what you would make when gargling
water.  Gha is  pronounced  more  as  “rha,”  rather  than  as  “ga.”  Ghada is
pronounced as “rhada.” In this program, the symbol for ghayin is gh, so keep your
eyes peeled.
Aayin is pronounced as a’a, pronounced deep at the back of your throat. Rather
similar to the sound one would make when gagging. In the program, the symbol
for aayin is a‘a, u‘u, o'o, or i‘i.
Ha is pronounced as “ha.” Pronunciation takes place deep at the back of your
throat, and for correct pronunciation, one must constrict the back of the throat and
exhale air while simultaneously saying “ha.” In the program, this strong h (“ha”)
is emphasized whenever ha, ah, hi, he, or hu is encountered.

NOTE TO THE READER
The purpose of this book is merely to enable you to communicate in the Lebanese
Arabic dialect. In the program itself you may notice that the composition of some
of those sentences might sound rather clumsy. This is intentional. These sentences
were formulated in a specific way to serve two purposes: to facilitate the easy
memorization of the vocabulary and to teach you how to combine the words in
order to form your own sentences for quick and easy communication, rather than
making complete literal sense in the English language. So keep in mind that this is
not a phrase book!
As the title suggests, the sole purpose of this program is for conversational use
only. It is based on the mirror translation technique. These sentences, as well as
the translations are  not incorrect, just a little clumsy. Latin languages, Semitic
languages,  and  Anglo-Germanic  languages,  as  well  as  a  few  others,  are
compatible with the mirror translation technique. 
Many users say that this method  surpasses any other known language learning
technique that is currently out there on the market. Just stick with the program and
you will achieve wonders!
Again, I wish to stress this program is by no means, shape, or form a phrase book!
The sole purpose of this book is to give you a fundamental platform to enable you
to  connect  certain  words  to  become  conversational.  Please  also  read  the
“Introduction” and the “About Me” section prior to commencing the program. 
In order to succeed with my method, please start on the very first page of the
program and fully master one page at a time prior to proceeding to the next.
Otherwise, you will overwhelm yourself and fail. Please do not skip pages, nor
start from the middle of the book. 
It is a myth that certain people are born with the talent to learn a language, and
this book disproves that myth. With this method, anyone can learn a foreign
language as long as he or she follows these explicit directions: 
*
Memorize the vocabulary on each page.
*
Follow that memorization by using a notecard to cover the 
words you have just memorized and test yourself.
*
Then read the sentences following that are created from the 
vocabulary bank that you just mastered.

*
Once fully memorized,  give yourself the green light to 
proceed to the next page. 
Again, if you proceed to the following page without mastering the previous, you
are guaranteed to gain nothing from this book. If you follow the prescribed steps,
you will realize just how effective and simplistic this method is.

The Program
Let’s Begin! “Vocabulary” (Memorize the Vocabulary)
I | I am - Ana
With you – (M) Ma'ak / (F) ma'keh
With him / with her - Ma'o / ma'a
With us - Ma'na
For you - (Masc) La ilak / (Fem) la ilik
Without him - Min duno 
Without them - Min dunon
Always - Dayman  
Was – Ken
This, this is - Hayda
Is, it's, it is - Hayda
Sometimes -   'Aw'aat
Maybe – Yimken
You / you are / are you – (M) Inta (F) inteh
Is it - (M) Howa, (F) Heya / (Neuter) hada
Today – Lyom
Better – Ahsan / ahla
He / he is - Huwweh 
She / she is - Heyyeh
From - Min
Sentences composed from the vocabulary (now you can speak the sentences and
combine the words).
This is for you
Hayda ilak
I am from Lebanon
Ana min Libnen
Are you from Lebanon?
Inta min Libnen?
I am with you
Ana ma'ak
Sometimes you are with us at the mall
'Aw'aat enta ma'na bil mall
I am always with her
Ana dayman ma'a

Are you without them today?
Inta mish ma'on lyom?
Sometimes I am with him
'Aw'aat ana ma'o
*In Lebanese Arabic, there are gender rules. Saying “for you” to a male is La ilak, but if
you are talking to a female, it’s la ilik. Kermalik may be also used to signify “for you.”
“This is for you” means it belongs to you and, hence, in this case we use ilak. However,
if the sentence was “I did it for you” ( i.e., I did this only because you are a special friend
to me or because you mean a lot to me), here in this context we use kermehlik for the girl
and kermehlak for the boy. 
*In Arabic with the question “is it?”, the “it” can pertain to either a masculine or
feminine noun. However, whenever pertaining to a masculine or feminine noun, it will
become howa or heyaa. For example, when referring to a feminine noun such as sayaara
(“the car), “is it (the car in question) here?” / heya hon? When referring to a masculine
noun such as kaleb (“a dog), “is it (the dog in question) on the table?” howa ala maida?
For neuter, it’s hayda. However, I yet again wish to stress that this isn't a grammar book!

I was - Ana kenet
To be - (M)Kun / (F)Kuni
The – El, le, l
Same – Nafs / Metel
Good - Mneeh 
Here - Hon
Very - Kteer
And - Wa
Between - Bayn
Now – Halla’
Later / after / afterwards - Ba'den
If - Iza / La-w
Yes - Na'am / eh
To – A’l / la
Tomorrow - Bukra
You - Enta / inteh
Also / too / as well - Kamen
If it's between now and later
Iza kenet bayn halla’ w ba'den
It's better tomorrow
Bukra ahsan
This is good as well
Hayda kamen mneh 
To be the same person
Tay kuun nafs elshakhes
Yes, you are very good
Eh, inta kteer mneeh 
I was here with them
Ana kenet hon ma'on
You and I
Inta w ana
The same day
Nafs el-yom
*In the Arabic language, adjectives usually proceed the noun. For example, “the same
day” is nafs el yom.
*
“small house” / beit  zgheer
*
“tall person” / shakhes  taweel
*
“short person” / shakhes ‘a-seer

There are exceptions, though. For example, when expressing admiration or something
impressive, we can say, “How big is this house?” / Shoo kbeer hal beit?
*In Lebanese Arabic there are two forms to signify “if” / iza and la-w. “If it’s raining
tomorrow, I am not going,” for instance, in this case, we use “iza.” For “if I knew that
this will happen, I wouldn’t go to visit her,” here the “if” is like “had I” and la-w will be
used.

Me - Ana
Ok – Eh/ ok 
Even if - Hatta la-w
No - La’a
Worse - Adrab
Where - Wein
Everything - Kilshi / Killon
Somewhere - B' Shimahal / Shimahal
What - Shu
Almost - Te'riban
There - Honeek
Afterwards is worse
Ba'dein adrab
Even if I go now
Hatta iza rehet halla’
Where is everything?
Wein kill-shi?
Maybe somewhere
Yimken b’ shimahal / shimahal
What? I am almost there
Shu? Ana te'riban honeek
Where are you?
(M) Inta wein? / (F) Inteh wein?
.
*In Arabic, the pronoun “me” has several definitions. In relation to verbs, it’s neh or leh.
Leh refers to any verb that relates to the action of doing something to someone, or for
someone.
For example, “tell me,” “tell (to) me” / (M) illeh.
Ni just means “me”: “love me” / heb’neh or “see me” / shoof’neh 
Other variations (yeh, eh):
*
“on me” / ‘aleyyeh
*
“in me” / fiyyeh
*
“to me” / la ‘eleh
*
“with me” / ma’eh
*
“in front of me” / eddemeh
*
“from me” / minneh
The same rule applies for “him” and “her”—both become suffixes: –o and –a. Basically
all verbs pertinent to males end with O, and all pertinent to female end with A.
*
“love her” / hebba 

*
“love him” / hebbo
*
“love them” / hebbon 
*
“love us” / hebbna
Any verb that relates to doing something to someone, or for someone put l:
*
“tell her” / illa
*
“tell him” / illo
*
“tell them” / il’lhun
*
“tell us” / il’linah
Adding you as a suffix in Arabic is ak or lak, female ik or lik.
*
“love you” / (M) bhebbak / (F)bhebbik
*
“tell you” / (M) b’ellak / (F) b’ellik

House - Beit
In - Be
At (or) at the - Bill 
Car - Seyyara
Already – Halla’ / Saba’ w
Good morning - Sabah el kheir
How are you? – (M) Kefak / (F) kefik
Where are you from? – (M) Inta min wein? / (F) inteh min wein?
Impossible - Mustaheel
Hello - Marhaba
What is your name? – (M) Shu ismak / (F) shu ismik
How old are you? - (M) Addeh 'omrak / (F) Addeh 'omrik
Son – ‘Eben
Daughter - Benet
To have – (M) ‘Endo / (F) ‘Enda
Doesn't - Ma
Hard – So’eb (difficult)/Ehseh (solid)
Still – Ba’ed
Then (or “so”) – Ye’neh
She doesn't have a car, so maybe she is still at the house?
Heyyeh ma ‘enda seyyara, ye’neh yemkin heyyeh ba’da bill beit?
I am in the car already with your son and daughter
Ana bill seyyara hala ma'ah ‘ebnak wa bentak
Good morning, how are you today?
Sabah el kheir, kefak lyom?
Hello, what is your name?
Marhaba, shu ismak?
How old are you?
Addeh ‘omrak?
This is very hard, but it's not impossible
Haida kteer so’eb, bas mish mustaheel
Then where are you from?
Ye’neh min wein inta?
*In Arabic, possessive pronouns become suffixes to the noun. For example, in the
translation for “your,” ak is the masculine form, and ik is the feminine form.
*
“your book” / kteibak (m.), kteibik (f.)
*
“your house” / beitak (m.), beitik (f.)

*In the Arabic language, as well as in other Semitic languages, the article “a” doesn’t
exist. She doesn’t have a car, heya ma ‘inda seyyara.

Thank you - Shukran
For – La, ala
Anything - Hayalla shi / ‘Ay shi
That / That is – (M) Heyda / (F) Heydeh
Time - Wa'et
But - Bas / Leikin
No / not - Ma, La’ / mish, mish rah
I am not - Ana mish / ana manneh
Away - B'eed
Late - M’akhar
Similar – (M) Byishbaho / (F) Byishbaha
Another/ other - Gheir/ teineh 
Side – Janab/jehhut
Until - La-hadd / la 
Yesterday - Mbeirih
Without us - Baleina / Be-dunna
Since - Min
Day - Yom
Before – ‘Abel
Thanks for everything 
Shukran ‘ala kill shi
It's almost time
Sar el wa'et te’reeban 
I am not here, I am away
Ana mish hon, ana b'eed
That is a similar house
Hayda beit byishbaho
I am from the other side
Ana minel jehhut-teineh
But I was here until late yesterday
Bas ana kenet hon la mbeireh m'akhar
I am not at the other house
Ana manneh bil beit it-teineh 
In Lebanese Arabic, there are three definitions for time:
* “time” / wa’t refers to “era”, “moment period,” “duration of time.”
* “time(s)” / marra(t) refers to “occasion” or “frequency.”
* “time” / sei’ah references “hour,” “what time is it?”

*In Lebanese Arabic, there are two separate cases used to signify “side”: janab and 
jehhut. For “I am from the other side” jehhut, but for “I stand by your side” here “your 
side” is janbak.

What time is it? - Addeish-es le-sei’ah
I say / I am saying - Ana b'ool / ana ‘am ‘ool
I want - Ana baddeh
Without you – (M) Balak, bidoonak /(F) balaki , bidoonik
Everywhere /wherever – Wein makein 
I go - (M) Ana raayih, ana mehsheh / (F) ana raayha, ana mehshyeh
With - Ma'
My – Eleh 
Cousin - (S)(M) Iben ‘ammeh, (F) benet  ‘ammteh / (P)Wleid 'ammeh, baneit
'ammehteh
I need - Mehtej / ana bhajeh
Right now – Halla’
Night – Leil / ‘ashiyyeh
To see - Shoof
Light - Noor / daw
Outside - Barra
Without - Bidoon / bala
Happy - Mabsoot
I see / I am seeing - Ana bshoof / ana shehyif
I am saying no / I say no
‘Am ool la’ / ana b'ool la’
I want to see this today
Ana baddeh shoof haydeh lyom
I am with you everywhere
Ana ma'ak wein makein
I am happy without my cousins here
Ana mabsoot bidoon wleid 'ammeh hon
I need to be there at night
Ana bhajeh koon honeek bill-leil
I see light outside
Ana sheyif daw barra
What time is it right now?
Addeish el-sei’ah halla’?
*“Mine” / eleh is also a possessive pronoun. Eleh means “my” but also becomes a suffix
to a noun. Nouns ending in a vowel end with –teh. Nouns ending with a consonant end
with –eh. For example:
*
“cousin” / iben el ‘amm
*
“my cousin” / iben ‘ammeh

*
“cup” / kibbeyeh
*
“my cup” / kibbeyteh
For second and third person masculine noun,  ibin (“son”), male (S)  ak, (P) kom,  and
female (S) ik, (P) kum). “His” – Ilo / “hers” – ila, noun endings will be o (for male) and a
(for female).
*
“your son” / ibnak (m.), ibnik (f.)
*
“your (plural) son” / ibinkom (m.), bintkom (f.)
*
“his son” / ibno
*
“her son” / ibna
*
“our son” / ibinn’a
*
“their son” / ibnon (m.), ibnon (f.)
For second and third person feminine noun: “car” / seyyara.
*
“your car” / seyyartak
*
“your (plural) car” / seyyaretkom
*
“his car” / seyyarto
*
“her car” / seyyareta
*
“our car” / seyyaretna
*
“their car” / seyyareton (m.), seyyareton (f.)
*This isn’t a phrase book! The purpose of this book is solely to provide you with the tools
to create your own sentences!

Place – Makein / matrah
Easy - Hayyin / ba-seet / khafeef / sahill
To find - Tleh’ee
To look for / to search – Obrom / Fattish
Near / Close - Areeb
To wait - / Ntor
To sell - Baya’a
To use - Ista’amill
To know - A'ariff
To decide – Arrirr
Between - Bein
Both – - Tneynehton
To - La / a’al
Next to - Hadde
This place it's easy to find
Haida matrah hayyin tleh’ee
I want to look for this next to the car
Ana baddeh obrom ‘ala haydeh haddes - seyyara
I am saying to wait until tomorrow
Ana b'ool ntor la bukra
This table is easy to sell
Haydeh tawleh hayyin baya’a
I want to use this
Ana baddeh ista’amill haydeh
I need to know where is the house
Ana bhajeh a'ariff wein el-beit
I want to decide between both places
Ana baddeh arrirr bein matrahein
*Please pay close attention to the conjugation of verbs, whether they are in first person,
second, or third. Unlike Anglo-Germanic languages, Latin languages, or even Classical
Arabic, in which the first verb is conjugated and the following is always infinitive, in
colloquial Arabic, it is quite different. The first verb is conjugated and the following one
is conjugated as well. Keep in mind: The Lebanese dialect of the Arabic language is
considered a colloquial, rather than an official language.

Because - La'enno / Kermeil
To buy – Ishtreh
They - Hinneh
Them | Their – Elonn
Bottle - Anneeneh
Book - Kteib
Mine - La'ileh
To understand - Latifham
Problem / Problems - (S) Mashkal / (P) Mashehkill
I do / I am doing - Ba'amill
Of - Min
To look – Shehyif
Myself - Nefsi
Enough - Bikaffeh / sheb’oh
Food / water - Akill / ma-yy
Each/ every/ entire/ all – Kill / killon
Hotel - Otel
I like this hotel because I want to look at the beach
Ana bheb haydal otel la'anno baddeh shoof el-bahirr
I want to buy a bottle of water
Ana baddeh ishtreh anninett ma-yy
I do this every day
Ana ba'amill heik kill yom
Both of them have enough food
Tneynehton sheb’oh akill
That is the book, and that book is mine
Hayda huwweh l-kteib, w hayda l-kteib la'ileh
I need to understand the problem
Ana bhajeh ifham lmashkal
I see the view of the city from the hotel
Ana shehyif manzar l madineh min-el otel
I do my homework today
Ana’amm ba'amill fardeh lyom
My entire life (all my life)
Kill 'omreh / kill hayehteh
*“Both of them” is tneynehton
*There are two ways of saying “life” in Arabic:’omr and hayeht.

I like - Ana bhebb
There is / There are – Fe
Family / Parents - ‘Ayleh / ahleh
Why – Lei / mishein
To say – Ool
Something - She
To go – Rooh 
Ready – Jeh-his
Soon - Areeban
To work – Ishte-ghill
Who – Meen / yalleh
To know - A'aref
That (conjunction) - Inno
I like to be at my house with my parents
Ana bheb koon be beyteh ma' ahleh
I want to know why I need to say something important
Ana baddeh a'aref lei ana bhajeh ool she mhim
I am there with him
Ana honeek ma'o
I am busy, but I need to be ready soon
Ana mashghool, bass ana bhajeh koon jeh-his areeban
I like to go to work
Ana bhebb rooh ishte-ghill 
'Who is there?
Meen honeek?
I want to know if they are here, because I want to go outside
Ana baddeh a'aref iza hinneh hon, la anno ana baddeh rooh la-barra 
There are seven dolls
Fe saba' lei’aab
I need to know that it is a good idea
Ana bhajeh a'aref inno heydeh fekra mniha
*In the last sentence, we use “that” as a conjunction (inno) and a demonstrative pronoun
(M) hayda / (F) heydeh).
 

How much /how many – Addeh
To bring – Jeeb
With me - Ma’eh
Instead - Badal
Only - Bas
When – Lamma
Or – Aw 
I can / Can I - Ana Fiyyeh (or) be’der
Were - Kehno
Without me - Balehyeh / b-dooneh
Fast - Bser’aa
Slow – ‘A-mahill
Cold – Sa’aa
Inside - Joowweit
To eat – Ehcol
Hot – Sokhon/ hameh
To Drive – Soo’
How much money do I need to bring with me?
Addeh ana bhajeh jeeb ma'eh ma-sareh?
Instead of this cake, I want that cake
Badal hal gatto, baddeh hayda l-gatto
Only when you can
Bas lamma te’dirr
They were without me yesterday
Kehno Balehyeh mbehrih
Do I need to drive the car fast or slow?
Ana bhajeh soo’ el seyyara bser’aa aw a-mahill?
It is cold inside the library
Fe sa’aa joowweit el-maktabeh
Yes, I like to eat this hot for my lunch
Eih, ana bhebb ehcol ghadeh'yeh sokhon
I can work today
Ana fiyyeh ishte-ghill lyom
*“Were” is kehno, “we were” is kenna.
*“I can” and “can I?” could either be ana ader or ana fiyyeh. “You can” or “can you?” is
bte’der or feek?

To answer - Jehwibb
To fly - Teer
Time / Times - Marra / Marrat
To travel – Sehfer
To learn - It'allam
How - Keef
To swim - Isbah
To practice - Timreen
To play - Il'aab
To leave - Khalleh
Many /much /a lot – Kteer (or) 'aadad
I go to - Ana rooh ‘ala
First - Awwal
Time / Times – Marra/Marrat
I want to answer many questions
Ana baddeh jehwibb ‘aa-la as’ila kteereh
I must fly to Dubai today
Ana lehzim teer ‘aa Dubai lyom
I need to learn how to swim at the pool
Ana bhajeh it'allam keef isbah bill berkeh
I want to learn to play better tennis
Ana baddeh it'allam il'aab tennis ahsan
I want to leave this here for you when I go to travel the world
Ana baddeh khalleh hayda hon la ilak lamma rooh sehfer el ‘aalamm
Since the first time
Min awwal marra
The children are yours
Holeh wlehdak
*In Lebanese Arabic, “to leave (something)” is khaleh. “To leave (a place)” is tarak. 
*In Lebanese Arabic, there are three definitions for time:
* “time” / wa’it refers to “era”, “moment period,” “duration of time.”
* “time(s)” / marra(t) refers to “occasion” or “frequency.”
* “time” / seh’aa references “hour,” “what time is it?”
*With the knowledge you’ve gained so far, now try to create your own sentences!

Nobody / anyone – Ma hada / hada
Against - Dodd
Us – Nehhna
To visit - Zoor 
Mom / Mother - Mama, imm
To give – A’ateh
Which - Ayya
To meet - Tejtehme’
Someone – Hadah
Just - Bas
To walk - Timsheh
Around – Barmeh
Towards - Bittijehh
Than - Min
Nothing – Balashi / walashi
Something is better than nothing
Hal shi ahsan min balashi
I am against him
Ana dodo
Is there anyone here?
Fi hada hon?
We go to visit my family each week
Nehhna min rooh nzoor el ayleh kill jehm’aa
I need to give you something
Ana bhajeh a’teek shi
Do you want to go meet someone?
Baddak trooh tejtehme’ ma’ hadah?
I was here on Wednesdays as well
Ana kenet hon el orb'aa kamen
Do you do this everyday?
Enta bta’mel heik kill yom?
You need to walk around, but not towards the house
Enta bhajeh timsheh barmeh, bas mish bittijehh el-beit
*In Arabic, when using the pronoun “you” as a direct and indirect object pronoun (the
person who is actually affected by the action that is being carried out) in relation to a
verb, the pronoun “you” becomes a suffix to that verb. That suffix becomes ak (masc.) ik
(fem.).
*
“to give” / ta’teh: “to give you” / ta a’teek
*
“to tell” / ool: “to tell you” / illak (m.), illik (f.)

*
“see you” / shoofak: “to see you” (plural) / shoofkon (m.), shoofkon (f.)
For third person male, add o and on for plural, for female add a and on for plural. 
*
“tell him” / illo
*
“tell her” / illa
*
“see them” / shoofon (m.), shoofon (f.)
*
“see us “/ shoofna

I have – ‘Ehndeh
Don't - Ma
Friend - Saheb, sadee’
To borrow – Ist’eer
To look like / resemble – Ishbah
Like (preposition) - Metel
Grandfather – Jiddeh
To want - Baddeh
To stay - Ib'a
To continue - Kammill
Way – Tari’
I don't - Manneh
To show - Tfarraj
To prepare - Hadderr
I am not going - Ana mishrah rooh
Do you want to look like Salim
Baddak tishbah Salim
I want to borrow this book for my grandfather
Ana baddeh Ist’eer hayda el ktehb la jiddeh
I want to drive and to continue on this way to my house
Ana baddeh soo’ w kammill ‘ala heydeh tari’ la beiteh
I have a friend there, that’s why I want to stay in Beirut
Ehndeh saheb honeek, mishein heik baddeh ib'a be beirut
I am not going to see anyone here
Ana mish rah rooh shoof hada hon
I need to show you how to prepare breakfast
Ana baddeh farjeek keef it'hadder terwee'a
Why don’t you have the book?
Lei ma ‘indak el-ktehb?
That is incorrect, I don’t need the car today
Hayda mish mazboot, manneh bhajeh lal seyyara lyom

To remember - Titzakar
Your - Ilak
Number - Ra'em
Hour - Se'aa
Dark / darkness – 'Atmeh
About / on the - 'B-khsoos / ala
Grandmother - Sitteh
Five - Khams
Minute / minutes - D’ee’ah / d’aye’
More - Aktar
To think – Fakker
To do – A’mel
To come – Ejeh
To hear - Esma'
Last – Ehkher
You need to remember my number
Enta bhajeh titzakar ra'emeh 
This is the last hour of darkness
Haydeh ehkher Se'aa min el 'atmeh 
I want to come and to hear my grandmother speak Arabic
Ana baddeh ejeh w esma’ sitteh tehkeh 'arabeh
I need to think more about this, and what to do
Ana mehtej fakker b hayda aktar, w shoo -a'mel
From here to there, it's only five minutes
Min hon la honeek, bas khams d’aye’ 
The school on the mountain
L maderseh ala l jabal
*In Lebanese Arabic b-khsoos is used to signify “about.” For example, “let’s talk about
this topic” / ta nehkeh b-khsoos … “On the mountain” is a place, so in this case, we will
use ala.

To leave - Yitrok
Again - Kamen / min jdeed / marra tehneh
Syria - Suriyya
To take - Ehkhod
To try - Jarreb
To rent – Yista’jer
Without her - Bdoona
We are – Neh’na
To turn off - Taffeh
To ask – Tis’al
To stop - Nwa'iff
Permission - Ezin
He needs to leave and rent a house at the beach
Huwweh bhajeh yitrok w yista’jer beit a’la l baher
I want to take the test without her
Ana baddeh ehkhod l fahoss b-doona
We are here a long time
Nehna hon min zamen kteer
I need to turn off the lights early tonight
Ana bhajeh taffeh l odowyeh bakeer l leyleh
We want to stop here
Nehna badna nwa’iff hon
We are from Tripoli
Neh’na min Trabloss
The same building 
Nafss el benehyeh
I want to ask permission to leave
Ana baddeh ekhod ezin la-itrok
*In Lebanese Arabic, “to stop” is  twa’iff, but “to cease” is  khalas. For example, if
someone is bothering you, you tell them, “Stop!” / Khalas!

To open - Iftah
A bit, a little, a little bit - Shwayyeh
To pay – Tidfa’
Once again - Tehneh marra
There isn't/ there aren't - Mafi
Sister - Okhteh
To hope - Bitmanna
To live - 'Eesh
Nice to meet you - (M)Tsharrafna bma'riftak, (F)tsharrafna bma'riftik
Name - Isem
Last name - Ism el ’ayleh
To return – Tirrja’
South – Junb
Door - Beib
I need to open the door for my sister
Ana bhajeh iftah elbeib la okhteh
I need to buy something
Ana bhajeh ishtereh she
I want to meet your sisters
Ana baddeh ’abill okhtak
Nice to meet you, what is your name and your last name?
Tsharrafna bma'riftak, shu ismak w isem ‘ayltak?
To hope for a little better
Bitmanna shi shwey ahsan
I want to return from the United States and to live in
Qatar without problems
Ana baddeh irja’ min Amrika w ‘eesh b Qatar bala mashehkill
Why are you sad right now?
(M)Lei inta hazeen halla’? (F) Lei inteh hazeeneh halla’?
There aren't any people here
Ma-fe nehss hon
There isn't enough time to go to South Lebanon today
Ma-fe kfeyeh wa'et lal rawha ‘a jnub lebnein lyom
*In Lebanese Arabic, regarding the verb “to meet,” there are two separate cases to define
this verb: tejtehme’ and abil, depending of the context. To meet for business is tejtehme’.
To meet for getting acquainted is  abil.  In the sentence, “Do you  want to go meet
someone?” (the sister, getting acquainted with her), it’s ’abill.

*This isn’t a phrase book! The purpose of this book is solely to provide you with the tools to
create your own sentences!

To happen – Yehsal
To order – Otlob
To drink - Ishrab
Excuse me - Bill ezin
Child - (M) Ebneh, (F) Binteh
Woman - Mara
To begin / to start - Ballish
To finish - Khalliss
To help - Seh'ed
To smoke - Dakhin
To love - Hebb
To talk / to speak – Eh’keh
This must happen today
Hayda lehzim yehsal lyom
Excuse me, my child is here as well
Bill ezin, ibneh honeh kamen
I love you
Ana bhebbak
I see you
Ana sheyfak
I need you at my side
Ana bhajeh ilak haddeh
I need to begin soon to be able to finish at 3 o'clock in the afternoon
Ana bhajeh ballish areeban hatta khalliss ‘a seh'a tlehteh ba’d el dohor
I need help
Ana bhajeh la museh’adeh
I don't want to smoke once again
Ana ma baddeh dakhin tehneh marra
I want to learn how to speak Arabic
Ana baddeh it’allam keef eh’keh 'arabeh
*“To help” is sa'ed. However, “help!” is museh’adeh. “I need help” or “I need rescue” /
ana meh’teij la museh’adeh.
*“To be able to” is hatta.

To read - Ii'ra
To write - Iktob
To teach - 'Allem
To close - Sakkir
To choose - Ikhtar
To prefer - Bfaddill
To put - Hott
Less - A'el
Sun - Shamess
Month - Shaher
I talk - Behkeh
Exact - Mazbut
I need this book to learn how to read and write in Arabic because I want to
teach in Egypt
Ana bhajeh la hayda likteib ta it’allam kif ii'ra w iktub bill-'arabeh la ‘inno baddeh
‘allem bi ma-ser
I want to close the door of the house
Ana baddeh sakkir beib el-beit
I prefer to put the gift here
Ana bfaddill hott el hdiyeh hon
I want to pay less than you for the dinner
Ana baddeh idfa’ a'el minnak bill ‘asha
I speak with the boy and the girl in French
Ana behkeh ma' el' sabeh will benett bill frinsehweh
There is sun outside today
Fi shamess barra lyom
Is it possible to know the exact date?
Mumkin ma’rfitt tehrikh el mazbut?
*”For the” is li                
*”In” is bill
*With the knowledge you’ve gained so far, now try to create your own sentences!

To exchange (money) – Osrof
To call – Otto-sill
Brother – Khayyeh
Dad – Bayyeh
To sit - E'e’od
Together - Sawa
To change - T'ghayyer
Of course - Akeed
Welcome - Ahlein
During - Wa'et
Years - (S)Seneh / (P)Sneen
Sky - Sama
Up – Fo’
Down - Tahet
Sorry - Be’tezirr
To follow - Ilha’
To the - Ila
Big - Kbeer
New - Jedid
Never / ever - Abadan
I don't want to exchange this money at the bank
Ana ma baddeh osrof hal mahsareh bill-bank
I want to call my brother and my dad today
Ana baddeh otto-sill b-khayyeh wbayyeh lyom
Of course I can come to the theater, and I want to sit together with you and
with your sister
Akeed ana be’dir ejeh a’l massrah, w ana baddeh e'e’od sawa ma'ak w ma' okhtak
I need to go down to see your new house
Ana bhajeh inzal la tahet ta shoof beytik el jdeed
I can see the sky from the window
Ana adirr shoof e'sama min el shibbeik
I am sorry, but he wants to follow her to the store
Ana be’tezirr, bass baddeh ilha’a ‘al mahal
I don't ever want to see you again
Abadan ma baddeh shoofik marra tehneh
*In Lebanese dialect, brother is khay, and dad is bay. However, “my dad” is bayyeh and
“my brother” is khayyeh. “My sister” is okhteh, and “my mother” is immeh. 

*For the possessive pronouns, her (a) and him (o), both become suffixes to the verb or
noun. Concerning nouns: her house / beita, his house / beito, concerning cases regarding
verbs, please see footnotes on here.     
 

To allow - Khallee
To believe – Bsadde’
Morning – ‘Abookra
Except - Min-'ada
To promise - Boo’dak
Good night - Tisbah ‘a kheir
Street - Shehri
People - Neis
To move - In'ol
Far - B'eed
Different - Gheir
Man - Rijjel
To enter - Foot
To receive – Istelim
Throughout - Khileil
Good evening – Ma-sa el kheir
Left / right - Shmel / yehmeen
Him / her - Huwweh / heyyeh
I need to allow him to go with us, he is a different man now
Ana bhajeh khallee yrooh ma'na, la’enno huwweh gheirrijjel halla’
I believe everything except this
Ana bsadde’ kill-shi min'ada haydeh
I promise to say good night to my parents each night
Ana boo’dak inno ‘ool tisbah ‘a kheir la ahleh kill leyleh
The people from Jordan are very pleasant
El neiss bill ordon kteer lutafa
I need to find another hotel very quickly
Ana bhajeh leh’eh otel tehneh be'ser’a
They need to receive a book for work
Hinneh bhajeh yistelmo kteib lal sheghill
I see the sun in the morning
Ana bshoof sh shamess ‘abookra
The house is on the right side of the street
El beit huwweh ‘a yehmeen el shehri’ 

To wish - Itmanna
Bad - Aa'tel/ ma mneeh
To get - Yekhod
To forget - Insa
Everybody / Everyone - Kill shakhess/ Killon
Although - Ma’ inno
To feel - Hiss
Great – Mhim
Next (as in close, near) - Hadd 
Next (as in next year) - Jei
To like – Bhibb
In front – Iddeim
Person - Shakhes
Behind - Wara
Well - Ahsan
Restaurant - Mat'aam
Bathroom - Hemmeim
Goodbye - Bye
I don’t want to wish you anything bad
Ana ma baddeh itmanneilak ayya shi aa'tel
I must forget everybody from my past to feel well
Ana leizim insa kill shakess min el madeh hatta hiss ahsan
I am next to the person behind you
Ana hadd el shakhes yalleh warak
There is a great person in front of me
Fi shakhes mhim iddeimeh
I say goodbye to my friends
Ana b'oul bye la rif’ateh
Where is the bathroom in the restaurant?
Wein el hemmeim bill mat'aam?
She has to get a car before the next year
Heya lehzim tjeeb seyyara abel sint el jei 
I like the house, but it is very small
Ana bheb el beit, bass huwweh kteer zgheer 
*Hadd literally means “side.” In Arabic, it refers to “next.” Haddeh is “besides me” and
haddak is “besides you.”

To remove / to take out - Tsheel
Please - ’Mol ma’roof
Beautiful - (M)Helo, (F)Helweh 
To lift – Ish’ol
Include / Including - Ma'
Belong – Byedkhol
To hold - Timsok
To check – It’akkad
Small - Zgheer
Real - Ha'ee'eh 
Week - Jem’aa
Size - Kebirr
Even though - Hatta la-w
Doesn’t - Mish
So (as in “then”) – Ye’neh
So (as in “so big”) - Kteer
Price - Se’er
She wants to remove this door please
Hiyyeh badda tsheel hal beib ’mol ma’roof 
This doesn’t belong here, I need to check again
Hayda ma byedkhol hon, ana bhajeh it’akkad kamein
This week the weather was very beautiful
Hal Jem’aa el ta’ess kein kteer helo
I need to know which is the real diamond
Ana bhajeh a'ref ayya elmazhuwweh ha'ee'eh
We need to check the size of the house
Nehna bhajeh nit’akkad min kibr el beit
I want to lift this, so you need to hold it high
Ana baddeh ish’ol hayda, ye’neh leizim timseko bill 'aleh
I can pay this even though that the price is expensive
Ana eider idfa’ hayda hatta la w inno el se'er ghaleh
Including everything is this price correct?
Ma' kill shi hass se’er mazboot?
The Program

Other useful tools in Lebanese Arabic
Countries of the Middle East
Bildein el-shar’ el- awsatt
Lebanon - Lebnein
Syria - Suriyya
Jordan - L-ordon
Saudi Arabia - So'odiyyeh
Israel /Palestine /West Bank - Isra'eel / Folosteen / Deffeh el-Gharbeyyeh
Bahrain - L-Bahrein
Yemen - L-Yaman
Oman - 'Oman
United Arab Emirates - L-Emarat
Kuwait - L-Kweit
Iraq - L-’Ira’
Qatar - Qatar
Morocco - Maghreb
Algeria - L-Jazeh’ir
Libya - Leebya
Egypt - Mossor
Tunisia - Tunis
Months
January - Kenoon el tehneh
February - Shbatt
March – Adar
April - Nissein
May - Ayyar
June - Hzeyran
July - Tammooz
August - Ab
September - Aylool
October - Teshreen el awwal
November - Teshreen el tehneh
December - Kenoon el awwal

Days of the Week
Sunday - Ahad
Monday - Tanein
Tuesday - Taleita
Wednesday - Orb'aa
Thursday - Khamees
Friday - Jem'aa
Saturday - Sabet
Seasons
Spring – Rabee’
Summer - Seif 
Autumn - Khareef
Winter - Shehteh
Colors
Black - (M)Aswad (F)Sawda
White - (M)Abyadd (F) Bayda
Gray - (M)Rmehdeh (F) Rmehdiyyeh
Red - (M)Ahmar (F)Hamra
Blue - (M)Azra’ (F)Zar’a
Yellow - (M)Asfar (F)Safra
Green - (M)Akhdar (F)Khadra
Orange – Berd’aneh
Purple - Leylakeh
Brown - (M)Benneh (F)Benniyyeh
Numbers
One - Wahad
Two - Tnein
Three - Tleteh
Four - Arb'aa
Five - Khamseh
Six - Sitteh
Seven - Sab'aa
Eight - Tmehneh
Nine - Tis'aa
Ten - 'Ashra 

Twenty - ‘Eshreen 
Thirty – Tlehteen
Forty - Arb'aa’een
Fifty - Khamseen
Sixty - Sitteen
Seventy - Saba'aeen
Eighty - Tmaneen
Ninety - Tisi'in
Hundred - Miyyeh
Thousand – Alef 
Million - Malyoon
Cardinal Directions
North - Shmeil
South - Jnoob
East – Share’
West - Ghareb

Conclusion
Congratulations! You have completed all the tools needed to master the Arabic
language, and I hope that this has been a valuable learning experience. Now you
have sufficient communication skills to be confident enough to embark on a visit
to Lebanon, impress your friends, and boost your resume so good luck.
This program is available in other languages as well, and it is my fervent hope
that my language learning programs will be used for good, enabling people from
all  corners  of  the  globe  and  from  all  cultures  and  religions  to  be  able  to
communicate harmoniously. After memorizing the required three hundred and
fifty words, please perform a daily five-minute exercise by creating sentences in
your  head  using  these  words.  This  simple  exercise  will  help  you  grasp
conversational communications even more effectively. Also, once you memorize
the vocabulary on each page, follow it by using a notecard to cover the words you
have just memorized and test yourself and follow that by going back and using
this same notecard technique on the pages you studied during the previous days.
This repetition technique will assist you in mastering these words in order to
provide you with the tools to create your own sentences.
Every day, use this notecard technique on the words that you have just studied.
Everything in life has a catch. The catch here is just consistency. If you just open
the book, and after the first few pages of studying the program, you put it down,
then you will not gain anything. However, if you consistently dedicate a half hour
daily to studying, as well as reviewing what you have learned from previous days,
then you will quickly realize why this method is the most effective technique ever
created to become conversational in a foreign language. My technique works! For
anyone who doubts this technique, all I can say is that it has worked for me and
hundreds of others. 

ALSO BY YATIR NITZANY
Conversational Spanish Quick and Easy
......................................................
Conversational French Quick and Easy
......................................................
Conversational Italian Quick and Easy
......................................................
Conversational Portuguese Quick and Easy
......................................................
Conversational German Quick and Easy
......................................................
Conversational Russian Quick and Easy
………………………………
Conversational Polish Quick and Easy
......................................................
Conversational Hebrew Quick and Easy
......................................................
Conversational Yiddish Quick and Easy
......................................................
Conversational Arabic Quick and Easy
Classical Arabic
......................................................
Conversational Arabic Quick and Easy
Lebanese Dialect
......................................................
Conversational Arabic Quick and Easy
Palestinian Dialect
......................................................
Conversational Arabic Quick and Easy
Jordanian Dialect
......................................................
Conversational Arabic Quick and Easy
Emirati Dialect
......................................................
Conversational Arabic Quick and Easy
Iraqi Dialect
......................................................
Conversational Arabic Quick and Easy

Syrian Dialect
......................................................
Conversational Arabic Quick and Easy
Libyan Dialect

Note from the Author
Thank you for your interest in my work. I encourage you to share your overall
experience of this book by posting a review. Your review can make a difference!
Please feel free to describe how you  benefited from my method or provide
creative feedback on how I can improve this program. I am constantly seeking
ways to enhance the quality of this product, based on personal testimonials and
suggestions from individuals like you. 
Thanks and best of luck,
Yatir Nitzany

