
Table of Contents
Blender 3D Printing Essentials
Credits
About the Author
About the Reviewers
www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers and more
Why Subscribe?
Free Access for Packt account holders
Preface
What this book covers
What you need for this book
Who this book is for
Conventions
Reader feedback
Customer support
Downloading the example code
Downloading the color images of this book
Errata
Piracy
Questions
1. Designing Objects for 3D Printing
Opportunities to use your 3D printer
How a 3D printer works
Types of 3D printers
Basic parts of a 3D printer
How is a 3D printer controlled?
The Peachy printer
Modeling dimensions
File sizes
Polygon sizes
Factors affecting precision
Controlling printing costs
Materials for 3D printing
3D printing and your health
What happens at a 3D printing service?

Summary
2. Measuring and Texturing Techniques for 3D Printing
Precision modeling in Blender
Using the Ruler/Protractor
Using the Protractor
Measuring the thickness of an object
Preparing the model for coloring
Leaving the object uncolored
Vertex colors
Vertex painting
Building texture maps
Choosing colors for printing
UV unwrapping
UV mapping the wings
UV mapping the belly
UV mapping the edges of the wing
UV mapping the head
Painting the texture map
Exporting the UV Layout for use in an external paint program
Painting your texture in Blender
Modifying the UV coordinates to add detail
Using the Clone brush to add detail
Summary
3. Making a Blender Model that's Ready to Print
What is special about 3D printing?
Installing the Print3D toolbox
Introducing the Print3D toolbox
Introducing the Mesh Analysis panel
Setting up the units of the scene
Making a 3D model that will print
Making a watertight model
Making a manifold model
Inspecting objects to see if they are manifold or non-manifold
Finding problems that make a file non-manifold
Fixing noncontiguous edges
Typical problem areas with a model
Fixing distorted polygons
Blunting sharp edges
Fixing the junction between blade and hilt

Economizing when 3D printing
Summary
4. Making Strong, Light Objects with the Solidify Modifier
Optimizing wall thickness
Using Solidify for proper wall thickness
Analyzing and modifying the inner shell
Making the dragon useful
Cutting holes for removing extra printing material
Precision modeling—fitting two objects together
Dealing with overhangs and support
If the printer automatically makes supports
Making supports for your model
Exporting your 3D object
Getting the orientation right
Making an STL file
Making an X3D file with a texture
Summary
A. 3D Printing References
References
3D printing services
3D printers – hobbyist
3D printers – industrial
3D objects
Index

Blender 3D Printing Essentials

Blender 3D Printing Essentials
Copyright © 2013 Packt Publishing All rights reserved. No part of this
book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in
any form or by any means, without the prior written permission of the
publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in critical
articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the
accuracy of the information presented. However, the information
contained in this book is sold without warranty, either express or implied.
Neither the author, nor Packt Publishing, and its dealers and distributors
will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to be caused
directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about
all of the companies and products mentioned in this book by the
appropriate use of capitals. However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee
the accuracy of this information.
First published: November 2013
Production Reference: 1141113
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78328-459-7
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Gordon Fisher (<phi3d@yahoo.com>)

Credits
Author
Gordon Fisher
Reviewers
Sandra Gilbert
Taylor Petrick
Acquisition Editor
Sam Birch
Commissioning Editor
Subho Gupta
Technical Editors
Novina Kewalramani
Harshad Vairat
Project Coordinator
Amey Sawant
Proofreader
Paul Hindle
Indexer
Rekha Nair
Production Coordinator

Nitesh Thakur
Cover Work
Nitesh Thakur

About the Author
Gordon Fisher, as a teenager, studied drafting and built plastic model
cars. He got his start in 3D computer modeling back when one would
have to create a 3D engineering drawing with a pencil and then input the
information into a computer, vertex-by-vertex.
He led a three-person crew in building 3D models of 80 aircraft for the
U.S. Army Visual Aircraft Recognition program. He also built an accurate
model of the 17th and 18th holes of the Pebble Beach golf course for
Callaway Golf's golf simulator. He's currently working with the Open Luna
Foundation to create models, X3D and 3D printed, of their parts of their
proposed lunar base.
He is the Creative Director at Point Happy Interactive. He has been using
Blender professionally since 2002 and has given classes on using
Blender and using Python with Blender at Python conferences in Texas
and Arkansas. His work has been displayed at the National Air and
Space Museum. He is also the author of the book Blender 3D Basics,
published by Packt Publishing.
I would like to thank all the people who helped me write this book,
especially Subho Gupta, the Commissioning Editor, and Amey
Sawant, the Project Coordinator. I'd also like to thank Bart Veldhuisen
of Blender Nation and Shapeways and Gary Fudge of mCor
Technologies for taking the time to answer all my questions, and all
the people who have devoted so many hours to developing better and
less expensive 3D printers.

About the Reviewers
Sandra Gilbert started using Blender in the fall of 2000. Back then, there
were not as many tutorials or educational resources available for Blender
artists, so she, like many others, figured it out as she went along. Over
the years, Sandra has seen not only Blender, but the community itself
grow and mature. Now, there is a wealth of tutorials and educational
materials available.
She is the Managing Editor of Blenderart Magazine. In 2005, she and her
friend, Gaurav Nawani, decided to start Blenderart Magazine. Blenderart
Magazine is a theme-based community magazine offering Blender
tutorials, interviews, and making of articles.
Having been part of such a large open source community and watching
how the community comes together to create and accomplish large
projects, she knows that Blenderart's success is due in large part to the
Blender community itself. The community supports their endeavor in
many ways, the biggest being by contributing articles, tutorials, and
images to be published in each issue.
I would like to thank all the talented writers and educators in the
Blender community for sharing their knowledge and helping in
teaching a new generation of Blender users.
Taylor Petrick is currently a student at the University of Waterloo in
Canada. He took an interest in 3D graphics and modeling in middle
school and has continued to develop his skills ever since. He has a
strong programming background, with over six years of practical
experience using C++ and technologies such as OpenGL, DirectX, and
CUDA. Currently, he is working with ray tracing and investigating its
potential for use in real-time applications.
He uses Blender3D both as a tool for his projects and to create artwork
as a hobby. He first started using Blender to make models and
animations for a video game project and has actively used it ever since.

He is excited about 3D printing and how quickly it is entering widespread
use. He is particularly interested in the Peachy Printer, a new low-cost
option that interfaces directly with Blender.
I'd like to thank Packt for giving me the opportunity to be involved in
the review process of this book. It was the first time I had a chance to
work on such a project and I was fortunate enough to be chosen as a
technical reviewer. Sharing knowledge has always been important to
me, so I was glad to contribute my skills to help others learn. I
enjoyed working with the team and becoming more familiar with the
review process in general.

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and
downloads related to your book.
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published,
with PDF and ePub files available? You can upgrade to the eBook
version at www.PacktPub.com and as a print book customer, you are
entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at
<service@packtpub.com> for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical
articles, sign up for a range of free newsletters and receive exclusive
discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's
online digital book library. Here, you can access, read and search across
Packt's entire library of books. 

Why Subscribe?
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
On demand and accessible via web browser

Free Access for Packt account
holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use
this to access PacktLib today and view nine entirely free books. Simply
use your login credentials for immediate access.

Preface
You know that 3D printing is hot. You wouldn't have bought this book if
you didn't. What I hope you will get from this book is an introduction to
building a model in Blender so it will make a good object in a 3D printer.
This is fairly simple. Mostly, you need to know what information the 3D
printer needs to make an object, what considerations you need to make
when designing your object, and which techniques you can use to
achieve your goals.
I have tried to avoid being printer-specific. 3D printing is in the phase
where new printers are appearing every day. At some point, there will be
a shakeout where the best printer makers prevail, but it's too early to
guess which companies those will be. But among all kinds of printers,
there are basic rules that will work with any printer, and you will learn how
to tailor your objects for particular printers.
While I have worked to ensure that you could do each step
demonstrated, I assume that you have a general knowledge of operating
Blender, such as one would get from my book Blender 3D Basics, also
available on the Packt website.
Let's get started!

What this book covers
Chapter 1, Designing Objects for 3D Printing, gives you a glimpse into
the general issues affecting 3D printing and background on what is going
on, so you understand why you may have to do things differently to make
an object in Blender for 3D printing than you do for animation or the
game engine.
Chapter 2, Measuring and Texturing Techniques for 3D Printing, explains
how to prepare a file to be used in 3D printing. We will cover using the
Ruler/Protractor tool to measure objects and some methods used in
texturing the model.
Chapter 3, Making a Blender Model that's Ready to Print, explains how to
make models that are watertight, manifold, and will print well.
Chapter 4, Making Strong, Light Objects with the Solidify Modifier,
explains how to make an object strong and light using the Solidify
modifier and how to clean up the model. You will also learn about doing
precision modeling, dealing with overhangs, and finally you will learn how
to export the completed file.
Appendix, contains links to good background material on 3D printing, 3D
printing services, hobbyist-level 3D printers, industrial-level 3D printers,
and Blender objects available on the web.

What you need for this book
Blender 2.67 or higher and a general understanding of standard modeling
techniques, such as described in Blender 3D Basics.

Who this book is for
People who want to be able to build 3D printed objects using Blender to
model the object(s).

Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish
between different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these
styles, and an explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text are shown as follows: "Set the radius of the brush to
about 25 and the strength to 1.0".
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see
on the screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text
like this: "In the UV/Image Editor header, select Image".
Note
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tip
Tips and tricks appear like this.

Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you
think about this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader
feedback is important for us to develop titles that you really get the most
out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to
<feedback@packtpub.com>, and mention the book title via the subject of
your message. If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are
interested in either writing or contributing to a book, see our author guide
on www.packtpub.com/authors.

Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of
things to help you to get the most from your purchase.
Downloading the example code
You can download the example code files for all Packt books you have
purchased from your account at http://www.packtpub.com. If you
purchased this book elsewhere, you can visit
http://www.packtpub.com/support and register to have the files emailed
directly to you.
Downloading the color images of this
book
We also provide you a PDF file that has color images of the
screenshots/diagrams used in this book. The color images will help you
better understand the changes in the output. You can download this file
from
http://www.packtpub.com/sites/default/files/downloads/4597OS_ColoredG
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our
content, mistakes do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—
maybe a mistake in the text or the code—we would be grateful if you
would report this to us. By doing so, you can save other readers from
frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this book. If you
find any errata, please report them by visiting
http://www.packtpub.com/submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on
the errata submission form link, and entering the details of your errata.
Once your errata are verified, your submission will be accepted and the
errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list of existing
errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be

viewed by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across
all media. At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses
very seriously. If you come across any illegal copies of our works, in any
form, on the Internet, please provide us with the location address or
website name immediately so that we can pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at <copyright@packtpub.com> with a link to the
suspected pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring
you valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at <questions@packtpub.com> if you are having a
problem with any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address
it.

Chapter 1. Designing Objects for
3D Printing
3D printing! It's big, it's exciting, and it's fun! It's so important that
Microsoft made being 3D printing compatible a high priority for Windows
8.1. This book will help you get started in using Blender to make objects
specifically for 3D printing. We will not recommend any particular printer
or printing service. If you already have a 3D printer, you will know what
you need to do for printing. If not, you'll probably be depending on
someone else to do the actual printing and you'll need to know what they
need from you, and what you need to keep in mind as you model in
Blender.
In this chapter, we will look into general issues affecting 3D printing and
give you a little background on what is going on so you understand why
you may have to do things differently to make an object in Blender for 3D
printing than you do for animation or a game engine.
The following are the topics we'll be covering in this chapter:
Opportunities to use your 3D printer
How a 3D printer works
Modeling dimensions, tolerances, and file sizes
Controlling printing costs
What materials can I use in 3D printing?
What types of printers are there?
A tour of a 3D printing service
Opportunities to use your 3D
printer
3D printing is not the correct way to make everything. If you need to
make a lot of copies of an object, 3D printing is too slow. 3D printing is
also expensive. You have a limited choice of materials. You have limits
on the size of objects and the quality of the objects you can make.

For example, think about making a bicycle completely with 3D printing.
While I am writing this, it's impossible. The tires alone are impossible,
with rubber, thread, and steel cords; the process is too complex for
today's 3D printers. The size of the bike frame is still too large for almost
all 3D printers; carbon fiber frames cannot be printed directly, titanium
frames are very expensive, and the quality of steel you would be able to
use in a 3D printer may not be right for a durable bike.
At the same time, you could easily make custom lugs to hold the frame
together, custom light mounts, shifters, and water bottle racks. 3D
printing can be used to create the mold for carbon fiber lugs or even a
mold for a carbon fiber frame.
3D printing is best used for making prototypes and custom objects. As an
exercise, I looked around to see what kinds of things I'd want to use 3D
printing for. I came up with the following things:
Water bottle holder for my recumbent bicycle's oval-shaped frame
A clip that would let me mount my hydration pack to my recumbent
bike and hold the hose securely next to my shirt, yet be convenient
to move so I can drink from it, and it detaches easily in case of an
accident
Replacement for the plastic table clamp of an old Luxo lamp
Replacement plastic foot for a camera tripod
Extension for my mouse to make it large enough for my hand
3D-printed business cards
Z-shaped key for an antique Chinese brass lock that had
accidentally got latched, and for which there was no key. As seen in
the following image, the new key was simple to make in 3D printing
but difficult to make otherwise:

I'm sure that you have your own list. The great part about 3D printers is
that they can make any shape you need, and they do it in a reasonable
time at a reasonable cost. That's amazingly powerful. Look at the
catalogs of the services linked later if you need more ideas.
You may want to use 3D printing as a part of a business. You could make
prototypes of mechanical parts and objects architectural or theatrical
stage models. You can sell what you make, such as jewelry, fantasy
figurines, a smart phone case, custom coffee cups or vases, cookie
molds in the shape of a cat, or whatever you think of.
3D printing is just getting started, so there is no telling how far it will go. A
company named Made in Space is designing a 3D printer for use in zero
gravity. They see that it will be far more efficient for many space-based
repairs to just make parts up there, rather than having to carry a large
number of spare parts into orbit. The OpenLuna Foundation is using 3D
printing to build a model of their proposed lunar lander to show potential
investors. Being able to touch and hold something is a powerful
influencer in making a sale:


How a 3D printer works
A 3D printer needs to take a description of a three-dimensional object
and turn it into a physical object. Like Blender, a 3D printer uses values
along the X, Y, and Z axes to determine the shape of an object. But
where Blender sees an object as perhaps cylinders, spheres, cubes, or
edges and faces, a 3D printer is all about layers and perimeters.
First, a slicing program opens the object file that you made and it slices
the object into vertical layers as seen in the following screenshot:
Then, each layer is printed out one by one in a growing stack as seen in
the following screenshot:

But you can get a better idea of how these layers stack up if you can see
it interactively. I have provided an interactive illustration that allows you to
see the dragon slice by slice. Scrolling through the frames, you can see
how the walls of the dragon's body are built:
1. Open up 4597OS_01_LayersDisplay.blend in your download packet.
Examine the thickness of the body at each layer.
2. Press Alt + A to play the animation. Press Esc to stop playing it.
3. You can also drag the current time indicator in the timeline back and
forth to look at individual frames, or use the right and left arrow keys.
Note how the dragon starts as a series of islands. Look at the dragon's
hands. The fingers start off floating in space until they are joined to the
arms.
The exact method a 3D printer uses to print a layer varies. Some printers
work like a pencil, drawing an outline of the shape on that layer and then
filling in the shape with cross-hatching. Look at the left side of the
preceding screenshot again.
The printer would first outline the tail, then fill it in. Next, it would move to
one haunch, outline it, and fill it in, and then the other. And finally, it would
outline and fill each foot. You can get a better idea of how this happens
with this 3D printer's hot end simulator. The hot end is the printer's
nozzle where the 3D printing material is extruded.
Note
Open 4597_01_HotEnd.blend and follow the instructions shown there.

Other printers may use a print head much like an inkjet printer. The print
head moves across the printing bed and deposits material where needed.
Tip
Downloading the example code
You can download the example code files for all Packt books you
have purchased from your account at http://www.packtpub.com. If you
purchased this book elsewhere, you can visit
http://www.packtpub.com/support and register to have the files e-
mailed directly to you.

Types of 3D printers
So what kinds of printers are there? How do they print and how are they
different? The terminology is still a bit confusing. The American Society
for Testing and Materials (ASTM International) recently came up with
the following categories:
Material extrusion is also known as Molten Polymer Deposition
(MPD), Fused Deposition Modeling (FDM), or Fused Filament
Fabrication (FFF); these extrude a gooey material out in layers to
build up the proper shape. This is the class of printers that includes
most hobbyist 3D printers. They work like the simulator you just
used. These can use plastic, metal wire, wax, sugar, frosting,
chocolate, cookie dough pasta, pizza, and even corn chips.
Material jetting is also known as photopolymer jetting. Like an
inkjet, this printer squirts liquid photopolymers at the right moment,
which are cured immediately with ultraviolet light, layer by layer. The
object being built is supported by a layer of gel that is also applied by
the print head, so overhang is not a problem.
Binder jetting uses a two part system. A thin layer of composite
material is spread across the print bed. Then, an inkjet-like printing
head sprays a binder fluid and possibly colored ink, which combine
with the composite material to produce solid colored and sometimes
textured objects. This can be plastic, gypsum, or metals, such as
copper, tungsten, bronze, and stainless steel. For metals, a second
step is needed to make them solid. The binder is removed and metal
is infused where the binder used to be.
Sheet lamination printers may use materials, such as paper or
metal, and will color, cut out, and glue layers together into objects.
Vat photopolymerization is also called Stereolithography (SLA).
Photopolymerization printers use light to cure liquid material into the
right shape. This process uses resins, wax, or liquid plastics for the
material. It may use a laser or a high resolution DLP video projector
similar to one you would hook up to your computer to give a
PowerPoint presentation.
Powder bed fusion is also known as Granular Materials Binding.
These printers use a laser or heat to fuse layers of powder into the
right shape. These can use metal, ceramic, gypsum, or plastic

powder. There are several subtypes of powder bed fusion printers.
Selective Laser Sintering (SLS) is used with thermoplastics, wax,
and ceramic powders. A thin coat of powder is spread across the
printing bed. Then, the printing head prints the layer by fusing
selected areas with the laser. The printing bed then drops down.
Another coat of powder is added and the laser prints the next layer.
Selective heat sintering (SHS) uses heat instead of a laser and can
be used with thermoplastic powder.
Direct Metal Laser Sintering (DMLS) or Selective Laser Melting
(SLM) is a subcategory of selective laser sintering. The laser beam
melts the metal and makes solid parts with metal alloys like
aluminum, iron, stainless steel, maraging steel, nickel, chromium,
cobalt, and titanium alloys. In theory, it can be used with most alloys.
Directed energy deposition, also known as Electron Beam
Melting (EBM), is similar to SLS, but uses an electron beam instead
of a laser. The high heat generated by the electron beam allows use
of pure metal powder such as titanium alloys, and can make high-
detail, high-strength objects that do not need any postmanufacturing
heat treatment.
Question: Earlier, I mentioned a company named Made In Space, which
is making a 3D printer to be used in zero gravity. What kind of printer is it
making?
1. Directed energy deposition
2. Vat photopolymerization
3. Material extrusion
4. Powder bed fusion
Answer: Option 3, material extrusion is correct. Extruding a material
avoids liquid or powder floating around in zero gravity.

Basic parts of a 3D printer
As you have observed, there are a wide variety of 3D printers. But there
are some parts they all have in common.
The printing bed is what the 3D object is built upon.
The printing head holds the laser, the printing jet, or the hot end of the
extruder.
And then there are controls to position the printing bed and the printing
head in relation to each other; one control for the X dimension, one for
the Y dimension, and one for the Z dimension.
There are no hard and fast rules for which controls the printing bed and
printing head have. The Cube printing head is controlled in the X
dimension only and the printing bed is controlled in the Y and Z
dimensions, whereas the MendelMaxPro puts X and Z controls on the
printer head and controls the printing bed only in the Y dimension.

How is a 3D printer controlled?
Generally, the answer is stepper motors. Stepper motors are motors
that move in small discrete angles of rotation instead of spinning like
most regular motors. This allows you to make definite, easily repeatable
motions. It is also one reason why there are minimum sizes on the detail
that you can make. A 3D printer can't make detail smaller than one step
of the stepper motor.
Then, through wires, drums, gears, and threaded rods, the motion of the
stepper motor is scaled to fit the medium that the printer uses. A hobbyist
printer that uses a filament of the ABS or PLA plastic that feeds off of a
reel will provide the kind of detail that those plastics can support. A high-
end stereolithography printer may get much finer detail.
The next graphic is a diagram of the insides of a stepper motor. The rotor
is in the center. It rotates and is attached to a shaft that pokes out of the
motor. The stators are attached to the outer shell of the motor. They are
wrapped with copper wire and an electrical current is run through the wire
to give each stator a negative charge, a positive charge, or no charge as
indicated in the next graphic. In the graphic, red represents a positive
charge, the blue is a negative charge, and the grey has no charge.
The rotor in the center has 50 teeth. The stators around the outside have
a total of 48 teeth. It's this imbalance in the number of teeth that allow the
stepper motor's rotor to walk around step-by-step.
The positive charge of the rotor is attracted to the stator teeth that are
negatively charged. In the following screenshot, you can see that the
rotor teeth aren't well aligned with the uncharged stator that is counter-
clockwise from the blue stator. To do a single step, the stepper motor
controller changes the negative charge from the blue stator in the
following screenshot to the stator just counter-clockwise to it. Then, the
teeth in the rotor try to align with that stator. So, the rotor moves just a
little, a step. To continue moving more steps, the stator with the negative
charge keeps moving to the next stator, as follows:

Note
To see how this works, open the interactive
4597_01_StepperDemo.blend file and follow the instructions.
The stepper motor is then attached to a control belt or a shaft with a
screw thread to give the printer precise control of the print head and the
printing bed. There may be one or more stepper motors controlling a
single axis.

The Peachy printer
Well, I said I wouldn't recommend any printers, and I won't. But, the
Peachy printer deserves a special mention in this book for three reasons.
One, it has no stepper motors. Two, it's the only 3D printer I have heard
of that actually uses Blender as the printer driver. Three, it uses the
Blender files as object files.
It is a vat photo polymerization system. Instead of stepper motors, the
laser beam is controlled in the X and Y axes by a sound form generated
in Blender that moves two mirrors. The Z axis is controlled by a salt water
drip system. The dripping is monitored to tell Blender which Z depth the
printer is working on and the salt water is used to float the resin so that
the resin rises to surround the part of the object that is being formed at
that moment. It should be on the market as of April 2014.

Modeling dimensions
You must know the maximum dimensions that the printer that you intend
to use can print. If your object is too large, then you must break it down or
find a larger printer. One printer may handle a volume of 10.16 x 10.16 x
10.16 cm (4 x 4 x 4 inches), another 22.86 x 25.4 x 17.78 cm (9 x 10 x 7
inches). A service may be able to do 100 x 45 x 25 cm (39 3/8 x 17 3/4 x
9 13/16 inches) in one material, but only 15 x 15 x 15 cm (5 15/16 x 5
15/16 x 5 15/16 inches) in another material. When you are planning your
object, know what you will print it with. The links later in this chapter will
help you figure out which printer(s) are big enough to make what you
want to build.
Pay attention to the minimum size as well. Small parts get lost. You may
want to attach tiny parts to a sprue, as used in plastic model kits, to keep
them together. Most services will list the minimum size parts that they can
work with.

File sizes
As with rendering in Blender, you need to consider how large your files
are. You probably won't run into a problem here, at least at first. Some
services set a maximum file size of 50 to 64 MB, and a polygon count
limit of 500,000 polygons.

Polygon sizes
Another thing to consider is the size of the polygons. There is a minimum
size of detail that each printer can handle. It makes no sense to have
polygons much smaller than the minimum detail size. The print won't be
better, but the file size will be larger. It makes more work for the slicing
program and the printer, which slows things down and may lower the
print quality.

Factors affecting precision
We like to imagine that when we make an object in Blender that
everything will just be exactly the size we specified. But this is not always
the case. 3D printers exist in the real world and there are a lot of things
that can affect how precise your object is:
The size of the object
How well the printer is set up
The quality of the printer to begin with
Any sloppiness in the system
Whether the printer controls the X, Y, and Z dimensions equally well
Printing speed affects how much extruded material is laid down at
any given spot
How recently the printer was calibrated, and how well it was
calibrated
How consistent the extrusion and material flow is
The ability of the software to control the system
How much flex there is in the printer
The ambient temperature of the room
These things can result in objects being stretched or squashed, holes not
being round, objects that should fit not fitting, straight lines being wavy,
gaps between the layers, and more. The burden of keeping these things
under control falls to the person with the 3D printer, but it's important to
keep in mind when you are designing your objects.

Controlling printing costs
Most printers charge by the cubic centimeter of material made. Some
may add a "handling" charge. So you, as a designer, want to minimize
the amount of material used. A few things you can do are as follows:
Shop around for a printer who charges less.
Use a less expensive material.
Make your object smaller.
Hollow out your object.
Remove unneeded material, in the lunar lander, the fuel tank clusters
were built as a single hollow object instead of individual tanks. The
landing pad is not a solid block; underneath, it's like an upside down
soda crate. The rocket motors are not solid.
Delete unneeded details.

Materials for 3D printing
There are hundreds of materials used in 3D printing, such as plastics,
ceramics, metal, and food. Here are some of the more common
materials.
Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene (ABS) is currently the most popular
plastic for 3D printing. It is lightweight, shiny, easily extruded, strong,
impact resistant, and heat tolerant. It's used for the interiors of cars,
household appliances, and more. It requires high heat to extrude. While
being extruded, it does give off fumes, so the printer should be in a well-
ventilated room. ABS is not generally recycled.
Polylactic acid (PLA) is made from lactic acid, the same chemical that
builds up in your muscles when you exercise hard. PLA melts at a lower
temperature than ABS. The PLA objects are stronger and take wear
better than ABS. PLA is used for things, such as plastic cups, fabric, and
microwave trays. PLA is derived from natural sources, such as corn
starch, tapioca roots, or sugar cane. It is recyclable.
Aliphatic polyamide (nylon) is a family of materials. Invented as a
synthetic silk, some early uses were in ladies stockings and parachutes.
Nylon is cheap, tough, flexible, and can be dyed. Nylon is less brittle than
ABS and PLA, so it can take a beating. It's also somewhat self-
lubricating, which is good for making gears. But nylon is also more prone
to warping, and is stringier when printing than ABS or PLA. Nylon is
recyclable.
Polyethylene terephthalate (PET), also known as Dacron or polyester,
is often used for soda and water bottles because the plastic's chemicals
don't leak into the food. It is strong and it takes a lot of wear, so it's used
for recording and adhesive tape as well as "space blankets". PET is the
most recyclable of the plastics.
LAYWOO-D3 is a composite of wood and polymer. It is similar to PLA,
but after printing, it has the smell and appearance of wood. The surface
can be rough or smooth on the same object.

Photopolymers are a class of liquid resins that cure or harden with a
laser or light. Some create a solid that resembles ABS in its properties.
Many are proprietary. Some are toxic, some are safe.
Stainless steel, bronze, tungsten, and copper are used in binder jetting
and mixed with a binding agent, which is later removed and replaced with
metal.
Tool steel, stainless steel, cobalt, chromium, nickel, titanium, and alloys
of these are used in direct metal sintering and directed energy deposition
printing to make solid metal objects.

3D printing and your health
Since 3D printing is a new technology, there may be problems that we
don't know about. ABS sometimes gives off fumes when being printed
because of the heat, but seems to be stable afterwards. Other materials
like PLA can be food safe. But there are a lot of variables; the object
could be dipped in acetone to smooth the surface, or there could be other
additives mixed into the materials. The more common problem is that 3D
printing processes may not create a completely smooth solid surface, so
germs can find nice places to live. Currently, the only 3D-printed
materials considered food safe are glazed ceramics and polished metals
such as stainless steel. For printing food, chocolate, frosting, and so on,
you need to make sure that the materials and the printer itself are food
safe.

What happens at a 3D printing
service?
It's a good idea to know at least a little about what happens between the
time a 3D printing service receives your file and when you receive your
object back. Here, Bart Veldhuizen, founder of BlenderNation, takes us
on a tour of the Shapeways factory. It's very good for seeing all the steps
involved in 3D printing:
http://vimeo.com/dezeen/print-shift-shapeways-3d-printing-tour

Summary
You have learned a little about 3D printers and 3D printing. You
discovered some opportunities for you to use your Blender design skills
in 3D printing. We covered the fundamentals of how a 3D printer works
and the different kinds of printers that there are. And you discovered that
3D printers can handle a wide variety of materials from wood, to plastic,
to titanium. You learned a bit about factors to keep in mind when you are
designing objects for 3D printing in Blender, such as the sizing and
tolerances.
3D printing is an industry just taking off. It's time to join in the excitement
and learn how to use Blender to make objects for 3D printing. Let's go!

Chapter 2. Measuring and
Texturing Techniques for 3D
Printing
You have been given a general introduction to 3D printing. Now it's time
to dive into preparing a file to be used in 3D printing. We will cover using
the Ruler/Protractor to measure objects and texturing the model.
We'll be covering the following topics in this chapter:
Precision modeling in Blender
Using the Ruler/Protractor tool
UV unwrapping
Texture painting
External textures
Precision modeling in Blender
With 3D printing, every object comes out of Blender into the real world. It
must fit on the printing bed of a real 3D printer. It has real walls that must
support the weight of the object; it's got real limits on how small or large
the detail can be.
Nothing in the real world is perfect.
Note
One note on the instructions in this book. Sometimes several keys
need to be pressed at the same time. These will be represented with
a plus between them such as Shift + D. Press both keys at the same
time.
Pressing several keys in sequence will be represented by the word
"press" followed by the keys separated by spaces, such as press S Y

0 Enter. You would press the S key, then the Y key, then the 0 key,
and finally the Enter key.
Some commands may use both, such as press Shift + D Enter. Here,
you would press the Shift and the D key at the same time. Then you
would press the Enter key.
1. Open Blender or open a new file by navigating to File | New File in
the upper-left corner of the Blender window.
2. With the mouse over the 3D View, press Z to get into wireframe
mode.
3. Press Shift + D Enter to copy the default cube. Press S and use the
mouse to scale up the cube. Do it quickly; don't worry about exact
size. Select the original cube with the RMB (Right Mouse Button)
and scale it quickly. Press A to deselect them.
4. Press Shift + A and navigate to Mesh | UV Sphere. Select UV
Sphere. Press Shift + D Enter. Press G and move the sphere quickly
in a direction. Select the other sphere and move it quickly in the
same direction. Press A.
5. Press Shift + A. Navigate to Mesh | Monkey. Select Monkey. Press
Shift + D Enter. Press R and rotate the monkey quickly. Select the
other monkey and rotate it quickly. Press the Home key.
You notice that your cubes are not quite the same size. Your spheres did
not end up in quite the same place and your monkeys did not rotate to
quite the same angle. Unlike usual Blender 3D modeling where
dimensions are precise, with 3D printing, there is always some variation
in conditions that affect the 3D print. Different printers, different batches
of plastic, different materials, and different temperatures all cause
variations in the final print.
Allowing for these differences is called tolerance. It means that a
measurement should be X but we'll accept it within a certain closeness of
X. Some of the things that can create this tolerance were discussed in
the Factors affecting precision section Chapter 1, Designing Objects for
3D Printing.

Note
Look at the header at the bottom of the 3D View. Note the 20 small
boxes, arranged in groups of five. These boxes control the display of
individual layers. The top 10 boxes control layers 1 to 10. The bottom
10 boxes control layers 11 to 20. Layer 11 is on the left and layer 20 is
on the right. A dark grey box means that the level is visible. A light
grey box means that the level is not visible. A grey dot indicates that
there are objects in that level. An orange dot indicates that an active
object is in that level. Pressing the Shift key while making a selection
allows multiple levels to be selected.
For any questions about Blender's controls, the Blender 3D Basics book
has an excellent introduction to the Blender user interface; check out
Chapter 2, Getting Comfortable Using the 3D View, to learn how to set up
and use basic controls such as the numpad, mouse, or keyboard on Mac,
PC, and Linux. In this book, we will be giving instructions using the
standard Blender controls.
Using the Ruler/Protractor
When building objects, you have to keep their dimensions and the ability
of the 3D printer to reproduce them in mind. One of the handiest tools is
a new tool called the Ruler/Protractor. It gives you a lot of power for
measuring items, but can also be a bit tricky. Its operation may improve
as it becomes more mature.
To learn how to use the Ruler/Protractor tool, let's use it to check how
well a sword fits into its scabbard:
1. Load the file 4597OS_02_Sword.blend from the code bundle of this
chapter. Press Z for wireframe display. Press the Shift button and
select layer 11 to see the scabbard. At this point, the hilt is not
important, so press Shift and select layer 2 to hide it.
2. Press 7 on the numpad to view the blade from the end. Look at the
upper-left corner of the 3D View. If you are not in Ortho mode, then
press 5 on the numpad. Zoom in so you can see the scabbard and

the blade clearly. It looks pretty good. The scabbard and the blade
don't interfere with each other, and there is a little room all around
the blade.
3. In the Object Tools subpanel of the 3D View tool shelf, click on the
Ruler/Protractor button. Move to the left edge of the blade and
press Ctrl + LMB (Left Mouse Button). With the LMB pressed,
move the cursor to the right edge of the blade. Then release the
LMB. You will see a readout of the distance measured as seen in the
following screenshot: 
Don't worry if the readout that you see is not the same as in the
screenshot. The Ruler/Protractor tool can be a little bit quirky, and we
will discover how to get reliable measurements from it.
Press 1 on the numpad. Look at the left-hand end of the ruler. Zoom
out so you can see to the end of the blade. Obviously, the ruler, as seen
in the left-side of the following screenshot, isn't just measuring across the
blade.
Select the left end of the ruler with the LMB and move it toward the top
end of the blade. When you get it close, release the LMB and zoom in
again. Pick up the end again with the LMB and move it close to the end
of the blade. Press and hold the LMB and now press the Ctrl button and
move the ruler end into place at the end of the blade. When you already
have the LMB pressed, pressing the Ctrl button snaps the cursor to the
nearest edge or vertex as seen on the right of the following screenshot.
Repeat this with the right end of the ruler if needed.
Press 7 on the numpad to see the end view again. Adjust the ends of
the ruler if needed. I measured just over 3.3 mm as seen in the following

screenshot: 
Now, move the cursor to the top of the blade. Press Ctrl + LMB and
move down to the bottom of the blade. Move the cursor a little below the
blade and notice how the cursor jumps between the blade and the
scabbard. The Ctrl button snaps the end of the ruler to the nearest edge
or vertex.
Press 1 on the numpad. Look at the new ruler carefully. Notice that the
new ruler started at the same Z measurement that the first ruler was at.
The last point has snapped to the corner of the blade. Rotate the view a
little so you can see the first point separately from the first ruler. Select
the first point and move it toward the end of the sword as seen on the
right of the following screenshot. Press 7 on the numpad. Select the point
again and start moving it. Then press Ctrl as you move it, and move it to
the top of the blade. Then, after it snaps in place, press 7 and 1 on the
numpad alternately to make sure it's in place. It's a little tricky, but now
you can get an accurate measurement.
Note
Ctrl + Z to undo an operation does not work with the Ruler/Protractor
tool. If you want to delete a ruler, press the Delete button.
The ruler is not associated with any specific object. You can snap its
measurement between two different objects. Now that you have some
idea of how the ruler works, try it for measuring the gap between the

blade of the sword and the scabbard.
Now, check the vertical gap between the blade and the scabbard.
Since you already have a measurement on the blade, start measuring
from the scabbard.
You'll notice that the numerical readouts are not in mm or cm. These
readings are in µm (micrometers or microns). I measured about 22
microns, or 0.022mm; that's tiny.
The specifications from one 3D printing service say that the accuracy for
a detail-plastic copy of the sword would be ± 0.1 mm or 100 µm.
Remember the last section, where you moved, rotated, and scaled the
objects. The accuracy means that the measurement for the thickness of
the sword could be 0.1 mm bigger than you intended, or it could be 0.1
mm smaller than you intended. The same holds true of the scabbard. You
could get the sword turning out smaller and the scabbard turning out
bigger; in this case, you'd have no problem. But if the sword turned out
bigger and the scabbard turned out smaller, it wouldn't fit. This is called
stacking tolerances, and must always be considered when making a
multipart assembly. The following table lists possible outcomes of
variations in the sword and scabbard:
 
SWORD
SCABBARD
 
Bigger Correct Smaller
Bigger ???
Okay
Okay
Correct Bad
Okay
Okay
Smaller Bad
Bad
???
Do you think that the scabbard should be enlarged? Remember that the

clearance between the sword and scabbard is about 1/5 of the minimum
accuracy that the printing service might guarantee.
Using the Protractor
The Ruler/Protractor tool measures angles as well as lengths. Let's see
how to do that:
1. Move the cursor to the middle of the ruler that you used to measure
the distance from the top of the blade to the bottom of the blade.
2. Click the LMB and move the cursor toward the edge of the blade.
The ruler becomes a protractor as seen in the following screenshot.
It tells you the angle in degrees:
Measuring the thickness of an object
The Ruler/Protractor tool has one more trick. It will measure the
thickness of an object:
1. Press the Enter key to get out of the Ruler/Protractor mode and save
your rulers. Go to the Visible Layers display on the 3D View
header. Press Shift and click on layer 2 to display the hilt of the
sword. Zoom out so you can see the hilt well.
2. In the Object Tools subpanel of the 3D View tool shelf, click on the
Ruler/Protractor button. Then choose an end of one of the rulers
you have made. As you move it, press the Shift key and watch it
automatically measuring the thickness of the object. Press the Esc
key when you are done.

Remember that you can save these rulers and protractors or dispose of
them. I have told you about deleting individual rulers. To get rid of all of
them, just press Esc and the Ruler/Protractor mode will turn off and not
save any of your tools. Press Enter and the rulers and protractors will be
saved and Blender will exit Ruler/Protractor mode.

Preparing the model for coloring
The first difference to realize between making colors in Blender for 3D
printing and the usual way of making colors in Blender is that you have
less control. All you can control is the diffuse color. You cannot make the
object shinier by adjusting the specularity, you cannot add transparency,
or any of the other controls. In this respect, a 3D printer is like a regular
printer. All it understands is a colored pixel. If you use transparency, at
best it will show you the bare physical material underneath. Shininess,
specularity, and so on are all properties of the material that you are
printing with.
There are three ways to color your model:
Leave the model uncolored and select a colored material when
printing
Assign colors to the polygons
Assign a texture map to the polygons
Leaving the object uncolored
Many 3D printers do not handle color. This includes printers that print
metal, extruded plastic, or liquid resins. The final color of the object
comes from the material selected. Many colors and materials are
available. You can dye or paint the objects after they are printed. The
lunar lander in Chapter 1, Designing Objects for 3D Printing, was printed
in this way. It was printed in white nylon then dyed yellow and grey. Next,
the joystick was painted red and black with acrylic paint and a small
image of the lander's touchscreen from a standard color copier was glued
into place. Blender exports an STL file for printers like these.
Vertex colors
Assigning color to the polygons is the easiest way, but it's also the most
limited because your minimum detail is constrained by the size of the
polygon. When you select a polygon and assign a color to it, the color is
assigned to all vertices of the polygon:

1. Open Blender or press Ctrl + N for a new file. With the default cube
selected, press the Tab key to go into edit mode.
2. In the Properties panel header on the right, select the shiny ball. This
opens the Materials panel.
3. In the Diffuse subpanel, set the color to red.
4. Click on Assign. The first material assigned to an object is assigned
to all polygons by default.
5. Click on the plus sign to the right of your red material. Click on the
New button. Set the Diffuse color to yellow.
6. Press A to deselect all of the vertices. Press C and then move the
mouse over four vertices in a polygon while pressing the LMB. Press
the RMB when you are done and click on the Assign button.
7. Press F12 to render the scene and view it. Then return to the 3D
View window by pressing Esc.
That's pretty simple, and when it is printed, you will have a red cube with
one yellow side.
Vertex painting
Blender has painting tools included to do vertex painting, which is much
easier than just selecting faces and assigning them colors and produces
a better result. Vertex painting allows you to set the colors vertex-by-
vertex. Then, the computer blends the color between the vertices. So,
between a blue vertex and a white vertex, the edge and part of the face
will go from blue to light blue to white. Let's see how vertex painting
works:
1. Press Tab to go from Edit Mode to Object Mode. Press A to
deselect the cube. Press Shift + A and navigate to Mesh |
UVSphere from the menu. Select UV Sphere. Press G and use the
mouse to move the sphere to the right of the cube. Press the LMB to
stop moving the sphere. Zoom in so you can see the sphere better.
2. Press V to go into vertex paint mode. The sphere turns white, and in
the toolbox on the left of the 3D View, there is a color palette and
paint brush controls. Choose a color and set the radius of the paint
brush to 15. Put the cursor over the sphere. Press the LMB and
move the mouse to paint some of the sphere.
3. Change the color and paint more of the sphere. Choose a third color

and just press the LMB to do small dabs of paint. Notice how it only
paints at the vertices, not everywhere.
4. Go to the Properties panel. Make a new material. Scroll down to the
Options subpanel and check Vertex Color Paint. Press F12 to
render.
Pretty easy! You can see how the colors are centered at the vertices and
blended between them. Feel free to play a little more with coloring and
rendering.
Building texture maps
The most powerful way of adding a texture to your object is by using a
texture map. Do not use a texture map and vertex colors on the same
object, especially if the two methods share a vertex. The 3D printer may
not choose the right material.
Tip
Make sure you delete any unwanted materials before exporting your
object for 3D printing. This is easy. With your object selected, just
select the materials button on the Properties window header. It's the
one that looks like a chrome ball. At the top will be a list of the
materials assigned to the active object. If you click on them, the
Preview window will display a preview of that material. To delete the
material, simply click on the minus button to the right of the list of
materials.
Texture mapping gives you the best control over the color of any part of
the surface. It also gives you controls so you can assign the locations of
different regions of the texture and use another program such as Gimp or
Photoshop to create fine details.
Choosing colors for printing
The most common colored 3D printing material is gypsum, sometimes

called sandstone. The following graphic is a chart of colors used in
printing full color sandstone: 
You get them from the printing service. The chart on the left-hand side of
the preceding diagram shows you a range of colors. The bars on the
right-hand side are 3D-printed samples printed with the same colors.
Look at the printed samples to choose the printed color you want. Read
the index number off of the samples. Then, use a program such as Gimp
or Photoshop to get the exact RGB values of the indexed color which you
can use to specify the exact color in Blender.
This is a useful tool because the colors printed are not always exactly as
you specify them. You can see this if you look at one color in the previous
chart and samples. And indeed, the printing service specifies that no two
samples may be exactly the same. So it's a rough guide, not an exact
one. A copy of the chart on the left-hand side is in your download kit as
4597OS_02_01.png.
UV unwrapping
UV mapping is a way of assigning a section of a graphic image to the
face of a polygon. This is done by a process called unwrapping the UV
mapping. The letters U and V describe the horizontal and vertical axes of

a bitmap image. The letters U and V are used to avoid confusion with the
X, Y, and Z geometry coordinates.
Creating UV maps may seem intimidating, but it's not that difficult. To
unwrap the UV mapping, you select a polygon and press the UV Unwrap
button. Then, Blender assigns a pair of UV coordinates to each vertex of
the polygon and gives them an initial value. Next, in the UV/Image editor
window, an image is displayed with an overlay that shows where the UV
coordinates for the polygon are with respect to the image. You then move
these coordinates around until they are over the section of the image that
you want to be displayed on the face of that polygon.
Next, you will do some texture mapping onto a model of a dragon that we
will be working on for most of the rest of the book. We will decorate its
wings, its chest, and its head.
UV mapping the wings
We will start by applying UV maps to the wings. This will give us good
practice in moving the UV coordinates as groups:
1. Open 4597OS_02_Dragon_Untextured.blend from the code bundle.
2. In the Properties panel, turn the visibility controls for the Mirror and
Subsurf modifiers off; they look like eyes. Half of the dragon will
disappear and it will look very blocky. The Mirror and Subsurf
modifiers will be used in Chapter 3, Making a Blender Model that's
Ready to Print, and Chapter 4, Making Strong, Light Objects with the
Solidify Modifier, but they are not needed now.
3. Press Tab to get into Edit Mode. Press 3 on the numpad to get a
side view. Click on the Face Select button.
4. The lower-left window is the UV/Image Editor. Select Image from
the header and then choose New Image from the popup menu.
5. For the dragon's general color, I chose the color square D12 from
the chart in the preceding image. Its value is 0.224 Red, 0.58 Green,
and 0 Blue. Use those values for the background color of the image.
The size should be 1024 x 1024. Then, click on OK. Press Home to
see the entire image.
6. In the 3D View, pan down and zoom in so you can see all of the
leading edge of the wing as shown in the next screenshot. Press C

and select the faces of the front of the wing as seen in the next
screenshot. Do not select the faces of the very edge of the wing, just
these 5 faces on the side of the wing. Press the RMB to stop
selecting.
7. This is the membrane of the wing. The narrow sections on either
side of the membrane are the dragon's fingers. Select the rest of the
membrane areas, as seen in the following screenshot: 
Select Mesh from the 3D View header. Then, navigate to UV Unwrap |

Unwrap from the pop-up menus. Select Unwrap. In the UV/Image
Editor, your green image disappears and is replaced by the UV
coordinates of the polygons that you have just unwrapped, as seen in the
following screenshot: 
To get your image back, select the Browse Image to be linked button
which is to the left-hand side of the New button, as seen in the previous
screenshot, and select your green Untitled image from the pop-up menu.
Press Home to see the whole image.
In the Properties panel, select the Object Data button that looks like a
triangle. In the Vertex Groups subpanel, click on the plus button and
create a new vertex group. Name it Texture - Outer Wing. Assign the
faces to it. This assigns all the faces that are currently selected in the 3D
View to the vertex group.
Using Vertex Groups to organize your sections of texture is very
important. It means you will never have to go through selecting the faces
again. This gives you a lot of flexibility if you make a mistake and greater
control when working with the UV maps.
The first thing that you notice when you look at the UV/Image Editor is
that the mapping of the UV coordinates does not resemble the shape of
the wing. You want to reorganize the UV coordinates so that they do:
1. Find the section that resembles the first membrane that you
selected. Select one UV coordinate on it with the RMB. Press L and
the whole membrane section is selected, as seen on the left-hand
side of the following screenshot: 

2. Now, rotate this group of UV coordinates into the same orientation
that the faces are in the 3D View window. Press R and rotate the
coordinates so they are at the same angle as in the 3D View. Press
S and scale them so they cover a little less than a quarter of the
height of the green image. Press G to move them to the top-left
corner of the image as seen in the right-hand side of the preceding
screenshot.
3. Select the next section of membrane in the same way as you
selected the first. It's the upper-left one that you have not modified,
as seen on the left-hand side of the following screenshot: 
4. Rotate, scale, and move it so it is snug with the first membrane
section as seen on the right-hand side of the preceding screenshot.

Leave a gap between them where the fingers of the wing should be.
5. Next, repeat this with the third membrane. It's the one in the lower-
left corner. There is a trick with this one. If you look carefully, you'll
see it's backwards in X. So, first press S X -1 Enter. This will flip the
UV coordinates along the x axis. Then rotate, scale, and move it into
place next to the other two membranes.
6. Now move, rotate, and scale the fourth membrane into place.
7. Repeat this with the membrane between a finger and the dragon's
body. Now it looks like a wing, as seen on the left-hand side of the
following screenshot: 
Good. Since the UV coordinates are now laid over the image in a shape
like the faces of the wing, when you paint the wing, you will know which
part of your image is mapped to which part of the wing. Now, to help us
remember which section of the image has already been used, let's
outline it:
1. There are two buttons labeled View in the UV/Image Editor header.
Choose the one in the center of the header with the icon of an
image. Select Paint from the pop-up menu.
2. Press N to get the UV/Image Editor properties panel. Scroll down to
the Paint subpanel. Set the color to red. Set the radius of the brush
to 5.
3. Use the Ctrl + MMB (Middle Mouse Button) to zoom into the part of

the image where you see the UV faces and Shift + MMB to pan.
Outline the faces as done in the preceding screenshot. You are just
marking the area where the UV coordinates of the outer wing are so
you will know what areas of the image are still available to put the
other UV coordinates that you create.
4. Click on the button labeled Paint and choose View from the pop-up
menu.
Congratulations, you have texture mapped the outer side of the wing.
Now it's time to do the inner side:
1. Move the cursor over the 3D View window. Press Ctrl + 3 on the
numpad to see the other side of the dragon. In the Vertex Groups
subpanel of the Properties panel, click on the plus button and create
a vertex group named Texture - Inner Wing.
2. Press A to deselect all the faces. Press C and select the faces of the
inner side of the wing membrane.
3. Assign these vertices to the Texture - Inner Wing group. Now, UV
unwrap the inner side of the wing membranes just as you did for the
outer side. Use the UV Unwrap command, display your Untitled image,
and move the UV coordinates. Be sure to start building your
mapping from the upper-right corner of the image at about the same
size as the outer wing was mapped. Do each section as before.
4. If you get stuck and you can't figure out which of the membranes is
which, make sure you have assigned the vertices to the Texture -
Inner Wing group. Then, in the 3D View, press A to deselect all
faces and then select a face from the membrane whose UV
coordinates you want to move. They will appear in the UV/Image
Editor and you can note where they are. Then, go to the Vertex
Groups subpanel and click on Select to have all the faces of the
inner wing appear.
5. Once all of the membranes are in place relative to each other, press
A in the UV/Image Editor to select all of them then scale the whole
so it is about as large as the outer wing as seen in the following

screenshot: 
6. Paint an outline around the inner wing to mark where it is.
7. Save your Blender file. Then, go down to the UV/Image editor
header. There is an * next to the word Image. This means that the
image in the UV/Image editor has been changed since it was last
saved. Click on Image then choose Save As Image from the pop-up
menu. Save it in the same folder as your Blender file. You never
know what kind of folder structure the printer is using, so it's best to
keep them together.
UV mapping the belly
Now we map the dragon's belly. This will give us practice in modifying
individual UV coordinates.
Now, it's time to texture the dragon's belly:
1. Press A to deselect all the polygons. Press C and select the column
of polygons from the dragons, chin down to his bottom as seen in the
following screenshot. Don't select the polygons on his tail.
2. Make a new vertex group named Texture - Belly and assign the
vertices to it.

3. Unwrap the UVs and display your image again.
4. Move the cursor over the top row of edges in the UV/Image Editor.
Press Alt + RMB to select the top row of edges. Press S Y 0 Enter.
This will put all of the selected UV coordinates at the same height.
5. Repeat these steps for the bottom edges. The edges will now be
parallel.
6. Now, move the UV coordinates of the bottom row one-by-one so that
the vertical edges are straight up and down. After selecting a UV
coordinate, pressing G X before you move it will limit your motion to
the X direction and make control much easier.
7. Select all of the UV coordinates. Move them almost to the bottom as
seen in the following screenshot. Leave a little room below them
though.
8. Go into Paint mode and outline where the top row of UV coordinates
are. Return to View mode from Paint mode.

9. The reason for making the top and bottom rows parallel is that now if
you make scales all of the same size in your art, they will appear
smaller when they are at the neck than at the bottom of the dragon's
belly.
UV mapping the edges of the wing
Mapping the edges of the wings is very similar to mapping the belly and
the wings. First you work with groups of UV coordinates, then you work
with individual UV coordinates:
1. In the 3D View window, press A to deselect all polygons. Rotate your
view so you can see the edge of the dragon's wing. Select the edge
of the membranes as seen in the following screenshot. Do not select

the edge of the fingers: 
In the Properties panel, make a Texture - Edge Wing vertex group.
Assign the faces to it.
UV unwrap them. What a mess. What we want to do is line all of the
UV coordinates into two nice rows. Remember about deselecting all of
them and choosing some faces in the 3D View as a way to get your
bearings? Start at the front of the wing and work your way to the back.
Move the faces of the edge so that they are in an approximate line.
With the mouse over the UV/Image editor, press A to deselect all the UV
coordinates. Press Shift + Alt + RMB to select the entire top row section-
by-section as seen in the following screenshot: 
Press S Y 0 Enter. Then, press G Y and move the top row up a little so
that the two rows do not overlap.
Select the bottom row only. Press S Y 0 Enter. Press G Y and move
that row up so it is about as thick as the UV coordinates were originally.
Select all of the UV coordinates. Get your image background displayed
in the UV/Image Editor.
Scale the UV coordinates so that they fit in the image area. Move them

just above the area for the belly, as seen in the following screenshot.
Paint a red line on the graphic at the top of the area they occupy to mark
where they are.
Note
Note the solitary orange dot near the lower-left corner of the following
screenshot. This is a quirk of Blender. You selected only the faces of
the edge of the membranes. But, since the faces on the end of the
fingers shared vertices with the edges of the membranes, Blender
also picked them up. Since you did not choose them, it did not assign
them any area on the UV map. It just lumped them all together in one
spot. This will work; just make sure that they are all mapped to an
area with the background green. Use the C or B command to select
them if you want to move them.
UV mapping the head
With the UV coordinates of the head, we will learn to adjust the UV
coordinates to emphasize certain details, giving us more of the texture
map to use on these details and allowing us more creative control:
1. Save your image file and your Blender file.
2. With the cursor over the 3D View window, press A to deselect all
faces. Now, select the polygons of the dragon's head. Do not select
the area under the chin because you have already assigned that to
the belly. Do not choose any polygons on the back of the frill or the
neck. Rotate your view to be sure you get the nose, the corner of the
mouth, and all sides of the horns.
3. Make a vertex group, Texture - Head, and assign the vertices to it.
UV unwrap it and display the green texture map image.
4. Select all the UV coordinates in the UV/Image Editor. If the nose is
at the bottom, you will need to scale the dragon's head; if you do,
press S Y -1 Enter to get it into the proper orientation. Now, scale,

rotate, and move the UV coordinates so that they fill the remaining
available area in the texture map as seen in the following
screenshot. Draw an outline around it: 
Save your files. You now have your dragon texture mapped.
You may want to take some time to make adjustments to the mapping.
Have the UV coordinate sets cover as much of the image area as
possible. The greater the area that these sets cover, the more pixels are
mapped to them. The more pixels that are mapped to a face, the more
detailed the texture can be.
Note
You may have noticed that we have not texture mapped the entire
dragon. In the following chapters, we will modifying some of the
geometry to put a pen cup into his back. This will destroy the UV
mapping of any faces that are involved. Only the faces on the center
of the dragon's back are affected, not the wings. But Blender does
provide a default UV mapping in this case. It takes the four corner
pixels of the texture map and uses the average of these four pixels as
the color for all unmapped polygons. So, make sure that none of your
UV coordinate faces cover the four corner pixels of the image.
Painting the texture map

It's time to paint your texture. You have a choice of methods. You can
continue to use the Paint tool in the UV/Image Editor, or you can export
your UV maps as a .png file for use in another program such as Gimp,
Photoshop, or whatever you prefer.
Exporting the UV Layout for use in an external
paint program
Exporting the UV Layout lets you have the power of the best graphics
programs for making a texture map. When you export the UV Layout, it is
in the form of a .png file that you can read into another graphics program.
One layer will be an image of all of the UV coordinate locations. Make an
image on other layers, using the coordinate layer to guide you. Turn the
coordinate's layer off when you are done and save a bitmap copy of the
finished graphic. Then, bring it back into Blender as a texture map for the
object.
It's easy to export your UV map. Display all of the UV coordinates that
you want to show up on the map and use the Export UV Layout function:
1. To export your UV map, change from Paint to View.
2. In the Vertex Group subpanel of the Properties panel, for each of
the vertex groups, choose the UV map and then click on the Select
button.
3. Select UVs from the UV/Image Editor header. Choose Export UV
Layout from the pop-up menu. Put this map into the same directory
as your Blender file. Choose a name and then press the Export UV
Layout button in the top-right of the page. This will create a .png file
with a layer that you can use as a guide to creating a texture map for
your dragon.
Painting your texture in Blender
You can also create a texture map using Blender's paint tools. This may
be more convenient, even though you don't have quite as much control
as you get in a dedicated graphics program such as Gimp or Photoshop.
Now you can paint the image in the UV/Image editor. You'll then save

your file and create a material that employs the UV mapping work that
you've done and mates it up to the texture map that you make:
1. To use the Paint tool, return to Paint mode. Paint the wings of your
dragon. Paint the outer wing, the inner wing, and the wing edge.
2. Return to View mode. Save your image file to a new name. It's time
to apply the texture.
3. In the Properties panel, select the Materials button in the header; it's
the one with the chrome ball on it. Click on the New button to make a
new material.
4. Now, click on the checkerboard button next to the Materials button.
Click on the New button. Click on the Type: button where it says
Clouds. Select Image or Movie from the pop-up menu.
5. Scroll down to the Image subpanel. Select Open. Choose the .png
file you just saved.
6. Scroll down to the Mapping subpanel. Click on the Coordinates:
button where it says Generated. Choose UV from the pop-up menu.
7. Press F12. You will render the dragon with its wings painted. Save
the file. Press Esc to close the rendered image.
Modifying the UV coordinates to add detail
You can also modify the UV coordinates to use more of the texture map
for more important details and use less of the texture map on less
important details. Here, you add more detail to the horn on his head by
adjusting the UV coordinates and painting on the texture map:
1. In the UV/Image Editor, zoom into the inner horn as seen on the
left-hand side of the following screenshot. It's kind of small. Get into
View mode. Move the UV coordinates out to cover more of the
texture map and organize them as seen in the center of the following
screenshot.
2. Next, go into Paint mode and paint it as seen on the right. You don't
have to copy what I did though. Then, return to View mode and save
the image to the same name as you did before.

3. In the Image subpanel of the texture panel in the properties window,
click on the button with the opposing arrows to reload the texture file.
Press F12 to render the dragon.
Using the Clone brush to add detail
Now, as a final touch, we will explore how to add better detail to the
texture map by bringing in an outside graphic and duplicating the patterns
from it.
1. In the UV/Image Editor, pan down to the area reserved for the
dragon's belly. Go into Paint mode. In the Paint subpanel of the
UV/Image Editor properties panel, choose the F Clone brush. The
brush selection is just below where it says Paint. Set the radius of
the brush to about 25 and the strength to 1.0.
2. In the UV/Image Editor header, select Image. Select Open Image
from the pop-up menu. Choose 4597OS_02_02.png in the Images
directory. Press Home.
3. Select your texture map with your wings from the header again.
4. In the Paint subpanel on the left-hand side of the UV Image
properties panel, click on the picture button next to Image:. Select
4597OS_02_02.png. The image of the scales will appear at the bottom
of the UV/Image Editor window.
5. In the UV/Image editor, zoom in to the area of the belly. Use the
Clone brush over the belly area.
6. When you have finished painting the clone area, return to View and
save the image. In the Image subpanel of the Properties panel,
refresh the texture as you did after painting the horn. Press F12 to
render the dragon.

Now, something may look odd. The dragon's body is a different shade of
green than its head is as seen in the following screenshot. Remember
about the pixels in the corner that I mentioned in the last information box?
You probably painted over two of the corner pixels when you used the
Clone brush. But that is easy to fix:
1. Return to Paint mode. Choose the F Brush. Click on the brush color
button below the color wheel. Another color wheel pops up. Click on
the eyedropper button on the popup color wheel. And click the
eyedropper cursor over a green part of the image. Set the radius of
the brush to 2 and the strength to 1.0.
2. Paint the bottom-left corner and right-corner pixels of the image
green. Don't paint into the UV area of the belly. If UV coordinates
extend to the corner, select them and move them up a few pixels.
Retouch the scales with the F Clone brush if needed.
3. Return to View mode. Save the image and the Blender file. Then
refresh the texture as you did after painting the horn. Rerender it and
it should be fine.
4. Now you can paint the eye, and if you want, paint a little blood on its
lips.

Summary
Now you have a good idea of how to use the Ruler/Protractor tool and
how to unwrap a UV map, paint a texture map, and apply it to the object.
You also learned how to use the F Clone brush to create a texture that is
more detailed than you would want to do with the Blender painting
system.
In the next chapter you will be introduced to what it takes to properly
make a Blender model for 3D printing. You will learn how to measure it
precisely and how to make the object so it will come out correctly into the
real world.

Chapter 3. Making a Blender
Model that's Ready to Print
You learned how to use the Ruler/Protractor tool so that you can do
precision modeling, and reviewed how to create colored and textured
objects. Now it's time to get to the core of this book and make a printer-
ready 3D model in Blender. This chapter teaches you how to make
models that are watertight, manifold, and will print well.
The following are the topics we'll be covering in this chapter:
Using the 3D Print Toolbox panel and the Mesh Analysis panel
Selecting the units to use
Making a model watertight
Making a model manifold
Dealing with distorted faces and sharp edges
Economizing-getting the most object for the least cost
What is special about 3D
printing?
Blender has always been able to make models suitable for 3D printing.
But starting with Blender 2.67, they included two new tools that make it
much easier, the Mesh Analysis panel and the 3D Print Toolbox panel.
We'll look at both of them and then use them to make sure our model is
fit for 3D printing.

Installing the Print3D toolbox
The Print 3D Toolbox panel is an add-on to Blender. The first thing you
need to do is install it and perform the following steps:
1. Open up Blender or select File | New | Reload Startup File, or
press Ctrl + N.
2. Open up the User Preferences panel, either by selecting File | User
Preferences... or by pressing Ctrl + Alt + U.
3. In the pop-up window, select Addons from the menu at the top.
4. When the Addons menu page appears, there are two sets of
menus, as seen in the following screenshot, one on the left and one
on the right. Select the Mesh button at the lower-left corner: 
Find the selection labeled Mesh: 3D Print Toolbox in the right-hand
menu. Check the checkbox. At the lower-left corner of the window, select
the Save User Settings button so that the 3D Print Toolbox will
automatically be included with Blender on startup.
Then click on the large red X at the upper-right corner of the window to
close the Blender User Preferences window.
Now the Print3D toolbox will be available to you in the Tool Shelf on
the left-hand side of the 3D View window.

Introducing the Print3D toolbox
The Print3D toolbox is located in Tool Shelf on the right-hand side of the
3D View window. It has 3 main sections, as seen in the following
screenshot. The first, on the left, has buttons for the checks you can
perform and statistics you can get about the object. The second, seen in
the center, has tools for cleanup and exporting the model. The third,
shown on the right, gives you a readout of what has been found and
buttons to display the affected polygons.

Introducing the Mesh Analysis
panel
The Mesh Analysis panel performs similar functions to the Print3D
Toolbox, but it has a more graphic interface and is more interactive. It's
located in the 3D View Properties panel on the right-hand side of the 3D
View window. You must be in edit mode to see it:
1. Open the 4597_03_Distorted Cube.blend file. This distorted cube is a
very bad candidate for 3D printing. Make sure you are in Edit Mode
and scroll down in the Properties panel of the 3D View window until
you see the Mesh Analysis subpanel.
2. Click on the Mesh Analysis checkbox. The Type: button says
Sharp. The distorted cube has become colored. Polygons that are
not too sharp are displayed in grey. The sharper the geometry, the
more the color goes from blue to red as seen in the following
screenshot: 
Rotate the cube around; look at the bottom as well as the point. The
two buttons below the Type: button mark the minimum and maximum
angles you are inspecting for. Play with their values. They let you choose
a range of values that you want to watch for.
Click on the Type: button and select Distortion. Rotate the cube and
notice the coloration. The two buttons below mark the minimum and
maximum angles you are inspecting for. Play with their values. Can you
see any distorted polygons?
Click on the Type: button and select Intersect. There are no degrees
to intersection; polygons either intersect or they don't.
Next is Thickness. It measures the thickness of the object. You can
choose a range with the min and max buttons. For a more graphic
display, select all the vertices, press W, and subdivide the faces of the
cube to about four or five cuts. Then inspect it again.
The last category is Overhang, which is a problem for material

extrusion printers like most hobbyist printers. You'll notice that initially, the
top surface of the cube is overhanging and red. Play with the min, max
buttons and select the different X, Y, and Z buttons. They define
overhang according to different axes.
The Mesh Analysis panel gives you powerful tools to use in determining
what needs to be fixed on your model to make it printable. You can adjust
the minimum and maximum values to trap a range of values which will
tell you a lot about the geometry.

Setting up the units of the scene
Metric units are the default standard of measurement in 3D printing. To
set up Blender for Metric scaling, navigate to the Blender Properties
panel and select the button with the lamp, sphere, and cylinder icon
from the header as seen in the following screenshot. Then, scroll down
until you see the Units subpanel. Select the Metric button, and then set
the Scale option to 0.001 (thousandths of a meter, or a millimeter).
Millimeters will be the scale we are using.
There is a reason for this. If you make something very tiny, like a detailed
HO scale train body and you use meters as your unit, you will be more
likely to run into rounding errors where the numbers you are using are too
small for the computer. They will get mangled and so will your model. Of
course, if you are modeling something bigger, like a full-sized copy of an
Aston Martin DB4, you may want to work in meters.
Note
There are several ways to see Ivan Sentch's ambitious Aston Martin
3D printing project. The builder has the following website and a
Facebook page. The website also goes into a lot of issues that people
making models for 3D printers face:
http://www.replicadb4.com/
https://www.facebook.com/ReplicaDB4
Designboom has a nice overview of the project with many good pictures

(http://www.designboom.com/design/3d-printed-aston-martin-db4-replica-
by-ivan-sentch/).

Making a 3D model that will print
Modeling for 3D printing is the same as any other modeling in Blender.
But there are no cheats. You have to be precise and orderly. Using the
Mesh Analysis panel hinted at the kinds of things we are looking to
eliminate, such as intersecting polygons, holes in the model, sharp
edges, polygons that aren't flat, and details that are too small or too
delicate. We are making objects for the real world and must always
consider that. We have to remember what material we are going to make
the part with, how large it is, and how precisely we have to fit it together
with other objects.
3D printing is an art, not a science. Many times, the only thing to do is to
try something and see if it works. A file that works with one printer or
material may fail with another. But there are considerations that are
universal. The two big words for 3D printing are watertight and manifold.
Making a watertight model
With 3D printing, we are trying to bring our Blender objects into the real
world. Real objects are solid. They have height, width, and depth. So, an
object modeled in Blender for 3D printing has to be solid as well. There
can't be any gaps between polygons. The polygons of an object must
enclose a volume of space completely. When they do, the object is called
watertight.
Consider a beach ball, as seen on the left of the following screenshot. It
surrounds a volume of air completely. There are no gaps in the surface. If
you throw it in the water, it will float because the water cannot get inside.
It's watertight.
If you cut the top off the beach ball, as in the center of the screenshot,
then throw it in the water, it does not completely surround a volume of air.
There's a big gap in the surface. Water can get in and it will sink. It's not
watertight.
But, if you give the beach ball a second inner wall, as seen on the right,

and then make sure that the inner wall and outer wall are sealed to each
other, then they completely surround a volume of air between the walls.
No water can get inside these walls, so it will float. It is watertight: 
You should also remember that you cannot control how well people will
be able to see your model. They can get up close with a magnifying glass
if they like. You can't cut corners the way you might if you are only
rendering an object. So, you want to make your model tight and pretty
anyway.
Making a manifold model
Manifold is a more mysterious term. The word doesn't come up in regular
conversation.
There are two conditions for being manifold:
A manifold vertex is the one that is connected to another vertex by
an edge
A manifold edge is the one that has exactly two polygons associated
with it
This may seem rather restrictive at first, but it's not. Non-manifold edges
are edges that have any other number of polygons associated with them.
This would include edges with zero polygons, one polygon, three
polygons, four, five, six, and more. They would be very confusing to a
printer.
Think about it. How could a printer print an edge without a polygon?
There is nothing to print. An edge that is associated only with one

polygon can't be printed either. A single polygon does not surround any
volume. When you have an edge with three or more polygons, the
outermost polygons will define a volume and any other edges will be
within the volume, as shown in the following screenshot. On the right-
hand side of the screenshot is a manifold edge attached to two polygons.
There are no conflicts and the polygons can contain a volume: 
Note
It should be noted that the two examples in the preceding screenshot
are meant to demonstrate only whether a single edge is manifold or
non manifold.
Inspecting objects to see if they are manifold or
non-manifold
This next exercise will give you some practice in identifying manifold
edges. You will get a number of objects to inspect. See what you think:
1. Go back to Blender and open the 4597_03_Distorted Cube.blend file
again. Press Z to set the display mode to wireframe. Look at it
closely. Can you find the edge that is shared by three polygons? Can
you find the two edges associated with only a single polygon? The
distorted cube is not manifold.
2. Press Tab to get into object mode. Press X to delete the distorted
cube.
3. Press Shift + A. Select Mesh | UV Sphere. Press Tab to get into edit
mode. Look at it closely. Observe that all edges share exactly two
polygons, no more, no less, even at the top and bottom. It is a nice

solid object, manifold, and can be 3D printed.
4. Look at the Mesh objects, Cube, Torus, and Cone; they are
manifold as well.
Finding problems that make a file non-manifold
Now that you've had a quick example of manifold and non-manifold
edges, it's time to use the Print3D Toolbox panel to find non-manifold
edges. You may use the file of the dragon that you made in Chapter 2,
Measuring and Texturing Techniques for 3D Printing, or you can use
4597_03_Dragon.blend from your download directory and perform the
following steps:
1. Load the file and make sure you are in Object mode.
2. Scroll down in the 3D View toolbox to the Print3D subpanel. Click on
the Solid button.
3. In the Output section of the subpanel, it says that there are 56 non-
manifold edges. Get in to Edit mode. Click on the Non Manifold
Edges button in the Output section of the Print3D subpanel to
display the problem areas.
4. Press Z to set the 3D View shading to Wireframe. You may want to
temporarily turn off the Mirror and Subsurface modifiers to make it
easier to see the non-manifold edges. The controls are in the
Properties panel on the right. Click on the wrench symbol in the
header to get the modifiers panel. Then, toggle the eye symbols for
the Mirror and Subsurface modifiers so they are a light grey.
5. Most of the non-manifold edges are because of the Mirror modifier
and lie on the YZ axis plane. There are 39 of them. Don't worry
about them. They will resolve themselves when you apply the Mirror
modifier in the next chapter. But there are seven other problems with
the dragon. The problem edges are displayed in orange.
These problems are typical of small errors that can happen in models.
They won't bother you if you animate in Blender, but will affect the 3D
printer. They are as follows:
A non-manifold vertex without an edge (this will not show up on the
count of non-manifold edges but might cause problems printing)
A non-manifold edge without any polygon

A non-manifold edge from a polygon to a single vertex
A non-manifold edge between vertices of two different polygons, but
not associated with any polygon
Four non-manifold edges surrounding a polygon (the polygon may
be unneeded)
Two vertices that are very, very close together and have separate
edges when they should be in the same location and share edges,
so they leave a tiny hole in the surface
A missing polygon causing a hole in the surface
Now you will begin to prepare the dragon for printing by eliminating the
non-manifold parts of the model. Compare the list to the problem areas
highlighted when you click on the Non Manifold Edges: button and one
by one eliminate the problems:
1. Open up a Text Editor window below the Blender Properties panel,
click on the button with the image of the spiral notebook to find a text
named Non Manifold Text. It has a list of the items you are to find.
You can use this to keep track of which problems you have found.
2. Find them and fix them. Every time you find one of the errors and fix
it, press the Solid button in the Print3D subpanel again to refresh
the list of non-manifold edges. Then, click on the Non Manifold
Edges: button to display what is still to be found. You'll see the count
go down to 39 as you remove problems. It is easiest if you work on
problems with edges first.
3. You can also use the command Ctrl + Alt + Shift + M to display non-
manifold edges.
Tip
To examine a vertex, edge, or face more closely, use the . key on the
numpad after you select a vertex, edge. The selected vertex, edge, or
face will then be the center of rotation for your view.
If you have searched and have not found the non-manifold vertex without
an edge, click on the Isolated button in the Cleanup section of the
Print3D subpanel. It removes any isolated edges and vertices. In the

Output: section, it will tell you Verts Removed: 1.
Fixing noncontiguous edges
Below the Non Manifold Edge: button, there is a button labeled Bad
Contig. Edges:. This is short for bad contiguous edges. It identifies
polygons that share an edge but do not make a smooth surface. The
following screenshot shows what this looks like. Most of the normals on
this surface are facing up as shown by the thin blue lines. A few of the
polygons have normals facing down. Their blue lines point away and are
hidden by the solid polygons.
The Bad Contig. Edges: function identifies adjoining polygons which
have normals facing in different directions by drawing the edge between
them in orange.
Now we will check the dragon for bad contiguous edges and eliminate
the problem. If this is not fixed, the solidify modifier in the next chapter
will not work properly:
1. Click on the Solid button again. Select the Bad Contig. Edges:
button and see orange lines snaking around the dragon. This means

that some of the normals on the dragon are pointing in the wrong
direction. These polygons are facing towards the inside of the
dragon, not the outside.
2. You can display all the normals by going to the Mesh Display
subpanel of the 3D View Properties panel. Click on the polygon
symbol under the label Normals: so that it is darkened. Set the Size:
to 0.1mm. If you set the 3D View shading to Solid and set the limit
selection to visible button, it will be easier to see which way the
normals point. You can see that the polygons within the edges
identified by the Bad Contig. Edges: point a different way than the
ones outside the edges.
3. Press A to select all the polygons.
4. Scroll up in the 3D View toolbox and find the buttons under the
Normals: heading. Click on Recalculate.
5. Click on the Solid button in the Print3D subpanel.
Look at the results for Bad Contig. Edges:. It should be 0 now. When
you finally apply the Mirror modifier, the dragon will be watertight and
manifold. Well done.

Typical problem areas with a
model
There are other problems your model may have, which can also prevent
it from being able to be printed by a 3D printer. They are as follows:
Degenerate geometry: With faces that have no area and edges that
have no length, these can often be fixed with the Remove Doubles
command
Distorted geometry: It has faces that are not flat
Improper thickness: It has walls that are too thin
Too sharp: It has edges that are too sharp, and will not print
correctly, or the object may break during or after printing because it
is too thin and fragile
Too much overhang: It has polygons that do not have proper
support and may sag, or break during printing on some printers
We will explore ways to fix these in this chapter and the next.
Fixing distorted polygons
A distorted polygon is one that is not flat. A 3D printer may or may not
have a problem with this. Following are the three things you can do with a
distorted polygon:
Flatten it
Turn it into triangles because triangles are always flat
Leave it alone and hope
When you export a Blender object to an STL file, the object gets
triangulated automatically, so the distorted polygons are fixed, but the
computer may not fix it the way you prefer. When you export a Blender
object to an X3D file to make a textured object, the object is not
triangulated.
Now, we'll examine the dragon for distorted polygons and see some of

the things that we can do to fix them as follows:
1. Turn off the normals display in the Mesh Display subpanel of the 3D
View window Properties panel so you can see the dragon better.
2. Click on the Distorted button in the Checks: section of the Print3D
panel.
3. Select the NonFlat Faces: button in the Output: section of the
Print3D panel. Note that it shows 14 nonflat polygons.
4. Select the highlighted polygon on the dragon's arm as seen in the
following screenshot: 
5. Navigate to the Transform Orientation button in the 3D View
header. Change it from Local or Global to Normal. Notice how the
3D Manipulator icon over the chosen polygon rotates when you
switch to normal. When it is set to Normal, you can see that the Z
axis points directly away from the surface of the polygon. The Z axis
is now the same as the normal and indicates a ray pointing
perpendicular to the surface of the polygon. Now any changes you
make in the polygon will be done with respect to the polygon's
normal.
6. To flatten the polygon, press S Z Z 0 Enter. The letter S is for scale.
Pressing Z twice tells Blender that you are not scaling in the global Z
axis but in the local Z axis, and 0 says to scale it to zero. Enter
executes the command.
7. Click on the Distorted button again. Note that the NonFlat Faces
button now shows only 13 distorted faces. When you click on it, that
polygon is no longer highlighted.
8. Rotate the view so you can see under the dragon. There is a

polygon at the bottom of the dragon's arm, highlighted as shown in
the following screenshot. Fix it in the same way you just fixed the
first polygon: 
9. Click on the Distorted button again. Note that the NonFlat Faces
button now shows only 12 distorted faces. The polygon that you
flattened is no longer highlighted.
10. Now, rotate your view of the dragon so that you can see the head.
There is a distorted polygon in between the horns, as seen in the
following screenshot: 

11. Get into vertex select mode. Choose the rear vertex at the base of
the horn. Press 1 from the numpad to get the front view in the 3D
View window.
12. In the Preferences panel of the 3D View, scroll down and check the
Mesh Analysis checkbox. Set Type: to Distortion and the range
from 45 to 90 degrees.
13. Distortion means that the polygon is not flat. The bending is
measured in degrees. Below the lower value, the polygon is just
displayed as a grey polygon. The lower number refers to the
minimum distortion that the Mesh Analysis panel will display as
distortion. The higher number refers to the maximum level of
distortion that will be displayed. Any distortion greater than or equal
to this number will also be displayed as red. This lets you set the
upper and lower limits to search for a particular extent of distortion.
In this case, I have allowed distortion below 45 degrees, and am
tracking up to 90 degrees of distortion.
14. Move the vertex down and to the left as seen in the following
screenshot. Use the color changes provided by the Mesh Analysis
panel as your guide. You can move it to where the distortion is less
than 45 degrees: 

15. Uncheck the checkbox in the Mesh Analysis display subpanel.
16. Click on the Distorted button in the 3D View toolbox again. Note that
the NonFlat Faces: button now shows only ten distorted faces.
When you click on it, that polygon is no longer highlighted.
17. Rotate the dragon so that you can see its side as shown in the
following screenshot: 
18. Select the largest highlighted polygon seen in the preceding
screenshot. Scroll up in the 3D View toolbox and select Deform:
Smooth Vertex in the Mesh Tools subpanel.
19. Click on the Distorted button in the Print3D toolbox again. Note that
the NonFlat Faces: button now shows only seven distorted faces.
When you click on it, that polygon is no longer highlighted.
20. Save your file to a unique name.
We've used several methods to smooth out distorted faces. These
include scaling to zero along the normal of the face, moving individual
vertices with the Mesh Analysis tool to guide us, and using the Smooth
Vertex tool. There is no best method as sometimes smoothing one face
will distort the surrounding ones more. And, as you saw in the last
exercise, smoothing one may also smooth the ones surrounding it.
The Print3D toolkit does have one cure-all for distorted faces, pressing

the Distorted button in the Cleanup: section will triangulate all the faces
of the object and eliminate any distortion. However, our dragon uses the
Subsurface modifier. The vertices we are working with now are the
control vertices for the final surface. So, we won't triangulate the faces
just now.
Blunting sharp edges
Sharp edges are pretty obvious. You know them when you see them.
Sometimes they are okay to print, sometimes they are not. The problem
is that the thinness of the material at the edge may allow the part to break
in printing, shipping, or use. So, how sharp is acceptable depends on
what material you select and how thick your material is. Stainless steel
holds a better edge than sandstone. Some plastics hold finer detail than
stainless steel.
There are two kinds of sharp features on an object, long thin edges and
points. Let's examine an object that has both of these and complements
our dragon well, a sword:
1. Press the Tab key to get into Object mode. Select the fifth layer.
Press Home to zoom in.
2. Select the sword. Press the Tab key to get into Edit mode. The
vertices of the hilt are all hidden to make working on the blade
easier. Make sure that the limit selection to visible setting is off and
its button is light grey.
3. Press Ctrl + 7 on the numpad to see the blade from the bottom and
zoom in so that the blade fills the window.
4. Scroll down to the Mesh Analysis subpanel in the 3D View window
Properties panel. Check the Mesh Analysis checkbox. Select the
Type: button to Sharp. Set the lower limit to 20 degrees and the
upper limit to 90 degrees.
Note
The lower limit of the Mesh Analysis button's Sharp Type: tracks the
minimum angle that you are declaring to be a sharp edge. The upper
limit is the largest angle you want to track. The difference between

distortion and sharpness is that distortion is an angle of folding within
a polygon. Sharpness is folding between two polygons. One thing that
may be counter intuitive is that a 20 degree angle is a sharper angle
than a 90 degree angle. But remember that a 180 degree angle is a
straight line. 90 degrees is a right angle.
As you have probably guessed, the tip of the blade and the edges are the
sharpest parts. They appear red as in the top of the following screenshot.
So, the angle is about 20 degrees at the edges. Rotate the view a little so
you can see the tip of the blade and the edges.
The edges of the fuller, which is the depression in the center of the blade,
are blue because there is a greater angle between them and the fuller, in
contrast to the gentle angles within the fuller which show up in grey as
seen at the bottom of the following screenshot: 
1. Press Ctrl + 7 on the numpad again to see the base end of the
blade. Use the Ruler/Protractor tool to measure the thickness of the
blade from top to bottom, on either side of the fuller.
The thickness is about 0.44 mm. According to the specs for printing
in nylon, the minimum thickness is 0.7 mm. So, this blade is going to
need to be thicker. And it would be good if it was less sharp so that

the edge of the blade is stronger. But, we still want a bit of a sharp
edge just for looks. What we need to do is to make the fuller wide
enough so that the blade will be strong. We will make it 0.9 mm
thick. Then, we need to make the edge of the blade thick enough to
be relatively strong, and add a point to the edge so it at least looks
sharp.
2. Press Esc to get out of the Ruler/Protractor tool. Press the Tab key
to go into object mode, press A to deselect the blade. Press Shift + S
and select Cursor to Center.
3. Now press Shift + A and make a cube. Make the cube 0.9 mm x 0.9
mm x 0.9 mm in size. This is just a little larger than the minimum
thickness. You can type in the values in the Transform subpanel of
the 3D View window Properties panel. Then, select the blade again
and go back into Edit mode. You can see the cube as a size
reference for the blade.
4. Go into Edge Select mode and press the Alt key while selecting the
edge of the blade. You want to select the entire edge where the
blade is the sharpest.
5. Press V, and then Enter to rip the central edge into two separate
edges.
6. Switch to Face Select mode. Press B and use the border select to
select all the edges of the upper half of the blade. There are a couple
of small polygons right at the tip of the blade so be sure to get them.
Zoom in after selecting to make sure that you have selected them.
7. Press G Y and move the top half up so the top of the upper fuller is
level with the top of the reference cube. You will see to two edges
still connected from the top half. Don't worry about them.
8. Now select the faces of the bottom half and move them down until
the bottom of the lower fuller is level with the bottom of the reference
cube, as seen in the following screenshot: 

Next, select the two edges that go between the top half and the bottom
half and delete them.
Select the bottom edge of the upper half of the blade with Alt + RMB.
Then select the top edge of the lower half of the blade with Shift + Alt +
RMB.
Choose Mesh on the View3D header then select Edges | Bridge Edge
Loops from the pop-up menus.
Select all the vertical edges you have just made by moving the cursor
over one and pressing Ctrl + Alt + RMB.
Press W and choose Subdivide from the pop-up menu.
Press Shift + S and select Cursor to Center, and then set the pivot
point to 3D Cursor.
Select all the edges of the blade's new center edge with Alt + RMB.
Press S X and move the edge out so the new sides of the edge are at
about 45 degrees as seen in the following screenshot. If you scale it
much wider, you will notice the edges of the sword turn red Press the
LMB when done: 
Now, as you can see in the preceding screenshot, some of the fuller is
still not as wide as the reference cube that you made. This is okay. We
made the reference cube a little larger than the minimum thickness for

nylon. You can use the Ruler/Protractor tool and the width of the
narrowest part of fuller should be just under 0.7 mm. It shouldn't be a
problem because the fuller was invented specifically to make a real
sword lighter without sacrificing strength. The material on either side of
the fuller is thick enough, and we have taken the edge and made it
thicker and blunter, so it should be strong enough as well.
Fixing the junction between blade and
hilt
Now we've made the blade wider but not the hilt. We should go and look
at where they join and patch up any problems, as follows:
1. Press 1 on the numpad, and then Home to display the entire length
of the sword.
2. Press Alt + H to show the hilt, or go to the 3D View header, select
Mesh | Show/Hide | Show Hidden from the pop-up menus.
3. Press Z to select solid shading. Turn limit selection to visible on.
Uncheck the Mesh Analysis checkbox.
4. Select an edge on the hilt next to the blade. Press . on the numpad
to center on that edge.
5. Rotate the sword so you can see the junction of the blade and the
hilt.
6. There are a few problems visible. The new edges you made for the
blade are not attached to the hilt. The edges of the hilt are only
attached to one side of the blade, so we need to go in and clean that
up. It's not difficult.
7. Change to Face Select mode. Select the four faces as shown on the
left side of the following screenshot. Delete them: 

Rebuild the junction of the blade and hilt similar to the faces on the
right side of the preceding screenshot.
Rotate the sword so you can see the other side of the blade. Repeat
rebuilding the junction between the blade and the hilt.
Now switch on the Mesh Analysis button again. You can see, as shown
in the following screenshot, that the sharpness is now confined to the
new edge that you just built rather than the whole blade except the fuller: 

Use the Print3D subpanel to ensure that the sword is watertight and
manifold. Save the file.

Economizing when 3D printing
In making the sword, we were introduced to the importance of making an
object thick enough so it doesn't break. But that is not all that we need to
be concerned with. The thicker the object is, the more material it requires.
If the printer is charging by the material used, this can be a major
consideration. I submitted the dragon to a 3D printing service several
times during the building process. The initial dragon model was solid and
it would have cost 224 percent as much to print as the final version where
the body was hollowed out using Solidify and a well for the pen cup was
created.
It also pays to shop around. Some local printers may charge you only 20
percent of what a national printer might. But they might not have the
temperature controlled printer rooms and paid maintenance engineers.
So, you need to see what works for you.
Blender has some tools to help you calculate the cost in the 3D Print
toolbox:
1. Look at the top of the 3D Print toolbox. Look at the top two buttons,
named Volume: and Area:.
2. Click on the Volume: button. At the bottom of the Print3D toolbox,
there is a read-out for the Volume: button of the sword. The volume
is about 0.453 cubic cm.
If the printer's price is $1.4 per cubic cm, the sword would cost about
$0.63 to print, plus a service charge for setup and so on, and shipping. If
the printer charges by the area, you can check that as well.
3D printing is an art. You may have to make changes to your model or
rebuild it entirely with an eye to bringing the price down. With the lunar
lander in Chapter 1, Designing Objects for 3D Printing, this included
steps, such as modeling all of the fuel tanks as a single unit instead of
individual cylinders. This removed the extra walls in the center of all the
tanks. But each cylinder also had a hole punched in the bottom, which
facilitated emptying out the extra printing material, but also took less
material. The landing pad was changed from a solid block and material

was removed from the bottom so it was more like a soda crate turned
upside down. The rocket motors were also rebuilt as hollow objects and
the framework holding the motors was changed from a series of cylinders
to single circles extruded along paths to make smoother objects.

Summary
In this chapter, you were introduced to the 3D Print toolbox and Mesh
Analysis panel. You have learned how to make a model watertight and
manifold so that it will print properly. Distorted polygons and sharp edges
shouldn't be a problem for you anymore. You found out how to control the
costs of 3D printing by minimizing the volume of the material in the
model.
In the next chapter, you will discover proper building techniques to make
a model strong, light, and precise. You will learn how to deal with
overhanging polygons, reorient your object if needed, and how to output
the file in STL and X3D formats.

Chapter 4. Making Strong, Light
Objects with the Solidify Modifier
You have started building an object for 3D printing. You were introduced
to the 3D Print Toolbox and the Mesh Analysis panel. You learned how to
make objects watertight and manifold and fix any problems with the
polygons. Now, it's time to complete the object by making it strong and
light using the Solidify modifier and cleaning up the model. You will also
learn about doing precision modeling, dealing with overhangs, and finally
you will learn how to export the completed file.
We'll be covering the following topics in this chapter:
Optimizing wall thickness
Making an object hollow using the Solidify command
Precision modeling—fitting two objects together
Dealing with overhangs and support
Exporting to STL and X3D
Optimizing wall thickness
Objects made with 3D printing are all subject to gravity. Failure to take
this into consideration will result in objects that break or droop. We
already worked a little with that in remodeling the sword, but it's time to
take a more in-depth look.
The first thing to do is to find out the minimum wall thickness
specifications for the material you will be printing in. You can find this
information on the Web. It differs for each material. For the dragon, which
will be printed in gypsum/sandstone, the minimum thickness is 2 mm for
a supported wall and 3 mm for a freestanding wall.

Using Solidify for proper wall
thickness
Now it's time to work with the dragon again. It's big, and so we need to do
what we can to decrease its volume and reduce the cost. To do that, we
will use a modifier called Solidify. What Solidify does is make a second
wall parallel to the original wall, but at an offset. It does a good job,
especially on simple objects. But our dragon is pretty complex, with thick
and thin parts. So, we are going to have to clean up the model after
finishing the Solidify operation.
In these following steps, we will investigate the Solidify modifier, apply it,
and separate the inner wall we have just created from the original outer
wall:
1. Open up the dragon file you were working on in the last chapter.
Press Tab to get into Object mode. Select Layer 1 and the dragon.
2. Rotate the view so you can see the front and side of the dragon and
center the dragon within the view so you can see it well. In the
Blender Properties panel, select the Modifiers button in the header.
3. Check the eye button for the Solidify modifier. Suddenly, the
dragon looks like it got attacked by a delirious cubist sculptor.
4. Whatever that is, it must be wrong. Open the Solidify modifier
subpanel and check Thickness:. Is it set to 2 mm? Hmmm, that
can't be the problem then. Let's figure this out.
5. Scroll up in the 3D View window and scroll the Properties panel up
until you can see what the Scale: of the dragon is. 10; there's the
problem. The modifier is getting scaled as well as the object, so it's
really giving the Solidify command a thickness of 20 mm, and not 2
mm. It's good that this was caught now. When you export a model
for 3D printing, its scale must be at 1, 1, 1 or you will have problems
getting the printer to print it at the proper size.
6. So, press Ctrl + A or select Object in the 3D View header and
navigate to Apply | Scale in the pop-up menus.
7. Now the size of the dragon is the same, but the scaling is 1, 1, 1 and
the dragon looks better.
8. Rotate your view of the dragon counter-clockwise and you can see

that it has a thickness inside.
9. We need two separate shells, not a solid object. One shell will
become the inner surface. The other will become the outer surface.
When they are finished and joined back together, they will define a
solid shape with walls about 2 mm thick, but it is hollow in the center,
like a ceramic vase. So look at the Solidify modifier panel and look
at the bottom. Uncheck the Fill Rim checkbox. Now there are two
separate surfaces.
10. Press the Apply button in the Solidify modifier panel.
11. We need to work on the inner shell, so switch to Edit Mode. Then
choose Mesh from the header of the 3D View window and navigate
to Vertices | Separate | By Loose Parts from the pop-up menus.
12. Return to Object Mode. Press Z to change to wireframe shading in
the 3D View.
13. Select the inner shell.
Analyzing and modifying the inner shell
Now, we must plan what to do to the inner shell of the dragon to prepare
it for use as the inner wall of the dragon's body:
The wing is like an unsupported wall and is pretty large. So, it should
be removed from the inner shell to give the greatest strength to the
wing of the outer shell.
The rear foot will be a supporting structure, so it should be strong. It
will be removed from the inner shell and the calf is scaled down to
strengthen it.
The front paw is a very large unsupported structure. For the best
strength, it will be removed from the inner shell.
The head has problems; the nose pokes backwards through the
outer shell. The horns need all the thickness they can get for
strength, so the inner horns must go. The neck, because it will have
to support so much weight, must be made thicker.
The tail needs some rebuilding.
So, let's get started in fixing up the inner shell. We need to prepare the
shell so we can see what we are doing better by giving it a different
material than we used for the outer shell:

1. Just to be sure that nothing gets missed, press the Z key to return to
solid shading.
2. In the Properties panel, choose the Materials button and open the
Materials panel.
3. Click on the minus button to the right-hand side of where it says
Dragon Skin to delete that material.
4. Press the New button below that to make a new texture. Name it
Dragon Guts and set the Diffuse color as R = 0.224, G = 0.58, and B
= 0.00. It is the color selected for the dragon's body in the second
chapter. Then, set the Specular Intensity to 0.
5. Now rotate the view and you can see the inner shell and the outer
shell. The inner shell is green, but there are a few places where they
intersect and you can see the grey of the outer shell. We will have to
fix this.
6. Select the outer shell of the dragon and press M to move it to layer
12.
7. Make only layer 1 visible. Press Z to return to wireframe mode.
Press 3 on the numpad to get the side view.
The first thing to do to the inner shell of the dragon is to remove the foot
and narrow down the calf so the foot can be a load bearing structure as
given in the following steps:
1. Select the inner shell of the dragon. Go into Edit Mode and choose
Vertex Select. Deselect all the vertices and press Shift + RMB to
select all the vertices of the top of the foot as seen in the following
screenshot: 
2. Press X to delete them. Select Vertices from the pop-up menu.
3. Select any vertex on the foot. Press L, which selects linked vertices,
to select all the other vertices on the foot. Press X to delete them.
4. Rotate your view so you are looking up at the stump.
5. Press Alt + RMB and select the four vertices at the bottom of the
stump. Press F to make a face on it.
6. Press Alt + RMB and select the edge loop above the stump. Set the

pivot point to Median Point, press S, and make the calf of the leg
narrower.
Next, the inner paw needs to be removed entirely so that the paw will be
as strong as possible since it is entirely unsupported. This is illustrated as
follows:
1. Pan up to the paw.
2. Select the edge loop, one loop from the body, as seen in the
following screenshot: 
3. Press X to delete the vertices and eliminate the paw as you
eliminated the foot.
4. Select the edges of the hole where the arm used to be by selecting
an edge of the hole by pressing Alt + RMB.
5. Press E Enter and then S 0 Enter. Then press W and choose
Remove Doubles from the pop-up menu. This extrudes a face,
scales it to zero, and removes the extra vertices. It's a handy generic
way of cleaning up areas of an inner shell.
Now, the wing must be removed from the inner shell. This is similar to
removing the paw. This is illustrated as follows:
1. Rotate your view so you can see the wing from the side, as shown in
the following screenshot: 

2. By pressing Alt + RMB, select the edge loop at the dragon's elbow
as seen in the preceding screenshot.
3. Eliminate the wing as you eliminated the foot and paw.
4. Next, select the five vertices as shown in the following screenshot
and delete them: 
5. Next, by pressing Alt + RMB, select the edges on the perimeter of
the hole you have created as seen in the following screenshot: 

6. Press E Enter and then S 0 Enter. Then press W and choose
Remove Doubles from the pop-up menu.
Next, it's time to work on the dragon's head. I mentioned that the nose
was a problem, so it will have to be removed. This is illustrated as
follows:
1. Press 3 on the numpad and pan the view so you can see the
dragon's head.
2. Delete the dragon's horns and fill the holes.
3. Press Ctrl + 3 on the numpad to get the Left Ortho view. Deselect all
faces.
4. Move the cursor just above and to the left of the nose. Press K and
move the knife tool down with the mouse while holding down the
LMB. This shows where the cuts to the faces of the snout will be, as
seen on the left-hand side of the following screenshot. Let go of the
LMB and then click on the LMB again. Then press Enter to complete
the cut.

5. Deselect all vertices and then press B and use the border select to
choose all of the vertices to the right of the ones you just cut. Delete
them as seen on the right-hand side of the preceding screenshot.
6. Rotate the view so you can see the other side of the dragon's head.
Fill in the holes in its upper and lower snout. Make a polygon to cap
the end of its snout as seen in the preceding screenshot.
7. Go into Object Mode. Display layers 1 and 12. Set the Viewport
Shading to Solid. Inspect the head.
8. There seems to be two places where the inner shell appears through
the outer shell as seen in the following screenshot: 
9. This shouldn't be. Press Z to get wireframe shading. Rotate your
view around the dragon's head. See if you can see what the problem
is.
10. I can't see any problem.
11. The two shells don't appear to conflict. Open the Modifiers panel in
the Properties panel. Darken the eye in the Subsurface modifier

subpanel.
12. Select the outer shell and do the same.
13. Press Z to get solid shading. Inspect the dragon again. It looks good.
So, there shouldn't be a problem after everything is done.
14. Select Layer 1 to display only the inner shell of the dragon once
more. Select the inner shell. Press Z to get wireframe shading and in
the Properties panel, click on the eye in the Subsurface subpanel
to turn the Subsurface modifier off.
15. To support the head, the walls of the neck should be extra thick. Set
the pivot point to Median Point. Return to Edit Mode.
16. Press Alt + RMB and select the first edge loop in the neck, as shown
in the following screenshot. Press S 0.6 Enter. This scales the neck
to 6/10ths of its former size: 
17. Repeat this for the other two edge loops in the neck.
The tail needs a little work. The geometry needs to be smoothed out a
bit. Look at the left-hand side of the following screenshot and you will see
that there seems to be a valley in the tail instead of it being nicely
rounded. The right-hand side of the following screenshot shows a couple
of vertices on the very tip of the tail that need to be moved to the left so
that they are the same side of the x axis as the rest of the model.

1. Press Ctrl + 1 on the numpad to get the back view. Zoom into the
tail.
2. For each of the four vertices highlighted in the left of the preceding
screenshot, select it and move it up a little to make a decent curve
as shown on the right-hand side of the screenshot.
3. Select the two vertices at the end of the tail, highlighted on the right-
hand side of the preceding screenshot, and move them so they are
both to the left of center.
4. The second vertex from the right on the bottom of the dragon is a
little low. Move it up in line with the others.
5. Press Home and rotate the view so you can see the open side of the
dragon.
6. Select all the edges on the open side of the dragon with Alt + RMB.
7. Press Shift + S and choose Cursor to Center. Set the pivot point to
3D Cursor. Press S X 0 Enter. Now that edge is snapped to the
center in the x axis.
8. Now it's time to do a final check on the inner and outer shells of the
dragon.
9. Switch to Object Mode. Make both Layer 1 and Layer 12 visible.
Make the Subsurface modifier of both shells visible. Press Z to
switch to solid shading.
10. Inspect the dragon and make sure that the inner shell does not
penetrate the outer shell. Notice the gap between the shells in the

neck area. It's thicker so the neck will be stronger, but there is plenty
of room in the inner neck so any excess material inside the head can
be shaken out.
11. Press Z to enter wireframe mode, select the inner shell and note the
differences between the two models. You've done well.
12. As a precaution, to ensure that the mirror operation will work
perfectly on the outer shell of the dragon, select the outer shell of the
dragon, go into Edit Mode, and then choose Edge Select. Press Alt
+ RMB and select the center perimeter of the shell as you did for the
inner shell.
13. Press Shift + S and choose Cursor to Center. Set the pivot point to
3D Cursor. Press S X 0 Enter. Return to Object Mode. Save the
file.
Now it's time to put things together. This is illustrated as follows:
1. Select the dragon's inner shell. Open the modifications panel of the
Properties panel. Make the Mirror modifier visible. Apply the
Mirror modifier.
2. Make the Subsurface modifier visible. Apply the Subsurface
modifier.
3. Select the dragon's outer shell. Repeat what you did to the inner
shell.
4. Inspect the two shells.
5. Use the Print 3D Toolbox to double check that the shells are solid
and manifold.
6. Make sure that Layer 1, Layer 12, and Layer 20 are turned on. Press
F12 to render the dragon. It should look just like it did in Chapter 2,
Measuring and Texturing Techniques for 3D Printing.
7. Save the file to a unique name.

Making the dragon useful
Your dragon is beautiful. Now it is time to make it useful and stick a pencil
cup in its back:
1. Press the Esc key to return to the 3D View in the largest window.
Display only Layer 1.
2. Select the dragon's inner shell. Go into Edit Mode. In the Mesh
Display subpanel, click on the display face normals as lines
button. A normal shows you which direction a polygon is facing.
Make sure that all the normals are facing outward and that the blue
lines used to represent them extend past the inner shell. If they are
not, select all the edges and use the Recalculate button in the Tool
Shelf. If the normals are not facing outward, the next step will not
work right.
3. Return to Object Mode. Open up the Boolean modifier subpanel.
Booleans are very powerful modifiers. They allow you to control the
shape of one object with another object. Here, we are going to use
the Boolean modifier to put a complex depression into the back of
the dragon. If you want an in-depth explanation of Boolean
operations, check Chapter 8, Making the Sloop of Blender 3D
Basics.
4. For the Object, select Pen Cup Boolean Inner Shell. Choose
Intersect as the Operation:. Click on the eye button so you can see
the Boolean operation. It should look like the following screenshot: 

Go to Layer 12. Select the dragon's outer shell. Once again, make sure
that the normals are facing outwards.
Return to Object Mode. Open up the Boolean modifier subpanel.
Choose Pen Cup Boolean Outer Shell as the Object. Choose Intersect
as the Operation:. Click on the eye so you can see the Boolean
operation.
If they both look good, apply the Boolean modifier to the outer shell.
Then go to Layer 1 and apply the Boolean to the inner shell.
Press the Tab key to go to Edit Mode. In the Tool Shelf, select
Normals: Flip Direction. This will be the inner section of the body, so
the normals must point towards the inside instead of the outside as they
usually do.
Save the file so you have a version for a material extrusion printer.
Cutting holes for removing extra printing
material
If you are using a printer that uses a powder or liquid for material, you will

need to cut holes out of the bottom so that the extra material can be
removed. This is not necessary if you are using material extrusion
printing like most hobbyist printers:
1. Return to Object Mode. Press Ctrl + 7 on the numpad. Display layer
12. Select the outer shell. Set the Shading to Solid. Go to Edit
Mode. Turn off the Normals: display. Display the faces.
2. The printing specification allows us one hole, two holes, or four
holes. They are thinking of round holes. In the interest of time, we
will make rectangular ones. But remember that stress-wise, round
holes are much stronger.
Note
To make round holes, what you do is create a cylinder of the
diameter of the holes you want. Line it up where the hole should
be; make sure it does not extend up into the pencil cup but does
extend below the dragon. Duplicate it, move the duplicate across
the x axis, and join the cylinders into a single object.
Select the outer shell, make a Boolean modifier, and choose the
cylinders as the Boolean object. Use a difference operation,
apply it, and then in the dragon, delete the vertices at the top of
where the cylinder is inside the dragon. Repeat these steps with
the inner shell, but delete the vertices at the bottom of where the
cylinder meets the dragon. Then, you connect the holes in a
similar manner to the way we connect the rectangular holes.
This is what I did for the sample dragon shown at the end of the
chapter.
3. For four holes, each hole should be 10 mm in diameter. Use the
Ruler /Protractor to measure the width of the central polygons.
4. It turns out that each polygon is about 5 mm on a side. So, to be
roughly equal to four 10 mm holes, we need to delete 16 polygons
as seen in the following screenshot: 

Select the faces and delete them.
Return to Object Mode. Display both Layer 1 and Layer 12. Select the
inner shell and go to Edit Mode.
Delete the faces in the inner shell that correspond to the holes in the
outer shell.
Go to Object Mode, press Shift, and select the outer shell as well as
the inner shell.
Press Ctrl + J to join them. Then press Tab to return to Edit Mode.
Choose Select Edges. Press Alt + RMB and choose the edges that
surround one hole of the inner shell. Press Shift + Alt + RMB and select
the edges that surround that hole of the outer shell as well.
From the 3D View header, choose Mesh and then navigate to Edges |
Bridge Edge Loops from the pop-up menus. Repeat this with the other
hole.
Check that the object is solid and manifold. Save your file.
Get into Object Mode. Turn on layers 12 and 20 to display your dragon
and make the camera and lamp active. Do a test render to ensure that all
your maps are in place.
Congratulations! Your dragon is done.
Precision modeling—fitting two objects

together
As a bonus, a tower shaped pencil/pen cup has been provided in layer 6.
It can be any material you prefer. But before you go and print it up, you
want to make sure it will fit into the dragons back. The clearance
specification for the material that the dragon is made from is 0.9 mm as
seen in the following screenshot. This means that there should be a gap
of at least 0.9 mm between the dragon and the tower if you want to be
sure that they won't bind: 
1. Get into wireframe mode. Use your measuring tools to check this.
The easiest way in this case would be to just measure the outer
width of the pencil cup at its bottom, and the inner width of the cavity
in the dragon's back. Make sure that the width of the cavity is at least
1.8 mm (0.18 cm) larger than the width of the pencil cup. If they need
to be modified, scale the pencil cup in X or Y as needed.
2. You can scale it in X or Y, then note the scale in the 3D View
Properties panel, and scale the pencil cup to the same percentage in

the other dimension.
3. Remember what you learned with the scaling of the dragon at the
beginning of this chapter. Be sure to apply the scale to the object
once it is the proper size. Other materials have different clearance
specifications, and painting parts and other finishing techniques can
also affect the clearance. Keep those factors in mind when sizing the
tower. Save the file to a unique name.
Dealing with overhangs and support
Material extrusion printers that extrude a filament of plastic have one
additional issue that most other printers do not, the issue of overhang.
Other printers use the raw printing material to support the object, but
material extrusion printers cannot. When the printer is printing a layer
without another layer directly underneath, there will be nothing to support
the plastic that is being laid down. A 45 degree angle is considered the
maximum angle that is acceptable. When the material extrusion printer
deposits the perimeter of a layer, often the perimeter is two extrusions
wide as seen in the following screenshot. The inner perimeter is
supported by the layer underneath and the outer perimeter is supported
by the inner perimeter: 
There are four solutions to this problem:
Modifying your object so there is less overhang
Finding an orientation for your object where there is no overhang;
printing it upside down or on its side

The slicers for some material extrusion printers automatically make a
support when they detect an overhang
Making your own supports
If the printer automatically makes supports
If you are using a material extrusion printer that automatically generates
supports, here's how to finish your object:
1. Open the file you saved for a material extrusion printer. Go into
Object Mode.
2. Select the inner shell then select the outer shell. Press Ctrl + J to join
them.
3. Save the file to a unique name. You are ready to print.
Making supports for your model
If you have no other choice, then you must make supports for your
model. This is not an exact science and you need to know what the
printer you are using can do to span a gap between supports. Your
dragon does not need holes in its bottom to shake out extra powder if you
are using a material extrusion printer. Nor do material extrusion printers
support textures; everything will be the same color:
1. Open the file you saved for a material extrusion printer. Go into
Object Mode. Select the outer shell.
2. Change to Solid View. Go into Edit Mode. Deselect all of the edges.
Turn off the Normals: display. Rotate the view so you can see the
bottom of the dragon. Check the Mesh Analysis checkbox in the 3D
View properties panel. Set the Type: to Overhang. Set limit the
selection to visible. The dragon will look similar to the following
screenshot: 

If you were making a support for the dragon, the Mesh Analysis would
look like the preceding screenshot. The colored areas have all been
flagged for needing support. The tail, bottom, and feet will all be on the
printer bed, so they don't need to be supported. The belly, paws, and
head do need support:
1. To build a support, first go into Face Select mode. Select a polygon
that has been colored red by the Mesh Analysis, say under the
dragon's chin. Press I to inset the face and then scale it down to
about the smallest size you think the printer can print, as seen on the
left-hand side of the following screenshot. This is to make the
support easy to break off after you have printed it and minimize the
sanding you will need to do.
2. Select the polygon in the center of the inset. Extrude it a little.
3. Set the pivot point to Median Point. Scale up the face to a size that

you think can support the weight.
4. Extrude it again as seen on the right-hand side of the following
screenshot. Press Shift + S and choose Cursor to Center. Set the
pivot point to 3D Cursor. Press S Z 0 Enter to make your support flat
on the bottom and extend down to the printing bed.
5. Now you have a support that goes all the way to the printing bed, as
seen in the following screenshot. Make as many as you need to hold
up the unsupported part of the object.
6. Go into Object Mode. Select Layer 1 as well as Layer 12. Select the
inner shell as well as the outer shell. Press Ctrl + J to join them.
7. Save your file.

Exporting your 3D object
There are two kinds of files for exporting Blender objects to be printed in
3D; STL files and X3D files. A few 3D printer companies offer plugins that
export Blender files to their website as well. STL files do not carry any
color information. Your color comes from the color material that is chosen
as I mentioned in Chapter 1, Designing Objects for 3D Printing. The
pencil cup is an example of this. No material was ever specified. It takes
its red color from the plastic chosen for printing. X3D files are really
interactive 3D file formats; they carry color information and 3D printing
bureaus accept them for printing.
When I am getting ready to export an STL or X3D file for 3D printing, I
like to put the object(s) to be printed into their own layer of the Blender
file, usually Layer 1.
Getting the orientation right
You've used Blender enough to be familiar with Blender's Z-Up axes as
shown on the left-hand side of the following diagram: 
Many 3D printers use a Y-Up orientation as seen on the right-hand side
of the preceding diagram. If the printer you are using is Y-Up orientation,
you want to rotate your object 90 degrees in X before exporting it so it will
be oriented correctly for printing. To be sure of how they orient their
geometry, consult the printing service.

Tip
An easy way to orient is to first select the object. Then, set the 3D
cursor to center. Set the pivot point to 3D cursor. Press R X 90 Enter
to rotate it.
Making an STL file
STL files do not have any color or texture information. They make all the
polygons into triangles so you are guaranteed to have no distorted faces.
The best way to double-check your STL file is to import your STL file
back into Blender and see what you have. The STL export process will
only export objects that are in a visible layer and selected. Unselected
objects in a visible layer will not be exported, nor will anything in a hidden
layer.
Making STL files is easy:
1. Select the object(s) that you want to print and make sure they are
visible. The STL export process will only export objects that are in a
visible layer and selected. Unselected objects in a visible layer will
not be exported, nor will anything in a hidden layer.
2. Select File at the top of the Blender window. Choose Export and
STL from the drop-down menus.
3. Select a name for the STL file then click on the Export STL button in
the upper-right of the window.
4. Follow the uploading directions on your printer's website.
Making an X3D file with a texture
X3D files do have color and texture information. The X3D exporter does
not triangulate your polygons. All objects in visible layers will be exported.
For X3D files, the printing bureau will want a ZIP file with both your object
file and the graphics file you using for your texture. Blender does not
combine the files and zip them up when it exports the file. You will have
to do it. As stated in Chapter 2, Measuring and Texturing Techniques for

3D Printing, it is best to put the graphic file in the same folder as the
Blender file. X3D files can be proofed either by importing them back in
Blender or by using an X3D viewer available on the Internet:
1. Choose which layers are visible. Select File at the top of the
Blender window.
2. Choose Export and X3D Extensible from the drop-down menus.
3. Select a name for the X3D file then click on the Export X3D button
in the upper-right of the window.
4. Then put the .x3d and texture files into a zip file.
5. Follow the uploading directions on the bureau's website.

Summary
As seen in the preceding screenshot, this is what the dragon looks like
when it returns from the printer. I customized it a little by coloring the
eyes and giving them Anime style double highlights, but leaving the horns
green, and I wanted to make the wings look as they are semi-transparent
by showing the blood veins.
In this chapter, you discovered how to use the Solidify modifier to
create a solid shell for the object and you learned proper building
techniques to make a model strong, light, and precise. You learned how
to make sure two objects will fit together correctly. You discovered how to
deal with overhanging polygons, and how to output the file in STL and
X3D formats. Congratulations and have fun doing 3D printing.

Appendix A. 3D Printing
References
As you continue learning about 3D printing, you may have questions
about the capabilities of certain 3D printers or printing services, or want
inspiration on what to make. These links should help you.
References
These are a variety of links I discovered while writing this book. They
include communities of 3D printing enthusiasts and links to keep up with
what's going on:
3Ders.org: 3D printer and 3D printing news available at
http://www.3ders.org/index.html
Case Western: 3D printing design fails available at
https://docs.google.com/document/d/142LhI2XYRTBgERyJMcjWn-
MIb5Txo20lFNfDYIFxzbM/view?pli=1
Mashable: 3D printing available at
http://mashable.com/category/3dprinting/
Oddee: 10 amazing 3D printed objects available at
http://www.oddee.com/item_98686.aspx
Soliforum 3D printing community: http://www.soliforum.com/
Top 3D printing sites on the web:
http://www.3ders.org/stats/20121209-top-100-websites-2012-in-
3dprinting-industry.html
Blender Key Commands:
http://waldobronchart.be/blenderkeyboard/
Using Blender on a Macbook:
http://devnulldb.blogspot.com/2012/07/using-blender-on-
macbook.html
3D printing services
The following are links to companies that create 3D printed objects from

the models you submit:
Find a local 3D printer near you, the smaller services:
http://www.makexyz.com/
Design Anything.com: Find custom figurines, awards, jewelry, and
more available at http://www.designanything3d.com/
I.Materialize: Find objects up to 6 feet in size, 70 materials available
at http://i.materialise.com/
Moddler.com: This is for industrial designers, fine artists, architects,
and inventors available at http://www.moddler.com/
Ponoko: 3D printing and laser cutting available at
http://www.ponoko.com/
Redeye: Service bureau for Stratasys available at
http://www.redeyeondemand.com
Sculpteo: This accepts Blender files directly available at
http://www.sculpteo.com/
Shapeways: To make, sell, and buy available at
http://www.shapeways.com/
ZoomRP: Emphasis on rapid available at http://www.zoomrp.com/
3D printers – hobbyist
The following is a list of 3D printers aimed at the 3D printing hobbyist. It's
not intended to be inclusive because new 3D printers are springing up
every day, but it includes the leaders as of now, and a few newcomers:
Afinia: http://www.afinia.com/3dprinters
Airwolf: http://airwolf3d.com/
Bukobot: http://bukobot.com/
Cube: http://cubify.com/cube/
Felix Printers: http://shop.felixprinters.com/
Lulzbot: http://www.lulzbot.com/
Makerbot: http://www.makerbot.com/
Makergear: http://www.makergear.com/
Mbot: http://www.mbot3d.com/
Peachy Printer: http://www.peachyprinter.com/
Printrbot: http://printrbot.com/
Robo: http://www.robo3dprinter.com/

Reprap: http://reprap.org/wiki/RepRap
Solidoodle: http://www.solidoodle.com/
Tinkerine Studio: http://www.tinkerines.com/
Trinity Labs: http://trinitylabs.com/
Type A Machines: http://www.typeamachines.com/
Ultimaker: https://www.ultimaker.com/
Up Mini: http://www.up3dusa.com/#!up-mini/c1hlm
B9 Creator: Liquid resin available at http://b9creator.com/
Form Labs: Liquid resin available at http://formlabs.com/
3D printers – industrial
The industrial 3D printers are the high precision, high quality, and high
price printers. But you can find a service that uses them and have the
service make your object:
3D Systems: http://www.3dsystems.com/
EnvisionTec: http://envisiontec.com/3dprinters/
Made in Space: http://www.madeinspace.us/
mCor Technologies: http://www.mcortechnologies.com/
Stratasys: http://www.stratasys.com/3dprinters
3D objects
Surely you want to make your objects yourself but sometimes it's good to
have a little help in modeling, especially if you are on a deadline. There is
no guarantee that the models listed are 3D printer-ready though:
60 sites with free 3D models:
http://www.blendernation.com/2009/03/23/60-sites-with-free-3d-
models/
Blender Models.com: http://www.blendermodels.com/
Blendswap.com: http://www.blendswap.com/
Next Wave Multimedia: Free Blender models available at
http://nextwavemultimedia.com/html/3dblendermodel.html
TF3DM free Blender models: http://tf3dm.com/3d-models/blender
Thingiverse: http://www.thingiverse.com/

Index
A
Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene (ABS) / Materials for 3D printing
Afinia / 3D printers – hobbyist
Airwolf / 3D printers – hobbyist
Aliphatic polyamide (nylon) / Materials for 3D printing
Alt + RMB / Blunting sharp edges
B
1 button / Using the Ruler/Protractor
B9 Creator / 3D printers – hobbyist
Bad Contig. Edges* button / Fixing noncontiguous edges
binder jetting / Types of 3D printers
Blender
precision modeling / Precision modeling in Blender
texture painting / Painting your texture in Blender
setting up, for metric scaling / Setting up the units of the scene
Blender Models.com
URL / 3D objects
Blendswap.com
URL / 3D objects
Bukobot / 3D printers – hobbyist
C
coloring model

preparing / Preparing the model for coloring
texture maps, building / Building texture maps
texture map, painting / Painting the texture map
Ctrl + MMB (Middle Mouse Button) / UV mapping the wings
Ctrl button / Using the Ruler/Protractor
Cube / 3D printers – hobbyist
Cube printing / Basic parts of a 3D printer
D
3D object
exporting / Exporting your 3D object, Getting the orientation
right, Making an STL file, Making an X3D file with a texture
Z-Up axes / Getting the orientation right
Y-Up orientation / Getting the orientation right
STL file, creating / Making an STL file
X3D file, creating with texture / Making an X3D file with a texture
3D objects
60 sites with free 3D models / 3D objects
Blendswap.com / 3D objects
Blender Models.com / 3D objects
Next Wave Multimedia / 3D objects
TF3DM free Blender models / 3D objects
Thingiverse / 3D objects
3D printer
working / How a 3D printer works
types / Types of 3D printers
parts / Basic parts of a 3D printer
controlling / How is a 3D printer controlled?
3D printer, materials
Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene (ABS) / Materials for 3D printing

Polylactic acid (PLA) / Materials for 3D printing
Aliphatic polyamide (nylon) / Materials for 3D printing
Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) / Materials for 3D printing
LAYWOO-D3 / Materials for 3D printing
photopolymers / Materials for 3D printing
3D printer, types
material extrusion / Types of 3D printers
material jetting / Types of 3D printers
Binder jetting / Types of 3D printers
sheet lamination printers / Types of 3D printers
Vat photopolymerization / Types of 3D printers
Powder bed fusion / Types of 3D printers
Selective Laser Sintering (SLS) / Types of 3D printers
Selective heat sintering (SHS) / Types of 3D printers
Direct Metal Laser Sintering (DMLS) / Types of 3D printers
Directed energy deposition / Types of 3D printers
3D Printing
features / What is special about 3D printing?
3D printing
using, opportunities / Opportunities to use your 3D printer
exercise / Opportunities to use your 3D printer
materials / Materials for 3D printing
health effects / 3D printing and your health
services / What happens at a 3D printing service?, 3D printing
services
watertight model, creating / Making a watertight model
manifold model, creating / Making a manifold model
noncontiguous edges, fixing / Fixing noncontiguous edges
cost, calculating / Economizing when 3D printing
hobbyist references / 3D printers – hobbyist
3D printing hobbyist
references / 3D printers – hobbyist

3D printing hobbyist references
Afinia / 3D printers – hobbyist
Airwolf / 3D printers – hobbyist
Bukobot / 3D printers – hobbyist
Cube / 3D printers – hobbyist
Felix Printers / 3D printers – hobbyist
Lulzbot / 3D printers – hobbyist
Makerbot / 3D printers – hobbyist
Makergear / 3D printers – hobbyist
Mbot / 3D printers – hobbyist
Peachy Printer / 3D printers – hobbyist
Printrbot / 3D printers – hobbyist
Robo / 3D printers – hobbyist
Reprap / 3D printers – hobbyist
Solidoodle / 3D printers – hobbyist
Tinkerine Studio / 3D printers – hobbyist
Trinity Labs / 3D printers – hobbyist
Type A Machines / 3D printers – hobbyist
Ultimake / 3D printers – hobbyist
Up Mini / 3D printers – hobbyist
B9 Creator / 3D printers – hobbyist
Form Labs / 3D printers – hobbyist
3D printing references
3Ders.org / References
Case Western / References
Mashable / References
Oddee / References
Soliforum 3D printing community / References
Blender Key Commands / References
Using Blender on a Macbook / References
3D printing services
Design Anything.com / 3D printing services
I.Materialize / 3D printing services
Moddler.com / 3D printing services

Ponoko / 3D printing services
Redeye / 3D printing services
Sculpteo / 3D printing services
Shapeways / 3D printing services
ZoomRP / 3D printing services
3D Systems / 3D printers – industrial
Design Anything.com
URL / 3D printing services
dimensions
modeling / Modeling dimensions
Directed energy deposition
about / Types of 3D printers
Direct Metal Laser Sintering (DMLS) / Types of 3D printers
Distorted button / Fixing distorted polygons
dragon
making, to use / Making the dragon useful
holes, cutting / Cutting holes for removing extra printing material
precision modelling / Precision modeling—fitting two objects
together
overhang issue, dealing with / Dealing with overhangs and
support
material extrusion printer,using / If the printer automatically
makes supports
model support, creating / Making supports for your model
E
EnvisionTec / 3D printers – industrial
Export STL button / Making an STL file
F

Felix Printers / 3D printers – hobbyist
file size / File sizes
Form Labs / 3D printers – hobbyist
G
G button / UV mapping the wings
H
Home key / Precision modeling in Blender
hot end simulator / How a 3D printer works
I
I.Materialize
URL / 3D printing services
industrial 3D printers
3D Systems / 3D printers – industrial
EnvisionTec / 3D printers – industrial
Made in Space / 3D printers – industrial
mCor Technologies / 3D printers – industrial
Stratasys / 3D printers – industrial
L
LAYWOO-D3 / Materials for 3D printing
LMB (Left Mouse Button) / Using the Ruler/Protractor
Lulzbot / 3D printers – hobbyist
M
Made in Space / 3D printers – industrial

Makerbo / 3D printers – hobbyist
Makergear / 3D printers – hobbyist
manifold model
creating / Making a manifold model
conditions / Making a manifold model
manifold edges, identifying / Inspecting objects to see if they are
manifold or non-manifold
non manifold issues, searching / Finding problems that make a
file non-manifold
material extrusion / Types of 3D printers
material jetting / Types of 3D printers
Mbot / 3D printers – hobbyist
mCor Technologies / 3D printers – industrial
MendelMaxPro / Basic parts of a 3D printer
Mesh Analysis checkbox / Fixing the junction between blade and hilt
Mesh Analysis panel
about / Introducing the Mesh Analysis panel
Mirror modifier / Finding problems that make a file non-manifold
Moddler.com
URL / 3D printing services
model
coloring, ways / Preparing the model for coloring
uncoloring / Leaving the object uncolored
vertex colors, applying / Vertex colors
vertex painting / Vertex painting
model issues
degenerate geometry / Typical problem areas with a model
distorted geometry / Typical problem areas with a model
improper thickness / Typical problem areas with a model
sharpness / Typical problem areas with a model
overhang / Typical problem areas with a model

distorted polygons, fixing / Fixing distorted polygons
sharp edges, blunting / Blunting sharp edges
blade and hilt junction, fixing / Fixing the junction between blade
and hilt
N
Next Wave Multimedia
URL / 3D objects
Non-Flat Faces button / Fixing distorted polygons
Non Manifold Edges* button / Finding problems that make a file non-
manifold
O
object precision
affecting, factors / Factors affecting precision
P
Paint mode / Modifying the UV coordinates to add detail
Paint tool / Painting your texture in Blender
Peachy Printer / 3D printers – hobbyist
Peachy printer / The Peachy printer
photopolymers / Materials for 3D printing
Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) / Materials for 3D printing
polygons sizes / Polygon sizes
Polylactic acid (PLA) / Materials for 3D printing
Ponoko
URL / 3D printing services
powder bed fusion
about / Types of 3D printers

precision modeling, Blender
about / Precision modeling in Blender
Ruler/Protractor, using / Using the Ruler/Protractor, Using the
Protractor
Preview window / Building texture maps
Print3D Toolbox
installing / Installing the Print3D toolbox
location / Introducing the Print3D toolbox
diagram / Introducing the Print3D toolbox
printing costs
controlling / Controlling printing costs
Printrbot / 3D printers – hobbyist
R
R button / UV mapping the wings
Redeye
URL / 3D printing services
Reprap / 3D printers – hobbyist
RMB (Right Mouse Button) / Precision modeling in Blender
Robo / 3D printers – hobbyist
Ruler/Protractor
using / Using the Ruler/Protractor
used, for angle measuring / Using the Protractor
object thickness, measuring / Measuring the thickness of an
object
Ruler/Protractor tool / Blunting sharp edges
S

60 sites with free 3D models
URL / 3D objects
S button / UV mapping the wings
Sculpteo
URL / 3D printing services
Selective heat sintering (SHS) / Types of 3D printers
Selective Laser Melting (SLM) / Types of 3D printers
Selective Laser Sintering (SLS) / Types of 3D printers
Shapeways
URL / 3D printing services
sheet lamination printers / Types of 3D printers
Shift + A / Precision modeling in Blender
Shift + Alt + RMB / Blunting sharp edges
Shift + D Enter / Precision modeling in Blender
slicing program / How a 3D printer works
Smooth Vertex tool / Fixing distorted polygons
Solidify modifier
used, for inner wall separation / Using Solidify for proper wall
thickness
inner shell, analysing / Analyzing and modifying the inner shell
inner shell, modifying / Analyzing and modifying the inner shell
Solidoodle / 3D printers – hobbyist
stacking tolerances / Using the Ruler/Protractor
stepper motors / How is a 3D printer controlled?
Stratasys / 3D printers – industrial
T
Tab key / Blunting sharp edges
texture maps

pronting colors, selecting / Choosing colors for printing
UV unwrapping / UV unwrapping
painting / Painting the texture map
UV Layout, exporting / Exporting the UV Layout for use in an
external paint program
texture painting, Blender
about / Painting your texture in Blender
UV coordinates modification, for detail adding / Modifying the
UV coordinates to add detail
Clone brush, using / Using the Clone brush to add detail
TF3DM free Blender models
URL / 3D objects
Thingiverse
URL / 3D objects
Tinkerine Studio / 3D printers – hobbyist
tolerance / Precision modeling in Blender
Transform Orientation button / Fixing distorted polygons
Type A Machines / 3D printers – hobbyist
U
Ultimake / 3D printers – hobbyist
Up Mini / 3D printers – hobbyist
UV/Image Editor / UV mapping the head
UV unwrapping
UV maps, applying to wings / UV mapping the wings
dragon�s belly, mapping / UV mapping the belly
wing edge, UV mapping / UV mapping the edges of the wing
head, UV mapping / UV mapping the head
V

Vat photopolymerization / Types of 3D printers
V button / Vertex painting
vertex painting / Vertex painting
View mode / Modifying the UV coordinates to add detail
Volume* button / Economizing when 3D printing
W
watertight model
creating / Making a watertight model
Y
Y-Up orientation / Getting the orientation right
Z
Z-Up axes / Getting the orientation right
ZoomRP
URL / 3D printing services

