THE THREE-FOLD LEGACY OF WILLIAM GLASSER, M.D.  
Robert E. Wubbolding, EdD  
Abstract  
The genius of William Glasser, MD is reflected in his three-fold legacy. He presented both 
professional helpers and the lay public with a theory of human behavior, a practical delivery 
system for immediate implementation and a streamlined, efficient organization that 
sponsored a process for certification in the practice of reality therapy. The theory is an open 
system allowing for expansion and growth. It is also congruent with the findings of current 
neuroscience research. The delivery system provides the opportunity for innovations in its 
application. Since his death, the international organization continues to grow and to 
establish institutes throughout the world.  
 
 
 
 
 
Surrounded by his wife Carleen and his son Martin, August 23, 2013 William Glasser, MD 
took his last breath and passed into eternity. He lived a full life serving others and 
contributing to the betterment of human beings around the world. My personal involvement 
with the William Glasser Institute through teaching and many other activities bears witness 
to my commitment and my focus on preserving and extending his legacy. This commitment 
began in 1986 as a member of his advisory board and subsequently as his personally 
appointed director of training (1988 – 2011). This article presents a summary of Dr. 
Glasser’s three-fold legacy: choice theory, reality therapy, and a worldwide organization.  
Overview  
In the 1960’s when he began writing and lecturing, no one could have predicted that the 
seeds he was sowing would grow into a detailed and evidence supported process that would 
be applied far beyond its North American origins. Individuals and institutions continue to 
implement the principles of choice theory/reality therapy on virtually every continent in the 
world.  
Throughout his life Dr. Glasser sought to demystify mental health and to create a path for 
people in the helping, educational, and managerial professions, as well as for the general 
public, to achieve a higher level of mental health by means of enhancing their relationships 
with friends, family, and society. He expressed his ideas in books, recordings, and lectures 
throughout the world. His listeners expressed astonishment at his non-technical, forthright 
language and the apparent simplicity of his ideas. However, he always stressed that though 
the ideas are simple, their implementation requires effort and a commitment to make more 
effective choices. His three-fold ingenious legacy consists in theoretical principles, a 
practical delivery system and a streamlined professional organization.  
Legacy Number One: Choice Theory  
Reality therapy was developed out of Glasser’s psychiatric practice in a mental hospital and 
a correctional institution. In order for it to receive the professional recognition it deserved, 
he believed this practical system needed a specific theory of human behavior to support it.  
 
International Journal of Choice Theory and Reality Therapy • Spring 2017 • Vol. XXXVII, number 1 • 17  

After searching for such a theory, he discovered control theory or control system theory as 
taught by William Powers (1973). He stated, “I was desperate for a theory when Powers 
came along” (Roy 2014, p. 183). This theory explains brain functioning with the analogy of 
a computer, the pre-eminent control system. It produces output as a result of input 
received. The work of Powers appeared to validate and explain the effectiveness of reality 
therapy.  
Because he altered the original control theory by placing emphasis on human choice, 
Glasser renamed it choice theory (1998, 2011). His highly theoretical explanation of control 
system theory described in Stations of the Mind (1980) and the more practical theoretical 
explanation, Control Theory (1984) added scholarly authority and justification for the practice 
of reality therapy. Pre-eminent in choice theory is the principle that all motivation of human 
behavior springs from current innate needs and more specifically from human wants. 
Human needs and wants thus energize the behavioral system for the purpose of impacting 
the world so as to shape it in a very personal and internally satisfying manner. 
Consequently, the external world does not determine or coerce human beings to inexorably 
select one or another course of action. Human beings have choices that depend on current 
desires as well as perceptions of how to fulfill their needs. Therefore, choice theory differs 
from behaviorism on one hand and psychological determinism on the other.  
Legacy Number Two: A Practical Internal-Control Delivery System  
Glasser’s second contribution emerged from his experiences in mental health and 
corrections and preceded the development of choice theory. Reality Therapy (1965) 
summarized his early work and thinking that he continued to refine in subsequent years. 
Other applications included the sociological emphasis as presented in The Identity Society 
(1972). In this resource he described reality therapy as a 7-step process. Even in this early 
expression of reality therapy, the therapeutic or counseling relationship serves as the 
foundation for client change. He also taught that in the superstructure of skills and 
techniques self-evaluation occupies a prominent and even central place. In other words, 
clients alter behaviors, i.e., make more effective choices, if they feel connected with the 
helper and if they examine the effectiveness of their own chosen behaviors. He states, “No 
one changes his behavior away from failure unless first he is involved with someone – a 
therapist, a friend, a relative, a teacher – who he feels is worthwhile and who can make him 
believe that changing behavior is possible . . . he must be able to make a value judgment 
about his behavior that he can then act upon.” He adds that only then has the client 
“established the basis for change” (pp. 119-120). Thus clients can formulate a plan of action 
that satisfies their internal longings, wants, and needs. Other teachers have added to his 
simple formulation. His early colleague Alex Bassin always taught, “Don’t give up” as an 8
th 
step. Wubbolding, (2000, 2011, 2017) expanded and further developed the original 8-steps 
with Dr. Glasser’s endorsement (Wubbolding, 1991).  
The use of reality therapy is inextricably linked to choice theory. Choice theory provides an 
explanation of how the human mind functions. Through reality therapy Glasser has given 
the world a comprehensive and understandable delivery system. The interconnection 
between theory and practice was explained by Dr. Glasser & Mrs. Carleen Glasser: “Choice 
theory is the train track and reality therapy is the train” (2008, p. 1). In practice, choice 
theory and reality therapy are now inseparable. The successful implementation of the 
theoretical principles formulated by Glasser requires understanding choice theory as well as  
 
International Journal of Choice Theory and Reality Therapy • Spring 2017 • Vol. XXXVII, number 1 • 18  

a wide range of skills for the efficacious practice of reality therapy. In teaching choice 
theory/reality therapy, a skilled instructor distinguishes between the train and the train 
track and yet communicates how they interface with each other. Educating students in the 
practice of reality therapy has undergone many extensions. For instance, Wubbolding has 
summarized reality therapy as the WDEP delivery system: Wants, Doing, self-Evaluation, 
and Planning (2000, 2011, 2017). Each letter represents a cluster of possible interventions 
with clients.  
Trainers, consultants, counselors, therapists, educators, managers, parents, and others help 
students, clients, families, and employees explore their wants, their desires, their hopes, 
and their dreams. They also help define specific behaviors including actions, thinking, and 
feelings, followed by a fearless self-evaluation of the effectiveness of their behavioral 
choices, as well as the realistic attainability of their wants. The culmination of the process is 
practical, attainable, and mutually agreed upon plans. Clearly, reality therapy applies to 
counseling, the classroom, and larger organizations such as schools, businesses, and 
agencies. Schools applying choice theory and reality therapy on a school wide basis can 
work toward becoming a Glasser Quality School. For instance, the achievement of the title 
“Glasser Quality School” by the Yangeob High School under the tutelage of “the Glasser of 
Korea”, Professor Rose Kim, represents the multicultural relevance of choice theory and 
reality therapy. The seeds planted by Glasser have indeed become trees that nourish people 
throughout the world.  
This application of choice theory and reality therapy illustrates the universal relevance of Dr. 
Glasser’s legacy and helps dispel the mistaken notion that reality therapy is usable only in 
western civilization. Wubbolding, Brickell, Imhof, Kim, Lojk and Al-Rashidi (2004) 
emphasized, “The evidence points toward the effectiveness of reality therapy with a wide 
range of cultures” (p. 227). Professor Kim has verified the existence of over 550 studies 
conducted by masters and doctoral level students exploring the effectiveness of choice 
theory and reality therapy with Korean people. Her unceasing attendance at national and 
international institute conferences illustrates one of her many contributions and her 
steadfast commitment to choice theory and reality therapy. Regardless of her successes, 
she continually seeks opportunities to infuse Dr. Glasser’s ideas into Korean society. As she 
frequently says, “Over the mountains, more mountains.” Dr. Glasser frequently recognized 
her as a loyal supporter and leader. She is a cherished colleague and one of the closest 
friends of my wife Sandie and me.  
Further evidence of the Glasser genius is the activity of institutes and organizations 
throughout Asia, Australia, Europe, and the Middle East.  
Legacy Number Three: William Glasser International  
The third component of Dr. Glasser’s legacy is organizational in nature. He demonstrated his 
organizational genius by founding an institute originally known as the Institute for Reality 
Therapy. Now known as William Glasser International (WGI) with member organizations 
around the world, it serves as the certifying body for individuals seeking a high level of 
skills. He envisioned a streamlined organization with minimal levels of bureaucracy. He was 
the president, Linda Harshman the executive director, and he appointed me as his director 
of training to oversee the training programs, a post I served in from 1988 to 2011. To  
 
 
International Journal of Choice Theory and Reality Therapy • Spring 2017 • Vol. XXXVII, number 1 • 19  

illustrate the principle of lead management, he initiated an elected advisory board that 
provided him with suggestions for program development and other day-to-day issues. 
Closely connected with the institute is the International Journal of Choice Theory and Reality Therapy, 
inspired by Dr. Glasser and originally edited by Larry Litwack and now by Tom Parish. These 
three components: theory, practice, organization and one subcomponent have provided 
worldwide respect for William Glasser and his many contributions to mental health and 
education.  
I can personally testify that professional people express a sense of increased respect when 
they learn that Dr. Glasser fired up a wide range of professional people to contribute journal 
articles, write books, sponsor conferences, develop national and regional institutes, and 
conduct cross-cultural research studies supporting the practice of reality therapy, thereby 
enhancing his legacy.  
In summary, Dr. Glasser’s legacy is three-fold: the formulation of an internal control 
theoretical system known as choice theory; the delivery system, reality therapy, now 
represented in most counseling textbooks and encyclopedias as well as in books on 
education. Thirdly, and often overlooked, was his organizational vision and pre-eminent 
contribution – The Institute for Reality Therapy, now known as William Glasser 
International. Of special significance is the structure of the organization founded by Glasser. 
He desired a streamlined system of management. The William Glasser Institute (as it was 
known for decades) reflected his organizational genius and can be summarized by the 
famous phrase: KIS – Keep It Simple.  
The Future of the Legacy  
The future of choice theory will include an interface with neuroscience. For example, the 
world famous neuroscientist Daniel Siegel (2012) defined the human mind as “an embodied 
and relational process that regulates the flow of energy and information” (p. 43-4). This 
definition includes the mind as existing not only in the human brain but also in the human 
body and even in a person’s behavior as it relates to others. This concept appears to 
provide a basis for Glasser’s choice theory.  
The future of reality therapy includes an expansion of the procedures, the incorporation of 
skills and techniques derived from other systems but congruent with Glasser’s legacy. 
Adding to the credibility of the monumental work of Dr. Glasser and to the contributions of 
the people he inspired will be the elevation of reality therapy from “evidence-supported” to 
“evidence-based.”  
The organization started by William Glasser and expanded by his followers supports 
individuals and groups as they train counselors, educators, therapists, and others 
throughout the world. It will struggle to avoid the fate of many similar organizations that fail 
to resist the centrifugal force that often results in organizational fragmentation. A healthy 
organization and scholarly individuals will do everything possible to “keep the flag flying.”  
References  
Glasser, W. (1972). The identity society. NY: Harper & Row. Glasser, W. (1968). Schools 
without failure. NY: Harper & Row.  
 
International Journal of Choice Theory and Reality Therapy • Spring 2017 • Vol. XXXVII, number 1 • 20  

Glasser, W. (1980). Stations of the mind. NY: HarperCollins. 
 
Glasser, W. (1984). Control theory. NY: HarperCollins. 
 
Glasser, W. (1998). Choice theory. NY: HarperCollins. 
 
Glasser, W. (2011). Take charge of your life. Bloomington, IN: iUniverse.  
Glasser, W., & Glasser, C. (2008). Procedures: The cornerstone of institute training. The 
William Glasser Institute Newsletter. Summer. Chatsworth, CA: The William Glasser 
Institute.  
Powers, W. T. (1973). Behavior: the control of perception. New York: Aldine. 
 
Roy, J. (2014). William Glasser: Champion of choice. Phoenix, AZ: Zeig, Tucker, Theisen, 
Inc.  
Siegel, D. J. (2012). Pocket guide to interpersonal neurobiology. NY: W. W. Norton & 
Company, Inc.  
Wubbolding, R. E. (1991). Understanding reality therapy. New York: HarperCollins.  
Wubbolding, R.E. (2000). Reality therapy for the 21
st century. Philadelphia: Brunner 
Routledge.  
Wubbolding, R.E. (2011). Reality therapy: Theories of psychotherapy series. Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association.  
Wubbolding, R.E. (2017). Reality therapy and self-evaluation, the key to client change. 
Alexandria, VA: American Counseling Association.  
Brief Biography  
Robert E. Wubbolding, EdD, Director of the Center for Reality Therapy, professor Emeritus 
Xavier University, senior faculty William Glasser International is a psychologist, counselor, 
and board certified coach. He also served as director of training for the William Glasser 
Institute for 24 years and is author of 17 books on reality therapy.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Choice Theory and Reality Therapy • Spring 2017 • Vol. XXXVII, number 1 • 21  

