


GOD 

GOD 
THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
How Science Shows 
That God 
Does Not Exist 
VICTOR J. STENGER 
Prometheus Books 
59 John Glenn Drive 
Amherst, New York 14228-2197 

Published 2007 by Prometheus Books 
God: The Failed Hypothesis—How Science Shows That God Does Not Exist. Copyright © 
2007 by Victor J. Stenger. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
digital, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, or conveyed 
via the Internet or a Web site without prior written permission of the publisher, ex-
cept in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. 
Inquiries should be addressed to 
Prometheus Books 
59 John Glenn Drive 
Amherst, New York 14228-2197 
VOICE: 716-691-0133, ext. 207 
FAX: 716-564-2711 
WWW.PROMETHEUSBOOKS.COM 
11 10 09 08 07 
5 4 3 2 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Stenger, Victor J., 1935-
God : the failed hypothesis : how science shows that God does not exist / 
Victor J. Stenger. 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-1-59102-481-1 (alk. paper) 
1. Religion and science. 2. God—Proof. 3. Atheism. I. Title. 
BL240.3.S738 2007 
212'. 1— dc22 
2006032867 
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Acknowledgments 
7 
Preface 
9 
Chapter 1: Models and Methods 
21 
Chapter 2: The Illusion of Design 
47 
Chapter 3: Searching for a World beyond Matter 
77 
Chapter 4: Cosmic Evidence 
113 
Chapter 5: The Uncongenial Universe 
137 
Chapter 6: The Failures of Revelation 
169 
5 

6 
CONTENTS 
Chapter 7: Do Our Values Come from God? 
193 
Chapter 8: The Argument from Evil 
215 
Chapter 9: Possible and Impossible Gods 
227 
Chapter 10: Living in the Godless Universe 
243 
Bibliography 
261 
Index 
283 
About the Author 
293 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
A
s with my previous books, I have benefited greatly from 
comments and corrections provided by a large number of 
individuals with whom I communicate regularly on the Internet. 
I am particularly grateful for the substantial suggestions provided 
by Bill Benson, Celel Berker, Eleanor Binnings, Richard Carrier, 
Lawrence Crowell, Yonathan Fishman, Joseph Hilbe, James 
Humpreys, Ludwig Krippahl, Andrew Laska, Justin Lloyd, Ken 
MacVey, Don McGee, Brent Meeker, Anne O'Reilly, Loren Petrich, 
Kerry Regier, John Syriatowicz, Phil Thrift, George Tucker, Ed 
Weinmann, Roahn Wynar, and Bob Zanelli. 
I must also acknowledge the support and valuable comments 
provided to me by Jeff Dean of Blackwell Publishing and his 
three anonymous reviewers. I have implemented many of their 
suggestions in this manuscript. 
And, as with my previous books, I have enjoyed the support 
7 

8 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
of Paul Kurtz and Steven L. Mitchell and their dedicated staff at 
Prometheus Books. 
Of course, none of my work would be possible without the 
help and encouragement of my wife Phylliss and our two children. 

PREFACE 
The sciences do not try to explain, they hardly even try to interpret, 
they mainly make models. By a model is meant a mathematical con-
struct which, with the addition of certain verbal interpretations, 
describes observed phenomena. The justification of such a mathemat-
ical construct is solely and precisely that it is expected to work. 
—John von Neumann1 
VIEW FROM THE SIDELINES 
T
hroughout history, arguments for and against the existence of 
God have been largely confined to philosophy and theology. 
In the meantime, science has sat on the sidelines and quietly 
watched this game of words march up and down the field. Despite 
9 

10 
PREFACE 
the fact that science has revolutionized every aspect of human life 
and greatly clarified our understanding of the world, somehow the 
notion has arisen that it has nothing to say about a supreme being 
that much of humanity worships as the source of all reality. 
In his 1999 book, Rocks of Ages, famed paleontologist Stephen 
Jay Gould referred to science and religion as two "non-overlapping 
magisteria," with science concerning itself with understanding the 
natural world while religion deals with issues of morality.2 How-
ever, as many reviewers pointed out, this amounted to a redefini-
tion of religion as moral philosophy. In fact, most religions do 
more than simple moralizing but make basic pronouncements 
about nature, which science is free to evaluate. Furthermore, sci-
ence has an obvious role in the study of physical objects, such as 
the Shroud of Turin, which may have religious implications. And, 
why can't science consider moral issues, which involve observable 
and sometimes even quantifiable human behavior? 
In a poll taken in 1998, only 7 percent of the members of the 
US National Academy of Sciences, the elite of American scientists, 
said they believed in a personal God.3 Nevertheless, most scientists 
seem to prefer as a practical matter that science should stay clear of 
religious issues. Perhaps this is a good strategy for those who wish 
to avoid conflicts between science and religion, which might lead 
to less public acceptance of science, not to mention that most 
dreaded of all consequences—lower funding. However, religions 
make factual claims that have no special immunity from being 
examined under the cold light of reason and objective observation. 
Besides, scientific arguments for the existence of God, that is, 
arguments based on observations rather than authority, have been 
made since ancient times—as early as 77 BCE by Marcus Tullius 
Cicero (d. 43 BCE) in his work De Natura Deorum (On the Nature 
of the Gods).4 Particularly influential was William Paley (d. 1805) 
with his Natural Theology or Evidences of the Existence and Attributes 
of the Deity Collected from the Appearance of Nature, first published 
in 1802.5 In more recent years, theologians and theistic scientists 

PREFACE 
11 
have begun looking to science to provide support for their beliefs 
in a supreme being. Many books have been published purporting 
that modern theoretical and empirical science supports the propo-
sition that God exists, and the popular media have been quick to 
promulgate this view.6 Very few books or media stories have 
directly challenged that assertion. But if scientific arguments for 
the existence of God are to be allowed into intellectual discourse, 
then those against his existence also have a legitimate place. 
In my 2003 book, Has Science Found God? I critically exam-
ined the claims of scientific evidence for God and found them 
inadequate.7 In the present book, I will go much further and 
argue that by this moment in time science has advanced suffi-
ciently to be able to make a definitive statement on the existence 
or nonexistence of a God having the attributes that are tradition-
ally associated with the Judeo-Christian-Islamic God. 
We now have considerable empirical data and highly suc-
cessful scientific models that bear on the question of God's exis-
tence. The time has come to examine what those data and models 
tell us about the validity of the God hypothesis. 
To be sure, the Judeo-Christian-Islamic God is not well 
defined. Not only do different views of God exist among these 
faiths, but also many differences can be found within each faith 
itself—between theologians and lay believers as well as from sect 
to sect. I will focus on those attributes of the God that the bulk 
of believers in each of these varied groups worship. Some of these 
attributes are also shared by the deities of religions outside the 
three great monotheisms. 
I am well aware that sophisticated theologians have devel-
oped highly abstracted concepts of a god that they claim is con-
sistent with the teachings of their faiths. One can always abstract 
any concept so it is out of the realm of scientific investigation. But 
these gods would not be recognized by the typical believer. 
In the three monotheisms, God is viewed as a supreme, tran-
scendent being—beyond matter, space, and time—and yet the 

12 
PREFACE 
foundation of all that meets our senses that is described in terms 
of matter, space, and time. Furthermore, this God is not the god 
of deism, who created the world and then left it alone, or the 
god of pantheism, who is equated with all of existence. The 
Judeo-Christian-Islamic God is a nanosecond-by-nanosecond 
participant in each event that takes place in every cubic 
nanometer of the universe, from the interactions of quarks 
inside atomic nuclei to the evolution of stars in the most distant 
galaxies. What is more, God listens to every thought and partic-
ipates in each action of his very special creation, a minute bit of 
organized matter called humanity that moves around on the sur-
face of a tiny pebble in a vast universe. 
So, when I use uppercase G, I mean the Judeo-Christian-
Islamic God. Other gods will be lowercase. I will also use the tra-
ditional masculine pronouns in referring to God. This book is an 
investigation of the evidence for the existence of God—not all 
gods. It might be likened to a physicist investigating the existence 
of a massless charged particle, but not all particles. 
SUPERNATURAL SCIENCE 
No consensus exists among philosophers of science on what dis-
tinguishes science from pseudoscience or nonscience, although 
most scientists would say they know pseudoscience when they see 
it. In this book, I will take science to refer to the performing of 
objective observations by eye and by instrument and the building 
of models to describe those observations. These models are not 
simple snapshots of the observations, but they utilize elements 
and processes or mechanisms that attempt to be universal and 
general so that not only one set of observations is described but 
also all the observations that fit into as wide a class as possible. 
They need not always be mathematical, as asserted by John von 
Neumann in the epigraph to this chapter. 

PREFACE 
13 
Perhaps the most outstanding current (mathematical) 
example is the standard model of elementary particles and forces in 
which all of familiar matter is composed of just three particles: 
the up quark, the down quark, and the electron. This model was 
formulated in the 1970s and to this date remains consistent with 
all the measured properties of matter made in our most sophisti-
cated laboratories on Earth and observed in space with our most 
powerful telescopes. 
Notice that the main purpose of scientific models is to 
describe rather than explain. That is, they are deemed successful 
when they agree with all observations, especially those that 
would have falsified the model had those observations turned 
out otherwise. Often this process takes the form of hypothesis 
testing, in which a model is proposed as a series of hypotheses 
that are then tested against carefully controlled observations. 
Whether the elements and processes that make up a successful 
model are to be taken as intrinsic parts of reality is not a question 
that can be simply answered since we can never know that the 
model might be falsified in the future. However, when a model is 
falsified, we can reasonably assume that those elements and 
processes that are unique to the model and not also part of 
another, successful model are likely not intrinsic parts of reality. 
My analysis will be based on the contention that God should 
be detectable by scientific means simply by virtue of the fact that 
he is supposed to play such a central role in the operation of the 
universe and the lives of humans. Existing scientific models con-
tain no place where God is included as an ingredient in order to 
describe observations. Thus, if God exists, he must appear some-
where within the gaps or errors of scientific models. 
Indeed, the "God of the gaps" has long been a common argu-
ment for God. Science does not explain everything, so there is 
always room for other explanations and the believer is easily con-
vinced that the explanation is God. However, the God of the gaps 
argument by itself fails, at least as a scientific argument, unless the 

14 
PREFACE 
phenomenon in question is not only currently scientifically inex-
plicable but can be shown to forever defy natural description. God 
can only show up by proving to be necessary, with science equally 
proven to be incapable of providing a plausible account of the 
phenomenon based on natural or material processes alone. 
This may strike the reader as an impossible requirement. How 
can we ever know that science will never be able to provide a 
"natural" account for some currently mysterious phenomenon? I 
claim this is within the realm of possibility, if not with 100 per-
cent certainty, within a reasonable doubt. Using the historical 
association of natural with material, I will provide hypothetical 
examples of phenomena that, if observed, cannot be of material 
origin beyond a reasonable doubt. Since by all accounts God is 
nonmaterial, his presence would be signaled, beyond a reason-
able doubt, by the empirical verification of such phenomena. 
Some scientists have raised objections to the association of 
natural with material. They say all observable phenomena are "nat-
ural," by (their) definition. Others say any testable theory is 
"natural," by (their) definition. I prefer not to indulge in endless 
arguments over the meanings of words that never seem to converge 
on a consensus. I have stated how I will use the words natural and 
supernatural, as synonymous with material and nonmaterial. The 
supernatural cannot be banished from science by mere definition. 
I define matter as anything that kicks back when you kick it. It 
is the stuff of physics. By "kick" I refer to the universal observation 
process in which particles, such as the photons that compose light, 
are bounced off objects. Measurements on the particles that bounce 
back into our eyes and other sensors give us properties of the 
observed object called mass, momentum, and energy that we iden-
tify with matter. Those measurements are described with models 
that contain purely material processes—the dynamical principles of 
physics—all subject to empirical testing and falsification.8 
Many scientists will object that the supernatural or nonmate-
rial cannot be tested in any analogous manner. Indeed, in recent 

PREFACE 
15 
political battles in the United States that have pit science against 
conservative religious groups who see their beliefs threatened by 
evolution, prominent scientists and national science organiza-
tions have made public statements and given court testimony to 
the effect that science can only deal with natural causes. In this 
they have played right into the hands of those who try to argue 
that science has a dogmatic commitment to materialism that pre-
vents it from even considering any alternatives. 
In this book I will show that a number of proposed supernat-
ural or nonmaterial processes are empirically testable using stan-
dard scientific methods. Furthermore, such research is being carried 
out by reputable scientists associated with reputable institutions 
and published in reputable scientific journals. So the public state-
ments by some scientists and their national organizations that sci-
ence has nothing to do with the supernatural are belied by the facts. 
True that science generally makes the assumption called 
methodological naturalism, which refers to the self-imposed con-
vention that limits inquiry to objective observations of the world 
and generally (but, as we will see, not necessarily) seeks natural 
accounts of all phenomena. This is often confused with metaphys-
ical naturalism, which assumes that reality itself is purely natural, 
that is, composed solely of material objects. While it cannot be 
denied that most physical scientists, at least, think this is the case, 
they cannot prove it. Furthermore, they have no need to try since 
ultimately it is not a scientific question amenable to empirical 
adjudication. If it were, it would be physics and not metaphysics. 
In this book I will show that certain natural, material phe-
nomena are implied by the God hypothesis. The observation of 
any of these phenomena would defy all reasonable natural, mate-
rial descriptions. 
Despite philosophical and historical literature in the past cen-
tury that described the history of science as a series of revolutions 
and "paradigm shifts,"9 the fundamental notion of matter and 
material processes has not been changed since the time of 

16 
PREFACE 
Newton—only embellished.10 Anything that can be shown to vio-
late those principles, to have properties different from those long 
associated with matter, would be of such world-shaking significance 
that, for want of a better term, we could call them supernatural. 
As far as we can tell from current scientific knowledge, the 
universe we observe with our senses and scientific instruments 
can be described in terms of matter and material processes alone. 
Certainly scientists will initially search for a material account of 
any new phenomenon since parsimony of thought requires that 
we seek the simplest models first, those that make the fewest new, 
untried hypotheses. However, should all material explanations 
fail, there is nothing stopping the empirical testing of hypotheses 
that go beyond those of conventional physical science. 
GAPS FOR GOD? 
Well aware that the existence of God is not proved from the 
incompleteness of science alone, some theologians and theistic 
scientists are now claiming that they have uncovered gaps in sci-
entific theories that can only be filled by a supreme being oper-
ating outside the natural realm. They boldly assert that science 
cannot account for certain phenomena and, furthermore, never 
will. The new "proofs" are based on claims that the complexity of 
life cannot be reduced, and never will be reduced, to purely nat-
ural (material) processes. They also assert that the constants and 
laws of physics are so fine-tuned that they cannot have come 
about naturally, and that the origin of the physical universe and 
the laws it obeys cannot have "come from nothing" without 
supernatural intervention. Believers also cite results from pur-
ported carefully controlled experiments that they say provide 
empirical evidence for a world beyond matter that cannot be 
accounted for by material processes alone. 
In order to estimate effectively the credibility of these claims, 

PREFACE 
17 
we must be careful to properly locate the burden of proof. That 
burden rests on the shoulders of those who assert that science 
will never be able to account naturally for some phenomenon, 
that is, describe the phenomenon with a model containing only 
material elements and processes. If a plausible scientific model 
consistent with all existing knowledge can be found, then the 
claim fails. That model need not be proven to be correct, just not 
proven to be incorrect. 
If we can find plausible ways in which all the existing gaps in 
scientific knowledge one day may be filled, then the scientific 
arguments for the existence of God fail. We could then conclude 
that God need not be included in the models we build to 
describe phenomena currently observable to humans. Of course, 
this leaves open the possibility that a god exists that is needed to 
account for phenomena outside the realm of current human 
observation. He might show up in some future space expedition, 
or in some experiment at a giant particle accelerator. However, 
that god would not be a god who plays an important role in 
human life. It is not God. 
EXAMINING THE EVIDENCE AGAINST GOD 
Evaluating the arguments that science has uncovered evidence for 
God is only part of my task, which was largely completed in Has 
Science Found God? My primary concern here will be to evaluate 
the less familiar arguments in which science provides evidence 
against the existence of God. 
The process I will follow is the scientific method of hypoth-
esis testing. The existence of a God will be taken as a scientific 
hypothesis and the consequences of that hypothesis searched for 
in objective observations of the world around us. Various models 
will be assumed in which God has specific attributes that can be 
tested empirically. That is, if a God with such attributes exists, cer-

18 
PREFACE 
tain phenomena should be observable. Any failure to pass a spe-
cific test will be regarded as a failure of that particular model. Fur-
thermore, if the actual observations are as expected in the absence 
of the specified deity, then this can be taken as an additional 
mark against his existence. 
Where a failure occurs, the argument may be made that a 
hidden God still may exist. While this is a logically correct state-
ment, history and common experience provide many examples 
where, ultimately, absence of evidence became evidence of 
absence. Generally speaking, when we have no evidence or other 
reason for believing in some entity, then we can be pretty sure that 
entity does not exist.11 We have no evidence for Bigfoot, the Abom-
inable Snowman, and the Loch Ness Monster, so we do not believe 
they exist. If we have no evidence or other reason for believing in 
God, then we can be pretty sure that God does not exist. 
NOTES 
1. As quoted in J. Tinsley Oden, acceptance remarks, 1993 John von 
Neumann Award Winner, United States Association of Computational 
Mechanics Bulletin 6, no. 3 (September 1993). Online at http://www.usacm  
.org/Oden's_acceptance_remarks.htm (accessed February 22, 2005). 
2. Stephen J. Gould, Rock of Ages: Science and Religion in the Fullness 
of Life (New York: Ballantine, 1999). 
3. Edward J. Larson and Larry Witham, "Leading Scientists Still 
Reject God," Nature 394 (1998): 313. 
4. Marcus Tullius Cicero, De Natura Deorum or On the Nature of 
the Gods, ed. and trans. H. Rackham (New York: Loeb Classical Library, 
1933). 
5. William Paley, Natural Theology or Evidences of the Existence and 
Attributes of the Deity Collected from the Appearance of Nature (London: 
Halliwell, 1802). 
6. Sharon Begley, "Science Finds God," Newsweek, July 20, 1998. 
7. Victor J. Stenger, Has Science Found God? The Latest Results in the 

PREFACE 
19 
Search for Purpose in the Universe (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 
2003). See references therein for the original claims. 
8. Victor J. Stenger, The Comprehensible Cosmos: Where Do the Laws of 
Physics Come From? (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2006). Contains a 
complete discussion of the nature of matter and other physical entities. 
9. Thomas Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1970). 
10. Steven Weinberg, "The Revolution That Didn't Happen," New 
York Review of Books, October 8, 1998. 
11. Keith Parsons, God and the Burden of Proof: Platinga, Swinburne, and 
the Analytical Defense of Theism (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1989). 

Chapter 1 
MODELS AND METHODS 
All that belongs to human understanding, in this deep ignorance and 
obscurity, is to be skeptical, or at least cautious; and not to admit of 
any hypothesis, whatsoever; much less, of any which is supported by 
no appearance of probability. 
—David Hume 
LACK OF EVIDENCE 
any theologians and theistic scientists claim that evi-
dence has been found for the existence of the Judeo-
Christian-Islamic God or, at least, some being with supernatural 
powers. However, they cannot deny that their evidence is not suf-
ficiently convincing to satisfy the majority of scientists. Indeed, as 
we saw in the preface, the overwhelming majority of prominent 
M 
21 

22 
GOD:THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
American scientists has concluded that God does not exist. If God 
exists, where is he? Philosopher Theodore Drange has termed this 
the lack-of-evidence argument, which he states formally as follows: 
1. Probably, if God were to exist, then there would be good 
objective evidence for his existence. 
2. But there is no good objective evidence for his existence. 
3. Therefore, probably God does not exist. 
Drange criticizes premise 1 of the lack-of-evidence argument, 
pointing out that God could simply choose not to use the 
channel of objective evidence but directly implant that knowl-
edge in human minds.1 However, as he and others have pointed 
out, such a deity would not be a perfectly loving God and the very 
existence of nonbelievers in the world who have not resisted such 
belief is evidence against his existence.2 The problem of divine hid-
denness is one that has taxed the abilities of theologians over the 
years—almost as much as the problem of evil, which questions 
how an omnibenevolent, omnipotent, and omniscient God can 
allow so much unnecessary suffering among the planet's humans 
and animals. We will return to each of these problems. 
However, independent of the unknowable intentions of a 
hypothetical being of infinite power and wisdom, objective evi-
dence for an entity with godlike attributes should be readily 
available. After all, God is supposed to play a decisive role in 
every happening in the world. Surely we should see some sign of 
that in objective observations made by our eyes and ears, and 
especially by our most sensitive scientific instruments. 
The founders and leaders of major religions have always 
claimed that God can be seen in the world around us. In Romans 
1:20, St. Paul says: "Ever since the creation of the world his invis-
ible nature, namely his eternal power and deity, have been clearly 
perceived in the things that have been made." We will look for 
evidence of God in the things that have been made. 

MODELS AND METHODS 
23 
THE NATURE OF SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE 
Before examining specific data, let us consider what constitutes 
"scientific evidence." Here I will limit myself to the kind of evi-
dence that is needed to establish the validity of an extraordinary 
claim that goes beyond existing knowledge. Clearly the standard 
for this must be set much higher than that for an ordinary claim. 
For example, an ordinary claim might be that an 81-milligram 
aspirin taken daily will reduce the chance of heart attacks and 
strokes. Such a claim is ordinary, because we have a plausible mech-
anism for such an effect in the resulting slight thinning of the blood. 
By contrast, an extraordinary claim might be that such a therapy 
would cure AIDS. Lacking any plausible mechanism, we would have 
to demand far more confirmatory data than in the first case. 
We often hear of stories citing examples of dreams that came 
true. This would seem to suggest a power of the mind that goes 
beyond known physical capabilities. However, in this case, a 
strong selection process is taking place whereby all the millions 
of dreams that do not come true are simply ignored. Unless oth-
erwise demonstrated, a plausible explanation that must first be 
ruled out is that the reported dream came true by chance selec-
tion out of many that had no such dramatic outcome. 
How can we rule out chance or other artifacts? This is what 
the scientific method is all about. We might do a controlled 
experiment with hundreds of subjects recording their dreams 
upon awaking every morning. Independent investigators, with no 
stake in the outcome one way or another, would then perform a 
careful statistical analysis of the data. It would help if the dream 
outcomes were something simple and quantitative, like the win-
ning number for a future lottery. Then the results could be com-
pared with the easily calculated expectations from chance. 
Allow me to list a few of the rules that the scientific commu-
nity conventionally applies when evaluating any extraordinary 
claim. This is not complete by any means; nowhere can we find a 

24 
GOD:THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
document that officially lays down the scientific method to the 
complete satisfaction of a consensus of scientists and philoso-
phers. However, five conditions suffice for our evaluation of 
claims of empirical evidence for extraordinary empirical claims 
in science: 
Conditions for Considering Extraordinary Claims 
1. The protocols of the study must be clear and impeccable so 
that all possibilities of error can be evaluated. The investi-
gators, not the reviewers, carry the burden of identifying 
each possible source of error, explaining how it was mini-
mized, and providing a quantitative estimate of the effect 
of each error. These errors can be systematic—attributable 
to biases in the experimental set up—or statistical—the 
result of chance fluctuations. No new effect can be claimed 
unless all the errors are small enough to make it highly 
unlikely that they are the source of the claimed effect. 
2. The hypotheses being tested must be established clearly 
and explicitly before data taking begins, and not changed 
midway through the process or after looking at the data. In 
particular, "data mining" in which hypotheses are later 
changed to agree with some interesting but unanticipated 
results showing up in the data is unacceptable. This may 
be likened to painting a bull's-eye around wherever an 
arrow has struck. That is not to say that certain kinds of 
exploratory observations, in astronomy, for example, may 
not be examined for anomalous phenomena. But they are 
not used in hypothesis testing. They may lead to new 
hypotheses, but these hypotheses must then be independ-
ently tested according to the protocols I have outlined. 
3. The people performing the study, that is, those taking and 
analyzing the data, must do so without any prejudgment 
of how the results should come out. This is perhaps the 

MODELS AND METHODS 
25 
most difficult condition to follow to the letter, since most 
investigators start out with the hope of making a remark-
able discovery that will bring them fame and fortune. They 
are often naturally reluctant to accept the negative results 
that more typically characterize much of research. Investi-
gators may then revert to data mining, continuing to look 
until they convince themselves they have found what they 
were looking for.3 To enforce this condition and avoid 
such biases, certain techniques such as "blinding" may be 
included in the protocol, where neither the investigators 
nor the data takers and analyzers know what sample of 
data they are dealing with. For example, in doing a study 
on the efficacy of prayer, the investigators should not 
know who is being prayed for or who is doing the praying 
until all the data are in and ready to be analyzed. 
4. The hypothesis being tested must be one that contains the 
seeds of its own destruction. Those making the hypothesis 
have the burden of providing examples of possible exper-
imental results that would falsify the hypothesis. They 
must demonstrate that such a falsification has not 
occurred. A hypothesis that cannot be falsified is a hypoth-
esis that has no value. 
5. Even after passing the above criteria, reported results must 
be of such a nature that they can be independently repli-
cated. Not until they are repeated under similar conditions 
by different (preferably skeptical) investigators will they 
be finally accepted into the ranks of scientific knowledge. 
Our procedure in the following chapters will be to select out, 
one by one, certain limited sets of attributes and examine the 
empirical consequences that can reasonably be expected by the 
hypothesis of a god having those attributes. We will then look for 
evidence of these empirical consequences. 

26 
GOD:THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
FALSIFICATION 
Falsification was the demarcation criterion proposed in the 1930s 
by philosophers Karl Popper4 and Rudolf Carnap5 as a means for 
distinguishing legitimate scientific models from nonscientifk 
conjectures. Since then, however, philosophers of science have 
found falsification insufficient for this purpose.6 For example, 
astrology is falsifiable (indeed, falsified) and not accepted as sci-
ence. Nevertheless, falsification remains a very powerful tool that 
is used whenever possible. When a hypothesis is falsifiable by a 
direct empirical test, and that test fails, then the hypothesis can 
be safely discarded. 
Now, a certain asymmetry exists when testing scientific 
models. While failure to pass a required test is sufficient to falsify 
a model, the passing of the test is not sufficient to verify the 
model. This is because we have no way of knowing a priori that 
other, competing models might be found someday that lead to 
the same empirical consequences as the one tested. 
Often in science, models that fail some empirical test are 
modified in ways that enable them to pass the test on a second or 
third try. While some philosophers have claimed this shows that 
falsification does not happen in practice, the modified model can 
be regarded as a new model and the old version was still falsified. 
I saw many proposed models falsified during my forty-year 
research career in elementary particle physics and astrophysics; it 
does happen in practice.7 
Popper restricted falsification (which he equates to 
refutability) to empirical statements, and declared, "philosophical 
theories, or metaphysical theories, will be irrefutable by defini-
tion."8 He also noted that certain empirical statements are 
irrefutable. These are statements that he called "strict or pure exis-
tential statements." On the other hand, "restricted" existential 
statements are refutable. He gives this example: 

MODELS AND METHODS 
27 
"There exists a pearl which is ten times larger than the next 
largest pearl." If in this statement we restrict the words "There 
exists" to some finite region in space and time, then it may of 
course become a refutable statement. For example, the fol-
lowing statement is obviously empirically refutable: "At this 
moment and in this box here there exist at least two pearls one 
of which is ten times larger than the next largest pearl in this 
box." But then this statement is no longer a strict or pure exis-
tential statement: rather it is a restricted existential statement. A 
strict or pure existential statement applies to the whole uni-
verse, and it is irrefutable simply because there can be no 
method by which it could be refuted. For even if we were able 
to search our entire universe, the strict or pure existential state-
ment would not be refuted by our failure to discover the 
required pearl, seeing that it might always be hiding in a place 
where we are not looking.9 
By this criterion, it would seem that the existence of God 
cannot be empirically refuted because to do so would require 
making an existential statement applying to the whole universe 
(plus whatever lies beyond). But, in looking at Popper's example, 
we see this is not the case for God. True, we cannot refute the exis-
tence of a God who, like the pearl in Popper's example, is some-
where outside the box, say, in another galaxy. But God is sup-
posed to be everywhere, including inside every box. So when we 
search for God inside a single box, no matter how small, we 
should either find him, thus confirming his existence, or not find 
him, thus refuting his existence. 
CAN SCIENCE STUDY THE SUPERNATURAL? 
Most national science societies and organizations promoting sci-
ence have issued statements asserting that science is limited to 
the consideration of natural processes and phenomena. For 

28 
GOD:THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
example, the United States National Academy of Sciences has 
stated, "Science is a way of knowing about the natural world. It is 
limited to explaining the natural world through natural causes. 
Science can say nothing about the supernatural. Whether God 
exists or not is a question about which science is neutral."10 
Those scientists and science organizations that would limit 
science to the investigation of natural causes provide unwitting 
support for the assertion that science is dogmatically naturalistic. 
In a series of books in the 1990s, law professor Phillip Johnson 
argued that the doctrine that nature is "all there is" is the virtually 
unquestioned assumption that underlies not only natural science 
but intellectual work of all kinds.11 In many of the public discus-
sions we hear today, science is accused of dogmatically refusing 
to consider the possible role other than natural processes may 
play in the universe. 
Given the public position of many scientists and their organ-
izations, Johnson and his supporters have some basis for making 
a case that science is dogmatically materialistic. However, any 
type of dogmatism is the very antithesis of science. The history of 
science, from Copernicus and Galileo to the present, is replete 
with examples that belie the charge of dogmatism in science. 
What history shows is that science is very demanding and does 
not blindly accept any new idea that someone can come up with. 
New claims must be thoroughly supported by the data, especially 
when they may conflict with well-established knowledge. Any 
research scientist will tell you how very difficult it is to discover 
new knowledge, convince your colleagues that it is correct—as 
they enthusiastically play devil's advocate—and then get your 
results through the peer-review process to publication. When sci-
entists express their objections to claims such as evidence for intel-
ligent design in the universe, they are not being dogmatic. They 
are simply applying the same standard they would for any other 
extraordinary claim and demanding extraordinary evidence. 
Besides, why would any scientist object to the notion of intelli-

MODELS AND METHODS 
29 
gent design or other supernatural phenomena, should the data 
warrant that they deserve attention? Most scientists would be 
delighted at the opening up of an exciting new field of study that 
would undoubtedly receive generous funding. As we will see, intel-
ligent design, in its current form, simply incorporates neither the 
evidence nor the theoretical arguments to warrant such attention. 
Furthermore, the assertions that science does not study the 
supernatural and that supernatural hypotheses are untestable are 
factually incorrect. Right under the noses of the leaders of national 
science organizations who make these public statements, capable, 
credentialed scientists are investigating the possibility of supernat-
ural causes. As we will discuss in a later chapter, reputable institu-
tions such as the Mayo Clinic, Harvard University, and Duke Uni-
versity are studying phenomena that, if verified, would provide 
strong empirical support for the existence of some nonmaterial ele-
ment in the universe. These experiments are designed to test the 
healing power of distant, blinded intercessory prayer. Their results 
have been published in peer-reviewed medical journals. 
Unfortunately, the prayer literature is marred by some very 
poor experimental work. But in reading the best of the published 
papers of the most reputable organizations you will witness all 
the indications of proper scientific methodology at work. If they 
are not science, then I do not know what is. 
The self-imposed convention of science that limits inquiry to 
objective observations of the world and generally seeks natural 
accounts for all phenomena is called methodological naturalism. We 
have also noted that methodological naturalism is often conflated 
with metaphysical naturalism, which assumes that reality itself is 
purely natural, that is, composed solely of material objects. 
Methodological naturalism can still be applied without 
implying any dogmatic attachment to metaphysical naturalism. 
The thesis of this book is that the supernatural hypothesis of God 
is testable, verifiable, and falsifiable by the established methods 
of science. We can imagine all sorts of phenomena that, if 

30 
GOD:THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
observed by means of methodological naturalism, would suggest 
the possibility of some reality that is highly unlikely to be consis-
tent with metaphysical naturalism. 
For example, it could happen that a series of carefully con-
trolled experiments provide independent, replicable, statistically 
significant evidence that distant, intercessory prayer of a specific 
kind, say, Catholic, cures certain illnesses while the prayers of 
other religious groups do not. It is difficult to imagine any plau-
sible natural explanation for this hypothetical result. 
IMPOSSIBLE GODS 
Before proceeding with the scientific evidence bearing on the 
God hypothesis, let us make a quick review of those disproofs of 
God's existence that are based on philosophy. For a recent survey, 
see The Non-Existence of God by Nicholas Everitt.12 Philosophers 
Michael Martin and Ricki Monnier have assembled a volume of 
essays on the logical arguments claiming to show the impossi-
bility of gods with various attributes.13 Here is how they classify 
these types of disproofs: 
• definitional disproofs based on an inconsistency in the def-
inition of God 
• deductive evil disproofs based on the inconsistency 
between the existence of God who has certain attributes 
and the existence of evil 
• doctrinal disproofs based on an inconsistency between the 
attributes of God and a particular religious doctrine, story, 
or teaching about God 
• multiple-attribute disproofs based on an inconsistency 
between two or more divine attributes 
• single-attribute disproofs based on an inconsistency within 
just one attribute 

MODELS AND METHODS 
31 
These disproofs merit greater credence than the claimed 
philosophical proofs of the existence of God, for the same reason 
scientists and philosophers give more credence to falsifications of 
scientific models than to the verifications. The logical disproofs 
seem inescapable, unless you change the rules of the game or, 
more commonly, change the definitions of the words being used 
in the argument. 
In the following, formal statements for a sample of nonexis-
tence arguments are listed, just to give the reader the flavor of the 
philosophical debate. They will not be discussed here since they 
are independent of the scientific arguments that form my main 
thesis; the conclusions of this book are in no way dependent on 
their validity. They are listed for completeness and for contrast 
with the scientific arguments. For the details, see the individual 
essays in the compilation by Martin and Monnier.14 
The first two are examples of definitional disproofs: 
An All-Virtuous Being Cannot Exist 
1. God is (by definition) a being than which no greater being 
can be thought. 
2. Greatness includes the greatness of virtue. 
3. Therefore, God is a being than which no being could be 
more virtuous. 
4. But virtue involves overcoming pains and danger. 
5. Indeed, a being can only be properly said to be virtuous if 
it can suffer pain or be destroyed. 
6. A God that can suffer pain or is destructible is not one 
than which no greater being can be thought. 
7. For you can think of a greater being, one that is nonsuf-
fering and indestructible. 
8. Therefore, God does not exist.15 

32 
GOD:THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
Worship and Moral Agency 
1. If any being is God, he must be a fitting object of worship. 
2. No being could possibly be a fitting object of worship, 
since worship requires the abandonment of one's role as 
an autonomous moral agent. 
3. Therefore, there cannot be any being who is God.16 
We have already briefly noted the problem of evil, and will be 
saying much more about it. For now, let us just indicate its formal 
statement: 
The Problem of Evil 
1. If God exists, then the attributes of God are consistent with 
the existence of evil. 
2. The attributes of God are not consistent with the existence 
of evil. 
3. Therefore, God does not and cannot exist.17 
The following three are examples of multiple-attribute disproofs: 
A Perfect Creator Cannot Exist 
1. If God exists, then he is perfect. 
2. If God exists, then he is the creator of the universe. 
3. If a being is perfect, then whatever he creates must be perfect. 
4. But the universe is not perfect. 
5. Therefore, it is impossible for a perfect being to be the cre-
ator of the universe. 
6. Hence, it is impossible for God to exist.18 

MODELS AND METHODS 
33 
A Transcendent Being Cannot Be Omnipresent 
1. If God exists, then he is transcendent (i.e., outside space 
and time). 
2. If God exists, he is omnipresent. 
3. To be transcendent, a being cannot exist anywhere in space. 
4. To be omnipresent, a being must exist everywhere in space. 
5. Hence it is impossible for a transcendent being to be 
omnipresent. 
6. Therefore, it is impossible for God to exist.19 
A Personal Being Cannot Be Nonphysical 
1. If God exists, then he is nonphysical. 
2. If God exists, then he is a person (or a personal being). 
3. A person (or personal being) needs to be physical. 
4. Hence, it is impossible for God to exist.20 
Finally, here is an example of a single-attribute disproof: 
The Paradox of Omnipotence 
1. Either God can create a stone that he cannot lift, or he 
cannot create a stone that he cannot lift. 
2. If God can create a stone that he cannot lift, then he is not 
omnipotent. 
3. If God cannot create a stone that he cannot lift, then he is 
not omnipotent. 
4. Therefore, God is not omnipotent.21 
The reader will undoubtedly see much in these bare formal state-
ments that needs clarification; again I address you to the original 
essays for details and additional disproofs of this kind. Like most 
philosophical discussions, it mainly comes down to the mean-

34 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
ings of words and assembling them into coherent, consistent 
statements. The philosophers who formulated these disproofs 
have been careful about defining the terms used, while those who 
dispute them will generally disagree with those definitions or the 
way they have been interpreted. As a result, the debate continues. 
WAYS OUT 
Ways out of purely logical arguments can always be found, simply 
by relaxing one or more of the premises or, as noted, one of the 
definitions. For example, assume God is not omnibenevolent. 
Indeed, the God of the more conservative elements of Judaism, 
Christianity, and Islam that take their scriptures literally can 
hardly be called omnibenevolent—or even very benevolent. No 
one reading the Bible or Qur'an literally can possibly regard the 
God described therein as all-good. We will see examples later, but 
for now the reader is invited to simply pick up an Old Testament 
or Qu'ran, open to a random page, and read for a while. It will not 
take you long to find an act or statement of God that you find 
inconsistent with your own concepts of what is good. And, as we 
will also see, much in the Gospel can hardly be called "good." 
In any event, the scientific case is not limited to an 
omnibenevolent, omniscient, or omnipotent god. 
The scientific method incorporates a means to adjudicate dis-
putes that otherwise might run in circles, never converging as dis-
putants on all sides of an issue continually redefine and refine 
their language. In science we are able to break out of this vicious 
cycle by calling upon empirical observations as the final judge. Of 
course, ways out of the scientific arguments can also be achieved 
by redefining God or by disputing the empirical facts. The reader 
will simply have to judge for herself whether the examples I 
present are convincing. 

MODELS AND METHODS 
35 
MODELS AND THEORIES 
Science is not just a matter of making observations but also devel-
oping models to describe those observations. In fact, philoso-
phers have pointed out that any observation or measurement we 
make in science depends on some model or theory. They assert 
that all observations are "theory-laden." For example, when we 
measure the time it takes for a particle to move from one point to 
another we must first assume a model in which particles are visu-
alized as moving in space and time. The model must begin by 
defining space and time. 
The use of models, which are simplified pictures of observa-
tions, is not limited to the professional practice of science. They 
are often used to deal with the ordinary problems of life. For 
example, we model the sun as an orb rising in the east and set-
ting in the west. Travelers heading to the west can point them-
selves each day in the direction of the setting sun and, correcting 
for some northward or southward drift (depending on season), 
arrive safely at their destination. No additional elements to the 
model are needed—in particular, no metaphysics. The ancient 
Greeks viewed the sun as the gold-helmeted god Apollo, driving 
a golden chariot across the sky. The ancient Chinese thought it 
was a golden bird. Neither metaphysical model offers any addi-
tional aid to our travelers in their navigation. And, that lack of 
necessity in the absence of any other evidence testifies strongly 
for the nonexistence of such a god or golden bird. 
While utilizing models is a normal process in everyday life, 
scientific models objectify and, whenever possible, quantify the 
procedure—thus providing a rational means for distinguishing 
between what works and what does not. Whenever possible, 
mathematics and logic are used as tools to enforce a consistency 
that is not always found in commonplace statements, which are 
formulated in the vernacular. For example, instead of saying that 
your blood pressure is probably high, a physician will measure it 

36 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
and give you two numbers, say, 130 over 100. Then he might pre-
scribe some calculated amount of medication to bring the 100 
down to 80. 
Scientific instruments that enhance the power of our senses 
commonly yield quantifiable measurements, enabling scientists to 
deal with variables having numerical values upon which all 
observers can agree—within equally quantifiable measurement 
errors. While some sciences may deal with nonnumerical variables, 
physical models are almost always quantitative and the logical 
power of mathematics is put to great use in their utilization. 
Most scientific models begin by defining their observables 
operationally, that is, by characterizing them in terms of a well-
prescribed, repeatable measuring procedure. For example (as Ein-
stein emphasized), time is defined as what you read on a clock. 
Temperature is what you read on a thermometer. Specific instru-
ments are chosen as standards. A mathematical framework is 
then formulated that defines other variables as functions of the 
observables and postulates connections between these quantities. 
The term model usually applies to the preliminary stages of a 
scientific process when considerable testing and further work still 
need to be done. The "theories" that arise from this effort are not 
the unsupported speculations that they are often accused of being 
by those unfamiliar with the scientific method or by those wishing 
to demean it. To be accepted into the ranks of scientific knowl-
edge, theories must demonstrate their value by passing numerous, 
risky empirical tests and by showing themselves to be useful. The-
ories that fail these tests, or do not prove useful, are discarded. 
In this book we will make frequent reference to the standard 
models of fundamental physics and cosmology. By now these have 
sufficiently advanced to the level where they can be honestly recog-
nized as standard theories, although their prior designations as 
models continue to be used in the literature, presumably to main-
tain familiarity. I find it amusing and ironic that opponents of evo-
lution think they are undermining it by calling it "just a theory." 

MODELS AND METHODS 
37 
The validity of the scientific method is justified by its 
immense success. However, we must recognize and acknowledge 
that scientific models and theories, no matter how well estab-
lished, are still human contrivances and subject to change by 
future developments. This is in contrast to revelations from God, 
which should be true unconditionally and not subject to revi-
sion. Furthermore, the elements of scientific models, especially at 
the deepest level of quantum phenomena, need not correspond 
precisely to the elements of whatever "true reality" is out there 
beyond the signals we receive with our senses and instruments. 
We can never know when some new model will come along that 
surpasses the old one. We regard such a happening as the wel-
come progress of science rather than some disastrous revolution 
that tears down the whole prior edifice, rendering it worthless. 
For example, despite a common misunderstanding, the models 
of Newtonian mechanics were hardly rendered useless by the 
twin twentieth-century developments of relativity and quantum 
mechanics. Newtonian physics continue to find major applica-
tion in contemporary science and technology. It is still what most 
students learn in physics classes and what most engineers and 
others use when they apply physics in their professions. 
Perhaps quarks and electrons are not real, although they are 
part of the highly successful standard model of particle physics. We 
cannot say. But we can say, with high likelihood, that some of the 
elements of older models, such as the ether, are not part of the real 
world. And, while we cannot prove that every variety of god or 
spirit does not exist in a world beyond the senses, we have no more 
rational basis for including them than we have for assuming that 
the sun is a god driving a chariot across the sky. Furthermore, we 
can proceed to put our models to practical use without ever settling 
any metaphysical questions. Metaphysics has surprisingly little use 
and would not even be worth discussing if we did not have this 
great desire to understand ultimate reality as best as we can. 
The ingredients of scientific models are not limited to those 

38 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
supported by direct observation. For example, the standard 
model of elementary particles and forces contains objects such as 
quarks, the presumed constituents of atomic nuclei, which have 
never been seen as free particles. In fact, the theory in its current 
form requires that they not be free. The observation of a free 
quark would falsify that aspect of the standard model, although 
nicely confirm the quark idea itself. 
Indeed, the development of models in physics is often moti-
vated by considerations of logical and mathematical beauty, such 
as symmetry principles. But they still must be tested against 
observations. 
Astronomical models include black holes, which can only be 
observed indirectly. Cosmological models include dark matter 
and dark energy, which remain unidentified at this writing but 
are inferred from the data. The models currently used in modern 
physics, astronomy, and cosmology are solidly grounded on 
direct observations and have survived the most intensive empir-
ical testing. By virtue of this success, they can be used to make 
inferences that are surely superior to speculations simply pulled 
out of thin air. 
Physicists generally speak as if the unobserved elements of 
their models, such as quarks, are "real" particles. However, this is 
a metaphysical assumption that they have no way of verifying 
and, indeed, have no real need (or desire) to do so. The models 
of physics and their unobserved elements are human inventions 
and represent the best we can do in describing objective reality. 
When a model successfully describes a wide range of observa-
tions, we can be confident that the elements of those models have 
something to do with whatever reality is out there, but less con-
fident that they constitute reality itself. 
On the other hand, if a model does not work there is no basis 
to conclude that any unique element of that model is still part of 
reality. An example is the electromagnetic ether, which was dis-
cussed earlier. 

MODELS AND METHODS 
39 
Having read this, please do not assume that the doctrine of 
postmodernism is being promoted here. Science is decidedly not 
just another cultural narrative. The science referred to is called 
"Western science," which was developed originally by Europeans 
utilizing mathematical insights from India (the concept of 
"zero"), the Arab world (numerals, algebra), and other cultures. 
Peoples in all but the most primitive societies now utilize science. 
While we might consider science another "cultural narrative," it 
differs from other cultural narratives because of its superior 
power, utility, and universality. 
MODELING GOD 
Everyone involved in discourses on the existence of gods may be 
well advised to consider the approach outlined above. Like 
quarks, the gods are human inventions based on human con-
cepts. Whether or not we can say if the gods people talk about 
have anything to do with whatever objective reality is out there 
depends on the empirical success of the models that are built 
around these hypothetical entities. Whatever a god's true nature, 
if one exists, a god model remains the best we can do in talking 
about that god. 
If we accept this procedure, then we can eliminate a whole 
class of objections that are made to types of logical and scientific 
arguments formulated in this book. In these arguments, God is 
assumed to have certain attributes. The theologian may ask: how 
can we mere mortals know about the true nature of a god who 
lies beyond our sensibilities? The answer is that we do not need 
to know—just as physicists do not need to know the ultimate 
reality behind quarks. Physicists are satisfied that they have a 
model, which currently includes quarks, that agrees beautifully 
with the data. The quark model is empirically grounded. It repre-
sents the best we humans have been able to do thus far in 

40 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
describing whatever objective reality underlies nuclear and sub-
nuclear observations. Whether quarks are real or not does not 
change this. Whether any of the objects of scientific models are 
real or not does not change the fact that those models have 
immense utility. This includes Newtonian physics, despite the 
further developments of twentieth-century relativity and 
quantum mechanics. 
Analogously, if a particular god model successfully predicts 
empirical results that cannot be accounted for by any other 
known means, then we would be rational in tentatively con-
cluding that the model describes some aspect of an objective 
reality without being forced to prove that god really is as 
described in the details of the model. 
Still, any god model remains a human invention, formulated 
in terms of human qualities that we can comprehend, such as 
love and goodness. Indeed, the gods of ancient mythology— 
including the Judeo-Christian-Islamic God—are clearly models 
contrived by humans in terms people could understand. What is 
amazing is that in this sophisticated modern age so many still 
cling to primitive, archaic images from the childhood of 
humanity. 
On the flip side, when a model is strongly falsified by the 
data, then those elements of the model that have been severely 
tested by observations should be rejected as not very likely to be 
representative of an objective reality. 
The following example should illustrate this rather subtle 
concept. Observations of electromagnetic phenomena support a 
model of electromagnetism containing pointlike electric charges 
we can call electric monopoles. Examples include ions, atomic 
nuclei, electrons, and quarks. Symmetry arguments would lead 
you to include in the model point magnetic charges—magnetic 
monopoles. 
Yet the simplest observed magnetic sources are described as 
magnetic dipoles—bar magnets that have north and south poles. 

MODELS AND METHODS 
41 
Electric dipoles such as hydrogen atoms, with a positive and a neg-
ative point charge separated in space, exist as well. But you can tear 
them apart into separate electric monopoles, such as an electron 
and a proton. On the other hand, if you cut away a piece of the 
north pole of a bar magnet, instead of getting a separate north and 
south monopole you get two dipoles—two bar magnets. 
Despite these empirical facts, some theoretical basis exists for 
magnetic monopoles, and they have been searched for exten-
sively with no success. The current standard model contains per-
haps a single magnetic monopole in the visible universe, which 
has no effect on anything. That is, the model does include a mag-
netic monopole, but we can proceed to use our conventional 
electromagnetic theory, which contains no magnetic monopoles, 
for all practical applications. 
Let us apply this same line of reasoning to God. When we 
show that a particular model of God fails to agree with the data, 
then people would not be very rational in using such a model as 
a guide to their religious and personal activities. While it remains 
possible that a god exists analogous to the lonely magnetic 
monopole, one who has no effect on anything, there is no point 
worshiping him. The gods we will consider are important ele-
ments of scientific models that can be empirically tested, such as 
by the successful consequences of prayer. 
THE SCIENTIFIC GOD MODEL 
So, let us now define a scientific God model, a theory of God. A 
supreme being is hypothesized to exist having the following 
attributes: 
1. God is the creator and preserver of the universe. 
2. God is the architect of the structure of the universe and the 
author of the laws of nature. 

42 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
3. God steps in whenever he wishes to change the course of 
events, which may include violating his own laws as, for 
example, in response to human entreaties. 
4. God is the creator and preserver of life and humanity, 
where human beings are special in relation to other life-
forms. 
5. God has endowed humans with immaterial, eternal souls 
that exist independent of their bodies and carry the 
essence of a person's character and selfhood. 
6. God is the source of morality and other human values 
such as freedom, justice, and democracy. 
7. God has revealed truths in scriptures and by communi-
cating directly to select individuals throughout history. 
8. God does not deliberately hide from any human being 
who is open to finding evidence for his presence. 
Most of these attributes are traditionally associated with the 
Judeo-Christian-Islamic God, and many are shared by the gods of 
diverse religions. Note, however, that the traditional attributes of 
omniscience, omnipotence, and omnibenevolence—the 30 char-
acteristics usually associated with the Judeo-Christian-Islamic 
God—have been omitted. Such a God is already ruled out by the 
arguments of logical inconsistency summarized above. While the 
30s will show up on occasion as supplementary attributes, they 
will rarely be needed. For example, the case against a creator god 
will apply to any such god, even an evil or imperfect one. Further-
more, as will be emphasized throughout, the God of the 
monotheistic scriptures—Old Testament or Hebrew Bible, New 
Testament, and Qur'an—is not omnibenevolent, and so not 
ruled out by logical inconsistency. The observable effects that 
such a God may be expected to have are still testable by the 
normal, objective processes of science. 

MODELS AND METHODS 
43 
THE GENERIC ARGUMENT 
The scientific argument against the existence of God will be a 
modified form of the lack-of-evidence argument: 
1. Hypothesize a God who plays an important role in the 
universe. 
2. Assume that God has specific attributes that should pro-
vide objective evidence for his existence. 
3. Look for such evidence with an open mind. 
4. If such evidence is found, conclude that God may exist. 
5. If such objective evidence is not found, conclude beyond 
a reasonable doubt that a God with these properties does 
not exist. 
Recall that it is easier to falsify a hypothesis than verify one. The 
best we can do if the data support a particular god model is 
acknowledge that faith in such a God is rational. However, just as 
we should not use a failed physical model that does not work, it 
would be unwise for us to guide our lives by religions that wor-
ship any gods that fail to agree with the data. 
NOTES 
1. Theodore M. Drange, Nonbelief and Evil: Two Arguments for the 
Nonexistence of God (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1998), p. 41. 
2. See also John L. Schellenberg, Divine Hiddenness and Human 
Reason (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1993). 
3. For a good example of data mining, see my discussion of the 
experiment by Elisabeth Targ and collaborators in Victor J. Stenger, Has 
Science Found God? The Latest Results in the Search for Purpose in the Uni-
verse (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2003), pp. 250-53. 
4. Karl Popper, The Logic of Scientific Discovery, English ed. 

44 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
(London: Hutchinson; New York: Basic Books, 1959). Originally pub-
lished in German (Vienna: Springer Verlag, 1934). 
5. Rudolf Carnap, "Testability and Meaning," Philosophy of Science 
B 3 (1936): 19-21; B 4 (1937): 1-40. 
6. Philip J. Kitcher, Abusing Science: The Case Against Creationism 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982). Note that the author was refuting 
the common creationist claim that evolution is not science because it is 
not falsifiable. Kitcher need not have bothered. Evolution is eminently 
falsifiable, as we show in chapter 3. 
7. I discuss several examples in Victor J. Stenger, Physics and Psy-
chics: The Search for a World beyond the Senses (Amherst, NY: Prometheus 
Books, 1990). 
8. Karl Popper, "Metaphysics and Criticizability," in Popper Selec-
tions, ed. David Miller (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1985), p. 214. Originally published in 1958. 
9. Ibid. 
10. National Academy of Sciences, Teaching About Evolution and the 
Nature of Science (Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences, 
1998), p. 58. Online at http://www.nap.edu/catalog/5787.html  
(accessed March 5, 2006). 
11. Phillip E. Johnson, Evolution as Dogma: The Establishment of Natu-
ralism (Dallas, TX: Haughton Publishing Co., 1990); Darwin on Trial 
(Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1991); Reason in the Balance: The 
Case Against Naturalism in Science, Law, and Education (Downers Grove, IL: 
InterVarsity Press, 1995); Defeating Darwinism by Opening Minds (Downers 
Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1997); The Wedge of Truth: Splitting the Foun-
dations of Naturalism (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2001). 
12. Nicholas Everitt, The Non-Existence of God (London, New York: 
Routledge, 2004). 
13. Michael Martin and Ricki Monnier, eds., The Impossibility of God 
(Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2003). 
14. Ibid. 
15. Douglas Walton, "Can an Ancient Argument of Carneades on 
Cardinal Virtues and Divine Attributes Be Used to Disprove the Exis-
tence of God?" Philo 2, no. 2 (1999): 5-13; reprinted in Martin and 
Monnier, The Impossibility of God, pp. 35-44. 

MODELS AND METHODS 
45 
16. James Rachels, "God and Moral Autonomy," in Can Ethics Pro-
vide Answers? And Other Essays in Moral Philosophy (New York: Rowman 
& Littlefield, 1997), pp. 109-23; reprinted in Martin and Monnier, The 
Impossibility of God, pp. 45-58. 
17. Martin and Monnier, The Impossibility of God, p. 59. 
18. Theodore M. Drange, "Incompatible-Properties Arguments—A 
Survey," Philo 1, no. 2 (1998): 49-60; in Martin and Monnier, The 
Impossibility of God, pp. 185-97. 
19. Ibid. 
20. Ibid. 
21. J. L. Cowen, "The Paradox of Omnipotence Revisited," Cana-
dian Journal of Philosophy 3, no. 3 (March 1974): 435-45; reprinted in 
Martin and Monnier, The Impossibility of God, p. 337. 

Chapter 2 
THE ILLUSION OF DESIGN 
Look round this universe. What an immense profusion of beings ani-
mated and organized, sensible and active! . . . But inspect a little more 
narrowly these living existences. . . . How hostile and destructive to 
each other! How insufficient all of them for their own happiness! 
—David Hume 
PALEY'S WATCH 
P
erhaps no argument is heard more frequently in support of 
the existence of God than the argument from design. It rep-
resents the most common form of the God of the gaps argument: 
the universe and, in particular, living organisms on Earth are said 
to be simply too complex to have arisen by any conceivable nat-
ural mechanism. 
47 

48 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
Before the age of science, religious belief was based on faith, 
cultural tradition, and a confidence in the revealed truth in the 
scriptures and teachings of holy men and women specially 
selected by God. As science began to erode these beliefs by 
showing that many of the traditional teachings, such as that of a 
flat Earth at rest at the center of a firmament of stars and planets 
were simply wrong, people began to look to science itself for evi-
dence of a supreme being that did not depend on any assump-
tions about the literal truth of the Bible or divine revelation. 
The notion that the observation of nature alone provides evi-
dence for the existence of God has a long history. It received per-
haps its most brilliant exposition in the work of Anglican 
archdeacon William Paley (d. 1805). In his Natural Theology or Evi-
dences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity Collected from the 
Appearance of Nature, first published in 1802,1 Paley wrote about 
finding both a stone and a watch while crossing a heath. While the 
stone would be regarded as a simple part of nature, no one would 
question that the watch is an artifice, designed for the purpose of 
telling time. Paley then alleged that objects of nature, such as the 
human eye, give every indication of being contrivances. 
Paley's argument continues to be used down to the present 
day. Just a few weeks before writing these words, two Jehovah's 
Witnesses came to my door. When I politely expressed my skep-
ticism, one began, "Suppose you found a watch ..." Design argu-
ments never die; nor do they fade away. 
Sophisticated modern forms of the argument from design are 
found in the current movement called intelligent design, which 
asserts that many biological systems are far too complex to have 
arisen naturally. Also classifying as an argument from design is 
the contemporary claim that the laws and constants of physics are 
"fine-tuned" so that the universe is able to contain life. This is 
commonly but misleadingly called the anthropic principle. 
Believers also often ask how the universe itself can have appeared, 
why there is something rather than nothing, how the laws of 

THE ILLUSION OF DESIGN 
49 
nature and human reason could possibly have arisen—all 
without the action of a supreme being who transcends the world 
of space, time, and matter. In this chapter and those that follow, 
we will see what science has to say about these questions. 
DARWINISM 
When Charles Darwin (d. 1882) entered Cambridge University 
in 1827 to study for the clergy, he was assigned to the same 
rooms in Christ's College occupied by William Paley seventy 
years earlier.2 By that time, the syllabus included the study of 
Paley's works and Darwin was deeply impressed. He remarked 
that he could have written out the whole of Paley's 1794 treatise, 
A View of the Evidences of Christianity, and that Natural Theology 
"gave me as much delight as did Euclid."3 
Yet it would be Darwin who provided the answer to Paley and 
produced the most profound challenge to religious belief since 
Copernicus removed Earth from the center of the universe. 
Darwin's discovery caused him great, personal grief and serves as 
an exemplar of a scientist following the evidence wherever its 
leads and whatever the consequences. 
Although the idea of evolution had been around for a while, 
Darwin's grandfather Erasmus Darwin being a notable proponent, 
no one had recognized the mechanism involved. That mechanism, 
proposed by Darwin in 1859 in The Origin of Species4 and independ-
ently by Alfred Russel Wallace,5 was natural selection by which organ-
isms accumulate changes that enable them to survive and have 
progeny that maintain those features. Darwin had actually held back 
publishing for twenty years until Wallace wrote him with his ideas 
and forced him to go public. Darwin's work was by far the more 
comprehensive and deserved the greater recognition it received. 
Today we understand the process of natural selection in terms 
of the genetic information carried in the DNA of cells and how it 

50 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
is modified by random mutations. It is not my purpose here to 
give yet another exposition of evolution. Darwin's theory, 
updated by the many developments since his time, resides at the 
foundation of modern biology. Evolution by natural selection is 
accepted as an observed fact by the great majority of biologists 
and scientists in related fields, and is utilized in every aspect of 
modern life science including medicine. In terms of the same 
strict standards of empirical evidence that apply in all the natural 
sciences, Darwinian evolution is a well-established theory that 
has passed many critical tests. 
A common argument made by opponents of evolution is that 
it is not a "true" scientific theory, like electromagnetism or ther-
modynamics. They wrongly claim that evolution does not make 
predictions that can be tested and is thus not falsifiable. In fact, 
evolution is eminently predictive and falsifiable. 
Darwin specifically predicted that recognizable human ances-
tors would be found in Africa. Many now have been. Evolutionary 
theory predicted that the use of antiviral or antibacterial agents 
would result in the emergence of resistant strains. This principle is, 
of course, a mainstay of contemporary medicine. Paleontologists 
correctly predicted that species showing the evolution from fish to 
amphibian would be found in Devonian strata. 
This example, among many, refutes the frequently heard cre-
ationist claim that "transitional forms" (presumably meaning 
transitional species) do not exist. Paleontologists had expected to 
find transitions from land-based mammals to whales for years. In 
the past decade, science journals, as well as the media, have been 
full of these finds. A simple Internet search will yield hundreds of 
examples of transitional species. 
The failure of many of these predictions would have falsified 
evolution. They did not fail. It is a trivial exercise to think of other 
ways to falsify evolution. For example, evolution would be falsified 
if we were to find bona fide remains of organisms out of place in 
the fossil record. Suppose mammals (horses, humans, or hippos) 

THE ILLUSION OF DESIGN 
51 
were found in the Paleozoic strata associated with trilobites, 
crinoids, and extinct corals. This would show that there was no evo-
lutionary process. But we do not find any such inconsistencies. 
My favorite example is over a hundred years old. Shortly after 
its publication in the nineteenth century, the theory of evolution 
was challenged by the famous physicist William Thomson, Lord 
Kelvin, whose thermodynamic calculations gave an age for Earth 
that was much too short for natural selection to operate. Darwin 
regarded this as the most serious challenge to his theory. 
However, at the time, nuclear energy was unknown. When 
this new form of energy was discovered early in the twentieth 
century, Kelvin and other physicists quickly realized that the 
energy released by nuclear reactions at the center of the sun 
would be very efficient, allowing the sun and other stars to last 
billions of years as a stable energy source. In fact, evolution can 
be said to have predicted the existence of such an energy source! 
When he learned of nuclear energy, Kelvin graciously withdrew 
his objection to evolution. 
As we will find several times in this book, some scientific 
arguments for the existence of God once had considerable force, 
and it was not until recently—within the last century—that accu-
mulated knowledge not only eliminated these lines of reasoning 
but also turned many of them on their heads to support the case 
against God. These examples amply refute the claim that science 
has nothing to say about God. One can imagine endless scenarios 
by which observations of the universe and life on Earth might 
confirm God's existence; we will mention just a few in this book. 
The discovery of human ancestors, the DNA and anatomical 
connections between humans and other animals (and even 
plants), and the use of animals in medical research falsify the 
hypothesis of a God who created humans as a distinct life-form. 
The fossil record, the existence of transitional species, and the 
actual observation of evolution in the laboratory falsify the 
hypothesis of a God who created separate "kinds" or species of 

52 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
life-forms at one time in history and left them unchanged since. 
It might have been otherwise. 
Many believers see no conflict between evolution and their 
faith. After all, God can do anything he wants. If he wanted to 
create life by means of evolution, then that's what he did. However, 
other believers have good reason to regard evolution as threatening 
to their own faith in the purposeful, divine creation of human life.6 
Evolution implies humanity was an accident and not the special 
creature of traditional doctrine. Many find this unacceptable and 
conclude, despite the evidence, that evolution must be wrong. 
However, if we are to rely on science as the arbiter of knowl-
edge rather than ancient superstitions, the opposite conclusion is 
warranted. Evolution removes the need to introduce God at any 
step in the process of the development of life from the simplest 
earlier forms. It does not explain the origin of life, so this gap still 
remains. This is insufficient to maintain consistency for some 
believers, especially since evolution is in deep disagreement with 
the biblical narrative of simultaneously created immutable 
forms. Furthermore, we have no reason to conclude that life itself 
could not have had a purely material origin. 
THE CREATIONISTS 
While a continuum of creationist views from extreme to mod-
erate continues to be heard, we can still identify a few dominant 
strains. Let us look at the recent history. According to Ronald 
Numbers, author of the definitive early history The Creationists, 
the term creationism did not originally apply to all forms of 
antievolution.7 Opponents of evolution were not always com-
mitted to the same, unified view of creation. However, by the 
1920s, the biblical creation story became the standard alternative 
to evolution in the United States and the creationist movement 
its champion. 

THE ILLUSION OF DESIGN 
53 
In that decade, Christian fundamentalists in the United States 
took over the front line of the battle. Under their influence, three 
states—Tennessee, Mississippi, and Arkansas—made the teaching 
of evolution a crime. Oklahoma prohibited textbooks promoting 
evolution, and Florida condemned the teaching of Darwinism as 
"subversive." 
In 1925 biology teacher John Scopes was brought to court in 
Dayton, Tennessee, for teaching evolution. This led to the sensa-
tional "Monkey Trial," with Clarence Darrow for the defense pitted 
against three-time losing Democratic presidential candidate 
William Jennings Bryan for the prosecution. Although Scopes was 
convicted (later overturned on appeal), the trial is still widely 
regarded as a public relations triumph for the Darwinians, as some-
what inaccurately depicted in the play and film Inherit the Wind. 
A new strain of creationism appeared in 1961 with the publi-
cation of The Genesis Flood by theologian John C. Whitcomb Jr. 
and hydraulic engineer Henry M. Morris,8 who were strongly 
influenced by earlier efforts by Seventh-day Adventist leader 
George McCready Price. The authors argued that science was com-
patible with Genesis, and although their scientific claims were not 
credible, conservative Christians sat up and took notice— 
recognizing a new strategy for combating hated Darwinism. 
Around 1970 Morris founded the Institute for Creation Science, 
which then led a movement to have the new "creation science" 
presented in public-school science classrooms. Biochemist Duane 
Gish traveled the country on behalf of the institute, giving talks 
and ambushing naive biologists in debates before huge, receptive 
audiences of churchgoers. Arkansas and Louisiana passed laws 
mandating the teaching of creation science alongside evolution. 
In 1982 a federal judge in Arkansas tossed out the law in that 
state, declaring creation science to be religion and not science.9 In 
1987 the Supreme Court ruled the Louisiana law unconstitutional. 
About this time, creation science speciated into two main 
branches, one holding to the more literal biblical picture of a 

54 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
young Earth and another that attempts to use sophisticated argu-
ments that appear, at least to the untutored eye, more consistent 
with established science. The second group has developed a new 
stealth creationism called intelligent design, which has the 
common shorthand, "ID." 
THE WEDGE OF INTELLIGENT DESIGN 
Learning from the mistakes of the creation scientists, proponents 
of ID downplay their religious motives in a so far not very suc-
cessful attempt to steer clear of the constitutional issue. They also 
have avoided the more egregious scientific errors of the young-
Earth creationists, and present this new form of creationism as 
"pure science." They claimed that design in nature can be scien-
tifically demonstrated and that the complexity of nature can be 
proved not to have arisen by natural processes alone.10 
In Creationism's Trojan Horse: The Wedge of Intelligent Design, 
philosopher Barbara Forrest and biologist Paul Gross detail the 
story of how the new creationism is fed and watered by a well-
funded conservative Christian organization called the Discovery 
Institute.11 The goals of this organization, documented by Forrest 
and Gross, are to "defeat scientific materialism and its destructive 
moral, cultural, and political legacies" and to "renew" science 
and culture along evangelical Christian lines. 
BEHE'S IRREDUCIBLE COMPLEXITY 
None of the claims of intelligent design proponents, especially 
the work of its primary theorists, biochemist Michael Behe and 
theologian William Dembski, have stood up under scientific 
scrutiny. Numerous books and articles have refuted their posi-
tions in great detail.12 Not only have their arguments been shown 

THE ILLUSION OF DESIGN 
55 
to be flawed, but also in several instances the factual claims on 
which they rest have been proven false. None of their work has 
been published in respected scientific journals.13 
Behe's fame rests on his 1996 popular-level book, Darwin's 
Black Box: The Biochemical Challenge to Evolution.14 There he intro-
duced the notion of irreducible complexity, which occurs when a 
system is reduced to several parts and can no longer function 
when any of the parts is removed. Behe argued that the individual 
parts could not have evolved by natural selection since they no 
longer have any function on which selection can operate. 
Thoroughly refuting Behe's argument, evolutionary biologists 
have listed many examples in nature where an organic system 
changes functions as the system evolves.15 They have provided 
plausible natural mechanisms for every example Behe presents, 
many of which were well known (except to Behe) before Behe 
ever sat down to write. 
The manner in which the parts of living systems change func-
tion over the course of evolution is one of those well-established 
facts of evolution that Behe and other proponents of intelligent 
design choose to ignore. Biological parts often evolve by natural 
selection by virtue of one function, and then gradually adapt to 
other functions as the larger system evolves. 
Many examples of organs and biological structures that are 
understood to have arisen from the modification of preexisting 
structure rather than the elegance of careful engineering can be 
found in the biological literature. Paleontologist Stephen Jay 
Gould made this point in his wonderful example of the panda's 
thumb.16 The panda appears to have six fingers, but its opposing 
"thumb" is not a finger at all but a bone in its wrist that has been 
enlarged to form a stubby protuberance handy for holding a stalk 
of bamboo shoots, the panda's only food. 
Behe is a biochemist, not an evolutionary biologist, and was 
unaware when he wrote his book that the mechanisms for the 
evolution of "irreducibly complex" systems were already dis-

56 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
cussed six decades earlier by the Nobel Prize winner Hermann 
Joseph Muller and have been common knowledge in the field 
since then.17 Behe cannot even be forgiven for simply falling into 
the God of the gaps trap. He did not even find a gap. 
THE EYE 
Let us look at the frequent example used by creationists since Paley: 
the human eye. In The Blind Watchmaker, which was primarily a 
contemporary evolution scientist's response to William Paley, zool-
ogist Richard Dawkins pointed out that the eye in all vertebrates is 
wired backward, with the wires from each light-gathering unit 
sticking out on the side nearest the light and traveling over the sur-
face of the retina where it passes through a hole, the "blind spot," 
to join to the optic nerve.18 Other animals, such as the octopodes 
and squids, have their eyes wired more rationally. 
This is often presented as an example of apparent "poor 
design." However, biologist (and devout Catholic) Kenneth 
Miller does not think this is a fair designation, since the arrange-
ment still works pretty well. He has shown how the wiring of the 
vertebrate is nicely described by evolution.19 The retina of the eye 
evolved as a modification of the outer layer of the brain that grad-
ually developed light sensitivity. The eye is neither poorly nor 
well designed. It is simply not designed. 
Eyes provide such obvious survival value that they developed at 
least forty times independently in the course of evolution.20 Neuro-
science has identified eight different optical solutions for collecting 
and focusing light, although all share similarities at the molecular 
and genetic levels.21 The physics and chemistry are the same; few 
ways exist for detecting photons. But, because of the important role 
of chance and local environment in the evolution of complex sys-
tems, different solutions to the problem were uncovered by 
random sampling of the varied paths allowed by evolution. In 

THE ILLUSION OF DESIGN 
57 
short, the structures of eyes look as they might be expected to look 
if they developed from purely material and mindless processes— 
chance plus natural selection—as these processes explore the space 
of possible survival solutions. 
DEMBSKI'S INFORMATION 
While to this date Behe has written one book, his Discovery Insti-
tute colleague William Dembski has been highly prolific, with sev-
eral books and many articles on intelligent design.22 Dembski 
claims that design in nature is mathematically demonstrable. Since 
his arguments are couched in highly and often ambiguous tech-
nical language, they require a certain expertise to understand and 
evaluate. Fortunately, many experts have taken the trouble to care-
fully examine Dembski's work. Almost universally they show it to 
be deeply flawed.23 I will just mention here one example where 
Dembski, like Behe, makes statements that are provably wrong. 
In his popular book Intelligent Design: The Bridge between Sci-
ence and Theology (no hiding the religious motive here), Dembski 
asserts, "Chance and law working in tandem cannot generate 
information."24 He calls this the Law of Conservation of Information. 
In Has Science Found God? I disproved this "law" by simply 
and trivially showing that the quantitative definition of informa-
tion, as used conventionally and, somewhat obscurely, by Dem-
bski is equivalent to negative entropy.25 Entropy, which is the 
quantitative measure of disorder in physics (hence information 
being related to negative entropy, or order), is not a conserved 
quantity like energy. In fact, the entropy of an "open" system 
(one that interacts with its environment by exchanging energy) 
can either increase or decrease. Certainly living systems on Earth 
are open systems. Indeed, a living organism is kept away from 
thermodynamic equilibrium by its use of sources of outside 
energy to maintain order. 

58 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
THE POLITICAL BATTLE TODAY 
While at this writing intelligent design continues to gain adher-
ents among those believers who cannot reconcile Darwinian nat-
ural selection with their faith, scientists of many faiths and scien-
tists of no faith have agreed overwhelmingly that intelligent 
design has not made its case scientifically. All the major scientific 
societies in the United States have issued statements supporting 
evolution and rejecting intelligent design. Behe's own depart-
ment at Lehigh University has put it as well as any: 
The faculty in the Department of Biological Sciences is com-
mitted to the highest standards of scientific integrity and aca-
demic function. This commitment carries with it unwavering 
support for academic freedom and the free exchange of ideas. It 
also demands the utmost respect for the scientific method, 
integrity in the conduct of research, and recognition that the 
validity of any scientific model comes only as a result of 
rational hypothesis testing, sound experimentation, and find-
ings that can be replicated by others. 
The department faculty, then, are unequivocal in their support 
of evolutionary theory, which has its roots in the seminal work 
of Charles Darwin and has been supported by findings accumu-
lated over 140 years. The sole dissenter from this position, Prof. 
Michael Behe, is a well-known proponent of "intelligent 
design." While we respect Prof. Behe's right to express his views, 
they are his alone and are in no way endorsed by the depart-
ment. It is our collective position that intelligent design has no 
basis in science, has not been tested experimentally, and should 
not be regarded as scientific.26 
Amid faculty protests, Dembski has left Baylor University, the 
largest Baptist university in the world, for the Southern Baptist 
Theological Seminary.27 Many scholars at Baylor and other Chris-

THE ILLUSION OF DESIGN 
59 
tian universities have come to realize that intelligent design does 
not provide respectable support for their religious beliefs.28 
The battle over intelligent design, which is fought in the polit-
ical arena rather than in scientific venues, is producing its share of 
litigation.29 In a court case that attracted world attention in 
December 2005, a federal court in Dover, Pennsylvania, deter-
mined that intelligent design was motivated by religion and thus 
presenting it in science classes in public schools is unconstitu-
tional.30 This would seem to signal the death knell for intelligent 
design except for a subtle point that has escaped the notice of most 
of the scientific community and others that support evolution. 
In the Dover trial Judge John E. Jones III ruled that teaching 
intelligent design (ID) in public-school science classes is an 
unconstitutional violation of church and state. This case mirrored 
McLean v. Arkansas, described above. 
In both trials, the presiding federal judges went further than 
was necessary in making their rulings. Not only did the jurists 
rule creation science and ID as unconstitutional entanglements 
of government with religion, which would have been sufficient to 
decide each case (as Judge Jones admitted in his decision), but 
they also labeled them as not science. In doing so, they were 
forced to define science—something on which neither scientists 
nor philosophers have been able to reach a consensus. 
In Arkansas, Judge William R. Overton relied mainly on the 
testimony of philosopher Michael Ruse and defined science as 
follows:31 
(1) It is guided by natural law; 
(2) It has to be explained by reference to natural law; 
(3) It is testable against the empirical world; 
(4) Its conclusions are tentative, that is, are not necessarily 
the final word; 
(5) It is falsifiable. 

60 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
The eminent philosopher Larry Laudan, my colleague at the Uni-
versity of Hawaii at the time, had worked for years on the so-
called demarcation problem, how to draw a line between science 
and nonscience. When the Arkansas decision was announced, 
Laudan objected strenuously. He pointed out that creation sci-
ence is in fact testable, tentative, and falsifiable. For example, it 
predicts a young Earth and other geological facts that have, in 
fact, been falsified. Falsified science can still be science, just 
wrong science. Laudan warned that the Arkansas decision would 
come back to haunt science by "perpetuating and canonizing a 
false stereotype on what science is and how it works."32 
Coming up to date, we similarly find that intelligent design is 
testable, tentative, and falsifiable. As described above, the claims 
of primary design theorists William Dembski and Michael Behe 
have been thoroughly refuted and in some cases falsified. 
I am not quibbling with the ruling that ID, as practiced by the 
Dover Board of Education, represented an unconstitutional 
attempt to promote a sectarian view of creation under the guise 
of science. And I also agree that ID has all the markings of pseu-
doscience rather than genuine science. 
Judge Jones relied on the Arkansas precedent and witnesses 
from both sides who testified that for ID to be considered science, 
the ground rules of science would have to be broadened to allow 
the consideration of supernatural forces. This position was both 
unwise and incorrect, for reasons I discussed in chapter 1. It is 
unwise because it plays into the hands of those who accuse sci-
ence of dogmatism in refusing to consider the possibility on non-
natural elements at work in the universe. It is incorrect because 
science is not forbidden from considering supernatural causes. 
Furthermore, some reputable scientists are doing just that. 

THE ILLUSION OF DESIGN 
61 
SELF-ORGANIZATION 
Proponents of intelligent design often point to a statement by "400 
scientists" that is purported to demonstrate their support for intel-
ligent design. Let me quote the exact statement: "We are skeptical 
of claims for the ability of random mutation and natural selection 
to account for the complexity of life. Careful examination of the 
evidence for Darwinian theory should be encouraged."33 
Note that "intelligent design" does not appear in the state-
ment. In fact, it is rather a mild expression of skepticism, always 
a reasonable scientific attitude, and a gratuitous call for careful 
examination of the evidence for Darwin's theory—unnecessary 
because this has been the rule in evolution science since Darwin's 
voyage on the Beagle. Indeed, Darwin's work still serves as an 
exemplar of the best in empirical and theoretical science, and is 
one of the most strenuously tested. 
Nevertheless, there may indeed be more to the mechanism of 
evolution than random mutation and natural selection. It simply 
isn't intelligent design. Complex material systems exhibit a 
purely natural process called self-organization and this appears to 
occur in both living and nonliving systems. 
In his beautifully illustrated book The Self-Made Tapestry, 
Philip Ball gives many examples of pattern formation in nature 
that should provide a strong antidote for those who still labor 
under the delusion that mindless natural processes are unable to 
account for the complex world we see around us.34 The fact that 
many patterns observed in biological systems are also present in 
nonliving systems and can be understood in terms of elementary, 
reductionist physics also should provide an antidote for those 
who still labor under the delusion that special holistic or nonreduc-
tive processes are needed to account for the complexity of life. 
Simplicity easily begets complexity in the world of locally inter-
acting particles.35 The whole is the sum of its parts. 
One remarkable observation, for example, is the frequent 

62 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
appearance in nature of the Fibonacci sequence of numbers. This is 
the set of numbers in which each entry is the sum of the pre-
ceding two: 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, . . . The number of 
petals on many flowers is a Fibonacci number. Buttercups have 
five petals, marigolds have thirteen, and asters have twenty-one. 
Dembski has attempted to argue that the appearance of what 
he calls complex specified information is evidence for "intelligent 
design" in the universe. He claims that simple natural processes 
are incapable of producing complex specified information.36 In 
his 1999 book, Intelligent Design, Dembski gives an example of 
the type of complex specified information that, when observed in 
nature, would in his view provide evidence for an intelligent 
source of that information. He refers to the film Contact, based on 
the novel of the same name by famed astronomer Carl Sagan.37 
In the film, an extraterrestrial signal is observed by astrono-
mers and interpreted as the sequence of prime numbers from 2 
to 101. The astronomers in the story take this as evidence for an 
extraterrestrial intelligence. Dembski argues that many living 
things on Earth exhibit this kind of complex specified informa-
tion that can only be produced by extraterrestrial, or perhaps 
extra-universal intelligence. 
But Dembski does not have to wait for signals from outer 
space to provide an interesting mathematical sequence. He can 
walk out into his garden and count the petals on flowers. He will 
find that most contain "complex specified information" that 
comes from purely natural processes. 
One example, given by Ball, is the double spiral pattern that 
is commonly found in nature. In 80 percent of plant species, 
leaves spiral up the stem, each separated from the one below by 
a constant angle turn.38 A double spiral pattern, twisting in oppo-
site directions, is seen when viewed from above. This double 
spiral pattern is also seen in the florets of flower heads such as the 
sunflower (see fig. 2.1) and the leaflets in a pinecone. 
It might be thought that some biological process, perhaps 

THE ILLUSION OF DESIGN 
63 
associated with Darwinian evolution, is taking place. However, it 
turns out to be simple physics—the minimization of potential 
energy. 
In 1992 Stephanie Douady and Yves Couder placed tiny 
droplets of magnetic fluid on a film of oil. They applied a vertical 
magnetic field that polarized the droplets and caused them to 
repel one another. Another field was applied along the periphery 
that pulled the droplets to the edge. They observed the droplets 
arrange themselves in a double spiral, thus demonstrating that 
the mechanism for spiral formation is physical rather than 
uniquely biological.39 
Several computer simulations have reproduced this result. 
However, I decided to try one myself that made as few assump-
tions as possible. I started with an electrically charged particle, 
such as an electron, and added more particles one at a time in 
rings of increasing radius from the central particle. I chose a par-
ticle location in each ring as the position for which the electric 
potential energy for a particle in that ring is minimum. The result 
is shown in figure 2.2. We see that the double spiral pattern is 
reproduced. Please note that this pattern was not built into the 
algorithm used, which involved only minimizing the total poten-
Fig. 2.1. 
A sunflower 
showing the 
double spiral 
pattern of 
florets in the 
flower head. 
Photograph by 
John Stone. 

64 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
Fig. 2.2. The dis-
tribution of 
charged particles 
that minimizes 
potential energy. 
The double spiral 
pattern commonly 
seen in plants is 
reproduced. 
tial energy, where the potential energy surrounding a point par-
ticle is spherically symmetric. 
With this simple computer program, I have demonstrated the 
process called spontaneous symmetry breaking, whereby the sym-
metry of a system is broken naturally, that is, without being 
forced on the system by some asymmetric mechanism. We will 
see the importance of spontaneous symmetry breaking when we 
talk about the formation of structure in the universe in the 
absence of design. 
Biologist Stuart Kauffman has long argued that self-organization 
plays a larger role in the evolution of life than previously thought, 
that blind natural selection is not sufficient.40 He proposes that life 
originated by a chemical process known as catalytic closure and visu-
alizes a network of interlinked chemical reactions becoming self-
sustaining. Although Kauffman seems to imply that self-
organization is some new, holistic law of nature, in fact nothing is 
needed besides basic, purely reductionistic physics and chemistry. 
The origin of life itself is not accounted for by the theory of 

THE ILLUSION OF DESIGN 
65 
evolution. Some prebiological process such as self-organization 
must have been involved. This is a current gap in scientific knowl-
edge, but plausible natural mechanisms such as Kauffman's are 
sufficient to keep God out of the picture. 
SIMPLE RULES 
In recent years, with the aid of computer simulations, we have 
begun to understand how simple systems can self-organize them-
selves into highly complex patterns that, at least superficially, 
resemble those seen in the world around us.41 Usually these 
demonstrations start by assuming a few simple rules and then pro-
gramming a computer to follow those rules. Some imagine they see 
a "law of increasing complexity" in which simple material systems 
become complex by self-organization.42 I see no evidence for this, 
just the workings of well-known laws of particle mechanics applied 
to systems of many particles. In any case, such a law, if it exists, has 
nothing to do with whether the systems are living or nonliving. 
The computer has made it possible for scientists to study many 
examples of complexity arising from simplicity. These are perhaps 
most easily demonstrated in what are called cellular automata, 
which were used by mathematician John von Neumann as an 
example of systems that can reproduce themselves. While cellular 
automata can be studied in any number of dimensions, they are 
easiest to understand in terms of a two-dimensional grid such as a 
piece of graph paper. You basically fill in a square on the grid based 
on a rule that asks whether or not certain of its adjoining squares 
are filled in. Note again that this is a purely "local" process, with no 
reference to cells that do not touch the cell in question. 
Self-reproduction with cellular automata can be illustrated by 
a simple rule introduced by physicist Edward Fredkin in the 
1960s.43 Fill in a cell, that is, turn it "on," if and only if an odd 
number of the four nondiagonal neighbors (top, bottom, left, 

66 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
right) are on. Repeat this process on any initial pattern of cells, 
and that pattern will produce four copies of itself every four 
cycles (see fig. 2.3). 
In a recently published, controversial tome called A New Kind 
of Science, physicist Stephen Wolfram has produced an enormous 
compilation of cellular automata.44 Beyond these examples, Wol-
fram claims he has uncovered a "new kind of science" in which the 
universe itself operates like a digital computer. While he has pre-
sented some new proposals and numerous new examples, the orig-
inal idea of a digital universe is usually attributed to Fredkin.45 
Whoever deserves the credit, it remains to be seen if this is a new 
science, since all that has been done so far are computer explo-
rations of cellular automata with no connection to the real world 
yet established by predictions that can be tested empirically. 
For my purposes here, suffice it to say that complex systems 
do not need complex rules in order to evolve from simple origins. 
They can do so with simple rules and no new physics. The 
grandiose claims one often hears in the literature about new 
Fig. 2.3. Fredkin's self-reproducing cellular automaton. 
The pattern at 0 produces four copies of itself in four steps. 

THE ILLUSION OF DESIGN 
67 
holistic principles emerging from these processes are without 
foundation. It follows that no complex rule maker of infinite 
intelligence is implied by the existence of complex systems in 
nature. Since all we need are simple rules, then, at most, a simple 
rule maker of limited intelligence is required. 
DEFINING DESIGN 
Note that to make an argument from design assumes a priori that 
design exists. Philosopher Nicholas Everitt suggests that better 
terms might be the argument from order, or, the argument to 
design.46 We will see that the evidence points firmly to the 
absence of design. And, if one of the attributes of God is that he 
designed the universe with at least one of his purposes being the 
existence of the complex structures we identify as life, with a spe-
cial role for human life, then the failure to observe such design 
provides us with empirical grounds for concluding that a God 
with this attribute does not exist. 
Some authors use the term "design" to refer to any structure 
of atoms and molecules that exhibits some pattern or purpose. 
Indeed, many are inconsistent in their usage and definition of the 
term "design."47 In order to avoid any confusion on this matter, 
we will use design to refer to the act of an agent, be she divine or 
human, stupid or intelligent, to draw a blueprint—so to speak— 
of some artifact that is later assembled from that plan. 
The assembly process in some cases might require high intel-
ligence, as the Wright brothers demonstrated at every step when 
they built a flying machine in their bicycle shop. Or, the assembly 
can be relatively mindless, as on a modern automated produc-
tion line—unless you want to argue that the computers running 
the process are pretty smart themselves. Indeed, many use the 
methods of "artificial intelligence." In any case, the assembly is 
unimportant unless the claim is being made that the assembly 

68 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
itself is a miracle. Since that is not normally an issue, what mat-
ters is the initial plan—a purpose that is either built into the con-
trivance from the beginning or not. In the example of the spiral 
discussed above, the broken symmetry of the spiral was not intro-
duced by the programmer, me, on purpose. 
Now, we must be careful not to confuse a preexisting purpose 
with mere utility or function. A stone can be used to break a 
window; however, the stone was not designed for that purpose. A 
salt crystal has a structure. But that structure was not contrived so 
that food would taste better when sprinkled with salt. 
Similarly, all living organisms have many parts serving func-
tions that are crucial for the survival of the organism. The ques-
tion is: did an intelligent agent design that part for its present 
purpose, or did that function evolve by a combination of accident 
and the mechanisms of natural selection? In examining evidence 
for or against design in the world, we should look at whether the 
system being studied shows any sign of preexisting purpose or 
plan, or whether it can be seen to have evolved mindlessly by nat-
ural selection in response to the needs of survival or other purely 
physical mechanisms such as self-organization. 
BAD DESIGN 
As mentioned, Paley drew an analogy between different parts of 
the human body and an exquisitely designed watch. In such a 
watch, every part—the balance, escape wheel, jewel, mainspring, 
and the rest—is carefully constructed to serve its specific func-
tions as efficiently as possible. The parts can always be improved 
upon, but not by much if the original work was by an expert 
craftsperson. Watches and all the many devices of human design 
have very few wasted parts. 
Some evolutionists have tried to counter the Paley claim with 
what might be called the argument from bad design, pointing out 

THE ILLUSION OF DESIGN 
69 
all the ways that a competent engineer could improve upon what 
nature has given us. 
The parts of the human body hardly resemble a watch. In an 
article in Scientific American titled "If Humans Were Built to Last," 
S. Jay Olshansky, Bruce Carnes, and Robert N. Butler have looked 
at flaws in the human body and shown how an engineer might 
have fixed them to enable us to live a hundred years or more in 
better health.48 They trace our physical defects to the Rube Gold-
berg way evolution cobbles together new features by tinkering 
with existing ones. Natural selection does not seek out perfection 
or endless good health. The body has to live only long enough to 
reproduce and raise young. Species survival does not require that 
individuals survive long after reproducing. We humans do, albeit 
with decreasing vitality, because human evolution resulted in off-
spring that require years to mature and grandparents with 
enough years remaining to help in their upbringing. Speaking as 
a grandfather, thank you, evolution! 
Let me list some of the flaws the Scientific American authors 
detect in the human machine that point away from any kind of 
near-perfection in design. Our bones lose minerals after age 
thirty, making them susceptible to fracture and osteoporosis. Our 
rib cage does not fully enclose and protect most internal organs. 
Our muscles atrophy. Our leg veins become enlarged and twisted, 
leading to varicose veins. Our joints wear out as their lubricants 
thin. Our retinas are prone to detachment. The male prostate 
enlarges, squeezing and obstructing urine flow. 
Olshansky, Carnes, and Butler show what a properly designed 
human would be like. She would have bigger ears, rewired eyes, 
a curved neck, a forward-tilting torso, shorter limbs and stature, 
extra padding around joints, extra muscles and fat, thicker spinal 
disks, a reversed knee joint, and more. But she would not be very 
pretty by our present standards. 
Despite their shortcomings, the various parts of the human body 
and those of other species do their jobs—even if those jobs were not 

70 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
part of any original plan. As discussed earlier, biologist Kenneth 
Miller argues persuasively that the eye serves us well and the inside-
out nature of the vertebrate eye is nicely described by evolution. 
NOWHERE EVIDENT 
Richard Dawkins subtitled The Blind Watchmaker "Why the Evi-
dence of Evolution Reveals a Universe without Design."49 How-
ever, not just biological data but, as we will see in future chapters, 
the whole realm of scientific observations lead to the same con-
clusion: the universe does not look designed. 
Estimates of the number of biological species on Earth range as 
high as one hundred million. Species on the order of ten or a hun-
dred times this number once lived and have become extinct. 
Without getting into the current situation, where scientists and envi-
ronmentalists fret that an increasing number of species may become 
extinct because of the degradation of the environment by humanity, 
these data can be best understood in terms of mindless natural 
selection. The large number of species results from the many, largely 
random attempts that evolution makes to produce a solution to the 
survival problem; many failures are to be expected as the bulk of 
these solutions fail. Many successes are marginal, leaving the species 
open to eventual extinction. We also now know that mass extinc-
tions have occurred several times as the result of natural catastro-
phes, such as meteorite strikes or geologic disruptions. 
The other place where evidence for the absence of beneficent 
design can be found is in the short, brutal existences of most life-
forms. A common misunderstanding holds that Darwin's dis-
covery of evolution led to his loss of faith. Actually, it wasn't the-
oretical musings but his lifetime of careful observations of 
nature. On May 22, 1860, Darwin wrote to American botanist 
Asa Gray (d. 1888): "I cannot see as plainly as others do, and as 
I should wish to do, evidence of design and beneficence on all 

THE ILLUSION OF DESIGN 
71 
sides of us. There seems to me too much misery in the world. I 
cannot persuade myself that a beneficent and omnipotent God 
would have designedly created the Ichneumonidae [wasps] with 
the express intention of their [larva] feeding within the living 
bodies of Caterpillars, or that a cat should play with mice."50 
More recently, Dawkins has written, "The universe that we 
observe has precisely the properties we should expect if there is, 
at bottom, no design, no purpose, no evil, no good, nothing but 
pitiless indifference."51 
Indeed, Earth and life look just as they can be expected to 
look if there is no designer God. 
NOTES 
1. William Paley, Natural Theology or Evidences of the Existence and 
Attributes of the Deity Collected from the Appearance of Nature (London: 
Halliwell, 1802). 
2. Keith Thomson, Before Darwin: Reconciling God and Nature 
(New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2005), p. 20. 
3. Ibid., p. 6. 
4. Charles Darwin, The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selec-
tion (London: John Murray, 1859). 
5. Michael Shermer, In Darwin's Shadow: The Life and Science of 
Alfred Russel Wallace (Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press, 2002). 
6. Phillip E. Johnson, Evolution as Dogma: The Establishment of 
Naturalism (Dallas, TX: Haughton Publishing Co., 1990); Darwin on 
Trial (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1991); Reason in the Balance: 
The Case Against Naturalism in Science, Law, and Education (Downers 
Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1995); Defeating Darwinism by Opening 
Minds (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1997); The Wedge of Truth: 
Splitting the Foundations of Naturalism (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity 
Press, 2001). 
7. Ronald Numbers, The Creationists: The Evolution of Scientific Cre-
ationism (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1992). 

72 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
8. John C. Whitcomb Jr. and Henry M. Morris, The Genesis Flood: 
The Biblical Record and Its Scientific Implications (Philadelphia: Presby-
terian and Reformed Publishing Co., 1961). 
9. William R. Overton, McLean v. Arkansas, U.S. Dist. Ct. Opinion, 
1982; Michael Ruse, ed., But Is It Science? The Philosophical Questions in 
the Creation/Evolution Controversy (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 
1996), pp. 307-31. 
10. Michael J. Behe, Darwin's Black Box: The Biochemical Challenge to 
Evolution (New York: Free Press, 1996); William A. Dembski, The Design 
Inference (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998); Intelligent 
Design: The Bridge between Science and Theology (Downers Grove, IL: 
InterVarsity Press, 1999); No Free Lunch: Why Specified Complexity 
Cannot Be Purchased without Intelligence (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Lit-
tlefield, 2002). 
11. Barbara Forrest and Paul R. Gross, Creationism's Trojan Horse: 
The Wedge of Intelligent Design (Oxford and New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2004). 
12. Robert Dorit, review of Darwin's Black Box by Michael Behe, 
American Scientist (September-October 1997); H. Allen Orr, "Darwin v. 
Intelligent Design (Again): The Latest Attack on Evolution Is Cleverly 
Argued, Biologically Informed—And Wrong," Boston Review (1998); 
Brandon Fitelson, Christopher Stephens, and Elliott Sober, "How Not 
to Detect Design—Critical Notice: William A. Dembski, "The Design 
Inference," Philosophy of Science 66, no. 3 (1999): 472-88; Kenneth R. 
Miller, Finding Darwin's God: A Scientist's Search for a Common Ground 
between God and Evolution (New York: HarperCollins, 1999); Robert T. 
Pennock, Tower of Babel: The Evidence Against the New Creationism (Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999); Niall Shanks and Karl H. Joplin, "Redun-
dant Complexity: A Critical Analysis of Intelligent Design in Biochem-
istry," Philosophy of Science 66 (1999): 268-98; Taner Edis, "Darwin in 
Mind: 'Intelligent Design' Meets Artificial Intelligence," Skeptical 
Inquirer 25, no. 2 (2001): 35-39; James Rachels and David Roche, "A Bit 
Confused: Creationism and Information Theory," Skeptical Inquirer 25, 
no. 2 (2001): 40-42; Jeffery Shallit, review of No Free Lunch by William 
Dembski, Biosystems 66, nos. 1-2 (2002): 93-99; Mark Perakh, Unintel-
ligent Design (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2003); Forrest and 

THE ILLUSION OF DESIGN 
73 
Gross, Creationism's Trojan Horse; Matt Young and Taner Edis, eds., Why 
Intelligent Design Fails: A Scientific Critique of the New Creationism (New 
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2004). For my own discussion, 
see Victor J. Stenger, Has Science Found God? The Latest Results in the 
Search for Purpose in the Universe (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 
2003), chap. 4. Young and Edis contains a complete listing of current 
Internet sites discussing both sides of the issue. 
13. A review by one of the main promoters of intelligent design 
has been published in the journal of a small biological society. See 
Stephen C. Meyer, "The Origin of Biological Information and the 
Higher Taxonomic Categories," Proceedings of the Biological Society of 
Washington 117, no. 2 (2004): 213-39. The society has publicly repudi-
ated this publication in a statement on September 7, 2004. See http://  
epsc.wustl.edu/~spozgay/home/id_statement.pdf (accessed July 11, 
2006). 
14. Behe, Darwin's Black Box. 
15. Dorit, review of Darwin's Black Box; Miller, Finding Darwin's 
God; Perakh, Unintelligent Design; David Ussery, "Darwin's Transparent 
Box: The Biochemical Evidence for Evolution," in Young and Edis, Why 
Intelligent Design Fails, chap. 4. 
16. Stephen J. Gould, The Panda's Thumb (New York: Norton, 
1980), pp. 19-34. 
17. H. J. Muller, "Reversibility in Evolution Considered from the 
Standpoint of Genetics," Biological Reviews 14 (1939): 261-80. Another 
bit of misinformation often bandied about by creationists is that no 
evolutionary biologist has ever won the Nobel Prize. 
18. Richard Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker: Why the Evidence of 
Evolution Reveals a Universe without Design (London, New York: Norton, 
1987), p. 93. 
19. Kenneth R. Miller, "Life's Grand Design," Technology Review 97, 
no. 2 (1994): 24-32. 
20. Richard Dawkins, Climbing Mount Improbable (New York, 
London: Norton, 1996). See the chapter "The Fortyfold Path to Enlight-
enment." 
21. R. D. Fernald, "Evolution of Eyes," Current Opinions in Neurobi-
ology 10, no. 4 (2000): 444-50. 

74 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
22. Dembski, The Design Inference, Intelligent Design, "The Design 
Inference." 
23. For the most recent work at this writing, see the chapters by 
Gishlack, Shanks, and Karsai; Hurd, Shallit, and Elsberry; and Perakh in 
Young and Edis, Why Intelligent Design Fails. 
24. Dembski, Intelligent Design, p. 168. 
25. Stenger, Has Science Found God? pp. 102-10. The connection 
between information and entropy was shown in C. E. Shannon, "A 
Mathematical Theory of Communication," Bell System Technical Journal 
27 (July 1948): 379-423; (October 1948): 623-25. See also Claude 
Shannon and Warren Weaver, The Mathematical Theory of Communica-
tion (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1949). 
26. "Department Position on Evolution and Intelligent Design," 
Department of Biological Sciences, Lehigh University, http://www  
.lehigh.edu/~inbios/news/evolution.htm (accessed July 11, 2006). 
27. Stenger, Has Science Found God? pp. 100-102. 
28. Laurie Goodstein, "Intelligent Design Might Be Meeting Its 
Maker," Ideas and Trends, New York Times, December 4, 2005. 
29. Matthew J. Brauer, Barbara Forrest, and Steven G. Gey, "Is It Sci-
ence Yet?: Intelligent Design Creationism and the Constitution," Wash-
ington University Law Quarterly 83, no. 1 (2005), http://law.wustl.edu/  
WULQ/83-1/p%201%20Brauer%20Forrest%20Gey%20book%20  
pages.pdf (accessed December 28, 2005). 
30. Kitzmuller, et al. v. Dover Area School District et al., Case No. 
04cv2688, Judge John E. Jones III presiding, December 20, 2005. 
31. Overton, McLean v. Arkansas, 1982. 
32. Larry Laudan, "Science at the Bar—Causes for Concern," Sci-
ence, Technology, & Human Values 7, no. 41 (1982): 16-19. Reprinted in 
Ruse, But Is It Science?, pp. 351-55. 
33. Discovery Institute, http://www.discovery.org/scripts/viewDB/  
filesDB-download.php?command=download&id=443 (accessed 
Octo-
ber 28, 2005). 
34. Philip Ball, The Self-Made Tapestry: Pattern Formation in Nature 
(New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001). 
35. John Gribbon, Deep Simplicity: Bringing Order to Chaos and 
Complexity (New York: Random House, 2004). 

THE ILLUSION OF DESIGN 
75 
36. Dembski, The Design Inference, Intelligent Design, "The Design 
Inference." 
37. Dembski, Intelligent Design, pp. 128-31. 
38. Ball, The Self-Made Tapestry, pp. 105-107. 
39. S. Douady and Y. Couder, "Phyllotaxis as a Physical Self-
Organized Growth Process," Physical Review Letters 68 (1992): 2098. 
40. Stuart Kauffman, At Home in the Universe: The Search for the 
Laws of Self-Organization and Complexity (New York and Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1995). 
41. Christoph Adami, Introduction to Artificial Life (New York: 
Springer, 1998). 
42. Christoph Adami, Charles Ofria, and Travis C. Collier, "Evolu-
tion of Biological Complexity," Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences USA 97 (2000): 4463-68. 
43. Martin Gardner, "On Cellular Automata, Self-Reproduction, 
the Garden of Eden, and the Game of 'Life,'" Scientific American 224, no. 
2 (1971): 112-17; William Poundstone, The Rescursive Universe (New 
York: Morrow, 1985). 
44. Stephen Wolfram, A New Kind of Science (Champagne, IL: Wol-
fram Media, 2002). 
45. James Gleick, Chaos: The Making of a New Science (New York: 
Viking, 1987). 
46. Nicholas Everitt, The Non-Existence of God (London, New York: 
Routledge, 2004), p. 85. 
47. A good example is Dembski, The Design Inference, Intelligent 
Design, "The Design Inference." On the other side of the argument, 
Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker is also somewhat inconsistent in his use 
of the term "design." 
48. S. Jay Olshansky, Bruce Carnes, and Robert N. Butler, "If 
Humans Were Built to Last," Scientific American (March 2001). 
49. Dawkins, The Blind Watchmaker. 
50. Charles Darwin, The Correspondence of Charles Darwin 8, 1860 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), p. 224. 
51. Richard Dawkins, River out of Eden (New York: HarperCollins, 
1995); "God's Utility Function," Scientific American (November 1995): 85. 

Chapter 3 
SEARCHING FOR A 
WORLD BEYOND MATTER 
For the living know that they shall die: but the dead know not any 
thing, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory of them 
is forgotten. Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy, is now 
perished; neither have they any more a portion for ever in any thing 
that is done under the sun. 
—Ecclesiastes 9: 5-6 (King James Version) 
MIND AND SOUL 
A
lmost from the moment that modern humans appeared 
on the scene tens of thousands of years ago, they seem to 
have possessed a vague notion that they were more than the phys-
ical bodies that were born of women, grew and aged, eventually 
ceased to move and breathe, and finally disintegrated into a small 
77 

78 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
pile of dusty bones. At some point in their development, people 
in almost every culture have imagined invisible spirits acting as 
agents for events around them, including the animation of living 
things such as themselves. 
Such thinking was perfectly reasonable during the childhood 
of humanity. One moment a person is talking and walking 
around and in another moment he is forever silent and immo-
bile. Whatever animated the person was suddenly absent. Fur-
thermore, a dead person still seemed to live on in thoughts and 
dreams—a ghostly spirit surviving death. 
A widespread ancient belief held that the heart is the center of 
being and intelligence. This idea carries metaphorically down to 
today, as when we say someone has a "good heart" or talk about 
some act "coming from the heart." When Egyptian priests prepared 
the dead for their afterlife, they disposed of the brain but kept the 
heart within the body. Early Greek philosophers, such as Empedo-
cles (d. 490 BCE), attributed thinking and feeling to an immortal 
soul that resides around the heart but leaves the body after death. 
The brain was not regarded as an important organ in ancient 
times, although Alcmaeon (c. 500) declared, "All senses are con-
nected to the brain." Still, like other ancient Greeks, he viewed 
the body as containing channels for spirits (pneumata) that were 
composed of air—one of the four elements of the cosmos that 
included fire, earth, and water. Plato (c. 347 BCE) placed a "veg-
etative soul" in the gut, a "vital soul" in the heart, and an 
immortal soul in the head. His most famous student, Aristotle (d. 
322 BCE), restored the immortal soul to the heart. Whatever its 
location, in the common view the soul was a conduit for spirits— 
the force that gave a body life and thought.1 
The association of spirit with air is embedded in a number of 
ancient languages: the Hebrew ruah ("wind" or "breath") and 
nefesh, also associated with breathing; the Greek psychein ("to 
breathe"), which is related to the word psyche for "soul"; and the 
Latin words anima ("air," "breath," or "life") and spiritus, which 

SEARCHING FOR A WORLD BEYOND MATTER 
79 
also refers to breathing.2 The soul was seen as departing the body 
in the dying last breath. 
In Hawaii, native shamans attempted to breathe life back into a 
dead body by shouting "ha!" Western doctors were seen not to do 
this and so were said to be "ha-ole"—without ha. In today's diverse 
population in Hawaii, Caucasians are commonly called haoles. 
In the Old Testament, the soul is life itself, breathed into the 
body by God. While traditional Judaism does not regard death as 
the end of human existence, it has no dogma of an afterlife, and 
a range of opinions can be found among Jewish scholars. Chris-
tianity, on the other hand, made human immortality its founda-
tional principle, the doctrine probably most responsible for the 
long success of that faith. The power of Islam can also be attrib-
uted to the promise of an afterlife, with dark-eyed maidens pro-
viding eternal pleasure (for men, anyway). 
Following the teaching of the Greek physician Galen (d. 201), 
early church fathers located the immortal soul in the empty spaces 
of the head. However, Christendom lost touch with Greek philos-
ophy after the fall of Rome in 476 until the ancient writings were 
recovered in the twelfth century, mostly from Islamic sources.3 
Christians did not take well to the teachings of the Greek 
atomists, who challenged the whole notion of an immortal soul. 
Epicurus (d. 270 BCE) taught that the soul was made of matter, 
like everything else. The soul atoms were concentrated in the 
chest and took life with them when a body died. In De Rerum 
Natura (On the Nature of Things), the Roman poet Lucretius (d. 55 
BCE) wrote, "Death is therefore nothing to us and does not con-
cern us at all, since it appears that the substance of the soul is per-
ishable. When the separation of body and soul, whose union is 
the essence of our being, is consummated, it is clear that 
absolutely nothing will be able to reach us and awaken our sen-
sibility, not even if earth mixes with sea and seas with heaven."4 
Most laypeople today take for granted a separateness or 
"duality" of soul and body, of spirit and matter. However, this 

80 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
distinction was not made clear-cut until the seventeenth century, 
when Rene Descartes (d. 1650) found a way to reconcile atoms 
and soul. This was the age when machines were coming into 
common use. Descartes was a contemporary of Galileo Galilei (d. 
1642), two generations ahead of Isaac Newton (d. 1727). The 
French thinker developed many of the mathematical methods 
such as representing curves by equations and the Cartesian coor-
dinate system that would receive wide application in the new sci-
ence of mechanics that was elaborated by Newton. 
Descartes argued that animals, including humans, were intri-
cate, material machines—designed by God, of course (he was ter-
rified of the Inquisition). However, he argued that humans pos-
sess an additional ingredient that is not composed of the basic 
particles of matter: an immaterial soul. The soul did everything 
that machines were presumably not capable of doing: thinking, 
consciousness, will, abstraction, doubt, and understanding.5 
Descartes speculated that the pineal gland of the brain marked 
the place where the soul and the brain interacted. 
Descartes was also a contemporary of Thomas Hobbes (d. 
1679), who agreed with him on the machinelike nature of the 
human body but viewed the notion of an additional, immaterial 
soul as a delusion. Hobbes even went further in proposing that 
society itself could be understood as a clockwork mechanism 
and, in his most famous work, Leviathan, first published in 1652, 
he attempted to deduce the optimum political structure. He 
determined it to be dictatorship, by a king or otherwise.6 
At this significant turning point in history, empirical science 
in Europe was beginning to raise doubts about the blind obedi-
ence to authority that had stifled progress for centuries. Coper-
nicus and Galileo had based their new cosmology, which chal-
lenged the teachings of Aristotle, on empirical data—setting the 
stage for the Newtonian revolution. But, even before that hap-
pened, a brave new breed of empiricists was taking a closer look 
at the bodies of humans and animals. 

SEARCHING FOR A WORLD BEYOND MATTER 
81 
RISE OF THE BRAIN 
In a fascinating book, Soul Made Flesh: The Discovery of the Brain— 
and How It Changed the World, Carl Zimmer tells the story of a 
remarkable group of seventeenth-century men working in Oxford 
during the English Civil War and its aftermath, who by dissecting 
human and animal cadavers established, among numerous other 
anatomical facts, that the brain was the primary organ of 
thought.7 These included several who became famous for other 
individual achievements: Christopher Wren (d. 1723) designed 
the magnificent Sheldonian Theater in Oxford while drafting 
detailed illustrations of human organs. Robert Boyle (d. 1691) 
transformed alchemy to modern chemistry and demonstrated the 
pressure of air, while conducting hundreds of experiments on 
anatomy. Boyle's assistant Robert Hooke (d. 1703) discovered the 
law of springs while designing instruments such as a microscope 
that enabled investigators to see the intricate structures inside 
living organisms. 
The leader of the "Oxford Circle" was a physician, Thomas 
Willis (d. 1675), who produced the first detailed anatomy of the 
brain and traced the nervous system throughout the body. He iden-
tified the heart as a blood pump that operated under the control of 
signals from the brain. Like his contemporaries, Willis referred to 
these signals as "spirits." Not until the eighteenth century would 
the signals carried by nerves be identified with electricity. 
After the restoration of Charles II to the throne, the Oxford 
Circle came out into the open, moved to London, and evolved 
into the Royal Society for Promoting Natural Knowledge, which 
became a catalyst for the scientific revolution that followed. 
Willis founded the science of neurology, which eventually 
confirmed many of his notions, at least in a general way. We now 
know that electrical impulses compose the "spirits" that carry sig-
nals from the brain through the nervous system. Different parts of 
the brain perform different functions. The human brain is basi-

82 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
cally similar to that of other animals, differing in those portions 
that give us our superior cognitive and intellectual abilities. Psy-
chological disorders arise in the brain and are routinely treated 
today with chemicals. And, as we all are well aware, chemicals can 
also cause mental disorders or alter mental states and even trigger 
"spiritual experiences" (as with LSD). Brain diseases, such as 
Alzheimer's, affect memory and behavior. All of this strongly 
implies that our thoughts, memories, and subjective experiences 
may be entirely based upon physical processes in the brain. 
BRAIN SCIENCE TODAY 
Scientists no longer need to remove the brain from a dead body 
in order to study it. Imaging technology makes it possible not 
only to examine brains in detail but also to observe them while 
they are still alive and functioning. In recent years, this has 
enabled the sources of perceptual judgments and different types 
of thought to be located within the brain. Experiments have been 
conducted in which subjects are asked to make mechanical, intel-
lectual, and moral choices, while researchers watch the brain 
carry out the necessary operations. 
A number of imaging techniques have been developed with 
modern technology. Perhaps the most powerful is magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI). Based on the physics of nuclear magnetic res-
onance (NMR), with the word "nuclear" removed so as not to 
alarm patients, MRI forms an image by detecting the energy that 
is released by the spinning nuclei of atoms. This energy is actu-
ally very low, coming from the radio region of the electro-
magnetic spectrum and not at all harmful—especially compared 
to x-rays, which have sufficient energy to break atomic bonds. In 
functional MRI (fMRI), the magnetic properties of the blood are 
used to see patterns of blood flow. An fMRI scan of the brain can 
quickly produce images that distinguish structures less than a 

SEARCHING FOR A WORLD BEYOND MATTER 
83 
millimeter apart and pinpoint areas in the brain that are being 
activated. 
Other brain imaging techniques include positron emission 
tomography (PET), single photon emission computed tomography 
(SPECT), and electroencephalography (EEG).8 
All these techniques confirm that thought processes are 
accompanied by localized physical activity in the brain. Let us 
look at just a few of the examples relevant to our discussion. 
Many more can be found in the literature. 
Using fMRI, scientists in the United States and Brazil have dis-
covered that the region of the brain activated when moral judg-
ments are being made is different from the region activated for 
social judgments that are equally emotionally charged.9 
Princeton researchers have studied the brain activity in people 
asked to make decisions based on various moral dilemmas. These 
dilemmas were divided into two categories—one involving 
impersonal actions and another where a direct personal action 
was required. The brain scans consistently showed greater activa-
tion in the areas of the brain associated with emotions when the 
actions were personal.10 The relevant point here is not just that 
physical processes in the brain take part in thinking; they seem to 
be responsible for the deepest thoughts that are supposed to be 
the province of spirit rather than matter. 
Another area of study with live brains involves the localized 
stimulation by electric or magnetic pulses. Neuroscientist 
Michael Persinger claims to have induced many of the types of 
experiences that people have interpreted as "religious" or "spiri-
tual" by magnetic stimulation of the brain.11 However, Persinger's 
results have been called into question.12 
On the other hand, Olaf Blanke and his colleagues report that 
they are able to bring about so-called out-of-body experiences 
(OBE), where a person's consciousness seems to become 
detached from the body, by electrical stimulation of a specific 
region in the brain.13 I have discussed OBE experiments in two 

84 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
books and have concluded that they provide no evidence for any-
thing happening outside of the physical processes of the brain.14 
These results do not totally deny the possibility that con-
scious thoughts are being directed by a disembodied soul, which 
then somehow implements them through the brain and nervous 
system. This, in one form or another, remains the teaching of 
most religions. In 1986 Pope John Paul II reaffirmed the 1950 
statement by Pope Pius XII that the Church does not forbid the 
study and teaching of biological evolution.15 However, the pope 
made it very clear that evolution applied to the body—not the 
mind: "Theories of evolution which, in accordance with the 
philosophies inspiring them, consider the spirit as emerging 
from the forces of living matter, or as a mere epiphenomenon of 
this matter, are incompatible with the truth about man. Nor are 
they able to ground the dignity of the person."16 
Despite the Holy Father's admonition, a wealth of empirical 
data now strongly suggests that mind is in fact a "mere epiphe-
nomenon of this matter." Matter alone appears to be able to carry 
out all the activities that have been traditionally associated with 
the soul. No "spiritual" element is required by the data. The 
implication that "we" are bodies and brains made of atoms and 
nothing more is perhaps simply too new, too disturbing, too 
incompatible with common preconceptions to be soon accepted 
into common knowledge. However, if we do indeed possess an 
immaterial soul, or a material one with special properties that 
cannot be found in inanimate matter, then we should expect to 
find some evidence for it. 
Hundreds of reports of scientific observations of special 
powers of the human mind under claimed "controlled condi-
tions" have been made over the past one hundred and fifty years. 
Not a single one has met all five of the conditions, listed in 
chapter 1, that are required for science to take an extraordinary 
claim seriously. Are these conditions unreasonable? Am I asking 
too much of the investigators? I can list dozens of extraordinary 

SEARCHING FOR A WORLD BEYOND MATTER 
85 
scientific discoveries made during that same period that have met 
precisely these same conditions, so this cannot be attributed to 
some dogmatic bias in science against "new ideas." 
Obviously I cannot do a survey of every claim, although in 
my 1990 book, Physics and Psychics, I singled out for critical 
analysis those that the proponents themselves considered the 
most convincing.17 These were brought up to date in my 2003 
book, Has Science Found God?18 In what follows I will review 
some sample claims that should sufficiently illustrate why the 
case for special powers of the mind has not been made. 
THE FORCE OF LIFE 
Let us begin by considering the ancient association of the soul 
with life itself, as a kind of special ingredient, an elan vital or vital 
force, that is possessed by live organisms and was long thought to 
distinguish them from inanimate objects such as rocks and dead 
organisms. Many cultures have held such beliefs, and even today 
we hear terms like qi (chi) used to represent some special energy 
that is supposed to flow through the body. In Western religions 
this life force is often identified with the soul. If such a life force 
exists, then we should be able to detect its presence. 
Although much of complementary and alternative medicine 
(that is, nonscientific therapies) is based on the assumption of a 
life force, sometimes called the "bioenergetic field," biological 
science has not uncovered its presence within humans, animals, 
or plants.19 Well-understood physical and chemical processes, 
the same that occur in all materials whether dead or alive, are suf-
ficient to account for the observed interactions between various 
parts of living organisms. The physics and chemistry of living 
cells is basically the same as the physics and chemistry of rocks, 
just a bit more complicated. 
The sensitive detectors used in physics laboratories are 

86 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
capable of detecting various kinds of radiation of very low inten-
sity. Except for some weak electromagnetic radiation emitted by 
oscillating charges in the heart and brain that can be picked up 
with sensors placed directly on the skin, and the infrared thermal 
radiation emitted by all physical bodies dead or alive (or never 
alive, like rocks), living organisms emit no unique radiation that 
can be detected by our best scientific instruments. 
Of course, one can argue that the instruments are simply 
insensitive to "living energies," although the proponents of bio-
energetic fields generally claim a connection to easily detectable 
electromagnetic waves.20 If it is significant, some effect should be 
measurable. For example, a widely used therapy is called thera-
peutic touch, in which a healer "manipulates" a patient's "energy 
field." After a decade or so of common use, you would reasonably 
expect some evidence for the efficacy of the treatment. In fact, 
there is none that is not purely anecdotal and thus not amenable 
to proper scientific testing. Indeed, therapeutic touch has been 
tested and failed the test.21 
QI = MC2? 
I recently examined a published claim that the vital force called 
qi has been demonstrated in a scientific experiment in China. I 
presented my analysis at several universities in China during a 
visit there in April 2005 as part of a scientific delegation. 
The reported experiments were performed during several 
public healing "lectures" by qi master and healer Dr. Xin Yan in 
Beijing in 1987 and published in a peer-reviewed American 
journal.22 Positive signals above background levels, claimed to be 
qi, were reported in standard radiation dosimeters. Both the 
background levels and signals were quite high. Other phe-
nomena were reported that I did not consider because the paper 
lacked sufficient information. 

SEARCHING FOR A WORLD BEYOND MATTER 
87 
The Yan paper was not published until 2002 and makes no 
mention of any successful (or unsuccessful) attempts at replica-
tion during the intervening years. The results are difficult to eval-
uate from the data presented. Furthermore, no error estimates are 
given, which would be sufficient cause to deny publication in 
most reputable scientific journals. 
Nevertheless, the data presented are sufficient in the case of 
one experiment to draw some conclusions. In this experiment, 
Dr. Yan "emitted qi" during an eleven-hour (!) "lecture." Thermo-
luminescence dosimeters (TLDs) of the type commonly used in 
nuclear laboratories to measure radiation exposure were placed 
throughout the auditorium. Doses significantly above back-
ground were reported from different directions, indicating that 
the supposed qi-rays were unfocused. Although some of the other 
experiments contained controls, no measurements taken under 
identical conditions with the qi master absent are reported for 
this particular experiment. 
In figure 3.1, I have plotted the reported dosages measured by 
two types of TLDs as a function of distance from the podium. 
One type [7LiF(Mg,Ti)] is sensitive to gamma rays while the other 
type [6LiF(Mg, Ti)] is sensitive to thermal neutrons as well as 
gamma rays. I averaged over the two sides of the auditorium 
where the intensities were comparable. The squares and circles on 
the figure show the measured radiation exposure in milliroent-
gens (mR) accumulated over the eleven-hour experiment. For 
gamma rays, one milliroentgen is approximately equivalent to 
one millirem (mrem), the unit used to measure biologically sig-
nificant exposure. If the numbers are accurate, they represent an 
intensity that would exceed the generally considered safe dosage 
if experienced steadily for a year, five thousand mrem. That is, the 
recorded radiation intensity was appreciable. 
At the same time, the dosimeters used in the experiment are 
designed for measuring long-term accumulated exposure with 
about a ten-mR detection limit. They were not particularly suit-

88 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
Fig. 3.1. Results from the experiment of Xin Yan et al. The square 
points are the data from the dosimeters sensitive to neutrons and 
γ-rays. The round points are γ-rays only. The solid curve shows what 
would be expected if the measured radiation were conserved as would 
be expected for any form of energy. 
able for the short-term exposures used here, and more precise 
instruments for measuring instantaneous radiation intensities are 
readily available. As mentioned, no estimates or errors are given 
in the paper (sufficient cause for its rejection). If we put ten mR 
error bars on the data points, the results are insignificant. 
The authors claim numerous reports from the audience of 
beneficial health effects, although they present no data on this. 
Gamma rays and neutrons are not noted for their positive health 
consequences unless directed at tumors, and the authors con­
cede, "It is highly unlikely that the qi field generated by Dr. Yan 
contains actual gamma rays and neutrons. Rather the TLD read­
ings seem to be a phenomenological description of the interac-

SEARCHING FOR A WORLD BEYOND MATTER 89 
tions between a TLD detector and Dr. Yan's qi field." They offer 
no theoretical model for the phenomenon, no suggestion on 
how qi-rays might affect these particular detectors. 
Independent of the significance of the dosage level, we see in 
figure 3.1 that the "gamma-ray" data actually increase with dis-
tance, while the "neutron-plus-gamma" data show no significant 
distance effect. The smooth curve plotted on the same graph 
shows the (unobserved) falloff with the square of distance that is 
required by energy conservation (arbitrary scale). 
If you were to ask me, "What is the defining property of 
energy?" I would answer the fact that it is conserved. If energy 
were not conserved, the quantity would be of little use in physics. 
When one measures a quantity that is not conserved under con-
ditions when it should be, then that can be taken as good evi-
dence that what is being observed is not some form of energy. Qi 
does not look like energy. Indeed, it looks nonexistent. 
ESP 
One special ability of minds that is widely taken as real (espe-
cially in science fiction) would be extrasensory perception (ESP), in 
which minds communicate with one another by some mecha-
nism that is not at present part of established scientific knowl-
edge. Another is psychokinesis (PK), or mind over matter, where 
thoughts are capable of moving objects or otherwise affecting 
physical phenomena—in the past, present, and future. If a disem-
bodied soul can use some from of psychokinesis to move around 
brain molecules, then it should be equally well able to move 
around molecules outside the brain. 
If these phenomena exist, then they should be readily 
detectable in controlled, scientific experiments. Since the mid-
nineteenth century scientists have attempted to scientifically 
verify the reality of unusual mental phenomena. These included 

90 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
the prominent physicists Michael Faraday, William Crookes, and 
Oliver Lodge. Faraday, the greatest experimentalist of the day, 
found no evidence, while Crookes and Lodge convinced them-
selves that they had discovered what they called the psychic force. 
However, Crookes and Lodge did not control their experi-
ments sufficiently to make them convincing.23 They generally 
worked with spiritual "mediums" who were highly skilled at the 
various illusions that professional magicians and charlatans have 
developed over the centuries. 
Crookes, Lodge, and other early psychic investigators made a 
fundamental error in allowing their subjects to control the pro-
tocol of their experiments. Even today we find this serious breach 
of commonsense methodology routinely made in psychic exper-
iments. For example, consider the much-touted experiments con-
ducted at the Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research Labora-
tory (PEAR).24 Scientists are no more capable of uncovering 
trickery than anyone else not specifically initiated into the mag-
ical arts—perhaps even less so since they are not used to the uni-
verse lying to them. Crookes and Lodge proved to be particularly 
gullible, possibly because of personal tragedies in their lives.25 
The need for better controls in psychic experiments was recog-
nized in the 1930s by botanist Joseph Banks Rhine of Duke Uni-
versity. Rhine coined the term ESP and made an honest attempt to 
find empirical evidence for the existence of psychic forces. He 
announced a number of claims that did not stand up to critical 
scrutiny and, after numerous rejections by established scientific 
journals, he started his own journal for which he could choose 
more sympathetic reviewers. Despite his failure to convince main-
stream scientists of the reality of psychic forces, Rhine pioneered a 
field of study that continues to the present day under the designa-
tion of parapsychology.26 Even parapsychologists must admit that 
they operate on the borders of conventional science. 
As I have mentioned, there is no agreed-upon precise defini-
tion of science. So I will not press the point as to whether or not 

SEARCHING FOR A WORLD BEYOND MATTER 91 
parapsychology is science. Parapsychologists continue to make 
claims that ESP has been observed in controlled experiments. 
Some of these reports are peer reviewed, but the peers are gener-
ally other true believers who review manuscripts for special jour-
nals like Rhine's that maintain different standards than main-
stream scientific journals. The editors of these journals claim they 
provide a greater "openness" to new ideas. This is fine, but the 
publishing of poorly executed experiments, as exemplified by the 
qi experiment described above, does not serve any useful purpose 
and drags down the credibility of everything else published by 
that journal. 
As with the creationists described in chapter 2, proponents of 
ESP claim that their results are unfairly rejected because of con-
ventional science's dogmatic attachment to old ideas. My reac-
tion is the same as it was in the case of intelligent design: what 
possible reason would scientists have to object if convincing evi-
dence for psychic phenomena was reported? As with intelligent 
design, the discovery of special powers of the mind would open 
up wonderful new avenues of research that would surely be gen-
erously funded by taxpayers. Mainstream scientists have not 
accepted the claims of parapsychology for exactly the same 
reason they have not accepted the claims of intelligent design. 
The data do not warrant it. 
From the first experiments in the mid-nineteenth century to 
the present, the claim of evidence for ESP simply does not stand 
up under the same scrutiny scientists apply when considering any 
extraordinary claim. 
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF EXPERIMENTS 
Let me expand on the issue of statistical significance of experi-
ments, which is the basis on which many reported extraordinary 
claims can be quickly discarded. Parapsychologists argue that 

92 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
they should be held to the same standard of statistical signifi-
cance as medical science, where claimed positive effects of, say, a 
new drug, are published when the statistical significance ("P 
value") is 5 percent (P = 0.05) or lower. That is, if the experiment 
were repeated many times in exactly the same fashion, on average 
one in twenty would produce the same effect, or a greater one, as 
an artifact of the normal statistical fluctuations that occur in any 
measurement dealing with finite data. 
But think of what that means. In every twenty claims that are 
reported in medical journals, on the average one such report is 
false—a statistical artifact! 
Contrast this with the standard in the field of research where I 
spent my career, elementary particle physics. There the standard of 
P value for publication of an important new discovery is one-
hundredth of one percent (P < 0.0001). This guarantees that, on 
average, only one in ten thousand such reports is a statistical artifact. 
A possible justification for the low standard in medicine may 
be that medical journals are not venues for extraordinary new 
discoveries but places where promising new therapies are dissem-
inated to the healthcare community as rapidly as possible. If one 
in twenty are spurious, that may be regarded by some as a small 
price to pay if a life might be saved by a therapy that works. Nev-
ertheless, I think the medical standard should be higher, given 
the large number of false reports that are later withdrawn. Think 
of all the wasted money, effort, and lives that probably go into 
useless therapies under the current arrangement. 
Indeed, medical researchers are beginning to recognize the 
inadequacy of their journal standards. Epidemiologist John Ion-
nidas has gone so far as to write, "Most published research find-
ings in Medicine are false."27 A recent paper in British Medical 
Journal recommends the P value threshold be changed to P < 
0.001, not as tight as in physics but probably suitable for medical 
science, given all its added complications.28 
Parapsychologists, on the other hand, are not in the business 

SEARCHING FOR A WORLD BEYOND MATTER 
93 
of saving lives. They are more like particle physicists or 
astronomers, seeking to uncover facts about the fundamental 
structure of nature, where no one will die if the report of an 
important discovery is held off for a few months or years. 
Almost without exception, claims of evidence for psychic 
phenomena come nowhere close to having the statistical errors 
small enough to rule out more mundane explanations for the 
results.29 The handful that claim reasonable statistical signifi-
cance all have methodological flaws that render their results 
unconvincing. And none are independently replicated at a statis-
tically significant level. 
A number of studies have claimed to be able to overcome the 
lack of statistical significance of single experiments by using a 
technique called "metanalysis," in which the results of many 
experiments are combined.30 This procedure is highly question-
able.31 I am unaware of any extraordinary discovery in all of sci-
ence that was made using metanalysis. If several, independent 
experiments do not find significant evidence for a phenomenon, 
we surely cannot expect a purely mathematical manipulation of 
the combined data to suddenly produce a major discovery. 
No doubt parapsychologists and their supporters will dispute 
my conclusions. But they cannot deny the fact that after one hun-
dred and fifty years of attempting to verify a phenomenon, they 
have failed to provide any evidence that the phenomenon exists 
that has caught the attention of the bulk of the scientific commu-
nity. We safely conclude that, after all this effort, the phenom-
enon very likely does not exist. In any other field, such an un-
broken history of negative results would have long ago resulted 
in the claims being discarded. At the minimum, psychic experi-
ments cannot be used to show that humans possess any special 
powers of the mind that exceed the physical limitations of inani-
mate matter. 

94 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
DOES PRAYER WORK? 
One of the defining characteristics of the Judeo-Christian-Islamic 
God is that he is believed to respond to entreaties from the 
faithful and steps in to change the natural course of events when 
he is sufficiently moved by the intensity and piety of the peti-
tioner (or, whenever he wishes). Surely, with the millions of 
prayers being submitted daily, totaling billions in recorded his-
tory, some objectively verifiable (not just anecdotal) positive evi-
dence should have been found by now! 
Of course, prayer by or in the presence of a patient plausibly 
could have some purely natural beneficial effects, such as helping 
relax an ill person, lower blood pressure, and so on. However, 
this effect is small at best and indistinguishable from other forms 
of relaxation that contain no religious or spiritual element.32 
Actually, as we will see, some data suggest that such prayer may 
actually be detrimental, possibly adding to the anxiety of the 
patient. In any case, to be considered extraordinary evidence in 
favor of prayer, experiments must be "blinded" so that neither 
patients nor investigators know who is being prayed for. 
It might seem that prayer is not amenable to scientific testing. 
First, it is supposedly "spiritual" rather than material. Second, 
prayer is difficult to control. For example, how could you stop 
someone from praying or know for sure that a subject is not being 
prayed for somewhere in the world? However, anything with 
observable consequences is testable by scientific means, and prayer 
is widely believed to have observable consequences. A positive 
signal is possible if, for example, some type of prayer is superior to 
another. This would show up in a statistically and systematically 
significant success rate for that type. In chapter 1 I presented a 
hypothetical example where Catholic prayers were convincingly 
demonstrated to work in careful scientific experiments, while those 
of other religions failed. It would be difficult to think of a plausible 
natural mechanism for this phenomenon. 

SEARCHING FOR A WORLD BEYOND MATTER 
95 
As already noted, despite official statements from some 
national science organizations, science is not wholly restricted to 
the consideration of purely material causes for observable phe-
nomena. If empirical data show some result that cannot be 
accounted for by current, conventional materialistic means, then 
good science as well as honesty demands that this fact be 
acknowledged and published. The issue of whether no material 
mechanism can ever be found could be left open for further 
research, which would surely get funded—once again leaving sci-
entists happy as clams. 
The effects of prayer should be readily measurable, in partic-
ular where prayers may be focused on some specific purpose such 
as healing the afflicted. As we saw with psychic phenomena, 
many popular books and articles have been published claiming 
that science has shown that prayer has positive healing value.33 
But, once again, we find that none of the reports is convincing. I 
discussed several specific examples in Has Science Found God ? and 
will not repeat these here.34 Every published claim of a positive 
effect of which I am aware fails to satisfy one or more of the 
methodological conditions I laid out in chapter 1. As I have 
emphasized, these conditions are routinely applied to all extraor-
dinary claims in physics or other "hard" sciences. With all the 
publicity that attends to prayer studies, it is highly unlikely any 
good quality study has been missed. 
Since my previous book went to press, several important new 
results have been published that have virtually settled the matter. 
One case, in particular, has generated considerable attention and 
provides valuable insight into the admitted difficulties that arise 
when the attempt is made to use rational science to evaluate long 
and deeply held religious beliefs. But then we will see that when 
scientists do their jobs properly, not allowing their personal 
beliefs to overrule their objective analysis of the data, we can have 
confidence in their results. 

96 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
THE COLUMBIA "MIRACLE" STUDY 
In 2001 the Journal of Reproductive Medicine published an article 
submitted by the highly prestigious Columbia University Medical 
Center claiming to show that infertile women who were prayed 
for by Christian prayer groups became pregnant twice as often as 
those not prayed for.35 This caught the immediate attention of 
national media, including ABC News, whose medical editor, Tim-
othy Johnson, credulously reported on the "surprising results" to 
millions on Good Morning America.36 It is probably not irrelevant 
to mention that Johnson at the time was also serving as a min-
ister at the evangelical Community Covenant Church in West 
Peabody, Massachusetts. 
The study was actually not conducted at Columbia but rather 
in Korea at an institute directed by one of the three coauthors, 
Kwang Cha. A sample of 219 women was separated randomly 
into two groups, one of which was prayed for and the other not. 
Christian prayer groups in the United States, Canada, and Aus-
tralia conducted the prayers, with the investigators masked until 
the data were all collected and the clinical outcomes known. 
The reported results showed that the prayed-for group had a 
pregnancy rate of 50 percent, while the not-prayed-for group had 
only 26 percent. The statistical significance for the difference was 
P = 0.0013. The prayed-for group also had a higher success rate 
for in vitro fertilization-embryo transfer, 16.3 percent compared to 8 
percent, P = .0005. 
While the first result does not quite meet the new standard of 
P < 0.001 suggested above, these statistical significances are cer-
tainly better than the worthless P = 0.05 we usually see. At the 
very least, if this report is correct, then attempts at replication are 
reasonably justified. 
However, doubt has been cast on the validity of the results. 
Bruce L. Flamm, clinical professor of obstetrics and gynecology at 
the University of California, Irvine, found a number of flaws in 

SEARCHING FOR A WORLD BEYOND MATTER 
97 
the study protocol, calling it "convoluted and confusing."37 For 
example, one group of prayer participants prayed directly for the 
patients while a second group not only prayed for the patients 
but also prayed for the effectiveness of the prayers of the first 
group. A third group simply prayed that "God's will or desire be 
fulfilled," whatever that is. 
Perhaps these confusions are not too serious and, in any case, 
could be easily rectified in a follow-up study. However, further 
convolutions and confusions have been revealed about the par-
ticipants in the study. 
One of the authors, Daniel P. Wirth, is a lawyer without a 
medical degree. However, he does have a degree in parapsy-
chology and has authored several articles in parapsychology jour-
nals claiming documented evidence for faith healing.38 In an 
unrelated matter, Wirth has since been imprisoned after being 
convicted of fraud, which included the use of names of dead 
people for financial gain. 
The lead author of the paper was originally identified as 
Rogerio Lobo, then head of the Columbia University department 
of obstetrics and gynecology. However, shortly after publication, 
Columbia University announced Lobo was not even aware of the 
study until being informed by Cha six to twelve months after the 
study was completed. Lobo has since withdrawn his name from 
the study and any connection between Cha and Columbia has 
been severed. The paper, however, has not been formally 
withdrawn—a black mark on a great university. 
Neither Columbia University nor the Journal of Reproductive 
Medicine has come completely clean on this fiasco, and while 
some media outlets have reported on the questionable nature of 
the claims, that knowledge has not become as widespread as the 
astounding claims made in the original announcement. What is 
referred to as the "Columbia miracle study" continues to be 
referred to by shameless promoters of faith healing, such as Larry 
Dossey, as one of his exemplars of the "controlled clinical trials 

98 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
and peer-review process" that provide scientific support for the 
efficacy of prayer.39 Indeed the experiment was exemplary. It 
serves as a prime example of how not to conduct a scientific 
investigation of extraordinary claims. 
CAN PRAYER CHANGE THE PAST? 
Dossey was also impressed by a study reported in the British Med-
ical Journal in 2001 reporting that praying for patients reduced their 
length of stay in hospital (P = 0.01) and duration of infections (P 
= 0.04).40 If this was not remarkable enough, the prayers were actu-
ally performed after the patients had left the hospital, implying that 
the power of prayer extends into the past as well as the future. Note 
that the journal did not apply the P < 0.001 standard that it, itself, 
had proposed that same year (see discussion above). 
It is not clear how seriously the author of this report, Dr. 
Leonard Leibovici, meant for us to take his results. He had earlier 
declared, "Empiricists are not equipped to recognize the loud sig-
nals of alternative medicine as false," calling alternative (comple-
mentary) medicine a "cuckoo in the nest of ... reed warblers."41 
Leibovici might regard Larry Dossey and Brian Olshansky as 
"cuckoo" for taking his report very seriously. They suggest that 
this result may be reconciled with our present understanding of 
the universe by going "beyond the superstring theories of today's 
physicists."42 
Physician (and devout Christian) Jeffrey P. Bishop and I eval-
uated these claims in a paper published in 2004 in the British 
Medical Journal, where the other reports had appeared.43 First, we 
pointed out that none of the studies in medicine and parapsy-
chology that Olshansky and Dossey take as "confirmatory evi-
dence" are significant. Second, we showed that nothing in 
modern physics suggests a physical basis for the type of backward 
causality being suggested. 

SEARCHING FOR A WORLD BEYOND MATTER 
99 
I have written extensively on the misuse of modern physics, in 
particular quantum mechanics, to support mystical claims.44 I 
have also argued that the results of some physics experiments 
may be interpreted as evidence for events in the future affecting 
events in the past.45 But this only happens at the quantum level, 
and no theoretical or empirical basis exists for backward causality 
on the large scale of human experience. 
In short, neither robust data nor existing physical, chemical, 
biological, or neurological theories support the notion that 
prayer can affect human health—forward or backward in time. 
THE DUKE STUDY 
Two of the studies I reported on in Has Science Found God? 
involved praying for the improved health of coronary patients.46 
While claiming positive results, neither study produced statisti-
cally significant effects, and both experiments were also otherwise 
severely flawed, so they may be safely discarded. These highly 
publicized reports have been followed by two well-executed 
experiments that seem to meet all the requirements of a proper 
investigation. Both find no evidence that prayer improves health. 
In a three-year clinical trial led by Duke University physicians, 
the effects of intercessory prayer and other so-called noetic thera-
pies such as music, imagery, and touch therapy were examined 
for 748 patients in 9 hospitals in the United States. Twelve prayer 
groups from around the world were involved, including lay and 
monastic Christians, Sufi Muslims, and Buddhist monks. Prayers 
were even e-mailed to Jerusalem and placed on the Wailing Wall. 
Patients awaiting angioplasty for coronary artery obstruction 
were selected at random by computer and sent to the twelve 
prayer groups. The groups prayed for complete recovery of the 
patients. The clinical trials were double blind: neither the hos-
pital staff nor the patients knew who was being prayed for. 

100 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
The findings, reported in the journal Lancet, showed no signif-
icant differences in the recovery and health between the two 
groups.47 The result for touch therapy was also negative, while 
the other techniques showed "some promise." 
It is notable that this study was not conducted by a bunch of 
"closed-minded skeptical materialistic atheists" but rather physi-
cians of religious faith who personally believe that alternatives to 
conventional scientific medicine are worth pursuing. There can be 
little doubt what, in their hearts, they wanted to see. The lead 
author, Mitchell Krucoff, was ecstatic when the first results started 
coming in. In November 2001 he told a media outlet: "We saw 
impressive reductions in all of the negative outcomes—the bad 
outcomes that were measured in the study. What we look for rou-
tinely in cardiology trials are outcomes such as death, a heart 
attack, or the lungs filling with water—what we call congestive 
heart failure—in patients who are treated in the course of these 
problems. In the group randomly assigned to prayer therapy, there 
was a 50 percent reduction in all complications and a 100 percent 
reduction in major complications."48 But as the significance of the 
data improved, the situation turned out otherwise. Since he signed 
the paper, Krucoff is now apparently satisfied with the published 
conclusion that no effect of prayer has been observed. 
A coauthor of the Lancet paper was Harold Koenig, who 
directs the Center for Spirituality, Theology and Health at Duke 
University in which Krucoff and other coauthors are participants. 
Koenig is the author of over a dozen book books on healing and 
faith.49 There can be no doubt that Koenig, also a person of faith, 
would like nothing better than to announce the discovery of evi-
dence for the supernatural healing power of prayer. But Koenig is 
an honest and competent scientist who is not going to make such 
an announcement until the data warrant it. I have communicated 
extensively with him and find we have little disagreement on the 
fact that, after extensive experimentation, any positive benefits of 
prayer and other religious exercises that may be currently indi-

SEARCHING FOR A WORLD BEYOND MATTER 
101 
cated can be understood in terms of physical processes alone. He 
is also in agreement with Bishop's and my refutation of the 
claims of efficacy for retroactive prayer. 
THE STEP PROJECT 
Perhaps the definitive work is the mammoth STEP project (Study 
of the Therapeutic Effects of Intercessory Prayer), a collaboration 
of six medical centers, including Harvard and the Mayo Clinic, 
lead by Harvard professor Herbert Benson.50 This study, lasting 
for almost a decade, involved 1,802 patients who were prayed for 
over a fourteen-day period starting the night before receiving 
coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery. 
The patients were randomly and blindly divided into three 
groups: 604 received intercessory prayers after being informed 
they might or might not receive such prayers, 597 did not receive 
prayers after being informed they might or might not receive such 
prayers, and 601 received intercessory prayers after being 
informed they definitely would be prayed for. None of the doc-
tors knew who was being prayed for in the first two groups. Two 
Catholic groups and one Protestant group carried out the 
praying. It apparently did not occur to the investigators to also 
include a group of atheists thinking nice thoughts. 
The published results showed that in the two groups uncer-
tain about receiving intercessory prayer, complications occurred 
in 52 percent (315/604) of patients who received intercessory 
prayer versus 51 percent (304/597) of those who did not. Com-
plications occurred in 59 percent (352/601) of patients certain of 
receiving intercessory prayer compared with the 52 percent of 
those uncertain of receiving intercessory prayer. Major events and 
thirty-day mortality were similar across the three groups. 
The authors concluded that intercessory prayer itself had no 
effect on complication-free recovery from CABG, but certain 

102 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
knowledge of receiving intercessory prayer was associated with a 
higher incidence of complications. The later effect somewhat sur-
prised the investigators, who speculated that these patients may 
have experienced higher anxiety, perhaps thinking they were so 
desperately ill that they needed to be prayed for. No one sug-
gested that God was deliberately thwarting the expectations of 
the researchers. Actually, I do not regard this effect as significant. 
The investigators included a Catholic priest, Father Dean 
Marek, who was principal investigator of the Mayo Clinic portion 
of the study, and other believers. Primary funding of $2.5 million 
was provided by the John Templeton Foundation, which seeks to 
find connections between religion and science, so skeptics cannot 
be blamed for deliberately producing negative results. They were 
not even involved. Father Marek and other coauthors have tried 
to account for why prayers do not work within a theological con-
text, but they are to be commended for accepting the data and 
admitting they did not work in their particular experiment. 
As was the case for the special powers of the mind termed 
"psychic," studies of the supernatural powers of prayer have so far 
produced no convincing results. If prayer were as important as it 
is taken to be by Jews, Christians, and Muslims, its positive effects 
should be obvious and measurable. They are not. It does not 
appear—based on the scientific evidence—that a God exists who 
answers prayers in any significant, observable way. 
IMMORTALITY 
For many if not most believers, the greatest appeal of religion is 
the promise of eternal life. St. Paul said, "And if Christ not be 
risen then is our preaching in vain, and your faith is also vain."51 
In his classic work The Illusion of Immortality, philosopher 
Corliss Lamont surveyed all the aspects of the subject of immor-
tality, from theological and philosophical to scientific and social.52 

SEARCHING FOR A WORLD BEYOND MATTER 
103 
He points out that the exact nature of the immortality that is 
preached in Christianity, as well as in other religions, is not at all 
clear, with many different doctrines being presented over the ages. 
Part of the problem is one that we can recognize from the ear-
lier discussion on the brain. What is it exactly that survives death? 
We have seen that neurological and medical evidence strongly 
indicates that our memories, emotions, thoughts, and indeed our 
very personalities reside in the physical particles of the brain or, 
more precisely, in the ways those particles interact. So this would 
seem to say that when our brains die, we die. 
Historically, the Catholic Church has taught that the full body 
is resurrected. The Apostles' Creed, adopted in the second century 
and still recited, states that there will be a resurrection of the 
flesh. The Council of Trent in the sixteenth century asserted that 
the "identical body" will be restored "without deformities." St. 
Augustine declared that "the substance of our bodies, however 
disintegrated, shall be entirely reunited."53 
This doctrine would seem to satisfy any objection raised by 
recognition of the physical nature of mind. God simply reassem-
bles us—brain and all—and the brain contains our personalities. 
Presumably, in heaven we will look as we did at eighteen, but we 
can hardly expect the same brain that was in our bodies at that age. 
Heaven forbid! I guess we get the brain we die with, so we have all 
our memories. But, then, what if we die with Alzheimer's disease? 
We need not go any further into these unconfirmable specu-
lations (at least unconfirmable in this life). The scientific ques-
tion is whether there is any evidence for life after death. As with 
ESP and other proposed super powers of the mind, despite 
numerous claims over the years, no claimed connection with a 
hereafter has ever been scientifically verified. And, as with those 
special powers, we can easily see how a connection should have 
been verified in controlled, scientific experiments. 
Consider the case of psychics or mediums who claim they 
have the power to speak to the dead. Such spirits surely would 

104 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
have access to a deep store of information from which some 
observable phenomenon currently unknown to science can be 
extracted that could not have been in the psychic's head all along. 
For example, suppose a psychic informs his client that her 
dead mother told him where to find a long-lost engagement 
ring—behind the kitchen stove. If the ring is then found at that 
place, it would indeed seem to be miraculous. 
However, before accepting this result as confirmation of the 
extraordinary hypotheses of life after death and the psychic's 
power to communicate with the dead, you have to rule out all pos-
sible ordinary explanations. For example, the psychic may have 
visited his client at home at some earlier time, seen the ring sitting 
alongside the sink where it had been removed to wash dishes, and 
surreptitiously dropped it behind the stove (yes, psychics have 
been known to cheat). That, and similar possibilities, would have 
to be ruled out first. But, if properly designed, experiments 
proving immortality are in principle possible. All that has to 
happen is for the psychic to receive information from his contact 
in the other world that he has no way of knowing ahead of time— 
say, the exact date of the future earthquake that levels Los Angeles. 
Another commonly reported phenomenon that is used to 
claim evidence for an afterlife is the near-death experience (NDE). 
People very close to death who then survive often report seeing a 
tunnel with light at the end of it and someone beckoning to them 
in the light. Since the person was never brain-dead, she cannot be 
said to have come back from the dead. However, the claim is that 
she saw a sign of the world beyond at the end of the tunnel. 
I provided an extensive critique of experiments on near-death 
experiences in Has Science Found God?54 There we found that 
none provide any evidence for an afterlife. See also the book by 
Susan Blackmore.55 
In a well-balanced assessment of the evidence of near-death 
experiences, Religion, Spirituality, and the Near-Death Experience, 
Mark Fox concludes: "This needs to be spelled out loudly and 

SEARCHING FOR A WORLD BEYOND MATTER 
105 
clearly: twenty-five years after the coining of the actual phrase 
'near-death experience,' it remains to be established beyond doubt 
that during such an experience anything actually leaves the body. 
To date, and claims to the contrary notwithstanding, no researcher 
has provided evidence for such an assertion of an acceptable stan-
dard which would put the matter beyond doubt."56 
In short, after over a century of unsuccessful attempts to find 
convincing scientific evidence for the almost universally desired 
immortal and immaterial soul, it seems very unlikely that it, and 
a God who provides us with such a gift, exists. 
MODERN THEOLOGIES OF SOUL 
Contemporary theologians are far from unaware that scientific 
developments in biology and neuroscience have undermined tra-
ditional beliefs about the soul and human nature. Theologian 
Nancey Murphy has written, "Science has provided a massive 
amount of evidence suggesting that we need not postulate the 
existence of an entity such as a soul or mind in order to account 
for life and consciousness."57 
Murphy sees this as a serious theological problem, that Carte-
sian dualism is no longer tenable. She is certainly correct on that. 
However, she is unwilling to concede that the only option 
remaining is "reductive materialism," which she regards as 
incompatible with Christian teaching (not a scientific reason). 
Instead she has joined other theologians in proposing what she 
calls nonreductive physicalism. In this view, "The person is a phys-
ical organism whose complex functioning, both in society and in 
relation to God, gives rise to 'higher' human capacities such as 
morality and spirituality."58 
Computer simulations of complex systems have uncovered a 
property that has provided Murphy and others what they think 
may be a scientific alternative to reductive materialism that has 

106 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
theological implications. These simulations have revealed unex-
pected features for systems as a whole that are not present in their 
various parts. This property is called emergence and is said to tes-
tify to a new holistic reality in which the whole is greater than the 
sum of its parts. 
Psychologist Warren S. Brown suggests that the neurocogni-
tive system has such emergent functions that cannot be reduced 
to "lower abilities," although he admits it would not exist 
without those lower abilities. Further, he claims, without evi-
dence, that the human cognitive system has the ability of "down-
ward causative influence" on those lower abilities.59 Brown 
argues that the notion of "interpersonal interrelatedness" that 
emerges corresponds to the Christian experience of soul.60 
If what emerges may be called the soul, it is still the product 
of purely material processes. Nothing supernatural is taking 
place, and God is an unnecessary ingredient. The wetness of water 
is an emergent property of H20 molecules, but that doesn't imply 
the existence of some immaterial thing called wetness. Human 
and animal mental processes look just as they can be expected to 
look if there is no soul or other immaterial component. 
As discussed above, physical processes display no properties 
that cannot be simply reduced to the localized interactions of its 
parts by well-known laws of physics that require some new 
"holistic" principles. Those properties follow from the same 
reducible physics as do the hardness of rock and the wetness of 
water. 
In any case, whether reductive or not, the emergent properties 
of the purely physical brain and body do not survive their deaths. 
The nonreductive physicalist soul is not an immortal immaterial 
soul—not even a mortal immaterial soul. Once again it appears 
that a God with a traditional attribute of the monotheistic God, 
one who endows humans with immortal immaterial souls, does 
not exist.61 

SEARCHING FOR A WORLD BEYOND MATTER 
107 
NOTES 
1. Carl Zimmer, Soul Made Flesh: The Discovery of the Brain—and 
How It Changed the World (New York: Free Press, 2004), pp. 9-11. 
2. Jerome W. Elbert, Are Souls Real? (Amherst, NY: Prometheus 
Books, 2000), p. 37; David Eller, Natural Atheism (Cranford, NJ: Amer-
ican Atheist Press, 2004), pp. 333-40. 
3. Zimmer, Soul Made Flesh, p. 17. 
4. Ibid. The Lucretius quotation is from Bernard Pullman, The 
Atom in the History of Human Thought (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1998). 
5. Ibid., p. 36. 
6. Philip Ball, Critical Mass: How One Thing Leads to Another (New 
York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2004), chap. 1. 
7. Zimmer, Soul Made Flesh. 
8. C. J. Aine, "A Conceptual Overview and Critique of Functional 
Neuro-Imaging Techniques in Humans: I. MRI/fMRI and PET," Critical 
Reviews in Neurobiology 9, nos. 2-3 (1995): 229-309. 
9. Jorge Moll et al., "Functional Networks in Emotive and Non-
moral Social Judgments," NeuroImage 16 (2002): 696-703. 
10. Joshua D. Greene et al., "The Neural Bases of Cognitive Con-
flict and Control in Moral Judgment," Neuron 44 (2004): 389-400. 
11. Michael A. Persinger, "Paranormal and Religious Beliefs May Be 
Mediated Differently by Subcortical and Cortical Phenomenological 
Process of the Temporal (Limbic) Lobes," Perceptual and Motor Skills 76 
(1993): 247-51. 
12. P. Granqvist et al., "Sensed Presence and Mystical Experiences 
Are Predicted by Suggestibility, Not by the Application of Transcranial 
Weak Complex Magnetic Fields," Neuroscience Letters 379, no. 1 (2005): 
1-6. 
13. Olaf Blanke et al., "Stimulating Illusory Own-Body Percep-
tions," Nature 419 (September 19, 2002): 269-70. 
14. Victor J. Stenger, Physics and Psychics: The Search for a World 
beyond the Senses (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1990), p. 111; Has 
Science Found God? The Latest Results in the Search for Purpose in the Uni-
verse (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2003), pp. 290-99. 

108 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
15. Pope Pius XII, Humani Generis, August 12, 1950. 
16. Pope John Paul II, Address to the Academy of Sciences, October 
28, 1986. L'Osservatore Romano, English ed., November 24, 1986, p. 22. 
17. Stenger, Physics and Psychics. 
18. Stenger, Has Science Found God? 
19. Stenger, "Bioenergetic Fields," Scientific Review of Alternative 
Medicine 3, no. 1 (Spring/Summer 1999). 
20. Joanne Stefanatos, "Introduction to Bioenergetic Medicine," in 
Complementary and Alternative Veterinary Medicine: Principles and Practice, 
ed. Allen M. Schoen and Susan G. Wynn (St. Louis: Mosby-Year Book, 
1998), chap. 16. 
21. L. Rosa et al., "A Close Look at Therapeutic Touch," Journal of 
the American Medical Association 279 (1998): 1005-10; Bela Scheiber 
and Carla Selby, eds., Therapeutic Touch (Amherst, NY: Prometheus 
Books, 2000). 
22. Xin Yan et al., "Certain Physical Manifestation and Effects of 
External Qi of Yan Xin Life Science Technology," Journal of Scientific 
Exploration 16, no. 3 (2002): 381-411. 
23. Stenger, Physics and Psychics. 
24. See my discussion in Stenger, Has Science Found God? pp. 
281-85. 
25. Crookes was drawn into spiritualism after the death of his 
brother in 1867. Lodge's son was killed in Flanders in 1915, and Lodge 
turned to mediums to communicate with Raymond in the beyond. 
26. Stenger, Physics and Psychics. 
27. John P. A. Ionnidas, "Why Most Published Research Findings 
Are False," Public Library of Science, Medicine 2, no. 8 (2005), http://  
medicine.plosjournals.org/perlserv/?request=get-document&doi=10  
.1371/journal.pmed.0020124 (accessed December 2, 2005). 
28. Jonathan A. Sterne and George Davey Smith, "Sifting the Evi-
dence—What's Wrong with Significance Tests?" British Medical Journal 
322 (2001): 226-31. 
29. Stenger, Physics and Psychics; Has Science Found God? 
30. Dean Radin, The Conscious Universe: The Scientific Truth of Psy-
chic Phenomena (New York: HarperEdge, 1997). 
31. Douglas M. Stokes, "The Shrinking Filedrawer: On the Validity 

SEARCHING FOR A WORLD BEYOND MATTER 
109 
of Statistical Meta-Analysis in Parapsychology," Skeptical Inquirer 25, no. 
3 (2001): 22-25. 
32. Jeffrey P. Bishop and Victor J. Stenger, "Retroactive Prayer: Lots 
of History, Not Much Mystery, and No Science," British Medical Journal 
329 (2004): 1444-46. 
33. See, for example, Larry Dossey, Healing Words: The Power of 
Prayer and the Practice of Medicine (San Francisco: Harper, 1993). 
34. Stenger, Has Science Found God? pp. 237-55. 
35. K. Y. Cha, D. P. Wirth, and R. A. Lobo, "Does Prayer Influence 
the Success of In Vitro Fertilization-Embryo Transfer? Report of a 
Masked, Randomized Trial," Journal of Reproductive Medicine 46, no. 9 
(September 2001): 781-87. 
36. Timothy Johnson, "Praying for Pregnancy: Study Says Prayer 
Helps Women Get Pregnant," ABC Television, Good Morning America, 
October 4, 2001. 
37. Bruce L. Flamm, "Faith Healing by Prayer," review of "Does 
Prayer Influence the Success of In Vitro Fertilization-Embryo Transfer?" 
by K. Y. Cha, D. P. Wirth, and R. A. Lobo, Scientific Review of Alternative 
Medicine 6, no. 1 (2002): 47-50; Bruce L. Flamm, "Faith Healing Con-
fronts Modern Medicine," Scientific Review of Alternative Medicine 8, no. 
1 (2004): 9-14. 
38. See references in Flamm, "Faith Healing Confronts Modern 
Medicine." 
39. Dossey, Response to letter to the editor, Southern California 
Physician (December 2001): 46. 
40. Leonard Leibovici, "Effects of Remote, Retroactive Intercessory 
Prayer on Outcomes in Patients with Bloodstream Infections: A Con-
trolled Trial," British Medical Journal 323 (2001): 1450-51. 
41. Leonard Leibovici, "Alternative (Complementary) Medicine: A 
Cuckoo in the Nest of Empiricist Reed Warblers," British Medical Journal 
319 (1999): 1629-31. 
42. Brian Olshansky and Larry Dossey, "Retroactive Prayer: A Pre-
posterous Hypothesis?" British Medical Journal 327 (2003): 1460-63. 
43. Bishop and Stenger, "Retroactive Prayer." 
44. Victor J. Stenger, The Unconscious Quantum: Metaphysics in 
Modern Physics and Cosmology (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995). 

110 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
45. Victor J. Stenger, Timeless Reality: Symmetry, Simplicity, and Mul-
tiple Universes (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2000). 
46. Randolph C. Byrd, "Positive Therapeutic Effects of Intercessory 
Prayer in a Coronary Care Unit Population," Southern Medical Journal 
81, no. 7 (1988): 826-29; W. S. Harris et al., "A Randomized, Con-
trolled Trial of the Effects of Remote, Intercessory Prayer on Outcomes 
in Patients Admitted to the Coronary Care Unit," Archives of Internal 
Medicine 159 (1999): 2273-78. 
47. M. W. Krucoff et al., "Music, Imagery, Touch, and Prayer as 
Adjuncts to Interventional Cardiac Care: The Monitoring and Actualiza-
tion of Noetic Trainings (MANTRA) II Randomized Study," Lancet 366 
(July 16, 2005): 211-17; for a media report, see Jonathan Petre, "Power 
of Prayer Found Wanting in Hospital Trial," News Telegraph, October 15, 
2003, http://news.telegraph.co.uk/news/main.jhtml?xml=/news/2003/  
10/15/nprayl5.xml (accessed December 6, 2004). 
48. Nathan Bupp, "Follow-up Study on Prayer Therapy May Help 
Refute False and Misleading Information about Earlier Prayer Study," Com-
mission for Scientific Medicine and Mental Health, http://csmmh.org/prayer/  
MANTRA.release.htm, July 22, 2005 (accessed December 16, 2005). 
49. Center for Spirituality, Theology and Health, http://www.duke  
spiritualityandhealth.org/books/ (accessed December 16, 2005). 
50. H. Benson et al., "Study of the Therapeutic Effects of Interces-
sory Prayer (STEP) in Cardiac Bypass Patients: A Multicenter Random-
ized Trial of Uncertainty and Certainty of Receiving Intercessory 
Prayer," American Heart Journal 151, no. 4 (2006): 934-42. 
51. 1 Corinthians 15:14. 
52. Corliss Lamont, The Illusion of Immortality, 5th ed. (New York: 
Continuum, 1990). First published in 1935. 
53. Ibid., pp. 43-44. 
54. Stenger, Has Science Found God? pp. 290-99. 
55. Susan Blackmore, Dying to Live: Near-Death Experiences 
(Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1993). 
56. Mark Fox, Religion, Spirituality, and the Near-Death Experience 
(New York: Routledge, 2003). 
57. Nancey Murphy in Whatever Happened to the Soul? Scientific 
and Theological Portraits of Human Nature, ed. Warren S. Brown, 

SEARCHING FOR A WORLD BEYOND MATTER 111 
Nancey Murphy, and H. Newton Malony (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 
1998), p. 18. 
58. Ibid., p. 25. 
59. Warren S. Brown in Whatever Happened to the Soul? Scientific 
and Theological Portraits of Human Nature, ed. Warren S. Brown, 
Nancey Murphy, and H. Newton Malony (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 
1998), p. 102. 
60. Ibid., p. 125. 
61. For further reading on the philosophical aspects of the mind-
body problem in the light of current research, see Daniel Dennett, Con-
sciousness Explained (Boston: Little, Brown, 1991); Patricia Smith 
Churchland, Neurophilosophy: Toward a Unified Science of the Mind/Brain 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996); Paul M. Churchland, The Engine of 
Reason, the Seat of the Soul: A Philosophical Journey into the Brain (Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996); George Lakoff and Mark Johnson, Philos-
ophy in the Flesh: The Embodied Mind and Its Challenge to Western Thought 
(New York: Basic Books, 1999). 

Chapter 4 
COSMIC EVIDENCE 
The only laws of matter are those which our minds must fabricate, 
and the only laws of mind are fabricated for it by matter. 
—James Clerk Maxwell 
MIRACLES 
L
et us now move from Earth to the cosmos in our search for 
evidence of the creator God of Judaism, Christianity, and 
Islam. From a modern scientific perspective, what are the empir-
ical and theoretical implications of the hypothesis of a supernat-
ural creation? We need to seek evidence that the universe (1) had 
an origin and (2) that origin cannot have happened naturally. 
One sign of a supernatural creation would be a direct empirical 
confirmation that a miracle was necessary in order to bring the 
113 

114 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
universe into existence. That is, cosmological data should either 
show evidence for one or more violations of well-established 
laws of nature or the models developed to describe those data 
should require some causal ingredient that cannot be under-
stood—and be probably not understandable—in purely material 
or natural terms. 
Now, as philosopher David Hume pointed out centuries ago, 
many problems exist with the whole notion of miracles. Three 
types of possible miracles can be identified: (1) violations of 
established laws of nature, (2) inexplicable events, and (3) highly 
unlikely coincidences. The latter two can be subsumed into the 
first since they also would imply a disagreement with current 
knowledge. 
In previous chapters I have given examples of observations 
that would confirm the reality of supernatural powers of the 
human mind. We can easily imagine cosmic phenomena that 
would forever defy material expectations. Suppose a new planet 
were to suddenly appear in the solar system. Such an observation 
would violate energy conservation and reasonably be classified as 
a supernatural event. 
Scientists will make every effort to find a natural mechanism 
for any unusual event, and the layperson is likely to agree that 
such a mechanism might be possible since "science does not 
know everything." 
However, science knows a lot more than most people realize. 
Despite the talk of "scientific revolutions" and "paradigm shifts," 
the basic laws of physics are essentially the same today as they 
were at the time of Newton. Of course they have been expanded 
and revised, especially with the twentieth-century developments 
of relativity and quantum mechanics. But anyone familiar with 
modern physics will have to agree that certain fundamentals, in 
particular the great conservation principles of energy and 
momentum, have not changed in four hundred years.1 The con-
servation principles and Newton's laws of motion still appear in 

COSMIC EVIDENCE 
115 
relativity and quantum mechanics. Newton's law of gravity is still 
used to calculate the orbits of spacecraft. 
Conservation of energy and other basic laws hold true in the 
most distant observed galaxy and in the cosmic microwave back-
ground, implying that these laws have been valid for over thirteen 
billion years. Surely any observation of their violation during the 
puny human life span would be reasonably termed a miracle. 
Theologian Richard Swinburne suggests that we define a miracle 
as a nonrepeatable exception to a law of nature.2 Of course, we can 
always redefine the law to include the exception, but that would be 
somewhat arbitrary. Laws are meant to describe repeatable events. 
So, we will seek evidence for violations of well-established laws that 
do not repeat themselves in any lawful pattern. 
No doubt God, if he exists, is capable of repeating miracles if 
he so desires. However, repeatable events provide more informa-
tion that may lead to an eventual natural description, while a 
mysterious, unrepeated event is likely to remain mysterious. Let 
us give the God hypothesis every benefit of the doubt and keep 
open the possibility of a miraculous origin for inexplicable events 
and unlikely coincidences, examining any such occurrences on 
an individual basis. If even with the loosest definition of a mir-
acle none is observed to occur, then we will have obtained strong 
support for the case against the existence of a God who directs 
miraculous events. 
Let us proceed to look for evidence of a miraculous creation 
in our observations of the cosmos. 
CREATING MATTER 
Until early in the twentieth century, there were strong indications 
that one or more miracles were required to create the universe. 
The universe currently contains a large amount of matter that is 
characterized by the physical quantity we define as mass. Prior to 

116 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
the twentieth century, it was believed that matter could neither be 
created nor destroyed, just changed from one type to another. So 
the very existence of matter seemed to be a miracle, a violation of 
the assumed law of conservation of mass that occurred just 
once—at the creation. 
However, in his special theory of relativity published in 1905, 
Albert Einstein showed that matter can be created out of energy and 
can disappear into energy. What all science writers call "Einstein's 
famous equation," E = mc2, relates the mass m of a body to an 
equivalent rest energy, E, where c is a universal constant, the speed 
of light in a vacuum. That is, a body at rest still contains energy. 
When a body is moving, it carries an additional energy of 
motion called kinetic energy. In chemical and nuclear interactions, 
kinetic energy can be converted into rest energy, which is equiva-
lent to generating mass.3 Also, the reverse happens; mass or rest 
energy can be converted into kinetic energy. In that way, chemical 
and nuclear interactions can generate kinetic energy, which then 
can be used to run engines or blow things up. 
So, the existence of mass in the universe violates no law of 
nature. Mass can come from energy. But, then, where does the 
energy come from? The law of conservation of energy, also 
known as the first law of thermodynamics, requires that energy 
come from somewhere. In principle, the creation hypothesis 
could be confirmed by the direct observation or theoretical 
requirement that conservation of energy was violated 13.7 billion 
years ago at the start of the big bang. 
However, neither observations nor theory indicates this to 
have been the case. The first law allows energy to convert from 
one type to another as long as the total for a closed system 
remains fixed. Remarkably, the total energy of the universe 
appears to be zero. As famed cosmologist Stephen Hawking said 
in his 1988 best seller, A Brief History of Time, "In the case of a 
universe that is approximately uniform in space, one can show 
that the negative gravitational energy exactly cancels the positive 

COSMIC EVIDENCE 
117 
energy represented by the matter. So the total energy of the uni-
verse is zero.4 Specifically, within small measurement errors, the 
mean energy density of the universe is exactly what it should be 
for a universe that appeared from an initial state of zero energy, 
within a small quantum uncertainty.5 
A close balance between positive and negative energy is pre-
dicted by the modern extension of the big bang theory called the 
inflationary big bang, according to which the universe underwent a 
period of rapid, exponential inflation during a tiny fraction of its 
first second.6 The inflationary theory has recently undergone a 
number of stringent observational tests that would have been suffi-
cient to prove it false. So far, it has successfully passed all these tests. 
In short, the existence of matter and energy in the universe did 
not require the violation of energy conservation at the assumed 
creation. In fact, the data strongly support the hypothesis that no 
such miracle occurred. If we regard such a miracle as predicted by 
the creator hypothesis, then that prediction is not confirmed. 
This example also serves to once more refute the assertion that 
science has nothing to say about God. Suppose our measurement 
of the mass density of the universe had not turned out to be exactly 
the value required for a universe to have begun from a state of zero 
energy. Then we would have had a legitimate, scientific reason to 
conclude that a miracle, namely, a violation of energy conserva-
tion, was needed to bring the universe into being. While this might 
not conclusively prove the existence of a creator to everyone's satis-
faction, it would certainly be a strong mark in his favor. 
CREATING ORDER 
Another prediction of the creator hypothesis also fails to be con-
firmed by the data. If the universe were created, then it should 
have possessed some degree of order at the creation—the design 
that was inserted at that point by the Grand Designer. This expec-

118 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
tation of order is usually expressed in terms of the second law of 
thermodynamics, which states that the total entropy or disorder of a 
closed system must remain constant or increase with time. It 
would seem to follow that if the universe today is a closed system, 
it could not always have been so. At some point in the past, order 
must have been imparted from the outside. 
Prior to 1929, this was a strong argument for a miraculous 
creation. However, in that year astronomer Edwin Hubble 
reported that the galaxies are moving away from one another at 
speeds approximately proportional to their distance, indicating 
that the universe is expanding. This provided the earliest evidence 
for the big bang. For our purposes, an expanding universe could 
have started in total chaos and still formed localized order con-
sistent with the second law. 
The simplest way to see this is with a (literally) homey 
example. Suppose that whenever you clean your house, you 
empty the collected rubbish by tossing it out the window into 
your yard. Eventually the yard would be filled with rubbish. How-
ever, you can continue doing this with a simple expedient. Just 
keep buying up the land around your house and you will always 
have more room to toss the rubbish. You are able to maintain 
localized order—in your house—at the expense of increased dis-
order in the rest of the universe. 
Similarly, parts of the universe can become more orderly as 
the rubbish, or entropy, produced during the ordering process 
(think of it as disorder being removed from the system being 
ordered) is tossed out into the larger, ever-expanding sur-
rounding space. As illustrated in figure 4.1, the total entropy of 
the universe increases as the universe expands, as required by the 
second law.7 However, the maximum possible entropy increases 
even faster, leaving increasingly more room for order to form. 
The reason for this is that the maximum entropy of a sphere of a 
certain radius (we are thinking of the universe as a sphere) is that 
of a black hole of that radius. The expanding universe is not a 

COSMIC EVIDENCE 
119 
Planck time 
Radius of the universe 
Fig. 4.1. The total entropy of the universe and the maximum entropy 
as a function of the radius of the universe. They are equal at the origin, 
the Planck time, which shows that the universe begins in total chaos. 
However, since the universe is expanding, the maximum entropy 
increases faster than the actual total entropy leaving increasing room 
for order to form without violating the second law of thermodynamics. 
black hole and so has less than maximum entropy. Thus, while 
becoming more disorderly on the whole as time goes by, our 
expanding universe is not maximally disordered. But, once it was. 
Suppose we extrapolate the expansion back 13.7 billion years 
to the earliest definable moment, the Planck time, 6.4 x 10-44 
second when the universe was confined to the smallest possible 
region of space that can be operationally defined, a Planck sphere 
that has a radius equal to the Planck length, 1.6 x 10-35 meter. As 
expected from the second law, the universe at that time had lower 
entropy than it has now. However, that entropy was also as high 

120 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
as it possibly could have been for an object that small, because a 
sphere of Planck dimensions is equivalent to a black hole. 
This requires further elaboration. I seem to be saying that the 
entropy of the universe was maximal when the universe began, 
yet it has been increasing ever since. Indeed, that's exactly what I 
am saying. When the universe began, its entropy was as high as it 
could be for an object of that size because the universe was equiv-
alent to a black hole from which no information can be 
extracted. Currently, the entropy is higher but not maximal, that 
is, not as high as it could be for an object of the universe's current 
size. The universe is no longer a black hole. 
I also need to respond here to an objection that has been 
raised by physicists who have heard me make this statement. 
They point out, correctly, that we currently do not have a theory 
of quantum gravity that we can apply to describe physics earlier 
than the Planck time. I have adopted Einstein's operational defi-
nition of time as what you read on a clock. In order to measure a 
time interval smaller than the Planck time, you would need to 
make that measurement in a region smaller than the Planck 
length, which equals the Planck time multiplied by the speed of 
light. According to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle of 
quantum mechanics, such a region would be a black hole, from 
which no information can escape. This implies that no time 
interval can be defined that is smaller than the Planck time.8 
Consider the present time. Clearly we do not have any qualms 
about applying established physics "now" and for short times 
earlier or later, as long as we do not try to do so for time intervals 
shorter than the Planck time. Basically, by definition time is 
counted off as an integral number of units where one unit equals 
the Planck time. We can get away with treating time as a contin-
uous variable in our mathematical physics, such as we do when 
we use calculus, because the units are so small compared to any-
thing we measure in practice. We essentially extrapolate our equa-
tions through the Planck intervals within which time is unmea-

COSMIC EVIDENCE 
121 
surable and thus indefinable. If we can do this "now," we can do 
it at the end of the earliest Planck interval where we must begin 
our description of the beginning of the big bang. 
At that time, our extrapolation from later times tells us that 
the entropy was maximal. In that case, the disorder was complete 
and no structure could have been present. Thus, the universe 
began with no structure. It has structure today consistent with the 
fact that its entropy is no longer maximal. 
In short, according to our best current cosmological under-
standing, our universe began with no structure or organization, 
designed or otherwise. It was a state of chaos. 
We are thus forced to conclude that the complex order we 
now observe could not have been the result of any initial design 
built into the universe at the so-called creation. The universe pre-
serves no record of what went on before the big bang. The 
Creator, if he existed, left no imprint. Thus he might as well have 
been nonexistent. 
Once again we have a result that might have turned out oth-
erwise and provided strong scientific evidence for a creator. If the 
universe were not expanding but a firmament, as described in the 
Bible, then the second law would have required that the entropy 
of the universe was lower than its maximum allowed value in the 
past. Thus, if the universe had a beginning, it would have begun 
in a state of high order necessarily imposed from the outside. 
Even if the universe extended into the infinite past, it would be 
increasingly orderly in that direction, and the source of that order 
would defy natural description. 
BEGINNING AND CAUSE 
The empirical fact of the big bang has led some theists to argue 
that this, in itself, demonstrates the existence of a creator. In 1951 
Pope Pius XII told the Pontifical Academy, "Creation took place 

122 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
in time, therefore there is a Creator, therefore God exists."9 The 
astronomer/priest Georges-Henri Lemaître, who first proposed 
the idea of a big bang, wisely advised the pope not make this 
statement "infallible." 
Christian apologist William Lane Craig has made a number 
of sophisticated arguments that he claims show that the universe 
must have had a beginning and that beginning implies a personal 
creator.10 One such argument is based on general relativity, the 
modern theory of gravity that was published by Einstein in 1916 
and that has, since then, passed many stringent empirical tests.11 
In 1970 cosmologist Stephen Hawking and mathematician 
Roger Penrose, using a theorem derived earlier by Penrose, 
"proved" that a singularity exists at the beginning of the big bang.12 
Extrapolating general relativity back to zero time, the universe gets 
smaller and smaller while the density of the universe and the grav-
itational field increases. As the size of the universe goes to zero, 
the density and gravitational field, at least according to the math-
ematics of general relativity, become infinite. At that point, Craig 
claims, time must stop and, therefore, no prior time can exist. 
However, Hawking has repudiated his own earlier proof. In 
his best seller A Brief History of Time, he avers, "There was in fact 
no singularity at the beginning of the universe."13 This revised 
conclusion, concurred with by Penrose, follows from quantum 
mechanics, the theory of atomic processes that was developed in 
the years following the introduction of Einstein's theories of rel-
ativity. Quantum mechanics, which also is now confirmed to 
great precision, tells us that general relativity, at least as currently 
formulated, must break down at times less than the Planck time 
and at distances smaller than the Planck length, mentioned ear-
lier. It follows that general relativity cannot be used to imply that 
a singularity occurred prior to the Planck time and that Craig's 
use of the singularity theorem for a beginning of time is invalid. 
Craig and other theists also make another, related argument that 
the universe had to have had a beginning at some point, because if 

COSMIC EVIDENCE 
123 
it were infinitely old, it would have taken an infinite time to reach 
the present. However, as philosopher Keith Parsons has pointed 
out, "To say the universe is infinitely old is to say that it had no 
beginning—not a beginning that was infinitely long ago."14 
Infinity is an abstract mathematical concept that was precisely 
formulated in the work of mathematician Georg Cantor in the late 
nineteenth century. However, the symbol for infinity, " ," is used 
in physics simply as a shorthand for "a very big number." Physics 
is counting. In physics, time is simply the count of ticks on a clock. 
You can count backward as well as forward. Counting forward you 
can get a very big but never mathematically infinite positive 
number and time "never ends." Counting backward you can get a 
very big but never mathematically infinite negative number and 
time "never begins." Just as we never reach positive infinity, we 
never reach negative infinity Even if the universe does not have a 
mathematically infinite number of events in the future, it still 
need not have an end. Similarly, even if the universe does not have 
a mathematically infinite number of events in the past, it still need 
not have a beginning. We can always have one event follow 
another, and we can always have one event precede another. 
Craig claims that if it can be shown that the universe had a 
beginning, this is sufficient to demonstrate the existence of a per-
sonal creator. He casts this in terms of the kalâm cosmological argu-
ment, which is drawn from Islamic theology.15 The argument is 
posed as a syllogism: 
1. Whatever begins to exist has a cause. 
2. The universe began to exist. 
3. Therefore, the universe has a cause. 
The kalâm argument has been severely challenged by philoso-
phers on logical grounds,16 which need not be repeated here 
since we are focusing on the science. 
In his writings, Craig takes the first premise to be self-evident, 

124 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
with no justification other than common, everyday experience. 
That's the type of experience that tells us the world is flat. In fact, 
physical events at the atomic and subatomic level are observed to 
have no evident cause. For example, when an atom in an excited 
energy level drops to a lower level and emits a photon, a particle 
of light, we find no cause of that event. Similarly, no cause is evi-
dent in the decay of a radioactive nucleus. 
Craig has retorted that quantum events are still "caused," just 
caused in a nonpredetermined manner—what he calls "proba-
bilistic causality." In effect, Craig is thereby admitting that the 
"cause" in his first premise could be an accidental one, something 
spontaneous—something not predetermined. By allowing proba-
bilistic cause, he destroys his own case for a predetermined creation. 
We have a highly successful theory of probabilistic causes— 
quantum mechanics. It does not predict when a given event will 
occur and, indeed, assumes that individual events are not prede-
termined. The one exception occurs in the interpretation of 
quantum mechanics given by David Bohm.17 This assumes the 
existence of yet-undetected subquantum forces. While this inter-
pretation has some supporters, it is not generally accepted 
because it requires superluminal connections that violate the 
principles of special relativity.18 More important, no evidence for 
subquantum forces has been found. 
Instead of predicting individual events, quantum mechanics 
is used to predict the statistical distribution of outcomes of 
ensembles of similar events. This it can do with high precision. 
For example, a quantum calculation will tell you how many 
nuclei in a large sample will have decayed after a given time. Or 
you can predict the intensity of light from a group of excited 
atoms, which is a measure of the total number of photons 
emitted. But neither quantum mechanics nor any other existing 
theory—including Bohm's—can say anything about the behavior 
of an individual nucleus or atom. The photons emitted in atomic 
transitions come into existence spontaneously, as do the particles 

COSMIC EVIDENCE 
125 
emitted in nuclear radiation. By so appearing, without predeter-
mination, they contradict the first premise. 
In the case of radioactivity, the decays are observed to follow 
an exponential decay "law." However, this statistical law is exactly 
what you expect if the probability for decay in a given small time 
interval is the same for all time intervals of the same duration. In 
other words, the decay curve itself is evidence for each individual 
event occurring unpredictably and, by inference, without being 
predetermined. 
Quantum mechanics and classical (Newtonian) mechanics are 
not as separate and distinct from one another as is generally 
thought. Indeed, quantum mechanics changes smoothly into clas-
sical mechanics when the parameters of the system, such as 
masses, distances, and speeds, approach the classical regime.19 
When that happens, quantum probabilities collapse to either zero 
or 100 percent, which then gives us certainty at that level. How-
ever, we have many examples where the probabilities are not zero 
or 100 percent. The quantum probability calculations agree pre-
cisely with the observations made on ensembles of similar events. 
Note that even if the kalâm conclusion were sound and the 
universe had a cause, why could that cause itself not be natural? 
As it is, the kalâm argument fails both empirically and theoreti-
cally without ever having to bring up the second premise about 
the universe having a beginning. 
THE ORIGIN 
Nevertheless, another nail in the coffin of the kalâm argument is 
provided by the fact that the second premise also fails. As we saw 
above, the claim that the universe began with the big bang has no 
basis in current physical and cosmological knowledge. 
The observations confirming the big bang do not rule out the 
possibility of a prior universe. Theoretical models have been pub-

126 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
lished suggesting mechanisms by which our current universe 
appeared from a preexisting one, for example, by a process called 
quantum tunneling or so-called quantum fluctuations.20 The 
equations of cosmology that describe the early universe apply 
equally for the other side of the time axis, so we have no reason 
to assume that the universe began with the big bang. 
In The Comprehensible Cosmos, I presented a specific scenario 
for the purely natural origin of the universe, worked out mathe-
matically at a level accessible to anyone with an undergraduate 
mathematics or physics background.21 This was based on the no 
boundary model of James Hartle and Stephen Hawking.22 In that 
model, the universe has no beginning or end in space or time. In 
the scenario I presented, our universe is described as having "tun-
neled" through the chaos at the Planck time from a prior universe 
that existed for all previous time. 
While he avoided technical details in A Brief History of Time, 
the no boundary model was the basis of Hawking's oft-quoted 
statement: "So long as the universe had a beginning, we could 
suppose it had a creator. But if the universe is really completely 
self-contained, having no boundary or edge, it would have nei-
ther beginning nor end; it would simply be. What place then, for 
a creator?"23 
Prominent physicists and cosmologists have published, in 
reputable scientific journals, a number of other scenarios by 
which the universe could have come about "from nothing" natu-
rally24 None can be "proved" at this time to represent the exact 
way the universe appeared, but they serve to illustrate that any 
argument for the existence of God based on this gap in scientific 
knowledge fails, since plausible natural mechanisms can be given 
within the framework of existing knowledge. 
As I have emphasized, the God of the gaps argument for God 
fails when a plausible scientific account for a gap in current 
knowledge can be given. I do not dispute that the exact nature of 
the origin of the universe remains a gap in scientific knowledge. 

COSMIC EVIDENCE 
127 
But I deny that we are bereft of any conceivable way to account 
for that origin scientifically. 
In short, empirical data and the theories that successfully 
describe those data indicate that the universe did not come about 
by a purposeful creation. Based on our best current scientific 
knowledge, it follows that no creator exists who left a cosmolog-
ical imprint of a purposeful creation. 
INTERVENING IN THE COSMOS 
This still leaves open the possibility that a god exists who may 
have created the universe in such a way that did not require any 
miracles and did not leave any imprint of his intentions. Of 
course, this is no longer the traditional Judeo-Christian-Islamic 
God, whose imprint is supposedly everywhere. But, perhaps 
those religions can modify their theologies and posit a god who 
steps in later, after the Planck time, to ensure that his purposes 
are still served despite whatever plans he had of creation being 
wiped out by the chaos at the Planck time. 
In that case, we can again expect to find, in observations or 
well-established theories, some evidence of places where this god 
has intervened in the history of the cosmos. In previous chapters 
we sought such evidence on Earth, in the phenomena of life and 
mind. Here we move to the vast space beyond Earth. 
History gives us many examples of unexpected events in the 
heavens that at first appeared miraculous. In 585 BCE a total 
eclipse of the sun over Asia Minor ended a battle between the 
Medes and the Lydians, with both sides fleeing in terror. In prob-
ably the first known case of a scientific prediction, Thales of 
Miletus had predicted the eclipse based on Babylonian records. 
Eclipses are sufficiently rare that they are not so regular a part 
of normal human experience as are the rising and setting of the 
sun and the phases of the moon. However, they do repeat and 

128 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
behave lawfully, as do these more familiar phenomena. That's 
why today we can give the exact date (on our current calendar) of 
Thales's eclipse: May 28, 585 BCE. This demonstrates the remark-
able power of science to both predict the future and postdict the 
past. About that time, Nebuchadnezzar II destroyed Jerusalem 
and carried the Judeans off into exile in Babylonia (where they 
would pick up their creation myth). The Buddha is said to have 
attained enlightenment at almost exactly the same time. Confu-
cius would be born a few decades later. 
Comets are a similar example of spectacular astronomical phe-
nomena that ancient people commonly regarded as supernatural 
omens but science has since described in natural terms, that is, 
with purely material models. In the seventeenth century, Edmund 
Halley (d. 1742) used the mechanical theories developed by his 
friend Isaac Newton (d. 1727) to predict that a comet seen in 
1682 would return in 1759. Indeed it did, after Halley's death, 
and has done so every seventy-six years since. Most comets appear 
unexpectedly, having such extended orbits that they have spent 
human history outside our view. However, records indicate that 
Halley's comet has appeared perhaps twenty-nine times in history. 
In more recent times, other astronomical phenomena have 
occurred unexpectedly and could not be immediately under-
stood. These include pulsars, supernovas, quasars, and gamma-
ray bursts. But, as with other examples, these phenomena eventu-
ally repeated in one way or another, in time or in space. This 
allowed us to learn enough to eventually understand their nature 
in purely physical terms. 
At no time and at no place in the sky have we run across an 
event above the noise that did not repeat sometime or someplace 
and could not be accounted for in terms of established natural 
science. We have yet to encounter an observable astronomical 
phenomenon that requires a supernatural element to be added to 
a model in order to describe the event. In fact, we have no cosmic 
phenomenon that meets the Swinburne criterion for a miracle. A 

COSMIC EVIDENCE 
129 
God who plays a sufficiently active role to produce miraculous 
events in the cosmos has not been even glimpsed at by our best 
astronomical instruments to date. Observations in cosmology 
look just as they can be expected to look if there is no God. 
WHERE DO THE LAWS 
OF PHYSICS COME FROM? 
We have seen that the origin and the operation of the universe do not 
require any violations of laws of physics. This probably will come as 
a surprise to the layperson who may have heard otherwise from the 
pulpit or the media. However, the scientifically savvy believer might 
concede this point for the sake of argument and then retort, "Okay, 
then where did the laws of physics come from?" The common belief 
is that they had to come from somewhere outside the universe. But 
that is not a demonstrable fact. There is no reason why the laws of 
physics cannot have come from within the universe itself. 
Physicists invent mathematical models to describe their 
observations of the world. These models contain certain general 
principles that have been traditionally called "laws" because of 
the common belief that these are rules that actually govern the 
universe the way civil laws govern nations. However, as I showed 
in my previous book, The Comprehensible Cosmos, the most funda-
mental laws of physics are not restrictions on the behavior of 
matter. Rather they are restrictions on the way physicists may 
describe that behavior.25 
In order for any principle of nature we write down to be 
objective and universal, it must be formulated in such a way that 
it does not depend on the point of view of any particular 
observer. The principle must be true for all point of views, from 
every "frame of reference." And so, for example, no objective law 
can depend on a special moment in time or a position in space 
that may be singled out by some preferred observer. 

130 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
Suppose I were to formulate a law that said that all objects 
move naturally toward me. That would not be very objective. But 
this was precisely what people once thought—that Earth was the 
center of the universe and the natural motion of bodies was 
toward Earth. The Copernican revolution showed this was wrong 
and was the first step in the gradual realization of scientists that 
their laws must not depend on frame of reference. 
In 1918 mathematician Emmy Noether proved that the most 
important physical laws of all—conservation of energy, linear 
momentum, and angular momentum—will automatically appear 
in any model that does not single out a special moment in time, 
position in space, and direction in space.26 Later it was realized that 
Einstein's special theory of relativity follows if we do not single out 
any special direction in four-dimensional space-time. 
These properties of space-time are called symmetries. For 
example, the rotational symmetry of a sphere is a result of the 
sphere singling out no particular direction in space. The four 
space-time symmetries described above are just the natural sym-
metries of a universe with no matter, that is, a void. They are just 
what they should be if the universe appeared from an initial state 
in which there was no matter—from nothing. 
Other laws of physics, such as conservation of electric charge 
and the various force laws, arise from the generalization of space-
time symmetries to the abstract spaces physicists use in their 
mathematic models. This generalization is called gauge invari-
ance, which is likened to a principle I more descriptively refer to 
as point-of-view invariance. 
The mathematical formulations of these models (which are 
provided in The Comprehensible Cosmos) must reflect this require-
ment if they are to be objective and universal. Surprisingly, when 
this is done, most of the familiar laws of physics appear naturally. 
Those that are not immediately obvious can be seen to plausibly 
arise by a process, mentioned in chapter 2, known as spontaneous 
symmetry breaking. 

COSMIC EVIDENCE 
131 
So where did the laws of physics come from? They came from 
nothing! Most are statements composed by humans that follow 
from the symmetries of the void out of which the universe spon-
taneously arose. Rather than being handed down from above, like 
the Ten Commandments, they look exactly as they should look if 
they were not handed down from anywhere. And this is why, for 
example, a violation of energy conservation at the beginning of 
the big bang would be evidence for some external creator. Even 
though they invented it, physicists could not simply change the 
"law." It would imply a miracle or, more explicitly, some external 
agency that acted to break the time symmetry that leads to con-
servation of energy. But, as we have seen, no such miracle is 
required by the data. 
Thus we are justified in applying the conservation laws to the 
beginning of the big bang at the Planck time. At that time, as we 
saw earlier in this chapter, the universe had no structure. That 
meant that it had no distinguishable place, direction, or time. In 
such a situation, the conservation laws apply. 
Now, this is certainly not a commonly understood view. Nor-
mally we think of laws of physics as part of the structure of the 
universe. But here I am arguing that the three great conservation 
laws are not part of any structure. Rather they follow from the 
very lack of structure at the earliest moment. 
No doubt this concept is difficult to grasp. My views on this 
particular issue are not recognized by a consensus of physicists, 
although I insist that the science I have used is well established 
and conventional. I am proposing no new physics or cosmology 
but merely providing an interpretation of established knowledge 
in those fields as it bears on the question of the origin of physical 
law, a question few physicists ever ponder. 
I must emphasize another important point, which has been 
frequently misunderstood. I am not suggesting that the laws of 
physics can be anything we want them to be, that they are merely 
"cultural narratives," as has been suggested by authors associated 

132 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
with the movement called postmodernism.27 They are what they 
are because they agree with the data. 
Whether or not you will buy into my account of the origin of 
physical law, I hope you will allow that I have at minimum pro-
vided a plausible natural scenario for a gap in scientific knowledge, 
that gap being a clear consensus on the origin of physical law Once 
again, I do not have the burden of proving this scenario. The 
believer who wishes to argue that God is the source of physical law 
has the burden of proving (1) that my account is wrong, (2) that 
no other natural account is possible, and (3) that God did it. 
W H Y IS THERE SOMETHING 
RATHER T H A N NOTHING? 
If the laws of physics follow naturally from empty space-time, 
then where did that empty space-time come from? Why is there 
something rather than nothing? This question is often the last 
recourse of the theist who seeks to argue for the existence of God 
from physics and cosmology and finds that all his other argu-
ments fail. Philosopher Bede Rundle calls it "philosophy's cen-
tral, and most perplexing, question." His simple (but book-
length) answer: "There has to be something."28 
Clearly many conceptual problems are associated with this 
question. How do we define "nothing"? What are its properties? 
If it has properties, doesn't that make it something? The theist 
claims that God is the answer. But, then, why is there God rather 
than nothing? Assuming we can define "nothing," why should 
nothing be a more natural state of affairs than something? In fact, 
we can give a plausible scientific reason based on our best current 
knowledge of physics and cosmology that something is more nat-
ural than nothing! 
In chapter 2 we saw how nature is capable of building com-
plex structures by processes of self-organization, how simplicity 

COSMIC EVIDENCE 
133 
begets complexity. Consider the example of the snowflake, the 
beautiful six-pointed pattern of ice crystals that results from the 
direct freezing of water vapor in the atmosphere. Our experience 
tells us that a snowflake is very ephemeral, melting quickly into 
drops of liquid water that exhibit far less structure. But that is only 
because we live in a relatively high-temperature environment, 
where heat reduces the fragile arrangement of crystals to a simpler 
liquid. Energy is required to break the symmetry of a snowflake. 
In an environment where the ambient temperature is well 
below the melting point of ice, as it is in most of the universe far 
from the highly localized effects of stellar heating, any water 
vapor would readily crystallize into complex, asymmetric struc-
tures. Snowflakes would be eternal, or at least would remain 
intact until cosmic rays tore them apart. 
This example illustrates that many simple systems of particles 
are unstable, that is, have limited lifetimes as they undergo sponta-
neous phase transitions to more complex structures of lower energy. 
Since "nothing" is as simple as it gets, we cannot expect it to be very 
stable. It would likely undergo a spontaneous phase transition to 
something more complicated, like a universe containing matter. 
The transition of nothing-to-something is a natural one, not 
requiring any agent. As Nobel laureate physicist Frank Wilczek has 
put it, "The answer to the ancient question 'Why is there something 
rather than nothing?' would then be that 'nothing' is unstable."29 
In the nonboundary scenario for the natural origin of the uni-
verse I mentioned earlier, the probability for there being some-
thing rather than nothing actually can be calculated; it is over 60 
percent.30 
In short, the natural state of affairs is something rather than 
nothing. An empty universe requires supernatural intervention— 
not a full one. Only by the constant action of an agent outside the 
universe, such as God, could a state of nothingness be main-
tained. The fact that we have something is just what we would 
expect if there is no God. 

134 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
NOTES 
1. Conservation of energy was not immediately recognized but was 
already implicit in Newton's laws of mechanics. 
2. Richard Swinburne, The Existence of God (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1979), p. 229. 
3. It is commonly thought that only nuclear reactions convert 
between rest and kinetic energy. This also happens in chemical reac-
tions. However, the changes in the masses of the reactants in that case 
are too small to be generally noticed. 
4. Stephen W. Hawking, A Brief History of Time: From the Big Bang 
to Black Holes (New York: Bantam, 1988), p. 129. 
5. Technically, the total energy of the universe cannot be defined 
for all possible situations in general relativity. However, in V. Faraoni 
and F. I. Cooperstock, "On the Total Energy of Open Friedmann-
Robertson-Walker Universes," Astrophysical Journal 587 (2003): 483-86, 
it is shown that the total energy of the universe can be defined for the 
most common types of cosmologies and is zero in these cases. This 
includes the case where the density is critical. 
6. Alan Guth, The Inflationary Universe (New York: Addison-Wesley, 
1997). 
7. The mathematical derivation of the curves on this plot is given 
in appendix C of Victor J. Stenger, Has Science Found God? The Latest 
Results in the Search for Purpose in the Universe (Amherst, NY: Prome-
theus Books, 2003), pp. 356-57. 
8. The mathematical proof of this is given in appendix A, Stenger, 
Has Science Found God? pp. 351-53. 
9. Pope Pius XII, "The Proofs for the Existence of God in the Light 
of Modern Natural Science," Address by Pope Pius XII to the Pontifical 
Academy of Sciences, November 22, 1951, reprinted as "Modern Sci-
ence and the Existence of God," Catholic Mind 49 (1972): 182-92. 
10. William Lane Craig and Quentin Smith, Theism, Atheism, and 
Big Bang Cosmology (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997). 
11. Clifford M. Will, Was Einstein Right? Putting General Relativity to 
the Test (New York: Basic Books, 1986). 
12. Stephen W. Hawking and Roger Penrose, "The Singularities of 

COSMIC EVIDENCE 
135 
Gravitational Collapse and Cosmology," Proceedings of the Royal Society 
of London, series A, 314 (1970): 529-48. 
13. Hawking, A Brief History of Time, p. 50. 
14. Keith Parsons, "Is There a Case for Christian Theism?" in Does 
God Exist? The Debate between Theists & Atheists, J. P. Moreland and Kai 
Nielsen (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1993), p. 177. See also Wes 
Morriston, "Creation Ex Nihilo and the Big Bang," Philo 5, no. 1 (2002): 
23-33. 
15. William Lane Craig, The Kalâm Cosmological Argument, Library 
of Philosophy and Religion (London: Macmillan, 1979); The Cosmolog-
ical Argument from Plato to Leibniz, Library of Philosophy and Religion 
(London: Macmillan, 1980). 
16. Smith in Theism, Atheism, and Big Bang Cosmology, by Craig and 
Smith; Graham Oppy, "Arguing About The Kalam Cosmological Argu-
ment," Philo 5, no. 1 (Spring/Summer 2002): 34-61, and references 
therein; Arnold Guminski, "The Kalam Cosmological Argument: The 
Questions of the Metaphysical Possibility of an Infinite Set of Real Enti-
ties," Philo 5, no. 2 (Fall/Winter 2002): 196-215; Nicholas Everitt, The 
Non-Existence of God (London, New York: Routledge, 2004), pp. 68-72. 
17. David Bohm and B. J. Hiley, The Undivided Universe: An Onto-
logical Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics (London: Routledge, 1993). 
18. I discuss this in detail in Victor J. Stenger, The Unconscious 
Quantum: Metaphysics in Modern Physics and Cosmology (Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 1995). 
19. Quantum mechanics becomes classical mechanics when 
Planck's constant h is set equal to zero. 
20. David Atkatz and Heinz Pagels, "Origin of the Universe as 
Quantum Tunneling Event," Physical Review D25 (1982): 2065-67; 
Alexander Vilenkin, "Birth of Inflationary Universes," Physical Review 
D27 (1983): 2848-55; David Atkata, "Quantum Cosmology for Pedes-
trians," American Journal of Physics 62 (1994): 619-27. 
21. Victor J. Stenger, The Comprehensible Cosmos: Where Do the Laws 
of Physics Come From? (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2006), supple-
ment H. 
22. J. B. Hartle and S. W. Hawking, "Wave Function of the Uni-
verse," Physical Review D28 (1983): 2960-75. 

136 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
23. Hawking, A Brief History of Time, pp. 140-41. 
24. E. P. Tryon, "Is the Universe a Quantum Fluctuation?" Nature 
246 (1973): 396-97; Atkatz and Pagels, "Origin of the Universe as 
Quantum Tunneling Event"; Alexander Vilenkin, "Quantum Creation 
of Universes," Physical Review D30 (1984): 509; Andre Linde, 
"Quantum Creation of the Inflationary Universe," Lettere Al Nuovo 
Cimento 39 (1984): 401-405; T. R. Mongan, "Simple Quantum Cos-
mology: Vacuum Energy and Initial State," General Relativity and Gravi-
tation 37 (2005): 967-70. 
25. Stenger, The Comprehensible Cosmos. 
26. E. Noether, "Invarianten beliebiger Differentialausdrücke," 
Nachr. d. König. Gesellsch. d. Wiss. zu Göttingen, Math-phys. Klasse (1918): 
37-44; Nina Byers, "E. Noether's Discovery of the Deep Connection 
between Symmetries and Conservation Laws," Israel Mathematical Confer-
ence Proceedings 12 (1999), http://www.physics.ucla.edu/~cwp/articles/  
noether.asg/noether.html (accessed July 1, 2006). This contains links to 
Noether's original paper including an English translation. 
27. Walter Truett Anderson, The Truth about the Truth (New York: 
Jeremy P. Tarcher/Putnam, 1996). 
28. Bede Rundle, Why There Is Something Rather Than Nothing 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2004). 
29. Frank Wilczek, "The Cosmic Asymmetry between Matter and 
Antimatter," Scientific American 243, no. 6 (1980): 82-90. 
30. Stenger, The Comprehensible Cosmos, supplement H. 

Chapter 5 
THE UNCONGENIAL UNIVERSE 
There can be no demonstrative argument to prove that those instances 
in which we have no experience, resemble those of which we have had 
experience. 
—David Hume 
THE PRIVILEGED PLANET 
H
uman life is very sensitive to the physical conditions on 
Earth. If the atmosphere were not transparent to light in 
the so-called visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum, and if 
the sun did not provide light in that region, then our eyes would 
not be of any use. But, does this mean that the sun and Earth were 
specifically designed with those properties because human eyes are 
sensitive to the visible spectrum of light? As silly as that suggestion 
137 

138 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
sounds, we hear similar arguments today presented as evidence for 
intelligent design in the universe. Of course the arguments are not 
presented in exactly that fashion but coated in a veneer of scien-
tific-sounding language. But when that thin veneer is ripped away 
we are left with the even thinner substance underneath. 
In his 1995 book, The Creator and the Cosmos, physicist Hugh 
Ross listed thirty-three characteristics a planet must have to sup-
port life. He also estimated the probability that such a combina-
tion be found in the universe as "much less than one in a million 
trillion."1 He concluded that only "divine design" could account 
for human life. 
However, Ross presented no estimate of the probability for 
divine design. Perhaps it is even lower! Ross and others who 
attempt to prove the existence of God on the basis of probabili-
ties make a fundamental logical error. When using probabilities 
to decide between two or more possibilities, you must have a 
number for each possibility in order to compare. In this vast uni-
verse, highly unlikely events happen every day. 
In a 2004 book called The Privileged Planet, astronomer 
Guillermo Gonzalez and theologian Jay Richards have carried the 
notion further, asserting that our place in the cosmos is not only 
special but also designed for discovery. They contend that condi-
tions on Earth, particularly those that make human life possible, 
are also optimized for scientific investigation and that this consti-
tutes "a signal revealing a universe so skillfully created for life and 
discovery that it seems to whisper of an extraterrestrial intelligence 
immeasurably more vast, more ancient, and more magnificent 
than anything we've been willing to expect or imagine."2 Oh, 
come on, guys, you are willing to imagine who that intelligence is. 
Following this line of reasoning, the atmosphere of Earth is 
not only transparent in the visible spectral band so that humans 
can see with their eyes, but it also is designed in this way so that 
astronomers can build telescopes and thereby observe the fruits 
of divine creation in the heavens. 

THE UNCONGENIAL UNIVERSE 
139 
Have you ever wondered why the angular diameters of the 
moon and sun as viewed from Earth are almost exactly the same, 
though the two celestial objects differ greatly in size and distance 
from Earth? Without that coincidence, we would never experi-
ence the type of total eclipse of the sun in which we can actually 
view starlight near the edge of the sun's disk. 
Gonzalez and Richards marvel at the fact that we happen to live 
on a planet where total solar eclipses are observable, and present 
this as an example of design for discovery. As we saw in chapter 4, 
in 585 BCE Thales of Miletus predicted a total eclipse that suppos-
edly ended a war. In more recent times, observations made during 
total eclipses have been used to verify Einstein's theory of general 
relativity, specifically the bending of starlight near the sun's edge. 
Gonzalez and Richards seem to think general relativity would not 
have been discovered (assuming the theories of physics are "out 
there" to be discovered, a notion I disputed in the previous 
chapter) had we lived on a planet without the coincidence of 
angular diameters. That is very dubious, since many other tests of 
general relativity have been made that do not involve eclipses.3 
The privileged planet argument is reminiscent of the proposal 
by eighteenth-century German philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm 
Leibniz (d. 1716) that we live "in the best of all possible worlds." 
Leibniz was one of the greatest thinkers of all time, the inde-
pendent coinventor (with Newton) of calculus. But this partic-
ular notion was ridiculed by the French philosopher François-
Marie Arouet de Voltaire (d. 1778) in his short story "Candide." 
There, Dr. Pangloss, a thinly disguised Leibniz, proclaims: 
It is demonstrable that things cannot be otherwise than as they 
are; for as all things have been created for some end, they must 
necessarily be created for the best end. Observe, for instance, 
the nose is formed for spectacles, therefore we wear spectacles. 
The legs are visibly designed for stockings, accordingly we wear 
stockings. Stones were made to be hewn and to construct cas-

140 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
ties, therefore My Lord has a magnificent castle; for the greatest 
baron in the province ought to be the best lodged. Swine were 
intended to be eaten, therefore we eat pork all the year round: 
and they, who assert that everything is right, do not express 
themselves correctly; they should say that everything is best.4 
Gonzalez and Richards are senior fellows of the Center for 
Science and Culture,5 the arm of the Seattle-based Discovery 
Institute that, as we saw earlier, is charged with the task of 
bringing science and culture into line with evangelical Christian 
teachings by driving "wedges" between materialistic science and 
the rest of society.6 
The Privileged Planet constitutes a new wedge, a form of intelli-
gent design designed to split conventional astronomy and physics 
off from the mainstream of public awareness. In 2005 the Dis-
covery Institute produced a slick film under the same title pre-
senting the arguments from the book. As with intelligent design in 
biology, the sectarian motives of the book and film were kept well 
hidden. So, when the film was presented by the Discovery Institute 
to the Smithsonian Institution for a special showing at the 
National Museum of Natural History in Washington, DC, along 
with a $16,000 fee, unsuspecting Smithsonian officials initially 
approved despite a house rule against showing political or religious 
material. That approval implied Smithsonian cosponsorship, 
which generated considerable heat from the scientific community. 
The Smithsonian quickly withdrew its cosponsorship, stating: 
"We have determined that the content of the film is not consis-
tent with the mission of the Smithsonian Institution's scientific 
research."7 They allowed the film to be shown but turned down 
the payment. 

THE UNCONGENIAL UNIVERSE 
141 
HOW COMMON IS LIFE IN THE UNIVERSE? 
Let us take a look at the scientific facts about life in the universe, 
hopefully unbiased by theological considerations. Unfortu-
nately, we only have one data point—Earth. Life has yet to be 
found anywhere but on Earth. Over a hundred planets beyond 
our solar system have been identified, with more being found 
regularly. None, so far, are likely to be suitable for complex life 
as we know it and certainly not for human life. This failure may 
be simply a matter of inadequate detector technology. However, 
the very fact that the powerful instruments of modern science, 
which can peer inside nuclei and out to the edge of the visible 
universe, have yet to find life outside Earth is already strong tes-
timony that the galactic space around Earth is not exactly 
teeming with life. 
Perhaps life may someday be confirmed on Mars or elsewhere 
in the solar system, such as under the ice on Jupiter's moon 
Europa or on Saturn's moon Titan. But such life undoubtedly will 
be at best primitive. Certainly humans cannot live on Mars or in 
an ocean on Europa without extensive life support. In fact, we 
very probably cannot live on more than the tiniest fraction of the 
planets in the universe. Not only are earthlike planets likely to be 
very rare; so are sunlike stars. 
One often hears that our sun is a "typical star." This is wrong. 
In fact, 95 percent of all stars are less massive than the sun. Stars 
much more massive than the sun have short lifetimes. If life is to 
be widespread in the universe, then it will have to exist under a 
far wider range of conditions than exist on Earth. And, how likely 
then is the possibility of intelligent life? 
The observations mentioned above imply that on the order of 
ten billion stars in the Milky Way may have planetary systems. 
While some form of life might have evolved in a large fraction of 
these systems, the very reasons that Gonzalez and Richards give 
for Earth being "privileged" make it very unlikely that humans 

142 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
could survive without extensive life support, even on those 
planets that might otherwise be suitable for some kind of life. 
In recent years a new scientific discipline called astrobiology 
has appeared on the scene to study the possibilities of extraterres-
trial life. This has brought together not only astronomers and 
biologists but philosophers and theologians to debate such 
issues as the definition of life and the impact the discovery of life 
elsewhere would have on human thinking. 
Sufficient data to settle the question of life elsewhere are still 
lacking. As mentioned, a whole spectrum of views can be found 
among those working in this field. At one extreme we have what 
is called the rare-earth position, as exemplified by the book of that 
title by paleontologist Peter D. Ward and astronomer Donald 
Brownlee, published in 2000,8 and The Privileged Planet, which 
was discussed above. In this view, complex forms of life are 
uncommon if not exceedingly rare in the universe. 
The other end of the spectrum maintains the viewpoint that 
complex life could in fact be quite common. Astronomer David 
Darling summarized both positions in Life Everywhere, which 
appeared in 2001.9 He argues that the rare-earth position is far 
too conservative, given what we currently know and don't know. 
Both extremes and those in between agree that simple, primi-
tive forms of life are likely to exist on an appreciable fraction of 
other planets. This conclusion is warranted by the discovery in 
recent years of new (but still DNA-based) forms of life on Earth, 
thriving under the most extreme conditions in deep-ocean vents, 
bubbling volcanic mud pots, frigid waters, and complete darkness. 
Indeed, life on Earth may have even begun under those conditions. 
The real controversy is over the likelihood of complex, multi-
cellular life. While microbial life is found over a wide range of 
conditions on Earth, the complex structures that make up ani-
mals and plants are very sensitive to their environments. Since we 
are hardly going to settle the issue here, let us just look at the 
flavor of the debate. 

THE UNCONGENIAL UNIVERSE 
143 
Essentially, rare-earth supporters argue that the evolution of 
complex life requires a planet with many of the specific features 
of Earth that are expected to be exceedingly uncommon. These 
features include a highly circular orbit around a stable, sunlike 
star with a relatively high "metallicity," that is, containing a sig-
nificant fraction of chemical elements heavier than helium (a 
rather misleading term, since that includes everything but 
hydrogen and helium, not just metals). Planets are made from 
heavier elements, as are living organisms. 
In the rare-earth view, in order to have complex life a planet 
must be orbited by a large, nearby moon that acts to stabilize the 
planet's axis of rotation. The planetary system must orbit a single 
star and include giant planets to stabilize the life-planet's orbit 
and shield it from comets and asteroids. The giant planets must 
also have highly circular orbits, or else they would have a desta-
bilizing effect. Furthermore, the planetary system must be in a 
"habitable zone" of the galaxy, where metallicity is high, radia-
tion is low, and chances of near encounters with other stars are 
low. It is also argued that the life-planet itself must have a mod-
erate but not too high level and proper timing of catastrophic 
events, such as comet impacts and ongoing plate tectonics. 
Not all galaxies have properties that are conducive to earth-
like life. Globular clusters, small galaxies, and elliptical galaxies 
are metal poor. Not every galaxy in the universe may have planets 
and the other conditions necessary for life. 
The rare-earth position is that essentially all of the special fea-
tures of Earth are required for complex life, while essentially none 
of the known planets besides Earth, inside or outside of the solar 
system, meet these requirements. 
Darling counters by referring to various studies that call into 
question each of the rare-earth claims.10 The need for a large moon 
to stabilize the planet's axis is debatable, as is the requirement that 
the axis be highly stable. The observations of extrasolar planets 
have so far been biased in favor of those with giant planets in ellip-

144 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
tical orbits because these are the easiest to detect. Most of the 
planets that have been found so far orbit stars with metallicity 
comparable to the sun, but a few planets orbit stars with low metal-
licity, so this issue is complicated. And, as for the galactic habitable 
zone, Darling claims that the data are insufficient to draw any 
definitive conclusions. His position is not that complex: life is 
highly likely to be common, but rather that we lack the knowledge 
to definitively conclude that it is likely to be uncommon. 
Clearly we are not yet in a position to determine whether com-
plex life is common or rare in the universe. However, the fact is that 
complex life exists on one planet, Earth. And that existence is not 
implausible, given the conditions we know exist in the universe. 
Obviously, if the physical parameters of our environment were just 
slightly different, life as we know it on Earth would not have 
evolved here. But, since the universe contains hundreds of billions 
if not trillions of planets, then it would seem that the chance of 
finding one someplace with the right conditions for our kind of life 
would be pretty good. We just happen to live on one suitable 
planet, having evolved to survive under its specific conditions. 
And, what about life that is not "as we know it"? It does not 
take a great stretch of the imagination to accept the possibility 
that an appreciable number of planets exist with conditions that, 
while unsuitable for our form of life, still can support some kind 
of life. 
IS THE UNIVERSE FINE-TUNED FOR LIFE? 
While we do not find it surprising that life exists on at least one 
planet in our universe under the conditions of that universe, we 
might ask what would be the case if the universe had different 
conditions. Over the past three decades, theologians and some 
theistic scientists have introduced a novel argument for the exis-
tence of a god who created the universe with special attention to 

THE UNCONGENIAL UNIVERSE 
145 
the presence of humanity in that universe. They ask: how can the 
universe possibly have obtained this unique set of constants, so 
exquisitely "fine-tuned" for life as they are, except by purposeful 
design—design with life and perhaps humanity in mind?11 
Of course, one might wonder why a perfect God would build 
a universe that was so delicately balanced. If he really designed it 
for life, you would think he could have made it a lot easier for life 
to evolve. 
The fine-tuning arguments have been somewhat misleadingly 
categorized under the designation anthropic principle, a term 
coined by astronomer Brandon Carter in 1974.12 Mathematician 
John Barrow and physicist Frank Tipler provided a detailed, sci-
entific review in 1986.13 I have also written much on the subject, 
in various books and papers.14 
Many of the examples of fine-tuning found in theological liter-
ature suffer from simple misunderstandings of physics. For 
example, any references to the fine-tuning of constants like the 
speed of light, c, Planck's constant, h, or Newton's gravitational con-
stant, G, are irrelevant since these are all arbitrary constants whose 
values simply define the system of units being used. Only "dimen-
sionless" numbers that do not depend on units, such as the ratio of 
the strengths of gravity and electromagnetism, are meaningful. 
Some of the "remarkable precision" of physical parameters 
that people talk about is highly misleading because it depends on 
the choice of units. For example, theologian John Jefferson Davis 
asserts, "If the mass of neutrinos were 5 x 10"34 instead of 
5 x 10"35 kg [kilogram], because of their great abundance in the 
universe, the additional gravitational mass would result in a con-
tracting rather than expanding universe."15 This sounds like fine-
tuning by one part in 1035. However, as philosopher Neil Manson 
points out, this is like saying that "if he had been one part in 1016 
of a light-year shorter (that is, one meter shorter), Michael Jordan 
would not have been the world's greatest basketball player."16 
Furthermore, if the neutrinos were ten times more massive, there 

146 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
would be ten times fewer of them in the cosmos, so the gravita-
tional effect would be unchanged. This fine-tuning example, like 
so many, collapses on several fronts. Philosopher Robert Klee has 
provided other examples of how numbers have been manipu-
lated to make it seem that fine-tuning has occurred.17 
In short, much of the so-called fine-tuning of the parameters 
of microphysics is in the eye of the beholder. Nevertheless, life as 
we know it on Earth would not exist if several of the parameters of 
physics were different from their existing values. Here are the 
most significant: 
1. The electromagnetic force is 39 orders of magnitude 
stronger than the gravitational force. If the forces were 
more comparable in strength, stars would have collapsed 
long before life had a chance to evolve. 
2. The vacuum energy density of the universe is at least 120 
orders of magnitude lower than some theoretical esti-
mates. If at any time the universe was as large as these cal-
culations suggest, it would have quickly blown apart. 
3. The electron's mass is less than the difference in the 
masses of the neutron and proton. Thus, a free neutron 
can decay into a proton, electron, and antineutrino. If this 
were not the case, the neutron would be stable and most 
of the protons and electrons in the early universe would 
have combined to form neutrons, leaving little hydrogen 
to act as the main component and fuel of stars. 
4. The neutron is heavier than the proton, but not so much 
heavier that neutrons cannot be bound in nuclei, where 
conservation of energy prevents the neutrons from 
decaying. Without neutrons we would not have the heavier 
elements needed for building complex systems such as life. 
5. The carbon nucleus has an excited energy level at around 
7.65 million electron-volts (MeV). Without this state, 
insufficient carbon would be manufactured in stars to 

THE UNCONGENIAL UNIVERSE 
147 
form the basis for life. Using anthropic arguments, 
astronomer Fred Hoyle predicted this energy level before it 
was confirmed experimentally.18 
All these statements can be expressed in a unit-free way. 
H O W SIGNIFICANT IS THE FINE-TUNING? 
Let us take a look at these parameters to see how significant is the 
fine-tuning. The strength of the electromagnetic force is deter-
mined by a dimensionless parameter a called the fine structure 
constant, which depends on the value of the unit electric charge, 
that is, the magnitude of the charge of an electron conventionally 
designated by e.19 The claim is that a has been fine-tuned far 
from its natural value in order that we have stars sufficiently long-
lived for life to evolve (item 1 above). 
However, a is not a constant. We now know from the highly 
successful standard model of particles and forces that a and the 
strengths of the other elementary forces vary with energy and 
must have changed very rapidly during the first moments of the 
big bang when the temperature changed by many orders of mag-
nitude in a tiny fraction of a second. According to current under-
standing, in the very high-temperature environment at the begin-
ning of the big bang, the four known forces were unified as one 
force. As was discussed in the previous chapter, the universe can 
be reasonably assumed to have started in a state of perfect sym-
metry, the symmetry of the "nothing" from which it arose. So, a 
began with its natural value; in particular, gravity and electromag-
netism were of equal strength. That symmetry, however, was 
unstable and, as the universe cooled, a process called spontaneous 
symmetry breaking resulted in the forces separating into the four 
basic kinds we experience at much lower energies today, and their 
strengths evolved to their current values. They were not fine-

148 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
tuned. Stellar formation and, thus, life had to simply wait for the 
forces to separate sufficiently. That wait was actually a tiny frac-
tion of a second. 
The forces continued to separate as the universe continued to 
cool, but this was so slow that for all practical purposes on a 
human timescale, the strengths of the various forces can be 
regarded as constant. 
Only four parameters are needed to specify the broad features 
of the universe as it exists today: the masses of the electron and 
proton and the current strengths of the electromagnetic and 
strong interactions.20 (The strength of gravity enters through the 
proton mass, by convention.) I have studied how the minimum 
lifetime of a typical star depends on the first three of these param-
eters.21 Varying them randomly in a range often orders of magni-
tude around their present values, I find that over half of the stars 
will have lifetimes exceeding a billion years. Large stars need to 
live tens of millions of years or more to allow for the fabrication 
of heavy elements. Smaller stars, such as our sun, also need about 
a billion years to allow life to develop within their solar system 
of planets. Earth did not even form until nine billion years after 
the big bang. The requirement of long-lived stars is easily met for 
a wide range of possible parameters. The universe is certainly not 
fine-tuned for this characteristic. 
One of the many major flaws with most studies of the 
anthropic coincidences is that the investigators vary a single 
parameter while assuming all the others remain fixed. They fur-
ther compound this mistake by proceeding to calculate meaning-
less probabilities based on the grossly erroneous assumption that 
all the parameters are independent.22 In my study I took care to 
allow all the parameters to vary at the same time. 
Physicist Anthony Aguire has independently examined the 
universes that result when six cosmological parameters are simul-
taneously varied by orders of magnitude, and found he could 
construct cosmologies in which "stars, planets, and intelligent life 

THE UNCONGENIAL UNIVERSE 
149 
can plausibly arise."23 Physicist Craig Hogan has done another 
independent analysis that leads to similar conclusions.24 And, 
theoretical physicists at Kyoto University in Japan have shown 
that heavy elements needed for life will be present in even the 
earliest stars independent of what the exact parameters for star 
formation may have been.25 
The current standard model of elementary particles and forces 
contains about twenty-four parameters that currently are not 
determined by the theory but must be inferred from experiments. 
This is not as bad as it might seem, since the model accurately 
describes thousands of data points. In any case, only four param-
eters are needed to specify most properties of matter. These are 
the masses of the electron and the two quarks ("up" and "down") 
that constitute protons and neutrons, and a universal strength 
parameter from which the value a and the other force strengths 
are obtained. Ultimately, it is hoped that all the basic parameters 
will be determined by theories that unify gravity with the stan-
dard model, for example, string theory.26 We must wait to see if 
the calculated masses of the electron and neutron come out to 
satisfy coincidences 3 and 4 above. 
ARE CARBON AND ORGANIC 
MOLECULES FINE-TUNED? 
Let us next take a more detailed look at coincidence 5, which 
asserts that fine-tuning is needed to produce carbon, the primary 
building block of life. Astronomer Fred Hoyle used anthropic 
arguments to successfully predict the presence of a nuclear energy 
level in carbon at 7.65 million electron-volts. However, M. Livio 
and collaborators have shown that the production of carbon in 
stars does not depend sensitively on that nuclear energy level. 
Rather it hinges on the radioactive state of a carbon nucleus 
formed out of three helium nuclei, which misses being too high 

150 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
for carbon production by only 20 percent.27 Nobel laureate 
physicist Steven Weinberg has noted that this "is not such a close 
call after all."28 
The chemical elements carbon and oxygen are among the eas-
iest to produce in the nuclear reactions that take place in dying 
stars. The main energy source in stars is the fusion of hydrogen 
into helium. The helium nucleus, composed of two protons and 
two neutrons and symbolized by 2He4, is highly stable—as pre-
dicted by the rules of quantum mechanics.29 Two helium nuclei 
can fuse to give a beryllium nucleus, 
2He4 + 2He4
 
4Be8 
Another helium then can fuse with the beryllium to produce 
carbon, 
2He4 + 4Be8
 
6C12 
And yet another helium can fuse with the carbon to give oxygen, 
2He4 + 
6C12
 
8O16 
Each of these product nuclei is also very stable and so will survive 
indefinitely. When the star finally runs out of energy these elements 
among others in the periodic table, especially iron, are distributed 
into the space between stars, either by evaporation or, in the case 
of very massive stars, enormous explosions called supernovae.30 
In short, no fine-tuning is necessary for the production of 
carbon, oxygen, and the other basic elements of life. They are in 
fact the elements that are among the easiest to form by common 
nuclear reactions. 
So, too, are the molecular ingredients of life easy to produce. 
In a remarkably simple experiment in 1952, which took only 
weeks to assemble, graduate student Stanley Miller, working 

THE UNCONGENIAL UNIVERSE 
151 
under the renowned chemist Harold Urey, sent a 60,000-volt 
electrical spark, simulating lightning, through a flask containing 
a gas of methane, ammonia, hydrogen, and water vapor. At the 
time, this was thought to simulate the atmosphere of early Earth. 
The by-product contained amino acids, the basic chemical sub-
unit of proteins, and other raw materials of life.31 
We now know that Miller's gas mixture did not accurately rep-
resent the Earth's atmosphere at the likely time that life origi-
nated. Some theists have seized on this to dismiss the importance 
of the experiment.32 But, they miss the point, which is that the 
complex, carbon-based molecules that occur in living matter can 
be readily produced by chemical reactions involving simpler sub-
stances. This is another example of how simplicity can beget 
complexity, contrary to the claims of creationists. 
Astrobiologists have now demonstrated that organic mole-
cules occur under a wide range of conditions, including those 
that existed on the early Earth and those existing in space. Space 
origins are confirmed by the observation of these molecules in 
meteorites analyzed immediately after striking Earth so that 
effects of contamination by earthly matter are minimal. Perhaps 
the first ingredients of life came from space after Earth formed.33 
IS THE VACUUM ENERGY FINE-TUNED? 
Next, let us examine the claim that the vacuum energy of the uni-
verse is fine-tuned. Normally we think of the vacuum as being 
empty of matter and energy. However, according to general rela-
tivity, gravitational energy can be stored in the curvature of empty 
space. Furthermore, quantum mechanics implies that a vacuum 
could contain a minimum zero-point energy. 
Weinberg referred to this as the cosmological constant problem, 
since any vacuum energy density is equivalent to the parameter 
in Einstein's theory of general relativity called the cosmological 

152 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
constant that relates to the curvature of empty space-time.34 A 
better term is vacuum energy problem. 
Crude calculations gave a value for the vacuum energy density 
that is some 120 orders of magnitude greater than its maximum 
value from observations. Since this density is constant, it would 
seem to have been fine-tuned with this precision from the early 
universe, so that its value today allowed for the existence of life. 
Until recent years, it was thought that the cosmological con-
stant is exactly zero, in which case there was no need for fine-
tuning, although no theoretical reason was known. However, in 
1998, two independent research groups studying distant super-
novae were astonished to discover that the current expansion of 
the universe is accelerating.35 More recent observations from other 
investigators have confirmed this result. The universe is falling 
up! The source of this cosmic acceleration may be some still-
unidentified dark energy, which constitutes 70 percent of the mass 
of the universe. One possible mechanism is gravitational repul-
sion by means of the cosmological constant, that is, by way of a 
vacuum energy field, which is allowed by general relativity. 
If that is the case, then the cosmological constant problem 
resurfaces. In the meantime, we now have plausible reasons to 
suspect that the original calculation was incomplete and that a 
proper calculation will give zero for the vacuum energy density.36 
Until these newer estimates are shown to be wrong, we cannot 
conclude that the vacuum is fine-tuned for life and we have no 
particularly strong need to invoke a designer deity. 
But, then, what is responsible for cosmic acceleration, that is, 
what is the nature of the dark energy? A cosmological constant is 
not the only possible source of gravitational repulsion. According 
to general relativity, any matter field will be repulsive if its pres-
sure is sufficiently negative. Theorists have proposed that the dark 
energy may be a matter field, called quintessence, which requires 
no fine-tuning.37 Finally, it should be noted that cosmologists are 
still not totally convinced that dark energy must be invoked to 

THE UNCONGENIAL UNIVERSE 
153 
account for the observed cosmic acceleration and have proposed 
alternate mechanisms. 
OTHER FORMS OF LIFE? 
Carbon would seem to be the chemical element best suited to act 
as the building block for the type of complex molecular systems 
that develop lifelike qualities. Even today, new materials assem-
bled from carbon atoms exhibit remarkable, unexpected proper-
ties, from superconductivity to ferromagnetism. We expect any 
life found in our universe to be carbon-based, or at least based on 
heavy element chemistry. 
But that need not be true in every conceivable universe. Even 
if all the forms of life discovered in our universe turn out to be of 
the same basic structure, it does not follow that life is impossible 
under any other arrangement of physical laws and constants. 
According to the scenario I mentioned briefly in the last chapter, 
certain laws of physics are likely to be common to any universe 
born out of empty space-time, but others along with many phys-
ical constants may be the result of a random process called spon-
taneous symmetry breaking. 
The possibility of other laws and constants is fatal to the fine-
tuning argument. Philosopher Gilbert Fulmer has shown that the 
fine-tuning argument is logically incoherent.38 Simplifying his 
more detailed analysis, the fine-tuning argument requires that the 
set of facts for our universe, {Ul}, could have been a different set, 
{U2}. But in that case, we cannot use {Ul}, which is all we 
know, to say anything about {U2}. (See epigraph to this chapter 
by David Hume.) 
We can only speculate what form life might take on another 
planet, with different conditions. It would be wonderful to have 
more examples of life, but we do not. And, any speculation about 
what form life might take in a universe with a different electron 

154 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
mass, electromagnetic interaction strength, or different laws of 
physics is even more problematical. We simply do not have the 
knowledge to say whether life of some sort would not occur under 
different circumstances. 
Theists who argue that the universe is fine-tuned to earthly life 
have the burden of proving that no other form of life is possible, 
not just on other planets in our universe but in every conceivable 
universe that has different physical parameters. They have provided 
no such proof and it would seem that such a proof is impossible. 
In fact, the whole argument from fine-tuning ultimately 
makes no sense. As my friend Martin Wagner notes, all physical 
parameters are irrelevant to an omnipotent God. "He could have 
created us to live in hard vacuum if he wanted."39 
WASTE 
The anthropic argument for the existence of God can be turned on 
its head to provide an argument against the existence of God. If 
God created a universe with at least one major purpose being the 
development of human life, then it is reasonable to expect that the 
universe should be congenial to human life. Now, you might say 
that God may have had other purposes besides humanity. As has 
been noted several times in this book, apologists can always 
invent a god who is consistent with the data. One certainly can 
imagine a god for whom humanity is not very high on the agenda 
and who put us off in a minuscule, obscure corner of the universe. 
However, this is not the God of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, 
who places great value on the human being and supposedly cre-
ated us in his image. Why would God send his only son to die an 
agonizing death to redeem an insignificant bit of carbon? 
If the universe were congenial to human life, then you would 
expect it to be easy for humanlike life to develop and survive 
throughout the universe. 

THE UNCONGENIAL UNIVERSE 
155 
As we will discuss in chapter 6, the cosmological universe 
bears no resemblance to what is described in Genesis. Indeed, the 
biblical myth is more akin to what one might expect from a per-
fect creator. But that is not what we see. Earth is not the flat, 
immovable circle at the center of a firmament or a vault of fixed 
stars, circled by the sun, moon, and planets pictured in Genesis. 
Rather, Earth is one planet among ten or so (depending on how 
you count) revolving around an atypical star, our sun. On the dis-
tance scale of human experience, the solar system is immense. 
Earth is one hundred and fifty million kilometers from the sun. 
Pluto is some six billion kilometers away. The Oort cloud of 
comets, which marks the edge of the solar system, extends to 
thirty trillion kilometers from the sun. Although the space be-
tween the planets contains smaller asteroids, comets, and dust, 
the solar system consists mainly of empty space that seems to 
serve no purpose. 
On this distance scale, the planets are tiny points. Yet they are 
huge on the human scale. The diameter of Earth is 12,742 kilome-
ters. The largest planet, Jupiter, is 139,822 kilometers in diameter. 
Beyond the solar system we find even more space. The next 
closest star (after the sun), Proxima Centauri, is forty trillion kilo-
meters away. This is part of the triple-star system called Alpha Cen-
tauri. On this scale we should start using light-years as the unit of 
distance, where the light-year is the distance traveled by light in a 
year (9.45 trillion kilometers). The Alpha Centauri system is 4.22 
light-years away. Note that multiple-star systems, which are very 
common, do not provide the kind of orbital stability we experi-
ence on Earth that is very important to our survival. It would seem 
that only single-star systems are likely to support life, another 
indication that life is not high on the universe's agenda. 
Our sun and its planetary system are well away from the 
center of a galaxy containing an estimated two hundred to four 
hundred billion other stars. Called the "Milky Way," after the 
band of stars we see across the sky on a clear night, our visible 

156 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
galaxy is a flat, spiral disk one hundred thousand light-years 
across, and about ten thousand light-years thick. 
The Milky Way is but one of perhaps a hundred billion galaxies 
in the visible universe. We have two satellite galaxies, just outside 
the Milky Way, the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds. The next 
galaxy nearest to us, Andromeda, is 2.44 million light-years away 
And, you might ask, how big is the universe? The farthest 
observed galaxy at this writing, Abell 1835 IR1916, is 13.2 billion 
light-years away. Since it has taken 13.2 billion years for its light 
to reach us, and the current estimate of the age of the universe is 
13.7 billion years, we are seeing this galaxy as it was only five 
hundred million years after the start of the big bang. Because the 
universe has been expanding since the light left Abell, this galaxy 
is now about forty billion light-years away. 
The farthest distance we can ever hope to see, what is called our 
horizon, is 13.7 billion light-years from Earth. Beyond that, light 
would take longer than the age of the universe to reach us. As vast 
as is the universe within our horizon, cosmology suggests that a far 
vaster one lies beyond. If the inflationary big bang model of the 
early universe is correct, then in a tiny time interval (something like 
10-35 second), the universe expanded in size by a factor that is 
almost impossible to imagine. Here is one estimate of that factor: 
Write down the number 1 and follow it by a hundred zeros. Then 
raise the number 10 to that power (10 to 10100). I have not been 
able to think of any analogy from common experience or science 
to help visualize that number. The size of the visible universe (1026 
meters) is only 1061 times larger than the smallest distance mat can 
be defined, the Planck distance (10-35 meter). 
In short, if God created the universe as a special place for 
humanity, he seems to have wasted an awfully large amount of 
space where humanity will never make an appearance. 
He wasted a lot of time, too. Instead of six days, he took nine 
billion years to make Earth, another billion years or so to make 
life, and then another four billion years to make humanity. 

THE UNCONGENIAL UNIVERSE 
157 
Humans have walked on Earth for less than one-hundredth of 
one percent of Earth's history. 
In fact, when you think of it, why would an infinitely pow-
erful God even need six days? Wouldn't he have the ability to 
create everything in an instant? And, why would he have to rest 
when he was all done? 
Let us also ponder the enormous waste of matter. The hun-
dred billion galaxies, each with on the order of a hundred billion 
stars, are composed of "atomic matter," that is, chemical ele-
ments. The portion that is luminous, that is, visible to the eye and 
optical telescopes, constitutes just one-half of one percent of all 
the mass in the universe. Another 3.5 percent of the matter in 
galaxies is of the same atomic nature, only nonluminous. Just 2 
percent of atomic matter is composed of elements heavier than 
helium. One-half of 1 percent of this is composed of carbon, the 
main element of life. That is, 0.0007 of the mass of the universe 
is carbon. Yet we are supposed to think that God specially 
designed the universe so it would have the ability to manufacture, 
in stars, the carbon needed for life? 
Still-unidentified "dark matter" makes up 26 percent of the 
mass of the universe, while the bulk of the universe, about 70 per-
cent, is "dark energy," which also remains unknown in nature but 
possesses no known miraculous properties. From this breakdown 
of mass, we see that 96 percent of the mass of the universe is not 
even of the type of matter associated with life. 
Energy is wasted, too. Of all the energy emitted by the sun, 
only two photons in a billion are used to warm Earth, the rest 
radiating uselessly into space. 
HUMANITY IN SPACE 
Much is made of human spaceflight. It is hyped as the search for 
new worlds akin to the European explorations on Earth during 

158 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
the Age of Discovery. Space operas like Star Trek and Star Wars 
lead people to think that someday all we will have to do is hop 
in a spaceship and cross the galaxy at warp speed. Every planet we 
land on is imagined to have an atmosphere and other conditions 
sufficiently like Earth that we will be able to walk around without 
spacesuits. In this way, it is widely believed, humanity will grad-
ually populate the cosmos. 
However, this is not as easy as saying, "Take over the bridge, 
Mr. Spock." Let us look at some of the numbers. A spaceship 
moving at 11.1 kilometers per second, the escape velocity for 
Earth, would take 114,000 years to reach Alpha Centauri, the 
nearest star system beyond the solar system. That same spaceship 
would take three billion years to cross our galaxy. The most opti-
mistic estimates are that earthlike planets are on average five hun-
dred light-years apart, depending on how you define "earthlike." 
This is at least a sixteen-generation trip at speeds near the speed 
of light. Here, it must be emphasized, just being labeled earthlike 
does not mean humans could survive without life support. In 
fact, we are not likely to be able to survive on the great majority 
of such planets since the planet is not likely to be exactly like 
Earth in every detail needed for human survival. 
Now, Einstein's special theory of relativity makes it in principle 
possible to reach anyplace in the universe in the lifetime of an 
astronaut onboard a spacecraft. The ship just has to go fast enough 
relative to Earth. According to what is called time dilation, a moving 
clock is observed to run slower than one at rest. In a related effect 
called Fitzgerald-Lorentz contraction, the measured length of an 
object contracts in the direction of its motion. These phenomena, 
which defy our commonsense notions of time and space, have 
been amply confirmed in experiments and other observations. 
The way it would work for a spaceship is as follows. Inside the 
ship, the astronauts would not experience any slowing down of 
their body clocks. They would run at the same rate as other 
onboard clocks. However, the distance from Earth to their desti-
i J 

THE UNCONGENIAL UNIVERSE 
159 
nation would contract, as measured from their own reference 
frame. An astronomer on Earth would measure the usual distance 
between astronomical objects but would observe the spaceship 
clocks to slow down and the astronauts to age more slowly. 
Suppose we were able to build a spaceship that could accel-
erate at a constant one g, that is, at the acceleration of gravity on 
Earth, which would also nicely provide artificial gravity for the 
astronauts. That ship would reach Alpha Centauri in five years' 
Earth-time while only a bit over two years would elapse in ship-
time. In eleven years' ship-time it could reach the center of our 
galaxy. But during that time, almost 27,000 years would have 
passed on Earth. In fifteen years' ship-time the astronauts could 
reach Andromeda, 2.4 million light-years away. By then, since 
most of the trip was at near the speed of light relative to Earth, 
2.4 million years would have gone by back on Earth. After expe-
riencing the passage of twenty-three years, the astronauts would 
actually pass the edge of the universe currently observable from 
Earth, but 13.7 billion years would have elapsed in the reference 
frame of a long-dead Earth. 
If the astronauts wish to stop at any of these places to explore 
for earthlike planets, then the times must be doubled, since they 
could accelerate only during the first half of the trip and then 
would have to decelerate for the second half. 
The unavoidable fact seems to be that any humans exploring 
the universe will effectively cut themselves off from Earth. Even if 
they traveled to the center of the Milky Way and back, aging forty-
four years in the process, they would return to an Earth 104,000 
years in the future as measured on Earth clocks. Basically, any 
humans traveling to the stars would forever leave behind their 
families, their society, and even their species. 
Notice that I have not asserted any technological limitations to 
argue that spaceflight to distant stars and galaxies is impossible. 
While a method for accelerating a spaceship to near the speed of 
light is beyond any technology we can currently imagine, we 

160 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
cannot rule that out for future generations. Authors also speculate 
about traveling through wormholes, tunnels through space-time 
that act as shortcuts to other parts of the universe.40 I don't know 
if that will ever prove possible, but I doubt it. 
But, suppose such explorations do someday take place. How 
earthlike must a planet be for humans to be able to live there? 
Life on Earth evolved under the very special set of conditions that 
exist here. We are adapted to live on Earth and not just anywhere 
in space. We would not be overly pessimistic in guessing that 
space travelers would have to travel tens of thousands of light-
years, at the minimum, before finding a planet they could live on 
without massive life support. 
The suggestion is frequently made that humanity might 
someday live in outer space, inside space stations orbiting Earth and 
other planets. However, even if these space stations duplicate all the 
conditions on Earth, they may not be able to deal with the cosmic 
rays from which we on Earth are shielded by the atmosphere. The 
same threat would seem to prohibit lengthy space travel of the type 
described earlier. Even the Mars missions people dream about 
would very possibly expose astronauts to life-shortening radiation 
poisoning. Traveling outside the solar system would kill them. 
Perhaps future technologies will solve this problem, too. 
Maybe genetic engineering will make new kinds of humans, 
really a new species, suitable for space travel. And, of course, we 
can always send automatons. 
Whatever the imagined possibilities, the strong conclusion is 
that humans are not constructed to live anywhere but on this tiny 
blue speck in a vast universe. Maybe many similar specks exist 
throughout the universe, but Homo sapiens is unlikely to ever 
find them. Our species is probably marooned in space, on space-
ship Earth, and likely to go extinct long before the sun burns its 
last hydrogen atom. 
However, once we give up the idea that we are special children 
of God, we can see ourselves as a link in the chain of evolution. 

THE UNCONGENIAL UNIVERSE 
161 
Our descendants, genetically engineered or made of titanium and 
silicon, unhampered by our brief life spans, may reach other 
planets. And if we do it right they hopefully will be smarter, 
kinder, more rational, and free of the superstitions that plague us 
and threaten our very survival even for a few more centuries. 
Even taking the most optimistic view of the future of 
humankind, though, it is hard to conclude that the universe was 
created with a special, cosmic purpose for humanity. It seems 
inconceivable that a creator exists who has a special love for 
humanity, and then just relegated it to a tiny point in space and 
time. The data strongly suggest otherwise. Indeed, the universe 
looks very much like it was produced with no attention whatso-
ever paid to humanity. 
When we take even the most optimistic estimates of the den-
sity of intelligent life of all kinds in the universe, those civiliza-
tions are still separated by enormous distances with nothing but 
wasted space in between. It is also hard to believe that the uni-
verse was created with a special, cosmic purpose for intelligent 
life of any kind. 
A LIFE PRINCIPLE? 
Despite the apparent uncongeniality of the universe to complex 
life, life is present and some people still insist that this alone is 
remarkable. Physicist Paul Davies suggests that perhaps a life prin-
ciple is "written into the laws of physics" or "built into the nature 
of the universe." 
But nowhere in current physics, chemistry, or biology do we 
find any sign of a fundamental life principle, some elan vital that 
distinguishes life from nonlife. Davies speculates, "A felicitous 
mix of law and chance might be generalised to cosmology, pro-
ducing directional evolution from simple states, through com-
plex, to life and mind."41 

162 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
Davies shares this notion with biologists Christian de Duve42 
and Stuart Kauffman.43 These authors all seem to view the life prin-
ciple as some previously unrecognized, holistic, teleological law of 
nature, although what this may be is not at all clear from their highly 
speculative writings. As discussed in chapter 3, Nancey Murphy and 
other theologians admit that the traditional notion of a separate soul 
and body is no longer viable given the evidence from neuroscience. 
But, being theologians they have to find God somewhere. If they 
conclude God does not exist they are quickly out of a job. Some have 
put their stock in what they call "nonreductive physicalism." They 
think they can find a place for God and the soul therein.44 
However, any life principle, if it exists, may be one of the type 
of so-called emergent principles found in chaos and complexity 
theory that naturally arise from the nonlinear, dissipative, but 
still purely local interactions of material particles.45 These cannot 
be called new laws of physics since they follow from already 
existing laws, if not by direct, mathematical proof, then by com-
puter simulations that involve no new principles. Indeed, as we 
have seen, such simulations indicate that complexity evolves 
from simplicity by familiar, purely reductive physical processes 
without the aid of any overarching holistic guiding principle.46 
A TINY POCKET OF COMPLEXITY 
It is commonly thought that the universe is an intricately complex 
place. However, taking an overview we can see that this is a selec-
tion effect resulting from the fact that we and our planet are rela-
tively complex. Most of the matter and energy of the universe 
exhibits little structure and shows no sign of design. We noted 
above that 96 percent of the mass of the universe appears to be 
composed of dark matter and dark energy whose exact natures are 
unknown but that are definitely not composed of familiar atomic 
matter. As far as we can tell, these components have little structure. 

THE UNCONGENIAL UNIVERSE 
163 
The very low-energy photons in the cosmic microwave back-
ground radiation are a billion times more plentiful than the atoms 
in galaxies. These particles are spread uniformly throughout the 
universe to one part in a hundred thousand. They move around 
almost completely randomly, as if they were a gas in thermal equi-
librium having maximum entropy and at a temperature only three 
degrees above absolute zero on the Kelvin scale. The little structure 
that is seen is understood as the remnant of random fluctuations 
that took place in the early universe and helped trigger galaxy for-
mation. Again, absence of design is evident. 
Physicist Max Tegmark has argued that the universe contains 
almost no information, that is, it has on the whole no structure.47 
He suggests that the large information content that we humans 
perceive results from our subjective viewpoint. According to 
quantum mechanics, the universe is perfectly random, a superpo-
sition of all possible realities. However, the very act of observa-
tion selects out only one of those realities. Some quantum mys-
tics, such as the popular author Deepak Chopra, interpret this as 
an ability of humans to "make our own reality."48 However, the 
evidence clearly indicates otherwise.49 If we could make our own 
reality we would all continue to look like we did when we were 
twenty. But even Chopra is aging along with the rest of us. The 
reality that is selected by our observations is just a toss of the dice. 
Even if Tegmark is off the mark, any huge, random universe, 
regardless of its properties, will naturally develop at least a few 
tiny pockets of complexity within a vast sea of chaos, which is 
just what we seem to see in our universe. We do not need either 
a designer or multiple universes to account for such rare devia-
tions as are consistent with chance. 
It is rather amusing that theists make two contradictory argu-
ments for life requiring a creator. Sometimes you hear these from 
the same people. In the fine-tuning argument, the universe is so 
congenial to life that the universe must have been created with life 
in mind. But, if it is so congenial, then we should expect life to 

164 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
evolve by natural processes and a sustaining God is unnecessary. 
In the second argument, the universe is so uncongenial to life that 
life could not have occurred by natural processes and so must have 
been created and be sustained by the constant actions of God. 
There is a third and much simpler possibility that fits the data far 
better; we are just the product of circumstance and chance. 
If God created matter with human life in mind, he did not use 
very much of it for his purpose. If God created order, he did not 
make much of that either. The observed universe and the laws 
and parameters of physics look just as they can be expected to 
look if there is no God. From this we can conclude, beyond a rea-
sonable doubt, that such a God does not exist. 
In a paper appearing just as this book was going to press, 
Roni Harnik, Graham Kribs, and Gilad Perez have constructed a 
universe without any weak nuclear interactions.50 They find that 
this universe undergoes big bang nucleosynthesis, matter domi-
nation, structure formation, and star formation. Stars burn for 
billions of years, synthesizing elements up to iron and under-
going supernova explosions, dispersing heavy elements into the 
interstellar medium. Chemistry and nuclear physics are essen-
tially unchanged. This is one more example, to be added to 
those discussed above, where a claim that certain parameters of 
the universe, in this case those of the weak interaction, are fine-
tuned for life. 
NOTES 
1. Hugh Ross, The Creator and the Cosmos: How the Greatest Scien-
tific Discoveries of the Century Reveal God, rev. ed. (Colorado Springs: 
Navpress, 1995), pp. 138-45. 
2. Guillermo Gonzalez and Jay W. Richards, The Privileged Planet: 
How Our Place in the Cosmos Is Designed for Discovery (Washington, DC: 
Regnery, 2004), p. 335. 

THE UNCONGENIAL UNIVERSE 
165 
3. Clifford M. Will, Was Einstein Right? Putting General Relativity to 
the Test (New York: Basic Books, 1986). 
4. Voltaire, Candide (1759), as quoted in the TalkOrigins archive, 
online at http://www.talkorigins.org/indexcc/CI/CI302.html (accessed 
June 5, 2005). The full text in English is available online at http://www  
.literature.org/authors/voltaire/candide/ (accessed June 5, 2005). 
5. Center for Science and Culture, online at http://www.discovery  
.org/csc/fellows.php (accessed June 6, 2005). 
6. Barbara Forrest and Paul R. Gross, Creationism's Trojan Horse: 
The Wedge of Intelligent Design (Oxford and New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2004). 
7. Tommy Nguyen, "Smithsonian Distances Itself from Contro-
versial Film," Washington Post, June 2, 2005. 
8. Peter D. Ward and Donald Brownlee, Rare Earth: Why Complex 
Life Is Uncommon in the Universe (New York: Copernicus, 2000). 
9. David J. Darling, Life Everywhere: The Maverick Science of Astro-
biology (New York: Basic Books, 2001). 
10. Ibid., pp. 95-110. 
11. Richard Swinburne, "Argument from the Fine-Tuning of the Uni-
verse" in Modern Cosmology and Philosophy, ed. John Leslie (Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 1998), pp. 160-79; George Ellis, Before the Beginning: 
Cosmology Explained (London, New York: Boyars/Bowerdean, 1993); Ross, 
The Creator and the Cosmos; Patrick Glynn, God: The Evidence (Rocklin, CA: 
Prima Publishing, 1997); Dean L. Overman, A Case Against Accident and 
Self-Organization (New York, Oxford: Rowman & Littleneld, 1997). 
12. Brandon Carter, "Large Number Coincidences and the 
Anthropic Principle in Cosmology" in Confrontation of Cosmological 
Theory with Astronomical Data, ed. M. S. Longair (Dordrecht: Reidel, 
1974), pp. 291-98, reprinted in Modern Cosmology and Philosophy, ed. 
John Leslie (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1998), pp. 131-39. 
13. John D. Barrow and Frank J. Tipler, The Anthropic Cosmological 
Principle (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986). 
14. See 
"Anthropics" 
online 
at http://www.colorado.edu/  
philosophy/vstenger/anthro.html (accessed June 10, 2005). 
15. J. J. Davis, "The Design Argument, Cosmic 'Fine Tuning,' and 
the Anthropic Principle," Philosophy of Religion 22 (1987): 139-50. 

166 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
16. Neil A. Manson, "There Is No Adequate Definition of 'Fine-
tuned for Life,'" Inquiry 43 (2000): 341-52. 
17. Robert Klee, "The Revenge of Pythagoras: How a Mathematical 
Sharp Practice Undermines the Contemporary Design Argument in 
Astrophysical Cosmology," British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 53 
(2002): 331-54. 
18. F. Hoyle et al., "A State in C12 Predicted from Astrophysical 
Evidence," Physical Review Letters 92 (1953): 1095. 
19. α = e
2/hc or e
2/4πε0hc, depending on unit system, where h = h/2π, 
h is Planck's constant, c is the speed of light, and ε0 is an electrical constant 
called the permittivity of free space. The low-energy value of α is 1/137. 
20. W. H. Press and A. P. Lightman, "Dependence of Macrophysical 
Phenomena on the Values of the Fundamental Constants," Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London A 310 (1983): 323-36; B. J. 
Carr and M. J. Rees, "The Anthropic Principle and the Structure of the 
Physical World," Nature 278 (1979): 606-12. 
21. Victor J. Stenger, The Unconscious Quantum: Metaphysics in 
Modern Physics and Cosmology (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995), 
pp. 236-38; "Natural Explanations for the Anthropic Coincidences," 
Philo 3, no. 2 (2001): 50-67. 
22. See, for example, R. Totten, "The Intelligent Design of the 
Cosmos: A Mathematical Proof" (2000), http://www.geocities.com/  
worldview_3/mathprfcosmos.html (accessed February 6, 2005). 
23. Anthony Aguire, "The Cold Big-Bang Cosmology as a Counter­
example to Several Anthropic Arguments," Physical Review D64 (2001): 
083508. 
24. Craig J. Hogan, "Why the Universe Is Just So," Reviews of 
Modern Physics 72 (2000): 1149-61. 
25. Takashi Nakamura, H. Uehara, and T. Chiba, "The Minimum 
Mass of the First Stars and the Anthropic Principle," Progress of Theoret­
ical Physics 97 (1997): 169-71. 
26. Gordon L. Kane, Michael J. Perry, and Anna N. Zytkow, "The 
Beginning of the End of the Anthropic Principle," New Astronomy 7 
(2002): 45-53. 
27. M. Livio et al., "The Anthropic Significance of the Existence of 
an Excited State of
 1 2C," Nature 340 (1989): 281-84. 

THE UNCONGENIAL UNIVERSE 
167 
28. Steven Weinberg, "A Designer Universe?" New York Review of 
Books, October 21, 1999. Reprinted in the Skeptical Inquirer (September/ 
October 2001): 64-68. 
29. The subscript indicates the number of protons, the superscript 
the number of protons and neutrons. The total of each number is con-
served in a nuclear reaction, as can be seen in reactions discussed in the 
text. 
30. Elements beyond iron are only produced in the massive stars 
that produce supernovae. 
31. Stanley L. Miller, "A Production of Amino Acids under Possible 
Primitive Earth Conditions," Science 117 (1953): 528-29. 
32. Overman, A Case Against Accident and Self-Organization, pp. 41-49. 
33. Darling, Life Everywhere, pp. 33-51, and references therein. 
34. Steven Weinberg, "The Cosmological Constant Problem," 
Reviews of Modern Physics 61 (1989): 1-23. 
35. A. Reiss et al., "Observational Evidence from Supernovae for an 
Accelerating Universe and a Cosmological Constant," Astronomical 
Journal 116 (1998): 1009-38; S. Perlmutter et al., "Measurements of 
Omega and Lambda from 42 High-Redshift Supernovae," Astrophysical 
Journal 517 (1999): 565-86. 
36. Victor J. Stenger, The Comprehensible Cosmos: Where Do the Laws 
of Physics Come From? (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2006). 
37. Lawrence Krauss, Quintessence: The Mystery of the Missing Mass 
in the Universe (New York: Basic Books, 2000). 
38. Gilbert Fulmer, "A Fatal Logical Flaw in Anthropic Design Prin-
ciple Arguments," International Journal for Philosophy of Religion 49 
(2001): 101-10. 
39. Martin Wagner, private communication. 
40. Kip S. Thorne, Black Holes & Time Warps: Einstein's Outrageous 
Legacy (New York: Norton, 1994). 
41. Paul Davies, The Cosmic Blueprint (New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1988; Radnor, PA: Templeton Foundation Press, 2004); "Mul-
tiverse or Design: Reflections on a Third Way," Proceedings of Universe or 
Multiverse? Stanford University (March 2003), http://aca.mq.edu.au/  
PaulDavies/Multiverse_StanfordUniv_March2003.pdf (accessed 
Janu-
ary 4, 2005). 

168 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
42. Christian de Duve, Vital Dust (New York: Basic Books, 1995). 
43. Stuart Kauffman, At Home in the Universe: The Search for the 
Laws of Self-Organization and Complexity (New York and Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1995). 
44. Warren S. Brown, Nancey Murphy, and H. Newton Malony, 
eds., Whatever Happened to the Soul? Scientific and Theological Portraits of 
Human Nature (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1998). 
45. Steven Johnson, Emergence: The Connected Lives of Ants, Brains, 
Cities, and Software (New York: Touchstone, 2001). 
46. Christoph Adami, Introduction to Artificial Life (New York: 
Springer, 1998); Christoph Adami, Charles Ofria, and Travis C. Collier, 
"Evolution of Biological Complexity," Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences USA 97 (2000): 4463-68. 
47. Max Tegmark, "Does the Universe In Fact Contain Almost No 
Information?" Foundations of Physics Letters 9, no. 1 (1996): 25-42. 
48. Deepak Chopra, Quantum Healing: Exploring the Frontiers of 
Mind/Body Medicine (New York: Bantam, 1989); Ageless Body, Timeless 
Mind: The Quantum Alternative to Growing Old (New York: Random 
House, 1993). 
49. Stenger, The Unconscious Quantum. 
50. Roni Harnik, Graham D. Kribs, and Gilad Perez, "A Universe 
without Weak Interactions," Physical Review D74 (2006): 035006. 

Chapter 6 
THE FAILURES OF REVELATION 
If the statements it [the Bible] contains concerning matters of history 
and science can be proven by extrabiblical records, by ancient docu-
ments recovered through archaeological digs, or by the established facts 
of modern science to be contrary to the truth, then there is grave doubt 
as to its trustworthiness in matters of religion. In other words, if the bib-
lical record can be proved fallible in areas of fact that can be verified, 
then it is hardly to be trusted in areas where it cannot be tested. 
—Archer L. Gleason1 
TESTING REVELATION 
T
he God of Jews, Christians, and Muslims is believed to com-
municate with humanity. Mystics of all faiths and in all ages 
have reported such communication. The knowledge they claim to 
169 

170 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
have received from God fills religious literature. While much of 
the material is esoteric and not readily confirmable, we can rea-
sonably expect that some revealed wisdom should be amenable to 
empirical verification. This is especially true for statements about 
the observable world and physical events. We should be able to 
find remarkable examples where specific information about the 
world, which was unknown to science at the time of the revela-
tion, would later be confirmed by observation. We should also be 
able to find numerous cases of successful predictions of future 
events that have no plausible alternate explanation. 
Instead we find the opposite. Scriptures and other records of 
claimed revelations contain many disagreements with science 
about the physical world. These are not just disagreements about 
"theories," such as biological evolution as covered in chapter 2, 
but disagreements with now well-established empirical facts. 
(Well, evolution is an established empirical fact, too, but this has 
not stopped it from being politically controversial.) 
Similarly, the records of claimed revelations contain no pre-
diction of a future event that cannot be plausibly accounted for 
without recourse to the supernatural. 
We will discuss three types of failures of revelation. In the 
first, we will see that no information supposedly gained during a 
mystical or religious experience, which could not have been oth-
erwise known to the individual claiming the experience, has ever 
been confirmed. In the second type of revelation failure, the 
scriptures will be seen to contain gross errors of scientific fact. 
Third, we will see that not a single risky biblical prophecy can be 
shown, by objective means, to have been fulfilled. Finally we will 
show that lack of physical evidence proves conclusively that 
important biblical tales, such as the Exodus and the events sur-
rounding Jesus' birth and death, cannot have occurred on the 
scale and manner described in the Bible. From all of this, it fol-
lows that the scriptures and reported religious experiences are not 
sources of revealed information. 

THE FAILURES OF REVELATION 
171 
Now, once again, standard scientific criteria are being applied 
in drawing these conclusions—the same criteria that are used to 
test all extraordinary claims. Personal testimonials and anecdotal 
stories have little or no value as evidence for the truth of extraordi-
nary claims. Poorly controlled experiments are similarly useless. 
Furthermore, predictions of future events have little or no value 
unless those predictions are risky, that is, they could have turned 
out otherwise. Predicting the sun will come up tomorrow is not 
risky. Predicting it will not—now that's risky! And, although this 
may seem an obvious requirement, prediction must be made 
before the fact. Many of the claimed fulfilled prophecies in scrip-
tures were actually made after the prophesized events took place. 
RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCES 
One place where truly spiritual revelation would be expected to 
produce testable consequences is with so-called religious experi-
ences. Throughout history, people have claimed deep, life-
altering mystical experiences and formed prophecies based on 
their visions. They say that they have been in touch with God or 
some other form of higher reality. I am convinced that many are 
sincere in that belief (television evangelists excepted). However, 
without independent confirmation, the reported experiences 
could have been all in their heads. 
As was the case for the claimed special powers of the mind 
discussed in chapter 3, ways can be conceived to test for supernat-
ural involvement in a religious experience. Once again, despite 
the widespread belief that science cannot deal with spiritual phe-
nomena, it is really very simple. If a person undergoes a religious 
experience that truly places her in communication with some 
reality from beyond the material world, then we may reasonably 
expect that person to have gained some deep, new knowledge 
about the world that can be checked against the empirical facts. 

172 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
Now, typically, the person having a religious experience 
returns with messages from beyond about how we humans 
should all love and care for one another, be kind to animals, pre-
serve the environment, and not eat too much red meat. As seen 
in chapter 3, purely material brain processes can produce the 
same experiences as reported in a mystical experience. Indeed, 
such experiences can be induced by various physical and chem-
ical means. In short, the mere occurrence of a religious experience 
is no evidence for a supernatural event. 
Suppose, however, that instead of simple homilies someone 
undergoing an epiphany gains new knowledge that she could not 
have possibly obtained by purely physical means. For example, 
imagine that someone in the twentieth century had a vision that 
foresaw that on December 26, 2004, a tsunami in the Indian 
Ocean would kill tens of thousands of people. If that had hap-
pened, we would take seriously the notion that some power 
beyond the material world does indeed exist. In short, the 
validity of an otherworldly component to a religious experience 
is readily verifiable. 
Despite many stories, however, no such report has stood up 
under scientific scrutiny. The prophecies of mystics have been 
either too vague to constitute a reasonable test, or downright fail-
ures. Just consider how many times throughout history that the 
end of the world has been proclaimed, with specific dates usually 
given. The world is still here. 
Reported religious experiences are wholly unremarkable 
despite the cosmic proportions of the claim. We saw in chapter 3 
that no successful (meaning statistically significant in ruling out 
all ordinary explanations) empirical tests for extrasensory percep-
tion, mind-over-matter, the efficacy of prayer, and other mystical 
or semimystical claims can be found in reputable scientific liter-
ature. Similarly, special revelation through religious experiences 
has not become part of common scientific knowledge. 
It does not suffice to say that perhaps these phenomena may 

THE FAILURES OF REVELATION 
173 
still exist at some low level that has not yet been detected, or that 
the issue is still controversial. Believers can accuse nonbelievers of 
being dogmatically skeptical and unwilling to "open their eyes to 
the truth." But our eyes are open and we see no convincing evi-
dence for phenomena that under the God hypothesis would be 
expected to hit us all square in the face. If the religious experience 
were as deeply significant as the monotheistic religions have 
taught, then data would exist that even the most die-hard skeptic 
could not ignore. 
Now, it might be argued that God has not chosen to reveal 
physical facts about nature that can be tested empirically. But 
surely the God of the monotheisms is believed to reveal moral 
knowledge. And, that moral knowledge, as we will discuss in 
chapter 7, is empirically testable. Indeed we will find that the 
hypothesis of a God who provides moral knowledge is falsified 
by the observable fact that many of the moral teachings found in 
scriptures that are supposed revelations are not obeyed by even 
the most pious faithful. 
A God who provides humans with important knowledge that 
they cannot obtain by material means should have produced 
testable evidence for his existence by now. He has not. The evi-
dence points to the opposite conclusion. We can say with some 
confidence that such a God does not exist. 
SCRIPTURE AND SCIENCE 
The next places we will look for scientific evidence of revelation 
are in the scriptures. The least ambiguous and most egregious sci-
entific errors in these books can be found in their references to 
phenomena now studied in the scientific fields of astronomy, 
cosmology, and biology. 
One often hears the claim that big bang cosmology confirms 
what is written in Genesis, thus "proving" the existence of the 

174 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
God of the Bible. However, almost all cultures and religions have 
their creation myths, and we need to compare these, as well as the 
scientific facts, with the details presented in the Bible. 
With thousands of religions, past and present, we cannot pos-
sibly list every creation story. So let us select just a few, which 
should at least illustrate that the Bible is not the sole source of 
creation narratives. 
An ancient Chinese myth tells us that everything started in 
chaos. The universe was like a black egg (a black hole?). A god 
named Pan Gu, wielding an axe, breaks the egg and the heavens 
begin to expand. The fleas and lice on Pan Gu's body evolve into 
humankind. 
In the Apache tale, nothing existed in the beginning—no 
Earth, no sky, no sun, no moon. Out of the darkness a thin disk 
appeared within which sat a bearded man, the Creator, the One 
Who Lives Above. 
The Tahitian story begins with Taaroa, who just was. He 
found himself all alone in the void. He calls in every direction 
and nothing replies, so he changes himself into the universe. 
In the Bible and Qur'an, a presumably preexisting God cre-
ates the universe in six days. Following the story in Genesis, Earth 
is created on the first day. Four days later, God creates the sun, 
moon, and stars. 
Now, what does science tell us about the origin of the uni-
verse? In recent years, observational cosmology has grown into 
an astonishingly precise science. The totality of data from a range 
of telescopes and other instruments, on the ground and in space, 
now solidly support the so-called big bang model of an 
expanding universe. In that model, the visible matter found in 
tens of billions of giant galaxies and in much greater amounts of 
invisible "dark matter" and "dark energy" emerged from a tiny 
volume of space some 13.7 billion years ago by current astro-
nomical estimates. 
Observations indicate that Earth was not formed until nine 

THE FAILURES OF REVELATION 
175 
billion years after the initiation of the big bang, grossly contra-
dicting the sequence of events presented in Genesis. Furthermore, 
the Bible seems to imply that the creation happened rather 
recently—on the order of ten thousand years ago. At that time, 
scripture says that all the "kinds" of living things were created and 
since then have remained immutable, in disagreement with evo-
lution. Throughout the Bible, the universe is referred to as a "fir-
mament" that sits above a flat, immovable Earth.2 
We see little resemblance in Genesis to the picture drawn by 
contemporary science. All these facts can lead to only one conclu-
sion: the biblical version of creation is dead wrong.3 
The Chinese myth described above provides an account closer 
to the scientific one than the Bible's myth, picturing an 
expanding universe beginning in complete chaos and suggesting 
the evolution of life. However, it can hardly be considered an 
accurate description of the scientific data. 
Theists often bring up the fact that a Catholic priest, Georges 
Lemaître, first proposed the big bang in 1927. That's true; but 
Lemaître was an eminent astronomer as well as a priest, and 
while the notion of a divine creation was undoubtedly part of his 
thinking, his proposal was based on good science rather than the-
ology. As mentioned in chapter 4, he strongly advised the pope 
not to make the big bang an infallible teaching of the Church. 
Skeptical literature lists a range of other types of scientific 
errors in scriptures, and places where pronouncements of 
dubious scientific merit are made, such as pi having the value of 
three. However, we have no need to discuss these, since biblical 
language is vague and ambiguous. Apologists can always find 
ways to make most biblical errors sound less damaging. Certainly 
we might suppose that God, if he exists, speaks to people in the 
language they understand. Ancient peoples cannot be expected to 
have understood the language of modern science or have needed 
an exact value of pi (except for the builders of great monuments 
like the pyramids). 

176 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
Still, the argument can be cast in the following terms, which 
by now should sound familiar: Our observations, in this case our 
reading of biblical and Qur'anic statements about the natural 
world, look exactly as you would expect them to look if there was 
no new knowledge being revealed—just what was the human 
understanding of the day. That is, they look as if there is no God 
who speaks to humanity through scriptures or other revelations. 
THE JESUS PROPHECIES 
It could have been different. The scriptures might have contained 
revelations that, while incomprehensible to people at the time of 
the revelation, may have still been recorded as mysterious, eso-
teric knowledge. That knowledge then might have become less 
esoteric as science and the other knowledge arts, such as history, 
developed higher levels of sophistication. 
For example, suppose the New Testament somewhere con-
tained the following passage: "Before two millennia shall pass 
since the birth of our Lord, a man will stand on another world 
within the firmament and he will smite a tiny orb with his staff 
such that it will fly from sight."4 Obviously no mere mortal in 
Jesus' day could have anticipated that in two thousand years men 
would walk on the moon. Nor would he be expected to know 
anything about golf. 
But, we have no risky prediction anywhere in the scriptures 
that has come true. Of course, preachers have disingenuously told 
their flocks that many biblical prophecies have been fulfilled. 
In Evidence That Demands a Verdict,5 written three decades ago, 
Josh McDowell of the Campus Crusade for Christ claimed that an 
intellectual basis exists for faith in Jesus Christ as the Son of God.6 
McDowell lists sixty-one Old Testament prophecies that he claims 
precisely foretold the coming of Jesus Christ as the Messiah.7 
For example, consider Prophecy 1 (all these are exact quotations):8 

THE FAILURES OF REVELATION 
177 
PROPHECY 
I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between 
your seed and her seed; he shall bruise your head, and you shall 
bruise his heel (Gen. 3:15, Revised Standard Version). 
FULFILLMENT 
But when the time had fully come, God sent forth his Son, born 
of a woman, born under the law (Gal. 4:4, Revised Standard 
Version). 
I am not sure what the prediction is here; that Jesus was to be 
born of a woman? 
McDowell often repeats himself. In Prophecies 14 and 32 he 
regards the statements in Luke 2:11, Mathew 22:43-45, Hebrews 
1:3, Mark 16:19, and Acts 2:34-35 in which Jesus sits down on the 
right hand of God as a fulfillment of: "The Lord says to my lord: 
'Sit at my right hand, till I make your enemies your footstool'" (Ps. 
110:1, Revised Standard Version). McDowell certainly views bib-
lical prophecy as something different than simple scientific pre-
diction. I would not be too far off base to note that Jesus sitting 
on God's right hand has not been verified scientifically. 
Each of the prophecies listed by McDowell is confirmed in no 
other place except in the Bible. We have no independent evidence 
that events actually took place as described—especially the ones hap-
pening in heaven. Before making the extraordinary claim that some-
thing supernatural occurred, simple common sense tells us that we 
must rule out the ordinary, far more plausible account that the events 
are fictional, written so as to conform to biblical prophecies. 
For example, Prophecy 55 takes the opening words of one of 
David's Psalms, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me" 
(Ps. 22:1a, King James Version) and sees this precisely fulfilled 
with Jesus' last words on the cross (Matt. 27:46). Which is the 
more plausible account: an extraordinary event in which a thou-

178 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
sand years earlier David predicted the exact last words of the Mes-
siah (although he does not identify them as such) or a perfectly 
ordinary one in which Matthew puts these words in Jesus' mouth 
when telling the story of the crucifixion? Or, perhaps Jesus really 
used these words, remembered from the Psalm. 
Many of McDowell's examples have appeared frequently in 
Christian literature. Consider the prophecy of Jesus' coming: "But 
you, O Bethlehem Eph'rathah, who are little among the clans of 
Judah, from you shall come forth for me one who is to be ruler 
in Israel whose origin is from old, from ancient days" (Mic. 5:2, 
Revised Standard Version). We have no reason outside the New 
Testament to believe that Jesus was born in Bethlehem. History 
does not support Luke's Christmas story about a decree from 
Caesar Augustus that all the Roman world was required to go to 
their place of origin to be "taxed" (King James Version) or 
"enrolled" (Revised Standard Version). Surely such a vast under-
taking would have been recorded. History does record a census 
affecting only Judea and not Galilee, but this took place in 6-7 
CE, which conflicts with the fact that Jesus was supposedly born 
in the days of Herod, who died in 4 BCE.9 
Similarly, we have no historical mention of a star lighting up 
the sky, although spectacular astronomical events such as comets 
and supernovae were frequently recorded in ancient times. And, 
surely there would be a record of Herod's slaughter of innocent 
children—had that really happened. The Jewish scholars Philo (c. 
50) and Josephus (c. 93) described Herod as murderous and 
killing some family members to keep them from challenging his 
throne. Yet neither mentions the slaughter of the innocents. 
Furthermore, Jesus was never the ruler of Israel. This aspect of 
the prophecy actually failed. And, he was never called 
"Immanuel" either, as the prophecy in Isaiah 7:14 foretold. 
Perhaps one of the most important prophecies of the New 
Testament stands out like a sore thumb for its repeated appear-
ance in the Gospels and gross failure to be fulfilled. In Matthew 

THE FAILURES OF REVELATION 
179 
16:28, 23:36, 24:34; Mark 9:1, 13:30; and Luke 9:27, Jesus tells 
his followers that he will return and establish his kingdom within 
a generation, before the listeners die. We are still waiting. 
Lack of evidence from outside of scripture surrounds the most 
important tale of the New Testament—Jesus' crucifixion and res-
urrection. Christian literature is filled with claims that these events 
were foretold. But again we have nothing outside of the Gospels 
that rules out what is the more plausible account: the authors of 
the Gospels formulated the life and death of Jesus to conform to 
their conception of the Messiah of the Old Testament. 
Many people say they believe because of the many eyewit-
nesses who said they saw Jesus walking after he was supposed to 
be dead. However, that testimony is only recorded in the Bible, 
second hand, and years after the fact. Eyewitness testimony 
recorded on the spot would still be open to question two thou-
sand years after the fact. Eyewitness testimony recorded decades 
later is hardly extraordinary evidence. 
Furthermore, eyewitness testimony recorded on the spot 
today is notoriously unreliable.10 In a recent decade, sixty-nine 
convicts were released from prison, seven on death row, based on 
DNA evidence. In most cases, these people were convicted prima-
rily on the basis of eyewitness testimony. 
Now, as with the Christmas story, we might easily imagine 
that independent evidence could have been found. Matthew 
describes what happened at the death of Jesus: "And behold, the 
curtain of the temple was torn in two, from top to bottom; and 
the earth shook, and the rocks were split; the tombs we opened 
and many of the bodies of the saints who had fallen asleep were 
raised, and coming out of the tombs after his resurrection they 
went into the holy city and appeared to many"(Matt. 27:51-54, 
Revised Standard Version). Again, we have no record of these 
phenomenal events outside scripture. If they really happened as 
described, Philo, Josephus, or one of the many historians of the 
time would very likely have mentioned them. 

180 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
The few mentions of "Christus" in the pagan literature, 
decades after Jesus' death, do not provide the needed confirma-
tion. They read simply as factual reports on a new cult that was 
appearing in the empire. Considerable controversy still exists on 
the validity of various statements taken from the writings of Jose-
phus, which seem to support specifics of the Gospel stories.11 But, 
once again, these were written well after Jesus' death and were not 
firsthand observations. In short, despite the long list of Jewish 
and pagan scholars writing at that time,12 there is no record of 
Jesus being tried by Pontius Pilate and executed—much less 
rising from the dead. 
Christian apologist William Lane Craig cites the empty tomb 
as evidence for the risen Christ.13 However, the Gospels are 
inconsistent in their description of this event, as the reader 
should check for herself. Simply compare the four accounts: 
Mark 16:1-8, Matthew 28:1-10, Luke 24:1-11, John 20:1-18. 
Even if we assume, for the sake of argument, that the story of the 
empty tomb is accurate, a much simpler explanation exists. Sup-
pose you are on holiday in Paris and decide one morning to visit 
the tomb of Napoleon. You arise bright and early and find the 
tomb is empty. Would you conclude that the emperor had risen 
into heaven? Hardly. You would figure somebody took the body! 
Since ancient times, many authors have commented on how 
the birth, life, death, and resurrection of Jesus as described in the 
Gospels are similar to those of savior-gods in various mystery 
cults and religions of the ancient world.14 True, this remains an 
issue in much dispute. In his exhaustive study of the background 
of the early Church, Everett Ferguson warns us that many of these 
generalizations are fraught with methodological problems and 
that the similarities between the mystery religions and Chris-
tianity is exaggerated.15 He admits, however, that much of that 
exaggeration came from Christian writers themselves. The Jesus 
story sure looks just like you would expect it to look if it were pat-
terned after other god-men.16 

THE FAILURES OF REVELATION 
181 
Early Christian Church fathers such as Justin Martyr (d. 165), 
Tertullian (d. 225), and Irenaeus (d. 202) felt compelled to 
answer the pagan critics of the time who claimed the lesus story 
was based on earlier traditions. The fathers claimed that the sim-
ilarities were the work of the devil, who copied the Jesus story 
ahead of time to mislead the gullible. 
Lacking any independent corroboration, we cannot take the 
New Testament as evidence for a single fulfilled Old Testament 
prophecy, much less sixty-one. The story of Jesus, as related in the 
Gospels, with all its unconfirmed miraculous happenings, is 
more plausibly explained as largely a fiction, written to not only 
conform to Judaic traditions but also to move Christianity 
beyond being a tribal religion. The story appealed to gentiles as 
well, with the incorporation of many of their god-man myths.17 
This is not to say that the myth of Jesus is not based on a real 
person, although some scholars have tried to make that case.18 
That assumption is not necessary for the case against God. We 
have seen that the Gospels cannot be used as evidence for the suc-
cess of various Old Testament predictions because we have no 
independent confirmation that those events ever occurred. 
OLD TESTAMENT PROPHECIES 
A similar conclusion can be drawn about Old Testament predic-
tions of events within that document itself. On his Web site Rea-
sons to Believe, physicist Hugh Ross lists a number of Old Testa-
ment prophecies that he claims were fulfilled. In addition to the 
predictions of a Messiah that have already been discussed, Ross 
lists several predictions where the predicted event occurs in the 
Old Testament. For example, quoting Ross, "One prophet of God 
(unnamed, but probably Shemiah) said that a future king of 
Judah, named Josiah, would take the bones of all the occultic 
priests (priests of the 'high places') of Israel's King Jeroboam and 

182 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
burn them on Jeroboam's altar" (1 Kings 13:2 and 2 Kings 
23:15-18). This event occurred approximately three hundred 
years after it was foretold.19 In his book Bible Prophecy, Tim 
Callahan notes, "1 Kings 13:2 refers to the northern kingdom as 
Samaria and since Israel was not referred to by the name of its cap-
ital until after it had fallen to the Assyrians in 721 BCE, the 
prophet crying out against Jeroboam's idolatry, which took place 
around 900 BCE, was inserted by Deuteronomists hundreds of 
years after the fact."20 All Ross's examples, like those of McDowell, 
have no corroboration outside the Bible. Rather than making the 
extraordinary claim that something supernatural has happened 
and future events were foretold, the far more plausible, ordinary 
explanation is that the "prophecies" were inserted after the fact. 
The Old Testament has numerous failures of prophecy as 
well. Here are just a few: 
• Isaiah 17:1. Damascus is predicted to cease to be a city. In 
fact, Damascus is one of the oldest continuously inhabited 
cities. 
• Jeremiah 49:33 predicts that Hazor will become an ever-
lasting wasteland in which humans will never again dwell. 
The King James Bible says it will become inhabited by 
dragons. None of this has happened. 
• Zechariah 10:11. The Nile is predicted to dry up. This has 
not yet happened. 
• Ezekiel 29, 30. The land of Egypt will be laid waste by Neb-
uchadnezzar, all its people killed and rivers dried up. It will 
remain uninhabited for forty years. This did not happen. 
Biblical scholars will argue endlessly about these issues, but it 
is not necessary to enter into their conflict. We need to seek evi-

THE FAILURES OF REVELATION 
183 
dence that will stand up under the kind of scrutiny scientists give 
to predictive claims of extraordinary events in any field. The fact 
is that no independent evidence exists that any biblical prophecy 
has been fulfilled, despite the insistent claims of apologists such 
as McDowell, Craig, and Ross. 
PHYSICAL EVIDENCE 
Events recorded two thousand years ago and longer by supersti-
tious people accustomed more to mythological tales than objec-
tive observations cannot be taken literally. The scriptures look 
exactly as they would be expected to look if they were written 
without the deep insight of divine revelation. 
But, again, it might have been different. Evidence might have 
been found that could not be dismissed as yet another myth in 
an ancient world filled with myths. Physical data, examined 
under the microscopes of modern science, could still provide for 
the type of verification of extraordinary claims that can be found 
in laboratories all over the world today. 
In 1995 I walked into the mummy room in the Cairo 
Museum and gazed down on the earthly remains of Pharaoh 
Ramses II. I could see the hawkish facial features of the great king 
who reigned over Egypt for sixty-seven years, dying at age ninety-
six in 1213 BCE—well over three thousand years ago! Thanks to 
the Rosetta Stone, discovered in 1799 during Napoleon's inva-
sion of Egypt, and the numerous monuments (to himself) that 
Ramses had built during his reign, we know much about his life. 
While no doubt many of the exploits depicted on the walls of 
temples were exaggerated, we can be sure this man existed and 
that many of the details of his life are known. 
A few months later, I visited a museum in Thessalonica, 
Greece. There I saw bones that I was told at the time belonged to 
King Philip II of Macedon (d. 336 BCE), the father of Alexander 

184 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
the Great. These remains had been discovered in Macedonia just 
a few years earlier, and my guide was a physicist involved in their 
dating. Since then, the remains have been reidentified as those of 
Alexander's half-brother, Philip III Arrhidaeus, who was assassi-
nated in 317 BCE.21 
So, here we have detailed, identifiable physical evidence for 
the existence of men who lived long before Jesus. Now, Jesus 
never ruled a worldly kingdom, but we have been led to believe 
he was a person of some local renown. In principle, we could 
have found either bones or some tablet from his time that con-
firmed Jesus' existence. The Shroud of Turin,22 and the more 
recent discovery called the James Ossuary, have turned out to be 
likely forgeries.23 They might not have been. And, in fact, these 
issues are still being debated. Perhaps someday a discovery will 
be made, especially since the region where Jesus lived is the most 
heavily excavated by archaeologists in the world. 
For example, suppose some bones are found that can be iden-
tified as those of Jesus by means of accompanying physical evi-
dence. This would disprove the doctrine that he rose bodily into 
heaven, which at least demonstrates that the hypothesis of Jesus' 
bodily resurrection is eminently falsifiable. Such a discovery 
would not ring the death knell of Christianity (although William 
Lane Craig seems to think so) where, today, most Christians 
think in terms of immaterial spirits as the entities that survive the 
grave and dwell in heaven or hell. A discovery of physical evi-
dence for the Jesus of the Gospels would at least put to rest the 
doubts that have been expressed about the very existence of the 
carpenter from Galilee. If they showed signs of crucifixion, then 
that part of the biblical narrative would be confirmed. Following 
a suggestion of Richard Dawkins, we might even imagine that the 
DNA found in the bones did not represent those of an earthly 
human, providing confirmation of Jesus' otherworldy nature. 
Of course this is all very hypothetical and not likely to ever 
happen. And the apologist can easily invent a host of reasons for 

THE FAILURES OF REVELATION 
185 
why we have found no evidence. My point is simply that 
obtaining incontrovertible physical data confirming the validity 
of events as related in scriptures is not out of the realm of possi-
bility. It could happen. Someday it may happen. So far, it has not. 
UNEARTHING NOTHING 
The lack of physical evidence does not prove necessarily that 
some person or event described in ancient chronicles is purely 
mythological. However, in the case of a number of biblical 
events, the absence of supporting physical evidence that should 
have been found with high probability allows us to draw a 
strong, scientific conviction that those events never took place. 
Such is the case for several of the most important of Old Tes-
tament narratives that describe people and events surrounding 
the very foundations of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. The 
details and references to the sources of data may be found in the 
startling book The Bible Unearthed, by Israel Finkelstein and Neil 
Asher Silberman.24 
Perhaps the most important figure in the Old Testament 
(besides Yahweh himself) is Moses, who supposedly led the Jews 
out of captivity in Egypt and wandered the Sinai Desert for forty 
years. During his wanderings, according to the scripture, Moses 
often talked to God, obtained the Ten Commandments, and 
made a covenant between the people of Israel and Yahweh. With 
God's guidance, Moses finally brought his people to the Promised 
Land, which, as modern Israeli prime minister Golda Meir once 
remarked, was the only place in the Middle East with no oil. 
Finkelstein and Silberman report that no recognizable archae-
ological evidence has been found of an Israelite presence in Egypt 
prior to the thirteenth century BCE, when most scholars believe 
the Exodus took place. This was around the time of Pharaoh 
Ramses II, whose remains I viewed in Cairo in 1995.25 

186 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
According to the biblical account, six hundred thousand Jews 
participated in the escape from Egypt. Even if this is wildly exag-
gerated, Finkelstein and Silberman argue that some archaeolog-
ical traces of their wandering should have been found by now. 
Despite extensive searching, "not a single campsite or sign of 
occupation from the time of Ramses II and his immediate prede-
cessors and successors has even been identified in Sinai."26 
Finkelstein and Silberman note that modern archaeological 
techniques are capable of tracing even the very meager remains of 
small bands of far more ancient hunter-gatherers and pastoral 
nomads all over the world. They say, "The conclusion—that the 
Exodus did not happen at the time and in the manner described 
in the Bible—seems irrefutable."27 
Finkelstein and Silberman are part of a school of biblical 
archaeologists called "minimalists," who argue that many bib-
lical accounts of early Israel have little, if any basis in factual data. 
They are opposed by the "maximalists," who still claim that Bible 
accounts are generally confirmed by archaeology. One highly 
respected scholar, William Dever, has tried to straddle the two 
positions. But he has to agree with the minimalists on the ques-
tions of Moses. "Absolutely no trace of Moses, or indeed of an 
Israelite presence in Egypt, has ever turned up. Of the Exodus and 
the wandering in the wilderness—events so crucial in the Biblical 
recitation of the 'mighty acts of God'—we have no evidence what-
soever. . . . Recent Israeli excavations at Kadesh-Barnea, the Sinai 
oasis where the Israelites are said to have encamped for forty 
years, have revealed an extensive settlement, but not so much as 
a potsherd earlier than the tenth century B.C."28 
The minimalists also cast considerable doubt that the great 
battles in Canaan, which the Bible describes as happening after 
the death of Moses, actually occurred. The cities in the region 
were poor and unfortified at that time, and excavations show no 
signs of destruction. Jericho had no walls to come tumbling 
down at the blast of Joshua's trumpet. In fact, it was not even set-

THE FAILURES OF REVELATION 
187 
tied at that time, having been destroyed around 2400 BCE, some 
nine hundred years before Joshua's alleged conquest.29 
In short, the stories of Moses and his immediate successors 
are surely myths. In science, the absence of evidence that is 
required by a hypothesis constitutes a falsification of the hypoth-
esis. The hypothesis of a God who selected out a small desert 
tribe as his chosen people and communicated the law to them 
while they wandered the Sinai Desert is falsified by the absence 
of evidence required by that hypothesis. 
After Moses and Abraham (who is also probably a mytholog-
ical figure30), the next most important personages in the Old Tes-
tament are David and Solomon. They are described in the Bible as 
rulers of great wealth, presiding over the Golden Age of the briefly 
united kingdoms of Israel and Judea. Yet there is no mention of 
either king in Egyptian or Mesopotamian texts. No physical evi-
dence has been found for David's conquests or his empire. Archae-
ological support for Solomon's great temple in Jerusalem or other 
building projects there and in other locales is nonexistent.31 
At a recent meeting in Rome, archaeologist Niels Peter 
Lemche declared, "Archaeological data have now definitely con-
firmed that the empire of David and Solomon never existed."32 
In 1993 a fragment of a black basalt monument was found at 
Tel Dan in northern Israel. It contained an inscription in Aramaic 
describing an assault on the northern kingdom of Israel by the 
king of Damascus around 835 BCE and his defeat of the "House 
of David." Some scholars now think this may be a forgery; in any 
case, it does not prove the existence of a united kingdom.33 
Almost certainly, the Jewish kingdom was far more modest 
than described in the Bible, and the events surrounding David are 
probably as mythological as those of the lives of Abraham, 
Moses, and Jesus. 
As you might expect, these conclusions continue to be hotly 
debated in the community of biblical scholars and archaeolo-
gists. Some maximalists have argued that the remains of 

188 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
Solomon's temple and other signs of a Golden Age in Jerusalem 
have been wiped out by later building projects. However, the 
extensive excavations carried on in Jerusalem in modern times 
have yielded impressive finds from much earlier periods such as 
the Middle Bronze Age and Iron Age, which would have been 
covered by even more debris.34 
In short, the hypothesis of a God who looked down with 
favor on a small desert tribe fifteen hundred to a thousand years 
before Christ, enabling them to forge a great, albeit short-lived 
empire, is falsified by the absence of data. 
NOT EVEN REMOTELY HISTORIC 
If the most important stories found in the Old and New Testa-
ments are even remotely historic, then scientific evidence should 
exist for an escape of large numbers of Jews from Egypt in the 
thirteenth century BCE and forty years of wandering in the desert. 
It does not. Physical evidence should exist for great battles as the 
Israelites captured the land of Canaan, after returning to Canaan. 
It does not. Physical evidence should exist for a Golden Age in a 
combined kingdom of Israel and Judea around 1000 BCE and the 
Temple of Solomon. It does not. 
Historical evidence should also exist for the extraordinary 
events reported to have occurred at the time of Jesus' birth. It does 
not. Historical evidence should exist for the extraordinary events 
reported to have occurred at the time of Jesus' death. It does not. 
From the absence of evidence that should exist in the scientific and 
historical record, we can conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that 
these extraordinary events did not take place as the Bible describes. 
The Bible reads as an assembly of myths fashioned by ancient 
authors who had no concept of historical accuracy. Its description 
of the world reflects the scientific and historical knowledge of the 
age in which the manuscripts were composed. 

THE FAILURES OF REVELATION 
189 
The information and insights contained in scriptures and 
other revelations look just as they can be expected to look if there 
is no God who revealed truths to humanity that were recorded in 
sacred texts. 
NOTES 
1. Archer L. Gleason, Encyclopedia of Bible Difficulties (Grand 
Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2001), p. 23. 
2. See, for example, Gen. 1:6-8; Chron. 16:30; Ps. 93:1, 96:10, 
104:5; Isa. 45:18. Isa. 40:22 says Earth is a "circle." Note that a circle is 
flat. Both the King James and Revised Standard versions have been con-
sulted here. 
3. For an attempt to make the Bible creation story consistent with 
science, see Gerald L. Schroeder, Genesis and the Big Bang: The Discovery of 
the Harmony between Modem Science and the Bible (New York: Bantam 
Books, 1992); The Science of God: The Convergence of Scientific and Biblical 
Wisdom (New York: Broadway Books, 1998); The Hidden Face of God: How 
Science Reveals the Ultimate Truth (New York: Free Press, 2001). For 
reviews, see Victor J. Stenger, "Fitting the Bible to the Data," Skeptical 
Inquirer 23 no. 4 (1999): 67, also online at Secular Web, http://www  
.infidels.org/library/modern/vic_stenger/schrev.html (accessed Decem-
ber 13, 2004), pp. 165-70; and Mark Perakh, "Not a Very Big Bang about 
Genesis" (December 2001), online at Talk Reason, http://www.talkreason  
.org/articles/schroeder.cfm (accessed December 15, 2004). 
4. Thanks to Brent Meeker for rewriting this for me in Biblespeak. 
5. Josh McDowell, Evidence That Demands a Verdict (San 
Bernardino, CA: Here's Life Publishers, 1972, 1979). Quotations from 
paperback version of revised edition. 
6. For a chapter-by-chapter critique, see Jeffery Jay Lowder, ed., 
"The Jury Is In: The Ruling on McDowell's 'Evidence,'" online at Secular 
Web, http://www.infidels.org/library/modern/jeff_lowder/jury/ (ac-
cessed January 14, 2005). The essays date from 1997 to 1999. 
7. McDowell, Evidence That Demands a Verdict, pp. 141-66. 
8. Ibid., p. 145. 

190 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
9. Randel Helms, Gospel Fictions (Amherst, NY: Prometheus 
Books, 1988), p. 59. 
10. Elizabeth F. Loftus, Eyewitness Testimony (Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press, 1996). 
11. Everitt Ferguson, Background of Early Christianity, 3d ed. (Grand 
Rapids, MI: W. B. Eerdmans, 2003), p. 488. 
12. Timothy Freke and Peter Gandy, The Jesus Mysteries: Was the 
"Original Jesus" a Pagan God? (New York: Harmony Books, 1999), p. 133. 
13. William Lane Craig, "The Historicity of the Empty Tomb of 
Jesus," New Testament Studies 31 (1985): 39-67, http://www.leaderu  
.com/offices/billcraig/docs/tomb2.html (accessed January 4, 2005). 
14. Freke and Gandy, The Jesus Mysteries. 
15. Ferguson, Background of Early Christianity, pp. 297-300. 
16. See, for example, Philostratus, The Life of Apollonius of Tyana, 
quoted in Helms, Gospel Fictions, p. 9. 
17. Helms, Gospel Fictions. 
18. Joseph R. Hoffmann and Gerald A. Larue, eds., Jesus in History 
and Myth (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1986); G. A. Wells, The His-
torical Evidence for Jesus (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1988); Earl 
Doherty, The Jesus Puzzle: Did Christianity Begin with a Mythical Christ? 
(Ottawa: Canadian Humanist Publications, 1999). 
19. Hugh Ross, 
"Fulfilled Prophecy," http://www.reasons.org/  
resources/apologetics/prophecy.shtml (accessed January 
14, 
2005). 
Original dating 1975, revised August 22, 2003. 
20. Tim Callahan, Bible Prophecy: Failure or Fulfillment (Altadena, 
CA: Millennium Press, 1997), p. 47. 
21. Angela M. H. Schuster, "Not Phillip II of Macedon," Archaeology 
(April 
20, 
2000), http://www.archaeology.org/online/features/  
macedon/ (accessed December 26, 2004). 
22. Joe Nickell, Inquest on the Shroud of Turin (Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 1987). 
23. Ibid., "Bone (Box) of Contention: The James Ossuary," Skep-
tical Inquirer 27, no. 2 (March/April 2003): 19-22. A complete set of 
scholarly essays on the James Ossuary is online at Bible and Interpreta-
tion, http://www.bibleinterp.com/articles/James_Ossuary_essays.htm  
(accessed December 25, 2004). 

THE FAILURES OF REVELATION 
191 
24. Israel Finkelstein and Neil Asher Silberman, The Bible 
Unearthed: Archaeology's New Vision of Ancient Israel and the Origin of Its 
Sacred Texts (New York: Free Press, 2001). 
25. Ibid., p. 57. 
26. Ibid., p. 62. 
27. Ibid., p. 63. 
28. William G. Dever, Recent Archaeological Discoveries and Biblical 
Research (Seattle and London: University of Washington Press, 1990), p. 25. 
29. Dever, Recent Archaeological Discoveries, p. 48; Finkelstein and 
Silberman, The Bible Unearthed, pp. 81-82. 
30. Finkelstein and Silberman, The Bible Unearthed, pp. 33-38. 
31. Ibid., pp. 128-31. 
32. As quoted in Biblical Archaeological Review 31, no. 1 (January/ 
February 2005): 16-17. 
33. Ibid. 
34. Finkelstein and Silberman, The Bible Unearthed, p. 133. 

Chapter 7 
DO OUR VALUES 
COME FROM GOD? 
Any animal whatever, endowed with well-marked social instincts, the 
parental and filial affections being here included, would inevitably 
acquire a moral sense or conscience, as soon as its intellectual powers 
had become as well developed, or nearly as well developed, as in man. 
—Charles Darwin 
THE PIPELINE 
T
he religions of the world have laid claim to the role of 
arbiters of human behavior, and their leaders continually 
decry the moral decay they claim to see in society. They insist they 
have the right to tell the rest of us what is right and what is wrong 
because they have a special pipeline to the place where right and 
wrong are defined—in the mind of God. 
193 

194 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
Even secular institutions pay tribute to this claim. Whenever a 
moral issue arises in politics, such as stem cell research or when to 
end life support, clergy are called upon to provide their wisdom. 
On the other hand, the opinions of atheists, freethinkers, and 
humanists are rarely solicited—and frequently reviled. 
The implication is that atheists and humanists are somehow 
undesirable members of society, people you would not want to 
invite into your house. According to lawyer Phillip Johnson, non-
believers actually think humans came from monkeys, which is 
the source of many of the "evils" of modern society, including 
homosexuality, abortion, pornography, divorce, and genocide— 
as if the world had none of these before Darwin came along.1 
However common may be the view that religion is the source 
of moral behavior, what do the data say? I have seen no evidence 
that nonbelievers commit crimes or other antisocial acts in 
greater proportion than believers. Indeed, some studies indicate 
the opposite. According to statistics from the Federal Bureau of 
Prisons, Christians make up almost 80 percent of the prison pop-
ulation. Atheists make up about 0.2 percent.2 It is to be admitted 
that these data are not published in a scientific journal, but I 
think it is safe to conclude that the godless do not fill prisons. 
Published studies do indicate that a child's risk of sexual abuse by 
a family member increases as the family's religious denomina-
tion becomes more conservative, that is, when the teachings of 
scriptures and other doctrines are taken more literally.3 Similarly, 
the probability of wife abuse increases with the rigidity of a 
church's teachings pertaining to gender roles and hierarchy.4 
But let me not rely solely on sociological statistics, where cor-
relation does not always imply connection given all the miti-
gating factors. Even observers from the Christian side have 
expressed dismay that the current dominance of evangelical 
Christianity in America has not translated into a strengthening of 
the nation's moral character or the characters of evangelical 
Christians themselves. In an article in Christianity Today, theolo-

DO OUR VALUES COME FROM GOD? 195 
gian Ronald Sider lamented: "Scandalous behavior is rapidly 
destroying American Christianity. By their daily activity, most 
'Christians' regularly commit treason. With their mouths they 
claim that Jesus is Lord, but with their actions they demonstrate 
allegiance to money, sex, and self-fulfillment."5 Sider continues, 
The findings in numerous national polls conducted by highly 
respected pollsters like The Gallup Organization and The Barna 
Group are simply shocking. "Gallup and Barna," laments evan-
gelical theologian Michael Horton, "hand us survey after survey 
demonstrating that evangelical Christians are as likely to 
embrace lifestyles every bit as hedonistic, materialistic, self-
centered, and sexually immoral as the world in general." 
Divorce is more common among "born-again" Christians than 
in the general American population. Only 6 percent of evangel-
icals tithe. White evangelicals are the most likely people to 
object to neighbors of another race. Josh McDowell has pointed 
out that the sexual promiscuity of evangelical youth is only a 
little less outrageous than that of their nonevangelical peers. 
COMMON STANDARDS 
It is not my purpose in this chapter to say how humans ought to 
behave. Rather I am acting as a scientist, observing how they do 
behave and asking what those observations tell us about the truth 
or falsity of the God hypothesis. In this regard, I reject the notion 
that science has nothing to say about morality. 
Preachers tell us that any universal moral standards can only 
come from one source—their particular God. Otherwise stan-
dards would be relative, depending on culture and differing 
across cultures and individuals. The data, however, indicate that 
the majority of human beings from all cultures and all religions 
or no religion agree on a common set of moral standards. While 
specific differences can be found, universal norms do seem to 

196 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
exist. Anthropologist Solomon Asch has observed, "We do not 
know of societies in which bravery is despised and cowardice 
held up to honor, in which generosity is considered a vice and 
ingratitude a virtue."6 
While we live in a society of law, much of what we do is not 
constrained by law but performed voluntarily. For example, we 
have many opportunities to cheat and steal in situations where 
the chance of being caught is negligible, yet most of us do not 
cheat and steal. While the Golden Rule is not usually obeyed to 
the letter, we generally do not try to harm others. Indeed, we are 
sympathetic when we see a person or animal in distress and take 
action to provide relief. We stop at auto accidents and render aid. 
We call the police when we witness a crime. We take care of chil-
dren, aged parents, and others less fortunate than us. We willingly 
take on risky jobs, such as in the military or public safety, for the 
protection of the community. 
That stealing from members of your own community is 
immoral requires no divine revelation. It is revealed by a 
moment's reflection on the type of society that would exist if 
everyone stole from one another. If lying were considered a virtue 
instead of truth-telling, communication would become impos-
sible. Mothers have loved their children since before mammals 
walked the earth—for obvious evolutionary reasons. The only 
precepts unique to religion are those telling us to not to question 
their dogma. 
Of course, not everyone agrees on every moral issue. These 
disagreements can be very pronounced, especially within specific 
religious communities where the same scriptural readings are 
often used to justify contradictory actions. 
For example, consider the opposing interpretations of the com-
mandment against killing found within the Christian community. 
Conservative Protestants interpret this commandment as pro-
hibiting abortion, stem cell research, and removing life support 
systems from the incurable, among other actions. However, they do 

DO OUR VALUES COME FROM GOD? 197 
not view capital punishment as prohibited, pointing to the biblical 
prescription of an eye for an eye. Catholics and liberal Christians, 
on the other hand, generally interpret the commandment as for-
bidding capital punishment. But Catholics oppose while liberals 
allow abortion, the removal of life support, and stem cell research. 
In all these cases, the Bible is evidently ambiguous. 
As philosopher Theodore Schick Jr. points out, both sides of the 
abortion debate believe murder is immoral. Where they disagree is 
on the nature of a fetus—whether or not it is the sort of entity that 
can be murdered. In other words, moral disagreements are often not 
about what is good or bad but about some other aspect of reality.7 
So how do Christians decide what is right or wrong? While 
they may look at the Bible, how they interpret what they read 
must depend on ideals that they have already developed from 
some other source. 
NOBLE IDEALS 
The Judeo-Christian and Islamic scriptures contain many pas-
sages that teach noble ideals that the human race has done well 
to adopt as norms of behavior and, where appropriate, to codify 
into law. But without exception, the fact that these principles 
developed in earlier cultures and history indicates that they were 
adopted by—rather than learned from—religion. While it is fine 
that religions preach moral precepts, they have no basis to claim 
that these precepts were authored by their particular deity or, 
indeed, any deity at all. 
Perhaps the primary principle upon which to live a moral life 
is the Golden Rule: "Do unto others, as you would have them do unto 
you." In our Christian-dominated society in the West, most 
people assume that this was an original teaching of Jesus from 
the Sermon on the Mount. For some reason, their preachers, who 
surely know better, perpetuate this falsehood. In fact, Jesus him-

198 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
self made no such claim. Here's what he actually said, according 
to the Gospel: "So, whatever you wish that men would do to you, 
do so to them; for this is the law of the prophets" (Matt. 7:12, 
Revised Standard Version). Indeed, the phrase "Love thy neighbor 
as thyself" appears in Leviticus 19:18, written a thousand years 
before Christ. 
But the Golden Rule is not the exclusive property of a small 
desert tribe with a high opinion of itself. Here are some other, 
independent sources showing that the Golden Rule was already a 
widespread teaching well before Jesus: 
• In The Doctrine of the Mean 13, written about 500 BCE, 
Confucius says, "What you do not want others to do to you, 
do not do to others." 
• Isocrates (c. 375 BCE) said, "Do not do to others what 
would anger you if done to you by others." 
• The Hindu Mahabharata, written around 150 BCE, teaches, 
"This is the sum of all true righteousness: deal with others 
as thou wouldst thyself be dealt by."8 
In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus also urged his listeners, "Do 
not resist one who is evil. But if any one strikes you on the right 
cheek, turn to him the other also" (Matt. 5:39, Revised Standard 
Version) and "You have heard that it was said, 'You shall love 
your neighbor and hate your enemy' But I say to you, Love your 
enemies and pray for those who persecute you" (Matt. 5:43-44, 
Revised Standard Version). 
Again, these are generally regarded as uniquely Christian sen-
timents. But the call to "love your enemies" precedes Jesus and 
does not even appear in the Old Testament:9 
• I treat those who are good with goodness. And I also treat 
those who are not good with goodness. Thus goodness is 
attained. I am honest with those who are honest. And I am 

DO OUR VALUES COME FROM GOD? 
199 
also honest with those who are dishonest. Thus honesty is 
attained (Taoism. Tao Te Ching 49). 
• Conquer anger by love. Conquer evil by good. Conquer the 
stingy by giving. Conquer the liar by truth (Buddhism. 
Dhammapada 223). 
• A superior being does not render evil for evil; this is a 
maxim one should observe; the ornament of virtuous per-
sons is their conduct. One should never harm the wicked 
or the good or even criminals meriting death. A noble soul 
will ever exercise compassion even towards those who 
enjoy injuring others or those of cruel deeds when they are 
actually committing them—for who is without fault? (Hin-
duism. Ramayana, Yuddha Kanda 115). 
No original moral concept of any significance can be found in 
the New Testament. In the early twentieth century, historian 
Joseph McCabe noted: "The sentiments attributed to Christ are 
. . . already found in the Old Testament. . . . They were familiar in 
the Jewish schools, and to all the Pharisees, long before the time 
of Christ, as they were familiar in all the civilizations of the 
earth—Egyptian, Babylonian, and Persian, Greek and Hindu."10 
As with the Bible, the Qur'an contains many sentiments that 
most of us would classify as commendable. It tells Muslims to be 
kind to their parents, not to steal from orphans, not to lend 
money at excess interest, to help the needy, and not to kill their 
children unless it is necessary. 
But, again, these are not original moral principles. In the 
scriptures and other teachings of the great monotheisms we find 
a repetition of common ideals that arose during the gradual evo-
lution of human societies, as they became more civilized, devel-
oped rational thinking processes, and discovered how to live 
together in greater harmony. The evidence points to a source 
other than the revelations claimed in these scriptures. 

200 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
THE GOOD SOCIETY 
Not only personal behavior but also societal behavior is suppos-
edly regulated by God. But, once again, we can find no evidence for 
this. One of the prevailing myths in modern America is that the 
nation was founded on "Christian principles." However, the 
United States Constitution is a secular document that contains no 
reference to God, Jesus, Christianity, salvation, or any other reli-
gious teaching. Most of the early presidents were not fervent Chris-
tians and based their commitments to freedom, democracy, and 
justice on Enlightenment philosophy rather than biblical sources. 
We often hear, especially from American politicians, that our 
legal system is founded on the Ten Commandments. Attempts 
have been made to display the Ten Commandments in public facil-
ities such as courthouses, which the courts have so far disallowed. 
But, we need to read what the commandments actually say. 
Since there are several versions, let me present a simplified 
wording with religious language omitted:11 
The Ten Commandments 
1. Have no other gods before me. 
2. Make no images of anything in heaven, Earth, or the sea, 
and do not worship or labor for them. 
3. Do not use the name of your God in vain. 
4. Do no work on the Sabbath. 
5. Honor your parents. 
6. Do not kill. 
7. Do not commit adultery. 
8. Do not steal. 
9. Do not give false testimony against another. 
10. Do not desire another's wife or anything that belongs to 
another. 

DO OUR VALUES COME FROM GOD? 201 
Only commandments 6, 8, and 9 (the numbering is different for 
Catholics and Protestants) can be found in the laws of any 
modern nation. Killing, stealing, and perjury are illegal—except 
when done by the government. While adultery is normally con-
sidered immoral, it is not generally illegal. 
The Old Testament contains many examples of killings per-
formed under God's orders. The only way this can be reconciled 
with commandment 6 is to assume that the proscription against 
killing must be restricted, say, only to your particular tribe rather 
than all humanity. 
And, how many believers realize they are breaking command-
ment 2 every time they take a photograph or draw a picture? How 
many would stop if that were pointed out to them? 
The restrictions imposed by the Ten Commandments can be 
found in other civilizations predating the time of Moses. Further-
more, it is clear from the above list that most of these restrictions 
are irrelevant to modern life and hardly form the basis for any 
existing legal system. Indeed, the Code of Hammurabi (c. 1780 
BCE) represents a considerably more significant historical step in 
the development of laws of justice, containing not merely 10 but 
282 detailed commandments.12 Perhaps these should be dis-
played on courthouse steps. 
Or, another option would be the Laws of Solon. Solon (d. 
558 BCE) was an Athenian who is regarded as the founder of 
Western democracy and the first man in Western history to record 
a written constitution. That constitution eliminated birth as a 
basis for government office and created democratic assemblies 
open to all male citizens, such that no law could be passed 
without the majority vote of all. (Equal rights for women were 
still a long way off.) American democracy owes far more to Solon 
than the crude rules of the Hebrews.13 
Christendom and Islam have a long history of authoritari-
anism with little disposition toward individual freedom and 
justice. Nowhere in the Bible can you discover the principles 

202 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
upon which modern democracies and justice systems are 
founded. 
Slavery provides another example where the Bible hardly 
forms a model for our modern free societies. The Old Testament 
not only condones slavery but actually regulates its practice: 
When you buy a Hebrew slave, he shall serve six years, and in 
the seventh he shall go out free, for nothing. (Exod. 21:2, 
Revised Standard Version) 
If his master gives him a wife and she bears him sons or daugh-
ters, the wife and her children shall be her master's and he shall 
go out alone. (Exod. 21:4, Revised Standard Version) 
Jesus had many opportunities to disavow slavery. He never 
did. St. Paul reaffirms the practice: "Bid slaves to be submissive to 
their masters and to give satisfaction in every respect" (Titus 2:9). 
Prior to the Civil War, the Bible was widely used to justify 
slavery in the United States. Baptist leader and slave owner 
Richard Furman (d. 1825) laid the foundation for the biblical 
arguments that would be made in support of slavery leading up 
to the Civil War. While president of the State Baptist Convention, 
Furman wrote to the governor of South Carolina, "The right of 
holding slaves is clearly established in the Holy Scriptures, both 
by precept and example."14 Furman University in Greenville, 
South Carolina, founded in 1826, was named for Richard 
Furman; his writings can be found in its archives. 
Another prominent churchman, Alexander Campbell (d. 
1866) wrote, "There is not one verse in the Bible inhibiting 
slavery, but many regulating it. It is not then, we conclude, 
immoral."15 It is to be noted that Campbell declared himself 
against slavery, so once again we have a Christian following his 
own conscience despite what the scriptures say. 
Jefferson Davis, president of the Confederacy, claimed to 

DO OUR VALUES COME FROM GOD? 203 
follow what the scriptures said: "[Slavery] was established by 
decree of Almighty God ... it is sanctioned in the Bible, in both 
Testaments, from Genesis to Revelation."16 
While Christians in the South held onto their slaves as long 
as they could, secular humanist Richard Randolph of Virginia 
began freeing his in 1791.17 Popes and other fathers of the 
Catholic Church owned slaves as late as 1800. Jesuits in colonial 
Maryland and nuns in Europe and Latin America owned slaves. 
The Church did not condemn slavery until 1888, after every 
Christian nation had abolished the practice.18 
Distinguished Catholic scholar John T. Noonan Jr. points out 
that the Church has traditionally denied that it has made any 
changes in the moral teachings of Jesus and the apostles.19 
Slavery and other examples he presents amply illustrate that the 
Church's teaching does indeed change with the times. 
Now, the campaign to end slavery in the United States and else-
where was led by Christians, to their everlasting credit. However, the 
abolitionists clearly were not guided by the literal words of scripture 
but by their own interpretations and innate senses of a higher good. 
Finally, let me just briefly mention the historical oppression 
of women. St. Paul said, "Wives, be subject to your husbands, as 
to the Lord. For the husband is the head of the wife as Christ is 
the head of the church, his body, and is himself its Savior" (Eph. 
5:22-23, Revised Standard Version). Western societies finally 
have begun to recognize the irrationality and injustice of treating 
women as lesser human beings, providing a clear, recent example 
of how our notions of right and wrong evolve independent of 
and often contrary to religious teachings. 
HOLY HORRORS 
The Old Testament is filled with atrocities committed in the 
name of God. These are rarely mentioned in Sunday school, but 

204 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
anyone can pick up a Bible and read them for herself. I will just 
mention some of the worst: "Now therefore, kill every male 
among the little ones, and kill every woman that hath known 
man by lying with him. But all the young girls who have not 
known a man by lying with him, keep alive for yourselves" 
(Num. 31:17-18, Revised Standard Version). 
At another time, Moses orders three thousand men put to the 
sword on God's authority: "And he said to them, 'Thus says the 
Lord God of Israel, "Put every man his sword on his side, and go 
to and fro from gate to gate throughout the camp, and slay every 
man his companion, and every man his neighbor"'" (Exod. 
32:27, Revised Standard Version). 
Most Christians dismiss this and other biblical carnage as 
anachronistic and imagine such orders were eliminated with the 
coming of Jesus. However, in the New Testament, Jesus frequently 
reaffirms the laws of the prophets: "Think not that I have come to 
abolish the law, or the prophets: I have come not to abolish them 
but to fulfil them" (Matt. 5:17, Revised Standard Version). The 
theist may respond that the above quotation is not a law but 
merely the report of an event, but the stories of the Bible are sup-
posed to provide guides to proper behavior. 
Christians like to pride themselves on their "family values" 
and their desire for peace in the world. No doubt, most are 
devoted to their families and are upright members of society. But 
they fail to remember that Jesus said: "Do not think that I have 
come to send peace on earth: I have not come to send peace, but 
a sword. For I have come to set a man against his father, a 
daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her 
mother-in-law; and a man's foes will be those of his own house-
hold. He who loves father or mother more than me is not worthy 
of me; and he who loves son or daughter more than me is not 
worthy of me" (Matt. 10:34-37, Revised Standard Version). 
The history of Christendom abounds with violence sanc-
tioned by the Church and thereby defined as divinely inspired 

DO OUR VALUES COME FROM GOD? 205 
"good." This divine inspiration is not limited to scripture but 
continually available to the specially anointed. Pope Urban II (d. 
1099) assured the medieval knights of the Crusades that the 
killing of infidels was not a sin. And this did not apply just to 
Muslims in the Holy Land. The Cathar faith in southern France, 
which was apparently based on the notion of dual gods that 
appeared earlier in Zoroastrianism and Manichaeism,20 was bru-
tally suppressed in the Albigensian Crusade in the thirteenth cen-
tury. When the besieged Cathar city of Beziers fell in 1209, sol-
diers reportedly asked their papal adviser how to distinguish the 
faithful from the infidel among the captives. He recommended: 
"Kill them all. God will know his own." Nearly twenty thousand 
were slaughtered—many first blinded, mutilated, dragged behind 
horses, or used for target practice.21 
Incidentally, until recently the term crusade was used to refer 
to a Christian holy war, the equivalent of the Islamic jihad. Lloyd 
George's book of speeches given during his stint as British prime 
minister during the First World War was called The Great Crusade. 
General Dwight Eisenhower's memoir of the Second World War 
was called Crusade in Europe. The term crusade only fell into 
disuse recently, when shortly after September 11, 2001, President 
George W. Bush used it to refer to the war on terrorism and was 
warned off by his advisers because of its negative connotation for 
Muslims.22 Of course, the Muslim terrorists themselves felt they 
were obeying God's command to engage in jihad. 
The Qur'an is as bloodthirsty as the Old Testament. 
Numerous references can be found for the horrible fate that 
awaits nonbelievers. However, it is Allah himself who generally 
metes out that punishment: "Lo! Those who disbelieve Our rev-
elations, We shall expose them to the Fire. As often as their skins 
are consumed We shall exchange them for fresh skins that they 
may taste the torment. Lo! Allah is ever Mighty, Wise" (Qur'an 
4:56). Muslims are enjoined to kill infidels wherever they find 
them, but only those who initiate hostilities: 

206 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
Fight in the way of Allah against those who fight against you, 
but begin not hostilities. Lo! Allah loveth not aggressors. Do 
not fight wars of aggression. And slay them wherever ye find 
them, and drive them out of the places whence they drove you 
out, for persecution is worse than slaughter. And fight not with 
them at the Inviolable Place of Worship until they first attack 
you there, but if they attack you (there) then slay them. Such is 
the reward of disbelievers. But if they desist, then lo! Allah is 
Forgiving, Merciful. And fight them until persecution is no 
more, and religion is for Allah. But if they desist, then let there 
be no hostility except against wrong-doers. (Qur'an 2:190-193) 
Of course, in every religion there are a few fanatics who 
follow to the letter what they regard as God's will: 
• Yigal Amir, who assassinated Israeli prime minister Yitzhak 
Rabin in 1995, was an extremely religious Jew who stated 
in court, "Everything I did, I did for God."23 
• Paul Hill, who murdered abortion provider Dr. John 
Britton in Florida in 1994, made the following statement 
just before his execution in 2003: "I feel very honored that 
they are most likely going to kill me for what I did. I'm cer-
tainly, to be quite honest, I'm expecting a great reward in 
heaven for my obedience."24 
• Mohammed Bouyeri, the Muslim extremist who killed 
Dutch filmmaker Theo van Gogh in 2004, declared in his 
trial, "What moved me to do what I did was purely my faith. 
. . . I was motivated by the law that commands me to cut off 
the head of anyone who insults Allah and his prophet. "25 
But, thankfully, they are the exception. Furthermore, each of 
these fanatics would be hard-pressed to demonstrate where 
exactly in their scriptures were they commanded to commit their 
dreadful acts. 

DO OUR VALUES COME FROM GOD? 207 
Of course, no one of conscience today would think it moral 
to kill everyone captured in battle, saving only the virgin girls for 
their pleasure. Few modern Christians take the commands of the 
Bible literally. While they claim to appeal to scriptures and the 
teachings of the great founders and leaders of their faiths, they 
pick and choose what to follow—guided by some personal inner 
light. And this is the same inner light that guides nonbelievers. 
AN INNER LIGHT 
If God does not define what is good, who does? How are theists 
supposed to decide what is good? 
Most do not go so far as to say that they hear it directly from 
God. While they claim to appeal to scriptures and the teachings 
of the great founders and leaders of their faiths, they pick and 
choose what to follow—guided by some personal inner light. 
A good example is the Catholic community in the United 
States. Shortly after the death of Pope John Paul II in 2005, the 
New York Times reported: 
The roughly 65 million Catholics in the United States no longer 
have as distinctive an identity as they did a generation ago, and 
as they assimilated more thoroughly into American society, 
their views on social and moral issues came to mirror those of 
other Americans. 
"Catholics as a whole occupy the mainstream of American life, 
when 50 or 60 years ago, they were on the periphery of society," 
said John Green, director of the Ray C. Bliss Institute of Applied 
Politics at the University of Akron in Ohio and an expert on 
religion and politics. 

208 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
As a result, the Vatican's teachings on a number of subjects, 
including contraception, the ordination of women, and homo-
sexuality, are out of step with the beliefs and lifestyles of most 
American Catholics. But the Americans mostly find a way to stay 
in their faith by adhering to values most important to them and 
quietly ignoring those they disagree with.26 
The Bible is not clear on what may be killed and what may 
not be. It does not explicitly sanction or forbid the killing of a 
fetus or stem cell. And, it certainly sanctions the killing of ene-
mies, specifically those who do not worship Yahweh. 
In all these cases, believers clearly read the Bible to find sup-
port for moral principles that they have already developed from 
some other source. 
Christians draw Jesus Christ in their own image. As philosopher 
George Smith explains, "Because of the theological obligation to 
endorse the precepts of Jesus, Christian theologians have a strong 
tendency to read their own moral conviction into the ethics of Jesus. 
Jesus is made to say what theologians think he should have said."27 
Philosopher Walter Kaufmann agrees, "Most Christians gerry-
mander the Gospels and carve an idealized self-portrait out of the 
texts: Pierre van Passen's Jesus is a socialist, Fosdick's is a liberal, 
while the ethic of Reinhold Niebuhr's Jesus agrees, not surpris-
ingly, with Niebuhr's own."28 As George Bernard Shaw com-
mented, "No man ever believes that the Bible means what it says. 
He is always convinced that it says what he means."29 
Every time a theologian reinterprets Moses, Jesus, or 
Muhammad, he further reinforces my crucial point: we humans 
decide what is good by standards lying outside the scriptures. 
Believers are guided by their consciences in deciding for 
themselves what is right and wrong, just as are nonbelievers. The 
basic notions of good and evil that we all share—believers and 
nonbelievers—are, for the most part, common and universal. 
Psychological tests indicate that there are no significant differ-
ences in the moral sense between atheists and theists.30 

DO OUR VALUES COME FROM GOD? 209 
In short, the empirical facts indicate that most humans are 
moral animals whose sense of right and wrong conflicts with 
many of the teachings of the great monotheistic religions. We can 
safely conclude they did not originate at that source. 
NATURAL MORALITY 
If human morals and values do not arise out of divine command, 
then where do they come from? They come from our common 
humanity. They can be properly called humanistic.31 
A considerable literature exists on the natural (biological, cul-
tural, evolutionary) origins of morality.32 Darwin saw the evolu-
tionary advantage of cooperation and altruism. Modern thinkers 
have elaborated on this observation, showing in detail how our 
moral sense can have arisen naturally during the development of 
modern humanity. 
We can even see signs of moral, or protomoral behavior in 
animals. Vampire bats share food. Apes and monkeys comfort 
members of their group who are upset and work together to get 
food. Dolphins push sick members of a pod to the surface to get 
air. Whales will put themselves in harm's way to help a wounded 
member of their group. Elephants try their best to save injured 
members of their families.33 
In these examples we glimpse the beginnings of the morality 
that advanced to higher levels with human evolution. You may 
call animal morality instinctive, built into the genes of animals 
by biological evolution. But when we include cultural evolution 
as well, we have a plausible mechanism for the development of 
human morality—by Darwinian selection. 
It seems likely that this is where we humans have learned our 
sense of right and wrong. We have taught it to ourselves. 

210 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
THE MORAL ARGUMENT 
Since Thomas Aquinas, theologians have claimed that the very 
fact that humans have a moral conscience can be taken as evi-
dence for the existence of God: 
There must be something which is to all beings the cause of 
their being, goodness and every other perfection: and this we 
call God. 
—Thomas Aquinas34 
Contemporary Christian apologist William Lane Craig puts it this 
way, "If we can in some measure be good, then it follows that 
God exists."35 
However, I have turned that argument on its head. The very 
fact that humans have a common moral conscience can be taken 
as evidence against the existence of God. 
As we have seen from an examination of the empirical evi-
dence, God cannot be the source of commonly accepted human 
morals and values. If he were, then we would expect to see evi-
dence in the superior moral behavior of believers compared to 
nonbelievers. Even if you deny that any discrepancy exists between 
the behavior of believers and what is taught in their scriptures, the 
empirical fact that nonbelievers show themselves to be no less vir-
tuous provides strong evidence that morals and values come from 
humanity itself. Observable human and societal behaviors look 
just as they can be expected to look if there is no God. 
NOTES 
1. Phillip E. Johnson, Darwin on Trial (Downers Grove, IL: Inter-
Varsity Press, 1991). 
2. According to a March 5, 1997, letter to Rod Swift from Denise 

DO OUR VALUES COME FROM GOD? 211 
Golumbaski, research analyst, Federal Bureau of Prisons, online at 
http://www.holysmoke.org/icr-pri.htm (accessed February 5, 2006). 
3. Ruth Miller, Larry S. Miller, and Mary R. Langenbrunner, "Reli-
giosity and Child Sexual Abuse: A Risk Factor Assessment," Journal of 
Child Sexual Abuse 6, no. 4 (1997): 14-34. 
4. Michael Franklin and Marian Hetherly, "How Fundamentalism 
Affects Society," Humanist 57 (September/October 1997): 25. 
5. Ronald J. Sider, "The Scandal of the Evangelical Conscience," 
Christianity Today 11, no. 1 (January/February 2005): 8, http://www  
.christianitytoday.com/bc/2005/001/3.8.html (accessed 
March 
22, 
2005). 
6. Solomon Asch, Social Psychology (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall, 1952), pp. 378-79. 
7. Theodore Schick Jr., "Is Morality a Matter of Taste? Why Profes-
sional Ethicists Think That Morality Is Not Purely Subjective," Free 
Inquiry 18, no. 4 (1998): 32-34. 
8. For other historical statements of the Golden Rule, see Michael 
Shermer, The Science of Good & Evil: Why People Cheat, Gossip, Care, 
Share, and Follow the Golden Rule (New York: Times Books, 2004), p. 23. 
9. Thanks to Eleanor Binnings for providing these quotations. 
10. Joseph McCabe, The Sources of Morality of the Gospels (London: 
Watts and Co., 1914), p. 209, as quoted in George Smith, Atheism: The 
Case Against God (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1989), p. 317. 
11. Richard Carrier, "The Real Ten Commandments," Internet Infi-
dels Library (2000), http://www.infidels.org/library/modern/features/  
2000/carrier2.html (accessed August 14, 2005). 
12. The text of the Code of Hammurabi, translated by L. W. King, 
online at http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/ancient/hamcode.html  
(accessed April 3, 2005). Commentaries by Charles F. Home (1915) 
and the Encyclopaedia Brittanica entry, 11th ed. (1910), written by Claude 
Hermann Walter Johns, also can be found at this site. 
13. Carrier, "The Real Ten Commandments." 
14. Richard Furman, "Exposition of the View of the Baptists Rela-
tive to the Colored Population of the United States to the Governor of 
South Carolina 1822," transcribed by T. Lloyd Benson from the original 
text in the South Carolina Baptist Historical Collection, Furman Uni-

212 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
versity, Greenville, South Carolina. Available at http://alpha.furman  
.edu/~benson/docs/rcd-fmnl.htm (accessed December 1, 2004), p. 6. 
15. Alexander Campbell, "Our Position to American Slavery—No. 
V," Millennial Harbinger, ser. 3, vol. 2 (1845): 193. 
16. Jefferson Davis, "Inaugural Address as Provisional President of 
the Confederacy," Montgomery, AL, February 18, 1861, Confederate States 
of America Congressional Journal 1 (1861): 64-66; quoted in Dunbar Row-
land, Jefferson Davis's Place in History as Revealed in His Letters, Papers, and 
Speeches, vol. 1 (Jackson, MS: Torgerson Press, 1923), p. 286. 
17. Melvin Patrick Ely, Israel on the Appomattox: A Southern Experi-
ment in Black Freedom from the 1790s through the Civil War (New York: 
Alfred A. Knopf, 2005). 
18. John T. Noonan Jr., A Church That Can and Cannot Change: The 
Development of Catholic Moral Teaching (Notre Dame, IN: University of 
Notre Dame Press, 2005). 
19. Ibid. 
20. Jean Markale, Montsegur and the Mystery of the Cathars, trans. 
Jon Graham (Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions, 2003). 
21. For this and other tales of atrocities in the name of religion, see 
James A. Haught, Holy Horrors: An Illustrated History of Religious Murder 
and Madness (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1990). 
22. Joan Acocella, "Holy Smoke; What Were the Crusades Really 
About?" New Yorker, December 13, 2004. 
23. CNN Report, March 27, 1996, http://www.cnn.com/WORLD/  
9603/amir_verdict/ (accessed December 9, 2004). 
24. Associated Press, September 2, 2003, http://www.fadp.org/  
news/TampaBayOnline-20030903.htm (accessed December 9, 2004). 
25. Trial statement, Associated Press, July 12, 2005, http://www  
.guardian.co.uk/worldlatest/story/0,1280,-5136448,00.html 
(accessed 
July 20, 2005). 
26. Dean E. Murphy and Neela Banjeree, "Catholics in U.S. Keep 
Faith, but Live with Contradictions," New York Times, April 11, 2005. 
27. Smith, Atheism: The Case Against God, p. 313. 
28. Walter Kaufmann, The Faith of a Heretic, paperback ed. (New 
York: Doubleday, 1963), p. 216. 
29. From a Saturday Review article, April 16, 1895. 

DO OUR VALUES COME FROM GOD? 213 
30. Marc Hauser and Peter Singer, "Morality without Religion," 
Free Inquiry 26, no. 1 (December 2005/January 2006): 18-19. 
31. Paul Kurtz, Forbidden Fruit: The Ethics of Humanism (Amherst, 
NY: Prometheus Books, 1988). 
32. Robert Axelrod, The Evolution of Cooperation (New York: Basic 
Books, 1984); Richard D. Alexander, The Biology of Moral Systems 
(Hawthorne, NY: Aldine de Gruyter, 1987); Robert Wright, The Moral 
Animal: Why We Are the Way We Are: The New Science of Evolutionary Psy-
chology (New York: Vintage Books, 1994); Frans B. M. de Wall, Good 
Natured: The Origins of Right and Wrong in Humans and Other Animals 
(Cambridge, MS: Harvard University Press, 1996); Larry Arnhart, Dar-
winian Natural Right; The Biological Ethics of Human Nature (Albany, NY: 
State University of New York Press, 1998); Leonard D. Katz, ed., Evolu-
tionary Origins of Morality: Cross-Disciplinary Perspectives (Bowling Green, 
OH: Imprint Academic, 2000); Jessica C. Flack and Frans B. M. de Wall, 
"'Any Animal Whatever' Darwinian Building Blocks of Morality in Mon-
keys and Apes," Journal of Consciousness Studies 7, nos. 1-2 (2000): 1-29; 
Donald M. Broom, The Evolution of Morality and Religion (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2003); Shermer, The Science of Good & Evil. 
33. Shermer, The Science of Good & Evil, pp. 26-31. 
34. Thomas Aquinas, Fourth Way in Summa Theologica. 
35. William Lane Craig, "The Absurdity of Life without God," 
http://www.hisdefense.org/audio/wc_audio.html (accessed March 9, 
2004). 

Chapter 8 
THE ARGUMENT FROM EVIL 
With or without religion, good people can behave well and had people 
can do evil; hut for good people to do evil—that takes religion. 
—Steven Weinberg1 
THE PROBLEM OF EVIL 
A
lthough the ancient problem of evil is usually discussed in 
philosophical and theological rather than scientific terms, 
it is so important to the debate over the existence of God that I 
have included a discussion in this chapter for the sake of com-
pleteness. Besides, we might argue that a scientific element does 
enter in the empirical fact that very bad things, such as gratuitous 
suffering, happen in the world. 
The problem of evil can be formally stated as follows: 
215 

216 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
1. If God exists, then the attributes of God are consistent with 
the existence of evil. 
2. The attributes of God are not consistent with the existence 
of evil. 
3. Therefore, God does not and cannot exist.2 
The primary attributes that apply here I have designated as 
"3O"—omnibenevolence, omnipotence, and omniscience. Recall 
that these attributes were not included explicitly in what I called 
the "scientific God model" (see chap. 1) since the arguments pre-
sented in this book are not limited to a god with these qualities. 
Nevertheless, the traditional God of the great monotheisms is 
assumed to have the 3O attributes, which leads to an enormous 
logical difficulty that theologians have wrestled with over cen-
turies without success. How can the 3O God be reconciled with 
the existence of evil? 
The attempt to defend the notion of a God of infinite good-
ness, power, and wisdom in light of the undeniable existence of 
pain and suffering in the world is called theodicy. So far, this 
attempt has proven unsatisfactory in the judgment of the 
majority of philosophers and other scholars who have not 
already committed themselves to God as an act of faith. 
The problem of evil remains the most powerful argument 
against God. But the argument collapses once any of the three 
omni- (3O) attributes are relaxed. 
W H A T IS EVIL? 
The argument from evil starts with the empirical fact that evil 
(bad stuff) exists in the world (a scientific statement) and shows 
that a god who is at the same time omnibenevolent, omnipotent, 
and omniscient—the 3O God—cannot exist. 
We need to define evil before we can go much further. First we 

THE ARGUMENT FROM EVIL 
217 
must confront what is called the Euthyphro dilemma.3 Does God 
forbid us to do certain acts because they are evil, or is an act evil 
because God defines it as such? 
Many of the same empirical facts about human behavior dis-
cussed in the previous chapter, which lead us to conclude that 
good exists independent of God, also apply to the case of evil. 
Evil does not seem to require the existence of God. As philoso-
pher Kai Nielsen writes, "God or no God, torturing the innocents 
is vile. More generally, even if we can make nothing of the con-
cept of God, we can readily come to appreciate . . . that, if any-
thing is evil, inflicting or tolerating unnecessary and pointless 
suffering is evil, especially when something can be done about 
it."4 An omnibenevolent, omnipotent, and omniscient God can 
do something about it. 
Now, an easy escape from the argument from evil can be 
achieved by relaxing one or more of the three Os. For example, we 
can imagine a God who is not omniscient. Such a God would not 
always know when evil happened and so could not act to avoid it. 
Similarly, a God who is not omnipotent may be unable to 
always stop evil. The latter possibility was the answer Rabbi 
Harold Kushner gave to the problem of evil in his best-selling 
book When Bad Things Happen to Good People.5 Such a God can 
have a pleasant, human face, such as George Burns in the film 
Oh, God!6 Burns, playing God, admits he isn't perfect. He says he 
would do things differently the next time he creates a universe. 
For one thing, he would not give the avocado such a large pit. 
In a 1995 paper "Evil and Omnipotence,"7 J. J. Mackie avers 
that adequate solutions to the problem of evil exist if you relax 
3O, but he demonstrates the fallaciousness of several claimed 
solutions that retain the 3O God: 
1. "Good cannot exist without evil" or "Evil is necessary as a 
counterpart to good." 
2. "Evil is necessary as a means to good." 

218 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
3. "The universe is better with some evil in it than it could be 
if there were no evil." 
4. "Evil is due to human free will." 
(Quotation marks in original.) Mackie shows that each of these 
solutions still implies a restriction on God's omnipotence. If God 
cannot create good without evil, that is a limit on his power. If 
God gives humans free will, then that is a restriction on his con-
trol of events. 
Mackie gives a long rebuttal to argument 3 above. However, 
note that it is an example of the definitional problem mentioned 
in chapter 1. How do we define "better" so that a universe with 
more evil is better than another universe? We could just as well 
define the better universe as one with no evil. 
One way that evil can coexist with omnipotence is if the evil 
is what philosophers call a "necessary truth." This is a statement 
that is true by virtue of its essential character. An example of such 
a statement is 2 + 2 is not equal to 5. This is true by virtue of the 
essential nature of numbers. Likewise, the statement that suf-
fering is evil could be a necessary truth over which God has no 
power despite his omnipotence.8 
Even so, this just means that God cannot simply define suf-
fering as good. It does not prevent him from utilizing his power 
to eliminate or at least alleviate suffering. 
Theologians have attempted to solve the problem of evil by 
pointing out that pain is a necessary part of life. Let's exempt such 
pain from our definition of evil and limit it to unnecessary pain. 
While pain warns us of disease and injury and prompts us to seek 
treatment, why must that pain persist, often unbearably, after 
treatment fails and we await death? 
Another reason given for suffering is that it helps us to be com-
passionate. As theologian Richard Swinburne has put it, "If the 
world was without any natural evil and suffering we wouldn't have 
the opportunity ... to show courage, patience and sympathy."9 

THE ARGUMENT FROM EVIL 
219 
But do we really need "natural evil" to encourage courage and 
sympathy? We can imagine a world in which the only pain was 
the necessary pain described above. A courageous act, such as 
giving up your life to save another's could be done in the absence 
of pain. Furthermore, many of the discomforts of life are not 
"natural evils" but necessities of growth—good in the benefits 
that accrue. For example, we can show sympathy to a child strug-
gling through a difficult mathematics problem. 
Does God really need so much pain and suffering to achieve 
his ends? Is there any conceivable good purpose behind so many 
children dying every day of starvation and disease? How are they 
helped by the rest of us becoming more sympathetic? 
Yet another common theistic defense for the problem of evil 
is that God has given us the freedom to choose to commit evil. 
This may apply to the suffering that results from human acts; but, 
great as that may be, much unnecessary suffering is of natural 
rather than human origin. Examples include most diseases and 
natural disasters, such as the 2004 tsunami in Asia that killed 
hundreds of thousands of people. Indeed these are called "acts of 
God." And what is the purpose of the suffering of animals? Per-
haps we can be sympathetic to that, but why is so much suffering 
necessary? And, what about the hundreds of millions of living 
things that died terrible deaths long before humans appeared on 
the scene? 
In a department seminar in 2005 my University of Colorado 
colleague, philosopher Michael Huemer, provided a concise sum-
mary of current responses to the problem of evil and gave his per-
sonal analysis of why they all fail.10 In the following, he is quoted 
exactly on these responses, but I give (in italics) my own short 
summary of reasons for their failure. Please excuse some repeti-
tiveness here. 

220 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
Summary of Attempts to Reconcile a 
30 God with the Existence of Evil: 
1. "Evil is a product of human free will. God gave us free will 
because free will is a very valuable thing. But he cannot 
both give us free will and prevent us from doing evil." 
Not all evil is the product of human free will, for 
example, natural disasters. If you redefine evil to 
include only human-caused ills, you still have to deal 
with the unnecessary suffering of natural disasters that 
are under God's control. 
2. "Some amount of suffering is necessary for humans to 
develop important moral virtues. Some moral virtues can 
only exist in response to suffering or other bad things. 
Examples: courage, charity, strength of will." 
This could be accomplished with a whole lot less suf-
fering than exists in the world. 
3. "Good and evil exist only as contrasts to each other. There-
fore, if evil were eliminated, good would automatically be 
eliminated as well." 
Good can exist independent of evil. Winning a race is 
good, but losing it is not evil. Buying a toy for your 
granddaughter is good, but not doing so is not evil when 
she already has a playroom full of toys. 
4. "Slightly different from #3: If evil were eliminated, then 
we wouldn't know that everything was good, because we 
can only perceive things when there is contrast." 

THE ARGUMENT FROM EVIL 
221 
Even if we did not identify something as good, it still 
can be good. And it still can be good even if we have no 
experience of bad. My grandchildren know that having 
toys is good, although they have never had no toys and 
so have not had the opposing experience. 
5. "Perhaps God has a different conception of evil from ours. 
Maybe what we think of as evil is good." 
We trust our own judgment on the evil of gratuitous suf-
fering. No one can conceive of a reason God could have 
for allowing so much suffering. Why should we worship 
a God who allows acts that we regard as unspeakable? If 
God has a different conception of evil from ours, then so 
much the worse for God. He is then nothing more than 
an evil potentate. He might have power, but he has no 
moral authority and no one should worship him. "Good" 
and "evil" are our words and they name our concepts. It 
is confused thinking to suppose that some God's opinion 
would make any difference in our concepts. 
6. "Perhaps there is some underlying purpose served by all 
the evil in the world, but we humans are not smart enough 
to comprehend it. Have faith." 
What could that possibly be? Again, why should we 
blindly accept acts that go against our very nature? Why 
would God give us a nature that finds his actions so 
reprehensible? 
7. "God is not responsible for evil. The Devil is." 
The Judeo-Christian-Islamic God is stronger than the 
devil and so is still ultimately responsible. 

222 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
8. "If we simply weaken the definition of God, then the exis-
tence of God may be compatible with the existence of evil. 
Thus, for example, he might be unable to instantly elimi-
nate all the evil." 
While the Judeo-Christian-Islamic God described in 
scriptures is hardly benevolent, the faithful of these reli-
gions are far more likely to ignore unpleasant scriptural 
passages than abandon belief in a benevolent God. 
A huge philosophical and theological literature can be found 
on the problem of evil, which need not be summarized here. As 
throughout this book, the case will be presented as a scientific 
one. We have the undeniable empirical fact of considerable suf-
fering in the world and have no reason to believe that the great 
bulk of that suffering is necessary. We have the hypothesis of a 
powerful God who is fully capable of alleviating all but the surely 
minimal suffering that is absolutely necessary. Many theologians 
argue that God has his own reasons for so much suffering, which 
then is, by definition, good. Our deepest instincts disagree and 
recognize unnecessary suffering as evil. 
AN EVIL GOD? 
We have seen that relaxing one of the Os, such as omniscience or 
omnipotence, can defeat the argument from evil against the exis-
tence of the 30 God. We can also relax omnibenevolence. 
As should be clear to anyone who simply sits down and reads 
the Bible or Qur'an, the God described in these scriptures is 
hardly benevolent by normal human standards. Still, if you make 
Euthyphro's choice, then whatever God does is good by defini-
tion. In that case, for example, genocide and slavery are good. 
In the previous chapter we saw that the Old Testament con-

THE ARGUMENT FROM EVIL 
223 
dones slavery. It also sanctions genocide: "Observe what I com-
mand you this day. Behold, I will drive out before you the Amor-
ites, the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Per'izzites, the Hivites, and 
the Jeb'usites. Take heed to yourself, lest you make a covenant 
with the inhabitants of the land whither you go, lest it become a 
snare in the midst of you. You shall tear down their altars, and 
break their pillars, and cut down their Ashe'rim" (Exod. 
34:11-13, Revised Standard Version). 
Indeed, in the Old Testament, God admits he is the source of 
evil: "I form light and create darkness, I make weal and create 
woe, I am the LORD, who do all these things" (Isa. 45:7, Revised 
Standard Version). 
The God of the Bible, if he exists, is not omnibenevolent by 
commonly accepted standards. At best, he is more like the dual 
God of Zoroastrianism, Manichaeism, and perhaps other reli-
gions—part good and part evil—or two separate but equal gods 
(or a pantheon of gods). 
Interestingly, many Christians seem to regard Satan as a 
source of evil independent of God. Immediately after the Sep-
tember 11, 2001, tragedy, many (though by no means all) of the 
Christian clergy blamed it on the devil and not God.11 This 
implies that either the devil is an equally powerful, autonomous 
separate God, which is no longer monotheism, or a part of God 
himself, which is no longer omnibenevolence. 
If the theology of a dual god had survived, then we would 
have no problem of evil. Or, to put it better, evil would be a 
problem but we could blame it on God. However, monotheistic 
Christianity (albeit with the Trinity) had become the dominant 
religion in Europe in the fourth century when it gained the favor 
of Emperor Constantine (a pretty evil character in his own 
right).12 Over the centuries, other variations were declared 
heretical and obliterated. In the doctrine that developed, Satan is 
still the creation of God but a fallen angel rather than a coequal 
deity. In that case, God is still the creator of evil. 

224 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
We are once again confronted with the undeniable fact that 
our instincts about good and evil take precedence over supposed 
divine commands, when those commands offend both the 
common sense and the reason that has been cultivated over the 
centuries as humankind has gradually and incompletely evolved 
from brutish predecessors. 
In the language of science, the empirical fact of unnecessary 
suffering in the world is inconsistent with a god who is omnis-
cient, omnipotent, and omnibenevolent. Observations of human 
and animal suffering look just as they can be expected to look if 
there is no God. 
NOTES 
1. In a dialogue on religion with other scientists in 1999, quoted 
from "The Constitution Guarantees Freedom From Religion" an open 
letter to US vice presidential candidate Senator Joseph Lieberman, 
issued by the Freedom From Religion Foundation on August 28, 2000. 
2. Michael Martin and Ricki Monnier, eds., The Impossibility of God 
(Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2003), p. 59. 
3. The dilemma is presented in Plato's Euthyphro, which is dis-
cussed in many philosophy books. 
4. Kai Nielsen, Ethics without God, rev. ed. (Amherst, NY: Prome-
theus Books, 1990), p. 10. 
: 
5. Harold S. Kushner, When Bad Things Happen to Good People 
(New York: Avon Books, 1987). 
6. Warner Bros., 1977. 
7. J. J. Mackie, "Evil and Omnipotence," Mind 64 (1955): 200-12, 
reprinted in The Impossibility of God, ed. Martin and Monnier, pp. 
61-105. 
8. Erik J. Wielenberg, Value and Virtue in a Godless Universe (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), p. 51. 
9. Julian Baggini and Jeremy Stranghorn, What Philosophers Think 
(London: Continuum, 2003), p. 109. 

THE ARGUMENT FROM EVIL 
225 
10. Michael Huemer, "Some Failed Responses to the Problem of 
Evil," Talk at the Theology Forum, University of Colorado at Boulder, 
February 16, 2005. 
11. See my discussion of religious reactions to the events of Sep-
tember 11, 2001, in Victor J. Stenger, Has Science Found God? The Latest 
Results in the Search for Purpose in the Universe (Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 2003), pp. 9-12. 
12. Jonathan Kirsch, God Against the Gods: The History of the War 
between Monotheism and Polytheism (New York: Viking Compass, 2004). 

Chapter 9 
POSSIBLE AND 
IMPOSSIBLE GODS 
Why would a perfect God create a universe in which such huge 
amounts of suffering occur, when such suffering does not bring into 
existence any of the goods required to absorb the suffering and make 
the situation on balance a good one? 
—Nicholas Everitt1 
DISAGREEING W I T H THE DATA 
I
n this book I have applied the scientific process of hypothe-
sizing models and testing those models against the empirical 
data to the question of God. Now, I am sure to hear the objection 
"science isn't everything." Of course it isn't. However, model 
building is not limited to science but is commonly carried out in 
everyday life, including religious activities. The brain does not 
227 

228 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
have the capacity to save the time, direction, and energy of each 
photon that hits the eyes. Instead it operates on a simplified pic-
ture of objects, be they rocks, trees, or people, assigning them 
general properties that do not encompass every detail.2 Science 
merely objectifies the procedure, communicating by speech and 
writing among individuals who then attempt to reach agreement 
on what they all have seen and how best to represent their collec-
tive observations. 
Religion carries out a similar process, although one in which 
agreement is generally asserted by authority rather than by con-
sensus. From humanity's earliest days, gods have been imagined 
who possessed attributes that people could understand and to 
which they could relate. Gods and spirits took the form of the 
objects of experience: the sun, Earth, moon, animals, and humans. 
The gods of the ancient Egyptians had the form of animals. The 
gods of the ancient Greeks had the form of humans. The God of 
Judaism, Christianity, and Islam has the form of a powerful, auto-
cratic, male king enthroned high above his subjects. Each seems to 
have developed from the culture of the day. If the process con-
tinued on to today, we would all worship cellular phones. 
By dealing in terms of models of God that are based on 
human conceptions, we avoid the objection that the "true" God 
may lie beyond our limited cognitive capabilities. When I 
demonstrate that a particular God is rejected by the data, I am not 
proving that all conceivable gods do not exist. I am simply 
showing beyond a reasonable doubt that a God with the specific, 
hypothesized attributes does not exist. Belief aside, at the very 
minimum the fact that a specific God does not agree with the 
data is cause enough not to assume the existence of that God in 
the practices of everyday life. 
The exact relationship between the elements of scientific 
models and whatever true reality lies out there is not of major 
concern. When scientists have a model that describes the data, 
that is consistent with other established models, and that can be 

POSSIBLE AND IMPOSSIBLE GODS 
229 
put to practical use, what else do they need? The model works 
fine in not only describing the data but also in enabling practical 
applications. It makes absolutely no difference whether or not an 
electron is "real" when we apply the model of electrons flowing 
in an electronic circuit to design some high-tech device. Whatever 
the intrinsic reality, the model describes what we observe, and 
those observations are real enough. 
Similarly, it does not matter from a practical standpoint 
whether the "real" God resembles any of the gods whose empir-
ical consequences we have examined. People do not worship 
abstractions. They worship a God with qualities they can compre-
hend. Since we have shown that a God who answers prayers does 
not agree with the data, then a religious person is wasting her 
time praying for some favor of such a God. If praying worked, the 
effects would be objectively observed. They are not. 
Let me then summarize the gods we have shown to disagree 
with the data. Again, an uppercase G will be used when the attrib-
utes apply specifically to the Judeo-Christian-Islamic God. 
Gods Who Disagree with the Data 
1. A God who is responsible for the complex structure of the 
world, especially living things, fails to agree with empirical 
fact that this structure can be understood to arise from 
simple natural processes and shows none of the expected 
signs of design. Indeed, the universe looks as it should 
look in the absence of design. 
2. A God who has given humans immortal souls fails to 
agree with the empirical facts that human memories and 
personalities are determined by physical processes, that no 
nonphysical or extraphysical powers of the mind can be 
found, and that no evidence exists for an afterlife. 
3. A God whose interactions with humans, including mirac-
ulous interventions, have been reported in scriptures is 

230 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
contradicted by the lack of independent evidence that 
these miraculous events took place and the fact that phys-
ical evidence now convincingly demonstrates that some of 
the most important biblical narratives, such as the Exodus, 
never took place. 
4. A God who miraculously and supernaturally created the 
universe fails to agree with the empirical fact that no viola-
tions of physical law were required to produce the universe, 
its laws, or its existence rather than nonexistence. It also 
fails to agree with established theories, based on empirical 
facts, which indicate that the universe began with max-
imum entropy and so bears no imprint of a creator. 
5. A God who fine-tuned the laws and constants of physics 
for life, in particular human life, fails to agree with the fact 
that the universe is not congenial to human life, being 
tremendously wasteful of time, space, and matter from the 
human perspective. It also fails to agree with the fact that 
the universe is mostly composed of particles in random 
motion, with complex structures such as galaxies forming 
less than 4 percent of the mass and less than one particle 
out of a billion. 
6. A God who communicates directly with humans by means 
of revelation fails to agree with the fact that no claimed 
revelation has ever been confirmed empirically, while 
many have been falsified. No claimed revelation contains 
information that could not have been already in the head 
of the person making the claim. 
7. A God who is the source of morality and human values 
does not exist since the evidence shows that humans 
define morals and values for themselves. This is not "rela-
tive morality." Believers and nonbelievers alike agree on a 
common set of morals and values. Even the most devout 
decide for themselves what is good and what is bad. Non-
believers behave no less morally than believers. 

POSSIBLE AND IMPOSSIBLE GODS 
231 
8. The existence of evil, in particular, gratuitous suffering, is 
logically inconsistent with an omniscient, omnibenevo-
lent, omnipotent God (standard problem of evil). 
W H A T IF? 
The existence of the God worshiped by most Jews, Christians, and 
Muslims is not only missing from but also is contradicted by 
empirical data. However, it need not have turned out that way. 
Things might have been different, and this is important to under-
stand as it justifies the use of science to address the God question 
and refutes the frequently heard statement that science can say 
nothing about God. If scientific observations had confirmed at 
least one model god, then even the most skeptical atheist would 
have to come around and admit that there might be some chance 
that God exists. 
Consider the following hypothetical events that, had they 
occurred, would have favored the God hypothesis. The reader is 
invited to think of her own "might have been" scenarios that 
would force even the most dogmatic skeptic to reconsider his 
atheism. 
Hypothetical Observations That Would Have 
Favored the God Hypothesis 
1. Purely natural processes might have been proved incapable 
of producing the universe, as we know it, from nothing. For 
example, the measured mass density of the universe might 
not have turned out to be exactly what is required for the 
universe to have begun from a state of zero energy, which 
we assume is the energy of nothing. This would have 
implied that a miracle, the violation of energy conserva-
tion, was required to produce the universe. 

232 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
2. Purely natural processes might have been proved inca-
pable of producing the order of the universe. For 
example, suppose the universe were not expanding but 
rather turned out to be a firmament (as the Bible says it 
is). The second law of thermodynamics would require 
that the universe always had total entropy less than max-
imum in the past. Thus, if the universe had a beginning, 
that beginning would have to be one of order imposed 
from the outside. If the universe had no beginning but 
extended indefinitely into the past, then we still would 
need to account for the source of the ever-increasing 
order as we go back in time. 
3. Purely natural processes might have proved incapable of 
producing the complex structure of the world. For 
example, the age of Earth might have turned out to be 
too short for evolution. Simple processes might not have 
been able to produce complex structure. 
4. Evidence was found that falsified evolution. Fossils might 
have been found that were inexplicably out of sequence. 
Life-forms might not have all been based on the same 
genetic scheme. Transitional species might not have been 
observed. 
5. Human memories and thoughts might have provided 
evidence that cannot be plausibly accounted for by 
known physical processes. Science might have confirmed 
exceptional powers of the mind that it could not plau-
sibly explain physically. Science might have uncovered 
convincing evidence for an afterlife. For example, a 
person who has been declared dead by every means 
known to science might return to life with detailed sto-
ries of an afterlife containing information he could not 
possibly have known and is later verified as factual, such 
as the location of the nearest planet with life. 
6. A nonphysical channel of communication might have 

POSSIBLE AND IMPOSSIBLE GODS 
233 
been empirically confirmed by revelations containing 
information that could not have been already in the head 
of the person reporting the revelation. For example, 
someone in a religious trance might learn the exact date of 
the end of the world, which then happens on schedule. 
7. Physical and historical evidence might have been found 
for the miraculous events and the important narratives of 
the scriptures. For example, Roman records might have 
been found of an earthquake in Judea at the time of a 
crucifixion ordered by Pontius Pilate. Campsites might 
have been found in the Sinai Desert. 
8. The void might have been found to be absolutely stable, 
requiring some action to bring something rather than 
nothing into existence. 
9. The universe might have been found to be so congenial 
to human life that it must have been created with human 
life in mind. Humans might have been able to move 
from planet to planet, just as easily as they now move 
from continent to continent, and be able to survive on 
every planet without life support. 
10. Natural events might follow some moral law, rather than 
morally neutral mathematical laws. For example, light-
ning might strike mostly wicked people; people who 
behave badly might fall sick more often; nuns would 
always survive plane crashes. 
11. Believers might have had a higher moral sense than non-
believers and other measurably superior qualities. For 
example, the jails might be filled with atheists while all 
believers live happy, prosperous, contented lives sur-
rounded by loving families and pets. 
But none of this has happened. The hypothesis of God is not 
confirmed by the data. Indeed that hypothesis is strongly contra-
dicted by the data. 

234 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
WHAT GODS REMAIN? 
Now, a believer is certainly free to argue that "none of these Gods 
is my god." I have nowhere claimed that I can rule out every con-
ceivable god, just those with the selected empirically detectable 
attributes. If a believer's god does not have any of those attributes, 
then I have no quarrel with her. 
For example, we might imagine a god who created the uni-
verse but does not interfere with it or interact with its inhabitants 
in anyway. The deist god of the Enlightenment (the "Creator" in 
the Declaration of Independence) created the universe with com-
pletely deterministic natural laws and thus has no need to ever 
step in. For this god, everything that happens is already written. 
However, this type of deist god is probably ruled out by a fact 
drawn from most interpretations of quantum mechanics. Based 
on our best current knowledge, nature is not deterministic. The 
Heisenberg uncertainty principle of quantum mechanics implies 
that the motion of a particle cannot be predicted with absolute 
certainty, that much that happens in the universe is random. Fur-
thermore, the latest developments in cosmology imply that the 
universe began in total chaos and so retains no memory of any 
creator. This still leaves open the possibility of a deist god who 
created the chaos and left everything else to chance. But, such a 
god has no observable effect and is functionally equivalent to 
nonexistent as far as humans are concerned. 
In Has Science Found God? I mentioned those contemporary 
theologians who are making serious attempts to reconcile science 
and the supernatural.3 I called them the "Premise Keepers," 
which perhaps was a bit cute but I did attempt to treat them with 
some sympathy. Their main concern is evolution, which they 
readily accept as well established. The problem they must deal 
with is the apparent accidental evolution of the human species. 
Some propose that God "poked his finger" in the historical 
process, so that humanity would appear. However, this is essen-

POSSIBLE AND IMPOSSIBLE GODS 
235 
tially intelligent design applied perhaps just once in evolution 
but applied nonetheless and contradictory to the essence of evo-
lutionary theory. 
Despite accepting the evolution of the human body, we saw 
that the Catholic Church insists that evolution does not apply to 
the mind.4 While stating that he would change his Buddhist 
beliefs should science demonstrate any of them to be false, the 
Dalai Lama still insists that humans cannot be "reduced to 
nothing more than biological machines, the products of pure 
chance in the random combination of genes, with no purpose 
other than the biological imperative of reproduction."5 
Some Premise Keepers are willing to accept the now apparent 
fact that humans are indeed biological machines that are products 
of chance. If you were to start the universe up again, we and every 
other species on Earth would not reappear in the same forms. 
Humanity is an accident. However, in the view of evolution theism, 
God can achieve his ends, whatever they are, by any of the count-
less pathways that become possible when no restrictions are placed 
on how matter may self-organize into complex systems. 
Physicist Howard van Till imagines a "possibility space" of all 
potential life-forms. By means of random variations, God 
explores and discovers (in contrast to creates) novel life-forms 
that actualize his intentions in the course of time.6 Einstein 
thought that God did not play dice with the universe, but the 
Premise Keepers say he does. 
However, Phillip Johnson, the Christian lawyer who initiated 
the intelligent design movement, protests strongly that this is not 
Christianity but simply an updated deism, with God "exiled to 
that shadowy realm before the Big Bang" where he "must 
promise to do nothing that might cause trouble between theists 
and scientific naturalists."7 
Obviously, neither the deist god nor the van Till god is the 
God of Jews, Christians, and Muslims. Their God plays a primary, 
moment-by-moment role in every phenomenon, from atomic 

236 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
collisions in the farthest galaxy down to the chemical reactions in 
each cell in each of the 1030 or so bacteria on Earth. And, of 
course, he reads every human thought. I have argued that such a 
God should have been detected by now, if not from casual obser-
vations, then surely from the precision data on every aspect of the 
world that have now been gathered by science. Like the chaos 
deity, a God with no observable effect is indistinguishable from 
one who is nonexistent. Certainly worshiping such a God serves 
no useful purpose. 
While many laypeople have been led to believe that science 
has found evidence for God, this is simply not the case. If it were 
true, the news would have made simultaneous headlines in every 
newspaper in the world, using the "Second Coming" font 
reserved for stupendous events. Indeed, the Second Coming 
would provide the needed evidence. But it is now two thousand 
years overdue, Jesus having assured his disciples that he would 
return before they died. 
As I have mentioned several times, there is no basis for the 
claim that science dogmatically refuses to accept the evidence for 
God, although some national scientific organizations, terrified of 
losing taxpayer support, have tried to distance science from reli-
gion. If scientific evidence for God turned up that passed the con-
ventional tests applied to any extraordinary claim, then scientists 
in every field would be happily busy writing research grant pro-
posals to study his nature. Instead most, even those who attend 
church on Sunday, go about their daily professional duties 
without ever bringing in God. 
Serious theologians not committed by faith to their own 
dogma have gradually begun to accept the absence of objective 
evidence for God and have been forced to conclude if a god 
exists, he must purposely hide himself from us. I fully admit that 
possibility. God could simply work through natural processes 
and, indeed, may have reasons to hide himself from us. Let us see 
what kind of god that might be. 

POSSIBLE AND IMPOSSIBLE GODS 
237 
THE HIDDENNESS PROBLEM 
In the fall of 2004, I attended a conference at the University of 
Colorado at Boulder on "The Hiddenness of God" sponsored by 
the Theology Forum of the Department of Philosophy. The atten-
dees were mostly theologians, philosophers of religion, and other 
religious scholars, many from theology schools and mostly con-
firmed believers. They were seeking to find a rational explanation 
for what most seemed to readily accept as a fact: no empirical evi-
dence for God exists. 
One of the attendees was philosopher John L. Schellenberg, 
who opened the meeting with a presentation of what is called the 
argument from hiddenness for the nonexistence of God. He pub-
lished this argument in a 1993 book, Divine Hiddenness and 
Human Reason.8 Stated formally, the argument is as follows (as 
quoted from Schellenberg's handouts): 
The Hiddenness Argument 
1. If there is a perfectly loving God, all creatures capable of 
explicit and positively meaningful relationships with God 
who have not freely shut themselves off from God are in a 
position to participate in such a relationship that is, able 
to do so just by trying to. 
2. No one can be in a position to participate in such relation-
ship without believing that God exists. 
3. If there is a perfectly loving God, all creatures capable of 
explicit and positively meaningful relationship with God 
who have not freely shut themselves off from God believe 
that God exists (from 1 and 2). 
4. It is not the case that all creatures capable of explicit and 
positively meaningful relationship with God who have 
not freely shut themselves off from God believe that God 
exists: there is non-resistant nonbelief; "God is hidden." 

238 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
5. It is not the case that there is a perfectly loving God (from 
3 and 4). 
6. If God exists, God is perfectly loving. 
7. It is not the case that God exists (from 5 and 6).9 
In short, a perfectly loving God would not deny knowledge of his 
existence to any human who is not resistant to that knowledge. 
The empirical fact that many humans are open to knowledge of 
God and still do not believe demonstrates that such a God does 
not exist. 
This argument is similar to the argument from nonbelief of 
philosopher Theodore Drange, which Drange states as follows: 
The Argument from Nonbelief 
1. If God were to exist, then there would be no avoidable 
nontheism in the world. 
2. But there is avoidable nontheism in the world. 
3. Therefore, God does not exist.10 
These arguments serve to answer the objection theists make to 
the argument from lack of evidence (see chap. 1) that God simply 
chooses to remain hidden from humanity. As Schellenberg puts 
it, "Why, we may ask, would God be hidden from us? Surely a 
morally perfect being—good, just, loving—would show himself 
more clearly. Hence the weakness of our evidence for God is not 
a sign that God is hidden; it is a revelation that God does not 
exist."11 Conference participants agreed that the hiddenness argu-
ment is also connected to the problem of evil. For example, both 
concentrate on attributes that seem contradictory to the assumed 
moral character of God. I have only briefly discussed the problem 
of evil in this book (see chap. 8), since it is not a scientific argu-
ment and hardly original with me—although the existence of 
unnecessary suffering in the world is an empirical fact. However, 

POSSIBLE AND IMPOSSIBLE GODS 
239 
the problem of evil remains the strongest argument against a 
beneficent God, one that theologians have grappled with for cen-
turies without success.12 
The hiddenness problem relates most directly to the scientific 
arguments I have presented. If a theist attempts to refute my con-
clusions by claiming that God intentionally hides himself from us, 
then that God cannot be the personal, perfect loving God of liberal 
Christianity. However, there is another brand of Christian God. 
THE HIDEOUS HIDDEN GOD 
OF EVANGELICAL CHRISTIANITY 
The believing theologians at the Boulder conference were all 
Christians, and they provided a variety of responses. Jeff Cook, a 
young graduate student at the University of Colorado, presented 
a solution to the hiddenness problem that left the more evangel-
ically inclined Christians at the conference shaking their heads 
vertically, while the rest of us shook our heads horizontally. 
Cook gave some personal history of how being born again 
turned his life around. His wife, sitting in the audience, was given 
the chance to affirm their joint transforming experience. 
Cook called his solution to the problem of divine hiddenness 
the "Ecclesiastic solution." Let me use his own words, as pre-
sented in the conference handouts: "Christianity shows that one 
of God's chief desires is to create a community of individuals that 
are devoted to the good of one another, with God himself as the 
chief participant. This community has many preconditions and 
needs, and it may be the case that God's universal self-disclosure 
would be less effective at creating and establishing the Kingdom 
of God than a policy of selective self-disclosure."13 In other 
words, God does not wish to spend eternity with all human 
souls, but only the chosen few who, by blind faith in the absence 
of all evidence, accept a Jewish carpenter who may or may not 

240 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
have lived two thousand years ago as their personal savior. Of 
course, this is hardly a new idea but was essentially the teaching 
of John Calvin (d. 1564). 
To Christians of this persuasion, Mahatma Gandhi is burning 
in hell, along with the six million Jews killed by Hitler and the 
billions of others who have died without accepting Jesus. 
Those Catholics and evangelical Christians who hold this view 
clearly do not believe in a perfectly loving God. Their God dooms 
everyone else but them to eternal fire. Muslims, too, insist that 
theirs is the only way to salvation. And while the range of belief in 
modern Judaism is enormous, including many Jews who are athe-
ists but still practice their religion out of respect for their heritage, 
a few extreme Jews still regard themselves as the chosen people of 
God. If anyone promoted such views in any area outside a reli-
gious context, he would be taken in for psychiatric evaluation. 
Philosopher Evan Fales has given another explanation for the 
hiddenness of God: "Some apologists tell us that God remains 
hidden from us so as not to coerce our worship. But God is not 
hiding out of solicitude for our freedom. We have not forgotten 
Job: therefore we understand that God is hiding out of cowardice. 
God is in hiding because He has too much to hide. We do not 
seek burning bushes or a pillar of smoke. No—we wish to see 
God. Can God stand before us? Can God see the face of suffering 
humanity—and live?"14 
The existence of the Catholic, evangelical, extreme Muslim, 
extreme Judaic God who hides himself from all but a selected 
elite cannot be totally ruled out. All I can say is that we have not 
one iota of evidence that he exists and, if he does exist, I person-
ally want nothing to do with him. This is a possible god, but a 
hideous one. 

POSSIBLE AND IMPOSSIBLE GODS 
241 
NOTES 
1. Nicholas Everitt, The Non-Existence of God (London, New York: 
Routledge, 2004), p. 236. 
2. Paul Bloom, Descartes' Baby: How the Science of Child Develop-
ment Explains What Makes Us Human (New York: Basic Books, 2004). 
3. Victor J. Stenger, Has Science Found God? The Latest Results in the 
Search for Purpose in the Universe (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 
2003), chap. 11. 
4. Pope John Paul II, Address to the Academy of Sciences, October 
28, 1986, L'Osservatore Romano, English ed., November 24, 1986, p. 22. 
5. Dalai Lama, The Universe in a Single Atom: The Convergence of 
Science and Spirituality (New York: Random House, 2005). 
6. Howard van Till, in Phillip E. Johnson and Howard van Till, 
"God and Evolution: An Exchange," First Things 34 (1993): 32-41. 
7. Ibid. 
8. John L. Schellenberg, Divine Hiddenness and Human Reason 
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1993). 
9. Ibid., "The Problem of Hiddenness and the Problem of Evil," 
Presented to the Conference on "The Hiddenness of God," Theology 
Forum, University of Colorado at Boulder, October 21-23, 2004. 
10. Theodore M. Drange, Nonbelief and Evil: Two Arguments for the 
Nonexistence of God (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1998), p. 23. 
11. Schellenberg, Divine Hiddenness and Human Reason, p. 1. 
12. J. J. Mackie, "Evil and Omnipotence," Mind 64 (1955): 200-12; 
Keith Parsons, God and the Burden of Proof: Platinga, Swinburne, and the 
Analytical Defense of Theism (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1989); 
Drange, Nonbelief and Evil. 
13. Jeff Cook, "The Problem of Divine Hiddenness," Presented to 
the Conference on "The Hiddenness of God," Theology Forum, Univer-
sity of Colorado at Boulder, October 21-23, 2004. 
14. Evan Fales, "Despair, Optimism, and Rebellion," http://  
www.infidels.org/library/modern/evan_fales/despair.html 
(accessed 
July 6, 2005). 

Chapter 10 
LIVING IN THE 
GODLESS UNIVERSE 
Live joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest all the days of the life of 
thy vanity, which he hath given thee under the sun, all the days of 
thy vanity: for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy labor which 
thou takest under the sun. Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it 
with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor 
wisdom, in the grave whither thou goest. 
—Ecclesiastes 9: 9-10 (King James Version) 
IS RELIGION USEFUL? 
A
rchaeology testifies that religion was a major component 
of human life for thousands of years before civilization 
began. And, of course, civilization did not put an end to religion 
but molded it into more sophisticated forms. The God of 
243 

244 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
Judaism, Christianity, and Islam arose in parallel with the city-
state and may have been created to justify the relation of an all-
powerful king to his subjects. 
Voltaire (d. 1778) said, "If God did not exist, it would be nec-
essary to invent him."1 Of course, the French philosopher and 
satirist was being his usual cynical self, but a common view is 
that religion is a necessary component of human life. The reason 
most frequently given is that, without religion, everyone would 
behave immorally and society would be wracked by wars and all 
kinds of other evils. However, despite the widespread influence of 
religion, some humans continue to behave immorally and some 
morally, with no particular correlation to faith being evident. 
And, society continues to be wracked by wars and all kinds of 
other evils. If we need yet one more example of a failed model, 
this is it. 
Yet most people believe, and libraries are full theories as to 
why they do despite all the evidence to the contrary.2 Justin L. 
Barrett asks directly, Why Would Anyone Believe in God? and credits 
such belief to the types of mental tools we all carry around in our 
brains.3 We hear other speculations that religious belief is built 
into our brains, with a special "God module"4 perhaps codified 
by a "God gene"5—all the result of natural selection. 
Psychologist Paul Bloom refers to recent research by himself 
and others indicating that the human brain has evolved two sep-
arate "programs" for analyzing the data from the senses.6 One 
program deals with physical objects and the other with social 
relationships. Bloom suggests that this has led to a natural, built-
in tendency to separate the world of matter from the world of 
mind and to believe in the survival of personality after death. As 
anthropologist Pascal Boyer has suggested, this also leads to a 
strong tendency to see purpose and design even when they are 
not there.7 Anthropologist Stewart Guthrie calls this hypersensi-
tivity to signs of agency, seeing intention where there is only acci-
dent or artifice, the clothes have no emperor.8 Columnist 

LIVING IN THE GODLESS UNIVERSE 
245 
Nicholas Kristof of the New York Times finds this a "cosmic joke," 
that "humans have gradually evolved to leave many of us 
doubting evolution."9 
If religion is a naturally evolved trait, then we have yet 
another argument against the existence of God. As always, the 
apologist can counter with the claim that God could still be 
behind it all. However, he can provide no evidence to support 
that hypothesis or any reason for introducing it. Once again, God 
is simply not needed any more than Bigfoot, the Abominable 
Snowman, and the Loch Ness Monster. 
The issue of a God module in the brain remains controversial, 
and we will have to wait and see. The timescale would seem too 
short for biological evolution of such a major nature. On the 
other hand, the timescale is long enough for cultural evolution. 
We can still consider the implications of the proposition that reli-
gion had survival value, whether or not this resulted in the 
humans evolving some genetic propensity for religion that 
became built into their genes. Religion may be a cultural idea that 
evolved by natural selection because it provided a survival bene-
fit, sort of the way the idea of traffic lights evolved. 
THE NEGATIVE IMPACT 
OF RELIGION ON SOCIETY 
In chapter 7, we saw how our notions of morals and values may 
have evolved naturally, their precursors being seen in animal 
behavior. There I argued that we possess innate concepts of what 
is good and what is bad that do not derive from a divine source 
and are, indeed, contradicted by the scriptures that are supposed 
to have a divine source. 
We saw that the empirical evidence does not support the 
widespread assertion that religion is especially beneficial to 
society as a whole. Of course, it has always proved extremely 

246 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
beneficial to those in power—helping them to retain that 
power—from prehistoric times to the latest presidential election. 
But it is not clear how society is any better off than it would have 
been had the idea of gods and spirits never evolved. 
Morality and religion may have evolved together. We can 
easily imagine, and history seems to confirm, that religion was 
the means by which good behavior—"good" usually being 
defined by whomever was in power at the time—was enforced. 
Even in modern times we see the remnants of this unholy 
alliance, with world leaders asserting divine authority for their 
actions and people still falling for it. By claiming divine 
authority, politicians are able to promote policies of dubious 
value that the public might otherwise find unacceptable. Jour-
nalist Chris Mooney has provided many disgraceful recent exam-
ples of this in his book The Republican War on Science.10 
In February 2003 President of the United States George W. 
Bush told Australian Prime Minister John Howard that liberating 
the people of Iraq would not be a gift provided by the United 
States but, rather, "God's gift to every human being in the 
world."11 In November 2004 Bush was reelected by a majority 
that included many who sincerely believed the president was car-
rying out God's work. 
Theists in the United States continue to insist, contrary to the 
historical facts, that God is the foundation of our political system 
and that we and our political leaders must all abide by their par-
ticular interpretations of God's will. As Father Frank Pavone of 
the antiabortion organization Priests for Life told the 2000 
Republican National Convention, "The Church does not dictate 
the policies of the nation. The Church proclaims the truth of God 
to which all these [public] policies must conform."12 
A far more powerful figure who holds this view and applies it 
with a vengeance in his decisions is US Supreme Court Associate 
Justice Antonin Scalia. He quotes St. Paul: 

LIVING IN THE GODLESS UNIVERSE 
247 
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no 
power but of God: the powers that be are ordained of God. 
Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordi-
nance of God: and they that resist shall receive to themselves 
damnation. For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the 
evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? Do that which 
is good, and thou shalt have praise of the same: for he is the 
minister of God to thee for good. But if thou do that which is 
evil, be afraid; for he beareth not the sword in vain: for he is the 
minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that 
doeth evil. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for 
wrath, but also for conscience sake. (Romans 13:1-5, King 
lames Version) 
Scalia has declared, "Government—however you want to limit 
that concept—derives its moral authority from God."13 He and 
Father Pavone apparently would have the United States abandon 
the Declaration of Independence: "We hold these truths to be self-
evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by 
their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are 
Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.—That to secure these 
rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just 
powers from the consent of the governed ..." Although American 
Christians have been led to believe that the "Creator" mentioned 
here is their God, Thomas Jefferson, who wrote these words, was 
not a Christian but a deist. But my point here is that Scalia and 
Pavone reject the authority of the governed in favor of the 
authority of God, as they interpret his authority for us, of course. 
According to Scalia, who President Bush called his model for 
Supreme Court appointments, governments do not derive "their 
just powers from the consent of the governed." Rather, Scalia tells 
us, "It [government] is the 'minister of God' with powers to 
'revenge' and to 'execute wrath,' including even wrath by the 
sword [which is unmistakably a reference to the death 

248 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
penalty]."14 In March 2005 the United States became the last 
country in the world to abolish the death penalty for offenders 
who were under eighteen when they committed murder. Scalia 
vigorously dissented from the Supreme Court decision. 
Most Americans view the Constitution as a "living document" 
that evolves as society evolves. Scalia calls this a "fallacy." For 
him, the text is fixed in meaning what it always meant. If slavery, 
which was not forbidden in the Constitution, still existed today, 
Scalia would probably rule against its abolition. If women could 
not vote, Scalia would do his best to see that they never did. No 
doubt he would use the Bible to justify those opinions. 
Justice Scalia's thinking exemplifies all that is wrong with reli-
gion and why it is so inimical to human progress. God rules over 
a physical and social firmament that must remain unchanged, 
because change implies imperfection in his original creation. 
I hope I have made it clear in this book that, while I wish 
people were less gullible, less willing to believe in the most prepos-
terous supernatural notions, I still have a high regard for the basic 
decency of most human beings. Many people are good. But they 
are not good because of religion. They are good despite religion. 
Nineteen Muslims would not have wreaked the havoc of Sep-
tember 11, 2001, destroying themselves along with three thou-
sand others, had they not been believers. I need not detail all the 
killing in the name of God that has gone on throughout the 
ages.15 At the time of this writing we have religious conflicts in a 
half-dozen places around the world.16 In his book Is Religion 
Killing Us? Jack Nelson-Pallmeyer traces the biblical and Qur'anic 
sources of violence. He concludes, "Violence is widely embraced 
because it is embedded and 'sanctified' in sacred texts and 
because its use seems logical in a violent world."17 
Religion at least partially accounts for the large cultural differ-
ences and mistrust that divide racially similar groups, like Israelis 
and Palestinians or Indians and Pakistanis, who might otherwise 
live together in harmony or even as a single people. 

LIVING IN THE GODLESS UNIVERSE 
249 
Not every war in history has been over religion, but religion 
has done little to ameliorate the conditions that led to war in 
those cases. We just have to look back half a century and witness 
the role played by the Catholic Church in aiding Nazi Ger-
many18 For example, the German Church opened its genealog-
ical records to the Third Reich so that a person's Jewish ancestry 
could be traced. Not a single German Catholic, including Adolf 
Hitler, was excommunicated for committing crimes against 
humanity.19 And Hitler often claimed he was serving God. In 
Mein Kampf he says, "Hence today I believe that I am acting in 
accordance with the will of the Almighty Creator: by defending 
myself against the Jew, I am fighting for the work of the Lord."20 How-
ever, I must hasten to add that many Catholic leaders outside 
Germany did speak out against the Nazis and some, such as the 
Dutch archbishop, were retaliated against. 
Now, you might ask, what about all the undeniable good that 
is done by religious charitable institutions—helping the poor 
and caring for the afflicted? Although the many selfless and ded-
icated people who do charitable work will tell you that they are 
motivated by their love of God, it is not really clear that God has 
that much to do with it. Perhaps these people are simply innately 
charitable and would have done the same in the absence of reli-
gious motives. The empirical fact is that people with no religion 
are not noticeably less charitable than those with religion. 
Much of the time and money spent by Christian charities, 
including that now provided by federal and state governments in 
the United States as part of "faith-based initiatives," goes to pros-
elytizing rather than solving the problems they were set up to 
solve. This money would be put to better use in providing serv-
ices other than worship services. Certainly no evidence exists that 
so-called faith-based charities do any better than secular ones. 
Indeed, there is mounting evidence that some do worse. 
For example, in 1996, the then Texas governor George W. 
Bush saw to it that state agencies eliminated inspection require-

250 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
ments of religious charities. In five years, the rate of confirmed 
abuse and neglect at religious facilities rose by a factor of twenty-
five compared to state-licensed facilities. In another example of 
misuse, a Texas state district court found that a jobs training pro-
gram unconstitutionally used $8,000 of state money to buy 
Bibles and spent most of the time on Bible study while providing 
no secular alternatives.21 For a survey of the negative social 
impact of religious extremism in the United States, see the book 
of essays edited by Kimberly Blaker.22 
Now, you might say this has nothing to do with the existence 
or nonexistence of God. However, the concept of a beneficent, 
loving God held by most people would reasonably be expected to 
lead to a better world when God is widely worshiped. Well, God 
is widely worshiped and we do not have a better world because 
of it. On the contrary, the world seems worse off as the result of 
faith. The certainty and exclusiveness of the major monotheisms 
make tolerance of differences very difficult to achieve, and these 
differences are the major source of conflict.23 
In stark contrast to almost all other religious leaders, the 
Dalai Lama has tried to keep Tibetan Buddhism in tune with the 
modern world. He has often made it clear that whenever a Bud-
dhist teaching disagreed with science, then he would attempt to 
change the teaching. However, as I have already noted, the Dalai 
Lama still seems to believe in a duality of mind and body not 
supported by science. 
Not that Buddhists have avoided committing their own atroc-
ities (condemned by the Dalai Lama, to be sure), as the recent 
history of Sri Lanka demonstrates. 
MEANING 
Finally, we need to deal with the personal aspects of religion that 
may be the most important for most people. In this section we 

LIVING IN THE GODLESS UNIVERSE 
251 
discuss the common claim that life is meaningless if God does 
not exist.24 In the next section we will consider the widespread 
belief that religion provides comfort and inspiration. 
Christian apologist William Lane Craig has spoken of "the 
absurdity of life without God." According to science, the human 
race is ultimately doomed as the universe plunges toward 
inevitable extinction. Without God, without immortality, Craig 
tells us, "The life we live is without ultimate significance, ultimate 
value, ultimate purpose."25 
Philosopher Erik Wielenberg tells of a gym teacher who 
would calm things down when tempers flared during a heated 
ball game by saying, "Ten years from now, will any of you care 
who won this game?" Wielenberg recalls thinking that a reason-
able response would be, "Does it really matter now whether any 
of us will care in ten years?"26 He quotes philosopher Thomas 
Nagel in the same vein, "It does not matter now that in a million 
years nothing we do now will matter."27 
In other words, what matters now is what happens now. The 
September 11, 2001, hijackers were guided by some imagined 
ultimate purpose and so did not care what happened to them 
when they flew airplanes into buildings. We (mostly) all agree 
how sick that was. We can take comfort in that highly probable 
fact that they did not wake up in paradise. 
Surely we can find present meaning in our lives that does not 
depend on our immortality, especially since our immortality is 
not likely to happen. Independent of immortality, many people 
think that life is pointless unless they fit into some grand, cosmic 
scheme. They imagine that meaning can only be assigned exter-
nally, by some outside, higher authority. 
But, why can't we find meaning internally? Why must 
meaning be handed down from above? Over the ages, philoso-
phers have offered many suggestions on how to live rewarding 
lives. In his Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle offered three ways that 
humans might live contentedly: a life devoted to the pursuit of 

252 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
bodily pleasure; a life devoted to political activity; and a life 
devoted to contemplation.28 He decided that the life of contem-
plation was best, since that most closely matches the activity of the 
gods. I suppose he wasn't thinking of the gods in Homer's Iliad. 
Many theists will claim that, without God, humans would 
seek only bodily pleasure and other selfish interests. But that is 
not the nature of a social animal. We seek pleasure in the society 
of others and we empathize with others suffering. With the evo-
lution of civilization, we have an enormous range of wonderful 
and important activities in which we can participate. I got my 
curiosity from the same place as cats, but I've been able to pursue 
mine into the deepest questions about the nature of the universe 
with the help of multimillion-dollar instruments and thousands 
of other scientists. Far from providing us meaningful goals, reli-
gions prescribe tribal values: amity for our tribe; enmity for other 
tribes; mind-closing faith; abject worship of authority. 
God is not necessary for someone to find fulfillment in con-
templation or social activity. Ethical philosopher Peter Singer 
emphasizes that "[we] can live a meaningful life by working 
toward goals that are objectively worthwhile."29 One of the ways 
he suggests is quite simple, namely, to work to reduce avoidable 
suffering. This, he claims, is an objectively worthwhile goal that 
can provide inner meaning and, furthermore, can be done 
whether or not God exists. 
Similarly, philosopher Kai Nielsen has remarked, "A man 
who says, 'If God is dead, nothing matters,' is a spoilt child who 
has never looked at his fellow man with compassion."30 
COMFORT AND INSPIRATION 
Many find comfort and inspiration in the notion that they are not 
alone in the universe, that they are a special part of the cosmos 
with a loving father looking down on them and providing them 

LIVING IN THE GODLESS UNIVERSE 
253 
with an eternal life. During their mortal lives, many also claim 
that religion inspires them to do greater things, to go beyond the 
bounds of their material existences. 
The idea of life after death probably came about when our 
primitive ancestors evolved the cognitive ability to not only 
realize that they will someday die, but also to ask whether death 
is final or that something still lay beyond the grave. The latter 
possibility would have been strongly suggested by the fact that a 
dead person was still "alive" in thoughts and dreams. Those 
thoughts and dreams were ephemeral, so the notion arose that 
some "spirit" carried on after the material body ceased to move 
and began to decay. 
In chapter 3 we traced the development of the soul to the 
place where it exists today as little more than a word used to rep-
resent someone's "personhood," encompassing the qualities 
such as love and kindness that identify a person as something 
more than a mechanical automaton. It now seems almost certain 
that those qualities are not the product of some immaterial sub-
stance or spirit but arise through the natural operations per-
formed by a highly complex but still purely material brain. That 
brain dies when we die, but our memories and thoughts carry on 
in the brains of others. 
Unfortunately, science cannot confirm the Christian-Islamic 
promise that we one day will be reunited with departed loved 
ones and live eternally in the bosom of our creator.31 The rational 
prospect of life after death is close to nil. But, at least, science can 
assure us that the many who happened to choose the wrong God 
will not be tortured through all eternity—that those millions 
who lived and died before the jealous God was invented will rest 
in peace. As an atheist T-shirt says, "Smile. There is no hell." 
Science can help us to live a better life with the years we have. 
No doubt most of humanity today enjoys longer lives in greater 
comfort and pleasure as the direct result of scientific advances 
(such as evolution) than it would in the absence of those 

254 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
advances—especially if humanity had relied solely on religious 
teachings. If science has brought with it new problems, such as 
overpopulation, pollution, and the threat of nuclear holocaust, 
few people suggest we do away with science to avoid those con-
sequences. Hopefully they can be avoided with the help of sci-
ence and wise political actions. 
Additionally, by ridding the world of superstition, science 
helps us live in less fear of the unknown. Humans no longer 
cower in the back of a cave during an electrical storm—and they 
know enough to get off the golf course. People are no longer 
burned at the stake when accused of heresy or witchcraft. By rid-
ding the world of God, science helps us to control our own lives 
rather than submitting them to the arbitrary authority of priests 
and kings who justify their acts by divine will. 
I do not deny that religion has inspired great art and music, 
which does much to enrich our lives. I personally have spent many 
happy hours viewing religious art in the great museums of the 
world and listening to sacred music in concert halls and recordings. 
I cannot think of anything more beautiful or more touching (or 
amazing) than Michelangelo's Pieta in St. Peter's in Rome. In my 
youth I thrilled at singing Bach's "Magnificat," Handel's Messiah, 
and Brahms's Requiem as a member of a church choir. 
Many religious stories appeal to us as poetry and plays do. 
They are parables speaking to the human condition. Their value 
has nothing to do with the supernatural or whether they are true. 
Most have existed in many forms, both religious and secular: 
Moses in the bulrushes; the ugly duckling; Luke Skywalker on 
Tatooine. Don't all young people feel that they may have great-
ness in them—and why shouldn't they? David and Goliath; Jack 
the Giant Killer; Odysseus and the Cyclops. We all need the 
courage to never give up, to call on our ingenuity and initiative 
against the giants we face. 
Beauty and inspiration can arise from secular sources. Cer-
tainly much great art and literature is secular in nature. Religion 

LIVING IN THE GODLESS UNIVERSE 
255 
hardly comes up in Shakespeare, the greatest poet of the English 
language. Often romantic love is the inspiration for great poetry, 
as when Romeo calls up to Juliet from her garden at sunrise, 
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon, 
That is already sick and pale with grief, 
That thou her maid art far more fair than she.32 
Many people think of science as cold and impersonal. Scien-
tists have tried to counter that by pointing to the beauty and 
majesty of nature and the great pleasure and inspiration that sci-
ence brings to its practitioners. In his 1980 hit public television 
series, Cosmos, astronomer Carl Sagan extolled the grandeur of 
the universe, life, and the human brain. In his book Pale Blue Dot, 
Sagan asks, "How is it that hardly any major religion has looked 
at science and concluded, 'This is better than we thought! The 
Universe is much bigger than our prophets said, grander, more 
subtle, more elegant'? Instead they say, 'No, no, no! My god is a 
little god, and I want him to stay that way.' A religion, old or new, 
that stressed the magnificence of the Universe as revealed by 
modern science might be able to draw forth reserves of reverence 
and awe hardly tapped by the conventional faiths."33 
In his 1998 book, Unweaving the Rainbow, Richard Dawkins car-
ried on in the Sagan tradition: "The feeling of awed wonder that sci-
ence can give us is one of the highest experiences of which the human 
psyche is capable. It is a deep aesthetic passion to rank with the finest 
that music and poetry can deliver. It is truly one of the things that 
makes life worth living and it does so, if anything, more effectively if 
it convinces us that the time we have for living it is fragile."34 
Dawkins takes his title from a poem by John Keats: 
Philosophy will clip an Angel's wings, 
Conquer all mysteries by rule and line, 
Empty the haunted air, and gnomed mine— 
Unweave a rainbow . . .35 

256 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
Keats felt that Newton had destroyed the poetry of the rainbow by 
reducing it to the prismatic colors.36 Dawkins disagrees, pointing 
out how the unweaving of the rainbow—the separation of its com-
ponents into different wavelengths—adds to rather than detracts 
from its beauty and poetry. The threads of the rainbow have been 
rewoven into the beautiful tapestry of modern physical and biolog-
ical science. From the spectral threads of visible light, a model of 
the atomic structure of matter has been woven. From the spectral 
threads of x-rays reflected off the atoms of biological matter, a 
model of the structure of the key to life, DNA, has been woven. 
From the spectral threads of light from stars and galaxies, and more 
recently that of the cosmic microwave background radiation, a 
model of the structure of the universe has been woven. 
Dawkins expresses the fulfillment of being a scientist: 
After sleeping through a hundred million centuries we have 
finally opened our eyes on a sumptuous planet, sparkling with 
color and bountiful with life. Within decades we must close our 
eyes again. Isn't it a noble, an enlightened way of spending our 
brief time in the sun, to work at understanding the universe and 
how we have come to wake up in it? This is how I answer when 
I am asked—as I am surprisingly often—why I bother to get up 
in the mornings. To put it the other way round, isn't it sad to go 
to your grave without ever wondering why you were born? 
Who, with such a thought, would not spring from bed, eager to 
resume discovering the world and rejoicing to be part of it?37 
Dawkins wishes he had written the following quatrain by 
William Blake, saying the meaning and inspiration would have 
been very different from that of the mystical Blake, 
To see a world in a grain of sand, 
And a heaven in a wild flower, 
Hold infinity in the palm of your hand, 
And eternity in an hour.38 

LIVING IN THE GODLESS UNIVERSE 
257 
Of course, most people value the benefits of science. Every-
where you go these days you see people talking on their mobile 
phones. They don't have to pass a course in the theory of electro-
magnetic waves before using them. But they also miss the exqui-
site pleasure of writing down the four beautiful equations of elec-
tromagnetism, called Maxwell's equations, and deriving from them 
other equations that describe the propagation of electromagnetic 
waves in a vacuum that move at exactly the speed of light. 
Nevertheless, our mobile phone user can still obtain ample 
inspiration and pleasure in art, music, literature, and the more 
mundane but equally important events of everyday life—family, 
work, and recreation. At least science helps make this possible by 
freeing humans from the need to spend all their time on simple 
survival. Unfortunately we still live in a world where this freedom 
is not yet enjoyed by all. 
So, even though science is a valuable tool available to most of 
humanity, only a tiny few find it a source of inspiration and even 
fewer a source of comfort. Religion, on the other hand, is sup-
posed to provide comfort for all. However, religious comfort is 
not all that it is cracked up to be. In a recent study, psychologists 
found that highly religious Protestants exhibit more symptoms of 
obsessive-compulsive disorder than the less religious or nonreli-
gious.39 The promise of life after death carries with it the dread 
that the afterworld will be spent elsewhere than in the bosom of 
God. Everyone is a sinner, and even the most cloistered nun lives 
with the nagging worry that she might not be forgiven for that 
occasional impious thought that slips into her head between 
endless recitations of the Hail Mary. Likewise, the believer in rein-
carnation might sometimes worry about living his next life as a 
rodent. The Muslim suicide bomber has been led to believe that 
he is guaranteed paradise by his murderous action. On the other 
hand, the atheist has the comfort of no fears for an afterlife and 
lacks any compulsion to blow himself up. 
No doubt a temporary feeling of peace of mind can be 

258 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
achieved during prayer or meditation. This results from an emp-
tying of the mind of other thoughts, especially thoughts of self. 
Of all the world's religions, Buddhism provides the clearest 
understanding of the process, although every indication is that 
the mechanism is purely physical.40 Enlightenment can only be 
obtained when the individual is able to eliminate all the desires 
of self. Nirvana is not heaven. Nirvana is nothingness. 
However, I am not quite ready for nothingness. I am willing 
to trade nirvana for the joy and anguish of life for at least a few 
more years. 
NOTES 
1. Voltaire, Candide, ou l'Optimisme, first published in 1759. 
2. See, for example, Daniel Dennett, Breaking the Spell: Religion as 
a Natural Phenomenon (New York: Viking Penguin, 2006). 
3. Justin L. Barrett, Why Would Anyone Believe in God? (Walnut 
Creek, CA: AltaMira Press, 2004). 
4. V S. Ramachandran, "God and the Temporal Lobes of the 
Brain," Talk at the conference Human Selves and Transcendental Expe-
riences: A Dialogue of Science and Religion, San Diego, California, Jan-
uary 31, 1998; Matthew Alper, The "God" Part of the Brain: A Scientific 
Interpretation of Human Spirituality and God (Brooklyn, NY: Rogue Press, 
2001); Andrew Newberg and Eugene d'Aquili, Why God Won't Go Away 
(New York: Ballantine Books, 2001); Pascal Boyer, Religion Explained: 
The Evolutionary Origin of Religious Thought (New York: Basic Books, 
2001); Donald M. Broom, The Evolution of Morality and Religion (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003). 
5. Dean H. Hamer, The God Gene: How Faith Is Hardwired into Our 
Genes (New York: Doubleday, 2004). 
6. Paul Bloom, Descartes' Baby: How the Science of Child Develop-
ment Explains What Makes Us Human (New York: Basic Books. 2004); "Is 
God an Accident?" Atlantic 296, no. 5 (December 2005): 105-12. 
7. Boyer, Religion Explained. 

LIVING IN THE GODLESS UNIVERSE 
259 
8. Stewart Elliott Guthrie, Faces in the Clouds: A New Theory of Reli-
gion (New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993). 
9. Nicholas D. Kristof, "God and Evolution," op-ed, New York 
Times, February 12, 2005, p. 17. 
10. Chris Mooney, The Republican War on Science (New York: 
Perseus Books Group, 2005). 
11. Peter Singer, The President of God and Evil: The Ethics of George 
W. Bush (New York: Dutton, 2004), p. 208. 
12. As quoted in Kimberly Blaker, ed., The Fundamentals of 
Extremism: The Christian Right in America (New Boston, MI: New Boston 
Books, 2003), p. 13. 
13. Antonin Scalia, "God's Justice and Ours," First Things 123 (May 
2002): 17-21. Online at http://www.firstthings.com/ftissues/ft0205/  
articles/scalia.html (accessed March 15, 2005). 
14. Ibid. 
15. See, for example, James A. Haught, Holy Horrors: An Illustrated 
History of Religious Murder and Madness (Amherst, NY: Prometheus 
Books, 1990). 
16. Sam Harris, The End of Faith: Religion, Terror, and the Future of 
Reason (New York: Norton, 2004), p. 26. 
17. Jack Nelson-Pallmeyer, Is Religion Killing Us? Violence in the 
Bible and the Quran (Harrisburg, PA: Trinity Press International, 2003), 
p. 146. 
18. Gregory S. Paul, "The Great Scandal: Christianity's Role in the 
Rise of the Nazis," Free Inquiry 23, no. 4 (October/November 2003): 
20-29; 24, no. 1 (December 2003/January 2004): 28-34. 
19. Ibid, pp. 103-104. 
20. Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf, vol. 1, chap. 2. 
21. Don Monkerud, "Faith No More," In These Times 27, no. 9 
(March 
10, 2003). Online at http://inthesetimes.com/comments.php  
?id=105_0_2_0_C (accessed February 19, 2005). 
22. Blaker, The Fundamentals of Extremism. 
23. For further discussion of this point, see Harris, The End of Faith; 
Richard Dawkins, The God Delusion (Boston, New York: Houghton Mif-
flin, 2006); Sam Harris, Letter to a Christian Nation (New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf, 2006). 

260 GOD: THE FAILED HYPOTHESIS 
24. In this section I have relied heavily on Erik J. Wielenberg, Value 
and Virtue in a Godless Universe (Cambridge, New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2005). 
25. William Lane Craig, "The Absurdity of Life without God." 
Online at http://www.hisdefense.org/audio/wc_audio.html (accessed 
March 9, 2004). 
26. Wielenberg, Value and Virtue in a Godless Universe, p. 30. 
27. Thomas Nagel, Mortal Questions (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1979), p. 11. 
28. Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, trans. Martin Ostwald (Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1962), p. 8. See also Wielenberg, Value 
and Virtue in a Godless Universe, pp. 24-25. 
29. Singer, How Are We to Live? Ethics in an Age of Self-interest 
(Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995), p. 195. 
30. Kai Nielsen, Ethics without God, rev. ed. (Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 1990), pp. 227-28. 
31. Judaism does not have the strong emphasis, indeed obsession, 
with eternal life found in Christianity and Islam. 
32. Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet. 
33. Carl Sagan, Pale Blue Dot (London: Headliner, 1995). 
34. Richard Dawkins, Unweaving the Rainbow: Science, Delusion and 
the Appetite for Wonder (Boston, New York: Houghton Mifflin Co., 
1998), p. x. 
35. John Keats, "Lamia" (1820). 
36. Dawkins, Unweaving the Rainbow, p. 39. 
37. Ibid, p. 6. 
38. William Blake, "Auguries of Innocence" (c. 1803). 
39. Jonathan S. Abramowitz, Brett J. Deacon, Carol M. Woods, and 
David F. Tolin, "Association between Protestant Religiosity and Obses-
sive-Compulsive Symptoms and Cognitions," Depression and Anxiety 20 
(2004): 70-76. 
40. Antonie Lutz, Lawrence L. Greischar, Nancy B. Rawlings, 
Mathew Ricard, and Richard J. Davidson, "Long-term Meditators Self-
induce High-amplitude Gamma Synchrony during Mental Practice," 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101, no. 46 (2004): 
16369-73. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Abramowitz, Jonathan S., Brett J. Deacon, Carol M. Woods, and David 
F. Tolin. "Association between Protestant Religiosity and Obses-
sive-Compulsive Symptoms and Cognitions." Depression and Anx-
iety 20 (2004): 70-76. 
Acocella, Joan. "Holy Smoke; What Were the Crusades Really About?" 
New Yorker, December 13, 2004. 
Adami, Christoph. Introduction to Artificial Life. New York: Springer, 
1998. 
Adami, Christoph, Charles Ofria, and Travis C. Collier. "Evolution of 
Biological Complexity." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences USA 97 (2000): 4463-68. 
Aguire, Anthony. "The Cold Big-Bang Cosmology as a Counter-example 
to Several Anthropic Arguments." Physical Review D64 (2001): 
083508. 
Aine, C. J. "A Conceptual Overview and Critique of Functional Neuro-
Imaging Techniques in Humans: I. MRI/fMRI and PET." Critical 
Reviews in Neurobiology 9, nos. 2-3 (1995): 229-309. 
261 

262 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Alexander, Richard D. The Biology of Moral Systems. Hawthorne, NY: 
Aldine de Gruyter, 1987. 
Alper, Matthew. The "God" Part of the Brain: A Scientific Interpretation of 
Human Spirituality and God. Brooklyn, NY: Rogue Press, 2001. 
Anderson, Walter Truett. The Truth about the Truth. New York: Jeremy P. 
Tarcher/Putnam, 1996. 
Aristotle. Nicomachean Ethics. Translated by Martin Ostwald. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1962. 
Arnhart, Larry. Darwinian Natural Right: The Biological Ethics of Human 
Nature. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1998. 
Asch, Solomon. Social Psychology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 
1952. 
Atkatz, David. "Quantum Cosmology for Pedestrians." American Journal 
of Physics 62 (1994): 619-27. 
Atkatz, David, and Heinz Pagels. "Origin of the Universe as Quantum 
Tunneling Event." Physical Review D25 (1982): 2065-73. 
Axelrod, Robert. The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic Books, 
1984. 
Baggini, Julian, and Jeremy Stranghorn. What Philosophers Think. 
London: Continuum, 2003. 
Ball, Philip. The Self-Made Tapestry: Pattern Formation in Nature. New 
York, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999. 
——. 
Critical Mass: How One Thing Leads to Another. New York: Farrar, 
Straus and Giroux, 2004. 
Barrett, Justin L. Why Would Anyone Believe in God? Walnut Creek, CA: 
AltaMira Press, 2004. 
Barrow, John D., and Frank J. Tipler. The Anthropic Cosmological Principle. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986. 
Begley, Sharon. "Science Finds God." Newsweek, July 20, 1998. 
Behe, Michael J. Darwin's Black Box: The Biochemical Challenge to Evolu-
tion. New York: Free Press, 1996. 
Benson H., J. A. Dusek, J. B. Sherwood, P. Lam, C. F. Bethea, et al. "Study 
of the Therapeutic Effects of Intercessory Prayer (STEP) in Cardiac 
Bypass Patients: A Multicenter Randomized Trial of Uncertainty 
and Certainty of Receiving Intercessory Prayer." American Heart 
Journal 151, no. 4 (2006): 934-42. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
263 
Bishop, Jeffrey P., and Victor J. Stenger. "Retroactive Prayer: Lots of His-
tory, Not Much Mystery, and No Science." British Medical Journal 
329 (2004): 1444-46. 
Blackmore, Susan. Dying to Live: Near-Death Experiences. Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 1993. 
Blaker, Kimberly, ed. The Fundamentals of Extremism: The Christian Right 
in America. New Boston, MI: New Boston Books, 2003. 
Blanke, Olaf, Stephanie Ortigue, Theodore Landis, and Margritta Seeck. 
"Stimulating Illusory Own-Body Perceptions." Nature 419 (Sep-
tember 19, 2002): 269-70. 
Bloom, Paul. Descartes' Baby: How the Science of Child Development 
Explains What Makes Us Human. New York: Basic Books, 2004. 
——. 
"Is God an Accident?" Atlantic 296, no. 5 (December 2005): 
105-12. 
Bohm, David, and B. J. Hiley. The Undivided Universe: An Ontological 
Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. London: Routledge, 1993. 
Boyer, Pascal. Religion Explained: The Evolutionary Origin of Religious 
Thought. New York: Basic Books, 2001. 
Brauer, Matthew J., Barbara Forrest, and Steven G. Gey. "Is It Science 
Yet?: Intelligent Design Creationism and the Constitution." Wash-
ington University Law Quarterly 83, no. 1 (2005), http://law.wustl  
.edu/WULQ/83-l/p%201%20Brauer%20Forrest%20Gey%20book  
%20pages.pdf (accessed December 28, 2005). 
Broom, Donald M. The Evolution of Morality and Religion. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2003. 
Brown, Warren S., Nancey Murphy, and H. Newton Malony, eds. What-
ever Happened to the Soul? Scientific and Theological Portraits of Human 
Nature. Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1998. 
Bupp, Nathan. "Follow-up Study on Prayer Therapy May Help Refute False 
and Misleading Information about Earlier Prayer Study." Commission 
for Scientific Medicine and Mental Health, July 22, 2005, http://csmmh  
.org/prayer/MANTRA.release.htm (accessed December 16, 2005). 
Byers, Nina. "E. Noether's Discovery of the Deep Connection between 
Symmetries and Conservation Laws." Israel Mathematical Conference 
Proceedings 
12 
(1999), http://www.physics.ucla.edu/~cwp/articles/  
noether.asg/noether.html (accessed July 1, 2006). 

264 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Byrd, Randolph C. "Positive Therapeutic Effects of Intercessory Prayer in 
a Coronary Care Unit Population." Southern Medical Journal 81, no. 
7 (1988): 826-29. 
Callahan, Tim. Bible Prophecy: Failure or Fulfillment. Altadena, CA: Mil-
lennium Press, 1997. 
Campbell, Alexander. "Our Position to American Slavery—No. V." Mil-
lennial Harbinger, ser. 3, vol. 2 (1845): 193. 
Carnap, Rudolf. "Testability and Meaning." Philosophy of Science B 3 
(1936): 19-21; B 4 (1937): 1-40. 
Carr, B. J., and M. J. Rees. "The Anthropic Principle and the Structure of 
the Physical World." Nature 278 (1979): 606-12. 
Carrier, Richard. "The Real Ten Commandments." Internet Infidels 
Library 
(2000), http://www.infidels.org/library/modern/features/  
2000/carrier2.html (accessed August 14, 2005). 
Carter, Brandon. "Large Number Coincidences and the Anthropic Prin-
ciple in Cosmology." In Confrontation of Cosmological Theory with 
Astronomical Data, edited by M.S. Longair, 291-98. Dordrecht: 
Reidel, 1974. Reprinted in Modern Cosmology and Philosophy, edited 
by John Leslie, 131-39. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1998. 
Cha, K. Y, D. P. Wirth, and R. A. Lobo. "Does Prayer Influence the Suc-
cess of In Vitro Fertilization-Embryo Transfer? Report of a Masked, 
Randomized Trial." Journal of Reproductive Medicine 46, no. 9 (Sep-
tember 2001): 781-87. 
Chopra, Deepak. Quantum Healing: Exploring the Frontiers of Mind/Body 
Medicine. New York: Bantam, 1989. 
——. Ageless Body, Timeless Mind: The Quantum Alternative to Growing 
Old. New York: Random House, 1993. 
Churchland, Patricia Smith. Neurophilosophy: Toward a Unified Science of 
the Mind/Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996. 
Churchland, Paul M. The Engine of Reason, the Seat of the Soul: A Philo-
sophical Journey into the Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996. 
Cicero, Marcus Tullius. De Natura Deorum or On the Nature of the Gods. 
Edited and translated by H. Rackham. New York: Loeb Classical 
Library, 1933. 
Cowen, J. L. "The Paradox of Omnipotence Revisited." Canadian Journal 
of Philosophy 3, no. 3 (March 1974): 435-45. Reprinted in The 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
265 
Impossibility of God, edited by Michael Martin and Ricki Monnier. 
Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2003. 
Craig, William Lane. The Kalâm Cosmological Argument. Library of Phi-
losophy and Religion. London: Macmillan, 1979. 
——. The Cosmological Argument from Plato to Leibniz. Library of Phi-
losophy and Religion. London: Macmillan, 1980. 
——. "The Historicity of the Empty Tomb of Jesus." New Testament 
Studies 31 (1985): 39-67, http://www.leaderu.com/offices/billcraig/  
docs/tomb2.html (accessed January 4, 2005). 
——. Reasonable Faith. Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 1994. 
Craig, William Lane, and Quentin Smith. Theism, Atheism, and Big Bang 
Cosmology. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997. 
——. 
"The Absurdity of Life without God," http://www.hisdefense 
.org/audio/wc_audio.html (accessed March 9, 2004). 
Dalai Lama. The Universe in a Single Atom: The Convergence of Science and 
Spirituality. New York: Random House, 2005. 
Darling, David J. Life Everywhere: The Maverick Science of Astrobiology. 
New York: Basic Books, 2001. 
Darwin, Charles. The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection. 
London: John Murray, 1859. 
——. The Correspondence of Charles Darwin 8, 1860. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1993. 
Davies, Paul. The Cosmic Blueprint. New York: Simon and Schuster, 
1988; Radnor, PA: Templeton Foundation Press, 2004. 
——. "Multiverse or Design: Reflections on a Third Way." Proceedings 
of Universe or Multiverse? Stanford University, March 2003, 
http://aca.mq.edu.au/PaulDavies/Multiverse_StanfordUniv_March  
2003.pdf (accessed January 4, 2005). 
Davis, Jefferson. "Inaugural Address as Provisional President of the 
Confederacy." Montgomery, AL, February 18, 1861. Confederate 
States of America Congressional Journal 1 (1861): 64-66, quoted in 
Dunbar Rowland, Jefferson Davis's Place in History as Revealed in His 
Letters, Papers, and Speeches, vol. 1, 286. Jackson, MS: Torgerson 
Press, 1923. 
Davis, J. J. "The Design Argument, Cosmic 'Fine Tuning,' and the 
Anthropic Principle." Philosophy of Religion 22 (1987): 139-50. 

266 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Dawkins, Richard. The Blind Watchmaker: Why the Evidence of Evolution 
Reveals a Universe without Design. London: Penguin Books, 1986. 
Paperback edition, London: Norton, 1987. 
——. River out of Eden. New York: HarperCollins, 1995. 
——. "God's Utility Function." Scientific American (November 1995): 85. 
——. Climbing Mount Improbable. New York, London: Norton, 1996. 
——. Unweaving the Rainbow: Science, Delusion and the Appetite for 
Wonder. Boston, New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1998. 
——. The God Delusion. Boston, New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2006. 
de Duve, Christian. Vital Dust. New York: Basic Books, 1995. 
Dembski, William A. The Design Inference. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1998. 
——. Intelligent Design: The Bridge between Science and Theology. 
Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1999. 
——. No Free Lunch: Why Specified Complexity Cannot Be Purchased 
without Intelligence. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2002. 
Dennett, Daniel. Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little, Brown, 1991. 
——. Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon. New York: 
Viking Penguin, 2006. 
Dever, William G. Recent Archaeological Discoveries and Biblical Research. 
Seattle and London: University of Washington Press, 1990. 
de Wall, Frans B. M. Good Natured: The Origins of Right and Wrong in 
Humans and Other Animals. Cambridge, MS: Harvard University 
Press, 1996. 
Doherty, Earl. The Jesus Puzzle: Did Christianity Begin with a Mythical 
Christ? Ottawa: Canadian Humanist Publications, 1999. 
Dorit, Robert. Review of Darwin's Black Box by Michael Behe. American 
Scientist (September/October 1997). 
Dossey, Larry. Healing Words: The Power of Prayer and the Practice of Med-
icine. San Francisco: Harper, 1993. 
——. Response to letter to the editor. Southern California Physician 
(December 2001): 46. 
Douady, S., and Y. Couder. "Phyllotaxis as a Physical Self-Organized 
Growth Process," Physical Review Letters 68 (1992): 2098. 
Drange, Theodore M. Nonbelief and Evil: Two Arguments for the Nonexis-
tence of God. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1998. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
267 
——. 
"Incompatible-Properties Arguments—A Survey." Philo 1, no. 2 
(1998): 49-60. In The Impossibility of God, edited by Michael Martin 
and Ricki Monnier, 185-97. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2003. 
Edis, Taner. "Darwin in Mind: 'Intelligent Design' Meets Artificial Intel-
ligence." Skeptical Inquirer 25, no. 2 (2001): 35-39. 
Elbert, Jerome W. Are Souls Real? Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 
2000. 
Eller, David. Natural Atheism. Cranford, NJ: American Atheist Press, 
2004. 
Ellis, George. Before the Beginning: Cosmology Explained. London, New 
York: Boyars/Bowerdean, 1993. 
Ely, Melvin Patrick. Israel on the Appomattox: A Southern Experiment in 
Black Freedom from the 1790s through the Civil War. New York: Alfred 
A. Knopf, 2005. 
Everitt, Nicholas. The Non-Existence of God. London, New York: Rout-
ledge, 2004. 
Fales, Evan. "Despair, Optimism, and Rebellion," http://www.infidels  
.org/library/modern/evan_fales/despair.html (accessed 
July 
6, 
2005). 
Faraoni, V., and F. I. Cooperstock. "On the Total Energy of Open Fried-
mann-Robertson-Walker Universes." Astrophysical Journal 587 
(2003): 483-86. 
Ferguson, Everitt. Background of Early Christianity. Third edition. Grand 
Rapids, MI: W. B. Eerdmans, 2003. 
Fernald, R. D. "Evolution of Eyes." Current Opinions in Neurobiology 10, 
no. 4 (2000): 444-50. 
Finkelstein, Israel, and Neil Asher Silberman. The Bible Unearthed: 
Archaeology's New Vision of Ancient Israel and the Origin of Its Sacred 
Texts. New York: Free Press, 2001. 
Fitelson, Brandon, Christopher Stephens, and Elliott Sober. "How Not 
to Detect Design—Critical Notice: William A. Dembski, The Design 
Inference." Philosophy of Science 66, no. 3 (1999): 472-88. 
Flack, Jessica C, and Frans B. M. de Wall. "'Any Animal Whatever' Dar-
winian Building Blocks of Morality in Monkeys and Apes." Journal 
of Consciousness Studies 7, nos. 1-2 (2000): 1-29. 
Flamm, Bruce L. "Faith Healing by Prayer." Review of "Does Prayer Influ-

268 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
ence the Success of In Vitro Fertilization-Embryo Transfer? Report of 
a Masked, Randomized Trial," by K. Y. Cha, D. P. Wirth, and R. A. 
Lobo, Scientific Review of Alternative Medicine 6, no. 1 (2002): 47-50. 
——. "Faith Healing Confronts Modern Medicine." Scientific Review of 
Alternative Medicine 8, no. 1 (2004): 9-14. 
——. 
"The Columbia 'Miracle' Study: Flawed and Fraud." Skeptical 
Inquirer 28, no. 5 (September/October 2004): 25-31. 
Forrest, Barbara, and Paul R. Gross. Creationism's Trojan Horse: The 
Wedge of Intelligent Design. Oxford and New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2004. 
Fox, Mark. Religion, Spirituality, and the Near-Death Experience. New 
York: Routledge, 2003. 
Franklin, Michael, and Marian Hetherly. "How Fundamentalism Affects 
Society." Humanist 57 (September/October 1997): 25. 
Freke, Timothy, and Peter Gandy. The Jesus Mysteries: Was the "Original 
Jesus" a Pagan God? New York: Harmony Books, 1999. 
Fulmer, Gilbert. "A Fatal Logical Flaw in Anthropic Design Principle Argu-
ments." International Journal for Philosophy of Religion 49 (2001): 101-10. 
Furman, Richard. "Exposition of the View of the Baptists Relative to the 
Colored Population of the United States to the Governor of South 
Carolina 1822." Transcribed by T. Lloyd Benson from the original 
text in the South Carolina Baptist Historical Collection, Furman Uni-
versity, 
Greenville, 
South 
Carolina. http://alpha.furman.edu/  
~benson/docs/rcd-fmnl.htm (accessed December 1, 2004). 
Gardner, Martin. "On Cellular Automata, Self-Reproduction, the 
Garden of Eden, and the Game of 'Life.'" Scientific American 224, no. 
2 (1971): 112-17. 
Gleason, Archer L. Encyclopedia of Bible Difficulties. Grand Rapids, MI: 
Zondervan, 2001. 
Gleick, James. Chaos: The Making of a New Science. New York: Viking, 1987. 
Glynn, Patrick. God: The Evidence. Rocklin, CA: Prima Publishing, 1997. 
Gonzalez, Guillermo, and Jay W. Richards. The Privileged Planet: How 
Our Place in the Cosmos Is Designed for Discovery. Washington, DC: 
Regnery, 2004. 
Goodstein, Laurie. "Intelligent Design Might Be Meeting Its Maker." 
Ideas and Trends, New York Times, December 4, 2005. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
269 
Gould, Stephen J. The Panda's Thumb. Norton: New York, 1980. 
——. Rocks of Ages: Science and Religion in the Fullness of Life. New York: 
Ballantine, 1999. 
Granqvist P., M. Fredrikson, P. Unge, A. Hagenfeldt, S. Valind, D. Larham-
mar, and M. Larsson. "Sensed Presence and Mystical Experiences Are 
Predicted by Suggestibility, Not by the Application of Transcranial Weak 
Complex Magnetic Fields." Neuroscience Letters 379, no. 1 (2005): 1-6. 
Greene, Joshua D., Leigh E. Nystrom, Andrew D. Engeli, John M. Dariey, 
and Jonathan D. Cohen. "The Neural Bases of Cognitive Conflict and 
Control in Moral Judgment." Neuron 44 (2004): 389-400. 
Gribbon, John. Deep Simplicity: Bringing Order to Chaos and Complexity. 
New York: Random House, 2004. 
Guminski, Arnold. "The Kalam Cosmological Argument: The Ques-
tions of the Metaphysical Possibility of an Infinite Set of Real Enti-
ties." Philo 5, no. 2 (Fall/Winter 2002): 196-215. 
Guth, Alan. The Inflationary Universe. New York: Addison-Wesley, 1997. 
Guthrie, Stewart Elliott. Faces in the Clouds: A New Theory of Religion. 
New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993. 
Haack, Susan. Defending Science—within Reason. Amherst, NY: Prome-
theus Books, 2003. 
Hamer, Dean H. The God Gene: How Faith Is Hardwired into Our Genes. 
New York: Doubleday, 2004. 
Harnik, Roni, Graham D. Kribs, and Gilad Perez. "A Universe without 
Weak Interactions." Physical Review D74 (2006): 035006. 
Harris, Sam. The End of Faith: Religion, Terror, and the Future of Reason. 
New York: Norton, 2004. 
——. Letter to a Christian Nation. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2006. 
Harris, W. S., M. Gowda, J. W. Kolb, C. P. Strychacz, J. L. Vacek, P. G. 
Jones, A. Forker, J. H. O'Keefe, and B. D. McCallister. "A Random-
ized, Controlled Trial of the Effects of Remote, Intercessory Prayer 
on Outcomes in Patients Admitted to the Coronary Care Unit." 
Archives of Internal Medicine 159 (1999): 2273-78. 
Hartle, J. B., and S. W. Hawking. "Wave Function of the Universe." Phys-
ical Review D28 (1983): 2960-75. 
Haught, James A. Holy Horrors: An Illustrated History of Religious Murder 
and Madness. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1990. 

270 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Hauser, Marc, and Peter Singer. "Morality without Religion." Free 
Inquiry 26, no. 1 (December 2005/January 2006): 18-19. 
Hawking, Stephen W. A Brief History of Time: From the Big Bang to Black 
Holes. New York: Bantam, 1988. 
Hawking, Steven W., and Roger Penrose. "The Singularities of Gravita-
tional Collapse and Cosmology." Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
London A, 314 (1970): 529-48. 
Helms, Randel. Gospel Fictions. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1988. 
Hoffmann, Joseph R., and Gerald A. Larue, eds. Jesus in History and 
Myth. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1986. 
Hogan, Craig J. "Why the Universe Is Just So." Reviews of Modern Physics 
72 (2000): 1149-61. 
Hoyle, F., D. N. F. Dunbar, W. A. Wensel, and W. Whaling, "A State in 
C12 Predicted from Astrophysical Evidence." Physical Review Letters 
92 (1953): 1095. 
Huemer, Michael. "Some Failed Responses to the Problem of Evil." Talk 
at the University of Colorado Theology Forum, February 16, 2005, 
Boulder, Colorado. 
Ionnidas, John P. A. "Why Most Published Research Findings Are False." 
Public Library of Science, Medicine 2, no. 8 (2005). http://medicine 
.plosjournals.org/perlserv/?request=get-document&doi=10.1371/ 
journal.pmed.0020124 (accessed December 2, 2005). 
John Paul II. Address to the Academy of Sciences, October 28, 1986. 
L'Osservatore Romano. English edition. November 24, 1986. 
Johnson, Phillip E. Evolution as Dogma: The Establishment of Naturalism. 
Dallas, TX: Haughton Publishing Co., 1990. 
——. 
Darwin on Trial. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1991. 
——. 
Reason in the Balance: The Case Against Naturalism in Science, Law, 
and Education. Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1995. 
——. 
Defeating Darwinism by Opening Minds. Downers Grove, IL: 
InterVarsity Press, 1997. 
——. 
The Wedge of Truth: Splitting the Foundations of Naturalism. 
Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2001. 
Johnson, Phillip E., and Howard van Till. "God and Evolution: An 
Exchange." First Things 34 (1993): 32-41. 
Johnson, Steven. Emergence: The Connected Lives of Ants, Brains, Cities, 
and Software. New York: Touchstone, 2001. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
271 
Johnson, Timothy. "Praying for Pregnancy: Study Says Prayer Helps 
Women Get Pregnant." ABC Television. Good Morning America, 
October 4, 2001. 
Kane, Gordon L., Michael J. Perry, and Anna N. Zytkow. "The Beginning of 
the End of the Anthropic Principle." New Astronomy 7 (2002): 45-53. 
Katz, Leonard D., ed. Evolutionary Origins of Morality: Cross-Disciplinary 
Perspectives. Bowling Green, OH: Imprint Academic, 2000. 
Kauffman, Stuart. At Home in the Universe: The Search for the Laws of Self-
Organization and Complexity. New York and Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1995. 
Kaufmann, Walter. The Faith of a Heretic. Paperback edition. New York: 
Doubleday, 1963. 
Kirsch, Jonathan. God Against the Gods: The History of the War between 
Monotheism and Polytheism. New York: Viking Compass, 2004. 
Kitcher, Philip J. Abusing Science: The Case Against Creationism. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982. 
Klee, Robert. "The Revenge of Pythagoras: How a Mathematical Sharp 
Practice Undermines the Contemporary Design Argument in Astro-
physical Cosmology." British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 53 
(2002): 331-54. 
Krauss, Lawrence. Quintessence: The Mystery of the Missing Mass in the 
Universe. New York: Basic Books, 2000. 
Kristof, Nicholas D. "God and Evolution." New York Times, February 12, 
2005, op-ed. 
Krucoff, M. W., S. W Crater, et al. "Music, Imagery, Touch, and Prayer as 
Adjuncts to Interventional Cardiac Care: The Monitoring and Actu-
alization of Noetic Trainings (MANTRA) II Randomized Study." 
Lancet 366 (July 16, 2005): 211-17. 
Kuhn, Thomas. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1970. 
Kurtz, Paul. Forbidden Fruit: The Ethics of Humanism. Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 1988. 
Kushner, Harold S. When Bad Things Happen to Good People. New York: 
Avon Books, 1987. 
Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. Philosophy in the Flesh: The Embodied 
Mind and Its Challenge to Western Thought. New York: Basic Books, 
1999. 

272 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Lamont, Corliss. The Illusion of Immortality. Fifth edition. New York: 
Continuum, 1990. First published in 1935. 
Larson, Edward J. and Larry Witham. "Leading Scientists Still Reject 
God." Nature 394 (1998): 313. 
Leibovici, Leonard. "Alternative (Complementary) Medicine: A Cuckoo 
in the Nest of Empiricist Reed Warblers." British Medical Journal 319 
(1999): 1629-31. 
——. 
"Effects of Remote, Retroactive Intercessory Prayer on Outcomes 
in Patients with Bloodstream Infections: A Controlled Trial." British 
Medical Journal 323 (2001): 1450-51. 
Leslie, John, ed. Modern Cosmology and Philosophy. Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 1998. 
Linde Andre. "Quantum Creation of the Inflationary Universe." Lettere 
Al Nuovo Cimento 39 (1984): 401-405. 
Livio, M., D. Hollowell, A. Weiss, and J. Truran. "The Anthropic Signif-
icance of the Existence of an Excited State of 12C." Nature 340 
(1989): 281-84. 
Loftus, Elizabeth F. Eyewitness Testimony. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1996. 
Longair, M. S., ed. Confrontation of Cosmological Theory with Astronomical 
Data. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1974. 
Lutz, Antonie, Lawrence L. Greischar, Nancy B. Rawlings, Mathew 
Ricard, and Richard J. Davidson. "Long-term Meditators Self-induce 
High-amplitude Gamma Synchrony during Mental Practice." Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101, no. 46 (2004): 
16369-73. 
Mackie, J. J. "Evil and Omnipotence." Mind 64 (1955): 200-12. 
Reprinted in The Impossibility of God, edited by Michael Martin and 
Ricki Monnier, 61-105. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2003. 
Manson, Neil A. "There Is No Adequate Definition of 'Fine-tuned for 
Life,'" Inquiry 43 (2000): 341-52. 
Markale, Jean. Montségur and the Mystery of the Cathars. Translated by 
Jon Graham. Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions, 2003. 
Martin, Michael, and Ricki Monnier, eds. The Impossibility of God. 
Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2003. 
McCabe, Joseph. The Sources of Morality of the Gospels. London: Watts 
and Co., 1914. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
273 
McDowell, Josh. Evidence That Demands a Verdict. San Bernardino, CA: 
Here's Life Publishers, 1972, 1979. 
Meyer, Stephen C. "The Origin of Biological Information and the 
Higher Taxonomic Categories." Proceedings of the Biological Society of 
Washington 117, no. 2 (2004): 213-39. 
Miller, Kenneth R. "Life's Grand Design." Technology Review 97, no. 2 
(1994): 24-32. 
——. 
Finding Darwin's God: A Scientist's Search for a Common Ground 
between God and Evolution. New York: HarperCollins, 1999. 
Miller, Ruth, Larry S. Miller, and Mary R. Langenbrunner. "Religiosity 
and Child Sexual Abuse: A Risk Factor Assessment." Journal of Child 
Sexual Abuse 6, no. 4 (1997): 14-34. 
Miller, Stanley L. "A Production of Amino Acids under Possible Primi-
tive Earth Conditions." Science 117 (1953): 528-29. 
Moll, Jorge, Ricardo de Oliveira-Souza, Ivanel E. Bramati, and Jordan 
Grafman. "Functional Networks in Emotive and Nonmoral Social 
Judgments." Neurolmage 16 (2002): 696-703. 
Mongan, T. R. "Simple Quantum Cosmology: Vacuum Energy and Ini-
tial State." General Relativity and Gravitation 37 (2005): 967-70. 
Monkerud, Don. "Faith No More." In These Times 27, no. 9 (March 10, 
2003). 
http://inthesetimes.com/comments.php?id=105_0_2_0_C 
(accessed February 19, 2005). 
Mooney, Chris. The Republican War on Science. New York: Perseus Books 
Group, 2005. 
Moreland, J. P., and Kai Nielsen. Does God Exist? The Debate between The-
ists & Atheists. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1993. 
Morriston, Wes. "Creation Ex Nihilo and the Big Bang." Philo 5, no. 1 
(2002): 23-33. 
Muller, H. J. "Reversibility in Evolution Considered from the Stand-
point of Genetics." Biological Reviews 14 (1939): 261-80. 
Murphy, Dean E., and Neela Banjeree. "Catholics in U.S. Keep Faith, but 
Live With Contradictions." New York Times, April 11, 2005. 
Nagel, Thomas. Mortal Questions. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1979. 
Nakamura, Takashi, H. Uehara, and T. Chiba. "The Minimum Mass of 
the First Stars and the Anthropic Principle." Progress of Theoretical 
Physics 97 (1997): 169-71. 

274 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
National Academy of Sciences. Teaching About Evolution and the Nature 
of Science. Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences, 1998, 
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/5787.html (accessed March 5, 2006). 
Nelson-Pallmeyer, Jack. Is Religion Killing Us? Violence in the Bible and the 
Quran. Harrisburg, PA: Trinity Press International, 2003. 
Newberg, Andrew, and Eugene d'Aquili. Why God Won't Go Away. New 
York: Ballantine Books, 2001. 
Nguyen, Tommy. "Smithsonian Distances Itself from Controversial 
Film." Washington Post, June 2, 2005. 
Nickell, Joe. Inquest on the Shroud of Turin. Amherst, NY: Prometheus 
Books, 1987. 
——. 
"Bone (Box) of Contention: The James Ossuary." Skeptical 
Inquirer 27, no. 2 (March/April 2003): 19-22. 
Nielsen, Kai. Ethics without God. Revised edition. Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 1990. 
Noether, E. "Invarianten beliebiger Differentialausdrücke." Nachr. d. 
König. Gesellsch. d. Wiss. zu Göttingen, Math-phys. Klasse (1918): 
37-44. See Nina Byers, "E. Noether's Discovery of the Deep Con-
nection between Symmetries and Conservation Laws," Israel Mathe-
matical Conference Proceedings 12 (1999), http://www.physics.ucla  
.edu/~cwp/articles/noether.asg/noether.html (accessed 
July 
1, 
2006), for English translation. 
Noonan, John T., Jr. A Church That Can and Cannot Change: The Devel-
opment of Catholic Moral Teaching. Notre Dame, IN: University of 
Notre Dame Press, 2005. 
Numbers, Ronald. The Creationists: The Evolution of Scientific Creationism. 
New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1992. 
Oden, J. Tinsley. Acceptance remarks, 1993 John von Neumann Award 
Winner. United States Association of Computational Mechanics Bulletin 6, 
no. 3 (September 1993), http://www.usacm.org/Oden's_acceptance 
_remarks.htm (accessed February 22, 2005). 
Olshansky, Brian, and Larry Dossey. "Retroactive Prayer: a Preposterous 
Hypothesis?" British Medical Journal 327 (2003): 1460-63. 
Olshansky, S. Jay, Bruce Carnes, and Robert N. Butler. "If Humans Were 
Built to Last." Scientific American (March 2001). 
Oppy, Graham. "Arguing About the Kalam Cosmological Argument." 
Philo 5, no. 1 (Spring/Summer 2002): 34-61. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
275 
Orr, H. Allen. "Darwin v. Intelligent Design (Again): The Latest Attack 
on Evolution Is Cleverly Argued, Biologically Informed—And 
Wrong." Boston Review (1998). 
Overman, Dean L. A Case Against Accident and Self-Organization. New 
York, Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield, 1997. 
Overton, William R. McLean v. Arkansas, United States District Court 
Opinion, 1982. 
Paley, William. Natural Theology or Evidences of the Existence and Attrib-
utes of the Deity Collected from the Appearance of Nature. London: Hal-
liwell, 1802. 
Parsons, Keith. God and the Burden of Proof : Platinga, Swinburne, and the 
Analytical Defense of Theism. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1989. 
——. 
"Is There a Case for Christian Theism?" in Does God Exist? The 
Debate between Theists & Atheists, by J. P. Moreland and Kai Nielsen. 
Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1993. 
Paul, Gregory S. "The Great Scandal: Christianity's Role in the Rise of 
the Nazis." Free Inquiry 23, no. 4 (October/November 2003): 
20-29; 24, no. 1 (December 2003/January 2004): 28-34. 
Pennock, Robert T. Tower of Babel: The Evidence Against the New Cre-
ationism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999. 
Perakh, Mark. "Not a Very Big Bang about Genesis" (December 2001). 
Online at Talk Reason, http://www.talkreason.org/articles/schroeder  
.cfm (accessed December 15, 2004). 
——. 
Unintelligent Design. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2003. 
Perlmutter, S., G. Aldering, G. Goldhaber, R. A. Knop, P. Nugent, P. G. 
Castro, S. Deustua, et al. "Measurements of Omega and Lambda 
from 42 High-Redshift Supernovae." Astrophysical Journal 517 
(1999): 565-86. 
Persinger, Michael A. "Paranormal and Religious Beliefs May Be Medi-
ated Differently by Subcortical and Cortical Phenomenological 
Process of the Temporal (Limbic) Lobes." Perceptual and Motor Skills 
76 (1993): 247-51. 
Petre, Jonathan. "Power of Prayer Found Wanting in Hospital Trial." 
News Telegraph, 
October 15, 2003. http://news.telegraph.co.uk/  
news/main.jhtml?xml=/news/2003/10/15/npray15.xml 
(accessed 
December 6, 2004). 
Pius XII. Humani Generis. August 12, 1950. 

276 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Pius XII. "The Proofs for the Existence of God in the Light of Modern 
Natural Science." Address of Pope Pius XII to the Pontifical 
Academy of Sciences, November 22, 1951. Reprinted as "Modern 
Science and the Existence of God." Catholic Mind 49 (1972): 
182-92. 
Popper, Karl. The Logic of Scientific Discovery. English edition. London: 
Hutchinson; New York: Basic Books, 1959. Originally published in 
German. Vienna: Springer Verlag, 1934. 
——. "Natural Selection and the Emergence of Mind." Dialectica 32 
(1978): 339-55. 
——. "Metaphysics and Criticizability." In Popper Selections, edited by 
David Miller. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1985. Orig-
inally published in 1958. 
Poundstone, William. The Rescursive Universe. New York: Morrow, 1985. 
Press, W. H., and A. P. Lightman. "Dependence of Macrophysical Phe-
nomena on the Values of the Fundamental Constants." Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London A 310 (1983): 323-36. 
Pullman, Bernard. The Atom in the History of Human Thought. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1998. 
Rachels, James. "God and Moral Autonomy." In Can Ethics Provide 
Answers? And Other Essays in Moral Philosophy. New York: Rowman 
& Littlefield, 1997. Reprinted in The Impossibility of God, edited by 
Michael Martin and Ricki Monnier, 45-58. Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 2003. 
Rachels, James, and David Roche. "A Bit Confused: Creationism and 
Information Theory." Skeptical Inquirer 25, no. 2 (2001): 40-42. 
Radin, Dean. The Conscious Universe: The Scientific Truth of Psychic Phe-
nomena. New York: HarperEdge, 1997. 
Ramachandran, V. S. "God and the Temporal Lobes of the Brain." Talk 
at the conference Human Selves and Transcendental Experiences: A 
Dialogue of Science and Religion, University of California, San 
Diego, January 31, 1998. 
Reiss, A., A. V. Filippenko, P. Challis, A. Clocchiattia, A. Diercks, P. M. 
Garnavich, R. L. Gilliland, et al. "Observational Evidence from 
Supernovae for an Accelerating Universe and a Cosmological Con-
stant." Astronomical Journal 116 (1998): 1009-38. 
Ross, Hugh. The Creator and the Cosmos: How the Greatest Scientific Dis-

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
277 
coveries of the Century Reveal God. Revised edition. Colorado Springs: 
Navpress, 1995. First published in 1993. 
——. 
"Astronomical Evidences for a Personal, Transcendent God." In 
The Creation Hypothesis, edited by J. P. Moreland, 41-72. Downers 
Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1994. 
Rowland, Dunbar. Jefferson Davis's Place in History as Revealed in His Let-
ters, Papers, and Speeches. Jackson, MS: Torgerson Press, 1923. 
Rundle, Bede. Why There Is Something Rather Than Nothing. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 2004. 
Ruse, Michael, ed. But Is It Science? The Philosophical Questions in the Cre-
ation/Evolution Controversy. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1996. 
Sagan, Carl. Pale Blue Dot. London: Headliner, 1995. 
Salpeter, E. E. "Accretion of Interstellar Matter by Massive Objects." 
Astrophysical Journal 140 (1964): 796-800. 
Scalia, Antonin. "God's Justice and Ours." First Things 123 (May 2002): 
17-21. 
http://www.firstthings.com/ftissues/ft0205/articles/scalia 
.html (accessed March 15, 2005). 
Schellenberg, John L. Divine Hiddenness and Human Reason. Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 1993. 
Schick, Theodore, Jr. "Is Morality a Matter of Taste? Why Professional 
Ethicists Think That Morality Is Not Purely Subjective." Free Inquiry 
18, no. 4 (1998): 32-34. 
Schroeder, Gerald L. Genesis and the Big Bang. The Discovery of the Har-
mony between Modern Science and the Bible. New York: Bantam 
Books, 1992. 
——. 
The Science of God: The Convergence of Scientific and Biblical 
Wisdom. New York: Broadway Books, 1998. 
——. 
The Hidden Face of God: How Science Reveals the Ultimate Truth. 
New York: Free Press, 2001. 
Schuster, Angela M. H. "Not Phillip II of Macedon." Archaeology (April 
20, 2000). http://www.archaeology.org/online/features/macedon/ 
(accessed December 26, 2004). 
Shallit, Jeffery. Review of No Free Lunch by William Dembski. Biosystems 
66, nos. 1-2 (2002): 93-99. 
Shanks, Niall, and Karl H. Joplin. "Redundant Complexity: A Critical 
Analysis of Intelligent Design in Biochemistry." Philosophy of Science 
66 (1999): 268-98. 

278 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Shannon, C. E. "A Mathematical Theory of Communication." Bell System 
Technical Journal 27 (July 1948): 379-423; (October 1948): 623-25. 
Shannon, Claude, and Warren Weaver. The Mathematical Theory of Com-
munication. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1949. 
Shermer, Michael. In Darwin's Shadow: The Life and Science of Alfred 
Russel Wallace. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press, 2002. 
——. The Science of Good & Evil: Why People Cheat, Gossip, Care, Share, 
and Follow the Golden Rule. New York: Times Books, 2004. 
Sider, Ronald J. "The Scandal of the Evangelical Conscience." Christian-
ity Today 11, no. 1 (January/February 2005): 8. http://www  
.christianitytoday.com/bc/2005/001/3.8.html (accessed March 22, 
2005). 
Singer, Peter. How Are We to Live? Ethics in an Age of Self-interest. 
Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995. 
——. The President of God and Evil: The Ethics of George W. Bush. New 
York: Dutton, 2004. 
Smith, George. Atheism: The Case Against God. Amherst, NY: Prometheus 
Books, 1989. 
Stefanatos, Joanne. "Introduction to Bioenergetic Medicine." In Comple-
mentary and Alternative Veterinary Medicine: Principles and Practice, 
edited by Allen M. Schoen and Susan G. Wynn, chap. 16. St. Louis: 
Mosby-Year Book, 1998. 
Stenger, Victor J. Not by Design: The Origin of the Universe. Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 1988. 
——. Physics and Psychics: The Search for a World beyond the Senses. 
Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1990. 
——. The Unconscious Quantum: Metaphysics in Modern Physics and Cos-
mology. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995. 
——. "Bioenergetic Fields." Scientific Review of Alternative Medicine 3, 
no. 1 (Spring/Summer 1999). 
——. Timeless Reality: Symmetry, Simplicity, and Multiple Universes. 
Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2000. 
——. "Natural Explanations for the Anthropic Coincidences." Philo 3, 
no. 2 (2001): 50-67. 
——. Has Science Found God? The Latest Results in the Search for Purpose 
in the Universe. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2003. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
279 
——. 
"Fitting the Bible to the Data." Skeptical Inquirer 23, no. 4 
(1999): 67. Online at Secular Web, http://www.infidels.org/library/  
modern/vic_stenger/schrev.html (accessed December 13, 2004). 
——. 
The Comprehensible Cosmos: Where Do the Laws of Physics Come 
From? Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2006. 
Sterne, Jonathan A., and George Davey Smith. "Sifting the Evidence— 
What's Wrong with Significance Tests?" British Medical Journal 322 
(2001): 226-31. 
Stokes, Douglas M. "The Shrinking Filedrawer: On the Validity of Statis-
tical Meta-Analysis in Parapsychology." Skeptical Inquirer 25, no. 3 
(2001): 22-25. 
Swinburne, Richard. The Existence of God. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1979. 
——. 
"Argument from the Fine-Tuning of the Universe." In Modern 
Cosmology and Philosophy, edited by John Leslie, 160-79. Amherst, 
NY: Prometheus Books, 1998. 
Tart, Charles T. "A Psychophysiological Study of Out-of-the-Body Expe-
riences in a Selected Subject." Journal of the American Society for Psy-
chical Research 62 (1968): 3-27. 
Tegmark, Max. "Does the Universe in Fact Contain Almost No Informa-
tion?" Foundations of Physics Letters 9, no. 1 (1996): 25-42. 
Thomson, Keith. Before Darwin: Reconciling God and Nature. New Haven 
and London: Yale University Press, 2005. 
Thorne, Kip S. Black Holes & Time Warps: Einstein's Outrageous Legacy. 
New York: Norton, 1994. 
Totten, R. "The Intelligent Design of the Cosmos: A Mathematical Proof" 
(2000). 
http://www.geocities.com/worldview_3/mathprfcosmos 
 
.html (accessed February 6, 2005). 
Tryon, E. P. "Is the Universe a Quantum Fluctuation?" Nature 246 
(1973): 396-97. 
Ussery, David. "Darwin's Transparent Box: The Biochemical Evidence 
for Evolution." In Why Intelligent Design Fails: A Scientific Critique of 
the New Creationism, edited by Matt Young and Taner Edis, chap. 4. 
New Brunswick, NJ, and London: Rutgers University Press, 2004. 
Vilenkin, Alexander. "Birth of Inflationary Universes." Physical Review 
D27 (1983): 2848-55. 
——. "Quantum Creation of Universes." Physical Review D30 (1984): 509. 

280 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Walton, Douglas. "Can an Ancient Argument of Carneades on Cardinal 
Virtues and Divine Attributes Be Used to Disprove the Existence of 
God?" Philo 2, no. 2 (1999): 5-13. Reprinted in The Impossibility of 
God, edited by Michael Martin and Ricki Monnier, 35-44. Amherst, 
NY: Prometheus Books, 2003. 
Ward, Peter D., and Donald Brownlee. Rare Earth: Why Complex Life Is 
Uncommon in the Universe. New York: Copernicus, 2000. 
Weinberg, Steven. "The Cosmological Constant Problem." Reviews of 
Modern Physics 61 (1989): 1-23. 
——. 
"The Revolution That Didn't Happen." New York Review of Books, 
October 8, 1998. 
——. 
"A Designer Universe?" New York Review of Books, October 21, 
1999. Reprinted in the Skeptical Inquirer (September/October 
2001): 64-68. 
Wells, G. A. The Historical Evidence for Jesus. Amherst, NY: Prometheus 
Books, 1988. 
Whitcomb, John C, Jr., and Henry M. Morris. The Genesis Flood: The Bib-
lical Record and Its Scientific Implications. Philadelphia: Presbyterian 
and Reformed Publishing Co., 1961. 
Wielenberg, Erik J. Value and Virtue in a Godless Universe. Cambridge, 
New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005. 
Wilczek, Frank. "The Cosmic Asymmetry between Matter and Anti-
matter." Scientific American 243, no. 6 (1980): 82-90. 
Will, Clifford M. Was Einstein Right? Putting General Relativity to the Test. 
New York: Basic Books, 1986. 
Wolfram, Stephen. A New Kind of Science. Champagne, IL: Wolfram 
Media, 2002. 
Wright, Robert. The Moral Animal: Why We Are the Way We Are: The New 
Science of Evolutionary Psychology. New York: Vintage Books, 1994. 
Xin Yan, F. Lu, H. Jiang, X. Wu, W. Cao, Z. Xia, H. Shen, et al. "Certain 
Physical Manifestation and Effects of External Qi of Yan Xin Life 
Science Technology." Journal of Scientific Exploration 16, no. 3 
(2002): 381-411. 
Young, Matt, and Taner Edis, eds. Why Intelligent Design Fails: A Scien-
tific Critique of the New Creationism. New Brunswick, NJ, and 
London: Rutgers University Press, 2004. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
281 
Zimmer, Carl. Soul Made Flesh: The Discovery of the Brain—and How It 
Changed the World. New York: Free Press, 2004. 
Zusne, Leonard, and Warren H. Jones. Anomalistic Psychology: A Study of 
Extraordinary Phenomena of Behavior and Experience. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Eribaum Associates, 1982. 

INDEX 
ABC News, 96 
Abominable Snowman, 18 
abortion, 196 
Abraham, 187 
acceleration of universe, 152 
Aguire, Anthony, 148 
Alcmaeon, 78 
Alexander the Great, 184 
Alpha Centauri, 155, 159 
Alzheimer's disease, 82, 103 
amino acids, 151 
Andromeda, 159 
angular momentum, 130 
anitna, 78 
anthropic principle, 145, 154. See 
also fine-tuning argument 
Apache creation myth, 174 
Apostles' Creed, 103 
Aquinas, Thomas, 210 
Aristotle, 78, 80, 251 
Asch, Solomon, 196 
astrobiology, 142 
atomism, 79 
Augustine, Saint, 103 
Bach, J. S., 254 
backward causality, 98 
bad design, argument from, 68 
Ball, Philip, 61, 62 
Barna Group, 195 
Barrow, John, 145 
Baylor University, 58 
Beagle, HMS, 61 
Behe, Michael, 54, 55, 57, 58, 60 
283 

284 
INDEX 
Benson, Herbert, 101 
beryllium, 150 
Beziers, France, 205 
Bible Unearthed, The (Finklestein 
and Silberman), 185 
big bang, 116, 121, 122, 125, 
126, 131, 148, 173, 175 
Bigfoot, 18 
bioenergetic field, 85 
Bishop, Jeffery P., 98, 101 
black hole, 38, 118-20, 174 
Blackmore, Susan, 104 
Blake, William, 256 
Blaker, Kimberly, 250 
Blanke, Olaf, 83 
Blind Watchmaker, The (Dawkins), 
70 
Bliss Institute of Applied Politics, 
207 
Bloom, Paul, 244 
Bohm, David, 124 
Bohm's quantum mechanics, 124 
Bouyeri, Mohammed, 206 
Boyer, Pascal, 244 
Boyle, Robert, 81 
Brahms, Johannes, 254 
brain science, 82 
British Medical Journal, 92, 98 
Britton, John, 206 
Brown, Warren S., 106 
Brownlee, Donald, 142 
Bryan, William Jennings, 53 
Buddhism, 199, 235, 257 
Bush, George W., 205, 217, 246, 249 
Butler, Robert N., 69 
Caesar Augustus, 178 
Cairo Museum, 183 
Callahan, Tim, 182 
Calvin, John, 240 
Campbell, Alexander, 202 
Campus Crusade for Christ, 176 
Carnap, Rudolf, 26 
Carnes, Bruce, 69 
Carter, Brandon, 145 
Cartesian dualism, 79, 105 
catalytic closure, 64 
Cathar faith, 205 
cellular automata, 65 
Center for Science and Culture, 
140 
Center for Spirituality, Theology 
and Health, 100 
Cha, Kwang, 96 
Charles II, 81 
chi. See qi 
Chinese creation myth, 174 
Chopra, Deepak, 163 
Christmas story, 178 
Christus, 180 
Cicero, Marcus Tullius, 10 
classical mechanics. See New-
tonian mechanics 
Code of Hammurabi, 201 
Columbia "miracle" study, 96, 97 
Columbia University, 96, 97 
Community Covenant Church, 96 
complex specified information, 
62 
Confucius, 198 
conservation of energy, 115, 116, 
130, 131, 134, 146 

INDEX 
285 
conservation of information, 57 
conservation of mass, 116 
conservation of momentum, 130 
Constantine (emperor), 223 
Constitution (US), 200, 248 
Cook, Jeff, 239 
Copernicus, Nicolaus, 28, 49, 80 
cosmic microwave background, 
115, 163, 256 
cosmological constant, 151-52 
cosmological constant problem, 
151-52. See also vacuum 
energy 
Couder, Yves, 63 
Council of Trent, 103 
Craig,William Lane, 122-24, 180, 
184, 210, 251 
creationism, 52-54 
creationists, 52-54 
creation science, 53, 59 
Crookes, William, 90 
Dalai Lama, 235, 250 
Damascus, 187 
dark energy, 38, 152, 162, 174 
dark matter, 38, 157, 162, 174 
Darling, David, 144 
Darrow, Clarence, 53 
Darwin, Charles, 49, 51, 61, 70, 
193, 194, 209 
Darwin, Erasmus, 49 
David, King, 187 
David and Goliath, 254 
Davies, Paul, 161 
Davis, Jefferson, 202 
Davis, John Jefferson, 145 
Dawkins, Richard, 56, 70-71, 
255-56 
de Duve, Christian, 162 
design, argument from, 47-48, 
67 
De Rerum Natura (On the Nature 
of Things, Lucretius), 79 
Declaration of Independence, 
247 
deism, 12, 234, 235, 247 
Dembski, William, 54, 57-62 
Descartes, Rene, 80 
Dever, William, 186 
Devonian strata, 50 
Discovery, Age of, 158 
Discovery Institute, 54, 57, 140 
DNA, 49, 51, 142, 179, 256 
Doctrine of the Mean (Confucius), 
198 
dogmatism in science, 28 
Dossey, Larry, 97-98 
Douady, Stephanie, 63 
Dover Board of Education (Penn-
sylvania), 60 
Drange, Theodore, 22, 238 
Duke University, 29, 90, 99-100 
Ecclesiastic solution, 239 
eclipse of the sun, 127 
EEG. See electroencephalography 
Einstein, Albert, 36, 116, 120, 
122, 130, 139, 151, 158, 235 
Eisenhower, Dwight, 205 
elan vital. See vital force 
electric dipole, 41 
electric monopole, 40 

286 
INDEX 
electroencephalography, 83 
electromagnetic force, 146-47 
emergence, 106, 162 
Empedocles, 78 
English Civil War, 202 
Enlightenment, Age of, 200 
entropy, 57, 118, 121 
Epicurus, 79 
ESP. See extrasensory perception 
ether, electromagnetic, 37-38 
Europa, 141 
Euthyphro dilemma, 217 
Everitt, Nicolas, 30, 227 
evil, problem of, 22, 30-32, 40, 
215-24 
evolution of life, 15, 36, 49, 
50-59, 61, 63-65, 69-71, 84, 
143, 160, 161, 170, 175, 199, 
209, 232, 234-35, 245, 253 
Exodus, 170, 185-86, 230 
extrasensory perception, 89, 91, 
103 
failures of prophecy, 182 
faith-based initiatives, 249 
Fales, Evan, 240 
falsification, 14, 25-26, 187 
Faraday, Michael, 90 
Federal Bureau of Prisons, 194 
Ferguson, Everett, 180 
Fibonacci sequence, 62 
fine structure constant, 147 
fine-tuning argument, 48, 144, 
153-54 
Finkelstein, Israel, 185-86 
first law of thermodynamics, 116 
First World War, 205 
Fitzgerald-Lorentz contraction, 
158 
Flamm, Bruce L., 96 
fMRI. See functional magnetic 
resonance imaging 
Forrest, Barbara, 54 
Fosdick, Harry Emerson, 208 
Fox, Mark, 104 
frame of reference, 129-30 
Fredkin, Edward, 65 
Fulmer, Gilbert, 153 
functional magnetic resonance 
imaging, 82-83 
Furman, Richard, 202 
Furman University, 202 
Galen, 79 
Galileo Galilei, 28, 80 
Gallup Poll, 195 
gamma-ray bursts, 128 
Gandhi, Mahatma, 240 
gauge invariance, 130 
general relativity, 122, 139, 
151-52 
Genesis, 155, 173-75 
Gish, Duane, 53 
God gene, 244 
God module, 244-45 
God of the gaps, 13, 47, 126 
Golden Rule, 196-98 
Gonzalez, Guillermo, 138-41 
Good Morning America, 96 
Gould, Stephen Jay, 10, 55 
Grand Designer, 117 
gravitational constant, 145 

INDEX 
287 
Gray, Asa, 70 
Green, John, 207 
Gross, Paul, 54 
Guthrie, Stewart, 244 
Halley, Edmund, 128 
Halley's comet, 128 
Handel, George Frideric, 254 
haole, 79 
Hartle, James, 126 
Harvard University, 101 
Hawking, Stephen, 122, 126 
Heisenberg uncertainty principle, 
234 
helium, 150 
hiddenness of God, 22, 237 
Hinduism, 199 
Hitler, Adolf, 240, 249 
HIV, 23 
Hobbes, Thomas, 80 
Hogan, Craig, 149 
holistic reality, 106 
Hooke, Robert, 81 
Horton, Michael, 195 
Howard, John, 246 
Hoyle, Fred, 147, 149 
Hubble, Edwin, 118 
Huemer, Michael, 219 
humanistic morality, 209 
Hume, David, 21, 47, 114, 137 
hydrogen, 150 
hypothesis testing, 13 
Ichneumonidae, 71 
ID. See intelligent design 
Iliad, 252 
inflationary big bang, 117 
information, 57 
Inherit the Wind, 53 
Institute for Creation Science, 53 
intelligent design, 28-29, 48, 54, 
59, 61-62, 140 
in vitro fertilization-embryo 
transfer, 96 
Ionnidas, John, 92 
Irenaeus, 181 
irreducible complexity, 55 
Islamic theology, 123 
Isocrates, 198 
James Ossuary, 184 
Jefferson, Thomas, 247 
Jehovah's Witnesses, 48 
Jericho, 186 
John Paul II (pope), 84, 207 
Johnson, Phillip, 28, 194, 235 
Johnson, Timothy, 96 
Jones, John E., III (judge), 59-60 
Jordan, Michael, 145 
Josephus, 178-80 
Joshua, 187 
Journal of Reproductive Medicine, 
96-97 
Jupiter, 141, 155 
Justin Martyr, 181 
Kadesh-Barnea, 186 
kalâm cosmological argument, 
123, 125 
Kauffman, Stuart, 64-65, 162 
Kaufmann, Walter, 208 
Keats, John, 255-56 

288 
INDEX 
Kelvin, Lord, 51 
kinetic energy, 116 
Kitzmuller v. Dover area School Dis-
trict, 59 
Klee, Robert, 146 
Koenig, Harold, 100 
Kristof, Nicholas, 245 
Krucoff, Mitchell, 100 
Kushner, Harold, 217 
Kyoto University, 149 
Mackie, J. L., 217 
Magellanic Clouds, 156 
magnetic dipole, 40 
magnetic monopole, 40-41 
magnetic resonance imaging, 82 
Mahabharata, 198 
Manichaeism, 205, 223 
Mars, 141 
maximalists, 186, 187 
Maxwell, James Clark, 113 
Maxwell's equations, 257 
Mayo Clinic, 29, 101 
McCabe, Joseph, 199 
McDowell, Josh, 176-83, 195 
McLean v. Arkansas, 53, 59-60 
Mein Kampf (Hitler), 249 
Meir, Golda, 185 
metallicity, 143 
metanalysis, 93 
metaphysical naturalism, 15, 29 
methodological naturalism, 15, 
29 
Michelangelo, 254 
Milky Way, 141, 155 
Miller, Kenneth, 56, 70 
Miller, Stanley, 150 
mind-over-matter. See psycho-
kinesis 
minimalists, 186 
miracles, 114 
Monkey Trial, 53 
Monnier, Ricki, 30 
Mooney, Chris, 246 
Morris, Henry M., 53 
Moses, 185-87 
MRI. See magnetic resonance 
imaging 
Muller, Hermann Joseph, 56 
Murphy, Nancey, 105, 162 
lack-of-evidence argument, 22, 43 
Lamont, Corliss, 102 
Lancet, 100 
Laudan, Larry, 60 
Laws of Solon, 201 
Lehigh University, 58 
Leibniz, Gottfied, 139 
Leibovici, Leonard, 98 
Lemaître, Georges-Henri, 175 
Lemche, Niels Peter, 187 
Leviathan (Hobbes), 80 
life force. See vital force 
life principle, 161 
linear momentum, 14, 114, 130 
Livio, M., 149 
Lloyd George, David, 205 
Lobo, Rogerio, 97 
Loch Ness Monster, 18 
Lodge, Oliver, 90 
LSD, 82 
Lucretius, 79 

INDEX 
289 
mystical experience. See religious 
experiences 
Nagel, Thomas, 251 
Napoleon, 180, 183 
National Academy of Sciences 
(US), 10, 28 
National Museum of Natural His-
tory, 140 
natural selection, 49, 50 
natural theology, 10, 48 
NDE. See near-death experience 
near-death experience, 104 
Nebuchadnezzar II, 128 
nefesh, 78 
negative entropy, 57 
Nelson-Pallmeyer, Jack, 248 
New Testament, 176-79 
Newton, Isaac, 16, 80, 114, 128, 
139, 256 
Newtonian mechanics, 37, 40, 
125,135 
Newtonian physics. See New-
tonian mechanics 
Newton's law of gravity, 115 
Newton's laws of motion, 114 
New York Times, 207 
Nicomachean Ethics (Aristotle), 
251 
Niebuhr, Reinhold, 208 
Nielsen, Kai, 217, 252 
nirvana, 257 
NMR. See nuclear magnetic reso-
nance 
Noether, Emmy, 130 
noetic therapies, 99 
nonbelief, argument from, 238 
nonreductive physicalism, 105, 
162 
Noonan, John T., Jr., 203 
nuclear magnetic resonance, 82 
Numbers, Ronald, 52 
obsessive-compulsive disorder, 
257 
Odysseus, 254 
Old Testament, 176, 179, 181, 
182, 185, 201, 202 
Olshansky, S. Jay, 69, 98 
operational definition of time, 
120 
operational definitions, 36 
origin of life, 52, 64 
Origin of Species (Darwin), 49 
out-of-body experiences, 83 
Overton, William R. (judge), 59 
Oxford Circle, 81 
Paley, William, 48-49, 56, 68 
Pan Gu, 174 
pantheism, 12 
paradigm shift, 15 
parapsychology, 90-93 
Parsons, Keith, 123 
Pavone, Frank, 246, 247 
PEAR. See Princeton Engineering 
Anomalies Research 
Laboratory 
Penrose, Roger, 122 
Persinger, Michael, 83 
PET. See positron emission 
tomography 

290 
INDEX 
Philip II of Macedon, 183 
Philip III Arrhidaeus, 184 
Philo, 178, 179 
Pieta (Michelangelo), 254 
Pius XII (pope), 84, 121 
PK. See psychokinesis 
Planck length, 119, 122, 156 
Planck time, 119, 120, 122, 126, 
127, 131 
Planck's constant, 145 
Plato, 78 
Pluto, 155 
point-of-view invariance, 130 
Pontius Pilate, 180 
Popper, Karl, 26-27 
positron emission tomography, 
83 
postmodernism, 39, 132 
prayer studies, 94-102 
premise keepers, 234-35 
Price, George McCready, 53 
Priests for Life, 246 
Princeton Engineering Anomalies 
Research Laboratory, 90 
Princeton University, 83 
Proxima Centauri, 155, 158 
psyche, 78 
psychein, 78 
psychic phemonena, 89-91 
psychokinesis, 89 
pulsars, 128 
P-value, 92 
qi, 85, 86, 87 
quantum fluctuations, 126 
quantum gravity, 120 
quantum mechanics, 37, 40, 99, 
114-15, 120, 122, 124-25, 
150-51, 163, 234 
quark, 13, 38-39 
quasars, 128 
quintessence, 152 
Rabin, Yitzhak, 206 
Ramayana, 199 
Ramses II, 183, 185-86 
Randolph, Richard, 203 
rare earth, 142-43 
Reasons to Believe (Web site), 181 
reductive materialism, 105 
refutability, 26 
relativity, 37, 40, 114-16, 122, 
124, 130, 139, 151-52, 158 
religious experiences, 82, 170-72 
Republican Party, 246 
rest energy, 116 
resurrection of the flesh, 103 
Rhine, Joseph Banks, 90 
Richards, Jay, 138-41 
Romeo and Juliet (Shakespeare), 255 
Rosetta Stone, 183 
Ross, Hugh, 138, 181-83 
Royal Society for Promoting 
Natural Knowledge, 81 
ruah, 78 
Rube Goldberg, 69 
Rundle, Bede, 132 
Ruse, Michael, 59 
Sagan, Carl, 62, 255 
Saturn, 141 
Scalia, Antonin, 246-48 

INDEX 
291 
Schellenberg, John L., 237-38 
Schick, Theodore, 197 
Scientific American, 69 
scientific evidence, 23 
scientific revolutions, 15 
Scopes, John, 53 
Second Coming, 236 
second law of thermodynamics, 118 
Second World War, 205 
self-organization, 61, 65 
September 11, 2001, 248, 251 
Sermon on the Mount, 197, 198 
Seventh-day Adventists, 53 
Shakespeare, William, 255 
Shaw, George Bernard, 208 
Sheldonian Theater, 81 
Shroud of Turin, 10, 184 
Sider, Ronald, 195 
Silberman, Neil Asher, 185-86 
Singer, Peter, 252 
single photon emission com-
puted tomography, 83 
singularity, 122 
slavery, 202-203, 222-23, 248 
Smith, George, 208 
Solomon, 187 
Solomon's temple, 187-88 
Solon, 201 
South Carolina Baptist Conven-
tion, 202 
Southern Baptist Theological 
Seminary, 58 
special theory of relativity. See rel-
ativity 
SPECT. See single photon emis-
sion computed tomography 
speed of light, 116, 120, 145, 
158-59, 166, 257 
spiritual experiences. See religious 
experiences 
spiritus, 78 
spontaneous symmetry breaking, 
130, 147, 153 
Sri Lanka, 250 
St. Paul, 22, 203, 246 
St. Peter's Bascilica, 254 
standard model of particles and 
forces, 13, 36-38, 147 
Star Trek, 158 
Star Wars, 158 
statistical significance, 92-93 
stem cell research, 194, 196 
STEP project, 101 
string theory, 149 
supernovae, 128, 150 
Supreme Court, 53 
Swinburne, Richard, 115, 128, 218 
symmetries, 130 
Taaroa, 174 
Tahitian creation myth, 174 
Taoism, 199 
Tao Te Ching, 199 
Tegmark, Max, 163 
Tel Dan, Israel, 187 
Ten Commandments, 131, 185, 
200-201 
Tertullian, 181 
Thales of Miletus, 127 
theodicy, 216 
Theology Forum, University of 
Colorado, 237 

292 
INDEX 
theory of God, 41 
theory of relativity. See relativity 
therapeutic touch, 86 
thermoluminescence dosimeter, 
87 
Thomson, William. See Kelvin, 
Lord 
Tibetan Buddhism, 250 
time dilation, 158 
Tipler, Frank, 145 
Titan, 141 
TLD. See thermoluminescence 
dosimeter 
transitional forms, 50 
transitional species, 50-51 
University of Akron, 207 
University of California, Irvine, 
96 
University of Colorado, 237 
Urban II (pope), 205 
Urey, Harold, 151 
vacuum energy, 146, 151-52 
van Gogh, Theo, 206 
van Passen, Pierre, 208 
van Till, Howard, 235 
Vatican, 208 
vital force, 85 
Voltaire, 139, 244 
von Neumann, John, 9, 65 
Wagner, Martin, 154 
Wallace, Alfred Russel, 49 
Ward, Peter T., 142 
wedge of intelligent design, 54 
Weinberg, Steven, 150-51 
Whitcomb, John C, Jr., 53 
Wielenberg, Erik, 251 
Wilczek, Frank, 133 
Willis, Thomas, 81 
Wirth, Daniel P., 97 
Wolfram, Stephen, 66 
Wren, Christopher, 81 
Yan, Xin, 86-88 
young Earth, 54 
zero-point energy, 151 
Zimmer, Carl, 81 
Zoroastrianism, 205, 223 

ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
V
ictor Stenger grew up in a Catholic working-class neigh-
borhood in Bayonne, New Jersey. His father was a 
Lithuanian immigrant, his mother the daughter of Hungarian 
immigrants. He attended public schools and received a bachelor 
of science degree in electrical engineering from Newark College 
of Engineering (now New Jersey Institute of Technology) in 1956. 
While at NCE, he was editor of the student newspaper and 
received several journalism awards. 
Moving to Los Angeles on a Hughes Aircraft Company fellow-
ship, Stenger received a master of science degree in physics from 
UCLA in 1959 and a PhD in physics in 1963. He then took a 
position on the faculty of the University of Hawaii, retiring to 
Colorado in 2000. His current position is emeritus professor of 
physics and astronomy at the University of Hawaii and adjunct 
293 

294 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
professor of philosophy at the University of Colorado. Stenger is 
a fellow of CSICOP and a research fellow of the Center for 
Inquiry. Stenger has also held visiting positions on the faculties 
of the University of Heidelberg in Germany, Oxford in England 
(twice), and has been a visiting researcher at Rutherford Labora-
tory in England, the National Nuclear Physics Laboratory in Fras-
cati, Italy, and the University of Florence in Italy. 
His research career spanned the period of great progress in 
elementary particle physics that ultimately led to the current stan-
dard model. He participated in experiments that helped establish 
the properties of strange particles, quarks, gluons, and neutrinos. 
He also helped pioneer the emerging fields of very high-energy 
gamma-ray and neutrino astronomy. In his last project before 
retiring, Stenger collaborated on the underground experiment in 
Japan that showed for the first time that the neutrino has mass. 
Victor Stenger has had a parallel career as an author of critically 
well-received popular-level books that interface between physics 
and cosmology and philosophy, religion, and pseudoscience. 
These include: Not By Design: The Origin of the Universe (1988); 
Physics and Psychics: The Search for a World beyond the Senses (1990); 
The Unconscious Quantum: Metaphysics in Modern Physics and Cos-
mology (1995); Timeless Reality: Symmetry, Simplicity, and Multiple 
Universes (2000); Has Science Found God? The Latest Results in the 
Search for Purpose in the Universe (2003); and The Comprehensible 
Cosmos: Where Do the Laws of Physics Come From? (2006). 
Stenger and his wife Phylliss have been happily married since 
1962 and have two children and four grandchildren. They attribute 
their long lives to the response of evolution to the human need for 
babysitters, a task they joyfully perform. Phylliss and Vic are avid 
doubles tennis players, golfers, generally enjoy the outdoor life in 
Colorado, and travel the world as often as they can. 
Stenger maintains a popular Web site (a thousand hits per 
month), where much of his writing can be found, at http://  
www.colorado.edu/philosophy/vstenger/. 

