does not bear contradicting; that she once ridiculed him and another 
time rebuffed him are facts recorded by the Vita nuova. Some main-
tain that those facts are symbolic of others. If that were true, it would 
strengthen even more our certainty of an unhappy and superstitious 
love. Dante, when Beatrice was dead, when Beatrice was lost forever, 
played with the idea of finding her, to mitigate his sorrow. I believe 
that he erected the triple architecture of his poem simply to insert 
that encounter. Then what .usually happens in dreams happened to 
him. In adversity we dream of good fortune, and the intimate aware-
ness that we cannot attain it is enough to corrupt our dream, cloud-
ing it with sad restraints. That was the case with Dante. Refused 
forever by Beatrice, he dreamed of Beatrice, but he dreamed her 
very austere, but he dreamed her inaccessible, but he dreamed her 
in a chariot drawn by a lion that was a bird and was all bird or all 
lion when it was reflected in her eyes (Purgatorio, XXXI, 121). 
Those facts can be the prefiguration of a nightmare, which is set forth 
and described at length in the following canto. Beatrice disappears; 
an eagle, a vixen, and a dragon attack the chariot; the wheels and 
the pole are covered with feathers; then the chariot ejects seven 
heads (Trasformato cosi'l dificio santo Mise fuor teste); a giant and 
a harlot usurp Beatrice's place.2 
Infinitely Beatrice existed for Dante; Dante existed very little, 
perhaps not at all, for Beatrice. Our piety, our veneration cause us 
to forget that pitiful inharmony, which was unforgettable for Dante. 
I read and reread about the vicissitudes of their illusory encounter, 
and I think of two lovers who were dreamed by Alighieri in the hur-
ricane of the Second Circle and who are dark emblems, although he 
perhaps neither knew that nor intended it, of the happiness he did not 
attain. I think of Francesca and of Paolo, united forever in their Hell. 
Questi, che mai da me non fia diviso. With frightening love, whh 
anxiety, with admiration, with envy, Dante must have formed that 
line. 
~ One will object that such ugliness is the reverse of the preceding "beauty." 
Yes, but it is significant. Allegorically, the eagle's aggression represents the 
first persecutions; the vixen, heresy; the dragon, Satan or Mohammed or the 
Antichrist; the heads, the capital sins (Benvenuto da lmola) or the sacraments 
(Buti) ; the giant, Philip IV; the harlot, the Church. 
100 
The Analytical Language of John Wilkins 
I see that the fourteenth edition of the Encyclopaedia Britan-
nica has omitted the article about John Wilkins. The omission 
is justified if we remember how trivial it was {twenty lines of bio-
graphical data: Wilkins was born in 1614, Wilkins died in 1672 
Wilkins was the chaplain of the Prince Palatine, Charles Louis.' 
Wilkins was appointed recto~ of one of the colleges of Oxford; Wil~ 
kins was the first secretary of the Royal Society of London, etc.) ; 
but not if we consider the speculative work of Wilkins. He abounded 
in h.appy curiosities: he was interested in theology, cryptography, 
music, the manufacture of transparent beehives, the course of an 
invisible planet, the possibility of a trip to the moon, the possibility 
and the principles of a world language. It was to this last problem 
that he dedicated the book An Essay towards a Real Character and a 
Philosophical Language ( 600 pages in quarto, 1668). Our National 
Library does not have a copy of that book. To write this article I 
have consulted The Life and Times of John Wilkins by P. A. Wright 
Henderson ( 1910), the W oerterbuch der Philosophie by Fritz 
Mauthner ( 1924), Delphos by E. Sylvia Pankhurst ( 1935), and 
Dangerous Thoughts by Lancelot Hogben ( 1939). 
At one time or another, we have all suffered through those unap-
pealable debates in which a lady, with copious interjections and 
101 

anacolutha, swears that the word luna is more (or less) expressive 
than the word moon. Apart from the self-evident observation that 
the monosyllable moon may be more appropriate to represent a very 
simple object than the disyllabic word luna, nothing can be contrib-
uted to such discussions. After the compound words and derivatives 
have been taken away, all the languages in the world (not excluding 
Johann Martin Schleyer's volapiik and Peano's romance-like inter-
lingua) are equally inexpressive. There is no .edition of the Royal 
Spanish Academy Grammar that does not ponder "the envied 
treasure of picturesque, happy and expressive words in the very rich 
Spanish language," but that is merely an uncorroborated boast. Every 
few years the Royal Academy issues a dictionary to define Spanish 
expressions. In the universal language conceived by Wilkins around 
the middle of the seventeenth century each word defines itself. Des-
cartes had already noted in a letter dated November, 1629, that by 
using the decimal system of numeration we could learn in a single 
day to name all quantities to infinity, and to write them in a new 
language, the language of numbers.1 He also proposed the formation 
of a similar, general language that would organize and contain all 
human thought. Around 1664 John Wilkins began to undertake that 
task. 
Wilkins divided the universe into forty categories or classes, which 
were then subdivisible into differences, subdivisible in turn into 
species. To each class he assigned a monosyllable of two letters; to 
each difference, a consonant; to each species, a vowel. For example, 
de means element; deb, the first of the elements, fire; deba, a portion 
of the element of fi.re, a flame. In a similar language invented by Le-
tellier (1850) a means animal; ab, mammalian; abi, herbivorous; 
abiv, equine; abo, carnivorus; aboj, feline; aboje, cat; etc. In the 
language of Bonifacio Sotos Ochando ( 1845) imaba means building; 
1 Theoretically, the number of systems of numeration is unlimited. The most 
complex (for the use of divinities and angels) would record an infinite number 
of symbols, one for each whole number; the simplest requires only two. Zero 
is written 0, one 1, two 10, three 11, four 100, five 101, six 110, seven 111, 
eightlOOO ... It is the invention of Leibnitz, who was apparently stimulated by 
the enigmatic hexagrams of the Yi tsing. 
102 
imaca, brothel; imafe, hospital; imafo, pesthouse; imari, house; 
imaru, country estate; imede, pillar; imedo, post; imego, floor; imela, 
ceiling; imago, window; bire, bookbinder, birer, to bind books. (I 
found this in a book published in Buenos Aires in 1886: the Curso de 
lengua universal by Dr. Pedro Mata.) 
The words of John Wilkins's analytical language are not stupid 
arbitrary symbols; every letter is meaningful, as the letters of the 
Holy Scriptures were meaningful for the cabalists. Mauthner ob-
serves that children could learn Wilkins's language without knowing 
that it was artificial; later, in school, they would discover that it was 
also a universal key and a secret encyclopedia: 
Mter defining Wilkins's procedure, one must examine a problem 
that is impossible or difficult to postpone: the meaning of the fortieth 
table, on which the language is based. Consider the eighth category, 
which deals with stones. Wilkins divides them into the following 
classifications: ordinary (flint, gravel, slate) ; intermediate (marble, 
~er, coral}; precious (pearl, opal); transparent (amethyst, sap-
~hire) ; and msoluble (coal, clay, and arsenic). The ninth category 
IS almost as alarming as the eighth. It reveals that metals can be im-
perfect (vermilion, quicksilver) ; artificial (bronze, brass ) ; recre-
mental (filings, rust); and natural (gold, tin, copper). The whale 
appears in the sixteenth c~tegory: it is a viviparous, oblong fish. 
These ambiguities, redundances, and deficiencies recall those attrib-
uted by Dr. Franz Kuhn to a certain Chinese encyclopedia entitled 
~e~stia! Emporium of Benevolent Knowledge. On those remote pages 
It IS written that animals are divided into (a) those that belong to 
the Emperor, (b) embalmed ones, (c) those that are trained (d) 
suckling pigs, (e) mermaids, (f) fabulous ones, (g) stray dogs: (h) 
those that are included in this classification, ( i) those that tremble 
as if they were mad, (j ) innumerable ones, (k) those drawn with a 
very fine camel's hair brush, (1 ) others, (m) those that have just 
broken a flower vase, ( n ) those that resemble flies from a distance. 
The Bibliographical Institute of Brussels also resorts to chaos: it has 
parceled the universe into 1,000 subdivisions: Number 262 cor-
responds to the Pope; Number 282, to the Roman Catholic Church· 
Number 263, to the Lord's Day; Number 268, to Sunday schools; 
103 

Number 298, to Mormonism; and Number 294, to Brahmanism, 
Buddhism, Shintoism, and Taoism. It also tolerates heterogeneous 
subdivisions, for example, Number 179: "Cruelty to animals. Pro-
tection of animals. Moral Implications of duelling and suicide. Vari-
ious vices and defects. Various virtues and qualities." 
I have noted the arbitrariness of Wilkins, of the unknown (or 
apocryphal) Chinese encyclopedist, and of the Bihliographi~al In-
stitute of Brussels; obviously there is no classification of the universe 
that is not arbitrary and conjectural. The reason is very simple: we 
do not know what the universe is. "This world," wrote David Hume, 
" ... was only the first rude essay of some infant deity who afterwards 
abandoned it, ashamed of his lame performance; it is the work only 
of some dependent, inferior deity, and is the object of derision to his 
superiors; it is the production of old age and dotage in some super-
annuated deity, and ever since his death has run on .. . " (Dialogues 
Concerning Natural Religion, V, 1779). We must go even further; 
we must suspect that there is no universe in the organic, unifying 
sense inherent in that ambitious word. If there is, we must conjecture 
its purpose; we must conjecture the words, the definitions, the ety-
mologies, the synonymies of God's secret dictionary. 
But the impossibility of penetrating the divine scheme of the 
universe cannot dissuade us from outlining human schemes, even 
though we are aware that they are provisional. Wilkins's analytical 
language is not the least admirable of those schemes. It is composed 
of classes and species that are contradictory and vague; its device of 
using the letters of the words to indicate divisions and subdivisions 
is, without a doubt, ingenious. The word salmon does not tell us any-
thing about the object it represents; zana, the corresponding word, 
defines (for the person versed in the forty categories and the classes 
of those categories) a scaly river fish with reddish flesh. (Theo-
retically, a language in which the name of each being would indicate 
all the details of its destiny, past and future, is not inconceivable.) 
Hopes and utopias aside, these words by Chesterton are perhaps 
the most lucid ever written about language: 
Man knows that there are in the soul tints more bewildering, more num· 
berless, and more nameless than the colours of an autumn forest; 
104 
Yet he seriously believes that these things can every one of them, in all 
their tones and semi·tones, in aU their blends and unions, be accurately 
represented by an arbitrary system of grunts and squeals. He believes that 
an ordinary civilized stockbroker can really produce out of his own inside 
noises which denote all the mysteries of memory and all the agonies of 
desire. (G. F. Watts, 1904, p. 88) 
105 

