Research and Perspectives 
in Endocrine Interactions
Brain Crosstalk  
 in Puberty and 
Adolescence
J.-P. Bourguignon   J.-C. Carel 
Y. Christen (Eds.)
 123

Research and Perspectives in Endocrine
Interactions

More information about this series at
http://www.springer.com/series/5241

Jean-Pierre Bourguignon • Jean-Claude Carel •
Yves Christen
Editors
Brain Crosstalk in Puberty
and Adolescence

Editors
Jean-Pierre Bourguignon
Developmental Neuroendocrinology Unit,
G GIGA Neurosciences
University of Lie`ge
Lie`ge
Belgium
Jean-Claude Carel
Serv. d’endocrinologie diabetol. pe´diatr
Hopital Robert Debre
Paris
Paris
France
Yves Christen
Fondation IPSEN
Boulogne-Billancourt Cedex
France
ISSN 1861-2253
ISSN 1863-0685 (electronic)
ISBN 978-3-319-09167-9
ISBN 978-3-319-09168-6 (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09168-6
Springer Cham Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2014956674
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or
information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief excerpts
in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied speciﬁcally for the purpose of being
entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. Duplication
of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the
Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from
Springer. Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center.
Violations are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt
from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for
any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with
respect to the material contained herein.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

Contents
Drugs and the Adolescent Brain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Anne L. Wheeler and Paul W. Frankland
Gonadal Hormones Organize the Adolescent Brain and Behavior . . . . .
15
Cheryl L. Sisk
The Role of Pubertal Hormones in the Development of Gender Identity:
fMRI Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
S.M. Burke and J. Bakker
Pubertal Timing, Exploratory Behavior and Mental Health: A View
from a Clinician and Public Health Practitioner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
P.-A. Michaud
Puberty, the Brain and Mental Health in Adolescence . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Russell Viner
The Role of Puberty in Human Adolescent Brain Development . . . . . . .
75
Anne-Lise Goddings
The Adolescent Brain: Insights from Neuroimaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
Jay N. Giedd and Alexander H. Denker
Gene Networks, Epigenetics and the Control of Female Puberty . . . . . .
97
Alejandro Lomniczi, Juan Manuel Castellano, Hollis Wright, Basak Selcuk,
Kemal Sonmez, and Sergio R. Ojeda
Neuroendocrine and Molecular Mechanisms for the Metabolic Control
of Puberty: Recent Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
121
Manuel Tena-Sempere
Prostaglandin E2, Gliotransmission and the Onset of Puberty . . . . . . . .
137
Vincent Prevot and Jerome Clasadonte
v

Gonadotropic Axis Deﬁciency: A Neurodevelopmental Disorder . . . . . .
155
Lukas Huijbregts, Brooke Tata, and Nicolas de Roux
Changes in Pubertal Timing: Past Views, Recast Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . .
163
Jean-Pierre Bourguignon, Franc¸oise Domine, Fabienne Glowacz,
Marie-Christine Lebrethon, and Anne-Simone Parent
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
173
vi
Contents

Volume Editors
Bourguignon, Jean-Pierre
Department of Pediatrics, CHU de Lie`ge, and Developmental Neuroendocrinology
unit, GIGA Neurosciences, University of Lie`ge, Lie`ge, Belgium
Carel, Jean-Claude
Endocrinologie Diab.Ped. & Inserm U690, Universite´ Paris 7 Denis Diderot,
Hoˆpital Robert Debre´, 48, Boulevard Se´rurier, 75019 Paris, France
Christen, Yves
Fondation IPSEN, 65 Quai Georges Gorse, 92100 Boulogne-Billancourt, France
vii

.

List of Contributors
Julie Bakker Center of Expertise on Gender Dysphoria, Department of Medical
Psychology, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
GIGA Neuroscience, University of Liege, Liege, Belgium
Jean-Pierre Bourguignon Department of Pediatrics, CHU de Lie`ge, Site ND
Bruye`res, Lie`ge, Belgium
Developmental Neuroendocrinology Unit, GIGA Neurosciences, University of
Lie`ge, Lie`ge, Belgium
S.M. Burke Center of Expertise on Gender Dysphoria, Department of Medical
Psychology, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Jean-Claude Carel Endocrinologie Diab.Ped. & Inserm U690, Universite´ Paris
7 Denis Diderot, Hoˆpital Robert Debre´, Paris, France
Juan Manuel Castellano Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate
Research Center, Oregon Health and Science University, Beaverton, OR, USA
Jerome Clasadonte Jean-Pierre Aubert Research Center, U837, Development and
Plasticity of the postnatal Brain, Inserm, Lille, France
School of Medicine, UDSL, Lille, France
Nicolas de Roux Inserm U1141, Universite´ Paris Diderot. Hoˆpital Robert Debre´,
Paris, France
ix

Alexander H. Denker Child Psychiatry Branch, National Institute of Mental
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
Franc¸oise Domine Department of Pediatrics, CHU de Lie`ge, Site CHR de la
Citadelle, Lie`ge, Belgium
Paul W. Frankland Program in Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for
Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada
Jay N. Giedd Child Psychiatry Branch, National Institute of Mental Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA
Fabienne Glowacz Clinic of Delinquency, Social Maladjustment and Integration
Processes, University of Lie`ge, Lie`ge, Belgium
Anne-Lise Goddings MRC Clinical Training Research Fellow, UCL Institute of
Child Health, London, UK
Lukas Huijbregts Inserm U1141, Universite´ Paris Diderot. Hoˆpital Robert Debre´,
Paris, France
Marie-Christine Lebrethon Department of Pediatrics, CHU de Lie`ge, Site ND
Bruye`res, Lie`ge, Belgium
Developmental Neuroendocrinology Unit, GIGA Neurosciences, University of
Lie`ge, Lie`ge, Belgium
Alejandro Lomniczi Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate
Research Center, Oregon Health and Science University, Beaverton, OR, USA
Pierre-Andre´ Michaud Multidisciplinary Unit for Adolescent Health, Lausanne
University Hospital – CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland
Sergio R. Ojeda Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research
Center, Oregon Health and Science University, Beaverton, OR, USA
Anne-Simone Parent Department of Pediatrics, CHU de Lie`ge, Site ND
Bruye`res, Lie`ge, Belgium
Developmental Neuroendocrinology Unit, GIGA Neurosciences, University of
Lie`ge, Lie`ge, Belgium
Vincent Prevot Jean-Pierre Aubert Research Center, U837, Development and
Plasticity of the postnatal Brain, Inserm, Lille, France
School of Medicine, UDSL, Lille, France
Basak Selcuk Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research
Center, Oregon Health and Science University, Beaverton, OR, USA
Cheryl L. Sisk Department of Psychology and Neuroscience Program, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, MI, USA
x
List of Contributors

Kemal Sonmez Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research
Center, Oregon Health and Science University, Beaverton, OR, USA
Brooke Tata Inserm U1141, Universite´ Paris Diderot. Hoˆpital Robert Debre´,
Paris, France
Manuel Tena-Sempere Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunol-
ogy, University of Co´rdoba; CIBER Fisiopatologı´a de la Obesidad y Nutricio´n,
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain
Instituto
Maimo´nides
de
Investigaciones
Biome´dicas
(IMIBIC),
Hospital
Universitario Reina Soﬁa, Co´rdoba, Spain
Russell Viner General and Adolescent Paediatrics Unit, UCL Institute of Child
Health, London, UK
Anne L. Wheeler Kimel Family Translational Imaging Genetics Laboratory,
Research Imaging Centre, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON,
Canada
Hollis Wright Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research
Center, Oregon Health and Science University, Beaverton, OR, USA
List of Contributors
xi

ThiS is a FM Blank Page

Introduction
Puberty and adolescence are key developmental processes occurring in the transi-
tion period between childhood and adulthood. They involve profound physical and
behavioral changes that share dependency on maturational events in the central
nervous system (CNS). The neurobiology of puberty and adolescence has made
important progress during the past decade through ﬁnely tuned studies on behavior,
CNS imaging, and molecular neurobiology.
The aim of the symposium on which these proceedings are based was to provide
the attendants with a pathophysiological perspective on the role of CNS in puberty
and adolescence, starting from genetic/molecular aspects, going through structural/
imaging changes, and leading to physical/behavioral characteristics. Renowned
investigators involved in both animal and human research convened and shared
with the participants their recent data as well as overall appraisals of relevant
questions around CNS control of puberty and adolescence.
Among other ﬁndings, some contributors have underscored that adolescence is a
critical phase for risk of addiction and mental illnesses in adulthood. Such a critical
period may be longer than commonly expected, since brain imaging studies indi-
cate that the ﬁnal maturational changes associated with adolescence can occur as
late as between 25 and 30 years.
Others have emphasized the importance of the prepubertal period that is crucial
for the effect of testosterone on male sexual behavior, the gender dimorphic
androgen effects on executive functioning, the epigenetic control of transcriptional
repression of the neuroendocrine regulators of the onset of puberty, and the
interactions between leptin- and kisspeptidergic-permissive effects on the onset of
puberty.
Finally, some factors arising in the fetal and perinatal periods have emerged as
possible new players in the early control of the onset of puberty. They involve
microRNAs, rabconnectin-3alpha, and endocrine-disrupting chemicals.
xiii

No doubt the present book will inspire those involved in either scientiﬁc research
or clinical practice or both in the fascinating ﬁeld of puberty and adolescence.
Lie`ge, Belgium
Jean-Pierre Bourguignon
Paris, France
Jean-Claude Carel
Boulogne-Billancourt, France
Yves Christen
xiv
Introduction

Drugs and the Adolescent Brain
Anne L. Wheeler and Paul W. Frankland
Abstract Adolescence is a developmental stage that is associated with increased
risk-taking, novelty-seeking and greater vulnerability to peer pressure. Given this, it
is perhaps not surprising that adolescence is also a time that is associated with drug
experimentation. In some cases, drug experimentation progresses to drug depen-
dence, a state commonly referred to as addiction. As the adolescent brain is still
developing, how does drug dependence impact brain development? Imaging studies
suggest that cocaine dependence is associated with abnormalities in brain structure
in humans. However, it is unclear whether these differences in brain structure
predispose an individual to drug use or are a result of cocaine’s action on the
brain. We have addressed this issue by studying the impact of chronic cocaine
exposure on brain structure and drug-related behavior in mice. In our studies, mice
were exposed to cocaine at two developmental time periods: adolescence (27–46
days-old) and young adulthood (60–79 days-old). Following 30 days of abstinence,
either ﬁxed brain T2 weighted MRIs were acquired on a 7T scanner at 32 μm
isotropic voxel dimensions or mice were assessed for sensitization to the locomotor
stimulant effects of cocaine. Three automated techniques (deformation-based mor-
phometry, striatum shape analysis and cortical thickness assessment) were used to
identify population differences in brain structure in cocaine vs. saline-exposed
mice. We found that cocaine induced changes in brain structure, and these were
most pronounced in mice exposed to cocaine during adolescence. Many of these
changes occurred in brain regions previously implicated in addiction, including the
nucleus accumbens, striatum, insular cortex, orbital frontal cortex and medial
forebrain bundle. Furthermore, exposure to the same cocaine regimen caused
sensitization to the locomotor stimulant effects of cocaine, and these effects were
again more pronounced in mice exposed to cocaine during adolescence. These
results suggest that altered brain structure following one month of abstinence may
A.L. Wheeler
Kimel Family Translational Imaging Genetics Laboratory, Research Imaging Centre, Centre
for Addiction and Mental Health, 250 College St., Toronto, ON M5T 1R8, Canada
P.W. Frankland (*)
Program in Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Ave.,
Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada
e-mail: Paul.frankland@sickkids.ca
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
J.-P. Bourguignon et al. (eds.), Brain Crosstalk in Puberty and Adolescence,
Research and Perspectives in Endocrine Interactions 13,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09168-6_1
1

contribute to these persistent drug-related behaviors and may identify cocaine
exposure as the cause of these morphological changes.
Introduction
An estimated 205 million people in the world use illicit drugs, and around 25 million
of these can be described as having a drug use disorder (UNODC 2009). Of course,
these numbers balloon if legal drugs such as alcohol and nicotine are additionally
considered. At the outset, people take these drugs of abuse to beneﬁt from their
short-term effects, which include pleasurable sensation, the alteration of mental
state and, in some instances, improved performance (Volkow and Li 2004). These
acute effects are mediated by relatively short-lived changes in brain chemistry and
physiology that are largely related to the molecular pharmacology of the drugs
themselves (Nestler 2005). While the ﬁve major classes of abused drugs –
psychostimulants, opiates, alcohol, cannabinoids and nicotine – have different
mechanisms of action in the brain, ultimately they all act either directly or indirectly
on dopamine function in the mesolimbic pathway. The mesolimbic circuitry con-
sists of dopaminergic neurons that project from the ventral tegmental area (VTA) in
the midbrain to the limbic system via the nucleus accumbens (NAc) to produce
reinforcing effects (Pierce and Kumaresan 2006).
A portion of individuals who take drugs will progress to a pattern of repeated
drug use that is typiﬁed by an intense desire for the drug and impaired ability to
control urges to take that drug, even at the expense of serious adverse health and
social consequences. This state is known as substance dependence and is often
referred to as addiction. Substance dependence is not due solely to the physical
dependence that underlies the withdrawal symptoms following cessation of drug
use because, even after withdrawal symptoms subside, the risk of relapse remains
very high (Milton and Everitt 2012). This increased relapse risk suggests that
repeated drug use permanently alters the brain, producing persistent changes in
brain circuits that favor learned drug-associated behaviors at the expense of adap-
tive responding for natural rewards (Kalivas and O’Brien 2008).
Repeated Drug Use Has a Long-Term Impact on Brain
Circuitry
How do drugs of abuse permanently alter the brain? Pre-clinical and clinical
research suggest that repeated use of drugs changes the brain of the user at the
molecular, cellular and circuit organizational levels. These changes likely underlie
a shift toward behaviors that are more reﬂexive and, consequently, much less
2
A.L. Wheeler and P.W. Frankland

amenable to cognitive interference. Brain alterations have been studied in most
detail in the neurocircuits responsible for reward, motivation, cognitive control and
memory. These circuits are directly or indirectly modulated by dopamine and are
highly connected to each other through glutamatergic and GABA-ergic projections
that allow them to interact to generate behavioral output in response to reinforcing
stimuli (Baler and Volkow 2006).
The rewarding properties of drugs are mediated by dopamine, and enduring
alterations in dopaminergic signaling following repeated drug use are thought to
contribute to drug dependence (Diana 2011). For example, dopamine release in the
NAc is decreased in drug-dependent rodents (Diana et al. 1999; Rossetti
et al. 1992), and human imaging studies have shown a reduction in dopamine
receptors (Volkow et al. 1996) accompanied by reduced release of endogenous
dopamine in the ventral striatum of drug-dependent subjects (Martinez et al. 2005).
Motivation is thought to be regulated by the orbital frontal cortex (OFC), which
is responsible for processing the motivational value of rewarding stimuli (Tremblay
and Schultz 1999). For example, the OFC is activated upon presentation of cocaine-
associated stimuli in humans (Garavan et al. 2000) and rodents (Thomas
et al. 2003). Furthermore, OFC dysfunction persists even following long periods
of drug abstinence in drug-dependent individuals (Goldstein and Volkow 2002).
The frontal cortex is responsible for cognitive control. The compromised ability
of cocaine users to reign in uncontrollable urges has been linked to reduced activity
in the anterior cingulate gyrus (ACG) and in the prefrontal cortex (PFC; Hester and
Garavan 2004). Additionally, a signiﬁcant aspect of drug dependence is the path-
ological narrowing of goal selection to those that are drug-related. The representa-
tion of goals, assignment of value to them, and selection of actions based on the
resulting valuation depend on the PFC (Hyman 2005).
Neuroadaptations in learning and memory processes have been proposed to play
an essential role in drug dependence as they can account for its persistence. First,
chronic drug exposure causes strong associations to develop between drugs and the
environmental stimuli and contexts in which they are encountered. Exposure to
these drug-associated cues often precedes drug relapse even after long periods of
abstinence (Torregrossa et al. 2011). This is consistent with drug-associated cues
producing limbic activation and craving (Childress et al. 1999), with associated
dopamine release (Volkow et al. 2006) in cocaine addicts. Second, changes in the
dorsal striatum underlie the learning of speciﬁc motor actions to receive rewards
that are linked to the rituals of drug consumption (Porrino et al. 2004). Shifting from
voluntary drug use to more habitual and compulsive drug use represents a transition
at the neural level from prefrontal cortical to striatal control over drug-seeking and
drug-taking behavior, as well as a progression from ventral to more dorsal domains
of the striatum (Everitt and Robbins 2005).
Drugs and the Adolescent Brain
3

Initiation of Drug Use Often Occurs During Adolescence,
Which May Increase Vulnerability to Drug Dependence
The onset of drug use often occurs during adolescence, a developmental transition
from childhood to adulthood during which the brain continues to develop and
change. Indeed, in Canada, 60 % of illicit drug users are between the ages of
15 and 24 (Statistics Canada 2003). Adolescence is thought of as a period when
risk-taking and novelty-seeking are typical and individuals are hyper-responsive to
peer pressure (Spear 2000); clearly, these factors may contribute to a propensity to
experiment with drugs during adolescence, a prerequisite for drug dependence.
The effects of drugs on behavior may also differ in adolescence. For example,
preclinical studies have shown that adolescent rodents are less sensitive than adult
animals to many of the negative effects of alcohol such as alcohol-induced sedation
and motor impairment (Little et al. 1996), as well as alcohol withdrawal-induced
social depression and anxiety (Varlinskaya and Spear 2004). Additionally, adoles-
cent rodents are subject to greater reinforcing properties of alcohol (Pautassi
et al. 2008) and have increased sensitivity to its social-facilitation effects compared
to adult animals (Varlinskaya and Spear 2002). Similar studies have demonstrated
that adolescent rodents show increased sensitivity to the rewarding effects of
nicotine (Natividad et al. 2013). This ‘enhanced’ sensitivity may lead to prolonged
periods of drug experimentation during adolescence and promote excessive con-
sumption. Epidemiological studies indicate that, when drug use is initiated during
adolescence (rather than during adulthood), there are higher lifetime rates of drug
use and faster progression to dependency (Anthony and Petronis 1995; Grant and
Dawson 1998; O’Brien and Anthony 2005). Together these data suggest that the
adolescent brain may contribute to drug experimentation and excessive consump-
tion and, at the same time, drug experimentation and excessive consumption at this
age likely impact ongoing development of the brain.
Brain Development Throughout Adolescence
and Its Susceptibility to the Effects of Drug Use
The structural and functional development of the brain is remarkably complex
during infancy and childhood and continues on a dynamic trajectory throughout
adolescence. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies indicate that white matter
volume increases into the third decade of life whereas the volume of gray matter in
the brain follows an inverted U-shaped trajectory, peaking in late childhood and
decreasing through adolescence (Giedd et al. 1999; Giedd 2008). The increase in
white matter volume may be associated with continued myelination of white matter
tracts or increases in the caliber of axons (Paus et al. 2008). The decline in gray
matter is thought to reﬂect the reorganization and reﬁnement of synaptic connec-
tions through the process of synaptic pruning (Petanjek et al. 2011), or it may be
4
A.L. Wheeler and P.W. Frankland

a result of the intracortical myelination and increased axonal caliber causing less
tissue to be classiﬁed as gray matter in MRI scans (Blakemore 2012). Sensory and
motor regions mature before frontal and temporal regions in terms of gray matter
density (Gogtay et al. 2004) and cortical thickness (Shaw et al. 2008).
Does the continued development of the adolescent brain make it more vulner-
able to environmental factors such as drug exposure? If so, then differences in the
age of ﬁrst encounter with psychoactive compounds may inﬂuence the subsequent
trajectory of brain development, which may, in turn, affect patterns of drug-related
behavior. For example, positive associations between hippocampal volumes and
age of ﬁrst alcohol use suggest that early adolescence may be a period of heightened
risk for the neurotoxic effects of alcohol (De Bellis et al. 2000). Similarly, abnormal
white matter microstructure in neocortical association pathways as well as in
projection and thalamic pathways is found in adolescents with substance-use
disorder (Baker et al. 2013). Finally, alcohol use disorder has been associated
with increased volume of the PFC in adolescent males and decreased volume of
the PFC in adolescent females compared to healthy controls (Medina et al. 2008).
Neural Substrates of Adolescent-Speciﬁc Drug-Related
Behaviors
What is unique about the adolescent brain that promotes experimentation and
excessive consumption of drugs? The differing developmental trajectories of two
of the key regions implicated in drug dependence – the PFC and the striatum – are
thought to contribute to the increased propensity to take drugs during adolescence
(Casey et al. 2000). The PFC, known to be important for cognitive control,
undergoes delayed maturation and continues to develop through the adolescent
years. In contrast, the striatum, which is critical for detecting and learning about
rewarding cues in the environment, develops sooner and is already mature in
adolescence.
Post-mortem analyses (Bourgeois et al 1994; Huttenlocher 1979; Rakic
et al. 1994) and in vivo MRI studies (Gogtay et al. 2004; Shaw et al. 2008) indicate
that PFC structure continues to change throughout adolescence. At the molecular
level, there are also developmental differences in the density of D1 and D2
dopamine receptors. In the striatum, D1/D2 density peaks early in adolescence,
followed by a loss of these receptors by young adulthood in humans (Seeman
et al. 1987) and in rats (Tarazi and Baldessarini 2000). In contrast, in the PFC,
D1 and D2 receptor density does not peak until late adolescence and young
adulthood in humans (Weickert et al. 2007) and in rats (Andersen et al. 2000).
These differences in maturation may also be revealed at the functional level: when
comparing adolescents to either children or adults, functional imaging studies
demonstrate exaggerated ventral striatum activity, relative to PFC activity in
response to reward manipulation (Galvan et al. 2006).
Drugs and the Adolescent Brain
5

This imbalance in prefrontal and striatal systems in the brain has been proposed
to underlie adolescent-speciﬁc behaviors that include (1) an increased propensity to
take drugs and (2) an increased impact of drugs on behavior. Increased experimen-
tation with drugs may result because mature striatal projections are sensitive to
motivational stimuli and promote drug consumption; at the same time, drug con-
sumption is left unchecked because delayed PFC maturation leads to poor top-down
cognitive control and an impaired ability to manage drug consumption (Casey and
Jones 2010). Drug-taking during the period of adolescence may exacerbate an
already enhanced ventral striatum response, resulting in heightened reinforcing
properties of the drug-impacting drug-induced behaviours.
Cocaine Use Is Associated with Structural Differences
in the Brains of Adults as Detected by MRI
Repeated exposure to drugs of abuse can result in structural changes in the brain
that can be probed in vivo with MRI. Advances in MRI technologies have allowed
the detailed, noninvasive and safe assessment of human brain structure and func-
tion. Furthermore, the recent increase in availability of high-resolution clinical
scanners allows for the collection of large samples of brain imaging data from
drug-addicted individuals. These subjects have rich case histories that can be
collected alongside the brain scans, which may allow for the identiﬁcation of
associations between these factors and imaging phenotypes. However because
these subjects and their experiences are so distinct from one another, a large amount
of heterogeneity is present in these studies.
Approximately 1 % (Bucello et al. 2010) of the 21 million users of cocaine
worldwide (UNODC 2011) are considered to develop cocaine drug dependence.
Cocaine is a psychostimulant and its mechanism of action is to directly increase
dopamine in the reward centers of the brain by inhibiting dopamine reuptake.
Though dependence on drugs of abuse other than cocaine is more common, other
drugs typically modulate dopamine cell ﬁring through their effects on other types of
receptors. Thus cocaine is a good drug to study in terms of direct effects of long-
term use on the reward systems of the brain.
There is a large collection of MRI studies that have investigated the effects
of cocaine use on brain structure. Gray matter reductions in the frontal cortex (Franklin
et al. 2002; Matochik et al. 2003) and temporal lobe (Bartzokis et al. 2000; Franklin
et al. 2002) have been reported. Subcortical alterations include reduced amygdala
volume (Makris et al. 2004) and increased (Ersche et al. 2011; Jacobsen et al. 2001)
as well as decreased (Barros-Loscertales et al. 2011; Hanlon et al. 2011) caudate and
putamen volumes in cocaine-dependent subjects. White matter alterations include
lower fractional anisotropy – an index of white matter microstructure –in inferior
frontal white matter (Lim et al. 2008), greater severity of white matter signal
hyperintensities on MRI (Lyoo et al. 2004), less frontal white-matter volume
6
A.L. Wheeler and P.W. Frankland

percentage than controls (Schlaepfer et al. 2006) and absence of age-related expan-
sion in white matter volume in frontal and temporal lobe (Bartzokis et al. 2002) in
cocaine-dependent subjects compared to controls.
Whether or not these morphological differences predated the onset of drug use or
are a consequence of drug use is less clear. In the studies cited above, there were
no associations between these imaging phenotypes and measures of drug use,
suggesting that these morphological differences could be developmental in nature,
potentially predisposing individuals to drug use. Consistent with this view, a recent
study reported volumetric alterations in several gray matter regions, including the
striatum and insular cortex in human cocaine addicts and their non-stimulant-
dependent siblings, suggesting that certain brain abnormalities precede drug use
and predispose these individuals to drug dependence (Ersche et al. 2012).
In contrast, some more recent studies have reported these types of associations
between imaging phenotypes and measures of drug use, suggesting that these
alterations may be a result of the drug use on the brain. For example, duration of
cocaine use was negatively correlated with cerebellar gray matter volume (Sim
et al. 2007), as well as with the volume of the bilateral middle frontal gyrus, left
superior frontal gyrus, parahippocampus, posterior cingulate, amygdala, insula, and
right middle temporal gyrus (Barros-Loscertales et al. 2011). Greater duration of
cocaine dependence was correlated with greater gray matter volume reduction in
orbitofrontal, cingulate and insular cortex (Ersche et al. 2011), and a thinner cortex
was correlated with cocaine use in some regions (Makris et al. 2008). It seems as
though morphological differences associated with cocaine dependence reﬂect both
pre-existing abnormalities (that perhaps predispose individuals towards depen-
dence) and the consequences of exposure to cocaine itself.
Limitations to Human Brain Imaging Studies
That Investigate the Associations Between Drug Use
and Brain Structure
What is clear from the human MRI literature is that cocaine dependence is associ-
ated with abnormalities in brain structure in humans. However, in addition to
difﬁculties in teasing out which brain structural alterations predispose individuals
to drug use and which are results of drug use, there are several inherent challenges
associated with isolating the impact of cocaine on brain structure in these human
imaging studies. First, alcohol, nicotine and caffeine consumption are characteristic
of chronic drug users (Compton et al. 2007), so concurrent drug use or other
lifestyle factors may contribute to structural variability in the brain. Second,
comorbid diagnoses of mood, anxiety and disruptive behavior disorders are com-
mon in cocaine-dependent subjects (Swendsen et al. 2010), making it difﬁcult to
attribute morphological differences to cocaine use speciﬁcally. Third, typically
there is variability in subjects’ history of cocaine exposure (e.g., pattern and
Drugs and the Adolescent Brain
7

duration of cocaine use, drug quality, route of administration, periods of abstinence
and total lifetime intake) and in the accuracy of self-reports concerning these
factors. Additionally, in human studies it is often challenging to isolate the effect
of age of onset of drug use on brain structure while controlling for total amount of
drug exposure in an individual. Given these limitations, there are some advantages
in using experimental animals to address how drugs of abuse impact the developing
and adult brain.
Describing Age Related Effects of Cocaine Exposure
in the Mouse Brain with MRI
The impact of cocaine exposure on brain structure can be assessed under controlled
conditions with experimental animal models, which allows for careful control of the
dose and timing of drug exposure while keeping variability in genetic and environ-
mental inﬂuences to a minimum. Previous studies have used this approach to
investigate cocaine-related changes in receptor distribution (Wolf 2010) and brain
structure at the microscopic level (Robinson and Kolb 2004). Using a similar
approach to the human imaging studies, we scanned mouse brains with high
resolution mouse MRI (Nieman et al. 2007) to assess cocaine-associated changes
in brain structure at the macroscopic level (Wheeler et al. 2013). As drug use is
often initiated during adolescence, which is a period of potentially increased
vulnerability to drug-induced alterations in structure and function, we compared
the impact of daily cocaine exposure during adolescence (27–46 days old) and
young adulthood (60–79 days old). Following 30 days of abstinence, ﬁxed brain T2
weighted MRIs were acquired on a 7T scanner at 32 μm isotropic voxel dimensions.
Population differences in brain structure in cocaine- vs. saline-exposed mice were
identiﬁed with three automated MRI analysis techniques: deformation-based mor-
phometry, striatum shape analysis and cortical thickness assessment. Additionally,
separate groups of mice underwent the same treatment regimen and were then
assessed for sensitization to the locomotor stimulant effects of cocaine.
The imaging results indicated that exposure to cocaine-induced changes in brain
structure, and these alterations were most pronounced in mice exposed to cocaine
during adolescence. Many of these changes occurred in brain regions previously
implicated in drug dependence and involved in mediating cocaine’s acute and
chronic effects associated with reward and sensitization (Table 1; Fig. 1). Compo-
nents of the mesolimbic dopaminergic pathway – nucleus accumbens, ventral
pallidum and medial forebrain bundle – were reduced in volume, consistent with
cocaine’s primary action on this system. Long-term alterations within this system
likely contribute to locomotor sensitization (Vanderschuren and Pierce 2010). In
addition, cocaine exposure caused a decrease in the volume of the cortical amyg-
daloid area and anterior cingulate cortex, regions where decreased metabolic
activity has been associated with cocaine craving in human subjects (Childress
8
A.L. Wheeler and P.W. Frankland

et al. 1999). The insular cortex also showed volume reduction, a region that has
previously been associated with dependence on cocaine in human addicts (Ersche
et al. 2011; Franklin et al. 2002). The substantia nigra, a dopamine-rich area of the
midbrain showed an increase in volume associated with cocaine exposure, as did
Table 1 Mouse brain regions where volumetric differences are observed following cocaine
exposure during adolescence. Direction of changes refers to cocaine-exposed mice relative to
saline-exposed mice. Changes were observed at the voxel level after correcting for multiple
comparisons with 5 % FDR correction
Brain region
Direction
Hemisphere
Region implicated in cocaine dependence
Orbital frontal cortex
Increase
Right
Yes
Striatum (anterior)
Increase
Right
Yes
Striatum (posterior)
Decease
Bilateral
Yes
Nucleus accumbens
Decease
Bilateral
Yes
Anterior cingulate
cortex
Decrease
Bilateral
Yes
Ventral pallidum
Decrease
Bilateral
Yes
Medial forebrain bundle
Decrease
Bilateral
Yes
Insular cortex
Decrease
Bilateral
Yes
Cortico amygdaloid area
Decrease
Bilateral
Yes
Substantia Nigra
Increase
Bilateral
Yes
Anterior olfactory area
Increase
Right
No
Corpus callosum
Increase
Bilateral
No
Rhinal cortex
Decrease
Bilateral
No
Piriform cortex
Decrease
Right
No
Medulla
Increase
Bilateral
No
Fig. 1 Coronal view of morphological changes in the striatum and cortex induced by cocaine
exposure during adolescence. Surface displacement of the striatum is color coded onto the surface
of the 3D striatum and embedded in the mouse brain (left). Warm colors (red/orange) indicate
inward displacement and cool colors (blues) indicate outward displacement of the striatum surface
in animals treated with cocaine relative to animals treated with saline. Cortical thickness changes
are color coded and superimposed onto the surface of the cortex and embedded in the mouse brain
(right). Regions of the cortex that are thinner in adolescent animals treated with cocaine relative to
saline-treated animals are indicated, with warm colors signifying bigger differences in thickness
than cool colors
Drugs and the Adolescent Brain
9

the OFC. Previous imaging studies in humans and rodents implicate orbital frontal
dysfunction in cocaine dependence through its impact on conditioned reinforce-
ment and drug craving (Everitt et al. 2007).
There were two other major categories of morphological change that were most
pronounced following adolescent cocaine exposure. First, we found volume as well
as shape differences in the striatum following cocaine exposure in adolescent mice.
Volume analysis showed that cocaine exposure led to portions of the anterior dorsal
striatum increasing in size and the posterior striatum reducing in size, whereas
shape analysis showed lateral outward displacement and medial inward displace-
ment of the striatum bilaterally following cocaine exposure. Previous discrepant
results from human imaging studies – with some reporting reduced (Barros-
Loscertales et al. 2011; Hanlon et al. 2011) and others increased (Ersche
et al. 2011; Jacobsen et al. 2001) striatal volume in cocaine-dependent subjects –
may be accounted for by these bidirectional changes. Second, we found that
adolescent but not adult cocaine exposure produced signiﬁcant cortical thinning
in regions of the right hemisphere. A comparison of mice treated with saline and
cocaine during adolescence showed thinning of the cortex in the primary somato-
sensory, rhinal, piriform and insular cortices. Moreover, cocaine exposure caused
locomotor sensitization, and these effects were again enhanced in mice exposed to
cocaine during the adolescent period.
These mouse imaging results identify cocaine exposure as the cause of these
morphological changes rather than being due to pre-existing anatomical differ-
ences, something that is difﬁcult to tease apart in human imaging studies. Because
not everyone who uses drugs goes onto develop a dependence, it is likely that these
cocaine-induced effects may aggravate or interact with pre-existing abnormalities
in brain structure, leading to behaviors related to drug dependence in humans.
Additionally, these results suggest that altered brain structure following one
month of abstinence may contribute to locomotor sensitization, a persistent drug-
related behavior. Finally, the more pronounced alterations observed in adolescent
animals suggest that adolescence is a sensitive period of brain development where
brain structure morphology can be altered by drug exposure. This contributes to
evidence that there is greater vulnerability of adolescents to experimentation with
drugs of abuse and to subsequent drug dependence, supporting prevention of early
exposure as an important strategy to curb drug dependence. Epidemiological
studies show that the prevalence of drug use in adolescents has changed signiﬁ-
cantly over the past 30 years, and some of the decreases seem to be related to
education about the risks of drugs (Volkow and Li 2004). Whole brain MRI for
macroscopic analysis of brain structure in animal models is useful to complement
human MRI results, due to the ability to maintain careful control of experimental
conditions and reduce environmental and genetic inﬂuences on outcome measures.
10
A.L. Wheeler and P.W. Frankland

References
Andersen SL, Thompson AT, Rutstein M, Hostetter JC, Teicher MH (2000) Dopamine receptor
pruning in prefrontal cortex during the periadolescent period in rats. Synapse 37:167–169
Anthony JC, Petronis KR (1995) Early-onset drug use and risk of later drug problems. Drug
Alcohol Depend 40:9–15
Baker ST, Yucel M, Fornito A, Allen NB, Lubman DI (2013) A systematic review of diffusion
weighted MRI studies of white matter microstructure in adolescent substance users. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 37:1713–1723
Baler RD, Volkow ND (2006) Drug addiction: the neurobiology of disrupted self-control. Trends
Mol Med 12:559–566
Barros-Loscertales A, Garavan H, Bustamante JC, Ventura-Campos N, Llopis JJ, Belloch V,
Parcet MA, Avila C (2011) Reduced striatal volume in cocaine-dependent patients.
Neuroimage 56:1021–1026
Bartzokis G, Beckson M, Lu PH, Edwards N, Rapoport R, Wiseman E, Bridge P (2000)
Age-related brain volume reductions in amphetamine and cocaine addicts and normal controls:
implications for addiction research. Psychiatry Res 98:93–102
Bartzokis G, Beckson M, Lu PH, Edwards N, Bridge P, Mintz J (2002) Brain maturation may be
arrested in chronic cocaine addicts. Biol Psychiatry 51:605–611
Blakemore SJ (2012) Imaging brain development: the adolescent brain. Neuroimage 61:397–406
Bourgeois JP, Goldman-Rakic PS, Rakic P (1994) Synaptogenesis in the prefrontal cortex of
rhesus monkeys. Cereb Cortex 4:78–96
Bucello C, Degenhardt L, Calabria B, Nelson P, Roberts A, Medina-Mora M (2010) NDARC
technical report no. 30. National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre, University of NSW,
Sydney
Casey BJ, Jones RM (2010) Neurobiology of the adolescent brain and behavior: implications for
substance use disorders. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 49:1189–1201; quiz 1285
Casey BJ, Giedd JN, Thomas KM (2000) Structural and functional brain development and its
relation to cognitive development. Biol Psychol 54:241–257
Childress AR, Mozley PD, McElgin W, Fitzgerald J, Reivich M, O’Brien CP (1999) Limbic
activation during cue-induced cocaine craving. Am J Psychiatry 156:11–18
Compton WM, Thomas YF, Stinson FS, Grant BF (2007) Prevalence, correlates, disability, and
comorbidity of DSM-IV drug abuse and dependence in the United States: results from the
national epidemiologic survey on alcohol and related conditions. Arch Gen Psychiatry 64:566–
576
De Bellis MD, Clark DB, Beers SR, Soloff PH, Boring AM, Hall J et al (2000) Hippocampal
volume in adolescent-onset alcohol use disorders. Am J Psychiatry 157:737–744
Diana M (2011) The dopamine hypothesis of drug addiction and its potential therapeutic value.
Front Psychiatry 2:64
Diana M, Muntoni AL, Pistis M, Melis M, Gessa GL (1999) Lasting reduction in mesolimbic
dopamine neuronal activity after morphine withdrawal. Eur J Neurosci 11:1037–1041
Ersche KD, Barnes A, Jones PS, Morein-Zamir S, Robbins TW, Bullmore ET (2011) Abnormal
structure of frontostriatal brain systems is associated with aspects of impulsivity and compul-
sivity in cocaine dependence. Brain 134(Pt 7):2013–2024
Ersche KD, Jones PS, Williams GB, Turton AJ, Robbins TW, Bullmore ET (2012) Abnormal brain
structure implicated in stimulant drug addiction. Science 335:601–604
Everitt BJ, Robbins TW (2005) Neural systems of reinforcement for drug addiction: from actions
to habits to compulsion. Nat Neurosci 8:1481–1489
Everitt BJ, Hutcheson DM, Ersche KD, Pelloux Y, Dalley JW, Robbins TW (2007) The orbital
prefrontal cortex and drug addiction in laboratory animals and humans. Ann NY Acad Sci
1121:576–597
Drugs and the Adolescent Brain
11

Franklin TR, Acton PD, Maldjian JA, Gray JD, Croft JR, Dackis CA, O’Brien CP, Childress AR
(2002) Decreased gray matter concentration in the insular, orbitofrontal, cingulate, and tem-
poral cortices of cocaine patients. Biol Psychiatry 51:134–142
Galvan A, Hare TA, Parra CE, Penn J, Voss H, Glover G, Casey BJ (2006) Earlier development of
the accumbens relative to orbitofrontal cortex might underlie risk-taking behavior in adoles-
cents. J Neurosci 26:6885–6892
Garavan H, Pankiewicz J, Bloom A, Cho JK, Sperry L, Ross TJ, Salmeron BJ, Risinger R,
Kelley D, Stein EA (2000) Cue-induced cocaine craving: neuroanatomical speciﬁcity for
drug users and drug stimuli. Am J Psychiatry 157:1789–1798
Giedd JN (2008) The teen brain: insights from neuroimaging. J Adolesc Health 42:335–343
Giedd JN, Blumenthal J, Jeffries NO, Castellanos FX, Liu H, Zijdenbos A, Paus T, Evans AC,
Rapoport JL (1999) Brain development during childhood and adolescence: a longitudinal MRI
study. Nat Neurosci 2:861–863
Gogtay N, Giedd JN, Lusk L, Hayashi KM, Greenstein D, Vaituzis AC et al (2004) Dynamic
mapping of human cortical development during childhood through early adulthood. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 101:8174–8179
Goldstein RZ, Volkow ND (2002) Drug addiction and its underlying neurobiological basis:
neuroimaging evidence for the involvement of the frontal cortex. Am J Psychiatry
159:1642–1652
Grant BF, Dawson DA (1998) Age of onset of drug use and its association with DSM-IV drug
abuse and dependence: results from the National Longitudinal Alcohol Epidemiologic Survey.
J Subst Abuse 10:163–173
Hanlon CA, Dufault DL, Wesley MJ, Porrino LJ (2011) Elevated gray and white matter densities
in cocaine abstainers compared to current users. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 218:681–692
Hester R, Garavan H (2004) Executive dysfunction in cocaine addiction: evidence for discordant
frontal, cingulate, and cerebellar activity. J Neurosci 24:11017–11022
Huttenlocher PR (1979) Synaptic density in human frontal cortex – developmental changes and
effects of aging. Brain Res 163:195–205
Hyman SE (2005) Addiction: a disease of learning and memory. Am J Psychiatry 162:1414–1422
Jacobsen LK, Giedd JN, Gottschalk C, Kosten TR, Krystal JH (2001) Quantitative morphology of
the caudate and putamen in patients with cocaine dependence. Am J Psychiatry 158:486–489
Kalivas PW, O’Brien C (2008) Drug addiction as a pathology of staged neuroplasticity. Neuropsy-
chopharmacology 33:166–180
Lim KO, Wozniak JR, Mueller BA, Franc DT, Specker SM, Rodriguez CP, Silverman AB,
Rotrosen JP (2008) Brain macrostructural and microstructural abnormalities in cocaine depen-
dence. Drug Alcohol Depend 92:164–172
Little PJ, Kuhn CM, Wilson WA, Swartzwelder HS (1996) Differential effects of ethanol in
adolescent and adult rats. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 20:1346–1351
Lyoo IK, Streeter CC, Ahn KH, Lee HK, Pollack MH, Silveri MM, Nassar L, Levin JM, Sarid-
Segal O, Ciraulo DA, Renshaw PF, Kaufman MJ (2004) White matter hyperintensities in
subjects with cocaine and opiate dependence and healthy comparison subjects. Psychiatry Res
131:135–145
Makris N, Gasic GP, Seidman LJ, Goldstein JM, Gastfriend DR, Elman I, Albaugh MD, Hodge
SM, Ziegler DA, Sheahan FS, Caviness VS Jr, Tsuang MT, Kennedy DN, Hyman SE, Rosen
BR, Breiter HC (2004) Decreased absolute amygdala volume in cocaine addicts. Neuron
44:729–740
Makris N, Gasic GP, Kennedy DN, Hodge SM, Kaiser JR, Lee MJ, Kim BW, Blood AJ, Evins AE,
Seidman LJ, Iosifescu DV, Lee S, Baxter C, Perlis RH, Smoller JW, Fava M, Breiter HC
(2008) Cortical thickness abnormalities in cocaine addiction–a reﬂection of both drug use and a
pre-existing disposition to drug abuse? Neuron 60:174–188
Martinez D, Gil R, Slifstein M, Hwang DR, Huang Y, Perez A, Kegeles L, Talbot P, Evans S,
Krystal J, Laruelle M, Abi-Dargham A (2005) Alcohol dependence is associated with blunted
dopamine transmission in the ventral striatum. Biol Psychiatry 58:779–786
12
A.L. Wheeler and P.W. Frankland

Matochik JA, London ED, Eldreth DA, Cadet JL, Bolla KI (2003) Frontal cortical tissue compo-
sition in abstinent cocaine abusers: a magnetic resonance imaging study. Neuroimage
19:1095–1102
Medina KL, McQueeny T, Nagel BJ, Hanson KL, Schweinsburg AD, Tapert SF (2008) Prefrontal
cortex volumes in adolescents with alcohol use disorders: unique gender effects. Alcohol Clin
Exp Res 32:386–394
Milton AL, Everitt BJ (2012) The persistence of maladaptive memory: addiction, drug memories
and anti-relapse treatments. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 36:1119–1139
Natividad LA, Torres OV, Friedman TC, O’Dell LE (2013) Adolescence is a period of develop-
ment characterized by short- and long-term vulnerability to the rewarding effects of nicotine
and reduced sensitivity to the anorectic effects of this drug. Behav Brain Res 257:275–285
Nestler EJ (2005) Is there a common molecular pathway for addiction? Nat Neurosci 8:1445–1449
Nieman BJ, Bishop J, Dazai J, Bock NA, Lerch JP, Feintuch A, Chen XJ, Sled JG, Henkelman RM
(2007) MR technology for biological studies in mice. NMR Biomed 20:291–303
O’Brien MS, Anthony JC (2005) Risk of becoming cocaine dependent: epidemiological estimates
for the United States, 2000–2001. Neuropsychopharmacology 30:1006–1018
Paus T, Keshavan M, Giedd JN (2008) Why do many psychiatric disorders emerge during
adolescence? Nat Rev Neurosci 9:947–957
Pautassi RM, Myers M, Spear LP, Molina JC, Spear NE (2008) Adolescent but not adult rats
exhibit ethanol-mediated appetitive second-order conditioning. Alcohol Clin Exp Res
32:2016–2027
Petanjek Z, Judas M, Simic G, Rasin MR, Uylings HB, Rakic P, Kostovic I (2011) Extraordinary
neoteny of synaptic spines in the human prefrontal cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
108:13281–13286
Pierce RC, Kumaresan V (2006) The mesolimbic dopamine system: the ﬁnal common pathway for
the reinforcing effect of drugs of abuse? Neurosci Biobehav Rev 30:215–238
Porrino LJ, Daunais JB, Smith HR, Nader MA (2004) The expanding effects of cocaine: studies in
a nonhuman primate model of cocaine self-administration. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 27:813–
820
Rakic P, Bourgeois JP, Goldman-Rakic PS (1994) Synaptic development of the cerebral cortex:
implications for learning, memory, and mental illness. Prog Brain Res 102:227–243
Robinson TE, Kolb B (2004) Structural plasticity associated with exposure to drugs of abuse.
Neuropharmacology 47(Suppl 1):33–46
Rossetti ZL, Melis F, Carboni S, Diana M, Gessa GL (1992) Alcohol withdrawal in rats is
associated with a marked fall in extraneuronal dopamine. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 16:529–532
Schlaepfer TE, Lancaster E, Heidbreder R, Strain EC, Kosel M, Fisch HU, Pearlson GD (2006)
Decreased frontal white-matter volume in chronic substance abuse. Int J Neuropsycho-
pharmacol 9:147–153
Seeman P, Bzowej NH, Guan HC, Bergeron C, Becker LE, Reynolds GP, Bird ED, Riederer P,
Jellinger K, Tourtellotte WW (1987) Human brain dopamine receptors in children and aging
adults. Synapse 1:399–404
Shaw P, Kabani NJ, Lerch JP, Eckstrand K, Lenroot R, Gogtay N, Greenstein D, Clasen L,
Evans A, Rapoport JL, Giedd JN, Wise SP (2008) Neurodevelopmental trajectories of the
human cerebral cortex. J Neurosci 28:3586–3594
Sim ME, Lyoo IK, Streeter CC, Covell J, Sarid-Segal O, Ciraulo DA, Kim MJ, Kaufman MJ,
Yurgelun-Todd DA, Renshaw PF (2007) Cerebellar gray matter volume correlates with
duration of cocaine use in cocaine-dependent subjects. Neuropsychopharmacology 32:2229–
2237
Spear LP (2000) The adolescent brain and age-related behavioral manifestations. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 24:417–463
Statistics Canada (2003) Canadian community health survey: mental health and well-being.
Statistics Canada Catalogue no. 12-591-X. Ottawa, Ontario
Drugs and the Adolescent Brain
13

Swendsen J, Conway KP, Degenhardt L, Glantz M, Jin R, Merikangas KR, Sampson N, Kessler
RC (2010) Mental disorders as risk factors for substance use, abuse and dependence: results
from the 10-year follow-up of the National Comorbidity Survey. Addiction 105:1117–1128
Tarazi FI, Baldessarini RJ (2000) Comparative postnatal development of dopamine D(1), D(2) and
D(4) receptors in rat forebrain. Int J Dev Neurosci 18:29–37
Thomas KL, Arroyo M, Everitt BJ (2003) Induction of the learning and plasticity-associated gene
Zif268 following exposure to a discrete cocaine-associated stimulus. Eur J Neurosci 17:1964–
1972
Torregrossa MM, Corlett PR, Taylor JR (2011) Aberrant learning and memory in addiction.
Neurobiol Learn Mem 96:609–623
Tremblay L, Schultz W (1999) Relative reward preference in primate orbitofrontal cortex. Nature
398:704–708
UNODC (2009) Principles of drug dependence treatment. United Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and
Crime. Vienna, Austria
UNODC (2011) World drug report. United Nations Ofﬁce on Drugs and Crime. Vienna, Austria
Vanderschuren LJ, Pierce RC (2010) Sensitization processes in drug addiction. Curr Top Behav
Neurosci 3:179–195
Varlinskaya EI, Spear LP (2002) Acute effects of ethanol on social behavior of adolescent and
adult rats: role of familiarity of the test situation. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 26:1502–1511
Varlinskaya EI, Spear LP (2004) Acute ethanol withdrawal (hangover) and social behavior in
adolescent and adult male and female Sprague-Dawley rats. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 28:40–50
Volkow ND, Li TK (2004) Drug addiction: the neurobiology of behaviour gone awry. Nat Rev
Neurosci 5:963–970
Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Fowler JS, Logan J, Hitzemann R, Ding YS, Ding YS, Pappas N, Shea C,
Piscani K (1996) Decreases in dopamine receptors but not in dopamine transporters in
alcoholics. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 20:1594–1598
Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Telang F, Fowler JS, Logan J, Childress AR, Jayne M, Ma Y, Wong C
(2006) Cocaine cues and dopamine in dorsal striatum: mechanism of craving in cocaine
addiction. J Neurosci 26:6583–6588
Weickert CS, Webster MJ, Gondipalli P, Rothmond D, Fatula RJ, Herman MM, Kleinman JE,
Akil M (2007) Postnatal alterations in dopaminergic markers in the human prefrontal cortex.
Neuroscience 144:1109–1119
Wheeler AL, Lerch JP, Chakravarty MM, Friedel M, Sled JG, Fletcher PJ, Josselyn SA, Frankland
PW (2013) Adolescent cocaine exposure causes enduring macroscale changes in mouse brain
structure. J Neurosci 33:1797–1803
Wolf ME (2010) Regulation of AMPA receptor trafﬁcking in the nucleus accumbens by dopamine
and cocaine. Neurotox Res 18:393–409
14
A.L. Wheeler and P.W. Frankland

Gonadal Hormones Organize the Adolescent
Brain and Behavior
Cheryl L. Sisk
Abstract Sexual differentiation of the nervous system and behavior occurs
through organizational effects of gonadal hormones acting during early neural
development and again during puberty. In rodents, a transient elevation in testos-
terone around the time of birth masculinizes and defeminizes the male brain,
creating structural sexual dimorphisms and programming sex-typical responses to
gonadal hormones in adulthood. A second wave of sexual differentiation occurs
when levels of gonadal hormones are elevated at the time of puberty. At this time,
both testicular and ovarian hormones further masculinize and feminize the male and
female brain, respectively, ﬁne-tuning sex differences in adult behavior. To test the
hypothesis that the peripubertal period is a sensitive period for hormone-dependent
sexual differentiation that is separate and distinct from the perinatal period, expo-
sure to testosterone was experimentally manipulated in male Syrian hamsters to
occur either prepubertally, during puberty, or in young adulthood. This experiment
revealed that the perinatal and peripubertal periods of masculinization of male
sexual behavior are not two separate critical periods of sensitivity to organizing
effects of testosterone. Instead, the two periods of masculinization are driven by the
two naturally occurring elevations in gonadal hormones. To explore possible neural
mechanisms of peripubertal organizational effects of gonadal hormones, cell birth-
dating experiments in male and female rats revealed sex differences in the addition
of new cells, including both neurons and glia, to sexually dimorphic cell groups in
the hypothalamus and medial amygdala. These sex differences in cell addition were
positively correlated with sex differences in the volume of these cell groups.
Prepubertal gonadectomy abolished sex differences in the pubertal addition of
new cells. These experiments provide evidence that gonadal hormone-dependent
sex differences in pubertal cytogenesis contribute to the establishment or mainte-
nance of sexual dimorphisms in the adult brain.
C.L. Sisk (*)
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience Program, Michigan State University, 293 Farm
Lane Giltner 108, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA
e-mail: sisk@msu.edu
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
J.-P. Bourguignon et al. (eds.), Brain Crosstalk in Puberty and Adolescence,
Research and Perspectives in Endocrine Interactions 13,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09168-6_2
15

The transition from childhood to adulthood begins with the onset of puberty and the
ensuing rise in sex steroid hormones, and it is completed by the end of adolescence.
This period of development comprises extraordinary gain of function: individuals
acquire the capacity to procreate, function independently within their social realm,
and provide for themselves and their offspring. The metamorphosis of behavior is
the product of a metamorphosis of underlying neural circuits, which necessarily
occurs along different trajectories in females and males. In fact, adolescence can be
regarded as a period of further sexual differentiation of brain and behavior, which is
mediated in part by the actions of sex steroid hormones in the brain. This paper
highlights research from my laboratory that has uncovered roles for gonadal
hormones in shaping sex-speciﬁc behavioral and brain development during puberty
and adolescence. I will ﬁrst review experiments that establish that testicular hor-
mones, acting during puberty, organize neural circuits underlying male social
behaviors. Next I will present evidence that hormonal regulation of pubertal
neuro- and gliogenesis is a potential mechanism for the establishment or mainte-
nance of structural sex differences in the brain during adolescence.
Hormonal Organization of Male Social Behaviors During
Puberty
The 1959 landmark paper by Phoenix et al. ﬁrst posited the organizational-
activational hypothesis of hormone-driven sex differences in brain and behavior.
Within this framework, a transient rise in testosterone during prenatal or early
postnatal development masculinizes and defeminizes neural circuits in males,
whereas the absence of testosterone in females results in development of a feminine
neural phenotype. Upon gonadal maturation during puberty, testicular and ovarian
hormones act on previously sexually differentiated circuits to facilitate expression of
sex-typical behaviors in particular social contexts. Research in the 1960–1970s
identiﬁed a sensitive period for hormone-dependent sexual differentiation that occurs
during late prenatal and early neonatal development (Baum 1979; Wallen and Baum
2002). Thus, the original conception was that gonadal steroid hormones organize
brain structure during an early, developmentally sensitive period and activate behav-
ior during puberty and into adulthood. Our work has reﬁned the organizational-
activational hypothesis to extend organizational effects of testicular hormones to the
pubertal period. This second wave of brain organization builds on and reﬁnes the
circuits that were sexually differentiated during early neural development.
Using the Syrian hamster as an animal model, we established that testicular
hormones, acting during puberty and adolescence, organize male social behaviors.
In these studies, we employed an experimental paradigm in which male hamsters
were castrated at weaning, i.e., after the perinatal period of sexual differentiation
and before the onset of puberty. In adulthood, testosterone was replaced and, 1–2
weeks later, social interactions with a receptive female or an intruder male were
studied. The behavior of these hamsters was compared to that of other hamsters that
were similarly treated, except that castration and hormone replacement occurred in
16
C.L. Sisk

adulthood, several weeks after the pubertal elevation in testicular hormones. Thus,
the two groups of hamsters differed in when they were deprived of testosterone,
either during the normal time of puberty or in adulthood. This design allowed us to
assess whether the presence of testicular hormones speciﬁcally during puberty and
adolescence programmed behavioral responsiveness to testosterone in adulthood.
In these experiments, we found that levels of sexual behavior, aggressive behavior,
and ﬂank-marking were all reduced in males in which testicular hormones were
absent during adolescent brain development (i.e., males castrated before puberty),
as compared to the behavior of males in which endogenous testicular hormones
were present during adolescent brain development (i.e., males castrated after
puberty; Schulz et al. 2004, 2006; Schulz and Sisk 2006). Even a prolonged period
of testosterone replacement in adulthood failed to normalize behavior in males
castrated before puberty. Thus, testicular hormones during puberty enhanced sub-
sequent hormone activation of male social behaviors and masculinize behavioral
responses in adulthood, outcomes similar to those of perinatal exposure to testos-
terone and indicative of organizational effects.
These ﬁndings prompted us to propose a two-stage model of behavioral devel-
opment in which the perinatal period of steroid-dependent sexual differentiation is
followed by a second wave of steroid-dependent neural organization during puberty
and adolescence (Sisk et al. 2003; Sisk and Zehr 2005; Schulz and Sisk 2006;
Fig. 1). During the second wave, pubertal hormones ﬁrst organize neural circuits in
the developing adolescent brain and then facilitate the expression of sex-typical
adult behaviors in speciﬁc social contexts by activating those circuits. We view
Fig. 1 Contemporary view of the sexual differentiation of brain and behavior by gonadal
hormones in rodents. Two phases of sexual differentiation occur during natural developmental
elevations in gonadal hormone secretion. The perinatal phase involves the masculinization and
defeminization of the brain by a transient rise in testosterone secretion in males. The ovary is
quiescent at this time. The pubertal phase involves the masculinization and feminization of the
brain by the pubertal rise in gonadal hormones. Testicular and ovarian hormones both play an
active role during this phase of sexual differentiation, which builds on the sex differences that were
created during perinatal development. The transition from gray to black shading depicts the
decreasing ability for gonadal hormones to exert organizational inﬂuences on brain and behavior
(Reprinted from Juraska et al. 2013)
Gonadal Hormones Organize the Adolescent Brain and Behavior
17

hormone-driven adolescent organization as a reﬁnement of the sexual differentia-
tion that occurred during perinatal neural development. That is, what occurs during
perinatal brain organization determines the substrate upon which pubertal hor-
mones act during adolescent organization. During the adolescent phase of organi-
zation, steroid-dependent reﬁnement of neural circuits results in long-lasting
structural changes that further program adult behavioral responses to hormones
and socially relevant sensory stimuli.
We next asked whether the perinatal and peripubertal periods of hormone-
dependent organization involve two discrete periods of enhanced sensitivity to
hormones. We know that a window of sensitivity opens in rodents during late
embryonic development to permit the initial sexual differentiation of the brain
organized by testicular hormones (Wallen and Baum 2002). We also know that a
window of developmental sensitivity to hormone-dependent organization closes
(or nearly so) by the end of adolescence, because a prolonged duration of testos-
terone replacement does not reverse or ameliorate the adverse consequences of the
absence of testosterone during puberty on adult social behaviors (Schulz
et al. 2004). What was not clear is the extent to which the perinatal and peripubertal
windows overlap: does the perinatal window close before the peripubertal window
opens, or do the perinatal and peripubertal windows overlap enough to be consid-
ered a single period of sensitivity to hormone-dependent organization of the
nervous system?
To address these questions, we manipulated the time during postnatal develop-
ment that male hamsters were exposed to testosterone. If puberty marks the opening
of a unique sensitive period for testosterone-dependent behavioral organization,
separate from the perinatal sensitive period, then males exposed to testosterone
during the normal time of puberty and adolescence, but not males exposed to
testosterone before or after, should display the full complement of adult-typical
mating behaviors. Male hamsters were castrated after the perinatal window of
sensitivity to organizing inﬂuences of testosterone on postnatal day (P; P0 ¼ day
of birth) 10 and were implanted with testosterone-ﬁlled or empty Silastic capsules
on P10, P29, or P63. Capsules remained in place for 19 days and then were removed
on P29, P48, or P82, respectively. Thus, the groups receiving testosterone-ﬁlled
capsules were exposed to testosterone either before (P10–29), during (P29–48), or
after (P63–82) the normal time of puberty and adolescence (roughly P30–P50).
Twenty-eight days after the removal of testosterone or blank pellets, when hamsters
in all groups were in young adulthood, all males were implanted with testosterone
pellets to activate mating behavior and were tested with a sexually receptive female
7 days later.
We found that testosterone treatment before and during adolescence, but not
after, facilitated mating behavior in adulthood (Schulz et al. 2009; Fig. 2). In
addition, prepubertal testosterone treatment more effectively facilitated adult mat-
ing behavior than at any other age. These ﬁndings extend our knowledge of
neurobehavioral development by demonstrating (1) adolescence is not a sensitive
period for testosterone-dependent behavioral organization distinct or separate
from the neonatal period but rather adolescence is part of a protracted sensitive
period that likely begins perinatally and ends in late adolescence; and (2) the
18
C.L. Sisk

timing of testosterone secretion within this postnatal window programs expression
of adult mating behavior, with the earlier exposure to testosterone, the greater
impact on behavior. Thus, these data have prompted us to revise the two-stage
model to include a large postnatal window of decreasing sensitivity to the organi-
zing actions of testosterone (Fig. 3). Importantly, the original two-stage model of
Fig. 2 Effects of periadolescent testosterone exposure on adult reproductive behaviors. Testos-
terone treatments were designed to simulate early, on-time, and late pubertal development, and all
behavior testing occurred in adulthood after a 1-week treatment with testosterone-ﬁlled or blank
subcutaneous pellets. Only before- and during-adolescent testosterone treatments facilitated
mounting behavior in response to testosterone in adulthood. The percentage of male hamsters
that showed intromissions was increased only by before-adolescent testosterone treatments. These
data suggest that early testosterone treatments enhance behavioral responsiveness to testosterone
in adulthood. Asterisk indicates a signiﬁcant difference ( p < 0.05) between groups (Reprinted
from Schulz et al. 2009)
Fig. 3 Illustration depicting the results of our study investigating the effects of early, on-time, and
late adolescent testosterone treatments on adult mating behavior. On the y-axis, the dashed line
approximates testosterone secretion across development, whereas the solid line depicts decreasing
sensitivity to the organizing actions of testosterone across development. Shading approximates the
timing of perinatal, prepubertal, adolescent, and adult periods in the Syrian hamster. Given that
early adolescent testosterone treatment was initiated immediately following the period of sexual
differentiation (postnatal day 10), our data suggest that adolescence is part of a protracted sensitive
period for the organizing actions of testosterone (area under the solid gray curve). In addition,
because early adolescent treatments most effectively organized adult mating behavior, we propose
that sensitivity to the organizing actions of testosterone decreases across postnatal development. If
sensitivity to the organizing actions of testosterone decreases with time, then differences in the
timing of pubertal onset may result in differences in brain development and adult behavior
(Reprinted from Schulz et al. 2009)
Gonadal Hormones Organize the Adolescent Brain and Behavior
19

hormone-dependent organization is still relevant, but the stages are not deﬁned
by distinct windows of sensitivity to steroid hormones but instead by the two
periods of elevated hormone secretion within a prolonged postnatal window of
sensitivity to organizational effects of gonadal steroid hormones.
Sexual Differentiation of Brain Structure During
Adolescence
In addition to proposing that sexually differentiated adult behaviors are organized
by testosterone during early development, Phoenix et al. (1959) also correctly
surmised that these early developmental effects of testicular hormones must involve
organizational effects on the structure of the developing nervous system. Over the
three decades following this seminal paper, an enormous literature emerged
describing numerous sexual dimorphisms in the adult nervous system and
uncovering the developmental processes by which these sex differences come to
be. Structural sexual dimorphisms are typically manifested as sex differences in cell
group volume, neuron or glial cell number, soma size, dendritic arborizations,
dendritic spine density, degree of myelination, or some combination of these
features. One principle derived from early studies of developmental mechanisms
of sexual dimorphisms was that testicular hormones drive the perinatal creation of
sexual dimorphisms in nervous system structure. This principle was based in large
part on experiments showing that either pharmacological blockade or surgical
removal of testicular hormone inﬂuences during the perinatal period was sufﬁcient
to prevent both masculinization and defeminization of sexually dimorphic hypo-
thalamic regions (reviewed in Cooke et al. 1998). In contrast, removal of the ovaries
immediately after birth did not have robust consequences on sexual differentiation,
which is not surprising given that ovarian hormones are not secreted at this time.
These studies led to the idea that, in the absence of testicular hormones, the default
phenotype is essentially female and ovarian hormones are not actively involved in
early sexual differentiation of the nervous system. Another principle was that the
period of sexual differentiation of the nervous system structure is conﬁned to a
sensitive period during prenatal and early postnatal life, which in rodents consti-
tutes a week bracketing the day of birth. This principle rested on studies in rodents
showing that manipulation of testicular hormones after P7 failed to alter the adult
phenotype of sexually dimorphic hypothalamic regions (reviewed in Cooke
et al. 1998).
Each of these tenets began to be challenged as scientiﬁc interest in adolescent
brain development gathered speed in the late twentieth century. Evidence began
accumulating in the 1990s that testicular hormones, acting during puberty, mascu-
linize male social behaviors, including male–female interactions, male-male
20
C.L. Sisk

interactions, and scent-marking (Primus and Kellogg 1990; Bloch et al. 1995;
Romeo et al. 2002; Schulz and Sisk 2006). Then came reports that ovarian hor-
mones, acting during puberty, feminize food-guarding behavior and behavioral
responses to metabolic challenge (Field et al. 2004; Swithers et al. 2008). These
behavioral data encouraged investigations of the potential organizational effects of
gonadal hormones on the masculinization and feminization of behavioral circuits
during puberty and adolescence and a re-examination of the role of pubertal ovarian
hormones in sexual dimorphisms in brain structure (reviewed in Juraska
et al. 2013). Here I will discuss experiments from my laboratory that provide
evidence that (1) ovarian hormones contribute to sexual differentiation of the
brain during puberty, and (2) sex differences in cytogenesis are a potential mech-
anism for establishment or maintenance of structural sexual dimorphisms in the
adolescent brain.
Sexual Differentiation of Hypothalamic Regions During
Adolescence: The Anteroventral Periventricular Nucleus
(AVPV) and Sexually Dimorphic Nucleus of the Preoptic
Area (SDN)
The AVPV and SDN of adult rats are sexually dimorphic, with the AVPV being
larger in females than in males (female-biased) and the SDN being larger in males
(male-biased). The AVPV is essential for the generation of the preovulatory surge
of gonadotropins (Wiegand and Terasawa 1982; Petersen and Barraclough 1989), a
neuroendocrine event displayed by female rats only after puberty and never
displayed by male rats (Hoffman et al. 2005). SDN function is linked to male
sexual behavior, particularly partner preference (Kondo et al. 1990; Baum
et al. 1996). Sex differences in the AVPV and SDN were among the ﬁrst forebrain
cell groups to be studied with respect to the mechanisms of sexual differentiation. It
was established that the perinatal surge of testosterone secretion in males promotes
survival of SDN cells, while simultaneously promoting death of AVPV cells during
early postnatal development. Conversely, the absence of testosterone in females
favors cell death in the SDN and cell survival in the AVPV (Dohler et al. 1982,
1984; Jacobson et al. 1985; Murakami and Arai 1989; Arai et al. 1994, 1996; Davis
et al. 1996a, b). For both AVPV and SDN, then, adult sexual dimorphisms are
hormonally programmed during perinatal brain development, with testosterone
(or a metabolite) playing the primary role in masculinization and defeminization
of these cell groups.
In spite of the evidence that neonatal testosterone promotes cell death in the
AVPV during the perinatal period, an early investigation of sex differences in
AVPV volume indicated that the female AVPV does not become larger than the
male AVPV until puberty; between P30 and P90, AVPV volume grows in females
but remains stable in males (Davis et al. 1996a). This ﬁnding suggests that the
Gonadal Hormones Organize the Adolescent Brain and Behavior
21

perinatal programming of sex differences in AVPV volume is not immediately
manifested and that pubertal processes contribute to the sexual dimorphism present
in adulthood. To determine whether the pubertal increase in AVPV volume is due to
the addition of new cells, we used the cell birthdate marker bromo-deoxyuridine
(BrdU) to label cells born during puberty in male and female rats (Ahmed
et al. 2008). BrdU was administered to rats that were at a prepubertal (P20),
early-pubertal (P30), or mid-pubertal (P40) stage, and BrdU-labeled cells were
quantiﬁed 3 weeks later, allowing time for the new cells to mature and potentially
differentiate. Across all ages at which BrdU was administered, more BrdU cells
were found in the female than in the male AVPV. Phenotyping studies revealed that
some of these AVPV cells that had been born during puberty had differentiated
3 weeks later into mature neurons (Fig. 4). BrdU-labeled cells were also found in
the SDN, with greater numbers of pubertally born cells in males than in females.
However, in the SDN, there was no evidence for co-labeling of BrdU with either
mature neuron or astrocyte markers, so the phenotype of pubertally added SDN
cells remains unknown. It is possible that 3–4 weeks is insufﬁcient time for these
cells to fully differentiate as mature neurons or glial cells, as reported for cortical
interneurons (Cameron and Dayer 2008). The results of these studies offer a novel
mechanism for establishing and/or maintaining sexual dimorphisms in the hypo-
thalamus during puberty, when new, sex-speciﬁc physiological functions and
behaviors are acquired as the transition to adulthood proceeds.
A role for gonadal hormones in the addition of new cells during puberty is
evident from additional experiments showing that prepubertal gonadectomy of
male and female rats completely abolished the sex differences in the pubertal
Fig. 4 Confocal images of cells in male and female rat AVPV. Sections were processed for
double-label BrdU (green) and the mature neuron marker NeuN (red); colocalization is yellow.
Orthogonal views (right) of confocal images verify colocalization of BrdU and NeuN in the female
AVPV of a neuron that was born on P30–32. Scale bars: 10 μm (Reprinted from Ahmed
et al. 2008)
22
C.L. Sisk

addition of new cells to the AVPV and SDN (Ahmed et al. 2008; Fig. 5). Prepu-
bertal ovariectomy reduced the volume of the AVPV of females to a volume similar
to males, and this reduction in volume was accompanied by a signiﬁcant reduction
in stereological estimates of total neuron number to a number similar to that of
males. In contrast, prepubertal gonadectomy had no effect on the volume or
pubertal addition of new cells to the AVPV of males. The effects of prepubertal
castration on cell addition to the SDN paralleled those for the AVPV, but in a
reverse direction. That is, prepubertal gonadectomy of male rats eliminated the sex
difference in the number of BrdU-labeled cells in the SDN, reducing the number of
pubertally added cells in males to the number observed in females. In contrast,
prepubertal ovariectomy did not affect the number of BrdU-labeled cells added to
the female SDN. Thus, ovarian hormones during puberty (or just before) feminize
the AVPV but do not appear to actively feminize the SDN at this time. And,
conversely, testicular hormones further masculinize the SDN during puberty but
do not appear to actively masculinize the AVPV.
Fig. 5 The effect of prepubertal gonadectomy (GDX) on the number of BrdU-labeled cells
depends on sex and brain region. Male and female rats were gonadectomized or sham gonadec-
tomized at 20 days of age (n ¼ 8/sex and treatment). A daily injection of BrdU was given on 30–32
days of age and brain tissue was collected at 50 days of age. Prepubertal GDX signiﬁcantly
decreased the number of BrdU-labeled cells in female but not male AVPV (interaction between
sex and treatment). Prepubertal GDX decreased the number of BrdU-labeled cells in male but not
female SDN and ME (interaction between sex and treatment). Prepubertal GDX did not affect
BrdU-labeled cells in the dentate gyrus (DG) of either males or females. Data are presented as
means  SEM. Asterisks indicate p < 0.05 (post hoc Fisher test between groups) (Reprinted from
Ahmed et al. 2008)
Gonadal Hormones Organize the Adolescent Brain and Behavior
23

Sexual Differentiation of the Posterodorsal Medial
Amygdala (MePD) During Adolescence
The rodent MePD evaluates chemosensory stimuli from conspeciﬁcs and integrates
this information with the internal hormonal milieu, thereby coordinating the exter-
nal and internal signals that regulate social behaviors. MePD volume is larger in
adult male rats than in female rats, with this sex difference being more pronounced
in the right hemisphere than in the left (Cooke and Woolley 2005; Cooke
et al. 2007; Morris et al. 2008). This adult sexual dimorphism is the product of
two successive phases of masculinization, one during early postnatal life and one
during puberty. At P25, still before the onset of puberty, the rat MePD is already
larger in males than in females (Cooke et al. 2007; Johnson et al. 2008, 2012a).
Between the time of puberty and young adulthood, the sex difference in the MePD
volume becomes even more exaggerated (Johnson et al. 2008, 2012a). BrdU cell
birth dating studies corroborate these ﬁndings by showing that, during puberty,
more cells are added to the male than to the female MePD (Ahmed et al. 2008).
Some of these pubertally added cells are neurons and some are astrocytes (Ahmed
et al. 2008), but it is not known at this time whether there are either sex or
hemispheric differences in the pubertal addition of neurons vs astrocytes to the
MePD. It does appear that pubertally born cells in the MePD become functionally
integrated into behavioral circuits, as some pubertally born cells in the male
hamster MePD express the immediate-early gene product fos after a sociosexual
interaction with a receptive female (Mohr and Sisk 2013).
The pubertal phase of sexual differentiation of the MePD appears to involve, at
least in part, testicular hormones acting via androgen receptors. The evidence
comes from comparing the pubertal development of MePD in wildtype (wt) male
and female rats with that of male rats carrying the testicular feminization mutation
(tfm) of the androgen receptor, which confers androgen insensitivity. These studies
show that the pubertal increase in MePD astrocyte number and astrocytic branching
seen in wt male rats does not occur in male tfm rats, indicating that an androgen
receptor-dependent mechanism is normally involved in these pubertal processes
(Johnson et al. 2012a, b). Furthermore, the sex difference in the pubertal addition of
new cells to the MePD is abolished by prepubertal gonadectomy of male rats,
indicating that testicular hormones normally promote proliferation and/or survival
of pubertally added cells in the male MePD (Ahmed et al. 2008). In contrast,
prepubertal ovariectomy does not alter the number of pubertally added cells to
the female MePD (Ahmed et al. 2008). Thus, the MePD provides a solid example of
a region in which sex differences arise during early development but are magniﬁed
during puberty, and in the MePD the sexual differentiation that occurs during
puberty involves a testicular hormone-, androgen receptor-dependent mechanism
that promotes the addition of new neurons and astrocytes and astrocyte branching in
males.
24
C.L. Sisk

Future Directions
Our work demonstrates that sexually differentiated social behaviors and their
underlying neural circuits are further masculinized and feminized during puberty
and adolescence by gonadal hormones. Our future work will investigate the mech-
anisms by which the pubertal elevation in testosterone organizes male social
behaviors. For example, are social information processing, social learning, and/or
executive regulation of behavior under the organizational inﬂuences of testosterone
during puberty, and if so, what neural circuits and neurotransmitters are involved
and how are they permanently changed by testosterone? What are the roles of
pubertally born neurons and glial cells in the adolescent maturation of sexually
differentiated behaviors? We hope that elucidation of the mechanisms underlying
typical sexual differentiation of the brain and behavior during puberty and adoles-
cence will inform our understanding of the etiology of sex-biased psychopathol-
ogies that emerge during this period of development.
References
Ahmed EI, Zehr JL, Schulz KM, Lorenz BH, DonCarlos LL, Sisk CL (2008) Pubertal hormones
modulate the addition of new cells to sexually dimorphic brain regions. Nat Neurosci
11:995–997
Arai Y, Murakami S, Nishizuka M (1994) Androgen enhances neuronal degeneration in the
developing preoptic area: apoptosis in the anteroventral periventricular nucleus (AVPvN-
POA). Horm Behav 28:313–319
Arai Y, Sekine Y, Murakami S (1996) Estrogen and apoptosis in the developing sexually
dimorphic preoptic area in female rats. Neurosci Res 25:403–407
Baum MJ (1979) Differentiation of coital behavior in mammals: a comparative analysis. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 3:265–284
Baum MJ, Tobet SA, Cherry JA, Paredes RG (1996) Estrogenic control of preoptic area develop-
ment in a carnivore, the ferret. Cell Mol Neurobiol 16:117–128
Bloch G, Mills R, Gale S (1995) Prepubertal testosterone treatment of female rats: defeminization
of behavioral and endocrine function in adulthood. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 19:177–186
Cameron HA, Dayer AG (2008) New interneurons in the adult neocortex: small, sparse, but
signiﬁcant? Biol Psychiatry 63:650–655
Cooke BM, Woolley CS (2005) Sexually dimorphic synaptic organization of the medial amygdala.
J Neurosci 25:10759–10767
Cooke B, Hegstrom CD, Villeneuve LS, Breedlove SM (1998) Sexual differentiation of the
vertebrate brain: principles and mechanisms. Front Neuroendocrinol 19:323–362
Cooke BM, Stokas MR, Woolley CS (2007) Morphological sex differences and laterality in the
prepubertal medial amygdala. J Comp Neurol 501:904–915
Davis EC, Shryne JE, Gorski RA (1996a) Structural sexual dimorphisms in the anteroventral
periventricular nucleus of the rat hypothalamus are sensitive to gonadal steroids perinatally,
but develop peripubertally. Neuroendocrinology 63:142–148
Davis EC, Popper P, Gorski RA (1996b) The role of apoptosis in sexual differentiation of the rat
sexually dimorphic nucleus of the preoptic area. Brain Res 734:10–18
Gonadal Hormones Organize the Adolescent Brain and Behavior
25

Dohler KD, Coquelin A, Davis F, Hines M, Shryne JE, Gorski RA (1982) Differentiation of the
sexually dimorphic nucleus in the preoptic area of the rat brain is determined by the perinatal
hormone environment. Neurosci Lett 33:295–298
Dohler KD, Coquelin A, Davis F, Hines M, Shryne JE, Gorski RA (1984) Pre- and postnatal
inﬂuence of testosterone propionate and diethylstilbestrol on differentiation of the sexually
dimorphic nucleus of the preoptic area in male and female rats. Brain Res 302:291–295
Field EF, Whishaw IQ, Forgie ML, Pellis SM (2004) Neonatal and pubertal, but not adult, ovarian
steroids are necessary for the development of female-typical patterns of dodging to protect a
food item. Behav Neurosci 118:1293–1304
Hoffman GE, Le WW, Schulterbrandt T, Legan SJ (2005) Estrogen and progesterone do not
activate Fos in AVPV or LHRH neurons in male rats. Brain Res 1054:116–124
Jacobson CD, Davis FC, Gorski RA (1985) Formation of the sexually dimorphic nucleus of the
preoptic area: neuronal growth, migration and changes in cell number. Brain Res 353:7–18
Johnson RT, Breedlove SM, Jordan CL (2008) Sex differences and laterality in astrocyte number
and complexity in the adult rat medial amygdala. J Comp Neurol 511:599–609
Johnson RT, Breedlove SM, Jordan CL (2012a) Androgen receptors mediate masculinization
of astrocytes in the rat posterodorsal medial amygdala during puberty. J Comp Neurol
521:2298–2309
Johnson RT, Schneider A, DonCarlos LL, Breedlove SM, Jordan CL (2012b) Astrocytes in the rat
medial amygdala are responsive to adult androgens. J Comp Neurol 520:2531–2544
Juraska JM, Sisk CL, DonCarlos LL (2013) Sexual differentiation of the adolescent rodent brain:
hormonal inﬂuences and developmental mechanisms. Horm Behav 64:203–210
Kondo Y, Shinoda A, Yamanouchi K, Arai Y (1990) Role of septum and preoptic area in
regulating masculine and feminine sexual behavior in male rats. Horm Behav 24:421–434
Mohr MA, Sisk CL (2013) Pubertally born neurons and glia are functionally integrated into limbic
and hypothalamic circuits of the male Syrian hamster. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
110:4792–4797
Morris JA, Jordan CL, Breedlove SM (2008) Sexual dimorphism in neuronal number of the
posterodorsal medial amygdala is independent of circulating androgens and regional volume
in adult rats. J Comp Neurol 506:851–859
Murakami S, Arai Y (1989) Neuronal death in the developing sexually dimorphic periventricular
nucleus of the preoptic area in the female rat: effect of neonatal androgen treatment. Neurosci
Lett 102:185–190
Petersen L, Barraclough C (1989) Suppression of spontaneous LH surges in estrogen-treated
ovariectomized rats by microimplants of antiestrogens into the preoptic brain. Brain Res
484:279–289
Phoenix C, Goy R, Gerall A, Young W (1959) Organizing action of prenatally administered
testosterone propionate on the tissues mediating mating behavior in the female guinea pig.
Endocrinology 65:369–382
Primus R, Kellogg C (1990) Gonadal hormones during puberty organize environment-related
social interaction in the male rat. Horm Behav 24:311–323
Romeo RD, Richardson HN, Sisk CL (2002) Puberty and the maturation of the male brain and
sexual behavior: recasting a behavioral potential. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 26:381–391
Schulz KM, Sisk CL (2006) Pubertal hormones, the adolescent brain, and the maturation of social
behaviors: lessons from the Syrian hamster. Mol Cell Endocrinol 254–255:120–126
Schulz KM, Richardson HM, Zehr JL, Osetek AJ, Menard TA, Sisk CL (2004) Gonadal hormones
masculinize and defeminize reproductive behaviors during puberty in the male Syrian hamster.
Horm Behav 45:242–249
Schulz KM, Menard TA, Smith DA, Albers HE, Sisk CL (2006) Testicular hormone exposure
during adolescence organizes ﬂank-marking behavior and vasopressin receptor binding in the
lateral septum. Horm Behav 50:477–483
Schulz KM, Zehr JL, Salas-Ramirez KY, Sisk CL (2009) Testosterone programs adult social
behavior before and during, but not after, adolescence. Endocrinology 150:3690–3698
26
C.L. Sisk

Sisk CL, Zehr JL (2005) Pubertal hormones organize the adolescent brain and behavior. Front
Neuroendocrinol 26:163–174
Sisk CL, Schulz KM, Zehr JL (2003) Puberty: a ﬁnishing school for male social behavior. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 1007:189–198
Swithers SE, McCurley M, Hamilton E, Doerﬂinger A (2008) Inﬂuence of ovarian hormones on
development of ingestive responding to alterations in fatty acid oxidation in female rats. Horm
Behav 54:471–477
Wallen K, Baum MJ (2002) Masculinization and defeminization in altricial and precocial mam-
mals: comparative aspects of steroid hormone action. In: Pfaff DW, Arnold AP, Etgen AM,
Fahrbach SE, Rubin RT (eds) Hormones, brain and behavior. Elsevier, San Diego, pp 385–423
Wiegand
SJ,
Terasawa
E
(1982)
Discrete
lesions
reveal
functional
heterogeneity
of
suprachiasmatic structures in regulation of gonadotropin secretion in the female rat. Neuroen-
docrinology 34:395–404
Gonadal Hormones Organize the Adolescent Brain and Behavior
27

The Role of Pubertal Hormones
in the Development of Gender Identity: fMRI
Studies
S.M. Burke and J. Bakker
Abstract The present study is the ﬁrst to demonstrate that sex differences in
hypothalamic activation upon smelling the chemo-signal androstadienone are not
acquired during sexual maturation, under the inﬂuence of gonadal hormones during
puberty, but might be considered hard-wired responses, which already can be
observed in prepubertal children. Moreover, the current study is the ﬁrst to explore
sex-atypical hypothalamic responses to androstadienone in male and female indi-
viduals with GD at two different developmental stages. Our results suggest that
individuals with GD possess certain functional brain characteristics of their expe-
rienced gender and might have undergone atypical neuronal sexual differentiation,
most likely during early brain development and not during puberty. Additional
analyses in other functional (e.g., mental rotation, emotional face matching, resting
state data) and structural (e.g., gray and white matter volumes or diffusion tensor
imaging data) MRI measures, which are in preparation, should corroborate the
present preliminary ﬁndings.
S.M. Burke (*)
Center of Expertise on Gender Dysphoria, Department of Medical Psychology, Neuroscience
Campus Amsterdam, VU University Medical Center, De Boelelaan 1131, 1081 HX
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Meibergdreef 47, 1105 BA Amsterdam,
The Netherlands
e-mail: s.burke@vumc.nl
J. Bakker
Center of Expertise on Gender Dysphoria, Department of Medical Psychology, Neuroscience
Campus Amsterdam, VU University Medical Center, De Boelelaan 1131, 1081 HX
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Meibergdreef 47, 1105 BA Amsterdam,
The Netherlands
GIGA Neuroscience, University of Liege, Avenue de l’Hoˆpital 1, 4000 Liege, Belgium
e-mail: jbakker@ulg.ac.be
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
J.-P. Bourguignon et al. (eds.), Brain Crosstalk in Puberty and Adolescence,
Research and Perspectives in Endocrine Interactions 13,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09168-6_3
29

Introduction
Deﬁnition
Gender dysphoria (GD) is a condition in which people suffer from an incongruence
between their natal sex and their gender identity, i.e., their experienced gender
(DSM-5; American Psychiatric Association 2013). GD is also referred to as trans-
sexualism (ICD-10; World Health Organization 1992). Although no formal epide-
miological studies exist on the prevalence of GD in children, adolescents, or adults,
severe and persisting GD is relatively rare. Based on studies conducted in clinical
samples (Zucker and Lawrence 2009), the prevalence of GD in adults was esti-
mated to range from 1:7,400 to 1:100,000 in natal males and from 1:30,400 to
1:400,000 in natal females. However, these estimates are based on adults turning to
health services and thus seeking medical treatment. Since individuals might be
hesitant to seek medical care related to GD, these studies probably underestimate
the prevalence of GD. Indeed, a recent Dutch study (Kuyper and Wijsen 2014)
based on self-report showed that 0.6 % of men and 0.2 % of women had ambivalent
and incongruent gender identities, combined with a dislike of their body and a wish
to obtain hormones/surgery.
Etiology
The etiology of GD is still largely unknown, although various hypotheses have been
formulated. It has been hypothesized that psychosocial (vulnerability) factors
(Coates and Person 1985; Coates 1990; Zucker and Bradley 1995), stressful events
during pregnancy (Ward et al. 2002; Seckl and Holmes 2007), or hormonal alter-
ations during critical periods of development (Cohen-Kettenis et al. 1998; Schagen
et al. 2012) might cause GD.
Most of our knowledge of how sex differences emerge in the brain and behavior
is derived from studies in animal models. These studies have clearly shown that
testosterone, secreted by the testes, induces male-typical neural and behavioral
characteristics during perinatal development, whereas female-typical neural and
behavioral characteristics are supposed to develop in the absence of testosterone
(“by default”). A default organization of the female brain and behavior has been
recently challenged by the observation that estradiol feminizes the brain in female
mice over a speciﬁc prepubertal period (Brock et al. 2011). Thus, the current view
of the sexual differentiation of the brain is that different critical windows exist for
the development of the male versus the female brain, with the male brain develop-
ing during pre- and early postnatal development under the inﬂuence of testosterone
whereas the female brain develops during prepubertal development under the
inﬂuence of estradiol (Bakker and Brock 2010). These effects of sex hormones on
the developing brain are also known as “organizational” effects, since they are
30
S.M. Burke and J. Bakker

permanent and irreversible. Furthermore, it is important to note that sex hormones
also have activational effects on the brain and behavior. For instance, male sexual
behavior is highly dependent on testosterone. In all mammalian species studied, the
display of mating behavior in adult males is stimulated by testosterone. The
increase in testosterone production at puberty underlies the increase in sexual
activity in maturing males, and if the source of testosterone, the testes, is removed
surgically, sexual activity typically declines. Likewise, in most female species
(with the exception of some primate species and humans), sexual behavior coin-
cides with ovulation and thus with high levels of the ovarian hormones, estradiol
and progesterone. When the ovaries are removed surgically, the female will no
longer be sexually receptive. These effects are thus not permanent and reversible
and are therefore referred to as “activational”.
Similar to what is seen in non-human animals, sex hormones have been proposed
to affect the sexual differentiation of the human brain. Clinical observations have
suggested that testosterone indeed induces male-typical psychosexual differentia-
tion in men prenatally (Baum 2006; Swaab 2007). The strongest clinical evidence
derives from a syndrome in genetic males (46, XY) with complete androgen
insensitivity (CAIS). These individuals carry a mutation in the androgen receptor;
as a consequence, all tissues, including the brain, are insensitive to testosterone.
They are born with external female genitalia, since the development of the external
genitalia entirely depends on testosterone action, but they have testes and internal
male genitalia, because these develop independently of testosterone action during
embryonic development (genetic factors and anti-mu¨llerian hormone). CAIS is
often discovered at puberty because of amenorrhea. Most remarkably, individuals
with CAIS have a female gender identity and gender role and they are sexually
attracted to men, thereby providing strong evidence that, in the absence of testoster-
one, a female-typical gender identity develops. Additional evidence for a role of
testosterone in the development of male-typical characteristics comes from genetic
women (46, XX) with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). These women have
been exposed prenatally to excessive amounts of androgen due to a mutation in the
gene encoding 21-hydroxylase, which is responsible for the conversion of proges-
terone into deoxycorticosterone and that of 17-dehydroxyprogesterone into 11,
deoxycortisol in the adrenal glands. Since the biosynthetic pathway to aldosterone
and cortisol is blocked, all progesterone will be converted into androgens by the
adrenal glands. Furthermore, the absence of negative feedback by cortisol on the
pituitary will lead to increased production and release of ACTH, which will stimulate
the adrenal glands to produce even more androgens. These women are often born
with clearly virilized external genitalia (to various degrees, depending on the amount
of androgen exposure). Furthermore, they show a masculinization in certain behav-
iors, such as toy preferences (Hines 2010), as well as an increased incidence of
bisexual orientation and GD (Meyer-Bahlburg et al. 2008). However, the majority of
these CAH women do not suffer from GD, indicating that there is no direct relation-
ship between testosterone exposure and developing a male-typical gender identity.
At present, there is only evidence for a role of testosterone in the sexual
differentiation of the human brain and no clear evidence for a feminizing role of
The Role of Pubertal Hormones in the Development of Gender Identity: fMRI. . .
31

estradiol, as has been suggested by recent studies using mouse models (Bakker and
Brock 2010). However, several studies (Downey et al. 1989; Rolstad et al. 2007;
Shaeffer et al. 2008) have shown that women with Turner Syndrome (TS), a
disorder in which all or part of the X chromosome is missing and with ovarian
dysgenesis as one of several morphological consequences, reported signiﬁcantly
lower heterosexual function (e.g., ever engaging in genital petting or sexual inter-
course, ever having a boyfriend) than control women. Furthermore, Ross
et al. (1998) reported some beneﬁcial effects of prepubertal low-dose estrogen
treatment on cognitive function. Twenty-four TS girls exhibited a signiﬁcant
improvement in their motor function and nonverbal processing speed after estradiol
treatment when compared to their TS peers who received a placebo treatment.
Interestingly, CAIS individuals who are insensitive to testosterone are not insensi-
tive to estradiol (testosterone is converted into estradiol by the enzyme aromatase);
thus it might be postulated that estrogens induce a female-typical gender identity in
these individuals. Clearly more research is needed to determine whether estradiol
feminizes the brain in humans.
Based on the important role of testosterone in the development of gender
identity, i.e., inducing a male-typical gender identity, the leading hypothesis on
the etiology of GD involves a sex-atypical cerebral programming that diverges
from the sexual differentiation of the rest of the body (Cohen-Kettenis and Gooren
1999; van Goozen et al. 2002; Gooren 2006; Hines 2010; Savic et al. 2010; Bao and
Swaab 2011). It should be noted that the primary sexual differentiation of the
genitals and the brain take place during different periods of fetal development,
thereby allowing a time window for a potential divergence of the in utero endocrine
climate driving the sexual differentiation of these organs. Some twin studies
(Coolidge et al. 2002; Heylens et al. 2012) suggested a role for genetic factors in
the development of GD, potentially involving polymorphisms in genes encoding
elements of the sex steroid signaling or metabolic pathways, such as the androgen
receptor (Hare et al. 2009), the estrogen receptor (Henningsson et al. 2005;
Ferna´ndez et al. 2013), and aromatase (Bentz et al. 2008). However, these latter
studies still await replication.
Neural Correlates
Postmortem studies investigating the brain of individuals with GD have observed a
reduced volume and number of neurons in the central subdivision of the sexually
dimorphic bed nucleus of the stria terminalis and the third interstitial nucleus of the
anterior hypothalamus (INAH3) in males-to-females (MFs) in comparison to their
natal sex controls (Zhou et al. 1995; Kruijver et al. 2000; Garcia-Falgueras and
Swaab 2008). A female-typical expression of neurokinin B, an important regulator
of GnRH release and thus reproductive functioning, has also been detected in the
hypothalamus of MFs (Taziaux et al. 2012). In a female-to-male (FM) individual,
32
S.M. Burke and J. Bakker

on the other hand, an INAH3 neuronal number in the male range was observed
(Garcia-Falgueras and Swaab 2008).
More recently, the introduction of neuroimaging techniques has allowed in vivo
assessment of the brain, thus enabling larger-scale projects involving more sub-
stantial subject samples and a more ﬂexible study design. Several imaging studies
have investigated the brains of individuals with GD. Studies using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) examining brain activation during a task of
mental spatial rotation in MFs showed a divergence from the natal sex in the
recruitment of parietal regions subserving this function (Carrillo et al. 2010;
Scho¨ning et al. 2010). Accordingly, a female-like pattern of brain activation was
observed in MFs while viewing erotic stimuli (Gizewski et al. 2009). Exposure to
4,16-androstadien-3-one (AND), a steroid compound with postulated pheromonal
properties, also elicited a female-like hypothalamic response in MF adults
(Berglund et al. 2008). However, unlike in women, the hypothalamus of MFs
also responded to estra-1,3,5(10),16-tetraen-3-ol (EST), a putative female chemo-
signal (Berglund et al. 2008).
Several imaging studies have also examined the structure of the brain in indi-
viduals with GD. MRI studies examining white matter tracts using diffusion tensor
imaging have shown deviations from the natal sex in white matter microstructure in
both FMs and MFs (Rametti et al. 2011a, b) . To date, ﬁve neuroimaging studies
have investigated gray matter (GM) in individuals with GD, observing brain
volumes largely concordant with the natal sex, although subtle signs of a
sex-atypical sexual differentiation of the brain were also detected (Luders
et al. 2009; Savic and Arver 2011; Zubiaurre-Elorza et al. 2013, 2014). A recent
study by Zubiaurre-Elorza et al. (2013) was the ﬁrst to examine GM in FMs.
Interestingly, they observed signs of subcortical masculinization in FM adults and
of cortical feminization in MF adults, providing the ﬁrst insights into the develop-
mental processes underlying GD in both sexes. Taken together, these ﬁndings
provide a strong suggestion of an atypical sexual differentiation of the brain in
individuals suffering from GD. However, all the above-mentioned studies exam-
ined individuals in adulthood, when both organizational and activational steroid
hormone effects have already sculpted the brain into a sex-speciﬁc conﬁguration.
Objectives
GD often shows up at early pre-pubertal ages. In general, sex reassignment for
individuals with GD was met with a great deal of skepticism, and this is even more
evident when it comes to the treatment of young people. Thus, no irreversible
interventions such as hormonal and surgical treatments were allowed before adult-
hood. However, this policy has changed over the years, particularly since early
hormonal treatment of GD individuals has led to positive results (Gooren and
Delemarre-van de Waal 1996; Cohen-Kettenis and van Goozen 1998). According
to the new Dutch protocol established by Cohen-Kettenis and Delemarre-van de
The Role of Pubertal Hormones in the Development of Gender Identity: fMRI. . .
33

Waal, adolescents who have experienced severe GD since early childhood are
allowed, after a careful psychological diagnostic procedure, to start using GnRH
agonists to suppress pubertal maturation (Kreukels and Cohen-Kettenis 2011; de
Vries and Cohen-Kettenis 2012). A minimum age of 12 years and at least Tanner
Stage 2/3 should be reached before any medical treatment is started. Several
advantages of this treatment are that further development of the secondary sex
characteristics is suppressed, the psychological well-being of adolescents improves
(stress relief), the adolescent can take his/her time to weigh the possibilities of an
actual sex reassignment procedure and, ﬁnally, arresting the development of the
secondary sex characteristics positively inﬂuences later physical appearance.
From the age of 16 years on, as a ﬁrst step in the actual sex reassignment,
adolescents with persisting GD may receive cross-sex hormones (testosterone for
natal girls and estradiol for natal boys), in addition to their treatment with GnRH
agonists, in order to develop secondary sex characteristics of their experienced
gender (Delemarre-van de Waal and Cohen-Kettenis 2006; Hembree et al. 2009).
However, empirical evidence for the favorable effects of this protocol is needed to
counter critics who raise ethical considerations about medical interventions in
minors. It has been argued that experiencing all stages of (physical) puberty and
having age-appropriate (socio-) sexual experiences are crucial for psychological
(cognitive and emotional) maturation (Meyenburg 1999; Spriggs 2004; Korte
et al. 2008). Others have pointed out that inhibition of endogenous sex hormone
functioning might have detrimental effects on bone maturation and growth (Viner
et al. 2005; Houk and Lee 2006). Finally, several studies, although only conducted
in animal species so far, have suggested that puberty might reﬂect a second
organizational period in brain development (Sisk et al. 2003).
Therefore, the ﬁrst aim of our studies was to determine whether sex-related brain
functions and sex differences in brain structures are already established during early
development and thus would be present in prepubertal children, or whether
sex-speciﬁc characteristics of the brain emerge during puberty, as a second orga-
nizational period in the sexual differentiation of the brain. The second aim was to
determine whether individuals with GD might have undergone a sex-atypical
sexual differentiation, and thus whether their neurobiological characteristics reﬂect
and match their experienced gender rather than their natal sex. In this review, we
focus on one small part of these rather extensive studies, i.e., the study in which
prepubertal children and adolescents, both GD and controls, were exposed to the
putative male chemo-signal 4,16-androstadien-3-one (AND). As mentioned above,
studies by the group of Savic et al. (2001) using positron emission topography
(PET) have shown sex differences in hypothalamic activation upon exposure to this
odorous steroid, with a signiﬁcant activation in the hypothalamus of heterosexual
women but not in heterosexual men. We recently replicated this sex difference in
groups of adult men and women by using functional MRI, since PET is considered
to be too invasive in pediatric populations (Burke et al. 2012).
34
S.M. Burke and J. Bakker

Methods
Subjects
All subjects diagnosed with GD were recruited via the Center of Expertise on
Gender Dysphoria at the VU University Medical Center in Amsterdam. The control
participants were recruited via several primary and secondary schools in The
Netherlands and by inviting friends and relatives of the participants with GD.
The children’s sample consisted of 19 control girls [mean (SD) years of
age ¼ 9.7  0.9], 20 control boys (9.5  1.1), 17 girls with GD (9.6  1.1), and
19 boys with GD (10.4  0.9). All children underwent a short physical examination
by a pediatric endocrinologist to ascertain their prepubertal status (Tanner stage 1;
Marshall and Tanner 1969, 1970).
The adolescent groups consisted of 21 control girls (16.3  0.9), 20 control boys
(15.0  0.6), 21 girls with GD (16.1  0.8), and 17 boys with GD (15.3  1.2). The
adolescent participants diagnosed with GD had been treated monthly with 3.75 mg
of Triptorelin (Decapeptyl-CR®, Ferring, Hoofddorp, The Netherlands), a GnRH
agonist, by injection for on average 24 months (range 2–48 months), resulting in
complete suppression of gonadal hormone production. Female adolescent controls
were tested randomly according to their menstrual cycle, and 11 of 21 control girls
reported using hormonal contraception. All subjects and their legal guardians gave
their informed consent according to the Declaration of Helsinki, and the study was
approved by the Ethics Committee of the VU University Medical Center Amster-
dam (application number NL31283.029.10).
Olfactory Function and Stimulation
First, normal olfactory function was ascertained by means of an extended version of
the “Snifﬁn’ Sticks” test battery (32-item odor identiﬁcation test and olfactory
threshold measurement; Kobal et al. 1996, 2000; Hummel et al. 2007). Then
participants were asked to report the perceived intensity of a 10 mM
androstadienone solution (on a scale from 0 to 10). For the olfactory stimulation
in the MRI, androstadienone (Steraloids Inc., Newport, RI 02840, US) was diluted
in propylene glycol (Sigma) to a concentration of 10 mM, according to the “high”
concentration used in our previous study (Burke et al. 2012). The volume of the
solution used during the fMRI experiments was 20 ml. Olfactory stimuli were
delivered through a tubing system to the subjects’ nostrils by means of a custom-
built air-dilution olfactometer (for details of the olfactometer set-up and procedure
see Burke et al. 2012). With a total air ﬂow of about 1 l per minute, during “ON”
periods the odor was delivered every 2 s for 1 s, whereas during “OFF” periods
subjects received odorless air.
The Role of Pubertal Hormones in the Development of Gender Identity: fMRI. . .
35

Image Acquisition and Processing
Scans were performed on a 3.0 T GE Signa HDxt scanner (General Electric,
Milwaukee, WI, USA). A gradient echo echoplanar imaging sequence was used
for functional imaging (19.2 cm2 ﬁeld of view, TR of 1950 ms, TE of 25 ms, an 80
ﬂip angle, isotropic voxels of 3 mm, and 36 slices). Before each imaging session, a
local high-order shimming technique was used to reduce susceptibility artefacts. A
scanning session consisted of six alternating ON-OFF cycles over 108 volumes in a
classical block design (one block consisted of nine volumes), lasting 3.6 min. For
co-registration with the functional images, a T1-weighted scan was obtained
(3D FSPGR sequence, 25 cm2 ﬁeld of view, TR of 7.8 ms, TE of 3.0 ms; slice
thickness of 1 mm, and 176 slices).
Data analysis was performed with SPM8 software (Statistical Parametric Map-
ping; Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology at the
University College London, UK) implemented in Matlab R2009b (Math Works
Inc., Natick, MA, USA). Functional images were slice-timed and realigned to the
mean image, followed by unwarp. Applying the ‘New Segment’ and ‘Create
Template’ options of the DARTEL (Diffeomorphic Anatomical Registration
Through Exponentiated Lie algebra) toolbox, structural images were segmented.
Then, gray matter and white matter images were used for creating age group-
speciﬁc templates (one each for the children and the adolescents samples), regis-
tered in Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space. Functional images were
spatially normalized to their respective group-template, applying each individual’s
DARTEL ﬂow ﬁeld and, ﬁnally, images were smoothed by means of a 5 mm full
width half maximum (FWHM) isotropic Gaussian kernel.
Individual image data were analyzed using boxcar regressors convolved with a
synthetic hemodynamic response function and a ﬁrst-order time modulation
(TM) regressor to test for possible effects of adaptation/sensitization to
androstadienone. To account for assumed late “wash-out” effects during OFF
blocks and an early peak response to the odor stimulation during ON blocks, ﬁrst-
level contrast images were built by subtracting the second half (b) of the OFF
blocks (four volumes) from the ﬁrst part (a) of the ON blocks (four volumes).
Accordingly, this was done with the associated TM regressor blocks. Further, based
on the image realignment process, individual head jerks were identiﬁed (>1 mm
displacement; Lemieux et al. 2007). Together with the six motion parameters, these
so-called scan nulling regressors were included in every ﬁrst-level design matrix to
account for the effects of excessive head motion.
Statistical Analyses
First, to test whether the sex difference in response to androstadienone was present
in the control groups (i.e., prepubertal and adolescent), and whether a potential sex
36
S.M. Burke and J. Bakker

difference in responsiveness varied as a function of adaptation/sensitization to the
odor, we conducted a sex (control boys, control girls) by odor stimulation ANOVA
for both the prepubertal and the adolescent control groups. The factor odor stimu-
lation consisted of two levels, a regressor modeling the condition ONa – OFFb
effect, i.e., the hypothesized hypothalamic response to the odor, and a ﬁrst order
parametric modulation TM ONa–TM OFFb regressor, which indicates how well the
hypothalamic response correlates with changes over time, thus modeling possible
effects of adaptation or sensitization.
Second, by means of four gender by odor stimulation ANOVAs separately for
the prepubertal and the adolescent groups, we tested whether boys and girls
diagnosed with GD differed signiﬁcantly in response to the steroid odor in com-
parison to their respective natal sex or their experienced gender control group.
Analyses were restricted to the hypothalamus area as region of interest (ROI),
deﬁned (with Marsbar; Brett et al. 2002) as a sphere (centered at MNI coordinates
x ¼ 0, y ¼ 10, z ¼ 7; with a 7 mm radius), and based on anatomical demarca-
tions following Makris et al. (2013) and Baroncini et al. (2012). The threshold for
statistical signiﬁcance was set at p < 0.05 family-wise error (FWE)-corrected for
the extent of the hypothalamus ROI.
Results
Sex Difference in Control Groups
Prepubertal girls and boys did not differ in terms of general hypothalamic respon-
siveness (condition effect ON > OFF) to androstadienone, but directional t-tests
showed that the sex difference (girls > boys) was signiﬁcantly modulated by the
effect of the TM regressor (t ¼ 3.33; p ¼ 0.033), indicating that hypothalamic
activation in boys differed from that of the girls during the course of the scanning
session and thus suggesting differences in adaptation and/or sensitization to the
odor between groups (Fig. 1). Accordingly, similar comparisons were done in the
adolescent
groups.
Again,
the
sex
difference
in
hypothalamic
activation
(girls > boys) was signiﬁcantly dependent on the factor time (t ¼ 3.52; p ¼ 0.019;
Fig. 1). Visual inspection of the data revealed that activation increased in girls with
repeated exposure to androstadienone (sensitization), particularly towards the end
of the session, whereas the responsiveness to the steroid odor seemed relatively
stable in boys, showing a slight decrease in activation over the course of
stimulation.
The Role of Pubertal Hormones in the Development of Gender Identity: fMRI. . .
37

Responses in Girls Diagnosed with GD
Prepubertal girls with GD differed signiﬁcantly from neither their experienced
(control boys) nor from their natal sex (control girls) in terms of hypothalamic
activation when smelling androstadienone. None of the comparisons between
prepubertal control girls and prepubertal girls with GD revealed any differences
in
hypothalamic
activation
upon
smelling
androstadienone.
However,
no
sex-typical effects (i.e., a female-typical hypothalamus response), when compared
to control boys, could be conﬁrmed. In contrast, the activation in adolescent girls
with GD was very similar to that in adolescent control boys, i.e., remaining stable
over the course of stimulation, whereas control girls showed a signiﬁcantly stronger
hypothalamic response to androstadienone over time as described earlier (Fig. 2).
Thus the comparison of adolescent control girls to girls diagnosed with GD
revealed a signiﬁcant effect of gender (control girls > girls with GD), which was
mainly explained by the effect of the TM regressor (t ¼ 4.3; p ¼ 0.002).
Responses in Boys Diagnosed with GD
Prepubertal boys with GD showed a pattern of hypothalamic activation that was
similar to that of the prepubertal control boys. However, when adolescent boys with
GD were compared to adolescent control boys, a signiﬁcant effect of condition
(ON > OFF) was observed (Fig. 2). Thus, adolescent boys with GD showed a
signiﬁcantly stronger, thus sex-atypical response, to androstadienone compared to
Fig. 1 Sex differences in hypothalamic activation in both the (a) adolescent and the (b) prepu-
bertal control groups. Irrespective of their pubertal status, girls compared with boys (directional
t-contrast) showed a stronger hypothalamic activation in response to smelling the chemo-signal
androstadienone. The color bar indicates the t statistic
38
S.M. Burke and J. Bakker

control boys, irrespective of the factor time, which indicates that adolescent boys
with
GD
showed
female-typical
hypothalamic
responses
upon
smelling
androstadienone without, however, any effects due to sensitization.
Discussion
Sex differences in hypothalamic activation upon smelling androstadienone are
already present before puberty: both prepubertal and adolescent control girls
showed a stronger hypothalamic activation compared to boys. This sex difference
seemed to be crucially modulated by effects of sensitization to androstadienone. So,
in answer to the ﬁrst aim, sex differences in hypothalamic responses to
androstadienone seemed to have developed during early brain development, at
least before puberty. Furthermore, adolescents with GD, both natal boys and
girls, showed hypothalamic responses that were in line with their experienced
gender, suggesting that they might indeed have undergone an atypical sexual
differentiation of the brain. However, the hypothalamic response was not observed
in the prepubertal subjects with GD, although girls with GD showed neither a male-
nor a female-typical hypothalamic response. By contrast, prepubertal boys with GD
showed similar responses as control boys.
The absence of a clear effect in the prepubertal sample of GD suggests that
pubertal
hormones
might
somehow
be
involved
in
the
development
of
GD. However, it should be noted that the prepubertal groups with GD constitute
rather heterogeneous groups with respect to future-persisting GD. It has been shown
Fig. 2 Sex-atypical hypothalamic responses in the (a) natal boys with Gender Dysphoria
(GD) and (b) natal girls with GD. Adolescent natal boys showed a similar hypothalamic activation
as control girls when smelling androstadienone, whereas adolescent natal girls with GD showed a
male-typical response pattern. The color bar indicates the t statistic
The Role of Pubertal Hormones in the Development of Gender Identity: fMRI. . .
39

that only about 20 % of the childhood GD cases will eventually lead to adult GD
(Steensma et al. 2011), although overall women present early-onset cases more
often (Nieder et al. 2011) and girls show higher persistency rates of GD into
adolescence compared to boys (Steensma et al. 2013). Thus, our ﬁnding of prepu-
bertal girls with GD showing neither a clear-cut female- nor male-typical response
to androstadienone awaits conﬁrmation in the future, when it will be known who of
our participants showed persisting GD into adolescence and adulthood. Regarding
the prepubertal boys with GD, who were similar to control boys in their hypotha-
lamic responses, the same argument probably holds, i.e., they present a heteroge-
neous group with respect to future-persisting GD and further conﬁrmation is
needed, especially since the adolescent boys with GD showed female-typical
hypothalamic activations.
Acknowledgments This study was funded by a VICI grant (453-08-003) from the Dutch Science
Foundation (Nederlandse Organisatie voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek) to Dr. J. Bakker.
Dr. J. Bakker is a senior research associate of the Belgian Fonds National de la Recherche
Scientiﬁque.
References
American Psychiatric Association (2013) Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders.
DSM-5, 5th edn. American Psychiatric Association, Arlington
Bakker J, Brock O (2010) Early oestrogens in shaping reproductive networks: evidence for a
potential organisational role of oestradiol in female brain development. J Neuroendocrinol
22:728–732
Bao A-M, Swaab DF (2011) Sexual differentiation of the human brain: relation to gender identity,
sexual orientation and neuropsychiatric disorders. Front Neuroendocrinol 32:214–226
Baroncini M, Jissendi P, Balland E, Besson P, Pruvo J-P, Francke J-P, Dewailly D, Blond S, Prevot
V (2012) MRI atlas of the human hypothalamus. Neuroimage 59:168–180
Baum MJ (2006) Mammalian animal models of psychosexual differentiation: when is “transla-
tion” to the human situation possible? Horm Behav 50:579–588
Bentz E-K, Heﬂer LA, Kaufmann U, Huber JC, Kolbus A, Tempfer CB (2008) A polymorphism of
the CYP17 gene related to sex steroid metabolism is associated with female-to-male but not
male-to-female transsexualism. Fertil Steril 90:56–59
Berglund H, Lindstro¨m P, Dhejne-Helmy C, Savic I (2008) Male-to-female transsexuals show
sex-atypical hypothalamus activation when smelling odorous steroids. Cereb Cortex
18:1900–1908
Brett M, Anton J, Valabregue R, Poline J-B (2002) Region of interest analysis using an SPM
toolbox (abstract). In: Presented at the 8th international conference on functional mapping of
the human brain. Sendai (available on CD–RO NeuroImage, Vol 16, No 2)
Brock O, Baum MJ, Bakker J (2011) The development of female sexual behavior requires
prepubertal estradiol. J Neurosci 31:5574–5578
Burke SM, Veltman DJ, Gerber J, Hummel T, Bakker J (2012) Heterosexual men and women both
show a hypothalamic response to the chemo-signal androstadienone. PLoS One 7:e40993
Carrillo B, Go´mez-Gil E, Rametti G, Junque C, Gomez A, Karadi K, Segovia S, Guillamon A
(2010) Cortical activation during mental rotation in male-to-female and female-to-male trans-
sexuals under hormonal treatment. Psychoneuroendocrinology 35:1213–1222
40
S.M. Burke and J. Bakker

Coates S (1990) Ontogenesis of boyhood gender identity disorder. J Am Acad Psychoanal
18:414–438
Coates S, Person ES (1985) Extreme boyhood femininity: isolated behavior or pervasive disorder?
J Am Acad Child Psychiatry 24:702–709
Cohen-Kettenis PT, Gooren LJ (1999) Transsexualism: a review of etiology, diagnosis and
treatment. J Psychosom Res 46:315–333
Cohen-Kettenis PT, van Goozen SH (1998) Pubertal delay as an aid in diagnosis and treatment of a
transsexual adolescent. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 7:246–248
Cohen-Kettenis PT, van Goozen SH, Doorn CD, Gooren LJ (1998) Cognitive ability and cerebral
lateralisation in transsexuals. Psychoneuroendocrinology 23:631–641
Coolidge FL, Thede LL, Young SE (2002) The heritability of gender identity disorder in a child
and adolescent twin sample. Behav Genet 32:251–257
De Vries ALC, Cohen-Kettenis PT (2012) Clinical management of gender dysphoria in children
and adolescents: the Dutch approach. J Homosex 59:301–320
Delemarre-van de Waal HA, Cohen-Kettenis PT (2006) Clinical management of gender identity
disorder in adolescents: a protocol on psychological and paediatric endocrinology aspects. Eur
J Endocrinol 155:S131–S137
Downey J, Ehrhardt AA, Gruen R, Bell JJ, Morishima A (1989) Psychopathology and social
functioning in women with Turner syndrome. J Nerv Ment Dis 177:191–201
Ferna´ndez R, Esteva I, Go´mez-Gil E, Rumbo T, Almaraz MC, Roda E, Haro-Mora J-J,
Guillamo´n A, Pa´saro E (2013) The (CA)n polymorphism of ERβ gene is associated with
FtM transsexualism. J Sex Med 11:720–728
Garcia-Falgueras A, Swaab DF (2008) A sex difference in the hypothalamic uncinate nucleus:
relationship to gender identity. Brain 131:3132–3146
Gizewski ER, Krause E, Schlamann M, Happich F, Ladd ME, Forsting M, Senf W (2009) Speciﬁc
cerebral activation due to visual erotic stimuli in male-to-female transsexuals compared with
male and female controls: an fMRI study. J Sex Med 6:440–448
Gooren L (2006) The biology of human psychosexual differentiation. Horm Behav 50:589–601
Gooren L, Delemarre-van de Waal H (1996) The feasibility of endocrine interventions in juvenile
transsexuals. J Psychol Hum Sex 8:69–74
Hare L, Bernard P, Sa´nchez FJ, Baird PN, Vilain E, Kennedy T, Harley VR (2009) Androgen
receptor repeat length polymorphism associated with male-to-female transsexualism. Biol
Psychiatry 65:93–96
Hembree WC, Cohen-Kettenis P, Delemarre-van de Waal HA, Gooren LJ, Meyer WJ, Spack NP,
Tangpricha V, Montori VM (2009) Endocrine treatment of transsexual persons: an Endocrine
Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 94:3132–3154
Henningsson S, Westberg L, Nilsson S, Lundstro¨m B, Ekselius L, Bodlund O, Lindstro¨m E,
Hellstrand M, Rosmond R, Eriksson E, Lande´n M (2005) Sex steroid-related genes and male-
to-female transsexualism. Psychoneuroendocrinology 30:657–664
Heylens G, De Cuypere G, Zucker KJ, Schelfaut C, Elaut E, Vanden Bossche H, De Baere E,
T’Sjoen G (2012) Gender identity disorder in twins: a review of the case report literature. J Sex
Med 9:751–757
Hines M (2010) Sex-related variation in human behavior and the brain. Trends Cogn Sci
14:448–456
Houk CP, Lee PA (2006) The diagnosis and care of transsexual children and adolescents: a
pediatric endocrinologists’ perspective. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 19:103–109
Hummel T, Kobal G, Gudziol H, Mackay-Sim A (2007) Normative data for the “Snifﬁn’ Sticks”
including tests of odor identiﬁcation, odor discrimination, and olfactory thresholds: an upgrade
based on a group of more than 3,000 subjects. Eur Arch Oto-Rhino-Laryngol 264:237–243
Kobal G, Hummel T, Sekinger B, Barz S, Roscher S, Wolf S (1996) “Snifﬁn’ sticks”: screening of
olfactory performance. Rhinology 34:222–226
Kobal G, Klimek L, Wolfensberger M, Gudziol H, Temmel A, Owen CM, Seeber H, Pauli E,
Hummel T (2000) Multicenter investigation of 1,036 subjects using a standardized method for
The Role of Pubertal Hormones in the Development of Gender Identity: fMRI. . .
41

the assessment of olfactory function combining tests of odor identiﬁcation, odor discrimina-
tion, and olfactory thresholds. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 257:205–211
Korte A, Lehmkuhl U, Goecker D, Beier KM, Krude H, Gru¨ters-Kieslich A (2008) Gender identity
disorders in childhood and adolescence: currently debated concepts and treatment strategies.
Dtsch Arztebl Int 105:834–841
Kreukels BPC, Cohen-Kettenis PT (2011) Puberty suppression in gender identity disorder: the
Amsterdam experience. Nat Rev Endocrinol 7:466–472
Kruijver FPM, Zhou JN, Pool CW, Hofman MA, Gooren LJ, Swaab DF (2000) Male-to-female
transsexuals have female neuron numbers in a limbic nucleus. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
85:2034–2041
Kuyper E, Wijsen C (2014) Gender identities and gender dysphoria in the Netherlands. Arch Sex
Behav 43:377–385
Lemieux L, Salek-Haddadi A, Lund TE, Laufs H, Carmichael D (2007) Modelling large motion
events in fMRI studies of patients with epilepsy. Magn Reson Imaging 25:894–901
Luders E, Sa´nchez FJ, Gaser C, Toga AW, Narr KL, Hamilton LS, Vilain E (2009) Regional gray
matter variation in male-to-female transsexualism. Neuroimage 46:904–907
Makris N, Swaab DF, van der Kouwe A, Abbs B, Boriel D, Handa RJ, Tobet S, Goldstein JM
(2013) Volumetric parcellation methodology of the human hypothalamus in neuroimaging:
normative data and sex differences. Neuroimage 69:1–10
Marshall WA, Tanner JM (1969) Variations in pattern of pubertal changes in girls. Arch Dis Child
44:291–303
Marshall WA, Tanner JM (1970) Variations in the pattern of pubertal changes in boys. Arch Dis
Child 45:13–23
Meyenburg B (1999) Gender identity disorder in adolescence: outcomes of psychotherapy.
Adolescence 34:305–313
Meyer-Bahlburg HFL, Dolezal C, Baker SW, New MI (2008) Sexual orientation in women with
classical or non-classical congenital adrenal hyperplasia as a function of degree of prenatal
androgen excess. Arch Sex Behav 37:85–99
Nieder TO, Herff M, Cerwenka S, Preuss WF, Cohen-Kettenis PT, De Cuypere G, Haraldsen IRH,
Richter-Appelt H (2011) Age of onset and sexual orientation in transsexual males and females.
J Sex Med 8:783–791
Rametti G, Carrillo B, Gomez-Gil E, Junque C, Segovia S, Gomez A, Guillamon A (2011a) White
matter microstructure in female to male transsexuals before cross-sex hormonal treatment. A
diffusion tensor imaging study. J Psychiatr Res 45:199–204
Rametti G, Carrillo B, Gomez-Gil E, Junque C, Zubiarre-Elorza L, Segovia S, Gomez A,
Guillamon A (2011b) The microstructure of white matter in male to female transsexuals before
cross-sex hormonal treatment. A DTI study. J Psychiatr Res 45:949–954
Rolstad SG, Moller A, Byrman I, Boman UW (2007) Sexual functioning and partner relationships
in women with turner syndrome: some empirical data and theoretical considerations regarding
sexual desire. J Sex Marital Ther 33:231–247
Ross JL, Roeltgen D, Feuillan P, Kushner H, Cutler GB (1998) Effects of estrogen on nonverbal
processing speed and motor function in girls with Turner’s syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
83:3198–3204
Savic I, Arver S (2011) Sex dimorphism of the brain in male-to-female transsexuals. Cereb Cortex
21:2525–2533
Savic I, Berglund H, Gulyas B, Roland P (2001) Smelling of odorous sex hormone-like com-
pounds causes sex-differentiated hypothalamic activations in humans. Neuron 31:661–668
Savic I, Garcia-Falgueras A, Swaab DF (2010) Sexual differentiation of the human brain in
relation to gender identity and sexual orientation. Prog Brain Res 186:41–62
Schagen SEE, Delemarre-van de Waal HA, Blanchard R, Cohen-Kettenis PT (2012) Sibling sex
ratio and birth order in early-onset gender dysphoric adolescents. Arch Sex Behav 41:541–549
Scho¨ning S, Engelien A, Bauer C, Kugel H, Kersting A, Roestel C, Zwitserlood P, Pyka M,
Dannlowski U, Lehmann W, Heindel W, Arolt V, Konrad C (2010) Neuroimaging differences
42
S.M. Burke and J. Bakker

in spatial cognition between men and male-to-female transsexuals before and during hormone
therapy. J Sex Med 7:1858–1867
Seckl JR, Holmes MC (2007) Mechanisms of disease: glucocorticoids, their placental metabolism
and fetal “programming” of adult pathophysiology. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab
3:479–488
Shaeffer AT, Lange E, Bondy CA (2008) Sexual function in women with Turner syndrome. J
Women’s Health 17:27–33
Sisk CL, Schulz KM, Zehr J (2003) Puberty: a ﬁnishing school for male social behavior. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 1007:189–198
Spriggs MP (2004) Ethics and the proposed treatment for a 13-year-old with atypical gender
identity. Med J Aust 181:319–321
Steensma TD, Biemond R, de Boer F, Cohen-Kettenis PT (2011) Desisting and persisting gender
dysphoria after childhood: a qualitative follow-up study. Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry
16:499–516
Steensma TD, McGuire JK, Kreukels BPC, Beekman AJ, Cohen-Kettenis PT (2013) Factors
associated with desistence and persistence of childhood gender dysphoria: a quantitative
follow-up study. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 52:582–590
Swaab DF (2007) Sexual differentiation of the brain and behavior. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol
Metab 21:431–444
Taziaux M, Swaab DF, Bakker J (2012) Sex differences in the neurokinin B system in the human
infundibular nucleus. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97:E2210–E2220
Van Goozen SHM, Gooren LJG, Sanders G, Cohen-Kettenis PT, Slabbekoorn D (2002) Organiz-
ing and activating effects of sex hormones in homosexual transsexuals. Behav Neurosci
116:982–988
Viner RM, Brain C, Carmichael P, Di Ceglie D (2005) Sex on the brain: dilemmas in the endocrine
management of children and adolescents with gender identity disorder [abstract G200]. Arch
Dis Child 90:A77–A81
Ward OB, Ward IL, Denning JH, Hendricks SE, French JA (2002) Hormonal mechanisms
underlying aberrant sexual differentiation in male rats prenatally exposed to alcohol, stress,
or both. Arch Sex Behav 31:9–16
World Health Organization (1992) International statistical classiﬁcation of diseases and related
health problems. 10th Revision (ICD-10). Chapter V. Mental and behavioural disorders,
Geneva, pp F00–F9
Zhou J-NN, Hofman MA, Gooren LJG, Swaab DF (1995) A sex difference in the human brain and
its relation to transsexuality. Nature 378:68–70
Zubiaurre-Elorza L, Junque C, Go´mez-Gil E, Segovia S, Carrillo B, Rametti G, Guillamon A
(2013) Cortical thickness in untreated transsexuals. Cereb Cortex 23:2855–2862
Zubiaurre-Elorza L, Junque C, Go´mez-Gil E, Guillamon A (2014) Effects of cross-sex hormone
treatment on cortical thickness in transsexual individuals. J Sex Med 11:1248–1261
Zucker KJ, Bradley SJ (1995) Gender identity disorder and psychosexual problems in children and
adolescents. Guilford Press, New York
Zucker KJ, Lawrence AA (2009) Epidemiology of gender identity disorder. Int J Transgenderism
11:8–18
The Role of Pubertal Hormones in the Development of Gender Identity: fMRI. . .
43

Pubertal Timing, Exploratory Behavior
and Mental Health: A View from a Clinician
and Public Health Practitioner
P.-A. Michaud
Abstract The potential impact of early versus late pubertal timing on adolescent
psychological and behavioral development and adjustment has led to interesting but
conﬂicting results. Early- and late-maturing adolescents engage in exploratory/risk
behavior differently, as compared with their “on time” peers. This impact is not the
same among males and females and probably varies within different environmental
contexts. Moreover, we do not clearly understand the origin of such a phenomenon:
recent publications tend to indicate that one’s self image representation may have
an effect on the behavior of early-maturing females, whereas others suggest that
poor psychosocial adjustment may antedate the appearance of puberty among early-
maturing adolescents of both sexes. The meaning of these pieces of research should
be integrated into the everyday care of adolescents and in the public health area.
Introduction
Human puberty is a very puzzling and sophisticated process. According to Bogin
(1994) and Gluckman (2005; (Gluckman and Hanson 2006), humans are the only
mammalian species that undergo a second growth spurt after a ﬁrst period of rapid
growth following birth. In an ontogenic perspective, this may be seen as a way to
allow for a more important growth of the brain as compared with other species, such
as apes. This is all the more understandable when we take into account what we
know from recent research, that the development of the adolescent brain lasts until
late adolescence or early adulthood (Giedd 2008), as is discussed in other chapters
of this volume. Another rather interesting phenomenon in the human species is the
secular trend in the reduction of the age at which puberty starts, a phenomenon that
is not totally understood but that, at least partly, relates to secular trends in the
nutritional state of pregnant women as well as the presence in the environment of
P.-A. Michaud (*)
Multidisciplinary Unit for Adolescent Health, Lausanne University Hospital – CHUV,
Lausanne, Switzerland
e-mail: Pierre-andre.michaud@chuv.ch
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
J.-P. Bourguignon et al. (eds.), Brain Crosstalk in Puberty and Adolescence,
Research and Perspectives in Endocrine Interactions 13,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09168-6_4
45

endocrine disruptors (Parent et al. 2003; Bellis et al. 2006; Gluckman and Hanson
2006; Bourguignon et al. 2010, 2013). A major consequence of an earlier puberty in
the human species is that the period separating the attainment of biologic maturity
and social maturity is enlarging. This kind of mismatch, or so-called maturational
gap (Mofﬁtt 1993; Waylen and Wolke 2004; Gluckman and Hanson 2006), has a
profound developmental impact on individuals who are neither children nor adults
for several years. A third singularity of human puberty is the wide span between
those individuals who mature earlier and those who mature later. Since the seminal
work of Tanner (1962), we know that a period of around ﬁve years separates early-
and late-maturing adolescents, with a mean difference of one year between girls and
boys, the former being the ones who enter puberty ﬁrst.
It is important to stress the difference between premature/precocious puberty
and early puberty, as well as between late and delayed puberty: both early- and late-
maturing individuals are in the normal range of pubertal timing, whereas precocious
and delayed puberty usually command clinical and laboratory investigations.
Although, once the process of puberty begins, it tends to follow a fairly strict
sequence of events (Tanner 1962), the question arises as to whether young people
who mature earlier or later exhibit differences in their health status or their
psychosocial development. There is an extensive literature available on this issue,
which stresses both the impact of early or late maturation among girls as well as
boys (Graber et al. 1997, 2004; Kaltiala-Heino et al. 2003a, b; Ostovich and Sabini
2005; Patton and Viner 2007).
Before discussing in detail the impact of pubertal timing on the health and
development of young people, and especially on behavior, a few general comments
are needed.
Conceptual Comments
The relationship between pubertal timing and the mental health and behavioral
conduct of adolescents has often been based on cross-sectional studies, whereas
more recent longitudinal publications have drawn attention to the fact that, on one
hand, some factors may precede the occurrence of puberty and explain some of
these relationships (Graber et al. 2010; Bleil et al. 2013), and, on the other hand,
such correlations may be observed well beyond the period of puberty itself
(Michaud et al. 2006). Given the emerging evidence that we have of the role of
hormones and brain development in determining adolescent behavior, such issues
should be kept in mind. Also, the measurement of pubertal timing is often difﬁcult,
as many if not most of the published literature focuses on a self-evaluation of
pubertal stage by the adolescents themselves and not on an actual clinical assess-
ment or a dosage of hormones. While the developmental staging in ﬁve clinically
observable steps proposed by Tanner (1962) is largely used by clinicians and
represents a good appreciation of the progress of puberty, a fairly large literature
has used self-reported measures of puberty, using questions or drawings or
46
P.-A. Michaud

comparisons with peers, without any clinical examination. These studies show that
both girls’ and boys’ reports tend to be biased by their own individual representa-
tions, with some subjects overestimating or underestimating the progress of their
own puberty (Brooks-Gunn et al. 1987; Berg-Kelly and Erdes 1997; Bond
et al. 2006).
Another area of conceptual discussion is that of so-called “risk behaviors”
(Jessor 1991); the literature, especially that of Anglo-Saxon origin, is ﬁlled with
papers pertaining to risky behaviors or risk-taking behavior. As of November 2013,
Medline provided around 34,000 references on this topic. There are several reasons
why this wording should be used cautiously:
1. Many studies tend to confuse risk factors and risk behaviors, which are two
distinct aspects of the general concept of risk;
2. Conduct that is considered risky is often not well deﬁned. Indeed, while it is
clear that unprotected sex can potentially result in the risk of transmission of
sexually transmitted infections or unintended pregnancy, sexual activity per se
should not be considered a risk-taking behavior; and
3. Confusion often exists between the behaviors and the individuals, inducing a
kind of “labeling” of individuals as risk-taking teenagers. This amalgam ignores
the fact that many behaviors during adolescence are transitory. Moreover, it is
stigmatizing and unfair to individuals who actually adopt deviant behavior not so
much because of their personality but as a consequence of an unfavorable
environment.
For these reasons, we have repeatedly suggested the use of expressions such as
experimental or exploratory behavior instead (Michaud et al. 1998; Michaud 2006),
underscoring the fact that a process of “try and retry” is part of the adolescent
developmental process (as it is for children). For extreme behavior that potentially
exposes individuals to short- and long-term consequences, the expression “health-
compromising behavior” is also probably more appropriate and less stigmatizing
than risk-taking behavior.
Pubertal Timing, Physical and Mental Health, Exploratory
Behavior
It is now recognized that precocious puberty is linked with several physical
disorders, such as polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) or a higher risk for breast
cancer, probably due to exposure to environmental toxic agents (Buck Louis
et al. 2008; Golub et al. 2008). Early puberty may also be linked with a higher
risk for the persistence of asthma into adulthood (Varraso et al. 2005). Still other
studies suggest that early puberty is linked with a higher rate of somatic burden,
such as muscular disorders or headaches (Rhee 2005; Patton and Viner 2007).
Pubertal Timing, Exploratory Behavior and Mental Health: A View from a. . .
47

Mental health problems and diseases occur earlier and at a higher rate among
early maturers, especially among girls (Kaltiala-Heino et al. 2003b; Graber
et al. 2004, 2010; Johansson and Ritzen 2005; Mendle et al. 2007; DeRose
et al. 2011; Oldehinkel et al. 2011), including a higher risk for deliberate self
harm and suicidal conduct (Wichstrom 2000; Michaud et al. 2006). However, the
relationship is far from clear, as one study found a higher risk for self harm among
late-maturing girls (Patton et al. 2007). An interesting question is whether the fact
that the rate of depression is higher among girls than among boys is linked to
gender/sex issues or to the fact that puberty begins earlier among females (Wade
et al. 2002). It should be stressed, however, that early puberty among boys may also
in some instances be linked with a higher risk for mental health problems (Mendle
et al. 2012). Also, it is well known that schizophrenia and psychotic disorders often
appear during adolescence, although the relationships between the increase in
psychotic disorders, the surge of hormones and the development of the brain are
still not well understood (Cohen et al. 1999).
Early puberty among girls and delayed puberty among boys have both been
showed to be correlated with lower self image and self esteem, with a higher risk for
eating disorders (Striegel-Moore et al. 2001; McCabe and Ricciardelli 2004; Zehr
et al. 2007; Graber et al. 2010). In a cross-sectional study involving 16–20 years
adolescents of both sexes, we have shown that such a correlation is still observable
beyond the period of puberty until late adolescence (Michaud et al. 2006). Much of
the available literature focuses on the correlations between early puberty and risk/
exploratory behaviors, such as early unprotected sexual intercourse or substance
use and misuse or antisocial behavior. The effect of early puberty on sexual
behavior, both among girls and boys, is well documented. In all studies focusing
on this issue, the rate of teenagers engaging in active sexual relations is higher
among early maturers and that this correlation persists into early adulthood (Lam
et al. 2002; Kaltiala-Heino et al. 2003a; Parent et al. 2003; Johansson and Ritzen
2005; Michaud et al. 2006). To some extent, the correlation may be higher among
boys than among girls (Ostovich and Sabini 2005). In most of these publications, it
has also been shown that late maturers of both sex conversely engage in an active
sexual life at a lower pace/later. The age and rate at which young people engage in
the use/misuse of psychotropic drugs is also linked with pubertal timing (Dick
et al. 2000; Lanza and Collins 2002; Patton et al. 2004; Michaud et al. 2006); both
early maturing boys and girls engage in the consumption of substances (e.g.,
cigarette, alcohol and illegal drugs) at a higher rate, with the difference persisting
into young adulthood. Conversely, delayed puberty may constitute a protective
factor against substance use and misuse (Orr and Ingersoll 1995; Waylen and
Wolke 2004).
In summary, among girls, the relationship between early versus late puberty is
fairly uniform, e.g., early maturing girls display a lower self image, a higher rate of
mental health problems and a higher and more precocious rate of exploratory
behavior than their mates of similar chronological age but who mature slower.
Among boys, the relationship is more complex; for example, in the ﬁeld of mental
health, the relationship is U-curved, that is, both early- and late-maturing boys
48
P.-A. Michaud

suffer from mental health problems and low self esteem at a higher rate, whereas the
correlation, as far as experimental/health-compromising behavior is concerned, is
similar to that of the girls (Michaud et al. 2006).
Hypotheses
As shown in Fig. 1, the interplay between pubertal timing and mental/behavioral
outcomes is extremely complex and probably still not well understood, involving
genetic and epigenetic factors, the hormonal climate, brain development, and the
inﬂuence of education, peers, and so on. Two examples of this complexity can be
provided. Eating disorders have been shown to be more prevalent among early-
maturing girls (Cooley and Toray 2001; Striegel-Moore et al. 2001; Zehr
et al. 2007; McNicholas et al. 2012). Is this linked with the fact that puberty has a
physiological impact on the amount of fat in body composition, or is it mainly
linked with the fact that these girls feel ashamed of their growing body as compared
to their mate? Or is the phenomenon linked directly with the hormones in the brain,
or is eating behavior mediated by modiﬁcations of the brain structure and func-
tioning, or are all these factors contributing, directly or indirectly ? In the ﬁeld of
substance use, one author elaborated some years ago two hypotheses to explain the
higher rate of substance use among early maturers (Tschann et al. 1994): the
maturational-deviance hypothesis was used to explain why early-maturing girls
and late-maturing boys experienced heightened emotional distress, which in turn
inﬂuenced initiation and use of substances. Alternatively, an early-maturation
hypothesis was suggested as a cause for early-maturing girls to engage in more
substance use than all other groups, independent of any emotional distress.
PUBERTAL TIMING
Genetic factors
Environmental factors
Disruptors..
Epigenetic factors
Family functioning
Educational style
ECOLOGICAL FRAME (ENVIRONMENT, SOCIO ECONOMIC SITUATION, ETC
OUTCOMES
Self  image
Mental health
Expl. behaviors
Brain structure/functions
Hormonal environment
Fig. 1 The interplay between pubertal timing and mental and behavioral outcomes
Pubertal Timing, Exploratory Behavior and Mental Health: A View from a. . .
49

In the same perspective, another question that has to be addressed is whether it is
the actual pubertal stage that impacts on one’s behavior or rather the image that an
adolescent has of his pubertal stage that inﬂuences his self image and behavior. Two
articles have focused on this question and have indeed shown that it is the percep-
tion that adolescents have of their pubertal stage rather than their actual stage that
may impact on their behavior (Bratberg et al. 2007; Deppen et al. 2012). In the
Bratberg paper, the authors found that perceived early maturation was associated, in
both genders, with increased involvement in binge drinking and cigarette use.
Interestingly, among late-maturing boys cigarette smoking was also more preva-
lent, as compared with “on time” maturers. In other words, the relationship between
cigarette smoking and pubertal timing among boys again displays a U-curved
aspect. The Deppen paper focused on a different issue among girls only, that is,
assessing the relationship between girls who have objectively an ‘on-time’ pubertal
status and who feel on time with those who are objectively on time but feel as early
maturers. The authors found that a perception of pubertal precocity was associated
with early sexual intercourse (before age 16) and early use of illegal drugs other
than cannabis, as compared with those who felt on time. Conversely, girls perceiv-
ing their puberty as late are less likely to report intercourse before age 16, as
compared with those who are and feel on time. These two papers suggest that,
among the factors that explain the differences in exploratory behaviors found
between early, on time, and late-maturing adolescents, the role of perceived
pubertal stage is critical.
Another set of researchers focused on developmental pathways that antedate the
start of puberty. In a recent publication (Mensah et al. 2013), an Australian team
investigating prospectively a cohort of children that were followed from the age of
4–5. They found that those who had already entered their puberty by age 8–9 had
experienced poor social adjustment (using a Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory)
already at an earlier age, that is, as they were 4–5 years old. Moreover, among boys,
behavioral difﬁculties at an earlier age also predicted early puberty. In other words,
this study suggests that children experiencing stressful situations as children may
mature at an earlier age, as compared with those who do not. The authors conclude
that “at least in part, the association between early-onset puberty and poor mental
health appears to result from processes under way,” and not the reverse. This
correlation between stressful experiences during early childhood and pubertal
timing has also been found by other authors (Bleil et al. 2013), but another study
has found the reverse, that is that depressive symptoms during the childhood among
girls may predict late pubertal timing (Black and Klein 2012). The differences
found between these different investigations may well be linked not only to the
design of the studies but also to the context in which adolescents live. It can be
hypothesized that the human environment directly impacts on the kind of relation-
ship found: indeed, in a cohort study published in December 2013, White
et al. (2013) found that the impact of early puberty on both externalizing and
internalizing symptoms of Mexican-origin boys differed, depending on the ethnic-
ity of their neighborhood; that is, environments providing a high number of peers of
similar ethnicity seemed to buffer the effect of early pubertal timing (White
50
P.-A. Michaud

et al. 2013). More epidemiological and neuroendocrinological studies will be
needed to elucidate the complex relationships between environment, hormonal
changes, brain development and mental health and behavior (Romeo et al. 2002;
Sisk and Foster 2004; Sisk and Zehr 2005; Natsuaki 2013).
Implications for Clinical Practice
From the preceding sections, it can be understood that the relationships between
pubertal timing and both mental health and experimental behaviors are complex
and probably imply bidirectional causality, e.g., the impact of pubertal timing on
development and the impact of developmental issues on pubertal timing, as tenta-
tively described in Fig. 1. What can be done to address the issue of mental health
and experimental behaviors in the clinical care of adolescents and how should these
developmental issues be accounted for?
The World Health Organization, along with other UN agencies, has developed a
conceptual framework that should inspire health professionals in their approach to
adolescent health, as shown in Fig. 2 (World Health Organization 1989). Although
somehow arbitrary, the developmental process of adolescence can be divided into
three main phases, which are early (e.g., ~10–13 years), middle (e.g., ~14–16 or
Development
Early 
adolescence
Mid 
adolescence
Late
adolescence
Biological
pubertal 
development
increase in 
pilosity
breaking
increase in 
muscle & bone 
mass, modific. of 
body shape
Cognitive &
Emotional
concrete thinking
focus on body 
changes
need for intimacy
increase in 
abstract thinking
lack of control
Sensation seeking
Conflicts with 
parents
Increase in abstract
thinking
perspectives on 
one’s future
consolidation of 
sexual orientation
Acquiring autonomy
Social
separating from  
the parents
staying with 
friends (of same 
sex)
peer activities
going out
Experimentation
(sex/drugs..)
acceptance of 
parents’ support
Intimate 
relationships
Capacity for 
compromise
Fig. 2 A grid assisting professionals to tailor their interventions in adolescents’ developmental
stages
Pubertal Timing, Exploratory Behavior and Mental Health: A View from a. . .
51

17 years) and late adolescence (e.g., ~17–19 or 20 years), with each phase charac-
terized by speciﬁc aspects along the biological, cognitive/emotional and social
dimensions. While for many individuals the three dimension stages of the adoles-
cent process are more or less synchronized, it can be understood from the preceding
section that the three dimensions overlap, especially among teenagers who start
their puberty early or late.
Health professionals who deliver health care to adolescents have to take into
account these developmental stages: for instance, the physiological changes linked
with the surge in growth has a clear impact on hepatic function and the metabolism
of drugs and medicine, so that what is often suspected as poor adherence or weak
effect of the treatment is just linked with too low doses of medication. Similarly, it
is often not relevant to warn young adolescents with a chronic disease (e.g., cystic
ﬁbrosis or diabetes) about the long-term effects of poor adherence as they lack the
cognitive capacity to analyze the long-term consequences of their behavior. What-
ever her chronological age, the investigation of abdominal pain in a female ado-
lescent will all depend on whether she has started puberty and may potentially be
pregnant or whether she has not yet had any pubertal symptoms. We also know
from epidemiological research that young people who have engaged in the use of
psychotropic drugs (cigarette, alcohol, cannabis. . .) early, that is before the age of
14 or 15 years, have a higher risk of becoming dependent (Ellickson et al. 2004;
Swift et al. 2008), which may be linked with the immaturity of the adolescent brain
during early adolescence. Both cross-sectional and longitudinal studies have con-
ﬁrmed this phenomenon (Tschann et al. 1994; Patton et al. 2004; Michaud
et al. 2006; Westling et al. 2008), and it seems as if not only individuals with
early puberty but also those with perceived early puberty engage at an earlier age in
the use of legal and illegal drugs (Arbeau et al. 2007; Deppen et al. 2012; Cance
et al. 2013). It thus can be easily understood that practitioners must take into
account the actual and perceived pubertal stage in assessing their young patients’
lifestyles, and deliver proper responses to situations that threaten their patients’
health and development: substance use and other exploratory/health-compromising
behavior should be assessed systematically among early-maturing adolescents (and
older adolescents as well).
Implications in the Field of Public Health
In a fairly recent paper, Steinberg reviews the extent to which neuroscience and
research on the adolescent brain inform decision makers in the ﬁeld of public health
(Steinberg 2009). It does indeed make sense to consider that policies and preventive
strategies should be developmentally appropriate, and we have learned from both
behavioral and neuro-developmental studies that younger adolescents tend to lack
speciﬁc control of their emotional arousals and sensation-seeking situations (Giedd
2008, 2012). It can be thus understood how an individual who matures early ﬁnds
himself in the position of a 1,000 cm3 motorcycle driver who has not learned how to
52
P.-A. Michaud

use a brake: in other words, one can hypothesize that the adolescent brain does not
necessarily mature at the same pace as the endocrine system does, so that early
maturers are particularly at risk of not being able to measure the short- and long-
term impacts of their exploratory behavior. This overlap of pubertal maturation
paces within groups of the same chronological age raises several issues: for
instance, physical education courses at school and training sessions with young
people on sports team must be tailored to the size and strength of the participants,
which is difﬁcult in team sports activities that gather individuals of the same
chronological age. Another issue is the one of school sexual education: by age
13, educators ﬁnd themselves in front of a mixed audience of pre-pubertal boys who
have little interest in sex and mature girls who may have already had sexual
intercourse.
In the ﬁelds of health education, prevention and health promotion, many pro-
grams attempt to shape adolescent behaviors; for example, programs such as those
pertaining to the prevention of injuries, unintended pregnancy, and substance
misuse are driven by the assumption that teaching teenagers how to adopt healthy
lifestyles is enough and efﬁcient. Health education – providing young people with
information about the risks linked with various life experiences – is useful, but
certainly not enough. Expecting adolescents to simply learn from adults (parents,
teachers, educators, etc.) is unreasonable and incorrect for at least two reasons.
First, it disregards the impact of the emotional context of such experiences and it
often overlooks the inﬂuence of peer pressure (Steinberg 2008). Second, it is
ethically unacceptable, as it ignores the inﬂuence of the environment (Michaud
2006): in a world ﬁlled with medications for every mood and difﬁculty that adults
may experience, why should we expect teenagers to refrain from experimenting
with drugs? In a society that promotes sensation seeking and praises fast cars, why
should we ask young people to be careful while driving their mopeds? In other
words, when adolescents fail to take into account our warnings and end up in the
hospital, many adults and health care professionals see the etiology as a function of
their risk-taking behavior rather than a consequence of the social background in
which we live. Indeed, their language is one of victim-blaming rather than
reﬂecting collective responsibility. On an individual basis, most of the so-called
risk-taking behaviors should be understood as normative behaviors and considered
as experimental conduct that inspires the adolescent’s psychosocial maturation. As
such, they should be assessed by taking into account the maturational stage of the
individual (Goldenring and Rosen 2004). On a societal level, prevention strategies
should attempt to create safe environments, a concept that is largely supported by
the World Health Organization (2009). Such an environment is one in which young
people are offered attractive leisure activities to deter them from drug misuse, in
which the organization of the trafﬁc is pedestrian- or cyclist-friendly and in which
communities provide safe public transportation late in the night, or in which
adolescents have easy access to contraception and protection instead of the “just
say no” useless message. In other words, recent endocrinological and neurodeve-
lopmental research should inform the activities and decisions of both health pro-
fessionals and policy makers.
Pubertal Timing, Exploratory Behavior and Mental Health: A View from a. . .
53

References
Arbeau KJ, Galambos NL, Mikael Jansson S (2007) Dating, sex, and substance use as correlates of
adolescents’ subjective experience of age. J Adolesc 30:435–447
Bellis MA, Downing J, Ashton JR (2006) Adults at 12? Trends in puberty and their public health
consequences. J Epidemiol Commun Health 60:910–911
Berg-Kelly K, Erdes L (1997) Self-assessment of sexual maturity by mid-adolescents based on a
global question. Acta Paediatr 86:10–17
Black SR, Klein DN (2012) Early menarcheal age and risk for later depressive symptomatology:
the role of childhood depressive symptoms. J Youth Adolesc 41:1142–1150
Bleil ME, Adler NE, Appelhans BM, Gregorich SE, Sternfeld B, Cedars MI (2013) Childhood
adversity and pubertal timing: understanding the origins of adulthood cardiovascular risk. Biol
Psychol 93:213–219
Bogin B (1994) Adolescence in evolutionary perspective. Acta Paediatr Suppl 406:29–35; discus-
sion 36
Bond L, Clements J, Bertalli N, Evans-Whipp T, McMorris BJ, Patton GC, Toumbourou JW,
Catalano RF (2006) A comparison of self-reported puberty using the Pubertal Development
Scale and the Sexual Maturation Scale in a school-based epidemiologic survey. J Adolesc
29:709–720
Bourguignon JP, Rasier G, Lebrethon MC, Gerard A, Naveau E, Parent AS (2010) Neuroendo-
crine disruption of pubertal timing and interactions between homeostasis of reproduction and
energy balance. Mol Cell Endocrinol 324:110–120
Bourguignon JP, Franssen D, Gerard A, Janssen S, Pinson A, Naveau E, Parent AS (2013) Early
neuroendocrine disruption in hypothalamus and hippocampus: developmental effects includ-
ing female sexual maturation and implications for endocrine disrupting chemical screening. J
Neuroendocrinol 25:1079–1087
Bratberg GH, Nilsen TI, Holmen TL, Vatten LJ (2007) Perceived pubertal timing, pubertal status
and the prevalence of alcohol drinking and cigarette smoking in early and late adolescence: a
population based study of 8950 Norwegian boys and girls. Acta Paediatr 96:292–295
Brooks-Gunn J, Warren MP, Rosso J, Gargiulo J (1987) Validity of self-report measures of girls’
pubertal status. Child Dev 58:829–841
Buck Louis GM, Gray LE Jr, Marcus M, Ojeda SR, Pescovitz OH, Witchel SF, Sippell W, Abbott
DH, Soto A, Tyl RW, Bourguignon JP, Skakkebaek NE, Swan SH, Golub MS, Wabitsch M,
Toppari J, Euling SY (2008) Environmental factors and puberty timing: expert panel research
needs. Pediatrics 121(Suppl 3):S192–S207
Cance JD, Ennett ST, Morgan-Lopez AA, Foshee VA, Talley AE (2013) Perceived pubertal
timing and recent substance use among adolescents: a longitudinal perspective. Addiction
108:1845–1854
Cohen RZ, Seeman MV, Gotowiec A, Kopala L (1999) Earlier puberty as a predictor of later onset
of schizophrenia in women. Am J Psychiatry 156:1059–1064
Cooley E, Toray T (2001) Body image and personality predictors of eating disorder symptoms
during the college years. Int J Eat Disord 30:28–36
Deppen A, Jeannin A, Michaud PA, Alsaker F, Suris JC (2012) Subjective pubertal timing and
health-compromising behaviours among Swiss adolescent girls reporting an on-time objective
pubertal timing. Acta Paediatr 101:868–872
DeRose LM, Shiyko MP, Foster H, Brooks-Gunn J (2011) Associations between menarcheal
timing and behavioral developmental trajectories for girls from age 6 to age 15. J Youth
Adolesc 40:1329–1342
Dick DM, Rose RJ, Viken RJ, Kaprio J (2000) Pubertal timing and substance use: associations
between and within families across late adolescence. Dev Psychol 36:180–189
Ellickson PL, Tucker JS, Klein DJ, Saner H (2004) Antecedents and outcomes of marijuana use
initiation during adolescence. Prev Med 39:976–984
Giedd JN (2008) The teen brain: insights from neuroimaging. J Adolesc Health 42:335–343
54
P.-A. Michaud

Giedd JN (2012) The digital revolution and adolescent brain evolution. J Adolesc Health
51:101–105
Gluckman PD, Hanson MA (2006) Evolution, development and timing of puberty. Trends
Endocrinol Metab 17:7–12
Gluckmann P (2005) An evolutionary and life history perspective on the nature of puberty. In:
Puberty: a sensor of genetic and environmental interactions throughout development. Evian
Goldenring J, Rosen D (2004) Getting into adolescent heads: an essential update. Contemp Pediatr
21:64–90
Golub MS, Collman GW, Foster PM, Kimmel CA, Rajpert-De Meyts E, Reiter EO, Sharpe RM,
Skakkebaek NE, Toppari J (2008) Public health implications of altered puberty timing.
Pediatrics 121(Suppl 3):S218–S230
Graber JA, Lewinsohn PM, Seeley JR, Brooks-Gunn J (1997) Is psychopathology associated with
the timing of pubertal development? J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 36:1768–1776
Graber JA, Seeley JR, Brooks-Gunn J, Lewinsohn PM (2004) Is pubertal timing associated with
psychopathology in young adulthood. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 43:718–726
Graber JA, Nichols TR, Brooks-Gunn J (2010) Putting pubertal timing in developmental context:
implications for prevention. Dev Psychobiol 52:154–262
Jessor R (1991) Risk behavior in adolescence: a psychosocial framework for understanding and
action. J Adolesc Health 12:597–605
Johansson T, Ritzen EM (2005) Very long-term follow-up of girls with early and late menarche.
Endocr Dev 8:126–136
Kaltiala-Heino R, Kosunen E, Rimpela M (2003a) Pubertal timing, sexual behaviour and self-
reported depression in middle adolescence. J Adolesc 26:531–545
Kaltiala-Heino R, Marttunen M, Rantanen P, Rimpela M (2003b) Early puberty is associated with
mental health problems in middle adolescence. Soc Sci Med 57:1055–1064
Lam TH, Shi HJ, Ho LM, Stewart SM, Fan S (2002) Timing of pubertal maturation and
heterosexual behavior among Hong Kong Chinese adolescents. Arch Sex Behav 31:359–366
Lanza ST, Collins LM (2002) Pubertal timing and the onset of substance use in females during
early adolescence. Prev Sci 3:69–82
McCabe MP, Ricciardelli LA (2004) A longitudinal study of pubertal timing and extreme body
change behaviors among adolescent boys and girls. Adolescence 39:145–166
McNicholas F, Dooley B, McNamara N, Lennon R (2012) The impact of self-reported pubertal
status and pubertal timing on disordered eating in Irish adolescents. Eur Eat Disord Rev
20:355–362
Mendle J, Turkheimer E, Emery RE (2007) Detrimental psychological outcomes associated with
early pubertal timing in adolescent girls. Dev Rev 27:151–171
Mendle J, Harden KP, Brooks-Gunn J, Graber JA (2012) Peer relationships and depressive
symptomatology in boys at puberty. Dev Psychol 48:429–435
Mensah FK, Bayer JK, Wake M, Carlin JB, Allen NB, Patton GC (2013) Early puberty and
childhood social and behavioral adjustment. J Adolesc Health 53:118–124
Michaud PA (2006) Adolescents and risks: why not change our paradigm? J Adolesc Health
38:48183
Michaud PA, Blum RW, Ferron C (1998) “Bet you I will!” risk or experimental behavior during
adolescence? Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 152:224–226
Michaud PA, Suris JC, Deppen A (2006) Gender-related psychological and behavioural correlates
of pubertal timing in a national sample of Swiss adolescents. Mol Cell Endocrinol
254–255:172–178
Mofﬁtt TE (1993) Adolescence-limited and life-course-persistent antisocial behavior: a develop-
mental taxonomy. Psychol Rev 100:674–701
Natsuaki MN (2013) Puberty in context: toward a more nuanced understanding of early matura-
tion. J Adolesc Health 53:677–678
Oldehinkel AJ, Verhulst FC, Ormel J (2011) Mental health problems during puberty: Tanner
stage-related differences in speciﬁc symptoms. The TRAILS study. J Adolesc 34:73–85
Orr DP, Ingersoll GM (1995) The contribution of level of cognitive complexity and pubertal
timing to behavioral risk in young adolescents. Pediatrics 95:528–533
Pubertal Timing, Exploratory Behavior and Mental Health: A View from a. . .
55

Ostovich JM, Sabini J (2005) Timing of puberty and sexuality in men and women. Arch Sex Behav
34:197–206
Parent AS, Teilmann G, Juul A, Skakkebaek NE, Toppari J, Bourguignon JP (2003) The timing of
normal puberty and the age limits of sexual precocity: variations around the world, secular
trends, and changes after migration. Endocr Rev 24:668–693
Patton GC, Viner R (2007) Pubertal transitions in health. Lancet 369:1130–1139
Patton GC, McMorris BJ, Toumbourou JW, Hemphill SA, Donath S, Catalano RF (2004) Puberty
and the onset of substance use and abuse. Pediatrics 114:e300–e306
Patton GC, Hemphill SA, Beyers JM, Bond L, Toumbourou JW, McMorris BJ, Catalano RF
(2007) Pubertal stage and deliberate self-harm in adolescents. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry 46:508–514
Rhee H (2005) Relationships between physical symptoms and pubertal development. J Pediatr
Health Care 19:95–103
Romeo RD, Richardson HN, Sisk CL (2002) Puberty and the maturation of the male brain and
sexual behavior: recasting a behavioral potential. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 26:381–391
Sisk CL, Foster DL (2004) The neural basis of puberty and adolescence. Nat Neurosci
7:1040–1047
Sisk CL, Zehr JL (2005) Pubertal hormones organize the adolescent brain and behavior. Front
Neuroendocrinol 26:163–174
Steinberg A (2008) Risk taking in adolescence: what changes and why? Ann N Y Acad Sci
1021:51–58
Steinberg L (2009) Should the science of adolescent brain development inform public policy? Am
Psychol 64:739–750
Striegel-Moore RH, McMahon RP, Biro FM, Schreiber G, Crawford PB, Voorhees C (2001)
Exploring the relationship between timing of menarche and eating disorder symptoms in black
and white adolescent girls. Int J Eat Disord 30:421–433
Swift W, Coffey C, Carlin JB, Degenhardt L, Patton GC (2008) Adolescent cannabis users at
24 years: trajectories to regular weekly use and dependence in young adulthood. Addiction
103:1361–1370
Tanner J (1962) Growth at adolescence, 2nd edn. Blackwell, Oxford
Tschann JM, Adler NE, Irwin CE Jr, Millstein SG, Turner RA, Kegeles SM (1994) Initiation of
substance use in early adolescence: the roles of pubertal timing and emotional distress. Health
Psychol 13:326–333
Varraso R, Siroux V, Maccario J, Pin I, Kauffmann F, Epidemiological Study on the G, Environ-
ment of A (2005) Asthma severity is associated with body mass index and early menarche in
women. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 171:334–339
Wade TJ, Cairney J, Pevalin DJ (2002) Emergence of gender differences in depression during
adolescence: national panel results from three countries. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry
41:190–198
Waylen A, Wolke D (2004) Sex ‘n’ drugs ‘n’ rock ‘n’ roll: the meaning and social consequences of
pubertal timing. Eur J Endocrinol 151(Suppl 3):U151–U159
Westling E, Andrews JA, Hampson SE, Peterson M (2008) Pubertal timing and substance use: the
effects of gender, parental monitoring and deviant peers. J Adolesc Health 42:555–563
White RM, Deardorff J, Liu Y, Gonzales NA (2013) Contextual ampliﬁcation or attenuation of the
impact of pubertal timing on Mexican-origin boys’ mental health symptoms. J Adolesc Health
53:692–698
Wichstrom L (2000) Predictors of adolescent suicide attempts: a nationally representative longi-
tudinal study of Norwegian adolescents. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 39:603–610
World Health Organization (1989) The health of youth. World Health Organization, Geneva
World Health Organization (2009) Strengthening the health sector response to adolescent health
and development. World Health Organization, Geneva
Zehr JL, Culbert KM, Sisk CL, Klump KL (2007) An association of early puberty with disordered
eating and anxiety in a population of undergraduate women and men. Horm Behav 52:427–435
56
P.-A. Michaud

Puberty, the Brain and Mental Health
in Adolescence
Russell Viner
Abstract There is increasing evidence that puberty inﬂuences mental health and
emotional well-being in humans in multiple ways. These effects begin with
adrenarche in late childhood and continue with gonadarche in early adolescence.
Puberty itself is associated with increased behavioral problems in boys and
increased social anxiety, depression and self-harm in girls. It is also associated
with a lower sense of well-being and with increased reports of fatigue, irritability
and somatic complaints.
The mechanisms by which puberty inﬂuences mental health are unclear, and
likely encompass biological and sociological pathways. Pubertal timing appears to
have effects that are separate from the processes of puberty itself, although it is
uncertain whether those with earlier puberty simply enter this risk period earlier
than peers. Developmental mismatch may be a key mechanism for the effects of
early puberty, i.e., a mismatch between emotional challenges and the cognitive
capacities of young adolescents. Hyperactivation of HPA stress responses with
puberty may play a role in mediating these associations.
However, it is also possible that early puberty and adolescent mental health
problems share a range of common risk factors. These may include stressful family
environments, early childhood adversity, sexual abuse and lack of parental invest-
ment or warmth. In support of this possibility are recent ﬁndings that children with
early puberty can be identiﬁed as having increased psychosocial problems in early
childhood before puberty (Mensah et al. J Adolesc Health 53:118–124, 2013).
Others have found that higher levels of mental health problems are associated
with early puberty only in those with high family risk. This ﬁnding has led to
hypotheses that early puberty may be an evolutionary response to early-life adver-
sities and, in turn, may be linked to a suite of risk-taking behaviors linked with early
reproduction.
Life-course studies of the associations of early puberty and mental health have
not been undertaken. I present ﬁndings from two British Birth Cohort studies (1958
and 1970 birth cohorts) that examined the associations between childhood adversity
R. Viner (*)
General and Adolescent Paediatrics Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guildford Street,
London WC1N 1EH, UK
e-mail: r.viner@ucl.ac.uk
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
J.-P. Bourguignon et al. (eds.), Brain Crosstalk in Puberty and Adolescence,
Research and Perspectives in Endocrine Interactions 13,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09168-6_5
57

and mental health in adult life. I also discuss a new Australian cohort study, the
Childhood to Adolescence Transition Study (CATS; Mundy et al. BMC Pediatr
13:160, 2013) that was set up to examine the effects of early life experience and the
earliest changes of adrenarche and gonadarche on mental health, behavior and well-
being in Australian children.
Introduction
There is increasing recognition of the importance of mental health in adolescence
for mental health and well-being across the life-course, driven by recognition that
adolescence is a key period of onset of mental disorders and spurred by rapid
advances in the neuroscience of the developing brain. In US samples, it is estimated
that three-quarters of all lifetime mental health disorders (with the exception of
dementia) onset by age 24 years (Kessler et al. 2005).
Mental health problems among young people have increased in the past four
decades, including both emotional and behavioral problems (Nufﬁeld Foundation
2009), in both the USA (Achenbach et al. 2003) and UK (Collishaw et al. 2004).
While a large part of adolescent mental health problems can be attributed to the
social transitions inherent in adolescent development, processes that were exacer-
bated by rapid social change over the past three decades (Nufﬁeld Foundation
2009), there is increasing evidence that biological mechanisms may also be
responsible.
Dramatic advances in adolescent neuroscience have shown the rapid develop-
ment of both cortical and sub-cortical structures continuing through adolescence.
There is increasing evidence that abnormalities of adolescent neural developmental
processes are related to the typical onset of conditions such as psychotic disorders
(Holtzman et al. 2013), eating disorders (Frank and Kaye 2012) and Attention
Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD; Frodl and Skokauskas 2012).
Increasing evidence of the actions of sex steroids in the risk for mental disorder,
particularly in psychoses (Trotman et al. 2013), and recent evidence that puberty
inﬂuences brain developmental trajectories (Goddings et al. 2012), has focused
attention on puberty as a potential modiﬁer of the impacts of adolescent
neurocognitive and sociological development on mental health risk.
In this chapter, I will review the evidence and mechanisms for an association
between puberty and mental health in adolescence and across the life-course and
will present novel ﬁndings from a large-scale longitudinal examination of this
association.
58
R. Viner

Puberty and Turbulence
Puberty has long been seen as a turbulent time in human life. William Shakespeare
famously declared, in The Winter’s Tale, “I would there were no age between
sixteen and three-and-twenty, or that youth would sleep out the rest; for there is
nothing in the between but getting wenches with child, wronging the ancientry,
stealing, ﬁghting”(Shakespeare 1623). Similar quotations can be found dating back
to Roman and Greek times. The idea of adolescence as a time of Sturm und Drang
(storm and stress) was common from the late eighteenth century and, throughout
much of the modern period, Goethe’s Young Werther symbolized the difﬁcult
struggles of young people becoming adults within the constraints of conventional
society.
By the early twentieth century, such ideas were being incorporated into scientiﬁc
theories of adolescence. The American psychologist G. Stanley Hall, following
Ernst Haeckel in believing that ‘ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny,’ saw adoles-
cence as a naturally turbulent period recapitulating in each individual the ‘savage’
stage of human evolution (Hall 1904). Sigmund Freud and his disciples added to the
perception of puberty as a difﬁcult period, understanding it to result from the need
for individuals to come to terms with their hitherto-suppressed sexual urges (Holder
2005).
There have been, of course, a number of counter-arguments suggesting that the
apparent turbulence of puberty is a Western social construction. Margaret Mead
claimed, in Coming of Age in Samoa (1928), that young people in Samoa experi-
enced no additional problems during adolescence, and she concluded that the
rebelliousness and emotional or behavioral problems increasingly seen in US
adolescents were the products of culture rather than biology (Scheper-Hughes
1984). This notion of adolescence as almost entirely a social construction still
retains some currency today (Mayall 2002).
Yet there is increasing evidence cross-culturally that the timing of puberty
inﬂuences the risk of a range of mental health problems in young people.
Secular Trends
First it is worthwhile noting that there have been notable trends in mental health
among young people as well as the well-known ‘secular trend’ in pubertal timing.
Michael Rutter and others showed in the 1990s that there had been concerning
increases in adolescent mental health problems across the middle and end of the
twentieth century in many countries (Rutter and Smith 1995). In-depth studies have
shown that mental health disorders increased in young people over the past 30 years
in the UK (Collishaw et al. 2004, 2010; Nufﬁeld Foundation 2009), the USA
(Achenbach et al. 2003) and even in developing countries such as China (Xin
et al. 2012).
Puberty, the Brain and Mental Health in Adolescence
59

The secular trend for the falling age of puberty is well described, particularly in
girls, and is largely thought to relate to improved nutrition. The secular trend was
largely complete by the 1950s in high income Western countries (Eveleth 1998),
although it remains controversial whether there have been further falls in the onset
of puberty over the past 20 years (Viner 2002; Parent et al. 2003; Sorensen
et al. 2012). The evidence suggests that there have been no real changes in age at
menarche or in age of gonadotropin and sex steroid surges in Western populations
(Viner 2002; Sorensen et al. 2012), although there may be increasing numbers with
early gonadotropin-independent thelarche (Sorensen et al. 2012). The vast majority
of data on secular trends in puberty relate to age of menarche in girls, as pubertal
events in boys are less amenable to study in large populations. An interesting
approach to studying pubertal trends in boys has been the study of changes in
injury mortality, given assumptions that puberty drives much of the rise in risky
behaviors seen in early to mid-adolescent males. Injury mortality creates an appre-
ciable ‘hump’ in male mortality during adolescence, and the age of onset of this
hump has been shown to have fallen steadily since 1750 through to the
mid-twentieth century, with stabilization after 1950 (Goldstein 2011).
Given the differences in timing of the respective secular trends in puberty and in
adolescent mental health, it is unlikely that changes in the timing of puberty
contribute signiﬁcantly to increases in adolescent mental health problems.
Evidence for the Association of Puberty and Mental Health
Problems in Adolescence
There is increasing evidence that puberty inﬂuences mental health and emotional
well-being in humans in multiple ways. These effects begin with adrenarche in late
childhood and continue with gonadarche in early adolescence.
Studies of Adrenarche
The impact of adrenarche on mental health has been little studied. Existing studies
are uniformly small and of variable quality. Studies also largely focus on those with
premature adrenarche, and little is known about the effects of normal adrenarcheal
timing on mental health and well-being. Girls with premature adrenarche have been
reported to have more behavioral disorders and higher symptom counts for anxiety
and mood problems (Dorn et al. 2008). A number of very small studies have found
that children who are early into adrenarche reported higher externalizing, depres-
sion and anxiety symptoms and somatic complaints compared to on-time children
(Dorn et al. 1999; Sontag-Padilla et al. 2012).
60
R. Viner

Others have found that levels of adrenal androgens such as dehydroepiandros-
tenedione (DHEA) are related to depression in children and adolescents and
postulate that adrenal androgens may modulate the actions of cortisol in
predisposing to depression (Goodyer et al. 1996, 2001).
Aggression and Violence
Aggressive behaviors, including bullying and violence, increase dramatically and
peak in mid adolescence, coincident with mid to late puberty (Krug et al. 2002;
Patton and Viner 2007). This ﬁnding, together with the known effects of testoster-
one on aggression in experimental animals and in humans (Archer 1991), focused
early attention on the relationship of puberty and aggression in males (Olweus
et al. 1988). However, there is also good evidence from large-scale studies that
increasing pubertal stage is associated with a two- to three-fold increase in risk of
violence and relational aggression in boys, compared with earlier pubertal stages.
There is a dose-response across puberty, with violence/aggression increasing from
early to mid to late puberty (Hemphill et al. 2010).
Depressive Disorders
There is considerable evidence that early puberty increases the risk of depression in
girls (Hayward et al. 1997; Kaltiala-Heino et al. 2003a, b; Mendle et al. 2007).
Concerns about an association between puberty and emotional problems in adoles-
cence gained greater prominence when Angold and colleagues (1998) showed that
pubertal stage predicted risk of major depression in adolescents better than age.
Rates of depression are higher in boys than girls before puberty, but adult females
have two- to three-fold higher rates than adult males. Angold et al. found that it
appeared to be in stage 3 puberty that girls began to transition towards female
preponderance in depression. There was also a suggestion that puberty may actually
reduce the prevalence of depression in males (Angold et al. 1998).
Anxiety
Adolescence is a time when anxiety disorders markedly increase in both sexes,
suggesting an association with puberty. However, the evidence for an association
between anxiety and pubertal timing is much less clear than for depression.
A recent review of over 45 empirical studies found that there is only moderate
quality evidence in girls that both earlier timing and more advanced pubertal stage
increase anxiety scores or symptoms after adjusting for age. Findings for boys are less
Puberty, the Brain and Mental Health in Adolescence
61

robust (Reardon et al. 2009). There is little evidence of anxiety disorders per se.
While one study reported a 2.3-fold increase (OR 2.3) in the likelihood of having had
a panic attack for each greater Tanner stage of puberty (Hayward et al. 1992), others
have found no association between anxiety disorders and pubertal timing in boys or
girls (Graber et al. 1997).
Deliberate Self-Harm
Deliberate self-harm (DSH), a major risk factor for suicide, is another problem that
rises sharply in early adolescence. In young women, DSH appears to peak around
15–16 years of age and prevalence falls thereafter (Hawton et al. 2002; Madge
et al. 2008). The literature on DSH and puberty is much smaller than that for
depression or anxiety. In a large population-based study, apparent strong associa-
tions between DSH and pubertal stage (adjusted for age) were attenuated when
models were adjusted for depressive symptoms, showing that this association was
largely or entirely mediated by depression (Patton et al. 2007).
Eating Disorders
There is strong evidence of an association between puberty and eating disorders, at
least in girls. A recent systematic review showed that more than 40 studies identi-
ﬁed advanced pubertal status and/or early pubertal timing as a risk factor for eating
disorders or disordered eating in girls; similar results were seen in over 20 studies in
boys. Early maturing girls and boys have a higher risk of a range of eating
problems, including anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and eating disorder symp-
toms, including body dissatisfaction and weight and shape concerns (Klump 2013).
However, a number of studies found no association between eating disorders and
puberty, particularly in boys, and others have reported that early or advanced
puberty was associated with improved body image (McCabe et al. 2001).
Mechanisms for the Association of Puberty and Mental
Health
The evidence is robust that early pubertal timing increases the risk for psychopa-
thology during adolescence in girls (Mendle et al. 2007), with good but less robust
evidence for the same association in boys (Mendle and Ferrero 2012). However,
evidence that late pubertal maturation is also associated with some psychological
problems in boys (Huddleston and Ge 2003) suggests that it may be off-time
62
R. Viner

maturation that is the source of problems in boys. There is little evidence that this is
the case in girls.
The mechanisms suggested fall into three broad categories:
(A) Psychosocial mechanisms
1. Psychosocial impact of differentiation from peers
2. Early adoption of more adult roles. The stage-termination hypothesis sug-
gests that earlier maturers face the adolescent transition before they have
successfully completed prior developmental tasks and developed the skills
necessary to cope with the challenges of adolescence (Caspi and Mofﬁtt
1991).
3. Early limiting of adult educational trajectories. Early maturation may also
orient girls toward early motherhood, with limited educational and occupa-
tional prospects, increasing their risk for select psychiatric outcomes (e.g.,
emotional and substance-related).
(B) Biological mechanisms
1. Direct effects of pubertal hormones on the CNS
2. Genetic mechanisms
(i) Hormonal activation of genetic inﬂuences
(ii) Common genetic factors responsible for both early puberty and
psychopathology
(C) Bio-psycho-social mechanisms related to stress
Early childhood stress is well established as a key factor for psychopathology
across the life-course. (Grant et al. 2003). It is postulated that early developmental
experience plays a role in calibrating the response dynamics of central neuroendo-
crine systems, with early adversity resulting in a proﬁle of heightened or prolonged
reactivity to stressors. This response conventionally has been seen as an atavistic
and pathogenic legacy of an evolutionary past in which threats to survival were
more prevalent and severe (Boyce and Ellis 2005). Alternatively, the developmen-
tal plasticity of the stress response systems can be understood as evolved mecha-
nisms that monitor childhood environments as a way of calibrating the development
of stress response systems to best match those environments (Boyce and Ellis
2005). Vulnerable young people exposed to childhood adversity may later be
particularly sensitive to stress sensitization during disruptive periods such as
puberty (Rudolph and Flynn 2007).
Obesity and the Metabolic Syndrome
One potential additional mechanism that has not been examined is potential medi-
ation through obesity. There is strong evidence that early puberty is associated with
Puberty, the Brain and Mental Health in Adolescence
63

later obesity in adolescence and in later adult life, particularly in women (Prentice
and Viner 2013). There is some evidence that this association is causal, i.e., it
persists after adjustment for childhood body mass index (Prentice and Viner 2013).
However, obesity and the metabolic syndrome are associated with psychological
disorders in adulthood through psychological as well as potentially biological
mechanisms (Shefer et al. 2013). It is possible that the association between early
puberty and adult psychopathology is, in fact, mediated by obesity. This has not yet
adequately examined.
Depression
Angold et al. (1998) found that it was pubertal stage rather than the timing of
puberty – found (no association with early menarche) or a transition into a new
stage that was important, i.e., that prevalence of depression was not associated with
recentness of transition between stages (Angold et al. 1998).
Alternatively, the stress of the transition through puberty may activate stress-
sensitization processes linked to depression. This is particularly likely in girls,
given the evidence of gender differences in stress sensitization (Rudolph and
Flynn 2007). Imaging studies suggest that there are unique pubertal inﬂuences on
white matter volumes and structures in a sexually dimorphic fashion that are
independent of age, although data are limited (Ladouceur 2012). Given other data
suggesting that the development of white matter tracts inﬂuences the risk for
depression, it is plausible that pubertal inﬂuences on white matter development
help explain the female rise of depression during adolescence (Ladouceur
et al. 2012).
Anxiety
Potential reverse causality has been examined in a small number of studies, (i.e.,
does childhood anxiety lead to earlier puberty onset?) There is weak evidence from
small studies that higher childhood anxiety may delay the onset of puberty in girls
(Reardon et al. 2009). This is likely to relate to earlier stressors. . ..
Evidence that pubertal hormones are associated with anxiety is weak, with
inconsistent ﬁndings from very small studies (Reardon et al. 2009).
Behavioral Disorders
It is widely believed that increases in testosterone in boys during puberty explain
the increase seen in aggression and violence during adolescence. However,
64
R. Viner

evidence that aggression and behavioral disorders are directly related to testoster-
one in humans is inconclusive. Indeed, the relationship may be reverse-causal, as
there is evidence from animal studies that behaviors may also modulate testosterone
levels (Archer 1991).
Suggested other mechanisms for the association of higher pubertal stage and
aggression or violence range from simple capacity issues, i.e., the increase in
physical size and strength at puberty allows greater capacity for violence, to
psychosocial factors, including conﬂict with parents, school disengagement and
increased substance use seen in puberty, to peer factors. Asynchrony between brain
maturation and emotional and behavioral regulation within a body rapidly devel-
oping greater strength may also increase risk for aggression.
Other mechanisms have focused on stress – acknowledging the increased stress
of growth, development and social role transitions during puberty (Stroud
et al. 2009) – but also the increasing evidence that biological stress responses are
exaggerated during puberty. There is a growing literature examining the role of
variations in stress responses, e.g., hypo- or hyper-arousal of the HPA axis, on the
association of puberty and aggressive behaviors; however, ﬁndings are contradic-
tory (Susman et al. 2010).
Further, it is possible that common genetic factors predispose to both aggression
and early puberty – evolutionary ideas. . .. – (Harden 2012)
There is evidence that links between puberty and violence/aggression are stron-
ger in boys with more anti-social friends, suggesting that puberty produces either a
change in peer group or greater susceptibility to peer inﬂuence (Patton and Viner
2007).
Other mechanisms may operate through associations of puberty with other
mental health problems, e.g., with anxiety, as this may increase aggression, partic-
ularly in males (Susman et al. 2010).
Eating Disorders
For eating disorders, mechanisms have focused on the association of puberty with
body dissatisfaction, a strong risk factor for eating disorders in girls. The physical
changes associated with puberty in girls, such as increased weight and fat deposi-
tion on the thighs and bust, are postulated to increase body dissatisfaction and,
therefore, disorder risk. Girls with early puberty are thought to be at particular risk,
as they may experience even more body dissatisfaction than their developmentally
on-time counterparts (Klump 2013). In boys, mechanisms are less clear, but it has
been postulated that eating disorders may relate to fear of adulthood. Signiﬁcant
weight loss results in gonadotrophin suppression and pubertal arrest or delay,
probably mediated by adipose mass sensing systems.
There is also considerable evidence for hormonal and genetic effects. Twin
studies provide strong support for puberty as a period of signiﬁcant genetic risk
for eating disorders, with evidence suggesting that genetic factors become
Puberty, the Brain and Mental Health in Adolescence
65

“activated” during puberty to increase risk. Heritability of eating disorders in girls
is 0 % before puberty but rises to 50 % during and after puberty, whereas herita-
bility in boys is around 50 % before and during puberty (Klump et al. 2012). There
is also evidence that rises in estrogen during puberty may increase eating disorder
risk, potentially through effects on modiﬁcation of genetic risk (Klump et al. 2010).
When girls in a pilot study of 99 female twin pairs aged 10–15 years were
dichotomized into low or high estradiol pairs, based upon salivary estradiol,
correlations in eating disorder scores were similar (around 0.5) for monozygotic
(MZ) and dizygotic (DZ) twins in the low estradiol group, suggesting that genetic
factors played little role. In contrast, twin correlations were high and signiﬁcant
(0.47) in the MZ group but low and non-signiﬁcant (0.04) in the DZ group,
indicating the presence of genetic effects (Klump et al. 2010). As heritability in
boys is not related to puberty (i.e., is stable across pre-puberty, mid and late
puberty), this ﬁnding adds weight to the hypothesis that rises in estrogen somehow
activate genetic risk (Klump et al. 2012).
Problems with Adjustment for Age
Nearly all studies adjusted models for both puberty and age and did not discuss
issues of co-linearity between puberty and age.
Long-Term Effects of Puberty on Mental Health
Despite the wealth of data on puberty and psychological function in adolescence,
very few studies have examined whether these associations persist across the life-
course. While puberty may be important for mental health during the brief years of
adolescence, it is its effects across the life-course that will determine whether
pubertal timing is of major developmental and public health importance.
While a number of studies of adults have retrospectively collected data on
pubertal timing, few prospective studies have examined the effects of pubertal
timing on function after the age of 20 years.
In a follow-up of Angold’s seminal study, Copeland et al. (2010) found that, at
age 19–21 years, the majority of associations found between puberty and psycho-
logical function in adolescence were attenuated, with the exception of depression in
girls with earlier conduct disorder. They found that early puberty ceased to be a risk
factor for depression in the wider group, and for crime, substance use and educa-
tional and employment outcomes (Copeland et al. 2010).
66
R. Viner

A follow-up of young people from the Oregon Depression project at age 24 years
found that early maturing girls were more likely to have signiﬁcant depression.
However, young men who had been late maturers had higher rates of disruptive
behavior and substance use disorders during the transition to adulthood (Graber
et al. 2004).
However, no studies have examined outcomes into middle adulthood. Further-
more, no studies have examined whether the effects of early puberty on later
psychopathology are mediated through obesity or, in fact, reﬂect common factors
causing both early puberty and psychopathology, such as early adversity.
Findings from the 1970 British Birth Cohort
We examined longitudinal outcomes of pubertal timing in individuals from the
1970 British Birth cohort, a nationally representative birth cohort that initially
recruited over 16,000 individuals born in one week in April of 1970. A total of
16,567 babies were enrolled, with follow-up at 5 years (N ¼ 13,135), 10 years
(N ¼ 14,875), 16 years (N ¼ 11,622), 30 years (N ¼ 11,261) and 34 years
(N ¼ 9,665). We used data from the birth survey and the 5-, 10-, 16- and 34-year
follow-ups (Butler and Golding 1986; Butler et al. 2000; Bynner et al. 2002).
Data on puberty were taken from the 10-year survey (N ¼ 12,981) when children
were examined by a school medical ofﬁcer and physical signs of puberty were
noted between age 10 and 11 years. Signs of puberty for girls were deﬁned as
signiﬁcant breast, pubic hair or axillary hair development or a report from the child
or mother of having achieved menarche. Data on age of menarche were combined
from the 16-year survey (when girls and mothers both reported on age at menarche)
and the 10-year survey.
At 10 years, data on pubertal status were available on 6,296 girls, with 25.9 %
(N ¼ 1,696) recorded as having any signs of puberty. This ﬁnding accords well with
expectations for age 10 years according to British normative data (see Table 1). We
were unable to stage puberty accurately at age 10 years as data were only recorded
as present or absent. We therefore deﬁned those girls who had any signs of puberty
at age 10 as having early puberty, representing the earliest quartile of pubertal
timing.
Data on age at menarche were available on 5,123 girls. Mean age of menarche in
this sample was 13.0 years, with a standard deviation of 1.0 years, which accords
very well with contemporary British reference data (mean age of menarche, 13.2
years, SD 1.0 year). We deﬁned early menarche as achieving menarche before the
11th birthday, as this indicates that Tanner stage 3 to 4 had been attained by this
time. This group included 17.5 % (N ¼ 895) of the girls.
Puberty, the Brain and Mental Health in Adolescence
67

Analyses
Analyses were undertaken in Stata 12. We ﬁrst examined differences in proportions
of adult outcomes in those in early or normal/late puberty groups. We then
calculated odds ratios for adult outcomes related to early puberty, adjusting for
the likely confounders of socioeconomic status in childhood and adulthood, mater-
nal educational status, childhood height and adult body mass index.
Findings
Data on frequency of signs of early puberty and age at menarche are given in
Table 1. Table 2 shows associations of early puberty (any signs of puberty at
10 years) with adult outcomes. Table 3 shows associations of early menarche
(menarche <11 years) with adult outcomes.
We found that early puberty was associated with higher risk of serious mental
health problems at age 34 years.
Table 1 Frequency of signs of puberty at 10 years and age at menarche compared with contem-
porary UK reference data
Frequency in
cohort % (N)
Expected frequency from UK
reference data %
Signs of puberty at 10 years
N ¼ 6,296
Breast
23 (144)
25
Pubic hair
8 (514)
9
Axillary hair
3 (177)
–
Menarche
0.4 (25)
0.04
Any signs of puberty
27 (1,696)
–
Age at menarche reported at 16 years
N ¼ 5,123
<11th birthday
18 (895)
2
11 years
13 (641)
13
12 years
22 (1,126)
35
13 years
25 (1,290)
35
14 years
15 (770)
13
15 years or not yet started
8 (401)
2
68
R. Viner

Table 2 Associations of pubertal status at age 10 years with outcomes at age 34 years
Adult outcome
variables at
age 34 years
Proportions with adult outcome by pubertal
timing
Adjusted OR
(95 % CI)
p
Early puberty
Normal/later puberty
Low life satisfaction
(lowest quartile)
24.2 (278)
21.5 (659)
1.1 (0.9, 1.4)
0.16
Psychological disorder
(Malaise Inventory
high scorer, indicating
likely depression)
19.8 (17.6, 22.2)
17.6 (16.3, 19.02)
1.2 (1.0, 1.4)
0.11
Serious mental illness
(Kessler 6 inventory
high score)
5.6 (4.4, 7.1)
4.0 (3.4, 4.8)
1.4 (1.1, 1.9)
0.03
Alcohol misuse or
dependency (CAGE
high scorer)
13.6 (11.7, 15.8)
13.2 (12.0, 14.5)
1.1 (0.9, 1.3)
0.7
Cautioned or criminal
conviction
1.5 (1.0, 2.4)
1.7 (1.3, 2.3)
0.8 (0.5, 1.5)
0.6
Unemployed and seek-
ing work
0.9 (0.5, 1.6)
1.8 (1.3, 2.3)
0.5 (0.2, 0.9)
0.04
OR, Odds ratios adjusted for social class at 10 and 34 years and body mass index (BMI) at 34 years
p-values for differences between proportions with adult outcome by pubertal timing, Fishers exact
test *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001
Table 3 Associations of early menarche with outcomes at age 34 years
Adult outcome
variables at
age 34 years
Proportions with adult outcome by
menarcheal timing
Adjusted OR
(95 % CI)
p
Early menarche
Normal/later menarche
Low life satisfaction
(lowest quartile)
22.4 (19.3, 25.9)
22.4 (20.9, 23.9)
1.0 (0.8, 1.2)
0.7
Psychological disorder
(Malaise Inventory
high scorer, indicating
likely depression)
18.5 (15.6, 21.8)
17.8 (16.5, 19.2)
1.0 (0.8, 1.3)
0.9
Serious mental illness
(Kessler 6 inventory
high score)
5.0 (3.6, 7.2)
4.3 (3.6, 5.1)
1.3 (0.8, 1.9)
0.3
Alcohol misuse or
dependency (CAGE
high scorer)
13.6 (11.1, 16.7)
13.8 (12.6, 15.1)
1.0 (0.8, 1.4)
0.8
Cautioned or criminal
conviction
2.3 (1.4, 3.9)
1.3 (1.0, 1.8)
1.8 (0.9, 3.4)
0.09
Unemployed and seek-
ing work
1.5 (0.8, 2.8)
1.1 (0.9, 1.1)
1.3 (0.6, 3.0)
0.5
Odds ratios adjusted for social class at 10 and 34 years and body mass index (BMI) at 34 years
p-values for differences between proportions with adult outcome by pubertal timing, Fishers exact
test *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001
Puberty, the Brain and Mental Health in Adolescence
69

Conclusions and Future Directions
There is strong evidence that early puberty in girls is associated with poorer
psychological function and increased risk of a range of psychiatric disorders during
adolescence. The evidence for boys is notably weaker, and there is some evidence
that late pubertal maturation similarly increases risk.
While the literature on the long-term effects of puberty on psychological func-
tion is sparse, and there is some evidence of limited persistent effects on psycho-
pathology in females, data suggest that the effects of puberty on psychological,
social and educational function are predominantly limited to adolescence. This
argues for psychosocial rather than biological factors being the predominant mech-
anisms by which early puberty inﬂuences psychological function. We did not ﬁnd
evidence to support childhood adversity as a common factor underlying early
puberty and later psychological function.
References
Achenbach TM, Dumenci L, Rescorla LA (2003) Are American children’s problems still getting
worse? A 23-year comparison. J Abnorm Child Psychol 31:1–11
Angold A, Costello EJ, Worthman CM (1998) Puberty and depression: the roles of age, pubertal
status and pubertal timing. Psychol Med 28:51–61
Archer J (1991) The inﬂuence of testosterone on human aggression. Br J Psychol 82(Pt 1):1–28
Boyce WT, Ellis BJ (2005) Biological sensitivity to context: I. An evolutionary-developmental
theory of the origins and functions of stress reactivity. Dev Psychopathol 17:271–301
Butler NR, Golding J (1986) From birth to ﬁve: a study of the health and behaviour of Britain’s
5-year-olds. Pergamon Press, Oxford
Butler NR, Despotidou S, Shepherd P (2000) The 1970 British Birth Cohort Study: ten year
follow-up: a guide to the BCS70 Ten-year data available at the Economic and Social Research
Council Data Archive, London
Bynner J, Butler N, Ferri E, Shepherd P, Smith K (2002) The design and conduct of the 1999–2000
surveys of the National Child Development Study and the 1970 British Birth Cohort Study.
Centre for Longitudinal Studies, Institute of Education, London
Caspi A, Mofﬁtt TE (1991) Individual differences are accentuated during periods of social change:
the sample case of girls at puberty. J Pers Soc Psychol 61:157–168
Collishaw S, Maughan B, Goodman R, Pickles A (2004) Time trends in adolescent mental health. J
Child Psychol Psychiatry 45:1350–1362
Collishaw S, Maughan B, Natarajan L, Pickles A (2010) Trends in adolescent emotional problems
in England: a comparison of two national cohorts twenty years apart. J Child Psychol
Psychiatry 51:885–894
Copeland W, Shanahan L, Miller S, Costello EJ, Angold A, Maughan B (2010) Outcomes of early
pubertal timing in young women: a prospective population-based study. Am J Psychiatry
167:1218–1225
Dorn LD, Hitt SF, Rotenstein D (1999) Biopsychological and cognitive differences in children
with premature vs. on-time adrenarche. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 153:137–146
Dorn LD, Rose SR, Rotenstein D, Susman EJ, Huang B, Loucks TL, Berga SL (2008) Differences
in endocrine parameters and psychopathology in girls with premature adrenarche versus
on-time adrenarche. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 21:439–448
70
R. Viner

Eveleth P (1998) Variation in age at menarche. In: Ulijaszek SJ, Johnston FE, Preece MA (eds)
Cambridge encyclopaedia of human growth and development. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 376–377
Frank GK, Kaye WH (2012) Current status of functional imaging in eating disorders. Int J Eat
Disord 45:723–736
Frodl T, Skokauskas N (2012) Meta-analysis of structural MRI studies in children and adults with
attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder indicates treatment effects. Acta Psychiatr Scand
125:114–126
Goddings A-L, Burnett Heyes S, Bird G, Viner RM, Blakemore S-J (2012) The relationship
between puberty and social emotion processing. Dev Sci 15:801–811
Goldstein JR (2011) A secular trend toward earlier male sexual maturity: evidence from shifting
ages of male young adult mortality. PLoS One 6:e14826
Goodyer IM, Herbert J, Altham PM, Pearson J, Secher SM, Shiers HM (1996) Adrenal secretion
during major depression in 8- to 16-year-olds, I. altered diurnal rhythms in salivary cortisol and
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) at presentation. Psychol Med 26:245–256
Goodyer IM, Park RJ, Netherton CM, Herbert J (2001) Possible role of cortisol and dehydroepi-
androsterone in human development and psychopathology. Br J Psychiatry 179:243–249
Graber JA, Lewinsohn PM, Seeley JR, Brooks-Gunn J (1997) Is psychopathology associated with
the timing of pubertal development? J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 36:1768–1776
Graber JA, Seeley JR, Brooks-Gunn J, Lewinsohn PM (2004) Is pubertal timing associated with
psychopathology in young adulthood? J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 43:718–726
Grant KE, Compas BE, Stuhlmacher AF, Thurm AE, McMahon SD, Halpert JA (2003) Stressors
and child and adolescent psychopathology: moving from markers to mechanisms of risk.
Psychol Bull 129:447–466
Hall GS (1904) Adolescence: its psychology and its relation to physiology, anthropology, sociol-
ogy, sex, crime, religion and education. Appleton, New York
Hawton K, Rodham K, Evans E, Weatherall R (2002) Deliberate self harm in adolescents: self
report survey in schools in England. BMJ 325:1207–1211
Hayward C, Killen JD, Hammer LD, Litt IF, Wilson DM, Simmonds B, Taylor CB (1992) Pubertal
stage and panic attack history in sixth- and seventh-grade girls. Am J Psychiatry 149:1239–
1243
Hayward C, Killen JD, Wilson DM, Hammer LD, Litt IF, Kraemer HC, Haydel F, Varady A,
Taylor CB (1997) Psychiatric risk associated with early puberty in adolescent girls. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry 36:255–262
Hemphill SA, Kotevski A, Herrenkohl TI, Toumbourou JW, Carlin JB, Catalano RF, Patton GC
(2010) Pubertal stage and the prevalence of violence and social/relational aggression. Pediat-
rics 126:e298–e305
Holder A (2005) Anna Freud, Melanie Klein, and the psycho-analysis of children and adolescents.
Karnac Books, London
Holtzman CW, Trotman HD, Goulding SM, Ryan AT, Macdonald AN, Shapiro DI, Brasﬁeld JL,
Walker EF (2013) Stress and neurodevelopmental processes in the emergence of psychosis.
Neuroscience 249:172–191
Huddleston J, Ge X (2003) Boys at puberty: psychosocial implications. In: Hayward C (ed) Gender
differences at puberty. Cambridge University Press, New York, pp 113–134
Kaltiala-Heino R, Kosunen E, Rimpela M (2003a) Pubertal timing, sexual behaviour and self-
reported depression in middle adolescence. J Adolesc 26:531–545
Kaltiala-Heino R, Marttunen M, Rantanen P, Rimpela M (2003b) Early puberty is associated with
mental health problems in middle adolescence. Soc Sci Med 57:1055–1064
Kessler RC, Berglund P, Demler O, Jin R, Merikangas KR, Walters EE (2005) Lifetime preva-
lence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication. Arch Gen Psychiatry 62:593–602
Klump KL (2013) Puberty as a critical risk period for eating disorders: a review of human and
animal studies. Horm Behav 64:399–410
Puberty, the Brain and Mental Health in Adolescence
71

Klump KL, Keel PK, Sisk C, Burt SA (2010) Preliminary evidence that estradiol moderates
genetic inﬂuences on disordered eating attitudes and behaviors during puberty. Psychol Med
40:1745–1753
Klump KL, Culbert KM, Slane JD, Burt SA, Sisk CL, Nigg JT (2012) The effects of puberty on
genetic risk for disordered eating: evidence for a sex difference. Psychol Med 42:627–637
Krug EG, Mercy JA, Dahlberg LL, Zwi AB (2002) The world report on violence and health.
Lancet 360:1083–1088
Ladouceur CD (2012) Neural systems supporting cognitive-affective interactions in adolescence:
the role of puberty and implications for affective disorders. Front Integr Neurosci 6:65
Ladouceur CD, Peper JS, Crone EA, Dahl RE (2012) White matter development in adolescence:
the inﬂuence of puberty and implications for affective disorders. Dev Cogn Neurosci 2:36–54
Madge N, Hewitt A, Hawton K, de Wilde EJ, Corcoran P, Fekete S, van Heeringen K, De Leo D,
Ystgaard M (2008) Deliberate self-harm within an international community sample of young
people: comparative ﬁndings from the Child & Adolescent Self-harm in Europe (CASE) Study.
J Child Psychol Psychiatry 49:667–677
Mayall B (2002) Towards a sociology for childhood: thinking from children’s lives. Open
University Press, Buckingham
McCabe MP, Ricciardelli LA, Banﬁeld S (2001) Body image, strategies to change muscles and
weight, and puberty: do they impact on positive and negative affect among adolescent boys and
girls? Eat Behav 2:129–149
Mendle J, Ferrero J (2012) Detrimental psychological outcomes associated with pubertal timing in
adolescent boys. Dev Rev 32:49–66
Mendle J, Turkheimer E, Emery RE (2007) Detrimental psychological outcomes associated with
early pubertal timing in adolescent girls. Dev Rev 27:151–171
Mensah FK, Bayer JK, Wake M, Carlin JB, Allen NB, Patton GC (2013) Early puberty and
childhood social and behavioral adjustment. J Adolesc Health 53:118–124
Mundy LK, Simmons JG, Allen NB, Viner RM, Bayer JK, Olds T, Williams J, Olsson C,
Romaniuk H, Mensah F, Sawyer SM, Degenhardt L, Alati R, Wake M, Jacka F, Patton GC
(2013) Study protocol: the Childhood to Adolescence Transition Study (CATS). BMC Pediatr
13:160
Nufﬁeld Foundation (2009) Time trends in adolescent well-being: update 2009. Nufﬁeld Founda-
tion, London
Olweus D, Mattsson A, Schalling D, Low H (1988) Circulating testosterone levels and aggression
in adolescent males: a causal analysis. Psychosom Med 50:261–272
Parent AS, Teilmann G, Juul A, Skakkebaek NE, Toppari J, Bourguignon JP (2003) The timing of
normal puberty and the age limits of sexual precocity: variations around the world, secular
trends, and changes after migration. Endocr Rev 24:668–693
Patton GC, Viner R (2007) Pubertal transitions in health. Lancet 369:1130–1139
Patton GC, Hemphill SA, Beyers JM, Bond L, Toumbourou JW, McMorris BJ, Catalano RF
(2007) Pubertal stage and deliberate self-harm in adolescents. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry 46:508–514
Prentice P, Viner RM (2013) Pubertal timing and adult obesity and cardiometabolic risk in women
and men: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Obes (Lond) 37:1036–1043
Reardon LE, Leen-Feldner EW, Hayward C (2009) A critical review of the empirical literature on
the relation between anxiety and puberty. Clin Psychol Rev 29:1–23
Rudolph KD, Flynn M (2007) Childhood adversity and youth depression: inﬂuence of gender and
pubertal status. Dev Psychopathol 19:497–521
Rutter M, Smith DJ (1995) Psychosocial disorders in young people: time trends and their causes.
Wiley, New York
Scheper-Hughes N (1984) The Margaret Mead controversy: culture, biology, and anthropological
inquiry. Hum Organ 43:85
Shakespeare W (1623) The Winter’s Tale. pp Act III, scene iii
72
R. Viner

Shefer G, Marcus Y, Stern N (2013) Is obesity a brain disease? Neurosci Biobehav Rev 37(10
Pt 2):2489–2503
Sontag-Padilla LM, Dorn LD, Tissot A, Susman EJ, Beers SR, Rose SR (2012) Executive
functioning, cortisol reactivity, and symptoms of psychopathology in girls with premature
adrenarche. Dev Psychopathol 24:211–223
Sorensen K, Mouritsen A, Aksglaede L, Hagen CP, Mogensen SS, Juul A (2012) Recent secular
trends in pubertal timing: implications for evaluation and diagnosis of precocious puberty.
Horm Res Paediatr 77:137–145
Stroud LR, Foster E, Papandonatos GD, Handwerger K, Granger DA, Kivlighan KT, Niaura R
(2009) Stress response and the adolescent transition: performance versus peer rejection
stressors. Dev Psychopathol 21:47–68
Susman EJ, Dockray S, Granger DA, Blades KT, Randazzo W, Heaton JA, Dorn LD (2010)
Cortisol and alpha amylase reactivity and timing of puberty: vulnerabilities for antisocial
behaviour in young adolescents. Psychoneuroendocrinology 35:557–569
Trotman HD, Holtzman CW, Ryan AT, Shapiro DI, MacDonald AN, Goulding SM, Brasﬁeld JL,
Walker EF (2013) The development of psychotic disorders in adolescence: a potential role for
hormones. Horm Behav 64:411–419
Viner RM (2002) Splitting hairs: is puberty getting earlier in girls? Arch Dis Child 86:8–10
Xin Z, Niu J, Chi L (2012) Birth cohort changes in Chinese adolescents’ mental health. Int J
Psychol 47:287–295
Puberty, the Brain and Mental Health in Adolescence
73

The Role of Puberty in Human Adolescent
Brain Development
Anne-Lise Goddings
Abstract Many of the physical, social and behavioural changes associated with
adolescence are linked with puberty, the physiological process resulting in repro-
ductive competence. Recent research has demonstrated that the human brain
undergoes signiﬁcant change during adolescence, but little is known about the
role of puberty in this process. This review summarises ﬁndings from current
human imaging studies regarding the relationship between both structural and
functional brain development and pubertal maturation, and it explores how these
occur in the context of changing chronological age and pubertal status. The ﬁndings
across these structural and functional MRI studies are consistent with the hypoth-
esis that pubertal hormones interact with the neuroanatomical and neurocognitive
changes seen during puberty (Blakemore et al., Hum Brain Map 31:926–933, 2010;
Sisk and Foster, Nat Neurosci 7:1040–1047, 2004) and that some aspects of brain
development in adolescence might be more closely linked to the physical and
hormonal changes of puberty than to chronological age.
Introduction
Adolescence is a key stage in human development, incorporating physical, social,
and psychological changes and culminating in the attainment of a stable adult role.
During adolescence, new behaviours are laid down, educational, socioeconomic
and relationship trajectories are canalized, and a new epidemiology of disease
burden emerges (Patton and Viner 2007). Many of these changes have been linked
with puberty, the biological process that culminates in reproductive competence
and a deﬁning event of adolescence (Sisk and Foster 2004). Research has demon-
strated that the human brain undergoes signiﬁcant change during adolescence, as
determined by age, but little is known about how puberty inﬂuences the develop-
ment of the human brain.
A.-L. Goddings (*)
MRC Clinical Training Research Fellow, UCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford St.,
London WC1N 1EH, UK
e-mail: Anne-lise.goddings@ucl.ac.uk
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
J.-P. Bourguignon et al. (eds.), Brain Crosstalk in Puberty and Adolescence,
Research and Perspectives in Endocrine Interactions 13,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09168-6_6
75

Since there is a normal variation of four to ﬁve years in the timing of onset of
puberty in healthy humans (Parent et al. 2003), pubertal development is partially
dissociable from chronological age. Nevertheless, puberty and age are inevitably
highly correlated when considered over the whole age range of adolescence. Most
developmental studies have not tried to dissect these two differing developmental
variables, either inferring pubertal effects using age-based studies (e.g. Giedd
et al. 1999) or focussing on puberty effects in a wide age range (e.g., Peper
et al. 2009). Where studies have attempted to dissociate age from pubertal devel-
opment, different techniques have been employed. One method involves limiting
the age range studied to a sufﬁciently narrow range that puberty is no longer
correlated with age (e.g., Forbes et al. 2010). An alternative approach is to statis-
tically incorporate age as a confounding variable within an analysis looking at
pubertal stage (e.g., Op de Macks et al. 2011). Different methods may be best suited
to different types of study, e.g., size of sample and cross-sectional vs. longitudinal.
This review summarises the ﬁndings from current human imaging studies
regarding the relationship between both structural and functional brain develop-
ment and pubertal maturation, and it explores how these occur in the context of
changing chronological age and pubertal status.
Structural Brain Development and Puberty
The past 20 years have seen a major expansion in research on the structural
development of the human adolescent brain, based largely on the results of cross-
sectional and longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies (Brain
Development
Cooperative
Group
2012;
Raznahan
et
al.
2011;
Sowell
et al. 2002). To date, studies of brain growth trajectories over adolescence have
predominantly considered growth in relation to chronological age, with few excep-
tions (Paus et al. 2010; Raznahan et al. 2010). It has been hypothesised that the
brain restructuring and development seen in adolescence might be speciﬁcally
related to the hormonal inﬂuences that control the onset of and progression through
puberty (Giedd et al. 1999; Lenroot et al. 2007; Peper et al. 2011; Sowell
et al. 2002). Sex steroids such as testosterone (an androgen) and oestradiol
(an oestrogen) have been shown to be capable of inducing both synaptogenesis
and synaptic pruning in rats and non-human primates (Ahmed et al. 2008; Hajszan
et al. 2008; Sato et al. 2008), with differential effects of androgens and oestrogens
on different brain areas, which might be related to hormone receptor distribution
(Clark et al. 1988; Sholl and Kim 1989). These differential effects across brain
areas might provide an explanation for the diverging growth trajectories of partic-
ular brain structures between males and females that has been documented across
studies and the resultant increasing sexual dimorphism in adolescence reported in
some regions (Brain Development Cooperative Group 2012; Lenroot et al. 2007;
Neufang et al. 2009; Sowell et al. 2002).
76
A.-L. Goddings

An early cross-sectional study by De Bellis and colleagues (2001) found signif-
icant correlations between Tanner stage (Marshall and Tanner 1969, 1970), a
marker
of
physical
pubertal
development,
and
changes
in
grey
matter
(GM) volume, white matter (WM) volume and corpus callosum (CC) area in a
sample of 118 children and adolescents aged 6.9–17 years. They reported a Tanner
stage by age interaction in development and hypothesised that this might relate to
differential hormone exposure in males and females in puberty (De Bellis
et al. 2001). Subsequent cross-sectional studies have investigated pubertal devel-
opment by considering both the physical changes of puberty and by measuring sex
steroid hormone levels. A study looking at cortical GM and pubertal measures
found region-speciﬁc correlations between GM density and both pubertal stage and
oestradiol concentration in girls (Peper et al. 2009). Neufang and colleagues (2009)
studied a sample of 46 healthy participants aged between 8 and 15 years of age,
focussing on the association between brain volumes and both pubertal stage
(n ¼ 46) and testosterone concentration (n ¼ 30). They found that males and
females in later stages of puberty, and with higher circulating testosterone concen-
tration, had larger amygdala volumes and smaller hippocampal volumes than their
less well-developed peers (Neufang et al. 2009). A second study (n ¼ 80; 10.75–
13.48 years) investigating puberty and pubertal hormone correlations with GM
volume again showed larger amygdala volumes in more pubertally mature males
than in their less mature counterparts but showed the opposite trend in females, with
decreasing amygdala volume with increasing testosterone levels (Bramen
et al. 2011). They also studied other brain regions, including the hippocampus,
thalamus, caudate and cortex, and reported signiﬁcant decreases in volume in the
right hippocampus and cerebral cortex in females, but no signiﬁcant changes in
males. The discrepant ﬁndings between these two latter papers could result from the
relatively small sample sizes or the differing age ranges of the two studies, which
also used different methods to extract the volumes of interest (Neufang et al. 2009:
voxel-based morphometry; Bramen et al. 2011: surface-based reconstruction). This
ﬁnal study conducted multiple regression analyses incorporating both age and
puberty measurements to study the relative contributions of both variables to the
changing brain structure seen (Bramen et al. 2011). Puberty and age are highly
correlated when considering adolescence as a whole, since puberty is a progressive
process that usually begins during early-mid adolescence and develops over time.
However, since there is a four- to ﬁve-year normal variation in the timing of onset
of puberty (Parent et al. 2003), careful study design, appropriate age ranges of
participants, and suitable analytical tools can allow puberty and age to be teased
apart so that the differing contributions of each variable to development can be
studied.
These studies have limited power due to relatively small sample sizes, which
constrain our ability to attribute causality to this association or to investigate the
effect of sex steroids on brain developmental trajectories during adolescence.
Longitudinal analysis allows comparison of brain volumes both between partici-
pants and also within each participant over time and, therefore, can provide a
measure not just of brain volume at a particular time point but also of
The Role of Puberty in Human Adolescent Brain Development
77

developmental trajectories for each of these subcortical regions by following what
happens to each participant. This approach is particularly advantageous when
looking at brain volumes, which vary substantially between individuals (Brain
Development Cooperative Group 2012; Lenroot et al. 2007; Tamnes et al. 2013).
We recently conducted a study using longitudinal data to address some of these
issues and to further explore the relationship between structural brain development
and the correlated but physiologically distinct variables of chronological age and
pubertal stage. This study included 275 individuals aged between 7 and 20 years,
each of whom was scanned at least twice, with a total of 711 scans used in the study
(Goddings et al. 2013). We focussed on the developmental trajectories of subcor-
tical regions across adolescence, and we used multi-level modelling analyses to
tease apart the effects of pubertal status (measured by Tanner stage) and chrono-
logical age. In this study, we found that the development of all regions examined
was associated with pubertal maturation (Fig. 1; Goddings et al. 2013), and for
many structures (females: amygdala, hippocampus, caudate, putamen; males:
amygdala, putamen), models including both Tanner stage and age best described
volume change over adolescence. Despite the close proximity of the subcortical
structures explored, there were clear differences in their structural development
during adolescence. These results might reﬂect the different mechanisms that
inﬂuence macroscopic volume changes between structures, with varying inﬂuences
10
Female
8
6
4
2
0
-2
1
2
3
4
5
-4
-6
% difference fromvolume at Tanner stage 1
-8
-10
Amygdala
Tanner Stage
10
Male
8
6
4
2
0
-2
1
2
3
4
5
-4
-6
% difference fromvolume at Tanner stage 1
-8
-10
Tanner Stage
Caudate
Hippocampus
Putamen
Nucleus accumbens
Globus Pallidus
Fig. 1 Growth trajectories (in terms of % volume change) for subcortical regions in females and
males across puberty. For each structure, the percentage volume was calculated for each pubertal
stage as a proportion of prepubertal volume (at Tanner stage 1). This allows comparison between
structures for relative changes in volume across puberty. For both sexes, the amygdala and
hippocampus increased in volume over puberty, while the nucleus accumbens, caudate, putamen
and globus pallidus decreased in volume (From Goddings et al. 2013)
78
A.-L. Goddings

of age and puberty between regions. Alternatively, the regions might undergo
similar growth patterns but do so at different chronological time points.
These studies provide evidence for a role for puberty in the development of the
human adolescent brain. Further large longitudinal studies incorporating both
hormonal and physical indicators of puberty are needed to further explore this
relationship and to tease apart puberty and age effects on structural brain
maturation.
Functional Brain Development in Puberty
In addition to assisting in the investigation of changing brain structure over
adolescence, MRI techniques can be used to assess changing brain function with
development. Functional MRI (fMRI) techniques have allowed researchers to
investigate the patterns of neural activation in subjects, as measured by recording
blood-oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) signal changes while they perform speciﬁc
tasks within the scanner, and to establish how these patterns develop from child-
hood to adulthood. Only a small number of functional neuroimaging studies of the
adolescent brain have included puberty measures. These studies have focussed on a
range of different behavioural tasks pertinent to adolescent development.
Two fMRI studies have been published assessing changes in face processing
with puberty. Reading emotions from faces is an important skill for perceiving
emotional states in others and is, therefore, likely to be of particular importance
during adolescence (Dahl and Gunnar 2009). Both studies showed differential
patterns of neural activation across puberty within the network of regions known
to be involved in perception and reaction to emotional expressions. One study
showed evidence of increased BOLD signal in the amygdala and ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex to threatening faces in a pre/early puberty group compared with
a mid/late puberty group (aged 11–13; Forbes et al. 2011). In a different study, with
10 and 13 year olds, Moore and colleagues (2012) found that participants in later
stages of pubertal development showed increased signal in face processing regions
when looking at affective facial expressions.. These studies reported some discrep-
ant ﬁndings, which might reﬂect the use of different methods of assessing pubertal
development or the administration of different tasks (Moore et al. 2012; Op de
Macks et al. 2011).
A further aspect of emotional development that is likely to be important during
adolescence is the ability to process social emotions. Social emotions require an
individual to understand that other people have different mental states to their own
and to be able to represent those mental states, a process known as mentalising.
Examples of social emotions include ‘guilt’ and ‘embarrassment’. In contrast, basic
emotions, e.g., ‘disgust’ and ‘fear,’ do not require this mentalising ability (Burnett
et al. 2009). A network of regions involved in mentalising has been robustly
demonstrated across a range of fMRI studies (see Blakemore 2012, for review),
and the ongoing structural and functional development of this mentalising network
The Role of Puberty in Human Adolescent Brain Development
79

has been shown to continue across adolescence, as determined by chronological age
(Mills et al. 2014). We conducted an fMRI study to explore whether the processing
of social emotions by this mentalising network changes with puberty in adoles-
cence. The study showed that girls (aged 11 to 13 years) with higher levels of
pubertal hormones had increased activation of the anterior temporal cortex - one of
the regions of the mentalising network - than their age-matched peers with lower
levels of pubertal hormones (Fig. 2; Goddings et al. 2012). In contrast, activation in
the prefrontal cortex, which is also involved in mentalising, showed no correlation
with pubertal status but showed decreasing activation with increasing chronological
age (Goddings et al. 2012), a ﬁnding that has been replicated in a number of studies
(e.g., Burnett et al. 2009; see Blakemore 2012 for review).
Fig. 2 There was a positive association between level of puberty hormones and BOLD signal in
the anterior temporal cortex during a Social>Basic emotion condition of an emotion task (From
Goddings et al. 2012) The graphs on the right show the positive correlation at the peak voxel
between each puberty hormone and adjusted BOLD signal in the Social>Basic contrast in the left
anterior temporal cortex
80
A.-L. Goddings

A different aspect of adolescent cognitive development that has been studied
from the perspective of pubertal changes is that of reward processing. Two studies
have tackled this topic, with both showing signiﬁcant differences in patterns of
neural activation with advancing puberty. One fMRI study demonstrated differ-
ences in caudate and rostral medial prefrontal BOLD signal between early and late
puberty groups (aged 11-13) when processing reward outcome in a gambling task,
and a correlation between testosterone level and caudate BOLD signal (Forbes
et al. 2010). A second fMRI study investigating reward and pubertal hormonal
concentration showed a signiﬁcant correlation between testosterone level and
activation in the ventral striatum (caudate in girls and putamen in both genders;
Op de Macks et al. 2011). Both of these studies focussed on risk-taking tasks with a
binary choice (risky option vs. safer option) and found signiﬁcant patterns of
activation and change with puberty, adding to the evidence for an underlying role
of puberty in functional brain development.
Summary
The ﬁndings across these structural and functional MRI studies are consistent with
the hypothesis that pubertal hormones interact with the neuroanatomical and
neurocognitive changes seen during puberty (Blakemore et al. 2010; Sisk and
Foster 2004) and that aspects of brain development in adolescence might be more
closely linked to the physical and hormonal changes of puberty than to chronolog-
ical age. Further work is needed to understand these complex relationships. The
current set of ﬁndings suggests that changes during adolescence in brain structure
and activity are not under the control of a single system. Instead, these changes may
be differentially related to the effects of age and puberty and could have multiply-
speciﬁed biological and environmental drivers. Sex hormone receptors are found
throughout the brain, with differing concentrations across regions. Thus, the
increase in sex hormones at puberty might have direct effects on structural devel-
opment and on activation of speciﬁc brain regions during cognitive tasks. A second
potential mechanism to explain differing patterns of neural activation could be that
increases in pubertal hormones cause a developmental shift in cognitive strategy,
which is then measured as changing patterns of BOLD signals during the task.
Ongoing work testing these theories using different methods and paradigms will
help to further ascertain the precise role of puberty in ongoing brain development
during adolescence.
References
Ahmed EI, Zehr JL, Schulz KM, Lorenz BH, DonCarlos LL, Sisk CL (2008) Pubertal hormones
modulate the addition of new cells to sexually dimorphic brain regions. Nat Neurosci
11:995–997
The Role of Puberty in Human Adolescent Brain Development
81

Blakemore SJ (2012) Development of the social brain in adolescence. J Roy Soc Med
105:111–116. doi:10.1258/jrsm.2011.110221
Blakemore S-J, Burnett S, Dahl RE (2010) The role of puberty in the developing adolescent brain.
Hum Brain Map 31:926–933. doi:10.1002/hbm.21052
Brain Development Cooperative Group (2012) Total and regional brain volumes in a population-
based normative sample from 4 to 18 years: the NIH MRI Study of Normal Brain Develop-
ment. Cereb Cort (1991) 22:1–12. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhr018
Bramen JE, Hranilovich JA, Dahl RE, Forbes EE, Chen J, Toga AW, Dinov ID, Worthman CM,
Sowell ER (2011) Puberty inﬂuences medial temporal lobe and cortical gray matter maturation
differently in boys than girls matched for sexual maturity. Cereb Cortex 21:636–646
Burnett S, Bird G, Moll J, Frith C, Blakemore S-J (2009) Development during adolescence of the
neural processing of social emotion. J Cogn Neurosci 21:1736–1750. doi:10.1162/jocn.2009.
21121
Clark AS, MacLusky NJ, Goldman-Rakic PS (1988) Androgen binding and metabolism in the
cerebral cortex of the developing rhesus monkey. Endocrinology 123:932–940
Dahl RE, Gunnar MR (2009) Heightened stress responsiveness and emotional reactivity during
pubertal maturation: implications for psychopathology. Dev Psychopathol 21:1–6
De Bellis MD, Keshavan MS, Beers SR, Hall J, Frustaci K, Masalehdan A, Noll J, Boring AM
(2001) Sex differences in brain maturation during childhood and adolescence. Cereb Cortex
11:552–557
Forbes EE, Ryan ND, Phillips ML, Manuck SB, Worthman CM, Moyles DL, Tarr JA, Sciarrillo
SR, Dahl RE (2010) Healthy adolescents’ neural response to reward: associations with puberty,
positive
affect,
and
depressive
symptoms.
J
Am
Acad
Child
Adolesc
Psychiatry
49:162–172e1–5
Forbes EE, Phillips ML, Silk JS, Ryan ND, Dahl RE (2011) Neural systems of threat processing in
adolescents: role of pubertal maturation and relation to measures of negative affect. Dev
Neuropsychol 36:429–452
Giedd JN, Blumenthal J, Jeffries NO, Castellanos FX, Liu H, Zijdenbos A, Paus T, Evans AC,
Rapoport JL (1999) Brain development during childhood and adolescence: a longitudinal MRI
study. Nat Neurosci 2:861–863
Goddings A-L, Burnett Heyes S, Bird G, Viner RM, Blakemore S-J (2012) The relationship
between puberty and social emotion processing. Dev Sci 15:801–811. doi:10.1111/j.1467-
7687.2012.01174x
Goddings A-L, Mills KL, Clasen LS, Giedd JN, Viner RM, Blakemore S-J (2013) The inﬂuence of
puberty on subcortical brain development. NeuroImage 88:242–251
Hajszan T, MacLusky NJ, Leranth C (2008) Role of androgens and the androgen receptor in
remodeling of spine synapses in limbic brain areas. Horm Behav 53:638–646. doi:10.1016/j.
yhbeh.2007.12.007
Lenroot RK, Gogtay N, Greenstein DK, Wells EM, Wallace GL, Clasen LS, Blumenthal JD,
Lerch J, Zijdenbos AP, Evans AC, Thompson PM, Giedd JN (2007) Sexual dimorphism of
brain
developmental
trajectories
during
childhood
and
adolescence.
NeuroImage
36:1065–1073
Marshall WA, Tanner JM (1969) Variations in pattern of pubertal changes in girls. Arch Dis Child
44:291–303
Marshall WA, Tanner JM (1970) Variations in the pattern of pubertal changes in boys. Arch Dis
Child 45:13–23
Mills KL, Lalonde F, Clasen LS, Giedd JN, Blakemore S-J (2014) Developmental changes in the
structure of the social brain in late childhood and adolescence. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci
9:123–131
Moore WE 3rd, Pfeifer JH, Masten CL, Mazziotta JC, Iacoboni M, Dapretto M (2012) Facing
puberty: associations between pubertal development and neural responses to affective facial
displays. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 7:35–43. doi:10.1093/scan/nsr066
82
A.-L. Goddings

Neufang S, Specht K, Hausmann M, Gu¨ntu¨rku¨n O, Herpertz-Dahlmann B, Fink GR, Konrad K
(2009) Sex differences and the impact of steroid hormones on the developing human brain.
Cereb Cortex 19:464–473. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhn100
Op de Macks ZA, Gunther Moor B, Overgaauw S, Gu¨rog˘lu B, Dahl RE, Crone EA (2011)
Testosterone levels correspond with increased ventral striatum activation in response to
monetary rewards in adolescents. Dev Cogn Neurosci 1:506–516. doi:10.1016/j.dcn.2011.06.
003
Parent A-S, Teilmann G, Juul A, Skakkebaek NE, Toppari J, Bourguignon J-P (2003) The Timing
of normal puberty and the age limits of sexual precocity: variations around the world, secular
trends, and changes after migration. Endocr Rev 24:668–693. doi:10.1210/er.2002-0019
Patton GC, Viner R (2007) Pubertal transitions in health. Lancet 369:1130–1139. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(07)60366-3
Paus T, Nawaz-Khan I, Leonard G, Perron M, Pike GB, Pitiot A, Richer L, Susman E, Veillette S,
Pausova Z (2010) Sexual dimorphism in the adolescent brain: role of testosterone and androgen
receptor in global and local volumes of grey and white matter. Horm Behav 57:63–75
Peper JS, Brouwer RM, Schnack HG, van Baal GC, van Leeuwen M, van den Berg SM,
Delemarre-Van de Waal HA, Boomsma DI, Kahn RS, Hulshoff Pol HE (2009) Sex steroids
and brain structure in pubertal boys and girls. Psychoneuroendocrinology 34:332–342
Peper JS, Hulshoff Pol HE, Crone EA, van Honk J (2011) Sex steroids and brain structure in
pubertal boys and girls: a mini-review of neuroimaging studies. Neuroscience 191:28–37.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.02.014
Raznahan A, Lee Y, Stidd R, Long R, Greenstein D, Clasen L, Addington A, Gogtay N, Rapoport
JL, Giedd JN (2010) Longitudinally mapping the inﬂuence of sex and androgen signaling on
the dynamics of human cortical maturation in adolescence. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
107:16988–16993. doi:10.1073/pnas.1006025107
Raznahan A, Lerch JP, Lee N, Greenstein D, Wallace GL, Stockman M, Clasen L, Shaw PW,
Giedd JN (2011) Patterns of coordinated anatomical change in human cortical development: a
longitudinal neuroimaging study of maturational coupling. Neuron 72:873–884
Sato SM, Schulz KM, Sisk CL, Wood RI (2008) Adolescents and androgens, receptors and
rewards. Horm Behav 53:647–658. doi:10.1016/j.yhbeh.2008.01.010
Sholl SA, Kim KL (1989) Estrogen receptors in the rhesus monkey brain during fetal development.
Brain Res Dev Brain Res 50:189–196
Sisk CL, Foster DL (2004) The neural basis of puberty and adolescence. Nat Neurosci
7:1040–1047. doi:10.1038/nn1326
Sowell ER, Trauner DA, Gamst A, Jernigan TL (2002) Development of cortical and subcortical
brain structures in childhood and adolescence: a structural MRI study. Dev Med Child Neurol
44:4–16
Tamnes CK, Walhovd KB, Grydeland H, Holland D, Østby Y, Dale AM, Fjell AM (2013)
Longitudinal working memory development is related to structural maturation of frontal and
parietal cortices. J Cogn Neurosci 25:1611–1623
The Role of Puberty in Human Adolescent Brain Development
83

The Adolescent Brain: Insights from
Neuroimaging
Jay N. Giedd and Alexander H. Denker
Abstract Adolescence is a time of dramatic changes in body, behavior, and brain.
Although the adolescent brain has different features than those of a child or mature
adult, it is not broken or defective. The changes in the teen brain have been
exquisitely forged by evolution to facilitate the survival of our species. During
the second decade of life the brain does not mature by becoming larger; it matures
by becoming more specialized and its subcomponents becoming more “inter-
connected.” Recent advances in neuroimaging and the application of graph theo-
retical methods of analysis are enabling scientists to characterize these changes in
connectivity and how they vary by age, sex, health/illness, and other cognitive or
behavioral measures.
Introduction
Adolescence is the transition from our caregiver-dependent childhood to indepen-
dent functioning as an adult; thus it is deﬁned by both biological and social factors.
The timing of this transition may vary across individuals and cultures but in general
is thought to begin around the onset of puberty and encompasses the teenage years.
Adolescence is a time of change, both physical and psychological. The path to
independence is usually accompanied by behaviors and attitudes that are different
from their parents, and often these differences are ridiculed as evidence that the
teenage brain is “broken” or “defective.” Although adolescence is a peak time for
the emergence of psychopathology, the many dynamic brain changes occurring
during the second decade are also part of the pattern of healthy development and are
integral to our success as a species.
In this chapter, we will review aspects of adolescent brain changes derived from
our ongoing longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study of brain devel-
opment that has been conducted since 1989 at the Child Psychiatry Branch of the
J.N. Giedd (*) • A.H. Denker
Child Psychiatry Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
e-mail: jg@nih.gov
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
J.-P. Bourguignon et al. (eds.), Brain Crosstalk in Puberty and Adolescence,
Research and Perspectives in Endocrine Interactions 13,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09168-6_7
85

National Institute of Mental Health. The data set encompasses approximately 8,000
images from 3,000 subjects (longitudinal data acquired at approximately 2-year
intervals): ¼ from healthy singletons, ¼ from healthy twins, and ½ from one of
25 clinical populations (e.g., autism, ADHD, childhood-onset schizophrenia). Our
focus on this data set is not meant to slight the many other excellent studies but to
provide one perspective from a single, fairly large project that has used standard-
ized methods of image acquisition and analysis.
The organization of the chapter is to ﬁrst describe the developmental trajectories
of speciﬁc brain regions during typical childhood and adolescence and then to
discuss the implications of the ﬁndings for clinicians, teachers, parents, and the
youth themselves.
Total Cerebral Volume
In the NIMH Child Psychiatry Branch study data, total cerebral volume increases
during childhood, reaches a peak at age 10.5 in girls and 14.5 in boys, and
subsequently slightly declines through the second and third decades (Lenroot
et al. 2007). Total brain volume is 95 % of its peak size by age 6. Brain size varies
markedly from person to person, with as much as a two-fold difference among
healthy subjects of the same age. This high variability extends to measures of brain
substructures and has important implications for the interpretation and utility of
brain imaging results.
Group-average brain size is approximately 10 % larger in males (see Fig. 1a).
The magnitude of this difference is relatively stable from birth across the life span.
This difference in brain size should not be interpreted as necessarily imparting any
sort of functional advantage or disadvantage, as large-scale brain measures may not
reﬂect sexually dimorphic differences in functionally relevant factors such as
neuronal connectivity and receptor density.
The sex difference in total brain volume is not solely attributable to the larger
body size of males. This is especially evident in our pediatric population, where the
brain size difference persists despite little difference in body size. In fact, both in
our sample and according to published normative data from the Centers for Disease
Control, because of an earlier growth spurt, females tend to be slightly taller than
males from ages 10–13 years. Across species there is a relationship between brain
size and body size, but in individual humans the growth trajectories are quite
dissimilar, with body size increasing through approximately age 17.
Total brain size difference between males and females has broad implications
for studies of sexual dimorphism. Many of the reported ﬁndings of brain sexual
dimorphism are inﬂuenced strongly by whether, or how, the size of subcomponents
of the brain are adjusted for the ~10 % difference in total brain volume. Without
adjustment, the absolute size of most structures is larger in males. If adjustments are
made to subcomponents (via covariation or the use of ratios to total brain volume),
86
J.N. Giedd and A.H. Denker

an entirely different list of structures, varying by sample size and age distribution, is
generated.
The challenge of how best to account for the male/female difference in sub-
components of the brain in light of the total size difference is informed by
allometry, the study of the relationship between size and shape. The size of neurons,
vasculature, and other components of brain anatomy is constrained by metabolic
and physical considerations, which creates the need for brains of different sizes to
have variable enlargement of all parts (Finlay and Darlington 1995). For instance,
in comparisons across and within species, white matter (WM) to gray matter
(GM) ratios increase with enlargement of total brain volume following a 4/3
power law (Zhang and Sejnowski 2000). This phenomenon may account for why
reported differences of greater GM/WM ratios in females (Allen et al. 2003; Gur
et al. 2002) are not nearly as robust when comparing males and females with similar
total brain volumes (Leonard et al. 2008).
Fig. 1 Mean volume by age in years for males (N ¼ 475 scans) and females (N ¼ 354 scans).
Middle lines in each set of three lines represent mean values, and upper and lower lines represent
upper and lower 95 % conﬁdence intervals. All curves differed signiﬁcantly in height and shape
with the exception of lateral ventricles, in which only height was different, and mid-sagittal area of
the corpus callosum, in which neither height nor shape was different. (a) Total brain volume, (b)
gray matter volume, (c) white matter volume, and (d) lateral ventricle volume (Adapted from
Lenroot et al. 2007, ﬁgure in public domain)
The Adolescent Brain: Insights from Neuroimaging
87

Cerebellum
The cerebellum is relatively understudied in pediatric neuroimaging studies but has
three features that make it of compelling interest. Of our large-scale measures, the
cerebellum is (1) the most sexually dimorphic; (2) the latest to reach adult volume;
and (3) the least heritable (i.e., most inﬂuenced by environment). Although only
about 1/9 the volume of the cerebrum, the cerebellum contains more brain cells than
the cerebrum. The cerebellum has traditionally been conceptualized as being
related to motor control, but it is now commonly accepted that the cerebellum is
also involved in emotional processing and other higher cognitive functions that
mature throughout adolescence (Riva and Giorgi 2000; Schmahmann 2004).
Similar to the cerebrum, developmental curves of total cerebellum size follow an
inverted, U-shaped developmental trajectory, with peak size occurring at 11.3 years
in girls and 15.6 in boys (Tiemeier et al. 2010). The cerebellum is not a unitary
structure but composed of functionally distinct subunits. In cross section, the
anatomy of the cerebellum resembles a butterﬂy shape, with the central body part
corresponding to the cerebellar vermis and the wings corresponding to the cerebel-
lar hemispheric lobes. In contrast to the evolutionarily more recent cerebellar
hemispheric lobes that followed the inverted, U-shaped developmental trajectory,
cerebellar vermis size did not change across this age span.
Lateral Ventricles
The lateral ventricles are unlike the other structures reported here, as they are
cerebrospinal ﬂuid-ﬁlled compartments, not GM or WM. Increased lateral ventricle
volume measures are usually interpreted as an indirect assessment of loss of the
tissue from neighboring structures. Ventricular volume increases during typical
child and adolescent development should be considered when interpreting the many
reports of increased ventricular volumes in a broad range of neuropsychiatric
conditions.
White Matter
Whether brain tissue is classiﬁed as GM or WM depends largely on the amount of
myelinated axons. Myelination is the wrapping of oligodendrocytes around axons,
which acts as an electrical insulator, increasing the speed of neuronal signal
transmission. The insulating properties of myelin allow signals to travel at speeds
up to 100 faster than in unmyelinated axons. Additionally, myelination allows ion
pumps to reset the ion gradients only at the nodes between sections of myelin
(called nodes of Ranvier), instead of along the entire expanse of the axons, resulting
88
J.N. Giedd and A.H. Denker

in up to a 30-fold increase in the frequency with which a given neuron can transmit
information. The combination of increased speed (100) and quicker recovery time
(30) can yield a 3,000-fold increase in the amount of information transmitted per
second. Myelination does not simply maximize speed of transmission but also
modulates the timing and synchrony of neuronal ﬁring patterns that convey mean-
ing in the brain (Fields 2002). Signal processing plays a central role in develop-
mental changes in the brain’s ability to adapt in response to its environment by
inhibiting axon sprouting and the creation of new synapses (Fields 2008). These
non-subtle impacts of myelin on the brain’s ability to process information may
underlie many of the cognitive abilities associated with our species.
WM volumes increase steadily throughout childhood and adolescence (Fig. 1c),
with similar rates across the major lobes (i.e., the frontal, temporal, and parietal
lobes). However, for smaller regions, the growth rates can be quite dynamic, with as
much as a 50 % change over a 2-year period (Thompson et al. 2000). The most
prominent WM structure is the corpus callosum. It is comprised of approximately
200 million mostly myelinated axons connecting homologous areas of the left and
right cerebral hemispheres. Its developmental trajectory reﬂects the general
increases in total WM volume.
Increasing WM volumes on anatomic MRI and greater coherence on fMRI,
EEG, and MEG converge to identify a pattern of increased connectivity among
spatially disparate brain regions as a hallmark of adolescent development. Diffu-
sion tensor imaging studies, which assess the directionality of WM, also demon-
strate an increase in WM organization during adolescence. Changes in WM
organization in speciﬁc regions correlate with improvements in language (Nagy
et al. 2004), reading (Deutsch et al. 2005), response inhibition ability (Liston
et al. 2006) and memory (Nagy et al. 2004). Characterizing developing neural
circuitry and the changing relationships among disparate brain components is one
of the most active areas of neuroimaging research, utilizing graph theory to quantify
such things as the small world network properties of the brain (Hagmann
et al. 2010).
Gray Matter
Cortical GM
GM is comprised predominantly of cell bodies and dendrites but may also include
axons, glia, blood vessels, and extracellular space (Braitenberg 2001). Despite a
lifelong reciprocal relationship and shared components of neural circuits, GM and
WM have distinctly different developmental trajectories (Fig. 1b). In contrast to the
roughly linear increase of WM, GM developmental trajectories follow an inverted,
U-shaped curve with peak sizes occurring at different times and in different regions.
For example, in the frontal lobes, peak cortical GM volume occurs at 9.5 years in
The Adolescent Brain: Insights from Neuroimaging
89

girls and 10.5 in boys; at 10.0 in girls and 11.0 in boys in the temporal lobes; and at
7.5 in girls and 9 in boys in the parietal lobes.
Although lobar level GM volumes provide some functional relevance, the
capacity to quantify GM thickness at each of approximately 40,000 voxels on the
brain surface provides a better spatial resolution to discern functionally distinct
regions. By analyzing scans acquired from the same individuals over the course of
development, movies of cortical thickness change can be created. One such anima-
tion derived from scans of 13 subjects who had each undergone scanning four times
at approximately 2-year intervals between the ages of 4 and 22 is available at http://
www.nimh.nih.gov/videos/press/prbrainmaturing.mpeg. Still images of the movie
at different ages are shown in Fig. 2 (Gogtay et al. 2004).
GM peaks earliest in primary sensorimotor areas and latest in higher order
association areas that integrate those primary functions (i.e., dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex, inferior parietal, and superior temporal gyrus). Postmortem studies suggest
that part of the GM changes may be related to synaptic proliferation and pruning
(Huttenlocher 1994). The connection between GM volume reductions, EEG
Fig. 2 Right lateral and top views of the dynamic sequence of GM maturation over the cortical
surface. The side bar shows a color representation in units of GM volume. The initial frames depict
regions of interest in the cortex (Adapted from Gogtay et al. 2004; copyright 2004 by the National
Academy of Sciences)
90
J.N. Giedd and A.H. Denker

changes, and synaptic pruning was also supported by an MRI/quantiﬁed EEG study
of 138 healthy subjects from ages 10 to 30 years. It was found that curvilinear
reductions in frontal and parietal GM were matched by similar curvilinear reduc-
tions in the EEG power of the corresponding regions (Whitford et al. 2007).
Because EEG power reﬂects synaptic activity, the temporally linked EEG power
and GM changes suggest that the GM volume reductions are accompanied by
reductions in the number of synapses. Another consideration is that myelination
may change classiﬁcation of voxels along the interior cortical border from GM to
WM, resulting in ostensible cortical thinning as assessed by MRI volumetrics, but
would not necessarily entail changes in the number of synapses (Sowell et al. 2001).
Knowledge of the degree to which these and other phenomena may be driving the
MRI changes has profound implications for interpreting the imaging results. Imag-
ing of nonhuman primates with post-mortem validation may help discern the
cellular phenomenon underlying the MRI changes.
Subcortical Gray Matter
Amygdala and Hippocampus
The temporal lobes, amygdala, and hippocampus are also involved in a myriad of
cognitive functions particularly in the realms of emotion, language, and memory
(Nolte 1993). These functions change markedly during adolescence (Diener
et al. 1985; Jerslid 1963; Wechsler 1974), yet the relationship between the devel-
opment of cognitive capacities and transformations in the size or shape of the
temporal lobe structures subserving these functions is poorly understood.
Amygdala volume increases signiﬁcantly during adolescence only in males, and
hippocampal volume increases signiﬁcantly only in females (Giedd et al. 1996).
This pattern of gender-speciﬁc maturational volumetric changes is consistent with
nonhuman primate studies indicating a relatively high number of androgen recep-
tors in the amygdala (Clark et al. 1988) and a relatively higher number of estrogen
receptors in the hippocampus (Morse et al. 1986).
Basal Ganglia
The basal ganglia are a collection of nuclei (the striatum, pallidum, and thalamus)
lying beneath the cortical surface. They are components of neural circuits involved
in mediating movement but are also critical to diverse, developmentally emergent
higher cognitive functions, attention allocation, and affective control. Basal ganglia
anomalies have been reported for almost all the neuropsychiatric disorders that
have been investigated by neuroimaging (Giedd et al. 2006).
The Adolescent Brain: Insights from Neuroimaging
91

In a recent study of 1,171 longitudinally acquired MRI scans from 618 typically
developing males and females aged 5–25 years, we showed that the striatum,
pallidum, and thalamus each followed an inverted, U-shaped developmental tra-
jectory (Raznahan et al. 2014).
The striatum and thalamus volumes peak later than cortical volumes and show a
relative delay in males. Analyzing the changing shape of these subcortical struc-
tures over time reveals that striatal, pallidal, and thalamic domains linked to speciﬁc
fronto-parietal association cortices contract with age whereas other subcortical
territories expand. Furthermore, each structure has areas of sexual dimorphism
that change dynamically during adolescence (Fig. 3). These differences may have
relevance for sex-biased mental disorders emerging in youth.
Fig. 3 Developmental trajectories for global volume. Plots showing individual-level anatomical
data and best-ﬁt group-level trajectories for bilateral striatal, pallidal, and thalamic volume.
Shaded ribbons around each curve denote 95 % conﬁdence intervals (Adapted from Raznahan
et al. 2014; copyright 2014 by the National Academy of Sciences)
92
J.N. Giedd and A.H. Denker

Discussion
During adolescence the brain does not mature by becoming larger; it matures by
becoming more inter-connected and more specialized. The increased connectivity
is reﬂected in observed WM volume increases but also by electroencephalographic,
functional MRI, postmortem, and neuropsychological studies. “Connectivity” char-
acterizes several neuroscience concepts. In anatomic studies, connectivity can
mean a physical link between areas of the brain that share common developmental
trajectories. In studies of brain function, connectivity describes the relationship
between different parts of the brain that activate together during a task. In genetics,
it refers to different regions inﬂuenced by the same genetic or environmental
factors. All of these types of connectivity increase during adolescence (Power
et al. 2010). The greater communication among disparate brain regions underlies
many of the cognitive advances that occur during the second decade of life. A
tradeoff for the increased connectivity is that myelin releases molecules such as
Nogo-A (Chen et al. 2000; GrandPr et al. 2000), MAG (GrandPr et al. 2000) and
OMgp (McKerracher et al. 1994; Wang et al. 2002) that impede arborization of new
connections (Huang et al. 2005; Schwab and Thoenen 1985) and thus decrease
plasticity (Fields 2008).
The increasing specialization of the brain is reﬂected by the inverted, U-shaped
GM developmental trajectories of childhood peaks followed by adolescent
declines. This pattern is found not only for GM volumes but also for the number
of synapses (Huttenlocher and Dabholkar 1997; Huttenlocher and de Courten 1987;
Huttenlocher et al. 1982), glucose utilization (Chugani et al. 1987), EEG power
(Thatcher 1991), and neurotransmitter receptor densities (Benes 2001). The pow-
erful process of overproduction followed by selective/competitive elimination that
shapes the developing nervous system in utero seems to continue to reﬁne the brain
throughout adolescent development.
The ability of the brain to change in response to the demands of the environment
is often referred to as “plasticity,” a highly adaptive feature of our species. Brain
plasticity is a life-long process but tends to be most robust in early development.
Compared to other species, humans have a very protracted period of life when they
are dependent upon their parents or other adults for survival. A beneﬁt of this
protracted period of protection is that it allows our brains to stay ﬂexible to
changing demands, even more so than our close genetic kin, the Neanderthals,
whose tool use changed remarkably little in over 1 million years. They were well
suited to deal with the stable, albeit harsh, environment of the time but less facile at
adapting to changing demands (Banks et al. 2008).
Plasticity enables humans to be remarkably adaptable to physical and social
environments alike. In 10,000 years, we have gone from spending the majority of
our time hunting for food and shelter to relying on words and symbols, skills that
are approximately only 5,000-years-old. The adaptability of the adolescent brain is
being put to the test in the modern world, where digital technologies have dramat-
ically changed the way we learn, play, and interact (Giedd 2012).
The Adolescent Brain: Insights from Neuroimaging
93

The dynamic brain changes of adolescence do confer an increased risk of
psychopathology (Paus et al. 2008), but they also provide an excellent basis for
learning and resilience. We are faced with an important initiative to utilize our
growing knowledge of developmental neurobiology to improve the lives of youth
and their families.
References
Allen JS, Damasio H, Grabowski TJ, Bruss J, Zhang W (2003) Sexual dimorphism and
asymmetries in the gray-white composition of the human cerebrum. Neuroimage 18:880–894
Banks WE, d’Errico F, Peterson AT, Kageyama M, Sima A, Sa´nchez-Gon˜i MF (2008) Neander-
thal extinction by competitive exclusion. PLoS One 3(12):e3972. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
0003972
Benes FM (2001) The development of prefrontal cortex: the maturation of neurotransmitter
systems and their interactions. In: Nelson CA, Luciana M (eds) Handbook of developmental
cognitive neuroscience, vol 2. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp 79–92
Braitenberg V (2001) Brain size and number of neurons: an exercise in synthetic neuroanatomy. J
Comput Neurosci 10:71–77
Chen MS, Huber AB, van der Haar ME, Frank M, Schnell L, Spillmann AA, Schwab ME (2000)
Nogo-A is a myelin-associated neurite outgrowth inhibitor and an antigen for monoclonal
antibody IN-1. Nature 403:434–439
Chugani HT, Phelps ME, Mazziotta JC (1987) Positron emission tomography study of human
brain functional development. Ann Neurol 22:487–497
Clark AS, MacLusky NJ, Goldman-Rakic PS (1988) Androgen binding and metabolism in the
cerebral cortex of the developing rhesus monkey. Endocrinology 123:932–940
Deutsch GK, Dougherty RF, Bammer R, Siok WT, Gabrieli JD, Wandell B (2005) Children’s
reading performance is correlated with white matter structure measured by diffusion tensor
imaging. Cortex 41:354–363
Diener E, Sandvik E, Larsen RF (1985) Age and sex effects for affect intensity. Dev Psychol
21:542–546
Fields RD (2008) White matter in learning, cognition and psychiatric disorders. Trends Neurosci
31:361–370. doi:10.1016/j.tins.2008.04.001, S0166-2236(08)00132-X [pii]
Fields RD, Stevens-Graham B (2002) New insights into neuron-glia communication. Science
298:556–562
Finlay BL, Darlington RB (1995) Linked regularities in the development and evolution of
mammalian brains. Science 268:1578–1584
Giedd J (2012) The digital revolution and adolescent brain evolution. J Adolesc Health 51:101–
105
Giedd JN, Vaituzis AC, Hamburger SD, Lange N, Rajapakse JC, Kaysen D, Rapoport JL (1996)
Quantitative MRI of the temporal lobe, amygdala, and hippocampus in normal human devel-
opment: ages 4–18 years. J Comp Neurol 366:223–230
Giedd JN, Shaw P, Wallace G, Gogtay N, Lenroot RK (2006) Anatomic brain imaging studies of
normal and abnormal brain development in children and adolescents. In: Cicchetti D, Cohen
DJ (eds) Developmental psychopathology, vol 2, 2nd edn. Wiley, Hoboken, pp 127–194
Gogtay N, Giedd JN, Lusk L, Hayashi KM, Greenstein D, Vaituzis AC, Thompson PM (2004)
Dynamic mapping of human cortical development during childhood through early adulthood.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101:8174–8179
GrandPr T, Nakamura F, Vartanian T, Strittmatter SM (2000) Identiﬁcation of the Nogo inhibitor
of axon regeneration as a Reticulon protein. Nature 403:439–444
94
J.N. Giedd and A.H. Denker

Gur RC, Gunning-Dixon F, Bilker WB, Gur RE (2002) Sex differences in temporo-limbic and
frontal brain volumes of healthy adults. Cereb Cortex 12: 998–1003. doi: Cited By (since 1996)
112 Export Date 23 December 2011
Hagmann P, Sporns O, Madan N, Cammoun L, Pienaar R, Wedeen VJ, Meuli R, Thiran JP, Grant
PE (2010) White matter maturation reshapes structural connectivity in the late developing
human brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107:19067–19072
Huang J, Phillips G, Roth A, Pedraza L, Shan W, Belkaid W, Colman D (2005) Glial membranes at
the node of Ranvier prevent neurite outgrowth. Science 310:1813–1817
Huttenlocher PR (1994) Synaptogenesis in human cerebral cortex. In: Dawson G, Fischer K (eds)
Human behavior and the developing brain. Guilford Press, New York, pp 137–152
Huttenlocher PR, Dabholkar AS (1997) Regional differences in synaptogenesis in human cerebral
cortex. J Comp Neurol 387:167–178
Huttenlocher PR, de Courten C (1987) The development of synapses in striate cortex of man. Hum
Neurobiol 6:1–9
Huttenlocher PR, de Courten C, Garey LJ, Van der Loos H (1982) Synaptic development in human
cerebral cortex. Int J Neurol 16–17:144–154
Jerslid AT (1963) The psychology of adolescence, 2nd edn. Macmillan, New York
Lenroot RK, Gogtay N, Greenstein DK, Wells EM, Wallace GL, Clasen LS, Giedd JN (2007)
Sexual dimorphism of brain developmental trajectories during childhood and adolescence.
Neuroimage 36:1065–1073. doi:10.1016/J.Neuroimage.2007.03.053
Leonard CM, Towler S, Welcome S, Halderman LK, Otto R, Eckert MA, Chiarello C (2008) Size
matters: cerebral volume inﬂuences sex differences in neuroanatomy. Cereb Cortex 18:2920–
2931
Liston C, Watts R, Tottenham N, Davidson MC, Niogi S, Ulug AM, Casey BJ (2006)
Frontostriatal microstructure modulates efﬁcient recruitment of cognitive control. Cereb Cor-
tex 16:553–560
McKerracher L, David S, Jackson DL, Kottis V, Dunn RJ, Braun PE (1994) Identiﬁcation of
myelin-associated glycoprotein as a major myelin-derived inhibitor of neurite growth. Neuron
13:805–811
Morse JK, Scheff SW, DeKosky ST (1986) Gonadal steroids inﬂuence axonal sprouting in the
hippocampal dentate gyrus: a sexually dimorphic response. Exp Neurol 94:649–658
Nagy Z, Westerberg H, Klingberg T (2004) Maturation of white matter is associated with the
development of cognitive functions during childhood. J Cogn Neurosci 16:1227–1233
Nolte J (1993) Olfactory and limbic systems. In: Farrell R (ed) The human brain. An introduction
to its functional anatomy, 3rd edn. Mosby, St Louis, pp 397–413
Paus T, Keshavan M, Giedd JN (2008) Why do many psychiatric disorders emerge during
adolescence? Nat Rev Neurosci 9:947–957
Power JD, Fair DA, Schlaggar BL, Petersen SE (2010) The development of human functional
brain networks. Neuron 67:735–748
Raznahan A, Shaw PW, Lerch JP, Clasen LS, Greenstein D, Berman R, Giedd JN (2014)
Longitudinal four-dimensional mapping of subcortical anatomy in human development. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 111:1592–1597. doi:10.1073/pnas.1316911111
Riva D, Giorgi C (2000) The cerebellum contributes to higher functions during development:
evidence from a series of children surgically treated for posterior fossa tumours. Brain 123
(Pt 5):1051–1061
Schmahmann JD (2004) Disorders of the cerebellum: ataxia, dysmetria of thought, and the
cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 16(3):367–378.
doi:10.1176/appi.neuropsych.16.3.36716/3/367 [pii]
Schwab ME, Thoenen H (1985) Dissociated neurons regenerate into sciatic but not optic nerve
explants in culture irrespective of neurotrophic factors. J Neurosci 5:2415–2423
Sowell ER, Thompson PM, Tessner KD, Toga AW (2001) Mapping continued brain growth and
gray matter density reduction in dorsal frontal cortex: Inverse relationships during
postadolescent brain maturation. J Neurosci 21:8819–8829
The Adolescent Brain: Insights from Neuroimaging
95

Thatcher RW (1991) Are rhythms of human cerebral development “traveling waves”? Behav
Brain Sci 14(4):575
Thompson PM, Giedd JN, Woods RP, MacDonald D, Evans AC, Toga AW (2000) Growth
patterns in the developing brain detected by using continuum mechanical tensor maps. Nature
404:190–193. doi:10.1038/35004593
Tiemeier H, Lenroot RK, Greenstein DK, Tran L, Pierson R, Giedd JN (2010) Cerebellum
development during childhood and adolescence: a longitudinal morphometric MRI study.
Neuroimage 49:63–70
Wang K, Koprivica V, Kim J, Sivasankaran R, Guo Y, Neve R, He Z (2002) Oligodendrocyte-
myelin glycoprotein is a Nogo receptor ligand that inhibits neurite outgrowth. Nature 417:941–
944
Wechsler D (1974) Wechsler intelligence scale for children – revised. The Psychological Corpo-
ration, New York
Whitford TJ, Rennie CJ, Grieve SM, Clark CR, Gordon E, Williams LM (2007) Brain maturation
in adolescence: concurrent changes in neuroanatomy and neurophysiology. Hum Brain Mapp
28:228–237
Zhang K, Sejnowski TJ (2000) A universal scaling law between gray matter and white matter of
cerebral cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:5621–5626. doi: Cited By (since 1996) 141
96
J.N. Giedd and A.H. Denker

Gene Networks, Epigenetics and the Control
of Female Puberty
Alejandro Lomniczi, Juan Manuel Castellano, Hollis Wright, Basak Selcuk,
Kemal Sonmez, and Sergio R. Ojeda
Abstract Puberty is a major developmental milestone set in motion by the inter-
action of genetic factors and environmental cues. The pubertal process is initiated
by an increased pulsatile release of gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) from
neurosecretory neurons of the hypothalamus. Although single genes have been
identiﬁed that are essential for puberty to occur, it appears clear now that many
genes controlling diverse cellular functions contribute to the process. The polygenic
nature of the neuroendocrine complex controlling puberty has prompted two
important questions: are these genes functionally connected and, if they are, is
their activity subject to a dynamic level of control independent of changes in DNA
sequence? In this article we will discuss emerging evidence suggesting that the
onset of puberty is controlled at the transcriptional level by interactive gene
networks subjected to epigenetic regulation. At least two modes of epigenetic
regulation provide coordination and transcriptional plasticity to these networks:
changes in DNA methylation and differential association of histone modiﬁcations
to genomic regions controlling gene activity. Architecturally, puberty-controlling
networks are endowed with “activators,” which move the process along by setting
in motion key developmental events, and “repressors,” which play a central role in
preventing the untimely unfolding of these events.
Introduction
Many years of research have been devoted to characterizing the hormonal changes
associated with the initiation of puberty and identifying the neurotransmitter sys-
tems involved in controlling the gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neuronal
network during the pubertal transition. Thanks to these efforts, we now have a much
better understanding of the basic biological underpinnings of the pubertal process.
A. Lomniczi • J.M. Castellano • H. Wright • B. Selcuk • K. Sonmez • S.R. Ojeda (*)
Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center/Oregon Health and
Science University, Beaverton, OR 97006, USA
e-mail: lomniczi@ohsu.edu; ojedas@ohsu.edu
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
J.-P. Bourguignon et al. (eds.), Brain Crosstalk in Puberty and Adolescence,
Research and Perspectives in Endocrine Interactions 13,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09168-6_8
97

It was more than 40 years ago that Boyar et al. (1972) demonstrated that the advent
of human puberty is signaled by a nocturnal increase in pulsatile luteinizing
hormone (LH) release. Consistent with this ﬁnding, subsequent work established
the concept that an increase in pulsatile release of GnRH is ultimately responsible
for setting in motion the endocrine manifestations of puberty. It also became clear
that GnRH neurons, though essential for puberty to occur, are neither the
primum movens of puberty nor do they temporarily limit its initiation. Instead,
GnRH neurons are controlled by upstream cellular systems consisting of both
neurons and glial cells. While a variety of neurotransmitter/neuromodulatory systems
have been shown to act trans-synaptically to advance or delay the advent of puberty,
the overarching concept emerging from these ﬁndings is that puberty is set in motion
by a coordinated reduction in inhibitory inﬂuences and an increase in excitatory
inputs to GnRH neurons (Plant and Witchel 2006; Terasawa and Fernandez 2001;
Ojeda and Terasawa 2002). It is also clear that, in addition to a dual neuronal input
(Kordon et al. 1994; Ojeda and Terasawa 2002), GnRH neurons are subjected to
excitatory glial inputs (Ojeda et al. 2008, 2010), provided by growth factors and
small molecules acting in a paracrine fashion within the glial-GnRH neuron interface
(Ojeda and Skinner 2006; Lomniczi and Ojeda 2009).
With the availability of new tools to explore the mammalian genome, attention
has shifted over the last decade towards the identiﬁcation of the genes involved in
controlling puberty-related changes in trans-synaptic and cell-cell communication
(Ojeda et al. 2006). Importantly, researchers have also taken advantage of examples
of pubertal failure and sexual precocity provided by nature to begin the identiﬁ-
cation of an elite group of genes required for human puberty to occur (Sykiotis
et al. 2010). While several of these genes are now known, it has also become
apparent that puberty is not set in motion by a single gene but instead requires the
contribution of several, functionally related gene sets (Lomniczi et al. 2013b).
In this article we will provide a brief description of the neurobiology of puberty,
review the contribution of genetic networks to the timing of puberty, and discuss the
emerging concept that a central component of the neuroendocrine machinery by
which the brain controls puberty is gene silencing, imposed by transcriptional
repressors and coordinated by changes in epigenetic information.
The Trans-synaptic Regulation of Puberty
Although it has been known for many years that a signiﬁcant fraction of the
excitatory control of puberty is provided by glutamatergic neurons (Plant and
Witchel 2006; Ojeda and Skinner 2006), more recently it has become clear that
an even stronger stimulatory input derives from neurons producing kisspeptins
(Oakley et al. 2009; d’Anglemont et al. 2010). These powerful stimulators of
98
A. Lomniczi et al.

GnRH release (Kauffman et al. 2007; Oakley et al. 2009; Shahab et al. 2005) are
encoded by the KISS1/Kiss1 gene (Ohtaki et al. 2001; Kotani et al. 2001). Loss of
function of either KISS1 or GPR54/KISS1R, the gene encoding the kisspeptin
receptor, results in pubertal failure (Seminara et al. 2003; de Roux et al. 2003;
Lapatto et al. 2007; Topaloglu et al. 2012). In humans and nonhuman primates, a
population of kisspeptin neurons is located in the arcuate nucleus (ARC) of the
medial basal hypothalamus (Shahab et al. 2005; Hrabovszky et al. 2010) and
another, less well-recognized group in the rostral periventricular area (Hrabovszky
et al. 2010). In rodents, this second population of kisspeptin neurons is located in
the periventricular region of the anteroventral periventricular nucleus (AVPV;
Clarkson et al. 2009; Gottsch et al. 2004). Current evidence indicates that ARC
kisspeptin neurons are required for pulsatile GnRH release (Navarro et al. 2011;
Wakabayashi et al. 2010), and that AVPV kisspeptin neurons are needed for
the pre-ovulatory surge of gonadotropins (Khan and Kauffman 2011; Smith
et al. 2006).
No less than three neuronal subsets are responsible for the inhibitory trans-
synaptic circuitry controlling GnRH release. They include GABAergic and
opiatergic neurons (reviewed in Terasawa and Fernandez 2001) and some more
recently recognized neurons that employ RFamide-related peptide (RFRP) to
inhibit GnRH neuronal activity (Ducret et al. 2009; Gibson et al. 2008; Tsutsui
et al. 2010). RFRP is the mammalian ortholog of the peptide gonadotropin-
inhibiting hormone (GnIH), originally described in birds (reviewed in Ebling and
Luckman 2008). RFRP neurons use two peptides for transsynaptic communication
(RFRP1 and RFRP3); they are recognized by a high-afﬁnity receptor termed
GPR147 or NPFFR1 (Hinuma et al. 2000; Tsutsui et al. 2010) and a low-afﬁnity
receptor termed GPR74 or NPFFR2 (Fukusumi et al. 2006). Because GPR147 is
expressed in GnRH neurons (Ducret et al. 2009; Poling et al. 2012), it is thought
that RFRP neurons can directly repress GnRH secretion.
GABAergic neurons can inhibit GnRH secretion by acting on neurons connected
to the GnRH neuronal network (Ojeda and Skinner 2006; Terasawa and Fernandez
2001), but they can also excite GnRH neurons by activating GABAA receptors
located on GnRH neurons themselves (DeFazio et al. 2002; Moenter and DeFazio
2005). Opiatergic neurons, on the other hand, only inhibit GnRH neuronal activity;
they do so using different peptides that act on different receptors (Kordon
et al. 1994) located either on GnRH neurons (Dudas and Merchenthaler 2006) or
on neurons involved in the stimulatory control of GnRH. A prominent example of
this latter synaptic pathway can be found in a subset of ARC neurons, termed KNDy
neurons because they produced Kisspeptins, Neurokinin B (NKB) and Dynorphin.
The latter is an opioid peptide that inhibits GnRH secretion, at least in part, by
repressing kisspeptin release from KNDy neurons (Navarro et al. 2009).
Gene Networks, Epigenetics and the Control of Female Puberty
99

The Glial Contribution
Astrocytes and tanycytes (ependymoglial cells lining the ventro-lateral surface of
the third ventricle) facilitate GnRH secretion via at least two mechanisms. One of
them involves several growth factors, including transforming growth factor-beta
(TGFβ), recognized by cell-membrane receptors with serine-threonine kinase acti-
vity, and growth factors recognized by receptors with tyrosine kinase activity: the
epidermal growth factor (EGF) family, basic ﬁbroblast growth factor (bFGF), and
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-I; reviewed in Prevot 2002; Mahesh et al. 2006).
Of these, the EGF family is perhaps the most extensively studied, with substantial
evidence showing that EGF-like peptides do not stimulate GnRH neurons directly
but instead facilitate GnRH release by eliciting prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) release
from astroglial cells and tanycytes (Lomniczi and Ojeda 2009; Clasadonte
et al. 2011).
In addition to this mechanism of glia-to-GnRH neuron communication, glial
cells facilitate GnRH neuronal activity via plastic rearrangement in cell adhesive-
ness mediated by different adhesion molecules with signaling capabilities. These
molecules include the sialylated form of the neural cell adhesion molecule NCAM
(PSA-NCAM; Parkash and Kaur 2005; Perera et al. 1993), the synaptic adhesion
molecule Synaptic Cell Adhesion Molecule 1 (SynCAM1); (Sandau et al. 2011a,
b), and the recognition molecule Receptor-like Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase-β
(RPTPβ) which, expressed in astrocytes, signals to GnRH neurons by associating
with contactin, a cell-surface protein expressed in GnRH neurons (Parent
et al. 2007). Because the adhesive proteins used by each of these systems contain
intracellular signaling domains, it is apparent that glial cells regulate GnRH neu-
ronal activity not only by releasing cell-cell signaling molecules (such as growth
factors and PGE2) but also by setting in motion intracellular signaling mechanisms
via direct contact of cell adhesive molecules [reviewed in (Lomniczi and Ojeda
2009)].
Identifying Gene Networks Controlling Puberty
Several monogenic mutations have been shown to cause pubertal failure by
disrupting the function of genes such as GNRHR (Bedecarrats and Kaiser 2007)
encoding the GnRH receptor, KISS1R (Seminara et al. 2003; de Roux et al. 2003)
encoding the kisspeptin receptor, KiSS1 (Lapatto et al. 2007; Topaloglu et al. 2012)
encoding kisspeptins, TAC3 encoding NKB and TAC3R (Topaloglu et al. 2008)
encoding an NKB receptor. Although less information exists about the genetic
mutations underlying familial precocious puberty or idiopathic central precocity,
two mutations with very different underlying biological underpinnings have been
described. One consists of activating mutations of KISS1R (Teles et al. 2008) and
the other – reported very recently – involves inactivating mutations of MKRN3,
100
A. Lomniczi et al.

a transcriptional repressor (Abreu et al. 2013). Though very important, the muta-
tions thus far described account for only a small percentage of individuals affected
by pubertal disorders, suggesting the existence of several additional genes not yet
identiﬁed. Indeed, genome-wide analyses have revealed that sequence variations in
more than 40 genes are associated with an early age at menarche (Ong et al. 2009;
Perry et al. 2009; Sulem et al. 2009; He et al. 2009; Elks et al. 2010), indicating that,
as predicted by the aforementioned clinical ﬁndings, the initiation and completion
of puberty involve the participation of a multiplicity of genes.
This is not in itself all that surprising, because reproductive function – essential
for the continuity of the species – would be expected to be governed by a robust
regulatory system endowed not only with a high degree of redundancy but also with
compensatory mechanisms geared to ensure the functional integrity of the system in
the event of loss of a component. The re-establishment of normal reproductive
function following either early death of kisspeptin neurons (Mayer and Boehm
2011) or loss of Tacr3, the NKB receptor (Yang et al. 2012) is a prominent example
of this safeguard mechanism.
If several genes are involved in the central control of puberty, a certain degree of
functional interconnectivity among them would also be expected. Using bio-
informatics and systems biology tools, coupled with high-throughput approaches,
our group identiﬁed a group of genes predicted to be organized into a functional
network that appears to contribute to the systems-wide control of puberty (Ojeda
et al. 2006; Roth et al. 2007). A main characteristic of this gene set is the compo-
sition of the predicted network, which mostly contains genes (referred to as either
tumor suppressor or tumor related genes, TSGs/TRGs) with diverse cellular func-
tions but sharing a common involvement in tumor suppression/tumor formation.
Structural characterization of the network predicted the existence of well-connected
central nodes providing control at a transcriptional level and many peripheral,
subordinate genes acting as portals for network output and perhaps as conduits of
externally derived regulatory inputs (Ojeda et al. 2006; Roth et al. 2007). Subse-
quent studies supported the original model of the network by showing that, of the
ﬁve putative central nodes of the network (CDP/CUTL1/CUX1, MAF, p53, YY1,
and USF2), YY1 and an isoform of CDP/CUTL1/CUX1 known as CUX1p120
repress KISS1 transcription, whereas another CUX1 isoform, CUX1p200, acts as a
trans-activator (Mueller et al. 2011).
These and earlier studies provided the bases for the view that mammalian
puberty is controlled by genetic networks that, operating within different cell
contexts in the neuroendocrine brain, coordinate the activity of GnRH neurons at
puberty. A more detailed account of this subject can be found in Lomniczi
et al. (2013b).
Gene Networks, Epigenetics and the Control of Female Puberty
101

Transcriptional Repression: A Key Regulatory Mechanism
of Prepubertal Development
A much-discussed view proposed to explain the cell-cell communication events
leading to the initiation of puberty states that GnRH neurons are under a tonic
inhibitory trans-synaptic control, which is lifted at the end of juvenile development,
unleashing the pubertal process [reviewed in (Terasawa 1999)]. It has been argued,
however, that lifting an inhibitory tone cannot by itself trigger puberty and that
concurrent activation of excitatory inputs is a sine qua non feature of pubertal
development (Ojeda 1991). The demonstration that activation of kisspeptin neu-
rons, the bona ﬁde prototype of excitatory system controlling GnRH secretion, is
essential for puberty to occur (reviewed in Pinilla et al. 2012) provided strong
support for this latter concept. On the surface, it also appeared to dismiss the idea of
a pubertal “brake,” as it showed that all that is required for puberty to occur is the
activation of a stimulatory system.
New evidence now indicates that an important inhibitory condition does indeed
exist, but it resides at a transcriptional, rather than a trans-synaptic, level. The ﬁrst
inkling that a transcriptionally repressive regulatory system may be biologically
signiﬁcant was provided by the realization that at least three central nodes of the
TRG network (YY1, EAP1, CUX1) repress the transcriptional activity of puberty-
related genes (Heger et al. 2007; Mueller et al. 2011, 2012). Very recently, we
identiﬁed the Polycomb Group (PcG) as a silencing complex that keeps puberty in
check by repressing the Kiss1 gene in kisspeptin neurons of the ARC (Lomniczi
et al. 2013a). The PcG complex plays a major role in imposing gene silencing at
various developmental stages (Schwartz and Pirrotta 2007; Simon and Kingston
2009; Kohler and Villar 2008). Our ﬁndings suggest that a mechanism of transcrip-
tional repression operating within excitatory neurons themselves is an important
component of the so-called “central restraint” that prevents puberty from starting
prematurely.
New studies in our laboratory suggest that the PcG complex is not the only
repressor involved. To search for factors that may inhibit hypothalamic PcG
expression at puberty, we again use a combination of gene expression arrays and
qPCR, in addition to in silico analysis of transcription factor binding sites in PcG
promoter regions. This search identiﬁed a subfamily of the BTB POZ-ZF (for Broad
Complex, Tramtrack, Bric-a`-brac, poxvirus and Zinc ﬁnger) group of transcrip-
tional repressors – known as the POK family (for POZ and Krϋppel; Kelly and
Daniel 2006; Maeda et al. 2005) – as potential regulators of PcG gene activity
(Lomniczi et al., unpublished results). POK genes contribute to controlling a variety
of developmental processes, with alterations of their function resulting in tumori-
genesis and developmental disorders (Dhordain et al. 1997; Lin et al. 1998; David
et al. 1998). We observed that hypothalamic expression of three of these genes
(Zbtb7a/LRF, Bcl6 and Zbtb16/Plzf) increases – instead of decreasing –during
prepubertal development of the female rat. Promoter assays demonstrated that all
102
A. Lomniczi et al.

three POK proteins are potent inhibitors of PcG gene expression, suggesting that
they may function as “repressors of repressors.”
Several members of the ZNF superfamily of transcriptional repressors (Urrutia
2003; Vogel et al. 2006; Shannon et al. 1996; Filion et al. 2006) may also contribute
to the transcriptional silencing of puberty, as expression of some of these genes
declines in the primate hypothalamus at the initiation of puberty (Lomniczi
et al. 2013b). The idea that a reduction in ZNF inhibitory output at puberty may
lift an inhibitory inﬂuence from puberty-activating genes (i.e., genes involved in the
stimulatory control of puberty) was recently given credence by the ﬁnding that a
ZNF gene known as MKRN3/ZNF127 plays a repressive role in human puberty
(Abreu et al. 2013). This report showed that inactivating mutations in the coding
region of MKRN3 are responsible for the sexual precocity observed in several
members of a cohort of 15 families with familial central precocious puberty.
MKRN3 is an intronless, maternally imprinted gene encoding a protein with a
RING ﬁnger domain and several zinc ﬁnger motifs (Jong et al. 1999) with predicted
ubiquitin ligase-like activity.
MKRN3 may represent a class of genes encoding RING and zinc ﬁnger
containing proteins that contribute to the repressive transcriptional control of
puberty, as the structurally similar gene EAP1 (IRF-2BPL) has also been implicated
in the control of puberty and reproductive function (Heger et al. 2007; Dissen
et al. 2012; Lomniczi et al. 2012). Hypothalamic expression of MKRN3 declines
during juvenile development in mice (Abreu et al. 2013), rats and nonhuman
primates (unpublished observations), implying a prepubertal decline in a
MKRN3-dependent inhibitory inﬂuence and suggesting that MKRN3 controls
puberty by repressing downstream target genes, instead of activating the GnRH
neuronal network (Lomniczi et al. 2013b). Interestingly, hypothalamic expression
of the POK genes Bcl6, Zbtb7a/LRF and Zbtb16/PLZF mirrors that of MKRN3 in
female rats (unpublished observations), suggesting a causal relationship.
An additional mechanism of repression may be provided by LIN28 proteins
acting post-transcriptionally. This involvement was suggested by the ﬁnding that a
single nucleotide polymorphism near the LIN28B gene in human chromosome 6
(q21) is associated with earlier puberty and shorter stature in girls (Perry et al. 2009;
Sulem et al. 2009; Ong et al. 2009). LIN28B encodes a cytoplasmic protein that
controls gene expression post-transcriptionally by binding to miRNAs and
diminishing miRNA-mediated mRNA degradation (Moss et al. 1997; Viswanathan
et al. 2009). Its main target appears to be members of the let-7 family of miRNAs.
LIN28 proteins bind to the terminal loops of let-7 precursors and block their
processing into mature miRNAs (Viswanathan et al. 2008). The hypothalamic
expression of Lin28 and Lin28b decreases substantially during prepubertal devel-
opment in rats and non-human primates with let-7a and let-7b RNA levels showing
an opposite pattern of expression (Sangiao-Alvarellos et al. 2013). These ﬁndings
suggest that LIN28 may contribute to controlling the pubertal process by down
regulating miRNAs potentially involved in silencing inhibitors of puberty, i.e.,
acting as a repressor of repressors but at a post-transcriptional level.
Gene Networks, Epigenetics and the Control of Female Puberty
103

Altogether, the aforementioned observations suggest that the timing of mamma-
lian puberty is controlled by overlapping layers of repressive regulation (Lomniczi
et al. 2013b) (Fig. 1). They are also consistent with the concept recently put forward
by Lomniczi et al. (2013a) that transcriptional repression is a core component of
theneuroendocrine circuitry regulating puberty.
Epigenetic Information: An Integrating Mechanism
of Reproductive Neuroendocrine Development
The discovery of gene networks controlling puberty raises the question as to the
existence of mechanisms able to regulate gene expression in a plastic, dynamic, and
coordinated fashion during pre- and peripubertal development. These mechanisms
are likely epigenetic, because epigenetic information can not only provide gene-
speciﬁc gatekeeper functions (Garcia-Bassets et al. 2007) but also has a degree of
plasticity able to transiently change gene expression within hours (Miller and
Sweatt 2007) and even minutes (Kangaspeska et al. 2008; Metivier et al. 2008).
It is now clear that epigenetic information is also essential for a variety of
neural functions, including memory formation (Miller and Sweatt 2007), recovery
of
learning
and
memory
(Fischer
et
al.
2007),
dendritic
development
(Wu et al. 2007), neuronal and behavioral plasticity (Kumar et al. 2005),
estrogen-induced gene expression (Perillo et al. 2008; Subramanian et al. 2008),
glial-neuronal interactions (Shen et al. 2008), circadian rhythms (Nakahata
et al. 2008), and sexual differentiation of the brain (McCarthy et al. 2009).
Mechanisms of Epigenetic Control
The basic mechanisms of epigenetic information are: (1) DNA methylation and
hydroxymethylation, two covalent modiﬁcations found in cytosine residues of the
dinucleotide sequence CpG (Jaenisch and Bird 2003; Bjornsson et al. 2004), and
(2) Chromatin modiﬁcations, consisting of post-translational modiﬁcations that
alter the N-terminus tails of core histones (H2A, H2B, H3, and H4) in nucleosomes
(Kouzarides 2007; Khorasanizadeh 2004).
While basal DNA methylation (i.e., the addition of a methyl group to position
5 in the cytosine ring to yield 5-methycytosine, 5-mC) is maintained by DNA
methyltransferase1 (DNMT1), de novo methylation is a function of DNMT3a and
DNMT3b, which target unmethylated and hemimethylated DNA with similar
efﬁciencies (Jaenisch and Bird 2003). Increased DNA methylation is associated
with gene repression; conversely, hypomethylation is associated with trans-
criptional activation. Consistent with the concept that loss of 5-mC is accom-
panied by corresponding increases in 5-hydroxymethycytosine (5-hmC), DNA
104
A. Lomniczi et al.

hydroxymethylation is associated with activation of transcription, as evidenced by
the abundance of 5-hmC in euchromatin (i.e., chromatin in the open state) and
promoter regions of active genes (Ficz et al. 2011).
In contrast to this relative simplicity, core histones are subjected to several post-
translational modiﬁcations, including acetylation, methylation, phosphorylation,
ubiquitination, and sumoylation (Kouzarides 2007; Jenuwein and Allis 2001).
Among these, acetylation by acetyltransferases (HATs), deacetylation by histone
deacetylases (HDACs), and methylation by methyltransferases (HMTs) are some of
the histone modiﬁcations most intimately involved in gene regulation. In general,
acetylation is associated with activation of transcription, whereas deacetylation is a
hallmark of gene silencing (Kouzarides 2007; Dillon 2006). In addition to histone
acetylation, promoter activity is regulated by histones methylated at speciﬁc lysine
residues. The most common histone modiﬁcation associated with active transcrip-
tion is trimethylation of H3 at lysine 4 (H3K4me3; Wang et al. 2008; Berger 2007;
Guttman et al. 2009). In contrast, H3 methylation of lysine 9 and 27 (H3K9me and
H3K27me) is a feature of silenced genes (Wang et al. 2008; Guttman et al. 2009;
Ruthenburg et al. 2007). Adding complexity to this scenario, DNA methylation and
histone modiﬁcations work in concert to regulate gene expression (Cameron
et al. 1999; Cedar and Bergman 2009), with H3K4me2/3 preventing DNA methyl-
ation (Ooi et al. 2007; Cedar and Bergman 2009), and H3K9me facilitating
DNMT3a and DNMTb recruitment to target genes (Cedar and Bergman 2009).
Once recruited, DNMTs associate with HDACs to bring about gene silencing
(Rountree et al. 2000; Robertson et al. 2000; Fuks et al. 2000; Burgers
et al. 2002). The dynamic nature of these mechanisms make epigenetic information
ideally suited to provide temporal and spatial cues, not furnished by DNA sequence,
to complex biological processes. The neuroendocrine regulation of puberty is one
such process.
Most, if not all, genes presumed to play a role in the hypothalamic control of
puberty are decorated with epigenetic marks (http://www.epigenome.org/, http://
epigenome.usc.edu/ and http://epigenomegateway.wustl.edu/). Changes in DNA
methylation of the GnRH promoter accompany the increase in GnRH expression
that occur during embryonic development of nonhuman primates (Kurian
et al. 2010), and estrogen-positive feedback results in increases acetylation of
histone 3 in the kiss1 promoter of AVPV kisspeptin neurons (Tomikawa
et al. 2012). Nevertheless, it is only recently that the identiﬁcation of the PcG
group as a major epigenetic regulator of puberty (Lomniczi et al. 2013a) has shed
light into the potential contribution of epigenetic cues to the neuroendocrine control
of the pubertal process. The PcG system is composed of three types of Pc repressive
complexes (PRCs) working together to bring about gene silencing. They are known
as PRC1, PRC2 and PhoRC (Simon and Kingston 2009; Schwartz and Pirrotta
2007). The PRC1 complex includes a group termed Cbx, because its members
contain a highly conserved chromodomain (Cbx) at their amino terminus (Ren
et al. 2008; Dietrich et al. 2007; Gil et al. 2004; Scott et al. 2007). The mammalian
homologs of Drosophila polycomb proteins are Cbx2, 4, 6, 7, and 8 (Schwartz and
Pirrotta 2007). In different cells, the PRC1 complex may contain different Cbx
Gene Networks, Epigenetics and the Control of Female Puberty
105

genes (Otte and Kwaks 2003). In mammals, the PRC2 complex includes four core
subunits: enhancer of zeste 1 or 2 (EZH1, EZH2), suppressor of zeste (Suz12), and
the WD40 domain proteins EED and P55 (Schwartz and Pirrotta 2007; Di and Helin
2013). In Droshophila, the PhoRC complex contains two proteins, Pho and its
homologue Phol, which bind directly to DNA (Schwartz and Pirrotta 2007). In
mammals, these proteins are replaced by YY1, which has both repressive and
activating functions (Shrivastava and Calame 1994; Wilkinson et al. 2006; Thomas
and Seto 1999). It is now clear that PcG-mediated gene silencing requires
H3K27me3; while PRC2 initiates silencing by methylating H3 at K27, the Cbx
components of PRC1 maintain the silenced state by binding to H3K27me3 via their
chromodomain (Schwartz and Pirrotta 2007; Otte and Kwaks 2003; Simon and
Kingston 2009) to form a repressive complex (Simon and Kingston 2009; Schwartz
and Pirrotta 2007). Yy1 recruits PRC2 and PRC1 proteins, in addition to
H3K27me3 to gene promoters to silence transcription (Wilkinson et al. 2006;
Woo et al. 2010). A greater complexity of the PcG complex was recently revealed
by studies showing the existence of six different non-canonical PRC1 complexes
that do not contain CBX proteins (Gao et al. 2012). One of them, containing the
protein RYBP (RING1/YY1 binding protein), appears to be critical for PRC1-
dependent monoubiquitination of histone 2A at lysine 119 (Tavares et al. 2012).
H2AK119ub1 plays a central role in suppressing RNA polymerase activity in
bivalent promoters and also appears to prevent H3K4 methylation (Di and Helin
2013), a hallmark of activated genes (Wang et al. 2008; Berger 2007; Guttman
et al. 2009).
Lomniczi and colleagues (2013a) examined the hypothalamus at three develop-
mental phases encompassing the juvenile and peripubertal stages of female rat
reproductive maturation: early juvenile (day 21), late juvenile (day 28), and the day
of the ﬁrst preovulatory surge of gonadotropins (days 30–36). These ages were
selected because day 21 marks the initiation of the juvenile period (Ojeda and
Urbanski 1994), day 28 signals the beginning of puberty, and the ﬁrst preovulatory
surge of gonadotropins represents the completion of puberty. In the female rat, the
ﬁrst neuroendocrine manifestation of puberty can be detected in the form of a
diurnal change in pulsatile LH release at the end of juvenile development (Urbanski
and Ojeda 1985).
Pulsatile GnRH secretion is thought to be driven by KNDy neurons
(Wakabayashi et al. 2010; Navarro et al. 2011) of the ARC (Navarro et al. 2011;
Lehman et al. 2010). KNDy neurons release NKB, which acts on other KNDy
neurons via speciﬁc receptors to stimulate kisspeptin release (Wakabayashi
et al. 2010; Navarro et al. 2011). NKB and kisspeptin are released periodically,
and this oscillatory behavior is determined by a phase-delayed inhibitory feedback
of dynorphin on NKB release (Wakabayashi et al. 2010; Navarro et al. 2011).
Because of these characteristics, we consider Kiss1 and Tac2 to be unique members
of a class of “puberty-activating” genes. Using the Kiss1 as the prototype, Lomniczi
et al. (2013a) showed that two core components of the PcG complex (Eed and
Cbx7) are expressed in kisspeptin neurons of the ARC, and their encoded proteins
are associated with the 50 ﬂanking region of the Kiss1 gene. At the end of juvenile
106
A. Lomniczi et al.

development, the expression of both Eed and Cbx7 decreases coinciding with
increased methylation of their promoters. As these changes take place, the asso-
ciation of EED and CBX proteins with the Kiss1 promoter is reduced. The chro-
matin status of the Kiss1 promoter also changes at this time, displaying increased
levels of two histone marks (H3K9, 14ac, and H3K4me3) associated with gene
activation. The net outcome of these alterations is activation of Kiss1 transcription,
as evidenced by the increase in Kiss1 expression that occurs at this time. Surpris-
ingly, the content of H3K27me3, a PcG-dependent repressive histone modiﬁcation
(Wang et al. 2008; Ruthenburg et al. 2007) did not decrease signiﬁcantly at the
initiation of puberty (i.e., at the end of juvenile development), but it did so later, on
the day of the ﬁrst preovulatory surge of gonadotropins. This developmental proﬁle
suggests that the association of H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 with the Kiss1 promoter
has the features of bivalent domains (Bernstein et al. 2006), that is, the co-existence
of repressive and activating histone modiﬁcations (Young et al. 2011; Bernstein
et al. 2006) in the regulatory region of genes “poised” for activation in response to
incoming inputs (Bernstein et al. 2007).
Importantly, inhibition of DNA methylation with 5-azacytidine prevented not
only the peripubertal decline in Cbx7 and Eed mRNA expression but also the
eviction of CBX7 and EED from the Kiss1 promoter, the association of activating
histone marks with the promoter, and the increase in Kiss1 expression that occurs at
this time of development. It is thus plausible that, when an increase in DNA
methylation of PcG promoters fails to occur, EED/CBX7 occupancy of the Kiss1
promoter persists resulting in diminished accessibility of activating histone marks
to the promoter. The increase in H3K4me3 content at the Kiss1 promoter raises the
possibility that an activating complex is recruited as loss of PcG inhibition unfolds.
Trithorax proteins appear to be particularly well suited to play this role as they are
known to be chromatin-activating factors that antagonize PcG silencing by induc-
ing H3K4 trimethylation and H3 acetylation (Simon and Kingston 2009). As such,
they may play an important role in counteracting the repressive effects of PcG on
puberty-activating genes. The contribution of Trithorax genes to the epigenetic
control of puberty may be signiﬁcant, especially because mutations in CHD7 have
been associated with hypothalamic hypogonadism in humans (Bianco and Kaiser
2009; Kim et al. 2008). CHD7 is a gene encoding an ATP-dependent chromatin-
remodeling
protein
that
forms
part
of
Trithorax-containing
complexes
(Schuettengruber et al. 2011).
That PcG-mediated silencing is intimately involved in restraining puberty was
made evident by experiments in which EED was overexpressed – via lentivirus-
mediated delivery – in the ARC of early juvenile rats to prevent the pubertal decline
in EED availability to kisspeptin neurons. These studies showed that the over-
expressed protein became associated with the Kiss1 promoter, resulting in a
reduced number of immunoreactive kisspeptin neurons, blunted pulsatile GnRH
release, delayed puberty, and disrupted estrous cyclicity. The number of pups
delivered by these animals was severely reduced, indicating that, if the repressive
inﬂuence of the PcG complex on kisspeptin neurons is not lifted, fertility is
compromised (Lomniczi et al. 2013a).
Gene Networks, Epigenetics and the Control of Female Puberty
107

Fig. 1 Hypothetical transcriptional regulatory network controlling the initiation of puberty. (a)
The diagram illustrates the emerging notion that transcriptional repression is a central component
of the mechanism by which the hypothalamus controls the onset of female puberty. According to
this view, puberty-activating genes (Kiss1, Tac2, etc.) are controlled by transcriptional activators
(e.g., TTF1, CUXp200) and by a level of repression provided by at least two silencing systems: the
PcG complex and members of the ZNF gene family, represented by MKRN3. We also envision
that an upstream repressive layer provided by members of the POK family, and perhaps LIN28
(acting postranscriptionally), gives developmental dynamism to the system by repressing the
proximal layer of repressors, i.e., acting as repressors of repressors. (b) Systems-wide coordination
would be achieved by epigenetic cues provided by changes in DNA methylation and the compo-
sition of histone posttranslational modiﬁcations at each participating gene locus. The proﬁles
depicted illustrate hypothetical changes in histone association (blue and red proﬁles) and DNA
methylation (short vertical lines) around the promoter region of each class of genes. The
108
A. Lomniczi et al.

Finally, this study by Lomniczi et al. also showed that estradiol (E2) is not
responsible for the decrease in Eed or Cbx7 expression that antedates the onset of
puberty, because this decrease occurs before the pubertal increase in circulating E2
levels. Although E2 may have activated the transcription of genes repressing PcG
expression via estrogen receptor alpha (ERα)-mediated activation of enhancer RNA
transcription (Li et al. 2013), there are no canonical estrogen responsive elements
(EREs) in the Eed or Cbx promoter. Earlier ﬁndings demonstrated that E2 does not
repress but instead induces demethylation of DNA and loss of H3K9me2/3 from
E2-target promoters (Kangaspeska et al. 2008; Metivier et al. 2008; Perillo
et al. 2008). It is likely, however, that some of the epigenetic modiﬁcations
affecting puberty-related genes other than PcG genes are caused by E2. In fact,
E2-mediated increases in gene transcription do involve epigenetic modiﬁcations,
such as ﬂuctuations in DNA methylation (Kangaspeska et al. 2008; Metivier
et al. 2008), and formation of co-activating complexes containing histone
acetyltransferases and histone methyltransferases (Metivier et al. 2003). Expression
of ERα itself is regulated by DNA methylation (Issa et al. 1994; Westberry
et al. 2008; Belinsky et al. 2002). A seemingly major epigenetic mechanism of
E2 action is the ability of E2-ERα complexes to induce demethylation of the
inhibitory histone mark H3K9me2/3, resulting in enhanced transcription (Perillo
et al. 2008; Garcia-Bassets et al. 2007). Recently, Tomikawa and colleagues
demonstrated that E2 increases acetylated H3 content of the Kiss1 promoter in
the AVPV but reduces acetylated H3 in the ARC (Tomikawa et al. 2012). Further-
more, E2 increased ERα binding to the Kiss1 promoter in the AVPV, but not the
ARC. In harmony with the results of Lomniczi et al. (2013a), Tomikawa et al. did
not detect changes in Kiss1 promoter DNA methylation in either the AVPV or
ARC, suggesting that DNA methylation may not be involved in regulating Kiss1
promoter activity. A ﬁnding with potentially important implications for the under-
standing of how puberty-activating genes may be regulated by E2 is the presence of
an estrogen-responsive enhancer in the 30-region of the Kiss1 gene (Tomikawa
et al. 2012). This interaction occurs in the AVPV but not the ARC, consistent with
the lack of ERα recruitment to the Kiss1 locus in the ARC. While these ﬁndings
provide a blueprint for the epigentic contribution to E2-positive feeback, they leave
unresolved the critical questions as to the identity and nature of the mechanism
(s) underlying the inhibitory effect of estrogen on ARC Kiss1 expression.
Notwithstanding the biological signiﬁcance of these observations, it is likely that
changes in epigenetic information affect simultaneously several hierarchically
different components of the gene networks controlling puberty. For instance,
POK proteins, which we believe to be located at a hierarchical level higher than
⁄

Fig. 1 (continued) transcription start site is denoted by the bent arrow followed by +1. The net
outcome of these changes would be a switch from inhibitory to stimulatory transcriptional control
leading to increased pulsatile GnRH, increased LH secretion, and the initiation of puberty
Gene Networks, Epigenetics and the Control of Female Puberty
109

the PcG complex, recruit HDACs to a repressor complex to silence gene expression
(Dhordain et al. 1997; Lin et al. 1998; David et al. 1998), and some POZ-ZF
proteins recognize methylated CpG dinucleotides for binding and repression of
gene transcription (Daniel et al. 2002; Prokhortchouk et al. 2001).
Concluding Remarks and Perspectives
Two main concepts emerge from the aforementioned observations: (1) that the
central control of mammalian puberty depends on the interaction of gene sets
organized into functionally connected networks, and (2) that the neuroendocrine
control of female puberty involves the participation of a repressive mechanism of
epigenetic regulation (Fig. 1). We believe that this silencing inﬂuence is exerted at
various hierarchical levels within the architecture of gene networks controlling the
pubertal process. A proximal repressive layer is provided by members of the
Polycomb group of transcriptional silencers. They use epigenetic mechanisms to
control downstream “puberty-activating” genes epitomized by the Kiss1 gene, and
their own expression is controlled by changes in DNA methylation. Another set of
transcriptional repressors, perhaps targeting the same downstream genes repressed
by the PcG complex, is provided by members of the ZNF family of transcriptional
silencers, typiﬁed by MKRN3, which encodes a RING and zinc-ﬁnger containing
protein. Finally, the POK family of transcriptional repressors, which shows a
preference for methylated regions controlling gene expression, may provide
“hard-wiring” to the above networks by acting as both “repressors of repressors”
and repressors of puberty-activating genes (Fig. 1).
While these observations lay out the initial scaffold upon which to build a more
complete understanding of the epigenetic control of puberty, they also raise a
myriad of questions. For instance, do the different neuronal and glial subsets
involved in the control of puberty express a different composition of transcriptional
repressors? Or do all cells, regardless of their position in the chain of command,
express the same repressors – and is the ability of each repressor to interact with
relevant DNA regulatory regions what determines the ﬁnal outcome? If there are
cell-speciﬁc developmental changes in transcriptional repressor expression, what
factors are responsible for those changes? If different puberty-controlling cell
populations in the hypothalamus have their own epigenetic landscape, what deter-
mines this cellular speciﬁcity? And how are the developmental changes in epi-
genetic landscape determined? No less important is the identity of the speciﬁc
“inlets” conveying environmental inputs as diverse as nutrition, toxins, light, and
social interactions to the hypothalamic epigenome. We envision that future research
will not only provide answers to these and other questions but also lead to the
identiﬁcation of speciﬁc epigenetic defects underlying the human disorders of
idiopathic precocious and delayed puberty.
110
A. Lomniczi et al.

Acknowledgments This research was supported by grant IOS IOS1121691 from the National
Science Foundation (USA).
References
Abreu AP, Dauber A, Macedo DB, Noel SD, Brito VN, Gill JC, Cukier P, Thompson IR,
Navarro VM, Gagliardi PC, Rodrigues T, Kochi C, Longui CA, Beckers D, de Zegher F,
Montenegro LR, Mendonca BB, Carroll RS, Hirschhorn JN, Latronico AC, Kaiser UB (2013)
Central precocious puberty caused by mutations in the imprinted gene MKRN3. N Engl J Med
368:2467–2475
Bedecarrats GY, Kaiser UB (2007) Mutations in the human gonadotropin-releasing hormone recep-
tor: insights into receptor biology and function. Semin Reprod Med 25:368–378
Belinsky SA, Snow SS, Nikula KJ, Finch GL, Tellez CS, Palmisano WA (2002) Aberrant CpG
island methylation of the p16(INK4a) and estrogen receptor genes in rat lung tumors induced
by particulate carcinogens. Carcinogenesis 23:335–339
Berger SL (2007) The complex language of chromatin regulation during transcription.
Nature 447:407–412
Bernstein BE, Mikkelsen TS, Xie X, Kamal M, Huebert DJ, Cuff J, Fry B, Meissner A, Wernig M,
Plath K, Jaenisch R, Wagschal A, Feil R, Schreiber SL, Lander ES (2006) A bivalent chromatin
structure marks key developmental genes in embryonic stem cells. Cell 125:315–326
Bernstein BE, Meissner A, Lander ES (2007) The mammalian epigenome. Cell 128:669–681
Bianco SD, Kaiser UB (2009) The genetic and molecular basis of idiopathic hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism. Nat Rev Endocrinol 5:569–576
Bjornsson HT, Fallin MD, Feinberg AP (2004) An integrated epigenetic and genetic approach to
common human disease. Trends Genet 20:350–358
Boyar R, Finkelstein J, Roffwarg H, Kapen S, Weitzman E, Hellman L (1972) Synchronization of
augmented luteinizing hormone secretion with sleep during puberty. N Engl J Med 287:
582–586
Burgers WA, Fuks F, Kouzarides T (2002) DNA methyltransferases get connected to chromatin.
Trends Genet 18:275–277
Cameron EE, Bachman KE, Myohanen S, Herman JG, Baylin SB (1999) Synergy of demethyl-
ation and histone deacetylase inhibition in the re-expression of genes silenced in cancer.
Nat Genet 21:103–107
Cedar H, Bergman Y (2009) Linking DNA methylation and histone modiﬁcation: patterns and
paradigms. Nat Rev Genet 10:295–304
Clarkson J, d’Anglemont de Tassigny X, Colledge WH, Caraty A, Herbison AE (2009) Distribution
of kisspeptin neurones in the adult female mouse brain. J Neuroendocrinol 21:673–682
Clasadonte J, Poulain P, Hanchate NK, Corfas G, Ojeda SR, Prevot V (2011) Prostaglandin E2
release from astrocytes triggers gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neuron ﬁring via
EP2 receptor activation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108:16104–16109
d’Anglemont de Tassigny X, Colledge WH (2010) The role of kisspeptin signaling in reproduction.
Physiology (Bethesda) 25:207–217
Daniel JM, Spring CM, Crawford HC, Reynolds AB, Baig A (2002) The p120(ctn)-binding partner
Kaiso is a bi-modal DNA-binding protein that recognizes both a sequence-speciﬁc consensus
and methylated CpG dinucleotides. Nucleic Acids Res 30:2911–2919
David G, Alland L, Hong SH, Wong CW, Depinho RA, Dejean A (1998) Histone deacetylase
associated with mSin3A mediates repression by the acute promyelocytic leukemia-associated
PLZF protein. Oncogene 16:2549–2556
de Roux N, Genin E, Carel J-C, Matsuda F, Chaussain J-L, Milgrom E (2003) Hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism due to loss of function of the KiSS1-derived peptide receptor GPR54. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 100:10972–10976
Gene Networks, Epigenetics and the Control of Female Puberty
111

DeFazio RA, Heger S, Ojeda SR, Moenter SM (2002) Activation of A-type g-aminobutyric acid
receptors excites gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons. Mol Endocrinol 16:2872–2891
Dhordain P, Albagli O, Lin RJ, Ansieau S, Quief S, Leutz A, Kerckaert JP, Evans RM, Leprince D
(1997) Corepressor SMRT binds the BTB/POZ repressing domain of the LAZ3/BCL6
oncoprotein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94:10762–10767
Di CL, Helin K (2013) Transcriptional regulation by Polycomb group proteins. Nat Struct Mol Biol
20:1147–1155
Dietrich N, Bracken AP, Trinh E, Schjerling CK, Koseki H, Rappsilber J, Helin K, Hansen KH
(2007) Bypass of senescence by the polycomb group protein CBX8 through direct binding to
the INK4A-ARF locus. EMBO J 26:1637–1648
Dillon N (2006) Gene regulation and large-scale chromatin organization in the nucleus. Chromo-
some Res 14:117–126
Dissen GA, Lomniczi A, Heger S, Neff TL, Ojeda SR (2012) Hypothalamic enhanced at puberty
1 (EAP1) is required for menstrual cyclicity in non-human primates. Endocrinology 153:
350–361
Ducret E, Anderson GM, Herbison AE (2009) RFamide-related peptide-3, a mammalian gonado-
tropin-inhibitory hormone ortholog, regulates gonadotropin-releasing hormone neuron ﬁring in
the mouse. Endocrinology 150:2799–2804
Dudas B, Merchenthaler I (2006) Three-dimensional representation of the neurotransmitter sys-
tems of the human hypothalamus: inputs of the gonadotrophin hormone-releasing hormone
neuronal system. J Neuroendocrinol 18:79–95
Ebling FJ, Luckman SM (2008) RFAmide-related peptide: another sexy peptide? Endocrinology
149:899–901
Elks CE, Perry JR, Sulem P, Chasman DI, Franceschini N, He C, Lunetta KL, Visser JA,
Byrne EM, Cousminer DL, Gudbjartsson DF, Esko T, Feenstra B, Hottenga JJ, Koller DL,
Kutalik Z, Lin P, Mangino M, Marongiu M, McArdle PF, Smith AV, Stolk L, van Wingerden
SH, Zhao JH, Albrecht E, Corre T, Ingelsson E, Hayward C, Magnusson PK, Smith EN,
Ulivi S, Warrington NM, Zgaga L, Alavere H, Amin N, Aspelund T, Bandinelli S, Barroso I,
Berenson GS, Bergmann S, Blackburn H, Boerwinkle E, Buring JE, Busonero F, Campbell H,
Chanock SJ, Chen W, Cornelis MC, Couper D, Coviello AD, d’Adamo P, de Faire U, de Geus
EJ, Deloukas P, Do¨ring A, Smith GD, Easton DF, Eiriksdottir G, Emilsson V, Eriksson J,
Ferrucci L, Folsom AR, Foroud T, Garcia M, Gasparini P, Geller F, Gieger C, Giant Consor-
tium, Gudnason V, Hall P, Hankinson SE, Ferreli L, Heath AC, Hernandez DG, Hofman A,
Hu FB, Illig T, Ja¨rvelin MR, Johnson AD, Karasik D, Khaw KT, Kiel DP, Kilpela¨inen TO,
Kolcic I, Kraft P, Launer LJ, Laven JS, Li S, Liu J, Levy D, Martin NG, McArdle WL,
Melbye M, Mooser V, Murray JC, Murray SS, Nalls MA, Navarro P, Nelis M, Ness AR,
Northstone K, Oostra BA, Peacock M, Palmer LJ, Palotie A, Pare´ G, Parker AN, Pedersen NL,
Peltonen L, Pennell CE, Pharoah P, Polasek O, Plump AS, Pouta A, Porcu E, Rafnar T, Rice JP,
Ring SM, Rivadeneira F, Rudan I, Sala C, Salomaa V, Sanna S, Schlessinger D, Schork NJ,
Scuteri A, Segre` AV, Shuldiner AR, Soranzo N, Sovio U, Srinivasan SR, Strachan DP,
Tammesoo ML, Tikkanen E, Toniolo D, Tsui K, Tryggvadottir L, Tyrer J, Uda M, van Dam
RM, van Meurs JB, Vollenweider P, Waeber G, Wareham NJ, Waterworth DM, Weedon MN,
Wichmann HE, Willemsen G, Wilson JF, Wright AF, Young L, Zhai G, Zhuang WV,
Bierut LJ, Boomsma DI, Boyd HA, Crisponi L, Demerath EW, van Duijn CM, Econs MJ,
Harris TB, Hunter DJ, Loos RJ, Metspalu A, Montgomery GW, Ridker PM, Spector TD,
Streeten EA, Stefansson K, Thorsteinsdottir U, Uitterlinden AG, Widen E, Murabito JM,
Ong KK, Murray A (2010) Thirty new loci for age at menarche identiﬁed by a meta-analysis
of genome-wide association studies. Nat Genet 42:1077–1085
Ficz G, Branco MR, Seisenberger S, Santos F, Krueger F, Hore TA, Marques CJ, Andrews S,
Reik W (2011) Dynamic regulation of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in mouse ES cells and during
differentiation. Nature 473:398–402
112
A. Lomniczi et al.

Filion GJ, Zhenilo S, Salozhin S, Yamada D, Prokhortchouk E, Defossez PA (2006) A family of
human zinc ﬁnger proteins that bind methylated DNA and repress transcription. Mol Cell Biol
26:169–181
Fischer A, Sananbenesi F, Wang X, Dobbin M, Tsai LH (2007) Recovery of learning and memory
is associated with chromatin remodelling. Nature 447:178–182
Fuks F, Burgers WA, Brehm A, Hughes-Davies L, Kouzarides T (2000) DNA methyltransferase
Dnmt1 associates with histone deacetylase activity. Nat Genet 24:88–91
Fukusumi S, Fujii R, Hinuma S (2006) Recent advances in mammalian RFamide peptides: the
discovery and functional analyses of PrRP, RFRPs and QRFP. Peptides 27:1073–1086
Gao Z, Zhang J, Bonasio R, Strino F, Sawai A, Parisi F, Kluger Y, Reinberg D (2012) PCGF
homologs, CBX proteins, and RYBP deﬁne functionally distinct PRC1 family complexes.
Mol Cell 45:344–356
Garcia-Bassets I, Kwon YS, Telese F, Prefontaine GG, Hutt KR, Cheng CS, Ju BG, Ohgi KA,
Wang J, Escoubet-Lozach L, Rose DW, Glass CK, Fu XD, Rosenfeld MG (2007) Histone
methylation-dependent mechanisms impose ligand dependency for gene activation by nuclear
receptors. Cell 128:505–518
Gibson EM, Humber SA, Jain S, Williams WP III, Zhao S, Bentley GE, Tsutsui K, Kriegsfeld LJ
(2008) Alterations in RFamide-related peptide expression are coordinated with the preovulatory
luteinizing hormone surge. Endocrinology 149:4958–4969
Gil J,BernardD, Martinez D,Beach D (2004) Polycomb CBX7has a unifyingrolein cellular lifespan.
Nat Cell Biol 6:67–72
Gottsch ML, Cunningham MJ, Smith JT, Popa SM, Acohido BV, Crowley WF, Seminara S,
Clifton DK, Steiner RA (2004) A role for kisspeptins in the regulation of gonadotropin
secretion in the mouse. Endocrinology 145:4073–4077
Guttman M, Amit I, Garber M, French C, Lin MF, Feldser D, Huarte M, Zuk O, Carey BW,
Cassady JP, Cabili MN, Jaenisch R, Mikkelsen TS, Jacks T, Hacohen N, Bernstein BE,
Kellis M, Regev A, Rinn JL, Lander ES (2009) Chromatin signature reveals over a thousand
highly conserved large non-coding RNAs in mammals. Nature 458:223–227
He C, Kraft P, Chen C, Buring JE, Pare G, Hankinson SE, Chanock SJ, Ridker PM, Hunter DJ,
Chasman DI (2009) Genome-wide association studies identify loci associated with age at
menarche and age at natural menopause. Nat Genet 41:724–728
Heger S, Mastronardi C, Dissen GA, Lomniczi A, Cabrera R, Roth CL, Jung H, Galimi F,
Sippell W, Ojeda SR (2007) Enhanced at puberty 1 (EAP1) is a new transcriptional regulator
of the female neuroendocrine reproductive axis. J Clin Invest 117:2145–2154
Hinuma S, Shintani Y, Fukusumi S, Iijima N, Matsumoto Y, Hosoya M, Fujii R, Watanabe T,
Kikuchi K, Terao Y, Yano T, Yamamoto T, Kawamata Y, Habata Y, Asada M, Kitada C,
Kurokawa T, Onda H, Nishimura O, Tanaka M, Ibata Y, Fujino M (2000) New neuropeptides
containing carboxy-terminal RFamide and their receptor in mammals. Nat Cell Biol 2:703–708
Hrabovszky E, CioﬁP, Vida B, Horvath MC, Keller E, Caraty A, Bloom SR, Ghatei MA, Dhillo WS,
Liposits Z, Kallo I (2010) The kisspeptin system of the human hypothalamus: sexual dimorphism
and relationship with gonadotropin-releasing hormone and neurokinin B neurons. Eur J Neurosci
31:1984–1998
Issa JP, Ottaviano YL, Celano P, Hamilton SR, Davidson NE, Baylin SB (1994) Methylation of
the oestrogen receptor CpG island links ageing and neoplasia in human colon. Nat Genet 7:
536–540
Jaenisch R, Bird A (2003) Epigenetic regulation of gene expression: how the genome integrates
intrinsic and environmental signals. Nat Genet 33(Suppl):245–254
Jenuwein T, Allis CD (2001) Translating the histone code. Science 293:1074–1080
Jong MT, Gray TA, Ji Y, Glenn CC, Saitoh S, Driscoll DJ, Nicholls RD (1999) A novel imprinted
gene, encoding a RING zinc-ﬁnger protein, and overlapping antisense transcript in the Prader-
Willi syndrome critical region. Hum Mol Genet 8:783–793
Gene Networks, Epigenetics and the Control of Female Puberty
113

Kangaspeska S, Stride B, Metivier R, Polycarpou-Schwarz M, Ibberson D, Carmouche RP,
Benes V, Gannon F, Reid G (2008) Transient cyclical methylation of promoter DNA.
Nature 452:112–115
Kauffman AS, Clifton DK, Steiner RA (2007) Emerging ideas about kisspeptin- GPR54 signaling
in the neuroendocrine regulation of reproduction. Trends Neurosci 30:504–511
Kelly KF, Daniel JM (2006) POZ for effect–POZ-ZF transcription factors in cancer and develop-
ment. Trends Cell Biol 16:578–587
Khan AR, Kauffman AS (2011) The role of Kisspeptin and RFRP-3 neurons in the circadian-timed
preovulatory luteinizing hormone surge. J Neuroendocrinol 24:131–143
Khorasanizadeh S (2004) The nucleosome: from genomic organization to genomic regulation.
Cell 116:259–272
Kim HG, Kurth I, Lan F, Meliciani I, Wenzel W, Eom SH, Kang GB, Rosenberger G, Tekin M,
Ozata M, Bick DP, Sherins RJ, Walker SL, Shi Y, Gusella JF, Layman LC (2008) Mutations in
CHD7, encoding a chromatin-remodeling protein, cause idiopathic hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism and Kallmann syndrome. Am J Hum Genet 83:511–519
Kohler C, Villar CB (2008) Programming of gene expression by Polycomb group proteins.
Trends Cell Biol 18:236–243
Kordon C, Drouva SV, Martı´nez de la Escalera G, Weiner RI (1994) Role of classic and peptide
neuromediators in the neuroendocrine regulation of luteinizing hormone and prolactin.
In: Knobil E, Neill JD (eds) The physiology of reproduction, vol 1, 2nd edn. Raven Press,
New York, pp 1621–1681
Kotani M, Detheux M, Vandenbogaerde A, Communi D, Vanderwinden JM, Le Poul E,
Brezillon S, Tyldesley R, Suarez-Huerta N, Vandeput F, Blanpain C, Schiffmann SN,
Vassart G, Parmentier M (2001) The metastasis suppressor gene KiSS-1 encodes kisspeptins,
the natural ligands of the orphan G protein-coupled receptor GPR54. J Biol Chem 276:
34631–34636
Kouzarides T (2007) Chromatin modiﬁcations and their function. Cell 128:693–705
Kumar A, Choi KH, Renthal W, Tsankova NM, Theobald DE, Truong HT, Russo SJ, Laplant Q,
Sasaki TS, Whistler KN, Neve RL, Self DW, Nestler EJ (2005) Chromatin remodeling is a key
mechanism underlying cocaine-induced plasticity in striatum. Neuron 48:303–314
Kurian JR, Keen KL, Terasawa E (2010) Epigenetic changes coincide with in vitro primate GnRH
neuronal maturation. Endocrinology 151:5359–5368
Lapatto R, Pallais JC, Zhang D, Chan YM, Mahan A, Cerrato F, Le WW, Hoffman GE, Seminara
SB (2007) Kiss1/ mice exhibit more variable hypogonadism than Gpr54/ mice. Endo-
crinology 148:4927–4936
Lehman MN, Coolen LM, Goodman RL (2010) Minireview: kisspeptin/neurokinin B/dynorphin
(KNDy) cells of the arcuate nucleus: a central node in the control of gonadotropin-releasing
hormone secretion. Endocrinology 151:3479–3489
Li W, Notani D, Ma Q, Tanasa B, Nunez E, Chen AY, Merkurjev D, Zhang J, Ohgi K, Song X,
Oh S, Kim HS, Glass CK, Rosenfeld MG (2013) Functional roles of enhancer RNAs for
oestrogen-dependent transcriptional activation. Nature 498:516–520
Lin RJ, Nagy L, Inoue S, Shao W, Miller WH Jr, Evans RM (1998) Role of the histone deacetylase
complex in acute promyelocytic leukaemia. Nature 391:811–814
Lomniczi A, Ojeda SR (2009) A role for glial cells of the neuroendocrine brain in the central
control of female sexual development. In: Parpura V, Haydon P (eds) Astrocytes in (patho)
physiology of the nervous system. Springer, New York, pp 487–511
Lomniczi A, Garcia-Rudaz C, Ramakrishnan R, Wilmont B, Khouangsathiene S, Ferguson B,
Dissen GA, Ojeda SR (2012) A single nucleotide polymorphism in the EAP1 gene is associated
with amenorrhea/oligomenorrhea in nonhuman primates. Endocrinology 153:339–349
Lomniczi A, Loche A, Castellano JM, Ronnekleiv OK, Bosh M, Kaidar G, Knoll JG, Wright H,
Pfeifer GP, Ojeda SR (2013a) Epigenetic control of female puberty. Nat Neurosci 16:281–289
114
A. Lomniczi et al.

Lomniczi A, Wright H, Castellano JM, Sonmez K, Ojeda SR (2013b) A system biology approach
to identify regulatory pathways underlying the neuroendocrine control of female puberty in rats
and nonhuman primates. Horm Behav 64:175–186
Maeda T, Hobbs RM, Merghoub T, Guernah I, Zelent A, Cordon-Cardo C, Teruya-Feldstein J,
PandolﬁPP (2005) Role of the proto-oncogene Pokemon in cellular transformation and ARF
repression. Nature 433:278–285
Mahesh VB, Dhandapani KM, Brann DW (2006) Role of astrocytes in reproduction and neuro-
protection. Mol Cell Endocrinol 246:1–9
Mayer C, Boehm U (2011) Female reproductive maturation in the absence of kisspeptin/GPR54
signaling. Nat Neurosci 14:704–710
McCarthy MM, Auger AP, Bale TL, De Vries GJ, Dunn GA, Forger NG, Murray EK, Nugent BM,
Schwarz JM, Wilson ME (2009) The epigenetics of sex differences in the brain. J Neurosci
29:12815–12823
Metivier R, Penot G, Hubner MR, Reid G, Brand H, Kos M, Gannon F (2003) Estrogen receptor-
alpha directs ordered, cyclical, and combinatorial recruitment of cofactors on a natural target
promoter. Cell 115:751–763
Metivier R, Gallais R, Tiffoche C, Le PC, Jurkowska RZ, Carmouche RP, Ibberson D, Barath P,
Demay F, Reid G, Benes V, Jeltsch A, Gannon F, Salbert G (2008) Cyclical DNA methylation
of a transcriptionally active promoter. Nature 452:45–50
Miller CA, Sweatt JD (2007) Covalent modiﬁcation of DNA regulates memory formation.
Neuron 53:857–869
Moenter SM, DeFazio RA (2005) Endogenous gamma-aminobutyric acid can excite gonado-
tropin-releasing hormone neurons. Endocrinology 146:5374–5379
Moss EG, Lee RC, Ambros V (1997) The cold shock domain protein LIN-28 controls develop-
mental timing in C. elegans and is regulated by the lin-4 RNA. Cell 88:637–646
Mueller JK, Dietzel A, Lomniczi A, Loche A, Tefs K, Kiess W, Danne T, Ojeda SR, Heger S
(2011) Transcriptional regulation of the human KiSS1 gene. Mol Cell Endocrinol 342:8–19
Mueller JK, Koch I, Lomniczi A, Loche A, Rulfs T, Castellano JM, Kiess W, Ojeda S, Heger S
(2012) Transcription of the human EAP1 gene is regulated by upstream components of a
puberty-controlling Tumor Suppressor Gene network. Mol Cell Endocrinol 351:184–198
Nakahata Y, Kaluzova M, Grimaldi B, Sahar S, Hirayama J, Chen D, Guarente LP, Sassone-Corsi
P (2008) The NAD+-dependent deacetylase SIRT1 modulates CLOCK-mediated chromatin
remodeling and circadian control. Cell 134:329–340
Navarro VM, Gottsch ML, Chavkin C, Okamura H, Clifton DK, Steiner RA (2009) Regulation of
gonadotropin-releasing hormone secretion by kisspeptin/dynorphin/neurokinin B neurons in
the arcuate nucleus of the mouse. J Neurosci 29:11859–11866
Navarro VM, Gottsch ML, Wu M, Garcia-Galiano D, Hobbs SJ, Bosch MA, Pinilla L, Clifton DK,
Dearth A, Ronnekleiv OK, Braun RE, Palmiter RD, Tena-Sempere M, Alreja M, Steiner RA
(2011) Regulation of NKB pathways and their roles in the control of Kiss1 neurons in the
arcuate nucleus of the male mouse. Endocrinology 152:4265–4275
Oakley AE, Clifton DK, Steiner RA (2009) Kisspeptin signaling in the brain. Endocr Rev 30:
713–743
Ohtaki T, Shintani Y, Honda S, Matsumoto H, Hori A, Kanehashi K, Terao Y, Kumano S,
Takatsu Y, Masuda Y, Ishibashi Y, Watanabe T, Asada M, Yamada T, Suenaga M,
Kitada C, Usuki S, Kurokawa T, Onda H, Nishimura O, Fujino M (2001) Metastasis suppressor
gene KiSS-1 encodes peptide ligand of a G-protein-coupled receptor. Nature 411:613–617
Ojeda SR (1991) The mystery of mammalian puberty: how much more do we know? Perspect Biol
Med 34:365–383
Ojeda SR, Skinner MK (2006) Puberty in the rat. In: Neill JD (ed) The physiology of reproduction,
3rd edn. Academic/Elsevier, San Diego, pp 2061–2126
Ojeda SR, Terasawa E (2002) Neuroendocrine regulation of puberty. In: Pfaff D, Arnold A,
Etgen A, Fahrbach S, Moss R, Rubin R (eds) Hormones, brain and behavior, vol 4. Elsevier,
New York, pp 589–659
Gene Networks, Epigenetics and the Control of Female Puberty
115

Ojeda SR, Urbanski HF (1994) Puberty in the rat. In: Knobil E, Neill JD (eds) The physiology of
reproduction, vol 2, 2nd edn. Raven Press, New York, pp 363–409
Ojeda SR, Lomniczi A, Mastronardi C, Heger S, Roth C, Parent AS, Matagne V, Mungenast AE
(2006) Minireview: the neuroendocrine regulation of puberty: is the time ripe for a systems
biology approach? Endocrinology 147:1166–1174
Ojeda SR, Lomniczi A, Sandau US (2008) Glial-gonadotrophin hormone (GnRH) neurone inter-
actions in the median eminence and the control of GnRH secretion. J Neuroendocrinol 20:
732–742
Ojeda SR, Lomniczi A, Sandau U (2010) Contribution of glial-neuronal interactions to the
neuroendocrine control of female puberty. Eur J Neurosci 32:2003–2010
Ong KK, Elks CE, Li S, Zhao JH, Luan J, Andersen LB, Bingham SA, Brage S, Smith GD,
Ekelund U, Gillson CJ, Glaser B, Golding J, Hardy R, Khaw KT, Kuh D, Luben R, Marcus M,
McGeehin MA, Ness AR, Northstone K, Ring SM, Rubin C, Sims MA, Song K, Strachan DP,
Vollenweider P, Waeber G, Waterworth DM, Wong A, Deloukas P, Barroso I, Mooser V,
Loos RJ, Wareham NJ (2009) Genetic variation in LIN28B is associated with the timing of
puberty. Nat Genet 41:729–733
Ooi SK, Qiu C, Bernstein E, Li K, Jia D, Yang Z, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Lin SP,
Allis CD, Cheng X, Bestor TH (2007) DNMT3L connects unmethylated lysine 4 of histone H3
to de novo methylation of DNA. Nature 448:714–717
Otte AP, Kwaks TH (2003) Gene repression by Polycomb group protein complexes: a distinct
complex for every occasion? Curr Opin Genet Dev 13:448–454
Parent AS, Mungenast AE, Lomniczi A, Sandau US, Peles E, Bosch MA, Ronnekleiv OK, Ojeda SR
(2007) A contactin-receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatase beta complex mediates
adhesive communication between astroglial cells and gonadotrophin-releasing hormone
neurones. J Neuroendocrinol 19:847–859
Parkash J, Kaur G (2005) Neuronal-glial plasticity in gonadotropin-releasing hormone release in
adult female rats: role of the polysialylated form of the neural cell adhesion molecule.
J Endocrinol 186:397–409
Perera AD, Lagenaur CF, Plant TM (1993) Postnatal expression of polysialic acid-neural cell
adhesion molecule in the hypothalamus of the male rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta). Endo-
crinology 133:2729–2735
Perillo B, Ombra MN, Bertoni A, Cuozzo C, Sacchetti S, Sasso A, Chiariotti L, Malorni A,
Abbondanza C, Avvedimento EV (2008) DNA oxidation as triggered by H3K9me2 demethy-
lation drives estrogen-induced gene expression. Science 319:202–206
Perry JR, Stolk L, Franceschini N, Lunetta KL, Zhai G, McArdle PF, Smith AV, Aspelund T,
Bandinelli S, Boerwinkle E, Cherkas L, Eiriksdottir G, Estrada K, Ferrucci L, Folsom AR,
Garcia M, Gudnason V, Hofman A, Karasik D, Kiel DP, Launer LJ, van Meurs J, Nalls MA,
Rivadeneira F, Shuldiner AR, Singleton A, Soranzo N, Tanaka T, Visser JA, Weedon MN,
Wilson SG, Zhuang V, Streeten EA, Harris TB, Murray A, Spector TD, Demerath EW,
Uitterlinden AG, Murabito JM (2009) Meta-analysis of genome-wide association data identi-
ﬁes two loci inﬂuencing age at menarche. Nat Genet 41:648–650
Pinilla L, Aguilar E, Dieguez C, Millar RP, Tena-Sempere M (2012) Kisspeptins and reproduction:
physiological roles and regulatory mechanisms. Physiol Rev 92:1235–1316
Plant TM, Witchel SF (2006) Puberty in nonhuman primates and humans. In: Neill JD
(ed) The physiology of reproduction, 3rd edn. Academic/Elsevier, San Diego, pp 2177–2230
Poling MC, Kim J, Dhamija S, Kauffman AS (2012) Development, sex steroid regulation, and
phenotypic characterization of RFamide-related peptide (Rfrp) gene expression and RFamide
receptors in the mouse hypothalamus. Endocrinology 153:1827–1840
Prevot V (2002) Glial-neuronal-endothelial interactions are involved in the control of GnRH secre-
tion. J Neuroendocrinol 14:247–255
Prokhortchouk A, Hendrich B, Jorgensen H, Ruzov A, Wilm M, Georgiev G, Bird A,
Prokhortchouk E (2001) The p120 catenin partner Kaiso is a DNA methylation-dependent
transcriptional repressor. Genes Dev 15:1613–1618
116
A. Lomniczi et al.

Ren X, Vincenz C, Kerppola TK (2008) Changes in the distributions and dynamics of polycomb
repressive complexes during embryonic stem cell differentiation. Mol Cell Biol 28:2884–2895
Robertson KD, Ait-Si-Ali S, Yokochi T, Wade PA, Jones PL, Wolffe AP (2000) DNMT1 forms a
complex with Rb, E2F1 and HDAC1 and represses transcription from E2F-responsive pro-
moters. Nat Genet 25:338–342
Roth CL, Mastronardi C, Lomniczi A, Wright H, Cabrera R, Mungenast AE, Heger S, Jung H,
Dubay C, Ojeda SR (2007) Expression of a tumor-related gene network increases in the
mammalian hypothalamus at the time of female puberty. Endocrinology 148:5147–5161
Rountree MR, Bachman KE, Baylin SB (2000) DNMT1 binds HDAC2 and a new co-repressor,
DMAP1, to form a complex at replication foci. Nat Genet 25:269–277
Ruthenburg AJ, Li H, Patel DJ, Allis CD (2007) Multivalent engagement of chromatin modiﬁcations
by linked binding modules. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8:983–994
Sandau US, Mungenast AE, Alderman Z, Sardi SP, Fogel AI, Taylor B, Parent AS, Biederer T,
Corfas G, Ojeda SR (2011a) SynCAM1, a synaptic adhesion molecule, is expressed in
astrocytes and contributes to erbB4 receptor-mediated control of female sexual development.
Endocrinology 152:2364–2376
Sandau US, Mungenast AE, McCarthy J, Biederer T, Corfas G, Ojeda SR (2011b) The synaptic
cell adhesion molecule, SynCAM1, mediates astrocyte-to-astrocyte and astrocyte-to-GnRH
neuron adhesiveness in the mouse hypothalamus. Endocrinology 152:2353–2363
Sangiao-Alvarellos S, Manfredi-Lozano M, Ruiz-Pino F, Navarro V, Sanchez-Garrido MA, Leon S,
Dieguez C, Cordido F, Matagne V, Dissen GA, Ojeda SR, Pinilla L, Tena-Sempere M (2013)
Changes in hypothalamic expression of the Lin28/let-7 system and related microRNAs during
postnatal maturation and after experimental manipulations of puberty. Endocrinology 154:
942–955
Schuettengruber B, Martinez AM, Iovino N, Cavalli G (2011) Trithorax group proteins:
switching genes on and keeping them active. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 12:799–814
Schwartz YB, Pirrotta V (2007) Polycomb silencing mechanisms and the management of
genomic programmes. Nat Rev Genet 8:9–22
Scott CL, Gil J, Hernando E, Teruya-Feldstein J, Narita M, Martinez D, Visakorpi T, Mu D,
Cordon-Cardo C, Peters G, Beach D, Lowe SW (2007) Role of the chromobox protein CBX7 in
lymphomagenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104:5389–5394
Seminara SB, Messager S, Chatzidaki EE, Thresher RR, Acierno JS Jr, Shagoury JK, Bo-Abbas Y,
Kuohung W, Schwinof KM, Hendrick AG, Zahn D, Dixon J, Kaiser UB, Slaugenhaupt SA,
Gusella JF, O’Rahilly S, Carlton MB, Crowley WF Jr, Aparicio SA, Colledge WH (2003)
The GPR54 gene as a regulator of puberty. N Engl J Med 349:1614–1627
Shahab M, Mastronardi C, Seminara SB, Crowley WF, Ojeda SR, Plant TM (2005) Increased
hypothalamic GPR54 signaling: a potential mechanism for initiation of puberty in primates.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102:2129–2134
Shannon M, Ashworth LK, Mucenski ML, Lamerdin JE, Branscomb E, Stubbs L (1996) Compa-
rative analysis of a conserved zinc ﬁnger gene cluster on human chromosome 19q and mouse
chromosome 7. Genomics 33:112–120
Shen S, Sandoval J, Swiss VA, Li J, Dupree J, Franklin RJM, Casaccia-Bonneﬁl P (2008)
Age-dependent epigenetic control of differentiation inhibitors is critical for remyelination
efﬁciency. Nat Neurosci 11:1024–1034
Shrivastava A, Calame K (1994) An analysis of genes regulated by the multi-functional transcrip-
tional regulator Yin Yang-1. Nucleic Acids Res 22:5151–5155
Simon JA, Kingston RE (2009) Mechanisms of polycomb gene silencing: knowns and unknowns.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10:697–708
Smith JT, Popa SM, Clifton DK, Hoffman GE, Steiner RA (2006) Kiss1 neurons in the forebrain as
central processors for generating the preovulatory luteinizing hormone surge. J Neurosci 26:
6687–6694
Gene Networks, Epigenetics and the Control of Female Puberty
117

Subramanian K, Jia D, Kapoor-Vazirani P, Powell DR, Collins RE, Sharma D, Peng J, Cheng X,
Vertino PM (2008) Regulation of estrogen receptor alpha by the SET7 lysine methyl-
transferase. Mol Cell 30:336–347
Sulem P, Gudbjartsson DF, Rafnar T, Holm H, Olafsdottir EJ, Olafsdottir GH, Jonsson T,
Alexandersen P, Feenstra B, Boyd HA, Aben KK, Verbeek AL, Roeleveld N, Jonasdottir A,
Styrkarsdottir U, Steinthorsdottir V, Karason A, Stacey SN, Gudmundsson J, Jakobsdottir M,
Thorleifsson G, Hardarson G, Gulcher J, Kong A, Kiemeney LA, Melbye M, Christiansen C,
Tryggvadottir L, Thorsteinsdottir U, Stefansson K (2009) Genome-wide association study
identiﬁes sequence variants on 6q21 associated with age at menarche. Nat Genet 41:734–738
Sykiotis GP, Pitteloud N, Seminara SB, Kaiser UB, Crowley WF Jr (2010) Deciphering genetic
disease in the genomic era: the model of GnRH deﬁciency. Sci Transl Med 2:32rv2
Tavares L, Dimitrova E, Oxley D, Webster J, Poot R, Demmers J, Bezstarosti K, Taylor S, Ura H,
Koide H, Wutz A, Vidal M, Elderkin S, Brockdorff N (2012) RYBP-PRC1 complexes mediate
H2A ubiquitylation at polycomb target sites independently of PRC2 and H3K27me3.
Cell 148:664–678
Teles MG, Bianco SD, Brito VN, Trarbach EB, Kuohung W, Xu S, Seminara SB, Mendonca BB,
Kaiser UB, Latronico AC (2008) A GPR54-activating mutation in a patient with central
precocious puberty. N Engl J Med 358:709–715
Terasawa E (1999) Hypothalamic control of the onset of puberty. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes
6:44–49
Terasawa E, Fernandez DL (2001) Neurobiological mechanisms of the onset of puberty in
primates. Endocr Rev 22:111–151
Thomas MJ, Seto E (1999) Unlocking the mechanisms of transcription factor YY1: are chromatin
modifying enzymes the key? Gene 236:197–208
Tomikawa J, Uenoyama Y, Ozawa M, Fukanuma T, Takase K, Goto T, Abe H, Ieda N, Minabe S,
Deura C, Inoue N, Sanbo M, Tomita K, Hirabayashi M, Tanaka S, Imamura T, Okamura H,
Maeda K, Tsukamura H (2012) Epigenetic regulation of Kiss1 gene expression mediating
estrogen-positive feedback action in the mouse brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109:
E1294–E1301
Topaloglu AK, Reimann F, Guclu M, Yalin AS, Kotan LD, Porter KM, Serin A, Mungan NO,
Cook JR, Ozbek MN, Imamoglu S, Akalin NS, Yuksel B, O’Rahilly S, Semple RK (2008)
TAC3 and TACR3 mutations in familial hypogonadotropic hypogonadism reveal a key role for
Neurokinin B in the central control of reproduction. Nat Genet 41:354–358
Topaloglu AK, Tello JA, Kotan LD, Ozbek MN, Yilmaz MB, Erdogan S, Gurbuz F, Temiz F,
Millar RP, Yuksel B (2012) Inactivating KISS1 mutation and hypogonadotropic hypo-
gonadism. N Engl J Med 366:629–635
Tsutsui K, Bentley GE, Bedecarrats G, Osugi T, Ubuka T, Kriegsfeld LJ (2010) Gonadotropin-
inhibitory hormone (GnIH) and its control of central and peripheral reproductive function.
Front Neuroendocrinol 31:284–295
Urbanski HF, Ojeda SR (1985) The juvenile-peripubertal transition period in the female rat:
establishment of a diurnal pattern of pulsatile luteinizing hormone secretion. Endocrinology
117:644–649
Urrutia R (2003) KRAB-containing zinc-ﬁnger repressor proteins. Genome Biol 4:231
Viswanathan SR, Daley GQ, Gregory RI (2008) Selective blockade of microRNA processing by
Lin28. Science 320:97–100
Viswanathan SR, Powers JT, Einhorn W, Hoshida Y, Ng TL, Toffanin S, O’Sullivan M, Lu J,
Phillips LA, Lockhart VL, Shah SP, Tanwar PS, Mermel CH, Beroukhim R, Azam M,
Teixeira J, Meyerson M, Hughes TP, Llovet JM, Radich J, Mullighan CG, Golub TR,
Sorensen PH, Daley GQ (2009) Lin28 promotes transformation and is associated with
advanced human malignancies. Nat Genet 41:843–848
Vogel MJ, Guelen L, de Wit E, Peric-Hupkes D, Loden M, Talhout W, Feenstra M, Abbas B,
Classen AK, van Steensel B (2006) Human heterochromatin proteins form large domains
containing KRAB-ZNF genes. Genome Res 16:1493–1504
118
A. Lomniczi et al.

Wakabayashi Y, Nakada T, Murata K, Ohkura S, Mogi K, Navarro VM, Clifton DK, Mori Y,
Tsukamura H, Maeda K, Steiner RA, Okamura H (2010) Neurokinin B and dynorphin A in
kisspeptin neurons of the arcuate nucleus participate in generation of periodic oscillation of
neural activity driving pulsatile gonadotropin-releasing hormone secretion in the goat.
J Neurosci 30:3124–3132
Wang Z, Zang C, Rosenfeld JA, Schones DE, Barski A, Cuddapah S, Cui K, Roh TY, Peng W,
Zhang MQ, Zhao K (2008) Combinatorial patterns of histone acetylations and methylations in
the human genome. Nat Genet 40:897–903
Westberry JM, Prewitt AK, Wilson ME (2008) Epigenetic regulation of the estrogen receptor alpha
promoter in the cerebral cortex following ischemia in male and female rats. Neuroscience 152:
982–989
Wilkinson FH, Park K, Atchison ML (2006) Polycomb recruitment to DNA in vivo by the YY1
REPO domain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:19296–19301
Woo CJ, Kharchenko PV, Daheron L, Park PJ, Kingston RE (2010) A region of the human HOXD
cluster that confers polycomb-group responsiveness. Cell 140:99–110
Wu JI, Lessard J, Olave IA, Qiu Z, Ghosh A, Graef IA, Crabtree GR (2007) Regulation of
dendritic development by neuron-speciﬁc chromatin remodeling complexes. Neuron 56:94–108
Yang JJ, Caligioni CS, Chan YM, Seminara SB (2012) Uncovering novel reproductive defects in
neurokinin B receptor null mice: closing the gap between mice and men. Endocrinology 153:
1498–1508
Young MD, Willson TA, Wakeﬁeld MJ, Trounson E, Hilton DJ, Blewitt ME, Oshlack A,
Majewski IJ (2011) ChIP-seq analysis reveals distinct H3K27me3 proﬁles that correlate with
transcriptional activity. Nucleic Acids Res 39:7415–7427
Gene Networks, Epigenetics and the Control of Female Puberty
119

Neuroendocrine and Molecular Mechanisms
for the Metabolic Control of Puberty: Recent
Developments
Manuel Tena-Sempere
Abstract Because reproduction is an energy-demanding function, acquisition of
reproductive capacity at puberty, especially in the female, is metabolically gated, as
a means of preventing fertility in conditions of energy insufﬁciency. On the other
hand, obesity has been shown to also impact the timing of puberty and may be
among the causes for the earlier trends of pubertal age reported in various countries,
especially in girls but probably also in boys. The metabolic control of puberty is the
result of the concerted action of different peripheral hormones and central trans-
mitters that sense the metabolic state of the organism and transmit this information
to the various elements of the reproductive brain, ultimately affecting GnRH
neurons. Much has been learned in recent decades about the important roles of
different neuropeptide pathways that are essential for the control of pulsatile GnRH
secretion at puberty and its modulation by numerous physiological (and eventually
pathological) signals, including metabolic cues. Remarkably, the essential roles of
kisspeptins, the products of the Kiss1 gene that operate through the receptor, Gpr54
(also named Kiss1R), have been recognized in the last few years. In addition, the
involvement of other central transmitters and molecular mediators, which may
interplay with kisspeptins or operate in a kisspeptin-independent manner, has
been unveiled recently by a combination of genetic, neuroanatomical, physiological
and clinical studies. In this chapter, we will discuss some recent advances in our
understanding of the neuroendocrine and molecular bases of the metabolic control
of the onset of puberty. Special emphasis will be paid to summarizing the putative
roles of the hypothalamic Kiss1 system in mediating the metabolic modulation of
puberty, either via direct or (preferentially) indirect pathways, and to present some
of our studies addressing the potential interplay of kisspeptins with other presum-
able metabolic regulators of puberty. In addition, recent progress in the identiﬁca-
tion of central molecular mediators, such as mTOR and AMPK, that are putatively
involved in the metabolic gating of puberty will be reviewed here. We expect that
M. Tena-Sempere (*)
Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, University of Co´rdoba; CIBER
Fisiopatologı´a de la Obesidad y Nutricio´n, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain
Instituto Maimo´nides de Investigaciones Biome´dicas (IMIBIC), Hospital Universitario
Reina Soﬁa, 14004 Co´rdoba, Spain
e-mail: ﬁ1tesem@uco.es
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
J.-P. Bourguignon et al. (eds.), Brain Crosstalk in Puberty and Adolescence,
Research and Perspectives in Endocrine Interactions 13,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09168-6_9
121

such information will help to better understand the physiological basis of normal
puberty and its eventual perturbations in conditions of metabolic stress, ranging
from anorexia to morbid obesity.
Introduction: Metabolic Regulation of Puberty:
Physiological and Pathophysiological Implications
Reproduction is an energy-demanding function that, despite being essential for the
perpetuation of the species, is dispensable at the individual level. Hence, in extreme
conditions that challenge energy homeostasis, other body functions are prioritized
while the reproductive axis is suppressed, therefore causing alterations in puberty
and/or fertility problems. In this context, it is well known that the onset of puberty is
inﬂuenced by the magnitude of body energy reserves and different nutritional and
metabolic factors (Fernandez-Fernandez et al. 2006; Navarro et al. 2007). Indeed,
critical thresholds of fat reserves are required to attain complete pubertal develop-
ment (Frisch and Revelle 1970), a phenomenon that is especially important in the
female because of the substantial energy demands of pregnancy and lactation
(Casanueva and Dieguez 1999). However, such a tight association likely occurs
in both sexes, and different reports suggest that conditions of metabolic stress can
also perturb puberty onset in males (Tena-Sempere 2008). Furthermore, conditions
of sustained energy excess, such as morbid obesity, are frequently associated with
reproductive alterations, through as yet poorly characterized patho-physiological
mechanisms. All in all, a better understanding of the signals and pathways respon-
sible for the metabolic regulation of puberty will help to deﬁne the basis for
perturbations of puberty in humans, whose incidence seems to be increasing and
may have a deleterious impact in health later in life (Lakshman et al. 2009).
Compelling evidence suggests that a substantial component of the mechanisms
for the metabolic regulation of puberty takes place at central levels, ultimately by
the modulation of the secretory activity of GnRH neurons in the hypothalamus
(Elias and Purohit 2012; Navarro and Tena-Sempere 2012; Xu et al. 2012). The
central mode of action of various metabolic regulators of puberty has been illus-
trated by functional genomics analyses, which showed that neuronal elimination of
the receptors for insulin or leptin impaired puberty onset (Bruning et al. 2000;
Quennell et al. 2009). Likewise, different studies have documented the capacity of
leptin, insulin and ghrelin to modulate GnRH secretion in different ex vivo and
in vitro settings (Cunningham et al. 1999; Tena-Sempere 2007; Pralong 2010).
However, the emerging consensus is that the actions of most of the metabolic
hormones inﬂuencing puberty are not conducted directly on GnRH neurons but
rather take place through intermediary neuronal pathways.
Thus, GnRH neuron-speciﬁc knockout of the leptin receptor did not alter the
timing of puberty in female mice, which displayed preserved fertility as adults
122
M. Tena-Sempere

(Quennell et al. 2009). Similarly, it was recently documented that selective elim-
ination of insulin receptors from GnRH neurons did not cause detectable alterations
in the timing of puberty or adult reproductive function in male and female mice
(Divall et al. 2010). Admittedly, results from congenital knockout mice should be
interpreted with caution because of the possibility of developmental compensatory
mechanisms. Yet, the above ﬁndings, together with data from expression and
functional analyses, strongly suggest that leptin or insulin signaling directly in
GnRH neurons is dispensable for pubertal onset, at least in rodents, therefore
pointing out the existence of indirect pathways that would operate as conduits for
the transmission of key metabolic information to GnRH neurons.
Endocrine Control of Puberty and Its Modulation
by Metabolic Cues: Role of Leptin
Since the critical fat mass hypothesis was initially postulated in the 1970s by Frisch
and co-workers (Frisch and Revelle 1970), the mechanisms whereby metabolic
signals and body energy status inﬂuence puberty onset and later fertility have been
analyzed thoroughly. Research in this area underwent a complete revolution with the
identiﬁcation, in 1994, and the subsequent characterization of the major biological
actions, of the adipose hormone, leptin. Indeed, in the last two decades, leptin has
been unanimously recognized not only as a key element in the hormonal control of
body weight and energy homeostasis but also as an essential neuroendocrine inte-
grator, linking the magnitude of body fat stores to different neuroendocrine axes,
including the reproductive system. While detailed recapitulation of the biological
features of leptin is clearly beyond the scope of this chapter, it is important to stress
that, given that leptin is secreted in proportion to the amount of white adipose tissue
and hence fuel reserves, it operates as a signal for the size of body fat stores to
different body systems; thus it is indispensable for proper adjustment of the func-
tioning of numerous physiological systems to changes in metabolic conditions.
Particularly in the context of the reproductive axis, leptin plays a key role in the
metabolic control of puberty and fertility (Casanueva and Dieguez 1999; Ahima
and Flier 2000; Tena-Sempere 2007). Thus, conditions of leptin insufﬁciency, as
observed in humans with low or null leptin levels as well as in different rodent
models (Fernandez-Fernandez et al. 2006; Tena-Sempere 2007), are often linked to
a delay in or absence of puberty and perturbed fertility (Roa et al. 2010).
Concerning the effects of leptin on puberty onset, there was an initial debate on
whether leptin was a trigger or, instead, a permissive signal for puberty to proceed.
The consensus derived from different observations in humans and model species
indicated that, while threshold leptin levels are required to achieve normal pubertal
development (and to retain reproductive function in adulthood), leptin alone is not
sufﬁcient per se to trigger complete puberty onset. This ﬁnding is compatible with a
predominantly permissive function of leptin on puberty, which has been better
Neuroendocrine and Molecular Mechanisms for the Metabolic Control of Puberty. . .
123

characterized in females. Of note, however, leptin deﬁciency, such as in ob/ob
mice, has been linked to reproductive defects in males also (Elias and Purohit
2012), whereas leptin replacement can rescue low testosterone and gonadotropin
secretion during short-term fasting in men (Chan et al. 2003). Therefore, it is
tenable that leptin plays a key role in the control of puberty in both sexes, albeit
with some differences in terms of relative importance vs. other metabolic signals. In
any event, recent studies have raised some doubts about the actual roles of leptin in
some aspects of the metabolic control of the gonadotropic axis, e.g., the rescue of
the hypogonadotropic state following the termination of short-term food depriva-
tion can apparently take place in the absence of detectable changes of circulating
leptin levels in rodents and sheep (Szymanski et al. 2007; True et al. 2011).
Nevertheless, to our knowledge, no study has challenged the consensus view that
proper leptin levels are mandatory for puberty to proceed.
Neuroendocrine Control of Puberty and Its Metabolic
Modulation: Role of Kisspeptins
Because of the predominant, if not exclusive, indirect mode of action of metabolic
signals in the regulation of GnRH neurons, much attention have been devoted to
elucidating the mechanisms whereby different hormones, including leptin, regulate
GnRH neurosecretion. Admittedly, different factors are likely to operate via dif-
ferent routes and mechanisms. For the sake of concision, much of the discussion
below will focus on the putative pathways whereby leptin, as the key factor for the
integral control of energy balance and puberty, transmits its regulatory effects to the
elements of the reproductive brain, and how neuronal pathways using kisspeptins as
transmitters may participate in this function.
The identiﬁcation of kisspeptins as gatekeepers of puberty and fertility, back in
2003, was a major breakthrough that has revolutionized our understanding of the
neuroendocrine mechanisms that control the reproductive axis. A recapitulation of
the major features of kisspeptins, the product of the Kiss1 gene that operate via the
surface receptor, Gpr54 (also termed Kiss1R), is clearly beyond the aims of this
chapter; recent extensive reviews of this topic can be found elsewhere (Pinilla
et al. 2012). In any event, as a means of introduction to the later contents of this
review, some brief account of the major features of kisspeptins as major regulators
of puberty and its modulation by metabolic signals is provided below.
The initial observation that patients or mice with null mutations in Gpr54 or
Kiss1 genes do not undergo puberty already suggested a prominent, indispensable
role of kisspeptin signaling in the control of puberty. This function has now been
substantiated by a wealth of experimental data indicating that, during puberty, the
hypothalamic Kiss1 system undergoes an extensive and complex activational
program that seems to be essential for proper pubertal timing (Roa and Tena-
Sempere 2010; Tena-Sempere 2010). Key aspects of such developmental activation
124
M. Tena-Sempere

during pubertal maturation are (1) a rise in the hypothalamic expression of the Kiss1
gene and kisspeptin content in key hypothalamic areas; (2) an increase in the
sensitivity to the stimulatory effects of kisspeptin in terms of GnRH/LH responses;
(3) an increase in the number of GnRH neurons expressing Gpr54, as well as in
Gpr54 signaling efﬁciency; and (4) a rise in the number of kisspeptin neurons and of
their projections/appositions to GnRH neurons (Sanchez-Garrido and Tena-
Sempere 2013).
In good agreement with the above evidence, pharmacological analyses demon-
strated that repeated administration of kisspeptins was sufﬁcient to advance the
occurrence of phenotypic or hormonal indices of puberty in rodents and monkeys,
whereas blockade of Gpr54 by means of a speciﬁc kisspeptin antagonist caused an
overt delay in puberty onset in female rats (Pineda et al. 2010). Admittedly,
however, recent data have suggested that, under some circumstances, kisspeptin
signaling might be dispensable for puberty onset in rodents. It must be stressed,
however, that the latter experimental data involved the extensive (albeit probably
not complete) congenital ablation of Kiss1 neurons, a condition that is likely to
bring about important developmental compensation (Mayer and Boehm 2011). In
fact, when similar ablation approaches were applied to early juvenile mice, puberty
was overtly altered following selective elimination of Kiss1 cells, conﬁrming that
puberty does indeed require the activational contribution of preserved kisspeptin
signaling to proceed normally.
Because of their paramount importance in the control of the reproductive axis in
general, and of puberty in particular, the possibility that Kiss1 neurons may
participate in the metabolic control of puberty has received quite some attention
in recent years. Expression and functional data do suggest that Kiss1 neurons are
inﬂuenced by metabolic cues, a contention that has been mainly documented in
conditions of severe negative energy balance, such as acute fasting, chronic
subnutrition, uncontrolled diabetes and inﬂammatory challenge (Castellano
et al. 2005, 2006, 2010; Roa et al. 2009). Furthermore, in those conditions,
replacement with pharmacological doses of kisspeptins was sufﬁcient to rescue
many of the reproductive deﬁcits associated with energy insufﬁciency. Altogether,
these data indirectly support the view that Kiss1 neurons are key sensors of the
metabolic state of the organisms and play a key role in transmitting this informa-
tion, ultimately, to GnRH neurons (Navarro and Tena-Sempere 2012). These
observations also raised the obvious question of which metabolic signals are
responsible for such control of Kiss 1 neurons; due to its essential roles in the
metabolic control of reproduction, leptin was considered to be a tenable candidate
(Sanchez-Garrido and Tena-Sempere 2013).
The possibility that leptin might operate as a regulator of Kiss1 neurons was
initially supported by reports showing the expression of the mRNA encoding the
functional leptin receptor in Kiss1 neurons of the arcuate nucleus (ARC) in the
mouse and sheep (Smith et al. 2006; Backholer et al. 2010); however, only a subset
of Kiss1 neurons, whose abundance varied from <10 % to ~40 depending on the
studies, apparently expressed leptin receptors (LepR) in the mouse (Cravo
et al. 2011). In addition, conditions of defective leptin levels are linked to blunted
Neuroendocrine and Molecular Mechanisms for the Metabolic Control of Puberty. . .
125

Kiss1 mRNA expression, especially in the ARC (Smith et al. 2006; Quennell
et al. 2011); reduced numbers of kisspeptin neurons in the rostral hypothalamic
area have been also reported in situations of hypoleptinemia (Quennell et al. 2011).
In turn, leptin administration caused an increase in hypothalamic Kiss1 gene
expression in rodent models of leptin deﬁciency (Castellano et al. 2006; Smith
et al. 2006; Luque et al. 2007; Backholer et al. 2010). In line with these observa-
tions, leptin enhanced Kiss1 mRNA expression in mouse and human neuronal cell
lines (Luque et al. 2007; Morelli et al. 2008), and leptin injections in a sheep model
of low leptin levels and central hypogonadism due to leanness signiﬁcantly
increased hypothalamic Kiss1 mRNA expression (Backholer et al. 2010). Further-
more, it has recently been shown that leptin can directly activate ARC Kiss1
neurons in the guinea pig (Qiu et al. 2011). Altogether, these data are fully
compatible with (and highly suggestive of) a direct mode of action of leptin in
the control of Kiss1 neurons.
Notwithstanding the above evidence, recent data have questioned the hypothesis
that direct actions of leptin on Kiss1 neurons are indispensable for its role as a
metabolic regulator of puberty and fertility. Thus, congenital elimination of leptin
receptors selectively from Kiss1 cells apparently did not cause alterations in the
timing of puberty or adult fertility (Donato et al. 2011). Caution should be exercised
when interpreting these data, however, as congenital elimination of leptin receptors
from Kiss1 cells might have caused compensatory changes that could mitigate the
phenotypic impact of selective elimination of leptin signalling. Yet, additional
studies in sheep and rodents did support the possibility of a predominantly indirect
mode of action of leptin on Kiss1 neurons. These studies did not ﬁnd evidence of
the presence of functional leptin receptors in Kiss1 (or GnRH) neurons, except for a
small population of Kiss1 cells in the ARC (Louis et al. 2011). Intriguingly,
however, that work identiﬁed a previously unknown neuronal population
expressing leptin receptor, located in the ARC and periventricular areas of the
rostral hypothalamus (globally termed RP3V); they were found in close proximity
to Kiss1 neurons and might contribute to conveying the biological effects of leptin
to Kiss1 (and GnRH) neurons (Louis et al. 2011).
All in all, the latter results suggest that a signiﬁcant fraction of the effects of
leptin on the hypothalamic Kiss1 system is conducted indirectly and transmitted via
as yet uncharacterized pathways (Louis et al. 2011). These may involve circuits
originating from (or projecting to) the ventral pre-mammillary nucleus (PMV), as
recent evidence has conclusively documented the indispensable role of PMV
pathways in conveying the permissive effects of leptin on puberty onset (Donato
et al. 2009, 2011). In fact, recent data have demonstrated alterations of the Kiss1
system following PMV lesions (Donato et al. 2013), suggesting that leptin-sensitive
pathways originating from the PMV may impinge on Kiss1 circuits for conveying
at least part of the effects of leptin in terms of metabolic gating of puberty. To add
further complexity to this phenomenon, it has been recently suggested that leptin
can carry out direct effects on Kiss1 neurons but only after pubertal maturation
(Cravo et al. 2013); the physiological relevance of this phenomenon in the control
of puberty and later fertility awaits further investigation.
126
M. Tena-Sempere

Neuropeptide Partners of Kisspeptins and Metabolic
Regulation of Puberty: The Role of Neurokinin B
In the last few years, it has been recognized that a group of Kiss1 neurons in the
ARC co-express at least two other relevant transmitters involved in the control of
the gonadotropic axis, namely, neurokinin B (NKB) and dynorphin (Dyn; Lehman
et al. 2010; Pinilla et al. 2012). This subpopulation of ARC Kiss1 neurons has been
termed KNDy to recognize such neuropeptide diversity (Lehman et al. 2010). It
must be stressed, however, that the percentage of ARC Kiss1 neurons that
co-express NKB and/or Dyn seems to vary depending on the species and sex
(Hrabovszky et al. 2012); hence, Kiss1-only (and NKB-only) neurons, which are
not KNDy neurons, likely exist in the ARC. Nonetheless, the importance of NKB
and Dyn as central regulators of the reproductive axis is illustrated not only by their
conserved co-expression with kisspeptins in discrete neuronal populations of the
ARC in several species, including rodents and primates, but also by the fact that
inactivating mutations of the genes encoding NKB (TAC3) or its receptor, NK3R
(TAC3R), in humans are associated with a state of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
(Topaloglu et al. 2009; Gianetti et al. 2010; Young et al. 2010), similar to that
caused by defects in kisspeptin signaling.
In addition, compelling pharmacological data support the roles of NKB and Dyn
in the central regulation of gonadotropin secretion. Thus, stimulatory actions of the
NKB agonist, senktide, on luteinizing hormone (LH) secretion have been reported
in different species (Billings et al. 2010; Ramaswamy et al. 2010; Navarro
et al. 2011; Garcia-Galiano et al. 2012). In turn, different studies have documented
the effects of Dyn as an inhibitor of GnRH/gonadotropin secretion. These func-
tional data, together with the neuroanatomical features of KNDy neurons, which are
profusely interconnected by numerous collaterals, provided the grounds for the
hypothesis that this neuronal population in the ARC is essential for the generation
of GnRH pulses, due to its capacity to produce a very potent stimulatory output
signal (kisspeptin) to GnRH neurons. The release of kisspeptins, in turn, would be
subjected to the reciprocal control of NKB and Dyn, acting as predominantly
stimulatory and inhibitory modulators, respectively (Navarro et al. 2009; Navarro
and Tena-Sempere 2012). While this model has been widely accepted and explains
the integration of kisspeptins, NKB and Dyn in the dynamic regulation of GnRH/
gonadotropin secretion, important functional aspects of the KNDy neuronal net-
work are yet to be fully elucidated, and species differences in the physiological
relevance of these neurons in the control of GnRH neurons may exist.
Regarding the metabolic modulation of the reproductive axis, recent studies in
models of metabolic challenge, conducted mostly in pubertal rodents, have
documented that, just as previously demonstrated for Kiss1, the NKB system is
also inﬂuenced by conditions of negative energy balance. Thus, complete food
deprivation, as a means to induce a profound state of energy deﬁcit, caused a
concomitant suppression of Kiss1 mRNA levels, in the ARC and RP3V, and of
the hypothalamic expression of the genes encoding NKB and its receptor in
Neuroendocrine and Molecular Mechanisms for the Metabolic Control of Puberty. . .
127

pubertal female rats (Navarro et al. 2012). Of note, in another model of metabolic
stress, such as chronic under-nutrition during the pubertal transition, the delay of
puberty caused by this state of negative energy balance was partially reversed by
chronic injections of the NKB agonist, senktide. Altogether, these ﬁndings support
the concept that NKB likely cooperates with kisspeptins in the metabolic control of
puberty (Navarro et al. 2012). This possibility is fully compatible with the proposed
KNDy paradigm, in which NKB would participate in the central regulation of
GnRH secretion by increasing the release of kisspeptins (Navarro and Tena-
Sempere 2012). Also in keeping with a putative role for NKB signaling in the
metabolic regulation of puberty, it was recently shown that high fat diet adminis-
tered to immature female rats from weaning onwards caused a signiﬁcant advance-
ment of puberty onset and enhanced the expression not only of Kiss1 but also of the
gene encoding NKB in the ARC (Feng Li et al. 2012). To our knowledge, the
physiological roles of the inhibitory signal, Dyn, in the metabolic control of puberty
and fertility remain largely unexplored.
Other Neuropeptide Pathways for the Metabolic Control
of Puberty: The Case of Nesfatin-1
In addition to kisspeptins and NKB, (many) other central transmitters are involved
in the joint control of energy homeostasis, metabolism and the reproductive axis.
One prototypical example is nesfatin-1, one of the peptide products encoded by the
gene Nucleobinding-2 (Nucb2). Nesfatin-1 has been shown to act as an anorectic
signal in the hypothalamus (Oh et al. 2006; Garcia-Galiano et al. 2010a). In fact,
due to its function as a satiety signal in various species and its expression in
hypothalamic areas with key roles in the control of food intake, such as the ARC,
the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) and the LHA, nesfatin-1 has been proposed to
play a role in the regulation of energy homeostasis (Garcia-Galiano et al. 2010a). In
addition, nesfatin-1 has been recently shown to participate in the control of female
puberty in the rat and, therefore, might participate in the central networks respon-
sible for the metabolic control of pubertal maturation.
The experimental evidence supporting such a role in puberty derives from
expression and functional studies. Thus, hypothalamic NUCB2/nesfatin-1 expres-
sion has been shown to increase during pubertal maturation. In contrast, conditions
of negative energy balance that suppress or delay puberty onset, e.g., chronic
sub-nutrition or short-term fasting, are associated with decreased hypothalamic
NUCB2
mRNA
and
protein
levels
in
pubertal
females
(Garcia-Galiano
et al. 2010b). In addition, central injections of low (pmol) doses of nesfatin-1
have been reported to induce signiﬁcant LH secretory responses in peripubertal
female rats (Garcia-Galiano et al. 2010b), whereas suppression of the endogenous
tone of nesfatin-1 in the hypothalamus during the pubertal transition, by means of
128
M. Tena-Sempere

the central infusion of an antisense morfolino oligonucleotide (as-MON) against
NUCB2, delayed the timing of puberty and lowered LH levels and ovarian weights.
Interestingly, studies in adult female rats did not detect gonadotropin responses
to central injection of nesfatin-1 at doses that were effective in peripubertal rats;
neither did infusion of as-MON against NUCB2 affect spontaneous pre-ovulatory
surges of LH and FSH (Garcia-Galiano et al. 2010b). However, recent preliminary
data indicate that, at higher doses, nesfatin-1 can stimulate LH secretion in adult
male rats (Tadross et al. 2010), as well as in adult mice (Navarro et al., unpublished
observations). Altogether, these features strongly suggest that nesfatin-1 might
operate as a putative effector for the metabolic regulation of puberty and gonado-
tropic function (Garcia-Galiano et al. 2010a). In keeping with this view, prelimi-
nary data from my laboratory suggest that blockade of endogenous nesfatin-1 tone,
by the use of as-MON against NUCB2, induces a suppression of Kiss1 gene
expression in the ARC and RP3V in pubertal female rats, whereas absence of
kisspeptin signaling (i.e., in Kiss1r null mice) blocks LH responses to nesfatin-1
(Navarro et al., unpublished observations). The latter ﬁnding suggests a putative
interplay between nesfatin-1 and kisspeptin pathways in the central control of the
HPG axis, which may be relevant for its modulation by metabolic cues.
Molecular Mediators for the Metabolic Control of Puberty
Efforts have also been devoted recently to identifying putative molecular mediators
that, acting at central levels, may participate in the metabolic control of puberty.
Admittedly, progress in the ﬁeld is still limited and is mostly restricted to the
characterization of potential mediators of leptin actions. Just as illustrative exam-
ples, the cases of the energy sensors, mTOR and AMPK, will be brieﬂy summarized
below.
The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and the downstream elements of
its signaling cascade are known to play a key role as a metabolic gauge of the cell,
linking external (nutrient and hormonal) signals and basic cellular processes
(Schmelzle and Hall 2000; Martin and Hall 2005; Wullschleger et al. 2006; Chiang
and Abraham 2007; Tsang et al. 2007). In addition, mTOR signaling in the
hypothalamus, and speciﬁcally the rapamycin-sensitive mTORC1 pathway, has
been shown to participate in the control of energy homeostasis at the whole body
level (Cota et al. 2006; Woods et al. 2008). Thus, leptin has been reported to
modulate the mTOR pathway in the ARC, as an effector mechanism for its
anorectic actions (Cota et al. 2006). Admittedly, the roles of hypothalamic mTOR
signaling in the control of energy balance are more complex and involve nuclei
other than the ARC (Villanueva et al. 2009), where mTOR mediates the metabolic
effects of other key hormones, such as ghrelin (Martins et al. 2012). In fact,
nutritional and metabolic signals seem to modulate the mTORC1 pathway within
the medial basal hypothalamus in a nucleus- and cell-speciﬁc manner, with
Neuroendocrine and Molecular Mechanisms for the Metabolic Control of Puberty. . .
129

different (if not opposite) responses depending on the prevailing metabolic status
(Villanueva et al. 2009).
Besides its role in energy homeostasis and the transduction of metabolic effects
of key factors, such as leptin, hypothalamic mTORC1 signaling seems to play an
important role in the control of puberty onset and in transmitting the positive/
permissive effects of leptin on the reproductive axis (Roa et al. 2009). Thus,
sustained blockade of central mTOR signaling, by means of repeated intracerebral
administration of rapamycin, delayed the timing of puberty in female rats, as
monitored by vaginal opening, reduced ovarian and uterus weights, perturbed
ovarian follicular development and suppressed ovulation. Moreover, central inhi-
bition of mTOR was sufﬁcient to totally block the permissive effects of leptin on
puberty onset in female rats subjected to chronic subnutrition, as a model of low
endogenous leptin levels. In fact, while leptin was able to rescue the ovulatory
failure induced by subnutrition in pubertal females, this effect was completely
prevented by simultaneous administration of the mTOR inhibitor, rapamycin, into
the brain. These observations strongly suggest a positive role for mTOR in the
central control of puberty, which seems to be indispensable for leptin effects on
brain centers driving the onset of puberty. Indeed, activation of central mTOR
signaling, by means of central administration of L-leucine, stimulated LH secretory
responses and partially rescued the state of low gonadotropin levels caused by
chronic subnutrition in pubertal female rats (Roa et al. 2009). The available
evidence strongly suggests that the positive action of mTOR on the HPG axis
stems, at least partially, from its capacity to activate Kiss1 neurons, since persistent
inhibition of central mTOR signaling signiﬁcantly reduced Kiss1 mRNA expres-
sion levels in the ARC and, to a lesser extent, the RP3V. The molecular and
neuroanatomical basis for this putative leptin-mTOR-Kiss1 pathway is yet to be
fully clariﬁed, and it remains possible that as yet unknown mediators might be
involved in linking mTOR signaling and Kiss1 expression.
Another brain fuel-sensing mechanism that might participate in the central
control of the HPG axis is the one involving the AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK), a member of the metabolite-sensing protein kinase family (Naimi
et al. 2009; Canto and Auwerx 2009). AMPK detects changes in the AMP/ATP
ratio and hence in the cellular metabolic state. In conditions of energy deﬁcit, when
ATP is consumed and excess AMP accumulates in the cell, AMPK becomes
activated,
thus
causing
the
phosphorylation
and
inactivation
of
diverse
ATP-consuming metabolic cascades. As described for the mTOR pathway, brain
AMPK signaling may be a pivotal regulator of energy balance and food intake.
Activation of AMPK stimulates appetite (Kahn et al. 2005; Cota et al. 2007), and
leptin has been shown to suppress hypothalamic AMPK activity, whereas ghrelin
stimulates it (Andersson et al. 2004). Interestingly, AMPK and mTOR are mutually
regulated, e.g., AMPK inactivates mTOR in different cell systems (Inoki
et al. 2003; Tsang et al. 2007), and hence these two metabolic cell sensors have
been proposed to reciprocally cooperate in the central control of energy homeosta-
sis (Cota et al. 2006).
130
M. Tena-Sempere

Whether the above interaction applies also to the metabolic regulation of the
HPG axis is an appealing possibility but yet to be experimentally proven. None-
theless, indirect evidence would support this possibility, as AMPK activation has
been reported to suppress GnRH secretion in murine GT1-7 cells in vitro and to
perturb the estrous cyclicity, as a proxy marker of ovarian cyclic function, in female
rats (Coyral-Castel et al. 2008; Wen et al. 2008). In good agreement, preliminary
data from studies conducted in our group, targeting speciﬁcally the roles of central
AMPK in puberty, strongly suggest that activation of central AMPK signaling
delays puberty onset and partially inhibits hypothalamic Kiss1 expression in the
ARC (Roa et al., unpublished observations). Altogether, these observations are
compatible with a predominant inhibitory role for AMPK pathways in the central
control of reproduction, which is in line with its function as a sensor of energy
insufﬁciency and functional antagonist of mTOR.
Concluding Remarks
Puberty, a major life-changing developmental event with a major impact on growth,
reproduction and metabolic health later in life, has been the subject of active
clinical and experimental investigation over the last decades. Numerous studies
have helped to unveil some of the neuro-hormonal and molecular bases of the close
connection between metabolism and body energy stores on the one hand and
pubertal maturation on the other. Indeed, in recent years, we have learned much
about the reciprocal metabolic and pubertal actions of several peripheral hormones
and central transmitters, and we have begun to elucidate the pathways whereby
these reciprocal connections take place. In this chapter, we aimed to provide a brief
recapitulation of recent developments in the ﬁeld, with special attention to the
identiﬁcation and functional characterization of novel neuropeptides and molecular
effectors for the metabolic regulation of puberty. While this review does not include
all of the major recent ﬁndings in this area, we believe that the information
summarized here will provide a ﬂavor of some of the most active research lines
in this area and will endow the reader with a deeper understanding of the central
mechanisms that link puberty to the metabolic state of the organism, not only in
health but also in disease conditions ranging from anorexia to early-onset morbid
obesity, whose prevalence is steadily increasing worldwide.
References
Ahima RS, Flier JS (2000) Leptin. Annu Rev Physiol 62:413–437
Andersson U, Filipsson K, Abbott CR, Woods A, Smith K, Bloom SR, Carling D, Small CJ (2004)
AMP-activated protein kinase plays a role in the control of food intake. J Biol Chem
279:12005–12008
Neuroendocrine and Molecular Mechanisms for the Metabolic Control of Puberty. . .
131

Backholer K, Smith JT, Rao A, Pereira A, Iqbal J, Ogawa S, Li Q, Clarke IJ (2010) Kisspeptin cells
in the ewe brain respond to leptin and communicate with neuropeptide Y and proopiomela-
nocortin cells. Endocrinology 151:2233–2243
Billings HJ, Connors JM, Altman SN, Hileman SM, Holaskova I, Lehman MN, McManus CJ,
Nestor CC, Jacobs BH, Goodman RL (2010) Neurokinin B acts via the neurokinin-3 receptor
in the retrochiasmatic area to stimulate luteinizing hormone secretion in sheep. Endocrinology
151:3836–3846
Bruning JC, Gautam D, Burks DJ, Gillette J, Schubert M, Orban PC, Klein R, Krone W, Muller-
Wieland D, Kahn CR (2000) Role of brain insulin receptor in control of body weight and
reproduction. Science 289:2122–2125
Canto C, Auwerx J (2009) PGC-1alpha, SIRT1 and AMPK, an energy sensing network that
controls energy expenditure. Curr Opin Lipidol 20:98–105
Casanueva FF, Dieguez C (1999) Neuroendocrine regulation and actions of leptin. Front
Neuroendocrinol 20:317–363
Castellano JM, Navarro VM, Fernandez-Fernandez R, Nogueiras R, Tovar S, Roa J, Vazquez MJ,
Vigo E, Casanueva FF, Aguilar E, Pinilla L, Dieguez C, Tena-Sempere M (2005) Changes in
hypothalamic KiSS-1 system and restoration of pubertal activation of the reproductive axis by
kisspeptin in undernutrition. Endocrinology 146:3917–3925
Castellano JM, Navarro VM, Fernandez-Fernandez R, Roa J, Vigo E, Pineda R, Dieguez C,
Aguilar E, Pinilla L, Tena-Sempere M (2006) Expression of hypothalamic KiSS-1 system
and rescue of defective gonadotropic responses by kisspeptin in streptozotocin-induced dia-
betic male rats. Diabetes 55:2602–2610
Castellano JM, Bentsen AH, Romero M, Pineda R, Ruiz-Pino F, Garcia-Galiano D, Sanchez-
Garrido MA, Pinilla L, Mikkelsen JD, Tena-Sempere M (2010) Acute inﬂammation reduces
kisspeptin immunoreactivity at the arcuate nucleus and decreases responsiveness to kisspeptin
independently of its anorectic effects. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 299:E54–E61
Chan JL, Heist K, DePaoli AM, Veldhuis JD, Mantzoros CS (2003) The role of falling leptin levels
in the neuroendocrine and metabolic adaptation to short-term starvation in healthy men. J Clin
Invest 111:1409–1421
Chiang GG, Abraham RT (2007) Targeting the mTOR signaling network in cancer. Trends Mol
Med 13:433–442
Cota D, Proulx K, Smith KA, Kozma SC, Thomas G, Woods SC, Seeley RJ (2006) Hypothalamic
mTOR signaling regulates food intake. Science 312:927–930
Cota D, Proulx K, Seeley RJ (2007) The role of CNS fuel sensing in energy and glucose regulation.
Gastroenterology 132:2158–2168
Coyral-Castel S, Tosca L, Ferreira G, Jeanpierre E, Rame C, Lomet D, Caraty A, Monget P,
Chabrolle C, Dupont J (2008) The effect of AMP-activated kinase activation on
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone secretion in GT1-7 cells and its potential role in hypotha-
lamic regulation of the oestrous cyclicity in rats. J Neuroendocrinol 20:335–346
Cravo RM, Margatho LO, Osborne-Lawrence S, Donato J Jr, Atkin S, Bookout AL, Rovinsky S,
Frazao R, Lee CE, Gautron L, Zigman JM, Elias CF (2011) Characterization of Kiss1 neurons
using transgenic mouse models. Neuroscience 173:37–56
Cravo RM, Frazao R, Perello M, Osborne-Lawrence S, Williams KW, Zigman JM, Vianna C,
Elias CF (2013) Leptin signaling in kiss1 neurons arises after pubertal development. PLoS One
8:e58698
Cunningham MJ, Clifton DK, Steiner RA (1999) Leptin’s actions on the reproductive axis:
perspectives and mechanisms. Biol Reprod 60:216–222
Divall SA, Williams TR, Carver SE, Koch L, Bruning JC, Kahn CR, Wondisford F, Radovick S,
Wolfe A (2010) Divergent roles of growth factors in the GnRH regulation of puberty in mice. J
Clin Invest 120:2900–2909
Donato J Jr, Silva RJ, Sita LV, Lee S, Lee C, Lacchini S, Bittencourt JC, Franci CR, Canteras NS,
Elias CF (2009) The ventral premammillary nucleus links fasting-induced changes in leptin
levels and coordinated luteinizing hormone secretion. J Neurosci 29:5240–5250
132
M. Tena-Sempere

Donato J Jr, Cravo RM, Frazao R, Gautron L, Scott MM, Lachey J, Castro IA, Margatho LO,
Lee S, Lee C, Richardson JA, Friedman J, Chua S Jr, Coppari R, Zigman JM, Elmquist JK,
Elias CF (2011) Leptin’s effect on puberty in mice is relayed by the ventral premammillary
nucleus and does not require signaling in Kiss1 neurons. J Clin Invest 121:355–368
Donato J Jr, Lee C, Ratra D, Franci CR, Canteras NS, Elias CF (2013) Lesions of the ventral
premammillary nucleus disrupt the dynamic changes in Kiss1 and GnRH expression charac-
teristic of the proestrus-estrus transition. Neuroscience 241:67–79
Elias CF, Purohit D (2012) Leptin signaling and circuits in puberty and fertility. Cell Mol Life Sci
70:841–862
Feng Li X, Lin YS, Kinsey-Jones JS, O’Byrne KT (2012) High-fat diet increases LH pulse
frequency and Kisspeptin-Neurokinin B expression in puberty-advanced female rats. Endocri-
nology 153:4422–4431
Fernandez-Fernandez R, Martini AC, Navarro VM, Castellano JM, Dieguez C, Aguilar E,
Pinilla L, Tena-Sempere M (2006) Novel signals for the integration of energy balance and
reproduction. Mol Cell Endocrinol 254–255:127–132
Frisch E, Revelle R (1970) Height and weight at menarche and a hypothesis of critical body
weights and adolescent events. Science 169:397–399
Garcia-Galiano D, Navarro VM, Gaytan F, Tena-Sempere M (2010a) Expanding roles of NUCB2/
nesfatin-1 in neuroendocrine regulation. J Mol Endocrinol 45:281–290
Garcia-Galiano D, Navarro VM, Roa J, Ruiz-Pino F, Sanchez-Garrido MA, Pineda R, Castellano
JM, Romero M, Aguilar E, Gaytan F, Dieguez C, Pinilla L, Tena-Sempere M (2010b) The
anorexigenic neuropeptide, nesfatin-1, is indispensable for normal puberty onset in the female
rat. J Neurosci 30:7783–7792
Garcia-Galiano D, van Ingen Schenau D, Leon S, Krajnc-Franken MA, Manfredi-Lozano M,
Romero-Ruiz A, Navarro VM, Gaytan F, van Noort PI, Pinilla L, Blomenrohr M, Tena-
Sempere M (2012) Kisspeptin signaling is indispensable for neurokinin B, but not glutamate,
stimulation of gonadotropin secretion in mice. Endocrinology 153:316–328
Gianetti E et al (2010) TAC3/TACR3 mutations reveal preferential activation of gonadotropin-
releasing hormone release by neurokinin B in neonatal life followed by reversal in adulthood. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 95:2857–2867
Hrabovszky E, Sipos MT, Molnar CS, CioﬁP, Borsay BA, Gergely P, Herczeg L, Bloom SR,
Ghatei MA, Dhillo WS, Liposits Z (2012) Low degree of overlap between kisspeptin,
neurokinin B, and dynorphin immunoreactivities in the infundibular nucleus of young male
human subjects challenges the KNDy neuron concept. Endocrinology 153:4978–4989
Inoki K, Zhu T, Guan KL (2003) TSC2 mediates cellular energy response to control cell growth
and survival. Cell 115:577–590
Kahn BB, Alquier T, Carling D, Hardie DG (2005) AMP-activated protein kinase: ancient energy
gauge provides clues to modern understanding of metabolism. Cell Metab 1:15–25
Lakshman R, Forouhi NG, Sharp SJ, Luben R, Bingham SA, Khaw KT, Wareham NJ, Ong KK
(2009) Early age at menarche associated with cardiovascular disease and mortality. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 94:4953–4960
Lehman MN, Coolen LM, Goodman RL (2010) Minireview: kisspeptin/neurokinin B/dynorphin
(KNDy) cells of the arcuate nucleus: a central node in the control of gonadotropin-releasing
hormone secretion. Endocrinology 151:3479–3489
Louis GW, Greenwald-Yarnell M, Phillips R, Coolen LM, Lehman MN, Myers MG Jr (2011)
Molecular mapping of the neural pathways linking leptin to the neuroendocrine reproductive
axis. Endocrinology 152:2302–2310
Luque RM, Kineman RD, Tena-Sempere M (2007) Regulation of hypothalamic expression of
KiSS-1 and GPR54 genes by metabolic factors: analyses using mouse models and a cell line.
Endocrinology 148:4601–4611
Martin DE, Hall MN (2005) The expanding TOR signaling network. Curr Opin Cell Biol 17:158–
166
Neuroendocrine and Molecular Mechanisms for the Metabolic Control of Puberty. . .
133

Martins L, Fernandez-Mallo D, Novelle MG, Vazquez MJ, Tena-Sempere M, Nogueiras R,
Lopez M, Dieguez C (2012) Hypothalamic mTOR signaling mediates the orexigenic action
of ghrelin. PLoS One 7:e46923
Mayer C, Boehm U (2011) Female reproductive maturation in the absence of kisspeptin/GPR54
signaling. Nat Neurosci 14:704–710
Morelli A, Marini M, Mancina R, Luconi M, Vignozzi L, Fibbi B, Filippi S, Pezzatini A, Forti G,
Vannelli GB, Maggi M (2008) Sex steroids and leptin regulate the “ﬁrst Kiss” (KiSS 1/G-
protein-coupled receptor 54 system) in human gonadotropin-releasing-hormone-secreting
neuroblasts. J Sex Med 5:1097–1113
Naimi M, Arous C, Van Obberghen E (2009) Energetic cell sensors: a key to metabolic homeo-
stasis. Trends Endocrinol Metab 21:75–82
Navarro VM, Tena-Sempere M (2012) Neuroendocrine control by kisspeptins: role in metabolic
regulation of fertility. Nat Rev Endocrinol 8:40–53
Navarro VM, Castellano JM, Garcia-Galiano D, Tena-Sempere M (2007) Neuroendocrine factors
in the initiation of puberty: the emergent role of kisspeptin. Rev Endocr Metab Disord 8:11–20
Navarro VM, Gottsch ML, Chavkin C, Okamura H, Clifton DK, Steiner RA (2009) Regulation of
gonadotropin-releasing hormone secretion by kisspeptin/dynorphin/neurokinin B neurons in
the arcuate nucleus of the mouse. J Neurosci 29:11859–11866
Navarro VM, Castellano JM, McConkey SM, Pineda R, Ruiz-Pino F, Pinilla L, Clifton DK, Tena-
Sempere M, Steiner RA (2011) Interactions between kisspeptin and neurokinin B in the control
of GnRH secretion in the female rat. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 300:E202–E210
Navarro VM, Ruiz-Pino F, Sanchez-Garrido MA, Garcia-Galiano D, Hobbs SJ, Manfredi-Lozano M,
Leon S, Sangiao-Alvarello S, Castellano JM, Clifton DK, Pinilla L, Steiner RA, Tena-Sempere
M (2012) Role of neurokinin B in the control of female puberty and its modulation by metabolic
status. J Neurosci 32:2388–2397
Oh IS, Shimizu H, Satoh T, Okada S, Adachi S, Inoue K, Eguchi H, Yamamoto M, Imaki T,
Hashimoto K, Tsuchiya T, Monden T, Horiguchi K, Yamada M, Mori M (2006) Identiﬁcation
of nesfatin-1 as a satiety molecule in the hypothalamus. Nature 443:709–712
Pineda R, Garcia-Galiano D, Roseweir A, Romero M, Sanchez-Garrido MA, Ruiz-Pino F,
Morgan K, Pinilla L, Millar RP, Tena-Sempere M (2010) Critical roles of kisspeptins in female
puberty and preovulatory gonadotropin surges as revealed by a novel antagonist. Endocrinol-
ogy 151:722–730
Pinilla L, Aguilar E, Dieguez C, Millar RP, Tena-Sempere M (2012) Kisspeptins and reproduc-
tion: physiological roles and regulatory mechanisms. Physiol Rev 92:1235–1316
Pralong FP (2010) Insulin and NPY pathways and the control of GnRH function and puberty onset.
Mol Cell Endocrinol 324:82–86
Qiu J, Fang Y, Bosch MA, Ronnekleiv OK, Kelly MJ (2011) Guinea pig kisspeptin neurons are
depolarized by leptin via activation of TRPC channels. Endocrinology 152:1503–1514
Quennell JH, Mulligan AC, Tups A, Liu X, Phipps SJ, Kemp CJ, Herbison AE, Grattan DR,
Anderson GM (2009) Leptin indirectly regulates gonadotropin-releasing hormone neuronal
function. Endocrinology 150:2805–2812
Quennell JH, Howell CS, Roa J, Augustine RA, Grattan DR, Anderson GM (2011) Leptin
deﬁciency and diet-induced obesity reduce hypothalamic kisspeptin expression in mice.
Endocrinology 152:1541–1550
Ramaswamy S, Seminara SB, Ali B, CioﬁP, Amin NA, Plant TM (2010) Neurokinin B stimulates
GnRH release in the male monkey (Macaca mulatta) and is colocalized with kisspeptin in the
arcuate nucleus. Endocrinology 151:4494–4503
Roa J, Tena-Sempere M (2010) Energy balance and puberty onset: emerging role of central mTOR
signaling. Trends Endocrinol Metab 21:519–528
Roa J, Garcia-Galiano D, Varela L, Sanchez-Garrido MA, Pineda R, Castellano JM, Ruiz-Pino F,
Romero M, Aguilar E, Lopez M, Gaytan F, Dieguez C, Pinilla L, Tena-Sempere M (2009) The
mammalian target of rapamycin as novel central regulator of puberty onset via modulation of
hypothalamic Kiss1 system. Endocrinology 150:5016–5026
134
M. Tena-Sempere

Roa J, Garcia-Galiano D, Castellano JM, Gaytan F, Pinilla L, Tena-Sempere M (2010) Metabolic
control of puberty onset: new players, new mechanisms. Mol Cell Endocrinol 324:87–94
Sanchez-Garrido MA, Tena-Sempere M (2013) Metabolic control of puberty: roles of leptin and
kisspeptins. Horm Behav 64:187–194
Schmelzle T, Hall MN (2000) TOR, a central controller of cell growth. Cell 103:253–262
Smith JT, Acohido BV, Clifton DK, Steiner RA (2006) KiSS-1 neurones are direct targets for
leptin in the ob/ob mouse. J Neuroendocrinol 18:298–303
Szymanski LA, Schneider JE, Friedman MI, Ji H, Kurose Y, Blache D, Rao A, Dunshea FR,
Clarke IJ (2007) Changes in insulin, glucose and ketone bodies, but not leptin or body fat
content precede restoration of luteinising hormone secretion in ewes. J Neuroendocrinol
19:449–460
Tadross JA, Patterson M, Wynne KJ, Patel S, Suzuki K, Ghatei MA, Bloom SR (2010) Nesfatin
suppresses feeding and stimulates the hypothalamo-pituitary-gonadal axis. In: 14th interna-
tional congress of endocrinology, p S442. Kyoto: Endocrine J.
Tena-Sempere M (2007) Roles of ghrelin and leptin in the control of reproductive function.
Neuroendocrinology 86:229–241
Tena-Sempere M (2008) Ghrelin as a pleotrophic modulator of gonadal function and reproduction.
Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab 4:666–674
Tena-Sempere M (2010) Roles of Kisspeptins in the control of hypothalamic-gonadotropic
function: focus on sexual differentiation and puberty onset. Endocr Dev 17:52–62
Topaloglu AK, Reimann F, Guclu M, Yalin AS, Kotan LD, Porter KM, Serin A, Mungan NO,
Cook JR, Ozbek MN, Imamoglu S, Akalin NS, Yuksel B, O’Rahilly S, Semple RK (2009)
TAC3 and TACR3 mutations in familial hypogonadotropic hypogonadism reveal a key role for
Neurokinin B in the central control of reproduction. Nat Genet 41:354–358
True C, Kirigiti MA, Kievit P, Grove KL, Susan Smith M (2011) Leptin is not the critical signal for
kisspeptin or luteinising hormone restoration during exit from negative energy balance. J
Neuroendocrinol 23:1099–1112
Tsang CK, Qi H, Liu LF, Zheng XF (2007) Targeting mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) for
health and diseases. Drug Discov Today 12:112–124
Villanueva EC, Munzberg H, Cota D, Leshan RL, Kopp K, Ishida-Takahashi R, Jones JC, Fingar
DC, Seeley RJ, Myers MG Jr (2009) Complex regulation of mammalian target of rapamycin
complex 1 in the basomedial hypothalamus by leptin and nutritional status. Endocrinology
150:4541–4551
Wen JP, Lv WS, Yang J, Nie AF, Cheng XB, Yang Y, Ge Y, Li XY, Ning G (2008) Globular
adiponectin inhibits GnRH secretion from GT1-7 hypothalamic GnRH neurons by induction of
hyperpolarization of membrane potential. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 371:756–761
Woods SC, Seeley RJ, Cota D (2008) Regulation of food intake through hypothalamic signaling
networks involving mTOR. Annu Rev Nutr 28:295–311
Wullschleger S, Loewith R, Hall MN (2006) TOR signaling in growth and metabolism. Cell
124:471–484
Xu Y, Faulkner LD, Hill JW (2012) Cross-talk between metabolism and reproduction: the role of
POMC and SF1 neurons. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2:98
Young J, Bouligand J, Francou B, Rafﬁn-Sanson ML, Gaillez S, Jeanpierre M, Grynberg M,
Kamenicky P, Chanson P, Brailly-Tabard S, Guiochon-Mantel A (2010) TAC3 and TACR3
defects cause hypothalamic congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in humans. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 95:2287–2295
Neuroendocrine and Molecular Mechanisms for the Metabolic Control of Puberty. . .
135

Prostaglandin E2, Gliotransmission
and the Onset of Puberty
Vincent Prevot and Jerome Clasadonte
Abstract Over the past four decades it has become clear that prostaglandin E2
(PGE2), a phospholipid-derived signaling molecule, plays a fundamental role in
modulating the gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neuroendocrine system
and in shaping the hypothalamus. In this chapter, after a brief historical overview,
we highlight studies revealing that PGE2 released by astrocytes is intimately
involved in the active control of GnRH neuronal activity and the acquisition of
reproductive competence.
Introduction
Sexual development, puberty and adult fertility are achieved by events that are
initiated within the central nervous system and require the maturation and function
of a neural network that transmits both homeostatic and external cues to the discrete
hypothalamic neuronal population that releases gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) from neuroendocrine terminals within the median eminence into the
pituitary portal vessels to control gonadotropin [luteinizing hormone (LH) and
follicle stimulating hormone (FSH)] secretion (Donato et al. 2011; Herbison and
Neill 2006; Malpaux 2006; Ojeda and Skinner 2006; Plant 2006; Terasawa and
Fernandez 2001). In turn, these gonadotropins act on the ovaries and testis to
regulate the secretion of sex steroids and the production of eggs and sperm.
Accumulating evidence over the past two decades has indicated that, in addition
to neurons, glial cells, and in particular astrocytes, contribute to the neural network
that converges onto GnRH neurons to control reproduction. Both the neuronal and
glial elements of this GnRH neural network are subject to the direct modulatory
inﬂuence of gonadal steroids (Bellefontaine et al. 2011; Christian and Moenter
V. Prevot (*) • J. Clasadonte
Jean-Pierre Aubert Research Center, U837, Development and Plasticity of the Postnatal Brain,
Inserm, Lille, France
School of Medicine, University of Lille, F-59000 Lille, France
e-mail: vincent.prevot@inserm.fr
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
J.-P. Bourguignon et al. (eds.), Brain Crosstalk in Puberty and Adolescence,
Research and Perspectives in Endocrine Interactions 13,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09168-6_10
137

2010; Garcia-Segura and McCarthy 2004; Mong and Blutstein 2006; Prevot
et al. 2010a; Ronnekleiv and Kelly 2005; Wintermantel et al. 2006). Although
neuronal elements regulate the activity of GnRH neurons through a complex array
of excitatory and inhibitory synaptic inputs, glial cells communicate with GnRH
neurons via the activation of speciﬁc growth factor-dependent signaling pathways
(reviewed in Sharif et al. 2013).
The main glial population in the brain consists of astrocytes that ensheathe
synapses and are in contact with blood vessels. They regulate blood ﬂow, provide
much-needed energy to neurons, and supply the building blocks for neurotransmit-
ters at the synapses, in addition to dynamically contributing to information
processing within the central nervous system (Di Castro et al. 2011; Eroglu and
Barres 2010; Halassa and Haydon 2010; Haydon and Carmignoto 2006; Iadecola
and Nedergaard 2007; Martineau et al. 2006; Panatier et al. 2011; Pfrieger 2010),
including the hypothalamus (Gordon et al. 2009; Hatton and Wang 2008; Oliet and
Bonfardin 2010; Panatier 2009; Theodosis et al. 2008). As integrative hubs, astro-
cytes likely play a fundamental role in shaping and regulating the GnRH system.
Here, we will review recent ﬁndings that illustrate the remarkable interplay
between glia and neurons within the hypothalamo-hypophyseal-gonadal axis. We
will mainly restrict our focus to the roles of hypothalamic astrocytes subserved by
the release of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), a molecule that has long been known to
regulate GnRH neuronal function and has recently been identiﬁed as a
gliotransmitter.
PGE2 Is Involved in the Hypothalamic Control
of Reproduction
PGE2 is one of a number of prostanoids synthesized from arachidonic acid, which is
produced from membrane phospholipids by a phospholipase A2. Arachidonic acid
is converted to bioactive prostanoids by the cyclooxygenases (COX-1 and COX-2)
and a class of terminal synthases (see for review Bosetti 2007). Several studies
suggest that PGE2 is mainly derived from the COX-2 pathway (Brock et al. 1999;
Sang et al. 2005; Vidensky et al. 2003). PGE2 signaling is propagated by four G-
protein-coupled receptors, EP1-EP4 (see for review Coleman et al. 1994; Fig. 1).
For more than 35 years, PGE2 has been known to play a role in the central
control of reproduction. The ﬁrst indication that PGE2 was involved in the process
of GnRH secretion was provided by experiments showing that, when PGE2 was
injected into the third ventricle of the rat brain, it induced the release of LH into the
general circulation (Harms et al. 1973) and the release of GnRH into the pituitary
portal blood vessels (Eskay et al. 1975; Ojeda et al. 1975b). A similar stimulatory
effect of PGE2 on GnRH release has been documented using push-pull perfusion in
conscious monkeys (Gearing and Terasawa 1991). To bring about the activation of
the GnRH axis, PGE2 acts at two main hypothalamic sites: the preoptic-anterior
138
V. Prevot and J. Clasadonte

Fig. 1 Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) biosynthesis and signaling. Upon its release from plasma
membrane phospholipids by phospholipase A2, arachidonic acid is converted to the unstable
endoperoxide intermediates, prostaglandin G2 (PGG2) and prostaglandin H2 (PGH2), by the
cyclooxygenases (COX-1 and COX-2, encoded by separate genes). Both COX isoforms catalyze
the same reactions, but while COX-1 is constitutively expressed, COX-2 is rapidly and transiently
upregulated by cytokines and growth factors. Terminal synthases convert both PGG2 and PGH2
into prostaglandins [PGE2, PGD2, PGF2α, prostacyclin (PGI2)], and thromboxane (TxA2). Once
synthesized, PGE2 immediately diffuses away and activates its speciﬁc E-prostanoid receptors
(EP1-4), which belong to the family of 7-transmembrane G-protein-coupled receptors. EP2 and
EP4 are coupled to Gs and stimulate the adenylyl cyclase (AC)-cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP)-protein kinase A (PKA) pathway. In contrast, EP3 is coupled to Gi and inhibits AC
activation, resulting in decreased cAMP concentrations. EP1 is thought to be coupled to the
Prostaglandin E2, Gliotransmission and the Onset of Puberty
139

hypothalamic region in which GnRH cell bodies reside and the tuberal region of the
hypothalamus, which contains the median eminence and GnRH-releasing neuroen-
docrine terminals (Ojeda et al. 1977). The use of COX inhibitors such as indometh-
acin has provided further support for a physiological role of the prostaglandins in
the control of GnRH release. Indomethacin administration suppresses the LH surge
induced by estradiol during anestrus in ewes (Carlson et al. 1974) and during the
early follicular phase in rhesus monkeys (Carlson et al. 1977). In rats, the intraven-
tricular or intrahypothalamic administration of indomethacin inhibits both pulsatile
LH release and the LH discharge induced by ovarian steroids (Ojeda et al. 1975a).
Other studies have demonstrated that the microinjection of either aspirin, a
non-steroidal COX inhibitor, or N-0164, a prostaglandin and thromboxane antag-
onist, into the tuberal region of the rat hypothalamus results in the suppression of
ovulation (Botting et al. 1977; Labhsetwar and Zolovick 1973). Finally, experi-
ments conducted using hypothalamic explants in vitro have revealed that PGE2 is
an effective stimulator of GnRH release from median eminence nerve terminals
(Gallardo and Ramirez 1977; Ojeda et al. 1979, 1986b).
Evidence implicating PGE2 as a physiological component of the GnRH system
during postnatal development arises from ﬁndings showing that PGE2 can induce
the release of GnRH long before puberty in both mice and rats (Ojeda et al. 1986a;
Prevot et al. 2003). As puberty approaches, the increasing output of estradiol from
the developing ovaries induces a preovulatory surge of GnRH/LH. Biochemical
analyses at this last phase of sexual maturation have demonstrated that the capacity
of the reproductive hypothalamus to metabolize arachidonic acid through the COX
pathway leads to a speciﬁc increase in PGE2 synthesis (Fig. 1), particularly during
the ﬁrst proestrus (Ojeda and Campbell 1982). This effect appears to be estrogen-
dependent since it is mimicked by the treatment of juvenile animals (early post-
weaning period) with estradiol at doses capable of inducing a preovulatory surge of
LH (Ojeda and Campbell 1982). More recent studies have shown that an estradiol-
induced increase in hypothalamic PGE2 levels can be seen even in newborn rats
(Amateau and McCarthy 2002). Intriguingly, experiments showing that estradiol
treatment upregulates both COX-2 mRNA and protein synthesis in the hypothala-
mus of female rats during postnatal development (Amateau and McCarthy 2004)
raise the possibility that estrogens may act on COX-2 expression to promote PGE2
synthesis at puberty.
Fig. 1 (continued) Gq-phospholipase C (PLC) pathway, leading to an elevation of free cytosolic
calcium concentrations (Milatovic et al. 2011). Notably, an examination of the capacity of the
hypothalamus to metabolize arachidonic acid through the COX pathway has revealed a pubertal
increase in the formation of PGE2, particularly during the ﬁrst proestrus (Ojeda and Campbell
1982). Intriguingly, the increase in PGE2 synthesis is not associated with changes in the formation
of PGF2α, PGI2, PGD2 or thromboxane A2 from exogenous arachidonic acid, suggesting that it is
a speciﬁc event directly associated with the peripubertal activation of the reproductive hypothal-
amus (Ojeda and Campbell 1982). Such a selective synthesis of PGE2 has also been shown to be
triggered by estrogens during early postnatal development (Amateau and McCarthy 2002)
140
V. Prevot and J. Clasadonte

Astrocytes Appear to Be the Main Source of PGE2
in the GnRH Neuroendocrine System
Although PGE2 was initially postulated to be an intracellular messenger produced
by the binding of neurotransmitters to receptors located on GnRH neurons and
acting within these neurons (Gearing and Terasawa 1991; Ojeda et al. 1982; Rettori
et al. 1992), this concept has been revisited following studies showing that the
actions of PGE2 on GnRH release are initiated by its binding to speciﬁc membrane
receptors (Coleman et al. 1994) expressed by GnRH neurons (Rage et al. 1997) and
the recognition that astrocytes represent a major source of PGE2 in the brain (Bezzi
et al. 1998; Hirst et al. 1999; Ma et al. 1997). Two decades ago, seminal studies by
Ojeda and colleagues revealed that the PGE2-mediated activation of GnRH neuro-
nal secretory activity triggered by estrogen at the time of puberty required the
activation of growth factor-dependent glial signaling pathways involving receptor
tyrosine kinases of the erbB family (Junier et al. 1991; Ma et al. 1992; Ojeda
et al. 1990).
Of the four known members of the erbB family (Fig. 2), three – erbB1, erbB3
and erbB4 – bind and are activated by cognate ligands. In contrast, erbB2 has no
known ligand, and functions primarily as a modulator of the other members of the
family (Hynes and Lane 2005). While erbB receptors do not appear to be expressed
Fig. 2 The erbB family of receptors and their ligands. ErbB1 (or EGFR, epidermal growth factor
receptor) and erbB4 are fully functional receptors that possess an extracellular ligand-binding
domain and a cytoplasmic protein tyrosine kinase domain and can function as homo- or
heterodimers. In contrast, erbB2 (or neu), which lacks a ligand-binding domain, and erbB3,
which is defective in its intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity (dashed lines), must heterodimerize
with another member of the erbB family for signal transduction. The different EGF-like growth
factors exhibit different binding speciﬁcities for the erbB receptors. While TGFα, EGF,
amphiregulin, epigen, neuregulin-3 and neuregulin-4 are speciﬁc for a single member of the
receptor family, the ﬁve other EGF-like ligands can bind two or three receptors each. EGF
epidermal growth factor, HB-EGF heparin binding-EGF, TGFα transforming growth factor α
Prostaglandin E2, Gliotransmission and the Onset of Puberty
141

in GnRH neurons Ma et al. 1994b, 1999; Prevot et al. 2003; Voigt et al. 1996),
erbB1, erbB2 and erbB4, but not erbB3, are expressed in hypothalamic astrocytes,
known to morphologically and physically interact with GnRH cell bodies
(Baroncini et al. 2007; Cashion et al. 2003; Sandau et al. 2011b; Witkin
et al. 1995) both in rodents and humans (Figs 3 and 4; Ma et al. 1999; Prevot
et al. 2003; Sharif et al. 2009). In addition, hypothalamic astrocytes express the
erbB1 ligand, transforming growth factor alpha (TGFα; Fig. 4) and several forms of
the erbB4 ligand, neuregulin (Ma et al. 1992, 1994a, 1999; Sharif et al. 2009).
Importantly, gonadal steroids have been found to induce dramatic increases in the
expression levels of the erbB receptors and their ligands within the hypothalamus at
puberty; no such changes are seen in the cortex or other brain regions unrelated to
reproductive control (Ma et al. 1992, 1994b, 1999).
Fig. 3 Astrocytes morphologically interact with GnRH neurons and express erbB4 receptors in
the tuberal region of the human hypothalamus. (a–c) Photomicrographs showing a GnRH neuronal
cell body (green) to which the processes of glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP)-immunoreactive
astrocytes (red, arrows) are abundantly apposed. Cell nuclei are stained with Hoechst (blue)
(Adapted from Baroncini et al. 2007 with permission). (d–f) GFAP-immunoreactive astrocytes
(red) of the tuberal region of the human hypothalamus express erbB4 receptors (green)
(M. Baroncini, V. Prevot, unpublished data). Scale bars ¼ 20 μm (c), 10 μm (f)
142
V. Prevot and J. Clasadonte

Fig. 4 Human hypothalamic astrocytes express the molecular components required for a glia-to-
neuron communication through the erbB-prostaglandin signaling system. Primary cultures of
human hypothalamic astrocytes prepared from 9- to 12-week-old human fetuses (a). The cultures
are composed 98 % of cells immunopositive for the astrocytic markers GFAP (b, green) and the
glutamate-aspartate transporter GLAST (c, red). Note that cells that express GFAP at low to
undetectable levels are nevertheless strongly immunopositive for GLAST (arrows). (d) Human
astrocytes in culture express TGFα protein (red). (e) Western blot analysis of erbB receptor
expression in primary cultures of human cortical and hypothalamic astrocytes. While all four
erbB receptors are expressed in the fetal brain, hypothalamic astrocytes (Hyp astro) express erbB1,
erbB2, and erbB4, but not erbB3, and cortical astrocytes (Ctx astro) express erbB1, erbB2, and
erbB3 but not erbB4 receptors. IB, immunoblot. (f) Human hypothalamic astrocytes in culture are
immunopositive
for
COX
(green).
(g–i)
EGF
ligands
induce
profound
morphological
rearrangements of human hypothalamic astrocytes in vitro. Cell morphology was examined by
visualization of the actin cytoskeleton using Alexaﬂuor 568-conjugated phalloidin (red). Hypo-
thalamic astrocytes exhibit heterogeneous shapes under control conditions, i.e., polygonal cells,
cells with short and thick extensions (asterisk) or long and thin processes (arrow) (g). TGFα
(50 ng/mL for 3 days) stimulates the extension of long and thin processes (arrows) and the
apparition of bipolar cells (double arrows) (h) whereas treatment with the neuregulin-1 HRGβ1
(50 ng/mL for 3 days) increases the number of multipolar cells with thick processes (arrowheads).
(i) Nuclei are counter-stained with Hoechst (b, c, f, g, h, i, blue). Scale bars ¼ 3 mm (a), 50 μm (b,
c, f), 20 μm (d), 100 μm (g–i) (Adapted from Sharif et al. 2009 with permission)
Prostaglandin E2, Gliotransmission and the Onset of Puberty
143

The pharmacological or genetic inhibition of erbB1, ebB2 and/or erbB4 recep-
tors delays the onset of puberty (Apostolakis et al. 2000; Ma et al. 1992; Prevot
et al. 2003, 2005) and alters adult reproductive function in rodents (Prevot
et al. 2005). In vitro studies using either hypothalamic explants or primary cultures
of hypothalamic astrocytes with a GnRH-producing neuronal cell line have shown
that erbB receptor ligands can stimulate GnRH release from the explants or
neuronal cells, but do so indirectly by inducing astrocytes to secrete PGE2
(Ma et al. 1997, 1999; Ojeda et al. 1990; Prevot et al. 2003, 2005). In addition,
ligand activation of erbB receptors has been shown to promote morphological
rearrangements in hypothalamic astrocytes (Fig. 4g–i; Sharif et al. 2009) thus
raising the possibility that erbB signaling may also inﬂuence the astrocytic cover-
age of GnRH neurons in vivo (see for review Prevot et al. 2010b).
In vitro experiments suggest that erbB signalling in hypothalamic astrocytes is
functionally connected to the neuronal glutamatergic system, the primary mode of
excitatory transsynaptic communication used by hypothalamic neurons (van den
Pol and Trombley 1993), and one that is known to increase GnRH secretion
(Claypool et al. 2000; Donoso et al. 1990) and accelerate the initiation of puberty
in both rodents and primates (Plant et al. 1989; Urbanski and Ojeda 1987, 1990). In
hypothalamic and non-hypothalamic astrocytes alike (Bezzi et al. 1998; Zonta
et al. 2003a, b), transmitter spillover from nearby synaptic activity results in an
elevation of PGE2 release (Glanowska and Moenter 2011; McCarthy et al. 2008).
For example, neuronally released glutamate can engage biochemical signaling in
astrocytes through the co-activation of AMPA and metabotropic glutamate recep-
tors to cause a ligand-dependent increase in astrocytic erbB signaling and PGE2
release (Dziedzic et al. 2003), which, in turn, signals back to GnRH neurons
(Fig. 5), facilitating neuroendocrine development and adult reproductive function
(Prevot et al. 2003, 2005).
144
V. Prevot and J. Clasadonte

Fig. 5 PGE2 acts as a gliotransmitter to stimulate GnRH neuron electrical activity. Neuronally
released glutamate (Glu) (1) co-activates metabotropic glutamatergic (mGluR) and AMPA
glutamatergic receptors (GluR) in astrocytes (2), stimulating the activity of zinc-dependent matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) of the ADAM (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase) family (3). The
MMPs catalyze ectodomain shedding of the pro-EGF ligands pro-TGFα and pro-NRG
(pro-neuregulin). In particular, the processing of pro-TGFα has been shown to involve the
metalloproteinase ADAM17, also known as tumor necrosis factor α converting enzyme
(TACE). The subsequently released mature TGFα and NRG activate erbB1/erbB2 and erbB4/
erbB2 heterodimers, respectively (Dziedzic et al. 2003). The co-activation of glutamatergic
receptors induces the recruitment of erbB1, erbB4 and their pro-ligands to the cell membrane,
where multiprotein complexes form, as demonstrated by the direct physical association of
glutamatergic and erbB receptors (not shown). The activation of erbB receptors in hypothalamic
astrocytes promotes profound morphological changes, including the retraction of cytoplasm and
the elongation and stellation of processes (see Fig. 4g–i) (4’). The activation of erbB receptors also
promotes the release of PGE2 (Dziedzic et al. 2003; Ma et al. 1997, 1999) (4), which stimulates a
cAMP/protein kinase A (PKA) pathway in GnRH neurons through the mobilization of EP2
Prostaglandin E2, Gliotransmission and the Onset of Puberty
145

Does Glial PGE2 Control Dendritic Spine Plasticity
in the GnRH Neural Network?
GnRH neurons exhibit a simple bipolar morphology with one or two very long
dendritic processes that can extend up to 1 mm (Campbell et al. 2005, 2009).
Intriguingly, recent studies have demonstrated that the density of spines along
these dendrites is subject to robust increases during sexual development in imma-
ture animals (Cottrell et al. 2006). Although sexual maturation have been shown to
require the neuronal expression of sex-steroid receptors (Mayer et al. 2010; Raskin
et al. 2009; Wintermantel et al. 2006), studies suggesting that astrocytic mecha-
nisms might control the stabilization of individual dendritic processes and their
subsequent maturation into spines (Nishida and Okabe 2007), together with the
demonstration that speciﬁc juxtacrine signaling pathways are involved in sculpting
astrocyte-dendritic spine interactions (Murai et al. 2003), raise the possibility that
astrocytes play a role in the physiological changes of synaptic structure underlying
GnRH neuronal maturation and function. PGE2 release by astrocytes could be
central to this process, and PGE2 has in fact been shown to mediate the dramatic
neuronal spine plasticity induced by estrogens in the developing preoptic region
(Amateau and McCarthy 2002, 2004; Wright and McCarthy 2009). This effect
involves the activation of AMPA and metabotropic glutamate receptors (Amateau
and McCarthy 2002; Wright and McCarthy 2009), which are known to promote
erbB-dependent PGE2 release in hypothalamic astrocytes (Dziedzic et al. 2003), as
well as the EP2/PKA signaling pathway (Amateau and McCarthy 2002) recently
found to be functional in native GnRH neurons (Clasadonte et al. 2011). Impor-
tantly, estrogens, which have long been known to regulate neuronal spine plasticity
in the adult hippocampus (Woolley and McEwen 1992, 1994), have also been
shown to promote comparable changes in the immature hippocampus (Amateau
and McCarthy 2002). However, in the hippocampus, the underlying mechanisms do
not appear to require PGE2 synthesis (Amateau and McCarthy 2002), suggesting
that increases in PGE2 synthesis are selectively used by estrogens to promote
dendritic spine plasticity in the developing preoptic region.
Fig. 5 (continued) receptors (EP2-R; Clasadonte et al. 2011) (5). Activation of this signaling
pathway induces a reversible membrane depolarization of GnRH neurons, leading to the initiation
of spike ﬁring via a postsynaptic effect involving the activation of a nonselective cation current
(Clasadonte et al. 2011) (6)
146
V. Prevot and J. Clasadonte

PGE2 Acts as a Gliotransmitter in the GnRH
Neuroendocrine System
Even though PGE2 has been known to trigger GnRH release from the hypothalamic
neurons controlling reproduction for almost 40 years, it is only very recently that it
has been identiﬁed as a potent excitatory regulator of GnRH neuronal activity in
both male and female mice (Clasadonte et al. 2011). Using patch-clamp recordings
in brain slices from transgenic mice expressing green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP)
under the control of the GnRH promoter, we showed that PGE2 induced a reversible
membrane depolarization of GnRH neurons leading to the initiation of spike ﬁring
via the postsynaptic effect involving activation of a nonselective cation current
(Fig. 5; Clasadonte et al. 2011) reminiscent of the ones recently described in GnRH
neurons by other groups (Roland and Moenter 2011; Zhang et al. 2008). Although
GnRH neurons are known to express both the EP1 and EP2 subtypes of prostaglan-
din receptors in vivo (Jasoni et al. 2005; Rage et al. 1997), the excitatory effect of
PGE2 on GnRH neuronal activity was selectively mimicked by the EP2 receptor
agonist butaprost (Clasadonte et al. 2011), previously shown to promote GnRH
release in the GnRH-producing neuronal cell line, GT1-7 (Rage et al. 1997). The
PGE2-mediated membrane depolarization of GnRH neurons was also shown to
require the cAMP/protein kinase A (PKA) pathway (Clasadonte et al. 2011), which
is known to be coupled to the EP2 receptor (Fig. 1; Coleman et al. 1994; Sang
et al. 2005) and to underlie the stimulatory effect of PGE2 on GnRH secretion
(Fig. 5; Ojeda et al. 1985).
As alluded to above, the selective disruption of erbB4 signaling in astrocytes by
the overexpression of a dominant-negative erbB4 receptor under the control of the
human GFAP promoter leads to diminished PGE2 release in response to ligand-
dependent erbB4 activation; this in turn leads to reduced GnRH release, delayed
puberty, and disrupted adult reproductive function (Prevot et al. 2003, 2005).
Intriguingly, electrophysiological analyses have shown that the spontaneous activ-
ity of GnRH neurons in these animals is decreased and that this deﬁciency is
mimicked by the bath application of either ﬂuoroacetate, an inhibitor of astrocyte
metabolism (Fonnum et al. 1997; Henneberger et al. 2010), or the COX blocker
indomethacin, to slices of the preoptic region from wild-type animals (Clasadonte
et al. 2011). The fact that GnRH neuronal activity in all these conditions can be
rescued by exogenous PGE2 (Clasadonte et al. 2011) strongly suggests that glial
PGE2 is an important component of the homeostatic mechanism controlling GnRH
neuronal excitability. The role of glia in the control of GnRH neuronal activity is
further supported by a recent study demonstrating that glial prostaglandins may
regulate the efﬁcacy of GABAergic inputs to GnRH neurons in ovariectomized
mice (Glanowska and Moenter 2011). Using GnRH-GFP transgenic mice and
patch-clamp recordings in brain slices, the authors demonstrated that the repeated
action potential-like depolarization of a GnRH neuron caused a short-term reduc-
tion in the frequency of spontaneous GABAergic postsynaptic currents in the same
neuron, suggesting the presence of local circuit interactions between GnRH neurons
Prostaglandin E2, Gliotransmission and the Onset of Puberty
147

and their GABAergic afferents (Chu and Moenter 2005; Glanowska and Moenter
2011). It is important to note that, in this local circuit, the activation of GABAA
receptors exerts a depolarizing action that can trigger action potential ﬁring due to
the elevated chloride levels maintained in adult GnRH neurons (DeFazio
et al. 2002; Han et al. 2002; Herbison and Moenter 2011). Consequently, this
represents a negative feedback loop in which depolarized GnRH neurons reduce
the activity of their own excitatory GABAergic afferents. In addition to being
steroid-dependent
and
under
the
inﬂuence
of
both
glutamatergic
and
endocannabinoid
signaling
mechanisms
via
the
activation
of
presynaptic
metabotropic glutamate receptors and cannabinoid CB1 receptors, respectively
(Chu and Moenter 2005; Glanowska and Moenter 2011), this local negative feed-
back loop also requires the action of glia-derived prostanglandins (Glanowska and
Moenter 2011). Indeed, the incubation of brain slices with indomethacin, the broad-
spectrum prostaglandin receptor antagonist AH 6809, or ﬂuorocitrate, which like
ﬂuoroacetate, is a speciﬁc blocker of astrocyte metabolism, prevents the
depolarization-induced suppression of GABAergic transmission in GnRH neurons
(Glanowska and Moenter 2011). Since GABA exerts a depolarizing action in this
local circuit, we could envisage that glial prostaglandins, by suppressing excitatory
drive, would reduce GnRH neuronal activity. Estradiol could also differentially
inﬂuence this local inhibitory feedback to exert its positive or negative feedback
effects (Glanowska and Moenter 2011). Thus, in addition to exerting a direct
postsynaptic excitatory action on the cell body of GnRH neurons, prostaglandins
released from astrocytes can participate in mechanisms that regulate the activity of
their GABAergic presynaptic inputs (Fig. 5). Thus in the GnRH system, PGE2
fulﬁls all the criteria that qualify a compound as a “gliotransmitter” (Parpura and
Zorec 2010): (1) it is synthesized by astrocytes, (2) its regulated release is triggered
by physiological stimuli, (3) it acutely activates the ﬁring of GnRH neurons and
modulates the activity of their GABAergic afferents, and (4) it plays a role in an
important physiological function, i.e., the neuroendocrine control of reproduction,
which is vital to species’ survival.
Conclusions
Several observations made over the last two decades have demonstrated that PGE2,
which has been known for almost 40 years to play an important role in the
regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, is a transmitter released by
astrocytes and intimately linked with GnRH neuronal function in the preoptic
region, where the cell bodies of GnRH neurons in rodents are located. However,
many mysteries regarding the underlying mechanisms remain unsolved. For exam-
ple, even though recent studies suggest that GnRH neurons can directly communi-
cate with neighboring astrocytes via juxtacrine signaling pathways (Sandau
et al. 2011a, b), a true understanding of how these GnRH neurons interact with
hypothalamic astrocytes to modulate PGE2 gliotransmission is missing. Are these
148
V. Prevot and J. Clasadonte

communication processes involved in sculpting astrocyte-dendritic spine interac-
tions and in promoting the physiological changes in synaptic structure that underlie
GnRH neuronal maturation? How is PGE2 released from hypothalamic astrocytes?
Now that a general strategy for the application of molecular genetics to the study
of neuron-glia interactions and gliotransmission has been elucidated, the next
several years should provide an opportunity to begin to address these questions.
Acknowledgments This research was supported by the Foundation pour la Recherche Me´dicale
(Equipe FRM DEQ20130326524).
References
Amateau SK, McCarthy MM (2002) A novel mechanism of dendritic spine plasticity involving
estradiol induction of prostaglandin-E2. J Neurosci 22:8586–8596
Amateau SK, McCarthy MM (2004) Induction of PGE2 by estradiol mediates developmental
masculinization of sex behavior. Nat Neurosci 7:643–650
Apostolakis EM, Garai J, Lohmann JE, Clark JH, O’Malley BW (2000) Epidermal growth factor
activates reproductive behavior independent of ovarian steroids in female rodents. Mol
Endocrinol 14:1086–1098
Baroncini M, Allet C, Leroy D, Beauvillain JC, Francke JP, Prevot V (2007) Morphological
evidence for direct interaction between gonadotrophin-releasing hormone neurones and
astroglial cells in the human hypothalamus. J Neuroendocrinol 19:691–702
Bellefontaine N, Hanchate NK, Parkash J, Campagne C, de Seranno S, Clasadonte J, d’Anglemont
de Tassigny X, Prevot V (2011) Nitric oxide as key mediator of neuron-to-neuron and
endothelia-to-glia communication involved in the neuroendocrine control of reproduction.
Neuroendocrinology 93:74–89
Bezzi P, Carmignoto G, Pasti L, Vesce S, Rossi D, Rizzini BL, Pozzan T, Volterra A (1998)
Prostaglandins stimulate calcium-dependent glutamate release in astrocytes. Nature 391:281–
285
Bosetti F (2007) Arachidonic acid metabolism in brain physiology and pathology: lessons from
genetically altered mouse models. J Neurochem 102:577–586
Botting JH, Linton EA, Whitehead SA (1977) Blockade of ovulation in the rat by a prostaglandin
antogonist (N-0164). J Endocrinol 75:335–336
Brock TG, McNish RW, Peters-Golden M (1999) Arachidonic acid is preferentially metabolized
by cyclooxygenase-2 to prostacyclin and prostaglandin E2. J Biol Chem 274:11660–11666
Campbell RE, Han SK, Herbison AE (2005) Biocytin ﬁlling of adult gonadotropin-releasing
hormone neurons in situ reveals extensive, spiny, dendritic processes. Endocrinology
146:1163–1169
Campbell RE, Gaidamaka G, Han SK, Herbison AE (2009) Dendro-dendritic bundling and shared
synapses between gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
106:10835–10840
Carlson JC, Barcikowski B, Cargill V, McCracken JA (1974) The blockade of LH release by
indomethacin. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 39:399–402
Carlson JC, Wong AP, Perrin DG (1977) Luteinizing hormone secretion in the rhesus monkey and
a possible role for prostaglandins. Biol Reprod 16:622–626
Cashion AB, Smith MJ, Wise PM (2003) The morphometry of astrocytes in the rostral preoptic
area exhibits a diurnal rhythm on proestrus: relationship to the luteinizing hormone surge and
effects of age. Endocrinology 144:274–280
Prostaglandin E2, Gliotransmission and the Onset of Puberty
149

Christian CA, Moenter SM (2010) The neurobiology of preovulatory and estradiol-induced
gonadotropin-releasing hormone surges. Endocr Rev 31:544–577
Chu Z, Moenter SM (2005) Endogenous activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors modulates
GABAergic transmission to gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons and alters their ﬁring
rate: a possible local feedback circuit. J Neurosci 25:5740–5749
Clasadonte J, Poulain P, Hanchate NK, Corfas G, Ojeda SR, Prevot V (2011) Prostaglandin E2
release from astrocytes triggers gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neuron ﬁring via
EP2 receptor activation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108:16104–16109
Claypool LE, Kasuya E, Saitoh Y, Marzban F, Terasawa E (2000) N-methyl D, L-aspartate
induces the release of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone in the prepubertal and pubertal
female rhesus monkey as measured by in vivo push-pull perfusion in the stalk-median
eminence. Endocrinology 141:219–228
Coleman RA, Smith WL, Narumiya S (1994) International Union of Pharmacology classiﬁcation
of prostanoid receptors: properties, distribution, and structure of the receptors and their sub-
types. Pharmacol Rev 46:205–229
Cottrell EC, Campbell RE, Han SK, Herbison AE (2006) Postnatal remodeling of dendritic
structure and spine density in gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons. Endocrinology
147:3652–3661
DeFazio RA, Heger S, Ojeda SR, Moenter SM (2002) Activation of A-type gamma-aminobutyric
acid receptors excites gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons. Mol Endocrinol 16:2872–
2891
Di Castro MA, Chuquet J, Liaudet N, Bhaukaurally K, Santello M, Bouvier D, Tiret P, Volterra A
(2011) Local Ca(2+) detection and modulation of synaptic release by astrocytes. Nat Neurosci
14:1276–1284
Donato J Jr, Cravo RM, Frazao R, Elias CF (2011) Hypothalamic sites of leptin action linking
metabolism and reproduction. Neuroendocrinology 93:9–18
Donoso AO, Lopez FJ, Negro-Vilar A (1990) Glutamate receptors of the non-N-methyl-D-aspartic
acid type mediate the increase in luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone release by excitatory
amino acids in vitro. Endocrinology 126:414–420
Dziedzic B, Prevot V, Lomniczi A, Jung H, Cornea A, Ojeda SR (2003) Neuron-to-glia signaling
mediated by excitatory amino acid receptors regulates ErbB receptor function in astroglial cells
of the neuroendocrine brain. J Neurosci 23:915–926
Eroglu C, Barres BA (2010) Regulation of synaptic connectivity by glia. Nature 468:223–231
Eskay RL, Warberg J, Mical RS, Porter JC (1975) Prostaglandin E2-induced release of LHRH into
hypophysial portal blood(1). Endocrinology 97:816–824
Fonnum F, Johnsen A, Hassel B (1997) Use of ﬂuorocitrate and ﬂuoroacetate in the study of brain
metabolism. Glia 21:106–113
Gallardo E, Ramirez VD (1977) A method for the superfusion of rat hypothalami: secretion of
luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 155:79–84
Garcia-Segura LM, McCarthy MM (2004) Minireview: role of glia in neuroendocrine function.
Endocrinology 145:1082–1086
Gearing M, Terasawa E (1991) Prostaglandin E2 mediates the stimulatory effect of methoxamine
on in vivo luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH) release in the ovariectomized
female rhesus monkey. Brain Res 560:276–281
Glanowska KM, Moenter SM (2011) Endocannabinoids and prostaglandins both contribute to
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neuron-GABAergic afferent local feedback circuits.
J Neurophysiol 106:3073–3081
Gordon GR, Iremonger KJ, Kantevari S, Ellis-Davies GC, MacVicar BA, Bains JS (2009)
Astrocyte-mediated distributed plasticity at hypothalamic glutamate synapses. Neuron
64:391–403
Halassa MM, Haydon PG (2010) Integrated brain circuits: astrocytic networks modulate neuronal
activity and behavior. Annu Rev Physiol 72:335–355
150
V. Prevot and J. Clasadonte

Han SK, Abraham IM, Herbison AE (2002) Effect of GABA on GnRH neurons switches from
depolarization to hyperpolarization at puberty in the female mouse. Endocrinology 143:1459–
1466
Harms PG, Ojeda SR, McCann SM (1973) Prostaglandin involvement in hypothalamic control of
gonadotropin and prolactin release. Science 181:760–761
Hatton GI, Wang YF (2008) Neural mechanisms underlying the milk ejection burst and reﬂex.
Prog Brain Res 170:155–166
Haydon PG, Carmignoto G (2006) Astrocyte control of synaptic transmission and neurovascular
coupling. Physiol Rev 86:1009–1031
Henneberger C, Papouin T, Oliet SH, Rusakov DA (2010) Long-term potentiation depends on
release of D-serine from astrocytes. Nature 463:232–236
Herbison AE, Moenter SM (2011) Depolarising and hyperpolarising actions of GABA(A) receptor
activation on gonadotrophin-releasing hormone neurones: towards an emerging consensus. J
Neuroendocrinol 23:557–569
Herbison AE, Neill JD (2006) Physiology of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone neuronal
network. In: Knobil E, Neill JD (eds) Knobil and Neill’s physiology of reproduction. Elsevier,
New York, pp 1415–1482
Hirst WD, Young KA, Newton R, Allport VC, Marriott DR, Wilkin GP (1999) Expression of
COX-2 by normal and reactive astrocytes in the adult rat central nervous system. Mol Cell
Neurosci 13:57–68
Hynes NE, Lane HA (2005) ERBB receptors and cancer: the complexity of targeted inhibitors. Nat
Rev Cancer 5:341–354
Iadecola C, Nedergaard M (2007) Glial regulation of the cerebral microvasculature. Nat Neurosci
10:1369–1376
Jasoni CL, Todman MG, Han SK, Herbison AE (2005) Expression of mRNAs encoding receptors
that mediate stress signals in gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons of the mouse. Neuro-
endocrinology 82:320–328
Junier MP, Ma YJ, Costa ME, Hoffman G, Hill DF, Ojeda SR (1991) Transforming growth factor
alpha contributes to the mechanism by which hypothalamic injury induces precocious puberty.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 88:9743–9747
Labhsetwar AP, Zolovick A (1973) Hypothalamic interaction between prostaglandins and cate-
cholamines in promoting gonadotrophin secretion for ovulation. Nat New Biol 246:55–56
Ma YJ, Junier MP, Costa ME, Ojeda SR (1992) Transforming growth factor-alpha gene expression
in the hypothalamus is developmentally regulated and linked to sexual maturation. Neuron
9:657–670
Ma YJ, Costa ME, Ojeda SR (1994a) Developmental expression of the genes encoding
transforming growth factor alpha and its receptor in the hypothalamus of female rhesus
macaques. Neuroendocrinology 60:346–359
Ma YJ, Hill DF, Junier MP, Costa ME, Felder SE, Ojeda SR (1994b) Expression of epidermal
growth factor receptor changes in the hypothalamus during the onset of female puberty. Mol
Cell Neurosci 5:246–262
Ma YJ, Berg-von der Emde K, Rage F, Wetsel WC, Ojeda SR (1997) Hypothalamic astrocytes
respond to transforming growth factor-alpha with the secretion of neuroactive substances that
stimulate the release of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone. Endocrinology 138:19–25
Ma YJ, Hill DF, Creswick KE, Costa ME, Cornea A, Lioubin MN, Plowman GD, Ojeda SR (1999)
Neuregulins signaling via a glial erbB-2-erbB-4 receptor complex contribute to the neuroen-
docrine control of mammalian sexual development. J Neurosci 19:9913–9927
Malpaux B (2006) Seasonal regulation in mammals. In: Knobil E, Neill JD (eds) Knobil and
Neill’s physiology of reproduction. Raven Press, New York
Martineau M, Baux G, Mothet JP (2006) D-serine signalling in the brain: friend and foe. Trends
Neurosci 29:481–491
Prostaglandin E2, Gliotransmission and the Onset of Puberty
151

Mayer C, Acosta-Martinez M, Dubois SL, Wolfe A, Radovick S, Boehm U, Levine JE (2010)
Timing and completion of puberty in female mice depend on estrogen receptor alpha-signaling
in kisspeptin neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107:22693–22698
McCarthy MM, Schwarz JM, Wright CL, Dean SL (2008) Mechanisms mediating oestradiol
modulation of the developing brain. J Neuroendocrinol 20:777–783
Milatovic D, Montine TJ, Aschner M (2011) Prostanoid signaling: dual role for prostaglandin E2
in neurotoxicity. Neurotoxicology 32:312–319
Mong JA, Blutstein T (2006) Estradiol modulation of astrocytic form and function: implications
for hormonal control of synaptic communication. Neuroscience 138:967–975
Murai KK, Nguyen LN, Irie F, Yamaguchi Y, Pasquale EB (2003) Control of hippocampal
dendritic spine morphology through ephrin-A3/EphA4 signaling. Nat Neurosci 6:153–160
Nishida H, Okabe S (2007) Direct astrocytic contacts regulate local maturation of dendritic spines.
J Neurosci 27:331–340
Ojeda SR, Campbell WB (1982) An increase in hypothalamic capacity to synthesize prostaglandin
E2 precedes the ﬁrst preovulatory surge of gonadotropins. Endocrinology 111:1031–1037
Ojeda SR, Skinner MK (2006) Puberty in the rat. In: Neill JD (ed) Knobil and Neill’s physiology
of reproduction. Academic, San Diego, pp 2026–2126
Ojeda SR, Harms PG, McCann SM (1975a) Effect of inhibitors of prostaglandin synthesis on
gonadotropin release in the rat. Endocrinology 97:843–854
Ojeda SR, Wheaton JE, McCann SM (1975b) Prostaglandin E2-induced release of luteinizing
hormone-releasing factor (LRF). Neuroendocrinology 17:283–287
Ojeda SR, Jameson HE, McCann SM (1977) Hypothalamic areas involved in prostaglandin (PG)-
induced gonadotropin release I: effects of PGE2 and PGF2alpha implants on luteinizing
hormone release. Endocrinology 100:1585–1594
Ojeda SR, Negro-Vilar A, McCann SM (1979) Release of prostaglandin Es by hypothalamic
tissue: evidence for their involvement in catecholamine-induced luteinizing hormone-releasing
hormone release. Endocrinology 104:617–624
Ojeda SR, Negro-Vilar A, McCann SM (1982) Evidence for involvement of alpha-adrenergic
receptors in norepinephrine-induced prostaglandin E2 and luteinizing hormone-releasing hor-
mone release from the median eminence. Endocrinology 110:409–412
Ojeda SR, Urbanski HF, Katz KH, Costa ME (1985) Stimulation of cyclic adenosine 30,5-
0-monophosphate production enhances hypothalamic luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone
release without increasing prostaglandin E2 synthesis: studies in prepubertal female rats.
Endocrinology 117:1175–1178
Ojeda SR, Urbanski HF, Katz KH, Costa ME (1986a) Activation of estradiol-positive feedback at
puberty: estradiol sensitizes the LHRH-releasing system at two different biochemical steps.
Neuroendocrinology 43:259–265
Ojeda SR, Urbanski HF, Katz KH, Costa ME, Conn PM (1986b) Activation of two different but
complementary biochemical pathways stimulates release of hypothalamic luteinizing
hormone-releasing hormone. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 83:4932–4936
Ojeda SR, Urbanski HF, Costa ME, Hill DF, Moholt-Siebert M (1990) Involvement of
transforming growth factor alpha in the release of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone
from the developing female hypothalamus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 87:9698–9702
Oliet SH, Bonfardin VD (2010) Morphological plasticity of the rat supraoptic nucleus–cellular
consequences. Eur J Neurosci 32:1989–1994
Panatier A (2009) Glial cells: indispensable partners of hypothalamic magnocellular neurones. J
Neuroendocrinol 21:665–672
Panatier A, Vallee J, Haber M, Murai KK, Lacaille JC, Robitaille R (2011) Astrocytes are
endogenous regulators of basal transmission at central synapses. Cell 146:785–798
Parpura V, Zorec R (2010) Gliotransmission: exocytotic release from astrocytes. Brain Res Rev
63:83–92
Pfrieger FW (2010) Role of glial cells in the formation and maintenance of synapses. Brain Res
Rev 63:39–46
152
V. Prevot and J. Clasadonte

Plant TM (2006) Puberty in non human primates and humans. In: Neill JD (ed) Knobil and Neill’s
physiology of reproduction. Academic, San Diego, pp 2177–2230
Plant TM, Gay VL, Marshall GR, Arslan M (1989) Puberty in monkeys is triggered by chemical
stimulation of the hypothalamus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 86:2506–2510
Prevot V, Rio C, Cho GJ, Lomniczi A, Heger S, Neville CM, Rosenthal NA, Ojeda SR, Corfas G
(2003) Normal female sexual development requires neuregulin-erbB receptor signaling in
hypothalamic astrocytes. J Neurosci 23:230–239
Prevot V, Lomniczi A, Corfas G, Ojeda SR (2005) erbB-1 and erbB-4 receptors act in concert to
facilitate female sexual development and mature reproductive function. Endocrinology
146:1465–1472
Prevot V, Bellefontaine N, Baroncini M, Sharif A, Hanchate NK, Parkash J, Campagne C, de
Seranno S (2010a) GnRH nerve terminals, tanycytes and neurohaemal junction remodeling in
the adult median eminence: functional consequences for reproduction and dynamic role of
vascular endothelial cells. J Neuroendocrinol 22:639–649
Prevot V, Hanchate NK, Bellefontaine N, Sharif A, Parkash J, Estrella C, Allet C, de Seranno S,
Campagne C, de Tassigny X, Baroncini M (2010b) Function-related structural plasticity of the
GnRH system: a role for neuronal-glial-endothelial interactions. Front Neuroendocrinol
31:241–258
Rage F, Lee BJ, Ma YJ, Ojeda SR (1997) Estradiol enhances prostaglandin E2 receptor gene
expression in luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) neurons and facilitates the
LHRH response to PGE2 by activating a glia-to-neuron signaling pathway. J Neurosci
17:9145–9156
Raskin K, de Gendt K, Duittoz A, Liere P, Verhoeven G, Tronche F, Mhaouty-Kodja S (2009)
Conditional inactivation of androgen receptor gene in the nervous system effects on male
behavioral and neuroendocrine responses. J Neurosci 29:4461–4470
Rettori V, Gimeno M, Lyson K, McCann SM (1992) Nitric oxide mediates norepinephrine-
induced prostaglandin E2 release from the hypothalamus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
89:11543–11546
Roland AV, Moenter SM (2011) Glucosensing by GnRH neurons: inhibition by androgens and
involvement of AMP-activated protein kinase. Mol Endocrinol 25:847–858
Ronnekleiv OK, Kelly MJ (2005) Diversity of ovarian steroid signaling in the hypothalamus. Front
Neuroendocrinol 26:65–84
Sandau US, Mungenast AE, Alderman Z, Sardi SP, Fogel AI, Taylor B, Parent AS, Biederer T,
Corfas G, Ojeda SR (2011a) SynCAM1, a synaptic adhesion molecule, is expressed in
astrocytes and contributes to erbB4 receptor-mediated control of female sexual development.
Endocrinology 152:2364–2376
Sandau US, Mungenast AE, McCarthy J, Biederer T, Corfas G, Ojeda SR (2011b) The synaptic
cell adhesion molecule, SynCAM1, mediates astrocyte-to-astrocyte and astrocyte-to-GnRH
neuron adhesiveness in the mouse hypothalamus. Endocrinology 152:2353–2363
Sang N, Zhang J, Marcheselli V, Bazan NG, Chen C (2005) Postsynaptically synthesized prosta-
glandin E2 (PGE2) modulates hippocampal synaptic transmission via a presynaptic PGE2 EP2
receptor. J Neurosci 25:9858–9870
Sharif A, Duhem-Tonnelle V, Allet C, Baroncini M, Loyens A, Kerr-Conte J, Collier F, Blond S,
Ojeda SR, Junier MP, Prevot V (2009) Differential erbB signaling in astrocytes from the
cerebral cortex and the hypothalamus of the human brain. Glia 57:362–379
Sharif A, Baroncini M, Prevot V (2013) Role of glia in the regulation of gonadotropin-releasing
hormone neuronal activity and secretion. Neuroendocrinology 98:1–15
Terasawa E, Fernandez DL (2001) Neurobiological mechanisms of the onset of puberty in
primates. Endocr Rev 22:111–151
Theodosis DT, Poulain DA, Oliet SH (2008) Activity-dependent structural and functional plastic-
ity of astrocyte-neuron interactions. Physiol Rev 88:983–1008
Urbanski HF, Ojeda SR (1987) Activation of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone release
advances the onset of female puberty. Neuroendocrinology 46:273–276
Prostaglandin E2, Gliotransmission and the Onset of Puberty
153

Urbanski HF, Ojeda SR (1990) A role for N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors in the control
of LH secretion and initiation of female puberty. Endocrinology 126:1774–1776
van den Pol AN, Trombley PQ (1993) Glutamate neurons in hypothalamus regulate excitatory
transmission. J Neurosci 13:2829–2836
Vidensky S, Zhang Y, Hand T, Goellner J, Shaffer A, Isakson P, Andreasson K (2003) Neuronal
overexpression of COX-2 results in dominant production of PGE2 and altered fever response.
Neuromolecular Med 3:15–28
Voigt P, Ma YJ, Gonzalez D, Fahrenbach WH, Wetsel WC, der Berg-von EK, Hill DF, Taylor KG,
Costa ME, Seidah NG, Ojeda SR (1996) Neural and glial-mediated effects of growth factors
acting via tyrosine kinase receptors on luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone neurons.
Endocrinology 137:2593–2605
Wintermantel TM, Campbell RE, Porteous R, Bock D, Grone HJ, Todman MG, Korach KS,
Greiner E, Pe´rez CA, Schu¨tz G, Herbison AE (2006) Deﬁnition of estrogen receptor pathway
critical for estrogen positive feedback to gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons and fertility.
Neuron 52:271–280
Witkin JW, O’Sullivan H, Ferin M (1995) Glial ensheathment of GnRH neurons in pubertal female
rhesus macaques. J Neuroendocrinol 7:665–671
Woolley CS, McEwen BS (1992) Estradiol mediates ﬂuctuation in hippocampal synapse density
during the estrous cycle in the adult rat. J Neurosci 12:2549–2554
Woolley CS, McEwen BS (1994) Estradiol regulates hippocampal dendritic spine density via an
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-dependent mechanism. J Neurosci 14:7680–7687
Wright CL, McCarthy MM (2009) Prostaglandin E2-induced masculinization of brain and behav-
ior requires protein kinase A, AMPA/kainate, and metabotropic glutamate receptor signaling. J
Neurosci 29:13274–13282
Zhang C, Roepke TA, Kelly MJ, Rønnekleiv OK (2008) Kisspeptin depolarizes gonadotropin-
releasing hormone neurons through activation of TRPC-like cationic channels. J Neurosci
28:4423–4434
Zonta M, Angulo MC, Gobbo S, Rosengarten B, Hossmann KA, Pozzan T, Carmignoto G (2003a)
Neuron-to-astrocyte signaling is central to the dynamic control of brain microcirculation. Nat
Neurosci 6:43–50
Zonta M, Sebelin A, Gobbo S, Fellin T, Pozzan T, Carmignoto G (2003b) Glutamate-mediated
cytosolic calcium oscillations regulate a pulsatile prostaglandin release from cultured rat
astrocytes. J Physiol 553:407–414
154
V. Prevot and J. Clasadonte

Gonadotropic Axis Deﬁciency:
A Neurodevelopmental Disorder
Lukas Huijbregts, Brooke Tata, and Nicolas de Roux
Abstract The onset of puberty remains a mysterious mechanism despite several
recent major breakthroughs in the ﬁeld of neuroendocrinology. Novel neuropep-
tides, along with new regulation networks of gene expression, have been described;
however, the intimate molecular mechanisms deﬁning the age of puberty onset have
yet to be characterized. This article proposes to broaden the reﬂection surrounding
the mechanisms that determine the onset of puberty as a developmental process,
similar to those described for other neuronal networks. This new and original
approach will bring further insight into the intricate interactions between the
brain and the gonads that drive and maintain normal reproductive function.
Puberty: A Neurodevelopmental Process That Starts Earlier
Than Usually Thought
The thelarche is deﬁned by the appearance of breasts in girls. It results from an
increase in estrogen secretion by the ovaries and corresponds to the stage of the
Tanner classiﬁcation deﬁned by the somatic changes occurring up to the end of
puberty. Tanner stage 5 corresponds to a fully developed, mature individual with a
functional reproductive activity. Although it is usually considered to be the ﬁrst
marker of puberty, Tanner stage 2 actually reﬂects a re-activation of the gonado-
tropic axis that had already started several months earlier. Indeed, biological
puberty starts before clinical puberty through nocturnal elevation of plasma
luteinizing hormone (LH), without changes during the day. Moreover, pituitary
response to GnRH injection appears concomitantly to thelarche. In other words, the
pituitary activation started several months before, probably by the nocturnal acti-
vation of the gonadotropic axis. The molecular mechanism of this circadian acti-
vation of the gonadotropic axis at the end of childhood is unknown. Further, from
L. Huijbregts • B. Tata • N. de Roux (*)
Inserm U1141, Univ Paris Diderot. Hoˆpital Robert Debre´, 48 Boulevard Se´rurier, 75019 Paris,
France
e-mail: nicolas.deroux@inserm.fr
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
J.-P. Bourguignon et al. (eds.), Brain Crosstalk in Puberty and Adolescence,
Research and Perspectives in Endocrine Interactions 13,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09168-6_11
155

stages 2 to 5, plasma LH undergoes important variations as diurnal LH reaches the
nocturnal levels and the circadian cycle completely disappears. In the meantime,
the negative feedback by steroid hormones in both sexes as well as the positive
feedback by estrogen in females only become functional on the hypothalamo-
pituitary unit. From a biological point of view, puberty therefore corresponds to
the development of a brain-gonads homeostasis that leads to normal reproductive
function. This is unique to the gonadotropic axis.
The recent discovery of kisspeptins and their ability to tightly regulate GnRH
neurons has led to a better understanding of the interplay between gonads and the
brain, especially in regard to neurons and other hypothalamic cells that are involved
in the regulation of GnRH secretion and associated disorders (de Roux et al. 2003;
Pinilla et al. 2012). Known as the GnRH network, it is composed of neurosecretory
neurons, glial cells, such as astrocytes, and also glia-like cells called tanycytes
(Prevot et al. 2010). The main function of this network is to regulate GnRH
secretion. For methodological and conceptual reasons, it is difﬁcult to study and
conceive of a constantly evolving neuronal network; hence the vast majority of
original knowledge on the GnRH network has come from adult animals. The roles
of kisspeptin, dynorphin, and/or neurokinin B have been described in detail, from
their regulation by sexual hormones to the involvement of glial cells in this network
(Lomniczi et al. 2013b; Tena-Sempere 2012). These results were then transposed to
pre-pubertal animals and helped deﬁne the link between the increase of KiSS1
expression in the hypothalamus and the onset of puberty (Terasawa et al. 2013).
These novel ﬁndings show that pubertal onset is the consequence of a long
neurodevelopmental process that starts during fetal life, just like most neuronal
networks do. The neurodevelopment of the gonadotropic axis is, however, unique
for several reasons. GnRH neurons emerge from the olfactory placode and migrate
to the hypothalamus during early pre-natal development. Such migration toward the
brain is very uncommon in animal biology and has largely been studied in humans
affected with Kallman syndrome and in rodents (Mitchell et al. 2011; Wierman
et al. 2011). In primates, gonadotrope cells are functional and can response to
GnRH stimulation at midgestation. The hypothalamo-pituitary control of the
gonadotropic axis must be functional during fetal life to have complete develop-
ment of gonads in both sexes and sexual organs in males. However, this control is a
complex phenomenon. Indeed, at mid-gestation, blood levels of LH and follicle
stimulating hormone (FSH) are elevated and close to those observed in adults,
whereas at the end of gestation, LH and FSH blood levels are close to null (Guimiot
et al. 2012). Such negative regulation partly depends on kisspeptins expressed in the
infundibulum (Guimiot et al. 2012). It is important to note that this timing is
speciﬁc to the gonadotropic axis since other endocrine axes tend to be activated
at the end of gestation. The second part of gestation is therefore crucial to producing
normal reproductive function in adults.
Post-natal development of the gonadotropic axis is comprised of several stages
that are clinically well deﬁned. Mini-puberty starts a few weeks after birth and is
followed by a quiescent phase that goes on during childhood until puberty at the
average age of 10. The mechanisms underlying this sequential activation-
inactivation surrounding mini-puberty are poorly understood, the majority of
156
L. Huijbregts et al.

studies having essentially focused on the reactivation at puberty. In rodents, mini-
puberty is not well characterized. It may correspond to the FSH surge observed in
mice at post-natal day (PND12), knowing that puberty usually starts around
PND30. This rather late surge, when compared to humans, may be explained by
the fact that the ﬁrst week of rodent life corresponds to the third semester of human
in utero development. It was recently shown that the quiescent phase partly depends
on a reduced kisspeptin tonus in non-human primates (Ramaswamy et al. 2013).
The timing of this central activation of the gonadotropic axis in the ﬁrst months of
life is comparable to other neurodevelopmental processes.
In recent years, studies on puberty onset have brought to light that puberty is
associated with a vast genes and transcription factors network whose hypothalamic
expression either increases or decreases before pubertal onset (Lomniczi
et al. 2013b). Indeed, this complex network notably depends on epigenetic regula-
tions that modulate kisspeptin expression (Lomniczi et al. 2013a). These studies
have been of tremendous importance to understanding puberty onset proceedings
but have failed to bring answers to the question of pubertal timing. In other words,
the molecular events leading to variations of hypothalamic genes expression
through time remain unknown.
Neurodevelopment is not limited to the embryonic development of neurons. It
also corresponds to the development of synaptic connections or synaptogenesis,
which starts during fetal life and goes on throughout adulthood. After birth, neurons
are myelinated, further modifying neuronal network activity. Synaptogenesis is
composed of well-timed stages, and adolescence is a very important period of
synaptic remodeling during which synaptic contacts between neurons get simpliﬁed
to maximize efﬁcacy. It is interesting to note that puberty happens concomitantly
with such complex and intense regulation of synaptic activity in the brain (Sisk and
Foster 2004). The link between these two events has essentially been studied
through the effect of sexual hormones on brain organization (Ahmed et al. 2008).
Nonetheless, it appears that the plasticity of cortical neurons during puberty only
partially depends on sexual hormones. These results suggest that the GnRH net-
work is organized and timely determined by similar processes to those involved in
the normal plasticity of cortical neurons. This maturation is initially independent of
sexual hormones, then progressively shifts under the control of estradiol and
testosterone during puberty. Inhibitory input from GABA and excitatory input
from glutamate on GnRH and Kisspeptin neurons during the early phase of puberty
have hence been demonstrated in rodents. These inputs radically change during the
childhood-to-puberty transition. We assume that this change is the consequence of
the neurodevelopmental process that probably began during the second half of
gestation and just after puberty.
The characterization of the neurodevelopmental mechanisms shared by both
hypothalamic and cortical neurons will have a double impact. Firstly, it should
provide further understanding of pubertal onset and its associated diseases. Sec-
ondly, it should provide new hypotheses to explain neurodevelopmental disorders
in children.
Gonadotropic Axis Deﬁciency: A Neurodevelopmental Disorder
157

Congenital Gonadotropic Deﬁciency:
A Neurodevelopmental Anomaly of the Gonadotropic Axis
We initially studied isolated gonadotropic deﬁciency, which led us to characterize
mutations in GnRHR and KiSS1R (de Roux et al. 1999, 2003). Mutations in KISS1
(Topaloglu et al. 2012), GnRH1 (Bouligand et al. 2009), and also TAC3 encoding
neurokinin B, and TACR3, the receptor of neurokinin B (Topaloglu et al. 2009)
have also been described in isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. The pheno-
type observed in these patients has conﬁrmed that the central control of the
gonadotropic axis during fetal life is required for normal development of reproduc-
tive function. Investigation of the neuroendocrine functions of Kisspeptin and
Neurokinin B has revealed their role in the secretion of GnRH. In addition, several
genetic defects have been described in Kallmann syndrome (for review see
Pitteloud et al. 2010). All of these genes encode proteins required for the develop-
ment of the olfactory bulbs (Pitteloud et al. 2010). The gonadotropic deﬁciency
observed in these patients is mainly the consequence of the agenesis of the olfactory
tracts, although a direct action of these proteins on the migration and maturation of
GnRH neurons has also been proposed. We now have evidence that isolated
gonadotropic deﬁciency is not only an endocrine disorder but is also a neurodeve-
lopmental disorder due to a defect in the migration of GnRH neurons or the
neuroendocrine control of GnRH neurons.
We have thus suspected that studying complex diseases comprising both neuro-
logical disorders and a delayed puberty due to a congenital gonadotropic deﬁciency
should be very informative to delineating the mechanism of the initiation of puberty
and related disorders. Indeed, we believe both conditions originate from the same
neurodevelopmental anomaly. The literature shows that gonadotropic deﬁciency
has been described in many neurological syndromes, some of which are extremely
rare (Alazami et al. 2008; Bem et al. 2011; Bernard et al. 2011; Margolin
et al. 2013; Nousbeck et al. 2008; Synofzik et al. 2014; Tetreault et al. 2011).
Apart from Prader-Willi and CHARGE syndromes, which are well known by
pediatric endocrinologists, most of these syndromes are only followed in pediatric
neurology departments. Indeed, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is rarely diag-
nosed at birth in these children.
The neurological disease can be neurodegenerative, hence progressive. Signs of
dementia have been observed in some adults (Margolin et al. 2013), and 4H
syndrome, which associated a leucodystrophia with hypodontia and hypogona-
dotropic hypogonadism, has been described (Bernard et al. 2011; Tetreault
et al. 2011). Mental retardation is frequently observed, as well as cerebellar or
proprioceptive ataxia. Some signs are speciﬁc to one of these syndromes, such as a
microphtalmia associated with a cataract in Warburg microsyndrome (Handley
et al. 2013). The endocrine phenotype has been more or less described, with in
utero or post-natal growth retardation. In most cases, the endocrine deﬁcit is limited
to the gonadotropic axis and is of hypothalamic origin.
158
L. Huijbregts et al.

Several genes have been described via genetic linkage or exome analysis. These
genes encode proteins with various and sometime unexpected functions. For
instance, 4H syndrome is due to mutations in two type III RNA polymerase
sub-units encoding genes, POLR3A and POLR3B (Bernard et al. 2011; Tetreault
et al. 2011). This is a surprising result, since type III RNA polymerase is ubiquitous.
Its main function is to transcribe transfer RNA genes, which will further participate
in protein translation. Interestingly, other leucodystrophias involving a defective
protein synthesis have been described, but no gonadotropic deﬁciency was
observed. This indicates that the gonadotropic deﬁciency in 4H syndrome does
not depend on white matter disease but on POLR3A or POLR3B dysfunction.
Mutations in other genes, such as RNF216 and OTUD4, were shown to cause a
complex phenotype associating a gonadotropic deﬁciency with dementia. Again, it
seems that synaptic activity may be impaired, though RNF216 and ITUD4 have
been shown to be involved in protein ubiquitination, a major mechanism of protein
degradation (Margolin et al. 2013). Very recently, mutations in PNPLA6 were
identiﬁed in Boucher-Neuhauser and Gordon Holmes syndromes (Synofzik
et al. 2014). PNPLA6 belongs to the family of proteins with a phospholipid esterase
domain. It is interesting to note that PNPLA6 mutations were characterized in
different neurodegenerative diseases with ataxia, suggesting that Boucher-
Neuhauser syndrome is a phenotypic variant of an important group of neurodegen-
erative diseases.
Warburg microsyndrome is caused by mutations in RAB3GAP1, RAB3GAP2
and RAB18 (Handley et al. 2013). RAB3GAP1 and RAB3GAP2 are proteins with a
GTPase activity on RAB3 and RAB27. RAB18 is a small monomeric G protein.
These results suggest that the gonadotropic deﬁciency may result from a defective
neuronal function such as a neuropeptide or neurosecretion defect.
Syndromic gonadotropic deﬁciency has thus been described in many neurolog-
ical pathologies, some of which are extremely rare. Human genetics have led to the
identiﬁcation of several genes but the mechanisms leading to the gonadotropic
deﬁciency remain poorly understood. Nonetheless, hypotheses arising from these
results must be validated in animal models by neuroendocrinology laboratory teams
to delineate the exact function of these proteins in the central control of the
gonadotropic axis. To go further in this direction, our group has decided to
characterize the molecular mechanism involved in a phenotype from three siblings.
This particular phenotype regroups an intra-uterine and post-natal growth retarda-
tion, an impaired glucose metabolism leading to hypoglycemic episodes during
childhood and insulino-dependent diabetes during adolescence, a proprioceptive
ataxia, mental retardation, central hypothyroidism and a gonadotropic deﬁciency
without anosmia. Our results showed that the haploinsufﬁsiency of DMXl2 was the
cause of this familial phenotype (Tata et al. 2014).
Gonadotropic Axis Deﬁciency: A Neurodevelopmental Disorder
159

Conclusions and Perspectives
The development of the molecular genetics of puberty disorders over the last
15 years has been critical to delineate puberty onset mechanisms. The constant
technical evolution of molecular biology and close collaboration with pediatric
endocrinology and pediatric neurology hospital departments will provide opportu-
nities to identify novel genes involved in hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Ini-
tially focused on isolated gonadotropic deﬁciency, recent promising results have
thus been obtained from the study of syndromic forms. This new gene inventory
will be of utmost interest for screening familial and sporadic cases of IHH, thus
providing better information for genetic counseling.
Initially classiﬁed as an endocrine defect, isolated gonadotropic deﬁciency must
now be considered as a neurodevelopmental disorder due to a defect in neuron
migration, a defect in the neuroendocrine control of the GnRH network and also a
defect in synaptic communication between neurons. This new view of the
etiopathogenicity of pubertal disorders also offers new perspectives on the concept
of neurodegenerative diseases speciﬁc to the GnRH network. Moreover, beyond the
fundamental contribution to the mechanisms of puberty onset, they represent an
opportunity to study extremely rare phenotypes. Finally, these works will help to
understand the development of the homeostasis of the brain-gonad axis during
childhood and adolescence that will lead to normal fertility throughout adult life.
References
Ahmed EI, Zehr JL, Schulz KM, Lorenz BH, DonCarlos LL, Sisk CL (2008) Pubertal hormones
modulate the addition of new cells to sexually dimorphic brain regions. Nat Neurosci
11:995–997
Alazami AM, Al-Saif A, Al-Semari A, Bohlega S, Zlitni S, Alzahrani F, Bavi P, Kaya N, Colak D,
Khalak H, Baltus A, Peterlin B, Danda S, Bhatia KP, Schneider SA, Sakati N, Walsh CA,
Al-Mohanna F, Meyer B, Alkuraya FS (2008) Mutations in C2orf37, encoding a nucleolar
protein, cause hypogonadism, alopecia, diabetes mellitus, mental retardation, and extrapyra-
midal syndrome. Am J Hum Genet 83:684–691
Bem D, Yoshimura S, Nunes-Bastos R, Bond FC, Kurian MA, Rahman F, Handley MT,
Hadzhiev Y, Masood I, Straatman-Iwanowska AA, Cullinane AR, McNeill A, Pasha SS,
Kirby GA, Foster K, Ahmed Z, Morton JE, Williams D, Graham JM, Dobyns WB,
Burglen L, Ainsworth JR, Gissen P, Mu¨ller F, Maher ER, Barr FA, Aligianis IA (2011)
Loss-of-function mutations in RAB18 cause Warburg micro syndrome. Am J Hum Genet
88:499–507
Bernard G, Chouery E, Putorti ML, Tetreault M, Takanohashi A, Carosso G, Clement I,
Boespﬂug-Tanguy O, Rodriguez D, Delague V, Abou Ghoch J, Jalkh N, Dorboz I,
Fribourg S, Teichmann M, Megarbane A, Schiffmann R, Vanderver A, Brais B (2011)
Mutations of POLR3A encoding a catalytic subunit of RNA polymerase Pol III cause a
recessive hypomyelinating leukodystrophy. Am J Hum Genet 89:415–423
Bouligand J, Ghervan C, Tello JA, Brailly-Tabard S, Salenave S, Chanson P, Lombes M, Millar
RP, Guiochon-Mantel A, Young J (2009) Isolated familial hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
and a GNRH1 mutation. N Engl J Med 360:2742–2748
160
L. Huijbregts et al.

de Roux N, Young J, Misrahi M, Schaison G, Milgrom E (1999) Loss of function mutations of the
GnRH receptor: a new cause of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab
12(Suppl 1):267–275
de Roux N, Genin E, Carel JC, Matsuda F, Chaussain JL, Milgrom E (2003) Hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism due to loss of function of the KiSS1-derived peptide receptor GPR54. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 100:10972–10976
Guimiot F, Chevrier L, Dreux S, Chevenne D, Caraty A, Delezoide AL, de Roux N (2012)
Negative fetal FSH/LH regulation in late pregnancy is associated with declined kisspeptin/
KISS1R expression in the tuberal hypothalamus. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97:E2221–E2229
Handley MT, Morris-Rosendahl DJ, Brown S, Macdonald F, Hardy C, Bem D, Carpanini SM,
Borck G, Martorell L, Izzi C, Faravelli F, Accorsi P, Pinelli L, Basel-Vanagaite L, Peretz G,
Abdel-Salam GM, Zaki MS, Jansen A, Mowat D, Glass I, Stewart H, Mancini G, Lederer D,
Roscioli T, Giuliano F, Plomp AS, Rolfs A, Graham JM, Seemanova E, Poo P, Garcı´a-
Cazorla A, Edery P, Jackson IJ, Maher ER (2013) Mutation spectrum in RAB3GAP1,
RAB3GAP2, and RAB18 and genotype-phenotype correlations in Warburg micro syndrome
and Martsolf syndrome. Hum Mutat 34:686–696
Lomniczi A, Loche A, Castellano JM, Ronnekleiv OK, Bosch M, Kaidar G, Knoll JG, Wright H,
Pfeifer GP, Ojeda SR (2013a) Epigenetic control of female puberty. Nat Neurosci 16:281–289
Lomniczi A, Wright H, Castellano JM, Sonmez K, Ojeda SR (2013b) A system biology approach
to identify regulatory pathways underlying the neuroendocrine control of female puberty in rats
and nonhuman primates. Horm Behav 64:175–186
Margolin DH, Kousi M, Chan YM, Lim ET, Schmahmann JD, Hadjivassiliou M, Hall JE, Adam I,
Dwyer A, Plummer L, Aldrin SV, O’Rourke J, Kirby A, Lage K, Milunsky A, Milunsky JM,
Chan J, Hedley-Whyte ET, Daly MJ, Katsanis N, Seminara SB (2013) Ataxia, dementia, and
hypogonadotropism caused by disordered ubiquitination. N Engl J Med 368:1992–2003
Mitchell AL, Dwyer A, Pitteloud N, Quinton R (2011) Genetic basis and variable phenotypic
expression of Kallmann syndrome: towards a unifying theory. Trends Endocrinol Metab
22:249–258
Nousbeck J, Spiegel R, Ishida-Yamamoto A, Indelman M, Shani-Adir A, Adir N, Lipkin E,
Bercovici S, Geiger D, van Steensel MA, Steijlen PM, Bergman R, Bindereif A, Choder M,
Shalev S, Sprecher E (2008) Alopecia, neurological defects, and endocrinopathy syndrome
caused by decreased expression of RBM28, a nucleolar protein associated with ribosome
biogenesis. Am J Hum Genet 82:1114–1121
Pinilla L, Aguilar E, Dieguez C, Millar RP, Tena-Sempere M (2012) Kisspeptins and reproduc-
tion: physiological roles and regulatory mechanisms. Physiol Rev 92:1235–1316
Pitteloud N, Durrani S, Raivio T, Sykiotis GP (2010) Complex genetics in idiopathic hypogona-
dotropic hypogonadism. Front Horm Res 39:142–153
Prevot V, Bellefontaine N, Baroncini M, Sharif A, Hanchate NK, Parkash J, Campagne C, de
Seranno S (2010) Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone nerve terminals, tanycytes and
neurohaemal junction remodelling in the adult median eminence: functional consequences
for reproduction and dynamic role of vascular endothelial cells. J Neuroendocrinol 22:639–649
Ramaswamy S, Dwarki K, Ali B, Gibbs RB, Plant TM (2013) The decline in pulsatile GnRH
release, as reﬂected by circulating LH concentrations, during the infant-juvenile transition in
the agonadal male rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta) is associated with a reduction in kisspeptin
content of KNDy neurons of the arcuate nucleus in the hypothalamus. Endocrinology
154:1845–1853
Sisk CL, Foster DL (2004) The neural basis of puberty and adolescence. Nat Neurosci
7:1040–1047
Synofzik M, Gonzalez MA, Lourenco CM, Coutelier M, Haack TB, Rebelo A, Hannequin D,
Strom
TM,
Prokisch
H,
Kernstock
C
et
al
(2014)
PNPLA6
mutations
cause
Boucher-Neuhauser and Gordon Holmes syndromes as part of a broad neurodegenerative
spectrum. Brain: J Neurol 137:69–77
Gonadotropic Axis Deﬁciency: A Neurodevelopmental Disorder
161

T^ata B, Huijbregts L, Jacquier S, Csaba Z, Genin E, Meyer V, Leka S, Dupont J, Charles P,
Chevenne D, Carel JC, Leger J, de Roux N (2014) Haploinsufﬁciency of Dmxl2, encoding
a synaptic protein, causes infertility associated with a loss of GnRH neurons in mouse.
PloS Biol 12(9):e1001952
Tena-Sempere M (2012) Deciphering puberty: novel partners, novel mechanisms. Eur J
Endocrinol 167:733–747
Terasawa E, Guerriero KA, Plant TM (2013) Kisspeptin and puberty in mammals. Adv Exp Med
Biol 784:253–273
Tetreault M, Choquet K, Orcesi S, Tonduti D, Balottin U, Teichmann M, Fribourg S,
Schiffmann R, Brais B, Vanderver A, Bernard G (2011) Recessive mutations in POLR3B,
encoding the second largest subunit of Pol III, cause a rare hypomyelinating leukodystrophy.
Am J Hum Genet 89:652–655
Topaloglu AK, Reimann F, Guclu M, Yalin AS, Kotan LD, Porter KM, Serin A, Mungan NO,
Cook JR, Ozbek MN, Imamoglu S, Akalin NS, Yuksel B, O’Rahilly S, Semple RK (2009)
TAC3 and TACR3 mutations in familial hypogonadotropic hypogonadism reveal a key role for
Neurokinin B in the central control of reproduction. Nat Genet 41:354–358
Topaloglu AK, Tello JA, Kota LD, Ozbek MN, Yilmaz MB, Erdogan S, Gurbuz F, Temiz F, Millar
RP, Yuksel B (2012) Inactivating KISS1 mutation and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. N
Engl J Med 366:629–635
Wierman ME, Kiseljak-Vassiliades K, Tobet S (2011) Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
neuron migration: initiation, maintenance and cessation as critical steps to ensure normal
reproductive function. Front Neuroendocrinol 32:43–52
162
L. Huijbregts et al.

Changes in Pubertal Timing: Past Views,
Recast Issues
Jean-Pierre Bourguignon, Franc¸oise Domine, Fabienne Glowacz,
Marie-Christine Lebrethon, and Anne-Simone Parent
Abstract The aim of this article is to review some common opinions on changes in
pubertal timing and shed new light both on the indicators used in assessing pubertal
timing and the underlying mechanisms. While emphasis is usually placed on the
advancement in timing of female puberty, it appears that timing also changes in
males, both towards earliness for the initial pubertal stages and towards lateness for
the ﬁnal stages. Such ﬁndings suggest that the environmental inﬂuences on pubertal
timing are more complex than initially thought. Moreover, self-evaluated pubertal
timing versus peers provides information that is not always consistent with obser-
vations at physical examination, suggesting that both approaches should be con-
sidered, especially when studying the correlation between pubertal timing and
psychosocial aspects.
The mechanisms of changes in pubertal timing may involve both central neuro-
endocrine control and peripheral effects in tissues targeted by gonadal steroids.
Though energy availability is certainly a clue to the mechanism of pubertal devel-
opment, changes in the control of both energy balance and reproduction may vary
under the inﬂuence of common determinants such as endocrine-disrupting
chemicals. These effects can take place right before puberty as well as much earlier,
during fetal and neonatal life. Finally, environmental factors can interact with
genetic factors in determining changes in pubertal timing. Therefore, the variance
in pubertal timing is no longer to be considered under the absolutely separate
control of environmental and genetic determinants.
J.-P. Bourguignon (*) • M.-C. Lebrethon • A.-S. Parent
Department of Pediatrics, CHU de Lie`ge, Site ND Bruye`res, 600, rue de Gaillarmont, B-4030
Lie`ge, Belgium
Developmental Neuroendocrinology unit, GIGA Neurosciences, University of Lie`ge, Lie`ge,
Belgium
e-mail: jpbourguignon@ulg.ac.be
F. Domine
Department of Pediatrics, CHU de Lie`ge, Site CHR de la Citadelle, B-4000 Lie`ge, Belgium
F. Glowacz
Clinic of Delinquency, Social Maladjustment and Integration Processes, University of Lie`ge,
Lie`ge, Belgium
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
J.-P. Bourguignon et al. (eds.), Brain Crosstalk in Puberty and Adolescence,
Research and Perspectives in Endocrine Interactions 13,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09168-6_12
163

Introduction
We review here how studies of the physiological variations in pubertal timing have
changed recently with emphasis on the indicators and the mechanisms. The ﬁndings
suggest that the respective roles of genetic and environmental factors in the control
of pubertal timing are complex because they can take place during late prepubertal
life as well as fetal/neonatal life. Moreover, both types of factors likely involve
intricate mechanisms.
Changes in Indicators of Pubertal Timing
Since the mid-nineteenth century, a so-called secular trend towards earlier menar-
cheal age has been observed in many countries in Europe and North America.
An overall advancement in female pubertal timing that averaged 4 years in a
century was derived from those observations (Parent et al. 2003). During the past
50 years, menarcheal age has stabilized in some countries, such as Belgium
(Jeurissen 1969; Vercauteren and Susanne 1985; Roelants et al. 2009), where it
seemed that the secular advancement in pubertal timing was leveling off as opposed
to countries where socio-economical status was still markedly progressing (Parent
et al. 2003). It is notable, however, that recent publications have highlighted a
persistent but moderate decrease in average menarcheal age in countries like
Denmark and the Netherlands (Aksglaede et al. 2009; Talma et al. 2013). Around
2000, a new pattern of changes was observed in several countries such as USA,
Denmark and Belgium (Roelants et al. 2009; Aksglaede et al. 2009; Herman-
Giddens et al. 1997), with a heterogeneity among pubertal events, i.e., advancement
in age at onset of breast development and less or no change in menarcheal age. This
ﬁnding has led us to revise some issues about indicators and mechanisms of changes
in pubertal timing.
Studies of female puberty have been prioritized (Table 1) due to the availability
of menarcheal age as a precise timer, and focus on the female has been reinforced
Table 1 Changes in pubertal timing: INDICATORS
Common opinion
Revision
More relevance in females (studies using
menarcheal age as timer, female predomi-
nance of precocity, weight as a critical factor)
Reality in males (few studies based on testicu-
lar volume increase, voice break and growth
spurt; association with BMI)
Mean or median age: the clue
Changes in pattern of timing distribution indi-
cating involvement of subgroups
Single pubertal signs prioritized (the “onset”
of puberty)
Changes possibly divergent among pubertal
signs
Self-evaluation of pubertal development
(practical and ethical reasons)
Self-perceived timing providing information
different from physical exam
164
J.-P. Bourguignon et al.

by the critical role of weight and the predominance of sexual precocity in girls
(Parent et al. 2003). Based on ﬁndings about testicular volume increase, voice break
and growth spurt, it has appeared recently, however, that male pubertal timing is
advancing as well (Roelants et al. 2009; Aksglaede et al. 2008; Sorensen et al. 2010;
Juul et al. 2007; Herman-Giddens et al. 2012). As already pointed out in the female,
the initial pubertal signs and signs of completion of puberty could show secular
changes that are different, suggesting heterogeneity in the response of pubertal
events to modulating factors. For example, the ﬁrst 3–10 % of boys with evidence
of initial pubertal increase in testicular volume (4 ml) are younger than in the past
(Roelants et al. 2009; Herman-Giddens et al. 2012; Mul et al. 2001) whereas the
ﬁnal 3–10 % (centile 90 and 97) appear to attain adult testicular volume (15 ml)
later (Roelants et al. 2009; Mul et al. 2001). Thus, besides the changes in mean or
median ages at a given pubertal sign, subtle changes in the pattern of distribution of
timing of pubertal signs may occur, extending the age range beyond the physio-
logical 4–5-year period for both the initial and the late stages of puberty. The latter
ﬁnding is also consistent with the secular increase in latency between menarche and
the occurrence of regular (ovulatory) cycling that was reported in France together
with the classical secular trend towards earlier menarche (Clavel-Chapelon
et al. 2002).
In the evaluation of pubertal development, two distinctive issues can be consid-
ered: pubertal status, which refers to the degree of physical changes, and pubertal
timing, which refers to the age at attainment of a given degree of physical change.
The adolescents are understandably reluctant to allow assessment of pubertal status
if not justiﬁed by the chief complaint at consultation. Therefore, methods of self-
assessment of pubertal status (Table 2) were designed, in comparison with Tanner
stages, provided either as pictures or drawings (Duke et al. 1980; Morris and Udry
(1980), or as written statements (Petersen et al. 1988). Controversial data have been
published regarding the validity of these methods that cannot substitute for a
physician’s examination (Hergenroeder et al. 1999; Brooks-Gunn et al. 1987;
Bond et al. 2006; Dick et al. 2001; Dorn and Biro 2011). Moreover, the signiﬁcance
of self-assessed pubertal status in determining pubertal timing has been limited to
the interpretation of current status with respect to age. In some instances, retro-
spective assessment of pubertal timing could be interesting. Berg-Kelly and Erdes
(1997) proposed an age-independent method of self-assessment of pubertal timing
through a global multiple choice question rating maturation versus peers. The
answer to this question was found to result in 94 % agreement with physician
examination and normal distribution of timing in the studied population (Berg-
Kelly and Erdes 1997). We have used a similar question: “Between 8 and 18 years,
boys and girls change physically but not all at the same time. If you consider your
physical development, how do you evaluate it in comparison with friends of the
same age: Very early? A bit early? Same as most friends? A bit late? Very late?”
Such a question enables self-evaluation of pubertal timing based on current status,
as done in the Swedish study (Berg-Kelly and Erdes 1997), or retrospectively, as
done in our study. As shown in Fig. 1, the distribution of responses in two separate
studies was found to be asymmetrical, with more adolescents estimating they had
Changes in Pubertal Timing: Past Views, Recast Issues
165

matured early than late. Interestingly enough, in a study comparing adolescent self-
perception of pubertal timing using both a global question (peer normative) and the
pubertal developmental scale (PDS; stage normative), a similar proportion of late
timing (12–13 %) was found using both tools whereas the global question resulted
in a greater proportion of early timing (28 %) as opposed to the PDS (13 %; Cance
et al. 2012). This ﬁnding suggests that the comparison with peers involves a factor
Table 2 Comparison of some features of different methods of self-assessment of pubertal status
and timing in healthy adolescents
Pubertal status
Pubertal
timing
Sexual maturation scale (SMS)
Pubertal
developmental
score (PDS)
Global
question
Tanner’s
pictures
Tanner’s drawings
References
Duke et al. 1980
Morris and Udry 1980;
Petersen et al. 1988;
Hergenroeder
et al. 1999; Dorn and
Biro 2011
Petersen
et al. 1988;
Brooks-Gunn
et al. 1987; Bond
et al. 2006
Berg-Kelly
and Erdes
1997
N items in
girls (F) &
boys (M)
F: 2 M: 2
F: 2 M: 2
F: 6 M: 5
F & M: 1
Items
assessed
Sex characteris-
tic staging (ﬁve
Tanner’s stages)
Sex characteristic
staging (ﬁve Tanner’s
stages)
Sex characteris-
tic staging (ﬁve
items)
Global timing
(ﬁve
qualiﬁcations)
Method of
self-
assessment
Current devel-
opment versus
photographs
and descriptive
text
Current development
versus drawings
Current develop-
ment versus
descriptive text
+ menarcheal
age
Current and
retrospective
development
versus peers
Acceptability/
response rate
Fairly good
Fairly good/64 %
Good/66 %,
70 %
Good/82 %
Usable for
different
races
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Agreement
with clinical
assessment
κ > 0.81–0.91
(Duke
et al. 1980)
r 0.59–0.81 (Morris
and Udry 1980) or κ
0.34–0.37
(Hergenroeder
et al. 1999) or 0.06–
0.43/27–59 %
(Schlossberger
et al. 1992); r ¼ 0.77–
0.91 and κ 0.33–0.50
(Dorn and Biro 2011)
α 0.65–0.82
(Petersen
et al. 1988)
94 % (Berg-
Kelly and
Erdes 1997)
F: 31–62 %
(Brooks-Gunn
et al. 1987)
F : κ :0.57 M : κ: 0.42 (Bond et al. 2006)
Biases
Adiposity
F females, M males, κ Kappa coefﬁcient (Cohen’s rule of thumb), r Pearson’s correlation
coefﬁcient, α Cronbach’s alpha coefﬁcient
166
J.-P. Bourguignon et al.

that accounts for increased self-perception of early timing of maturation. Desirability
could play some role: evaluating oneself as early versus peers could be felt as a plus
whereas being late would be a minus. Some discrepancies in self-evaluation of
pubertal timing could be related to the conditions of evaluation. Agreement with
physician evaluation was greater when the sexual maturation scale was administered
in a clinical setting rather than at school (Schlossberger et al. 1992). These authors also
found a greater proportion of early-maturing subjects based on adolescent global
self-rating than based on physician evaluation.
Our data also raise the question as to whether an increased proportion of self-
evaluated earliness is actually consistent with early or precocious puberty. The
response is negative since, among a group of adolescents with early or precocious
puberty conﬁrmed by physical examination, about 2/3 had a concordant self-
evaluated timing whereas 1/3 were felt to be average maturers. Thus, self-perceived
pubertal development does not reliably match data from physical exam and pro-
vides different information that can have its own signiﬁcance for adolescent
behavior. Such a conclusion has been drawn by Deppen et al. (2012), who reported
that adolescent girls with average timing of menarche but early self-perceived
pubertal timing were at increased risk of adolescent exploratory behaviors.
Fig. 1 Upper panel: self evaluation of pubertal timing versus peers of the same age in two
separate groups of 265 adolescents irrespective of gender and 249 adolescents (108 girls and
141 boys). Lower panel: self evaluation of pubertal timing versus peers of the same age in
52 adolescents with early or precocious pubertal timing, based on physical exam
Changes in Pubertal Timing: Past Views, Recast Issues
167

Changes in Mechanisms of Pubertal Timing
In searching for possible causes and mechanisms of changes in pubertal timing, the
default hypothesis is hypothalamic-pituitary maturation, possibly because central
precocity is much more frequent than peripheral precocity (Table 3). It appears,
however, that peripheral mechanisms can coexist with central mechanisms or
secondarily facilitate them. Such a concept is supported by the dissociation between
advancement in age at onset of breast development in Denmark, the Netherlands
and Belgium without a parallel change in menarcheal age, suggesting that both
events are inﬂuenced by different factors, including possible breast development
due to estrogenic effects independent of hypothalamic-pituitary maturation
(Roelants et al. 2009; Aksglaede et al. 2009; Mul et al. 2001). That dissociation
of breast development and menarche could account for the secular reduction in
correlation coefﬁcient between the ages at occurrence of the two pubertal events
(Biro et al. 2006). The interpretation of the mechanistic role of sex steroids or
related environmental factors is complex due to the multiple sites where they can
interact between the hypothalamus and the peripheral target tissues. In particular,
sex steroids exert potent inhibitory feedback on the pituitary gonadotrophins. As an
illustration (Fig. 2), a girl with androgen excess caused by an adrenal adenoma has
developed no breasts at 13, possibly due to the androgen/estrogen ratio as well as
the negative feedback caused at the pituitary level. However, hypothalamic matu-
ration should have progressed silently since, 6 months after withdrawal from the
androgen excess, breast development is nearly adult and menarche occurs. This
condition is somehow comparable with the mechanism that we have delineated in a
female rodent model (Rasier et al. 2007, 2008) to explain sexual precocity in girls
who were previously exposed to the estrogenic insecticide DDT and then with-
drawn from that environment after migration to Belgium (Krstevska-Konstantinova
et al. 2001).
Table 3 Changes in pubertal timing: MECHANISMS
Common opinion
Revision
Central puberty as default hypothesis
Peripheral mechanisms likely coexisting with
or preceding secondary central puberty
Direct causal role of nutrition in onset of
puberty established
Factors such as EDCs affect both energy bal-
ance and pubertal timing
Focus on environmental conditions right before
onset of puberty
Fetal and neonatal origin of changes in
pubertal timing
Variance of pubertal timing explained by
genetic factors for 70–80 % and environmental
factors for 20–30 %
Environmental and genetic factors interaction
through polymorphisms and epigenetics
Increase in age at pubertal onset is associated
with reduction in pubertal growth and little or
no change in ﬁnal height
In the male, promotion of bone growth by
androgens and bone maturation by estrogens
can be dissociated, e.g., using aromatase
inhibitors
EDCs endocrine-disrupting chemicals
168
J.-P. Bourguignon et al.

Fig. 2 Growth curve of a female patient presenting at 13 years with no breast development
(B1 Tanner’s stage) and adult pubic hair (P6 Tanner’s stage) due to an androgen-secreting adrenal
adenoma. Within 6 months after surgical removal of the adenoma, breasts attained B4 stage and
menarche occurred. Target height and bone age (X) are indicated
Changes in Pubertal Timing: Past Views, Recast Issues
169

Because nutrition has long been known to be a determinant of puberty, especially
in females, a direct causal relationship between obesity and earlier onset of puberty
has been hypothesized (Parent et al. 2003). Evidence has indeed accumulated that a
sufﬁcient amount of fat mass signaling to the neuroendocrine system through leptin
is a prerequisite to the onset of puberty. Leptin can stimulate pulsatile GnRH
secretion and is indeed necessary but not sufﬁcient to account for the onset of puberty
(Lebrethon et al. 2007). It appears also that both energy balance and pubertal timing
share common regulatory factors that could be jointly inﬂuenced during prenatal or
neonatal organization of the neuroendocrine control of homeostasis (Bourguignon
et al. 2010, 2013) Along the same lines, most studies on the role of environmental
factors in triggering the onset of puberty were centered on the immediately preceding
period. Now, the impact of events during fetal and neonatal periods appears to be
equally important. For instance, Ibanez et al. (2011) have provided evidence that, in
girls with premature pubarche, menarche is advanced as a function of reduction in
birth weight. Studies of the effects of neonatal exposure to endocrine disrupters such
as diethylstilbestrol (DES) in the female rat showed opposing effects on GnRH
secretion and pubertal timing, depending on the dose (Franssen et al. 2014). More-
over, both prenatal food restriction and neonatal DES exposure resulted in a reduced
response of pulsatile GnRH secretion to leptin, with both effects being additive
(Franssen et al. 2014). Though the mechanism of variations in pubertal timing caused
in fetal or neonatal life is not fully elucidated, it could involve epigenetics that,
together with polymorphisms, teach us that the contribution of genetic and environ-
mental factors is intricate in explaining the variance in pubertal timing.
While the pubertal growth spurt is decreasing with age at onset of puberty, the
impact of differences in pubertal timing on ﬁnal height is limited (Bourguignon
1988). Such a ﬁnding, however, may be revised based on the dissociated gain in
height and progression of bone maturation in two prismatic male cases with
estrogen receptor or aromatase deﬁciency (Smith et al. 1994; Carani et al. 1997).
Those observations have highlighted the speciﬁc role of estrogens in bone matura-
tion and led some authors to use aromatase inhibitors in short adolescents and
demonstrated a signiﬁcant gain in adult stature (Hero et al. 2006). Such treatment,
however, may involve undesirable effects such as vertebral deformities and should
be restricted to research protocols that also have to delineate the possible effects of
such treatment on brain and behavior.
Acknowledgments Supported by the “Belgian Fonds de la Recherche Scientiﬁque Me´dicale” ,
the University of Lie`ge and the Belgian Study Group for Pediatric Endocrinology.
References
Aksglaede L, Olsen LW, Sorensen TI, Juul A (2008) Forty years trends in timing of pubertal
growth spurt in 157,000 Danish school children. PLoS One 3:e2728
Aksglaede L, Sorensen K, Petersen JH, Skakkebaek NE, Juul A (2009) Recent decline in age at
breast development: the Copenhagen Puberty Study. Pediatrics 123:e932–e939
170
J.-P. Bourguignon et al.

Berg-Kelly K, Erdes L (1997) Self-assessment of sexual maturity by mid-adolescents based on a
global question. Acta Paediatr 86:10–17
Biro FM, Huang B, Crawford PB, Lucky AW, Striegel-Moore R, Barton BA, Daniels S (2006)
Pubertal correlates in black and white girls. J Pediatr 148:234–240
Bond L, Clements J, Bertalli N, Evans-Whipp T, McMorris BJ, Patton GC, Toumbourou JW,
Catalano RF (2006) A comparison of self-reported puberty using the Pubertal Development
Scale and the Sexual Maturation Scale in a school-based epidemiologic survey. J Adolesc
29:709–720
Bourguignon JP (1988) Linear growth as a function of age at onset of puberty and sex steroid
dosage: therapeutic implications. Endocr Rev 9:467–488
Bourguignon JP, Rasier G, Lebrethon MC, Gerard A, Naveau E, Parent AS (2010) Neuroendo-
crine disruption of pubertal timing and interactions between homeostasis of reproduction and
energy balance. Mol Cell Endocrinol 324:110–120
Bourguignon JP, Franssen D, Gerard A, Janssen S, Pinson A, Naveau E, Parent AS (2013) Early
neuroendocrine disruption in hypothalamus and hippocampus: developmental effects includ-
ing female sexual maturation and implications for endocrine disrupting chemical screening. J
Neuroendocrinol 25:1079–1087
Brooks-Gunn J, Warren MP, Rosso J, Gargiulo J (1987) Validity of self-report measures of girls’
pubertal status. Child Dev 58:829–841
Cance JD, Ennett ST, Morgan-Lopez AA, Foshee VA (2012) The stability of perceived pubertal
timing across adolescence. J Youth Adolesc 41:764–775
Carani C, Qin K, Simoni M, Faustini-Fustini M, Serpente S, Boyd J, Korach KS, Simpson ER
(1997) Effect of testosterone and estradiol in a man with aromatase deﬁciency. N Engl J Med
337:91–95
Clavel-Chapelon F, E3N-Epic group, European Prospective Investigation into Cancer (2002)
Evolution of age at menarche and at onset of regular cycling in a large cohort of French
women. Hum Reprod 17:228–232
Deppen A, Jeannin A, Michaud PA, Alsaker F, Suris JC (2012) Subjective pubertal timing and
health-compromising behaviours among Swiss adolescent girls reporting an on-time objective
pubertal timing. Acta Paediatr 101:868–872
Dick DM, Rose RJ, Pulkkinen L, Kaprio J (2001) Measuring and understanding its impact: a
longitudinal study of adolescent twins. J Youth Adolesc 30:385–399
Dorn LD, Biro FM (2011) Puberty and its measurement: a decade in review. J Res Adolesc
21:180–195
Duke PM, Litt IF, Gross RT (1980) Adolescents’ self-assessment of sexual maturation. Pediatrics
66:918–920
Franssen D, Ioannou YS, Alvarez-Real A, Gerard A, Mueller JK, Heger S, Bourguignon JP, Parent
AS (2014) Pubertal timing after neonatal diethylstilbestrol exposure in female rats: neuroen-
docrine vs peripheral effects and additive role of prenatal food restriction. Reprod Toxicol
44:63–72
Hergenroeder AC, Hill RB, Wong WW, Sangi-Haghpeykar H, Taylor W (1999) Validity of self-
assessment of pubertal maturation in African American and European American adolescents. J
Adolesc Health 24:201–205
Herman-Giddens ME, Slora EJ, Wasserman RC, Bourdony CJ, Bhapkar MV, Koch GG,
Hasemeier CM (1997) Secondary sexual characteristics and menses in young girls seen in
ofﬁce practice: a study from the Pediatric Research in Ofﬁce Settings network. Pediatrics
99:505–512
Herman-Giddens ME, Steffes J, Harris D, Slora E, Hussey M, Dowshen SA, Wasserman R,
Serwint JR, Smitherman L, Reiter EO (2012) Secondary sexual characteristics in boys: data
from the Pediatric Research in Ofﬁce Settings network. Pediatrics 130:e1058–e1068
Hero M, Wickman S, Dunkel L (2006) Treatment with the aromatase inhibitor letrozole during
adolescence increases near-ﬁnal height in boys with constitutional delay of puberty. Clin
Endocrinol 64:510–513
Ibanez L, Lopez-Bermejo A, Diaz M, Marcos MV (2011) Endocrinology and gynecology of girls
and women with low birth weight. Fetal Diagn Ther 30:243–249
Changes in Pubertal Timing: Past Views, Recast Issues
171

Jeurissen A (1969) Age of the establishment of the menarche and its evolution in Belgium during
the last 40 years. Acta Paediatr Belg 23:319–330
Juul A, Magnusdottir S, Scheike T, Prytz S, Skakkebaek NE (2007) Age at voice break in Danish
boys: effects of pre-pubertal body mass index and secular trend. Int J Androl 30:537–542
Krstevska-Konstantinova M, Charlier C, Craen M, Du Caju M, Heinrichs C, de Beaufort C,
Plomteux G, Bourguignon JP (2001) Sexual precocity after immigration from developing
countries to Belgium: evidence of previous exposure to organochlorine pesticides. Hum
Reprod 16:1020–1026
Lebrethon MC, Aganina A, Fournier M, Gerard A, Parent AS, Bourguignon JP (2007) Effects of
in vivo and in vitro administration of ghrelin, leptin and neuropeptide mediators on pulsatile
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone secretion from male rat hypothalamus before and after
puberty. J Neuroendocrinol 19:181–188
Morris NM, Udry JR (1980) Validation of a self-administered instrument to assess stage of
adolescent development. J Youth Adolesc 9:271–280
Mul D, Fredriks AM, van Buuren S, Oostdijk W, Verloove-Vanhorick SP, Wit JM (2001) Pubertal
development in The Netherlands 1965–1997. Pediatr Res 50:479–486
Parent AS, Teilmann G, Juul A, Skakkebaek NE, Toppari J, Bourguignon JP (2003) The timing of
normal puberty and the age limits of sexual precocity: variations around the world, secular
trends, and changes after migration. Endocr Rev 24:668–693
Petersen AC, Crockett L, Richards M, Boxer A (1988) A self-report measure of pubertal status:
reliability, validity, and initial norms. J Youth Adolesc 17:117–133
Rasier G, Parent AS, Gerard A, Lebrethon MC, Bourguignon JP (2007) Early maturation of
gonadotropin-releasing hormone secretion and sexual precocity after exposure of infant female
rats to estradiol or dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane. Biol Reprod 77:734–742
Rasier G, Parent AS, Gerard A, Denooz R, Lebrethon MC, Charlier C, Bourguignon JP (2008)
Mechanisms of interaction of endocrine-disrupting chemicals with glutamate-evoked secretion
of gonadotropin-releasing hormone. Toxicol Sci 102:33–41
Roelants M, Hauspie R, Hoppenbrouwers K (2009) References for growth and pubertal develop-
ment from birth to 21 years in Flanders, Belgium. Ann Hum Biol 36:680–694
Schlossberger NM, Turner RA, Irwin CE Jr (1992) Validity of self-report of pubertal maturation in
early adolescents. J Adolesc Health 13:109–113
Smith EP, Boyd J, Frank GR, Takahashi H, Cohen RM, Specker B, Williams TC, Lubahn DB,
Korach KS (1994) Estrogen resistance caused by a mutation in the estrogen-receptor gene in a
man. N Engl J Med 331:1056–1061
Sorensen K, Aksglaede L, Petersen JH, Juul A (2010) Recent changes in pubertal timing in healthy
Danish boys: associations with body mass index. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 95:263–270
Talma H, Schonbeck Y, van Dommelen P, Bakker B, van Buuren S, Hirasing RA (2013) Trends in
menarcheal age between 1955 and 2009 in the Netherlands. PLoS One 8:e60056
Vercauteren M, Susanne C (1985) The secular trend of height and menarche in Belgium: are there
any signs of a future stop? Eur J Pediatr 144:306–309
172
J.-P. Bourguignon et al.

Index
A
Adolescent, 34, 35, 37–39, 45–53
GnRH, 35
AMPK, 129–131
and puberty, 121–131
Androstadienone, 35–40
4,16-Androstadien-3-one (AND),
33, 34
Anteroventral periventricular nucleus,
21–23
Aspirin, 140
Astrocytes, 137, 138, 144, 156
B
Behavior, 31, 45–53
mating, 31
sexual, 31
testosterone, 31
toy preferences, 31
Brain, 45, 46, 48–50, 52
in adolescence, 57–70, 75–81, 85–94
and behavior, 15–25
development, 75–81
British Birth Cohort, 67–69
C
Cerebral volume, 86–87
Childhood GD, 40
Children, 34, 35
Cocaine, 3, 6–10
Cortex/cortices/cortical
anterior cingulate gyrus (ACG), 3
orbital frontal cortex (OFC), 3, 9, 10
prefrontal cortex (PFC), 3, 5, 6
COX inhibitors, 140
D
Dendritic spine plasticty,
Depression, 61, 62, 64, 66, 67, 69
Development, 30–32, 34, 39, 45–52
embryonic, 31
perinatal, 30
postnatal, 30
testosterone, 31
Development/developmental (of the brain),
4–5, 7, 10
Differentiation, 31–34, 39
estradiol, 32
estrogen, 32
psychosexual, 31
sexual, 31
testosterone, 31, 32
Dopamine, 2, 3, 5, 6, 9
E
Eating disorder, 58, 62, 65–66
Ensheathe synapses, 138
erbB, 141
signalling, 144
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
J.-P. Bourguignon et al. (eds.), Brain Crosstalk in Puberty and Adolescence,
Research and Perspectives in Endocrine Interactions 13,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-09168-6
173

F
Feminization, 33
Firing, 147
Functionally connected, 144
Functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI), 33, 79–81, 89
G
Gender identity (GD), 30–35, 37–40
testosterone, 31
Gliotransmission,
Gliotransmitter, 138, 148
GnRH, 155–158, 160
neural network, 137
neurons, 147
metabolic control of puberty,
121–131
metabolic regulation, 122–123,
127–128
system, 148
Gonadal hormone, 15–25
Gonadectomy, 22–24
Gray matter, 87, 89–92
Growth trajectories for subcortical regions
of the brain, 78
H
Health care, 52, 53
Health compromising behavior, 47, 48, 52
Hormones, 30, 31, 34, 39
ACTH, 31
aldosterone, 31
androgen, 31
androgens, 31
cortisol, 31
17-dehydroxyprogesterone, 31
deoxycorticosterone, 31
deoxycortisol, 31
estradiol, 30, 31, 34
GnRH, 32, 34
progesterone, 31
testosterone, 30, 34
Hypothalamic control of reproduction,
138–140
Hypothalamus, 34, 37, 38, 140
I
INAH3. See Third interstitial nucleus of the
anterior hypothalamus (INAH3)
Incongruence, 30
K
Kisspeptins
metabolic control of puberty, 121–131
and puberty, 121–131
L
Long term effects of puberty on mental health,
66–67
M
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 4–10,
33–35
Mammalian target of Rapamycin (mTOR),
129–131
and puberty, 121–131
Masculinization, 31, 33
Maturation, 46, 49, 50, 52, 53
Mechanism of puberty, 164, 168–170
Menarche, 165, 167–170
Mental health, 45–53
in adolescence, 57–70
Morphology/morphological (of the brain),
7, 9, 10
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
N
Nesfatin-1, 128–129
and puberty, 121–131
Neuregulin, 142
Neuroimaging, 85–94
Neurokinin B (NKB), 127–128
and puberty, 121–131
Neuronal glutamatergic system, 144
Nucleus accumbens (NAc), 2, 3, 8, 9
O
Odor, 35–37
Ojeda, S.R., 97–110
Onset of puberty, 156
P
PGE2. See Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)
Posterodorsal medial amygdala, 24
Postsynaptic effect, 147
Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), 138, 147, 148
Pubertal status, 165, 166
Pubertal timing, 45–53
Puberty, 34, 39, 45–52
Public health, 45–53
174
Index

R
Receptor tyrosine kinases, 141
S
Secular trend, 164, 165
in puberty, 59–60
Self-assessment of puberty, 165, 166
Sex reassignment, 34
Sexual development, 137
Sexual differentiation, 16–25
Sexuality, 47, 48, 50, 51, 53
Sexually dimorphic bed nucleus of the stria
terminalis, 32
Sexually dimorphic nucleus of the preoptic
area (SDN), 21–23
Striatum, 3, 5–10
Subcortical gray matter, 91–92
Substance use, 48, 49, 52
Suppression of ovulation, 140
T
Testosterone, 16–21, 25
TGFα, 142
Third interstitial nucleus of the anterior
hypothalamus (INAH3), 32, 33
V
Ventral pre-mammillary nucleus (PMV), 126
and leptin, 126
W
White matter (WM), 87–89, 91, 93
Index
175

