



Clinical Focus
Adapting Curricula for Children With Language
Comprehension Deficits
Mindy S. Bridges,a
Maura Curran,b
Corinne Neal,a
Shayne Piasta,c
Kandace Fleming,d
and Tiffany Hoganb
aThe University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City bMGH Institute of Health Professions, Boston, MA cThe Ohio State University,
Columbus dThe University of Kansas, Lawrence
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article History:
Received November 21, 2022
Revision received March 11, 2023
Accepted April 13, 2023
Editor-in-Chief: Amanda J. Owen Van Horne
https://doi.org/10.1044/2023_LSHSS-22-00189
Correspondence to Mindy Bridges: mbridges2@kumc.edu. Publisher
Note: This article is part of the Forum: Implementation Science in
School-Based Settings. Disclosure: Mindy S. Bridges was a member of
the LARRC consortium. The other authors have declared that no com-
peting financial or nonfinancial interests existed at the time of
publication.
A B S T R A C T
Purpose: We
will
describe
how
a
multisite
research
team
adapted
a
language-focused curriculum to be used in a scale-up project. Specifically,
we identified underlying principles to modify a Tier 1 whole-classroom lan-
guage comprehension–focused curriculum to be used as a Tier 2 small-group
curriculum with children identified as at risk for low language comprehension,
including children with developmental language disorder (DLD).
Method: We discuss how researchers used the following five guiding principles
to adapt a curriculum for children at risk for low language comprehension,
including children with DLD: (a) increased and ongoing professional develop-
ment, (b) simplification of language input, (c) increased scaffolding, (d) attention
to distributed practice, and (e) materials to support diversity and inclusion.
Results: We used these guiding principles to modify a popular language-based
curriculum used in schools across the country.
Conclusion: This clinical focus article showcases how guiding principles and
frameworks for adaptation, within implementation science, can serve as a guidepost
for speech-language pathologists and other educators who are adapting or scaling
up a curriculum or intervention that was not designed for their target population.
Multitiered system of support, or MTSS, is a school-
based framework used in elementary schools to provide sup-
port for the individual learning needs of all students. MTSS
involves increasingly targeted intervention across three levels
of support—Tier 1 classroom instruction, Tier 2 small
group–targeted instruction, and Tier 3 Individualized Educa-
tion Programs (Jimerson et al., 2016). Assessment across the
school year determines a child’s needs within MTSS.
The two primary components underlying reading
comprehension are word reading and language compre-
hension (Castles et al., 2018; Gough & Tumner, 1986;
Hoover & Gough, 1990; Language and Reading Research
Consortium [LARRC], 2015). Word reading is a child’s
ability to turn print into speech (inner speech, if reading
silently). Language comprehension is the ability to under-
stand the language created by that speech. Currently,
MTSS frameworks, in all tiers, focus mostly on word
reading instruction with limited attention to language
comprehension (Snowling et al., 2022). To comprehen-
sively address reading comprehension, MTSS frameworks
require evidence-based high-quality instruction for not
only word reading but also language comprehension. In
this clinical focus article, we describe how a multi-
site research team adapted a language-focused Tier 1
classroom-wide curriculum to be used with Tier 2 small
groups of children with low levels of language, including
children with developmental language disorder (DLD).
The Need for Tier 2 Small-Group
Instruction in Language Comprehension
Although word reading instruction has improved
over the past decade, reading comprehension scores have
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools
Vol. 54
1066–1079
October 2023
Copyright © 2023 American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
1066
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

remained stagnant in the United States (U.S. Department
of Education, 2022). Why? One key factor is the lack of
systematic, high-quality, evidence-based language compre-
hension instruction (Castles et al., 2018; Dickinson et al.,
2010; R. Silverman & Crandell, 2010; Wright & Neuman,
2013). If only one of the two components of reading com-
prehension is explicitly taught in elementary school—word
reading—then it is not surprising that reading comprehen-
sion scores are not improving over time. Unfortunately,
when curricula do include language comprehension instruc-
tion, that “instruction” is often limited to testing comprehen-
sion instead of teaching comprehension. That is, a teacher
will ask children questions to test their comprehension of
a text, but no direct instruction is given on the language
skills needed to comprehend the questions (Chall, 1967).
Some children have low reading comprehension even
if they learn to read words (Nation et al., 2004). These
children, referred to as poor comprehenders (Nation et al.,
2004; Spear-Swerling, 2016), are often undetected until the
later grades because early reading instruction is focused
on teaching word reading, a skill they can acquire (Catts
et al., 2006). Poor comprehenders have less-developed lan-
guage comprehension as well as less-developed lower and
higher level language skills (e.g., age-appropriate vocabu-
lary, grammar, and discourse-level processing) that are
foundational
to
comprehension
(Nation
et
al.,
1999;
Oakhill et al., 2005; Spencer et al., 2014). Of note, chil-
dren with DLD are almost always poor comprehenders;
however, poor comprehenders do not always meet the clini-
cal cutoff for a diagnosis of DLD (see Adlof & Hogan,
2018). DLD is a neurobiological condition in which a per-
son has difficulty learning, using, and understanding lan-
guage (McGregor, 2020). Poor comprehenders are charac-
terized by language deficits linked to, for example, DLD
(Catts et al., 2002), intellectual disability (Wei et al., 2011),
and autism (Davidson & Ellis Weismer, 2014), and contex-
tual factors such as limited English proficiency (Li et al.,
2021). Regardless of the root cause, if language comprehen-
sion is not explicitly and systematically taught in the early
elementary school grades, especially to poor comprehenders,
then reading comprehension skills will not improve, even if
word reading instruction is strong.
Development and Efficacy of Let’s Know!
Language Comprehension Curricula
In 2010, the LARRC (R305F100002) was formed.
The consortium was funded as part of an extensive effort
to improve Reading for Understanding, an initiative that
provided $20 million in funding to five consortia. Over a 5-
year period (2010–2015), the LARRC team of 14 investiga-
tors across six sites developed and tested a comprehensive
Tier
1
whole-classroom
curriculum
supplement,
Let’s
Know!, to stimulate language skills in children ages 4–
9 years (prekindergarten [PK] to Grade 3), which culmi-
nated in a large randomized trial involving over 1,500 stu-
dents in PK through Grade 3 classrooms across six U.S.
states (LARRC et al., 2017, 2019, 2022).
Prior to developing the curriculum, the LARRC
team conducted an exhaustive review of basic processes
related to language and reading development and lan-
guage pedagogy. The review drew on multiple literatures,
synthesizing basic and applied research findings from the
fields of speech-hearing sciences, developmental and cog-
nitive psychology, reading education, and special educa-
tion. The team then spent 3 years using this information,
along with information about other evidence-based best
practices, to iteratively develop and pilot the Let’s Know!
curriculum (see LARRC, 2016). During development, the
research team identified guiding principles for the curricu-
lum. These guidelines included ensuring that the curricu-
lum was (a) text based and included both expository and
narrative text representing a variety of text structures; (b)
adaptable with options for differentiating instruction to
meet individual child needs; (c) motivating by incorporating
empirically validated ways to increase motivation during
reading instruction, including opportunities for children to
make choices and engage in hands-on activities with peers;
(d) systematically organized with lessons aligned to sequenced
instructional objectives and practice opportunities interleaved
throughout lessons and across units; and (e) language
focused to emphasize stimulation of foundational, lower
level
language
skills
(vocabulary
and
grammar)
and
higher,
discourse-level
language
skills
(text
structure
knowledge, inferencing, and comprehension monitoring).
LARRC used a systematic, evidence-based gold standard
approach
to
curriculum
development:
the
curriculum
research framework (Clements, 2007; see LARRC, 2016).
The resultant curriculum, Let’s Know!, was designed
to be delivered to whole classrooms by the classroom
teacher. The curriculum features manualized, soft-scripted
lessons that provide 120 min of language instruction per
week, organized into four instructional units, based on the
common core curriculum adopted by most states at the
time of curriculum development (and still in use in most
states, in some form). These four instructional units
emphasize repeated reading and exploration of authentic
commercially available texts, with two units comprising
narrative books (fiction, folktales) and two comprising
expository books (animals, earth materials). For each unit,
teachers provided whole-class instruction 4 times per week
for approximately 25–30 min per lesson. Each lesson
emphasizes empirically validated instructional techniques
for promoting language skills, following a gradual release
of responsibility model (Pearson & Gallagher, 1983) via
Bridges et al.: Adapting Curricula for Children With DLD
1067
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 




an I Do, We Do, You Do approach. A Let’s Know!
teacher’s manual provides the scope of instruction, specific
teaching strategies, lessons, and materials for implementa-
tion. All aspects of Let’s Know!, including the curriculum
manual, lessons, associated professional development, and
implementation fidelity tools, are already fully developed
and freely available (LARRC, 2022; https://larrc.ehe.osu.
edu/). The Let’s Know! curriculum is the culmination of a
large-scale, federally funded, systematic effort by multiple
researchers
and
hundreds
of
educators
to
synthesize
decades of language and comprehension work for the cre-
ation of an evidence-based whole-classroom curriculum to
target a critical gap in reading instruction.
Results from the large randomized control trial
(RCT) support the initial efficacy of Let’s Know! as a Tier
1 intervention: Compared to business-as-usual instruction,
Let’s Know! significantly improved select measures of
lower and higher level language skills that underpin com-
prehension for children in Grades 1 through 3 (LARRC
et al., 2017, 2019). The impact of improved language skills
for students in Grades 1–3—and specifically the direct
effect on vocabulary—corresponded to indirect improve-
ments in reading comprehension (ds = 1.89–2.26 across
Grades 1–3; LARRC et al., 2019).
Aims of This Clinical Focus Article
In 2021, a subset of LARRC investigators were
funded to test the efficacy of Let’s Know!2, a modified,
small-group Tier 2 version of the Let’s Know! curriculum
in a multisite RCT (NIH R01 DC018823; Co-Principal
Investigators Hogan and Piasta; Co-Investigators Bridges
and Fleming). Delivering Tier 2 small-group instruction
affords a targeted focus on those children with low levels
of language, many of whom have DLD, who are most at
risk
for poor
reading
comprehension.
A pilot
study
showed that Let’s Know! could be adapted for small-group
instruction with high fidelity, and initial outcomes were
positive (Bridges et al., 2016).
In this clinical focus article, we describe the process
by which we
adapted Let’s
Know!, during
the
pre-
implementation of our RCT, to create Let’s Know!2. We
used extant literature to employ adaptations shown to be
efficacious for children with poor language comprehension
including those with DLD. The following sections describe
each adaptation. We then apply the same adaptations to
another Tier 1 curriculum to illustrate their utility. In
doing so, we showcase how these adaptations can be
applied to any language comprehension curricula for
adoption in Tier 2 small-group implementation within an
MTSS framework. Finally, we end with additional consid-
erations for clinicians and researchers in adapting curricula
for special populations of children with other communica-
tions disorders (see Figure 1).
The Need for Adaptation
Often,
evidence-based
instructional
programs
or
interventions require adaptations to better account for the
complex variability often evident in school settings. Adap-
tation involves a deliberate process of identifying compo-
nents of a treatment, or delivery of that treatment, that
would improve the appropriateness or effectiveness in a
particular context or with a particular population (Stirman
et al., 2017). As discussed by La Bash et al. (2022), typi-
cally adaptations do not make changes to the core compo-
nents of a program or intervention, but instead they
involve changing components that are not thought to be
“active ingredients” for the intervention to be effective.
They also discussed two common reasons for adaptations:
a change in target population or setting. Both were crucial
changes for the current project. The original Let’s Know!
lessons were delivered in PK and elementary classrooms,
to all children, by the classroom teacher. In Let’s Know!2,
lessons are delivered by interventionists to small groups of
children identified as having low levels of language. The
interventionists are research staff that come from a variety
of experiential and educational backgrounds, including
teachers and reading specialists as well as paraprofes-
sionals, graduate students, and assistant teachers. We
intentionally broadened the qualifications of the interven-
tionists to mirror the wide variety of personnel imple-
menting Tier 2 intervention in schools. Because of the
change in target population and setting, the research team
felt it necessary to make changes to the original curriculum
while keeping the core component of language-focused
instruction intact. For this project, adaptations were cen-
tered around two primary ideas. First and foremost, we
wanted to ensure that the adaptations would facilitate lan-
guage learning in our target population, which was children
at risk for later reading comprehension difficulties due to
low language skills. Second, the adaptations should be sys-
tematic and well documented, so that we could clearly
share these adaptations with educators and researchers.
As discussed above, we systematically made adapta-
tions that would potentially affect both the effectiveness of
the intervention with our target population of students
with low language abilities as well as increase the possi-
bility that the intervention be delivered with fidelity. To
select the adaptations, the first author completed a thor-
ough review of the original curriculum as well as notes
from the small group pilot study discussed earlier. Then,
a proposed list of systematic changes was shared with the
research team as well as consultants who were part of
1068
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools
Vol. 54
1066–1079
October 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

the original Let’s Know! development team. The follow-
ing five adaptations were established and are discussed in
the next section: (a) increased and ongoing professional
development, (b) simplification of language input, (c)
increased scaffolding, (d) attention to distributed practice,
and (e) materials to support diversity and inclusion. An
overview of the adaptations can be found in Figure 2, and
specific examples can be found in Table 2 below.
Figure 1. Let’s Know! in the multitiered system of support system. LARRC = Language and Reading Research Consortium.
Modifications Implemented
Increased Professional Development
A
compelling
literature
shows
that
professional
development
can
be
effective
at
increasing
teachers’
knowledge of language acquisition and their use of empiri-
cally validated techniques to increase children’s language
skills (e.g., Dickinson & Brady, 2006; Girolametto et al.,
2007; Piasta et al., 2012). The original professional devel-
opment for Let’s Know! consisted of three parts. First,
teachers met approximately 30–45 min with research staff
to receive materials and to hear a brief overview of
research activities. At that time, teachers were provided
with self-paced videos that provided an overview of lan-
guage development as well as specifics related to the
research components of the study. They were given a month
to review those independently, which took, on average,
between 4 and 5 hours to view. Finally, there was a brief
follow-up meeting with research staff; the purpose of this
meeting was to allow teachers an opportunity to ask ques-
tions. After these initial meetings, there was minimal direct
contact with teachers and no ongoing support provided.
In Let’s Know!2, there were two primary phases of
professional development: initial interventionist training
and ongoing monitoring and support. The initial training
consisted of two meetings that took between 1 and 2
hours. These were conducted by the first author virtually
to accommodate individuals from both sites (Ohio and
Boston). In the meetings, interventionists learned about
the language basis of reading, which also included a dis-
cussion of DLD and associated risks for reading difficul-
ties. An overview of the history of the Let’s Know! curric-
ulum was provided, as well as a description of the current
research project. After this first session, interventionists
were provided with the first unit and all related books and
materials to review prior to the second virtual session. In
Bridges et al.: Adapting Curricula for Children With DLD
1069
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 




the second session, the first author discussed how to
implement the lessons, pointing out aspects that were con-
sidered “critical components.”
Figure 2. Five areas of modification for Let’s Know!2.
One primary adaptation to professional development
in Let’s Know!2 was, unlike in the original curriculum,
additional ongoing professional development opportunities
occurred. We increased this professional development to
provide more support for interventionists who may not be
classroom teachers, as in the original LARRC study, but
instead could include paraprofessionals or those with less
knowledge of language-focused instruction and less daily
experience with the students receiving Tier 2 intervention
in small groups. During the first 2 weeks of Units 2, 3,
and 4, interventionists watched a recorded video (average
length of 20 min) and read assigned reading material
related to the topic. The topics were chosen by the first
author with feedback from the project directors as to
where the interventionists seemed to need the most sup-
port. In addition, ongoing coaching was provided to each
interventionist. One or two lessons per unit were observed
by research staff, and then direct feedback related to fidel-
ity and behavior management was provided.
Simplification of Language Input
One of the most critical aspects of the adaptation
was simplification of the language used by the interventionists
in the lessons. Children with low levels of language,
including
those
with
DLD,
benefit
from
language-
facilitating techniques and other modifications to language
input. For example, we know that many children with
DLD know fewer words than other children their age
(McGregor et al., 2013). Because learning new vocabulary
words and hearing rich language is a critical component
of Let’s Know! and Let’s Know!2, we did not want to just
simplify all vocabulary through the lessons. Instead, we
concentrated on two aspects when adapting these lessons.
First, we wanted to ensure that simple vocabulary was
used when teaching a new skill. Original lessons plans
were modified so that directions used words that were
likely to be known by first graders with low levels of lan-
guage. For example, instead of saying, “Put the cards in
the correct sequence,” directions were changed to say,
“Put cards in the right order. Put what happens first here,
then what happens second here, and then what happened
last here.” Second, we reviewed the original definitions for
our target words to confirm that the definitions consisted
of words that first graders should know. For example, the
definition for absurd was initially written as “something
that is foolish” but was revised to “something that is fool-
ish or silly.” There are many online dictionaries and
resources
available
such
as
Merriam-Webster’s
Word
Central (https://www.merriam-webster.com/kids; Merriam-
Webster, 2022) to help teachers craft child-friendly defini-
tions; however, educators should be aware that often even
1070
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools
Vol. 54
1066–1079
October 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

these definitions might need to be revised for children with
low levels of language/DLD.
We also reviewed lessons in their entirety and
looked to simplify language to aid in comprehension for
children with low levels of language or DLD (see Paul
et al., 2017). For example, for lessons in which new infor-
mation was being introduced, the wording was revised so
any one sentence contained no more than two clauses.
This often involved replacing complex with single-clause
sentences and removing what was considered extraneous
information/instructions. In one of the original lessons, for
example, suggested directions were as follows: “Think of
our target word, ‘absurd,’ and then make up a sentence
that you might say to your teacher or friend.” This was
modified as, “Think of the word ‘absurd.’ Now tell us a
sentence using ‘absurd.’” Another modification included
building in repetitions. This was accomplished in multiple
ways. A simple way to accomplish this was to have the
interventionist
repeat
a
direction
verbatim.
However,
interventionists were also taught to rephrase directions to
provide children with additional input, and this was
reflected in the actual lesson plans. The website DLD and
Me (https://dldandme.org/; Boys Town National Research
Hospital, 2022) is an excellent resource for those interested
in
learning
how
to
support
children
with
DLD
in
classrooms.
Increased Scaffolding
The original Let’s Know! lessons adopted many
tenets of scaffolding, which occurs when an adult helps a
child learn a new skill by providing support during a
learning opportunity. In a review of literature, van de Pol
et al. (2010) identified three common components of scaf-
folding: contingency, fading, and transfer of responsibility.
Contingency refers to teacher feedback that is individual-
ized for each child. Another component is fading, which
occurs when an educator offers lower levels of scaffolding
as students are succeeding at a given task. A third compo-
nent is transfer of responsibility. This occurs when an edu-
cator expects a student to take more control of their learn-
ing. The Let’s Know!2 lessons were revised to include
more explicit scaffolding. Children with low levels of lan-
guage often need support to succeed, but the type, inten-
sity, and frequency of scaffolding often vary between chil-
dren or for different tasks. Based on input during the pilot
stage of the original Let’s Know! (e.g., LARRC, 2016), we
provided more and more explicit examples directly in the
lessons of how to scaffold to ensure all children are learn-
ing the material. This seemed particularly important for
the revised Let’s Know!2 for two reasons. First, interven-
tionists in the project were varied in terms of their experi-
ence working with at-risk children. Secondly, the target
students in this study, and for Let’s Know!2 in general,
were children with low language abilities, who would
likely
benefit
for
increased
scaffolding.
Each
lesson
includes suggested ways to differentiate instruction for
children with varying language skill levels. For example,
in many lessons, students are asked to provide definitions
and use target vocabulary words. One way to do that is to
use a word web, in which teachers help students provide
words that are related to target vocabulary. In the inter-
vention lesson plans, the following scaffolding suggestions
were provided: “Continue filling in word webs and provid-
ing opportunities for students to share answers. If an
open-ended format is too difficult, provide two choices
and have students pick the correct option.” Scaffolding
suggestions for interventionists were added throughout the
lessons.
Attention to Distributed Practice
Another adaptation to the lessons included provid-
ing more instruction on the pacing of the lessons. One
common question from the original study was when to
move on in a lesson, or in contrast, when interventionists
should continue with a specific portion of a lesson and
provide more models and examples. This uncertainty has
been noted by the authors when supervising students or
research assistants during similar language- or reading-
focused projects. One of the essential components of the
original Let’s Know! lessons was the concept of distributed
practice, in which learning experiences occur across time,
with periods of rest before returning to the skill (Burdick,
1977). Thus, it is not expected that a particular skill be
mastered in one lesson but, instead, might slowly be
learned over time. This was discussed early on, during
the professional development, with interventionists imple-
menting Let’s Know!2, so they would feel comfortable
continuing to new lessons and thus new skills, even with-
out mastery of content. For example, an objective related
to comprehension monitoring occurs in lessons across the
entire year. This would include lessons with specific
explicit instruction on comprehension monitoring inter-
spersed with lessons that focus on alternative objectives.
In many of the lessons, we made explicit notes or com-
ments in the lesson regarding concepts or tasks that might
be particularly difficult for students, with notes to move
on in the lesson after a certain number of examples were
provided.
Diversity and Inclusion
For this project, the intention was to keep the mate-
rials as similar to the original Let’s Know! materials as
possible. However, the lessons were reviewed and revised
with an eye toward diversity and inclusion. The state of
Bridges et al.: Adapting Curricula for Children With DLD
1071
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 




Washington has models for the evaluation of bias content
in instructional materials, and many tenants of these
models were used when revising materials for Let’s Know!
2 (Washington Office of Superintendent of Public Instruc-
tion, 2009). These materials provide guidance for examin-
ing books and instructional materials, such as checking
illustrations and watching for loaded language. A “Screen-
ing Tool for Biased Content” is included. This tool pro-
vides guidance on how to ensure instructional materials
“reflect the rich cultural diversity and lived experiences of
all students” (Washington Office of Superintendent of
Public Instruction, 2009, p. 6). Questions address aspects
such as race/ethnicity, sexual orientation, physical ability/
disability, family structure, and gender/gender expression/
gender identity. For this project, we used this screening
tool to examine the examples that were embedded in the
lessons to ensure that they represented experiences that
were more universal. For example, one lesson referenced
traveling and navigating an airport. This example was
changed to an experience related to a typical school day.
We also ensured that if holidays were mentioned, they
included examples from multiple cultures.
In the future, we would also like to more fully incor-
porate books that have characters or situations that are
identifiable to all children. Each year, the Cooperative
Children’s
Book
Center
(CCBC)
releases
information
related to the number of books by and about Black,
Indigenous, and people of color. The CCBC is a research
library for Wisconsin school and public librarians and is
affiliated with the School of Education at the University
of Wisconsin–Madison. Their work shows that most chil-
dren’s books published in 2019, for example, highlight
White children, talking animals, or inanimate objects. It is
important that books and materials used in classrooms
are representative of the children reading them. In the last
decade, more online resources have been made available
to educators. One example is Maya’s Book Nook (https://
mayasbooknook.com/; Maya’s Book Nook, 2022). This
site provides recommendations for diverse children’s litera-
ture as well as resources to promote language and literacy
for parents and educators. The “Beyond the Book” guide
is a resource that provides ideas to go beyond the book,
such as providing prereading activities, within-book ques-
tions, and suggestions for target vocabulary. This website
could be a valuable resource for any educator, administra-
tor, or researcher committed to providing representative
instructional materials while providing excellent language
and literacy foundations. As previously stated, for this
project, we retained the original books, which were felt to
be broadly used and readily available. However, future
revisions could use these resources to replace or add books
to promote diversity and equity more specifically. Table 1
provides links to resources that would be beneficial for
future adaptations.
Table 1. Resources for finding diverse books.
Website
Description
Diverse Book Finder (2022), https://diversebookfinder.org/books/
Comprehensive collection of books with many categories. Book
descriptions by the publisher are provided. Also provides a
“Collection Analysis Tool” to analyze your own book collection.
We Need Diverse Books (2022), https://diversebooks.org/resources-
old/where-to-find-diverse-books/
Comprehensive list of websites for diverse book collections
separated into categories. This organization also has an app,
OurStory.
embracerace (2022), https://www.embracerace.org/resources/where-
to-find-diverse-childrens-books
List of websites and blogs for diverse books
Little Free Library (2022), https://littlefreelibrary.org/category/read-in-
color-rec-reading/
List of recommended books by category. Within each category, the
books are broken down into the categories of Early Readers,
Middle Readers, and Adult Readers.
Maya’s Book Nook (2022), https://mayasbooknook.com/
List of diverse books with supplemental support materials for
parents and educators. The “Beyond the Book” resource
provides activities and discussion tips to use before, during, and
after reading the suggested book.
Application of Modifications to Core
Knowledge Grade 1: Fables and Stories
We wished to demonstrate that the principles for
adapting curricula to serve the needs of children with low
levels of language are generally applicable and to show
how to work through this process with a popular, existing
curriculum. Thus, we examined a commercially available
English Language Arts unit and applied each of the prin-
ciples deliberately. Our hope is that this provides a guide
to teachers, researchers, and others attempting to engage
in similar work and that it further illustrates the concepts
and steps outlined above.
We selected Core Knowledge Language Arts First Grade
(CKLA) for this worked example of adaptation because it
is a commonly used content-focused curriculum with
1072
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools
Vol. 54
1066–1079
October 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

strong evidence (cf. Cabell & Hwang, 2020). We provide
examples specifically from the Fables and Stories unit.
Note that Fables and Stories is part of an overarching cur-
riculum meant to occur over an extended period, much as
Folk Tales is one of four units in Let’s Know!2. Thus, a
full adaptation process would involve all the CKLA first-
grade units. With that said, Fables and Stories provides a
useful illustration of the process of curricula adaptions for
children who have low levels of language. The Appendix
provides examples of our suggested adaptations to the
CKLA lessons.
Increased Professional Development
First, we examined the professional development
related to language supports for children who may strug-
gle with comprehension, including children with DLD and
others. CKLA provides a teacher’s guide and a Supple-
mental Guide for working with children who are English
language learners or who have disabilities. The informa-
tion relevant to each population is straightforward and
helpful, outlining common challenges facing English lan-
guage learners in terms of vocabulary and other areas.
For example, the guide informs teachers that English lan-
guage learners may not know Tier 1 words, that Tier 2
and Tier 3 words may be particularly challenging, and
that explicit instruction and practice with vocabulary will
be essential for this population. The guide goes on to pro-
vide specific information about which words are essential
for understanding, have multiple meanings, or may other-
wise have characteristics that affect their relevance and
difficulty
level
for
English
language
learners.
Taken
together, this information provides instructors with basic
information around what may be expected from students
who
are
English
language
learners,
sets
expectations
around what may need to occur to assist these learners,
and provides information about specific words within each
lesson plan to help focus instruction where most needed.
However, additional information about how to assess
transitioning to a new skill and specific information for
children with low levels of language would be helpful
additions. Thus, if modifying this program, we would
include additional segments in the supplemental guide
regarding the key strategies and supports that help chil-
dren with low levels of language learn and how to effec-
tively provide feedback to this population. For example,
we provide strategies to interventionists within each lesson
of Let’s Know!2 surrounding how to respond to students.
A community of practice is one way that this type
of coaching or continued support could be implemented in
a school setting. A community of practice is defined as a
“group of people who share a concern, a set of problems,
or a passion about a topic, and who deepen their
knowledge and expertise in this area by interacting on an
ongoing basis” (Wenger et al., 2002, p. 4). Such communi-
ties of practice might have shared interest in supporting
each other as they implement a language comprehension
intervention or program and similarly provide regular
feedback to each other during implementation.
Simplification of Language Input
Next, we examined the simplification of language.
The read-alouds in the Supplemental Guide do include
both additional previewing and simplified language to
support comprehension. For example, teachers complete a
“picture walk” before reading some of the stories. In one
picture walk, students are shown a visual (a picture that
includes a stream) and the new vocabulary is linked to a
more familiar word (a stream is like a small river). How-
ever, children with low levels of language would benefit
from additional support when new core concepts (e.g.,
prediction) are introduced. Currently, prediction is intro-
duced during a “picture walk” to preview a story; children
are guided through the story but may struggle to under-
stand and apply prediction skills. We would adapt this by
explicitly defining prediction for children, using language
that we could confirm was appropriately simplified via use
of the resources outlined. This is one example, but similar
strategies would be applied throughout the unit each time
a higher level skill or language task was introduced.
Increased Scaffolding
Continuing on the example of how we would adapt
the teaching of prediction, we would also provide scaffold-
ing around the concept. We would add language linking
prediction to familiar tasks or activities in children’s lives
and supporting them in making predictions. During these
activities, we would provide ongoing scaffolding around
understanding the concept of prediction, application to
books, and ongoing revision of predictions during reading.
For example, we would model making a specific predic-
tion (e.g., “I predict that the other men will get mad at
the boy”), read a passage, and then would verbally model
checking the prediction against the text (e.g., “Was my
prediction correct? Were the men mad?”). Then, we would
include multiple prompts for children to voice specific pre-
dictions (e.g., “Look at this picture. What do you predict
the boy will do next?”), check the predictions, and revise
the predictions throughout the reading (e.g., “Was our
prediction right? What do you want to change about your
prediction?”). We would provide guidance on how to sup-
port children who struggled with prediction at first, such
as
highlighting
key
information
in
illustrations
and
prompting children to think about related background
information.
Bridges et al.: Adapting Curricula for Children With DLD
1073
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 




Attention to Distributed Practice
CKLA includes an interim assessment at the end of
key lessons, a summative assessment at the end of the
unit, and several informal opportunities to monitor what
children know. These are well designed and appropriate
for children of this age and skill level. However, we would
add
additional
wording
for
teachers
throughout
the
lessons surrounding ongoing monitoring of what children
know, how to check in on skills as they develop, and how
to provide distributed practice of target skills during
acquisition and maintenance. For example, we would pro-
vide wording to teachers to suggest they monitor students’
abilities to make predictions at key points throughout the
unit, as well as at the end of the lesson/unit. Thus,
teachers would both gain ongoing information regarding
Table 2. Examples of curricular modifications for children with DLD.
Modifications to consider for Tier 2 intervention with children with low language levels
Increased and ongoing professional development
Provide interventionists training on the needs of children with low levels of language
•
Interventionists may need training on the importance of distributed practice and the appropriate pacing of lessons
Provide support throughout intervention for issues that arise
•
Children may exhibit behaviors as they encounter skills they find difficult. Interventionists may need training to manage behaviors and
move through the lessons
•
School-based professionals could use a community of practice to support each other in the implementation of a curriculum
Simplification of Language Input
Simplify vocabulary used when teaching a new skill
•
Evaluate the vocabulary used when teaching a new skill or a definition of a word. Make sure to use simple vocabulary children can
understand. The sources below provide kid-friendly definitions and/or synonyms.
Reduce sentence complexity
•
Evaluate the language of the curriculum. Look for complex sentence structure and try to reduce to single independent clauses rather
than compound or dependent clauses. The students’ focus should be on learning the new concept rather than understanding the
instructions.
Increase repetition within and across lessons
•
A new vocabulary word or literary concept can be taught in several ways during a single lesson and should be revisited across lessons
even after mastery.
•
The interventionist can repeat or rephrase directions to give children additional input.
Resources
•
https://dldandme.org/supporting-a-child-with-dld-in-the-classroom/
•
https://kids.wordsmyth.net/we/
•
https://www.merriam-webster.com/kids
•
https://www.factmonster.com/dictionary
•
https://kids.britannica.com/kids/browse/dictionary
Increase scaffolding
Provide more explicit scaffolding during lessons
•
Train interventionists on how to scaffold for children with DLD. Teach the concepts of contingency, fading, and transfer of responsibility.
•
Help interventionists learn the signs of when to fade support as the child becomes more independent in the skill.
Provide interventionists options for activity modifications if inhibiting learning
•
The content is more important than the activity. Teach interventionists how to decrease the cognitive load of the activity so the
students can focus on learning the content
Attention to distributed practice
Teach interventionists when to move forward in the lessons
•
Show interventionists the distribution of practice of a skill or word throughout the lesson. Teach the interventionists that the child does
not need to master a concept in one lesson.
•
Also teach the importance of continuing to check for comprehension after mastery.
Supporting diversity and inclusion
Include more diverse and representative books in lessons
•
Evaluate the characters and traditions portrayed in the books you are using. You can find more representative books from a number of
sources listed in Table 2.
Evaluate for bias in lessons using screening tools
•
Look at the examples provided in the lessons. Evaluate whether the examples are representative of the experiences of all the students
you are teaching and make minor modifications when necessary.
Note.
DLD = developmental language disorder.
1074
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools
Vol. 54
1066–1079
October 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

how students were acquiring this skill and would provide
repeated
practice
opportunities
that
were
distributed
across a lengthy period of instruction. Skills could be
addressed throughout the unit (e.g., target vocabulary) or
across the entire year of curriculum (e.g., making predic-
tions). Skills that are more broadly applicable and/or skills
that are more challenging for children should be addressed
over a longer period of time than skills that are more spe-
cific and straightforward. We would also include informa-
tion regarding how children demonstrate they know a tar-
get vocabulary word and how to extend practice for words
that are not being acquired as well as hoped. In other
words, we would apply the same practices around increas-
ing distributed practice to vocabulary words and other tar-
gets as we would for prediction.
Diversity and Inclusion
CKLA: Fables and Stories provides stories from around
the world, representing diverse cultures. This is encouraging in
terms of our final standard. However, during a more com-
plete adaptation process, we would examine each unit in the
first-grade curriculum and ensure that this diversity is contin-
ued throughout. For example, we would use the Washington
bias screening tool to evaluate the unit. Thus, we can ensure
that the lessons meet each of our standards. Where needed,
we could change curricula, adapt, or add lessons.
Overall, the CKLA: Fables and Stories unit provides a
solid framework for working with students with varied lan-
guage needs. However, working through systematically using
the standards we have identified as essential, we can make
key adjustments that will support the success of learners with
poor comprehension due to low language levels in focused,
small-group instruction. For example, we can provide
instruction regarding group size and how to adjust scaffold-
ing for learners with varied language comprehension skills
within the same small group. We can ensure that the lessons
are appropriate in terms of bias and diversity. We can pro-
vide increased, targeted professional development. All of
these adjustments—to professional development, language
input, scaffolding, distributed practice, and support of diver-
sity and inclusion—do not change the core of the curriculum;
rather, they enhance what is already present so that it can
support children with low levels of language in achieving suc-
cess and learning effectively from the lessons (see Table 2).
Table 3. Frameworks for adapting curricula.
FRAME
Wiltsey Stirman et al. (2019). The FRAME: An expanded framework for reporting adaptations and modifications to evidence-based
interventions. Implementation Science, 14(58).
FRAME-IS
Miller et al. (2021). The FRAME-IS: A framework for documenting modifications to implementation strategies in healthcare. Implementation
Science, 16(36).
Dynamic adaptation framework
Aarons et al. (2012). Dynamic adaptation process to implement an evidence-based child maltreatment intervention. Implementation Science, 7(32).
RE-AIM
Glasgow et al. (2020). Making implementation science more rapid: Use of the RE-AIM framework for mid-course adaptations across five
health services research projects in the Veterans Health Administration. Frontiers in Public Health, 8(194).
Additional Adaptation Techniques
and Tools
In this clinical focus article, we shared our initial
process of adapting a curriculum to better fit our needs
within a research context. Our adaptation process included
initial review/planning for adaptation as well as a specific
description of what adaptations were made and how that
was accomplished. However, in future work, we would
include further steps to guide us through this process. One
way to do this is to engage interested parties, such as
school district administrators, educators, local community
partners, and parents of children who would benefit from
the intervention, more directly in the adaptation process.
This can be done in a variety of ways, including surveys
or focus groups. A relatively new system for quickly
receiving feedback is a Community Engagement Studio
(Joosten et al., 2015), which is a way to allow these inter-
ested parties to provide feedback to researchers about
their current or proposed work. Recently, Quinn et al.
(2022) conducted a Community Engagement Studio with
parents of toddlers to gain information related to teleprac-
tice. This framework allows researchers to use their com-
munity partners to help plan and inform research, includ-
ing adaptations to current interventions, such as Let’s
Know!, that will be meaningful to those who will mostly
likely benefit.
Another way to plan for adaptations more systema-
tically is to use one of multiple frameworks available in
the implementation science literature specifically for adap-
tations. One example is the Framework for Reporting
Bridges et al.: Adapting Curricula for Children With DLD
1075
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 




Adaptations
and
Modifications–Enhanced
(FRAME;
Wiltsey Stirman et al., 2019). Benefits of using existing
frameworks include the fact that they are evidence based
and allow for a systematic approach to adaptations and
implementation. Another benefit is that many of these
frameworks, such as FRAME, guide the evaluation of
adaptations. Researchers and practitioners understand that
adaptations to existing programs occur frequently in prac-
tice and approaching this with a framework to ensure that
changes are systematic and documented is important. A list
of other example frameworks is provided in Table 3. We
did not use a specified framework in our current project
but will be exploring the use of one in future iterations.
Conclusions and Clinical Implication
As
discussed
previously,
there
is
a
need
for
evidence-based instructional and intervention materials
focusing on language comprehension within an MTSS sys-
tem. While the original Let’s Know! Tier 1 curriculum was
shown to be effective at improving reading comprehension
through incorporation of language instruction, children
with low levels of language need additional targeted sup-
port. It is important that researchers continue to develop
materials for use in Tiers 2 and 3, particularly those that
can be used with students with low levels of language.
Tier 1 instruction needs to undergo adaptations so it can
be effectively implemented by a variety of personnel who
implement Tier 2 support in the schools and to fit the
needs of the children with low levels of language. This
project seeks to fill some of this evidence gap by investigat-
ing the efficacy and feasibility of an adapted curricula on
the language skills of first-grade students with low language
abilities. These students require explicit language-focused
instruction with increased and differentiated scaffolding to
meet language outcomes, and it is our expectation that
interventionists require specific instructions and increased
professional development to facilitate this. Our hope is that
our work can be helpful for other research groups who are
working toward developing or adapting similar content.
However, we also are aware that educators need ways to
adapt curricula for Tier 2 support now. We hope that our
description of the modifications we made to Let’s Know!
provides a guide for educators to make adaptations to cur-
rent Tier 1 curricula in a systematic way, with their eye
toward serving children with low levels of language.
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are
available from the corresponding author, Mindy S. Bridges,
upon reasonable request.
Acknowledgments
The research reported here was supported by National
Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders
under Award Number 1R01DC018823 to the Massachusetts
General Hospital Institute of Health Professions, The Ohio
State University, The University of Kansas, and The Univer-
sity of Kansas Medical Center. The content is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily repre-
sent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.
References
Aarons, G., Green, A., Palinkas, L., Self-Brown, S., Whitaker,
D., Lutzker, J., Silovsky, J., Hecht, D. B., & Chaffin, M.
(2012).
Dynamic
adaptation
process
to
implement
an
evidence-based child maltreatment intervention. Implementa-
tion Science, 7(1), Article 32. https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-
5908-7-32
Adlof, S. M., & Hogan, T. P. (2018). Understanding dyslexia in
the context of developmental language disorders. Language,
Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 49(4), 762–773.
https://doi.org/10.1044/2018_LSHSS-DYSLC-18-0049
Boys Town National Research Hospital. (2022). DLD and me.
https://dldandme.org/
Bridges, M. S., Piasta, S. B., Daniels, D., & Brandel, J. (2016,
February). Small-group intervention to support language and
comprehension: Feasibility and pilot data. Presented at Pacific
Coast Research Conference, San Diego, CA.
Burdick, K. (1977). Effects of massed and distributed practice on
the learning and retention of a novel gross motor skill [Master’s
thesis, Western Illinois University].
Cabell, S. Q., & Hwang, H. (2020). Building content knowledge
to boost comprehension in the primary grades. Reading Research
Quarterly, 55(S1), S99–S107. https://doi.org/10.1002/rrq.338
Castles, A., Rastle, K., & Nation, K. (2018). Ending the reading
wars: Reading acquisition from novice to expert. Psychologi-
cal Science in the Public Interest, 19(1), 5–51. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1529100618772271
Catts, H. W., Adlof, S. M., & Ellis Weismer, S. (2006). Language
deficits in poor comprehenders: A case for the simple view of
reading. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
49(2), 278–293. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2006/023)
Catts, H. W., Fey, M. E., Tomblin, J. B., & Zhang, X. (2002). A
longitudinal investigation of reading outcomes in children
with language impairments, Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research, 45(6), 1142–1157. https://doi.org/10.1044/
1092-4388(2002/093)
Chall, J. (1967). The great debate: Ten years later, with a modest
proposal for reading stages. National Institute of Education.
Clements, D. H. (2007). Curriculum research: Toward a frame-
work for “research-based curricula.” Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 38(1), 35–70. https://www.jstor.org/
stable/30034927
Davidson, M. M., & Ellis Weismer, S. (2014). Characterization
and prediction of early reading abilities in children on the
autism spectrum. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disor-
ders, 44, 828–845. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-013-1936-2
Dickinson, D. K., & Brady, J. P. (2006). Toward effective support
for language and literacy through professional development. In
1076
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools
Vol. 54
1066–1079
October 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

M. Zaslow & I. Martinez-Beck (Eds.), Critical issues in early
childhood professional development (pp. 141–170). Brookes.
Dickinson, D. K., Golinkoff, R. M., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (2010).
Speaking out for language: Why language is central to read-
ing development. Educational Researcher, 39(4), 305–310.
https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189x10370204
Diverse
Book
Finder.
(2022).
Search
the
collection.
https://
diversebookfinder.org/books
embracerace. (2022). Looking for excellent “diverse” books for
children? Start here! https://www.embracerace.org/resources/
where-to-find-diverse-childrens-books
Girolametto, L., Weitzman, E., Lefebvre, P., & Greenberg, J.
(2007). The effects of in-service education to promote emer-
gent literacy in child care centers: A feasibility study. Lan-
guage, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 38(1), 72–83.
https://doi.org/10.1044/0161-1461(2007/007)
Glasgow, R., Battaglia, C., McCreight, M., Ayele, R. A., &
Rabin, B. (2020). Making implementation science more rapid:
Use of the RE-AIM framework for mid-course adaptations
across five health services research projects in the Veterans
Health Administration. Frontiers in Public Health, 8(194).
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2020.00194
Gough, P. B., & Tunmer, W. E. (1986). Decoding, reading, and
reading disability. Remedial and Special Education, 7(1), 6–10.
https://doi.org/10.1177/074193258600700104
Hoover, W. A., & Gough, P. B. (1990). The simple view of read-
ing. Reading and Writing, 2(2), 127–160. https://doi.org/10.
1007/BF00401799
Jimerson, S. R., Burns, M. K, & VanDerHeyden, A. M. (Eds.),
(2016). Handbook of response to intervention: The science and
practice of multi-tiered systems of support (2nd ed.). Springer.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4899-7568-3
Joosten, Y. A., Israel, T. L., Neely, A. W., Boone, L. R.,
Schlundt, D. G., Mouton, C. P., Dittus, R. S., Bernard, G. R.,
& Wilkins, C. H. (2015). Community Engagement Studios: A
structured approach to obtaining meaningful input from
stakeholders to inform research. Academic Medicine, 90(12),
1646–1650. https://doi.org/10.1097/ACM.0000000000000794
La Bash, H., Thomas, F. C., & Stirman, S. W. (2022). Adapta-
tion of evidence-based interventions. In B. J. Weiner, K.
Scherr, & C. C. Lewis (Eds.), Practical implementation sci-
ence: Moving evidence into action. Springer. https://doi.org/10.
1891/9780826186935.0004
Language and Reading Research Consortium. (2015). Learning to
read: Should we keep things simple? Reading Research Quar-
terly, 50(2), 151–169. https://doi.org/10.1002/rrq.99
Language and Reading Research Consortium. (2016). Use of the
curriculum
research
framework
(CRF)
for
developing
a
reading-comprehension curricular supplement for the primary
grades. The Elementary School Journal, 116(3), 459–486.
https://doi.org/10.1086/684827
Language and Reading Research Consortium. (2022). Curriculum.
https://larrc.ehe.osu.edu/curriculum/
Language and Reading Research Consortium, Jiang, H., & Davis,
D. (2017). Let’s Know! Proximal impacts on prekindergarten
through grade 3 students’ comprehension-related skills. The
Elementary School Journal, 118(2), 177–206. https://doi.org/
10.1086/694220
Language and Reading Research Consortium, Jiang, H., & Logan,
J. A. R. (2019). Improving reading comprehension in the pri-
mary grades: Mediated effects of a language-focused class-
room intervention. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing
Research, 62(8), 2812–2828. https://doi.org/10.1044/2019_JSLHR-
L-19-0015
Language and Reading Research Consortium, Lo, M.-T., & Xu,
M. (2022). Impacts of the Let’s Know! curriculum on the lan-
guage and comprehension-related skills of prekindergarten
and kindergarten children. Journal of Educational Psychology,
114(6), 1205–1224. https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000744
Li, M., Geva, E., D’Angelo, N., Koh, P. W., Chen, X., &
Gottardo, A. (2021). Exploring sources of poor reading com-
prehension in English language learners. Annals of Dyslexia,
71, 299–321. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11881-021-00214-4
Little Free Library. (2022). Category: Read in color recommended
reading. https://littlefreelibrary.org/category/read-in-color-rec-reading
Maya’s Book Nook. (2022). Maya’s Book Nook: Promoting lan-
guage and literacy skills through diverse children’s literature.
https://mayasbooknook.com/
McGregor, K. K. (2020). How we fail children with developmen-
tal language disorder. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services
in Schools, 51(4), 981–992. https://doi.org/10.1044/2020_LSHSS-
20-00003
McGregor, K. K., Oleson, J., Bahnsen, A., & Duff, D. (2013).
Children with developmental language impairment have vocab-
ulary deficits characterized by limited breadth and depth. Inter-
national Journal of Language & Communication Disorders,
48(3), 307–319. https://doi.org/10.1111/1460-6984.12008
Merriam-Webster. (2022). Student dictionary for kids. https://
www.merriam-webster.com/kids
Miller, C. J., Barnett, M., Baumann, A. A., Gutner, C., &
Wiltsey-Stirman, S. (2021). The FRAME-IS: A framework
for documenting modifications to implementation strategies in
healthcare. Implementation Science, 16(1), Article 36. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s13012-021-01105-3
Nation, K., Adams, J. W., Bowyer-Crane, C. A., & Snowling,
M. J. (1999). Working memory deficits in poor comprehen-
ders reflect underlying language impairments. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 73(2), 139–158. https://doi.
org/10.1006/jecp.1999.2498
Nation, K., Clarke, P., Marshall, C. M., & Durand, M. (2004).
Hidden language impairments in children: Parallels between
poor reading comprehension and specific language impair-
ment? Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research,
47(1), 199–211. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2004/017)
Oakhill, J., Hartt, J., & Samols, D. (2005). Levels of comprehen-
sion monitoring and working memory in good and poor com-
prehenders. Reading and Writing, 18(7–9), 657–686. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11145-005-3355-z
Paul, R., Norbury, C., & Gosse, C. (2017). Language disorders:
From infancy through adolescence: Listening, speaking, read-
ing, writing, and communicating (5th ed.). Elsevier.
Pearson, P. D. & Gallagher, M. C. (1983). The instruction
of reading comprehension. Contemporary Educational Psychology,
8(3), 317–344. https://doi.org/10.1016/0361-476X(83)90019-X
Piasta, S. B., Justice, L. M., Cabell, S. Q., Wiggins, A. K., Pence
Turnbull, K., & Curenton, S. M. (2012). Impact of profes-
sional development on preschool teachers’ conversational
responsivity and children’s linguistic productivity and com-
plexity. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 27, 387–400.
https://doi.org/10.1016.j.ecresq.2012.01.001
Quinn, E. D., Cotter, K., Kurin, K., & Brown, K. (2022). Con-
ducting a community engagement studio to adopt enhanced
milieu teaching. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology,
31(3), 1095–1113. https://doi.org/10.1044/2021_AJSLP-21-00100
Silverman, R., & Crandell, J. D. (2010). Vocabulary practices
in
prekindergarten
and kindergarten
classrooms.
Reading
Research Quarterly, 45(3), 318–340. https://doi.org/10.1598/
RRQ.45.3.3
Bridges et al.: Adapting Curricula for Children With DLD
1077
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 




Snowling, M. J., West, G., Fricke, S., Bowyer-Crane, C., Dilnot,
J., Cripps, D., Nash, M., & Hulme, C. (2022). Delivering lan-
guage intervention at scale: Promises and pitfalls. Journal of
Research in Reading, 45(3), 342–366. https://doi.org/10.1111/
1467-9817.12391
Spear-Swerling, L. (2016). Common types of reading problems
and how to help children who have them. The Reading
Teacher, 69(5), 513–522. https://doi.org/10.1002/trtr.1410
Spencer, M., Quinn, J. M., & Wagner, R. K. (2014). Specific
reading comprehension disability: Major problem, myth, or
misnomer? Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 29(1),
3–9. https://doi.org/10.1111/ldrp.12024
Stirman, S. W., Gamarra, J. M., Bartlett, B. A., Calloway, A., &
Gutner, C. A. (2017). Empirical examinations of modifica-
tions and adaptations to evidence-based psychotherapies:
Methodologies, impact, and future directions. Clinical Psy-
chology Science and Practice, 24(4), 396–420. https://doi.org/10.
1111/cpsp.12218
U.S. Department of Education. (2022). Institute of Education Sci-
ences, National Center for Education Statistics, National Assess-
ment of Educational Progress (NAEP), 2022 Reading Assessment.
van de Pol, J., Volman, M., & Beishuizen, J. (2010). Scaffolding
in teacher–student interaction: A decade of research. Educational
Psychology Review, 22, 271–296. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-
010-9127-6
Washington
Office
of
Superintendent
of
Public
Instruction.
(2009). Washington models for the evaluation of bias content
in instructional materials. https://www.k12.wa.us/sites/default/
files/public/equity/pubdocs/Washington%20Models%20for%20the%
20Evaluation%20of%20Bias_2009.pdf
We Need Diverse Books. (2022). Where to find diverse books.
https://diversebooks.org/resourcesold/where-to-find-diverse-books
Wei, X., Blackorby, J., & Schiller, E. (2011). Growth in reading achieve-
ment of students with disabilities, ages 7 to 17. Exceptional Children,
78(1), 89–106. https://doi.org/10.1177/001440291107800106
Wenger, E., McDermott, R. A., & Snyder, W. (2002). Cultivating
communities of practice: A guide to managing knowledge.
Harvard Business School Press.
Wiltsey Stirman, S., Baumann, A. A., & Miller, C. J. (2019). The
FRAME: An expanded Framework for Reporting Adapta-
tions
and
Modifications
to
evidence-based
interventions.
Implementation Science, 14(1). Article 58. https://doi.org/10.
1186/s13012-019-0898-y
Wright, T. S., & Neuman, S. B. (2013). Vocabulary instruction in
commonly used kindergarten core reading curricula. The Elemen-
tary School Journal, 113(3), 386–408. https://doi.org/10.1086/668766
1078
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools
Vol. 54
1066–1079
October 2023
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

Appendix
Examples of Adaptations to the Core Knowledge Grade 1: Fables and Stories Unit for the Concept of Prediction
Areas of adaptation
Examples for the concept of prediction
Simplification of language input
Explicitly define terms
A prediction is when we guess what is going to happen in the story
based on the pictures and what we already know.
Increased scaffolding
Link new concept to a concept the child understands
Let’s make a prediction about your day. I predict that when the bell
rings at the end of the day you are going to go home. Am I
right?
What do you predict would happen if the fire alarm went off right
now?
Increase modeling
Let’s look at this picture of the shepherd boy. He is laughing and
the men look mad. I predict that the boy plays a trick on the
men. Let’s read and find out if I’m right.
Add additional prompts to aid student’s learning
Let’s look at this picture and make a prediction. What do you see
happening? That’s right, the rabbit is eating. He’s eating a lot Oh
my, he just keeps eating! How do you think he will feel? What is
your prediction?
If the child does not respond you can offer choices: Do you think
he will feel sick or excited?
Let’s listen to the story and find out if we are right!
Attention to distributed practice
To teachers: Students have the opportunity to practice their
predictions multiple times during this unit. Pay attention to how
your students improve their abilities to make a prediction. It’s
okay if their predictions are wrong! The skill we are looking at is
if they can guess what is going to happen and evaluate whether
they were right. If it takes your student multiple stories to make a
prediction on their own that is ok. That is why there are multiple
opportunities for them to practice. If they can’t make a prediction
on their own model it for them and move on to the next step.
Bridges et al.: Adapting Curricula for Children With DLD
1079
Downloaded from: https://pubs.asha.org Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. on 12/21/2023, Terms of Use: https://pubs.asha.org/pubs/rights_and_permissions 

