At least in one well-motivated sense of “concept,” all perception involves 
concepts, even perception as practiced by lizards and bees. That is because 
all perception involves belief. Or so I will argue. Let us take concepts, 
belief, and perception in order.
4.1  Concepts
“Concept” is such a protean word that the question calls for a well-
motivated stipulative answer, rather than catching some concepts and 
putting them under a microscope. On one use of the term, the con-
cept dog is a mental representation of some sort, perhaps a word in 
the language of thought that applies to all and only dogs (Fodor 1998). 
Alternatively, a concept is a body of information (or misinformation) 
about dogs (Machery 2009: 122); an ability to identify dogs (Sellars 
1956: §18; Dummett 1993: 98); a mode of presentation of the property 
doghood (Peacocke 1992: 2); the “reference of the predicate” “is a dog” 
(Frege 1951: 173); the meaning of the English word “dog,” the Italian 
word “cane,” and so on (Williamson 2003: 253); or a constituent or part 
of thoughts about dogs (Margolis and Laurence 2003: 190). Some of 
these stipulations are better motivated than others, and some seem rather 
unclear. Some are compatible with and/or are closely related to others, 
while some are not. In any event, the word “concept” provides endless 
possibilities for theorists to talk past one another—not that any excuse 
was needed.
For our purposes, we make do with Fodor’s explanation of what it is 
to have (or “possess”) a concept: to have the concept dog is to be able 
to think about dogs as such; and conversely, to be able to think about 
dogs as such is to have the concept dog (Fodor 2004: 31). Fodor thinks 
that there really is such an item as “the concept dog” (speciﬁcally, an 
interpreted expression in the language of thought), but his explanation 
does not guarantee that because it simply deﬁnes the entire phrase “hav-
ing the concept dog.” And that phrase might be syntactically misleading. 
“Having the concept dog” seems to stand for a relation to a particular 
4 
Concepts, Belief, and 
Perception1
Alex Byrne
9781138316089_C004.indd   60
02-10-2020   10:20:27 AM
Concepts in Thought, Action, and Emotion: New Essays
edited by Christoph Demmerling and Dirk Schröder
Routledge (2021)

Concepts, Belief, and Perception 61
thing, but Fodor’s explanation is compatible with it being an idiom, like 
“Jerry’s sake” (see Fodor 1981: 178–179).
One way of thinking about dogs (in Fodor’s expansive sense of “think-
ing”) is to have beliefs about dogs “as such.” The belief that Fido is a dog, 
that dogs bark, that dogs are Martian robots, that either Fido is a dog or 
Fido is not a dog, are examples. Generalizing: someone has beliefs about 
dogs as such iff she believes that … dog …, for some ﬁlling of the dots. 
Since anyone who has any propositional attitudes about dogs as such will 
surely have some beliefs about dogs as such, we can put the Fodorian 
account of possessing the concept dog as follows:
To have the concept dog is to believe that … dog …., for some ﬁlling 
of the dots.
It is useful to have “the concept dog” as a genuine singular term. What is 
the concept dog, then? Whatever it is, it is distinct from the concept cat, 
because someone can have the concept dog without having the concept 
cat. (The concept dog thus has a property that the concept cat lacks, 
and so they are not identical.) On the other hand, there seems little point 
distinguishing the concept dog from the concept hound (in the archaic 
sense of “hound” on which it is synonymous with “dog”), since anyone 
who believes that … dog … also believes that … hound … (with the same 
ﬁlling for the dots), even though she might not put it that way.3
Given these points, the natural candidate to be the concept dog is 
simply the semantic value of the word “dog” (at least as it appears 
in “belief” constructions). That has the beneﬁt—skepticism about 
semantics aside—of securing the existence of the concept dog with-
out recourse to speculations about the architecture of the mind. Thus 
Fodor and Dennett, for example, who disagree about the language of 
thought, can both agree that there is such a thing as the concept dog, 
and that people possess or have it. In presently recommended usage, 
what they disagree about is not whether the concept is a word (type) in 
the language of thought, but whether having the concept dog requires 
having a word-type in the language of thought which can be translated 
in English as “dog.”
4.2  Belief
We have just tied having concepts very closely to having beliefs. In par-
ticular, if someone believes that … X … then she possesses the concept 
X; more generally, belief implies concept possession, even if the relevant 
concepts have no corresponding English expressions. In this sense belief 
is a conceptual state. Assuming (as we will) that knowledge entails belief, 
knowledge is also a conceptual state: if someone knows that … X … 
then she possesses the concept X. Plausibly, knowledge is not analyzable 
9781138316089_C004.indd   61
02-10-2020   10:20:27 AM

62 Alex Byrne
in terms of belief, truth, and other ingredients. Arguably it is the other 
way around. Belief is to be understood in terms of knowledge: “[m]ere 
believing is a kind of botched knowing” (Williamson 2000: 47). On this 
“knowledge-ﬁrst” conception of belief, credence, familiar from Bayesian 
epistemology, is not in the picture. Credence ½ that the coin lands heads 
never amounts to knowledge, botched or otherwise.4
As Stalnaker says, “[t]he semantics of belief attributions seems, at a 
certain level of abstraction at least, very simple: the transitive verb believe 
expresses a relation between a person or other animate thing and a prop-
osition denoted by the sentential complement” (Stalnaker 1988: 150). 
This can be further supported by two observations. First, there are things 
we believe, because we (apparently) quantify over them, resulting in valid 
arguments like: Moore believed everything Russell did, Russell believed 
that Wittgenstein was a genius, hence Moore believed that Wittgenstein 
was a genius. Second, these things we believe are presumably proposi-
tions, because one can substitute salva veritate “the proposition that 
Wittgenstein was a genius” for the “that”-clause in the second prem-
ise, yielding “Russell believed the proposition that Wittgenstein was a 
genius” (see, e.g., Schiffer 2003: 12–14). Although the simple relational 
view of belief is not secured quite so easily, alternative views will have to 
be passed over here (see, e.g., Moltmann 2003).
4.2.1  Occurrent and Dispositional Belief
Philosophers sometimes draw a distinction between occurrent and dispo-
sitional belief, along the following lines:
a belief is occurrent if it is either currently before one’s conscious-
ness or in some other way currently operative in guiding what one is 
thinking or doing. A belief is merely dispositional if it is only poten-
tially occurrent in this sense.
(Harman 1986: 14)
Given the seemingly reasonable assumption that any non-occurrent 
belief is “potentially occurrent,” the occurrent/dispositional distinction 
is exhaustive.
Whatever it means for a belief to be “currently before one’s conscious-
ness,” Harman clearly supposes that it involves the belief being “currently 
operative”—that is, the belief is causally active in some way. But then 
the occurrent/dispositional terminology is inappropriate. The shape of 
a key is sometimes causally active, as when the key is turned in a lock, 
and sometimes inactive, as when the key is in one’s pocket. This is not 
happily expressed by saying that shapes come in “occurrent” and “dispo-
sitional” varieties. Absolutely nothing is lost by dropping the “occurrent” 
terminology, since believing is (going by the usual grammatical criteria) a 
9781138316089_C004.indd   62
02-10-2020   10:20:27 AM

Concepts, Belief, and Perception 63
state, not an occurrence or process. In particular, there is no progressive: 
*“I am believing that snow is white”/“I am throwing snowballs”/“I am 
skiing.”
4.2.2  Implicit and Explicit Beliefs
Philosophers are also partial to the distinction between implicit and 
explicit beliefs, which Harman explains as follows:
I assume one believes something explicitly if one’s belief in that thing 
involves an explicit mental representation whose content is the con-
tent of that belief. On the other hand something is believed only 
implicitly if it is not explicitly believed but, for example, is easily 
inferable from one’s explicit beliefs.
(Harman 1986: 13)
Harman then adds:
It is a possible view that none of one’s beliefs are explicit, that is, 
that none are explicitly represented and all are only implicit in one’s 
mental makeup. This is a form of behaviorism about belief.
(Harman, 1986: 13)
This is a little puzzling, because Harman seems to suggest that if no belief 
is explicit, all beliefs are implicit (“implicit in one’s mental makeup”). But 
since the one straightforward route to implicit beliefs is by inference from 
explicit beliefs, it’s unclear how to square the existence of implicit beliefs 
with the non-existence of explicit ones.5
It is a good question how beliefs relate to mental representations—
neural symbols of some sort. Philosophers usually reject behaviorism 
and suppose that some beliefs are “explicitly represented.” But then 
they argue that not all beliefs can be explicitly represented, because the 
brain is ﬁnite and beliefs are inﬁnite. This motivates the explicit/implicit 
distinction explained along Harman’s lines: either beliefs are explicitly 
represented or else derived from explicitly represented ones, paradigmati-
cally by being “easily inferable” from them.
Why think that there is a storage problem if all beliefs are explicitly 
represented? Harman gives the example of believing “that the earth does 
not have two suns, that the earth does not have three suns, and so on”—
presumably without end. That is too many beliefs to be explicitly repre-
sented (see also Dennett 1975: 45). Instead, Harman says, one believes 
these propositions implicitly, because one can easily infer them from the 
premise “that the earth has exactly one sun,” which one does explicitly 
believe (Harman 1986: 13). But it is hardly clear that people do have 
inﬁnitely many beliefs of this sort. Of course, one can readily believe that 
9781138316089_C004.indd   63
02-10-2020   10:20:27 AM

64 Alex Byrne
for all x > 1, the earth does not have x suns, but this is to believe a single 
generalization, not all its particular instances. One might have a disposi-
tion to believe these instances (or at least some ﬁnite initial segment of 
them), but having a disposition to believe p is not thereby to believe it, 
any more that having a disposition to break is thereby to be broken.
There are other examples of “obvious truths” that purport to mas-
sively inﬂate the totality of one’s beliefs, if not to break the ﬁnite barrier. 
Harman gives one he attributes to Dennett, the belief that elephants don’t 
wear pajamas in the wild (Harman 1986: 13).6 Others in the same vein 
include the belief that no grass grows on kangaroos (Fodor 1985: 89), 
and the belief that there are no bicycles on the moon (Gertler 2011: 131).7
However, these examples are not very persuasive. It is true that answer-
ing the question “Do elephants wear pajamas in the wild?” is pretty 
effortless, but it would not be unusual to hesitate if one’s negative answer 
is followed up with “Have you always believed that?”. Similar hesitation 
is even more likely with the other two examples. Grass has been reported 
to grow on the backs of elephants, if not kangaroos. Astronauts have left 
a variety of vehicles on the moon, although not bicycles. Answering the 
questions “Does grass grow on kangaroos?” and “Are there bicycles on 
the moon?” could easily be accompanied by a palpable impression of rea-
soning. In fact, Fodor took his own example to be one of merely potential 
belief. Yet other cases of “obvious truths” elicit the opposite reaction: it is 
natural to say that we did not believe them before they were pointed out. 
Consider, for instance, the fact that a stopped clock is right twice a day, 
and that “Saturday” contains “turd.”
There is no obvious storage problem for the view that all beliefs are 
explicitly represented.
4.2.3  Belief and Dispositions
Uncontroversially, believing that it’s raining disposes normal subjects to 
do various things, given that they are in certain other mental states (e.g. 
wanting to stay dry). But this doesn’t show that belief is a dispositional 
state. Being cylindrical is not usually thought of as dispositional, but that 
state disposes pieces of metal to roll, given that they are in certain other 
states (e.g. lying convex surface down). However, according to many 
philosophers, believing is not just closely connected with dispositions, it 
is a disposition. What sort of disposition? Here is one suggestion from 
Stalnaker:
Belief and desire … are correlative dispositional states of a poten-
tially rational agent … To believe that P is to be disposed to act in 
ways that would tend to satisfy one’s desires, whatever they are, in a 
world in which P (together with one’s other beliefs) were true.
(Stalnaker 1984: 15)
9781138316089_C004.indd   64
02-10-2020   10:20:27 AM

Concepts, Belief, and Perception 65
This account does not purport to analyze believing p in non-mental terms, 
since “desire” appears in the analysandum.8 Indeed, given the qualiﬁca-
tion about “one’s other beliefs,” it doesn’t even analyze believing p in 
non-belief terms. In these ways the account is quite modest.
However, even modest accounts like Stalnaker’s are hard to defend. 
Indeed, Stalnaker himself immediately goes on to imply that “some more 
sophisticated variant” will be required, so problems are to be expected. 
For example, suppose that one has a rich complement of beliefs, which 
happen to be entirely true. One truly believes that there is beer in the 
fridge, that one is permitted to drink any beer in the fridge, that the fridge 
is nearby, and so on. Given these true beliefs, we may suppose that one 
is disposed to satisfy one’s desires—say, the desire to drink beer. But now 
consider some mundane truth q that one does not believe, and which has 
no bearing on the satisfaction of any of one’s desires—say, that the fridge 
was once owned by Stalnaker. One is “disposed to act in ways that would 
tend to satisfy one’s desires, whatever they are, in a world in which q 
(together with one’s other beliefs) were true”; hence Stalnaker’s account 
incorrectly predicts that one believes q.9
For a counterexample in the other direction, suppose—as is surely 
 possible—that one believes that one is not disposed to act in ways that 
satisfy one’s desires. Call that believed proposition “r.” In a realistic case, 
r is false. But had r (along with one’s other beliefs) been true, one would 
not have been disposed to act in desire-satisfying ways, and so Stalnaker’s 
account incorrectly predicts that one does not believe r.
Schwitzgebel offers a quite different dispositional account:
Think of the dispositional stereotype for the belief that P … as con-
sisting of the cluster of dispositions that we are apt to associate with 
the belief that P … The dispositional properties belonging to belief 
stereotypes fall into three main categories. The most obvious, per-
haps, are behavioral dispositions, the manifestations of which are 
verbal and nonverbal behavior, such as, in the present case [the belief 
that there is beer in the fridge], the disposition to say that there is 
beer in the fridge (in appropriate circumstances) and the disposition 
to go to the fridge (if one wants a beer). Equally important, though 
rarely invoked in dispositional accounts of any sort, are what may 
be called phenomenal dispositions, dispositions to have certain sorts 
of conscious experiences. The disposition to say silently to oneself, 
“there’s beer in my fridge,” and the disposition to feel surprise should 
one open the fridge and ﬁnd no beer are phenomenal dispositions 
stereotypical of the belief that there is beer in the fridge. Finally, there 
are dispositions to enter mental states that are not wholly characteriz-
able phenomenally, such as dispositions to draw conclusions entailed 
by the belief in question or to acquire new desires or habits conso-
nant with the belief. Call these cognitive dispositions … To believe 
9781138316089_C004.indd   65
02-10-2020   10:20:27 AM

66 Alex Byrne
that P, on the view I am proposing, is nothing more than to match to 
an appropriate degree and in appropriate respects the dispositional 
stereotype for believing that P.
(Schwitzgebel 2002: 252)
Again, like Stalnaker’s account, Schwitzgebel’s does not analyze belief in 
non-mental terms, or even in non-belief terms (Schwitzgebel 2002: 258). 
Belief enters the analysandum in a few places, for instance: “dispositions 
to draw conclusions [i.e. to form beliefs] entailed by the belief in question.”
Is it true that “a person who possesses all the dispositions in the ste-
reotype for … believing that ‘There is beer in my fridge’ can always 
accurately be described as believing that there is beer in her fridge” 
(Schwitzgebel 2002: 252)? That is not so clear. Someone who does not 
believe that there is beer in her fridge might nonetheless be disposed to 
say that there is in order to deceive.10 She may also be disposed to go 
to the fridge if she wants a beer because she knows that frosted glasses 
are to be found there. She may utter “There’s beer in my fridge” in inner 
speech merely to remind her to keep up the deception. Suppose, in addi-
tion, that she believes some propositions that entail that there is beer in 
her fridge: she believes, say, that there is Moosehead Lime in her fridge, 
and that Moosehead Lime is a kind of beer. Perhaps opening the fridge 
would prompt her to draw the obvious conclusion, and so form the belief 
that there is beer in her fridge. She is thus disposed to “feel surprise” on 
opening the fridge and ﬁnding no beer. Similarly, since she is disposed 
to conclude that there is beer in her fridge, we can also suppose that she 
is disposed “to draw conclusions entailed by the belief in question or to 
acquire new desires or habits consonant with the belief.” She apparently 
ﬁts the stereotype of believing that there is beer in her fridge perfectly, 
despite not believing it.
What about the other direction? Could one believe p without “match-
ing” the dispositional stereotype to an “appropriate degree”? Pace 
Davidson (1975), belief does not require language, so we can forget dis-
positions to engage in inner and outer speech. Presumably a sufﬁciently 
sophisticated languageless creature could believe that it is awake. Since it 
could not discover that it was asleep, the relevant “the disposition to feel 
surprise” is absent. Offhand, we may suppose that the creature is prone 
to reason poorly (including the acquisition of “new desires or habits”) 
from the premise that it is awake. Behavioral dispositions are then the 
only ones left. We may grant that the creature’s belief that it is awake has 
behavioral effects in some circumstances, but now the idea that belief 
requires matching the stereotype “to an appropriate degree” seems to 
have been lost entirely.
Both Stalnaker and Schwitzgebel helpfully describe dispositions that 
are often associated with belief. But there is a large gap between these 
observations and a credible account of belief as a disposition.
9781138316089_C004.indd   66
02-10-2020   10:20:27 AM

Concepts, Belief, and Perception 67
4.2.4  Belief and the Space of Reasons
Belief is truth-normed (Thau 2002: 56): if a belief is false it is in some 
way defective. In this sense, someone who falsely believes p ought not 
to have this belief. That does not mean that the believer herself deserves 
blame or criticism, since she may have an excellent excuse.
True beliefs can be defective too: if a belief is true but is formed 
by reading tea leaves, there is something wrong with it. Is it “wrong 
always, everywhere, and for anyone to believe anything on insufﬁcient 
evidence” (Clifford 1947: 77)? Not quite: one may know p without hav-
ing (distinct) evidence for p, and there can hardly be something wrong 
with a belief that amounts to knowledge. Some perceptual knowledge 
is plausibly of this kind: if one knows by vision that a dark spot is 
moving, what is one’s evidence? “Appearances” was once a popular 
answer, but that arguably requires too much sophistication and is ill-
motivated for other reasons. And even if that answer could be made to 
work, what about knowledge of the appearances themselves? A regress 
is in the ofﬁng if knowledge of appearances requires evidence. Either 
way, it is not always wrong to believe something on no—a fortiori 
insufﬁcient—evidence.
Sometimes believers don’t have excuses. One believes p, and compel-
ling evidence against p is presented. Given the evidence, one does not 
know p, but if one stubbornly persists in believing p then blame may be 
deserved. This relatively bland point should be distinguished from the 
Sellarsian view that belief is in the “logical space of reasons, of justifying 
and being able to justify what one says” (Sellars 1956: §36). Beliefs may 
be defective, and believers may be blameworthy, even if they are unable 
to justify what they say—and even if they are unable to say anything at 
all. Although McDowell quotes Sellars approvingly, the following pas-
sage contains no implication about the ability to justify:
A belief … is an actualization of capacities of a kind, the conceptual, 
whose paradigmatic mode of actualization is in the exercise of free-
dom that judging is. This freedom, exempliﬁed in responsible acts of 
judging, is essentially a matter of being answerable to criticism in the 
light of rationally relevant considerations.
(McDowell 1998: 434; quoted in Gendler 2008: 565, fn. 21)
(Note that one may be “answerable to criticism” while being unable to 
answer.) Gendler endorses something similar:
[B]elief … is normatively governed by the following constraint: belief 
aims to “track truth” in the sense that belief is subject to immediate 
revision in the face of changes in our all-things- considered evidence.
(Gendler 2008: 565)
9781138316089_C004.indd   67
02-10-2020   10:20:27 AM

68 Alex Byrne
She appeals to this to argue that a trembling man “suspended in a cage” 
does not believe that he is in danger, because he persists in trembling 
despite having convincing evidence that he is perfectly safe:
Beliefs change in response to changes in evidence … If new evidence 
won’t cause you to change your behavior in response to an apparent 
stimulus, then your reaction is [not] due to … belief.
(Gendler 2008: 566)
In this passage Gendler shifts from a plausible normative constraint 
(beliefs should change in response to evidence) to a much less plausible 
descriptive constraint (beliefs do change in response to evidence). Clearly 
beliefs sometimes change as they ought. But sometimes they (apparently) 
don’t: beliefs are retained despite the believer having decisive evidence 
to the contrary. Gendler has not bridged the gap between the normative 
constraint and the descriptive one; for all she has said, the trembling man 
in a cage believes that he is in danger.11
Summing up so far: believing p is a relational state of a person or 
other animate thing, a state that can sometimes be causally active, and 
sometimes not. Whether or not belief requires mental representations, the 
explicit/implicit distinction should be rejected. Although beliefs typically 
bring dispositions in their wake, the case that believing p is identical to 
a dispositional state has yet to be made. Finally, sometimes beliefs do 
not respond as they should, remaining immune to the blandishments of 
evidence.
4.3  Perception
What is perception good for? Perception enables the organism to ﬁnd food, 
shelter, and mates, and ultimately to reproduce its kind. Plausibly, percep-
tion has these beneﬁts because it provides the organism with knowledge 
about its environment. Sometimes it will fall short, and the organism will 
merely end up with environmental beliefs. In Thomas Reid’s metaphor of 
the testimony of the senses, sometimes the senses knowledgeably testify 
and sometimes they don’t.
In contemporary parlance, the testimony of the senses is “the content 
of perception.” We will assume, along with many contemporary philoso-
phers of perception, that Reid’s metaphor is appropriate and that experi-
ence does “have content.” There are notable dissenters, however.12
The basic assumption of orthodoxy can usefully be put in terms of a 
propositional attitude: exing (Byrne 2009). (“Exing” is intended to sug-
gest “experiencing,” although it should not be taken to be equivalent 
to any ordinary English expression.) If one’s senses testify to p (in the 
intended interpretation of Reid’s metaphor), one exes p. If one exes p and 
9781138316089_C004.indd   68
02-10-2020   10:20:27 AM

Concepts, Belief, and Perception 69
vision is the operative modality, then we can think of vision scientists as 
trying to explain how the visual system derives p from retinal stimula-
tion, a notoriously under-constrained problem.13
Exing provides an appealing treatment of the difference between verid-
ical perception and illusion. In the “good case,” where one veridically 
perceives, one exes p and p is true. In the “bad case,” where one is the 
subject of an illusion, one exes p and p is false. (Hallucination, however, 
is especially tricky, because it is unclear whether there is any suitable 
proposition available to ex; for present purposes we can leave the proper 
treatment of hallucination open.)
What sorts of propositions can be exed? Suppose, to borrow an exam-
ple from Reid, a man takes “a counterfeit guinea for a true one.” Is vision 
(falsely) testifying that this golden disk is a guinea? Or is the man simply 
exing a (true) proposition about “low-level” properties of the coin—its 
color, shape, and so forth—from which he concludes that it is a guinea? 
Reid held the latter view:
Did your sense give a false testimony of the colour, or of the ﬁgure, or 
of the impression? No. But this is all that they testiﬁed, and this they 
testiﬁed truly: From these premises you concluded that it was a true 
guinea, but this conclusion does not follow.
(Reid 1785/2002: 244; quoted in Van Cleve 2015: 139)
Reid was on the “thin” side of the rich/thin debate about perceptual con-
tent (Siegel and Byrne 2016).
Although exing is a common factor of the good case and the illusory 
bad case, that is not to say that one’s perceptual state in the good case 
is simply a veridical version of one’s perceptual state in the bad case. 
For example, one possibility is that exing is a determinable of a factive 
propositional attitude, which we can call sensing, and it is sensing that 
explains how the good case differs epistemologically from the bad case. 
In the good case, when everything is working well, one senses (and exes) 
p, and ends up knowing p. In the illusory bad case, one merely exes p and 
the corresponding belief is excusable but unjustiﬁed.14
Metaphors are rarely perfect, and the testimony of the senses is no 
exception.15 In an ordinary case of testimony one doesn’t just come to 
believe what one’s testiﬁer is saying. One is also aware that the testiﬁer is 
speaking (in, say, Hindi-Urdu) and thereby is asserting something—one 
is aware of testimony to p. But in an ordinary case of exing p one is not 
(or need not be) aware of exing p. A closely related point was emphasized 
by Dretske long ago, that seeing should be distinguished from saying that 
one sees (Dretske 1969: 35–43). It is safe to say that exing p and aware-
ness of exing p come apart completely in the case of many animals, who 
always perceive without knowing that they do.16
9781138316089_C004.indd   69
02-10-2020   10:20:27 AM

70 Alex Byrne
Such animals—perhaps including some primates—immediately raise 
an issue about the relation between exing p and believing p. Since there is 
little motivation to deny them perceptual knowledge, there is little moti-
vation to deny them perceptual belief. Although we humans sometimes 
resist the testimony of our senses, as when we insist that the lines in 
the Müller-Lyer illusion are the same length, they never do. For these 
less sophisticated animals, perceiving is always believing. When evolu-
tion designed their perceptual systems there was no need for a transition 
between the senses testifying to p and the acceptance of that testimony: 
building belief into the testifying would do.
Unless humans are brought into the picture, the simplest hypothesis is 
therefore that believing is a component of exing, as it is a component of 
knowing; exing p thus entails believing p. Call this view belief- dependence. 
The parallel view for knowledge does not imply that knowing can be 
analyzed in terms of believing; likewise, belief-dependence does not imply 
that exing can be analyzed in terms of believing. (For early attempts at 
such a reductive account, see Armstrong 1968; Pitcher 1971.) Still, belief-
dependence is almost universally rejected.17
We have already alluded to the chief reason for denying belief- 
independence—resisted perceptual illusions. As Evans puts it: “It is a 
well-known fact about perceptual illusions that it will continue to appear 
to us as though, say, one line is longer than the other (in the Müller-Lyer 
illusion) even though we are quite sure it is not” (Evans 1982: 123). But 
that doesn’t quite show that one can ex p without believing p. We need 
the further assumption that if one believes that the lines are equal, one 
does not also believe that they are unequal. And since people sometimes 
have contradictory beliefs, the assumption isn’t obvious.
What’s more, less sophisticated perceivers give us some reason to 
resist the assumption. If their perceptual states have belief as a compo-
nent, then given the incremental way evolution works, one would expect 
that we have preserved the same basic architecture. This suggests that, 
as in our more primitive cousins, when we perceive we also believe. But 
unlike them, we have developed the ability to inhibit the beliefs which 
are components of perceptual experience. Despite believing that the lines 
are unequal, we can allow the contrary belief that they are equal to guide 
our behavior. Delusory beliefs are a useful model here (Bortolotti 2010). 
Of course the beliefs that are entailed by exing are not usually false, 
but they are like delusions in two respects: they may be inferentially 
isolated, and will persist despite evidence to the contrary. Section 4.2 
provided some reassurance that genuine beliefs may be quite impervious 
to evidence.
Section 4.2 helps a defense of belief-dependence in two other ways. If 
beliefs come in implicit and explicit varieties, then so does knowledge. One 
explicitly knows, say, that the earth has exactly one sun, and implicitly 
knows that it does not have two suns. Given belief-dependence, and the 
9781138316089_C004.indd   70
02-10-2020   10:20:27 AM

Concepts, Belief, and Perception 71
parallel between exing and knowing, one would expect exing to come in the 
same two ﬂavors: one explicitly exes, say, that this patch is red, and implic-
itly exes that this patch is either red or triangular. But this is an unwanted 
result. By the usual tests, being either red or triangular is not a perceptual 
feature. For example, seeing red—hence red or triangular—patches will 
result in adaptation to being red, not to being red or triangular.18 But how 
to avoid saying that one exes that this patch is red or triangular? Given 
the collapse of the implicit/explicit distinction, the problem does not arise.
Second, because the content of perceptual experience is typically rich 
and exed ﬂeetingly, the belief-dependence does not ﬁt particularly well 
with dispositional accounts of belief in the literature. These accounts nor-
mally take relatively sparse and enduring beliefs—say, about the location 
of beer—as paradigm cases. If some such account worked for the para-
digm cases then this would be problematic. The discussion in Section 4.2 
suggests that there is little reason to worry.
The argument so far is hardly decisive, but there are other consider-
ations supporting belief-dependence. One (rather indirect) argument is 
that belief-dependence is required for an appealing “transparent” account 
of perceptual self-knowledge—how one knows that one sees a spoon, for 
example (Byrne 2018: Ch. 6). Another (also indirect) argument is that 
it allows an explanation of why we have perceptual experiences at all 
(Byrne 2016; for yet other arguments, see Byrne 2018: 144–146).
If perception requires belief, then belief must appear in the phyloge-
netic tree whenever perception does. For simple organisms like paramecia 
there is no evident need to posit any perceptual representation of the 
environment: “registration of proximal stimulation” is sufﬁcient (Burge 
2010: 422). But on any credible view, insects like bees perceive (Tye 2017: 
148–156; Burge 2010: 375). Do bees believe? Despite their tiny brains, 
they can learn to ﬂy through mazes and distinguish two objects from 
three objects; attributing “knowledge” to them seems perfectly natural 
(Srinivasan 2010: 274). Given that knowledge entails belief, bees believe.
As argued in Section 4.1, belief is sufﬁcient for concept possession. 
And if perception requires belief, then it requires concepts. On the view 
defended here, it’s concepts all the way down.
Notes
 1 Thanks to the audience at Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena and especially to 
Eva Schmidt.
 2 Machery himself thinks that “the term ‘concept’ ought to be eliminated from 
the theoretical vocabulary of psychology and replaced with more adequate 
theoretical terms” (Machery 2009: 230). Cf. Millikan (2017: 49).
 3 Even this is not entirely beyond dispute: Mates (1952) sets out a classic puz-
zle about whether substitution of synonyms always preserves truth. See also 
Soames (2005: 346).
 4 For a contrary view, on which credences can amount to knowledge, see Moss 
(2018).
9781138316089_C004.indd   71
02-10-2020   10:20:27 AM

72 Alex Byrne
 5 Just before the previous quotation, Harman mentions “another way in which 
something can be implicitly believed—it may be implicit in one’s believing 
something else” (Harman 1986: 13; emphasis added). Whatever this amounts 
to, it doesn’t seem to help with the problem raised in the text.
 6 Harman cites Dennett (1978), which does not contain anything about paja-
mas. Dennett does, however, give these two examples: the belief that “a grain 
of salt is smaller than an elephant” (Dennett 1978: 45), and the belief that 
“zebras in the wild do not wear overcoats” (Dennett 1978: 104).
 7 See also Stalnaker (1984: 68–71).
 8 The elided part of the quotation contains Stalnaker’s analysis of desire in 
terms of belief: “To desire that P is to be disposed to act in ways that would 
tend to bring it about that P in a world in which one’s beliefs, whatever they 
are, were true” (Stalnaker 1984: 15).
 9 Note that this objection applies to two slightly different ways of spelling out 
Stalnaker’s account. First, a simple counterfactual formulation: one believes 
q iff q (together with one’s other beliefs) were true one would be disposed to 
act in ways that would tend to satisfy one’s desires. Second, a more elastic ver-
sion in terms of “suitably close” worlds: one believes q iff, in worlds suitably 
close to the actual world in which q (together with one’s other actual beliefs) 
is true, one is disposed to act in ways that tend to satisfy one’s desires.
 10 Schwitzgebel is of course aware of this possibility (Schwitzgebel 2002: 253).
 11 Indeed, Gendler mentions the phenomenon of recalcitrant belief in a foot-
note, saying that “[a]s stated, the principle [in the above quotation] is too 
strong” (Gendler 2008: 566, fn. 26).
 12 E.g. Travis (2004) and Brewer (2011). A useful survey is Fish (2010).
 13 Information from the various senses is pooled (this is particularly clear for 
smell and taste), hence a single attitude of exing is arguably all that is needed, 
rather than different ones for different sensory modalities.
 14 This is close to the view in McDowell (2011). See Byrne (2014) for discussion.
 15 Reid notes that the “analogy between the evidence of sense and the evidence 
of testimony” is imperfect (Reid 1785/2002: 231), but not for the reason 
about to be given.
 16 On metacognition in animals, see, e.g., Smith et al. (2012).
 17 Reid seems to have held it (Van Cleve 2015: 19–21). Contemporary excep-
tions include Craig (1976), Glüer (2009), and Quilty-Dunn (2015); see also 
Lewis (1980: 239). (On Glüer’s idiosyncratic view, perceptual experiences are 
identical to beliefs with “phenomenal” contents: “visual experience has con-
tents of the form x looks F” (Glüer 2009: 311).)
 18 On adaptation as a test for perceptual representation, see Block (2019).
References
Armstrong, D.M. (1968), A Materialist Theory of the Mind. London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul.
Block, N. (2019), ‘Tyler Burge on Perceptual Adaptation’, in Pautz, A. & Stoljar, 
D. (eds.) Blockheads! Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Bortolotti, L. (2010), Delusions and Other Irrational Belief. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Brewer, B. (2011), Perception and Its Objects. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Burge, T. (2010), Origins of Objectivity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Byrne, A. (2009), ‘Experience and Content’, Philosophical Quarterly, 59, 
429–451.
9781138316089_C004.indd   72
02-10-2020   10:20:27 AM

Concepts, Belief, and Perception 73
Byrne, A. (2014), ‘McDowell and Wright on Anti-Scepticism etc’, in Dodd, D. 
and Zardini, E. (eds.) Scepticism and Perceptual Justiﬁcation. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Byrne, A. (2016), ‘The Epistemic Signiﬁcance of Experience’, Philosophical 
Studies, 173, 947–967.
Byrne, A. (2018), Transparency and Self-Knowledge. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Clifford, W.K. (1947), The Ethics of Belief and Other Essays. London: Watts & 
Co.
Craig, E. (1976), ‘Sensory Experience and the Foundations of Knowledge’, 
Synthese, 33, 1–24.
Davidson, D. (1975), ‘Thought and Talk’, in Guttenplan, S. (ed.) Mind and 
Language. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dennett, D.C. (1975), ‘Brain Writing and Mind Reading’, Minnesota Studies in 
the Philosophy of Science, 7, 403–415.
Dennett, D.C. (1978), Brainstorms. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Dretske, F. (1969), Seeing and Knowing. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Dummett, M.A.E. (1993), The Seas of Language. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Evans, G. (1982), The Varieties of Reference. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fish, W. (2010), Philosophy of Perception. London: Routledge.
Fodor, J.A. (1998), Concepts: Where Cognitive Science Went Wrong. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Fodor, J.A. (1981), Representations: Philosophical Essays on the Foundations of 
Cognitive Science. Brighton, UK: Harvester Press.
Fodor, J.A. (1985), ‘Fodor's Guide to Mental Representation: The Intelligent 
Auntie's Vade-mecum’, Mind, 94, 76–100.
Fodor, J.A. (2004), ‘Having Concepts: A Brief Refutation of the Twentieth 
Century’, Mind and Language, 19, 29–47.
Frege, G. (1951), ‘On Concept and Object’, Mind, 60, 168–180.
Gendler, T.S. (2008), ‘Alief in Action (and Reaction)’, Mind and Language, 23, 
552–585.
Gertler, B. (2011), ‘Self-Knowledge and the Transparency of Belief’, in Hatzimoysis, 
A. (ed.) Self-Knowledge. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Glüer, K. (2009), ‘In Defence of a Doxastic Account of Experience’, Mind and 
Language, 24, 297–327.
Harman, G. (1986), Change in View. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Lewis, D. (1980), ‘Veridical Hallucination and Prosthetic Vision’, Australasian 
Journal of Philosophy, 58, 239–249.
Machery, E. (2009), Doing Without Concepts. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Margolis, E. and Laurence, S. (2003), ‘Concepts’, in Stich, S. and Warﬁeld, T. 
(eds.) The Blackwell Guide to Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Blackwell.
Mates, B. (1952), ‘Synonymity’, in Linsky, L. (ed.) Semantics and the Philosophy 
of Language. Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Press.
McDowell, J. (1998), ‘Lecture I: Sellars on Perceptual Experience’, Journal of 
Philosophy, 95, 431–450.
McDowell, J. (2011), Perception as a Capacity for Knowledge. Milwaukee: 
Marquette University Press.
Millikan, R. (2017), Beyond Concepts. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
9781138316089_C004.indd   73
02-10-2020   10:20:27 AM

74 Alex Byrne
Moltmann, F. (2003), ‘Propositional Attitudes Without Propositions’, Synthese, 
135, 77–118.
Moss, S. (2018), Probabilistic Knowledge. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Peacocke, C. (1992), A Study of Concepts. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Pitcher, G. (1971), A Theory of Perception. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Quilty-Dunn, J. (2015), ‘Believing in Perceiving: Known Illusions and the Dual-
Component Theory’, Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly, 96, 550–575.
Reid, T. (1785/2002), Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man. Edinburgh, UK: 
Edinburgh University Press.
Schiffer, S. (2003), The Things We Mean. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schwitzgebel, E. (2002), ‘A Phenomenal, Dispositional Account of Belief’, Nous, 
36, 249–275.
Sellars, W. (1956), ‘Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind’, Minnesota Studies 
in the Philosophy of Science, 1, 253–329.
Siegel, S. and Byrne, A. (2016), ‘Rich or Thin?’, in Nanay, B. (ed.) Current 
Controversies in Philosophy of Perception. New York: Routledge.
Smith, J.D., Beran, M.J. and Couchman, J.J. (2012), ‘Animal Metacognition’, 
in Wasserman, E.A. and Zentall, T.R. (eds.) The Oxford Handbook of 
Comparative Cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Soames, S. (2005), Reference and Description. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press.
Srinivasan, M.V. (2010), ‘Honey Bees as a Model for Vision, Perception, and 
Cognition’, Annual Review of Entomology, 55, 267–284.
Stalnaker, R. (1984), Inquiry. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Stalnaker, R. (1988), ‘Belief Attribution and Context’, in Grimm, R.H. and 
Merrill, D.D. (eds.) Contents of Thought. Tucson: University of Arizona Press. 
Page reference to the reprint in Stalnaker 1999.
Stalnaker, R. (1999), Context and Content: Essays on Intentionality in Speech 
and Thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Thau, M. (2002), Consciousness and Cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Travis, C. (2004), ‘The Silence of the Senses’, Mind, 113, 57–94.
Tye, M. (2017), Tense Bees and Shell-Shocked Crabs. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Van Cleve, J. (2015), Problems from Reid. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Williamson, T. (2000), Knowledge and Its Limits. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Williamson, T. (2003), ‘Blind Reasoning’, Aristotelian Society Supplementary 
Volume, 77, 249–293
9781138316089_C004.indd   74
02-10-2020   10:20:27 AM

