This is a section of doi:10.7551/mitpress/12441.001.0001
Active Inference
The Free Energy Principle in Mind, Brain, and
Behavior
By: Thomas Parr, Giovanni Pezzulo, Karl J.
Friston
Citation:
Active Inference: The Free Energy Principle in Mind, Brain, and
Behavior
By:
DOI:
ISBN (electronic):
Publisher:
Published:
Thomas Parr, Giovanni Pezzulo, Karl J. Friston
The MIT Press
2022
10.7551/mitpress/12441.001.0001
9780262369978
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2107388/c000700_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 25 June 2023

Chance ­favors the prepared mind.
—­Louis Pasteur
1.1  Introduction
This chapter introduces the main question that Active Inference seeks 
to address: How do living organisms persist while engaging in adaptive 
exchanges with their environment? We discuss the motivation for addressing 
this question from a normative perspective, which starts from first princi­ples 
and then unpacks their cognitive and biological implications. Furthermore, 
this chapter briefly introduces the structure of the book, including its sub-
division into two parts: the first of which aims to help readers understand 
Active Inference, and the second of which aims to help them use it in their 
own research.
1.2  How Do Living Organisms Persist and Act Adaptively?
Living organisms constantly engage in reciprocal interactions with their 
environment (including other organisms). They emit actions that change 
the environment and receive sensory observations from it, as schematically 
illustrated in figure 1.1.
Living organisms can only maintain their bodily integrity by exerting 
adaptive control over the action-­perception loop. This means acting to solicit 
sensory observations that ­either correspond to desired outcomes or goals 
(e.g., the sensations that accompany secure nutrients and shelter for ­simple 
1  Overview
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2107388/c000700_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 25 June 2023

4	
Chapter 1
organisms, or friends and jobs for more complex ones) or help in making 
sense of the world (e.g., informing the organism about its surroundings).
Engaging in adaptive action-­perception loops with the environment 
poses formidable challenges to living organisms. This is largely due to the 
recursive nature of the cycle, where each observation, solicited by the pre-
vious action, changes how we decide on the next action, to solicit the next 
observation. The possibilities for control and adaptation are plentiful, but 
very few are useful. Yet during evolution, living organisms have man-
aged to develop adaptive strategies to face the fundamental challenges of 
existence. ­These strategies vary in their level of cognitive sophistication, 
with simpler and more rigid solutions in simpler organisms (e.g., follow-
ing nutrient gradients in bacteria) and more cognitively demanding and 
flexible solutions in more advanced organisms (e.g., planning to achieve 
distal goals in ­humans). ­These strategies also vary for the timescales at 
which they are selected and operate—­ranging from ­simple responses to 
environmental threats or morphological adaptations that arise at an evo-
lutionarily timescale, to behavioral patterns established during cultural 
or developmental learning, up to ­those requiring cognitive pro­cesses that 
operate at comparable timescales to action and perception (e.g., attention 
and memory).
Observation
Action
Figure 1.1
An action-­perception cycle reciprocally connecting a creature and its environment. 
The term environment is intentionally generic. In the examples that we discuss, it can 
include the physical world, the body, the social environment, and so on.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2107388/c000700_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 25 June 2023

Overview	
5
1.3  Active Inference: Be­hav­ior from First Princi­ples
This diversity is a blessing for biology but challenging for formal theories of 
brain and mind. Broadly, ­there are two perspectives we could take on this. 
One perspective is that dif­fer­ent biological adaptations, neural pro­cesses 
(e.g., synaptic exchanges and brain networks), and cognitive mechanisms 
(e.g., perception, attention, social interaction) are highly idiosyncratic and 
require dedicated explanations. This would lead to proliferation of theo-
ries in fields like philosophy, psy­chol­ogy, neuroscience, ethology, biology, 
artificial intelligence, and robotics, with ­little hope for their unification. 
Another perspective is that, despite their diverse manifestations, the cen-
tral aspects of be­hav­ior, cognition, and adaptation in living organisms are 
amenable to a coherent explanation from first princi­ples.
­These two possibilities map to two dif­fer­ent research programs and, to 
some extent, dif­fer­ent attitudes ­toward science: “neats” versus “scruffies” 
(terms due to Roger Shank). Neats always seek unification beyond the (appar-
ent) heterogeneity of brain and mind phenomena. This usually corresponds 
to designing top-­down, normative1 models that start from first princi­ples and 
try to derive as much as pos­si­ble about brains and minds. Scruffies instead 
embrace the heterogeneity by focusing on details that demand dedicated 
explanations. This usually corresponds to designing bottom-up models that 
start from data and use what­ever works to explain complex phenomena, 
including dif­fer­ent explanations for dif­fer­ent phenomena.
Is it pos­si­ble to explain heterogenous biological and cognitive pheno­
mena from first princi­ples, as the neats assume? Is a unified framework to 
understand brain and mind pos­si­ble?
This book answers ­these questions affirmatively and advances Active 
Inference as a normative approach to understand brain and mind. Our 
treatment of Active Inference starts from first princi­ples and unpacks their 
cognitive and biological implications.
1.4  Structure of the Book
The book comprises two parts. ­These are aimed at readers who want to under-
stand Active Inference (first part) and ­those who seek to use it for their own 
research (second part). The first part of the book introduces Active Inference 
both conceptually and formally, contextualizing it within current theories of 
cognition. The goal of this first part is to provide a comprehensive, formal, 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2107388/c000700_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 25 June 2023

6	
Chapter 1
and self-­contained introduction to Active Inference: its main constructs and 
implications for the study of brain and cognition.
The second part of the book illustrates specific examples of computa-
tional models that use Active Inference to explain cognitive phenomena, 
such as perception, attention, memory, and planning. The goal of this sec-
ond part is to help readers both understand existing computational models 
using Active Inference and design novel ones. In short, this book divides 
into theory (part 1) and practice (part 2).
1.4.1  Part 1: Active Inference in Theory
Active Inference is a normative framework to characterize Bayes-­optimal2 
be­hav­ior and cognition in living organisms. Its normative character is 
evinced in the idea that all facets of be­hav­ior and cognition in living organ-
isms follow a unique imperative: minimizing the surprise of their sensory obser-
vations. Surprise has to be interpreted in a technical sense: it mea­sures how 
much an agent’s current sensory observations differ from its preferred sen-
sory observations—­that is, ­those that preserve its integrity (e.g., for a fish, 
being in the ­water). Importantly, minimizing surprise is not something that 
can be done by passively observing the environment: rather, agents must 
adaptively control their action-­perception loops to solicit desired sensory 
observations. This is the active bit of Active Inference.
Minimizing surprise turns out to be a challenging prob­lem for technical 
reasons that ­will become apparent ­later. Active Inference offers a solution 
to this prob­lem. It assumes that even if living organisms cannot directly 
minimize their surprise, they can minimize a proxy—­called (variational) 
­free energy. This quantity can be minimized through neural computation 
in response to (and in anticipation of ) sensory observations. This emphasis 
on ­free energy minimization discloses the relation between Active Infer-
ence and the (first) princi­ple that motivates it: the ­free energy princi­ple 
(Friston 2009).
­Free energy minimization seems a very abstract starting point to explain 
biological phenomena. However, it is pos­si­ble to derive a number of for-
mal and empirical implications from it and to address a number of central 
questions in cognitive and neural theory. ­These include how the variables 
involved in ­free energy minimization may be encoded in neuronal popu-
lations; how the computations of minimized ­free energy map to specific 
cognitive pro­cesses, such as perception, action se­lection, and learning; and 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2107388/c000700_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 25 June 2023

Overview	
7
what kind of be­hav­iors emerge when an Active Inference agent minimizes 
its ­free energy.
As the above list of topics exemplifies, in this book we are mainly concerned 
with Active Inference and ­free energy minimization at the level of living 
organisms—­simpler (e.g., bacterial) or more complex (e.g., ­human)—­and 
their behavioral, cognitive, social, and neural pro­cesses. This clarification is 
necessary to contextualize our treatment of Active Inference within the more 
general ­free energy princi­ple (FEP), which discusses ­free energy minimization 
across a much wider range of biological phenomena and timescales beyond 
neural information processing—­ranging from evolutionary to cellular and 
cultural (Friston, Levin et al. 2015; Isomura and Friston 2018; Palacios, Razi 
et al. 2020; Veissière et al. 2020)—­which are beyond the scope of this book.
It is pos­si­ble to motivate Active Inference by taking one of two roads: a 
high road and a low road; see figure 1.2. ­These two roads provide two dis-
tinct but highly complementary perspectives on Active Inference:
•	 The high road to Active Inference starts from the question of how liv-
ing organisms persist and act adaptively in the world and motivates 
Active
Inference
Free energy
principle
 
Self-
organization
Bayes’
theorem
Predictive
coding
Bayesian
brain
Planning as
inference
Perception as
inference
Markov
blanket
Variational
Bayes
Surprise
minimization
Autopoiesis and
niche construction
Generative
model
Self-
evidencing
Predictive
processing
Figure 1.2
Two roads to Active Inference: the high road (starting from top-­right) and the low 
road (starting from bottom-­left).
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2107388/c000700_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 25 June 2023

8	
Chapter 1
Active Inference as a normative solution to ­these prob­lems. This high 
road perspective is useful to understand the normative nature of Active 
Inference: what living organisms must do to face their fundamental exis-
tential challenges (minimize their ­free energy) and why (to vicariously 
minimize the surprise of their sensory observations).
•	 The low road to Active Inference starts from the notion of the Bayesian 
brain, which casts the brain as an inference engine trying to optimize 
probabilistic repre­sen­ta­tions of the ­causes of its sensory input. It then 
motivates Active Inference as a specific, variational approximation to 
the (other­wise intractable) inferential prob­lem, which has a degree of 
biological plausibility. This low road perspective is useful to illustrate 
how Active Inference agents minimize their ­free energy—­therefore illus-
trating Active Inference not just as a princi­ple but also as a mechanistic 
explanation (aka pro­cess theory) of cognitive functions and their neuro-
nal under­pinnings.
In chapter 2, we set out the low road perspective on Active Inference. We 
start from foundational theories that cast perception as a prob­lem of statis-
tical (Bayesian) inference (Helmholtz 1866) and their modern incarnation 
in the Bayesian brain hypothesis (Doya 2007). We ­will see that to perform 
such (perceptual) inference, living organisms must be equipped with—or 
embody—­a probabilistic generative model of how their sensory observations 
are generated, which encodes beliefs (probability distributions) about both 
observable variables (sensory observations) and nonobservable (hidden) 
variables. We ­will extend this inferential view beyond perception to cover 
prob­lems of action se­lection, planning, and learning.
In chapter 3, we ­will illustrate the complementary high road perspective 
on Active Inference. This chapter introduces the FEP and the imperative 
for biological organisms to minimize surprise. Further to this, it unpacks 
how this princi­ple encompasses the dynamics of self-­organization and the 
preservation of a statistical boundary or Markov blanket that maintains sepa-
ration from the environment. This is vital in maintaining the integrity of 
biological creatures, and it is central to their autopoiesis.
In chapter 4, we ­will unpack Active Inference more formally. This chapter 
takes its cue from the discussion of the Bayesian brain in chapter 2 and sets 
out the mathematical relationship between the self-­evidencing dynamics of 
chapter 3 and variational inference. In addition, this chapter sets out two 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2107388/c000700_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 25 June 2023

Overview	
9
sorts of generative model used to formulate Active Inference prob­lems. ­These 
include the partially observed Markov decision pro­cesses used for decision-­
making and planning and the continuous time dynamical models that inter-
face with sensory receptors and muscles. Fi­nally, we see how ­free energy 
minimization for each of ­these models manifests as dynamic belief updating.
In chapter 5, we ­will move from formal treatments to biological impli-
cations of Active Inference. By starting from the premise that “every­thing 
that changes in the brain must minimize ­free energy” (Friston 2009), we 
­will discuss how the specific quantities involved in the ­free energy mini-
mization (e.g., prediction, prediction error, and precision signals) manifest 
in neuronal dynamics. This aids in mapping the abstract computational 
princi­ples of Active Inference to specific neural computations that can be 
executed by physiological substrates. This is impor­tant in forming hypoth-
eses ­under this framework and ensures that ­these are answerable to mea­
sured data. In other words, chapter 5 sets out the pro­cess theory associated 
with Active Inference.
Throughout the first part of the book, we ­will discuss several characteris-
tic aspects of Active Inference. ­These highlight the ways in which it is dif­fer­
ent from alternative frameworks that seek to explain biological regulation 
and cognition—­some of which we preview ­here.
•	 ­Under Active Inference, perception and action are two complementary 
ways to fulfill the same imperative: minimization of ­free energy. Percep-
tion minimizes ­free energy (and surprise) by (Bayesian) belief updating 
or changing your mind, thus making your beliefs compatible with sen-
sory observations. Instead, action minimizes ­free energy (and surprise) 
by changing the world to make it more compatible with your beliefs and 
goals. This unification of cognitive functions marks a fundamental dif-
ference between Active Inference and other approaches that treat action 
and perception in isolation from one another. Learning is yet another 
way to minimize ­free energy. However, it is not fundamentally dif­fer­ent 
from perception; it simply operates at a slower timescale. The comple-
mentarity between perception and action ­will be unpacked in chapter 2.
•	 In addition to driving action se­lection in the pre­sent to change currently 
available sensory data, the Active Inference framework accommodates 
planning—or the se­lection of the optimal course of action (or policy) 
in the ­future. Optimality ­here is mea­sured in relation to an expected ­free 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2107388/c000700_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 25 June 2023

10	
Chapter 1
energy and is distinct from the notion of variational ­free energy considered 
above in the context of action and perception. Indeed, while computing 
variational ­free energy depends on pre­sent and past observations, com-
puting expected ­free energy also requires predicted ­future observations 
(hence the term expected). Interestingly, the expected ­free energy of a policy 
comprises two parts. The first quantifies the extent to which the policy is 
expected to resolve uncertainty (exploration) and the second how consis-
tent the predicted outcomes are with an agent’s goals (exploitation). In 
contrast with other frameworks, policy se­lection in Active Inference auto-
matically balances exploration and exploitation. The relations between 
variational and expected ­free energy ­will be unpacked in chapter 2.
•	 ­Under Active Inference, all cognitive operations are conceptualized as 
inference over generative models—in keeping with the idea that the brain 
performs probabilistic computations—­aka the Bayesian brain hypothesis. 
Yet, the appeal to a specific approximate form of Bayesian inference—­
that is, a variational scheme that is motivated by first princi­ples—­adds 
specificity to the pro­cess theory. Furthermore, Active Inference extends 
the inferential approach to domains of cognition that are rarely con-
sidered and adds some specificity to the kind of models and inferential 
pro­cesses that may be implemented by biological brains. ­Under some 
assumptions, the dynamics that emerge from generative models used 
in Active Inference closely correspond to widespread models in compu-
tational neuroscience, such as predictive coding (Rao and Ballard 1999) 
and the Helmholtz machine (Dayan et al. 1995). The specifics of the 
variational scheme ­will be unpacked in chapter 4.
•	 ­Under Active Inference, both perception and learning are active pro­cesses, 
for two reasons. First, the brain is essentially a predictive machine, which 
constantly predicts incoming stimuli rather than passively waiting for 
them. This is impor­tant as perceptual and learning pro­cesses are always 
contextualized by prior predictions (e.g., expected and unexpected stim-
uli affect perception and learning in dif­fer­ent ways). Second, creatures 
engaging in Active Inference actively seek out salient sensory observa-
tions that resolve their uncertainty (e.g., by orienting their sensors or 
selecting learning episodes that are informative). The active character 
of perception and learning stands in contrast with most current theo-
ries that treat them as largely passive pro­cesses; this ­will be unpacked in 
chapter 2.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2107388/c000700_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 25 June 2023

Overview	
11
•	 Action is quintessentially goal directed and purposive. It starts from 
a desired outcome or goal (analogous to the concept of a set-­point in 
cybernetics), which is encoded as a prior prediction. Planning proceeds 
by inferring an action sequence that fulfills this prediction (or equiva-
lently, reduces any prediction error between prior prediction and the 
current state). The goal-­directed character of action in Active Inference is 
in keeping with early cybernetic formulations but is distinct from most 
current theories that explain be­hav­ior in terms of stimulus-­response 
mappings or state-­action policies. Stimulus-­response or habitual be­hav­
ior then becomes a special case of a broader ­family of policies in Active 
Inference. The goal-­directed nature of Active Inference ­will be unpacked 
in chapters 2 and 3.
•	 Vari­ous constructs of Active Inference have plausible biological analogues 
in the brain. This implies that—­once one has defined a specific genera-
tive model for a prob­lem at hand—­one can move from Active Inference 
as a normative theory to Active Inference as a pro­cess theory, which 
makes specific empirical predictions. For example, perceptual inference 
and learning correspond to changing synaptic activity and changing 
synaptic efficacy, respectively. Precision of predictions (in predictive cod-
ing) corresponds to the synaptic gain of prediction error units. Precision 
of policies corresponds to dopaminergic activity. Some of the biological 
consequences of Active Inference ­will be unpacked in chapter 5.
1.4.2  Part 2: Active Inference in Practice
While the first part of the book provides readers with the conceptual and 
formal tools to understand Active Inference, the second part focuses on 
practical issues. Specifically, we hope to provide readers with the tools to 
understand existing Active Inference models of cognitive functions (and 
dysfunctions) and to design novel ones. To this aim, we discuss specific 
examples of models using Active Inference. Importantly, models of Active 
Inference can vary along dif­fer­ent dimensions (e.g., with discrete or con-
tinuous time formulations, flat or hierarchical inference). The second part 
is structured as follows:
In chapter 6, we introduce a ­recipe to build Active Inference models. 
The ­recipe covers the essential steps to design an effective model, which 
include the identification of the system of interest, the most appropriate 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2107388/c000700_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 25 June 2023

12	
Chapter 1
form of the generative model (e.g., to characterize discrete-­ or continuous-­
time phenomena), and the specific variables to be included in the model. 
This chapter therefore offers an introduction to the design princi­ples that 
underwrite the models discussed in the following chapters.
In chapter 7, we discuss Active Inference models that address prob­lems 
formulated in discrete time; for example, as hidden Markov models (HMMs) 
or partially observable Markov decision pro­cesses (POMDPs). Our examples 
include a model of perceptual pro­cessing and a model of discrete foraging 
choices—­that is, ­whether to turn left or right at a decision point to secure 
a reward. We also introduce topics such as information seeking, learning, 
and novelty seeking, which can be treated in terms of discrete-­time Active 
Inference.
In chapter 8, we discuss Active Inference models that address prob­lems 
formulated in continuous time, using stochastic differential equations. 
­These include models of perception (like predictive coding), movement con-
trol, and sequential dynamics. Interestingly, it is in the continuous-­time 
formulation that some of the most distinctive predictions of Active Infer-
ence appear, such as the idea that movement generation stems from the ful-
fillment of predictions and that attentional phenomena can be understood 
in terms of precision control. We also introduce hybrid models of Active 
Inference that include both discrete-­ and continuous-­time variables. ­These 
permit simultaneous assessment of the choice among discrete options (e.g., 
targets for saccades) and the continuous movements resulting from the 
choice (e.g., oculomotor movements).
In chapter 9, we illustrate how to use Active Inference models to analyze 
data from behavioral experiments. We discuss the specific steps that are 
necessary for model-­based data analy­sis, from the collection of data to 
the formulation of a model and its inversion to support the analy­sis of data 
from single participants or at the group level.
In chapter  10, we discuss the relations between Active Inference and 
other theories in psy­chol­ogy, neuroscience, AI, and philosophy. We also 
highlight the most impor­tant aspects of Active Inference that distinguish it 
from the other theories.
In the appendixes, we briefly discuss the mathematical background 
required to understand the most technical parts of the book, including 
the notions of Taylor series approximation, variational Laplace, variational 
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2107388/c000700_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 25 June 2023

Overview	
13
calculus, and more. For reference we also pre­sent in a concise form the most 
impor­tant equations used in Active Inference.
In sum, the second part of the book illustrates a broad variety of mod-
els of biological and cognitive phenomena that can be constructed using 
Active Inference and a methodology to design novel ones. Apart from the 
interest of the specific models, we hope that our treatment clarifies the 
value of using a unified, normative framework to address biological and 
cognitive phenomena from a coherent perspective. In the end, this is the 
real appeal of normative frameworks: to provide a unified perspective and 
a guiding princi­ple to reconcile apparently disconnected phenomena—in 
this case, phenomena like perception, decision-­making, attention, learning, 
and movement control, each having its separate chapter in any psy­chol­ogy 
or neuroscience manual.
The models highlighted in the second part have been selected to illus-
trate specific points as simply as pos­si­ble. While we cover several models 
and domains, from discrete-­time decisions to continuous-­time perception 
and movement control, we are clearly disregarding many ­others that are 
equally in­ter­est­ing. Many other Active Inference models exist in the lit­er­
a­ture that cover domains as diverse as biological self-­organization and the 
origins of life (Friston 2013), morphogenesis (Friston, Levin et al. 2015), cog-
nitive robotics (Pio-­Lopez et al. 2016, Sancaktar et al. 2020), social dynam-
ics and niche construction (Bruineberg, Rietveld et al. 2018), the dynamics 
of synaptic networks (Palacios, Isomura et al. 2019), learning in biological 
networks (Friston and Herreros 2016), and psychopathological conditions, 
such as post-­traumatic stress disorder (Linson et al. 2020) and panic disor-
der (Maisto, Barca et al. 2021). ­These models vary along many dimensions: 
some are more directly related to biology whereas ­others are less so; some 
are single-­agent models whereas ­others are multi-­agent models; some tar-
get adaptive inference whereas other target maladaptive inference (e.g., in 
patient groups), and so on.
This growing lit­er­a­ture exemplifies the increasing popularity of Active 
Inference and the possibility of using it in a very large variety of domains. 
The aim of this book is to provide our readers with the ability to under-
stand and use Active inference in their own research—­possibly, to explore 
its unforeseen potentialities.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2107388/c000700_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 25 June 2023

14	
Chapter 1
1.5  Summary
This chapter briefly introduces the Active Inference approach to explain 
biological prob­lems from a normative perspective—­and previews some 
implications of this perspective that ­will be unpacked in ­later chapters. Fur-
thermore, this chapter highlights the division of the book into two parts, 
which aim to help readers understand Active Inference and use it in their 
own research, respectively. Over the next few chapters, we ­will develop 
the low road and high road perspectives outlined herein, before delving 
into the structure of generative models and the resulting message passing. 
Together ­these comprise Active Inference in princi­ple and provide the pre-
liminaries for Active Inference in practice. We hope that ­these chapters ­will 
persuade readers that Active Inference offers not only a unifying princi­ple 
­under which to understand be­hav­ior but also a tractable approach to study-
ing action and perception in autonomous systems.
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2107388/c000700_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 25 June 2023

© 2022 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
This work is subject to a Creative Commons CC BY-NC-ND license.
Subject to such license, all rights are reserved.
The MIT Press would like to thank the anonymous peer reviewers who provided 
comments on drafts of this book. The generous work of academic experts is essential 
for establishing the authority and quality of our publications. We acknowledge with 
gratitude the contributions of these otherwise uncredited readers.
This book was set in Stone Serif and Stone Sans by Westchester Publishing Services. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available.
Names: Parr, Thomas, 1993– author. | Pezzulo, Giovanni, author. | Friston, K. J. 
(Karl J.), author.
Title: Active inference : the free energy principle in mind, brain, and behavior / 
Thomas Parr, Giovanni Pezzulo, and Karl J. Friston.
Description: Cambridge, Massachusetts : The MIT Press, [2022] | Includes 
bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2021023032 | ISBN 9780262045353 (hardcover)
Subjects: LCSH: Perception. | Inference. | Neurobiology. | Human behavior models. | 
Knowledge, Theory of. | Bayesian statistical decision theory.
Classification: LCC BF311 .P31366 2022 | DDC 153—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021023032         
MIT Press Direct
Downloaded from http://direct.mit.edu/books/oa-monograph/chapter-pdf/2107388/c000700_9780262369978.pdf by guest on 25 June 2023

