
CALCULUS MADE EASY 

BOOKS BY MARTIN GARDNER 
Fads and Fallacies in the Name 
of Science 
Mathematics, Magic, and Mystery 
Great Essays in Science (ed.) 
Logic Machines and Diagrams 
The Scientific American Book of 
Mathematical Puzzles and 
Diversions 
The Annotated Alice 
The Second Scientific American 
Book of Mathematical Puzzles 
and Diversions 
Relativity for the Million 
The Annotated Snark 
The Ambidextrous Universe 
The Annotated Ancient Mariner 
New Mathematical Diversions 
from Scientific American 
The Annotated Casey at the Bat 
Perplexing Puzzles and 
Tantalizing Teasers 
The Unexpected Hanging and 
Other Mathematical Diversions 
Never Make Fun of a Turtle, My 
Son (verse) 
The Sixth Book of Mathematical 
Games from Scientific American 
Codes, Ciphers, and Secret Writing 
Space Puzzles 
The Snark Puzzle Book 
The Flight of Peter Fromm (novel) 
Mathematical Magic Show 
More Perplexing Puzzles and 
Tantalizing Teasers 
The Encyclopedia of Impromptu 
Magic 
Aha! Insight 
Mathematical Carnival 
Science: Good, Bad, and Bogus 
Science Fiction Puzzle Tales 
Aha! Gotcha 
Wheels, Life, and Other 
Mathematical Amusements 
Order and Surprise 
The Whys of a Philosophical 
Scrivener 
Puzzles from Other Worlds 
The Magic Numbers of Dr. 
Matrix 
Knotted Doughnuts and Other 
Mathematical Entertainments 
The Wreck of the Titanic Foretold 
Riddles of the Sphinx 
The Annotated Innocence of 
Father Brown 
The No-Sided Professor (short 
stories) 
Time Travel and Other 
Mathematical Bewilderments 
The New Age: Notes of a Fringe 
Watcher 
Gardner's Whys and Wherefores 
Penrose Tiles to Trapdoor Ciphers 
How Not to Test a Psychic 
The New Ambidextrous Universe 
More Annotated Alice 
The Annotated Night Before 
Christmas 
Best Remembered Poems (ed.) 
Fractal Music, Hypercards, and 
More 
The Healing Revelations of Mary 
Baker Eddy 
Martin Gardner Presents 
My Best Mathematical and Logic 
Puzzles 
Classic Brainteasers 
Famous Poems of Bygone Days 
(ed.) 
Urantia: The Great Cult 
Mystery 
The Universe Inside a 
Handkerchief 
The Night Is Large 
Last Recreations 
Visitors from Oz 

CALCULUS 
MADE EASY 
BEING A VERY-SIMPLEST INTRODUCTION TO THOSE 
BEAUTIFUL METHODS OF RECKONING WHICH 
ARE GENERALLY CALLED BY THE 
TERRIFYING NAMES 
OF THE 
DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS 
AND THE 
INTEGRAL CALCULUS 
Silvanus P. Thompson, F.R.S. 
AND 
Martin Gardner 
Newly Revised, Updated, Expanded, and 
Annotated for its 1998 edition. 
palgrave 

* 
Cl Martin Gardner 1998 
All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of 
this publication may be made without written permission. 
No paragraph of this publication may be reproduced, copied or 
transmitted save with written permission or in accordance with 
the provisions of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, 
or under the terms of any licence permitting limited copying 
issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 90 Tottenham Court 
Road, London WH 4LP. 
Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this 
publication may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil 
claims for damages. 
The author has asserted his right to be identified as the author 
of this work in accordance with the Copyright, Designs 
and Patents Act 1988. 
Original edition written by Silvanus P. Thompson and 
published 1910 
Subsequent editions 1914, 1946 
This edition first published in North America 1998 by St Martin's Press 
Published by 
PALGRAVE 
Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS and 
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y. 10010 
Companies and representatives throughout the world 
PALGRAVE is the new global academic imprint of 
St. Martin's Press LLC Scholarly and Reference Division and 
Palgrave Publishers Ltd (formerly Macmillan Press Ltd). 
ISBN 978-0-333-77243-0 
ISBN 978-1-349-15058-8 (eBook) 
This book is printed on paper suitable for recycling and 
made from fully managed and sustained forest sources. 
A catalogue record for this book is available 
from the British Library. 
10 
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
07 06 OS 
04 03 02 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-349-15058-8 

CONTENTS 
Preface to the 1998 Edition 
1 
Preliminary Chapters by Martin Gardner 
1. What Is a Function? 
10 
2. What Is a Limit? 
18 
3. What Is a Derivative? 
30 
Calculus Made Easy by Silvanus P. Thompson 
Publisher's Note on the Third Edition 
36 
Prologue 
38 
I. To Deliver You from the Preliminary 
Terrors 
39 
II. On Different Degrees of Smallness 
41 
III. On Relative Growings 
45 
IV. Simplest Cases 
51 
V. Next Stage. What to Do with Constants 
59 
VI. Sums, Differences, Products, and Quotients 
66 
VII. Successive Differentiation 
79 
VIII. When Time Varies 
83 
IX. Introducing a Useful Dodge 
94 
X. Geometrical Meaning of Differentiation 
103 
XI. Maxima and Minima 
116 
XII. Curvature of Curves 
132 
XIII. Partial Fractions and Inverse Functions 
139 
XlV. On True Compound Interest and the Law 
of Organic Growth 
150 
Xv. How to Deal with Sines and Cosines 
175 
XVI. Partial Differentiation 
184 
v 

vi 
Contents 
XVII. Integration 
XVIII. Integrating as the Reverse of 
Differentiating 
XIX. On Finding Areas by Integrating 
XX. Dodges, Pitfalls, and Triumphs 
XXI. Finding Solutions 
XXII. A Little More about Curvature of Curves 
XXIII. How to Find the Length of an Arc on a 
Curve 
Table of Standard Forms 
Epilogue and Apologue 
Answers to Exercises 
Appendix: 
Some Recreational Problems Relating to 
Calculus, by Martin Gardner 
Index 
About the Authors 
191 
198 
210 
227 
235 
249 
263 
276 
279 
281 
296 
326 
330 

PREFACE TO THE 1998 EDITION 
Introductory courses in calculus are now routinely taught to high 
school students and college freshmen. For students who hope to 
become mathematicians or to enter professions that require a 
knowledge of calculus, such courses are the highest hurdle they 
have to jump. Studies show that almost half of college freshmen 
who take a course in calculus fail to pass. Those who fail almost 
always abandon plans to major in mathematics, physics, or engi-
neering-three fields where advanced calculus is essential. They 
may even decide against entering such professions as architecture, 
the behavioral sciences, or the social sciences (especially econom-
ics) where calculus can be useful. They exit what they fear will be 
too difficult a road to consider careers where entrance roads are 
easier. 
One reason for such a high dropout rate is that introductory 
calculus is so poorly taught. Classes tend to be so boring that stu-
dents sometimes fall asleep. Calculus textbooks get fatter and fat-
ter every year, with more multi color overlays, computer graphics, 
and photographs of eminent mathematicians (starting with New-
ton and Leibniz), yet they never seem easier to comprehend. You 
look through them in vain for simple, clear exposition and for 
problems that will hook a student's interest. Their exercises have, 
as one mathematician recently put it, "the dignity of solving 
crossword puzzles." Modern calculus textbooks often contain 
more than a thousand pages-heavy enough to make excellent 
doorstops-and more than a thousand frightening exercises! 
Their prices are rapidly approaching $100. 
"Why do calculus books weigh so much?" Lynn Arthur Steen 
1 

2 
Preface to the 1998 Edition 
asked in a paper on "Twenty Questions for Calculus Reformers" 
that is reprinted in Toward a Lean and Lively Calculus (Math-
ematical Association of America, 1986), edited by Ronald Doug-
las. Because, he answers, "the economics of publishing compels 
authors. . . to add every topic that anyone might want so that 
no one can reject the book just because some particular item is 
omitted. The result is an encyclopaedic compendium of tech-
niques, examples, exercises and problems that more resemble an 
overgrown workbook than an intellectually stimulating introduc-
tion to a magnificent subject." 
"The teaching of calculus is a national disgrace," Steen, a math-
ematician at St. Olaf College, later declared. "Too often calculus 
is taught by inexperienced instructors to ill-prepared students in 
an environment with insufficient feedback." 
Leonard Gillman, writing on "The College Teaching Scandal" 
(Focus, Vol. 8, 1988, page 5), said: "The calculus scene has been 
execrable for many years, and given the inertia of our profession 
is quite capable of continuing that way for many more." 
Calculus has been called the topic mathematicians most love to 
hate. One hopes this is true only of teachers who do not appreci-
ate its enormous power and beauty. Howard Eves is a retired 
mathematician who actually enjoyed teaching calculus. In his 
book Great Moments in Mathematics I found this paragraph: 
Surely no subject in early college mathematics is more excit-
ing or more fun to teach than the calculus. It is like being 
the ringmaster of a great three-ring circus. It has been said 
that one can recognize the students on a college campus who 
have studied the calculus-they are the students with no 
eyebrows. In utter astonishment at the incredible applica-
bility of the subject, the eyebrows of the calculus students 
have receded higher and higher and finally vanished over the 
backs of their heads. 
Recent years have seen a great hue and cry in mathematical 
circles over ways to improve calculus teaching. Endless confer-
ences have been held, many funded by the federal government. 
Dozens of experimental programs are underway here and there. 
Some leaders of reform argue that while traditional textbooks 

Preface to the 1998 Edition 
3 
get weightier, the need for advanced calculus is actually dimin-
ishing. In his popular Introduction to the History of Mathematics. 
Eves sadly writes: "Today the larger part of mathematics has no, 
or very little connection with calculus or its extensions." 
Why is this? One reason is obvious. Computers! Today's digi-
tal computers have become incredibly fast and powerful. Con-
tinuous functions which once could be handled only by slow ana-
log machines can now be turned into discrete functions which 
digital computers handle efficiently with 
s~ep-by-step algo-
rithms. Hand-held calculators called "graphers" will instantly 
graph a function much too complex to draw with a pencil on 
graph paper. The trend now is away from continuous math to 
what used to be called finite math, but now is more often called 
discrete math. 
Calculus is steadily being downgraded to make room for com-
binatorics, graph theory, topology, knot theory, group theory, ma-
trix theory, number theory, logic, statistics, computer science, 
and a raft of other fields in which continuity plays a relatively mi-
nor role. 
Discrete mathematics is all over the scene, not only in math-
ematics but also in science and technology. Quantum theory is 
riddled with it. Even space and time may turn out to be quan-
tized. Evolution operates by discrete mutation leaps. Television is 
on the verge of replacing continuous analog transmission by dis-
crete digital transmission which greatly improves picture quality. 
The most accurate way to preserve a painting or a symphony is by 
converting it to discrete numbers which last forever without de-
teriorating. 
When I was in high school I had to master a pencil-and-paper 
way to calculate square roots. Happily, I was not forced to learn 
how to find cube and higher roots! Today it would be difficult to 
locate mathematicians who can even recall how to calculate a 
square root. And why should they? They can find the nth root of 
any number by pushing keys in less time than it would take to 
consult a book with tables of roots. Logarithms, once used for mul-
tiplying huge numbers, have become as obsolete as slide rules. 
Something similar is happening with calculus. Students see no 
reason today why they should master tedious ways of differenti-
ating and integrating by hand when a computer will do the job 

4 
Preface to the 1998 Edition 
as rapidly as it will calculate roots or multiply and divide large 
numbers. Mathematica, a widely used software system developed 
by Stephen Wolfram, for example, will instantly differentiate and 
integrate, and draw relevant graphs, for any calculus problem 
likely to arise in mathematics or science. Calculators with keys 
for finding derivatives and integrals now cost less than most cal-
culus textbooks. It has been estimated that more than ninety per-
cent of the exercises in the big textbooks can be solved by using 
such calculators. 
Leaders of calculus reform are not suggesting that calculus no 
longer be taught, what they recommend is a shift of emphasis 
from problem solving, which computers can do so much faster 
and more accurately, to an emphasis on understanding what com-
puters are doing when they answer calculus questions. A knowl-
edge of calculus is even essential just to know what to ask a com-
puter to do. Above all, calculus courses should instill in students 
an awareness of the great richness and elegance of calculus. 
Although suggestions are plentiful for ways to improve calcu-
lus teaching, a general consensus is yet to emerge. Several math-
ematicians have proposed introducing integral calculus before 
differential calculus. A notable example is the classic two-volume 
Differential and Integral Calculus (1936-37) by Richard Courant. 
However, differentiating is so much easier to master than inte-
grating that this switch has not caught on. 
Several calculus reformers, notably Thomas W. Tucker (See his 
"Rethinking Rigor in Calculus," in American Mathematical 
Monthly, (Vol. 104, March 1997, pp. 231-240) have recom-
mended that calculus texts replace the important mean value 
theorem (MVT) with an increasing function theorem (1FT). (On 
the mean value theorem see my Postscript to Thompson's Chap-
ter 10.) The 1FT states that if the derivative on a function's inter-
val is equal to or greater than zero, then the function is increasing 
on that interval. For example, if a car's speedometer always shows 
a number equal to or greater than zero, during a specified interval 
of time, then during that interval the car is either standing still 
or moving forward. Stated geometrically, it says that if the curve 
of a continuous function, during a given interval, has a tangent 
that is either horizontal or sloping upward, the function on that 
interval is either unchanging or increasing. This change also has 
not caught on. 

Preface to the 1998 Edition 
5 
Many reformers want to replace the artificial problems in tra-
ditional textbooks with problems about applications of calculus 
in probability theory, statistics, and in the biological and social 
sciences. Unfortunately, for beginning students not yet working 
in these fields, such "practical" problems can seem as dull and te-
dious as the artificial ones. 
More radical reformers believe that calculus should no longer 
be taught in high school, and not even to college freshmen unless 
they have' decided on a career for which a knowledge of calculus 
is required. And there are opponents of reform who find nothing 
wrong in the way calculus has been traditionally taught, assum-
ing, of course, it is taught by competent teachers. 
In its February 28, 1992, issue, Science investigated Project 
Calc, a computer oriented calculus course offered at Duke Uni-
versity. Only 57 percent of its students continued on with a sec-
ond course in calculus as compared with 68 percent who contin-
ued on after taking a more traditional course. A few students 
liked the experimental course. Most did not. One student called 
it "the worst class I ever took." Another described it as "a big ex-
ercise in confusion." Still another is quoted in Science as saying: "I 
am very jealous of my friends in normal calculus. I would do any-
thing to have taken a regular calculus with pencil and paper." 
Efforts are now underway to combine continuous and discrete 
mathematics in a single textbook. An outstanding example is 
Concrete Mathematics (1984, revised 1989), an entertaining text-
book by Ronald Graham, Donald Knuth, and Oren Patashnik. 
The authors coined the term "concrete" by taking "con" from the 
start of "continuous," and "crete" from the end of "discrete." 
However, even this exciting textbook presupposes a knowledge of 
calculus. 
The American philosopher and psychologist William James, in 
an 1893 letter to Theodore Flournoy, a Geneva psychologist, 
asked "Can you name me any simple book on the differential cal-
culus which gives an insight into the philosophy of the subject?" 
In spite of the current turmoil over fresh ways to teach calcu-
lus, I know of no book that so well meets James's request as the 
book you are now holding. Many similar efforts have been made, 
with such titles as Calculus for the Practical Man, The ABC of Cal-
culus, What Is Calculus About?, Calculus the Easy Way, and 
Simplified Calculus. They tend to be either too elementary, or too 

6 
Preface to the 1998 Edition 
advanced. Thompson strikes a happy medium. It is true that his 
book is old-fashioned, intuitive, and traditionally oriented. Yet 
no author has written about calculus with greater clarity and hu-
mor. Thompson not only explains the "philosophy of the sub-
ject," he also teaches his readers how to differentiate and inte-
grate simple functions. 
Silvanus Phillips Thompson was born in 1851, the son of a 
school teacher in York, England. From 1885 until his death in 
1916 he was professor of physics at the City and Guilds Technical 
College, in Finsbury. A distinguished electrical engineer, he was 
elected to the Royal Society in 1891, and served as president of 
several scientific societies. 
Thompson wrote numerous technical books and manuals on 
electricity, magnetism, dynamos, and optics, many of which went 
through several editions. He also authored popular biographies of 
scientists Michael Faraday, Philipp Reis, and Lord Kelvin. A de-
vout Quaker and an active Knight Templar, he wrote two books 
about his faith: The Quest for Truth (1915), and A Not Impossible 
Religion (published posthumously 1918). He was much in de-
mand as a lecturer, and said to be a skillful painter of landscapes. 
He also wrote poetry. In 1920 two of his four daughters, Jane 
Smeal Thompson and Helen G. Thompson, published a book 
about their father titled Silvanus Phittips Thompson: His Life and 
Letters. 
Calculus Made Easy was first issued by Macmillan in England in 
1910 under the pseudonym ofER.S.-initials that stand for Fel-
low of the Royal Society. The identity of the author was not re-
vealed until after his death. The book was reprinted three times 
before the end of 1910. Thompson revised the book considerably 
in 1914, correcting errors and adding new material. The book 
was further revised and enlarged posthumously in 1919, and 
again in 1945 by E G. W. Brown. Some of these later additions, 
such as the chapter on partial fractions, are more technical than 
chapters in Thompson's original work. Curiously, Thompson's 
first edition, with its great simplicity and clarity, is in a way 
closer to the kind of introductory book recommended today by 
reformers who wish to emphasize the basic ideas of calculus, and 
to downplay tedious techniques for solving problems that today 
can be solved quickly by computers. Readers who wish merely to 
grasp the essentials of calculus can skip the more technical chap-

Preface to the 1998 Edition 
7 
ters, and need not struggle with solving all the exercises. The 
book has never been out of print. St. Martin's Press published its 
paperback edition in 1970. 
Almost all reviews of the book's first edition were favorable. A 
reviewer for The Athenaeum wrote: 
It is not often that it falls to the lot of a reviewer of math-
ematicalliterature to read such a gay and boisterous book as 
this "very simplest introduction to those beautiful methods 
of reckoning which are generally called by the terrifying 
names of the differential calculus and the integral calculus." 
As a matter of fact, professional mathematicians will give a 
warm welcome to a book which is so orthodox in its teach-
ing and so vigorous in its exposition. 
Professor E. G. Coker, a colleague, said 10 a letter to 
Thompson: 
I am very pleased to hear that your little book on the calcu-
lus is likely to be available for general use. As you know, I 
have been teaching the elements of this subject to the junior 
classes here for some years, and I do not know of any other 
book so well adapted to give fundamental ideas. One of the 
great merits of the book is that it dispels the mysteries with 
which professional mathematicians envelope the subject. I 
feel sure that your little book, with its common sense way of 
dealing with elementary ideas of the calculus, will be a great 
success. 
Many of coday's eminent mathematicians and scientists first 
learned calculus from Thompson's book. Morris Kline, himself 
the author of a massive work on calculus, always recommended it 
as the best book co give a high school student who wants to learn 
calculus. The late economist and statistician Julian Simon, sent 
me his paper, not yet published, titled "Why Johnnies (and 
Maybe You) Hate Math and Statistics." It contains high praise for 
Thompson's book: 
Calculus Made Easy has been damned by every professional 
mathematician I have asked about it. So far as I know, it is 

8 
Preface to the 1998 Edition 
not used in any calculus courses anywhere. Nevertheless, al-
most a century after its first publication, it still sells briskly 
in paperback even in college bookstores. It teaches a system 
of approximation that makes quite clear the central idea of 
calculus-the idea that is extraordinarily difficult to com-
prehend using the mathematician's elegant method of 
limits. 
Later on Simon asks: 
Question: why don't high school and college kids get to 
learn calculus the Thompson way? Answer: Thompson's sys-
tem has an unremediable fatal flaw: It is ugly in the eyes of 
the world-class mathematicians who set the standards for 
the way mathematics is taught all down the line; the run-of-
the-mill college and high school teachers, and ultimately 
their students, are subject to this hegemony of the aesthetic 
tastes of the great. Thompson simply avoids the deductive 
devices that enthrall mathematicians with their beauty and 
elegance. 
I mentioned earlier a book titled Toward a Lean and Lively Cal-
culus. It contains papers by mathematicians who participated in a 
1986 conference at Tulane University on how to improve calculus 
teaching. Most of the contributors urged cutting down on tech-
niques for problem solving, stressing the understanding of ideas, 
integrating calculus with the use of calculators, and scaling down 
textbooks to leaner and livelier forms. Now, the leanest and live-
liest introduction to calculus ever written is Thompson's Calculus 
Made Easy, yet Peter Renz was the only mathematician at the 
conference who had the courage to praise the book and list it as 
a reference. 
The two most important concepts in calculus are functions and 
limits. Because Thompson more. or less assumes that his readers 
understand both notions, I have tried in two preliminary chapters 
to make clearer what they both mean. And I have added a brief 
chapter about derivatives. Here and there throughout Calculus 
Made Easy I have inserted footnotes where I think something of 
interest can be said about the text. These notes are initialed M.G. 
to distinguish them from Thompson's notes. 

Preface to the 1998 Edition 
9 
Where Thompson speaks of British currency I have changed 
the values to dollars and cents. Terminology has been updated. 
Thompson uses the obsolete term "differential coefficient." I have 
changed it to "derivative." The term "indefinite integral" is still 
used, but it is rapidly giving way to "antiderivative," so I have 
made this substitution. 
Thompson followed the British practice of raising a decimal 
point to where it is easily confused with the dot that stands for 
multiplication. I have lowered every such poiQ.t to conform to 
American custom. Where Thompson used a now discarded sign 
for factorials, I have changed it to the familiar exclamation mark. 
Where Thompson used the Greek letter for epsilon, I have 
changed it to the english e. Where Thompson used the symbol 
loge' I have replaced it with In. Finally, in a lengthy appendix, I 
have thrown together a variety of calculus-related problems that 
have a recreational flavor. 
I hope my revisions and additions for this newly revised edition 
of Calculus Made Easy will render it even easier to understand-
not just for high school and college students, but also for older 
laymen who, like William James, long to know what calculus is 
all about. Most mathematics deals with static objects such as 
circles and triangles and numbers. But the great universe "out 
there," not made by us, is in a constant state of what Newton 
called flux. At every microsecond it changes magically into some-
thing different. 
Calculus is the mathematics of change. If you are not a math-
ematician or scientist, or don't intend to become one, there is no 
need for you to master the techniques for solving calculus prob-
lems by hand. But if you avoid acquiring some insight into the 
essentials of calculus, into what James called its philosophy, you 
will miss a great intellectual adventure. You will miss an exhila-
rating glimpse into one of the most marvelous, most useful cre-
ations of those small and mysterious computers inside Out heads. 
I am indebted to Dean Hickerson, Oliver Selfridge, and Peter 
Renz for looking over this book's manuscript and providing a raft 
of corrections and welcome suggestions. 
-MARTIN GARDNER 
January, 1998 

Preliminary Chapter 1 
WHAT IS A FUNCTION? 
No concept in mathematics, especially in calculus, is more funda-
mental than the concept of a function. The term was first used in 
a 1673 letter written by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, the German 
mathematician and philosopher who invented calculus indepen-
dently of Isaac Newton. Since then the term has undergone a 
gradual extension of meaning. 
In traditional calculus a function is defined as a relation between 
two terms called variables because their values vary. Call the terms 
x and y. If every value of x is associated with exactly one value of 
y, then y is said to be a function of x. It is customary to use x for 
what is called the independent variable, and y for what is called the 
dependent variable because its value depends on the value of x. 
As Thompson explains in Chapter 3, letters at the end of the 
alphabet are traditionally applied to variables, and letters else-
where in the alphabet (usually first letters such as a,b,c . .. ) are 
applied to constants. Constants are terms in an equation that 
have a fixed value. For example, in y = ax + b, the variables are x 
and y, and a and b are constants. If y = 2x + 7, the constants are 
2 and 7. They remain the same as x and y vary. 
A simple instance of a geometrical function is the dependence 
of a square's area on the length of its side. In this case the func-
tion is called a one-to-one function because the dependency goes 
both ways. A square's side is also a function of its area. 
A square's area is the length of its side multiplied by itself. To 
express the area as a function of the side, let y be the area, x the 
side, then write y = x 2 . It is assumed, of course, that x and yare 
positive. 
10 

What Is a Function? 
11 
A slightly more complicated example of a one-to-one function 
is the relation of a square's side to its diagonal. A square's diago-
nal is the hypotenuse of an isosceles right triangle. We know 
from the Pythagorean theorem that the square of the hypotenuse 
equals the sum of the squares of the other two sides. In this case 
the sides are equal. To express the diagonal as a function of the 
square's side, let y be the diagonal, x the side, and write 
y = ~, 
or more simply y = xY2 to express the side as a func-
:i:O ~~ 
::':O:~i:;yb; ~h~de, x the di.gooru, .od w"''' 
The most common way to denote a function is to replace y, 
the dependent variable, by f(x)-f being the first letter of 
"function." Thus y = f(x) = x 2 means that y, the dependent vari-
able, is the square of x. Instead of, say, y = 2x - 7, we write 
y = f(x) = 2x - 7. This means that y, a function of x, depends on 
the value of x in the expression 2x - 7. In this form the expres-
sion is called an explicit function of x. If the equation has the 
equivalent form of 2x - y - 7 = 0, it is called an implicit function 
of x because the explicit form is implied by the equation. It is 
easily obtained from the equation by rearranging terms. Instead 
of f(x), other symbols are often used. 
If we wish to give numerical values to x and y in the example 
y = f(x) = 2x - 7, we replace x by any value, say 6, and write 
y = f( 6) = (2 . 6) - 7, giving the dependent variable y a value of 5. 
If the dependent variable is a function of a single independent 
variable, the function is called a function of one variable. Familiar 
examples, all one-to-one functions, are: 
The circumference or area of a circle in relation to its radius. 
The surface or volume of a sphere in relation to its radius. 
The log of a number in relation to the number. 
Sines, cosines, tangents, and secants are called trigonometric 
functions. Logs are logarithmic functions. Exponential functions 
are functions in which x, the independent variable, is an expo-
nent in a equation, such as y = 2x. There are, of course, endless 
other examples of more complicated one-variable functions which 
have been given names. 
Functions can depend on more than one variable. Again, there 

12 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
are endless examples. The hypotenuse of a right triangle depends 
on its two sides, not necessarily equal. (The function of course in-
volves three variables, but it is called a two-variable function be-
cause it has two independent variables.) If z is the hypotenuse, we 
know from the Pythagorean theorem that z = V x 2 + l. Note 
that this is not a one-to-one function. Knowing x and y gives z a 
unique value, but knowing z does not yield unique values for x 
and y. 
Two other familiar examples of a two-variable function, neither 
one-to-one, are the area of a triangle as a function of its altitude 
and base, and the area of a right circular cylinder as a function of 
its radius and height. 
Functions of one and two variables are ubiquitous in physics. 
The period of a pendulum is a function of its length. The distance 
covered by a dropped stone and its velocity are each functions of 
the elapsed time since it was dropped. Atmospheric pressure is a 
function of altitude. A bullet's energy is a two-variable function 
dependent on its mass and velocity. The electrical resistance of a 
wire depends on the length of the wire and the diameter of its cir-
cular cross section. 
Functions can have any number of independent variables. A 
simple instance of a three-variable function is the volume of a 
rectangular room. It is dependent on the room's two sides and 
height. The volume of a four-dimensional hyper-room is a func-
tion of four variables. 
A beginning student of calculus must be familiar with how 
equations with two variables can be modeled by curves on the 
Cartesian plane. (The plane is named after the French mathema-
tician and philosopher Rene Descartes who invented it.) Values of 
the independent variable are represented by points along the 
horizontal x axis. Values of the dependent variable are repre-
sented by points along the vertical y axis. Points on the plane sig-
nify an ordered pair of x and y numbers. If a function is linear-
that is, if it has one form y = ax + b-the curve representing the 
ordered pairs is a straight line. If the function does not have the 
form ax + b the curve is not a straight line. 
Figure 1 is a Cartesian graph of y = x 2 • The curve is a parabola. 
Points along each axis represent real numbers (rational and irra-

What Is a Function? 
1\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
1\ 
\ 
x -
-
-
I"-.. 
Range 
y 
n 
n 
0 
u 
J 
.... 
J 
... .. 
1 
~ 
./ 
9 
~ 
... .. , 
J 
y 
FIG. 1. Y = x 2 or f(x) = x 2 
/ 
II 
I 
V /Dc 
,/ 
II 
/ 
/ 
rna ·n 
x 
Note that the scales are different on the two axes. 
13 
tional), positive on the right side of the x axis, negative on the 
left; positive at the top of the y axis, negative at the bottom. The 
graph's origin point, where the axes intersect, represents zero. If 
x is the side of a square, we assume it is neither zero nor negative, 
so the relevant curve would be only the right side of the parabola. 
Assume the square's side is 3. Move vertically up from 3 on the 
x axis to the curve, then go left to the y axis where you find that 
the square of 3 is 9. (I apologize to readers for whom all this is 
old hat.) 
If a function involves three independent variables, the Carte-
sian graph must be extended to a three-dimensional space with 
axes x, y, and z. I once heard about a professor, whose name I no 
longer recall, who liked to dramatize this space to his students by 
running back and forth while he exclaimed "This is the x axis!" 
He then ran up and down the center aisle shouting "This is the 
y axis!", and finally hopped up and down while shouting "This is 
the z axis!" Functions of more than three variables require a Car-
tesian space with more than three axes. Unfortunately, a professor 
cannot dramatize axes higher than three by running or jumping. 

14 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Note the labels "domain" and "range" in Figure 1. In recent 
decades it has become fashionable to generalize the definition of 
function. Values that can be taken by the independent variable 
are called the variable's domain. Values that can be taken by the 
dependent variable are called the range. On the Cartesian plane 
the domain consists of numbers along the horizontal (x) axis. The 
range consists of numbers along the vertical (y) axis. 
Domains and ranges can be infinite sets, such as the set of real 
numbers, or the set of integers; or either one can be a finite set 
such as a portion of real numbers. The numbers on a thermom-
eter, for instance, represent a finite interval of real numbers. If 
used to measure the temperature of water, the numbers represent 
an interval between the temperatures at which water freezes and 
boils. Here the height of the mercury column relative to the wa-
ter's temperature is a one-to-one function of one variable. 
In modern set theory this way of defining a function can be ex-
tended to completely arbitrary sets of numbers for a function that 
is described not by an equation but by a set of rules. The simplest 
way to specify the rules is by a table. For example, the table in 
Figure 2 shows a set of arbitrary numbers that constitute the do-
main on the left. The corresponding set of arbitrary numbers in 
the range is on the right. The rules that govern this function are 
indicated by arrows. These arrows show that every number in the 
domain correlates to a single number on the right. As you can 
see, more than one number on the left can lead to the same num-
ber on the right, but not vice versa. Another example of such a 
function is shown in Figure 3, along with its graph, consisting of 
6 isolated points in the plane. 
Domain 
Because every number on the left leads to 
exactly one number on the right, we can say 
that the numbers on the right are a function 
of those on the left. Some writers call the 
numbers on the right "images" of those on 
the left. The arrows are said to furnish a 
"mapping" of domain to range. Some call 
the arrows "correspondence rules" that de-
fine the function. 
FIG. 2. An arbitrary 
For most of the functions encountered in 
function. 
calculus, the domain consists of a single in-

What Is a Function? 
y 
6 r-r-r-r-r-r-r-i 
51--+---"'----+-+--+---+--1 
4 1---1---1---1---1---1---1----1 
3 r-r-r-I--<~r-r-i 
2 f----<t---t-t-t-t-~ 
~.L-.L--'--...L---'----'-...J X 
0123456 
Domain 
Range 
~~l 
5~5 
6 
15 
FIG. 3. How another arbitrary discrete function of integers is graphed. 
terval of real numbers. The domain might be the entire x axis, as 
it is for the function y = x 2 • Or it might be an interval that's 
bounded; for example, the domain of y = arcsin x consists of all x 
such that -1 < x :$ 1. Or it might be bounded on one side and 
unbounded on the other; for example, the domain of y = Vx con-
sists of all x >- o. We call such a function "continuous" if its 
graph can be drawn without lifting the pencil from the paper, 
and "discontinuous" otherwise. (The complete definition of con-
tinuity, which is also applicable to functions with more compli-
cated domains, is beyond the scope of this book.) 
For example, the three functions just mentioned are all con-
tinuous. Figure 4 shows an example of a discontinuous function. 
Its domain consists of all real numbers, but its graph has infi-
nitely many pieces that aren't connected to each other. In this 
book we will be concerned almost entirely with continuous func-
tions. 
Note that if a vertical line from the x axis intersects more than 
one point on a curve, the curve cannot represent a function be-
cause it maps an x number to more than one y number. Figure 5 
is a graph that clearly is not a function because vertical lines, such 
as the one shown dotted, intersect the graph at three spots. (It 
should be noted that Thompson did not use the modern defini-
tion of "function." For example the graph shown in Figure 30 of 
Chapter XI fails this vertical line test, but Thompson considers it 
a function.) 
In this generalized definition of function, a one-variable func-
tion is any set of ordered pairs of numbers such that every num-

16 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
y 
u 
" 
j . 
, 
J 
~ 
1 
L 
x 
x 
0 
y 
FIG. 4. This function is called the greatest integer function because it 
maps each real number (on the x axis) to the largest integer on the y axis 
that is equal to or less than the real number. 
ber in one set is paired with exactly one number of the other set. 
Put differently, in the ordered pairs no x number can be repeated 
though a y number can be. 
In this broad way of viewing functions, the arbitrary combina-
tion of a safe or the sequence of buttons to be pushed to open a 
door, are functions of counting numbers. To open a safe you must 
turn the knob back and forth to a random set of integers. If the 
safe's combination is, say, 2-19-3-2-19, then those numbers are a 
function of 1,2,3,4,5. They represent the order in which numbers 
y 
must be taken to open the safe, or the 
order in which buttons must be 
pushed to open a door. In a similar 
way the heights of the tiny "peaks" 
along a cylinder lock's key are an ar-
bitrary function of positions along the 
x--~-+--+----x key's length. 
In recent years mathematicians have 
widened the notion of function even 
further to include things that are not 
y 
numbers. Indeed, they can be anything 
5 A 
h h 
d 
at all that are elements of a set. A func-
FIG. 
. 
grap 
t at 
oes 
not represent a function. 
tion is simply the correlation of each el-

What Is a Function? 
17 
ement in one set to exactly one element of another set. This leads 
to all sorts of uses of the word function that seem absurd. If Smith 
has red hair,]ones has black hair, and Robinson's hair is white, the 
hair color is a function of the three men. Positions of towns on a 
map are a function of their positions on the earth. The number of 
toes in a normal family is a function of the number of persons in 
the family. Different persons can have the same mother, but no per-
son has more than one mother. This allows one to say that mothers 
are a function of persons. Elephant mothers are a function of el-
ephants, but not grandmothers because an elephant can have two 
grandmothers. As one mathematician recently put it, functions 
have been generalized "up to the sky and down into the ground." 
A useful way to think of functions in this generalized way is to 
imagine a black box with input and output openings. Any ele-
ment in a domain, numbers or otherwise, is put into the box. Out 
will pop a single element in the range. The machinery inside the 
box magically provides the correlations by using whatever corre-
spondence rules govern the function. In calculus the inputs and 
outputs are almost always real numbers, and the machinery in the 
black box operates on rules provided by equations. 
Because the generalized definition of a function leads to bizarre 
extremes, many educators today, especially those with engineer-
ing backgrounds, think it is confusing and unnecessary to intro-
duce such a broad definition of functions to beginning calculus 
students. Nevertheless, an increasing number of modern calculus 
textbooks spend many pages on the generalized definition. Their 
authors believe that defining a function as a mapping of elements 
from any set to any other set is a si:rong unifying concept that 
should be taught to all calculus students. 
Opponents of this practice think that calculus should not be 
concerned with toes, towns, mothers, and elephants. Its domains 
and ranges should be confined, as they have always been, to real 
numbers whose functions describe continuous change. 
It is a fortunate and astonishing fact that the fundamental laws 
of our fantastic fidgety universe are based on relatively simple 
equations. If it were otherwise, we surely would know less than 
we know now about how our universe behaves, and Newton and 
Leibniz would probably never have invented (or discovered?) cal-
culus. 

Preliminary Chapter 2 
WHAT IS A LIMIT? 
It is possible, though difficult, to understand calculus without a 
firm grasp on the meaning of a limit. A derivative, the funda-
mental concept of differential calculus, is a limit. An integral, the 
fundamental concept of integral calculus, is a limit. 
To explain what is meant by a limit, we will be concerned in 
this chapter only with limits of discrete functions because limits 
are easier to understand in discrete terms. When you read Calcu-
lus Made Easy you will learn how the limit concept applies to 
what are called functions of a continuous variable because their 
variables have real number values that vary continuously. Func-
tions of discrete variables have variables whose values jump from 
one value to another. There are also functions of complex vari-
ables in which the values are complex numbers-numbers based 
on the imaginary square root of minus one. Complex variables are 
outside the scope of Thompson's book. 
A sequence is a set of numbers in some order. The numbers 
don't have to be different and they need not be integers. Consider 
the sequence 1,2,3,4, .... This is just the positive integers. It is 
an infinite sequence because it continues without stopping. If it 
stopped it would be a finite sequence. 
If the terms of a finite sequence are added to obtain a finite 
sum, it is called a series. If a series is infinite, the sum up to 
any specified term is called a "partial sum." If the partial sums 
of an infinite series get closer and closer to a number k, so 
that by continuing the series you can make the sum as close 
to k as you please, then k is called the limit of the partial sums, 
or the limit of the infinite series. The terms are said to 
18 

What Is a Limit? 
19 
"converge" on k. If there is no convergence, the series is said to 
"diverge." 
The limit of an infinite series is, sometimes called its "sum at 
infinity," but of course this is nbt a sum in the usual arithmetical 
sense when the number of terms is finite. You can't obtain the 
"sum" of an infinite series by adding because the number of terms 
to be added is infinite. When we speak of the "sum" of an infinite 
series, this is just a short way of naming its limit. 
An infinite series can converge on its limit in three different 
ways: 
1. The partial sums get ever closer to the limit without actually 
reaching it, but they never go beyond the limit. 
2. The partial sums reach the limit. 
3. The partial sums go beyond the limit before they converge. 
Let's look at examples of types 1 and 3. 
The fifth century B.C. Greek philosopher Zeno of Elia invented 
several famous paradoxes intended to show that there is some-
thing extremely mysterious about motion. One of them imagines 
a runner going from A to B. He first runs half the distance, then 
half the remaining distance, then again half the remaining dis-
tance, and so on. The distances he runs get smaller and smaller in 
h 
h I . 
. 
1 
1 
1 liD' 
fi 
B 
tea vmg senes 2 + 4 + 8" + 16 + . . .. 2"' 
Istances 
rom 
approach zero as their limit while the distances from A form a se-
ries that converges on 1. The runner, of course, models a point 
moving along a line from A to B. Does the runner ever reach the 
goal? 
It depends. 
Assume that after each step in the series the runner pauses to 
rest for a second. We can model this with a pawn (representing a 
point) that you push across a table from one edge to the edge op-
posite. First you push the pawn half the distance, then pause for 
a second. You push it half the remaining distance and again pause 
for a second. If this procedure continues, the pawn (point) will 
get closer and closer to the limit, but will never reach it. 
There is an old joke based on this. A mathematics professor 
places a male student at one side of an empty room and a gor-
geous female student at the opposite wall. On command, the boy 

20 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
walks half the distance toward the girl, waits a second, then goes 
half the rest of the way, and so on, always pausing a second before 
he cuts the remaining distance in half. The girl says, "Ha ha, 
you'll never reach me!" The boy replies, "True, but I can get close 
enough for all practical purposes." 
Suppose, now, that instead of waiting a second after each pawn 
push, the pawn is moved at a steady rate. Assume that the con-
stant speed is such that the pawn goes half the distance in one 
second, half the remaining distance in half a second, and so on. 
No pauses. A discrete process has been transformed into a con-
tinuous one. In two seconds the pawn has reached the table's far 
edge. Zeno's runner, ifhe goes at a steady rate, will reach the goal 
in a finite period of time. The halving series, modeled in this 
fashion, converges exactly on the limit. 
Zeno's runner leads to a variety of amusing paradoxes involv-
ing what are called "infinity machines." A simple example is a 
lamp that is turned off at the end of one minute, then turned on 
at the end of half a minute, off after a quarter minute, and so on 
in an infinite series of ons and offs. The time series converges on 
two minutes. At the end of two minutes is the lamp on or off? 
This of course is a thought experiment. It can't be performed 
with an actual lamp, but can it be 
answered in the abstract? No, be-
cause there is no last operation in an 
infinite series of on and off. It is 
like asking if the last digit of pi is 
odd or even. * 
An easy way to "see" that the 
1·· 
f 
1 
1 
1 
. 
1 
Iml t 
0 
2" + 4 + 8 + . . .. 
IS 
is to mark off the fractional lengths 
along a number line as Thompson 
does in his Figure 46. A similar 
"look-see" proof that the series con-
FIG. 6. A two-dimensional 
verges on 1 is shown by the dis-
"look-see" proof that 
~ +! + 
sected unit square in Figure 6. The 
~ + ft + ... = 1. 
*On infinity m-achines, see "Alephs and Supertasks," Chapter 4, in my 
Wheels, Life, and Other Mathematical Amusements (W. H. Freeman, 1983), 
and the references cited in that chapter's bibliography. 

What Is a Limit? 
21 
partial sums of this series are generated by the discrete function 
1 -?, where n takes the integral values 1,2,3,4,5, .... 
We turn now to an infinite series that goes past its limit before 
finally converging. An example is provided by changing every 
other 
sign 
in 
the 
halving 
series 
to 
a 
minus 
sign: 
1 1 + 11Th 
. I 
f h· "I 
. 
." 
2 - 4 
8" - 16 + . . . . 
e partla sums 0 t IS a ternatmg senes 
are alternately above and below the limit of t. The difference 
from t can be made as small as you please, but every other partial 
sum is larger than the limit. 
As an infinite series approaches but never reaches its limit, the 
differences between a partial sum and the limit get closer and 
closer to zero. Indeed they get so close that you can assume they 
are zero and therefore, as Thompson likes to say, they can be 
"thrown away." In early books on calculus, terms said to become 
infinitely close to zero were called "infinitesimals." Clearly there 
is something spooky about numbers living in a neverland that is 
infinitely close to zero, yet somehow not zero. In the halving se-
ries, for example, the fractions approaching zero never become in-
finitesimals because they always remain a finite portion of 1. In-
finitesimals are an infinitely small part of 1. They are smaller 
than any finite fraction you can name, yet never zero. Are they le-
gitimate mathematical entities, or should they be banished from 
mathematics? 
The most outspoken opponent of infinitesimals was the 
eighteenth-century British philosopher Bishop George Berkeley 
who attacked them in a 1734 book titled The Analyst, Or a Dis-
course Addressed To an Infidel Mathematician. The infidel was the as-
tronomer Edmond Halley, for whom Halley's comet is named, and 
the man who persuaded Newton to publish his famous Principia. 
Here are some of Bishop Berkeley's complaints about infini-
tesimals. ("Fluxion" was Newton's term for a derivative.) 
And what are these fluxions? The velocities of evanescent in-
crements. And what are these same evanescent increments? 
They are neither finite quantities, nor quantities infinitely 
small, nor yet nothing. May we not call them ghosts of de-
parted quantities? 

22 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
And of the aforesaid fluxions there be other fluxions, which 
fluxions of fluxions are called second fluxions. And the flux-
ions of these second fluxions are called third fluxions: and so 
on, fourth, fifth, sixth, etc., ad infinitum. Now, as our Sense 
is strained and puzzled with the perception of objects ex-
tremely minute, even so the Imagination, which faculty de-
rives from sense, is very much strained and puzzled to frame 
clear ideas of the least particle of time, or the least incre-
ment generated therein: and much more to comprehend the 
moments, or those increments of the flowing quantities in 
status nascenti, in their first origin or beginning to exist, be-
fore they become finite particles. And it seems still more 
difficult to conceive the abstracted velocities of such nascent 
imperfect entities. But the velocities of the velocities, the 
second, third, fourth, and fifth velocities, etc., exceed, if I 
mistake not, all human understanding. The further the 
mind analyseth and pursueth these fugitive ideas the more it 
is lost and bewildered; the objects, at first fleeting and 
minute, soon vanishing out of sight. Certainly, in any sense, 
a second or third fluxion seems an obscure Mystery. The in-
cipient celerity of an incipient celerity, the nascent augment 
of a nascent augment, i. e. of a thing which hath no magni-
tude; take it in what light you please, the clear conception 
of it will, if I mistake not, be found impossible; whether it 
be so or no I appeal to the trial of every thinking reader. 
And if a second fluxion be inconceivable, what are we to 
think of third, fourth, fifth fluxions, and so on without end. 
He who can digest a second or third fluxion, a second or 
third difference, need not, methinks, be squeamish about 
any point in Divinity. 
Johann Bernoulli, a Swiss mathematician who did pioneering 
work in developing calculus, expressed the paradox of infinitesi-
mals crisply. They are so tiny, he said, that "if a quantity is in-
creased or decreased by an infinitesimal, then that quantity is nei-
ther increased nor decreased." 
For two centuries most mathematicians agreed with Berkeley 
and refused to use the term. You won't find it in Ca1culus Made 

What Is a Limit? 
23 
EaJY. Bertrand Russell, in PrincipleJ of MathematicJ (1903, Chap-
ters 39 and 40) has a vigorous attack on infinitesimals. He calls 
them "mathematically useless," "unnecessary, erroneous, and self-
contradictory." As late as 1941 the noted mathematician Richard 
Courant wrote: "Infinitely small quantities are now definitely and 
dishonorably discarded." Like Russell and others, he believed 
that calculus should replace infinitesimals by the concept of lim-
its. 
Charles Peirce (1839-1914), America's great mathematician 
and philosopher, and friend of William James, strongly dis-
agreed. He was almost alone in his day in siding with Leibniz, 
who believed that infinitesimals were as real and as legitimate as 
imaginary numbers. Here are some typical remarks by Peirce that 
I found by checking "infinitesimal" in the indexes of the volumes 
that make up Peirce's Collected Papm and his New ElementJ of 
MathematicJ. 
Infinitesimals may exist and be highly important for philoso-
phy, as I believe they are. 
The doctrine of infinitesimals is far simpler than the doctrine 
of limits. 
Is it consistent ... freely to admit of imaginaries while re-
jecting infinitesimals as inconceivable? 
Infinitesimals, in the strict and literal sense, are perfectly in-
telligible, contrary to the teaching of the great body of mod-
ern textbooks on the calculus. 
There is nothing contradictory about the idea of such 
quantities .... As a mathematician, I prefer the method of 
infinitesimals to that of limits, as far easier and less infested 
with snares. 
Peirce would have been delighted had he lived to see the work 
of Abraham Robinson, of Yale University. In 1960, to the vast 
surprise of mathematicians everywhere, Robinson found a way to 
reintroduce Leibniz's infinitesimals as legitimate, precisely de-
fined mathematical entities! His way of using them in calculus is 
known as "nonstandard analysis." (Analysis is a term applied to 
calculus and all higher mathematics that use calculus.) Non-
standard analysis has produced simpler solutions than standard 

24 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
analysis to many calculus problems, and of course it is closer to an 
intuitive way of interpreting infinite converging series. Robin-
son's achievement is too difficult to go into here, but you will 
find a good introduction to it in "Nonstandard Analysis," by 
Martin Davis and Reuben Hersh, in ScientijicAmerican, June 
1972. 
Mathematician and science fiction writer Rudy Rucker, in his 
book Infinity and the Mind (1982) vigorously defends infinitesi-
mals: 
So great is the average person's fear of infinity that to this 
day calculus all over the world is being taught as a study of 
limit processes instead of what it really is: infinitesimal analysis. 
As someone who has spent a good portion of his adult life 
teaching calculus courses for a living, I can tell you how 
weary one gets of trying to explain the complex and fiddling 
theory of limits to wave after wave of uncomprehending 
freshmen .... 
But there is hope for a brighter future. Robinson's inves-
tigations of the hyperreal numbers have put infinitesimals 
on a logically unimpeachable basis, and here and there cal-
culus texts based on infinitesimals have appeared. 
Which is preferable? To talk about quantities so infinitely 
small that you can, as Thompson says, "throw them away," or to 
talk of values approaching a limit? Debate over the infinitesimal 
versus the limit language goes nowhere because they are two 
ways of saying the same thing. It's like choosing between calling 
a triangle a polygon with three sides or a polygon with three 
angles. Calculations in differentiating or integrating are exactly 
the same regardless of your preference for how to describe what 
you are doing. Now that infinitesimals have become respectable 
again, thanks to nonstandard analysis, you needn't hesitate, if you 
like, to use the term. 
You might suppose that if the terms of an infinite series get 
smaller and smaller, the series must converge. This is far from 
T 
c 
1·11111 
true. he most ramous examp e IS T +"2 +"3 + 4 +"5 + .... Known 
as the "harmonic series," it has countless applications in physics 
as well as in mathematics. Although its fractions get progres-

What Is a Limit? 
25 
sively smaller, converging on zero, its partial sums grow without 
limit! The growth is infuriatingly slow. After a hundred terms 
the partial sum is only a bit higher than 5. To reach a sum of 100 
requires more than 1043 termsl 
If we eliminate all terms in the harmonic series that have 
even denominators, will it converge? Amazingly, it will not, 
though its rate of growth is much slower. If we eliminate from 
the series all terms whose denominators contain a specific digit 
one or more times, the series will then converge. The following 
table gives to two decimal places the limit for each omitted 
digit: 
Omitted digit 
Sum 
1 
16.18 
2 
19.26 
3 
20.57 
4 
21.33 
5 
21.83 
6 
22.21 
7 
22.49 
8 
22.73 
9 
22.92 
0 
23.10 
Limits of infinite series can be expressed by unending decimal 
fractions. For example, .33333 .... is the limit of the series 
3 
3 
3 
1 I 
'd 
1 
h 
. 
°do 
1 
1 
10 + 100 + 1000 + ... = 3' 
nCt ent y, t ere IS a Cl lCU ous y easy 
way to determine the integral limit of any repeating decimal. 
The trick is to divide the repetend (the repeated sequence of dig-
its) by a number consisting of the same number of nines as there 
are digits in the repetend. Thus .3333 ... reduces to ~ =~. If the 
repeating decimal is, say, .123123123 .... the limit is ~~~ which 
d 
41 
re uces to 333' 
Irrational numbers such as irrational roots, and transcendental 
numbers such as pi and e, are limits of many infinite series. Pi, 
for example, is the limit of such highly patterned series as: 
4 
4 
4 44Th 
b 
('11 
. 
T - 3 + "5 -
'7 + '9 - . . . . 
e num er e you WI 
encounter It 
in Thompson's Chapter 14) is the limit of 1 + t + if + t + 
1 4T+ . .... 

26 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Although Archimedes did not know calculus, he anticipated 
integration by calculating pi as the limit of the perimeters of 
regular polygons as their number of sides increases. In the lan-
guage of infinitesimals, a circle can be viewed as the perimeter of 
a regular polygon with an infinity of sides, its perimeter consist-
ing of an infinity of straight line segments each of infinitesimal 
length. 
Many ingenious techniques have been found for determining if 
an infinite series converges or diverges, as well as ways, some-
times not easy, of finding the limit. If the terms of a series de-
crease in a geometric progression (each term is the same fraction 
of the preceding one) finding the limit is easy. Here is how it 
works on the halving series 1 + ~ + ~ + ~ + ..... Let x equal the 
entire series. Multiply each side of the equation by 2: 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2x = 2 + 2 + 4: + '8 + 16 + ... 
Reduce the terms: 
1 
1 
1 
2x= 2 + 1 +2+4+'8+ .... 
Note that the series beyond 2 is the same as the original halv-
ing series which we took as x. This enables us to substitute x for 
the sequence and write 2x = 2 + x. Rearranging terms to 
2x - x = 2 gives x, the limit of the series, a value of 2. 
The same trick will show that ~ is the limit of t + ~ + 
f-i + if + .... ; it works on any series in which terms decrease in 
geometric progression. 
Bouncing ball problems are common in the literature on lim-
its. They assume that an ideally elastic ball is dropped a specified 
distance to a hard floor. After each bounce it rises a constant frac-
tion of the previous height. Here is a typical example. 
The ball is dropped from a height of four feet. Each bounce 
takes it to i the previous height. In practice, of course, a rubber 
ball bounces only a finite number of times, but the idealized ball 
bounces an infinite number of times. The rises approach zero as a 
limit, but because the times of each bounce also approach a limit 
of zero, the ball (like Zeno's runner) finally reaches the limit. Af-
ter an infinity-of bounces, it comes to rest after a finite period of 
time. When the ball ceases to bounce, how far has it traveled? 
We can solve this problem by using the same trick used on the 

What Is a Limit? 
27 
halving series. Ignoring for a moment the initial drop of four 
feet, the ball will rise three feet then fall three feet for a total of 
six feet. After that, each bounce (rise plus fall) is three-fourths the 
previous bounce. Letting x be the total distance the ball travels 
after the first drop of four feet, we write the equation: 
6 
18 
54 
162 
486 
X = + "4 + 16 + 64 + 256 + ... 
Reducing the fractions: 
6 
9 
27 
81 
243 
x= +"2+8+3"2+rrs+ ... 
Because each term is t its following term, we multiply each 
side by t to get: 
4x 
6 
9 
27 
81 
3=8+ +"2+8+3"2+···· 
Observe that after 8 the sequence is the same as x, so we can 
substitute x for it: 
¥=8+x 
4x= 24 + 3x 
x=24 
This is the distance the ball bounces after the initial drop of 4 
feet. The total distance traveled by the ball is 24 + 4 = 28 feet. 
Sam Loyd, America's great puzzlemaker, in his Cyclopedia of 
Puzzles (page 23), and his British counterpart Henry Ernest Du-
deney, in Puzzles and Curious Problems (Problem 223), each give 
the following ball bounce problem. A ball is dropped 179 feet 
from the Tower of Pisa. Each bounce is one-tenth the height of 
the previous bounce. How far does the ball travel after an infinity 
of bounces before it finally comes to rest? (See Figure 7.) 
We can solve this by the trick used before, but because each 
fraction is one-tenth the previous one, we can find the answer by 
an even faster method. 
After the initial drop of 179 feet, the height of the first bounce 
is 17.9. Succeeding bounces have heights of 1.79, .179, .0179, 
and so on, with the decimal point moving one position left after 
each bounce. Adding these heights gives a total of 19.8888 .... 
We now double this distance to obtain the up plus down dis-
tances for each bounce to get 39.7777 .... Finally, we add the 

28 
CAL C U L U SMA DEE A S Y 
THE 
~ANING 
~~~ T°Wmt 
~~-Pi,jl 
~~~ 
Aelassical 
puzzle, 
.BY 
SA ... ~. 
~~ 
-
FIG. 7 . Sam Loyd's bouncing ball puzzle. 

What Is a Limit? 
29 
initial drop of 179 feet to obtain the total distance the ball trav-
els: 218.7777 ... , or exactly 218 and ~ feet. 
Converging series that do not decrease by a geometric progres-
sion often can be solved by other clever methods. Here is an in-
teresting example. 
3 
5 
7 
9 
.n 
x= 1 +'2+4+ii+16+'32+ .... 
Note that the numerators are odd numbers in sequence, and 
the denominators are a doubling series. Here is a simple way to 
find the limit. 
First divide each term by 2: 
x 
1 
3 
5 
7 
'2='2+4+ii+16+'" . 
Subtract this sequence from the original sequence: 
x= 1 + ~ +~+~+-&+ ... 
~_ 
1+3+5+7+ 
2-
'2 
4 ii 
16 .. . 
~= 1 +[1 +!+~+ ~ + .... J 
Observe that after the 1 inside the brackets, the sequence that 
follows ~s our old friend the halving series which we know con-
verges on 1. Adding 2 to the initial 1 gives the series a limit of 
3. Since 3 is half of x, x must be 6, the limit of the original series. 
Thompson does not spend much time on series and their lim-
its. I have done so in this chapter for two reasons: they are the 
best way to become comfortable with the limit concept, and 
modern calculus textbooks now usually include chapters on infi-
nite series and their usefulness in many aspects of calculus. 

Preliminary Chapter 3 
WHAT IS A DERIVATIVE? 
In Chapter 3 Thompson makes crystal clear what a derivative is, 
and how to calculate it. However, it seemed to me useful to make 
a few introductory remarks about derivatives that may make 
Thompson's chapter even easier to understand. 
Let's start with Zeno's runner. Assume that he runs ten meters 
per second on a path from zero to 100 meters. The independent 
variable is time, represented by the x axis of a Cartesian graph. 
The dependent variable y is the runner's distance from his start-
ing spot. It is represented on the y axis. Because the function is 
linear, the runner's motion graphs as an upward tilted straight 
line from zero, the graph's origin, to the point that is ten seconds 
on the time axis and 100 meters on the distance axis. (Figure 8) 
If by distance we mean distance from the goal, the line on the 
graph tilts the other way (Figure 9). 
Given any point in time, how fast is the runner moving? Be-
cause we are dealing with a simple linear function we don't need 
calculus to tell us that at every instant he is going ten meters per 
second. The function's equation is y = lOx. Note that the slope of 
the line on the graph, as measured by the height in meters at any 
point divided by the elapsed time in seconds at any point, is 10. 
At each instant the runner has gone in meters ten times the 
elapsed number of seconds. His instantaneous speed throughout 
the run clearly is ten meters per second. 
Consider any moment of time along the x axis, then go verti-
cally up the graph to the distance traveled in meters. You will 
find that the distance is always ten times the elapsed time. As you 
will learn when you read Calculus Made Easy, the derivative of a 
30 

What Is a Derivative? 
31 
y 
1 "1\ 
~I\ 
1/ 
'v 
/ 
.v 
/ 
" ... 
v 
1/ 
.JV 
1/ 
" 
.v 
1/ 
, " 
'v 
1/ 
" 
IV 
1/ 
,,, 
,,"v 
1/ 
" 
.v 1/ 
10 
x 
y 
FIG, 8. Graph of Zeno's runner. 
The x axis is time, the y axis is the distance from the start of the run. 
y 
1. \1\. 
" ... " " 
r£' " 
v 
" 
IV 
" 
:" 
" 
'v 
'" 
'V 
" 
or, 
" 
'\. 
V 
" 
x 
x 
0 
10 
y 
FIG. 9. Graph of Zeno's runner showing distance from goal. The equation 
is y = 10(10 - x). 

32 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
function is simply another function that describes the rate at 
which a dependent variable changes with respect to the rate at 
which the independent variable changes. In this case the runner's 
speed never changes, so the derivative of y = lOx is simply the 
number 10. It tells you two things: (1) that at any time the run-
ner's speed is ten meters per second, and (2) that at any point on 
the line that graphs this function, the slope of the line is 10. This 
generalizes to all linear functions in which the variable y changes 
with respect to variable x at a constant rate. If a function is 
y = ax, its derivative is simply the constant a. 
As I said, you don't need calculus to tell you all this, but it is 
good to know that calculating derivatives gives the correct result 
even when functions are linear. 
An even simpler case of a derivative, too obvious to require any 
thought, let alone demanding calculus, is the case of a runner 
who stands perfectly still. Let's say he stops running after going 
ten meters. The function is y = 10. The graph becomes a horizon-
tal straight line as shown in Figure 10. Its slope is zero which is 
the same as saying that the rate at which the runner's distance 
from the start changes, relative to changes of time, is zero. The 
function's derivative is zero. Even in this extreme case it is com-
forting to know that calculus still applies. In general, the deriva-
tive of any constant is zero. 
Calculus ceases to be trivial when functions are nonlinear. Con-
sider the simple nonlinear function y = x 2 , which Thompson uses 
to open his chapter on derivatives. Let's see how it applies to the 
growth of a square, the simplest 
geometrical interpretation of this 
function. 
Imagine a monster living on 
Flatland, a plane of two dimen-
sions. It is born a square of side 1 
and area 1, then grows at a 
y 
" 
.~ 
steady rate. We wish to know, at x 
x 
0 
any instant of time, how fast its 
area grows with respect to the 
growrh of its side. 
y 
The monster's area, of course, FIG. 10. Graph of a runner who 
is the square of its side, so the stands still at a distance of ten 
function we have to consider is units from the start. 

What Is a Derivative? 
33 
y = x 2 , where y is the area and x the side. (It graphs as the pa-
rabola shown in Figure 1 of the first preliminary chapter.) As you 
will learn from Thompson; the function's derivative is 2x. What 
does this tell us? It tells us that at any given moment the mon-
ster's area is growing at a rate that is 2x times as fast as its side 
is lengthening. 
For example, let's say the monster's side is growing at a rate of 
3 units per second. Starting with a side of one unit, at the end of 
ten seconds its side will have reached 31 units. The value of x at 
this point is 31. The derivative says that when the monster's side 
is 31, its area is increasing with respect to its side at a rate of 2x, 
or 2 X 31 = 62 units. When the square reaches 100 on its side, its 
area will be increasing with respect to its side by 2 X 100 = 200 
units. 
These figures express the rate of the square's growth with re-
spect to its side. For the square's growth rate with respect to time 
we have to multiply these values by 3. Thus when the square has 
a side of 31 (after ten seconds), it is growing at a rate of 3 X 2 X 
31 = 186 square units per second. When the side is 100, its 
growth rate per second is 3 X 2 X 100 = 600. 
Suppose the monster is a cube of edge x which increases at a 
steady rate of 2 units per second. The cube's volume, y, is x 3. 
The derivative of the function y = x 3 is 3x2• This tells you that 
the cube's volume in cubical units grows 3X2 times as fast as its 
edge grows. Thus when the cube's side reaches, say, 10, the 
value of x, its volume, is growing 3 X 102 = 300 square inches 
as fast as its side. Its. growth rate per second is 2 X 3 X 
102 = 600. 
Although Thompson avoids defining a derivative as the limit 
of a sequence of ratios, this clearly is the case. Suppose, for in-
stance, that our growing square has sides that increase at one unit 
per second. We can tabulate the area's growth at times slightly 
larger than 2 seconds as follows: 
Time 
Side 
Area 
2 
3 
9 
2.1 
3.1 
9.61 
2.01 
3.01 
9.0601 
2.001 
3.001 
9.006001 

34 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
The average rate of growth from time 2 to time 2.1 is: 
9.61-9=6.1 
2.1- 2 
And from time 2 to time 2.01: 
9.0601- 9 
6 
----= .01 
2.01 - 2 
And from time 2 to time 2.001: 
9.006001 - 9 
6 
-----= .001 
2.001 - 2 
The averages obviously approach a limit of 6. Thus the deriva-
tive of the area with respect to time is the limit of an infinite se-
quence of ratios that converge on 6. Put simply, a derivative is 
the rate at which a function's dependent variable grows with re-
spect to the growth rate of the independent variable. In geo-
metrical terms, it determines the exact slope of the tangent to a 
function's curve at any specified point along the curve. This 
equivalence of the algebraic and geometrical definitions of a de-
rivative is one of the most beautiful aspects of calculus. 
I hope this and the previous two preliminary chapters will help 
prepare you for understanding Calculus Made Easy. 

CALCULUS MADE EASY 
What one fool can do, another can. 
-Ancient Simian proverb 

PUBLISHER'S NOTE ON 
THE THIRD EDITION 
Only once in its long and useful life in 1919, has this book been 
enlarged and revised. But in twenty-six years much progress can 
be made, and the methods of 1919 are not likely to be the same 
as those of 1945. If, therefore, any book is to maintain its useful-
ness, it is essential that it should be overhauled occasionally so 
that it may be brought up-to-date where possible, to keep pace 
with the forward march of scientific development. 
For the new edition the book has been reset, and the diagrams 
modernised. Mr. F. G. W. Brown has been good enough to revise 
the whole of the book, but he has taken great care not to interfere 
with the original plan. Thus teachers and students will still 
recognise their well-known guide to the intricacies of the 
calculus. While the changes made are not of a major kind, yet 
their significance may not be inconsiderable. There seems no 
reason now, even if one ever existed, for excluding from the 
scope of the text those intensely practical functions, known as 
the hyperbolic sine, cosine and tangent, whose applications to 
the methods of integration are so potent and manifold. These 
have, accordingly, been introduced and applied, with the result 
that some of the long cumbersome methods of integrating have 
been displaced, just as a ray of sunshine dispels an obstructing 
cloud. 
The introduction, too, of the very practical integrals: 
J 
cPt sin kt . dt 
and J 
cPt cos kt . dt 
36 

Publisher's Note on the Third Edition 
37 
has eliminated some of the more ancient methods of "Finding So-
lutions" (Chapter XXI). By their application, shorter and more 
intelligible ones have grown up naturally instead. 
In the treatment of substitutions, the whole text has been ti-
died up in order to render it methodically consistent. A few ex-
amples have also been added where space permitted, while the 
whole of the exercises and their answers have been carefully re-
vised, checked and corrected. Duplicated problems have thus 
been removed and many hints provided in the answers adapted to 
the newer and more modern methods introduced. 
It must, however, be emphatically stated that the plan of the 
original author remains unchanged; even in its more modern 
form, the book still remains a monument to the skill and the 
courage of the late Professor Silvanus P. Thompson. All that the 
present reviser has attempted is to revitalize the usefulness of 
the work by adapting its distinctive utilitarian bias more closely 
in relation to present-day requirements. 

PROLOGUE 
Considering how many fools can calculate, it is surprising that it 
should be thought either a difficult or a tedious task for any other 
fool to learn how to master the same tricks. 
Some calculus-tricks are quite easy. Some are enormously diffi-
cult. The fools who write the text-books of advanced mathemat-
ics-and they are mostly clever fools-seldom take the trouble to 
show you how easy the easy calculations are. On the contrary, 
they seem to desire to impress you with their tremendous clever-
ness by going about it in the most difficult way. 
Being myself a remarkably stupid fellow, I have had to unteach 
myself the difficulties, and now beg to present to my fellow fools 
the parts that are not hard. Master these thoroughly, and the rest 
will follow. What one fool can do, another can. 
COMMON GREEK LETTERS USED AS SYMBOLS 
Capital Small English Name Capital Small English Name 
A 
a 
Alpha 
A 
A 
Lambda 
B 
f3 
Beta 
M 
f..t 
Mu 
r 
Gamma 
-
~ 
Xi 
'Y 
1-/ ... 
.1 
8 
Delta 
II 
7T 
Pi 
E 
€ 
Epsilon 
P 
p 
Rho 
H 
11 
Eta 
! 
a 
Sigma 
€) 
(J 
Theta 
cp 
cp 
Phi 
K 
K 
Kappa 
a 
w 
Omega 
38 

Chapter I 
TO DELIVER YOU FROM THE 
PRELIMINARY TERRORS 
The preliminary terror, which chokes off most high school stu-
dents from even attempting to learn how to calculate, can be 
abolished once for all by simply stating what is the meaning-in 
common-sense terms--of the two principal symbols that are used 
in calculating. 
These dreadful symbols are: 
(1) d which merely means "a little bit of". 
Thus dx means a little bit of x; or du means a little bit of u. Or-
dinary mathematicians think it more polite to say "an element 
of", instead of "a little bit of". Just as you please. But you will 
find that these little bits (or elements) may be considered to be 
infinitely small. 
(2) f 
which is merely a long S, and may be called (if you like) 
"the sum of". 
Thus f 
dx means the sum of all the little bits of x; or f 
dt 
means the sum of all the little bits of t. Ordinary mathemati-
cians call this symbol "the integral of". Now any fool can see 
that if x is considered as made up of a lot of little bits, each 
of which is called dx, if you add them all up together you get 
the sum of all the dx's (which is the same thing as the whole 
of x). The word "integral" simply means "the whole". If you 
think of the duration of time for one hour, you may (if you 
like) think of it as cut up into 3600 little bits called seconds. 
39 

40 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
The whole of the 3600 little bits added up together make one 
hour. 
When you see an expression that begins with this terrifying 
symbol, you will henceforth know that it is put there merely to 
give you instructions that you are now to perform the operation 
(if you can) of totalling up all the little bits that are indicated by 
the symbols that follow. 
That's all. 

Chapter II 
ON DIFFERENT DEGREES 
OF SMALLNESS 
We shall find that in our processes of calculation we have to deal 
with small quantities of various degrees of smallness. 
We shall have also to learn under what circumstances we may 
consider small quantities to be so minute that we may omit them 
from consideration. Everything depends upon relative minute-
ness. 
Before we fix any rules let us think of some familiar cases. 
There are 60 minutes in the hour, 24 hours in the day, 7 days in 
the week. There are therefore 1440 minutes in the day and 
10,080 minutes in the week. 
Obviously 1 minute is a very small quantity of time compared 
with a whole week. Indeed, our forefathers considered it small as 
compared with an hout, and called it "one minute", meaning a 
minute fraction-namely one sixtieth---of an hour. When they 
came to require still smaller subdivisions of time, they divided 
each minute into 60 still smaller parts, which, in Queen Eliza-
beth's days, they called "second minutes" (i.e. small quantities of 
the second order of minuteness). Nowadays we call these small 
quantities of the second order of smallness "seconds". But few 
people know why they are so called. 
Now if one minute is so small as compared with a whole day, 
how much smaller by comparison is one second! 
Again, think of a hundred dollars compared with a penny: it is 
worth only a l~O part. A penny is of precious little importance 
compared with a hundred dollars: it may certainly be regarded as 
a small quantity. But compare a penny with ten thousand dollars: 
relative to this greater sum, a penny is of no more importance 
41 

42 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
than a hundredth of a penny would be to a hundred dollars. Even 
a hundred dollars is relatively a negligible quantity in the wealth 
of a millionaire. 
Now if we fix upon any numerical fraction as constituting the 
proportion which for any purpose we call relatively small, we can 
easily state other fractions of a higher degree of smallness. Thus 
if, for the purpose of time, to be called a small fraction, then to of 
to (being a small fraction of a small fraction) may be regarded as 
a small quantity of the second order of smallness. * 
Or, if for any purpose we were to take 1 percent (i.e. 160) as a 
small fraction then 1 percent of 1 percent (i.e. 1O,~00) 'i0uld be a 
small fraction of the second order of smallness; and 1,000,000 would 
be a small fraction of the third order of smallness, being 1 percent 
of 1 percent of 1 percent. 
Lastly, suppose that for some very precise purpose we should 
regard 1,006,000 as "small". Thus, if a first-rate chronometer is not 
to lose or gain more than half a minute in a year, it must keep 
time with an accuracy of 1 part in 1,051,200. Now if, for such a 
purpose, we regard 1006000 (or one millionth) as a small quantity, 
1 
1 ". 
1 
. 
then 1,000,000 of 1,000,000, that IS, 1,000,000,000,000 Will be a small quan-
tity of the second order of smallness, and may be utterly disre-
garded, by comparison. 
Then we see that the smaller a small quantity itself is, the more 
negligible does the corresponding small quantity of the second 
order become. Hence we know that in all cases we are justified in 
neglecting the small quantities of the second--or third (or higher)--or-
tiers, if only we take the small quantity of the first order small 
enough in itself. 
But it must be remembered that small quantities, if they occur 
in our expressions as factors multiplied by some other factor, may 
become important if the other factor is itself large. Even a penny 
becomes important if only it is multiplied by a few hundred. 
Now in the calculus we write dx for a little bit of x. These 
things such as dx, and du, and dy, are called "differentials", the 
differential of x, or of u, or of y, as the case may be. [You read 
*The mathematicians may talk about the second order of "magnitude" (i.e. 
greatness) when they really mean second order of smallness. This is very con-
fusing to beginners. 

On Different Degrees of Smallness 
43 
them as dee-eks, or dee-you, or dee-wy.} If dx be a small bit of x, and 
relatively small of itself, it does not follow that such quantities as 
x . dx, or x 2dx, or aXdx are negligible. But dx X dx would be neg-
ligible, being a small quantity of the second order. 
A very simple example will serve as illustration. Consider the 
function f(x) = x 2 
Let us think of x as a quantity that can grow by a small amount 
so as to become x + dx, where dx is the small. increment added by 
growth. The square of this is x2 + 2x . dx + (dxf. The second 
term is not negligible because it is a first-order quantity; while 
the third term is of the second order of smallness, being a bit of 
a bit of x 2. Thus if we took dx to mean numerically, say, to of x, 
then the second term would be to of x 2 , whereas the third term 
would be 3 Joo of x 2 • This last term is dearly less important than 
, 
1 
the second. But if we go further and take dx to mean only 1000 of 
x, then the second term will be 1~00 of x 2 , while the third term 
will be only 1,00~,000 of x 2 • 
Geometrically this may be depicted as follows: Draw a square 
(Fig. 1) the side of which we will take to represent x. Now suppose 
the square to grow by having a bit dx added to its size each way. 
The enlarged square is made up of the original square x 2 , the two 
rectangles at the top and on the right, each of which is of area x . dx 
(or together 2x . dx), and a little square at the top right-hand cor-
ner which is (dX)2. In Fig. 2 we have taken dx as quite a big fraction 
of x-about t. But suppose we had taken it only l~o-about the 
thickness of an inked line drawn with a fine pen (See Figure 3). 
Then the little corner square will have an area of only 1O,~00 of x 2 , 
and be practically invisible. Clearly (dxf is negligible if only we 
consider the increment dx to be itself small enough. 
Let us consider a simile. 
Suppose a millionaire were to say to his secretary: next week I 
will give you a small fraction of any money 
that comes in to me. Suppose that the secretary 
were to say to his boy: I will give you a small 
fraction of what I get. Suppose the fraction in 
each case to be 1~0 part. Now if Mr. Millionaire 
received during the next week $1,000, the sec-
retary would receive $10 and the boy 1 dime. 
Ten dollars would be a small quantity com-
x 
x 
FIG. 1. 

44 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
dx 
dx 
dx 
~-----+--i 
x 
dx 
FIG. 2. 
FIG. 3. 
pared with $1,000; but a dime is a small small quantity indeed, 
of a very secondary order. But what would be the disproportion if 
the fraction, instead of being l~O' had been settled at lO~O part? 
Then, while Mr. Millionaire got his $1,000, Mr. Secretary would 
get only $1.00, and the boy only a tenth of a penny! 
The witty Dean Swift once wrote: 
So, Nat'ralists observe, a Flea 
Hath smaller Fleas that on him prey. 
And these have smaller Fleas to bite 'em. 
And so proceed ad infinitum. 
An ox might worry about a flea of ordinary size-a small crea-
ture of the first order of smallness. But he would probably not 
trouble himself about a flea's flea; being of the second order of 
smallness, it would be negligible. Even a gross of fleas' fleas 
would not be of much account to the ox. 

Chapter III 
ON RELATIVE GROWINGS 
All through the calculus we are dealing with quantities that are 
growing, and with rates of growth. We classify all quantities into 
two classes: constants and variables. Those which we regard as of 
fixed value, and call constants, we generally denote algebraically 
by letters from the beginning of the alphabet, such as a, b, or c; 
while those which we consider as capable of growing, or (as 
mathematicians say) of "varying", we denote by letters from the 
end of the alphabet, such as x, y, z, u, v, W, or sometimes t. 
Moreover, we are usually dealing with more than one variable 
at once, and thinking of the way in which one variable depends 
on the other: for instance, we think of the way in which the 
height reached by a projectile depends on the time of attaining 
that height. Or, we are asked to consider a rectangle of given area, 
and to enquire how any increase in the length of it will compel 
a corresponding decrease in the breadth of it. Or, we think of the 
way in which any variation in the slope of a ladder will cause the 
height that it reaches, to vary. 
Suppose we have got two such variables that depend on each 
other. An alteration in one will bring about an alteration in the 
other, because of this dependence. Let us call one of the variables 
x, and the other that depends on it y. 
Suppose we make x to vary, that is to say, we either alter it or 
imagine it to be altered, by adding to it a bit which we call dx. 
We are thus causing x to become x + dx. Then, because x has 
been altered, y will have altered also, and will have become 
y + dy. Here the bit dy may be in some cases positive, in others 
negative; and it won't (except very rarely) be the same size as dx. 
45 

46 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Take Two Examples. 
(1) Let x and y be respectively the 
base and the height of a right-angled 
triangle (Fig. 4), of which the slope 
of the other side is fixed at 30°. If we 
suppose this triangle to expand and 
yet keep its angles the same as at 
first, then, when the base grows so as 
to become x + dx, the height be-
FIG. 4. 
J' 
comes y + dy. Here, increasing x results in an increase of y. The 
little triangle, the height of which is dy, and the base of which is 
dx, is similar to the original triangle; and it is obvious that the 
value of the ratio dy is the same as that of the ratio 2'.. As the 
A 
x 
angle is 30° it will be seen that here! 
FIG. 5. 
dy = 
1 
dx 
1.73 ... 
(2) Let x represent, in Fig. 5, the hori-
zontal distance, from a wall, of the bottom 
end of a ladder, AB, of fixed length; and let 
y be the height it reaches up the wall. Now 
y clearly depends on x. It is easy to see that, 
if we pull the bottom end A a bit farther 
from the wall, the top end B will come 
down a little lower. Let us state this in sci-
entific language. If we increase x to x + dx, 
then y will become y - dy; that is, when x receives a positive in-
crement, the increment which results to y is negative. 
Yes, but how much? Suppose the ladder was so long that when 
the bottom end A was 19 inches from the wall the top end B 
reached just 15 feet from the ground. Now, if you were to pull 
the bottom end out 1 inch more, how much would the top end 
come down? Put it all into inches: x = 19 inches, y = 180 inches. 
Now the increment of x which we call dx, is 1 inch: or 
x + dx = 20 inches. 
1. The 
cotangent 
of 
30° 
is V3 = 1.7320. . .. 
Its 
reciprocal, 
1.7~20 ... , is .5773 ... , the tangent of 30°.-M.G. 

On Relative Growings 
47 
How much will y be diminished? The new height will be 
y - dy. If we work out the height by the Pythagorean Theorem, 
then we shall be able to find how much dy will be. The length of 
the ladder is 
\1'(180)2 + (19)2 = 181 inches. 
Clearly, then, the new height, which is y - dy, will be such that 
(y - dy)2 = (181)2 - (20f = 32761 - 400 =: 32361, 
y - dy = \132361 = 179.89 inches. 
Now y is 180, so that dy is 180 - 179.89 = 0.11 inch. 
So we see that making dx an increase of 1 inch has resulted in 
making dy a decrease of 0.11 inch. 
And the ratio of dy to dx may be stated thus: 
dy = 0.11 
dx 
1 
It is also easy to see that (except in one particular position) dy 
will be of a different size from dx. 
Now right through the differential calculus we are hunting, 
hunting, hunting for a curious thing, a mere ratio, namely, the 
proportion which dy bears to dx when both of them are infinitely 
small. 
It should be noted here that we can find this ratio dy only 
dx 
when y and x are related to each other in some way, so that when-
ever x varies y does vary also. For instance, in the first example 
just taken, if the base x of the triangle be made longer, the height 
y of the triangle becomes greater also, and in the second example, 
if the distance x of the foot of the ladder from the wall be made 
to increase, the height y reached by the ladder decreases in a cor-
responding manner, slowly at first, but more and more rapidly as 
x becomes greater. In these cases the relation between x and y is 
perfectly definite, it can be expressed mathematically, being 
l = tan 30° and x 2 + l = 12 (where I is the length of the ladder) 
x 
dy 
respectively, and -
has the meaning we found in each case. 
dx 

48 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
If, while x is, as before, the distance of the foot of the ladder 
from the wall, y is, instead of the height reached, the horizontal 
length of the wall, or the number of bricks in it, or the number 
of years since it was built, any change in x would naturally cause 
h 
h 
. 
. 
h· 
dy h 
. 
h 
no c ange w atever 10 y; 10 t IS case -
as no mean10g w at-
dx 
ever, and it is not possible to find an expression for it. Whenever 
we use differentials dx, dy, dz, etc., the existence of some kind of 
relation between x, y, z, etc., is implied, and this relation is called 
a "function" in x, y, z, etc.; the two expressions given above, for 
instance, namely, l = tan 30° and x2 + y2 = P, are functions of x 
x 
and y. Such expressions contain implicitly (that is, contain with-
out distinctly showing it) the means of expressing either x in 
terms of y or y in terms of x, and for this reason they are called 
implicit functions in x and y; they can be respectively put into the 
forms 
y = x tan 30° 
y 
or x= tan 30° 
and 
y=YP_x2 or X=YP_y2. 
These last expressions state explicitly the value of x in terms of 
y, or of y in terms of x, and they are for this reason called explicit 
functions of x or y. For example x2 + 3 = 2y - 7 is an implicit 
x 2 + 10 
function of x and y; it may be written y = 
(explicit func-
2 
tion of x) or x = V 2y - 10 (explicit function of y). We see that an 
explicit function in x, y, Z, etc., is simply something the value of 
which changes when x, y, z, etc., are changing, either one at the 
time or several together. Because of this, the value of the explicit 
function is called the dependent variable, as it depends on the value 
of the other variable quantities in the function; these other vari-
ables are called the independent variables because their value is not 
determined from the value assumed by the function. For ex-
ample, if u = x 2 sin e, x and e are the independent variables, and 
u is the dependent variable. 
Sometimes the exact relation between several quantities x, y, z 

On Relative Growings 
49 
either is not known or it is not convenient to state it; it is only 
known, or convenient to state, that there is some sort of relation 
between these variables, so that one cannot alter either x or y or 
z singly without affecting the other quantities; the existence of a 
function in x, y, z is then indicated by the notation F(x, y, z) (im-
plicit function) or by x = F(y, z), y = F(x, z) or z = F(x, y) (explicit 
function). Sometimes the letter f or cp is used instead of F, so 
that y = F(x), y = f(x) and y = cp(x) all mean the same thing, 
namely, that the value of y depends on the value of x in some way 
which is not stated. 
We call the ratio dy , "the differential coefficient of y with respect 
dx 
to x". It is a solemn scientific name for this very simple thing. 
But we are not going to be frightened by solemn names, when 
the things themselves are so easy. Instead of being frightened we 
will simply pronounce a brief curse on the stupidity of giving 
long crack-jaw names; and, having relieved out minds, will go on 
to the simple thing itself, namely the ratio dy. 2 
dx 
In ordinary algebra which you learned at school, you were al-
ways hunting some unknown quantity which you called x or y; or 
sometimes there were two unknown quantities to be hunted for 
simultaneously. You have now to learn to go hunting in a new 
way; the fox being now neither x nor y. Instead of this you have 
to hunt for this curious cub called dy. The process of finding the 
d 
dx 
value of 2. is called "differentiating". But, remember, what is 
dx 
wanted is the value of this ratio when both dy and dx are them-
selves infinitely small. The true value of the derivative is that to 
which it approximates in the limiting case when each of them is 
considered as infinitesimally minute. 
dy 
Let us now learn how to go in quest of -. 
dx 
2. I have let stand here Thompson's justified criticism of the term "differ-
ential coefficient," a term in use when he wrote his book. The term was 
later replaced by the simpler word "derivative." Henceforth in this book it 
will be called a derivative.-M.G. 

50 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
NOTE TO CHAPTER III 
How to Read Derivatives 
It will never do to fall into the schoolboy error of thinking that 
dx means d times x, for d is not a factor-it means "an element 
of" or "a bit of" whatever follows. One reads dx thus: "dee-eks". 
In case the reader has no one to guide him in such matters it 
may here be simply said that one reads derivatives in the follow-
ing way. The derivative 
dy 
-
is read "dee-wy dee-eks", or "dee-wy over dee-eks". 
dx 
du 
So also -
is read "dee-you dee-tee". 
dt 
Second derivatives will be met with later on. They are like this: 
d2 
~; which is read "dee-two-wy over dee-eks-squared", and it means 
dx 
that the operation of differentiating y with respect to x has been 
(or has to be) performed twice over. 
Another way of indicating that a function has been differenti-
ated is by putting an accent sign to the symbol of the function. 
Thus if y = F(x), which means that y is some unspecified function 
f 
. F'()' 
d f d(F(x» 
S· 
'1 1 F"() 
'11 
o x, we may wnte 
x mstea 
0 ---. lml ar y, 
x WI 
dx 
mean that the original function F(x) has been differentiated twice 
over with respect to x. 3 
3. Newton called a variable a "fluent," and a derivative a "fluxion" because 
its value flowed or fluctuated continuously. In Chapter 10 Thompson tells 
how Newton indicated a first derivative by putting a dot over a term, a sec-
ond derivative by putting two dots, a third derivative by three dots, and so 
on. 
Morris Kline, in his two-volume Calculus (1967), is the only mathema-
tician I know of in recent times who adopted Newton's dot notation for de-
rivatives. Physicists, however, often use dot notation to denote differentia-
tion with respect to time.-M.G. 

Chapter IV 
SIMPLEST' CASES 
Now let use see how, on first principles, we can differentiate some 
simple algebraical expression. 
Case 1. 
Let us begin with the simple expression y = X 2 •l Now remember 
that the fundamental notion about the calculus is the idea of 
growing. Mathematicians call it varying. Now as y and x 2 are equal 
to one another, it is clear that if x grows, x 2 will also grow. And 
if x 2 grows, then y will also grow. What we have got to find out 
is the proportion between the growing of y and the growing of x. 
In other words, our task is to find out the ratio between dy and 
dx, or, in brief, to find the value of dy. 
dx 
Let x, then, grow a little bit bigger and become x + dx; simi-
larly, y will grow a bit bigger and will become y + dy. Then, 
clearly, it will still be true that the enlarged y will be equal to the 
square of the enlarged x. Writing this down, we have: 
y + dy = (x + dxf 
Doing the squaring we get: 
y + dy = x2 + 2x . dx + (dX)2 
What does (dX)2 mean? Remember that dx tp.eant a bit-a 
little bit~f x. Then (dX)2 will mean a little bit of a little bit of 
1. The graph of this equation is a parabola.-M.G. 
51 

52 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
x 2 ; that is, as explained above, it is a small quantity of the second 
order of smallness. It may therefore be discarded as quite negli-
gible in comparison with the other terms. Leaving it out, we then 
have: 
y + dy = x 2 + 2x . dx 
Now y = x 2 ; so let us subtract this from the equation and we 
have left 
dy=2x' dx 
Dividing across by dx, we find 
dy 
-=2x 
dx 
Now this* is what we set out to find. The ratio of the growing 
of y to the growing of x is, in. the case before us, found to be 2x. 
Numerical Example. 
Suppose x = 100 and therefore y = 10,000. Then let x grow till it 
becomes 101 (that is, let dx = 1). Then the enlarged y will be 
101 X lOl = lO,201. But if we agree that we may ignore small 
quantities of the second order, 1 may be rejected as compared 
with lO,OOO; so we may round off the enlarged y to lO,200; y has 
*N.B.-This ratio dy is the result of differentiating y with respect to x. 
dx 
Differentiating means finding the derivative. Suppose we had some other 
function of x, as, for example, u = 7x2 + 3. Then if we were told to differ-
du 
entiate this with respect to x, we should have to find -, or, what is the 
dx 
d(7x 2 + 3) 
same thing, 
. On the other hand, we may have a case in which 
dx 
time was the independent variable, such as this: y = b + 1at2. Then, if we 
were told to differentiate it, that means we must find its derivative with re-
spect to t. So that then our business would be to try to find dy , that is, to 
dt 

Simplest Cases 
53 
grown from 10,000 to 10,200; the bit added on is dy, which is 
therefore 200. 
dy 
200 
- = -- = 200. According to the algebra-working of the pre-
dx 
1 
d 
vious paragraph, we find 2'. = 2x. And so it is; for x = 100 and 
dx 
2x= 200. 
But, you will say, we neglected a whole unit. 
Well, try again, making dx a still smaller bit. 
Try dx=fo. Then x+dx= 100.1, and 
(x + dX)2 = 100.1 X 100.1 = 10,020.01 
Now the last figure 1 is only one-millionth part of the 10,000, 
and is utterly negligible; so we may take 10,020 without the 
little decimal at the end. 2 And this makes dy = 20; and dy = 
dx 
20 
-
= 200, which is still the same as 2x. 
0.1 
2. Many writers of calculus texts prefer to use the Greek letter delta, A, in 
place of d to stand for an increment that is small enough to be taken as 
zero. A derivative is defined as: 
dy = lim 
f(x + Ax) - f(x) 
dx 
.1x --> 0 
Ax 
This expresses the limit when Ax diminishes to zero. For example, if 
f(x) = 2, the formula becomes: 
..1y = 2 -2 = ~ 
..1x 
..1x 
..1x 
Since Ax goes to zero, the derivative of 2 is zero, and its graph is a hori-
zontal line. 
If f(x) = 2x, the formula gives 2Axl..1x. Because ..1x goes to zero, the de-
rivative of 2x is 2, and the function graphs as a straight line sloping up-
ward. 
Thompson does not use the ..1 notation.-Indeed, he avoids altogether the 
notion of limits. But no harm is done. It is easy to translate Thompson's 
technique of "exhausting" ever decreasing increments to the point where 
they can be "thrown away" into today's way of defining derivatives as lim-
its.-M.G. 

54 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Case 2. 
Try differentiating y = x 3 in the same way. 
We let y grow to y + dy, while x grows to x + dx. 
Then we have 
y + dy = (x + dX)3 
Doing the cubing we obtain 
y + dy = x3 + 3X2 . dx + 3x(dxf + (dX)3 
Now we know that we may neglect small quantities of the 
second and third orders; since, when dy and dx are both made 
infinitely small, (dX)2 and (dx)3 will become infinitely smaller 
by comparison. So, regarding them as negligible, we have 
left: 
y + dy = x3 + 3x2 . dx 
But y = x 3; and, subtracting this, we have: 
and 
Case 3. 
dy = 3X2. dx 
dy = 3x2 
dx 
Try differentiating y = x4. Starting as before by letting both y and 
x grow a bit, we have: 
y + dy = (x + dx)4 
Working out the raising to the fourth power, we get 
y + dy = X4 + 4x3 dx + 6x2(dxf + 4x(dx)3 + (dX)4 
Then, striking out the terms contaiQing all the higher powers 
of dx, as being negligible by comparison, we have 
y+dy=x4+4x3dx 
Subtracting the original y = X4, we have left 
dy = 4x3 dx, 
and 

Simplest Cases 
55 
Now all these cases are quite easy. Let us collect the results to see 
if we can infer any general rule. Put them in two columns, the 
values of y in one and the corresponding values found for dy in 
dx 
the other: thus 
dy 
y 
dx 
x2 
2x 
x3 
3X2 
X4 
4x3 
Just look at these results: the operation of differentiating ap-
pears to have had the effect of diminishing the power of x by 1 
(for example in the last case reducing X4 to x 3), and at the same 
time multiplying by a number (the same number in fact which 
originally appeared as the power). Now, when you have once seen 
this, you might easily conjecrure how the others will run. You 
would expect that differentiating x5 would give 5x4, or differen-
tiating x 6 would give 6x5• If you hesitate, try one of these, and 
see whether the conjecture comes right. 
Try y = x 5 • 
Then y + dy = (x + dX)5 = x5 + 5x4dx + lOx3(dx)2 + lOx2(dx)3 
+ 5x(dx)4 + (dx)5. 
Neglecting all the terms containing small quantities of the 
higher orders, we have left 
y + dy = x5 + 5x4dx 
and subtracting y = x 5 leaves us 
dy = 5x4dx 
whence 
dy 
4 
- = 5x , exactly as we supposed. 
dx 

56 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Following out logically our observation, we should conclude that 
if we want to deal with any higher power--call it xn-we could 
tackle it in the same way~ 
Let 
then we should expect to find that 
dy 
n-l 
-=nx 
dx 
For example, let n = 8, then y = x 8 ; and differentiating it 
dy 
7 
would give - = 8x . 
dx 
And, indeed, the rule that differentiating xn gives as the result 
nxn-l is true for all cases where n is a whole number and positive. 
[Expanding (x + dxt by the binomial theorem will at once show 
this.) But the question whether it is true for cases where n has 
negative or fractional values requires further consideration. 
Case of a Negative Exponent. 
Let y = x -2. Then proceed as before: 
y + dy = (x + dxr2 
=X-'(l + ~ r 
Expanding this by the binomial theorem, we get 
=X-2[1- 2dx + 2(2 + 1)(dx)2 - ... J 
x 
lx2 
x 
= x-2 - 2x-3 • dx + 3x-4(dx)2 - 4x-5(dxl + etc. 
So, neglecting the small quantities of higher orders of small-
ness, we have: 
y + dy = x-2 - 2x-3 • dx 

Simplest Cases 
Subtracting the original y = x -2, we find 
dy =~2x-3dx 
dy =-2x-3 
dx 
And this is still in accordance with the rule inferred above. 
Case of a Fractional Exponent. 
Let y = x~. Then, as before, 
I I( 
dX)4 
(dX)~ 
y + dy = (x + dx)' = x' 1 + -; = V; 1 + -; 
= V; +..!:. dx _..!:. (dX)2 + terms with higher 
2 V; 
8 xV; 
powers of dx. 
57 
Subtracting the original y = x4, and neglecting higher powers 
we have left: 
1 dx 
1 
I 
dy = - -
= - X -, . dx 
2 V; 
2 
dy 
1 -! Th· 
. h h 
I 
I 
- = - X '. 
IS agrees WIt t e genera ru e. 
dx 
2 
and 
Summary. 
Let us see how far we have got. We have arrived at 
the following rule: To differentiate x n , multiply it by the expo-
nent and reduce the exponent by one, so giving us nxn- 1 as the re-
sult. 3 
3. This rule is today known as the "power rule." It is the rule most fre-
quently used in differentiating low-order functions.-M.G. 

58 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
EXERCISES I 
Differentiate the following: 
(1) y=X13 
(3) y = x 2a 
(5) z=~ 
(7) u= )1 
\/;S 
(9) y=V 
l 
(2) y = x-, 
(4) u = t 2 .4 
(6) y=V'75 
(8) y= 2xa 
~
1 
(10) y= 
-xm 
You have now learned how to differentiate powers of x. How easy it is! 

Chapter V 
NEXT STAGE. WHAT TO DO 
WITH CONSTANTS 
In our equations we have regarded x as growing, and as a result 
of x being made to grow y also changed its value and grew. We 
usually think of x as a quantity that we can vary; and, regarding 
the variation of x as a sort of cause, we consider the resulting 
variation of y as an effect. In other words, we regard the value of 
y as depending on that of x. Both x and yare variables, but x is 
the one that we operate upon, and y is the "dependent variable". 
In all the preceding chapters we have been trying to find out 
rules for the proportion which the dependent variation in y bears 
to the variation independently made in x. 
Our next step is to find out what effect on the process of dif-
ferentiating is caused by the presence of constants, that is, of num-
bers which don't change when x or y changes its value. 
Added Constants. 
Let us begin with a simple case of an added constant, thus: 
Let 
y = x 3 + 5 
Just as before, let us suppose x to grow to x + dx and y to grow 
to y +dy. 
Then: 
y + dy = (x + dX)3 + 5 
= x3 + 3x2dx + 3x(dx)2 + (dX)3 + 5 
Neglecting the small quantities of higher orders, this becomes 
y + dy = x3 + 3X2 . dx + 5 
59 

60 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Subtract the original y = x 3 + 5, and we have left: 
dy = 3x2dx 
dy 
2 
-=3x 
dx 
So the 5 has quite disappeared. It added nothing to the growth of 
x, and does not enter into the derivative. If we had put 7, or 700, 
or any other number, instead of 5, it would have disappeared. So 
if we take the letter a, or b, or c to represent any constant, it will 
simply disappear when we differentiate. 
If the additional constant had been of negative value, such as 
-5 or -b, it would equally have disappeared. 
Multiplied Constants. 
Take as a simple experiment this case: 
Let y = 7x2 
Then on proceeding as before we get: 
y + dy = 7(x + dX)2 
= 7{x2 + 2x· dx + (dX)2} 
= 7x2 + 14x· dx + 7(dx)2 
Then, subtracting the original y = 7 x 2 , and neglecting the last 
term, we have 
dy = 14x· dx 
dy = 14x 
dx 
Let us illustrate this example by working out the graphs of the 
equations y = 7 x 2 and dy = 14x, by assigning to x a set of succes-
dx 
sive values, 0, 1, 2, 3, etc., and finding the corresponding values 
dy 
of y and of-. 
dx 
These values we tabulate as follows: 

Next Stage. What to Do with Constants 
61 
x 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
-1 
-2 
-3 
y 
0 
7 
28 
63 
112 
175 
7 
28 
63 
dy 
0 
14 
28 
42 
56 
70 
-14 
-28 
-42 
dx 
Now plot these values to some convenient scale, and we obtain 
the two curves, Figs. 6 and 6a. 
Carefully compare the two figures, and verify by inspection 
that the height of the ordinate of the derived curve, Fig. 6a, is 
porportional to the slope of the original curve, Fig. 6, at the cor-
responding value of x. To the left of the origin, where the original 
curve slopes negatively (that is, downward from left to right) the 
corresponding ordinates of the derived curve are negative. 
Now, if we look back at previous pages, we shall see that sim-
ply differentiating x 2 gives us 2x. So that the derivative of 7x2 is 
just 7 times as big as that of x 2 . If we had taken 8x2 , the deriva-
tive would have come out eight times as great as that of x 2 • If we 
put y =,ax2 , we shall get 
.Y 
200 
dy 
-
=a X 2x 
dx 
1110 
100 
50 
3 
4 
~ 
----
-60 
dy 
FIG. 6a. Graph of -
= 14x. 
dx 

62 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
If we had begun with y = axn , we should have had 
dy 
n-l 
-
=a X nx 
dx 
So that any mere multiplication by a constant reappears as a mere 
multiplication when the thing is differentiated. And what is true 
about multiplication is equally true about division: for if, in the 
example above, we had taken as the constant t instead of 7, we 
should have had the same t come out in the result after differen-
tiation. 
Some Further Examples. 
The following further examples, fully worked out, will enable 
you to master completely the process of differentiation as applied 
to ordinary algebraical expressions, and enable you to work out 
by yourself the examples given at the end of this chapter. 
or 
X S 
3 
(1) Differentiate y = - - -
7 
5 
- i is an added constant and vanishes. 
5 
We may then write at once 
dy 
1 
- = - X 5 XXS- 1 
dx 
7 
dy 
5 
4 
-=- x 
dx 
7 
1 
(2) Differentiate y = aYx - - Va 
2 
1 
The term - - Va vanishes, being an added constant; and as 
2 
aYx, in the index form, is written ax~, we have 
or 
dy 
1 
!-l 
a 
_! 
-=aX-Xx' =-Xx' 
dx 
2 
2 
dy =_a_ 
dx 2Yx 

Next Stage. What to Do with Constants 
63 
(3) The volume of a right circular cylinder of radius r and height 
h is given by the formula V = 7rr2h. Find the rate of variation of 
volume with the radius when r = 5.5 in. and h = 20 in. If r = h, 
find the dimensions of the cylinder so that a change of 1 in. in ra-
dius causes a change of 400 cubic inches in the volume. 
The rate of variation of V with regard to r is 
dV 
- = 27rrh 
dr 
If r = 5.5 in. and h = 20 in. this becomes 691.2. It means that a 
change of radius of 1 inch will cause a change of volume of 691.2 
cubic inches. This can be easily verified, for the volumes with 
r = 5 and r = 6 are 1570.S cubic inches and 2262 cubic inches re-
spectively, and 2262 - 1570.S = 691.2. 
Also, if h = r, and h remains constant, 
dV = 27rr2 = 400 
and 
dr 
~
oo 
r=h= 
-=7.9Sin. 
27r 
If, however, h = r and varies with r, then 
dv = 37rr2 = 400 
and 
dr 
~
oo 
r=h= 
-=6.51 in. 
3'1T 
(4) The reading 0 of a Fery's Radiation pyrometer is related to 
the centigrade temperature t of the observed body by the relation 
0/01 = (t/t1)4, where 01 is the reading corresponding to a known 
temperature t 1 of the observed body. 
Compare the sensitivity of the pyrometer at temperatures SOOO 
c., 10000 c., 12000 c., given that it read 25 when the tempera-
ture was 10000 C. 
The sensitivity is the rate of variation of the reading with the 
dO 
temperature, that is, -. The formula may be written 
dt 
o = ~ t4 = 25t4 
t 4 
10004 
1 
dO 
100t3 
t 3 
and we have 
dt = 10004 = 10,000,000,000 

64 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
dO 
When t=800, 1000 and 1200, we get -
=0.0512,0.1 and 
dt 
0.1728 respectively. 
The sensitivity is approximately doubled from 800° to 1000°, 
and becomes three-quarters as great again up to 1200°. 
EXERCISES II 
Differentiate the following: 
(1) y =ax3 + 6 
(3) y= 12x~+c~ 
azn -1 
(5) u=--
c 
, 
(2) y = 13x' - c 
(4) y = c~x~ 
(6) y = 1. 18t2 + 22.4 
Make up some other examples for yourself, and try your hand 
at differentiating them. 
(7) If It and 10 be the lengths of a rod of iron at the tempera-
tures to C. and 0° C. respectively, then It = 10 (1 + 0.000012t). 
Find the change of length of the rod per degree centigrade. 
(8) It has been found that if c be the candle power of an incan-
descent electric lamp, and V be the voltage, c = ayb, where a and 
b are constants. 
Find the rate of change of the candle power with the voltage, 
and calculate the change of candle power per volt at 80, 100 and 
120 volts in the case of a lamp for which a = 0.5 X 10-10 and 
b=6. 
(9) The frequency n of vibration of a string of diameter D, 
length L and specific gravity u, stretched with a force T, is given 
by 
n= _1_ 
fiT 
DL -V;; 
Find the rate of change of the frequency when D, L, u and T 
are varied singly. 

Next Stage. What to Do with Constants 
65 
(10) The greatest external pressure P which a tube can support 
without collapsing is given by 
where E and (I' are constants, t is the thickness of the tube and D 
is its diameter. (This formula assumes that 4t is small compared 
to D.) 
Compare the rate at which P varies for a small change of thick-
ness and for a small change of diameter taking place separately. 
(11) Find, from first principles, the rate at which the following 
vary with respect to a change in radius: 
(a) the circumference of a circle of radius r; 
(b) the area of a circle of radius r; 
(c) the lateral area of a cone of slant dimension I; 
(d) the volume of a cone of radius r and height h; 
(e) the area of a sphere of radius r; 
(f) the volume of a sphere of radius r. 

Chapter VI 
SUMS, DIFFERENCES, 
PRODUCTS, AND QUOTIENTS l 
We have learned how to differentiate simple algebraical functions 
such as x 2 + c or ax 4 , and we have now to consider how to tackle 
the sum of two or more functions. 
For instance, let 
y = (x2 + c) + (ax4 + b) 
what will its dy be? How are we to go to work on this new job? 
dx 
The answer to this question is quite simple: just differentiate 
them, one after the other, thus: 
dy - = 2x+4ax3 
dx 
If you have any doubt whether this is right, try a more general 
case, working it by first ptinciples. And this is the way. 
Let y = u + v, where u is any function of x, and v any other 
function of x. Then, letting x increase to x + dx, y will increase to 
y + dy; and u will increase to u + du; and v to v + dv. 
And we shall have: 
y+dy=u+du+v+dv 
1. The rules given in this chapter are today known as the sum rule, the dif-
ference rule, the product rule, and the quotient rule.-M.G. 
66 

Sums, Differences, Products, and Quotients 
Subtracting the original y = u + v, we get 
dy=du+dv 
and dividing through by dx, we get: 
dy 
du 
dv 
-=-+-
dx 
dx 
dx 
67 
This justifies the procedure. You differentiate each function 
separately and add the results. So if now we take the example of 
the preceding paragraph, and put in the values of the two func-
tions, we shall have, using the notation shown. 
dy 
d(x 2 + c) 
d(ax4 + b) 
-= 
+----
dx 
dx 
dx 
= 2x 
+ 4ax3 
exactly as before. 
If there were three functions of x, which we may call u, v and 
w, so that 
then 
y=u+v+w 
dy 
du 
dv 
dw 
-=-+-+-
dx 
dx 
dx 
dx 
As for the rule about subtraction, it follows at once; for if the 
function v had itself had a negative sign, its derivative would also 
be negative; so that by differentiating 
y=u-v 
we should get 
dy 
du 
dv 
-=--
dx 
dx 
dx 
But when we come to do with Products, the thing is not quite 
so simple. 
Suppose we were asked to differentiate the expression 
y = (x2 + c) X (ax4 + b) 

68 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
what are we to do? The result will certainly not be 2x X 4ax3; for 
it is easy to see that neither c X ax4 , nor x 2 X b, would have been 
taken into that product. 
Now there are two ways in which we may go to work. 
First Way. 
Do the multiplying first, and, having worked it out, 
then differentiate. 
Accordingly, we multiply together x 2 + c and ax4 + b. 
Th·· 
6 
4 
b 2 
b 
IS gIves ax + acx + x + c. 
Now differentiate, and we get: 
Second Way. 
tion 
dy 
-
= 6ax5 + 4acx3 + 2bx 
dx 
Go back to first principles, and consider the equa-
y=uxv 
where u is one function of x, and v is any other function of x. 
Then, if x grows to be x + dx; and y to y + dy; and u becomes 
u + du; and v becomes v + dv, we shall have: 
y + dy = (u + du) X (v + dv) 
=u· v+u· dv+v· du+du· dv 
Now du . dv is a small quantity of the second order of small-
ness, and therefore in the limit may be discarded, leaving 
y + dy = u . v + u . dv + v . du 
Then, subtracting the original y = u . v, we have left 
dy=u·dv+v·du 
and, dividing through by dx, we get the result: 
dy 
dv 
du 
-=u-+v-
dx 
dx 
dx 
This shows that our instructions will be as follows: To differen-
tiate the product of two functions, multiply each function by the detiva-
tive of the other, and add together the two products so obtained. 
You should note that this process amounts to the following: 

Sums, Differences, Products, and Quotients 
69 
Treat u as constant while you differentiate v; then treat v as con-
stant while you differentiate u; and the whole derivative dy will 
dx 
be the sum of the results of these two treatments. 
Now, having found this rule, apply it to the concrete example 
which was considered above. 
We want to differentiate the product 
(x 2 + c) X (ax4 + b) 
Call 
(x 2 + c) = u; 
and 
(ax4 + b) = v 
Then, by the general rule just established, we may write: 
dy 
2 
d(ax4 + b) 
4 
b d(x 2 + c) 
-
=(x +c) 
+(ax + )---
dx 
dx 
dx 
= (x 2 + c)4ax3 
+ (ax4 + b)2x 
= 4ax' + 4acx3 
dy - = 6ax' + 4acx3 
dx 
Exactly as before. 
+ 2ax5 + 2bx 
+ 2bx 
Lastly, we have to differentiate quotients. 
bx' +c 
Think of this example, y = -2--' In such a case it is no use 
x +a 
to try to work out the division beforehand, because x 2 + a will 
not divide into bx5 + c, neither have they any common factor. So 
there is nothing for it but to go back to first principles, and find 
a rule. 
So we will put 
u 
y=-
v 
where u and v are two different functions of the independent vari-
able x. Then, when x becomes x + dx, y will become y + dy; and 
u will become u + du; and v will become v + dv. So then 
u+du 
y+dy=--
v+dv 

70 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Now perform the algebraic division, thus: 
v+dv I u+du 
u 
du 
u·dv 
-+----
v 
v 
V 2 
u' dv 
u+--
v 
u' dv 
du---
v 
J 
du·dv 
aU+---
v 
u·dv 
du·dv 
v 
U· dv 
v 
U· dv· dv 
--------
v 
du·dv 
u·dv·dv 
---+----
V 2 
v 
As both these remainders are small quantities of the second or-
der, they may be neglected, and the division may stop here, since 
any further remainders would be of still smaller magnitudes. 
So we have got: 
u 
du 
U· dv 
y+dY=-+---2-
v 
v 
v 
which may be written 
u 
v·du-u·dv 
=-+-----
V2 
v 
u 
Now subtract the original y = -, and we have left: 
v 
whence 
v· du -u' dv 
dy=----
v2 
du 
dv 
v--u-
dy = dx 
dx 
dx 
v2 

Sums, Differences, Products, and Quotients 
71 
This gives us our instructions as to how to differentiate a quotient 
of two functions. Multiply the divisor function by the derivative of the 
dividend function; then multiply the dividend function by the deriva-
tive of the divisor function; and subtract the latter product from the 
former. Lastly, divide the difference by the square of the divisor 
function. 
bx5 +c 
Going back to our example y = -2--
X +a 
write 
Then 
bx5 + C = u; 
and 
x 2 + a = v 
2 
d(bx 5 + c) 
b 5 
d(x2 + a) 
(x + a) 
- (x + c)----'-
dy= 
dx 
dx 
dx 
(x2 + a)2 
(x2 + aX5bx4 ) - (bx 5 + c)(2x) 
(x2 + a)2 
dy = 3bx6 + 5abx4 - 2cx 
dx 
(x2 + a)2 
The working out of quotients is often tedious, but there is 
nothing difficult about it. 
Some further examples fully worked out are given hereafter. 
2 
2 
a 
3 
a 
a 
(1) Differentiate 
y = b2 X 
- b x + b2 
a 2 
Being a constant, --; vanishes, and we have 
b 
dy 
a 
3-1 
a 2 
1-1 
-=-X3Xx --X1Xx 
dx 
b2 
b 
But X 1- 1 = Xo = 1; so we get: 
(2) Differentiate 
dy 
3a 2 
a2 
-=-x --
dx 
b2 
b 
3b~ 
y = 2a -vt;;3 - -- - 2v::b 
x 

72 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Putting x in the exponent form, we get 
or, 
Now 
y = 2aW x~ - 3b~ X-l - 2v;;i; 
dy = 2aW X ~ X X~-l - 3b~ X (-1) X X-1- 1 
dx 
dy 
.. r,-
3b~ 
-=3avbx+--
dx 
x 2 
~
1 
4.4 
(3) Differentiate z = 1.8 
"2 - -
- 27. 
o V'o 
2 
I 
This may be written: z = 1.80-' - 4.40-' - 27. 
The 27 vanishes, and we have 
or, 
or, 
dz = 1.8 X (_~)o-~-l - 4.4 X (_t)o-~-l 
dO 
dz 
, 
6 
- = -1.20-' + 0.880-' 
dO 
dz 
0.88 
1.2 
dO=~-W 
(4) Differentiate 
v = (3t 2 - 1.2t + 1)3. 
A direct way of doing this will be explained later; but we can 
nevertheless manage it now without any difficulty. 
Developing the cube, we get 
v = 27t6 - 32.4t5 + 39.96t4 - 23.328t3 + 13.32t2 - 3.6t + 1 
hence 
dv - = 162t5 - 162t4 + 159.84t3 - 69.984t2 + 26.64t - 3.6. 
dt 
(5) Differentiate y = (2x - 3)(x + 1)2. 

Sums, Differences, Products, and Quotients 
73 
dy 
d[(x + 1)(x + 1)] 
2d(2x - 3) 
- = (2x - 3) 
+ (x + 1) --..:..----:. 
dx 
dx 
dx 
[ 
d(x + 1) 
d(x + 1)] 
= (2x - 3) (x + 1) 
+ (x + 1)---
dx 
. 
dx 
2d(2x - 3) 
+(x+l) ---
dx 
= 2(x + 1)[(2x - 3) + (x + 1)] = 2(x + 1)(3x - 2) 
or, more simply, multiply out and then differentiate. 
(6) Differentiate 
y = 0.5x3(x - 3). 
dy 
[ 3d(X - 3) 
d(x3)] 
- = 0.5 x 
+ (x - 3)--
dx 
dx 
dx 
= 0.5[x3 + (x - 3) X 3X2] = 2x3 - 4.5x2 
Same remarks as for preceding example. 
(7) Differentiate 
w = ( 6 + ~ ) ( VB + ~) 
This may be written 
w = (0 + e-1>( 0& + e-~) 
dw 
II 
0-1 ci( 0& + e-!) (d 
o-!)d(O + e-1) 
-=(u+v) 
+ !T+U 2 __ 
_ 
dO 
dO 
dO 
= (0 + e-1>(~e-~ - ~e-~) + (0& + e-~)(1 - e-2) 
= ~ 0& + e-~ - e-~ - e-~) + ( 0& + e-~ - e-~ - e-~) 
=~( Vo-Jo,) +~( Jo-Jo,) 
This, again, could be obtained more simply by multiplying 
the two factors first, and differentiating afterwards. This is not, 
however, always possible; see, for instance, example 8 in 
Chapter XV, in which the rule for differentiating a product must 
be used. 

74 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
a 
(8) Differentiate y = ------
1 +aVx+a2x 
( 
! 
2) 
d( 1 + ax! + a2x) 
1 +ax2 +a x xO-a----:..-----
dy = 
dx 
dx 
(1 +aVx+a2xt 
a(!ax -~ + a2) 
= 
(1 + ax! + a2x)2 
x 2 
(9) Differentiate y = -2--· 
X + 1 
dy = (x2 + 1)2x- x2 X 2x = 
2x 
dx 
(x2 + 1)2 
(x2 + Il 
(10) Differentiate 
a+Vx 
y= a-Vx 
, 
In the exponent form, 
a+x' 
y=--, 
dx 
hence 
(11) Differentiate 
Now 
a-x' 
dy = 
a 
dx 
(a - Vx)2Vx 
0= l-aW 
l+a~ 
2 
1 -at' 
0=--3 
1 + at' 
( 
')2' 
2 a -x' x' 

Sums, Differences, Products, and Quotients 
75 
dt 
(1 + at~)2 
2 ... 6/7 
4a 
... 2r 
5a V t' -
-
- 9a V t 
V; 
=------------------
6(1 +aV?Y 
(12) A reservoir of square cross-section has sides sloping at an 
angle of 45° with the vertical. The side of the bottom is p feet in 
length, and water flows in the reservoir at the rate of c cubic feet 
per minute. Find an expression for the rate at which the surface 
of the water is rising at the instant its depth is h feet. Calculate 
this rate when p = 17, h = 4 and c = 35. 
The volume of a frustum of pyramid of height H, and of bases 
H 
A and a, is V = -(A + a + -v:A:;). It is easily seen that, the slope 
3 
being 45°, for a depth of h, the length of the side of the upper 
square surface of water is (p + 2h) feet; thus A = p2, a = (p + 2h)2 
and the volume of the water is 
thfp2 + p(p + 2h) + (p + 2h)2} cubic feet 
= p2h + 2ph2 + ~h3 cubic feet 
Now, if t be the time in minutes taken for this volume of water 
to flow in, 
From this relation we have the rate at which h increases with t, 
dh 
that is -, but as the above expression is in the form, t = function 
dt 
dt 
of h, rather than h = function of t, it will be easier to find -
and 
dh 
then invert the result, for 
dt 
dh 
-x-=1 
dh 
dt 

76 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Hence, since c and p are constants, and 
ct = p2h + 2ph2 + th3 
dt 
c- = p2 + 4ph + 4h2 = (P + 2hf 
dh 
dh 
c 
so that - = 
2' which is the required expression. 
dt 
(p + 2h) 
When p = 17, h = 4 and c = 35; this becomes 0.056 feet per 
minute. 
(13) The absolute pressure, in atmospheres, P, of saturated 
° 
(40+t)5 
steam at the temperature t C. is P = --
as long as t is 
140 
above 80°. Find the rate of variation of the pressure with the tem-
perature at 100° C. 
Since 
P = (40 +t)5. 
140 
' 
dP 
5(40 + t)4 
-
dt 
(140P 
so that when t = 100, 
dP 
5 X (140)4 
5 
1 
- --'---::-,- = -
= - = 0.036 
dt 
(140)5 
140 
28 
Thus, the rate of variation of the pressure is, when t = 100, 0.036 
atmosphere per degree centigrade change of temperature. 
EXERCISES III 
(1) Differentiate 
x 2 
x 3 
(a) u = 1 + x + -- + 
+ ... 
1x2 
1X2X3 
(b) y = ax2 + bx + c 
(d) Y = (x + a)3 
(c) y = (x +af 

Sums, Differences, Products, and Quotients 
77 
1 
2 
dw 
(2) If w = at - -bt find-
2, 
dt 
(3) Find the derivative of 
y = (x + V-T) X (x - V-T) 
(4) Differentiate 
y = (197x - 34x2) X (7 + 22x - 83x3) 
dx 
(5) Ifx=(y+3)X(y+5), find-. 
dy 
(6) Differentiate y = 1.3709x X (112.6 + 45.202x2). 
Find the derivatives of 
2x+ 3 
(7) y=--
3x+ 2 
ax+b 
(9) y=--
cx+d 
1 + x + 2X2 + 3X3 
(8)y=-----
1 +x+ 2X2 
xn+a 
(10) y=--
x-n +b 
(11) The temperature t of the filament of an incandescent elec-
tric lamp is connected to the current passing through the lamp 
by the relation 
C =a + bt + ct2 
Find an expression giving the variation of the current corre-
sponding to a variation of temperature. 
(12) The following formulae have been proposed to express the 
relation between the electric resistance R of a wire at the tem-
perature to C, and the resistance Ro of that same wire at 0° cen-
tigrade, a and b being constants. 
R = Ro(1 + at + bt2) 
R=Ro(1 +at+bVt) 
R = Ro(1 + at + bt2r 1 
Find the rate of variation of the resistance with regard to tem-
perature as given by each of these formulae. 

78 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
(13) The electromotive force E of a certain type of standard 
cell has been found to vary with the temperature t according to 
the relation 
E= 1.4340[1-0.000814(t-15) 
+ 0.000007(t - 15fJ volts 
Find the change of electromotive force per degree, at 15°, 20° 
and 25°. 
(14) The electromotive force necessary to maintain an electric 
arc of length I with a current intensity i has been found to be 
c+kl 
E=a+bl+ -,-
t 
where a, b, c, k are constants. 
Find an expression for the variation of the electromotive force 
(a) with regard to the length of the arc; (b) with regard to the 
strength of the current. 

Chapter VII 
SUCCESSIVE 
DIFFERENTIATION 
Let us try the effect of repeating several times over the operation 
of differentiating a function. Begin with a concrete case. 
Let y = x 5• 
First differentiation, 
5X4. 
Second differentiation, 5 X 4x 3 
= 20x3. 
Third differentiation, 5 X 4 X 3X2 
= 60x2 • 
Fourth differentiation, 5 X 4 X 3 X 2x 
= 120x. 
Fifth differentiation, 
5 X 4 X 3 X 2 X 1 = 120. 
Sixth differentiation, 
= 0. 1 
1. When applied to an object moving at a constant rate, the first derivative 
gives its change of position per second. If the object is accelerating, the 
second derivative gives the rate at which the first derivative is changing, 
that is, its change of position per second per second. If the acceleration 
is changing, the third derivative gives the rate at which the second 
derivative is changing, namely the change of position per second per 
second per second. Physicists call such a change a "jerk," such as the 
wayan old car jerks if there is too sudden a change in how it is 
accelerating. 
Second derivatives, in which time is the independent variable, turn up 
everywhere in physics, less often in other sciences. In economics, a second 
derivative can express the rate at which a worker's annual increase in wages 
is increasing (or decreasing). Third derivatives are also useful in many 
branches of physics. Beyond the third, higher order derivatives are seldom 
needed. This testifies to the fortunate fact that the universe seems to favor 
simplicity in its fundamentallaws.-M.G. 
79 

80 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
There is a certain notation, with which we are already ac-
quainted, used by some writers, that is very convenient. This is to 
employ the general symbol f(x) for any function of x. Here the 
symbol f( ) is read as "function of", without saying what par-
ticular function is meant. So the statement y = f(x) merely tells 
us that y is a function of x, it may be x 2 or axn , or cos x or any 
other complicated function of x. 
The corresponding symbol for the derivative is f' (x), which is 
simpler to write than dy. This is called the "derived function" 
dx 
of x. 
Suppose we differentiate over again, we shall get the "second 
derived function" or second derivative which is denoted by f" (x); 
and so on. 
Now let us generalize. 
Let y = f(x) = xn. 
First differentiation, 
f' (x) = nxn- 1• 
Second differentiation, 
f"(x) = n(n - 1)xn-2. 
Third differentiation, f'" (x) = n(n - l)(n - 2)Xn-3. 
Fourth differentiation, f"" (x) = n(n -
l)(n - 2)(n - 3 )xn-4. 
etc., etc. 
But this is not the only way of indicating successive differen-
tiations. For, if the original function be 
y = f(x); 
differentiating once gives 
dy 
, 
dx = f (x); 
differentiating twice gives d( aY) 
dx 
" 
dx 
= f (x); 
d2 
and this is more conveniently written as ~, or more usually 
(dx) 

Successive Differentiation 
81 
d2 
~. Similarly, we may write as the result of differentiating three 
dx 
. 
d3y 
f'"() 
urnes, -3 = 
X • 
dx 
Examples. 
Now let us try y = f(x) = 7X4 + 3.5x3 - h2 + X - 2 
dy, 
3 
2 
- = f (x) 
= 28x + 10.5x - x + 1 
dx 
d
2y = f"(x) = 84x2 + 21x - 1 
dx 2 
d3y 
-
= f"'(x) = 168x + 21 
dx 3 
~y = f""(x) = 168 
dx4 
d'5y 
-
= f"'''(x) = 0 
dx'5 
In a similar manner if y = cJ><x) = 3x(x2 - 4) 
cf>'(x) = dy = 3[x X 2x + (x 2 - 4) X I} = 3(3x2 - 4) 
dx 
,1.." 
d2y 
6 
'f' (x) = -
= 3 X x = 18x 
dx 2 
d3y 
cf>"'(x) = -
= 18 
dx 3 
cf>"" (x) = ~y = 0 
dx4 

82 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
EXERCISES IV 
d 
d2 
Find .2 and ~ 
for the following expressions: 
dx 
dx 
(1) y= 17x+ 12x2 
x 2 +a 
(2) y=--
x+a 
X 
x 2 
x 3 
x4 
(3) y= 1 +- + -- + 
+ ----
I 
lx2 
lx2x3 
lX2x3x4 
(4) Find the 2nd and 3rd derivatives in Exercises III, No.1 to 
No.7, and in the Examples given in Chapter VI, No. 1 to No.7. 

Chapter VIII 
WHEN TIME VARIES 
Some of the most important problems of the calculus are those 
where time is the independent variable, and we have to think 
about the values of some other quantity that varies when the time 
varies. Some things grow larger as time goes on; some other 
things grow smaller. The distance that a train has travelled from 
its starting place goes on ever increasing as time goes on. Trees 
grow taller as the years go by. Which is growing at the greater 
rate: a plant 12 inches high which in one month becomes 14 
inches high, or a tree 12 feet high which in a year becomes 14 
feet high? 
In this chapter we are going to make much use of the word 
rate. Nothing to do with birth rate or death rate, though these 
words suggest so many births or deaths per thousand of the 
population. When a car whizzes by us, we say: What a terrific 
rate! When a spendthrift is flinging about his money, we remark 
that that young man is living at a prodigious rate. What do we 
rI:lean by rate? In both these cases we are making a mental compari-
son of something that is happening, and the length of time it takes 
to happen. If the car goes 10 yards per second, a simple bit of men-
tal arithmetic will show us that this is equivalent-while it 
lasts-to a rate of 600 yards per minute, or over 20 miles per hour. 
Now in what sense is it true that a speed of 10 yards per second 
is the same as 600 yards per minute? Ten yards is not the same 
as 600 yards, nor is one second the same thing as one minute. 
What we mean by saying that the rate is the same, is this: that 
the proportion borne between distance passed over and time 
taken to pass over it, is the same in both cases. 
83 

84 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Now try to put some of these ideas into differential notation. 
Let y in this case stand for money, and let t stand for time. 
If you are spending money, and the amount you spend in a 
short time dt be called dy, the rate of spending it will be dy ; or, 
d 
dt 
as regards saving, with a minus sign, as - 2::, because then dy is 
dt 
a decrement, not an increment. But money is not a good example 
for the calculus, because it generally comes and goes by jumps, 
not by a continuous flow-you may earn $20,000 a year, but it 
does not keep running in all day long in a thin stream; it comes 
in only weekly, or monthly, or quarterly, in lumps: and your ex-
penditure also goes out in sudden payments. 
A more apt illustration of the idea of a rate is furnished by the 
speed of a moving body. From London to Liverpool is 200 miles. 
If a train leaves London at 7 o'clock, and reaches Liverpool at 11 
0' clock, you know that, since it has travelled 200 miles in 4 
hours, its average rate must have been 50 miles per hour; because 
200 
50 H 
11 
k' 
1 
. 
b 
""4 = T· 
ere you are rea y rna mg a menta companson etween 
the distance passed over and the time taken to pass over it. You 
are dividing one by the other. If y is the whole distance, and t the 
whole time, clearly the average rate is !. Now the speed was not 
t 
actually constant all the way: at starting, and during the slowing 
up at the end of the journey, the speed was less. Probably at some 
part, when running downhill, the speed was over 60 miles an 
hour. If, during any particular element of time dt, the corre-
sponding element of distance passed over was dy, then at that 
part of the journey the speed was dy. The rate at which one quan-
dt 
tity (in the present instance, distance) is changing in relation to 
the other quantity (in this case, time) is properly expressed, then, 
by stating the derivative of one with respect to the other. A veloc-
ity, scientifically expressed, is the rate at which a very small dis-
tance in any given direction is being passed over, and may there-
fore be written 
dy 
v=-
dt 

When Time Varies 
85 
But if the velocity v is not uniform, then it must be either in-
creasing or else decreasing. The rate at which a velocity is increas-
ing is called the acceleration. If a moving body is, at any particular 
instant, gaining an additional velocity dv in an element of time 
dt, then the acceleration a at that instant may be written 
. 
dy 
But SInce v = -, 
dt 
dv 
a=-
dt 
a= dv = d (dY) 
dt 
dt 
dt 
which is usually written 
or the acceleration is the second derivative of the distance, with 
respect to time. Acceleration is expressed as a change of velocity 
in unit time, for instance, as being so many feet per second per 
second; the notation used being ft/sec 2 • 
When a railway train has just begun to move, its velocity v is 
small; but it is rapidly gaining speed-it is being hurried up, or 
d2 
accelerated, by the effort of the engine. So its ~ 
is large. When 
dt 
it has got up its top speed it is no longer being accelerated, so 
d2 
that then ~ 
has fallen to zero. But when it nears its stopping 
dt 
place its speed begins to slow down; may, indeed, slow down very 
quickly if the brakes are put on, and during this period of decel-
eration or slackening of pace, the value of dv, that is, of d
2
; , will 
dt 
dt 
be negative. 
To accelerate a mass m requires the continuous application of 
force. The force necessary to accelerate a mas~ is proportional to 
the mass, and it is also proportional to the acceleration which is 
being imparted. Hence we may write for the force f, the expres-
SIon 
f= ma 

86 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
dv 
or 
f=m-
dt 
d2y 
or 
f=m-
dt2 
The product of a mass by the speed at which it is going is 
called its momentum, and is in symbols mv. If we differentiate mo-
d(mv) 
mentum with respect to time we shall get -- for the rate of 
dt 
change of momentum. But, since m is a constant quantity, this 
dv 
may be written m -, which we see above is the same as f. That 
dt 
is to say, force may be expressed either as mass times acceleration, 
or as rate of change of momentum. 
Again, if a force is employed to move something (against an 
equal and opposite counter-force), it does work; and the amount 
of work done is measured by the product of the force into the dis-
tance (in its own direction) through which its point of applica-
tion moves forward. So if a force f moves forward through a 
length y, the work done (which we may call w) will be 
w=fxy 
where we take f as a constant force. If the force varies at different 
parts of the range y, then we must find an expression for its value 
from point to point. If f be the force along the small element of 
length dy, the amount of work done will be f X dy. But as dy is 
only an element of length, only an element of work will be done. 
If we write w for work, then an element of work will be dw; and 
we have 
which may be written 
or 
or 
dw=fxdy 
dw=ma' dy; 
d2y 
dw=m- ·dy 
dt2 
dv 
dw=m-' dy 
dt 

When Time Varies 
Further, we may transpose the expression and write 
dw =i 
dy 
87 
This gives us yet a third definition of force; that if it is being 
used to produce a displacement in any direction, the force (in that 
direction) is equal to the rate at which work is being done per 
unit of length in that direction. In this last sentence the word rate 
is clearly not used in its time-sense, but in its meaning as ratio or 
proportion. 
Sir Isaac Newton, who was (along with Leibniz) an inventor of 
the methods of the calculus, regarded all quantities that were 
varying as flowing; and the ratio which we nowadays call the de-
rivative he regarded as the rate of flowing, or the fluxion of the 
quantity in question. He did not use the notation of the dy and 
dx, and dt (this was due to Leibniz), but had instead a notation of 
his own. If y was a quantity that varied, or "flowed", then his 
symbol for its rate of variation (or "fluxion") was y. If x was the 
variable, then its fluxion was called x. The dot over the letter in-
dicated that it had been differentiated. But this notation does not 
tell us what is the independent variable with respect to which the 
differentiation has been effected. When we see dy we know that 
dt 
y is to be differentiated with respect to t. If we see dy we know 
dx 
that y is to be differentiated with respect to x. But if we see 
merely y, we cannot tell without looking at the context whether 
h· . 
dy 
dy 
dy 
h· h 
h 
. bl 
S 
t IS IS to mean -
or -
or -, or w at IS t e ot er vana e. 
0, 
dx 
dt 
dz 
therefore, this fluxional notation is less informing than the differ-
ential notation, and has in consequence largely dropped out of 
use. But its simplicity gives it an advantage if only we will agree 
to use it for those cases exclusively where time is the independent 
. bl I 
h 
. 
·11 
dy 
d· 
·11 
du 
d·· 
vana e. n t at case y WI 
mean -
an u WI 
mean -; an x 
d2x 
dt 
dt 
will mean -2. 
dt 

88 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Adopting this fluxional notation we may write the mechanical 
equations considered in the paragraphs above, as follows: 
Examples. 
distance 
velocity 
acceleration 
force 
work 
x 
v=x 
a=v=x 
f=mv=mx 
w=xXmx 
(1) A body moves so that the distance x (in feet), which it travels 
from a certain point 0, is given by the relation 
x = 0.2t2 + 10.4 
where t is the time in seconds elapsed since a certain instant. Find 
the velocity and acceleration 5 seconds after the body began to 
move, and also find the corresponding values when the distance 
covered is 100 feet. Find also the average velocity during the first 
10 seconds of its motion. (Suppose distances and motion to the 
right to be positive.) 
Now 
dx 
v = x = - = O.4t; 
dt 
x = 0.2t2 + 10.4 
d2x 
a = x = -2 = 0.4 = constant. 
dt 
and 
When t = 0, x = 10.4 and v = o. The body started from a point 
10.4 feet to the right of the point 0; and the time was reckoned 
from the instant the body started. 
When 
t = 5, 
v = 0.4 X 5 = 2 ft.lsec.; 
a = 0.4 ft.lsec2 • 
When x = 100, 
100 = 0.2t2 + 10.4, 
or 
t2 = 448, 
and 
t = 21.17 sec.; 
v = 0.4 x 21.17 = 8.468 ft'!sec. 
When 
t= 10, 
distance travelled = 0.2 X 102 + 10.4 - 10.4 = 20 ft. 
Average velocity = ffi == 2 ft'!sec. 

When Time Varies 
89 
(It is the same velocity as the velocity at the middle of the in-
terval, t = 5; for, the acceleration being constant, the velocity has 
varied uniformly from zero when t = 0 to 4 ft.lsec. when t = 10.) 
(2) In the above problem let us suppose 
x = 0.2t2 + 3t + lOA 
dx 
v = x = - = OAt + 3; 
dt 
d2x 
a = x = -2 = 004 = constant. 
dt 
When t = 0, x = lOA and v = 3 ft.lsec., the time is reckoned 
from the instant at which the body passed a point lOA ft. from 
the point 0, its velocity being then already 3 ft.lsec. To find the 
time elapsed since it began moving, let v = 0; then OAt + 3 = 0, 
t = -~ = -7.5 sec. The body began moving 7.5 sec. before time 
was begun to be observed; 5 seconds after this gives t = -2.5 and 
v = 004 X -2.'5 + 3 = 2 ft.lsec. 
When x = 100 ft., 
100 = 0.2t2 + 3t + lOA; 
or 
t2 + 15t - 448 = 0 
hence 
t = 14.96 sec., v = 004 X 14.96 + 3 = 8.98 ft.lsec. 
To find the distance travelled during the first 10 seconds of the 
motion one must know how far the body was from the point 0 
when it started. 
When t = -7.5, 
x = 0.2 X (-7.5)2 - 3 X 7.5 + lOA = -0.85 ft. 
that is 0.85 ft. to the left of the point O. 
Now, when t = 2.5, 
x = 0.2 X 2.52 + 3 X 2.5 + lOA = 19.15 
So, in 10 seconds, the distance travelled was 19.15 + 0.85 = 20 
ft., and 
the average velocity = f§ = 2 ft.lsec. 
(3) Consider a similar problem when the distance is given 
by x = 0.2t2 - 3t + lOA. Then v = OAt - 3, a = 004 = constant. 
When t = 0, x = lOA as before, and v = -3; so that the body was 
moving in the direction opposite to its motion in the previous 

90 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
cases. As the acceleration is positive, however, we see that this ve-
locity will decrease as time goes on, until it becomes zero, when 
v = 0 or O.4t - 3 = 0; or t = +7.5 sec. After this, the velocity be-
comes positive; and 5 seconds after the body started, t = 12.5, 
and 
v = 0.4 X 12.5 - 3 = 2 ft./sec. 
When x= 100, 
100 = 0.2t2 - 3t + 10.4, 
or 
t2 - 15t - 448 = 0 
and· 
t = 29.96; v = 0.4 X 29.96 - 3 = 8.98 ft./sec. 
When v is zero, x = 0.2 X 7.5 2 - 3 X 7.5 + 10.4 = -0.85, in-
forming us that the body moves back to 0.85 ft. beyond the point 
o before it stops. Ten seconds later t = 17.5 and 
x = 0.2 X 17.5 2 - 3 X 17.5 + 10.4 = 19.15 
The distance travelled = 0.85 + 19.15 = 20.0, and the average 
velocity is again 2 ft./sec. 
(4) Consider yet another problem of the same sort with 
x = 0.2t3 - 3t2 + 10.4; v = 0.6t2 - 6t; a = 1.2t - 6. The accelera-
tion is no more constant. 
When t = 0, x = 10.4, v = 0, a = -6. The body is at rest, but 
just ready to move with a negative acceleration, that is, to gain a 
velocity towards the point O. 
(5) If we have x = 0.2t3 - 3t + 10.4, then v = 0.6t2 - 3, and 
a = 1.2t. 
When t = 0, x = 10.4; v = -3; a = O. 
The body is moving towards the point 0 with a velocity of 3 
ft./sec., and just at that instant the velocity is uniform. 
We see that the conditions of the motion can always be at 
once ascertained from the time-distance equation and its first 
and second derived functions. In the last two cases the mean 
velocity during the first 10 seconds and the velocity 5 seconds 
after the start will no more be the same, because the velocity is 
not increasing uniformly, the acceleration being no longer 
constant. 
(6) The angle (J (in radians) turned through by a wheel is given 
by (J = 3 + 2t - 0.lt3 , where t is the time in seconds from a cer-
tain instant; find the angular velocity wand the angular accelera-

When Time Varies 
91 
tion a, (a) after 1 second; (b) after it has performed one revolu-
tion. At what time is it at rest, and how many revolutions has it 
performed up to that instant? 
. 
d() 
2 
w = () = -
= 2 - 0.31 , 
dl 
When 1 = 0, () = 3; w = 2 rad.lsec.; a = o. 
When 1 = 1, W = 2 - 0.3 = l.7 rad.lsec.; a = -0.6 rad.lsec2 • 
This is a retardation; the wheel is slowing down. 
After 1 revolution 
() = 27T= 3 + 21 - 0.1/3 
By solving this equation numerically we can get the value or 
values of 1 for which () = 27T; these are about 2.11 and 3.02 (there 
is a third negative value). 
When 
When 
1=2.11, 
() = 6.28; W = 2 - l.34 = 0.66 rad./sec. 
a = -1.27 rad.lsec2 
1 = 3.02, 
() = 6.28; W = 2 - 2.74 = -0.74 rad.lsec. 
a = -1.81 rad.lsec2 
The velocity is reversed. The wheel is evidently at rest between 
these two instants; it is at rest when w = 0, that is when 
0= 2 - 0.3/2 , or when t = 2.58 sec., it has performed 
() 
3+ 2 X 2.58 - 0.1 X 2.583 
-
= 1.025 revolutions 
27T 
6.28 
EXERCISES V 
dy 
d 2y 
(1) Ify=a+bI2 +cI4 ; find -
and -2. 
dl 
dl 
dy 
'3 d 2y 
2 
-
= 2bl + 4cl . -
= 2b + 12cl 
dt 
' dl2 
Ans. 

92 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
(2) A body falling freely in space describes in t seconds a space 
s, in feet, expressed by the equation s = 16t2 . Draw a curve show-
ing the relation between sand t. Also determine the velocity of 
the body at the following times from its being let drop: t = 2 sec-
onds; t = 4.6 seconds; t = 0.01 second. l 
(3) If x = at - !gt2 ; find x and x. 
(4) If a body moves according to the law 
s = 12 - 4.5t + 6.2t2 
find its velocity when t = 4 seconds; s being in feet. 
(5) Find the acceleration of the body mentioned in the preced-
ing example. Is the acceleration the same for all values of t? 
(6) The angle (J (in radians) turned through by a revolving 
wheel is connected with the time t (in seconds) that has elapsed 
since starting, by the law 
(J = 2.1 - 3.2t + 4.8t2 
Find the angular velocity (in radians per second) of that wheel 
when I! seconds have elapsed. Find also its angular acceleration. 
1. It is good to be clear on just how derivatives apply to falling bodies, the 
most familiar instance of accelerated motion. Let t be the time in seconds 
from the moment a stone is dropped, and s the distance it has fallen. The 
function relating these two variables is s = 16t2 . (It graphs as a neat pa-
rabola.) Thus after one second the stone has fallen 16 feet, after two seconds 
it has dropped 4 X 16 = 64 feet, after three seconds, 9 X 16 = 144 feet, and 
so on. The first derivative is 32t. This gives the instantaneous velocity at 
which the stone is falling at the end of t seconds. After the first second its 
velocity is 32 feet per second. After two seconds its velocity is 64 feet per 
second, and so on. 
The second derivative is simply 32. This derivative of a derivative of a 
function" is the stone's acceleration-the rate at which its velocity is in-
creasing. Physicists call it the "gravitation constant" for bodies falling to 
the earth's surface. 
Later on, in chapters on integration, you will see how integrating the 
falling stone's first derivative will give the distance traveled by the stone 
between any two moments as it goes from the start of its fall until the time 
it is stopped by the ground.-M.G. 

When Time Varies 
93 
(7) A slider moves so that, during the first part of its motion, 
its distance s in inches from its starting point is given by the ex-
pression 
s = 6.8t3 - 1O.8t; t being in seconds. 
Find the expression for the velocity and the acceleration at any 
time; and hence find the velocity and the acceleration after 3 sec-
onds. 
(8) The motion of a rising balloon is such that its height h, in 
miles, is given at any instant by the expression 
h = 0.5 + loY't - 125; t being in seconds. 
Find an expression for the velocity and the acceleration at any 
time. Draw curves to show the variation of height, velocity and 
acceleration during the first ten minutes of the ascent. 
(9) A stone is thrown downwards into water and its depth p in 
meters at any instant t seconds after reaching the surface of the 
water is given by the expression 
4 
p= -- +0.8t-1 
4 +t2 
Find an expression for the velocity and the acceleration at any 
time. Find the velocity and acceleration after 10 seconds. 
(10) A body moves in such a way that the space described in 
the time t from starting is given by s = tn, where n is a constant. 
Find the value of n when th~ velocity is doubled from the 5th to 
the 10th second; find it also when the velocity is numerically 
equal to the acceleration at the end of the 10th second. 

Chapter IX 
INTRODUCING A 
USEFUL DODGE 
Sometimes one is stumped by finding that the expression to be 
differentiated is too complicated to tackle directly. 
Thus, the equation 
2 
2 ' 
Y = (x +a P 
is awkward to a beginner. 
Now the dodge to turn the difficulty is this: Write some symbol, 
such as u, for the expression x 2 + a 2 ; then the equation becomes 
, 
y =u' 
which you can easily manage; for 
dy 
3! 
-=-u' 
du 
2 
Then tackle the expression 
u =x2 +a2 
and differentiate it with respect to x 
du 
-=2x 
dx 
Then all that remains is plain sailing; 
for 
94 
dy 
dy 
du 
-=-x-
dx 
du 
dx 

that is, 
Introducing a Useful Dodge 
dy 
3 
I 
-
= -u'X 2x 
dx 
2 
= ~(X2 + a2)4 X 2x 
= 3x(x2 + az)4 
and so the trick is done. l 
95 
By and by, when you have learned how to deal with sines, and 
cosines, and exponentials, you will find this dodge of increasing 
usefulness. 
Examples. 
Let us practice this dodge on a few examples. 
(1) Differentiate y = Yah. 
Let u=a +x. 
du 
1 
! dy 
1 -! 
1 ( 
)_! 
dx = ; y = u'; du = '2u ' = '2 a + x ' 
dy 
dy 
du 
1 
-=-X-=----
dx 
du 
dx 
2~ 
1. Thompson's "useful dodge" is known today as the "chain rule." It is one 
of the most useful rules in calculus. The function he gives to illustrate it is 
called a "composite function" because it involves a "function of a function." 
The expression inside the parentheses (x 2 + a 2) is called the "inside func-
tion." The "outside function" is- the exponent 3/2. 
One could try to differentiat<) by cubing (x2 + a 2) and taking its square 
root, or by expanding (x2 + a2)2 by the binomial theorem, but neither of 
these methods works very well. As Thompson makes clear, the much sim-
pler way is to differentiate the outside function with respect to the inside 
one, then multiply the result by the derivative of the inside function with 
respect to x. It is called the chain rule because it can be applied to compos-
ite functions with more than one inside function. You simply compute a 
chain of derivatives, then multiply them together. Modern calculus texts 
give proof of why the chain rule works. 
For a trivial example of how it works, consider three children A, B, and 
C. A grows twice as fast as B, and B grows three times as fast as C. How 
much faster is A growing than C? Clearly the answer is 2 X 3 = 6 times as 
fast.-,M.G. 

96 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
1 
(2) Differentiate y = ... r-z 
Va+x-
Let u =a +x2 • 
dy 
dy 
du 
x 
-=-x-=---;=== 
dx 
du 
dx 
Y(a + X 2)3 
(3) Dilfe,.ntia:e y = ( .. - nxl + :} 
Let u=m-nx'+px-'. 
a dy 
a-I 
y=U; du =au 
dy 
dy 
du 
~ 
P 
2 
-! 
4 
_" 
- = -
X - = -a m - nx' + "1 
(3nx l + 3px l) 
( 
)
a-I 
dx 
du 
dx 
x, 
1 
(4) Differentiate y = Y 
x 3 _a 2 
Let u = x 3 - a2 • 
dy 
dy 
du 
-=-x-= 
dx 
du 
dx 
(5) Differentiate y = ~ 
1 - x 
l+x 
1 
Write this as 
(1 - x» 
Y-
-
1 
(1 + x)2 

Introducing a Useful Dodge 
97 
I 
I 
I d(l-x), 
I d(l + x)' 
(1 + x)' 
- (1 - x)' ---
dy= 
dx 
dx 
dx 
l+x 
(We may also write y = (1 -
x)~(1 + x)-~ and differentiate as a 
product.) 
or 
Proceeding as in Example (1) above, we get 
d(l -
x)~ 
1 
---= 
; and 
dx 
2~ 
d(1 + x)~ 
1 
= 
dx 
2~ 
dy = 
(1 + x)~ 
dx 
2(1+x)~ 
Hence 
(1 -
x)~ 
2(1 + x)v'1+x 
1 
~ 
-2~~ 
2V(1 +X)3 
dy 
1 
dx =-(1+x)~ 
(6
3 
(6) Differentiate y = 
--2 
1+x 
We may write this 
y = x~(1 + x2)-i 
dy 
3 
1 
2 _1 
? 
d[(1 + x2)-i] 
- = '2 x '(1 + x ) ,+ x' X ---"-----"-
dx 
dx 
Differentiating (1 + x2ri, as shown in Example (2) above, we 
get 
d[(1 +X2)-Q 
X 
= 
dx 
V(1 +x2)3 
dy = 3Yx 
W 
so that 
2~ V(1 +x2)3 
= 
dx 
(7) Differentiate y = (x + V x 2 + X + a y 
Let u = x + V x 2 + X + a 
Yx(3 +x2) 
2V(1 +x2)3 

98 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
dy 
2 
( 
V 2 
)2 
-
= 3u = 3 x + 
x + x + a 
du 
Now let v = (x2 + X + a)~ and 
w = (x2 + X + a) 
Hence 
dw 
,dv l' 
-
= 2x + l' v = Wi. -
= -w-i 
dx 
' 
'dw 
2 
dv 
dv 
dW
12 
' 
- = -
X -
=z(x +x+a)-i(2x+ 1) 
dx 
dw 
dx 
du 
2x+ 1 
-=I+-r==== 
dx 
2Yx2+x+a 
dy 
dy 
du 
-=-X-
dx 
du 
dx 
= 3(x + Y x2 + X + a )2 (1 + y2: + 1 
) 
2 
x +x+a 
. 
. 
_ ~2+X2 ...Ja2 - x2 
(8) DIfferentIate y -
2 
2 
2 
2 
a -x 
a +x 
2 
2! 
2 
2! 
(a + x )'(a - x ), 
2 
2! 
2 
2 _! 
Y = 
2 
2' 
2 
2 ' = (a + x )6 (a - x ) 6 
(a - x )i(a + x )' 
We get 
dy 
2 
2 ! d(a2 -
X2)-~) 
d(a2 + X2)~) 
- = (a +X)6 
+ 
, 
dx 
dx 
(a2 - X2)6dx 
Let u = (a2 -
X2)-~ and v = (a2 - x2) 
,du 
l,dv 
u = v-6• -
= --v-6• -
= -2x 
'dv 
6 
'dx 
du 
du 
dv 
-=-x- = 
dx 
dv 
dx 
1 
2 
2' 
-x(a -x p 
3 

or 
Introducing a Useful Dodge 
2 
2 ' 
2 
2 
Let w = (a + x )6 and z = (a + x ) 
Hence 
,dw 1,dz 
w = Z6. -
= - z-·· - = 2x 
'dz 
6 
'dx 
dw 
dw 
dz 
1 
2 
2' 
- = -
X - = - x(a + x r· 
dx 
dz 
dx3 
(9) Differentiate yn with respect to y5. 
d(yn) _ nyn-l _!'!.. n-S 
d(ys) - 5,s-1 - 5 Y 
99 
(10) Find the first and second derivatives of y = ~ Y(a - x)x. 
b 
dy 
x d{[(a -
x)x]~} 
Y(a - x)x 
- = -
+ --'--------'--
dx 
b 
dx 
b 
Let u = [(a -
x)x]~ and let w = (a - x)x; then u = w~ 
du 
1 ,1 
1 
- = -w-'= -, = --;===== 
dw 
2 
2w' 
2Y(a - x)x 
dw 
-=a-2x 
dx 
du 
dw 
du 
a-2x 
-dw X -dx = dx = -2Y-;:'(a=-==x)=x 
Hence 
dy 
x(a - 2x) 
Y(a - x)x 
x(3a - 4x) 
dx = 2bY(a - x)x + 
b 
= -2b-Y-:=(a=-=x=)=x 

100 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
(3ax - 4x2)b(a - 2x) 
2bY(a - x)x(3a - 8x) - ---;:====--
d2y = 
Y(a - X)X 
Now 
dx2 
4b2(a - X)X 
3a2 - 12ax + 8x2 
= 
(We shall need these two last derivatives later on. See Ex. X, 
No. 11.) 
EXERCISES VI 
Differentiate the following: 
(1) y=vQ+! 
1 
(3) y= ... ~ 
va+x 
a 
(4)y= ... ~ 
Va-x-
V'?+a 
(6) y= ... 2~ 
V x 3 +a 
a 2 +x2 
(7) y = ( 
)2 
a+x 
(8) Differentiate y5 with respect to y2 
~ 
(9) Differentiate y = ---
1-0 
The process can be extended to three or more derivatives, so 
dy 
dy 
dz 
dv 
that - = -
X -
X -
dx 
dz 
dv 
dx 
Examples. 
4 
7 
... r.-:-
dy 
(1) If z = 3x ; v = 2; y = V 1 + v, find -d 
z 
x 
We have 
dy = 
168x3 
= 
dx 
{2Vi"+v)z3 
28 

Introducing a Useful Dodge 
101 
1 
t 
7x2 
dv 
(2) If t = -_. x = t 3 + _. v = 
find -
5W' 
2' 
V'x-1' 
dO 
dv 
7x(5x-6) dx 
2 
1 dt 
1 
-
. -=3t +2· -=-----
dx 
3 V' (x - 1)4' dt 
' dO 
1O\f03 
dv 
7x(5x - 6)(3t2 + ~) 
dO = - 30V'(x - 1)4\f03 
Hence 
an expression in which x must be replaced by its value, and t by 
its value in terms of O. 
and 
1 
e/>=V3--, 
wv'2 
1 
and e/>= V3 - -w-1 
v'2 
dO 
3a2 
dw 
1 
dx =-2W; dO =-(1 + 8)v1=82 
(see example 5, Capter IX); and 
de/> = 
1 
dw 
v'2.w2 
de/> 
1 
1 
3a2 
So that 
-
= 
X 
X --
dx 
V2 X w 2 
(1 + (J)v1=82 tvQ 
Replace now first w, then 0 by its value. 
EXERCISES VII 
You can now successfully try the following. 
13 
2 
1 
dw 
(1) If u = 2 x ; v = 3(u + u ); and w = 2' find -d 
v 
x 

102 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
1 
dv 
(2) If y = 3X2 + Y2; z = \I'i+Y; and v = 
, find -
V3 +4z 
dx 
x 3 
2 
1 
du 
(3) If Y = -; z = (1 + y) ; and u = 
, find -
V3 
~ dx 
The following exercises are placed here for reasons of space and because 
their solution depends upon the dodge explained in the foregoing chapter, 
but they should not be attempted until Chapters XIV and XV have been 
read. 
(4) If y = 2a3loge u - u(5a 2 - 2au + tu 2 ), and u = a + x, 
show that 
dy = x 2(a -x) 
dx 
a+x 
dx 
(5) For the curve x = a(O - sin 0), y = a(1 - cos 0), find -
and 
dO 
dy 
dy 
-; hence deduce the value of-
dO 
dx 
dx 
dy 
(6) Find -
and 
for the curve x = a cos30, y = a sin30; 
dO 
dO 
dy 
hence obtain -dx 
(7) Given that y = logesin (x 2 - a 2), find dy in its simplest 
form. 
dx 
(8) If u = x + y and 4x = 2u -loge(2u - 1), show that 
dy = x+y 
dx 
x+y-l 

Chapter X 
GEOMETRICAL MEANING 
OF DIFFERENTIATION 
It is useful to consider what geometrical meaning can be given to 
the derivative. 
In the first place, any function of x, such, for example, as x 2 , or 
Yx, or ax + b, can be plotted as a curve; and nowadays every 
schoolboy is familiar with the process of curve plotting. 
Let PQR, in Fig. 7, be a portion of a curve plotted with respect 
to the axes of coordinates OX and OY. Consider any point Q on 
this curve, where the abscissa of the point is x and its ordinate is 
y. Now observe how y changes when x is varied. If x is made to 
increase by a small increment dx, to the right, it will be observed 
that y also (in this particular curve) increases by a small increment 
dy (because this particular curve happens to be an ascending 
curve). Then the ratio of dy to dx is a measure of the degree to 
which the curve is sloping up between the two points Q and T. 
As a matter of fact, it can be seen on the figure that the curve be-
tween Q and T has many different slopes, so that we cannot very 
well speak of the slope of the curve between Q and T. If, however, 
Q and T are so near each other that the 
small portion QT of the curve is practi-
Y 
cally straight, then it is true to say that 
the ratio dy is the slope of the curve 
dx 
along QT. The straight line QT pro-
duced on either side touches the curve 
along the portion QT only, and if this 
portion is infinitely small, the straight 
x 
FIG. 7. 
103 

104 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
line will touch the curve at practically one point only, and be 
therefore a tangent to the curve. 
This tangent to the curve has evidently the same slope as QT, 
so that dy is the slope of the tangent to the curve at the point Q 
dx 
d 
for which the value of 2 is found. 
dx 
We have seen that the short expression "the slope of a curve" 
has no precise meaning, because a curve has so many slopes-in 
fact, every small portion of a curve has a different slope. "The 
slope of a curve at a point" is, however, a perfectly defined thing; 
it is the slope of a very small portion of the curve situated just at 
that point; and we have seen that this is the same as "the slope of 
the tangent to the curve at that point". 
Observe that dx is a short step to the right, and dy the corre-
sponding short step upwards. These steps must be considered as 
short as possible-in fact infinitely short,-though in diagrams 
we have to represent them by bits that are not infinitesimally 
small, otherwise they could not be seen. 
We shall hereafter make considerable use o[ this circumstance that 
dy 
-
represents the slope of the tangent to the curve at any point. 
dx 
If a curve is sloping up at 45 0 at a particular point, as 1fi 
Fig. 8, dy and dx will be equal, and the value of dy = 1. 
dx 
If the curve slopes up steeper than 45 0 (Fig. 
greater than 1. 
y Aj 
:dx: 
I 
I 
I 
• 
I 
• 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
: 
I 
I 
I 
0 
X 
o 
FIG. 8. 
dy 
9), -
will be 
dx 
x 
FIG. 9. 

Geometrical Meaning of Differentiation 
If the curve slopes up very gently, as 
y 
in Fig. 10, dy will be a fraction smaller 
dx 
105 
than 1. 
For a horizontal line, or a horizontal 
place in a curve, dy = 0, and therefore ~ 
I 
I 
dy =0. 
dx 
o 
If a curve slopes downward, as in Fig. 
FIG. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
10. 
x 
11, dy will be a step down, and must therefore be reckoned of 
negative value; hence dy will have negative sign also. 
dx 
If the "curve" happens to be a straight line, like that in Fig. 12, 
the value of dy will be the same at all points along it. In other 
dx 
words its slope is constant. 
If a curve is one that turns more upwards as it goes along to the 
right, the values of dy will become greater and greater with the 
dx 
increasing steepness, as in Fig. 13. 
If a curve is one that gets flatter and flatter as it goes along, the 
values of dy will become smaller and smaller as the flatter part is 
dx 
reached, as in Fig. 14. 
y 
t 
I 
Y 
i 
{+-,--~.L....:-~~ 
o --x-.... dx 
X 
FIG. 11. 
FIG. 12. 

106 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
y 
y 
o 
o 
FIG. 13. 
FIG. 14. 
If a curve first descends, and then goes up again, as in Fig. 15, 
dy 
presenting a concavity upwards, then clearly -
will first be 
dx 
negative, with diminishing values as the curve flattens, then will 
be zero at the point where the bottom of the trough of the curve 
is reached; and from this point onward dy will have positive val-
dx 
ues that go on increasing. In such a case y is said to pass through 
a local minimum. This value of y is not necessarily the smallest 
value of y, it is that value of y corresponding to the bottom of the 
trough; for instance, in Fig. 28, the value of y corresponding to 
the bottom of the trough is 1, while y takes elsewhere values 
which are smaller than this. The characteristic of a local mini-
mum is that y must increase on either side of it. 
N.B.-For the particular value of x that makes y a minimum, 
the value of dy = o. 
dx 
y 
FIG. 15. 
If a curve first ascends and then de-
scends, the values of dy will be posi-
dx 
tive at first; then zero, as the summit is 
reached; then negative, as the curve 
slopes downwards, as in Fig. 16. 
In this case y is said to pass through 
a local maximum, but this value of y is 

Geometrical Meaning of Differentiation 
107 
y 
y 
I 
I 
o 
=+--'--'---'--'-----"-'.-
X 
~ 
FIG. 16. 
FIG. 17. 
not necessarily the greatest value of y. In Fig. 28, the local maxi-
mum of y is 2%, but this is by no means the greatest value yean 
have at some other point of the curve. 
N.B.-For the particular value of x that makes y a maximum, 
dy 
the value of - = O. 
dx 
If a curve has the particular form of Fig. 17, the values of 
dy will always be positive; but there will be one particular place 
~ 
d 
where the slope is least steep, where the value of .2 will be a 
dx 
minimum; that is, less than it is at any other part of the curve. 
If a curve has the form of Fig. 18, the value of dy will be nega-
dx 
tive in the upper part, and positive in 
the lower part; while at the nose of the y 
curve where it becomes actually perpen-
dicular, the value of dy will be infinitely 
dx 
great. 
dy 
Now that we understand that -
mea-
dx 
sures the steepness of a curve at any 
point, let us turn to some of the equa-
tions which we have already learned how 0 
to differentiate. 
Q 
X 
FIG. 18. 

108 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
x 
FIG. 19. 
(1) As the simplest case take this: 
y=x+b 
y 
FIG. 20. 
It is plotted out in Fig. 19, using equal scales for x and y. If we 
put x = 0, then the corresponding ordinate will be y = b; that is 
to say, the "curve" crosses the y-axis at the height b. From here it 
ascends at 45°; for whatever values we give to x to the right, we 
have an equal y to ascend. The line has a gradient of 1 in 1. 
Now differentiate y = x + b, by the rules we have already 
dy 
learned and we get - = 1. 
dx 
The slope of the line is such that for every little step dx to the 
right, we go an equal little step dy upward. And this slope is con-
stant-always the same slope. 
(2) Take another case: 
y =ax+ b. 
We know that this curve, like the preceding one, will start 
from a height b on the y-axis. But before we draw the curve, let 
us find its slope by differentiating; which gives us dy = a. The 
dx 
slope will be constant, at an angle, the tangent of which is here 
called a. Let us assign to a some numerical 
value-say 1. Then we must give it such a 
slope that it ascends 1 in 3; or dx will be 3 
times as great as dy; as magnified in Fig. 2l. 
So, draw the line in Fig. 20 at this slope. 
FIG. 21. 

Geometrical Meaning of Differentiation 
109 
FIG. 22. 
(3) Now for a slightly harder case. Let 
y =ax2 +b 
Again the curve will start on the y-axis at a height b above the 
origin. 
Now differentiate. [If you have forgotten, turn back to Chapter 
V, or, rather, don't turn back, but think out the differentiation.} 
dy 
-=2ax 
dx 
This shows that the steepness will not be constant: it in-
creases as x increases. At the starting point P, where x = 0, 
the curve (Fig. 22) has no steepness-that is, it is level. On 
the left of the origin, where x has negative values, dy will also 
dx 
have negative values, or will descend from left to right, as in the 
Figure. 
Let us illustrate this by working out a particular instance. Tak-
ing the equation 
y=h2 + 3 
and differentiating it, we get 
dy 
1 
-=2X 
dx 

110 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
y ------------ 1 
8 
'!, 
:, 
________ .. !-
: I 
6 
L,Y&r,+ 
: 
:4~· 
, ------ -----~ "., 
: 
: I 
, 
---·4 ----
:': 
I 
, , 
, , ' i 
~ 
• 
I 
-
-
1--1--'T--~--} 
I If. " 
I. 
I " ,": '6 
1: :::, :'1 
, 
I 
I 
f 
-8 -2 -I 
1 
2 a 4 
5 X 
FIG. 23. 
dy 
tb 
6 
FIG. 24. 
Now assign a few successive values, say from 0 to 5, to x; and cal-
culate the corresponding values of y by the first equation; and of 
dy from the second equation. Tabulating results, we have: 
dx 
x 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
y 
3 
3~ 4 
5~ 7 
9~ 
dy 
0 
1 
1 
l~ 2 
2~ 
dx 
"2 
Then plot them out in two curves, Figs. 23 and 24; in Fig. 23 
plotting the values of y against those of x, and in Fig. 24 those of 
dy against those of x. For any assigned value of x, the height of the 
dx 
ordinate in the second curve is propor-
y 
tional to the slope of the first curve. 
If a curve comes to a sudden cusp, as 
in Fig. 25, the slope at that point 
suddenly changes from a slope upward ~ 
, 
dy 0:+------:.--.... 
to a slope downward. In that case -
X 
dx 
FIG. 25. 

Geometrical Meaning 0/ Differentiation 
111 
will clearly undergo an abrupt change from a positive to a nega-
tive value. 1 
The following examples show further applications of the prin-
ciples just explained. 
. 
1 
(4) Fmd the slope of the tangent to the curve y = - + 3 at the 
2x 
point where x = -1. Find the angle which this tangent makes 
with the curve y = 2X2 + 2. 
The slope of the tangent is the slope of the curve at the 
point where they touch one another; that is, it is the dy of 
dy 
1 
dx 
the curve for that point. Here - = - --2 and for x = -1, 
d 
1 
dx 
2x 
..z = - -, which is the slope of the tangent and of the curve at 
dx 
2 
that point. The tangent, being a straight line, has for equation 
y = ax + b, and its slope is dy = a, hence a = _.!:.. Also if x = -1, 
1 
~ 
2 
Y = -- + 3 = 2~; and as the tangent passes by this point, the 
2(-1) 
coordinates of the point must satisfy the equation of the tangent, 
namely 
1 
y=--x+b 
2 
1 
1 
so that 22 = - - X (-1) + band b = 2; the equation of the tangent 
2 
1 
is therefore y = -- x + 2 
2 
1. A cusp is the sharp point on a curve where the curve abruptly changes 
its direction by 180°. If it changes by some other angle the point is called 
a "corner." A cusp or corner can, of course, point north as well as south, 
east, or west, or in any other direction. The tangent at the cusp shown in 
Figure 25 is vertical. The curve approaches the tangent from one side, 
leaves it on the other side. At the cusp point there is no derivative. 
A typical example is the curve for y = (x - 4)f. lts cusp points south at x = 4. 
Corners can occur on graphs of continuous functions that are made up of 
straight lines. For example, the absolute value function, defined to be x if 
x ~ 0 and -x if x < 0, has a corner at x = O.-M.G. 

112 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Now, when two curves meet, the intersection being a point 
common to both curves, its coordinates must satisfy the equation 
of each one of the two curves; that is, it must be a solution of the 
system of simultaneous equations formed by coupling together 
the equations of the curves. Here the curves meet one another at 
points given by the solution of 
{
y = 2X2 + 2 
1 
2 
1 
Y = -'2X + 2 
or 
2x + 2 = -'2x + 2 
that is, 
x(2x + t) = ° 
This equation has for its solutions x = ° 
and x = -~. The slope 
of the curve y = 2X2 + 2 at any point is 
dy 
-=4x 
dx 
For the point where x = 0, this slope is zero; the curve is hori-
zontal. For the point where 
x=-..!:. 
dy =-1 
4' 
dx 
hence the curve at that point slopes downwards to the right at 
such an angle () with the horizontal that tan () = 1; that is, at 45° 
to the horizontal. 
The slope of the straight line is -t; that is, it slopes downwards 
to the rifht and makes with the horizontal an angle cf> such that 
tan cf> = '2; that is, an angle of 26° 34'. It follows that at the first 
point the curve cuts the straight line at an angle of 26° 34', while 
at the second it cuts it at an angle of 45° - 26° 34' = 18° 26'. 
(5) A straight line is to be drawn, through a point whose co-
ordinates are x = 2, Y = -1, as tangent to the curve 
y =x2 - 5x+ 6 
Find the coordinates of the point of contact. 
dy 
The slope of the tangent must be the same as the -
of the 
dx 
curve; that is, 2x - 5. 

Geometrical Meaning of Differentiation 
113 
The equation of the straight line is y = ax + b, and as it is sat-
isfied for the values x = 2, y = -1, then -1 = a X 2 + b; also, its 
dy 
-=a=2x-5 
dx 
The x and the y of the point of contact must also satisfy both 
the equation of the tangent and the equation of the curve. 
We have then 
y = x 2 - 5x + 6, .............................. (i) 
y = ax + b, ..................................... (ii) 
-1 = 2a + b, .................................... (iii) 
a = 2x - 5, .................................... (iv) 
four equations in a, b, x, y. 
Equations (i) and (ii) give x 2 - 5x + 6 = ax + b. 
Replacing a and b by their value in this, we get 
x 2 - 5x + 6 = (2x - 5)x - 1 - 2(2x - 5) 
which simplifies to x 2 - 4x + 3 = 0, the solutions of which are: 
x = 3 and x = 1. Replacing in (i), we get y = 0 and y = 2 respec-
tively; the two points of contact are then x = 1, Y = 2; and x = 3, 
y=O. 
Note.-In all exercises dealing with curves, students will find it 
extremely instructive to verify the deductions obtained by actu-
ally plotting the curves. 
EXERCISES VIII 
(1) Plot the curve y = ix2 - 5, using a scale of millimeters. 
Measure at points corresponding to different values of x, the 
angle of its slope. 
Find, by differentiating the equation, the expression for slope; 
and see from your calculator whether this agrees with the mea-
sured angle. 

114 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
(2) Find what will be the slope of the curve 
y=0.12x 3 -2 
at the point where x = 2. 
(3) If y = (x - a)(x - b), show that at the particular point of the 
dy. 
1 
curve where - = 0, x wIll have the value "2(a + b). 
dx 
(4) Find the dy of the equation y = x 3 + 3x; and calculate the 
dx 
numerical values of dy for the points corresponding to x = 0, 
dx 
x=1,x=1,x=2. 
(5) In the curve to which the equation is x 2 + y2 = 4, find the 
value of x at those points where the slope = 1. 
(6) Find the slope, at any point, of the curve whose equation is 
2 
2 
X 2 + Y 2 = 1; and give the numerical value of the slope at the 
3 
2 
place where x = 0, and at that where x = 1. 
(7) The equation of a tangent to the curve y = 5 - 2x + 0.5x3 , 
being of the form y = mx + n, where m and n are constants, find 
the value of m and n if the point where the tangent touches the 
curve has x = 2 for abscissa. 
(8) At what angle do the two curves 
y = 3.5x2 + 2 
and 
y =x2 - 5x+ 9.5 
cut one another? 
(9) Tangents to the curve y = ± V 25 - x 2 are drawn at points 
for which x = 3 and x = 4, the value of y being positive. Find the 
coordinates of the point of intersection of the tangents and their 
mutual inclination. 
(10) A straight line y = 2x - b touches a curve y = 3X2 + 2 at 
one point. What are the coordinates of the point of contact, and 
what is the value of b? 
POSTSCRIPT 
If the graph of a continuous function crosses the x axis at two 
points a and b, and is differentiable for the closed interval be-

Geometrical Meaning of Differentiation 
115 
tween a and b, there must be at least 
one point on the curve between a and 
b where the tangent is horizontal and 
the derivative is zero. This is called 
Rolle's (pronounced Roll's) theorem af-
ter French mathematician Michel Rolle 
(1652-1719). 
Rolle's theorem is a special case of what 
jk?? 
a 
b 
FIG. 
25 a. Lagrange's 
mean value theorem. 
is called Lagrange's mean value theorem, after French mathema-
tician Joseph Louis Lagrange (1736-1813). It states that a 
straight line between points a and b on the curve for a continuous 
differentiable function is parallel to the tangent of at least one 
point c on the closed interval between a and b. (See Figure 25a) 
Applied to the velocity of a car that goes at an average speed of, 
say, 45 miles per hour from A to B, ~o matter how many times 
it alters its speed along the way (including even stops), there will 
be at least one moment when the car's instantaneous speed will 
be exactly 45 miles per hour. 
Both theorems are intuitively obvious, yet they underlie many 
important, more complicated calculus theorems. For example, 
the mean value theorem is the basis for calculating antideriva-
tives. 
The Lagrange mean value theorem further generalizes to what is 
called Cauchy'S mean value theorem after Augustin Louis Cauchy 
(1789-1857), a French mathematician. It concerns two continu-
ous functions that are differentiable in a closed interval. You will 
learn about it in more advanced calculus textbooks.-M.G. 

Chapter XI 
MAXIMA AND MINIMA 
A quantity which varies continuously is said to pass by (or 
through) a local maximum or minimum value when, in the 
course of its variation, the immediately preceding and following 
values are both smaller or greater, respectively, than the value re-
ferred to. An infinitely great value is therefore not a maximum 
value. 
One of the principal uses of the process of differentiating is to 
find out under what conditions the value of the thing differenti-
ated becomes a maximum or a minimum. This is often exceed-
ingly important in engineering and economic questions, where it 
is most desirable to know what conditions will make the cost of 
working a minimum, or will make the efficiency a maximum. 
Now, to begin with a concrete case, let us take the equation 
y =x2 - 4x+ 7 
By assigning a number of successive values to x, and finding 
the corresponding values of y, we can readily see that the equa-
tion represents a curve with a minimum. 
x 
0 
1 2 3 4 
5 
y 
7 4 3 4 7 
12 
These values are plotted in Fig. 26, which shows that y has ap-
parently a minimum value of 3, when x is made equal to 2. But 
are you sure that the minimum occurs at 2, and not at 2~ or at 1~? 
116 

Maxima and Minima 
117 
Of course it would be possible with any algebraic expression to 
work out a lot of values, and in this way arrive gradually at the 
particular value that may be a maximum or a minimum. 
Here is another example: Let 
y= 3x-x2 
Calculate a few values thus: 
x 
-1 0 
1 2 3 
Y -4 0 
2 2 0 
Plot these values as in Fig. 27. 
4 
5 
-4 -10 
It will be evident that there will be a maximum somewhere be-
tween x = 1 and x = 2; and the thing looks as if the maximum 
value of y ought to be about 2l Try some intermediate values. If 
x = It y = 2.1875; if x = 14, y = 2.25; if x = 1.6, y = 2.24. How 
can we be sure that 2.25 is the real maximum, or that it occurs 
exactly when x = 14? 
Now it may sound like juggling to be assured that there is a 
way by which one can arrive straight at a maximum (or mini-
mum) value without making a lot of preliminary trials or 
guesses. And that way depends on differentiating. Look back to 
Chapter X for the remarks about Figs. 15 and 16, and you will 
see that whenever a curve gets either to its maximum or to its 
y 
6 
I; 
4 
3 
--~--
I 
2 
: 
I 
I 
I 
I 
o 
1 
2 
3 
X 
FIG. 26. 
y 
4 
3 
FIG. 27. 

118 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
. . 
h . h 
h 
.. dy 
0 N 
h" 
h 
mmlmum elg t, at t at pomt Its -
= . 
OW t IS gIves us t e 
dx 
clue to the dodge that is wanted. When there is put before you 
an equation, and you want to find that value of x that will make 
its y a minimum (or a maximum), first differentiate it, and having 
done so, write its dy as equal to zero, and then solve for x. Put this 
dx 
particular value of x into the original equation, and you will then 
get the required value of y. This process is commonly called 
"equating to zero". 
To see how simply it works, take the example with which this 
chapter opens, namely, 
y=X2 -4x+ 7 
Differentiating, we get: 
dy 
-
=2x-4 
dx 
Now equate this to zero, thus: 
2x-4=O 
Solving this equation for x, we get: 
2x=4, x= 2 
Now, we know that the maximum (or minimum) will occur 
exactly when x = 2. 
Putting the value x = 2 into the original equation, we get 
y = 22 - (4 X 2) + 7 
=4-8+7=3 
Now look back at Fig. 26, and you will see that the minimum 
occurs when x = 2, and that this minimum of y = 3. 
Try the second example (Fig. 27), which is 
y = 3x-x2 

Differentiating, 
Equating to zero, 
whence 
Maxima and Minima 
dy - = 3 -2x 
dx 
3 - 2x = 0 
119 
and putting this value of x into the original equation, we find: 
y=41-(11 X11) 
y = 2~ 
This gives us exactly the information as to which the method of 
trying a lot of values left us uncertain. 
Now, before we go on to any further cases, we have two re-
dy 
marks to make. When you are told to equate -
to zero, you feel 
dx 
at first (that is if you have any wits of your own) a kind of resent-
dy 
ment, because you know that -
has all sorts of different values 
dx 
at different parts of the curve, according to whether it is sloping 
up or down. So, when you are suddenly told to write 
dy 
-=0 
dx 
you resent it, and feel inclined to say that it can't be true. Now 
you will have to understand the essential difference between "an 
equation", and "an equation of condition". Ordinarily you are 
dealing with equations that are true in themselves; but, on occa-
sions, of which the present are examples, you have to write down 
equations that are not necessarily true, but are only true if certain 
conditions are to be fulfilled; and you write tJllm down in order, 
by solving them, to find the conditions which make them true. 
Now we want to find the particular value that x has when the 
curve is neither sloping up nor sloping down, that is, at the par-

120 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
ticular place where dy = O. So, writing dy = 0 does not mean that 
dx 
dx 
it always is = 0; but you write it down as a condition in order to 
see how much x will come out if dy is to be zero. 
dx 
The second remark is one which (if you have any wits of your 
own) you will probably have already made: namely, that this 
much-belauded process of equating to zero entirely fails to tell 
you whether the x that you thereby find is going to give you a 
maximum value of y or a minimum value of y. Quite so. It does not 
of itself discriminate; it finds for you the right value of x but 
leaves you to find out for yourselves whether the corresponding y 
is a maximum or a minimum. Of course, if you have plotted the 
curve, you know already which it will be. 
For instance, take the equation: 
1 
y=4x+ -
x 
Without stopping to think what curve it corresponds to, differ-
entiate it, and equate to zero: 
dy 
2 
1 
-=4-x- =4--=0 
dx 
x 2 
whence 
x=~ or 
x=-~ 
and, inserting these values, 
y =4 or 
y =-4 
Each will be either a maximum or else a minimum. But which? 
You will hereafter be told a way, depending upon a second differ-
entiation (see Chap. XII). But at present it is enough if you will 
simply try two other values of x differing a little from the one 
found, one larger and one smaller, and see whether with these al-
tered values the corresponding values of yare less or greater than 
that already found. 

Maxima and Minima 
121 
Try another simple problem in maxima and minima. Suppose 
you were asked to divide any number into two parts, such that 
the product was a maximum? How would you set about it if you 
did not know the trick of equating to zero? I suppose you could 
worry it out by the rule of try, try, try again. Let 60 be the num-
ber. You can try cutting it into two parts, and multiplying them 
together. Thus, 50 times 10 is 500; 52 times 8 is 416; 40 times 
20 is 800; 45 times 15 is 675; 30 times 30 is 900. This looks like 
a maXimum: try varying it. 31 times 29 is 899, which is not so 
good; and 32 times 28 is 896, which is worse. So it seems that 
the biggest product will be got by dividing into two halves. 
Now see what the calculus tells you. Let the number to be cut 
into two parts be called n. Then if x is one part, the other will be 
n - x, and the product will be x(n - x) or nx - Xl. So we write 
y = nx - Xl. Now differentiate and equate to zero; 
Solving for x, we get 
dy 
-
=n- 2x=0 
dx 
n -=x 
2 -
So now we know that whatever number n may be, we must divide 
it into two equal parts if the product of the parts is to be a maxi-
mum; and the value of that maximum product will always 
be = ~nl. 
This is a very useful rule, and applies to any number of factors, 
so that if m + n + p = a constant number, m X n X p is a maximum 
when m=n=p. 
Test Case. 
Let us at once apply our knowledge to a case that we can test. 
Let 
and let us find whether this function has a maximum or mini-
mum; and if so, test whether it is a maximum or a minimum. 
Differentiating, we get 
dy - = 2x-l 
dx 

122 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Equating to zero, we get 
whence 
or 
2x-1 =0 
2x= 1 
x=t 
That is to say, when x is made = t, the corresponding value of 
y will be either a maximum or a minimum. Accordingly, putting 
x = t in the original equation, we get 
or 
y=0)2 -t 
y=-i 
Is this a maximum or a minimum? To test it, try putting x a 
little bigger than t-say, make x = 0.6. Then 
y = (0.6)2 - 0.6 = 0.36 - 0.6 = -0.24 
Also try a value of x a little smaller than t-say, x = OA. 
Then 
y = (OAf - 0.4 = 0.16 - OA = -0.24 
Both values are larger than -0.25, showing that y = -0.25 is a 
minimum. 
Plot the curve for yourself, and verify the calculation. 
Further Examples. 
A most interesting example is afforded by a curve that has both 
a maximum and a minimum. Its equation is: 
1 3 
2 
Y = 3X 
- 2x + 3x + 1 
Now 
dy 
2 
-=x -4x+3 
dx 
Equating to zero, we get the quadratic, 
x 2 - 4x+ 3 = 0 
and solving the quadratic gives us two roots, viz. 
{x= 3 
x=1 

Maxima and Minima 
123 
Now, when x = 3, y = 1; and when x = 1, Y = 2t. The first of 
these is a minimum, the second a maximum. 1 
The curve itself may be plotted (as in Fig. 28) from the values 
calculated, as below, from the original equation. 
x 
-1 
0 
1 2 3 4 5 
6 
y -4t 1 2t 
l-f 3 
1 2t 
7~ 19 
A further exercise in maxima and minima is afforded by the 
following example: 
The equation of a circle of radius r, having its center C at the 
point whose coordinates are x = a, y = b, as depicted in Fig. 29, is: 
(y - b f + (x - a)2 = r2 
This may be transformed into 
y = V'-r2---(x---a)-2 + b 
(where the square root may be either positive or negative). 
1. The maximum point on the curve in Figure 28 is called a "local" maxi-
mum because the curve obviously has higher points later on. Similarly, its 
minimum point is a "local" minimum because there are lower points earlier 
on the curve. If maximum and minimum points are the highest and lowest 
points on a curve, as in Figures 26 and 27, they are called "absolute" 
maxima and minima. In Figure 28 the curve has no absolute maximum or 
minimum points because it goes to infinity at both ends. 
In Figure 28 the point on the curve at x = 2 is called an "inflection" 
point. This is a point at which the curve is concave upward on one side and 
concave downward on the other. Put another way, it is the point at which 
a tangent to the line, as you move left to right, stops rotating in one direc-
tion and starts to rotate the other way. When a curve's second derivative is 
positive, the curve is concave upward (like a smile), and when the second 
derivative is negative, the curve is concave downward (like a frown). Cal-
culus texts often distinguish the two curves by saying that one "holds wa-
ter" and the other does not. 
d 
Sometimes a curve has an inflection point at a point where .2 = O. In 
dx 
this case, the point is neither a maximum or minimum. For example, this 
is true for y = x 3 at x = O. So after we equate the derivative to zero, we need 
to check points on both sides of x to determine if we've found a maximum, 
a minimum, or neither.-M.G. 

124 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
y 
x 
FIG. 28. 
FIG. 29. 
Now we know beforehand, by mere inspection of the figure, 
that when x = a, y will be either at its maximum value, b + r, or 
else at its minimum value, b - r. But let us not take advantage of 
this knowledge; let us set about finding what value of x will 
make y a maximum or a minimum, by the process of differenti-
ating and equating to zero. 
dy 
1 
1 
- = -
x (2a - 2x) 
dx 
2 V r2 - (x - a)2 
which reduces to 
dy = 
a-x 
dx 
Vr2 _(x-a)2 
Then the condition for y being maximum or minimum is: 

Maxima and Minima 
125 
Since no value whatever of x will make the denominator infi-
nite, the only condition to give zero is 
x=a 
Inserting this value in the original equation for the circle, we 
find 
y=W+b 
and as the root of y2 is either +r or -1", we have two resulting val-
ues of y, 
{ y=b+y 
y=b-y 
The first of these is the maximum, at the top; the second the 
minimum, at the bottom. 
If the curve is such that there is no place that is a maximum or 
minimum, the process of equating to zero will yield an impos-
sible result. For instance: 
Let 
Then 
y =ax3 +bx+c 
dy 
2 
- = 3ax +b 
dx 
-b 
Equating this to zero, we get 3ax2 + b = 0, x 2 = -, and 
x = N, which is impossible, supposing a and b to ~:ve the 
\j~ 
same sign. 
Therefore y has no maximum nor minimum. 
A few more worked examples will enable you to thoroughly 
master this most interesting and useful application of the calcu-
lus. 2 
(1) What are the sides of the rectangle of maximum area in-
scribed in a circle of radius R? 
2. This is an understatement. Finding extrema (maxima and minima) val-
ues of a function is one of the most beautiful and useful aspects of differ-
ential calculus. Simply equate a derivative to zero and solve for x! It seems 
to work like magid-M.G. 

126 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
If one side be called x, 
the other side = Y(diagonal)2 - x 2 ; 
and as the diagonal of the rectangle is necessarily a diameter of 
the circumscribing circle, the other side = Y 4R2 - x2. 
Then, area of rectangle S = x Y 4R 2 - x 2 , 
dS = x X d(Y 4R 2 - x2) + Y 4R 2 _ x2 X d(x) 
dx 
dx 
dx 
If you have forgotten how to differentiate Y 4R 2 - x 2 , here is 
2 
2 
... / 
dy 
dw 
a hint: write w = 4R - x and y = V w, and seek -
and -; 
dw 
dx 
fight it out, and only if you can't get on refer to Chapter IX. 
You will get 
For maximum or minimum we must have 
that is, 4R 2 - 2X2 = 0 and x = RY2. 
The other side = Y 4R2 - 2R2 = RY2; the two sides are 
equal; the figure is a square the side of which is equal to the di-
agonal of the square constructed on the radius. In this case it is, 
of course, a maximum with which we are dealing. 
(2) What is the radius of the opening of a conical vessel the 
sloping side of which has a length I when the capacity of the ves-
sel is greatest? 
If R be the radius and H the corresponding height, 
H=YP-R 2 
H 
YP-R 2 
Volume V= 'TrR2 X - = 'TrR2 X ----
3 
3 

Maxima and Minima 
127 
Proceeding as in the previous problem, we get 
dV 
2 
R 
27T'R "' / 2 
2 
- = 7rR 
X -
+ --
V l - R 
dR 
3YP _R2 
3 
27T'R(P - R 2) -
7T'R 3 
= 
=0 
3YP-R 2 
for maximum or minimum. 
Or, 27T'R(P - R2) - 7T'R 3 = 0, and R = l\li, for a maximum, 
obviously. 
(3) Find the maxima and minima of the function 
x 
4-x 
y=--+--
4-x 
x 
We get 
dy 
(4-x)-(-x) -x-(4-x) 
-= 
+ 
=0 
dx 
(4 - X)2 
x2 
for maximum or minimum; or 
4 
4 
----::- - - = 0 
and 
x = 2 
(4-X)2 
x2 
There is only one value, hence only one maximum or minimum. 
For x=2 
y=2 
for 
x= 1.5 
y = 2.27 
for 
x= 2.5 
y = 2.27 
it is therefore a minimum. (It is instructive to plot the graph of 
the function.) 
(4) Find the maxima and minima of the function 
y=~+~ 
(It will be found instructive to plot the graph.) 
Differentiating gives at once (see example No.1, Chapter IX). 
dy = 
1 
dx 
2~ 
for maximum or minimum. 
1 
---=0 
2~ 

128 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Hence ~ 
= ~ 
and x = 0, the only solution 
Forx=O, 
y=2. 
For x = ±0.5, 
y = 1.932, so this is a maximum. 
(5) Find the maxima and minima of the function 
x 2 - 5 
y=--
2x-4 
We have 
dy 
(2x - 4) X 2x - (x2 - 5)2 
-= 
=0 
dx 
(2x- 4)2 
for maximum or minimum; or 
2X2 -8x+ 10 
-----=0 
(2x - 4)2 
or x 2 - 4x + 5 = 0; which has solutions 
x=2±V-1 
These being imaginary, there is no real value of x for which 
dy ° 
h 
h··h· 
.. 
-
= ; ence t ere IS nelt er maxImum nor mIfl1mum. 
dx 
(6) Find the maxima and minima of the function 
(y _ X 2)2 = x 5 
This may be written y = x 2 ± x~. 
dy 
2+5
1 Or. 
.. 
-
= 
X _ lX' = 
lor maxImum or m1flImUm; 
dx 
that is? x{2 ± ~x~) = 0, which is satisfied for x = 0, and for 
2 ± 1x "i = 0, that is for x =~. So there are two solutions. 
Taking first x = 0. If x = -0.5, y = 0.25 ± \7'_(.5)5, and if 
x = +0.5, y = 0.25 ± ~. 
On one side y is imaginary; that is, 
there is no value of y that can be represented by a graph; the 

Maxima and Minima 
latter is therefore entirely on the 
right side of the axis of y (see 
y 
Fig. 30). 
0.3 
On plotting the graph it will 
be found that the curve goes to 
the origin, as if there were a 0.2 
minimum there; but instead of 
continuing beyond, as it should 
do for a minimum, it retraces its 0.1 
steps (forming a cusp). There is 
129 
no 
mmlmum, 
therefore, 
al-
though the condition for a mini-
mum 
IS 
satisfied, 
namely 
~-+--~--+-~--~---x 
o 0.2 
dy -- = O. It is necessary therefore 
dx 
FIG. 30. 
always to check by taking one value on either side.3 
Now, if we take x = ¥S = 0.64. If x = 0.64, y = 0.7373 and 
y = 0.0819; if x = 0.6, y becomes 0.6389 and 0.0811; and if 
x= 0.7, y becomes 0.9000 and 0.0800. 
This shows that there are two branches of the curve; the upper 
one does not pass through a maximum, but the lower one does. 
[At this point Thompson introduces a problem that has noth-
ing to do with extrema, but I have let it remain. Note also that 
problem 10 of the exercises is also out of place for the same rea-
son.-M.G.J 
(7) A cylinder whose height is twice the radius of the base is 
increasing in volume, so that all its parts keep always in the same 
proportion to each other; that is, at any instant, the cylinder is 
similar to the original cylinder. When the radius of the base is r 
inches, the surface area is increasing at the rate of 20 square inches 
per second; at what rate per second is its volume then increasing? 
Area = S = 2( 7Tr2) + 27Tr X 2r = 67Tr2 
Volume = V = 7Tr2 X 2r = 27Tr3 
3. Today's terminology broadens the meaning of extrema, allowing local 
extrema at cusps, corners, and endpoints of intervals in a function's 
domain.-M.G. 

130 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
dS 
dr 
- = 127Tr- = 20; 
dt 
dt 
dr 
20 
----
dt 
127Tr 
dV 
2dr 
- = 67Tr -; and 
dt 
dt 
dV 
2 
20 
- = 67Tr X -- = lOr 
dt 
127Tr 
The volume changes at the rate of lOr cubic inches per second. 
Make other examples for yourself. There are few subjects which 
offer such a wealth for interesting examples. 
EXERCISES IX 
(1) What values of x will make y a maximum and a minimum, 
x 2 
ify= --? 
x+1 
(2) What value of x will make y a maximum in the equation 
x 
y = 2 
2? 
a +x 
(3) A line of length p is to be cut up into 4 parts and put to-
gether as a rectangle. Show that the area of the rectangle will be 
a maximum if each of its sides is equal to iP. 
(4) A piece of string 30 inches long has its two ends joined to-
gether and is stretched by 3 pegs so as to form a triangle. What 
is the largest triangular area that can be enclosed by the string? 
(5) Plot the curve corresponding to the equation 
10 
10 
y=-+--
x 
8-x 
also find dy , and deduce the value of x that will make y a mini-
dx 
mum; and find that minimum value of y. 
(6) If y = x 5 - 5x, find what values of x will make y a maxi-
mum or a minimum. 

Maxima and Minima 
131 
(7) What is the smallest square that can be placed in a given 
square so each corner of the small square touches a side of the 
larger square? 
(8) Inscribe in a given cone, the height of which is equal to the 
radius of the base, a cylinder (a) whose volume is a maximum; (b) 
whose lateral area is a maximum; (c) whose total area is a maxi-
mum. 
(9) Inscribe in a sphere, a cylinder (a) whose volume is a maxi-
mum; (b) whose lateral area is a maximum; (c) whose total area is 
a maximum. 
(10) A spherical balloon is increasing in volume. If, when its 
radius is r feet, its volume is increasing at the rate of 4 cubic feet 
per second, at what rate is its surface then increasing? 
(11) Inscribe in a given sphere a cone whose volume is a maxi-
mum. 

Chapter XII 
CURVATURE OF CURVES 
Returning to the process of successive differentiation, it may be 
asked: Why does anybody want to differentiate twice over? We 
know that when the variable quantities are space and time, by 
differentiating twice over we· get the acceleration of a moving 
body, and that in the geometrical interpretation, as applied to 
dy 
d2y 
curves, -
means the slope of the curve. But what can -2 mean 
~ 
~ 
in this case? Clearly it means the rate (per unit of length x) at 
which the slope is changing-in brief, it is an indication of the 
manner in which the slope of the portion of curve considered varies, that 
is, whether the slope of the curve increases or decreases when x 
increases, or, in other words, whether the curve curves up or 
down towards the right. 
Suppose a slope constant, as in Fig. 3l. 
dy 
Here, -
is of constant value. 
dx 
Suppose, however, a case in which, like Fig. 32, the slope itself 
y 
o 
132 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
,- - ~--.. --I--... ----
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
FIG. 31. 
x 
y 
o 
I 
I 
I 
I 
a---=~ __ ~ __ ~ __ L. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I x 
FIG. 32. 

Curvature of Curves 
133 
d( dY) 
dx 
y 
is getting greater upwards; then 
dx 
d2 
h
· 
Y 
·11 b 
.. 
t at IS, -2' WI 
e posItIve. 
dx 
-4'-':~..L-"":"'~--'~)( 
If the slope is becoming less as you go 
o 
to the right (as in Fig. 14), or as in Fig. 33, 
FIG. 33. 
h 
h 
h h 
be 
. 
t en, even t oug t e curve may 
gomg 
upward, since the change is such as to 
d2 
diminish its slope, its~ will be negative. 
dx 
It is now time to initiate you into -another secret-how to tell 
whether the result that you get by "equating to zero" is a maxi-
mum or a minimum. The trick is this: After you have differen-
tiated (so as to get the expression which you equate to zero), you 
then differentiate a second time and look whether the result of 
d2 
the second differentiation is positive or negative. If ~ 
comes out 
d." 
positive, then you know that the value of y which you got was a 
d2 
minimum; but if ~ 
comes out negative, then the value of y which 
dx 
you got must be a maximum. That's the rule. 
The reason of it ought to be quite evident. Think of any curve 
that has a minimum point in it, like Fig. 15, or like Fig. 34, 
where the point of minimum y is marked M, and the curve is con-
cave upward. To the left of M the slope is downward, that is, 
negative, and is getting less negative. 
To the right of M the slope has become 
Y 
upward, and is getting more and more 
upward. Clearly the change of slope as 
the curve passes through M is such that 
d2 
~ 
is positive, for its operation, as x in-
dx 
creases toward the right, is to convert a 0 
downward slope into an upward one. 
~ 
" l.r"';'" 
I 
x 
FIG. 34. 

134 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Similarly, consider any curve that has 
a maximum point in it, like Fig. 16, 
or like Fig. 35, where the curve is con-
cave upward, and the maximum point is 
marked M. In this case, as the curve 
passes through M from left to right, its 
upward slope is converted into a down-
ward or negative slope, so that in this 
y 
M 
d2 
h "1 
fh 1 
" 
Y. 
case t e s ope 0 t e s ope dx2 1S nega-
FIG. 35. 
five. 
Go back now to the examples of the last chapter and verify in 
this way the conclusions arrived at as to whether in any particular 
case there is a maximum or a minimum. You will find below a 
few worked-out examples. 
(1) Find the maximum or minimum of 
(a) y = 4x2 - 9x - 6; 
(b) y = 6 + 9x - 4x2 
and ascertain if it be a maximum or a minimum in each case. 
(a) 
(b) 
dy 
1 
- = 8x - 9 = 0; x = Is; and y = -11.0625 
dx 
d2 
~ 
= 8; it is +; hence it is a minimum. 
dx 
dy 
1 
- = 9 - 8x = 0; x = Is; and y = +11.0625 
dx 
d2 y 
8·· 
h 
.. 
. 
-2 = -
; 1t IS -; ence It IS a maxunum. 
dx 
(2) Find the maxima and minima of the function 
y = x 3 - 3x + 16 
dy - = 3x2 - 3 = 0; x 2 = 1; and x = ±1 
dx 

Curvature of Curves 
d2 
-.--.2'.. = 6x· for x = 1· it is + 
dx 2
' 
, 
, 
135 
hence x = 1 corresponds to a minimumy = 14. For x = -1 it is-; 
hence x = -1 corresponds to a maximum y = + 18. 
x-I 
(3) Find the maxima and minima of y = -2--. 
X + 2 
dy = (x2 + 2) X 1 - (x - 1) X 2x _ 2x - x2 + 2 _ 0 
dx 
(x2 + 2)2 
-
(x2 + 2)2 -
or x2 - 2x - 2 = 0, whose solutions are x = +2.73 and x = -0.73. 
d2y 
(x2 + 2)2(2 - 2x) - (2x - x2 + 2)(4x3 + 8x) 
-=-
~2 
~2+2t 
2x5 - 6x4 - 8x 3 - 8x2 - 24x + 8 
= 
(x2 + 2)4 
The denominator is always positive, so it is sufficient to ascer-
tain the sign of the numerator. 
If we put x = 2.73, the numerator is negative; the maximum, 
y = 0.183. 
If we put x = -0.73, the numerator is positive; the minimum, 
y =-0.683. 
(4) The expense C of handling the products of a certain fac-
tory varies with the weekly output P according to the relation 
b 
C = aP + -- + d, where a, b, c, d are positive constants. For 
c+P 
what output will the expense be least? 
dC 
b 
- = a -
= 0 for maximum or minimum; hence 
dP 
(c+ p)2 
a = 
band P = ± ff -c 
(c + p)2 
-V ~ 
As the output cannot be negative, P = + f: -c. 
d2C 
b(2c + 2P) 
-
= +--'---..,:-'-
dP2 
(c + p)4 
Now 

136 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
which is positive for all the values of P; hence P = + ~ 
- c 
corresponds to a minimum. 
(5) The total cost per hour C of lighting a building with N 
lamps of a certain kind is 
( C1 
EPCe) 
C=N -+--
t 
1000 
where 
E is the commercial efficiency (watts per candle), 
P is the candle power of each lamp, 
t is the average life of each lamp in hours, 
C, = cost of renewal in cents per hour of use, 
Ce = cost of energy per 1000 watts per hour. 
Moreover, the relation connecting the average life of a lamp 
with the commercial efficiency at which it is run is approxi-
mately t = mEn, where m and n are constants depending on the 
kind of lamp. 
Find the commercial efficiency for which the total cost of light-
ing will be least. 
We have 
C = N(C1E- n + PCe E) 
m 
1000 
dC =N( PCe _ nC'E-<n+l») =0 
dE 
1000 
m 
for maximum or minimum. 
En+l = 1000 X nCt 
and 
mPCe 
This is clearly for minimum, since 
1000 X nCt 
mPCe 
d2C =N[<n+ 1)nc'E-(n+2)] 
dE 2 
m 
which is positive for a positive value of E. 

Curvature of Curves 
137 
For a particular type of 16 candle-power lamps, C, = 17 cents, 
Ce = 5 cents; and it was found that m = 10 and n = 3.6. 
\/1000 X 3.6 X 17 
E = 
. 
= 2.6 watts per candle power. 
lO X 16 X 5 
. 
EXERCISES X 
You are advised to plot the graph of any numerical example. 
(1) Find the maxima and minima of 
y = x 3 + x 2 - 10x + 8 
b 
2 
~ 
~ 
(2) Given y = - x - cx , find expressions for -, and for -2; 
a 
dx 
dx 
also find the value of x which makes y a maximum or a mini-
mum, and show whether it is maximum or minimum. Assume 
c> O. 
(3) Find how many maxima and how many minima there are 
in the curve, the equation to which is 
x 2 
x4 
y=I--+-
2 
24 
and how many in that of which the equation is 
x 2 
x4 
x 6 
y=I--+---
2 
24 
720 
(4) Find the maxima and minima of 
5 
y= 2x+ 1 +-
x 2 
(5) Find the maxima and minima of 
3 
y = x 2 + X + 1 
(6) Find the maxima and minima of 
5x 
y = 2 + x 2 

138 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
(7) Find the maxima and minima of 
3x 
x 
y=--+-+5 
X 2 - 3 
2 
(8) Divide a number N into two parts in such a way that three 
times the square of one part plus twice the square of the other 
part shall be a minimum. 
(9) The efficiency u of an electric generator at different values 
of output x is expressed by the general equation: 
x 
u=-----
a + hx + cx2 
where a is a constant depending chiefly on the energy losses in 
the iron and c a constant depending chiefly on the resistance of 
the copper parts. Find an expression for that value of the output 
at which the efficiency will be a maximum. 
(10) Suppose it to be known that consumption of coal by a cer-
tain steamer may be represented by the formula 
y = 0.3 + 0.001v3 
where y is the number of tons of coal burned per hout and v is the 
speed expressed in nautical miles per hour. The cost of wages, in-
terest on capital, and depreciation of that ship are together equal, 
per hour, to the cost of 1 ton of coal. What speed will make the 
total cost of a voyage of 1000 nautical miles a minimum? And, 
if coal costs 10 dollars per ton, what will that minimum cost of 
the voyage amount to? 
(11) Find the maxima and minima of 
y=±:: Yx(10-x) 
6 
(12) Find the maxima and minima of 
y = 4x3 - x 2 - 2x + 1 

Chapter XIII 
PARTIAL FRACTIONS AND 
INVERSE FUNCTIONS 
We have seen that when we differentiate a fraction we have to 
perform a rather complicated operation; and, if the fraction is not 
itself a simple one, the result is bound to be a complicated ex-
pression. If we could split the fraction into two or more simpler 
fractions such that their sum is equivalent to the original frac-
tion, we could then proceed by differentiating each of these sim-
pler expressions. And the result of differentiating would be the 
sum of two (or more) derivatives, each one of which is relatively 
simple; while the final expression, though of course it will be the 
same as that which could be obtained without resorting to this 
dodge, is thus obtained with much less effort and appears in a 
simplified form. 
Let us see how to reach this result. Try first the job of adding 
two fractions together to form a resultant fraction. Take, for ex-
1 
2 
ample, the two fractions -- and --. Every schoolboy can 
x+l 
x-I 
3x+ 1 
add these together and find their sum to be -2 --. And in the 
x -1 
same way he can add together three or more fractions. Now this 
process can certainly be reversed: that is to say that, if this last ex-
pression were given, it is certain that it can somehow be split 
back again into its original components or partial fractions. Only 
we do not know in every case that may be presented to us how we 
can so split it. In order to find this out we shall consider a simple 
case at first. But it is important to bear in mind that all which 
follows applies only to what are called "proper" algebraic frac-
139 

140 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
tions, meaning fractions like the above, which have the numera-
tor of a lesser degree than the denominator; that is, those in which 
the highest exponent of x is less in the numerator than in the 
denominator. If we have to deal with such an expression as 
x 2 + 2 
-2--' we can simplify it by division, since it is equivalent to 
x -1 
1 + +; and + is a proper algebraic fraction to which the 
x -1 
x-I 
operation of splitting into partial fractions can be applied, as ex-
plained hereafter. 
Case I. 
If we perform many additions of two or more fractions 
the denominators of which contain only terms in x, and no terms 
in x 2 , x 3 , or any other powers of x, we always find that the denomi-
nator of the final resulting fraction is the product of the denominators of 
the fractions which were added to form the result. It follows that 
by factorizing the denominator of this final fraction, we can find 
everyone of the denominators of the partial fractions of which we 
are in search. 
3x+ 1 
Suppose we wish to go back from -2-- to the components 
x -1 
1 
2 
which we know are -- and --. If we did not know what 
x+l 
x-I 
those components were we can still prepare the way by writing: 
3x+ 1 
3x+ 1 
-- - ----- = -- +--
x 2 -
1 
(x + l)(x - 1) 
x + 1 x-I 
leaving blank the places for the numerators until we know what 
to put there. We always may assume the sign between the partial 
fractions to be plus, since, if it be minus, we shall simply find the 
corresponding numerator to be negative. Now, since the partial 
fractions are proper fractions, the numerators are mere numbers 
without x at all, and we can call them A, B, C ... as we please. 
So, in this case, we have: 
3x+ 1 
A 
B 
--=--+--
x 2 -
I 
x + 1 x-I 

Partial Fractions and Inverse Functions 
141 
If, now, we perform the addition of these two partial frac-
A(x-1)+B(x+ 1) 
. 
tions, we get 
; and this must be equal to 
(x + 1)(x - 1) 
3x+ 1 
-----. And, as the denominators in these two expressions 
(x + l)(x - 1) 
are the same, the numerators must be equal, giving us: 
3x+ 1 =A(x-l)+B(x+ 1) 
Now, this is an equation with two unknown quantities, and it 
would seem that we need another equation before we can solve 
them and find A and B. But there is another way out of this dif-
ficulty. The equation must be true for all values of x; therefore it 
must be true for such values of x as will cause x-I and x + 1 to 
become zero, that is for x = 1 and for x = -1 respectively. If we 
make x = 1, we get 4 = (A X 0) + (B X 2), so that B = 2; and if we 
make x = -1, we get 
-2 = (A X -2) + (B X 0) 
so that A = 1. Replacing the A and B of the partial fractions by 
1 
2 
these new values, we find them to become -- and --; and 
the thing is done. 
x + 1 
x-I 
As a further example, let us take the fraction 
4x2 + 2x - 14 
x 3 + 3X2 -x - 3 
The denominator becomes zero when x is given the value 1; 
hence x-I is a factor of it, and obviously then the other factor 
will be x2 + 4x + 3; and this can again be decomposed into 
(x + 1)(x + 3). So we may write the fraction thus: 
4x2 + 2x - 14 
ABC 
------ = -- + -- +--
x 3 + 3X2 - X - 3 
x + 1 x-I 
x + 3 
making three partial factors. 
Proceeding as before, we find 
4x2 + 2x - 14 = A(x - 1)(x + 3) + B(x + 1Xx + 3) 
+ C(x + l)(x - 1) 

142 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Now, if we make x = 1, we get: 
-8 = (A X 0) + B(2 X 4) + (C X 0); that is, B = -1 
If x = -1, we get 
-12 = A(-2 X 2) + (B X 0) + (C X 0); whence A = 3. 
If x = -3, we get: 
16 = (A X 0) + (B X 0) + C(-2 X -4); whence C = 2. 
So then the partial fractions are: 
312 
-----+--
x+l 
x-I 
x+3 
which is far easier to differentiate with respect to x than the com-
plicated expression from which it is derived. 
Case II. 
If some of the factors of the denominator contain terms 
in x 2 , and are not conveniently put into factors, then the corre-
sponding numerator may contain a term in x, as well as a simple 
number, and hence it becomes necessary to represent this un-
known numerator not by the symbol A but by Ax + B; the rest 
of the calculation being made as before. 
_x2 _ 3 
Try, for instance: -2-----
(x + l)(x + 1) 
_x2 _ 3 
Ax+B 
C 
--:---+--
(x 2 + l)(x + 1) 
x 2 + 1 
x + 1 
_x2 - 3 = (Ax + B)(x + 1) + C(x 2 + 1) 
Putting x = -1, we get -4 = C X 2; and C =-2 
hence 
and 
_x2 - 3 = (Ax + B)(x + 1) - 2X2 - 2 
x 2 -
1 ::;: Ax(x + 1) + B(x + 1) 
Putting x = 0, we get -1 = B; 
hence 
x 2 -1 = Ax(x + 1)-x-1; or 
x 2 +x=Ax(x+ 1) 
and 
x + 1 =A(x + 1) 

Partial Fractions and Inverse Functions 
so that A = I, and the partial. fractions are: 
x-I 
2 
x 2 + I 
x + 1 
Take as another example the fraction 
x 3 - 2 
We get 
x 3 - 2 
Ax + B 
Cx + D 
------ = 
+ ---
(x 2 + 1)(x2 + 2) 
x 2 + 1 
x 2 + 2 
143 
(Ax + B)(x2 + 2) + (Cx + D)(x2 + 1) 
= 
In this case the determination of A, B, C, D is not so easy. It 
will be simpler to proceed as follows: Since the given fraction and 
the fraction found by adding the partial fractions are equal, and 
have identical denominators, the numerators must also be identi-
cally the same. In such a case, and for such algebraical expressions 
as those with which we are dealing here, the coefficients of the same 
powers of x are equal and of same sign. 
Hence, since 
x 3 - 2 = (Ax + B)(x 2 + 2) + (Cx + D)(x2 + 1) 
= (A + C)x3 + (B + D)x2 + (2A + C)x + 2B + D 
we have 1 = A + C; 0 = B + D (the coefficient of x 2 in the left ex-
pression being zero); 0 = 2A + C; and -2 = 2B + D. Here are 
four equations, from which we readily obtain A = -1; B = -2; 
2(x + 1) 
C = 2; D = 2; so that the partial fractions are -2--
x+2 
x +2 
-2--. This method can always be used; but the method shown 
x + 1 
first will be found the quickest in the case of factors in x only. 
Case III. 
When among the factors of the denominator there are 
some which are raised to some power, one must allow for the pos-
sible existence of partial fractions having for denominator the 

144 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
several powers of that factor up to the highest. For instance, in 
3X2 - 2x+ 1 
splitting the fraction 
2 
we must allow for the pos-
(x + 1) (x - 2) 
sible existence of a denominator x + 1 as well as (x + 1)2 and 
x-2. 
It may be thought, however, that, since the numerator of the 
fraction the denominator of which is (x + 1)2 may contain terms 
in x, we must allow for this in writing Ax + B for its numerator, 
so that 
3X2 - 2x + 1 
Ax + BCD 
-----= 
+--+--
(x + 1)2(X - 2) 
(x + 1)2 
X + 1 
x - 2 
If, however, we try to find A, B, C and D in this case, we fail, be-
cause we get four unknowns; and we have only three relations 
connecting them, yet 
3X2 - 2x + 1 
x - 1 
1 
1 
-----= 
+--+--
(x+ 1)2(X- 2) 
(x+ 1)2 
x+ 1 
x- 2 
But if we write 
3X2 - 2x + 1 
ABC 
-----= 
+--+--
(x + 1)2(X - 2) 
(x + 1)2 
X + 1 
x - 2 
we get 
3X2 - 2x + 1 = A(x - 2) + B(x + l)(x - 2) + C(x + 1)2. 
For x=-l; 6=-3A, orA=-2 
For 
x = 2; 
9 = 9C, 
or C = 1 
For. x = 0; 
1 =-2A - 2B+C 
Putting in the values of A and C: 
1 = 4 - 2B + 1, from which B = 2 
Hence the partial fractions are: 
221 
---
+--
x + 1 
(x + 1)2 
X - 2 

Partial Fractions and Inverse Functions 
145 
1 
x- 1 
1 
instead of -- + 
+ -- stated above as being the 
x + 1 
(x + 1)2 
X - 2 
3X2 - 2x+ 1 
fractions from which 
2 
was obtained. The mystery 
(x + 1) (x - 2) 
x-I 
is cleared if we observe that 
2 can itself be split into the 
(x+ 1) 
1 
2 
two fractions -- -
2' so that the three fractions given 
x + 1 
(x + 1) 
are really equivalent to 
1 
1 
2 
122 
1 
--+---
+--=---
+--
x+ 1 
x+ 1 
(x+ 1)2 
x-2 
x+ 1 
(x+ 1)2 
x- 2 
which are the partial fractions obtained. 
We see that it is sufficient to allow for one numerical term in 
each numerator, and that we always get the ultimate partial frac-
tions. 
When there is a power of a factor of x 2 in the denominator, 
however, the corresponding numerators must be of the form 
Ax + B; for example, 
3x-1 
Ax+B 
Cx+D 
E 
2 
2 
= 
2 
2+ 
2 
+--
(2x - 1) (x + 1) 
(2x - 1) 
2x - 1 
x + 1 
which gives 
3x - 1 = (Ax + B)(x + 1) + (Cx + DXx + 1)(2x2 - 1) + E(2x2 - 1)2. 
For x = -1, this gives E = -4. Replacing, transposing, collect-
ing like terms, and dividing by x + 1, we get 
16x3 - 16x2 + 3 = 2Cx3 + 2Dx2 + x(A - C) + (B - D). 
Hence 2C = 16 and C = 8; 2D = -16 and D = -8; A - C = 0 
or A - 8 = 0 and A = 8; and finally, B - D = 3 or B = -5. So that 
we obtain as the partial fractions: 
8x - 5 
8(x - 1) 
4 
----:-+ 
---
(2x2 - 1)2 
2X2 - 1 
x + 1 

146 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
It is useful to check the results obtained. The simplest way is 
to replace x by a single value, say +1, both in the given expres-
sion and in the partial fractions obtained. 
Whenever the denominator contains but a power of a single 
factor, a very quick method is as follows: 
4x+ 1 
Taking, for example, 
3' let x + 1 = z; then x = z - 1. 
(x + 1) 
-
Replacing, we get 
4(z - 1) + 1 
4z - 3 
4 
3 
=--=--
The partial fractions are, therefore, 
4 
3 
(x+ 1)2 
(x+ 1)3 
Applying this to differentiation, let it be required to differen-
5 -4x 
tiate y = 
2 
; we have 
6x +7x-3 
dy 
(6x 2 +7x-3)x4+(5-4x)(12x+7) 
-=-
dx 
(6x 2 + 7x - 3)2 
24x2 - 60x - 23 
= 
If we split the given expression into 
we get, however, 
dy = 
dx 
1 
2 
3x - 1 
2x + 3 
3 
4 
----:-+----
(3x - 1)2 
(2x + 3)2 
which is really the same result as above split into partial frac-
tions. But the splitting, if done after differentiating, is more 
complicated, as will easily be seen. When we shall deal with the 

Partial Fractions and Inverse Functions 
147 
integration of such expressions, we shall find the splitting into par-
tial fractions a precious auxiliary. 
EXERCISES XI 
Split into partial fractions: 
3x+ 5 
3x-4 
(1) 
(2) 
(x - 3)(x + 4) 
(x - 1)(x - 2) 
3x+ 5 
(4) 
x+l 
(3) 
x2+x-12 
x2 -7x + 12 
x-S 
6 
x2 -13x+ 26 
(5) 
( ) 
(2x + 3)(3x - 2) 
(x - 2)(x - 3)(x - 4) 
x2 - 3x + 1 
5x2 + 7x + 1 
(7) 
(S) 
(x - 1)(x + 2)(x - 3) 
(2x + 1)(3x - 2)(3x + 1) 
x2 
x4 + 1 
(9) 
x 3 -1 
(10) 
x 3 + 1 
5x2 + 6x+4 
x 
(11) 
(x + 1)(x2 + X + 1) 
(12) 
(x - l)(x - 2)2 
x 
(14) 
x+3 
(13) 
(x2 - l)(x + 1) 
(x + 2)2(X - 1) 
3X2 + 2x+ 1 
(16) 5x2+Sx-12 
(15) (x+ 2)(x2 +x+ 1)2 
(x + 4)3 
7x2 + 9x - 1 
x2 
(17) 
Ox - 2)4 
(IS) 
(x3 - S)(x - 2) 
Derivative of an Inverse Function 
Consider the function y = 3x; it can be expressed in the form x = 
l; this latter form is called the inverse function to the one origi-
3 
nally given. 

148 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
dy 
y dx 
1 
Ify = 3x -
= 3' if x = -
-
= -
and we see that 
'dx' 
3' dy 
3' 
dy 
1 
dy 
dx 
-=-
or -x-=l 
dx 
dx 
dx 
dy 
dy 
C
'd 
4 2 dy 
8 
h' 
fu" 
onSI er y = x, - = x; t e Inverse 
nctlon IS 
dx 
1 
Y' 
x= -
and 
2 ' 
dx 
1 
1 
1 
-=--=---=-
dy 
4v) 
4 X 2x 
8x 
dy 
dx 
-X-=l 
dx 
dy 
Here again 
It can be shown that for all functions which can be put into the 
inverse form, one can always write 
dy 
dx 
-x-=l 
dx 
dy 
dy 
1 
or -=-
dx 
dx 
dy 
It follows that, being given a function, if it be easier to differ-
entiate the inverse function, this may be done, and the reciprocal 
of the derivative of the inverse function gives the derivative of the 
given function itself. 
As an example, suppose that we wish to differentiate 
y = ~. 
We have seen one way of doing this, by writing 
3 
dy 
du 
u = - - 1, and finding -
and -. This gives 
x 
du 
dx 
dy 
3 
-=------
dx 
2~ 
2x -V; - 1 

Partial Fractions and Inverse Functions 
149 
If we had forgotten how to proceed by this method, or wished 
to check our result by some other way of obtaining the derivative, 
or for any other reason we could not use the ordinary method, we 
could proceed as follows: The inverse function is x = ~. 
1 +y 
dx 
3 X 2y 
6y 
-=-
= 
dy 
(1 + l)2 
(1 + y2)2 
hence 
1+--1 
M
2 
dy = 2.. = _ (1 + y2l = _ 
x 
= 
dxdx 
6y 
~ 
6x 
-X-1 
dy 
1 
Let us take, as another example, y = ---
3 
2~ 
2x \j ~ - 1 
\0/0+5 
1 
The inverse function 0 = 3" - 5 or 0 = y -3 - 5, and 
y 
dO = _3y-4 = -3V'(0 + 5)4 
dy 
dy 
1 
It follows that - = -
... 31 
' as might have been found 
dO 
3 V (0+ 5)4 
otherwise. 
We shall find this dodge most useful later on; meanwhile you 
are advised to become familiar with it by verifying by its means 
the results obtained in Exercises I (Chapter IV), Nos. 5, 6, 7; Ex-
amples (Chapter IX), Nos. 1,2,4; and Exercises VI (Chapter IX), 
Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4. 
You will surely realize from this chapter and the preceding, that 
in many respects the calculus is an art rather than a science: an art 
only to be acquired, as all other arts are, by practice. Hence you 
should work many examples, and set yourself other examples, to 
see if you can work them out, until the various artifices become 
familiar by use. 

Chapter XIV 
ON TRUE COMPOUND 
INTEREST AND THE LAW OF 
ORGANIC GROWTH 
Let there be a quantity growing in such a way that the increment 
of its growth, during a given time, shall always be proportional 
to its own magnitude. This resembles the process of reckoning 
interest on money at some fixed rate; for the bigger the capital, 
the bigger the amount of interest on it in a given time. 
Now we must distinguish clearly between two cases, in our 
calculation, according as the calculation is made by what the 
arithmetic books call "simple interest", or by what they call 
"compound interest". For in the former case the capital remains 
fixed, while in the latter the interest is added to the capital, 
which therefore increases by successive additions. 
(1) At simple interest. Consider a concrete case. Let the capital at 
start be $100, and let the rate of interest be 10 percent per an-
num. Then the increment to the owner of the capital will be $10 
every year. Let him go on drawing his interest every year, and 
hoard it by putting it by in a stocking or locking it up in his safe. 
Then, if he goes on for 10 years, by the end of that time he will 
have received 10 increments of $10 each, or $100, making, with 
the original $100, a total of $200 in all. His property will have 
doubled itself in 10 years. If the rate of interest had been 5 per-
cent, he would have had to hoard for 20 years to double his prop-
erty. If it had been only 2 percent, he would have had to hoard for 
50 years. It is easy to see that if the value of the yearly interest is 
1 
- of the capital, he must go on hoarding for n years in order to 
n 
double his property. 
150 

On True Compound Interest and the Law of Organic Growth 
151 
Or, if Y be the original capital, and the yearly interest is l., 
then, at the end of n years, his property will be 
n 
y + nl. = 2y 
n 
(2) At compound interest. As before, let the owner begin with a 
capital of $100, earning interest at the rate of 10 percent per an-
num; but, instead of hoarding the interest, let it be added to the 
capital each year, so that the capital grows year by year. Then, at 
the end of one year, the capital will have grown to $110; and in 
the second year (still at 10%) this will earn $11 interest. He will 
start the third year with $121, and the interest on that will be 
$12.10; so that he starts the fourth year with $133.10, and so on. 
It is easy to work it out, and find that at the end of the ten years 
the total capital will have grown to more than $259. In fact, we 
see that at the end of each year, each dollar will have earned to of 
a dollar, and therefore, if this is always added on, each year mul-
tiplies the capital by ii; and if continued for ten years (which will 
multiply by this factor ten times over) the original capital will be 
multiplied by 2.59374. Let us put this into symbols. Pur Yo for 
1 
the original capital; - for the fraction added on at each of the n 
n 
operations; and Yn for the value of the capital at the end of the n[h 
operation. Then 
But this mode of reckoning compound interest once a year is 
really not quite fair; for even during the first year the $100 ought 
to have been growing. At the end of half a year it ought to have 
been at least $105, and it certainly would have been fairer had 
the interest for the second half of the year been calculated on 
$105. This would be equivalent to calling it 5 % per half-year; 
with 20 operations, therefore, at each of which the capital is mul-
tiplied by ~. If reckoned this way, by the end of ten years the 
capital would have grown to more than $265; for 
( 
1 )20 
1+20 
=2.653 

152 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
But, even so, the process is still not quite fair; for, by the end 
of the first month, there will be some interest earned; and a half-
yearly reckoning assumes that the capital remains stationary for 
six months at a time. Suppose we divided the year into 10 parts, 
and reckon a one percent interest for each tenth of the year. We 
now have 100 operations lasting over the ten years; or 
$ 
( 
1 )100 
Yn = 100 1 + 100 
which works out to $270.48. 
Even this is not final. Let the ten years be divided into 1000 
periods, each of 1~0 of a year; the interest being to percent for each 
such period; then 
( 
1 )1000 
Yn = $100 1 + 1000 
which works out to a little more than $271.69. 
Go even more minutely, and divide the ten years into 10,000 
parts, each 1O~0 of a year, with interest at 1~0 of 1 percent. Then 
- $100(1 
_1_)10,000 
Yn -
+ 10,000 
which amounts to about $271.81. 
Finally, it will be seen that what we are trying to find is in re-
ality the ultimate value of the expression (1 +;;)', which, as we 
see, is greater than 2; and which, as we take n larger and larger, 
grows closer and closer to a particular limiting value. However 
big you make n, the value of this expression grows nearer and 
nearer to the limit 
2.71828 ... , 
a number never to be forgotten. 1 
1. This number is transcendental-an irrational number that is not the 
root of any polynomial equation with integer coefficients. It was named e 
by Euler (1707-1783), a famous Swiss mathematician. He was the first to 
prove that e is the limit of (1 + lIx)X as x approaches infinity. 
Like all irrationals, the decimal expansion of e (2.71828 18284 
59045 ... ) never repeats. (The curious repetition of 1828 is entirely co-

On True Compound Interest and the Law of Organic Growth 
153 
u 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
J 
I 
-.-1-1- -:- ~-~- ~- ~ - ~- ~ 2 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
o 1 234 5 6 7 8 9 T 
FIG. 36. 
u 
: I 
I 
: 
I 
: I 
I l : : : IHtBI 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I II 
_ ... _L-I-~-.,.-r-... -r- of 
: 
: 
: 
I 
t 
I 
I 
I 
• II 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
• 
I 
• 
l 
t 
: 
I 
• 
I •• ' 
t 
• 
I 
• 
I 
•• I' 
I 
3466789T 
FIG. 37. 
Let us take geometrical illustrations of these things. In Fig. 36, 
OP stands for the original value. OT is the whole time during 
which the value is growing. It is divided into 10 periods, in each 
of which there is an equal step up. Here dy is a constant; and if 
dx 
each step up is fo of the original Op, then, by 10 such steps, the 
height is doubled. If we had taken 20 steps, each of half the 
height shown, at the end the height would still be just doubled. 
1 
Or n such steps, each of - of the original height Op, would suffice 
n 
to double the height. This is the case of simple interest. Here is 
1 growing till it becomes 2. 
In Fig. 37, we have the corresponding illustration of the geo-
metrical progression. Each of the successive ordinates is to be 
1 
n+1 
1 + -, that is, -- times as high as its predecessor. The steps 
n 
n 
1 
up are not equal, because each step up is now -
of the ordi-
n 
nate at that part of the curve. If we had literally 10 steps, with 
incidental.) Its best fractional approximation with integers less than 1,000 
is 878/323 = 2.71826 .... 
The number e is as ubiquitous as pi, turning up everywhere, and espe-
cially in probability theory. If you randomly select real numbers between 0 
and 1, and continue until their sum exceeds 1, the expected number of 
choices is e. See the chapter on e in my Unexpected Hanging and Other Math-
ematical Diversions (1969).-M.G. 

154 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
(1 + to) for the multiplying factor, the final total would be 
(1 + tofO or 2.594 times the original 1. But if only we take n 
1 
sufficiently large (and the corresponding -
sufficiently small), 
then the final value ( 1 + ;; ). to which un:ty will gtOW will be 
2.71828 .... 
e. 
To this mysterious number 2.7182818 ... , the mathemati-
cians have assigned the English letter e. All schoolboys know that 
the Greek letter 7T (called pi) stands for 3.141592 ... , but how 
many of them know that e stands for 2.71828 .... Yet it is an 
even more important number than 7T! 
What, then, is e? 
Suppose we were to let 1 grow at simple interest till it became 
2; then, if at the same nominal rate of interest, and for the same 
time, we were to let 1 grow at true compound interest, instead of 
simple, it would grow to the value e. 
This process of growing proportionately, at every instant, to 
the magnitude at that instant, some people call an exponential rate 
of growing. Unit exponential rate of growth is that rate which in 
unit time will cause 1 to grow to 2.718281. ... It might also 
be called the organic rate of growing: because it is characteristic of 
organic growth (in certain circumstances) that the increment of 
the organism in a given time is proportional to the magnitude of 
the organism itself. 
If we take 100 percent as the unit of rate, and any fixed period 
as the unit of time, then the result of letting 1 grow arithmetically 
at unit rate, for unit time, will be 2, while the result of letting 1 
grow exponentially at unit rate, for the same time, will be 
2.71828 .... 
A Little More About e. 
We have seen that we require to know 
what value is reached by the exptession (1 +;;)', when n be-
comes infinitely great. Arithmetically, here are tabulated a lot of 
values obtained by assuming n = 2; n = 5; n = 10; and so on, up 
to n = 10,000. 

On True Compound Interest and the Law a/Organic Growth 
155 
(1 +~y 
(1 +tr 
(l+ro)lO 
(1 + toyo 
= 2.25 
= 2.489 
= 2.594 
= 2.653 
(1 + l~O)lOO 
= 2.705 
(1 + l~YoOO 
= 2.7169 
(1 + lO.~)lO.OOO = 2.7181 
It is, however, worth while to find another way of calculating 
this immensely important figure. 
Accordingly, we will avail ourselves of the binomial theorem, 
and expand the expres,ion (1 + ; ). in that well-known way. 
The binomial theorem gives the rule that 
an-1b 
an- 2b2 
(a+bt=a n +n -- +n(n -1)--
1! 
2! 
an-3b3 
+ n(n - lXn - 2)-- + .... 
3! 
1 
Putting a = 1 and b = -, we get 
n 
(
1)" 
1(n-1) 
1 (n-1)(n-2) 
1+-
=1+1+- -- +------
n 
2! 
n 
3! 
n2 
1 (n - 1Xn - 2)(n - 3) 
+-
3 
+ .... 
4! 
n 
Now, if we suppose n to become infinitely great, say a billion, 
or a billion billions, then n - 1, n - 2, and n - 3. etc., will all be 
sensibly equal to n; and then the series becomes 
111 
e=l+l+-+-+-+ .. .. 
2! 
3! 
4! 

156 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
By taking this rapidly convergent series to as many terms as we 
please, we can work out the sum to any desired point of accuracy. 
Here is the working for ten terms: 
1.000000 
dividing by 1 
1.000000 
dividing by 2 
0.500000 
dividing by 3 
0.166667 
dividing by 4 
0.041667 
dividing by 5 
0.008333 
dividing by 6 
0.001389 
dividing by 7 
0.000198 
dividing by 8 
0.000025 
dividing by 9 
0.000003 
Total 
2.718282 
e is incommensurable with 1, and resembles 7T' in being an in-
terminable nonrecurrent decimal. 
The Exponential Series. 
We shall have need of yet another series. 
Let us, ag(ain ~a)k~~g use of the binomial theorem, expand the 
expression 
1 + ~ , which is the same as eX when we make n 
indefinitely great. 
~ ::Gr
2 
1 nx-l ! 
1 nx-2 
-
eX = 1 nx + nx 
n + nx(nx _ 1) 
n 
1! 
2! 
1-'{;1' 
+ nx(nx - 1)(nx - 2) 
+ .... 
3! 

On True Compound Interest and the Law of Organic Growth 
157 
1 
n2x 2 - nx 
1 
n3x 3 - 3n2x 2 + 2nx 
=1+x+-' 
2 
+-. 
3 
+ .... 
2! 
n 
3! 
n 
2 
X 
X --
3 
3X2 
2x 
X --+-
n 
n2 
n 
=1+x+--+-----+ . ... 
2! 
3! 
But, when n is made infinitely great, this simplifies down to 
the following: 
x 2 
x 3 
x4 
eX = 1 + x + - + - + - + .... 
2! 
3! 
4! 
This series is called the exponential series. 
The great reason why e is regarded of importance is that eX pos-
sesses a property, not possessed by any other function of x, that 
when you differentiate it its value remains unchanged; or, in other 
words, its derivative is the same as itself. This can be instantly 
seen by differentiating it with respect to x, thus: 
d(e X ) 
2x 
3x2 
4x3 
5x4 
--=0+1+-+ 
+ 
+ 
+ .... 
dx 
1·2 1·2·3 1·2·3·4 1·2·3·4·5 
x 2 
x 3 
x4 
or 
= 1+x+--+ 
+ 
+ .... 
1·2 
1·2·3 1·2·3·4 
which is exactly the same as the original series. 
Now we might have gone to work the other way, and said: Go 
to; let us find a function of x, such that its derivative is the same 
as itself. Or, is there any expression, involving only powers of x, 
which is unchanged by differentiation? Accordingly, let us assume 
as a general expression that 
y = A + Bx + Cx2 + Dx3 + EX4 + .... 
(in which the coefficients A, B, C, .... will have to be deter-
mined), and differentiate it. 
dy 
2 
3 
-
=B + 2Cx+ 3Dx +4Ex + .... 
dx 

158 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Now, if this new expression is really to be the same as that 
from which it was derived, it is clear that A must = B; that C = 
B 
A 
CAD 
A 
- = -_. that D = - = 
. that E = - = ----
2 
1·2' 
3 
1·2·3' 
4 
1·2·3·4 
The law of change is therefore that 
Y=A(l+~+~+ x
3 
+ 
x4 
+ .... ) 
1 
1·2 
1·2·3 
1·2·3·4 
If, now, we take A = 1 for the sake of further simplicity, we 
have 
x 
x 2 
x 3 
X4 
y=l+-+--+ 
+ 
+ .... 
1 
1·2 
1·2·3 
1·2·3·4 
Differentiating it any number of times will give always the 
same series over again. 
If, now, we take the particular case of A = 1, and evaluate the 
series, we shall get simply 
when x= 1, 
y = 2.718281 .... ; 
that is, y = e; 
when x= 2, 
y = (2.718281 .... )2; 
h· 
2 
t at IS, y = e ; 
when x= 3, 
y = (2.718281 .... )3; 
that is, y = e3; 
and therefore 
when x=x, y = (2.718281 ... y; that is, y = eX, 
thus finally demonstrating that 
2 
x 
X 
X 
e =1+-+--+ 
+ 
+ .... 
1 
1·2 
1·2·3 
1·2·3·4 
Natural or Napierian Logarithms. 
Another reason why e is important is because it was made by 
Napier, the inventor of logarithms, the basis of his system. If y is 
the value of eX, then x is the logarithm, to the base e, of y. Or, if 
y =ex 
then 
x = log.)' 
The two curves plotted in Figs. 38 and 39 represent these 
equations. 

On True Compound Interest and the Law of Organic Growth 
159 
Y 
8 7 --------T 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
o 0.5 1 1.5 
FIG. 38. 
The points calculated are: 
For Fig. 38 { 
For Fig. 39 { 
x 
Y 
y 
x 
0 
1 
1 
0 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
0.5 
1 
1.65 
2.72 
2 
3 
0.69 
1.10 
Y 
-----------
~ 
~~ 
II 
Jr 
-------
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
X 
1 
2 
FIG. 39. 
1.5 
2 
4.48 7.39 
4 
8 
1.39 2.08 
It will be seen that, though the calculations yield different 
points for plotting, yet the result is identical. The two equations 
really mean the same thing. 
As many persons who use ordinary logarithms, which are cal-
culated to base 10 instead of base e, are unfamiliar with the 
"natural" logarithms, it may be worth while to say a word about 
them. 2 The ordinary rule that adding logarithms gives the loga-
rithm of the product still holds good; or 
In a + In b = In ab 
Also the rule of powers holds good; 
n X In a = In an 
But as 10 is no longer the basis, one cannot multiply by 100 or 
1000 by merely adding 2 or 3 to the index. A narurallogarithm 
2. It is customary today to write In (pronounced el-en) rather than log, for 
all natural logarithms. From here on I have replaced Thompson's loge with 
In-M.G. 

160 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
is connected to the common logarithm of the same number by 
the relations: 
10g1O X = 10g1O e X In x, 
and 
In x = In 10 X 10g10 x; 
but 
10g1O e = 10g10 2.718 = 0.4343 
and 
In 10 = 2.3026 
10g1O x = 0.4343 X In x 
In x = 2.3026 X 10g10 x 
A Useful Table of "Naperian Logarithms" 
(Also called Natural Logarithms or Hyperbolic Logarithms) 
Number 
Log. 
Number 
Log, 
1 
0.0000 
6 
1.7918 
1.1 
0.0953 
7 
1.9459 
1.2 
0.1823 
8 
2.0794 
1.5 
0.4055 
9 
2.1972 
1.7 
0.5306 
10 
2.3026 
2.0 
0.6931 
20 
2.9957 
2.2 
0.7885 
50 
3.9120 
2.5 
0.9163 
100 
4.6052 
2.7 
0.9933 
200 
5.2983 
2.8 
1.0296 
500 
6.2146 
3.0 
1.0986 
1,000 
6.9078 
3.5 
1.2528 
2,000 
7.6009 
4.0 
1.3863 
5,000 
8.5172 
4.5 
1.5041 
10,000 
9.2103 
5.0 
1.6094 
20,000 
9.9035 
Exponential and Logarithmic Equations. 
Now let us try our hands at differentiating certain expressions 
that contain logarithms or exponentials. 
Take the equation: 
y=ln x 
First transform this into 

On True Compound Interest and the Law of Organic Growth 
161 
whence, since the derivative of eY with regard to y is the original 
function unchanged, 
dx =eY 
dy 
and, reverting from the inverse to the original function, 
dy 
1 
1 
1 
-=-=-=-
dx 
dx 
eY 
x 
dy 
Now this is a very curious result. It may be written 
d(ln x) 
-1 
---=x 
dx 
Note that X-I is a result that we could never have got by the 
rule for differentiating powers. That rule is to multiply by the 
power, and reduce the power by 1. Thus, differentiating x 3 gave 
us 3x2 ; and differentiating x 2 gave 2x1• But differentiating XO 
gives us 0 X X-I = 0, because XO is itself = 1, and is a constant. 
We shall have to come back to this curious fact that differentiat-
1 
ing log.,.x gives us - when we reach the chapter on integrating. 
x 
Now, try to differentiate 
y = In (x+a) 
that is 
d(x+a) 
we have 
= eY, since the derivative of eY remains eY. 
dy 
This gives 
dx 
-
=e'=x+a' 
dy 
, 
hence, reverting to the original function, we get 

162 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Next try 
dy 
1 
1 
-=-=--
dx 
dx 
x+a 
dy 
y = 10glO X 
First change to natural logarithms by multiplying by the 
modulus 0.4343. This gives us 
y = 0.4343 In x 
whence 
dy = 0.4343 
dx 
x 
The next thing is not quite so simple. Try this: 
y=ax 
Taking the logarithm of both sides, we get 
lny =x Ina 
or 
lny 
1 
x=-=-Xlny 
In a 
In a 
1 
Since -
is a constant, we get 
Ina 
dx 
1 
1 
1 
-=-X-=---
dy 
In a 
y 
aX X in a 
hence, reverting to the original function, 
We see that, since 
dx 
dy 
-x-=l 
dy 
dx 
dy 
1 
X 
-=-=a xina 
dx 
dx 
and 
dy 
dx 
1 
1 
-=-x-
dy 
y 
ina' 
1 
dy 
-x-=ina 
y 
dx 

On True Compound Interest and the Law of Organic Growth 
163 
We shall find that whenever we have an expression such as 
In y = a function of x, we always have !. dy = the derivative of 
y dx 
the function of x, so that we could- have written at once, from 
lny = x In a 
1 dy 
- -
=lna and 
y dx 
dy 
x 
-
= y In a = a In a 
dx 
Let us now attempt further examples. 
Examples. 
(1) y = e-ax. Let z = -ax; then y = eZ 
dy 
Z dz 
dy 
Z 
-ax 
-
= e ; -
= -a; hence -
= -ae = -ae 
dz 
dx 
dx 
Or thus: 
1 dy 
dy 
-ax 
lny=-ax; - -
=-a; -
=-ay=-ae 
y dx 
dx 
~ 
x 2 
(2) y = e 3 . Let z = -; then y = eZ • 
3 
Or thus: 
dy 
Z dz 
2x dy 
2x x 2 
-=e· -=_. -=-e 3 
dz 
'dx 
3'dx 
3 
2 
d 
2 
xl" 2xdy 
2x~ 
lny= _. - -
= _. -
= -
e 3 
3'ydx 
3'dx 
3 
.E... 
2x 
1 dy 
2(x + 1) - 2x 
(3) y=ex +1 • iny= --, - -
= 
x + 1 Y dx 
(x + 1)2 
hence 
dy = 
2y 
= 
2 
eXz;.l 
aX 
(x+ 1)2 
(x+ 1)2 
2x 
Check by writing z = --
x+1 

164 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
(4) y = ev;;r:;:;.. In y = (x2 + a)~ 
! dy = 
x 
y dx 
(x2 +a)~ and 
dy = x X e v;;r:;:;. 
dx 
(x2 + a)~ 
2 
I 
I 
For if u = (x + a)' and v = x 2 + a, U = v', 
du 
Idv 
du 
x 
---' --2x' -----
dv -
2v~' dx -
'dx - (x2 + a)~ 
Check by writing z = ~ 
(5) y = In (a + x 3). Let z = (a + x 3); then y = In z. 
dy 
1 dz 
2 
dy 
3X2 
-
= -' -
= 3x . hence -
= --
dz 
z' dx 
' 
dx 
a + x3 
(6) y=In{3x2+Ya+x2}. Let z=3x2+Ya+x2; then 
y = In z. 
dy 
1 dz 
x 
-
= -' -
=6x+ ------
dz 
z'dx 
~ 
6x + .. r;--
.. r;--
dy = 
V x 2 + a = 
x( 1 + 6 V x 2 + a) 
dx 
3X2 + Ya +x2 
(3x2 + Yx2 +a)Yx2 +a 
x 
(7) y=(x+3l~ 
In y = 2 In (x + 3) +! In (x - 2) 
1 dy 
2 
1 
--=--+---
y dx 
(x+3) 
2(x-2) 
dy = (x + 3)2\t'x=2 {_2_ + 
1 
} = 5(x + 3)(x - 1) 
dx 
x + 3 
2(x - 2) 
2Vx=2 
(8) y = (x 2 + 3)3(x3 - 2l 
In y = 3 In (x2 + 3) + ~ In (x 3 - 2) 
1 dy 
2x 
2 
3X2 
6x 
2X2 
- - = 3-- + - -- = --+--
y dx 
x2 + 3 
3 x3 - 2 
x2 + 3 
x3 - 2 

On True Compound Interest and the Law of Organic Growth 
165 
For if u = In (x2 + 3), Z = x 2 + 3 and u = In z 
du 
Idz 
du 
2x 
2x 
-=-. -=2x· -=-=--
dz 
z' dx 
'dx 
Z 
x2 + 3 
dv 
3X2 
Similarly, if v = In (x 3 - 2), - = -3-- and 
dx x-2 
~ 
2 
3 
3 
'{ ~ 
2~} 
-=(x +3) (x -2)' -2--+--
dx 
x + 3 
x 3 - 2 
1 
1 
In y = - In (x2 + a) - - In (x 3 - a) 
2 
3 
1 dy 
1 
2x 
1 3X2 
X 
x2 
- -=- ---- --=-----
y dx 
2 x2 + a 
3 x 3 - a 
x2 + a 
x 3 - a 
and 
dy_ ~{_x __ ~} 
dx - ~ 
x 3 _ a 
x2 + a 
x 3 - a 
1 
(10) y=-. 
Inx 
1 
InxXO-l X-
dy = _____ 
x_ = _-1-
dx 
In 2X 
x In 2X 
.. 3r.-
1 
1 
(11) y = V In x = (In x)'. Let z = In x; y = z" 
dy 
1 
_~ dz 
1 dy 
1 
-=-z ,. -=-._= 
dz 
3 
'dx 
x' dx 
3x ~ 
( 1 )ax 
(12) y = 
aX 

166 
and 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
In y = -ax In aX = -ax2 . In a 
1 dy 
- - = -2ax . In a 
y dx 
( 
)
ax 
dy 
1 
i-ax2 
-
= -2ax ~ 
. In a = -2xa 
. In a 
dx 
a 
Try now the following exercises. 
EXERCISES XII 
(1) Differentiate y = b(eax - e-ax). 
(2) Find the derivative with respect to t of the expression 
u = at2 + 2 In t. 
( ) Ify = nt find d(lny) 
3 
, 
dt 
1 
abx dy 
bx 
(4) Show that if y = - . -; -
= a 
b Ina dx 
n 
dw 
(5) If w = pv , find dv 
Differentiate 
X 
(6) y=lnxn 
(7) y = 3e x-I 
(8) y = (3x 2 + l)e-5x 
(9) y = In (xa + a) 
In (x + 3) 
(11) y=---
x+3 
(10) y=(3X2-1)(Vx+ 1) 
(13) It was shown by Lord Kelvin that the speed of signalling 
through a submarine cable depends on the value of the ratio 
of the external diameter of the core to the diameter of the 
enclosed copper wire. If this ratio is called y, then the number 
of signals s that can be sent per minute can be expressed by the 
formula 
2 
1 
s=ay In-
y 

On True Compound Interest and the Law of Organic Growth 
167 
where a is a constant depending on the length and the quality of 
the materials. Show that if these are given, s will be a maximum 
if lIe4. 
(14) Find the maximum or minimum of 
y = x 3 -In x 
(15) Differentiate y = In (axe X ) 
(16) Differentiate y = (In ax)3 
The Logarithmic Curve 
Let us return to the curve which has its successive ordinates in 
geometrical progression, such as that represented by the equation 
y =bpx. 
We can see, by putting x = 0, that b is the initial height of y. 
Then when 
x=l,y=bp; x=2,y=bp2; x=3,y=bp3,etc. 
Also, we see that p is the numerical value of the ratio between 
the height of any ordinate and that of the next preceding it. In 
Fig. 40, we have takenp as~; each ordinate being ~ as high as the 
preceding one. 
If two successive ordinates are related together thus in a con-
stant ratio, their logarithms will have a constant difference; so 
that, if we should plot out a new curve, Fig. 41, with values of 
In y as ordinates, it would be a straight line sloping up by equal 
steps. In fact, it follows from the equation, that 
y 
I 
o 
In y = In b + x . In p, whence In y - In b = x . In p. 
2 
3 
4 
& ex 
FIG. 40. 
o 
FIG. 41. 

168 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Now, since lnp is a mere number, and may be written as 
In p = a, it follows that 
In l =ax 
b 
and the equation takes the new form 
The Die.away Curve 
If we were to take p as a proper fraction (less than unity), the curve 
would obviously tend to sink downwards, as in Fig. 42, where each 
successive ordinate is i of the height of the preceding one. 
The equation is still 
but since p is less than one, In p will be a negative quantity, and 
may be written -a; so that p = e-a , and now our equation for the 
curve takes the form 
y = be-ax 
The importance of this expression is that, in the case where the 
independent variable is time, the equation represents the course of 
a great many physical processes in which something is gradually 
dying away. Thus, the cooling of a hot body is represented (in 
Newton's celebrated "law of cooling") by the equation 
01 = ODe -al 
where 00 is the original excess of temperature of a hot body over 
that of its surroundings, 01 the excess of temperature at the end 
of time t, and a is a constant-namely, the constant of decrement, 
depending on the amount of surface ex-
posed by the body, and on its coeffi-
cients of conductivity and emissivity, 
etc. 
A similar formula, 
is used to express the charge of an elec-
trified body, originally having a charge 
Qo, which is leaking away with a con 
, 
2 
3 
4 
& ex 
FIG. 42. 

On True Compound Interest and the Law of Organic Growth 
169 
stant of decrement a; which constant depends in this case on the 
capacity of the body and on the resistance of the leakage-path. 
Oscillations given to a flexible spring die out after a time, and 
the dying-out of the amplitude of the motion may be expressed 
in a similar way. 
In fact e -at serves as a die-away factor for all those phenomena in 
which the rate of decrease is proportional to the magnitude of 
that which is decreasing; or where, in our usual symbols, dy is 
dt 
proportional at every moment to the value that y has at that mo-
ment. For we have only to inspect the curve, Fig. 42, to see that 
at every part of it, the slope dy is proportional to the height y; 
dx 
the curve becoming flatter as y grows smaller. In symbols, thus 
y = be-ax 
or 
In y = In b - ax In e = In b - ax, 
and, differentiating, 
1 dy 
- -=-a 
y dx 
hence, 
dy 
ax 
-
= be-
X (-a) = -ay 
dx 
or, in words, the slope of the curve is downward, and proportional 
to y and to the constant a. 
We should have got the same result if we had taken the equa-
tion in the form 
for then 
But 
giving us 
as before. 
y =bpx 
dy - = bpx X Inp 
dx 
Inp =-a 
dy - = y X (-a) = -ay 
dx 

170 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
The Time-Constant. 
In the expression for the "die-away factor" 
e-at, the quantity a is the reciprocal of another quantity known as 
"the time-constant", which we may denote by the symbol T. Then 
the die-away factor will be written e-f ; and it will be seen, by 
making t = T, rhar rhe meaning of T (or of ~) is thar this is rhe 
length of time which it takes for the original quantity (called 80 
1 
or Qo in the preceding instances) to die away to -th part-that is 
to 0.3679-of its original value. 
e 
The values of eX and e-X are continually required in different 
branches of physics, and as they are given in very few sets of 
mathematical tables, some of the values are tabulated here for 
convenience. 
x 
0.00 
0.10 
0.20 
0.50 
0.75 
0.90 
1.00 
1.10 
1.20 
1.25 
1.50 
1.75 
2.00 
2.50 
3.00 
3.50 
4.00 
4.50 
5.00 
5.50 
6.00 
7.50 
10.00 
1.0000 
1.1052 
1.2214 
1.6487 
2.1170 
2.4596 
2.7183 
3.0042 
3.3201 
3.4903 
4.4817 
5.755 
7.389 
12.182 
20.086 
33.115 
54.598 
90.017 
148.41 
244.69 
403.43 
1808.04 
22026.5 
-X 
e 
1.0000 
0.9048 
0.8187 
0.6065 
0.4724 
0.4066 
0.3679 
0.3329 
0.3012 
0.2865 
0.2231 
0.1738 
0.1353 
0.0821 
0.0498 
0.0302 
0.0183 
0.0111 
0.0067 
0.0041 
0.00248 
0.00055 
0.000045 
I
-X 
-e 
0.0000 
0.0952 
0.1813 
0.3935 
0.5276 
0.5934 
0.6321 
0.6671 
0.6988 
0.7135 
0.7769 
0.8262 
0.8647 
0.9179 
0.9502 
0.9698 
0.9817 
0.9889 
0.9933 
0.9959 
0.99752 
0.99945 
0.999955 

On True Compound Interest and the Law of Organic Growth 
171 
As an example of the use of this table, suppose there is a hot 
body cooling, and that at the beginning of the experiment (i.e. 
when t = 0) it is n° hotter than the surrounding objects, and if 
the time-constant of its cooling is 20 minutes (that is, if it takes 
1 
20 minutes for its excess of temperature to fall to - part of 72°), 
e 
then we can calculate to what it will have fallen in any given time 
t 
t. For instance, let t be 60 minutes. Then - = 60 + 20 = 3, and 
T 
we shall have to find the value of e-3, and then multiply the origi-
nal n° by this. The table shows that e-3 is 0.0498. So that at the 
end of 60 minutes the excess of temperature will have fallen to 
n° x 0.0498 = 3.586°. 
Further Examples. 
(1) The strength of an electric current in a conductor at a time t 
sees. after the application of the electromotive force producing it 
E 
_Rt 
is given by the expression C = -{ 1 - e L}. 
R 
L 
The time constant is -. 
R 
If E = 10, R = 1, L = 0.01; then when t is very large the term 
_Rt 
E 
1 - e L becomes 1, and C = - = 10; also 
R 
L -=T=O.Ol 
R 
Its value at any time may be written: 
t 
C = 10 - lOe 0.01 
the time-constant being 0.01. This means that it takes 0.01 sec. 
1 
for the variable term to fall to - = 0.3679 of its initial value 
o 
e 
10e 0.01 = 10. 
To find the value of the current when t = 0.001 sec., say, 
t - = 0.1, e-o· 1 = 0.9048 (from table). 
T 

172 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
It follows that, after 0.001 sec., the variable term is 
0.9048 X 10 = 9.048 
and the actual current is 10 - 9.048 = 0.952. 
Similarly, at the end of 0.1 sec., 
t 
lO 
- = 10; e- = 0.000045 
T 
the variable term is 10 X 0.000045 = 0.00045, the current being 
9.9995. 
(2) The intensity 1 of a beam of light which has passed 
through a thickness I cm. of some transparent medium is 
1 = loe-K1, where 10 is the initial intensity of the beam and K is a 
"constant of absorption". 
This constant is usually found by experiments. If it be found, 
for instance, that a beam of light has its intensity diminished 
by 18% in passing through 10 cm. of a certain transparent 
medium, this means that 82 = 100 X e-KXlO or e-lOK = 0.82, and 
from the table one sees that 10K = 0.20 very nearly; hence 
K= 0.02. 
To find the thickness that will reduce the intensity to half its 
value, one must find the value of I which satisfies the equality 
50 = 100 x e-0 .02/, or 0.5 = e-0 .02/• It is found by putting this 
equation in its natural logarithmic form, namely, 
In 0.5 
1= -- = 34.7 cm. nearly. 
-0.02 
(3) The quantity Q of a radio-active substance which has not 
yet undergone transformation is known to be related to the initial 
quantity Qo of the substance by the relation Q = Qoe-At, where A 
is a constant and t the time in seconds elapsed since the transfor-
mation began. 
For "Radium A", if time is expressed in seconds, experiment 
shows that A = 3.85 X 10-3. Find the time required for trans-
forming half the substance. (This time is called the "half life" of 
the substance.) 

On True Compound Interest and the Law of Organic Growth 
17 3 
We have 
0.5 = e-o·00385t 
10glO 0.5 = -0.00385t X loglo e 
and 
t = 3 minutes very nearly. 
EXERCISES XIII 
t 
(1) Draw the curve y = be T; where b = 12, T = 8, and t is 
given various values from 0 to 20. 
(2) If a hot body cools so that in 24 minutes its excess of tem-
perature has fallen to half the initial amount, deduce the time-
constant, and find how long it will be in cooling down to 1 per-
cent of the original excess. 
(3) Plot the curve y = 100(1 - e-2t ). 
(4) The following equations give very similar curves: 
x 
ax 
(i) y= --; 
x+b 
(ii) Y = a(l - e-b) 
(iii) y = ~ 
arctan (~) 
90° 
b 
Draw all three curves, taking a = 100 millimetres; b = 30 mil-
limetres. 
(5) Find the derivative of y with respect to x, if 
(a) y = xx; 
(b) y = (exy; 
(c) y = eX' 
(6) For "Thorium A", the value of A is 5; find the "half life", 
that is, the time taken by the transformation of a quantity Q of 
"Thorium A" equal to half the initial quantity Qo in the expression 
Q = Qoe-At; 
t being in seconds. 
(7) A condenser of capacity K = 4 X 10-6 , charged to a poten-
tial Vo = 20, is discharging through a resistance of 10,000 ohms. 
Find the potential V after (a) 0.1 second; (b) 0.01 second; assum-
ing that the fall of potential follows the rule V = Voe KR. 

174 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
(8) The charge Q of an electrified insulated metal sphere is re-
duced from 20 to 16 units in 10 minutes. Find the coefficient J.L 
of leakage, if Q = Qo X e-IM; Qo being the initial charge and t be-
ing in seconds. Hence find the time taken by half the charge to 
leak away. 
(9) The damping on a telephone line can be ascertained from 
the relation i = ioe-{3/, where i is the strength, after t seconds, of 
a telephonic current of initial strength io; I is the length of the 
line in kilometres, and f3 is a constant. For the Franco-English 
submarine cable laid in 1910, f3 = 0.0114. Find the damping at 
the end of the cable (40 kilometres), and the length along which 
i is still 8% of the original current (limiting value of very good 
audition). 
(10) The pressure P of the atmosphere at an altitude h kilome-
tres is approximately P = Po e-kh for some constant k; Po being the 
pressure at sea level (760 millimetres). 
The pressures at 10, 20, and 50 kilometres being 199.2,42.4, 
0.32 millimetres respectively, find k in each case. Using the aver-
age of these three values of k, find the percentage error in the 
computed value of the pressure at the three heights. 
(11) Find the minimum or maximum of y = XX. 
i 
(12) Find the minimum or maximum of y = xx. 
i 
(13) Find the minimum or maximum of y = xa x , if a> 1. 

Chapter XV 
HOW TO DEAL WITH SINES 
AND COSINES 
Greek letters being usual to denote angles, we will take as the 
usual letter for any variable angle the letter 0 ("theta"). 
Let us consider the function 
y = sin 0 
d(sin 0) 
What we have to investigate is the value of 
; or, 1fi 
dO 
other words, if the angle 0 varies, we have to find the relation be-
tween the increment of the sine and the increment of the angle, 
both increments being infinitely small in themselves. Examine 
Fig. 43, whetein, if the tadius of the circle is unity, the height of 
y is the sine, and 0 is the angle. Now, if 0 is supposed to increase 
by the addition to it of the small angle dO-an element of 
angle-the height of y, the sine, will be increased by a small el-
ement dy. The new height y + dy will be the sine of the new angle 
0+ dO, or, stating it as an equation, 
y + dy = sin (0 + dO) 
and subtracting from this the first equa-
tion gives 
dy = sin (0 + dO) - sin 0 
The quantity on the right-hand side is 
the difference between two sines, and 
books on trigonometry tell us how to 
work this out. For they tell us that if M 
and N are two different angles, 
FIG. 43. 
175 

176 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
M+N 
M-N 
sin M - sin N = 2 cos --- . sin ---
2 
2 
If, then, we put M = 0 + dO for one angle, and N = 0 for the 
other, we may write 
0+ dO + 0 
0 + dO - 0 
dy = 2 cos 
. sin ----
2 
2 
or, 
dy = 2 cos (0 + !dO) . sin !dO 
But if we regard dO as infinitely small, then in the limit we 
may neglect !dO by comparison with 0, and may also take sin !dO 
as being the same as !dO. The equation then becomes: 
and, finally, 
dy = 2 cos 0 . !dO 
dy = cos O· dO 
dy 
- = cos (J 
dO 
The accompanying curves, Figs. 44 and 45, show, plotted to 
dy 
scale, the values of y = sin 0, and -
= cos 0, for the correspond-
dO 
ing values of O. 
Take next the cosine. 
FIG. 44. 

How to Deal with Sines and Cosines 
" , 
o·a 
-1 
Let 
y = cos 0 
FIG. 45. 
Now cos 0 = sin (; - 0 ) 
Therefore 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
ls 
3110 
dy = d( Sin(; -0) ) = cos ( ; - o)x ~-O) 
= COs( ~ - 0) X (-dO) 
:a=~os(;-o) 
And it follows that 
dy 
. 
-
=-Slll 0 
dO 
Lastly, take the tangent. 
Let 
y=tan 0 
sin 0 
---
cos 0 
177 
Applying the rule given in Chapter VI for differentiating a quo-
tient of two functions, we get 

178 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
£l d(sin 8) 
. 
£l d(cos 8) 
cos 17 
- sin 17 
dy = 
d8 
d8 
d8 
cos28 
cos28 + sin28 
=-----
1 
or 
dy 
2 
- = sec 8 
d8 
Collecting these results, we have: 
dy 
y 
d8 
sin 8 
cos 8 
cos 8 -sin 8 
tan 8 
sec28 
Sometimes, in mechanical and physical questions, as, for ex-
ample, in simple harmonic motion and in wave-motions, we have 
to deal with angles that increase in proportion to the time. Thus, 
if T be the time of one complete period, or movement round the 
circle, then, since the angle all round the circle is 27T radians, or 
360°, the amount of angle moved through in time t will be 
or 
t 
8 = 27T -, in radians 
T 
t 
8 = 360-, in degrees 
T 
If the frequency, or number of periods per second, be denoted by 
1 
n, then n = -, and we may then write: 
T 

How to Deal with Sines and Cosines 
179 
0= 27Tnt 
Then we shall have 
y = sin 27Tnt 
If, now, we wish to know how the sine varies with respect to 
time, we must differentiate with respect, not to 0, but to t. For 
this we must resort to the artifice explained in Chapter IX, and 
put 
dy 
dy 
dO 
-=-. 
dt 
dO 
dt 
dO 
Now -
will obviously be 27Tn; so that 
dt 
dy 
-
= cos 0 X 27Tn 
cit 
= 27Tn . cos 27Tnt 
Similarly, it follows that 
d(cos 27Tnt) 
----- = -27Tn . sin 27Tnt 
dt 
Second Derivative of Sine or Cosine 
We have seen that when sin 0 is differentiated with respect to 0 
it becomes cos 0; and that when cos 0 is differentiated with re-
spect to 0 it becomes -sin 0; or, in symbols, 
d 2(sin 0) 
. 
II 
= -SIn 17 
d~ 
So we have this curious result that we have found a function 
such that if we differentiate it twice over, we get the same thing 
from which we started, but with the sign changed from + to -. 
The same thing is true for the cosine; for differentiating cos 0 
gives us -sin 0, and differentiating -sin 0 gives us -cos 0; or 
thus: 
d 2(cos 8) 
II 
d~ =-cos v. 

180 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Sines and cosines furnish a basis for the only functions of which the sec-
ond derivative is equal and of opposite sign to the original function. 
Examples. 
With what we have so far learned we can now differentiate ex-
pressions of a more complex nature. 
(1) y = arcsin x. 
If y is the angle whose sine is x, then x = sin y. 
dx 
-
=cosy 
dy 
Passing now from the inverse function to the original one, we 
get 
Now 
hence 
dy 
1 
1 
-=-=--
dx 
dx 
cosy 
dy 
cos y = y'''l---Sl-' 0-2-y = ~ 
dy = 
1 
dx ~ 
7T 
a rather unexpected result. Because by definition, - -
S arcsin 
2 
7T 
Y < -, we know that cos y is positive, so we use the positive 
2 
square root here. 
(2) y = cos3 O. 
This is the same thing as y = (cos 8)3 
Let v = cos O' then y = v3• dy = 3v2 
, 
, dv 
dv 
-
=-sin 0 
dO 
dy 
dy 
dv 
2 
-
= -
X -
= -3 cos 0 sin 0 
dO 
dv 
dO 

How to Deal with Sines and Cosines 
(3) y = sin (x + a). 
Let v = x + a; then y = sin v. 
dv 
-=1· 
dx 
' 
dy 
-
=cosv and 
dv 
dy 
-
= cos (x+a) 
dx 
(4) y = log. sin 0 
Let v = sin 0; y = log. v. 
dv 
-
= cos O· 
dO 
' 
dy =!; 
dy = _1_ x cos O=cot O. 
dv 
v 
dO 
sin 0 
cos 0 
(5) y = cot 0 =--
sin 0 
dy = -sin20 - cos20 
dO 
sin20 
= -(1 + cot28) = -csc20 
(6) y=tan 30 
dv 
dy 
2 
Let v = 30· y = tan v· -
= 3· -
= sec v 
, 
, dO 
' dv 
and 
dy 
2 
-
= 3 sec 30 
dO 
(7) y = Y 1 + 3 tan20 = (1 + 3 tan20)~ 
Let v = 3 tan20, then y = (1 + v)~; 
and 
dv 
2dy 
1 
-=6tan Osee O· -=---
dO 
'dv 2~ 
dy _ 6 tan 0 sec20 = 
6 tan 0 sec20 
dO -
2~ 2Y1 + 3 tan20 
for, if u = tan 0, v = 3u 2 
du 
2 
dv 
-
= sec O· 
-
=6u 
dO 
'du ' 
181 

182 
hence 
hence 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
dv 
2 
- = 6 tan 0 sec 0 
dO 
dy = 6 tan 0 sec2 0 
dO 
2\1'1 + 3 tan20 
(8) y = sin x cos x. 
dy 
.x(.) 
- = sm 
-sm x + cos x X cos x 
dx 
2 
. 2 
= cos X - sIn x 
Closely associated with sines, cosines and tangents are three other 
very useful functions. They are the hyperbolic sine, cosine and 
tangent, and are written sinh, cosh, tanh. These functions are de-
fined as follows: 
sinh x = !(eX - e-" cosh x = !(eX + e-X), 
sinh x 
eX - e-x 
tanh x = -- = ---
cosh x 
eX + e-x 
Between sinh x and cosh x, there is an important relation, for 
cosh2x - sinh2x = ~(eX + e-xf -
~(eX _ e-x)2 
= ~(iX + 2 + e-2x - e2x + 2 - e-2x) = 1. 
d 
Now -
(sinh x) = !(eX + e-X) = cosh x. 
dx 
d 
-
(cosh x) = !(eX - e-X) = sinh x. 
dx 
d 
d 
cosh x -
(sinh x) - sinh x -
(cosh x) 
d 
dx 
dx 
-
(tanh x) = -------------
dx 
cosh2x 
1 
= ------ - ---
by the relation just proved. 

How to Deal with Sines and Cosines 
EXERCISES XIV 
(1) Differentiate the following: 
0) y = A sin ( 8 - ;) 
(ii) y = sin2 0; and y = sin 20 
(iii) y = sin30; and y = sin 30 
183 
(2) Find the value of 0 (0 :!5 0:::; 2 7T) for which sin 0 X cos 0 
is a maximum. 
1 
(3) Differentiate y = -
cos 27Tnt. 
27T 
x fi 
dy 
If y = sin a, nd -. 
dx 
(4) 
(5) Differentiate y = In cos x. 
(6) Differentiate y = 18.2 sin (x + 26°). 
(7) Plot the curve y = 100 sin (0 - 15°); and show that the 
slope of the curve at 0 = 75° is half the maximum slope. 
(8) If y = sin O· sin 20, find dy. 
dO 
(9) If y = a . tanm(lr), find the derivative of y with respect to O. 
(10) Differentiate y = eX sin2x. 
(11) Differentiate the three equations of Exercises XIII, No.4, 
and compare their derivatives, as to whether they are equal, or 
nearly equal, for very small values of x, or for very large values of 
x, or for values of x in the neighbourhood of x = 30. 
(12) Differentiate the following: 
(i) y = sec x. 
(iii) y = arctan x. 
(ii) Y = arccos x. 
(iv) y = arcsec x. 
(v) y=tanxx~. 
(13) Differentiate y = sin (20 + 3)2.3. 
(14) Differentiate y = 03 + 3 sin (0 + 3) - 3sinO - 3 o. 
(15) Find the maximum or minimum of y = 0 cos 0, for 
7T 
7T 
-- <: 0:::; -. 
2 
2 

Chapter XVI 
PARTIAL DIFFERENTIATION 
We sometimes come across quantities that are functions of more 
than one independent variable. Thus, we may find a case where y 
depends on two other variable quantities, one of which we will 
call u and the other v. In symbols 
y = f(u, v) 
Take the simplest concrete case. 
Let 
y=uXv 
What are we to do? If we were to treat v as a constant, and dif-
ferentiate with respect to u, we should get 
dyv=v du 
or if we treat u as a constant, and differentiate with respect to v, 
we should have: 
dyu=u dv 
The little letters here put as subscripts are to show which 
quantity has been taken as constant in the operation. 
Another way of indicating that the differentiation has been 
performed only partially, that is, has been performed only with-
respect to one of the independent variables, is to write the deriva-
184 

Partial Differentiation 
185 
tives with a symbol based on Greek small deltas, instead of little 
d. 1 In this way 
oy 
-=v 
au 
ay 
-=u 
ov 
If we put 10 these values for v and u respectively, we shall 
have 
oy 
dy =-du 
v 
au ' 
oy 
dy = -dv 
u 
av ' 
which are partial derivatives. 
But, if you think of it, you will observe that the total variation 
of y depends on both these things at the same time. That is to say, 
if both are varying, the real dy ought to be written 
oy 
oy 
dy= -du+ -dv 
ou 
av 
and this is called a total differential. In some books it is written 
dy~ (!)dN+ (:)dv 
1. Robert Ainsley, in his amusing booklet Bluff Your Way in Mathematics 
(1988) defines partial derivatives as "derivatives biased toward x, y, or z in-
stead of treating all three equally-the sign for this is six written back-
wards .... " 
The adjective "partial" indicates that the derivative is partial toward one 
independent variable, the other or oth~rs being treated as constants. A de-
rivative is called a "mixed partial derivative" if it is a partial derivative of 
order 2 or higher that involves more than one of the independent variables. 
Higher partial derivatives are partial derivatives of partial derivatives.-
M.G. 

186 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Example (1). 
Find the partial derivatives of the expression 
w = 2ax2 + 3bxy + 4cl. The answers are: 
dw 
-
=4ax+3by 
dx 
OW 
2 
-
= 3bx+ 120' 
oy 
The first is obtained by supposing y constant, the second is ob-
tained by supposing x constant; then the total differential is 
dw = (4ax + 3by)dx + (3bx + 120'2)dy 
Example (2). 
Let z = xl. Then, treating first y and then x as con-
stant, we get in the usual way 
dz 
. .)'-1 
-=y:x.-
dx 
oz 
-
=xI X lou x 
oy 
Oe 
so that dz = yxl-1dx + xl loge xdy. 
Example (3). 
A cone having height h and radius of base r, has vol-
ume V = t'7Tr2h. If its height remains constant, while r changes, 
the ratio of change of volume, with respect to radius, is different 
from ratio of change of volume with respect to height which would 
occur if the height were varied and the radius kept constant, for 
oV = 2'7T rh 
or 
3 
dV 
'7T 2 
-=-r 
oh 
3 
The variation when both the radius and the height change is 
2'7T 
'7T 2 
given by dV= -rh dr+ -r dh. 
3 
3 

Partial Differentiation 
187 
Example (4). 
In the following example P and f denote two ar-
bitrary functions of any form whatsoever. For example, they may 
be sine-functions, or exponentials, or mere algebraic functions of 
the two independent variables, t and x. This being understood, 
let us take the expression 
or, 
where 
Then 
y = P(x + at) + f(x - at) 
y = P(w) + f(v) 
w=x+at, and v=x-at 
ay 
ap(w) aw 
af(v) 
av 
-=--.-+--.-
ax 
aw 
ax 
av 
ax 
= P' (w) . 1 + f' (v) . 1 
(where the figure 1 is simply the coefficient of x in wand v); 
and 
Also 
and 
whence 
a2 
-.1. = P" (w) + f" (v) 
ax2 
ay 
ap(w) 
aw 
af(v) av 
-=--.-+--.-
at 
aw 
at 
av 
at 
= P'(w) . a - f'(v)a 
This differential equation is of immense importance in math-
ematical physics. 
Maxima and Minima of Functions of two 
Independent Variables 
Example (5). 
Let us take up again Exercises IX, No.4. 
Let x and y be the lengths of two of the portions of the string. 
The third is 30 - (x + y), and the area of the triangle is A = 
Ys(s - x)(s - yXs - 30 + x + y), where s is the half perimeter, so 
that s = 15, and A = v'i5P, where 

188 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
P=(15 -x)(15 -y)(x+y-15) 
= xl + x2y - 15x2 - 15y2 - 45xy + 450x + 450y - 3375 
Clearly A is a maximum when P is maximum. 
ap 
ap 
dP= -dx+ -dy 
ax 
ay 
For a maximum (clearly it will not be a minimum in this case), 
one must have simultaneously 
that is, 
ap 
-
=0 and 
ax 
ap 
-=0 
ay 
2xy - 30x + l- 45y + 450 = O,} 
2xy - 30y + x2 - 45x + 450 = o. 
Subtracting the second equation from the first and factoring 
gives 
(y-xXx+y-15)=0 
so either x = y or x + y - 15 = o. In the latter case P = 0, which is 
not a maximum, hence x = y. 
If we now introduce this condition in the value of P, we find 
P = (15 - x)2(2x - 15) = 2x3 - 75x2 + 900x - 3375 
dP 
For maximum or minimum, -
= 6x2 - 150x + 900 = 0, which 
dx 
gives x= 15 or x= 10. 
Clearly x = 15 gives zero area; x = 10 gives the maximum, for 
d2P 
-2 = 12x - 150, which is +30 for x = 15 and -30 for x = 10. 
dx 
Example (6). 
Find the dimensions of an ordinary railway coal 
truck with rectangular ends, so that, for a given volume V, the 
area of sides and floor together is as small as possible. 
The truck is a rectangular box open at the top. Let x be the 

Partial Differentiation 
189 
length and y be the width; then the depth is V. The surface area 
xy 
2V 
2V 
is S=xy+ - +-. 
x 
y 
as 
as 
( 
2V) 
( 
2V) 
dS=-dx+-dy= y--; dx+ x--; dy 
ax 
ay 
x 
y 
For minimum (clearly it won't be a maximum here), 
2V 
2V 
y--=O x--=O 
x2 
y2 
Multiplying the first equation by x, the second by y, and sub-
tracting gives x = y. So x 3 = 2V and x = y = V2V. 
EXERCISES XV 
x 3 
y 
(1) Differentiate the expression -
- 2x3y - 2lx + - with re-
3 
3 
spect to x alone, and with respect to y alone. 
(2) Find the partial derivatives with respect to x, y, and z, of 
the expression 
x2yz + xlz + xyz2 + x2lz2 
(3) Let r2 = (x - a)2 + (y - b)2 + (z - cf. 
~ ~ ~ 
~ 
Find the value of -
+ - + -. Also find the value of -2 + 
a2r 
a2r 
ax 
ay 
az 
ax 
-+-
ay2 
az2' 
(4) Find the total derivative of y = uti. 
(5) Find the total derivative of y = u3 sin v; of y = (sin x),,; and 
lnu 
ofy=-. 
v 
(6) Verify that the sum of three quantities x, y, z, whose prod-
uct is a constant k, is minimum when these three quantities are 
equal. 

190 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
(7) Does the function u = x + 2xy + y have a maximum or 
minimum? 
(8) A post office regulation once stated that no parcel is to be 
of such a size that its length plus its girth exceeds 6 feet. What 
is the greatest volume that can be sent by post (a) in the case of 
a package of rectangular cross-section; (b) in the case of a package 
of circular cross-section? 
(9) Divide 7T into 3 parts such that the product of their sines 
may be a maximum or minimum. 
ex+Y 
(10) Find the maximum or minimum of u =-. 
xy 
(11) Find maximum and minimum of 
u = y + 2x - 2 In y - In x 
(12) A bucket of given capacity has the shape of a horizontal 
isosceles triangular prism with the apex underneath, and the op-
posite face open. Find its dimensions in order that the least 
amount of iron sheet may be used in its construction. 

Chapter XVII 
INTEGRATION 
The great secret has already been revealed that this mysterious 
symbol f' which is after all only a long S, merely means "the 
sum of", or "the sum of all such quantities as". It therefore re-
sembles that other symbol! (the Greek Sigma), which is also a 
sign of summation. There is this difference, however, in the prac-
tice of mathematical men as to the use of these signs, that while 
! is generally used to indicate the sum of a number of finite 
quantities, the integral sign f is generally used to indicate the 
summing up of a vast number of small quantities of infinitely 
minute magnitude, mere elements in fact, that go to make up the 
total required. Thus f dy = y, and f dx = x. 
Anyone can understand how the whole of anything can be con-
ceived of as made up of a lot of little bits; and the smaller the bits 
the more of them there will be. Thus, a line one inch long may 
be conceived as made up of 10 pieces, each to of an inch long; or 
of 100 parts, each part being 160 of an inch long; or of 1,000,000 
parts, each of which is 1.006.000 of an inch long; or, pushing the 
thought to the limits of conceivability, it may be regarded as 
made up of an infinite number of elements each of which is in-
finitesimally small. 
Yes, you will say, but what is the use of thinking of anything 
191 

192 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
that way? Why not think of it straight off, as a whole? The 
simple reason is that there are a vast number of cases in which 
one cannot calculate the bigness of the thing as a whole without 
reckoning up the sum of a lot of small parts. The process of "in-
tegrating" is to enable us to calculate totals that otherwise we 
should be unable to estimate directly. 
Let us first take one or two simple cases to familiarize ourselves 
with this notion of summing up a lot of separate parts. 
Consider the series: 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 +"2+4+8+16+32+64+ .... 
Here each member of the series is formed by taking half the 
value of the preceding one. What is the value of the total if we 
could go on to an infinite number of terms? Every schoolboy 
knows that the answer is 2. Think of it, if you like, as a line. Be-
gin with one inch; add a half inch; add a quarter; add an eighth; 
and so on. If at any point of the operation we stop, there will still 
be a piece wanting to make up the whole 2 inches; and the piece 
wanting will always be the same size as the last piece added. 
Thus, if after having put together 1, ~, and t we stop, there will 
be ~ wanting. If we go on till we have added -l4, there will still be 
-l4 wanting. The remainder needed will always be equal to the last 
term added. By an infinite number of operations only should we 
reach the actual 2 inches. Practically we should reach it when we 
got to pieces so small that they could not be drawn-that would 
be after about 10 terms, for the eleventh term is ~. If we want 
to go so far that no measuring machine could detect it, we should 
merely have to go to about 20 terms. A microscope would not 
show even the 18th term! So the infinite number of operations is 
no such dreadful thing after all. The integral is simply the whole 
lot. But, as we shall see, there are cases in which the integral cal-
culus enables us to get at the exact total that there would be as the 
result of an infinite number of operations. In such cases the inte-
gral calculus gives us a rapid and easy way of getting at a result 
FIG. 46. 

Integration 
193 
that would otherwise require an interminable lot of elaborate 
working out. So we had best lose no time in learning how to in-
tegrate. 
Slopes of Curves, and the Curves Themselves 
Let us make a little preliminary enquiry about the slopes of 
curves. For we have seen that differentiating a curve means 
finding an expression for its slope (or for its slopes at differ-
ent points). Can we perform the reverse process of reconstruct-
ing the whole curve if the slope (or slopes) are prescribed 
for us? 
Go back to Chapter 10, case (2). Here we have the simplest of 
curves, a sloping line with the equation 
y =ax + b 
We know that here b represents the 
initial height of y when x = 0, and that 
h· h· 
h 
dy 
. 
h 
a, w 1C 
1S t e same as -, 1S t e 
dx 
"slope" of the line. The line has a con-
y 
, 
, : I 
, : : , " 
, 
' 
I 
I 
I 
, 
I 
: 
I 
I 
: 
I 
, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I-++'H-~-':--:-of-+ 
I 
, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
, 
f 
I 
I 
• 
I 
• 
t 
I 
I 
• 
I 
I 
, 
I 
I 
, 
, 
• 
I 
J 
x 
stant slope. All along it the elementary 
FIG. 47. 
triangles ..LJd1 have the same proportion between height and 
base. suppos1~we were to take the dx's and dy's of finite magni-
tude, so that 10 dx's made up one inch, then there would be ten 
little triangles like 
Now, suppose that we were ordered to reconstruct the "curve", 
starting merely from the information that dy = a. What could 
dx 
we do? Still taking the little ds as of finite size, we could draw 
lOaf them, all with the same slope, and then put them together, 
end to end, like this: 
And, as the slope is the same for all, they would join to make, 
as in Fig. 48, a sloping line sloping with the correct slope 

194 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
FIG. 48. 
dy = a. And whether we take the dy's and dx's as finite or infi-
dx 
nitely small, as they are all alike, clearly l = a, if we reckon y as 
x 
the total of all the dy's, and x as the total of all the dx's. But 
whereabouts are we to put this sloping line? Are we to start at 
the origin 0, or higher up? As the only information we have is 
as to the slope, we are without any instructions as to the 
particular height above 0; in fact the initial height is undeter-
mined. The slope will be the same, whatever the initial height. 
Let us therefore make a shot at what may be wanted, and start 
the sloping line at a height C above O. That is, we have the 
equation 
y=ax+C 
It becomes evident now that in this case the added constant 
means the particular value that y has when x = O. 
Now let us take a harder case, that of a line, the slope of which 
is not constant, but turns up more and more. Let us assume that 
the upward slope gets greater and greater in proportion as x 
grows. In symbols this is: 
dy 
-=ax 
dx 

Integration 
Or, to give a concrete case, take a = t so that 
dy 
1 
-=5X 
dx 
195 
Then we had best begin by calculating a few of the values of 
the slope at different values of x, and also draw little diagrams of 
them. 
When 
x=O, dy_o 
dx-' 
x=l, dy =0.2 
dx 
' 
-==::l 
x=2, dy 
~ 
-=0·4 
dx 
' 
x=3, dy 
~ 
-=0·6 
dx 
' 
x=4, dy 
LJ 
-=0·8 
dx 
' 
x=5, dy 
dx=I·O. 
.LJ 
Now try to put the pieces together, setting each so that the 
middle of its base is the proper distance to the right, and so that 
they fit together at the corners; thus (Fig. 49). The result is, of 
course, not a smooth curve: but it is an approximation to one. If 
we had taken bits half as long, and twice as numerous, like Fig. 
50, we should have a better approximation. l 
1. Approximating a continuous curve by drawing smaller and smaller right 
triangles under the curve is today called the "trapezoidal rule" because the 
little triangles, joined to the narrow rectangles beneath them, form trap-
ezoids as shown in Figure 47. 
A closer approximation, though much more difficult to apply, is to draw 
tiny parabolas below (or above) a curve's segments. The sum is then ap-
proximated by the "parabolic rule" or what is also known as "Simpson's 
rule" after British mathematician Thomas Simpson (1710-1761). Thomp-
son does not go into this, but you can read about Simpson's rule in modern 
calculus textbooks.-M.G. 

196 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
y 
p 
o 
t 
a 
.. 
15 
X 
FIG. 49. 
FIG. 50. 
But for a perfect curve we ought to take each dx and its corre-
sponding dy infinitesimally small, and infinitely numerous. 
Then, how much ought the value of any y to be? Clearly, at any 
point P of the curve, the value of y will be the sum of all the little 
dy's from 0 up to that level, that is to say, I 
dy = y. And as each 
dy is equal to ~x . dx, it follows that the whole y will be equal to 
the sum of all such bits as ~x· dx, or, as we should write it, 
Ih. dX. 
Now if x had been constant, I 
h . dx would have been the 
same as ~x I 
dx, or ~X2. But x began by being 0, and increases to 
the particular value of x at the point P, so that its average value 
fi 
0 
h 
.. I 
H II J 
1 
2 
1 
2 
rom 
to t at pOtnt IS "2x. 
ence 
"5XaX = lOx ; or Y = lOx . 
But, as in the previous case, this re-
quires the addition of an undetermined 
Y 
constant C, because we have not been told 
at what height above the origin the curve 
will begin, when x = o. So we write, as 
the equation of the curve drawn in Fig. 
51, 
1 
2 
C 
Y = lOx + 
FIG. 5l. 

Integration 
197 
EXERCISES XVI 
(1) Find the ultimate sum of ~ + i + ~ + -b + f4 + .... 
Sh 
h 
h 
'1111111. 
(2) 
ow t at t e senes 
- 2 + "3 - 4 + 5 -
(; + "7 ••• , IS conver-
gent, and find its sum to 8 terms. 
x 2 
x 3 
x4 
(3) Ifln (1 + x) = x - -
+ -
- - + ... , find In 1.3. 
234 
(4) Following a reasoning similar to that explained in this 
chapter, find y, 
. dy 
1 
.f -
=4X 
dx 
dy 
(5) If - = 2x + 3, find y 
dx 

Chapter XVIII 
INTEGRATING AS THE 
REVERSE OF 
DIFFERENTIATING 
Differentiating is the process by which when y is given us as a 
dy 
function of x, we can find -dx 
Like every other mathematical operation, the process of differ-
entiation may be reversed. l Thus, if differentiating y = x4 gives 
us dy = 4x3 , then, if one begins with dy = 4x3 , one would say 
dx 
dx 
that reversing the process would yield y = x4. But here comes in 
a curious point. We should get dy = 4x 3 if we had begun with 
dx 
any of the following; X4, or x4 + a, or x4 + C, or x4 with any added 
constant. So it is clear that in working backwards from dy to y, 
dx 
1. Familiar examples of inverse operations in arithmetic are subtraction as 
the reverse of addition, division as the reverse of multiplication, and root 
extraction as the reverse of raising to higher powers. 
In arithmetic you can test a subtraction A - B = C by adding Band C 
to see if you get A. In similar fashion one can test an integration or a dif-
ferentiation by reversing the process to see if you return to the original ex-
pression. 
In its geometrical model, differentiating a function gives a formula that 
determines the slope of a function's curve at any given point. Integration 
provides a method with which, given the formula for the slope you can de-
termine the curve and its function. This in turn provides a quick way of 
calculating the area between intervals on a curve and the graph's x axis. 
198 

Integrating as the Reverse of Differentiating 
199 
one must make provision for the possibility of there being an 
added constant, the value of which will be undetermined until 
ascertained in some other way. So, if differentiating xn yields 
n-l 
. 
b k 
d f 
dy 
n-l 
·11 
. 
n 
C 
nx 
, gomg ac war s rom - = nx 
Wi give us y = x + ; 
dx 
where C stands for the yet undetermined possible constant. 
Clearly, in dealing with powers of x, the rule for working back-
wards will be: Increase the power by 1, then divide by that in-
creased power, and add the undetermined constant. 
So, in the case where 
dy 
n 
-=x 
dx 
working backwards, we get 
1 
n+l 
y=--x 
+C 
n+l 
If differentiating the equation y = axn gives us 
dy 
n-l 
-=anx 
dx 
it is a matter of common sense that beginning with 
dy 
n-l 
-=anx 
dx 
and reversing the process, will give us 
y =axn 
So, when we are dealing with a multiplying constant, we must 
simply put the constant as a multiplier of the result of the inte-
gration. 
Thus, if dy = 4x2 , the reverse process gives us y = ~X3. 
dx 
But this is incomplete. For we must remember that if we had 
started with 
y =axn +C 

200 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
where C is any constant quantity whatever, we should equally 
have found 
dy 
n-l 
-=anx 
dx 
So, therefore, when we reverse the process we must always re-
member to add on this undetermined constant, even if we do not 
yet know what its value will be.2 
This process, the reverse of differentiating, is called integrating; 
for it consists in finding the value of the whole quantity y when 
you are given only an expression for dy or for dy. Hitherto we 
dx 
have as much as possible kept dy and dx together as a derivative: 
henceforth we shall more often have to separate them. 
If we begin with a simple case, 
dy 
2 
-=x 
dx 
We may write this, if we like, as 
dy =x2dx 
2. A joke about integration recently made the rounds of math students and 
teachers. Two students at a technical college, Bill and Joe, are having lunch 
at a campus hangout. Bill complains that math teaching has become so 
poor in the United States that most college students know next to nothing 
about calculus. 
Joe disagrees. While Bill is in the men's room, Joe calls over a pretty 
blond waitress. He gives her five dollars to playa joke on Bill. When she 
brings the dessert he will ask her a question. He doesn't tell her the ques-
tion, but he instructs her to answer "one third x cubed." The waitress 
smiles, pockets the fiver, and agrees. 
When Bill returns to the booth, Joe proposes the following twenty-
dollar bet. He will ask their waitress about an integral. If she responds cor-
rectly he wins the bet. Joe knows he can't lose. The two friends shake hands 
on the deal. 
When the waitress comes to the table, Joe asks, "What's the integral of 
x squared?" 
"One third x cubed," she replies. Then as she walks away she says over 
her shoulder, "plus a constant." 

Integrating as the Reverse of Differentiating 
201 
Now this is a "differential equation" which informs us that an 
element of y is equal to the corresponding element of x multi-
plied by x 2 . Now, what we want is the integral; therefore, write 
down with the proper symbol the instructions to integrate both 
sides, thus: 
[Note as to reading integrals: the above would be read thus: 
"Integral of dee-wy equals integral of eks-squared dee-eks. "J 
We haven't yet integrated: we have only written down instruc-
tions to integrate-if we can. Let us try. Plenty of other fools can 
do it-why not we also? The left-hand side is simplicity itself. 
The sum of all the bits of y is the same thing as y itself. So we 
may at once put: 
But when we come to the right-hand side of the equation we 
must remember that what we have got to sum up together is not 
all the dx's, but all such terms as x 2dx; and this will not be the 
same as x 2 f 
dx, because x 2 is not a constant. For some of the dx's 
will be multiplied by big values of x 2 , and some will be multi-
plied by small values of x 2 , according to what x happens to be. So 
we must bethink ourselves as to what we know about this process 
of integration being the reverse of differentiation. Now, our rule 
for this reversed process when dealing with xn is "increase the 
power by one, and divide by the same number as this increased 
power". That is to say, x 2dx will be changed* to iX 3. Put this into 
*You may ask: what has become of the little dx at the end? Well, remem-
ber that it was really part of the derivative, and when changed over to the 
right-hand side, as in the x 2dx, serves as a reminder that x is the indepen-
dent variable with respect to which the operation is to be effected; and, as 
the result of the product being totalled up, the power of x has increased by 
one. You will soon become familiar with all this. 

202 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
the equation; but don't forget to add the "constant of integra-
tion" C at the end. So we get: 
y =ix3 + C 
You have actually performed the integration. How easy! 
Let us try another simple case 
Let 
dy 
12 
-=ax 
dx 
where a is any constant multiplier. Well, we found when differ-
entiating (see Chapter V) that any constant factor in the value of 
dy 
y reappeared unchanged in the value of -. In the reversed pro-
dx 
cess of integrating, it will therefore also reappear in the value of 
y. So we may go to work as before, thus: 
dy =axI2 • dx 
f dy = fax 12 • dx 
f dy =a f X 12dx 
y = a X ftx 13 + C 
So that is done. How easy! 
We begin to realize now that integrating is a process 0/ finding 
our way back, as compared with differentiating. If ever, during 
differentiating, we have found any particular expression-in this 
example axl2_we can find our way back to the y from which it 
was derived. The contrast between the two processes may be il-
lustrated by the following illustration due to a well-known 
teacher. If a stranger to Manhattan were set down in Times 
Square, and told to find his way to Grand Central Station, he 
might find the task hopeless. But if he had previously been per-
sonally conducted from Grand Central Station to Times Square, 
it would be comparatively easy for him to find his way back to 
Grand Central Station. 

Let 
then 
Integrating as the Reverse of Differentiating 
203 
Integration of .the Sum or Difference of Two 
Functions 
dy 
-
=x2 +x3 
dx 
dy = x 2dx + x 3dx 
There is no reason why we should not integrate each term sepa-
rately; for, as may be seen in Chapter VI, we found that when we 
differentiated the sum of two separate functions, the derivative 
was simply the sum of the two separate differentiations. So, when 
we work backwards, integrating, the integration will be simply 
the sum of the two separate integrations. 
Our instructions will then be: 
If either of the terms had been a negative quantity, the corre-
sponding term in the integral would have also been negative. So 
that differences are as readily dealt with as sums. 
How to Deal with Constant Terms 
Suppose there is in the expression to be integrated a constant 
term-such as this: 
dy 
n 
b 
-=x + 
dx 
This is laughably easy. For you have only to remember that 
when you differentiated the expression y = ax, the result was 
dy 
-
= a. Hence, when you work the other way and integrate, the 
dx 
constant reappears multiplied by x. So we get 

204 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
dy = xn dx + b . dx 
J dy = J xn dx + J b dx 
1 
n+l 
y=--x 
+bx+C 
n+l 
Here are a lot of examples on which to try your newly acquired 
powers. 
Examples. 
(1) Given dy = 24xll. Find y. Am. y = 2X12 + C 
dx 
(2) Find J(a + b)(x + l)dx. It is (a + b) J(X + l)dx 
0' 
(a + b{JX dx+ J 
dx] 0' (a+h)( x; +x) +C 
du 
1 
2 
' 
(3) Given - = gt' Find u. Am. u = "gt' + C 
dt 
dy 
3 
2 
(4) -
=x -x +x Find y. 
dx 
dy = (x 3 - x 2 + x) dx 
or 
dy = x 3 dx - x2 dx + x dx; y = J x b dx - J x 2 dx + J x dx 
and 
y = h4 - ix3 + ~X2 + C 
(5) Integrate 9.75x2.25dx. Am. y = 3X3 .25 + C 
All these are easy enough. Let us try another case. 
Let 
dy 
-1 
-=ax 
dx 

Integrating as the Reverse of Differentiating 
205 
Proceeding as before, we will write 
Well, but what is the integral of x-Idx? 
If you look back amongst the results of differentiating x 2 and 
x3 and xn , etc., you will find we never got X-I from anyone of 
dy 
2 
3 
2 
them as the value of -. We got 3x from x ; we got 2x from x ; 
dx 
we got 1 from Xl (that is, from x itself); but we did not get X-I 
from xo, for a very good reason. Its derivative (got by slavishly 
following the usual rule) is 0 X x-I, and that multiplication by 
zero gives it zero value! Therefore when we now come to try to 
integrate x-Idx, we see that it does not come in anywhere in the 
powers of x that are given by the rule: 
Jx n dx = _1_ x n+l 
n+1 
It is an exceptional case. 
Well; but try again. Look through all the various derivatives 
obtained from various functions of x, and try to find amongst 
them X-I. A sufficient search will show that we actually did get 
dy = X-I as the result of differentiating the function y = In x. 
dx 
Then, of course, since we know that differentiating In x gives 
us x-I, we know that, by reversing the process, integrating 
dy = x-Idx will give us y = In x. But we must not forget the con-
stant factor a that was given, nor must we omit to add the unde-
termined constant of integration. This then gives us as the solu-
tion to the present problem, 
y=a In x+ C 
But this is valid only for x > O. For x < 0, you should verify 
that the solution is 
y = a In (-x) + C 

206 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
These two cases are usually combined by writing 
y =a In Ixl + C 
where I x I is the absolute value of x, namely x if x > 0 and -x if 
x< o. 
N.B.-Here note this very remarkable fact, that we could not 
have integrated in the above case if we had not happened to know 
the corresponding differentiation. If no one had found out that 
differentiating In x gave X-I, we should have been utterly stuck 
by the problem how to integrate x-1dx. Indeed it should be 
frankly admitted that this is one of the curious features of the in-
tegral calculus:-that you can't integrate anything before the re-
verse process of differentiating something else has yielded that 
expression which you want to integrate. 
Another Simple Case. 
Find f(X + l)(x + 2)dx. 
On looking at the function to be integrated, you remark that 
it is the product of two different functions of x. You could, you 
think, integrate (x + l)dx by itself, or (x + 2)dx by itself. Of 
course you could. But what to do with a product? None of the 
differentiations you have learned have yielded you for the 
derivative a product like this. Failing such, the simplest thing 
is to multiply up the two functions, and then integrate. This 
glves us 
f(X2 + 3x + 2)dx 
And this is the same as 
And performing the integrations, we get 

Integrating as the Reverse of Differentiating 
207 
Some Other Integrals 
Now that we know that integration is the reverse of differentia-
tion, we may at once look up the derivatives we already know, 
and see from what functions they were derived. This gives us the 
following integrals ready made: 
-1 
x 
fX- 1dX 
= In Ixl +C 
1 
f_l_dX 
= In Ix+al +C 
x+a 
x+a 
-1 dy 
for ify= -
-
= 
ex'dx 
=-e-X+C 
eX X 0 - 1 X eX 
-x 
=e 
sin x; f sin x dx 
= -cos x + C 
cos x; f cos x dx 
= sin x + C 
Also we may deduce the following: 
In x 
f In x dx 
= x(ln x - 1) + C 
dy 
x 
for if y = x In x - x, -
= - + In x-I = in x 
dx 
x 
ioglO X flOglO X dx = 0.4343x(ln x-I) + C 

208 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
aX 
=-+c 
In a 
cos ax J 
cos ax dx =; sin ax + C 
for if y = sin ax, dy = a cos ax; hence to get cos ax one must dif-
dx 
1 
ferentiate y = - sin ax 
a 
sin ax J 
sin ax dx = -; cos ax + C 
Try also cos2 0; a little dodge will simplify matters: 
hence 
and 
cos 2(J = cos2 (J - sin2 (J = 2 cos2 0 - 1 
cos2 0 = t<cos 20 + 1) 
J cos2 0 dO = t J<cos 20 + l)dO 
= 1 J 
cos 20 dO + 1 J 
dO 
sin 20 
0 
=--+-+C. 
4 
2 
See also the Table of Standard Forms at the end of the last 
chapter. You should make such a table for yourself, putting in it 
only the general functions which you have successfully differen-
tiated and integrated. See to it that it grows steadily! 

Integrating as the Reverse of Differentiating 
209 
EXERCISES XVII 
(1) Find fY dx when y2 = 4ax. 
(2) Find f :4 dx. 
(3) Find f: x 3 dx. 
(4) Find f(X2 + a)dx. 
(5) Integrate 5x-~. 
(6) Find f(4x 3 + 3X2 + 2x + l)dx. 
dy 
ax 
bx2 
ex3 
(7) If - = - + -
+ -' find y. 
dx 
2 
3 
4' 
(8) Find f( :::) Jx. 
(9) Find f<x+ 3)3Jx 
(10) Find f(X + 2)(x - a)dx. 
(11) Find fC\!; + ~)3a2dx. 
(12) Find f(Sin O_!)~o. 
(13) Find f 
cos2 aO dO. 
(15) Find fSin 2 aO dO. 
(17) Find --. 
f dx 
l+x 
(14) Find f 
sin2 0 dO. 
(16) Find fe 3X dx. 
(18) Find --. 
f dx 
I-x 

Chapter XIX 
ON FINDING AREAS 
BY INTEGRATING 
One use of the integral calculus is to enable us to ascertain the 
values of areas bounded by curves. 
Let us try to get at the subject bit by bit. 
Let AB be a curve, the equation to which is known. That is, y 
in this curve is some known function of x. (See Fig. 52.) 
Think of a piece of the curve from the point P to the point Q. 
Let a perpendicular PM be dropped from P, and another QN 
from the point Q. Then call OM = Xl and ON = X 2 , and the ordi-
nates PM = Yl and QN = Y2. We have thus marked out the area 
PQNM that lies beneath the piece PQ. The problem is, how can we 
calculate the value of this area? 
The secret of solving this problem is to conceive the area as be-
ing divided up into a lot of narrow strips, each of them being of 
the width dx. l The smaller we take dx, the more of them there 
will be between Xl and x2 • Now, the whole area is dearly equal 
to the sum of the areas of all such strips. Our business will then 
l. Thompson explains the integral as the sum of a finite number of thin 
strips under the curve as their widths approach the limit of zero. When 
these strips are all below a curve their sum is called today a "lower Ri-
emann sum" after German mathematician George Friedrich Bernhard Ri-
emann (1826-1866). The same sum can be obtained by letting the strips 
extend above the curve as shown in Figure 42, in which case the sum is 
called an "upper Riemann sum." If the strips are drawn so that their tops 
cross the curve, their sum is called a "Riemann sum." Regardless of how 
the strips are drawn, they will have the same "Riemann integral" at the 
limit when they became infinite in number and their widths become infi-
nitely small.-M.G. 
210 

On Finding Areas by Integrating 
211 
y 
QB 
P 
A 
Y2 
Y1 
M 
N 
x 1-1 
X 
0 
X2 
FIG. 52. 
be to discover an expression for the area of anyone narrow strip, 
and to integrate it so as to add together all the strips. Now think 
of anyone of the strips. It will be like this: being bounded 
between two vertical sides, with a flat bottom dx, and with a 
slightly curved sloping top. Suppose we take its average 
height as being y; then, as its width is dx, its area will be 
ydx. And seeing that we may take the width as narrow as 
we please, if we only take it narrow enough its average 
height will be the same as the height at the middle of it. 
Now let us call the unknown value of the whole area S, 
meaning surface. The area of one strip will be simply a bit 
of the whole area, and may therefore be called dS. So we 
may write 
area of 1 strip = dS = y dx 
If then we add up all the strips, we get 
total area S = J 
dS = Jy dx 
So then our finding S depends on whether we can integrate y dx 
for the particular case, when we know what the value of y is as a 
function of x. 
For instance, if you were told that for the particular curve in 
question y = b + ax2 , no doubt you could put that value into the 
expression and say: then I must find J 
(b + ax2)dx. 

212 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
That is all very well; but a little thought will show you that 
something more must be done. Because the area we are trying to 
find is not the area under the whole length of the curve, but only 
the area limited on the left by PM, and on the right by QN, it 
follows that we must do something to define our area between 
those bounds. 
This introduces us to a new notion, namely, that of integrating 
between limits. 2 We suppose x to vary, and for the present purpose 
we do not require any value of x below Xl (that is OM), nor any 
value of X above X 2 (that is ON). When an integral is to be thus 
defined between two limits, we call the lower of the two values 
the inferior limit, and the upper value the superior limit. Any inte-
gral so limited we designate as a definite integral, by way of distin-
guishing it from a general integral to which no limits are as-
signed.3 
2. The word "limit" is confusing here because it is not a limit in the sense 
of the sum of an infinite series. The word "bound" is much clearer. What 
Thompson calls inferior and superior limits of a closed interval along a con-
tinuous curve are lower and upper bounds, although today many textbooks 
call them "lower and upper limits of integration," or "left and right end-
points of integration."-M.G. 
3. Thompson's term "general integral" is no longer used. In the past it was 
also called a "primitive integral" and later an "indefinite integral." Today it 
is usually called an "antiderivative." The reason is obvious. It is the inverse 
of a derivative. Writers differ on how to symbolize it. Thompson simply 
puts it inside brackets. One common symbol for it today is F(x), using a 
capital F instead of a lower case J. In all that follows I have substituted 
"antiderivative" for Thompson's "general integral." 
As Thompson makes clear, a derivative does not have a unique anti-
derivative because an antiderivative can have anyone of an infinite number 
of added constants. These constants correspond to different heights a curve 
can have above the x axis. For example, the derivative of x 2 is 2x. But 2x 
is also the derivative of x 2 + 1; x 2 + 666; x 2 - pi, and so on. It can be x 2 
plus or minus any real number. Because there is an infinity of real numbers, 
if a derivative has one antiderivative it will have an infinite number of 
them. They differ only in what are called their "constants of integration." 
The antiderivative is "indefinite" because it is not unique. 
In Calculus Made Easy, and in all calculus textbooks, when "integral" is 
used without an adjective, it means the definite integral. It is the funda-
mental concept of integration.-M.G. 

On Finding Areas by Integrating 
213 
In the symbols which give instructions to integrate, the limits 
are marked by putting them at the top and bottom respectively 
of the sign of integration. Thus the instruction 
will be read: find the integral of y . dx between the inferior limit 
Xl and the superior limit x2 • 
Sometimes the thing is written more simply 
Well, but how do you find an integral between limits when you 
have got these instructions? 
Look again at Fig. 52. Suppose we could find the area under 
the larger piece of curve from A to Q, that is from X = 0 to X = x 2 , 
naming the area AQNO. Then, suppose we could find the area un-
der the smaller piece from A to P, that is from X = 0 to X = Xl' 
namely, the area APMO. If then we were to subtract the smaller 
area from the larger, we should have left as a remainder the area 
PQNM, which is what we want. Here we have the clue as to what 
to do; the definite integral between the two limits is the difference 
between the antiderivative worked out for the superior limit and 
the antiderivative worked out for the lower limit. 
Let us then go ahead. First, find the antiderivative thus: 
and, as y = b + ax2 is the equation to the curve (Fig. 52), 
f(b +ax2)dx 
is the antiderivative which we must find. 

214 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Doing the integration in question, we get 
a 
bx+ -
X3 + C 
3 
and this will be the whole area from 0 up to any value of x that 
we may assign. When x is 0, this area is 0, so C = o. 
Therefore, the larger area up to the superior limit x 2 will be 
a 
3 
bX2 + -
X 2 
3 
and the smaller area up to the inferior limit Xl will be 
Now, subtract the smaller from the larger, and we get for the 
area S the value, 
This is the answer we wanted. Let us give some numerical val-
ues. Suppose b = 10, a = 0.06, and X 2 = 8 and Xl = 6. Then the 
area S is equal to 
10(8 - 6) + 0.06(83 _ 63) 
3 
= 20 + 0.02(512 - 216) 
= 20 + 0.02 X 296 
=20+5.92 
= 25.92 
Let us here put down a symbolic way of stating what we have 
ascertained about limits: 

On Finding Areas by Integrating 
215 
where Y2 is the integrated value of y dx corresponding to x2 , and 
Y 1 that corresponding to Xl' 
All integration between limits requires the difference between 
two values to be thus found. Also note that, in making the sub-
traction the added constant C has disappeared.4 
4. Because the technique Thompson describes is at the heart of integral cal-
culus, let me try to make it clearer. 
To transform an antiderivative into a definite integral, bounds on the 
continuous curve must be specified. Each bound has a value for the curve's 
antiderivative. The definite integral is the difference between those two 
values. Simply subtract the value of the antiderivative at the left bound, 
where x is smaller, from the value of the antiderivative at the right bound, 
where x is larger. The result is the definite integral. 
The definite integral is not a function. It is a number that is the limit 
sum of all the thin rectangles under the curve, between the curve's upper 
and lower bounds, as their widths approach zero and their number becomes 
infinite. The situation is analogous to cutting a piece of string. Suppose it 
is a foot long and you wish to obtain a 9-inch portion from the 3-inch mark 
to the 12-inch end. What do you do? You snip off the first three inches. 
The fact that the definite integral is the difference between two values of 
the antiderivative is known as the "fundamental theorem of calculus." The 
theorem can be expressed in other ways, but this way is the simplest and 
most useful. It is an amazing theorem-one that unites differentiating 
with integrating. It works like sorcery, almost too good to be true! 
Jerry P. King, in his Art of Mathematics (1992) likens the theorem to the 
cornerstone of an arch that holds together the two sides of calculus. Because 
there is one unified calculus, many mathematicians have recommended 
dropping the terms "differential calculus" and "integral calculus," replac-
ing them with "calculus of derivatives" and "calculus of integrals." 
It is impossible, King writes, to overestimate the importance of this arch. 
"Above the great arch and supported by it rests all of mathematical analysis 
and the significant parts of physics and the other sciences which calculus 
sustains and explains. Mathematics and science stand on calculus .... " 
Newton was the first to construct the arch. Eric Temple Bell, in his 
chapter on Newton in Men of Mathematics (1937), calls the arch "surely one 
of the most astonishing things a mathematician ever discovered." 
The mean value theorem (see the Postscript of Chapter X) defines a point 
p on a continuous function curve between bounds a and b. The point's y 
value is the mean value of the function. If you draw a horizontal line 
through this point, and drop vertical lines through a and b to the x axis, 
you form what is called the function's "mean value rectangle." (See Figure 
53a). The area of this rectangle, shown shaded, is exactly equal to the area 
under the curve's interval from a to b.-M.G. 

216 
FIG. 53. 
Examples. 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
p 
a 
FIG. 
5 3 a . The mean-value rect-
angle. 
(1) To familiarize ourselves with the process, let us take a case of 
which we know the answer beforehand. Let us find the area of the 
triangle (Fig. 53), which has base x = 12 and height y = 4. We 
know beforehand, from obvious mensuration, that the answer 
will come to 24. 
Now, here we have as the "curve" a sloping line for which the 
equation is 
x 
y=-
3 
The area· in question will be 
y·dx= 
-·dx 
f.
X=12 
f.X=12 x 
x=O 
x=O 3 
x 
Integrating 
dx, and putting down the value of the anti-
3 
derivative in square brackets with the limits marked above and 
below, we get 
[ 1 
1 
]X=12 
area = -. - x 2 + C 
3 2 
x=O 
[
X2 
]X=12 
= -+c 
6 
x=O 

On Finding Areas by Integrating 
217 
[ 122 
] 
[02 
] 
area= 6+ C -
6"+C 
144 
=-=24 
6 
Note that, in dealing with definite integrals, the constant C al-
ways disappears by subtraction. 
Let us satisfy ourselves about this rather surprising dodge of 
calculation, by testing it on a simple example, Get some squared 
paper, preferably some that is ruled in little squares of one-eighth 
or one-tenth inch each way. On this squared paper plot out the 
graph of this equation, 
x 
y= -
3 
The values to be plotted will be: 
x 
0 3 6 
Y 
0 
1 2 
The plot is given in Fig. 54. 
9 12 
3 
4 
Now reckon out the area beneath the curve by counting the little 
squares below the line, from x = 0 as far as x = 12 on the right. 
There are 18 whole squares and four triangles, each of which has 
an area equal to I! squares; or, in total, 24 squares. Hence 24 is 
y 
II 
4 a 
2 , 
i--' 
1) 
3 
8 
e 
12 X 
FIG. 54. 
FIG. 55. 

218 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
x 
the numerical value of the integral of - dx between the lower 
3 
limit of x = 0 and the higher limit of x = 12. 
As a further exercise, show that the value of the same integral 
between the limits of x = 3 and x = 15 is 36. 
(2) Find the area, between limits x = Xl and x = 0, of the curve 
b 
y=--
x+a 
Area = 
y . dx = 
-- dx 
i X=Xl 
iX=Xl b 
x=o 
x=o x +a 
= b [In (x + a) + C J:' 
= b[ln (Xl + a) + C - In (0 + a) - C) 
Xl +a 
=bln--
a 
Let it be noted that this process of subtracting one part from a 
larger to find the difference is really a common practice. How do 
you find the area of a plane ring (Fig. 56), the outer radius of 
which is r2 and the inner radius is r l ? You know frommensura-
tion that the area of the outer circle is 7Tr22; then you find the area 
of the inner circle 7TrI2; then you subtract the latter from the 
former, and find area of ring = 7T(r22 - rI2); which may be written 
7T(r2 + rl)(r2 - r l ) 
= mean circumference of ring X width of 
ring. 
(3) Here's another case-that of the die-
away curve. Find the area between X = 0 and 
x = a of the curve (Fig. 57) whose equation 
IS 
y = be-x 
Area = bix=ae-x . dx 
x=o 
FIG. 56. 

v 
On Finding Areas by Integrating 
-11- ..... 
x 
FIG. 57. 
The integration gives 
p 
= b(-e-a - (-e-Q)} 
= b(l - e-a ) 
219 
v 
FIG. 58. 
(4) Another example is afforded by the adiabatic curve of a 
perfect gas, the equation to which is pvn = c, where p stands for 
pressure, v for volume, and n has the value 1.42 (Fig. 58). 
Find the area under the curve (which is proportional to the 
work done in suddenly compressing the gas) from volume V2 to 
volume VI. 
Here we have i
"="2 
area = 
cv-n • dv 
. 
V=Vl 
[ 
1 
]"2 
=c -- Vl - n 
I-n 
"1 
1 (l-n 
l-n) 
=C-- V2 
-VI 
I-n 
-C (1 
1) 
= 0.42 
V2°.42 -
VI °.42 

220 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
An Exercise. 
Prove the ordinary mensuration formula, 
that the area A of a circle whose radius is 
R, is equal to TTR 2. 
Consider an elementary zone or annulus 
of the surface (Fig. 59), of breadth dr, situ-
ated at a distance r from the centre. We 
may consider the entire surface as consist-
ing of such narrow zones, and the whole 
FIG. 5 9 . 
area A will simply be the integral of all 
such elementary zones from centre to mar-
gin, that is, integrated from r = 0 to r = R. 
We have therefore to find an expression for the elementary area 
dA of the narrow zone. Think of it as a strip of breadth dr, and 
of a length that is the periphery of the circle of radius r, that is, 
a length of 27Tr. Then we have, as the area of the narrow zone, 
dA = 27Tr dr 
Hence the area of the whole circle will be: 
J 
{r=R 
(r=R 
A = dA = L=o 27Tr' dr = 27T L=o r . dr 
Now, the antiderivative of r' dr is 4r2. Therefore, 
A = 27T[ 4r2 I: 
or 
A = 27T[tR2 - 4(0)2) 
whence 
A = TTR 2 
Another Exercise. 
Let us find the mean value of the posItive part of the curve 
y = x - x 2 , which is shown in Fig. 60. To find the mean ordinate, 
we shall have to find the area of the 
M 
piece OMN, and then divide it by y~ 
the length of the base ON. But be-
~ 
N 
fore we can find the area we must as- p~ 
certain the length of the base, so as 
FIG. 60. 

On Finding Areas by Integrating 
221 
to know up to what limit we are to integrate. At N the ordinate 
y has zero value; therefore, we must look at the equation and 
see what value of x will make y = O. Now, clearly, if x is 0, 
y will also be 0, the curve passing through the origin 0; but 
also, if x = 1, Y = 0: so that x = 1 gives us the position of the 
point N. 
Then the area wanted is 
But the base length is 1. 
Therefore, the average ordinate of the curve =~. 
[N.E.-It will be a pretty and simple exercise in maxima and 
minima to find by differentiation what is the height of the maxi-
mum ordinate. It must be greater than the average.] 
The mean ordinate of any curve, over a range from x = 0 to 
X = Xl' is given by the expression, 
1 Lx=xl 
meany = -;-
y' dx 
I 
x=O 
If the mean ordinate be required over a distance not beginning 
at the origin but beginning at a point distant Xl from the origin 
and ending at a point distant X2 from the origin, the value will 
be 
1 
LX=X2 
meany= 
ydx 
x -x 
2 
I 
X=XI 
Areas in Polar Coordinates 
When the equation of the boundary of an 
area is given as a function of the distance r 
of a point of it from a fixed point 0 (see Fig. 
61) called the pole, and of the angle which r 
makes with the positive horizontal direc-
tion OX, the process just explained can be 
applied just as easily, with a small modifica-
tion. Instead of a strip of area, we consider a 
x 
FIG. 61. 

222 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
small triangle OAB, the angle at 0 being dO, and we find the sum 
of all the little triangles making up the required area. rdO 
The area of such a small triangle is approximately -
X r; 
2 
hence the portion of the area included between the curve and two 
positions of r corresponding to the angles 01 and O2 is given by 
Examples. 
(1) Find the area of the sector of 1 radian in a circumference of 
radius a inch. 
The polar equation of the circumference is evidently r = a. The 
area is 
! (9=1 a 2 dO = a 2 (9=1 dO = a 2 
J9=O 
2 J9=O 
2 
(2) Find the area of the first quadrant of the curve (known as 
a "cardioid"), the polar equation of which is 
r = a(1 + cos 0) 
= a
2 (9=-¥ (1 + 2 cos 0 + cos2 O)dO 
2 J9=O 
a 
0 
sin 20 
2 
2[ 
].!! 
= -
0 + 2 sin 0 + - + --
2 
240 
a 2(31T+ 8) 
= 
8 
Volumes by Integration 
What we have done with the area of a little strip of a surface, we 
can, of course, just as easily do with the volume of a little strip 
of a solid. We can add up all the little strips that make up the to-

On Finding Areas by Integrating 
223 
tal solid, and find its volume, just as we have added up all the 
small little bits that made up an area to find the final area of the 
figure operated upon. 
Examples. 
(1) Find the volume of a sphere of radius r. 
A thin spherical shell has for volume 47TX2 dx (see Fig. 59). 
Summing up all the concentric shells which make up the sphere, 
we have 
Lx=r 
[ 3]" 
volume sphere = 
47TX2 dx = 47T 
~ = t7Tr3 
X=O 
0 
We can also proceed as follows: a slice of the sphere, of thick-
ness dx, has for volume 7TJ2 dx (see Fig. 62). Also x and yare re-
lated by the expression 
y2 = r2 _x2 
Hence 
volume sphere = 2 L:~ m/ - x 2)dx 
(2) Find the volume of the solid generated by the revolution of 
the curve l = 6x about the axis of x, between x = 0 and x = 4. 
y 
FIG. 62. 

224 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
The volume of a slice of the solid is 7TJ 2dx. 
Hence 
volume = L: 7ry2dx=67r L:XdX 
= 61T[ ~' I 
= 481T = 150.8. 
On Quadratic Means 
In certain branches of physics, particularly in the study of alter-
nating electric currents, it is necessary to be able to calculate the 
quadratic mean of a variable quantity. By "quadratic mean" is de-
noted the square root of the mean of the squares of all the values 
between the limits considered. Other names for the quadratic 
mean of any quantity are its "virtual" value, or its "R.M.S." (mean-
ing root-mean-square) value. The French term is valeur efficace. If 
y is the function under consideration, and the quadratic mean is 
to be taken between the limits of x = 0 and x = k; then the qua-
dratic mean is expressed as 
~H'Y'dx 
Examples. 
(1) To find the quadratic mean of the function y = ax (Fig. 63). 
Here the intergral is Lka2x2dX which is la2k 3• Dividing by k 
and taking the square root, we have 
1 
quadratic mean = --ak 
V3 y 
y 
Here the arithmetical mean is ~ak; and 
the ratio of quadratic to arithmetical 
mean (this ratio is called the form-factor) 
is 2/V3 = 2V3/3 = 1.1547. . . . 
-oC-~L..L_...L.L-.L..L.J...L...L...L...L...-x 
FIG. 63. 

On Finding Areas by Integrating 
225 
(2) To find the quadratic mean of the function y = xa. 
The integral is 
x 2a dx, that is ---
l
X=k 
k2a+l 
x=O 
2a + 1 
{E;
2a 
Hence 
quadratic mean = 
---
2a+ 1 
(3) To find the quadratic mean of the function y = a ~ 
l
X=k 
lX=k 
The integral is 
x=O (a J)2 dx, that is 
x=o aXdx 
or 
[
X ]X=k 
k 
1 
a 
a -
-
, which is --
In a 
x=O 
In a 
j{ff
k_ 1 
Hence the quadratic mean is 
--
kIna 
EXERCISES XVIII 
(1) Find the area of the curve y = x 2 + X + 5 between x = 0 and 
x = 6, and the mean ordinate between these limits. 
(2) Find the area of the parabola y = 2aYx between x = 0 and 
x = a. Show that it is two-thirds of the rectangle of the limiting 
ordinate and of its abscissa. 
(3) Find the area of the portion of a sine curve between x = 0 
and x = 'fT, and the mean ordinate. 
(4) Find the area of the portion of the curve y = sin2 x from 0° 
to 180°, and find the mean ordinate. 
(5) Find the area included between the two branches of the 
curve y = x 2 ± x~ from x = 0 to x = 1, also the area of the positive 
portion of the lower branch of the curve (Fig. 30). 
(6) Find the volume of a cone of radius of base r, and of 
height h. 
(7) Find the area of the curve y = x 3 - In x between x = 0 and 
x= 1. 

226 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
(8) Find the volume generated by the curve y = ~, 
as it 
revolves about the axis of x, between x = 0 and x = 4. 
(9) Find the volume generated by a sine curve between x = 0 
and x = 7T, revolving about the axis of x. 
(10) Find the area of the portion of the curve xy = a included 
between x = 1 and x = a, where a > 1. Find the mean ordinate 
between these limits. 
(11) Show that the quadratic mean of the function y = sin x, 
between the limits of 0 and 7T radians, is v2. Find also the ar-
2 
ithmetical mean of the same function between the same limits; 
and show that the form-factor is =1.11. 
(12) Find the arithmetical and quadratic means of the function 
x 2 + 3x + 2, from x = 0 to x = 3. 
(13) Find the quadratic mean and the arithmetical mean of the 
function y = Al sin x + A3 sin 3x between x = 0 and x = 271'. 
(14) A certain curve has the equation y = 3.42l·2IX• Find the 
area included between the curve and the axis of x, from the ordi-
nate at x = 2 ,to the ordinate at x = 8. Find also the height of the 
mean ordinate of the curve between these points. 
(15) The curve whose polar equation is r = a(1 - cos 0) is 
known as the cardioid. Show that the area enclosed by the axis 
and the curve between 0 = 0 and 0 = 271' radians is equal to 1.5 
times that of the circle whose radius is a. 
(16) Find the volume generated by the curve 
y = ±.:: V x(lO - x) 
6 
rotating about the axis of x. 

Chapter XX 
DODGES, PITFALLS, AND 
TRIUMPHS 
Dodges. 
A great part of the labor of integrating things consists 
in licking them into some shape that can be integrated. The 
books-and by this is meant the serious books--on the integral 
calculus are full of plans and methods and dodges and artifices for 
this kind of work. The following are a few of them. 
Integration by Parts. 
This name is given to a dodge, the formula 
for which is 
Iu dx=ux - Ix du+C 
It is useful in some cases that you can't tackle directly, for it 
shows that if in any case I x du can be found, then I u dx can also 
be found. The formula can be deduced as follows. 
d(ux) = u dx + x du 
which may be written 
u dx = d(ux) - x du 
which by direct integration gives the above expression. 
Examples. 
(1) Find I 
w· sin w dw 
227 

228 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Write u = w, and dx for sin w . dw. We shall then have du = dw, 
while x = fSin w· dw = -cos w. 
Putting these into the formula, we get 
f 
w· sin w dw = w(-cos w) -f -cos w dw 
= -w cos w + sin w + C. 
Write 
u =x dv=exdx 
then 
du =dx 
v=ex 
and 
f 
xex dx = xex - f 
eX dx (by the formula) 
= xeX - eX + C = eX(x - 1) + C 
(3) Try f cos2 0 dO. 
u = cos 0 
dx = cos 0 dO 
Hence 
du = -sin 0 dO 
x = sin 0 
f cos20 dO = cos 0 sin 0 + f sin20 dO 
2 cos 0 sin 0 f 
= 
2 
+ 
(1 - cos20)dO 
sin 20 f f 
= -2- + dO-
cos20 dO 
Hence 
f 
sin 20 
2 cos2 0 dO= -2- + 0+ 2C 

Dodges, Pit/alls, and Triumphs 
229 
and 
cos 0 dO = -- + - + C 
J 
2 
sin 20 
0 
4 
2 
(4) Find J 
x 2 sin x dx. 
Write 
u = x 2 
dv = sin x dx 
then 
du=2xdx 
v=-cosx 
J 
x 2 sin x dx = _x2 cos X + 2 J 
x cos x dx 
Now find J 
x cos x dx, integrating by parts (as in Example 1 
above): 
J 
x cos x dx = x sin x + cos x + C 
Hence f 
x 2 sin x dx = _x2 cos X + 2x sin x + 2 cos x + C' 
= (2 - x 2) cos X + 2x sin x + C' 
(5) Find f 
~dx. 
Write 
then 
u=~, dx=dv 
xdx 
du = -
... r.--; (see Chap. IX) 
V l-x2 
and x = v; so that 
J ... r--2 
... r--2 J x 2dx 
V l-x~dx=x V l-x~+ ~ 

230 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Here we may use a little dodge, for we can write 
V I-x- x-
-
-
I
~ ~d 
- I(I-X2)dX -
I 
dx 
I 
x2dx 
~ ~~ 
I 
x2dx 
Adding these two last equations, we get rid of 
... ~' 
V I-x-
and we have 
2I~dX=X~+ IvS 
dx 
Do you remember meeting ~ r--:;? It is got by differentiat-
V l-x2 
ing y = arc sin x; hence its integral is arc sin x, and so 
f~~ x~ 
1 
V 1 - x-dx = 
2 
+ 2' arc sin x + C 
You can try now some exercises by yourself; you will find some 
at the end of this chapter. 
Substitution. 
This is the same dodge as explained in Chap. IX. 
Let us illustrate its application to integration by a few examples. 
(1) I v'3+x dx 
Let 
u = 3 + x, 
du = dx 
replace: 
u' du = 3U' + C = 3(3 + x)' + C 
I 
1 
2 
l 
2 
l 
I 
dx 
(2) 
x 
-x 
e +e 

Dodges, Pitfalls, and Triumphs 
231 
Let 
du 
du 
u = eX - = eX and dx = -
, dx' 
eX 
so that f 
e' ~e- = f 
e'(e'~ e-,) = f (d. 1) = f 
.,~ 1 
u u+-
u 
du 
--2 is the result of differentiating arc tan u. 
I+u 
Hence the integral is arc tan eX + C. 
(3) f 
x'+~+ 3 = f 
x'+2:: 1 + 
2 = L+ 1)'~(V2)' 
Let 
u = x + I, 
du = dx; 
then the integral becomes f 
du 
2; but 
2 du 2 is the re-
u2 +(V2) 
u +a 
I 
u 
suIt of differentiating - arc tan -. 
a 
a 
I 
x+1 
Hence one has finally -- arc tan -- + C for the value of 
V2 
V2 
the given integral. 
Rationalization, and Factorization of Denominator are dodges ap-
plicable in special cases, but they do not admit of any short or 
general explanation. Much practice is needed to become familiar 
with these preparatory processes. 
The following example shows how the process of splitting into 
partial fractions, which we learned in Chap. XIII, can be made 
use of in integration. 
Take 
2 
; if we split 
2 
into partial frac-
f 
dx 
I 
x + 2x - 3 
x + 2x - 3 
tions, this becomes: 
~[f~ -f~] =.!. [in (x-I) -In (x+ 3)} +C 
4 
x-I 
x+3 
4 
1 
x- I 
=-In--+C 
4 
x+ 3 

232 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Notice that the same integral can be expressed sometimes in 
more than one way (which are equivalent to one another). 
Pit/ails. 
A beginner is liable to overlook certain points that a 
practised hand would avoid; such as the use of factors that are 
equivalent to either zero or infinity, and the occurence of indeter-
minate quantities such as g. There is no golden rule that will 
meet every possible case. Nothing but practice and intelligent 
care will avail. An example of a pitfall which had to be circum-
vented arose in Chap. XVIII, when we came to the problem of in-
tegrating X-I dx. 
Triumphs. 
By triumphs must be understood the successes with 
which the calculus has been applied to the solution of problems 
otherwise intractable. Often in the consideration of physical rela-
tions one is able to build up an expression for the law governing 
the interaction of the parts or of the forces that govern them, 
such expression being naturally in the form of a differential 
equation, that is an equation containing derivatives with or 
without other algebraic quantities. And when such a differential 
equation has been found, one can get no further until it has 
been integrated. Generally it is much easier to state the appro-
priate differential equation than to solve it: the real trouble be-
gins then only when one wants to integrate, unless indeed the 
equation is seen to possess some standard form of which the in-
tegral is known, and then the triumph is easy. The equation 
which results from integrating a differential equation is called* 
its "solution"; and it is quite astonishing how in many cases the 
solution looks as if it had no relation to the differential equation 
of which it is the integrated form. The solution often seems as 
different from the original expression as a butterfly does from a 
*This means that the actual result of solving it is called its "solution". But 
many mathematicians would say, with Professor A.R. Forsyth, "every dif-
ferential equation is considered as solved when the value of the dependent 
variable is expressed as a function of the independent variable by means ei-
ther of known functions, or of integrals, whether the integrations in the 
latter can or cannot be expressed in terms of functions already known." 

Dodges, Pitfalls, and Triumphs 
233 
caterpillar that it was. Who would have supposed that such an 
innocent thing as 
dy = -,--1_ 
2 
2 
a -x 
dx 
could blossom out into 
1 
a+x 
y=-ln -- +C? 
2a 
a-x 
yet the latter is the solution of the former. 
As a last example, let us work out the above together. 
By partial fractions, 
1 
1 
1 
---= 
+----
a2 - x2 
2a(a + x) 
2a (a - x) 
dx 
dx 
dy= 
+---
2a (a + x) 
2a (a - x) 
1 (f dx 
f 
dx ) 
y--
--+--
2a 
a+x 
a-x 
1 
= -
[In (a + x) - In (a - x)J + C 
2a 
1 
a+x 
=-In--+C 
2a 
a-x 
Not a very difficult metamorphosis! 
There are whole treatises, such as George Boole's Differential 
Equations, devoted to the subject of finding the "solutions" for 
different original forms. 
EXERCISES XIX 
(1) Find fVa2-x2dx. 
(3) Find f xa In x dx. 
(2) Find f x In x dx. 
(4) Find fex cos eX dx. 

234 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
(5) Find I; cos (in x) dx, 
I
(ln xt 
(7) Find -x- dx, 
I 
5x+ 1 
(9) Find 
2 
dx, 
x +x-2 
I 
bdx 
(11) Find 
2 
2' 
X -a 
I 
dx 
(13) Find 
--4' 
I-x 
I 
dx 
(8) Find --, 
xlnx 
(10) Find 
, 
I (
X2 - 3)dx 
x 3 -7x+6 
I
4xdX 
(12) Find 
-4--' 
x -1 
1 
b 
(15) Use the substitution - = - cosh 11 to show that 
x 
a 
I 
dx 
1 1 a - Va2 - b2x 2 
---;==== = -
n 
+ C 
xVa 2 - b2x 2 
a 
x 

Chapter XXI 
FINDING SOLUTIONS 
In this chapter we go to work finding solutions to some impor-
tant differential equations, using for this purpose the processes 
shown in the preceding chapters. 
The beginner, who now knows how easy most of those pro-
cesses are in themselves, will here begin to realize that integra-
tion is an art. As in all arts, so in this, facility can be acquired 
only by diligent and regular practice. Those who would attain 
that facility must work out examples, and more examples, and 
yet more examples, such as are found abundantly in all the regu-
lar treatises on the calculus. Our purpose here must be to afford 
the briefest introduction to serious work. 
Example 1. 
Find the solution of the differential equation 
dy 
ay+b- =0 
Transposing, we have 
dx 
dy 
b- =-ay 
dx 
Now the mere inspection of this relation tells us that we have 
got to do with a case in which dy is proportional to y. If we think 
dx 
of the curve which will represent y as a function of x, it will be 
such that its slope at any point will be proportional to the ordi-
nate at that point, and will be a negative slope if y is positive. So 
235 

236 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
obviously the curve will be a die-away curve, and the solution 
will contain e-x as a factor. But, without presuming on this bit of 
sagacity, let us go to work. 
As both y and dy occur in the equation and on opposite sides, 
we can do nothing until we get both y and dy to one side, and dx 
to the other. To do this, we must split our usually inseparable 
companions dy and dx from one another. 
dy 
a 
-=--dx 
y 
b 
Having done the deed, we now can see that both sides have got 
. 
h 
h·· 
bl 
b 
. 
dy 
Id 
1Oto a s ape t at IS 10tegra e, ecause we recogmze -, or -
y, 
y 
y 
as a differential that we have met with when differentiating loga-
rithms. So we may at once write down the instructions to inte-
grate, 
J; = J-~dX 
and doing the two integrations, we have: 
a 
In y = - - x + In C 
b 
where In C is the yet undetermined constant* of integration. 
Then, delogarizing, we get: 
a 
y = Ce- b x 
which is the solution required. Now, this solution looks quite un-
like the original differential equation from which it was con-
structed: yet to an expert mathematician they both convey the 
same information as to the way in which y depends on x. 
*We may write down any form of constant as the "constant of integration", 
and the form In C is adopted here by preference, because-the other terms in 
this line of equation are, or are treated as logarithms; and it saves compli-
cations afterward if the added constant be of the same kind. 

Finding Solutions 
237 
Now, as to the C, its meaning depends on the initial value of y. 
For if we put x = 0 in order to see what value y then has, we find 
that this makes y = Ce-Q; and as e-Q = 1, we see that C is nothing 
else than the particular value* of y at starting. This we may call Yo 
and so write the solution as 
a 
-- x 
y = yoe 
b 
Example 2. 
Let us take as an example to solve 
dy 
ay+b- =g 
dx 
where g is a constant. Again, inspecting the equation will sug-
gest, (1) that somehow or other eX will come into the solution, 
and (2) that if at any part of the curve y becomes either a maxi-
mum or a minimum, so that dy = 0, then y will have the value = 
dx 
£. But let us go to work as before, separating the differentials and 
a 
trying to transform the thing into some integrable shape. 
dy 
b- =g-ay 
dx 
dy = ~(£ _y) 
dx 
b a 
dy 
a 
--=--dx 
g 
b 
y--
a 
Now we have done our best w get nothing but y and dy on one 
side, and nothing but dx on the other. But is the result on the left 
side integrable? 
*Compare what was said about the "constant of integration", with refer-
ence to Fig. 48, and Fig. 51. 

238 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
It is of the same form as the result in Chapter XIV, so, writing 
the instructions to integrate, we have: 
f dYg =-f 
~dx 
Y--a 
and, doing the integration, and adding the appropriate constant, 
In (Y -!) = -~ x + In C 
whence 
and finally, 
which is the solution. 
g 
-~x 
Y - - = Ce b 
a 
g 
-~x 
Y = - + Ce b 
a 
If the condition is laid down that Y = 0 when x = 0 we can find 
C; for then the exponential becomes =1; and we have 
o=£+C 
a 
or 
Putting in this value, the solution becomes 
g 
-~x 
Y = -(1 - e b ) 
a 
But further, if x grows infinitely, Y will grow to a maximum; 
for when x = 00, the exponential = 0, giving Ymax. = £. Substitut-
a 
ing this, we get finally 
a 
--x 
Y = Ymax.(1 - e b ) 
This result is also of importance in physical science. 

Finding Solutions 
239 
Before proceeding to the next example, it is necessary to discuss 
two integrals which are of great importance in physics and engi-
neering. These seem to be very elusive as, when either of them is 
tackled, it turns partly into the other. Yet this very fact helps us 
to determine their values. Let us denote these integrals by Sand 
C, where 
S = f 
e"t sin kt dt, 
and 
C = f 
e"t cos kt dt, 
where p and k are constants. 
To tackle these formidable-looking integrals, we resort to the 
device of integrating by parts, the general formula of which is 
fUdV=UV- fVdU 
For this purpose, write U = e"t and dv = sin kt dt in S; then 
du = pe"t dt, and v = f sin kt dt = -i cos kt, omitting tempo-
rarily the constant. 
Inserting these values, the integral S becomes 
S = f 
eP' sin kt dt = -i e"t cos kt - f -i cos kt peP' dt 
= -..!:. ePt cos kt +!!.. f 
ePt cos kt dt 
k 
k 
= -i 
ePt cos kt + 1 
c ................ (i) 
Thus the dodge of integrating by parts turns S partly into C. 
But let us look at C. Writing U = e"t, as before, dv = cos kt dt, 
1 
then v = - sin kt; hence, the rule for integrating by parts gives 
k 
C = f e" cos kt dt = ~ e" sin kt -1 f e" sin kt dt 
1 e"t . k 
P s 
C) 
= k. 
SIO t - k. ............... 11 

240 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
The facts that S turns pardy into C, and C pardy into S might 
lead you to think that the integrals are intractable, but from the 
relations (i) and (ii), which may be regarded as two equations in 
Sand C, the integrals themselves may be readily deduced. 
Thus, substitute in (i) the value of C from (ii), then 
S = -.!:. e"1 cos kt + 1!.. (.!:. e"1 sin kt - 1!..s) 
k 
k k 
k 
or 
( p2 
) 
1 
S k 2 + 1 = k 2 e"1 (p sin kt - k cos kt) 
e"1 
from which 
S = 2 
2 (p sin kt - k cos kt) 
P +k 
The integral C may be obtained in like manner by inserting in 
(ii) the equivalent of S given by (i); the final result is 
e"1 
C = 
2 
2 (p cos kt + k sin kt) 
P +k 
We have, therefore, the following very important integrals to 
add to our list, namely: 
e"1 sin kt dt = 
2 
2 (p sin kt - k cos kt) + E 
f 
e"1 
P +k 
e"t cos kt dt = 2 
2 (p cos kt + k sin kt) + F 
f 
e"1 
P +k 
where E and F are the constants of integration. 
Example 3. 
Let 
dy 
ay + b- = g sin 21Tnt 
dt 
First divide through by b. 
dy 
a 
g. 
- + - y = - S10 21Tnt 
dt 
b 
b 

Finding Solutions 
241 
Now, as it stands, the left side is not integrable. But it can be 
made so by the artifice-and this is where skill and practice sug-
a -t 
gest a plan--of multiplying all the terms by eb , giving us: 
dY~t 
a~' ga, 
-
eb + - yeb = -eI' sin 27f"nt 
dt 
b 
b 
~t du 
dy 
~t a 
~t 
For if u = yeb , - = - eb + - yeb 
dt 
dt 
b 
The equation thus becomes 
du 
g ~t 
- = -eb sin 27rnt 
dt 
b 
Hence, integrating gives 
u or ye~t = ! J 
e~t sin 27rnt dt + K 
But the right-hand integral is of the same form as S which has 
a 
just been evaluated; hence putting p = - and k = 27rn; 
b 
a -t 
~ t 
geb 
ye b = 
(a sin 27rnt - 27rnb cos 27rnt) + K 
a2 + 47r2n2b2 
{a sin 27rnt - 27rnb cos 27rnt] 
-~t 
or 
y =g 
+Ke b 
a2 + 47r2n2b2 
To simplify still further, let us imagine an angle cf> such that 
tan cf> = 27rnb/a. 
27rnb 
Then sin cf> = vi 
' and cos cf> = 
a2 + 47r2n2b2 

242 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
or 
which is the solution desired, omitting the constant which dies out. 
This is indeed none other than the equation of an alternating 
electric current, where g represents the amplitude of the electro-
motive force, n the frequency, a the resistance, b the coefficient of 
induction of the circuit, and cJ> is the delay of a phase angle. 
Example 4. 
Suppose that 
Mdx+N dy=O 
We could integrate this expression directly, if M were a func-
tion of x only, and N a function of y only; but, if both M and N 
are functions that depend on both x and y, how are we to inte-
grate it? Is it itself an exact differential? That is: have M and N 
each been formed by partial differentiations from some common 
function U, or not? If they have, then 
au 
au 
-=M and-=N 
ax 
' 
ay 
And if such a common function exists, then 
au 
au 
-dx+-dy 
ax 
ay 
is an exact differential. 
Now the test of the matter is this. If the expression is an exact 
differential, it must be true that 
BM 
BN 
= 
By 
Bx 
for then 
B(BU) 
B(BU) 
-----
BxBy 
ByBx 
which is necessarily true. 
Take as an illustration the equation 
(1 + 3xy)dx + x 2dy = 0 

Finding Solutions 
243 
Is this an exact differential or not? Apply the test. 
8(1 + 3xy) 
--'----=- = 3x 
8y 
which do not agree. Therefore, it is not an exact differential, and 
the two functions 1 + 3xy and x 2 have not come from a common 
original function. 
It is possible in such cases to discover, however, an integrating 
factor, that is to say, a factor such that if both are multiplied by 
this factor, the expression will become an exact differential. There 
is no one rule for discovering such an integrating factor; but ex-
perience will usually suggest one. In the present instance 2x will 
act as such. Multiplying by 2x, we get 
(2x + 6x2y)dx + 2x3 dy = 0 
Now apply the test to this. 
8(2x + 6x 2y) = 6x 2 
8y 
which agrees. Hence this is an exact derivative, and may be inte-
grated. Now, if w = 2x3y, 
dw = 6x 2y dx + 2x3 dy 
Hence 
f 
6x2y dx + f 
2x3 dy = w = 2x3y 
so that we get 
U=x 2 +2x3y+C 
Example 5. 
In this case we have a differential equation of the second de-
gree, in which y appears in the form of a second derivative, as 
well as in person. Transposing, we have 
d2y 
2 
-=-ny 
dt 2 

244 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
It appears from this that we have to do with a function such 
that its second derivative is proportional to itself, but with re-
versed sign. In Chapter XV we found that there was such a func-
tion-namely, the sine (or the cosine also) which possessed this 
property. So, without further ado, we may guess that the solution 
will be of the form 
y = A sin (pt + q) 
However, let us go to work. 
Multiply both sides of the original equation by 2 dy and inte-
dt 
d2y dy 
2 dy 
grate, giving us 2-2 -
+ 2n y - = 0, and, as 
dt dt 
dt 
C being a constant. Then, taking the square roots, 
and 
dy 
V 
2 
2 
-=n C-y 
dt 
But it can be shown that 
whence, passing from angles to sines, 
arc sin I = nt + C 1 and y = C sin (nt + C 1) 
C 
where C 1 is a constant angle that comes in by integration. 
Or, preferably, this may be written 
y = A sin nt + B cos nt, which is the solution. 

Finding Solutions 
245 
d2y 
2 
--n y=O 
dx2 
Example 6. 
Here we have obviously to deal with a function y which is such 
that its second derivative is proportional to itself. The only func-
tion we know that has this property is the exponential function, 
and we may be certain therefore that the solution of the equation 
will be of that form. 
dy 
Proceeding as before, by multiplying through by 2-, and in-
~y~ 
~ 
~ 
tegrating, we get 2-2 -
- 2n 2y -
= 0, and, as 
dx dx 
dx 
ill 
d dy 
2 
2 
d ydy 
dx 
dy 
2 
2 
2-- = 
,(-) - n (y + c2) = 0 
dx2~ 
dx 
dx 
dy 
... ;;;--; 
--nvl+c2 =0 
dx 
dy 
where c is a constant, and ... ;;;--; = n dx. 
vy2 + c2 
To integrate this equation it is simpler to use hyperbolic func-
tions. 
Let 
y = c sinh u, then dy = c cosh u du, and 
y2 + c2 = c2 (sinh2u + 1) = c2 cosh2u. 
f b= 
f':~:'::: = f 
dN = · 
Hence, the integral of the equation 
nfdx = fb 
is 
nx+K=u 
where K is the constant of integration, and c sinh u = y. 

246 
or 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
sinh (nx + K) = sinh u = l 
c 
y = c sinh (nx + K) 
= !c(enx+K _ e-nx.-K) 
= Aenx + Be -nx 
where A = k~ and B = -!ce-K • 
This solution which at first sight does not look as if it had any-
thing to do with the original equation, shows that y consists of 
two terms, one of which grows exponentially as x increases, while 
the other term dies away as x increases. 
Example 7. 
d 2y 
dy 
b- + a- + gy = o. 
dt2 
dt 
Let 
Examination of this expression will show that, if b = 0, it has 
the form of Example 1, the solution of which was a negative ex-
ponential. On the other hand, if a = 0, its form becomes the same 
as that of Example 6, the solution of which is the sum of a posi-
tive and a negative exponential. It is therefore not very surprising 
to find that the solution of the present example is 
y = (e-mt)(Aent + Be-nt) 
where 
a 
Vr-a-2 --4b-'g 
m = -
and 
n = -----=-
2b 
2b 
The steps by which this solution is reached are not given here; 
they may be found in advanced treatises. 
Example 8. 
It was seen earlier that this equation was derived from the 
original 

Finding Solutions 
247 
y = F(x + at) + f(x - at} 
where F and f were any arbitrary functions of t. 
Another way of dealing with it is to transform it by a change 
of variables into 
where u = x + at, and v = x - at, leading to the same general so-
lution. If we consider a case in which F vanishes, then we have 
simply 
y=f(x-at) 
and this merely states that, at the time t = 0, y is a particular 
function of x, and may be looked upon as denoting that the curve 
of the relation of y to x has a particular shape. Then any change 
in the value of t is equivalent simply to an alteration in the origin 
from which x is reckoned. That is to say, it indicates that, the 
form of the function being conserved, it is propagated along the 
x direction with a uniform velocity a; so that whatever the value 
of the ordinate y at any particular time to at any particular point 
xo, the same value of y will appear at the subsequent time t 1 at a 
point further along, the abscissa of which is Xo + a(tl - to)' In this 
case the simplified equation represents the propagation of a wave 
(of any form) at a uniform speed along the x direction. 
If the differential equation had been written 
the solution would have been the same, hut the velocity of propa-
gation would have had the value 
a={! 

248 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
EXERCISES XX 
Try to solve the following equations. 
rlI' 
(1) dO = /LT, given that /L is constant, and when 0 = 0, 
T=To· 
d2s 
(2) -
= a where a is constant. When t = 0, s = 0 and 
dt2 
' 
ds 
-=u. 
dt 
di 
(3) - + 2i = sin 3t, it being known that i = 0 when t = O. 
dt 
(Hint. Multiply out by it.) 

Chapter XXII 
A LITTLE MORE ABOUT 
CURVATURE OF CURVES 
In Chapter XII we have learned how we can find out which way 
a curve is curved, that is, whether it curves upwards or down-
wards towards the right. This gave us no indication whatever as 
to how much the curve is curved, or, in other words, what is its cur-
vature. 
By curvature of a curve, we mean the amount of bending or de-
flection taking place along a certain length of the curve, say along 
a portion of the curve the length of which is one unit of length 
(the same unit which is used to measure the radius, whether it be 
one inch, one foot, or any other unit). For instance, consider two 
circular paths of center 0 or 0' and of equal lengths AB, A'B' 
(see Fig. 64). When passing from A to B along the arc AB of the 
first one, one changes one's direction from AP to BQ, since at A 
FIG. 64. 
249 

250 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
one faces in the direction AP and at B one faces in the direction 
BQ. In other words, in walking from A to B one unconsciously 
turns round through the angle PCQ, which is equal to the angle 
AOB. Similarly, in passing from A' to B', along the arc A'B', of 
equal length to AB, on the second path, one turns round through 
the angle P'C'Q', which is equal to the angle A'O' B', obviously, 
greater than the corresponding angle AOB. The second path bends 
therefore more than the first for an equal length. 
This fact is expressed by saying that the curvature of the second 
path is greater than that of the first one. The larger the circle, the 
lesser the bending, that is, the lesser the curvature. If the radius 
of the first circle is 2, 3,4, ... etc. times greater than the radius 
of the second, then the angle of bending or deflection along an arc 
of unit length will be 2, 3,4, ... etc. times less on the first circle 
than on the second, that is, it will be ~, ~, ~,. . . etc. of the bend-
ing or deflection along the arc of same length on the second circle. 
In other words, the curvature of the first circle will be ~, ~ , ~,. . . 
etc. of that of the second circle. We see that, as the radius becomes 
2,3,4, ... etc. times greater, the curvature becomes 2, 3,4, ... 
etc. times smaller, and this is expressed by saying that the curvature 
of a circle is inversely proportional to the radius of the circle, or 
1 
curvature = k X --
radius 
where k is a constant. It is agreed to take k = 1, so that 
always. 
1 
curvature = --
radius 
If the radius becomes infinitely great, the curvature becomes 
1 
--- = zero, since when the denominator of a fraction is infi-
infinity 
nitely large, the value of the fraction is infinitely small. For this 
reason mathematicians sometimes consider a straight line as an 
arc of circle of infinite radius, or zero curvature. 
In the case of a circle, which is perfectly symmetrical and uni-
form, so that the curvature is the same at every point of its cir-
cumference, the above method of expressing the curvature is per-

A Little More about Curvature of Curves 
251 
fecdy definite. In the case of any other curve, however, the 
curvature is not the same at different points, and it may differ 
considerably even for two points fairly close to one another. It 
would not then be accurate to take the amount of bending or de-
flection between two points as a measure of the curvature of the 
arc between these points, unless this arc is very small, in fact, un-
less it is infinitely small. 
If then we consider a very small arc such as AB (see Fig. 65), 
and if we draw such a circle that an arc AB of this circle coincides 
with the arc AB of the curve more closely than would be the case 
with any other circle, then the curvature of this circle may be 
taken as the curvature of the arc AB of the curve. The smaller the 
arc AB, the easier it will be to find a circle an arc of which most 
nearly coincides with the arc AB of the curve. When A and Bare 
very near one another, so that AB is so small so that the length 
ds of the arc AB is practically negligible, then the coincidence of 
the two arcs, of circle and of curve, may be considered as being 
practically perfect, and the curvature of the curve at the point A 
(or B), being then the same as the curvature of the circle, will be 
expressed by the reciprocal of the radius of this circle, that is, by 
1 -, according to our way of measuring curvature, explained 
OA 
above. 
Now, at first, you may think that, if AB is very small, then the 
circle must be very small also. A little thinking will, however, 
y 
(J 
~----~~-----------------x 
0' 
FIG. 65. 

252 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
cause you to perceive that it is by no means necessarily so, and 
that the circle may have any size, according to the amount of 
bending of the curve along this very small arc AB. In fact, if the 
curve is almost flat at that point, the circle will be extremely 
large. This circle is called the circle of curvature, or the osculating 
circle at the point considered. Its radius is the radius of curvature of 
the curve at that particular point. 
If the arc AB is represented by ds and the angle AOB by d8, 
then, if r is the radius of curvature, 
ds = r d8 
or 
d8 
1 
ds 
r 
The secant AB makes with the axis OX the angle 8, and it will 
dy 
be seen from the small triangle ABC that -
= tan e. When AB 
dx 
is infinitely small, so that B practically coincides with A, the line 
AB becomes a tangent to the curve at the point A (or B). 
Now, tan 8 depends on the position of the point A (or B, which 
is supposed to nearly coincide with it), that is, it depends on x, 
or, in other words, tan e is "a function" of x. 
Differentiating with regard to x to get the slope, we get 
~dY) 
dx 
= d( tan 8) 
dx 
dx 
hence 
or 
d2y 
2 
de 
1 
de 
-=sec e-=---
dx2 
dx 
cos2 e dx 
dx 
de 
de 
dx 
But -
= cos e, and for -
one may write -
X -; therefore 
ds 
ds 
dx 
ds 
d2y 
1 
de 
de 
dx 
3 
d2y 
dx2 
- = -
= -
X -
= cos e -
= --
r 
ds 
dx 
ds 
dx2 
sec3 e 
but sec e = VI + tan 2 e; hence 

A Little More about Curvature of Curves 
253 
d2y 
d2y 
1 
dX2 
dX2 
-
= 
l' 
(\1'1 + tan2 (J)3 {1+(!n 
{1+ ~n 
1'= 
d2y 
and finally, 
dX2 
The numerator, being a square root, may have the sign + or the 
sign -. One must select for it the same sign as the denominator, 
so as to have l' positive always, as a negative radius would have no 
• 
1 
meanmg. 
d2y 
It has been shown (Chapter XII) that if -2 is positive, the 
dx 
d2 
curve is concave upword, while if ~ 
is negative, the curve is 
dx 
d2 
concave downward. If ~ = 0, the radius of curvature is infinitely 
dx 
great, that is, the corresponding portion of the curve is a bit of 
straight line. This necessarily happens whenever a curve gradually 
changes from being convex to concave to the axis of x or vice versa. 
The point where this occurs is called a point of inflection. 
The center of the circle of curvature is called the center of curva-
ture. If its coordinates are Xl' Y1> then the equation of the circle is 
hence 
and 
(X - Xl)2 + (y - Yl)2 = 1'2 
2(x - xl)dx + 2(y - Yl)dy = 0 
dy 
X-Xl +(Y-YI)- =0 ....................... (1) 
dx 
1. Thompson is not always clear as to when a square root i~ to be taken 
as positive. In modern textbooks Vx (or in this case xi) means the 
positive value. If we want to allow either the positive or the negative value 
we write iVx. The formula for the radius of curvature is usually written 
with I ;; I in the denominator; since the numerator is positive, this makes 
f' positive.-M.G. 

254 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Why did we differentiate? To get rid of the constant r. This 
leaves but two unknown constants Xl and Yl; differentiate again; 
you shall get rid of one of them. This last differentiation is not 
quite as easy as it seems: let us do it together; we have: 
d[ 
dY] 
d(x) 
(y - Yl) dx 
-+ 
=0 
dx 
dx 
the numerator of the second term is a product; hence. differenti-
ating it gives 
d( a)) 
dx 
dy d(y - Yl) 
d2y 
(dy )2 
(Y - Yl) 
+ -
= (y - Yl) -2 + -
dx 
dx 
dx 
dx 
dx 
so that the result of differentiating (1) is 
from this we at once get 
1 + .2 
dx 
~
2 
Yl = Y + 
d2y 
dx2 
Replacing in (1), we get 
and finally, 
dy 
-=0 
dx 

A Little More about Curvature of Curves 
255 
Xl and Yl give the position of the center of curvature. The use of 
these formulae will be best seen by carefully going through a few 
worked-out examples. 
Example 1. 
Find the radius of curvature and the coordinates of 
the center of curvature of the curve Y = 2X2 -
X + 3 at the point 
x=O. 
We have 
dX2 
when x = 0; this becomes 
{1 + (_1)2)~ v8 
~--'-4--'-~ = -4- = 0.707 
If Xl' Yl are the coordinates of the center of curvature, then 
-
1+ -
dy { 
dy 2} 
dx 
dx 
(4x - 1){1 + (4x - 1)2) 
Xl=X-
d2y 
=x-
4 
dx 2 
(-1){1+(-1)2) 
1 
=0-
=-
4 
2 
when X = 0, y = 3, so that 
~
2 
1 + .2 
dx 
1 + (4x - 1)2 
1 + (_1)2 
Yl = Y + 
= Y + 
= 3 + 
4 
= 31 
d2y 
4 
dX2 
Plot the curve and draw the circle; it is both interesting and in-
structive. The values can be checked easily, as since when X = 0, 
y = 3, here 

256 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Example 2. 
Find the radius of curvature and the position of the 
center of curvature of the curve l = mx at the point for which 
y=O. 
Here 
hence 
I 
1 1 dy 
1 
1 _1 
m' 
y=m'x' -=-m'x '=-
, dx 
2 
2x~ 
2 
I 
, 
d y 
1 
m' _, 
m' 
-2 = -- X -
X '= --, 
dx 
2 
2 
4x' 
2y ±{ 1 + ::Y 
, 
(4x+ m)2 
= 
= 
, 
m' 
2m~ 
dx2 
4x~ 
taking the - sign at the numerator, so as to have r positive. 
, 
m' 
m 
Since when y = 0 x = 0 we get r = -
= -
, 
" 
2m1 
2 
Also, if xl> Yl are the coordinates of the center, 
= x-
4x+m 
m 
=x+--=3x+-
2 
2 
'{ } 
m' 
m 
-
1+-
2x1 
4x 
, 
m' 
4x~ 
m 
when x = 0 then Xl = -
, 
2 
~
y2 
m 
1+ -
1+-, 
dx 
, , 
4x 
4x' 
Yl =y+ 
=m'x'-
, =--, 
d2y 
m' 
m' 
Also 
4x~ 
when x= 0, Yl = O. 

A Little More about Curvature of Curves 
257 
Example 3. 
Show that the circle is a curve of constant curvature. 
If Xl' Yl are the coordinates of the center, and R is the radius, 
the equation of the circle in rectangular coordinates is 
(x - Xl)2 + (Y - Yl)2 = R2 
Let x - Xl = R cos 0, then 
(y - Yl)2 = R2 - R2 cos20 = R2(l - cos20) = R2 sin20 
Y - Y 1 = R sin 0 
R, 0 are thus the polar coordinates of any point on the circle re-
ferred to its center as pole. 
Since x - Xl = R cos 0, and Y - Yl = R sin 0, 
dx 
dy 
-
= -R sin 0 
-
= R cos 0 
dO 
' 
dO 
dy 
dy 
dO 
-
= -
. -
= -cot 0 
dx 
dO 
dx 
Further, 
d 2y 
2 
dO 
2 
(csc 0) 
-
= -(-csc 0) -
= csc O· ---
dx2 
dx 
R 
R 
(See Ex. 5, Chapter XV.) 
=---
Hence 
R 
Thus the radius of curvature is constant and equal to the radius 
of the circle. 
Example 4. 
Find the radius of curvature of the curve X = 2 cos3t, 
Y = 2 sin3t at any point (x, y). 
Here 
and 
dx = -6 cos2t sin t dt (see Ex. 2, Chapter XV) 
dy = 6 sin2t cos t dt. 
dy 
6 sin2t cos t dt 
sin t 
-
=-
=--- =-tant 
dx 
6 sin t cos2t dt 
cos t 

258 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Hence 
d2y 
d 
dt 
-sec2t 
sec4t 
-
=-(-tant) -
= 
---
dx2 
dt 
dx 
-6 cos2t sin t 
6 sin t 
±(1 + tan2t)~ X 6 sin t 
6 sec3t sin t 
r= 
= 
sec4t 
sec4t 
= 6 sin t cos t = 3 sin 2t, for 2 sin t cos t = sin 2t 
Example 5. 
Find the radius and the center of curvature of the 
curve y = x 3 - 2X2 + X - 1 at points where x = 0, x = 0.5 and 
x = 1. Find also the position of the point of inflection of the 
curve. 
Here 
dy 
2 
d2y 
- = 3x - 4x + 1 -
= 6x - 4 
dx 
' dx2 
{1 + (3x2 - 4x + 1)2}~ 
r= 
6x-4 
(3x2 - 4x + 1){1 + (3x2 - 4x + 1)2} 
Xl =x-
6x-4 
1 + (3x2 - 4x + 1)2 
Yl = Y + 
6x- 4 
When x= 0, y =-1, 
When x = 0.5, y = -0.875: 
-{1 + (-0.25)2}~ 
r= 
= 1.09 
-1 
-0.25 X 1.0625 
Xl = 0.5 -
= 0.23 
-1 
1.0625 
Yl = -0.875 + 
= -1.94 
-1 

A Little More about Curvature of Curves 
259 
When x = 1, Y = -1. 
l 
(1 + 0)2 
r= 
= 0.5 
2 
Ox (1 + 0) 
Xl = 1 -
2 
= 1 
1 + 02 
Y1 =-1 + -- =-0.5 
2 
d2 
At the point of inflection ~ 
= 0, 6x - 4 = 0, and X = t; hence 
dx 
y=-0.926. 
Example 6. 
Find the radius and center of curvature of the curve 
y = ~{e:; + e-:;}, at the point for which x = O. (This curve is called 
the catenary, as a hanging chain affects the same slope exactly.) 
The equation of the curve may be written 
then, 
x 
x 
a -
a--
y = - ea + - e a 
2 
2 
dy 
a 
1 ~ 
a 
1 -~ 
1 ( ~ 
-~) 
- = - X - ea -
-
X - e a = - ea _ e a 
dx 
2 
a 
2 
a 
2 
Similarly 
d2y = .!.{e'; + e-';} = .!. X 2y = 1... 
dx 2 
2a 
2a 
a 
a 2 

260 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
x 
x 
since ea 
a = l = 1, or 
a 2 
r=-
8y 
when 
hence 
a 0 
0 
x = 0 y = -(e + e ) = a 
, 
2 
a 2 
r=-=a 
a 
The radius of curvature at the vertex is equal to the constant a. 
Also when 
0(1 + 0) 
x = 0, Xl = 0 -
= 0 
1 
and 
As defined earlier, 
a 
1+0 
YI = Y + -- = a + a = 2a 
1 
a 
1 ( ~ 
-~) 
x 
-
ea + e a = cosh -
2 
a 
thus the equation of the catenary may be written in the form 
x 
y =a cosh-
a 
It will therefore be a useful exercise for you to verify the above 
results from this form of the equation. 
You are now sufficiently familiar with this type of problem to 
work out the following exercises by yourself. You are advised to 
check your answers by careful plotting of the curve and construc-
tion of the circle of curvature, as explained in Example 4. 
EXERCISES XXI 
(1) Find the radius of curvature and the position of the center 
of curvature of the curve y = eX at the point for which x = o. 

A Little More about Curvature 0/ Curves 
261 
(2) Find the radius and the center of curvature of the curve 
y ~x(~ -1) at the point for which x 
~ 2. 
(3) Find the point or points of curvature unity in the curve 
y =x2 • 
(4) Find the radius and the center of curvature of the curve 
xy = m at the point for which x = Ym. 
(5) Find the radius and the center of curvature of the curve 
l = 4ax at the point for which x = 0. 
(6) Find the radius and the center of curvature of the curve 
y = x 3 at the points for which x = ±0.9 and also x = 0. 
(7) Find the radius of curvature and the coordinates of the cen-
ter of curvature of the curve 
Y=X2 -x+ 2 
at the two points for which x = ° 
and x = 1, respectively. Find 
also the maximum or minimum value of y. Verify graphically all 
your results. 
(8) Find the radius of curvature and the coordinates of the cen-
ter of curvature of the curve 
y = x 3 -x-l 
at the points for which x = -2, x = 0, and x = 1. 
(9) Find the coordinates of the point or points of inflection of 
the curve y = x 3 + x 2 + 1. 
(10) Find the radius of curvature and the coordinates of the 
center of curvature of the curve 
4 
2 
I 
Y = ( x - x - 3)' 
at the points for which x = l.2, x = 2 and x = 2.5. What is this 
curve? 
(11) Find the radius and the center of curvature of the curve 
y=x3-3x2+2x+l at the points for which x=O, x=+1.5. 
Find also the position of the point of inflection. 
(12) Find the radius and center of curvature of the curve 
1T 
1T 
Y = sin (J at the points for which (J = - and (J = -. Find the po-
4 
2 
sition of the points of inflection. 
(13) Draw a circle of radius 3, the center of which has for its 

262 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
coordinates x = 1, Y = O. Deduce the equation of such a circle 
from first principles. Find by calculation the radius of curvature 
and the coordinates of the center of curvature for several suitable 
points, as accurately as possible, and verify that you get the 
known values. 
(14) Find the radius and center of curvature of the curve 
'IT' 
'IT' 
Y = cos 8 at the points for which 8 = 0, 8 = - and 8 = -. 
4 
2 
(15) Find the radius of curvature and the center of curvature of 
2 
2 
the ellipse x 2 + Y 2 = 1 at the points for which x = 0 and at the 
a 
b 
points for which y = o. 
(16) When a curve is defined by equations in the form 
x = F(8), 
y = f(8) 
the radius r of curvature is given by 
dx 
dy 
2 
dx dy 
dy dx 
{( )2 ()2}~/( 2 
2 ) 
r = 
dO 
+ dO 
dO . d02 -
dO . d02 
Apply the formula to find r for the curve 
x = a(O - sin 0), 
y = a(1 - cos 8) 

Chapter XXIII 
HOW TO FIND THE LENGTH 
OF AN ARC ON A CURVE 
Since an arc on any curve is made up of a lot of little bits of 
straight lines joined end to end, if we could add all these little 
bits, we would get the length of the arc. But we have seen that 
to add a lot of little bits together is precisely what is called inte-
gration, so that it is likely that, since we know how to integrate, 
we can find also the length of an arc on any curve, provided that 
the equation of the curve is such that it lends itself to integration. 
If MN is an arc on any curve, the length s of which is required 
(see Fig. 66a), if we call "a little bit" of the arc ds, then we see at 
once that 
v 
5 
.,.1--------; ...... 
Q 
.r, 
;Y. • 
T 
0 
."", 
x. X 
0 
x, 
r. 
X 
(a) 
(b) 
FIG. 66. 
263 

264 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
or 
Now the arc MN is made up of the sum of all the little bits ds 
between M and N, that is, between Xl and X 2 , or between YI and 
Y2' so that we get either 
That is all! 
The second integral is useful when there are several points of 
the curve corresponding to the given values of X (as in Fig. 66b). 
In this case the integral between X I and X 2 leaves a doubt as to 
the exact portion of the curve, the length of which is required. It 
may be ST, instead of MN, or SQ; by integrating between YI and 
Y2 the uncertainty is removed, and in this case one should use the 
second integral. 
If instead of x and Y coordinates--or Cartesian coordinates, as 
they are named from the French mathematician Descartes, who 
invented them-we have rand 0 coordinates (or polar coordi-
nates); then, if MN be a small arc of length ds on any curve, the 
length s of which is required (see Fig. 67),0 being the pole, then 
the distance ON will generally differ from OM by a small amount 
dr. If the small angle MON is called dO, then, the polar coordi-
nates of the point M being 0 and r, those of N are (0 + dO) and 
(r + dr). Let MP be perpendicular to ON, and let OR = OM; then 
FIG. 67. 

How to Find the Length of an Arc on a Curve 
265 
RN = dr, and this is very nearly the same as PN, as long as dO is 
a very small angle. Also RM = r dO, and RM is very nearly equal 
to PM, and the arc MN is very nearly equal to the chord MN. In 
fact we can write PN = dr, PM = r d6, and arc MN = chord MN 
without appreciable error, so that we have: 
ds 
2 
dr 
( )2 ()2 
Dividing by d62 we get 
d6 = r + dB ; hence 
! ~ ~,,+ (:0)' and ds~ ~,,+ (:O),d6 
hence, since the length s is made up of the sum of all the little 
bits ds, between values of 6 = 61 and 0 = O2 , we have 
62 
62 
2 
dr 
f. 
f. ~ ()2 
s = 6
1 ds = 6
1 
r + d6 
d6 
We can proceed at once to work out a few examples. 
Example 1. 
The equation of a circle, the center of which is at 
the origin--or intersection of the axis of x with the axis of y-is 
x2 + l = r2; find the length of an arc of one quadrant. 
2 
2 
2 
dy 
x 
y = r - x and 2y dy = -2x dx, so that - = --
dx 
y 
hence 
d
· 
2 
2 
2 
an slfice y = r - x , 

266 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
The length we want--one quadrant--extends from a point for 
which x = 0 to another point for which x = t'. We express this by 
writing 
s= l
x=r 
t'dx 
x=o Yt'2 _x2 
or, more simply, by writing 
the 0 and t' to the right of the sign of integration merely meaning 
that the integration is only to be performed on a portion of the 
curve, namely, that between x = 0, x = t', as we have seen. 
Here is a fresh integral for you! Can you manage it? 
In Chapter XV we differentiated y = arcsin x and found 
dy = ~. 
If you have tried all sorts of variations of the 
dx 
l-x2 
given examples (as you ought to have done!), you perhaps tried to 
x 
differentiate something like y = a arcsin -, which gave 
a 
or d _ 
adx 
'Y-Y2 
2 
a -x 
that is, just the same expression as the one we have to integrate 
here. 
f 
J 
t'uX 
X 
Hence s = 
.... / 2 
2 = t' arcsin - + C, C being a constant. 
Vt' -x 
t' 
As the integration is only to be made between x = 0 and x = t', 
we write 
lr t'dx 
[ 
x]r 
S = Y 2 
2 = 
t' arcsin - + C 
o 
t' -x 
t' 
0 
proceeding then as explained in Example (1), Chapter XIX, we 
get 
t' 
0 
S = t' arcsin - + C - t' arcsin - - C, 
t' 
t' 
7T 
or s = t'X-
2 

How to Find the Length of an Arc on a Curve 
267 
Tr 
since arcsin 1 is 90° or - and arc-
2 
sin 0 is zero, and the constant C 
disappears, as has been shown. 
The length of the quadrant is 
Trr 
therefore -, and the length of 
2 
the circumference, being four 
Trr 
times this, is 4 X - = 2Trr. 
2 
Example 2. 
Find the length of 
the arc AB between Xl = 2 and 
v 
FIG. 68. 
X 2 = 5, in the circumference X2 + y2 = 62 (see Fig. 68). 
Here, proceeding as in the previous example, 
J = [rarcsin; +c I: = [6 arcsin ~ + C J: 
= 6[ arcsin ~ - arcsin ~ ] = 6(0.9851 - 0.3398) 
= 3.8716 (the arcs being expressed in radians). 
x 
It is always well to check results obtained by a new and yet un-
familiar method. This is easy, for 
2 
1 
d 
0 
5 
cos AOX = "6 = 3" an cos B X = 6 
hence AOB = AOX - BOX = arccos t = arccos i = 0.6453 radians, 
and the length is 6 X 0.6453 = 3.8716. 
Example 3. 
Find the length of an arc of the curve 
y = ~{e; + e-;} 
between X = 0 and x = a. (This curve is the catenary.) 

268 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
s= J 
1 {~ 
_~}2 
1 +"4 ea - e a dx 
1 J-J 
2x 
2x 
x 
x 
= 2" 
4 + e a + e a - 2ea 
a dx 
Now 
~-~ 
1 J -J 
2x 
- 2x 
ea 
a = l = 1, so that s = 2" 
2 + e a + e a dx 
x 
x 
we can replace 2 by 2 X eO = 2 X i-a; then 
1 J..J 2x 
~-~ 
- 2x 
S = 2" 
e a + 2ea 
a + e a dx 
1 J ~( ~ 
_~)2 
1 J( ~ 
-~) 
= 2" 
ea + e a dx = 2" 
ea + e a dx 
1 J ~ 
1 J -~ 
a [~ 
-~] 
= 2" 
ea dx + 2" 
e a dx = 2" ea - e a 
Here 
[
X 
x]a 
a a 
-a 
all 
s = -
e - e 
= -[e - e- - 1 + 1) 
2 
0 
2 
and 
Example 4. 
A curve is such that the length of the tangent at any 
point P (see Fig. 69) from P to the intersection T of the tangent 
with a fixed line AB is a constant length a. Find an expression for 

How to Find the Length of an Arc on a Curve 
269 
y 
o 
A 
x 
8 
FIG. 69. 
an arc of this curve-which is called the tractrix1-and find the 
length, when a = 3, between the ordinates y = a and y = 1. 
We shall take the fixed line for the axis of x. The point D, with 
DO = a, is a point on the curve, which must be tangent to OD at 
D. We take OD as the axis of y. PT = a, PN = y, ON = x. 
If we consider a small portion ds of the curve, at P, then 
. 
dy 
y 
SIn () = - = - - (minus because the curve slopes downwards to 
ds 
a 
the right. 
Hence ds =-~,ds=-ady and s=-afdY, that is, 
~ 
y 
Y 
Y 
s =-a Iny + C 
When x=O, s=O, y=a, so that O=-a In a+C, and 
C =a In a. 
a 
It follows that s = a In a - a In y = a In -. 
y 
1. The tractrix is the involute of the catenary. The involute of a curve is the 
curve traced by the end of a taut thread as it is unwound from a given curve. 
The origin of the name tractrix is interesting. It can be demonstrated by 
the following experiment. Attach a length of string to a small object. Place 
the object at the center of a large rectangular table, then extend the string 
horizontally until it hangs over, say, the table's right edge. Grab the string 
where it touches the table edge, then move it along the edge. The track 
generated by the object as it is dragged along the table is a tractrix.-M.G. 

270 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
When a = 3, s between y = a and y = 1 is therefore 
F 
3 [10 ; J: = 3(10 1 - 10 3) = 3 X (0 - 1.0986) 
= -3.296 or 3.296, 
as the sign - refers merely to the direction in which the length 
was measured, from D to P, or from P to D. 
Note that this result has been obtained without a knowledge of 
the equation of the curve. This is sometimes possible. In order to 
get the length of an arc between two points given by their abscis-
sae, however, it is necessary to know the equation of the curve; 
this is easily obtained as follows: 
dy 
y 
-
= -tan (J = -
since PT = a 
dx 
Va 2 _ y2' 
dx = _ Va 2 - y2 dy 
hence 
, 
and 
y 
The integration will give us a relation between x and y, which 
is the equation of the curve. 
To effect the integration, let u2 = a 2 -l, then 
2u du = -2y dy, 
or 
u du = -y dy 
_ fU 2 du _ f u2 du _ f a2 - (a2 - u2) 
x-
2 
-
2 
2 -
2 
2 
. du 
y 
a -u 
a -u 
2 f du f 
=a 
2 
2-
du 
a -u 
2 
1 
a +u 
= a . -
In -- - u + C 
2a 
a-u 
1 
(a + u)(a + u) 
='ia In 
-u+C 
(a - u)(a + u) 
a+u 
=aln V 
-u+C 
2 
2 
a -u 

How to Find the Length 0/ an Arc on a Curve 
271 
We have then, finally, 
a + Va 2 - y2 
... / 2 
2 
X = a In 
-
V a - y + C 
y 
When x = 0, y = a, so that 0 = a In 1 - 0 + C, and C = 0; the 
equation of the tractrix is therefore 
a+Va 2-l V 2 
2 
x=aln 
-
a-y 
y 
Example 5. 
Find the length of an arc of the logarithmic spiral 
r = l between 6 = 0 and 6 = 1 radian. 
Do you remember differentiating y = eX? It is an easy one to re-
member, for it remains always the same whatever is done to it: 
dy 
X 
-=e. 
dx 
Here, since 
6 dr 
6 
r=e -=e =r 
, d6 
If we reverse the process and integrate f l d6 we get back to 
r + C, the constant C being always introduced by such a process, 
as we have seen in Chap. XVII. 
It follows that 
Integrating between the two given values 6 = 0 and 6 = 1, we 
get 
= Y2e1 - Y2l = Y2(e - 1) 
= 1.41 X 1.718 = 2.43 

272 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Example 6. 
Find the length of an arc of the logarithmic spiral 
r = eO between 8 = 0 and 8 = 81 • 
As we have just seen, 
Example 7. 
As a last example let us work fully a case leading to 
a typical integration which will be found useful for several of the 
exercises found at the end of this chapter. Let us find the expres-
a 
2 
sion for the length of an arc of the curve y = - x + 3. 
2 
To work out this integral, let ax = sinh z, then a dx = cosh z dz, 
and 1 + a2x 2 = 1 + sinh2z = cosh2z; 
s = -
cosh z z = -
(e + 2 + e- ) z 
1 f 
2 d 
1 f 
2z 
2z d 
a 
4a 
1 
z 
z 
z 
z 
Z 
= -(e - e - )(e + e - ) + -
8a 
2a 
= ~ (sinh z cosh z + z) = ~(ax VI + a 2x 2 + z) 
2a 
2a 
To turn z back into terms of x, we have 
. h 
l( Z 
-Z) 
ax = sm z = 2 e - e 
Multiply out by 2eX, 
or 

How to Find the Length of an Arc on a Curve 
273 
This is a quadratic equation in eZ, and taking the positive root: 
Taking natural logarithms: 
z = In (ax + VI + a2x2) 
Hence, the integral becomes finally: 
From several of the foregoing examples, some very important 
integrals and relations have been worked out. As these are of 
great use in solving many other problems, it will be an advantage 
to collect them here for future reference. 
Inverse Hyperbolic Functions 
If x = sinh z, z is written inversely as sinh-Ix; 
and 
z = sinh-Ix = In(x + VAl). 
Similarly, if 
x = cosh z, 
z = cosh-Ix = In(x + ~) 
Irrational Quadratic Integrals 
I
Va2 - x2 
... / 2 
2 
a + y'a-2-_-x-2 
(i) 
dx = V a - x - a In 
+ C 
x 
x 
(ii) I Va2 + x2 dx = h Va 2 + x2 + 4a2 In (x + Va2 + x2) + C 
To these may be added: 
(iii) Iv dx 
=In(x+Va2+x2)+c 
a 2 +x2 

274 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
For, if x = a sinh u, dx = a cosh u du, and 
--;;::===:= = du = u + C = sinh -
- + C 
f dx f 
' 
IX, 
Va 2 +x2 
a 
x+ Va 2 +x2 
, 
=In 
+C 
a 
You ought now to be able to attempt with success the follow-
ing exercises. You will find it interesting as well as instructive to 
plot the curves and verify your results by measurement where 
possible. 
EXERCISE XXII 
(1) Find the length of the line y = 3x + 2 between the two 
points for which X = 1 and x = 4. 
(2) Find the length of the line y = ax + b between the two 
points for which x = -1 and x = a 2 • 
(3) Find the length of the curve y = ~x% between the two points 
for which x = 0 and x = 1. 
(4) Find the length of the curve y = x 2 between the two points 
for which x = 0 and x = 2. 
(5) Find the length of the curve y = mx2 between the two 
1 
points for which x = 0 and x = -. 
2m 
(6) Find the length of the curve x = a cos 8 and y = a sin 8 be-
tween 8 = 81 and 8 = 82 , 
(7) Find the length of the arc of the curve r = a sec 8 from 
8 = 0 to an arbitrary point on the curve. 
(8) Find the length of the arc of the curve l = 4ax between 
x= 0 and x=a. 
(9) Find the length of the arc of the curve y ~ x( ~ - 1 ) be-
tween x = 0 and x = 4. 

How to Find the Length of an Arc on a Curve 
275 
(10) Find the length of the arc of the curve y = eX between 
x= 0 and x= 1. 
(Note. This curve is in rectangular coordinates, and is not the 
same curve as the logarithmic spiral r = l which is in polar coor-
dinates. The two equations are similar, but the curves are quite 
different.) 
(11) A curve is such that the coordinates of a point on it are 
x = a(8 - sin 8) and y = a(1 - cos 8), 8 being a certain angle 
which varies between 0 and 2'7T. Find the length of the curve. (It 
is called a cycloid.)2 
(12) Find the length of an arc of the curve y = In sec x between 
'7T 
x = 0 and x = "4 radians. 
(13) Find the expression for the length of an arc of the curve 
x 3 
l- a 
(14) Find the length of the curve l = 8x3 between the two 
points for which x = 1 and x = 2. 
(15) Find the length of the curve y~+x~=a~ between x=O 
and x=a. 
(16) Find the length of the curve r = a(1 - cos 8) between 
(J ;:;; 0 and (J;:;; 71'. 
You have now been personally conducted over the frontiers into 
the enchanted land. And in order that you may have a handy ref-
erence to the principal results, the author, in bidding you fare-
well, begs to present you with a passport in the shape of a con-
venient collection of standard forms. In the middle column are 
set down a number of the functions which most commonly occur. 
The results of differentiating them are set down on the left; the 
results of integrating them are set down on the right. May you 
find them useful! 
2. See the paragraph on the cycloid in this book's appendix.-M.G. 

276 
dy 
dx 
1 
o 
1 
a 
2x 
nxn-1 
-2 
-x 
du+dv+dw 
dx-dx-dx 
dv 
du 
u-+v-
dx 
dx 
du 
dv 
v--u-
dx 
dx 
v2 
du 
dx 
cos x 
-sin x 
sec2 x 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Table of Standard Forms 
y I 
Iydx 
Algebraic 
x 
a 
x±a 
ax 
x 2 
-1 
X 
u±v±w 
uv 
u 
v 
u 
~X2 +C 
ax+C 
~X2 ± ax+C 
1 
2 
C 
lax + 
!x3 +C 
1 
__ Xn+1 +C 
n+I 
In x+C 
JUdX± JVdX± JWdX 
dy 
Put v= -
and 
dx 
integrate by parts 
No general form known 
JUdX=UX- JXdU+C 
Exponential and Logarithmic 
rrigonometrical 
sin x 
cos x 
tan x 
eX +C 
x(ln x-I) + C 
0.4343x(ln x-I) + C 
aX 
-+C 
Ina 
-cos x+C 
sin x+ C 
-In cos x+ C 

How to Find the Length of an Arc on a Curve 
277 
1 
~ 
1 
cosh x 
sinh x 
sech2 x 
1 
(x+ai 
x 
(a 2 + x 2); 
+ 
b 
-(a ± bxi 
-3a2x , 
(a 2 + x 2)", 
a cos ax 
-a sin ax 
a sec2ax 
sin 2x 
-sin 2x 
Circular (Inverse) 
arcsin x 
x arcsin x+~+C 
arccos x 
x arccos x -~+C 
arctan x 
x arctan x - ! In (1 + x 2) + C 
Hyperbolic 
sinh x 
cosh x 
tanh x 
Miscellaneous 
1 
x+a 
1 
Va 2 +x2 
1 
a±bx 
a2 
(a 2 + x 2); 
sin ax 
cos ax 
tan ax 
. 2 
SIn x 
cos2x 
coshx+C 
sinh x+ C 
In coshx+ C 
In Ix+al +C 
In (x + Va 2 + x 2 ) + C 
1 
±- In I a ± bx I + C 
b 
x 
Va 2 +x2 +C 
1 
-- cos ax+C 
a 
1 
- sin ax+ C 
a 
1 
I cos axl + C 
-- In 
a 
X 
sin 2x 
----+C 
2 
4 
x 
sin 2x 
-+--+C 
2 
4 

278 
CALCULUS MADE EASY 
Miscellaneous 
. n-l 
n'S1O 
X· cos x 
. n 
S10 X 
cos X 
. n-l 
--- SIn 
x 
n 
n -1 f n-2 
+ -n-
sin 
xdx+C 
cos x 
1 
in I 
tan ~ I + C 
. 2 
sin x 
S10 x 
sin 2x 
1 
--. -4-
. 2 
-cot x+ C 
S10 x 
S10 X 
. 2 
2 
1 
S10 x- cos x 
in I tan xl +C 
. 2 
2 
SIn X· COS x 
sin X· cos x 
sin (m - n)x 
n . sin mx . cos nx + sin mx . sin nx 
2(m - n) 
m . sin nx . cos mx 
sin (m + n)x +C 
2 (m + n) 
a sin 2ax 
. 2 
SIn ax 
x 
sin 2ax 
----+C 
2 
4a 
cos2ax 
x 
sin 2ax 
-a sin 2ax 
-+--+C 
2 
4a 

EPILOGUE AND APOLOGUE 
It may be confidently assumed that when this book Calculus Made 
Easy falls into the hands of the professional mathematicians, they 
will (if not too lazy) rise up as one man, and damn it as being a 
thoroughly bad book. Of that there can be, from their point of 
view, no possible manner of doubt whatever. It commits several 
most grievous and deplorable errors. 
First, it shows how ridiculously easy most of the operations of 
the calculus really are. 
Secondly, it gives away so many trade secrets. By showing you 
that what one fool can do, other fools can do also, it lets you see that 
these mathematical swells, who pride themselves on having mas-
tered such an awfully difficult subject as the calculus, have no 
such great reason to be puffed up. They like you to think how 
terribly difficult it is, and don't want that superstition to be 
rudely dissipated. 
Thirdly, among the dreadful things they will say about "So 
Easy" is this: that there is an utter failure on the part of the au-
thor to demonstrate with rigid and satisfactory completeness the 
validity of sundry methods which he has presented in simple 
fashion, and has even dared to use in solving problems! But why 
should he not? You don't forbid the use of a watch to every per-
son who does not know how to make one? You don't object to the 
musician playing on a violin that he has not himself constructed. 
You don't teach the rules of syntax to children until they have al-
ready become fluent in the use of speech. It would be equally ab-
surd to require general rigid demonstrations to be expounded to 
beginners in the calculus. 
279 

280 
Epilogue and Apologue 
One other thing will the professed mathematicians say about 
this thoroughly bad and vicious book: that the reason why it is so 
easy is because the author has left out all the things that are really 
difficult. And the ghastly fact about this accusation is that-it is 
true! That is, indeed, why the book has been written-written for 
the legion of innocents who have hitherto been deterred from ac-
quiring the elements of the calculus by the stupid way in which 
its teaching is almost always presented. Any subject can be made 
repulsive by presenting it bristling with difficulties. The aim of 
this book is to enable beginners to learn its language, to acquire 
familiarity with its endearing simplicities, and to grasp its pow-
erful methods of solving problems, without being compelled to 
toil through the intricate out-of-the-way (and mostly irrelevant) 
mathematical gymnastics so dear to the unpractical mathemati-
cian. 
There are amongst young engineers a number on whose ears 
the adage that what one fool can do, another can, may fall with a fa-
miliar sound. They are earnestly requested not to give the author 
away, nor to tell the mathematicians what a fool he really is. 

(1) dy = 13x12 
dx 
du 
(4) - = 2.4t1.4 
dt 
ANSWERS 
Exercises I 
(2) dy = -~ x-~ 
dx 
2 
dz 
1 
2 
(5) -=-u-' 
du 
3 
(3) dy 
2 
2a-l 
-= ax 
dx 
dy 
5. 
(6) -
=--x-' 
dx 
3 
du 
8 
" 
(7) - = --x-' 
dx 
5 
(8) dy = 2axa - 1 
dx 
dy 
3 3-q 
(9) -
= -x q 
dx 
q 
J 
m+n 
y 
m--
(10) -
=--x 
n 
dx 
n 
Exercises II 
dy 
2 
(1) -
= 3ax 
dx 
dy 
3 
I 
(2) -
= 13 x 2X' 
dx 
(3) dy = 6x-~ 
dx 
dy 
1 
I 
I 
(4) - = -c'x-' 
dx 
2 
du 
an 
n 1 
(5) -
= -
z -
dz 
c 
d/ 
(7) --1. = 0.000012 X 10 
dt 
(6) dy = 2.36t 
dt 
de 
T.b-l 
(8) -
= abv 
,0.98, 3.00 and 7.46 candle power per volt 
dV 
respectively. 
dn 
1 
I7i dn 
1 
I7i 
(9) dD = - LD2 -V -;;., dL = - DL2 -V-;;' 
dn ___ 1_ ~ 
gT 
dn __ 1_ ~ g 
du -
2DL 
'TT'U3 ' til' - 2DL 
'TT'uT 
Rate of change of P when t varies 
D 
(10) 
=--
Rate of change of P when D varies 
t 
(11) 2'TT', 2m', 'TT'/, ~'TT'rh, 8'TT'r, 4'TT'r2. 
281 

282 
Answers 
Exercises III 
x2 
x 3 
x4 
(1) (a) 1 + x + - + - + -
+. . . (b) 2ax + b (c) 2x + 2a 
2 
6 
24 
(d) 3X2 + 6ax + 3a2 
dw 
dy 
(2) -=a-bt 
(3) -=2x 
dt 
dx 
(4) 14110x4 - 65404x3 - 2244x2 + 8192x + 1379 
dx 
(5) - = 2y + 8 
dy 
-5 
(7) -----:-
(3x + 2)2 
ad-bc 
(9) --
(cx + d)2 
(11) b + 2ct 
(6) 185.9022654x2 + 154.36334 
6x4 + 6x3 + 9X2 
(8) 
(1 + x + 2X2)2 
anx-n - 1 + bnxn - 1 + 2nx-1 
(10) -------
(x- n + b)2 
(12) Ro(a + 2bt), Ro(a + _b_) , 
2Vt 
(13) 1.4340(0.000014t - 0.001024), -0.00117, -0.00107, 
-0.00097 
dE 
k 
dE 
c+kt 
(14) (a) d" = b + -t.' 
(b) -
= ---
t 
di 
P 
(1) 17 + 24x; 24 
Exercises IV 
x2 + 2ax - a 2a(a + 1) 
(2) ---- ---
(x+a)2 
'(x+a)3 
x2 
x 3 
x2 
(3) 1 +x+ -- + 
; 1 +x+--
lx2 
1x2x3 
1x2 
(4) (Exercises Ill): 

Answers 
283 
(b) 2a,0 
(2) -b,O 
(c) 2, 0 
(3) 2,0 
(d) 6x + 6a, 6 
(4) 56440x3 - 196212x2 - 4488x + 8192. 
169320x2 - 392424x - 4488 
(5) 2, 0 
(6) 37l.80453x, 37l.80453 
30 
270 
(7) (3x + 2)3' 
(3x + 2)4 
(Examples); 
6a 
6a 
3aYb 
6bV:; 18bV:; 
(1) -x -
(2) -----
X4 
b2 'b2 
2Vx 
x 3
' 
2 
l.056 
2.3232 
16 
(3) ----
V'e8 V(jl' ~ 3V'oD 
(4) 810t4 - 648t3 + 479.52P - 139.968t + 26.64 
3240t3 - 1944t2 + 959.04t - 139.968 
(5) 12x + 2, 12 
(6) 6x2 - 9x, 12x - 9 
(7) ~( ~+ Je, ) + 1 ( Ja, -Je, ) 
~( Je, -Je, ) -': ( Va. + Ja, ) 
Exercises V 
(2) 64; 147.2; and 0.32 feet per second 
3aYb 
-4W 
(3) x = a - gt; x = -g 
(4) 45.1 feet per second 
(5) 12.4 feet per second per second. Yes. 
(6) Angular velocity = 11.2 radians per second; 
angular acceleration = 9.6 radians per second per second. 

284 
Amwers 
(7) v=20.4t2-1O.8, a=40.8t 
I72.8in./sec.,122.4in./sec. 2 
1 
1 
(8) v= 
a = 
30\1'(t - I25{ 
45\1'(t - 125)5 
8t 
24t2 - 32 
(9) v=0.8-
22,a= 
23,0.7926andO.00211 
(4 + t ) 
(4 + t ) 
(10) n = 2, n = 11 
Exercises VI 
x 
(1) --::::== 
v7+1 
Exercises VII 
dw 
3X2(3 + 3x3) 
(1) - = 
dx 
27(h3 + h 6)3 
I2x 
2a(x - a) 
(7) ---
(x +a)3 
(9) 
1 
(1-0)~ 
dv 
(2) - = 
dx 
du 
(3) - = 
dx 
v'I + V2 + 3X2(v'3 +4v'I + V2 + 3x2f 
X2(v'3 +x3) 

Answers 
dx 
21 
(5) -
= a(1 - cos 0) = 2a sin 20 
dO 
dy 
.n 
.1 
Idy 
1 
- = a SlO U = 2a SlO -0 cos -0· - = cot -0 
dO 
2 
2, dx 
2 
dx 
2 
dy 
2 
(6) - = -3a cos 0 sin 0, - = 3a sin 0 cos 0; 
dO 
dO 
dy - = -tan 0 
dx 
dy 
2 
2 
(7) - = 2x cot (x - a ) 
dx 
dx dy 
dy 
(8) Write y = u - x; find -, -, and then -
du du 
dx 
Exercises VIII 
(2) 1.44 
285 
dy 
2 
3 
(4) - = 3x + 3; and the numerical values are: 3, 34, 6, and 
dx 
15. 
(5) ±Y2 
dy 
4 x 
1 
(6) -
= -- -. Slope is zero where x = 0; and is ±--
~ 9y 
3Y2 
where x = 1. 
(7) m = 4, n = -3 
(8) Intersections at x= 1, x=-3. Angles 153° 26', 2° 28' 
(9) Intersection at x = y =?t. Angle 16° 16' 
(10) x = t, y = 2t, b =-~ 
Exercises IX 
(1) Min.: x= 0, y = 0; max.: x=-2, y =-4 
(2) x = a 
(4) 25\13 square inches. 

286 
Answers 
dy 
10 
10 
(5) dx = - x2 + (8 _ xl; x = 4; y = 5 
(6) Max. for x=-l; min. for x= 1. 
(7) Join the middle points of the four sides. 
2 
R 
(8) r=3R, r= -, no max. 
2 
(9) r = R ~ r = ~ 
r = 0.8507 R 
V "3' 
V2' 
(10) At the rate of 8\I7T square feet per second. 
RVs 
(11) r=--
3 
Exercises X 
(1) Max.: x = -2.19, y = 24.19; min.: x = 1.52, y = -1.38 
dy 
b 
d2y 
b 
(2) dx = ~ - 2cx; dx2 = -2c; x = 2ac (a maximum) 
(3) (a) One maximum and two minima. 
(b) One maximum. 
(x = 0; other points unreal.) 
(4) Min.: x= 1.71,y=6.13 
(5) Max.: x = -.5, y = 4 
(6) Max.: x= 1.414, y= 1.7678. Min.: x=-1.414, 
y = -1.7678 
(7) Max.: x = -3.565, y = 2.12. Min.: x = +3.565, y = 7.88 
(8) O.4N, 0.6N 
(9) x = f 
(10) Speed 8.66 nautical miles per hour. Time taken 115.44 
hours, total cost is $2,251.11. 
(11) Max. and min. for x = 7.5, y = ± 5.413. 
(12) Min.: x = t y = 0.25; max.: x = --t, y = 1.407 

2 
1 
(1) --+--
x-3 
x+4 
Answers 
Exercises Xl 
1 
2 
(2) --+--
x-I x-2 
287 
2 
1 
(3) -+-
x-3 
x+4 
5 
4 
(4) ---
x-4 x-3 
(5) 
19 
___ 
2_2_ 
13(2x + 3) 
13(3x - 2) 
245 
(6) -+---
x-2 x-3 x-4 
1 
11 
1 
(7) 
+ 
+---
6(x - 1) 
15(x + 2) 
10(x - 3) 
7715 
(8) 
+ 
----
9(3x + 1) 
63(3x - 2) 
7(2x + 1) 
1 
2x+ 1 
(9) 
+----
3(x - 1) 
3(x2 + x + 1) 
2 
1- 2x 
(10) x+ 
+--2---
3(x + 1) 
3(x - x + 1) 
3 
2x+ 1, 
(11) --+-2---
x+l 
x +x+l 
1 
1 
1 
112 
(12) -----+--
x-I 
x - 2 
(x - 2)2 
(13) 4(x _ 1) - 4(x + 1) + 2(x + 1)2 
4 
4 
1 
(14) 
---
9(x - 1) 
9(x + 2) 
3(x + 2)2 
1 
x-I 
1 
(15) ---
-----
x + 2 
x2 + X + 1 
(x2 + X + If 
5 
32 
36 
(16) ---
+--
x + 4 
(x + 4)2 
(x + 4)3 
7 
55 
73 
(17) 9(3x _ 2)2 + 9(3x - 2)3 + 9(3x _ 2)4 
1 
1 
x 
(18) 6(x _ 2) + 3(x - 2)2 - 6(x2 + 2x + 4) 

288 
(1) ab(~x + r"") 
Answers 
Exercises XII 
2 
(2) 2at+-
t 
x 
(3) In n 
(5) npvn-1 
n 
(6) -
3e-x-1 
(7) 
(8) 6xe-'5x - 5(3x2 + l)e-'5x 
(x - 1)2 
x 
15x2 + 12xYx - 1 
(10) 
4 r 
2vx 
. 1 -In (x + 3) 
(11) 
(x+ 3)2 
(12) a X(ax,,-l + x" In a) 
I 
(14) Min.: y = 0.7 for x = 0.693 
l+x 
(15) 
x 
. 3 
2 
(16) - (In ax) 
x 
Exercises XIII 
(2) T = 34.625; 159.45 minutes 
(5) (a) x"(1 + In x); 
(b) 2x (eX)X; 
(c) eX' X XX (1 + In x) 
(6) 0.14 second 
(7) (a) 1.642; 
(b) 15.58 
(8) IL = 0.00037. 31.06 min 
(9) ; is 63.4% of ;0. 221.56 kilometers 
(10) k = 0.1339.0.1445, 0.1555, mean = 0.1446; percentage 
errors:-l0.2%, 0.18% nil, +71.8%. 
. 
1 
(11) Mm. for x=-
(12) Max. for x = e 
e 
(13) Min. for x = In a 
Exercises XIV 
(1) 
(i) dy = A cos (6 _ 7T) 
d6 
2 
(ii) dy = 2 sin 6 cos 6 = sin 26 and dy = 2 cos 26 
d6 
d6 

Answers 
289 
d'll 
2 
d'll 
(iii) 2... = 3 sin 0 cos 0 and 2... = 3 cos 30 
dO 
dO 
4 ° 
7T 
(2) 0 = 5 or "4 radians 
(6) 18.2 cos (x + 26°) 
dy 
(3) - = -n sin 27Tnt 
dt 
-sin x 
(5) -- = -tan x 
cos x 
(7) The slope is dy = 100 cos (0 - 15°), which is a maximum 
dO 
when (0 - 15°) = 0, or 0 = 15°; the value of the slope being 
then = 100. When 0 = 75° the slope is 100 cos (75° - 15°) 
= 100 cos 60° = 100 X ~ = 50 
(8) cos 0 sin 20 + 2 cos 20 sin 0 = 2 sin 0 (cos20 + cos 20) 
= 2 sin 0 (3 cos20 - 1) 
(9) amnOn- 1 tanm- 1 (on) sec2 (on) 
(10) eX (sin2 x + sin 2x) 
. dy 
ah 
(11) 
(1) dx = (x + h)2 
a -~ 
(ii) - e b 
h 
(12) 
dy 
(i) - = sec x tan x 
dx 
( ... ) dy 
1 
111 -=--
dx 
1 + x 2 
dy __ v'3 sec x (3 sec2 x-I) 
(v) 
dx 
2 
(13) dy = 4.6 (20 + 3)1.3 cos (20 + 3)2.3 
dO 
1 
ah 
(iii) -
x ---:---:-
90° 
(h 2 + x 2 ) 
(ii) dy = 
1 
dx 
~ 
dy 
1 
(iv) - = -----------
dx x~ 

290 
Answers 
(14) dy = 302 + 3 cos (0 + 3) -in 3(cos 0 X 3sin8 + 38) 
dO 
(15) 0 = cot 0; 0 = ±o.86; y = ±o.56; is max. for +0, min. for 
-0 
Exercises XV 
(1) x2 - 6x2y - 2l; j - 2x3 - 4xy 
(2) 2xyz + y2z + Z2y + 2xy2Z2 
2xyz + x2z + XZ2 + 2x2yz2 
2xyz + x2y + xy2 + 2X2y2z 
1 
(x + y + z) - (a + b + c) 2 
(3) -{(x - a) + (y - b) + (z - c)} = 
; -
r 
r 
r 
(4) dy = 1) uv-l du + u" In u d1) 
(5) dy = 3 sin 1) u2 du + u3 cos 1) d1) 
dy = u (sin X)tl-I cos x dx + (sin x)" In sin x du 
1 1 
1 
dy=--du-inu-d1) 
1) u 
1)2 
(7) There is no minimum or maximum. 
(8) (a) Length 2 feet, width = depth = 1 foot, vol. = 2 cubic 
feet 
2 
(b) Radius = - feet = 7.64 in., length = 2 feet, 
7T 
vol. = 2.55 
(9) All three parts equal; the product is maximum. 
(10) Minimum = e2 for x = y = 1 
(11) Min. = 2.307 for x = i. y = 2 
(12) Angle at apex = 90°; equal sides = length = \1'2V 
(1) 1j. 
(4) y=iX2 +C 
Exercises XVI 
(2) 0.6345 
(3) 0.2624 
(5) y = x 2 + 3x + C 

4Vax~ 
(1) 
+ C 
3 
(4) tx3 +ax+C 
Answers 
Exercises XVII 
1 
(2) -- +C 
x 3 
291 
X4 
(3) -+C 
4a 
ax2 
bx3 
cx4 
(7) -+-+-+C 
4 
9 
16 
x 2 +a 
a2 +a 
(8) -- = x - a + -- by division. Therefore the answer 
x+a 
x+a 
is ~ x 2 - ax + a(a + 1) In (x + a) + C 
4 
X 
3 
27 
2 
(9) -
+ 3x + -
x + 27 x + C 
4 
2 
x 3 
2-a 
(10) -
+ -- x 2 - 2ax+C 
3 
2 
(11) a2 (2x~+h~)+c 
sin 2aO 
(12) -~ cos 0 - io + C 
(13) to+ 
4a 
+C 
(14) ~O -
~ sin 20 + C 
1 
sin 2aO 
(15) '20-
4a 
+ C 
(17) In 11 + x I + C 
(18) -In Ii-xl +C 
Exercises XVIII 
(1) Area = 120; mean 
4 ' 
(2) Area = '3a' 
ordinate = 20. 
(3) Area = 2; mean ordinate = 217r = 0.637 
(4) Area = l.57; mean ordinate = 0.5 
(6) Volume = ~7Tr2h 
(7) l.25 
(5) 0.571, 0.0476 
(8) 79.6 
(9) Volume = 4.935, from 0 to 7T 
a 
(10) a In a, -- In a 
a-l 

292 
Answers 
(12) A.M. = 9.5; Q.M. = 10.85 
1 
... / 
2 
2 
(13) Quadratic mean = V2 V Al + A3 ; 
arithmetical mean = o. 
The first involves the integral 
f(A/ sin2 x + 2AIA3 sin x sin 3x + A/ sin2 3x)dx 
which mar be evaluated by putting sin2 x = 4(1 - cos 2x), 
sin2 3x = 2(1 - cos 6x) and 2 sin x sin 3x = cos 2x - cos 4x. 
(14) Area is 62.6 square units. Mean ordinate is 10.43. 
(16) 436:3 (This solid is pear-shaped.) 
Exercises XIX 
xVa2 _x2 
a2 
x 
(1) 
. 
+ -
arcsin - + C 
2 
2 
a 
x"+ l 
( 
1 ) 
(3) --
Inx- --
+C 
a+l 
a+l 
(5) sin (In x) + C 
1 
(7) -- (In X)II+I + C 
a+l 
(9) 2 In I x-II + 3 In I x + 21 + C 
2 
(2) ~ (In x - 4) + C 
2 
(4) sin eX + C 
(6) ex(x2 - 2x + 2) + C 
(8) In lin x I + C 
(10) 4 In I x-II +! In I x - 21 + fa In I x + 31 + C 
b 
x-a 
(11) -In -
+C 
2a 
x+a 
(13) i In 
l+x 
1 
--
+'2 arctan x+C 
I-x 
x2 -1 
(12) In -2-
+ C 
X + 1 
(14) Va2 _b2x 2 
1/ 
+C 

Answers 
293 
Exercises XX 
(2) s = ut + !at2 
d 
(3) Multiplying out by e2t gives -
(ie 2t ) = e2t sin 3t, so that, 
dt 
ie 2f = f 
e2f sin 3t dt = -he 2f (2 sin 3t - 3 cos 3t) + E 
Since i = 0 when t = 0, E = n; hence the solution becomes 
i = -h (2 sin 3t - 3 cos 3t + 3e-2f ). 
Exercises XXI 
(1) r = 2V'2, Xl = -2, YI = 3 (2) r = 2.83, Xl = 0, YI = 2 
(3) X = ±0.383, Y = 0.147 
(4) r = ~, 
Xl = YI = 2Vm 
(5) r = 2a, Xl = 2a, YI = 0 
(6) When X = 0, r = YI = infinity, Xl = 0 
When X = +0.9, r = 3.36, Xl = -2.21, YI = +2.01 
When X = -0.9, r = 3.36, Xl = +2.21, YI= -2.01 
(7) When x= 0, r= 1.41, Xl = 1, YI = 3 
When X = 1, r = 1.41, Xl = 0, YI = 3 
Minimum = 1.75 
(8) For x=-2, r= 112.3, Xl = 109.8, YI =-17.2 
For X = 0, r = Xl = YI = infinity 
For X = 1, r = 1.86, Xl = -0.67, YI = -0.17 
(9) X = -0.33, Y = +1.07 
(10) r = 1, X = 2, Y = 0 for all points. A circle. 
(11) When X = 0, r = 1.86, Xl = 1.67, YI = 0.17 
When X = 1.5, r = 0.365, Xl =1.59, YI = 0.98 
X = 1, Y = 1 for zero curvature. 

294 
Answers 
7T 
7T 
(12) When 0 = -
r = 1 x = -
Y = O. 
2' 
'l 2' 1 
7T 
When 0 = 4' r = 2.598, Xl = 2.285, Yl = -1.414 
(14) When 0=0, r= 1, Xl =0'Y1 =0 
7T 
When 0= 4' r= 2.598, Xl =-0.715, Y1 =-1.414 
7T 
When 0 = -, r = Xl = Y1 = infinity 
2 
a2 _b2 
Xl =±--'Yl =0 
a 
(16) r=4a Isin~OI 
(1) s = 9.487 
Exercises XXII 
(2) s = (1 + a2)~ 
(4) ,= l' V\ +4x''''' 
(3) s = 1.22 
= [~V\ +4x' +Jln (2x+ V\ +4x')]: = 4.65 
0.57 
(5) s=-
m 
(8) s = f 
a ~ 
dx 
and 
s = aYz + a in (1 + v'2) = 2.30a 
Jo 
X 

Answers 
295 
(9) s = x-I v'(x - 1)2 + 1 +! In {(x - 1) + v'(x - 1)2 + I} 
2 
and s = 6.80 
I
e v'l'+7 
2 
2 
(10) S = 
dy. Put u = 1 + Y ; this leads to 
1 
y 
s = v'l'+7 + In 
~ 
and s = 2.00 
1 + 
1 +l 
(11) s = 4a 
sin - dO and s = 8a 
L
7T 
0 
o 
2 
L
~1T 
(12) s = 
0 
sec x dx. Put u = sin x; this leads to 
s = In (1 + v'2) = 0.8814 
8a 
9x ., 
{( 
)'} 
(13)s=27 
1+ 4a
-l 
(14) s = I2 \,11 + 18x dx. Let 1 + 18x = z, express s in terms 
of z and integrate between the values of z corresponding 
to x = 1 and x = 2. s = 5.27 
3a 
(15) s=-
2 
(16) 4a 
All earnest students are exhorted to manufacture more ex-
amples for themselves at every stage, so as to test their powers. 
When integrating he can always test their answer by differenti-
ating it, to see whether they gets back the expression from which 
they started. 

APPENDIX 
SOME RECREATIONAL 
PROBLEMS RELATED TO 
CALCULUS 
THE OLD OAKEN CALCULUS PROBLEM 
How dear to my heart are cylindrical wedges, 
when fond recollection presents them once more, 
and boxes from tin by upturning the edges, 
and ships landing passengers where on the shore. 
The ladder that slid in its slanting projection, 
the beam in the corridor rounding the ell, 
but rarest of all in that antique collection 
the leaky old bucket that hung in the well-
the leaky old bucket, the squeaky old bucket, 
the leaky old bucket that hung in the well. 
Katherine O'Brien, in 
The American Mathematical Monthly 
(vol. 73, 1966, p. 881). 
Problems solvable only by calculus are extremely rare in popular 
puzzle books. One exception is a puzzle that usually involves an 
animal A that is a certain distance from a man or another animal 
B. Assume the animal is a cat directly north of a dog. Both run 
at a constant rate, but B goes faster than A. If both animals run 
due north, the dog will of course eventually catch the cat. In this 
296 

Appendix 
297 
form it is equivalent to Zeno's famous paradox of Achilles and the 
tortoise. It is the simplest example of what are called "pursuit 
paths." Finding the distance traveled by pursuer and pursued, in 
this linear form, is an easy task involving only arithmetic. 
Pursuit paths on the plane become more interesting. Assume 
that the cat travels in a straight line due east, and that the dog al-
ways runs directly toward the cat. Both go at a constant rate. If 
the dog is faster than the cat it can always catch the cat. Given its 
initial distance south of the cat, and the ratio of their speeds, how 
far does the cat go before it is caught? How far does the dog go, 
along its curved path, before it catches the cat? 
Versions of this two-dimensional pursuit problem are not quite 
so easy to solve. Such puzzles were popular in the eighteenth cen-
tury when they usually involved one ship pursuing another. Later 
versions took the form of running animals and persons. I will cite 
two examples from classic twentieth-cenrury puzzle collections. 
Henry Dudeney, in Puzzles and Curious Problems (1931, Prob-
lem 210) describes the situation this way. Pat is 100 yards south 
of a pig. The pig runs due west. Pat goes twice as fast as the pig. 
If he always runs directly toward the pig, how far does each go 
before the pig is caught? 
Sam Loyd, in his Cyclopedia of Puzzles (1914, p. 217), also 
makes the pursued a pig, but now it is being chased by Tom the 
Piper's Son. (He stole a pig, remember, in the old Mother Goose 
rhyme). Tom is 250 yards south of the pig and the pig runs due 
east. Both go at uniform rates with Tom running ~ as fast as the 
pig. Tom always runs directly toward the pig. Again, how far 
does each travel before the pig is caught? 
Such problems can be solved the hard way by integrating. Du-
deney answers his puzzle with no explanation of how to solve it. 
He adds: "The curve of Pat's line is one of those curves the length 
of which may be exactly measured. But we have not space to go 
into the method." 
Like so many calculus problems, it turns out that pursuit prob-
lems of this type often can be handled by simple formulas, al-
though calculus is needed to prove them. One such method is 
given by L.A. Graham in his Ingenious Mathematical Problems and 
Methods (1959, Problem 74). His version of the puzzle involves a 
dog chasing a cat. The dog, 60 yards south of the cat, runs ~ as 

298 
Appendix 
fast as the cat who runs due east. Graham first solves the problem 
by integrating, then provides the following surprising formula. 
The distance traveled by the cat equals the initial distance be-
tween dog and cat multiplied by the fraction that expresses the 
ratio of their speeds, divided by a number one less than the 
square of the ratio. 
Using the parameters of Graham's problem, the distance trav-
eled by the cat is: 
which works out to 133 and t yards. Because the dog goes i as 
fast as the cat, it travels i times 133 and t, or 166 and ~ yards. 
Applying the formula to Dudeney's version shows that the pig 
runs 66 and ~ yards, and Pat, who goes twice as fast, runs 133 and 
t yards. In Loyd's version the pig goes 428 and ~ yards. Tom trav-
els ~ times that distance, or 571 and ~ yards. 
Another well known pursuit path problem, covered in many 
books on recreational mathematics, involves n bugs at the corners 
of a regular n-sided polygon of unit side. The bugs simulta-
neously start to crawl directly toward their nearest neighbor on, 
say, the left. (It doesn't matter whether they go clockwise or 
counterclockwise). All bugs move at the same constant rate. It is 
intuitively obvious that they will travel spiral paths that come to-
gether at the polygon's center. When they all meet, how far has 
each bug traveled? 
Although the problem can be posed with any regular polygon, 
it is usually based on a square. At any given moment the four 
bugs will be at the corners of a square that steadily diminishes 
and rotates until the four bugs meet at the center. Their paths are 
logarithmic spirals. Although the length of each path can be de-
termined by calculus, the problem can be solved quickly without 
calculus if you have the following insight. 
At all times the path of each bug is perpendicular to the 
bug it is pursuing. It follows that there is no component of a 
pursued bug's motion that carries it toward or away from its 
pursuer. Consequently, the pursuer will reach the pursued in 
the same time it would take if the pursued bug remained 

Appendix 
299 
stationary and its pursuer moved directly toward it. Each spiral 
path will therefore have the same length as the side of the unit 
square. 
A geometrical way of measuring the distance traveled by each 
bug starting at the corner of a regular polygon is shown in Figure 
11 where it is applied to a regular hexagon. Draw line AO from 
a corner to the polygon's center, then extend OX at right angles 
to AO until it meets either side AB or its extension as shown. 
AX, which is r times the secant of angle theta, is then the length 
of the path traveled by each bug. In the case of the square, AX is 
(he square's side. In the case of a triangle, OX meets AB at a spot 
two-thirds of the way from A, indicating that the bug travels 
two-thirds of the length of the triangle's side. For the hexagon, 
theta is 60°, and the bug travels twice the distance of a side. 
Minimum path problems that require differentiating occasion-
ally turn up in books on puzzles as well as in calculus textbooks. 
They usually take the form of a swimmer who is in a lake at dis-
tance x from a straight shoreline. He wants to get to a certain 
point p along the coast. Given a steady speed at which he swims, 
and his steady speed while walking on land, what spot along the 
coast should he swim to so as to minimize the total time it takes 
him to swim to shore and then walk to point p along the coast? 
B 
e: 
I :r 
;; 
I 
I 
X·~~--- ------ -----------JO 
FIG. 1 1 . How to calculate a bug's pursuit path on a regular hexagon. 

300 
Appendix 
In his Cyclopedia 0/ Puzzles (page 165), Sam Loyd offers a ver-
sion of such a problem. His text and its accompanying illustra-
tion are shown in Figure 12. Loyd's constants make the problem 
tedious to calculate, but the solution by equating a derivative to 
zero is straightforward. 
FIG. 1 2. Sam Loyd's steeplechase puzzle from his Cyclopedia of Puzzles. 
Here is a little cross-country steeplechase problem which developed during 
the recent meeting, which will interest turfites as well as puzzlists. It ap-
pears that toward the end of a well-contested course, when there was but a 
mile and three quarters yet to run, the leaders were so closely bunched to-
gether that victory turned upon the selection of the best or shortest road. 
The sketch shows the judges' stand to be at the opposite end of a rectan-
gular field, bounded by a road of a mile long on one side by three-quarters 
of a mile on the other. 
By the road, therefore, it would be a mile and three-quarters, which all 
of the horses could finish in three minutes. They are at liberty, however, to 
cut across lots at any point they wish, but over the rough ground they 
could not go so fast. So while they would lessen the distance, they would 
lose twenty-five per cent. in speed. By going directly across on the bias, or 
along the line of the hypotenuse as the mathematicians would term it, the 
distance would be a mile and a quarter exactly. What time can the winner 
make by selecting the most judicious route? 

Appendix 
Figure 13 diagrams the rel-
evant rectangle. Let x be the 
distance from the jump point to 
the rectangle's corner B, and 
(1 -
x) be the distance from 
where the horses start to where 
they should jump the wall. The 
path the horses take on rough 
(1 
~ 
~ 
r-X 
V 
/ 
301 
c 
/ 
/ 
r4' / 
xV 
;/ 
x 
B 
ground is the hypotenuse of a A 
p 
right triangle with a length 
----1 Mile----
equal to the square root of (x2 + FIG. 1 3. Diagram of Sam Loyd's 
.75 2). The horses run on the steeplechase puzzle. 
smoother ground at a speed of 
1.75/3 = .58333+ miles per minute. Their speed on rougher 
ground is a fourth less, or .4375 miles per minute. 
To solve the problem we must first write an expression for the 
total time as a function of x. The time it takes the horses to go 
on rough ground from P to Cis: 
The time it takes them to cover distance 1 -
x, on the 
smoother ground, to the point where they jump the wall is: 
I-x 
.5833 
The total time is the sum of these two expressions: 
v'x2 + .75 2 
I-x 
t=-----+--
.4375 
.5833 
We next differentiate by the "sum rule" (see Chapter VI): 
dt 
x 
1 
- ---;:=== - --
dx 
.4375v' x2 + .75 2 
.5833 
We equate the derivative to zero and solve for x. This gives x 
a value of .8504+ miles. Subtracting this from 1 gives the dis-

302 
Appendix 
tance on smooth ground, from the start to the jump point, as 
about .15 miles. The times are easily obtained by substituting 
.8504 for x in the two time expressions. The total time is 2.85 
minutes or about 2 minutes and 51 seconds. 
Because the ratio of the two speeds is 2T or t we can greatly 
simplify the calculation by substituting 3 and 4 for the respective 
velocities: 
V x2 + .75 2 
1 - x 
-----+--
3 
4 
The derivative of this function becomes: 
Equate to zero: 
Square both sides: 
x 2 
1 
9(x2 + .752) 
16 
16x2 = 9(x2 + .75 2) = 9X2 + 5.0625 
16x2 - 9X2 = 5.0625 
7x2 = 5.0625 
x2 = 5.062517 = .72321428 .... 
x = .85042 .... 
Occasionally what seems to be a very difficult path problem, 
involving the sum of an infinite converging series, can be solved 
in a flash if you have the right insight. A classic instance is the 
brainteaser about two locomotives that face each other on the 

Appendix 
303 
same track, 100 miles apart. Each locomotive travels at a speed of 
50 miles per hour. On the front of one engine is a fly that flies 
back and forth between the two engines on a zigzag path that 
ends when the locomotives collide. If the fly's speed is 80 miles 
per hour, how far does it travel before the trains crash? 
It is not easy to sum the infinite series of zigzags, but this is 
not necessary. The trains collide in one hour, so if the fly's speed 
is 80 miles per hour, it will have gone 80 miles. 
There is an anecdote about how the great mathematician John 
von Neumann solved this problem. He is said to have thought for 
a moment before giving the right answer. "Correct," said the pro-
poser, "but most people think you have to sum an infinite series." 
Von Neumann looked surprised and said that was how he solved 
it! 
A joke version of this problem gives the fly a normal speed of 
40 miles per hour instead of 80. How far does it go? The answer 
is not 40 miles! 
In Chapter 8 of my Wheels, Life, and Other Mathematical Amuse-
ments I published a peculiar path problem invented by A.K. Aus-
tin, a British mathematician. Here is how he phrased it: 
"A boy, a girl and a dog are at the same spot on a straight 
road. The boy and the girl walk forward-the boy at four 
miles per hour, the girl at three miles per hour. As they pro-
ceed, the dog trots back and forth between them at 10 miles 
per hour. Assume that each reversal of its direction is instan-
taneous. An hour later, where is the dog and which way is it 
facing?" 
Answer: "The dog can be at any point between the boy 
and the girl, facing either way. Proof: At the end of one 
hour, place the dog anywhere between the boy and the girl, 
facing in either direction. Time-reverse all motions and the 
three will return at the same instant to the starting point." 
The problem generated considerable controversy centering 
around the question of whether the boy, girl, and dog could ever 
get started. Philosopher of science Wesley Salmon wrote a 
Scientific American article about it which you'll find reprinted in 
the book previously cited. The problem is a strange instance of an 

304 
Appendix 
event that can be precisely defined in forward time, but becomes 
ambiguous when time is reversed. 
Another example of such a paradox involves a spiral curve on a 
sphere. Imagine a point starting at the earth's equator and mov-
ing northeast at constant speed. It traces a spiral path called a 
loxodrome. The point will circle the north pole an infinite num-
ber of times before it finally, after a finite time, strangles the pole 
as the limit of its path. The point starts from a precise spot on the 
equator. But if the event is time reversed, the point can end at 
any spot on the equator. Are the time reversed versions of the 
loxodrome and Austin's dog self-contradictory because they re-
quire starting an infinite series at its limit? Can the two situa-
tions be resolved by applying nonstandard analysis-a form of 
calculus mentioned in my chapter on limits? For more details, see 
Professor Salmon's article. 
Limits can lead to a variety of mind-twisting fallacies and para-
doxes. Consider the doubling series x = 1 + 2 + 4 + 8 +. . . . 
Apply to it the trick I explained in my chapter on limits. Mul-
tiply each side by 2: 
2x = 2 + 4 + 8 + 16 + .... 
The right side clearly is the original series minus 1, therefore 
2x = x-I. We seem to have proved that the series has a final sum 
of -1. 
A less obvious fallacy occurs when we consider the following 
two series, each with terms that get progressively smaller so it 
seems as if each converges: 
1 
1 
1 
1 
X=I+"3+3"+7+···· 
1 
1 
1 
1 
y=2+4+6+8+···· 
The first series is the harmonic series with all even denomina-
tor fractions dropped. The second is the harmonic series with all 
odd denominator fractions omitted. 
Multiply both sides of the second series by 2: 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2y = I + 2 + "3 + 4 + .... 
This is the harmonic series. Clearly it is the sum of x and y. If 
x + y = 2y, then x = y, and we seem to have shown that x - y = 
o. 

Appendix 
305 
We now group the terms of the harmonic series so that each 
even denominator fraction is subtracted from an odd denomina-
tor one: 
x - y = (1 -
~) + (i -
~) + (t - i) + .... 
Each term inside parentheses is greater than zero. In other 
words x - y is greater than zero, so apparently we have shown 
that 0 is greater than o. 
One encounters similar fallacies when terms in a nonconverg-
ing series are grouped in various ways. 
An even wilder fallacy, which bewildered many mathemati-
cians in the early days of calculus, involves the oscillating series: 
1-1+1-1+1-1+ .... 
If terms are grouped like this: 
x = (1 - 1) + (1 -
1) + (1 - 1) + .... , then the series 
becomes 0 + 0 + 0 + .... and x = O. 
But if we group like so: 
x = 1 - (1 - 1) - (1 - 1) - (1 - 1) - .... 
x=1-0-0-0- .... 
x = 1 
Leonhard Euler, by the way, argued that the sum was ~. 
Mathematicians distinguish between infinite series that are ab-
solutely convergent and those that are conditionally convergent. If 
grouping or rearranging terms has no effect on a series' limit, the 
series is absolutely convergent. This is always the case if in a se-
ries with a mix of plus and minus signs the plus terms taken 
separately converge, and so do the terms with minus signs taken 
separately. For example: 1 - J + ~ - ~ + .... is absolutely conver-
gent, with a limit of l 
The series 1 - J + i - ~ + .... is conditionally convergent be-
cause its plus and minus terms, taken separately, do not converge. 
By rearranging its terms it can have any limit you please. If the 
terms are not rearranged, their partial sums hop back and forth to 
finally converge on .693147 .... , the natural logarithm of 2. 
An ancient geometrical paradox involving a series of line seg-
ments that appear to reach a limit, but do not, is the fallacious 

306 
Appendix 
"proof' that a square's diagonal is 
equal to the sum of its two sides. 
Figure 14 shows a series of stair-
steps along a square's diagonal. Be-
cause each new series of steps is 
smaller than the previous series, it 
looks as if the stairsteps eventually 
get so tiny that they become the di-
agonal. Because each stairstep has a 
length equal to the sum of two 
sides of the square, have we not 
shown that the diagonal is the sum 
of two sides? 
FIG. 
1 4 . "Proof" 
that 
a 
square's diagonal equals the 
sum of its two sides. 
Of course we haven't. It is true 
that the stairsteps, as they get smaller, converge on the diagonal 
as a limit, but this is a case where they never actually reach the 
limit. No matter how far we carry the procedure, the total length 
of the steps remains twice the square's side. 
In a similar way we can "prove" that half the circumference of 
a circle equals the circle's diameter. The "proof' is based on the 
yin-yang symbol of the Orient, as shown in Figure 15. As the 
semicircles get smaller and smaller they appear to become the 
circle's diameter. However, as in the previous fallacy, they never 
actually reach this limit. The construction along the circle's di-
ameter, and the construction along the square's diagonal, are 
fractals. Magnify any portion of ei-
ther "curve" and it always looks the 
same. 
A beautiful example of a fractal of 
infinite length even though it sur-
rounds a finite area is the snowflake 
curve. It is produced by attaching a 
small equilateral triangle to the 
central third of each side of an equi-
lateral triangle, then continuing to 
add smaller and smaller triangles to 
the new sides. Imagine this process FIG. 1 5. A yin-yang "proof" 
carried to infinity. When the snow-
that half a circle's circumfer-
flake reaches its limit, its perimeter ence equals its diameter. 

Appendix 
307 
becomes infinitely long. At the limit it has no tangent at any 
point, therefore it is a curve without a derivative. Figure 16 
shows what the curve looks like after a small number of steps. 
When I wrote about the snowflake in my Scientific American col-
umn I said it had a solid analog with very similar properties. 
Imagine a regular tetrahedron with a smaller regular tetrahedron 
attached to the central fourth of each face. Assume this procedure 
is repeated, with smaller and smaller tetrahedra, to infinity. The 
resulting surface, I wrote, is a fractal surface, crinkly like the 
snowflake, infinite in area even though it surrounds a finite vol-
ume of space. 
My intuition was wrong. William Gosper, a computer scientist 
famed for his discovery of the glider gun in John Conway's fabled 
game of Life, was suspicious of my remarks. He wrote a computer 
program to trace the progress of the solid snowflake. He found 
that at the limit the polyhedron converged on the surface of a 
cube! Although the cube is crosscrossed with an infinity of lines, 
at the limit the lines have no thickness, so the cube's surface is 
perfectly smooth. 
Another striking example of a solid with a finite volume but an 
infinite surface area is provided by the sequence of attached cubes 
shown in Figure 17. The top cube has a side of 1. The sides di-
FIG. 1 6. How the snowflake curve grows. 

308 
• • · · 
Appendix 
1 
1 
minish in the series: 1 + V2 + Y3 + 
1 
1 
V4+ ... +Y;;+ .... 
The series diverges, which means that 
the polyhedron grows to an infinite 
length. The sum of the areas of the faces 
also diverges. Consider only the faces 
shown shaded. Their areas are in the se-
. 
I 
1 
1 
1 
nes: 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + ... + it .... 
Do you recognize it? It is the harmonic 
series which we know diverges. It would 
require an infinite supply of paint just to 
paint one side of each cube! On the other 
hand, the volumes of the cubes fall into 
the series: 
1 
1 
1 
1 + 2V2 + 3Y3 + 4V4 + ... + 
1 
nY;;+··· . 
FIG. 17. A solid of fi-
This series converges. The total vol-
nite volume but infinite ume of the cubes is a finite number, but 
surface area. 
the sum of their surface areas is infinite! 
EXTREMUM PROBLEMS 
Examples of extrema (maximum and minimum values) abound in 
physics. Soap films form minimal surface areas. Refracted light 
minimizes the time it takes to go from A to B. In general rela-
tivity bodies moving freely in space-time follow geodesics (short-
est paths), and planets and stars seek to minimize their surface 
area, though mountains and rotational bulges go the other way. 
Examples are endless. The fact that at extreme points in functions 
their derivatives equal zero is a striking tribute to the simplicity 
which nature seems to favor in its fundamental laws. 
A maximum value of one variable in a function often mini-
mizes another variable, and vice versa. A circle's circumference, 
for instance, is a minimum length that surrounds a given area. 

Appendix 
309 
Conversely, the circle is the closed curve of given length that 
maximizes the area it surrounds. A miniskirt is designed both to 
minimize a skirt's length and maximize the amount of exposed 
legs. A maxiskirt maximizes its length and minimizes the ex-
posed legs. 
In Chapter XI Thompson asks how a number n should be di-
vided into two parts so that the product of the parts is maximum. 
He shows how easy it is to find the answer by equating a deriva-
tive to zero. The number must be divided in half, giving a prod-
uct equal to n2/4. 
A father tosses a handful of coins on a table and says to his son: 
"Separate those coins into two parts, and your weekly allowance 
will be the product of the amount in each part. The son maxi-
mizes his allowance by dividing the coins so that the two 
amounts are as nearly equal as possible. 
The problem of dividing n into two parts to get a maximum 
product is equivalent to the following geometrical problem. 
Given a rectangle's perimeter, what sides will maximize its area? 
The answer of course is a square. For example, suppose the perim-
eter is 14. The sum of the two adjacent sides is 7. To maximize 
the rectangle's area each side must be half of 7 or 3.5, forming a 
square of area 12.25. 
Paul Halmos, in his Problems for Mathematicians Young and Old 
(1991), asks in Problem 51 for the shortest curve that bisects the 
area of an equilateral triangle. You might guess it to be a straight 
line parallel to a side, a line of 
length .707 .... The correct answer 
is a circular arc of length .673 .... 
You can prove this with calculus, 
but there is an easier way. Consider 
the regular hexagon shown in Fig-
ure 18. The figure of smallest pe-
rimeter that bisects the hexagon's 
area is the circle shown. Its arc 
within each of the six equilateral 
triangles must therefore bisect each 
triangle. The hexagon's area, as-
suming its side is 1, is 3 Y312. The FIG. 18. The shortest curve 
circle 
of half that 
area 
is 
bisecting an equilateral tri-
3Y3/4 = l.299 .... It is not hard angle. 

310 
Appendix 
now to find its radius to be .643 ... , and the length of the arc 
that bisects each triangle to be 
7T ~3Y3 = .673 .... 
3 
47T 
The proof of course assumes the fact that a circle is the closed 
curve of given length that maximizes its interior area. 
Thompson extends his proof that a number divided into two 
equal parts gives a maximum product to a proof that if a number 
is broken into n parts, the maximum product of the parts results 
when all n parts are equal. For example, if the number is 15, the 
3-part partition with a maximum product is 5 X 5 X 5 = 125. 
This provides a neat proof that given the perimeter of a tri-
angle, the largest area results if the triangle is equilateral. The 
proof rests on an elegant formula for determining the area of any 
triangle when given its three sides. It is called Hero's (or Heron's) 
formula after Hero (Heron) of Alexandria, an ancient Greek 
mathematician. (The formula has several algebraic proofs, but 
they are complicated.) Let a,b,c stand for a triangle's sides, and s 
for its semiperimeter (half the perimeter). Hero's famous formula 
IS: 
Area = Ys(s - a)(s - b)(s - c) 
It is easy to see that the area is maximized when the three val-
ues inside the parentheses are equal. This is true only if a = b = c, 
making the triangle equilateral. If each side is 1, the triangle's 
area will be Y3/4. 
Suppose we are given the perimeter of a triangle and its base. 
What sides will maximize its area? Calculus will tell you. Here's 
another way. Imagine two pins separated by the distance of the tri-
angle's base. A string with a length equal to the perimeter circles 
the pins as shown in Figure 19. A pencil point at c keeps the string 
taut. As you move the pencil point from side to side, clearly the 
highest altitude of the triangle formed by the string is obtained 
when the sides are equal, making the triangle isosceles. (Con-
tinuing to move the pencil around the pins will trace an ellipse.) 
Assume that the sides of an isosceles triangle remain constant, 
but the angle they make between them is allowed to vary. This of 

Appendix 
311 
c 
FIG. 1 9. A string proof of a maximum problem. 
course also varies the length of the triangle's third side. What 
angle maximizes the triangle's area? Knowing that for a given 
perimeter the equilateral triangle has the largest area, one is 
tempted to guess that the angle will be 60 degrees. Surprisingly, 
this is not the case. The maximizing angle is 90 degrees, making 
the triangle an isosceles right triangle. 
Calculus will prove this, but here is a simpler proof. Consider 
the isosceles right triangle shown on its side in Figure 20. The 
equal sides a and b are fixed. By moving the top vertex (c) left or 
right, keeping b the same length, we can vary the angle theta. 
Note that regardless of which direction the vertex moves, the al-
titude of the triangle is shortened. Because a triangle's area is half 
~_c~ 
/<, ... -.... 
--- ........ ) 
I 
\ 
I 
I 
\ 
I 
I 
\ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
\ 
I 
I 
\ 
I 
I 
\ 
I 
// 
b\ 
b 
/b 
I 
\ 
I 
I 
\ 
I 
I 
\ 
I 
I 
\ 
I 
I 
\ 
I 
I 
\ 
I 
I 
\ 
I 
/ 
\ 
I 
/ 
e\ / 
a 
FIG. 2 o. A simple proof of an isosceles triangle problem. 

312 
Appendix 
the product of its base and altitude, the largest area results when 
the altitude is maximum. This occurs when the angle theta is 
neither acute nor obtuse, but a right angle. 
Another simple proof that the angle is 90° is provided by 
imagining that the triangle's variable side is a mirror. As Figure 
21 shows, the reflection produces a rhombus. As we have learned 
(and Thompson proves by calculus in Chapter XI), the rectangle 
of given perimeter which has the largest area is a square. Figure 
21B shows that when the reflection forms a square, the area of the 
isosceles triangle is maximized by having a right angle between 
its two equal sides. 
A farmer wishes to build a fence of three sides to enclose a rect-
angular plot of land with a fixed wall as its fourth side. What 
three lengths of the fence will maximize the plot's area? This 
problem is a favorite of calculus textbooks, but knowing that a 
square maximizes a rectangle's area, given the perimeter, solves 
the problem quickly. Imagine the wall to be a mirror. The plot of 
land plus its mirror image is a larger rectangle. The largest area 
of this larger rectangle results if it is a square. The plot of land is 
half that square. Its longer side will be twice the length of each 
of the other two sides. 
A related problem can be solved using the correct assumption 
that a regular polygon of n sides encloses the largest area for its 
perimeter. If the farmer's fence has n sides, the mirror trick shows 
that the plot's area is maximized by making the sides half of a 
regular polygon of 2n sides. As the sides of a regular polygon in-
crease, they approach the circle as their limit. (This was how 
1\ 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\I 
A 
Mirror 
, 
/ 
, 
/ 
, 
/ 
, 
/ 
, 
/ 
, 
/ 
, 
/ 
, 
/ 
, 
/ 
, 
/ 
, / 
B 
FIG. 2 1 . A mirror reflection proof. 

Appendix 
313 
Archimedes found a good approximation for the value of 1T.) So, 
if the farmer wishes to surround his plot with a curved fence on 
the side of the wall, the mirror trick shows that he maximizes the 
plot's area by making the fence the arc of a semicircle. 
Sometimes more than one mirror reflection will solve a prob-
lem easier than by using calculus. Suppose you have a screen 
made of two identical halves that are hinged together so you can 
vary the angle between them. You wish to place them at the cor-
ner of a room so as to maximize the enclosed area. Figure 22 
shows how two mirrors solve the problem. A polygon of eight 
equal sides has the largest area when it is regular. The screens 
must be placed so they form a quadrant of the regular octagon 
which has angles of 135°. 
A maximum problem given in most calculus textbooks (I'm 
surprised Thompson does not include it) concerns a square to be 
cut and folded to make a square box without a lid. This is done 
by cutting out little squares at the four corners of the large 
square, then folding up the rectangular sides. The question is: 
What sizes should the removed squares be to produce an open 
box of maximum volume? 
For example, suppose the square is 12 inches on the side. Let x 
be the side of each corner square to be removed. The box's square 
base will have a side of 12 - 2x, or 2(6 - x). The area of the 
square base = [2(6 - X»)2 = 4(6 - X)2. The volume of the box is x 
times the area of the base, or 4x(6 - xf. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
, 
I 
I 
I 
, 
I 
I 
... -+- ... 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
, 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
I 
\ 
--+---=--'--+---------t----
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
FIG. 2 2. A mirror reflection proof. 

314 
Appendix 
The derivative simplifies to 12(6 - x)(2 - x). When this is 
equated to zero, we find that x has a value of either 6 or 2. It can't 
be 6, because cutting out six-inch squares would leave nothing to 
fold up, therefore x = 2. The box of maximum volume has a 
square base of 8 inches on the side, a depth of 2 inches, and a vol-
ume of 2 X 64 = 128 cubic inches. 
Note that the area of the base is 64 inches, and the total area 
of the sides is also 64 inches. This equality holds regardless of the 
size of the original square. 
S. King, in "Maximizing a Polygonal Box" (The Mathematical 
Gazette, Vol. 81, March 1997, pp. 96-99) shows that this is true 
for any convex polygon whose corners are cut and the rectangular 
sides folded to make an open box. If the polygon is a triangle or 
a regular polygon the volume is maximized when the ratio of the 
combined area of the sides to the area of the discarded corners is 
4 to 1. 
The task of determining the largest square that will go inside 
a cube is involved in a famous problem known as Prince Rupert's 
problem after a nephew of England's King Charles. (The Prince 
lived from 1619 to 1682.) Rupert asked: Is it possible to cut a 
hole through a cube large enough for a slightly larger cube to be 
passed through the tunnel? 
If you hold a cube so a corner points directly toward you you 
will see the regular hexagon shown in Figure 23, left. It is 
possible to inscribe within this hexagon a square that has a side 
a trifle larger than the cube's face. Figure 24, right, shows the 
square from a different perspective. Note that two of the 
FIG. 23. 
FIG. 24. Two views of 
Prince 
Rupert's 
hole 
through cube. 

Appendix 
315 
square's sides are visible on outside faces of the cube, whereas 
the other two sides are inside the cube and invisible if the cube 
IS opaque. 
The square is the largest possible square that fits inside a cube. 
Each corner, as indicated, is one-fourth the distance along an 
edge from a corner. If the cube's edge is 1, the side of the in-
scribed square is 3/Vs = 1.060660 .... This is three-fourth's of 
the cube's face diagonal, a tiny bit longer than the cube's edge. 
This allows a tunnel to be cut through a solid cube-a tunnel 
with the inscribed square as its cross-section. Through the tunnel 
can be passed a cube whose edge is a trifle less than 
1.060660 .... The square's area is exactly 9/8 = 1.125. 
I do not know how to prove by differentiating that this square 
is the largest that fits in a cube, and would enjoy hearing from 
any reader who can tell me. The problem generalizes to cubes of 
higher dimension. It is not easy to determine the largest cube 
that will fit within a hypercube of four dimensions. For higher 
dimensions the general problem remains unsolved. See Problem 
B4 in Unsolved Problems in Geometry (1991) by Hallard Croft, Ken-
neth Falconer, and Richard Guy. 
The largest rectangle, by the way, that fits inside a cube is the 
cross-section that goes through the diagonals of two opposite 
faces. On the unit cube it is a rectangle of sides 1 X \12, with an 
area of \12. 
CYLINDERS 
Problems about right circular cylinders abound in calculus text-
books. Here is a delightful little-known puzzle that I found in 
Problems for Puzzlebusters (1992, pp 25-26), by David 1. Book. 
A right circular cylindrical can is open at the top. The can's di-
ameter is 4 inches, its height is 6 inches. A sphere is dropped into 
the can. The task is to find the size of the ball that maximizes the 
amount of liquid that must be poured into the can to cover the 
ball exactly. 
You might think that the largest possible ball, four inches in 
diameter, would do the trick. With more reflection you realize 
that a smaller ball might require more liquid because there 
would be more space around it to fill. 

316 
Appendix 
Let x be the ball's diameter. The ball, plus the liquid that just 
covers it, forms a right circular cylinder with a height e~ual to 
the ball's diameter. The height of this cylinder (ball plus liquid) 
is also x. The cylinder's volume is 47TX. The ball's volume is 
4'lT( ~ r 
13 ~ =3/6. 
The amount of liquid required to cover the ball is the differ-
ence between the ball's volume and the cylinder's volume, so we 
can write: 
7TX3 
V=47TX- --
.6 
=---
6 
6 
The above expression gives the amount of liquid needed to 
cover the ball as a function of x, the ball's diameter. To find the 
largest size of the ball, 7T/6 is a constant so it can be dropped. 
Only 24x - x 3 need be differentiated and equated to zero. The 
derivative is 24 - 3x2 • E,quating to zero and solving for x gives 
the ball's diameter as V8 = 2.828+. 
In Chapter V Thompson considers the rate at which a right cir-
cular cylinder's volume varies as a function of its radius. Susan 
Jane Colley, writing on "Calculus in the Brewery" in The College 
MathematicsJournal (May 1994) points out how manufacturers of 
products that come in cylindrical cans make use of this function 
to deceive consumers. She noticed that beer cans which hold ex-
actly the same amount often have different heights but seem to 
have the same radius. One expects the taller can to hold more 
beer when actually it does not. 
Colley shows by differentiating the formula for the volume of 
a cylinder (the area of base times height) that if a cylindrical beer 
can has a very slight decrease in radius, a decrease imperceptible 
to the eye, it grows taller by ten times the decrease in radius 
while keeping its volume the same. The taller cans are optical il-

Appendix 
317 
lusions. They seem to hold more beer than the shorter cans, but 
actually do not. "Smart people, those marketing sales types," 
Cooley concludes. 
Another delightful cylinder problem that deserves to be in cal-
culus textbooks is solved by Aparna W. Higgins in "What is the 
Lowest Position of the Center of Mass of a Soda Can?", in Primus 
(Vol. 7, March 1997, pp. 35-42). A full can's center of mass is 
near the can's geometrical center, and the same is true of an 
empty can. As the drink is consumed, the center of mass steadily 
lowers. When the can is empty, it is back up to the geometric 
center. Obviously it cannot go to the bottom, then jump sud-
denly up to the center, so there must be a point at which the cen-
ter of mass reaches its lowest point before it starts to rise. 
The problem is to find that minimum. Three cylinders are in-
volved: the can, the liquid, and the air above the liquid, assum-
ing, of course, the can is vertical. 
Dr. Higgins, a mathematician at the University of Dayton in 
Ohio, shows how to solve the problem neatly by differentiating 
and equating to zero. Surprise! The can's center of mass reaches 
its lowest point when it exactly reaches the level of the liquid! 
In Chapter 16 of my Wheels, Life, and Other Mathematical 
Amusements I give this problem along with a reader's clever way of 
solving it without calculus. However, as Dr. Higgins points out, 
using differential calculus to find the answer is an excellent exer-
cise for calculus students. I might add that unlike so many text-
book problems it is directly related to a srudent's experience. 
Problems of integration that routinely turn up in calculus text-
books can often be solved by simpler methods. A classic example 
involves two circular cylinders, each with a unit radius, which in-
tersect at right angles as shown in Figure 25, top. What is the 
volume of the shaded portion that is common to both cylinders? 
To answer this question you need know only that the area of a 
circle is 7Ty2, and the volume of a sphere is (4 7Tr3)/3. 
Imagine a sphere of unit radius inside the volume common to 
the two cylinders and having as its center the point where the 
axes of the cylinders intersect. Suppose that the cylinders and 
sphere are sliced in half by a plane through the sphere's center 
and both axes of the cylinders (See Figure 26, bottom left). The 
cross section of the volume common to the cylinders will be a 

318 
Appendix 
FIG. 2 5 . Archimedes Problem of the crossed cylinders 
FIG. 26. Crossections of the cylinders. 
square. The cross section of the sphere will be a circle inscribed 
in a square. 
Now suppose that the cylinders and sphere are sliced by a plane 
parallel to the previous one but that shaves off only a small por-
tion of each cylinder (Figure 26, bottom right). This will produce 
parallel tracks on each cylinder, which intersect as before to form 
a square cross section of the volume common to both cylinders. 
Also as before, the cross section of the sphere will be a circle in-
side the square. It is not hard to see (with a little imagination and 
pencil doodling) that any plane section through the cylinders, 
parallel to the cylinders' axes, will always have the same result: a 
square cross section of the volume common to the cylinders, en-
closing a circular cross section of the sphere. 
Think of all these plane sections as being packed together 
like the leaves of a book. Clearly, the volume of the sphere will 
be the sum of all circular cross sections, and the volume of the 

Appendix 
319 
solid common to both cylinders will be the sum of all the 
square cross sections. We conclude, therefore that the ratio of 
the volume of the sphere to the volume of the solid common to 
the cylinders is the same as the ratio of the area of a circle to 
the area of a circumscribed square. A brief calculation shows 
that the latter ratio is Tr14. This allows the following equation, 
in which x is the volume we seek: 
x 
4 
The Tr'S drop out, giving x a value of 16r3/3. The radius in this 
case is 1, so the volume common to both cylinders is 16/3. As 
Archimedes pointed our, it is exactly 213 the volume of a cube 
that encloses the sphere; that is, a cube with an edge equal to the 
diameter of each cylinder. 
This solution is a famous application of what is known as 
"Cavalieri's principle" after Francesco Bonaventura Cavalieri 
(1598-1647), an Italian mathematical physicist and student of 
Galileo. In essence it says that solids, such as prisms, cones, cyl-
inders, and pyramids which have the same height and corre-
sponding cross sections of the same area, have the same volume. 
In proving his principle Cavalieri anticipated integral calculus by 
building up a volume by summing to a limit an infinite set of in-
finitesimal cross sections. The principle was 
known 
to 
Archimedes. In a lost book called The Method that was not found 
until 1906 (it is the book in which Archimedes answers the 
crossed cylinders problem), he attributes the principle to Dem-
ocritus who used it for calculating the volume of a pyramid and 
a cone. 
The problem can be generalized in various ways, notably to n 
mutually perpendicular cylinders of the same radius that inter-
sect in spaces of three and higher dimensions. Even the case of 
three cylinders that intersect at right angles is beyond the power 
of Cavalieri's principle and requires the use of integral calculus. 
The volume common to three cylinders is 8r3(2 - \12). 
The two-cylinder case has applications in architecture to what 
are called "barrel vaults" that form ceilings. When two such 
vaults intersect they create a cross vault-a portion of the surface 

320 
Appendix 
of the solid shared by two crossed cylinders. There also are impor-
tant applications in crystallography and engineering. 
Another application of Cavalieri's principle is to an old brain 
teaser about a cork plug that will fit smoothly into three holes: a 
circle, square, and an almost equilateral triangle. (See Figure 27, 
left.) Put another way, what shape can, if turned properly, cast 
shadows that are circles, squares, and isosceles triangles? 
The plug solving the problem is shown on the right. Assume 
its circular base has a radius of 1, its height 2, and the top edge, 
directly above a diameter of the base, is also 2. You can also think 
of the surface as generated by a straight line joining the sharp 
edge to the circumference of the base, and moving so that at all 
times it is parallel to a plane perpendicular to the sharp edge. 
Calculus will give the plug's volume, but Cavalieri's method 
again solves it more simply. All you need know is that the vol-
ume of a right circular cylinder is the area of its base times its al-
titude. 
D 
o 
FIG. 27. The cork plug problem. 

Appendix 
321 
Here is how I gave the solution in my Second Scientific American 
Book of Mathematical Puzzles and DiverJions (1961): 
Any vertical cross section of the cork plug at right angles to 
the top edge and perpendicular to the base will be a tri-
angle. If the cork were a cylinder of the same height, corre-
sponding cross sections would be rectangles. Each triangular 
cross section is obviously 112 the area of the corresponding 
rectangular cross section. Since all the triangular sections 
combine to make up the cylinder, the plug must be 112 the 
volume of the cylinder. The cylinder's volume is 2'lT, so our 
answer is simply 'IT. 
Actually, the cork can have an infinite number of shapes 
and still fit the three holes. The shape described has the least 
volume of any convex solid that will fit the holes. The larg-
est volume is obtained by the simple procedure of slicing 
the cylinder with two plane cuts as shown in Figure 28. 
This is the shape given in most puzzle books that include 
the plug problem. Its volume is equal to 2'lT - 8/3. 
Cavalieri's principle also applies to plane figures. If shapes be-
tween parallel lines A and B, as in Figure 29, have cross sections 
of the same area when cut by every line parallel to A and B, then 
they have the same area. As in the solid case, this generalizes to 
the theorem that if corresponding cross sections are always in the 
same ratio, their areas will have the same ratio. 
CYCLOIDS AND 
HYPOCYCLOIDS 
The curve generated by a point on a 
circle as it rolls along a straight line (see 
Figure 30) is called a cycloid. The length 
of the straight line segment from A to B 
is, of course, pi. Because pi is irrational, 
many mathematicians in days before cal-
culus suspected that the length of the arc 
from cusp to cusp was also irrational. To-
FIG. 28. Another way 
day, almost all calculus textbooks show to slice the cork plug. 

322 
Appendix 
A----.--.------~~------_,~r_----
B--J-----~----~~---L--~----~ __ 
FIG. 29. Cavalieri's principle applied to plane figures. 
how easy it is to determine that the arc's length is exactly four 
times the circle's diameter. It is also easy to determine by integra-
tion that the area below the arch is exactly three times the area of 
the circle. (For some of the cycloid's remarkable properties see 
Chapter 13 of my Sixth Book of Mathematical Games, 1971.) 
Hypocycloids are closed curves generated by a point on a circle 
as it rolls inside a larger circle. They are discussed in many books 
on recreational mathematics as well as in calculus textbooks. Fig-
ure 31 shows two hypocycloids that have names. The deltoid is a 
three-cusped hypocycloid traced by a point on a rolling circle 
with a radius one-third or two-thirds that of the larger circle. The 
astroid of four cusps is produced by a point on a rolling circle 
one-fourth or three-fourths that of the containing circle. 
A circle is not a graph of a function because a vertical line can 
cross it at two points, thereby giving two values to y for a given 
value of x. However, sectors of it can be integrated to obtain areas 
by using what are called "parametric" equations because they in-
volve a third variable called their parameter. In the circle's case 
the parameter is the angle theta shown in Thompson's Figure 43, 
commonly designated by t or the Greek 0. 
A 
B 
FIG. 3 O. How a cycloid is generated by a point on a rolling circle. 

Appendix 
323 
The Deltoid 
The Astroid 
FIG. 31. 
If r is the radius of a circle centered at the graph's origin, its 
parametric equations are the trigonometric functions x = r cos 8, 
and y = r sin 8. Each value of theta, -from 0 to 360°, determines 
a point on the circle. 
Like the circle, the deltoid and astroid are not graphs of func-
tions. Their areas are best obtained from their parametric equa-
tions based on the angle theta. Thompson does not discuss para-
metric equations, but you'll find them in modern textbooks. 
Integrating such equations gives the deltoid's area 2/9 the area of 
the larger circle, or 27T'a 2 where a is a rolling circle's radius that 
is 113 that of the larger circle. If that radius is 1, the deltoid's area 
is 27T'. The astroid's area is 3/8 of its outer circle, and six times 
the rolling circle's area. The rolling circle has a radius 1/4 of the 
larger circle, or 2/3 times the rolling circle's area if the rolling 
circle has 3/4 the radius of the larger one. 
I mention all this because of two connections with recreational 
geometry. What is the area of the two-cusped hypocycloid traced 
by a point on a rolling circle with half the radius of the larger 
circle? (See Figure 32) The surprising answer is zero! The hy-
pocycloid is a straight line that is the large circle's diameter! 
The minimum-size convex figure in which a 
needle (a straight line segment) of length 1 can 
be rotated 180 degrees is the equilateral triangle 
with a unit altitude and area of V3/3. What is 
the minimum nonconvex figure in which a unit 
needle can be rotated? 
For many decades it was believed to be the del-
toid. To everyone's surprise it was proved that the 
area could be as small as desired! I give the his-
tory of what is called "Kakeya's needle pr~blem" 
"Two-cusped" 
Hypocycloid 
FIG. 32. 

324 
Appendix 
in Chapter 18 of my Unexpected Hanging and Other Mathematical 
Diversions (1969). Hypocycloids and their sisters the epicycloids 
(generated by points on a circle that rolls outside another circle) 
are discussed in the first chapter of my Wheels, Life, and Other 
Mathematical Amusements (1983). 
I have, of course, covered only a tiny fraction of calculus related 
problems that can be found in the literature of recreational math-
ematics. As you have seen, many calculus problems can be solved 
more easily by not using calculus. Indeed, there is a tendency of 
some mathematicians to look down their noses on non-calculus 
solutions to calculus problems, as though they were undignified 
tricks. On the contrary, they are just as useful and just as elegant 
as calculus solutions. The two classic references on this are: "No 
Calculus, Please," an entertaining paper by J. H. Butchart and 
Leo Moser in Scripta Mathematica (Vol. 18, September-December 
1952, pp. 221-226), and Ivan Niven's Maxima and Minima With-
out Calculus (1981). 
"The position taken by this book," Niven writes (p. 242), "is 
that, while calculus offers a powerful technique for solving ex-
tremal problems, there are other methods of great power that 
should not be overlooked. . . . . Many students . . . try to 
solve extremal questions. . . by seeking some function to differ-
entiate, even though most of these problems are handled best by 
other methods. Moreover, students will often pursue the differen-
tiation process through thick and thin, in spite of hopelessly 
complicated functions at hand." 
Let me close this haphazard selection of problems by introduc-
ing a joke that physicist Richard Feynman once inflicted on fel-
low students at M.LT. I quote from his autobiography Surely 
You're Joking, Mr. Feynman (1985): 
I often liked to play tricks on people when I was at MIT. 
One time, in mechanical drawing class, some joker picked 
up a French curve (a piece of plastic for drawing smooth 
curves-a curly, funny-looking thing) and said, "I wonder if 
the curves on this thing have some special formula?" 
I thought for a moment and said, "Sure they do. The 
curves are very special curves. Lemme show ya," and I 
picked up my French curve and began to turn it slowly. 

Appendix 
325 
"The French curve is made so that at the lowest point on 
each curve, no matter how you turn it, the tangent is hori-
zontal." 
All the guys in the class were holding their French curve 
up at different angles, holding their pencil up to it at the 
lowest point and laying it along, and discovering that, sure 
enough, the tangent is horizontal. They were all excited by 
this "discovery"--even though they had already gone 
through a certain amount of calculus and had already 
"learned" that the derivative (tangent) of the minimum 
(lowest point) of any curve is zero (horizontal). They didn't 
put two and two together. They didn't even know what they 
"knew." 

INDEX 
absolutely convergent, 305 
acceleration, 85, 88 
Achilles and tortoise, 297 
adiabatic curve, 219 
Ainsley, Robert, 185 
alternating series, 21 
A1JZ"ican Mamem"tical Monthly, 296 
Analyst, Or a Discourse Addressed to an Infidel 
Mathematician, The, 21 
annulus, 218, 220 
antiderivative~ 212 
arc length, 263-73 
Archimedes, 26, 313, 318-19 
Archimedes' cylinder problem, 318 
area by integrating, 210-2' 
area, in poia£' coordinates, 221-22 
arithmetic growth, 154 
Art of Mathematics, 215 
astroid, 322-23 
AthenaliNm, The, 7 
Austin, A. K., 303-34 
ball, bouncing, 26-27 
Barcellos, Anthony, 9 
Bell, Eric Temple, 215 
Berkeley, Bishop George, 21-22 
Bernoulli, Johann, 22 
binomial theorem, 56 
Bluff YONr Way in MathematlCS, 185 
Book, David 1.,315 
Boole, George, 233 
bound, 212 
8rown, F. G. W., 6, 36 
Burchart, J. H., 324 
calculators, 3 
Cakulus Made Easy, 6-8, 36-37 
calculus 
book cost, 1 
book size, 1-2 
326 
failure rate, 1 
fundameoral theotem of, 215 
in high school, 5 
principal symbols of, 39-40 
reform of, 1-5, 8 
rigor in, 4 
simple books on, 5-6 
teaching of, 2 
Cartesian coordinates, 264 
Cartesian graph, 12-16 
Cartesian plane, 12, 14 
catenary, 259- 60 
Cauchy, Augustin Louis, 115 
Cauchy's mean value theorem, 115 
Cavalieri, Francesco Bonaventura, 319 
Cavalieri's principle, 319-22 
center of curvature, 253 
chain rule, 94-101 
Charles, King of England, 314 
circle 
of curvarure, 252 
osculating, 252 
Coker, E. G., 7 
College Mathemat;csJoNmal, The, 316-17 
Colley, Susan Jane, 316 
complex variable, 18 
compound interest, 150-52 
computers, 3 
Concrete Mathematics! 5 
conditionally convergent, 305 
constant, 45, 59-62 
of absorption, 172 
of integration, 202, 212, 236-37 
undetermined, 194, 196, 199-200, 202 
continwty, 15 
converge, 19 
absolutely, 305 
conditionally, 305 
correspondence rule, 14 
Courant, Richard, 4, 23 

Croft, Halland, 315 
curvature, 132-37,249-60 
center of, 253 
circle of, 252 
of a circle, 249-51 
radius of, 252 
curve 
involute of, 269 
slope of, 104, 132, 193 
cusp, III 
cycloid, 275, 321-22 
Cyclopedia of Puzzles, 27, 297 
Davis, Martin, 24 
deceleration, 85, 88 
definite integral, 212 
notation, 53 
deltoid, 322-23 
Democritus, 319 
derivative, 18, 30-34,49, 50, 79 
fractional exponent, 57 
negative exponent, 56 
positive powers, 55-56 
prime notation for, 80 -81 
~ond, 50, 79-81, 132, 179-80 
third, '0, 79-81 
derived function, 80 
Descartes, Rene, 12 
die-away curve, 168-73, 218-19 
die-away factor, 169 
Diffmntial and Int,gral CaleNlus, 4 
differential coefficient, 49 
diffetential equation, 201, 235-47 
Differtntial Eqllali.ns, 233 
differential, 42 
exact, 242~43 
total, 185 
differentiation, 49,51,57,66-76 
chain rule, 94-101 
cosine, 176-77, 179-80 
differences, 67 
exponential, 157 
geometrical meaning. 103-13 
inverse function, 147-49 
logarithm, 161-62 
partial, 184-89 
power, ')7 
products, 67-69 
quotients, 69-70 
reversing, 198-209 
sine, 175-76, 179-80 
successively, 79-81 
sums, 66-67 
tangent, 177-78 
discrete mathematics, 3 
diverge, 19 
domain, 14-15 
dot notation, 50, 87-88 
Douglas, Ronald, 2 
Dudeney, Henry Ernest, 27, 297 
Duke University, 5 
Index 
dx, 39, 42-43 
dyldx, 47, 50, 104, 132 
e, 152-56 
element, 39 
equation of condition, 119-120 
Euler, Leonhard, 152, 305 
Eves, Howard, 2-3 
evolution, 3 
exact di££erential, 242-43 
exponential equation, 160 - 66 
exponential growth, 154 
exponential series, 156-58 
extrema, 125, 129 
problems, 308-17 
[,(x), 80 
Falconer, Kenneth, 315 
falling body, 92 
Faraday, Michael, 6 
Fery's radiation pyrometer, 63 
Feynman, Richard P., 324-25 
Flatland,32 
Flournoy, The6dore, 5 
fluent, 50 
fluxion, 21-22, 50, 87 
force, 85-87, 88 
Forsyth, A. R., 232 
fractal, 306-7 
French curve, 324 -25 
frequency, 178 
function, 10 -17, 48 
as black box, 17 
continuous, 15 
derived,80 
domain of, 14 
explicit, 11,48-49 
implicit, 11, 48- 49 
inverse, 147-49 
linear, 12 
notation, 11 
one-variable,15-16 
range of, 14 
two-variable, 187 
venical line test for, 15 
fundamental theorem of calculus, 
215 
Galilei, Galilea, 319 
general imegral, 212 
geomecric series, 26 
Gillman, Uonard, 2 
glider gun, 307 
Gosper, William, 307 
Graham, L. A., 297 
Graham, Ronald, 5 
gravitation constant, 92 
Great M911WIts in Mathematics, 2 
greatest integer function, 15-16 
Greek lettres, 38 
Guy, Richard, 315 
327 

328 
half-life, 172 
Halley, Edmond, 21 
Halley's comet, 21 
Halmos, Paul, 309 
harmonic series, 24 -25, 305 
Hero (Heron) of Alexandria, 310 
Hero's (Heron's) formula, 310 
Hersh, Reuben, 24 
Hickerson, Dean, 9 
Higgins, Aparna W., 317 
hyperbolic functions, 182, 260 
inverse, 273 
hypocycloid, 321-24 
image, 14 
increasing functIon theorem, 4 
indefinite integral, 212 
infinitesimals, 21-24 
Infinity and the Mind, 24 
inflection point, 123, 253 
Ingenious Mathematical Prohlems and Methods, 
297 
input, 17 
instantaneous speed, 30 
integral, 39, 192 
definite, 212 
general, 212 
indefinite, 212 
irrational quadratic, 273-74 
list of, 207-8 
Riemann, 210 
integrating factor, 243 
integrating, 200 
integration, 191-96, 198-208 
between limits, 212 
by parts, 227-30 
by substitution, 230-31 
constant of, 202, 212, 236-37 
dodges, 227 
of a power, 199 
of sum or difference, 203 
pitfalls, 232 
standard forms, 276-78 
10 find area, 210-25 
volume by, 222-24 
with constant terms, 203-4 
I ntroductton to the H is/ory of Mathematics, 3 
inverse function, 147-49 
inverse hyperbolic functions, 273 
involute, 269 
irrational numbers, 2S 
irrational quadratic integrals. 273-74 
James, William, 5, 9, 23 
Kakeya's needle problem, 323 
Kelvin, Lord, 6, 166 
King, Jerry P., 215 
King, S., 314 
Kline, Morris, 7, 50 
Knuth, Donald, 5 
Index 
Lagrange, Joseph Louis, 115 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhem, I, 10, 17, 23, 87 
length, of are, 263-73 
Life, game of, 307 
hmit (of a function), 18-29 
limit (of integration) 
inferior, 212 
supenor, 212 
line, slope of, 30 
linear function, derivative of, 32 
logarithm, 3, 158-160 
logarithmic curve, 167-68 
logarithmic equation, 160-66 
loxodrome, 304 
Loyd, Sam, 27, 297, 300 
magnitude, order of, 42 
mapping, 14 
Mathematica, 4 
Mathematical Gazette, The, 314 
Maxima and Minima Without Calculus, 324 
maxima and minima, 116-29, 133, 187-89 
functions of two independent variables. 
187-89 
second derivative and. 133 
maximum, local, 106-7, 123 
mean value theorem, 4. 115 
mean, quadratic, 224 -25 
Men of Mathemaltcs, 215 
minimum, local, 106, 123 
minute, 41 
momentum, 86 
Moser, Leo, 324 
motion, 84 -87 
Napier, John, 158 
Napierian logarithm, 158-60 
natural logarithm, 158-60,205-6 
New Elements of Mathematics, 23 
Newton, Isaac, I, 10, 17,21,50,87,215 
Niven, Ivan, 324 
nonstandard analysis, 23-24 
Not Impossible Religion, A, 6 
O'Brien, Katherine, 296 
Old Oaken Calculus Problem, 296 
organic rate of growing, 154 
origin, 13 
osculating circle, 252 
output, 17 
parabola, graph of, 12 -13, 5 1 
parabolic rule, 195 
parametric equations. 322-23 
partial derivative, 185 
partial differentiation, 184 -189 
partial fractions, 139-47 
partial sum, 18 
parts, integration by, 227-30 
Patashnik, Oren, 5 
Peirce, Charles, 23 

period, 178 
pi, 20, 26, 154, 321 
point of inflection, 2)3 
polar coordinates, 221-22, 264-65 
area in, 221-22 
power rule, 57 
prime notation, 80-81 
Pri""", 317 
Prince Rupert's problem, 314 
Prmcipia, 21 
PrincIples of Mathematics, 23 
Probl"", for MathematIcians Young and Old, 309 
Problems for Puzzlebu,ters, 315 
product rule, 66,67-69 
Project Calc, 5 
pursuit path, 296 -99 
Puzzles and Curious Probl""" 27, 297 
Pythagorean theorem, 11, 12 
quadratic mean, 224-25 
quantum theory, 3 
Quest for Truth, The, 6 
quotient rule, 66, 69-70 
radioactive decay, 172-73 
radius of curvature, 252 
range, 14 
rate, 83-88 
Reis, Philipp, 6 
relatIve growings, 45-50 
Renz, Peter, 8, 9 
Riemann, George Friedrich Bernhard, 210 
Riemann integral, 210 
Riemann sum, 210 
Robinson, Abraham, 23-24 
Rolle, Michel, 115 
Rolle's theorem, 114-115 
Rucker, Rudy, 24 
Russell, Bertrand, 23 
J, 39,191 
Salmon, Wesley, 303 
Science, 5 
Scientific A_iean, 24, 303, 307 
Scripta Mathematica, 324 
second minute, 41 
Second Scientific A_ican Book of Mathematical 
Puzzles and Diversions, 321 
Selfridge, Oliver, 9 
sequence, 18 
series 
alternating. 21 
exponential, 156 - 58 
harmonic, 24-25, 305 
infinite, 18, 24 
Silvan", Phi//ips Thompson: His Life and Letters, 6 
Simon, Julian, 7-8 
Simpson, Thomas, 195 
Simpson's rule, 195 
sines and cosines, 175-82 
Sixth Book of MathematICal Games, 322 
Index 
slide rule, 3 
slope, 30, 104 
smallness, degrees of, 41-44 
smallness, order, of, 42 
snowflake curve, 306-7 
square roots, 3 
standard forms, table of, 276-78 
Steen, Lynn Arthur, 1-2 
Steeplechase problem, 300-2 
substitution, integration by, 230-31 
sum at infinity, 19 
Surely You're Jokmg, My. Feynman!, 324 
Swift, Dean Jonathan, 44 
tangent, 104 
The Method, 319 
Thompson, Helen G., 6 
Thompson, Jane Smeal, 6 
Thompson, Silvanus Phillips, 6-9, 37 
time as independent variable, 83-91 
time-constant, 170 
[Otal differential, 185 
Toward a Lean and Lively Caleulus, 2, 8 
Tower of Pis., 27-29 
rracrcix, 269 
transcendental number, 25, 152 
trapezoidal rule, 195 
trigonometric function, 175 -82 
Tucket, Thomas W., 4 
Tulane University, 8 
329 
undetermined constant, 194, 196, 199-200, 202 
Unexpected Hanging and Other Mathemaftcal 
Diversions, 153,324 
U molved Problems in Geometry, 315 
useful dodge (see chain rule) 
variable, 10, 45 
complex, 18 
dependent, 10, 12,45,48 
independent, 10, 12, 13,48, 184 
time as, 83-91 
velocity, 84 -85, 88, 115 
vertical line test, 15 
volume, 222-24 
von Neumann, John, 303 
Wheels, Life, and Other Mathematical Amusements, 
303,317,324 
Wolfram, Stephen, 4 
work, 86, 88 
x axis, 12, 13 
yaxis, 12, 13 
yin-yang, 306 
z axis, 13 
Zeno of Elea, 19 
Zeno's paradoxes, 19-20, 297 
Zeno's runner, 19-20,26,30-32 

About the Authors 
Silvanus Phillips Thompson was born in 1851, the son of a school 
teacher in York, England. He was President of the Institution of 
Electrical Engineers, was elected to the Royal Society in 1891, 
served as president of several scientific societies, and was the 
holder of many foreign honors and degrees. 
Thompson wrote numerous technical books and manuals on 
electricity, magnetism, dynamos, and optics. He also wrote popu-
lar biographies of scientists Michael Faraday, Philipp Reis, and 
Lord Kelvin. As a devout Quaker and an active Knights Templar, 
he wrote two books about his faith: The Quest for Truth (1915) and 
A Not Impossible Religion (published posthumously in 1918). 
Silvanus P. Thompson was also a popular lecturer and a skillful 
painter oflandscapes. He died in 1916. 
Born in 1914 in Tulsa, Oklahoma, the son of a petroleum geolo-
gist, Martin Gardner obtained a bachelor's degree in philosophy 
at the University of Chicago in 1936. Early jobs included re-
porter on the Tulsa Tribune, writer in the University of Chicago's 
office of press relations, and case worker in Chicago's Black Belt 
for the city's Relief Administration. After four years in the navy 
he began freelancing with sales of fiction to Esquire. In New York 
City he worked eight years as a contributing editor of Humpty 
Dumpty's Magazine before he began a twenty-five year stint with 
Scientific American as writer of that magazine's "Mathematical 
Games" column. 
Gardner is now the author of some sixty books, most of them 
about mathematics and science. Among his awards are two hon-
orary doctorates, and several prizes for math and science writing. 
He and his wife, Charlotte, live quietly in the mountains of 
North Carolina. 
330 

