CALL FOR MURAL ARTISTS
Public Art Murals, Request for Expression of Interest: Town of Sussex, New
Brunswick, Canada
Deadline: July 31, 2024 at 11:59 PM AST
Award: $22,000 (inclusive of all taxes) for the Sussex Regional Library location &
$11,000 (inclusive of all taxes) for Needle Street location.
Call for Artist Opportunity Overview
The town of Sussex is seeking to commission two new site-specific murals that will be
created in the summer/fall of 2024 and will remain on public display for 5-10 years.
These two dynamic new pieces of art will connect and engage with the community,
transforming the sites into vibrant, inviting and meaningful public places.
Eligible artists are invited to submit expressions of interest and qualifications to this call.
Details are provided below.
The commissioned artists will be selected through an open, two-stage process. The
project budget of $22,000 CAD (inclusive of all taxes) and $11,000 CAD (inclusive of all
taxes) respectively includes all costs directly associated with the artwork: including
taxes, artist fees, production, materials, equipment rental, installation, and other
professional services, accommodations, insurance, WorkSafe fee, travel and other
incidental and production expenses.
No fewer than 4 artists will be shortlisted and each paid $500 CAD (inclusive of all
taxes) to create detailed proposals.

Community Background
The town of Sussex is located on the ancestral territory of the Wolastoqiyik people in
south central New Brunswick, between the province's three largest cities, Saint John,
Moncton, and Fredericton. Sussex straddles the Kennebecasis River, 70 km northeast
of Saint John, and is a major dairy product producer in the province.
Residents enjoy access to a variety of cultural and recreational opportunities, including
a ski resort, nature trails, and sports facilities, as well as museums, a public library,
festivals, and art exhibitions.
Artwork locations
Location #1 - This mural will be located on the Sussex Regional Library, located at 46
Magnolia Ave, Sussex, NB. Its size is 105’ 6’ by 10’ less 6 windows (just under 1000
square feet). The wall is made of red brick and the selected artwork will be created
directly onto this surface, on location. Please see the image below (Figure 1. Location
#1) for detailed dimensions.
Figure 1. Location #1

Location #2 - This mural will be located on the side of a private residence located at 10
Needle Street, Sussex, NB. Its size is 17’ 4” by 22’ (approx. 350 square feet). The wall
is made of Crezon (aka mural board) and the selected artwork will be created directly
onto this surface, on location. Please see the image below(Figure 1. Location #2) for
detailed dimensions.
Figure 1. Mural area #2

Selection Process
Final artwork proposals are not requested at this time. The Sussex Public Art
Committee will review all submitted applications and narrow down a shortlist based on
the following criteria:
Overall quality and authenticity of previous projects, interest in the project and the site,
originality, excellence and intrigue of previous designs, the artist’s reputation and
demonstrated experience managing and facilitating projects or public art competitions or
similar scopes and sizes, and suitability for display in a public spaces and an
assessment and review of references.
Applying artists must be considered professional artists as defined by the Canada
Council for the Arts. As per their guidelines, a professional artist is someone who:
●
has specialized artistic training (not necessarily in academic institutions);
●
is critically recognized as a professional by their peers (artists working in the
same artistic tradition);
●
is active in and committed to their art practice;
●
has a history of public exhibitions; and/or has produced an independent body of
work.
In the spirit of reconciliation and celebrating diversity and the land on which we live, it is
the intent that at least one of the two artists selected for the 2024 mural projects will be
Wolastoqiyik.
As stated in Sussex’s Public Art Policy , preference will be given to artists from
Wabanaki First Nations, local professional artists who live, or have lived, in Sussex or
within a 150 km radius, and artists who self-identify as members of equity deserving
groups. If applicable, we invite you to self identify as belonging to an equity deserving
group on the application form.
Artist teams are welcome to apply but must share the total project award and one artist
must act as the main point of contact for communication.
Applicants who need support applying for this opportunity are encouraged to contact
Alison Murphy (Executive & Artistic Director of AX, the Arts & Culture Centre of Sussex)
at execdirector@axartscentre.ca at least one week before the application deadline to
appropriately accommodate your needs and to discuss alternate formats for submitting
your application.

STAGE ONE: REQUEST FOR QUALIFICATIONS
All applications will be reviewed by Sussex’s Public Art Committee. Shortlisted
applicants will be contacted by a representative from AX and asked to submit a design
concept for the specified public art project. Shortlisted artists selected for stage two will
be paid $500 CAD each (inclusive of all taxes) for these designs. Artists may be
requested to submit a five-ten year maintenance and conservation plan along with their
designs.
STAGE TWO: SHORTLISTED PROPOSAL DEVELOPMENT AND PRESENTATION
If selected for Stage 2, shortlisted artists will be provided a $500 CAD fee for the
development of a detailed artist design concept and proposal.
Each artist/artist team will create a detailed artist proposal including a written artist
statement, a project budget, production and installation plan, etc. Further details and
deliverables will be provided at the outset of Stage 2.
Designs will be artist-led concepts, with no dictation or direction of content by any
outside influence.
Please note that artwork is to be created directly onto the wall, onsite.
The $500 fee for this work will be paid to the artists once their design and proposal have
been submitted.
STAGE THREE: JURY SELECTION
A Public Art Selection Jury will choose artist(s) based on the submitted designs and
proposals. The jury’s selections will be final.
The Public Art Selection Jury will review and choose artists based on the following
criteria:
●
Overall Quality and Authenticity
●
Originality of design
●
Intrigues viewers and stimulates imagination
●
Artist reputation, demonstrated and related experience
●
Suitability for display in the specific public space
●
Compliance with guidelines outlined in the Sussex Public Art Policy Quality of the
approach/work plan, conceptualization and methodology

Preference is given to artists from Wabanaki First Nations, local professional artists who
live, or have lived, in Sussex or within a 150 km radius, and artists who self-identify as
members of equity-deserving groups.
Extra consideration given to proposals which include community engagement.
The artists/artist teams selected by the jury as the competition winners will enter into a
contract with the town to create the final public artwork.
REQUEST FOR QUALIFICATIONS: APPLICATION FORM
Professional artists/artist teams are invited to respond to this Request for Qualifications
(RFQ) by completing this google form application which will prompt you to upload:
A Letter of Intent: 2-page maximum (11-point font). Outline of artistic experience,
ability, approach and interest in this project, site and community, highlighting relevant
experience. While proposals are not accepted at this stage of the competition, we
encourage artists to speak to their typical artwork themes in this letter. If applying as a
group, please only submit one Letter of Intent.
Curriculum Vitae (CV): 3-page maximum. Detail professional experience as an artist,
past public art experience, and other information relevant to this Request for
Qualifications. If applying as a group, provide one CV per group member and indicate
preferred pronouns at the beginning of the document.
Artistic Support Material: Please upload a minimum of three (3), Maximum of ten (10)
images of work. If applying as a team, please only submit a total maximum of ten (10)
images. Images should be in .jpeg or .png format and no larger than 10MB per file.
Each file should be labeled in this format: Last Name_image number.file type (ex:
Murphy_1.PNG).
Support Material List: Please attach a written list that clearly explains the Artistic
Support Material (above). Include the following details in order: Image number
(corresponding to the previous question), artist(s) name, title, date, location,
commissioning agent (if applicable), budget, dimensions, medium/materials and a brief
description of the works (maximum 50 words each).

References: Please provide names and contact information (current email and phone
number) for two (2) references (preferably from recent public art projects) with their role
and affiliation listed. Reference letters are not required at this stage of the competition.
*If applying as a group, please list team members and submit required references for
each.
Connection to Local Communities (Optional): 1-page maximum (11-point font).
Include details about living in Sussex or within a 150 km radius. If applying as a group,
please only upload one combined document.
Estimated Project Timeline
●
July 2024: Call to artists is issued
●
August 2024: Shortlisted Artists identified, Shortlisted Artists develop detailed
proposals
●
September 2024: Final Artist selected, Artist Agreement signed
●
September -October 2024: Mural production
●
October 2024: Mural unveiling
This project has a tight turnaround time to ensure 2024 installation and will require the
shortlisted and selected artist/artist team to complete the proposals and project
components within the above timeline.

REQUEST FOR QUALIFICATION: APPLICATION DELIVERY & DEADLINE
Submissions must be received by July 31, 2024 at 11:59pm
Forms – emailed, faxed or mailed applications will not be accepted. It is your
responsibility to ensure the application package is complete and submitted through the
Google form, by the posted deadline.
Final submissions must not exceed 10 MB in total size.
Questions and requests for clarification will be received by email until July 26, 2024 at
12:00 PM AST. Applicants who need additional support applying for this opportunity are
encouraged to contact Alison Murphy (Executive and Artistic Director of AX, the Arts &
Culture Centre of Sussex) at execdirector@axartscentre.ca by July 26 at 12:00 PM AST
to appropriately accommodate your needs and to discuss alternate formats for
submitting your application. Incomplete and/or late applications will not be accepted.
Applications must be submitted via Google Application
For inquiries or further information, please contact Alison Murphy at
execdirector@axartscentre.ca or call at 506-433-8351.
We look forward to receiving your submissions and enhancing the beauty, diversity and
creativity in this wonderful rural east coast community!

