The Case For Kirby 
Jack Kirby as creator (not co-creator) 
of the Marvel Universe 
 
 
by “Tuk” 
 
 
 
version 3.0 
 

Contents 
Introduction
4 
The first cover: the history of Marvel
10 
The inside cover: a reputable company?
19 
Page 1: Signatures, and dialog versus art
22 
Page 2: Sexism
35 
Page 3: “Bah!”
42 
Page 4: Who wrote the monster pages?
44 
Page 5: Why Lee was good at connecting with readers
50 
Page 6: The flame demon
52 
Page 7: On realism
56 
Page 8: Characterisation
63 
Page 9: Heroes with moral flaws
67 
Page 10: Who had the idea for superpowers?
76 
Page 11: Was Lee “concentrating”?
80 
Page 12: Heroes who fight each other
83 
Page 13: The smoking gun
90 
Page 14: The book was changed. Why?
93 
Page 15: Lee did not understand the story
102 
Page 16: Lee’s hyperbole
109 
Page 17: Kirby was ahead of his time
112 
Page 18: A Challengers story, no superpowers
115 
Page 19: Another smoking gun
118 
Page 20: The emotional core
125 
Page 21: forgetting the name of the villain
132 
Page 22: The dialogue weakens the story
135 
Page 23: Removing humanity from the story
139 
Page 24: Powers added later
142 

Page 25: Where’s the humour?
147 
Who wrote the other Fantastic Four stories?
158 
Who wrote the other Marvel stories?
179 
Did Lee add any value?
207 
 
Appendices 
1: Kirby the writer, pre 1961
218 
2: Lee's version of events
230 
3: Lee’s reputation
242 
4: The alleged "scripts"
248 
5: Sales figures
253 
6: Kirby’s career in brief
261 
7: How the Challengers became the Fantastic Four
264 
8: Responses from critics
282 
9: Reconstructing the original book
284 
10: How Lee’s claim evolved
296 
About the author
301 
Acknowledgements
303 
 
 

Introduction 
 
In this book I examine Fantastic Four issue 1, to see how the Marvel Universe was created.  
 
I argue that the creation process was like the creation of the painting The Last Supper. One 
man (Leonardo da Vinci) created the painting, and another man (the owner of the building) 
made changes. Some people liked the changes, and others did not. Are the changes 
enough to say that both men are co-creators of The Last Supper? 
 
Here is The Last Supper. Below it is the closest we can get to the original.   
1
 
 
Note the changes.The “real” Last Supper is faded and cracked, and has a doorway cut 
through it. These change are due to decisions made by the owner of the building. The owner 
wanted the painting to be permanently on the wall of the convent dining room, so it got faded 
and cracked. And the owner (or his successor) decided to add a door through the wall.  
 
These changes made the painting better for the core audience, the nuns who were eating 
dinner. They liked that the painting was always there, even though it meant it became faded. 
The fading added to its character. And they liked the new doorway, it meant they could go 
1 The original was completed in 1498, and Giovanni Pietro Rizzoli made this copy in the early 1500s. His version 
is used as a guide when attempting to repair the original. 

about their business more easily. And what else was the painting for, except to inspire them 
to do their holy work? So the changes added real value, at least for its original market. 
 
However, later art critics felt that the loss of da Vinci’s vibrant colours, and the missing 
doorway section, meant the owners actually  damaged  the painting. So the owners do not 
qualify as “co-creators” of the painting. Even though the nuns liked the improvements. 
 
I argue that Jack Kirby was like Leonardo da Vinci, and Stan Lee was like the building 
owners. Kirby created a rich and powerful story, and Lee then changed it. Some people feel 
like Lee’s changes made the story better, by making it more accessible. Others think he 
made it worse.  
 
To measure Lee’s  overall  contribution I compare sales of the Fantastic Four to sales of Kirby 
comics before and after he worked for Lee. And I show that Lee’s net contribution to sales 
was probably zero.   
2
 
And so I argue that Kirby, like Leonardo, was the sole creator of his work, even though his 
boss made changes that some people like. Because, judged by sales, Lee added no value at 
all. 
 
Introduction to the Marvel Universe 
In this book the Marvel Universe refers to the foundational characters: the Fantastic Four 
(first appearance 1961), the Hulk (1962), Spider-man (1962), Thor (1962), Iron Man (1963), 
Dr Strange (1963), the X-men (1963) and the Avengers (1963). In this book I argue that Jack 
Kirby created these characters , and Lee’s merely simplified his stories 
3
Fantastic Four issue 1 overview 
Most of this book is a detailed examination of Fantastic Four 1, the book that started it all. It 
is the primary source document and therefore our best guide to who did what. It contains 
three stories: the introduction, the origin, and the Mole Man story. 
Story 1: the introduction 
The first story (8 pages plus cover) is titled “The Fantastic Four”. A mystery man fires a flare 
gun and the words “Fantastic Four” appear in the sky. Three other people then stop what 
they are doing and gather to the call.  
2 See the final chapter and appendix 5 
3 See the chapter on who created the other comics 

 
A high class woman is having tea with a friend. She sees the message, turns invisible and 
catches a taxi. A monstrous man is trying to buy clothes to fit. He sees the message, angrily 
breaks through the door and his appearance causes people to panic. Finally, a teenage boy 
is fixing a car with a friend. He sees the message, turns to flame, and flies off. The air force 
think he is some kind of enemy missile, and attack him. He barely escapes and the four of 
them are now together. 
Story 2: the origin 
The second story (5 pages) has no title. It tells the origin of the group’s powers.  
 
They have an argument then sneak into a rocket launch site. They take a rocket into space 
but are hit by cosmic rays. They crash land the rocket, and find they each have strange 
powers. They decided to work together. 
Story 3: the Mole Man 
The third story (12 pages) is in two parts. Part 1 (6 pages) is called “The fantastic Four Meet 
The Mole Man!” 

 
Seismograph readings detect underground tremors. A giant monster is tunneling underneath 
nuclear power plants and they then disappear into holes in the ground. The team trace the 
origin of the tremors to a remote island. They visit the island and find it guarded by a three 
headed monster. The ground then caves in and two of them find themselves in a dark cave. 
Then they see a blinding light that causes them to collapse. They wake up wearing radiation 
suits, see a valley of glowing diamonds, and meet The Mole Man. 
 
Part 2 (6 pages) is called “The Mole Man’s Secret!” 
 
On the island, the Thing battles another monster. Back underground, we learn how the Mole 
Man found the underground caves and went blind. He tries to show his skill in fighting. Then 
the Thing and the Invisible Girl appears. The Mole Man summons his monsters, and the 
team runs away. As they fly away in their plane the island explodes. 
 
What Fantastic Four 1 reveals 
Analysis shows that the Mole Man story originally featured different characters with no 
superpowers. That is, it was an unrelated story originally intended for one of Marvel’s 
monster comics. This and other evidence indicates that the origin story was originally 
planned in the same way as Spider-Man, Ant-man, Thor and Iron Man: as just one of several 
stories in a monster or sci-fi anthology comic.  
 
The choice to instead make it a new comic must have been a last minute decision: else why 
waste time changing an existing story? The Mole Man story could have been unchanged, 
been used in another comic, and a new, more appropriate Fantastic Four story created 
instead. 
 
Now we come to who created the stories. By comparing Lee’s dialog with Kirby’s art we can 
see different levels of: 

1.
Understanding: 
Kirby understood the story and Lee did not. This clearest example is probably the 
seismometer: this was essential to te plot, it was how they found the Mole Man, yet 
lee did not know what it was or how it worked.   There are numerous examples like 
4
this in later stories. Lee did not understand the science that was essential to the 
plots.   
5
2.
Quality: 
Kirby’s art shows a story that makes more sense. For example, the Mole Man was 
blinded by underground atomic testing, and this caused his hatred of atomic plants.  
6
But Lee’s dialog says he hates the entire surface world, does so for petty reasons, 
that atomic plants are merely incidental to his plans, and that he was blinded by 
falling over. 
3.
Realism: 
Kirby’s art shows a more realistic story. Everything in the art could take place in the 
real world (as understood in 1961). All the unrealistic elements come from the dialog 
alone. 
4.
Care: 
Kirby took more care over the story. He shows a good understanding of recent history 
(most of the Mole Man story is based on the events of 1958), of technology (the 
seismometers, the space capsule, or how the Torch is chased by a very particular 
kind of missile), of the battles (every time that Reed uses his powers he relies on 
tensile strength, not muscular strength), and so on. However, Lee’s dialog shows 
inconsistencies (e.g. “central city” is by the sea), multiple spelling mistakes (as editor 
he should have caught these) and general bad writing (e.g. The Thing says “bah!” 
four times despite having very little dialog). 
5.
Continuity: 
When comparing other comics, we can see that the Fantastic Four is simply 
“business as usual” for Kirby: all its ideas and strengths were in Kirby’s other recent 
work, but not in Lee’s work. 
6.
Reputation: 
Kirby created his new characters throughout his long career. But Lee could only 
“create” characters when Kirby was there. 
 
Based on this, we can infer how the Fantastic Four was created:  
7
 
1.
Kirby had the idea. 
Kirby was the driving force behind the renaissance in DC’s superheroes.  So he 
8
would have discussed superheros with Lee. 
2.
Lee agreed. 
Lee agreed to a superhero story based on Kirby’s Challengers (the origin, and the 
powers from issue 3).  
4 See the discussion of page 15. 
5 See the chapter on who created the other Fantastic Four stories 
6  See the discussion of page 14. 
7 See appendix 9 for details 
8 See the timeline in appendix 6 

3.
Kirby created the origin story.  
The original version probably had a splash page. This page probably introduced Ben 
Grimm, test pilot, and had the “here they are” banner used on the current splash 
page. The story may have had an extra page showing how the team got home by 
flagging down a plane (as recalled in issue 2). 
4.
Lee agreed it should be whole book 
After seeing the story Lee must have agreed it should be a whole new comic. 
Possibly he wrote the issue 1 synopsis before presenting the idea to the publisher, 
his uncle  Martin Goodman. 
9
5.
Goodman approved a new comic. 
As publisher, Goodman had to approve any new comic. 
6.
Kirby created the book to a deadline 
The book was created to a tight deadline. Kirby added an eight page introduction and 
adapted an existing story (the Mole Man). 
7.
Lee wrote the finished dialog.  
Lee’s job was to appeal to younger readers.  So Lee’s dialog mostly described the 
10
action, made it sound as extreme as possible, and removed adult plot details (such 
as how the Mole Man was blinded by the good guys). 
8.
And so on. 
Later stories followed a similar pattern: 
i.
Kirby suggested an idea 
ii.
Lee, as editor, approved it or added his own ideas 
iii.
Lee sometimes wrote notes at the meeting 
iv.
Kirby created it 
v.
Lee added dialog and sometimes requested edits. 
Lee’s role in later years 
Lee had a high opinion of his own contribution (making suggestions and writing the final 
dialog), so after the first year  he began to call himself the writer. He was thrilled to see the 
11
amount of fan mail, so he began to relax and add wisecracks and asides. The story was 
entirely contained in the art, so Lee had plenty of space to have fun without worrying about 
the plot. 
 
The bottom line is that Kirby created, and Lee simplified. Lee’s changes shifted the audience 
demographic slightly (to younger readers) but did not affect total sales figures. 
 
Now let us examine Fantastic Four issue 1 in detail. 
 
 
9 Lee referred to Goodman as “my uncle.” (Dick Ayers interview, Alter Ego V3 No31). Goodman was actually 
Lee's uncle's brother-in-law ("Secret History of Marvel Comics" p.157). In this book I use "uncle" or "nephew" for 
brevity. 
10 See the discussion of page 3, and especially the quotation from Lee 
11 See appendix 10 for details 

The front cover: 
the history of Marvel 
The cover to Fantastic Four issue 1 tells us the history of Marvel comics. Where? In the 
details and small print, the parts that most people ignore. 
 
 
Let’s start with the price, as this is the background for everything that follows.  
 

10c 
 
Barely profitable  
Comics had been ten cents for decades, despite inflation. This made them less and less 
profitable. Publishers were scared to raise the price in case young readers just went to a 
competitor instead. So instead they cut costs, offering fewer and fewer pages.  
 
But the comics still took up space in stores. Almost anything else in that space would have 
made more money for the retailer. So ten years later most stores were replacing comics with 
more profitable magazines. But even here in 1961 everyone knew the writing was on the 
wall. Comics were barely profitable, and publishers knew it. The biggest sellers, like 
Superman, or Disney’s Uncle Scrooge, could make up for small margins in high volumes, 
nearly a million copies per issue. But comics like the Fantastic Four were not expected to sell 
more than 180,000 copies per issue. The publisher, Martin Goodman, focused nearly all his 
attention on his men’s magazines instead. 
The Comics Code Authority 
 
Look at the box on the right that says “Approved by the Comics Code Authority”. What does 
that tell us? Everything! 
The crisis of 1954 
In 1954 psychologist Fredric Wertham published the book “Seduction of the Innocent”. This 
created a moral panic against comics as a bad influence on children. Distributors and stores 
stopped handling as many comics. There were calls for comics to be banned. The industry 
was in crisis. As a result the comics companies set up the Comics Code, to say “we are safe 
and inoffensive now!” The code banned anything that might offend people, and enabled 
some comics to keep publishing. 
 

The bottom line is that, since 1954, publishers were afraid to publish anything that might take 
risks or be adult in nature. Comics became bland. The most admired comics publisher of the 
time, EC, simply stopped publishing comics. In short, comics were in a bad way. 
IND 
 
The next detail I want to point out is “IND”, short for “Independent News”, the company that 
delivered the comics to retailers. These three letters speak volumes. 
The greater crisis of 1957 
In 1956, Goodman relied on the American News Company for distribution. But in 1952 the 
government began investigating it for anti-competitive practices. This made other publishers 
nervous, and they gradually stopped using the company. In June 1957 the American News 
Company ceased trading, leaving Goodman with no way to get his comics into the shops. In 
one month he had to cancel eighty titles . 
12
 
Thanks to the Wertham moral panic, and the very low profit margins from comics, most 
distributors were not interested in taking on Goodman’s titles. Desperate, Goodman finally 
turned to his main competitor for help: Independent News was the distributor owned by 
National Periodical Publications, the company better known as DC, publisher of Superman. 
 
Independent News said yes, they would distribute their competitor’s comics, but not the 
eighty plus titles Goodman was publishing. They would only distribute eight titles per month. 
So Goodman fired all of his writers and artists, except for one man: his nephew (by 
marriage), Stan Lee. Lee now had to organise everything himself, hiring freelance comic 
creators as needed. Lee feared for his own job. Artist DIck Ayers recalled: 
 
Things started to get really bad in 1958. One day when I went in Stan looked at me and said, “Gee whiz, 
my uncle goes by and he doesn’t even say hello to me.” He meant Martin Goodman [owner of the 
company]. And he proceeds to tell me, “You know, it’s like a sinking ship and we’re the rats, and we’ve 
got to get off.”  
13
12 Michael Vassallo, author of The Secret History of Marvel Comics,“ tracked all of Goodman’s publications across 
the decades. Goodman had been ramping up from his normal 40-something titles to 85 titles by 1957. Then in 
one moment almost the entire comics division was wiped out. (Note that the numbers include some bi-monthly 
titles: not all 85 titles shipped every month.) 
13  Dick Ayers, interviewed in Alter Ego V3 No31 

MC 
 
Now let’s look at that other symbol, “MC”, meaning Marvel Comics. In previous years, 
Goodman’s comics were branded as “Timely” or “Atlas”, and since Spring of 1957 they had 
no shared brand at all. So why was the cover stamped MC? 
Content was unimportant 
“Marvel Comics Group” was just a term used for selling advertising space. The Marvel 
Comics group was the group of similar comics that all had the same adverts. Women’s 
magazines would have a different group name, men’s magazines had a different group, 
sports magazines had a different group, and so on. This matters for two reasons. 
 
1.
Goodman’s comics sold so badly, and were so often replaced, that there was no 
point in selling advertising space in a particular title: nobody had heard of it, nobody 
cared, it barely mattered and might not be there the next month. So instead, 
Goodman sold space in a block of titles, then he could promise “this ad will appear in 
a million copies of  something ”. 
2.
In later years, when the comics sold better, they needed a brand name. Goodman 
chose the name he used when selling advertising space.  This indicates how 
14
Goodman saw the comics: he did not care about the content. His job was just to sell 
newsprint by adding ink to it, and make them profitable by selling ads. 
 
The book “The Secret History of Marvel Comics” gives more details of Goodman’s attitude to 
content: to pay as little as possible for it. Content was the least important part of his 
business. 
The cover date: why it matters 
14  Back when the original book called “Marvel Comics” was popular, Goodman had briefly tried “Marvel Comics” 
on the top of other books. This was in 1946-7. He tried again in an attempt to recover flagging sales in 1949-50. 
But generally the comics were sold as “Timely”, or “Atlas”, or with no common name at all. By 1961 the only 
consistent name was the one used for advertisers, “Marvel Comics Group” 

 
Fantastic Four 1 is cover dated November 1961. The comic was on sale in August 8 and 
created in April. There was something very special about April 1961: Kirby was back! 
Jack Kirby in the 1950s 
Kirby's decade was a story of dizzying highs and devastating lows. He was one half of the 
Simon and Kirby Studio, a birthplace of new ideas, new genres, and hit titles that had at 
times sold over a million copies per issue.   Simon and Kirby were the superstars of the 
15
business, and their names appeared on covers. 
 
In 1954, they launched Mainline Publications, their own self-publishing venture. In a case of 
spectacularly bad timing, Wertham's campaign against comic books took down the 
distributor they shared with EC Comics, resulting in Mainline's insolvency.  By early 1956, 
16
the Mainline experiment was over.[Footnote: Robert Lee Beerbohm, "The Mainline Comics 
Story: An Initial Examination," Jack Kirby Collector 25, August 1999.] 
 
Switching from owner back to freelancer, Kirby continued producing stories for the Prize 
romance books, sold stories to Stan Lee at Atlas, to Harvey where Simon was editor, and his 
work appeared in Charlton comics in the form of Mainline inventory. The industry continued 
to shrink, and by the latter half of the decade Kirby was trying to diversify into the more 
lucrative world of newspaper strips, producing a number of samples. While he continued with 
monthly comics to pay the bills, his dream was elsewhere. In 1957, Kirby landed on his feet 
at DC where the pay was good. He successfully pitched the S&K concept, Challengers of the 
Unknown, and was welcomed back without Simon.  
 
In 1958, Kirby realised his dream of a newspaper strip, Sky Masters. Unfortunately, his editor 
at DC, Jack Schiff, had arranged the contact with the newspaper syndicate, and was due a 
portion of the proceeds. Kirby believed that his future assignments at DC were being 
leveraged to increase the editor's take from Kirby's share, from which he was already 
responsible for paying the inker. When the two wound up in court, Schiff won the judgment: 
15 “Although Captain America sold almost 1m copies per issue, surprisingly he was not Simon's biggest seller. [...] 
Young Romance topped 1m sales per issue, as did its companion title, Young Love” From the Guardian’s Joe 
Simon obituary. Joe Simon obituary, Steve Holland - https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/16/joe-simon 
16 Their distributor was “Leader News” who handled the highly respected EC comics. But EC published graphic 
horror comics. Their boss, William Gaines, was defending this comics on national TV one day, but he was on very 
strong “diet pills” that back then contained meth amphetamines. His pills ran out that day, and he appeared as 
some freakish person on live TV. EC horror comics then came under the spotlight at the Senate comic book 
investigation. Thus, when stores saw new comics coming from the same distributor, many just sent them back 
unopened. For more details on the rise and fall of Mainline, see Jack Kirby Collector magazine 25 (the Simon and 
Kirby issue), and Dave Rawlins’ online EC discussion group 

Kirby was blacklisted at DC, but his work on Sky Masters continued for another year.  His 
17
DC earnings had run dry by early 1959, but Kirby had already picked up assignments from 
Archie, Western, Prize, Gilberton,  and back at Atlas, from Stan Lee.  By early 1961, Atlas 
18
19
was Kirby's sole source of income. The pay rates were half what DC had paid: he really 
needed the money, yet he could see that Goodman’s comic divison might shut down at any 
moment. More than ever, Kirby had to create new hit comics, and fast! 
 
Research suggests that writers hit their creative peak at age 42 , and artists at 48 . Kirby 
20
21
was 43. Just using the facts available to us in early 1961, we know that Jack Kirby, 
America’s number one comics creator, was about to do something world changing. 
The cover picture 
 
 
17 Jon B Cooke, "The Story Behind Sky Masters," Jack Kirby Collector 15, April 1997 
18  Declaration of Mark Evanier on behalf of the Kirby family, 2011. 
https://docs.justia.com/cases/federal/district-courts/new-york/nysdce/1:2010cv00141/356975/74 
19 He and Simon previously created Captain America for Goodman, and they were supposed to get a cut of the 
profits. Sales were huge yet Goodman said the profits were slim. Goodman was allegedly paying his other 
comics expenses out of the Captain America account. (See Mark Evanier, “Kirby: King of Comics”). 
20 This Is the Peak Age for Creativity, Science Says. Betsy Mikel - 
https://www.inc.com/betsy-mikel/this-is-the-peak-age-for-creativity-science-says.html 
21  When Do Great Artists Hit Peak Creativity? 
Tom Jacobs - https://psmag.com/social-justice/great-artists-hit-peak-creativity-70528 

Lee later claimed that the Fantastic Four was all his idea, and that he was inspired by the 
Justice League comic. That claim does not stand up to examination: appendix 2 has the full 
details.  
 
Based on that claim, some people like to see a slight resemblance between the cover of 
Fantastic Four issue 1 and the cover of The Brave and The Bold 28 (the first appearance of 
the Justice League). However, there is a much closer resemblance to Kirby’s monster 
comics: 

 
(See for example Journey into Mystery 58, or Amazing Adventures 5, published the month 
before Fantastic Four 1).  
 
We will see this again and again in the origin of Marvel comics: everything can be traced to 
Kirby’s earlier work.  
The cover text: would the editor lie to you? 
All sides agree that the final text in this comic was written by Stan Lee. Let’s look at that text. 
Reading left to right, the first text we see (other than the title and small print) is the Invisible 
Girl: 
 
“I can’t turn invisible fast enough!”  
 
 
This is not true of course. On page 18 she can turn invisible instantly when a monster is 
chasing her. But this is not necessarily a lie, it’s just a character’s opinion in the heat of the 

moment. And maybe it’s just part of the symbolic cover: symbolic covers were normal for the 
time.  
22
 
The truth or otherwise of Sue’s statement is a silly, trivial detail. But it raises a very serious 
question: how far can we go before “not exactly true” becomes a lie? Look at the next 
statement on the cover. This is in a text box, so it’s the editor speaking to the reader: 
 
 
FEATURING “THE THING!” “MR. FANTASTIC!” “HUMAN TORCH!” “INVISIBLE 
GIRL!” TOGETHER FOR THE FIRST TIME IN ONE MIGHTY MAGAZINE! 
 
The editor implies that we should recognise these names. He implies that they have 
appeared somewhere before. But neither claim is true. A different character called “The 
Human Torch” once had his own comic, but if you bought this comic expecting that character 
you would be cheated. You would find you have been tricked into buying somebody 
completely different. 
 
So this is a false claim, about the real world, made with the intention of getting your money. 
But is it a lie? How far can an editor allow the bending of the truth in order to get money? 
Turn the page and we will see. 
 
 
22 The cover combines several different themes: the home in New York, the monster, and the powers. Issues 
2,3,4,6,7, etc also had symbolic covers. The most obviously symbolic covers are those where Doctor Doom 
towers over everybody else (issues 5, 16, 29, 57, 84, 86, annual 2, and Treasury Edition 11). 

The inside cover:  
a reputable company? 
 
Look on the inside front cover below the advertisement for building muscles. This tells us 
much more about the business.  
 
 
If you are following along an ordinary reprint it probably misses the ads. If you have the 
scans  you might notice that it has the wrong page, using the inside front cover from issue 8 
23
instead of issue 1. But they are very similar: all the early Fantastic Four inside covers had 
the same small print. I want to draw attention to the official company name. 
“Canam Publishers Sales Corp” 
The officially named publisher of Fantastic Four 1 was not the real publisher, Martin 
Goodman’s Magazine Management. It was not Timely, or Atlas, the names used when 
talking to readers. It was not even Marvel Comics Group, the name use for advertisers. It 
was “Canam.” Why does this matter? Well, check the small print of other comics published 
by Magazine Management: 
 
1.
The Fantastic Four was published by “Canam”. 
2.
Spider-Man was “Non-parail”. 
3.
Daredevil was “Olympia”. 
4.
Avengers was “Vista”. 
5.
Hulk was “Zenith”. 
6.
Strange Tales was “Chipiden” (named after Goodman's sons Chip and Iden). 
7.
Tales To Astonish was “Miss America Publishing Corp” 
8.
and so on. Goodman used  fifty nine  different company names.  
 
These companies do not exist. Or rather, they do not have significant assets like buildings 
and employees.  The technical term is “shell companies” (empty shells). There are 
24
legitimate reasons for shell companies , but they are very commonly used to prevent losing 
25
money if you are sued. Goodman was often sued, and violated FCC regulations on at least 
four occasions: 
 
23 These scans are often traced to the “Gitcorp” DVD sold in the early 2000s 
24 Or rather, they own assets only long enough to transfer them to somebody else. 
25 E.g. create a company in a tax haven, transfer assets via it, and save tax.  

The modus operandi that Goodman adopted to satisfy his thirst for a quick profit at any cost (except, of 
course, for the cost of investing in quality original material) got him censured by the federal government 
on at least four occasions. 
In addition, he was sued by employees and competitors and, like many of the low-rent pulp and 
magazine publishers that entered the comic book field in the 1930s, was forever labeled by freelancers 
and comic book historians as a swindler of creative talent.  
26
 
One way to cheat a writer was to pay them for a story once, then later to use the old story 
again with minor changes, and without paying the original writer again. The “Secret History 
of Marvel Comics” (by Bell and Vassallo) has examples of Goodman doing this. Lee seems 
to have followed the same practice. For example: 
 
The first time Stan Lee worked with Jack Kirby on a story (TWO GUN KID #54) Lee actually gave Kirby 
a plot. The plot was taken from an old Timely Western story called "The Tenderfoot" (WILD WESTERN 
#50) which was not written by Lee. Lee later used the same plot again in RAWHIDE KID #36).  
27
 
Another way was to simply not acknowledge their work at all. In Lee’s 1947 book “Secrets of 
the Comics” Lee gives Goodman all the credit for the existence of Captain America, never 
mentioning the book’s creators, Simon and Kirby, at all. 
Deceptive advertising 
Another indication of the company’s standards was the advertising it accepted. These ads 
were perfectly normal in the comics industry as a whole, but low standards across the 
industry are still low standards. While we are on the inside front cover, look at that 
advertisement for big muscles. Look closely at the picture: it seems to have a fake head 
posted on the body. Look at the promise: huge muscles in “ten minutes of fun each day”. 
 
 
Let’s be clear: this advertisement is lying to us. And while we’re at it, look at the other ads in 
the comics. Some offer magic tricks of highly dubious quality. Another says “if you know just 
20 people you can make at least $50, more likely $100 to $200 in your spare time”. This was 
a fortune in 1961 when a comic was just ten cents. Those numbers are all theoretically 
possible, but saying “at least” and “more likely” is simply a lie.  
 
26 Bell and Vassallo, The Secret History of Marvel Comics, 2013, p.26 
27 From a social media comment by Patrick Ford 

Nearly all the ads are like this, either very misleading or simply lying. For example there are 
two full page ads looking for artists. But the comic book art industry was shrinking, indicating 
an oversupply of artists, and artists were the bottom of the pecking order. These ads exist 
precisely because artists could make more money money from kids responding to these ads 
than from working in the industry. 
 
All of this confirms what we saw in the small print: the business was not to be trusted.  
Freeze frame: what happens next? 
We are about to begin the story itself. Let’s pause and consider where we are.  
 
●
A company has a history of cheating writers.  
●
The comics division is run by the boss’s nephew. The nephew has never done any 
other job, and his sales are mediocre.   
28
●
The company is in crisis and the nephew fears he may be fired.  
29
●
Then who should walk in the door? The world’s greatest comics creator. A man who 
spends every hour at the drawing board and is consequently unskilled in the ways of 
business.  
 
What happens next? How can the boss’s nephew make himself so important to the boss that 
he can never be fired? The answer is in the comic. 
 
 
 
28  See appendix 5 
29  “You know, it’s like a sinking ship and we’re the rats, and we’ve got to get off.” - Lee’s words to Dick Ayers at 
the time. Recalled in Ayers’ interview in Alter Ego V3 No31 
 

Page 1:  
Signatures, and dialog versus art 
Now we get to the story itself. I will use the page numbers written on the bottom right hand 
corner of each page. So the splash page is page 1, and the final page of the Mole Man story 
is page 25. 
Challengers, Challengers everywhere 
Before discussing the signatures, let’s look at how the story begins with a yellow box with 
four circles and the four heroes. The dialog says these are the Fantastic Four. But haven’t 
we seen this design before somewhere? It was used on the original ad for Kirby’s 
Challengers of the Unknown.  
 
 
This is the first of many indications that the Fantastic Four was simply a continuation of 
Kirby’s Challengers, with minor changes for legal reasons.  
30
30  See appendix 7 for a list of similarities 

Signed “Stan Lee and Jack Kirby” 
At the top right we see the names “Stan Lee and Jack Kirby”.  
 
What does it mean to have a name on a comic? Not much, according to Lee. Lee discussed 
names on comics in his 1947 book, “Secrets Behind the Comics”: 

 
The man whose name is signed to a comic strip is  not always  the man who  really  writes and draws the 
strip. Then  why  are false names sometimes used? False names are sometimes used because a comic 
strip may have  many artists ! One artist may create a comic strip... the strip may grow so popular than 
the one artist who created it cannot draw all the strips needed. So, the editor hires another artist to draw 
the same strip. But the first artist wants his name on  all  the strips! So, even though the new artist draws 
some strips, the name of the first artist will appear on all of them!   Remember:  you cannot always tell 
who writes or draws a comic strip by looking at the name which is signed! it may be the wrong name or a 
fictitious name!  
31
 
Lee was writing in 1947, so probably had in mind Bob Kane, who recently (1943) left Batman 
but his name still appeared on every issue. Unlike most creators of the time, Kane 
understood the legal power of a signature: Kane made himself irreplaceable by getting a 
contract where his signature had to appear on every issue of Batman, even when Kane had 
little or no input.  
 
The largest section in “Secrets Behind The Comics” argues that Martin Goodman should 
take credit for Captain America. This was probably the motive for the book, as Siegel and 
Shuster had recently claimed credit for Superman. Goodman would not want Simon and 
Kirby claiming the rights to Captain America. So Lee promoted Goodman as the genius 
behind the strip: 
31   Secrets Behind the Comics p.11, emphasis in original 


In 1961 Lee was placed in the same predicament again. Here was Kirby, the creator of the 
company’s biggest hit, with his name on a new comic. Lee had to assert his claim over the 
Fantastic Four, just as Goodman had asserted his claim over Captain America. 
The Matthew Effect 
Bosses often take credit for their employees’ work. This is not a controversial idea. In 
science this is called the Matthew Effect, after the statement in Matthew 25:29 that “to he 
that has shall be given”. If a scientific team discovers something it is generally the head of 
the team who gets the glory and the awards, regardless of who did what. The team head is 
then more likely to be the team head in future, and will therefore attract even more money 
and more awards regardless of who did the actual work.  
 
As head of the comics division, Lee could put his name on any comic he wanted. He could 
call himself “writer” even if he was merely copywriter - someone who added the final printed 
copy (text) to another person’s ideas. Within the comics industry Lee had a reputation for 
signing his name on other people’s work, but perhaps that reputation was not deserved? In 
this book I focus on the primary documents to see where the evidence leads. 
 
Lee did the same thing when he left writing comics in 1972, “Stan Lee presents” was written 
at the top of thousands of comics that Lee seldom read, let alone created.  True, Lee did not 
32
assert that he wrote these later comics, but he did not assert that he wrote Fantastic Four 
issues 1-8 either. We’ll discuss that next. 
No “writer” claim for over a year.  
For the first year, the books were merely signed “Lee and Kirby”  
 
Lee did not call himself the “writer” until issue 9, dated December 1962 . For the evolution of 
33
Lee’s claim to be the writer see appendix 10. 
What “Lee and Kirby” meant in 1961 
“Lee and Kirby” is like “Simon and Kirby”, where both men shared in writing and drawing 
(though Simon also had to split his time with running the company). 
32 We can be fairly sure that Lee stopped reading comics around this time, because when in 2007 Lee wrote “the 
Last Fantastic Four Story”, although the story was set in the future, the characters were mostly as they were in 
1973, around the time that Lee left day to day contact with the comics. 
33 The first few issues were bi-monthly. Issue 1 was cover dated Nov 1961, issue 9 was Dec 1962. 

 
 
Fantastic Four 1 was essentially a Goodman monster comic. Goodman monster comics 
were signed “Kirby and X” (where X is usually the inker Dick Ayers, but could be Joe Sinnott, 
etc).  
 
 
This topic is discussed in more detail when we examine page 4.  That analysis suggests that 
“Kirby and Ayers” meant the same as “Simon and Kirby”: it meant that between them they 
created the comic. No more, no less. If it meant “A wrote it, and B drew it” then it would have 
said so.  
 

Give that “Lee and Kirby” just meant “both were involved”, and given that Fantastic Four 1 
was essentially a monster comic, and given that Kirby wrote the monster comics, the 
signatures “Lee and Kirby” would suggest that Kirby had at least some part in writing 
Fantastic Four issue 1.  
 
For how Lee’s claim to be the writer evolved, see appendix 10. 
 
However, the finished dialog, written onto Kirby’s finished pencils, was by Lee. Nobody 
disputes that. That is what allows us to compare Lee’s dialog with Kirby’s art, and see what 
that tells us about the creation process. 
Dialogue versus art: the city 
Now we begin the story itself. 
 
The dialogue refers to a fictional "Central City".  Here are some real life locations called 
“central city”: There’s Central City, Missouri, Central City, Nebraska, Central City, Colorado… 
notice anything in common? 
 
City planners call a place “central city” because it’s  central . The clue is in the name.  
But a few pages later we see that this comic book city is on the coast, the opposite of being 
central. 

 
It’s a minor point, but it suggests that either Lee did not know what would happen later, or he 
didn’t care. We will see this again and again as the book continues: either Lee did not know 
what was in the book or he did not care. 
New York and realism 
The art shows that this could easily be New York, where Kirby and Lee both lived. But for the 
first two issues Lee called it Central City. In issue 3 Kirby set a battle outside the Bijou 
Theatre, a landmark on New York’s 45th street , and from then on Lee began to refer to the 
34
city as New York.  
 
This is a common theme throughout the book: Kirby’s art shows things that might exist in the 
real world, then Lee’s dialog destroys the believability. This matters because many fans felt 
that realism, such as heroes living in New York, was the key to Marvel’s success: 
 
It was important that Lee's heroes lived in the real world, and not in Gotham City or Metropolis, because 
they were real people. That is, Marvel Comics imagined how real people might act if they suddenly 
gained superpowers -- confused, conflicted and not necessarily eager for the responsibility. They were a 
departure from that straight-arrow hero of the Golden Age, Superman. The next age belonged to Marvel. 
And Stan Lee ushered it in with his creations.  
35
 
34 At the time, in 1961, it was officially called the D.W.Griffith theater, but everyone still knew it as Bijou. 
35  Article titled “Stan Lee” at Salon: https://www.salon.com/1999/08/17/lee/a 

Calling the city “Central City” contradicts Lee’s later claim that having superheroes “live in 
the real world” was his own idea from the start: 
 
 "For years we had been producing comics for kids, because they were supposed to be the market," Lee 
explained. "One day, out of sheer boredom, we said let's do something we would like. So we tried to get 
rid of the old clichés. Comics were too predictable. Why not accept the premise that the superhero has 
his superpower, and then keep everything else as realistic as possible? If I were Spiderman, for 
example, wouldn't I still have romantic problems, financial problems, sinus attacks and fits of insecurity? 
Wouldn't I be a little embarrassed about appearing in public in a costume? We decided to let our 
superheroes live in the real world."  
36
 
Realism was not a minor thing, Lee said being “in the real world” was “the whole formula” for 
their success: 
 
 "The whole formula, if there was one, I think was to say -- let's assume that somebody really could walk 
on walls like Spider-Man, or turn green and become a monster like The Hulk, that's a given, we'll accept 
that, but accepting that -- what would that person be like in the real world if he really existed? Wouldn't 
he still have to worry about making a living, or people distrusting him, or having acne and dandruff, or 
his girlfriend jilting him, or what are the real problems people would have? and I think that's what made 
the books popular -- but it took years for the competition to realize that, I'm very happy to say."  
37
 
We will see throughout issue 1 that the realism, the secret of Marvel’s success, came from 
Kirby, and Lee fought against it. 
Dialogue versus art: the “flare gun” 
The art shows wobbly writing projected onto clouds. That is, something like Batman’s Bat 
signal, or (a couple of years later) Spider-Man’s Spider Signal. The pulp hero The Phantom 
had a similar device.  
36  “The Stan Lee Universe” by FIngeroth et al,  p.74 
37 Stan Lee, in 1984  
http://www.etonline.com/movies/155709_flashback_stan_lee_talks_future_of_marvel_1984_it_a_growing_compa
ny 

 
 
Sky projection is a real thing, and has been used since the 1920s as an advertising gimmick. 
Modern laser projectors make it even easier and the words are surprisingly clear (due to the 
distance and therefore viewing angle) 

 
This works with regular lights, but the first laser had just been built, the year before Fantastic 
Four 1 came out, so Kirby may have had this in mind.  
38
 
Occam’s razor 
It is possible of course that the story involves radically new technology that appears to defy 
all known laws: the text says the words “take form, as if by magic” and then later form into 
the number 4. That would require numerous new discoveries and technologies that are not 
implied by the story. If we allow things that are not implied then why not say the Fantastic 
Four are really fluffy bunny rabbits in disguise, and are controlled by a flying teapot just out 
of view? Occam’s razor is the principal that we should shave off unnecessary parts from any 
theory. New flare gun technology is not necessary, so we should shave it off.  
 
Other “problems” with the image are easily explained: the wobbly edges to the letters are the 
same as we see in the sky projection photos. And the smoke appearing to come from behind 
the building is a mistake in the reprint: the original published comic shows it could have been 
from either in front or behind - the point is that the people watching do not know its source. 
38 The first laser was demonstrated in 1960, by Theodore H. Maiman at Hughes Research Laboratories. Kirby 
kept up to date with science magazines, as we can see from the Sidewinder missile, seismometer, etc., in this 
issue alone. 

 
 
In conclusion, just as with the New York / Central City example, the art shows something that 
could be real. But the dialog (and the reprint) makes it  not  real. 
Dialogue versus art: Reed’s hesitancy 
Reed’s first words are: 
 
It is the first time I have found it necessary to give the signal! I pray it will be the  last ! 
 
This suggests he does not want to use his powers to help the world. But later pages reveal 
that he hijacked a rocket ship, taking enormous risks to oppose the authorities, and did not 
hesitate in using his later powers aggressively. Then the Mole Man story shows him piloting 
his own plane, so there’s a lot of planning. The later dialog says Reed called himself “Mister 
Fantastic”. Is this a hesitant man? A man who prays he will never have to use his power?  
 
So is Lee unaware of what happens later in the story? Or is Lee just careless? Or not at all 
concerned with internal contradictions? The following pages support all three conclusions. 

Conclusion 
At the end of page one we already have hints that Lee is adding dialog to a story he has 
never seen before, that Lee contradicts himself, and that above all the the original story was 
realistic but Lee makes it unrealistic. This evidence will mount up, page after page. 
 
 

Page 2:  
Sexism 
 
The first person we see in action is Sue Storm. She is also the first person we saw on the 
cover (reading left to right, top to bottom), and will be the first person to gain powers. Her 
face is confident and serious. She learns of the alarm and does not hesitate, even to check 
for herself, or to tell her friend, but she immediately moves into action. She pushes men (and 
some women) out of the way.  
 
Also note that outfit. Later issues of the comic mention Dior several times (most notably in 
annual 1). Let us compare the Dior summer 1960 collection (beehive hair, big flower prints 
dresses) to the summer 1961 collection: the latest fashions are exactly what Sue is wearing: 
minimalist jacket, three quarter length sleeves, accented with neck details. 

 
Why does this matter? The old vision of women, as pretty things wearing long flowery 
dresses and impractical hair, changed in 1961. The future belonged to practical women who 
got things done. We are now building up an image of Jack Kirby from his art. He’s a guy who 
noticed what was up to date and looked to the future. Later we’ll see examples of Kirby being 
up to date with politics and science as well.  
Sue’s place in the book 
The art puts Sue first: First on the cover, first to use her powers in the book, first to use her 
powers after the spaceflight, and she is the one to make Ben join so the flight can go ahead. 
She acts decisively without hesitation, and pushes men out of the way. Later art and later 
issues will make this even clearer.  
 

We saw the same thing with Kirby’s Challengers, even though they were originally just men. 
(June, the computer expert, joined the group later.) The origin story began with the men 
coming second to four heroic women.  
 
Now that we have seen how Sue as described in the art, let’s look at the dialog and see the 
contrast: 
 
So it has happened at last! I must be true to my vow! It is time for the world to meet The Invisible Girl! 
 
It’s subtle, but it’s a different message. According to the dialog, Sue was waiting for someone 
else to tell her to use her powers. That other person was of course a man. She was 
apparently hesitant and only did it because of her vow: a vow she made to men. 
 
On its own this is a minor point. But examples in later Fantastic Four comics, are far, far 
worse. The art often showed her as independent and dominating men, and on the same 
panels Lee added dialog that made her scared or subservient to men.  

 
Once Kirby left and Lee wrote the book (issues 103-125), Sue was reduced to fainting and 
being rescued almost every issue. 
 
While the boys were out fighting bad guys, Lee’s Sue sometimes stayed home to answer the 
phone. 

 
 
The result of Lee’s dialog (and later his writing) is that readers now see the early Sue in that 
context. For example, a reader recently criticised page 2 of Fantastic Four issue 1 for 
showing Sue “demurely drinking tea”. Would the same critic have referred to James Bond in 
the same pose as “demurely drinking Martini”?  
 
In short, Kirby’s art empowered women, but Lee’s dialog made them weak and dependent 
on men. 
Who was the better writer? 
Strong, independent women are generally considered a sign of good writing. Or at least 
modern writing.  
 
The remainder of the dialog on page 2 simply describes what we can already see in the art. 
Jerry Bails, founder of Alter Ego, described this problem a couple of years later: 
 

Stan writes a one page synopsis of an entire FF story [after meeting with Kirby: see appendix 4]  then 
Kirby breaks down the whole story even before any dialogue or captions are written. Naturally then, 
there can be little in the way of real plot carried in the "script". Captions must be limited largely to 
describing the action in the box, and dialogue must consist largely of wisecracks, both of which can be 
added directly to the pencilled drawing.  
39
 
In this first issue the problem is even worse: Lee is using the dialog as well as the captions to 
describe what the reader can already see. Later he will adopt the method observed by Bails, 
leaving dialog free for wisecracks. Either way, in these pages the story is fully told in the art, 
and Lee’s dialog is redundant. 
 
“Show, don’t tell” is the usual advice when writing. So in this as well as the sexism, Kirby is 
shown as a better writer than Lee. 
Did Lee know what would happen next? 
We saw on page 1 that Lee might not know what happens on later pages. We see it again 
here on page 2. A taxi ride is a classic example of a time when a writer can develop the plot: 
a taxi ride means they are going to somewhere, but the hero has time to anticipate what will 
happen. So this is a perfect moment to reveal information, foreshadow what is to come, and 
build the tension. But instead Lee simply describes the taxi ride. He has the taxi simply 
wander aimlessly, killing any sense of urgency, whereas the art shows it speeding, leaving a 
trail of dust in its path.  
 
The speeding taxi makes a far better story, but it requires some idea of what is happening 
next.  
 
Lee’s taxi dialog suggests again that either he is a bad writer (killing the tension) or that he 
does not know what happens next, and is just making up dialogue to fit whatever he sees for 
the first time when seeing each page.  
39 Jerry Bails, Alter Ego issue 2, 1964 

The secret of Lee’s charm 
Lee’s apparent method, taking a fully complete story and adding his own comments, evolved 
over time into something unique and appealing to many fans (while irritating and empty to 
others). It’s like Mystery Science Theatre, where a clever friend is watching the story with 
you. The fact that the story does not actually need dialog gave him plenty of space to chat 
with the reader, add wisecracks and asides, and so on. Competitors like DC comics did not 
have that luxury. Kirby could tell a complete story just with the art, but few other creators had 
that skill. 
 
IMHO, Lee's comics do in fact read better, in the main, than their DC counterparts, despite Lee's writing 
being perhaps technically worse than the DC writers. The fact that Lee is actually NOT the writer, but is 
a kind of a disreputable uncle figure improvising commentary on, and even undermining, a story he has 
little personal investment in, made these comics feel livelier to me as a kid.[...] Neither one is very 
readable to me now, but to the young me the Marvel books felt spontaneous compared to the neatly 
scripted DC superhero books.  
40
 
 
40 Aaron Noble, commenting on social media about his memories of Marvel and DC in the 1960s 

Page 3:  
“Bah!” 
On this page we start to see Ben’s dialog: 
 
Bah! Everywhere it is the same! 
 
Bah! I cannot delay! 
 
Bah! What'd you expect? 
 
Bah! How can you care for that weakling when I'm here? 
 
Notice a pattern? Ben doesn’t have much dialog in this issue (he appears to have been 
added as an afterthought to the Mole Man story, but we’ll get to that) so all this “bah”ing 
stands out. It’s fairly typical of the clunky dialog in this issue.  
Who wrote better dialog? 
It is commonly claimed that Lee improved Kirby’s dialog. But the evidence from the comics 
themselves shows the opposite. It is true that in later years kirby preferred a richer, more 
intense style. By 1970 he had spent thirty years writing simple dialog and human level plots, 
and he had nothing to prove. He wanted to move on to bigger topics, and they required 
bigger language. But in 1961 Kirby was still writing simple language that any child could 
follow. I give examples in appendix 1.  
 
Compare Kirby’s dialog in appendix 1 with Lee’s dialog in Fantastic Four 1. Is any of Kirby’s 
dialog hard to follow? Would any of it feel “clunky” to a child?  Does Kirby lack the human 
touch? Judge for yourself. 
 
Both Kirby and Lee could write easy dialog. But compare their dialog, and ask yourself, who 
was the better writer? 
 
What was Lee’s job? 
Lee’s job at the time was to keep the comics simple. 

[O] ne edict that my publisher had was that the stories had to be geared towards young readers; or 
unintelligent older readers. We weren't supposed to use words of more than two syllables, and we had 
to have simple plots; no continuing stories, because he felt our readers weren't smart enough to 
remember from month to month where they had left off. It was really boring.  
41
 
This seems to be exactly what he was doing in Fantastic Four issue 1: Kirby provided a 
complex story and Lee simplified it for younger readers.  
 
Page 3 summary 
So far we see energy in the story, and interesting plotting. But it’s all in Kirby’s art, not in 
Lee’s dialog. Perhaps we could still argue that Lee wrote the original plot, but let’s look at the 
next page. 
 
 
41 Stan Lee’s 2000 interview with Kenneth Plume. 
http://uk.ign.com/articles/2000/06/26/interview-with-stan-lee-part-1-of-5 
 

Page 4:  
Who wrote the monster pages? 
 
This page features a lumpy orange monster, then half under water, then bursting from 
underground. These are typical scenes from numerous Kirby monster stories.  So whoever 
42
wrote those scenes probably wrote these Fantastic Four scenes as well. 
 
The Kirby monster stories are all conveniently reprinted in the “Monsterbus”.  If we examine 
each one we find that Stan Lee did not sign a single one. But many of the monster comics 
have the signatures “Kirby & Ayers” and once “Kirby & Sinnott”.   
43
42  Another monster bursting from underground is on the cover and also later in the story. The discussion of the 
cover gives other examples. The water pose is next seen on the splash page of issue 2. The Challengers’ first 
adventure combines both scenes, with a monster bursting from underwater, grabbing a hero in his hand. As for 
the orange lumpy Thing, even if we restrict ourselves to Goodman monster comics dated the same month 
(November 1961), we have "The Thing in the Black box" from Journey into Mystery 73, Sserpo from Amazing 
Adventures 6, "The Creature in the Black bog" (arising from the sea) and also "I entered the dimension of Doom" 
both from Tales of Suspense 23, "The Creature from Krogarr" in Tales to Astonish 25, and Orrgo the 
Unconquerable in Strange Tales 90. 
43 Thanks to Michael Hill for checking every issue. Examples of signatures are: 
Tales of Suspense 34, October '62, Kirby/Ayers two stories, sig on the first. 
“ST 100, ‘[Kirby][Ayers]’ (boxed) two stories. 
ToS 33, ‘[Kirby][Ayers]’ (boxed) two stories, Ayers cover unsigned. 
ST 99, ‘[Kirby][Ayers]’ (boxed) cover and two stories. 
TtA 34, ‘[Kirby][Ayers]’ (boxed) story, Ayers cover unsigned. 
ToS 32, ‘[Kirby][Ayers]’ (boxed) cover and two stories. 
JIM 82, ‘[Kirby][Ayers]’ (boxed) on cover 
ToS 31, ‘Kirby+Ayers’ two stories, Ayers cover unsigned. 
TtA 33, ‘Kirby+Ayers’ two stories. 
Etc., etc.... 
ST 94, ‘Kirby + Sinnott’ story, Ayers cover and story unsigned.” 

 
 
Lee (or someone working for him) would often paint over their signatures. Here’s an original 
penciled monster page: you can see where the signatures were covered up.: 

 
Ayers later wrote 
 
So… regarding those Kirby / Ayers signatures… I always put the signatures on our work together just as 
I always sign my work. I noticed that the ‘whiteouts’ were happening and it sure didn’t make me happy 
for I usually had the signature as part of the composition of the drawing. It was a sore point. I’m not keen 
on the credit boxes that are added to the drawing and confuse the composition of my drawing.  
44
 
In later years, reprints with signatures were altered to say that Kirby and Ayers only did the 
art. In this example the scan is poor, and the colouring makes it hard to see in the original, 
but you can just about make out how the rock has been extended to make space for the 
changed credits: 
 
44 DIck Ayers, Dec. 8, 1998, on the Kirby-List forum 

 
 
It seems unlikely that Lee had written these stories, as his signature was never there. After 
Marvel’s bankruptcy in 1996-97, the question of legal ownership became a hot topic. At that 
point Lee began to say that he, or possibly his brother, wrote them.   
45
45 Patrick Ford has researched the topic and Lee’s claims seem to date from the 1990s. For example, the Lieber 
claim (Lee’s brother) first appeared in in an interview in “Alter-Ego” #2, October 1999. The interview was with 
Lee’s friend Roy Thomas, who was not there at the time in question, so the claim probably came from Lee. 
“Comic Book Marketplace” (Jan-Feb 1993) an article by Dr John Townsend briefly mentioned Lieber in a list of 
monster comic inkers, but there is no other evidence for this so Ford suggests it may have been a typo. 

But there is no actual evidence (beyond those late claims) for Lee or Lieber writing them: 
 
In summary, page 4 reminds us that the Fantastic Four was in many ways a monster comic, 
and Jack Kirby wrote all his monster comics himself.  
Who wrote the sci-fi pages? 
A couple of months before this issue was written, Kirby had just finished plotting “Sky 
Masters”, a newspaper strip about the space race.  
 
The Sunday edition would include a section where Kirby covered real world space science. 
 

 
 
Kirby’s superhero and romance comics strips will be discussed on a later page. The point is 
that Kirby was already producing high quality material in every area touched on by the 
Fantastic Four: superhero, sci-fi, monster, emotional drama, etc.  
 
The Fantastic Four is not some great leap forward, or some miracle that can only be 
explained by Lee adding some mystery ingredient. The Fantastic Four is just Kirby doing 
what Kirby always did. If anything, the Fantastic Four is Kirby when he’s rushed, because he 
worked on five other books the same month. It’s a normal Kirby comic, no more no less, 
except the dialog got dumbed down. 
 
 

Page 5:  
Why Lee was good at connecting with 
readers 
 
As mentioned earlier, Lee writes as if he is sitting next to the reader, commenting on a story 
that somebody else has written. Page five has a particularly clear example:  
 
(Dialogue:)  But what does it add up to, chief? What?” 
(Caption box:)  What does it add up to, indeed? Perhaps if the police officers could witness still another 
scene in a local service station, they would find yet another clue – as will  WE ! 
 
Why was Lee so good at acting like the reader, not the writer?  Other writers sounded fake 
when they wrote that way. The simplest explanation is that Lee was not faking: he really was 
reading the story, and reacting like any reader would react.  
Inside the mind of the writer 
A comment like “what will happen next?” is only possible because there is space: normally 
the story would need that space for some useful information. But all the information in this 
story - the entire plot - can be seen in the art. So whoever wrote this story thought in terms of 
pictures, not words. 
Up to date with culture 
Later on the page we see that Johnny Storm loves cars.  This story comes soon after the  
46
46 We actually see Johnny in two different cars (look at the windows), and in the second his friend is at the 
opposite end. This suggests a couple of minutes’ difference between the establishing scene on page 5 and the 
action scene on page 6. Unfortunately the colourist chose to colour the cars the same, and Lee’s dialog makes it 
sound like a continuous sentence, giving the impression that the car and friend had changed mid-sentence. 
 

opening of America’s interstate highways (the act was passed in 1956). That and increasing 
wealth meant cars became a big part of youth culture.  
 
This of course is just one data point, but it’s part of a pattern: this is a story based in the real 
world. This matters, because the art was as realistic as possible, but the dialog was not. And 
as we saw earlier, realism is what made people buy the book.  
 
 

Page 6:  
The flame demon 
 
Is this “The Human Torch”? 
On this page we see Johnny turn to flame for the first time. Look at every time the Torch is 
on fire in this issue (and the next): he has no face, no legs, and does not use the "arm" 
shapes for anything. he is basically a continuous long flame with vaguely arm and head 
shaped flames. He is just as misshapen and monstrous as Ben, probably far more so.  
 
This flame monster is a force of chaos, creating uncontrollable destruction wherever he is 
(without using his arms): destroying airplanes with men inside, setting fire to the forest, and 
making caves collapse.  

 
In contrast, The Human Torch was a well known superhero owned by Goodman's company. 
He had a distinctive look, recognisably very human, and used his flame in skillful, human 
ways. 
 
What did Lee want? 
Lee wrote the dialog and called this new creation The Human Torch. Whoever decided the 
name, Lee seemed happy with it. And two issues later this new Torch was drawn to look like 
the original Torch. The art change was probably requested by Lee: Kirby had chosen a 
different style, more in keeping with the monstrous look of the others, and the new style took 
longer to draw.  
 
Lee had previously shown himself keen to keep the look of the original Torch. When that 
Torch was relaunched seven years previously (1954), and the artist drew him slightly 
differently, the Torch art had to be changed by Carl Burgos, the original Torch artist. Lee was 
in charge of the comics, so the decision was probably his.  

 
 
So the Torch we see is not the Torch Lee would have written, but a different, less controlled, 
more monstrous character. 
Maybe Lee was being creative? 
Of course, the difference can easily be explained by Lee being creative. Perhaps he liked the 
idea of someone less controlled, more likely to destroy planes and set fire to forests? But the 
dialog does not mention this, and Lee usually mentions everything that matters. The only 
dialog that might hints that the Torch might be uncontrolled is when he says he warned the 
planes. But being able to warn the planes suggests at least some level of control. 
A simpler explanation 
While it is certainly possible, in theory, that Lee could have requested the new character in 
this uncontrolled form and then changed his mind, there is a much simpler explanation: Kirby 
had a long history of creating superhero stories, monster stories and horror stories. This 
monstrous, destructive fire being is just what we would expect from Kirby. 

 
One year before this, Kirby created the fire creature Dragoom (Strange Tales 76). A couple 
of years before that, in Tales of the Unexpected 22, Kirby created flaming lava men (and did 
so again later in Thor). Around the same time, in Challengers of the Unknown, Kirby created 
a flaming monster (Showcase issue 12) and later a human figure with flaming powers 
(Challengers issue 6). Kirby’s best known fire demon was probably Surtur in Thor. Fire 
demons were Kirby’s bread and butter. 
 
In later years Kirby said he threw in Carl Burgos’ Human Torch “for entertainment value”, but 
the context indicates this was an afterthought.  This is consistent with deciding on a flaming 
47
character first, then later thinking “we can get extra sales by making the link.” 
Conclusion 
So while it is possible that either Lee or Kirby created this Human Torch, the evidence 
suggests it is more likely to be Kirby. 
 
It might be argued that Lee improved the character by his change in issue 3, but we can't 
say that without seeing what the more monstrous Torch would have worked out. The 
monstrous Ben worked well, so perhaps this would have strengthened the rivalry with 
Johnny. The question of whether Lee's changes add to sales figures is examined later.  
 
Regardless of what happened in later issues, this part of the book is just about who created 
the ideas for Fantastic Four issue 1. And this page, like every other, points more to Kirby 
than to Lee. 
 
 
47 In his  1986/7 interview: http://kirbymuseum.org/blogs/effect/2012/08/06/19867-kirby-interview/ 

Page 7:  
On realism 
 
Page seven has Johnny and a heat seeking missile. Not just any heat seeking missile, but 
the granddaddy of them all, the AIM-9 Sidewinder.
 
48
 
The Sidewinder was the first big heat seeking missile, first used in 1958 to devastating 
effect.  
 
The Soviets, weapons suppliers to half the world, later admitted that the Sidewinder’s near-biological 
intelligence was a complete revelation to them.  
49
 
This is an example of how Kirby’s art was often based on recent science and technology. But 
not  just  the art: the  story  was also based on the science: the Sidewinder was notable for 
being a heat seeker, with “near biological intelligence” for changing direction to follow a 
target. So what is more natural than that a flaming man should attract such a response, 
resulting in almost certain death for the hero? 
 
This was a realistic response from the authorities: this was 1961, the height of the cold war, 
and the authorities saw what seemed to be a missile over the city. It kept changing direction, 
so what could they do except scramble military jets with Sidewinders? 
 
However, this is where it become unrealistic. The art shows realism, but the dialog says the 
missiles carry a nuclear weapon.  
48 Later versions (e.g. the 9L) had thinner tail fins as in the image, though this may just be foreshortening. Kirby’s 
version only shows two fins on each section, almost certainly for artistic purposes: all air to air missiles have four 
fins, but changing it to two fins makes the perspective much stronger at the end of page 7. It also simplifies and 
takes up less space on page 8. Similarly the forward facing front fins allow the hands to grasp it without needing 
a larger image. But otherwise the detail suggests a reference image was used, and the sidewinder is by far the 
closest candidate. 
49  The story of the Sidewinder: http://www.donhollway.com/foxtwo/ 

 
Lee seems unaware that these are Sidewinders: why not use such a cool name if he knew 
it? Worse, not only did sidewinders  not  carry nuclear warheads, but using a nuclear weapon 
over one of your larger cities (probably New York, though Lee calls it Central City) would be 
madness. 
 
So this is another example of Kirby’s art creating a realistic story, and Lee’s dialog making it 
unrealistic. 
Realism and the question of creativity 
Readers my wonder why I keep discussing realism. Realism is relevant to the question of 
“who created what”, in four ways. 
 
1.
Connecting with the reader: 
While there are anti-realistic forms of literature,"that was unrealistic" is seldom a 
compliment. It generally means the reader is pushed out of the story. If Kirby was 
realistic and Lee was unrealistic, then this makes it more likely (though not proven) 
that Kirby was the better writer. 
2.
Creativity: 
Realism provides a guide to which of the authors was widely read, was most aware 
of the world around him, etc. That is, who was more likely to come up with interesting 
new ideas. 
3.
Depth: 
Realism is a quick way to show the layers of depth. By referring to a real world 
situation a writer can introduce a host of interesting and relevant ideas at a stroke. 
My argument is that Kirby, by connecting to more of the real world, is a deeper and 
more interesting writer than Lee. 
4.
Who understood the story? 
If the stories are based on the real world, but Lee did not understand that, then Lee 
could not have written the stories. 

 
Realism? From superheroes? 
Although The Fantastic Four is conventionally called a superhero comic (or possible a 
monster comic) it is more accurately hard science fiction. Kirby described it as a look at what 
might be possible from radiation. Everything else is as accurate as possible. 
 
The idea for the F.F. was my idea. My own anger against radiation. Radiation was the big subject at that 
time, because we still don’t know what radiation can do to people.  
50
 
"My stories were true. They involved living people, and they involved myself. They involved whatever I 
knew. I never lied to my readers. [...] If you analyze them, you'll find that I'm not really fictionalizing.   
51
 
Kirby’s predictions about radiation ended up coming true. Not in the exact way he described 
of course, but the general concept was true: radiation can make us stronger, more flexible, 
more dangerous and invisible. Today, for example, mobile technology relies on microwave 
radiation for both wifi and the atomic clocks that drive global positioning. Mobile technology 
makes us stronger (we can more easily work in larger groups), more flexible (we can do 
more things), more dangerous (we can organise fighters) and invisible (we can do it almost 
undetected).  
 
All of this is just from microwave radiation: radiation in the wavelength around one 
centimetre. Imagine how much more will be possible once we improve our understanding of 
the much shorter wavelengths produced by atomic radiation. At present atomic radiation 
cannot be very precisely targeted, so it is most useful for killing cancerous cells (that is, cells 
that grow too quickly). Researchers can now switch molecular triggers on and off using 
radiation , which promises more precise control. Imagine what might be possible after 
52
another fifty years of research, when the switching on and off of molecules is routine along 
with splicing genes from one place to another. In Challengers of the Unknown issue 3, Kirby 
explained that these superpowers were simply gene manipulation by highly advanced alien 
societies. Kirby was simply looking ahead. 
Good writing versus bad writing 
A different way to define Kirby’s story is not as hard science fiction, but as what Tolkien calls 
a “fairy story”. Tolkien defines this as follows: 
 
A “fairy-story” is one which touches on or uses Faerie, whatever its own main purpose may be: satire, 
adventure, morality, fantasy. Faerie itself may perhaps most nearly be translated by Magic—but it is 
magic of a peculiar mood and power, at the furthest pole from the vulgar devices of the laborious, 
scientific, magician.  
53
50 Jack Kirby Interview, Leonard Pitts, 1986. 
http://kirbymuseum.org/blogs/effect/2012/08/06/19867-kirby-interview/ 
51 Jack Kirby Interview, Glenn Danzig,   http://www.twomorrows.com/kirby/articles/22danzig.html 
52  Scott, Marples, etc.: “A radiation controlled molecular switch for use in gene therapy of cancer.” Gene Therapy 
7: 1121–1125, 2000 
53 Tolkien, “on Fairy Stories” 

 
That is, any story that involves something amazing and unusual. Or, as Tolkien puts it, a 
story involving “Marvels”. Tolkien says that a story about Marvels should give no hint that it is 
not real. Otherwise we have a lesser or debased form: 
 
It is at any rate essential to a genuine fairy-story, as distinct from the employment of this form for lesser 
or debased purposes, that it should be presented as “true.” The meaning of “true” in this connexion I will 
consider in a moment. But since the fairy-story deals with “marvels,” it cannot tolerate any frame or 
machinery suggesting that the whole story in which they occur is a figment or illusion.  
 
To clarify, Tolkien rejected the fake kind of fairy story. So did Kirby: 
 
I didn’t want to tell fairy tales. I wanted to tell things as they are. But I wanted to tell them in an 
entertaining way, and I told it in the Fantastic Four.  
54
 
Kirby said his stories were real: 
 
My stories were true. They involved living people, and they involved myself. They involved whatever I 
knew. I never lied to my readers. [...] If you analyze them, you'll find that I'm not really fictionalizing.  
55
 
Tolkien explained how fairy stories can and should be real: they should be internally 
consistent, and also reveal truths about the real world: 
 
Probably every writer making a secondary world, a fantasy, every sub-creator, wishes in some measure 
to be a real maker, or hopes that he is drawing on reality: hopes that the peculiar quality of this 
secondary world (if not all the details) are derived from Reality, or are flowing into it. If he indeed 
achieves a quality that can fairly be described by the dictionary definition: “inner consistency of reality,” it 
is difficult to conceive how this can be, if the work does not in some way partake of reality. The peculiar 
quality of the ”joy” in successful Fantasy can thus be explained as a sudden glimpse of the underlying 
reality or truth. It is not only a “consolation” for the sorrow of this world, but a satisfaction, and an answer 
to that question, “Is it true?” The answer to this question that I gave at first was (quite rightly): “If you 
have built your little world well, yes: it is true in that world.”  
56
 
How can a fairy story tell us truths about the real world? By focusing on simplicity: 
 
Fairy-stories deal largely, or (the better ones) mainly, with simple or 
fundamental things, untouched by Fantasy, but these simplicities are made all the more luminous by 
their setting. For the story-maker who allows himself to be “free with” Nature can be her lover not her 
slave. It was in fairy-stories that I first divined the potency of the words, and the wonder of the things, 
such as stone, and wood, and iron; tree and grass; house and fire; bread and wine.  
57
 
Incidentally, Tolkien uses Thor as an example of a story about marvels. We could also give 
the example of the Human Torch: in the popular Alex Ross book “Marvels” the story of 
marvels begins with the Human Torch.  
54 Quoted in “The Formative Fantastic Four”, Alter Ego #78 
55 Jack Kirby Interview, Glenn Danzig,  http://www.twomorrows.com/kirby/articles/22danzig.html 
56 Tolkien, “on Fairy Stories” 
57 ibid 

 
Tolkien warns against thinking such marvels are for children: 
 
It is true that in recent times fairy-stories have usually been written or “adapted” for children. 
But so may music be, or verse, or novels, or history, or scientific manuals. It is a dangerous 
process, even when it is necessary. It is indeed only saved from disaster by the fact that the 
arts and sciences are not as a whole relegated to the nursery; the nursery and schoolroom are merely 
given such tastes and glimpses of the adult thing as seem fit for them in adult 
opinion (often much mistaken). Any one of these things would, if left altogether in the 
nursery, become gravely impaired. So would a beautiful table, a good picture, or a useful 
machine (such as a microscope), be defaced or broken, if it were left long unregarded in a 
schoolroom. Fairy-stories banished in this way, cut off from a full adult art, would in the end 
be ruined; indeed in so far as they have been so banished, they have been ruined.  
58
 
To summarise, the Fantastic Four, like Thor and others, is what Tolkien calls a fairy story, 
because it deal with Marvels in the real world. A good writer will make it totally believable, 
focus on simple concepts, and not aim it at children in particular.  
 
Throughout this book I argue that Kirby is concerned with realism, he focuses on how people 
react to conflicts at their simplest level (in the moment, shorn of all details) and he deals with 
adult topics like survival, science, and sexual equality. In contrast, Lee avoids realism, he 
deals with surface appearances,  and simplifies stories to be more suitable for children. It 
59
follows that, by Tolkien’s measures, Kirby was a good writer and Lee was a bad one. 
 
58 ibid 
59 See appendix two for how his career was built on copying others’ ideas. And see the issues after 
Kirby left for how he simply copied plots created when Kirby was there, but without the original depth.  

Bad writing and the synopsis 
On the topic of page 7 and bad writing, long-time fans of the Fantastic Four may remember a 
synopsis printed in issue 358. It first appeared over twenty years after Fantastic Four 1, in 
the 1980s, when fans were starting to question whether Lee really invented these 
characters. So Lee produced a typewritten manuscript that he said was his original script. I 
examine it in detail in appendix 4, but here is the part that’s important for page 7. I scanned it 
from issue 358. Like I said, all the evidence you need is in the comics themselves: 
 
 
Lee said that the Human Torch could only flame on for five minutes, and then had to wait 
until he became excited before he could flame on again, and that would be at least five 
minutes later. But now look at page 7 of the comic: 
 
The Torch is chased by planes sent by Washington “before the hour is out”. That is, closer to 
an hour than five minutes. “So what?” you may ask, Lee changed his mind and the story was 
better for it? But that’s the point, The original plan was a bad idea from the start. Anybody 
who was used to creating stories would know that a guy who can only flame on for five 
minutes would be very limiting to the stories. Lee just wrote it without thinking it through. We 
see that again and again in Lee’s writing. 
 
And on that topic of not thinking it through, why was the Torch flying around Central City for 
nearly an hour? He was already in the city, close enough to Reed to see the flare gun, and 

had to get there in a hurry. How long would it take to fly across a typical city? A minute? 
Five? Ten if he took the long route? Lee’s dialog makes no sense when we think about it. Yet 
the art not only tells the story on its own, but makes more sense.  
 
The art looks like New York, one of the biggest cities in the world. Johnny knew the others 
would also have to reach Reed, so he may have taken a long route round the coast to scout 
for problems on his way. At the height of the cold war, such as 1961, a bomber could be 
scrambled in two minutes.  The nearest jets were probably at Stewart National Guard base, 
60
55 miles to the north.  
 
Given their expectation that this could be a Russian nuclear attack on New York City, they 
would have pushed the jets to their limits. So reaching Johnny within ten minutes is 
reasonable. The art shows he was then directly above Reed’s location. A ten minute journey 
fits perfectly and adds to the drama: who would reach their goal first, Johnny or the planes? 
 
You are probably thinking “he takes this way too seriously!” And that is why Lee’s dialog is so 
damaging. Everything about the story could have happened in real life. But generations of 
readers, raised on Lee’s dialog, find it impossible to imagine these stories as anything but 
silly. 
 
 
60  This is the consensus when the topic comes up in military forums. Obviously this assumes a state of high alert, 
such as 1961, when tensions were at their highest and the nation’s biggest city would be its most vulnerable 
spot.. 

Page 8:  
Characterisation 
 
By page 8 the art showed us a fascinating and horrifying view of Johnny storm. It revealed 
his character through his choices: how he throws himself into danger, sometimes at the cost 
of destroying what he loves: 
 
First, the art showed that he loves cars, and spent a long time working on them. But in 
responding to his call he destroyed one of the cars he was working on.61
 
Next we saw him destroying planes, almost killing several people.  
61 The art indicates this was a different car: see the window strut and general shape. In the second picture the 
friend is at the back But the dialog makes a delay less likely, as if it was the same car. 

 
Later in the story we will see him set fire to a forest 
 
Look at that face. He is never happy when he flames on. Yet Lee’s dialog says he loves it.  
 
Finally we see him cause the caves around him to collapse, which may or may not contribute 
to the radioactive materials exploding..  
 
 
After destroying the planes we saw him hunted by a heat seeking missile, and without 
miraculous intervention he would have been dead.  

 
Next we saw that his flame suddenly ran out, leaving him falling hundreds of feet to be 
smashed onto the concrete below. 
 
This is a man who causes destruction on a large and chaotic scale. His life expectancy is 
measured in minutes, not years! And the life expectancy of those who come close to him him 
isn’t much better. 
 
At least, that is the horror story told by the art, a story set in the real world, a story of what 
could happen if radiation did unimaginable things to our bodies. What kind of person is 
Johnny Storm that he  chooses  to burn up like that? He is a fire starter in the biggest way! 
Through these few acts we see his character. And we get an idea of the underlying message 
of the story, the horror and danger when radiation goes wrong. 

 
We get all that from the art. But the text, on the other hand, is literally a different story. 
The text 
The text captures almost none of this tragedy. The text says Johnny loves flaming on! The 
text does not have Johnny react to destroying his beloved car. The text underplays the 
destructive horror: Johnny blames the planes for being destroyed and says it's their fault! 
And when he falls from the sky he doesn't even have any dialog: the text is a passive and 
detached description.  
 
In fact the whole of page 8 is almost all verbose description of what we can already see: it is 
all about how the reader wonders what happens next, there is no insight into how these 
characters think or feel. 
 
In summary, the art shows more intense horror and more insights into characterisation. But 
the text reduces both. Once again we see that the Kirby's art creates a rich and dynamic 
story and Lee's text waters it down. 
 
 

Page 9:  
Heroes with moral flaws 
On page 9, Ben's anger clouds his judgment, and he will eventually pay a high price.  
 
Ben and his anger become the heart of the Fantastic Four, it is what set them apart from 
other comics where characters always seemed to be friends. A person’s attempt to control 
their anger was a common theme in Kirby’s work over the years. The theme is perhaps best 
known from the Hulk, but here a fan talks about Kirby’s 1948 story “Disgrace”: 

 
“Disgrace!" from Young Romance July 1948, which I believe stands alongside the best of anything Kirby 
ever wrote. At first I was struck by the language, so distinctly his: 
 
"Although I was born and raised on the surface of the earth, I had never seen the full brightness of the 
sun, or felt the clean, fresh touch of the air...The town of Coalville was a dark mine shaft...and in its 
depths, my soul moved...harnessed in the yoke of resignation." 
 

The story contains his greatest theme, which he has explored many times in works such as The Pack, 
The Frog Prince, and with The Thing and The Hulk, et al: Man's violent nature and the struggle to 
overcome those base instincts.  
62
 
Usually Kirby didn’t have the space to explore repressed emotions in detail, as a typical story 
was often just eight pages. But when he did have the space his work showed great 
sophistication. Take for example his story The Frog Prince (circa 1950), about a man’s 
frustration: 
 
Clay Chapman is both the title character and the protagonist in Kirby's play "The Frog Prince." Chapman 
had been running around town as an egotistical golden boy until his face is scarred in an automobile 
accident. Like Doom, Chapman is unable to deal with his spoiled profile even though his scars are not 
grotesque.  
63
 
When Kirby co-created the romance genre in comics, he was very much at home with the 
human, emotional side of stories. In contrast, Lee did not have a track record of subtlety or 
characters with real human emotion: it’s not even clear how much Lee wrote at all. His dialog 
in Fantastic Four 1 does not suggest a writer capable of subtlety or realism. 
The missing splash page 
On this page we have first evidence of major changes to the book before publication. 
 
Kirby’s stories always had splash pages when the story took a new turn. It didn’t matter how 
relatively minor the change was, or how long it was since the last one, if a new section of the 
story began we always got a splash page. 
62 Patrick Ford, via social media 
63 ibid 

 

This is not an idea Kirby just invented half way through issue 1 and then used in later issues. 
It was normal for his previous comics, like the Challengers. Here is the start of Challengers 
of the Unknown issue 1. The story begins the same way as the Fantastic Four origin, with 
the team standing around discussing a problem. But first we have the splash page. But 
where is the splash page for the Fantastic Four’s origin? 

 
Here are three more clues that suggest a splash page has gone missing: 
 

1.
“Show, don’t tell.”  
Throughout the book, Lee’s dialog simply embellishes what can already be seen. 
That is, the story can be read purely from the pictures alone. This is what we would 
expect from a comic artist after twenty years at the top: “show, don’t tell”. However, 
on this page the reason for Ben’s anger is only in the text. We should expect the art 
to tell us why Ben was angry. 
2.
Ben appears from nowhere. 
Ben is at the heart of the Fantastic Four. The emotional core of the story is that he 
lost everything. Yet we barely see him. A good storyteller would have introduced him 
before we reach this dramatic moment, so we have more reason to care when the 
tragedy strikes. This point is particularly important if we accept the later argument 
that this story is the first time we see Ben Grimm in any form.  
3.
Kirby’s later recollection. 
Kirby later emphasised how the origin story was all about Ben losing his perfect life. 
But we never see his perfect life in the current version. I discuss this in more detail in 
relation to page 14, on reconstructing the original story. 
 
The apparent loss of the splash page is is the first of many hints that the book was changed 
before publication. Later hints will be stronger. 
Dialog versus art: realism is destroyed 
The art shows four people involved in a space flight. They oppose protocol and force the 
flight to leave earlier than planned. So far this is a realistic possibility. In the early days of 
spaceflight everything depended on one person. In Russia this man was Sergey Korolyov. In 
America it was Wernher Von Braun. 
 
Everyone in the ground crew would hold these men in awe. If either of these men had 
decided to launch a rocket earlier than planned then the ground crew would have followed 
orders. They would of course risk an army of angry bureaucrats a few hours later: but if they 
succeeded it wouldn’t matter. 
 
As for the location of the spaceport, the art suggests the team are based in New York. Kirby 
had just finished Sky Masters, which included features on the real world space race, so Kirby 
would be well aware of launch facilities near the city where he lived. The closest launch site 
to New York was Wallops Flight Facility, Delmarva Peninsula, Virginia, established 1945. 

 
There have been over 16,000 launches from the rocket testing range at Wallops since its founding in 
1945 in the quest for information on the flight characteristics of airplanes, launch vehicles, and 
spacecraft, and to increase the knowledge of the Earth's upper atmosphere and the environment of 
outer space. The launch vehicles vary in size and power from the small Super Loki meteorological 
rockets to orbital-class vehicles.  
64
 
So the art shows a story that could be real. But the dialog turns this into something 
unrealistic: a scientist decides to take his girlfriend and her kid brother into space!  
 
64  Wikipedia. Note the reference to Loki 

This may be a fun idea for children, but it ruins the story for adults. If the dialog had better 
reflected the story then it could have worked on  both  levels.  
 
 

Page 10:  
Who had the idea for superpowers? 
 
On page ten we see the first indication that the team are gaining superpowers. Except that at 
this stage this is simply a horror story.  
 
We have seen (and will continue to see) that Lee aims his stories at children, so this horror 
story was not created by Lee. 
 
Who had the idea for superpowers? At this point (1961), Kirby had just introduced a new, 
more realistic kind of superhero: the Challengers. He had also just created more 
conventional superheroes, in “The Fly”...  

 
...and the Double Life of Private Strong. 

 
 

Lee later said that superheroes were  his  idea, based on DC’s recent book Justice League of 
America. However, Lee’s story falls apart on closer inspection.  For example, a look at the 
65
timeline suggests that Kirby was responsible for kick-starting the superhero era that became 
the silver age of comics.   
66
 
The Fantastic Four’s superpowers were practically the same as he had recently given Rocky 
in Challengers issue 3 (flame, invisibility, size changing and great strength). Kirby was just 
continuing what he was already doing. 
 
 
65 Appendix 2 
66 Appendix 6 

Page 11:  
Was Lee “concentrating”? 
 
By 1961, Lee had been making comics for over twenty years. His stories sold poorly and 
were by definition mediocre at best.  But when Lee started a new book with Kirby, suddenly 
67
his plotting and characters improved. This improvement ended the moment that Kirby left.  
68
Lee explained it this way: one day he just decided to concentrate, and then his writing 
improved.  
 
It was time to start concentrating on what I was doing — to carve a real career for myself in the nowhere 
world of comic books.  
69
 
However, right from page 1 (Central City, Reed’s hesitancy) we have evidence that Lee was 
not concentrating as much as he might. Page 11 has some clear examples of carelessness. 
 
Typos 
 
Page 11 contains not one but two typos: “completely” is spelled “completly” and “invisible” is 
spelled “invi n sible”. Typos elsewhere include on page 16, where “countless” is spelled 
“coutless”, and on page 17, where “equatorial” is spelled “equ i torial”.  
 
Anybody can make a typo, and perhaps a great writer, engrossed in a stream of 
consciousness, would make more. But didn’t he read it back afterwards? Lee was an editor, 
and an editor’s job is specifically to spot these things. And this was a first issue: in Secrets 
Behind the Comics, Lee claimed that “when a comic strip is born, the greatest effort is made 
to see to it that the comic strip is perfect!” 
67 See appendix 3 for his output and appendix 5 for sales figures. 
68 See the chapter on who wrote the other Fantastic Four stories: once Kirby left, every single Stan 
Lee plot was based on a Kirby plot. 
69  Stan Lee, 1974, "Origins of Marvel Comics" 
 

 
 
Not only was this his “greatest effort” but Lee claimed to be “concentrating” more than ever 
before in his career. Something does not add up. As Kirby argued later, how could Lee come 
up with this comic when Lee “could hardly spell”?  
70
Inside Lee’s mind 
Some typos might be blamed on a letterer: errors like repeated words can be signs of 
concentrating on the letters and not the meaning of the sentence. But “equitorial” is harder to 
explain that way. If Lee spelled it right, why would a letterer get it wrong?  
 
A person is very unlikely to get “equitorial” wrong if they understand the meaning: from 
“equator”, from the word “equate”. “Equitorial” just screams out that it is wrong as soon as it 
is written. Whoever made that typo wasn’t a science fan, that’s for sure. On the same page 
Lee didn’t recognise a piece of scientific equipment, so he is the prime suspect. Either way, 
as an editor taking “the greatest effort” he should not let four typos pass him by. 
Other comics 
Other comics of the time also imply that Lee had trouble spelling. How did he miss the word 
“Pharoah” in large letters on a cover, twice? Even if he can blame someone else, as editor 
he should have spotted those. 
 
70 From the Gary Groth interview, www.tcj.com/jack-kirby-interview/6/ 

There are plenty of indications that Lee didn’t always concentrate. He admitted that he gave 
characters alliterative names (such as Reed Richards, or Sue Storm) because he tended to 
forget who was who: 
 
"It would be hard for you to believe this, because I seem so perfect: I have the worst memory in the 
world," Stan said. "So I finally figured out, if I could give somebody a name, where the last name and the 
first name begin with the same letter, like Peter Parker, Bruce Banner, Matt Murdock, then if I could 
remember one name, it gave me a clue what the other one was, I knew it would begin with the same 
letter."  
71
 
This recollection was not just Lee being modest. Bruce Banner spent a whole issue being 
called Bob Banner, and in the first Spider-Man issue, Peter Parker (named in Amazing 
Fantasy 15) became “Peter Palmer”. 
 
Is this the sign of a writer who cares about his characters and their unique situations and 
personalities? 
 
 
71Stan Lee's "A Brief History of Marvel" with Kevin Smith, 
http://www.cbr.com/stan-lees-a-brief-history-of-marvel-with-kevin-smith/ 

Page 12:  
Heroes who fight each other 
On page 12 we come to the heart of the Fantastic Four: the serious fighting between Ben 
and the other men. This is what made the Fantastic Four different from other comic books of 
the time. It made the book stand out as more alive, more real, more interesting. Whoever 
added this detail was responsible for making the book a hit. But was it Lee or Kirby? 
Internal evidence: d ialogue versus art 
In several places in Fantastic Four issue 1, Kirby’s art depicts violence and Lee’s text either 
tones it down or misses the reason. 
 
On pages 4-5 we see Ben destroying a door he previously walked through, then in an 
aggressive pose to a police officer, then tearing up the streets, then destroying a car, and 
people running in panic. The dialog could have gone either way, but Lee chose to make it all 
seem accidental, just a guy in a bad mood, rather than someone who maybe hated the world 
and had the power to do something about it. 
 
 

In every appearance of the Torch we see violence and danger, even horror, but Lee tones it 
down. 
 
On pages 20-21, discussed later, Lee misses the significance of the battle.  
 
On page 23, discussed later, Lee again misses the significance of the battle. 
 
Each of these examples is subtle. Lee did not make enormous changes, but his changes 
were all in one direction: Kirby creates stories with conflict everywhere: in battle, in romance, 
inner conflict with yourself, and so on. Lee then tones down the conflict.  
 
In every case the conflict is seen in the art more than in the dialog. So if we are asking who 
created the conflicts between the characters, it had to be Kirby. 
External evidence: interviews 
Both Lee and Kirby have described their version of how the Fantastic Four came about. We 
could examine their particular claims (see appendix 2) but we don’t even need to go that far. 
Whenever Lee talks about the origin of the Fantastic Four he talks like this: 
 
After about 20 years on the job, I said to my wife, "I don't think I'm getting anywhere. I think I'd like to 
quit." She gave me the best piece of advice in the world. She said, "Why not write one book the way 
you'd like to, instead of the way Martin wants you to? Get it out of your system. The worst thing that will 
happen is he'll fire you -- but you want to quit anyway." At the time, DC Comics had a book called The 
Justice League, about a group of superheroes, that was selling very well. So in 1961 we did The 
Fantastic Four. I tried to make the characters different in the sense that they had real emotions and 
problems. And it caught on. After that, Martin asked me to come up with some other superheroes. That's 
when I did the X-Men and The Hulk. And we stopped being a company that imitated.  
72
 
Lee talks about himself for half the time. Then he talks about the surface details: these 
characters have superpowers. He then talks about what made them different in the most 
abstract way: they had real emotions and problems, but which emotions? Which problems? 
Why should a reader care? Now compare how Kirby describes what happened: 
 
The idea for the F.F. was my idea. My own anger against radiation. Radiation was the big subject at that 
time, because we still don’t know what radiation can do to people. It can be beneficial, it can be very 
harmful. In the case of Ben Grimm, Ben Grimm was a college man, he was a World War II flyer. He was 
everything that was good in America. And radiation made a monster out of him–made an angry monster 
out of him, because of his own frustration. 
 
If you had to see yourself in the mirror, and the Thing looked back at you, you’d feel frustrated. Let’s say 
you’d feel alienated from the rest of the species. Of course, radiation had the effect on all of the F.F.– the 
girl became invisible, Reed became very plastic. And of course, the Human Torch, which was created by 
Carl Burgos, was thrown in for good measure, to help the entertainment value..  
73
 
72 Stan Lee, “How I Did It”, https://www.inc.com/magazine/20091101/how-i-did-it-stan-lee-of-marvel-comics.html 
73 Kirby, 1986/7 interview with Leonard Pitts 
http://kirbymuseum.org/blogs/effect/2012/08/06/19867-kirby-interview/ 

We can’t rely entirely on memory of course, but note how Kirby talks about the underlying 
motivations, the feelings, what made each individual character different. Kirby knows what 
drives the characters as individuals, and hence where conflicts would arise. So who is more 
likely to have written these conflicts? Lee or Kirby? 
External evidence: Lee’s earlier work 
Lee’s earlier work was all aimed at younger readers and had no serious continuing stories, 
as he admitted himself in an earlier quote. So there were no serious internal conflicts. A 
typical Lee series was Millie the Model: 
 
This follows from Lee’s personality: while Kirby is a natural fighter, Lee’s style is to be 
likeable and light hearted. It is notable that years later, when Lee took over writing 

Spider-Man,  Peter Parker became more popular and had more friends. He still had self 
74
doubt - this seems to be Lee’s contribution to the character -  but not the savage hatred of 
friends that we see with Ben Grimm, Rocky Davis, etc., or even the hard edge of the early 
Ditko Spider-Man. Kirby fought in the war and struggled his whole life. He understood 
conflict. But Lee always had a much easier life, ever since his uncle gave him a job as a 
teenager. It is only natural that Lee’s work would tend toward the frivolous and fun with just 
the occasional self doubt. 
External evidence: Kirby’s earlier work 
What we see here is what we saw in Kirby’s Challengers of the Unknown issue 3. In the 
story Rocky (the character like Ben Grimm) tests an experimental space capsule, travels to 
the edge of space, and returns with the ability to turn invisible, flame on, change his body 
size and use great strength.  The experience gave him a murderous hatred of his former 
teammates, and he could only be calmed by June (the Challengers’ equivalent of Sue).  
 
For even more parallels, look no further than Kirby’s romance and crime books. 
74 Lee and Ditko used the “Marvel Method”, meaning that Ditko created the story and Lee merely 
edited the dialog. This is clear from both external and internal evidence. John Romita also helped with 
the plots, but at least he and Lee were on speaking terms, so there would be more of Lee in the 
plotting. 

 
Why the characters fight 
Look at every time Ben Grimm becomes angrily violent in the early fantastic Four. In every 
case, the art (and sometimes, as in this case, the dialog) shows it is about losing Sue Storm.  

 
We might think there are exceptions when Ben gets angry with Johnny Storm, Sue’s brother. 
But again, look at the art (and often the dialog). Johnny is making fun of Ben for being ugly 
and therefore having no chance with the ladies.  
 
In other words, the violent infighting all stems from a love triangle. This kind of thing was 
meat and drink to Jack Kirby, who (with Joe Simon) invented the genre of romance comics. 
(His “Young Romance” sold a million copies per issue .) Kirby also created numerous “true 
75
crime” comics, and what is more common than a crime of passion, where a man becomes 
angry and violent because he lost his girl to another man? 
75 See appendix 5 

Writing from experience 
We only need to look at their lives to see which man had to fight constantly. Kirby grew up in 
one of the rougher parts of New York. As a short guy he had to fight constantly. He then 
fought on the front lines in WWII. He had no particular business skills so had to struggle 
every day to pay bills and put food on the table. Lee in contrast got a well paying job from his 
uncle, was tall and good at talking, spent the war in America chasing girls, was a natural 
joker and was never short of money.  Which of these men is more likely to have written about 
conflict in a powerful, believable way? 
 
In conclusion, the core of the Fantastic Four’s success is the conflict between Ben and 
Reed. Internal and external evidence all point to Kirby as the writer behind the conflict. 
 
 

Page 13:  
The smoking gun 
Now we come to the space flight and crash. This is the single biggest indication that Kirby 
created this story, like finding a smoking gun at the scene of a crime. 
 
The Fantastic Four origin is simply the Challengers of the Unknown origin story… 

 
 
... combined with Challengers Of the Unknown issue 3 (where Rocky goes into space and 
returns with the ability to flame on, change size, use great strength and turn invisible). 
 
Kirby created the Challengers and left after issue 8. There are so many other parallels that 
Fantastic Four issue 1 is essentially Challengers issue 9, with trivial changes for legal 
reasons.  
76
 
According to an anecdote that is widely repeated (but I am unable to trace its source), when 
the Fantastic Four became a sales success somebody at DC made a large size poster of the 
76 See appendix 7 for details 

cover of Challengers issue 3. They put it on the wall at the DC offices, without comment.
 
 The cover speaks for itself. Anyone who sees it knows where the Fantastic Four came from. 
 
 
 

Page 14:  
The book was changed. Why? 
 
Now we come to the start of the Mole Man Story. This is the key to how Fantastic Four issue 
1 was created. In later pages we will see much stronger clues, but the clues begin right here. 
I will point out the clues on this page, then give an overview of where all the clues, taken 
together, seem to point. 
The monster’s face 
Look at the the monster’s face. Let’s be honest, the face is not well drawn. 
 
Which is odd, because if there is anything Kirby could draw better than anyone else at this 
point, without even trying, it was solid, three dimensional looking monsters. Compare the 
same monster in almost the same pose on the cover and later in the story: 

 
The other monsters have satisfying, solid looking faces. But the monster on this page has his 
face squashed. Why squashed? Apparently to make space for the Human Torch, a character 
whose powers, just like the others, adds nothing to the story. Kirby characters are always 
doing something to progress the story. But here the characters just stand in symbolic poses, 
as if their only role is to just be there. 
Heavy editing was very common 
Editing, even heavy editing, removing and reordering pages, was not unusual. As was 
adding characters to a scene. For example, there are at least two slightly different versions 
of the cover to this comic - Lee wanted more people added to the background.  
 
Perhaps the best known major edit was Fantastic Four 108, which had so many pages 
removed that Marvel was later able to sell the original version again as a completely different 

story. And even that version wasn’t the same as the story Kirby created: Lee changed it 
again, perhaps because the story looks like a subtle dig at Lee himself.   
77
 
Above: Kirby’s original, complete with margin notes where he explained the story to Lee. 
Then the version Lee published, largely rewritten with new pages by a different artist. Then 
the “lost adventure” version. 
 
Lesser edits, such as removing pages for a reprint (e.g. Marvel’s Greatest Comics) or having 
another artist change a face, were also common.  In this example, Fantastic Four issue 1 
78
was reprinted two years later but the Human Torch was redrawn by a different artist: 
77 The story began with a two faced god. The splash page has some similarities with the splash page to Kirby’s 
“Funky Flashman” story, where Lee was portrayed as two faced and seeing himself as godlike. In the 
reconstructed version Lee changed the two faced god to be just some random bust. The rest of the story was 
about a nice guy, who nevertheless had a darker side that just wanted power. 
78 A well known example is when Kirby left for DC: they redrew all hs Superman faces, so that every Superman 
image they sold would look exactly the same.  

 
It was apparently normal for Lee to ask for major changes or reject pages. In a later legal 
deposition, Kirby’s son Neal recalled what this was like: 
 
Q. Did you have an understanding when you were living in East Williston about the economic terms of 
your father's relationship with any publisher? 
A. Well, I knew that Marvel paid him by the page, and that he and mom used to argue about it, because 
he would be up all night doing pages, and Marvel would say, "Well, we don't want to buy this."  Then 
they would go ahead and make him do the whole thing over again, and he would just get paid for the 
artwork that he did over again. So he was doing things twice, and getting half the money. 
Q. When do you recall hearing a conversation to that effect? 
A. Early '60's, late '50's. 
Q. Do you know what character or characters were involved in those discussions? 
A. No. 
Q. Was there any mention of who it was that was asking your father to redo pages or correct pages? 
A. From what I recall, Stan Lee.  
79
 
There must have been a lot of edits each month, as Kirby was creating a huge amount of 
material at this time, The same month that he produced Fantastic Four issue 1 (issues cover 
dated November 1961) he also worked on: 
 
●
Amazing Adventures # 6, 
●
Gunsmoke Western # 67, 
●
Journey into Mystery # 74, 
79  Deposition of Neal Kirby, 2010. 
https://ohdannyboy.blogspot.co.uk/2011/04/marvel-worldwide-inc-et-al-v-kirby-et_11.html 

●
Love Romances # 96, 
●
Strange Tales # 90, 
●
Tales of Suspense # 23, 
●
Tales to Astonish # 25, 
●
and Teen-Age Romance # 84 
 
Kirby was generally too busy to read his comics once they were published. So it is possible 
that he never read the printed issue 1 with Lee’s dialog. 
Scrapping several pages was common 
Larry Lieber once mentioned a batch of finished pages being rejected by Lee (probably 
intended for Hulk issue 6). This must have been a fairly common occurrence as Kirby never 
mentioned those Hulk pages to anyone else. 
 
Q: Can you tell me how you came into possession specifically of these drawings? 
LARRY LIEBER: They — I was in the office, the Marvel office. It probably was at — no, it must have 
been at the — on 57th Street when they were there on Madison, and Jack Kirby came out of Stan’s 
office from — and from the direction of Stan’s office. He may, probably, he had come out of Stan’s office, 
and he seemed upset. And he took the drawings, he had these drawings, he took them and he tore 
them in half and he threw them in a trash can, a large trash can. 
 
And I, since I was such a big fan of his, I knew that at the end of the day, they would be discarded, you 
know, and would be trash. And I — I saw it as an opportunity to have some of his originals to keep, to 
look at and study, and so I took them out of the trash can. 
 
And there were other people in the office, but nobody else seemed to have noticed this, which I was 
glad about, and I just took them, walked over to where I was sitting and put them in my case. And I took 
them home and I taped them together, you know, I taped them all, and I kept them and I’ve kept them all 
these years to look at them and, as I say, to study them.  
80
 
Note that Kirby was proud of that work and Lieber studied it to learn from it. It was good 
quality material, but it was removed.  
 
When removed pages are saved like this they sometimes turn up at auctions. The FF #31` 
page is another page of rejected Kirby art which found it’s way into the hands of Larry Lieber. 
I assume he still has it. Here for example is a lost page from issue 31. This is a particularly 
important page because it shows Sue meeting her father and Kirby’s notes (instructions to 
Lee) say that Sue does not recognise her own father (he had been in jail since Sue was a 
child).  
80  Larry Lieber’s deposition, 
https://www.bleedingcool.com/2011/03/09/the-larry-lieber-deposition-for-the-kirby-family-vs-marvel-lawsuit / 

 
This simple touch tells us so much about Sue's character, her loneliness, but also her 
strength in facing him down. The art suggests that he is a crook who is deceiving the older 
woman in some way. This makes his eventual redemption all the more powerful. But this 
storyline - strong women, weak man - would be unacceptable to Lee: as I show in the 
discussion of page 2, Lee has to always have strong men and weak women. In Lee's 
version, without this scene, Sue is simply portrayed as weak throughout the story, and her 
father's redemption is less powerful because he was never bad in the first place. This is 
another example of Lee destroying Kirby’s powerful story and replacing it with a weaker one. 
 
Another example of pages being removed before publication is from annual 5. The original 
version had several more pages of action: 

 
 
Those pages later turned up at auction. The original story apparently also had a sequence 
with Crystal, but that is now lost. We can deduce that because part of the edit was to remove 
her from the group photo. Here is the pencil art and the finished version: 

 
Winston Smith would be proud! 
 
Yet another example of pages being removed was Fantastic Four issue 100, which was 
originally planned as a double sized special. I have given numerous examples to show that 
removing pages was so common that we should not expect anyone to remember it years 
later. We have to rely on the original pages turning up at auction, or failing that, piecing 
together the original story from the clues that remain. 
Why make changes? 
Why would issue 1 have been edited? What was the motive? In this book I give examples of 
Lee changing stories to make them easier for children. Editing issue 1 to make the 
superpowers more obvious would fit that pattern. 
 
Later I will argue that in Kirby’s original version the superpowers only appeared at the end of 
the book, just as they did in the Challengers’ powers   and Dr Strange origins. But I think 
81
Lee wanted them at the beginning, and an intro where they show the powers in use. These 
81 Challengers issue 3, second story 

changes may make the story appeal more to younger children, but at the expense of making 
the stories worse for adults. For example, the Mole Man story is now more disjointed. And I 
will argue that the changes removed the danger (superpowered people were always going to 
win), the realism (the plot about underground testing) and the motivation (how underground 
testing made the Mole Man blind).  
 
For an attempted reconstruction of the original story, see appendix 9. 
 
 

Page 15:  
Lee did not understand the story 
The Mole Man story is about a man who is mocked for being ugly, so he goes to live 
underground. The current dialog suggests that this is also his motive for attacking the entire 
surface world. Destroy the world because people call you ugly? It's a pretty weak motive. But 
the art on its own suggests a different motive.  
What the story is really about 
The story art shows a monster from underground attacking military bases (shades of 
Godzilla, a monster awakened by nuclear tests). These bases, judging by the art and the 
context, are probably nuclear bases: they are power plants in deserts, protected by soldiers, 
this was the height of the Cold War. The soldiers look French, and France had just started 
underground testing.  
 
 
The art shows circular cave-ins, similar to ones caused by underground atomic tests.  

 
 
The team later wear radiation suits.  
 
 
The Mole Man goes blind in an underground event that, the art suggests, is like some kind of 
explosion.  

 
 
The story ends with a mushroom cloud explosion.  
 
 
The Mole Man was located using a network of seismometers that were designed to locate 
underground tests (see “recent history” below).  

 
Notice a pattern? The story is about underground testing, which was big news at the time 
(see “recent history”, below).  But Lee’s dialog and text makes no mention of it.  
 
This omission weakens the story, as it removes the villain’s motivation. Did Lee simply 
remove it (making the story worse) for personal political reasons? Possibly, but that is pure 
speculation, and the story provides its own explanation: Lee simply didn’t understand the 
history or the science, as we shall see. 
 
Recent history (in 1961) 
1961 was the height of the cold war, when everyone feared nuclear weapons. Three years 
earlier (1958) saw the biggest hope for nuclear peace: the first ever limitation on nuclear 
testing. Signed in Geneva, The Limited Test Ban Treaty  moved all nuclear testing 
underground . The key part of the treaty - the part that made it work - was the establishment 
of a network of 170 control posts around the world, each equipped with seismometers. 
Through triangulating their results they could pinpoint the source of any disturbance in the 
Earth (such as a nuclear test) anywhere in the world.  These are the seismometers that 
82
Kirby drew (that Lee wrongly called “radar machines”). 
 
A year before the story (1960), France began underground nuclear tests in Africa. Until then, 
only America and Russia, then Britain in 1952, had nuclear weapons. (As such a close ally of 
America, Britain merely shared American  technology.) This was a major spreading of 
nuclear weapons to other countries. 
 
So the story, or underground monsters destroying a French nuclear base, was inspired by 
the news. But Lee did not understand (or care for) the news, as evidenced by his dialogue 
that Australia had a nuclear base. It did not. So Lee cannot have plotted this story. This 
ignorance (or lack of concern) is compounded by the “radar scope”. 
82 The Making of the Limited Test Ban Treaty, 1958-1963, William Burr and Hector L. Montford, editors, 
http://nsarchive.gwu.edu/NSAEBB/NSAEBB94 

“Radar-scope”?? 
Lee’s dialog calls the seismometer a “radar machine” and later “radar scope,” like it’s some 
weird science fiction device rather than the instruments used in the real world.  Did Lee just 
think "seismometer" was a difficult word for young readers? If so, then why not call it a 
"vibration-scope" or “vibro-scope”? Or just an "earthquake detector"? "Radar" is pretty much 
the opposite of a seismometer: radar uses radio waves, usually in the air (i.e. to detect 
airplanes). Ground penetrating radar has a very specialised use and only penetrates a very 
short distance. Because radar is at its best in the air or a vacuum, whereas seismography 
deals with the rocks below our feet. One is for above, the other is for below. One is for air, 
the other for rock. Calling a seismometer a “radar machine” shows that Lee had no idea what 
it was or what it did, despite its use being indicated by the art. The seismometer appeared 
twice  at the start. It is how they located the monsters and saved the world. It matters to the 
story, and Lee did not understand it. 
Kirby’s Reed was realistic 
Reed, in Lee’s dialog, is implausible. He designs or steals a rocket, and in the next story he 
has his own seismographs and private plane. However, Kirby’s emphasis on radiation unifies 
both stories. If Reed’s field of expertise was atmospheric radiation, this would make him 
vitally interested in keeping track of atom bomb tests (the start of the Mole Man story) and 
also at the forefront of studying the Van Allen belts (the origin story). So while Lee’s story is 
implausible, Kirby’s story could be set in the real world. 
 
Kirby’s Reed, a leader and adventurer, a man with means and contacts, an expert with 
rockets and seismometers, was basically James Van Allen.  This is not to say that Kirby 
83
consciously copied Van Allen,t merely shows that Kirby’s story was realistic.  (The Time 
cover is from May 4, 1959, two years before the Fantastic Four.) 
83 James A. Van Allen, Discoverer of Earth-Circling Radiation Belts, Is Dead at 91, Walter Sullivan, 
http://www.nytimes.com/2006/08/10/science/space/10vanallen.html ; James Van Allen Biography, 
http://www.notablebiographies.com/newsmakers2/2007-Pu-Z/Van-Allen-James.html ; Dr James Van Allen, NASA, 
https://image.gsfc.nasa.gov/poetry/tour/bioAllen.html  

 
 
James Van Allen, like Reed, was an adventurer at heart. As a young adult he was invited to 
join Admiral Byrd to study the Antarctic  (note the icy wastes in the Mole Man story) and he 
84
was obsessed with outer space. As a child h e “enjoyed building motors, radios, and electrical 
generators that threw foot-long bolts of lightning across the room.”  In the war he developed 
new kinds of bombs and earned four combat stars. On his return he worked on the newly 
captured V2 rockets. 
 
Van Allen specialised in seismic testing (he was supposed to operate seismic and magnetic 
equipment with Byrd) and was later involved in Operation Argus, where atomic bombs were 
exploded over the south Atlantic to see what happened. Was this the fictional location of 
Monster Isle? Were Reed’s atmospheric tests responsible for the Mole Man? Is this why Lee 
removed the central plot about the bomb, because it might imply the hero caused the 
problem and the villain was innocent? 
 
At the same time as Operation Argus, Van Allen was instrumental (literally!) in sending 
detectors into space to prove that a radiation field existed around the Earth. Hence his fame 
as discoverer of the Van Allen belts: he proved that, in his own words, “space is radioactive!” 
84 His mother persuaded him not to, so he reluctantly stayed home 

And what else did he do, the same day that he announced the van Allen belts to the world? 
He planned to set off atomic bombs in space. 
 
While looking through the Van Allen papers at the University of Iowa to prepare a Van Allen biography, 
Fleming discovered "that [the] very same day after the press conference, [Van Allen] agreed with the 
military to get involved with a project to set off atomic bombs in the magnetosphere to see if they could 
disrupt it."
 
85
 
The same year, Van Allen was chairman of a group of top scientists (which included Von 
Braun and the heads of important institutions) who recommended that America send a man 
to the moon within ten years (that is, by 1968). So while Lee’s Reed could only exist in a 
comic, Kirby’s Reed not only  could  exist in Real Life, but practically  did .  
 
Readers may think I am labouring the point, just a fan boy talking about his favourite comic. 
But if you remember nothing else about this book, I want you to remember this: Kirby created 
an amazing story about the real world. And Lee destroyed it. 
 
Note how the two stories deal with underground, distant lands and outer space, and with 
children, romance, drama and conflict: all human life is here. When Kirby said he would 
create a story that would save Goodman’s comics business, he was not kidding. And you 
can see why I am so angry at what Lee did to Kirby’s stories. 
 
My stories were true. They involved living people, and they involved myself. They involved whatever I 
knew. I never lied to my readers. 
 
If you analyze them, you'll find that I'm not really fictionalizing.  
86
 
 
 
85 A Very Scary Light Show: Exploding H-Bombs In Space, Robert Krulwich, 
http://www.npr.org/sections/krulwich/2010/07/01/128170775/a-very-scary-light-show-exploding-h-bombs-in-space 
86 Jack Kirby Interview, Glenn Danzig,  http://www.twomorrows.com/kirby/articles/22danzig.html 

Page 16:  
Lee’s hyperbole 
Lee is known for exaggerating. It’s his style, and it’s part of why fans love him. Everything 
was “Senses shattering”, “Pulse pounding”, or 
An Adventure Epic of Most Compelling Excellence  
87
Lee exaggerated not just when selling the story, but in the story itself. The art shows a rocket 
that only goes beyond the atmosphere, just as rockets did in 1961. But the dialog says it’s “to 
the stars” (and issue 2 says it was to Mars). The art shows them in a cave that can’t be very 
deep, but the dialog says it is at “the center of the Earth”. The Mole Man, an ordinary human, 
becomes “the strangest menace of all time”. This current page has the clearest example: 
 
A gigantic pair of claws, the like of which have never been seen on Earth, or on any planet in the 
universe!! 
“Or on any planet in the universe!!” Really? That’s hyperbole. Hyperbole can be fun, but it 
creates problems in two areas: 
1.
Intelligence:  
Hyperbole breaks down when you think about it. Does the writer know every planet in 
87 The first Sandman story in Spider-man 

the universe? Is the universe really so limited? We might recall that Lee was, at the 
same time, publishing stories in other comics about even bigger, stronger monsters, 
including this Kirby comic from the very same month. Of course, Lee had very little to 
do with those comics (he did not sign them, and only later claimed to have written 
them, so maybe he was not aware of their content). 
 
2.
Continuity: 
If every issue has the biggest, strongest, most amazing, etc, then after a few issues 
we realise that nothing in the universe can defeat our hero for long. So all danger is 
lost. The comic only works if we don’t think about continuity.  
So hyperbole is bad for intelligence and continuity. But these are supposed to be what made 
Marvel different. As Stan Lee later claimed: 
 

It was now 1960. By now, I really wanted to leave, because one edict that my publisher had was that the 
stories had to be geared towards young readers - or unintelligent older readers. We weren't supposed to 
use words of more than two syllables, and we had to have simple plots - no continuing stories, because 
he felt our readers weren't smart enough to remember from month to month where they had left off. It 
was really boring.  
88
 
True, Lee’s memory is seldom reliable  (e.g. there were plenty of three syllable words, even 
89
in the comic titles: “America”, “Mystery”, “Magician”, etc.). But he often repeated the claims: 
Marvel comics were for more intelligent readers, and (undeniably) Marvel comics had more 
continuing stories (compared with DC). But both intelligence and continuity were harmed by 
Lee’s hyperbole. Whatever was pulling the stories toward intelligence and continuity, Lee 
was pulling in the opposite direction. 
 
 
88 Interview with Stan Lee, Kennect Plume, 
http://uk.ign.com/articles/2000/06/26/interview-with-stan-lee-part-1-of-5 
89 Appendix 2 

Page 17:  
Kirby was ahead of his time 
On page 17 the team arrive, wearing their Challengers uniforms. The first monster they see 
is well known to moviegoers: the three headed King Ghidorah from the Godzilla movies. 
Except that Kirby drew this in 1961, and Ghidorah did not appear until 1964.  
 
This was not an isolated incident. While researching this book I read the first Challengers of 
the Unknown book (Showcase issue 6) for the first time. I was disappointed to see that Kirby 
had simply copied elements from the hit movie Jason and the Argonauts: notably the giant 
Greek statue that attacks a ship (but this time is submerged in the sea like the giant 
Poseidon in the movie).  
 

The same story has a reference to the story of Cadmus and his seeds, the basis of the 
fighting skeletons at the end of the movie.  
 
But then I checked the dates: Kirby created Challengers story in 1957, and the Argonauts 
movie was not released until 1963. 
 
A better known example of having a movie idea first is from Star Wars. Darth Vader’s look, 
his mixture of royalty and black magic, the father-son plot, the term “dark side” (Kirby spelled 
it “Darkseid”), and so on, are a mix of New Gods and Dr Doom. As Mark Hamill recalls: 
 
I also went out to [Jack's] house once in Thousand Oaks. [Jack] was a very self-effacing guy. You'd 
never know from his demeanor how important he really was. We were joking, and I said that when I first 
saw Darth Vader, I thought, "Oh, it's Doctor Doom." (laughter) He certainly didn't say, "Oh, he took my 
ideas," or any of that kind of stuff. He was content with who he was and his abilities.  
90
 
Kirby even had a character called the Sky Walker , and at least one scene in Empire Strikes 
91
Back is, frame for frame, the same as a sequence in the Fantastic Four.  This may not be 
92
coincidence: at the time George Lucas was writing Star Wars, he was part owner of the 
Supersnipe comic art gallery (named after the famous Supersnipe comic shop). 
90  Mark Hamill Interview, John Morrow, http://twomorrows.com/kirby/articles/28hamill.html 
91 In Justice, Inc issue 2, published in 1975. The story was based on Paul Ernst's story “The Sky Walker” in 
Avenger Magazine in 1939 
92 Fantastic Four 141, from 1974, a major issue of the flagship title, introducing the first new F.F. artist since Stan 
Lee left. So any comic fan would have seen it, including others involved in Empire - which of course was not 
directed by Lucas. That scene in turn was based on Kirby’s Fantastic Four issue 87. 

 
 
These movie examples are trivial. More important was Kirby’s ability to see the future of 
comics, and the need to move to graphic novels and more adult work. That is a whole topic 
on its own and will not be discussed here.  
 
Even more important than that is Kirby’s ability to foresee major trends in the wider world. If I 
had the time I would write a large book on Kirby’s predictions that came true, drawing mainly 
on his OMAC and Eternals titles. Originally that was going to be the focus of this present 
book, with Kirby and Marvel as just the introduction. But that would have taken too many 
years. A person could easily spend a lifetime studying Kirby’s ideas and only see the tip of 
the iceberg. 
 
So the three-headed monster was not a coincidence. Kirby was always ahead of his time. 
 
 

Page 18:  
A Challengers story, no superpowers 
 
This page is full of instances where the story works better without superpowers and the 
superpowers appear to be clumsily added later. 
 
The page begins with Sue turning invisible in front of a monster. But the story would be more 
exciting if she could not turn invisible: the powers remove the tension.  
 
Next, Reed uses his arm as a lasso, but an ordinary lasso would have made more more 
sense. If you can stretch your arm into a lasso then it would be quicker to just stretch and 
grab the monster. Or do something more dramatic, like stretching to giant size. The lasso is 
problematic in another way: it’s a very badly designed image, where much of the arm is cut 
off (and he has two left hands!). No competent writer would have written it this way, and no 
competent artist would have drawn it this way. So it looks like this may have been Reed 
using a regular lasso, but the picture was changed when it was decided they had 
superpowers. 
 
Next, Reed and Sue watch the monster fall into the sea. Look at Reed’s arm. Try to tell me 
that arm was not added later! 

 
Next, they suddenly fall down a hole without warning. This might indicate frames were cut 
out - how often do people fall down holes when they are just standing there? But we cannot 
prove that, maybe it was just a very fast moving story. They are then shown free falling, yet 
the introduction showed that Johnny loved flying more than anything else. Why didn’t he just 
fly? Unless in this story he originally didn’t have superpowers. 
 
The next page is even worse: Johnny cannot see because it is dark! Yet this is supposedly 
the human torch! The clue is in the name - the human torch - and he doesn’t have any light? 
Clearly the characters had no superpowers in the original version. 
 
Next, Reed stretches into a parachute shape. But the story would have been more dramatic 
if they simply fell, just as the Mole Man did later in the story: the Mole Man didn’t need a 
parachute. The superpower here is not needed, and simply removes tension from the story. 
So once again it looks like the original story was changed to add superpowers. 
 
Why does this matter? Because without the superpowers, the original story is basically just 
Challengers of the Unknown. This page is yet more evidence that the Fantastic Four began 
as a continuation of Kirby’s earlier work. Except that when he left DC, DC retained ownership 

of those characters. Kirby replaced them with three new characters and added the fourth one 
in the next story where they gain powers.  
 
 

Page 19:  
Another smoking gun 
 
Page 19 has the clearest example that something weird is going on in the Mole Man story in 
its current form. First the characters are knocked unconscious by a light. Really? How can 
that happen? But much worse, they are suddenly wearing radiation suits of the kind used in 
the 1960s. Why? 
 
The text calls the radiation suits “adhesive-type suits”. Presumably it means they very quickly 
stick to the body, yet the art shows them as being very baggy, and easily removed later.  

 
“Adhesive suit” must be an attempt to explain why the heroes’ clothes changed so quickly. It 
implies that Lee knew that the change of clothes was a problem. He further “lampshades” 
the problem by having Johnny ask how they got into the suits. But Johnny’s question is 
never answered.  
 
The text box tries to explain that the suits are to protect them from the light… but the only 
part of the body that is not covered is the eyes! 
 
At the very least, the “light” had to be radiation (the original plot, concerning underground 
testing, was discussed earlier). The radiation suits otherwise serve no purpose: they are 
merely discarded later. 
 
It is possible that the suits are explained in panels that are now removed (presumably to 
make space for the new Thing battle on the following page). Any missing panels might 
explain how Reed and Johnny hit the ground and began to explore the caves.  
 
All we can say for sure is that the story has been changed: the dialog struggles, and fails, to 
make sense of the art. Perhaps Lee planned a story about underground radiation and then 
completely changed his mind. But why would he do that?  
●
Because he suddenly feared that people would think opposed nuclear weapons and 
was unpatriotic?  
●
Because he suddenly remembered that the word “radiation” has four syllables and 
Martin Goodman told him to use two syllable words?  
●
Or did Lee simply decide to shorten the story, and was not a good enough writer to 
think of an explanation that made sense? 
 
Any theory that requires Lee to be the writer also requires him to dramatically change his 
mind while writing, or simply be a bad writer. But there is a much simpler explanation for the 
changes: Kirby delivered a story ready made. Lee, the editor, saw it and wanted a change. 

That is how publishing normally works. That is how Kirby always worked. It requires mental 
gymnastics to force Lee into the role of writer, so why do it? 
 
Evidence for editing 
It is possible that frames have been rearranged or redrawn. Later pages have more 
examples, but let’s focus on the bottom of this page. 
 
The final two panels break a principle of good design (known as the “180 degree rule”  in 
93
cinematography): a character who is on the left in one shot should not be on the right in the 
next shot as if the camera has flipped over. Look at the the valley of diamonds: note the 
direction of the the speech bubble: the Mole Man would be facing right, as also implied by 
the previous panel. But in the next panel, the reveal, he is facing left. We could say this was 
a momentary lapse by an overworked Kirby, but look closer at that last panel.  
 
If you have a good scan of the original comic (not a reprint, though sometimes these 
artefacts survive in reprints as well), zoom in on the final frame where we first see the Mole 
Man.  
93 Arguably the Goozlebobber example later also breaks it, but I think he was just comically turning his head 
looking for the “wild animals” - that will make sense when you see it. 

 
Notice how the Mole Man is to right of centre, with unused space on the left of the panel. 
Now zoom in on the left part of the panel. Just where the edge of a well-balanced panel 
would be, there is a vertical line in the shading, such as you see when drawing over paper 
that has been physically cut and pasted. (This cannot be explained by a ghost image of the 
previous printed page, as there is no line in that position.) It looks like the original panel was 
narrower. Now look closely at the top and right of the panel. The blacks are less dense. This 
might be because of the purple added below, but it could also be a sign that the panel was 

originally shorter. The height could go either way, but the panel was probably cut and 
expanded on the left.  
 
At the very least, the reveal was originally on the left and the valley of diamonds was on the 
right. Why change it? It seems likely that the Thing battle was added later, and the following 
splash page (Sue shading her eyes) would have been the Mole Man’s throne room. So it 
would naturally fit that the previous picture was the valley of diamonds. We then have  a 
natural reveal: the Mole Man’s voice, then his face, then the first evidence of his world, then 
a big picture of his world. However, once the Thing battle was added they needed a dramatic 
break, one that would also link to the next shot. So the Mole Man was put at the end (and 
perhaps flipped over). That does not explain why the image would be widened - why make 
the diamond picture narrower? Again we are left with the suggestion that more panels were 
removed. 
 
What were the “diamonds” originally? 
Let’s remove the colouring from those “diamonds”, to get closer to the original art: 
 
 
Notice anything? Look closer, especially at the back: 

 
These are badly drawn! We can’t blame the fact that they are tiny details. Look at other tiny 
details, blown up: 
 
Kirby was probably the greatest comic artist in the world. Even his tiny details look right. But 
those diamonds are just horrible.  
 
Did Kirby just rush his drawing at that point? He didn’t rush the drawings at either side. And 
this the “big reveal”, where the heroes finally see something more than just rocks. It seems 
clear that they saw something, and it was not those badly drawn diamonds. 
 
Reader MW Gallaher points out what we should expect to see in their place, and from that, 
we can reconstruct the original story: 
 
The crudity of the diamonds is what first caught my attention. At a glance I knew Kirby didn't 
draw that. Assuming it was changed, then, what was it changed from? Radioactive stuff, of 
course...and then, the original plot starts to show: monsters causing nuclear facilities to 

collapse underground, they loot the fuel and transport it through underground tunnels to 
Monster Isle where it mutates more monsters from Mole Man's army.  
94
 
What Gallaher describes is simply good storytelling. We see the nuclear plants disappear 
under the ground. The team investigates, so we have to see where they ended up. This also 
solves the problem of where the extra monsters came from: the first monster is a kind of 
Godzilla, created by earlier tests. The new smaller monsters might be early stages in 
mutating new giant monsters: Monster Isle then becomes the island of Doctor Moreau, 
where the Mole Man is deliberately experimenting to create his own army. For more about 
reconstructing the original story, see appendix 9. 
 
If the original pencil art ever surfaces at auction then we will have more clues. But until then 
all we can say for sure is that this page had the radiation story removed. Lee was unlikely to 
change his own story, and if he did he wouldn’t do it in such a clumsy way. This implies that 
Kirby is more likely to be the writer, and Lee just his editor. 
 
 
94 From a comment on the Classic Comics forum 

Page 20:  
The emotional core 
 
This new sequence interrupts the flow of the story, which is taking place underground.  
 
 
It comes between the surprise appearance of the Mole Man and a small picture of his throne 
room. We would expect to see a new chapter title and big picture of the throne room at this 
point. That was probably the original page, but it looks like it was removed to add an extra 
page of The Thing fighting. 

 
We saw earlier that The Thing looks out of place on every other page of the Mole Man story, 
and serves no purpose. So it was natural to add a page where he does something useful, 
and this is it.  
 
Notice how Sue looks older and sexier here. It’s hard to be sure what the previous Sue was 
like, because any editing would have changed her (e.g. adding a hood as noted earlier). But 
there are clues that the original Sue had a larger head, younger face, and flatter figure, and 
the same social status as the teenager Johnny.  

 
 
The new sequence establishes Susan as fully adult and sexy, and eligible to be Reed’s love 
interest.  SInce Kirby is adding a new sequence with a sexy Sue, he took the opportunity to 
add to the emotional story, and this is something Lee completely missed. 
Lee missed the point 
As usual, let’s start with the art and ignore the text: 


Sue looks sexy and vulnerable. The thing sees her and strips off. He fights the beast in front 
of her while she watches. He raises it above his head in triumph. He throws it into the sea 
and they run off together.  
 
If the problem had been urgent, why strip off? Would he risk Sue’s life just to save dirtying 
his coat? In fact, he could have just told Sue to become invisible, then step out of the way. 
And there was certainly no need to lift the creature over his head: when Reed had a similar 
problem he just pulled the creature off balance so it fell into the sea. But Ben has to show off. 
“Look at my strength!” This is a classic example of a man trying to impress the girl.  
 
We saw earlier that the conflict over Sue is the emotional core of this story. And here, with 
Ben and Sue alone, Kirby knows it is inevitable that Ben will show off. But Lee seems to miss 
the point. Let’s look at his dialog: 

 
 

In Lee’s dialog there is no hint of Ben caring for Sue any more than he would care for Johnny 
or Reed in the same situation. Indeed, he seems irritated by Sue and reacts just as he would 
with Johnny or Reed (saying “what did you expect?”). And when they are alone together 
what does Ben talk about? He insults her boyfriend, and by implication insults Sue for 
choosing him. Lee’s Ben Grimm has the emotional intelligence of a five year old. After saving 
her life he should be asking about her, and how she feels.  
 
So Lee misses what should have been an emotional highlight and it becomes just a pointless 
fight. And look at the panel where Sue is watching Ben fight. This is Ben at his most 
vulnerable: he desperately needs to impress the girl. But instead Lee’s comment is about the 
surface detail, the fight, and says Ben “can’t be stopped.” No, Stan, Ben  has  been stopped, 
Reed has defeated him. This is not about the rock monster, you are totally missing the point! 
Ben can beat an even rockier monster than himself, but he cannot defeat Reed. This 
sequence was about their romance. This was Ben’s big chance to try and win Sue’s heart. 
But Lee’s dialog killed the moment. 
 
We will see a similar clumsiness three pages hence with the Mole Man. Lee misses the 
loneliness and vulnerability in the art, and again just sees a pointless fight and an 
unsympathetic character whining about how he is better than Reed.  
 
In conclusion, the comic shows that Lee seems not to understand the emotional core of the 
story. He only sees the fights, and the only person who matters to Lee is Reed, the boss. But 
Kirby, the man who invented the romance genre in comics, understood it perfectly.  
 
In summary, how could Lee have written the story when he did not understand its emotional 
core? 
 
 

Page 21: forgetting the name of the 
villain 
 
Page 21 contains many of the problems already noted, plus a new one. 
More signs of heavy editing 
As noted previously, the tiny throne room picture only makes sense if there was previously a 
larger picture, but it as removed to make more space for the Thing fight. And while we’re 
here, look at the poor quality of the drawing of the two heroes. Was this just the inker having 
trouble with a baggy suit? Or signs of further last minute editing?  
 
More bad dialog 
The Mole Man’s dialog is corny, which again contradicts Lee’s claim to be concentrating on 
writing better stories.  
 
More dumbing down for children 
Most of the page is in words of two syllables or fewer, as if written for younger readers. Lee 
later claimed that the comics improved because he stopped writing for children. There is no 
evidence of that in this issue. 

Not paying attention 
Lee cannot even remember the name of the villain. “Mole Man” is two words in the story title: 
 
It is two words in most later appearances.  
 
But for most of this issue he’s called the “Moleman”, one word. 
 
Which would be fair enough, a single slip up is only human. But toward the end Lee seems 
to forget both names, and and refers to the villain in text boxes (and dialog) as “The Mole”. 
 
 
If Lee created the plot wouldn’t he at least remember the names of the characters? 

 
 

Page 22:  
The dialogue weakens the story 
 
Once again ignore the text and look at the art.  
 
First look at the final panel, where the Mole Man becomes blind. That is not a normal picture! 
Have you ever seen a picture like that before? He is apparently being affected by some kind 
of radiation, or perhaps an explosion. The dialog just said that our heroes were knocked out 
by a light, which had to have been radiation also: how does a blast of regular light knock a 
person unconscious? 
 
Now look at the previous two panels. We are seeing the same character from the same 
angle, with a tunnel behind him each time. So the camera has not moved. It appears that 
some kind of explosion has knocked him off his feet.  
 
Now look at the page as a whole, without Lee’s dialog. 

 
 
There is nothing in the art to suggest that the Mole Man was heading anywhere in particular, 
especially not the center of the Earth: he first goes to the frozen north, and then to an island, 
and then to a cave. The common feature is that these places are remote. It is clear from the 
first panels that he feels rejected by humanity so he is simply trying to get away.  But Lee’s 
dialog says he wanted to find the Center of the Earth. If so, wouldn’t he  begin  in caves 
instead of going there as a last resort?  
 
Lee’s dialog is both redundant and undermines the tragedy: if he had some pre-existing 
interest in very deep caves then the other people did him a favour by prompting him to start 
his life’s quest. The quest idea also destroys the pathos: Kirby drew a man in ultimate 
despair, wandering the world unable to find a place to call home. But Lee’s dialog gives him 
a  purpose and hence a reason to live.  
 
Lee’s purpose, besides being redundant (he already has a motive to leave), makes  no 
sense. If the legends of the center of the Earth were already known, wouldn’t professional 
climbers and expert explorers have already found it? How likely is it that a sad loser with no 
resources (unable to get a job, according to Lee) would succeed where they failed? It’s just 
one more example of Kirby creating a realistic, powerful story and Lee making it less 
believable. 
 
Most importantly, Lee’s dialog destroys the power of the story, and our reason for caring, and 
the villain’s motivation. Kirby drew in one page the story of a man who is persecuted 
because he is ugly, then spending his life looking for anywhere he can call home. When he 
finally discovers a remote island and a cave to live in, he has stumbled on exactly the kind of 
remote island that America uses for underground atomic tests, and he is blinded. He is finally 
befriended by other blind monsters and vows to stop the nuclear program by attacking 
nuclear bases. But all he really wants is to be wanted. 
 

Dumbing down for children 
Note the symbolism: who is really the ugly one here? Who is really the blind one? Who is the 
monster? What is really going on under the surface of our nuclear energy programs? This is 
adult stuff! But Lee’s job was always to fit his stories for younger children. So Lee removed 
the motivation, turning the Mole Man into a one dimensional villain who wanted to kill 
everybody simply because he was ugly. 
 
Once again we see the common themes: Lee takes an existing story he would not (or could 
not) have written. The story is about the real world, but Lee makes it unrealistic, removes 
crucial details, and aims it at younger children. Lee was just doing his job: his job had always 
been to create simple stories for children. 
Did Lee ever improve? 
A critic might say that change does not take place overnight. Perhaps issue 1 was childlike, 
but Lee got better and was soon writing with older readers in mind? But an examination of 
later issues shows Lee did not change very much: always Kirby provided the adult story and 
Lee dumbed it down for children. Here is just one example, as it provides a close parallel 
with issue 1. 
 
Fantastic Four issues 66-67 parallels issue 1: Its focus is a man who, due to surface 
ugliness, is lonely and in despair (Ben on the cover, and losing Alicia).  
 
That leads to the most remote places on Earth, where well meaning scientists are 
experimenting with dangerous radiation. You enter caves where, if unprepared, you go blind. 
At the heart of the caves is a very lonely man with great power. Both stories end with beings 
gaining superpowers and starting the next stage of humanity.  

 
 
Once again Lee used his dialog to change the story (and add hyperbole ). Lee made the 
95
scientists one dimensional villains, wanting to conquer mankind.  Lee was always the same. 
96
 
This was the last straw for Kirby. From that moment he began to hold back his new ideas 
from Marvel, and to look for another employer.  
97
 
 
95 The cave in issue 67 became “possibly the remotest spot on the face of the earth” just as issue 1 became “the 
center of the Earth” (issue 67, page 3) 
96 Fantastic Four 67, page 4 
97  For more details see the chapter on who created the other Fantastic Four stories 

Page 23:  
Removing humanity from the story 
 
In Lee’s dialog on page 23, the Mole Man simply brags about his abilities. There is no hint of 
humility, self doubt, or tragedy: no humanity at all. But the art tells a different story.  
 
The art shows a man who controls giant monsters and can destroy nuclear plants anywhere 
in the world; a man who owns a whole valley of giant diamonds and a network of tunnels 
extending throughout the globe. When measured by military force, wealth, or land area 
controlled, he is the most powerful ruler in the world. Yet he chooses to fight a stranger with 
a stick. Why? 
The previous art gave us the answer: he was a very small and ugly man, humiliated by 
others. Judging by the art, all he wanted (other than an end to the nuclear program that 
blinded him and possibly created the other monsters) was to show he was just as good as 
any other person. But Lee’s dialog misses this. And worse, Lee gives him superpowers (the 
ability to see in the dark and echo locate) so he becomes even less sympathetic. We lose 
the idea that this man has been practicing and practicing just to prove to someone anyone, 
that he is not a failure. 

Perhaps the saddest part is near the end of the book, where Reed tries to rescue him, to 
bring him back to the surface before the bomb explodes. But he wants to stay and die with 
his fellows monsters.  
 
We also see very clearly that he is small and light: this would have been part of his misery 
and inferiority complex, though Lee simplifies it to being about ugliness. 
That vulnerability is in the art but not the dialog. Lee removed the humanity from Kirby’s 
story. 
 
More bad dialog, and no superpowers 
This page has another striking example of Lee not paying attention to the story. The text 
often has cliches that make no sense. For example, the text tells the reader that the Mole 
Man "makes his first fatal mistake". But it is not fatal: he survives. And it is not a mistake: he 
wins.  
 

And of course the whole page reminds us that in the original story Reed had no 
superpowers.  
 
 

Page 24:  
Powers added later 
 
This page has the clearest examples of heavy editing, and of powers not being in the original 
story.  
 
First, look at where the monster rises from the ground. 
 
 
The characters are squashed into a tiny blank space. What artist would design an image like 
that? It works better with either no heroes there, or three unpowered characters. Three 
humans facing a monster is dramatic. But four superbeings including one who is proven to 
beat monsters? No danger at all. 
 
Second, look at where the Mole Man is pulling the cord. On the next page he is still pulling it. 
Yet the previous frame showed him running away! Something is wrong here. 

 
 
Even if we ignore the running frame, the entire Mole Man story is fast paced. The pacing is 
wrong if we have more than a couple of frames while he is pulling that cord.  
 
Now look at this section between the cord pulls. 

 
 
 First, it has no backgrounds, so was probably rushed. And it adds absolutely nothing to the 
story. The Thing does nothing as usual (he’s not even present). The Invisible Girl does 
nothing either. If anybody was going to grab the Mole Man without making him run away, 
wouldn’t it be her? Johnny flies around in circles as usual. And Reed’s arm reaches out, but 
the next frame shows the Mole Man was never running away in the first place.  
 
The new section is badly drawn compared with most of the story. Look at that first face, with 
the eyes too far up the head. This would be fine if he was supposed to be showing extreme 
anger, but it’s Reed who always stays in control. Kirby was the master of his craft, and this is 
not the work of a master. 

 
 
Or compare the monster’s face to the higher quality monster that rose from the ground. And 
why is the monster at an angle? How often did Kirby draw panels at angles? Did somebody 
else help draw this section? 
 
One or two details do look OK to me, or at least consistent with the rest of the story: see 
below for which ones, and a possible reconstruction of the original art. 
Lettering edits 
The lettering on the new section is intriguing. In panels 3 and 6, the words “fly”, “flies” and 
“tries to” have clearly been edited: 

 
By far the simplest explanation is that these were originally in the past tense: “flew” and 
“tried”. As if these panels were written separately, then somebody noticed that the rest of the 
story was present tense, so they quickly made the changes.  
 
An alternative explanation is that Lee was just not paying attention again. See also: spelling 
mistakes, contradictions, forgetting the villain’s name, etc. 
Reconstructing the original ending 
To my eye, the running Mole Man is the one part of these superpower pictures that looks 
reasonably well drawn.  
 
This solves a problem on the next page: we see Reed holding tight onto the Mole Man but 
we don't see the Mole Man escape. Reed removing the radiation suit  might  be original as 
well: it’s not a  great  picture, but not as ugly and badly framed like the rest, and the original 
would need an image like this. 
 
We can use these clues to reconstruct the original ending. See appendix 9 for details. 
 
 

Page 25:  
Where’s the humour? 
 
This is the last page, and we still haven’t seen any humour. We’ll discuss this later, but first 
let’s have a final look at dialog versus art. 
Dialog versus art: the last page 
The first thing we notice is that, as usual, the ending comes from earlier Kirby work. This 
example, from Challengers 4, suggests that perhaps Kirby intended the Mole Man to be 
rescued at the end. We saw Red pulling him, and able to carry him, so that seems likely. 
 
 
On previous pages the art showed that the Mole Man story was probably supposed to be 
first, with no superpowers, and no Ben Grimm. So the original story, the story created by the 
art alone, would have been: 
 
1.
More exciting. There was never any doubt that four superheroes could defeat 
monsters. But three ordinary people? That adds genuine danger. 
2.
More urgent: The story ends with a mushroom cloud. This implies that they are not 
just running from monsters but from an imminent explosion. 
3.
More meaningful: a story about underground testing that ends with a tragic figure. 
They tried to rescue him (top of page 25) but he wanted to stay with the monsters, his 
only friends, and they were all finally killed by the explosion. 
4.
More immersive: adding the superpower panels meant losing essential panels that 
would have given pacing. For example we only see the monsters once in the final 
version, and we don’t see the escape through the tunnels at all (except for a vaguely 
humanoid flame shape). 

5.
Less cluttered: the loss of those details means the current version has big blocks of 
text to try and tell the story. These would not be needed in the original where the art 
tells the story. The final image would not have The Thing squashed into the corner. 
The final image currently has a text box where Lee says very little but in a lot of 
words. Kirby would have a better idea of the next issue so could simply say “next 
issue; alien invasion”. (This would probably be at the end of the origin story, the 
original ending of the book.) 
6.
Better drawn. We would have the original art, not the hurriedly drawn superpowers. 
 
To illustrate how Kirby’s ending would have been better, here is the end to Kirby’s last ever 
Challengers of the Unknown story. This was, in effect, the previous issue of the Fantastic 
Four:   
98
 
The ending is similar - they triumph over monsters and the last frame is the four of them 
piloting a plane home. But: 
1.
The triumph was more impressive, because they lack superpowers.  
2.
It’s easier to follow, because no panels have been removed. 
3.
The art is less squashed, because art and dialog are laid out by the same artist. 
98 See appendix 7 for how the Fantastic Four is a continuation of Kirby’s Challengers 

4.
There is much more story, because the dialog adds to the art: it does not merely try 
to explain what we can already see.  
5.
There is more humour (the joke at the end). 
Humour 
This last part is important, because it is easy to assume that Lee made the lightness and 
humour to Kirby. But here we see it was Kirby who added the jokes  and Lee’s dialog was 
99
plain and dark. Over the following year Lee learned from Kirby and added more humour. But 
Lee’s humour was in wisecracks: it never had Kirby’s subtlety, love of life, or madcap energy. 
 
Humour is missing from Lee’s dialog in issue 1, but it is crucial to future issues, so I will finish 
by spending some time on the topic. Let’s look at each main kind of Kirby humour in turn: 
Wisecracks 
The “Tin man” comment was an example of a wisecrack, a witty remark or joke. Lee had little 
control over the story, but plenty of space to write whatever he wanted, so wisecracks 
became his trademark. 
 
Wisecracks depend on three things: 
1:  The situation implied by the art. As in this example, “I always thought there was 
something very strange about that chick”. 
99 Perhaps an editor at DC added the joke? But we see humour throughout Kirby’s work, so he didn’t need any 
help. However, Kirby had to plan for the possibility that his dialog would be changed, so most of his Kirby’s 
humour tended to arise from ironic situations or from the fun of life, and less from superficial wisecracks. 

 
This dialog arises from the art, and is only funny because the art shows his lack of self 
awareness. 
 
2: How the dialog writer was feeling at the time. It’s difficult be funny when you’re worried. In 
the first few issues of the Fantastic Four, when Goodman’s comics were still in a bad way, 
there was very little humour in Lee’s dialog. But in the period 1963-66, when sales were 
growing at their fastest, Lee’s dialog was light hearted and happy. Later, when Kirby left and 
sales declined, Lee’s jokes became repetitive and fewer in number. 
 
3. Freedom to control the dialog. Jokes often depend on precise wording. For most of his 
career Kirby could not rely on having final say over the dialog, so he generally used other 
forms of humour. 
Subtlety 
As with Jane Austen, Kirby’s humor often comes from irony. Take this example from Captain 
Victory. It’s so subtle that most readers miss it, but spotting it is half the fun. 

 
I love Captain Victory's sense of humour. It's extremely subtle but it's there. For the first arc 
he seems deadly serious all the time, and this is necessary because it establishes the 
pressures he is under. But look at the times when he smiles. He gets innocent playful 
pleasure from the very few things he enjoys. And one of the things he enjoys is his little 
contests with Mr Mind. As a telepath, Mr Mind should know exactly when Captain Victory is 
winding him up. But CV gains pleasure from misdirection, and the intellectual exercise of 
pitting his mind against one that is (on paper) superior to his. Mr Mind's weakness is that he 
is so overwhelmed by data that he tends to take things literally where possible. CV is tickled 
by these little conflicts, pretending to be super angry. You can tell he likes it. 
 
When Kirby had complete control over dialog then much of his humor came from verbal 
sparring and wordplay, much as with Shakespeare. Here the Goozlebobber has fun with a 
policeman. But it’s loving fun: see the complete concentration on his face as he tugs the 
officer’s strings but never goes too far. 

 
Note the references to swift talking and changing of forms, the very essence of wit, but here 
the wit is also visual. Note the final image where Goozlebobber takes the form of a racially 
stereotyped Irishman who had obviously eaten many donuts: making himself a mocking 
stereotype of the Irish policeman, and daring the officer to see him now as a friend. It’s 
brilliant stuff.
 
100
Love of life 
Most of the comedy in Kirby is comedy in its purest form: love of life! The word “comedy” 
literally means “happy ending”. It comes from the Greek “komos” (to “revel” or enjoy) and 
“aoidos” (“singer”) ‘singer’. Kirby’s stories are full of this joy, this optimism, this playful twinkle 
in the eye. The final Captain Victory story is about three friends just having fun in a Jacobean 
romp. Note the absurd use of cod Shakespeare.
  
101
100 Very little of this would be conscious on Kirby’s part. He was simply drawing on a lifetime of experience of what 
felt funny, including his childhood on the streets playing cat and mouse with police officers. Goozlebobber felt 
hilarious to Kirby, and fans were left scratching their heads at first. 
101 Lee used such silly language without irony when dialoguing Thor. When Kirby dialogued gods or Elizabethan 
scenes he never did that. Kirby reserved the style for comedy where it belonged. 

 
 
Sadly, readers often missed the subtlety. For example, many people thought that Kirby’s 
satirical series, “Fighting American”, was played straight. They didn’t get it. Kirby was making 
serious points through hilariously absurd characters. 

 

 
 
Madcap energy 
Captain America and Fighting American show some of Kirby’s madcap energy. He used it in 
pure slapstick mode in Fantastic Four annual 5. 

 

When I first read this as a child I was so used to Lee’s simple dialog that I couldn’t follow it. 
So I naturally concluded that Kirby was not a good writer. Maybe he wasn’t, if “good” means 
“make it easy for children.” But if “good” means “challenging children to raise their game” and 
“gets better on third and fourth read” then this writing was superb.
 
102
 
Compare the intensity and layers of Kirby humour with Lee’s style humour. This is a typical 
example, from Lee’s earlier “Willie Lumpkin” strip  
 
Lee’s humour used to be very simplistic. Possibly he learned to become a little cleverer after 
he dialogued Kirby’s work. But he never learned Kirby’s range or depth.  
Summary of page 25 and the whole story 
In short, Lee’s decision to move the superpowers to the start, and his choice of dialog, ruined 
the ending.  
 
The same decisions, by forcing changes on the Mole Man story and losing the origin splash 
page, also ripped the heart out of the story: it no longer had the core truth about nuclear 
testing. We no longer got to know Ben Grimm at the start, so his tragedy meant less. But 
thankfully Kirby poured so much into each issue that even half a story was worth reading. 
And in later issues Kirby was able to develop the Thing’s tragedy so that readers began to 
see what Ben Grimm had lost. 
 
For how Lee changed later issues, and the Fantastic Four as a whole, see the final part of 
this book (“about the author”). There I give my personal experience with the Fantastic Four 
and why I wrote “The Case For Kirby”.  
 
 
102 Note that Kirby slips in hints that all is not as it appears. Not just the obvious “budget slashing” while Lee eats 
caviar and pheasant, but details like “little absentee bullpen”: Lee called it a bullpen, implying an office where 
everyone works, but Kirby and most others worked from home, and only came in to deliver the finished work. 

Who wrote the other Fantastic Four 
stories? 
 
In this chapter I discuss who wrote the remaining Fantastic Four issues. We could repeat the 
same page by page analysis for a hundred issues, but it may be quicker to focus on the 
science in the stories. Kirby’s stories tended to feature up to date science: 
 
In all my work, you'll see the times are reflected. I don't contrive stories. I don't give you B.S., and I'm not 
giving you fairy tales. At the time, radiation was the big topic and The Fantastic Four came out of those 
times.
 
103
 
The art indicates that Kirby followed and understood the science news. The text indicates 
that Lee did not. So Lee cannot have written those science based plots. Here are some 
examples of science details that Lee got wrong. There are no doubt many, many more, but 
these are the science topics that I happened to notice and that were easy to prove. 
DNA  
In Fantastic Four #15, Lee's dialog referred to "DNA, the cells that are the building blocks of 
life".  
 
Anybody who read an article about DNA knew that DNA is not the cells, DNA is the stuff 
inside  cells. Now, the picture of a helix is accurate enough, given space constraints, and 
even includes spare plastic rods as often seen in plastic models. This indicates that Kirby 
103 Kirby, quoted in Comics File Magazine #2 (Psi Fi Movie Press 1986) 

was working from a picture in a science magazine article. But Lee could not have read the 
article, as he got the details wrong. The fact that Lee got the words right, but in the wrong 
order, suggests he heard it from someone else, presumably making notes as Kirby explained 
the story. 
  
And another thing. When I first read this story I could not understand why the Mad Thinker 
would encase the Baxter Building in a giant crystal. There is nothing in Lee's dialog to 
suggest why, or how.  It was one of those mad comic things that comes out of nowhere.  
 
 
This kind of nonsense makes people laugh at these comics: clearly they are unworthy of 
serious thought. But somebody who had read about the discovery of DNA would know that 
the secret to discovering DNA was X-ray crystallography: Francis Crick and Rosalind 
Franklin were both crystallographers. Kirby, who must have read the article to draw the helix, 
would have known the connection between DNA and crystals. But Lee's dialog shows no 
evidence that he understood the link.  
 
Incidentally, the rest of Fantastic Four issue 15 has numerous examples of Lee not paying 
attention to the story. He confused the time of day, he confused Broadway with Hollywood, 
and of course he would not not see the significance of Ben as a wrestler and Johnny as 
circus daredevil (their previous Challengers occupations). But for brevity I will just focus on 
the science. 
The Trebelev Mole 
In Fantastic Four #21 Kirby drew a Russian tunnelling machine, and drew something like an 
actual Trebelev Mole.  

 
This was before the days when you could Google such things, so Kirby must have read an 
article about it. He would probably know from the article that the new Russian device relied 
on a nuclear engine to generate heat to vapourise the rocks, and so that is what Kirby drew. 
But Lee's dialog said it used a rocket engine on “reverse thrust”. Kirby would know that a 
rocket engine made no sense, as rockets are designed to produce force, not heat. A rocket 
engine on reverse would push the mole back against the solid rock and it would never move 
forwards! Kirby served in the army, he had flown on planes, he had fired guns, he would 
understand action and reaction. Kirby drew nuclear heat, not rocket thrust. But Lee got it 
wrong again. 
The solar wind 
In Fantastic Four #23, Kirby drew the solar wind, something that had recently been 
discovered, so was in the science news. But Lee's dialog called it a solar wave. 
 

"Solar wind" is the correct term. Whoever read the article would have known that. But Lee's 
dialog got it wrong again.  
Antimatter 
This next example is more subtle, but it's a far more common type. It's not that Lee's dialog 
is wrong (in this case), but it could be a lot clearer.  
 
In Fantastic Four #48 the Negative Zone was introduced. We saw a different negative zone 
three issues later in issue 51, but that time it was explained: positive matter becomes 
negative, and if you touch it, it explodes. The art showed the same thing happening in issue 
48: they needed to get out before the material around them changed, and they needed a 
force-field to protect them from explosions.  
 
 
Yet the dialog did not describe what was happening (that positive matter was becoming 
negative). It's as if Lee didn't understand it the first time, but he did the second time. His 
dialog isn't "wrong" here, it's just unclear. As if he didn't understand his own story. 
 
Here's another example from the same issue: Lee's dialog made the first half of the story 
(the Inhumans) seem totally unrelated to the second half (Galactus).  

 
But if we ignore Lee's dialog the art is clear: Maximus fired a gun into space, causing the 
whole world to vibrate. Then out in space the Silver Surfer abruptly changed direction and 
became aware of Earth. Lee's dialog did not make the connection. This suggests that Lee 
did not understand the story. 
Vulcanism 
In Fantastic Four #98 the story revolved around a "nameless mass" that “slithers” beneath 
the moon. Why is it called a "nameless mass"? And the art does not show it slithering but 
rather expanding, building up pressure beneath the rocks.  

 
 
It would be more exciting to call this the real thing that scientists were really afraid of: 
volcanoes! They thought the craters might be the tops of volcanoes, and maybe they could 
collapse, or erupt, as the Apollo craft landed! 
 
Geologists didn't know, for example, whether volcanism or meteor impacts were responsible for the 
moon's pockmarked surface. (Current wisdom says meteors.)
 
104
 
We didn't finally see the moon erupt, because the team saved the day. But we did see the 
danger mirrored on Earth: the Sentry's island formed like a volcano out of the ocean, and at 
the end it exploded like a volcano.  
104 Moon Landing Facts: Apollo 11 at 40, Anne Minard, 
http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2009/07/090715-moon-landing-apollo-facts.html 

 
Once again, Kirby's art showed a strong understanding of a then-current science topic, while 
Lee's dialog seemed unsure of what was going on in the story. 
 
Incidentally, a year or so later Kirby shows us what the moon might look like if massive 
volcanoes erupted: the planet of Apokolips in The New Gods! 
Vandalising issue 1 
In earlier chapters I argued that Lee changed issue 1. And I argued that the story was better 
if we ignore Lee’s dialog: it makes more sense, contains more depth, the villain has a clearer 
motive, etc. Could we call this vandalism? 
 
Lee damaged a work of art due to a lack of understanding, then wrote all over it and signed 
his name inappropriately. Imagine if he had done this to a painting on a wall. Wouldn’t 
vandalism be the right word? 
Vandalising issue 2 
Lee vandalised issue 2 with his dialog, just as he did with issue 1.  How? The clearest 
example is the ending: 

 
These aliens are so advanced that they have city sized space ships. They study us so 
closely that they can duplicate individuals down to the smallest detail. But they are defeated 
by being shown clippings from comics. They think those monsters are real and they run 
away scared.  
 
This colours how we see the whole story from the start. Turn back to the opening pages and 
we see the aliens destroy some kind of ocean rig and turning the power off to the city. It 
looks like random violence. See the sneaky grin as the alien turns off the big switch. It’s all 
very silly.  

 
 
But look closer at Lee’s dialog and we see problems as usual. Lee wrote that the comic 
clippings are from the Marvel titles “Strange Tales” and “Journey into Mystery”. But try 
searching those comics for those images: you won’t find them, or anything close. So let’s 
remove Lee’s dialog, and see what is really going on. 

 
Those are clearly photographs, not comic clippings. And the images appear to come from 
recent movies: the creatures with the tentacles and claws are the race from “The She 
Creature” (1956),  

 
the satellite guns are from “War of the Satellites” (1958, a movie which also featured aliens 
impersonating humans), 
 
and the giant ants are from “Them” (1954).  

 
 
Movie still photos could easily be purchased in New York in 1961, from kiosks such as “Irving 
Klaw’s Movie Star Photos”.  
 
 
This changes the story completely. Watch those three movies: regardless of their acting, they 
try to be believable. “War of the Satellites” is about how Sputnik could lead to guns in space. 
“Them” is about atomic tests causing radiation which causes mutation in ants. “The She 
Creature” is about hypnotism uncovering abilities humans used to have. Although they use 
models and costumes the right photos could pass for spy photos taken in dangerous 
conditions. The Skrulls would not see these things from space because of course they are 

our secret weapons. Suddenly a story that was just absurd becomes one that could perhaps 
take place in the real world. 
 
With this new, more serious view, return again to those opening scenes. The apparently silly 
crimes are real events that actually happened, just before the comic was written. The 
disasters at the Texas Towers took place in January 1961. Large parts of New York had  a 
blackout due to a faulty circuit breaker on June 13th 1961, exactly when the story would 
have been plotted. The middle section of the story is basically McCarthyism: the best and 
brightest Americans are condemned as enemy sympathisers, when in fact they are needed 
to save the nation. The alien invaders, hiding among us, are of course symbols for 
communists or other sleeper agents and false flag attacks. 
 
So Kirby’s art shows a deadly serious story about the real world. Children could see it as fun, 
but adults could se more depth. However, Lee’s dialog removed the adult layer. Once again 
Lee destroyed half of the story  
 
We could see the same thing in issue 3 (a story essentially about McCarthyism), issue 4 
(which has insights into the Cuban crisis), and so on. Kirby created a rich, layered story each 
time, and each time Lee vandalised it. 
More Kirby = better comic 
Comic historians agree that the best Fantastic Four issues were those published between 
1965 and 1967. These were possibly the best comic books ever, period: 
 
Lee and Kirby's Fantastic Four run is the Mount Olympus of comic book storytelling. Nothing else can 
touch it in its innovation, sustained excitement, consequential events, and unprecedented character 
development.
 
105
 
Stan and Jack's Fantastic Four was, at its peak, almost unarguably the richest and most imaginative 
comic in the history of the medium.
 
106
 
"Those fifty issues [FF25-75] were, simply put, the best super-hero comics ever done and nobody, let 
me repeat that, nobody, has done it better."
 
107
 
"For about twenty Issues, on either side of 50, it was possibly the best comic book ever done."
  
108
 
"The general wisdom is that the Stan and Jack Fantastic Four is the greatest run of any comic book, 
ever."
 
109
 
What was different about this period? Many people say that Kirby’s art improved, or he was 
dealing with bigger concepts. But a closer look shows that everything here was also present 
105  Mark Engblom in Comic Coverage: March 21, 2009 
106  Mark Waid's Fantastic Four Manifesto, in "Comics Creators on Fantastic Four" page 202 
107  Marv Wolfman, http://www.marvwolfman.com/marv/Wade-ing_Through_The_Fantastic_Four.html 
108  Len Wein,  http://www.kleefeldoncomics.com/2012/06/old-wolfmanwein-interview.html 
109  Bob Reyer, comics expert on the Talking Comic Books podcast episode 89 

in the earlier issues, and in the Challengers of the Unknown. For example, compare the 
Silver Surfer cosmic art in issue 48 with the cosmic art in issue 7.  
 
 
 

It’s the same art, but the later issues have a better inker and Kirby is allowed more space: he 
can spend three issues with an idea instead of just one. The same is true for the writing. 
Compare the debate with Galactus and the debate with Ultivac in Kirby’s Challengers comic. 
 
 

The same grand themes are here, the only differences are the inker and the freedom to use 
more space. When Kirby had the space, his art was just as good before the Fantastic Four 
as during that period, as this Ultivac image demonstrates: 
 
 
The secret to getting the best stories from Kirby is to give him more freedom. The stories 
improved in the mid 1960s when Lee was less involved. As we see from the surviving 
synopses
, by the mid 1960s Lee had less and less time to spend on the Fantastic Four, 
110
and that’s when the story quality improved. Lee admitted at the time that Kirby basically did it 
all. 
 
Some artists, such as Jack Kirby, need no plot at all. I mean I’ll just say to Jack, ‘Let’s let the next villain 
be Dr. Doom’… or I may not even say that. He may tell me. And then he goes home and does it. He’s so 
110 Appendix 4 

good at plots, I’m sure he’s a thousand times better than I. He just about makes up the plots for these 
stories. All I do is a little editing
 
111
 
In short, the Fantastic Four got better when Kirby had more freedom and Lee was less involved. 
 
Another factor affecting the quality of Kirby’s work was his page rate. At Marvel’s rates in the 
early sixties, Kirby needed to maintain a pace he described as “back-breaking” just to make ends 
meet. After the departure of Ditko and Wood, Kirby received an increase which allowed him to 
cut back to a working pace that allowed him to instill more detail into his stories and art. 
1967 
The same people who note increasing quality in 1965 admit to a slide in quality after 1967. This 
is measurably true: after issue 67 we have fewer new characters and more plots based on 
movies and TV shows.  
 
From November '65 to November '67 —two years where Jack was pretty much doing the stories on his 
own, plus plotting for other books that he wasn't drawing—from the imagination of this man came: 
 
Black Bolt, Gorgon, Crystal, Triton, Karnak, Lockjaw, Galactus, The Silver Surfer, Wyatt Wingfoot, The 
Black Panther, Klaw, Sub-Space (later dubbed The Negative Zone), Blastaar, The Sentry, The Supreme 
Intelligence, The Kree, Ronan, Him, Psycho-Man, Hercules, Pluto, Zeus and the Greek Pantheon, Tana 
Nile and The Space Colonizers, The Black Galaxy, Ego the Bioverse, The High Evolutionary, 
Wundagore and The New-Men, The Man-Beast, Ulik, Orikal, The Growing Man, Replicus, The 
Enchanters, The Three Sleepers, Batroc, A.I.M., The Cosmic Cube, The Adaptoid (who later becomes 
The Super- Adaptoid), Modok, Mentallo, The Fixer, The Demon Druid, The Sentinels, and The Mimic. 
This is not complete as secondary creations such as The Seeker, Prester John, The Tumbler and others 
weren't mentioned; but they all premiered within the two-year period. 
 
After November '67, for the last three years that Jack worked for Marvel, you get the exact opposite; 
many secondary characters, but very few memorable ones. In FF, the only character of note after 
November '67 is Annihilus.
 
112
 
At this point Kirby was increasingly unhappy at Marvel, and Fantastic Four 66-67 (late 1967) 
was the last straw. Kirby had plotted a sophisticated story about Objectivist philosophy and 
the direction of science. Then Lee’s dialogue vandalised it, turning the good guys into bad 
guys and removing the point of the story. 
 
According to Mark Evanier (based on conversations he had with Kirby), Jack originally intended for this 
storyline to represent his take on the Objectivist philosophy. [...] Stan didn't notice any villain in the story 
and almost always felt that every story had to have a bad guy, so he had to come up with one. [...] The 
story that Jack wanted: "Create a superior human and he just might find you inferior enough to get rid 
of," became through Lee another "bad guys try to take over world and get their comeuppance" story. 
(ibid) 
 
This was the last straw for Kirby. From this point (the story went on sale in August 1967) 
Jack began holding back his best ideas. He kept them for what would become his Fourth 
World books at DC instead.  
111  Lee,  interviewed in "Castle of Frankenstein" 12, 1968 
112  Mike Gartland, Jack Kirby Collector 24,  http://twomorrows.com/kirby/articles/24compare.html 

 
Jack Kirby developed the concept of the New Gods in 1967 while still working for Marvel. [...] The 
characters — Darkseid, Orion, Mister Miracle, Metron, Mantis, and Lightray — are all recognizable and 
were tweaked only slightly when they debuted at DC in 1971.
  
113
 
The decline began when Kirby began holding back his best ideas. But it might still be argued 
that Lee contributed ideas to the Kirby stories. So let us see what happened when Kirby left. 
Lee had no ideas of his own 
When Kirby left Marvel, Lee continued to write the Fantastic Four on his own. Every single 
issue was a copy of a Jack Kirby plot. Yet when Kirby was there, plots were always original. 
Fantastic Four 103-4:  Prince Namor kidnaps Sue Storm and declares war on the surface 
world.  
This plot was previously used in Fantastic Four annual 1. This time Lee adds Magneto, 
presumably to increase interest in the X-Men title, where sales were falling. 
Fantastic Four 105-6:  A mystery man shooting bolts of power appears on the streets of 
New York. The mystery man is linked to a close family member, a scientist who uncovered a 
new type of energy and created the villain by accident. Reed befriends the scientist and thus 
neutralises the menace.  
This plot is essentially the same as the last plot that Kirby submitted. But Lee held that back 
to became FF 108. As a result, Lee’s first solo plot appeared to be original, whereas Kirby’s 
plot, being published later, then looked like the copy. For years, when growing up, I thought 
this first Stan lee story was proof that Lee was the writer, and I was disappointed that Kirby’s 
later story seemed hackneyed and confusing. Lee’s trick worked. For more about how Lee 
made Kirby’s final story look bad, see issue 108. 
Fantastic Four 107:  Reed tries to cure Ben, but it turns Ben evil.  
This plot was previously used in Fantastic Four 68-69. 
Fantastic Four 108:  An original Kirby plot, held back to coincide with the first Kirby material 
published by DC. Lee made some changes, which he admitted made the story harder to 
follow (an apology for the confusing nature appears at the bottom of page 3).  
113  http://www.cosmicteams.com/newgods/ 

Years later, Kirby’s art was pieced together again for “The Lost Fantastic Four story”. But 
once again Lee added the dialog and changed crucial parts. For example, the story begins 
with an ancient discovery, but Lee’s dialog glosses over that part, changing it into a modern 
sculpture, thus losing the crucial “lost gods” foundation for the story.  
Fantastic Four 109-110:  Reed is trapped in the Negative Zone as a result of his 
thoughtlessness (not packing enough fuel) while the other team members fret and worry 
outside. 
This plot was previously used in Fantastic Four 60-61. We could perhaps argue that 60-61 
was Kirby re-using a plot device from Fantastic Four 51. But in that case Reed being trapped 
was just an enabler for the main plot: Kirby did not reuse a main plot like Lee did. Kirby used 
a detail from another story, but with major differences. In the first story Reed was trapped 
there by an enemy, but in issue 60 it was his own fault: that was a turning point, the first time 
Reed’s moral weakness (his secrecy and trying to do everything himself) led to an obvious 
bonehead mistake. Whereas in issue 51 the story was about the opposite: Reed’s moral 
strength. Issues 51 and 60 thus made a fascinating couplet. At that point the idea of “trapped 
in the Negative Zone” had been done to death and Kirby did not return to it. But once Kirby 
left, later writers reused the same plot again and again: in the 110s, 130s, 180s, 230s, 250s, 
etc., etc. 
Fantastic Four 111:  see issue 107 above (reuses the plot to 68-69) 
Fantastic Four 112 : an inconclusive (and pointless) battle between the Hulk and Thing, for 
the sole purpose of increasing sales by promising something more. 
This plot was previously used in Fantastic Four 12, exactly 100 issues earlier. 
Fantastic Four 113-116:  the Watcher warns the team that an alien being has been crossing 
the galaxy destroying worlds, and is headed to Earth. He is finally defeated by a deus ex 
machina. 
This plot was previously used in Fantastic Four 48-50: the Galactus trilogy. Note the 
contrast: when Kirby was there, the story was unforgettable, the high point of the series. But 
Lee’s version is wisely forgotten. The idea of a violent composite being, the combined power 
of a whole civilisation, is from Kirby’s Mangog in Thor. 
Fantastic Four 116-119:  these were written by Archie Goodwin and Roy Thomas, not Stan 
Lee. While the stories did not become classics, at least the plots were original. 

Fantastic Four 120-123 : An air-walking herald appears, announcing the end of the world. 
Galactus then appears and is only defeated by being sent into the Negative Zone. 
This plot was previously used in Fantastic Four 48-50. That is, in two consecutive plots (for 
him), Lee copied the exact same Kirby plot. This time it’s even closer, with the Air Walker 
instead of the Silver Surfer, and the idea of Galactus endlessly exploring the Negative Zone 
is a variation on the Surfer endlessly exploring the Microverse in another Galactus story, 
issue 75. It could be argued that when Galactus reappeared in issues 74-75 this was Kirby 
reusing a plot. But read the story closely: the purpose is different. Galactus is far away and 
simply wants his herald back. He only threatens Earth as a way to persuade the Surfer to 
find him food. And the appearance of Galactus was almost certainly demanded by Lee, as a 
way to promote Lee’s new Silver Surfer comic. A comic which, lacking Kirby’s plots, failed. 
Fantastic Four 124-5:  The Monster from the Lost Lagoon: 
This plot was previously used in Fantastic Four 97. At first glance it might look like Kirby also 
reused the plot from the movie The Creature from the Black Lagoon. At this point Kirby was 
planning his move to DC, and was deliberately holding back his new ideas. But even here, 
Kirby’s plot was original, and was the opposite of the movie. The movie was about an 
ancient inhabitant of Earth that killed people and was itself killed. Kirby’s plot was about the 
opposite; how the creature was innocent, people had the wrong idea, and it simply needed 
materials to help its mate, and then it left. Interestingly, the Lee dialog in issue 97 suggests 
that the creature stayed on Earth for weeks or months simply to gather water. Which of 
course makes no sense: it could have gathered all the water it needed in seconds. The art 
however implies that something in the materials it gathered was needed for its mate: this is 
the plot that Lee reused. 
Fantastic Four 125 was Lee’s final issue. (Though it was probably scripted, uncredited, by a 
young Gerry Conway: Conway mentioned in an interview that he did an uncredited script 
under Lee’s direction when he started, and internal evidence suggests that it was this one. 
But the general plot would have been dictated by Lee.) Fantastic Four 126 was then a re-run 
of the Mole Man story, including a homage to the original cover. 
“The Last Fantastic Four Story”:   Many years later, Lee wrote one more solo Fantastic 
Four story. In it, the Watcher warns the team of a giant planet destroyer on his way. He was 
sent by an alien race that has judged the Earth and found it guilty. He is defeated when the 
Surfer (instead of the Watcher) provides unbeatable machines that threaten the enemy’s 
existence. 
This was another copy of the Galactus saga, just like Lee’s previous two Fantastic Four 
stories. But this time it is combined with the plot from Fantastic Four 65, where the Kree 

send an Accuser to judge the Fantastic Four. Only here Lee renames Kirby’s “The Accuser” 
as the less exciting name “The Adjudicator”. 
The bottom line is that Kirby’s Fantastic Four plots were always new. But Lee’s Fantastic 
Four plots were always based on Kirby’s old plots. 
Conclusion 
In summary: 
1.
Lee did not understand the stories he claimed to write.  
2.
Lee added dialog that vandalised the story.  
3.
When Lee was less involved the stories got better.  
4.
Lee had no new ideas of his own. 
 
From this I conclude that Kirby wrote the Fantastic Four, and Lee merely tried to dumb it 
down for children. 
 
 

Who wrote the other Marvel stories? 
In this chapter I suggest that Kirby wrote all the stories he illustrated at Marvel. To be clear, 
the process apparently went like this: 
 
1.
Kirby was pushing for superheroes: see appendix 6 for the timeline. 
2.
Goodman would occasionally approve a new book. 
3.
Lee and Kirby would then discuss it. We have a written record of four such meetings, 
and in each case all the best ideas (the most original and the ones with the longest 
commercial value) came from Kirby. Lee would also suggest ideas. Kirby would use 
as few of Lee’s ideas as he could get away with. For the details see appendix 4. 
4.
Kirby then presented his finished story to Lee, and either explain it (in the early days 
when their meetings were longer), with Lee taking notes, or write explanatory notes in 
margins.  
5.
Lee would then ask for changes, or just add dialog. 
 
Here is a typical example of Kirby’s notes telling Lee what to write: 

  

 
Before Fantastic Four 1 
As we saw in the discussion of page 4, Kirby wrote the Monster comics that were the 
immediate forerunners to Fantastic Four 1. Even without that evidence, it would be insane 
for Lee to write stories for Kirby. Because before joining Marvel, Kirby’s stories typically sold 
around 300,000 issues. When he previously worked for Goodman he sold up to a million 
copies per issue. Lee’s books only sold around 180,000. Marvel was in trouble when Kirby 
came back, so Lee desperately needed the sales that only Kirby could bring. Lee’s own 
career depended on him letting Kirby write his own stuff.  
 
It would also be a waste of time to write for Kirby. By that point in his career Kirby had 
created around a thousand stories: he could write monster stories as he drew, probably 
faster than he could draw from someone else’s script, as he wasn’t used to the separate 
script method. When DC gave Kirby scripts for Challengers, Kirby said he ignored them and 
did things his own way anyway. By comparing Challengers stories to other DC stories, and to 
Kirby stories both before and after, we can see that Kirby was right: those were Kirby stories, 
though no doubt an editor may have changed some parts. 
The Hulk 
All the elements of the Hulk’s origin story can be found in previous Kirby stories. He even 
created a monster called “The Hulk” in Journey into Mystery 62.  
 
The scenes involving the gamma bomb and rescuing Rick Jones are very similar to a 
sequence in Kirby’s Sky Masters.  

 
The transformation from Banner to the Hulk is very similar to a sequence in a Kirby story 
called “The Midnight Monster”. 

 
Early villains, such as the Ringmaster and his Circus of Crime, were very similar in name 
and appearance to previous Kirby villains. 

 
 
Thor 
This was the fourth time that Kirby created a Thor character: 
In Kirby’s Captain America 1, we have Hurricane, Son of Thor 

 
 
In “Adventure Comics” 5, Kirby’s Sandman story has a character masquerade as Thor 
through the streets of New York. 
 
 
In DC’s “Tales of the Unexpected” Kirby produced “Tales of the Magic Hammer” about the 
power of Thor’s hammer. This scene with the hammer splitting a tree was even used in the 
Marvel Thor origin. 

 
 
Kirby then put these elements together by having the real Thor living in New York, powered 
by his hammer. Meanwhile Lee, who put his name on as writer, did not even know how to 
spell  Thor, calling him “Thorr” at the end.  
 

Even if we blame the letterer, Lee as editor should have caught it as it was in very large type 
and dominated the final frame. 
Iron Man 
Iron Man is clearly based on the character, Metallo, from Action Comics 252 (1959).  
 
The same wound in the heart, the same metal chest plate, even the same facial features. 
 
 
The name “metallo” or a man in a metal suit was apparently generic: it was also used 
(spelled “metalo”) in 1942
 
114
114 World’s Finest Comics, 6 

 
The name was used again for a different character in Superboy 49 (1956). Kirby then used 
this familiar concept - man in a suit of high tech armour becomes “Metallo” - in a story he 
wrote in 1961 for Tales of Suspense.  
 
Iron Man was just yet another Metallo. 
 
The origin story - being forced to create a scientific miracle by a southeast Asian warlord - is 
from a Kirby Green Arrow story in Adventure Comics 255 for DC. 

 
 
Dr Strange 
Many people have commented on how Dr Strange is very similar to a Dr D r oom from 
Amazing Adventures issue 1, in 1961. Lee claims to have written it. But the outlines are by 
Kirby (and finishes by Ditko) which indicates that Kirby would have supplied the plot. As for 
the name and costume, two months before Ditko's Dr Strange premiered (in Strange Tales 
110, July 1963), Jack Kirby drew a story in Tales of Suspense 41 (May 1963). Called "The 
Stronghold of Dr Strange". The name and costume are the same. 
 
The X-Men 
Kirby had created plenty of teams of young adventurers: Boy's Ranch, Young Allies, Boy 
Commandos, etc. They often had an adult mentor: 

 
 
But what about a team with mutant superpowers? Yellow Claw 2 (1956) credits Kirby as both 
writer and penciller. In it, the Yellow Claw gathers a group of mutants and says their 
combined brain power is more effective than a dozen H-bombs. In the story FBI agent Jimmy 
Woo defines mutants as "people with deviations... in either mind or body... or both!" 

 
 
Another Kirby story, in  Black Cat Mystic 59  has another team of mutants.  
 
And right back in 1940 a Kirby "Blue Bolt" story had mutant powers that came from cosmic 
rays. (By 1963 the source of radiation was the atom bomb.) 

 
 
The remaining details of the X-Men (outcasts, led by a man in a wheelchair, enemies called 
"the brotherhood", tag-line "the world's strangest heroes") are identical to Doom Patrol, a DC 
comic that came out three months earlier. Three months is not long enough to read a comic 
on the newsstands and then create your own comic, so this argues for inside information. At 
the time, some DC artists were secretly moonlighting for Marvel: Gene Colan called himself 
Adam Austin, Gil Kane called himself Scott Edward, Jerry Siegel called himself "Joe Carter", 
etc. So Stan Lee, as editor, was in regular contact with insiders at DC. Arnold Drake, creator 
of Doom patrol, explained: 
 
I’ve become more and more convinced that [Stan Lee] knowingly stole The X-Men from The Doom 
Patrol. Over the years I learned that an awful lot of writers and artists were working surreptitiously 
between [Marvel and DC]. Therefore from when I first brought the idea into [DC editor] Murray Boltinoff’s 
office, it would’ve been easy for someone to walk over and hear that [I was] working on a story about a 
bunch of reluctant superheroes who are led by a man in a wheelchair. So over the years I began to feel 
that Stan had more lead time than I realized. He may well have had four, five or even six months.
 
115
 
Kirby had no reason to copy DC, but Lee’s whole career had been sent following trends. So 
the Doom Patrol details probably came via Lee. This illustrates the difference between 
Stan's ideas and Jack's ideas. Jack's ideas were creatively different, and can be seen 
evolving in his own earlier comics. But Stan's ideas tend to be straight swipes from other 
people's work. 
 
Even the Doom Patrol ideas can be traced to Kirby eventually, because Doom Patrol was 
DC’s answer to Kirby’s Fantastic Four. Negative Man was a test pilot like Ben Grimm, and 
when flying looks like the Human Torch. The leader, Niles Caulder, is a brilliant scientist like 
Reed, but is visually missing from the action, like Sue. Elastigirl has Sue's gender and 
Reed's power. Robotman is a big orange strong guy who wants to be human, like Ben 
Grimm. The team were outcasts, like the FF in issues 2, 7 and 9. Of course the FF were 
themselves a continuation of the Challengers... by Jack Kirby. Every original idea seems to 
come back to Jack Kirby eventually. 
115 An Incessantly Asked Question, Mark Evanier, 
http://www.webcitation.org/5lXJY5e28?url=http://povonline.com/iaq/IAQ05.htm  

Spider-Man 
I left this one until last as it’s the most interesting. Jack Kirby rightly gives credit to Steve 
DItko for Spider-Man being such a success.  
 
My initial concept was practically the same. But the credit for developing Spider-Man goes to Steve 
Ditko; he wrote it and he drew it and he refined it. Steve Ditko is a thorough professional. And he an 
intellect. Personality wise, he’s a bit withdrawn, but there are lots of people like that. But Steve Ditko, 
despite the fact that he doesn’t disco– although he may now; I haven’t seen him for a long time– Steve 
developed Spider-Man and made a salable item out of it."  
116
 
Kirby’s Spider-Man would have been too muscular, too confident. Ditko was able to turn 
Spider-Man into a skinny kid with self doubts and an inability to solve his problems. That was 
the demographic that bought the most comics and they loved it! But where did the idea come 
from originally? Here is a timeline, based on research by Stan Taylor and others. Unless 
stated, quotations are from Taylor.
 Note that 1954 is when Kirby and Simon launched 
117
mainline, so Kirby was creating all kinds of ideas that year, and only used some. 
 
●
1954: The Silver Spider 
In 1954 Kirby and Joe Simon (mainly Simon) developed the Silver Spider, but did not 
use him. It featured an orphaned boy living with an old couple finds a magic ring that 
granted him extra strength, including the ability to leap. 
●
1954: web fluid 
Their publisher then suggested some changes: "a tall thin wiry person with long legs 
and arms." and he "could accomplish great acrobatic tricks, an almost flight, by use 
of silken ropes that would enable him to swing a-la Tarzan, or a Batman.   The silken 
threads that the spider would use might come from a special liquid, from some part of 
his costume that would become silken threads in much the same way as the spider 
insect.  These threads would also be used in making of a web, which could also be 
used as a net."  
●
1954: The name and costume 
1954 was when Ben Carson, the biggest Halloween costume designer in America, 
began selling a "Spider man" costume. The surviving versions are all in yellow, not 
red, but they have the name, the full face mask, and the distinctive web design and 
black around the eyes, spider on the chest, etc.  
116  Jack Kirby Interview. Leonard Pitts,  http://kirbymuseum.org/blogs/effect/2012/08/06/19867-kirby-interview/ 
117 Spider-Man: The Case For Kirby, Stan Tayor,   http://www.adelaidecomicsandbooks.com/kirbycase.html 

 
 
Kirby’s son Neal was six years old at the time (and 15 when Spider-Man was 
published) so would have been the target market for such a costume. Ditko had no 
children so was unlikely to have seen it. 
●
1954: The name "Spider Man" 
The same year that the Halloween costume launched, "Simon had rejected a working 
title 'Spider-man' for his Silver Spider project, and showed a logo to Kirby”. Eventually 
the Silver Spider idea was shelved, and never used.  
●
The full face mask 
A key claim is the full face mask that Ditko says he chose to hide the fact that 
Spider-man was young. But many of Kirby's characters had full masks: from his first 
ever character, the Lone Rider, through to Iron Man, Dr Doom, Mr Miracle, etc. So 
this is not conclusive. Ditko has no history of lying or reason to do so: choosing the 
full face mask does not mean he had never seen one before, it just means he 
considered other masks and rejected them.  
●
The big white eyes 
In 1968 (long before the issue of who created what became a hot topic) Kirby was 

interviewed for the Excelsior fanzine (issue 1). Kirby mentioned that he created the 
pre-Marvel Vision's costume with big white eyes, and called it "the forerunner of the 
Spider-Man and Silver Surfer eye", perhaps implying that he created all three sets of 
white eyes.  
 
All we know for certain is that whited out eyes were a familiar idea for Kirby. And that 
Lee went to Kirby for the initial cover (after rejecting Ditko’s cover): it as normal for 
Kirby to be consulted for anything art related. But Ditko could have come up with 
whited eyes independently. 
●
1957: insect powers 
In 1957 Kirby drew the story "’The Ant Extract’ in which a meek scientist discovers a 
serum that gives him the proportional strength of an ant.  Because of his new power, 
the scientist is feared and ostracized by authorities." 
 
●
Late 1950s: Peter Parker at school 
In the late 1950s Kirby proposed a strip called "Chip Hardy" - a college freshman on 
a science scholarship. "Moose Mulligan, the campus jock, teased young Chip about 
why he didn't try out for football, instead of 'hiding behind a mess of test tubes'. 
Other students followed suit and mocked the youngster, labeling all science majors 
as "squares". Eventually, this taunting escalated into a physical confrontation 
between Moose and Hardy, with young Chip getting the better of it, mimicking exactly 
the character template and early relationship between Peter Parker, Flash 
Thompson, and the other school mates." 

●
Peter Parr 
At the same time Kirby created a character for another strip named 'Peter Parr'. 
●
1959: The Fly 
In 1959 Kirby and Simon created the Fly, who clings to walls, senses danger, and is 
super strong (he could also fly). "The first use of his powers is to bring to justice, a 
petty crook that had assaulted his guardian." When Kirby suggested his Spider-Man 
idea to Lee, Ditko pointed out that it was very similar to the Fly, and that caused Lee 
to ask for changes.  
 
●
1959: Spider Spry 
The Fly issue 1 had an enemy called "Spider Spry" with thin legs and a bulbous 
head, who "walks up thin silken lines, traps the Fly in a web-like net, and wears a 
colorful costume complete with a spider icon."  
●
1958 and 1959: The spider emblem 
In 1958 a Charlton comic that Ditko either drew or was familiar with had webbing 
patterns. They looked like the one on the Halloween costume, and later on 

Spider-Man. However, Spider-Man's spider image on his back looks more like a tick 
than a spider. Just like the emblem on Spider Spry. 
●
1959: Uncle Ben’s death 
In 1959 Kirby also created Lancelot Strong, aka The Shield, “an orphaned high 
school senior, and like Peter Parker, his surrogate parents were gentle, 
compassionate, and supportive.  His powers were the result of a scientific 
experiment, in this case, genetic engineering… While rushing off to test his 
new-found powers against a rampaging alien monster, The Shield, (Lancelot Strong), 
in his teen exuberance, ignores and leaves his best friend Spud in harm’s way.  After 
defeating the brute, the Shield returns to celebrate his triumph only to learn that the 
monster has killed Spud. The distraught Shield blames himself, and vows that it will 
never happen again." 
●
1961: The bookworm 
Tales to Astonish 22 had "The Crawling Creature"  by Kirby. "The hero is a high 
school student, a skinny, dorky, academic sort, laughed at by the jocks for his lack of 
athletic ability, and taunted by the girls. Typically, by the end of the story, it is the 
bookworm, not the jock who saves the world.  Even the visuals of the lead character 
strongly resemble the Peter Parker character as shown in AF#15." 
●
Lee and Ditko's earlier work 
For comparison, neither Lee nor Steve Ditko had anything like these parallels. 
●
1963: Kirby showed Lee 
In 1963, according to Lee, Goodman asked him for a new superhero. Lee had a 
meeting with Kirby. Kirby showed the Spider character to Lee, who liked it. 
●
Goodman's decision 
Martin Goodman reportedly approved the name and "ordinary teen" 
concept.[Footnote: According to Lee.] 
●
1963: The first six pages 
Kirby then drew the first six pages, and Ditko was going to ink it. Lee decided it 
looked too heroic, and asked Ditko to re-do it. Ditko says he only saw five pages from 
Kirby: they did not show Spider-Man after the transformation. 
●
The magic ring 
At some point someone said to drop Stan's idea of using a magic ring to gain the 
powers. The Kirby art that Ditko saw did not include the transformation so nobody 
knows who said this. 
●
1963: The cover 
Lee did not like Ditko's cover, so got Kirby to pencil the version they used. 
●
Lee's dialog 
Lee is definitely responsible for one thing: the dialog based on whatever Kirby or 
DItko gave him. 
●
The first three stories 
The first three issues (Amazing Fantasy 15, and Amazing Spider-Man 1 and 2) are 
full of elements from Kirby stories (see the Stan Taylor article) and typical Kirby 
elements like spaceships and aliens. The stories then settle down to the kind of 
cerebral plots that Ditko does on his own.  
●
Story “conferences” 
Ditko has written various letters and fascinating essays on the creation of 

Spider-Man, and on related topics such as when “bad memory” is just an excuse for 
lying.
 Ditko’s descriptions of the initial story conferences with Lee (before Lee 
118
stopped speaking to him) indicate that Ditko had to steer Lee away from bad 
decisions. For example, Lee wanted to use magic in the stories, but that would 
undermine the realistic world Ditko was building: The title’s entire strength was that 
ordinary readers could relate to everything. Ditko’s accounts of blocking Lee’s bad 
suggestions are like the stories from the White House about the presidential handlers 
using distraction techniques to move the focus away from the nuclear football. 
●
After those three issues 
Ditko then did the rest up to issue 38. Toward the end Ditko was unable to speak to 
Lee at all, but delivered the pages ready for dialog. This is important. Nobody 
disagrees that after issue 1 Spider-Man is Steve Ditko's baby. The character changed 
and evolved. Ditko was a creative genius. Spider-Man 1 to 36 is a tremendous story 
in its own right, with a beginning, middle and end (for his last two issues Ditko 
seemed to just "phone it in" as they say.) But "who created Spider-Man" is a different 
question, a very narrow question about who got him to the first issue. 
●
FOOM 
Ditko later claimed to have designed the iconic costume. But the official Marvel 
publication FOOM (issue 11, 1975) said it was Kirby. It was normal for Kirby to create 
character designs for other artists. 
●
The shoes 
Ditko's memory can be unreliable, just as anyone's can. He says he gave Spider-man 
soft soled shoes for climbing, and others have claimed that Kirby always used full 
boots. But issues 1-3 of Spider-Man show him with hard soled shoes. Meanwhile 
Kirby did not give hard shoes to his climbing characters (e.g. Spider Spry, Toad, 
Cobra, the Beast). 
●
Belt, but no shorts 
During this time Kirby's costumes tended to have belts and shorts. Ditko's costumes 
(e.g. Captain Atom, Vulture, Mysterio, Kraven) tended not to have either. Spider-Man 
has a belt (it's where he kept spare webbing) but not shorts, so this is inconclusive. 
●
1976 changed everything 
In 1976 the law on work for hire changed, so suddenly Kirby was able to sue if it 
could be proven that he created the characters. If he won, Marvel would have to pay 
millions of dollars (today, billions) in royalties owed. 
●
The missing costume proposal 
Jim Shooter says he saw Kirby's costume proposal in the 1970s, but since then it 
mysteriously disappeared. 
●
Lee claims credit 
In 1977 Lee published an article entitled "How I created Spider-Man".  
Where Lee deserves credit 
Lee definitely deserves credit for at least one thing: the Spider-Man dialog filled with self 
doubt. Self doubt is not a Kirby thing: Kirby is about fighting. Self-doubt is not a Ditko thing: 
Ditko is about Objectivism, absolute certainty. But self-doubt is definitely a Lee thing, and 
118 For where to find Ditko’s essays, etc., see the blog: http://ditko.blogspot.co.uk/p/ditko-book-in-print.html 

probably the reason he hides behind his larger than life image. Mark Evanier, who knew Lee 
for years, said: 
 
When you talk to Stan Lee, when he turns the Stan Lee act off, he’s a very decent human being who is 
chronically obsessed with himself. He’s very insecure. Those of us who have trouble being angry for 
some of the things that happened, it's because we saw the real human being there at times.
  
119
 
Lee’s traces his insecurity to seeing his father unemployed during the Great Depression: 
 
Seeing the demoralizing effect that his unemployment had on his spirit, making him feel that he just 
wasn’t needed, gave me a feeling I’ve never been able to shake. [...] It’s a feeling that the most 
important thing for a man is to have work to do, to be busy, to be needed.”
  
120
 
Kirby said Lee was running away from something: 
 
PITTS: Are you claiming that ego has run away with him? 
KIRBY: Not ego. Oh, there’s ego in it, but he’s running away from some deep pain or hurt and I don’t 
know what it is. I feel sympathy for him in that respect. I have an idea of what it is, but it’s not my right to 
analyze Stan Lee. 
 
121
 
So the self doubt came from Lee. And it resonated with readers, many of whom were young, 
insecure introverts. But the Spider-Man plots (from issues 4 to 38) seem to have been from 
Steve Ditko, and the original idea (without the self doubt) from Jack Kirby. 
Case study: Thor 97 
When we look closely at any issue of a Lee-Kirby book we see that Kirby wrote it, and Lee 
may have made changes, but those changes are always problematic. Take Thor in Journey 
into Mystery (JiM) issue 97 for example. JiM 97 was where the epic Thor story really begins, 
and had the first “Tales of Asgard”.  
Earth and Jane were by Lee; gods are by Kirby 
By comparing the Kirby issues and the non-Kirby issues, we can see that Kirby probably 
wanted to get rid of the Jane Foster romance subplot, and have Thor go cosmic much 
earlier. But Lee wanted to keep it down to Earth, based on Earth and with a human love 
interest. In JiM 97 Kirby finally got his way and the epic Thor story took off.  
 
It would take a hundred pages to prove what I just said, so let’s focus on just one small part 
to illustrate how the art and dialog pulled in opposite directions. If you have a copy of 
Journey into Mystery 97, turn to the two pages where Thor saw Odin and then Loki 
unleashed a fire demon. 
119 Why is Stan Lee’s Legacy in Question? Abraham Reisman, 
http://www.vulture.com/2016/02/stan-lees-universe-c-v-r.html  
120Excelsior! By Stan Lee, quoited at   http://www.vulture.com/2016/02/stan-lees-universe-c-v-r.html  
121 Jack Kirby interview. Leonard Pitts, http://kirbymuseum.org/blogs/effect/2012/08/06/19867-kirby-interview/ 

 
The key is the top right hand corner: in Lee’s dialog Loki referred to previously bringing the 
lava man to the surface, then forgetting about him. But we never saw that in the comic. Just 
before that Loki was frustrated that he had no way to attack Thor. Yet the coming of the lava 
man was all over Earth's newspapers for three pages. Having such a major event happen off 
screen is bad enough, but then having Loki immediately forget? Something was wrong here. 
But the art told a different story. Odin was not coming to discuss Thor's love life, he was 
coming to warn Thor of the lava man. Consider parallel scenes in the Fantastic Four: the 
Watcher warning the FF of Galactus, or later warning them of the surfer, or the cosmic Doom 
appearing as a warning in the thunder. This was a common Kirby theme. 
 
Previous issues (the Kirby issues, not the non-Kirby ones) shows a steady build up in power 
and threat. Everything points toward Ragnarok. The big war begins here. Note how the lava 
man appears gigantic in his first appearance (where we see just his feet) and at the end he 
grows to the size of a gigantic boulder to crush Thor. This is a gigantic event, but Lee’s 
dialog does not acknowledge that. 
Sky versus earth: stone men, lava men and Surtur 
Kirby was doing something epic here: throughout mythology we have the gods of the sky 
and the gods of under the Earth. Kirby had only shown us two non-human enemy races until 

now and they were both rock men. This was rock (Earth, below) versus gods (sky, above: 
with storms, rainbows, flying, bird's wings on the helmet, etc). Here we had a rock-fire 
demon arising from the depths of hell: the earth itself was finally beginning to convulse in 
preparation for Ragnarok.  
Surtur and Ragnarok 
The very first "Tales of Asgard" was in this issue, and reinforces the point. This issue was 
about Surtur, the flaming demon who waits underground for the end of the world. Yet by 
pushing the lava man story aside to make space for a silly "will they won't they" love story, 
the epic importance of this story was lost. The picture of Loki foreseeing Ragnarok became 
just Loki noticing some random fire. The whole story was destroyed by the dialog, in my 
opinion. 
The love story was just wrong 
The love story was not only silly, did not only take space away from the building story, but it 
went totally against the nature of this epic. Gods do not worry about marrying mortals; they 
take what they want and leave. Even if they wanted to it would be unethical to marry a 
human, Thor would have to put the planet at risk to save her. And it is absurd to think she 
could ever relate to him as an equal: Thor would be taking advantage of a desperate 
groupie. Plus, Thor was already married to Sif, a fact that anybody who was aware of the 
legends (enough to know about Balder, the rainbow bridge, etc) would know. 
 
The art makes more sense if this was Thor choosing his destiny: Blake left Jane behind, just 
as Shakespeare's Henry V left Falstaff behind. The characters' feelings were unfortunately 
obscured by Don Heck's inking: every face looked dramatically different from previous 
inkers, so it's hard to say if this reflected Kirby's pencils. (I can't help but think "Happy 
Hogan" whenever I see this Blake). But most likely, Blake looked happy because he (Blake) 
had found Jane a better job. Maybe we should give Lee credit for making Jane a stronger 
character, as the dialog has her initiating the change.. but is she strong, really? Her life 
revolved around men. At least Kirby's art was consistent with the original epics, where 
mortals' only role was to provide contrast with the gods. The whole Blake-Foster romance 
always felt out of place to me. 
Grasping the hammer 
Finally, see the frame where Thor grasped his hammer for strength. The dialog made him 
weak: we are supposed to believe that he felt weak because he could not have a woman 
who was so shallow that, despite secretly loving Blake, she immediately switched when Thor 
came along. That story might have fitted in Kirby's romance comics, which dealt with mortal 
weakness. But this was a story of gods! Thor was not weak!!  
 
Thor was grasping his hammer like that because he knew that the end was coming. He 
finally understood why he was chosen, and how he and all the gods must ultimately die in 
order to save Midgard, and why the hammer was the key to the memory of the gods 

surviving Ragnarok. But by shoe-horning in an unnecessary and foolish love story the 
timeless epic was diminished and ignored. In my opinion. 
When Kirby was away the story became small 
When Kirby is there the stories are big. When Kirby was not there the stories were small.  
 
In JiM 97 we saw the start of classic cosmic Thor: we had Odin! Loki! Fire demons from 
within the Earth! Thor preparing for the final great cosmic war! Then in JiM 98-100 Kirby was 
not there. The writer then invented third rate nobodies Cobra and Mr Hyde. We also saw 
Don Blake and Jane Foster in a domestic romance. Kirby avoided that (though the dialogue 
often tries to add it anyway). 
 
In JiM 101 when Kirby’s Thor returned he looked angry. He casually knocked a chunk out of 
an iron lamp post merely by brushing past it. As if to remind us that Kirby‘s Thor was a god, 
not like the weak Thor of the previous two issues. 
Changes to the art 
There are several places in early Thor where it looks like the art was changed after Kirby 
finished it, in order to change the story. How could this happen if the writer was telling Kirby 
what to draw? 
 
Take JiM 113 for example: at the end, Don Blake had a strange looking smile. Remove the 
dialogue and it is clear that this was not a Kirby smile, and Blake probably had a serious face 
as in every other panel. But the dialogue added a romance subplot, so somebody changed 
the frown into a smile. 

 
Two issues later, (JiM 115) there were several scenes where somebody drew Jane Foster 
squashed into gaps in the picture with a generic “scared female” pose. Kirby’s women were 
strong, his frames were well composed: this addition was not Kirby.  

 
When we remove the dialogue there is no reason for Jane to be present. In the previous 
issue the dialogue said she had been kidnapped, but the art showed no evidence of that. It 
looks like Kirby created a story without Jane, and the person adding the dialog wanted to 
change Kirby’s story to have Jane there. 
Who wrote Tales of Asgard? 
Just as Lee did not understand the science in Fantastic Four, he does not appear to know 
the legends in Tales of Asgard.  
 
I mentioned Lee’s desire to have Jane Foster as a love interest. But the writer of Tales of 
Asgard knows the legends, so he knows that Thor is already married, to Sif. Perhaps Lee 
chose to ignore that part? Then why have the legend of how Thor rescued Sif and carried 
her away on horseback (JiM 102)? That is how he chose his bride. Why would Lee choose 
that legend and also have Thor looking for romance on Earth? The art on its own (without 
the text) is closer to the original legends where Sif is Thor’s bride. Odin’s flashback in the 
main story seems to support that view. 

 
 
Another example is in JiM 114, the Apples of Idunna story. The previous and next stories are 
about Loki’s childhood. But Lee begins the apples story by saying "we interrupt our 
biographies in depth series of the life of Loki". If Lee knew the legends he would know that 
this legend is also about Loki. The original legend is about Loki and the giants, but for space 
reasons Tales of Asgard combined them in the form of Fenrir. Fenrir is the son of Loki 
(father) and a giant (mother) so he can represent them both.  But Lee seems unaware of 
this. 
 
This has just been a few brief examples: illustrations,not proof. But wherever we look we see 
the same themes: Lee does not understand the story he claims to be writing. When he writes 
alone his writing quality takes a huge drop. He adds sexism to the stories, but otherwise 
dumbs them down for children. 

Conclusion 
Once again we see that Kirby invents the characters, Kirby writes the stories, and Lee then 
comes along and tries to make sense of it. 
 
It follows that Kirby is a writer, not a co-writer. Kirby is the creator of Marvel, not “co-creator”. 
Lee was simply the editor. Lee chose to dumb down the stories and then gave himself the 
writing money.  
 
 

Did Lee add any value? 
 
For some peope Lee added great value: he made the stories, simpler, in later years he made 
them lighthearted and fun, and his instincts for editing perhaps added impact. For example, 
Lee is probably responsible for the structure of Fantastic Four 1 (big introduction, then intro, 
then Mole Man story) and many people find that works well. However, others feel that this 
does not offset his “dumbing down” and his changing of the stories. So, what was Lee’s  net 
contribution, the positives minus the negatives?  
 
Did Lee increase sales? 
Before Lee and Kirby got together, a Stan Lee comic typically sold 180,000 issues, and a 
Jack Kirby comic typically sold just over 300,000. Some Kirby comics sold a million copies 
per issue.
 
122
 
After ten years with Jack Kirby, when Kirby became the house style, and Kirby characters 
were the main earners, a Stan Lee comic typically sold just over 300,000. That is, they sold 
the same as a typical Jack Kirby comic. No more, no less. 
 
So the net difference between “Lee and Kirby” sales and “just Kirby” sales was zero. So for 
every person who was attracted by what Lee added, another person must have been 
repelled.  
 
I grew up with Marvel. I read Bullpen Bulletins, and heard rumours of “Marvel Zombies” who 
would buy anything with the name “Marvel” on it. So I was convinced that (1) Marvel was a 
huge success, and (2) Lee’s salesmanship and branding must be the reason. But the sales 
numbers do not support either claim.  
Lee created a successful company? 
By the end of the 1960s Lee made it sound like Marvel superheroes were a huge success. 
But privately it was a very different story.  
 
Comics had always been a cyclical business, and almost everybody in 1971 thought that superheroes 
must inevitably be on their way out again. That's why there was such a gold rush on to find the next big 
genre--sword-and-sorcery looked like it might be a contender, and there were a lot of new mystery 
(watered-down horror comics without much horror), war and western comics being churned out in this 
period. But the classic Marvel, Stan's Marvel, was still seen as something of a fad (even by Stan 
himself), and the common wisdom was that everybody was going to be doing something else very soon 
(possibly in another field entirely.)
  
123
 
122 See appendix 5 
123   Tom Brevoort, on his now defunct blog, 8 November 2010 

After Kirby left, Lee merely recycled Kirby plots for two years (e.g. Fantastic Four 103-125), 
and then Lee left as well. The superhero comics that were Lee’s speciality were declining 
fast. True, they were number two behind DC, but that was also true in the 1950s before the 
crisis, and the recovery can be traced to Kirby’s work. Any final success (decisively 
overtaking DC, the 1980s, the movies) happened when Lee was more absent than present. 
 
The claim that Lee’s personality helped in any way is hard to quantify. Back before the crisis 
of 1957, when Lee was almost invisible, and by his own admission his job was to produce 
very boring comics, the comics sold much better: up to 85 titles per month is some 
achievement, and while individual sales were low by industry standards the company was 
still one of America’s biggest comic publishers.  
Spider-Man sold better under Lee? 
At first glance, Spider-Man numbers might seem to support Lee’s position: Ditko left in 1966, 
then Lee had more influence, and the sales went up. Here are the sales figures:
 
124
1962: 126,000 (estimate)
 
125
1963: 190,000 (estimate)
 
126
1964: 240,000 (estimate)
 
127
1965: 280,000 (estimate)
 
128
1966: 340,000 
1967: 361,000 
1968: 373,000 
1969: 372,000 
1970: 322,000 
1971: 307,000 
1972: 288,000 
 
John Romita, the artist, said he provided the plots, but at least he was talking to Lee: Ditko 
and Lee simply never spoke after the first two dozen issues.
. So Lee had at least some 
129
input here. The numbers rose sharply under Ditko, until Lee and Romita took over, then rose 
slowly, then declined sharply. The continued small increase might be due to inertia, or due to 
124 Amazing Spider-Man Sales Figures,:  http://www.comichron.com/titlespotlights/amazingspiderman.html ; Comic 
Book Sales Figures for 1965,  http://www.comichron.com/yearlycomicssales/postaldata/1965.html ; for 1964 etc. 
change the last part of the URL or search on that site. 
125 Not every title reported its sales. Spider-Man first appeared in Amazing Fantasy 15 in 1962. The title was 
selling so badly that it was already slated for cancellation. Marvel’s lowest selling reported sales that year was 
Tales of Suspense at 126,000 
126 Amazing Spider-Man launched in 1963, when a  typical Marvel comic sold 190,000 or so.  
127 Marvel’s best selling reported sales were from Strange Tales (the Human Torch) at 215,000, Internal evidence 
suggests that Spider-Man sold better. This fits a straight line from the 1963 estimate to the 1966 number. 
128  Marvel’s best selling reported sales were from Journey into Mystery (Thor) at 233,000. Around this time 
Marvel was selling the rights to cartoons. The Fantastic Four and Spider-man got their own cartoons, indicating 
that they were the top sellers. This agrees with internal evidence in the comics. Rights to other characters (Thor, 
etc) were lumped together and sold as a block to a Canadian cartoon company. So again this fits a straight line 
from the 1963 estimate to the 1966 number. 
129 Steve Ditko’s letter, printed in Comic Book Marketplace #63, October 1998 

Lee, or due to Romita (the new art looked gorgeous). But none of the factors explain the 
sharp decline in 1970.  
 
There is an obvious explanation for an increase in sales in 1967 and a decline in 1970: the 
famous Spider-man cartoon aired on TV between those dates.  
 
 
 
The Spider-Man cartoon was highly memorable: its catchy music was still referenced in the 
movies a generation later. And unlike the Batman TV series, the cartoon was entirely in 
keeping with Lee’s comic, so could help sales. 
 
The fact that the sales increase was small, but the sales drop at the end was big, suggests 
that without the cartoon the sales would have been declining under Lee. 

Long running titles 
Despite the “no better than normal” sales and long term decline, this period did have one 
stand-out feature: The early “Lee-Kirby” titles are still selling today, after five or six hundred 
issues. What caused that? Was it Lee?  
 
Take a closer look. The six hit titles (Fantastic Four, Hulk, Spider-Man, Iron man, Avengers, 
and X-Men) all began between 1961 and 1963. Lee was editor with Kirby as freelancer from 
1958 to 1970, but those early years were different: it was not simply the collaboration. 
 
This graph shows long running titles at any point. Remember that the later titles are just the 
earlier titles still running: to find the key moments, find the steepest slope, then look back 
100 months (around 8 years)  
 
Long running titles are a special feature of (1) World War II, and (2) the years 1956-1963. 
Both were the periods of greatest economic and cultural change. A smaller bump is seen in 
titles that began in the late 1990s, the crash of the speculation bubble and start of the 
Internet: another period of great economic and cultural change when the industry was turned 
upside down again.  
  
Can Lee take credit for the 1956-1963 bump? No, because DC saw the same effect, but DC 
saw it first. In the period 1956-1964, DC introduced the new Flash, Justice League, Doom 
Patrol, and Teen Titans. Those titles are still successful today.  

 
 
The 1956-64 cultural shift wasn't just reflected in comics. We see the same in sci-fi TV 
shows, the closest thing we can get to superhero comics. While Star Trek was not until 1966, 
Roddenberry was trying to make it from 1964. Dr Who began in 1963, and both followed the 
highly influential Twilight Zone (1959-64). This period is when the biggest ideas began. 
 
 
 
All youth oriented culture saw the same effect: the biggest, longest running hits began in the 
period 1956-64. Take the music industry for example. The biggest names of all time 
appeared in those years: Elvis Presley (1956), the Beatles (1962), the Rolling Stones (1962), 
etc. 
 
 
We see a similar trend in movies. The much greater cost of movies means they are much 
slower to invest in new ideas, but the longest running and most successful movie franchise 
of all (James Bond) began in 1962.  
 
The major cultural winners were simply the first in a time of great change. Obviously they 
had to be natural winners anyway - a Beatles or a Kirby - but they were the first in a new 
race. That gave them a natural advantage over later contestants who might offer similar 

ideas and similar quality. And the longer they stuck around, the higher their brand 
awareness, so they gathered long term fans, merchandising, and eventually movies. 
 
So, what was Lee’s role in this crucial 1956-64 window? Kirby had the track record of top 
quality comics. He was the guy who was always starting new comics with new ideas. He 
arrived at Marvel in 1958, at the crucial moment. But Kirby was not allowed to start a new 
comic until 1961, toward the end of this short window in time. Far from creating hit comics, 
Lee may have simply held them back. 
“Marvel Zombies” 
There is another, less flattering theory for long running titles. That these particular comics 
lasted as long as they did because of Lee’s style. He dumbed down, and flattered the 
readers, and this attracted a needy group of Marvel Zombies. Then the first six or so titles 
lasted longest simply because after that the kids ran out of money.  
 
However, this “Marvel Zombie” theory does not explain why DC’s more traditional style also 
created long lasting titles that sold just as well. The numbers show that there was nothing 
special about what Lee did, Zombies or otherwise. The 1950s and early 1960s were just a 
very special time to be young. 
Lee and fandom 
It might be argued that Lee’s larger than life personality helped the fan community to grow. 
However, fan communities were growing in the 1960s in every other medium (TV, movies, 
music, etc) without Lee’s help.  
 
The comic fan industry was nurtured by DC before Lee got involved. The earliest major 
fanzine, Alter Ego, was originally going to be called “The JLA Subscriber” because it was 
inspired by The Justice League. The magazine was sent to a growing list of fans, and was 
encouraged and supported by DC editor Julius Schwartz.  
 
The DC letters pages did not have the frenzy of fake personality (pretending the comics were 
all written by one man, pretending the artists all worked in a bullpen, pretending everyone 
was friends) but instead they treated readers with respect and discussed matters as adults. 
And in the 1970s and 1980s it was DC who led the way with creators’ rights, not Marvel. 
 
Lee’s brand of self promotion encouraged a certain kind of fan. But as the numbers indicate, 
it discouraged another kind.  
Lee and name recognition 
It is sometimes claimed that Lee pioneered giving credit to named talent, through the use of 
credit boxes. But the comics themselves show that the opposite is true: the credit boxes 
were designed to  take credit away. 
  

For years, Joe Simon and Jack Kirby had routinely put their names on the front covers of 
their comics... 
 
...and over a decade before Lee began listing the names of others, EC regularly featured the 
artist’s signature on the opening splash. It was another forty years before mainstream 
comics caught up. 
 
When working for Lee, frequent Kirby inker Dick Ayers tried to sign Kirby + Ayers very 
discreetly on the cover and the splash page, but as noted before, Lee had their names 
painted over. Lee sometimes let a cover signature pass, sometimes didn’t. And sometimes a 
signature would later be changed to make it seem that it only referred to the art: the 
discussion on page 4 has the details. 
 

So rather than raising the profile of creators, Lee reduced their profile. Lee later used credit 
boxes inside the comics, but they were unreliable and misleading: they routinely listed 
himself at the top as writer when he had merely edited the dialog. To this day, most fans 
believe that Jack Kirby was only the artist, thanks to these boxes. 
 
How Marvel finally beat DC 
When Lee stepped away from the position he held since age 17, his comics were in the 
same position they were in the mid 1950s, before the twin crises knocked the company down 
and Kirby bought them back: second to DC. 
 
Both companies saw a gradual decline in sales across the 1970s, but Marvel gained a small 
lead around 1972, then bumped up in 1977 and again in 1978 and 1979. But  none of this 
was due to the quality of Marvel’s writing.  
1972: dirty tricks 
The biggest problem that comics faced in the early 1970s was that newsstands were 
replacing spinner racks because other products brought in more money. Why use valuable 
space for a 15 cent comic when the same space could have a dollar magazine and bring in 
ten times the profit? Comic companies knew that they needed to move to higher priced 
comics (either with more pages or better content). But nobody wanted to be the first to raise 
their prices: they all remembered what happened to Uncle Scrooge comics! But in 1971, 
Martin Goodman “made a handshake deal” with DC’s boss Carmine Infantino, so they would 
raise their prices and page counts together.
  
130
 
So the issues dated November 1971 jumped from 15c to 25c, with more pages. DC breathed 
a huge sigh of relief, and did the same. But the next month, Goodman immediately dropped 
to 20c. DC had invested heavily in extra paper, and they knew that low prices were killing 
newsstand sales, so they stuck with the higher prices and more pages for a few months. But 
the kids just saw that Marvel was cheaper. At the same time, Goodman gave the 
newsstands a bigger slice of the 5 cent rise, to make them more likely to stock Marvel 
instead of DC. This was the moment when Marvel decisively beat DC in sales. It was not due 
to the quality or otherwise of the product, but because Goodman was willing to shake on an 
agreement then shoot his partner in the back, even when it harmed the industry as a whole. 
130 “American Comic Book Chronicles: The 1970s” by Jason Sacks et al. p.36 
 

1977: Luck 
In the mid 1970s both Marvel and DC thought comics would die, due to the loss of spinner 
racks to more profitable products. But Marvel got lucky: Roy Thomas was friends with 
George Lucas, and wanted to publish a comic based on Star Wars. Stan Lee had turned the 
idea down. But Thomas managed to persuade him.
 The Star Wars Comic sold so well that 
131
it saved Marvel Comics. This is important. Marvel did not become number one due to the 
quality of its writing, as Jim Shooter admits: 
 
Many books, despite my best efforts to shore up the bottom were unreadable.  Not merely bad. 
Unreadable.  Almost all were less than they ought to be.  There were a few exceptions.  [...] However, 
what can’t be debated is that sales were bad and falling.  It was almost all newsstand sales then, by the 
way.  This was before the Direct Market was a significant factor.  The comics overall were breakeven at 
best. Upstairs, the cheesy non-comics magazine department was losing millions. It seemed like the 
company as a whole was in a death spiral.
 
132
 
Star Wars saved Marvel while DC continued to decline. So at that point Marvel was clearly 
the number 1 selling comics company, though it didn’t mean much. 
1978: DC shot itself in the foot 
Without Star Wars to help it, DC sales continued to slide. In 1978 the company decided to 
just close twelve of its titles overnight. This became known as it “The DC Implosion”. DC 
itself could see that the new Superman movie give them hope, but the people higher up in 
the parent company (Warner Brothers) never read comics and just decided to cut the less 
profitable titles. The result was that Marvel’s lead became even clearer.  
1979: DC shot itself in the other foot 
By far the most important factor in sales in the 1970s was not quality, but the decline of the 
newsstands. In 1979 comic speciality shops began to take over.
 It was a huge shake up. 
133
DC remembered that in the last huge shake up (1954 and 1957) they won by being extra 
cautious and letting others take the risks. So DC let Marvel invest in comic speciality shops, 
and planned to copy only if it worked.
 This proved disastrous for DC. For comic fans, 
134
Marvel was now way out in front.  
131 A really long time ago, Marvel played fast and loose with Star Wars, Tegan O'Neil, 
https://aux.avclub.com/a-really-long-time-ago-marvel-played-fast-and-loose-wi-1798286716 
132 Roy Thomas Saved Marvel, Jim Shooter, 
https://web.archive.org/web/20150912134444/http://www.jimshooter.com/2011/07/roy-thomas-saved-marvel.html 
133 When newsstands didn’t sell a comic they just returned it for a refund. This was expensive for the publisher. A 
speciality shop was different: it kept unsold comics and hoped to sell them later to collectors. In return for never 
sending comics back it got a better price. Convention organizer and distributor Phil Seuling arranged the first 
such deal in 1972. But in 1978 another distributor, Irjax, sued Marvel and DC, saying Seuling got special 
treatment, like getting his comics earlier. By 1979, Marvel and DC realised they either had to either stop helping 
speciality shops, or gamble their whole future on them. See “Comic Shop: The Retail Mavericks Who Gave Us a 
New Geek Culture” by Dan Gearino 
134 Gaining a Firm Control on the Direct Market, Chuck Rozanski, 
http://www.milehighcomics.com/tales/cbg116.html 

What was Lee’s role in Marvel’s success? 
The 1972 “dirty tricks” were due to Goodman, not Lee. The 1977 Star Wars license had been 
opposed by Lee. And Lee’s greatest contribution to the 1978 and 1979 success was that he 
got out of the way: DC was overly cautious because its management remembered the 
1950s. But all the old leadership (including Lee) had left Marvel, and it was led by younger 
people who were a little more ready to take risks. 
Lee and movies 
When Lee left the day to day running of comics in 1972, he spent that time time in 
Hollywood, working on deals. But the deals seldom came to anything, and any movies were 
generally poor. Lee was the public face of the movies, the one who was supposed to make 
deals, when the company made its most costly mistake: irretrievably selling the movie rights 
to the X-Men and Fantastic Four. 
 
135
 
Marvel’s movies did not become hits until the 2000s, when Lee was no longer directly 
involved. But they are still trying to undo the damage caused when he was there.  
 
It might also be argued that Lee’s publicity and movie cameos are now a net benefit to the 
company, but they may only appeal to people already predisposed to like the movies. I have 
heardpeople complain that the cameos are distracting, removing the necessary realism, but 
the belief may not be widespread. 
Did Lee help Kirby’s work improve? 
It might be claimed that, even if Kirby did the work, Lee somehow gave him the freedom to 
flourish. For example, Sequart's Richard Bensam writes:  
 
It’s astonishing to look back at FF #1 and then jump ahead to The Battle of the Baxter Building, the 
wedding of Reed and Sue, the introduction of the Inhumans and Galactus and the Silver Surfer, and that 
transformation takes place in just four years. Four years!"
 
136
 
However, this theory fails if we compare Kirby’s pre-Fantastic Four work. There were plenty 
of spectacular and choreographed battles in Captain America, plenty of weddings in Kirby’s 
romance comics, and plenty of majestic aliens in his monster comics. As for the art 
improving, as noted in the chapter on later Fantastic Four comics, the cosmic art in issue 7 
(and the dramatic alien scenes) are just as good as anything later. Yes, Kirby’s style evolved 
incrementally as always, but the real difference was that later Kirby had more space and a 
better inker. Kirby had used more space in his Captain America comics as well, with 
spectacular results. All Kirby ever needed was to be set free. 
 
135 “Captain Finance”: The Secret Hero Behind Marvel Studios, Kelly Konda, 
https://weminoredinfilm.com/2016/05/05/captain-finance-the-secret-hero-behind-marvel-studios/ 
136 Fantastic Four at 55: Talking With Sequart's Richard Bensam, Michael Brown 
http://comicbook.com/marvel/2016/11/25/fantastic-four-at-55-talking-with-sequarts-richard-bensam/ 

Kirby had more freedom by 1965 simply because the title was selling so well. But it was 
merely selling at normal Kirby levels. 
Lee’s long term legacy 
As argued throughout this book, Lee’s primary role was to dumb down stories. He attracted 
people who like simple stories and drove away people who like sophistication. At the time 
the net result was zero. But the long term result may have been to destroy the comics 
industry.  
 
Mainstream comics have been in decline since the 1960s. A “hit” comic now may sell just 
30,000 copies: fewer than one per large town in the USA. This decline is usually blamed on 
the rise of TV, video, games, etc: readers now have more choices.  
 
However, TV has not led to the death of the regular printed book. Why? 
 
Normal printed books survive because they offer something TV does not have: greater 
depth. People who are tired of dumbed down media can escape to a book. Books are mainly 
for adults. So books survive. 
 
But comics? While Lee would praise his young readers as being intelligent, he nevertheless 
produced a dumbed down product. Kirby produced a sophisticated product, and Lee 
dumbed it down. This is not to insult comics readers: even a genius might need mindless 
relaxation at times. But TV (and games, social media etc.) can provide mindless relaxation 
better than comics can. Lee’s dumbed down comics cannot compete with TV. 
 
Perhaps comics would have dumbed down even without Lee. But Lee’s principal influence is 
in dumbing down. Therefore, to the extent that Lee had any effect, it was to help destroy the 
long term future of comics.  
 

Appendices 
 
 

Appendix 1: Kirby the writer, pre 1961 
 
Many readers only know Kirby’s later prose, where he deals with huge concepts. Naturally 
this prose is information-dense and punchy, not like Lee’s smooth, simple style. But Kirby 
wrote plenty of simple, easy to read comics before 1961. This appendix has some examples. 
How to identify Kirby’s writing 
A writer can be identified by their distinctive style. This is the science of stylometry (Google 
it) and is used for identifying disputed documents. Martin O’Hearn applies this to comics: he 
discusses this in detail in his blog, “Who Created the Comic Books”, with numerous 
examples.
 And so, for example, he can confidently say that the Captain America stories 
137
credited to Otto Binder were completely rewritten by Kirby: the finished product was Kirby 
dialog, not Binder dialog.
  
138
 
Even if we don’t use formal methods, when we read enough of an author’s work we grow 
familiar with the tell-tale signs. Kirby stands out a mile! 
Kirby’s romance books 
The romance books (Young Love, Young Romance, etc) show Kirby’s ability to write simple 
yet compelling character-driven dialog. Though they were signed “Simon and Kirby”, classic 
Kirby phrases turn up again and again. It is very clear that the dialog is written by the same 
person who wrote the Fourth World comics twenty years later. Sometimes entire phrases are 
the same. For example, Aaron Noble noticed this example, from the introduction to “Hands 
off Lucy” in Young Romance 20: 
 
There are episodes in the lives of all of us which remain forever hidden shadows in the mind…on 
occasions, they drift like dark mists across our thoughts —to be fleetingly relived! 
 
Now compare this passage from New Gods 11: 
 
The moments are few when the shadows of deep concern creep across Darkseid’s granite visage —and 
the secrets hidden there begin to emerge—as if to retreat before great pain—! 
 
The Romance books typically start with an intense emotional description like that, before 
moving into the everyday dialog of the characters. Here’s are two sample pages, from Young 
137 For methods used, see Identifying the Writers, Martin O’Hearn, 
https://martinohearn.blogspot.co.uk/2011/07/identifying-writers.html ; For Kirby examples, see Who Created the 
Comic Books? Martin O’Hearn,  https://martinohearn.blogspot.co.uk/search/label/Kirby%20scripts  
138 “O'Hearn's fellow scholar Rich Morrissey said that O'Heran had a copy of Otto Binder's assignment log and 
that early Captain America stories known from the log to have been written by Binder had been so heavily 
rewritten by Kirby that the stories could not be identified as Binder's work using O'Hearn's stylometry method.” - 
Patrick Ford, on the Jack Kirby Dialogue Facebook group 

Romance 6. The whole story is available on the Comic Book Plus site
, along with dozens 
139
of other complete Kirby stories. See for yourself! 
: 
 
139 Young Romance v1 6, Prize, http://comicbookplus.com/?dlid=57915 

 
 
It’s richer than Lee dialog, but still easy to read. If you don’t think Kirby writes like that, try the 
next example: 
 

The Frog Prince 
The Frog Prince is a screenplay Kirby wrote in 1949 or 1950
, about a proud man who 
140
cannot stand it when his face is scarred (a forerunner of Kirby’s Dr Doom). Here’s part of an 
action scene: 
 
 
And here is a more domestic scene: 
 
140  For the full screenplay, see Jeremy Kirby’s book “Jack Kirby: A Personal Look” 

 
 
And here’s a descriptive passage, showing how Kirby handles character and emotion: 

 

Kirby writes sci-fi 
Next is a page from one of Kirby’s many sci-fi stories: it’s from “Alarming Tales”. Again you 
can read the whole thing on the Comic Book Plus site.
 I urge you to do so. Kirby is a 
141
brilliant writer! 
This story is about a post apocalyptic world inhabited by humanoid animals. This was a 
classic Kirby theme, most famously used in Kamandi.  
141 Alarming Tales #1, Harvey Comics,  http://comicbookplus.com/?dlid=16924  

 

Incidentally, note the underground setting, the small angry rat-man with a stick, and the map 
of tunnels on the wall. Look familiar? Glimpses of Kirby’s later Mole Man story (and this one 
ends with a nuclear bomb as well).  
Next is a page from a journey into a higher dimension, an idea Kirby would return to with the 
subspace portal (the negative zone entrance) in the Fantastic Four. Note Kirby’s lighthearted 
use of humour, something else that will figure in the Fantastic Four: the title is playing with 
the title of the 1955 movie “Love is a Many Splendored Thing”.  
Once again I urge you to read the whole story, and the whole issue, available online for free.
 Kirby’s writing is just wonderful! 
142
142 Alarming Tales #2, Harvey Comics, http://comicbookplus.com/?dlid=16918 

 

Conclusion: Kirby could do dialog too 
As these examples show, Kirby could write simply when he needed do. It wasn’t quite as 
simple as Lee’s, but it didn’t need to be. Children will make the effort if the story is rewarding, 
as Kirby’s sales demonstrate.
  
143
By 1970 Kirby knew that the average reader was a little older, so he adjusted his dialog 
accordingly. Kirby always challenged his readers with bigger ideas. And by the 1980s they 
were older still, so he produced rich poetic language like this example from Captain Victory. 
But in 1961 Kirby was writing for younger readers, so would have no trouble dialoguing the 
Fantastic Four. Kirby could write for all ages. 
143 Appendix 5 

 
 
 

Appendix 2: Lee's version of events 
 
Here is Lee’s story of how he created the Fantastic Four, from his “Origins of Marvel 
Comics”: 
 
"Martin [Goodman, the publisher, and Stan's uncle by marriage] mentioned that he had noticed one of 
the titles published by National Comics seemed to be selling better than most. It was a book called The 
[sic] Justice League of America and it was composed of a team of superheroes  . . . 'if the Justice 
League is selling', spoke he, 'why don't we put out a comic book that features a team of superheroes?'" 
Joan [Stan's wife] was commenting about the fact that after 20 years of producing comics I was still 
writing television material, advertising copy, and newspaper features in my spare time. She wondered 
why I didn't put as much effort and creativity into the comics as I seemed to be putting into my other 
freelance endeavors. . . . [her] little dissertation made me suddenly realize that it was time to start 
concentrating on what I was doing — to carve a real career for myself in the nowhere world of comic 
books." 
"For just this once, I would do the type of story I myself would enjoy reading.... And the characters would 
be the kind of characters I could personally relate to: they'd be flesh and blood, they'd have their faults 
and foibles, they'd be fallible and feisty, and — most important of all — inside their colorful, costumed 
booties they'd still have feet of clay."  
"After kicking it around with Martin and Jack for a while, I decided to call our quaint quartet The Fantastic 
Four.  I wrote a detailed first synopsis for Jack to follow, and the rest is history."
 
144
 
Lee often retold that story, with more details: 
 
"It was now 1960. By now, I really wanted to leave, because one edict that my publisher had was that 
the stories had to be geared towards young readers; or unintelligent older readers. We weren't 
supposed to use words of more than two syllables, and we had to have simple plots; no continuing 
stories, because he felt our readers weren't smart enough to remember from month to month where they 
had left off. It was really boring. 
"In either '60 or '61 I said to my wife, Joanie, "This time, I'm really going to leave." She said, "Well, if 
you're determined to leave, why don't you first do a book or two the way you wanted to, no matter what 
the publisher says? The worst that can happen is that he'll fire you. You won't care, because you want to 
leave, but at least you'll get it out of your system." 
"It happened that; at that time; my publisher had been playing golf with Jack Liebowitz, who was one of 
the bosses at DC comics; which in those days was called National Comics. Jack Liebowitz had told him 
that he had a magazine called The Justice League, which was selling very well, and it was a group of 
super-heroes. So Martin came to me and he said, "Hey Stan... Why don't you do a group of 
super-heroes?" Again, this business of following the trend. 
"I figured, "All right, but this time I'm going to do it my way." Instead of the typical heroes that have secret 
identities and nobody knows who they are, I did The Fantastic Four; where everybody knew who they 
were. And instead of the girlfriend who doesn't know that the hero is so-and-so, I had the girl in the 
series actually be engaged to the hero, and she was a heroine; she was part of the team. Instead of the 
typical junior sidekick, I had a teenager who was also the brother of the heroine; and the hero would 
soon marry the heroine, so they would be brothers-in-law. The fourth member of the team was a 
monstrous-looking guy, called The Thing, which was not a typical super-hero type in those days. I also 
144  Stan Lee, 1974, "Origins of Marvel Comics" 
 

tried to give them fairly realistic dialogue, and I didn't have them wear colorful costumes. I always felt 
that if I had super-power, I wouldn't immediately run out to the store and buy a costume. 
"Somehow or other, the book caught on." 
 
145
 
Is the story real? Readers with good memories will recall a similar claim by Lee, written back 
in 1947, called "Secrets behind the comics". In it, Lee claimed that Captain America was the 
result of Martin Goodman's foresight and genius. Even though Goodman simply bought a 
book that was already created by Joe Simon and Jack Kirby. So perhaps we should look 
again at Stan's claims. 
Lee’s memory 
Lee is famous for his bad memory. E.g. 
 
"My memory is not the best,"  
 
"I have the worst memory in the world,"  
 
“Obviously my memory is wrong.”
 
146
 
This is not a new thing: 
 
"I even had a bad memory when I was young. I'd call him 'Bob Banner' instead of 'Bruce Banner,' etc. I 
hadda give out a heap of no-prizes!"
 
147
Does Lee always tell the truth?  
A cynic might point out that by “bad memory” Lee means “I do not tell the truth.” Here are 
some examples: 
1. 
For years Lee told the story of how he got his first job in comics by answering a newspaper 
ad. When confronted with evidence that actually his uncle got him the job, Lee admitted:  
 
I've been saying this [classified-ad] story for years, but apparently it isn't so. And I can't remember 
because I['ve] said it so long now that I believe it..
 
148
 
145  Stan Lee’s 2000 interview with Kenneth Plume 
146  http://twomorrows.com/comicbookartist/articles/02stanroy.html 
147  Stan Lee, on Twitter. https://twitter.com/therealstanlee/status/5997120542 
148  See Joe Simon's 1990 autobiography, "The Comic Book Makers" 

2. 
Readers may also recall Lee's claim (in the famous 1966 newspaper interview) that he won 
the Herald Tribune competition three times. That claim has been thoroughly investigated and 
found to be false.
  
149
3. 
Sometimes Lee’s memories cannot be checked, but are just highly unlikely if not physically 
impossible. For example: 
 
I was a show-off, in my early twenties, as I look back at it. What I would do was dictate two or three 
stories at a time. I'd quickly dictate a page of one story to one girl, and while she was transcribing it. I'd 
dictate a page of another story to another girl, and then maybe a third one to a third girl. I had this great 
feeling of power, that I was keeping three secretaries busy with three stories, and I knew that 
occasionally people were watching—and I was so proud.
  
150
 
A good secretary can type at least 60 words per minute, often more. People talk at around 
140 words per minute, and a fast novelist would expect to produce 1500 words per day, or 
10 minutes of good quality finished work in 8 hours.
  If Lee’s story is true, then it is false: 
151
because Lee could not be creating usable stories that way. If he really did dictate at such a 
speed, any useable results would have to come from the secretaries themselves. 
4. 
Even today, Lee  “remembers” things for their effect rather than their accuracy. For example, 
at the 2017 D23 expo, Lee was given the DIsney Legends award. Yes, he is very old, but 
had plenty of time to prepare his speech, and plenty of money to have a secretary check the 
facts. He spoke about how, as a penniless "kid of eight or ten", he wanted to buy the book 
“The Art of Walt Disney”. However, The Art of Walt Disney was not published until 1942, the 
year when Lee turned 20, and had been making a good living in his uncle’s company for 
three years. Kirby’s Captain America had debuted the year before, selling a million copies an 
issue, so Lee, as editor, was neither “penniless” nor a “kid of eight or ten”. 
5. 
Lee’s story about creating the Fantastic Four seems to be another example of a fabricated 
memory. Let us examine the claims, one by one. 
Lee wanted to quit? 
This part is supported by the surrounding evidence, but not quite the way Lee tells it. Rather 
than Lee being a TV and newspaper writer who could choose other jobs, Lee was a 
149 "Stan Lee and the Rise and Fall of the American Comic Book" p.6 
150 Stan Lee: Conversations, page 61 
151 http://thewritepractice.com/how-fast/ 

desperate man. Lee had run his uncle's comics since he left school, with a business model 
of copying other people's ideas. When the comics business slumped in the 1950s (largely 
due to Fredric Wertham) his uncle's comics lost their distributor and almost collapsed. Dick 
Ayers recalls:  
 
Things started to get really bad in 1958. One day when I went in Stan looked at me and said, “Gee whiz, 
my uncle goes by and he doesn’t even say hello to me.” He meant Martin Goodman. And he proceeds 
to tell me, “You know, it’s like a sinking ship and we’re the rats, and we’ve got to get off.” When I told 
Stan I was going to work for the post office, he said, “Before you do that let me send you something that 
you’ll ink.”
 
152
 
Lee could be a nice guy. He wanted to help those around him who were losing their jobs. But 
he was in a very weak position himself. 
 
"I was writing television material television material, 
advertising copy, and newspaper features" 
This quote implies that Lee was a successful writer. But when we look closer it tells the 
opposite story. In danger of losing his job, Lee tried creating a newspaper strip, called Willie 
Lumpkin. That was for "Publishers Syndicate", "a relatively small outfit" and "1960 was the 
only year the syndicate advertised it to potential buyers".
  
153
 
A few newspapers carried it for a while, but the last one stopped after 18 months. I can't find 
any other evidence of Lee writing either "television material", "advertising copy", or 
"newspaper features". Perhaps he sent off scripts, or did the odd job for his uncle's 
publications. But when in the 1970s he tried selling scripts he was generally unsuccessful, 
despite his fame from Marvel that opened doors and given him free publicity. Those doors 
opened, they saw the quality of his work, and the doors closed again. 
The golf game with Jack Liebowitz? 
Comics historian Michael Uslan has researched this and it simply did not happen. Jack 
Liebowitz did not play golf. It was suggested that maybe Lee meant Irwin Donenfeld, but that 
didn't happen either. Could it be somebody else? Maybe, but why would you play golf with 
your direct competitor, and then give him your most valuable trade secrets, your sales 
figures? Goodman relied on copying trends, so he would have inside information from 
somewhere, but probably not golf. 
The Justice League as motivation? 
Fans sometimes point to a faint similarity between the cover of Brave and Bold 28 (the first 
Justice League comic) and Fantastic Four 1. However, there is a much closer comparison 
152 Dick ayers, interviewed in Alter Ego V3 No31 
153 http://www.toonopedia.com/wililump.htm 

with several Kirby covers and splash pages of the same time: see for example Kirby’s splash 
page in Journey into Mystery 58, which is almost identical. 
 
If Goodman had been inspired by Justice League then the rational response would be to 
make a team out of the biggest hitters you have: bring back Captain America, the Torch and 
Sub-Mariner on a team. Yet when the Sub-Mariner did come back he was as an enemy. And 
if Goodman was afraid of being too obvious (since National distributed his comics), and 
wanted to phase in the big hitters quietly, at least have a team that is capable of having new 
members! 
They wanted a team book? 
Lee claimed that Goodman knew that a team of superheroes would sell, thanks to the 
Justice League. But that logic makes no sense, and this is why: 
 
The new Justice League averaged 335,000 sales, but The Flash was not far behind at 
305,000, and Kirby’s old comic The Fly was not far behind that. And The Flash had been 
selling better and better for two years at that point. We know that Lee was aware of the Flash 
because on page 1 of Fantastic Four 1 Lee called New York “Central City”, the Flash’s city. 
It’s like calling it “Metropolis” or “Gotham”: it indicates what you’ve been reading.  
 
But if Goodman was looking at comic sales, wait, who is that in  eight  of the top ten spots, 
dwarfing Justice League’s sales? Superman and Batman.
 
154
 
So it's a safe bet that Justice League's success was simply due to having both Superman 
and Batman. Yet Justice League’s sales were  lower  than Superman and Batman-related 
solo books (Lois Lane etc.). So being a team was actually  hurting  sales: their solo tales sold 
better. 
 
They wanted superheroes? 
The Fantastic Four were superheroes, but not Justice League-type superheroes. Justice 
League stories relied heavily on superpowers. Early Fantastic Four stories did not. Those 
Fantastic Four stories were more like Challengers-type superheroes: the main purpose of 
the powers was simply for Ben to be a tragic figure. All of the first eight stories could easily 
have taken place without any powers at all: 
 
FF 1: the Mole Man story was apparently not a superhero story, and only had superpowers 
added later: they could easily be removed and the story still works. 
FF 2: the Skrull crisis is solved by Reed showing photos from FF 1 (see below) 
FF 3: the Miracle Man crisis is solved by dazzling the enemy. A bright flash light would have 
done 
154  http://www.comic hron.com/yearlycomicss…/postaldata/1961.html 

FF 4: the Namor crisis is solved by explosives. A hundred kilos of TNT would have done the 
job, if placed correctly (a single kilo, carefully placed, is enough to destroy a car). As an 
ex-Army man, Kirby would know that a single soldier could carry that: the oversized bomb 
was just so The Thing had something to do. 
FF 5: the Dr Doom crisis is solved by sneaking up on Doom when he was busy and looking 
the other way. So invisibility was not needed. (At this time Sue could not make other objects 
invisible, so Doom would have seen the ropes anyway.) 
FF 6: the space crisis was solved by Namor's presence: the FF were bystanders. 
FF 7: the alien crisis was solved by Reed's intelligence, not his stretching. 
FF 8: the Puppet Master crisis is solved by Alicia, not the team. 
 
The powers only become important from issue 9, when it appears that Lee demanded a 
lighter, more conventional book from Kirby. 
 
FF 9: each member uses their powers to escape a danger designed to stop them. Jack is 
deliberately making the powers important to the plot for the first time. 
FF 10: Sue defeats the pseudo-Doom with her powers, then the Torch tricks him with his 
powers, then the Thing stops him getting away by using his strength. 
FF 11: both stories are designed to show off their powers. 
FF 12: The Thing versus The Hulk 
FF 13: fighting another superpowered team. And so on. 
The early stories was about a team of adventurers, like the Challengers, with superpowers 
as an unnecessary add-on, a completely different concept from Justice League. 
 
Lee discussed it with Jack first 
Lee wrote: "After kicking it around with Martin and Jack for a while”. Note the  “and Jack” , 
This is the one part that agrees with all the evidence: Lee discussed the possibilities with 
Jack Kirby "for a while" before deciding anything. This explains why all the ideas that people 
like can be traced to Kirby. 
Sue was engaged? 
Lee said, "I had the girl in the series actually be engaged to the hero". It is true that in FF 1 
Stan's dialog calls her Reed's fiancée. But that is contradicted by both the art and the later 
story. The art shows her to be an active part of the planning team, and so she joins the crew 
on her own merits: rather than Lee raising the profile of women he reduces her to going into 
space just because she is Reed's girlfriend. Once Kirby left, Sue fainted and had to be 
rescued in almost every issue written by Lee. 
Lee disliked simple plots? 
Lee said, "I really wanted to leave, because one edict that my publisher had was that the 
stories had to be geared towards young readers; or unintelligent older readers. We weren't 
supposed to use words of more than two syllables, and we had to have simple plots; no 

continuing stories, because he felt our readers weren't smart enough to remember from 
month to month where they had left off. It was really boring."  
 
If Lee disliked aiming stories at children, why did he aim the Fantastic Four at children? And 
if Lee disliked “simple plots” why, when given the choice of any story in the world, did he 
choose to create Willie Lumpkin?  
 
Compare Lee’s story with one by Kirby at around the same time. Lee disliked simple plots? 
Sure... 
 

 
 
 
 

Lee disliked secret identities? 
Lee said, "Instead of the typical heroes that have secret identities and nobody knows who 
they are, I did The Fantastic Four; where everybody knew who they were."  
 
Then why did Lee's dialog add several references to secret hideouts? 
 
 
Why, in Strange Tales 101 (published the same month as Fantastic Four 7) did Johnny 
Storm have a secret identity? 
 
Why did Lee give (or allow) the Hulk to have a secret identity? And Thor. And Spider-Man. 
And pretty much everybody else? For a man who disliked secret identities he sure used a lot 
of them. 
Lee disliked costumes? 
Lee said, "I didn't have them wear colorful costumes. I always felt that if I had super-power, I 
wouldn't immediately run out to the store and buy a costume." Yet by issue 3 they had 
costumes. 
 
Lee’s explanation for costumes is that fans demanded them. But issue 3 was too early for a 
large amount of fan feedback, due to the time lag between writing, printing and distributing. 
That issue did had the first letters page, but at least two of the letters were fake, which 
suggests how few real letters they had received: 

 
(“S. Brodsky" would be Sol Brodsky the production manager, who managed to list all the 
company's products in his letter. “Unsigned" uses “heckuva”, a distinctive Lee word, and his 
letter is suspiciously like something Lee would write.) 
 
Two months later, issue 4’s letters page still had at least one fake letter, and possibly 
several. Again this indicates that there still wasn’t much feedback at this point. 
 
 
(“S Goldberg“ would be Stan Goldberg,  Marvel artist and colourist. Jim Moony, Hollywood” 
sounds suspiciously like DC artist Jim Mooney of Hollywood who would soon come to work 
for Marvel.) 
 
None of these letters asked for costumes. If Lee disliked the idea of costumes why would he 
go ahead with it? And why did he then give every later superhero a costume? 
 
Lee did it “his way”? 
The core of the matter is that Lee decided to suddenly write great stories. Which is 
something he had never done before or since. He spent his life copying whatever kind of 
comic was already popular, so he was very good at writing quickly and creating passable 
stories. He was good at easy to read dialog and over-selling. But he had zero track record of 
creating anything successful, either before or since. Lee's list of original creations before 
1961 includes... well, Willie Lumpkin. A gentle humour that didn't sell particularly well or for 
very long. And that's about it.  Meanwhile Kirby had created or co-created Captain America, 
the entire romance genre, original titles about dreams, war, space, westerns, pretty much 
anything you can imagine.  
 
And where is Lee's track record after he left Marvel? We have Stripperella, and... that's 
about the only memorable one. But Jack Kirby continued creating original characters that still 
sell today: Darkseid, OMAC, Mr Miracle, Kamandi, Eternals, and many many more. How 

likely is it that Lee had a sudden and once-only flash of inspiration when he was around 
Kirby (or Steve Ditko) and not at any other time? 
 
“The rest is history”? 
This phrase implies that these events were special, from Lee, and that led to greatness. That 
is a misleading partial history at best.  
 
Lee’s efforts in 1961 were not special - that is, not unique. Seven years earlier, in 1954, Lee 
already tried superheroes. Between 1954 and 1955, Goodman tried to revive their top selling 
superheroes, Captain America, the Submariner and the Human Torch. Goodman and Lee 
had just as much reason to try hard, to commission or write the best possible material, 
because of the crisis of 1954. They desperately needed a hit! But they didn’t have Kirby 
then, and their superhero revival failed.
 
155
 
As for the rest being history, 1954 was not the only time Lee failed at superheroes. It 
happened again after Kirby left in the early 1970s. Superhero sales fell, which is why Marvel 
began trying non-superheroes again: Conan, Jungle Action, Dracula, War of the Worlds, 
Night Nurse, etc. The only times Lee had a hit with superheroes were 1941 and 1961, when 
Jack Kirby produced the comics. When Kirby left, sales declined.
  
156
 
 
155 Perhaps we could blame the 1954 crisis for Lee’s earlier failed attempt, because after all, Kirby’s Mainline 
comics also failed soon after. But Mainline failed because it could not get distribution. Before 1967 Lee had good 
distribution, plus he could promote the new comics in his numerous other comics (whereas readers had little 
chance to hear about Mainline). Lee continued to produce other comics, so that was not the problem. Yet his 
1954-55 superhero titles did not sell. So we can only attribute this to readers not wanting Lee’s superheroes.  
156 Superheroes sold well again in the 1980s, and had success with movies in the 2000s, but these were almost 
all Kirby creations. Marvel’s success is always a measure of how well it manages Kirby’s ideas. 

Appendix 3: Lee’s reputation 
Before 1960 
Lee’s job was to copy other people’s ideas. Martin Goodman would see a comics that sold 
well, and tell Lee to produce something based on it, as cheaply as possible. Lee would then 
hire writers and artists. For example: 
 
●
Kirby had a hit with “Young Romance”, so Lee was told to produce “My Romance”. 
Lee’s version failed after three issues. 
●
EC had hits with “Weird Fantasy”, “Weird Science” and “Two Fisted Tales”, So Lee 
was told to change Captain America into “Captain America’s Weird Tales”. This failed 
after two issues. 
●
Dell had a hit with “Little Lulu”, so Lee produced “Little Lizzie”. It lasted five issues. 
●
Chic Young had a hit with “Blondie”, so Lee produced “Rusty.” It lasted almost two 
years. 
●
Harvey had a hit with “Casper The Friendly Ghost”, so Lee produced “Homer the 
Happy Ghost”. This lasted three years, which made it a hit for Lee. But a Lee “hit” 
typically sold 180,000 issues, whereas an average comic from another publisher 
would sell around 300,000. 
Daniel Keyes, acclaimed author of “Flowers for Algernon”, recalls working for Lee years 
earlier.  
Stan Lee was a lanky shy young man who let his editors deal with the scriptwriters, cartoonists, and 
lettering crew. Writers turned in plot synopses, Stan read them, and as a matter of course, would accept 
one or two from each of the regulars he referred to as his "stable." As one of his front men, I would pass 
along comments and criticism. ... Because of my experience editing Marvel and because I'd sold a few 
science fiction stories by then, Stan allowed me to specialize in the horror, fantasy, suspense, and 
science fiction comic books. Naturally, I began submitting story ideas, getting freelance assignments, 
and supplementing my salary by writing scripts on my own time.
 
157
When asked if Lee wrote comics at the time, Keyes replied 
Not to my knowledge. He edited, I guess. He was a businessman, as far as I was concerned. And a shy 
businessman is almost an oxymoron. I’ve never thought of Stan as a writer at all. So that surprises me. 
Of course, he might have been turning in comics for a few extra bucks, doing it under pen names so that 
Martin Goodman wouldn’t know about it. I never thought of Stan as a writer. He says that he created 
Spider-Man. I never thought of him as a creative person. It could be that one of the writers created it and 
sent in a synopsis. And it got picked up. But of course he’s become a multi-millionaire for that stuff.
 
158
157  Keyes, “Algernon, Charlie, and I: A Writer's Journey” 2004 edition, p.79 
158 Keyes, i nterview in Alter-Ego #13, 2002.  

When asked about this quote, Lee said he could not remember ever seeing Keyes. However, 
Lee admits to having an extremely bad memory (see appendix 2). 
After 1960 
Among his fans, Lee is generally beloved. He told them that he created their favourite 
characters. He told readers that they were very intelligent. He used self deprecating humour. 
No wonder fans loved him! 
Among people he paid properly, he is generally respected. If a writer is paid to write, he is 
happy. If an artist is paid to draw, he is happy. 
But others in the industry knew him as somebody who would sign his name on other 
people’s work. For example,when legendary artist Wally Wood worked on Daredevil, he said 
he received the same treatment as Kirby: he wrote and drew Daredevil, but was only paid for 
the art. He left Marvel after one year. He later wrote,  
I resent guys like Stan Lee more than I can say! He’s my one reason for living… I want to see that 
no-talent bum get his.
 
159
Steve Ditko had a similar view: he was “boiling mad” for the same reason. That was why 
Ditko left:  
Dick Giordano recalled visiting Ditko at his studio and he was "boiling mad," according to an interview 
with Giordano in Comic Book Artist #9 (August 2000, pg. 42). "The dispute was, he thought he was 
writing Spider-Man, but Stan was getting the credit.”
  
160
Artist Joe Orlando (who later became vice-president of DC comics) didn’t mind plotting the 
comics for nothing. But he resented Lee then making him do extra artwork for nothing. When 
he complained he got no more work. Mark Evanier explained: 
Orlando said that on the Daredevil issues he did, he had to draw 25-30 pages to get 20 that Stan would 
accept, and the page rate wasn’t that wonderful for 20 in the first place. He finally refused to do redraws 
on a Giant-Man story without additional pay because, as he put it, “I drew what Stan told me to draw and 
then he demanded I erase half of it and draw something else.” That was his last Marvel job.
 
161
159 In a letter to John Hitchcock, a fan. 
160 From the Ditko FAQ at the United Fanzine Organization 
161 Mark Evanier (Kirby’s biographer), on social media 

The November 1966 issue of Sick Magazine (a competitor to Mad) contained a parody of 
“The Marvel Age of Comics” called “The New Age of Comics” written by Joe Simon. In it, a 
publisher called “Stan Me” signs every single book “written by Stan Me” even though other 
people write them.  
 
The November 1968 issue of DC’s “Angel and the Ape” contained a character called “Stan 
Bragg” (he and his assistant were drawn to look like Lee and his assistant Roy Thomas, 
though the likenesses were reversed). Stan Bragg spoke like Stan Lee, and signed his name 
on other people’s work. 

 
The February 1972 issue of Mister Miracle, by Kirby, contained  “Funky Flashman” and his 
assistant “Houseroy”, modelled on Lee and his assistant Roy Thomas.. 
 
Again the topic was getting his money from other people’s work. 

 
Today the idea that Lee signs his name on others’ work is no longer controversial. Since 
1972 Marvel comics had “Stan Lee presents” even though he did not claim to be the writer. 

 
Lee’s name now appears as “executive producer” on movies that he apparently did little or 
nothing to produce.  
 
Signing his name on other people’s work is just what he does. 
 
 

Appendix 4: The alleged "scripts" 
 
Lee described how he worked with Kirby. Kirby came up with most of the ideas: 
 
 
That interview was published in 1968,
 but the copyrights indicate it may have been given 
162
in 1967. 
 
In the same interview Lee said he would tape record these plotting meetings for someone 
else to type up: 
162  Stan Lee Interview in “Castle of Frankenstein” 12, 1968. The images say “copyright 1967” so the interview 
may have taken place in that year. 
“http://kirbymuseum.org/blogs/dynamics/2012/05/08/stan-lee-interview-from-castle-of-frankenstein-12-1968/ 

 
 
This is normal practice in any business: a meeting with consequences should leave a paper 
trail.  
 
Note that Lee found it hard to get the recordings typed. So very few early documents survive. 
Fans asked for them, but usually without success, as indicated in Fantastic Four 13:. 
 
 
 
In 1964, Jerry Bails, the most persistent fan of all (grandaddy of fandom and founder of Alter 
Ego) asked Lee for a “script” and Lee was eventually able to find one. But it was almost 
three years old. In total only three such documents have ever been found. 

Lee may have changed the documents 
Lee has a history of self promotion, including making false claims
 and changing historical 
163
documents
 so it is possible he further tweaked these documents to make his own role look 
164
more important. 
Document 1 (issue 1) 
The most famous of the three documents concerns issue 1.
 It describes what is essentially 
165
the origin from Kirby’s recent Challengers of the Unknown, plus the flame, invisibility, size 
and strength powers from Challengers issue 3, and the space race plot from Kirby’s recent 
“Race to the Moon” and “Sky Masters” comics. It is divided into chapters, something Kirby 
generally did but Leedid not. This supports the previous quote, that Kirby came up with most 
of his plots.  
 
The document says it covers 11 pages, but was only 5 in the final version. If this describes 
Lee’s understanding of the issue then Kirby must have come up with the remaining 20 pages 
without consulting with Lee. 
 
As Lee said, Kirby didn’t need a plot, so this document would be for Lee’s use when adding 
the final dialog. Kirby says he never saw it. 
 
GROTH: Stan says he conceptualized virtually everything in The Fantastic Four — that he came up with 
all the characters. And then he said that he wrote a detailed synopsis for Jack to follow. 
ROZ KIRBY: I’ve never seen anything. 
KIRBY: I’ve never seen it, and of course I would say that’s an outright lie.
 
166
Document 2 (issue 8) 
The “script” for issue 8
 does not include the ending, which comes from an earlier Kirby 
167
story.
 The document reads like rough notes, not a polished script,
 and contains plot 
168
169
holes that suggest Lee was making hurried notes.
 There are indications that Lee did not 
170
163  See appendix 2 
164  In the discussion of page 4 (on who created the monster comics) we saw how Lee or his representatives 
painted over the Kirby/Ayers signatures. When those signatures survived, years later Lee (or his representatives) 
added “art by” in the same handwriting, to make it seem that Kirby and Ayers were only claiming they did the art. 
165 Fantastic Four 1 Synopsis, http://kirbymuseum.org/blogs/dynamics/2011/03/14/ff-1-synopsis/  
166,Jack Kirby Interview, http://www.tcj.com/jack-kirby-interview/6/ 
167 As printed in Jerry Bail’s fanzine, Alter Ego” issue 2, dated November 1964. The full synopsis is reprinted half 
way through this blog post: 
http://galaxybeingsmavericlions.blogspot.co.uk/2008/08/true-origin-of-fantastic-four.html 
168 "Voodoo on 10th Ave." from Black Magic issue 4. 
169 The issue 1 synopsis used complete sentences, but this one does not. As if this was written quickly. The 
previous synopsis has sentences that make sense. But this one contains lines like "people stare at invisible gal 
talking to Thing". Presumably he meant “stare at  Thing” or “stare at the space where the Thing is looking” but 
this works as a quick summary.  
170 For example, the document never says how the Puppet master controls people. The person who created the 
plot would not miss that out! It does appear in Kirby’s art but is missing from Lee’s notes. 

like the plot,
 and did not understand it.
 So this is most likely some notes that Lee made 
171
172
while Kirby described his story. 
Document 3 (issue 57) 
The “script” for issue 57
 is very brief, not even a plot. It effectively says little more than 
173
“meet the most popular villain”. This supports Lee’s earlier description of how plots were 
created and how Kirby did most of it. 
The newspaper interview (issue 55) 
In addition to the three documents we have a newspaper article that appeared to show Lee 
telling Kirby what to do.
 Lee first made himself sound good by making up a story about 
174
winning writing competitions (it never happened).
 In contrast, Kirby was depicted as 
175
looking old and tired. The reporter apparently did not know that Kirby routinely worked 
through the night to create the stories, so had to come to the interview with very little sleep. 
Lee put on a good show, but his words indicate he did not know what was in the comic: 
 
"The Silver Surfer has been somewhere out in space since he helped the F.F. stop Galactus 
from destroying Earth," begins Lee. "Why don't we bring him back?" 
"Ummh," says Kirby.  
"Suppose Alicia, the Thing's blind girl friend, is in some kind of trouble. And the Silver Surfer comes to 
help her." Lee starts pacing and gesturing as he gets warmed up. "I see," says Kirby. He has kind of a 
high-pitched voice. "But the Thing sees them together and he misunderstands. So he starts a big fight 
with the Silver Surfer. And meanwhile, the Fantastic Four is in lots of trouble. Doctor Doom has caught 
them again and they need the Things help." Lee is lurching around and throwing punches now. "Right," 
says Kirby. "The Thing finally beats the Silver Surfer. But then Alicia makes him realize he's made a 
terrible mistake. This is what the Thing has always feared more than anything else, that he would lose 
control and really clobber somebody." Kirby nods. "The Thing is brokenhearted. He wanders off 
by-himself. He's too ashamed to face Alicia or go back home to the Fantastic Four. He doesn't realize 
how he's failing for the second time.... How much the F.F. needs him."  
Lee sags back on his desk, limp and spent.
 
176
 
The reference to the surfer battle, and the date of the article, indicates that this was about 
Fantastic Four 55. But Lee begins by showing that he knows nothing about the characters. 
He says: "The Silver Surfer has been somewhere out in space since he helped the F.F. stop 
Galactus from destroying Earth," The whole point of the Surfer, the core of his character, was 
that he was trapped on Earth and could not go into space. Lee did not even know this basic 
fact. Lee's comments about Ben questioning his place in the team is also out of character: at 
171 The first victim is named a congressman  three times . So it must be important. But Lee's dialog changes it to 
the opposite: he explicitly says this is "an unknown nobody". There is no need for that line unless Lee really 
disliked the congressman idea. This is consistent with Lee’s personality, being less willing to offend people in 
power, more conservative in his tastes, etc. Why would Lee write a script he did not like? 
172 The first victim is a congressman, which is necessary as the Puppet Master’s goal is to rule the world. So he 
must show his power over existing rulers. Yet in the final version Lee changed the congressman to being "a 
nameless nobody". This undermines the whole point. 
173 A very brief description, printed in the Jack Kirby Collector 63, p.58 
174 A story conference recounted by Nat Freedland in his article “Super Heroes With Super Problems” published 
in the New York Herald Tribune in 1966. 
175 See appendix 2 for this and other claims. 
176 “ Super Heroes With Super Problems”, Nat Freedland, New York Herald Tribune, January 1966 

this point, Ben is the only one who wants to stay! (Johnny wants to leave to be with Crystal, 
and Reed and Sue will soon try to leave the team to raise  a child.) 
 
Lee also showed no understanding of recent issues. There was no hint of Doom in recent 
comics. Instead they were in the middle of Africa, and Johnny had just started a quest to free 
Crystal. They were also in the middle of the Klaw saga: if anybody captured the team it 
would be Klaw, not Doom. Lee shows no awareness of any of this. Once issue 55 is over 
Kirby returned to these plots he had been developing for months. 
 
 
 

Appendix 5: Sales figures 
 
Lee and Kirby raised Marvel’s sales to the same level as DC’s. That is, the same level we 
would expect from Jack Kirby on his own.  
 
Typical Kirby sales, pre-1960 
Jack Kirby was one half of the “Simon and Kirby” studio, and Kirby was the hit maker. That 
is, Kirby created hits wherever he was, even on his own, whereas Simon had less success 
without Kirby. Simon and Kirby created hit titles that sometimes sold over a million copies per 
issue: 
 
Although Captain America sold almost 1m copies per issue, surprisingly he was not Simon's biggest 
seller. [...] Young Romance topped 1m sales per issue, as did its companion title, Young Love.
 
177
 
Sales before 1960 are not always easy to obtain, as that was the first year the US Postal 
Service required public records. But Kirby’s Challengers sold well enough in a tryout book to 
be given its own title, so they must have been at least average sales for DC at the time (over 
300,000) or probably better.  
 
Kirby’s sales outside of Marvel and DC are heavily skewed by problems with distribution: it’s 
hard to sell comics when they never reach the stores! Those problems are discussed later.  
 
Marvel before Kirby 
Here are the sales figures for 1960, the year before the Fantastic Four. After twenty years 
with Stan Lee at its head, Marvel typically sold around 180,000 copies. 
1 
Uncle Scrooge 
Dell 
1,040,543 
2 
Walt Disney's Comics & Stories 
Dell 
1,004,901 
3 
Superman 
DC 
810,000 
4 
Superboy 
DC 
635,000 
5 
Mickey Mouse 
Dell 
568,803 
6 
Batman 
DC 
502,000 
7 
Superman's Pal Jimmy Olsen 
DC 
498,000 
177  From the Guardian’s Simon obituary. https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/16/joe-simon 
 

8 
World's Finest Comics 
DC 
476,000 
9 
Looney Tunes 
Dell 
459,344 
10 Action Comics 
DC 
458,000 
11 Superman's Girlfriend Lois Lane 
DC 
458,000 
12 Adventure Comics 
DC 
438,000 
13 Lone Ranger 
Dell 
408,711 
14 Casper 
Harvey 
399,985 
15 Turok, Son of Stone 
Dell 
359,013 
16 Blackhawk 
DC 
316,000 
17 Detective Comics 
DC 
314,000 
18 Flash 
DC 
298,000 
19 Pep Comics 
Archie 
269,504 
20 Mystery in Space 
DC 
248,000 
21 Challengers (without Kirby) 
DC 
228,000 
22 Blondie 
Harvey 
218,344 
23 Brave & Bold 
DC 
214,000 
24 Showcase 
DC 
213,000 
25 Wonder Woman 
DC 
213,000 
26 Little Archie 
Archie 
210,089 
27 Sugar & Spike 
DC 
209,000 
28 My Greatest Adventure 
DC 
208,000 
29 House of Mystery 
DC 
208,000 
30 Strange Adventures 
DC 
207,000 
31 House of Secrets 
DC 
194,000 
32 Fox & The Crow 
DC 
193,000 
33 Adventures into the Unknown 
ACG 
192,500 
34 Unknown Worlds 
ACG 
192,000 

35 Tales of the Unexpected 
DC 
192,000 
36 Dagwood 
Harvey 
188,819 
37 Forbidden Worlds 
ACG 
187,200 
38 Tomahawk 
DC 
180,000 
39 All-American Men of War 
DC 
176,000 
40 Our Fighting Forces 
DC 
175,000 
41 Our Army at War 
DC 
172,000 
42 Star-Spangled Comics 
DC 
169,000 
43 Tales to Astonish 
Marvel 
163,156 
44 All Star Western 
DC 
154,000 
45 Tales of Suspense 
Marvel 
148,929 
46 Kid Colt Outlaw 
Marvel 
144,746 
47 Felix the Cat 
Dell 
138,191 
48 Space Adventures 
Charlton 
110,166 
 
(Source: comichron.com) 
 
Also in 1960, Mad magazine sold 1,209,000 issues. Mad began as an EC comic. EC comics 
were aimed at adults as well as children, and they sold well. The anti-comics crusade of the 
1950s persuaded EC to drop their other comics, and rebrand Mad as a magazine (that just 
happened to have some comic book content). EC is proof that comics could sell to adults if 
they were not dumbed down.  
 
Marvel after Kirby 
Here are the sales figures for 1969. Marvel is typically in the 300,000 range, just like DC..  
 
1 
Archie 
(Archie) 
515,356 
2 
Superman 
(DC) 
511,984 
3 
Superboy 
(DC) 
465,462 
4 
Superman's Girlfriend Lois Lane 
(DC) 
397,346 
5 
Betty and Veronica 
(Archie) 
384,789 

6 
Action Comics 
(DC) 
377,535 
7 
Amazing Spider-Man 
(Marvel) 
372,352 
8 
World's Finest Comics 
(DC) 
366,618 
9 
Batman 
(DC) 
355,782 
10 Adventure Comics 
(DC) 
354,123 
11 Archie and Me 
(Archie) 
345,869 
12 Fantastic Four 
(Marvel) 
340,363 
 
13
Life with Archie
Archie
326,488 
14
Reggie and Me
Archie
276,275 
15
Walt Disney's Comics & Stories
Gold Key
272,672 
16
Archie Giant Series
Archie
271,699 
17
Thor
Marvel
266,368 
18
Incredible Hulk
Marvel
262,472 
19
Flintstones
Gold Key
258,821 
20
Archie's Pals 'n' Gals
Archie
253,206 
21
Daredevil
Marvel
245,422 
22
Captain America
Marvel
243,798 
23
Sgt. Fury and his Howling Commandos
Marvel 242,897 
24
Brave & Bold
DC
242,501 
25
Avengers
Marvel
239,986 
26
Uncanny X-Men
Marvel
235,811 
27
Justice League of America
DC
233,000 
28
Treasure Chest
Catholic Guild 231,531 
29
Reggie's Wise Guy Jokes
Archie
222,732 
30
Flash
DC
221,470 
31
Detective Comics
DC
221,267 
32
Little Dot
Harvey
213,070 
33
Little Lotta
Harvey
211,039 
34
Madhouse
Archie
209,897 
35
Turok, Son of Stone
Gold Key
209,813 
36
Rawhide Kid
Marvel
204,896 
37
Phantom
Charlton
199,045 
38
Beetle Bailey
Charlton
198,020 
39
G.I. Combat
DC
186,264 
40
Unusual Tales
Charlton
178,545 
41
Adventures of Jerry Lewis
DC
174,125 
42
House of Mystery
DC
173,206 
43
Sugar & Spike
DC
171,227 
44
Wonder Woman
DC
171,197 
45
Green Lantern
DC
160,423 

46
Aquaman
DC
156,307 
47
Tales of the Unexpected
DC
155,110 
48
Star-Spangled Comics
DC
149,170 
49
Fightin' Army
Charlton
141,335 
50
Strange Adventures
DC
141,179 
51
Challengers of the Unknown
DC
140,238 
52
Texas Rangers in Action
Charlton
136,378 
53
Showcase
DC
130,219 
Average for comics
252,202 
 
(Source: comichron.com) 
 
Problems with sales data 
There are many difficulties with comparing “Marvel” and “DC” sales:  
●
Actual figures are closely guarded secrets. 
●
Not all sales were reported (see “affidavit fraud” below). 
●
Do we measure individual titles, averages, or the total across all titles?  
●
Do we measure units sold or the dollar value (not all comics are priced the same)? 
●
How do we average out the wild fluctuations? 
●
Do we include later reprints? 
●
Do we include foreign editions? 
●
How do we remove unconscious bias? I grew up with Marvel, and Lee made me think 
Marvel was a huge hit. So for years I used to assume that any data set that made 
Marvel look good was probably more reliable than a data set that said the opposite. 
●
Etc. 
But the consensus is that Marvel equalled DC’s sales by the early 1970s. Marvel pulled 
ahead in the late 1970s, helped by owning the Star Wars brand and by “The DC Implosion” 
where they suddenly cancelled their lower selling titles. 
Reprint sales are not included 
The above sales figures are for newsstand sales when the title was first published. Most of 
those comics were then largely forgotten. But the more popular titles, such as the Fantastic 
Four (and Spider-Man) have been reprinted many times. For example, the 1960s Fantastic 
Four issues were reissued under the title “Marvel’s Greatest Comics”, were issued at least 
twice in Britain (in “The Titans” and later the Fantastic Four pocketbook), appeared in 
collected anthologies (Essentials, Masterworks, Epic Collections, etc), were translated for 
foreign language markets, and so on.  
Popularity and sales are not the same  
Readers’ preference for a title (it’s popularity) is a major contributor to sales (or lack of 
sales). But there are other contributors, and these are sometimes more important: 

●
Distribution:  
Marvel’s sales collapsed in 1957 when they lost their distributor. Archie always sold 
well, because they were sold at supermarkets and other places that didn’t stock a full 
range of titles. 
●
Cover price:  
The top selling comic in 1961 was Uncle Scrooge. Yet sales collapsed soon after. 
Why? When other comics went up from 10c to 12c, Scrooge went up to 15c. They 
gambled and lost. 
●
Inertia: 
A title like Superman or Spider-Man has so many fans that they will keep buying for 
several months even if every issue is bad. This allows them time to improve. Newer 
titles don’t have that luxury. 
●
Hype: 
In the 1980s comics moved to speciality shops. This allowed them to target readers 
more directly. The top selling single issues of all time are from over-hyped first issues 
from the 1990s, where comic fans were persuaded that these issues would one day 
be worth a lot of money. It was another trick. 
●
Time of year:  
Summer comics sold much better than winter comics. Presumably because kids were 
less likely to hang around near newsstands or need a portable reading to stuff in their 
pockets.  
●
Office politics: 
DC’s “Brother Power, the Geek” was cancelled before any sales figures came in, 
because somebody in management hated the idea. The Fantastic Four was 
cancelled in 2015, despite healthy sales (for the time), because (most people believe) 
Marvel was angry at Fox for not giving back the movie rights. 
●
Affidavit fraud: 
This deserves its own section as it particularly affects Jack Kirby comics. 
Kirby Fourth World sales 
The exact figures were a commercial secret, but Jenette Kahn, a DC insider, saw the figures 
that DC managers saw, and she said they "weren't all that bad" (according to Mark Evanier, 
Kirby’s assistant at the time). However, the figures they saw were probably far less than the 
actual sales, due to affidavit fraud.  
Affidavit fraud 
The large comic publishers allowed distributors to return unsold comics. But transport costs 
were expensive, so they made deals that allowed distributors to sign affidavits stating they 
had simply destroyed unsold comics. Of course, this created an incentive to lie: you could 
say “I destroyed one hundred thousand unsold comics this month” and then sell them 
instead. So a comic might have huge sales, but the official numbers say they hardly sold 
any.  
 

Chuck Rozanski (highly respected comic dealer) reports how this fraud was run by organised 
crime.  It ran for decades until the FBI cracked down in 1979. Just one warehouse (and there 
were several) could have as many as 14,000 copies of a single issue. These  copies would 
be sold, but not show up on sales figures.  
 
I saw many instances where there were entire unopened case lots of certain issues of comics, where 
the distributor obviously never even put the books out for sale. I eventually discovered that the highest 
number of a single issue in the warehouse was 14,000 copies of one 12 cent cover price Marvel comic.
 
178
 
Obviously the fraudsters wanted comics that would sell. Kirby’s Fourth World comics were 
ideal. In an era when writers were still mostly anonymous, DC had full page ads saying 
“Kirby is coming!” and the covers said in big letters “Kirby s here!” but this was a new 
phenomenon DC had no idea how many more copies they would sell. Obviously they would 
print more, so it was trivially easy for the fraudsters to say “sorry, they just sold the normal 
number” and then pocket the difference. 
 
Robert Beerbohm (another highly respected dealer) saw large numbers of these undeclared 
comics being traded: 
"New Gods and Forever People were 'HOT' big time sellers down in the Independent Distributor system 
of 900 or so wholesale outlets at the time. I remember the comicons back in 1970-1973 awash with 
unopened cases of the Kirby books. Likewise with Adams GL/GA. The mail order guys advertising in 
Marvel classifieds and places like Rocket's Blast Comiccollector, The Buyers Guide etc etc had them 
also stocked in depth. Due to the affidavit return "honor system" fraud rampant by the 70s the NYC 
publishers were not seeing the sales dollars." [citation?] 
 
Beerbohm noted that by he never saw issues of Mister Miracle stolen like that. So Mister 
Miracle’s sales figures were probably more accurate. Mister Miracle was not cancelled, but 
continued after Kirby left DC. 
Captain Victory sales figures 
Captain Victory was (along with Silver Star) Kirby’s last major comic. By this time his critics 
were saying he was past it. But as usual sales were in the “upper tier” for the industry as a 
whole. Jim Shooter recalls: 
 
I don't remember the exact number, but as I recall, Captain Victory sold like an upper tier Marvel book 
sold in the direct market, which would have been 200,000 plus. I remember that we at Marvel were 
impressed.
 
179
Conclusion 
The conclusion is that Kirby always sold in the top tier of the industry as a whole. A critic 
might use New Gods as an exception, as proof that Kirby on his own did not sell. But even 
178  http://www.milehighcomics.com/tales/cbg70.html 
179 From Shooter’s blog, replying to a visitor: 
http://jimshooter.com/2011/09/letter-column-rant-and-few-observations.html/#comment-5158 

there, its “not bad” sales probably become “good” when we allow for affidavit fraud, and 
“excellent” when we include the constant reprints. So Kirby always sold well. But Lee did not. 
 
So with Kirby on board, Marvel sales rose to the normal Kirby level. No more, no less. And 
Lee had nothing to do with Marvel’s eventual dominance: it was pure hype. Judging by the 
numbers, whatever Lee did, his effect on sales was negligible. 
 
 

Appendix 6: Kirby’s career in brief 
 
This only includes Kirby’s most notable books, and is intended as an introduction for new 
readers. For a complete year by year bibliography visit the Jack Kirby Chronology online.
 
180
For an alphabetical list of titles visit the Jack Kirby Checklist.
 
181
 
1940: Blue Bolt:  
1940: The Vision: 
1941: Captain America: Kirby’s breakout hit, the one that put him on the map. 
           Includes many backup stories, including Tuk, the first Avenger. 
1942: Boy Commandos 
(1943-1945: Kirby is in Europe, fighting World War II) 
1946: Stuntman 
1947: Various crime stories for Headline and other comics. 
1947: Young Romance: inventing the romance comics genre.  
1950: Black Magic: horror focused on ideas, not gore. 
1950: Boys Ranch: the most notable of Kirby’s many western stories 
1952: Strange World of Your Dreams: inventing the psychological genre 
1954: Fighting American: a satire on superheroes.  
1954: Foxhole: reflecting Kirby’s first hand experience of war 
1957: “The Thing in the Box”: the first of many stories about monsters attacking. 
1957: Alarming Tales, and (1958) Race For The Moon: various sci-fi stories 
1958: Challengers of the Unknown: the major turning point in his career. 
           From here on, Kirby focuses on the question “what’s out there?” 
1958: Sky Masters: newspaper strip about the space race 
1959: The Fly, and the Double Life of Private Strong: a return to superheroes 
1961: The Fantastic Four: the Challengers with a superhero twist 
1962: The Hulk: a monster comic with the same monster every issue 
1963: The X-Men, and various other superheroes (e.g. Avengers) 
1963: Thor: Kirby’s best known god book 
1967: (Later ideas were devised, but held back until Kirby left Marvel) 
1971: The Forever People: Kirby’s take on Hippie culture 
1971: The New Gods:
 often considered to be Kirby’s defining work.  
182
1971: Mister Miracle. The third of the Fourth World titles. 
1971: In The Days of The Mob, and Spirit World:  
         Kirby’s only books to not attempt to be child friendly. 
1972: The Demon 
1972: Kamandi: the post apocalyptic future 
1974: OMAC: future war with a one man army 
180  http://www.marvelmasterworks.com/resources/kirby_chronology1.html 
181  http://kirbymuseum.org/blogs/simonandkirby/archives/592  
182 They returned in the 1980s in Kirby’s Hunger Dogs”. Both times, Kirby wanted the series to end with 
characters dying, and each time DC said no. so the ending is not quite what Kirby wanted. 

1974: Sandman 
1976: 2001: Though an adaptation, it is pure Kirby, and goes well beyond the movie 
1976: The Eternals 
1977: Black Panther: Kirby’s unique take on the character he created 
1978: Devil Dinosaur 
1978: Machine Man: Kirby’s take on the themes of “I, Robot” 
1979-81: disillusioned with publishers taking his ideas, Kirby worked for animation studios. 
Unlike comics they provided good pay and conditions, and crucially, health insurance. 
1981: Captain Victory: essentially, a story about the meaning of life. 
1983: Silver Star: the possible future of mankind. This can be considered as a companion to 
Captain Victory: both were planned as movie scripts in the mid 1970s. These were Kirby’s 
last major works. 
 
By now Kirby was approaching seventy years old. After a lifetime of overwork, his health was 
failing: his eyesight and drawing hand no longer served as they did. Much of the 1980s was 
spent fighting for the return of his art, and to be recognised as the author of the stories he 
wrote.  
 
Kirby died in February 1994. A few months earlier Image Comics patched together the 
remains of an unused Kirby martial arts story from the 1970s (Phantom Force) using 
additional writers and multiple inkers. Possibly Kirby’s original intent can be salvaged by 
future scholars, but essentially Captain Victory and Silver Star are Kirby’s final works. 
How Kirby brought back the superhero genre 
The timeline indicates that it was Kirby, more than anyone else, who created the silver age 
interest in more realistic superheroes: 
 
●
1956: the Flash’s failed. 
In Showcase issue 4 (not by Kirby), The Flash came back. Comics historians see this 
as an important date for the return of superheroes. But the title didn’t set the world on 
fire: the Flash was only there for two issues. 
●
1956: the Challengers succeeded. 
In Showcase issue 6, Kirby introduced Challengers of the Unknown: a team of highly 
skilled individuals who fought villains with superpowers. They had an initial two issue 
run, and were popular enough to quickly get another two issues, and then their own 
title.  
●
1957: the Flash got a second chance. 
After the Challengers were such a success, the Flash was given another chance in 
Showcase. 
●
1958: the Challengers got their own book. 
The Challengers were given their own solo book. In issue 3 one of the Challengers 
temporarily gained superpowers: flaming, strength, invisibility and size-changing. 
●
1959: the Flash got his own book. 
The Flash finally resumed his own title. Issue 104 had been in 1949 when the series 
was cancelled. It resumed with issue 105, cover dated March 1959.  

●
1959: Kirby tried more superheroes 
Kirby (with Simon) created The Fly – a hero who walked on walls, and fought The 
Spider, a villain who created webs. Sounds familiar?
 Kirby also tried a return of the 
183
superhero The Shield, in ”The Double Life of Private Strong”.
 
184
●
Late 1959: Green Lantern 
In Showcase 22, dated October, DC premiered Green Lantern. Like Kirby’s Fly, he 
gained his power from finding a ring. He later gained his own book.. 
●
1960: Justice League 
The Justice League of America first appeared in The Brave and The Bold issue 28. 
They proved popular, and superheroes were back to stay. 
 
 
183 Kirby and Simon left after issue 4. The hero was originally a child who found a magic ring: this was originally 
going to be the premise for Spider-Man, until Ditko pointed out the similarity with The Fly, so Spider-Man went 
with the same power source as the Fantastic Four and Hulk: radiation. Kirby’s Fly also foreshadowed Harry 
Potter in some regards: an orphan boy discovers he is living with wizards (in Harry’s case his parents were 
wizards) and learns of ancient battles and becomes one of the wizards’ people. When Kirby left, the publisher 
(Archie Comics) changed the hero to be an adult. The series survived (Kirby-less) for 30 issues.  
184  Kirby only produced the first issue’s story. “With Private Strong and the Fly the origin story would be spread 
out over several stories in the first issue. As far as I know this early use of continuity, limited though it was, cannot 
be found in any other comics before the Marvel age.” (Harry Mendryk, in the Kirby Museum: 
http://kirbymuseum.org/blogs/simonandkirby/archives/2564 ). The second issue’s Private Strong story did not 
involve Kirby and showed a marked decline in quality. However, it didn’t matter: DC felt the character (published 
by Archie Comics) was too similar to Superman, and threatened legal action. So the comic ended after two 
issues. See “The Short and Double Life of Private Strong” at 
http://danhagen-odinsravens.blogspot.co.uk/2016/03/the-short-and-double-life-of-private.htm 

Appendix 7: How the Challengers 
became the Fantastic Four 
 
Kirby intended the Fantastic Four to be "a derivative" of the Challengers.  
 
 
Q What information, if any, do you have concerning the creation of The Fantastic Four? 
A In discussions with my father The Fantastic Four basically was a derivative of the, from what he told 
me, basically he came up with the idea just as a derivative from the Challengers of the Unknown that he 
had done several years earlier.
  
185
 
Kirby said so himself: 
 
GROTH: "Looking back on it, do you see the Challengers as a precursor to the Fantastic Four?" 
KIRBY: "Yes, there were always precursors to the Fantastic Four”
 
186
 
Kirby left after Challengers issue 8. The Fantastic Four has numerous parallels: 
 
The same team of four adventurers. 
Later we will look at their individual similarities.  
The same origin.  
They narrowly survive a plane crash and decide to devote their lives to doing good.  
185 Neal Kirby, from the 2010 legal case 
186 Jack Kirby Interview, Gary Groth, http://www.tcj.com/jack-kirby-interview/ 
 

 
 

The same powers. 
In Challengers issue 3, Rocky travels to space and gains the ability to flame on, expand his 
body, and has super strength. The Fantastic Four merely gain those powers permanently. 
Any of the first eight Fantastic Four stories could have taken place without superpowers: the 
powers were not the focus. 
 
The same kinds of adventures.  
Both groups challenge the unknown, reacting to dangers nobody else can handle. 
The same introduction.  
Compare the yellow box on the splash page of Fantastic Four 1 with the yellow box in the 
original ad for the Challengers.  

 
The same costumes.  
Compare the final Kirby Challengers issue with Fantastic Four issue 1 

 
Similar headquarters. 
The early headquarters looks the same inside, with the four characters standing in the same 
poses. 
 
Similar enemies.  
Compare Morelian and Doom: both are sorcerers who wear a hooded cloak, live in old world 
castles in America, with links to Merlin (Doom wanted Merlin’s stones) and a goal of 
obtaining jewels that grant immortality. Compare the red giant in the Challengers origin 
issue, who disappears when you no longer believe in him, with the red giant in Fantastic 
Four issue 3 who only exists in their minds. Compare the vastly powerful alien child who is 
finally stopped by his parents, with the similar Infant Terrible. 

 
 
Similar locations.  
Both visit remote oceans, outer space, ancient Egypt, etc. The first story in both cases had 
them travel to a remote island where they meet a monster. 

 
Similar technology.  
Compare the rocket powered helicopters, 
 
 or the alien anti gravity transport. 

 
 
The same fighting between team members.  
Something about Rocky's trip (Challengers issue 3) must have been extremely painful or 
distressing. When he came back he violently attacked anybody associated with taking him 
into space: not just "Ace" and the professor, but also the men involved in the space 
programme. 

 
 
 However, he did not attack ordinary people, or June, who was not directly involved in 
causing what happened.  
 
We can explain this as a kind of madness, or of him losing his memory, but the exact cause 
of the anger is not given in either case. All we know for sure is that the exact same thing 
happened in the Fantastic Four. If we remove Lee’s dialog then it seems that even Johnny 
lashes out in an uncontrolled fashion, setting fire to the forest. 

 
 
Even closer similarities 
Kirby said he wrote stories so as to leave as much as possible to the reader.  
 
I was presenting my views to the reader and saying 'what do YOU think?' I think that's an imperative for 
any writer. In other words, no writer should feel that he has the last word on any subject. Because he 
hasn't got the capacity. He doesn't know! I don't know, see, I'm guessing as well as you [do], except I 
may be a little more descriptive, that's all. [...] I put enough chinks into the story to allow the reader to 
interpret it his way.  Because I've always respected the reader. [...] I sold the best stories I could. But I 
didn't present my stories as the final word.
 
187
 
With that approach we can see even more parallels: 
 
The same explanation for their powers  
The Challengers found a liquid that aliens use to gain whatever abilities they need to survive 
in given circumstances: if they need to do X to survive, they can do X.  
187  Earth Watch radio interview. 
http://comicbookcollectorsclub.com/jack-kirby-and-stan-lee-radio-interview-earth-watch-wbai-1987/ 

 
That explains the Fantastic Four’s powers: each person gains the ability they need at that 
moment. That is, judging by Kirby’s art alone, removing Lee’s dialog. After the team was 
affected by the rays, Ben wanted to hit Reed, and Reed wanted to tie up Ben. So Ben gained 
strength, and Reed gained the ability to stretch his arms like ropes. Sue looked worried, and 
so she gained the ability to hide from danger. Johnny was highly agitated by the danger, so 
gained the ability to destroy anything that might threaten him. However, with no more access 
to the cause of their powers they were stuck with the first power they gained. 
The same emotional core 
The Fantastic Four was notable because of the tragedy of Ben Grimm, and how he would 
lash out at his partners because he felt different. The same thing happened with Rocky, but 
Rocky was able to recover when June held him and treated him with kindness. Ben however 
lost Sue forever and was never able to recover. If we examine every case where Ben attacks 
the others, it is nearly always over losing Sue. 
 

 
 
The only other times are when Johnny makes fun of Ben for being ugly, which amounts to 
the same thing - one of those times (if we trust Lee’s dialog) Johnny explicitly links this to 
being unattractive to women.  So the emotional core of the Fantastic Four comes from a love 
triangle. This is merely the natural development of the interest that Rocky and Ace showed in 
June, and exactly the sort of thing we would expect from Jack Kirby, the man who invented 
the romance comic genre. It’s all about Sue. 
The same reason for being together in the first place. 
Many readers have questioned why Reed would take his girlfriend on a space flight. But if 
Sue is a computer expert and Johnny is an expert at engineering (his interest in cars, and 
how he later redesigns the Fantasticar) then they all earn their place, just as the Challengers 
are each experts in their own field. 
Reed is “Ace”: 
Ace is just his nickname (we learn from page 1 of their first story). It  means the same as Mr 
Fantastic: this guy loves himself! He worked on the top secret military space program, so 
"Morgan" could easily be an alias to keep his real name (Richards) private. Ace’s big goal is 
to enter space: he is twice shown in a space suit on the edge of space, and it’s once 
mentioned that he is in the space program. 

 
Remember, this was 1958, when "the space program" was merely the elite section of the Air 
Force. In Fantastic Four 1, Ace succeeds in his goal. "Ace" looks older and thinner in 
Fantastic Four 1, but that is easily explained by side effects of experimenting with the youth 
serum in the previous issue, Challengers 8.  
 
The Thing is “Rocky”: 
A tough fighter who calls himself Rocky ends up covered in rocks. Rocky was an olympic 
wrestler, but before 1972 the Olympics were strictly amateur, so Rocky needed a day job. In 
the Fantastic Four we learn he was a test pilot, like Ace. In Fantastic Four 15, when the 
Thinker tries to break up the Fantastic Four, he knows that wrestling is the best way to attract 
Ben. This suggests that Ben was once a wrestler, like Rocky.  

 
“Ben Grimm” sounds like a wrestler’s stage name, just as “Rocky” sounds like a nickname. 
His real name was probably Ben Davis (like the clothing brand!) 
Johnny is "Red" 
“Red” is clearly a nickname, and it is normal for circus performers to have stage names, so 
his real name was probably Johnny Ryan or Johnny Storm. Red’s distinctive hairstyle 
remains the same: the change from orange to yellow can easily be explained by the printing 
technology of the time (there would be no way to show the actual color in between). “Red”, 
the "circus daredevil", is clearly the youngster of the Challengers: he is always shown as 
shorter than the others, and the others take the lead. World class circus acrobats need to be 
young for maximum flexibility. Possibly his age was further reduced after experiments with 
the youth serum from the previous issue (Challengers 8). In Fantastic Four 15 we learn that 
Johnny Storm comes from a circus family.  

 
Lee’s dialog implies that Johnny was new to the circus, but Kirby's art says otherwise. In the 
story Johnny’s face is relaxed, as if this is familiar territory. As noted, the powers reflect what 
the individual wants, so it was natural for the “red” circus acrobat to become a flaming flying 
acrobat. Johnny’s early stories show him still practising acrobatic skills.  
Sue is “June” 
As time went on, June Robbins’ hair became more blonde and she tried different styles, and 
in one later  issue she could easily pass for an early version of Sue Storm. 
 
June was an expert on computers, and so was Sue, judging by the art: in Fantastic Four 
issue 5 Sue is able to short circuit Doom's computer in a second, with her hands tied behind 
her back.  

 
Incidentally, the name, occupation and look of “June Robbins” was probably based on the 
real life mathematician Julia Robinson. 

 
June’s surname changed from Robbins to Walker then back to Robbins again, suggesting a 
failed marriage. This explains why the other Challengers held back romantically, despite 
being clearly interested in her. By Fantastic Four 1 Sue was free to date, and both Ben and 
Reed competed for her affection. 
 
Namor stands in for Prof Haley 
In the Challengers, Professor Haley never really fit in. He looked less enthusiastic, he didn’t 
use an alias, and his real interest was in studying the oceans. He appears to have left the 
team after Challengers 8, and the team’s connection with the oceans is now via Namor. In 
Namor’s first story, Fantastic Four 4, we often see a character in the background who looks 
like Professor Haley. This is probably just coincidence, but it’s fun to speculate that when 
Johnny found Namor it was no accident. 
 
 
And so on. 
 

The previous parallels were noted from my brief initial reading of the Challengers. No doubt 
a more thorough examination would uncover many more. 
 
If the Fantastic Four are the Challengers then this solves various mysteries. For example: 
 
1.
Why did Reed take his girlfriend and her kid brother into space? Because this 
“girlfriend” was one of the world’s foremost computer experts, and this “kid brother” 
was older and more experienced than he looked. Both were part of a seasoned team 
and the most qualified people on Earth for this job. 
2.
Why were they willing to go into space without proper shielding? Because they were 
living on borrowed time, and their whole purpose was to take risks. 
3.
Why was Ben shamed by mentioning the danger? Because danger was their 
business. 
4.
Where did they get their own private airplane? The Challengers had one. And where 
did  they  get it? The Challengers took on work in an organised manner, so would have 
planned for equipment and funding before accepting their first job. 
5.
Etc., etc. 
 
 

Appendix 8: Responses from critics 
 
Here are the arguments that I used to use in support of Lee, and a few more. 
 
“Lee didn’t create the comics, but he created the brand” 
Then we should make that clear: stop calling him a writer, and call him what he was: an 
editor and promoter. . 
“Let it go, it’s in the past” 
If this was in the past then we can learn from the past. We can learn how people take credit 
for others’ work.  If we don’t learn from the past we are condemned to repeat it. 
 
But this is not in the past. There are millions of people (billions) who would enjoy Kirby’s 
work if only they knew where to find it. Many of his stories are buried under Lee’s dialog. I 
argue in this book that we can uncover and reconstruct those stories. There is a gold mine of 
hundreds of lost Kirby stories waiting to be uncovered. This book is a plea for that work to 
begin! 
Marvel settled a lawsuit “on the steps” of the Supreme 
Court 
There was a lawsuit, but it was not about who created the characters. In August 2009, 
Disney bought Marvel for $4 billion. In September, the Kirby family served notice to Marvel to 
regain copyright of characters created by Jack Kirby, and after leading the family to believe 
negotiation was an option, the company filed suit. Disney of course has vastly more money 
for lawyers, and were able to make the suit into a question about “work for hire.” Judgment 
was handed down in July 2011. The conclusion? Marvel paid Kirby for whatever he did, 
therefore Marvel owned it. Just as the convent owner paid Leonardo to paint The Last 
Supper.  
 
Judge Colleen McMahon, prefaced her ruling by making it clear this was only about the 
technical question of work for hire, and the laws in place in 1961. It says nothing about 
fairness or who created what: 
 
This case is not about whether Kirby (and other freelance artists who created culturally iconic comic 
book characters for Marvel and other publishers) were treated ‘fairly’ by companies that grew rich off the 
fruit of their labor. It is about whether Kirby’s work qualifies as work-for-hire.
 
188
188  The full decision: https://handoffire.files.wordpress.com/2011/10/kirby-v-marvel-decision-28-july-20121.pdf 

“John Romita said… Roy Thomas said…” 
Judge McMahon allowed the testimony of John Romita and Roy Thomas, but disallowed 
Mark Evanier and John Morrow as witnesses. Like Evanier and Morrow, Romita and Thomas 
were not present at Marvel during the years covered by the suit (1958-1963). Furthermore, 
no one besides Lee or Kirby was ever present for one of Kirby’s story conferences. 
Kirby didn’t say anything at the time? 
While employed by Marvel, Kirby spoke in guarded terms in interviews. He told the Excelsior 
fanzine in 1968 that he didn’t write his own dialogue because that was Lee’s policy. In 1969 
he told The Nostalgia Journal’s Mark Hebert how he created The Hulk. After he left Marvel in 
1970, Kirby immediately began telling the story of his creations.[Footnotes to be added.] 
Kirby also had a bad memory? 
In appendix 2 we saw that Lee has a bad memory, or at least, that is the charitable 
explanation for why he says things that are not true. Lee claimed that Kirby also had a bad 
memory, and gave the following example. First, what Kirby said, about walking into Lee’s 
office in 1958: 
 
I came in [to the Marvel offices] and they were moving out the furniture, they were taking desks out — 
and I needed the work! ... Stan Lee is sitting on a chair crying. He didn't know what to do, he's sitting on 
a chair crying — he was still just out of his adolescence.
 I told him to stop crying. I says, 'Go in to 
189
Martin and tell him to stop moving the furniture out, and I'll see that the books make money'.
 
190
 
Lee says he never saw furniture being carried out: 
 
I never remember being there when people were moving out the furniture. If they ever moved the 
furniture, they did it during the weekend when everybody was home.  
 
191
 
However, the company had recently seen its titles slashed from 85 per month to just 8, and 
everybody but Lee had been fired from staff (any future comics relied on people working 
from home as freelancers). They went from several offices to just one, so furniture must 
have moved out at some point. Lee conceded that it could have happened, but just claims he 
was not here at the exact moment. The more serious charge comes next: Lee says he never 
cried. 
 
189  This probably refers to Kirby’s opinion of Lee’s behaviour, not his age. Lee was 36 at the time, but Kirby felt he 
acted in a childish way and often referred to Lee as “the kid”. 
190 Interview reprinted in the Comics Journal collected essays, volume 1, p. 38.  
191 Stan the Man & Roy the Boy: A Conversation Between Stan Lee and Roy Thomas". Comic Book Artist (2). 
Summer 1998 

Jack tended toward hyperbole, just like the time he was quoted as saying that he came in and I was 
crying and I said, 'Please save the company!' I'm not a crier and I would never have said that. I was very 
happy that Jack was there and I loved working with him, but I never cried to him.  
 
192
 
Kirby arrived just after artist Joe Maneely died in a tragic train accident. Maneely was Lee’s 
favourite artist, and his sudden death at a young age affected everyone deeply. Michael 
Vassallo once examined the surviving records (job numbers, etc.) and worked out that Kirby 
arrived on the Monday after Maneely died on the Friday (Maneely’s family were told on the 
Saturday). So Lee was not only reeling from losing almost all of his comics, and in danger of 
losing his job, but his good friend had just died. And Lee says he did not shed a tear? 
 
Kirby also copied others work? 
If Kirby used others’ work would this make him no better than Lee, taking credit where it is 
not due? For example, the X-Men is suspiciously like Doom Patrol that came out just before. 
 
All artists learn from others’ work. The difference is that a great artist ir writer makes his 
version better. The X-Men is more popular than Doom Patrol. Similarly, although Captain 
America was clearly influenced by The Shield, Captain America was vastly more popular. 
 
In contrast, when Kirby left the Fantastic Four and Lee simply copied old Kirby plots, Lee’s 
versions were not as good. E.g. compare Galactus with Lee’s version, the Overmind. 
 
And no the topic of the X-Men and Doom Patrol, this is discussed in the chapter on who 
created the Marvel universe. In it I noted that the copied ideas probably came via Lee. and 
even if they didn’t, Doom Patrol was itself based on Kirby’s Fantastic Four, which was in turn 
based on Kirby’s Challengers. Kirby produced so many new characters, in so many genres, 
and so any of them became hits, that he probably had the most original mind in comics 
history. 
Lee seems like such a nice guy 
Depends what you mean by nice. Do nice guys take credit for other people’s work? 
 
 
192 ibid 

Appendix 9: Reconstructing the original book 
 
Let us try to piece together Kirby’s original version of Fantastic Four issue 1. Here is what we 
can conclude, based on the evidence in this book. 
Conclusion 1: the Mole Man story was heavily edited. 
There are numerous places where the Mole Man story looks edited (see the analysis of page 
14 for examples).  
Conclusion 2: the original story had no superpowers. 
There is clear evidence that the original Mole Man story did not feature superpowers. See 
the analysis of page 19 for the clearest example, but there are many.  
 
Nothing in the story required superpowers, except the two page Thing battle which appears 
to have been added later. In each case (except the Thing battle) the story would be more 
exciting without the powers. E.g. when falling down a hole: it’s more exciting to see them 
tumbling down the slope, not being able to comfortably save themselves and fly out 
whenever they want. And defeating a Mole Man and monsters is not hard when you have 
superpowers.  
Conclusion 3: The Thing was not in the original Mole Man 
story 
When we look closer at the likely edits, the Thing does not fit. Except in the sequence on the 
island where he fights the monster, a sequence that was almost certainly added later (see 
page 20). Elsewhere, the Thing serves no purpose in the story. Worse, he looks out of place: 
whenever he appears he is either squashed into a picture that is better composed without 
him… 
...or his arms are just added to the side but he doesn’t actually do anything... 

 
.. or he’s simply absent. 

 
The couple of times he does say or do something his words seem more appropriate for 
somebody else. Like here where the words would be better coming from Johnny: 
 
And is it just me, or does the art style on The Thing look cleaner, more solid than on the 
other two? And look again at the last frames of the story: not only is Ben superfluous and 
badly drawn but  Reed pilots the plane.  While Ben sits in the back. 

 
The whole point of Ben Grimm being in the origin story was that Ben was the skilled pilot. On 
the last page they have to escape an exploding island - if anything needed a skilled pilot this 
did.
 
193
 
So it appears that Ben was probably not in the original Mole Man story. So the origin story is 
probably where we first meet Ben, perhaps on that missing splash page. 
Conclusion 4: The original story was probably of a 
scientist and two teenagers 
Without the Thing, we next notice that Sue (in the Mole Man story) looks far too young to be 
dating Reed.  
 
Susan and Johnny look more like teenagers. (A similar idea - an older scientist and his 
young sidekicks - was used again in the original Dr Who two years later.) In the other Sue 
193  We might argue that Ben’s fingers are now too thick. But the controls shown are large. if the writer had gone 
further and thought about possible small switches in the cockpit he would also have recalled that Reed designed 
a rocket ship and a flare gun, so small adjustments to switches would be easy. 

pictures she often wears a hood, which would make it easier to edit the picture: a child has a 
larger head, so the hood is a quick way to make her head look smaller and hence older. Add 
a couple of curves on the baggy costume, and bingo, you have fixed the character’s 
younger-looking appearance, all in five minutes. 
 
 
There is no other reason for the hood. In the previous Challengers story, which had similar 
locations and costumes, the women do not wear hoods. 
 
 
 
 
 

Years later, Susan Kirby (Jack’s daughter), recalled seeing her father create the Fantastic 
Four. Here they are in 1961: Susan is at the middle at the back (the photo is from Neal 
Kirby’s Father’s Day tribute).
 
194
 
Susan was a teenager at the time. She remembered this event because her father called her 
to show her he was naming a character after her. Susan Storm was Susan Kirby. 
 
Q. Do you have any recollection of discussing with your father the work he was doing for Marvel? 
A. Yes. I was in his office a lot, because he had a vast library of books, because he was into everything. 
And I used to go down there and read, so I used to read his books, and stuff, and one day I was 
upstairs, and mom told me to go downstairs because Dad was creating some new superheroes. So I 
went downstairs, and he said, "I want you to see this." He said, I named the female super hero after you, 
her name is Sue," Sue Storm he was talking about, it was the Fantastic Four. 
Q. Do you remember what year that was? 
A. Oh, gosh, I was a teenager, that is all I remember, maybe 15 or 16, so 1961, '62. 
Q. And when you went downstairs did you discuss with your father what he was doing? 
A. Yes. 
Q. What did you say to him? What did he say to you? 
A. I said it looked great. There were three characters on the board, three of the four. And I asked about 
who they are, and he told me who each one was. And I said, "It looks great, they look great". 
Q. Do you recall anything else being said between the two of you at that time? 
A. Not at that particular conversation, no.
 
195
 
Note that Susan only recalls seeing three characters. 
194 http://www.co2comics.com/blog/2011/06/13/father%E2%80%99s-day-tribute-to-jack-kirby-from-his-son/ 
195 Deposition of Susan Kirby, October 25, 2010. 
https://ohdannyboy.blogspot.co.uk/2011/04/marvel-worldwide-inc-et-al-v-kirby-et_11.html 

Reconstructing the original Mole Man story 
We have enough clues now to attempt a reconstruction of the original story. In general it 
would be the same as now, but set when Sue and Johnny were younger, with no Thing, and 
with no powers. E.g. when Reed and Johnny fell down the whole they would fall just as the 
Mole Man did, and not drift gently in a Reed-parachute. Other major changes are discussed 
when we come to them, but here is a summary: 
 
No Thing-monster fight:  
When Reed and Johnny first see the Mole Man, at present we jump back to the surface, and 
start a new chapter with Sue just sitting there. We then get a page (in two half pages) of the 
Thing fighting a monster. We then see a small image of the Mole Man’s throne room.  
 
The story works just as well if we remove this sequence: it is not needed. Its only purpose is 
to give Ben something to do. And the story flows more smoothly and naturally if it is not 
interrupted. So remove those two half pages. The big image, currently of Sue, would 
naturally be of entering the throne room, and the smaller throne room picture would then 
continue as now. 
 
The monsters gather the materials to one place 
Reader MW Gallaher summarised the art: “monsters causing nuclear facilities to collapse 
underground, they loot the fuel and transport it through underground tunnels to Monster Isle 
where it mutates more monsters from Mole Man's army." See the analysis of page 19 for his 
reasoning.  
 
Page 19 was originally 2 pages? 
A lot happens on page 19, more than in single pages elsewhere in the story. The obvious 
gap is where the heroes awake in radiation suits. So this may have been another page at 
that point. Or, possibly, different text would have been enough to explain the suits 
convincingly. 
 
Sue saves them at the end:  
Just before the end, we see two images with the Mole Man pulling a cord. At present we see 
a fight in between, but the fight achieves nothing (other than to take off the radiation suits) 
and the story flows better if those are images are consecutive. The fight images are small 
and awkward - not normal Kirby standards, so were probably added later. Meanwhile the 
ending seems rushed, so this space was probably used (in a slightly different order) to 
explain how Sue found her way down, they removed their radiation suits, and the radioactive 
remains (replaced by the badly drawn “valley of diamonds”) explode.  
 
The panels with first pulling the cord and the large monster appearing would be at the end of 
that page, not the start as now. That is, the radiation suits were already off when the cord 
was pulled. Why would they be removed? So the heroes could move more quickly, which 
suggests the radioactive remains were about to explode: Sue must have realised that on her 

way. She would be shouting that as she bursts into the room. This explains why Reed tries to 
bring the Mole Man with him after the cord is pulled, to save his life. 
 
 
 
●
Page 24, top: the same as now (Mole Man pulls cord, monster appears), but the 
three heroes (no Thing) are slightly larger.
 
●
Page 24, middle: The team react in fear (because they have no superpowers). Reed 
removes the radiation suits (now cropped to be panel 7)
 
●
Page 24: maybe? This would be a good time to realise the island was about to blow 
up: the materials that the monsters dragged from around the world are collapsing into 
a critical mass. Alternatively, this panel could be a larger image of monsters, and the 
imminent explosion could be mentioned in dialog. 
●
Page 24, bottom: the same as the current panel 25, top. They try to grab the Mole 
Man as they leave 
●
Page 25, panel 1: the approaching monsters cause the team to let go of the Mole 
Man. The running Mole Man was cropped to become page 24, last panel. 
●
Page 25, panel 2: as now 
●
Page 25, panel 3: cave as now, but contains running people and monsters. They 
probably talk about the imminent explosion. 
●
Page 25, last panels: as now, but no flaming and no Thing. 
 
Removing those panels would make space for the superpower section we see now. 
 

This is of course just one possible reconstruction. We are dealing with possibilities and 
probabilities, not certainties. One day the original art may resurface and we can see if there 
are signs of cutting and pasting and if so, what they imply.  
Conclusion 5: The origin story originally had a splash page 
When discussing page 9 we saw that the origin story probably had its own splash page 
originally. But what did it contain? 
 
In later years Kirby recalls the Fantastic Four as being focused on how Ben Grimm lost his 
perfect life. Yet this isn’t in our current version: 
 
The idea for the F.F. was my idea. My own anger against radiation. Radiation was the big subject at that 
time, because we still don’t know what radiation can do to people. It can be beneficial, it can be very 
harmful. In the case of Ben Grimm, Ben Grimm was a college man, he was a World War II flyer. He was 
everything that was good in America. And radiation made a monster out of him–made an angry monster 
out of him, because of his own frustration.
 
196
 
That description is lost from the final cut. However, Kirby’s later memory shows he 
remembers the  earlier  version of the story, not the version that finally saw print. We can say 
this because he remembered the Fantastic Four origin in terms of the bomb (i.e. the theme 
of underground testing) and not in terms of the space flight in particular: 
 
When people began talking about the bomb and its possible effect on human beings, they began talking 
about mutations because that’s a distinct possibility. And I said, “That’s a great idea.” That’s how the 
Fantastic Four began, with an atomic explosion and its effect on the characters. Ben Grimm who was a 
college man and a fine looking man suddenly became the Thing. Susan Storm became invisible 
because of the atomic effects on her body. Reed Richards became flexible and became a character that 
I could work with in various ways. And there were others — mutation effects didn’t only affect heroes, it 
affected villains too. So I had a grand time with the atomic bomb. [Laughter.]
 
197
 
Conclusion 6: The Mole Man story had different people 
Examine the faces: why do they change? 
196  From 1996 or 87, interview with Leonard Pitts 
http://kirbymuseum.org/blogs/effect/2012/08/06/19867-kirby-interview/ 
197Jack Kirby interview with Gary Groth, http://www.tcj.com/jack-kirby-interview/6/ 

 
Compare the first Reed with the last one. And see how different he is whenever there’s a 
close up. And notice how few images of faces there are in the Mole Man story: this is all of 
them (except for the Thing battle that was added later). When I wrote the first version of this 
book I thought the Mole Man story must have been part of the original plan, because of the 
effort needed to tediously redraw all the characters. But then I checked, and it would be 

trivially easy to redraw those characters. Reed’s face would be redrawn twice (the two close 
ups) and the rest need just minor tweaks. The simplest explanation of the wildly different 
faces is that these were different characters and the stories were not related at all.  
 
Possibly the radiation suits were added at the same time as Sue’s hood, just to save the 
trouble of redrawing all those faces. 
Did the origin originally have another page? 
The origin story is surprisingly short for an important story that might re-launch superheroes. 
Even with the missing splash page it’s only six pages.The final image (where they decide to 
work together) is very small for a dramatic finale, and doesn’t show how they got to 
civilisation. But the next issue has this intriguing flashback: 
 
This shows scenes from the origin, plus one more: Reed flagging down a plane. Perhaps this 
was the final page in the original, but was cut for space reasons? 
 
 

Appendix 10: How Lee’s claim evolved 
In 1961, Lee was still a relatively unknown editor, whereas Kirby was the big name creator. 
Kirby’s name appeared on the covers of numerous hit comics.  
 
 
This relationship (Kirby as creator, Lee as editor) is shown as late as issue 10 of the 
Fantastic Four: 
 
Lee calls this “the studio of Kirby and Lee”, not “Lee and Kirby”. Kirby has the idea and Lee, 
as editor, decides whether or not to use it. This is the same relationship we will see 
throughout issue 1. And a few months later Lee does use “False Face” - the Chameleon - in 
Spider-Man issue 1.  So when did Lee begin to claim he was the sole and only writer? 
 

Previous monster comics: “Kirby and Ayers” 
The Fantastic Four was essentially a monster comic. These were always signed by “Kirby 
and Ayers” or similar, and written by Kirby.
 The dialog on some of the monster comics 
198
looks like it was edited byLee or somebody else (it doesn’t have all of Kirby’s tell-tale signs). 
Editing dialog for children was a trivial matter compared to writing the story, so whoever 
edited the dialog did not sign the books. 
Fantastic Four issue 1: “Stan Lee and Jack Kirby” 
For the new comic, Lee needed it to be a success, and having a very high opinion of his own 
abilities, he rewrote all the dialog, changed the story (e.g. removing references to 
underground nuclear testing
). He probably told Kirby to swap the order of the stories in 
199
order to put the superpowers first, and this led to numerous edits.
 With so much 
200
involvement, Lee put his name on the book as well. So it was signed “Stan Lee and Jack 
Kirby”. 
Issues 2-8 
In the next issue,  Lee chose to minimise Jack’s signature, from “Stan Lee and Jack Kirby” to 
“Stan Lee and J. Kirby”. (The actual writing would be by the letterer, but Lee would have the 
final say. Kirby had no reason to shrink his own name.) 
Issue 3 
The first letter ever printed in a modern Marvel comic was from Alan Weiss, future comics 
artist.
 He asked who was the artist.  
201
198 See the discussion of page 4 
199  See the discussion of page 14 
200 Appendix 9 has a summary of probable changes. 
201 Yes, this was the same Weiss. He would have been 13 at the time. See "Comic Book Artist Collection, Volume 
1" by Jon B. Cooke 

 
 
Yet the book was clearly signed “Stan Lee and Jack Kirby”. Maybe Weiss didn’t notice? No, it 
is clear from his interview
 that Weiss was deeply into comics from an early age. So Weiss 
202
would have known that the artist was either Lee or Kirby. The fact that he had to ask 
indicates that he thought Kirby (a famous comic writer-artist) might be the writer and Lee (the 
relative unknown) might be the artist. 
 
Why did Lee make this the first ever letter? Why did his humour put Kirby down? Lee’s later 
humour is seldom mean, and once he has established Kirby as merely the “artist” Lee feels 
free to praise him as “the king” of artists.  
 
Note that Lee does not clarify “artist” with “he also comes up with many of the ideas”. Yet 
Lee openly admitted that was the case in issue 10. This early era, before Lee declared 
himself to be writer and Kirby as just the artist, shows a tension over who did what: Lee 
would sometimes even paint over the “Kirby & Ayers” signature.
 
203
 
Another letter was from Bill Sarill, another future comics professional: as such he obviously 
kept a close eye on who did what. He referred to  “the team of Lee-Kirby” and then Kirby 
supplying the art. This does not mean that Kirby did not write as well, as issue 10 reminds us 
he provided ideas too. But only Kirby drew. The claim that the book only had one writer did 
not begin until issue 9. 
Issue 9: the claim is made 
Finally, more than a year after issue 1 (due to early issues being bi-monthly) we have the 
first credit box: 
202 ibid 
203 See the discussion of page 4, about who created the monster comics. 

 
This issue marked a major change in the book’s style: it become much lighter in tone. From 
issue 9 there was: 
 
1.
Less alienation: from the end of issue 9 onwards the team were popular celebrities. 
2.
More use of superpowers 
3.
More crossovers with other characters 
4.
Fewer cosmic issues.
 
204
 
These are all departures from Kirby’s established interests. True, these issues still resemble 
previous Kirby plots - issue 9 for example had a plot that Kirby created for Fighting American 
issue 8 in 1955 - but issue 9 onwards has more of Lee’s light-hearted style. 
Issue 10: Lee was more relaxed 
As noted earlier, in issue 10 Lee was happy to show Kirby supplying the ideas, because Lee 
had already staked his own claim to be the main scripter.  
 
Note that a story would be pencilled weeks (or months) before the finishing touches were 
made and the comic sent to the printers. So Kirby could have been drawing issue 10 before 
Lee decided to add the credit box to issue 9.  
 
By the time of issue 10’s letters page Lee seemed more relaxed. Until this point Lee was 
addressed as “editor”, his role. That established his status. But the new credit box assures 
his status as “the writer”. So he stops worrying about status and invites fans to call him by 
his first name. This is the start of the self-deprecating Stan that fans love.  
 
Note that Lee still refers to the team as “Jack Kirby and Stan Lee”. But after this he makes 
sure to always put his name first: always “Lee and Kirby” or “Stan and Jack”. 
Issue 11: reaffirming his new position 
Issue 11’s first story was about to the FF having fans. The issue also had the first double 
page letters section. What was the very first letter chosen? One about “who is the writer”. 
Lee restated his claim and implied that everybody should know by now. 
204 Issues 1,2,6 and 7 and arguably 3 and 8 all feature aliens or outer space. 

 
 
And that is how Lee established himself as “writer”. The first letter in the following issue can 
be read as Lee praising himself and undermining Kirby, and the next few stories can be seen 
as metaphors for Lee defeating Kirby
, but it doesn’t really matter. As the Marvel Universe 
205
expanded, Lee had his own name printed as the writer, and his position was secure. 
 
 
205 Around this time Kirby was becoming identified with Ben Grimm (due to his attitude, cigar, accent, etc.) and 
Lee with Reed Richards (the boss). In issues 1-12, Ben was the undisputed strongest member of the team. But 
issues 13 and 14 can be read as Reed establishing his dominance. Reed piloted a rocket to the moon, whereas 
in issue 1 Ben (the official test pilot) failed. By issue 18 and annual 1 Ben sits on the floor in a defensive pose and 
acts like a child. 

About the author 
I call myself “Tuk” after the cave boy in Jack Kirby's most famous comic (Captain America 
issue 1, from 1941). In the story, Tuk (the first “Avenger”) heard that gods walked the earth. 
So he wanted to learn more.  
 
As a child, Lee and Kirby were like gods to me. And so, like Tuk, I wanted to learn more. I 
wanted to learn how these gods did their magic. This book is the result. 
 
You may wonder, why the hate? Why not let the past be the past? Because Stan Lee is not 
the past. He is our future, if we’re not careful.  
 
Stan Lee destroyed stories. I document one of them in this book: the Mole man story. Kirby 
wrote a story based in the real world, about the atomic bomb, and about how an innocent 
person can be pushed too far. Lee then defaced the story: he removed the realism, removed 
the plot about the bomb and turned the tragic innocent Mole Man character into a one 
dimensional cartoon villain. In this book I also refer to issue 2, and issue 67 and others, as 
illustrations of how Lee did this all the time. Lee destroyed good stories.  
 
I don’t like it when people destroy good stories. Lee reminds me of the book burning of 1948, 
and how it almost happened again in 1954.
  Book burning is bad, but at least other copies 
206
still exist. Lee destroyed the stories at their source. 
206 For the full story, see the Comic Book Legal Defense Fund at 
http://cbldf.org/2012/06/1948-the-year-comics-met-their-match/ , and Adam Blatner’s article, “Why My Mother 
Threw Out My Comic Books”, at  https://www.blatner.com/adam/cartoons/comicbooks/history2.html 

 
 
But destroying stories is just the beginning. Lee created a cult of personality. Today, when 
grown adults learn that Lee’s version of events is not the whole truth, they tend to make 
excuses for him. I believe this is far more dangerous than people realise.  
 
Think what this means. A person can become very rich by taking credit, and the pay, for 
other people’s work. But as long as that person is charming, people accept it. Think about 
that!  
 
Lee got rich through means we are not supposed to look at too carefully. His major 
occupation was in dumbing down stories that were supposed to make people think. And we 
are supposed to smile and approve of him?  
 
These elements are everywhere in the world in different forms. The unethical behaviour, the 
way that millions of people look the other way, the anti-intellectualism, and it is all so 
polished, so charming, so much part of our culture. I hate it. For me, Lee is the poster child 
for all that is wrong with the world. 
 
You don’t have to agree with me. But that’s just the conclusion I reached after a lifetime of 
study.  
 
Thanks for reading. 
 
 
 

Acknowledgements 
Thanks to Nathan Summers of “How Would You Fix…?” for pointing out the DNA problem in 
Fantastic Four 15, and for numerous other insights. He realised that the question “who did 
what?” could be answered by comparing the words and pictures in the books themselves. 
Thanks to Patrick Ford and Michael Hill for their tireless work in documenting who said what, 
and for gently correcting errors on countless forums. Despite insults
 and polite requests to 
207
shut up.
 And thanks to Michael for proofreading. 
208
Thanks to Stan Taylor, Michael Vassallo, and others whose detective work has changed 
everything.
 
209
Thanks to Gary Groth for letting Kirby tell his story again. 
Thanks to Mark Evanier for being the voice of calm restraint in all of this. 
And thanks to Kirby for everything! 
 
 
207 “Kirby Kultists” 
208 Forums typically do not want arguments over  that  topic. So, moderators tend to make statements like “We will 
just agree that Lee and Kirby were equally important” and that ends the debate. 
209 E.g Taylor tracked down all the known details surrounding Spider-Man’s creation. Vassallo, co-author of The 
Secret History of Marvel Comics, made a number of remarkable discoveries, such as why Lee was weeping 
when Kirby walked into his office in 1958. 

