Proof stage  
 
“Do not Distribute”
CAVITATION AND BUBBLE
DYNAMICS
Christopher E. Brennen


CAVITATION AND BUBBLE DYNAMICS
Cavitation and Bubble Dynamics deals with the fundamental physi-
cal processes of bubble dynamics and the phenomenon of cavitation.
It is ideal for graduate students and research engineers and scientists,
and a basic knowledge of ﬂuid ﬂow and heat transfer is assumed. The
analytical methods presented are developed from basic principles.
The book begins with a chapter on nucleation and describes both
the theory and observations in ﬂowing and non-ﬂowing systems. Three
chapters provide a systematic treatment of the dynamics and growth,
collapse, or oscillation of individual bubbles in otherwise quiescent
ﬂuids. The following chapters summarize the motion of bubbles in
liquids, describe some of the phenomena that occur in homogeneous
bubbly ﬂows, with emphasis on cloud cavitation, and summarize some
of the experimental observations of cavitating ﬂows. The last chapter
provides a review of free streamline methods used to treat separated
cavity ﬂows with large attached cavities.
Christopher Earls Brennen is the Richard and Dorothy M. Hayman
Professor of Mechanical Engineering Emeritus in the Faculty of Engi-
neering and Applied Science at the California Institute of Technology.
He has published more than 200 referred articles and is especially well
known for his research on cavitation, turbomachinery, and multiphase
ﬂows. He is the author of three textbooks – Fundamentals of Multi-
phase Flows, Hydrodynamics of Pumps, and Cavitation and Bubble
Dynamics – and has edited several others. Among his many honors
and positions are UN Consultant to India (1980); NASA New Technol-
ogy Award (1980); ASME Centennial Medallion (1980); Chair ASME
Fluids Engineering Division (1984–1985); ASME R. T. Knapp Award
for Best Paper (1978 and 1981); Caltech Student Award for teach-
ing excellence (1982, 1995, 1996); Christensen Fellow, St. Catherine’s
College, Oxford (1992); Fellow of the Japan Society for Promo-
tion of Science (1993); JSME Fluids Engineering Award (2002); and
Vice-President of Student Affairs at Caltech.


CAVITATION AND BUBBLE
DYNAMICS
Christopher E. Brennen
California Institute of Technology

32 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10013-2473, USA
Cambridge University Press in part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781107644762
c⃝Christopher E. Brennen 2014
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2014
Printed in the United States of America
A catalog record for this publication is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Brennen, Christopher E. (Christopher Earls), 1941- author.
Cavitation and bubble dynamics / Christopher E. Brennen, California Institute of Technology.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-107-64476-2 (pbk.)
1. Bubbles–Dynamics.
I. Title.
QC183.B815 2014
532′.597–dc23
2013022118
CIP
ISBN 978-1-107-64476-2 Paperback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of
URLs for external or third-party Internet websites referred to in this publication,
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.

“Where Alph, the sacred river, ran
Through caverns measureless to man ..”
Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772–1834)


Contents
Preface
page xi
Nomenclature
xiii
1
Phase Change, Nucleation, and Cavitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1
Introduction
1
1.2
The Liquid State
1
1.3
Fluidity and Elasticity
3
1.4
Illustration of Tensile Strength
5
1.5
Cavitation and Boiling
6
1.6
Types of Nucleation
7
1.7
Homogeneous Nucleation Theory
8
1.8
Comparison with Experiments
10
1.9
Experiments on Tensile Strength
13
1.10 Heterogeneous Nucleation
14
1.11 Nucleation Site Populations
15
1.12 Effect of Contaminant Gas
18
1.13 Nucleation in Flowing Liquids
19
1.14 Viscous Effects in Cavitation Inception
21
1.15 Cavitation Inception Measurements
22
1.16 Cavitation Inception Data
25
1.17 Scaling of Cavitation Inception
27
References
28
2
Spherical Bubble Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.1
Introduction
30
2.2
Rayleigh-Plesset Equation
30
2.3
Bubble Contents
33
2.4
In the Absence of Thermal Effects
35
2.5
Stability of Vapor/Gas Bubbles
39
2.6
Growth by Mass Diffusion
43
2.7
Thermal Effects on Growth
45
vii

viii
Contents
2.8
Thermally Controlled Growth
47
2.9
Nonequilibrium Effects
50
2.10 Convective Effects
50
2.11 Surface Roughening Effects
52
2.12 Nonspherical Perturbations
53
References
57
3
Cavitation Bubble Collapse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
3.1
Introduction
59
3.2
Bubble Collapse
59
3.3
Thermally Controlled Collapse
62
3.4
Thermal Effects in Bubble Collapse
63
3.5
Nonspherical Shape During Collapse
64
3.6
Cavitation Damage
71
3.7
Damage Due to Cloud Collapse
74
3.8
Cavitation Noise
75
3.9
Cavitation Luminescence
83
References
85
4
Dynamics of Oscillating Bubbles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
4.1
Introduction
89
4.2
Bubble Natural Frequencies
90
4.3
Effective Polytropic Constant
93
4.4
Additional Damping Terms
95
4.5
Nonlinear Effects
96
4.6
Weakly Nonlinear Analysis
98
4.7
Chaotic Oscillations
102
4.8
Threshold for Transient Cavitation
102
4.9
Rectiﬁed Mass Diffusion
103
4.10 Bjerknes Forces
107
References
108
5
Translation of Bubbles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
5.1
Introduction
110
5.2
High Re Flows Around a Sphere
111
5.3
Low Re Flows Around a Sphere
114
5.4
Marangoni Effects
117
5.5
Molecular Effects
120
5.6
Unsteady Particle Motions
120
5.7
Unsteady Potential Flow
123
5.8
Unsteady Stokes Flow
126
5.9
Growing or Collapsing Bubbles
130

Contents
ix
5.10 Equation of Motion
132
5.11 Magnitude of Relative Motion
136
5.12 Deformation Due to Translation
137
References
143
6
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
6.1
Introduction
145
6.2
Sonic Speed
146
6.3
Sonic Speed with Change of Phase
149
6.4
Barotropic Relations
152
6.5
Nozzle Flows
154
6.6
Vapor/Liquid Nozzle Flow
159
6.7
Flows with Bubble Dynamics
163
6.8
Acoustics of Bubbly Mixtures
164
6.9
Shock Waves in Bubbly Flows
168
6.10 Spherical Bubble Cloud
173
References
180
7
Cavitating Flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182
7.1
Introduction
182
7.2
Traveling Bubble Cavitation
183
7.3
Bubble/Flow Interactions
184
7.4
Experimental Observations
185
7.5
Large-Scale Cavitation Structures
191
7.6
Vortex Cavitation
192
7.7
Cloud Cavitation
196
7.8
Attached or Sheet Cavitation
197
7.9
Cavitating Foils
200
7.10 Cavity Closure
201
References
203
8
Free Streamline Flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 206
8.1
Introduction
206
8.2
Cavity Closure Models
209
8.3
Cavity Detachment Models
211
8.4
Wall Effects and Choked Flows
217
8.5
Steady Planar Flows
219
8.6
Some Nonlinear Results
222
8.7
Linearized Methods
227
8.8
Flat Plate Hydrofoil
229
8.9
Cavitating Cascades
232
8.10 Three-Dimensional Flows
237

x
Contents
8.11 Numerical Methods
237
8.12 Unsteady Flows
239
References
242
Index
247

Preface
This book is intended as a combination of a reference book for those who work with
cavitation or bubble dynamics and as a monograph for advanced students interested
in some of the basic problems associated with this category of multiphase ﬂows. A
book like this has many roots. It began many years ago when, as a young post-
doctoral fellow at the California Institute of Technology, I was asked to prepare a
series of lectures on cavitation for a graduate course cum seminar series. It was truly
a baptism by ﬁre, for the audience included three of the great names in cavitation
research, Milton Plesset, Allan Acosta, and Theodore Wu, none of whom readily
accepted superﬁcial explanations. For that, I am immensely grateful. The course and
I survived, and it evolved into one part of a graduate program in multiphase ﬂows.
There are many people to whom I owe a debt of gratitude for the roles they
played in making this book possible. It was my great good fortune to have known
and studied with six outstanding scholars, Les Woods, George Gadd, Milton Plesset,
Allan Acosta, Ted Wu, and Rolf Sabersky. I beneﬁted immensely from their schol-
arship and their friendship. I also owe much to my many colleagues in the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers whose insights ﬁll many of the pages of this mono-
graph. The support of my research program by the Ofﬁce of Naval Research is also
greatly appreciated. And, of course, I feel honored to have worked with an out-
standing group of graduate students at Caltech, including Sheung-Lip Ng, Kiam
Oey, David Braisted, Luca d’Agostino, Steven Ceccio, Sanjay Kumar, Douglas
Hart, Yan Kuhn de Chizelle, Beth McKenney, Zhenhuan Liu, Yi-Chun Wang,
Ronald J. Franz, Tricia A. Waniewski, Fabrizio d’Auria, Garrett E. Reisman, Mark
E. Duttweiler, and Keita Ando, all of whom studied aspects of cavitating ﬂows.
The original edition of this book was published by Oxford University Press in
1995. This corrected edition is published by Cambridge University Press and I wish
to express my sincerest thanks to Peter Gordon of CUP for his expert help and
encouragement on this and other projects.
This edition is dedicated with great love and deep gratitude to my wife and
lifelong friend, Barbara.
Pasadena, Calif.
C.E.B.
January 2013
xi


Nomenclature
Roman Letters
a
Amplitude of wave-like disturbance
A
Cross-sectional area or cloud radius
b
Body half-width
B
Tunnel half-width
c
Concentration of dissolved gas in liquid, speed of sound, chord
ck
Phase velocity for wavenumber k
cP
Speciﬁc heat at constant pressure
CD
Drag coefﬁcient
CL
Lift coefﬁcient
˜CLh, ˜CLp
Unsteady lift coefﬁcients
CM
Moment coefﬁcient
˜CMh, ˜CMp
Unsteady moment coefﬁcients
Cij
Lift/drag coefﬁcient matrix
Cp
Coefﬁcient of pressure
Cpmin
Minimum coefﬁcient of pressure
d
Cavity half-width, blade thickness to spacing ratio
D
Mass diffusivity
f
Frequency in Hz.
f
Complex velocity potential, φ + iψ
fN
A thermodynamic property of the phase or component, N
Fr
Froude number
g
Acceleration due to gravity
gx
Component of the gravitational acceleration in direction, x
gN
A thermodynamic property of the phase or component, N
G(f)
Spectral density function of sound
h
Speciﬁc enthalpy, wetted surface elevation, blade tip spacing
H
Henry’s law constant
Hm
Haberman-Morton number, normally gμ4/ρS3
i,j,k
Indices
xiii

xiv
Nomenclature
i
Square root of −1 in free streamline analysis
I
Acoustic impulse
I∗
Dimensionless acoustic impulse, 4πIR/ρLU∞R2
H
IKi
Kelvin impulse vector
j
Square root of −1
k
Boltzmann’s constant, polytropic constant or wavenumber
kN
Thermal conductivity or thermodynamic property of N
KG
Gas constant
Kij
Added mass coefﬁcient matrix, Mij/ 4
3ρπR3
Kc
Keulegan-Carpenter number
Kn
Knudsen number, λ/2R
ℓ
Typical dimension in the ﬂow, cavity half-length
L
Latent heat of vaporization
m
Mass
mG
Mass of gas in bubble
mp
Mass of particle
Mij
Added mass matrix
n
Index used for harmonics or number of sites per unit area
N(R)
Number density distribution function of R
˙NE
Cavitation event rate
Nu
Nusselt number
p
Pressure
pa
Radiated acoustic pressure
ps
Root mean square sound pressure
pS
A sound pressure level
pG
Partial pressure of gas
P
Pseudo-pressure
Pe
Peclet number, usually WR/αL
q
Magnitude of velocity vector
qc
Free surface velocity
Q
Source strength
r
Radial coordinate
R
Bubble radius
RB
Equivalent volumetric radius, [3τ/4π]
1
3
RH
Headform radius
RM
Maximum bubble radius
RN
Cavitation nucleus radius
RP
Nucleation site radius
R
Distance to measurement point
Re
Reynolds number, usually 2WR/νL
s
Coordinate measured along a streamline or surface
s
Speciﬁc entropy
S
Surface tension

Nomenclature
xv
St
Strouhal number, 2fR/W
t
Time
tR
Relaxation time for relative motion
t∗
Dimensionless time, t/tR
T
Temperature
u,v,w
Velocity components in cartesian coordinates
ui
Velocity vector
ur,uθ
Velocity components in polar coordinates
u′
Perturbation velocity in x direction, u −U∞
U,Ui
Fluid velocity and velocity vector in absence of particle
V,Vi
Absolute velocity and velocity vector of particle
U∞
Velocity of upstream uniform ﬂow
w
Complex conjugate velocity, u −iv
w
Dimensionless relative velocity, W/W∞
W
Relative velocity of particle
W∞
Terminal velocity of particle
We
Weber number, 2ρW2R/S
z
Complex position vector, x + iy
Greek Letters
α
Thermal diffusivity, volume fraction, angle of incidence
β
Cascade stagger angle, other local variables
γ
Ratio of speciﬁc heats of gas

Circulation, other local parameters
δ
Boundary layer thickness or increment of frequency
δD
Dissipation coefﬁcient
δT
Thermal boundary layer thickness
ϵ
Fractional volume
ζ
Complex variable, ξ + iη
η
Bubble population per unit liquid volume
η
Coordinate in ζ-plane
θ
Angular coordinate or direction of velocity vector
κ
Bulk modulus of compressibility
λ
Mean free path of molecules or particles

Accommodation coefﬁcient
μ
Dynamic viscosity
ν
Kinematic viscosity
ξ
Coordinate in ζ-plane
ϖ
Logarithmic hodograph variable, χ + iθ
ρ
Density
σ
Cavitation number
σc
Choked cavitation number

xvi
Nomenclature
σij
Stress tensor

Thermal parameter in bubble growth
τ
Volume of particle or bubble
φ
Velocity potential
φ′
Acceleration potential
ϕ
Fractional perturbation in bubble radius

Potential energy
χ
log(qc/|w|)
ψ
Stream function
ω
Radian frequency
ω∗
Reduced frequency, ωc/U∞
Subscripts
On any variable, Q:
Qo
Initial value, upstream value or reservoir value
Q1,Q2,Q3
Components of Q in three Cartesian directions
Q1,Q2
Values upstream and downstream of a shock
Q∞
Value far from the bubble or in the upstream ﬂow
QB
Value in the bubble
QC
Critical values and values at the critical point
QE
Equilibrium value or value on the saturated liquid/vapor line
QG
Value for the gas
Qi
Components of vector Q
Qij
Components of tensor Q
QL
Saturated liquid value
Qn
Harmonic of order n
QP
Peak value
QS
Value on the interface or at constant entropy
QV
Saturated vapor value
Q∗
Value at the throat
Superscripts and Other Qualiﬁers
On any variable, Q:
¯Q
Mean value of Q or complex conjugate of Q
˜Q
Complex amplitude of oscillating Q
˙Q
Time derivative of Q
¨Q
Second time derivative of Q
ˆQ(s)
Laplace transform of Q(t)
˘Q
Coordinate with origin at image point
Q+,Q−
Values of Q on either side of a cut in a complex plane

Nomenclature
xvii
δQ
Small change in Q
Re{Q}
Real part of Q
Im{Q}
Imaginary part of Q
Units
In most of this book, the emphasis is placed on the nondimensional parameters that
govern the phenomenon being discussed. However, there are also circumstances in
which we shall utilize dimensional thermodynamic and transport properties. In such
cases the International System of Units will be employed using the basic units of
mass (kg), length (m), time (s), and absolute temperature (K); where it is particularly
convenient units such as a joule (kgm2/s2) will occasionally be used.


1
Phase Change, Nucleation, and Cavitation
1.1 Introduction
This ﬁrst chapter will focus on the mechanisms of formation of two-phase mixtures
of vapor and liquid. Particular attention will be given to the process of the creation
of vapor bubbles in a liquid. In doing so we will attempt to meld together several
overlapping areas of research activity. First, there are the studies of the fundamen-
tal physics of nucleation as epitomized by the books of Frenkel (1955) and Skripov
(1974). These deal largely with very pure liquids and clean environments in order
to isolate the behavior of pure liquids. On the other hand, most engineering sys-
tems are impure or contaminated in ways that have important effects on the process
of nucleation. The later part of the chapter will deal with the physics of nucleation
in such engineering environments. This engineering knowledge tends to be divided
into two somewhat separate ﬁelds of interest, cavitation and boiling. A rough but
useful way of distinguishing these two processes is to deﬁne cavitation as the pro-
cess of nucleation in a liquid when the pressure falls below the vapor pressure, while
boiling is the process of nucleation that ocurs when the temperature is raised above
the saturated vapor/liquid temperature. Of course, from a basic physical point of
view, there is little difference between the two processes, and we shall attempt to
review the two processes of nucleation simultaneously. The differences in the two
processes occur because of the different complicating factors that occur in a cavi-
tating ﬂow on the one hand and in the temperature gradients and wall effects that
occur in boiling on the other hand. The last sections of this ﬁrst chapter will dwell
on some of these complicating factors.
1.2 The Liquid State
Any discussion of the process of phase change from liquid to gas or vice versa must
necessarily be preceded by a discussion of the liquid state. Though simple kinetic
theory understanding of the gaseous state is sufﬁcient for our purposes, it is nec-
essary to dwell somewhat longer on the nature of the liquid state. In doing so we
shall follow Frenkel (1955), though it should also be noted that modern studies are
usually couched in terms of statistical mechanics (for example, Carey 1992).
1

2
Phase Change, Nucleation, and Cavitation
P
Vapor
Spinodal
Liquid
Spinodal
Gas
Liquid
Solid
Saturated
Vapor/Liquid
Triple
Point
T
Saturated
Liquid
Saturated Vapor
(Binodal)
Liquid
Spinodal
Isotherm
Actual
Isotherm
Theoretical Isotherm
Critical
Point
Isotherm
Vapor
Spinodal
D
B
A
F
F
C
E
D
Critical
Point
P
V
Figure 1.1 Typical phase diagrams.
Our discussion will begin with typical phase diagrams, which, though idealized,
are relevant to many practical substances. Figure 1.1 shows typical graphs of pres-
sure, p, temperature, T, and speciﬁc volume, V, in which the state of the substance
is indicated. The triple point is that point in the phase diagram at which the solid,
liquid, and vapor states coexist; that is to say the substance has three alternative
stable states. The saturated liquid/vapor line (or binodal) extends from this point
to the critical point. Thermodynamically it is deﬁned by the fact that the chemical
potentials of the two coexisting phases must be equal. On this line the vapor and liq-
uid states represent two limiting forms of a single “amorphous” state, one of which
can be obtained from the other by isothermal volumetric changes, leading through
intermediate but unstable states. To quote Frenkel (1955), “Owing to this insta-
bility, the actual transition from the liquid state to the gaseous one and vice versa
takes place not along a theoretical isotherm (dashed line, right, Figure 1.1), but along
a horizontal isotherm (solid line), corresponding to the splitting up of the original
homogeneous substance into two different coexisting phases...” The critical point is
that point at which the maxima and minima in the theoretical isotherm vanish and
the discontinuity disappears.
The line joining the maxima in the theoretical isotherms is called the vapor
spinodal line; the line joining the minima is called the liquid spinodal line Clearly
both spinodals end at the critical point. The two regions between the spinodal lines
and the saturated (or binodal) lines are of particular interest because the condi-
tions represented by the theoretical isotherm within these regions can be realized
in practice under certain special conditions. If, for example, a pure liquid at the
state A (Figure 1.1) is depressurized at constant temperature, then several things
may happen when the pressure is reduced below that of point B (the saturated vapor
pressure). If sufﬁcient numbers of nucleation sites of sufﬁcient size are present (and
this needs further discussion later) the liquid will become vapor as the state moves

1.3 Fluidity and Elasticity
3
horizontally from B to C, and at pressure below the vapor pressure the state will
come to equilibrium in the gaseous region at a point such as E. However, if no
nucleation sites are present, the depressurization may lead to continuation of the
state down the theoretical isotherm to a point such as D, called a “metastable state”
since imperfections may lead to instability and transition to the point E. A liquid at
a point such as D is said to be in tension, the pressure difference between B and D
being the magnitude of the tension. Of course one could also reach a point like D by
proceeding along an isobar from a point such as D′ by increasing the temperature.
Then an equivalent description of the state at D is to call it superheated and to refer
to the difference between the temperatures at D and D′ as the superheat.
In an analogous way one can visualize cooling or pressurizing a vapor that is
initially at a state such as F and proceeding to a metastable state such as F′ where the
temperature difference between F and F′ is the degree of subcooling of the vapor.
1.3 Fluidity and Elasticity
Before proceding with more detail, it is valuable to point out several qualitative fea-
tures of the liquid state and to remark on its comparison with the simpler crystalline
solid or gaseous states.
The ﬁrst and most obvious difference between the saturated liquid and satu-
rated vapor states is that the density of the liquid remains relatively constant and
similar to that of the solid except close to the critical point. On the other hand the
density of the vapor is different by at least 2 and up to 5 or more orders of mag-
nitude, changing radically with temperature. Since it will also be important in later
discussions, a plot of the ratio of the saturated liquid density to the saturated vapor
density is included as Figure 1.2 for a number of different ﬂuids. The ratio is plotted
against a non-dimensional temperature, θ = T/TC where T is the actual temperature
and TC is the critical temperature.
Second, an examination of the measured speciﬁc heat of the saturated liquid
reveals that this is of the same order as the speciﬁc heat of the solid except at high
temperature close to the critical point. The above two features of liquids imply
that the thermal motion of the liquid molecules is similar to that of the solid and
involves small amplitude vibrations about a quasi-equilibrium position within the
liquid. Thus the arrangement of the molecules has greater similarity with a solid
than with a gas. One needs to stress this similarity with a solid to counteract the ten-
dency to think of the liquid state as more akin to the gaseous state than to the solid
state because in many observed processes it possesses a dominant ﬂuidity rather
than a dominant elasticity. Indeed, it is of interest in this regard to point out that
solids also possess ﬂuidity in addition to elasticity. At high temperatures, particu-
larly above 0.6 or 0.7 of the melting temperature, most crystalline solids exhibit a
ﬂuidity known as creep. When the strain rate is high, this creep occurs due to the
nonisotropic propagation of dislocations (this behavior is not like that of a Newto-
nian liquid and cannot be characterized by a simple viscosity). At low strain rates,
high-temperature creep occurs due simply to the isotropic migration of molecules

4
Phase Change, Nucleation, and Cavitation
108
107
106
105
104
103
102
10
0.2
0.4
Temperature / Critical Temperature, T/TC
Saturated Liquid / Saturated Vapor Density Ratio, ρL/ρV
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
Oxygen
Water
Sodium
Toluene
Ethane
Freon-12
Nitrogem
Methane
Hydrogen
Mercury
Helium-4
Figure 1.2 Ratio of saturated liquid density to saturated vapor density as a function of
temperature for various pure substances.
within the crystal lattice due to the thermal agitation. This kind of creep, which is
known as diffusion creep, is analogous to the ﬂuidity observed in most liquids and
can be characterized by a simple Newtonian viscosity.
Following this we may ask whether the liquid state possesses an elasticity even
though such elasticity may be dominated by the ﬂuidity of the liquid in many physi-
cal processes. In both the liquid and solid states one might envisage a certain typical
time, tm, for the migration of a molecule from one position within the structure of
the substance to a neighboring position; alternatively one might consider this typi-
cal time as characterizing the migration of a “hole” or vacancy from one position to
another within the structure. Then if the typical time, t, associated with the applied
force is small compared with tm, the substance will not be capable of permanent
deformation during that process and will exhibit elasticity rather than ﬂuidity. On
the other hand if t ≫tm the material will exhibit ﬂuidity. Thus, though the con-
clusion is overly simplistic, one can characterize a solid as having a large tm and a
liquid as having a small tm relative to the order of magnitude of the typical time, t,
of the applied force. One example of this is that the earth’s mantle behaves to all

1.4 Illustration of Tensile Strength
5
intents and purposes as solid rock in so far as the propagation of seismic waves is
concerned, and yet its ﬂuid-like ﬂow over long geological times is responsible for
continental drift.
The observation time, t, becomes important when the phenomenon is controlled
by stochastic events such as the diffusion of vacancies in diffusion creep. In many
cases the process of nucleation is also controlled by such stochastic events, so the
observation time will play a signiﬁcant role in determining this process. Over a
longer period of time there is a greater probability that vacancies will coalesce to
form a ﬁnite vapor pocket leading to nucleation. Conversely, it is also possible to
visualize that a liquid could be placed in a state of tension (negative pressure) for a
signiﬁcant period of time before a vapor bubble would form in it. Such a scenario
was visualized many years ago. In 1850, Berthelot (1850) subjected puriﬁed water
to tensions of up to 50 atmospheres before it yielded. This ability of liquids to with-
stand tension is very similar to the more familiar property exhibited by solids and is
a manifestation of the elasticity of a liquid.
1.4 Illustration of Tensile Strength
Frenkel (1955) illustrates the potential tensile strength of a pure liquid by means of
a simple, but instructive calculation. Consider two molecules separated by a vari-
able distance s. The typical potential energy, , associated with the intermolecular
forces has the form shown in Figure 1.3. Equilibrium occurs at the separation, xo,
typically of the order of 10−10m. The attractive force, F, between the molecules is
equal to ∂/∂x and is a maximum at some distance, x1, where typically x1/xo is of
the order of 1.1 or 1.2. In a bulk liquid or solid this would correspond to a fractional
volumetric expansion, V/Vo, of about one-third. Consequently the application of
a constant tensile stress equal to that pertinent at x1 would completely rupture the
liquid or solid since for x > x1 the attractive force is insufﬁcient to counteract that
tensile force. In fact, liquids and solids have compressibility moduli, κ, which are
usually in the range of 1010 to 1011 kg/m s2 and since the pressure, p = −κ(V/Vo),

X
XO
XI
Figure 1.3 Intermolecular potential.

6
Phase Change, Nucleation, and Cavitation
it follows that the typical pressure that will rupture a liquid, pT, is −3 × 109 to
−3 × 1010 kg/m s2. In other words, we estimate on this basis that liquids or solids
should be able to withstand tensile stresses of 3 × 104 to 3 × 105 atmospheres! In
practice solids do not reach these limits (the rupture stress is usually about 100 times
less) because of stress concentrations; that is to say, the actual stress encountered
at certain points can achieve the large values quoted above at certain points even
when the overall or globally averaged stress is still 100 times smaller. In liquids
the large theoretical values of the tensile strength defy all practical experience; this
discrepancy must be addressed.
It is valuable to continue the above calculation one further step (Frenkel
1955). The elastic energy stored per unit volume of the above system is given by
κ(V)2/2Vo or |p|Vo/2. Consequently the energy that one must provide to pull
apart all the molecules and vaporize the liquid can be estimated to be given by
|pT|/6 or between 5 ×108 and 5 ×109 kg/m s2. This is in agreement with the order of
magnitude of the latent heat of vaporization measured for many liquids. Moreover,
one can correctly estimate the order of magnitude of the critical temperature, TC,
by assuming that, at that point, the kinetic energy of heat motion, kTC per molecule
(where k is Boltzmann’s constant, 1.38 × 10−23 kg m2/s2K) is equal to the energy
required to pull all the molecules apart. Taking a typical 1030 molecules per m3, this
implies that TC is given by equating the kinetic energy of the thermal motions per
unit volume, or 1.38 × 107 × TC, to |pT|/6. This yields typical values of TC of the
order of 30 →300◦K, which is in accord with the order of magnitude of the actual
values. Consequently we ﬁnd that this simplistic model presents a dilemma because
though it correctly predicts the order of magnitude of the latent heat of vaporiza-
tion and the critical temperature, it fails dismally to predict the tensile strength that
a liquid can withstand. One must conclude that unlike the latent heat and critical
temperature, the tensile strength is determined by weaknesses at points within the
liquid. Such weaknesses are probably ephemeral and difﬁcult to quantify, since they
could be caused by minute impurities. This difﬁculty and the dependence on the
time of application of the tension greatly complicate any theoretical evaluation of
the tensile strength.
1.5 Cavitation and Boiling
As we discussed in Section 1.2, the tensile strength of a liquid can be manifest in at
least two ways:
1. A liquid at constant temperature could be subjected to a decreasing pressure,
p, which falls below the saturated vapor pressure, pV. The value of (pV −p) is
called the tension, p, and the magnitude at which rupture occurs is the tensile
strength of the liquid, pC. The process of rupturing a liquid by decrease in
pressure at roughly constant liquid temperature is often called cavitation.
2. A liquid at constant pressure may be subjected to a temperature, T, in excess
of the normal saturation temperature, TS. The value of T = T −TS is the

1.6 Types of Nucleation
7
superheat, and the point at which vapor is formed, TC, is called the critical
superheat. The process of rupturing a liquid by increasing the temperature at
roughly constant pressure is often called boiling.
Though the basic mechanics of cavitation and boiling must clearly be similar, it is
important to differentiate between the thermodynamic paths that precede the for-
mation of vapor. There are differences in the practical manifestations of the two
paths because, although it is fairly easy to cause uniform changes in pressure in a
body of liquid, it is very difﬁcult to uniformly change the temperature. Note that the
critical values of the tension and superheat may be related when the magnitudes of
these quantities are small. By the Clausius-Clapeyron relation,
 dp
dT

saturation
conditions
=
L
T

ρ−1
V −ρ−1
L

(1.1)
where ρL,ρV are the saturated liquid and vapor densities and L is the latent heat
of evaporation. Except close to the critical point, we have ρL ≫ρV and hence
dp/dT ≈ρVL/T. Therefore
TC ≈pC · T
LρV
(1.2)
For example, in water at 373K with ρV = 1 kg/m3 and L ≈2 × 106 m2/s2 a superheat
of 20K corresponds approximately to one atmosphere of tension. It is important to
emphasize that Equation (1.2) is limited to small values of the tension and superheat
but provides a useful relation under those circumstances. When pC and TC are
larger, it is necessary to use an appropriate equation of state for the substance in
order to establish a numerical relationship.
1.6 Types of Nucleation
In any practical experiment or application weaknesses can typically occur in two
forms. The thermal motions within the liquid form temporary, microscopic voids
that can constitute the nuclei necessary for rupture and growth to macroscopic bub-
bles. This is termed homogeneous nucleation. In practical engineering situations
it is much commoner to ﬁnd that the major weaknesses occur at the boundary
between the liquid and the solid wall of the container or between the liquid and
small particles suspended in the liquid. When rupture occurs at such sites, it is
termed heterogeneous nucleation.
In the following sections we brieﬂy review the theory of homogeneous nucle-
ation and some of the experimental results conducted in very clean systems that can
be compared with the theory.
In covering the subject of homogeneous nucleation, it is important to remember
that the classical treatment using the kinetic theory of liquids allows only weak-
nesses of one type: the ephemeral voids that happen to occur because of the thermal
motions of the molecules. In any real system several other types of weakness are
possible. First, it is possible that nucleation might occur at the junction of the liquid

8
Phase Change, Nucleation, and Cavitation
and a solid boundary. Kinetic theories have also been developed to cover such
heterogeneous nucleation and allow evaluation of whether the chance that this will
occur is larger or smaller than the chance of homogeneous nucleation. It is impor-
tant to remember that heterogeneous nucleation could also occur on very small,
sub-micron sized contaminant particles in the liquid; experimentally this would be
hard to distinguish from homogeneous nucleation.
Another important form of weaknesses are micron-sized bubbles (microbub-
bles) of contaminant gas, which could be present in crevices within the solid
boundary or within suspended particles or could simply be freely suspended within
the liquid. In water, microbubbles of air seem to persist almost indeﬁnitely and
are almost impossible to remove completely. As we discuss later, they seem to
resist being dissolved completely, perhaps because of contamination of the inter-
face. While it may be possible to remove most of these nuclei from a small research
laboratory sample, their presence dominates most engineering applications. In liq-
uids other than water, the kinds of contamination which can occur in practice have
not received the same attention.
Another important form of contamination is cosmic radiation. A collision
between a high energy particle and a molecule of the liquid can deposit sufﬁcient
energy to initiate nucleation when it would otherwise have little chance of occur-
ring. Such, of course, is the principal of the bubble chamber (Skripov 1974). While
this subject is beyond the scope of this text, it is important to bear in mind that nat-
urally occurring cosmic radiation could be a factor in promoting nucleation in all of
the circumstances considered here.
1.7 Homogeneous Nucleation Theory
Studies of the fundamental physics of the formation of vapor voids in the body of
a pure liquid date back to the pioneering work of Gibbs (Gibbs 1961). The mod-
ern theory of homogeneous nucleation is due to Volmer and Weber (1926), Farkas
(1927), Becker and Doring (1935), Zeldovich (1943), and others. For reviews of the
subject, the reader is referred to the books of Frenkel (1955) and Skripov (1974),
to the recent text by Carey (1992) and to the reviews by Blake (1949), Bernath
(1952), Cole (1970), Blander and Katz (1975), and Lienhard and Karimi (1981).
We present here a brief and simpliﬁed version of homogeneous nucleation theory,
omitting many of the detailed thermodynamical issues; for more detail the reader is
referred to the above literature.
In a pure liquid, surface tension is the macroscopic manifestation of the inter-
molecular forces that tend to hold molecules together and prevent the formation of
large holes. The liquid pressure, p, exterior to a bubble of radius R, will be related
to the interior pressure, pB, by
pB −p = 2S
R
(1.3)
where S is the surface tension. In this and the section which follow it is assumed that
the concept of surface tension (or, rather, surface energy) can be extended down to

1.7 Homogeneous Nucleation Theory
9
bubbles or vacancies a few intermolecular distances in size. Such an approximation
is surprisingly accurate (Skripov 1974).
If the temperature, T, is uniform and the bubble contains only vapor, then the
interior pressure pB will be the saturated vapor pressure pV(T). However, the exte-
rior liquid pressure, p = pV −2S/R, will have to be less than pV in order to produce
equilibrium conditions. Consequently if the exterior liquid pressure is maintained
at a constant value just slightly less than pV −2S/R, the bubble will grow, R will
increase, the excess pressure causing growth will increase, and rupture will occur.
It follows that if the maximum size of vacancy present is RC (termed the criti-
cal radius or cluster radius), then the tensile strength of the liquid, pC, will be
given by
pC = 2S/RC
(1.4)
In the case of ephemeral vacancies such as those created by random molecular
motions, this simple expression, pC = 2S/RC, must be couched in terms of the
probability that a vacancy, RC, will occur during the time for which the tension is
applied or the time of observation. This would then yield a probability that the
liquid would rupture under a given tension during the available time.
It is of interest to substitute a typical surface tension, S = 0.05 kg/s2, and a
critical vacancy or bubble size, RC, comparable with the intermolecular distance
of 10−10 m. Then the calculated tensile strength, pC, would be 109 kg/m s2 or
104 atm. This is clearly in accord with the estimate of the tensile strength out-
lined in Section 1.4 but, of course, at variance with any of the experimental obser-
vations.
Equation (1.4) is the ﬁrst of three basic relations that constitute homoge-
neous nucleation theory. The second expression we need to identify is that giving
the increment of energy that must be deposited in the body of the pure liquid
in order to create a nucleus or microbubble of the critical size, RC. Assuming
that the critical nucleus is in thermodynamic equilibrium with its surroundings
after its creation, then the increment of energy that must be deposited consists
of two parts. First, energy must be deposited to account for that stored in the
surface of the bubble. By deﬁnition of the surface tension, S, that amount is S
per unit surface area for a total of 4πR2
CS. But, in addition, the liquid has to be
displaced outward in order to create the bubble, and this implies work done on
or by the system. The pressure difference involved in this energy increment is
the difference between the pressure inside and outside of the bubble (which, in
this evaluation, is pC, given by Equation (1.4)). The work done is the volume
of the bubble multiplied by this pressure difference, or 4πR3
CpC/3, and this is
the work done by the liquid to achieve the displacement implied by the creation
of the bubble. Thus the net energy, WCR, that must be deposited to form the
bubble is
WCR = 4πR2
CS −4
3πR3
CpC = 4
3πR2
CS
(1.5)

10
Phase Change, Nucleation, and Cavitation
It can also be useful to eliminate RC from Equations (1.4) and (1.5) to write the
expression for the critical deposition energy as
WCR = 16πS3/3(pC)2
(1.6)
It was, in fact, Gibbs (1961) who ﬁrst formulated this expression. For more detailed
considerations the reader is referred to the works of Skripov (1974) and many
others.
The ﬁnal step in homogeneous nucleation theory is an evaluation of the
mechansims by which energy deposition could occur and the probability of that
energy reaching the magnitude, WCR, in the available time. Then Equation (1.6)
yields the probability of the liquid being able to sustain a tension of pC during that
time. In the body of a pure liquid completely isolated from any external radiation,
the issue is reduced to an evaluation of the probability that the stochastic nature of
the thermal motions of the molecules would lead to a local energy perturbation of
magnitude WCR. Most of the homogeneous nucleation theories therefore relate WCR
to the typical kinetic energy of the molecules, namely kT (k is Boltzmann’s constant)
and the relationship is couched in terms of a Gibbs number,
Gb = WCR/kT
(1.7)
It follows that a given Gibbs number will correspond to a certain probability of a
nucleation event in a given volume during a given available time. For later use it is
wise to point out that other basic relations for WCR have been proposed. For exam-
ple, Lienhard and Karimi (1981) ﬁnd that a value of WCR related to kTC (where
TC is the critical temperature) rather than kT leads to a better correlation with
experimental observations.
A number of expressions have been proposed for the precise form of the rela-
tionship between the nucleation rate, J, deﬁned as the number of nucleation events
occurring in a unit volume per unit time and the Gibbs number, Gb, but all take the
general form
J = JOe−Gb
(1.8)
where JO is some factor of proportionality. Various functional forms have been
suggested for JO. A typical form is that given by Blander and Katz (1975), namely
JO = N
 2S
πm
 1
2
(1.9)
where N is the number density of the liquid (molecules/m3) and m is the mass of a
molecule. Though JO may be a function of temperature, the effect of an error in JO
is small compared with the effect on the exponent, Gb, in Equation (1.8).
1.8 Comparison with Experiments
The nucleation rate, J, is given by Equations (1.8), (1.7), (1.6), and some form for
JO, such as Equation (1.9). It varies with temperature in ways that are important to

1.8 Comparison with Experiments
11
identify in order to understand the experimental observations. Consider the tension,
pC, which corresponds to a given nucleation rate, J, according to these equations:
pC =

16πS3
3kT ln(JO/J)
 1
2
(1.10)
This can be used to calculate the tensile strength of the liquid given the temperature,
T, knowledge of the surface tension variation with temperature, and other ﬂuid
properties, plus a selected criterion deﬁning a speciﬁc critical nucleation rate, J.
Note ﬁrst that the most important effect of the temperature on the tension occurs
through the variation of the S3 in the numerator. Since S is roughly linear with T
declining to zero at the critical point, it follows that pC will be a strong function
of temperature close to the critical point because of the S3 term. In contrast, any
temperature dependence of JO is almost negligible because it occurs in the argument
of the logarithm. At lower temperatures, far from the critical point, the dependence
of pC on temperature is weak since S3 varies little, so the tensile strength, pC,
will not change much with temperature.
For reasons that will become clear as we progress, it is convenient to divide
the discussion of the experimental results into two temperature ranges: above and
below that temperature for which the spinodal pressure is roughly zero. This divid-
ing temperature can be derived from an applicable equation of state and turns out
to be about T/TC = 0.9.
For temperatures between TC and 0.9 TC, the tensile strengths calculated from
Equation (1.10) are fairly modest. This is because the critical cluster radii, RC =
2S/pC, is quite large. For example, a tension of 1 bar corresponds to a nucleus
RC = 1 μm. It follows that sub-micron-sized contamination particles or microbub-
bles will have little effect on the experiments in this temperature range because
the thermal weaknesses are larger. Figure 1.4, taken from Skripov (1974), presents
typical experimental values for the average lifetime, J−1, of a unit volume of super-
heated liquid, in this case diethyl ether. The data is plotted against the saturation
temperature, TS, for experiments conducted at four different, positive pressures
(since the pressures are positive, all the data lies in the TC > T > 0.9 TC domain).
Figure 1.4 illustrates several important features. First, all of the data for J−1 < 5s
correspond to homogeneous nucleation and show fairly good agreement with homo-
geneous nucleation theory. The radical departure of the experimental data from the
theory for J−1 > 5s is caused by radiation that induces nucleation at much smaller
superheats. The ﬁgure also illustrates how weakly the superheat limit depends on
the selected value of the “critical” nucleation rate, as was anticipated in our com-
ments on Equation (1.10). Since the lines are almost vertical, one can obtain from
the experimental results a maximum possible superheat or tension without the need
to stipulate a speciﬁc critical nucleation rate. Figure 1.5, taken from Eberhart and
Schnyders (1973), presents data on this superheat limit for ﬁve different liquids.
For most liquids in this range of positive pressures, the maximum possi-
ble superheat is accurately predicted by homogeneous nucleation theory. Indeed,

12
Phase Change, Nucleation, and Cavitation
100
10
1
1
2
3
4
130
140
Temperature, T (ºC)
Average Lifetime, J –1 (sec)
150
160
0.1
Figure 1.4 Experimentally observed average lifetimes (1/J) of a unit volume of superheated
diethyl ether at four different pressures of (1) 1 bar (2) 5 bar (3) 10 bar and (4) 15 bar plot-
ted against the saturation temperature, TS. Lines correspond to two different homogeneous
n u cl eat i o n t h eo r i es. (F ro m S k r i p o v 1974).
1.00
0.95
0.80
0.85
0.90
–0.6
–0.4
5
43
2
1
–0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
N–Pentane
Pressure Ratio, p/pc
Temperature Ratio, T/TC
1.0
0.75
N–Hexane
N–Heptane
Ether
Benzene
Figure 1.5 Limit of superheat data for ﬁve different liquids compared with the liquid spin-
odal lines derived from ﬁve different equations of state including van der Waal’s (1) and
B ert h el o t ’ s ( 5). ( F r o m E b erh art an d S ch n yd ers 1973).
Lienhard and Karimi (1981) have demonstrated that this limit should be so close to
the liquid spinodal line that the data can be used to test model equations of state for
the liquid in the metastable region. Figure 1.5 includes a comparison with several
such constitutive laws. The data in Figure 1.5 correspond with a critical Gibbs num-
ber of 11.5, a value that can be used with Equations (1.6) and (1.7) to yield a simple
expression for the superheat limit of most liquids in the range of positive pressures.
Unfortunately, one of the exceptions to the rule is the most common liquid of
all, water. Even for T > 0.9TC, experimental data lie well below the maximum super-
heat prediction. For example, the estimated temperature of maximum superheat

1.9 Experiments on Tensile Strength
13
at atmospheric pressure is about 300◦C and the maximum that has been attained
experimentally is 280◦C. The reasons for this discrepancy do not seem to be well
understood (Eberhart and Schnyders 1973).
The above remarks addressed the range of temperatures above 0.9 TC. We now
turn to the differences that occur at lower temperatures. Below about 0.9TC, the
superheat limit corresponds to a negative pressure. Indeed, Figure 1.5 includes data
down to about −0.4 pC (T ≈0.85 TC) and demonstrates that the prediction of the
superheat limit from homogeneous nucleation theory works quite well down to this
temperature. Lienhard and Karimi (1981) have examined the theoretical limit for
water at even lower temperatures and conclude that a more accurate criterion than
Gb = 11.5 is WCR/kTC = 11.5.
One of the reasons for the increasing inaccuracy and uncertainty at lower
temperatures is that the homogeneous nucleation theory implies larger and larger
tensions, pC, and therefore smaller and smaller critical cluster radii. It follows that
almost all of the other nucleation initiators become more important and cause rup-
ture at tensions much smaller than predicted by homogeneous nucleation theory. In
water, the uncertainty that was even present for T > 0.9 TC is increased even fur-
ther, and homogeneous nucleation theory becomes virtually irrelevant in water at
normal temperatures.
1.9 Experiments on Tensile Strength
Experiments on the tensile strength of water date back to Berthelot (1850) whose
basic method has been subsequently used by many investigators. It consists of seal-
ing very pure, degassed liquid in a freshly formed capillary tube under vacuum
conditions. Heating the tube causes the liquid to expand, ﬁlling the tube at some
elevated temperature (and pressure). Upon cooling, rupture is observed at some
particular temperature (and pressure). The tensile strength is obtained from these
temperatures and assumed values of the compressibility of the liquid. Other tech-
niques used include the mechanical bellows of Vincent (1941) (see also Vincent and
Simmonds 1943), the spinning U-tube of Reynolds (1882), and the piston devices of
Davies et al. (1956). All these experiments are made difﬁcult by the need to carefully
control not only the purity of the liquid but also the properties of the solid surfaces.
In many cases it is very difﬁcult to determine whether homogeneous nucleation has
occurred or whether the rupture occurred at the solid boundary. Furthermore, the
data obtained from such experiments are very scattered.
In freshly drawn capillary tubes, Berthelot (1850) was able to achieve tensions
of 50 bar in water at normal temperatures. With further reﬁnements, Dixon (1909)
was able to get up to 200 bar but still, of course, far short of the theoretical limit.
Similar scattered results have been reported for water and other liquids by Meyer
(1911), Vincent (1941), and others. It is clear that the material of the container plays
an important role; using steel Berthelot tubes, Rees and Trevena (1966) were not
able to approach the high tensions observed in glass tubes. Clearly, then, the data
show that the tensile strength is a function of the contamination of the liquid and

14
Phase Change, Nucleation, and Cavitation
the character of the containing surface, and we must move on to consider some of
the important issues in this regard.
1.10 Heterogeneous Nucleation
In the case of homogeneous nucleation we considered microscopic voids of radius
R, which grow causing rupture when the pressure on the liquid, p, is reduced below
the critical value pV −2S/R. Therefore the tensile strength was 2S/R. Now con-
sider a number of analogous situations at a solid/liquid interface as indicated in
Figure 1.6. The contact angle at the liquid/vapor/solid intersection is denoted by
θ. It follows that the tensile strength in the case of the ﬂat hydrophobic surface is
given by 2Ssinθ/R where R is the typical maximum dimension of the void. Hence, in
theory, the tensile strength could be zero in the limit as θ →π. On the other hand,
the tensile strength for a hydrophilic surface is comparable with that for homoge-
neous nucleation since the maximum dimensions of the voids are comparable. One
could therefore conclude that the presence of a hydrophobic surface would cause
heterogeneous nucleation and much reduced tensile strength.
Of course, at the microscopic scale with which we are concerned, surfaces are
not ﬂat, so we must consider the effects of other local surface geometries. The coni-
cal cavity of case (c) is usually considered in order to exemplify the effect of surface
geometry. If the half angle at the vertex of this cavity is denoted by α, then it is clear
that zero tensile strength occurs at the more realizable value of θ = α + π/2 rather
than θ →π. Moreover, if θ > α + π/2, it is clear that the vapor bubble would grow
to ﬁll the cavity at pressures above the vapor pressure.
Case (A) Flat Hydrophobic
               Surface (  > /2) 
Bubble
2R
Case (B) Flat Hydrophilic
                 Surface (  > /2) 
Bubble
2R
Case (C) Conical Cavity
Bubble
Figure 1.6 Various modes of heterogeneous nucleation.

1.11 Nucleation Site Populations
15
Hence if one considers the range of microscopic surface geometries, then it is
not at all surprising that vapor pockets would grow within some particular surface
cavities at pressures in the neighborhood of the vapor pressure, particularly when
the surface is hydrophobic. Several questions do however remain. First, how might
such a vapor pocket ﬁrst be created? In most experiments it is quite plausible to
conceive of minute pockets of contaminant gas absorbed in the solid surface. This
is perhaps least likely with freshly formed glass capillary tubes, a fact that may help
explain the larger tensions measured in Berthelot tube experiments. The second
question concerns the expansion of these vapor pockets beyond the envelope of the
solid surface and into the body of the liquid. One could still argue that dramatic
rupture requires the appearance of large voids in the body of the liquid and hence
that the ﬂat surface conﬁgurations should still be applicable on a larger scale. The
answer clearly lies with the detailed topology of the surface. If the opening of the
cavity has dimensions of the order of 10−5 m, the subsequent tension required to
expand the bubble beyond the envelope of the surface is only of the order of a tenth
of an atmosphere and hence quite within the realm of experimental observation.
It is clear that some speciﬁc sites on a solid surface will have the optimum geom-
etry to promote the growth and macroscopic appearance of vapor bubbles. Such
locations are called nucleation sites. Furthermore, it is clear that as the pressure is
reduced more and more, sites will become capable of generating and releasing bub-
bles to the body of the liquid. These events are readily observed when you boil a pot
of water on the stove. At the initiation of boiling, bubbles are produced at a few spe-
ciﬁc sites. As the pot gets hotter more and more sites become activated. Hence the
density of nucleation sites as a function of the superheat is an important component
in the quantiﬁcation of nucleate boiling.
1.11 Nucleation Site Populations
In pool boiling the hottest liquid is in contact with the solid heated wall of the pool,
and hence all the important nucleation sites occur in that surface. For the purpose
of quantifying the process of nucleation it is necessary to deﬁne a surface number
density distribution function for the nucleation sites, N(RP), where N(RP)dRP is the
number of sites with size between RP and RP + dRP per unit surface area (thus N
has units m−3). In addition to this, it is necessary to know the range of sizes brought
into operation by a given superheat, T. Characteristically, all sizes greater than R∗
P
will be excited by a tension of βS/R∗
P where β is some constant of order unity. This
corresponds to a critical superheat given by
T = βST/LρV R∗
P
(1.11)
Thus the number of sites per unit surface area, n(T), brought into operation by a
speciﬁc superheat, T, is given by
n(T) =
∞

βST
LρV T
N(RP)dRP
(1.12)

16
Phase Change, Nucleation, and Cavitation
15
5
10
10
20
Superheat, T
Active Sites Per Unit Surface Area, n (cm–2)
0
Water
Ethanol
Methanol
20
0
60
40
Site Size, RP (m)
Figure 1.7 Experimental data on the number of active nucleation sites per unit surface area,
n, for a polished copper surface. Fro m Grifﬁth an d Wallis (1960).
The data of Grifﬁth and Wallis (1960), presented in Figure 1.7, illustrates this effect.
On the left of this ﬁgure are the measurements of the number of active sites per unit
surface area, n, for a particular polished copper surface and the three different liq-
uids. The three curves would correspond to different N(RP) for the three liquids. The
graph on the right is obtained using Equation (1.11) with β = 2 and demonstrates
the veracity of Equation (1.12) for a particular surface.
Identiﬁcation of the nucleation sites involved in the process of cavitation is
much more difﬁcult and has sparked a number of controversies in the past. This
is because, unlike pool boiling where the largest tensions are experienced by liquid
in contact with a heated surface, a reduction in pressure is experienced by the liquid
bulk. Consequently very small particles or microbubbles present as contaminants
in the bulk of the liquid are also potential nucleation sites. In particular, cavities
in micron-sized particles were ﬁrst suggested by Harvey et al. (1944) as potential
“cavitation nuclei.” In the context of cavitating ﬂows such particles are called “free
stream nuclei” to distinguish them from the “surface nuclei” present in the macro-
scopic surfaces bounding the ﬂow. As we shall see later, many of the observations
of the onset of cavitation appear to be the result of the excitation of free stream
nuclei rather than surface nuclei. Hence there is a need to characterize these free
stream nuclei in any particular technological context and a need to control their
concentration in any basic experimental study. Neither of these tasks is particularly
easy; indeed, it was not until recently that reliable methods for the measurement
of free stream nuclei number densities were developed for use in liquid systems
of any size. Methods used in the past include the analysis of samples by Coulter
counter, and acoustic and light scattering techniques (Billet 1985). However, the

1.11 Nucleation Site Populations
17
most reliable data are probably obtained from holograms of the liquid, which can
be reconstructed and microscopically inspected. The resulting size distributions are
usually presented as nuclei number density distribution functions, N(RN), such that
the number of free stream nuclei in the size range from RN to RN + dRN present
in a unit volume is N(RN)dRN (N has units m−4). Illustrated in Figure 1.8 are some
typical distributions measured in the ﬁltered and deaerated water of three different
water tunnels and in the Paciﬁc Ocean off Los Angeles, California (O’Hern et al.
1985, 1988). Other observations (Billet 1985) produce distributions of similar gen-
eral shape (roughly N ∝R−4
N
for RN > 5 μm) but with larger values at higher air
contents.
It is much more difﬁcult to identify the character of these nuclei. As discussed
in the next section, there are real questions as to how small gas-ﬁlled microbubbles
could exist for any length of time in a body of liquid that is not saturated with that
gas. It is not possible to separately assess the number of solid particles and the num-
ber of microbubbles with most of the existing experimental techniques. Though both
1013
1
10
102
103
Radius, RN (m)
Number Density Distribution Function, N(RN) (m–4)
108
109
1010
1011
1012
O’Hern et al (1985)
(Pacific Ocean)
Katz (1978)
( = 0.51)
Peterson
et al (1975)
( = 0.49)
Gates and
Bacon (1978)
( = 0.44)
Figure 1.8 Cavitation nuclei number density distribution functions measured by holography
in three d ifferent water tunnels (Peterso n et al. 1975, Gat es an d B aco n 1978, Kat z 1978) at
the cavitation numbers, σ, as shown) and in the ocean off Los Angeles, Calif. (O’Hern et al.
1985, 1988).

18
Phase Change, Nucleation, and Cavitation
can act as cavitation nucleation sites, it is clear that microbubbles will more readily
grow to observable macroscopic bubbles. One method that has been used to count
only those nuclei that will cavitate involves withdrawing sample ﬂuid and sucking it
through a very small venturi. Nuclei cavitate at the low pressure in the throat and
can be counted provided the concentration is small enough so that the events are
separated in time. Then the concentrations of nuclei can be obtained as functions
of the pressure level in the throat if the ﬂow rate is known. Such devices are known
as cavitation susceptibility meters and tend to be limited to concentrations less than
10 cm−3 (Billet 1985).
If all of the free stream nuclei were uniform in composition and character, one
could conclude that a certain tension p would activate all nuclei larger than βp/S
where β is constant. However, the lack of knowledge of the composition and char-
acter of the nuclei as well as other ﬂuid mechanical complications greatly reduces
the value of such a statement.
1.12 Effect of Contaminant Gas
Virtually all liquids contain some dissolved gas. Indeed it is virtually impossible to
eliminate this gas from any substantial liquid volume. For example, it takes weeks
of deaeration to reduce the concentration of air in the water of a tunnel below 3 ppm
(saturation at atmospheric pressure is about 15 ppm). If the nucleation bubble con-
tains some gas, then the pressure in the bubble is the sum of the partial pressure of
this gas, pG, and the vapor pressure. Hence the equilibrium pressure in the liquid
is p = pV + pG −2S/R and the critical tension is 2S/R −pG. Thus dissolved gas will
decrease the potential tensile strength; indeed, if the concentration of gas leads to
sufﬁciently large values of pG, the tensile strength is negative and the bubble will
grow at liquid pressures greater than the vapor pressure.
We refer in the above to circumstances in which the liquid is not saturated with
gas at the pressure at which it has been stored. In theory, no gas bubbles can exist
in equilibrium in a liquid unsaturated with gas but otherwise pure if the pressure is
maintained above pV +pG where pG is the equilibrium gas pressure (see Section 2.6).
They should dissolve and disappear, thus causing a dramatic increase in the tensile
strength of the liquid. While it is true that degassing or high pressure treatment does
cause some increase in tensile strength (Keller 1974), the effect is not as great as one
would expect. This dilemma has sparked some controversy in the past and at least
three plausible explanations have been advanced, all of which have some merit. First
is the Harvey nucleus mentioned earlier in which the bubble exists in a crevice in a
particle or surface and persists because its geometry is such that the free surface has
a highly convex curvature viewed from the ﬂuid so that surface tension supports the
high liquid pressure. Second and more esoteric is the possibility of the continuous
production of nuclei by cosmic radiation. Third is the proposal by Fox and Herzfeld
(1954) of an “organic skin” that gives the free surface of the bubble sufﬁcient elas-
ticity to withstand high pressure. Though originally less plausible than the ﬁrst
two possibilities, this explanation is now more widely accepted because of recent

1.13 Nucleation in Flowing Liquids
19
advances in surface rheology, which show that quite small amounts of contaminant
in the liquid can generate large elastic surface effects. Such contamination of the
surface has also been detected by electron microscopy.
1.13 Nucleation in Flowing Liquids
Perhaps the commonest occurrence of cavitation is in ﬂowing liquid systems where
hydrodynamic effects result in regions of the ﬂow where the pressure falls below
the vapor pressure. Reynolds (1873) was among the ﬁrst to attempt to explain the
unusual behaviour of ship propellers at the higher rotational speeds that were being
achieved during the second half of the ninteenth century. Reynolds focused on the
possibility of the entrainment of air into the wakes of the propellor blades, a phe-
nomenon we now term “ventilation.” He does not, however, seem to have envisaged
the possibility of vapor-ﬁlled wakes, and it was left to Parsons (1906) to recog-
nize the role played by vaporization. He also conducted the ﬁrst experiments on
“cavitation” (a word suggested by Froude), and the phenomenon has been a subject
of intensive research ever since because of the adverse effects it has on performance,
because of the noise it creates and, most surprisingly, the damage it can do to nearby
solid surfaces.
For the purposes of the present discussion we shall consider a steady, single-
phase ﬂow of a Newtonian liquid of constant density, ρL, velocity ﬁeld, ui(xi), and
pressure, p(xi). In all such ﬂows it is convenient to deﬁne a reference velocity, U∞,
and reference pressure, p∞. In external ﬂows around solid bodies, U∞and p∞
are conventionally the velocity and pressure of the uniform, upstream ﬂow. The
equations of motion are such that changing the reference pressure results in the
same uniform change to the pressure throughout the ﬂow ﬁeld. Thus the pressure
coefﬁcient
Cp(xi) = p(xi) −p∞
1
2ρU2∞
(1.13)
is independent of p∞for a given geometry of the macroscopic ﬂow boundaries. Fur-
thermore, there will be some location, x∗
i , within the ﬂow where Cp and p are a
minimum, and that value of Cp(x∗
i ) will be denoted for convenience by Cpmin. Note
that this is a negative number.
Viscous effects within the ﬂow are characterized by the Reynolds number,
Re = ρLU∞ℓ/μL = U∞ℓ/νL where μL and νL are the dynamic and kinematic viscosi-
ties of the liquid and ℓis the characterized length scale. For a given geometry, Cp(xi)
and Cpmin are functions only of Re in steady ﬂows. In the idealized case of an inviscid,
frictionless liquid, Bernoulli’s equation applies and Cp(xi) and Cpmin become depen-
dent only on the geometry of the ﬂow boundaries and not on any other parameters.
For purposes of the present discussion, we shall suppose that for the ﬂow geome-
try under consideration, the value of Cpmin for the single-phase ﬂow is known either
from experimental measurement or theoretical calculation.

20
Phase Change, Nucleation, and Cavitation
The stage is therefore set to consider what happens in a given ﬂow when either
the overall pressure is decreased or the ﬂow velocity is increased so that the pres-
sure at some point in the ﬂow approaches the vapor pressure, pV, of the liquid
at the reference temperature, T∞. In order to characterize this relationship, it is
conventional to deﬁne the cavitation number, σ as
σ = p∞−pV(T∞)
1
2ρLU2∞
(1.14)
Any ﬂow, whether cavitating or not, has some value of σ. Clearly if σ is sufﬁciently
large (p∞sufﬁciently large compared with pV(T∞) or U∞sufﬁciently small), single-
phase liquid ﬂow will occur. However, as σ is reduced, nucleation will ﬁrst occur at
some particular value of σ called the incipient cavitation number and denoted by σi.
For the moment we shall ignore the practical difﬁculties involved in observing cav-
itation inception. Further reduction in σ below σi causes an increase in the number
and extent of vapor bubbles.
In the hypothetical ﬂow of a liquid that cannot withstand any tension and in
which vapor bubbles appear instantaneously when p reaches pV, it is clear that
σi = −Cpmin
(1.15)
and hence the incipient cavitation number could be ascertained from observations
or measurements of the single-phase ﬂow. To exemplify this, consider the nucle-
ation of a free stream nucleus as it travels along the streamline containing x∗
i (see
Figure 1.9). For σ > −Cpmin the pressure along the entire trajectory is greater
than pV. For σ = −Cpmin the nucleus encounters p = pV only for an inﬁnitesmal
moment. For σ < −Cpmin the nucleus experiences p < pV for a ﬁnite time. In so
far as free steam nuclei are concerned, two factors can cause σi to be different
from −Cpmin (remember again that −Cpmin is generally a positive number). First,
CP
CP
Possible
locations
of p = pv
Distance Along
Streamline
 < –CPmin
 = –CPmin
 > –CPmin
Xi
p < pv
*
Figure 1.9 Schematic of pressure distribution on a streamline.

1.14 Viscous Effects in Cavitation Inception
21
nucleation may not occur at p = pV. In a degassed liquid nucleation may require a
positive tension, say pC, and hence nucleation would require a cavitation num-
ber less than −Cpmin, namely σi = −Cpmin −pC/ 1
2ρLU2
∞. In a liquid containing
a great deal of contaminant gas pC could actually be negative, so that σi would
be larger than −Cpmin. Second, growth of a nucleus to a ﬁnite, observable size
requires a ﬁnite time under conditions p < pV −pC. This residence time effect
will cause the observed σi to be less than −Cpmin −pC/ 1
2ρLU2
∞. As we shall see in
the next chapter, the rate of growth of a bubble can also be radically affected by
the thermodynamic properties of the liquid and vapor which are, in turn, functions
of the temperature of the liquid. Consequently σi may also depend on the liquid
temperature.
1.14 Viscous Effects in Cavitation Inception
The discussion in the previous section was deliberately conﬁned to ideal, steady
ﬂows. When the ﬂow is also assumed to be inviscid, the value of −Cpmin is a simple
positive constant for a given ﬂow geometry. However, when the effects of viscosity
are included, Cpmin will be a function of Reynolds number, Re, and even in a steady
ﬂow one would therefore expect to observe a dependence of the incipient cavitation
number, σi, on the Reynolds number. For convenience, we shall refer to this as the
steady viscous effect.
Up to this point we have assumed that the ﬂow and the pressures are laminar
and steady. However, most of the ﬂows with which the engineer must deal are not
only turbulent but also unsteady. Vortices occur not only because they are inherent
in turbulence but also because of both free and forced shedding of vortices. This
has important consequences for cavitation inception because the pressure in the
center of a vortex may be signiﬁcantly lower than the mean pressure in the ﬂow.
The measurement or calculation of −Cpmin would elicit the value of the lowest mean
pressure, while cavitation might ﬁrst occur in a transient vortex whose core pressure
was much lower than the lowest mean pressure. Unlike the residence time factor,
this would tend to cause higher values of σi than would otherwise be expected. It
would also cause σi to change with Reynolds number, Re. Note that this would be
separate from the effect of Re on Cpmin and, to distinguish it, we shall refer to it as
the turbulence effect.
In summary, there are a number of reasons for σi to be different from the value
of −Cpmin that might be calculated from knowledge of the pressures in the single-
phase liquid ﬂow:
1. Existence of a tensile strength can cause a reduction in σi.
2. Residence time effects can cause a reduction in σi.
3. Existence of contaminant gas can cause an increase in σi.
4. Steady viscous effect due to dependence of Cpmin on Re can cause σi to be a
function of Re.
5. Turbulence effects can cause an increase in σi.

22
Phase Change, Nucleation, and Cavitation
If it were not for these effects, the prediction of cavitation would be a straight-
forward matter of determining Cpmin. Unfortunately, these effects can cause large
departures from the criterion, σi = −Cpmin, with important engineering conse-
quences in many applications.
Furthermore, the above discussion identiﬁes the parameters that must be
controlled or at least measured in systematic experiments on cavitation inception:
1. The cavitation number, σ.
2. The Reynolds number, Re.
3. The liquid temperature, T∞.
4. The liquid quality, including the number and nature of the free stream nuclei,
the amount of dissolved gas, and the free stream turbulence.
5. The quality of the solid, bounding surfaces, including the roughness (since this
may affect the hydrodynamics) and the porosity or pit population.
Since this is a tall order, and many of the effects such as the interaction of turbulence
and cavitation inception have only recently been identiﬁed, it is not surprising that
the individual effects are not readily isolated from many of the experiments per-
formed in the past. Nevertheless, some discussion of these experiments is important
for practical reasons.
1.15 Cavitation Inception Measurements
To illustrate some of the effects described in the preceding section, we shall attempt
to give a brief overview of the extensive literature on the subject of cavitation incep-
tion. For more detail, the reader is referred to the reviews by Acosta and Parkin
(1975), Arakeri (1979), and Rood (1991), as well as to the book by Knapp, Daily,
and Hammitt (1970).
The ﬁrst effect that we illustrate is that of the uncertainty in the tensile strength
of the liquid. It is very difﬁcult to characterize and almost impossible to remove
from a substantial body of liquid (such as that used in a water tunnel) all the parti-
cles, microbubbles, and contaminant gas that will affect nucleation. This can cause
substantial differences in the cavitation inception numbers (and, indeed, the form
of cavitation) from different facilities and even in the same facility with differently
treated water. The ITTC (International Towing Tank Conference) comparative
tests (Lindgren and Johnsson 1966, Johnsson 1969) provided a particularly dramatic
example of these differences when cavitation on the same axisymmetric headform
(called the ITTC headform) was examined in many different water tunnels around
the world. An example of the variation of σi in those experiments is reproduced as
Figure 1.10.
As a further illustration, Figure 1.11 reproduces data obtained by Keller (1974)
for the cavitation inception number in ﬂows around hemispherical bodies. The water
was treated in different ways so that it contained different populations of nuclei as
shown on the left in Figure 1.11. As one might anticipate, the water with the higher
nuclei population had a substantially larger cavitation inception number.

1.15 Cavitation Inception Measurements
23
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
6
4
Water Tunnel Speed (m/sec)
Cavitation Number, 
8
1
2
0
0
18
16
14
12
0.3
0.4
0.5
Penn. State (DTMB-Body A)
Closed Jet Test Section
Tokyo
DTMB 24 in, Body A
–Cpmin
SSPA
NPL2
Rome
SAFH
Penn. State [SAFH-Body]
DTMB 36 in. W.R. Body B
DTMB 36 in. W.R. Body B
DTMB 36 in. Body B
NSMB
Nagasaki
KMW
AEW 1 DELFT
Open Jet Test Section
Figure 1.10 The inception numbers measured for the same axisymmetric headform in a vari-
ety of water tunnels around the world. Data collected as part of a comparative study of
cavitation inception by the International Towing Tank Conference (Lindgren and Johnsson
1966, Jo h n sso n 1969).
1105
3
10
15
20
1106
0.5
1.0
0
20
10
Untreated Tap
Water
Total with
R>23 m
0
Untreated
Cavitation Inception Number, l
Reynolds Number
Nuclei Radius, R (m)
Nuclei Population, (no. / cm3)
Degassed
Tap Water
Filtered
20
10
Degassed Tap
Water
0
10
Filtered Tap
Water
0
Figure 1.11 Histograms of nuclei populations in treated and untreated tap water and the
corresponding cavitation inception numbers on hemispherical headforms of three different
d i amet ers, 3 cm (•), 4.5 cm (△ ), an d 6 cm (2) ( Kel l er 1974).

24
Phase Change, Nucleation, and Cavitation
Because the cavitation nuclei are crucial to an understanding of cavitation
inception, it is now recognized that the liquid in any cavitation inception study must
be monitored by measuring the number of nuclei present in the liquid. Typical nuclei
number distributions from water tunnels and from the ocean were shown earlier in
Figure 1.8. It should, however, be noted that most of the methods currently used for
making these measurements are still in the development stage. Devices based on
acoustic scattering and on light scattering have been explored. Other instruments
known as cavitation susceptibility meters cause samples of the liquid to cavitate
and measure the number and size of the resulting macroscopic bubbles. Perhaps
the most reliable method has been the use of holography to create a magniﬁed
three-dimensional photographic image of a sample volume of liquid, which can
then be surveyed for nuclei. Billet (1985) has recently reviewed the current state
of cavitation nuclei measurements (see also Katz et al. 1984).
It may be of interest to note that cavitation itself is also a source of nuclei in
many facilities. This is because air dissolved in the liquid will tend to come out of
solution at low pressures and contribute a partial pressure of air to the contents
of any macroscopic cavitation bubble. When that bubble is convected into regions
of higher pressure and the vapor condenses, this leaves a small air bubble that only
redissolves very slowly, if at all. This unforeseen phenomenon caused great trauma
for the ﬁrst water tunnels, which were modeled directly on wind tunnels. It was
discovered that after a few minutes of operating with a cavitating body in the work-
ing section, the bubbles produced by the cavitation grew rapidly in number and
began to complete the circuit of the facility to return in the incoming ﬂow. Soon
the working section was obscured by a two-phase ﬂow. The solution had two com-
ponents. First, a water tunnel needs to be ﬁtted with a long and deep return leg so
that the water remains at high pressure for sufﬁcient time to redissolve most of the
cavitation-produced nuclei. Such a return leg is termed a “resorber.” Second, most
water tunnel facilities have a “deaerator” for reducing the air content of the water
to 20 to 50% of the saturation level. These comments serve to illustrate the fact that
N(RN) in any facility can change according to the operating condition and can be
altered both by deaeration and by ﬁltration.
One of the consequences of the effect of cavitation itself on the nuclei popula-
tion in a facility is that the cavitation number at which cavitation disappears when
the pressure is raised may be different from the value of the cavitation number at
which it appeared when the pressure was decreased. The ﬁrst value is termed the
“desinent” cavitation number and is denoted by σd to distinguish it from the incep-
tion number, σi. The difference in these values is termed “cavitation hysteresis”
(Holl and Treaster 1966).
One of the additional complications is the subjective nature of the judgment
that cavitation has appeared. Visual inspection is not always possible, nor is it very
objective since the number of events (single bubble growth and collapse) tends to
increase gradually over a range of cavitation numbers. If, therefore, one made a
judgment based on a certain event rate, it is inevitable that the inception cavita-
tion number would increase with nuclei population. Experiments have found that

1.16 Cavitation Inception Data
25
the production of noise is a simpler and more repeatable measure of inception
than visual observation. While still subject to the variations with nuclei population
discussed above, it has the advantage of being quantiﬁable.
Most of the data of Figure 1.8 is taken from water tunnel water that has been
somewhat ﬁltered and degassed or from the ocean, which is surprisingly clean. Thus
there are very few nuclei with a size greater than 100 μm. On the other hand,
there are many hydraulic applications in which the water contains much larger gas
bubbles. These can then grow substantially as they pass through a region of low
pressure in the pump or other hydraulic device, even though the pressure is every-
where above the vapor pressure. Such a phenomenon is called “pseudo-cavitation.”
Though a cavitation inception number is not particularly relevant to such circum-
stances, attempts to measure σi under these circumstances would clearly yield values
much larger than −Cpmin.
On the other hand, if the liquid is quite clean with only very small nuclei, the
tension that this liquid can sustain would mean that the minimum pressure would
have to fall well below pV for inception to occur. Then σi would be much smaller
than −Cpmin. Thus it is clear that the quality of the water and its nuclei could cause
the cavitation inception number to be either larger or smaller than −Cpmin.
1.16 Cavitation Inception Data
Though much of the inception data in the literature is deﬁcient in the sense that the
nuclei population and character are unknown, it is nevertheless of value to review
some of the important trends in that data base. In doing so we could be reassured
that each investigator probably applied a consistent criterion in assessing cavita-
tion inception. Therefore, though the data from different investigators and facilities
may be widely scattered, one would hope that the trends exhibited in a particular
research project would be qualitatively signiﬁcant.
Consider ﬁrst the inception characteristics of a single hydrofoil as the angle of
attack is varied. The data of Kermeen (1956), obtained for a NACA 4412 hydrofoil,
is reproduced in Figure 1.12. At positive angles of attack the regions of low pres-
sure and cavitation inception will occur on the suction surface; at negative angles of
attack these phenomena will shift to the pressure surface. Furthermore, as the angle
of attack is increased in either direction, the value of −Cpmin will increase, and hence
the inception cavitation number will also increase.
As we will discuss in the next section, the scaling of cavitation inception with
changes in the size and speed of the hydraulic device can be an important issue,
particularly when scaling the results from model-scale water tunnel experiments to
prototypes as is necessary, for example, in developing ship propellers. Typical data
on cavitation inception for a single hydrofoil (Holl and Wislicenus 1961) is repro-
duced in Figure 1.13. Data for three different sizes of 12% Joukowski hydrofoil (at
zero angle of attack) were obtained at different speeds. They were plotted against
Reynolds number in the hope that this would reduce the data to a single curve.
The fact that this did not occur demonstrates that there is a size or speed effect

26
Phase Change, Nucleation, and Cavitation
6
Velocity
7.6 m/s
12.2 m/s
18.3 m/s
Suction Surface
Pressure Surface
5
4
3
2
1
0
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
Angle of Attack, α(degrees)
Cavitation Number, σl
F i gu re 1. 12 C avi t at i o n i n cep t i o n c h aract eri s t i cs o f a N A C A 4412 h yd r o f o i l ( Kermeen 1956).
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
105
106
107
Desinent Cavitation Number
Reynolds Number, Uc /vL
CPMin = –0.54
Chord, c
5.1 cm
10.2 cm
20.3 cm
Figure 1.13 The desinent cavitation numbers for three sizes of Joukowski hydrofoils at zero
an gle o f attack an d as a function of Reynolds number, Re (Ho l l an d W i sl i cen u s 1961). N o t e
the theoretical Cpmin = −0.54.
separate from that due to the Reynolds number. It seems reasonable to suggest that
the missing parameter is the ratio of the nuclei size to chord length; however, in the
absence of information on the nuclei, such conclusions are purely speculative.
To complete the list of those factors that may inﬂuence cavitation inception, it
is necessary to mention the effects of surface roughness and of the turbulence level

Scaling of Cavitation Inception
27
in the ﬂow. The two effects are connected to some degree since roughness will affect
the level of turbulence. But roughness can also affect the ﬂow by delaying boundary
layer separation and therefore affecting the pressure and velocity ﬁelds in a more
global manner. The reader is referred to Arndt and Ippen (1968) for details of the
effects of surface roughness on cavitation inception.
Turbulence affects cavitation inception since a nucleus may ﬁnd itself in the
core of a vortex where the pressure level is lower than the mean. It could therefore
cavitate when it might not do so under the inﬂuence of the mean pressure level.
Thus turbulence may promote cavitation, but one must allow for the fact that it
may alter the global pressure ﬁeld by altering the location of ﬂow separation. These
complicated viscous effects on cavitation inception were ﬁrst examined in detail by
Arakeri and Acosta (1974) and Gates and Acosta (1978) (see also Arakeri 1979).
The implications for cavitation inception in the highly turbulent environment of
many internal ﬂows such as occur in pumps have yet to be examined in detail.
1.17 Scaling of Cavitation Inception
The complexity of the issues raised in the last section helps to explain why serious
questions remain as to how to scale cavitation inception. This is perhaps one of
the most troublesome issues a hydraulic engineer must face. Model tests of a ship’s
propeller or large pump-turbine may allow the designer to accurately estimate the
noncavitating performance of the device. However, he will not be able to place
anything like the same conﬁdence in his ability to scale the cavitation inception data.
Consider the problem in more detail. Changing the size of the device will alter
not only the residence time effect but also the Reynolds number. Furthermore, the
nuclei will now be a different size relative to the device than in the model. Changing
the speed in an attempt to maintain Reynolds number scaling may only confuse the
issue by further alterating the residence time. Moreover, changing the speed will
also change the cavitation number. To recover the modeled condition, one must
then change the pressure level, which may alter the nuclei content. There is also the
issue of what to do about the surface roughness in the model and in the prototype.
The other issue of scaling that arises is how to anticipate the cavitation phe-
nomena in one liquid based on data obtained in another. It is clearly the case that
the literature contains a great deal of data on water. Data on other liquids are quite
meager. Indeed, I have not located any nuclei number distributions for a ﬂuid other
than water. Since the nuclei play such a key role, it is not surprising that our current
ability to scale from one liquid to another is quite tentative.
It would not be appropriate to leave this subject without emphasizing that most
of the remarks in the last two sections have focused on the inception of cavita-
tion. Once cavitation has become established, the phenomena that occur are much
less sensitive to special factors such as the nuclei content. Hence the scaling of
developed cavitation can proceed with much more conﬁdence than the scaling of
cavitation inception. This is not, however, of much solace to the engineer charged
with avoiding cavitation completely.

28
Phase Change, Nucleation, and Cavitation
References
Acosta, A.J. and Parkin, B.R. (1975). Cavitation inception—a selective review. J. Ship Res.,
19, 193–205.
Arakeri, V.H. (1979). Cavitation inception. Proc. Indian Acad. Sci., C2, Part 2, 149–177.
Arakeri, V.H. and Acosta, A.J. (1974). Viscous effects in the inception of cavitation on
axisymmetric bodies. ASME J. Fluids Eng., 95, No. 4, 519–528.
Arndt, R.E.A. and Ippen, A.T. (1968). Rough surface effects on cavitation inception. ASME
J. Basic Eng., 90, 249–261.
Becker, R. and Doring, W. (1935). The kinetic treatment of nuclear formation in supersatu-
rated vapors. Ann. Phys., 24, 719 and 752.
Bernath, L. (1952). Theory of bubble formation in liquids. Ind. Eng. Chem., 44, No. 6,
1310–1313.
Berthelot, M. (1850). Sur quelques ph´enomenes de dilation forc´ee de liquides. Ann. de
Chimie et de Physique, 30, 232–237.
Billet, M.L. (1985). Cavitation nuclei measurement—a review. Proc. 1985 ASME Cavitation
and Multiphase Flow Forum, 31–38.
Blake, F.G. (1949). The tensile strength of liquids; a review of the literature. Harvard Acou.
Res. Lab. Rep. TM9.
Blander, M. and Katz, J.L. (1975). Bubble nucleation in liquids. AIChE Journal, 21, No. 5,
833–848.
Carey, V.P. (1992). Liquid-vapor phase-change phenomena. Hemisphere Publ. Co.
Cole, R. (1970). Boiling nucleation. Adv. Heat Transfer, 10, 86–166.
Davies, R.M., Trevena, D.H., Rees, N.J.M., and Lewis, G.M. (1956). The tensile strength of
liquids under dynamic stressing. Proc. N.P.L. Symp. on Cavitation in Hydrodynamics.
Dixon, H.H. (1909). Note on the tensile strength of water. Sci. Proc. Royal Dublin Soc., 12,
(N.S.), 60 (see also 14, (N.S.), 229, (1914)).
Eberhart, J.G. and Schnyders, M.C. (1973). Application of the mechanical stability condition
to the prediction of the limit of superheat for normal alkanes, ether, and water. J. Phys.
Chem., 77, No. 23, 2730–2736.
Farkas, L. (1927). The velocity of nucleus formation in supersaturated vapors. J. Physik
Chem., 125, 236.
Fox, F.E. and Herzfeld, K.F. (1954). Gas bubbles with organic skin as cavitation nuclei.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 26, 984–989.
Frenkel, J. (1955). Kinetic theory of liquids. Dover, New York.
Gates, E.M. and Acosta, A.J. (1978). Some effects of several free stream factors on cavita-
tion inception on axisymmetric bodies. Proc. 12th Naval Hydrodyn. Symp., Wash. D.C.,
86–108.
Gates, E.M. and Bacon, J. (1978). Determination of cavitation nuclei distribution by
holography. J. Ship Res., 22, No. 1, 29–31.
Gibbs, W. (1961). The Scientiﬁc Papers, Vol. 1. Dover Publ. Inc., NY.
Grifﬁth, P. and Wallis, J.D. (1960). The role of surface conditions in nucleate boiling. Chem.
Eng. Prog. Symp., Ser. 56, 30, 49.
Harvey, E.N., Barnes, D.K., McElroy, W.D., Whiteley, A.H., Pease, D.C., and Cooper, K.W.
(1944). Bubble formation in animals. I, Physical factors. J. Cell. and Comp. Physiol., 24,
No. 1, 1–22.
Holl, J.W. and Wislicenus, G.F. (1961). Scale effects on cavitation. ASME J. Basic Eng., 83,
385–398.
Holl, J.W. and Treaster, A.L. (1966). Cavitation hysteresis. ASME J. Basic Eng., 88, 199–212.
Johnsson, C.A. (1969). Cavitation inception on headforms, further tests. Proc. 12th Int.
Towing Tank Conf., Rome, 381–392.
Katz, J. (1978). Determination of solid nuclei and bubble distributions in water by hologra-
phy. Calif.Inst. of Tech., Eng. and Appl. Sci. Div. Rep. No. 183–3.

References
29
Katz, J., Gowing, S., O’Hern, T., and Acosta, A.J. (1984). A comparitive study between
holographic and light-scattering techniques of microbubble detection. Proc. IUTAM Symp.
on Measuring Techniques in Gas-Liquid Two-Phase Flows, 41–66.
Keller, A.P. (1974). Investigations concerning scale effects of the inception of cavitation.
Proc. I.Mech.E. Conf. on Cavitation, 109–117.
Kermeen, R.W. (1956). Water tunnel tests of NACA 4412 and Walchner proﬁle 7 hydrofoils
in non-Cavitating and cavitating Flows. Calif. Inst. of Tech. Hydro. Lab. Rep. 47–5.
Knapp, R.T., Daily, J.W., and Hammitt, F.G. (1970). Cavitation. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Lienhard, J.H. and Karimi, A. (1981). Homogeneous nucleation and the spinodal line. ASME
J. Heat Transfer, 103, 61–64.
Lindgren, H. and Johnsson, C.A. (1966). Cavitation inception on headforms, ITTC compari-
tive experiments. Proc. 11th Towing Tank Conf. Tokyo, 219–232.
Meyer, J. (1911). Zur Kenntnis des negativen Druckes in Fl¨ussigkeiten. Abhandl. Dent.
Bunsen Ges., III, No. 1; also No. 6.
O’Hern, T.J., Katz, J., and Acosta, A.J. (1985). Holographic measurements of cavitation
nuclei in the sea. Proc. ASME Cavitation and Multiphase Flow Forum, 39–42.
O’Hern, T., d’Agostino, L., and Acosta, A.J. (1988). Comparison of holographic and Coul-
ter counter measurements of cavitation nuclei in the ocean. ASME J. Fluids Eng., 110,
200–207.
Parsons, C.A. (1906). The steam turbine on land and at sea. Lecture to the Royal Institution,
London.
Peterson, F.B., Danel, F., Keller, A.P., and Lecoffre, Y. (1975). Comparitive measurements
of bubble and particulate spectra by three optical methods. Proc. 14th Int. Towing Tank
Conf.
Rees, E.P. and Trevena, D.H. (1966). Cavitation thresholds in liquids under static conditions.
Proc. ASME Cavitation Forum, 12 (see also (1967), 1).
Reynolds, O. (1873). The causes of the racing of the engines of screw steamers investigated
theoretically and by experiment. Trans. Inst. Naval Arch., 14, 56–67.
Reynolds, O. (1882). On the internal cohesion of liquids and the suspension of a column of
mercury to a height of more than double that of the barometer. Mem. Manchester Lit. Phil.
Soc., 7, 3rd Series, 1.
Rood, E.P. (1991). Mechanisms of cavitation inception—review. ASME J. Fluids Eng., 113,
163–175.
Skripov, V.P. (1974). Metastable Liquids. John Wiley and Sons.
Vincent, R.S. (1941). The measurement of tension in liquids by means of a metal bellows.
Proc. Phys. Soc. (London), 53, 126–140.
Vincent, R.S. and Simmonds, G.H. (1943). Examination of the Berthelot method of
measuring tension in liquids. Proc. Phys. Soc. (London), 55, 376–382.
Volmer, M. and Weber, A. (1926). Keimbildung in ¨ubers¨attigten Gebilden. Zeit. Physik.
Chemie, 119, 277–301.
Zeldovich, J.B. (1943). On the theory of new phase formation: cavitation. Acta Physicochim-
ica, URSS, 18, 1–22.

2
Spherical Bubble Dynamics
2.1 Introduction
Having considered the initial formation of bubbles, we now proceed to identify
the subsequent dynamics of bubble growth and collapse. The behavior of a sin-
gle bubble in an inﬁnite domain of liquid at rest far from the bubble and with
uniform temperature far from the bubble will be examined ﬁrst. This spherically
symmetric situation provides a simple case that is amenable to analysis and reveals
a number of important phenomena. Complications such as those introduced by
the presence of nearby solid boundaries will be discussed in the chapters which
follow.
2.2 Rayleigh-Plesset Equation
Consider a spherical bubble of radius, R(t) (where t is time), in an inﬁnite domain of
liquid whose temperature and pressure far from the bubble are T∞and p∞(t) respec-
tively. The temperature, T∞, is assumed to be a simple constant since temperature
gradients were eliminated a priori and uniform heating of the liquid due to internal
heat sources or radiation will not be considered. On the other hand, the pressure,
p∞(t), is assumed to be a known (and perhaps controlled) input which regulates the
growth or collapse of the bubble.
Though compressibility of the liquid can be important in the context of bubble
collapse, it will, for the present, be assumed that the liquid density, ρL, is a con-
stant. Furthermore, the dynamic viscosity, μL, is assumed constant and uniform.
It will also be assumed that the contents of the bubble are homogeneous and that
the temperature, TB(t), and pressure, pB(t), within the bubble are always uniform.
These assumptions may not be justiﬁed in circumstances that will be identiﬁed as
the analysis proceeds.
The radius of the bubble, R(t), will be one of the primary results of the anal-
ysis. As indicated in Figure 2.1, radial position within the liquid will be denoted
by the distance, r, from the center of the bubble; the pressure, p(r,t), radial out-
ward velocity, u(r,t), and temperature, T(r,t), within the liquid will be so designated.
Conservation of mass requires that
30

2.2 Rayleigh-Plesset Equation
31
Liquid
Far From Bubble
Vapor / Gas
PB(t), TB (t)
P(t), T
Bubble Surface
p (r, t)
T (r, t)
r
u (r, t)
R (t)
Figure 2.1 Schematic of a spherical bubble in an inﬁnite liquid.
u(r,t) = F(t)
r2
(2.1)
where F(t) is related to R(t) by a kinematic boundary condition at the bubble surface.
In the idealized case of zero mass transport across this interface, it is clear that
u(R,t) = dR/dt and hence
F(t) = R2 dR
dt
(2.2)
But this is often a good approximation even when evaporation or condensation
is occurring at the interface. To demonstrate this, consider a vapor bubble. The
volume rate of production of vapor must be equal to the rate of increase of size
of the bubble, 4πR2dR/dt, and therefore the mass rate of evaporation must be
ρV(TB)4πR2dR/dt where ρV(TB) is the saturated vapor density at the bubble tem-
perature, TB. This, in turn, must equal the mass ﬂow of liquid inward relative to the
interface, and hence the inward velocity of liquid relative to the interface is given by
ρV(TB)(dR/dt)/ρL. Therefore
u(R,t) = dR
dt −ρV(TB)
ρL
dR
dt =

1 −ρV(TB)
ρL
 dR
dt
(2.3)
and
F(t) =

1 −ρV(TB)
ρL

R2 dR
dt
(2.4)
In many practical cases ρV(TB) ≪ρL and therefore the approximate form of
Equation (2.2) may be adequate. For clarity we will continue with the approximate
form given in Equation (2.2).
Assuming a Newtonian liquid, the Navier-Stokes equation for motion in the r
direction,
−1
ρL
∂p
∂r = ∂u
∂t + u∂u
∂r −νL
 1
r2
∂
∂r

r2 ∂u
∂r

−2u
r2

(2.5)

32
Spherical Bubble Dynamics
yields, after substituting for u from u = F(t)/r2:
−1
ρL
∂p
∂r = 1
r2
dF
dt −2F2
r5
(2.6)
Note that the viscous terms vanish; indeed, the only viscous contribution to the
Rayleigh-Plesset Equation (2.10) comes from the dynamic boundary condition at
the bubble surface. Equation (2.6) can be integrated to give
p −p∞
ρL
= 1
r
dF
dt −1
2
F2
r4
(2.7)
after application of the condition p →p∞as r →∞.
To complete this part of the analysis, a dynamic boundary condition on the
bubble surface must be constructed. For this purpose consider a control vol-
ume consisting of a small, inﬁnitely thin lamina containing a segment of interface
(Figure 2.2). The net force on this lamina in the radially outward direction per unit
area is
(σrr)r=R + pB −2S
R
(2.8)
or, since σrr = −p + 2μL∂u/∂r, the force per unit area is
pB −(p)r=R −4μL
R
dR
dt −2S
R
(2.9)
In the absence of mass transport across the boundary (evaporation or condensation)
this force must be zero, and substitution of the value for (p)r=R from Equation (2.7)
with F = R2 dR
dt
yields the generalized Rayleigh-Plesset equation for bubble
dynamics:
pB(t) −p∞(t)
ρL
= Rd2R
dt2 + 3
2
dR
dt
2
+ 4νL
R
dR
dt + 2S
ρLR
(2.10)
Bubble
Surface
Vapour/Gas
Liquid
(rr) r=R
PB
Figure 2.2 Portion of the spherical bubble surface.

2.3 Bubble Contents
33
Given p∞(t) this represents an equation that can be solved to ﬁnd R(t) provided
pB(t) is known. In the absence of the surface tension and viscous terms, it was ﬁrst
derived and used by Rayleigh (1917). Plesset (1949) ﬁrst applied the equation to the
problem of traveling cavitation bubbles.
2.3 Bubble Contents
In addition to the Rayleigh-Plesset equation, considerations of the bubble contents
are necessary. To be fairly general, it is assumed that the bubble contains some
quantity of contaminant gas whose partial pressure is pGo at some reference size,
Ro, and temperature, T∞. Then, if there is no appreciable mass transfer of gas to or
from the liquid, it follows that
pB(t) = pV(TB) + pGo
 TB
T∞
Ro
R
3
(2.11)
In some cases this last assumption is not justiﬁed, and it is necessary to solve a mass
transport problem for the liquid in a manner similar to that used for heat diffusion
in the next section (see Section 2.6).
It remains to determine TB(t). This is not always necessary since, under some
conditions, the difference between the unknown TB and the known T∞is negligible.
But there are also circumstances in which the temperature difference, (TB(t)−T∞), is
important and the effects caused by this difference dominate the bubble dynamics.
Clearly the temperature difference, (TB(t) −T∞), leads to a different vapor pres-
sure, pV(TB), than would occur in the absence of such thermal effects, and this alters
the growth or collapse rate of the bubble. It is therefore instructive to substitute
Equation (2.11) into (2.10) and thereby write the Rayleigh-Plesset equation in the
following general form:
(1)
(2)
(3)
pV(T∞) −p∞(t)
ρL
+ pV(TB) −pV(T∞)
ρL
+ pGo
ρL
 TB
T∞
Ro
R
3
= Rd2R
dt2 + 3
2
dR
dt
2
+ 4νL
R
dR
dt + 2S
ρLR
(2.12)
(4)
(5)
(6)
The ﬁrst term, (1), is the instantaneous tension or driving term determined by the
conditions far from the bubble. The second term, (2), will be referred to as the ther-
mal term, and it will be seen that very different bubble dynamics can be expected
depending on the magnitude of this term. When the temperature difference is small,
it is convenient to use a Taylor expansion in which only the ﬁrst derivative is retained
to evaluate
pV(TB) −pV(T∞)
ρL
= A(TB −T∞)
(2.13)

34
Spherical Bubble Dynamics
where the quantity A may be evaluated from
A =
1
ρL
dpV
dT
= ρV(T∞)L(T∞)
ρLT∞
(2.14)
using the Clausius-Clapeyron relation. It is consistent with the Taylor expansion
approximation to evaluate ρV and L at the known temperature T∞. It follows that,
for small temperature differences, term (2) in Equation (2.12) is given by A(TB−T∞).
The degree to which the bubble temperature, TB, departs from the remote liq-
uid temperature, T∞, can have a major effect on the bubble dynamics, and it is
neccessary to discuss how this departure might be evaluated. The determination of
(TB −T∞) requires two steps. First, it requires the solution of the heat diffusion
equation,
∂T
∂t + dR
dt
R
r
2 ∂T
∂r = αL
r2
∂
∂r

r2 ∂T
∂r

(2.15)
to determine the temperature distribution, T(r,t), within the liquid (αL is the thermal
diffusivity of the liquid). Second, it requires an energy balance for the bubble. The
heat supplied to the interface from the liquid is
4πR2kL
∂T
∂r

r=R
(2.16)
where kL is the thermal conductivity of the liquid. Assuming that all of this is used
for vaporization of the liquid (this neglects the heat used for heating or cooling the
existing bubble contents, which is negligible in many cases), one can evaluate the
mass rate of production of vapor and relate it to the known rate of increase the
volume of the bubble. This yields
dR
dt = kL
ρVL
∂T
∂r

r=R
(2.17)
where kL,ρV,L should be evaluated at T = TB. If, however, TB −T∞is small, it is
consistent with the linear analysis described earlier to evaluate these properties at
T = T∞.
The nature of the thermal effect problem is now clear. The thermal term in the
Rayleigh-Plesset Equation (2.12) requires a relation between (TB(t) −T∞) and R(t).
The energy balance Equation (2.17) yields a relation between (∂T/∂r)r=R and R(t).
The ﬁnal relation between (∂T/∂r)r=R and (TB(t) −T∞) requires the solution of the
heat diffusion equation. It is this last step that causes considerable difﬁculty due to
the evident nonlinearities in the heat diffusion equation; no exact analytic solution
exists. However, the solution of Plesset and Zwick (1952) provides a useful approx-
imation for many purposes. This solution is conﬁned to cases in which the thickness
of the thermal boundary layer, δT, surrounding the bubble is small compared with
the radius of the bubble, a restriction that can be roughly represented by the identity
R ≫δT ≈(T∞−TB)/
∂T
∂r

r=R
(2.18)

2.4 In the Absence of Thermal Effects
35
The Plesset-Zwick result is that
T∞−TB(t) =
	αL
π

 1
2
t

0
[R(x)]2 ∂T
∂r

r=R(x) dx
 t
x
[R(y)]4dy
 1
2
(2.19)
where x and y are dummy time variables. Using Equation (2.17) this can be
written as
T∞−TB(t) =
LρV
ρLcPLα
1
2
L
 1
π
 1
2
t

0
[R(x)]2 dR
dt dx
[
 t
x R4(y)dy]
1
2
(2.20)
This can be directly substituted into the Rayleigh-Plesset equation to generate a
complicated integro-differential equation for R(t). However, for present purposes it
is more instructive to conﬁne our attention to regimes of bubble growth or collapse
that can be approximated by the relation
R = R∗tn
(2.21)
where R∗and n are constants. Then the Equation (2.20) reduces to
T∞−TB(t) =
LρV
ρLcPLα
1
2
L
R∗tn−1
2 C(n)
(2.22)
where the constant
C(n) = n
4n + 1
π
 1
2
1

0
z3n−1dz
(1 −z4n+1)
1
2
(2.23)
and is of order unity for most values of n of practical interest (0 < n < 1 in the case
of bubble growth). Under these conditions the linearized thermal term, (2), in the
Rayleigh-Plesset Equation (2.12) becomes
(TB −T∞) ρVL
ρLT∞
= −(T∞)C(n)R∗tn−1
2
(2.24)
where the thermodynamic parameter
(T∞) =
L2ρ2
V
ρ2
LcPLT∞α
1
2
L
(2.25)
It will be seen that this parameter, , whose units are m/sec
3
2 , is crucially important
in determining the bubble dynamic behavior.
2.4 In the Absence of Thermal Effects
First we consider some of the characteristics of bubble dynamics in the absence
of any signiﬁcant thermal effects. This kind of bubble dynamic behavior is termed
“inertially controlled” to distinguish it from the “thermally controlled” behavior

36
Spherical Bubble Dynamics
discussed later. Under these circumstances the temperature in the liquid is assumed
uniform and term (2) in the Rayleigh-Plesset Equation (2.12) is zero.
Furthermore, it will be assumed that the behavior of the gas in the bubble is
polytropic so that
pG = pGo
Ro
R
3k
(2.26)
where k is approximately constant. Clearly k = 1 implies a constant bubble tem-
perature and k = γ would model adiabatic behavior. It should be understood that
accurate evaluation of the behavior of the gas in the bubble requires the solution of
the mass, momentum, and energy equations for the bubble contents combined with
appropriate boundary conditions which will include a thermal boundary condition
at the bubble wall. Such an analysis would probably assume spherical symmetry.
However, it is appropriate to observe that any non-spherically symmetric internal
motion would tend to mix the contents and, perhaps, improve the validity of the
polytropic assumption.
With the above assumptions the Rayleigh-Plesset equation becomes
pV(T∞) −p∞(t)
ρL
+ pGo
ρL
Ro
R
3k
= R¨R+ 3
2(˙R)2 + 4νL ˙R
R
+ 2S
ρLR
(2.27)
where the overdot denotes d/dt. Equation (2.27) without the viscous term was ﬁrst
derived and used by Noltingk and Neppiras (1950, 1951); the viscous term was
investigated ﬁrst by Poritsky (1952).
Equation (2.27) can be readily integrated numerically to ﬁnd R(t) given the
input p∞(t), the temperature T∞, and the other constants. Initial conditions are also
required and, in the context of cavitating ﬂows, it is appropriate to assume that the
microbubble of radius Ro is in equilibrium at t = 0 in the ﬂuid at a pressure p∞(0)
so that
pGo = p∞(0) −pV(T∞) + 2S
Ro
(2.28)
and that dR/dt|t=0 = 0. A typical solution for Equation (2.27) under these conditions
and with a pressure p∞(t), which ﬁrst decreases below p∞(0) and then recovers to its
original value, is shown in Figure 2.3. The general features of this solution are char-
acteristic of the response of a bubble as it passes through any low-pressure region;
they also reﬂect the strong nonlinearity of Equation (2.27). The growth is fairly
smooth and the maximum size occurs after the minimum pressure. The collapse
process is quite different. The bubble collapses catastrophically, and this is followed
by successive rebounds and collapses. In the absence of dissipation mechanisms such
as viscosity these rebounds would continue indeﬁnitely without attenuation.
Analytic solutions to Equation (2.27) are limited to the case of a step func-
tion change in p∞. Nevertheless, these solutions reveal some of the characteristics
of more general pressure histories, p∞(t), and are therefore valuable to document.
With a constant value of p∞(t > 0) = p∗
∞, Equation (2.27) is integrated by multi-
plying through by 2R2 ˙R and forming time derivatives. Only the viscous term cannot

2.4 In the Absence of Thermal Effects
37
0
20
40
80
60
100
200
400
600
800
1000
etc.
Dimensionless Time, Ut / RO
Bubble Radius / Initial Radius, R/RO
Figure 2.3 Typical solution of the Rayleigh-Plesset equation for spherical bubble size/ initial
size, R/R0. The nucleus enters a low-pressure region at a dimensionless time of 0 and is con-
vected back to the original pressure at a dimensionless time of 500. The low-pressure region
is sinusoidal and symmetric about 250.
be integrated in this way, and what follows is conﬁned to the inviscid case. After
integration, application of the initial condition ˙R(0) = 0 yields
(˙R)2 = 2(pV −p∗
∞)
3ρL

1 −R3
o
R3

+
2pGo
3ρL(1 −k)
R3k
o
R3k −R3
o
R3

−2S
ρLR

1 −R2
o
R2

(2.29)
where, in the case of isothermal gas behavior, the term involving pGo becomes
2pGo
ρL
R3
o
R3 ln
Ro
R

(2.30)
By rearranging Equation (2.29) it follows that
t = Ro
R/Ro

1
2(pV −p∗
∞)(1 −x−3)
3ρL
+ 2pGo(x−3k −x−3)
3(1 −k)ρL
−2S(1 −x−2)
ρLRox
−1
2
dx
(2.31)
where, in the case k = 1, the gas term is replaced by
2pGo
x3
lnx
(2.32)
This integral can be evaluated numerically to ﬁnd R(t), albeit indirectly.

38
Spherical Bubble Dynamics
Consider ﬁrst the characteristic behavior for bubble growth which this solution
exhibits when p∗
∞< p∞(0). Equation 2.29 shows that the asymptotic growth rate for
R ≫Ro is given by
˙R →
2
3
(pV −p∗
∞)
ρL
 1
2
(2.33)
Hence, following an initial period of acceleration, whose duration, tA, may be
estimated from this relation and the value of
¨R(0) = (p∞(0) −p∗
∞)/ρLRo
(2.34)
to be
tA =
2ρLR2
o(pV −p∗
∞)
3(p∞(0) −p∗∞)2
 1
2
(2.35)
the subsequent velocity of the interface is relatively constant. It should be empha-
sized that Equation (2.33) nevertheless represents explosive growth of the bubble,
in which the volume displacement is increasing like t3.
Now contrast the behavior of a bubble caused to collapse by an increase in p∞
to p∗
∞. In this case when R ≪Ro Equation (2.29) yields
˙R →−
Ro
R
 3
2

2(p∗
∞−pV)
3ρL
+ 2S
ρLRo
−
2pGo
3(k −1)ρL
Ro
R
3(k−1) 1
2
(2.36)
where, in the case of k = 1, the gas term is replaced by 2pGoln(Ro/R)/ρL. However,
most bubble collapse motions become so rapid that the gas behavior is much closer
to adiabatic than isothermal, and we will therefore assume k ̸= 1.
For a bubble with a substantial gas content the asymptotic collapse velocity
given by Equation (2.36) will not be reached and the bubble will simply oscillate
about a new, but smaller, equilibrium radius. On the other hand, when the bubble
contains very little gas, the inward velocity will continually increase (like R−3/2) until
the last term within the square brackets reaches a magnitude comparable with the
other terms. The collapse velocity will then decrease and a minimum size given by
Rmin = Ro

1
(k −1)
pGo
(p∗∞−pV + 3S/Ro)

1
3(k−1)
(2.37)
will be reached, following which the bubble will rebound. Note that, if pGo is small,
the Rmin could be very small indeed. The pressure and temperature of the gas in the
bubble at the minimum radius are then given by pmax and Tmax where
pmax = pGo

(k −1)(p∗
∞−pV + 3S/Ro)/pGo
k/(k−1)
(2.38)
Tmax = To

(k −1)(p∗
∞−pV + 3S/Ro)/pGo

(2.39)
We will comment later on the magnitudes of these temperatures and pressures (see
Section 3.2).

2.5 Stability of Vapor/Gas Bubbles
39
The case of zero gas content presents a special albeit somewhat hypothetical
problem, since apparently the bubble will reach zero size and at that time have
an inﬁnite inward velocity. In the absence of both surface tension and gas con-
tent, Rayleigh (1917) was able to integrate Equation (2.31) to obtain the time, tTC,
required for total collapse from R = Ro to R = 0:
tTC = 0.915

ρLR2
o
p∗∞−pV
 1
2
(2.40)
It is important at this point to emphasize that while the above results for bubble
growth are quite practical, the results for bubble collapse may be quite mislead-
ing. Apart from the neglect of thermal effects, the analysis was based on two
other assumptions that may be violated during collapse. Later we shall see that the
ﬁnal stages of collapse may involve such high velocities (and pressures) that the
assumption of liquid incompressibility is no longer appropriate. But, perhaps more
important, it transpires (see Chapter 5) that a collapsing bubble loses its spherical
symmetry in ways that can have important engineering consequences.
2.5 Stability of Vapor/Gas Bubbles
Apart from the characteristic bubble growth and collapse processes discussed in the
last section, it is also important to recognize that the equilibrium condition
pV −p∞+ pGE −2S
RE
= 0
(2.41)
may not always represent a stable equilibrium state at R = RE with a partial pressure
of gas pGE.
Consider a small perturbation in the size of the bubble from R = RE to R =
RE(1 + ϵ), ϵ ≪1 and the response resulting from the Rayleigh-Plesset equation.
Care must be taken to distinguish two possible cases:
(i) The partial pressure of the gas remains the same at pGE.
(ii) The mass of gas in the bubble and its temperature, TB, remain the same.
From a practical point of view the Case (i) perturbation is generated over a length
of time sufﬁcient to allow adequate mass diffusion in the liquid so that the partial
pressure of gas is maintained at the value appropriate to the concentration of gas
dissolved in the liquid. On the other hand, Case (ii) is considered to take place too
rapidly for signiﬁcant gas diffusion. It follows that in Case (i) the gas term in the
Rayleigh-Plesset Equation (2.27) is pGE/ρL whereas in Case (ii) it is pGER3k
E /ρLR3k.
If n is deﬁned as zero for Case (i) and n = 1 for Case (ii) then substitution of R =
RE(1 + ϵ) into the Rayleigh-Plesset equation yields
R¨R+ 3
2(˙R)2 + 4νL
˙R
R = ϵ
ρL
 2S
RE
−3nkpGE

(2.42)

40
Spherical Bubble Dynamics
Note that the right-hand side has the same sign as ϵ if
2S
RE
> 3nkpGE
(2.43)
and a different sign if the reverse holds. Therefore, if the above inequality holds,
the left-hand side of Equation (2.42) implies that the velocity and/or acceleration of
the bubble radius has the same sign as the perturbation, and hence the equilibrium
is unstable since the resulting motion will cause the bubble to deviate further from
R = RE. On the other hand, the equilibrium is stable if npGE > 2S/3RE.
First consider Case (i) which must always be unstable since the inequality
(2.43) always holds if n = 0. This is simply a restatement of the fact (discussed in
Section 2.6) that, if one allows time for mass diffusion, then all bubbles will either
grow or shrink indeﬁnitely.
Case (ii) is more interesting since in many of the practical engineering situations
pressure levels change over a period of time that is short compared with the time
required for signiﬁcant gas diffusion. In this case a bubble in stable equilibrium
requires
pGE = mGTBKG
4
3πR3
E
>
2S
3kRE
(2.44)
where mG is the mass of gas in the bubble and KG is the gas constant. Indeed for a
given mass of gas there exists a critical bubble size, RC, where
RC =
9kmGTBKG
8πS
1/2
(2.45)
This critical radius was ﬁrst identiﬁed by Blake (1949) and Neppiras and Noltingk
(1951) and is often referred to as the Blake critical radius. All bubbles of radius RE <
RC can exist in stable equilibrium, whereas all bubbles of radius RE > RC must be
unstable. This critical size could be reached by decreasing the ambient pressure from
p∞to the critical value, p∞c, where from Equations (2.45) and (2.41) it follows that
p∞c = pV −4S
3

8πS
9kmGTBKG
 1
2
(2.46)
which is often called the Blake threshold pressure.
The isothermal case (k = 1) is presented graphically in Figure 2.4 where the
solid lines represent equilibrium conditions for a bubble of size RE plotted against
the tension (pV −p∞) for various ﬁxed masses of gas in the bubble and a ﬁxed sur-
face tension. The critical radius for any particular mG corresponds to the maximum
in each curve. The locus of the peaks is the graph of RC values and is shown by the
dashed line whose equation is (pV −p∞) = 4S/3RE. The region to the right of the
dashed line represents unstable equilibrium conditions. This graphical representa-
tion was used by Daily and Johnson (1956) and is useful in visualizing the quasistatic
response of a bubble when subjected to a decreasing pressure. Starting in the fourth
quadrant under conditions in which the ambient pressure p∞> pV, and assuming the

2.5 Stability of Vapor/Gas Bubbles
41
Unstable
Equilibrium
Stable
Equilibrium
RC
Increasing mG
mG TB KG = 0
RE < RC
mG TB KG = 20 × 10-10
mG TB KG = 5 × 10-10
Bubble Radius, RE (m)
–0.5
10–3
10–4
10–5
0
0.5
1.0
Tension, (Pv – P) × 10−4     (kg/m sec2)
Figure 2.4 Stable and unstable bubble equilibrium radii as a function of the tension for var-
ious masses of gas in the bubble. Stable and unstable conditions are separated by the dotted
line. Adap ted fro m Daily an d Johnson (1956).
mass of gas in the bubble is constant, the radius RE will ﬁrst increase as (pV −p∞)
increases. The bubble will pass through a series of stable equilibrium states until the
particular critical pressure corresponding to the maximum is reached. Any slight
decrease in p∞below the value corresponding to this point will result in explosive
cavitation growth regardless of whether p∞is further decreased or not. Indeed, it is
clear from this analysis that the critical tension for a liquid should be given by 4S/3R
rather than 2S/R as maintained in Chapter 1, since stable equilibrium conditions do
not exist in the range
4S
3R < (pV −p∞) < 2S
R
(2.47)
Other questions arise from inspection of Figure 2.4. Note that for a given subcritical
tension two alternate equilibrium states exist, one smaller stable state and one larger
unstable state. Suppose that a bubble at the smaller stable state is also subjected
to pressure oscillations of sufﬁcient magnitude to cause the bubble to momentar-
ily exceed the size, RC. It would then grow explosively without bound. This effect
is important in understanding the role of turbulence in cavitation inception or the
response of a liquid to an acoustic ﬁeld (see Chapter 4).
This stability phenomenon has important consequences in many cavitating
ﬂows. To recognize this, one must visualize a spectrum of sizes of cavitation nuclei
being convected into a region of low pressure within the ﬂow. Then the p∞in
Equations (2.41) and (2.47) will be the local pressure in the liquid surrounding the
bubble, and p∞must be less than pV for explosive cavitation growth to occur. It

42
Spherical Bubble Dynamics
is clear from the above analysis that all of the nuclei whose size, R, is greater than
some critical value will become unstable, grow explosively, and cavitate, whereas
those nuclei smaller than that critical size will react passively and will therefore not
become visible to the eye. Though the actual response of the bubble is dynamic and
p∞is changing continuously, we can nevertheless anticipate that the crtical nuclei
size will be given approximately by 4S/3(pV −p∞)∗where (pV −p∞)∗is some repre-
sentative measure of the tension in the low-pressure region. Note that the lower the
pressure level, p∞, the smaller the critical size and the larger the number of nuclei
that are activated. This accounts for the increase in the number of bubbles observed
in a cavitating ﬂow as the pressure is reduced.
A quantitative example of this effect is shown in Figure 2.5, which presents
results from the integration of the Rayleigh-Plesset equation for bubbles in the ﬂow
around an axisymmetric headform. It shows the maximum size which the bubbles
achieve as a function of the size of the original nucleus for a typical Weber number,
ρLRHU2
∞/S, of 28,000 where U∞and RH are the free stream velocity and headform
radius. Data are plotted for four different cavitation numbers, σ, representing dif-
ferent ambient pressure levels. Note that the curves for σ < 0.5 all have abrupt
vertical sections at certain critical nuclei sizes and that this critical size decreases
with decreasing σ. Numerical results for this and other ﬂows show that the criti-
cal size, RC, adheres fairly closely to the nondimensional version of the expression
derived earlier,
RC ≈κS/ρLU2
∞( −σ −Cpmin)
(2.48)
0.5
0.4
0.3
Nuclei Radius / Headform Radius, RO/RH
10−3
10−2
10−1
10−2
10−3
10−4
1
10−1
 Bubble Maximum Radius / Headform Radius, RM / RH
 = 0.6
RM = RO
Figure 2.5 The maximum size, RM, to which a cavitation bubble grows according to the
Rayleigh-Plesset equation as a function of the original nucleus size, Ro, and the cavitation
number, σ, in the ﬂow around an axisymmetric headform of radius, RH, with Weber number,
ρL R H U2∞/S = 28,000 (f ro m C ecci o an d B r en n en 1991).

2.6 Growth by Mass Diffusion
43
where Cpmin is the minimum pressure coefﬁcient in the ﬂow and the factor κ is close
to unity.
Note also from Figure 2.5 that, whatever their initial size, all unstable nuclei
grow to roughly the same maximum size. This is because both the asymptotic growth
rate and the time available for growth are relatively independent of the size of the
original nucleus. From Equation (2.33) the growth rate is given approximately by
dR
dt = U∞( −σ −Cpmin)
1
2
(2.49)
Moreover, if the pressure near the minimum pressure point is represented by
Cp = Cpmin + Cp∗(s/RH)2
(2.50)
where s is a coordinate measured along the surface, RH is the typical dimension of
the body, and Cp∗is a constant which is typically of order one, then the typical time
available for growth, tG, is given approximately by
tG = 2RH( −σ −Cpmin)
1
2
C
1
2p∗U∞(1 −Cpmin)
1
2
(2.51)
It follows that the maximum size, RM, will be given roughly by
RM
RH
= 2( −σ −Cpmin)
C
1
2p∗(1 −Cpmin)
1
2
(2.52)
and therefore only changes modestly with cavitation number within the range of
signiﬁcance.
2.6 Growth by Mass Diffusion
In most of the circumstances considered in this chapter, it is assumed that the events
occur too rapidly for signiﬁcant mass transfer of contaminant gas to occur between
the bubble and the liquid. Thus we assumed in Section 2.3 and elsewhere that the
mass of contaminant gas in the bubble remained constant. It is convenient to recon-
sider this issue at this point, for the methods of analysis of mass diffusion will clearly
be similar to those of thermal diffusion (Scriven 1959). Moreover, there are some
issues that require analysis of the rate of increase or decrease of the mass of gas in
the bubble. One of the most basic issues is the fact that any and all of the gas-ﬁlled
microbubbles that are present in a subsaturated liquid (and particularly in water)
should dissolve away if the ambient pressure is sufﬁciently high. Henry’s law states
that the partial pressure of gas, pGE, in the bubble, which is in equilibrium with a
saturated concentration, c∞, of gas dissolved in the liquid will be given by
pGE = Hc∞
(2.53)
where H is Henry’s law constant for that gas and liquid combination. (Note that H
decreases substantially with temperature.) Consequently, if the ambient pressure,

44
Spherical Bubble Dynamics
p∞, is greater than (Hc∞+ pV −2S/R), the bubble should dissolve away completely.
As we discussed in Section 1.12, experience is contrary to this theory, and microbub-
bles persist even when the liquid is subjected to several atmospheres of pressure for
an extended period.
The process of mass transfer can be analysed by noting that the concentration,
c(r,t), of gas in the liquid will be governed by a diffusion equation identical in form
to Equation (2.15),
∂c
∂t + dR
dt
R
r
2 ∂c
∂r = D
r2
∂
∂r

r2 ∂c
∂r

(2.54)
where D is the mass diffusivity, typically 2 × 10−5 cm2/sec for air in water at normal
temperatures. As Plesset and Prosperetti (1977) demonstrate, the typical bubble
growth rates due to mass diffusion are so slow that the convection term (the second
term on the left-hand side of Equation (2.54)) is negligible.
The simplest problem is that of a bubble of radius, R, in a liquid at a ﬁxed
ambient pressure, p∞, and gas concentration, c∞. In the absence of inertial effects
the partial pressure of gas in the bubble will be pGE where
pGE = p∞−pV + 2S/R
(2.55)
and therefore the concentration of gas at the liquid interface is cS = pGE/H. Epstein
and Plesset (1950) found an approximate solution to the problem of a bubble in a
liquid initially at uniform gas concentration, c∞, at time, t = 0, which takes the form
RdR
dt = D
ρG

c∞−cS(1 + 2S/Rp∞)

(1 + 4S/3Rp∞)

1 + R(πDt)−1
2

(2.56)
where ρG is the density of gas in the bubble and cS is the saturated concentration at
the interface at the partial pressure given by Equation (2.55) (the vapor pressure is
neglected in their analysis). The last term in Equation (2.56), R(πDt)−1
2 , arises from
a growing diffusion boundary layer in the liquid at the bubble surface. This layer
grows like (Dt)
1
2 . When t is large, the last term in Equation (2.56) becomes small
and the characteristic growth is given approximately by
[R(t)]2 −[R(0)]2 ≈2D(c∞−cS)t
ρG
(2.57)
where, for simplicity, we have neglected surface tension.
It is instructive to evaluate the typical duration of growth (or shrinkage). From
Equation (2.57) the time required for complete solution is tCS where
tCS ≈
ρG [R(0)]2
2D(cS −c∞)
(2.58)
Typical values of (cS −c∞)/ρG of 0.01 (Plesset and Prosperetti 1977) coupled with
the value of D given above lead to complete solution of a 10μm bubble in about

2.7 Thermal Effects on Growth
45
2.5s. Though short, this is a long time by the standards of most bubble dynamic
phenomena.
The fact that a microbubble should dissolve within seconds leaves unresolved
the question of why cavitation nuclei persist indeﬁnitely. One possible explanation
is that the interface is immobilized by the effects of surface contamination. Another
is that the bubble is imbedded in a solid particle in a way that inhibits the solution
of the gas, the so-called Harvey nucleus. These issues were discussed previously in
Section 1.12.
Finally we note that there is an important mass diffusion effect caused by ambi-
ent pressure oscillations in which nonlinearities can lead to bubble growth even in
a subsaturated liquid. This is known as “rectiﬁed diffusion” and is discussed later in
Section 4.9.
2.7 Thermal Effects on Growth
In Sections 2.4 through 2.6 some of the characteristics of bubble dynamics in the
absence of thermal effects were explored. It is now necessary to examine the regime
of validity of these analyses, and it is convenient to ﬁrst evaluate the magnitude of
the thermal term (2.24) which was neglected in Equation (2.12) in order to produce
Equation (2.27).
First examine the case of bubble growth. The asymptotic growth rate given by
Equation (2.33) is constant and hence in the characteristic case of a constant p∞,
terms (1), (3), (4), (5), and (6) in Equation (2.12) are all either constant or dimin-
ishing in magnitude as time progresses. Furthermore, a constant, asymptotic growth
rate corresponds to the case
n = 1;
R∗= {2(pV −p∗
∞)/3ρL}
1
2
(2.59)
in Equation (2.21). Consequently, according to Equation (2.24), the thermal term
(2) in its linearized form for small (T∞−TB) will be given by
term(2) = (T∞)C(1)R∗t
1
2
(2.60)
Under these conditions, even if the thermal term is initially negligible, it will gain
in magnitude relative to all the other terms and will ultimately affect the growth
in a major way. Parenthetically it should be added that the Plesset-Zwick assump-
tion of a small thermal boundary layer thickness, δT, relative to R can be shown
to hold throughout the inertially controlled growth period since δT increases like
(αLt)
1
2 whereas R is increasing linearly with t. Only under circumstances of very slow
growth might the assumption be violated.
Using the relation (2.60), one can deﬁne a critical time, tc1 (called the ﬁrst criti-
cal time), during the growth when the order of magnitude of term (2) becomes equal
to the order of magnitude of the retained terms, as represented by (˙R)2. This ﬁrst
critical time is given by
tc1 = (pV −p∗
∞)
ρL
· 1
2
(2.61)

46
Spherical Bubble Dynamics
where the constants of order unity have been omitted for clarity. Thus tc1 depends
not only on the tension (pV −p∗
∞)/ρL but also on (T∞), a purely thermophysical
quantity that is a function only of the liquid temperature. Recalling Equation (2.25),
(T) =
L2ρ2
V
ρ2
LcPLT∞α
1
2
L
(2.62)
it can be anticipated that 2 will change by many, many orders of magnitude in
a given liquid as the temperature T∞is varied from the triple point to the critical
point since 2 is proportional to (ρV/ρL)4. As a result the critical time, tc1, will
vary by many orders of magnitude. Some values of  for a number of liquids are
plotted in Figure 2.6 as a function of the reduced temperature T/TC and in Figure 2.7
as a function of the vapor pressure. As an example, consider a typical cavitating
ﬂow experiment in a water tunnel with a tension of the order of 104 kg/m s2. Since
water at 20◦C has a value of  of about 1 m/s
3
2 , the ﬁrst critical time is of the order
of 10s, which is very much longer than the time of growth of bubbles. Hence the
Nitrogen
Sodium
Freon - 12
Water
Toluene
Oxygen
Sodium
0.2
10-4
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Methane
Helium -4
Mercury
Temperature / Critical Temperature, T / TC
10-2
1
102
104
106
108
Thermodynamic Parameter, Σ (m / sec3/2)
Figure 2.6 Values of the thermodynamic parameter, , for various saturated liquids as a
function of the reduced temperature, T/TC.

2.8 Thermally Controlled Growth
47
Mercury
Freon - 12
Oxygen
Nitrogen
Sodium
Toluene
Methane
Water
Vapor Pressure
102
104
106
108
Thermodynamic Parameter, ∑ (m / sec3/2)
108
106
104
102
1
10–2
10–4
Helium - 4
Figure 2.7 Values of the thermodynamic parameter, , for various saturated liquids as a
function of the vapor pressure (in kg/m s2).
bubble growth occurring in this case is unhindered by thermal effects; it is “inertially
controlled” growth. If, on the other hand, the tunnel water were heated to 100◦C or,
equivalently, one observed bubble growth in a pot of boiling water at superheat of
2◦K, then since  ≈103 m/s
3
2 at 100◦C the ﬁrst critical time would be 10μs. Thus
virtually all the bubble growth observed would be “thermally controlled.”
2.8 Thermally Controlled Growth
When the ﬁrst critical time is exceeded it is clear that the relative importance of
the various terms in the Rayleigh-Plesset Equation, (2.12), will change. The most
important terms become the driving term (1) and the thermal term (2) whose magni-
tude is much larger than that of the inertial terms (4). Hence if the tension (pV −p∗
∞)
remains constant, then the solution using the form of Equation (2.24) for the thermal

48
Spherical Bubble Dynamics
term must have n = 1
2 and the asymptotic behavior is
R =
(pV −p∗
∞)t
1
2
ρL(T∞)C
	
1
2

or
n = 1
2;
R∗=
(pV −p∗
∞)
ρL(T∞)C
	
1
2

(2.63)
Consequently, as time proceeds, the inertial, viscous, gaseous, and surface tension
terms in the Rayleigh-Plesset equation all rapidly decline in importance. In terms of
the superheat, T, rather than the tension
R =
1
2C
	
1
2

 ρLcPLT
ρVL
(αLt)
1
2
(2.64)
where the group ρLcPLT/ρVL is termed the Jakob Number in the context of pool
boiling and T = TW −T∞, TW being the wall temperature.
The result, Equation (2.63), demonstrates that the rate of growth of the bubble
decreases substantially after the ﬁrst critical time, tc1, is reached and that R subse-
quently increases like t
1
2 instead of t. Moreover, since the thermal boundary layer
also increases like (αLt)
1
2 , the Plesset-Zwick assumption remains valid indeﬁnitely.
An example of this thermally inhibited bubble growth is including in Figure 2.8,
which is taken from Dergarabedian (1953). We observe that the experimental data
and calculations using the Plesset-Zwick method agree quite well.
When bubble growth is caused by decompression so that p∞(t) changes substan-
tially with time during growth, the simple approximate solution of Equation (2.63)
no longer holds and the analysis of the unsteady thermal boundary layer surround-
ing the bubble becomes considerably more complex. One must then solve the
diffusion Equation (2.15), the energy equation (usually in the approximate form of
Equation (2.17)) and the Rayleigh-Plesset Equation (2.12) simultaneously, though
Time (sec)
Plesset - Zwick Theory
Radius, R (cm)
0
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.05
0.10
Figure 2.8 Experimental observations of the growth of three vapor bubbles (⃝, △, ▽) in
superheated water at 103.1◦C compared with the growth expected using the Plesset-Zwick
t h eo ry (ad ap t ed f r o m Dergarab ed i an 1953).

2.8 Thermally Controlled Growth
49
for the thermally controlled growth being considered here, most of the terms in
Equation (2.12) become negligible so that the simpliﬁcation, pV(TB) = p∞(t), is usu-
ally justiﬁed. When p∞is a constant this reduces to the problem treated by Plesset
and Zwick (1952) and later addressed by Forster and Zuber (1954) and Scriven
(1959). Several different approximate solutions to the general problem of thermally
controlled bubble growth during liquid decompression have been put forward by
Theofanous et al. (1969), Jones and Zuber (1978) and Cha and Henry (1981). Theo-
fanous et al. include nonequilibrium thermodynamic effects on which we comment
in the following section. If these are ignored, then all three analyses yield quali-
tatively similar results which also agree quite well with the experimental data of
Hewitt and Parker (1968) for bubble growth in liquid nitrogen. Figure 2.9 presents
a typical example of the data of Hewitt and Parker and a comparison with the three
analytical treatments mentioned above.
Several other factors can complicate and alter the dynamics of thermally con-
trolled growth, and these are discussed in the sections which follow. Nonequilibrium
effects are addressed in Section 2.9. More important are the modiﬁcations to the
heat transfer mechanisms at the bubble surface that can be caused by surface
Pressure
Jones & Zuber
Cha & Henry
Hewitt & Parker
Theofanous et. al
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
Time (msec)
Pressure,  p (Atm)
Bubble Radius, R(mm)
1.0
1.2
1.4
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
0
F i gu re 2. 9 Dat a f ro m Hew i t t an d P ark er (1968) o n t h e gro w t h o f a vap o r bubble in liquid
nitrogen (pressure/time history also shown) and comparison with the analytical treatments
by Theo fanous et al. (1969), J o n es an d Z u b er ( 1978), an d C h a an d Hen r y ( 1981).

50
Spherical Bubble Dynamics
instabilities or by convective heat transfer. These are reviewed in Sections 2.10
and 2.12.
2.9 Nonequilibrium Effects
One factor that could affect the dynamics of thermally controlled growth is whether
or not the liquid at the interface is in thermal equilibrium with the vapor in the
bubble. Most of the analyses assume that the temperature of the liquid at the inter-
face, TLS, is the temperature of the saturated vapor in the bubble, TB. Theofanous
et al. (1969) have suggested that this might not be the case because of the high
evaporation rate. They employ an accommodation coefﬁcient, , deﬁned (Schrage
1953) by
GV = 
⎡
⎣

1
2πKV
 1
2
⎛
⎝pV(TLS)
T
1
2
LS
−pV(TB)
T
1
2
B
⎞
⎠
⎤
⎦
(2.65)
where GV is the evaporative mass ﬂux and KV is the gas constant of the vapor.
For a chosen value of  this effectively deﬁnes a temperature discontinuity at the
interface. Clearly  = ∞corresponds to the previously assumed equilibrium condi-
tion. Plesset and Prosperetti (1977) demonstrate that if  is of order unity then the
nonequilibrium correction is of the order of the Mach number of the bubble wall
motion and is therefore negligible except, perhaps, near the end of a violent bubble
collapse (see Fujikawa and Akamatsu 1980 and Section 3.2). On the other hand, if 
is much smaller than unity, signiﬁcant nonequilibrium effects might be encountered.
Theofanous et al. (1969) explore the effects of small values of  theoretically.
They conﬁrm that values of order unity do not yield bubble histories that differ by
very much from those that assume equilibrium. Values of  of the order of 0.01
did produce substantial differences. However, the results using equilibrium appear
to compare favorably with the experimental results as shown in Figure 2.9. This
suggests that nonequilibrium effects have little effect on thermally controlled bubble
growth though the issue is not entirely settled since some studies do suggest that
values of  as low as 0.01 may be possible.
2.10 Convective Effects
Another way in which the rate of heat transfer to the interface may be changed is
by convection caused by relative motion between the bubble and the liquid. Such
enhancement of the heat transfer rate is normally represented by a Nusselt number,
Nu, deﬁned as the ratio of the actual heat transfer rate divided by the rate of heat
transfer by conduction. Therefore in the present context the factor, Nu, should be
included as a multiplier in the thermal term of the Rayleigh-Plesset equation. Then
one seeks a relationship between Nu and the Peclet number, Pe = WR/αL, where W
is the typical translational velocity of the bubble relative to the liquid. The appro-
priate relationship for a growing and translating bubble is not known; analytically
this represents a problem that is substantially more complex than that tackled by

2.10 Convective Effects
51
Plesset and Zwick. Nevertheless, it is of interest to speculate on the form of Nu(Pe)
and observe the consequences for the bubble growth rate. Therefore let us assume
that this relationship takes the approximate form common in many convective heat
transfer problems:
Nu = 1
for Pe ≪1
= CPem
for Pe ≫1
(2.66)
where C is some constant of order unity. We must also decide on the form of the
relative velocity, W, which could have several causes. In either a cavitating ﬂow
or in pool boiling it could be due to pressure gradients within the liquid due to
acceleration of the liquid. It could also be caused by the presence of nearby solid
boundaries.
Despite the difﬁculties of accurate assessment of the convective heat transfer
effects, let us consider the qualitative effects of two possible translational motions
on a bubble growing like R = R∗tn. The ﬁrst effect is that due to buoyancy; the rela-
tive velocity, W, caused by buoyancy in the absence of viscous drag will be given by
W ∝gt with a factor of proportionality of order one. The viscous drag on the bubble
will have little effect so long as νLt ≪R2. The second example is a bubble growing
on a solid wall where the effective convective velocity is roughly given by dR/dt and
hence W ∝R∗tn−1. Thus the Peclet numbers for the two cases are respectively
R∗gtn+1
αL
and
(R∗)2t2n−1
αL
(2.67)
Consider ﬁrst the case of inertially controlled growth for which n = 1. Then it
follows that convective heat transfer effects will only occur for Pe ≥1 or for times
t > tc2 where
tc2 =

ρLα2
L
(pV −p∗∞)g2
 1
4
and
αLρL
(pV −p∗∞)
(2.68)
respectively where the asymptotic growth rate given by Equation (2.33) has been
used. Consequently, the convective enhancement of the heat transfer will only occur
during the inertially controlled growth if tc2 < tc1 and this requires that
pV −p∗
∞> ρL
4αL
g
 2
5
and
ρL(2αL)
1
2
(2.69)
respectively. Since  increases rapidly with temperature it is much more likely that
these inequalities will be true at low reduced temperatures than at high reduced
temperatures. For example, in water at 20◦C the right-hand sides of Inequality
(2.69) are respectively 30 and 4 kg/msec2, very small tensions (and correspondingly
minute superheats) that could readily occur. If the tension is larger than this critical
value, then convective effects would become important. On the other hand, in water
at 100◦C the values are respectively equivalent to superheats of 160◦K and 0.5◦K,
which are less likely to occur.

52
Spherical Bubble Dynamics
It follows that in each of the two bubble motions assumed there is some temper-
ature below which one would expect Pe to reach unity prior to tc1. The question is
what happens thereafter, for clearly the thermal effect that would otherwise begin
at tc1 is now going to be altered by the enhanced heat transfer. When Pe > 1 the
thermal term in the Rayleigh-Plesset equation will no longer grow like t
1
2 but will
increase like t
1
2 /Nu which, according to the relations (2.67), is like t
1
2−2m and t
1
2 −m
for the two bubble motions. If, as in many convective heat transfer problems, m = 1
2,
it would follow that thermal inhibition of the growth would be eliminated and the
inertially controlled growth would continue indeﬁnitely.
Finally, consider the other possible scenario in which convective heat transfer
effects might inﬂuence the thermally controlled growth in the event that tc2 > tc1.
Given n = 1
2, the Peclet number for buoyancy-induced motion would become
unity at
tc3 =

αLρL
g(pV −p∗∞)
2/3
(2.70)
using Equation (2.63). Consequently, convective heat transfer could alter the form
of the thermally controlled growth after t = tc3; indeed, it is possible that inertially
controlled growth could resume after tc3 if m > 1
4. In the other example of bubble
growth at a wall, the Peclet number would remain at the value less than unity which
it had attained at tc1. Consequently, the convective heat transfer effects would delay
the onset of thermally inhibited growth indeﬁnitely if (pV −p∗
∞) ≫ρL(2αL)
1
2 but
would have little or no effect on either the onset or form of the thermally controlled
growth if the reverse were true.
2.11 Surface Roughening Effects
Another important phenomenon that can affect the heat transfer process at the
interface during bubble growth (and therefore affect the bubble growth rate) is the
development of an instability on the interface. If the bubble surface becomes rough
and turbulent, the increase in the effective surface area and the unsteady motions
of the liquid near that surface can lead to a substantial enhancement of the rate of
heat transfer to the interface. The effect is to delay (perhaps even indeﬁnitely) the
point at which the rate of growth is altered by thermal effects. This is one possible
explanation for the phenomenon of vapor explosions which are essentially the result
of an extended period of inertially controlled bubble growth.
Shepherd and Sturtevant (1982) and Frost and Sturtevant (1986) have exam-
ined rapidly growing nucleation bubbles near the limit of superheat and have found
growth rates substantially larger than expected when the bubble was in the ther-
mally controlled growth phase. The experiments examined bubble growth within
droplets of superheated liquid suspended in another immiscible liquid. Typical pho-
tographs are shown in Figure 2.10 and reveal that the surfaces of the bubbles are
rough and irregular. The enhancement of the heat transfer caused by this rough-
ening is probably responsible for the larger growth rates. Shepherd and Sturtevant

2.12 Nonspherical Perturbations
53
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.10 Typical photographs of a rapidly growing bubble in a droplet of superheated
ether suspended in glycerine. The bubble is the dark, rough mass; the droplet is clear and
transparent. The photographs, which are of different events, were taken 31, 44, and 58 μs
after nucleation and the droplets are approximately 2mm in diameter. Reproduced from Frost
an d S t u rt evan t ( 1986) w i t h t h e p ermi ssi o n o f t h e au t h o rs.
(1982) attribute the roughness to the development of a baroclinic interfacial insta-
bility similar to the Landau-Darrieus instability of ﬂame fronts. It is also of interest
to note that Frost and Sturtevant report that the instability could be suppressed by
increasing the ambient pressure and therefore the temperature and density within
the bubble. At an ambient pressure of 2 bar, the onset of the instability could be
observed on the surface of ether bubbles and was accompanied by a jump in the
radiated pressure associated with the sudden acceleration in the growth rate. At
higher ambient pressures the instability could be completely suppressed. This occurs
because the growth rate of the instability increases with the rate of growth of the
bubble, and both are signiﬁcantly reduced at the higher ambient pressures. It may
be that, under other circumstances, the Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities described in
Section 2.12 could give rise to a similar effect.
2.12 Nonspherical Perturbations
Apart from the phenomena described in the preceding section, it has, thus far, been
tacitly assumed that the bubble remains spherical during the growth or collapse pro-
cess; in other words, it has been assumed that the bubble is stable to nonspherical
distortions. There are, however, circumstances in which this is not true, and the
subsequent departure from a smooth spherical shape can have important practical
consequences.
The stability to nonspherical disturbances has been investigated from a purely
hydrodynamic point of view by Birkhoff (1954) and Plesset and Mitchell (1956),
among others. These analyses essentially examine the spherical equivalent of the
Rayleigh-Taylor instability; they do not include thermal effects. If the inertia of the
gas in the bubble is assumed to be negligible, then the amplitude, a(t), of a spherical
harmonic distortion of order n (n > 1) will be governed by the equation:
d2a
dt2 + 3
R
dR
dt
da
dt −
(n −1)
R
d2R
dt2 −(n −1)(n + 1)(n + 2)
S
ρLR3

a = 0
(2.71)

54
Spherical Bubble Dynamics
The coefﬁcients require knowledge of the global dynamic behavior, R(t). It is clear
from this equation that the most unstable circumstances occur when ˙R < 0 and ¨R ≥0
(where overdots denote differentiation with respect to time, t). These conditions
will be met just prior to the rebound of a collapsing cavity. On the other hand, the
most stable circumstances occur when ˙R > 0 and ¨R < 0, which is the case for growing
bubbles as they approach their maximum size.
The fact that the coefﬁcients in Equation (2.71) are not constant in time causes
departure from the equivalent Rayleigh-Taylor instability for a plane boundary. The
coefﬁcient of a is not greatly dissimilar from the case of the plane boundary in the
sense that instability is promoted when ¨R > 0 and surface tension has a stabilizing
effect. The primary difference is caused by the da/dt term, which can be interpreted
as a geometric effect. As the bubble grows the wavelength on the surface increases,
and hence the growth of the wave amplitude is lessened. The reverse occurs during
collapse.
Plesset and Mitchell (1956) examined the particular case of a vapor/gas bubble
initially in equilibrium that is subjected to a step function change in the pressure
at inﬁnity. Thermal and viscous effects are assumed to be negligible. The effect
of a ﬁxed mass of gas in the bubble will be included in this presentation though
it was omitted by Plesset and Mitchell. Note that this simple growth problem for
a spherical bubble was solved for R(t) in Section 2.4. One feature of that solution
that is important in this context is that ¨R ≥0. It is this feature that gives rise to the
instability. However, in any real scenario, the initial acceleration phase for which
¨R ≥0 is of limited duration, so the issue will be whether or not the instability has
sufﬁcient time during the acceleration phase for signiﬁcant growth to occur.
It transpires that it is more convenient to rewrite Equation (2.71) using y = R/Ro
as the independent variable rather than t. Then a(y) must satisfy
A(y)d2a
dy2 + B(y)
y
da
dy −(n −1)C(y)a
y3
= 0
(2.72)
where
A(y) = 2
3

1 −1
y3

−β1
y

1 −1
y2

+ β2
y3 lny
(2.73)
B(y) = 2 −1
y3 −β1
y
5
2 −3
2y2

+ β2
y3

1 + 3
2 lny

(2.74)
C(y) = 1
y2 −3β1
2y2 + β2
y2

1 −3
2 lny

+ β1
2 {1 −(n + 1)(n + 2)}
(2.75)
and the parameters
β1 =
2S
Ro(pV −p∞),
β2 =
pGo
(pV −p∞)
(2.76)
represent the effects of surface tension and gas content respectively. Note that a
positive value of
(pV −p∞)(1 −β1 + β2)
(2.77)

2.12 Nonspherical Perturbations
55
Bubble Radius, y = R /RO
n = 60
n = 50
n = 40
n = 250
n = 200
n = 150
1 = 10–4,  
2 = 0 
1 = 10–4,  
2 = 10 
Amplitude / Initial Amplitude, α
1.0
106
105
104
103
102
10
1
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
Figure 2.11 Examples of the growth of the amplitude, a, of a spherically harmonic disturbance
(of order n as indicated) on the surface of a growing cavitation bubble for two typical choices
of the surface tension and gas content parameters, β1 and β2.
implies bubble growth following t = 0 whereas a negative value implies collapse.
Some typical numerical integrations of Equation (2.72) in cases of bubble
growth are shown in Figure 2.11 where the amplitude scale is arbitrary. Plesset and
Mitchell performed hand calculations for small n and found only minor ampliﬁcation
during growth. However, as can be anticipated from Equation (2.72), the amplitudes
may be much larger for large n. It can be seen from Figure 2.11 that the amplitude of
the disturbance reaches a peak and then decays during growth. For given values of
the parameters β1 and β2, there exists a particular spherical harmonic, n = nA, which
achieves the maximum amplitude, a; in Figure 2.11 we chose to display data for n
values which bracket nA. The dependence of nA on β1 and β2 is shown in Figure 2.12.
A slightly different value of n denoted by nB gives the maximum value of a/y. Since
the latter quantity rather than a represents a measure of the wave amplitude to
wavelength ratio, Figure 2.12 also shows the dependence of nB on β1 and β2. To
complete the picture, Figure 2.13 presents values of (a)max,(a/y)max and the sizes of
the bubble (y)a=max and (y)a/y=max at which these maxima occur.
In summary, it can be seen that the initial acceleration phase of bubble growth
in which ¨R ≥0 is unstable to spherical harmonic perturbations of fairly high order, n.
On the other hand, visual inspection of Equation (2.71) is sufﬁcient to conclude that
the remainder of the growth phase during which ˙R > 0, ¨R < 0 is stable to all spherical
harmonic perturbations. So, if inadequate time is available for growth of the per-
turbations during the acceleration phase, then the bubble will remain unperturbed
throughout its growth. In their experiments on underwater explosions, Reynolds
and Berthoud (1981) observed bubble surface instabilities during the acceleration

56
Spherical Bubble Dynamics
500
200
100
50
20
10
5
2
1
102
103
104
1 / 
1
nB
nB
nB
nA
nA
nA
0
2 = 10
Order Of Spherical Harmonic, nA and nB
1
Figure 2.12 The orders of the spherical harmonic disturbances that, during bubble growth,
produce (i) the maximum disturbance amplitude (nA) and (ii) the maximum ratio of distur-
bance amplitude to bubble radius (nB) for various surface tension and gas content parameters,
β1 and β2.
phase that did correspond to fairly large n of the order of 10. They also evaluate the
duration of the acceleration phase in their experiments and demonstrate, using an
estimated growth rate, that this phase is long enough for signiﬁcant roughening of
the surface to occur. However, their bubbles become smooth again in the second,
deceleration phase of growth. The bubbles examined by Reynolds and Berthoud
were fairly large, 2.5 cm to 4.5 cm in radius. A similar acceleration phase instability

References
57
103
5
4
3
2
1
1/1 
10
1
y
102
OMax
aMax
(y)o = Max
(a/y)Max
aMax
(y)a/y = Max
(y)O = Max
(a/y)Max
(y)O = Max
aMax or (a/y)Max
2
102
103
104
10
1
0
Figure 2.13 The maximum ampliﬁcation, amax, and the maximum ratio of amplitude to bub-
ble radius, (a/y)max, for spherical harmonic disturbances on the surface of a growing bubble
for various surface tension and gas content parameters, β1 and β2. Also shown are the bubble
sizes, (y)a=max and (y)a/y=max, at which these maxima occur.
has not, to the author’s knowledge, been reported for the smaller bubbles typical of
most cavitation experiments. This could either be the result of a briefer acceleration
phase or the greater stabilizing effect of surface tension in smaller bubbles.
References
Birkhoff, G. (1954). Note on Taylor instability. Quart. Appl. Math., 12, 306–309.
Blake, F.G. (1949). The onset of cavitation in liquids: I. Acoustics Res. Lab., Harvard Univ.,
Tech. Memo. No. 12.
Ceccio, S.L. and Brennen, C.E. (1991). Observations of the dynamics and acoustics of
travelling bubble cavitation. J. Fluid Mech., 233, 633–660.

58
Spherical Bubble Dynamics
Cha, Y.S. and Henry, R.E. (1981). Bubble growth during decompression of a liquid. ASME
J. Heat Transfer, 103, 56–60.
Daily, J.W. and Johnson, V.E., Jr. (1956). Turbulence and boundary layer effects on
cavitation inception from gas nuclei. Trans. ASME, 78, 1695–1706.
Dergarabedian, P. (1953). The rate of growth of vapor bubbles in superheated water. ASME
J. Appl. Mech., 20, 537–545.
Epstein, P.S. and Plesset, M.S. (1950). On the stability of gas bubbles in liquid-gas solutions.
J. Chem. Phys., 18, 1505–1509.
Forster, H.K. and Zuber, N. (1954). Growth of a vapor bubble in a superheated liquid.
J. Appl. Phys., 25, No.4, 474–478.
Frost, D. and Sturtevant, B. (1986). Effects of ambient pressure on the instability of a liquid
boiling explosively at the superheat limit. ASME J. Heat Transfer, 108, 418–424.
Fujikawa, S. and Akamatsu, T. (1980). Effects of the non-equilibriumcondensation of vapour
on the pressure wave produced by the collapse of a bubble in a liquid. J. Fluid Mech., 97,
481–512.
Hewitt, H.C. and Parker, J.D. (1968). Bubble growth and collapse in liquid nitrogen. ASME
J. Heat Transfer, 90, 22–26.
Jones, O.C. and Zuber, N. (1978). Bubble growth in variable pressure ﬁelds. ASME J. Heat
Transfer, 100, 453–459.
Neppiras, E.A. and Noltingk, B.E. (1951). Cavitation produced by ultrasonics: theoretical
conditions for the onset of cavitation. Proc. Phys. Soc., London, 64B, 1032–1038.
Noltingk, B.E. and Neppiras, E.A. (1950). Cavitation produced by ultrasonics. Proc. Phys.
Soc., London, 63B, 674–685.
Plesset, M.S. (1949). The dynamics of cavitation bubbles. ASME J. Appl. Mech., 16, 228–231.
Plesset, M.S. and Zwick, S.A. (1952). A nonsteady heat diffusion problem with spherical
symmetry. J. Appl. Phys., 23, No. 1, 95–98.
Plesset, M.S. and Mitchell, T.P. (1956). On the stability of the spherical shape of a vapor
cavity in a liquid. Quart. Appl. Math., 13, No. 4, 419–430.
Plesset, M.S. and Prosperetti, A. (1977). Bubble dynamics and cavitation. Ann. Rev. Fluid
Mech., 9, 145–185.
Poritsky, H. (1952). The collapse or growth of a spherical bubble or cavity in a viscous ﬂuid.
Proc. First Nat. Cong. in Appl. Math., 813–821.
Rayleigh, Lord. (1917). On the pressure developed in a liquid during the collapse of a
spherical cavity. Phil. Mag., 34, 94–98.
Reynolds, A.B. and Berthoud, G. (1981). Analysis of EXCOBULLE two-phase expansion
tests. Nucl. Eng. and Design, 67, 83–100.
Schrage, R.W. (1953). A theoretical study of interphase mass transfer. Columbia Univ. Press.
Scriven, L.E. (1959). On the dynamics of phase growth. Chem. Eng. Sci., 10, 1–13.
Shepherd, J.E. and Sturtevant, B. (1982). Rapid evaporation near the superheat limit. J. Fluid
Mech., 121, 379–402.
Theofanous, T., Biasi, L., Isbin, H.S., and Fauske, H. (1969). A theoretical study on bubble
growth in constant and time-dependent pressure ﬁelds. Chem. Eng. Sci., 24, 885–897.

3
Cavitation Bubble Collapse
3.1 Introduction
In the preceding chapter some of the equations of bubble dynamics were devel-
oped and applied to problems of bubble growth. In this chapter we continue the
discussion of bubble dynamics but switch attention to the dynamics of collapse
and, in particular, consider the consequences of the violent collapse of vapor-ﬁlled
cavitation bubbles.
3.2 Bubble Collapse
Bubble collapse is a particularly important subject because of the noise and mate-
rial damage that can be caused by the high velocities, pressures, and temperatures
that may result from that collapse. The analysis of Section 2.4 allowed approxi-
mate evaluation of the magnitudes of those velocities, pressures, and temperatures
(Equations (2.36), (2.38), (2.39)) under a number of assumptions including that the
bubble remains spherical. It will be shown in Section 3.5 that collapsing bubbles do
not remain spherical. Moreover, as we shall see in Chapter 7, bubbles that occur
in a cavitating ﬂow are often far from spherical. However, it is often argued that
the spherical analysis represents the maximum possible consequences of bubble
collapse in terms of the pressure, temperature, noise, or damage potential. Depar-
ture from sphericity can diffuse the focus of the collapse and reduce the maximum
pressures and temperatures that might result.
When a cavitation bubble grows from a small nucleus to many times its original
size, the collapse will begin at a maximum radius, RM, with a partial pressure of gas,
pGM, which is very small indeed. In a typical cavitating ﬂow RM is of the order of
100 times the original nuclei size, Ro. Consequently, if the original partial pressure
of gas in the nucleus was about 1 bar the value of pGM at the start of collapse would
be about 10−6 bar. If the typical pressure depression in the ﬂow yields a value for
(p∗
∞−p∞(0)) of, say, 0.1 bar it would follow from Equation (2.38) that the maxi-
mum pressure generated would be about 1010 bar and the maximum temperature
would be 4 × 104 times the ambient temperature! Many factors, including the diffu-
sion of gas from the liquid into the bubble and the effect of liquid compressibility,
59

60
Cavitation Bubble Collapse
mitigate this result. Nevertheless, the calculation illustrates the potential for the
generation of high pressures and temperatures during collapse and the potential for
the generation of shock waves and noise.
Early work on collapse focused on the inclusion of liquid compressibility in
order to learn more about the production of shock waves. Herring (1941) introduced
the ﬁrst-order correction for liquid compressibility assuming the Mach number of
collapse motion, |dR/dt|/c, was much less than unity and neglecting any noncon-
densable gas or thermal effects so that the pressure in the bubble remains constant.
Later, Schneider (1949) treated the same, highly idealized problem by numeri-
cally solving the equations of compressible ﬂow up to the point where the Mach
number of collapse, |dR/dt|/c, was about 2.2. Gilmore (1952) (see also Trilling
1952) showed that one could use the approximation introduced by Kirkwood and
Bethe (1942) to obtain analytic solutions that agreed with Schneider’s numerical
results up to that Mach number. Parenthetically we note that the Kirkwood-Bethe
approximation assumes that wave propagation in the liquid occurs at sonic speed,
c, relative to the liquid velocity, u, or, in other words, at c + u in the absolute
frame (see also Flynn 1966). Figure 3.1 presents some of the results obtained by
Herring (1941), Schneider (1949), and Gilmore (1952). It demonstrates how, in the
idealized problem, the Mach number of the bubble surface increases as the bub-
ble radius decreases. The line marked “incompressible” corresponds to the case in
which the compressibility of the liquid has been neglected in the equation of motion
(see Equation (2.36)). The slope is approximately −3/2 since |dR/dt| ∝R−3
2 . Note
that compressibility tends to lessen the velocity of collapse. We note that Benjamin
0.001
0.01
0.1
Bubble Size, R/RM
4
2
1
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.6
Incompressible
Herring
Gilmore
Bubble Mach Number, - R / C
Figure 3.1 The bubble surface Mach number, −˙R/c, plotted against the bubble radius (rela-
tive to the initial radius) for a pressure difference, p∞− pGM , of 0.517 bar . Results are shown
for the incompressible analysis and for the methods of Herring (1941) an d G i l m o r e ( 1952).
S c h n ei d er’ s (1949) n u meri c al resu l t s c l o sel y f o l l o w Gi l mo r e’ s c u r ve u p t o a M ach n u mb er
of 2.2.

3.2 Bubble Collapse
61
(1958) also investigated analytical solutions to this problem at higher Mach numbers
for which the Kirkwood-Bethe approximation becomes quite inaccurate.
When the bubble contains some noncondensable gas or when thermal effects
become important, the solution becomes more complex since the pressure in the
bubble is no longer constant. Under these circumstances it would clearly be very
useful to ﬁnd some way of incorporating the effects of liquid compressibility in a
modiﬁed version of the Rayleigh-Plesset equation. Keller and Kolodner (1956) pro-
posed the following modiﬁed form in the absence of thermal, viscous, or surface
tension effects:

1 −1
c
dR
dt

Rd2R
dt2 + 3
2

1 −1
3c
dR
dt
dR
dt
2
=

1 + 1
c
dR
dt
 1
ρL

pB −p∞−pc(t + R/c)

+ R
ρLc
dpB
dt
(3.1)
where pc(t) denotes the variable part of the pressure in the liquid at the location of
the bubble center in the absence of the bubble. Other forms have been suggested
and the situation has recently been reviewed by Prosperetti and Lezzi (1986), who
show that a number of the suggested equations are equally valid in that they are
all accurate to the ﬁrst or linear order in the Mach number, |dR/dt|/c. They also
demonstrate that such modiﬁed Rayleigh-Plesset equations are quite accurate up to
Mach numbers of the order of 0.3. At higher Mach numbers the compressible liquid
ﬁeld equations must be solved numerically.
However, as long as there is some gas present to decelerate the collapse, the
primary importance of liquid compressibility is not the effect it has on the bubble
dynamics (which is slight) but the role it plays in the formation of shock waves dur-
ing the rebounding phase that follows collapse. Hickling and Plesset (1964) were
the ﬁrst to make use of numerical solutions of the compressible ﬂow equations
to explore the formation of pressure waves or shocks during the rebound phase.
Figure 3.2 presents an example of their results for the pressure distributions in the
liquid before (left) and after (right) the moment of minimum size. The graph on
the right clearly shows the propagation of a pressure pulse or shock away from the
bubble following the minimum size. As indicated in that ﬁgure, Hickling and Ples-
set concluded that the pressure pulse exhibits approximately geometric attentuation
(like r−1) as it propagates away from the bubble. Other numerical calculations have
since been carried out by Ivany and Hammitt (1965), Tomita and Shima (1977),
and Fujikawa and Akamatsu (1980), among others. Ivany and Hammitt (1965)
conﬁrmed that neither surface tension nor viscosity play a signiﬁcant role in the
problem. Effects investigated by others will be discussed in the following section.
These later works are in accord with the ﬁndings of Hickling and Plesset (1964)
insofar as the development of a pressure pulse or shock is concerned. It appears
that, in most cases, the pressure pulse radiated into the liquid has a peak pressure
amplitude, pP, which is given roughly by
pP ≈100RMp∞/r
(3.2)

62
Cavitation Bubble Collapse
105
104
103
102
10
1
10–2
10–1
1
Pressure, p/p
Bubble wall
Bubble wall
r-1 Attenuation
7.2
16.0
3.7
2.1
1.1
0.1
Bubble Collapse
–16.0
–5.5
–3.8
–2.4
–1.4
–0.1
105
104
103
102
10
1
10–2
10–1
1
Radial Coordinate, r/RM
Bubble Growth After Collapse
F i gu re 3. 2 T yp i cal resu l t s o f Hi ck l i n g an d P l esset ( 1964) f o r t h e p r essu re d i st ri b u t i o n s i n
the liquid before collapse (left) and after collapse (right) (without viscosity or surface ten-
sion). The parameters are p∞= 1 bar, γ = 1.4, and the initial pressure in the bubble was
10−3 bar. The values attached to each curve are proportional to the time before or after the
minimum size.
Though Akulichev (1971) found much stronger attentuation in the far ﬁeld, it seems
clear that Equation (3.2) gives the order of magnitude of the strong pressure pulse,
which might impinge on a solid surface a few radii away. For example, if p∞≈1 bar
this implies a substantial pulse of 100 bar at a distance of one maximum bubble
radius away (at r = RM). Experimentally, Fujikawa and Akamatsu (1980) found
shock intensities at the wall of about 100 bar when the collapsing bubble was about
a maximum radius away from the wall. We note that much higher pressures are
momentarily experienced in the gas of the bubble, but we shall delay discussion of
this feature of the results until later.
All of these analyses assume spherical symmetry. Later we will focus attention
on the stability of shape of a collapsing bubble before continuing discussion of the
origins of cavitation damage.
3.3 Thermally Controlled Collapse
Before examining thermal effects during the last stages of collapse, it is important
to recognize that bubbles could experience thermal effects early in the collapse
in the same way as was discussed for growing bubbles in Section 2.7. As one can
anticipate, this would negate much of the discussion in the preceding and fol-
lowing sections since if thermal effects became important early in the collapse
phase, then the subsequent bubble dynamics would be of the benign, thermally
controlled type.

3.4 Thermal Effects in Bubble Collapse
63
Consider a bubble of radius, Ro, initially at rest at time, t = 0, in liquid at a
pressure, p∞. Collapse is initiated by increasing the ambient liquid pressure to p∗
∞.
From the Rayleigh-Plesset equation the initial motion in the absence of thermal
effects has the form
R/Ro = 1 −pct2 + 0(t3)
(3.3)
where pc is the collapse motivation deﬁned as
pc =
(p∗
∞−pV)
2ρLR2o
+
S
ρLR3o
−3mGT∞KG
8πρLR5o

(3.4)
If this is substituted into the Plesset-Zwick Equation (2.20) to evaluate the thermal
term in the Rayleigh-Plesset equation, one obtains a critical time tc4, necessary for
development of signiﬁcant thermal effects given by
tc4 = (Ro/)2/3
(3.5)
One problem with such an approach is that the Plesset-Zwick assumption of a ther-
mal boundary layer that is thin compared to R will be increasingly in danger of being
violated as the boundary layer thickens while the radius decreases. Nevertheless,
proceeding with the analysis, it follows that if tc4 ≪tTC where tTC is the typical time
for collapse (see Section 2.4), then thermally controlled collapse will begin early in
the collapse process. It follows that this condition arises if
(pc)1/2
Ro

2/3
≪1
(3.6)
If this is the case then the initial motion will be effectively dominated by the thermal
term and will be of the form
R = Ro −pcR2
o

⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎣
4π1/2
1
0
dy
(y(1−y))1/2
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎦t1/2
(3.7)
where the term in the square bracket is a simple constant of order unity. If Inequality
(3.6) is violated, then thermal effects will not begin to become important until later
in the collapse process.
3.4 Thermal Effects in Bubble Collapse
Even if thermal effects are negligible for most of the collapse phase, they play a
very important role in the ﬁnal stage of collapse when the bubble contents are
highly compressed by the inertia of the inrushing liquid. The pressures and tem-
peratures that are predicted to occur in the gas within the bubble during spherical
collapse are very high indeed. Since the elapsed times are so small (of the order
of microseconds), it would seem a reasonable approximation to assume that the
noncondensable gas in the bubble behaves adiabatically. Typical of the adiabatic

64
Cavitation Bubble Collapse
calculations is the work of Tomita and Shima (1977), who used the accurate method
for handling liquid compressiblity that was ﬁrst suggested by Benjamin (1958) and
obtained maximum gas temperatures as high as 8800◦K in the bubble center. But,
despite the small elapsed times, Hickling (1963) demonstrated that heat transfer
between the liquid and the gas is important because of the extremely high temper-
ature gradients and the short distances involved. In later calculations Fujikawa and
Akamatsu (1980) included heat transfer and, for a case similar to that of Tomita and
Shima, found lower maximum temperatures and pressures of the order of 6700◦K
and 848 bar respectively at the bubble center. The gradients of temperature are such
that the maximum interface temperature is about 3400◦K. Furthermore, these tem-
peratures and pressures only exist for a fraction of a microsecond; for example, after
2 μs the interface temperature dropped to 300◦K.
Fujikawa and Akamatsu (1980) also explored nonequilibrium condensation
effects at the bubble wall which, they argued, could cause additional cushioning
of the collapse. They carried out calculations that included an accommodation coef-
ﬁcient similar to that deﬁned in Equation (2.65). As in the case of bubble growth
studied by Theofanous et al. (1969), Fujikawa and Akamatsu showed that an accom-
modation coefﬁcient, , of the order of unity had little effect. Accommodation
coefﬁcients of the order of 0.01 were required to observe any signiﬁcant effect; as
we commented in Section 2.9, it is as yet unclear whether such small accommodation
coefﬁcients would occur in practice.
Other effects that may be important are the interdiffusion of gas and vapor
within the bubble, which could cause a buildup of noncondensable gas at the inter-
face and therefore create a barrier which through the vapor must diffuse in order
to condense on the interface. Matsumoto and Watanabe (1989) have examined a
similar effect in the context of oscillating bubbles.
3.5 Nonspherical Shape During Collapse
Now consider the collapse of a bubble that contains primarily vapor. As in
Section 2.4 we will distinguish between the two important stages of the motion
excluding the initial inward acceleration transient. These are
1. the asymptotic form of the collapse in which ˙R ∝R−3
2 , which occurs prior to
signiﬁcant compression of the gas content, and
2. the rebound stage, in which the acceleration, ¨R, reverses sign and takes a very
large positive value.
The stability characteristics of these two stages are very different. The calculations
of Plesset and Mitchell (1956) showed that a bubble in an inﬁnite medium would
only be mildly unstable during the ﬁrst stage in which ¨R is negative; disturbances
would only grow at a slow rate due to geometric effects. Note that for small y,
Equation (2.72) reduces to
d2a
dy2 + 3
2y
da
dy + (n −1) a
y2 = 0
(3.8)

3.5 Nonspherical Shape During Collapse
65
which has oscillatory solutions in which the amplitude of a is proportional to y−1
4 .
This mild instability probably has little or no practical consequence.
On the the hand, it is clear from the theory that the bubble may become highly
unstable to nonspherical disturbances during stage two because ¨R reaches very large
positive values during this rebound phase. The instability appears to manifest itself
in several different ways depending on the violence of the collapse and the presence
of other boundaries. All vapor bubbles that collapse to a size orders of magnitude
smaller than their maximum size inevitably emerge from that collapse as a cloud
of smaller bubbles rather than a single vapor bubble. This fragmentation could be
caused by a single microjet as described below, or it could be due to a spherical
harmonic disturbance of higher order. The behavior of collapsing bubbles that are
predominantly gas ﬁlled (or bubbles whose collapse is thermally inhibited) is less
certain since the lower values of ¨R in those cases make the instability weaker and, in
some cases, could imply spherical stability. Thus acoustically excited cavitation bub-
bles that contain substantial gas often remain spherical during their rebound phase.
In other instances the instability is sufﬁcient to cause fragmentation. Several exam-
ples of fragmented and highly distorted bubbles emerging from the rebound phase
are shown in Figure 3.3. These are from the experiments of Frost and Sturtevant
(1986), in which the thermal effects are substantial.
A dominant feature in the collapse of many vapor bubbles is the development
of a reentrant jet (the n = 2 mode) due to an asymmetry such as the presence
of a nearby solid boundary. Such an asymmetry causes one side of the bubble
to accelerate inward more rapidly than the opposite side and this results in the
development of a high-speed re-entrant microjet which penetrates the bubble. Such
microjets were ﬁrst observed experimentally by Naude and Ellis (1961) and Ben-
jamin and Ellis (1966). Of particular interest for cavitation damage is the fact
that a nearby solid boundary will cause a microjet directed toward that bound-
ary. Figure 3.4, from Benjamin and Ellis (1966), shows the initial formation of the
microjet directed at a nearby wall. Other asymmetries, even gravity, can cause the
formation of these reentrant microjets. Figure 3.5 is one of the very ﬁrst, if not the
ﬁrst, photographs taken showing the result of a gravity-produced upward jet having
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.3 Photographs of an ether bubble in glycerine before (left) and after (center) a col-
lapse and rebound. The cloud on the right is the result of a succession of collapse and rebound
cycles. Rep roduced from Frost and Sturtevan t ( 1986) w i t h t h e p ermi ssi o n o f t h e au t h o rs.

66
Cavitation Bubble Collapse
Figure 3.4 Photograph of a collapsing bubble showing the initial development of the reen-
trant microjet caused by a solid but transparent wall whose location is marked by the dotted
lin e. F ro m Ben j amin an d E llis (1966) rep roduced with permission of the ﬁ rst au thor.
F i gu re 3. 5 P h o t o grap h fro m Ben j amin an d E llis (1966) sh o w in g t h e p r o t u b eren ce gen erated
when a gravity-induced upward-directed reentrant jet progresses through the bubble and
penetrates the ﬂuid on the other side. Reproduced with permission of the ﬁrst author.
progressed through the bubble and penetrated into the ﬂuid on the other side thus
creating the spiky protuberance. Indeed, the upward inclination of the wall-induced
reentrant jet in Figure 3.4 is caused by gravity. Figure 3.6 presents a comparison

3.5 Nonspherical Shape During Collapse
67
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Solid Boundary
Figure 3.6 The collapse of a cavitation bubble close to a solid boundary in a quiescent liquid.
T h e t h eo r et i cal sh ap es o f P l esset an d C h ap man ( 1971) (so l i d l i n es) are co mp ared w i t h t h e
exp eri men t al o b s ervat i o n s o f L au t erb o r n an d B o l l e (1975) (p o i n t s). F i gu re ad ap t ed f ro m
P l esset an d P r o s p eret t i (1977).
between the reentrant jet development in a bubble collapsing near a solid wall as
observed by Lauterborn and Bolle (1975) and as computed by Plesset and Chapman
(1971).
Another asymmetry that can cause the formation of a reentrant jet is the prox-
imity of other, neighboring bubbles in a ﬁnite cloud of bubbles. Then, as Chahine
and Duraiswami (1992) have shown in their numerical calculations, the bubbles on
the outer edge of such a cloud will tend to develop jets directed toward the center of
the cloud; an example is shown in Figure 3.7. Other manifestations include a bubble
collapsing near a free surface, that produces a reentrant jet directed away from the
free surface (Chahine 1977). Indeed, there exists a critical surface ﬂexibility sepa-
rating the circumstances in which the reentrant jet is directed away from rather than
toward the surface. Gibson and Blake (1982) demonstrated this experimentally and
analytically and suggested ﬂexible coatings or liners as a means of avoiding cavi-
tation damage. It might also be noted that depth charges rely for their destructive
power on a reentrant jet directed toward the submarine upon the collapse of the
explosively generated bubble.
Many other experimentalists have subsequently observed reentrant jets (or
“microjets”) in the collapse of cavitation bubbles near solid walls. The progress of
events seems to differ somewhat depending on the initial distance of the bubble
center from the wall. When the bubble is initially spherical but close to the wall, the
typical development of the microjet is as illustrated in Figure 3.8, a series of pho-
tographs taken by Tomita and Shima (1990). When the bubble is further away from
the wall, the later events are somewhat different; another set of photographs taken
by Tomita and Shima (1990) is included as Figure 3.9 and shows the formation of two

68
Cavitation Bubble Collapse
Figure 3.7 Numerical calculation of the collapse of a group of ﬁve bubbles showing the devel-
opment of inward-directed reentrant jets on the outer four bubbles. From Chahine and
Du rai s w ami (1992) rep r oduced with permission of the authors.
Figure 3.8 Series of photographs showing the development of the microjet in a bubble col-
lapsing very close to a solid wall (at top of frame). The interval between the numbered frames
is 2 μs an d t h e f r ame w i d t h i s 1.4 mm. F ro m T o mi t a an d S h i ma (1990), r ep roduced with
permission of the authors.
toroidal vortex bubbles (frame 11) after the microjet has completed its penetration
of the original bubble. Furthermore, the photographs of Lauterborn and Bolle
(1975) in which the bubbles are about a diameter from the wall, show that the initial
collapse is quite spherical and that the reentrant jet penetrates the ﬂuid between the
bubble and the wall as the bubble is rebounding from the ﬁrst collapse. At this stage

3.5 Nonspherical Shape During Collapse
69
Figure 3.9 A series of photographs similar to the previous ﬁgure but with a larger separation
f r o m t h e w al l . F r o m T o mi t a an d S h i ma (1990), r ep roduced with permission of the authors.
the appearance is very similar to Figure 3.5 but with the protuberance directed at
the wall.
On the other hand, when the initial bubble is much closer to the wall and col-
lapse begins from a spherical cap shape, the photographs (for example, Shima et al.
(1981) or Kimoto (1987)) show a bubble that “pancakes” down toward the surface
in a manner illustrated by Figure 3.10 taken from Benjamin and Ellis (1966). In
these circumstances it is difﬁcult to observe the microjet.
The reentrant jet phenomenon in a quiescent ﬂuid has been extensively studied
analytically as well as experimentally. Plesset and Chapman (1971) numerically cal-
culated the distortion of an initially spherical bubble as it collapsed close to a solid
boundary and, as Figure 3.6 demonstrates, their proﬁles are in good agreement with
the experimental observations of Lauterborn and Bolle (1975). Blake and Gibson
(1987) review the current state of knowledge, particularly the analytical methods
for solving for bubbles collapsing near a solid or a ﬂexible surface.
When a bubble in a quiescent ﬂuid collapses near a wall, the reentrant jets
reach high speeds quite early in the collapse process and long before the volume
reaches a size at which, for example, liquid compressibility becomes important (see
Section 3.2). The speed of the reentrant jet, UJ, at the time it impacts the opposite
surface of the bubble has been shown to be given by
UJ = ξ(p/ρL)1/2
(3.9)
where ξ is a constant and p is the difference between the remote pressure, which
would maintain the bubble at equilibrium at its maximum or initial radius, and the
remote pressure present during collapse. Gibson (1968) found that ξ = 7.6 ﬁt his
experimental observations; Blake and Gibson (1987) indicate that ξ is a function of
ratio, ϱ, of the initial distance of the bubble center from the wall to the initial radius
and that ξ = 11.0 for ϱ = 1.5 and ξ = 8.6 for ϱ = 1.0. Voinov and Voinov (1975)

70
Cavitation Bubble Collapse
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
Figure 3.10 Series of photographs of a hemispherical bubble collapsing against a wall showing
the “pancaking” mode of collapse. Four groups of three closely spaced photographs begin-
n i n g at to p l eft an d en d i n g at th e b o tto m righ t . F ro m B en jamin an d Ellis (1966) rep roduced
with permission of the ﬁrst author.
found that the value of ξ could be as high as 64 if the initial bubble had a slightly
eccentric shape.
Whether the bubble is ﬁssioned due to the disruption caused by the microjet or
by the effects of the stage two instability, many of the experimental observations of
bubble collapse (for example, those of Kimoto 1987) show that a bubble emerges
from the ﬁrst rebound not as a single bubble but as a cloud of smaller bubbles.
Unfortunately, the events of the last moments of collapse occur so rapidly that the
experiments do not have the temporal resolution neccessary to show the details of
this ﬁssion process. The subsequent dynamical behavior of the bubble cloud may be
different from that of a single bubble. For example, the damping of the rebound and
collapse cycles is greater than for a single bubble.

3.6 Cavitation Damage
71
Finally, it is important to emphasize that virtually all of the observations
described above pertain to bubble collapse in an otherwise quiescent ﬂuid. A bubble
that grows and collapses in a ﬂow is subject to other deformations that can signif-
icantly alter the noise and damage potential of the collapse process. In Chapter 7
this issue will be addressed further.
3.6 Cavitation Damage
Perhaps the most ubiqitous engineering problem caused by cavitation is the mate-
rial damage that cavitation bubbles can cause when they collapse in the vicinity of
a solid surface. Consequently, this subject has been studied quite intensively for
many years (see, for example, ASTM 1967; Thiruvengadam 1967, 1974; Knapp,
Daily, and Hammitt 1970). The problem is a difﬁcult one because it involves com-
plicated unsteady ﬂow phenomena combined with the reaction of the particular
material of which the solid surface is made. Though there exist many empirical
rules designed to help the engineer evaluate the potential cavitation damage rate
in a given application, there remain a number of basic questions regarding the
fundamental mechanisms involved.
In the preceding sections, we have seen that cavitation bubble collapse is
a violent process that generates highly localized, large-amplitude shock waves
(Section 3.2) and microjets (Section 3.5) in the ﬂuid at the point of collapse. When
this collapse occurs close to a solid surface, these intense disturbances generate
highly localized and transient surface stresses. Repetition of this loading due to
repeated collapses causes local surface fatigue failure and the subsequent detach-
ment or ﬂaking off of pieces of material. This is the generally accepted explanation
of cavitation damage. It is also consistent with the metallurgical evidence of dam-
age in harder materials. Figure 3.11 is a typical photograph of localized cavitation
damage on a pump blade. It usually has the jagged, crystalline appearance consis-
tent with fatigue failure and is usually fairly easy to distinguish from the erosion due
to solid particles, which has a much smoother appearance. With iron or steel, the
effects of corrosion often enhance the speed of cavitation damage.
Parenthetically it should be noted that pits caused by individual bubble col-
lapses are often observed with soft materials, and the relative ease with which this
process can be studied experimentally has led to a substantial body of research evi-
dence for soft materials. Much of this literature implies that the microjets cause the
individual pits. However, it does not neccessarily follow that the same mechanism
causes the damage in harder materials.
Indeed, the issue of whether cavitation damage is caused by microjets or by
shock waves or by both has been debated for many years. In the 1940s and 1950s
the focus was on the shock waves generated by spherical bubble collapse. When
the phenomenon of the microjet was ﬁrst observed by Naude and Ellis (1961) and
Benjamin and Ellis (1966), the focus shifted to studies of the impulsive pressures
generated by these jets. But, even after the disruption caused by the microjet, one is
left with a remnant cloud of small bubbles that will continue to collapse collectively.

72
Cavitation Bubble Collapse
Figure 3.11 Photograph of typical cavitation damage on the blade of a mixed ﬂow pump.
Though no longer a single bubble, this remnant cloud will still exhibit the same
qualitative dynamic behavior, including the possible production of a shock wave
following the point of minimum cavity volume. Two important research efforts in
Japan then shifted the focus back to the remnant cloud shock. First Shima et al.
(1983) used high speed Schlieren photography to show that a spherical shock wave
was indeed generated by the remnant cloud at the instance of minimum volume.
Figure 3.12 shows a series of photographs of a collapsing bubble along with the
corresponding pressure trace. The instant of minimum volume is between frames 6
and 7, and the trace clearly shows the peak pressure occuring at that instant. When
combined with the Schlieren photographs showing a spherical shock being gener-
ated at this instant, this seemed to relegate the microjet to a subsidiary role. About
the same time, Fujikawa and Akamatsu (1980) used a photoelastic material so that
they could simultaneously observe the stresses in the solid and measure the acoustic
pulses. Using the ﬁrst collapse of a bubble as the trigger, Fujikawa and Akamatsu
employed a variable time delay to take photographs of the stress state in the solid at
various instants relative to the second collapse. They simultaneously recorded the
pressure in the liquid and were able to conﬁrm that the impulsive stresses in the
material were initiated at the same moment as the acoustic pulse (to within about
1 μs). They also conclude that this corresponded to the instant of minimum volume
and that the waves were not produced by the microjet.
However, in a later investigation, Kimoto (1987) was able to observe stress
pulses that resulted both from microjet impingement and from the remnant cloud

3.6 Cavitation Damage
73
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
10
L/Rmax = 1.09
Pmax = 9.76 MPa
8
6
4
2
0
–2
8
10 s
7
6
5
P [MPa]
4
3
2
1
Figure 3.12 Series of photographs of a cavitation bubble collapsing near a wall along with the
characteristic wall pressure trace. The time corresponding to each photograph is marked by a
n u mb er o n t h e t r ace. F r o m S h i ma, T ak ayama, T o mi t a, an d Oh saw a (1983) rep r oduced with
permission of the authors.
collapse shock. Typically, the impulsive pressures from the latter are 2 to 3 times
larger than those due to the microjet, but it would seem that both may contribute to
the impulsive loading of the surface.
For detailed experimental evaluation of the comparative susceptibility of var-
ious materials to cavitation damage, the reader is referred to Knapp, Daily, and
Hammitt (1970). Standard devices have been been used to evaluate these compara-
tive susceptibilities. The most common consists of a device that oscillates a specimen
in a liquid, producing periodic growth and collapse of cavitation bubbles on the face
of the specimen. The tests are conducted over many hours with regular weighing
to determine the weight loss. It transpires that the rate of loss of material is not
constant. Causes suggested for changes in the rate of loss of material include time
constants associated with the fatigue process and the fact that an irregular, damaged
surface may produce an altered pattern of cavitation. Commonly, these test cells are
operated by a magnetostrictive device in order to achieve the standard frequencies
of 5 kHz or, sometimes, 20 kHz. These frequencies cause the largest cavitating bubble

74
Cavitation Bubble Collapse
clouds on the surface of the specimen because they are close to the natural frequen-
cies of a signiﬁcant fraction of the nuclei present in the liquid (see Section 4.2). In
addition to the magnetostrictive devices, standard material susceptibility tests are
also carried out using cavitating venturis and rotating disks.
In most practical devices, cavitation damage is a very undesirable. However,
there are some circumstances in which the phenomenon is used to advantage. It
is believed, for example, that the mechanics of rock-cutting by high speed water
jets is caused, at least in part, by cavitation in the jet as it ﬂows over a rough rock
surface. Many readers have also been subjected to the teeth-cleaning power of the
small, high-speed cavitating water jets used by dentists; those with dentures may also
have successfully employed acoustic cavitation to clean their dentures in commercial
acoustic cleaners. On the other side of the coin, the violence of a collapsing bubble
is suspected of causing major tissue damage in head injuries.
3.7 Damage Due to Cloud Collapse
In many practical devices cavitation damage is observed to occur in quite local-
ized areas, for example, in a pump impeller. Often this is the result of the periodic
and coherent collapse of a cloud of cavitation bubbles. Such is the case in the
magnetostrictive cavitation testing equipment mentioned above. A typical cloud of
bubbles generated by such acoustic means is shown in Figure 3.13. In other hydraulic
machines, the periodicity may occur naturally as a result of regular shedding of cav-
itating vortices, or it may be a response to a periodic disturbance imposed on the
ﬂow. Example of the kinds of imposed ﬂuctuations are the interaction between a
row of rotor vanes and a row of stator vanes in a pump or turbine or the interaction
Figure 3.13 Photograph of a transient cloud of cavitation bubbles generated acoustically.
F ro m P l esset an d Ellis (1955).

3.8 Cavitation Noise
75
Figure 3.14 Axial views from the inlet of the cavitation and cavitation damage on the hub
or base plate of a centrifugal pump impeller. The two photographs are of the same area, the
one on the left showing the typical cavitation pattern during ﬂow and the one on the right the
typical cavitation damage. Parts of the blades can be seen in the upper left and lower right
corners. Relative to these blades, the ﬂow proceeds from the lower left to the upper right. The
leading edge of the blade in upper left is just outside the ﬁeld of view on the left. Reproduced
f r o m S o yama, Kat o , an d Ob a ( 1992) w i t h p ermi ssi o n o f t h e au t h o rs.
between a ship’s propeller and the nonuniform wake behind the ship. In almost all
such cases the coherent collapse of the cloud can cause much more intense noise and
more potential for damage than in a similar nonﬂuctuating ﬂow. Consequently the
damage is most severe on the solid surface close to the location of cloud collapse.
An example of this phenomenon is included in Figure 3.14 taken from Soyama,
Kato, and Oba (1992). In this instance clouds of cavitation are being shed from the
leading edge of a centrifugal pump blade and are collapsing in a speciﬁc location, as
suggested by the pattern of cavitation in the left-hand photograph. This leads to the
localized damage shown in the right-hand photograph.
At the time of writing, a number of research efforts are focusing on the dynam-
ics of cavitation clouds. Later, in Section 6.10, we analyze some of the basic
dynamics of spherical bubble clouds and show that the interaction between bub-
bles lead to a coherent dynamics of the cloud, including natural frequencies that can
be much smaller than the natural frequencies of individual bubbles. These studies
suggest that the coherent collapse can be more violent than that of individual bub-
bles. However, a complete explanation for the increase in the noise and damage
potential does not yet exist.
3.8 Cavitation Noise
The violent and catastrophic collapse of cavitation bubbles results in the production
of noise as well as the possibility of material damage to nearby solid surfaces. The

76
Cavitation Bubble Collapse
noise is a consequence of the momentary large pressures that are generated when
the contents of the bubble are highly compressed. Consider the ﬂow in the liquid
caused by the volume displacement of a growing or collapsing cavity. In the far ﬁeld
the ﬂow will approach that of a simple source, and it is clear that Equation (2.7)
for the pressure will be dominated by the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side (the
unsteady inertial term) since it decays more slowly with radius, r, than the second
term. If we denote the time-varying volume of the cavity by V(t) and substitute using
Equation (2.2), it follows that the time-varying component of the pressure in the far
ﬁeld is given by
pa =
ρL
4πR
d2V
dt2
(3.10)
where pa is the radiated acoustic pressure and we denote the distance, r, from the
cavity center to the point of measurement by R (for a more thorough treatment
see Dowling and Ffowcs Williams 1983 and Blake 1986b). Since the noise is directly
proportional to the second derivative of the volume with respect to time, it is clear
that the noise pulse generated at bubble collapse occurs because of the very large
and positive values of d2V/dt2 when the bubble is close to its minimum size. It is
conventional (see, for example, Blake 1986b) to present the sound level using a root
mean square pressure or acoustic pressure, ps, deﬁned by
p2
s = p2a =
 ∞
0
G(f)df
(3.11)
and to represent the distribution over the frequency range, f, by the spectral density
function, G(f).
The crackling noise that accompanies cavitation is one of the most evident char-
acteristics of this phenomenon to the researcher or engineer. The onset of cavitation
is often detected ﬁrst by this noise rather than by visual observation of the bubbles.
Moreover, for the practical engineer it is often the primary means of detecting cavi-
tation in devices such as pumps and valves. Indeed, several empirical methods have
been suggested that estimate the rate of material damage by measuring the noise
generated (for example, Lush and Angell 1984).
The noise due to cavitation in the oriﬁce of a hydraulic control valve is typical,
and spectra from such an experiment are presented in Figure 3.15. The lowest curve
at σ = 0.523 represents the turbulent noise from the noncavitating ﬂow. Below the
incipient cavitation number (about 0.523 in this case) there is a dramatic increase in
the noise level at frequencies of about 5 kHz and above. The spectral peak between
5 kHz and 10 kHz corresponds closely to the expected natural frequencies of the
nuclei present in the ﬂow (see Section 4.2).
Most of the analytical approaches to cavitation noise build on knowledge of the
dynamics of collapse of a single bubble. Fourier analyses of the radiated acous-
tic pressure due to a single bubble were ﬁrst visualized by Rayleigh (1917) and
implemented by Mellen (1954) and Fitzpatrick and Strasberg (1956). In consider-
ing such Fourier analyses, it is convenient to nondimensionalize the frequency by
the typical time span of the whole event or, equivalently, by the collapse time, tTC,

3.8 Cavitation Noise
77
10-2
10-3
10-4
3 × 103
5 × 103
2 × 104
104
Frequency (Hz)
Noise Energy Spectra
= 0.342
= 0.452
= 0.523
Figure 3.15 Acoustic power spectra from a model spool valve operating under noncavitating
(σ = 0.523) and cavitating (σ = 0.452 an d 0. 342) conditions (fro m the investigation o f M artin
et al . 1981).
given by Equation (2.40). Now consider the frequency content of G(f) using the
dimensionless frequency, ftTC. Since the volume of the bubble increases from zero
to a ﬁnite value and then returns to zero, it follows that for ftTC < 1 the Fourier
transform of the volume is independent of frequency. Consequently d2V/dt2 will
be proportional to f 2 and therefore G(f) ∝f 4 (see Fitzpatrick and Strasberg 1956).
This is the origin of the left-hand asymptote in Figure 3.16. The behavior at inter-
mediate frequencies for which ftTC > 1 has been the subject of more speculation and
debate. Mellen (1954) and others considered the typical equations governing the
collapse of a spherical bubble in the absence of thermal effects and noncondensable
gas (Equation (2.36)) and concluded that, since the velocity ˙R ∝R−3
2 , it follows that
R ∝t
2
5 .
Therefore the Fourier transform of d2V/dt2 leads to the asymptotic behavior
G(f) ∝f −2
5 . The error in this analysis is the neglect of the noncondensable gas. When
this is included and when the collapse is sufﬁciently advanced, the last term in the
square brackets of Equation (2.36) becomes comparable with the previous terms.
Then the behavior is quite different from R ∝t
2
5 . Moreover, the values of d2V/dt2
are much larger during this rebound phase, and therefore the frequency content
of the rebound phase will dominate the spectrum. It is therefore not surprising that
the f −2
5 is not observed in practice. Rather, most of the experimental results seem to
exhibit an intermediate frequency behavior like f −1 or f −2. Jorgensen (1961) mea-
sured the noise from submerged, cavitating jets and found a behavior like f −2 at

78
Cavitation Bubble Collapse
0
–10
–20
–30
–40
1
Reduced Frequency, f/fR
Spectral Density (dB)
10
–50
Set B
f-2
Set A
f4
0.1
Figure 3.16 Acoustic power spectra of the noise from a cavitating jet. Shown are mean lines
t h ro u gh t w o set s o f d at a co n s t r u c t ed b y B l ak e an d S evi k ( 1982) f r o m t h e d at a b y J o r gen sen
(1961). T yp i c al asymp t o t i c b eh avi o r s are al so i n d i cat ed . T h e r ef eren ce f r eq u en c y, fR, is
[p∞/ρLD2]
1
2 where D is the jet diameter.
the higher frequencies (see Figure 3.16). However, most of the experimental data
for cavitating bodies or hydrofoils exhibit a weaker decay. The data by Arakeri and
Shangumanathan (1985) from cavitating headform experiments show a very consis-
tent f −1 trend over almost the entire frequency range, and very similar results have
been obtained by Ceccio and Brennen (1991) (see Figure 3.20). Though the data of
Blake et al. (1977) for a cavitating hydrofoil exhibit some consistent peaks, the over-
all trend in their data is also consistent with f −1. This is also the asymptotic behavior
exhibited at higher frequencies by the data of Barker (1973) for a cavitating foil.
Several authors have also analyzed the effects of the compressibility of the liq-
uid. Mellen (1954) and Fitzpatrick and Strasberg (1956) conclude that this causes
faster decay like f −2 above some critical frequency, though this has not been clearly
demonstrated experimentally. In Figure 3.16 typical functional behaviors of G(f)
have been included in a graph showing measurements of some of the noise from a
cavitating jet taken by Jorgensen (1961).
The peaks in many of the spectra of the noise from cavitating ﬂows (for example
those of Figures 3.15 and 3.16) tend to lower frequencies as the cavitation number
decreases, primarily because of an increase in the amplitude of the higher frequen-
cies. This trend is further illustrated by the data for cavitating jets presented in
Figure 3.17. Given some form for the asymptotes at high and low frequency and
some functional behavior for the location of the peak frequency, it is not unreason-
able to seek to reduce the measured spectra for a given type of cavitating ﬂow to
some universal form. Arakeri and Shangumanathan (1985) were able to reduce the

3.8 Cavitation Noise
79
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cavitation Number, 
0.1
1
10
Reduced Frequeny, fD / u
Figure 3.17 Frequency of the peak in the acoustic spectra as a function of cavitation num-
b er. Data fo r cavitatin g jets fro m F ran k lin an d M cM illan (1984). T h e jet d iameter an d mean
velocity are denoted by D and U.
noise spectra from cavitating headform experiments to a single band provided the
bubble population was low enough to eliminate bubble/bubble interaction. Blake
(1986a) has attempted a similar task for the various kinds of cavitation that can occur
on a propeller, since the ability to scale from model tests to the prototype is impor-
tant in that context. There remain, however, a number of unresolved issues that
seem to demand a closer examination of the basic mechanics of noise production
even in the absence of bubble/bubble interactions.
Recently Ceccio and Brennen (1991) have recorded the noise from individual
cavitation bubbles in a ﬂow; a typical acoustic signal from their experiments is repro-
duced in Figure 3.18. The large positive pulse at about 450 μs corresponds to the ﬁrst
collapse of the bubble. This ﬁrst pulse in Figure 3.18 is followed by some facility-
dependent oscillations and by a second pulse at about 1100 μs. This corresponds
to the second collapse, which follows the rebound from the ﬁrst collapse. Further
rebounds are possible but were not observed in these experiments.
A good measure of the magnitude of the collapse pulse is the acoustic impulse,
I, deﬁned as the area under the pulse or
I =
 t2
t1
padt
(3.12)
where t1 and t2 are times before and after the pulse at which pa is zero. For later
purposes we also deﬁne a dimensionless impulse, I∗, as
I∗= 4πIR/ρLU∞R2
H
(3.13)
where U∞and RH are the reference velocity and length in the ﬂow. The average
acoustic impulses for individual bubble collapses on two axisymmetric headforms

80
Cavitation Bubble Collapse
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
–1.0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
Time ( sec)
Pressure (kPa)
Figure 3.18 A typical acoustic signal from a single collapsing bubble. From Ceccio and
B r en n en ( 1991).
0
25
50
75
100
Maximum Volume (mm3)
Impulse (Pa s)
0.6
0.4
0.2
Schiebe Body
(Theory)
ITTC Body
(Theory)
Figure 3.19 Comparison of the acoustic impulse, I, produced by the collapse of a single cav-
itation bubble on two axisymmetric headforms as a function of the maximum volume prior
to collapse. Open symbols: average data for Schiebe headform; closed symbols: ITTC head-
form; vertical lines indicate one standard deviation. Also shown are the corresponding results
f r o m t h e s o l u t i o n o f t h e Rayl ei gh - P l esset eq u at i o n . F r o m C ecci o an d B r en n en ( 1991).
(ITTC and Schiebe headforms) are compared in Figure 3.19 with impulses predicted
from integration of the Rayleigh-Plesset equation. Since these theoretical calcula-
tions assume that the bubble remains spherical, the discrepancy between the theory
and the experiments is not too surprising. Indeed one interpretation of Figure 3.19
is that the theory can provide an order of magnitude estimate and an upper bound

3.8 Cavitation Noise
81
100
30
10
3
1
0.3
0.1
0.03
0.1
0.3
1
3
U = 8.68 → 8.75 m/sec 
 = 0.50
10
30
100
300
1000
Frequency (kHz)
Fourier Amplitude
 = 0.54 → 0.57
 = 0.44 → 0.46
Figure 3.20 Typical spectra of noise from bubble cavitation for various cavitation numbers.
F r o m C ecci o an d B r en n en ( 1991).
on the noise produced by a single bubble. In actuality, the departure from sphericity
produces a less focused collapse and therefore less noise.
Typical spectra showing the frequency content in single bubble noise are
included in Figure 3.20. If the events are randomly distributed in time (see below),
this would also correspond to the overall cavitation noise spectrum. These spectra
exhibit the previously mentioned f −1 behavior for the range 1 →50 kHz; the rapid
decline at about 80 kHz represents the limit of the hydrophone used to make these
measurements.
The next step is to consider the synthesis of cavitation noise from the noise
produced by individual cavitation bubbles or events. This is a fairly simple matter
provided the events can be considered to occur randomly in time. At low nuclei
population densities the evidence suggests that this is indeed the case (see, for
example, Morozov 1969). Baiter, Gruneis, and Tilmann (1982) have explored the
consequences of the departures from randomness that could occur at larger bubble
population densities. Here, we limit the analysis to the case of random events. Then,
if the impulse produced by each event is denoted by I and the number of events per
unit time is denoted by ˙NE, the sound pressure level, pS, will be given by
pS = I ˙NE
(3.14)
Consider the scaling of cavitation noise that is implicit in this construct. We shall
omit some factors of proportionality for the sake of clarity, so the results are only
intended as a qualitative guide.
Both the experimental results and the analysis based on the Rayleigh-Plesset
equation indicate that the nondimensional impulse produced by a single cavita-
tion event is strongly correlated with the maximum volume of the bubble prior to
collapse and is almost independent of the other ﬂow parameters. It follows from

82
Cavitation Bubble Collapse
Equations (3.10) and (3.12) that
I∗=
1
U∞R2
H
dV
dt

t2
−
dV
dt

t1

(3.15)
and the values of dV/dt at the moments t = t1,t2 when d2V/dt2 = 0 may be obtained
from the Rayleigh-Plesset equation. If the bubble radius at the time t1 is denoted
by RX and the coefﬁcient of pressure in the liquid at that moment is denoted by
Cpx, then
I∗≈8π
 RX
RH
2 
Cpx −σ
 1
2
(3.16)
Numerical integrations of the Rayleigh-Plesset equation for a range of typical cir-
cumstances yield RX/RM ≈0.62 where RM is the maximum volumetric radius and
that (Cpx −σ) ∝RM/RH so that
I∗≈β
RM
RH
 5
2
(3.17)
The aforementioned integrations of the Rayleigh-Plesset equation yield a factor of
proportionality, β, of about 35. Moreover, the upper envelope of the experimental
data of which Figure 3.19 is a sample appears to correspond to a value of β ≈4. We
note that a quite similar relation between I∗and RM/RH emerges from the analysis
by Esipov and Naugol’nykh (1973) of the compressive sound wave generated by the
collapse of a gas bubble in a compressible liquid. Indeed, the compressibility of the
liquid does not appear to affect the acoustic impulse signiﬁcantly.
From the above relations, it follows that
I ≈β
12ρLU∞R
5
2
M/RR
1
2
H
(3.18)
Consequently, the evaluation of the impulse from a single event is completed by
some estimate of RM. Previously (Section 2.5) we evaluated RM and showed it to be
independent of U∞for a given cavitation number. In that case I is linear with U∞.
The event rate,
˙NE, can be considerably more complicated to evaluate than
might at ﬁrst be thought. If all the nuclei ﬂowing through a certain, known stream-
tube (say with a cross-sectional area in the upstream ﬂow of AN) were to cavitate
similarly, then the result would be
˙NE = NANU∞
(3.19)
where N is the nuclei concentration (number/unit volume) in the incoming
ﬂow. Then it follows that the acoustic pressure level resulting from substituting
Equations (3.19), (3.18) and (2.52) into Equation (3.14) becomes
pS ≈β
3 ρLU2
∞ANNR2
H( −σ −Cpmin)
5
2 /R
(3.20)
where we have omitted some of the constants of order unity. For the relatively sim-
ple ﬂows considered here, Equation (3.20) yields a sound pressure level that scales

3.9 Cavitation Luminescence
83
with U2
∞and with R4
H because AN ∝R2
H. This scaling with velocity does correspond
roughly to that which has been observed in some experiments on traveling bubble
cavitation, for example, those of Blake, Wolpert, and Geib (1977) and Arakeri and
Shangumanathan (1985). The former observe that pS ∝Um
∞where m = 1.5 to 2.
There are, however, a number of complicating factors that can alter these scaling
relationships. First, as we have discussed earlier in Section 2.5, only those nuclei
larger than a certain critical size, RC, will actually grow to become cavitation bub-
bles. Since RC is a function of both σ and the velocity, U∞, this means that the
effective N will be a function of RC and U∞. Since RC decreases as U∞increases,
this would tend to produce powers, m, somewhat greater than 2. But it is also the
case that, in any experimental facility, N will typically change with U∞in some
facility-dependent manner. Often this will cause N to decrease with U∞at constant
σ (since N will typically decrease with increasing tunnel pressure), and this effect
would then produce values of m that are less than 2.
Different scaling laws will apply when the cavitation is generated by turbulent
ﬂuctuations such as in a turbulent jet (see, for example, Ooi 1985 and Franklin and
McMillan 1984). Then the typical tension experienced by a nucleus as it moves along
a disturbed path in a turbulent ﬂow is very much more difﬁcult to estimate. Conse-
quently, the models for the sound pressure due to cavitation and the scaling of that
sound with velocity are less well understood.
When the population of bubbles becomes sufﬁciently large, the radiated noise
will begin to be affected by the interactions between the bubbles. In Chapters 6
and 7 we discuss some analyses and some of the consequences of these interactions
in clouds of cavitating bubbles. There are also a number of experimental studies of
the noise from the collapse of cavitating clouds, for example, that of Bark and van
Berlekom (1978).
3.9 Cavitation Luminescence
Though highly localized both temporally and spatially, the extremely high temper-
atures and pressures that can occur in the noncondensable gas during collapse are
believed to be responsible for the phenomenon known as luminescence, the emis-
sion of light that is observed during cavitation bubble collapse. The phenomenon
was ﬁrst observed by Marinesco and Trillat (1933), and a number of different expla-
nations were advanced to explain the emissions. The fact that the light was being
emitted at collapse was ﬁrst demonstrated by Meyer and Kuttruff (1959). They
observed cavitation on the face of a rod oscillating magnetostrictively and corre-
lated the light with the collapse point in the growth-and-collapse cycle. The balance
of evidence now seems to conﬁrm the suggestion by Noltingk and Neppiras (1950)
that the phenomenon is caused by the compression and adiabatic heating of the non-
condensable gas in the collapsing bubble. As we discussed previously in Sections 2.4
and 3.4, temperatures of the order of 6000◦K can be anticipated on the basis of
uniform compression of the noncondensable gas; the same calculations suggest
that these high temperatures will last for only a fraction of a microsecond. Such

84
Cavitation Bubble Collapse
conditions would indeed explain the emission of light. Indeed, the measurements of
the spectrum of sonoluminescence by Taylor and Jarman (1970), Flint and Suslick
(1991), and others suggest a temperature of about 5000K. However, some recent
experiments by Barber and Putterman (1991) indicate much higher temperatures
and even shorter emission durations of the order of picoseconds. Speculations on
the explanation for these observations have centered on the suggestion by Jarman
(1960) that the collapsing bubble forms a spherical, inward-propagating shock in
the gas contents of the bubble and that the focusing of the shock at the center of
the bubble is an important reason for the extremely high apparent “temperatures”
associated with the sonoluminescence radiation. It is, however, important to observe
that spherical symmetry is essential for this mechanism to have any signiﬁcant con-
sequences. One would therefore expect that the distortions caused by a ﬂow would
not allow signiﬁcant shock focusing and would even reduce the effectiveness of the
basic compression mechanism.
When it occurs in the context of acoustic cavitation (see Chapter 4), lumines-
cence is called sonoluminescence despite the evidence that it is the cavitation rather
than the sound that causes the light emission. Sonoluminescence and the associ-
ated chemistry that is induced by the high temperatures and pressures (known as
“sonochemistry”) have been more thoroughly investigated than the corresponding
processes in hydrodynamic cavitation. However, the subject is beyond the scope
of this book and the reader is referred to other works such as the book by Young
(1989).
As one would expect from the Rayleigh-Plesset equation, the surface tension
and vapor pressure of the liquid are important in determining the sonolumines-
cence ﬂux as the data of Jarman (1959) clearly show (see Figure 3.21). Certain
aqueous solutes like sodium disulphide seem to enhance the luminescence, though
it is not clear that the same mechanism is responsible for the light emission under
these circumstances. Sonoluminescence is also strongly dependent on the thermal
conductivity of the gas (Hickling 1963, Young 1976), and this is particularly evident
with gases like xenon and krypton, which have low thermal conductivities. Clearly
then, the conduction of heat in the gas plays an important role in the phenomenon.
Therefore, the breakup of the bubble prior to complete collapse might be expected
to eliminate the phenomenon completely.
Light emission in a cavitating ﬂow was ﬁrst investigated by Jarman and Taylor
(1964, 1965) who observed luminescence in a cavitating venturi and identiﬁed the
source as the region of bubble collapse. They also found that an acoustic pressure
pulse was associated with each ﬂash of light. The maximum emission was in a band
of wavelengths around 5000 angstroms, which is in accord with the many apocryphal
accounts of steady or ﬂashing blue light emanating from ﬂowing water. Peterson
and Anderson (1967) also conducted experiments with venturis and explored the
effects of different, noncondensable gases dissolved in the water. They observe that
the emission of light implies blackbody sources with a temperature above 6000◦K.
There are, however, other experimenters who found it very difﬁcult to observe any
luminescence in a cavitating ﬂow. One suspects that only bubbles that collapse with

References
85
0.01
0.1
13
15
14
12
11
9
8
7
4
5
6
3
2
1
1  Dimethyl phthalate
2  Ethylene glycol
3  Tap water
4  o - xylene
5  Isoamyl alcohol
6  Chlorobenzene
7  n- Butyl alcohol
8  Isobutyl alcohol
9  Toluene
10  Secondary butyl alcohol
11 n- Propyl alcohol
12  Isopropyl alcohol
13 Ethyl alcohol
14 Benzene
15 Tertiary butyl alcohol
10
1
10
10-2
10-3
10-4
10-5
10-6
Sonoluminescence Flux at 40º C
S2 / PV (in kg m/sec2)
Figure 3.21 The correlation of the sonoluminescence ﬂux with S2/pV for data in a variety of
l i q u i d s . F ro m Jarman ( 1959).
signiﬁcant spherical symmetry will actually produce luminescence. Such events may
be exceedingly rare in many ﬂows.
The phenomenon of luminescence is not just of academic interest. For one thing
there is evidence that it may initiate explosions in liquid explosives (Gordeev et al.
1967). More constructively, there seems to be signiﬁcant interest in utilizing the
chemical-processing potential of the high temperatures and pressures in what is oth-
erwise a benign environment. For example, it is possible to use cavitation to break
up harmful molecules in water (Dahi 1982).
References
ASTM. (1967). Erosion by cavitation or impingement. Amer. Soc. for Testing and Materials,
ASTM STP408.
Akulichev, V.A. (1971). High intensity ultrasonic ﬁelds. L.D. Rosenberg (ed.), Plenum Press.
Arakeri, V.H. and Shangumanathan, V. (1985). On the evidence for the effect of bubble
interference on cavitation noise. J. Fluid Mech., 159, 131–150.
Baiter, H.-J., Gruneis, F. and Tilmann, P. (1982). An extended base for the statistical
description of cavitation noise. Proc. ASME Int. Symp. on Cavitation Noise, 93–108.
Barber, B.P. and Putterman, S.J. (1991). Observations of synchronous picosecond sonlumi-
nescence. Nature, 352, 318.
Bark, G. and van Berlekom, W.B. (1978). Experimental investigations of cavitation noise.
Proc. 12th ONR Symp. on Naval Hydrodynamics, 470–493.

86
Cavitation Bubble Collapse
Barker, S.J. (1973). Measurements of radiated noise from cavitating hydrofoils. ASME
Cavitation and Polyphase Flow Forum, 27–30.
Benjamin, T.B. (1958). Pressure waves from collapsing cavities. Proc. Second ONR Symp.
Naval Hyrodynamics, 207–233.
Benjamin, T.B. and Ellis, A.T. (1966). The collapse of cavitation bubbles and the pressures
thereby produced against solid boundaries. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc., London, Ser. A, 260,
221–240.
Blake, J.R. and Gibson, D.C. (1987). Cavitation bubbles near boundaries. Ann. Rev. Fluid
Mech., 19, 99–124.
Blake, W.K., Wolpert, M.J. and Geib, F.E. (1977). Cavitation noise and inception as
inﬂuenced by boundary-layer development on a hydrofoil. J. Fluid Mech., 80, 617–640.
Blake, W.K. and Sevik, M.M. (1982). Recent developments in cavitation noise research. Proc.
ASME Int. Symp. on Cavitation Noise, 1–10.
Blake, W.K. (1986a). Propeller cavitation noise: the problems of scaling and prediction. Proc.
ASME Int. Symp. on Cavitation Noise, 89–99.
Blake, W.K. (1986b). Mechanics of ﬂow-induced sound and vibration. Academic Press.
Ceccio, S.L. and Brennen, C.E. (1991). Observations of the dynamics and acoustics of
travelling bubble cavitation. J. Fluid Mech., 233, 633–660.
Chahine, G.L. (1977). Interaction between an oscillating bubble and a free surface. ASME
J. Fluids Eng., 99, 709–716.
Chahine, G.L. and Duraiswami, R. (1992). Dynamical interactions in a multibubble cloud.
ASME J. Fluids Eng., 114, 680–686.
Dahi, E. (1982). Perspective of combination of ozone and ultrasound. In Ozonization Manual
for Water and Wastewater Treatment (editor W.J.Masschelein), John Wiley and Sons.
Dowling, A.P. and Ffowcs Williams, J.E. (1983). Sound and sources of sound. Ellis Horwood
Ltd. and John Wiley and Sons.
Esipov, I.B. and Naugol’nykh, K.A. (1973). Collapse of a bubble in a compressible liquid.
Akust. Zh., 19, 285–288.
Fitzpatrick, H.M. and Strasberg, M. (1956). Hydrodynamic sources of sound. Proc. First ONR
Symp. on Naval Hydrodynamics, 241–280.
Flint, E.B. and Suslick, K.S. (1991). The temperature of cavitation. Science, 253, 1397–1399.
Flynn, H.G. (1966). Cavitation dynamics. I, A mathematical formulation. Acoust. Res. Lab.,
Harvard Univ., Tech. Memo. 50.
Franklin, R.E. and McMillan, J. (1984). Noise generation in cavitating ﬂows, the submerged
jet. ASME J. Fluids Eng., 106, 336–341.
Frost, D. and Sturtevant, B. (1986). Effects of ambient pressure on the instability of a liquid
boiling explosively at the superheat limit. ASME J. Heat Transfer, 108, 418–424.
Fujikawa, S. and Akamatsu, T. (1980). Effects of the non-equilibriumcondensation of vapour
on the pressure wave produced by the collapse of a bubble in a liquid. J. Fluid Mech., 97,
481–512.
Gibson, D.C. (1968). Cavitation adjacent to plane boundaries. Proc. Australian Conf. on
Hydraulics and Fluid Machinery, 210–214.
Gibson, D.C. and Blake, J.R. (1982). The growth and collapse of bubbles near deformable
surfaces. Appl. Sci. Res., 38, 215–224.
Gilmore, F.R. (1952). The collapse and growth of a spherical bubble in a viscous compressible
liquid. Calif. Inst. of Tech. Hydrodynamics Lab. Rep. No. 26–4.
Gordeev, V.E., Serbinov, A.I., and Troshin, Ya.K. (1967). Stimulation of explosions in the
collapse of cavitation bubbles in liquid explosives. Dokl. Akad. Nauk., 172, 383–385.
Herring, C. (1941). Theory of the pulsations of the gas bubble produced by an underwater
explosion. O.S.R.D. Rep. No. 236.
Hickling, R. (1963). Effects of thermal conduction in sonoluminescence. J. Acoust. Soc. Am.,
35, 967–974.

References
87
Hickling, R. and Plesset, M.S. (1964). Collapse and rebound of a spherical bubble in water.
Phys. Fluids, 7, 7–14.
Ivany, R.D. and Hammitt, F.G. (1965). Cavitation bubble collapse in viscous, compressible
liquids—numerical analysis. ASME J. Basic Eng., 87, 977–985.
Jarman, P. (1959). Measurements of sonoluminescence from pure liquids and some aqueous
solutions. Proc. Phys. Soc. London, 73, 628–640.
Jarman, P. (1960). Sonoluminescence: a discussion. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 32, 1459–1462.
Jarman, P. and Taylor, K.J. (1964). Light emisssion from cavitating water. Brit. J. Appl. Phys.,
15, 321–322.
Jarman, P. and Taylor, K.J. (1965). Light ﬂashes and shocks from a cavitating ﬂow. Brit.
J. Appl. Phys., 16, 675–682.
Jorgensen, D.W. (1961). Noise from cavitating submerged jets. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 33,
1334–1338.
Keller, J.B. and Kolodner, I.I. (1956). Damping of underwater explosion bubble oscillations.
J. Appl. Phys., 27, 1152–1161.
Kimoto, H. (1987). An experimental evaluation of the effects of a water microjet and a
shock wave by a local pressure sensor. Int. ASME Symp. on Cavitation Res. Facilities and
Techniques, FED 57, 217–224.
Kirkwood, J.G. and Bethe, H.A. (1942). The pressure wave produced by an underwater
explosion. O.S.R.D., Rep. 588.
Knapp, R.T., Daily, J.W., and Hammitt, F.G. (1970). Cavitation. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Lauterborn, W. and Bolle, H. (1975). Experimental investigations of cavitation bubble
collapse in the neighborhood of a solid boundary. J. Fluid Mech., 72, 391–399.
Lush, P.A. and Angell, B. (1984). Correlation of cavitation erosion and sound pressure level.
ASME. J. Fluids Eng., 106, 347–351.
Marinesco, M. and Trillat, J.J. (1933). Action des ultrasons sur les plaques photographiques.
Compt. Rend., 196, 858–860.
Martin, C.S., Medlarz, H., Wiggert, D.C., and Brennen, C. (1981). Cavitation inception in
spool valves. ASME. J. Fluids Eng., 103, 564–576.
Matsumoto, Y. and Watanabe, M. (1989). Nonlinear oscillation of gas bubble with internal
phenomena. JSME Int. J., 32, 157–162.
Mellen, R.H. (1954). Ultrasonic spectrum of cavitation noise in water. J. Acoust. Soc. Am.,
26, 356–360.
Meyer, E. and Kuttruff, H. (1959). Zur Phasenbeziehung zwischen Sonolumineszenz und
Kavitations-vorgang bei periodischer Anregung. Zeit angew. Phys., 11, 325–333.
Morozov, V.P. (1969). Cavitation noise as a train of sound pulses generated at random times.
Sov. Phys. Acoust., 14, 361–365.
Naude, C.F. and Ellis, A.T. (1961). On the mechanism of cavitation damage by non-
hemispherical cavities in contact with a solid boundary. ASME. J. Basic Eng., 83,
648–656.
Noltingk, B.E. and Neppiras, E.A. (1950). Cavitation produced by ultrasonics. Proc. Phys.
Soc., London, 63B, 674–685.
Ooi, K.K. (1985). Scale effects on cavitation inception in submerged water jets: a new look.
J. Fluid Mech., 151, 367–390.
Peterson, F.B. and Anderson, T.P. (1967). Light emission from hydrodynamic cavitation.
Phys. Fluids, 10, 874–879.
Plesset, M.S. and Ellis, A.T. (1955). On the mechanism of cavitation damage. Trans. ASME,
1055–1064.
Plesset, M.S. and Mitchell, T.P. (1956). On the stability of the spherical shape of a vapor
cavity in a liquid. Quart. Appl. Math., 13, No. 4, 419–430.
Plesset, M.S. and Chapman, R.B. (1971). Collapse of an initially spherical vapor cavity in the
neighborhood of a solid boundary. J. Fluid Mech., 47, 283–290.

88
Cavitation Bubble Collapse
Plesset, M.S. and Prosperetti, A. (1977). Bubble dynamics and cavitation. Ann. Rev. Fluid
Mech., 9, 145–185.
Prosperetti, A. and Lezzi, A. (1986). Bubble dynamics in a compressible liquid. Part 1. First-
order theory. J. Fluid Mech., 168, 457–478.
Rayleigh, Lord (Strutt, John William). (1917). On the pressure developed in a liquid during
the collapse of a spherical cavity. Phil. Mag., 34, 94–98.
Schneider, A.J.R. (1949). Some compressibility effects in cavitation bubble dynamics. Ph.D.
Thesis, Calif. Inst. of Tech.
Shima, A., Takayama, K., Tomita, Y., and Miura, N. (1981). An experimental study on effects
of a solid wall on the motion of bubbles and shock waves in bubble collapse. Acustica, 48,
293–301.
Shima, A., Takayama, K., Tomita, Y., and Ohsawa, N. (1983). Mechanism of impact pressure
generation from spark-generated bubble collapse near a wall. AIAA J., 21, 55–59.
Soyama,H., Kato, H., and Oba, R. (1992). Cavitation observations of severely erosive vortex
cavitation arising in a centrifugal pump. Proc. Third I.Mech.E. Int. Conf. on Cavitation,
103–110.
Taylor, K.J. and Jarman, P.D. (1970). The spectra of sonoluminescence. Aust. J. Phys., 23,
319–334.
Theofanous, T., Biasi, L., Isbin, H.S., and Fauske, H. (1969). A theoretical study on bubble
growth in constant and time-dependent pressure ﬁelds. Chem. Eng. Sci., 24, 885–897.
Thiruvengadam, A. (1967). The concept of erosion strength. In Erosion by cavitation or
impingement. Am. Soc. Testing Mats. STP 408, 22–35.
Thiruvengadam, A. (1974). Handbook of cavitation erosion. Tech. Rep. 7301-1, Hydronau-
tics, Inc., Laurel, Md.
Tomita, Y. and Shima, A. (1977). On the behaviour of a spherical bubble and the impulse
pressure in a viscous compressible liquid. Bull. JSME, 20, 1453–1460.
Tomita, Y. and Shima, A. (1990). High-speed photographic observations of laser-induced
cavitation bubbles in water. Acustica, 71, No. 3, 161–171.
Trilling, L. (1952). The collapse and rebound of a gas bubble. J. Appl. Phys., 23, 14–17.
Voinov, O.V. and Voinov, V.V. (1975). Numerical method of calculating non-stationary
motions of an ideal incompressible ﬂuid with free surfaces. Sov. Phys. Dokl., 20, 179–180.
Young, F.R. (1976). Sonoluminescence from water containing dissolved gases. J. Acoust. Soc.
Am., 60, 100–104.
Young, F.R. (1989). Cavitation. McGraw-Hill Book Company.

4
Dynamics of Oscillating Bubbles
4.1 Introduction
The focus of the two preceding chapters was on the dynamics of the growth and
collapse of a single bubble experiencing one period of tension. In this chapter we
review the response of a bubble to a continuous, oscillating pressure ﬁeld. Much of
the material comes within the scope of acoustic cavitation, a subject with an exten-
sive literature that is reviewed in more detail elsewhere (Flynn 1964; Neppiras 1980;
Plesset and Prosperetti 1977; Prosperetti 1982, 1984; Crum 1979; Young 1989). We
include here a brief summary of the basic phenomena.
One useful classiﬁcation of the subject uses the magnitude of the bubble radius
oscillations in response to the imposed ﬂuctuating pressure ﬁeld. Three regimes can
be identiﬁed:
1. For very small pressure amplitudes the response is linear. Section 4.2 contains
the ﬁrst step in any linear analysis, the identiﬁcation of the natural frequency of
an oscillating bubble.
2. Due to the nonlinearities in the governing equations, particularly the Rayleigh-
Plesset Equation (2.12), the response of a bubble will begin to be affected by
these nonlinearities as the amplitude of oscillation is increased. Nevertheless
the bubble may continue to oscillate stably. Such circumstances are referred
to as “stable acoustic cavitation” to distinguish them from those of the third
regime described below. Several different nonlinear phenomena can affect sta-
ble acoustic cavitation in important ways. Among these are the production
of subharmonics, the phenomenon of rectiﬁed diffusion, and the generation
of Bjerknes forces. Each of these is described in greater detail later in the
chapter.
3. Under other circumstances the change in bubble size during a single cycle of
oscillation can become so large that the bubble undergoes a cycle of explosive
cavitation growth and violent collapse similar to that described in the preced-
ing chapter. Such a response is termed “transient acoustic cavitation” and is
distinguished from stable acoustic cavitation by the fact that the bubble radius
changes by several orders of magnitude during each cycle.
89

90
Dynamics of Oscillating Bubbles
Though we imply that these three situations follow with increasing amplitude,
it is important to note that other factors are important in determining the kind of
response that will occur for a given oscillating pressure ﬁeld. One of the factors
is the relationship between the frequency, ω, of the imposed oscillations and the
natural frequency, ωN, of the bubble. Sometimes this is characterized by the rela-
tionship between the equilibrium radius of the bubble, RE, in the absence of pressure
oscillations and the size of the hypothetical bubble, RR, which would resonate at
the imposed frequency, ω. Another important factor in determining whether the
response is stable or transient is the relationship between the pressure oscillation
amplitude, ˜p, and the mean pressure, ¯p∞. For example, if ˜p < ¯p∞, the bubble
is never placed under tension and will therefore never cavitate. A related factor
that will affect the response is whether the bubble is predominantly vapor-ﬁlled
or gas-ﬁlled. Stable oscillations are more likely with predominantly gas-ﬁlled bub-
bles while bubbles which contain mostly vapor will more readily exhibit transient
acoustic cavitation.
We begin, however, with a discussion of the small-amplitude, linear response of
a bubble to oscillations in the ambient pressure.
4.2 Bubble Natural Frequencies
The response of a bubble to oscillations in the pressure at inﬁnity will now be
considered. Initially we shall neglect thermal effects and the inﬂuence of liquid com-
pressibility. As discussed in the next section both of these lead to an increase in the
damping above that represented by the viscous terms, which are retained. How-
ever, both can be approximately represented by increases in the damping or the
“effective” viscosity.
Consider the linearized dynamic solution of Equation (2.27) when the pres-
sure at inﬁnity consists of a mean value, ¯p∞, upon which is superimposed a small
oscillatory pressure of amplitude, ˜p, and radian frequency, ω, so that
p∞= ¯p∞+ Re{˜pejωt}
(4.1)
The linear dynamic response of the bubble will then be
R = RE[1 + Re{ϕejωt}]
(4.2)
where RE is the equilibrium size at the pressure, ¯p∞, and the bubble radius response,
ϕ, will in general be a complex number such that RE|ϕ| is the amplitude of the bub-
ble radius oscillations. The phase of ϕ represents the phase difference between p∞
and R.
For the present we shall assume that the mass of gas in the bubble, mG,
remains constant. Then substituting Equations (4.1) and (4.2) into Equation (2.27),
neglecting all terms of order |ϕ|2 and using the equilibrium condition (2.41) one
ﬁnds
ω2 −jω4νL
R2
E
+
1
ρLR2
E
 2S
RE
−3kpGE

=
˜p
ρLR2
Eϕ
(4.3)

4.2 Bubble Natural Frequencies
91
where, as before,
pGE = ¯p∞−pV + 2S
RE
= 3mGTBKG
4πR3
E
(4.4)
It follows that for a given amplitude, ˜p, the maximum or peak response amplitude
occurs at a frequency, ωP, given by the minimum value of the spectral radius of the
left-hand side of Equation (4.3):
ωP =

(3kpGE −2S/RE)
ρLR2
E
−8ν2
L
R4
E
 1
2
(4.5)
or in terms of (¯p∞−pV) rather than pGE:
ωP =

3k(¯p∞−pV)
ρLR2
E
+ 2(3k −1)S
ρLR3
E
−8ν2
L
R4
E
 1
2
(4.6)
At this peak frequency the amplitude of the response is, of course, inversely
proportional to the damping:
|ϕ|ω=ωP =
˜p
4μL

ω2
P + 4ν2
L
R4
E
 1
2
(4.7)
It is also convenient for future purposes to deﬁne the natural frequency, ωN, of
oscillation of the bubbles as the value of ωP for zero damping:
ωN =

1
ρLR2
E

3k(¯p∞−pV) + 2(3k−1) S
RE
 1
2
(4.8)
The connection with the stability criterion of Section 2.5 is clear when one observes
that no natural frequency exists for tensions (pV −¯p∞) > 4S/3RE (for isothermal gas
behavior, k = 1); stable oscillations can only occur about a stable equilibrium.
The peak frequency, ωP, is an important quantity to consider in any bub-
ble dynamic problem. Note from Equation (4.41) that ωP is a function only of
(¯p∞−pV),RE, and the liquid properties. Typical graphs for ωP as a function of
RE for several (¯p∞−pV) values are shown in Figures (4.1) and (4.2) for water at
300◦K (S = 0.0717, μL = 0.000863, ρL = 996.3) and for sodium at 800◦K (S = 0.15,
μL = 0.000229, ρL = 825.8). As is evident from Equation (4.41), the second and
third terms on the right-hand side dominate at very small RE and the frequency is
almost independent of (¯p∞−pV). Indeed, no peak frequency exists below a size
equal to about 2ν2
LρL/S. For larger bubbles the viscous term becomes negligible and
ωP depends on (¯p∞−pV). If the latter is positive, the natural frequency approaches
zero like R−1
E . In the case of tension, pV > ¯p∞, the peak frequency does not exist
above RE = RC.
It is important to take note of the fact that for the typical nuclei commonly
found in water, which lie in range 1 to 100 μm, the natural frequencies are of the
order, 5 to 25 kHz. This has several important practical consequences. First, if one

92
Dynamics of Oscillating Bubbles
108
102
104
106
Bubble Peak Frequency (in Hz)
10-8
10-7
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
Bubble Radius, RE (m)
106
105
104
103
(P – PV)
Figure 4.1 Bubble resonant frequency in water at 300◦K (S = 0.0717, μL = 0.000863, ρL =
996.3) as a function of the radius of the bubble for various values of (¯p∞−pV) as indicated.
108
109
102
103
10
104
105
106
107
Peak Frequency (in Hz.)
10-7
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
Bubble Radius, RE (m.)
106
105
104
(P – PV) = 103
Figure 4.2 Bubble resonant frequency in sodium at 800◦K (S = 0.15, μL = 0.00023, ρL =
825.8) as a function of the radius of the bubble for various values of (¯p∞−pV) as indicated.

4.3 Effective Polytropic Constant
93
wishes to cause cavitation in water by means of an acoustic pressure ﬁeld, then the
frequencies that will be most effective in producing a substantial concentration of
large cavitation bubbles will be in this frequency range. This is also the frequency
range employed in magnetostrictive devices used to oscillate solid material samples
in water (or other liquid) in order to test the susceptibility of that material to cavi-
tation damage (Knapp et al. 1970). Of course, the oscillation of the nuclei produced
in this way will be highly nonlinear; nevertheless, the peak response frequency will
be less than but not radically different from the peak response frequency for small
linear oscillations.
It is also important to note that, like any oscillator, a nucleus excited at its reso-
nant frequency, ωP, will exhibit a response whose amplitude is primarily a function
of the damping. Since the viscous damping is rather small in many practical cir-
cumstances, the amplitude given by Equation (4.7) can be very large due to the
factor μL in the denominator. It could be heuristically argued that this might cause
the nucleus to exceed its critical size, RC (see Section 2.5), and that highly nonlin-
ear behavior with very large amplitudes would result. The pressure amplitude, ˜pC,
required to achieve RE|ϕ| = RC −RE can be readily evaluated from Equation (4.7)
and the results of the last section:
˜pC ≈4μL

ω2
N −4ν2
L
R4
E
 1
2
⎡
⎣

1 + ρLω2
NR3
E
2S
 1
2
−1
⎤
⎦
(4.9)
and in many circumstances this is approximately equal to 4μLωN. For a 10 μm nuclei
in water at 300◦K for which the natural frequency is about 10 kHz this critical pres-
sure amplitude is only 0.002 bar. Consequently, a nucleus could readily be oscillated
in a way that would cause it to exceed the Blake critical radius and therefore proceed
to explosive cavitation growth. Of course, nonlinear effects may substantially alter
the estimate given in Equation (4.9). Further comment on this and other critical or
threshold oscillating pressure levels is delayed until Sections 4.8 and 4.9.
4.3 Effective Polytropic Constant
At this juncture it is appropriate to discuss the validity of the assumption that the
gas in the bubble behaves polytropically according to Equation (2.26). For the cir-
cumstances of bubble growth and collapse considered in Chapter 2 the polytropic
assumption is usually considered acceptable for the following reasons. First, during
the growth of a vapor bubble the gas plays a relatively minor role, and the prepon-
derance of vapor will tend to determine the bubble temperature. Second, during the
later stages of collapse when the gas predominates, the velocities are so high that an
adiabatic assumption, k = γ , seems appropriate. Since a collapsing bubble loses its
spherical symmetry, the resulting internal motions of the gas would, in any case,
generate mixing, which would tend to negate any more sophisicated model based
on spherical symmetry.

94
Dynamics of Oscillating Bubbles
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
Polytropic Exponent, k
10-1
1
102
10
103
109
108
107
106
105
104
Reduced Frequency, ωRE
2 / αG
α G* = 10–5
10–6
10–7
10–8
10–9
Figure 4.3 Effective polytropic exponent, k, for a diatomic gas (γ = 1.4) as a function of a
reduced frequency, ωR2
E/αG, for various values of a reduced thermal diffusivity of the gas, α∗
G
(see t ext ). A d ap t ed f ro m P ro sp eret t i (1977b ).
The issue of the appropriate polytropic constant is directly coupled with the
evaluation of the effective thermal damping of the bubble and was ﬁrst addressed
by Pfriem (1940), Devin (1959), and Chapman and Plesset (1971). Prosperettti
(1977b) analysed the problem in detail with particular attention to thermal diffusion
in the gas and predicted the effective polytropic exponents shown in Figure 4.3. In
that ﬁgure the effective polytropic exponent is plotted against a reduced frequency,
ωR2
E/αG, for various values of a nondimensional thermal diffusivity in the gas, α∗
G,
deﬁned by
α∗
G = αGω/c2
G
(4.10)
where αG and cG are the thermal diffusivity and speed of sound in the gas. Note
that for low frequencies (at which there is sufﬁcient time for thermal diffusion) the
behavior tends to become isothermal with k = 1. On the other hand, at higher fre-
quencies (at which there is insufﬁcient time for heat transfer) the behavior initially
tends to become isentropic (k = γ ). At still higher frequencies the mean free path
in the gas becomes comparable with the bubble size, and the exponent can take on
values outside the range 1 < k < γ (see Plesset and Prosperetti 1977). Crum (1983)
has made measurements of the effective polytropic exponent for bubbles of vari-
ous gases in water. Figure 4.4 shows typical experimental data for air bubbles in
water. The results are consistent with the theory for frequencies below the resonant
frequency.
Prosperetti, Crum, and Commander (1988) summarize the current understand-
ing of the theory in which
k = 1
3Re{ϒ}
(4.11)

4.4 Additional Damping Terms
95
1.5
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Polytropic Exponent, k
0
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
Radius/Resonant Radius, RE/RR
Figure 4.4 Experimentally measured polytropic exponents, k, for air bubbles in water as a
function of the bubble radius to resonant bubble radius ratio. The solid line is the theoretical
resu l t . A d ap t ed f r o m C r u m (1983).
where the complex function, ϒ, is given by
ϒ =
3γ
1 −3(γ −1)iχ
	
i
χ

 1
2 coth
	
i
χ

 1
2 −1

(4.12)
where χ = αG/ωR2
E. As we shall discuss in the next section, this analysis also predicts
an effective thermal damping that is related to Im{ϒ}.
While the use of an effective polytropic exponent (and the associated ther-
mal damping given by Equation (4.15)) provides a consistent approach for linear
oscillations, Prosperetti, Crum, and Commander (1988) have shown that it may
cause signiﬁcant errors when the oscillations become nonlinear. Under these cir-
cumstances the behavior of the gas may depart from that which is consistent with
an effective polytropic exponent, and there seems to be no option but to numeri-
cally solve the detailed mass, momentum, and energy equations in the interior of
the bubble.
4.4 Additional Damping Terms
Chapman and Plesset (1971) have presented a useful summary of the three primary
contributions to the damping of bubble oscillations, namely that due to liquid vis-
cosity, that due to liquid compressibility through acoustic radiation, and that due
to thermal conductivity. It is particularly convenient to represent the three compo-
nents of damping as three additive contributions to an effective liquid viscosity, μE,
which can then be employed in the Rayleigh-Plesset equation in place of the actual
liquid viscosity, μL :
μE = μL + μT + μA
(4.13)

96
Dynamics of Oscillating Bubbles
10–2
10–3
10–4
10–5
10–6
Acoustic
Component
Thermal
Component
Viscous
Component
Total
0
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
Equilibrium Radius, RO(m)
Bubble Damping, 

E/PL	NRO
2
Figure 4.5 Bubble damping components and the total damping as a function of the equi-
librium bubble radius, RE, for water. Damping is plotted as an “effective” viscosity, μE,
nondimensionalized as shown (from Ch ap man and Plesset 1971).
where the “acoustic” viscosity, μA, is given by
μA = ρLω2R3
E
4cL
(4.14)
where cL is the velocity of sound in the liquid. The “thermal” viscosity, μT, follows
from the same analysis as was used to obtain the effective polytropic exponent in
the preceding section and yields
μT = (¯p∞+ 2S/RE)
4ω
Im{ϒ}
(4.15)
where ϒ is given by Equation (4.12).
The relative magnitudes of the three components of damping (or “effective”
viscosity) can be quite different for different bubble sizes or radii, RE. This is illus-
trated by the data for air bubbles in water at 20◦C and atmospheric pressure that
is taken from Chapman and Plesset (1971) and reproduced as Figure 4.5. Note that
the viscous component dominates for very small bubbles, the thermal component is
dominant for most bubbles of practical interest, and the acoustic component only
dominates for bubbles larger than about 1 cm.
4.5 Nonlinear Effects
The preceding sections assume that the perturbation in the bubble radius, ϕ, is
sufﬁciently small so that the linear approximation holds. However, as Plesset and
Prosperetti (1977) have detailed in their review of the subject, single bubbles exhibit
a number of interesting and important nonlinear phenomena. When a liquid that
will inevitably contain microbubbles is irradiated with sound of a given frequency,

4.5 Nonlinear Effects
97
0.4
0.5
–0.5
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
0.4
–0.4
–0.2
0
0.2
1.6
Pressure (Atm.)
Radius / RE
Pressure (Atm.)
Radius / RE
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time (s)
Figure 4.6 Numerically computed examples of the steady nonlinear radial oscillations of a
bubble excited by the single-frequency pressure oscillations shown at the top of each graph.
Top: Subresonant excitation at 83.4 kHz or ω/ωN = 0.8 with an amplitude, ˜p = 0.33 bar.
Bottom: Superresonant excitation of a bubble of mean radius 26 μm at 191.5 kHz or ω/ωN =
1.8 w i t h an amp l i t u d e ˜p = 0.33 bar . A d ap t ed f r o m F l yn n ( 1964).
ω, the nonlinear response results in harmonic dispersion, which not only produces
harmonics with frequencies that are integer multiples of ω (superharmonics) but,
more unusually, subharmonics with frequencies less than ω of the form mω/n where
m and n are integers. Both the superharmonics and subharmonics become more
prominent as the amplitude of excitation is increased. The production of subhar-
monics was ﬁrst observed experimentally by Esche (1952), and possible origins
of this nonlinear effect were explored in detail by Noltingk and Neppiras (1950,
1951), Flynn (1964), Borotnikova and Soloukin (1964), and Neppiras (1969), among

98
Dynamics of Oscillating Bubbles
1.6
1.2
1.6
1.5
1.3
1.1
0.9
0.7
0.5
0.3
0.1
0.8
0.4
1.6
0.2
0.3
0.5
0.7
1
2
3
Reduced Frequency, ω/ωN
(RMax - RE)/RE
4
1
3
1
2
1
1
1
1
2
Figure 4.7 Numerically computed amplitudes of radial oscillation of a bubble of radius 1 μm
in water at a mean ambient pressure of 1 bar plotted as a function of ω/ωN for various ampli-
tudes o f o scillation, ˜p (in bar ), as shown o n the left. The numbers above the peak s indicate
the order of the resonance, m/n. A d ap t ed f r o m L au t erb o r n ( 1976).
others. Neppiras (1969) also surmised that subharmonic resonance could evolve into
transient cavitation. These analytical and numerical investigations use numerical
solutions of the Rayleigh-Plesset equation to explore the nonlinear characteristics
of a single bubble excited by an oscillating pressure with a single frequency, ω. As
might be expected, different kinds of response occur depending on whether ω is
greater or less than the natural frequency of the bubble, ωN. Figure 4.6 presents two
examples of the kinds of response encountered, one for ω < ωN and the other for
ω > ωN. Note the presence of subharmonics in both cases.
Lauterborn (1976) examined numerical solutions for a large number of different
excitation frequencies and was able to construct frequency response curves of the
kind shown in Figure 4.7. Notice the progressive development of the peak responses
at subharmonic frequencies as the amplitude of the excitation is increased. Nonlin-
ear effects not only create these subharmonic peaks but also cause the resonant
peaks (both the main resonance near ω/ωN = 1 and the subharmonic resonances)
to be skewed to the left, creating the discontinuities indicated by the dashed verti-
cal lines. These correspond to bifurcations or sudden transitions between two valid
solutions, one with a much larger amplitude than the other. Prosperetti (1977a) has
provided a theoretical analysis of these transitions.
4.6 Weakly Nonlinear Analysis
When the amplitudes of oscillation are large, there are no simple analytical methods
available, and one must resort to numerical calculations such as those of Lauter-
born (1976) in order to investigate the phenomena that result from nonlinearity.
However, while the amplitudes are still fairly small, it is valid to use an expansion

4.6 Weakly Nonlinear Analysis
99
technique to investigate weakly nonlinear effects. Here we shall retain only terms
that are quadratic in the oscillation amplitude; cubic and higher order terms are
neglected.
To illustrate weakly nonlinear analysis and the frequency dispersion that results
from this procedure, Equations (4.1) and (4.2) are rewritten as
p∞= ¯p∞+
N
 
n=1
Re
!
˜pnejnδt"
(4.16)
R = RE

1 +
N
 
n=1
Re
!
ϕnejnδt"

(4.17)
where nδ, n = 1 to N, represents a discretization of the frequency domain. When
these are substituted into Equation (2.27), all cubic or higher order terms are
neglected, and the coefﬁcients of the time-dependent terms are gathered together,
the result is the following nonlinear version of Equation (4.3) (Kumar and Brennen
1993):
˜pn
ρLω2
NR2
E
= β0(n)ϕn +
n−1
 
m=1
β1(n,m)ϕmϕn−m +
N−n
 
m=1
β2(n,m)ˆϕmϕn+m
(4.18)
where ˆϕ denotes the complex conjugate of ϕ and
β0(n) = n2δ2
ω2
N
−1 −j nδ
ωN
4νL
ωNR2
E
(4.19)
β1(n,m) = (3k + 1)
4
+ (3k −1)S
2ρLω2
NR3
E
+ δ2
2ω2
N
(n −m)
	
n + m
2

+ j 2νL
ωNR2
E
δ
ωN
(n −m)
(4.20)
β2(n,m) = (3k + 1)
2
+ (3k −1)S
ρLω2
NR3
E
+ δ2
2ω2
N
(n2 −nm −m2) + j 2νL
ωNR2
E
nδ
ωN
(4.21)
Given the ﬂuid and bubble characteristics, Equation (4.18) may be solved iteratively
to ﬁnd ϕn given ˜pn and the parameters, ν/ωNR2
E, S/ρLω2
NR3
E, k, and δ. The value of N
should be large enough to encompass all the harmonics with signiﬁcant amplitudes.
We shall ﬁrst examine the characteristics of the radial oscillations that are
caused by a single excitation frequency. It is clear from the form of Equation (4.18)
that, in this case, the only non-zero ϕn occur at frequencies that are integer mul-
tiples of the excitation frequency. Consequently, for this class of problems we may
chose δ to be the excitation frequency; then ˜p1 is the amplitude of that excitation and
˜pn = 0 for n ̸= 1. Figure 4.8 provides two comparisons between the weakly nonlinear
solutions and more exact numerical integrations of the Rayleigh-Plesset equation.
Clearly these will diverge as the amplitude of oscillation is increased; nevertheless
the examples in Figure 4.8 show that the weakly nonlinear solutions are qualitatively
valuable.
Figure 4.9 presents examples of the values for |ϕn| for three different ampli-
tudes of excitation and demonstrates how the harmonics become more important

100
Dynamics of Oscillating Bubbles
1.06
1.04
1.02
1.00
0.98
0.96
0.94
Radius, R / RE
0
20
40
60
80
100
Time, N t
1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
Radius, R / RE
0
20
40
60
80
100
Figure 4.8 Two comparisons between weakly nonlinear solutions and more exact numeri-
cal calculations. The parameters are νL/ωNR2
E = 0.01, S/ρLω2
NR3
E = 0.1, k = 1.4, and the
excitation frequency is ωN/3. The upper ﬁgure has a dimensionless excitation amplitude,
˜p1/ρLω2
NR2
E, of 0.04 while the lower ﬁgure has a value of 0.08.
as the amplitude increases. In this example, the frequency of excitation is ωN/6;
the prominence of harmonics close to the natural frequency is characteristic of all
solutions in which the excitation frequency is less than ωN.
Weakly nonlinear solutions can also be used to construct frequency response
spectra similar to those due to Lauterborn (1976) described in the preceding section.
Figure 4.10 includes examples of such frequency response spectra obtained by plot-
ting the maximum possible deviation from the equilibrium radius, (Rmax −RE)/RE,
against the excitation frequency. For convenience we estimate (Rmax −RE)/RE as
(Rmax −RE)
RE
=
N
 
n=1
|ϕn|
(4.22)

4.7 Weakly Nonlinear Analysis
101
1.0
0.0001
0.001
0.01
0.1
0
2
4
Excitation
Frequency
6
8
10
12
Harmonic Number, n
Amplitude, φn
0.3
0.2
0.1 Bubble Natural
Frequency
Figure 4.9 Example of the magnitude of the harmonics of radial motion, |φn|, from Equation
(4.18) with νL/ωNR2
E = 0.01, S/ρLω2
NR3
E = 0.1, k = 1.4, an excitation frequency of ωN/6, and
three amplitudes of excitation, ˜p1/ρLω2
NR2
E, as indicated. The connecting lines are for visual
effect only.
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Frequency/Natural Frequency
(RMax – RE)/RE
0.5
1.0
Figure 4.10 Example of frequency response spectra from Equation (4.18) with νL/ωNR2
E =
0.01, S/ρLω2
NR3
E = 0.1, k = 1.4, and three different excitation amplitudes, ˜p1/ρLω2
NR2
E, of 0.1
(dotted line), 0.2 (dashed line), and 0.3 (solid line).
Clearly the weakly nonlinear solutions exhibit subharmonic resonances similar to
those seen in the more exact solutions like those of Lauterborn (1976). However,
they lack some of the ﬁner detail such as the skewing of the resonant peaks that
produces the sudden jumps in the response at some subresonant frequencies.
The advantages of the weakly nonlinear analyses become more apparent when
dealing with problems of more complex geometry or multiple frequencies of excita-
tion. It is particularly useful in studying the interactions between bubbles in bubble
clouds, a subject that is discussed in Chapter 6.

102
Dynamics of Oscillating Bubbles
4.7 Chaotic Oscillations
In recent years, the modern methods of nonlinear dynamical systems analysis have
led to substantial improvement in the understanding of the nonlinear behavior of
bubbles and of clouds of bubbles. Lauterborn and Suchla (1984) seem to have
been the ﬁrst to explore the bifurcation structure of single bubble oscillations. They
constructed the bifurcation diagrams and strange attractor maps that result from a
compressible Rayleigh-Plesset equation similar to Equation (3.1). Among the phe-
nomena obtained was a period doubling sequence of a periodic orbit converging to
a strange attractor. Subsequent studies by Smereka, Birnir, and Banerjee (1987),
Parlitz et al. (1990), and others have provided further information on the nature
of these chaotic, nonlinear oscillations of a single, spherical bubble. It remains to
be seen how far real bubble systems that involve departures from spherical sym-
metry and from the Rayleigh-Plesset equation adhere to these complex dynamical
behaviors.
In Section 6.10, we shall explore the linear, dynamic behavior of a cloud of
bubbles and will ﬁnd that such clouds exhibit their own characteristic dynamics
and natural frequencies. The nonlinear, chaotic behavior of clouds of bubbles
have also been recently examined by Smereka and Banerjee (1988) and Birnir
and Smereka (1990), and these studies reveal a parallel system of bifurcations and
strange attractors in the oscillations of bubble clouds.
4.8 Threshold for Transient Cavitation
We now turn to one of the topics raised in the introduction to this chapter: the
distinction between those circumstances in which one would expect stable acoustic
cavitation and those in which transient acoustic cavitation would occur. This issue
was ﬁrst addressed by Noltingk and Neppiras (1950, 1951) and is reviewed by Flynn
(1964) and Young (1989), to which the reader is referred for more detail.
We consider a bubble of equilibrium size, RE, containing a mass of gas, mG,
and subjected to a mean ambient pressure, ¯p∞, with a superimposed oscilla-
tion of frequency, ω, and amplitude, ˜p (see Equations (4.1) and (4.2)). The ﬁrst
step in establishing the criterion is accomplished by the static stability analysis of
Section 2.5. There we explored the stability of a bubble when the pressure far from
the bubble was varied and identiﬁed a critical size, RC, and a critical threshold pres-
sure, p∞c, which, if reached, would lead to unstable bubble growth and therefore, in
the present context, to transient cavitation. The added complication here is that
there is only a ﬁnite time during each cycle during which growth can occur, so
one must address the issue of whether or not that time is sufﬁcient for signiﬁcant
unstable growth.
The issue is determined by the relationship between the radian frequency, ω, of
the imposed oscillations and the natural frequency, ωN, of the bubble. If ω ≪ωN,
then the liquid inertia is relatively unimportant in the bubble dynamics and the bub-
ble will respond quasistatically. Under these circumstances the Blake criterion (see

4.9 Rectiﬁed Mass Diffusion
103
Section 2.5) will hold. Denoting the critical amplitude at which transient cavitation
will occur by ˜pC, it follows that the critical conditions will be reached when the
minimum instantaneous pressure, (¯p∞−˜p), just reaches the critical Blake threshold
pressure given by Equation (2.45). Therefore
˜pC = ¯p∞−pV + 4S
3

8πS
9mGTBKG
 1
2
(4.23)
On the other hand, if ω ≫ωN, the issue will involve the dynamics of bubble growth
since inertia will determine the size of the bubble perturbations. The details of
this bubble dynamic problem have been addressed by Flynn (1964) and convenient
guidelines are provided by Apfel (1981). Following Apfel’s construction, we note
that a neccessary but not sufﬁcient condition for transient cavitation is that the ambi-
ent pressure, p∞, fall below the vapor pressure for part of the oscillation cycle. The
typical negative pressure will, of course, be given by (¯p∞−˜p). Moreover, the pres-
sure will be negative for some fraction of the period of oscillation; that fraction is
solely related to the parameter, β = (1 −¯p∞/˜p) (Apfel 1981). Then, assuming that
the quasistatic Blake threshold has been exceeded, the bubble growth rate will be
given roughly by the asymptotic growth rate of Equation (2.33). Combining this
with the time available for growth, the typical maximum bubble radius, RM, will be
given by
RM = f(β)π
ω
 ˜p −¯p∞
ρL
 1
2
(4.24)
where we have neglected the vapor pressure, pV. In this expression the function f(β)
accounts for some of the details such as the fraction of the half-period, π/ω, for
which the pressure is negative. Apfel (1981) ﬁnds
f(β) =
 4
3π

(2β)
1
2

1 +
2
3(1 −β)
 1
3
(4.25)
The ﬁnal step in constructing the criterion for ω ≫ωN is to argue that transient
cavitation will occur when RM →2RE and, using this, the critical pressure becomes
˜pC = ¯p∞+ 4ρLR2
Eω2/π2f 2
(4.26)
For more detailed analyses the reader is referred to the work of Flynn (1964) and
Apfel (1981).
4.9 Rectiﬁed Mass Diffusion
We now shift attention to a different nonlinear effect involving the mass transfer of
dissolved gas between the liquid and the bubble. This important nonlinear diffusion
effect occurs in the presence of an acoustic ﬁeld and is known as “rectiﬁed mass dif-
fusion” (Blake 1949a). Analytical models of this phenomenon were ﬁrst put forward
by Hsieh and Plesset (1961) and Eller and Flynn (1965), and reviews of the subject
can be found in Crum (1980, 1984) and Young (1989).

104
Dynamics of Oscillating Bubbles
Consider a gas bubble in a liquid with dissolved gas as described in Section 2.6.
Now, however, we add an oscillation to the ambient pressure. Gas will tend to come
out of solution into the bubble during that part of the oscillation cycle when the bub-
ble is larger than the mean because the partial pressure of gas in the bubble is then
depressed. Conversely, gas will redissolve during the other half of the cycle when
the bubble is smaller than the mean. The linear contributions to the mass of gas in
the bubble will, of course, balance so that the average gas content in the bubble will
not be affected at this level. However, there are two nonlinear effects that tend to
increase the mass of gas in the bubble. The ﬁrst of these is due to the fact that release
of gas by the liquid occurs during that part of the cycle when the surface area is
larger, and therefore the inﬂux during that part of the cycle is slightly larger than the
efﬂux during the part of the cycle when the bubble is smaller. Consequently, there
is a net ﬂux of gas into the bubble which is quadratic in the perturbation amplitude.
Second, the diffusion boundary layer in the liquid tends to be stretched thinner when
the bubble is larger, and this also enhances the ﬂux into the bubble during the part
of the cycle when the bubble is larger. This effect contributes a second, quadratic
term to the net ﬂux of gas into the bubble. Recent analyses, which include all of the
contributing nonlinear terms (see Crum 1984 or Young 1989), yield the following
modiﬁcation to the steady mass diffusion result given previously in Equation (2.56)
(see Section 2.6):
RE
dRE
dt = D
ρGE
(c∞−cS3(1 + 2S/RE¯p∞)/2)
(1 + 4S/3RE¯p∞)

1 + RE(2)
1
2
(πDt)
1
2

(4.27)
which is identical with Equation (2.56) except for the  terms, which differ from
unity by terms that are quadratic in the ﬂuctuating pressure amplitude, ˜p:
1 = 1 + !1!−2
2
 ˜p
¯p∞
2
(4.28)
2 = 1 + (4!1 + 3)!−2
2
 ˜p
¯p∞
2
(4.29)
3 = 1 + (4 −3k)(!1 −3(k −1)/4)!−2
2
 ˜p
¯p∞
2
(4.30)
where
!1 = (3k + 1 −β2)/4 + (S/4RE¯p∞)(6k + 2 −4/3k)
1 + (2S/RE¯p∞)(1 −1/3k)
(4.31)
!2 =
#
ρLR2
E
¯p∞
$
(ω2 −ω2
N)2 + (4μω2ωN/3k¯p∞)2 1
2
(4.32)
β2 = ρLω2R2
E
3k¯p∞
(4.33)
where one must choose an appropriate μ to represent the total effective damp-
ing (see Section 4.4) and an appropriate effective polytropic constant, k (see

4.9 Rectiﬁed Mass Diffusion
105
Section 4.3). Valuable contributions to the evolution of these results were made
by Hsieh and Plesset (1961), Eller and Flynn (1965), Safar (1968), Eller (1969, 1972,
1975), Skinner (1970), and Crum (1980, 1984), among others.
Strasberg (1961) ﬁrst explored the issue of the conditions under which a bubble
would grow due to rectiﬁed diffusion. Clearly, the sign of the bubble growth rate
predicted by Equation (4.27) will be determined by the sign of the term
c∞−cS(1 + 2S/RE¯p∞)
3
2

(4.34)
In the absence of oscillations and surface tension, this leads to the conclusion that
the bubble will grow when c∞> cS and will dissolve when the reverse is true. The
term involving surface tension causes bubbles in a saturated solution (cS = c∞) to
dissolve but usually has only a minor effect in real applications. However, in the
presence of oscillations the term 3/2 will decrease below unity as the amplitude,
˜p, is increased. This causes a positive increment in the growth rate as anticipated
earlier. Even in a subsaturated liquid for which c∞< cS this increment could cause
the sign of dR/dt to change and become positive. Thus Equation (4.27) allows us to
quantify the bubble growth rate due to rectiﬁed mass diffusion.
If an oscillating pressure is applied to a ﬂuid consisting of a subsaturated or
saturated liquid and seeded with microbubbles of radius, RE, then Expression (4.34)
also demonstates that there will exist a certain critical or threshold amplitude above
which the microbubbles will begin to grow by rectiﬁed diffusion. This threshold
amplitude, ˜pC, will be large enough so that the value of 3/2 is sufﬁciently small
to make Expression (4.34) vanish. From Equations (4.29) to (4.33) the threshold
amplitude becomes
˜p2
C =
(ρLR2
Eω2
N)2
	
1 −ω2
ω2
N

2
+
	
4μLω2
3kωN ¯p∞

2
1 +
2S
RE ¯p∞−c∞
cS

(3 + 4!1)
	
c∞
cS

−

3(k−1)(3k−4)
4
+ (4 −3k)!1

1 +
2S
RE ¯p∞

(4.35)
Typical experimental measurements of the rates of growth and of the thresh-
old pressure amplitudes are shown in Figures 4.11 and 4.12. The data are from the
work of Crum (1980, 1984) and are for distilled water that is saturated with air. It
is clear that there is satisfactory agreement for the cases shown. However, Crum
also observed signiﬁcant discrepancies when a surface-active agent was added to
the water to change the surface tension.
Finally, we note again that most of the theories assume spherical symmetry and
that departure from sphericity could alter the diffusion boundary layer in ways that
could radically affect the mass transfer process. Furthermore, there is some evidence
that acoustic streaming induced by the excitation can also cause disruption of the
diffusion boundary layer (Elder 1959, Gould 1966).
Before leaving the subject of rectiﬁed diffusion, it is important to emphasize
that the bubble growth that it causes is very slow compared with most of the other
growth processes considered in the last two chapters. It is appropriate to think of

106
Dynamics of Oscillating Bubbles
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
100
200
300
400
500
0.195 bar
0.22 bar
0.26 bar
0.305 bar
Time (s)
Bubble Radius (m)
F i gu re 4. 11 E xamp l es f r o m C r u m (1980) o f t h e gro w t h ( o r sh ri n k age) o f ai r bubbles in sat-
urated water (S = 68 dynes/cm) due to rectiﬁed diffusion. Data is shown for four pressure
amplitudes as shown. The lines are the corresponding theoretical predictions.
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0
20
40
60
80
100
Bubble Radius (m)
Pressure Amplitude, p (MPa)
F i gu re 4. 12 Dat a f r o m C r u m (1984) o f t h e t h r esh o l d p ressu re amp l i t u d e f o r r ect i ﬁ ed d i f f u si o n
for bubbles in distilled water (S = 68 dynes/cm) saturated with air. The frequency of the sound
is 22.1 kHz. The line is the prediction of Equation (4.35).
it as causing a gradual, quasistatic change in the equilibrium size of the bubble, RE.
However, it does provide a mechanism by which very small and stable nuclei might
grow sufﬁciently to become nuclei for cavitation. It is also valuable to observe that
the Blake threshold pressure, p∞c, increases as the mass of gas in the bubble, mG,
increases (see Equation (2.46)). Therefore, as mG increases, a smaller reduction in

4.10 Bjerknes Forces
107
the pressure is necessary to create an unstable bubble. That is to say, it becomes
easier to cavitate the liquid.
4.10 Bjerknes Forces
A different nonlinear effect is the force experienced by a bubble in an acoustic ﬁeld
due to the ﬁnite wavelength of the sound waves. The spatial wavenumber will be
denoted by k = ω/cL. The presence of such waves implies an instantaneous pressure
gradient in the liquid. To model this we substitute
˜p = ˜p∗sin(kxi)
(4.36)
into Equation (4.1) where the constant ˜p∗is the amplitude of the sound waves and xi
is the direction of wave propagation. Like any other pressure gradient, this produces
an instantaneous force, Fi, on the bubble in the xi direction given by
Fi = −4
3πR3
dp∞
dxi

(4.37)
Since both R and dp∞/dxi contain oscillating components, it follows that the combi-
nation of these in Equation (4.37) will lead to a nonlinear, time-averaged component
in Fi, which we will denote by ¯Fi. Substituting Equations (4.36), (4.1), and (4.2) into
(4.37) yields
¯Fi = −2πR3
ERe{ϕ}k˜p∗cos(kxi)
(4.38)
where the radial oscillation amplitude, ϕ, is given by Equation (4.3) so that
Re{ϕ} =
˜p(ω2 −ω2
N)
ρLR2
E

(ω2 −ω2
N)2 +

4νLω/R2
E
2
(4.39)
If ω is not too close to ωN, a useful approximation is
Re{ϕ} ≈˜p/ρLR2
E(ω2 −ω2
N)
(4.40)
and substituting this into Equation (4.38) yields
¯Fi = −πkRE(˜p∗)2 sin(2kxi)
ρL(ω2 −ω2
N)
(4.41)
This is known as the primary Bjerknes force since it follows from some of the effects
discussed by that author (Bjerknes 1909). The effect was ﬁrst properly identiﬁed by
Blake (1949b).
The form of the primary Bjerknes force produces some interesting bubble
migration patterns in a stationary sound ﬁeld. Note from Equation (4.41) that if
the excitation frequency, ω, is less than the natural frequency, ωN, (or RE < RR) then
the primary Bjerknes force will cause migration of the bubbles away from the nodes
in the pressure ﬁeld and toward the antinodes (points of largest pressure amplitude).
On the other hand, if ω > ωN (or RE > RR) the bubbles will tend to migrate from the

108
Dynamics of Oscillating Bubbles
antinodes to the nodes. A number of investigators (for example, Crum and Eller
1970) have observed the process by which small bubbles in a stationary sound ﬁeld
ﬁrst migrate to the antinodes, where they grow by rectiﬁed diffusion until they are
larger than the resonant radius. They then migrate back to the nodes, where they
may dissolve again when they experience only small pressure oscillations. Crum and
Eller (1970) and have shown that the translational velocities of migrating bubbles
are compatible with the Bjerknes force estimates given above.
Finally, it is important to mention one other nonlinear effect. An acoustic ﬁeld
can cause time-averaged or mean motions in the ﬂuid itself. These are referred to as
acoustic streaming,. The term microstreaming is used to refer to such motions near
a small bubble. Generally these motions take the form of circulation patterns and,
in a classic paper, Elder (1959) observed and recorded the circulating patterns of
microstreaming near the surface of small gas bubbles in liquids. As stated earlier,
these circulation patterns could alter the processes of heat and mass diffusion to or
from a bubble and therefore modify phenomena such as rectiﬁed diffusion.
References
Apfel, R.E. (1981). Acoustic cavitation prediction. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 69, 1624–1633.
Birnir, B. and Smereka, P. (1990). Existence theory and invariant manifolds of bubble clouds.
Comm. Pure Appl. Math., 43, 363–413.
Bjerknes, V. (1909). Die Kraftfelder. Friedrich Vieweg and Sohn, Braunsweig.
Blake, F.G. (1949a). The onset of cavitation in liquids. Acoustics Res. Lab., Harvard Univ.,
Tech. Memo. No. 12.
Blake, F.G. (1949b). Bjerknes forces in stationary sound ﬁelds. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 21, 551.
Borotnikova, M.I. and Soloukin, R.I. (1964). A calculation of the pulsations of gas bubbles in
an incompressible liquid subject to a periodically varying pressure. Sov. Phys. Acoust., 10,
28–32.
Chapman, R.B. and Plesset, M.S. (1971). Thermal effects in the free oscillation of gas bubbles.
ASME J. Basic Eng., 93, 373–376.
Cole, R.H. (1948). Underwater explosions. Princeton Univ. Press, reprinted by Dover in 1965.
Crum, L.A. (1979). Tensile strength of water. Nature, 278, 148–149.
Crum, L.A. (1980). Measurements of the growth of air bubbles by rectiﬁed diffusion.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 68, 203–211.
Crum, L.A. (1983). The polytropic exponent of gas contained within air bubbles pulsating in
a liquid. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 73, 116–120.
Crum, L.A. (1984). Rectiﬁed diffusion. Ultrasonics, 22, 215–223.
Crum, L.A. and Eller, A.I. (1970). Motion of bubbles in a stationary sound ﬁeld. J. Acoust.
Soc. Am., 48, 181–189.
Devin, C. (1959). Survey of thermal, radiation, and viscous damping of pulsating air bubbles
in water. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 31, 1654–1667.
Elder, S.A. (1959). Cavitation microstreaming. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 31, 54–64.
Eller, A.I. and Flynn, H.G. (1965). Rectiﬁed diffusion during non-linear pulsation of
cavitation bubbles. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 37, 493–503.
Eller, A.I. (1969). Growth of bubbles by rectiﬁed diffusion. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 46,
1246–1250.
Eller, A.I. (1972). Bubble growth by diffusion in an 11 kHz sound ﬁeld. J. Acoust. Soc. Am.,
52, 1447–1449.
Eller, A.I. (1975). Effects of diffusion on gaseous cavitation bubbles. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 57,
1374–1378.

References
109
Esche, R. (1952). Untersuchung der Schwingungskavitation in Fl¨ussigkeiten. Acustica, 2,
AB208–AB218.
Flynn, H.G. (1964). Physics of acoustic cavitation in liquids. Physical Acoustics, 1B. Academic
Press.
Gould, R.K. (1966). Heat transfer across a solid-liquid interface in the presence of acoustic
streaming. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 40, 219–225.
Hsieh, D.-Y. and Plesset, M.S. (1961). Theory of rectiﬁed diffusion of mass into gas bubbles.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 33, 206–215.
Knapp, R.T., Daily, J.W., and Hammitt, F.G. (1970). Cavitation. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Kumar, S. and Brennen, C.E. (1993). Some nonlinear interactive effects in bubbly cavitation
clouds. J. Fluid Mech., 253, 565–591.
Lauterborn, W. (1976). Numerical investigation of nonlinear oscillations of gas bubbles in
liquids. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 59, 283–293.
Lauterborn, W. and Suchla, E. (1984). Bifurcation superstructure in a model of acoustic
turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 53, 2304–2307.
Neppiras, E.A. (1969). Subharmonic and other low-frequency emission from bubbles in
sound-irradiated liquids. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 46, 587–601.
Neppiras, E.A. (1980). Acoustic cavitation. Phys. Rep., 61, 160–251.
Neppiras, E.A. and Noltingk, B.E. (1951). Cavitation produced by ultrasonics: theoretical
conditions for the onset of cavitation. Proc. Phys. Soc., London, 64B, 1032–1038.
Noltingk, B.E. and Neppiras, E.A. (1950). Cavitation produced by ultrasonics. Proc. Phys.
Soc., London, 63B, 674–685.
Parlitz, U., Englisch, V., Scheffczyk, C., and Lauterborn, W. (1990). Bifurcation structure of
bubble oscillators. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 88, 1061–1077.
Pfriem, H. (1940). Akust. Zh., 5, 202–212.
Plesset, M.S. and Prosperetti, A. (1977). Bubble dynamics and cavitation. Ann. Rev. Fluid
Mech., 9, 145–185.
Prosperetti, A. (1974). Nonlinear oscillations of gas bubbles in liquids: steady state solutions.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 56, 878–885.
Prosperetti, A. (1977a). Application of the subharmonic threshold to the measurement of the
damping of oscillating gas bubbles. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 61, 11–16.
Prosperetti, A. (1977b). Thermal effects and damping mechanisms in the forced radial
oscillations of gas bubbles in liquids. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 61, 17–27.
Prosperetti, A. (1982). Bubble dynamics: a review and some recent results. Appl. Sci. Res.,
38, 145–164.
Prosperetti, A. (1984). Bubble phenomena in sound ﬁelds: part one and part two. Ultrasonics,
22, 69–77 and 115–124.
Prosperetti, A., Crum, L.A. and Commander, K.W. (1988). Nonlinear bubble dynamics.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 83, 502–514.
Safar, M.H. (1968). Comments on papers concerning rectiﬁed diffusion of cavitation bubbles.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 43, 1188–1189.
Skinner, L.A. (1970). Pressure threshold for acoustic cavitation. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 47,
327–331.
Smereka, P., Birnir, B. and Banerjee, S. (1987). Regular and chaotic bubble oscillations in
periodically driven pressure ﬁelds. Phys. Fluids, 30, 3342–3350.
Smereka, P. and Banerjee, S. (1988). The dynamics of periodically driven bubble clouds.
Phys. Fluids, 31, 3519–3531.
Strasberg, M. (1961). Rectiﬁed diffusion: comments on a paper of Hsieh and Plesset.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 33, 359.
Young, F.R. (1989). Cavitation. McGraw-Hill Book Company.

5
Translation of Bubbles
5.1 Introduction
This chapter will brieﬂy review the issues and problems involved in constructing
the equations of motion for individual bubbles (or drops or solid particles) moving
through a ﬂuid and will therefore focus on the dynamics of relative motion rather
than the dynamics of growth and collapse. For convenience we shall use the generic
name “particle” when any or all of bubbles, drops, and solid particles are being con-
sidered. The analyses are implicitly conﬁned to those circumstances in which the
interactions between neighboring particles are negligible. In very dilute multiphase
ﬂows in which the particles are very small compared with the global dimensions
of the ﬂow and are very far apart compared with the particle size, it is often suf-
ﬁcient to solve for the velocity and pressure, ui(xi,t) and p(xi,t), of the continuous
suspending ﬂuid while ignoring the particles or disperse phase. Given this solution
one could then solve an equation of motion for the particle to determine its trajec-
tory. This chapter will focus on the construction of such a particle or bubble equation
of motion. Interactions between particles or, more particularly, bubble, are left for
later.
The body of ﬂuid mechanical literature on the subject of ﬂows around parti-
cles or bodies is very large indeed. Here we present a summary that focuses on a
spherical particle of radius, R, and employs the following common notation. The
components of the translational velocity of the center of the particle will be denoted
by Vi(t). The velocity that the ﬂuid would have had at the location of the particle
center in the absence of the particle will be denoted by Ui(t). Note that such a con-
cept is difﬁcult to extend to the case of interactive multiphase ﬂows. Finally, the
velocity of the particle relative to the ﬂuid is denoted by Wi(t) = Vi −Ui.
Frequently the approach used to construct equations for Vi(t) (or Wi(t)) given
Ui(xi,t) is to individually estimate all the ﬂuid forces acting on the particle and to
equate the total ﬂuid force, Fi, to mpdVi/dt (where mp is the particle mass, assumed
constant). These ﬂuid forces may include forces due to buoyancy, added mass, drag,
etc. In the absence of ﬂuid acceleration (dUi/dt = 0) such an approach can be made
unambigiously; however, in the presence of ﬂuid acceleration, this kind of heuristic
approach can be misleading. Hence we concentrate in the next few sections on a
110

5.2 High Re Flows Around a Sphere
111
fundamental ﬂuid mechanical approach, which minimizes possible ambiguities. The
classical results for a spherical particle or bubble are reviewed ﬁrst. The analysis
is conﬁned to a suspending ﬂuid that is incompressible and Newtonian so that the
basic equations to be solved are the continuity equation
∂uj
∂xj
= 0
(5.1)
and the Navier-Stokes equations
ρ
∂ui
∂xj

= −∂p
∂xi
−ρν ∂2ui
∂xj∂xj
(5.2)
where ρ and ν are the density and kinematic viscosity of the suspending ﬂuid. It
is assumed that the only external force is that due to gravity, g. Then the actual
pressure is p′ = p −ρgz where z is a coordinate measured vertically upward.
Furthermore, in order to maintain clarity we conﬁne attention to rectilinear
relative motion in a direction conveniently chosen to be the x1 direction.
5.2 High Re Flows Around a Sphere
For steady ﬂows about a sphere in which dUi/dt = dVi/dt = dWi/dt = 0, it is conve-
nient to use a coordinate system, xi, ﬁxed in the particle as well as polar coordinates
(r,θ) and velocities ur,uθ as deﬁned in Figure 5.1.
Then Equations (5.1) and (5.2) become
1
r2
∂
∂r(r2ur) +
1
rsinθ
∂
∂θ (uθ sinθ) = 0
(5.3)
θ
R
θ
X1
W
ur
u
r
Figure 5.1 Notation for a spherical particle.

112
Translation of Bubbles
and
ρ

∂ur
∂t + ur
∂ur
∂r + uθ
r
∂ur
∂θ −u2
θ
r

= −∂p
∂r
+ρν
 1
r2
∂
∂r

r2 ∂ur
∂r

+
1
r2 sinθ
∂
∂θ

sinθ ∂ur
∂θ

−2ur
r2 −2
r2
∂uθ
∂θ

(5.4)
ρ
∂uθ
∂t + ur
∂uθ
∂r + uθ
r
∂uθ
∂θ + uruθ
r

= −1
r
∂p
∂θ
+ρν
 1
r2
∂
∂r

r2 ∂uθ
∂r

+
1
r2 sinθ
∂
∂θ

sinθ ∂uθ
∂θ

+ 2
r2
∂ur
∂θ −
uθ
r2 sin2 θ

(5.5)
The Stokes streamfunction, ψ, is deﬁned to satisfy continuity automatically:
ur =
1
r2 sinθ
∂ψ
∂θ ;
uθ = −
1
rsinθ
∂ψ
∂r
(5.6)
and the inviscid potential ﬂow solution is
ψ = −Wr2
2
sin2 θ −D
r sin2 θ
(5.7)
ur = −W cosθ −2D
r3 cosθ
(5.8)
uθ = +W sinθ −D
r3 sinθ
(5.9)
φ = −Wrcosθ + D
r2 cosθ
(5.10)
where, because of the boundary condition (ur)r=R = 0, it follows that D = −WR3/2. In
potential ﬂow one may also deﬁne a velocity potential, φ, such that ui = ∂φ/∂xi. The
classic problem with such solutions is the fact that the drag is zero, a circumstance
termed D’Alembert’s paradox. The ﬂow is symmetric about the x2x3 plane through
the origin and there is no wake.
The real viscous ﬂows around a sphere at large Reynolds numbers, Re =
2WR/ν > 1, are well documented. In the range from about 103 to 3 × 105, lami-
nar boundary layer separation occurs at θ ∼= 84◦and a large wake is formed behind
the sphere (see Figure 5.2). Close to the sphere the “near-wake” is laminar; fur-
ther downstream transition and turbulence occurring in the shear layers spreads to
generate a turbulent “far-wake.” As the Reynolds number increases the shear layer
transition moves forward until, quite abruptly, the turbulent shear layer reattaches
to the body, resulting in a major change in the ﬁnal position of separation (θ ∼= 120◦)
and in the form of the turbulent wake (Figure 5.2). Associated with this change in
ﬂow pattern is a dramatic decrease in the drag coefﬁcient, CD (deﬁned as the drag
force on the body in the negative x1 direction divided by 1
2ρW2πR2), from a value of
about 0.5 in the laminar separation regime to a value of about 0.2 in the turbulent
separation regime (Figure 5.3). At values of Re less than about 103 the ﬂow becomes
quite unsteady with periodic shedding of vortices from the sphere.

Figure 5.2 Smoke visualization of the nominally steady ﬂows (from left to right) past a sphere
showing, at the top, laminar separation at Re = 2.8 × 105 and, on the bottom, turbulent sep-
aration at Re = 3.9 × 105. Photographs by F.N.M.Brown, reproduced with the permission of
the University of Notre Dame.
10
0.5
0
1.0
1.5
102
103
104
105
106
Reynolds Number, WR/
Drag Coefficient, CD
Figure 5.3 Drag coefﬁcient on a sphere as a function of Reynolds number. Dashed curves
indicate the drag crisis regime in which the drag is very sensitive to other factors such as the
free stream turbulence.

114
Translation of Bubbles
5.3 Low Re Flows Around a Sphere
At the other end of the Reynolds number spectrum is the classic Stokes solution for
ﬂow around a sphere. In this limit the terms on the left-hand side of Equation (5.2)
are neglected and the viscous term retained. This solution has the form
ψ = sin2 θ

−Wr2
2
+ A
r + Br

(5.11)
ur = cosθ

−W + 2A
r3 + 2B
r

(5.12)
uθ = −sinθ

−W −A
r3 + B
r

(5.13)
where A and B are constants to be determined from the boundary conditions on the
surface of the sphere. The force, F, on the “particle” in the x1 direction is
F1 = 4
3πR2ρν

−4W
R + 8A
R4 + 2B
R2

(5.14)
Several subcases of this solution are of interest in the present context. The ﬁrst is
the classic Stokes (1851) solution for a solid sphere in which the no-slip boundary
condition, (uθ)r=R = 0, is applied (in addition to the kinematic condition (ur)r=R =
0). This set of boundary conditions, referred to as the Stokes boundary conditions,
leads to
A = −WR3
4
,
B = +3WR
4
and
F1 = −6πρνWR
(5.15)
The second case originates with Hadamard (1911) and Rybczynski (1911) who sug-
gested that, in the case of a bubble, a condition of zero shear stress on the sphere
surface would be more appropriate than a condition of zero tangential velocity, uθ.
Then it transpires that
A = 0,
B = +WR
2
and
F1 = −4πρνWR
(5.16)
Real bubbles may conform to either the Stokes or Hadamard-Rybczynski solutions
depending on the degree of contamination of the bubble surface, as we shall dis-
cuss in more detail in the next section. Finally, it is of interest to observe that the
potential ﬂow solution given in Equations (5.7) to (5.10) is also a subcase with
A = +WR3
2
,
B = 0
and
F1 = 0
(5.17)
However, another paradox, known as the Whitehead paradox, arises when the
validity of these Stokes ﬂow solutions at small (rather than zero) Reynolds num-
bers is considered. The nature of this paradox can be demonstrated by examining
the magnitude of the neglected term, uj∂ui/∂xj, in the Navier-Stokes equations
relative to the magnitude of the retained term ν∂2ui/∂xj∂xj. As is evident from
Equation (5.11), far from the sphere the former is proportional to W2R/r2 whereas

5.3 Low Re Flows Around a Sphere
115
the latter behaves like νWR/r3. It follows that although the retained term will
dominate close to the body (provided the Reynolds number Re = 2WR/ν ≪1), there
will always be a radial position, rc, given by R/rc = Re beyond which the neglected
term will exceed the retained viscous term. Hence, even if Re ≪1, the Stokes solu-
tion is not uniformly valid. Recognizing this limitation, Oseen (1910) attempted to
correct the Stokes solution by retaining in the basic equation an approximation to
uj∂ui/∂xj that would be valid in the far ﬁeld, −W∂ui/∂x1. Thus the Navier-Stokes
equations are approximated by
−W ∂ui
∂x1
= −1
ρ
∂p
∂xi
+ ν ∂2ui
∂xj∂xj
(5.18)
Oseen was able to ﬁnd a closed form solution to this equation that satisﬁes the
Stokes boundary conditions approximately:
ψ = −WR2

r2 sin2 θ
2R2
+ Rsin2 θ
4r
+ 3ν(1 + cosθ)
2WR
%
1 −e
Wr
2ν(1−cosθ)
&
(5.19)
which yields a drag force
F1 = −6πρνWR

1 + 3
16 Re

(5.20)
It is readily shown that Equation (5.19) reduces to (5.11) as Re →0. The correspond-
ing solution for the Hadamard-Rybczynski boundary conditions is not known to the
author; its validity would be more questionable since, unlike the case of Stokes’
boundary conditions, the inertial terms uj∂ui/∂xj are not identically zero on the
surface of the bubble.
More recently Proudman and Pearson (1957) and Kaplun and Lagerstrom
(1957) showed that Oseen’s solution is, in fact, the ﬁrst term obtained when the
method of matched asymptotic expansions is used in an attempt to patch together
consistent asymptotic solutions of the full Navier-Stokes equations for both the near
ﬁeld close to the sphere and the far ﬁeld. They also obtained the next term in the
expression for the drag force.
F1 = −6πρνWR

1 + 3
16Re + 9
160Re2ln
Re
2

+ 0(Re2)

(5.21)
The additional term leads to an error of 1% at Re = 0.3 and does not, therefore, have
much practical consequence.
The most notable feature of the Oseen solution is that the geometry of the
streamlines depends on the Reynolds number. The downstream ﬂow is not a mir-
ror image of the upstream ﬂow as in the Stokes or potential ﬂow solutions. Indeed,
closer examination of the Oseen solution reveals that, downstream of the sphere, the
streamlines are further apart and the ﬂow is slower than in the equivalent upstream
location. Furthermore, this effect increases with Reynolds number. These features
of the Oseen solution are entirely consistent with experimental observations and
represent the initial development of a wake behind the body.

116
Translation of Bubbles
Re = 9 .15
Re = 37 .7
Re = 17 .9
Re = 73 .6
Re = 25 .5
Re = 118
Re = 26 .8
Re = 133
Figure 5.4 Streamlines of steady ﬂow (from left to right) past a sphere at various Reynolds
n u mb ers (f ro m T an ed a 1956, rep roduced by permission of the author).
The ﬂow past a sphere at Reynolds numbers between about 0.5 and several
thousand has proven intractable to analytical methods though numerical solutions
are numerous. Experimentally, it is found that a recirculating zone (or vortex ring)
develops close to the rear stagnation point at about Re = 30 (see Taneda 1956 and
Figure 5.4). With further increase in the Reynolds number this recirculating zone
or wake expands. Deﬁning locations on the surface by the angle from the front
stagnation point, the separation point moves forward from about 130◦at Re = 100
to about 115◦at Re = 300. In the process the wake reaches a diameter comparable
to that of the sphere when Re ≈130. At this point the ﬂow becomes unstable and
the ring vortex that makes up the wake begins to oscillate (Taneda 1956). However,
it continues to be attached to the sphere until about Re = 500 (Torobin and Gauvin
1959).

5.4 Marangoni Effects
117
At Reynolds numbers above about 500, vortices begin to be shed and then
convected downstream. The frequency of vortex shedding has not been studied
as extensively as in the case of a circular cylinder and seems to vary more with
Reynolds number. In terms of the conventional Strouhal number, St, deﬁned as
St = 2fR/W
(5.22)
the vortex shedding frequencies, f, that Moller (1938) observed correspond to a
range of St varying from 0.3 at Re = 1000 to about 1.8 at Re = 5000. Furthermore, as
Re increases above 500 the ﬂow develops a fairly steady “near-wake” behind which
vortex shedding forms an unsteady and increasingly turbulent “far-wake.” This pro-
cess continues until, at a value of Re of the order of 1000, the ﬂow around the sphere
and in the near-wake again becomes quite steady. A recognizable boundary layer
has developed on the front of the sphere and separation settles down to a position
about 84◦from the front stagnation point. Transition to turbulence occurs on the
free shear layer, which deﬁnes the boundary of the near-wake and moves proges-
sively forward as the Reynolds number increases. The ﬂow is similar to that of the
top picture in Figure 5.2. Then the events described in the previous section occur
with further increase in the Reynolds number.
Since the Reynolds number range between 0.5 and several hundred can often
pertain in multiphase ﬂows, one must resort to an empirical formula for the drag
force in this regime. A number of empirical results are available; for example,
Klyachko (1934) recommends
F1 = −6πρνWR

1 + Re
2
3
6

(5.23)
which ﬁts the data fairly well up to Re ≈1000. At Re = 1 the factor in the square
brackets is 1.167, whereas the same factor in Equation (5.20) is 1.187. On the other
hand, at Re = 1000, the two factors are respectively 17.7 and 188.5.
5.4 Marangoni Effects
As a postscript to the steady, viscous ﬂows of the last section, it is of interest to
introduce and describe the forces that a bubble may experience due to gradients
in the surface tension, S, over the surface. These are called Marangoni effects.
The gradients in the surface tension can be caused by a number of different fac-
tors. For example, gradients in the temperature, solvent concentration, or electric
potential can create gradients in the surface tension. The “thermocapillary” effects
due to temperature gradients have been explored by a number of investigators (for
example, Young, Goldstein, and Block 1959) because of their importance in sev-
eral technological contexts. For most of the range of temperatures, the surface
tension decreases linearly with temperature, reaching zero at the critical point. Con-
sequently, the controlling thermophysical property, dS/dT, is readily identiﬁed and
more or less constant for any given ﬂuid. Some typical data for dS/dT is presented in

118
Translation of Bubbles
Table 5.1. Values of the temperature gradient of the surface
tension, −dS/dT, for pure liquid/vapor interfaces (in
kg/s2 K).
Water
2.02 × 10−4
Methane
1.84 × 10−4
Hydrogen
1.59 × 10−4
Butane
1.06 × 10−4
Helium-4
1.02 × 10−4
Carbon Dioxide
1.84 × 10−4
Nitrogen
1.92 × 10−4
Ammonia
1.85 × 10−4
Oxygen
1.92 × 10−4
Toluene
0.93 × 10−4
Sodium
0.90 × 10−4
Freon-12
1.18 × 10−4
Mercury
3.85 × 10−4
Uranium Dioxide
1.11 × 10−4
Table 5.1 and reveals a remarkably uniform value for this quantity for a wide range
of liquids.
Surface tension gradients affect free surface ﬂows because a gradient, dS/ds,
in a direction, s, tangential to a surface clearly requires that a shear stress act in
the negative s direction in order that the surface be in equilibrium. Such a shear
stress would then modify the boundary conditions (for example, the Hadamard-
Rybczynski conditions used in the preceding section), thus altering the ﬂow and the
forces acting on the bubble.
As an example of the Marangoni effect, we will examine the steady motion of
a spherical bubble in a viscous ﬂuid when there exists a gradient of the tempera-
ture (or other controlling physical property), dT/dx1, in the direction of motion (see
Figure 5.1). We must ﬁrst determine whether the temperature (or other controlling
property) is affected by the ﬂow. It is illustrative to consider two special cases from a
spectrum of possibilities. The ﬁrst and simplest special case, which is not so relevant
to the thermocapillary phenomenon, is to assume that T = (dT/dx1)x1 throughout
the ﬂow ﬁeld so that, on the surface of the bubble,
 1
R
dS
dθ

r=R
= −sinθ
 dS
dT
 dT
dx1

(5.24)
Much more realistic is the assumption that thermal conduction dominates the heat
transfer (∇2T = 0) and that there is no heat transfer through the surface of the
bubble. Then it follows from the solution of Laplace’s equation for the conductive
heat transfer problem that
 1
R
dS
dθ

r=R
= −3
2 sinθ
 dS
dT
 dT
dx1

(5.25)
The latter is the solution presented by Young, Goldstein, and Block (1959), but it
differs from Equation (5.24) only in terms of the effective value of dS/dT. Here
we shall employ Equation (5.25) since we focus on thermocapillarity, but other
possibilities such as Equation (5.24) should be borne in mind.
For simplicity we will continue to assume that the bubble remains spherical.
This assumption implies that the surface tension differences are small compared

5.5 Marangoni Effects
119
with the absolute level of S and that the stresses normal to the surface are entirely
dominated by the surface tension.
With these assumptions the tangential stress boundary condition for the spher-
ical bubble becomes
ρLνL
∂uθ
∂r −uθ
r

r=R
+ 1
R
dS
dθ

r=R
= 0
(5.26)
and this should replace the Hadamard-Rybczynski condition of zero shear
stress that was used in the preceding section. Applying Equation (5.26) with
Equation (5.25) and the usual kinematic condition, (ur)r=R = 0, to the general
solution of the preceding section leads to
A = −
R4
4ρLνL
dS
dx1
;
B = WR
2 +
R2
4ρLνL
dS
dx1
(5.27)
and consequently, from Equation (5.14), the force acting on the bubble becomes
F1 = −4πρLνLWR −2πR2 dS
dx1
(5.28)
In addition to the normal Hadamard-Rybczynski drag (ﬁrst term), we can identify a
Marangoni force, 2πR2(dS/dx1), acting on the bubble in the direction of decreas-
ing surface tension. Thus, for example, the presence of a uniform temperature
gradient, dT/dx1, would lead to an additional force on the bubble of magnitude
2πR2( −dS/dT)(dT/dx1) in the direction of the warmer ﬂuid since the surface ten-
sion decreases with temperature. Such thermocapillary effects have been observed
and measured by Young, Goldstein, and Block (1959) and others.
Finally, we should comment on a related effect caused by surface contaminants
that increase the surface tension. When a bubble is moving through liquid under
the action, say, of gravity, convection may cause contaminants to accumulate on the
downstream side of the bubble. This will create a positive dS/dθ gradient which, in
turn, will generate an effective shear stress acting in a direction opposite to the ﬂow.
Consequently, the contaminants tend to immobilize the surface. This will cause the
ﬂow and the drag to change from the Hadamard-Rybczynski solution to the Stokes
solution for zero tangential velocity. The effect is more pronounced for smaller
bubbles since, for a given surface tension difference, the Marangoni force becomes
larger relative to the buoyancy force as the bubble size decreases. Experimentally,
this means that surface contamination usually results in Stokes drag for spherical
bubbles smaller than a certain size and in Hadamard-Rybczynski drag for spherical
bubbles larger than that size. Such a transition is observed in experiments measur-
ing the rise velocity of bubbles as, for example, in the Haberman and Morton (1953)
experiments discussed in more detail in Section 5.12. The effect has been analyzed
in the more complex hydrodynamic case at higher Reynolds numbers by Harper,
Moore, and Pearson (1967).

120
Translation of Bubbles
5.5 Molecular Effects
Though only rarely important in the context of bubbles, there are some effects that
can be caused by the molecular motions in the surrounding ﬂuid. We brieﬂy list
some of these here.
When the mean free path of the molecules in the surrounding ﬂuid, λ, becomes
comparable with the size of the particles, the ﬂow will clearly deviate from the
continuum models, which are only relevant when λ ≪R. The Knudsen number,
Kn = λ/2R, is used to characterize these circumstances, and Cunningham (1910)
showed that the ﬁrst-order correction for small but ﬁnite Knudsen number leads
to an additional factor, (1 + 2AKn), in the Stokes drag for a spherical particle. The
numerical factor, A, is roughly a constant of order unity (see, for example, Green
and Lane 1964).
When the impulse generated by the collision of a single ﬂuid molecule with
the particle is large enough to cause signiﬁcant change in the particle velocity, the
resulting random motions of the particle are called “Brownian motion” (Einstein
1956). This leads to diffusion of solid particles suspended in a ﬂuid. Einstein showed
that the diffusivity, D, of this process is given by
D = kT/6πμR
(5.29)
where k is Boltzmann’s constant. It follows that the typical rms displacement, λ, of
the particle in a time, t, is given by
λ = (kTt/3πμR)
1
2
(5.30)
Brownian motion is usually only signiﬁcant for micron- and sub-micron-sized parti-
cles. The example quoted by Einstein is that of a 1 μm diameter particle in water at
17◦C for which the typical displacement during one second is 0.8 μm.
A third, related phenomenon is the reponse of a particle to the collisions of
molecules when there is a signiﬁcant temperature gradient in the ﬂuid. Then the
impulses imparted to the particle by molecular collisions on the hot side of the
particle will be larger than the impulses on the cold side. The particle will there-
fore experience a net force driving it in the direction of the colder ﬂuid. This
phenomenon is known as thermophoresis (see, for example, Davies 1966). A sim-
ilar phenomenon known as photophoresis occurs when a particle is subjected to
nonuniform radiation. One could, of course, include in this list the Bjerknes forces
described in Section 4.10 since they constitute sonophoresis.
5.6 Unsteady Particle Motions
Having reviewed the steady motion of a particle relative to a ﬂuid, we must now con-
sider the consequences of unsteady relative motion in which either the particle or
the ﬂuid or both are accelerating. The complexities of ﬂuid acceleration are delayed
until the next section. First we shall consider the simpler circumstance in which the
ﬂuid is either at rest or has a steady uniform streaming motion (U = constant) far

5.6 Unsteady Particle Motions
121
from the particle. Clearly the second case is readily reduced to the ﬁrst by a simple
Galilean transformation and it will be assumed that this has been accomplished.
In the ideal case of unsteady inviscid potential ﬂow, it can then be shown by
using the concept of the total kinetic energy of the ﬂuid that the force on a rigid
particle in an incompressible ﬂow is given by Fi, where
Fi = −Mij
dVj
dt
(5.31)
where Mij is called the added mass matrix (or tensor) though the name “induced
inertia tensor” used by Batchelor (1967) is, perhaps, more descriptive. The reader
is referred to Sarpkaya and Isaacson (1981), Yih (1969), or Batchelor (1967) for
detailed descriptions of such analyses. The above mentioned methods also show
that Mij for any ﬁnite particle can be obtained from knowledge of several steady
potential ﬂows. In fact,
Mij = ρ
2

volume
of ﬂuid
uikujk d(volume)
(5.32)
where the integration is performed over the entire volume of the ﬂuid. The veloc-
ity ﬁeld, uij, is the ﬂuid velocity in the i direction caused by the steady translation
of the particle with unit velocity in the j direction. Note that this means that Mij is
necessarily a symmetric matrix. Furthermore, it is clear that particles with planes of
symmetry will not experience a force perpendicular to that plane when the direction
of acceleration is parallel to that plane. Hence if there is a plane of symmetry per-
pendicular to the k direction, then for i ̸= k, Mki = Mik = 0, and the only off-diagonal
matrix elements that can be nonzero are Mij, j ̸= k, i ̸= k. In the special case of the
sphere all the off-diagonal terms will be zero.
Tables of some available values of the diagonal components of Mij are given by
Sarpkaya and Isaacson (1981) who also summarize the experimental results, particu-
larly for planar ﬂows past cylinders. Other compilations of added mass results can be
found in Kennard (1967), Patton (1965), and Brennen (1982). Some typical values
for three-dimensional particles are listed in Table 5.2. The uniform diagonal value
for a sphere (often referred to simply as the added mass of a sphere) is 2ρπR3/3
or one-half the displaced mass of ﬂuid. This value can readily be obtained from
Equation (5.32) using the steady ﬂow results given in Equations (5.7) to (5.10). In
general, of course, there is no special relation between the added mass and the dis-
placed mass. Consider, for example, the case of the inﬁnitely thin plate or disc with
zero displaced mass which has a ﬁnite added mass in the direction normal to the sur-
face. Finally, it should be noted that the literature contains little, if any, information
on off-diagonal components of added mass matrices.
Now consider the application of these potential ﬂow results to real viscous ﬂows
at high Reynolds numbers (the case of low Reynolds number ﬂows will be discussed
in Section 5.8). Signiﬁcant doubts about the applicability of the added masses cal-
culated from potential ﬂow analysis would be justiﬁed because of the experience
of D’Alembert’s paradox for steady potential ﬂows and the substantial difference

122
Translation of Bubbles
Table 5.2. Added masses (diagonal terms in Mij) for some three-dimensional
bodies (particles): (T) Potential ﬂow calculations, (E) Experimental data from
P at t o n ( 1965).
R
R
H
H
1
1
Particle
Sphere (T)
Mii
Mii
Cab2
K11
K22(K33)
a/b
2
5
10
0.209
0.059
0.021
0.702
0.895
0.960
= Kii
M11
Disc (T)
R
1
Ellipsoids (T)
2 (or 3)
2 (or 3)
2b
2a
1
Sphere near Plane
Wall (T)
(R/H << 1)
Sphere near Free
Surface (E)
(R/H << 1)
Matrix Element
Value
R
4
3
K11 = 1
2 ( 1 + 
 + . . . )
3
8
R3
H3
K22 = 1
2 ( 1 + 
 + . . . )
3
16
R3
H3
K33 = K22
H / R
K11
8.0
4.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
0.52
0.59
0.54
0.44
0.25
Mii
CR3
= Kii
4
3
CR3
2
3
CR3
8
3
Mii
CR3
= Kii
4
3
between the streamlines of the potential and actual ﬂows. Furthermore, analyses of
experimental results will require the separation of the “added mass” forces from the
viscous drag forces. Usually this is accomplished by heuristic summation of the two
forces so that
Fi = −Mij
dVj
dt −1
2ρACij|Vj|Vj
(5.33)
where Cij is a lift and drag coefﬁcient matrix and A is a typical cross-sectional area
for the body. This is known as Morison’s equation (see Morison et al. 1950).
Actual unsteady high Reynolds number ﬂows are more complicated and not
necessarily compatible with such simple superposition. This is reﬂected in the fact
that the coefﬁcients, Mij and Cij, appear from the experimental results to be not
only functions of Re but also functions of the reduced time or frequency of the
unsteady motion. Typically experiments involve either oscillation of a body in a ﬂuid

5.7 Unsteady Potential Flow
123
or acceleration from rest. The most extensively studied case involves planar ﬂow
past a cylinder (for example, Keulegan and Carpenter 1958), and a detailed review
of this data is included in Sarkaya and Isaacson (1981). For oscillatory motion of the
cylinder with velocity amplitude, UM, and period, t∗, the coefﬁcients are functions
of both the Reynolds number, Re = 2UMR/ν, and the reduced period or Keulegan-
Carpenter number, Kc = UMt∗/2R. When the amplitude, UMt∗, is less than about
10R (Kc < 5), the inertial effects dominate and Mii is only a little less than its poten-
tial ﬂow value over a wide range of Reynolds numbers (104 < Re < 106). However,
for larger values of Kc, Mii can be substantially smaller than this and, in some range
of Re and Kc, may actually be negative. The values of Cii (the drag coefﬁcient) that
are deduced from experiments are also a complicated function of Re and Kc. The
behavior of the coefﬁcients is particularly pathological when the reduced period,
Kc, is close to that of vortex shedding (Kc of the order of 10). Large transverse or
“lift” forces can be generated under these circumstances. To the author’s knowl-
edge, detailed investigations of this kind have not been made for a spherical body,
but one might expect the same qualitative phenomena to occur.
5.7 Unsteady Potential Flow
In general, a particle moving in any ﬂow other than a steady uniform stream will
experience ﬂuid accelerations, and it is therefore necessary to consider the struc-
ture of the equation governing the particle motion under these circumstances. Of
course, this will include the special case of acceleration of a particle in a ﬂuid at
rest (or with a steady streaming motion). As in the earlier sections we shall conﬁne
the detailed solutions to those for a spherical particle or bubble. Furthermore, we
consider only those circumstances in which both the particle and ﬂuid acceleration
are in one direction, chosen for convenience to be the x1 direction. The effect of an
external force ﬁeld such as gravity will be omitted; it can readily be inserted into any
of the solutions that follow by the addition of the conventional buoyancy force.
All the solutions discussed are obtained in an accelerating frame of reference
ﬁxed in the center of the ﬂuid particle. Therefore, if the velocity of the particle in
some original, noninertial coordinate system, x∗
i , was V(t) in the x∗
1 direction, the
Navier-Stokes equations in the new frame, xi, ﬁxed in the particle center are
∂ui
∂t + uj
∂ui
∂xj
= −1
ρ
∂P
∂xi
+ ν ∂2ui
∂xj∂xj
(5.34)
where the pseudo-pressure, P, is related to the actual pressure, p, by
P = p + ρx1
dV
dt
(5.35)
Here the conventional time derivative of V(t) is denoted by d/dt, but it should be
noted that in the original x∗
i frame it implies a Lagrangian derivative following the
particle. As before, the ﬂuid is assumed incompressible (so that continuity requires
∂ui/∂xi = 0) and Newtonian. The velocity that the ﬂuid would have at the xi origin

124
Translation of Bubbles
in the absence of the particle is then W(t) in the x1 direction. It is also convenient to
deﬁne the quantities r, θ, ur, uθ as shown in Figure 5.1 and the Stokes streamfunction
as in Equations (5.6). In some cases we shall also be able to consider the unsteady
effects due to growth of the bubble so the radius is denoted by R(t).
First consider inviscid potential ﬂow for which Equations (5.34) may be inte-
grated to obtain the Bernoulli equation
∂φ
∂t + P
ρ + 1
2(u2
θ + u2
r) = constant
(5.36)
where φ is a velocity potential (ui = ∂φ/∂xi) and ψ must satisfy the equation
Lψ = 0
where
L ≡∂2
∂r2 + sinθ
r2
∂
∂θ
 1
sinθ
∂
∂θ

(5.37)
This is of course the same equation as in steady ﬂow and has harmonic solutions,
only ﬁve of which are necessary for present purposes:
ψ = sin2 θ

−Wr2
2
+ D
r

+ cosθ sin2 θ
2Ar3
3
−B
r2

+ Ecosθ
(5.38)
φ = cosθ

−Wr + D
r2

+

cos2 θ −1
3

Ar2 + B
r3

+ E
r
(5.39)
ur = cosθ

−W −2D
r3

+

cos2 θ −1
3

2Ar −3B
r4

−E
r2
(5.40)
uθ = −sinθ

−W + D
r3

−2cosθ sinθ

Ar + B
r4

(5.41)
The ﬁrst part, which involves W and D, is identical to that for steady translation. The
second, involving A and B, will provide the ﬂuid velocity gradient in the x1 direction,
and the third, involving E, permits a time-dependent particle (bubble) radius. The
W and A terms represent the ﬂuid ﬂow in the absence of the particle, and the D,B,
and E terms allow the boundary condition
(ur)r=R = dR
dt
(5.42)
to be satisﬁed provided
D = −WR3
2
,
B = 2AR5
3
,
E = −R2 dR
dt
(5.43)
In the absence of the particle the velocity of the ﬂuid at the origin, r = 0, is simply
−W in the x1 direction and the gradient of the velocity ∂u1/∂x1 = 4A/3. Hence A is
determined from the ﬂuid velocity gradient in the original frame as
A = 3
4
∂U
∂x∗
1
(5.44)

5.7 Unsteady Potential Flow
125
Now the force, F1, on the bubble in the x1 direction is given by
F1 = −2πR2
π

0
psinθ cosθdθ
(5.45)
which upon using Equations (5.35), (5.36), and (5.39) to (5.41) can be integrated to
yield
F1
2πR2ρ = −D
Dt(WR) −4
3RWA + 2
3RdV
dt
(5.46)
Reverting to the original coordinate system and using τ as the sphere volume for
convenience (τ = 4πR3/3), one obtains
F1 = −1
2ρτ dV
dt∗+ 3
2ρτ DU
Dt∗+ 1
2ρ(U −V) dτ
dt∗
(5.47)
where the two Lagrangian time derivatives are deﬁned by
D
Dt∗≡∂
∂t∗+ U ∂
∂x∗
1
(5.48)
d
dt∗≡∂
∂t∗+ V ∂
∂x∗
1
(5.49)
Equation 5.47 is an important result, and care must be taken not to confuse the
different time derivatives contained in it. Note that in the absence of bubble growth,
of viscous drag, and of body forces, the equation of motion that results from setting
F1 = mpdV/dt∗is

1 + 2mp
ρτ
 dV
dt∗= 3DU
Dt∗
(5.50)
where mp is the mass of the “particle.” Thus for a massless bubble the acceleration
of the bubble is three times the ﬂuid acceleration.
In a more comprehensive study of unsteady potential ﬂows Symington (1978)
has shown that the result for more general (i.e., noncolinear) accelerations of the
ﬂuid and particle is merely the vector equivalent of Equation (5.47):
Fi = −1
2ρτ dVi
dt∗+ 3
2ρτ DUi
Dt∗+ 1
2ρ(Ui −Vi) dτ
dt∗
(5.51)
where
d
dt∗= ∂
∂t∗+ Vj
∂
∂x∗
j
;
D
Dt∗= ∂
∂t∗+ Uj
∂
∂x∗
j
(5.52)
The ﬁrst term in Equation (5.51) represents the conventional added mass effect
due to the particle acceleration. The factor 3/2 in the second term due to the
ﬂuid acceleration may initially seem surprising. However, it is made up of two
components:
1.
1
2ρdVi/dt∗, which is the added mass effect of the ﬂuid acceleration
2. ρτDUi/Dt∗, which is a “buoyancy”-like force due to the pressure gradient
associated with the ﬂuid acceleration.

126
Translation of Bubbles
The last term in Equation (5.51) is caused by particle (bubble) volumetric growth,
dτ/dt∗, and is similar in form to the force on a source in a uniform stream.
Now it is necessary to ask how this force given by Equation (5.51) should be
used in the practical construction of an equation of motion for a particle. Fre-
quently, a viscous drag force FD
i , is quite arbitrarily added to Fi to obtain some
total “effective” force on the particle. Drag forces, FD
i , with the conventional forms
FD
i = CD · 1
2ρ|Ui −Vi|(Ui −Vi)πR2
(Re ≫1)
(5.53)
FD
i = 6πμ(Ui −Vi)R
(Re ≪1)
(5.54)
have both been employed in the literature. It is, however, important to recognize
that there is no fundamental analytical justiﬁcation for such superposition of these
forces. At high Reynolds numbers, we noted in the last section that experimentally
observed added masses are indeed quite close to those predicted by potential ﬂow
within certain parametric regimes, and hence the superposition has some experi-
mental justiﬁcation. At low Reynolds numbers, it is improper to use the results of
the potential ﬂow analysis. The appropriate analysis under these circumstances is
examined in the next section.
5.8 Unsteady Stokes Flow
In order to elucidate some of the issues raised in the last section, it is instructive
to examine solutions for the unsteady ﬂow past a sphere in low Reynolds num-
ber Stokes ﬂow. In the asymptotic case of zero Reynolds number, the solution of
Section 5.3 is unchanged by unsteadiness, and hence the solution at any instant
in time is identical to the steady-ﬂow solution for the same particle velocity. In
other words, since the ﬂuid has no inertia, it is always in static equilibrium. Thus
the instantaneous force is identical to that for the steady ﬂow with the same Vi(t).
The next step is therefore to investigate the effects of small but nonzero iner-
tial contributions. The Oseen solution provides some indication of the effect of the
convective inertial terms, uj∂ui/∂xj, in steady ﬂow. Here we investigate the effects
of the unsteady inertial term, ∂ui/∂t. Ideally it would be best to include both the
∂ui/∂t term and the Oseen approximation to the convective term, U∂ui/∂x. How-
ever, the resulting unsteady Oseen ﬂow is sufﬁciently difﬁcult that only small-time
expansions for the impulsively started motions of droplets and bubbles exist in the
literature (Pearcey and Hill 1956).
Consider, therefore the unsteady Stokes equations in the absence of the
convective inertial terms:
ρ ∂ui
∂t = −∂P
∂xi
+ μ ∂2ui
∂xj∂xj
(5.55)
Since both the equations and the boundary conditions used below are linear in ui,
we need only consider colinear particle and ﬂuid velocities in one direction, say
x1. The solution to the general case of noncolinear particle and ﬂuid velocities and
accelerations may then be obtained by superposition. As in Section 5.7 the colinear

5.8 Unsteady Stokes Flow
127
problem is solved by ﬁrst transforming to an accelerating coordinate frame, xi, ﬁxed
in the center of the particle so that P = p +ρx1dV/dt. Elimination of P by taking the
curl of Equation (5.55) leads to

L −1
ν
∂
∂t

Lψ = 0
(5.56)
where L is the same operator as deﬁned in Equation (5.37). Guided by both the
steady Stokes ﬂow and the unsteady potential ﬂow solution, one can anticipate a
solution of the form
ψ = sin2 θ f(r,t) + cosθ sin2 θ g(r,t) + cosθ h(t)
(5.57)
plus other spherical harmonic functions. The ﬁrst term has the form of the steady
Stokes ﬂow solution; the last term would be required if the particle were a grow-
ing spherical bubble. After substituting Equation (5.57) into Equation (5.56), the
equations for f,g,h are

L1 −1
ν
∂
∂t

L1f = 0
where
L1 ≡∂2
∂r2 −2
r2
(5.58)

L2 −1
ν
∂
∂t

L2g = 0
where
L2 ≡∂2
∂r2 −6
r2
(5.59)

L0 −1
ν
∂
∂t

L0h = 0
where
L0 ≡∂2
∂r2
(5.60)
Moreover, the form of the expression for the force, F1, on the spherical particle (or
bubble) obtained by evaluating the stresses on the surface and integrating is
F1
4
3ρπR3 = dV
dt +
1
r
∂2f
∂r∂t + ν
r
 2
r2
∂f
∂r + 2
r
∂2f
∂r2 −∂3f
∂r3

r=R
(5.61)
It transpires that this is independent of g or h. Hence only the solution to
Equation (5.58) for f(r,t) need be sought in order to ﬁnd the force on a spheri-
cal particle, and the other spherical harmonics that might have been included in
Equation (5.57) are now seen to be unnecessary.
Fourier or Laplace transform methods may be used to solve Equation (5.58) for
f(r,t), and we choose Laplace transforms. The Laplace transforms for the relative
velocity W(t), and the function f(r,t) are denoted by ˆW(s) and ˆf(r,s):
ˆW(s) =
∞

0
e−stW(t)dt;
ˆf(r,s) =
∞

0
e−stf(r,t)dt
(5.62)
Then Equation (5.58) becomes
(L1 −α2)L1ˆf = 0
(5.63)

128
Translation of Bubbles
where α2 = s/ν, and the solution after application of the condition that ˆu1(s,t) far
from the particle be equal to ˆW(s) is
ˆf = −
ˆWr2
2
+ A(s)
r
+ B(s)
1
r + α

e−αr
(5.64)
where α = (s/ν)
1
2 and A and B are as yet undetermined functions of s. Their determi-
nation requires application of the boundary conditions on r = R. In terms of A and
B the Laplace transform of the force ˆF1(s) is
ˆF1
4
3πR3ρ
=
ˆdV
dt +

s
r
∂ˆf
∂r + ν
R

−4 ˆW
r + 8A
r4 + CBe−αr

r=R
(5.65)
where
C = α4 + 3α3
r
+ 3α2
r2 + 8α
r3 + 8
r4
(5.66)
The classical solution (see Landau and Lifshitz 1959) is for a solid sphere (i.e.,
constant R) using the no-slip (Stokes) boundary condition for which
f(R,t) = ∂f
∂r
'''
r=R = 0
(5.67)
and hence
A = +
ˆWR3
2
+ 3 ˆWRν
2s
{1 + αR};
B = −3 ˆWRν
2s
eαR
(5.68)
so that
ˆF1
4
3πR3ρ
=
ˆdV
dt −3
2s ˆW −9ν ˆW
2R2 −9ν
1
2
2R s
1
2 ˆW
(5.69)
For a motion starting at rest at t = 0 the inverse Laplace transform of this yields
F1
4
3πR3ρ
= dV
dt −3
2
dW
dt −9ν
2R2 W −9
2R
	 ν
π

 1
2
t

0
dW(˜t)
d˜t
d˜t
(t −˜t)
1
2
(5.70)
where ˜t is a dummy time variable. This result must then be written in the original
coordinate framework with W = V −U and can be generalized to the noncolinear
case by superposition so that
Fi = −1
2τρ dVi
dt∗+ 3
2τρ dUi
dt∗+ 9τμ
2R2 (Ui −Vi) + 9τρ
2R
	 ν
π

 1
2
×
t∗

0
d(Ui −Vi)
d˜t
d˜t
(t∗−˜t)
1
2
(5.71)
where d/dt∗is the Lagrangian time derivative following the particle. This is then
the general force on the particle or bubble in unsteady Stokes ﬂow when the Stokes
boundary conditions are applied.

5.8 Unsteady Stokes Flow
129
Compare this result with that obtained from the potential ﬂow analysis,
Equation (5.51) with τ taken as constant. It is striking to observe that the coefﬁ-
cients of the added mass terms involving dVi/dt∗and dUi/dt∗are identical to those
of the potential ﬂow solution. On superﬁcial examination it might be noted that
dUi/dt∗appears in Equation (5.71) whereas DUi/Dt∗appears in (5.51); the differ-
ence is, however, of order Wj∂Ui/dxj and terms of this order have already been
dropped from the equation of motion on the basis that they were negligible com-
pared with the temporal derivatives like ∂Wi/∂t. Hence it is inconsistent with the
initial assumption to distinguish between d/dt∗and D/Dt∗in the present unsteady
Stokes ﬂow solution.
The term 9νW/2R2 in Equation (5.71) is, of course, the steady Stokes drag.
The new phenomenon introduced by this analysis is contained in the last term of
Equation (5.71). This is a fading memory term that is often named the Basset term
after one of its identiﬁers (Basset 1888). It results from the fact that additional vor-
ticity created at the solid particle surface due to relative acceleration diffuses into
the ﬂow and creates a temporary perturbation in the ﬂow ﬁeld. Like all diffusive
effects it produces an ω
1
2 term in the equation for oscillatory motion.
Before we conclude this section, comment should be included on two other ana-
lytical results. Morrison and Stewart (1976) have considered the case of a spherical
bubble for which the Hadamard-Rybczynski boundary conditions rather than the
Stokes conditions are applied. Then, instead of the conditions of Equation (5.67),
the conditions for zero normal velocity and zero shear stress on the surface require
that
f(R,t) =
∂2f
∂r2 −2
r
∂f
∂r

r=R
= 0
(5.72)
and hence in this case (see Morrison and Stewart 1976)
A(s) = +
ˆWR3
2
+ 3 ˆWR(1 + αR)
α2(3 + αR)
; B(s) = −3 ˆWRe+αR
α2(3 + αR)
(5.73)
so that
ˆF1
4
3πR3ρ
=
ˆdV
dt −9 ˆWν
R2 −3
2
ˆWs +
6ν ˆW
R2
%
1 + s
1
2 R/3ν
1
2
&
(5.74)
The inverse Laplace transform of this for motion starting at rest at t = 0 is
F1
4
3πR3ρ
= dV
dt −3
2
dW
dt −3νW
R2
(5.75)
−6ν
R2
t

0
dW(˜t)
d˜t
exp
9ν(t −˜t)
R2

erfc
⎧
⎨
⎩
9ν(t −˜t)
R2
 1
2
⎫
⎬
⎭d˜t
Comparing this with the solution for the Stokes conditions, we note that the ﬁrst
two terms are unchanged and the third term is the expected Hadamard-Rybczynski
steady drag term (see Equation (5.16)). The last term is signiﬁcantly different from
the Basset term in Equation (5.71) but still represents a receding memory.

130
Translation of Bubbles
The second interesting case is that for unsteady Oseen ﬂow, which essentially
consists of attempting to solve the Navier-Stokes equations with the convective ini-
tial terms approximated by Uj∂ui/∂xj. Pearcey and Hill (1956) have examined the
small-time behavior of droplets and bubbles started from rest when this term is
included in the equations.
5.9 Growing or Collapsing Bubbles
We now return to the discussion of higher Re ﬂow and speciﬁcally address the effects
due to bubble growth or collapse. A bubble that grows or collapses close to a bound-
ary may undergo translation due to the asymmetry induced by that boundary. A
relatively simple example of the analysis of this class of ﬂows is the case of the
growth or collapse of a spherical bubble near a plane boundary, a problem ﬁrst
solved by Herring (1941) (see also Davies and Taylor 1942, 1943). Assuming that
the only translational motion of the bubble (with velocity, W) is perpendicular to
the plane boundary, the geometry of the bubble and its image in the boundary will
be as shown in Figure 5.5. For convenience, we deﬁne additional polar cooordinates,
(˘r, ˘θ), with origin at the center of the image bubble. Assuming inviscid, irrotational
ﬂow, Herring (1941) and Davies and Taylor (1943) constructed the velocity poten-
tial, φ, near the bubble by considering an expansion in terms of R/h where h is the
distance of the bubble center from the boundary. Neglecting all terms that are of
order R3/h3 or higher, the velocity potential can be obtained by superposing the
individual contributions from the bubble source/sink, the image source/sink, the
bubble translation dipole, the image dipole, and one correction factor described
below. This combination yields
φ = −R2 ˙R
r
−WR3 cosθ
2r2
±

−R2 ˙R
˘r
+ WR3 cos ˘θ
2˘r2
−R5 ˙Rcosθ
8h2r2

(5.76)
The ﬁrst and third terms are the source/sink contributions from the bubble and the
image respectively. The second and fourth terms are the dipole contributions due
w
Spherical 
Bubble
h
h
Boundary
Image 
Bubble
r
y
x
w
r
θ
θ
∪
∪
Figure 5.5 Schematic of a bubble undergoing growth or collapse close to a plane boundary.
The associated translational velocity is denoted by W.

5.9 Growing or Collapsing Bubbles
131
to the translation of the bubble and the image. The last term arises because the
source/sink in the bubble needs to be displaced from the bubble center by an amount
R3/8h2 normal to the wall in order to satisfy the boundary condition on the surface
of the bubble to order R2/h2. All other terms of order R3/h3 or higher are neglected
in this analysis assuming that the bubble is sufﬁciently far from the boundary so
that h ≫R. Finally, the sign choice on the last three terms of Equation (5.76) is as
follows: the upper, positive sign pertains to the case of a solid boundary and the
lower, negative sign provides an approximate solution for a free surface boundary.
It remains to use this solution to determine the translational motion, W(t), nor-
mal to the boundary. This is accomplished by invoking the condition that there is
no net force on the bubble. Using the unsteady Bernoulli equation and the veloc-
ity potential and ﬂuid velocities obtained from Equation (5.76), Davies and Taylor
(1943) evaluate the pressure at the bubble surface and thereby obtain an expression
for the force, Fx, on the bubble in the x direction:
Fx = −2π
3
 d
dt
	
R3W

± 3
4
R2
h2
d
dt

R3 dR
dt

(5.77)
Adding the effect of buoyancy due to a component, gx, of the gravitational acceler-
ation in the x direction, Davies and Taylor then set the total force equal to zero and
obtain the following equation of motion for W(t):
d
dt
	
R3W

± 3
4
R2
h2
d
dt

R3 dR
dt

+ 4πR3gx
3
= 0
(5.78)
In the absence of gravity this corresponds to the equation of motion ﬁrst obtained
by Herring (1941). Many of the studies of growing and collapsing bubbles near
boundaries have been carried out in the context of underwater explosions (see Cole
1948). An example illustrating the solution of Equation (5.78) and the compari-
son with experimental data is included in Figure 5.6 taken from Davies and Taylor
(1943).
Another application of this analysis is to the translation of cavitation bubbles
near walls. Here the motivation is to understand the development of impulsive loads
on the solid surface (see Section 3.6), and therefore the primary focus is on bubbles
close to the wall so that the solution described above is of limited value since it
requires h ≫R. However, as discussed in Section 3.5, considerable progress has
been made in recent years in developing analytical methods for the solution of the
inviscid free surface ﬂows of bubbles near boundaries. One of the concepts that is
particularly useful in determining the direction of bubble translation is based on
a property of the ﬂow ﬁrst introduced by Kelvin (see Lamb 1932) and called the
Kelvin impulse. This vector property applies to the ﬂow generated by a ﬁnite particle
or bubble in a ﬂuid; it is denoted by IKi and deﬁned by
IKi = ρ

SB
φnidS
(5.79)

132
Translation of Bubbles
Free Surface
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3 .0
2.0
1.0
0
Time (sec)
Elevation of 
Bubble Center
Bubble 
Radius
Expt.
Calc.
Expt.
Calc.
Expt.
Bubble Radius
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
} 
} 
F i gu re 5. 6 D at a f ro m Davi es an d T ayl o r (1943) o n t h e mean rad i u s an d c en t r al el evat i o n o f
a bubble in oil generated by a spark-initiated explosion of 1.32 × 106 ergs situated 6.05 cm
below the free surface. The two measures of the bubble radius are one half of the horizontal
span (△) and one quarter of the sum of the horizontal and vertical spans (⊙). Theoretical
calculations using Equation (5.78) are indicated by the solid lines.
where φ is the velocity potential of the irrotational ﬂow, SB is the surface of the bub-
ble, and ni is the outward normal at that surface (deﬁned as positive into the bubble).
If one visualizes a bubble in a ﬂuid at rest, then the Kelvin impulse is the impulse
that would have to be applied to the bubble in order to generate the motions of
the ﬂuid related to the bubble motion. Benjamin and Ellis (1966) were the ﬁrst to
demonstrate the value of this property in determining the interaction between a
growing or collapsing bubble and a nearby boundary (see also Blake and Gibson
1987).
5.10 Equation of Motion
In a multiphase ﬂow with a very dilute discrete phase the ﬂuid forces discussed
in Sections 5.1 to 5.8 will determine the motion of the particles that constitute
that discrete phase. In this section we discuss the implications of some of the
ﬂuid force terms. The equation that determines the particle velocity, Vi, is gen-
erated by equating the total force, FT
i , on the particle to mpdVi/dt∗. Consider the
motion of a spherical particle or (bubble) of mass mp and volume τ (radius R) in a
uniformly accelerating ﬂuid. The simplest example of this is the vertical motion of
a particle under gravity, g, in a pool of otherwise quiescent ﬂuid. Thus the results
will be written in terms of the buoyancy force. However, the same results apply
to motion generated by any uniform acceleration of the ﬂuid, and hence g can be
interpreted as a general uniform ﬂuid acceleration (dU/dt). This will also allow some
tentative conclusions to be drawn concerning the relative motion of a particle in the

5.10 Equation of Motion
133
nonuniformly accelerating ﬂuid situations that can occur in general multiphase ﬂow.
For the motion of a sphere at small relative Reynolds number, ReW ≪1 (where
ReW = 2WR/ν and W is the typical magnitude of the relative velocity), only the
forces due to buoyancy and the weight of the particle need be added to Fi as given
by Equations (5.71) or (5.75) in order to obtain FT
i . This addition is simply given
by (ρτ −mp)gi where g is a vector in the vertically upward direction with magni-
tude equal to the acceleration due to gravity. On the other hand, at high relative
Reynolds numbers, ReW ≫1, one must resort to a more heuristic approach in which
the ﬂuid forces given by Equation (5.51) are supplemented by drag (and lift) forces
given by 1
2ρACij|Wj|Wj as in Equation (5.33). In either case it is useful to nondi-
mensionalize the resulting equation of motion so that the pertinent nondimensional
parameters can be identiﬁed.
Examine ﬁrst the case in which the relative velocity, W (deﬁned as positive in
the direction of the acceleration, g, and therefore positive in the vertically upward
direction of the rising bubble or sedimenting particle), is sufﬁciently small so that the
relative Reynolds number is much less than unity. Then, using the Stokes boundary
conditions, the equation governing W may be obtained from Equation (5.70) as
w + dw
dt∗
+

9
π(1 + 2mp/ρτ)
 1
2
t∗

0
dw
d˜t
d˜t
(t∗−˜t)
1
2
= 1
(5.80)
where the dimensionless time
t∗= t/tR
and
tR = R2(1 + 2mp/ρτ)/9ν
(5.81)
and w = W/W∞where W∞is the steady terminal velocity given by
W∞= 2R2g(1 −mp/ρτ)/9ν
(5.82)
In the absence of the Basset term the solution of Equation (5.80) is simply
w = 1 −e−t/tR
(5.83)
and the typical response time, tR, is called the relaxation time for particle velocity
(see, for example, Rudinger 1969). In the general case that includes the Basset term
the dimensionless solution, w(t∗), of Equation (5.80) depends only on the parameter
mp/ρτ (particle mass/displaced ﬂuid mass) appearing in the Basset term. Indeed,
the dimensionless Equation (5.80) clearly illustrates the fact that the Basset term
is much less important for solid particles in a gas where mp/ρτ ≫1 than it is for
bubbles in a liquid where mp/ρτ ≪1. Note also that for initial conditions of zero
relative velocity (w(0) = 0) the small-time solution of Equation (5.80) takes the form
w = t∗−
2
π
1
2 !
1 + 2mp/ρτ
" 1
2
t
3
2∗+ ...
(5.84)
Hence the initial acceleration at t = 0 is given dimensionally by 2g(1 −mp/ρτ)/
(1 + 2mp/ρτ) or 2g in the case of a massless bubble and −g in the case of a heavy

134
Translation of Bubbles
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
3
6
9
High Reynolds Number
Hadamard - Rybczynski
Boundary Condition with
m / τ = 0
m / 

τ = 0
1
10
100
1000
00
12
15
Reduced Time, t∗
Velocity, w/w
Figure 5.7 The velocity, W, of a particle released from rest at t∗= 0 in a quiescent ﬂuid and
its approach to terminal velocity, W∞. Horizontal axis is a dimensionless time deﬁned in text.
Solid lines represent the low Reynolds number solutions for various particle mass/displaced
mass ratios, mp/ρτ, and the Stokes boundary condition. The dashed line is for the Hadamard-
Rybczynski boundary condition and mp/ρτ = 0. The dash-dot line is the high Reynolds
number result; note that t∗is nondimensionalized differently in that case.
solid particle in a gas where mp ≫ρτ. Note also that the effect of the Basset term is
to reduce the acceleration of the relative motion, thus increasing the time required
to achieve terminal velocity.
Numerical solutions of the form of w(t∗) for various mp/ρτ are shown in
Figure 5.7 where the delay caused by the Basset term can be clearly seen. In
fact in the later stages of approach to the terminal velocity the Basset term dom-
inates over the added mass term, (dw/dt∗). The integral in the Basset term becomes
approximately 2t
1
2∗dw/dt∗so that the ﬁnal approach to w = 1 can be approximated by
w = 1 −Cexp

−t
1
2∗
.
9
π{1 + 2mp/ρτ}
 1
2

(5.85)
where C is a constant. As can be seen in Figure 5.7, the result is a much slower
approach to W∞for small mp/ρτ than for larger values of this quantity.
The case of a bubble with Hadamard-Rybczynski boundary conditions is very
similar except that
W∞= R2g(1 −mp/ρτ)/3ν
(5.86)
and the equation for w(t∗) is
w + 3
2
dw
dt∗
+ 2
t∗

0
dw
d˜t (t∗−˜t)d˜t = 1
(5.87)

5.11 Equation of Motion
135
where the function, (ξ), is given by
(ξ) = exp

1 + 2mp
ρτ

ξ

erfc

1 + 2mp
ρτ

ξ
 1
2

(5.88)
For the purposes of comparison the form of w(t∗) for the Hadamard-Rybczynski
boundary condition with mp/ρτ = 0 is also shown in Figure 5.7. Though the altered
Basset term leads to a more rapid approach to terminal velocity than occurs for the
Stokes boundary condition, the difference is not qualitatively signiﬁcant.
If the terminal Reynolds number is much greater than unity then, in the absence
of particle growth, Equation (5.51) heuristically supplemented with a drag force
of the form of Equation (5.53) leads to the following equation of motion for
unidirectional motion:
w2 + dw
dt∗
= 1
(5.89)
where w = W/W∞,t∗= t/tR,
tR = (1 + 2mp/ρτ)(2R/3CDg(1 −mp/τρ))
1
2
(5.90)
and
W∞= [8Rg(1 −mp/ρτ)/3CD]
1
2
(5.91)
The solution to Equation (5.89) for w(0) = 0,
w = tanht∗
(5.92)
is also shown in Figure 5.7 though, of course, t∗has a different deﬁnition in this case.
For the purposes of reference in Section 5.12 note that, if we deﬁne a Reynolds
number, Re, Froude number, Fr, and drag coefﬁcient, CD, by
Re = 2W∞R
ν
;
Fr =
W∞
[2Rg(1 −mp/ρτ)]
1
2
(5.93)
then the expressions for the terminal velocities, W∞, given by Equations (5.82),
(5.86), and (5.91) can be written as
Fr = (Re/18)
1
2 , Fr = (Re/12)
1
2 ,
and
Fr = (4/3CD)
1
2
(5.94)
respectively. Indeed, dimensional analysis of the governing Navier-Stokes equations
requires that the general expression for the terminal velocity can be written as
F(Re,Fr) = 0
(5.95)
or, alternatively, if CD is deﬁned as 4/3Fr2, then it could be written as
F∗(Re,CD) = 0
(5.96)

136
Translation of Bubbles
5.11 Magnitude of Relative Motion
Qualitative estimates of the magnitude of the relative motion in multiphase ﬂows
can be made from the analyses of the last section. Consider a general steady ﬂuid
ﬂow characterized by a velocity, U, and a typical dimension, ℓ; it may, for exam-
ple, be useful to visualize the ﬂow in a converging nozzle of length, ℓ, and mean
axial velocity, U. A particle in this ﬂow will experience a typical ﬂuid acceleration
(or effective g) of U2/ℓfor a typical time given by ℓ/U and hence will develop a
velocity, W, relative to the ﬂuid. In many practical ﬂows it is necessary to determine
the maximum value of W (denoted by WM) that could develop under these circum-
stances. To do so, one must ﬁrst consider whether the available time, ℓ/U, is large
or small compared with the typical time, tR, required for the particle to reach its
terminal velocity as given by Equation (5.81) or (5.90). If tR ≪ℓ/U then WM is given
by Equation (5.82), (5.86), or (5.91) for W∞and qualitative estimates for WM/U
would be

1 −mp
ρτ
UR
ν
R
ℓ

and

1 −mp
ρτ
 1
2 1
C
1
2
D
R
ℓ
 1
2
(5.97)
when WR/ν ≪1 and WR/ν ≫1 respectively. We refer to this as the quasistatic
regime. On the other hand, if tT ≫ℓ/U, WM can be estimated as W∞ℓ/UtR so that
WM/U is of the order of
2(1 −mp/ρτ)
(1 + 2mp/ρτ)
(5.98)
for all WR/ν. This is termed the transient regime.
In practice, WR/ν will not be known in advance. The most meaningful quantities
that can be evaluated prior to any analysis are a Reynolds number, UR/ν, based on
ﬂow velocity and particle size, a size parameter
X = R
ℓ
''''1 −mp
ρτ
''''
(5.99)
and the parameter
Y =
'''' 1 −mp
ρτ
''''
/
1 + 2mp
ρτ

(5.100)
The resulting regimes of relative motion are displayed graphically in Figure 5.8.
The transient regime in the upper right-hand sector of the graph is characterized by
large relative motion, as suggested by Equation (5.98). The quasistatic regimes for
WR/ν ≫1 and WR/ν ≪1 are in the lower right- and left-hand sectors respectively.
The shaded boundaries between these regimes are, of course, approximate and are
functions of the parameter Y, which must have a value in the range 0 < Y < 1. As
one proceeds deeper into either of the quasistatic regimes, the magnitude of the
relative velocity, WM/U, becomes smaller and smaller. Thus, homogeneous ﬂows
(see Chapter 6) in which the relative motion is neglected require that either X ≪
Y2 or X ≪Y/(UR/ν). Conversely, if either of these conditions is violated, relative
motion must be included in the analysis.

5.12 Deformation Due to Translation
137
102
10
INCR, Wm/U
INCR, Wm/U
10–3
10–4
10–2
Wm/U = O(10–1)
X = 9Y / (UR/v)
X = Y2
Wm/U = O(10–2)
Wm/U = O (10–1)
Quasistatic
Regime
(High WR/v)
Transient Regime
Quasistatic Regime
(Small WR/v)
Wm/U = O (10–2)
10–3
10–2
10–1
102
103
10
UR
v
= O (2Y)
Wm
v
mP

τ
X =         1 –        
R
O
10–1
Figure 5.8 Schematic of the various regimes of relative motion between a particle and the
surrounding ﬂow.
5.12 Deformation Due to Translation
In the case of bubbles, drops, or deformable particles it has thus far been tacitly
assumed that their shape is known and constant. Since the ﬂuid stresses due to trans-
lation may deform such a particle, we must now consider not only the parameters
governing the deformation but also the consequences in terms of the translation
velocity and the shape. We concentrate here on bubbles and drops in which sur-
face tension, S, acts as the force restraining deformation. However, the reader will
realize that there would exist a similar analysis for deformable elastic particles. Fur-
thermore, the discussion will be limited to the case of steady translation, caused by
gravity, g. Clearly the results could be extended to cover translation due to ﬂuid
acceleration by using an effective value of g as indicated in the last section.
The characteristic force maintaining the sphericity of the bubble or drop is given
by SR. Deformation will occur when the characteristic anisotropy in the ﬂuid forces
approaches SR; the magnitude of the anisotropic ﬂuid force will be given by μW∞R
for W∞R/ν ≪1 or by ρW2
∞R2 for W∞R/ν ≫1. Thus deﬁning a Weber number,
We = 2ρW2
∞R/S, deformation will occur when We/Re approaches unity for Re ≪1 or

138
Translation of Bubbles
Table 5.3. Values of the Haberman-Morton numbers,
Hm = gμ4/ρS3, for various liquids at normal temperatures.
Filtered Water
0.25 × 10−10
Turpentine
2.41 × 10−9
Methyl Alcohol
0.89 × 10−10
Olive Oil
7.16 × 10−3
Mineral Oil
1.45 × 10−2
Syrup
0.92 × 106
when We approaches unity for Re ≫1. But evaluation of these parameters requires
knowledge of the terminal velocity, W∞, and this may also be a function of the
shape. Thus one must start by expanding the functional relation of Equation (5.95)
which determines W∞to include the Weber number:
F(Re,We,Fr) = 0
(5.101)
This relation determines W∞where Fr is given by Equations (5.93). Since all three
dimensionless coefﬁcients in this functional relation include both W∞and R, it is
simpler to rearrange the arguments by deﬁning another nondimensional parameter
known as the Haberman-Morton number, Hm, which is a combination of We, Re,
and Fr but does not involve W∞. The Haberman-Morton number is deﬁned as
Hm =
We3
Fr2Re4 = gμ4
ρS3

1 −mp
ρτ

(5.102)
In the case of a bubble, mp ≪ρτ and therefore the factor in parenthesis is usu-
ally omitted. Then Hm becomes independent of the bubble size. It follows that the
terminal velocity of a bubble or drop can be represented by functional relation
F(Re,Hm,Fr) = 0
or
F∗(Re,Hm,CD) = 0
(5.103)
and we shall conﬁne the following discussion to the nature of this relation for
bubbles (mp ≪ρτ).
Some values for the Haberman-Morton number (with mp/ρτ = 0) for various
saturated liquids are shown in Figure 5.9; other values are listed in Table 5.3. Note
that for all but the most viscous liquids, Hm is much less than unity. It is, of course,
possible to have ﬂuid accelerations much larger than g; however, this is unlikely to
cause Hm values greater than unity in practical multiphase ﬂows of most liquids.
Having introduced the Haberman-Morton number, we can now identify the
conditions for departure from sphericity. For low Reynolds numbers (Re ≪1) the
terminal velocity will be given by Re ∝Fr2. Then the shape will deviate from
spherical when We ≥Re or, using Re ∝Fr2 and Hm = We3Fr−2Re−4, when
Re ≥Hm−1
2
(5.104)
Thus if Hm < 1 all bubbles for which Re ≪1 will remain spherical. However, there
are some unusual circumstances in which Hm > 1 and then there will be a range
of Re, namely Hm−1
2 < Re < 1, in which signiﬁcant departure from sphericity might
occur.

5.12 Deformation Due to Translation
139
Toluene
Oxygen
Nitrogen
Helium - 4
Helium - 4
Methane
Water
Sodium
Mercury
Freon - 12
Oxygen
Nitrogen
Haberman - Morton Parameter, Hm   
Reduced Temperature, (T-TT)/(TC - TT)
10-10
10-12
10-14
10-8
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure 5.9 Values of the Haberman-Morton parameter, Hm, for various pure substances as a
function of reduced temperature.
For high Reynolds numbers (Re ≫1) the terminal velocity is given by Fr ≈O(1)
and distortion will occur if We > 1. Using Fr = 1 and Hm = We3Fr−2Re−4 it follows
that departure from sphericity will occur when
Re ≫Hm−1
4
(5.105)
Consequently, in the common circumstances in which Hm < 1, there exists a range
of Reynolds numbers, Re < Hm−1
4 , in which sphericity is maintained; nonspherical
shapes occur when Re > Hm−1
4 . For Hm > 1 departure from sphericity has already
occurred at Re < 1 as discussed above.
Experimentally, it is observed that the initial departure from sphericity causes
ellipsoidal bubbles that may oscillate in shape and have oscillatory trajectories (Har-
tunian and Sears 1957). As the bubble size is further increased to the point at which
We ≈20, the bubble acquires a new asymptotic shape, known as a “spherical-cap
bubble.” A photograph of a typical spherical-cap bubble is shown in Figure 5.10;
the notation used to describe the approximate geometry of these bubbles is sketched
in Figure 5.11. Spherical-cap bubbles were ﬁrst investigated by Davies and Taylor
(1950), who observed that the terminal velocity is simply related to the radius of
curvature of the cap, RC, or to the equivalent volumetric radius, RB, by
W∞= 2
3(gRC)
1
2 = (gRB)
1
2
(5.106)

140
Translation of Bubbles
Figure 5.10 Photograph of a spherical cap bubble rising in water (from Davenport, Bradshaw,
an d R i ch ard so n 1967).

M
Bubble volume
= 4  R
3
B
3
RC
Figure 5.11 Notation used to describe the geometry of spherical cap bubbles.
Assuming a typical laminar drag coefﬁcient of CD = 0.5, a spherical solid particle
with the same volume would have a terminal velocity,
W∞= (8gRB/3CD)
1
2 = 2.3(gRB)
1
2
(5.107)
which is substantially higher than the spherical-cap bubble. From Equation (5.106)
it follows that the effective CD for spherical-cap bubbles is 2.67 based on the area
πR2
B.
Wegener and Parlange (1973) have reviewed the literature on spherical-cap
bubbles. Figure 5.12 is taken from from their review and shows that the value of
W∞/(gRB)
1
2 reaches a value of about 1 at a Reynolds number, Re = 2W∞RB/ν, of
about 200 and, thereafter, remains fairly constant. Visualization of the ﬂow reveals

5.12 Deformation Due to Translation
141
90
80
70
60
50
40
Angle, M
1.2
2.0
2.4
2.8
3.2
1.1
1.0
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
10
102
103
104
105
W / (gRB)1/2
Reynolds Number, Re = 2 W RB / v
CD
Figure 5.12 Data on the terminal velocity, W∞/(gRB)
1
2 , and the conical angle, θM, for
spherical-cap bubbles studied by a number of different investigators (adapted from Wegener
an d P arl an ge 1973).
that, for Reynolds numbers less than about 360, the wake behind the bubble is
laminar and takes the form of a toroidal vortex (similar to a Hill (1894) spherical
vortex) shown in the left-hand photograph of Figure 5.13. The wake undergoes tran-
sition to turbulence about Re = 360, and bubbles at higher Re have turbulent wakes
as illustrated in the right side of Figure 5.13. We should add that scuba divers have
long observed that spherical-cap bubbles rising in the ocean seem to have a maxi-
mum size of the order of 30 cm in diameter. When they grow larger than this, they
ﬁssion into two (or more) bubbles. However, the author has found no quantitative
study of this ﬁssion process.
In closing, we note that the terminal velocities of the bubbles discussed here
may be represented according to the functional relation of Equations (5.103) as a
family of CD(Re) curves for various Hm. Figure 5.14 has been extracted from the
experimental data of Haberman and Morton (1953) and shows the dependence of

142
Translation of Bubbles
Figure 5.13 Flow visualizations of spherical-cap bubbles. On the left is a bubble with a
laminar wak e at Re ≈ 180 (f ro m W egen er an d P arl an ge 1973) an d , o n t h e r i gh t , a bubble
with a turbulen t wak e at Re ≈ 17,000 (f ro m W egen er, Sundell an d Parlange 1971, rep r oduced
with permission of the authors).
Liquid
Hm
G    1.17 × 10–8    Water + 13% Ethyl Alcohol
H    2.41 × 10–9    Turpentine
J     4.3 × 10–10     Varsol
K    1.08 × 10–10   Cold Filtered Water
L    0.89 × 10–10   Methyl Alcohol
M   0.25 × 10 –10  Filtered Water
Liquid
Hm
A    9.2 × 105            Syrup
B    1.45 × 10–2         Mineral Oil
C     7.2 × 10–3          Olive Oil
D    1.5 × 10–4  →   Water + Corn Syrup
               2.1 × 10–3  
E   1.75 × 10 –7         Water + 56% Glycerine
F   4.18 × 10 –8         Water + 42% Glycerine
Reynolds Number, Re
Drag Coefficient, CD
CD = 24
Re
CD = 16
Re
B
E
H
J
G
K
L
M
A
D
F
C
102
10
1
10–1
10–1
1
10
102
103
104
Figure 5.14 Drag coefﬁcients, CD, for bubbles as a function of the Reynolds number, Re, for
a range of Haberman-Morton numbers, Hm, as shown. Data from Haberman and Morton
(1953).
CD(Re) on Hm at intermediate Re. The curves cover the spectrum from the low Re
spherical bubbles to the high Re spherical cap bubbles. The data demonstrate that,
at higher values of Hm, the drag coefﬁcient makes a relatively smooth transition

References
143
from the low Reynolds number result to the spherical cap value of about 2.7. Lower
values of Hm result in a deep minimum in the drag coefﬁcient around a Reynolds
number of about 200.
References
Basset, A.B. (1888). A treatise on hydrodynamics, II. Reprinted by Dover, NY, 1961.
Batchelor, G.K. (1967). An introduction to ﬂuid dynamics. Cambridge Univ. Press.
Benjamin, T.B. and Ellis, A.T. (1966). The collapse of cavitation bubbles and the pressures
thereby produced against solid boundaries. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc., London, Ser. A, 260,
221–240.
Blake, J.R. and Gibson, D.C. (1987). Cavitation bubbles near boundaries. Ann. Rev. Fluid
Mech., 19, 99–124.
Brennen, C.E. (1982). A review of added mass and ﬂuid inertial forces. Naval Civil Eng. Lab.,
Port Hueneme, Calif., Report CR82.010.
Cole, R.H. (1948). Underwater explosions. Princeton Univ. Press (reprinted by Dover, 1965).
Cunningham, E. (1910). On the velocity of steady fall of spherical particles through ﬂuid
medium. Proc. Roy. Soc. A, 83, 357–365.
Davenport, W.G., Bradshaw, A.V., and Richardson, F.D. (1967). Behavior of spherical-cap
bubbles in liquid metals. J. Iron Steel Inst., 205, 1034–1042.
Davies, C.N. (1966). Aerosol science. Academic Press, New York.
Davies, R.M. and Taylor, G.I. (1942). The vertical motion of a spherical bubble and the
pressure surrounding it. In The Scientiﬁc Papers of G.I.Taylor, III, 320–336, edited by
G.K.Batchelor, Cambridge Univ. Press.
Davies, R.M. and Taylor, G.I. (1943). The motion and shape of the hollow produced by
an explosion in a liquid. In The Scientiﬁc Papers of G.I.Taylor, III, 337–353, edited by
G.K.Batchelor, Cambridge Univ. Press.
Davies, R.M. and Taylor, G.I. (1950). The mechanics of large bubbles rising through
extended liquids and through liquids in tubes. Proc. Roy. Soc. A, 200, 375–390.
Einstein, A. (1956). Investigations on the theory of Brownian movement. Dover Publ., Inc.,
New York.
Green,
H.L. and Lane,
W.R. (1964).
Particulate clouds:
dusts,
smokes and mists.
E. and F.N. Spon Ltd., London.
Haberman, W.L. and Morton, R.K. (1953). An experimental investigation of the drag and
shape of air bubbles rising in various liquids. David Taylor Model Basin, Washington,
Report No. 802.
Hadamard, J. (1911). Movement permanent lent d’une sphere liquide et visqueuse dans un
liquide visqueux. Comptes Rendus, 152, 1735.
Harper, J.F., Moore, D.W. and Pearson, J.R.A. (1967). The effect of the variation of surface
tension with temperature on the motion of bubbles and drops. J. Fluid Mech., 27, 361–366.
Hartunian, R.A. and Sears, W.R. (1957). On the instability of small gas bubbles moving
uniformly in various liquids. J. Fluid Mech., 3, 27–47.
Herring, C. (1941). The theory of the pulsations of the gas bubbles produced by an
underwater explosion. US Nat. Defence Res. Comm. Report.
Hill, M.J.M. (1894). On a spherical vortex. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc., London, Ser. A., 185,
213–245.
Kaplun, S. and Lagerstrom, P.A. (1957). Asymptotic expansions of Navier-Stokes solutions
for small Reynolds numbers. J. Math. Mech., 6, 585–593.
Kennard, E.M. (1967). Irrotational ﬂow of frictionless ﬂuid, mostly of invariable density.
David Taylor Model Basin, Washington, Report No. 2299.
Keulegan, G.H. and Carpenter, L.H. (1958). Forces on cylinders and plates in an oscillating
ﬂuid. U.S. Nat. Bur. Standards J. Res., 60, No. 5, 423–440.
Klyachko, L.S. (1934). Heating and ventilation. USSR Journal Otopl. i Ventil., No.4.

144
Translation of Bubbles
Lamb, H. (1932). Hydrodynamics. Cambridge Univ. Press.
Landau, L.E. and Lifshitz, E.M. (1959). Fluid Mechanics. Pergamon Press, NY.
Moller, W. (1938). Experimentelle Untersuchungen zur Hydrodynamik der Kugel. Physik.
Z., 39, 57–80.
Morrison, F.A. and Stewart, M.B. (1976). Small bubble motion in an accelerating liquid.
ASME J. Appl. Mech., 43, 399–403.
Morison, J.R., O’Brien, M.P., Johnson, J.W., and Schaaf, S.A. (1950). The forces exerted by
surface waves on piles. AIME Trans., Petroleum Branch, 189, 149–154.
Oseen, C.W. (1910). ¨Uber die Stokessche Formel und ¨uber die verwandte Aufgabe in der
Hydrodynamik. Arkiv Mat., Astron. och Fysik, 6, No. 29.
Patton, K.T. (1965). Tables of hydrodynamic mass factors for translational motion. ASME
Paper, 65-WA/UNT-2.
Pearcey, T. and Hill, G.W. (1956). The accelerated motion of droplets and bubbles.
Australian J. of Phys., 9, 19–30.
Proudman, I. and Pearson, J.R.A. (1957). Expansions at small Reynolds number for the ﬂow
past a sphere and a circular cylinder. J. Fluid Mech., 2, 237–262.
Rudinger, G. (1969). Relaxation in gas-particle ﬂow. In Nonequilibrium ﬂows. Part 1, (ed:
P.P.Wegener), Marcel Dekker, New York and London.
Rybzynski, W. (1911). ¨Uber die fortschreitende Bewegung einer ﬂ¨ussigen Kugel in einem
z¨ahen Medium. Bull. Acad. Sci. Cracovie, A, 40.
Sarpkaya, T. and Isaacson, M. (1981). Mechanics of wave forces on offshore structures. Van
Nostrand Reinhold Co., NY.
Stokes, G.G. (1851). On the effect of the internal friction of ﬂuids on the motion of
pendulums. Trans. Camb. Phil. Soc., 9, Part II, 8–106.
Symington, W.A. (1978). Analytical studies of steady and non-steady motion of a bubbly
liquid. Ph.D. Thesis, Calif. Inst. of Tech.
Taneda, S. (1956). Studies on wake vortices (III). Experimental investigation of the wake
behind a sphere at low Reynolds number. Rep. Res. Inst. Appl. Mech., Kyushu Univ., 4,
99–105.
Torobin, L.B. and Gauvin, W.H. (1959). Fundamental aspects of solids-gas ﬂow. Part II. The
sphere wake in steady laminar ﬂuids. Canadian J. Chem. Eng., 37, 167–176.
Wegener, P.P., Sundell, R.E., and Parlange, J.-Y. (1971). Spherical-cap bubbles rising in
liquids. Z. Flugwissenschaften, 19, 347–352.
Wegener, P.P. and Parlange, J.-Y. (1973). Spherical-cap bubbles. Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech., 5,
79–100.
Yih, C.-S. (1969). Fluid mechanics. McGraw-Hill Book Co.
Young, N.O., Goldstein, J.S., and Block, M.J. (1959). The motion of bubbles in a vertical
temperature gradient. J. Fluid Mech., 6, 350–356.

6
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows
6.1 Introduction
When the concentration of bubbles in a ﬂow exceeds some small value the bubbles
will begin to have a substantial effect on the ﬂuid dynamics of the suspending
liquid. Analyses of the dynamics of this multiphase mixture then become signiﬁ-
cantly more complicated and important new phenomena may be manifest. In this
chapter we discuss some of the analyses and phenomena that may occur in bubbly
multiphase ﬂow.
In the larger context of practical multiphase (or multicomponent) ﬂows one
ﬁnds a wide range of homogeneities, from those consisting of one phase (or compo-
nent) that is very ﬁnely dispersed within the other phase (or component) to those
that consist of two separate streams of the two phases (or components). In between
are topologies that are less readily deﬁned. The two asymptotic states are conve-
niently referred to as homogeneous and separated ﬂow. One of the consequences of
the topology is the extent to which relative motion between the phases can occur.
It is clear that two different streams can readily travel at different velocities, and
indeed such relative motion is an implicit part of the study of separated ﬂows. On
the other hand, it is clear from the results of Section 5.11 that any two phases could,
in theory, be sufﬁciently well mixed and the disperse particle size sufﬁciently small
so as to eliminate any signiﬁcant relative motion. Thus the asymptotic limit of truly
homogeneous ﬂow precludes relative motion. Indeed, the term homogeneous ﬂow
is sometimes used to denote a ﬂow with negligible relative motion. Many bubbly
ﬂows come close to this limit and can, to a ﬁrst approximation, be considered to be
homogeneous. In the present chapter we shall consider some of the properties of
homogeneous bubbly ﬂows.
In the absence of relative motion the governing mass and momentum conserva-
tion equations reduce to a form similar to those for single-phase ﬂow. The effective
mixture density, ρ, is deﬁned by
ρ =
 
N
αNρN
(6.1)
145

146
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows
where αN is the volume fraction of each of the N components or phases whose
individual densities are ρN. Then the continuity and momentum equations for the
homogeneous mixture are
∂ρ
∂t + ∂
∂xj
(ρuj) = 0
(6.2)
∂
∂t(ρui) + ∂
∂xj
(ρuiuj) = −∂p
∂xi
+ ρgi
(6.3)
in the absence of viscous effects. As in single-phase ﬂows the existence of a
barotropic relation, p = f(ρ), would complete the system of equations. In some mul-
tiphase ﬂows it is possible to establish such a barotropic relation, and this allows
one to anticipate (with, perhaps, some minor modiﬁcation) that the entire spec-
trum of phenomena observed in single-phase gas dynamics can be expected in such
a two-phase ﬂow. In this chapter we shall not dwell on this established body of
literature. Rather, we shall conﬁne attention to the identiﬁcation of a barotropic
relation (if any) and focus on some ﬂows in which there are major departures from
the conventional gas dynamic behavior.
From a thermodynamic point of view the existence of a barotropic relation,
p = f(ρ), and its associated sonic speed,
c =
 dp
dρ
 1
2
(6.4)
implies that some thermodynamic property is considered to be held constant. In
single-phase gas dynamics this quantity is usually the entropy and occasionally the
temperature. In multiphase ﬂows the alternatives are neither simple nor obvious. In
single-phase gas dynamics it is commonly assumed that the gas is in thermodynamic
equilibrium at all times. In multiphase ﬂows it is usually the case that the two phases
are not in thermodynamic equilibrium with each other. These are some of the ques-
tions one must address in considering an appropriate homogeneous ﬂow model for
a multiphase ﬂow. We begin in the next section by considering the sonic speed of a
two-phase or two-component mixture.
6.2 Sonic Speed
Consider an inﬁnitesmal volume of a mixture consisting of a disperse phase denoted
by the subscript A and a continuous phase denoted by the subscript B. For conve-
nience assume the initial volume to be unity. Denote the initial densities by ρA and
ρB and the initial pressure in the continuous phase by pB. Surface tension, S, can be
included by denoting the radius of the disperse phase particles by R. Then the initial
pressure in the disperse phase is pA = pB + 2S/R.
Now consider that the pressure, pA, is changed to pA + δpA where the difference
δpA is inﬁnitesmal. Any dynamics associated with the resulting ﬂuid motions will be
ignored for the moment. It is assumed that a new equilibrium state is achieved and
that, in the process, a mass, δm, is transferred from the continuous to the disperse

6.2 Sonic Speed
147
phase. It follows that the new disperse and continuous phase masses are ρAαA + δm
and ρBαB −δm respectively where, of course, αB = 1 −αA. Hence the new disperse
and continuous phase volumes are respectively
(ρAαA + δm)
0
ρA + ∂ρA
∂pA
''
QAδpA

(6.5)
and
(ρBαB −δm)
0
ρB + ∂ρB
∂pB
''
QBδpB

(6.6)
where the thermodynamic constraints QA and QB are, as yet, unspeciﬁed. Adding
these together and subtracting unity, one obtains the change in total volume, δV,
and hence the sonic velocity, c, as
c−2 = −ρ δV
δpB
''
δpB→0
(6.7)
c−2 = ρ
αA
ρA
∂ρA
∂pA
''
QA
δpA
δpB
+ αB
ρB
∂ρB
∂pB
''
QB −(ρB −ρA)
ρAρB
δm
δpB

(6.8)
where, as deﬁned in Equation (6.1), ρ = ρAαA+ρBαB. If one assumes that no disperse
particles are created or destroyed, then the ratio δpA/δpB may be determined by
evaluating the new disperse particle size R+δR commensurate with the new disperse
phase volume and using the relation δpA = δpB −2S
R2 δR:
δpA
δpB
=

1 −
2S
3αAρAR
δm
δpB
/
1 −
2S
3ρAR
∂ρA
∂pA
''
QA

(6.9)
Substituting this into Equation (6.8) and using, for convenience, the notation
1
c2
A
= ∂ρA
∂pA
''
QA;
1
c2
B
= ∂ρB
∂pB
''
QB
(6.10)
the result can be written as
1
ρc2 = αB
ρBc2
B
+

αA
ρAc2
A −δm
δpB

1
ρA −1
ρB +
2S
3ρAρBc2
AR


1 −
2S
3ρAc2
AR

(6.11)
This is incomplete in several respects. First, appropriate thermodynamic constraints
QA and QB must be identiﬁed. Second, some additional constraint is necessary to
establish the relation δm/δpB. But before entering into a discussion of appropriate
practical choices for these constraints (see Section 6.3) several simpler versions of
Equation (6.11) should be discussed.
We ﬁrst observe that in the absence of any exchange of mass between the
components the result reduces to
1
ρc2 = αB
ρBc2
B
+
αA
ρAc2
A

1 −
2S
3ρAc2
AR

(6.12)

148
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows
In most practical cases one can neglect the surface tension effect since S ≪ρAc2
AR
and Equation (6.12) becomes
1
c2 = {ρAαA + ρBαB}
 αB
ρBc2
B
+ αA
ρAc2
A

(6.13)
In other words, the acoustic impedance 1/ρc2 for the mixture is simply given by the
average of the acoustic impedance of the components weighted according to their
volume fractions.
Perhaps the most dramatic effects occur when one of the components is a gas
(subscript G), which is much more compressible than the other component (a liquid
or solid, subscript L). In the absence of surface tension (p = pG = pL), according
to Equation (6.13), it matters not whether the gas is the continuous or the dis-
perse phase. Denoting αG by α for convenience and assuming the gas is perfect
and behaves polytropically according to ρk
G ∝p, Equation (6.13) may be written as
1
c2 = [ρL(1 −α) + ρGα]
 α
kp + (1 −α)
ρLc2
L

(6.14)
This is the familiar form for the sonic speed in a two-component gas/liquid or
gas/solid ﬂow. In many applications p/ρLc2
L ≪1 and hence this expression may be
further simpliﬁed to
1
c2 = α
kp [ρL(1 −α) + ρGα]
(6.15)
Note however, that this approximation will not hold for small values of the gas
volume fraction α.
Equation (6.14) and its special properties were ﬁrst identiﬁed by Minnaert
(1933). It clearly exhibits one of the most remarkable features of the sonic veloc-
ity of gas/liquid or gas/solid mixtures. The sonic velocity of the mixture can be very
much smaller than that of either of its constituents. This is illustrated in Figure 6.1
where the speed of sound, c, in an air/water bubbly mixture is plotted against the
air volume fraction, α. Results are shown for both isothermal (k = 1) and adia-
batic (k = 1.4) bubble behavior using Equation (6.14) or (6.15), the curves for these
two equations being indistinguishable on the scale of the ﬁgure. Note that sonic
velocities as low as 20 m/s occur.
Also shown in Figure 6.1 is experimental data of Karplus (1958) and Gouse
and Brown (1964). We shall see later (Section 6.8) that the dynamics of the bubble
volume change cause the sound speed to be a function of the frequency. Data for
sound frequencies of 1.0 kHz and 0.5 kHz are shown, as well as data extrapolated to
zero frequency. The last should be compared with the analytical results presented
here since the analysis of this section neglects bubble dynamic effects. Note that the
data corresponds to the isothermal theory, indicating that the heat transfer between
the bubbles and the liquid is sufﬁcient to maintain the air in the bubbles at roughly
constant temperature.
Further discussion of the acoustic characteristics of dilute bubbly mixtures is
delayed until Section 6.8.

6.3 Sonic Speed with Change of Phase
149
100
80
60
Theory (k)
1.4 (Adiabatic)
40
Sonic Velocity, (m/sec)
Air Volume Fraction, 
20
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.0 (Isothermal)
Figu re 6.1 The sonic velocity in a bubbly air/water mixture at atmospheric p ressu re for k = 1.0
an d 1.4. E xp eri men t al d at a p resen t ed i s f r o m Karp l u s ( 1958) an d Go u s e an d B r o w n ( 1964)
for frequencies of 1 kHz (⊙), 0.5 kHz (2), and extrapolated to zero frequency(△).
6.3 Sonic Speed with Change of Phase
Turning now to the behavior of a two-phase rather than two-component mixture, it
is necessary not only to consider the additional thermodynamic constraint required
to establish the mass exchange, δm, but also to reconsider the two thermodynamic
constraints, QA and QB, which were implicit in the two-component analysis. These
latter constraints were implicit in the choice of the polytropic index, k, for the gas
and the choice of the sonic speed, cL, for the liquid. Note that a nonisentropic
choice for k (for example, k = 1) implies that heat is exchanged between the com-
ponents, and yet this heat transfer process was not explicitly considered, nor was an
overall thermodynamic contraint such as might be placed on the global change in
entropy.
We shall see that the two-phase case requires more intimate knowledge of these
factors because the results are more sensitive to the thermodynamic constraints.
In an ideal, inﬁnitely homogenized mixture of vapor and liquid the phases would
everywhere be in such close proximity to each other that heat transfer between the
phases would occur instantaneously. The entire mixture of vapor and liquid would
then always be in thermodynamic equilibrium. Indeed, one model of the response of
the mixture, called the homogeneous equilibrium model, assumes this to be the case.
In practice, however, one seeks results for bubbly ﬂows and mist ﬂows in which heat
transfer between the phases does not occur so readily. A second common model
assumes zero heat transfer between the phases and is known as the homogeneous
frozen model. In many circumstances the actual response lies somewhere between
these extremes. A limited amount of heat transfer occurs between those portions
of each phase that are close to the interface. In order to incorporate this in the

150
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows
analysis, we adopt an approach that includes the homogeneous equilibrium and
homogeneous frozen responses as special cases but that requires a minor adjustment
to the analysis of the last section in order to reﬂect the degree of thermal exchange
between the phases. As in the last section the total mass of the phases A and B after
application of the incremental pressure, δp, are ρAαA + δm and ρBαB −δm, respec-
tively. We now deﬁne the fractions of each phase, ϵA and ϵB which, because of their
proximity to the interface, exchange heat and therefore approach thermodynamic
equilibrium with each other. The other fractions (1−ϵA) and (1−ϵB) are assumed to
be effectively insulated so that they behave isentropically. This is, of course, a crude
simpliﬁcation of the actual circumstances, but it permits qualitative assessment of
practical ﬂows.
It follows that the volumes of the four fractions following the incremental
change in pressure, δp, are
(1 −ϵA)(ρAαA + δm)

ρA + δp(∂ρA/∂p)S
 ;
ϵA(ρAαA + δm)

ρA + δp(∂ρA/∂p)E

(1 −ϵB)(ρBαB −δm)

ρB + δp(∂ρB/∂p)S
 ;
ϵB(ρBαB −δm)

ρB + δp(∂ρB/∂p)E

(6.16)
where the subscripts S and E refer to isentropic and phase equilibrium derivatives,
respectively. Then the change in total volume leads to the following modiﬁed form
for Equation (6.11) in the absence of surface tension:
1
ρc2 = (1 −ϵA)αA
ρA
∂ρA
∂p

S
+ ϵA
αA
ρA
∂ρA
∂p

E
+ (1 −ϵB)αB
ρB
∂ρB
∂p

S
+ ϵB
αB
ρB
∂ρB
∂p

E
−δm
δp
 1
ρA
−1
ρB

(6.17)
The exchange of mass, δm, is now determined by imposing the constraint that
the entropy of the whole be unchanged by the perturbation. The entropy prior to
δp is
ρAαAsA + ρBαBsB
(6.18)
where sA and sB are the speciﬁc entropies of the two phases. Following the
application of δp, the entropy is
(1 −ϵA){ρAαA + δm}sA + ϵA {ρAαA + δm}
!
sA + δp(∂sA
0
∂p)E
"
+ (1 −ϵB){ρBαB −δm}sB + ϵB{ρBαB −δm} !
sB + δp(∂sB
0
∂p)E
"
(6.19)
Equating (6.18) and (6.19) and writing the result in terms of the speciﬁc enthalpies
hA and hB rather than sA and sB, one obtains
δm
δp =
1
(hA −hB)

ϵAαA

1 −ρA
∂hA
∂p

E

+ ϵBαB

1 −ρB
∂hB
∂p

E

(6.20)
Note that if the communicating fractions ϵA and ϵB were both zero, this would
imply no exchange of mass. Thus ϵA = ϵB = 0 corresponds to the homogeneous

6.3 Sonic Speed with Change of Phase
151
frozen model (in which δm = 0) whereas ϵA = ϵB = 1 clearly yields the homogeneous
equilibrium model.
Substituting Equation (6.20) into Equation (6.17) and rearranging the result,
one can write
1
ρc2 = αA
p

(1 −ϵA)fA + ϵAgA

+ αB
p

(1 −ϵB)fB + ϵBgB

(6.21)
where the quantities fA, fB, gA, and gB are purely thermodynamic properties of the
two phases deﬁned by
fA =
∂lnρA
∂lnp

S
;
fB =
∂lnρB
∂lnp

S
(6.22)
gA =
∂lnρA
∂lnp

E
+
 1
ρA
−1
ρB

ρAhA
∂lnhA
∂lnp −p

E
0
(hA −hB)
gB =
∂lnρB
∂lnp

E
+
 1
ρA
−1
ρB

ρBhB
∂lnhB
∂lnp −p

E
0
(hA −hB)
The sensitivity of the results to the, as yet, unspeciﬁed quantitives ϵA and ϵB does not
emerge until one substitutes vapor and liquid for the phases A and B (A = V, B = L,
and αA = α, αB = 1 −α for simplicity). The functions fL, fB, gL, and gV then become
fV =
∂lnρV
∂lnp

S
;
fL =
∂lnρL
∂lnp

S
(6.23)
gV =
∂lnρV
∂lnp

E
+

1 −ρV
ρL
hL
L
∂lnhL
∂lnp + ∂lnL
∂lnp −
p
LρV

E
gL =
∂lnρL
∂lnp

E
+
 ρL
ρV
−1
hL
L
∂lnhL
∂lnp −
p
LρL

E
where L = hV −hL is the latent heat. It is normally adequate to approximate fV and
fL by the reciprocal of the ratio of speciﬁc heats for the gas and zero respectively.
Thus fV is of order unity and fL is very small. Furthermore gL and gV can readily
be calculated for any ﬂuid as functions of pressure or temperature. Some partic-
ular values are shown in Figure 6.2. Note that gV is close to unity for most ﬂuids
except in the neighborhood of the critical point. On the other hand, gL can be a
large number that varies considerably with pressure. To a ﬁrst approximation, gL
is given by g∗(pC/p)η where pC is the critical pressure and, as indicated in ﬁgure
6.2, g∗and η are respectively 1.67 and 0.73 for water. Thus, in summary, fL ≈0,
fV and gV are of order unity, and gL varies signiﬁcantly with pressure and may be
large.
With these magnitudes in mind, we now examine the sensitivity of 1/ρc2 to the
interacting ﬂuid fractions ϵL and ϵV:
1
ρc2 = α
p

(1 −ϵV)fV + ϵVgV

+ (1 −α)
p
ϵLgL
(6.24)

152
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows
104
103
102
10–5
10–4
10–3
10–2
10–1
1
10
1
Water
Oxygen
Liquid Index, gL
Methane
Carbon dioxide
gL  2.1 (    )–0.566
ρ
ρC
gL  1.67 (    )–0.73
ρ
ρC
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
Water
Oxygen
Vapor Index, gV
Pressure/Critical Pressure
Carbon dioxide
Methane
Figure 6.2 Typical values of the liquid index, gL, and the vapor index, gV, for various ﬂuids.
Using gL = g∗(pC/p)η this is written for future convenience in the form:
1
ρc2 = αkV
p
+ (1 −α)kL
p1+η
(6.25)
where kV = (1 −ϵV)fV + ϵVgV and kL = ϵLg∗(pC)η. Note ﬁrst that the result is rather
insensitive to ϵV since fV and gV are both of order unity. On the other hand 1/ρc2 is
sensitive to the interacting liquid fraction ϵL though this sensitivity disappears as α
approaches 1, in other words for mist ﬂow. Thus the choice of ϵL is most important at
low vapor volume fractions (for bubbly ﬂows). In such cases, one possible qualitative
estimate is that the interacting liquid fraction, ϵL, should be of the same order as the
gas volume fraction, α. In Section 6.6 we will examine the effect of the choice of
ϵL and ϵV on a typical vapor/liquid ﬂow and compare the model with experimental
measurements.
6.4 Barotropic Relations
Conceptually, the expressions for the sonic velocity, Equations (6.13), (6.14), (6.15),
or (6.24), need only be integrated (after substituting c2 = dp/dρ) in order to obtain
the barotropic relation, p(ρ), for the mixture. In practice this is algebraically
complicated except for some of the simpler forms for c2.
Consider ﬁrst the case of the two-component mixture in the absence of mass
exchange or surface tension as given by Equation (6.14). It will initially be assumed

6.4 Barotropic Relations
153
that the gas volume fraction is not too small so that Equation (6.15) can be used;
we will return later to the case of small gas volume fraction. It is also assumed that
the liquid or solid density, ρL, is constant and that p ∝ρk
G. Furthermore it is con-
venient, as in gas dynamics, to choose reservoir conditions, p = po,α = αo,ρG =
ρGo to establish the integration constants. Then it follows from the integration of
Equation (6.15) that
ρ = ρo(1 −α)
0
(1 −αo)
(6.26)
and that
p
po
=
αo(1 −α)
(1 −αo)α
k
=

αoρ
ρo −(1 −αo)ρ
k
(6.27)
where ρo = ρL(1 −αo) + ρGoαo. It also follows that, written in terms of α,
c2 = kpo
ρo
(1 −α)k−1
αk+1
αk
o
(1 −αo)k−1
(6.28)
As will be discussed later, Tangren, Dodge, and Seifert (1949) ﬁrst made use of
a more limited form of the barotropic relation of Equation (6.27) to evaluate the
one-dimensional ﬂow of gas/liquid mixtures in ducts and nozzles.
In the case of very small gas volume fractions, α, it may be necessary to include
the liquid compressibility term, 1 −α/ρLc2
L, in Equation (6.14). Exact integration
then becomes very complicated. However, it is sufﬁciently accurate at small gas
volume fractions to approximate the mixture density ρ by ρL(1 −α), and then
integration (assuming ρLc2
L = constant) yields
α
(1 −α) =

αo
(1 −αo) +
k
(k + 1)
po
ρLc2
L
po
p
 1
k
−
k
(k + 1)
po
ρLc2
L
p
po
(6.29)
and the sonic velocity can be expressed in terms of p/po alone by using
Equation (6.29) and noting that
c2 = p
ρL

1 +
α
(1−α)
2

1
k
α
(1−α) +
p
ρLc2
L

(6.30)
Implicit within Equation (6.29) is the barotropic relation, p(α), analogous to
Equation (6.27). Note that Equation (6.29) reduces to Equation (6.27) when po/ρLc2
L
is set equal to zero. Indeed, it is clear from Equation (6.29) that the liquid compress-
ibility has a negligible effect only if αo ≫po/ρLc2
L. This parameter, po/ρLc2
L, is usually
quite small. For example, for saturated water at 5 ×107 kg/msec2 (500 psi) the value
of po/ρLc2
L is approximately 0.03. Nevertheless, there are many practical problems
in which one is concerned with the discharge of a predominantly liquid medium
from high pressure containers, and under these circumstances it can be important to
include the liquid compressibility effects.
Now turning attention to a two-phase rather than two-component homoge-
neous mixture, the particular form of the sonic velocity given in Equation (6.25)

154
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows
may be integrated to yield the implicit barotropic relation
α
1 −α =

αo
(1 −αo) + kLp−η
o
(kV −η)
po
p
kV
−

kLp−η
o
(kV −η)
 po
p
η
(6.31)
in which the approximation ρ ≈ρL(1 −α) has been used. As before, c2 may be
expressed in terms of p/po alone by noting that
c2 = p
ρL

1 +
α
1−α
2

kV
α
(1−α) + kLp−η

(6.32)
Finally, we note that close to α = 1 the Equations (6.31) and (6.32) may fail because
the approximation ρ ≈ρL(1 −α) is not sufﬁciently accurate.
6.5 Nozzle Flows
The barotropic relations of the last section can be used in conjunction with the
steady, one-dimensional continuity and frictionless momentum equations,
d
ds (ρAu) = 0
(6.33)
and
udu
ds = −1
ρ
dp
ds
(6.34)
to synthesize homogeneous multiphase ﬂow in ducts and nozzles. The predicted
phenomena are qualitatively similar to those in one-dimensional gas dynamics. The
results for isothermal, two-component ﬂow were ﬁrst detailed by Tangren, Dodge,
and Seifert (1949); more general results for any polytropic index are given in this
section.
Using the barotropic relation given by Equation (6.27) and Equation (6.26) for
the mixture density, ρ, to eliminate p and ρ from the momentum Equation (6.34),
one obtains
u du = kpo
ρo
αk
o
(1 −αo)k−1
(1 −α)k−2
αk+1
dα
(6.35)
which upon integration and imposition of the reservoir condition, uo = 0, yields
u2 = 2kpo
ρo
αk
o
(1 −αo)k−1

1
k
1 −αo
αo
k
−
1 −α
α
k
+
either
1
(k −1)
1 −αo
αo
k−1
−
1 −α
α
k−1
if k ̸= 1
or
ln
(1 −αo)α
αo(1 −α)

if k = 1
(6.36)
Given the reservoir conditions po and αo as well as the polytropic index k and the
liquid density (assumed constant), this relates the velocity, u, at any position in the

6.5 Nozzle Flows
155
duct to the gas volume fraction, α, at that location. The pressure, p, density, ρ,
and volume fraction, α, are related by Equations (6.26) and (6.27). The continuity
equation,
A = Constant/ρu = Constant/u(1 −α)
(6.37)
completes the system of equations by permitting identiﬁcation of the location where
p, ρ, u, and α occur from knowledge of the cross-sectional area, A.
As in gas dynamics the conditions at a throat play a particular role in determin-
ing both the overall ﬂow and the mass ﬂow rate. This results from the observation
that Equations (6.33) and (6.31) may be combined to obtain
1
A
dA
ds = 1
ρ
dp
ds
 1
u2 −1
c2

(6.38)
where c2 = dp/dρ. Hence at a throat where dA/ds = 0, either dp/ds = 0, which is true
when the ﬂow is entirely subsonic and unchoked; or u = c, which is true when the
ﬂow is choked. Denoting choked conditions at a throat by the subscript ∗, it follows
by equating the right-hand sides of Equations (6.28) and (6.36) that the gas volume
fraction at the throat, α∗, must be given when k ̸= 1 by the solution of
(1 −α∗)k−1
2αk+1
∗
=1
k
1 −αo
αo
k
−
1 −α∗
α∗
k
(6.39)
+
1
(k −1)
1 −αo
αo
k−1
−
1 −α∗
α∗
k−1
or, in the case of isothermal gas behavior (k = 1), by the solution of
1
2α2∗
= 1
αo
−1
α∗
+ ln
(1 −αo)α∗
αo(1 −α∗)

(6.40)
Thus the throat gas volume fraction, α∗, under choked ﬂow conditions is a func-
tion only of the reservoir gas volume fraction, αo, and the polytropic index. Solutions
of Equations (6.39) and (6.40) for two typical cases, k = 1.4 and k = 1.0, are shown in
Figure 6.3. The corresponding ratio of the choked throat pressure, p∗, to the reserv-
ior pressure, po, follows immediately from Equation (6.27) given α = α∗and is also
shown in Figure 6.3. Finally, the choked mass ﬂow rate, ˙mc, follows as ρ∗A∗c∗where
A∗is the cross-sectional area of the throat and
˙mc
A∗(poρo)
1
2
= k
1
2
α
k
2o
(1 −αo)
k+1
2
1 −α∗
α∗
 k+1
2
(6.41)
This dimensionless choked mass ﬂow rate is exhibited in Figure 6.4 for k = 1.4 and
k = 1.
Data from the experiments of Symington (1978) and Muir and Eichhorn (1963)
are included in Figures 6.3 and 6.4. Symington’s data on the critical pressure ratio
(Figure 6.3) is in good agreement with the isothermal (k = 1) analysis indicating that,

156
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Critical Throat Gas Volume Fraction, *
k = 1.4
k = 1,      p /ρLc2
L = 0.05
Reservoir Gas Volume Fraction, 
k = 1.0
k = 1.4
k = 1.0
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Critical Throat Pressure / Reservoir Pressure, p*/p
k = 1, and
p /ρLc2
L = 0.05
Muir and Eichhorn
Symington
Figure 6.3 Critical or choked ﬂow throat characteristics for the ﬂow of a two-component
gas/liquid mixture through a nozzle. On the left is the throat gas volume fraction as a function
of the reservoir gas volume fraction, αo, for gas polytropic indices of k = 1.0 and 1.4 and an
incompressible liquid (solid lines) and for k = 1 and a compressible liquid with po/ρLc2
L = 0.05
(dashed line). On the right are the corresponding ratios of critical throat pressure to reservoir
p r essu re. A l s o s h o w n i s t h e exp eri men t al d at a o f S ymi n gt o n (1978) an d M u i r an d E i c hhorn
(1963).
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Dimensionless
Critical Mass Flow Rate, m/A*(ρ p)1/2
Reservoir Gas Volume Fraction, 
k = 1.4
k = 1
k = 1 with
= 0.05
p
L c2
L
Figure 6.4 Dimensionless critical mass ﬂow rate, ˙m/A∗(poρo)
1
2 , as a function of αo for choked
ﬂow of a gas/liquid ﬂow through a nozzle. Solid lines are incompressible liquid results for
polytropic indices of 1.4 and 1.0. Dashed line shows effect of liquid compressibility for
po/ρLc2
L = 0.05. T h e exp eri m en t al d at a (⊙ ) are from Muir an d Eichhorn (1963).

6.5 Nozzle Flows
157
at least in his experiments, the heat transfer between the bubbles and the liquid is
large enough to maintain constant gas temperature in the bubbles. On the other
hand, the experiments of Muir and Eichhorn yielded larger critical pressure ratios
and ﬂow rates than the isothermal theory. However, Muir and Eichhorn measured
signiﬁcant slip between the bubbles and the liquid (strictly speaking the abscissa for
their data in Figures 6.3 and 6.4 should be the upstream volumetric quality rather
than the void fraction), and the discrepancy could be due to the errors introduced
into the present analysis by the neglect of possible relative motion (see also van
Wijngaarden 1972).
Finally, the pressure, volume fraction, and velocity elsewhere in the duct or noz-
zle can be related to the throat conditions and the ratio of the area, A, to the throat
area, A∗. These relations, which are presented in Figures 6.5, 6.6, and 6.7 for the
case k = 1 and various reservoir volume fractions, αo, are most readily obtained in
the following manner. Given αo and k, p∗/po and α∗follow from Figure 6.3. Then for
p/po or p/p∗, α and u follow from Equations (6.27) and (6.36) and the corresponding
A/A∗follows by using Equation (6.37). The resulting charts, Figures 6.5, 6.6, and 6.7,
can then be used in the same way as the corresponding graphs in gas dynamics.
If the gas volume fraction, αo, is sufﬁciently small so that it is compara-
ble with po/ρLc2
L, then the barotropic Equation (6.29) should be used instead of
3.5
3.0
 = 0.1
 = 0.9
0.5
0.3
0.7
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
0
0.2 0.4
Throat
0.6 0.8 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2
Pressure Ratio, p / p*
 = 0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9
Subsonic
A*/A
Supersonic
A*/A
Figure 6.5 Ratio of the pressure, p, to the throat pressure, p∗, for two-component ﬂow in a
duct with isothermal gas behavior.

158
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
0
0.2 0.4
0.7
0.5
0.3
Throat
0.6 0.8 1.0 0.8
0.9
0.5
0.7
0.3
0.6 0.4 0.2
Subsonic
A*/A
Supersonic
A*/A
 = 0.1
 = 0.9
 = 0.1
Gas Volume Fraction Ratio,  / *
Figure 6.6 Ratio of the void fraction, α, to the throat void fraction, α∗, for two-component
ﬂow in a duct with isothermal gas behavior.
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.2
0
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Throat
Subsonic
A*/A
Supersonic
A*/A
Velocity Ratio, u/u*
 = 0.9
 = 0.1
0.7
0.5
 = 0.3
0.1
0.5
 = 0.9
Figure 6.7 Ratio of the velocity, u, to the throat velocity, u∗, for two-component ﬂow in a
duct with isothermal gas behavior.

6.6 Vapor/Liquid Nozzle Flow
159
Equation (6.27). In cases like this in which it is sufﬁcient to assume that ρ ≈ρL(1−α),
integration of the momentum Equation (6.34) is most readily accomplished by
writing it in the form
ρL
po
u2
2 = 1 −p
po
+
 1
p/po

α
1 −α

d
 p
po

(6.42)
Then substitution of Equation (6.29) for α/(1 −α) leads in the present case to
u2 = 2po
ρL

1 −p
po
+
k
2(k + 1)
po
ρLc2
L
p2
p2o
−1

+
either
k
(k −1)

αo
1 −αo
+
k
(k + 1)
po
ρLc2
L

1 −
 p
po
 k−1
k

for k ̸= 1
or

αo
1 −αo
+ 1
2
po
ρLc2
L

ln
po
p

for k = 1
(6.43)
The throat pressure, p∗(or rather p∗/po), is then obtained by equating the velocity
u for p = p∗from Equation (6.43) to the sonic velocity c at p = p∗obtained from
Equation (6.30). The resulting relation, though algebraically complicated, is read-
ily solved for the critical pressure ratio, p∗/po, and the throat gas volume fraction,
α∗, follows from Equation (6.29). Values of p∗/po for k = 1 and k = 1.4 are shown
in Figure 6.3 for the particular value of po/ρLc2
L of 0.05. Note that the most signif-
icant deviations caused by liquid compressibility occur for gas volume fractions of
the order of 0.05 or less. The corresponding dimensionless critical mass ﬂow rates,
˙m/A∗(ρopo)
1
2 , are also readily calculated from
˙m
A∗(ρopo)
1
2
=
(1 −α∗)c∗
[po(1 −αo)/ρL]
1
2
(6.44)
and sample results are shown in Figure 6.4.
6.6 Vapor/Liquid Nozzle Flow
A barotropic relation, Equation (6.31), was constructed in Section 6.4 for the
case of two-phase ﬂow and, in particular, for vapor/liquid ﬂow. This may be
used to synthesize nozzle ﬂows in a manner similar to the two-component analy-
sis of the last section. Since the approximation ρ ≈ρL(1 −α) was used in deriving
both Equation (6.31) and Equation (6.42), we may eliminate α/(1 −α) from these
equations to obtain the velocity, u, in terms of p/po:
ρL
po
u2
2 = 1 −p
po
+
1
(1 −kV)

αo
(1 −αo) + kLp−η
o
(kV −η)

1 −
 p
po
1−kV 
−
1
(1 −η)

kLp−η
o
(kV −η)

1 −
 p
po
1−η
(6.45)

160
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows
To ﬁnd the relation for the critical pressure ratio, p∗/po, the velocity, u, must equated
with the sonic velocity, c, as given by Equation (6.32):
c2
2 = p
ρL

1 +
%
αo
1−αo) + kL
p−η
o
(kV−η)
&	
po
p

kV −
%
kL
p−η
o
(kV−η)
&	
po
p

η2
2

kV
%
αo
(1−αo) + kLp−η
o
(kV−η)
&	
po
p

kV −η
%
kLp−η
o
(kV−η)
&	
po
p

η
(6.46)
Though algebraically complicated, the equation that results when the right-
hand sides of Equations (6.45) and (6.46) are equated can readily be solved
numerically to obtain the critical pressure ratio, p∗/po, for a given ﬂuid and given
values of αo, the reservoir pressure and the interacting ﬂuid fractions ϵL and ϵV
(see Section 6.3). Having obtained the critical pressure ratio, the critical vapor vol-
ume fraction, α∗, follows from Equation (6.31) and the throat velocity, c∗, from
Equation (6.46). Then the dimensionless choked mass ﬂow rate follows from the
same relation as given in Equation (6.44).
Sample results for the choked mass ﬂow rate and the critical pressure ratio are
shown in Figures 6.8 and 6.9. Results for both homogeneous frozen ﬂow (ϵL = ϵV =
0) and for homogeneous equilibrium ﬂow (ϵL = ϵV = 1) are presented; note that
these results are independent of the ﬂuid or the reservoir pressure, po. Also shown
in the Figures are the theoretical results for various partially frozen cases for water
at two different reservoir pressures. The interacting ﬂuid fractions were chosen with
the comment at the end of Section 6.3 in mind. Since ϵL is most important at low
vapor volume fractions (i.e., for bubbly ﬂows), it is reasonable to estimate that the
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0.2
Reservoir Volume Fraction, 
/2

/2
(1– )/2
1– 
(1– )/2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
B or C
A
Homogeneous
Frozen (L = V = 0)
Homogeneous
Equilibrium
(L = V = 1)
A
B
C
500
500
200
P (psia)
L
V
Dimensionless Choked Mass Flow Rate,
m
A(p)1/2
Figure 6.8 The dimensionless choked mass ﬂow rate, ˙m/A∗(poρo)
1
2 , plotted against the reser-
voir vapor volume fraction, αo, for water/steam mixtures. The data shown is from the
exp eri m en t s o f M an eel y ( 1962) an d N eu sen ( 1962) f o r 100 → 200 psi a (+), 200 → 300 psi a
(×), 300 →400 psia (2), 400 →500 psia (△), 500 →600 psia (▽) and > 600 psia (∗). The
theoretical lines use g∗= 1.67, η = 0.73, gV = 0.91, and fV = 0.769 for water.

6.6 Vapor/Liquid Nozzle Flow
161
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0.2
Reservoir Volume Fraction, 
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Homogeneous Equilibrium
(V = L = 1)
Critical Pressure / Reservoir Pressure, p* / p
B or C
Homogeneous Frozen
(V = L = 0)
A
Figure 6.9 The ratio of critical pressure, p∗, to reservoir pressure, po, plotted against the
reservoir vapor volume fraction, αo, for water/steam mixtures. The data and the partially
frozen model results are for the same conditions as in Figure 6.8.
interacting volume of liquid surrounding each bubble will be of the same order as
the bubble volume. Hence ϵL = αo or αo/2 are appropriate choices. Similarly, ϵV
is most important at high vapor volume fractions (i.e., droplet ﬂows), and it is rea-
sonable to estimate that the interacting volume of vapor surrounding each droplet
would be of the same order as the droplet volume; hence ϵV = (1 −αo) or (1 −αo)/2
are appropriate choices.
Figures 6.8 and 6.9 also include data obtained for water by Maneely (1962) and
Neusen (1962) for various reservoir pressures and volume fractions. Note that the
measured choked mass ﬂow rates are bracketed by the homogeneous frozen and
equilibrium curves and that the appropriately chosen partially frozen analysis is in
close agreement with the experiments, despite the neglect (in the present model) of
possible slip between the phases. The critical pressure ratio data is also in good
agreement with the partially frozen analysis except for some discrepancy at the
higher reservoir volume fractions.
It should be noted that the analytical approach described above is much simpler
to implement than the numerical solution of the basic equations suggested by Henry
and Fauske (1971). The latter does, however, have the advantage that slip between
the phases was incorporated into the model.
Finally, information on the pressure, volume fraction, and velocity elsewhere in
the duct (p/p∗, u/u∗, and α/α∗) as a function of the area ratio A/A∗follows from a
procedure similar to that used for the noncondensable case in Section 6.5. Typical
results for water with a reservoir pressure, po, of 500 psia and using the partially
frozen analysis with ϵV = αo/2 and ϵL = (1 −αo)/2 are presented in Figures 6.10,
6.11, and 6.12. In comparing these results with those for the two-component mixture

162
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.2
0
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Throat
Subsonic
A*/A
Supersonic
A*/A
Pressure Ratio, p / p*
 = 0.1
 = 0.3, 0.5
0.9
0.3
0.7
0.7
 = 0.1, 0.9
 = 0.5
Figure 6.10 Ratio of the pressure, p, to the critical pressure, p∗, as a function of the area ratio,
A∗/A, for the case of water with g∗= 1.67, η = 0.73, gV = 0.91, and fV = 0.769.
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
0
0.2 0.4
0.7
0.5
0.3
Throat
0.6 0.8 1.0 0.8
0.5
0.7
0.3
0.6 0.4 0.2
Subsonic
A*/A
Supersonic
A*/A
 = 0.1
 = 0.9
 = 0.9
 = 0.1
Vapor Volume Fraction Ratio, /*
Figure 6.11 Ratio of the vapor volume fraction, α, to the critical vapor volume fraction, α∗,
as a function of area ratio for the same case as Figure 6.10.
(Figures 6.5, 6.6, and 6.7) we observe that the pressure ratios are substantially
smaller and do not vary monotonically with αo. The volume fraction changes are
smaller, while the velocity gradients are larger.

6.7 Flows with Bubble Dynamics
163
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
0
0.2 0.4
Throat
0.6 0.8 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2
Subsonic
A*/A
Supersonic
A*/A
Velocity Ratio, u/u*
0.9
 = 0.5, 0.7
 = 0.1
0.3
 = 0.1
 = 0.3 → 0.9
Figure 6.12 Ratio of the velocity, u, to the critical velocity, u∗, as a function of the area ratio
for the same case as Figure 6.10.
6.7 Flows with Bubble Dynamics
Up to this point the analyses have been predicated on the existence of an effective
barotropic relation for the homogeneous mixture. Indeed, the construction of the
sonic speed in Sections 6.2 and 6.3 assumes that all the phases are in dynamic equilib-
rium at all times. For example, in the case of bubbles in liquids, it is assumed that the
response of the bubbles to the change in pressure, δp, is an essentially instantaneous
change in their volume. In practice this would only be the case if the typical frequen-
cies experienced by the bubbles in the ﬂow are very much smaller than the natural
frequencies of the bubbles themselves (see Section 4.2). Under these circumstances
the bubbles would behave quasistatically and the mixture would be barotropic.
In this section we shall examine some ﬂows in which this criterion is not
met. Then the dynamics of individual bubbles as manifest by the Rayleigh-Plesset
Equation (2.12) should be incorporated into the solutions of the problem. The
mixture will no longer behave barotropically.
Viewing it from another perspective, we note that analyses of cavitating ﬂows
often consist of using a single-phase liquid pressure distribution as input to the
Rayleigh-Plesset equation. The result is the history of the size of individual cavitat-
ing bubbles as they progress along a streamline in the otherwise purely liquid ﬂow.
Such an approach entirely neglects the interactive effects that the cavitating bubbles
have on themselves and on the pressure and velocity of the liquid ﬂow. The analysis
that follows incorporates these interactions using the equations for nonbarotropic
homogeneous ﬂow.

164
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows
It is assumed that the ratio of liquid to vapor density is sufﬁciently large so
that the volume of liquid evaporated or condensed is negligible. It is also assumed
that bubbles are neither created or destroyed. Then the appropriate continuity
equation is
∂ui
∂xi
=
η
(1 + ητ)
Dτ
Dt
(6.47)
where η is the population or number of bubbles per unit volume of liquid and τ(xi,t)
is the volume of individual bubbles. The above form of the continuity equation
assumes that η is uniform; such would be the case if the ﬂow originated from a
uniform stream of uniform population and if there were no relative motion between
the bubbles and the liquid. Note also that α = ητ/(1 + ητ) and the mixture density,
ρ ≈ρL(1 −α) = ρL/(1 + ητ). This last relation can be used to write the momentum
Equation (6.3) in terms of τ rather than ρ:
ρL
Dui
Dt = −(1 + ητ) ∂p
∂xi
(6.48)
The hydrostatic pressure gradient due to gravity has been omitted for simplicity.
Finally the Rayleigh-Plesset Equation (2.12) relates the pressure p and the
bubble volume, τ = 4
3πR3:
RD2R
Dt2 + 3
2
DR
Dt
2
= pB −p
ρL
−2S
ρLR −4νL
R
DR
Dt
(6.49)
where pB, the pressure within the bubble, will be represented by the sum of a partial
pressure, pV, of the vapor plus a partial pressure of noncondensable gas as given in
Equation (2.11).
Equations (6.47), (6.48), and (6.49) can, in theory, be solved to ﬁnd the
unknowns p(xi,t), ui(xi,t), and τ(xi,t) (or R(xi,t)) for any bubbly cavitating ﬂow. In
practice the nonlinearities in the Rayleigh-Plesset equation and in the Lagrangian
derivative, D/Dt = ∂/∂t + ui∂/∂xi, present serious difﬁculties for all ﬂows except
those of the simplest geometry. In the following sections several such ﬂows are
examined in order to illustrate the interactive effects of bubbles in cavitating ﬂows
and the role played by bubble dynamics in homogeneous ﬂows.
6.8 Acoustics of Bubbly Mixtures
One class of phenomena in which bubble dynamics can play an important role is
the acoustics of dilute bubbly mixtures. When the acoustic excitation frequency
approaches the natural frequency of the bubbles, the latter no longer respond in
the quasistatic manner assumed in Section 6.2, and both the propagation speed and
the acoustic attenuation are signiﬁcantly altered. An excellent review of this sub-
ject is given by van Wijngaarden (1972) and we will include here only a summary of
the key results. This class of problems has the advantage that the magnitude of the
perturbations is small so that the equations of the preceding section can be greatly
simpliﬁed by linearization.

6.8 Acoustics of Bubbly Mixtures
165
Hence the pressure, p, will be represented by the following sum:
p = ¯p + Re
!
˜pejωt"
(6.50)
where ¯p is the mean pressure, ω is the frequency, and ˜p is the small amplitude
pressure perturbation. The response of a bubble will be similarly represented by
a perturbation, ϕ, to its mean radius, Ro, such that
R = Ro

1 + Re
!
ϕejωt"
(6.51)
and the linearization will neglect all terms of order ϕ2 or higher.
The literature on the acoustics of dilute bubbly mixtures contains two comple-
mentary analytical approaches. In important papers, Foldy (1945) and Carstensen
and Foldy (1947) applied the classical acoustical approach and treated the prob-
lem of multiple scattering by randomly distributed point scatterers representing the
bubbles. The medium is assumed to be very dilute (α ≪1). The multiple scatter-
ing produces both coherent and incoherent contributions. The incoherent part is
beyond the scope of this text. The coherent part, which can be represented by
Equation (6.50), was found to satsify a wave equation and yields a dispersion rela-
tion for the wavenumber, k, of plane waves, which implies a phase velocity, ck = ω/k,
given by (see van Wijngaarden 1972)
1
c2
k
= k2
ω2 = 1
c2
L
+ 1
c2o

1 −jδDω
ωN
−ω2
ω2
N
−1
(6.52)
Here cL is the sonic speed in the liquid, co is the sonic speed arising from
Equation (6.15) when αρG ≪(1 −α)ρL,
c2
o = k¯p
0
ρLα(1 −α)
(6.53)
ωN is the natural frequency of a bubble in an inﬁnite liquid (Section 4.2), and δD is a
dissipation coefﬁcient that will be discussed shortly. It follows from Equation (6.52)
that scattering from the bubbles makes the wave propagation dispersive since ck is
a function of the frequency, ω.
As described by van Wijngaarden (1972) an alternative approach is to linearize
the ﬂuid mechanical Equations (6.47), (6.48), and (6.49), neglecting any terms of
order ϕ2 or higher. In the case of plane wave propagation in the direction x (velocity
u) in a frame of reference relative to the mixture (so that the mean velocity is zero),
the convective terms in the Lagrangian derivatives, D/Dt, are of order ϕ2 and the
three governing equations become
∂u
∂x =
η
(1 + ητ)
∂τ
∂t
(6.54)
ρL
∂u
∂t = −(1 + ητ) ∂p
∂x
(6.55)
R∂2R
∂t2 + 3
2
∂R
∂t
2
= 1
ρL

pV + pGo
Ro
R
3k
−p

−2S
ρLR −4νL
R
∂R
∂t
(6.56)

166
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows
Assuming for simplicity that the liquid is incompressible (ρL = constant) and elim-
inating two of the three unknown functions from these relations, one obtains the
following equation for any one of the three perturbation quantities (q = ϕ, ˜p, or ˜u,
the velocity perturbation):
3αo(1 −αo)∂2q
∂t2 =
3kpGo
ρL
−
2S
ρLRo
 ∂2q
∂x2 + R2
o
∂4q
∂x2∂t2 + 4νL
∂3q
∂x2∂t
(6.57)
where αo is the mean void fraction given by αo = ητo/(1+ητo). This equation govern-
ing the acoustic perturbations is given by van Wijngaarden, though we have added
the surface tension term. Since the mean state must be in equilibrium, the mean
liquid pressure, ¯p, is related to pGo by
¯p = pV + pGo −2S
Ro
(6.58)
and hence the term in square brackets in Equation (6.57) may be written in the
alternate forms
3kpGo
ρL
−2S
ρLRo
= 3k
ρL
(¯p −pV)+
2S
ρLRo
(3k −1) = R2
oω2
N
(6.59)
where ωN is the natural frequency of a single bubble in an inﬁnite liquid (see
Section 4.2).
Results for the propagation of a plane wave in the positive x direction are
obtained by substituting q = e−jkx in Equation (6.57) to produce the following
dispersion relation:
c2
k = ω2
k2 =

3k
ρL (¯p −pV) +
2S
ρLRo (3k −1)

+ 4jωνL −ω2R2
o
3αo (1 −αo)
(6.60)
Note that at the low frequencies for which one would expect quasistatic bubble
behavior (ω ≪ωN) and in the absence of vapor (pV = 0) and surface tension, this
reduces to the sonic velocity given by Equation (6.15) when ρG α ≪ρL(1 −α).
Furthermore, Equation (6.60) may be written as
c2
k = ω2
k2 =
R2
oω2
N
3αo(1 −αo)

1 + jδDω
ωN
−ω2
ω2
N

(6.61)
where δD = 4νL/ωNR2
o. For the incompressible liquid assumed here this is identical to
Equation (6.52) obtained using the Foldy multiple scattering approach (the differ-
ence in sign for the damping term results from using j(ωt −kx) rather than j(kx −ωt)
and is inconsequential).
In the above derivation, the only damping mechanism that was included was
that due to viscous effects on the radial motion of the bubbles. As discussed in
Section 4.4, other damping mechanisms (thermal and acoustic radiation) that may
affect radial bubble motion can be included in approximate form in the above anal-
ysis by deﬁning an “effective” damping, δD, or, equivalently, an effective liquid
viscosity, μE = ωNR2
oδD/4.

6.8 Acoustics of Bubbly Mixtures
167
The real and imaginary parts of k as deﬁned by Equation (6.61) lead respec-
tively to a sound speed and an attenuation that are both functions of the frequency
of the perturbations. A number of experimental investigations have been car-
ried out (primarily at very small α) to measure the sound speed and attenuation
in bubbly gas/liquid mixtures. This data is reviewed by van Wijngaarden (1972)
who concentrates on the more recent experiments of Fox, Curley, and Lawson
(1955), Macpherson (1957), and Silberman (1957), in which the bubble size distri-
bution was more accurately measured and controlled. In general, the comparison
between the experimental and theoretical propagation speeds is good, as illus-
trated by Figure 6.13. One of the primary experimental difﬁculties illustrated in
both Figures 6.13 and 6.14 is that the results are quite sensitive to the distribution
of bubble sizes present in the mixture. This is caused by the fact that the bubble
natural frequency is quite sensitive to the mean radius (see Section 4.2). Hence a
distribution in the size of the bubbles yields broadening of the peaks in the data of
Figures 6.13 and 6.14.
Though the propagation speed is fairly well predicted by the theory, the same
cannot be said of the attenuation, and there remain a number of unanswered ques-
tions in this regard. Using Equation (6.61) the theoretical estimate of the damping
coefﬁcient, δD, pertinent to the experiments of Fox, Curley, and Lawson (1955) is
0.093. But a much greater value of δD = 0.5 had to be used in order to produce
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
100
200
300
400
Frequency, f (kHz)
Propagation Velocity, c (m/sec)
Figure 6.13 Sonic speed for water with air bubbles of mean radius, Ro = 0.12mm, and a void
fraction, α = 0.0002, p l o t t ed agai n s t f req u en c y. T h e exp eri m en t al d at a o f F o x, C u r l ey, an d
L arso n ( 1955) i s p l o t t ed al o n g w i t h t h e t h eo r et i cal cu rve f o r a mi xt u re w i t h i d en t i cal Ro =
0.11 mm bubbles (dotted line) and with the experimental distribution of sizes (solid line).
These lines use δ = 0.5.

168
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
100
200
300
400
Frequency, f (kHz)
Attenuation (dB/cm)
Figure 6.14 Values for the attenuation of sound waves corresponding to the sonic speed data
of Figure 6.13. The attenuation in dB/cm is given by 8.69 Im{k} where k is in cm−1.
an analytical line close to the experimental data on attenuation; it is important to
note that the empirical value, δD = 0.5, has been used for the theoretical results in
Figure 6.14. On the other hand, Macpherson (1957) found good agreement between
a measured attenuation corresponding to δD ≈0.08 and the estimated analytical
value of 0.079 relevant to his experiments. Similar good agreement was obtained
for both the propagation and attenuation by Silberman (1957). Consequently, there
appear to be some unresolved issues insofar as the attenuation is concerned. Among
the effects that were omitted in the above analysis and that might contribute to the
attenuation is the effect of the relative motion of the bubbles. However, Batchelor
(1969) has concluded that the viscous effects of translational motion would make a
negligible contribution to the total damping.
Finally, it is important to emphasize that virtually all of the reported data
on attenuation is conﬁned to very small void fractions of the order of 0.0005 or
less. The reason for this is clear when one evaluates the imaginary part of k from
Equation (6.61). At these small void fractions the damping is proportional to α.
Consequently, at large void fraction of the order, say, of 0.05, the damping is 100
times greater and therefore more difﬁcult to measure accurately.
6.9 Shock Waves in Bubbly Flows
The propagation and structure of shock waves in bubbly cavitating ﬂows represent a
rare circumstance in which fully nonlinear solutions of the governing equations can
be obtained. Shock wave analyses of this kind have been investigated by Campbell
and Pitcher (1958), Crespo (1969), Noordzij (1973), and Noordzij and van Wijn-
gaarden (1974), among others, and for more detail the reader should consult these

6.9 Shock Waves in Bubbly Flows
169
works. Since this chapter is conﬁned to ﬂows without signiﬁcant relative motion,
this section will not cover some of the important effects of relative motion on the
structural evolution of shocks in bubbly liquids. For this the reader is referred to
Noordzij and van Wijngaarden (1974).
Consider a normal shock wave in a coordinate system moving with the shock so
that the ﬂow is steady and the shock stationary. If x and u represent a coordinate
and the ﬂuid velocity normal to the shock, then continuity requires
ρu = constant = ρ1u1
(6.62)
where ρ1 and u1 will refer to the mixture density and velocity far upstream of the
shock. Hence u1 is also the velocity of propagation of a shock into a mixture with
conditions identical to those upstream of the shock. It is assumed that ρ1 ≈ρL(1−α1)
= ρL/(1+ητ1) where the liquid density is considered constant and α1, τ1 = 4
3πR3
1, and
η are the void fraction, individual bubble volume, and population of the mixture far
upstream.
Substituting for ρ in the equation of motion and integrating, one also obtains
p + ρ2
1u2
1
ρ
= constant = p1 + ρ1u2
1
(6.63)
This expression for the pressure, p, may be substituted into the Rayleigh-Plesset
equation using the observation that, for this steady ﬂow,
DR
Dt = udR
dx = u1
(1 + ητ)
(1 + ητ1)
dR
dx
(6.64)
D2R
Dt2 = u2
1
(1 + ητ)
(1 + ητ1)2

(1 + ητ)d2R
dx2 + 4πR2η
dR
dx
2
(6.65)
where τ = 4
3πR3 has been used for clarity. It follows that the structure of the ﬂow is
determined by solving the following equation for R(x):
u2
1
(1 + ητ)2
(1 + ητ1)2 Rd2R
dx2 + 3
2u2
1
(1 + 3ητ)(1 + ητ)
(1 + ητ1)2
dR
dx
2
(6.66)
+ 2S
ρLR + u1(1 + ητ)
(1 + ητ1)
4νL
R
dR
dx

= (pB −p1)
ρL
+ η(τ −τ1)
(1 + ητ1)2 u2
1
It will be found that dissipation effects in the bubble dynamics (see Sections 4.3
and 4.4) strongly inﬂuence the structure of the shock. Only one dissipative term,
that term due to viscous effects (last term on the left-hand side) has been included
in Equation (6.66). However, note that the other dissipative effects may be incorpo-
rated approximately (see Section 4.4) by regarding νL as a total “effective” damping
viscosity.
The pressure within the bubble is given by
pB = pV + pG1

τ1
0
τ
k
(6.67)

170
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows
and the equilibrium state far upstream must satisfy
pV −p1 + pG1 = 2S
0
R1
(6.68)
Furthermore, if there exists an equilibrium state far downstream of the shock (this
existence will be explored shortly), then it follows from Equations (6.66) and (6.67)
that the velocity, u1, must be related to the ratio, R2
0
R1 (where R2 is the bubble size
downstream of the shock), by
u2
1 =
(1 −α2)
(1 −α1)(α1 −α2)

(p1 −pV)
ρL
R1
R2
3k
−1

+ 2S
ρLR1
R1
R2
3k
−R1
R2

(6.69)
where α2 is the void fraction far downstream of the shock and
R2
R1
3
= α2(1 −α1)
α1(1 −α2)
(6.70)
Hence the “shock velocity,” u1, is given by the upstream ﬂow parameters α1,
(p1−pV)/ρL, and 2S/ρLR1, the polytropic index, k, and the downstream void fraction,
α2. An example of the dependence of u1 on α1 and α2 is shown in Figure 6.15 for
selected values of (p1 −pV)/ρL = 100 m2/sec2, 2S/ρLR1 = 0.1 m2/sec2, and k = 1.4.
Also displayed by the dotted line in this ﬁgure is the sonic velocity of the mixture,
c1, under the upstream conditions (actually the sonic velocity at zero frequency); it
100
80
60
1 = 0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
1 = 0.9
40
Shock Speed, u1 (m/sec)
Downstream Volume Fraction, 2
20
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Sonic Velocity, c1
Figure 6.15 Shock speed, u1, as a function of the upstream and downstream void fractions,
α1 and α2, for the particular case (p1 −pV)/ρL = 100 m2/sec2, 2S/ρLR1 = 0.1 m2/sec2, and
k = 1.4. Also shown by the dotted line is the sonic velocity, c1, under the same upstream
conditions.

6.9 Shock Waves in Bubbly Flows
171
6.0
4.0
Upstream Mach Number, u1 / c1
Downstream Void Fraction, 2
2.0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1 = 0.1 0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8 1 = 0.9
Figure 6.16 The upstream Mach number, u1/c1, as a function of the upstream and down-
stream void fractions, α1 and α2, for k = 1.4 and R1(p1 −pV)/S = 200.
is readily shown that c1 is given by
c2
1 =
1
α1(1 −α1)
k(p1 −pV)
ρL
+

k −1
3
 2S
ρLR1

(6.71)
Alternatively, one may follow the presentation conventional in gas dynamics
and plot the upstream Mach number, u1/c1, as a function of α1 and α2. The result-
ing graphs are functions only of two parameters, the polytropic index, k, and the
parameter, R1(p1 −pV)/S. An example is included as Figure 6.16 in which k = 1.4
and R1(p1 −pV)/S = 200. It should be noted that a real shock velocity and a real
sonic speed can exist even when the upstream mixture is under tension (p1 < pV).
However, the numerical value of the tension, pV −p1, for which the values are real is
limited to values of the parameter R1(p1−pV)/2S > −(1−1/3k)or −0.762 for k = 1.4.
Also note that Figure 6.16 does not change much with the parameter, R1(p1 −pV)/S.
Bubble dynamics do not affect the results presented thus far since the speed, u1,
depends only on the equilibrium conditions upstream and downstream. However,
the existence and structure of the shock depend on the bubble dynamic terms in
Equation (6.66). That equation is more conveniently written in terms of a radius
ratio, r = R/R1, and a dimensionless coordinate, z = x/R1:
	
1 −α1 + α1r3
2
rd2r
dz2 + 3
2
	
1 −α1 + α1r3
 	
1 −α1 + 3α1r3
dr
dz
2
+
	
1 −α1 + α1r3
 4νL
u1R1
1
r
dr
dz + α1 (1 −α1)
	
1 −r3
= 1
u2
1
(p1 −pV)
ρL
	
r−3k −1

+
2S
ρLR1
	
r−3k −r−1

(6.72)

172
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows
0.4
0.3
0.2
2 = 0.1
0.1
Void Fraction, 
Distance, z=x/R1 (Arbitrary Origin)
00
–5
0
5
10
15
2 = 0.05
Figure 6.17 The typical structure of a shock wave in a bubbly mixture is illustrated by these
examples for α1 = 0.3, k = 1.4, R1(p1 −pV)/S ≫1, and u1R1/νL = 100.
It could also be written in terms of the void fraction, α, since
r3 =
α
(1 −α)
(1 −α1)
α1
(6.73)
When examined in conjunction with the expression in Equation (6.69) for u1, it is
clear that the solution, r(z) or α(z), for the structure of the shock is a function only
of α1, α2, k, R1(p1 −pV)/S, and the effective Reynolds number, u1R1/νL, which, as
previously mentioned, should incorporate the various forms of bubble damping.
Equation (6.72) can be readily integrated numerically using Runge-Kutta pro-
cedures, and typical solutions are presented in Figure 6.17 for α1 = 0.3, k = 1.4,
R1(p1 −pV)/S ≫1, u1R1/νL = 100, and two downstream volume fractions, α2 = 0.1
and 0.05. These examples illustrate several important features of the structure of
these shocks. First, the initial collapse is followed by many rebounds and subsequent
collapses. The decay of these nonlinear oscillations is determined by the damping
or u1R1/νL. Though u1R1/νL includes an effective kinematic viscosity to incorpo-
rate other contributions to the bubble damping, the value of u1R1/νL chosen for this
example is probably smaller than would be relevant in many practical applications,
in which we might expect the decay to be even smaller. It is also valuable to identify
the nature of the solution as the damping is eliminated (u1R1/νL →∞). In this limit
the distance between collapses increases without bound until the structure consists
of one collapse followed by a downstream asymptotic approach to a void fraction
of α1 (not α2). In other words, no solution in which α →α2 exists in the absence of
damping.
Another important feature in the structure of these shocks is the typical interval
between the downstream oscillations. This “ringing” will, in practice, result in acous-
tic radiation at frequencies corresponding to this interval, and it is of importance to
identify the relationship between this ring frequency and the natural frequency of
the bubbles downstream of the shock. A characteristic ring frequency, ωR, for the

6.10 Spherical Bubble Cloud
173
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
1 = 0.3
0.2
Effective Damping parameter, v / u1R1
00
10–5
10–4
10–3
10–2
2 = 0.05
2 = 0.01
2 = 0.1
2 = 0.2
Ring Freq.
Downstream Nat. Freq.
, R
2
Figure 6.18 The ratio of the ring frequency downstream of a bubbly mixture shock to the
natural frequency of the bubbles far downstream as a function of the effective damping
parameter, νL/u1R1, for α1 = 0.3 and various downstream void fractions as indicated.
shock oscillations can be deﬁned as
ωR = 2πu1
0
x
(6.74)
where x is the distance between the ﬁrst and second bubble collapses. The nat-
ural frequency of the bubbles far downstream of the shock, ω2, is given by (see
Section 4.2)
ω2
2 = 3k(p2 −pV)
ρLR2
2
+ (3k −1) 2S
ρLR3
2
(6.75)
and typical values for the ratio ωR/ω2 are presented in Figure 6.18 for α1 = 0.3,
k = 1.4, R1(p1 −pV)/S ≫1, and various values of α2. Similar results were obtained
for quite a wide range of values of α1. Therefore note that the frequency ratio is
primarily a function of the damping and that ring frequencies up to a factor of 10 less
than the natural frequency are to be expected with typical values of the damping in
water. This reduction in the typical frequency associated with the collective behavior
of bubbles presages the natural frequencies of bubble clouds, which are discussed in
the next section.
6.10 Spherical Bubble Cloud
A second illustrative example of the effect of bubble dynamics on the behavior of
a homogeneous bubbly mixture is the study of the dynamics of a ﬁnite cloud of
bubbles. Clouds of bubbles occur in many circumstances. For example, breaking
waves generate clouds of bubbles as illustrated in Figure 6.19, and these affect the
acoustic environment in the ocean.

174
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows
Figure 6.19 Photograph of a breaking wave showing the resulting cloud of bubbles. The ver-
tical d istances between the cro sses is about 5 cm . Rep roduced from Petroff (1993) w i t h t h e
author’s permission.
Bubble Radius
Bubbly Mixture
(Population =  Per
Unit Liquid Volume)
Spherical Cloud
Boundary
A(t)
R (r, t)
r
Pure Liquid
Figure 6.20 Spherical cloud of bubbles: notation.
One of the earliest investigations of the collective dynamics of bubble clouds
was the work of van Wijngaarden (1964) on the oscillations of a layer of bubbles
near a wall. Later d’Agostino and Brennen (1983) investigated the dynamics of a
spherical cloud (see also d’Agostino and Brennen 1989, Omta 1987), and we will
choose the latter as a example of that class of problems with one space dimension
in which analytical solutions may be obtained but only after linearization of the
Rayleigh-Plesset Equation (6.49).
The geometry of the spherical cloud is shown in Figure 6.20. Within the cloud of
radius, A(t), the population of bubbles per unit liquid volume, η, is assumed constant
and uniform. The linearization assumes small perturbations of the bubbles from an
equilibrium radius, Ro:
R(r,t) = Ro [1 + ϕ(r,t)] , |ϕ| ≪1
(6.76)

6.10 Spherical Bubble Cloud
175
We will seek the response of the cloud to a correspondingly small perturbation in
the pressure at inﬁnity, p∞(t), which is represented by
p∞(t) = p(∞,t) = ¯p + Re
!
˜pejωt"
(6.77)
where ¯p is the mean, uniform pressure and ˜p and ω are the perturbation ampli-
tude and frequency, respectively. The solution will relate the pressure, p(r,t), radial
velocity, u(r,t), void fraction, α(r,t), and bubble perturbation, ϕ(r,t), to ˜p. Since the
analysis is linear, the response to excitation involving multiple frequencies can be
obtained by Fourier synthesis.
One further restriction is necessary in order to linearize the governing
Equations (6.47), (6.48), and (6.49). It is assumed that the mean void fraction in
the cloud, αo, is small so that the term (1 + ητ) in Equations (6.47) and (6.48) is
approximately unity. Then these equations become
1
r2
∂
∂r
	
r2u

= ηDτ
Dt
(6.78)
Du
Dt = ∂u
∂t + u∂u
∂r = −1
ρ
∂p
∂r
(6.79)
It is readily shown that the velocity u is of order ϕ and hence the convective compo-
nent of the material derivative is of order ϕ2; thus the linearization implies replacing
D/Dt by ∂/∂t. It then follows from the Rayleigh-Plesset equation that to order ϕ
p(r,t) = ¯p −ρR2
o
∂2ϕ
∂t2 + ω2
Nϕ

;
r < A(t)
(6.80)
where ωN is the natural frequency of an individual bubble if it were alone in an
inﬁnite ﬂuid (equation 4.8). It must be assumed that the bubbles are in stable
equilibrium in the mean state so that ωN is real.
Upon substitution of Equations (6.76) and (6.80) into (6.78) and (6.79) and
elimination of u(r,t) one obtains the following equation for ϕ(r,t) in the domain
r < A(t):
1
r2
∂
∂r

r2 ∂
∂r
∂2ϕ
∂t2 + ω2
Nϕ

−4πηRo
∂2ϕ
∂t2 = 0
(6.81)
The incompressible liquid ﬂow outside the cloud, r ≥A(t), must have the standard
solution of the form:
u(r,t) = C(t)
r2
; r ≥A(t)
(6.82)
p(r,t) = p∞(t) + ρ
r
dC(t)
dt
−ρC2
2r4 ; r ≥A(t)
(6.83)
where C(t) is of perturbation order. It follows that, to the ﬁrst order in ϕ(r,t), the
continuity of u(r,t) and p(r,t) at the interface between the cloud and the pure liquid
leads to the following boundary condition for ϕ(r,t):

1 + Ao
∂
∂r
∂2ϕ
∂t2 + ω2
Nϕ

r=Ao
= ¯p −p∞(t)
R2oρ
(6.84)

176
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows
The solution of Equation (6.81) under the above boundary condition is
ϕ(r,t) = −1
ρR2o
Re

˜p
ω2
N −ω2
ejωt
cosλAo
sinλr
λr

;
r < Ao
(6.85)
where:
λ2 = 4πηRo
ω2
ω2
N −ω2
(6.86)
Another possible solution involving (cosλr)/λr has been eliminated since ϕ(r,t) must
clearly be ﬁnite as r →0. Therefore in the domain r < Ao:
R(r,t) = Ro −
1
ρRo
Re

˜p
ω2
N −ω2
ejωt
cosλAo
sinλr
λr

(6.87)
u(r,t) = 1
ρ Re

j ˜p
ω
1
r
sinλr
λr
−cosλr

ejωt
cosλAo

(6.88)
p(r,t) = ¯p −Re

˜psinλr
λr
ejωt
cosλAo

(6.89)
The entire ﬂow has thus been determined in terms of the prescribed quantities
Ao,Ro,η,ω, and ˜p.
Note ﬁrst that the cloud has a number of natural frequencies and modes of
oscillation. From Equation (6.85) it follows that, if ˜p were zero, oscillations would
only occur if
ω = ωN
or
λAo = (2n −1)π
2 , n = 0 , ±2...
(6.90)
and, therefore, using Equation (6.86) for λ, the natural frequencies, ωn, of the cloud
are found to be:
1. ω∞= ωN, the natural frequency of an individual bubble in an inﬁnite liquid,
and
2. ωn = ωN

1 + 16ηRoA2
o/π(2n −1)2 1
2 ; n = 1,2,..., which is an inﬁnite series of
frequencies of which ω1 is the lowest. The higher frequencies approach ωN as n
tends to inﬁnity.
The lowest natural frequency, ω1, can be written in terms of the mean void fraction,
αo = ητo/(1 + ητo), as
ω1 = ωN

1 +
4
3π2
A2
o
R2o
αo
1 −αo
−1
2
(6.91)
Hence, the natural frequencies of the cloud will extend to frequencies much smaller
than the individual bubble frequency, ωN, if the initial void fraction, αo, is much
larger than the square of the ratio of bubble size to cloud size (αo ≫R2
o/A2
o). If
the reverse is the case (αo ≪R2
o/A2
o), all the natural frequencies of the cloud are
contained in a small range just below ωN.
Typical natural modes of oscillation of the cloud are depicted in Figure 6.21,
where normalized amplitudes of the bubble radius and pressure ﬂuctuations are

6.10 Spherical Bubble Cloud
177
1.0
0.5
0
–0.5
0.5
1.0
0
Normalized Radial Coordinate, r/A
Natural Mode Shapes
Figure 6.21 Natural mode shapes as a function of the normalized radial position, r

Ao, in
the cloud for various orders n = 1 (solid line), 2 (dash-dotted line), 3 (dotted line), 4 ( bro-
ken line). The arbitrary vertical scale represents the amplitude of the normalized undamped
oscillations of the bubble radius, the pressure, and the bubble concentration per unit liquid
volume. The oscillation of the velocity is proportional to the slope of these curves.
shown as functions of position, r/Ao, within the cloud. The amplitude of the radial
velocity oscillation is proportional to the slope of these curves. Since each bubble is
supposed to react to a uniform far ﬁeld pressure, the validity of the model is limited
to wave numbers, n, such that n ≪Ao/Ro. Note that the ﬁrst mode involves almost
uniform oscillations of the bubbles at all radial positions within the cloud. Higher
modes involve amplitudes of oscillation near the center of the cloud, which become
larger and larger relative to the amplitudes in the rest of the cloud. In effect, an
outer shell of bubbles essentially shields the exterior ﬂuid from the oscillations of
the bubbles in the central core, with the result that the pressure oscillations in the
exterior ﬂuid are of smaller amplitude for the higher modes. The corresponding
shielding effects during forced excitation are illustrated in Figure 6.22, which shows
the distribution of the amplitude of bubble radius oscillation, |ϕ|, within the cloud
at various excitation frequencies, ω. Note that, while the entire cloud responds in a
fairly uniform manner for ω < ωN, only a surface layer of bubbles exhibits signiﬁcant
response when ω > ωN. In the latter case the entire core of the cloud is essentially
shielded by the outer layer.
The variations in the response at different frequencies are shown in more detail
in Figure 6.23, in which the amplitude at the cloud surface, |ϕ(Ao,t)|, is presented
as a function of ω. The solid line corresponds to the above analysis, which did not
include any bubble damping. Consequently, there are asymptotes to inﬁnity at each
of the cloud natural frequencies; for clarity we have omitted the numerous asymp-
totes that occur just below the bubble natural frequency, ωN. Also shown in this
ﬁgure are the corresponding results when a reasonable estimate of the damping is
included in the analysis (d’Agostino and Brennen 1989). The attenuation due to
the damping is much greater at the higher frequencies so that, when damping is

178
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows
0.15
0.10
0.05
	2 = 	2
1 / 2
Normalized Amplitude of Bubble Radius
Oscillation,  	 
Normalized Radial Coordinate, r/A
0
0.5
1.0
	2 = (	2
1 + 	2
2 ) / 2
	2 = 1.1	2
N
	2 = 2 	2
N
Figure 6.22 The distribution of bubble radius oscillation amplitudes, |ϕ|, within a cloud
subjected to forced excitation at various frequencies, ω, as indicated (for the case of
αo(1 −α o) A2o/R2o = 0.822). F r o m d ’ A go s t i n o an d B ren n en ( 1989).
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.5
Multiple
Asymptotes
1.0
1.5
0
Square of the Reduced Frequency, 	2/	2
N
Normalized Amplitude of Bubble Radius
Oscillation,  (AO, t)
Figure 6.23 The amplitude of the bubble radius oscillation at the cloud surface, |ϕ(Ao,t)|, as a
function of frequency (for the case of αo(1−α o) A2o/R2o = 0.822). Solid line is without damp ing;
b r o k en l i n e i n cl u d es d amp i n g. F ro m d ’ A go st i n o an d B r en n en ( 1989).
included (Figure 6.23), the dominant feature of the response is the lowest natural
frequency of the cloud. The response at the bubble natural frequency becomes much
less signiﬁcant.
The effect of varying the parameter, αo(1 −αo)A2
o/R2
o, is shown in Figure 6.24.
Note that increasing the void fraction causes a reduction in both the amplitude and
frequency of the dominant response at the lowest natural frequency of the cloud.
d’Agostino and Brennen (1988) have also calculated the acoustical absorption and
scattering cross-sections of the cloud that this analysis implies. Not surprisingly, the
dominant peaks in the cross-sections occur at the lowest cloud natural frequency.

6.10 Spherical Bubble Cloud
179
0.5
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
1.0
1.5
0
Square of the Reduced Frequency, 	2/	2
N
Normalized Amplitude of Bubble Radius
Oscillation,  (AO, t)
Figure 6.24 The amplitude of the bubble radius oscillation at the cloud surface, |ϕ(Ao,t)|, as
a function of frequency for damped oscillations at three values of αo(1 −αo)A2o/R2o equal to
0.822 (solid line), 0.411 (dot-dash line), and 1.65 (dashed line). From d’Agostino and Brennen
(1989).
It is important to emphasize that the analysis presented above is purely linear
and that there are likely to be very signiﬁcant nonlinear effects that may have a
major effect on the dynamics and acoustics of real bubble clouds. Hanson et al.
(1981) and Mørch (1980, 1981) visualize that the collapse of a cloud of bubbles
involves the formation and inward propagation of a shock wave and that the focus-
ing of this shock at the center of the cloud creates the enhancement of the noise and
damage potential associated with cloud collapse (see Section 3.7). The deformations
of the individual bubbles within a collapsing cloud have been examined numerically
by Chahine and Duraiswami (1992), who showed that the bubbles on the periphery
of the cloud develop inwardly directed reentrant jets (see Section 3.5).
Numerical investigations of the nonlinear dynamics of cavity clouds have been
carried out by Chahine (1982), Omta (1987), and Kumar and Brennen (1991, 1992,
1993). Kumar and Brennen have obtained weakly nonlinear solutions to a number
of cloud problems by retaining only the terms that are quadratic in the amplitude;
this analysis is a natural extension of the weakly nonlinear solutions for a single
bubble described in Section 4.6. One interesting phenomenon that emerges from
this nonlinear analysis involves the interactions between the bubbles of different size
that would commonly occur in any real cloud. The phenomenon, called “harmonic
cascading” (Kumar and Brennen 1992), occurs when a relatively small number of
larger bubbles begins to respond nonlinearly to some excitation. Then the higher
harmonics produced will excite the much larger number of smaller bubbles at their
natural frequency. The process can then be repeated to even smaller bubbles. In
essence, this nonlinear effect causes a cascading of ﬂuctuation energy to smaller
bubbles and higher frequencies.
In all of the above we have focused, explicitly or implicitly, on spherical bubble
clouds. Solutions of the basic equations for other, more complex geometries are

180
Homogeneous Bubbly Flows
not readily obtained. However, d’Agostino et al. (1988) have examined some of the
characteristics of this class of ﬂows past slender bodies (for example, the ﬂow over
a wavy surface). Clearly, in the absence of bubble dynamics, one would encounter
two types of ﬂow: subsonic and supersonic. Interestingly, the inclusion of bubble
dynamics leads to three types of ﬂow. At sufﬁciently low speeds one obtains the
usual elliptic equations of subsonic ﬂow. And when the sonic speed is exceeded,
the equations become hyberbolic and the ﬂow supersonic. However, with further
increase in speed, the time rate of change becomes equivalent to frequencies above
the natural frequency of the bubbles. Then the equations become elliptic again and a
new ﬂow regime, termed “super-resonant,” occurs. d’Agostino et al. (1988) explore
the consequences of this and other features of these slender body ﬂows.
References
Batchelor, G.K. (1969). In Fluid Dynamics Transactions, 4, (eds: W.Fizdon, P.Kucharczyk,
and W.J.Prosnak). Polish Sci. Publ., Warsaw.
Campbell, I.J. and Pitcher. A.S. (1958). Shock waves in a liquid containing gas bubbles. Proc.
Roy. Soc. London, A, 243, 534–545.
Carstensen, E.L. and Foldy, L.L. (1947). Propagation of sound through a liquid containing
bubbles. J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., 19, 481–501.
Chahine, G.L. (1982). Cloud cavitation: theory. Proc. 14th ONR Symp. on Naval Hydrody-
namics, 165–194.
Chahine, G.L. and Duraiswami, R. (1992). Dynamical interactions in a multibubble cloud.
ASME J. Fluids Eng., 114, 680–686.
Chapman, R.B. and Plesset, M.S. (1971). Thermal effects in the free oscillation of gas bubbles.
ASME J. Basic Eng., 93, 373–376.
Crespo, A. (1969). Sound and shock waves in liquids containing bubbles. Phys. Fluids, 12,
2274–2282.
d’Agostino, L., and Brennen, C.E. (1983). On the acoustical dynamics of bubble clouds.
ASME Cavitation and Multiphase Flow Forum, 72–75.
d’Agostino, L., and Brennen, C.E. (1988). Acoustical absorption and scattering cross-sections
of spherical bubble clouds. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 84, 2126–2134.
d’Agostino, L., and Brennen, C.E. (1989). Linearized dynamics of spherical bubble clouds.
J. Fluid Mech., 199, 155–176.
d’Agostino, L., Brennen, C.E., and Acosta, A.J. (1988). Linearized dynamics of two-
dimensional bubbly and cavitating ﬂows over slender surfaces. J. Fluid Mech., 192,
485–509.
Foldy, L.L. (1945). The multiple scattering of waves. Phys. Rev., 67, 107–119.
Fox, F.E., Curley, S.R., and Larson, G.S. (1955). Phase velocity and absorption measure-
ments in water containing air bubbles. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 27, 534–539.
Gouse, S.W. and Brown, G.A. (1964). A survey of the velocity of sound in two-phase
mixtures. ASME Paper 64-WA/FE-35.
Hanson, I., Kedrinskii, V.K., and Mørch, K.A. (1981). On the dynamics of cavity clusters.
J. Appl. Phys., 15, 1725–1734.
Henry, R.E. and Fauske, H.K. (1971). The two-phase critical ﬂow of one-component mixtures
in nozzles, oriﬁces, and short tubes. ASME J. Heat Transfer, 93, 179–187.
Karplus, H.B. (1958). The velocity of sound in a liquid containing gas bubbles. Illinois Inst.
Tech. Rep. COO-248.
Kumar, S. and Brennen, C.E. (1991). Non-linear effects in the dynamics of clouds of bubbles.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 89, 707–714.

References
181
Kumar, S. and Brennen, C.E. (1992). Harmonic cascading in bubble clouds. Proc. Int. Symp.
on Propulsors and Cavitation, Hamburg, 171–179.
Kumar, S. and Brennen, C.E. (1993). Some nonlinear interactive effects in bubbly cavitation
clouds. J. Fluid Mech., 253, 565–591.
Macpherson, J.D. (1957). The effect of gas bubbles on sound propagation in water. Proc.
Phys. Soc. London, 70B, 85–92.
Maneely, D.J. (1962). A study of the expansion process of low quality steam through a de
Laval nozzle. Univ. of Calif. Radiation Lab. Rep. UCRL-6230.
Minnaert, M. (1933). Musical air bubbles and the sound of running water. Phil. Mag., 16,
235–248.
Mørch, K.A. (1980). On the collapse of cavity cluster in ﬂow cavitation. Proc. First Int.
Conf. on Cavitation and Inhomogenieties in Underwater Acoustics, Springer Series in
Electrophysics, 4, 95–100.
Mørch, K.A. (1981). Cavity cluster dynamics and cavitation erosion. Proc. ASME Cavitation
and Polyphase Flow Forum, 1–10.
Muir, T.F. and Eichhorn, R. (1963). Compressible ﬂow of an air-water mixture through a
vertical two-dimensional converging-diverging nozzle. Proc. 1963 Heat Transfer and Fluid
Mechanics Institute, Stanford Univ. Press, 183–204.
Neusen, K.F. (1962). Optimizing of ﬂow parameters for the expansion of very low quality
steam. Univ. of Calif. Radiation Lab. Rep. UCRL-6152.
Noordzij, L. (1973). Shock waves in mixtures of liquid and air bubbles. Ph.D. Thesis,
Technische Hogeschool, Twente, Netherlands.
Noordzij, L. and van Wijngaarden, L. (1974). Relaxation effects, caused by relative motion,
on short waves in gas-bubble/liquid mixtures. J. Fluid Mech., 66, 115–143.
Omta, R. (1987). Oscillations of a cloud of bubbles of small and not so small amplitude.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 82, 1018–1033.
Petroff, C. (1993). The interaction of breaking solitary waves with an armored bed. Ph.D.
Thesis, Calif. Inst. of Tech.
Silberman, E. (1957). Sound velocity and attenuation in bubbly mixtures measured in
standing wave tubes. J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 18, 925–933.
Symington, W.A. (1978). Analytical studies of steady and non-steady motion of a bubbly
liquid. Ph.D. Thesis, Calif. Inst. of Tech.
Tangren, R.F., Dodge, C.H., and Seifert, H.S. (1949). Compressibility effects in two-phase
ﬂow. J. Appl. Phys., 20, No. 7, 637–645.
van Wijngaarden, L. (1964). On the collective collapse of a large number of gas bubbles in
water. Proc. 11th Int. Cong. Appl. Mech., Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 854–861.
van Wijngaarden, L. (1972). One-dimensional ﬂow of liquids containing small gas bubbles.
Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech., 4, 369–396.

7
Cavitating Flows
7.1 Introduction
We begin this discussion of cavitation in ﬂows by describing the effect of the ﬂow
on a single cavitation “event.” This is the term used in referring to the processes
that occur when a single cavitation nucleus is convected into a region of low pres-
sure within the ﬂow, grows explosively to macroscopic size, and collapses when it
is convected back into a region of higher pressure. Pioneering observations of indi-
vidual cavitation events were made by Knapp and his associates at the California
Institute of Technology in the 1940s (see, for example, Knapp and Hollander 1948)
using high-speed movie cameras capable of 20,000 frames per second. Shortly there-
after Plesset (1948), Parkin (1952), and others began to model these observations
of the growth and collapse of traveling cavitation bubbles using modiﬁcations of
Rayleigh’s original equation of motion for a spherical bubble. Many analyses and
experiments on traveling bubble cavitation followed, and a brief description these
is included in the next section. All of the models are based on two assumptions: that
the bubbles remain spherical and that events do not interact with one another.
However, observations of real ﬂows demonstrate that even single cavitation
bubbles are often far from spherical. Indeed, they may not even be single bubbles
but rather a cloud of smaller bubbles. Departure from sphericity is often the result
of the interaction of the bubble with the pressure gradients and shear forces in the
ﬂow or the interaction with a solid surface. In Section 7.3 we describe some of these
effects while still assuming that the events are sufﬁciently far apart in space and
time that they do not interact with one another or modify the global liquid ﬂow
in any signiﬁcant way. Often the words “limited cavitation” are used to distinguish
these circumstances from the more complex phenomena that occur at higher event
densities.
When the frequency of cavitation events increases in space or time such that
they begin to interact with one another, a whole new set of phenomena may be
manifest. They may begin to interact hydrodynamically, and some of the resulting
phenomena are described and analysed in Chapter 6. Often these interaction phe-
nomena can have important practical consequences as is the case, for example, with
cloud cavitation (see section 3.7).
182

7.2 Traveling Bubble Cavitation
183
But increase in the density of events also causes the formation of large-scale
cavitation structures either because of the coalescence of individual bubbles (often
because they accumulate in regions of recirculating ﬂow) or because a large region
of the ﬂow vaporizes. Typical large-scale structures include cavitating vortices and
attached cavities. As a result, cavitating ﬂows can exhibit a number of different
kinds of cavitation; later in this chapter we shall describe some of the forms that
large-scale cavitation structures can take. Some of the analytical methods used to
understand and predict these structures are discussed in the next chapter.
7.2 Traveling Bubble Cavitation
Since the early work by Plesset (1948) had demonstrated some approximate valid-
ity for models of cavitation events that use the equation we now refer to as the
Rayleigh-Plesset equation, Parkin (1952) was motivated to attempt a more detailed
model for the growth of traveling cavitation bubbles in the ﬂow around a body.
It was assumed that the bubbles began as micron-sized nuclei in the liquid of the
oncoming stream and that the bubble moved with the liquid velocity along a stream-
line close to the solid surface. Cavitation inception was deemed to occur when the
bubbles reached an observable size of the order of 1 mm. Parkin believed the lack
of agreement between this theory and the experimental observations was due to
the neglect of the boundary layer. Subsequent experiments by Kermeen, McGraw,
and Parkin (1955) revealed that cavitation could result either from free stream
nuclei as earlier assumed or from nuclei originating from imperfections in the head-
form surface, which would detach when they reached a critical size. Later, Arakeri
and Acosta (1973) observed that, if separation occurs close to the low-pressure
region, then free stream nuclei could not only be supplied to the cavitating zone
by the oncoming stream but could also be supplied by the recirculating ﬂow down-
stream of separation. Under such circumstances some of these recirculating nuclei
could be remnants from a cavitation event itself, and hence there exists the pos-
sibility of hysteretic effects. Though the supply of nuclei either from the surface
or from downstream may occasionally be important, the majority of the experi-
mental observations indicate that the primary supply is from nuclei present in the
incident free stream. Other viscous boundary layer effects on cavitation incep-
tion and on traveling bubble cavitation are reviewed by Holl (1969) and Arakeri
(1979).
Rayleigh-Plesset models of traveling bubble cavitation that attempted to incor-
porate the effects of the boundary layer include the work of Oshima (1961) and Van
der Walle (1962). Holl and Kornhauser (1970) added the thermal effects on bubble
growth and explored the inﬂuence of initial conditions such as the size and location
of the nucleus. Like Parkin’s (1952) original model these improved versions contin-
ued to assume that the nucleus or bubble moves along a streamline with the ﬂuid
velocity. However, Johnson and Hsieh (1966) showed that since the streamlines
that encounter the low-pressure region are close to the surface and, therefore, close
to the stagnation streamline, nuclei will experience large ﬂuid accelerations and

184
Cavitating Flows
pressure gradients as they pass close to the front stagnation point. The effect is to
force the nuclei to move outwards away from the stagnation streamline. Moreover,
the larger nuclei, which are those most likely to cavitate, will be displaced more
than the smaller nuclei. Johnson and Hsieh termed this the “screening” effect, and
more recent studies have conﬁrmed its importance in cavitation inception. But this
screening effect is only one of the effects that the accelerations and pressure gradi-
ents in the ﬂow can have on the nucleus and on the growing and collapsing cavitation
bubble. In the next section we turn to a description of these interactions.
7.3 Bubble/Flow Interactions
The maximum-modulus theorem states that maxima of a harmonic function must
occur on the boundary and not in the interior of the region of solution of that func-
tion (see, for example, Titchmarsh 1947). Consequently, a pressure minimum in a
steady, inviscid, potential ﬂow must occur on the boundary of that ﬂow (see Kirch-
hoff 1869, Birkhoff and Zarantonello 1957). Moreover, real ﬂuid effects in many
ﬂows do not alter the fact that the minimum pressure occurs at or close to a solid
surface. Perhaps the most common exception to this rule is in vortex cavitation,
where the unsteady effects and/or viscous effects associated with vortex shedding or
turbulence cause deviation from the maximum-modulus theorem; but discussion of
this type of cavitation is delayed until later. In the many ﬂows in which the minimum
pressure does occur on a boundary, it follows that the cavitation bubbles that form in
the vicinity of that point are likely to be affected by and to interact with that bound-
ary, which we will assume is a solid surface. We observe, furthermore, that any
curvature of the solid surface or, more speciﬁcally, of the streamlines in the vicinity
of the minimum pressure point will cause pressure gradients normal to the surface,
which are often substantially larger than those in the streamwise direction. These
normal pressure gradients will force the bubble toward the surface and may cause
substantial departure from sphericity. Consequently, even before boundary layer
effects are factored into the picture, it is evident that the dynamics of individual
cavitation bubbles may be signiﬁcantly altered by interactions with the nearby solid
surface and the ﬂow near that surface. In this section we focus attention on these
bubble/wall or bubble/ﬂow interactions (grouped together in the term bubble/ﬂow
interactions).
Before describing some of the experimental observations of bubble/ﬂow inter-
actions, it is valuable to consider the relative sizes of the cavitation bubbles and
the viscous boundary layer. In the ﬂow of a uniform stream of velocity, U, around
an object such as a hydrofoil with typical dimension, ℓ, the thickness of the lami-
nar boundary layer near the minimum pressure point will be given qualitatively by
δ = (νLℓ/U)
1
2 . Parenthetically, we note that transition to turbulence usually occurs
downstream of the point of minimum pressure, and consequently the appropriate
boundary layer thickness for limited cavitation conﬁned to the immediate neighbor-
hood of the low-pressure region is the laminar boundary layer thickness. Moreover,
the approximate analysis of Section 2.5 yields a typical maximum bubble radius, RM,

7.4 Experimental Observations
185
given by
RM ≈2ℓ( −σ −Cpmin)
(7.1)
It follows that the ratio of the boundary layer thickness to the maximum bubble
radius, δ/RM, is roughly given by
δ
RM
=
1
2( −σ −Cpmin)
% νL
ℓU
& 1
2
(7.2)
Therefore, provided (−σ −Cpmin) is of the order of 0.1 or greater, it follows that for
the high Reynolds numbers, Uℓ/νL, which are typical of most of the ﬂows in which
cavitation is a problem, the boundary layer is usually much thinner than the typical
dimension of the bubble. This does not mean the boundary layer is unimportant.
But we can anticipate that those parts of the cavitation bubble farthest from the
solid surface will interact with the primarily inviscid ﬂow outside the boundary layer,
while those parts close to the solid surface will be affected by the boundary layer.
7.4 Experimental Observations
Some of the early (and classic) observations of individual traveling cavitation bub-
bles by Knapp and Hollander (1948), Parkin (1952), and Ellis (1952) make mention
of the deformation of the bubbles by the ﬂow. But the focus of attention soon shifted
to the easier observations of the dynamics of individual bubbles in quiescent liq-
uid, and it is only recently that investigations of the deformation caused by the
ﬂow have resumed. Both Knapp and Hollander (1948) and Parkin (1952) observed
that almost all cavitation bubbles are closer to hemispherical than spherical and
that they appear to be separated from the solid surface by a thin ﬁlm of liquid.
Such bubbles are clearly evident in other photographs of traveling cavitation bub-
bles on a hydrofoil such as those of Blake et al. (1977) or Brianc¸on-Marjollet et al.
(1990).
A number of recent research efforts have focused on these bubble/ﬂow inter-
actions, including the work of van der Meulen and van Renesse (1989) and
Brianc¸on-Marjollet et al. (1990). Recently, Ceccio and Brennen (1991) and Kuhn
de Chizelle et al. (1992a,b) have made an extended series of observations of cavita-
tion bubbles in the ﬂow around axisymmetric bodies, including studies of the scaling
of the phenomena. Two axisymmetric body shapes were used, both of which have
been employed in previous cavitation investigations. The ﬁrst of these was a so-
called “Schiebe body” (Schiebe 1972) which is one of a series based on the solutions
for the potential ﬂow generated by a normal source disk (Weinstein 1948) and ﬁrst
suggested for use in cavitation experiments by Van Tuyl (1950). One of the impor-
tant characteristics of this shape is that the boundary layer does not separate in the
region of low pressure within which cavitation bubbles occur. The second body had
the ITTC headform shape originally used by Lindgren and Johnsson (1966) for the
comparative experiments described in Section 1.15. This headform exhibits laminar
separation within the region in which the cavitation bubbles occur. For both head-
forms, the isobars in the neighborhood of the minimum pressure point exhibit a

186
Cavitating Flows
D/50
CPmin = –0.78
CP = –0.45
–0.75
–0.70
–0.65
–0.60
–0.55
–0.50
Figure 7.1 Isobars in the vicinity of the minimum pressure point on the axisymmetric Schiebe
headform with values of the pressure coefﬁcient, Cp, as indicated. The pressures were
obtained from a potential ﬂow calculation. The insert shows the headform shape and the
area t h at h as b een en l arged i n t h e mai n ﬁ gu re (d ash ed l i n es). F r o m S c h i eb e ( 1972) an d K u h n
d e C h i z el l e et al . ( 1992b ).
large pressure gradient normal to the surface, as illustrated by the isobars for the
Schiebe body shown in Figure 7.1. This pressure gradient is associated with the cur-
vature of the body and therefore the streamlines in the vicinity of the minimum
pressure point. Consequently, at a given cavitation number, σ, the region below the
vapor pressure that is enclosed between the solid surface and the Cp = −σ isobaric
surface is long and thin compared with the size of the headform. Only nuclei that
pass through this thin volume will cavitate.
The observations of Ceccio and Brennen (1991) at lower Reynolds numbers will
be described ﬁrst. Typical photographs of bubbles on the 5.08 cm diameter Schiebe
headform during the cycle of bubble growth and collapse are shown in Figure 7.2.
Simultaneous proﬁle and plan views provide a more complete picture of the bub-
ble geometry. In all cases the shape during the initial growth phase was that of a
spherical cap, the bubble being separated from the wall by a thin layer of liquid of
the same order of magnitude as the boundary layer thickness. Later developments
depend on the geometry of the headform and the Reynolds number, so we begin
with the simplest case, that of the Schiebe body at relatively low Reynolds num-
ber. Typical photographs for this case are included in Figure 7.2. As the bubble
begins to enter the region of adverse pressure gradient, the exterior frontal surface
begins to be pushed inward, causing the proﬁle of the bubble to appear wedge-
like. Thus the collapse is initiated on the exterior frontal surface of the bubble,
and this often leads to the bubble ﬁssioning into forward and aft bubbles as seen in
Figure 7.2.

7.4 Experimental Observations
187
Figure 7.2 A series of photographs illustrating the growth and collapse of traveling cavitation
bubbles in a ﬂow around a 5.08 cm diameter Schiebe headform at σ = 0.45 and a speed of
9 m/s. Simultaneous proﬁle and plan views are presented but each row is, in fact, a different
bubble. The ﬂow is from right to left. The scale is 4.5 times lifesize. From Ceccio and Brennen
(1991).
Two other processes are occuring at the same time. First, the streamwise
thickness of the bubble decreases faster than its spanwise breadth (spanwise being
deﬁned as the direction parallel to the headform surface and normal to the oncom-
ing stream), so that the largest dimension of the bubble is its spanwise breadth.
Second, the bubble acquires signiﬁcant spanwise vorticity through its interactions
with the boundary layer during the growth phase. Consequently, as the collapse
proceeds, this vorticity is concentrated and the bubble evolves into one (or two or
possibly more) cavitating vortex with a spanwise axis. These vortex bubbles pro-
ceed to collapse and seem to rebound as a cloud of much smaller bubbles. Often

188
Cavitating Flows
Figure 7.3 Examples of simultaneous proﬁle and plan views illustrating the instability of the
l i q u i d l ayer under a traveling cavitation bubble. From Ceccio and Brennen (1991) exp eri -
ments with a 5.08 cm diameter ITTC headform at σ = 0.45 and a speed of 8.7 m/s. The ﬂow
is from right to left and the scale is 3.8 times lifesize.
a coherent second collapse of this cloud was observed when the bubbles were not
too scattered by the ﬂow. Ceccio and Brennen (1991) (see also Kumar and Brennen
1993) conclude that the ﬂow-induced ﬁssion prior to collapse can have a substantial
effect on the noise impulse (see Section 3.8).
Two additional phenomena were observed on the ITTC headform, which exhib-
ited laminar separation. The ﬁrst of these was the observation that the layer of
liquid underneath the bubble would become disrupted by some instability. As seen
in Figure 7.3, this results in a bubbly layer of ﬂuid that subsequently gets left behind
the main bubble. Thus the instability of the liquid layer leads to another process of
bubble ﬁssion. Because of the physical separation, the bubbly layer would collapse
after the main body of the bubble.
The second and perhaps more consequential phenomenon observed with the
ITTC headform only occurs with the occasional bubble. Infrequently, when a
bubble passes the point of laminar separation, it triggers the formation of local
“attached cavitation” streaks at the lateral or spanwise extremities of the bubble, as
seen in Figure 7.4. Then, as the main bubble proceeds downstream, these “streaks”
or “tails” of attached cavitation are stretched out behind the main bubble, the trail-
ing ends of the tails being attached to the solid surface. Subsequently, the main
bubble collapses ﬁrst, leaving the “tails” to persist for a fraction longer, as illustrated
by the lower photograph in Figure 7.4.

7.4 Experimental Observations
189
Figure 7.4 Examples illustrating the attached tails formed behind a traveling cavitation bub-
ble. The top two are simultaneous proﬁle and plan views. The bottom shows the persistence
of the tails after the bubble h as co llapsed . Fro m Ceccio and Brennen (1991) exp eri m en t s w i t h
a 5.08 cm diameter ITTC headform at σ = 0.42 and a speed of 9 m/s. The ﬂow is from right
to left and the scale is 3.8 times lifesize.
The importance of these occasional “events with tails” did not become clear
until tests were conducted at much higher Reynolds numbers, with larger headforms
(up to 50.5 cm in diameter) and somewhat higher speeds (up to 15 m/s). These
tests were part of an investigation of the scaling of the bubble dynamic phenom-
ena described above (Kuhn de Chizelle et al. 1992a,b). One notable observation
was the presence of a “dimple” on the exterior surface of all the individual trav-
eling bubbles; examples of this dimple are included in Figure 7.5. They are not
the precursor to a reentrant jet, for the dimple seems to be relatively stable dur-
ing most of the collapse process. More importantly, it was observed that, at higher
Reynolds number, “attached tails” occurred even on these Schiebe bodies, which
did not normally exhibit laminar separation. Moreover, the probability of occurence
of attached tails increased as the Reynolds number increased and the attached cav-
itation began to be more extensive. As the Reynolds number increased further, the
bubbles would tend to trigger attached cavities over the entire wake of the bub-
ble as seen in the lower two photographs in Figure 7.5. Moreover, the attached
cavitation would tend to remain for a longer period after the main bubble had dis-
appeared. Eventually, at the highest Reynolds numbers tested, it appeared that the
passage of a single bubble was sufﬁcient to trigger a “patch” of attached cavitation

190
Cavitating Flows
Figure 7.5 Typical cavitation events from the scaling experiments of Kuhn de Chizelle et al.
(1992b ) s h o w i n g an u n at t ach ed bubble with “dimp le”(upper left), a bubble with attach ed tails
(upper right), and a transient bubble-induced patch (middle), all occurring on the 50.8 cm
diameter Schiebe headform at σ = 0.605 and a speed of 15 m/s. The bottom photograph
shows a patch on the 25.4 cm headform at σ = 0.53 and a speed of 15 m/s. The ﬂow is
from right to left. The top three are shown at 1.3 times lifesize and the bottom at 1.25 times
lifesize.

7.5 Large-Scale Cavitation Structures
191
(Figure 7.5, bottom), which would persist for an extended period after the bubble
had long disappeared. This progression of events and the changes in the probabili-
ties of the different kinds of events with Reynolds number imply a rich complexity
in the micro-ﬂuidmechanics of cavitation bubbles, much of which remains to be
understood. Its importance lies in the fact that these different types of events cause
differences in the collapse process which, in turn, alters the noise produced (see
Kuhn de Chizelle et al. 1992b) and, in all probability, the potential for cavitation
damage. For example, the events with attached tails were found to produce signiﬁ-
cantly less noise than the events without tails. Due to the changes in the probabilities
of occurence of these events with Reynolds number, this implies a scaling effect that
had not been previously recognized. It also suggests some possible strategies for the
reduction of cavitation noise and damage.
When examined in retrospect, one can identify many of these phenomena
in earlier photographic observations, including the pioneering, high-speed movies
taken by Knapp. As previously noted, Knapp and Hollander (1948), Parkin (1952),
and others noted the spherical-cap shape of most traveling cavitation bubbles. The
ITTC experiments (Lindgren and Johnsson 1966) emphasized the diversity in the
kinds of cavitation events that could occur on a given body, and later authors
attempted to identify, understand, and classify this spectrum of events. For example,
Holl and Carroll (1979) observed a variety of different types of cavitation events
on axisymmetric bodies and remarked that both traveling and attached cavitation
“patches” occurred and could be distinguished from traveling bubble cavitation.
A similar study of the different types of cavitation events was reported by Huang
(1979), whose “spots” are synonymous with “patches.”
7.5 Large-Scale Cavitation Structures
When the density of cavitation events becomes large enough, they begin to interact
and to alter the ﬂow in a signiﬁcant way. This increase in density may come about
as a result of a decrease in the cavitation number, which causes the activation of
increasingly smaller nuclei, or it may result from an increase in the population of
nuclei in the oncoming stream. As long as the interaction effects are small, they seem
to cause a decrease in the rate of growth of the bubbles (see, for example, Arakeri
and Shanmuganathan 1985) and a shift in the spectrum of the cavitation noise (see,
for example, Marboe, Billet, and Thompson 1986). Signiﬁcant progress has been
made in developing analytical models that incorporate such weak interaction effects
on traveling bubble cavitation; these models are described in chapter 6.
An example of dense traveling bubble cavitation is included in Figure 7.6. Note
that the bubbles seem to merge to form a single vapor-ﬁlled wake near the trailing
edge of the foil. Notice also the wispy trails of very small air bubbles that remain
after the vapor-ﬁlled cavity collapses. In a water tunnel special efforts are required
to allow these ﬁne bubbles sufﬁcient time to dissolve before they recirculate back
to the working section. Without such efforts the population of small bubbles in the
tunnel would quickly reach unacceptable levels. Even with special efforts it is clear

192
Cavitating Flows
Figure 7.6 Dense traveling bubble cavitation on the surface of a NACA 4412 hydrofoil at
zero incidence angle, a speed of 13.7 m/s and a cavitation number of 0.3. The ﬂow is from
left to right and the leading edge of the foil is just to the left of the white glare patch on the
su rf ace ( Kermeen 1956).
that cavitation itself contributes to the population of nuclei in a closed loop water
tunnel.
The large-scale cavitation structures that are formed when the cavitation num-
ber is reduced can take a variety of forms, and we review these in the next few
sections. In many practical devices such as pumps or propellers, the ﬁrst large-scale
structure to be observed as the cavitation number is decreased takes the form of a
cavitating vortex, so we begin with a discussion of vortex cavitation.
7.6 Vortex Cavitation
Many high Reynolds number ﬂows of practical importance contain a region of con-
centrated vorticity where the pressure in the vortex core is often signiﬁcantly smaller
than in the rest of the ﬂow. Such is the case, for example, in the tip vortices of ship’s
propellers or pump impellers or in the swirling ﬂow in the draft tube of a water
turbine. It follows that cavitation inception often occurs in these vortices and that,
with further reduction of the cavitation number, the entire core of the vortex may
become ﬁlled with vapor. Naturally, the term “vortex cavitation” is used for these
circumstances. In Figures 7.7 to 7.12 we present some examples of this particular
kind of large-scale cavitation structure. Figure 7.7 consists of photographs of cavi-
tating tip vortices on a ﬁnite aspect ratio hydrofoil at an angle of attack. In those
experiments of Higuchi, Rogers, and Arndt (1986) cavitation inception occurred
in the vortex some distance downstream of the tip at a cavitation number of about
σ = 1.4. With further decrease in pressure the cavitation in the core becomes contin-
uous, as illustrated by the picture on the left in Figure 7.7. This transition is probably
triggered by an accumulation of individual bubbles in the core; they will tend to

7.6 Vortex Cavitation
193
Figure 7.7 Cavitating tip vortices generated by a ﬁnite aspect ratio hydrofoil of ellipsoidal
planform at an angle of attack. On the left is a continuous tip vortex cavity at a cavitation
number, σ = 1.15, and an angle of attack of 7.5◦. On the right, the tip vortex emerges from
so me su rf ace cavi t at i o n at a l o w er val u e o f σ = 0.43 (angle of attack = 9.5◦ ). Reproduced
f r o m Hi gu ch i , Ro gers, an d A rn d t (1986) w i t h t h e au t h o rs’ p ermi ssi o n .
Figure 7.8 Cavitating tip vortex on a scale model of the low-pressure LOX turbopump
impeller in the Space Shuttle Main Engine. The ﬂuid is water, the inlet ﬂow coefﬁcient is
0.07 an d the cavitation number is 0.42. Rep roduced from Braisted (1979).
migrate to the center of the vortex due to the centrifugal pressure gradient. With fur-
ther decrease in σ, bubble and/or sheet cavitation appear on the hydrofoil surface
(Figure 7.7, photograph on right) and disturb the tip vortex which is nevertheless
still apparent. Cavitating tip vortices are also quite apparent in unshrouded pump
impellers as illustrated by Figure 7.8.
When continuous cavitating tip vortices occur at the tips of the blades of a pro-
peller they create a surprisingly stable ﬂow structure. As illustrated by Figure 7.9
the intertwined, helical cavitating vortices from the blade tips can persist for a long
distance downstream of the propeller.
Clearly cavitation can occur in any vortex, and Figures 7.10 and 7.11 present
two further examples. Figure 7.10 shows a typical picture of a cavitating vortex in

194
Cavitating Flows
Figure 7.9 Tip vortex cavitation on a model propeller. Reproduced with permission of the
Netherlands Maritime Research Institute and Lips B.V.
Figure 7.10 Cavitating vortex in the draft tube of a Francis turbine. Reproduced with the
permission of P.Henry, Institut de Machines Hydrauliques et de Mecanique de Fluides, Ecole
Polytechnique Federal de Lausanne, Switzerland.
the swirling ﬂow in the draft tube of a Francis turbine. Often these draft tube vor-
tices can exhibit quite complex patterns of unsteady ﬂow. The vortices in a turbulent
mixing layer or wake will also cavitate, as illustrated in Figure 7.11, a photograph
of the separated wake behind a lifting ﬂat plate with a ﬂap. Looking closely at
the structures in this turbulent ﬂow, one can identify not only the large transverse

7.6 Vortex Cavitation
195
Figure 7.11 Cavitating vortices in the separated wake of a lifting ﬂat plate with a ﬂap; the ﬂow
is from the right to the left. Reproduced with the permission of A.J. Acosta.
Figure 7.12 The formation of a ring vortex in the closure region of an attached cavity on
an oscillating, ﬁnite-aspect-ratio hydrofoil with a chord of 0.152 m. The incidence angle is
oscillating between 5◦and 9◦at a frequency of 10 Hz. The ﬂow is from left to right at a
velocity of 8.5 m/s and a mean cavitation number of 0.5. Note the cavitating tip vortex as
well as the attached cavity. Photograph by D.P. Hart.
vortices that contain many bubbles, but also the ﬁlament-like longitudinal vortices
ﬁrst identiﬁed in a single-phase mixing layer ﬂow by Bernal and Roshko (1986).
After that discovery by Bernal and Roshko one could recognize this secondary
vortex structure in photographs of cavitating wakes and mixing layers taken many
years previously, and yet its importance was not appreciated at the time. The
streamwise vortices can play a particularly important role in cavitation inception.
Katz and O’Hern (1986) have shown that, when streamwise vortices are present,
inception occurs in these longitudinal structures before it occurs in the primary or
transverse vortices.
The three-dimensional shedding of vortices from a ﬁnite aspect ratio foil or
other device can often lead to the formation and propagation of a ring vortex with a
vapor/gas core. Figure 7.12 shows such a cavitating vortex ring that has just emerged

196
Cavitating Flows
Figure 7.13 A vortex ring shed by the partial cavitation oscillations of a hydrofoil. The ﬂow
is from right to left. Reproduced with the permission of A.J. Acosta.
from the closure region of an attached cavity on an oscillating foil. Often these ring
vortices can persist for quite a distance as they are convected downstream. Another
example is shown in Figure 7.13; in this case the vortex shedding is caused by the
natural oscillations of a partially cavitating foil (see Section 7.9). The cavitating ring
vortex has its own velocity of propagation relative to the surrounding ﬂuid and has
therefore moved substantially above the rest of the wake at the moment when the
photograph was taken.
7.7 Cloud Cavitation
In many ﬂows of practical interest one observes the periodic formation and collapse
of a “cloud” of cavitation bubbles. Such a structure is termed “cloud cavitation.”
The temporal periodicity may occur naturally as a result of the shedding of cavitat-
ing vortices (see, for example, Figure 7.11), or it may be the response to a periodic
disturbance imposed on the ﬂow. Common examples of imposed ﬂuctuations are
the interaction between rotor and stator blades in a pump or turbine and the inter-
action between a ship’s propeller and the nonuniform wake created by the hull. In
many of these cases the coherent collapse of the cloud of bubbles (see, for exam-
ple, Figure 3.14) can cause more intense noise and more potential for damage than
in a similar nonﬂuctuating ﬂow (see Section 3.7). Bark and van Berlekom (1978),
Shen and Peterson (1978), Franc and Michel (1988), Kubota et al. (1989), and Hart
et al. (1990) have studied the complicated ﬂow patterns involved in the produc-
tion and collapse of a cavitating cloud on an oscillating hydrofoil. These studies
are exempliﬁed by the photographs of Figure 7.14, which show the formation, sep-
aration, and collapse of a cavitation cloud on a hydrofoil oscillating in pitch. All
of these studies emphasize that a substantial bang occurs as a result of the col-
lapse of the cloud; in Figure 7.14 this occurred between the middle and right-hand
photographs.
Cloud cavitation continues to be a primary concern for propeller and pump
manufacturers and is currently the subject of active research. In Chapter 6 we
presented some simpliﬁed, analytical investigations that provided some qualitative

7.8 Attached or Sheet Cavitation
197
Figure 7.14 Three frames illustrating the formation, separation, and collapse of a cavitation
cloud on the suction surface of a hydrofoil (0.152 m chord) oscillating in pitch with a fre-
quency of 5.8 Hz and an amplitude of ±5◦about a mean incidence angle of 5◦. The ﬂow
is from left to right, the tunnel velocity is 7.5 m/s and the mean cavitation number is 1.1.
Photographs by E.McKenney.
information on the coherent dynamics of these structures. More accurate modeling
of these complex, unsteady multiphase ﬂows poses some challenging problems that
have only begun to be addressed. The recent numerical modeling by Kubota, Kato,
and Yamaguchi (1992) is an important step in this direction.
7.8 Attached or Sheet Cavitation
Another class of large-scale cavitation structures is that which occurs when a wake
or region of separated ﬂow ﬁlls with vapor. Referring back to Figure 7.6, we note
that Kermeen (1956) only observed dense traveling bubbles when the angle of
attack was small. At angles of attack greater than about 10◦(or less than about
−2◦) cavitation occurred as a single vapor-ﬁlled separation zone as illustrated in
Figure 7.15. This form of cavitation on a hydrofoil or propeller blade is usually
termed “sheet” cavitation; in the context of pumps it is known as “blade” cavitation.
Bluff bodies often exhibit a sudden transition from traveling bubble cavitation
to a single vapor-ﬁlled wake as the cavitation number is decreased. An example is
shown in Figure 7.16 which includes two photographs of a cavitating sphere; the
transition occurs when the bubbly wake in the picture on the left suddenly becomes
a single vapor-ﬁlled void as seen in the picture on the right. In the context of bluff
bodies, a vapor-ﬁlled wake is often called a “fully developed” or “attached” cavity.
Clearly sheet, blade, fully developed, and attached cavities are terms for the same
large-scale cavitation structure.
When a sharp edge provides a clean deﬁnition for the leading edge of a fully
developed cavity, the surface of that cavity is often glassy smooth since the sepa-
rating boundary layer is usually laminar. This initially smooth surface can be seen
in the right-hand photograph of Figure 7.16 and in the photographs of Figure 7.17.
Depending on the shape of the forebody the interfacial boundary layer may rapidly
undergo transition to a turbulent interfacial layer, as is the case in the photograph
of the cavitating ogive in Figure 7.17 and the cavitating sphere in the photo-
graph on the right of Figure 7.16. For other headforms transition may be delayed

198
Cavitating Flows
Figure 7.15 Sheet cavitation on the suction surface of a NACA 4412 hydrofoil at an angle of
attack of 12◦ , a sp eed o f 10.7 m/s an d a cavitation number o f 1.05 (Kermeen 1956). T h e ﬂ o w
is from left to right.
Figure 7.16 Two photographs of a cavitating, 7.62 cm diameter sphere. The left photographs
shows bubble cavitation and bubbly wake prior to the transition to the fully developed cavity
sh o w n o n t h e ri gh t ( B r en n en 1970). T h e ﬂ o w i s f r o m ri gh t t o l ef t , t h e vel o c i t i es b ei n g 5.6 m/s
and 10.7 m/s, respectively.
Figure 7.17 Two fully developed cavities on a 5.95 cm diameter ogive (left) and a 7.62 cm
d i amet er d i sc (ri gh t ) set n o r mal t o t h e o n co mi n g s t r eam (B ren n en 1970). T h e ﬂ o w i s f r o m
right to left and the velocities are 7.62 m/s and 10.7 m/s, respectively.

7.8 Attached or Sheet Cavitation
199
Figure 7.18 Sheet cavitation on the ITTC headform. The ﬂow is from left to right with a
speed of 12.2 m/s and a cavitation number of 0.424. Reproduced with the permission of
A.J. Acosta.
Figure 7.19 Streak cavitation on a biconvex hydrofoil at a speed of 15.5 m/s and a cavitation
number of 0.11 (A rak eri 1975). T h e ﬂ o w i s f r o m l ef t t o ri gh t an d t h e l ead i n g ed ge o f t h e f o i l
is about 1 cm from the left-hand edge. Reproduced with the permission of V.H. Arakeri.
almost indeﬁnitely, as in the case of the cavitating disc of Figure 7.17 (see Brennen
1970).
When there is no sharp edge to initiate a fully developed cavity, several different
phenomena may occur. Cavitation separation may still occur along a well-deﬁned
and stable line on the body surface, as exempliﬁed by the photograph on the right
in Figure 7.16. Or the separation line may be interrupted, as in the photograph of
Figure 7.18. For example, such a scalloped leading edge is typical of cavitation in
bearings (Dowson and Taylor 1979).

200
Cavitating Flows
Other forms of developed cavitation can be strikingly different from that of
Figures 7.17 or 7.18. Sometimes the cavities occur as streaks, as exempliﬁed by
the photograph in Figure 7.19 of cavitation on the surface of a biconvex hydro-
foil (Arakeri 1975). Again a tranverse periodicity appears to occur in which one
can envisage that the expansion of the ﬂow in the streamtubes containing cavities
results in an increase in the pressure in the ﬂuid in between these cavitating stream-
tubes and therefore inhibits further lateral spreading of the cavitation. Currently
there does not appear to be any clear understanding of the reason for the transverse
periodicity of Figures 7.18 and 7.19.
7.9 Cavitating Foils
On a lifting foil (a hydrofoil), attached cavitation can take a number of forms, as
discussed in the review by Acosta (1973). When, as sketched in Figure 7.20, the
attached cavity closes on the suction surface of the foil, the condition is referred
to as “partial cavitation.” This is the form of attached cavitation most commonly
observed on propellers and in pumps. At lower cavitation numbers, the cavity may
close well downstream of the trailing edge of the foil, as shown in the lower sketch
in Figure 7.20. Such a conﬁguration is termed “super-cavitation” and propellers
for high-speed boats are often designed to be operated under these conditions.
In between these regimes, experiments have shown (Wade and Acosta 1966) that,
when the length of the cavity is close to the length of the foil (between about 3/4 and
4/3 times the chord), the ﬂow becomes unstable and the size of the cavity ﬂuctuates
quite violently between these limits. During this ﬂuctuation cycle, the cavity length-
ens fairly smoothly. On the other hand, it shortens by a process of “pinching-off” of
a large cloud of bubbles from the rear of the cavity, and this cloud can collapse quite
violently as described previously. However, there is also shed vorticity bound up in
the cloud, and this is concentrated by the collapse of the cloud. One result is the
Cavity
Cavity
(a)
Cavity Closure
Cavity Closure
(b)
Figure 7.20 Sketch of the types of attached cavitation on a lifting foil: (a) partial cavitation
(b) supercavitation.

7.10 Cavity Closure
201
formation of the vortex ring seen in Figure 7.13. In pumps and other devices, this
condition between partial and supercavitation clearly needs to be avoided because
of the potential damage that can result. Further discussion of this oscillating cavity
phenomenon is included in Section 8.8. It should also be noted that cavities may
ﬂuctuate for other reasons, as discussed in the next section.
Methods for the analysis of both partially and supercavitating ﬂows are dis-
cussed in the next chapter.
7.10 Cavity Closure
The ﬂow in the vicinity of cavity closure deserves further comment because it is quite
complex and involves processes that have not, as yet, been discussed. First, the ﬂow
is invariably turbulent since the boundary layer, which detaches from the body along
with the free surface, produces an interfacial boundary layer. This is almost always
unstable and undergoes transition to yield a turbulent interfacial layer (Brennen
1970). The level of turbulence in this layer grows rapidly as the closure region is
approached, so the ﬂow in that vicinity usually appears as a frothy turbulent mixing
motion. Where the two free surface streams collide, some ﬂow is deﬂected back
into the cavity. Observations of this “reentrant jet” were part of the motivation for
the reentrant jet model of cavity closure, which is sometimes employed in potential
ﬂow solutions (see Section 8.2). However, actual reentrant jets are nothing like as
coherent as the jet in that model; they could better be described as a frothy turbulent
mass tumbling back into the cavity.
Changes to the structure of the ﬂow in the closure region can occur in horizon-
tal ﬂows when the buoyancy forces become signiﬁcant. Such will be the case when
the Froude number based on cavity length, ℓ, Fr = U∞
0
(gℓ)
1
2 , is less than some
critical value denoted by Frc. For bodies of small aspect ratio (such as axisymmet-
ric headforms) it appears that Frc ≈2.5 (Brennen 1969) and, when Fr < Frc, the
reentrant jet structure no longer occurs. Instead, a pair of counter-rotating vortices
with gas/vapor cores form in the closure region (Cox and Claydon 1956); this type
of closure is much steadier and less turbulent than the reentrant jet type, which is
prevalent at higher Froude numbers. The rate at which vapor/gas can be entrained
by the counter-rotating vortex closure is much higher than for the reentrant jet
closure (Brennen 1969).
Returning to our discussion of the reentrant jet form of cavity closure, we
note that this ﬂow can also exhibit signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations. These ﬂuctuations can
be caused by vortex shedding from the rear of the cavity (Young and Holl 1966);
they may also be the result of some other, less well understood instability associated
with this complex multiphase ﬂow. Knapp (1955) ﬁrst described the cyclic process in
which a “pinching off” mechanism (similar to that described in the last section) pro-
duces vortices that initially have large, bubbly vapor/gas cores (see also Furness and
Hutton 1975). As the vapor condenses and the core of the cloud/vortex collapses,
the vorticity is concentrated and the vortices become more intense before they enter
the normal, single-phase wake ﬂow. After condensation, only small, remnant gas

202
Cavitating Flows
bubbles containing the residual noncondensable component remain to be convected
away into the far wake. It is, incidentally, this supply of microbubbles to the tun-
nel population that neccessitates the use of a resorber in a cavitation tunnel (see
Section 1.15).
It should also be noted that under some circumstances this cyclic process in the
cavity closure region is more evident than in others. Moreover, there are several
other instabilities that can trigger or promote such a cyclic shedding process. We
have already discussed one such instability in the preceding section, the partial cav-
itation instability. A somewhat similar cavity pulsation phenomenon occurs when
large super-cavities are created by supplying noncondensable gas to the wake of a
body. Such cavities, which are visually almost indistinguishable from their natural
or vapor-ﬁlled counterparts, are known as “ventilated” cavities. However, when
the gas supplied is increased to the point at which the entrainment processes in the
closure region (see below) are unable to carry away that volume of gas, the cav-
ity may begin to ﬂuctuate; a pinching-off process sheds a large gas volume into the
wake, and this is followed by regrowth of the cavity. This phenomenon was inves-
tigated by Silberman and Song (1961) and Song (1962). Finally, we should mention
one other process that may be at work in the closure region. In the case of pre-
dominantly vapor-ﬁlled cavities Jakobsen (1964) has suggested that a condensation
shock provides a mechanism for cavity closure (simple shocks of this kind were anal-
ysed in Section 6.9). This last suggestion deserves more study than it has received
to date.
Both the large-scale ﬂuctuations and the small-scale turbulence in the closure
region act to entrain bubbles and thus remove vapor/gas from the cavity, though it
is clear from the preceding paragraphs that the precise mechanisms of entrainment
may differ considerably from one closure conﬁguration to another. Measurements
of the volume rate of entrainment for large cavities with the steady, reentrant jet
type of closure (for example, Brennen 1969) suggest that the volume rate increases
with velocity as Un
∞where n is a little larger than unity. Using axisymmetric head-
forms of different size, b, Billet and Weir (1975) showed that though the volume
entrainment rate scaled approximately with U∞b2, there was a signiﬁcant variation
with cavitation number, σ, the volume rate increasing substantially as σ decreased
and the cavity became larger.
Under steady-state conditions, the removal of vapor and noncondensable gas
by entrainment in the closure region is balanced by the supply process of evapora-
tion and the release of gas from solution along the length of the free surface. These
supply processes will, in turn, be affected by the state of the interfacial boundary
layer. A turbulent layer will clearly enhance the heat and mass diffusion processes
that produce evaporation and the release of gas from solution. One of the con-
sequences of the balance between the supply of noncondensable gas (air) and its
removal by entrainment is the inherent regulation of the partial pressure of the
noncondensable gas (air) in the cavity. Brennen (1969) put together a simpliﬁed
model of these processes and showed that the results for the partial pressure of air
were in rough agreement with experimental measurements of that partial pressure.

References
203
Moreover, there is an analogous balance of heat in which the latent heat removed by
the entrainment process must be balanced by the heat diffused to the cavity through
the interfacial layer. This requires a cavity temperature below that of the surround-
ing liquid. (This thermal effect in fully developed cavity ﬂows is analogous to the
thermal effect in the dynamics of individual bubbles described in Sections 2.3 and
2.7.) The temperature depression produced by this process has been investigated
by a number of authors including Holl, Billet, and Weir (1975). Though it is usually
small in water at normal temperatures, it can be signiﬁcant at higher temperatures or
in other liquids at temperatures similar to those at which single bubbles experience
signiﬁcant thermal effects on growth (see Section 2.7).
References
Acosta, A.J. (1973). Hydrofoils and hydrofoil craft. Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech., 5, 161–184.
Arakeri, V.H. and Acosta, A.J. (1973). Viscous effects in the inception of cavitation on
axisymmetric bodies. ASME J. Fluids Eng., 95, 519–528.
Arakeri, V.H. (1975). Viscous effects on the position of cavitation separation from smooth
bodies. J. Fluid Mech., 68, 779–799.
Arakeri, V.H. (1979). Cavitation inception. Proc. Indian Acad. Sci., C2, Pt. 2, 149–177.
Arakeri, V.H. and Shanmuganathan, V. (1985). On the evidence for the effect of bubble
interference on cavitation noise. J. Fluid Mech., 159, 131–150.
Bark, G. and van Berlekom, W.B. (1978). Experimental investigations of cavitation noise.
Proc. 12th ONR Symp. on Naval Hydrodynamics, 470–493.
Bernal, L.P. and Roshko, A. (1986). Streamwise vortex structure in plane mixing layers.
J. Fluid Mech., 170, 499–525.
Billet, M.L. and Weir, D.S. (1975). The effect of gas diffusion on the ﬂow coefﬁcient for a
ventilated cavity. Proc. ASME Symp. on Cavity Flows, 95–100.
Birkhoff, G. and Zarantonello, E.H. (1957). Jets, wakes and cavities. Academic Press.
Blake, W. K., Wolpert, M. J., and Geib, F. E. (1977). Cavitation noise and incep-
tion as inﬂuenced by boundary-layer development on a hydrofoil. J. Fluid Mech., 80,
617–640.
Braisted, D.M. (1979). Cavitation induced instabilities associated with turbomachines. Ph.D.
Thesis, Calif. Inst. of Tech.
Brennen, C. (1969). The dynamic balances of dissolved air and heat in natural cavity ﬂows.
J. Fluid Mech., 37, 115–127.
Brennen, C. (1970). Cavity surface wave patterns and general appearance. J. Fluid Mech., 44,
33–49.
Brianc¸on-Marjollet, L., Franc, J.P., and Michel, J.M. (1990). Transient bubbles interacting
with an attached cavity and the boundary layer. J. Fluid Mech., 218, 355–376.
Ceccio, S. L. and Brennen, C. E. (1991). Observations of the dynamics and acoustics of
travelling bubble cavitation. J. Fluid Mech., 233, 633–660.
Cox, R.N. and Claydon, W.A. (1956). Air entrainment at the rear of a steady cavity. Proc.
Symp. on Cavitation in Hydrodynamics, N.P.L., London.
Dowson, D. and Taylor, C.M. (1979). Cavitation in bearings. Ann. Rev. of Fluid Mech., 11,
35–66.
Ellis, A.T. (1952). Observations on bubble collapse. Calif. Inst. of Tech. Hydro. Lab. Rep.
21–12.
Franc, J.P. and Michel, J.M. (1988). Unsteady attached cavitation on an oscillating hydrofoil.
J. Fluid Mech., 193, 171–189.
Furness, R.A. and Hutton, S.P. (1975). Experimental and theoretical studies on two-
dimensional ﬁxed-type cavities. Proc. ASME Symp. on Cavity Flows, 111–117.

204
Cavitating Flows
Hart, D.P., Brennen, C.E., and Acosta, A.J. (1990). Observations of cavitation on a three-
dimensional oscillating hydrofoil. ASME Cavitation and Multiphase Flow Forum, FED 98,
49–52.
Higuchi, H., Rogers, M.F., and Arndt, R.E.A. (1986). Characteristics of tip cavitation noise.
Proc. ASME Int. Symp. on Cavitation and Multiphase Flow Noise, FED 45, 101–106.
Holl, J.W. (1969). Limited cavitation. In Cavitation State of Knowledge (eds: J.M. Robertson
and G.F. Wislicenus), ASME, New York.
Holl, J.W. and Kornhauser, A.L. (1970). Thermodynamic effects on desinent cavitation on
hemispherical nosed bodies in water at temperatures from 80◦F to 260◦F. ASME J. Basic
Eng., 92, 44–58.
Holl, J.W., Billet, M.L., and Weir, D.S. (1975). Thermodynamic effects on developed
cavitation. Proc. ASME Symp. on Cavity Flows, 101–109.
Holl, J.W. and Carroll, J.A. (1979). Observations of the various types of limited cavitation on
axisymmetric bodies. Proc. ASME Int. Symp. on Cavitation Inception, 87–99.
Huang, T.T. (1979). Cavitation inception observations on six axisymmetric headforms. Proc.
ASME Int. Symp. on Cavitation Inception, 51–61.
Jakobsen, J.K. (1964). On the mechanism of head breakdown in cavitating inducers. ASME
J. Basic Eng., 86, 291–304.
Johnson, V.E., Jr. and Hsieh, T. (1966). The inﬂuence of the trajectories of gas nuclei on
cavitation inception. Proc. 6th ONR Symp. on Naval Hydrodynamics, 163–182.
Katz, J. and O’Hern, T.J. (1986). Cavitation in large scale shear ﬂows. ASME J. Fluids Eng.,
108, 373–376.
Kermeen, R.W. (1956). Water tunnel tests of NACA 4412 and Walchner Proﬁle 7 hydrofoils
in non-cavitating and cavitating ﬂows. Calif. Inst. of Tech. Hydro. Lab. Rep. 47–5.
Kermeen, R.W., McGraw, J.T., and Parkin, B.R. (1955). Mechanism of cavitation inception
and the related scale-effects problem. Trans. ASME, 77, 533–541.
Kirchhoff, G. (1869). Zur Theorie freier Fl¨ussigkeitsstrahlen. Z. reine Angew. Math., 70,
289–298.
Knapp, R.T. and Hollander, A. (1948). Laboratory investigations of the mechanism of
cavitation. Trans. ASME, 70, 419–435.
Knapp, R.T. (1955). Recent investigations of the mechanics of cavitation and cavitation
damage. Trans. ASME, 77, 1045–1054.
Kubota, A., Kato, H., Yamaguchi, H., and Maeda, M. (1989). Unsteady structure measure-
ment of cloud cavitation on a foil section using conditional sampling. ASME J. Fluids Eng.,
111, 204–210.
Kubota, A., Kato, H., and Yamaguchi, H. (1992). A new modelling of cavitating ﬂows—a
numerical study of unsteady cavitation on a hydrofoil section. J. Fluid Mech., 240, 59–96.
Kuhn de Chizelle, Y., Ceccio, S.L., Brennen, C.E., and Gowing, S. (1992). Scaling experi-
ments on the dynamics and acoustics of travelling bubble cavitation. Proc. 3rd I. Mech. E.
Int. Conf. on Cavitation, Cambridge, England, 165–170.
Kuhn de Chizelle, Y., Ceccio, S.L., Brennen, C.E., and Shen, Y. (1992). Cavitation scal-
ing experiments with headforms: bubble acoustics. Proc. 19th ONR Symp. on Naval
Hydrodynamics, 72–84.
Kumar, S. and Brennen, C.E. (1993). A study of pressure pulses generated by travelling
bubble cavitation. J. Fluid Mech., 255, 541–564.
Lindgren, H. and Johnsson, C.A. (1966). Cavitation inception on headforms, ITTC compar-
ative experiments. Proc. 11th Int. Towing Tank Conf., Tokyo, 219–232.
Marboe, R.C., Billet, M.L., and Thompson, D.E. (1986). Some aspects of travelling bubble
cavitation and noise. Proc. ASME Int. Symp. on Cavitation and Multiphase Flow Noise,
FED 45, 119–126.
Oshima, R. (1961). Theory of scale effects on cavitation inception on axially symmetric
bodies. ASME J. Basic Eng., 83, 379–398.
Parkin, B.R. (1952). Scale effects in cavitating ﬂow. Ph.D. Thesis, Calif. Inst. of Tech.

References
205
Plesset, M.S. (1948). The dynamics of cavitation bubbles. ASME J. Appl. Mech., 16, 228–231.
Schiebe, F.R. (1972). Measurements of the cavitation susceptibility using standard bodies. St.
Anthony Falls Hydr. Lab., Univ. of Minnesota, Rep. No. 118.
Shen, Y. and Peterson, F.B. (1978). Unsteady cavitation on an oscillating hydrofoil. Proc.
12th ONR Symp. on Naval Hydrodynamics, 362–384.
Silberman, E. and Song, C.S. (1961). Instability of ventilated cavities. J. Ship Res., 5, 13–33.
Song, C.S. (1962). Pulsation of ventilated cavities. J. Ship Res., 5, 8–20.
Titchmarsh, E.C. (1947). The theory of functions. Oxford Univ. Press.
van der Meulen, J.H.J. and van Renesse, R.L. (1989). The collapse of bubbles in a ﬂow near
a boundary. Proc. 17th ONR Symp. on Naval Hydrodynamics, 379–392.
Van der Walle, F. (1962). On the growth of nuclei and the related scaling factors in cavitation
inception. Proc. 4th ONR Symp. on Naval Hydrodynamics, 357–404.
Van Tuyl, A. (1950). On the axially symmetric ﬂow around a new family of half-bodies. Quart.
Appl. Math., 7, 399–409.
Wade, R.B. and Acosta, A.J. (1966). Experimental observations on the ﬂow past a plano-
convex hydrofoil. ASME J. Basic Eng., 88, 273–283.
Weinstein, A. (1948). On axially symmetric ﬂow. Quart. Appl. Math., 5, 429–444.
Young, J.O. and Holl, J.W. (1966). Effects of cavitation on periodic wakes behind symmetric
wedges. ASME J. Basic Eng., 88, 163–176.

8
Free Streamline Flows
8.1 Introduction
In this chapter we brieﬂy survey the extensive literature on fully developed cavity
ﬂows and the methods used for their solution. The terms “free streamline ﬂow” or
“free surface ﬂow” are used for those situations that involve a “free” surface whose
location is initially unknown and must be found as a part of the solution. In the con-
text of some of the multiphase ﬂow literature, they would be referred to as separated
ﬂows. In the introduction to Chapter 6 we described the two asymptotic states of a
multiphase ﬂow, homogeneous and separated ﬂow. Chapter 6 described some of the
homogeneous ﬂow methods and their application to cavitating ﬂows; this chapter
presents the other approach. However, we shall not use the term separated ﬂow in
this context because of the obvious confusion with the accepted, ﬂuid mechanical
use of the term.
Fully developed cavity ﬂows constitute one subset of free surface ﬂows, and this
survey is intended to provide information on some of the basic properties of these
ﬂows as well as the methods that have been used to generate analytical solutions of
them. A number of excellent reviews of free streamline methods can be found in
the literature, including those of Birkkoff and Zarantonello (1957), Parkin (1959),
Gilbarg (1960), Woods (1961), Gurevich (1961), Sedov (1966), and Wu (1969, 1972).
Here we shall follow the simple and elegant treatment of Wu (1969, 1972).
The subject of free streamline methods has an interesting history, for one can
trace its origins to the work of Kirchhoff (1869), who ﬁrst proposed the idea of a
“wake” bounded by free streamlines as a model for the ﬂow behind a ﬁnite, bluff
body. He used the mathematical methods of Helmholtz (1868) to ﬁnd the irrota-
tional solution for a ﬂat plate set normal to an oncoming stream. The pressure in
the wake was assumed to be constant and equal to the upstream pressure. Under
these conditions (the zero cavitation number solution described below) the wake
extends inﬁnitely far downstream of the body. The drag on the body is nonzero, and
Kirchhoff proposed this as the solution to D’Alembert’s paradox (see Section 5.2),
thus generating much interest in these free streamline methods, which Levi-Civita
(1907) later extended to bodies with curved surfaces. It is interesting to note that
Kirchhoff’s work appeared many years before Prandtl discovered boundary layers
206

8.1 Introduction
207
and the reason for the wake structure behind a body. However, Kirchhoff made
no mention of the possible application of his methods to cavity ﬂows; indeed, the
existence of these ﬂows does not seem to have been recognized until many years
later.
In this review we focus on the application of free streamline methods to fully
developed cavity ﬂows; for a modern view of their application to wake ﬂows the
reader is referred to Wu (1969, 1972). It is important to take note of the fact that,
because of its low density relative to that of the liquid, the nature of the vapor or
gas in the fully developed cavity usually has little effect on the liquid ﬂow. Thus the
pressure gradients due to motion of the vapor/gas are normally negligible relative to
the pressure gradients in the liquid, and consequently it is usually accurate to assume
that the pressure, pc, acting on the free surface is constant. Similarly, the shear stress
that the vapor/gas imposes on the free surface is usually negligible. Moreover, other
than the effect on pc, it is of little consequence whether the cavity contains vapor or
noncondensable gas, and the effect of pc is readily accommodated in the context of
free streamline ﬂows by deﬁning the cavitation number, σ, as
σ = p∞−pc
1
2ρLU2∞
(8.1)
where pc has replaced the pV of the previous deﬁnition and we may consider pc to
be due to any combination of vapor and gas. It follows that the same free streamline
analysis is applicable whether the cavity is a true vapor cavity or whether the wake
has been ﬁlled with noncondensable gas externally introduced into the “cavity.” The
formation of such gas-ﬁlled wakes is known as “ventilation.” Ventilated cavities
can occur either because of deliberate air injection into a wake or cavity, or they
may occur in the ocean due to naturally occurring communication between, say, a
propeller blade wake and the atmosphere above the ocean surface. For a survey of
ventilation phenomena the reader is referred to Acosta (1973).
Most of the available free streamline methods assume inviscid, irrotational and
incompressible ﬂow, and comparisons with experimental data suggest, as we shall
see, that these are reasonable approximations. Viscous effects in fully developed
cavity ﬂows are usually negligible so long as the free streamline detachment loca-
tions (see Figure 8.1) are ﬁxed by the geometry of the body. The most signiﬁcant
discrepancies occur when detachment is not ﬁxed but is located at some initially
unknown point on a smooth surface (see Section 8.3). Then differences between the
calculated and observed detachment locations can cause substantial discrepancies
in the results.
Assuming incompressible and irrotational ﬂow, the problems require solution
of Laplace’s equation for the velocity potential, φ(xi,t),
∇2φ = 0
(8.2)
subject to the following boundary conditions:

208
Free Streamline Flows
Free surface or
Free streamline
Smooth
detachment
Wetted
surface
B
Body
O
Flow
A
Cavity
p = pc
Cavity
closure point
Free surface
Abrupt
detachment
Figure 8.1 Schematic showing the terminology used in the free streamline analysis.
1. On a solid surface, SW(xi,t), the kinematic condition of no ﬂow through that
surface requires that
dSW
dt
= ∂SW
∂t
+ (∇φ) · ∇SW = 0
(8.3)
2. On a free surface, SF(xi,t), a similar kinematic condition that neglects the liquid
evaporation rate yields
dSF
dt = ∂SF
∂t + (∇φ) · ∇SF = 0
(8.4)
3. Assuming that the pressure in the cavity, pc, is uniform and constant, leads
to an additional dynamic boundary condition on SF. Clearly, the dimensionless
equivalent of pc, namely σ, is a basic parameter in this class of problem and must
be speciﬁed a priori. In steady ﬂow, neglecting surface tension and gravitational
effects, the magnitude of the velocity on the free surface, qc, should be uniform
and equal to U∞(1 + σ)
1
2 .
The two conditions on the free surface create serious modeling problems both
at the detachment points and in the cavity closure region (Figure 8.1). These issues
will the addressed in the two sections that follow.
In planar, two-dimensional ﬂows the powerful methods of complex variables
and the properties of analytic functions (see, for example, Churchill 1948) can be
used with great effect to obtain solutions to these irrotational ﬂows (see the review
articles and books mentioned above). Indeed, the vast majority of the published
literature is devoted to such methods and, in particular, to steady, incompressible,
planar potential ﬂows. Under those circumstances the complex velocity potential, f,
and the complex conjugate velocity, w, deﬁned by
f = φ + iψ;
w = df
dz = u −iv
(8.5)

8.2 Cavity Closure Models
209
are both analytic functions of the position vector z = x + iy in the physical, (x,y)
plane of the ﬂow. In this context it is conventional to use i rather than j to denote
( −1)
1
2 and we adopt this notation. It follows that the solution to a particular ﬂow
problem consists of determining the form of the function, f(z) or w(z). Often this
takes a parametric form in which f(ζ) (or w(ζ)) and z(ζ) are found as functions of
some parametric variable, ζ = ξ + iη. Another very useful device is the logarithmic
hodograph variable, ϖ, deﬁned by
ϖ = log qc
w = χ + iθ;
χ = ln qc
|w|;
θ = tan−1 v
u
(8.6)
The value of this variable lies in the fact that its real part is known on a free surface,
whereas its imaginary part is known on a solid surface.
8.2 Cavity Closure Models
Addressing ﬁrst the closure problem, it is clear that most of the complex processes
that occur in this region and that were described in Section 7.10 cannot be incor-
porated into a potential ﬂow model. Moreover, it is also readily apparent that the
condition of a prescribed free surface velocity would be violated at a rear stagna-
tion point such as that depicted in Figure 8.1. It is therefore necessary to resort to
some artifact in the vicinity of this rear stagnation point in order to effect termi-
nation of the cavity. A number of closure models have been devised; some of the
most common are depicted in Figures 8.2 and 8.3. Each has its own advantages and
deﬁciences:
1. Riabouchinsky (1920) suggested one of the simpler models, in which an “image”
of the body is placed in the closure region so that the streamlines close smoothly
onto this image. In the case of planar or axisymmetric bodies appropriate
shapes for the image are readily found; such is not the case for general three-
dimensional bodies. The advantage of the Riabouchinsky model is the simplicity
of the geometry and of the mathematical solution. Since the combination of the
body, its image, and the cavity effectively constitutes a ﬁnite body, it must sat-
isfy D’Alembert’s paradox, and therefore the drag force on the image must be
equal and opposite to that on the body. Also note that the rear stagnation point
is no longer located on a free surface but has been removed to the surface of the
image. The deﬁciences of the Riabouchinsky model are the artiﬁciality of the
image body and the fact that the streamlines downstream are an image of those
upstream. The model would be more realistic if the streamlines downstream
of the body-cavity system were displaced outward relative to their locations
upstream of the body in order to simulate the effect of a wake. Nevertheless, it
remains one of the most useful models, especially when the cavity is large, since
the pressure distribution and therefore the force on the body is not substantially
affected by the presence of the distant image body.

210
Free Streamline Flows
Cavity
(a) Riabouchinsky Image Model
      (Free Streamlines AB and BA)
(b) Open -Wake Model
      (Free Streamlines ACI, BCI)
(c) Reentrant Jet Model
      (Free Streamlines AJ, BJ)
Cavity
A
A
C
B
O
C
A
B
B
O
O
I
I
O
R
Cavity
B
A
P+
P–
y
x
J
I
I
I
I
Figure 8.2 Closure models for the potential ﬂow around an arbitrary body shape (AOB) with
a fully developed cavity having free streamlines or surfaces as shown. In planar ﬂow, these
geometries in the physical or z-plane transform to the geometries shown in Figure 8.11.
Cavity
Cavity
A
(d) Single Spiral Vortex Model
(e) Double Spiral Vortex Model
A
B
P
B
P
Wake
boundaries
Wake
boundaries
O
O
P
P
F i gu re 8. 3 T w o ad d i t i o n al cl o su re mo d el s f o r p l an ar ﬂ o w su ggest ed b y T u l i n (1953, 1964).
The free streamlines end in the center of the vortices at the points P and P′ which are also the
points of origin of the wake boundary streamlines on which the velocity is equal to U∞.
2. Joukowski (1890) proposed solving the closure problem by satisfying the
dynamic free surface condition only up to a certain point on the free stream-
lines (the points C and C′ in Figure 8.2) and then somehow continuing these
streamlines to downstream inﬁnity, thus simulating a wake extending to inﬁn-
ity. This is known as the “open-wake model.” For symmetric, pure-drag bodies
these continuations are usually parallel with the uniform stream (Roshko 1954).
Wu (1956, 1962) and Mimura (1958) extended this model to planar ﬂows about
lifting bodies for which the conditions on the continued streamlines are more
complex. The advantage of the open-wake model is its simplicity. D’Alembert’s
paradox no longer applies since the effective body is now inﬁnite. The disadvan-
tage is that the wake is signiﬁcantly larger than the real wake (Wu, Whitney, and

8.3 Cavity Detachment Models
211
Brennen 1971). In this sense the Riabouchinsky and open-wake models bracket
the real ﬂow.
3. The “reentrant jet” model, which was ﬁrst formulated by Kreisel (1946) and
Efros (1946), is also shown in Figure 8.2. In this model, a jet ﬂows into the cav-
ity from the closure region. Thus the rear stagnation point, R, has been shifted
off the free surfaces into the body of the ﬂuid. Moreover, D’Alembert’s paradox
is again avoided because the effective body is no longer simple and ﬁnite; one
can visualize the momentum ﬂux associated with the reentrant jet as balancing
the drag on the body. One of the motivations for the model is that reentrant jets
are often observed in real cavity ﬂows, as discussed in Section 7.10. In practice
the jet impacts one of the cavity surfaces and is reentrained in an unsteady and
unmodeled fashion. In the mathematical model the jet disappears onto a sec-
ond Riemann sheet. This represents a deﬁciency in the model since it implies an
unrealistic removal of ﬂuid from the ﬂow and consequently a wake of “negative
thickness.” In one of the few detailed comparisons with experimental observa-
tions, Wu et al. (1971) found that the reentrant jet model did not yield results
for the drag that were as close to the experimental observations as the results
for the Riabouchinsky and open-wake models.
4. Two additional models for planar, two-dimensional ﬂow were suggested by
Tulin (1953, 1964) and are depicted in Figure 8.3. In these models, termed
the “single spiral vortex model” and the “double spiral vortex model,” the free
streamlines terminate in a vortex at the points P and P′ from which emerge the
bounding streamlines of the “wake” on which the velocity is assumed to be U∞.
The shapes of the two wake bounding streamlines are assumed to be identical,
and their separation vanishes far downstream. The double spiral vortex model
has proved particularly convenient mathematically (see, for example, Furuya
1975a) and has the attractive feature of incorporating a wake thickness that is
ﬁnite but not as unrealistically large as that of the open-wake model. The single
spiral vortex model has been extensively used by Tulin and others in the context
of the linearized or small perturbation theory of cavity ﬂows (see Section 8.7).
Not included in this list are a number of other closure models that have either
proved mathematically difﬁcult to implement or depart more radically from the
observations of real cavities. For a discussion of these the reader is referred to Wu
(1969, 1972) or Tulin (1964). Moreover, most of the models and much of the above
discussion assume that the ﬂow is steady. Additional considerations are necessary
when modeling unsteady cavity ﬂows (see Section 8.12).
8.3 Cavity Detachment Models
The other regions of the ﬂow that require careful consideration are the points at
which the free streamlines “detach” from the body. We use the word “detachment”
to avoid confusion with the process of separation of the boundary layer. Thus the
words “separation point” are reserved for boundary layer separation.

212
Free Streamline Flows
Free surface
S
S
n
n
D
(a) Abrupt Detachment
(b) Smooth Detachment
D
Wetted
surface
Wetted
surface
Flow
qc
qc
Free surface
Figure 8.4 Notation used in the discussion of the detachment of a free streamline from a solid
body.
Since most of the mathematical models assume incompressible and irrotational
potential ﬂow, it is necessary to examine the prevailing conditions at a point at which
a streamline in such a ﬂow detaches from a solid surface. We ﬁrst observe that if the
pressure in the cavity is assumed to be lower than at any other point in the liquid,
then the free surface must be convex viewed from the liquid. This precludes free
streamlines with negative curvatures (the sign is taken to be positive for a convex
surface). Second, we distinguish between the two geometric circumstances shown in
Figure 8.4.
Abrupt detachment is the term applied to the case in which the free surface
leaves the solid body at a vertex or discontinuity in the slope of the body surface.
For convenience in the discussion we deﬁne a coordinate system, (s,n), whose
origin is at the detachment point or vertex. The direction of the coordinate, s,
coincides with the direction of the velocity vector at the detachment point and
the coordinate, n, is perpendicular to the solid surface. It is sufﬁciently accurate
for present purposes to consider the ﬂow to be locally planar and to examine
the nature of the potential ﬂow solutions in the immediate neighborhood of the
detachment point, D. Speciﬁcally, it is important to identify the singular behavior
at D. This is most readily accomplished by using polar coordinates, (r,ϑ), where
z = s + in = r eiϑ, and by considering the expansion of the logarithmic hodograph
variable, ϖ (Equation (8.6)), as a power series in z. Since, to ﬁrst order, Re{ϖ} = 0
on ϑ = 0 and Im{ϖ} = 0 on ϑ = π, it follows that, in general, the ﬁrst term in this
expansion is
ϖ = −Ciz
1
2 + ···
(8.7)
where the real constant C would be obtained as a part of the solution to the speciﬁc
ﬂow. From Equation (8.7), it follows that
w = qc{1 + Ciz
1
2 + ···}
(8.8)
f = φ + iψ = qc

z + 2
3Ciz
3
2 + ···

(8.9)
and the following properties of the ﬂow at an abrupt detachment point then become
evident. First, from Equation (8.8) it is clear that the acceleration of the ﬂuid tends

8.3 Cavity Detachment Models
213
to inﬁnity as one approaches the detachment point along the wetted surface. This,
in turn, implies an inﬁnite, favorable pressure gradient. Moreover, in order for the
wetted surface velocity to be lower than that on the free surface (and therefore for
the wetted surface pressure to be higher than that in the cavity), it is necessary for
C to be a positive constant. Second, since the shape of the free surface, ψ = 0, is
given by
y + Re
2
3Cz
3
2 + ···

= 0
(8.10)
it follows that the curvature of that surface becomes inﬁnite as the detachment point
is approached along the free surface. The sign of C also implies that the free surface
is convex viewed from within the liquid. The modiﬁcations to these characteristics
as a result of a boundary layer in a real ﬂow were studied by Ackerberg (1970); it
seems that the net effect of the boundary layer on abrupt detachment is not very
signiﬁcant. We shall delay further discussion of the practical implications of these
analytical results until later.
Turning attention to the other possibility sketched in Figure 8.4, “smooth
detachment,” one must ﬁrst ask why it should be any different from abrupt detach-
ment. The reason is apparent from one of the results of the preceding paragraph.
An inﬁnite, convex free-surface curvature at the detachment point is geometrically
impossible at a smooth detachment point because the free surface would then cut
into the solid surface. However, the position of the smooth detachment point is
initially unknown. One can therefore consider a whole family of solutions to the
particular ﬂow, each with a different detachment point. There may be one such solu-
tion for which the strength of the singularity, C, is identically zero, and this solution,
unlike all the others, is viable since its free surface does not cut into the solid sur-
face. Thus the condition that the strength of the singularity, C, be zero determines
the location of the smooth detachment point. These circumstances and this condi-
tion were ﬁrst recognized independently by Brillouin (1911) and by Villat (1914),
and the condition has become known as the Brillouin-Villat condition. Though nor-
mally applied in planar ﬂow problems, it has also been used by Armstrong (1953),
Armstrong and Tadman (1954), and Brennen (1969a) in axisymmetric ﬂows.
The singular behavior at a smooth detachment point can be examined in a
manner similar to the above analysis of an abrupt detachment point. Since the one-
half power in the power law expansion of ϖ is now excluded, it follows from the
conditions on the free and wetted surfaces that
ϖ = −Ciz
3
2 + ···
(8.11)
where C is a different real constant, the strength of the three-half power singularity.
By parallel evaluation of w and f one can determine the following properties of the
ﬂow at a smooth detachment point. The velocity and pressure gradients approach
zero (rather than inﬁnity) as the detachment point is approached along the wetted
surface. Also, the curvature of the free surface approaches that of the solid sur-
face as the detachment point is approached along the free surface. Thus the name
“smooth detachment” seems appropriate.

214
Free Streamline Flows
Having established these models for the detachment of the free streamlines in
potential ﬂow, it is important to emphasize that they are models and that viscous
boundary-layer and surface-energy effects (surface tension and contact angle) that
are omitted from the above discussions will, in reality, have a substantial inﬂuence in
determining the location of the actual detachment points. This can be illustrated by
comparing the locations of smooth detachment from a cavitating sphere with exper-
imentally measured locations. As can readily be seen from Figures 8.5 and 8.6, the
predicted detachment locations are substantially upstream of the actual detachment
points. Moreover, the experimental data exhibit some systematic variations with the
size of the sphere and the tunnel velocity. Exploring these scaling effects, Brennen
(1969b) interpolated between the data to construct the variations with Reynolds
number shown in Figure 8.6. This data clearly indicates that the detachment loca-
tions are determined primarily by viscous, boundary-layer effects. However, one
must add that all of the experimental data used for Figure 8.6 was for metal spheres
and that surface-energy effects and, in particular, contact-angle effects probably also
play an important role (see Ackerberg 1975). The effect of the surface tension of the
liquid seems to be relatively minor (Brennen 1970).
90
86
82
78
Detachment Angle
74
70
66
62
58
54
Cavitation Number, 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Brennen
(1969) {
Choked flow
B/b = 5
B/b = 4
B/b = ∞
Armstrong &
Tadman (1954)
0.6
Figure 8.5 Observed and calculated locations of free surface detachment for a cavitating
sphere. The detachment angle is measured from the front stagnation point. The analytical
resu lts u sing the smooth d etachmen t condition are fro m Armstrong an d Tad man (1954) an d
B r en n en ( 1969a), i n t h e l at t er c ase f o r d i f f eren t w at er t unnel to sphere radius ratios, B/b (see
Figure 8.15). The experimental results are for different sphere diameters as follows: 7.62 cm
(⊙ ) and 2.86 cm (2) f ro m B ren n en ( 1969a), 5.08 cm (△ ) and 3.81 cm (▽ ) f ro m Hsu an d
P erry (1954). T unnel velocities are indicated b y the additional ticks at card inal points as fol-
lows: 4.9 m/s (NW), 6.1 m/s (N), 7.6 m/s (NE), 9.1 m/s (E), 10.7 m/s (SE), 12.2 m/s (S) and
13.7 m/s (SW).

8.3 Cavity Detachment Models
215
110
90
80
70
Detachment angle,  (degrees)
Reynolds Number, Re = 2bU/v
100
60
Theoretical Potential
Flow Values
104
106
105
σ = 0.1
σ = 0.25

b
σ = 0.5
σ
σ
σ
U∞
Detachment
Flow
= 0.5
= 0.25
= 0.1
{
Figure 8.6 Observed free surface detachment points from spheres for various cavitation num-
bers, σ, and Reynolds numbers. Also shown are the potential ﬂow values using the smooth
detach ment condition. Adap ted fro m Brennen (1969b ).
Theoretical
detachment
location
Figure 8.7 Comparison of the theoretical and experimental proﬁles of a fully developed cavity
b eh i n d a s p h ere. T h e ﬂ o w i s f r o m t h e r i gh t t o t h e l ef t . F r o m B r en n en ( 1969a).
It is worth noting that, despite the discrepancies between the observed locations
of detachment and those predicted by the smooth detachment condition, the proﬁle
of the cavity is not as radically affected as one might imagine. Figure 8.7, taken from
Brennen (1969a), is a photograph showing the proﬁle of a fully developed cavity
on a sphere. On it is superimposed the proﬁle of the theoretical solution. Note the
close proximity of the proﬁles despite the substantial discrepancy in the detachment
points.
The viscous ﬂow in the vicinity of an actual smooth detachment point is com-
plex and still remains to be completely understood. Arakeri (1975) examined this

216
Free Streamline Flows
Free
surface
Cavity
Separation
streamline
Flow
Boundary
layer separation
Free surface
detachment
Solid surface
Figure 8.8 Model of the ﬂow in the vicinity of a smooth detachment point. Adapted from
A r ak eri ( 1975).
Headform Profile
Laminar Boundary
Layer Separation
Cavity Detachment
Cavity Profile
Figure 8.9 Schlieren photograph showing boundary layer separation upstream of the free
surface detachment on an axisymmetric headform. The cavitation number is 0.39 and the
tunnel velocity is 8.1 m/s. The actual distance between the separation and detachment points
is about 0.28 cm . Rep roduced from Arak eri (1975) w i t h p ermi ssi o n o f t h e au t h o r .
issue experimentally using Schlieren photography to determine the behavior of the
boundary layer and observed that boundary layer separation occurred upstream of
free surface detachment as sketched in Figure 8.8 and shown in Figure 8.9. Arakeri
also generated a quasi-empirical approach to the prediction of the distance between
the separation and detachment locations, and this model seemed to produce detach-
ment positions that were in good agreement with the observations. Franc and
Michel (1985) studied this same issue both analytically and through experiments on
hydrofoils, and their criterion for the detachment location has been used by several
subsequent investigators.
In practice many of the methods used to solve free streamline problems
involving detachment from a smooth surface simply assume a known location of
detachment based on experimental observations (for example, Furuya and Acosta
1973) and neglect the difﬁculties associated with the resulting abrupt detachment
solution.

8.4 Wall Effects and Choked Flows
217
8.4 Wall Effects and Choked Flows
Several useful results follow from the application of basic ﬂuid mechanical principles
to cavity ﬂows constrained by uniform containing walls. Such would be the case, for
example, for experiments in water tunnels. Consequently, in this section, we focus
attention on the issue of wall effects in cavity ﬂows and on the related phenomenon
of choked ﬂow. Anticipating some of the results of Figures 8.16 and 8.17, we observe
that, for the same cavitation number, the narrower the tunnel relative to the body,
the broader and longer the cavity becomes and the lower the drag coefﬁcient. For
a ﬁnite tunnel width, there is a critical cavitation number, σc, at which the cavity
becomes inﬁnitely long and no solutions exist for σ < σc. The ﬂow is said to be
choked at this limiting condition because, for a ﬁxed tunnel pressure and a ﬁxed
cavity pressure, a minimum cavitation number implies an upper limit to the tunnel
velocity. Consequently the choking phenomenon is analogous to that which occurs
in a the nozzle ﬂow of a compressible ﬂuid (see Section 6.5). The phenomenon is
familiar to those who have conducted experiments on fully developed cavity ﬂows
in water tunnels. When one tries to exceed the maximum, choked velocity, the water
tunnel pressure rises so that the cavitation number remains at or above the choked
value.
In the choked ﬂow limit of an inﬁnitely long cavity, application of the equations
of conservation of mass, momentum, and energy lead to some simple relationships
for the parameters of the ﬂow. Referring to Figure 8.10, consider a body with a
frontal projected area of AB in a water tunnel of cross-sectional area, AT. In the limit
of an inﬁnitely long cavity, the ﬂow far downstream will be that of a uniform stream
in a straight annulus, and therefore conservation of mass requires that the limiting
cross-sectional area of the cavity, AC, be given by
AC
AT
= 1 −U∞
qc
= 1 −(1 + σc)−1
2
(8.12)
which leads to
σc ≈2AC
0
AT
(8.13)
for the small values of the area ratio that would normally apply in water tunnel
tests. The limiting cavity cross-sectional area, AC, will be larger than the frontal
body area, AB. However, if the body is streamlined these areas will not differ greatly
Tunnel
Wall
Infinitely
long cavity
Flow
AT AB
AC
Flow
Flow
Figure 8.10 Body with inﬁnitely long cavity under choked ﬂow conditions.

218
Free Streamline Flows
and therefore, according to Equation (8.12), a ﬁrst approximation to the value of σc
would be
σc ≈1 −

1 −AB
AT
2
(8.14)
Note, as could be anticipated, that the larger the blockage ratio, AB/AT, the higher
the choked cavitation number, σc. Note, also, that the above equations assume fric-
tionless ﬂow since the relation, qc/U∞= (1 + σ)
1
2 , was used. Hydraulic losses along
the length of the water tunnel would introduce other effects in which choking would
occur at the end of the tunnel working section in a manner analogous to the effects
of friction in compressible pipe ﬂow.
A second, useful result emerges when the momentum theorem is applied to
the ﬂow, again assumed frictionless. Then, in the limit of choked ﬂow, the drag
coefﬁcient, CD(σc), is given by
CD(σc) = AT
AB

σc −2
%
(1 + σc)
1
2 −1
&
(8.15)
When σc ≪1 it follows from Equations (8.13) and (8.15) that
CD(σc) ≈
A2
C
ABAT
≈AC
AB
σc
2
(8.16)
where, of course, AC
0
AB, would depend on the shape of the body. The approximate
validity of this result can be observed in Figure 8.16; it is clear that for the 30◦half-
angle wedge AC
0
AB ≈2.
Wall effects and choked ﬂow for lifting bodies have been studied by Cohen and
Gilbert (1957), Cohen et al. (1957), Fabula (1964), Ai (1966), and others because of
their importance to the water tunnel testing of hydrofoils. Moreover, similar phe-
nomena will clearly occur in other internal ﬂow geometries, for example that of a
pump impeller. The choked cavitation numbers that emerge from such calculations
can be very useful as indicators of the limiting cavitation operation of turbomachines
such as pumps and turbines (see Section 8.9).
Finally, it is appropriate to add some comments on the wall effects in ﬁnite cav-
ity ﬂows for which σ > σc. It is counterintuitive that the blockage effect should cause
a reduction in the drag at the same cavitation number as illustrated in Figure 8.16.
Another remarkable feature of the wall effect, as Wu et al. (1971) demonstrate,
is that the more streamlined the body the larger the fractional change in the drag
caused by the wall effect. Consequently, it is more important to estimate and cor-
rect for the wall effects on streamline bodies than it is for bluff bodies with the same
blockage ratio, AB/AT. Wu et al. (1971) evaluate these wall effects for the planar
ﬂows past cavitating wedges of various vertex angles (then AB/AT = b/B, ﬁgure 8.15)
and suggest the following procedure for estimating the drag in the absence of wall
effects. If during the experiment one were to measure the minimum coefﬁcient of
pressure, Cpw, on the tunnel wall at the point opposite the maximum width of the
cavity, then Wu et al. recommend use of the following correction rule to estimate
the coefﬁcient of drag in the absence of wall effects, CD(σ ′,0), from the measured

8.5 Steady Planar Flows
219
coefﬁcient, CD(σ,b/B). The effective cavitation number for the unconﬁned ﬂow is
found to be σ ′ where
σ ′ = σ + 2Cpw(2 −σ)
0
3(1 −Cpw)
(8.17)
and the unconﬁned drag coefﬁcient is
CD(σ ′,0) = (1 + σ ′)
(1 + σ) CD(σ,b/B) + O
 b2
B2

(8.18)
As illustrated in Figure 8.16, Wu et al. (1971) use experimental data to show that
this correction rule works well for ﬂows around wedges with various vertex angles.
8.5 Steady Planar Flows
The classic free streamline solution for an arbitrary ﬁnite body with a fully devel-
oped cavity is obtained by mapping both the geometry of the physical plane (z-plane,
Figure 8.2) and the geometry of the f-plane (Figure 8.11) into the lower half of a
f-plane
f-plane
f-plane
0
0′
0′
0
A
A
A
I
I
Ψ
B
C
C
R
I
J
C′
C′
A′
B′
A
(a) Riabouchinsky Image Model
(b) Open-Wake Model
(c) Re-Entrant Jet Model
Ψ
Ψ
φ
φ
φ


C
R
J
I
I
I
- plane
- plane
- plane

η
η
η
A
B′
B
R
R
J
J
I
I
I
I
I
P–
P+
A
B
0
B
B
0
0
0
1
1
1
–1
–1
–1
Figure 8.11 Streamlines in the complex potential f -plane and the parametric ζ-plane where
the ﬂow boundaries and points correspond to those of Figure 8.2.

220
Free Streamline Flows
parametric, ζ-plane. The wetted surface is mapped onto the interval, η = 0, −1 <
ξ < 1 and the stagnation point, 0, is mapped into the origin. For the three closure
models of Figure 8.2, the geometries of the corresponding ζ-planes are sketched in
Figure 8.11. The f = f(ζ) mapping follows from the generalized Schwarz-Christoffel
transformation (Gilbarg 1949); for the three closure models of Figures 8.2 and 8.11
this yields respectively
df
dζ =
Cζ
(ζ −ζI)
3
2 (ζ −¯ζI)
3
2
(8.19)
df
dζ =
Cζ(ζ −ζC)
(ζ −ζI)2(ζ −¯ζI)2
(8.20)
df
dζ =
Cζ(ζ −ζR)(ζ −¯ζR)
(ζ −ζI)2(ζ −¯ζI)2(ζ −ζJ)
(8.21)
where C is a real constant, ζI is the value of ζ at the point I (the point at inﬁnity
in the z-plane), ζC is the value of ζ at the end of the constant velocity part of the
free streamlines, and ζR and ζJ are the values at the rear stagnation point and the
upstream inﬁnity point in the reentrant jet model.
The wetted surface, AOB, will be given parametrically by x(s),y(s) where s is
the distance measured along that surface from the point A. Then the boundary
conditions on the logarithmic hodograph variable, ϖ = χ + iθ, are
θ−(ξ) ≡θ(ξ,0−) = πF( −ξ) + θ∗(s(ξ))
on
−1 < ξ < 1
(8.22)
χ−(ξ) ≡χ(ξ,0−) = 0
on
ξ > 1
and
ξ < −1
(8.23)
where the superscripts + and −will be used to denote values on the ξ axis of the
ζ-plane just above and just below the cut. The function F(−ξ) takes a value of 1 for
ξ < 0 and a value of 0 for ξ > 0. The function θ∗(s) is the inclination of the wetted
surface so that tanθ∗= dy/ds
0
dx/ds. The solution to the above Reimann-Hilbert
problem is
ϖ(ζ) = ϖ0(ζ) + ϖ1(ζ) + ϖ2(ζ)
(8.24)
where
ϖ0(ζ) = log
%	
1 + i(ζ 2 −1)
1
2

0
ζ
&
(8.25)
ϖ1(ζ) = 1
iπ
 1
−1
 ζ 2 −1
1 −β2
 1
2 θ∗∗(β)dβ
β −ζ
(8.26)
where β is a dummy variable, θ∗∗(ξ) = θ∗(s(ξ)) and the function (ζ 2 −1)
1
2 is analytic
in the ζ-plane cut along the ξ axis from −1 to +1 so that it tends to ζ as |ζ| →∞. The
third function, ϖ2(ζ), is zero for the Riabouchinsky and open-wake closure models;
it is only required for the reentrant jet model and, in that case,
ϖ2(ζ) = log
 (β −¯βR)(ββR −1)
(β −βR)(β ¯βR −1)

where
ζ = (β + β−1)/2
(8.27)

8.5 Steady Planar Flows
221
Given ϖ(ζ), the physical coordinate z(ζ) is then calculated using
z(ζ) =

1
w(ζ)
df
dζ dζ
(8.28)
The distance along the wetted surface from the point A is given by
s(ξ) = C
qc
 ξ
−1
e1(ξ)2(ξ)dξ
(8.29)
where
1(ξ) = −1
π
1 1
−1
 1 −ξ2
1 −β2
 1
2 θ∗∗(β)dβ
β −ξ
(8.30)
2(ξ) = 1
C exp
!
ϖ −
0 (ξ) + ϖ −
2 (ξ)
" df
dξ
(8.31)
where the integral in Equation (8.30) takes its Cauchy principal value.
Now consider the conditions that can be applied to evaluate the unknown
parameters in the problem, namely C and ζI in the case of the Riabouchinsky model,
C, ζI, and ζC in the case of the open-wake model, and C, ζI, ζR, and ζJ in the case
of the reentrant jet model. All three models require that the total wetted surface
length, s(1), be equal to a known value, and this establishes the length scale in the
ﬂow. They also require that the velocity at z →∞have the known magnitude, U∞,
and a given inclination, α, to the chord, AB. Consequently this condition becomes
ϖ(ζ0) = 1
2 log(1 + σ) + iα
(8.32)
This is sufﬁcient to determine the solution for the Riabouchinsky model. Additional
conditions for the open-wake model can be derived from the fact that f(ζ) must be
simply covered in the vicinity of ζ0 and, for the reentrant jet model, that z(ζ) must
be simply covered in the vicinity of ζ0. Also the circulation around the cavity can be
freely chosen in the re-entrant jet model. Finally, if the free streamline detachment
is smooth and therefore initially unknown, its location must be established using
the Brillouin-Villat condition (see Section 8.3). For further mathematical detail the
reader is referred to the texts mentioned earlier in Section 8.1.
As is the case with all steady planar potential ﬂows involving a body in an inﬁnite
uniform stream, the behavior of the complex velocity, w(z), far from the body can
be particularly revealing. If w(z) is expanded in powers of 1/z then
w(z) = U∞e−iα + Q + i
2π
1
z + (C1 + iC2) 1
z2 + O
 1
z3

(8.33)
where U∞and α are the magnitude and inclination of the free stream. The quantity
Q is the net source strength required to simulate the body-cavity system and must
therefore be zero for a ﬁnite body-cavity. This constitutes a cavity closure condition.
The quantity, , is the circulation around the body-cavity so that the lift is given by

222
Free Streamline Flows
ρU∞. Evaluation of the 1/z term far from the body provides the simplest way to
evaluate the lift.
The mathematical detail involved in producing results from these solutions (Wu
and Wang 1964b) is considerable except for simple symmetric bodies. For more
complex, bluff bodies it is probably more efﬁcient to resort to one of the modern
numerical methods (for example a panel method) rather than to attempt to sort
through all the complex algebra of the above solutions. For streamlined bodies, a
third alternative is the algebraically simpler linear theory for cavity ﬂow, which is
brieﬂy reviewed in Section 8.7. There are, however, a number of valuable results
that can be obtained from the above exact, nonlinear theory, and we will examine
just a few of these in the next section.
8.6 Some Nonlinear Results
Wu (1956, 1962) (see also Mimura 1958) generated the solution for a ﬂat plate at an
arbitrary angle of incidence using the open-wake model and the methods described
in the preceding section. The comparison between the predicted pressure distri-
butions on the surface of the plate and those measured by Fage and Johansen
(1927) in single phase, separated wake ﬂow is excellent, as shown by the exam-
ples in Figure 8.12. Note that the effective cavitation number for the wake ﬂow (or
base pressure coefﬁcient) is not an independent variable as it is with cavity ﬂows.
In Figure 8.12 the values of σ are taken from the experimental measurements. Data
such as that presented in Figure 8.12 provides evidence that free streamline methods
have value in wake ﬂows as well as in cavity ﬂows.
Location on Wetted Surface
–1.0
–1.0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
1.0
1.0
Coefficient of Pressure, CP
1.0
1.0
Figure 8.12 Comparison of pressure distributions on the surface of a ﬂat plate set at an angle,
α , t o t h e o n c o mi n g s t r eam. T h e t h eo ry o f W u (1956, 1962) (so l i d l i n es) i s c o mp ared w i t h t h e
measu r emen t s i n w ak e ﬂ o w mad e b y F age an d J o h an s en (1927) (◦). The case o n the left is
for a ﬂat p late set normal to the stream (α = 90◦ ) and a wake coefﬁcient of σ = 1.38; the case
on the right is α = 29.85◦ , σ = 0.924. A d ap t ed f r o m W u (1962).

8.6 Some Nonlinear Results
223
The lift and drag coefﬁcients at various cavitation numbers and angles of inci-
dence are compared with the experimental data of Parkin (1958) and Silberman
(1959) in Figures 8.13 and 8.14. Data both for supercavitating and partially cavitat-
ing conditions are shown in these ﬁgures, the latter occurring at the higher cavitation
numbers and lower incidence angles. The calculations tend to be quite unstable in
the region of transition from the partially cavitating to the supercavitating state,
and so the dashed lines in Figures 8.13 and 8.14 represent smoothed curves in this
region. Later, in Section 8.8, we continue the discussion of this transition. For the
present, note that the nonlinear theory yields values for the lift and the drag that
are in good agreement with the experimental measurements. Wu and Wang (1964a)
show similar good agreement for supercavitating, circular-arc hydrofoils.
The solution to the cavity ﬂow of a ﬂat plate set normal to an oncoming stream,
α = 90◦, is frequently quoted (Birkkoff and Zarantonello 1957, Woods 1961), usu-
ally for the case of the Riabouchinsky model. At small cavitation numbers (large
cavities) the asymptotic form of the drag coefﬁcient, CD, is (Wu 1972)
CD(σ) =
2π
π + 4

1 + σ +
σ 2
(8π + 32) + O(σ 4)

(8.34)
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
Cavitation Number,  
Lift Coefficient, CL
 = 15º
 = 10º
 = 8º
 = 4º
 = 2º
8º
10º
15º
20º
25º
30º
F i gu re 8. 13 L i f t co ef ﬁ c i en t s f o r a ﬂ at p l at e f ro m t h e n o n l i n ear t h eo ry o f W u (1962). T h e
exp eri men t al d at a ( P ark i n 1958) i s f o r an gl es o f i n c i d en ce as f o l l o w s : 8◦ (▽ ), 10◦ (2), 15◦
(△ ), 20◦ (⊕ ), 25◦ (⊗ ), an d 30◦ (3). A l so sh o w n i s s o me d at a o f S i l b erman ( 1959) i n a f ree j et
tunnel: 20◦(+) and 25◦(×).

224
Free Streamline Flows
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
Cavitation Number,  
Drag Coefficient, CD
 = 40˚
 = 30˚
 = 25˚
 = 20˚
 = 15˚
 = 10˚
 = 8˚
 = 4˚
Figure 8.14 Drag coefﬁcients corresponding to the lift coefﬁcients of Figure 8.13.
Tunnel Wall
Body
Cavity
Flow
2nd
(Mamimum
Cavity Width)
2b
2B

Figure 8.15 Notation for planar ﬂow in a water tunnel.
where the value for σ = 0, namely CD = 0.88, corresponds to the original solu-
tion of Kirchoff (in that case the cavity is inﬁnitely long and the closure model is
unnecessary). A good approximation to the form of Equation (8.34) at low σ is
CD(σ) = CD(0)[1 + σ]
(8.35)
and it transpires that this is an accurate empirical formula for a wide range of
body shapes, both planar and axisymmetric (see Brennen 1969a), provided the
detachment is of the abrupt type. Bodies with smooth detachment such as a
sphere (Brennen 1969a) are less accurately represented by Equation (8.35) (see
Figure 8.18).
Since experiments are almost always conducted in water tunnels of ﬁnite width,
2B, another set of solutions of interest are those in which straight tunnel bound-
aries are added to the geometries of the preceding section, as shown in Figure 8.15.
In the case of symmetric wedges in tunnels, solutions for all three closure models

8.6 Some Nonlinear Results
225
of Figure 8.2 were obtained by Wu et al. (1971). Drag coefﬁcients, cavity dimen-
sions, and pressure distributions were computed as functions of cavitation number,
σ, and blockage ratio, b/B. As illustrated in Figure 8.16, the results compare well
with experimental measurements provided the cavitation number is low enough
for a fully developed cavity to be formed (see Section 7.8). In the case shown in
Figure 8.16, this cavitation number was about 1.5. The Riabouchinsky model results
are shown in the ﬁgure since they were marginally better than those of the other two
models insofar as the drag on the wedge was concerned. The variations with b/B
shown in Figure 8.16 were discussed in Section 8.4.
For comparative purposes, some results for a cavitating sphere in an axisymmet-
ric water tunnel are presented in Figures 8.17 and 8.18. These results were obtained
by Brennen (1969a) using a numerical method (see Section 8.11). Note that the
variations with tunnel blockage are qualitatively similar to those of planar ﬂow.
However, the calculated drag coefﬁcients in Figure 8.18 are substantially larger
than those experimentally measured because of the difference in the detachment
locations discussed in Section 8.3 and illustrated in Figure 8.5.
Reichardt (1945) carried out some of the earliest experimental investigations
of fully developed cavities and observed that, when the cavitation number becomes
1.4
1.2
b/B = 0.107
b/B = 0.236
b/B = 0.236
30˚ Wedge
b/B
Pressure Integration
Corresponding Values
for b/B=0 from Wall
Correction Rule
0.236
0.107
b/B = 0
0.167
0.107
0.050
b/B = 0.025
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.4
0.2
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
Cavitation Number,  
Drag Coefficient, CD
Figure 8.16 Analytical and experimental data for the drag coefﬁcient, CD, of a 30◦half-angle
wedge with a fully developed cavity in a water tunnel. Data are presented as a function of cav-
itation number, σ, for various ratios of wedge width to tunnel width, b/B (see Figure 8.15).
Results are shown for the Riabouchinsky model (solid lines) including the choked ﬂow con-
ditions (dashed line with points for various b/B indicated by arrows), for the experimental
measu r emen t s (o p en s ymb o l s), an d f o r t h e exp eri men t al d at a c o rrect ed t o b/B → 0. Adapted
f r o m W u , W h i t n ey, an d B ren n en ( 1971).

226
Free Streamline Flows
Cavitation Number,  
0.8
0.6
0.2
0.2
Choked Flow
0.4
0.6
0
0.4
(b/d)2
B/b=3.4
B/b=3.4
B/b=4
B/b=4
B/b=5
B/b=5
B/b=7
B/b=∞
0.6
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.6
0
0.4
b/
B/b=7
B/b=∞
Figure 8.17 The dimensions of a fully developed cavity behind a sphere of radius, b, for var-
ious tunnel rad ii, B , f ro m t h e n u meri c al cal c u l at i o n s o f B r en n en ( 1969a). On t h e l ef t t h e
maximum radius of the cavity, d, is compared with some results from Rouse and McNown
(1948). On t h e ri gh t t h e h al f - l en gt h o f t h e cavi t y, ℓ, i s c o mp ared w i t h t h e exp eri men t al d at a
o f B r en n en ( 1969a) (◦) for which B/b = 14.7.
∞
Armstrong &
Tradman (1954)
Results
Tentatively
Extrapolated
to σ = 0
Experiments
Mean Lines
Re = 3 × 105
                8.3 × 105
Eisenberg &
Pond (1948)
HSU & Perry (1954)
Choked Flow Line
7.0
5.0
4.0
3.4
B/b
Brennen
(1969)
Cavitation Number,  
0.42
0.40
0.38
0.36
0.34
0.32
0.30
0.28
0.26
0.1
0
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Drag Coefficient, CD
Figure 8.18 Calculated and measured drag coefﬁcients for a sphere of radius, b, as a function
of cavitation number, σ . T h e n u meri c al resu l t s are b y A r mst r o n g an d T ad man ( 1954) an d
B r en n en ( 1969a) (f o r vari o u s t unnel rad ii, B ) an d t h e exp eri men t al d at a are f r o m E i sen b erg
an d P o n d (1948) an d Hsu an d P erry (1954).

8.7 Linearized Methods
227
very small, the maximum width, 2d, and the length, 2ℓ, of the cavity in an unconﬁned
ﬂow (b/B = 0) vary roughly with σ in the following way:
• In planar ﬂow:
d ∝σ −1;
ℓ∝σ −2
(8.36)
• In axisymmetric ﬂow:
d ∝σ −1
2 ;
ℓ∝σ −1
(8.37)
The data for b/B = 0 in Figure 8.17 are crudely consistent with the relations of
Equation (8.37). Equations (8.36) and (8.37) provide a crude but useful guide to
the relative dimensions of fully developed cavities at different cavitation numbers.
8.7 Linearized Methods
When the body/cavity system is slender in the sense that the direction of the veloc-
ity vector is everywhere close to that of the oncoming uniform stream (except,
perhaps, close to some singularities), then methods similar to those of thin air-
foil theory (see, for example, Biot 1942) become feasible. The approximations
involved lead to a more tractable mathematical problem and to approximate solu-
tions in circumstances in which the only alternative would be the application of
more direct numerical methods. Linear theories for cavity ﬂows were pioneered by
Tulin (1953). Though the methods have been extended to three-dimensional ﬂows,
it is convenient to begin by describing their application to the case of an inviscid
and incompressible planar ﬂow of a uniform stream of velocity, U∞, past a single,
streamlined cavitating body. It is assumed that the body is slender and that the wet-
ted surface is described by y = h(x) where dh/dx ≪1. It is also assumed that the
boundary conditions on the body and the cavity can, to a ﬁrst approximation, be
applied on the x-axis as shown in Figure 8.19. The velocity components at any point
are denoted by u = U∞+ u′ and v where the linearization requires that both u′ and
v are much smaller than U∞. The appropriate boundary condition on the wetted

Leading
Edge
U
Cavity
Cavity
y
y
A
B
C
x
D
E
F
G
x
Detachment
Points
Cavity
Closure
Trailing
Edge
Cavity
Closure
Figure 8.19 Examples of the linearized geometry (lower ﬁgures) for two planar cavity ﬂows
(upper sketches): a partially cavitating foil (left) and a supercavitating headform (right). Solid
boundaries are indicated by the thick lines and the free streamlines by the thick dashed lines.

228
Free Streamline Flows
surface is then
v = U∞
dh
dx
(8.38)
Moreover, the coefﬁcient of pressure anywhere in the ﬂow is given by Cp ≈
−2u′0
U∞, and therefore the boundary condition on a free streamline becomes
u′ = σU∞
0
2
(8.39)
Finally, a boundary condition at inﬁnity must also be prescribed. In some instances
it seems appropriate to linearize about an x-axis that is parallel with the veloc-
ity at inﬁnity. In other cases, it may be more appropriate and more convenient
to linearize about an x-axis that is parallel with a mean longitudinal line through
the body-cavity system. In the latter case the boundary condition at inﬁnity is
w(z →∞) →U∞e−iα where α is the angle of incidence of the uniform stream relative
to the body-cavity axis.
Even within the conﬁnes of this simple problem, several different conﬁgurations
of wetted surface and free surface are possible, as illustrated by the two examples
in Figure 8.19. Moreover, various types of singularity can occur at the end points of
any segment of boundary in the linearized plane (points A through G in Figure 8.19).
It is important that the solution contain the correct singular behavior at each of
these points. Consider the form that the complex conjugate perturbation velocity,
w = u′ −iv, must take for each of the different types of singularity that can occur.
Let x = c be the location of the speciﬁc singularity under consideration. Clearly,
then, a point like D, the stagnation point at a rounded nose or leading edge, must
have a solution of the form w ∼i(z −c)−1/2 (Newman 1956). On the other hand, a
sharp leading edge from which a free surface detaches (such as A) must have the
form w ∼i(z−c)−1/4 (Tulin 1953). These results are readily derived by applying the
appropriate conditions of constant v or constant u′ on θ = 0 and θ = 2π.
The conditions at regular detachment points such as E or F (as opposed to
the irregular combination of a detachment point and front stagnation point at A)
should follow the conditions derived earlier for detachment points (Section 8.3). If
it is an abrupt detachment point, then w is continous and the singular behavior is
w ∼(z −c)1/2; on the other hand, if it is a smooth detachment point, both w and
dw/dz must be continuous and w ∼(z −c)3/2. At cavity closure points such as B or
G various models have been employed (Tulin 1964). In the case of the supercavi-
tating body, Tulin’s (1953) original model assumes that the point G is a stagnation
point so that the singular behavior is w ∼(z −c)1/2; this is also the obvious choice
under the conditions that u′ is constant on θ = ±π. However, with this closure con-
dition the circulation around the body-cavity system can no longer be arbitrarily
prescribed. Other closure conditions that address this issue have been discussed by
Fabula (1962), Woods and Buxton (1966), Nishiyama and Ota (1971), and Furuya
(1975a), among others. In the case of the partial cavity almost all models assume a
stagnation point at the point B so that the singular behavior is w ∼(z −c)1/2. The
problem of prescription of circulation that occurred with the supercavitation closure

8.8 Flat Plate Hydrofoil
229
does not arise in this case since the conventional, noncavitating Kutta condition can
be applied at the trailing edge, C.
The literature on linearized solutions for cavity ﬂow problems is too large for
thorough coverage in this text, but a few important milestones should be mentioned.
Tulin’s (1953) original work included the solution for a supercavitating ﬂat plate
hydrofoil with a sharp leading edge. Shortly thereafter, Newman (1956) showed how
a rounded leading edge might be incorporated into the linear solution and Cohen,
Sutherland, and Tu (1957) provided information on the wall effects in a tunnel of
ﬁnite width. Acosta (1955) provided the ﬁrst partial cavitation solution, speciﬁcally
for a ﬂat plate hydrofoil (see below). For a more recent treatment of supercavitating
single foils, the reader is referred to Furuya and Acosta (1973).
It is appropriate to examine the linear solution to a typical cavity ﬂow problem
and, in the next section, the details for a cavitating ﬂat plate hydrofoil will be given.
Many other types of cavitating ﬂow have been treated by linear theory, includ-
ing such problems as the effect of a nearby ocean surface. An important class of
solutions is that involving cascades of foils, and these are addressed in Section 8.9.
8.8 Flat Plate Hydrofoil
The algebra associated with the linear solutions for a ﬂat plate hydrofoil is fairly
simple, so we will review and examine the results for the supercavitating foil (Tulin
1953) and for the partially cavitating foil (Acosta 1955). Starting with the latter, the
z-plane is shown on the left in Figure 8.19, and this can be mapped into the upper
half of the ζ-plane in Figure 8.20 by
ζ = i

1 +
1
z −1
 1
2
(8.40)
The point H∞at η = i corresponds to the point at inﬁnity in the z-plane and the point
C∞, the trailing edge of the foil, is the point at inﬁnity in the ζ-plane. It follows that
the point B, the cavity closure point, is at ξ = c where c = (ℓ/(1 −ℓ))1/2 and ℓis the
length of the cavity, AB, in the physical plane. The chord of the hydrofoil, AC, has
been set to unity. Since there must be square-root singularities at A and B, since v is
zero on the real axis in the intervals ξ < 0 and ξ > c and u′ = σU∞/2 in 0 < ξ < c,
and since w must be everywhere bounded, the general form of the solution may be
C
C
A
B
H
 = i

	
Figure 8.20 The ζ-plane for the linearized theory of a partially cavitating ﬂat plate hydrofoil.

230
Free Streamline Flows
written down by inspection:
w(ζ) = σU∞
2
+ U∞(C0 + C1ζ)
[ζ(ζ −c)]1/2
(8.41)
where C0 and C1 are constants to be determined. The Kutta condition at the trail-
ing edge, C∞, requires that the velocity be ﬁnite and continous at that point, and
this is satisﬁed provided there are no terms of order ζ 2 or higher in the series
C0 + C1ζ.
The conditions that remain to be applied are those at the point of inﬁnity in the
physical plane, η = i. The nature of the solution near this point should therefore
be examined by expanding in powers of 1/z. Since ζ →i + i/2z + O(z−2) and since
we must have that w →−iαU∞, expanding Equation (8.41) in powers of 1/z allows
evaluation of the real constants, C0 and C1, in terms of α and σ:
C0 = β1α + β2σ/2;
C1 = β2α −β1σ/2
(8.42)
where
β1,β2 =
1
2
%
(1 −ℓ)−1/2 ± 1
& 1
2
(8.43)
In addition, the expansion of w in powers of 1/z must satisfy Equation (8.33). If the
cavity is ﬁnite, then Q = 0 and evaluation of the real part of the coefﬁcient of 1/z
leads to
σ
2α = 2 −ℓ+ 2(1 −ℓ)
1
2
ℓ
1
2 (1 −ℓ)
1
2
(8.44)
while the imaginary part of the coefﬁcient of 1/z allows the circulation around the
foil to be determined. This yields the lift coefﬁcient,
CL = πα

1 + (1 −ℓ)−1
2

(8.45)
Thus the solution has been obtained in terms of the parameter, ℓ, the ratio of the
cavity length to the chord. For a given value of ℓand a given angle of attack, α, the
corresponding cavitation number follows from Equation (8.44) and the lift coefﬁ-
cient from equation 8.45. Note that as ℓ→0 the value of CL tends to the theoretical
value for a noncavitating ﬂat plate, 2πα. Also note that the lift-slope, dCL/dα, tends
to inﬁnity when ℓ= 3/4.
In the supercavitating case, Tulin’s (1953) solution yields the following results
in place of Equations (8.44) and (8.45):
α
 2
σ + 1

= (ℓ−1)
1
2
(8.46)
CL = παℓ

ℓ
1
2 (ℓ−1)−1
2 −1

(8.47)
where now, of course, ℓ> 1. Note that the lift-slope, dCL/dα, is zero at ℓ= 4/3.

8.9 Flat Plate Hydrofoil
231
1.0
Supercavitation
Partial Cavitation
Supercavitation
Partial Cavitation
CL
3.0
2.0
1.0
0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0
Cavitation Number,  
Lift Coefficient, CL
Cavity Length / Chord
2
2
Figure 8.21 Typical results from the linearized theories for a cavitating ﬂat plate at an angle
of attack of 4◦. The lift coefﬁcients, CL (solid lines), and the ratios of cavity length to chord, ℓ
(d ash ed l i n es), are f ro m t h e su p ercavi t at i o n t h eo ry o f T u l i n (1953) an d t h e p art i al cavi t at i o n
t h eo ry o f A co s t a (1955). A l s o s h o w n are t h e exp eri men t al r esu l t s o f W ad e an d A co st a ( 1966)
for ℓ(△) and for CL (◦and •) where the open symbols represent points of stable operation
and the solid symbols denote points of unstable cavity operation.
The lift coefﬁcient and the cavity length from Equations (8.44) to (8.47) are
plotted against cavitation number in Figure 8.21 for a typical angle of attack of
α = 4◦. Note that as σ →∞the fully wetted lift coefﬁcient, 2πα, is recovered from
the partial cavitation solution, and that as σ →0 the lift coefﬁcient tends to πα/2.
Notice also that both the solutions become pathological when the length of the cav-
ity approaches the chord length (ℓ→1). However, if some small portion of each
curve close to ℓ= 1 is eliminated, then the characteristic decline in the performance
of the hydrofoil as the cavitation number is decreased can be observed. Speciﬁcally,
it is seen that the decline in the lift coefﬁcient begins when σ falls below about 0.7
for the ﬂat plate at an angle of attack of 4◦. Close to σ = 0.7, one observes a small
increase in CL before the decline sets in, and this phenomenon is often observed in
practice, as illustrated by the experimental data of Wade and Acosta (1966) included
in Figure 8.21.
The variation in the lift with angle of attack (for a ﬁxed cavitation number) is
presented in Figure 8.22. Also shown in this ﬁgure are the lines of ℓ= 4/3 in the
supercavitation solution and ℓ= 3/4 in the partial cavitation solution. Note that
these lines separate regions for which dCL/dα > 0 from those for which dCL/dα < 0.
Heuristically it could be argued that dCL/dα < 0 implies an unstable ﬂow and the
corresponding region in ﬁgure 8.22 for which 3/4 < ℓ< 4/3 does, indeed, correspond
quite closely to the observed regime of unstable cavity oscillation (Wade and Acosta
1966).

232
Free Streamline Flows
 = 1.6
 = 4/3
 = 3/4
 = 1.6
 = 1.2
 = 1.2
 = 0.8
 = 0.8
 = 0.4
 = 0.4
 = 0.2
 = 0.2
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
5
Coefficient of Lift, CL
Angle of Attack,  (deg.)
10
15
Unstable
Stable
Supercavitation
Stable
Part.-CAV.
Figure 8.22 The lift coefﬁcient for a ﬂat plate from the partial cavitation model of Acosta
(1955) (d ash ed l i n es) an d t h e s u p ercavi t at i o n mo d el o f T u l i n (1953) (so l i d l i n es) as a f u n ct i o n
of angle of attack, α, for several cavitation numbers, σ, as shown. The dotted lines are the
boundaries of the region in which the cavity length is between 3/4 and 4/3 of a chord and in
which dCL/dα < 0.
8.9 Cavitating Cascades
Because cavitation problems are commonly encountered in liquid turbomachines
(pumps, turbines) and on propellers, the performance of a cascade of hydrofoils
under cavitating conditions is of considerable practical importance. A typical cas-
cade geometry (z-plane) is shown on the left in Figure 8.23; in the terminology of
these ﬂows the angle, β, is known as the “stagger angle” and 1/h, the ratio of the
blade chord to the distance between the blade tips, is known as the “solidity.” The
corresponding complex potential plane (f-plane) is shown on the right. Note that
the geometry of the linearized physical plane is very similar to that of the f-plane.
The ﬁrst step in the analysis of the planar potential ﬂow in a cascade (whether
by linear or nonlinear methods) is to map the inﬁnite array of blades in the f-plane
(or the linearized z-plane) into a ζ-plane in which there is a single wetted surface
boundary and a single cavity surface boundary. This is accomplished by the well-
known cascade mapping function
f
or
z = h
2π

e−iβ ln(1 −ζ/ζH) + eiβ ln(1 −ζ/¯ζH)

(8.48)
where h∗(or h) is the distance between the leading edges of the blades and β∗(or
β) is the stagger angle of the cascade in the f-plane (or the linearized z-plane).

8.9 Cavitating Cascades
233
A
B
E D
Γ
C
h∗
h
Cavity
y
A B
E
C
D
Wake
x
U



∗


O
Figure 8.23 On the left is the physical plane (z-plane), and on the right is the complex
potential plane (f -plane) for the planar ﬂow through a cascade of cavitating hydrofoils. The
example shown is for supercavitating foils. For partial cavitation the points D and E merge
and the point C is on the upper wetted surface of the foil. For a sharp leading edge the points
A an d B merge. F i gu res ad ap t ed f r o m F u ru ya (1975a).
D
E
–1
B
C
	
H(H)


1
A
Figure 8.24 The ζ-plane obtained by using the cascade mapping function.
This mapping produces the ζ-plane shown in Figure 8.24 where H∞(ζ = ζH)
is the point at inﬁnity in the original plane and the angle β′ is equal to the stagger
angle in the original plane. The solution is obtained when the mapping w(ζ) has
been determined and all the boundary conditions have been applied.
For a supercavitating cascade, a nonlinear solution was ﬁrst obtained by Woods
and Buxton (1966) for the case of a cascade of ﬂat plates. Furuya (1975a) expanded
this work to include foils of arbitrary geometry. An interesting innovation intro-
duced by Woods and Buxton was the use of Tulin’s (1964) double-spiral-vortex
model for cavity closure, but with the additional condition that the difference in
the velocity potentials at the points C and D (Figure 8.23) should be equal to the
circulation around the foil.
Linear theories for a cascade began much earlier with the work of Betz and
Petersohn (1931), who solved the problem of inﬁnitely long, open cavities produced
by a cascade of ﬂat plate hydrofoils. Sutherland and Cohen (1958) generalized this
to the case of ﬁnite supercavities behind a ﬂat plate cascade, and Acosta (1960)
solved the same problem but with a cascade of circular-arc hydrofoils. Other early
contributions to linear cascade theory for supercavitating foils include the models
of Duller (1966) and Hsu (1972) and the inclusion of the effect of rounded leading
edges by Furuya (1974).

234
Free Streamline Flows
C
A
h
	
H( = H)
E
E
a
A
l
C
E
U
E
x
y




Figure 8.25 The linearized z-plane (left) and the ζ-plane (right) for the linear solution of
partial cavitation in an inﬁnitely long cascad e o f ﬂ at plates (Aco sta and Ho llander 1959). T h e
points E∞and H∞are respectively the points at upstream and downstream inﬁnity in the
z-plane.
Cavities initiated at the leading edge are more likely to extend beyond the trail-
ing edge when the solidity and the stagger angle are small. Such cascade geometries
are more characteristic of propellers and, therefore, the supercavitating cascade
results are more often utilized in that context. On the other hand, most cavitating
pumps have larger solidities (> 1) and large stagger angles. Consequently, partial
cavitation is the more characteristic condition in pumps, particularly since the pres-
sure rise through the pump is likely to collapse the cavity before it emerges from the
blade passage. Partially cavitating cascade analysis began with the work of Acosta
and Hollander (1959), who obtained the linear solution for a cascade of inﬁnitely
long ﬂat plates, the geometry of which is shown in Figure 8.25.
The appropriate cascade mapping is then the version of Equation (8.48) with z
on the left-hand side. The Acosta and Hollander solution is algebraically simple and
therefore makes a good, speciﬁc example. The length of the cavity in the ζ-plane,
a, provides a convenient parameter for the problem and should not be confused
with the actual cavity length, ℓ. Given the square-root singularities at A and C, the
complex velocity, w(ζ), takes the form
w(ζ)
U∞
= (1 + σ)
1
2 + C1

ζ
ζ −a
 1
2
−C2
ζ −a
ζ
 1
2
(8.49)
where the real constants, C1 and C2, must be determined by the conditions at
upstream and downstream inﬁnity. As x →−∞or ζ →ζH = ie−iβ we must have
w/U∞= e−iα and therefore
C1

ζH
ζH −a
 1
2
−C2
ζH −a
ζH
 1
2
+ (1 + σ)
1
2 = e−iα
(8.50)
and, as x →+∞or |ζ| →∞, continuity requires that
C1 −C2 + (1 + σ)
1
2 = cos(α + β)
0
cos(β)
(8.51)
The complex Equation (8.50) and the scalar Equation (8.51) permit evaluation of
C1, C2, and a in terms of the parameters of the physical problem, σ and β. Then the

8.9 Cavitating Cascades
235
completed solution can be used to evaluate such features as the cavity length, ℓ:
ℓ
h = 1
π Re
!
e−iβ ln

1 + iaeiβ"
(8.52)
Wade (1967) extended this partial cavitation analysis to cover ﬂat plate foils of ﬁnite
length, and Stripling and Acosta (1962) considered the nonlinear problem. Brennen
and Acosta (1973) presented a simple, approximate method by which a ﬁnite blade
thickness can be incorporated into the analysis of Acosta and Hollander. This is
particularly valuable because the choked cavitation number, σc, is quite sensitive to
the blade thickness or radius of curvature of the leading edge. The following is the
expression for σc from the Brennen and Acosta analysis:
σc =

1 + 2sin α
2 sec
π
4 −β
2

sin
π
4 −β
2 −α
2

+2dsin2
π
4 −β
2
 1
2
−1 (8.53)
where d is the ratio of the blade thickness to normal blade spacing, hcosβ, far
downstream. Since the validity of the linear theory requires that α ≪1 and since
many pumps (for example, cavitating inducers) have stagger angles close to π/2, a
reasonable approximation to Equation (8.53) is
σc ≈α(θ −α) + θ2d
(8.54)
where θ = π/2 −β. This limit is often used to estimate the breakdown cavitation
number for a pump based on the heuristic argument that long partial cavities that
reach the pump discharge would permit substantial deviation angles and therefore
lead to a marked decline in pump performance (Brennen and Acosta 1973).
Note, however, that under the conditions of an inviscid model, a small partial
cavity will not signiﬁcantly alter the performance of the cascade of higher solidity
(say, 1/h > 1) since the discharge, with or without the cavity, is essentially con-
strained to follow the direction of the blades. On the other hand, the direction of
ﬂow downstream of a supercavitating cascade will be signiﬁcantly affected by the
cavities, and the corresponding lift and drag coefﬁcients will be altered by the cav-
itation. We return to the subject of supercavitating cascades to demonstrate this
effect.
A substantial body of data on the performance of cavitating cascades has been
accumulated through the efforts of Numachi (1961, 1964), Wade and Acosta (1967),
and others. This allows comparison with the analytical models, in particular the
supercavitating theories. Figure 8.26 provides such a comparison between mea-
sured lift and drag coefﬁcients (deﬁned as normal and parallel to the direction of the
incident stream) for a particular cascade and the theoretical results from the super-
cavitating theories of Furuya (1975a) and Duller (1966). Note that the measured lift
coefﬁcients exhibit a rapid decline in cascade performance as the cavitation num-
ber is reduced and the supercavities grow. However, it is important to observe that

236
Free Streamline Flows
0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0
0.8
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Lift Coefficient, CL
Drag  Coefficient,  CD 
0.14
0.12
0.10
9˚
9˚
8˚
8˚
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
Cavitation Number,   
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Figure 8.26 Lift and drag coefﬁcients as functions of the cavitation number for cascades of
so l i d i t y, 0. 625, an d s t agger an gl e, β = 45◦−α , operating at angles of incidence, α , of 8◦
(△ ) and 9◦ (2). T h e p o i n t s are f r o m t h e exp eri men t s o f W ad e an d A co st a ( 1967), an d t h e
an al yt i c al resu l t s f o r a s u p ercavi t at i n g cascad e are f r o m t h e l i n ear t h eo ry o f Du l l er ( 1966)
(d ash ed l i n es) an d t h e n o n l i n ear t h eo ry o f F u ru ya (1975a) (so l i d l i n es).
this degradation does not occur until the cavitation is quite extensive. The cavitation
inception numbers for the experiments were σi = 2.35 (for 8◦) and σi = 1.77 (for 9◦).
However, the cavitation number must be lowered to about 0.5 before the perfor-
mance is adversely affected. In the range of σ in between are the partial cavitation
states for which the performance is little changed.
For the cascades and incidence angles used in the example of Figure 8.26,
Furuya (1975a) shows that the linear and nonlinear supercavitation theories yield
results that are similar and close to those of the experiments. This is illustrated in
Figure 8.26. However, Furuya also demonstrates that there are circumstances in
which the linear theories can be substantially in error and for which the nonlin-
ear results are clearly needed. The effect of the solidity, 1/h, on the results is also
important because it is a major design factor in determining the number of blades in
a pump or propeller. Figure 8.27 illustrates the effect of solidity when large super-
cavities are present (σ = 0.18). Note that the solidity has remarkably little effect.

8.11 Numerical Methods
237
CD, = 8°
CD, = 6°
CL, = 6°
CL, = 8°
CD (= 6°)
CL (= 6°)
0.5
1.0
Drag Coefficient CD × 10 
Lift Coefficient CL 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Solidity, 1/h
1.5
Figure 8.27 Lift and drag coefﬁcients as functions of the solidity for cascades of stagger angle,
β = 45◦−α , operating at the indicated angles o f inciden ce, α , and at a cavitation number,
σ = 0.18. T h e p o i n t s are f r o m t h e exp eri men t s o f W ad e an d A co st a ( 1967), an d t h e l i n es are
f r o m t h e n o n l i n ear t h eo ry o f F u ru ya (1975). R ep roduced from Furuya (1975a).
8.10 Three-Dimensional Flows
Though numerical methods seem to be in the ascendant, several efforts have been
made to treat three-dimensional cavity ﬂows analytically. Early analyses of attached
cavities on ﬁnite aspect ratio foils combined the solutions for planar ﬂows with the
corrections known from ﬁnite aspect ratio aerodynamics (Johnson 1961). Later,
stripwise solutions for cavitating foils of ﬁnite span were developed in which an
inner solution from either a linear or a nonlinear theory was matched to an outer
solution from lifting line theory. This approach was used by Nishiyama (1970),
Leehey (1971), and Furuya (1975b) to treat supercavitating foils and by Uhlman
(1978) for partially cavitating foils. Widnall (1966) used a lifting surface method in
a three-dimensional analysis of supercavitating foils.
For more slender bodies such as delta wings, the linearized procedure outlined
in Section 8.7 can be extended to three-dimensional bodies in much the same way
as it is applied in the slender body theories of aerodynamics. Tulin (1959) and
Cumberbatch and Wu (1961) used this approach to model cavitating delta wings.
8.11 Numerical Methods
With the modern evolution of computational methods it has become increasingly
viable to consider more direct numerical methods for the solution of free surface
ﬂows, even in circumstances in which analytical solutions could be generated. It
would be beyond the scope of this text to survey these computational methods,
and so we conﬁne our discussion to some brief comments on the methods used
in the past. These can be conveniently divided into two types. Some of the liter-
ature describes “ﬁeld” methods in which the entire ﬂow ﬁeld is covered by a lattice
of grids and node points at which the ﬂow variables are evaluated. But most of

238
Free Streamline Flows
the work in the past has focused on the use of “boundary element” methods that
make use of superposition of the fundamental singularity solutions for potential
ﬂows. A few methods do not ﬁt into these categories; for example, the expansion
technique devised by Garabedian (1956) in order to construct axisymmetric ﬂow
solutions from the corresponding planar ﬂows.
Methods for the synthesis of potential ﬂows using distributed singularities can,
of course, be traced to the original work of Rankine (1871). The ﬁrst attempts
to use distributions of sources and sinks to ﬁnd solutions to axisymmetric cavity
ﬂow problems appear to have been made by Reichardt and Munzner (1950). They
distributed doublets on the axis and sought symmetric, Rankine-like body shapes
with nearly constant surface pressure except for fore and aft caps in order to simu-
late Riabouchinsky ﬂows. The problem with this approach is its inability to model
the discontinuous or singular behavior at the free surface detachment points. This
requires a distribution of surface singularities that can either be implemented explic-
itly (most conveniently with surface vortex sheet elements) or by the equivalent use
of Green’s function methods as pioneered by Trefftz (1916) in the context of jets.
Distributions of surface singularities to model cavity ﬂows were ﬁrst employed by
Landweber (1951), Armstrong and Dunham (1953), and Armstrong and Tadman
(1954). The latter used these methods to generate solutions for the axisymmetric
Riabouchinsky solutions of cavitating discs and spheres. The methods were later
extended to three-dimensional potential ﬂows by Struck (1966), who addressed
the problem of an axisymmetric body at a small angle of attack to the oncoming
stream.
As computational capacity grew, it became possible to examine more complex
three-dimensional ﬂows and lifting bodies using boundary element methods. For
example, Lemonnier and Rowe (1988) computed solutions for a partially cavitating
hydrofoil and Uhlman (1987, 1989) has generated solutions for hydrofoils with both
partial cavitation and supercavitation. These methods solve for the velocity. The
position of the cavity boundary is determined by an iterative process in which the
dynamic condition is satisﬁed on an approximate cavity surface and the kinematic
condition is used to update the location of the surface. More recently, a method
that uses Green’s theorem to solve for the potential has been developed by Kin-
nas and Fine (1990) and has been applied to both partially and supercavitating
hydrofoils. This appears to be superior to the velocity-based methods in terms of
convergence.
Efforts have also been made to develop “ﬁeld” methods for cavity ﬂows. South-
well and Vaisey (1946) (see also Southwell 1948) ﬁrst explored the use of relaxation
methods to solve free surface problems but did not produce solutions for any real-
istic cavity ﬂows. Woods (1951) suggested that solutions to axisymmetric cavity
ﬂows could be more readily obtained in the geometrically simpler (φ,ψ) plane, and
Brennen (1969a) used this suggestion to generate Riabouchinsky model solutions
for a cavitating disc and sphere in a ﬁnite water tunnel (see Figures 8.5, 8.17 and
8.18). In more recent times, it has become clear that boundary integral methods are
more efﬁcient for potential ﬂows. However, ﬁeld methods must still be used when

8.12 Unsteady Flows
239
seeking solutions to the more complete viscous ﬂow problem. Signiﬁcant progress
has been made in the last few years in developing Navier-Stokes solvers for free
surface problems in general and cavity ﬂow problems in particular (see, for example,
Deshpande et al. 1993).
8.12 Unsteady Flows
Most of the analyses in the preceding sections addressed various steady free stream-
line ﬂows. The corresponding unsteady ﬂows pose more formidable modeling
problems, and it is therefore not surprising that progress in solving these unsteady
ﬂows has been quite limited. Though Wang and Wu (1965) show how a general
perturbation theory of cavity ﬂows may be formulated, the implementation of their
methodology to all but the simplest ﬂows may be prohibitively complicated. More-
over, there remains much uncertainity regarding the appropriate closure model
to use in unsteady ﬂow. Consequently, the case of zero cavitation number raises
less uncertainty since it involves an inﬁnitely long cavity and no closure. We will
therefore concentrate on the linear solution of the problem of small amplitude per-
turbations to a mean ﬂow with zero cavitation number. This problem was ﬁrst solved
by Woods (1957) in the context of an oscillating aerofoil with separated ﬂow but can
be more conﬁdently applied to the cavity ﬂow problem. Martin (1962) and Parkin
(1962) further reﬁned Woods’ theory and provided tabulated data for the unsteady
force coefﬁcients, which we will utilize in this summary.
The unsteady ﬂow problem is best posed using the “acceleration potential” (see,
for example, Biot 1942), denoted here by φ′ and deﬁned simply as (p∞−p)/ρ, so
that linearized versions of Euler’s equations of motion may be written as
∂φ′
∂x = ∂u
∂t + U∞
∂u
∂x
(8.55)
∂φ′
∂y = ∂v
∂t + U∞
∂v
∂x
(8.56)
It follows from the equation of continuity that φ′ satisﬁes Laplace’s equation,
∇2φ′ = 0
(8.57)
Now consider the boundary conditions on the cavity and on the wetted surface of
a ﬂat plate foil. Since the cavity pressure at zero cavitation number is equal to p∞,
it follows that the boundary condition on a free surface is φ′ = 0. The linearized
condition on a wetted surface (the unsteady version of Equation (8.38)) is clearly
v = −αU∞−∂h
∂t
(8.58)
where y = −h(x,t) describes the geometry of the wetted surface, α is the angle of
incidence, and the chord of the foil is taken to be unity. We consider a ﬂat plate
at a mean angle of incidence of ¯α that is undergoing small-amplitude oscillations in
both heave and pitch at a frequency, ω. The amplitude and phase of the pitching

240
Free Streamline Flows
oscillations are incorporated in the complex quantity, ˜α, so that the instantaneous
angle of incidence is given by
α = ¯α + Re
!
˜αejωt"
(8.59)
and the amplitude and phase of the heave oscillations of the leading edge are
incorporated in the complex quantity ˜h (positive in the negative y direction) so that
h(x,t) = Re
%
˜hejωt&
+ xRe
!
˜αejωt"
(8.60)
where the origin of x is taken to be the leading edge. Combining Equations (8.56),
(8.58), and (8.60), the boundary condition on the wetted surface becomes
∂φ′
∂y = Re
%
(ω2˜h + ω2 ˜αx −2jωU∞˜α)ejωt&
(8.61)
Consequently, the problem reduces to solving for the analytic function φ′(z) subject
to the conditions that φ′ is zero on a free streamline and that, on a wetted surface,
∂φ′0
∂y is a known, linear function of x given by Equation (8.61).
In the linearized form this mathematical problem is quite similar to that of the
steady ﬂow for a cavitating foil at an angle of attack and can be solved by similar
methods (Woods 1957, Martin 1962). The resulting instantaneous lift and moment
coefﬁcients can be decomposed into components due to the pitch and the heave:
CL = ¯CL + Re
%
(˜h ˜CLh + ˜α ˜CLp)ejωt&
(8.62)
CM = ¯CM + Re
%
(˜h ˜CMh + ˜α ˜CMp)ejωt&
(8.63)
Reduced Frequency, 	* = 	c/U
5
10
1
10–2
10–1
–5
Re{C˜Lh}
Re{C˜Mh}
Im{C˜Mh}
Im{C˜Mp}
Re{C˜Mp}
Re{C˜Lp}
Im{C˜Lh}
Im{C˜Lp}
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
Figure 8.28 Real and imaginary parts of the four unsteady lift and moment coefﬁcients for a
ﬂat plate hydrofoil at zero cavitation number.

8.12 Unsteady Flows
241
7
6
5
4
3
Cavitating
Im {C~
Lh / 	*}
Cavitating
Re {–C~
Lh / 	*}
2
1
0
–1 
0
0.4
0.8
Reduced Frequeyncy, 	* = 	c / U
1.2
1.6
2.0
2.4
2.8
Non-Cavitating
Im {C~
Lh / 	*}
Non-Cavitating
Im {–C~
Lh / 	*}
 = 6˚
 = 6˚
 = 0˚
 = 0˚
Figure 8.29 Fluctuating lift coefﬁcients, ˜CLh, for foils undergoing heave oscillations at various
reduced frequencies, ω∗. Real and imaginary parts of ˜CLh/ω∗are presented for noncavitating
ﬂow at mean incidence angles of 0◦and 6◦(solid symbols) and for cavitating ﬂow for a mean
incidence of 8◦, for very long choked cavities (2) and for cavities 3 chords in length (3).
A d ap t ed f ro m A co st a an d DeL o n g (1971).
where the moment about the leading edge is considered positive in the clockwise
direction (tending to increase α). The four complex coefﬁcients, ˜CLh, ˜CLp, ˜CMh, and
˜CMp, represent the important dynamic characteristics of the foil and are functions of
the reduced frequency deﬁned as ω∗= ωc/U∞where c is the chord. The tabulations
by Parkin (1962) allow evaluation of these coefﬁcients, and they are presented in
Figure 8.28 as functions of the reduced frequency. The values tabulated by Woods
(1957) yield very similar results. Note that when the reduced frequency is much
less than unity, the coefﬁcients tend to their quasistatic values; in this limit all but
Re{ ˜CLp} and Re{ ˜CMp} tend to zero, and these two nonzero coefﬁcients tend to the
quasistatic values of dCL/dα and dCM/dα, namely π/2 and 5π/32, respectively.
Acosta and DeLong (1971) measured the oscillating forces on a cavitating
hydrofoil subjected to heave oscillations at various reduced frequencies. Their
results both for cavitating and noncavitating ﬂow are presented in Figure 8.29 for
several mean angles of incidence, ¯α. The analytical results from ﬁgure 8.28 are

242
Free Streamline Flows
included in this ﬁgure and compare fairly well with the experiments. Indeed, the
agreement is better than is manifest between theory and experiment in the noncav-
itating case, perhaps because the oscillations of the pressure in the separated region
or wake of the noncavitating ﬂow are not adequately modeled.
Other advances in the treatment of unsteady linearized cavity ﬂows were intro-
duced by Wu (1957) and Timman (1958), and the original work of Woods was
extended to ﬁnite cavitation numbers (ﬁnite cavities) by Kelly (1967), who found
that the qualitative nature of the results was not dependent on σ. Later, Widnall
(1966) showed how the linearized acceleration potential methods could be imple-
mented in three dimensions. Another valuable extension would be to a cascade of
foils, but the author is unaware of any similar unsteady data for cavitating cascades.
Indeed, apart from the work of Sisto (1967), very little analytical work has been
done on the problem of the unsteady response of separated ﬂow in a cascade, a prob-
lem that is of considerable importance in the context of turbomachinery. Though
progress has been made in understanding the “dynamic stall” of a single foil (see,
for example, Ham 1968), there seems to be a clear need for further research on the
unsteady behavior of separated and cavitating ﬂows in cascades. The unsteady lift
and moment coefﬁcients are not only valuable in determining the unsteady char-
acteristics of propulsion and lift systems but have also been used to predict the
ﬂutter and divergence characteristics of cavitating foils (for example, Brennen et al.
1980).
References
Ackerberg, R.C. (1970). Boundary layer separation at a free streamline. Part 1. Two-
dimensional ﬂow. J. Fluid Mech., 44, 211–225.
Ackerberg, R.C. (1975). The effects of capillarity on free streamline separation. J. Fluid
Mech., 70, 333–352.
Acosta, A.J. (1955). A note on partial cavitation of ﬂat plate hydrofoils. Calif. Inst. of Tech.
Hydro. Lab. Rep. E-19.9.
Acosta, A.J. (1960). Cavitating ﬂow past a cascade of circular arc hydrofoils. Calif. Inst. of
Tech. Hydro. Lab. Rep. E-79.2.
Acosta, A.J. (1973). Hydrofoils and hydrofoil craft. Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech., 5, 161–184.
Acosta, A.J. and Hollander, A. (1959). Remarks on cavitation in turbomachines. Calif. Inst.
of Tech. Eng. Div. Rep. No. 79.3
Acosta, A.J. and DeLong, R.K. (1971). Experimental investigation of non-steady forces on
hydrofoils oscillating in heave. Proc. IUTAM Symp. on non-steady ﬂow of water at high
speeds, Leningrad, USSR, 95–104.
Ai, D.K. (1966). The wall effect in cavity ﬂows. ASME J. Basic Eng., 88, 132–138.
Arakeri, V.H. (1975). Viscous effects on the position of cavitation separation from smooth
bodies. J. Fluid Mech., 68, 779–799.
Armstrong, A.H. (1953). Abrupt and smooth separation in plane and axisymmetric ﬂow.
Memo. Arm. Res. Est., G.B., No. 22/63.
Armstrong, A.H. and Dunham, J.H. (1953). Axisymmetric cavity ﬂow. Rep. Res. Est., G.B.,
No. 12/53.
Armstrong, A.H. and Tadman, K.G. (1954). Axisymmetric cavity ﬂow about ellipsoids. Proc.
Joint Admiralty-U.S.Navy Meeting on Hydroballistics.
Betz, A. and Petersohn, E. (1931). Application of the theory of free jets. NACA TM No. 667.
Biot, M.A. (1942). Some simpliﬁed methods in airfoil theory. J. Aero. Sci., 9, No. 5, 185–190.

References
243
Birkhoff, G. and Zarantonello, E.H. (1957). Jets, wakes, and cavities. Academic Press.
Brennen, C. (1969a). A numerical solution of axisymmetric cavity ﬂows. J. Fluid Mech., 37,
671–688.
Brennen, C. (1969b). Some viscous and other real ﬂuid effects in fully developed cavity ﬂows.
In Cavitation State of Knowledge (eds: J.M. Robertson, G.F. Wislicenus), ASME, N.Y.
Brennen, C. (1970). Some cavitation experiments with dilute polymer solutions. J. Fluid
Mech., 44, 51–63.
Brennen, C.E. and Acosta, A.J. (1973). Theoretical, quasistatic analysis of cavitation
compliance in turbopumps. J. Spacecraft and Rockets, 10, No. 3, 175–180.
Brennen, C.E., Oey, K., and Babcock, C.D. (1980). On the leading edge ﬂutter of cavitating
hydrofoils. J. Ship Res., 24, No. 3, 135–146.
Brillouin, M. (1911). Les surfaces de glissement de Helmholtz et la r´esistance des ﬂuides.
Ann. Chim. Phys., 23, 145–230.
Churchill, R.V. (1948). Introduction to complex variables and applications. McGraw-Hill
Book Company.
Cohen, H. and Gilbert, R. (1957). Two-dimensional, steady, cavity ﬂow about slender bodies
in channels of ﬁnite width. ASME J. Appl. Mech., 24, 170–176.
Cohen, H., Sutherland, C.D., and Tu, Y-O. (1957). Wall effects in cavitating hydrofoil ﬂow.
J. Ship Res., 1, No. 3, 31–39.
Cumberbatch, E. and Wu, T.Y. (1961) Cavity ﬂow past a slender pointed hydrofoil. J. Fluid
Mech., 11, 187–208.
Deshpande, M., Feng, J., and Merkle, C. (1993). Navier-Stokes analysis of 2-D cavity ﬂows.
ASME Cavitation and Multiphase Flow Forum, FED-153, 149–155.
Duller, G.A. (1966). On the linear theory of cascades of supercavitating hydrofoils. U.K. Nat.
Eng. Lab. Rep. No. 218.
Efros, D.A. (1946). Hydrodynamical theory of two-dimensional ﬂow with cavitation. Dokl.
Akad. Nauk. SSSR, 51, 267–270.
Eisenberg, P. and Pond, H.L. (1948). Water tunnel investigations of steady state cavities.
David Taylor Model Basin Rep. No. 668.
Fabula, A.G. (1962). Thin airfoil theory applied to hydrofoils with a single ﬁnite cavity and
arbitrary free-streamline detachment. J. Fluid Mech., 12, 227–240.
Fabula, A.G. (1964). Choked ﬂow about vented or cavitating hydrofoils. ASME J. Basic Eng.,
86, 561–568.
Fage, A. and Johansen, F.C. (1927). On the ﬂow of air behind an inclined ﬂat plate of inﬁnite
span. Proc. Roy. Soc., London, Series A, 116, 170–197.
Franc, J.P. and Michel, J.M. (1985). Attached cavitation and the boundary layer: experimen-
tal investigation and numerical treatment. J. Fluid Mech., 154, 63–90.
Furuya, O. and Acosta, A.J. (1973). A note on the calculation of supercavitating hydrofoils
with rounded noses. ASME J. Fluids Eng., 95, 222–228.
Furuya, O. (1974). Supercavitating linear cascades with rounded noses. ASME J. Basic Eng.,
Series D, 96, 35–42.
Furuya, O. (1975a). Exact supercavitating cascade theory. ASME J. Fluids Eng., 97, 419–429.
Furuya, O. (1975b). Three-dimensional theory on supercavitating hydrofoils near a free
surface. J. Fluid Mech., 71, 339–359.
Garabedian, P.R. (1956). The mathematical theory of three-dimensional cavities and jets.
Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 62, 219–235.
Gilbarg, D. (1949). A generalization of the Schwarz-Christoffel transformation. Proc. U.S.
Nat. Acad. Sci., 35, 609–612.
Gilbarg, D. (1960). Jets and cavities. In Handbuch der Physik, Springer-Verlag, 9, 311–445.
Gurevich, M.I. (1961). Theory of jets in ideal ﬂuids. Academic Press, N.Y. (1965).
Ham, N.D. (1968). Aerodynamic loading on a two-dimensional airfoil during dynamic stall.
AIAA J., 6, 1927–1934.

244
Free Streamline Flows
Helmholtz, H. (1868). ¨Uber diskontinuierliche Fl¨ussigkeitsbewegungen. Monatsber. Akad.
Wiss., Berlin, 23, 215–228.
Hsu, C.C. (1972). On ﬂow past a supercavitating cascade of cambered blades. ASME J. Basic
Eng., Series D, 94, 163–168.
Hsu, E.-Y. and Perry, B. (1954). Water tunnel experiments on spheres in cavity ﬂow. Calif.
Inst. of Tech. Hydro. Lab. Rep. No. E-24.9.
Johnson, V.E. (1961). Theoretical and experimental investigation of supercavitating hydro-
foils operating near the free surface. NASA TR R-93.
Joukowski, N.E. (1890). I. A modiﬁcation of Kirchhoff’s method of determining a two-
dimensional motion of a ﬂuid given a constant velocity along an unknown streamline.
II. Determination of the motion of a ﬂuid for any condition given on a streamline. Mat.
Sbornik (Rec. Math.), 15, 121–278.
Kelly, H.R. (1967). An extension of the Woods theory for unsteady cavity ﬂows. ASME J.
Basic Eng., 89, 798–806.
Kinnas, S.A. and Fine, N.E. (1990). Non-linear analysis of the ﬂow around partially or super-
cavitating hydrofoils on a potential based panel method. Proc. IABEM-90 Symp. Int.
Assoc. for Boundary Element Methods, Rome, 289–300.
Kirchhoff, G. (1869). Zur Theorie freier Fl¨ussigkeitsstrahlen. Z. reine Angew. Math., 70,
289–298.
Kreisel, G. (1946). Cavitation with ﬁnite cavitation numbers. Admiralty Res. Lab. Rep.
R1/H/36.
Landweber, L. (1951). The axially symmetric potential ﬂow about elongated bodies of
revolution. David Taylor Model Basin Report No. 761.
Leehey, P. (1971). Supercavitating hydrofoil of ﬁnite span. Proc. IUTAM Symp. on Non-
steady Flow of Water at High Speeds, Leningrad, 277–298.
Lemonnier, H. and Rowe, A. (1988). Another approach in modelling cavitating ﬂows. J. Fluid
Mech., 195, 557–580.
Levi-Civita, T. (1907). Scie e leggi di resistenzia. Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo, 18, 1–37.
Martin, M. (1962). Unsteady lift and moment on fully cavitating hydrofoils at zero cavitation
number. J. Ship Res., 6, No. 1, 15–25.
Mimura, Y. (1958). The ﬂow with wake past an oblique plate. J. Phys. Soc. Japan, 13, 1048–
1055.
Newman, J.N. (1956). Supercavitating ﬂow past bodies with ﬁnite leading edge thickness.
David Taylor Model Basin Rep. No. 1081.
Nishiyama, T. (1970). Lifting line theory of supercavitating hydrofoil of ﬁnite span. ZAMM,
50, 645–653.
Nishiyama, T. and Ota, T. (1971). Linearized potential ﬂow models for hydrofoils in
supercavitating ﬂows. ASME J. Basic Eng., 93, Series D, 550–564.
Numachi, F. (1961). Cavitation tests on hydrofoils designed for accelerating ﬂow cascade:
Report 1. ASME J. Basic Eng., 83, Series D, 637–647.
Numachi, F. (1964). Cavitation tests on hydrofoils designed for accelerating ﬂow cascade:
Report 3. ASME J. Basic Eng., 86, Series D, 543–555.
Parkin, B.R. (1958). Experiments on circular-arc and ﬂat plate hydrofoils. J. Ship Res., 1,
34–56.
Parkin, B.R. (1959). Linearized theory of cavity ﬂow in two-dimensions. The RAND Corp.
(Calif.) Rep. No. P-1745.
Parkin, B.R. (1962). Numerical data on hydrofoil reponse to non-steady motions at zero
cavitation number. J. Ship Res., 6, No. 1, 40–42.
Rankine, W.J.M. (1871). On the mathematical theory of stream lines, especially those with
four foci and upwards. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc., 267–306.
Reichardt, H. (1945). The physical laws governing the cavitation bubbles produced behind
solids of revolution in a ﬂuid ﬂow. Kaiser Wilhelm Inst. Hyd. Res., Gottingen, TPA3/TIB..

References
245
Reichardt, H. and Munzner, H. (1950). Rotationally symmetric source-sink bodies with
predominantly constant pressure distributions. Arm. Res. Est. Trans. No. 1/50.
Riabouchinsky, D. (1920). On steady ﬂuid motion with a free surface. Proc. London Math.
Soc., 19, 206–215.
Roshko, A. (1954). A new hodograph for free streamline theory. NACA TN 3168.
Rouse, H. and McNown, J.M. (1948). Cavitation and pressure distribution: headforms at zero
angles of yaw. Bull. St. Univ. Iowa, Eng., No. 32.
Sedov, L.I. (1966). Plane problems in hydrodynamics and aerodynamics (in Russian). Izdat.
“Nauka”, Moscow.
Silberman, E. (1959). Experimental studies of supercavitating ﬂow about simple two-
dimensional bodies in a jet. J. Fluid Mech., 5, 337–354.
Sisto, F. (1967). Linearized theory of non-stationary cascades at fully stalled or supercavitat-
ing conditions. Zeitschrift fur Angewandte Mathematik und Mechanik, 8, 531–542.
Southwell, R.V. and Vaisey, G. (1946). Fluid motions characterized by free streamlines. Phil.
Trans., 240, 117–161.
Southwell, R.V. (1948). Relaxation methods in mathematical physics. Oxford Univ. Press.
Stripling, L.B. and Acosta, A.J. (1962). Cavitation in turbopumps—Part 1. ASME J. Basic
Eng., Series D, 84, 326–338.
Struck, H.G. (1970). Discontinuous ﬂows and free streamline solutions for axisymmetric
bodies at zero and small angles of attack. NASA TN D-5634.
Sutherland, C.D. and Cohen, H. (1958). Finite cavity cascade ﬂow. Proc. 3rd U.S. Nat. Cong.
of Appl. Math., 837–845.
Timman, R. (1958) A general linearized theory for cavitating hydrofoils in nonsteady ﬂow.
Proc. 2nd ONR Symp. on Naval Hydrodynamics, 559–579.
Trefftz, E. (1916). ¨Uber die Kontraktion kreisf¨ormiger Fl¨ussigkeits-strahlen. Z. Math. Phys.,
64, 34–61.
Tulin, M.P. (1953). Steady two-dimensional cavity ﬂows about slender bodies. David Taylor
Model Basin Rep. 834.
Tulin, M.P. (1959). Supercavitating ﬂow past slender delta wings. J. Ship Res., 3, No. 3,
17–22.
Tulin, M.P. (1964). Supercavitating ﬂows—small perturbation theory. J. Ship Res., 7, No. 3,
16–37.
Uhlman, J.S. (1978). A partially cavitated hydrofoil of ﬁnite span. ASME J. Fluids Eng., 100,
No. 3, 353–354.
Uhlman, J.S. (1987). The surface singularity method applied to partially cavitating hydrofoils.
J. Ship Res., 31, No. 2, 107–124.
Uhlman, J.S. (1989). The surface singularity or boundary integral method applied to
supercavitating hydrofoils. J. Ship Res., 33, No. 1, 16–20.
Villat, H. (1914). Sur la validit´e des solutions de certains probl`emes d’hydrodynamique.
J. Math. Pures Appl.(6), 10, 231–290.
Wade, R.B. (1967). Linearized theory of a partially cavitating cascade of ﬂat plate hydrofoils.
Appl. Sci. Res., 17, 169–188.
Wade, R.B. and Acosta, A.J. (1966). Experimental observations on the ﬂow past a planocon-
vex hydrofoil. ASME J. Basic Eng., 88, 273–283.
Wade, R.B. and Acosta, A.J. (1967). Investigation of cavitating cascades. ASME J. Basic
Eng., Series D, 89, 693–706.
Wang, D.P. and Wu, T.Y. (1965). General formulation of a perturbation theory for unsteady
cavity ﬂows. ASME J. Basic Eng., 87, 1006–1010.
Widnall, S.E. (1966). Unsteady loads on supercavitating hydrofoils. J. Ship Res., 9, 107–118.
Woods, L.C. (1957). Aerodynamic forces on an oscillating aerofoil ﬁtted with a spoiler. Proc.
Roy. Soc. London, Series A, 239, 328–337.
Woods, L.C. (1951). A new relaxation treatment of ﬂow with axial symmetry. Quart. J. Mech.
Appl. Math., 4, 358–370.

246
Free Streamline Flows
Woods, L.C. (1961). The theory of subsonic plane ﬂow. Cambridge Univ. Press.
Woods, L.C. and Buxton, G.H.L. (1966). The theory of cascade of cavitating hydrofoils.
Quart. J. Mech. Appl. Math., 19, 387–402.
Wu, T.Y. (1956). A free streamline theory for two-dimensional fully cavitated hydrofoils.
J. Math. Phys., 35, 236–265.
Wu, T.Y. (1957). A linearized theory for nonsteady cavity ﬂows. Calif. Inst. of Tech. Eng.
Div. Rep. No. 85–6.
Wu, T.Y. (1962). A wake model for free streamline ﬂow theory, Part 1. Fully and par-
tially developed wake ﬂows and cavity ﬂows past an oblique ﬂat plate. J. Fluid Mech., 13,
161–181.
Wu, T.Y. (1969). Cavity ﬂow analysis; a review of the state of knowledge. In Cavitation State
of Knowledge (eds: J.M. Robertson, G.F. Wislicenus), ASME, N.Y.
Wu, T.Y. (1972). Cavity and wake ﬂows. Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech., 4, 243–284.
Wu, T.Y. and Wang, D.P. (1964a). A wake model for free streamline ﬂow theory, Part 2.
Cavity ﬂows past obstacles of arbitrary proﬁle. J. Fluid Mech., 18, 65–93.
Wu, T.Y. and Wang, D.P. (1964b). An approximate numerical scheme for the theory of cavity
ﬂows past obstacles of arbitrary proﬁle. ASME J. Basic Eng., 86, 556–560.
Wu, T.Y., Whitney, A.K., and Brennen, C. (1971). Cavity-ﬂow wall effect and correction
rules. J. Fluid Mech., 49, 223–256.

Index
abrupt detachment, 212
acceleration potential, 239
accommodation coefﬁcient, 50
acoustic impulse, 79
acoustic pressure, 76
acoustic spectra, 78
acoustic streaming, 105, 108
added mass matrix, 121
air content, 24
attached cavitation, 188, 197–200
attached cavitation tails, 188
barotropic relation, 146, 152–154
base pressure coefﬁcient, 222
Basset term, 129, 133
bearings, 199
Berthelot tube, 13
bifurcations, 102
binodal, 2
Bjerknes forces, 89, 107–108, 120
blade cavitation, 197
Blake critical pressure, 40, 103
Blake critical radius, 40
blockage ratio, 218
boiling, 6
Boltzmann’s constant, 6
boundary element methods, 238
boundary layer
separation, 211, 216
breakdown cavitation number, 235
Brillouin-Villat condition, 213
Brownian motion, 120
bubble
acceleration, 132–135
chamber, 8
cloud, 67, 74, 102, 173–180, 196
cloud collapse, 74–75, 196
collapse, 59–85
damping, 95–96
deformation, 137–143
dimple, 189
ﬁssion, 186, 188
ﬂow interactions, 184–185
migration, 107, 130–132
natural frequency, 90–93
stability, 39
translation, 110–143
buoyancy effects, 51
cascade, 232–236
ﬂat plate, 233
mapping function, 232
unsteady motion, 242
cavitation, 19
damage, 65, 71–75
desinence, 24
event, 182
hysteresis, 24
inception, 19–27
inception number, 20
large-scale structures, 183,
191–192
luminescence, 83–85
noise, 75–83
number, 20, 207
scaling, 27
separation, 199
stable acoustic, 89
susceptibility, 73
transient acoustic, 89, 103
cavity closure, 201–203
models, 209–211
cavity detachment, 211–216
cavity pulsation, 202
choked cavitation number, 218, 235
choked ﬂow, 155, 217–219
Clausius-Clapeyron equation, 7, 34
cloud cavitation, 196–197, 200
cloud natural frequency, 176
cluster radius, 9
complex variable methods, 208
contact angle, 14
247

248
Index
contaminant
gas, 8, 18, 21, 33
particles, 8
convective effects, 50
cosmic radiation, 8
Coulter counter, 16
creep, 3
critical gas volume fraction, 155, 159
critical mass ﬂow rate, 155, 160
critical point, 2
critical pressure ratio, 155, 160
critical radius, 40
critical superheat, 15
critical temperature, 6
critical vapor volume fraction, 160
D’Alembert’s paradox, 112, 206
deaerator, 24
delta wings, 237
dental drills, 74
disperse phase, 145
drag coefﬁcient, 112
dynamic stall, 242
elasticity, 3, 18
entrainment, 202
far-wake, 112, 117
ﬂexible coating, 67
ﬂuidity, 3
free streamline
detachment, 207, 211–216
ﬂow, 206
methods, 206
free surface, 206
detachment, 211–216
Froude number, 135, 201
fully developed cavitation, 197
Gibbs number, 10
Haberman-Morton number, 138
Hadamard-Rybczynski ﬂow, 114, 129, 134
harmonic cascading, 179
head injuries, 74
hodograph variable, 209
holography, 17, 24
homogeneous equilibrium model, 149, 160
homogeneous ﬂow, 145
homogeneous frozen model, 149, 160
hydrofoil, 200–201
biconvex, 200
circular-arc, 223
divergence, 242
ﬁnite aspect ratio, 237
ﬂat plate, 222, 229–231
ﬂutter, 242
partially cavitating, 229
supercavitating, 229
unsteady motion, 239
impurities, 6
inertia tensor, 121
interfacial layer, 197, 201
ITTC
headform, 22, 80, 185
tests, 22
Jakob number, 48
Joukowski foils, 25
Kelvin impulse, 131
Keulegan-Carpenter number, 123
Kirkwood-Bethe approximation,
60
Knudsen number, 120
Kutta condition, 230
laminar boundary layer, 184
Landau-Darrieus instability, 53
latent heat, 6
limited cavitation, 182
linearized methods, 227–229
liquid compressibility, 60, 69, 153
liquid explosives, 85
liquid quality, 22
liquid state, 1–3
liquid turbomachines, 232
magnetostrictive device, 73
Marangoni effects, 117–119
mass diffusion, 43–45, 202
metastable state, 3
microbubbles, 8, 17
microjet, 65–71
microstreaming, 108
mixture density, 145
Morison’s equation, 122
near-wake, 112, 117
nozzle ﬂow, 154–162
nucleation
heterogeneous, 7, 14–15
homogeneous, 7–14
rate, 10
sites, 15–18
nuclei, 7
cavitation, 16
free stream, 16, 22
Harvey, 16, 18
ocean, 25
surface, 16

Index
249
numerical methods, 237–239
Nusselt number, 50
open-wake model, 210
organic skin, 18
Oseen ﬂow, 115, 130
partial cavitation, 200
particle acceleration, 132–135
patch cavitation, 189
Peclet number, 50
photophoresis, 120
Plesset-Zwick equation, 35, 63
polytropic constant, 36, 93–95
pressure coefﬁcient, 19
propellers, 232
pseudo-cavitation, 25
Rayleigh collapse time, 39
Rayleigh-Plesset equation, 30, 61
Rayleigh-Taylor instability, 53
re-entrant jet, 65
rectiﬁed diffusion, 45, 89, 103–108
reentrant jet, 201
model, 211
relative motion, 145
relaxation time, 133
remnant cloud, 72, 187
reservoir conditions, 153
residence time, 21
resorber, 24
Reynolds number, 19, 112
Riabouchinsky model, 209
ring vortices, 195
rock-cutting, 74
Schiebe headform, 80
screening effect, 184
separated ﬂow, 145
shape distortion, 64
sheet cavitation, 197–200
shock wave, 61, 71, 84, 168–173, 179
slender body theory, 237
smooth detachment, 213
solidity, 232
sonic speed, 146–152
sonochemistry, 84
sonophoresis, 120
speciﬁc heat, 3
spherical-cap bubble, 139
spinodal line
liquid, 2, 12
vapor, 2
spiral vortex models, 211
stagger angle, 232
Stokes ﬂow, 114–117, 126–130, 133
Stokes streamfunction, 112
streamwise vortices, 195
Strouhal number, 117
subharmonics, 97
super-cavitation, 200
super-resonant ﬂow, 180
superheat, 3, 7
limit, 11
surface contaminants, 119
surface roughening, 52, 188
surface roughness, 27
surface tension, 8, 117
susceptibility meter, 18
tensile strength, 5, 6, 9, 13–15
tension, 3, 6
terminal velocity, 133
thermal effects, 45, 62, 203
thermocapillary effects, 117
thermodynamic equilibrium, 146
thermophoresis, 120
three-dimensional ﬂow, 237
throat conditions, 155
tip vortices, 192
transverse vortices, 195
traveling bubble cavitation, 185, 191
turbulence
effects, 21
free stream, 22
ventilated cavities, 202
ventilation, 19, 207
viscous effects, 19
vortex cavitation, 184, 192–196
vortex shedding, 112, 117, 123, 184, 196, 201
wake, 206
wall effects, 217–219
Weber number, 42
Whitehead paradox, 114


