Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
 
Cancer 
Wolf R, Wolf D. Increased incidence of cancer near a cell-phone transmitter 
station. Inter J Cancer Prev 1(2):123-128, 2004.  
Significant concern has been raised about possible health effects from exposure to 
radiofrequency (RF) electromagnetic fields, especially after the rapid introduction of 
mobile telecommunication systems. Parents are especially concerned with the 
possibility that children might develop cancer after exposure to the RF emissions 
from mobile telephone base stations erected in or near schools. The few 
epidemiologic studies that did report on cancer incidence in relation to RF radiation 
have generally presented negative or inconsistent results, and thus emphasized the 
need for more studies that should investigate cohorts with high RF exposure for 
changes in cancer incidence. The aim of this study is to investigate whether there is 
an increased cancer incidence in populations, living in a small area, and exposed to 
RF radiation from a cell-phone transmitter station. 
This is an epidemiologic assessment, to determine whether the incidence of cancer 
cases among individuals exposed to a cell-phone transmitter station is different 
from that expected in Israel, in Netanya, or as compared to people who lived in a 
nearby area. Participants are people (n=622) living in the area near a cell-phone 
transmitter station for 3-7 years who were patients of one health clinic (of DW). The 
exposure began 1 year before the start of the study when the station first came into 
service. A second cohort of individuals (n=1222) who get their medical services in a 
clinic located nearby with very closely matched, environment, workplace and 
occupational characteristics was used for comparison. 
In the area of exposure (area) eight cases of different kinds of cancer were 
diagnosed in a period of only one year. This rate of cancers was compared both with 
the rate of 31 cases per 10,000 per year in the general population and the 2/1222 
rate recorded in the nearby clinic (area B). Relative cancer rates for female were 
10.5 for area A. 0.6 for area B and 1 for the whole town of Netanya. Cancer incidence 
of women in area A was thus significantly higher (p<0.0001) compared with that of 
area B and the whole city. A comparison of the relative risk revealed that there were 
4.15 times more cases in area than in the entire population. The study indicates an 
association between increased incidence of cancer and living in proximity to a cell-
phone transmitter station. 
Yakymenko I, Sidorik E, Kyrylenko S, Chekhun V. Long-term exposure to 
microwave radiation provokes cancer growth: evidences from radars and 
mobile communication systems.Exp Oncol. 33(2):62-70, 2011. 
In this review we discuss alarming epidemiological and experimental data on 
possible carcinogenic effects of long term exposure to low intensity microwave 
(MW) radiation. Recently, a number of reports revealed that under certain 
conditions the irradiation by low intensity MW can substantially induce cancer 
progression in humans and in animal models. The carcinogenic effect of MW 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
irradiation is typically manifested after long term (up to 10 years and more) 
exposure. Nevertheless, even a year of operation of a powerful base transmitting 
station for mobile communication reportedly resulted in a dramatic increase of 
cancer incidence among population living nearby. In addition, model studies in 
rodents unveiled a significant increase in carcinogenesis after 17-24 months of MW 
exposure both in tumor-prone and intact animals. To that, such metabolic changes, 
as overproduction of reactive oxygen species, 8-hydroxi-2-deoxyguanosine 
formation, or ornithine decarboxylase activation under exposure to low intensity 
MW confirm a stress impact of this factor on living cells. We also address the issue of 
standards for assessment of biological effects of irradiation. It is now becoming 
increasingly evident that assessment of biological effects of non-ionizing radiation 
based on physical (thermal) approach used in recommendations of current 
regulatory bodies, including the International Commission on Non-Ionizing 
Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) Guidelines, requires urgent reevaluation. We 
conclude that recent data strongly point to the need for re-elaboration of the current 
safety limits for non-ionizing radiation using recently obtained knowledge. We also 
emphasize that the everyday exposure of both occupational and general public to 
MW radiation should be regulated based on a precautionary principles which imply 
maximum restriction of excessive exposure. 
 
Michelozzi P, Ancona C, Fusco D, Forastiere F, Perucci CA, Risk of leukemia and 
residence near a radio transmitter in Italy. Epidemiology 9 (Suppl) 354p, 
1998.  
We conducted a small area study to investigate a cluster of leukemia near a high 
power radio-transmitter in a peripheral area of Rome.  The leukemia mortality 
within 3.5 km (5,863 inhabitants) was higher than expected (SMR=2.5, 95% 
confident interval 1.07-4.83); the excess was due to a significant higher mortality 
among men (7 cases observed, SMR=3.5). The results of the Stone’s test, after 
adjusting for socio-economic confounding, showed a significant decline in risk with 
distance from the transmitter only among men (p=0.005), whereas the p-value for 
both sexes was p=0.07.  
 
Lourencini da Silva R , Albano F, Lopes dos Santos LR , Tavares AD, 
Felzenszwalb I, The effect of electromagnetic field exposure on the formation 
of DNA lesions. Redox Rep 5(5):299-301, 2000.  
In an attempt to determine whether electromagnetic field (EMF) exposure might 
lead to DNA damage, we exposed SnCl2-treated pBR322 plasmids to EMF and 
analysed the resulting conformational changes using agarose gel electrophoresis. An 
EMF-dependent potentiation of DNA scission (i.e. the appearance of relaxed 
plasmids) was observed. In confirmation of this, plasmids pre-exposed to EMF also 
were less capable of transforming Escherichia coli. The results indicate that EMF, in 
the presence of a transition metal, is capable of causing DNA damage. These 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
observations support the idea that EMF, probably through secondary generation of 
reactive oxygen species, can be clastogenic and provide a possible explanation for 
the observed correlation between EMF exposure and the frequency of certain types 
of cancers in humans. 
 
Li CY, Liu CC, Chang YH, Chou LP, Ko MC. A population-based case-control study 
of radiofrequency exposure in relation to childhood neoplasm. Sci Total 
Environ. 435-436:472-478, 2012. 
This population-based case-control study in Taiwan considered incident cases aged 
15 years or less and admitted in 2003 to 2007 for all neoplasm (ICD-9-CM: 140-239) 
(n=2606), including 939 leukemia and 394 brain neoplasm cases. Controls were 
randomly selected, with a case/control ratio of 1:30 and matched on year of birth, 
from all non-neoplasm children insured in the same year when the index case was 
admitted. Annual summarized power (ASP, watt-year) was calculated for each of the 
71,185 mobile phone base stations (MPBS) in service between 1998 and 2007. 
Then, the annual power density (APD, watt-year/km(2)) of each township (n=367) 
was computed as a ratio of the total ASP of all MPBS in a township to the area of that 
particular township. Exposure of each study subject to radio frequency (RF) was 
indicated by the averaged APD within 5 years prior to the neoplasm diagnosis 
(cases) or July 1st of the year when the index case was admitted (controls) in the 
township where the subject lived. Unconditional logistic regression model with 
generalized estimation equation was employed to calculate the covariate-adjusted 
odds ratio [AOR] of childhood neoplasm in relation to RF exposure. A higher than 
median averaged APD (approximately 168 WYs/km(2)) was significantly associated 
with an increased AOR for all neoplasms (1.13; 1.01 to 1.28), but not for leukemia 
(1.23; 0.99 to 1.52) or brain neoplasm (1.14, 0.83 to 1.55). This study noted a 
significantly increased risk of all neoplasms in children with higher-than-median RF 
exposure to MPBS. The slightly elevated risk was seen for leukemia and brain 
neoplasm, but was not statistically significant. These results may occur due to 
several methodological limitations. 
Johnson EH, Chima SC, Muirhead DE, A cerebral primitive 
neuroectodermal tumor in a squirrel monkey (Saimiri sciureus). J 
Med Primatol 28(2):91-96, 1999.  
An adult squirrel monkey with a history of long-term exposure to microwave 
radiation was found at necropsy to have a malignant tumor of the right cerebral 
cortex. Gross examination revealed a mass with expanding borders in the right 
frontoparietal cortex with compression of the adjacent lateral ventricle. Microscopy 
revealed a tumor composed of sheets of moderate-sized cells, resembling an 
oligodendroglioma, with clear cytoplasm and central nuclei interrupted by delicate 
vasculature. Malignant features were present in the form of marked nuclear 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
pleomorphism, frequent mitotic figures, and focal necrosis. A neuronal cell origin for 
this tumor was supported by immunohistochemical analysis, which revealed 
immunopositivity for neurofilament proteins and neuron-specific enolase. Staining 
for vimentin and glial fibrillary acid protein was negative, except in reactive 
astrocytes at the tumor margins and adjacent to intra-tumoral blood vessels. 
Antibody activity against Ki-67 antigen, a marker of rapidly proliferating tumor 
cells, and p53 oncoprotein was strongly positive, indicative of the aggressive and 
malignant nature of this tumor. The tumor was diagnosed as a cerebral primitive 
neuroectodermal tumor. 
 
Neurological Effects: 
Khurana VG, Hardell L, Everaert J, Bortkiewicz A, Carlberg M, Ahonen M. 
Epidemiological evidence for a health risk from mobile phone base 
stations.Int J Occup Environ Health. 16(3):263-267, 2010. 
Human populations are increasingly exposed to microwave/radiofrequency (RF) 
emissions from wireless communication technology, including mobile phones and 
their base stations. By searching PubMed, we identified a total of 10 epidemiological 
studies that assessed for putative health effects of mobile phone base stations. Seven 
of these studies explored the association between base station proximity and 
neurobehavioral effects and three investigated cancer. We found that eight of the 10 
studies reported increased prevalence of adverse neurobehavioral symptoms or 
cancer in populations living at distances < 500 meters from base stations. None of 
the studies reported exposure above accepted international guidelines, suggesting 
that current guidelines may be inadequate in protecting the health of human 
populations. We believe that comprehensive epidemiological studies of long-term 
mobile phone base station exposure are urgently required to more definitively 
understand its health impact. 
Hocking B, Westerman R. Neurological abnormalities associated with CDMA 
exposure. Occup Med (Lond) 51(6):410-413, 2001.  
 Dysaesthesiae of the scalp and neurological abnormality after mobile phone use 
have been reported previously, but the roles of the phone per se or the radiations in 
causing these findings have been questioned. We report finding a neurological 
abnormality in a patient after accidental exposure of the left side of the face to 
mobile phone radiation [code division multiple access (CDMA)] from a down-
powered mobile phone base station antenna. He had headaches, unilateral left 
blurred vision and pupil constriction, unilateral altered sensation on the forehead, 
and abnormalities of current perception thresholds on testing the left trigeminal 
ophthalmic nerve. His nerve function recovered during 6 months follow-up. His 
exposure was 0.015-0.06 mW/cm(2) over 1-2 h. The implications regarding health 
effects of radiofrequency radiation are discussed. 
Abdel-Rassoul G, El-Fateh OA, Salem MA, Michael A, Farahat F, El-Batanouny M, 
Salem E. Neurobehavioral effects among inhabitants around mobile phone 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
base stations. Neurotoxicology. 28(2):434-40, 2007.  
BACKGROUND: There is a general concern on the possible hazardous health effects 
of exposure to radiofrequency electromagnetic radiations (RFR) emitted from 
mobile phone base station antennas on the human nervous system. AIM: To identify 
the possible neurobehavioral deficits among inhabitants living nearby mobile phone 
base stations. METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted on (85) inhabitants 
living nearby the first mobile phone station antenna in Menoufiya governorate, 
Egypt, 37 are living in a building under the station antenna while 48 opposite the 
station. A control group (80) participants were matched with the exposed for age, 
sex, occupation and educational level. All participants completed a structured 
questionnaire containing: personal, educational and medical histories; general and 
neurological examinations; neurobehavioral test battery (NBTB) [involving tests for 
visuomotor speed, problem solving, attention and memory]; in addition to Eysenck 
personality questionnaire (EPQ). RESULTS: The prevalence of neuropsychiatric 
complaints as headache (23.5%), memory changes (28.2%), dizziness (18.8%), 
tremors (9.4%), depressive symptoms (21.7%), and sleep disturbance (23.5%) 
were significantly higher among exposed inhabitants than controls: (10%), (5%), 
(5%), (0%), (8.8%) and (10%), respectively (P<0.05). The NBTB indicated that the 
exposed inhabitants exhibited a significantly lower performance than controls in 
one of the tests of attention and short-term auditory memory [Paced Auditory Serial 
Addition Test (PASAT)]. Also, the inhabitants opposite the station exhibited a lower 
performance in the problem solving test (block design) than those under the station. 
All inhabitants exhibited a better performance in the two tests of visuomotor speed 
(Digit symbol and Trailmaking B) and one test of attention (Trailmaking A) than 
controls. The last available measures of RFR emitted from the first mobile phone 
base station antennas in Menoufiya governorate were less than the allowable 
standard level. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS: Inhabitants living nearby 
mobile phone base stations are at risk for developing neuropsychiatric problems 
and some changes in the performance of neurobehavioral functions either by 
facilitation or inhibition. So, revision of standard guidelines for public exposure to 
RER from mobile phone base station antennas and using of NBTB for regular 
assessment and early detection of biological effects among inhabitants around the 
stations are recommended. 
Akbari A, Jelodar G, Nazifi S. Vitamin C protects rat cerebellum and encephalon 
from oxidative stress following exposure to radiofrequency wave generated 
by a BTS antenna model. Toxicol Mech Methods. 24(5):347-352, 2014. 
Radio frequency wave (RFW) generated by base transceiver station has been 
reported to produce deleterious effects on the central nervous system function, 
possibly through oxidative stress. This study was conducted to evaluate the 
effect of RFW-induced oxidative stress in the cerebellum and encephalon and 
the prophylactic effect of vitamin C on theses tissues by measuring the 
antioxidant enzymes activity, including: glutathione peroxidase, superoxide 
dismutase, catalase, and malondialdehyde (MDA). Thirty-two adult male 
Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly divided into four equal groups. The control 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
group; the control-vitamin C group received L-ascorbic acid (200 mg/kg of body 
weight/day by gavage) for 45 days. The RFW group was exposed to RFW and 
the RFW+ vitamin C group was exposed to RFW and received vitamin C. At the 
end of the experiment, all groups were killed and encephalon and cerebellum of 
all rats were removed and stored at -70 °C for measurement of antioxidant 
enzymes activity and MDA. The results indicate that exposure to RFW in the test 
group decreased antioxidant enzymes activity and increased MDA compared 
with the control groups (p < 0.05). The protective role of vitamin C in the treated 
group improved antioxidant enzymes activity and reduced MDA compared with 
the test group (p < 0.05). It can be concluded that RFW causes oxidative stress in 
the brain and vitamin C improves the antioxidant enzymes activity and decreases 
MDA. 
Bak M, Dudarewicz A, Zmyślony M, Sliwinska-Kowalska M. Effects of GSM 
signals during exposure to event related potentials (ERPs). Int J Occup 
Med Environ Health. 23(2):191-199, 2010. 
Objectives: The primary aim of this work was to assess the effect of 
electromagnetic field (EMF) from the GSM mobile phone system on human brain 
function. The assessment was based on the assay of event related potentials 
(ERPs). Material and Methods: The study group consisted of 15 volunteers, 
including 7 men and 8 women. The test protocol comprised determination of 
P300 wave in each volunteer during exposure to the EMF. To eliminate possible 
effects of the applied test procedure on the final result, the test was repeated 
without EMF exposure. P300 latency, amplitude, and latency of the N1, N2, P2 
waves were analysed. Results: The statistical analysis revealed an effect of EMF 
on P300 amplitude. In the experiment with EMF exposure, lower P300 
amplitudes were observed only at the time in which the volunteers were exposed 
to EMF; when the exposure was discontinued, the values of the amplitude were 
the same as those observed before EMF application. No such change was 
observed when the experiment was repeated with sham exposure, which may be 
considered as an indirect proof that lower P300 amplitude values were due to 
EMF exposure. No statistically significant changes were noted in the latencies of 
the N1, N2, P2 waves that precede the P300 wave, nor in the latency of the P300 
itself. Conclusions: The results suggest that exposure to GSM EMF exerts some 
effects on CNS, including effects on long latency ERPs. 
Hinrichs H, Heinze HJ.Effects of GSM electromagnetic field on the MEG during 
an encoding-retrieval task. Neuroreport. 15(7):1191-1194, 2004.  
 Potential effects of GSM 1800 electromagnetic fields (EMF) on verbal memory 
encoding were investigated by recording event-related magnetic fields (ERMF) from 
the brain during subsequent memory retrieval. Twelve normal subjects participated 
in the study. After encoding words from a study list presented in the first phase they 
had to discriminate old from new words mixed together in a test list presented 
during the second phase. All subjects performed two experimental sessions, one 
with exposure to EMF during the study phase, and one without. Exposure to EMF 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
changed an early (350-400 ms) task-specific component of the ERMF indicating an 
interference of EMF and item encoding. Behavioural measures were not significantly 
affected. Adverse health effects cannot be derived from these data. 
Reproductive Organs and Fertility 
Magras, IN, Xenos, TD, RF radiation-induced changes in the prenatal 
development of mice. Bioelectromagnetics 18(6):455-461, 1997.  
The possible effects of radiofrequency (RF) radiation on prenatal development has 
been investigated in mice. This study consisted of RF level measurements and in 
vivo experiments at several places around an "antenna park." At these locations RF 
power densities between 168 nW/cm2 and 1053 nW/cm2 were measured. Twelve 
pairs of mice, divided in two groups, were placed in locations of different power 
densities and were repeatedly mated five times. One hundred eighteen newborns 
were collected. They were measured, weighed, and examined macro- and 
microscopically. A progressive decrease in the number of newborns per dam was 
observed, which ended in irreversible infertility. The prenatal development of the 
newborns, however, evaluated by the crown-rump length, the body weight, and the 
number of the lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal vertebrae, was improved.  
 
Jelodar G, Nazifi S, Akbari A. The prophylactic effect of vitamin C on induced 
oxidative stress in rat testis following exposure to 900 MHz radio frequency 
wave generated by a BTS antenna model.  Electromagn Biol Med. 2013 Jan 16. 
[Epub ahead of print] 
Radio frequency wave (RFW) generated by base transceiver station (BTS) has been 
reported to make deleterious effects on reproduction, possibly through oxidative stress. 
This study was conducted to evaluate the effect of RFW generated by BTS on oxidative 
stress in testis and the prophylactic effect of vitamin C by measuring the antioxidant 
enzymes activity, including glutathione peroxidase, superoxide dismutase (SOD) and 
catalase, and malondialdehyde (MDA). Thirty-two adult male Sprague-Dawley rats were 
randomly divided into four experimental groups and treated daily for 45 days as follows: 
sham, sham+vitamin C (l-ascorbic acid 200 mg/kg of body weight/day by gavage), RFW 
(exposed to 900 MHz RFW) 'sham' and 'RFW' animals were given the vehicle, i.e., 
distilled water and the RFW+vitamin C group (received vitamin C in addition to exposure 
to RFW). At the end of the experiment, all the rats were sacrificed and their testes were 
removed and used for measurement of antioxidant enzymes and MDA activity. The 
results indicate that exposure to RFW in the test group decreased antioxidant enzymes 
activity and increased MDA compared with the control groups (p < 0.05). In the treated 
group, vitamin C improved antioxidant enzymes activity and reduced MDA compared 
with the test group (p < 0.05). It can be concluded that RFW causes oxidative stress in 
testis and vitamin C improves the antioxidant enzymes activity and decreases MDA. 
 
Lukac N, Massanyi P, Roychoudhury S, Capcarova M, Tvrda E, Knazicka Z, 
Kolesarova A, Danko J. In vitro effects of radiofrequency electromagnetic 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
waves on bovine spermatozoa motility. J Environ Sci Health A Tox Hazard 
Subst Environ Eng. 46(12):1417-1423, 2011. 
In this study the effects of 1800 MHz GSM-like radiofrequency electromagnetic 
waves (RF-EMW) exposure on bovine semen was monitored. The experimental 
samples were analyzed in vitro in four time periods (0, 30, 120 and 420 min) and 
compared with unexposed samples (control). Spermatozoa motility was 
determined by computer assisted semen analyzer (CASA). Evaluation of the 
percentage of motile spermatozoa showed significant (P < 0.001) decrease in 
experimental groups after 120 and 420 min of culture when exposed to 
microwaves, in comparison to control. Similar spermatozoa motility inhibition was 
detected for the percentage of progressively motile spermatozoa, too. Average 
path distance decreased significantly (p < 0.001) in experimental groups after 30 
and 420 min of culture. Path velocity increased in the experimental groups 
exposed to RF-EMW after 30 minutes of culture, but subsequently decreased 
after 420 min of culture, in comparison to control. This indicates a possible initial 
stimulation and subsequent velocity inhibition of bovine spermatozoa under RF-
EMW exposure. Changes in spermatozoa motility were also detected for some 
fine parameters, too. A significant decrease (P < 0.001) was noted for amplitude 
of lateral head displacement in the experimental group after 420 minutes of 
culture. Detailed in vitro motility analysis of bovine spermatozoa exposed to 
microwave radiation suggested that the parameters of path and velocity at the 
beginning of the culture significantly increase, but after longer culture (420 
minutes) a significant decrease occur in the experimental group as compared to 
control. In general, results of this experiment indicate a negative time-dependent 
effect of 1800 MHz RF-EMW radiation on bovine spermatozoa motility. 
Wellbeing 
Santini R, Santini P, Danze JM, Le Ruz P, Seigne M.Study of the health of people 
living in the vicinity of mobile phone base stations: I. Influence of distance and 
sex. Pathol Biol (Paris) 50(6):369-373, 2002. [Article in French] 
A survey study using questionnaire was conducted in 530 people (270 men, 260 
women) living or not in vicinity of cellular phone base stations, on 18 Non Specific 
Health Symptoms. Comparisons of complaints frequencies (CHI-SQUARE test with 
Yates correction) in relation with distance from base station and sex, show 
significant (p < 0.05) increase as compared to people living > 300 m or not exposed 
to base station, till 300 m for tiredness, 200 m for headache, sleep disturbance, 
discomfort, etc. 100 m for irritability, depression, loss of memory, dizziness, libido 
decrease, etc. Women significantly more often than men (p < 0.05) complained of 
headache, nausea, loss of appetite, sleep disturbance, depression, discomfort and 
visual perturbations. This first study on symptoms experienced by people living in 
vicinity of base stations shows that, in view of radioprotection, minimal distance of 
people from cellular phone base stations should not be < 300 m. 
Santini R, Santini P, Le Ruz P, Danze JM, Seigne M, Survey study of people living 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
in the vicinity of cellular phone base stations. Electromag Biol Med 22:41-49, 
2003. 
A survey study was conducted, using a questionnaire, on 530 people (270 men, 260 
women) living or not in proximity to cellular phone base stations. Eighteen different 
symptoms (Non Specific Health Symptoms-NSHS), described as radiofrequency 
sickness, were studied by means of the chi-square test with Yates correction. The 
results that were obtained underline that certain complaints are experienced only in 
the immediate vicinity of base stations (up to 10 m for nausea, loss of appetite, 
visual disturbances), and other at greater distances from base stations (up to 100 m 
for irritability, depressive tendencies, lowering of libido, and up to 200 m for 
headaches, sleep disturbance, feeling of discomfort). In the 200 m to 300 m zone, 
only the complaint of fatigue is experienced significantly more often when 
compared with subjects residing at more than 300 m or not exposed (reference 
group). For seven of the studied symptoms and for the distance up to 300 m, the 
frequency of reported complaints is significantly higher (P< 0.05) for women in 
comparison to men. Significant differences are also observed in relation to the ages 
of subjects, and for the location of subjects in relation to the antennas and to other 
electromagnetic factors. 
 
Navarro EA, Sequra J, Portoles M, Gomez-Perretta de Mateo C. The Microwave 
Syndrome: A Preliminary Study in Spain. Electromag Biol Med 22:161-169, 
2003.  
A health survey was carried out in Murcia, Spain, in the vicinity of a Cellular 
Phone Base Station working in DCS-1800 MHz. This survey contained health 
items related to “microwave sickness” or “RF syndrome.” The microwave power 
density was measured at the respondents' homes. Statistical analysis showed 
significant correlation between the declared severity of the symptoms and the 
measured power density. The separation of respondents into two different 
exposure groups also showed an increase of the declared severity in the group 
with the higher exposure. 
Lerchl A, Krüger H, Niehaus M, Streckert JR, Bitz AK, Hansen V. Effects of 
mobile phone electromagnetic fields at nonthermal SAR values on melatonin 
and body weight of Djungarian hamsters (Phodopus sungorus). J Pineal Res. 
44(3):267-272, 2008.  
In three experiments, adult male Djungarian hamsters (Phodopus sungorus) were 
exposed 24 hr/day for 60 days to radio frequency electromagnetic fields (RF-EMF) 
at 383, 900, and 1800 MHz, modulated according to the TETRA (383 MHz) and GSM 
standards (900 and 1800 MHz), respectively. A radial waveguide system ensured a 
well defined and uniform exposure at whole-body averaged specific absorption 
rates of 80 mW/kg, which is equal to the upper limit of whole-body exposure of the 
general population in Germany and other countries. For each experiment, using two 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
identical waveguides, hamsters were exposed (n = 120) and sham-exposed (n = 
120) in a blind fashion. In all experiments, pineal and serum melatonin levels as well 
as the weights of testes, brain, kidneys, and liver were not affected. At 383 MHz, 
exposure resulted in a significant transient increase in body weight up to 4%, while 
at 900 MHz this body weight increase was more pronounced (up to 6%) and not 
transient. At 1800 MHz, no effect on body weight was seen. The results corroborate 
earlier findings which have shown no effects of RF-EMF on melatonin levels in vivo 
and in vitro. The data are in accordance with the hypothesis that absorbed RF 
energy may result in metabolic changes which eventually cause body weight 
increases in exposed animals. The data support the notion that metabolic effects of 
RF-EMFs need to be investigated in more detail in future studies. 
Kato Y, Johansson O. Reported functional impairments of 
electrohypersensitive Japanese: A questionnaire survey. 
Pathophysiology.19(2) 95-100, 2012.  
An increasing number of people worldwide complain that they have become 
electromagnetic hypersensitive (EHS). We conducted a questionnaire survey of 
EHS persons in Japan. The aim was to identify electromagnetic fields (EMF) and 
plausible EMF sources that caused their symptoms. Postal questionnaires were 
distributed via a self-help group, and 75 participants (95% women) responded. 
Reported major complaints were "fatigue/tiredness" (85%), "headache", 
"concentration, memory, and thinking" difficulty (81%, respectively). Seventy-two 
per cent used some form of complementary/alternative therapy. The most 
plausible trigger of EHS onset was a mobile phone base station or personal 
handy-phone system (37%). Sixty-five percent experienced health problems to 
be due to the radiation from other passengers' mobile phones in trains or buses, 
and 12% reported that they could not use public transportation at all. Fifty-three 
percent had a job before the onset, but most had lost their work and/or 
experienced a decrease in income. Moreover, 85.3% had to take measures to 
protect themselves from EMF, such as moving to low EMF areas, or buying low 
EMF electric appliances. EHS persons were suffering not only from their 
symptoms, but also from economical and social problems. 
 
Hutter HP, Moshammer H, Wallner P, Kundi M. Subjective symptoms, sleeping 
problems, and cognitive performance in subjects living near mobile phone 
base stations. Occup Environ Med. 63(5):307-313, 2006.  
BACKGROUND: The erection of mobile telephone base stations in inhabited areas 
has raised concerns about possible health effects caused by emitted microwaves. 
METHODS: In a cross-sectional study of randomly selected inhabitants living in 
urban and rural areas for more than one year near to 10 selected base stations, 365 
subjects were investigated. Several cognitive tests were performed, and wellbeing 
and sleep quality were assessed. Field strength of high-frequency electromagnetic 
fields (HF-EMF) was measured in the bedrooms of 336 households. RESULTS: Total 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
HF-EMF and exposure related to mobile telecommunication were far below 
recommended levels (max. 4.1 mW/m2). Distance from antennae was 24-600 m in 
the rural area and 20-250 m in the urban area. Average power density was slightly 
higher in the rural area (0.05 mW/m2) than in the urban area (0.02 mW/m2). 
Despite the influence of confounding variables, including fear of adverse effects 
from exposure to HF-EMF from the base station, there was a significant relation of 
some symptoms to measured power density; this was highest for headaches. 
Perceptual speed increased, while accuracy decreased insignificantly with 
increasing exposure levels. There was no significant effect on sleep quality. 
CONCLUSION: Despite very low exposure to HF-EMF, effects on wellbeing and 
performance cannot be ruled out, as shown by recently obtained experimental 
results; however, mechanisms of action at these low levels are unknown. 
 
Bortkiewicz A, Zmyslony M, Szyjkowska A, Gadzicka E.  [Subjective symptoms 
reported by people living in the vicinity of cellular phone base stations: a 
review of the studies] Med Pr. 55(4):345-351, 2004. [Article in Polish] 
The problem of health effects of electromagnetic fields (EMF) emitted by cellular 
phone base stations evokes much interest in view of the fact that people living in 
their vicinity are fated to continuous exposure to EMF. None of the studies carried 
out throughout the world have revealed excessive values of standards adopted by 
the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP). A 
questionnaire was used as a study tool. The results of the questionnaire survey 
reveal that people living in the vicinity of base stations report various complaints 
mostly of the circulatory system, but also of sleep disturbances, irritability, 
depression, blurred vision, concentration difficulties, nausea, lack of appetite, 
headache and vertigo. The performed studies showed the relationship between the 
incidence of individual symptoms, the level of exposure, and the distance between a 
residential area and a base station. This association was observed in both groups of 
persons, those who linked their complaints with the presence of the base station 
and those who did not notice such a relation. Further studies, clinical and those 
based on questionnaires, are needed to explain the background of reported 
complaints. 
Bortkiewicz A, Gadzicka E, Szyjkowska A, Politański P, Mamrot P, Szymczak W, 
Zmyślony M. Subjective complaints of people living near mobile phone base 
stations in Poland. Int J Occup Med Environ Health. 25(1):31-40, 2012.  
OBJECTIVES: The aim of our study was to assess the health conditions and 
subjective symptoms of the inhabitants living in the base stations vicinity and to 
analyse the relationship between the complaints and level of exposure to 
electromagnetic fields (EMF).MATERIALS AND METHODS: Our study was 
performed in housing estates located in five regions of Łódź. The electric field 
measurements were performed in the buildings located closest to the azimuth of the 
antennas. Respondents were selected by trained interviewers using an uniform 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
procedure. The number of the households to be examined was set at a minimum of 
420. The questionnaire contained: demographic data, occupational and 
environmental exposure to EMF, health condition, subjective complaints. Results 
were adjusted for confounders (age, gender, EMF at the workplace and EMF emitted 
by household equipment) using multiple regression model.RESULTS: 181 men and 
319 women from 500 households were examined. Electric field above 0.8 V/m was 
recorded in 12% of flats. There was no significant correlation between electric field 
strength and the distance of examined flats from the base stations. To make possible 
comparison with relevant literature, we analysed also the frequency of the reported 
symptoms vs. the distance. Headache was declared by 57% people, most frequently 
(36.4%) living 100-150 m away from the base station compared to people living at 
longer distances (p = 0.013). 24.4% subjects, mostly living at a distance above 150 
m, declared impaired memory. Difference was statistically significant in comparison 
with people living at other distances (p = 0.004).CONCLUSIONS: The explanation 
why we did not find any correlation between the electric field strength and frequency 
of subjective symptoms but found a correlation between subjective symptoms and 
distance from base station needs further studies. Maybe new metrics of exposure 
assessment should be adopted for this purpose. 
Augner C, Florian M, Pauser G, Oberfeld G, Hacker GW. GSM base stations: 
Short-term effects on well-being. Bioelectromagnetics. 30:73-80, 2009.  
The purpose of this study was to examine the effects of short-term GSM (Global 
System for Mobile Communications) cellular phone base station RF-EMF 
(radiofrequency electromagnetic fields) exposure on psychological symptoms (good 
mood, alertness, calmness) as measured by a standardized well-being 
questionnaire. Fifty-seven participants were selected and randomly assigned to one 
of three different exposure scenarios. Each of those scenarios subjected participants 
to five 50-min exposure sessions, with only the first four relevant for the study of 
psychological symptoms. Three exposure levels were created by shielding devices in 
a field laboratory, which could be installed or removed during the breaks between 
sessions such that double-blinded conditions prevailed. The overall median power 
flux densities were 5.2 microW/m(2) during "low," 153.6 microW/m(2) during 
"medium," and 2126.8 microW/m(2) during "high" exposure sessions. For scenario 
HM and MH, the first and third sessions were "low" exposure. The second session 
was "high" and the fourth was "medium" in scenario HM; and vice versa for scenario 
MH. Scenario LL had four successive "low" exposure sessions constituting the 
reference condition. Participants in scenarios HM and MH (high and medium 
exposure) were significantly calmer during those sessions than participants in 
scenario LL (low exposure throughout) (P = 0.042). However, no significant 
differences between exposure scenarios in the "good mood" or "alertness" factors 
were obtained. We conclude that short-term exposure to GSM base station signals 
may have an impact on well-being by reducing psychological arousal. 
Augner C, Hacker GW. Are people living next to mobile phone base 
stations more strained? Relationship of health concerns, self-estimated 
distance to base station, and psychological parameters. Indian J Occup 
Environ Med. 13(3):141-145, 2009. 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Coeval with the expansion of mobile phone 
technology and the associated obvious presence of mobile phone base stations, 
some people living close to these masts reported symptoms they attributed to 
electromagnetic fields (EMF). Public and scientific discussions arose with regard 
to whether these symptoms were due to EMF or were nocebo effects. The aim of 
this study was to find out if people who believe that they live close to base 
stations show psychological or psychobiological differences that would indicate 
more strain or stress. Furthermore, we wanted to detect the relevant connections 
linking self-estimated distance between home and the next mobile phone base 
station (DBS), daily use of mobile phone (MPU), EMF-health concerns, 
electromagnetic hypersensitivity, and psychological strain parameters. DESIGN, 
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifty-seven participants completed standardized 
and non-standardized questionnaires that focused on the relevant parameters. In 
addition, saliva samples were used as an indication to determine the 
psychobiological strain by concentration of alpha-amylase, cortisol, 
immunoglobulin A (IgA), and substance P. RESULTS: Self-declared base station 
neighbors (DBS </= 100 meters) had significantly higher concentrations of alpha-
amylase in their saliva, higher rates in symptom checklist subscales (SCL) 
somatization, obsessive-compulsive, anxiety, phobic anxiety, and global strain 
index PST (Positive Symptom Total). There were no differences in EMF-related 
health concern scales. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that self-declared base 
station neighbors are more strained than others. EMF-related health concerns 
cannot explain these findings. Further research should identify if actual EMF 
exposure or other factors are responsible for these results. 
Blettner M, Schlehofer B, Breckenkamp J, Kowall B, Schmiedel S, Reis U, 
Potthoff P, Schuez J, Berg-Beckhoff G. Mobile phone base stations and adverse 
health effects: Phase 1: A population-based cross-sectional study in Germany. 
Occup Environ Med. 66(2):118-123. 2009. 
Abstract OBJECTIVE: The aim of this first phase of a cross-sectional study from 
Germany was to investigate whether proximity of residence to mobile phone 
base stations as well as risk perception is associated with health complaints. 
METHODS: We conducted a population-based multi-phase cross-sectional study 
within the context of a large panel survey regularly carried out by a private 
research institute in Germany. In the initial phase, which we will report on in this 
paper, 30,047 persons from a total of 51,444 who took part in the nationwide 
survey also answered questions on how mobile phone base stations affect their 
health. A list of 38 health complaints was used. A multiple linear regression 
model was used to identify predictors of health complaints including proximity of 
residence to mobile phone base stations and risk perception. RESULTS: Of the 
30,047 participants (response rate 58.6%), 18.7% of participants were concerned 
about adverse health effects of mobile phone base stations, while an additional 
10.3% attributed their personal adverse health effects to the exposure from them. 
Participants who are concerned about or attribute adverse health effects to 
mobile phone base stations and those living in the vicinity of a mobile phone 
base station (500 m) reported slightly more health complaints than others. 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
CONCLUSIONS: A substantial proportion of the German population is concerned 
about adverse health effects caused by exposure from mobile phone base 
stations. The observed slightly higher prevalence of health complaints near base 
stations can however not be fully explained by attributions or concerns. 
 
Sleep 
 Mohammed HS, Fahmy HM, Radwah NM, Elsayed AA. Non-thermal continuous 
and modulated electromagnetic radiation fields effects on sleep EEG of rats.  J 
Adv Res 4(2) 181-187, 2013. 
In the present study, the alteration in the sleep EEG in rats due to chronic exposure 
to low-level non-thermal electromagnetic radiation was investigated. Two types of 
radiation fields were used; 900 MHz unmodulated wave and 900 MHz modulated at 
8 and 16 Hz waves. Animals has exposed to radiation fields for 1 month (1 h/day). 
EEG power spectral analyses of exposed and control animals during slow wave sleep 
(SWS) and rapid eye movement sleep (REM sleep) revealed that the REM sleep is 
more susceptible to modulated radiofrequency radiation fields (RFR) than the SWS. 
The latency of REM sleep increased due to radiation exposure indicating a change in 
the ultradian rhythm of normal sleep cycles. The cumulative and irreversible effect 
of radiation exposure was proposed and the interaction of the extremely low 
frequency radiation with the similar EEG frequencies was suggested. 
 
Liu H, Chen G, Pan Y, Chen Z, Jin W, Sun C, Chen C, Dong X, Chen K, Xu Z, Zhang 
S, Yu Y. (2014) Occupational Electromagnetic Field Exposures Associated with 
Sleep Quality: A Cross-Sectional Study. PLoS ONE 9(10): e110825. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0110825. 
 
BACKGROUND: Exposure to electromagnetic field (EMF) emitted by mobile phone 
and other machineries concerns half the world's population and raises the problem 
of their impact on human health. The present study aims to explore the effects of 
electromagnetic field exposures on sleep quality and sleep duration among workers 
from electric power plant. METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted in an 
electric power plant of Zhejiang Province, China. A total of 854 participants were 
included in the final analysis. The detailed information of participants was obtained 
by trained investigators using a structured questionnaire, which including socio-
demographic characteristics, lifestyle variables, sleep variables and electromagnetic 
exposures. Physical examination and venous blood collection were also carried out 
for every study subject. RESULTS: After grouping daily occupational 
electromagnetic exposure into three categories, subjects with long daily exposure 
time had a significantly higher risk of poor sleep quality in comparison to those with 
short daily exposure time. The adjusted odds ratios were 1.68 (95%CI: 1.18, 2.39) 
and 1.57 (95%CI: 1.10, 2.24) across tertiles. Additionally, among the subjects with 
long-term occupational exposure, the longer daily occupational time apparently 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
increased the risk of poor sleep quality (OR (95%CI): 2.12 (1.23∼3.66) in the second 
tertile; 1.83 (1.07∼3.15) in the third tertile). There was no significant association of 
long-term occupational exposure duration, monthly electric fee or years of mobile-
phone use with sleep quality or sleep duration. CONCLUSIONS: The findings showed 
that daily occupational EMF exposure was positively associated with poor sleep 
quality. It implies EMF exposure may damage human sleep quality rather than sleep 
duration. 
 
Hung CS, Anderson C, Horne JA, McEvoy P. Mobile phone 'talk-mode' signal 
delays EEG-determined sleep onset. Neurosci Lett. 421: 82-86, 2007.  
Mobile phones signals are pulse-modulated microwaves, and EEG studies 
suggest that the extremely low-frequency (ELF) pulse modulation has sleep 
effects. However, 'talk', 'listen' and 'standby' modes differ in the ELF (2, 8, and 
217Hz) spectral components and specific absorption rates, but no sleep study 
has differentiated these modes. We used a GSM900 mobile phone controlled by 
a base-station simulator and a test SIM card to simulate these three specific 
modes, transmitted at 12.5% (23dBm) of maximum power. At weekly intervals, 
10 healthy young adults, sleep restricted to 6h, were randomly and single-blind 
exposed to one of: talk, listen, standby and sham (nil signal) modes, for 30min, at 
13:30h, whilst lying in a sound-proof, lit bedroom, with a thermally insulated silent 
phone beside the right ear. Bipolar EEGs were recorded continuously, and 
subjective ratings of sleepiness obtained every 3min (before, during and after 
exposure). After exposure the phone and base-station were switched off, the 
bedroom darkened, and a 90min sleep opportunity followed. We report on sleep 
onset using: (i) visually scored latency to onset of stage 2 sleep, (ii) EEG power 
spectral analysis. There was no condition effect for subjective sleepiness. Post-
exposure, sleep latency after talk mode was markedly and significantly delayed 
beyond listen and sham modes. This condition effect over time was also quite 
evident in 1-4Hz EEG frontal power, which is a frequency range particularly 
sensitive to sleep onset. It is possible that 2, 8, 217Hz modulation may 
differentially affect sleep onset. 
Cells 
Neshev NN, Kirilova EI, Environmental-health aspects of pulse-modulated  
microwaves. Rev Environ Health 11(1-2):85-88, 1996. 
Our theoretical model describes the potential influence of irradiation with pulse-
modulated microwaves on the conformational oscillations of enzymes in living 
organisms. Certain values of pulse-repetition time, determined by the period of 
conformational oscillations of the corresponding type of enzyme, can produce the 
effect at extremely low power levels. Synchronized oscillations in identical enzyme 
molecules produce in turn large-scale oscillations within living cells. Thus, short 
periods of exposure to pulse-modulated microwaves could be beneficial to cellular 
function, whereas maintaining the amplitude of such oscillations at a maximum for 
long periods may have a stressful effect on biochemical processes. The model 
discloses the possible environmental-health risks of long-term exposure in ambient 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
fields that are created by radar, navigation, and communication systems. 
 
Kwee S, Raskmark P,  Changes in cell proliferation due to environmental non-
ionizing radiation 2. Microwave radiation. Bioelectrochem Bioenerg 44(2) 
251-255, 1998.  
 
Due to the use of mobile telephones, there is an increased exposure of the 
environment to weak radiofrequency (RF) electromagnetic fields, emitted by these 
devices. This study was undertaken to investigate if the microwave radiation from 
these fields will have a similar effect on cell proliferation as weak electromagnetic 
(ELF) fields. The field was generated by signal simulation of the Global System for 
Mobile communications (GSM) of 960 MHz. Cell cultures, growing in microtiter 
plates, were exposed in a specially constructed chamber, a Transverse 
Electromagnetic (TEM) cell. The Specific Absorption Rate (SAR) values for each cell 
well were calculated for this exposure system. Experiments were performed on cell 
cultures of transformed human epithelial amnion cells (AMA), which were exposed 
to 960 MHz microwave fields at three different power levels and three different 
exposure times, respectively. It was found that cell growth in the exposed cells was 
decreased in comparison to that in the control and sham exposed cells. Cell 
proliferation during the period following exposure varied not only with the various 
SAR levels, but also with the length of exposure time. On the other hand, repeated 
periods of exposure did not seem to change the effects. There was a general linear 
correlation between power level and growth change. However, the exposure time 
required to obtain the maximum effect was not the same for the various power 
levels. It turned out that at low power level, a maximum effect was first reached 
after a longer exposure time than at higher power level. A similar phenomenon was 
registered in the studies on ELF electromagnetic fields. Here, it was found that there 
was a linear correlation between the length of exposure time to obtain maximum 
effect and field strength.  
 
Eyes 
Lu L, Xu H, Wang X, Guo G.Increased nitric oxide synthase activity is essential 
for electromagnetic-pulse-induced blood-retinal barrier breakdown in 
vivo.Brain Res. 1264:104-10, 2009.  
PURPOSE: To examine whether electromagnetic pulses (EMPs) affected the 
permeability of the blood-retinal barrier (BRB), gene expression of occludin and 
activity of nitric oxide synthase (NOS).METHODS: Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats were 
used and randomized into EMP and control groups. Retinas were removed 
immediately, and 2 h or 24 h after EMP radiation. BRB permeability was analyzed by 
transmission electron microscopy and Evans Blue staining. Retinal NOS activity and 
concentrations of nitrite and nitrate were measured. Occludin mRNA and protein 
levels were detected by RT-PCR and Western blotting.RESULTS: Exposure of SD rats 
to EMP resulted in increased BRB permeability, with the greatest decrease in 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
occludin at 24 h. Moreover, this permeability defect was also correlated with 
significant increases in the formation of NO and induction of NOS activity in SD rats. 
Furthermore, we found that treatment with NOS inhibitor N-nitro-L-arginine methyl 
ester (L-NAME) blocked BRB breakdown and prevented the increase in NO 
formation and induction of NOS activity, as well as the decrease in occluding 
expression.CONCLUSION: Taken together, these results support the view that NOS-
dependent NO production is an important factor that contributes to EMP-induced 
BRB dysfunction, and suggests that NOS induction may play an important role in 
BRB breakdown. 
Hässig M, Jud F, Naegeli H, Kupper J, Spiess B. Prevalence of nuclear cataract in 
Swiss veal calves and its possible association with mobile telephone antenna 
base stations. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd. 151(10):471-478, 2009. 
The purpose of this study was to valuate the prevalence of nuclear cataract in veal 
calves and to elucidate a possible impact by mobile phone base stations (MPBS). For 
this experiment a cohort study was conducted. A follow-up of the geographical 
location of each dam and its calf from conception through the fetal period up to 
slaughter was performed. The first trimester of gestation (organogenesis) was 
particularly emphasized. The activities of selected protective antioxidants 
(superoxide dismutase, catalase, glutathione peroxidase [GPx]) were assessed in 
aqueous humor of the eye to evaluate the redox status. Of 253 calves, 79 (32 %) had 
various degrees of nuclear cataract, but only 9 (3.6 %) calves had severe nuclear 
cataract. Results demonstrate a relation between the location of veals calves with 
nuclear cataracts in the first trimester of gestation and the strength of antennas. The 
number of antennas within 100 to 199 meters was associated with oxidative stress 
and there was an association between oxidative stress and the distance to the 
nearest MPBS. Oxidative stress was increased in eyes with cataract (OR per 
kilometer: 0.80, confidence interval 95 % 0.62,0.93). It has not been shown that the 
antennas actually affected stress. Hosmer-Lemeshow statistics showed an accuracy 
of 100 % in negative cases with low radiation, and only 11.11 % accuracy in positive 
cases with high radiation. This reflects, that there are a lot of other possibilities for 
nuclear cataract beside MPBS. Further studies on the influence of electromagnetic 
fields during embryonic development animal or person at risk are indicated. 
Hässig M, Jud F, Spiess B. [Increased occurrence of nuclear cataract in the calf 
after erection of a mobile phone base station]. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd. 
154(2):82-86, 2012.[Article in German] 
We examined and monitored a dairy farm in which a large number of calves were 
born with nuclear cataracts after a mobile phone base station had been erected 
in the vicinity of the barn. Calves showed a 3.5 times higher risk for heavy 
cataract if born there compared to Swiss average. All usual causes such as 
infection or poisoning, common in Switzerland, could be excluded. The real 
cause of the increased incidence of cataracts remains unknown. 
Jelodar G, Akbari A, Nazifi S. The prophylactic Effect of Vitamin C on Oxidative 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
Stress Indexes in Rat Eyes Following Exposure to Radiofrequency Wave 
Generated by a BTS Antenna Model. Int J Radiat Biol. 89(2):128-131, 2013. 
 
Purpose: This study was conducted to evaluate the effect of radiofrequency wave 
(RFW)-induced oxidative stress in the eye and the prophylactic effect of vitamin C 
on this organ by measuring the antioxidant enzymes activity including: glutathione 
peroxidase (GPx), superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT), and 
malondialdehyde (MDA). Materials and methods: Thirty-two adult male Sprague-
Dawley rats were randomly divided into four experimental groups and treated daily 
for 45 days as follows: control, vitamin C (L-ascorbic acid 200 mg/kg of body 
weight/day by gavage), test (exposed to 900 MHz RFW) and the treated group 
(received vitamin C in addition to exposure to RFW). At the end of the experiment 
all animals were killed, their eyes were removed and were used for measurement of 
antioxidant enzymes and MDA activity. Results: The results indicate that exposure 
to RFW in the test group decreased antioxidant enzymes activity and increased MDA 
compared with the control groups (P<0.05). In the treated group vitamin C 
improved antioxidant enzymes activity and reduced MDA compared to the test 
group (P<0.05). Conclusions: It can be concluded that RFW causes oxidative stress 
in the eyes and vitamin C improves the antioxidant enzymes activity and decreases 
MDA. 
 
Oxidative Stress: 
Achudume A, Onibere  B, Aina F, Tchokossa P. Induction of oxidative stress in 
male rats subchronically exposed to electromagnetic fields at non-thermal 
intensities.  J Electromagnetic Analysis and Applications 2(8), 482-487, 2010.  
 
To investigate the oxidative stress-inducing potential of non-thermal 
electromagnetic fields in rats. Male Wister rats were exposed to electrical field 
intensity of 2.3 ± 0.82 µV/m . Exposure was in three forms: continuous waves, or 
modulated at 900 MHz or modulated GSM-nonDTX. The radio frequency radiation 
(RFR) was 1800 MHz, specific absorption radiation (SAR) (0.95-3.9 W/kg) for 40 
and/or 60 days continuously. Control animals were located > 300 m from base 
station, while sham control animals were located in a similar environmental 
conditions, but in the vicinity of a non-functional base station. The rats were 
assessed for thiobarbituric and reactive species (TBARS), reduced glutathione (GSH) 
content, catalase activity, glutathione reductase (GR) and glucose residue after 40 
and 60 days of exposure. At 40 days, electromagnetic radiation failed to induce any 
significant alterations. However, at 60 days of exposure various attributes evaluated 
decreased. The respective decreases in both nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
phosphate (NADPH) and Ascorbate- linked lipid peroxidation (LPO) with 
concomitant diminution in enzymatic antioxidative defense systems resulted in 
decreased glucose residue. The present studies showed some biochemical changes 
that may be associated with a prolong exposure to electromagnetic fields and its 
relationship to the activity of antioxidant system in rat Regular assessment and 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
early detection of antioxidative defense system among people working around the 
base stations are recommended. 
 
Augner C, Hacker GW, Oberfeld G, Florian M, Hitzl W, Hutter J, Pauser G. 
Effects of Exposure to GSM mobile phone base station signals on salivary 
cortisol, alpha-amylase, and Immunoglobulin A. Biomed Environ Sci. 
23(3):199-207, 2010. 
OBJECTIVE: The present study aimed to test whether exposure to 
radiofrequency electromagnetic fields (RF-EMF) emitted by mobile phone base 
stations may have effects on salivary alpha-amylase, immunoglobulin A (IgA), 
and cortisol levels. METHODS: Fifty seven participants were randomly allocated 
to one of three different experimental scenarios (22 participants to scenario 1, 26 
to scenario 2, and 9 to scenario 3). Each participant went through five 50-minute 
exposure sessions. The main RF-EMF source was a GSM-900-MHz antenna 
located at the outer wall of the building. In scenarios 1 and 2, the first, third, and 
fifth sessions were "low" (median power flux density 5.2 muW/m(2)) exposure. 
The second session was "high" (2126.8 muW/m(2)), and the fourth session was 
"medium" (153.6 muW/m(2)) in scenario 1, and vice versa in scenario 2. 
Scenario 3 had four "low" exposure conditions, followed by a "high" exposure 
condition. Biomedical parameters were collected by saliva samples three times a 
session. Exposure levels were created by shielding curtains. RESULTS: In 
scenario 3 from session 4 to session 5 (from "low" to "high" exposure), an 
increase of cortisol was detected, while in scenarios 1 and 2, a higher 
concentration of alpha-amylase related to the baseline was identified as 
compared to that in scenario 3. IgA concentration was not significantly related to 
the exposure.CONCLUSIONS: RF-EMF in considerably lower field densities than 
ICNIRP-guidelines may influence certain psychobiological stress markers. 
Marzook EA, Abd El Moneim AE, Elhadary AA. Prootective role of seame oil 
against mobile phone base station-induced oxidative stress. J Rad Res Appl Sci 
7(1):1-6, 2014. 
 
The present study was undertaken to shed the light on the environmental threats 
associated with the wireless revolution and the health hazards associated with 
exposure to mobile base station (MBS). Besides, studying the possible protective 
role of sesame oil (SO) as an antioxidant against oxidative stress. Therefore, the 
present work was designed to study the effect of chronic exposure to 
electromagnetic radiations (EMR), produced by a cellular tower for mobile phone 
and the possible protective role of sesame oil on glutathione reductase (GSH-Rx), 
superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), total testosterone and lipid profile 
(total cholesterol (Tch), triglycerides (TG), low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-
c) and high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-c) in male albino rats. Rats were 
arranged into four groups: the control unexposed, the exposed untreated and the 
exposed treated groups (1.5 and 3 ml oil). Exposed groups were subjected to 
electromagnetic field at frequency of 900 MHz, for 24 h/day for 8 weeks, at the same 
time both treated groups were supplied with oral injection of sesame oil three times 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
per week. At the end of the experiment, blood samples were obtained for 
determination of the above mentioned variables in serum. The results obtained 
revealed that TG and testosterone were raised significantly over control in all 
groups and the significant increase in oil groups occurred in dose dependent 
manner. SOD and CAT activities were reduced significantly in exposed rats than 
control and increased significantly in sesame oil groups as the dose of oil increased. 
Total cholesterol only showed remarkable reduction in the group treated with 3 ml 
sesame oil. Also, in this latter group, significant elevation of GSH-Rx was recorded. 
Changes in serum HDL-c and LDL-c followed an opposite trend in exposed and 
sesame oil groups reflecting their affectation by EMR or sesame oil. In conclusion, all 
results of the current study proved that sesame oil can be used as an edible oil to 
attenuate the oxidative stress which could be yielded as a result of chronic exposure 
to EMR. 
 
Blood: 
Kismali G, Ozgur E, Guler G, Akcay A, Sel T, Seyhan N. The influence of 1800 
MHz GSM-like signals on blood chemistry and oxidative stress in non-pregnant 
and pregnant rabbits. Int J Radiat Biol. 88(5):414-419, 2012.  
PURPOSE:  Environmental electromagnetic fields originate from man-made sources, 
such as mobile phones and base stations, and have led to increasing public concern 
about their possible adverse health effects. We aimed to investigate the possible 
effects of radiofrequency radiation (RFR) generated from these devices on 
oversensitive animals, such as pregnant rabbits. MATERIALS AND METHODS:  In 
the present study, the effects of whole body 1800 MHz Global System for Mobile 
Communications (GSM)-like RFR exposure for 15 min/day for seven days on blood 
chemistry and lipid peroxidation levels in both non-pregnant and pregnant New 
Zealand White rabbits were investigated. Thirteen-month-old rabbits were studied in 
the following four groups: Non-pregnant control, non-pregnant RFR-exposed, 
pregnant control and pregnant RFR-exposed. RESULTS: Lipid peroxidation, namely 
malondialdehyde (MDA) levels, did not change after RFR exposure. However, blood 
chemistry parameters, such as cholesterol (CHO), total protein (TP), albumin (ALB), 
uric acid, creatinin and creatine kinase (CK) and creatine kinase-myocardial band 
isoenzyme (CK-MB) changed due to both pregnancy and RFR exposure. 
CONCLUSION:  Our investigations have been shown that no indication for oxidative 
stress was detected in the blood of pregnant rabbits upon RF exposure at specific 
conditions employed in the present study. Minor changes in some blood chemistry 
parameters were detected but CK-MB and CK increases were found remarkable. 
Studies on RFR exposure during pregnancy will help establish international 
standards for the protection of pregnant women from environmental RFR. 
 
Yurekli AI, Ozkan M, Kalkan T, Saybasili H, Tuncel H, Atukeren P, Gumustas K, 
Seker S. GSM Base Station Electromagnetic Radiation and Oxidative Stress in 
Rats. Electromagn Biol Med. 2006;25(3):177-188, 2006.  

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
The ever increasing use of cellular phones and the increasing number of 
associated base stations are becoming a widespread source of nonionizing 
electromagnetic radiation. Some biological effects are likely to occur even at low-
level EM fields. In this study, a gigahertz transverse electromagnetic (GTEM) cell 
was used as an exposure environment for plane wave conditions of far-field free 
space EM field propagation at the GSM base transceiver station (BTS) frequency 
of 945 MHz, and effects on oxidative stress in rats were investigated. When EM 
fields at a power density of 3.67 W/m2 (specific absorption rate = 11.3 mW/kg), 
which is well below current exposure limits, were applied, MDA 
(malondialdehyde) level was found to increase and GSH (reduced glutathione) 
concentration was found to decrease significantly (p < 0.0001). Additionally, there 
was a less significant (p = 0.0190) increase in SOD (superoxide dismutase) 
activity under EM exposure. 
 
Jin YB, Lee HJ, Seon Lee J, Pack JK, Kim N, Lee YS. One-year, simultaneous 
combined exposure of CDMA and WCDMA radiofrequency electromagnetic 
fields to rats.Int J Radiat Biol. 87(4):416-423, 2011.  
PURPOSE:  We investigated whether one-year, long-term, simultaneous exposure to 
code division multiple access (CDMA; 849 MHz) and wideband code division 
multiple access (WCDMA; 1.95 GHz) radiofrequencies (RF) would induce chronic 
illness in Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats. MATERIALS AND METHODS:  Two groups of 
40 SD rats (50% males and females in sham and exposed groups) were exposed to 
CDMA and WCDMA RF simultaneously at 2.0 W/kg for 45 min/day (total 4.0 W/kg), 
5 days per week for a total of one year. Body and organ weight measurements, 
urinalysis, haematological and blood biochemical analysis, and histopathological 
evaluations were performed. RESULTS:  The mortality patterns in male and female 
rats exposed to RF were compared with those found in gender-matched sham 
control animals. No significant alteration in body weight was observed with the 
simultaneous combined RF exposure. Most RF-exposed rats showed no significant 
alteration, based on urinalysis, haematology, blood biochemistry, or histopathology. 
However, some altered parameters of the complete blood count and serum 
chemistry were seen in RF-exposed rats. The total tumour incidence was not 
different between sham-exposed and RF-exposed animals. CONCLUSIONS: Our 
results suggest that one-year chronic exposure to CDMA (849 MHz) and WCDMA 
(1.95 GHz) RF simultaneously at 2.0 W/kg for 45-min RF exposure periods (total, 4 
W/kg) did not increase chronic illness in rats, although there were some altered 
parameters in the complete blood count and serum chemistry. 
Death 
Dode AC, Leão MM, Tejo Fde A, Gomes AC, Dode DC, Dode MC, Moreira CW, 
Condessa VA, Albinatti C, Caiaffa WT. Mortality by neoplasia and cellular 
telephone base stations in the Belo Horizonte municipality, Minas Gerais state, 
Brazil.Sci Total Environ. 409(19):3649-3665, 2011.  

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
Pollution caused by the electromagnetic fields (EMFs) of radio frequencies (RF) 
generated by the telecommunication system is one of the greatest environmental 
problems of the twentieth century. The purpose of this research was to verify the 
existence of a spatial correlation between base station (BS) clusters and cases of 
deaths by neoplasia in the Belo Horizonte municipality, Minas Gerais state, Brazil, 
from 1996 to 2006 and to measure the human exposure levels to EMF where there 
is a major concentration of cellular telephone transmitter antennas. A descriptive 
spatial analysis of the BSs and the cases of death by neoplasia identified in the 
municipality was performed through an ecological-epidemiological approach, using 
georeferencing. The database employed in the survey was composed of three data 
banks: 1. death by neoplasia documented by the Health Municipal Department; 2. 
BSs documented in ANATEL ("Agência Nacional de Telecomunicações": 
'Telecommunications National Agency'); and 3. census and demographic city 
population data obtained from official archives provided by IBGE ("Instituto 
Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística": 'Brazilian Institute of Geography and 
Statistics'). The results show that approximately 856 BSs were installed through 
December 2006. Most (39.60%) of the BSs were located in the "Centro-Sul" 
('Central-Southern') region of the municipality. Between 1996 and 2006, 7191 
deaths by neoplasia occurred and within an area of 500 m from the BS, the mortality 
rate was 34.76 per 10,000 inhabitants. Outside of this area, a decrease in the 
number of deaths by neoplasia occurred. The greatest accumulated incidence was 
5.83 per 1000 in the Central-Southern region and the lowest incidence was 2.05 per 
1000 in the Barreiro region. During the environmental monitoring, the largest 
accumulated electric field measured was 12.4 V/m and the smallest was 0.4 V/m. 
The largest density power was 40.78 μW/cm(2), and the smallest was 0.04 
μW/cm(2). 
Adang D, Remacle C, Vorst AV Results of a long-term low-level microwave 
exposure of rats. IEEE Trans Microwave Theor Tech 57: 2488-2497, 2009. 
This paper summarizes the results of experimental research on biological effects 
induced by electromagnetic exposure to low-level microwaves. We exposed four-
month-old Wistar albino rats during 21 months to two different microwave 
frequencies and exposure modes, 2 h a day, seven days a week. In order to assess 
possible biological effects of microwaves, we selected among others the following 
parameters: leucocytes, erythrocytes, monocytes, neutrophils, lymphocytes, 
hemoglobin, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, and mortality rate. After 
three and eight months of exposure, we found a statistically significant difference of 
about 20% between the 970-MHz continuous wave group and sham-exposed group 
regarding the monocytes in both considered periods. After 14 and 18 months of 
exposure, we observed a significant increase in white blood cells and neutrophils of 
about 15% and 25%, respectively. Lymphocytes fell down after 18 months of 
exposure with about 15% compared to the sham-exposed group. No other 
statistically significant differences were found, except for minor changes with little 
biological significance. The most obvious effect we detected is the increase in 
mortality rate of the exposed groups with respect to the sham-exposed group after 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
21 months of exposure at the age of 25 months. This increase even increases when 
observing rats until the age of 28 months: mortality in exposed groups then reaches 
almost twice the value observed in the sham-exposed group. 
Hormones 
Eskander EF, Estefan SF, Abd-Rabou AA. How does long term exposure to base 
stations and mobile phones affect human hormone profiles? Clin Biochem. 
45(1-2):157-161, 2012 
OBJECTIVES: This study is concerned with assessing the role of exposure to radio 
frequency radiation (RFR) emitted either from mobiles or base stations and its 
relations with human's hormone profiles. DESIGN AND METHODS:  All volunteers' 
samples were collected for hormonal analysis. RESULTS:  This study showed 
significant decrease in volunteers' ACTH, cortisol, thyroid hormones, prolactin for 
young females, and testosterone levels. CONCLUSION:  The present study revealed 
that high RFR effects on pituitary-adrenal axis. 
Eşmekaya MA, Seyhan N, Omeroğlu S. Pulse modulated 900 MHz radiation 
induces hypothyroidism and apoptosis in thyroid cells: A light, electron 
microscopy and immunohistochemical study. Int J Radiat Biol. 86(12):1106-
1116, 2010. 
Purpose: In the present study we investigated the possible histopathological 
effects of pulse modulated Radiofrequency (RF) fields on the thyroid gland using 
light microscopy, electron microscopy and immunohistochemical methods. 
Materials and methods: Two months old male Wistar rats were exposed to a 900 
MHz pulse-modulated RF radiation at a specific absorption rate (SAR) of 1.35 
Watt/kg for 20 min/day for three weeks. The RF signals were pulse modulated by 
rectangular pulses with a repetition frequency of 217 Hz and a duty cycle of 1:8 
(pulse width 0.576 ms). To assess thyroid endocrine disruption and estimate the 
degree of the pathology of the gland, we analysed structural alterations in 
follicular and colloidal diameters and areas, colloid content of the follicles, and 
height of the follicular epithelium. Apoptosis was confirmed by Transmission 
Electron Microscopy and assessing the activites of an initiator (caspase-9) and 
an effector (caspase-3) caspases that are important markers of cells undergoing 
apoptosis. Results: Morphological analyses revealed hypothyrophy of the gland 
in the 900 MHz RF exposure group. The results indicated that thyroid hormone 
secretion was inhibited by the RF radiation. In addition, we also observed 
formation of apoptotic bodies and increased caspase-3 and caspase-9 activities 
in thyroid cells of the rats that were exposed to modulated RF fields. Conclusion: 
The overall findings indicated that whole body exposure to pulse-modulated RF 
radiation that is similar to that emitted by global system for mobile 
communications (GSM) mobile phones can cause pathological changes in the 
thyroid gland by altering the gland structure and enhancing caspase-dependent 
pathways of apoptosis. 
 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
Gene  
Gandhi G, Kaur G, Nisar U. A cross-sectional case control study on genetic 
damage in individuals residing in the vicinity of a mobile phone base station. 
Electromagn Biol Med. 2014 Jul 9:1-11. [Epub ahead of print]  
Mobile phone base stations facilitate good communication, but the continuously 
emitting radiations from these stations have raised health concerns. Hence in this 
study, genetic damage using the single cell gel electrophoresis (comet) assay was 
assessed in peripheral blood leukocytes of individuals residing in the vicinity of a 
mobile phone base station and comparing it to that in healthy controls. The power 
density in the area within 300 m from the base station exceeded the permissive 
limits and was significantly (p = 0.000) higher compared to the area from where 
control samples were collected. The study participants comprised 63 persons with 
residences near a mobile phone tower, and 28 healthy controls matched for gender, 
age, alcohol drinking and occupational sub-groups. Genetic damage parameters of 
DNA migration length, damage frequency (DF) and damage index were significantly 
(p = 0.000) elevated in the sample group compared to respective values in healthy 
controls. The female residents (n = 25) of the sample group had significantly 
(p = 0.004) elevated DF than the male residents (n = 38). The linear regression 
analysis further revealed daily mobile phone usage, location of residence and power 
density as significant predictors of genetic damage. The genetic damage evident in 
the participants of this study needs to be addressed against future disease-risk, 
which in addition to neurodegenerative disorders, may lead to cancer. 
Fucic A, Garaj-Vrhovac V, Skara M, Dimitrovic B, X-rays, microwaves and vinyl 
chloride monomer: their clastogenic and aneugenic activity, using the 
micronucleus assay on human lymphocytes. Mutat Res 282(4):265-271, 1992.  
Chromosome aberration assays, sister-chromatid exchange techniques and 
micronucleus assays are commonly used methods for biomonitoring genetic 
material damaged by chemical or physical agents. On the other hand, their 
aneugenic activity, which can lead to hypoploidy and may also be associated with 
carcinogenesis, has not been thoroughly investigated. In our study we chose the 
micronucleus assay with a new mathematical approach to separate clastogenic from 
aneugenic activity of three well-known mutagens (vinyl chloride monomer, X-rays 
and microwaves) on the genome of human somatic cells. The comparison of 
frequencies of size distribution of micronuclei in the lymphocytes of humans 
exposed to each of these three mutagens showed that X-rays and microwaves were 
preferentially clastogens while vinyl chloride monomer showed aneugenic activity 
as well. Microwaves possess some mutagenic characteristics typical of chemical 
mutagens. 
Esmekaya MA, Aytekin E, Ozgur E, Güler G, Ergun MA, Omeroğlu S, Seyhan N. 
Mutagenic and morphologic impacts of 1.8GHz radiofrequency radiation on 
human peripheral blood lymphocytes (hPBLs) and possible protective role of 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
pre-treatment with Ginkgo biloba (EGb 761). Sci Total Environ. 410-411:59-
64, 2011.  
The mutagenic and morphologic effects of 1.8GHz Global System for Mobile 
Communications (GSM) modulated RF (radiofrequency) radiation alone and in 
combination with Ginkgo biloba (EGb 761) pre-treatment in human peripheral 
blood lymphocytes (hPBLs) were investigated in this study using Sister Chromatid 
Exchange (SCE) and electron microscopy. Cell viability was assessed with 3-(4, 5-
dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) reduction assay. The 
lymphocyte cultures were exposed to GSM modulated RF radiation at 1.8GHz for 6, 
8, 24 and 48h with and without EGb 761. We observed morphological changes in 
pulse-modulated RF radiated lymphocytes. Longer exposure periods led to 
destruction of organelle and nucleus structures. Chromatin change and the loss of 
mitochondrial crista occurred in cells exposed to RF for 8h and 24h and were more 
pronounced in cells exposed for 48h. Cytoplasmic lysis and destruction of 
membrane integrity of cells and nuclei were also seen in 48h RF exposed cells. 
There was a significant increase (p<0.05) in SCE frequency in RF exposed 
lymphocytes compared to sham controls. EGb 761 pre-treatment significantly 
decreased SCE from RF radiation. RF radiation also inhibited cell viability in a time 
dependent manner. The inhibitory effects of RF radiation on the growth of 
lymphoctes were marked in longer exposure periods. EGb 761 pre-treatment 
significantly increased cell viability in RF+EGb 761 treated groups at 8 and 24h 
when compared to RF exposed groups alone. The results of our study showed that 
RF radiation affects cell morphology, increases SCE and inhibits cell proliferation. 
However, EGb 761 has a protective role against RF induced mutagenity. We 
concluded that RF radiation induces chromosomal damage in hPBLs but this 
damage may be reduced by EGb 761 pre-treatment. 
Kim JY, Hong SY, Lee YM, Yu SA, Koh WS, Hong JR, Son T, Chang SK, Lee M. In 
vitro assessment of clastogenicity of mobile-phone radiation (835 MHz) using 
the alkaline comet assay and chromosomal aberration test. Environ Toxicol. 
23(3):319-327, 2008.  
Recently we demonstrated that 835-MHz radiofrequency radiation electromagnetic 
fields (RF-EMF) neither affected the reverse mutation frequency nor accelerated 
DNA degradation in vitro. Here, two kinds of cytogenetic endpoints were further 
investigated on mammalian cells exposed to 835-MHz RF-EMF (the most widely 
used communication frequency band in Korean CDMA mobile phone networks) 
alone and in combination with model clastogens: in vitro alkaline comet assay and 
in vitro chromosome aberration (CA) test. No direct cytogenetic effect of 835-MHz 
RF-EMF was found in the in vitro CA test. The combined exposure of the cells to RF-
EMF in the presence of ethylmethanesulfonate (EMS) revealed a weak and 
insignificant cytogenetic effect when compared to cells exposed to EMS alone in CA 
test. Also, the comet assay results to evaluate the ability of RF-EMF alone to damage 
DNA were nearly negative, although showing a small increase in tail moment. 
However, the applied RF-EMF had potentiation effect in comet assay when 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
administered in combination with model clastogens (cyclophosphamide or 4-
nitroquinoline 1-oxide). Thus, our results imply that we cannot confidently exclude 
any possibility of an increased risk of genetic damage, with important implications 
for the possible health effects of exposure to 835-MHz electromagnetic fields. 
Nikolova T, Czyz J, Rolletschek A, Blyszczuk P, Fuchs J, Jovtchev G, Schuderer J, 
Kuster N, Wobus AM. Electromagnetic fields affect transcript levels of 
apoptosis-related genes in embryonic stem cell-derived neural progenitor 
cells. ASEB J. 19(12):1686-1688, 2005.  
Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells were used as an experimental model to study the 
effects of electromagnetic fields (EMF). ES-derived nestin-positive neural progenitor 
cells were exposed to extremely low frequency EMF simulating power line magnetic 
fields at 50 Hz (ELF-EMF) and to radiofrequency EMF simulating the Global System 
for Mobile Communication (GSM) signals at 1.71 GHz (RF-EMF). Following EMF 
exposure, cells were analyzed for transcript levels of cell cycle regulatory, 
apoptosis-related, and neural-specific genes and proteins; changes in proliferation; 
apoptosis; and cytogenetic effects. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis revealed that ELF-
EMF exposure to ES-derived neural cells significantly affected transcript levels of 
the apoptosis-related bcl-2, bax, and cell cycle regulatory "growth arrest DNA 
damage inducible" GADD45 genes, whereas mRNA levels of neural-specific genes 
were not affected. RF-EMF exposure of neural progenitor cells resulted in down-
regulation of neural-specific Nurr1 and in up-regulation of bax and GADD45 mRNA 
levels. Short-term RF-EMF exposure for 6 h, but not for 48 h, resulted in a low and 
transient increase of DNA double-strand breaks. No effects of ELF- and RF-EMF on 
mitochondrial function, nuclear apoptosis, cell proliferation, and chromosomal 
alterations were observed. We may conclude that EMF exposure of ES-derived 
neural progenitor cells transiently affects the transcript level of genes related to 
apoptosis and cell cycle control. However, these responses are not associated with 
detectable changes of cell physiology, suggesting compensatory mechanisms at the 
translational and posttranslational level. 
 
Maes A, Collier M, Slaets D, Verschaeve L, 954 MHz microwaves enhance the 
mutagenic properties of mitomycin C. Environ Mol Mutagen 28(1):26-30, 
1996.  
This paper focuses on the combined effects of microwaves from mobile 
communication frequencies and a chemical DNA damaging agent mitomycin C 
(MMC). The investigation was performed in vitro by exposing whole blood samples 
to a 954 MHz emitting antenna from a GSM (Global System for Mobile 
Communication) base station, followed by lymphocyte cultivation in the presence of 
MMC. A highly reproducible synergistic effect was observed as based on the 
frequencies of sister chromatid exchanges in metaphase figures. 
 
Fritze K, Wiessner C, Kuster N, Sommer C, Gass P, Hermann DM, Kiessling 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
M,Hossmann KA, Effect of global system for mobile communication microwave 
exposure on the genomic response of the rat brain. Neuroscience 81(3):627-
639, 1997.  
The acute effect of global system for mobile communication (GSM) microwave 
exposure on the genomic response of the central nervous system was studied in rats 
by measuring changes in the messenger RNAs of hsp70, the transcription factor 
genes c-fos and c-jun and the glial structural gene GFAP using in situ hybridization 
histochemistry. Protein products of transcription factors, stress proteins and 
marker proteins of astroglial and microglial activation were assessed by 
immunocytochemistry. Cell proliferation was evaluated by bromodeoxyuridine 
incorporation. A special GSM radiofrequency test set, connected to a commercial 
cellular phone operating in the discontinuous transmission mode, was used to 
simulate GSM exposure. The study was conducted at time averaged and brain 
averaged specific absorption rates of 0.3 W/kg (GSM exposure), 1.5 W/kg (GSM 
exposure) and 7.5 W/kg (continuous wave exposure), respectively. Immediately 
after exposure, in situ hybridization revealed slight induction of hsp70 messenger 
RNA in the cerebellum and hippocampus after 7.5 W/kg exposure, but not at lower 
intensities. A slightly increased expression of c-fos messenger RNA was observed in 
the cerebellum, neocortex and piriform cortex of all groups subjected to 
immobilization, but no differences were found amongst different exposure 
conditions. C-jun and GFAP messenger RNAs did not increase in any of the 
experimental groups. 24 h after exposure, immunocytochemical analysis of FOS and 
JUN proteins (c-FOS, FOS B, c-JUN JUN B, JUN D), of HSP70 or of KROX-20 and -24 
did not reveal any alterations. Seven days after exposure, neither increased cell 
proliferation nor altered expression of astroglial and microglial marker proteins 
were observed. In conclusion, acute high intensity microwave exposure of 
immobilized rats may induce some minor stress response but does not result in 
lasting adaptive or reactive changes of the brain. 
 
Baohong Wang, Jiliang H, Lifen J, Deqiang L, Wei Z, Jianlin L, Hongping D. 
Studying the synergistic damage effects induced by 1.8GHz radiofrequency 
field radiation (RFR) with four chemical mutagens on human lymphocyte DNA 
using comet assay in vitro. Mutat Res. 578(1-2):149-157, 2005. 
The aim of this investigation was to study the synergistic DNA damage effects in 
human lymphocytes induced by 1.8GHz radiofrequency field radiation (RFR, SAR of 
3W/kg) with four chemical mutagens, i.e. mitomycin C (MMC, DNA crosslinker), 
bleomycin (BLM, radiomimetic agent), methyl methanesulfonate (MMS, alkylating 
agent), and 4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide (4NQO, UV-mimetic agent). The DNA damage 
of lymphocytes exposed to RFR and/or with chemical mutagens was detected at two 
incubation time (0 or 21h) after treatment with comet assay in vitro. Three 
combinative exposure ways were used. Cells were exposed to RFR and chemical 
mutagens for 2 and 3h, respectively. Tail length (TL) and tail moment (TM) were 
utilized as DNA damage indexes. The results showed no difference of DNA damage 
indexes between RFR group and control group at 0 and 21h incubation after 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
exposure (P>0.05). There were significant difference of DNA damage indexes 
between MMC group and RFR+MMC co-exposure group at 0 and 21h incubation 
after treatment (P<0.01). Also the significant difference of DNA damage indexes 
between 4NQO group and RFR+4NQO co-exposure group at 0 and 21h incubation 
after treatment was observed (P<0.05 or P<0.01). The DNA damage in RFR+BLM co-
exposure groups and RFR+MMS co-exposure groups was not significantly increased, 
as compared with corresponding BLM and MMS groups (P>0.05). The experimental 
results indicated 1.8GHz RFR (SAR, 3W/kg) for 2h did not induce the human 
lymphocyte DNA damage effects in vitro, but could enhance the human lymphocyte 
DNA damage effects induced by MMC and 4NQO. The synergistic DNA damage 
effects of 1.8GHz RFR with BLM or MMS were not obvious. 
Baohong W, Lifen J, Lanjuan L, Jianlin L, Deqiang L, Wei Z, Jiliang H.Evaluating 
the combinative effects on human lymphocyte DNA damage induced by 
ultraviolet ray C plus 1.8GHz microwaves using comet assay in 
vitro.Toxicology. 232(3):311-316, 2007.  
The objective of this study was to observe whether 1.8GHz microwaves (MW) 
(SAR, 3 W/kg) exposure can influence human lymphocyte DNA damage induced 
by ultraviolet ray C (UVC). The lymphocytes, which were from three young 
healthy donors, were exposed to 254 nm UVC at the doses of 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 
1.0, 1.5 and 2.0 J m(-2), respectively. The lymphocytes were irradiated by 
1.8GHz MW (SAR, 3 W/kg) for 0, 1.5 and 4 h. The combinative exposure of UVC 
plus MW was conducted. The treated cells were incubated for 0, 1.5 and 4 h. 
Finally, comet assay was used to measure DNA damage of above treated 
lymphocytes. The results indicated that the difference of DNA damage induced 
between MW group and control group was not significant (P>0.05). The MTLs 
induced by UVC were 1.71+/-0.09, 2.02+/-0.08, 2.27+/-0.17, 2.27+/-0.06, 2.25+/-
0.12, 2.24+/-0.11 microm, respectively, which were significantly higher than that 
(0.96+/-0.05 microm) of control (P<0.01). MTLs of some sub-groups in 
combinative exposure groups at 1.5-h incubation were significantly lower that 
those of corresponding UVC sub-groups (P<0.01 or P<0.05). However, MTLs of 
some sub-groups in combinative exposure groups at 4-h incubation were 
significantly higher that those of corresponding UVC sub-groups (P<0.01 or 
P<0.05). In this experiment it was found that 1.8GHz (SAR, 3 W/kg) MW 
exposure for 1.5 and 4 h did not enhance significantly human lymphocyte DNA 
damage, but could reduce and increase DNA damage of human lymphocytes 
induced by UVC at 1.5-h and 4-h incubation, respectively. 
Canseven AG, Esmekaya MA, Kayhan H, Tuysuz MZ, Seyhan N. Effects of 
microwave exposure and Gemcitabine treatment on apoptotic activity in 
Burkitt's lymphoma (Raji) cells. Electromagn Biol Med. 2014 Jun 5:1-5. [Epub 
ahead of print] 
We investigated the effects of 1.8 MHz Global System for Mobile Communications 
(GSM)-modulated microwave (MW) radiation on apoptotic level and cell viability of 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
Burkitt's lymphoma (Raji) cells with or without Gemcitabine, which exhibits cell 
phase specificity, primarily killing cells undergoing DNA synthesis (S-phase). Raji 
cells were exposed to 1.8 GHz GSM-modulated MW radiation at a specific absorption 
rate (SAR) of 0.350 W/kg in a CO2 incubator. The duration of the exposure was 24 h. 
The amount of apoptotic cells was analyzed using Annexin V-FITC and propidium 
iodide (PI) staining with flow cytometer. The apoptotic activity of MW exposed Raji 
cells was increased significantly. In addition, cell viability of exposed samples was 
significantly decreased. Combined exposure of MW and Gemcitabine increased the 
amount of apoptotic cells than MW radiation alone. Moreover, viability of 
MW + Gemcitabine exposed cells was lower than that of cells exposed only to MW. 
These results demonstrated that MW radiation exposure and Gemcitabine 
treatment have a synergistic effect on apoptotic activity of Raji cells. 
Glands 
Aydogan F, Unlu I, Aydin E, Yumusak N, Devrim E, Samim EE, Ozgur E, Unsal V, 
Tomruk A, Ozturk GG, Seyhan N. The effect of 2100 MHz radiofrequency 
radiation of a 3G mobile phone on the parotid gland of rats. Am J Otolaryngol. 
2014 Oct 5. pii: S0196-0709(14)00207-5. doi: 10.1016/j.amjoto.2014.10.001. 
[Epub ahead of print] 
 
PURPOSE: We aimed to evaluate the effect of 2100 MHz radiofrequency radiation on 
the parotid gland of rats in short and relatively long terms. MATERIAL AND 
METHODS:  Thirty Wistar albino rats were divided into four groups. Groups A and B 
served as the control groups (for 10 days and 40 days, respectively), and each group 
included six rats. Groups C and D were composed of nine rats each, and they were 
the exposure groups. The rats were exposed to 2100 MHz radiofrequency radiation 
emitted by a generator, simulating a third generation mobile phone for 6 hours/day, 
5 days/week, for 10 or 40 days. Following exposure, the rats were sacrificed and 
parotid glands were removed. Histopathological and biochemical examinations 
were performed. RESULTS:  Although there were no histopathological changes in 
the control groups except for two animals in group A and three animals in group B, 
the exposure groups C (10 days) and D (40 days) showed numerous 
histopathological changes regarding salivary gland damage including acinar 
epithelial cells, interstitial space, ductal system, vascular system, nucleus, amount of 
cytoplasm and variations in cell size. The histopathological changes were more 
prominent in group D compared to group C. There was statistically significant 
different parameter regarding variation in cell size between the groups B and D 
(p=0.036). CONCLUSION: The parotid gland of rats showed numerous 
histopathological changes after exposure to 2100 MHz radiofrequency radiation, 
both in the short and relatively long terms. Increased exposure duration led to an 
increase in the histopathological changes. 
 
Animals and Environments 
 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
Panagopoulos DJ, Chavdoula ED, Margaritis LH. Bioeffects of mobile 
telephony radiation in relation to its intensity or distance from the antenna. 
Int J Radiat Biol. 86(5):345-357, 2010. 
PURPOSE: To examine the bioactivity of GSM 900 and 1800 (Global System for 
Mobile Telecommunications) radiations, in relation to the distance from the 
antenna or to the radiation-field intensities. MATERIALS AND METHODS: 
Drosophila melanogaster adult insects were exposed to the radiation of a GSM 
900/1800 mobile phone antenna at different distances ranging from 0 to 100 cm, 
and the effect on their reproductive capacity and cell death induction in the 
gonads by the use of TUNEL (Terminal deoxynucleotide transferase dUTP Nick 
End Labeling) assay, was studied. RESULTS: These radiations/fields decreased 
the reproductive capacity by cell death induction, at all the different distances 
tested. The effect diminished with the distance/decreasing intensities. An 
increased bioactivity 'window' was revealed at distances of 20-30 cm from the 
mobile phone antenna, (radiation intensity around 10 microW/cm(2)) where the 
effect became highest, in relation to smaller or longer distances. The effect 
diminished considerably for distances longer than 40-50 cm and became not 
evident for distances longer than 1 m or radiation intensities smaller than 1 
microW/cm(2). CONCLUSIONS: GSM bioactivity is highest for intensities down 
to less than 10 microW/cm(2) and still evident until 1 microW/cm(2) exhibiting 
'window' effects 
 
Loscher W, Kas G, Extraordinary behavior disorders in cows in proximity to 
transmission stations. Der Praktische Tierarz 79:437-444, 1998. (Article in 
German)  
In addition to reduction of milk yield and increased health problems, behavioral 
abnormalities were observed over a period of two years in a herd of diary cows 
maintained in close proximity to a TV and cell phone transmitting antenna. 
Evaluation of possible factors which could explain the abnormalities in the live stock 
did not disclose any factors other than the high-frequency electromagnetic fields. An 
experiment in which a cow with abnormal behavior was brought to a stable 20 km 
away from the antenna resulted in a complete normalization of the cow within five 
days, whereas symptoms returned when the cow was brought back to the stable 
nearby the antenna. In view of the previous described effects of electromagnetic 
fields, it might be possible that the observed abnormalities in cows are related to 
electromagnetic field exposure. (power densities measured 0.02-7 mW/m2). 
 
Koldayev VM, Shchepin YV, Effects of electromagnetic radiation on embryos of 
sea-urchins. Bioelectrochem Bioenerg 43:161-164, 1997.  
Electromagnetic radiation (EMR) causes a decrease in the number of fertilized eggs 
and an increase in the number of zygotes with abnormal fertilization envelopes in 
sea-urchins. The microstructural impairments of the cellular surface, the increase of 
lipid peroxidation and the changes of amino acid metabolism show that the 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
impairments of the development of embryos exposed to EMR are caused by the 
damages of the membrane structures. 
 
Cammaerts MC, De Doncker P, Patris X, Bellens F, Rachidi Z, Cammaerts D. 
GSM 900 MHz radiation inhibits ants' association between food sites and 
encountered cues. Electromagn Biol Med. 31(2):151-165, 2012. 
The kinetics of the acquisition and loss of the use of olfactory and visual cues 
were previously obtained in six experimental colonies of the ant Myrmica sabuleti 
meinert 1861, under normal conditions. In the present work, the same 
experiments were conducted on six other naive identical colonies of M. sabuleti, 
under electromagnetic radiation similar to those surrounding GSM and 
communication masts. In this situation, no association between food and either 
olfactory or visual cues occurred. After a recovery period, the ants were able to 
make such an association but never reached the expected score. Such ants 
having acquired a weaker olfactory or visual score and still undergoing olfactory 
or visual training were again submitted to electromagnetic waves. Not only did 
they lose all that they had memorized, but also they lost it in a few hours instead 
of in a few days (as under normal conditions when no longer trained). They kept 
no visual memory at all (instead of keeping 10% of it as they normally do). The 
impact of GSM 900 MHz radiation was greater on the visual memory than on the 
olfactory one. These communication waves may have such a disastrous impact 
on a wide range of insects using olfactory and/or visual memory, i.e., on bees. 
Senavirathna MD, Asaeda T, Thilakarathne BL, Kadono H. Nanometer-scale 
elongation rate fluctuations in the Myriophyllum aquaticum (Parrot feather) 
stem were altered by radio-frequency electromagnetic radiation. Plant Signal 
Behav. 2014 Mar 26;9(3). pii: e28590. [Epub ahead of print] 
 
The emission of radio-frequency electromagnetic radiation (EMR) by various 
wireless communication base stations has increased in recent years. While there is 
wide concern about the effects of EMR on humans and animals, the influence of EMR 
on plants is not well understood. In this study, we investigated the effect of EMR on 
the growth dynamics of Myriophyllum aquaticum (Parrot feather) by measuring the 
nanometric elongation rate fluctuation (NERF) using a statistical interferometry 
technique. Plants were exposed to 2 GHz EMR at a maximum of 1.42 Wm-2 for 1 h. 
After continuous exposure to EMR, M. aquaticum plants exhibited a statistically 
significant 51 ± 16% reduction in NERF standard deviation. Temperature 
observations revealed that EMR exposure did not cause dielectric heating of the 
plants. Therefore, the reduced NERF was due to a non-thermal effect caused by EMR 
exposure. The alteration in NERF continued for at least 2.5 h after EMR exposure 
and no significant recovery was found in post-EMR NERF during the experimental 
period. 
 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
 
 
Balmori A. Mobile Phone Mast Effects on Common Frog (Rana temporaria) 
Tadpoles: The City Turned into a Laboratory. Electromagn Biol Med. 29(1-
2):31-35, 2010. 
An experiment has been made exposing eggs and tadpoles of the common frog 
(Rana temporaria) to electromagnetic radiation from several mobile (cell) phone 
antennae located at a distance of 140 meters. The experiment lasted two 
months, from the egg phase until an advanced phase of tadpole prior to 
metamorphosis. Measurements of electric field intensity (radiofrequencies and 
microwaves) in V/m obtained with three different devices were 1.8 to 3.5 V/m. In 
the exposed group (n = 70), low coordination of movements, an asynchronous 
growth, resulting in both big and small tadpoles, and a high mortality (90%) was 
observed. Regarding the control group (n = 70) under the same conditions but 
inside a Faraday cage, the coordination of movements was normal, the 
development was synchronous, and a mortality of 4.2% was obtained. These 
results indicate that radiation emitted by phone masts in a real situation may 
affect the development and may cause an increase in mortality of exposed 
tadpoles. This research may have huge implications for the natural world, which 
is now exposed to high microwave radiation levels from a multitude of phone 
masts. 
Balode, Z,  Assessment of radio-frequency electromagnetic radiation by the 
micronucleus test in bovine peripheral erythrocytes. Sci Total Environ 
180(1):81-85, 1996.  
Previous bioindicative studies in the Skrunda Radio Location Station area have 
focused on the somatic influence of electromagnetic radiation on plants, but it is also 
important to study genetic effects. We have chosen cows as test animals for 
cytogenetical evaluation because they live in the same general exposure area as 
humans, are confined to specific locations and are chronically exposed to radiation. 
Blood samples were obtained from female Latvian Brown cows from a farm close to 
and in front of the Skrunda Radar and from cows in a control area. A simplified 
alternative to the Schiff method of DNA staining for identification of micronuclei in 
peripheral erythrocytes was applied. Microscopically, micronuclei in peripheral 
blood erythrocytes were round in shape and exhibited a strong red colour. They are 
easily detectable as the only coloured bodies in the uncoloured erythrocytes. From 
each individual animal 2000 erythrocytes were examined at a magnification of x 
1000 for the presence of micronuclei. The counting of micronuclei in peripheral 
erythrocytes gave low average incidences, 0.6 per 1000 in the exposed group and 
0.1 per 1000 in the control, but statistically significant (P < 0.01) differences were 
found in the frequency distribution between the control and exposed groups. 
 
Skin 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
Cam ST, Seyhan N, Kavaklı C, Celikbıçak O. Effects of 900 MHz Radiofrequency 
Radiation on Skin Hydroxyproline Contents. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2014 Apr 
24. [Epub ahead of print] 
The present study aimed to investigate the possible effect of pulse-modulated 
radiofrequency radiation (RFR) on rat skin hydroxyproline content, since skin is the 
first target of external electromagnetic fields. Skin hydroxyproline content was 
measured using liquid chromatography mass spectrometer method. Two months 
old male wistar rats were exposed to a 900 MHz pulse-modulated RFR at an average 
whole body specific absorption rate (SAR) of 1.35 W/kg for 20 min/day for 3 weeks. 
The radiofrequency (RF) signals were pulse modulated by rectangular pulses with a 
repetition frequency of 217 Hz and a duty cycle of 1:8 (pulse width 0.576 ms). A skin 
biopsy was taken at the upper part of the abdominal costa after the exposure. The 
data indicated that whole body exposure to a pulse-modulated RF radiation that is 
similar to that emitted by the global system for mobile communications (GSM) 
mobile phones caused a statistically significant increase in the skin hydroxyproline 
level (p = 0.049, Mann-Whitney U test). Under our experimental conditions, at a SAR 
less than the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection safety 
limit recommendation, there was evidence that GSM signals could alter 
hydroxyproline concentration in the rat skin. 
Protein 
Hässig M, Wullschleger M, Naegeli HP, Kupper J, Spiess B, Kuster N, Capstick M, 
Murbach M. Influence of non ionizing radiation of base stations on the activity 
of redox proteins in bovines. BMC Vet Res. 2014 Jun 19;10(1):136. [Epub 
ahead of print] 
 
BACKGROUND: The influence of electromagnetic fields on the health of humans and 
animals is still an intensively discussed and scientifically investigated issue (Prakt 
Tierarzt 11:15-20, 2003; Umwelt Medizin Gesellschaft 17:326-332, 2004; J Toxicol 
Environment Health, Part B 12:572-597, 2009). We are surrounded by numerous 
electromagnetic fields of variable strength, coming from electronic equipment and 
its power cords, from high-voltage power lines and from antennas for radio, 
television and mobile communication. Particularly the latter cause's controversy, as 
everyone likes to have good mobile reception at anytime and anywhere, whereas 
nobody wants to have such a base station antenna in their proximity. RESULTS:  In 
this experiment, the non-ionizing radiation (NIR) has resulted in changes in the 
enzyme activities. Certain enzymes were disabled, others enabled by NIR. 
Furthermore, individual behavior patterns were observed. While certain cows 
reacted to NIR, others did not react at all, or even inversely. CONCLUSION: The 
present results coincide with the information from the literature, according to 
which NIR leads to changes in redox proteins, and that there are individuals who are 
sensitive to radiation and others that are not. However, the latter could not be 
distinctly attributed - there are cows that react clearly with one enzyme while they 
do not react with another enzyme at all, or even the inverse. The study approach of 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
testing ten cows each ten times during three phases has proven to be appropriate. 
Future studies should however set the post-exposure phase later on. 
 
Immune Function 
Li CY, Liao MH, Lin CW, Tsai WS, Huang CC, Tang TK. Inhibitory Effects of 
Microwave Radiation on LPS-Induced NFκB Expression in THP-1 Monocytes. 
Chin J Physiol. 55(6):421-427, 2012. 
Microwave radiations can be encountered regularly in daily lives. When WHO 
announced that microwave radiations were a kind of environmental energy which 
interfere with the physiological functions of the human body, great concerns have 
been raised over the damages microwave frequencies can do to human physiology. 
The immunological performance and the activities of the cellular inflammatory 
factor NFκB have been closely related in monocyte. Due to the effect of phorbol 12-
myristate 13-acetate (PMA) on THP-1 monocytes, THP-1 monocytes would 
differentiate into macrophages and would then react with lipopolysaccharides 
(LPS), and the amount of NFκB increased in the THP-1 monocytes. Expression of 
cytokine is affected when cells are exposed to a frequency of 2450 MHz and at 900 
W. Thus, in our experiments, an observation was made when THP-1 monocytes 
were stimulated with PMA and LPS to differentiate into macrophage, the amount of 
NFκB in cells increased exponentially, and the levels of NFκB expression were 
decreased by the exposure of microwave radiation. In conclusion, microwave 
radiations were found to inhibit the activity functions of THP-1 monocytes 
stimulated with PMA and LPS. 
Electro Hypersensitivity 
 
Nordin S, Neely G, Olsson D, Sandström M. Odor and Noise Intolerance in 
Persons with Self-Reported Electromagnetic Hypersensitivity.  Int J Environ 
Res Public Health. 11(9):8794-8805, 2014.  
Lack of confirmation of symptoms attributed to electromagnetic fields (EMF) and 
triggered by EMF exposure has highlighted the role of individual factors. Prior 
observations indicate intolerance to other types of environmental exposures among 
persons with electromagnetic hypersensitivity (EHS). This study assessed 
differences in odor and noise intolerance between persons with EHS and healthy 
controls by use of subscales and global measures of the Chemical Sensitivity Scale 
(CSS) and the Noise Sensitivity Scale (NSS). The EHS group scored significantly 
higher than the controls on all CSS and NSS scales. Correlation coefficients between 
CSS and NSS scores ranged from 0.60 to 0.65 across measures. The findings suggest 
an association between EHS and odor and noise intolerance, encouraging further 
investigation of individual factors for understanding EMF-related symptoms. 
 
Cities 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
Urbinello D, Huss A, Beekhuizen J, Vermeulen R, Röösli M. Use of portable 
exposure meters for comparing mobile phone base station radiation in 
different types of areas in the cities of Basel and Amsterdam. Sci Total 
Environ. 468-469:1028-1033, 2014.  
 
BACKGROUND: Radiofrequency electromagnetic fields (RF-EMF) are highly variable 
and differ considerably within as well as between areas. Exposure assessment 
studies characterizing spatial and temporal variation are limited so far. Our 
objective was to evaluate sources of data variability and the repeatability of daily 
measurements using portable exposure meters (PEMs). METHODS:  Data were 
collected at 12 days between November 2010 and January 2011 with PEMs in four 
different types of urban areas in the cities of Basel (BSL) and Amsterdam (AMS). 
RESULTS:  Exposure from mobile phone base stations ranged from 0.30 to 0.53 V/m 
in downtown and business areas and in residential areas from 0.09 to 0.41 V/m. 
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) demonstrated that measurements from various days 
were highly reproducible (measurement duration of approximately 30 min) with 
only 0.6% of the variance of all measurements from mobile phone base station 
radiation being explained by the measurement day and only 0.2% by the 
measurement time (morning, noon, afternoon), whereas type of area (30%) and city 
(50%) explained most of the data variability. CONCLUSIONS:  We conclude that 
mobile monitoring of exposure from mobile phone base station radiation with PEMs 
is useful due to the high repeatability of mobile phone base station exposure levels, 
despite the high spatial variation. 
 
Urbinello D, Joseph W, Verloock L, Martens L, Röösli M. Temporal trends of 
radio-frequency electromagnetic field (RF-EMF) exposure in everyday 
environments across European cities. Environ Res. 2014 Aug 12;134C:134-
142. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2014.07.003. [Epub ahead of print] 
BACKGROUND: The rapid development and increased use of wireless 
telecommunication technologies led to a substantial change of radio-frequency 
electromagnetic field (RF-EMF) exposure in the general population but little is 
known about temporal trends of RF-EMF in our everyday environment. 
OBJECTIVES: The objective of our study is to evaluate temporal trends of RF-EMF 
exposure levels in different microenvironments of three European cities using a 
common measurement protocol. METHODS:  We performed measurements in the 
cities of Basel (Switzerland), Ghent and Brussels (Belgium) during one year, 
between April 2011 and March 2012. RF-EMF exposure in 11 different frequency 
bands ranging from FM (Frequency Modulation, 88MHz) to WLAN (Wireless Local 
Area Network, 2.5GHz) was quantified with portable measurement devices 
(exposimeters) in various microenvironments: outdoor areas (residential areas, 
downtown and suburb), public transports (train, bus and tram or metro rides) and 
indoor places (airport, railway station and shopping centers). Measurements were 
collected every 4s during 10-50min per environment and measurement day. Linear 
temporal trends were analyzed by mixed linear regression models. RESULTS:  

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
Highest total RF-EMF exposure levels occurred in public transports (all public 
transports combined) with arithmetic mean values of 0.84V/m in Brussels, 0.72V/m 
in Ghent, and 0.59V/m in Basel. In all outdoor areas combined, mean exposure 
levels were 0.41V/m in Brussels, 0.31V/m in Ghent and 0.26V/m in Basel. Within 
one year, total RF-EMF exposure levels in all outdoor areas in combination 
increased by 57.1% (p<0.001) in Basel by 20.1% in Ghent (p=0.053) and by 38.2% 
(p=0.012) in Brussels. Exposure increase was most consistently observed in 
outdoor areas due to emissions from mobile phone base stations. In public 
transports RF-EMF levels tended also to increase but mostly without statistical 
significance. DISCUSSION:  An increase of RF-EMF exposure levels has been 
observed between April 2011 and March 2012 in various microenvironments of 
three European cities. Nevertheless, exposure levels were still far below regulatory 
limits of each country. A continuous monitoring is needed to identify high exposure 
areas and to anticipate critical development of RF-EMF exposure at public places. 
Estenberg J, Augustsson T. Extensive frequency selective measurements 
of radiofrequency fields in outdoor environments performed with a novel 
mobile monitoring system. Bioelectromagnetics. 2013 Dec 27. doi: 
10.1002/bem.21830. [Epub ahead of print] 
A novel, car based, measuring system for estimation of general public outdoor 
exposure to radiofrequency fields (RF) has been developed. The system enables 
fast, large area, isotropic spectral measurements with a bandwidth covering the 
frequency range of 30 MHz to 3 GHz. Measurements have shown that complete 
mapping of a town with 15000 inhabitants and a path length of 115 km is possible 
to perform within 1 day. The measured areas were chosen to represent typical 
rural, urban and city areas of Sweden. The data sets consist of more than 70000 
measurements. All measurements were performed during the daytime. The 
median power density was 16 µW/m2 in rural areas, 270 µW/m2 in urban areas, 
and 2400 µW/m2 in city areas. In urban and city areas, base stations for mobile 
phones were clearly the dominating sources of exposure. 
Chemical Effects 
Hinrikus H, Lass J, Karai D, Pilt K, Bachmann M. Microwave effect on diffusion: 
a possible mechanism for non-thermal effect. Electromagn Biol Med. 23:1-7, 
2014.  
In this study, we assume that microwave radiation affects hydrogen bonding 
between dipolar water molecules and through that diffusion in water at constant 
temperature. The experimental study was performed on the setup of two identical 
reservoirs filled with pure water and 0.9% NaCl solution and connected by a thin 
tube. Alterations of NaCl concentration in the reservoir initially filled with pure 
water were measured using the resistance of the solution as an indicator. The 
applied 450 MHz continuous-wave microwave field had the maximal specific 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
absorption rate of 0.4 W/kg on the connecting tube. The standard deviation of water 
temperature in the setup was 0.02 °C during an experiment. Our experimental data 
demonstrated that microwave exposure makes faster the process of diffusion in 
water. The time required for reduction of initial resistance of the solution by 10% 
was 1.7 times shorter with microwave. This result is consistent with the proposed 
mechanism of low-level microwave effect: microwave radiation, rotating dipolar 
water molecules, causes high-frequency alterations of hydrogen bonds between 
water molecules, thereby affects its viscosity and makes faster diffusion. 
RF Levels From Cell Towers 
Martinez-Burdalo M, Martin A, Anguiano M, Villar R. On the safety assessment 
of human exposure in the proximity of cellular communications base-station 
antennas at 900, 1800 and 2170 MHz. Phys Med Biol. 50(17):4125-4137, 2005.  
In this work, the procedures for safety assessment in the close proximity of cellular 
communications base-station antennas at three different frequencies (900, 1800 
and 2170 MHz) are analysed. For each operating frequency, we have obtained and 
compared the distances to the antenna from the exposure places where 
electromagnetic fields are below reference levels and the distances where the 
specific absorption rate (SAR) values in an exposed person are below the basic 
restrictions, according to the European safety guidelines. A high-resolution human 
body model has been located, in front of each base-station antenna as a worst case, 
at different distances, to compute whole body averaged SAR and maximum 10 g 
averaged SAR inside the exposed body. The finite-difference time-domain method 
has been used for both electromagnetic fields and SAR calculations. This paper 
shows that, for antenna-body distances in the near zone of the antenna, the fact that 
averaged field values be below the reference levels could, at certain frequencies, not 
guarantee guidelines compliance based on basic restrictions. 
 
Hu J, Lu Y, Zhang H, Xie H, Yang X. [Level of microwave radiation from 
mobile phone base stations built in residential districts] Wei Sheng Yan 
Jiu. 38(6):712-716, 2009. [Article in Chinese] 
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the condition of microwave radiation pollution from 
mobile phone base station built in populated area. METHODS: Random selected 
18 residential districts where had base station and 10 residential districts where 
had no base stations. A TES-92 electromagnetic radiation monitor were used to 
measure the intensity of microwave radiation in external and internal living 
environment. RESULTS: The intensities of microwave radiation in the exposure 
residential districts were more higher than those of the control residential districts 
(p < 0.05). There was a intensity peak at about 10 m from the station, it would 
gradually weaken with the increase of the distance. The level of microwave 
radiation in antenna main lobe region is not certainly more higher than the side 
lobe direction, and the side lobe direction also is not more lower. At the same 
district, where there were two base stations, the electromagnetic field 
nestification would take place in someplace. The intensities of microwave 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
radiation outside the exposure windows in the resident room not only changed 
with distance but also with the height of the floor. The intensities of microwave 
radiation inside the aluminum alloys security net were more lower than those of 
outside the aluminum alloys security net (p < 0.05), but the inside or outside of 
glass-window appears almost no change (p > 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Although 
all the measure dates on the ground around the base station could be below the 
primary standard in "environment electromagnetic wave hygienic standard" 
(GB9175-88), there were still a minorities of windows which exposed to the base 
station were higher, and the outside or inside of a few window was even higher 
beyond the primary safe level defined standard. The aluminum alloys security net 
can partly shield the microwave radiation from the mobile phone base station. 
 
Danger Perception 
Hutter HP, Moshammer H, Wallner P, Kundi M. Public perception of risk 
concerning cell towers and mobile phones. Soz Praventivmed. 49(1):62-66, 
2004.  
OBJECTIVE: The controversy about health risks of electromagnetic fields (EMF) has 
contributed in raising fears concerning emissions from celltowers. The study was to 
examine whether or not neighbours of celltowers are particularly concerned about 
adverse health effects of mobile phones and their base stations. METHODS: Prior to 
information delivered by medical doctors of the Institute of Environmental Health at 
public hearings a questionnaire was handed out to participants asking for their 
personal rating of several environmental health risks including those of mobile 
telecommunication (n = 123, response rate approx. 48%). Medical students (n = 
366) served as a contrast group. RESULTS: Participants rated health risk for both, 
mobile phones and celltowers higher as students. A trend for higher ratings was also 
seen with older subjects and female sex. The risk ratings of both exposures 
correlated well with each other. The magnitude of the perceived risks, however, 
resembled that of other ubiquitous exposures like traffic noise and air pollution. 
CONCLUSION: Contrary to the claims of the telecommunication industry, opponents 
of celltowers generally do not express unusual fears concerning electromagnetic 
field exposure. The outcome of our study indicates that the risk rating is comparable 
with other perceived common hazards of the civilised world. It is hypothesised that 
offering information and participation to the concerned population will be efficient 
in reducing exaggerated fears. 
 
Reason Why Not  A Lot Of Studies on Cell Towers 
Kundi M, Hutter HP.Mobile phone base stations-Effects on wellbeing and 
health.Pathophysiology. 16(2-3):123-135, 2009.  
Studying effects of mobile phone base station signals on health have been 
discouraged by authoritative bodies like WHO International EMF Project and COST 
281. WHO recommended studies around base stations in 2003 but again stated in 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
2006 that studies on cancer in relation to base station exposure are of low priority. 
As a result only few investigations of effects of base station exposure on health and 
wellbeing exist. Cross-sectional investigations of subjective health as a function of 
distance or measured field strength, despite differences in methods and robustness 
of study design, found indications for an effect of exposure that is likely independent 
of concerns and attributions. Experimental studies applying short-term exposure to 
base station signals gave various results, but there is weak evidence that UMTS and 
to a lesser degree GSM signals reduce wellbeing in persons that report to be 
sensitive to such exposures. Two ecological studies of cancer in the vicinity of base 
stations report both a strong increase of incidence within a radius of 350 and 400m 
respectively. Due to the limitations inherent in this design no firm conclusions can 
be drawn, but the results underline the urgent need for a comprehensive 
investigation of this issue. Animal and in vitro studies are inconclusive to date. An 
increased incidence of DMBA induced mammary tumors in rats at a SAR of 1.4W/kg 
in one experiment could not be replicated in a second trial. Indications of oxidative 
stress after low-level in vivo exposure of rats could not be supported by in vitro 
studies of human fibroblasts and glioblastoma cells. From available evidence it is 
impossible to delineate a threshold below which no effect occurs, however, given 
the fact that studies reporting low exposure were invariably negative it is suggested 
that power densities around 0.5-1mW/m(2) must be exceeded in order to observe 
an effect. The meager data base must be extended in the coming years. The 
difficulties of investigating long-term effects of base station exposure have been 
exaggerated, considering that base station and handset exposure have almost 
nothing in common both needs to be studied independently. It cannot be accepted 
that studying base stations is postponed until there is firm evidence for mobile 
phones. 
Miscellaneous 
Panagopoulos, D. J., Johansson O. & Carlo G.L. Polarization: A Key 
Difference between Man-made and Natural Electromagnetic Fields, 
in regard to Biological Activity. Sci. Rep. 5, 14914; doi: 
10.1038/srep14914 (2015). Published online Oct 12, 2015.  
In the present study we analyze the role of polarization in the biological 
activity of Electromagnetic Fields (EMFs)/Electromagnetic Radiation 
(EMR). All types of man-made EMFs/EMR - in contrast to natural 
EMFs/EMR - are polarized. Polarized EMFs/EMR can have increased 
biological activity, due to: 1) Ability to produce constructive interference 
effects and amplify their intensities at many locations. 2) Ability to force 
all charged/polar molecules and especially free ions within and around 

Studies that show Cell Tower Health Effects 
 
all living cells to oscillate on parallel planes and in phase with the 
applied polarized field. Such ionic forced-oscillations exert additive 
electrostatic forces on the sensors of cell membrane electro-sensitive 
ion channels, resulting in their irregular gating and consequent 
disruption of the cell’s electrochemical balance. These features render 
man-made EMFs/EMR more bioactive than natural non-ionizing 
EMFs/EMR. This explains the increasing number of biological effects 
discovered during the past few decades to be induced by man-made 
EMFs, in contrast to natural EMFs in the terrestrial environment which 
have always been present throughout evolution, although human 
exposure to the latter ones is normally of significantly higher 
intensities/energy and longer durations. Thus, polarization seems to be 
a trigger that significantly increases the probability for the initiation of 
biological/health effects. 
Dhami AK. Study of electromagnetic radiation pollution in an 
Indian city. Environ Monit Assess.184(11):6507-6512, 2012. 
Abstract. Electromagnetic radiation emitted by cell phone towers is a form of 
environmental pollution and is a new health hazard, especially to children and patients. 
The present studies were taken to estimate the microwave/RF pollution by measuring 
radiation power densities near schools and hospitals of Chandigarh city in India. The cell 
phone radiations were measured using a handheld portable power density meter TES 
593 and specific absorption rates were estimated from the measured values. These 
values of electromagnetic radiation in the environment were compared with the levels 
at which biological system of humans and animals starts getting affected. The values 
were also compared with the international exposure limits set by the International 
Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP). The highest measured 
power density was 11.48 mW/m(2) which is 1,148% of the biological limit. The results 
indicated that the exposure levels in the city were below the ICNIRP limit, but much 
above the biological limit. 
 

