Mass Programmed Agents for Simulating Human
Strategies in Large Scale Systems
Michal Chalamish
Department of Computer
Science
Bar Ilan University
Ramat Gan 52900, Israel
merlich@cs.biu.ac.il
David Sarne
School of Engineering and
Applied Sciences
Harvard University, Cambridge
MA 02138 USA
sarned@eecs.harvard.edu
Sarit Kraus
Department of Computer
Science
Bar-Ilan University
Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel
sarit@cs.biu.ac.il
Categories and Subject Descriptors
I.2.11 [Artiﬁcial Intelligence]: Distributed Artiﬁcial In-
telligence —Multiagent systems
General Terms
Experimentation
Keywords
Human strategies, Self-interested agents, simulation
1.
INTRODUCTION
Simulation is an important tool for studying systems’ be-
havior under speciﬁc conditions. In recent years, agent tech-
nology has been recognized as a promising new approach for
developing simulation systems, in particular, Multi-Agent
Systems (MAS) based simulations.
One of the great challenges of simulation systems is model-
ing the behavior of self interested individuals [3] since people
can not be trusted to exhibit the expected behavior.
This paper focuses on large-scale self-interested agents-
based simulation systems. The parking space search prob-
lem [2], in which people entering a parking lot search for a
free parking space, is a good example. Diﬀerent people have
diﬀerent concepts of what a good parking space is. One per-
son’s behavior is aﬀected by other people’s behaviors since
one cannot park in an already occupied space.
Another example is the fastpass mechanism recently in-
stituted in the Disneyland amusement park. It is used to
reserve rides in several of the park’s rides. Predicting the
fastpass impact on actual line lengths is very diﬃcult. A
person’s decision of using her fastpass privilege depends on
many factors and the behavior of any given visitor aﬀects
the behaviors exhibited by the other visitors. Having a sim-
ulation tool that can reliably capture visitors behaviors with
regard to the fastpass, can help plan the proper implemen-
tation of such a mechanism in the park.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
AAMAS’07 May 14–18 2007, Honolulu, Hawai’i, USA.
Copyright 2007 IFAAMAS .
The following sections introduce our unique methodology
of using mass programmed-based agents for generating a
signiﬁcant number of simulated individuals reliably repre-
senting self-interested behaviors. This allows the system to
scale-up and test the inﬂuence of changing diﬀerent system
parameters. The main steps we use are:
• Deﬁne the simulated environment and the main set-
tings alternatives that need to be compared.
• Develop a simulator server and client skeleton agents,
lacking a strategy implementation.
• Elicit people’s goals and utility functions.
• Have people implement their strategies as a programmed
component of a skeleton agent, aiming at maximizing
their beneﬁt considering their utility functions.
• Change simulation settings and repeat the former step.
Analyzing the results of the diﬀerent settings provide a good
estimation of what to expect when implementing the pro-
posed settings in the real world.
To Test our methodology a simulation tool was imple-
mented. The simulation was used to test the eﬀectiveness of
diﬀerent information models in the parking space search do-
main. We claim, that the methodology actually simulates
real-people behavior and validate this claim by analyzing
answers to questionnaires.
2.
PARKING PROBLEM DOMAIN
Parking lot design is an important problem addressed by
many traﬃc and transportation researchers [1]. The park-
ing problem domain consists of a speciﬁc parking lot design
and of cars constantly going into and out of the parking lot.
Every driver entering the lot has to ﬁnd a parking space
and might implement a diﬀerent strategy for doing so. This
problem has several interesting characteristics as far as sim-
ulation systems are concerned.
1. It is a daily task executed in diﬀerent environments.
2. One’s behavior is directly inﬂuenced by the behavior
of the surrounding people.
3. There are several possibilities one must choose from at
every given time until actually parking.
4. A person driving a car has only his limited vision to
relay on when making decisions.
5. Each parking attempt is unique. The parking lot and
the people attempting to park change, as well as the
occupied and free parking spaces.

Today, many diﬀerent information models can be provided
to the drivers, to help them ﬁnd a satisfactory parking place
more easily. Nevertheless, the more sophisticated the infor-
mation is, the greater is the cost of supplying it and the
complexity of producing it.
Therefore, a parking lot de-
signer/manager has a strong incentive to acquire tools for
capturing the value of diﬀerent information models.
One of the earliest simulated parking systems is PARK-
SIM, speciﬁed in [4]. All of it’s driving agents share the same
parking strategy, based on a matrix of knowledge which in-
cludes the perceived availability of every parking space, the
minimum travel time to it and the perceived number of ve-
hicles between the driver’s current position and the parking
space. The matrix is updated throughout the parking space
search. The driver determines which parking space is ‘best’
by considering those not likely be taken by another vehicle.
Cassady and Kobza [2] developed a probabilistic approach
to parking space search strategies. They assumed parking
space availability probabilities for all parking spaces in the
lot, deﬁned two parking strategies and evaluated them using
three performance measures. No actual data was collected
or simulation run to verify the results.
To the best of our knowledge, no previous research simu-
lated dynamic changes aﬀecting the behavior of the drivers
or evaluated the role of information. We used our innovative
methodology to address these important questions.
3.
IMPLEMENTATION DESCRIPTION
Aiming at testing our proposed methodology, we created
a simulation system for the parking search problem. The
parking lot structure and the rate of cars arriving to the
parking lot and exiting it at each time step are deﬁned by
the simulation manager (SM). Cars entering the parking lot
are agents, operating on diﬀerent clients which receive con-
tinuous information from the SM based on their locations in
the lot and the information model deﬁned. Each agent has
access to a general map describing possible parking spaces
and legal moving directions. This map, containing no real-
time data, is based on coordination points of structure (x, y).
In every time step, an agent located at point (x, y) can
either move to adjunctive point (x′, y′), park at adjunctive
point (x′, y′) or wait in place. The decision is reported to the
SM and executed only if legal. The agent is also provided
with a small matrix representing the portion of the parking
lot (a “viewing frame”) in its vicinity, containing real-time
data, before deciding on the action to take.
New agents are instantiated based on the entry rates de-
ﬁned and their type is randomly selected from a pool of
types, each associated with a diﬀerent agent implementa-
tion. The agent searches for a suitable parking space and
terminates its life cycle when it is found. The space it occu-
pies will be vacant based on the exiting rates deﬁned.
Each agent type has a diﬀerent parking strategy set by a
person, according to her perception of what a “good” park-
ing space is. Our strategy developers (SDs) each deﬁned her
own cost function, using the same measures. Next, each SD
had to implement her agent’s strategy aiming at minimizing
her cost. A skeleton agent handling all necessary communi-
cation with the SM and supplying an API for programming
the parking strategy was provided to the SDs.
The SDs
were asked to update the agent’s strategy layer for each of
the tested information models.
35
Entrance
Exit 1
Entrance
Exit 2
Entrance
Exit 4
Entrance
Front Door
35
35
35
35
35
35
Exit 3
(a) Parking lot structure
(b) Viewing
frame
example
Figure 1: Parking lot structure used in experiments
and viewing frame example
4.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
We used the structure of an underground parking lot, sim-
ilar to that used in [2]. It is sketched in ﬁgure 1(a) and has
4 Entrance-Exit points denoted as Entrance-Exit 1,2,3 and
4, as well as six rows of parking spaces, each with 70 aligned
parking spaces, and one row aligned with 35. That is, a total
of 455 available parking spaces. Traﬃc lanes are denoted by
dashed lines and the arrows indicate the allowed traﬃc di-
rection(s). The front door serves as a sole foot entrance/exit
point. Foot traﬃc may proceed in either direction but both
vehicle and foot traﬃc are restricted to the traﬃc lanes.
Figure 1(b) illustrates a viewing frame. The circle located
at the lower part is the agent. The frame provides a view
of 5 points forward, 2 backwards and 3 in width. In ﬁgure
1(b) we can identify: (a) another agent that entered the
agent’s viewing scope (ﬁlled circle); (b) 8 occupied parking
spaces (X-ed squares); (c) 6 free parking spaces (non-X-ed
squares); and (d) the traﬃc directions (arrows).
These are the measures used to evaluate the strategies:
• Walking distance from the parking space to the door.
• Parking space search time.
• Driving distance from the parking space to the exit.
Each SD had to choose a set of weights to create a single
linear cost function. Then, the SDs had to implement their
agent’s strategy according to their chosen function. These
functions were used to evaluate the system’s performance
but can also be used for analysis other performance mea-
sures. For example, a parking lot manager might want to
know how much time drivers search for a parking space.
Following are the information models tested.
1. Nothing provided apart from the general map and view-
ing frame.
2. The number of free parking spaces provided on entry.
3. An updated map of the free parking spaces provided
on entry.
4. An updated map of the free parking spaces provided
at every time step.
5. An updated map of the free parking spaces and the
locations of other agents provided at every time step.
34 students, all senior computer science undergraduates,
acted as SDs, and were graded according to their agent’s
performances as evaluated by their own cost functions.

They were provided with a limited version of the simula-
tion tool, always instantiating the same agent, for debugging
and strategy testing. After the submission of all the agents
of a single task, the full simulation tool was used by us in
order to detect abnormal behaviors. SDs whose agent was
found to behave abnormally (i.e., stand in place for a long
time when there is an option of moving) were asked whether
the abnormality was part of their strategy or a bug. In case
of a bug, the agent was ﬁxed and re-tested.
5.
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
Three initial capacities and three Entry/Exit rates were
deﬁned, the combination of which results in 9 simulation pa-
rameters settings. For each such setting, the simulator can
produce a full randomized scenario. Further strengthening
our results, three diﬀerent scenarios were created for each
parameters setting, resulting in 27 scenarios, used to test all
information models. Simulations lasted 3000 time steps.
5.1
Improvements by Information Models
At the end of each simulation, we averaged the total cost
of the diﬀerent agents.
For every information model and
every scenario the total cost of each of the 34 agent types
were averaged over all the agents of the same type.
We denote infoi as the simulation result when using the i-
th information model. The averaged costs are: info1=35.51,
info2=34.72, info3=33.71, info4=32.16 and info5=31.77.
A lower bound for the overall cost calculated for this envi-
ronment is: bound=20.93. This bound allows allocation of
a parking space to multiple cars in parallel if the aggregated
parking times for this space do not exceed the simulation
duration. Using this assumption, the optimal allocation of
cars to parking spaces, based only on the agents’ cost func-
tions, was produced. While this lower bound is signiﬁcantly
smaller1 than the theoretical minimum cost, it still serves
well to demonstrate the improvement obtained when using
the diﬀerent information models.
The results show that on average, info2 lowers the to-
tal cost by 5.36%, info3 by 12.30%, info4, by 22.95 and
info5 by 25.63% relative to info1. That is, each information
model further lowers the total cost. A paired, single tailed
t-test found all improvements to be signiﬁcant (p < 0.029).
The greatest improvement relative to info1 is info5, which
is also the one to demonstrate the greatest improvement rel-
ative to former information model.
Drawing conclusions from these results, we can say that
the diﬀerent information models have great inﬂuence on the
drivers’ costs.
They can help drivers ﬁnd a better suited
parking space, according to their own preferences.
5.2
Central Management Implication
Sometimes, the simulation designer is interested in diﬀer-
ent performance measures. For example, a parking lot man-
ager may be solely focused on the overall time it takes the
agents to look for the parking space. In this case Costmang =
P
agi WalkDist(agi) + SearchTime(agi) (assuming that it
takes the same time to walk and to drive similar distances).
The results show that Costmang improves considerably
as the information given is more detailed. The results also
1Both because it uses more permissive assumption and be-
cause it uses a cooperative approach in which a central al-
locator is allocating cars to parking spaces.
show that the relative improvement from the parking lot
designer perspective is signiﬁcantly greater in comparison
to the improvement measures in terms of social-welfare.
6.
VALIDITY OF RESULTS
Our methodology assumes people will use their own be-
havior when deciding on their agent’s strategy. Following
the completion of the entire task each SD was asked whether
her strategy was speciﬁc to the given parking lot structure,
whether she uses that strategy in real life, and does she con-
sider it to be usable by a person.
Analyzing the answers revealed that 74% of the SDs con-
sidered their strategies to be parking lot structure indepen-
dent. 82% reported on using approximately the same strat-
egy themselves in the physical world. 88% considered their
strategy to be usable by people, with the exception of non-
accurate calculations. Apparently, even though asked to im-
plement the best agent, almost all SDs chose to implement
their own real-life strategy. We can also safely predict that
similar results would have been reached if we would have
used a diﬀerent parking lot structure.
7.
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
The encouraging feedback received from the SDs, indi-
cates that the system successfully managed to capture real-
life parking-related human behaviors.
Settings in which
agents programmed by people were proposed in recent years,
however these have not been scaled to large simulations that
can truly mimic a real-life domain.
The validness of our
parking search problem simulation derives from the incor-
poration of 34 diﬀerent types of agents, each programmed by
a diﬀerent person trying to minimize a personal cost func-
tion. Furthermore, we can add as many additional types as
needed to the simulation. This process can be performed
incrementally, and requires no large group eﬀort.
While our goal in this research was mainly to demonstrate
the applicableness of our proposed methodology, the signiﬁ-
cant speciﬁc results obtained, are an important contribution
to the parking search and parking lot design domains. The
fact that most participants reported that their agent’s strat-
egy was not parking lot structure dependent, suggests using
the system for designing new parking lots and test them
with the information models that we used for our agents.
Acknowledgement: This research was supported in part
by ISF grant #1211/04.
8.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Brown, R. Evens, and I. Black. Evaluation of traﬃc
managment and parking schemes: Whither now? Traf.
Eng. & Ctrl, 32:110–119, 1991.
[2] C. R. Cassady and J. E. Kobza. A probablistic
approach to evaluate strategies for selecting a parking
space. Transp. Science, 32(1):30–42, February 1998.
[3] Y. Murakami, Y. Sugimoto, and T. Ishida. Modeling
human behavior for virtual training systems. In AAAI,
2005.
[4] W. Young. Parksim/1 (1): a simulation model of driver
behaviour in parking lots. Traf. Eng. & Ctrl, 1986.

