1

This Presentation is part of a series of 13
on the 2010 National Model Construction Codes. 
It is important to note that the model codes, which are developed 
by the Canadian Commission on Building and Fire Codes 
must be adopted by provincial/territorial authorities to become law.
This may mean that code requirements enacted by legislation within 
your province or territory might differ from what is presented here. 
Please check with your local authority.
2

In the last Code Cycle 2005-2010, the work on stairs identified issues related 
to stairs, ramps, handrails and guards that needed to be addressed: 
This presentation will look at these changes within the following  three 
categories:
•Harmonizing inconsistencies between Part 3 and Part 9 requirements
•Introducing new terminology  and explanations to provide consistency in the 
application of the provisions
• Introducing new minimum criteria for stairs, ramps, handrails and guards. 
3

Under the 2005 NBC the Part 9 refers to this measured height in a stairwell as 
a clear height.  Part 3 refers to this dimension as headroom clearance. 
The use of the term “clear height” already in the Code,  along with a new 
Appendix note has been introduced to provide consistency in both parts 3 and 
9. We will look at this terminology and its application in the upcoming slides.
4

Under the 2005 NBC, the clear height over stairs in Part 9 is measured 
vertically from a line drawn through the leading edges of the treads.
Click
5

The clear height, referred to as headroom clearance, for a stairway in Part 3 is 
measured vertically from any landing or from the nosing of any stair tread.
6

This change resolves the difference between Part 3 and Part 9. It provides a 
consistent description of where the clear height measurement is to be taken. 
The “clear height” in the stairwell is now measured over a “clear width”, which is 
described in the Appendix (see illustration) as the space between the horizontal 
and or vertical projections ( i.e handrails, ceiling detectors).
Use of the terms  clear height & clear width  is meant to indicate that the terms 
and related concept has a specific meaning and measurement in the NBC that 
is distinct from the colloquial use of the terms headroom or headroom 
clearance.  
The 2005 requirement did not recognize that projections  at the ceiling that are 
close to the sides of the exit did not present a hazard, therefore measuring the 
height within the areas noted by the new terminologies was more reasonable.  
As a person can only walk within the clear width of the exit, there is no need to 
maintain clear height beyond the clear width.
7

In Part 3, there has also been a slight reduction in the clear height from  2100  
mm to 2050 mm to coincide with Part 9 requirements and to reflect the new 
measurement parameters.  It should be noted that this clear height is now 
measured between the clear width.
8

The 2005 wording suggests that the clear height over exterior stairs, ramps and 
landings serving single dwelling  should be 2050 mm instead of 1950 mm.
There is no apparent reason why the clear height for exterior elements should 
be higher than for interior elements.
The  change replaces the word within with serving to specify the same 
minimum height over exterior and interior stairs, ramps and landings  serving a 
single dwelling units and the same minimum height over exterior and interior 
stairs, ramps and landings not serving a single dwelling units.
9

In the 2005 Code, as shown in the illustration in the Appendix Note, the 
measurement of run is from nosing to nosing.
10

The change in 2010 Code text provides a consistent description of where the  
dimensions of risers and runs are to be taken.
After reviewing other standards, the nosing-to-nosing measurement is 
considered to be better option.
The attached figure illustrates how maximum and minimum dimensions are to 
be determined.
•Run measured as a horizontal nosing-to nosing distance, and
•Rise measured as a vertical nosing-to nosing distance
For instance
•The Industry measures run from rise-to-rise
• CMHC documents refer to  rise-to-rise and
• The US  Residential Code  for 1 and 2 dwelling units measures from 
nosing-to-nosing
Along with the  same change to Part 3, this change resolves the difference 
between Part 3 and Part 9.
11

Under the 2005 Code, the following applies:
• For service stairs, Part 9 specifies minimum rise and maximum run, part 3 
provides no criteria. Service stairs serve areas only used for service rooms or 
service space
• Private stairs are stairs within dwelling units, including stairs in attached 
garages and exterior stairs serving a single dwelling unit.
•Part 3 references Part 9 for stairs within dwelling unit
• Public stairs are all stairs not described as service or private stairs
Click to go the next slide
12

Part 3 has an exception for these stairs as they are only used by maintenance 
staff.
The 2010 change makes Part 9 consistent with Part 3 for service stairs.
13

Part 3 references Part 9 for stairs within dwelling units. Note that no changes 
are being proposed at this time for stairs serving dwelling units.
A note is added to the Table to clarify that:
Private stairs are exterior and interior stairs that serve:
(a)Single dwelling units
(b)Houses with secondary suites including their common spaces
(c)Garages that serve single dwelling units and  houses with secondary suites 
including their common spaces
14

The changes recognize that there is no technical basis for the 355 mm (14”) 
limit on maximum run and tread depth.  It was noted that stadia often have 
treads that are 24” deep and that depths higher than 355 mm are acceptable.  
In order to be consistent with Part 3, the following changes are made to Table 
9.8.4.2. with respect to Part 9 public stairs:
•specify a maximum rise of 180 mm (7”), 
•specify a minimum run and tread depth of 280 mm (11”), and  
•remove the 355 mm limit on maximum run and tread depth. 
Part 9
Rise between 180-125mm (was 200-125mm)
Run between no limit -280mm (was 355- 230mm)
15

2005 Code
•Part 9 (Sentence 9.8.4.1) specifies limits to define uniformity of rise, run and 
tread depth within a flight, and recognizes that there may be variation in height 
of the lowest riser where a stair adjoins a sloping surface at the top or bottom. 
• Part 3 provides qualitative performance requirements for uniformity of rise and 
run within a flight and between successive flight
16

2010 Code
The change introduces new tolerance limits to variations in treads and risers to 
specify 
•5 mm maximum tolerance between adjacent treads or between treads 
and landings measured from nosing to nosing,
•10 mm in-flight tolerance.
These changes are based on:
•various standards that specify a maximum of 5 mm between individual 
treads and between individual risers specifications
•NFPA Life Safety Code specifies 5 mm tolerances in rise and run
•International Construction Code (ICC) specifies 10 mm  between steps 
and over the flight
Along with the  same change to Part 3 that moved from a qualitative which
provides no basis against which to determine compliance to a quantitative  
requirement, this change resolves the difference between Part 3 and Part 9 and 
reduces the likelihood of missteps, trips and falls due to changes in rise, run 
and tread depth.
Exception permitted for fire escapes.
17

18

Safety in Use for Ramps
Part 9 permits a maximum projection of 100 mm on either side into the required 
width of ramps.  This leaves a minimum of 700 mm between projections, 170 
mm less than for ramps in a barrier-free path of travel.
Although the existing requirements for ramps in Part 9 are not intended to 
address accessibility (the barrier-free provisions in Section 3.8. address this 
issue), a ramp that appears as if it will provide an accessible route when it will 
not can present a serious hazard. 
This is based on the assumption that if a required element of a building must 
meet certain criteria, users generally expect that elements that are installed, 
even if not required, will provide the same level of performance.  For example, if 
an element looks like a guard, it must perform like a guard or it will create a 
hazard.  Similarly, if a ramp looks like a barrier-free ramp, it must perform like a 
barrier-free ramp or it will create a hazard. 
19

The proposed change provides a description of how to measure handrail height 
that is consistent with the description for measuring height over stairs.  It 
resolves the inconsistency between Part 3 and Part 9 and recognizes handrail 
installation above landings and floors.
20

Part 9 (Article 9.8.7.4.) specifies a minimum height of 800 mm while Part 3 
specifies 865 mm.
In order to recognize the research findings and better align with international 
models, the change specifies 865 mm minimum height of handrails in both Part 
3 and Part 9.
Additional Info
Other codes require various heights as follows: from between 865 to 965 mm.
21

2005 Code
Part 3 requires installation of intermediate handrail on wide stair and ramps. 
There is no such requirement in Part 9.
The change specifies a distance from a position on the stair or ramp to a 
handrail rather than distance between handrails to reduce the likelihood that a 
handrail will be beyond reach.  The change provides handrails not more than a 
step away for adult users. The intents refer to harm that may result as a 
consequence of inadequate provision for maintaining balance and arresting 
falls.  Excessive distance between handrails can result in the path of travel 
being beyond reach of a handrail.  
The 2010 Code change makes Part 9 consistent with Part 3
22

There were two issues with the provisions in the 2005 Code:
1. There was no justification for requiring landings at the top of stairs in garages.  
Landings add significantly to the length and/or width of a minimum-sized garage, 
possibly adding to the overall size of the house, and potentially requiring larger lot 
sizes and reducing the number of houses that may be built in a development. 
2. It was not clear whether garages serving a single dwelling unit is considered to be 
part of the dwelling unit and whether requirements that apply to stairs, ramps, landings, 
handrails and guards in garages serving single dwelling units should be those that 
apply within dwelling units or those that apply to exterior elements serving dwelling 
units.
The changes recognizes that an unacceptable hazard has not been demonstrated 
where a landing is not provided at the top of stairs in garages and avoids the possibly 
onerous implications with respect to building and lot sizes. They also clarify the 
application of the provisions to stairs, ramps, landings, handrails and guards in 
garages serving a single dwelling unit or a house with a secondary suite.  
Now Landings in garages are not required
–
when the stair  does not have more than 3 risers
–
at the top of stairs in garages where the door opens away from 
the stairs, regardless of the number of risers
23

In the 2005 NBC differences in the requirements for ramps and landings within 
dwelling units and requirements for exterior stairs, ramps, landings, handrails and 
guards serving one or two dwelling units were based only on whether those dwelling 
units were in Part 9 buildings or non-Part 9 buildings. ( i.e greater or less than 600 
metres squared) 
Under the 2005 Code :
• ramps and landings within dwelling units in non-Part 9 buildings must comply with 
requirements for public ramps, and
• exterior stairs, ramps, landings, handrails and guards serving single dwelling units in 
non-Part 9 buildings must comply with requirements for public stairs, ramps, handrails 
and guards.
For example, the exterior stair of a ground level dwelling unit in a non-Part 9 building 
must be designed and constructed according to Part 3 whereas the exterior stair of a 
ground level dwelling unit in a Part 9 building is designed and constructed according to 
Part 9.  These differences could not be justified.
24

The change eliminates the differences between Part 3 and Part 9 with respect 
to the application of requirements for ramps and landings within dwelling units, 
and exterior stairs, ramps, landings, handrails and guards serving not more 
than two dwelling units. 
25

Part 3 did  not indicate whether or how the landing requirements apply to 
exterior stairs or ramps.  The new requirements makes it clear how the landing 
requirements are to apply to exterior stairs and ramps. 
The change provides separately the requirements that specify where landings 
must be provided and the requirements that specify dimensions.
26

Part 3 does not specify that a landing must be provided where a door opens 
onto a ramp, a ramp opens onto a stair or a stair opens onto a ramp.  Although 
it might seem obvious that this is necessary, the lack of requirement could lead 
to a situation where the landing is not considered to be a landing and the 
dimensional requirements would not apply.
27

2005 Code
Part 9
Slope on treads
In Part 9, the change incorporated into the 2005  Code for treads was not 
supported with evidence of hazard at slopes greater than 1 in 100.  A limit of 1 
in 100 is considered to be overly stringent.  1% tolerance (10 mm in 1000 mm 
or approximately ½” in 4’) is difficult to achieve. 
Slope on landings
Part 9 specifies maximum acceptable slope on tread, however maximum slope 
for landings is not specified.
Part3 
Maximum slope for landings and treads is not specified.
2010 Code
The change in Part 9 introduces limit to slope on landings at the top and bottom 
of flights.
The change in Part 3 introduces limit to slope on treads and landings.
These changes resolve the difference between the requirements that apply to 
treads and those that apply to landings and achieve uniformity between Part 3 
and Part 9 in limits on slopes that is considered as critical for safety.  
28

Protection of Openable Windows
In the 2005 NBC there were no requirements within Part 3 to protect against 
children falling from openable windows in residential occupancies.
New protection requirement have been introduced to limit the possibility of falls 
from openable windows in Part 3 residential buildings.
Designers are provided with two options.
1. They can provide a guard of 1070 mm at the window or 
2. They can restrict the opening of that window to no more that 100 mm.
Some exceptions do apply to this requirement where the openable portion is 
above the 1070 mm no restriction is required as well where the elevation on the 
other side of the openable window is less than 1.8 m.
29

The 2005 requirements were editorially revised to reflect the intent. The 
wording now makes it clear that one should conform to at least one Clause to
meet the non climbability requirement.
An appendix note with illustrations was added for clarification. 
30

31

32

