Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ujcs20
Journal of College Science Teaching
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ujcs20
Combining Different Inoculation Types to Increase
Student Engagement and Build Resilience Against
Science Misinformation
Melanie Trecek-King & John Cook
To cite this article: Melanie Trecek-King & John Cook (2024) Combining Different Inoculation
Types to Increase Student Engagement and Build Resilience Against Science Misinformation,
Journal of College Science Teaching, 53:1, 1-6, DOI: 10.1080/0047231X.2023.2291968
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/0047231X.2023.2291968
Published online: 30 Jan 2024.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 99
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 

CASE STUDY
Combining Different Inoculation Types to Increase Student Engagement and 
Build Resilience Against Science Misinformation
Melanie Trecek-Kinga and John Cookb 
aDepartment of Biology, Massasoit Community College, Brockton, MA, USA; bMelbourne Centre for Behaviour Change, University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia 
ABSTRACT 
Inoculation theory, which applies the biological concept of vaccination to misinformation, 
provides a range of ways to effectively build resilience against misinformation. In this article, 
we define and organize the various types of inoculation, which includes three delivery 
mechanisms that can be useful in the classroom—passive, active, and experiential. In pas­
sive inoculations, students passively receive inoculating messages, whereas in active inocula­
tions, students actively generate misinformation using misleading techniques. We introduce 
a new category of inoculation—experiential—which involves misleading students and then 
debriefing them on how they were misled. We then describe how these three techniques 
were implemented in a general education science class designed to teach critical thinking 
and science literacy. Through these activities, we illustrate how the different types of inocu­
lation can be creatively combined to maximize student engagement and learning.
KEYWORDS 
Inoculation theory; 
Misinformation; Education; 
Experiential inoculation; 
Active inoculation; Passive 
inoculation   
Misinformation plagues society in a multitude of 
ways, but two features make it particularly problem­
atic: It spreads faster than accurate information 
(Vosoughi et al., 2018) and is notoriously difficult to 
dislodge once people believe it (Chan et al., 2017). For 
these reasons, more research attention has been paid 
to preemptive strategies in an attempt to build peo­
ple’s resilience against misinformation before encoun­
tering it. An ounce of prevention, after all, is worth a 
pound of cure. Inoculation theory, coming from the 
field of psychology, offers a useful framework, as it 
applies the concept of vaccination to knowledge 
(McGuire & Papageorgis, 1961). Just as exposing peo­
ple to a weakened form of a disease helps them 
develop immunity against the actual disease, exposing 
people to a weakened form of misinformation builds a 
person’s cognitive immunity so they are less likely to 
be misled.
An inoculation requires two key elements: (i) a 
warning or threat letting the person know of the 
threat of being misled, and (ii) refutations explaining 
how the misinformation is false. This general structure 
is quite versatile and can use a variety of methods, 
such as technique-based inoculation—which explains 
the techniques or logical fallacies used to mislead— 
and 
fact-based 
inoculation—which 
shows 
how 
misinformation is false through factual explanations 
(Banas & Miller, 2013; Schmid & Betsch, 2019).
Inoculations can also be delivered through several 
different mechanisms. The most common approach is 
passive, in which recipients passively receive an inocu­
lating message. In contrast, active inoculation involves 
having people generate misinformation themselves, as 
a form of active learning. In this article, we introduce 
a third mechanism—experiential inoculation—which 
involves employing misinformation techniques to mis­
lead recipients, with the intent that their experience of 
being misled strengthens their engagement with and 
understanding of the content.
Typically, inoculations are preemptive, or prophy­
lactic, so the words “prebunking” and “inoculation” 
are often used interchangeably. However, there has 
been some research into debunking, or therapeutic 
inoculation, which occurs after a person encounters 
misinformation and involves both correcting the mis­
information and protecting the recipient against future 
encounters with misinformation (Compton, 2020). 
The style of an inoculation message can also vary, 
such as using content that is either humorous or ser­
ious. Both approaches can be beneficial for different 
reasons, as humorous corrections hold people’s 
CONTACT Melanie Trecek-King 
mtrecekking@massasoit.mass.edu 
Biology, Massasoit Community College, Brockton, MA, USA. 
ß 2024 National Science Teaching Association
JOURNAL OF COLLEGE SCIENCE TEACHING 
2024, VOL. 53, NO. 1, 1–6 
https://doi.org/10.1080/0047231X.2023.2291968 

attention longer, whereas serious corrections are seen 
as more credible (Kim et al., 2021).
Because inoculation is so versatile, it has been used in 
a variety of contexts, from public awareness campaigns 
to social media advertising. Inoculation as a classroom 
activity is also a useful pedagogical tool, as inoculation 
types can be combined in a multitude of ways. Table 1
summarizes the different types of inoculation.
In the next three sections, we will outline real- 
world examples of three inoculation methods imple­
mented in a general education science course taught 
by 
this 
article’s 
first 
author 
(Trecek-King) 
at 
Massasoit 
Community 
College 
in 
Brockton, 
Massachusetts. The course, Science for Life, focuses 
on teaching students critical-thinking, information lit­
eracy, and science literacy skills (Trecek-King, 2022c).
Passive Inoculation
Passive inoculation involves an educator explaining to 
students in a one-way fashion how misinformation is 
misleading. Including misinformation in the science 
classroom, such as pseudoscience and science denial, 
can help students better understand the characteristics 
of good science. Like the general public, many stu­
dents hold a variety of science misconceptions, and 
addressing these false beliefs directly increases stu­
dents’ engagement and teaches them how to recognize 
and not fall for these beliefs in the “real world” 
(Mason et al., 2008). This approach, misconception- 
based learning, involves teaching scientific concepts 
by exploring how the science might be misunderstood 
(McCuin et al., 2014).
Science for Life covers a range of pseudoscience 
and science denial issues, such as ghosts, psychics, fad 
diets, energy medicine, fake news, astrology, the MMR 
(measles, mumps, and rubella) vaccine and autism 
“controversy,” conspiracy theories, and climate change 
denial. Including diverse forms of misinformation 
helps students understand that we can all be fooled, 
which increases students’ empathy for others who 
hold different beliefs and reduces their defensiveness 
when their own beliefs are evaluated. After the teacher 
explains the misinformation to the students, they 
evaluate the claims using tools provided in class, such 
as the characteristics of pseudoscience (Thinking Is 
Power, n.d.) and the techniques of science denial 
(Cook, 2021). Additionally, the FLOATER framework 
(Falsifiability, Logic, Objectivity, Alternative explana­
tions, 
Tentative 
conclusions, 
Evidence, 
and 
Replicability) is introduced as a guide for evaluating 
claims (Trecek-King, 2022b).
For example, after a brief explanation of homeop­
athy and how it is supposed to work, students quickly 
recognize the implausibility of the claims and discover 
for themselves that homeopathy is pseudoscience. 
Because students often assume homeopathy is medi­
cine that is “natural” and “safe,” they are shocked to 
learn what it actually is (and that it is allowed to be 
sold alongside evidence-based medicine). Students 
who 
have 
previously 
purchased 
homeopathic 
“treatments” often report feeling deceived and vow 
not to “waste their money” in the future.
Active Inoculation
The modern conception of active inoculation involves 
students learning the techniques used to mislead by 
creating misinformation themselves (Roozenbeek & 
van der Linden, 2018), in contrast with McGuire’s ori­
ginal conception of recipients actively generating refu­
tations of misinformation (McGuire & Papageorgis, 
1961). Imagine a child seeing a magic trick for the 
first time. Without any prior knowledge, the trick 
Table 1. Types of inoculation.
Fact-based
Technique-based
Source-based
Method of inoculation
Explains how specific examples of 
misinformation are false, using 
factual explanations. This method 
is closely related to the issue- or 
topic-based method, which 
focuses on misinformation 
around a topic.
Explains the techniques used to 
mislead. Logic-based inoculation 
is a subset of the technique- 
based method that focuses on 
logical fallacies.
Reveals that a misleading source is 
not a credible source of 
information.
Delivery mechanism
Passive
Active
Experiential
Students passively receive the 
inoculating message, which is 
communicated in one-way 
fashion by the educator.
Students generate the 
misinformation themselves as a 
form of active learning.
Students learn the techniques of 
misinformation when they 
experience being misled.
Order
Prebunking (prophylactic)
Debunking (therapeutic)
N/A
Inoculation occurs before exposure 
to misinformation.
Inoculation occurs after exposure to 
misinformation.
Style
Nonhumorous
Humorous
N/A
2
M. TRECEK-KING AND J. COOK

could look like magic! We might explain the trick to 
the child (i.e., passive inoculation), or we could teach 
the child how to do the trick (i.e., active inoculation).
Science for Life includes several active inoculation 
exercises, and students enjoy pretending to be a char­
latan. In the “Please Don’t Fail Me” assignment, stu­
dents pretend it is the end of the semester and they 
are failing the class because they did not do the work 
(Cook et al., 2023). Students are told to compose an 
email to their instructor explaining why they should 
receive a passing grade, using at least four logical fal­
lacies learned in class, such as appeal to emotion, ad 
hominem, red herring, slippery slope, appeal to 
authority, or false choice (see Table 2 for definitions 
of the logical fallacies). Students then read their class­
mates’ emails, identify any fallacies, and explain why 
they are fallacious. Students are encouraged to have 
fun with the assignment, and their submissions are 
often humorous.
In the “Selling Pseudoscience” assignment, students 
put on their grifter hats and create advertisements for 
a health pseudoscience product, such as the example 
in Figure 1 (Trecek-King, 2022a). After learning about 
the characteristics of pseudoscience and the techni­
ques used to sell it, students are told they have been 
hired by the Beautifaux Company to create an adver­
tisement for a social media platform (e.g., Instagram 
or Facebook) for one of their latest products—either a 
weight-loss pill or a muscle-building supplement. 
Students are instructed to give their product a catchy 
name and use misleading techniques to “sell” it 
online, and they are encouraged to use humor and be 
creative.
Simply put, an excellent way to learn the techni­
ques used to mislead is to apply the techniques to 
“mislead” others. No one likes to be manipulated, and 
students report feeling empowered by their increased 
ability to spot misinformation. Students often express 
that once they can see the misinformation techniques, 
it is hard for them to “unsee” when the techniques 
are used.
There are numerous ways to use active inoculation 
in the classroom. In active inoculation, in contrast 
with passive inoculation, students create the misinfor­
mation rather than having it explained to them.
Experiential Inoculation
Experiential inoculation involves students experienc­
ing (and falling for) misinformation, followed by a 
debrief about their experience. In previous literature, 
the terms “active inoculation” and “experiential inoc­
ulation” have been used interchangeably (Green 
et al., 2022; Roozenbeek & van der Linden, 2018); 
however, we note that the two terms have key differ­
ences. With active inoculation, the explanation of 
misleading techniques occurs before the inoculation, 
whereas with experiential inoculation, the technique 
explanation comes after. Students should go into an 
experiential inoculation unaware of the misinforma­
tion techniques, or the exercise will not be as effect­
ive; part of its strength depends on the feelings 
associated with being fooled. The other difference is 
that with experiential inoculation, the recipient does 
not actively create misinformation, as they do in 
active inoculation, but is instead misled by misinfor­
mation techniques.
Science for Life begins every semester with a per­
sonality reading. The exercise is borrowed from 
Bertram Forer’s classic experiment (Forer, 1949), 
which he first conducted in an introductory psych­
ology class and which has been used since in psych­
ology classes for more than 50 years. Students are told 
the instructor has a friend who is a well-known psy­
chic, and she has agreed to provide students with free 
personality assessments. They fill out a brief question­
naire that asks for their name, birth date, and brief 
answers to a few questions about their interests. In 
the following class, students are given their readings, 
which include vague statements such as “You have a 
tendency to be critical of yourself” and “At times, 
you’re extroverted and sociable, and at other times 
you’re introverted and reserved.” These generic state­
ments can induce the Barnum effect, in which indi­
viduals interpret statements as applying to them 
specifically. Students are then asked to rate the accur­
acy of their reading on a scale of 1 to 5, with 5 being 
the most accurate. On average, students rate the 
accuracy between 4 and 5, which is consistent with 
Forer’s original findings (Forer, 1949). Students then 
discuss their psychic readings in small groups and 
Table 2. A sample of logical fallacies.
Logical fallacies
Definition
Ad hominem
Attempts to discredit an argument by attacking the source
Appeal to authority
Argues that a claim is true because of the (supposed) authority of the person asserting it
Appeal to emotion
Manipulates a person’s emotions to win an argument, in place of evidence
False choice
Oversimplifies a complex issue into two options
Red herring
Attempts to distract from the main issue by bringing in irrelevant information
Slippery slope
Suggests that taking a minor action will inevitably lead to major consequences
JOURNAL OF COLLEGE SCIENCE TEACHING
3

(eventually) discover they all received the same 
reading.
Following this, the teacher debriefs the students, 
explaining how and why they were misled (as well as 
offering an apology). The “how” is straightforward: It 
is easy to fake psychic powers, especially when recipi­
ents want to believe something. The students learn 
about a few tricks commonly used by “psychics,” as 
well as some of the thinking errors that can contribute 
to being misled, such as the Barnum effect, the rain­
bow ruse, and confirmation bias (see Table 3 for defi­
nitions of manipulative techniques). The goal is to 
teach students the importance of skepticism and crit­
ical thinking so they can protect themselves against 
being manipulated.
The teacher must explain to the students why they 
were fooled. Misleading students can be tricky, espe­
cially at the beginning of the semester, when relation­
ships between the teacher and students have not yet 
formed. Over the years, however, this exercise has 
proven to be foundational to the Science for Life 
course. No one likes to think they can be fooled, but 
the truth is that we are all vulnerable. Simply telling 
students this is insufficient, though; it is more effect­
ive to show them. The teacher should clarify for the 
students that although the exercise did not (and can­
not) disprove psychic powers, just because something 
appears paranormal does not mean it is. This fact 
highlights the importance of considering natural 
explanations and demanding extraordinary evidence 
for extraordinary claims.
Students’ reactions to this exercise are overwhelm­
ingly positive. Apologizing to them helps lighten the 
mood, as does joking with them (e.g., “At least I 
fooled you for free, and for educational purposes!”). 
Many students laugh like it was a fun game, and the 
few who are initially upset come around within a cou­
ple of class meetings. This activity establishes a tone 
for the course in which students are encouraged to be 
skeptical, active participants as they explore a range of 
pseudoscientific claims. Fooling students also helps 
them build empathy for others who have been fooled, 
Figure 1. Example of social media advertisement employing the techniques used to sell pseudoscience. 
Source. Trecek-King (2022a).
Table 3. A sample of techniques used (and psychological biases exploited) by psychics.
Manipulative techniques
Definition
Barnum statements
Assertions that are vague and general but seem to be specific to an 
individual
Barnum effect
The tendency to assign high accuracy to personality descriptions that are 
presented as tailored specifically to a person but are, in reality, vague 
and general
Confirmation bias
The tendency to search for, interpret, and remember information that 
confirms existing beliefs
Rainbow ruse
A statement that simultaneously awards a person opposite personality 
traits; by covering both possibilities, the statement cannot be 
considered wrong
4
M. TRECEK-KING AND J. COOK

which becomes relevant later in the semester, when 
they learn how to mislead people.
Conclusion
Educators play an essential role in protecting students 
from potentially harmful misinformation. Inoculation 
theory provides a versatile framework for building 
student resilience against misinformation and offers 
creative ways for educators to engage their students. 
Inoculation researchers are developing exciting, cut­
ting-edge solutions to misinformation, including 
online games such as Bad News (Roozenbeek & van 
der Linden, 2018), Go Viral! (Basol et al., 2021), and 
Cranky Uncle (Cook et al., 2023), all of which com­
bine logic-based inoculation with the active delivery 
mechanism.
In this article, we defined and organized various 
types of inoculation based on their method, delivery 
mechanism, order, and style. We then provided exam­
ples of passive, active, and experiential inoculation les­
sons. Figure 2 illustrates the inoculation types that 
appeared in each of the four classroom activities 
described earlier. These case studies showed how the 
various types of inoculation can be creatively com­
bined in unique ways, offering many permutations for 
educators to meet their own classroom needs. 
Inoculation activities are engaging and effective, and 
educators are limited only by their imaginations when 
it comes to finding new ways to inoculate their stu­
dents against misinformation.
References
Banas, J. A., & Miller, G. (2013). Inducing resistance to con­
spiracy theory propaganda: Testing inoculation and meta­
inoculation strategies. Human Communication Research, 
39(2), 184–207. https://doi.org/10.1111/hcre.12000
Basol, M., 
Roozenbeek, J., 
Berriche, M., 
Uenal, F., 
McClanahan, W. P., & van der Linden, S. (2021). Towards 
psychological herd immunity: Cross-cultural evidence for 
two prebunking interventions against COVID-19 misinfor­
mation. Big Data & Society, 8(1), 20539517211013868. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/20539517211013868
Chan, M. S., Jones, C. R., Hall Jamieson, K., & Albarracın, 
D. (2017). Debunking: A meta-analysis of the psycho­
logical efficacy of messages countering misinformation. 
Psychological Science, 28(11), 1531–1546. https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/0956797617714579
Compton, 
J. 
(2020). 
Prophylactic 
versus 
therapeutic 
inoculation treatments 
for 
resistance 
to 
influence. 
Communication Theory, 30(3), 330–343. https://doi.org/ 
10.1093/ct/qtz004
Cook, J. (2021). Deconstructing climate science denial. In 
D. Holmes & L. M. Richardson (Eds.), Edward Elgar 
research handbook in communicating climate change (pp. 
62–78). Edward Elgar.
Cook, J., Ecker, U. K. H., Trecek-King, M., Schade, G., 
Jeffers-Tracy, K., Fessmann, J., Kim, S. C., Kinkead, D., 
Orr, M., Vraga, E., Roberts, K., & McDowell, J. (2023). 
The Cranky Uncle game—combining humor and gamifi­
cation to build student resilience against climate misin­
formation. Environmental Education Research, 29(4), 
607–623. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504622.2022.2085671
Figure 2. Classification of inoculation types as implemented in four classroom activities.
JOURNAL OF COLLEGE SCIENCE TEACHING
5

Forer, B. R. (1949). The fallacy of personal validation: A 
classroom demonstration of gullibility. The Journal of 
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 44(1), 118–123. https:// 
doi.org/10.1037/h0059240
Green, M., McShane, C. J., & Swinbourne, A. (2022). Active 
versus passive: Evaluating the effectiveness of inoculation 
techniques in relation to misinformation about climate 
change. Australian Journal of Psychology, 74(1), 2113340. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00049530.2022.2113340
Kim, S. C., Vraga, E. K., & Cook, J. (2021). An eye tracking 
approach to understanding misinformation and correc­
tion strategies on social media: The mediating role of 
attention and credibility to reduce HPV vaccine misper­
ceptions. Health Communication, 36(13), 1687–1696. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10410236.2020.1787933
Mason, L., Gava, M., & Boldrin, A. (2008). On warm con­
ceptual change: The interplay of text, epistemological 
beliefs, and topic interest. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 100(2), 291–309. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022- 
0663.100.2.291
McCuin, J. L., Hayhoe, K., & Hayhoe, D. (2014). 
Comparing the effects of traditional vs. misconceptions- 
based instruction on student understanding of the green­
house effect. Journal of Geoscience Education, 62(3), 445– 
459. https://doi.org/10.5408/13-068.1
McGuire, W. J., & Papageorgis, D. (1961). The relative effi­
cacy of various types of prior belief-defense in producing 
immunity against persuasion. The Journal of Abnormal 
and Social Psychology, 62(2), 327–337. https://doi.org/10. 
1037/h0042026
Roozenbeek, J., & van der Linden, S. (2018). The fake news 
game: Actively inoculating against the risk of misinfor­
mation. Journal of Risk Research, 22(5), 570–580. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/13669877.2018.1443491
Schmid, P., & Betsch, C. (2019). Effective strategies for 
rebutting science denialism in public discussions. Nature 
Human Behaviour, 3, 931–939. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41562-019-0632-4
Thinking Is Power. (n.d.). 11 characteristics of pseudoscience. 
Thinking Is Power. https://thinkingispower.com/11-char­
acteristics-of-pseudoscience
Trecek-King, M. (2022a). How to sell pseudoscience. 
Skeptical Inquirer, 46(5), 46–49.  https://skepticalinquirer. 
org/2022/08/how-to-sell-pseudoscience
Trecek-King, M. (2022b). A life preserver for staying afloat 
in a sea of misinformation. Skeptical Inquirer, 46(2), 44– 
49.  https://skepticalinquirer.org/2022/02/a-life-preserver- 
for-staying-afloat-in-a-sea-of-misinformation
Trecek-King, M. (2022c). Teach skills, not facts. Skeptical 
Inquirer, 46(1), 39–42.  https://skepticalinquirer.org/2021/ 
12/teach-skills-not-facts
Vosoughi, S., Roy, D., & Aral, S. (2018). The spread of true 
and false news online. Science, 359(6380), 1146–1151. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aap9559
6
M. TRECEK-KING AND J. COOK

