Vol.:(0123456789)
Synthese
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-019-02373-9
1 3
Confabulation does not undermine introspection 
for propositional attitudes
Adam J. Andreotta1 
Received: 20 September 2018 / Accepted: 17 August 2019 
© Springer Nature B.V. 2019
Abstract
According to some, such as Carruthers (Behav Brain Sci 32:121–138, 2009; Philos 
Phenomenol Res 80:76–111, 2010; The opacity of mind: an integrative theory of 
self-knowledge, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2011; The centered mind: what the 
science of working memory shows us about the nature of human thought, Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, 2015), the confabulation data (experimental data showing 
subjects making false psychological self-ascriptions) undermine the view that we can 
know our propositional attitudes by introspection. He believes that these data favour 
his interpretive sensory-access (ISA) theory—the view that self-knowledge of our 
propositional attitudes always involves self-interpretation of our sensations, behav-
iour, or situational cues. This paper will review some of the confabulation data and 
conclude that the presence and pattern of these data do not substantiate the claim that 
we cannot introspect our propositional attitudes. As a consequence of this discussion, 
I conclude that the ISA theory is not well supported by the empirical data.
Keywords Self-knowledge · Introspection · Confabulation · Carruthers · ISA theory
1 Introduction
The question of how we know what we believe, desire, intend, as well as other so-
called ‘propositional attitudes’ has figured prominently in the recent self-knowledge 
literature.1 Some philosophers argue that we can know our own minds by looking 
 * Adam J. Andreotta 
 
adamandreotta@outlook.com
1 
Department of Philosophy, University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Hwy, Crawley, 
WA 6009, Australia
1 This set of mental states is also sometimes referred to as ‘intentional mental states’. See Searle (1983, 
p. 3) for a more comprehensive list of these states.

 
Synthese
1 3
inward—either by an internal monitor or self-scanner (see, e.g., Lycan 1996)2; by 
introspecting internal ‘tagged’ representational states (see, e.g., Rey 2013); or by a 
process that can directly tie introspective judgements, such as I am now in pain, with 
their truthmakers (see, e.g., Gertler 2012).
Others think that self-detection does not correctly describe the unique way in 
which we acquire knowledge of our psychological states. They defend alternative 
views such as the transparency method (see, e.g., Moran 2001; Fernández 2013; 
Byrne 2018), the view that one can know what one believes, for instance, by attend-
ing to questions about the world; neo-expressivism (see, e.g., Finkelstein 2003; Bar-
On 2004), the view that one does not detect one’s mental states, but rather expresses 
them; and pluralism (see, e.g., Schwitzgebel 2012), the view that there are multiple 
ways in which we come to know our own minds.3
Despite these differences of opinion, most philosophers currently writing about 
self-knowledge would agree that the way in which we come to know our own propo-
sitional attitudes is typically different in kind from the way in which other people 
acquire knowledge of them. Most philosophers, then, accept what Declan Smithies 
and Daniel Stoljar call the difference thesis: ‘the thesis that introspection is different 
from other ways of knowing about the world’ (2012, p. 4). We need not understand 
the word ‘introspection’ here in relation to any specific theory of self-knowledge. As 
is common in the literature (see, e.g. Dretske 2003), I will use the word ‘introspec-
tion’ in this paper to refer to the unique (or special)—and thus different—way in 
which we gain knowledge of our mental states.4
To illustrate the difference thesis, consider the following example. Suppose I want 
to know whether my friend intends to have dinner with me. To find out whether she 
does, I need to observe her behaviour, hear her speak, read her email invitation, and 
3 In previous work, see Andreotta (2017), I have argued that the transparency method is the most prom-
ising of these theories. In what follows, however, I make no explicit reference to this view. I am only 
interested in addressing scepticism about our ability to know our own propositional attitudes in a way 
that is different from the way that other people gain knowledge of them. Only once this scepticism has 
been addressed can we begin to assess views which seek to account for this difference.
4 It is worth pointing out that not all philosophers have chosen to use the word ‘introspection’ this 
broadly. Gertler (2011), for instance, uses the word ‘introspection’ only for processes which involve 
inner perception. According to Gertler, even if a view states that there is a unique way in which one 
can acquire knowledge of one’s own mind, that view should not be called ‘introspective’ unless it also 
involves inner perception. See Andreotta (2017), chapter one, for a theory-neutral definition of introspec-
tion.
2 Theorists such as Lycan maintain that one’s mechanism of inner sense works like one’s mechanism 
of outer sense (visual perception), except that inner sense’s objects of detection include beliefs, desires, 
intentions, and so on. According to another of the view’s proponents, Paul Churchland, this makes the 
view ‘no more (and no less) mysterious’ ([1988] 2013, p. 122) than outer sense. It may be objected here, 
however, that inner sense (e.g., the detection of a belief) is far more mysterious than outer sense (e.g., the 
seeing of a red rose). This is because it seems quite mysteriousness as to how one could know whether 
one had a belief that P, rather than say a wish or desire that P, by simply looking inward. What would 
one look for in one’s internal search? It is such a mystery that opens the door to scepticism about intro-
spection, and thus makes sceptical accounts of self-knowledge important to address. See Byrne (2018, 
chapter 2) for a recent discussion of the main objections to the inner sense view.

1 3
Synthese 
so on. With respect to my own intention to have dinner with my friend, however, 
I do not need to undertake such actions. It seems like I can know that I intend to 
have to dinner with my friend in a different way—that is, without perceiving my 
behaviour or hearing myself speak. It seems that I can know what I intend to do by 
introspection.5
In what follows, I consider scepticism about our ability to gain knowledge of our 
own propositional attitudes in a way that is different from the way that other people 
gain knowledge of them. I consider the question of whether the confabulation data 
warrant scepticism about our ability to introspect our mental states. In doing so, I 
examine the work of Peter Carruthers, who has done much in recent years to moti-
vate such scepticism. He claims that the confabulation data support the thesis that 
‘self-knowledge of most forms of thought doesn’t differ in kind from knowledge of 
the thoughts of other people’ (2011, p. xii).6 According to his interpretive sensory-
access (ISA) theory, there is no introspective, or unique way, in which one can know 
what propositional attitude one is currently in. This means that, if I want to know 
whether I believe that P, desire that P, or intend to φ, I must make an inference from 
sensory, behavioural, or situational cues. This is the same method another person 
wanting to know my mental states would use. However, in my own case, such cues 
are derived from introspectable sensations.
Now, while several philosophers have expressed sympathy towards the ISA the-
ory (see, e.g., Cassam 2014; Scaife 2014; Rosenberg 2018, p. 108), many have been 
critical of it. Fiala and Nichols (2009) argue that one of the examples of confabula-
tion that Carruthers draws upon to support the ISA theory—the split-brain data—
is controversial, due to the fact that some split-brain patients express doubts about 
their own self-ascriptions, thus giving us reason to doubt that the cases are really 
ones of confabulation. Rey (2013) argues that it is unlikely that we would be as reli-
able as we actually are, with regard to our psychological self-ascriptions, if we had 
to make inferences from our sensations and behaviour. Eivind Balsvik argues that 
the existence of the confabulation data, which Carruthers cites to motivate the ISA 
theory, does not lead to ‘general skepticism about the authority of self-attributions 
of mental states’ (2017, p. 324). Several others have offered various criticisms in an 
‘Open Peer Commentary’ (pp. 138–164) supplement to Carruthers’ (2009) article.
5 Smithies and Stoljar (2012) note that there are multiple ways in which the difference thesis may be 
construed. They note that introspection may differ from other ways of gaining knowledge—such as by 
perception or testimony—in epistemological respects and psychological respects (as well as many other 
ways).
6 Carruthers (2011, p. xii) says that his own view is closest to Gazzaniga’s (1998). He situates the ISA 
theory between Gopnik’s (1993) view—which he claims goes too far; and Wegner’s (2002) and Wilson’s 
(2002) views—which he claims do not go far enough. One reason to focus on Carruthers’ view here, 
as opposed to the view outlined in Gopnik’s earlier work, is that Carruthers’s view draws upon recent 
empirical data. As Rey (2013, p. 262), points out, a major piece of evidence for Gopnik’s (1993) view—
evidence from the false belief studies—is now seen as highly controversial (see Onishi and Baillargeon 
2005).

 
Synthese
1 3
Although these criticisms succeed in highlighting some of the problems that face 
the ISA theory, they do not touch the central argument for the theory which is pre-
sented in Carruthers’ (2011) book length defence of it. This is the argument that it 
is not just the presence of the confabulation data that support the ISA theory, but 
the pattern in which the data arise.7 Carruthers argues that people confabulate when 
they are presented with misleading sensory cues. He suggests that such cases reveal 
the normal way in which people self-attribute their attitudes—namely, that we draw 
upon our sensations. He argues that this is revealed by examining the way, or pat-
tern, of errors that people make when they confabulate. A rational reconstruction of 
this abductive argument can be offered as follows:
[1] Subjects in experimental settings confabulate their propositional attitudes.
[2] Subjects do not confabulate randomly: there is a specific pattern to their false 
self-attributions. The data show that subjects’ confabulations are correlated with 
the sensory cues they are receiving.
Carruthers thinks that the best explanation of this pattern of error is that the subjects 
are interpreting their sensory cues when they self-attribute their mental states. He 
cites [1] and [2] as support for the following thesis:
[C] Self-attribution of our propositional attitudes always requires interpretation of our 
own sensory cues. We cannot introspect our propositional attitudes directly.
Call this the patterning argument. Since this argument provides us with the strong-
est reason to accept scepticism about our ability to introspect our propositional atti-
tudes, a careful analysis of it is required before we declare that such a position is 
untenable.8
In what follows, I argue that while the patterning argument needs to be taken seri-
ously, it is unsuccessful because there are no noteworthy patterns—no examples of 
subjects confabulating their propositional attitudes because of misleading sensory 
cues (as stated in [2])—that emerge from the confabulation data. If there exist data 
that vindicate the thesis that we cannot introspect our own attitudes, the confabula-
tion data are not it. In Sect. 2, I explicate Carruthers’ ISA theory which maintains 
that we cannot introspect our propositional attitudes. In Sect.  3, I consider two 
experimental studies that Carruthers thinks provide us with examples of subjects 
confabulating their propositional attitudes, because of misleading perceptual cues. 
I argue that these two cases should not be described as cases of confabulation. In 
Sect. 4, I consider confabulation data from the Choice Blindness Paradigm experi-
ments. I argue that while these experiments do involve examples of confabulation, 
7 In this paper, I will employ the term ‘confabulation’ in accordance with how Carruthers (2011) under-
stands it—namely, to refer to any false psychological self-ascription. It should be noted that there are 
controversies about the definition and applicably of the term that will not be considered here. See Hirst-
ein (2009) for a discussion of such controversies.
8 Carruthers expands upon the ISA theory in chapter 2 of his recent book The Centred Mind (2015).

1 3
Synthese 
the data are compatible with our ability to introspect our own propositional attitudes. 
In Sect. 5, I consider two experiments that Carruthers thinks provide us with exam-
ples of subjects who have confabulated their intentions and judgements because of 
misleading perceptual cues. I argue that such data only show that subjects have con-
fabulated the causal explanations for why they have their propositional attitudes, and 
not the attitudes themselves, as Carruthers maintains.
I conclude that the presumption that we can acquire knowledge of our own propo-
sitional attitudes, in a way that is different from the way that other people acquire 
knowledge of them—by introspection—is not brought into doubt by the existence, 
and pattern, of the confabulation data. As a consequence of this discussion, I claim 
that the ISA theory is undersupported by the confabulation data.
2  Carruthers’ interpretive sensory‑access (ISA) theory
What do the confabulation data tell us about introspection? According to Carruthers, 
they support his ISA theory, which ‘maintains that the mind contains a single mental 
faculty charged with attributing mental states (whether to oneself or others), where 
the inputs to this faculty are all sensory in character’ (2011, p. 1). In other words, 
all psychological ascriptions that a person can make—whether to oneself or another 
person—will be grounded in some sensory experience of the person who is making 
the ascription. Any self-knowledge that a person achieves that is not of a sensation—
such as a belief, intention, or desire—will be acquired indirectly, or inferentially, in 
the same way that one would gain knowledge of another person’s mental states.
The ISA theory, as Georges Rey succinctly puts it, ‘suggests that our introspect-
able lives consist merely of sensations’ (2013, p. 264). By the terms ‘sensory’ and 
‘sensations’ Carruthers is referring to ‘all forms of perception’ (2011, p. 1) one is 
capable of having, from the first-person point of view. This encompasses the five tra-
ditional senses: sight, hearing, taste, smell, and touch; as well as others such as inter-
oception and proprioception.9 So while one can introspect one’s feeling of being in 
pain, one cannot introspect one’s belief that there will be a solar eclipse on Sunday. 
In order to know that one had such a belief, according to this theory, one would have 
to make inferences from one’s sensations (which one can introspect), behaviour, or 
situational cues.
One issue that immediately arises with this division—between broadly perceptual 
events (e.g., sight, hearing, touch, taste, and so on) and propositional attitude events 
(e.g., beliefs, desires, and so on)—is that some propositional attitudes appear to be 
embedded in perceptions. As Rey (2013, p. 265) has pointed out, many sensory 
mental states appear to involve the attitudes that the ISA theory suggests we cannot 
have introspective access to. Rey notes that ‘pain involves aversion; hunger a desire 
9 It may be objected that this view is easily refuted because one will still be able to self-attribute one’s 
own propositional attitudes even if one is in a dark room, unable to observe any of one’s own behaviour 
(see Rey 2013). Carruthers’ (2011, p. 158) own response to this objection is that such a person will still 
have visual imagery, inner speech, and affective feelings to draw upon.

 
Synthese
1 3
to eat; thirst a desire to drink; fear a belief that danger is imminent’ (2013, p. 265). 
Some propositional attitudes, therefore, appear to ‘come for free’ with one’s percep-
tions. If it is true that one can introspect one’s sensory states, then it seems that one 
will be able to introspect a certain class of propositional attitudes too. This is not 
what we should expect from a theory that says that we cannot introspect, or have no 
unique access to, our propositional attitudes.
Such exceptions require Carruthers to make a distinction between perceptual 
and non-perceptual propositional attitudes. He claims that the ‘mindreading faculty 
lacks direct access to the subject’s own non-perceptual judgements, decisions and 
other propositional attitudes’ (2011, p. 69).10 This qualification allows Carruthers to 
acknowledge what has been said above—namely, that some propositional attitudes 
are embedded in broadly perceptual events, while at the same time upholding the 
central thesis of the ISA theory—namely, that our introspective lives consist only of 
sensations.11
Now, just because Carruthers thinks that we cannot directly introspect our propo-
sitional attitudes, one should not get the impression that he thinks that we always 
confabulate. Carruthers grants that we often form true beliefs about our own minds 
(just as we often form true beliefs about the minds of others). What he claims is that 
our self-ascriptions will ultimately be grounded in sensory, situational, or behav-
ioural cues. When those cues are misleading, Carruthers thinks one will confabu-
late. He thinks that the confabulation data reveal that sensory, situational, or behav-
ioural cues are the source of one’s self-ascriptions. Another adherent of this position 
is Rosenberg (2018), who claims that: ‘What neuroscientific and clinical data about 
normal and mentally ill people show is that what we know about our own beliefs and 
desires has exactly the same source as what we know about other people’s beliefs 
and desires’ (2018, p. 108).
Let us now turn to the empirical evidence that Carruthers thinks supports the the-
sis that we cannot introspect our propositional attitudes. In Carruthers’ view, ‘the 
central, key, prediction’ (2011, p. 6) made by the ISA theory is the confabulation 
data. These data include the results of psychological experiments, some of which 
include: choice blindness experiments, priming experiments, and experiments on 
split-brain patients. Typically, the subjects in these experiments form false beliefs 
about the reasons they acted in the way that they did.
While Carruthers thinks that rival theories of self-knowledge may be compatible 
with the existence of this data, he thinks that few can ‘explain the patterning of the 
confabulation data’ (2011, p. 6). This claim is explained by Carruthers as follows:
10 Carruthers leaves open the question of what constitutes a perceptually-embedded attitude (2011, p. 
83). For example, he points out that a grandmaster in chess may be able to ‘see literally…that White is 
doomed to lose’ (2011, p. 84) after looking at a particular chess configuration.
11 Carruthers’ contention that we have special (or introspective) access to our sensory based proposi-
tional attitudes because such attitudes are bound to the sensations they are about is by no means obvious, 
however. The binding position could be false and we could still have special (or introspective) access to 
our sensory based proposition attitudes. Such a position would not sit easily with ISA theory, though I do 
not consider the point any further here.

1 3
Synthese 
[s]ince the [ISA] theory claims that our only access to our thoughts and 
thought processes is interpretive, relying on sensory, situational, and behavio-
ral cues, there should be frequent instances where the presence of misleading 
data of these sorts leads us to attribute attitudes to ourselves mistakenly (2011, 
p. 325).
Frequent instances of misleading data leading to false self-attributions are present, 
in Carruthers’ view, in the confabulation data. These data, Carruthers thinks, pro-
vide us with examples of people who have made false psychological self-ascriptions 
because they have been presented with misleading perceptual cues. Call this the pat-
terning argument.
In opposition to Balsvik (2017), who attempts to provide a general framework 
for discussing the confabulation data, I go through several cases separately—as I 
do not think the different cases of confabulation data fail to support the thesis that 
we cannot introspect our propositional attitudes in the same way. In Sect. 3, I show 
that Carruthers misclassifies some experimental data as cases that involve confabu-
lation; and thus, such data do not support the sceptical conclusion about introspec-
tion. Next, in Sect. 4, I consider data from the change blindness paradigm experi-
ments. I show that subjects in these cases only confabulate the reasons why they 
made their decision, not the actual decision itself. In Sect. 5, I consider data that I 
claim are rightly classified as involving confabulation, but only involve confabula-
tion of causes, not the subjects’ propositional attitudes.
3  Sensory priming or sensory based self‑attributions?
In addressing the question of what the confabulation data can tell us about the nature 
of introspection, it is important that we first question whether each set of data that is 
employed to support this sceptical conclusion about introspection does feature sub-
jects who have confabulated. After all, if a set of data does not involve subjects who 
have made an erroneous self-attribution, then there is no pattern of error to explain; 
and thus, no reason to suspect that subjects must rely on sensory based inferences 
to self-ascribe their propositional attitudes. In the two cases I look at below, I con-
sider sets of data which Caruthers classifies as cases which involve confabulation. 
I argue that these cases do not involve confabulation at all. I claim that they pro-
vide us with examples of subjects whose attitudes have been influenced by sensory 
inputs; as opposed to examples of subjects who have confabulated a propositional 
because of misleading sensations. If I am right about this, then there is no pattern 
of error to explain. In Sect. 3.1, I look at data that pertain to judgements about one’s 
own professional characteristics, and then in Sect. 3.2, I look at data that pertain to 
judgements about moral issues.
3.1  The effect of ‘shaky’ handwriting on judgements
Carruthers cites experiments performed by Briñol and Petty (2003) as support for 
the claim that we cannot introspect our propositional attitudes. In these experiments, 

 
Synthese
1 3
the authors sought to test how overt behaviour affects attitude change. In one experi-
ment, Briñol and Petty asked subjects to think about, and then write down, either 
three positive or negative qualities that they believed they possessed as potential 
professionals. Example of positive statements included ‘I am a hard worker’ and ‘I 
am polite’; examples of negative statements included ‘I am shy’ and ‘I am lazy’. The 
experimenters asked the subjects to rate the confidence of their statements—or in 
other words, to state the extent to which they judge (or believe) the statements writ-
ten down are true.
Briñol and Petty manipulated the experiment by getting half of the participants 
to write down their answers in their right hand (or preferred hand), and the other 
half to write down their answers in their left hand (or their non-preferred hand). 
Because writing with a non-dominant hand is infrequent, the subjects who wrote 
their responses down in their non-preferred hand sometimes produced ‘shaky’ look-
ing sentences. The experiments found that subjects who had written shaky sentences 
expressed less confidence in the propositions written down, compared to the sub-
jects who had written down sentences in their preferred hand.
In Carruthers’ view, the results of the experiment support the thesis that we can-
not introspect our propositional attitudes. This is because he thinks the subjects can 
be made to express a greater or lesser amount of agreement in the propositions by 
simply modifying the perceptual inputs they are receiving. Given the ease of this 
manipulation, Carruthers thinks that some of the subjects are wrong about what they 
claim to judge—that is, he thinks the subjects do not really agree/disagree with the 
statement to the extent to which they claim. Carruthers concludes, ‘it is…hard to see 
why the supposed mechanisms of inner sense [or introspection] should have failed 
to detect such a judgment…[i]f transparent [or introspective] access to judgments 
really exists, then the subjects in this study should have just accessed and reported 
on their current judgment’ (2011, p. 344). Thus, the explanation that Carruthers 
favours is that the subjects’ mindreading faculty interpreted the ‘shakier’ sentences 
as looking hesitant, and thus less likely to be true. Thus, the subjects were not able 
to have introspective access to what they really judged, and so confabulated.
There is, however, an alternative explanation—one that does not require us to 
invoke confabulation at all. It may be that subjects speak truthfully when they state 
their judgements. All that may be occurring in the experiment is that the neatness 
of the handwritten sentences is influencing (or priming) the subjects. It may be that 
when the subjects see the messy handwriting, they do not take the sentences as seri-
ously as the sentences which are more neatly written. There may be an unconscious 
bias, which the participants are subjected to, which makes them more likely to take 
neatly written sentences as true, possibly because neatness goes together with pro-
fessionalism, and hence truth.
This is a more plausible explanation. For one reason, the subjects do not behave 
as if their avowals are false. Second, we know that peoples’ judgements can be 
influenced by a wide variety of factors that may seem, at first pass, unrelated. Con-
sider, for example, the large body of research on how physical appearance can 
affect judges’ verdicts of guilt (see, e.g., Wareham et al. 2018). These data suggests 
that attractive people—all thing being equal—are less likely to be found guilty by 
judges, compared to unattractive people. These results are obviously a concern for 

1 3
Synthese 
the justice system, but there is no reason to doubt that the judges are wrong when 
they state their verdict. In these cases, we acknowledge that the judges have allowed 
themselves to be influenced by external factors—not that they really have made the 
right decision but are simply unaware of it. Analogously in the handwriting case: 
since the subjects may not have strongly formed opinions about their professional 
attributes, their judgements may be easily influenced by how messy the handwriting 
is.12
Carruthers briefly considers this priming explanation, but rejects it. He asks, 
‘why should writing sentences shakily with one’s left hand induce feelings of doubt, 
except via a mindreading inference?’ (2011, p. 344). This is a good question, but it 
is not one that should lead us to doubt the subjects’ reports. After all, we may ask 
the same question of any psychological study which produces unexpected results. 
Why, for example, should a person’s attractiveness make them seem less guilty to 
judges? Or why should women who have first tried on a swimsuit in experimental 
settings do worse in a math test compared to women who have tried on a sweater.13 
These are important questions in their own right, but they do not show that the sub-
jects are wrong about the judgement they attribute to themselves. The case involv-
ing the messy handwriting is similar to these cases. It shows how external factors 
can influence peoples’ judgements in surprising ways; but it does not provide us 
with examples of subjects who have mistakenly self-attributed their propositional 
attitudes. Thus, there is no pattern of error to explain here. These data illustrate how 
easily subjects can be influenced by external factors. This is an interesting phenom-
enon in its own right, but it doesn’t support the thesis that we cannot introspect our 
propositional attitudes.
3.2  Moral judgements: sensory influence or grounding?
The same problem that I have just raised is present in another set of data that Car-
ruthers (2011, p. 140) cites as evidence for claiming that we cannot introspect 
our propositional attitudes—namely, the experiments conducted by Schnall et  al. 
(2008), who sought to investigate how disgust can influence our moral judgements. 
The question that the experimenters specifically addressed was: ‘Might some peo-
ple look to their bodily reactions for guidance more than others do?’ (Schnall et al. 
2008, p. 1099). To answer this question, the experimenters asked participants to fill 
in a questionnaire, which required them to make a moral judgement. One question, 
for example, was ‘How moral or immoral do you, personally, find consensual sex 
between first cousins to be?’ (2008, p. 1107).
The experimenters introduced a manipulation by eliciting feelings of disgust in 
some of the participants. In one experiment, a foul smell was present; in another, the 
13 This was noted in an experiment performed by Fredrickson et al. (1998). See chapter 3 of Bargh’s 
(2017) recent book Before You Know It for many similar experiments involving priming.
12 I suspect that we would not see the same results with stronger beliefs people held. For example, if 
people were asked about what they believed about the place they were born, or what they believe their 
brother’s name to be.

 
Synthese
1 3
participants were asked to work in a disgusting room; in another, they were asked 
to recall a disgusting experience; in another, they were asked to watch a disgust-
ing video. It was observed that in all four cases, disgust increased the severity of 
moral judgements. The experimenters concluded that there is a ‘causal relationship 
between feelings of physical disgust and moral condemnation’ (Schnall et al. 2008, 
p. 1118).
These results would support the patterning argument for the ISA theory given 
two assumptions: [1] the subjects believe that they have made moral judgements that 
they have not in fact made; and [2] the subjects have been led to this false belief 
because of misleading perceptual cues. If [1] and [2] are true, then we would have 
evidence in support of the thesis that we cannot introspect our propositional atti-
tudes: we have a case where subjects have confabulated because of misleading 
perceptual inputs (in this case their sensations of disgust). There is a problem with 
accepting both [1] and [2], however. It is the same problem that I raised above with 
the messy handwriting experiment—namely, that it is hard to see why we should 
doubt the truth of the subjects’ avowals. If the subjects are not wrong about what 
they judge, then there is no pattern of error to explain.
What argumentation can be offered to support the thesis that some of the sub-
jects are mistaken about their self-attributions in these experiments?14 I do not think 
one can appeal solely to the fact that the subjects’ moral judgements can be affected 
by invoking sensations of disgust. As we have already seen, the fact that peoples’ 
judgements can be altered, in surprising ways, by external factors, does not neces-
sarily mean that the subjects are wrong about what they judge (this is, after all, not 
even something that the experimenters challenge).
Another approach would be to point out that these results are just what the ISA 
theory predicts (in other words, the data can be made to fit the theory). If it is true 
that the way in which we normally self-attribute our propositional attitudes is by 
drawing upon our sensations, then the above data does seem to confirm the ISA the-
ory: change the sensations and you change the propositional attitude. This makes 
sense if one needs to draw upon one’s sensations to self-attribute an attitude. While 
I think that the data can be interpreted in this way, I think that the explanation is 
plausible only if we assume that subjects are drawing upon their sensations to self-
ascribe a mental state. The problem with this reply, however, is that it involves cir-
cular reasoning: the only reason to think that the subjects are confabulating because 
of misleading sensory inputs is if we assume that they are drawing upon their sen-
sations to self-ascribe a mental state. This is the very sceptical conclusion that the 
confabulation data is supposed to support. The line of argumentation is therefore 
not useful for providing support for the claim that we cannot introspect our proposi-
tional attitudes.
Although the confabulation interpretation cannot be ruled out, it does not mean 
that either position is equally as plausible. The debate is not like two scientists 
14 While it is true that the ISA theory does not predict that subjects will always make erroneous self-
attributions, the cases involving errors are important, as they are the cases that are supposed to reveal 
how we normally do attribute our propositional attitudes.

1 3
Synthese 
arguing over whether life exists in Alpha Centauri (a case where there is little evi-
dence either way). While I cannot rule out the no confabulation interpretation, I 
think that Carruthers’ preferred interpretation is undersupported by the data. To sup-
port such a claim, Carruthers would need cases like the ones discussed by Schwit-
zgebel (2010), which involve subjects who profess to judge that P, and yet act in 
ways that indicate that they believe not-P. These are cases where we have a reason to 
doubt the truth of the subjects’ avowals. Problematically for Carruthers’ interpreta-
tion of the above case, this is not what we have. Absent of any behavioural defeaters, 
it is difficult to claim that the subjects are wrong in their self-ascriptions—even if 
their judgements can be manipulated by the experimenters.15
I have argued that in both cases discussed here, we lack evidence that confabula-
tion has occurred; thus, there is no pattern of error to explain. If I am right, then 
these data do not support the thesis that we cannot introspect our propositional 
attitudes.
4  Change blindness and introspection
Not all cases that Carruthers discusses can be explained away so easily as the ones 
above: some do appear to involve confabulation. It does not follow from this admis-
sion, however, that we have evidence for the thesis that we cannot introspect our 
propositional attitudes. The reason for this is that the mental states in question do not 
involve propositional attitudes. Consider, first, evidence from the choice blindness 
paradigm (CBP) experiments. In one study performed by Johansson et al. (2005)—
which has since been replicated using different materials by Hall et al. (2010), and 
Hall et al. (2013)—male and female subjects were shown pairs of photographs of 
female faces, and were asked to choose which face in each pair they found the most 
attractive. Once a subject made their selection, both photographs were placed down 
and the selected photograph was given to the subject who was then asked to verbally 
describe why they chose the photograph they did. In some trials, the experimenters 
manipulated the experiment by implementing a ‘double card ploy’, which enabled 
them to return the ‘rejected’ photograph back to the subject.
One striking result of this experiment was that no more than 27% of the subjects 
in the manipulated trials noticed that they had been given back the ‘rejected’ photo. 
Some subjects even gave reasons, when asked, why they had chosen the ‘rejected’ 
photograph. One subject, for example, said ‘I chose her…because she had dark hair’ 
(Johansson et al. 2005, p. 118), in a situation where the subject had originally chosen 
15 Another significant challenge to Carruthers’ preferred interpretation of this data—quite apart from 
the concerns raised here—comes from the findings from a direct replication of these experiments carried 
out by Johnson et al. (2014). Using a much larger sample size than the one used by Schnall et al. (2008), 
Johnson et al. (2014) found that similar results did not materialise—that is, the experimenters failed to 
find the same kind of connection between one’s sensations and one’s moral judgements that was present 
in the original experiments. This failure to replicate the original results means that the conclusion that 
subjects are confabulating because of misleading perceptual cues would not seem to be the best explana-
tion of the patterning of the data.

 
Synthese
1 3
a picture of a woman with blonde hair. These results would seem to empirically sup-
port the claim that we are often unaware of the reasons why we choose what we 
do—given the large percentage of people who did not notice the change.
How do these results support the claim that we can only introspect our sensa-
tions? First, according to Carruthers, the subjects have confabulated the reasons 
why they chose the card that they did. He claims that ‘subjects plainly had no 
awareness of what it was about the original photographs that had induced liking’ 
(2011 p. 148). Second, there is a pattern of error—that is, the subjects have not 
confabulated randomly. They have, presumably, visually scanned the pictures on 
the card they have been told they have selected, and then picked some feature that 
they think must have been the reason that they chose it. In Carruthers’ view, this is 
exactly the kind of result we should expect if our introspective lives consisted only 
of sensations.
There are, of course, alternative explanations to consider. One is to deny that 
confabulation has even occurred here—the same strategy that was employed in 
Sect. 3 above. If this is right, there is no pattern of error to explain, and thus the 
data would not point in the direction of the sceptical conclusion. This strategy is 
employed by Goldman (2006, p. 234), who is not convinced that the subjects in 
the CBP experiments are confabulating. He cites data from experiments performed 
by Simons and Rensink (2005), who suggest that the visual representations of an 
earlier display can decay, or be overridden, very quickly. Their article suggests that 
detailed representations of visual imagery might only last for 0.5 s, which is, as 
Goldman points out, less than the time it takes for the experimenters in this experi-
ment above to return the photograph. If this is right, then the subjects may not be 
literally confabulating, because they are not giving reasons why they liked the orig-
inal picture. It is possible that when the subjects are asked questions such as ‘Why 
did you choose this picture?’ and ‘Tell me what you find most attractive about the 
picture you chose’ they are forming new judgements about the picture that they are 
currently looking at.
While this explanation seems quite reasonable to me, the data from Simons and 
Rensink (2005) can only be used to discredit the confabulation explanation from the 
Johansson et al. (2005) and Hall et al. (2010) versions of the CBP experiments. The 
Simons and Rensink data do not seem applicable to the Hall et  al. (2013) CBP 
experiments, because visual imagery is not involved. In these experiments, subjects 
were asked to fill in a questionnaire of 12 statements which separated two political 
parties in a Swedish election. One of the statements, for example, was ‘The legal 
age for criminal responsibility should be lowered’. The subjects were asked to indi-
cate the extent to which they agreed with the statements presented, on a scale of 
0–100% (where 0% indicated that they completely disagreed with the statement, and 
100% indicated complete agreement). After filling in the form, the subjects were 
then asked to discuss their choices.
In some cases, the experimenters introduced a manipulation. Using a sleight-
of-hand, they replaced the subjects’ provided answers with answers that indicated 
agreement with the opposite political camp. For example, if a subject indicated their 
agreement with the proposition ‘the legal age for criminal responsibility should be 

1 3
Synthese 
lowered’, the experimenters changed their response to indicate disagreement. As 
with the CBP experiment discussed above, when it came time to explain the rea-
son why the subjects choose the ‘false’ answer, the subjects sometimes provided 
answers—even though these were not the original selections that subjects made.
Since this experiment does not involve visual imagery, Goldman’s strategy of 
rejecting the confabulation interpretation, because visual imagery can be overridden 
very quickly, seems implausible here. The interpretation of the experiments I favour 
is the one made by Rieznik et al. (2017), who think these results show subjects who 
have a ‘marked introspective blindness to the internal processes leading to…politi-
cal judgment’ (2017, p. 2). Thus, I think that we can be confident that some CPB 
experiments provide us with examples of confabulation.
Even if we grant Carruthers that some CBP experiments provide us with exam-
ples of confabulation, this is not enough to show that our introspective lives consist 
only of sensations. This is because such experiments only appear to show subjects 
confabulating the reasons why they made their selection. This may provide a chal-
lenge to peoples’ views about how their own mind works, but it doesn’t provide sup-
port for the thesis that we cannot introspect our propositional attitudes. Consider 
an analogy. Suppose I am asked why it is I claim to like Picasso’s Guernica over 
Rembrandt’s Philosopher in Meditation. My struggling to come up with an answer 
to this question, or my providing of a false answer, doesn’t automatically show that 
I am wrong about my preference. This is because my preference and the reasons for 
my preference are separate—meaning I can be wrong about the reason why I prefer 
A or B, but still be right about what I prefer.
The same is true of the CPB experiments we have looked at above: subjects are 
being asked to provide justification (or reasons) for why they believe they made the 
choice they did. Their focus is on the reasons why they have made their choice. They 
are not being asked to report upon a current propositional attitude—such as a belief, 
an intention, or a desire. If the CPB data is to provide support for the thesis that we 
cannot introspect our propositional attitudes, then it should provide us with cases of 
subjects who have mistakenly self-attributed a propositional attitude because of mis-
leading perceptual cues. This is not what is occurring in these cases.
The CPB data show that we are sometimes ignorant about the reasons why we 
have chosen something; however, this result is compatible with human beings pos-
sessing an ability to introspect their own propositional attitudes.
5  Explaining why or reporting that?
In this section, I consider two experiments that Carruthers cites as evidence for the 
thesis that we cannot introspect our attitudes. I consider whether the results show 
that subjects have only confabulated a causal explanation for why they acted in 
the way they did, or whether they have also confabulated a propositional attitude 
because of misleading perceptual cues. In Sect. 5.1, I look at data that pertain to 

 
Synthese
1 3
intentions; and then in Sect. 5.2, I look at data that pertain to judgements.16 In oppo-
sition to Carruthers, I argue that these data only provide us with examples of sub-
jects who have confabulated the causal explanations for why they behaved the way 
they did. I conclude, therefore, that these data do not support the thesis that we can 
only introspect our sensations.
In advancing this position, I am not suggesting that Carruthers is ignorant of the 
distinction between mental causes and mental events. In the Opacity of Mind, for 
example, he claims, ‘in the course of confabulating about the causes of their behav-
ior people will also often confabulate the existence of some suitable mental event’ 
(2011, p. 329). Here we can see that Carruthers is aware of the distinction between 
causes and mental events. The disagreement I have with Carruthers, with respect 
to the following cases, is about this ‘also’. In contrast to Carruthers, I think that the 
subjects have only confabulated the causes of their mental states, but not also the 
mental states themselves.
5.1  Explaining intentions or reporting them?
A set of data that Carruthers cites as evidence for the claim that we cannot introspect 
our propositional attitudes comes from the widely-discussed experiments conducted 
by Michael Gazzaniga (1995, 2000), which feature studies of commissurotomy 
(hereafter, ‘split-brain’) patients. These are patients who have had their corpus cal-
losum—the connection between the left and right hemisphere of the human brain—
cut. With such patients, it is possible to expose information to only one side of the 
brain by presenting stimulus to the corresponding visual field. For example, if an 
experimenter were to display information—e.g., a photo—to the subject’s right vis-
ual field, then such information would be available to the left side of the brain.
In one specific case involving a man known as ‘Joe’—though this case has been 
replicated (see, e.g., Gazzaniga 2000)—a ‘Walk!’ sign was flashed to his right brain 
hemisphere (the hypothesis being that the right hemisphere controls action). Imme-
diately after this, Joe got up from his chair in the testing van and started walking. 
When asked by the experimenters why he had arisen from his chair and started 
walking, Joe answered: ‘I’m going to get a Coke from the house’. It would seem 
from this result that Joe had no conscious awareness of the flashed sign, which 
would appear to be the real reason why he got up and started walking.
In Carruthers’ view, the answer that this subject gives (as well as other split-brain 
subjects) is clearly confabulated. Not only does Carruthers think that the subject has 
confabulated the reason why he acted, but he also thinks that the subject has con-
fabulated an intention. With respect to Joe’s statement that he is going to get a Coke, 
16 Following Cassam (2010), I understand judgements to be conscious mental actions, which are related 
to beliefs, which are typically more stable, longstanding, mental states. Unlike Cassam, however, I think 
the two typically go together with a greater congruity. I agree with Nico Silins, who says that if you 
‘judge that p, you have justification to believe that you believe that p’ (see 2012, p. 302). I raise this dis-
tinction because in the examples discussed here, Carruthers claims that a judgement has been confabu-
lated. Given the close connection between judgement and belief, I think that these cases could have just 
as easily be classified as cases involving belief.

1 3
Synthese 
Carruthers says, ‘[t]his attribution of a current intention to himself is plainly con-
fabulated, but delivered with all of the confidence and seeming introspective obvi-
ousness as normal’ (2010, p. 85). It is this propositional attitude—an intention—that 
Carruthers thinks is confabulated here.
Although I think that a legitimate case can be made for thinking that this self-
attribution counts as an example of confabulation, I disagree with Carruthers that 
such a result supports the thesis that we cannot introspect our propositional atti-
tudes, in this case an intention.17 This is because the subject has only confabulated 
the causal explanation of the origins of his behaviour—not his occurrent intention. 
The reason that I say this is because the subject is not being asked to self-ascribe 
a mental state, he is being asked to describe the causal origins of his act—a point 
I expand upon below. Although this may appear like a trivial point, it is of signifi-
cance for the patterning argument that we are currently assessing. If the subject is 
still able to introspect his occurrent intention, then this case would not count as evi-
dence for the claim that our introspective lives consist only of sensations.
I am not simply making a verbal point. Gazzaniga, after all, defines confabula-
tion as ‘giving a fictitious account of a past event, believing it to be true’ (2011, p. 
77).18 This is precisely what I think the split-brain patient has done here. However, I 
think we should be careful to distinguish between rationalisations—which are causal 
explanations of past events; and occurrent intentions—which are mental states about 
future directed actions. As Michael Bratman puts it, an intention is ‘a complex form 
of commitment to action, a commitment revealed in reasoning as well as in action’ 
([1987] 1999, p. 107). An intention thus, is an action we plan to carry out in the 
future; whereas a rationalisation is backwards looking.
The split-brain case does not support the proposition that the patient’s future-
directed intention to get a Coke is confabulated. The patient’s avowal and behav-
iour are consistent with it being the case that he ocurrently intends to get one. 
This is because the subject’s behaviour and avowal indicate that he has commit-
ted to, or has decided to, get a Coke at the time he is asked. This is so, even if it 
is false that this was the reason he got up. Interestingly, Carruthers appears to 
agree with me that the patient would have most likely left the testing van to get 
a Coke from his house, if he was not interrupted by an experimenter. Carruthers 
claims he would ‘bet a great deal of money’ (2011, p. 95) that this would occur. 
If this is so, then why does Carruthers think that the patient has confabulated an 
17 Not everyone agrees that the confabulation interpretation is correct here. For example: Goldman 
(2006, p. 232), considers the possibility that the left and right hemispheres may be separate streams of 
consciousness, and so the subject’s self-attribution is not, strictly speaking, an example of confabula-
tion because the psychological ascription refers to a different stream of consciousness. Goldman does not 
press this response, however. Fiala and Nichols (2009), moreover, suggest that there are some examples 
in the split-brain literature where subjects express low confidence in their self-reports. If this is true, it 
may not be right to identify such a case as one of confabulation, because the subject would not be confi-
dent in his avowal. And Rey (2013, p. 265 ft. 9) points out that there has not been a sustained attempt to 
determine whether the split-brain subjects express any hesitancy when they give their answers. There is 
also the possibility that even without displays of hesitancy, the subjects may nonetheless possess an abil-
ity to introspect that is difficult to detect in usual performance.
18 This quote was brought to my attention in Balsvik (2017).

 
Synthese
1 3
intention? Carruthers’ answer is that the patient’s act is ‘self-fulfilling’ (2011, p. 
95). By this, he means that prior to being asked why he arose from his chair, the 
patient had no intention to get a Coke. It was only after the experimenters asked 
him why he got up did he become committed to, or decide, to get a Coke. In other 
words, Carruthers thinks that the patient formed the belief that he intended to get 
a Coke simply because of the experimenter’s questioning. He appears to think it 
is irrelevant whether the patient really was committed to getting to a Coke or had 
decided to; so, his belief that he intended to get a Coke was false.
My disagreement with Carruthers is over this last point. One would not be jus-
tified in challenging S’s sincere avowal that he currently intends to φ, by pointing 
to S’s behaving as if he intends to φ—even if the act is self-fulfilling. If anything, 
this would only support the position that S does intend to φ. What Carruthers 
fails to appreciate is the fragility of occurrent propositional attitudes. It is sim-
ply a characteristic of beliefs, desires, and intentions that they may arise sud-
denly and mysteriously. Clearly if S claims that he intends to get a Coke, and then 
shows no interest in getting the Coke, then we may have just cause for doubting 
the truth of S’s self-ascription. Yet this is not what happens in the above case.
A proponent of the self-fulfilment hypothesis may reply here by saying that it 
does not matter whether it is true that the subject intends to get the Coke; what 
matters is the source of the subject’s self-ascription. The proponent of the self-
fulfilment hypothesis may then claim that the subject’s behaviour (the getting up 
and walking) is just what we should expect if the subject was drawing upon his 
sensations to self-ascribe an attitude. They could then go on to argue that this 
result supports the thesis that we lack any special internal non-sensory access to 
our propositional attitudes.
The problem with such a reply, however, is that it downplays one of the main con-
siderations for upholding scepticism about introspection in the first place—namely, 
error (the confabulation data). The reason that it is so important to focus on cases 
that involve error is because such cases are supposed to reveal the way in which a 
subject normally self-ascribes their propositional attitudes. What the cases of con-
fabulation purportedly show, according to Carruthers, is that (i) the subject did not 
introspect their mental state because they falsely self-ascribed their mental state; 
and (ii) the subject’s self-ascription is drawn from the subject’s sensations. Without 
error however, it is difficult to establish such scepticism about introspection. This is 
because we are left without any reason to suspect that the subject has not used intro-
spection to self-ascribe her mental state.
The central problem with Carruthers’ claim that the subject has confabulated his 
intention because of misleading sensory cues, is that he cites the patient’s ignorance 
of the causal origins of his intention as evidence for it. Since our concern here is 
only with the question of whether the patient can introspect his own intention—
and not whether the patient is unaware of the causal origins of his intention—this 
is problematic. As Hurlburt and Schwitzgebel (2007) point out, we should avoid 
asking subjects to infer causation, or ‘avoiding asking “why” questions’ (2007, p. 
18), if we want to test the reliability of introspection. This is because, Hurlburt and 
Schwitzgebel correctly recognise, ignorance of the causal origin of one’s mental 
state doesn’t necessary mean that one is ignorant of one’s mental state.

1 3
Synthese 
The split-brain data do not lend support to the claim that we can only introspect 
our sensations. All the data show is that we are sometimes unaware of what it is that 
motivates our intentions. While this result may be surprising, it does not warrant 
scepticism about introspection. To support such scepticism, we would require data 
showing subjects behaving in a way that contradicts their self-ascriptions. As conse-
quence of this discussion, I contend that the patterning argument for the ISA theory 
is undersupported by the split-brain data. Let us now turn to a second experiment, 
where I argue that the same point can be made.
5.2  Explaining judgements or reporting them?
One of the most widely discussed papers on the topic of confabulation is Nisbett 
and Wilson’s (1977) ‘Telling more than we can know: Verbal Reports on mental 
processes’.19 In their paper, Nisbett and Wilson describe a series of experiments that 
show how peoples’ introspective reports about their own mental processes are not 
always reliable. The paper is often cited as an example of how commonplace con-
fabulation is (see, e.g., Hirstein 2009, p. 1). In the most well-known of these experi-
ments, participants were told to examine a set of four identical nylon stockings that 
were placed upon a table—under the impression that they were participating in a 
survey. Once they made their selection, the subjects were asked to state which item 
they preferred, and why they selected the item they did. The answers that the sub-
jects gave appeared to show that some of them did not know why they chose the 
item they did. For example, some claimed it was the softness or the colour of the 
item selected that made it preferable to the other items. Given that the items were all 
the same, these explanations seem false. The experimenters concluded that people 
have ‘little or no introspective access to higher order cognitive processes’ (1977, p. 
231).
In Carruthers’ view, these results provide support for the claim that we cannot 
introspect our propositional attitudes because of the way (or pattern) in which the 
subjects have made their mistakes. He thinks that the reason why the subjects make 
false self-ascriptions in this experiment is because of the misleading sensory cues 
that they received—specifically, the perceptions of themselves making a selection, 
which caused them to confabulate.
To assess this claim, we first need to address the question of what type of mental 
state or process the subjects are confabulating. In Carruthers view, there are two 
confabulations. First, he thinks that the subjects confabulate when they state their 
reasons for choosing the items that they did: the reason being that the subjects could 
not possibly have chosen an item because it was the softest, for example, because the 
items were all the same. The second confabulation is the propositional attitude itself. 
Carruthers claims that the
subjects are also confabulating and attributing to themselves a judgement 
(albeit one that they believe to have caused their action)—at least, if we can 
19 According to a Google Scholar search, in September 2018, the paper has had over 12,000 citations.

 
Synthese
1 3
assume they didn’t actually judge that the right hand-item was the softest (or a 
nicer color, or whatever) (2011, p. 336).
The second claim is the more controversial one, and it is the one that I will challenge 
here. Even if we accept—which I think we should—that the subjects are confabulat-
ing the reasons why they chose the item they did, this does not necessarily support 
the sceptical position that we can only introspect our sensations. As Goldman points 
out, ‘no careful privileged-access theorist should claim that people have introspec-
tive access to the causes of their behavior’ (2006, p. 233).20 One can acknowledge, 
along with Rey (2008) and Balsvik (2017), that the subjects were simply unaware 
of what was, most likely, a right-hand side bias; yet the subjects were not mistaken 
about what they judged. To be clear, I am not proposing that Carruthers does not 
draw the distinction between mental states and mental causes (as I pointed out 
above). My position is rather that Carruthers thinks that the subjects are confabulat-
ing both the mental states and the causes, when there is only evidence that the sub-
jects are confabulating the causes of their acts.
In order to support this position, it will be useful to mention Timothy Wilson’s 
(one of the original experimenters) repudiation of his own original sceptical con-
clusion. In his recent book, Strangers to Ourselves, Wilson distinguishes between 
mental contents and mental processes. He now holds that ‘to the extent that peo-
ple’s responses are caused by the adaptive unconscious, they do not have privileged 
access to the causes and must infer them’ (2002, p. 106), but grants that people have 
‘privileged access to a great deal of information about themselves, such as the con-
tents of their current thoughts’ (2002, p. 105). Wilson’s distinction between mental 
content and processes is useful, because it allows us to acknowledge that we may be 
often unaware of what it is that gives rise to, or causes, our attitudes (the process); 
without denying that we can introspect content, in this case the subjects’ judgements.
The pertinent question that needs to be addressed then is, ‘Are the subjects only 
unaware of the processes which gave rise to their judgements; or are they also una-
ware of what they judge (a propositional attitude)?’ As I said above, I do not see any 
reason to suppose that the subjects are wrong when they state their judgements—
even though they may be unaware of what it was that gave rise to their judgement. 
Carruthers, as I said above, disagrees with this contention. In his view, by positing 
that the subjects really do judge what they profess to (e.g., that a certain item was the 
softest), we would need to posit causal pathways which are ‘mysterious’ (2011, p. 
336). In other words, Carruthers does not see how simply paying more attention to 
an item could give rise to a judgement about that item which does not have an objec-
tive basis (e.g., that the item is the softest). Carruthers adds, ‘how could one claim 
otherwise?’ (2011, p. 336). Robin Scaife agrees with this contention. He thinks that 
20 Although the two are closely related, it is important to distinguish introspection from privileged 
access (the thesis that our own self-ascriptions are epistemically privileged). This is because, as Byrne 
(2018, p. 9) points out, the two can come apart. One could argue that we do not have introspective access 
to our propositional attitudes, and yet still claim that we have privileged access to them (perhaps because 
we are around ourselves more often). In this paper, I am only concerned with the question ‘Can humans 
introspect their own propositional attitudes?’

1 3
Synthese 
the subjects did not really judge an item to be the softest (or nice colour, etc.). This 
is because, Scaife says, ‘participants offer a vast array of different explanations for 
exactly the same bias’ (2014, p. 476).
I do not find these objections persuasive. In opposition to Carruthers’ contention 
that the causal pathways required to uphold the non-confabulation interpretation are 
mysterious, I think that a perfectly reasonable explanation can be offered: it may be 
that the right-hand side bias is causing the subjects to spend more time on the last 
item, which may lead subjects to form a judgement about what it was that they liked 
about the item (this would not be surprising considering it was such a trivial task). 
The subjects may then be able use introspection to gain knowledge of such a judge-
ment. This may seem like a strange result, given that we know the items are all the 
same, but I would not say that it is a mysterious result. We know from other studies, 
after all, that seemingly irrelevant factors can influence people’s judgements. For 
example, by increasing the price of a wine, people tend to report an increase in sub-
jective pleasure.21 We would not say that these people do not really enjoy the wine 
more; and neither do I think we should say that the subjects are ignorant of what 
they judge.
In response to Scaife’s objection—that it is unlikely that the subjects are correct 
when they state their avowals, because they react differently to the same bias—I 
also think that a plausible explanation can be given. It may be that subjects’ choices 
reflect their own personal preferences. Some may be predisposed to notice colours, 
others the softness, and so on. I do not see why we should expect the same bias to 
influence subjects in the exact same way, given that such preferences would exist in 
the subjects.
In anticipation of such explanations, Carruthers offers a positive account of what 
he thinks is going on in the experiment. He claims that the subjects are uncon-
sciously reasoning as follows: ‘I need to make a choice. But there is nothing to 
choose between the items, so I might as well select this one [that I am looking at]’ 
(2011, p. 336). This interpretation is implausible because it goes beyond the avail-
able data. The only reason that we would have to accept it is because it coheres with 
the ISA theory. It is hard to see how Carruthers could reach such a conclusion by 
looking at the subjects’ behaviour alone.
We do not have to posit any mysterious causal relations in order to say that the 
subjects speak truthfully when they state their occurrent judgements. We may find 
it strange that the subjects in the above experiment judge that there is a difference 
between the items, when there is none; however, this does not show that the sub-
jects have confabulated. The data that we would need to challenge the subjects’ self-
ascriptions here would need to be behaviourally based. This is not what we have in 
these experiments. Both sets of data, thus, do not provide us with the evidence for 
thinking that our introspective lives consist only of sensations.
21 See Schmidt et al. (2017).

 
Synthese
1 3
6  Conclusion
Cognitive science provides us with a multitude of experimental data to support the 
thesis that people are often unaware of the external factors which give rise to their 
propositional attitudes. These data show, moreover, that peoples’ psychological 
self-attributions are sometimes influenced by various sensations, behaviour, or situ-
ational cues. These results are important for us to consider, as they conflict with the 
confidence that many of us express when we are asked why we have acted in a cer-
tain way, or why we have made a certain decision. What these results do not license, 
I have argued here, is the sceptical conclusion that we cannot introspect our propo-
sitional attitudes. The confabulation data, thus, do not provide us with grounds for 
doubting the difference thesis—the thesis that the knowledge of our propositional 
attitudes is typically acquired in a way that is different from the way in which other 
people acquire knowledge of them. An important implication of this discussion is 
that Carruthers’ ISA theory is undersupported by the data. How exactly we should 
characterise the unique way that each of us come to know our own propositional 
attitudes is obviously a matter of controversy amongst contemporary philosophers, 
and is one that I have not had the space to venture into here.
Although I have disagreed with Carruthers that the confabulation data do not 
support the thesis that we cannot introspect our propositional attitudes, I think that 
Carruthers is right about one thing—namely, that philosophers interested in self-
knowledge have much to learn from studying the confabulation data. Philosophical 
discussion of questions such as ‘Why do we confabulate?’, ‘What are the limits of 
privileged access/first-person authority?’ and ‘What are the limits of introspection?’ 
would be greatly enriched by paying closer attention to these data.22
Acknowledgements I would like to thank Miri Albahari, Nin Kirkham, Daniel Stoljar, Alex Byrne, 
André Gallois, Sean Ramsey, and Harriet Levenston for feedback and advice on earlier versions of the 
paper. I also would like to thank three anonymous referees of this journal for their insightful comments.
References
Andreotta, A. (2017). First-person authority and its limits. PhD thesis, The University of Western 
Australia.
Balsvik, E. (2017). Interpretivism, first-person authority, and confabulation. Philosophy of the Social Sci-
ences, 47, 311–329.
Bargh, J. (2017). Before you know it: The unconscious reasons we do what we do. London: Windmill 
Books.
Bar-On, D. (2004). Speaking my mind: Expression and self-knowledge. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bortolotti, L. (2018). Stranger than fiction: Costs and benefits of everyday confabulation. Review of Phi-
losophy and Psychology, 9, 227–249.
Bratman, M. ([1987] 1999). Intention, plans, and practical reason. Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Briñol, P., & Petty, R. E. (2003). Overt head movements and persuasion: A self-validation analysis. Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 1123–1139.
22 See Keeling (2018), for a discussion of the question ‘Why do we confabulate?’ For a discussion about 
some of the potential epistemic benefits of confabulation see Bortolotti (2018).

1 3
Synthese 
Byrne, A. (2018). Transparency and self-knowledge. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carruthers, P. (2009). How we know our own minds: The relationship between mindreading and meta-
cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32, 121–138.
Carruthers, P. (2010). Introspection: Divided and partly eliminated. Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research, 80, 76–111.
Carruthers, P. (2011). The opacity of mind: An integrative theory of self-knowledge. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Carruthers, P. (2015). The centered mind: What the science of working memory shows us about the nature 
of human thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cassam, Q. (2010). Judging, believing and thinking. Philosophical Issues, 20, 80–95.
Cassam, Q. (2014). Self-knowledge for humans. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Churchland, P. ([1988] 2013). Matter and consciousness (3rd ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dretske, F. (2003). How do you know you are not a zombie? In B. Gertler (Ed.), Privileged access: Philo-
sophical accounts of self-knowledge. Burlington, VT: Ashgate Publishing Company.
Fernández, J. (2013). Transparent minds: A study of self-knowledge. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fiala, B., & Nichols, S. (2009). Confabulation, confidence, and introspection (commentary on Peter Car-
ruthers). Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32, 144–145.
Finkelstein, D. H. (2003). Expression and the inner. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Fredrickson, B. L., Roberts, T. A., Noll, S. M., Quinn, D. M., & Twenge, J. M. (1998). That swimsuit 
becomes you: Sex differences in self-objectification, restrained eating, and math performance. Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 269–284.
Gazzaniga, M. S. (1995). Consciousness and the cerebral hemispheres. In M. S. Gazzaniga (Ed.), The 
cognitive neurosciences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gazzaniga, M. S. (1998). The mind’s past. Berkley: California University Press.
Gazzaniga, M. S. (2000). Cerebral specialization and inter-hemispheric communication: Does the corpus 
callosum enable the human condition? Brain, 123, 1293–1326.
Gazzaniga, M. S. (2011). Who’s in charge? Free will and the science of the brain. New York: Harper 
Collins.
Gertler, B. (2011). Self-knowledge. London: Routledge.
Gertler, B. (2012). Renewed acquaintance. In D. Smithies & D. Stoljar (Eds.), Introspection and con-
sciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goldman, A. (2006). Simulating minds. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gopnik, A. (1993). How we know our minds: The illusion of first-person knowledge of intentionality. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 1–14.
Hall, L., Johansson, P., Tärning, B., Sikström, S., & Deutgen, T. (2010). Magic at the marketplace: 
Choice blindness for the taste of jam and the smell of tea. Cognition, 117, 54–61.
Hall, L., Strandberg, T., Pärnamets, P., Lind, A., Tärning, B., & Johansson, P. (2013). How the polls can 
be both spot on and dead wrong: Using choice blindness to shift political attitudes and voter inten-
tions. PLoS ONE, 8, e60554.
Hirstein, W. (2009). Introduction: What is confabulation? In W. Hirstein (Ed.), Confabulation: Views 
from neuroscience, psychiatry, psychology and philosophy. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hurlburt, R. T., & Schwitzgebel, E. (2007). Describing inner experience? Proponent meets skeptic. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Johansson, P., Hall, L., Sikström, S., & Olsson, A. (2005). Failure to detect mismatches between intention 
and outcome in a simple decision task. Science, 310, 116–119.
Johnson, D. J., Cheung, F., & Donnellan, M. B. (2014). Does cleanliness influence moral judgments? A 
direct replication of Schnall, Benton, and Harvey (2008). Social Psychology, 45, 209–215.
Keeling, S. (2018). Confabulation and rational obligations for self-knowledge. Philosophical Psychology, 
31, 1215–1238.
Lycan, W. G. (1996). Consciousness and experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Moran, R. (2001). Authority and estrangement: An essay on self-knowledge. Princeton: Princeton Univer-
sity Press.
Nisbett, R., & Wilson, T. (1977). Telling more than we can know. Psychological Review, 84, 231–295.
Onishi, K. H., & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Do 15-month-old Infants understand false beliefs? Science, 308, 
255–258.
Rey, G. (2008). (Even higher-order) intentionality without consciousness. Revue Internationale de Phi-
losophie, 62, 51–78.

 
Synthese
1 3
Rey, G. (2013). We are not all “self-blind”: A defense of a modest introspectionism. Mind and Language, 
28, 259–285.
Rieznik, A., Moscovich, L., Frieiro, A., Figini, J., Catalano, R., Garrido, J. M., et al. (2017). A massive 
experiment on choice blindness in political decisions: Confidence, confabulation, and unconscious 
detection of self-deception. PLoS ONE, 12, e0171108.
Rosenberg, A. (2018). How history gets things wrong: The neuroscience of our addiction to stories. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Scaife, R. (2014). A problem for self-knowledge: The implications of taking confabulation seriously. Acta 
Analytica, 29, 469–485.
Schmidt, L., Skvortsova, V., Kullen, C., Weber, B., & Plassmann, H. (2017). How context alters value: 
The brain’s valuation and affective regulation system link price cues to experienced taste pleasant-
ness. Scientific Reports, 7, 1–13.
Schnall, S., Haidt, J., Clore, G. L., & Jordan, A. H. (2008). Disgust as embodied moral judgment. Person-
ality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34, 1096–1109.
Schwitzgebel, E. (2010). Acting contrary to our professed beliefs, or the gulf between occurrent judgment 
and dispositional belief. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly, 91, 531–553.
Schwitzgebel, E. (2012). Introspection, what? In D. Smithies & D. Stoljar (Eds.), Introspection and con-
sciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Searle, J. R. (1983). Intentionality: An essay in the philosophy of mind. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Silins, N. (2012). Judgment as a guide to belief. In D. Smithies & D. Stoljar (Eds.), Introspection and 
consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Simons, D. J., & Rensink, R. A. (2005). Change blindness: Past, present, and future. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 9, 16–20.
Smithies, D., & Stoljar, D. (2012). Introspection and consciousness: An overview. In D. Smithies & D. 
Stoljar (Eds.), Introspection and consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wareham, J., Blackwell, B. S., Bonnie, B., & Boots, D. P. (2018). Complainant’s physical attractiveness 
and juristic judgments of blame and punishment in physical, domestic, and sexual assault scenarios. 
Deviant Behavior, 40, 219–230.
Wegner, D. M. (2002). The illusion of conscious will. Cambridge MA: Cambridge University Press.
Wilson, T. D. (2002). Strangers to ourselves: Discovering the adaptive unconscious. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published 
maps and institutional affiliations.

