
Constructing a Language


Constructing
a Language
A Usage-Based Theory
of Language Acquisition
MICHAEL TOMASELLO
HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, Massachusetts, and London, England

Copyright © 2003 by Michael Tomasello
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
First Harvard University Press paperback edition, 2005
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Tomasello, Michael.
Constructing a language : a usage-based theory of
language acquisition / Michael Tomasello.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-674-01030-2 (cloth)
ISBN 0-674-01764-1 (pbk.)
1. Language acquisition.
2. Cognition in children
I. Title.
P118 .T558 2003
4019.93—dc21
2002038840
Designed by Gwen Nefsky Frankfeldt

For Liz Bates


Contents
1
Usage-Based Linguistics
1
2
Origins of Language
8
2.1.
Phylogenetic Origins
9
2.2.
Ontogenetic Origins
19
2.3.
Children’s First Utterances
31
2.4.
Summary
40
3
Words
43
3.1.
Early Words and their Uses
44
3.2.
Processes of Word Learning
58
3.3.
Theories of Word Learning
81
3.4.
Summary
91
4
Early Syntactic Constructions
94
4.1.
The Nature of Constructions
98
4.2.
Early Constructional Islands
113
4.3.
Marking Syntactic Roles
126
4.4.
Summary
140
5
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
144
5.1.
Abstract Constructions
146
5.2.
Constructing Constructions
161
5.3.
Constraining Constructions
175

viii
Contents
5.4.
Theories of Syntactic Development
181
5.5.
Summary
193
6
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
196
6.1.
Reference and Nominals
199
6.2.
Predication and Clauses
213
6.3.
Learning Morphology
232
6.4.
Summary
241
7
Complex Constructions and Discourse
243
7.1.
Complex Constructions
244
7.2.
Conversation and Narrative
266
7.3.
Summary
279
8
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
282
8.1.
Dual Inheritance
283
8.2.
Psycholinguistic Processes of Acquisition
295
8.3.
Psycholinguistic Processes of Production
305
8.4.
The Development of Linguistic Representations
314
8.5.
Summary
320
9
Toward a Psychology of Language Acquisition
323
References
331
Acknowledgments
373
Index
375

Constructing a Language


Constructing a Language
Usage-Based Linguistics
NOTHING could seem less remarkable than a
one-year-old child requesting “More juice” or commenting “Doggie
gone.” But the remarkable fact is that even these baby utterances differ
from the communicative activities of other animal species in a number of
fundamental ways. For example, other animals do not refer one another’s
attention to outside entities such as juice, they do not make disinterested
comments to one another about missing doggies or the like, and they do
not combine communicatively signiªcant elements to create new mean-
ings. But from an ethological perspective, perhaps the most astounding
fact is that something on the order of 80 percent of all Homo sapiens can-
not understand these simple utterances at all. That is, whereas the individ-
uals of all nonhuman species can communicate effectively with all of their
conspeciªcs, human beings can communicate effectively only with other
persons who have grown up in their same linguistic community—typi-
cally, in the same geographical region.
Whatever may be the evolutionary reasons for this unique, indeed bi-
zarre, situation, one immediate outcome is that, unlike most other animal
species, human beings cannot be born with any speciªc set of communica-
tive behaviors. Young children must learn during their individual on-
togenies the set of linguistic conventions used by those around them,
which for any given language consists of tens of thousands, or perhaps
even hundreds of thousands, of individual words, expressions, and con-
structions. The human species is biologically prepared for this prodigious
task in ways that individuals of other species are not, of course, but this
preparation cannot be too speciªc, as human children must be ºexible
O N E
Usage-Based Linguistics
The confusions which occupy us arise when language
is like an engine idling, not when it is doing its work.
—LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN

enough to learn not only all of the different words and conventional ex-
pressions of any language but also all of the different types of abstract
constructional patterns that these languages have grammaticized histori-
cally. It thus takes many years of daily interaction with mature language
users for children to attain adult-like skills, which is a longer period of
learning with more things to be learned—by many orders of magnitude—
than is required of any other species on the planet.
The ªrst proposal in the modern context was that young children learn
their “verbal behavior” using the same garden-variety learning mecha-
nisms they use to learn other behaviors—which, by the way, are the same
learning mechanisms used by rats and pigeons. Thus, Skinner (1957) pro-
posed that young children learn pieces of language by means of instrumen-
tal conditioning (based on principles of association) and that they general-
ize to new instances by means of stimulus generalization (based on
principles of induction). But in his withering review of Skinner’s book,
Chomsky (1959) argued that there are some principles of grammar that
are so abstract and, in a sense, arbitrary that children could not possibly
learn them by means of simple association and induction. Indeed,
Chomsky (1968, 1980a, 1986) later argued that there are some abstract
principles of grammar for which children have no reliable and unambigu-
ous evidence at all—given that the language they experience consists of
nothing more than a series of individual utterances. This is the so-called
argument from the poverty of the stimulus, and Chomsky’s well-known
solution was to hypothesize that human beings are born with an innate
universal grammar containing a number of abstract principles that guide
the acquisition process.
This argument had a profound effect on researchers studying children’s
language in the 1960s and 1970s. The prevailing opinion at the time was
that baby utterances such as “More juice” and “Doggie gone” were just
that, baby utterances that rested on very concrete and seemingly non-
adult-like linguistic representations such as More X and X gone (e.g.,
Braine, 1963, 1976). But people impressed with the argument from the
poverty of the stimulus looked at these baby representations and at the
formal descriptions of adult language being proposed by Chomsky and
others and said, in effect: “You can’t get there from here” (e.g., Gleitman
and Wanner, 1982). The majority opinion in the ªeld thus changed rather
quickly to the view that children’s early language was somehow under-
girded by some kind of linguistic abstractions—perhaps even the same
ones that underlie mature adult language. This is the so-called continuity
assumption: that basic linguistic representations are the same throughout
all stages of child language development—since they come ultimately from
a single universal grammar (Pinker, 1984).
2
Constructing a Language

But much has happened in the last two decades in developmental psy-
chology, linguistics, and cognitive science which suggests a re-evaluation
of the situation, that is, which suggests that children can get from here to
there, and that they can do it without the aid of any hypothesized univer-
sal grammar. There are two fundamental points: (1) children have at their
disposal much more powerful learning mechanisms than simple associa-
tion and blind induction; and (2) there exist plausible and rigorous theo-
ries of language that characterize adult linguistic competence in much
more child-friendly terms than does generative grammar—which makes
the endpoint of language acquisition seem much closer.
The ªrst point is that modern developmental psychologists and cogni-
tive scientists no longer think of children’s learning as isolated association-
making and induction, but rather they think of it as integrated with other
cognitive and social-cognitive skills—in ways that Skinner and the Behav-
iorists (and Chomsky in his critiques) could never have envisaged. Two
sets of such skills are of particular importance for language acquisition.
The ªrst set comprises various skills of intention-reading (theory of mind,
broadly conceived). These skills ªrst emerge in human ontogeny at around
9–12 months of age (Tomasello, 1995a) and include such things as:
• the ability to share attention with other persons to objects and events
of mutual interest (Bakeman and Adamson, 1984);
• the ability to follow the attention and gesturing of other persons to
distal objects and events outside the immediate interaction (Corkum
and Moore, 1995);
• the ability to actively direct the attention of others to distal objects by
pointing, showing, and using of other nonlinguistic gestures (Bates,
1979);
• the ability to culturally (imitatively) learn the intentional actions of
others, including their communicative acts underlain by communica-
tive intentions (Tomasello, Kruger, and Ratner, 1993; Tomasello,
1998b).
These skills are necessary for children to acquire the appropriate use of
any and all linguistic symbols, including complex linguistic expressions
and constructions. Indeed, they basically deªne the symbolic or functional
dimension of linguistic communication—which involves in all cases the at-
tempt of one person to manipulate the intentional or mental states of
other persons.* Importantly in the current context, this functional dimen-
Usage-Based Linguistics
3
* The notions of communicative intention and function are correlative. Someone uses a
piece of language with a certain communicative intention, and so we may say that that piece
of language has a certain function.

sion enables certain kinds of abstraction processes, such as analogy, that
can only be effected when the elements to be compared play similar func-
tional (communicative) roles in larger linguistic expressions and/or con-
structions. Intention-reading skills are very likely unique to human beings,
and they probably emerged relatively recently in human evolution
(Tomasello, 1999). They are domain-general in the sense that they do not
just enable linguistic communication, but also enable a variety of other
cultural skills and practices that children routinely acquire (such as tool
use, pretend play, rituals).
The other main set of skills is those involved in various kinds of pattern-
ªnding—categorization, broadly deªned. These skills also begin to emerge
early in human development (some prelinguistically) and include such
things as:
• the ability to form perceptual and conceptual categories of “similar”
objects and events (e.g., Rakison and Oakes, in press);
• the ability to form sensory-motor schemas from recurrent patterns of
perception and action (e.g., Piaget, 1952; Schneider, 1999; Conway
and Christiansen, 2001);
• the ability to perform statistically based distributional analyses on
various kinds of perceptual and behavioral sequences (e.g., Saffran,
Aslin, and Newport, 1996; Marcus et al., 1999; Gomez and Gerken,
1999; Ramus et al., 2000);
• the ability to create analogies (structure mappings) across two or
more complex wholes, based on the similar functional roles of some
elements in these different wholes (Gentner and Markman, 1997).
These skills are necessary for children to ªnd patterns in the way adults
use linguistic symbols across different utterances, and so to construct the
grammatical (abstract) dimensions of human linguistic competence. They
are skills that are evolutionarily fairly old, probably possessed in some
form by all primates at the very least (Tomasello and Call, 1997; Hauser,
Weiss, and Marcus, in press). They are also domain-general, in the sense
that they allow organisms to categorize many different aspects of their
worlds into a manageable number of kinds of things and events (although
it seems very likely that when these skills are applied to linguistic sym-
bols—as they are in humans but not in other primate species—some novel
characteristics emerge). A particularly exciting development along these
lines is the creation of connectionist and other kinds of computer pro-
grams that are able to ªnd many patterns in linguistic stimuli with only a
few uncomplicated pattern-ªnding algorithms (Elman, 1990, 1993). This
of course suggests that young children should be able to do the same thing
with similar skills—or even more with more skills.
The second modern development that undermines the You Can’t Get
4
Constructing a Language

There From Here argument is new ways of looking at the nature of lan-
guage itself. Chomskian generative grammar is a “formal” theory, mean-
ing that it is based on the supposition that natural languages are like for-
mal languages. Natural languages are thus characterized in terms of (1) a
uniªed set of abstract algebraic rules that are both meaningless themselves
and insensitive to the meanings of the elements they algorithmically com-
bine, and (2) a lexicon containing meaningful linguistic elements that
serve as variables in the rules. Principles governing the way the underlying
algebra works constitute a universal grammar, the “core” of linguistic
competence. The linguistic “periphery” involves such things as the lexi-
con, the conceptual system, irregular constructions and idioms, and prag-
matics. This dichotomy between core and periphery leads to the so-called
dual process approach to language acquisition (also called the words and
rules approach by Pinker, 1999), namely, that whereas children acquire el-
ements of the linguistic periphery using “normal” learning processes, the
linguistic core, universal grammar, cannot be so learned; it is an innate
property of the human mind.
But in recent years a new view of language and human linguistic compe-
tence has begun to emerge. This view is represented by a group of theories
most often called cognitive-functional linguistics but sometimes also called
usage-based linguistics to emphasize their central processing tenet that
language structure emerges from language use (e.g., Langacker, 1987a,
1991, 2000; Croft, 1991, 2001; Goldberg, 1995; Givón, 1995; Bybee,
1985, 1995, 2002; see Tomasello, 1998a, in press, and Barlow and
Kemmer, 2000, for similar approaches). Usage-based theories hold that
the essence of language is its symbolic dimension, with grammar being de-
rivative. The ability to communicate with conspeciªcs symbolically (con-
ventionally, intersubjectively) is a species-speciªc biological adaptation.
But, in contrast to generative grammar and other formal approaches, in
usage-based approaches the grammatical dimension of language is a prod-
uct of a set of historical and ontogenetic processes referred to collectively
as grammaticalization. When human beings use symbols to communicate
with one another, stringing them together into sequences, patterns of use
emerge and become consolidated into grammatical constructions—for ex-
ample, the English passive construction, noun phrase construction, or -ed
past tense construction. As opposed to conceiving linguistic rules as alge-
braic procedures for combining words and morphemes that do not them-
selves contribute to meaning, this approach conceives linguistic construc-
tions as themselves meaningful linguistic symbols—since they are nothing
other than the patterns in which meaningful linguistic symbols are used in
communication (for example, the passive construction is used to commu-
nicate about an entity to which something happens).
In the usage-based approach, competence with a natural language con-
Usage-Based Linguistics
5

sists of the mastery of all its items and structures, and these constitute a
much more complex and diverse set of linguistic representations than the
“core grammar” of formal approaches. They include the highly canonical
(core), the highly idiosyncratic (periphery), and many things in between.
Thus, ºuent speakers of English control not only highly abstract syntactic
constructions (past-tense -ed, the passive construction), but also concrete
expressions based on individual words or phrases, such as ritualized
greetings, idioms, metaphors, and noncanonical phrasal collocations (I
wouldn’t put it past him; He’s getting to me these days; Hang in there;
That won’t go down well with the boss; She put me up to it; see Pawley
and Syder, 1983; Jackendoff, 1996). In addition, and importantly, they
also control many so-called mixed constructions that fall somewhere in
between these in having both concrete and abstract elements (such as the
-er construction, as in The bigger they are, the nicer they are, which has
many unique properties along with some more regular ones). A plausible
way to think of mature linguistic competence, then, is as a structured in-
ventory of constructions, some of which are similar to many others and so
reside in a more core-like center, and others of which connect to very few
other constructions (and in different ways) and so reside more toward the
periphery.
The implications of this new view of language for theories of language
acquisition are truly revolutionary. If there is no clean break between the
more rule-based and the more idiosyncratic items and structures of a lan-
guage, then all constructions may be acquired with the same basic set of
acquisitional processes—namely, those falling under the general headings
of intention-reading and pattern-ªnding. If adult linguistic competence is
based, to a much larger degree than previously supposed, on concrete
pieces of language and straightforward generalizations across them—with
many constructions remaining idiosyncratic and item-based into adult-
hood—then it is possible that children’s early language is largely item-
based and yet they can still construct an adult-like set of grammatical con-
structions originating with these baby constructions (given several years in
which they hear several million adult utterances). If linguistic construc-
tions are meaningful linguistic symbols in their own right, then children
can use function or meaning to assist in their acquisition, just as they do in
their acquisition of smaller linguistic constructions such as individual
words.
In this book I proceed from the assumption that children can get from
here to there, from item-based baby constructions to abstract construc-
tions, and that they can do this with one set of acquisition processes. The
assumption is justiªed by the fact that the cognitive and social learning
skills that children bring to the acquisition process are much more power-
6
Constructing a Language

ful than previously believed, and by the fact that the adult endpoint of lan-
guage acquisition comprises nothing other than a structured inventory of
linguistic constructions, a much closer and more child-friendly target than
previously believed. These two new advances in developmental psychol-
ogy and usage-based linguistics thus encourage us to pursue the possibility
that we might be able to describe and explain child language acquisition
without recourse to any hypothesized universal grammar.
It should also be emphasized at the outset that, in the current view,
the principles and structures whose existence it is difªcult to explain
without universal grammar (such Chomskian things as the subjacency
constraint, the empty category principle, and the binding principles) are
theory-internal affairs and simply do not exist in usage-based theories of
language—full stop. There is no poverty of the stimulus when a structured
inventory of constructions is the adult endpoint. Moreover, hypothesizing
the existence of an innate universal grammar brings with it two major ac-
quisition problems that are currently unresolved—and that do not exist on
a usage-based view. First is the problem of cross-linguistic diversity: How
can the child link her abstract universal grammar to the particularities of
the particular language she is learning (the linking problem)? Second is the
problem of developmental change: How can we understand the changing
nature of children’s language across development if universal grammar is
always the same (the problem of continuity)? For these reasons as well,
then, it seems worthwhile to attempt to describe and explain child lan-
guage acquisition without adding the extra acquisitional problems created
by an hypothesized universal grammar.
Usage-Based Linguistics
7

Constructing a Language
Origins of Language
T
W O
Origins of Language
The common behavior of mankind is the system of ref-
erence by means of which we interpret an unknown
language.
—LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN
HUMAN linguistic communication differs from
the communication of other animal species in two main ways. First, and
most importantly, human linguistic communication is symbolic. Linguistic
symbols are social conventions by means of which one individual attempts
to share attention with another individual by directing the other’s
attentional or mental state to something in the outside world. Other ani-
mal species do not communicate with one another using linguistic sym-
bols, most likely because they do not understand that conspeciªcs have
attentional or mental states that they could attempt to direct or share
(Tomasello, 1998b). To oversimplify, animal signals are aimed at the be-
havior and motivational states of others, whereas human symbols are
aimed at the attentional and mental states of others. It is this mental di-
mension that gives linguistic symbols their unparalleled communicative
power, enabling them to be used to refer to and to predicate all kinds of
diverse perspectives on objects, events, and situations in the world.
The second main difference is that human linguistic communication is
grammatical. Human beings use their linguistic symbols together in pat-
terned ways, and these patterns, known as linguistic constructions, take
on meanings of their own—deriving partly from the meanings of the indi-
vidual symbols but, over time, at least partly from the pattern itself. The
process by which this occurs over historical time is called grammati-
calization (or syntacticization), and grammatical constructions of course
add still another dimension of communicative power to human languages.
The process of grammaticalization depends crucially on a variety of do-
main-general cognitive and social-cognitive processes that operate as peo-
ple communicate with and learn from one another. It is also a species-

unique process—because if other animals do not use symbols, the question
of grammar is moot.
Human skills of linguistic communication are also unique in the way
they are acquired during ontogeny. The main point is that, unlike other
animal species, the human species does not have a single system of com-
munication. Different groups of human beings have conventionalized dif-
ferent systems of communication (there are more than 6,000 of them), and
children typically acquire only the system(s) of their natal group(s).
Children take several years to acquire the many tens of thousands of lin-
guistic conventions used by those around them, whereas most other ani-
mal species do not learn any of their species-typical communicative signals
at all.
2.1. Phylogenetic Origins
As adumbrated in Chapter 1, the Generative Grammar hypothesis focuses
only on grammar and claims that the human species has evolved during its
phylogeny a genetically based universal grammar. The theory is uncon-
cerned with the symbolic dimensions of human linguistic communication.
The usage-based view—or at least the version of it espoused here—is pre-
cisely the opposite. In this view, the human use of symbols is primary, with
the most likely evolutionary scenario being that the human species evolved
skills enabling the use of linguistic symbols phylogenetically. But the emer-
gence of grammar is a cultural-historical affair—probably originating
quite recently in human evolution—involving no additional genetic events
concerning language per se (except possibly some vocal-auditory infor-
mation-processing skills that contribute indirectly to grammaticalization
processes).
This is not to imply that we know how language originated in human
evolution, because we do not. But if we focus on linguistic symbols as pri-
mary, we may obtain some hints by looking at the communication of our
nearest primate relatives—who communicate not with symbols but with
vocal and gestural signals. At the very least, this comparison will help us
to identify the unique features of human symbolic communication. For
hints about the emergence of grammar in human evolution we need to ex-
amine various processes of grammaticalization and syntacticization as
they may be inferred from historical examinations of written language and
from comparative examinations within language families.
2.1.1. Primate Communication
Discerning the unique features of human symbolic/linguistic communica-
tion is sometimes made more difªcult by anthropocentric accounts of non-
Origins of Language
9

human primate communication. The most important instance of this is the
well-known case of the alarm calls of vervet monkeys. The basic facts are
these (see Cheney and Seyfarth, 1990, for more details). In their natural
habitats in east Africa vervet monkeys use three different types of alarm
calls to indicate the presence of three different types of predator: leopards,
eagles, and snakes. A loud, barking call is given to leopards and other cat
species, a short cough-like call is given to two species of eagle, and a
“chutter” call is given to a variety of dangerous snake species. Each call
elicits a different escape response on the part of vervets who hear the call:
to a leopard alarm they run for the trees; to an eagle alarm they look up in
the air and sometimes run into the bushes; and to a snake alarm they look
down at the ground, sometimes from a bipedal stance. These responses are
just as distinct and frequent when researchers play back previously re-
corded alarm calls over a loudspeaker, indicating that the responses of the
vervets are not dependent on seeing the predator but rather on informa-
tion contained in the call itself.
On the surface, these alarm calls would seem to be very similar to hu-
man language. It seems as if the caller is directing the attention of others to
something they do not perceive or something they do not know is present;
that is, the calls would seem to be symbolic (referential). But several addi-
tional facts argue against this interpretation. First, there is basically no
sign that vervet monkeys attempt to manipulate the attentional or mental
states of conspeciªcs in any other domain of their lives. Thus, vervets also
have different “grunts” that they use in various social situations, but these
show no signs of being symbolic or referential in the sense of being in-
tended to direct the attention of others to outside entities; they mainly
serve to regulate dyadic social interactions not involving outside entities,
such as grooming, playing, ªghting, sex, and travel. Second, predator-
speciªc alarm calls turn out to be fairly widespread in the animal king-
dom. They are used by a number of species—from ground squirrels to do-
mestic chickens—that must deal with multiple predators requiring differ-
ent types of escape responses (Owings and Morton, 1998), but no one
considers them to be symbolic or referential in a human-like way. An ex-
tremely important evolutionary fact in all of this is that no species of ape
has such speciªc alarm calls or any other vocalizations that appear to be
referential (Cheney and Wrangham, 1987). Since human beings are most
closely related to the great apes, this means that it is not possible that
vervet monkey alarm calls could be the direct precursor of human lan-
guage unless at some point apes used them also—and there is no evidence
of this.
Similarly and importantly, the visual-gestural communication of nonhu-
man primates shows no signs of referentiality or symbolicity either. Most
strikingly, nonhuman primates do not point or gesture to outside objects
10
Constructing a Language

or events for others, they do not hold up objects to show them to others,
and they do not even hold out objects to offer them to others (Tomasello
and Call, 1997). Once again, primate gestures are used almost exclusively
to regulate dyadic social interactions such as grooming, play, ªghting, sex,
and travel, not triadically to direct the attention of others to outside enti-
ties or events. Relatedly, nonhuman primates use their species-typical vo-
calizations and gestures almost exclusively for imperative motives, to re-
quest a behavior of others, not to share attention or information with
others in a disinterested manner (Tomasello, 1998b).
Finally, nonhuman primate vocalizations and gestures are not socially
learned in the sense of being copied from others. Primate vocalizations are
almost certainly not learned at all, as monkeys and apes raised outside
their normal social environments vocalize in much the same way as those
who grow up in normal social environments (although some aspects of
call comprehension and use may be learned). Many nonhuman primate
gestures are also not learned, but some are. However, these are not
learned by imitation—by observing others using a gesture and then adopt-
ing it oneself—but rather by a process of ritualization in which individuals
mutually shape one another’s behavior over repeated social interactions
(Tomasello and Zuberbühler, 2002). Overall, because they are not used
referentially, not used simply to share attention with others, and not
learned from others via imitation, the communicative signals of nonhu-
man primates do not seem to be socially shared (or socially constituted) in
the same way as human linguistic symbols.
As a result of facts such as these, a number of primatologists and behav-
ioral ecologists have cautioned against using human language as an inter-
pretive framework for nonhuman primate communication (Owings and
Morton, 1998; Owren and Rendell, 2001). They concur with the current
analysis that nonhuman primates do not use communicative signals to
convey meaning or to convey information or to refer to things or to direct
the attention of others, but rather use them to affect the behavior or moti-
vational states of others directly. If this interpretation is correct, then the
deep evolutionary roots of human language lie in the attempts of primate
individuals to inºuence the behavior, not the mental states, of conspeciªcs.
To ªnd the most direct precursors of human linguistic symbols as tools for
directing attention, therefore, we can only look at the history of the hu-
man species since it began its own unique evolutionary trajectory.
2.1.2. Symbols and Grammaticalization
Although no one knows for certain, it is very likely that human symbolic
skills arose as a more or less direct result of a biological adaptation—most
likely occurring very recently with the emergence of modern humans some
Origins of Language
11

200,000 years ago. According to Deacon (1998), this adaptation con-
cerned symbolic skills directly, whereas according to Tomasello (1999) it
concerned a new kind of social cognition more generally, in which human
beings understood one another for the ªrst time as intentional and mental
agents—which then led them to attempt to manipulate one another’s in-
tentional and mental states for various cooperative and competitive pur-
poses.
In any case, whenever and however they arose, human linguistic sym-
bols are most clearly distinguished from the communicative signals of
other primate species by the ways they are learned and used:
• Human linguistic symbols are socially learned, mainly by cultural
(imitative) learning in which the learner acquires not just the conven-
tional form of the symbol but also its conventional use in acts of
communication (Tomasello, Kruger, and Ratner, 1993).
• Because they are learned imitatively from others, linguistic symbols
are understood by their users intersubjectively in the sense that users
know their interlocutors share the convention (that is, everyone is po-
tentially both a producer and a comprehender and they all know this;
see Saussure, 1916, on “bi-directionality of the sign”).
• Linguistic symbols are not used dyadically to regulate social interac-
tions directly, but rather they are used in utterances referentially
(triadically) to direct the attentional and mental states of others to
outside entities (see Grice, 1975, on the non-natural meaning of lin-
guistic symbols).
• Linguistic symbols are sometimes used declaratively, simply to inform
other persons of something, with no expectation of an overt behav-
ioral response (see Dunbar, 1996, on the origins of language for pur-
poses of gossip).
• Linguistic symbols are fundamentally perspectival in the sense that a
person may refer to one and the same entity as dog, animal, pet, or
pest, or to the same event as running, ºeeing, moving, or surviving—
depending on her communicative goal with respect to the listener’s
attentional states (Langacker, 1987a).
All these features are in contrast to the unlearned, or at least not imita-
tively learned, dyadic and imperative communicative signals of nonhuman
primates that do not involve mental perspectives at all. In at least one rea-
sonable hypothesis, these uniquely human features all derive—along with
a host of other cultural skills involving, for example, teaching and collabo-
rative interactions—from a single social-cognitive adaptation enabling the
understanding of the psychological states of others more generally (theory
of mind, broadly deªned; Tomasello, 1999).
12
Constructing a Language

Tomasello (1999) also argued that linguistic symbols provide human
beings with a species-unique format for cognitive representation. That is,
when a child learns the conventional use of linguistic symbols, what she is
learning are the ways her forebears in the culture found it useful to share
and manipulate the attention of others in the past. And because the people
of a culture, as they move through historical time, evolve many and varied
purposes for manipulating one another’s attention (and because they need
to do this in many different types of discourse situations), today’s child is
faced with a whole panoply of linguistic symbols and constructions that
embody many different attentional construals of any given situation. As
just a sampling, languages embody attentional construals based on such
things as:
• Granularity-speciªcity (thing, furniture, chair, desk chair).
• Perspective (chase-ºee, buy-sell, come-go, borrow-lend).
• Function (father, lawyer, man, American; coast, shore, beach).
Consequently, as the young child internalizes a linguistic symbol—as she
learns the human perspective embodied in that symbol—she cognitively
represents, not just the perceptual or motoric aspects of a situation, but
also one way, among other ways of which she is also aware, that the cur-
rent situation may be attentionally construed by “us,” the users of the
symbol. The way that human beings use linguistic symbols thus creates a
clear break with straightforward perceptual or sensory-motor cognitive
representations—even those connected with events displaced in space and/
or time—and enables human beings to view the world in whatever way is
convenient for the communicative purpose at hand.
The evolution of grammar raises a more controversial set of theoretical
issues, leading to some very different hypothesized evolutionary scenarios.
Generative grammarians believe that the human species evolved a geneti-
cally based universal grammar common to all peoples and that the vari-
ability in modern languages is basically on the surface only. There are a
number of accounts from this perspective, ranging from Chomsky’s
(1986) single-mutation account to Bickerton’s (1984) two-stage account
to Pinker and Bloom’s (1992) gradualist account. But in all these variants
the basic idea is the same: that the fundamental grammatical categories
and relations underlying all of the world’s languages come from a biologi-
cal adaptation (or set of adaptations) in the form of a universal grammar.
The alternative is the usage-based view, in which there is no need to
posit a speciªc genetic adaptation for grammar because processes of
grammaticalization and syntacticization can actually create grammatical
structures out of concrete utterances—and grammaticalization and syn-
tacticization are cultural-historical processes, not biological ones. Thus, it
Origins of Language
13

is a historical fact that the speciªc items and constructions of a given lan-
guage are not invented all at once, but rather they emerge, evolve, and ac-
cumulate modiªcations over historical time as human beings use them
with one another and adapt them to changing communicative circum-
stances (Croft, 2000). Most importantly, through various discourse pro-
cesses (involving various kinds of pragmatic inferencing, analogy making,
and so on) loose and redundantly organized discourse structures congeal
into more tightly and less redundantly organized constructions (see Trau-
gott and Heine, 1991; Hopper and Traugott, 1993). This happens both on
the level of words and on the level of more complex constructions.
On the level of words, simple examples are English phrases such as on
the top of and in the side of evolving into on top of and inside of and even-
tually into atop and inside. Often, however, this congealing process results
in some structural changes as the communicative functions of some ele-
ments are reanalyzed in the context of speciªc constructions. Thus, case
markers and agreement markers most often originate in free-standing
words such as spatial prepositions, pronouns, or even nouns and verbs. A
simple English example concerns the future marker gonna, a fusion of go-
ing and to. The original use of going was as a verb for movement, often in
combination with the preposition to to indicate the destination (I’m going
to the store), but sometimes also to indicate an intended action that the
going to enabled (Why are you going to London? I’m going to see my
bride). This later became I’m gonna VERB, with gonna indicating not just
the intention to do something in the future, but futurity only (with no
movement or intention necessary; on this change see Bybee, 2002).
Givón’s (1979) well-known characterization of this process is: today’s
morphology is yesterday’s syntax.
On the level of constructions, instead of sequences of words becoming
one word, whole phrases take on a new kind of organization; that is, loose
discourse sequences become more tightly organized syntactic construc-
tions. Again Givón’s characterization is apt: today’s syntax is yesterday’s
discourse. Some hypothetical examples based on Givón (although in many
cases the historical record is not sufªciently detailed for conªdence in the
speciªcs):
• Loose discourse sequences such as He pulled the door and it opened
may become syntacticized into He pulled the door open (a resultative
construction).
• Loose discourse sequences such as My boyfriend . . . He plays piano
. . . He plays in a band may become My boyfriend plays piano in a
band. Or, similarly, My boyfriend . . . He rides horses . . . He bets on
14
Constructing a Language

them may become My boyfriend, who rides horses, bets on them (a
relative clause construction).
• If someone expresses the belief that Mary will wed John, another per-
son may respond with an assent, I believe that, followed by a repeti-
tion of the expressed belief, Mary will wed John—which become
syntacticized into the single statement I believe that Mary will wed
John (a sentential complement construction).
• Complex constructions may also derive from discourse sequences of
initially separate utterances, as in I want it . . . I buy it evolving into
I want to buy it (an inªnitival complement construction).
The historical processes of grammaticalization and syntacticization de-
rive from a number of psychological and social-communicative processes
that have been well studied, most importantly automatization, functional
reanalysis, and analogy. Thus, when a person says going and to together
enough (and consistently for the same single function), she ends up saying
gonna by processes of automaticity very similar to those which occur in a
variety of sensory-motor skills (Schneider, 1999). The constraint on such
streamlining is of course that the behavior cannot be so streamlined that it
no longer serves its communicative function effectively. In situations of
high predictability the reduction of phonetic content may be relatively
great; in less predictable situations less reduction is possible without seri-
ous consequences for communication.
Frequency plays a large role in this process as well, as only relatively fre-
quently used expressions will become highly predictable—which accounts
for the well-known principle that the more frequently a word is used in a
language the shorter it tends to be (Zipf’s Law). Frequency is also crucial
because, as is well known, constructions that occur frequently are often ir-
regular. This irregularity can be maintained because items and construc-
tions that are highly frequent can be learned and used on their own, as
constructional islands, whereas items and constructions that are less fre-
quent tend to get regularized by pattern-seeking children (or, in the limit-
ing case, they drop out of use as children do not get enough exposures to
learn them). An interesting example is the subjunctive in Canadian
French, which has dropped out of active use for virtually all low-
frequency verbs but has stayed in use for a small number of high-
frequency verbs (Poplack, 2001; also note an even narrower pattern in
English in which the subjunctive survives for most speakers only in some
ªxed expressions such as If I were you . . .).
Grammaticalization also quite often involves processes of functional
reanalysis and analogy. An example from English illustrates (adapted from
Origins of Language
15

Trask, 1996). Old English had a verb lician that meant something like “be
pleasing to.” Like similar verbs in many languages (such as the German
gefallen, the Spanish gustar), this verb had as its subject the thing that
pleased, with the person who was pleased with that item appearing in the
dative case (X is pleasing to Fred). The normal word order for utterances
with this verb consisted of the person being pleased said before the verb
(in dative case) and the thing doing the pleasing said after the verb (as sub-
ject, agreeing in number with the verb); this is presumably because in Eng-
lish nominals indicating people most often come before verbs (for prag-
matic reasons of topicality) and nominals for inanimate objects most often
come after verbs. We thus get:
Pam kynge licoden peran.
To the king-[dative] were-pleasing pears. (pears  plural subject)
During the Middle English period, however, English lost much of its case-
marking morphology, and so this same utterance was normally expressed:
The king licenden peares.
The king were-pleasing pears. (no dative marking)
It is clear that pears is still the subject at this point since the verb agrees
with it in number, and not with the singular king (the -en ending on the
verb indicates plurality, as in modern-day German). Finally, the plural
marking on the verb was lost too, and we were left with the modern-day:
The king liked pears.
The dative king has now been reanalyzed as the subject, and the former
subject pears as a direct object. Presumably, a driving force in this particu-
lar historical development was the fact that this construction had an atypi-
cal conªguration of case-marking and word order (and perhaps it became
less frequent as well, creating pressure for regularization), and so the
reanalysis was in some sense aided by a kind of analogy to other Subject-
Verb-Object (SVO) constructions.
All of this is not perfectly understood at this point, but for the process
of grammaticalization to result in complex and abstract syntactic con-
structions the organisms involved must be equipped with some fairly com-
plex cognitive and social-cognitive skills, including the ability to form
complex schemas and to categorize these and their internal constituents
into abstract categories, as well as the abilities to make sophisticated prag-
matic inferences, functional reanalyses, and analogies. It may also be that
humans’ relatively recent specialized speech adaptations enabled the emer-
gence of fully linguistic communication, if for no other reason than that
16
Constructing a Language

they enabled the very rapid production of sequences of linguistic symbols
so that grammaticalization could take place (Lieberman, 1985). In any
case, grammaticalization theory is able, at least in principle, to account
both for the similarities among the world’s languages—based on species-
wide skills of cognition, vocal-auditory information processing, and prag-
matic inferencing, along with commonalities among peoples in social and
communicative goals—and for fundamental differences in these lan-
guages, as different speech communities use and grammaticalize different
discourse sequences.*
2.1.3. Language Universals
Of crucial importance to the question of whether human grammatical
competence is best explained by an innate universal grammar or by pro-
cesses of grammaticalization is the question of language universals. The
basic facts are these. Leaving aside for the moment nouns and verbs—
which may or may not be universal in all the world’s languages—virtually
all linguists who are involved in the detailed analysis of individual lan-
guages cross-linguistically (known as linguistic typologists) now agree that
there are very few if any speciªc grammatical categories and constructions
that are present in all languages. Many languages simply do not have one
or more of what are conventionally called relative clauses, auxiliary verbs,
passive constructions, grammatical markers for tense, grammatical mark-
ers of evidentiality, prepositions, topic markers, subject markers, a copula
(to be), case marking of grammatical roles, subjunctive mood, deªnite and
indeªnite articles, incorporated nouns, plural markers, conjunctions, ad-
verbs, complementizers, and on and on. The fact is that many languages
(or language families) have grammatical categories and constructions that
seem to be unique to them, that is, that do not correspond to any of the
European categories and constructions as these have been deªned over the
centuries, beginning with Greek and Roman sources—who, by the way,
created these grammatical entities not with the goal of psychological real-
Origins of Language
17
* Some people may doubt that cultural-historical processes can create abstract structures
such as those embodied in the grammatical constructions of modern-day languages. But, al-
though the analogy is clearly not perfect, there are many highly abstract structures in modern
mathematics that could only have been created by cultural-historical processes since they are
not universal among cultures (for example, those of algebra and calculus). Again, there are
many disanalogies between language and mathematics (which is more closely related, both
logically and historically, to written language). The only point is that abstract symbolic sys-
tems can be created by groups of human beings working together over historical time in the
domain of mathematics, and so perhaps they can also be created in similar yet different ways
in the domain of language.

ity in mind, but rather as resources for the analysis of written texts and the
teaching of Latin grammar.
For sure, we can force all languages into one abstract mold, which
mostly means forcing the grammatical entities of non-European languages
into European categories. Just as there was a time when Europeans viewed
all languages through the Procrustean lens of Latin grammar, we may now
view the native languages of Southeast Asia, the Americas, and Australia
through the Procrustean lens of Standard Average European grammar. But
why? On one reasonable view, this is just Eurocentrism, plain and simple,
and it is not very good science. Foley and van Valin (1984) speculate about
what our linguistic categories and theories would look like if we had be-
gun by analyzing the languages of Southeast Asia and the Paciªc Ocean
and then attempted to assimilate European languages to them. The con-
clusion is that they would look very different. Croft (2002) also points out
the “methodological opportunism” routinely employed by many linguists
looking for language universals. In effect, they focus on a subset of the fea-
tures that characterize, for instance, English subjects, and claim that any
category in any language characterized by this subset is a subject—basi-
cally ignoring the features that don’t match. From a very practical perspec-
tive, Dryer (1997) points out that when different investigators, whatever
their theoretical persuasions, look long enough and in enough detail at a
given language, they mostly come to agreement about the basic grammati-
cal categories and how they work. The problems arise when they then try
to decide if any of these categories correspond to such things as “subject,”
“preposition,” and “auxiliary verb,” as these have been deªned for Euro-
pean languages. We can ªght about it, but is it really a useful ªght? The
fact that our Greco-Roman pigeonholes do not accommodate many non-
European languages in a particularly graceful way should not be surpris-
ing, since these pigeonholes were not created with those languages in
mind.
Of course there are language universals. It is just that they are not uni-
versals of form—that is, not particular kinds of linguistic symbols or
grammatical categories or syntactic constructions—but rather they are
universals of communication and cognition and human physiology. Be-
cause all languages are used by human beings with similar social lives, all
peoples have the need to solve in their languages certain kinds of commu-
nicative tasks, such as referring to speciªc entities or predicating things
about those entities. All human beings also have the same basic tools for
accomplishing those tasks—linguistic symbols, markers on those symbols,
ordering of symbols, and prosodic patterns (Bates and MacWhinney,
1982)—and certain grammaticalization pathways seem to recur quite of-
18
Constructing a Language

ten in the service of those tasks. This leads to some language universals,
for example, something like nouns and verbs as expressions of reference
and predication using linguistic symbols of certain kinds. Such universals
are therefore emergent phenomena, based ultimately on universals of hu-
man cognition, human communicative needs, and human vocal-auditory
processing. But there is very little evidence in the typological literature for
the existence of contentful language universals of the type one would nor-
mally associate with an innate universal grammar.
2.2. Ontogenetic Origins
The human adaptation for symbolic communication emerges in human
ontogeny quite predictably across cultures at around 1 year of age
(Tomasello, 1995a, 1999). It emerges in the context of a whole suite of
new social-cognitive skills, the most important for language acquisition
being the establishment of joint attentional frames, the understanding
communicative intentions, and a particular type of cultural learning
known as role reversal imitation. Together this new suite of skills may be
referred to as skills of intention-reading, indicating the most fundamental
social-cognitive ability underlying them all.
As for grammar, recent ªndings have demonstrated that prelinguistic in-
fants have some astounding skills of pattern-ªnding when exposed to vari-
ous kinds of auditory sequences, which obviously prepare them for ac-
quiring grammatical constructions. But these skills cannot go to work in
earnest until children are able to acquire some linguistic symbols in the
ªrst place, again depending on key social-cognitive developments at
around 1 year of age.
2.2.1. Prelinguistic Infants
When people speak in a language that is totally unfamiliar to us, we have
no way of understanding what they are trying to say. Prelinguistic infants
are in an even worse situation. Not only do they not know what adults
are trying to say, they do not even know that adults are trying to say
something. They do not even know what “saying something” is. Without
an understanding of linguistic symbols and how they work, it is all just
noise.
Perhaps surprisingly, there are very few concrete proposals for why chil-
dren start comprehending and producing language when they do, soon af-
ter their ªrst birthdays. In a recent account of early word learning, it is
claimed that “in the end, nobody knows why word learning starts at
Origins of Language
19

about 12 months and not at six months or three years” (Bloom, 2000: 45).
The puzzle is that infants seemingly have conceptualized things they can
talk about from at least 4 or 5 months of age, by which time they have, by
all accounts, formed concepts of simple objects and events (see, e.g., the
research reviewed by Spelke et al., 1994; Baillargeon, 1995). Infants of
about this same age have also demonstrated that they can recognize word-
like sound patterns when these recur in their experience in association
with distinct objects (Jusczyk, 1997). And, of course, one of the best-
established ªndings in infancy research is that even neonates are able to
associate two aspects of their experience with one another, including
auditory and visual experiences (see Haith and Benson, 1997, for a re-
view). But, since 5-month-olds do not comprehend or produce language,
it would seem that concepts, speech units, and associations are not
enough.
It is possible that further developments in infants’ ability to conceptual-
ize the world emerge at around the ªrst birthday, and so account for the
emergence of language. But this is unlikely. The only serious candidate in
this regard is infants’ emerging ability to deal with so-called sortal catego-
ries like “dog” and “duck” (e.g., Xu, Carey, and Welch, 1999). But such
categories are not necessary for them to learn, for example, the proper
names of those around them. It is also possible that further developments
in infants’ ability to segment speech are involved in the initial emergence
of language. But, again, this is unlikely. Although infants are indeed ac-
quiring new speech-perception skills at around their ªrst birthdays, these
would not be necessary for them to learn single words said to them in iso-
lation, which occur with some frequency in at least some infants’ daily
lives well before language begins. And there exist no serious proposals
that infants’ skills of association learning undergo any kind of qualitative
shift at 1 year of age that would provide some new boost to their ability to
acquire language.
An alternative explanation involves infants’ social and communicative
skills. In this case something important does indeed seem to happen at the
appropriate developmental period, and it does so in a way that is corre-
lated with the emergence of language. Thus, although human infants are
social creatures from very early in development—they look selectively at
schematic drawings of human faces over other perceptual patterns (Fantz,
1963); they recognize other persons as animate beings that are different
from physical objects (Legerstee, 1991); they engage in “protoconver-
sations” with adults (Trevarthen, 1979); and they mimic some body
movements (Meltzoff and Moore 1977, 1989, 1994)—they are probably
not so different from other primate species socially. But near the end of the
ªrst year of life something new happens in the way human infants relate to
20
Constructing a Language

other persons, and, in the current account, this explains why the acquisi-
tion of language begins when it does.
In the current account, children begin to acquire language when they do
because the learning process depends crucially on the more fundamental
skills of joint attention, intention-reading, and cultural learning—which
emerge near the end of the ªrst year of life. And importantly, a number of
studies have found that children’s earliest skills of joint attentional engage-
ment with their mothers correlate highly with their earliest skills of lan-
guage comprehension and production (see Carpenter, Nagell, and
Tomasello, 1998, for a review; and see Chapter 3 for studies of joint atten-
tion and word learning). This correlation derives from the simple fact that
language is nothing more than another type—albeit a very special type—
of joint attentional skill; people use language to inºuence and manipulate
one another’s attention.
2.2.2. Early Skills of Intention-Reading
At around 9–12 months of age human infants begin to engage in a host of
new behaviors that would seem to indicate something of a revolution in
the way they understand their social worlds. Prototypically, it is at this age
that infants begin to ºexibly and reliably look where adults are looking
(gaze following), to use adults as social reference points (social referenc-
ing), and to act on objects in the way adults are acting on them (imitative
learning). These behaviors are not dyadic—between child and adult (or
child and object)—but rather they are triadic in the sense that they involve
infants coordinating their interactions with both objects and people, re-
sulting in a referential triangle of child, adult, and the object or event to
which they share attention. These behaviors would seem to indicate an
emerging understanding of other persons as intentional agents like the self
whose psychological relations to outside entities may be followed into, di-
rected, and shared (Tomasello, 1995a). Intentional agents are animate be-
ings who have goals and who make active choices among behavioral
means for attaining those goals, including active choices about what to
pay attention to in pursuit of them.
Three manifestations of this new level of social understanding are espe-
cially important for language acquisition: (1) the joint attentional frame,
(2) understanding communicative intentions, and (3) cultural learning in
the form of role reversal imitation.
THE JOINT ATTENTIONAL FRAME
First, 1-year-olds’ newfound ability to interact triadically with other per-
sons enables them to participate in relatively extended bouts of social in-
Origins of Language
21

teraction mediated by an object in which both participants constantly
monitor each other’s attention both to the object and to themselves. These
periods of joint engagement establish the common ground—what we may
call the joint attentional frame*—within which adult-child communica-
tion may take place. For example, suppose a child is on the ºoor playing
with a toy, but also is perceiving many other things in the room. An adult
enters the room and joins the child in playing with the toy. The joint
attentional frame is those objects and activities that the child and the adult
know are part of the attentional focus of both of them. In this case, such
things as the rug and the sofa and the child’s diaper will not be a part of
the joint attentional frame, even though the child may be perceiving them
basically continuously, because they are not part of “what we are doing.”
In contrast, if the adult enters the room with a new diaper and readies the
child for a diaper change on the rug, then the joint attentional frame may
include the diapers and perhaps the rug—but not the toys because “we”
have no goals with respect to the toys.
The basic point is that joint attentional frames are deªned intentionally,
that is, they gain their identity and coherence from the child’s and the
adult’s understandings of “what we are doing” in terms of the goal-
directed activities in which we are engaged. In one case we are playing
with a toy, which means that certain objects and activities are part of what
we are doing, and in another case we are changing a diaper, which brings
into existence, from the point of view of our joint attention, a whole dif-
ferent set of objects and activities. This enables the child, as we shall see
shortly, to create the common ground within which she may understand
the adult’s communicative intentions when the adult uses a novel piece of
language—at least partly by creating a domain of “current relevance.”
Another crucial feature of joint attentional frames is that the child under-
stands both the adult’s and her own roles in the interaction from the same
“outside” perspective—so that they are all in a common representational
format (Bruner, 1983; Tomasello, 1999).
UNDERSTANDING COMMUNICATIVE INTENTIONS
Second, 1-year-olds’ newfound ability to understand others’ communica-
tive intentions enables them to understand communicative intentions in-
side these joint attentional frames. Human infants very likely begin to un-
derstand the intentional actions of others in the last few months of their
ªrst year of life, before language begins (Gergely et al., 1995). But commu-
22
Constructing a Language
* Other terms that have been used are “joint attentional formats” (Bruner, 1981) and
“joint attentional scenes” (Tomasello, 1999).

nicative intentions are a special type of intention in which an individual in-
tends something not just toward an inert object but toward the intention
states of someone else. Consequently, when an adult addresses an utter-
ance to an infant too young to comprehend intentions, from the infant’s
point of view the adult is just making noise (for whatever reason). Infants
this young may on occasion learn to associate one of these noises with a
perceptual event in much the same way a household pet may understand
that the sound dinner heralds the arrival of food. But this is not language.
Sounds become language for young children when and only when they un-
derstand that the adult is making that sound with the intention that they
attend to something. This requires an understanding of other persons as
intentional agents who intend things toward one’s own intentional states.
To illustrate, Tomasello, Call, and Gluckman (1997) attempted to com-
municate with apes and human 2-year-olds by using communicative signs
that were totally novel for the subjects. In two of their experimental condi-
tions they indicated for subjects which of three distinct containers con-
tained a reward by (a) placing a small wooden marker on top of the cor-
rect container, or (b) holding up an exact replica of the correct container.
Before this experiment, children did not know about using markers and
replicas as communicative signs, but they nevertheless used these novel
signs very effectively to ªnd the reward. In contrast, no ape was able to do
this for either of the novel communicative signs. One explanation of these
results is that the apes were not able to understand that the human being
had intentions toward their attentional states. The apes therefore treated
the communicative attempts of the human as discriminative cues on a par
with all other types of discriminative cues that have to be laboriously
learned over repeated experiences. The children, meanwhile, treated each
communicative attempt as an expression of the adult’s intention to direct
their attention in ways relevant to their current situation.
Said another way, the children understood something of the experi-
menter’s communicative intentions. In one reasonable analysis, to under-
stand your communicative intention I must understand:
You intend for [me to share attention to [X]]
Two aspects of this formulation are especially important. First, according
to all analysts from Grice (1975) forward, the understanding of a commu-
nicative intention must have this embedded structure. Thus, if you physi-
cally push me down into a chair I will recognize your intention that I sit
down. But if you tell me “Sit down” I will recognize your intention that I
attend to your proposal that I sit down—and if I do sit down it will not be
due to physical force but rather because I have changed my intentional
Origins of Language
23

states to comply with your proposal. The understanding of a communica-
tive intention is therefore a special case of the understanding of an inten-
tion; it is the understanding of another person’s intention toward my
intentional states. Understanding this is clearly more complex than under-
standing another person’s intention simpliciter.
The other important aspect of this analysis is that it readily accommo-
dates different kinds of speech act goals on the part of the speaker and
their recognition by the listener. This is accomplished by simply substitut-
ing different things for the X in the formula. Thus, in the case of an imper-
ative such as Sit down, I understand that you intend for me to attend to
your proposal that I sit down. In the case of an indicative, referential utter-
ance such as A birdie! I understand that you intend for me to share atten-
tion with you to the bird (to attend to your already established attention
to the bird). Importantly, in the case of so-called performatives or
expressives such as Hi or Thank you, I understand that you intend for me
to attend to your expression of happiness at seeing me or your expression
of gratitude at receiving this gift. The reason performatives are important
in the current context is that most theories of language acquisition basi-
cally ignore them. But they are frequently used communicative symbols,
and they have a very similar intentional structure to expressions with a
more clearly referential component. If performatives were nothing more
than spontaneous and unreºective expressions of emotion (with referen-
tial expressions involving some extra cognitive work), there would be no
reason children could not begin using them at a much younger age than
referential words—but they do not.
Children understand adult communicative intentions, including those
expressed in linguistic utterances, most readily inside the common ground
established by joint attentional frames. Using adults to highlight the gen-
eral principles involved, suppose that an American is in a train station in
Hungary when a native speaker approaches and starts talking to her in
Hungarian. It is very unlikely that in this situation the American visitor
will understand the communicative intentions expressed in any Hungarian
word or phrase; there is no common ground or joint attentional frame.
But suppose now that the American goes to the ticket window, manned by
another Hungarian speaker, and tries to buy a ticket. In this situation it is
possible that the visitor may come to comprehend the communicative in-
tentions expressed in some Hungarian words and phrases because the two
interactants share an understanding of each other’s interactive goals in
terms of gaining information about train schedules, obtaining a ticket, ex-
changing money, and so forth—goals expressed directly through the exe-
cution of meaningful and already understood actions such as the actual
exchanging of ticket and money.
24
Constructing a Language

The key for language understanding in such a situation would be for the
native speaker to use some novel word or phrase in a context that sug-
gested his reason for making that utterance at that time—for example,
while reaching for the bills in the visitor’s hand or while offering her the
ticket or some change. In such cases the learner makes an inference of the
type: If the speaker is using that unknown expression with communicative
intention X, then it is relevant to his goal in the current joint attentional
frame as I already know it (Sperber and Wilson, 1986; Nelson, 1996).
Note that the establishment of a joint attentional frame between child and
adult requires the child to read the adult’s simple intentions in the general
situation (and the adult the child’s), whereas identifying the referential
event symbolized in an utterance or some part of an utterance requires the
child to read adult communicative intentions within that frame. The rela-
tionship between the joint attentional frame and the referential event (as
one aspect of communicative intentions)—as well as the overall perceptual
scene the child is experiencing—is depicted in Figure 2.1.
The general picture is thus that at around 9–12 months of age human
infants begin to understand others as intentional agents like the self, which
enables them to understand adult intentions on speciªc occasions in two
especially important ways. First, infants begin to monitor the intentional
states of other persons toward outside objects and so to engage with them
in all kinds of joint attentional activities, including relatively extended
periods of joint engagement—joint attentional frames—which serve to
“scaffold” children’s attention and learning. These joint attentional
frames create a common intersubjective ground within which children and
adults may understand one another’s communicative attempts and their
current relevance. Second, infants begin to monitor the intentional states
of adults toward themselves and their own intentional/attentional states
and so to understand the unique structure of communicative intentions.
Understanding communicative intentions seems to happen most readily
for young children within the conªnes of joint attentional frames. This
dual-level structure—the establishment of joint attentional frames and the
expression of communicative intentions within them—is crucial not only
to basic symbol learning, but also to children’s pragmatic skills in using
language appropriately in different communicative contexts; for example,
in children’s pragmatic grounding of their own utterances in the current
speech situation as deªned by the listener’s current knowledge and atten-
tion, as will be documented below and in Chapter 6.
ROLE REVERSAL IMITATION
Third and ªnally, understanding others as intentional agents enables some
new and species-unique forms of social learning known as cultural learn-
Origins of Language
25

ing, which underlie children’s ability to become producers of language on
their own (Tomasello, Kruger, and Ratner, 1993). Children who under-
stand that other persons have intentional relations to the world, similar to
their own, may attend especially carefully to the behavioral means that
these persons have devised for meeting their goals, and so may imitate
their intentional actions. That is, whereas in early infancy there is some
face-to-face dyadic mimicking of behaviors (Meltzoff and Moore, 1977),
at 9 months of age infants begin to reproduce triadically adults’ novel in-
tentional actions on outside objects. This of course opens up the possibil-
ity of acquiring the conventional use of tools and other artifacts that pre-
suppose or “point” to outside entities, including symbolic artifacts such as
linguistic symbols.
Two recent studies have tested directly what infants understand about
others’ intentional actions in the context of imitative learning. In the ªrst,
Meltzoff (1995) presented 18-month-olds with two types of demonstra-
tion. Infants in one group saw the adult perform actions on objects. In-
fants in the other group saw the adult try but fail to achieve the end result
of some target action; for example, the adult tried to pull two parts of an
object apart but never succeeded in separating them. Infants in this second
group thus never saw the target actions actually performed. Meltzoff
found that infants in both groups reproduced the target actions equally
26
Constructing a Language
Figure 2.1. The basic adult-child communicative situation: (a) the perceptual
situation (not relevant to utterance); (b) the joint attentional frame (immedi-
ate relevance); and (c) the event being referred to linguistically.
(b) Joint attentional frame
(c) Ref. event
(a) Perceptual situation

well, that is, they appeared to understand what the adult intended to do
and performed that action instead of just mimicking the adult’s actual be-
havior. In the second study, Carpenter, Akhtar, and Tomasello (1998a) in-
vestigated infants’ imitation of accidental versus intentional actions. They
had 16-month-olds watch an adult perform some two-action sequences on
objects that made interesting results occur. One action of the modeled se-
quences was marked vocally as intentional (“There!”), and one action was
marked vocally as accidental (“Woops!”). Infants were then given a
chance to make the result occur themselves, and what they mainly did was
to reproduce the adult’s intentional actions but not the accidental ones.
From soon after their ªrst birthdays, then, infants cannot help perceiving
Daddy as “trying to clean the table” or “trying to open the drawer”—not
simply as making speciªc bodily motions or producing salient changes of
state in the environment—and these intentional actions are what they at-
tempt to reproduce.
Importantly, in learning to produce an act of symbolic communication,
the process of imitative learning is similar to, but somewhat different
from, the imitative learning of these straightforward intentional actions.
For example, if the child sees an adult operate a novel toy in a particular
way and then imitatively learns to do the same thing, there is a parallel in
the way the adult and child treat the toy—the child just substitutes herself
for the adult. However, when an adult addresses the child with a novel
communicative symbol intending to refer her attention to that toy, and the
child wants to imitatively learn this communicative behavior, the situation
changes. The reason is that in expressing communicative intentions in a
linguistic symbol, the adult expresses her intentions toward the child’s
attentional state. Consequently, if the child simply substitutes herself for
the adult she will end up directing the symbol to herself—which is not
what is needed. To learn to use a communicative symbol in a convention-
ally appropriate manner, the child must engage in role reversal imitation:
she must learn to use a symbol toward the adult in the same way the adult
used it toward her. This is clearly a process of imitative learning in which
the child aligns herself with the adult in terms of both the goal and the
means for attaining that goal; it is just that in this case the child must not
only substitute herself for the adult as actor (which occurs in all types of
cultural learning) but also substitute the adult for herself as the target of
the intentional act (that is, she must substitute the adult’s attentional state
as goal for her own attentional state as goal).
The result of this process of role reversal imitation is a linguistic symbol:
a communicative device understood intersubjectively from both sides of
the interaction. That is to say, this learning process ensures that the child
Origins of Language
27

understands that she has acquired a symbol that is socially “shared” in the
sense that she can assume in most circumstances that the listener both
comprehends and can produce that same symbol—and the listener also
knows that they can both comprehend and produce the symbol (see Fig-
ure 2.2). This contrasts with the process of understanding communicative
signals—for example, by nonhuman primates and presymbolic human in-
fants—in which each participant understands its own role as sender or re-
ceiver only, from its own inside perspective. It is interesting to note that
the intersubjectivity inherent in socially shared symbols, but not in one-
way signals, sets up all kinds of pragmatic “implicatures” of the type in-
vestigated by Grice (1975) concerning expectations that other persons will
use the conventional means of expression—that we both know they
know—and not others that are more cumbersome or indirect.
The main thing to note in Figure 2.2 is the contrast between an asso-
ciationistic account in which sounds are connected to objects (or concepts)
in a direct, dyadic way and a social-pragmatic account in which the rela-
tionship is triadic and therefore not one of association but of inten-
tionality (signiªer-signiªed). Using linguistic symbols in utterances is a
social act, and when this act is internalized in Vygotskian fashion the
product is a unique kind of cognitive representation that is not only
intersubjective (involving both self and other), but also perspectival in the
sense that the child understands that the same referent could have been in-
dicated in some other way—the speaker could have chosen another lin-
guistic symbol to indicate a different aspect of this entity (Tomasello,
1999).
2.2.3. Early Skills of Pattern-Finding
In addition to these precursors for children’s understanding of the sym-
bolic dimensions of linguistic communication, prelinguistic infants dem-
onstrate some of the prerequisite skills necessary for an understanding of
the grammatical dimensions of linguistic communication. If we deªne
these prerequisites as a pattern-ªnding skill (categorization, broadly
deªned), it has long been recognized that human infants are experts from
early in development in ªnding visual patterns (see Haith and Benson,
1997, for a review). But some more recent ªndings have extended this to
the auditory domain, and in some surprising ways.
It has recently been discovered that prelinguistic infants are able to ªnd
patterns in sequentially presented auditory stimuli with amazing facility.
Saffran, Aslin, and Newport (1996) exposed 8-month-olds to two minutes
of synthesized speech consisting of four tri-syllabic nonsense “words.” For
28
Constructing a Language

example, infants would hear bidakupadotigolabubidakutupiropadoti . . .
They were then exposed to two new streams of synthesized speech simul-
taneously (one presented to the left and one to the right) to see which they
preferred to listen to (as indicated by the direction they turned their head).
One of these streams contained “words” from the original (such as tupiro
and golabu), whereas the other contained the same syllables but in a dif-
ferent order (so that there were no “words” from the original). Infants
preferred to look toward the speech stream containing the “words” they
had originally heard. The only cue in this experiment indicating “words”
was that in the original and in one test stream the constituent syllables al-
ways occurred together (that is, the transition probabilities were equal to
1.0), whereas in the other test stream syllables occurred together ran-
domly (that is, they never occurred together in the original; transition
Origins of Language
29
Figure 2.2. Structure of a linguistic symbol. Each person can use it to intend (thick
lines) that the partner follow her attention (thin lines) to some external entity,
that is, to share attention to it.

probabilities were equal to 0). There were no other cues such as intonation
or pauses or the like to indicate “word” boundaries.
Subsequent studies have shown that infants can ªnd patterns even when
the syllables from the original speech stream and the test speech stream are
not the same. Marcus et al. (1999) found that 7-month-olds exposed re-
peatedly over a three-minute period to tri-syllabic nonsense “words” with
the pattern ABB (such as wididi, delili) preferred in subsequent testing to
look toward the speech stream containing other “words” having this same
ABB pattern even though the speciªc syllables involved were totally new
(such as bapopo). Gomez and Gerken (1999) found very similar results
with 12-month-olds. These results indicate that prelinguistic infants are
able to ªnd patterns in auditory stimuli of an abstract nature, which
would seem to be a necessary (although not sufªcient) skill in the learning
of abstract grammatical patterns in linguistic stimuli.
Two other sets of studies help to place these results into perspective.
First, infants can ªnd patterns of this same type in nonlinguistic tone se-
quences and even in visually presented sequences (Saffran et al., 1999;
Kirkham, Slemmer, and Johnson, 2002). These pattern-ªnding skills are
thus not speciªcally linguistic. Second, when nonhuman primates (spe-
ciªcally, tamarin monkeys) are tested in these same procedures, they show
these same abilities (Ramus et al., 2000; Newport, Aslin, and Hauser,
2001; Hauser, Weiss, and Marcus, in press). These pattern-ªnding skills
are thus not uniquely human, and so probably express very deep-seated
skills of primate vocal-auditory processing. So it is important to remember
that 7- and 8-month-old infants who are ªnding all of these patterns in au-
ditory and visual stimuli in experiments do not process the grammatical
constructions of real language—consisting of meaningful symbols—in ei-
ther comprehension or production. Their pattern-ªnding skills are thus
not sufªcient by themselves for dealing with real grammatical construc-
tions used for communication—because the infants do not comprehend
the symbolic dimension of those constructions.
And so, what we have is an amazing set of necessary cognitive skills—
namely, the statistical learning of concrete and abstract auditory pat-
terns—that are ready to be put to use in constructing the grammatical di-
mensions of language, once children’s ability to understand linguistic sym-
bols comes on-line in the months surrounding their ªrst birthdays. And
interestingly, once language acquisition begins in earnest children use their
pattern-ªnding skills on the functional (or meaning) side of things as well.
That is, to learn the conventional use of a particular word the child not
only must discern across instances that it is the same phonological form
(the easiest, limiting case of pattern-ªnding) but also must see patterns in
30
Constructing a Language

the way adults use a particular form communicatively across different us-
age events. This functional pattern-ªnding ranges from seeing similarities
in the different referents to which a word like ball might be applied to see-
ing similarities in the different relationships indicated by the many differ-
ent uses of the word for.
2.3. Children’s First Utterances
Intention-reading, broadly construed, is thus the foundational social-
cognitive skill underlying children’s comprehension of the symbolic di-
mensions of linguistic communication. Children begin to understand the
linguistic symbols produced by adults when they are able to participate
with adults in joint attentional frames and then, within that common
ground, to understand their speciªc communicative intentions as ex-
pressed in an utterance. The ability to coordinate this intention-reading
with social learning skills (creating cultural learning skills, including role
reversal imitation) enables children to begin to acquire for themselves con-
ventional linguistic symbols and a number of symbolically constituted ges-
tures as well. With their skills in ªnding both concrete and abstract pat-
terns in auditory sequences, once children have begun to acquire linguistic
symbols they are also ready to begin relatively quickly to acquire more
complex and abstract linguistic constructions. The motivational bases for
all of this would seem to be speciªc to uniquely human social and cultural
activities; in particular, the motivation would seem to emanate from (1) a
desire to communicate with other persons, and (2) a desire to be like other
persons (that is, to imitate them).
Children’s ªrst active uses of linguistic symbols take place within the
common ground of joint attentional frames, and include both gestural and
linguistic means. Most 1-year-olds produce a number of different kinds of
gestures as well as some conventional linguistic symbols, and these two
forms of communication are often coordinated in single utterances.
Children of this age produce their gestural and linguistic utterances for
both imperative motives, to get the adult to do something with respect to
an object or event, and declarative motives, to get adults simply to share
attention with them to some external event or entity (Bates, Camaioni,
and Volterra, 1975). They also begin to make attempts to learn different
kinds of symbols for expressing both aspects of their communicative in-
tention that are already shared with their listener in the joint attentional
frame (such as pronouns, demonstratives, some pointing) and aspects of
their communicative intention that concern things outside that frame,
which must be more speciªcally indicated (for example, with nouns and
verbs).
Origins of Language
31

2.3.1. Early Gestures
Human infants produce three main types of gesture: ritualizations, deictic
gestures, and symbolic gestures. The ªrst of these is not symbolic, the third
is symbolic, and the second may or may not be. The fact that gestures run
the gamut from non-symbolic to symbolic—and emerge along with the
ªrst linguistic skills—is strong evidence that children’s ability to communi-
cate symbolically is not tied speciªcally to language but rather emanates
from a more fundamental set of social-cognitive skills (Tomasello and
Camaioni, 1997).
Ritualizations are gestures in which the infant simply employs an effec-
tive procedure for getting something done. For example, many infants
from around the world learn to request being picked up by raising their
arms over their heads while approaching an adult. This act is not sym-
bolic, as becomes clear if we examine the learning processes involved.
Most likely, infants do not learn this gesture by imitating other infants but
rather in a more direct way (Locke, 1978). For instance, the infant ªrst at-
tempts to crawl up the adult’s body, or reaches for the adult’s arm, or
grabs at the adult’s waist; that is, she engages in an activity designed to
bring about the desired result physically. The adult understands what the
infant wants and so responds accordingly. On a future occasion, the adult
sees the infant approach and prepare for this same activity—her arms be-
gin to go up—and so responds appropriately to these very ªrst signs (the
infant’s “intention movement” in ethological terminology; Tinbergen,
1951). The infant, for her part, notices that as soon as she raises her arms
the adult springs into action, and so she learns that just the initial part of
the sequence is sufªcient to obtain the desired result. She then begins to
produce just the ªrst part of the sequence, the “arms up” (often in a styl-
ized version; Bates, 1979), in order to obtain the desired result not physi-
cally but socially and communicatively through adult assistance.
This learning process is essentially the one by which nonhuman pri-
mates learn their gestures (Tomasello, 1996). Because it does not involve
understanding communicative intentions or cultural (imitative) learning of
any sort, it does not create a shared communicative symbol. Indeed, it is
very likely that if some other very small infant were to approach our sig-
naling infant with his arms raised, our infant would not know what he
wanted. She would not know that he was using “the same” gesture as she;
she would know the gesture from the producer’s side only. Ritualized ges-
tures are thus not symbolic because the gesturer is not attempting to
inºuence the attention of the other with some mutually understood com-
municative act (toward sharing attention or any other end), but only to
32
Constructing a Language

achieve some concrete result using a behavior that originally was designed
to be physically efªcacious.
The second type of gestures is deictics, which are designed to direct
adult attention to outside entities. The prototypes are showing (as in hold-
ing up an object to the adult) and pointing. Infant pointing has not been
studied in great detail, but several important facts about how infants learn
and use pointing gestures are known.
The most important fact is that, unlike most ritualizations that only in-
volve a signaler and an interactant dyadically, pointing is generally triadic;
there is some third entity involved. But this does not automatically mean
that the infant is pointing in order to induce the adult to share attention
with her on that third entity. Indeed, for some infants pointing is just an-
other ritualization. For example, many infants use arm and index ªnger
extension to orient their own attention to things. If an adult were to re-
spond to this by attending to the same thing and then share excitement
with the infant by smiling and talking to her, then this kind of pointing
might also become ritualized—as a kind of request for increased social in-
teraction with the adult (Moore and D’Etremont, 2001). In this scenario it
would be possible for an infant to point for others while still not under-
standing the function of other persons’ pointing, and indeed a number of
empirical studies have found just such a dissociation in many infants (pro-
duction but not comprehension of pointing)—as well as the reverse disso-
ciation in which they visually follow adult pointing but do not themselves
point (comprehension but not production; Franco and Butterworth, 1996;
Carpenter, Nagell, and Tomasello, 1998). Infants who learn to point via
ritualization, therefore, understand their gesture just as their “arms up”
gesture: as a procedure for getting something done, not as an invitation to
share attention using a mutually understood communicative symbol.
The alternative is that the infant sees an adult pointing for her and com-
prehends that the adult is attempting to induce her to share attention to
something, and then imitatively learns that when she has the same goal she
can use the same means, with roles reversed, thus creating an inter-
subjective symbolic act for sharing attention. It is crucial that in this learn-
ing process the infant is not just mimicking adults’ sticking out their
ªngers; she is truly understanding and attempting to reproduce the adult’s
intentionally communicative act, including both means and end. It is cru-
cial because a bi-directional symbol can only be created when the child
ªrst understands the intentions behind the adult’s communicative act, and
then identiªes with those intentions herself as she produces the “same”
means for the “same” end.
Empirically we do not know whether infants learn to point via ritualiza-
Origins of Language
33

tion or imitative learning or whether some infants learn in one way (espe-
cially prior to their ªrst birthdays) and some learn in the other. And it may
even happen that an infant who learns to point via ritualization later co-
mes to comprehend adult pointing in a new way, and so comes to a new
understanding of her own pointing and its equivalence to the adult version
(Franco and Butterworth, 1996). Interestingly, Petitto (1988) has docu-
mented an important difference between the “natural” gestures of deaf
children and their truly linguistic signs in American Sign Language (ASL).
Most deaf children learn to point “naturally,” but they also learn to point
in ASL as symbols in this linguistic system (for example, for me and you).
Deaf children differentiate these two types of pointing in several ways
right from the beginning; for example, they sometimes make reversal er-
rors with me and you as ASL symbols. These children thus seem to learn
both an indexical or deictic form of pointing, as other children do, and
also a symbolic form of pointing for ASL—most likely learned imitatively
from observation of others using the ASL pointing symbol.
It is also of crucial theoretical signiªcance that human infants point for
others not just for imperative motives—to get help with something—but
also for declarative motives such as simply wishing to share attention with
them. Declarative pointing (and showing) may thus be the purest expres-
sion of the uniquely human social-cognitive motivation to share attention
with others. Indeed, the lack of declarative pointing in the second year of
life is a key diagnostic criterion for children with autism (Baron-Cohen,
1995).
The third kind of infant gestures is symbolic (sometimes called referen-
tial) gestures (Acredolo and Goodwyn, 1988; Pizzuto and Volterra, 2000).
These are communicative acts that are associated with a referent either
metonymically or iconically. Examples include such things as snifªng for a
ºower, panting for a dog, holding arms out for an airplane, raising arms
for big things, and blowing for hot things. It is possible that some of these
may be acquired via ritualization—the child performs a behavior sponta-
neously and the adult reacts in some positive way—but it is much more
likely that in most cases infants are learning these symbolic gestures via
imitation. That is, they are learning exactly as some infants learn to point
symbolically via imitative learning or use linguistic symbols: by ªrst un-
derstanding an adult’s communicative intention in using the gesture and
then engaging in role reversal imitation to use the gesture herself when she
has “the same” communicative intention.
One interesting question concerning symbolic gestures is the role of
iconicity. When the child holds out her arms like an airplane or pants like
a dog, is she mimicking some aspect of the physical or behavioral proper-
34
Constructing a Language

ties of the object, or has she just learned from an adult a gesture that is as
arbitrarily related to its referent as a linguistic symbol? There is not so
much research relevant to this question, but it seems likely that the
iconicity in such cases is in the eyes of the adult only and plays very little
role in acquisition. Evidence for this interpretation is: (1) in the earliest
stages, deaf children learning sign language are not helped by the iconicity
of many sign language signs (Bonvillian, Garber, and Dell, 1997); (2) early
in the second year, human infants can learn arbitrary gestures used
referentially (like human object names) as easily as they learn words
(Namy and Waxman, 1998); and (3) in experiments, 18-month-olds are
unable to use iconicity to understand an adult’s speciªc communicative in-
tention (Tomasello, Striano, and Rochat, 1999). Symbolic gestures are
thus very likely the same as spoken symbols in being learned via imitation
of adults and in being only conventionally connected to their intended
referents.
Thus, although human infants vocalize and babble from soon after
birth, it is gestures that for many children seem to be the ªrst carriers of
their communicative intentions. And it is gestures that seem to pave the
way to early language—at least from a functional point of view. In a study
of the emergence of language in 12 Italian-speaking children, Iverson,
Capirci, and Caselli (1994) found that virtually all the infants gestured fre-
quently with adults, and that the function of children’s gestures changed—
from the primary carriers of communicative intent to a more supplemen-
tary function—as they began to acquire some conventional linguistic sym-
bols (see also Marcos, 1991). Interestingly, in a comprehension experi-
ment, Morford and Goldin-Meadow (1992) found that 1- and 2-year-old
children could understand gestures in combination with speech, both
when they were referentially redundant and when the gesture provided
unique information (see also Golinkoff, 1983, on the interaction of speech
and gesture in the early “negotiation of meaning” between infant and
adult). Similarly, Harris, Barlow-Brown, and Chasin (1995) found a very
strong correlation between children’s tendency to point and their tendency
to use object names. The research of Goodwyn and Acredolo (1993) also
provides support for this position, as they found strong correlations be-
tween children’s use of symbolic gestures before language and their early
linguistic skills.
The importance and robustness of gesture as a communicative device
are evidenced by the fact that even young blind children gesture while
communicating (Iverson and Goldin-Meadow, 1998). And of course ges-
ture remains a crucial aspect of human communication throughout child-
hood and even into adulthood (McNeill, 1992; Goldin-Meadow, 1997).
Origins of Language
35

From this point of view, the existence of fully grammaticized sign lan-
guages and their ready acquisition by deaf children is not surprising. With
respect to very early language in particular, it is interesting that deaf chil-
dren acquiring a signed language do so on the same general timetable as
hearing children learning a vocal language—thus demonstrating some-
thing of the robustness of the symbolic dimensions of human linguistic
competence.
2.3.2. Early Holophrases
Most Western middle-class children begin producing conventional linguis-
tic symbols in utterances in the months following their ªrst birthdays. By
the time they begin doing this, they typically have been communicating
with other people gesturally and vocally for some months. Children’s ªrst
linguistic expressions are learned and used in the context of these prior
forms of nonlinguistic communication and for the same basic motives—
declarative and imperative—and children soon learn to ask things inter-
rogatively as well. There is typically a distinctive intonational pattern for
each of these three types of speech act (declarative, imperative, interroga-
tive). Children’s ªrst declarative utterances are sometimes about shared,
topical referents and sometimes aimed at focusing the listener’s attention
on something new (typically assessed only from their own egocentric point
of view; Greenªeld and Smith, 1976).
At this early age the communicative functions of children’s single-word
utterances are an integral aspect of their reality for the child, and initially
these functions (for example, imperative or interrogative) may not be well
differentiated from the more referential aspects of the utterance (Ninio,
1992, 1993). That is to say, children’s early one-word utterances may be
thought of as “holophrases” that convey a holistic, undifferentiated com-
municative intention, most often the same communicative intention as
that of the adult expressions from which they were learned (Barrett, 1982;
Ninio, 1992). Many of children’s early holophrases are relatively idiosyn-
cratic, and their uses can change and evolve over time in a somewhat un-
stable manner. For example, Tomasello (1992a) reported the following
holophrases for his daughter early in her language development:
• Rockin: First used while rocking in the rocking chair, then as a re-
quest to do so, and then as a name for the object.
• Phone: First used in response to hearing the telephone ring, then as
she “talked” on the phone, then to point at and name the phone, and
then when she wanted someone to pick her up so she could talk on
the wall-phone (pointing to it).
36
Constructing a Language

• Play-play: First used as an accompaniment to her “playing” the pi-
ano, then to name the piano.
• Towel: First used as an accompaniment to her using a towel to clean
up a spill, then to name the towel.
• Steps: First used as an accompaniment to her climbing or descending
stairs (never to name the object).
• Bath: First used as an accompaniment to preparations for bath, then
as she bathed her baby doll (never to name the object).
• Game: First used for others and then for herself playing with a base-
ball and baseball glove (never to name objects).
• Make: First used in block play to request that a structure be built,
usually so that she could knock it down (and make a “mess”).
• Mess: First used for the result of knocking down blocks, then when
she wanted to knock them down.
In addition, however, some of children’s holophrases are a bit more con-
ventional and stable. Children speaking all the languages of the world of-
ten talk about such salient scenes of experience as the existence-nonexis-
tence-recurrence of people and objects, the exchange-possession of
objects, the movement-location of people and objects, various states and
changes of states of objects, and the physical and mental activities of peo-
ple (Brown, 1973). Thus, combining basic speech act motives and salient
scenes of experience, young children of linguistic communities from
around the world tend to use their earliest productive language to do such
things as:
• request or indicate the existence of objects (for example, by naming
them with a requestive or neutral intonation);
• request or describe the recurrence of objects or events (more, again,
another);
• request or describe dynamic events involving objects (as described by
up, down, on, off, in, out, open, close);
• request or describe the actions of people (eat, kick, ride, draw);
• comment on the location of objects and people (here, outside);
• ask some basic questions (Whats-that? Where-go?);
• attribute a property to an object (pretty, wet); and
• use performatives to mark speciªc social events and situations (hi,
bye, thank you, no).
An important issue for later language development is what parts of
adult expressions children choose for their initial holophrases. The answer
presumably lies in the speciªc language they are learning and the kinds of
discourse in which they participate with adults, including the perceptual
Origins of Language
37

salience of particular words and phrases in adults’ speech (Slobin, 1985a).
In English, most beginning language learners acquire a number of so-
called relational words such as more, gone, up, down, on, and off, pre-
sumably because adults use these words in salient ways to talk about sa-
lient events (Bloom, Tinker, and Margulis, 1993; McCune, 1992). Many
of these words are verb particles in adult English, and so the child at some
point must learn to talk about the same events with phrasal verbs such as
pick up, get down, put on, and take off. In Korean and Mandarin Chinese,
in contrast, children learn fully adult verbs from the onset of language de-
velopment because these verbs are most salient in adult speech to them
(parallel to an English verb like remove for clothing; Choi and Gopnik,
1996; Gopnik and Choi, 1995; Tardif, 1996). When they begin with an
adult verb as a holophrase, children must then at some point learn, at least
for some discourse purposes, to ªll in linguistically the nominal partici-
pants involved in the scene (as in Remove shirt!). Children in all languages
also learn object labels for some events, such as Bike! as a request to ride a
bicycle or Birdie as a comment on a passing ºight, which means that they
still need to learn to linguistically express the activity involved (Ride bike!
or See birdie). The point is that children may begin talking about different
scenes in different ways initially, and these ontogenetic starting points
frame the subsequent task in particular ways.
In addition, most children begin language acquisition by learning some
unparsed adult expressions as holophrases—such expressions as I-wanna-
do-it, Lemme-see, and Where-the-bottle. The prevalence of this pattern in
the early combinatorial speech of English-speaking children has been doc-
umented by Pine and Lieven (1993), who found that almost all children
have at least some of these so-called frozen phrases in their early speech.
This is especially true of some children, especially later-born children who
observe siblings (Barton and Tomasello, 1994; Bates, Bretherton, and
Snyder, 1988). In these cases there is different syntactic work to do if the
child is to extract productive linguistic elements that can be used appropri-
ately in other utterances, in other linguistic contexts, in the future. For this
the child must engage in a process of segmentation, with regard not only
to the speech stream but also to the communicative intentions involved—
so as to determine which components of the speech stream go with which
components of the underlying communicative intention.
As a nonlinguistic example, we may imagine that a child sees an adult
use a stapler and understands that his goal is to staple together two pieces
of paper. In some cases, the child may understand also that the sub-goal/
function of placing the papers inside the stapler’s jaws is to align them
with the stapling mechanism inside the stapler, and that the sub-goal/
function of pressing down on the stapler is to eject the staple through the
38
Constructing a Language

two papers—with both of these sub-functions being in the service of the
overall goal of attaching the two sheets of paper. The child does not need
to understand all of this to mimic an adult stapling papers with the same
stapler over and over again (an analogy: the child can say There-ya-go
over and over again without understanding its internal constituents). But
to the extent that the child does not understand these sub-functions, she
will be lost when she encounters a new stapler in which the sub-functions
are effected by a different means, for example, one whose stapling mecha-
nism does not require pressing down but rather squeezing. Extracting a
functionally coherent unit from an intentional action sequence—whether
in action or language—means identifying sub-functions (sub-goals) in
some larger whole.
This segmenting of (communicative) intentions is used by English-
speaking children to learn some kinds of linguistic elements (for example,
extracting unstressed prepositions such as of from such phrases as piece-
of-ice and scared-of-that; Tomasello, 1987), but in languages that are less
isolating than English (for example, polysynthetic languages such as many
Eskimo languages) the whole-to-parts pattern of acquisition, requiring the
segmenting of communicative intentions to extract meaningful elements,
is the normal case. For example, in Inuktitut many early utterances are
word-sentences such as Taartaulirtunga, meaning “Something is in my
way,” or Tuqutaulangasivungaa! meaning “I’m going to get killed!” (Al-
len, 1996)—which obviously require some segmenting to extract the pro-
ductive elements involved. In any event, the general principle is that young
children come equipped to move in either direction—part to whole or
whole to parts—in learning to linguistically partition experiential scenes
and indicate their constituents with different linguistic elements in multi-
unit expressions and constructions. All children probably use both pro-
cesses to some extent in different aspects of language acquisition.
Thus, from soon after their ªrst birthdays infants learn to communicate
symbolically about the important scenes in their lives using conventional
linguistic expressions. Most often their utterances reºect salient compo-
nents of fully formed utterances that adults use in those scenes. Func-
tionally speaking, children’s early one-unit utterances are entire semantic-
pragmatic packages—holophrastic expressions—that express a single rela-
tively coherent, yet undifferentiated, communicative intention. Why chil-
dren begin with only one-unit expressions—either individual words or ho-
listic expressions—is not known at this time. But it is presumably the case
that in many instances they initially only attend to limited parts of adult
utterances, or can only process one linguistic unit at a time. The degree to
which children productively control communicative functions as ex-
pressed by intonations separately from linguistic forms—so that they can
Origins of Language
39

hear an expression used for one function with one intonation but use it
themselves creatively for another function with another intonation—is
also unknown. However, there is some evidence from a single diary study
that children’s earliest holophrases are mostly tied to a single intonational
contour for some months (Galligan, 1987), providing further evidence for
their undifferentiated nature.
Many accounts of early language development describe the process as
one in which children ªrst acquire words and then combine them, perhaps
via rules, into sentences. This is basically a structural point of view, and it
is aimed at languages like English, which are very isolating, not at lan-
guages like Inuktitut. From a more functional point of view, children are
hearing and producing whole utterances, and their task is to break down
an utterance into its constituent parts and so to understand what func-
tional role is being played by each of those parts in the utterance as a
whole. When they produce holophrases, children have simply assigned the
function of the utterance to a single linguistic unit (perhaps with an associ-
ated intonation contour), and so in the future they will have to attend to
other linguistic units in similar utterances and in this way ªll out their lin-
guistic expression to ªt the adult-like conventions.
2.4. Summary
Adopting the usage-based perspective from the ªrst chapter, I have pro-
posed in this chapter some speciªc hypotheses about the phylogenetic and
ontogenetic origins of language. First, the symbolic dimensions of lan-
guage derive from a uniquely human biological adaptation for things cul-
tural. This adaptation may be characterized as the ability to understand
that other persons have intentional and mental states like one’s own—
which leads, quite naturally, to a desire to manipulate those intentional
and mental states via social conventions. Second, the grammatical dimen-
sions of language derive from people’s uses of linguistic symbols in pat-
terned ways for purposes of interpersonal communication, as these are
played out repeatedly over historical time. In the evolution of human lan-
guages, various kinds of primate-wide pattern-ªnding and categorization
skills—in combination with such things as pragmatic inferencing and au-
tomatization—worked over historical time in processes of grammati-
calization and syntacticization to create in different linguistic communities
a variety of different types of grammatical constructions. There was no bi-
ological adaptation for grammar.
The evolutionary adaptation for understanding others as intentional
agents like the self becomes manifest in human ontogeny today at around
40
Constructing a Language

9–12 months of age. It enables human infants to engage with other per-
sons in a variety of new ways, and it enables them for the ªrst time to un-
derstand the communicative intentions of other persons as embodied in
acts of symbolic communication, that is, in utterances. More speciªcally,
at around their ªrst birthdays infants become able to:
• establish with adults various joint attentional frames that create a
common intersubjective ground for communication;
• within these frames, understand communicative intentions as they are
expressed in utterances; and
• engage in role reversal imitation to acquire symbolic conventions ªrst
used toward them in these frames.
Language emerges in human children in the months following the ªrst
birthday—and not before—because this is when these fundamental skills
of intention-reading are solidly in place.
Children’s ªrst symbolic productions are various kinds of gestures and
linguistic holophrases and expressions that are often coordinated with one
another in the same utterance. Children’s gestures come in different forms
—ritualizations, deictics, and symbolic gestures—which reºect rather di-
rectly the intention-reading and social learning processes involved. The ex-
istence of symbolic gestures, sometimes prior to linguistic communication,
demonstrates that human symbolic capacities are not conªned only to lan-
guage. But linguistic symbols, which are perspectival in a way that sym-
bolic gestures are not, go beyond symbolic gestures in requiring especially
sophisticated skills of intention-reading and perspective-taking.
In learning a language children could in principle memorize utterances
in the contexts in which adults use them, and then reproduce those utter-
ances in those contexts as needed—without internal analysis. They do this
in some cases (Hello, Thank-you, See-ya-later). But most often they at-
tempt to analyze the utterances they hear and partition them into constitu-
ents both structurally and functionally. That is, they use their already ex-
isting skills of categorization and statistical learning on the utterances they
experience to begin moving down the road of grammatical development.
In this process children do two things simultaneously. First, they extract
from utterances and expressions such small things as words, morphemes,
and phrases by identifying the communicative job these elements are do-
ing in the utterance or expression as a whole. Second, they see patterns
across utterances, or parts of utterances, with “similar” structure and
function, which enables them to create more or less abstract categories
and constructions. These are the two faces of grammar: smaller elements
and larger patterns. In producing utterances, children may then use their
Origins of Language
41

constructional patterns as templates within which they insert previously
extracted words, morphemes, and phrases—often within functional re-
strictions—to produce creative and yet conventional utterances. The main
point—to presage a coming theme—is thus that learning words and learn-
ing grammar are really all a part of the same developmental process.
42
Constructing a Language

Constructing a Language
Words
T H R E E
Words
The question “What is a word really?” is analogous to
“What is a piece in chess?”
—LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN
WORD LEARNING is often characterized as a
kind of mini–linguistics lesson, similar to vocabulary lessons in a foreign
language classroom, in which adults point to and name objects for chil-
dren. In this pointing-and-naming game, the process seems relatively sim-
ple. The child only has to associate the word she is currently hearing with
the thing she is currently seeing. Another popular metaphor is that chil-
dren “map” words onto things (or perhaps concepts of things).
Unfortunately, this game is not representative of the vast majority of
word-learning situations that children encounter in their daily lives. First,
adults in many cultures do not stop what they are doing to name things
for children at all. These children experience basically all words in the on-
going ºow of social interaction and discourse in which adults produce
many different types of words in many different types of utterances—
virtually none of which present new words isolated from other words
while at the same time the adult is explicitly designating some entity with
pointing or some other gesture. Second, even the most pedagogically con-
scious Western middle-class parents seldom play the pointing-and-naming
game with words other than object labels; parents do not say to their chil-
dren “Look! Giving” or “Look! Of.” This means that the child must learn
many, perhaps most, words from more complex interactive situations in
which determining the adult’s intended referent for some novel word is
much less straightforward. Third, even in the pointing-and-naming game,
things are not as simple as they ªrst appear. When someone holds up a toy
car and names it for a child, how is the child to know whether the adult is
saying something like car or toy or Volkswagen? Or even worse, how is

the child to know that the adult is naming the object at all—as opposed to
designating one of its parts or properties, or its owner or some action it is
about to engage in?
Despite these difªculties, children around the world learn new words on
a daily basis—several per day once the process really gets started. This is
the miracle of word learning. Some theorists believe that the feat is so mi-
raculous that children could not accomplish it without some special help,
in the form of some special word learning constraints or principles that
they bring to the word learning process. Another view—and the one that
will be adopted here—is that children’s skills of joint attention, intention
reading, and cultural learning, as explicated in the previous chapter, pro-
vide them with the “special help” they need. At the beginning, children use
these skills almost exclusively to determine the adult’s communicative in-
tentions in using a novel word in a particular context. But as they learn
more and more language—both other words and some grammatical con-
structions—they are able to use their understanding of this known lan-
guage to help them to determine the communicative intentions behind
much of the new language they hear.
I thus adopt in this chapter the so-called social-pragmatic theory of
word learning, in which children’s ability to read the intentions and com-
municative intentions of other persons is central. Other factors are inte-
gral to the process as well: the ability to segment speech and the ability to
conceptualize entities, to name just two important prerequisites. And lin-
guistic factors also contribute importantly as well, and may even in some
cases be necessary, to the learning process—especially for words that are
deªned mainly in contrast to other words (lend as opposed to give) and for
words that typically take much of their meaning from the surrounding lin-
guistic context (get, of). But the current proposal is that the glue that holds
all of these factors together is always the child’s attempts to understand
the communicative intentions of other persons as she interacts with them
socially and linguistically.
3.1. Early Words and Their Uses
The vast majority of research on children’s word learning has focused on
content words such as nouns and verbs (and sometimes adjectives), with
so-called function words typically being studied under the aegis of gram-
mar and being basically ignored in theories of word learning. But the fact
that children manage to master the form and function of so many different
kinds of words—that do so many different kinds of communicative jobs—
is, or should be, crucially important for theories of word learning (see
Wittgenstein’s, 1955, analogy between a linguistic vocabulary and a tool-
44
Constructing a Language

box containing everything from hammers and saws to pencils and rulers).
In the account of word learning presented here I will, following tradition,
focus on the acquisition of content words (open-class words such as nouns
and verbs), but will also attempt to place these in the context of the wider
range of lexical items that young children acquire—many of which will be
further discussed, also following tradition, in later chapters concerned
with grammatical issues (for example, closed-class words such as articles,
modal auxiliaries, and pronouns in Chapter 6). A complete theory of
word learning should account for children’s acquisition of all these word
types, ideally within the framework of a single, coherent set of learning
and cognitive processes.
3.1.1. First Words
The ªrst words that children learn and use include exemplars from almost
all of the major parts of speech from adult language: proper nouns, com-
mon nouns, pronouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, prepositions, and so
forth. The main exceptions to this are some minor parts of speech that are
low in salience both phonologically and semantically, such as articles, con-
junctions, and auxiliary verbs. But virtually no one believes that adult
part-of-speech categories are relevant to children just beginning to learn
language; children are simply learning a collection of individual communi-
cative conventions for regulating their social interactions with adults.
Some investigators have therefore grouped children’s early words into cat-
egories that seem more relevant for them, but even in this case without
proposing that these categories are real for young children. The best-
known scheme is Nelson’s (1973; see Gopnik, 1988, for a similar group-
ing), which includes:
• General nominals: apple, shoe.
• Speciªc nominals: Sarah, Mommy.
• Action words: throw, dance.
• Personal-social words: bye-bye, thank you.
• Modiªers: cold, wet.
• Functors: of, and.
It nevertheless turns out that across many of the world’s languages chil-
dren initially seem to learn adult nouns more readily than adult verbs and
other types of words, as ªrst documented by Gentner (1982). This is a
striking ªnding because across different languages nouns, verbs, and other
words are used in very different ways. Thus, some languages would seem
to be more noun-friendly because all clauses must have nominals (ensur-
ing the relative high frequency of nouns), and nouns are often especially
Words
45

salient in the speech stream (they occur in utterance-ªnal position, with
stress, etc.). Other languages would seem to be more verb-friendly since
many clauses consist of verbs only with no nominals (for example, when
Chinese speakers indicate an ongoing event such as a boy kissing a girl,
they quite often say only the equivalent of Kiss), and verbs are often more
salient than nouns in the speech stream. Most critically, in basically all
languages individual verbs—and many other relational words and func-
tion words—occur with higher token frequency in the language children
hear than do nouns (since many relations and actions such as coming and
going recur in the child’s experience regularly, across many different situa-
tions, whereas particular objects such as ducks and ºowers are mostly ex-
perienced irregularly). Nevertheless, children quite often, if not always,
learn more nouns early in development than other types of words.
The claim that the so-called noun bias is universal has not gone unchal-
lenged, however. A number of researchers have claimed that the hypothe-
sis does not hold for particular languages, for example, Korean (Choi and
Gopnik, 1995), Chinese (Tardif, 1996), and Tzotzill (de León, 2000).
These are all very verb-friendly languages, and when spontaneous speech
samples are taken the children quite often use more verbs than nouns early
in development. The problem is that because children use each of their
verbs more frequently than they use each of their nouns, spontaneous
speech samples tend to underestimate children’s noun vocabularies—since
the probability that a child will use any particular noun in one hour of
sampling is not very high. For this reason, Caselli, Casadio, and Bates
(1999) used a parent interview measure to estimate the vocabularies of
English-speaking children and Italian-speaking children, reasoning that
this measure would be less sensitive to sampling issues. Italian has some of
the properties of a verb-friendly language (e.g., verbs occur quite often at
the ends of utterances in child directed speech) and so might be expected
to show a verb advantage. But it did it not, and indeed Italian children
show almost as strong a noun advantage as American children. Tardif,
Gelman, and Xu (1999) addressed this issue directly by measuring Chi-
nese children’s vocabularies in both ways (spontaneous sample and parent
interview), and the verb advantage for these children mostly disappeared
with the interview measure. Surprisingly, there has been very little experi-
mental work on this issue, but the studies that exist show that with similar
numbers of exemplars children tend to learn novel nouns more easily than
novel verbs (Goldin-Meadow, Seligman, and Gelman, 1976; Childers and
Tomasello, in press).
Gentner (1982) provided a plausible explanation for the developmental
priority of nouns: the Natural Partitions hypothesis. In brief, her hypothe-
sis was that the nouns children learn early in development are proto-
46
Constructing a Language

typically used to refer to concrete objects, and concrete objects are more
easily individuated from their environmental surroundings than are states,
actions, processes, and attributes. Concrete objects are spatially bounded
entities, perceptible at a glance, whereas actions and events have more
ºuid temporal boundaries, and these are deªned in different ways for dif-
ferent verbs (cleaning is over when things are clean, but running and smil-
ing have no such clearly deªned endpoints). Verbs also vary in basic pa-
rameters such as whether causation is an essential semantic element (die
versus kill).
Gentner and Boroditsky (2001) elaborated on this explanation, as de-
picted in Figure 3.1. The argument is that nouns and other open-class
words show relative cognitive dominance, in that their primary function is
to denote perceptible entities in the world, whereas relational words (espe-
cially closed-class items) mostly serve to provide linguistic connections
among the more referential, open-class words. Indeed, most relational
words have determinant meanings only in the context of nouns or other
referential terms: the words the and and do not really indicate things in the
world in the same way as the ball or Jill and Jack. Relational terms are
thus more linguistically dominant, in the sense that they take their mean-
ing partially from other linguistic items in the context. Verbs are some-
where in the middle of this continuum since they rely on their arguments
(He kicked the ball) to denote a referential situation fully—leading
Langacker (1987a) to say that nouns are more conceptually autonomous,
whereas verbs are more conceptually dependent. As one piece of evidence
for this view, Gentner and Boroditsky (2001) cite the study of Gillette
et al. (1999), who found that when viewing a videotape of adult-child in-
teractions with the sound off—so that none of the discourse contexts for
key words could be heard—adults had much more difªculty inferring the
verb an adult was using as opposed to the noun she was using.
While the general outlines of this explanation are not in dispute, it is al-
most certainly the case that other factors are at work as well. This is sug-
gested by three additional sets of facts. First, most children learn many dif-
ferent kinds of words early in development—regardless of relative
frequencies—thus demonstrating that they can, in the appropriate condi-
tions, individuate many different kinds of referents in the world. And
quite often the ªrst words children learn are not nouns but personal-social
words such as hello, goodbye, please, no, and thank you (e.g., Gopnik,
1988; Bloom, Tinker, and Margulis, 1993; Caselli et al., 1995). Because
these words are performatives, and not referential at all, they are largely
ignored in discussions of children’s ªrst words. (Interestingly, despite their
lack of concrete reference, these words are not in any obvious way linguis-
tically dominant, and so are presumably individuated mostly on the basis
Words
47

of perceptual experience—in this case, of social situations—which is, in a
very broad sense, consistent with Gentner’s latest hypothesis.) But the im-
portant point is that the nature of the referent involved cannot be the only
factor determining whether children do or do not learn a word because
they learn some words that lack a concrete referent.
Second, many of the nominals that children learn early in develop-
ment—and that are counted when comparing their nouns to their verbs—
do not really have as referents easily individuated concrete objects. Nel-
son, Hampson, and Shaw (1993) found that only about half of the speciªc
nouns children use early in development are prototypical concrete objects,
that is, basic-level object categories such as dog and chair—“things you
can hold or bump into.” Just as frequent were nominals that did not refer
to such tangible things, words such as breakfast, kitchen, plastic, kiss,
lunch, light, park, doctor, night, and party. From a conceptual point of
view, the referents of these nouns would not seem to be more easily indi-
viduated than those of verbs and other relational words. Also interesting
in this context are Nelson’s (1995) observations of children’s early acquisi-
tion of so-called dual-category words such as brush, kiss, bite, drink,
walk, hug, help, and call, which can be used as either nouns or verbs.
There is no evidence that the noun function is learned ªrst, but rather the
frequency and salience of adult use seem to be the most important factors.
Third, in an experimental study Tomasello and Akhtar (1995) found
that 24-month-olds learn nouns and verbs equally well for ambiguous ref-
erential situations. In one study, all children saw an adult perform a novel
and nameless action (target action) with a novel and nameless object (tar-
get object) on a special apparatus. Children in the “action highlighted”
condition then watched as the adult prepared the apparatus so that the
48
Constructing a Language
cognitive dominance
linguistic dominance
open class
closed class
proper
names
concrete
nouns
kinship terms
and  other
relational
systems
verbs
spatial
prepositions
determiners
conjunctions
Ida
dog
spoon
grandmother
uncle
skate
enter
on
over
the
and
Figure 3.1. Division of dominance. From Gentner and Boroditsky (2001);
reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press.

child could perform it again (by orienting the apparatus correctly for him).
The adult then held out the object to the child and said “Your turn, Jason.
Widgit!” while alternating her gaze between the child and the apparatus—
as if requesting that the child perform the action. In the “object high-
lighted” condition the experimenter did not prepare the apparatus for the
child but simply held out the object to the child and said “Widgit, Jason!
Your turn,” while alternating her gaze between the child and the object
(never looking at the apparatus at all). As determined by later testing, chil-
dren in the “action highlighted” condition learned the new word for the
target action, whereas children in the “object highlighted” condition
learned the new word for the target object. A second study, using a similar
method but a different set of cues, replicated this result. The important
point here is that the pragmatics of the situation in which the child learns
a new word structure the learning process, so much so that in some cases
the ease with which referents are individuated is a secondary factor.
The fact that children can learn many different kinds of words early in
development, and that in some conditions they learn other kinds of words
as easily as concrete nouns, suggests a social-pragmatic modiªcation to
the Natural Partitions hypothesis. The modiªed hypothesis is that children
learn words most readily in situations in which it is easiest to read the
adult’s communicative intentions. Thus, in the right situation they can
learn event-type nouns such as breakfast, performatives such as no, and
some verbs and other relational words. But concrete nouns, with percepti-
ble referents, are often used in pragmatically simple situations, in which
the adult’s communicative intentions are especially clear—for example, in
handling objects or pointing out new objects for shared inspection (al-
though this has never been investigated systematically). Importantly, this
hypothesis does not conºict with the Natural Partitions hypothesis, be-
cause the cognitive dominance of nouns is one of the most important fac-
tors making it easier for children to interpret utterances containing them.
It is just that in the current view cognitive dominance (relative ease of indi-
viduation) is only one of several factors that contribute to the relative ease
with which children can read adult communicative intentions in utter-
ances with novel words.
It would also be worth investigating whether nouns are used more often
in linguistic contexts that are more well known to children, for example,
in English, the various presentational constructions (It’s a X, There’s a X,
and so on)—which are used almost exclusively with nouns (and there are
no comparable linguistic frames for other types of words). There has been
very little experimental research on the question of which words children
ªnd easiest to learn and the factors that determine this. Varying pragmatic
contexts and linguistic contexts in presenting different types of novel
Words
49

words to young children would go a long way toward settling many of the
outstanding issues.
3.1.2. Rates of Learning
During the ªrst ªve years of language acquisition, young children average
learning about one new word every one to two waking hours (depending
on how such things as dog and dogs are counted). This is truly an amazing
rate of learning. But the growth curve across this period is positively accel-
erating, with a much faster rate near the end of the preschool period. In
fact, during the ªrst year of language acquisition, age 1–2 years, children
learn only about one new word per day, and at the very outset the rate is
more like one word per week (Fenson et al., 1994).
Children’s rates of learning in comprehension and production in English
and Italian (based on the MacArthur Communicative Development Inven-
tory, which is basically a parent interview; Fenson et al., 1994) are pre-
sented in Figure 3.2. The most obvious pattern to observe is that in both
languages comprehension outstrips production by several orders of mag-
nitude throughout early development (although it must be kept in mind
that assessment procedures for comprehension and production are differ-
ent; Tomasello and Mervis, 1994). Grouping the Italian words into four
broad classes of word types, we get Figure 3.3. Here, the most obvious
pattern to observe is that, after the very earliest phases, nouns predomi-
nate, especially beginning at around the 100-word mark. At 500–600
words (reached typically between the second and third birthdays), chil-
dren’s vocabularies in Italian and many European languages are about
one-half nouns, about one-quarter verbs, and about one-quarter words of
other types (grammatical function words, social-performative words, and
so on).
Some researchers have claimed that at around 18 months of age many
children have a “vocabulary burst,” perhaps based on the Helen Keller in-
sight “everything has a name.” There is some research supporting the idea
of a vocabulary burst at this age (e.g., Reznick and Goldªeld, 1992;
Mervis and Bertrand, 1995), which might indicate a change of process
such as a “naming insight.” But larger, more recent analyses have shown
that this is simply a gradual increase in the rate of word learning, and that
it only occurs in some children (Bates and Goodman, 1997). A number of
theorists have therefore argued that there is no change of process at 18
months of age, but rather that the vocabulary burst reºects children be-
coming gradually more and more skillful at learning words (Bates and
Goodman, 1997; P. Bloom, 2000). Indeed, there is not even an agreed-
upon criterion for what constitutes a vocabulary “burst.”
50
Constructing a Language

Anisfeld et al. (1998) have shown that when children do accelerate in
rate of word learning in the middle of the second year of life, the accelera-
tion is often associated with the emergence of the ªrst word combinations
and grammar. This suggests a number of explanations for the increased
rate other than some kind of new understanding about the relation of
words to their referents. In particular, as children learn more language the
utterances they hear include more familiar words, and so is easier for them
to identify new words in the speech stream and also to identify the words’
communicative functions in the utterance as a whole (see Section 3.2.3 be-
low). It is also important to note that school-age children’s vocabularies
often grow at even faster rates, mainly because of literacy skills and pro-
ductive morphological skills in deriving new words from known words in
various ways (Clark, 1993). In general, investigation of older children’s
vocabularies shows an ever increasing ability to actively control all of the
Words
51
Figure 3.2. Growth of comprehension and production vocabulary from 8–16
months. From Caselli et al. (1995); reprinted with the permission of Elsevier
Science.

possible derivational forms of a lexeme, and indeed much of the exponen-
tial growth of children’s vocabularies during the school years may be at-
tributed to this mastery of derivational processes (Anglin, 1993).
The overall picture thus seems to be that children learn words at ever in-
creasing rates from age 1 year until the early teens, when a leveling off be-
gins to occur (Bates and Goodman, 1997; Anglin, 1993).
3.1.3. Word Meanings
There have also been a number of attempts to characterize more precisely
the nature of children’s early word meanings. One important issue is the
extent to which children’s early words are truly symbolic, in the sense of
being ºexibly used across an array of appropriate referential situations.
The problem is that some of children’s early words seem bound to particu-
lar communicative situations; for example, a child might say Bath only
when actually splashing in the tub and not to name bathtubs or comment
52
Constructing a Language
Figure 3.3. Vocabulary composition for Italian children from 18–30 months. From
Caselli et al. (1995); reprinted with the permission of Elsevier Science.

on other children taking baths (Bates, 1976; Nelson, 1985). Although it is
undeniable that some children use some of their early words in this event-
bound way (see Barrett, 1986, and the examples from Tomasello, 1992a,
in Chapter 2), systematic research has shown that that this phenomenon is
not as widespread and pervasive as ªrst believed (see Harris et al., 1988,
for nouns; Vear and Ramos, 2001, for verbs). The fact is that children use
the majority of their words fairly ºexibly from the beginning. One possi-
bility—currently unexplored—is that children’s early event-bound words
are simply those relatively few words that they have heard and attended to
in only a single communicative context or with a single communicative
purpose, with no opportunity (for whatever reason) to observe adult gen-
eralizations to other contexts.
Another important issue concerns how early word meanings are
cognitively represented. Focusing on object labels (and some adjectives),
the classic proposal is that of Clark (1973) to the effect that children’s
word meanings are cognitively represented as lists of perceptual features.
In contrast, Nelson (1974) proposed that the “functional core” of an ob-
ject label’s meaning consisted of the child’s understanding of what she
could do with the object or what the object could do—with perceptual
features being used simply to identify instances of the concept. Subsequent
work has shown that both of these proposals have some validity. Thus,
young children seem to show a fairly strong “shape bias” in identifying
novel exemplars of a newly learned word. For example, if 2-year-olds are
ªrst taught that a novel object is a “gazzer” and then confronted with
other objects that either look like the object or do the same thing, they
most often identify as other gazzers the objects that look like the original
(Jones and Smith, 2002). However, Kemler Nelson et al. (2000) taught 2-
year-olds novel names for novel objects that had novel functions—func-
tions that were related causally to perceptible aspects of the objects’ physi-
cal structure—and then looked at how the children extended these names
to new objects. They found that, given only minimal experience with the
new objects, children generalized the names in accordance with the ob-
jects’ functions. Their major conclusion was that “two-year-olds name by
function when they can make sense of the relation between the appear-
ances and functions of artifacts” (1271). When children rely on which of
these methods of generalization is currently unknown.
Since these classic proposals of the 1970s, there has been very little
work on how children cognitively represent the meanings of object labels
and other nouns. But perhaps we might make some progress by following
the lead of cognitive linguists, who are currently investigating word mean-
ings from some novel theoretical perspectives, including the use of such
theoretical entities as frame semantics, radial categories, and the like. For
Words
53

one thing, cognitive linguists highlight the importance of the various kinds
of background cultural knowledge and categories that structure word
meanings: a knuckle presupposes a ªnger, a pedestrian presupposes trafªc,
and a bachelor presupposes a culture in which marriage is expected. The
meaning of many, if not most, words is thus not speciªable in isolation,
but must be understood in the context of a larger set of cultural activities
and entities (Fillmore, 1989; Langacker, 1987a; Lakoff, 1987). Cognitive
linguists have also investigated the rampant polysemy characteristic of
most common adult words—including metaphorical extensions—and
they posit a number of different representational schemes (prototypes, ra-
dial categories, and so on) to account for this pattern of use. The ªnding is
that most words, especially the common ones, require for their representa-
tion a structured network of interrelated word uses (for example, run as a
physical activity, as the activity of operating machines, as the activity of
operating a store, as the activity of standing for political ofªce, and so on).
These phenomena have scarcely been touched on in the literature on lan-
guage development.
There has also been little recent work on the cognitive representations
that underlie children’s use of relational words and verbs. One exception
is Pinker (1989), who used Jackendoff’s (1990) model to characterize chil-
dren’s verb meanings in terms of adult verb semantics. Another exception
is Tomasello (1992a), who attempted to specify early verb meanings more
in terms of children’s own nonlinguistic cognitive structures as determined
by cognitive-developmental research in general (see also McCune-
Nicolich, 1981). Invoking Piaget’s (1952, 1954) theory of infant cogni-
tion, Tomasello proposed that the conceptualizations underlying early
words for actions and events could be speciªed in terms of four basic con-
ceptual elements: space, time, causality, and objects (and perhaps posses-
sion). Following Langacker (1987a), each of these dynamic words was
seen as depicting a process that unfolded in a series of discrete sequential
steps (“moments of attention” from a processing point of view), typically
with an object changing location or state across this time (with perhaps
the causal source of that motion integrally involved as well). The hypothe-
sized conceptualizations underlying early language thus had the virtue of
being things that young children could potentially construct from their
own experience as they attempted to comprehend and use these words in
communicating with adults. For example, a child’s understanding of an
act of giving may be depicted as a sequence of steps (see Figure 3.4) in
which one person (P1) originally is co-located with or possesses an object
(O), followed by a step in which someone else (P2) is co-located with or
possesses that object, with a causal arrow connected to the ªrst person in-
dicating that she caused the transfer to happen.
54
Constructing a Language

Thanks
Hold
Have
Give
Buy
Keep
Share
Use
Left
Here-go
Get-it
Back
Get
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
P
Ego/P
X
P1
Store
Ego
P
P
Ego
P
X
Ego
X
Ego
P/Ego
P
P2
Ego
Ego
P
P
Ego
Ego
Ego
X
Ego
P
X
Ego
P
Key
spatial
domain
posessive
domain
X, P, Ego locations and
possessors
O
object
cause
16
17
18
19
20
22
24
Figure 3.4. Conceptual situations underlying one child’s use of words concerning
the exchange and possession of objects. Each word is described by two “moments
of attention” in an unfolding process (one panel for each moment of attention).
For example, get is depicted as a ªrst moment when O is in the spatial domain X
(basically anywhere) followed by a second moment when O is in the spatial do-
main of person P. P causes this transfer (indicated by arrow). From Tomasello
(1992a); reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press.

Some general hypotheses have been proposed to account for the order
in which children learn their early verbs: (1) that children learn words for
their own actions before they learn words for observed actions, and that
when they do learn words for observed actions it is ªrst for processes not
involving intentional actions (Huttenlocher, Smiley, and Charney, 1983;
Smiley and Huttenlocher, 1995); (2) that children learn words for simple,
perceivable state changes before they learn words for more complex and
abstract changes of state (Edwards and Goodwin, 1986); and (3) that
from 3 years of age children have a bias toward verbs deªned in terms of
results (such as to clean) rather than in terms of the actions themselves
(such as to wipe; Behrend, 1990; but see Forbes and Farrar, 1993). None
of these hypotheses has overwhelming empirical support, and indeed to
date there is no adequate explanation of the order in which children learn
verbs (which seems to be variable across children), other than factors hav-
ing to do with the frequency and saliency with which adults use particular
verbs in speaking with children (Naigles and Hoff-Ginsberg, 1998).
In cross-linguistic analyses, the only word type other than nouns and
verbs with any claim to universality (although it is controversial) is adjec-
tives. As is well known, adjectives have some noun-like properties (relative
time stability) and some verb-like properties (use as a predicate) (Givón,
1984). Also, because they denote properties that are most clearly identi-
ªed with reference to commonalities across entities, adjectives often re-
quire language learners to compare across situations to extract the com-
mon property. Akhtar and Montague (1999) demonstrated experimentally
that children as young as 2 years are able to do this in learning the appro-
priate use of a novel adjective.
In English, adjectives are used in a number of ways. Nelson (1976)
identiªed three basic ways that children use words that adults would call
adjectives: (1) as predications in utterances such as This is big; (2) as
modiªers in utterances such as The big boy hit me; and (3) as classiªcatory
modiªers in utterances such as The baby moose (where baby is most often
a noun serving an adjectival function). Nelson found that 1- to 2-year-old
children used different sets of speciªc words for these different functions.
More than 80 percent of the predications they used involved temporary
states of objects or animate beings (It’s broken, I’m hurt). In contrast,
most of their modiªcational uses of adjectives concerned time-stable de-
scriptive properties (Big doggie, Little kitty) or evaluative properties
(Pretty ºower, Bad boy) from the beginning (see Saylor, 2000, for further
evidence of this asymmetry). The classiªcatory adjectives, used to subdi-
vide referent classes, consisted of animate types (baby giraffe) substance
terms (chocolate cookie), and kind terms (Panda bear)—again, mostly
56
Constructing a Language

nouns used in adjectival functions. Because for any given child there was
little overlap in the speciªc words used in these three functions, Nelson
proposed that young children do not have a single class of adjectives.
Prepositions and postpositions are words that serve to relate non-core
arguments to the main clause of the utterance. In the early language of
speakers of English and many other European languages, the most promi-
nent prepositions are locatives. Johnston and Slobin (1979) investigated
the ability of 2- to 5-year-old children to produce locative pre- or postposi-
tions in English, Italian, and Serbo-Croatian. Using a standardized elicita-
tion procedure, they found that children in all three languages ªrst learned
simple locatives such as in, on, under, and beside (see Wilcox and Palermo,
1975, for evidence that English-speaking children learn in and on before
under). Only later did they learn more complex locatives involving either
object-relative frames of reference (such as the front and back of a house)
or deictic frames of reference (such as the left and right sides of a house,
from the speaker’s point of view). The linguistic complexity of the expres-
sions used for these different functions in each language also accounted
for a number of learning patterns. Tomasello (1987) found similar results
for one English-speaking child’s use of spatial prepositions early in devel-
opment, and also found that salience in adult utterances (such as ªnal po-
sition with stress) was important to the learning process. In addition, how-
ever, this child used other common English prepositions not involving
concrete spatial relationships. For example, she learned the preposition of
from such expressions as piece of ice, piece of bread, scared of that, and
scared of monsters. The preposition of has much more varied uses than
the spatial propositions, and children can learn it only by extracting it
from larger expressions—with perhaps some subclassiªcation of its many
uses.
This same basic analysis applies to many other English words, some
with semantically heavy functions and many others with more grammati-
cal functions. For example, Levy and Nelson (1994), investigating early
acquisition of temporal words like because, tomorrow, today, morning,
pretty soon, yesterday, and now, found that children initially use these
terms only in relatively formulaic phrases and for the same functions for
which their parents use them. They thus hypothesized that in this case
children’s production of linguistic items precedes their comprehension, in
the sense that their earliest uses do not display adult-like ºexibility of us-
age. The early uses of these words thus serve speciªc discourse functions
only, and a fully adult-like understanding awaits children’s encounters
with these words in a fuller range of functional contexts. Most investiga-
tions of children’s acquisition of such things as auxiliary verbs, verb parti-
Words
57

cles, articles, and adverbs also show that children’s learning is much
more discourse-speciªc than in the case of more contentful words such as
nouns and verbs (see Chapter 6 for studies of various types of function
words).
At the moment, the issue of how best to characterize children’s early
word meanings is unresolved. The current suggestion is that the ªeld of
child language acquisition could beneªt greatly in this respect by attending
to the work of cognitive linguists. For one thing, Langacker (1987a) and
others use image-schematic diagrams, such as those in Figure 3.4, to de-
pict iconically the conceptualizations underlying all kinds of word mean-
ings. Barsalou (1999) argues and presents evidence that these kinds of per-
ceptually based representations are a more adequate characterization of
adult cognition than are the more commonly used abstract propositional
representations (typically formulated in English words, as in feature lists).
If cognitive-developmental research is used in constructing semantic prim-
itives, iconic diagrams may thus provide more psychologically realistic
representations of children’s early word meanings. Second, cognitive lin-
guists also provide analyses of the complex network of uses to which peo-
ple put various words, including the different conceptual frames in which
they occur. This process was referred to in Chapter 2 as pattern-ªnding in
the communicative uses of a linguistic symbol. These uses can then be
summarized as prototype and/or radial category representations. Again, in
the developmental context these may be created using knowledge of chil-
dren’s cognitive development to help identify psychologically plausible in-
terpretations of children’s different word uses. This cognitive linguistics
approach might possibly lead to a new and very productive line of re-
search on children’s early lexical semantics.
3.2. Processes of Word Learning
It is widely recognized that learning a word involves the cooperation of
many different cognitive and social-cognitive processes (Golinkoff, Hirsh-
Pasek, and Hollich, 1999). But these different processes play different
roles, and they play them at different periods in development. In the cur-
rent account, I will specify three types:
• Prerequisite processes: segmenting speech; conceptualizing referents.
• Foundational processes: joint attention; intention-reading; cultural
learning.
• Facilitative processes: lexical contrast; linguistic context.
These begin to operate in human ontogeny in approximately this order,
with prerequisite processes beginning to work prelinguistically, intention-
58
Constructing a Language

reading processes jump-starting language into operation at 1 year of age,
and linguistic processes providing a booster rocket that accelerates the
pace of word learning exponentially during the preschool period. I will
also discuss some processes of input and learning that operate, to some ex-
tent, at each of these periods.
3.2.1. Prerequisite Processes
Obviously before we can talk about children’s understanding of how
adults use particular phonological sequences to direct other people’s atten-
tion to external phenomena, we must establish that children can indeed
isolate particular phonological sequences and particular external phe-
nomena.
PROCESSING SPEECH
When we hear someone speaking to us in a foreign language—or when an
infant hears an adult speaking to her in any language—it is often ex-
tremely difªcult to parse the utterance into its component words or other
linguistic units. Thus, even when the infant understands the overall com-
municative intention of an utterance (for example, to fetch a toy), she may
be unable to assign different components of that communicative intention
to different segmental units such as words (get, me, the, toy) within the
speech stream.
The cues children must use to segment speech in different languages are
in some cases very different. Research by Werker and colleagues (summa-
rized in Werker and Desjardins, 1995) has established that as infants ap-
proach their ªrst birthdays they are so concentrated on the speech they
hear around them that they are losing the ability to make speech discrimi-
nations that are made in other languages—and that they made earlier in
infancy. Indeed, 1-year-old Japanese infants (like Japanese adults) have
practically lost the ability to distinguish between the sounds English-
speaking people hear as ra and la, and 1-year-old English infants (like Eng-
lish adults) have practically lost the ability to distinguish between the
Mandarin sounds ma and má (with tone marking). During the ªrst year of
life human infants are “tuning up” to the speech discriminations and pat-
terns of the language into which they are born.
In all languages the perceptual segmentation of utterances into words is
accomplished by three basic mechanisms (Jusczyk, 1997). First, almost ev-
ery language has a typical stress pattern associated with words. For exam-
ple, in English the vast majority of two-syllable words have a stressed ªrst
syllable, as in candle or doctor. Second, each language has certain predict-
able sequences of sounds that often occur together and others that almost
Words
59

never do. For example, in English sequences of consonants such as db and
kt virtually never occur together within words (so-called phonotactic con-
straints), and so hearing such a sequence in ºuent speech may be used to
infer a word boundary with a high probability. Third, infants may use dis-
tributional evidence on the level of whole words to segment ºuent speech.
For example, when someone hears See the cat, My cat is pretty, and An old
grey cat, the word cat pops out as a coherent unit with some consistency
across these utterances.
Experimental research using the preferential head-turning technique (in-
fants turn their heads to listen to sounds they prefer to listen to—some-
times because they are bored with what they have been hearing) has found
that by about 7 or 8 months of age infants in an English-speaking environ-
ment can segment words with the prototypical strong-weak stress pattern
from ºuent adult speech (e.g., Jusczyk and Aslin, 1995). A few months
later infants begin to use other, mostly phonotactic cues to identify words
with non-prototypical stress patterns (Jusczyk, Hohne, and Bauman,
1998). On the level of whole words, Jusczyk and Hohne (1997) visited 8-
month-old infants ten times during a two-week period. On each visit they
played audio recordings of the same three children’s stories. Two weeks
later, in the laboratory, infants preferred to listen to the words they had
heard over similar words that had not been in the stories. However, Hous-
ton, Jusczyk, and Tager (1997) found that the recognition of speciªc
words after 24 hours was much more difªcult for infants if the words were
spoken by a different person. They concluded that early in development
infants’ representations of words may be stored exemplars of previously
heard words rather than abstract prototypes. This does not last long, how-
ever. Fernald et al. (1998) investigated the word-recognition skills of older
infants, at 15 and 24 months of age. They found that the speed and
efªciency of word recognition increased dramatically during this period.
Although 15-month-olds did not orient to the correct picture indicated by
a target word until after the entire word had been spoken, 24-month-olds
shifted their gaze to the correct picture during the middle of the spoken
word, anticipating the entire word on the basis of its initial syllable (see
also Swingley, Pinto, and Fernald, 1999).
Segmenting words from speech in a particular language is obviously
something an infant must learn to do. In their species-typical environ-
ments, other animals are not faced with this perceptual discrimination
problem. And yet many household pets, perhaps especially dogs, learn to
discriminate a number of words from one another (e.g., Warden and
Warner, 1928)—although it is not clear if they are able to extract these
from ºuent speech. Especially impressive are the skills of the bonobo
60
Constructing a Language

Kanzi, who has learned to discriminate hundreds of English words, in
most cases by hearing complete utterances of ºuent speech (Shanker,
Savage-Rumbaugh, and Taylor, 1999). It has also been shown that some
mammals perceive phonemes categorically in much the same way as hu-
mans (Kuhl and Miller, 1975), and that some nonhuman primates dis-
criminate utterances in the particular human language they hear around
them from those in other languages (Ramus et al., 2000). Also, as reported
in Chapter 2, Newport, Aslin, and Hauser (2001) and Hauser, Weiss, and
Marcus (in press) found evidence of human-like pattern learning of audi-
tory sequences in nonhuman primates. And so the empirical discovery is
that the sound systems of human languages are adapted to general mam-
malian auditory perceptual capabilities more than the other way around—
even though human beings can produce some species-unique sounds as
well.
The adult-like production of speech takes much more time to develop,
longer for some children than others. At early stages of language produc-
tion some children actively avoid certain sounds, effectively ignoring
words that contain them. Thus, Schwartz and Leonard (1983) attempted
to teach 13- to 16-month-old children 16 novel words over several
months, some words with phonological characteristics that had been pre-
viously evidenced in the child’s production and some with characteristics
that had not been previously evidenced in production. The major ªnding
was that children more often produced the words that corresponded to
their existing phonological capabilities and more often avoided those that
did not. Also important is the metrical (rhythmic) properties of words.
Gerken (1994) and Lewis, Antone, and Johnson (1999) found, using both
naturalistic and experimental methods, that young children systematically
alter their production of words so as to conform with metrical patterns
they have already mastered. For example, many English-speaking children
early in development prefer words with the typical strong-weak stress pat-
tern (as in table or napkin) and avoid or change words with the opposite
pattern (as in surprise or remove).
Of special interest from the current perspective, Vihman (1996) has pro-
posed that young children have certain holistic phonological templates to
which they assimilate their early words and even multi-word expressions,
and that these are psychologically prior to any elementary so-called build-
ing blocks such as phonemes—which must be extracted from these larger
structures (see also Behrens and Gut, in press). The process is thus from
whole to parts. This proposal is especially interesting in the current con-
text because in Chapter 4 the focus is on children’s acquisition of syntactic
templates that contain both a consistent prosodic contour and some con-
Words
61

sistent phonological material (speciªc words and phrases). In this case as
well, one can see the acquisition of so-called building blocks, such as
words, as a process of extraction from these holistic templates.
CONCEPTUALIZING REFERENTS
Human communication can work only if the people communicating share
basic ways of perceiving and, to some degree, conceptualizing the world.
Children come to the adult way of perceiving and conceptualizing the
world partly by means of to the physical and perceptual equipment with
which they are born, and partly through their own sensory-motor interac-
tions with the world. According to Mandler (1992), language acquisition
can begin in earnest only when infants progress from a direct perception
of the world to conceptualizing it in more ºexible and abstract ways.
Mandler proposes that conceptualizations (mostly in the form of image
schemas; see below) provide a level of representation intermediate be-
tween perception and language that enables children to begin to iden-
tify abstract word meanings. This process can be seen most clearly in
children’s emerging understanding of, and talk about, (1) objects and
(2) events.
Human infants actively search for hidden objects from about 7 or 8
months of age (Piaget, 1954), but they show perceptual expectancies that
hidden objects still exist even earlier (see Baillargeon, 1995, for a review).
From a purely cognitive point of view, infants are ready to name particular
objects quite early in infancy, and indeed there is some evidence that in-
fants can associate some names with some people quite early (Jusczyk,
1997; although this is presumably not symbolic). But to really make
progress in using words to indicate objects for other people, young chil-
dren must begin to categorize objects into “kinds,” because most nouns in
a language are used to indicate such categories as dog, ball, tree, and so
on. (Xu, Carey, and Welch, 1999). Gopnik and Meltzoff (1986) investi-
gated the nonlinguistic categorizing abilities of beginning language learn-
ers (by noting which objects of an array they touched in sequence) and
correlated this ability with their early use of common nouns, which should
depend on this skill. They found that these 1-year-olds began to ºexi-
bly categorize objects and to ºexibly use common nouns in close de-
velopmental synchrony, with the object categorization typically leading
the way.
Conceptualizing events would seem, on the surface, to be more compli-
cated. However, Piaget (1954) found that soon after infants searched for
hidden objects they also tracked their visible and invisible displacements.
Mandler (1992) reviewed a variety of lines of evidence that from before
their ªrst birthdays infants do not just perceive but also conceptualize the
62
Constructing a Language

dynamic and relational aspects of their experience, involving such things
as animate motion, caused motion, containment, and support. These are
just as basic as object conceptualizations. Mandler posited that these more
dynamic aspects of infant cognition are best characterized in terms of im-
age schemas in which the commonalties across a number of speciªc dy-
namic experiences are extracted (Lakoff, 1987; Johnson, 1987). Evidence
for this proposal is provided by a series of studies begun by McCune-
Nicolich (1981) and pursued further by Gopnik and Meltzoff (1986) and
Tomasello and Farrar (1984). The basic ªnding of all the studies is that
young children only begin talking about such things as objects appearing,
disappearing, reappearing, or being “gone” after they have begun to inter-
act with objects nonlinguistically in ways that embody these concepts.
Tomasello and Farrar (1986b) even provided experimental support in a
training study in which they found that only children who could deal ef-
fectively with the invisible displacement of objects in a Piagetian object
permanence task could learn, from extensive tutelage, words that indi-
cated invisible movements.
It is also true that sometimes word learning actually leads and directs
cognitive development. That is, as a result of attempts to learn the linguis-
tic conventions used by those around them, young children sometimes
come to conceptualize the world in ways that they would not have if they
were not attempting to learn those conventions. Most important here is
the work of Choi and Bowerman (1991), who found that very young chil-
dren, still in their second year of life, come to conceptualize spatial rela-
tionships differently depending on the language they are learning. Thus,
young English-speaking and Korean-speaking children conceptualize dif-
ferently such basic spatial relations as containment (in) and support
(on)—as evidenced by their behavior in preferential-looking studies—be-
cause English encodes these concepts with prepositions such as in and on,
whereas Korean uses verbs that indicate such different kinds of spatial re-
lationships as “tight ªtting” and “loose ªtting.” Recently these investiga-
tors have extended these ªndings to other concepts and languages (Choi
et al., 2001). A diagrammatic depiction of the cross-linguistic relation-
ships is presented in Figure 3.5.
Language also inºuences conceptualization in some other ways, some of
which will be reviewed in Chapter 7. For now the important point is that
children must have some ability to conceptualize aspects of their percep-
tual experience in order to acquire linguistic conventions. But at the same
time the process of acquiring linguistic conventions serves to focus chil-
dren’s attention on aspects of experience that they might otherwise not
have focused on. The relation between children’s language and cognition
is a two-way street.
Words
63

Figure 3.5. Categorization of some object placements in English and Korean. From Bowerman
and Choi (2001); reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press.

3.2.2. Foundational Processes
As presaged in Chapter 2, in order to learn the conventional communica-
tive signiªcance of a linguistic item—to connect a segment of speech with
a segment of communicative intention—the child has to engage in a dual-
level social-cognitive process. She must ªrst establish some form of com-
mon ground with an adult, in the context of a joint attentional frame, and
then within this frame be able to read the adult’s speciªc communicative
intention in using a particular linguistic item—by both extracting its form
and isolating its functional role within the adult’s communicative inten-
tion as a whole. The establishment of common ground within a joint
attentional frame is a dyadic affair, depending on both adult and child,
whereas the intention-reading (and the resulting cultural learning) is
mostly due to the child’s own social-cognitive skills and efforts. There is
research in support of the foundational role of both of these components
of the process.
JOINT ATTENTION
Bruner (1983) argued and provided evidence that adult and child estab-
lishing common communicative ground is a necessary condition for the in-
fant to break into the world of conventionalized communication known
as language. Tomasello and Todd (1983) took the argument a step further
by investigating the possibility that individual differences in the way
mother-child dyads established and maintained joint attentional interac-
tions might be related to individual differences in children’s early language
development. Observing six mother-infant dyads at monthly intervals
from the infant’s 12th to 18th month, they found a very high correlation
between the amount of time infants spent in joint engagement with their
mothers during the six observation periods and the size of the infants’ vo-
cabulary at the end of the study (see also Tomasello and Farrar, 1986a;
Smith, Adamson, and Bakeman, 1988). A variation on this approach was
reported by Tomasello, Mannle, and Kruger (1986), who investigated the
relation between joint engagement and early language both in singleton
children and in twins, who are known to be signiªcantly delayed in early
language development (see Tomasello, Mannle, and Barton, 1989, for a
review). The main ªndings were that (1) the twin infants spent only one-
tenth as much time in dyadic joint engagement with their mothers as the
singleton infants, and (2) there was a very high correlation between time
spent in joint engagement at 15 months of age and vocabulary size at both
15 and 21 months for both singletons and twins (see Tomasello, 1988, for
a review of studies on joint attention and early language development).
More recently, Carpenter, Nagell, and Tomasello, (1998) found some
Words
65

similar relationships at an even earlier age, indeed as children were just be-
ginning to learn and use language. They found that infants who spent
more time in joint attentional engagement with their mothers at 12
months comprehended and produced more language at that age and in the
months immediately following. They also found that mothers who fol-
lowed into their 12-month-olds’ attentional focus with words had chil-
dren with larger comprehension vocabularies in the months immediately
following (with relationships to language production showing up a bit
later; see also Tomasello and Farrar, 1986a). When both of these variables
were used together—the time spent in joint attentional engagement and
the mother’s tendency to “follow into” the child’s attentional focus when
she used referential language—over half of the variance in children’s lan-
guage comprehension and production was predicted at several points dur-
ing the period from 12 to 15 months of age, with each variable accounting
for signiªcant amounts of unique variance. A number of measures of chil-
dren’s non-social cognitive development—mostly involving their knowl-
edge of objects and space—emerged in an uncorrelated fashion with lan-
guage and the other joint attentional activities, providing evidence that the
correlation of joint attentional engagement and language was not just the
result of some generalized developmental advance.
Experimental evidence for the facilitative role of joint attentional inter-
actions is provided by Farrar, Freund, and Forbes (1993), who found that
young children learn words much more rapidly in repetitive and scripted
events with adults than in less predictable event sequences. An interesting
twist on this story is that some children at an early age, and all children at
later ages, learn new pieces of language from observing third parties talk-
ing to one another—outside the prototypical joint attentional frame be-
tween adult and language-learning child (e.g., Brown, 2001). In this case,
the process of understanding different roles in this frame and substituting
participants for one another is still the same (as in more prototypical cases
of role reversal imitation); it is just that in this case the child is not one of
the original participants in the linguistic interchange. Learning language in
this way has not been studied in enough detail to reveal how children ac-
complish this feat, or if it creates special difªculties (or special opportuni-
ties) for them early in development (but see Akhtar, Jipson, and Callanan,
2001; Oshima-Takane, 1999).
Importantly, it has also been found that individual differences in the
nonlinguistic joint attentional abilities of children with autism are system-
atically related to their ability to learn new linguistic symbols. A number
of studies have found that these two sets of skills are related to each other
in autistic children in the same way they are related in normal children
(Loveland and Landry, 1986; Mundy, Sigman, and Kasari, 1990; Rollins
66
Constructing a Language

and Snow, 1998; see Sigman and Capps, 1997, for reviews). More recently
Siller and Sigman (2002) have even found that autistic children’s non-
linguistic joint attentional skills during early childhood are extremely
strong predictors of their linguistic skills many years later in adolescence.
Together, these studies on joint attention and early language clearly
demonstrate that being able to segment speech and to conceptualize the
world are by themselves not adequate for acquiring a linguistic conven-
tion. The child must also be exposed to that convention in the context of a
social interaction in which she and the adult ªnd some way to share atten-
tion—or perhaps she discerns shared attention between other persons
from the outside. Even within a joint attentional frame, however, it is still
not a given that the child will be able to infer the adult’s speciªc communi-
cative intention in using a speciªc piece of language. We must therefore
look at the process in a bit more detail.
INTENTION-READING
Reading communicative intentions seems to work a bit differently for ob-
ject words and action words. First, with respect to object words, a number
of observational and experimental studies have found that word learning
is easier when adults name new objects for young children by following
into their already established focus of attention, as opposed to using the
new language to direct their attention to something else (Tomasello and
Farrar, 1986a; Dunham, Dunham, and Curwin, 1993; Akhtar, Dunham,
and Dunham, 1991; Carpenter, Akhtar, and Tomasello, 1998). But this
does not mean that the child is a passive participant in the word learning
process. Subsequent studies have shown that when there is a discrepancy
between the adult’s and the child’s focus of attention—when young chil-
dren hear a novel word in situations in which their focus of attention dif-
fers from that of an adult they nevertheless are able to do the extra work
to determine the adult’s referential intentions, almost never assuming that
the new word is being used for whatever is their own current focus of at-
tention irrespective of what the adult is attempting to do (Baldwin, 1991,
1993a, 1993b). In all cases of word learning children make active at-
tempts to understand adult communicative intentions; it is just that in
some situations they have to work a little harder at it.
The point is made most clearly in a series of studies by Tomasello and
colleagues in which young children had to discern the adult’s communi-
cative intentions in using a new word in some fairly complicated social-
interactive situations. In Baldwin’s studies, the 18-month-olds had to shift
their attention to what the adult was focused on visually in order to learn
the new word. In the studies of Tomasello and colleagues, children had to
use a variety of more complicated social-pragmatic cues. In the case of
Words
67

learning new object labels, the three relevant studies can be summarized as
follows:
• In the context of a ªnding game, an adult announced her intentions
to “ªnd the toma” and then searched in a row of buckets, all con-
taining novel objects. Sometimes she found it in the ªrst bucket
searched. Sometimes, however, she searched longer, rejecting un-
wanted objects by scowling at them and replacing them in their buck-
ets until she found the one she wanted. Children 18 and 24 months
old learned the new word for the object the adult intended to ªnd (in-
dicated by a smile and termination of search) regardless of how many
objects were rejected during the search (Tomasello and Barton, 1994;
Tomasello, Strosberg, and Akhtar, 1996).
• Also in the context of a ªnding game, an adult had the child ªnd four
different objects in four different hiding places, one of which was a
very distinctive toy barn. Once the child had learned which objects
went with which places, the adult announced her intention to “ªnd
the gazzer.” She then went to the toy barn, but it turned out to be
“locked.” She frowned at the barn and then proceeded to another
hiding place, saying “Lets see what else we can ªnd,” and taking out
an object with a smile. Later, 18- and 24-month-olds demonstrated
that they had learned “gazzer” for the object they knew the experi-
menter had wanted in the barn even though they had not seen the ob-
ject after they heard the new word, and even though the adult had
frowned at the barn and smiled at a distractor object (Akhtar and
Tomasello, 1996; Tomasello, Strosberg, and Akhtar, 1996).
• A child, her mother, and an experimenter played together with three
novel objects. The mother then left the room. A fourth object was
bought out and the child and experimenter played with it, noting the
mother’s absence. When the mother returned, she looked at the four
objects together and exclaimed “Oh look! A modi! A modi!” Under-
standing that the mother would not be excited about the objects she
had already played with, but that she might well be excited about the
object she was seeing for the ªrst time, 24-month-olds learned the
new word for the object the mother had not seen previously (Akhtar,
Carpenter, and Tomasello, 1996).
These studies make two important points. First, no account in terms of
simple association will work. In classic associationistic accounts, word
and referent should occur in relatively close spatial-temporal contiguity.
But that is clearly not the case in these studies: in the ªrst two studies
distractor objects are experienced in closer spatial-temporal contiguity
with the new words than are target objects; in the third study, both
68
Constructing a Language

distractors and the target are present when the new word is said. And so,
not only do young children not need adults to stop other activities and
name objects for them, they do not even need the adult to say the word
while they are paying attention to the object; they are able to discern the
adult’s focus of attention in much more complicated situations (see Jaswal
and Markman, 2001, for more on children’s abilities to infer referents of
nouns in non-ostensive contexts).
The second point is that children could not, in these studies, be relying
on any one cue or small set of cues. The direction of the adult’s visual gaze
was not diagnostic of her referential intentions in any of the studies (as it
was in Baldwin, 1991, 1993a, 1993b). In the ªrst two studies, the child
had to ªrst understand that she and the adult were playing a ªnding game.
Giving this intentional understanding (and a few details of the game), the
child could then infer in the ªrst study that when the adult frowned at an
object, that was not the one she was seeking, and when she smiled at an
object, that was the one she was seeking. But then in the second study the
adult frowned while she was trying unsuccessfully to open the toy barn to
“ªnd the gazzer,” so in this case the frown meant frustration at not being
able to obtain the toy from inside the barn—which was the target of her
referential intentions. The main point is that the adult’s speciªc behaviors
such as a smile or a frown were not sufªcient by themselves to indicate for
the child the adult’s intended referent. In the third study, the adult did not
single out any of the objects behaviorally, so the child had to infer which
object was the target of the adult’s referential intentions by determining
which object was new to the adult, and thus likely to elicit enthusiasm. At
18–24 months children can read the communicative intentions of adults,
and so learn new object labels from them, in a variety of fairly complex,
non-ostensive situations.
Learning a new verb presents young children with some of the same and
also some different challenges. For example, the actions and changes of
state to which verbs refer are mostly transient. This means that, unlike the
case of object labels, the referential situation in the case of verbs is quite
often not perceptually available to the child when the word is uttered, nor
can it be located by visual or other perceptual inspection of the immediate
context. Tomasello (1992a) in fact found that a number of his subject’s
early verbs were never modeled when the action was perceptually present,
but rather as the adult was requesting an action of the child (“Move!”),
checking her intentions (“Do you want to go?”), commenting on a com-
pleted action (“I broke it”), and so forth. Indeed, Tomasello and Kruger
(1992) found that children learn verbs best in impending-action situations
(including requests), next in completed-action situations, and worst in on-
going-action situations. Ambalu, Chiat, and Pring (1997) extended this
Words
69

ªnding by showing that movement verbs like roll and spin were learned
best in impending-action situations but result verbs like clean and ªx were
learned best when the event was completed before the model was given.
Gillette et al. (1999) invoked this temporal dislocation between word and
referent as a major factor helping to explain why adults ªnd it difªcult to
infer the verb an adult is using (as opposed to nouns) when viewing a vid-
eotape of adult-child interactions with the sound off.
An additional difªculty, as Talmy (1985) and Gentner (1982) have
pointed out, is that a verb may be deªned in many and diverse ways, for
example, by the manner of motion (to ºoat), the instrument involved (to
hammer), the result achieved (to empty), the action performed (to wave),
and so on, depending on the particular language involved. And there are
other elements, such as the causative, that may or may not be a part of a
verb’s meaning (compare kill and die; see Bowerman, 1982). The “packag-
ing problem”—deciding which aspects of a situation are relevant for a
new word’s meaning—seems much more difªcult for verbs than for object
labels, both for any given word and in terms of regularities across words
that the child might learn to exploit at some point (Tomasello, 1995b).
Thus, although children learn early in their language development that
when adults use words to refer to objects they are usually naming the
whole object (Golinkoff, Mervis, and Hirsh-Pasek, 1994), there would
seem to be no analogous generalizations about verbs to help narrow the
packaging options.
Tomasello and colleagues performed two studies with verbs, analogous
to those with nouns, that, although they do not address all these problems,
demonstrate at least some of the complexities involved.
• An adult set up a script with a child in which a novel action was per-
formed always and only with a particular toy character (Big Bird al-
ways appeared on a swing, and other character-action pairings were
demonstrated as well). She then picked up Big Bird and announced
“Let’s meek Big Bird,” but the swing was nowhere to be found, so
the action was not performed. Later, using a different character, 24-
month-olds demonstrated their understanding of the new verb even
though they had never seen the referent action performed after the
novel verb was introduced (Akhtar and Tomasello, 1996).
• An adult announced her intention to “dax Mickey Mouse” and then
performed one action accidentally (“Woops!”) and another intention-
ally (“There!”)—or sometimes in reverse order. Twenty-four-month-
old children learned the word for the intentional not the accidental
action regardless of which came ªrst in the sequence (Tomasello and
Barton, 1994).
70
Constructing a Language

In addition, two further studies looked at the kinds of cues children use
to differentiate adult acts of reference to objects and actions. These studies
demonstrate with special clarity that children are using a variety of kinds
of cues to read adult referential intentions, evidencing a very deep and
ºexible understanding of adult intentional action.
• An adult introduced the child to a curved pipe, down which objects
could be thrown. In one condition she ªrst threw a novel object
down, then threw another, and then announced “Now, modi” as she
threw a third novel object. In this condition 24-month-olds thought
modi was the name of that object. In another condition the adult
took out a novel object and ªrst did one thing with it, and then an-
other thing, and then announced “Now, modi” as she threw it down
the pipe. In this condition children thought modi was the name of the
action of throwing objects down a pipe. In each case the child as-
sumed the adult was talking about the entity, either object or action,
that was new in the communicative situation (Tomasello and Akhtar,
1995).
• An adult played a merry-go-round game with a child several times.
They then did something else. Then the adult returned to the merry-
go-round. In one condition she readied the merry-go-round for play,
then held out a novel object to the child while alternating gaze be-
tween child and merry-go-round, saying “Widgit, Jason.” In this
case, the 24-month-olds thought widgit was a request for them to use
the new object with the merry-go-round. In the other condition the
adult did not ready the merry-go-round for play and did not gaze at
it, but instead held out the novel object while alternating gaze be-
tween child and object, and said “Jason, widget.” In this case, the
children thought widgit was the name of the object (Tomasello and
Akhtar, 1995).
And so learning to read adult intentions when they use a novel verb
would seem to include even more difªcult factors than when nouns are in-
volved. In particular, in line with the thinking of Gentner and of Gleitman
and Fisher (see below), it is very likely that learning verbs is more depend-
ent than learning nouns on the child’s understanding of the surrounding
linguistic context.
All these studies concerning joint attention and intention-reading con-
cern how, in a particular situation, a child might discern which object or
action an adult is referring to with a new word. They do not address the
additional problem of how a child infers the meaning of a new word more
generally, in the sense of determining the range of referents to which it ap-
plies. For both nouns and verbs, more information is needed to distinguish
Words
71

the extension (meaning) of a word from that of other semantically related
words. And so, for example, when the child in an experiment picks out an
object for the dax, we still do not know what other things she might also
be willing to call a dax (all things of a certain shape, all things that roll,
and so on); that is, we do not know either the intension or the extension of
her understanding of the word’s conventional use. For this, other informa-
tion—such as that supplied by lexical contrast and by linguistic context—
is needed.
3.2.3. Facilitating Processes
As children learn more and more language, they are able to use it to help
them to isolate new words in the speech stream as well as to identify the
particular aspect of the overall communicative intention that a new word
is intended to indicate. This happens in two main ways: children can con-
trast new words with known words that might have been used in their
stead (the adult says moose instead of deer for a deer-like animal, indicat-
ing some difference); and children can use the surrounding linguistic con-
text to make inferences about meaning (the adult says Give me the blicket,
and so a blicket must be an object). Both of these processes are best seen in
the context of children’s attempts to read adult communicative intentions.
LEXICAL CONTRAST
For over a century, linguists have noted that there is strong pressure
against synonyms in a language, and consequently that, for the most part,
every word in a language expresses a unique meaning. Thus, even the
words cop and policeman differ in their connotations. But the deeper
point is that words contrast in meaning with one another and so closely
related words—words in the same “semantic ªeld”—are in fact inter-
deªned. The meaning of morose is something a little different from sad
and is not quite depressed either. In a language that did not have a word
equivalent to morose the word equivalent to depressed might extend to
cover a wider range of contexts. Clark (1983, 1993) in particular has dem-
onstrated that young children use lexical contrast to help them home in on
the adult way of using words. Markman (1989, 1992) has proposed the
strongest version of the hypothesis, claiming that early in development
young children that the meanings of words do not just contrast but are in
fact mutually exclusive.
Lexical contrast plays an important role in children’s word learning,
both (1) in providing another source of information to complement the
child’s intention-reading in the immediate communicative context and (2)
in providing crucial information about a word’s ultimate extension. In
72
Constructing a Language

terms of beneªts in the immediate situation, children are helped in learn-
ing, for example, proper names and superordinate category terms when
they know ahead of time the basic level name of some objects. According
to Markman (1989), children who know that a particular entity is a dog
are in a better position to comprehend the precise meaning of the word an-
imal or the name Rover when used to refer to a dog—since the most natu-
ral referent is blocked by mutual exclusivity (see Hall, 1991). However, a
number of researchers have provided evidence that young children can use
different words for the same entities if they have information that the
speaker intends to take a different perspective on those entities. Mervis,
Golinkoff, and Bertrand (1994) and Deak and Maratsos (1998), among
others, have demonstrated that young children will accept more than one
word for a given entity. Especially impressive is the study of Clark and
Svaib (1997) who engaged in discourse with 2- and 3-year-olds about a
book of pictures. In the course of a single brief session, they were able to
elicit from these children—by varying discourse context—different words
for the exact same referent (such as cat and animal or man and sailor).
Clark (1997) takes this as evidence that children have a many-perspectives
understanding of language and that they do not follow strict mutual ex-
clusivity, but only lexical contrast.
In addition to helping children learn such things as proper names and
superordinate category terms, lexical contrast helps them identify in-
tended referents in the immediate situation in other ways. In an effect ªrst
observed by Carey and Bartlett (1978), children often use a kind of pro-
cess of elimination to learn novel words. For example, Markman and
Wachtel (1988) showed preschool children two objects, one familiar and
one novel (such as a spoon and a whisk), and said “Show me the fendle.”
Most children gave them the whisk in this situation, presumably because
they knew that under ordinary circumstances the adult would call the
spoon a “spoon,” and so on this occasion she must intend this novel term
to refer to the novel object. Markman and Wachtel also found that when a
novel word was used when only a familiar object, such as a spoon, was
present, children often inferred that the novel word was intended to indi-
cate an object part—again, use of a novel word to refer to the spoon qua
spoon was unlikely. Children behave in these ways in these situations be-
cause they know that the different words that adults use are usually in-
tended to indicate different entities (see Golinkoff, Hirsh-Pasek, and
Hollich, 1995, and Merriman, Marazita, and Jarvis, 1995, for this effect
with verbs; Woodward and Markman, 1997, and P. Bloom, 2000, for re-
views of similar studies).
Lexical contrast is also of crucial importance in helping children to
specify the meanings of words more precisely over time. For example,
Words
73

many young children overextend words such as dog to cover all four-
legged furry animals. One way they home in on the adult extension of this
word is by hearing many four-legged furry animals called by other names
such as horse and cow. An adult illustration comes from the reporting of
the Gulf War, in which citizens were often told that on a given day the
American military had ºown X number of bombing “sorties.” In the con-
text, virtually everyone knew what this meant generally. But if asked more
speciªc questions—To qualify as a sortie does the plane have to return to
the location from which it took off? Must a certain type or number of
planes or a certain type or number of bombs be involved? Can the point of
origin be an aircraft carrier? Can a tank go on a sortie over land?—most
people would display their ignorance of the conventional meaning of this
term in military parlance. But if we learned other related terms, such as
bombing mission, bombing run, and bombing raid, our understanding of
bombing sortie would become more precise. Although the process has not
been studied in much detail, being able to contrast word meanings with
one another in this way almost certainly facilitates children’s acquisition
of new words, particularly words that are spin-offs of more conceptually
basic situations (see Tomasello, Mannle, and Werdenschlag, 1988, for one
example).
Following this reasoning, Tomasello (1992a) argued that his daughter
could only have learned the verb share—which she used to request objects
from others while forfeiting any claim of ownership—if she already knew
the verbs give and have which were used to request objects in more generic
situations, sometimes with an ownership claim. Indeed, the ownership
component of the verb have only arose as a result of its being contrasted
with the later-learned word share. The point is that the details of the use of
these more speciªc terms are understood by the child as she ªrst encoun-
ters them only in contrast to the generic terms that the speaker might have
used but did not. Why did Mother say I could not have it but I could share
it? Why did she call this thing that looks to me like a dog a cow? Clark’s
(1987, 1988) argument is that the principle that all words contrast with
one another in meaning in some way is really a principle of rational hu-
man behavior along the lines of “If someone is using this word, rather
than that word in the current situation, there must be a reason for it.” The
child then examines the current situation to see if she can discover what
distinguishes, for example, the current situation about which the adult
said share from the more common situation in which both she and the
adult normally say give or have.
Interestingly, young children also use evidence about contrast in inter-
preting other kinds of adult communicative behavior. Diesendruck and
Markson (2002) found that when an adult told a 3-year-old a fact about
74
Constructing a Language

an object (“My uncle gave me this”), and then asked for an object using
another fact (“Give me the one my dog likes to play with”) children sys-
tematically avoided the original object. Children’s broad application of
contrast suggests that it is not just a linguistic principle but rather a more
general pragmatic principle for interpreting communicative behavior. The
important theoretical point is that lexical contrast is a natural outgrowth
of children’s attempts to understand adult communicative intentions, in
the context of their understanding that people have many symbolic op-
tions for construing the immediate situation in whatever way they wish
for their immediate communicative purpose, and that they make these
choices for pragmatic reasons.
LINGUISTIC CONTEXT
Children’s learning of a new word can also be facilitated—and perhaps in
some cases enabled—by the linguistic context within which it is embedded
in a particular utterance and across utterances. As argued above, children
are always attempting to understand the entire communicative intention
of the adult’s entire utterance, and as they are attempting to identify at the
same time the communicative intention of various components, some un-
derstanding of this whole is crucial.
Brown (1957) made the point in a very simple study. He showed 3- and
4-year-olds a picture of an unusual action performed on an unusual sub-
stance with an unusual object. He then told one group of children “In this
picture you can see sibbing” (verb condition); told another group of chil-
dren “In this picture you can see a sib” (count noun condition); and told a
third group of children “In this picture you can see some sib” (mass noun
condition). Each child then saw three pictures depicting a similar action, a
similar object, or a similar substance, and was then asked—depending on
the original experimental condition—to “Show me another picture of
sibbing/a sib/some sib.” Children tended to choose the picture that ac-
corded with the linguistic form they had heard.
Subsequent research has shown that the process is perhaps a bit differ-
ent for nouns than for verbs. For nouns, Katz, Baker, and McNamara
(1974), Gelman and Taylor (1984), and Littschwager and Markman
(1993) showed that even 2-year-old children could distinguish count
nouns from proper names if they were introduced to a novel object as
“This is a/the zav” versus “This is Zav.” Soja (1992) replicated and ex-
tended Brown’s (1957) ªnding concerning count and mass nouns by
showing children a pile of a clay-like substance and encouraging them to
focus on the substance by saying either “Here is some zav” or “Here is a
zav” (see also McPherson, 1991; Bloom, 1994). However, children clearly
do not need these syntactic cues to make the relevant distinctions, as many
Words
75

languages in the world (the majority) do not have articles (e.g., see Imai
and Haryu, 2001). And even for English-speaking children, Soja, Carey,
and Spelke (1991) found that young children treated words that referred
to objects differently from words that referred to substances even when
those words were presented in syntactically neutral form.
For verbs, a much stronger claim has been made. In particular, Gleit-
man (1990) has claimed that syntax plays an essential role in verb learn-
ing. The basic idea is that there is a strong correspondence between certain
action/state concepts and the way they are expressed in language. Thus, all
things being equal, a language should express the concept of giving (or a
close equivalent) in an utterance containing three semantic roles expressed
in nominals: the giver, the receiver, and the thing given. Similarly, the con-
cept of thinking (or a close equivalent) should take as its complement a
full proposition (as in He thinks she’s crazy). Ultimately, many verbs are
distinguished by a unique range of syntactic contexts (see can take either a
direct object, as in He sees it, or a sentential complement, as in He sees
that she’s lost). Gleitman believes that these correspondences do not need
to be learned by the child, but rather are at least to some degree part of the
child’s innate endowment that enables her to acquire language. (It could
hardly be otherwise in this theory because if children use syntax to learn
initial verb meanings, before they know much language, they must have
some access to syntactic knowledge from the outset.)
Much of the empirical work of Gleitman and colleagues has focused on
showing that in their speech to children adults differentiate verbs from one
another by producing them in different ranges of syntactic contexts (e.g.,
Fisher, Gleitman, and Gleitman, 1991; Lederer, Gleitman, and Gleitman,
1995; Naigles and Hoff-Ginsberg, 1995). More recently, in a set of natu-
ralistic observations, Naigles and Hoff-Ginsberg (1998) found that verbs
that were used in more diverse sentence frames by mothers were also used
in more diverse ways by their children (see also DeVilliers, 1985). Using a
preferential-looking experimental paradigm, Naigles (1990) found that 2-
year-olds matched the two utterances “The duck is glorping the bunny”
and “The bunny and the duck are glorping” with their appropriate pic-
tures (one depicting the duck doing something to the bunny and the other
depicting the two participants engaged in the same parallel action). This is
taken to indicate that they know the two syntactic frames involved in an
abstract way. Similarly, Naigles (1996) found that young children could
use multiple syntactic frames from adult language to distinguish contact
from causative actions (see also Naigles and Kako, 1993). Using an act-
out task, Naigles, Gleitman, and Gleitman (1993) found that when pre-
sented with utterances in which verb semantics and syntax conºicted,
young children often went with the syntax (but see Akhtar and Tomasello,
1997: 964).
76
Constructing a Language

There is no question that children use linguistic context to help them
learn the meanings of new verbs (e.g., see Behrend, Harris, and Cart-
wright, 1995, on children’s use of verb inºections to infer verb meanings).
But there are two major issues. One is whether this effect derives from the
meaning of the rest of the utterance, or whether it derives more narrowly
from the utterance’s form (syntax, narrowly deªned). For example, chil-
dren in the Naigles (1990) study might very well have been using the word
and, rather than syntax per se, as an indicator of the parallel action picture
(this is also true of many of the stimuli in Naigles, Gleitman, and Gleit-
man, 1993). Fisher (1996) argues that children use a variety of sources of
information from the surrounding utterance to learn the meaning of a new
word. Some of these are quite mundane; for example, if the child hears I’m
tamming now as the adult strikes her hand against the desk, the child can
infer that the action being referred to by tamming is not one that changes
the state of the object acted upon because the desk is not even mentioned.
Along similar lines, Goldberg (1995) argues that since constructions have
meaning, it is really the meaning of the construction that is the top-down
component of “syntactic bootstrapping,” not any abstract syntax-lexicon
correspondences. The general point is thus that the linguistic contexts that
help children to learn verb meanings may be working solely on the seman-
tic level, in this sense that the child is determining the meaning of the ut-
terance as a whole and then partitioning out those parts due to particular
lexical items.
The second issue is the age at which children can use different aspects of
the linguistic context to help them acquire new words. Age is important
because in many cases researchers have hypothesized that the child makes
inferences about the meaning of a new word from the syntactic form of
the utterance in which it appears. But this can only work if the child be-
gins with the syntax of the particular language she is learning—universal
grammar will not tell the child the particularities of English grammar, for
example, which are necessary in cases such as articles signaling count
nouns or a certain range of syntactic frames signaling a particular English
verb. By 3 or 4 years of age, everyone agrees, children have learned
enough syntax to use it to acquire new words. But 2-year-olds are another
story, and indeed each instance must be investigated separately. If 2-year-
olds are not very good at using abstract syntactic constructions to infer
word meanings, this lends credence to the hypothesis that children take
some time to create the abstractions that they will later use to make top-
down inferences about speciªc word meanings (see Chapter 4). Again,
however, if children are simply segmenting the communicative intentions
of an utterance semantically to learn a new word, then there is no reason
why this cannot be an important part of the word learning process from
the beginning.
Words
77

Finally, there is one set of observations that is particularly informative
in illustrating the role of linguistic context, including syntax, in helping
children to learn the meanings of new words. Nelson (1995) identiªed a
number of words in children’s early vocabularies that could be used as ei-
ther nouns or verbs. These so-called dual-category words included such
common things as bite, kiss, drink, brush, walk, hug, help, and call. Many
children use some of these words for both functions, often in referential
situations that would seem to be identical (Give me a hug/kiss versus Hug/
Kiss me; Help/Call your sister versus Give your sister some help/a call). In
these cases (whose prevalence is unknown), it is hard to imagine how chil-
dren could learn the two different uses of the same phonological sequence
to indicate similar referential situations if they were not using as a major
source of information its semantic/syntactic role in a larger utterance.
Once again, then, we are led to a picture of word learning in which the
child is determining the meaning of the utterance as a whole and then par-
titioning out those parts due to particular lexical items.
There is thus no doubt that linguistic context is an important, in some
cases essential, factor in children’s word learning. Indeed, one plausible
explanation for the dramatic increase in the pace of children’s word learn-
ing in the middle preschool period is that by that time each utterance they
hear is more comprehensible to them—in terms of both the words they al-
ready know and the syntactic constructions involved—so that any new
word must play a highly constrained role in the communicative intention
of the utterance as a whole (as in She puds that things can only get worse,
in which pud presumably indicates a psychological state of some sort).
Linguistic contrast and context together thus provide very powerful hints
and constraints—within the context of the child’s attempts to read adult
communicative intentions—that enable preschool children to acquire new
words at the prodigious rate that they do.
3.2.4. Quantitative Factors of Input and Learning
To learn a piece of language children have to hear it. The conditions under
which they hear it and the number of times they hear it are important fac-
tors in whether they do indeed learn it. Perhaps especially difªcult is the
process of getting started, before infants have any other language to help
them isolate either the form or the function of a speciªc word or phrase.
Interestingly, it seems that beginning language learners often do manage to
ªnd exactly the kind of language they need in the speech of their parents.
Both Ninio (1993) and Brent and Siskind (2000) found that many of chil-
dren’s earliest words—up to 60 percent—are words that their parent has
used relatively often as single-word utterances, things such as people’s
78
Constructing a Language

names, interjections, performatives, and some object and action words.
Also relevant is the classic research of Peters (1983) and Slobin (1985a),
who both observed that young children seem to be especially sensitive to
words and phrases that are highly salient in the speech stream perceptu-
ally—by being stressed and/or in salient sentence positions (beginning or
end). Attaching this salient word to the adult’s entire communicative in-
tention then leads to the acquisition of a holophrase.
A variety of studies have shown that after children have started learning
words in earnest the amount of language they hear is a very good predic-
tor of their vocabulary development. Representative studies are Hutten-
locher, Hedges, and Duncan (1991); Hart and Risley (1995); Naigles and
Hoff-Ginsberg (1998). Because these correlations might result from some
more general factor (for example, parents who are skillful with language
both talk a lot and have children who are skillful with language—with no
direct causal link between the two) an especially important study is that
of Pearson et al. (1997). They found a very strong relation in bilingual
children between amount of exposure to each language and vocabulary
size in that language. In combination, these studies are thus persuasive
that hearing relatively large amounts of language facilitates vocabulary
development.
But in these naturalistic studies there is no linking of information about
precisely how often and in what ways children hear particular words, and
how this affects their word learning. Indeed, the most natural interpreta-
tion is clearly false. That is, it is not the case that the more often a child
hears a particular word, the quicker she learns it. As just two examples,
the words the and a are among the most frequent words that young chil-
dren hear, but they do not learn these words particularly early—for many
obvious reasons. What is needed to complement these naturalistic ªndings
are experiments in which children are exposed to new words under con-
trolled conditions with a pre-set number of exposures. There is some such
research, but surprisingly little.
The most robust ªnding of experimental studies is that comprehension
precedes production. When Goldin-Meadow, Seligman, and Gelman
(1976) asked 2-year-olds to comprehend or produce common words in an
experimental setting, the children comprehended about 2–3 times as many
words as they produced. Similarly, Childers and Tomasello (in press)
found that with a similar number of exposures to nonce words 2-year-old
children’s comprehension was almost always better than their production.
Exploring comprehension further, Carey and Bartlett (1978) found that
many 3- and 4-year-olds could comprehend a novel word used for a novel
object after only a single exposure, and many retained this comprehension
up to six weeks later. Markson and Bloom (1997) found that over 80 per-
Words
79

cent of 2-year-olds comprehended a novel object label one week after hav-
ing heard it just a few times (and over 80 percent of 3- and 4-year-olds af-
ter one month) (see also Heibeck and Markman, 1987; Rice, 1990). And
Woodward, Markman, and Fitzsimmons (1994) found that even 13-
month-old infants comprehended a new word at above-chance levels after
24 hours, given only a single training session with nine exposures to the
novel word.
There is much less research on the quantitative dimensions of how chil-
dren learn to produce novel words. Nelson and Bonvillian (1978) found
that after only a few exposures to a novel label for a novel object, 212-year-
olds could produce that label appropriately more than half the time in the
same session (depending on several other factors). But this may depend on
children hearing only one new word in a session. Kuczaj (1987) reported
that children in this same age range learned to produce, on average, fewer
than 1 of 10 novel words presented to them on a single day when tested 24
hours later. In the only study to systematically investigate precisely how
many exposures are needed to learn a novel word productively, Schwartz
and Terrell (1983) found that children between 12 and 18 months took,
on average, 10–12 exposures to a novel word to be able to produce it ap-
propriately. These children eventually acquired about 35 percent of a
group of 16 novel words presented to them over a ten-week period in from
10 to 20 exposures.
Another interesting issue is the spacing/timing of models. Schwartz and
Terrell (1983) reported a very surprising additional ªnding from their
study. They presented children with novel words on one of two schedules
during their ten weekly sessions. On one schedule they exposed children to
a novel word only once per session. On the other schedule they exposed
children to a novel word twice per session. What they found was that chil-
dren took approximately the same number of sessions (6–8) to learn to
produce the new word in both conditions, meaning that they learned the
less frequently presented words with about half as many exposures as the
more frequently presented words (approximately 7 versus 12). A similar
ªnding is reported by Childers and Tomasello (in press). They taught
children novel words by giving them either 4 or 8 models, with these
models distributed across days in various ways, for example, at the ex-
treme, 1 model per day for 4 days versus 8 models all on the same day.
The very strong ªnding was that children learned to produce both nouns
and verbs better in distributed (over 4 days) than in massed (all in one
day) exposures no matter the frequency; for example, 1 model per day for
4 days was better than 8 models all on the same day. In all conditions, re-
tention was as good after one week as in immediate testing.
These ªndings on the timing of models may be interpreted in the con-
80
Constructing a Language

text of the well-known ªndings in studies of animal and human learning
that, given an equal number of exposures, distributed (or spaced) practice
at a skill is almost always superior to massed practice. This ªnding holds
for many skills for many species and has been replicated hundreds of times
(see Dempster, 1996, for a review). These quantitative ªndings thus sug-
gest that general learning processes are at work in word learning. In sup-
port of this claim, Markson and Bloom (1997; see also Markson, 1999)
compared the learning of words to the learning of verbal and nonverbal
facts. They taught some 3- and 4-year-olds the name of a particular novel
object, “a koba”; they taught others that “This toy comes from a place
called Koba” (a particular object); they taught others that “My uncle gave
me this” (a particular object); and they taught still others that “This goes
on here” (a sticker on a particular novel object). They found that in all of
the conditions with verbally presented information, including word learn-
ing, children learned equally well quantitatively, both immediately and af-
ter week-long and month-long delays. Markson and Bloom interpreted
these results as demonstrating that children can learn verbally presented
facts about objects with the same number of exposures with which they
learn object names, implying that at least some learning principles are gen-
eral across linguistic and nonlinguistic domains.
Finally, an interesting quantitative issue concerning production is which
of their words children use most often in spontaneous speech. Table 3.1
lists the words that one child at around her second birthday used most of-
ten in her everyday speech with her mother. As can be seen, for this child,
who was mostly speaking in short two- to four-word utterances, various
kinds of function words predominate. There are four conversational de-
vices; three pronouns or proper names that refer to the child herself or her
mother; nine pronouns, demonstratives, or articles having to do with ob-
ject reference; six prolocatives or spatial propositions; two very generic
verbs (want, go); and several other words. There are no nouns in this list;
the most frequently used noun for this child was baby, which was ranked
number 56 in terms of frequency of use. Interestingly, these 25 words,
which represent less than 2 percent of this child’s vocabulary, account for
about 45 percent of all the words she says in terms of token frequency.
What this list and these facts demonstrate is that as soon as just a small
amount of grammar begins, young children’s utterances are peppered with
a relatively small number of high-frequency lexical items such as certain
pronouns and function words with highly recurrent discourse functions—
with the more well-known nouns and verbs, which are typically thought
of as the prototypical items in young children’s vocabularies, used rela-
tively infrequently as their speciªc referents occur in the child’s experience
at only irregular intervals.
Words
81

3.3. Theories of Word Learning
To account for the facts of word learning so far presented, as well as some
others, there are three basic theories of children’s lexical development. The
ªrst is that word learning is nothing special; children learn words by
garden-variety associative learning. The second is that word learning is
very special; so special that to learn a word children must utilize a priori
word learning constraints or principles. The third, social-pragmatic theory
is that word learning is somewhat special. Children do not need special-
ized word learning constraints or principles, but associative learning is not
by itself sufªcient. What is needed is a special form of social learning in-
volving intention-reading, that is, cultural learning.
3.3.1. Learning Theory
Most people think it died with Behaviorism, but associative learning the-
ory lives on. Smith (2000) has argued that the essence of word learning is
associating sounds with salient aspects of perceptual experience. In sup-
port of this view, she has demonstrated in several experiments that chil-
dren often assume that the meaning of a novel word is the most “salient”
aspect of the current nonlinguistic context. For example, in an attempt to
provide an associationistic explanation for the ªndings of Akhtar, Carpen-
ter, and Tomasello (1996), Samuelson and Smith (1998) presented 2-year-
olds with three objects, one at a time, each of which they dropped down a
82
Constructing a Language
Table 3.1
One child’s 25 most frequently used words at age 2;0.
Reference
Movement and location
it
where’s
one
here
that
there
the
on
a
down
this
go
it’s
Desire and prohibition
that’s
want
my
more
People
don’t
I
Conversational devices
Mummy
yeah
you
no
oh
and

chute. The experimenter and child then moved to a special location where
they played with a fourth object. They then moved back to the original lo-
cation and (after a brief distraction) looked at all four objects inside a box,
and the experimenter said “There’s a gazzer in there.” On the basis of this
experience, most of the children thought the gazzer was the one they had
played with at the special location. Samuelson and Smith argued that the
children were associating the novel word, gazzer, with the most salient
possible referent in this situation.
But two recent studies suggest a different interpretation of this result.
First, in a direct replication and extension of this study, Diesendruck et al.
(in press) reasoned that salience in this situation—as in all word learning
situations—was determined by children’s social-pragmatic inferences. To
illustrate this, they compared a situation similar to that of Samuelson and
Smith with another situation in which the experimenter accidentally
dropped an object so that it rolled over to the same special location (where
the experimenter and the child then played with it). They predicted that in
this situation children would not infer that the experimenter’s subsequent
reference to the gazzer was aimed at the object played with in the special
location because in this experimental condition there was no good prag-
matic reason for the adult to be singling out this object—since it ended up
in the new location only accidentally, and so was not treated in any special
way intentionally. And this is exactly what they found. Children did not
think there was anything special about the accidentally dropped object,
and so they did not preferentially assign the novel label to it. The point is
that in both studies—Samuelson and Smith and Diesendruck et al.—an
object was made more salient, if salience is thought of as an objective
property of an entity. Therefore, from Samuelson and Smith’s point of
view the children should have singled out the object played with in the
special location in both studies. But children were not blindly drawn to the
“salient” object in the Diesendruck et al. study because the accidentally
dropped object was not especially salient from an intentional point of
view. The most plausible interpretation of these ªndings is thus that in
both studies the children were actively attempting to determine the adult’s
communicative intentions when she used the new word.
The second study is that of Moore, Angelopoulos, and Bennett (1999).
They directly pitted objective salience against a relevant social cue (adult
gaze direction). In the key experimental condition, an adult looked at and
labeled one toy (“Look! A modi!”) while another toy was made objec-
tively more salient (by being lit up) at the same time. The salience did cap-
ture the children’s attention (they looked over at the toy that was lit up),
but this salience did not determine their pragmatic inferences about the
meaning of the new word. In a subsequent comprehension test in which
Words
83

they were asked to retrieve the modi, 24-month-olds consistently chose
the object that the adult had been looking at instead of the one that had
been lit up (and that indeed had captured their attention at the moment
the new word was said). So, at least by 24 months of age, gaze direction as
an indication of adult attention and communicative intentions wins out
over “objective salience” in this type of word learning situation.
An even deeper problem with garden-variety learning theory as an ac-
count of word learning is that the theory does not even acknowledge that
linguistic symbols are special. The theory implicitly holds that a linguistic
symbol is simply a sound (or possibly a hand sign) that “stands for” some-
thing in the world. What it means for one thing to stand for another is
never really addressed. But if we look at children’s earliest comprehension
and production of real-live linguistic utterances, we see that there is some-
thing very special going on. The child encounters an adult making funny
noises at her. To make sense of this odd behavior she must attempt to de-
termine the purpose for which that person is making these funny noises.
Once she determines that the adult is making these funny noises in an at-
tempt to communicate with her, she still must determine precisely what
the adult is attempting to communicate with some particular word. That
is to say, the child must determine, ªrst, the adult’s overall communicative
intention and, then, the particular way or ways that the new word is con-
tributing to that communicative intention. This complex set of cognitive
and social-cognitive processes is not accurately described by the simple
term “association.”
Relatedly and ªnally, learning theory has no concrete proposal for why
language acquisition begins when it does at around 1 year of age. Human
infants are very good at associative learning from very early in ontogeny,
as demonstrated by the research of Haith, Rovee-Collier, and many others
(see Haith and Benson, 1997, for a review). And so, as argued in Chap-
ter 2, if association were all that was involved, language development
should begin in early infancy. But it does not, and so we may assume that
some additional factor or factors come on-line later, speciªcally at around
1 year of age.
3.3.2. Constraints and Principles
A second approach to word learning is the so-called constraints approach
(e.g., Markman, 1989, 1992). In this approach the problem of word learn-
ing is formulated in terms of Quine’s (1960) famous parable of a native
who utters the expression “Gavagai!” and “shows” a foreigner the in-
tended referent by pointing to a salient event as it unfolds: a rabbit run-
ning past. The problem is that since there is no shared context between
84
Constructing a Language

interactants for this expression, there is basically no way that the foreigner
can know whether the native’s novel expression is being used to refer to
the activity, to the rabbit, to some part of the rabbit’s body, to the color of
the rabbit’s fur, or to any of an inªnite number of things. This problem
of referential indeterminacy—ªrst explored in depth by Wittgenstein
(1955)—is thus a kind of poverty-of-the-stimulus problem: children
would seem to need additional information, over and above a perceived
sound pattern and a perceived external scene, to learn the conventional
communicative signiªcance of a linguistic symbol. To solve this problem,
constraints theorists have posited the existence of certain a priori con-
straints and/or principles that children bring to the word learning situa-
tion. These constraints and principles “limit the hypothesis space” so that
the child is given a head start in solving the problem of referential indeter-
minacy in particular cases. The constraints approach thus emphasizes that
the child needs a priori, specialized machinery to learn the linguistic con-
ventions of those around her.
In Markman’s (1989, 1992) account, young children ªrst encounter lan-
guage in possession of two especially important word learning constraints:
(1) the Whole Object constraint, and (2) the Mutual Exclusivity constraint
(a third is the Taxonomic assumption). The Whole Object constraint
claims that, in the absence of direct evidence to the contrary, young chil-
dren assume that a novel word is being used to refer to a whole object—
not to one of the object’s parts or properties or to an activity in which it is
engaged. Children learn other kinds of words because the second con-
straint, Mutual Exclusivity, blocks the Whole Object constraint when chil-
dren already have a name for an object. Thus, for example, if the child
hears the word modi in association with an object whose name she already
knows, she can assume that this new word is being used to refer to an ob-
ject part, property, state, or action—although the theory does not specify
how children determine precisely which of these other types of referents
might be intended on a speciªc occasion. It is important to emphasize that
the theory is not just that young children perceive the world in certain
ways or ªnd certain things especially salient, but rather that they assume a
priori certain kinds of connections between language and the world.
While it is true that many children learning many of the world’s lan-
guages acquire a disproportionately large number of adult nouns early in
development, it is still the case that almost all children learning almost all
languages learn other types of words early in development as well (and
there are explanations for the priority of nouns other than the Whole Ob-
ject constraint; see Section 3.1.1). Markman’s theory assumes that these
other words must all be learned in communicative situations involving ob-
jects for which the child already has a name (otherwise the Whole Object
Words
85

constraint would take charge). But this particular aspect of the theory has
no empirical support, and indeed in the study of Tomasello and Akhtar
(1995) 24-month-old children learned a new action word (verb) even
when they did not know the name of the object engaged in the action.
Young children’s propensity to acquire nouns early in development thus
very likely has some explanation other than an a priori Whole Object con-
straint. Children might learn many nouns early in development simply be-
cause whole, concrete objects are so salient and important in their social
interactions with other persons, and so whole objects are often the focus
of their social-pragmatic inferences—with no a priori connection to lan-
guage. In terms of the Mutual Exclusivity assumption, studies by Mervis,
Golinkoff, and Bertrand (1994), Deak and Maratsos (1998), and Clark
and Svaib (1997) have demonstrated that from an early age young chil-
dren will accept more than one word for a given entity if they understand
that an adult is attempting to express different perspectives on that entity.
In partial recognition of the problems created by hard-and-fast word
learning constraints, Golinkoff, Mervis, and Hirsh-Pasek (1994) proposed
a number of word learning principles. Principles are “softer” than con-
straints and so may be violated more easily, and, at least in some accounts,
they are not a priori but rather derived from children’s word learning ex-
periences. This is an important theoretical difference because this means
that word learning principles cannot be used to solve Quine’s problem of
referential indeterminacy, at least not in the initial stages of word learning.
Also, a main problem, once again, is that the theorists who espouse word
learning principles have focused mainly on the learning of object labels to
the neglect of other types of words, so that the proposed principles often
work directly against the learning of word types other than object labels.
A list of the major principles proposed (from Golinkoff, Mervis, and
Hirsh-Pasek, 1994) and some of the other word types that would be hin-
dered if they were actually employed is as follows:
• Reference (“Words map to objects, actions, attributes”): performa-
tives such as hi, bye, please, and thank you are quite common in early
language, and they are not referential.
• Object scope (“Words map to whole objects”): verbs, adjectives,
prepositions, and many nonprototypical nouns like breakfast, party,
and park are all quite common in early vocabularies, and they do not
map to whole objects.
• Extendability (“Words extend to other referents”): proper nouns
such as Daddy, Jeffrey, and Mickey Mouse are quite common in early
vocabularies, and they do not extend to other referents at all.
• Categorical scope (“Words extend to basic-level categories”): proper
nouns such as Daddy do not extend, and commonly occurring pro-
86
Constructing a Language

nouns such as it, that, and she extend to a wide range of objects well
beyond basic-level categories.
And so not only would these particular word learning constraints and
principles not help the child with words other than object labels, they
would in fact be a positive hindrance to the learning of all these other
word types.
Constraints theory and principles theory were created by looking at
some facts about the learning of common nouns (that many children pre-
fer object labels early in development, that they extend them routinely to
novel objects, and so on), and then concocting a set of descriptive con-
straints that might account for these facts—with virtually no attention to
other types of words. It is also a problem that constraints theory has not
gone beyond an associationistic view of the symbolic relationship (it uses
the metaphor of “mapping,” instead of associating, word to world or con-
cept, but the basic idea is the same), which is, as argued earlier, wholly in-
adequate to capture the distinctive quality of linguistic symbols.
Finally, like learning theory, constraints theory has no explanation for
why language emerges when it does in human ontogeny—other than to
stipulate that the constraints emerge when they do (perhaps matura-
tionally), with no independent evidence of this other than the (circular)
fact that language begins when it does. It would be much more satisfying
to be able to connect children’s word learning to other aspects of their cog-
nitive and social-cognitive development in ways that would help to ex-
plain the age at which they begin to learn words.
3.3.3. Social-Pragmatic Theory
Like constraints theory, the social-pragmatic theory of word learning rec-
ognizes that garden-variety associative learning is not sufªcient for the ac-
quisition of linguistic symbols; the process must be constrained. But, in
this view, posing the problem in terms of Quine’s Gavagai parable—and
then positing special word learning constraints to solve it—sets things up
in the wrong way from the beginning (Bruner, 1983; Nelson, 1985;
Tomasello, 1992b). That way of viewing things radically underestimates
the informational richness of the social-interactive environment in which
children learn language. In social-pragmatic theory, in contrast, the focus
is on two inherently constraining aspects of the word learning process: (1)
the structured social world into which children are born—full of scripts,
routines, social games, and other patterned cultural interactions; and (2)
children’s social-cognitive capacities for tuning into and participating in
this structured social world—especially joint attention and intention-read-
ing (with the resulting cultural learning).
Words
87

First, human children are born into worlds in which their caregivers
have certain activities to perform on a regular basis, many involving the
child directly. Some of these routines are fairly constant across cultures
(such as nursing), while some are unique to particular cultures. Watson-
Gegeo and Gegeo (1986), for example, report a “calling-out” routine en-
gaged in regularly by Kwara’ae children and adults that is different from
anything participated in by Western children. But Peters and Boggs
(1986), in an analysis of adult-child routines from several societies, show
that there are certain parallels between adult structuring of this routine
and adult structuring of several routines common in Western middle-class
culture. They speculate that the existence of some kinds of routines is vir-
tually inevitable in human social life and that, although there may be im-
portant cultural differences in what routines are practiced, there may also
be some underlying commonalities of process across cultures. And young
children seem to learn almost all of their earliest language in cultural rou-
tines of one sort or another. Social interactional routines such as feeding,
diaper changing, bathing, interactive games, book reading, car trips, and a
host of other activities constitute the formats—joint attentional frames—
within which children acquire their earliest linguistic symbols (Ratner and
Bruner, 1978; Ninio and Bruner, 1978; Snow and Goldªeld, 1983; for
summaries see Bruner, 1983; Nelson, 1985). In general, if a child were
born into a world in which the same event never recurred, the same object
never appeared twice, and the adult never used the same language in the
same context, it is difªcult to see how that child—no matter her cognitive
capabilities—could acquire a natural language.
Perhaps ironically, one of the most convincing demonstrations of the
power of a structured cultural environment in the process of language ac-
quisition does not involve human children at all because it involves, in ef-
fect, a comparison between being raised inside and outside a cultural con-
text. The case is that of chimpanzees who have been taught to use human-
like symbols. The ªrst attempts to teach chimpanzees such skills relied on
various associationistic training techniques. But when these pioneer chim-
panzees were trained to point to the thing named, they could not then turn
around and name the thing pointed to; when they were taught to name the
thing pointed to, they could not point to the thing named. In contrast,
apes such as the famous Kanzi, who were raised in a different way, did not
show these limitations of language understanding and use. Savage-
Rumbaugh (1990) reports that the crucial difference is that whereas the
earlier chimpanzee students were “trained” to do certain things in certain
situations, Kanzi was not trained at all. Rather, he was raised more natu-
rally in a human-like cultural environment in which he was regularly in-
cluded in highly structured cultural activities such as changing diapers,
88
Constructing a Language

preparing food, going outdoors, taking a bath, blowing bubbles, riding in
the car, looking at a book, and so on. Language was used by his caretakers
in these situations in any way that seemed natural to them, and Kanzi
learned symbols in these situations in seemingly human-like ways. This
would seem to be a very convincing demonstration that routine cultural
activities and events structure the language learner’s experience in a way
that is conducive to the acquisition of communicative conventions.
The second half of the equation concerns the social-cognitive abilities of
young children that allow them to participate intersubjectively in these
culturally constituted joint attentional frames. Participation with another
person in cultural activities requires in most cases the ability to coordinate
attention to the person with attention to the objects that person is interact-
ing with, and even, in many cases, to take the perspective of that person
on the object. As documented in Chapter 2, this coordination begins at
around 9 months of age when infants begin to engage in a complex of be-
haviors and interactions with adults most often known as joint attention.
Within joint attentional frames, adults often make linguistic utterances
in an attempt to exhort children to attend to certain aspects of the shared
situation. In attempting to comply with these exhortations—that is, in at-
tempting to comprehend the adult’s communicative intention as expressed
in the utterance—children use all kinds of interpretive strategies based on
the pragmatic assumption that utterances are somehow relevant to the on-
going social interaction (Sperber and Wilson, 1986; Bruner, 1983; Bloom,
1993). In the social-pragmatic view, word learning does not consist in the
child engaging in a reºective cognitive task in an attempt to make correct
mappings of word to world, but rather it emerges naturally from situa-
tions in which children are engaged in social interactions in which they are
attempting to understand and interpret adult communicative intentions as
expressed in utterances (making sense; Nelson, 1985). Learning the com-
municative signiªcance of an individual word consists in the child ªrst dis-
cerning the adult’s overall communicative intention in making the utter-
ance, and then identifying the speciªc functional role this word is playing
in the communicative intention as a whole. This is a process of intention-
reading and extraction, not of association or constraint.
The most basic point that differentiates social-pragmatic theory from
constraints theory is the recognition that human linguistic communication
can take place only when there is some “common ground” (joint at-
tentional frame) between speaker and listener, which sets the context for
the reading of the speciªc communicative intentions behind a word or ut-
terance. Thus, in Quine’s “Gavagai!” situation, if, before hearing the
novel word, the foreigner understood that she and her informant were
searching for material to make a coat, she would be very unlikely to infer
Words
89

that the word was being used to refer to the running activity or the leg of
the rabbit. If she knew they were searching for a particular pet rabbit with
its own name, she would be very unlikely to interpret the word as a com-
mon noun for the class of rabbits. And on and on. In general, the shared
intentional situation (joint attentional frame, common ground) constrains
the interpretation of the speaker’s communicative intentions from the out-
set—given, of course, a child and an adult capable of participating in
shared intentional situations. Even Quine himself is very clear (1960: pref-
ace and 28) that the Gavagai situation is an unrealistic (“radical”) situa-
tion, stripped of a shared culture, shared intentional situation, and other
background cues to the native’s communicative intent. But children do not
learn language in such a vacuum; they learn it in the midst of meaningful
social interactions in which they share common ground with their adult
interlocutor (such as searching for material to make a coat), and this com-
mon ground then serves to “constrain the hypothesis space” without any
dedicated, language-speciªc principles or constraints. In situations where
there is no common ground—which happen all day every day in the lives
of young children—children simply are not learning new words.
In the social-pragmatic view, then, children acquire linguistic symbols as
a kind of by-product of social interaction with adults, in much the same
way they learn many other cultural conventions (Tomasello, Kruger, and
Ratner, 1993). The acquisition of linguistic symbols does not need exter-
nal linguistic constraints in this theory because children are always partici-
pating in and experiencing particular social contexts, and it is these social
contexts that serve to “constrain” the interpretive possibilities. The child
who knows that his mother wishes him to put on his hat (she is holding it
out to him and gesturing) assumes that her utterance is relevant to that in-
tention, and this is what guides his interpretations of any novel word in
the utterance. All of the philosophically possible hypotheses that Quine
and others may create are simply not part of the child’s experience in this
particular social context—assuming of course that by the time language
acquisition begins young children have a reasonably adult-like under-
standing of at least some aspects of the social activities in which they par-
ticipate. Having complied with adult instructions to experience a situation
in a particular way in a given instance, the child may then learn to produce
the appropriate linguistic symbol herself (by role reversal imitation) when
she wishes others to experience a situation in that same way—thus enter-
ing into the world of bi-directionally (intersubjectively) understood lin-
guistic symbols (Tomasello, 1999).
Importantly, the social-pragmatic theory has a clear answer to the ques-
tion of why language acquisition begins when it does. Language acquisi-
tion begins when it does because it depends on the ability to share atten-
90
Constructing a Language

tion with other human beings communicatively and so to form symbols,
an ability that emerges near the end of the ªrst year of life (Tomasello,
1995a; Carpenter, Nagell, and Tomasello, 1998; and see Chapter 2). This
is not to deny that as a result of learning their ªrst words children induce
some word learning principles. One good example is the principle of con-
trast (see Section 3.2.3), a pragmatic principle that helps young children to
specify word meanings more precisely. And of course as children learn
more language they learn some principles of grammar (that the and a are
used with count nouns, that sentential complements typically indicate
mental verbs, and so on), and they use these linguistic contexts to “boot-
strap” later word learning. The social-pragmatic theory thus does not
deny the usefulness of some word learning principles; it simply emphasizes
that the foundational skills of word learning are social-cognitive skills,
and that all other participating skills—including any induced principles—
are built on this foundation.
3.4. Summary
In this chapter I have adopted a social-pragmatic approach to word learn-
ing. As compared with other approaches, this approach has two impor-
tant advantages. First, it connects the learning of words with many of chil-
dren’s other joint attentional and cultural learning activities in a way that
demonstrates precisely what a linguistic symbol is, in comparison with
other forms of simple association between sounds and experiences. Lin-
guistics symbols are social conventions that may be used to manipulate the
attentional and mental states of other people in a way that is different
from, but still similar to, the way this is done with other joint attentional
behaviors (such as nonlinguistic gesturing). Second, unlike any other the-
ory, social-pragmatic theory explains why word learning begins when it
does in the months immediately following the ªrst birthday. The explana-
tion is that word learning awaits the emergence of children’s more funda-
mental social-cognitive skills of joint attention and intention-reading, on
which it depends fundamentally. Social-pragmatic theory may also be used
to explain the noun bias in early vocabularies by focusing on how easy or
difªcult it is to read adult communicative intentions as expressed in adult
utterances in different situations.
In proposing factors involved in word learning, I have identiªed three
types of factors, depending on their precise role. I have called joint atten-
tion and intention-reading foundational because they in essence deªne the
symbolic dimensions of linguistic communication. But there are also fac-
tors that we may call prerequisite. Thus, in order to learn a word young
children must be able to segment the speech stream into identiªable units,
Words
91

and they must be able to conceptualize different aspects of their experien-
tial worlds. (In hypothesizing semantic representations for children’s word
meanings, it is important to keep in mind that these will be composed of
elements from the child’s own, not adults’, conceptualizations.) In the be-
ginning, these prerequisite and foundational skills are all that children
have available to them; 1-year-olds do not have any constraints, princi-
ples, knowledge of syntactic context, or knowledge of paradigmatic con-
trast to rely on. As development proceeds, however, and “all the easy ones
are taken,” the job of word learning becomes both more complex and
more powerful. Children learn to read adult communicative intentions in
a wider variety of contexts, and they learn to use a wider range of infor-
mational sources that help them do this.
And so ªnally we must recognize other factors that are facilitative of the
process of word learning. Most important among these are the linguistic
factors of context and contrast. First, fairly early in their linguistic careers
children begin to rely on their knowledge of the communicative signiª-
cance of other words, and/or linguistic constructions, in the adult’s utter-
ance (that is, in the immediate linguistic context). This involves an under-
standing of the adult’s overall communicative intention and a kind of
blame-assignment procedure in which different components of this are as-
signed to different components of the utterance. For instance, suppose an
adult asks the child something like Do you want to glorp the modi? To
comprehend the new words, the child must understand something of the
overall communicative intention (I am being asked if I want to do some-
thing to something) and what parts of this are already taken by the known
words and constructions (and intonation)—and so what roles are left for
the new words to play. Second, also fairly early in their linguistic careers
children begin to use their knowledge of other words that might contrast
paradigmatically in the adult utterance with one they do not know: Why
did she say I could not throw it but I could glorp it? Contrast of this type
would seem to be especially important in learning ªne-grained distinctions
among closely related words (give, have, use, share). These two additional
sources of linguistic information—one in the immediate linguistic context
and one in the child’s stored linguistic experience—are primarily responsi-
ble for the rapid pace of word learning during the late preschool years and
beyond (that is, along with derivational morphology and literacy).
A very interesting ªnding that highlights the tight interrelation of chil-
dren’s different language acquisition skills is that lexical and grammatical
development are highly intercorrelated. Anisfeld et al. (1998) found that
children’s early vocabularies begin to expand quite rapidly soon after the
onset of grammatical speech, presumably indicating some synergistic in-
teraction between the two. Additionally, Bates and her colleagues (Caselli,
92
Constructing a Language

Casadio, and Bates, 1999; summarized in Bates and Goodman, 1999)
have found that only after children have vocabularies of several hundred
words do they begin to produce in earnest grammatical speech. Moreover,
they have found a very high positive correlation between children’s lexical
and grammatical skills at all points in early development.
There are a number of hypotheses that might explain these correlational
ªndings. One is that children must have a certain number of words before
they can understand a syntactic construction, and understanding more
words helps in understanding more constructions. Another is that know-
ing linguistic constructions helps in learning words, in ways discussed
above. A third—not incompatible with the other two—is that learning
words and learning grammatical constructions are both part of the same
overall process. Although a bit more complex, learning the communicative
signiªcance of a complex expression or construction shares many acquisi-
tion processes with learning the communicative signiªcance of a single
word. This parallel analysis for words and constructions is particularly
apt if we consider words composed of multiple morphemes expressing a
complex event or situation and its participants—even something relatively
simple such as the Spanish Dámelo! (Give it to me!)—which is the normal
case for many of the words in many of the world’s more fusional lan-
guages (much more so than in isolating languages like English). Indeed,
coming from the perspective of Polish, a highly inºected language,
Dabrowska (2000) has called syntactic constructions simply “big words.”
In any case, the processes of lexical and grammatical development are
closely intertwined, and theories of child language acquisition would do
well to begin to integrate their accounts of these different aspects of the
process more closely. With this goal in mind, we can now turn to an inves-
tigation of the ways in which children acquire productive control of their
ªrst constructional patterns containing multiple words.
Words
93

Constructing a Language
Early Syntactic Constructions
F O U R
Early Syntactic Constructions
Our language can be seen as an ancient city: a maze of
little streets and squares, of old and new houses, and
of houses with additions from various periods; and this
surrounded by a multitude of new boroughs with
straight regular streets and uniform houses.
—LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN
AT THE same time they are extracting words
from adult utterances, young children are also learning from these utter-
ances more complex linguistic expressions and constructions as kind of
linguistic gestalts. Indeed, if one takes a usage-based view of language,
learning to use complex expressions and constructions shares a number of
fundamental processes with learning to use words. A child can learn to use
the English passive construction appropriately and productively, for ex-
ample, only by witnessing events in the world and attempting to discern
speakers’ communicative intention in referring to these events with a cer-
tain pattern of linguistic symbols (to communicate about an entity to
which something happens). Given that each language has its own lexical
and grammatical conventions, there is really no alternative to this basic
account of how children acquire linguistic symbols, be they words or more
complex constructions. But there is still the question of how concrete or
abstract these initial acquisitions are—whether they are based in speciªc
words and phrases or in abstract categories and principles—and this is in-
deed the central question in the study of children’s early syntactic develop-
ment. A brief history will clarify the issue and the current approach to it.
Using the linguistics of the 1950s (namely American structural linguis-
tics), the ªrst modern researchers of child language acquisition attempted
in the 1960s to identify the items and structures in children’s language us-
ing exclusively the method of distributional analysis. They make basically
no assumptions about possible correspondences between child and adult
linguistic competence. The main ªnding was that many of children’s earli-
est word combinations involved one constant word which could be freely

combined with any one of many variable words. Many of these lexically
based patterns also seemed to show some consistencies, however, espe-
cially with respect to ordering, and so Braine (1963) formalized these pat-
terns into a three-rule pivot grammar that was supposed to be what chil-
dren used to generate their language:
1. P1  O (More juice, More milk, There Daddy, There Joe).
2. O  P2 (Juice gone, Mommy gone, Flowers pretty, Janie pretty).
3. O  O (Ball table, Mommy sock—utterances without a pivot).
The main problem with formalized pivot grammar was that it was empiri-
cally inadequate since (1) children did not always use the same pivot in a
consistent sequential position, (2) children sometimes combined two piv-
ots, and (3) the O  O rule was essentially a wastebasket for non-
canonical utterances (Bloom, 1971). It was also unclear in this account
how young children could ever get from these purely child-like syntactic
categories and rules to the more adult-like syntactic categories and rules
that were being described by a number of emerging linguistic theories at
that time.
The natural next attempt, therefore, was to apply the new adult linguis-
tic models of the 1960s and 1970s to the data on child language acquisi-
tion. These attempts—which included several versions of transformational
generative grammar, case grammar, generative semantics, and others—
were reviewed and evaluated by Brown (1973). Brown’s basic conclusion
was that, while children’s linguistic productions could be forced into any
one of the models, none of them was totally satisfactory in accounting for
all of the data. But the more fundamental problem was that there was re-
ally no evidence that children employed, or even needed, the adult-like lin-
guistic categories and rules that were being attributed to them in these
models. As one example, Bowerman (1973) surveyed the utterances pro-
duced by several children learning several languages and found that—on
internal grounds—there was no reason to assume that the children used as
a constituent of their utterances anything like Verb Phrase (VP  Verb 
Complement), a crucial constituent of some adult models. The main point
was that few if any of the phenomena of adult language that required the
positing of VP as a coherent utterance constituent were present in the lan-
guage of young children. Schlesinger (1971) made the same basic argu-
ment for the grammatical relations “subject” and “direct object.” And
there was a suspicion among many people who looked at languages across
different cultures that no single formal grammar would be adequate to ac-
count for the variety of typological patterns observed (Slobin, 1973).
Returning to a more child-centered view, several theorists—including
Brown (1973), Slobin (1970), Schlesinger (1971), Bloom (1973), and
Early Syntactic Constructions
95

Braine (1976)—suggested a more semantic-cognitive basis for children’s
early language: the so-called semantic relations approach. The basic obser-
vation in this case was that some of the fundamental syntactic relations
apparent in children’s early language correspond rather closely to some of
the categories of sensory-motor cognition as outlined by Piaget (1952).
For example, infants know nonlinguistically some things about the causal
relations among agents, actions, and objects, and this knowledge might
form the basis for a linguistic schema of the type Agent-Action-Object
(and similarly for Possessor-Possessed, Object-Location, Object-Attribute,
and so on). While this approach seemed to capture something of the spirit
of early language—children mostly talk about a fairly delimited set of
events, relations, and objects that correspond in some ways to Piagetian
sensory-motor categories—it was also empirically inadequate, as many
child utterances ªt into none of the categories while others ªt into several
(and different investigators proposed different categories; Howe, 1976).
Moreover, echoing the theoretical problems of pivot grammar, there were
basically no serious theoretical proposals about how young children got
from these semantically based categories to the more abstract syntactic
categories of adults.
And so, swinging the pendulum back in the adult direction once again,
in the 1980s a new group of theorists began to advocate a return to adult
grammars, but in this case using some new formal models such as govern-
ment and binding theory, lexical functional grammar, and the like (e.g.,
Baker and McCarthy, 1981; Hornstein and Lightfoot, 1981; Pinker,
1984). The general consensus was that proposing a discontinuity from
child to adult language—as such things as pivot grammar and the seman-
tic relations approach seemed to do—created insurmountable “logical”
problems, that is to say, problems of learnability. These logical problems
were thought by learnability theorists to be sufªcient justiªcation to make
the “continuity assumption,” namely, that children operate with the same
basic linguistic categories and rules as adults (Pinker, 1984). This general
point of view was strongly associated with linguistic nativism, in which all
human beings possess the same basic linguistic competence, in the form of
a universal grammar, throughout their lives (Chomsky, 1968, 1980a). The
inadequacies of this approach soon became apparent as well (at least to
more developmentally minded researchers), most fundamentally its inabil-
ity to deal with the problems of cross-linguistic variation and developmen-
tal change—how children could “link” an abstract and unchanging uni-
versal grammar to the structures of a particular language, and why, if this
was the process, children’s language looked so different from adults’ lan-
guage. And again, there was no evidence that children actually use ab-
stract adult-like categories—continuity was only an assumption.
96
Constructing a Language

It is thus fair to say that all the initial attempts to account for child lan-
guage acquisition in terms of some kind of abstractions failed. They failed
even though they included attempts based on
• the child making her own abstractions from adult utterances (pivot
grammar);
• the child possessing adult abstractions from the beginning (as
speciªed by one or another formal grammar); and
• the child starting with semantic-cognitive abstractions (the semantic
relations approach).
Given all these failures, one obvious possibility is that young children be-
gin with no linguistic abstractions at all, or with only a very limited set.
What if instead of leaping at every opportunity to attribute to children ab-
stract linguistic categories and constructions, researchers simply acknowl-
edged the empirical fact that linguistic abstractions build up during ontog-
eny in a much slower and more piecemeal fashion than previously
believed—and then adjusted their models accordingly? That is the strategy
that will be pursued here.
On the face of it this approach seems to face the problem of You Can’t
Get There From Here—the downfall of earlier child-centered approaches
such as pivot grammar and semantic relations—because adults clearly do
work with a fairly wide range of linguistic abstractions. But the current
approach is different from its progenitors in not sending children off ini-
tially in any wrong directions, making the wrong kinds of generalizations
based on pivot grammar or semantic relations. Children make the right
kinds of generalizations from the beginning, just slowly and unevenly—
depending on input. Their early constructions are thus similar to adult
constructions; it is just that they are simpler and more concrete, with
fewer and weaker abstractions—because they are based on less linguistic
experience. In combination with the previously described new develop-
ments in usage-based linguistics—comprehensive and rigorous yet still
child-friendly models of the adult endpoint—and developmental psychol-
ogy—more powerful models of child cognition and learning—this new ap-
proach makes it much easier than before to envisage how children might
get from here (item-based constructions) to there (adult syntactic compe-
tence).
In this chapter, I attempt to describe, and to some degree explain, chil-
dren’s early multi-word syntactic constructions. The next chapter deals
with children’s later, more abstract syntactic constructions and lays out in
more detail the basic theoretical approaches in the ªeld. For now, the one
piece of theory we need is this. Generative grammar approaches, whatever
their speciªcs, predict that all of the particular linguistic items and struc-
Early Syntactic Constructions
97

tures that fall under a certain formal description should emerge at the
same time in development and be applied productively across all lexical
and grammatical items basically immediately. For example:
Once a child is able to parse an utterance such as “Close the door!,” he will
be able to infer from the fact that the verb “close” in English precedes its
complement “the door,” that all verbs in English precede their complements.
(Radford, 1990: 61)
In contrast, usage-based approaches expect children’s learning to be more
gradual, piecemeal, and lexically dependent—with the acquisition of par-
ticular linguistic structures depending heavily on the speciªc language to
which a particular child is exposed, and with generalizations coming only
after a fair amount of concrete linguistic material has been learned.
4.1. The Nature of Constructions
A basic unit of traditional linguistic analysis is the construction. Clas-
sically, one could talk about such things as the English passive construc-
tion, the German noun phrase construction, and so forth. Because the em-
phasis was on describing very general patterns, these constructions were
almost always described in terms of abstract linguistic categories and rules
such as Noun, Verb, Article  Noun, SVO, and so forth. The difference in
modern-day usage-based approaches—especially construction grammar
(Fillmore, 1989; Goldberg, 1995; Croft, 2001) and cognitive grammar
(Langacker, 1987a, 1991)—is that the search is for all kinds of usage pat-
terns, even those of only limited generality. Usage-based approaches there-
fore seek to account not just for “core grammar,” as in most formal lin-
guistic approaches, but for all kinds of linguistic items and structures—
including idioms, irregular constructions, mixed constructions, and meta-
phorical extensions—all within one theoretical framework. Most impor-
tantly, usage-based theorists do not search for the most general abstrac-
tions possible in a corpus and automatically attribute them to the speaker.
The level of abstraction at which the speaker is working in particular cases
may or may not correspond to the most abstract level the linguist can ªnd;
it is in all cases an empirical question that most often needs psychological
experimentation (priming experiments, experiments with nonce words,
and so on).
4.1.1. Why Constructions Are Not Rules
As outlined in Chapter 1, formal linguistic approaches (including genera-
tive grammar) characterize natural languages in terms of formal lan-
98
Constructing a Language

guages, using as basic theoretical primitives meaningless algebraic rules
and meaningful linguistic elements that serve as variables in the rules. But
many contemporary linguists simply do not believe that the analogy be-
tween natural languages and formal languages is a particularly accurate or
productive one—most importantly because it effaces the symbolic dimen-
sion of grammatical constructions. The alternative is to look at linguistic
competence, not in terms of the possession of a formal grammar of seman-
tically empty rules, but rather in terms of the mastery of a structured in-
ventory of meaningful linguistic constructions.
Beginning at the beginning, for usage-based theorists the fundamental
reality of language is people making utterances to one another on particu-
lar occasions of use. When people repeatedly use the same particular and
concrete linguistic symbols to make utterances to one another in “similar”
situations, what may emerge over time is a pattern of language use,
schematized in the minds of users as one or another kind of linguistic cate-
gory or construction. As opposed to linguistic rules conceived of as alge-
braic procedures for combining symbols that do not themselves contribute
to meaning, linguistic categories and constructions are themselves mean-
ingful linguistic symbols—since they are nothing other than the patterns in
which meaningful linguistic symbols are used to communicate. Thus, the
pattern X VERBed Y the Z is a construction of English that signiªes some
kind of transfer of possession (either literal or metaphorical); the pattern
the X signiªes a “thing” (in the sense of Langacker, 1987b). There are no
linguistic entities—lexical or syntactic—that are not symbolic in this way;
all have communicative signiªcance because they all derive directly from
language use.
Usage-based linguists such as Langacker (1987a), Bybee (1995), Fill-
more (1989), Goldberg (1995), and Croft (2001) thus recognize a contin-
uum of meaningful linguistic constructions from morphemes to words to
phrases to syntactic assemblies. These constructions are of different levels
of complexity, but they are all meaningful in basically the same way. This
is true regardless of whether they comprise concrete and particular items
(as in words and idioms), more abstract classes of items (as in word classes
and abstract constructions), or complex combinations of concrete and ab-
stract pieces of language (such as mixed constructions). Thus, before they
are 2 years old, many young children have in their linguistic inventories
concrete words (such as bird), some bound morphemes of varying degrees
of productivity (for example, plural -s, past tense -ed, but only with some
words), frozen phrases (such as I-wanna-do-it), and a variety of item-
based (mixed) constructions (Where’s-the X? X on-there; I-wanna X).
From a psycholinguistic point of view, children do not ªrst learn words
and then combine them into sentences via contentless syntactic “rules.”
Early Syntactic Constructions
99

Rather, children learn simultaneously from adult utterances meaningful
linguistic structures of many shapes and sizes and degrees of abstraction,
and they then produce their own utterances on particular occasions of use
by piecing together some of these many and variegated units in ways that
express their immediate communicative intention.
The most important point is that constructions are nothing more or less
than patterns of usage, which may therefore become relatively abstract if
these patterns include many different kinds of speciªc linguistic symbols.
But never are they empty rules devoid of semantic content or communica-
tive function. In usage-based approaches, contentless rules, principles, pa-
rameters, constraints, features, and so forth are the formal devices of pro-
fessional linguists; they simply do not exist in the minds of speakers of a
natural language.
4.1.2. Utterances and Constructions
To explicate the nature of constructions more fully, we must begin with
some terminological clariªcations. The basic problem is that traditional
linguistic analysis privileges words and rules, but these differ from each
other on two dimensions simultaneously. Words are both simple and con-
crete whereas rules are both complex and abstract. To be clear, we must
therefore unconfound these two dimensions. We will do so by referring to
concrete pieces of language as either words (simple, such as tree, run) or
expressions (complex, such as How are you?), and to linguistic abstrac-
tions as either categories (simple, such as N or NP) or constructions (com-
plex, such as NP  V  NP). When we wish to be neutral with regard to
the level of abstractness involved, we will use the terms linguistic items
(simple) and linguistic structures (complex). The situation is actually a bit
more complex than this, as one of the main arguments below will be that
human beings master a number of linguistic structures that are compli-
cated mixtures of concrete pieces of language and linguistic abstractions.
But in any case, attempted clarity at the outset can only help, and so our
initial working deªnitions of key terms may be summarized as shown in
Figure 4.1.
A construction is prototypically a unit of language that comprises multi-
ple linguistic elements used together for a relatively coherent communica-
tive function, with sub-functions being performed by the elements as well.
Consequently, constructions may vary in complexity depending on the
number of elements involved and their interrelations. For example, the
English regular plural construction (N  s) is relatively simple, whereas
the passive construction (X was VERBed by Y) is relatively complex. Inde-
pendent of complexity, however, constructions may also vary in their
100
Constructing a Language

abstractness. Some constructions—indeed most of the well-studied con-
structions—are highly abstract, using various categories as their constitu-
tive elements. For example, the very simple English regular plural con-
struction and the more complex English passive construction are both
highly (though not totally) abstract. To repeat, even these most abstract
constructions are still symbolic, as they possess a coherent, if abstract,
meaning in relative independence of the lexical items involved. Thus, in
the utterance Mary sneezed John the football, our construal of the action
is
inºuenced
more
by
the
transfer-of-possession
meaning
of
the
ditransitive construction than it is by the verb sneeze (since sneezing is not
normally construed as transferring possession; Goldberg, 1995). Similarly,
we know that the nonce noun gazzers very likely indicates a plurality
without even knowing what a gazzer is.
Importantly, however, some complex linguistic structures are not based
on abstract categories, but rather on particular linguistic items (see espe-
cially the work in construction grammar, e.g., Fillmore, 1988, 1989; Fill-
more, Kaye, and O’Conner, 1988; Croft, 2001). The limiting case is totally
ªxed expressions such as the idiom How do you do?—which is a structure
of English with an idiosyncratic meaning that dissolves if any of the partic-
ular words is changed (one does not normally, with the same intended
meaning, ask How does she do?). Other clear examples are such well-
known idioms as kick the bucket and spill the beans, which have a little
more ºexibility and abstractness as different people may kick the bucket
and they may do so in past, present, or future tense—but we cannot, with
the same meaning, kick the pail or spill the peas. It turns out that, upon in-
spection, a major part of human linguistic competence—much more than
previously believed—involves the mastery of all kinds of routine formulas,
ªxed and semi-ªxed expressions, idioms, and frozen collocations. Indeed
Early Syntactic Constructions
101
Simple
Bold
Categories
Items
Structures
Words
(morphemes)
Constructions
Expressions
(phrases)
Linguistic
abstractions
Concrete
pieces of language
Linguistic symbols
(neutral re: abstraction)
Figure 4.1. Terminology for talking about constructions at different levels of
complexity and abstractness.

one of the distinguishing characteristics of native speakers of a language is
their control of these semi-ªxed expressions as ºuent units with somewhat
unpredictable meanings (Pawley and Syder, 1983; Wray and Perkins,
2000).
The theoretical problem for algebraic approaches such as generative
grammar is what to do with these ªxed and semi-ªxed complex structures.
They are complex and somewhat regular, and so they would seem to be a
part of the grammar to be generated by rules. But as ªxed expressions they
would seem to be a part of the lexicon to be memorized like words.
Chomsky’s (1980a) approach to the issue is to simply draw a line in the
sand. Idioms and idiosyncratic constructions are not part of core gram-
mar, and so they are not subject to the principles of universal grammar.
This approach has recently been characterized as the words and rules ap-
proach (also called the dual mechanism approach) by Pinker (1991, 1999)
and Clahsen (1999), for whom the lexicon contains everything that must
be learned by rote, while the grammar contains everything that can be
subsumed under a rule and so is part of the generative, productive compo-
nent of linguistic competence.* In line with the algebraic metaphor, every
linguistic structure is either a rote-learned item (variable) or an instan-
tiation of a productive rule (formula), with no provision for in-between
cases.
The problem is that there are many in-between cases; Chomsky’s line in
the sand is not so easy to draw. There are three classes of difªcult exam-
ples. First and most important are the many types of so-called mixed con-
structions, which have some components based on more regular rule-like
patterns and some components based on more idiosyncratic conventions
including particular words and/or morphemes. Consider the let alone con-
struction:
I wouldn’t live in New York, let alone Boston.
He wouldn’t use a bicycle, let alone a car.
She wouldn’t do calisthenics, let alone lift weights.
Fillmore, Kaye, and O’Conner (1988) have analyzed this construction in
detail, highlighting its many idiosyncratic properties, not the least of
which is the necessity of the construction-deªning lexical item let alone—
but acknowledging its canonical properties as well (for example, the initial
clause is garden variety). One particularly difªcult question is what ex-
actly is the grammatical status of the clause after the comma (let alone a
car, let alone lift weights), since it would not seem to ªt easily into any tra-
ditional grammatical categories. And so the problem is that this construc-
102
Constructing a Language
* We may refer to these approaches as “generative grammar lite” because they retain the
ºavor of the original but without all the fat (annoying formalisms).

tion is neither purely words nor purely rules (and its “rules” include both
regular and irregular ones).
Another example of a mixed construction—what are sometimes re-
ferred to as “schematic idioms” (Nunberg, Sag, and Wasow, 1994)—is the
-er construction:
The bigger they are, the nicer they are.
The more you try, the worse it gets.
The faster I run, the behinder I get.
This construction is a bit more non-canonical than the let alone construc-
tion, as both of the two clauses are difªcult to classify using classical
grammatical techniques, although there are obvious canonical elements as
well. The speciªc words and morphemes required here are also a bit less
straightforward, with the initial the clearly required and with some kind
of comparative term in each clause required as well (often but not always
comparative adjectives ending in -er).
Another slightly odd mixed construction (of special complexity) is the
“nominal extraposition” construction (Michaelis and Lambrecht, 1996):
It’s amazing the people you see here.
It’s ridiculous how much it costs.
It’s a joke the way they run that place.
Once more, there are obviously some general principles of English at
work, but this construction also has some singular properties shared by no
others in the language, including the mandatory presence of the initial It’s.
A complex family of mixed constructions known as there-constructions
(Lakoff, 1987) are especially common in early child language. In these
constructions the NP subject follows the verb:
There is my shoe.
There are my shoes.
The construction is of course deªned by the presence of the initial word
there, but it makes a difference if there is functioning as a locative (as in
the above examples) or as a so-called existential deictic (There once was a
man. . .)—and both of these are different from similar constructions be-
ginning with It (It is my shoe; *It are my shoes). In any case, the key ques-
tion is: Are this construction and other mixed constructions memorized or
generated by a rule? And is the rule speciªc to the construction or is it
more general? Is it a part of core grammar?
A second class of constructions problematic for traditional analyses are
constructions that are basically canonical, but that apply to a very limited
range of linguistic items—so that in writing “rules” for them we must re-
Early Syntactic Constructions
103

spect their narrow scope. As just one example, in English we can say
things like:
This hairdryer needs ªxing.
My house needs painting.
Note in this case that although hairdryer and house are the subjects of the
sentences they are the logical objects of the predicates ªxing and painting,
which are expressed as participles. Virtually no other verbs besides need
work in this construction of the English language (some people will accept
the semantically similar verbs require and want). It would thus seem that
this construction, while basically canonical, is at the same time best de-
scribed in lexically speciªc terms. And in some languages there are much
wider constructional patterns that still apply in very restricted ways; for
example, some languages organize constructions in one tense or person
ergatively but those in another tense or person accusatively (DeLancey,
1981; van Valin, 1992).
The third major class of constructions problematic for traditional analy-
ses comprises those that are abstract and productive but idiosyncratic.
Consider the well-known “incredulity construction”:
Him be a doctor!
My mother ride the train!
Her wash the dishes!
This is an extremely productive construction; a native speaker of English
can generate examples virtually ad inªnitum. It is also a totally abstract
construction, since most of these examples will share exactly zero mor-
phemes, and so it would seem to be rule based. But this is also a highly id-
iosyncratic construction sharing little with other constructions of English.
While it is ordered in canonical SVO ordering, the S is in accusative case
(Him, Her) and the V is devoid of the normal agreement marker for third-
person subjects (My mother ride, not rides). (It is very likely that this con-
struction is an historical relic—a salvaged part of some larger construc-
tion.) And so, which is it: rote-learned and in the lexicon, or rule-based
and in core grammar? The answer is that it is both and it is neither. It is
simply a construction of the English language that learners must acquire
by hearing exemplars and then generalize on the basis of a common pat-
tern among those exemplars.
The impossibility of making a clear distinction between the core and the
periphery of linguistic structure is a genuine scientiªc discovery, and it has
far-reaching theoretical implications.* Most importantly in the current
104
Constructing a Language
* Even theorists from a generative grammar perspective have recently begun to recognize
the problem. For example, Jackendoff (1996) has noted the large number of idioms and

context, it presents major, perhaps insurmountable, difªculties for any ac-
quisition theory that attempts to partition the linguistic universe cleanly
into just two kinds of entities: rule-based and unruly. Instead, it suggests
that language structure emerges from language use, and that a community
of speakers may conventionalize from their language use all kinds of lin-
guistic structures—from the more concrete to the more abstract, from the
more regular to the more idiomatic, and with all kinds of mixed construc-
tions as well. Adopting this perspective may require some rethinking of
many traditional linguistic entities, and indeed a number of theorists are
even moving toward the idea that so-called closed classes of grammatical
words and morphemes (auxiliaries, prepositions, determiners, comple-
mentizers, and so on) do not really form coherent linguistic classes at all.
People just learn to use the particular lexical items and grammatical mor-
phemes individually (must, the, that), and these typically number in the
dozens for each so-called closed grammatical class of words/morphemes.
And these morphemes do this in the context of larger constructions from
which they typically derive much of their meaning. While the class names
may be convenient for linguists, real language users may not operate with
such classes at all (Cullicover, 1999).
If we take these points seriously, an important question for acquisition
researchers becomes: If many, perhaps most, of the structures of a lan-
guage (as embodied in various kinds of semi-ªxed expressions, irregular
formations, schematic idioms, and the like) may be acquired through
“normal” processes of learning and abstraction—as they are in all theoret-
ical accounts, including the words and rules of generative grammar lite—
then why cannot the more regular and canonical aspects of a language be
acquired in this same straightforward way? Why do we need a second set
of mechanisms for core grammar over and above those used for learning
other aspects of language structure?
4.1.3. Constructions and Grammar
In usage-based linguistics, the linguistic competence of mature speakers of
a language is characterized not as a monolithic grammar—as in generative
grammar—but rather as a “structured inventory of symbolic units” in the
minds of its speakers (Langacker, 1987a; Croft, 2001). Exactly how these
Early Syntactic Constructions
105
unique collocations a language possesses and has basically posited that the lexicon is very
much larger than we previously thought. Cullicover (1999) has examined a number of syn-
tactic structures that have traditionally been described by abstract categories and rules, and
has found that in case after case detailed analysis of the particular words and expressions in-
volved reveals idiosyncrasies that cannot be accounted for with a general “one size ªts all”
abstract, algebraic description.

units are structured is currently not a settled question, and a number of
different lines of investigation—including everything from psycholin-
guistic experiments to computational modeling—are being pursued in the
quest for an answer. But at this point the majority view would seem to be
that linguistic items and structures are organized in the minds of speakers
in a complex, multi-dimensional network—with much variability in how
richly particular linguistic units are connected to others. Langacker
(1987a), Goldberg (1995), and Croft (2001) specify a number of kinds of
links that linguistic units might possibly have with one another, including
most importantly instance links (Where’s X? is an instance of the where-
question construction, and perhaps a wh-question construction more gen-
erally) and part-whole links (the passive construction has as one part the
past participle construction). A hypothetical example—focused on some
of the most abstract constructions of mature English speakers—is given in
Figure 4.2. The question of how children’s inventories match up with
adults’ is of course in all cases an empirical question.
Importantly, and radically, in usage-based approaches a given linguistic
structure may exist psychologically for the speaker both as a concrete ex-
pression on its own—at the bottom of the structural hierarchy, as it
were—and, at the same time, as an exemplar of some more abstract con-
struction or constructions (Bybee, 1985, 1995; Langacker, 1987a, 2000).
Thus, for most speakers of English, I dunno is a ªxed expression with a
single coherent meaning equivalent to a shrug of the shoulders. Its unitary
status can be seen by the fact that the pronunciation involves many re-
duced elements, and indeed on some occasions the word don’t can hardly
be heard it all (Bybee and Scheibman, 1999). But speakers may also break
down this expression into its constituent parts if the need arises. The pho-
nological reductions involved in such cases result from general principles
of automaticity in which repetition of a skill leads to smoother and less re-
dundant movements in its execution (Schneider, 1999). It is also possible
that parts of a construction may be automatized, and so unitized, while
others are left variable, as in mixed constructions such as Where’s-the X?,
I-wanna X, Lemme X, Gimme X, I’m-gonna X. The main point from an
acquisition point of view is that when a higher abstraction is made the
lower-level, more concrete constructions and expressions do not necessar-
ily go away but may remain available for use—especially if they are used
frequently. And indeed, recent psycholinguistic research has shown that as
adult speakers attempt to comprehend spoken language they quite often
work at a very concrete, item-speciªc level (McRae, Ferretti, and Amyote,
1997).
In general, in usage-based models the token frequency of an expression
in the language learner’s experience tends to entrench that expression in
106
Constructing a Language

terms of the concrete words and morphemes involved—enabling the user
to access and ºuently use the expression as a whole, as in I dunno
(Langacker, 1988; Krug, 1998; Bybee and Scheibmann, 1999). However,
the type frequency of a class of expressions (that is, the number of differ-
ent forms in which the language learner experiences the expression or
some
element
of
the
expression)
determines
the
abstractness
or
schematicity of the resulting construction—which mainly (along with
some other factors) underlies the creative possibilities, or productivity, of
the construction, as in Where’s the X? or X got VERBed by Y (Bybee,
1985, 1995). Together, token and type frequency—along with the cogni-
tive processes of learning and categorization that they imply—explain the
ways in which language users both (1) acquire the use of speciªc linguistic
expressions in speciªc communicative contexts and (2) in some instances
generalize these expressions to new contexts based on various kinds of
type variations they hear, including everything from type variation in a
single slot to type variation in all the constituents of a construction.
Early Syntactic Constructions
107
Figure 4.2. Top: A taxonomic hierarchy of clause types (instance links). Bottom:
Multiple parents in a construction taxonomy (part-whole links). © William
Croft, 2001. Reprinted from Radical Construction Grammar: Syntactic Theory
in Typological Perspective by William Croft (2001), by permission of Oxford
University Press.
Clause
Sbj IntrVerb
Sbj TrVerb Obj
Sbj sleep
Sbj kick Obj
Sbj run
Sbj kiss Obj
Sbj kick the bucket
Sbj kick the habit
Sbj Aux-
Verb
n’t
Sbj IntrVerb
I didn’t sleep

This usage-based principle—that people form constructions at different
levels of abstraction and use them at different levels of abstraction as
well—underlines the fact that what we are dealing with here is not formal
linguistics but rather a kind of psycholinguistics. We do not simply de-
scribe linguistic constructions in the most abstract manner possible and
then automatically assume that this is psychological reality (what
Langacker, 1987a, calls the rule-list fallacy). Rather, we look for evidence
in language use—distributional patterns, reduced pronunciation, perfor-
mance in experiments introducing nonce linguistic forms, and so forth—
for the actual level at which the speaker is operating psychologically. In
general, we are not concerned with providing a set of algebraic rules that
covers the data in the most elegant manner possible; we are concerned
with how people use a natural language (see the papers in Tomasello,
1998a).
4.1.4. The Utterances Children Hear
To understand how children acquire a language we must know something
about the language they hear—both in terms of speciªc utterances and in
terms of the constructions these instantiate. There are two issues. The ªrst
concerns the role of so-called Motherese: the ways adults adjust their
speech for young children and whether these adjustments are a necessary
part of the acquisition process. The second issue is about the type and
amount of language children hear (“input”), regardless of adult adjust-
ments, and how this inºuences the language they acquire (and how they
acquire it).
First, many Western middle-class adults speak to young children in
some special ways, sometimes called Motherese. They often use a higher
pitch and exaggerated intonation, they restrict the range of topics they
talk about, and they are highly selective in the words and syntactic con-
structions they use. A number of studies have claimed that such adult
speech adjustments facilitate children’s language development (for classic
studies see the papers in Snow and Ferguson, 1977; Galloway and Rich-
ards, 1994). But cross-linguistic research has demonstrated that these ad-
justments are not a necessary part of the process. Research in a variety of
non-Western cultures has shown that many parents do not adjust their
speech for young children to any great degree (e.g., see papers in Ochs and
Schieffelin, 1986; Brown, 2001; de León, 2000). Moreover, in many of
these cultures young children spend a large part of their day interacting
not with adults but with siblings and peers (Lieven, 1994), and numerous
studies have shown that preschool-age siblings and peers make very few
adjustments for young language learners (see Barton and Tomasello,
108
Constructing a Language

1994, for a review). While the language development of children in these
cultures has never been systematically documented quantitatively—and
indeed it is possible that they do not acquire language as quickly as West-
ern middle-class children—it is nevertheless clear that they become compe-
tent speakers of their mother tongues during early childhood. The overall
conclusion is thus that special adjustments from adults are not necessary
for children to acquire a language, although it is possible that these adjust-
ments may in some cases speed up the process.
The second issue is whether the way individual parents speak to their
children inºuences the children’s language development. In this case we
are less concerned with the fact that all normal children in all normal envi-
ronments acquire language normally, and more concerned with the ques-
tion of individual differences and, ultimately, process. Is children’s early
language a more or less direct reºection of the language they hear—which
would imply that they are relatively conservative learners? Or do all chil-
dren produce the same kinds of utterances at similar developmental peri-
ods no matter what they hear—implying the setting of a parameter or
some other hookup to universal grammar on a relatively ªxed matura-
tional schedule?
Most of the early studies investigating this question used very global
measures of the syntactic complexity—both the child-directed speech
(CDS) children heard and their later language development, for example,
mean length of utterance or total amount of speech (see Pine, 1994, for a
review). Some studies also focused on particular linguistic structures, such
as auxiliary fronted questions, noun phrases, and verb phrases. Thus,
Newport, Gleitman, and Gleitman (1977) found correlations between
(1) the way individual mothers used noun phrases and the number of
inºections per noun phrase their children produced, and (2) the way
mothers used auxiliary-fronted questions and the number of auxiliaries
per verb phrase their children produced (see also Furrow, Nelson, and
Benedict, 1979; Richards, 1990; Barnes et al., 1983; Hoff-Ginsberg,
1985). However, subsequent research identiªed many methodological and
interpretive problems in looking for relationships between CDS and chil-
dren’s language development (e.g., Hoff-Ginsberg and Shatz, 1982;
Gleitman, Newport, and Gleitman, 1984), leading to the consensus in the
ªeld that the ªndings are “mixed.”
Virtually all of these studies investigated adults’ and children’s language
on a relatively abstract level, that is, in terms of adult syntactic categories
and constructions: noun phrases, verb phrases, and the like. In contrast, a
few studies have investigated the particular grammatical words and
phrases adults use and how these are related to what children learn. For
instance, Theakston et al. (2001) found that the way children use particu-
Early Syntactic Constructions
109

lar English verbs (as either transitives, intransitives, or both) was strongly
related to the way their mothers used those same particular verbs. Simi-
larly, Pine et al. (submitted) found that whether children mark particular
verbs for tense and agreement is related to the way they hear those same
verbs used (marked in ªnite clauses or unmarked in non-ªnite clauses) by
their mothers. Finally, Farrar (1990, 1992) found that children’s acquisi-
tion of some particular grammatical morphemes in English (past tense -ed,
plural -s, progressive -ing, and so on) was facilitated when mothers used
these morphemes as immediate recasts of the child’s utterances that were
missing them. What these studies suggest is that there may be close links
between the way adults use particular words, morphemes, and phrases in
CDS and the way children learn those same words, morphemes, and
phrases—much closer links than if syntactic constructions are deªned in
terms of abstract, adult-like syntactic categories and constructions.
The conclusion in the case of the issue of individual differences and the
language acquisition process is thus that input does matter (see also Sec-
tion 3.2.4). Children learn what they hear, and different children hear dif-
ferent things and in different quantities. What this suggests is that lan-
guage acquisition is not just triggered by the linguistic environment, as
proposed by generative grammarians, but rather the linguistic environ-
ment provides the raw materials out of which young children construct
their linguistic inventories. The fact that most adults end up with fairly
similar (though not identical) linguistic inventories does not negate the ob-
vious fact that early in development children can only learn what they are
exposed to. It is also useful in this context to note that when pattern-
ªnding computer programs are given CDS as input, they are able to group
together, by means of distributional analysis, linguistic items in a way that
yields a number of word classes of a type that would seem to be psycho-
logically realistic for young children (e.g., Redington, Chater, and Finch,
1998).
In light of these facts, we must start our investigation of children’s syn-
tactic development with a description of the types of utterances they hear.
Surprisingly few studies have attempted to document the full range of lin-
guistic expressions and constructions that children hear in their daily lives.
The most comprehensive study is that of Wells (1983), who sampled the
language that preschool children both heard and produced (using micro-
phones attached to children’s clothes) at regular intervals throughout the
many activities of their day. The analyses conducted on these data, how-
ever, focused on only a small number of speciªc constructions.
In contrast, Cameron-Faulkner, Lieven, and Tomasello (in press) exam-
ined all of the CDS of 12 English-speaking mothers during samples of
their linguistic interactions with their 2-year-old children. They ªrst cate-
110
Constructing a Language

gorized each of the mothers’ utterances in terms of very general construc-
tional categories, resulting in the percentages displayed in Table 4.1
(which also includes a comparable analysis of Wells’s data, which is im-
portant because those children were sampled in a wider variety of activi-
ties). The overall ªndings were as follows:
• children heard an estimated 5,000–7,000 utterances per day; of these,
• between one-quarter and one-third were questions;
• more than 20 percent were not full adult sentences, but rather were
some kind of fragment or phrase (most often a noun phrase or prepo-
sitional phrase);
• about one-quarter were imperatives and utterances structured by the
copula;
• only about 15 percent had the canonical SVO form (transitive utter-
ances of various kinds) supposedly characteristic of the English lan-
guage; and over 80 percent of the SVOs had a pronoun subject.
In a second analysis, these investigators looked at the speciªc words and
phrases with which mothers initiated utterances in each of these general
construction types, including such item-based frames as Are you . . . , I’ll
. . . , It’s . . . , Can you . . . , Here’s . . . , Let’s . . . , Look at . . . , What did
. . . . They found that more than half of all maternal utterances began with
one of 52 highly frequent item-based frames (that is, frames used more
than an estimated 40 times per day for more than half the children),
mostly consisting of two words or morphemes. Further, more than 65 per-
cent of all of the mothers’ utterances began with one of just 156 item-
based frames. And perhaps most surprising, approximately 45 percent of
all maternal utterances began with one of just 17 words: What (8.6 per-
cent), That (5.3 percent), It (4.2 percent), You (3.1 percent), Are/Aren’t
(3.0 percent), Do/Does/Did/Don’t (2.9 percent), I (2.9 percent), Is (2.3
percent), Shall (2.1 percent), A (1.7 percent), Can/Can’t (1.7 percent),
Where (1.6 percent), There (1.5 percent), Who (1.4 percent), Come (1.0
percent), Look (1.0 percent), and Let’s (1.0 percent). Interestingly, the
children used many of these same item-based frames in their speech, in
some cases at a rate that correlated highly with their own mother’s fre-
quency of use.
These results clearly demonstrate two things. First, spontaneous spoken
speech, perhaps especially speech addressed to children, is not like written
language and other formal modes of discourse. Consider the adult linguis-
tic category “subject of a sentence.” In their daily conversations, about 30
percent of the utterances children hear have no overt subject (imperatives,
fragments), and another 30 percent or more have subjects that follow an
auxiliary or main verb (questions). In addition, almost 15 percent have the
Early Syntactic Constructions
111

copula as the main verb, with many of these having the subject after the
verb (in here- and there- presentational utterances, such as There are my
toys). So children actually hear a prototypical English subject in only a rel-
atively small proportion of the utterances directed at them (though this is
still many hundreds per day). Moreover, even though it is usually claimed
that English is a word-order language, the vast majority of subjects that
children do hear are in the form of case-marked pronouns such as I and he
(as contrasted with me and him), so they have case information as well.
The methodological lesson is thus that that we can never presume to know
what children are hearing on the basis of our “knowledge of English”; we
must look empirically at what they actually are hearing.
The second main implication of these ªndings is that many, indeed the
majority, of the utterances children hear are grounded in highly repetitive
item-based frames that they experience dozens, in some cases hundreds, of
times every day. Indeed, many of the more complex utterances children
hear have as a major constituent some well-practiced item-based frame.
This means that the more linguistically complicated and creative utter-
ances that children comprehend and produce constitute only a small mi-
nority of their linguistic experience, and that in most cases these rest on
the foundation of many highly frequent and relatively simple item-based
utterance frames.
112
Constructing a Language
Table 4.1
Most general construction types mothers use in talking to their 2-year-
old children.
Current study
Wells (1983)
Fragments
.20
.27
one word
.07
.08
multi-word
.14
.19
Questions
.32
.22
wh-
.16
.08
yes/no
.15
.13
Imperatives
.09
.14
Copulas
.15
.15
Subject-Predicate
.18
.18
transitives
.10
.09
intransitives
.03
.02
other
.05
.07
Complex
.06
.05
Source: Cameron-Faulkner et al. (in press).

4.2. Early Constructional Islands
Children begin producing multi-word utterances at about 18–24 months
of age. These utterances are cognitively grounded in their understanding
of the various “scenes” that make up their social lives. A scene is a coher-
ent conceptual package that contains an event or state of affairs along
with one or more participants (Fillmore, 1977a, 1977b; Langacker,
1987a). By the time children begin to acquire language at 1 year of age
they already are able to conceptualize any number of speciªc scenes from
their daily lives, many of which are “manipulative activity scenes” such as
someone pushing, pulling, or breaking an object; many of which are
“ªgure-ground scenes” such as objects moving up, down, or into a con-
tainer; and many of which are “possession scenes” such as getting, giving,
or having an object (Slobin, 1985). As development proceeds children
come to (1) partition these speciªc scenes into their various component el-
ements, with different linguistic symbols indicating different components,
and (2) use syntactic symbols such as word order and case marking to
identify the roles these components are playing in the scene as a whole. At
some later point they come to categorize these speciªc scenes into various
classes of scenes that may be linguistically partitioned and marked in anal-
ogous ways.
Children’s ªrst multi-word utterances are socially grounded in their
communicative goals, including both their speech act goals and the differ-
ent perspectives they take on scenes in different communicative circum-
stances (Lambrecht, 1994). Thus, on different occasions children may
have different communicative goals with respect to the same basic scene
and so on one occasion ask a question about it, on another occasion re-
quest that someone make it happen, on another occasion simply report on
its existence, and on another occasion socially mark its occurrence with
some kind of performative. For example, for the scene of people leaving,
the child might comment “Go-away,” request that they “Go-away!” ask
them “Where-go?” or tell them “Bye-bye”—depending on his or her com-
municative purposes. Moreover, children at some point come to under-
stand that in different communicative circumstances scenes are most ap-
propriately described from different points of view, depending on such
things as the discourse topic previously established. For example, an event
such as Daddy’s breaking of the clock may be approached from the point
of view of Daddy, as in Daddy broke the clock, or from the point of view
of the clock, as in The clock got broken (see Clark, 1997).
The most direct linguistic counterparts to scenes are utterance-level con-
structions. An utterance-level construction is a relatively complete and co-
herent verbal expression associated in a relatively routinized manner with
Early Syntactic Constructions
113

a complete and coherent communicative function (see Lakoff, 1978, on
linguistic gestalts; Van Valin, 1993, on syntactic templates; Langacker,
1987a, on sentence schemas; Fillmore, Kaye, and O’Conner, 1988, and
Goldberg, 1995, on verb-argument constructions). Utterance-level con-
structions provide language-learning children with preconstituted seman-
tic-pragmatic packages that allow them to symbolize as whole intact units
many of the experiential scenes of their lives—from various discourse per-
spectives and for various communicative purposes.
4.2.1. Word Combinations and Pivot Schemas
Children produce their earliest multi-word utterances to talk about many
of the same kinds of things they talked about previously with their
holophrases—since indeed many, though not all, early multi-word con-
structions may be traced back to earlier holophrases. From the point of
view of linguistic form, the utterance-level constructions underlying these
multi-word utterances come in three types: word combinations, pivot
schemas, and item-based constructions.
First, beginning at around 18 months of age, many children combine
two words or holophrases in situations in which both are relevant—with
both words having roughly equivalent status. For example, a child has
learned to name a ball and a table and then spies a ball on a table and says
“Ball table.” Utterances of this type include both “successive single-word
utterances” (with a pause between them; Bloom, 1973) and “word combi-
nations” or “expressions” (under a single intonational contour). The
deªning features of word combinations or expressions are that they parti-
tion the experiential scene into multiple symbolizable units—in a way that
holophrases obviously (by deªnition) do not—and that they are totally
concrete in the sense that they are comprised only of concrete pieces of
language, not categories.
Beginning at around this same age, however, many of children’s multi-
word productions show a more systematic pattern. Often there is one
word or phrase that seems to structure the utterance in the sense that it de-
termines the speech act function of the utterance as a whole (often with
help from an intonational contour), with the other linguistic item(s) sim-
ply ªlling in variable slot(s)—the ªrst type of linguistic abstraction. Thus,
in many of these early utterances one event-word is used with a wide vari-
ety of object labels (More milk, More grapes, More juice) or, more rarely,
something like a pronoun or other general expression is the constant ele-
ment (I
, or
it, or even It’s
or Where’s
). Following
Braine (1963), we may call these pivot schemas. Braine (1976) established
that this is a widespread and productive strategy for children acquiring
114
Constructing a Language

many of the world’s languages. He identiªed many pivot schemas in the
early language of children of ªve different language communities (see Ta-
ble 4.2 for examples), sometimes including productive utterances never
before heard from adults, for example, the famous “Allgone sticky”
(Braine, 1971).
Tomasello et al. (1997) demonstrated more systematically that these
pivot schemas are indeed productive in this way. They found that 22-
month-old children who were taught a novel name for an object knew im-
mediately how to combine this novel name with other pivot-type words
already in their vocabulary. That is, when taught a novel object label as a
single-word utterance (“Look! A wug!”), children were able to use that
new object label in combination with their existing pivot-type words in ut-
terances such as “Wug gone” or “More wug.” This productivity suggests
that young children can create linguistic categories at this early age,
speciªcally categories corresponding to the types of linguistic items that
can play particular roles in speciªc pivot schemas (such as “things that are
gone,” “things I want more of”).
However, children at this age do not make generalizations across the
various pivot schemas; each is a constructional island. Thus, Tomasello
et al. (1997) also tested the idea that children who use pivot schemas can
come to a new scene and already know how to partition it by means of a
pivot word and some other word. But they found that children cannot do
this. When taught a novel verb as a single-word utterance for a novel scene
(for example, “Look! Meeking!” or “Look what she’s doing to it. That’s
called meeking”), 22-month-olds were not then able to talk about the
event in a more differentiated way that included reference to a participant
in the event based on some generalized knowledge of how other events are
partitioned in the English language (for example, they did not create a slot
for the newly learned verb by saying “Ernie meeking!”). Apparently, in
talking about a new event with a new event word, children follow the
adult model rather closely; they do not create new ways of talking about
it, other than to substitute participants for one another.
Pivot schemas do not have syntax. That is to say, whereas in many early
pivot schemas there is a consistent ordering pattern of event-word and
participant-word (such as More
or
gone), a consistent ordering
pattern is not the same thing as a productive syntactic symbol used
contrastively to indicate what role a word is playing in a larger combina-
torial structure. If Gone juice does not mean something different from
Juice gone, then the word order is not doing any signiªcant syntactic
work. The consistent ordering patterns in many pivot schemas are very
likely direct reproductions of the ordering patterns children have heard
most often in adult speech, with no communicative signiªcance. This
Early Syntactic Constructions
115

Table 4.2
Some early pivot schemas used by children learning three languages.
Andrew (English)
Seppo (Finnish)
Toª (Samoan)
more car
more cereal
more cookie
more ªsh
no bed
no down
no ªx
other bib
other bread
other milk
boot off
light off
pants off
see baby
see pretty
all broke
all buttoned
all clean
all done
clock on there
up on there
hot in there
milk in there
all done milk
all done now
all gone juice
setä tuu
setä polttaa
setä tanssii
pupu heittää
pupu leikkii
pupu ajaa
pupu ajaa tuftuf
tipu kuti
tipu pois
tipu mamma
pipi tuossa
tuossa kenkä
tuossa ammu
mamma pois
kirja pois
takki poin
man blows horn
man burns
man dances
bunny throws
bunny plays
bunny drives
bunny drives train
chick tickles
chick (geos) away
chick (eating) food
sore there
there shoe
there cow
(take) food away
(take) book away
(take) coat away
alu lea!
alu Usu lea
pa’u: pepe lalo
pa’u: pepe o sami
tu’u lalo!
lifo lalo!
mai lea!
mai mea lea!
mai lole pepe!
o nofo pepe
o nofo ia pepe
pa’u: mea
pa’u: teine
pa’u: lole
‘aumai isi!
mai pepe!
mai lole!
ta’ita’i lima!
si’isi’i pepe!
si’isi’i tama!
si’isi’i teine!
ªa moe
ªa moe lava
ªa moe pepe
go there
go Usu there
fall baby down
fall baby into sea
put down!
set down!
bring there!
bring thing there!
bring candy baby!
sits doll
sits—emph—doll
fall thing
fall girl
fall candy
bring other!
bring baby!
bring candy!
hold hand!
hold baby!
hold boy!
hold girl!
want sleep
want sleep much
want sleep baby
Source: Adapted from Braine (1976).

means that although young children are using their early pivot schemas to
partition scenes conceptually with different words, they are not using syn-
tactic symbols—such as word order or case marking—to indicate the dif-
ferent roles being played by different participants in that scene.
4.2.2.
Item-based constructions go beyond pivot schemas in having syntactic
marking as an integral part of the construction. The evidence that children
have, from fairly early in development, such syntactically marked item-
based constructions is solid. Most important are a number of comprehen-
sion experiments in which children barely 2 years of age respond appro-
priately to requests that they “Make the bunny push the horse” (reversible
transitives) that depend crucially and exclusively on a knowledge of ca-
nonical English word order (e.g., DeVilliers and DeVilliers, 1973; Chap-
man and Miller, 1975; Roberts, 1983; Bates et al., 1984; Bates and
MacWhinney, 1989). Successful comprehension of word order with famil-
iar verbs is found at even younger ages if preferential looking techniques
are used (Hirsh-Pasek and Golinkoff, 1991, 1996). In production as well,
many children around their second birthdays are able to produce transi-
tive utterances with familiar verbs that respect canonical English word-
order marking (e.g., in the control conditions of Tomasello and Brooks,
1998, and similar studies reviewed in Tomasello, 2000b).
At the same time, there is abundant evidence from many studies of both
comprehension and production that the syntactic marking in these item-
based constructions is still verb speciªc, depending on how a child has
heard a particular verb being used. Tomasello (1992a) found that almost
all of his daughter’s early multi-word utterances during her second year of
life revolved around the speciªc verbs or predicative terms involved. This
was referred to as the Verb Island hypothesis since each verb seemed like
its own island of organization in an otherwise unorganized language sys-
tem. The lexically speciªc pattern of this phase of combinatorial speech
was evident in the patterns of participant roles with which individual
verbs were used. Thus, during exactly the same developmental period
some verbs were used in only one type of construction and that construc-
tion was quite simple (Cut
), whereas other verbs were used in more
complex frames of several different types (Draw
, Draw
on
,
Draw
for
,
draw on
). Interestingly and importantly,
within any given verb’s development there was great continuity such that
new uses of a given verb almost always replicated previous uses and then
made one small addition or modiªcation (such as the marking of tense or
the adding of a new argument). In general, by far the best predictor of this
child’s use of a given verb on a given day was not her use of other verbs on
Early Syntactic Constructions
117

that same day, but rather her use of that same verb on immediately preced-
ing days.
The general explanation of such speciªcity would seem to be that for
some experiential scenes the child was exposed to and attended to rich dis-
course involving multiple participant types and pragmatic functions for
the associated verb, while for other activities she either was not exposed to
or did not attend to talk about multiple participants and functions. This
same pattern of verb-speciªc organization characterized this child’s early
use of syntactic symbols; for example, the instruments of some verbs were
marked with the preposition with, while the instruments of other verbs
were not (Open it with this versus He hit me this). What this means is that
the child did not have a general semantic or syntactic category of “instru-
ment,” but rather she possessed more verb-speciªc categories such as
“thing to open with” and “thing to draw with.” And the same would be
true of her other syntagmatic categories involving what adults would call
agents, patients, recipients, locations, and so forth, which from the child’s
point of view were actually such scene-speciªc things as “kisser,” “person
kissed,” “breaker,” and “thing broken.”
Using a combination of periodic sampling and maternal diaries, Lieven,
Pine, and Baldwin (1997; see also Pine and Lieven, 1993; Pine, Lieven,
and Rowland, 1998) found some very similar results in a sample of 12
English-speaking children from 1 to 3 years of age. In particular, they
found that virtually all the children used most of their verbs and predica-
tive terms in one and only one construction type early in language devel-
opment—suggesting that their syntax was built around these particular
lexical items. In fact, fully 92 percent of these children’s earliest multi-
word utterances emanated from one of their ªrst 25 lexically based pat-
terns, which were different for each child. Along these same lines, Pine and
Lieven (1997) found that when these children began to use the determin-
ers a and the at 2–3 years of age, they did so with almost completely dif-
ferent sets of nominals (that is, there was almost no overlap in the sets of
nouns used with the two determiners)—suggesting that the children at this
age did not have any kind of abstract category of “determiner” that in-
cluded both of these lexical items.
A number of systematic studies of children learning languages other
than English have found very similar results. For example, Pizzuto and
Caselli (1994) investigated the grammatical morphology used by three
Italian-speaking children on their simple, ªnite, main verbs, from approxi-
mately 112 to 3 years of age (see also Pizzuto and Caselli, 1992). Although
there are six forms possible for each verb root (ªrst-person singular, sec-
ond-person singular, etc.), 47 percent of all verbs used by these children
were used in one form only, and an additional 40 percent were used with
two or three forms. Of the 13 percent of verbs that appeared in four or
118
Constructing a Language

more forms, approximately half were highly frequent, highly irregular
forms that could only be learned by rote. The clear implication is that Ital-
ian children do not master the whole verb paradigm for all their verbs at
once, but rather they only master some endings with some verbs—and of-
ten different ones with different verbs. In a similar study of one child
learning to speak Brazilian Portuguese at around 3 years of age, Rubino
and Pine (1998) found a comparable pattern of results, including addi-
tional evidence that the verb forms this child used most consistently corre-
sponded to those he had heard most frequently from adults. That is, this
child produced adult-like subject-verb agreement patterns for the parts of
the verb paradigm that appeared with high frequency in adult language
(such as ªrst-person singular), but much less consistent agreement patterns
in low frequency parts of the paradigm (such as third-person plural). (Also
see Serrat, 1997, for Catalan; Behrens, 1998, for Dutch; Allen, 1996, for
Inuktitut; Gathercole, Sebastián, and Soto, 1999, for Spanish; and Stoll,
1998, for Russian.) Finally, in a study of six children learning Hebrew—a
language typologically quite different from most European languages—
Berman and Armon-Lotem (1995; see also Berman, 1982) found that their
ªrst 20 verb forms were almost all “rote-learned or morphologically
unanalyzed” (37).
Similarly, in experimental studies, when children who are themselves
producing many transitive utterances are taught a new verb in any one of
many different constructions, they mostly cannot transfer their knowledge
of word order from their existing item-based constructions to this new
item until after their third birthdays—and this ªnding holds in compre-
hension as well (Tomasello, 2000b; see Section 4.3 for a review). These
ªndings would seem to indicate that young children’s early syntactic
marking—at least with English word order—is only local, learned for dif-
ferent verbs on a one-by-one basis. What little evidence we have from
nonce verb studies of case-marking languages (e.g., Berman, 1993; Wittek
and Tomasello, submitted-a) is in general accord with this developmental
pattern. This means that although there are real syntactic roles in item-
based constructions, overtly marked syntactically, this marking is verb-
speciªc, conªned to various constructional islands. Following the conven-
tions of Croft (2001), we may depict their structure as follows:
hit-SUBJ’s hitting hit-OBJ
break-SUBJ’s broken
throw throw-OBJ
smile-SUBJ’s smiling
Note that here, and in the following representations, concrete pieces of
language are in lower-case letters and italicized, whereas categories and
Early Syntactic Constructions
119

other abstractions are in upper-case letters. Designations such as hit-SUBJ
indicate the “subject” in the hit-construction, which may have special
properties as compared with, for example, break-SUBJ—their commonal-
ity only emerging with some higher level abstract constructions. Note that
pivot schemas do not include designations such as SUBJ at all because
there is no syntactic marking and so syntactic roles do not exist at that
point—just slots.
The main point is that unlike in pivot schemas, in item-based construc-
tions children use syntactic symbols such as morphology, adpositions, and
word order to syntactically mark the roles participants are playing in these
events, including generalized “slots” that include whole categories of enti-
ties as participants. But all of this is done on an item-speciªc basis, that is,
the child does not generalize across scenes to syntactically mark similar
participant roles in similar ways without having heard those participants
used and marked in adult discourse for each verb speciªcally. This limited
generality is presumably due to the difªculty of categorizing or schema-
tizing entire scenes, including both the events and the participant roles in-
120
Constructing a Language
Throw__
__give__ __
__kick__
__running
__fall down
Break__
Figure 4.3. Some hypothetical item-based schemas of a 24-month-old child, each
with a form (English words and slots) and a function (iconic depiction). In the
verb island hypothesis the schemas are not structurally related, so no connections
among them are depicted.

volved, into more abstract constructions—especially given the many dif-
ferent kinds of utterances children hear and must sort through. Tomasello
(1992a, 2000b) argued and presented evidence that up until age 2;6—and
for many children until 3;0 or older—syntactic competence is best charac-
terized as simply an inventory of independent verb island constructions
that pair a scene of experience and an item-based construction, with no
structural relationships among these constructional islands. Figure 4.3 de-
picts an hypothesized child’s early constructional inventory graphically.
4.2.3. Verbs and Constructional Islands
Children’s early item-based constructions come in many shapes and sizes,
reºecting the diversity of both their own speech act goals and the speech
act goals of their forebears in the culture who grammaticized the construc-
tions they now have at their disposal. Tomasello (1992a), however, high-
lighted the special role played by early constructions that revolve around
verbs. In this account, verb island constructions (as one special type of
item-based construction) pave the way to more adult-like grammatical
competence since so much of adult grammar, especially the more abstract
parts, is centered around verbs and their arguments (Fillmore, 1988;
Goldberg, 1995).
Recently, Goldberg and Sethuraman (manuscript) argued that all of the
most basic verb-argument constructions of English have one or more basic
verbs—usually a “light verb”—as their central sense. As one example, the
various dative constructions in English have as their central sense utter-
ances with the verb give, and Goldberg and Sethuraman provide some evi-
dence from naturalistic data that many English-speaking children produce
many of their early dative utterances with the single verb give. Ninio
(1999) presented a related argument that children acquire their earliest
constructions on the basis of one or two initial “pathbreaking” verbs—
again usually basic, light verbs—which are used exclusively for some time,
after which the acquisition of other verbs for use in that construction is
much easier. Ninio provided evidence from children’s acquisition of the
basic transitive constructions of Hebrew. Although she did not address the
dative constructions in particular, presumably she would predict that chil-
dren ªrst learn the ditransitive version of this construction with give and
only later extend it to other semantically related verbs.
As simple and attractive as these proposals might be, a recent study by
Campbell and Tomasello (2001) on the acquisition of the English dative
constructions (to-dative, for-dative, ditransitive) found little support for
either of them. First, the earliest verbs used in the ditransitive construction
by the seven children of this study were: give (4), show (2), bring, feed,
Early Syntactic Constructions
121

send, read, get, make (some children used more than one of these verbs in
their initial recording). It is thus clear that not all children begin with give
(and three of the four who do begin with give begin with another verb in
the same month as well). Moreover, many of the other ªrst verbs do not
look very much like light verbs; feed, send, show, and read are fairly
“heavy” verbs. The most likely explanation for children’s choice of these
particular verbs is that these are the verbs used most often by parents in
talking to their children about activities that are salient for them
(DeVilliers, 1985; Tomasello and Kruger, 1992; Naigles and Hoff-
Ginsberg, 1998), and indeed there was evidence in this study to this effect.
To the degree that give and other light verbs are used quite often, this is
due to the fact that these verbs (by deªnition) are used widely and fre-
quently in many different contexts.
Ninio’s (1999) other claim is that a new construction is initially used by
the child for some relatively extended period with the pathbreaking verb
(in her study of transitives about one month) before it is used with any
other verbs. From acquisition of the second verb on, the construction ex-
pands to new verbs quickly. Campbell and Tomasello (2001) did not ªnd
this in their study of the ditransitive construction. Overall, for this con-
struction the ªnding was that only one of seven children ªt the hypothesis
of a period of several months with a pathbreaking verb followed by rapid
extension to other verbs.
Recently, some other analyses and studies have called into question the
hegemonic role of verbs in children’s transition from more item-based to
more abstract syntactic constructions (Lieven, Pine, and Rowland, 1998;
Childers and Tomasello, 2001). Children may form constructions, and
even generalize constructions, on the basis of different kinds of concrete
linguistic material, for example, I’m
ing it, It’s
ing, It
ed.
Nevertheless, the most abstract constructions characteristic of adult lin-
guistic competence typically revolve around verbs in one way or another.
And so it may still be true that although verbs do not provide the structur-
ing element for all item-based constructions, they play an especially im-
portant, although not exclusive, role in the transition to more adult-like
syntactic competence.
4.2.4. Processes of Schematization
From a usage-based perspective, word combinations, pivot schemas, and
item-based constructions are things that children construct out of the lan-
guage they hear around them using general cognitive and social-cognitive
skills. It is thus important to establish that, at the necessary points in de-
122
Constructing a Language

velopment, children have the skills they need to comprehend, learn, and
produce each of these three types of early constructions.
First, to produce a word combination under a single intonation contour,
children must be able to create a multiple-step procedure toward a single
goal, assembled conceptually ahead of time (what Piaget, 1952, called
“mental combinations”). They are able to do this in nonlinguistic behav-
ior quite readily, from about 14–18 months of age in their own problem-
solving, and they are also able to copy such sequences from the behavior
of other persons at around this same age. Thus, Bauer (1996) found that
14-month-olds were quite skillful at imitatively learning both two- and
three-step action sequences from adults—mostly involving the construct-
ing of complex toy objects (such as a toy bell) that they saw adults assem-
bling. Children were sensitive to the order of the steps involved as well.
These would seem to be the right skills at the right time for constructing
word combinations.
With respect to input for word combinations, there is good evidence
that 1-year-olds do not catch on immediately to the general principle of
combinatoriality involved in a way that transfers across speciªc words
and expressions—without hearing speciªcally relevant discourse (as docu-
mented above). One especially important type of discourse may be so-
called vertical structures (Scollon, 1973). Vertical structures occur in dis-
course when the child lexicalizes one aspect of the event and then the adult
gives a reply that lexicalizes another aspect of the event (or vice versa). For
example, the child might say “More!” and the adult reply “You want
some grapes?” Or the adult might say “Do you want your shoes?” and the
child reply “On!” The multi-word structure (for something like More
grapes or Shoes on) thus only exists across the discourse turns of the two
interlocutors; but the child registers them both in the conversation. Also
important may be so-called replacement sequences in which the adult ex-
pands the child’s utterance; for example, the child says “More!” and the
adult says “Do you want more grapes?” Discourse sequences such as these
may provide a kind of Vygotskian scaffolding in which children can see in
the immediate context how to express their communicative intention more
explicitly in a combinatorial way.
Second, the process by which pivot schemas are formed—as abstrac-
tions across individual word combinations—is presumably very similar to
the way 1-year-olds form other kinds of sensory-motor schemas, including
those learned through observation of others’ behavior. Thus, Piaget (1952)
reports that when infants repeatedly enact the same action on different ob-
jects they form a sensory-motor schema consisting of (1) what is general in
all of the various actions, and (2) a kind of slot for the variable compo-
Early Syntactic Constructions
123

nent. As one example, Brown and Kane (1988) taught 2-year-old children
to use a certain kind of action with a particular object (say, to pull a stick)
and then gave them transfer problems in which it was possible for them to
use the same action but with a different object creatively (they learned to
pull stick, pull rope, pull towel). Their skill at doing this demonstrates ex-
actly the kind of cognitive ability needed to create a pivot schema across
different utterances so as to yield something like Pull X. Such schemas,
whether in behavior or in language, have some abstractness—in the slot
designated by X—but they are mostly concrete in the sense that they are
structured by a concrete piece of behavior. Forming such a schema is thus
like laying overhead transparencies—each with a stored sequence such as
an utterance printed on it—on top of one another. The repeated elements
can be clearly recognized through the entire stack, but the variable ele-
ments are blurred because of their variability (Langacker’s, 1987a). To re-
peat a point from earlier, the slot in a pivot-type schema is not a syntactic
role because it is in no way syntactically marked—either by case marking
or by a contrastive use of word order.
Forming the slot in pivot schemas is obviously a process of categoriza-
tion. Classical views of categorization focus on the perceptual features of
items in the world, but Nelson (1974, 1985, 1996; see also Mandler,
2000) has shown that early in development categories are formed on the
basis of function. Thus, for a young child a ball is something one can act
on in certain ways and that does certain things; its function derives from
the role it plays in activities and events. Ultimately, if the child forms a
generalized action or event schema with a variable slot for some class of
items (such as Throw X), that slot and class of items are deªned by their
role in the schema—which is why Nelson calls them slot-ªller categories.
This means that in the case of pivot schemas such as Throw X, X gone,
and Want X, the slot could be thought of as something like “throwable
things,” “things that are gone,” “things I want more of,” and so forth.
This primacy of the schema in deªning the slot leads to the kinds of coer-
cion evidenced in creative uses of language in which an item is used in a
schema that requires us to interpret it in an unusual way. For example, un-
der communicative pressure a child might say “I’m juicing it” as she pours
juice onto something, or “Where’s-the swimming?” as she looks for a pic-
ture of a swimming activity in a book. This process of “functional coer-
cion” is perhaps the major source of syntactic creativity in the language of
1- and 2-year-old children.
The input needed to create slots in pivot schemas (or any other syntactic
constructions) has never been systematically studied. However, Tomasello
et al. (1997) provided at least some evidence that the slots in pivot
schemas are productive from very early in development (see above). But
124
Constructing a Language

neither this study nor any other addressed the simple question of exactly
what kinds of linguistic experience children must have in order to form a
productive slot in a pivot schema. Presumably they do this on the basis of
hearing repeated instances of highly similar utterances with the appropri-
ate token and type variation: such things as Throw ball, Throw paper, and
Throw shoe. But, to repeat, there are no studies. It is also not known
whether different kinds of experience lead to slots with different proper-
ties, for example, based on different kinds of similarities of the objects in-
volved. And we know nothing about the frequencies that might be re-
quired in different cases. All we know from experimental studies is that
when 2- to 3-year-old children hear novel verbs, such as bafªng, with doz-
ens of different items in constant positions either immediately before or af-
ter the novel verb (such as Bafªng X, Bafªng Y, Bafªng Z) they are able to
create a productive slot in that position (e.g., Tomasello and Brooks,
1998; Brooks and Tomasello, 1999a; and others reviewed in Tomasello,
2000b).
Third and ªnally, it is not clear how young children learn about syntac-
tically marking their utterance-level constructions, so creating item-based
constructions. Essentially what they need to learn is that whereas some
linguistic symbols are used for referring and predicating things about the
world, others (including word order) are used for more grammatical func-
tions. These functions are many and various, but they all share the prop-
erty that they are parasitic on the symbols that actually carry the load of
referring and predicating. Thus, with special reference to utterance-level
constructions, an accusative case marker (or an immediate postverbal po-
sition) can function symbolically only if there is some referential expres-
sion to indicate the entity that is the object of some action; we may thus
call syntactic markers second-order symbols (Tomasello, 1992). Although
children do engage in nonlinguistic activities that have clear and general-
ized roles, there is really nothing in nonlinguistic activities that corre-
sponds to such second-order symbols. (The closest might be the designa-
tion of participant roles in some forms of pretend play—but that is
typically a much later developmental achievement.) Children presumably
learn to deal with such symbols when they hear such things as, in English,
X is pushing Y and then on another occasion Y is pushing X, each paired
with its own real-world counterpart. From this, they begin to see that the
verb island construction involving push is structured so that the “pusher”
is in the preverbal position and “pushee” is in the postverbal position—
regardless of the speciªc identity of that participant. The same would hold
for a case-marking language such as German if the child heard something
like Der X schlägt den Y (The X-nominative hits the Y-accusative) and
then its opposite.
Early Syntactic Constructions
125

Interestingly, with respect to the linguistic experience necessary to con-
struct an item-based construction, Bybee (1985, 1995) has proposed that
in general the token frequency of an expression in the language learner’s
experience tends to entrench it as a single item of use with a coherent func-
tion. Thus, there is historical evidence that if one particular expression
(that is, one particular string of words) becomes extremely frequent, it
may become so ªxed that it does not contribute to the generalizability of
any abstract construction—presumably because its holistic meaning be-
comes so predominant that it begins to lose its internal constituency. Ap-
plied to child language, this would mean that, for instance, if a child heard
or said “Gimme-that” enough times, this expression would become ªxed
as a unit (a holophrase) and so would not contribute to the generaliza-
bility of either the give-imperative construction (item-based) or the
ditransitive construction (abstract). This might also mean that such high-
frequency structures as there-constructions remain constructional islands
because of their entrenchment and so do not interfere with the construct-
ing of more “regular” categories and constructions (such as transitives
and intransitives).
4.3. Marking Syntactic Roles
From a psycholinguistic point of view, utterance-level and other construc-
tions comprise four and only four types of symbolic elements: words, mor-
phological markers on words, word order, and intonation/prosody (Bates
and MacWhinney, 1989). Of special importance for utterance-level con-
structions are the syntactic devices used for marking the participant roles
(typically expressed as NPs) to indicate the basic “who-did-what-to-
whom” of the utterance, what are sometimes called agent-patient rela-
tions. The two major devices that languages use for this purpose are (1)
word order (of NPs) and (2) morphological marking (case and agreement
marking).
The methodological situation for determining how young children un-
derstand word order and case marking is this. Spontaneous speech is of
course the place to begin, but, as always with spontaneous speech, one can
never be sure if the child has productive control of a particular linguistic
device or if she is simply repeating what she has heard. And so of most im-
portance in spontaneous speech are overgeneralization errors because they
represent things that the child has not previously heard but must be pro-
ducing creatively—presumably on the basis of some abstract category or
construction. The other methodological option is experiments in which in-
vestigators control exactly what children do and do not hear, often using
nonce verbs that children could never have heard before. In this case, we
126
Constructing a Language

can be even more certain about precisely which aspects of an utterance
children are and are not processing and in which ways, including the rele-
vant aspects of word order and case marking.
4.3.1. Word Order
The systematic study of children’s understanding of word order as a
marker of agent-patient relations is conªned almost exclusively to English.
English is supposedly a language that marks its basic agent-patient rela-
tions via word order alone because there is no case marking on lexical
NPs. But over three-quarters of the agent-patient utterances that English-
speaking children hear contain pronoun subjects (see Section 4.1.4), most
of which have unique forms for the subject version as opposed to the ob-
ject version (I versus me, she versus her, and so on). In addition, agents in
English and all other languages are overwhelmingly animate beings, and
in some cases children can use this as a cue for comprehension as well. So
in order to test young children’s understanding of the syntactic function of
canonical English word order, case-marked pronouns and animacy must
be carefully controlled.
In their spontaneous speech young English-speaking children use canon-
ical word order for most of their verbs, including transitive verbs, from
very early in development (Braine, 1971; Brown, 1973; Bloom, 1992).
And as reported above, in comprehension tasks children as young as
2 years of age respond appropriately to requests such as “Make the doggie
bite the cat” (reversible transitives) that depend crucially and exclusively
on a knowledge of canonical English word order (e.g., DeVilliers and
DeVilliers, 1973). But if we do not know what children have and have not
heard, adult-like production and comprehension are not diagnostic of the
underlying processes and representations involved. Children might simply
be reproducing the ordering of the particular words they have heard
adults using (as in pivot schemas), or they might be marking agent-patient
relations syntactically but only locally for that particular verb (as in item-
based constructions), or they might be using these devices to mark these
relations in a more abstract, verb-general way (as in abstract construc-
tions; see Chapter 5).
English-speaking children’s overgeneralization errors of most interest
for the issue of the marking of agent-patient relations via word order are
those involving the transitive SVO frame. This includes such things as She
falled me down or Don’t giggle me in which the child uses intransitive
verbs in the SVO transitive frame productively. (Note that in both of these
cases the intransitive version would be unergative, with I as subject.)
Bowerman (1982, 1988) documented a number of such overgenerali-
Early Syntactic Constructions
127

zations in the speech of two English-speaking children, and Pinker (1989)
compiled examples from other sources as well. The main result of interest
is that these children produced very few of these types of overgenerali-
zations before about 3 years of age.
Production experiments focused on the marking of agent-patient rela-
tions by word order in English typically introduce young children to a
novel verb in a syntactic construction such as an intransitive or passive
and then see if they can later use that verb in the canonical SVO transitive
construction. Cues to syntactic roles other than word order (such as
animacy of the S and O participants, use of case-marked pronouns) are
carefully controlled and/or monitored. Experiments of this type have
clearly demonstrated that by 312 or 4 years of age most English-speaking
children can readily assimilate novel verbs to an abstract SVO schema that
they bring to the experiment. For example, Maratsos et al. (1987) taught
children from 412 to 512 years of age the novel verb fud for a novel transi-
tive action (human operating a machine that transformed the shape of
Play-Doh). Children were introduced to the novel verb in a series of in-
transitive sentence frames such as “The dough ªnally fudded,” “It won’t
fud,” and “The dough’s fudding in the machine.” They were then
prompted with either neutral questions such as “What’s happening?” or
more biasing questions such as “What are you doing?” (which encourages
a transitive response such as “I’m fudding the dough”). Although animacy
cues could have been used in this experiment (human fuds inanimate
dough), Pinker, Lebeaux, and Frost (1987) used a similar experimental de-
sign eliminating animacy cues. They introduced children to a novel verb in
a passive construction, “The fork is being ºoosed by the pencil,” and then
asked them “What is the pencil doing?” to pull for an active, transitive re-
sponse such as “It’s ºoosing the fork.” In both of these studies, the general
ªnding was that the vast majority of children from 312 to 8 years of age
could produce a canonical transitive SVO utterance with the novel verb,
even though they had never heard it used in that construction.
But the same is not true for younger children. Tomasello and Brooks
(1998) exposed 2- to 3-year-olds to a novel verb used to refer to a highly
transitive and novel action in which an agent was doing something to a
patient. In the key condition the novel verb was used in an intransitive sen-
tence frame such as “The sock is tamming” (to refer to a situation in
which, for example, a bear was doing something that caused a sock to
“tam”—similar to the verb roll or spin). Then, with novel characters per-
forming the target action, the adult asked children “What is the doggie do-
ing?” (when the dog was causing some new character to tam). Agent ques-
tions of this type encourage a transitive reply such as “He’s tamming the
car”—which would be creative since the child has heard this verb only in
128
Constructing a Language

an intransitive sentence frame. Even though children could potentially
have used animacy cues in this experiment, very few of them at either age
produced a full transitive utterance with the novel verb. Importantly, as a
control, children also heard another novel verb introduced in a transitive
sentence frame, and in this case virtually all of them produced a transitive
utterance—demonstrating that they could use a novel verb in an SVO con-
struction when they had heard it used in that way. It is also important to
note that it is not the case that young children are simply reluctant to use
newly learned words in novel ways; when even younger children (22
months) are taught novel nouns, they use them quite freely in already es-
tablished pivot schemas or item-based constructions (Tomasello et al.,
1997).
The generality of this ªnding is demonstrated by a number of similar
studies using different modeled constructions and measurement proce-
dures. These studies have used children of many different ages and have
tested for a variety of constructions (see Tomasello 2000b, for a review).
Virtually all of the ªndings concern children’s ability to produce a simple
transitive SVO utterance after hearing a novel verb only in some other sen-
tence frame (intransitive, passive, imperative, and so on). When all these
ªndings are compiled and quantitatively compared, we see a continuous
developmental progression in which children gradually become more pro-
ductive with novel verbs in the transitive SVO construction during their
third and fourth years of life and beyond, evidencing a growing under-
standing of the working of canonical English word order (see Figure 4.4).
It should be noted that there are very few novel verb studies in languages
other than English. The major exception is Berman (1993), who investi-
gated young Hebrew-speaking children’s ability to use an intransitively in-
troduced novel verb in a canonical transitive construction—requiring
them to creatively construct a special verb form (a type of causative
marker on the formerly intransitive verb) as well as a special ordering of
the other lexical items involved. She found a steady increase in novel tran-
sitive utterances over age very similar to that found in English-speaking
children.
Finally, Akhtar (1999) used a different novel verb methodology to in-
vestigate young children’s knowledge of English word-order conventions.
An adult modeled novel verbs for novel transitive events for young chil-
dren at ages 2;8, 3;6, and 4;4. One verb was modeled in canonical English
SVO order (“Ernie meeking the car”), whereas two others were in non-
canonical order, either SOV (“Ernie the cow tamming”) or VSO (“Gop-
ping Ernie the cow”). Children were then asked neutral questions such as
“What’s happening?” Almost all of the children at all three ages who
heard the verb modeled in SVO order produced exclusively SVO utter-
Early Syntactic Constructions
129

ances with the novel verb. However, when they heard one of the non-
canonical SOV or VSO forms, children behaved differently at different
ages. In general, the older children used their verb-general knowledge of
English transitivity to “correct” the non-canonical uses of the novel verbs
to canonical SVO form. The younger children, in contrast, much more of-
ten matched the ordering pattern they had heard with the novel verb, no
matter how bizarre that pattern sounded to adult ears. Interestingly, many
of the younger children vacillated between imitation of the odd sentence
patterns and “correction” of these patterns to canonical SVO order—indi-
cating that they knew enough about English word-order patterns to dis-
cern that these were strange utterances, but not enough to overcome com-
pletely their tendency to imitatively learn and reproduce the basic
structure of what the adult was saying with the novel verb. Abbot-Smith,
Lieven, and Tomasello (2001) recently extended this methodology to
younger ages (children at 2;4, using intransitives) and found that even
fewer children (less than half as many as Akhtar’s youngest children) cor-
rected the adult’s strange word order.
Perhaps surprisingly, young children also fail to show a verb-general un-
derstanding of canonical English word order in comprehension studies us-
ing novel verbs in which they must act out (with toys) a scene indicated by
an SVO utterance. Thus, Akhtar and Tomasello (1997) exposed young
children to many models of “This is called dacking” used to describe a ca-
130
Constructing a Language
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
2,0
2,6
3,0
3,6
4,0
4,6
5,0
8,0
Age
Percentage
Figure 4.4. Percentage of children producing transitive utterances using novel
verbs, by age. Adapted from Tomasello (2000b); reprinted with the permission of
Elsevier Science.

nonical transitive action. They then, using novel characters, asked the chil-
dren to “Make Cookie Monster dack Big Bird.” All 10 of the children at
3;8 were excellent in this task, whereas only 3 of the 10 children at 2;9
were above chance—even though most did well on a control task using fa-
miliar verbs. In a second type of comprehension test, children just under
3 years of age ªrst learned to act out a novel action on a novel apparatus
with two toy characters, and then were introduced to the novel verb: the
adult handed them two new characters and asked, while pushing the ap-
paratus toward them, “Can you make X meek Y?” In this case children’s
only exposure to the novel verb was in a very natural transitive sentence
frame used for an action they already knew how to perform. Since every
child knew the names of the novel characters and on every trial attempted
to make one of them act on the other in the appropriate way, the only
question was which character should play which role. These under-3-year-
olds were, as a group, at chance in this task, with only 3 of the 12 children
performing above chance as individuals. Similar results, using a different
comprehension methodology (a token placement task), were found by
Bridges (1984). Using a comprehension methodology in which children
had to point to the agent of an utterance—the main clue to which was
word order, Fisher (1996) found positive results for children averaging 3;6
years of age (and Fisher, 2002, found somewhat weaker evidence for the
same effect in children at 2;6).
Another technique used to assess children’s comprehension of various
linguistic items and structures is so-called preferential looking. In this
technique, a child is shown two displays (often on two television screens)
and hears a single utterance (through a centrally located loudspeaker) that
describes only one of the pictures felicitously. The question is which pic-
ture the child will look at longer. The ªndings from studies using this
method show some interesting things about young children’s comprehen-
sion of verb semantics but not, as is sometimes suggested, about their
comprehension of canonical English word order. The relevant studies are
those using novel or very low frequency verbs, so we know that children
have had no previous experience with them. In almost all of these studies
the comparison is between transitives and intransitives. Thus, Naigles
(1990) found that when they hear canonical SVO utterances English-
speaking children from 2;1 preferred to look at one participant doing
something to another (causative meaning) rather than two participants
carrying out synchronous independent activities. She also found that chil-
dren had the reverse preference when they heard an intransitive utterance.
(See Hirsh-Pasek and Golinkoff, 1996; Bavin and Growcott, 2000; Bavin
and Kidd, 2000; for related ªndings—and Tomasello and Abbot-Smith,
2002, for a critique).
Early Syntactic Constructions
131

With regard to the transitive SVO construction in particular, Naigles’s
study shows that in the preferential looking paradigm 2-year-olds know
enough about the construction to know that it goes with asymmetrical ac-
tivities (one participant acting on another) rather than symmetrical activi-
ties (two participants engaging in the same activity simultaneously). What
the study does not show is understanding of word order. That is, it does
not show that young children can connect the pre-verbal position with the
agent (or subject) and the post-verbal position with the patient (or object)
in a transitive utterance—which would be required for a full-blown repre-
sentation of the transitive construction, and which is indeed required of
children in both act-out comprehension tasks and novel verb production
tasks. The only preferential looking study which attempted to examine
this knowledge is by Fisher (2000). However, the sentences she gave chil-
dren (1;9 and 2;2) had prepositional phrases that provided additional in-
formation (“The duck is gorping the bunny up and down”). Thus, the
child merely had to interpret bunny up and down in order to “prefer” the
picture in which the bunny (rather than the duck) was indeed moving up
and down, without paying attention to the syntactic marking of verb argu-
ments at all.
The overall conclusion is thus that in both production and comprehen-
sion the majority of English-speaking children do not fully understand
word order as a productive syntactic device for marking agents and pa-
tients (subjects and objects) until after 3 years of age (although some mi-
nority of children understand it before, and some children may under-
stand it weakly, in some limited contexts). In some cases, even the presence
of animacy cues (agents were animate, patients inanimate) does not help.
But, of course, most English-speaking children are hearing SVO utterances
with one or more case-marked pronouns, and so we now turn to an inves-
tigation of their understanding of case marking.
4.3.2. Case and Agreement
In the 1960s and 1970s a number of investigators speculated that word
order should be easier than case and agreement for children to learn as a
syntactic device because canonical ordering is so fundamental to so many
sensory-motor and cognitive activities (McNeill, 1966; Bruner, 1975;
Braine, 1976; Pinker, 1981). However, cross-linguistic research has since
exploded this “word order myth” (Weist, 1983). That is, cross-linguistic
research has demonstrated that in their spontaneous speech, children
learning many different languages—regardless of whether their language
relies mainly on word order, case marking, or some combination of the
two—generally conform to adult usage and appear to mark agent-patient
132
Constructing a Language

relations equally early and appropriately. Indeed, on the basis of his re-
view, Slobin (1982) concluded that children learning languages that mark
agent-patient relations clearly and simply with morphological (case)
markers, such as Turkish, comprehend agent-patient syntax earlier than
children learning word-order languages such as English. In support of his
argument, Slobin cited the fact that some children learning case-marking
languages overgeneralize case markers in ways indicating productive con-
trol while they are still only 2 years old (Slobin, 1982; Slobin, 1985). In
comprehension experiments, it is clearly the case that children learning
morphologically rich languages, in which word order plays only a minor
role in indicating agent-patient relations, comprehend the syntactic mark-
ing of agent-patient relations as early or earlier than children learning
word-order languages such as English. Representative studies are reported
by Slobin and Bever (1982) for Turkish, Hakuta (1982) for Japanese, and
Weist (1983) for Polish (see Slobin, 1982, and Bates and MacWhinney,
1989, for reviews).
Interestingly in this regard, Dodson and Tomasello (1998) performed a
novel verb experiment with young English-speaking children—similar to
the novel verb production studies described in the previous section—in
which they introduced the novel verbs with pronouns, many of which are
case marked in English (he versus him). They found that the children did
somewhat better than their counterparts in studies in which they heard
only full noun phrases with no case marking, although the majority of
children still were not skillful before 3 years of age. In addition, Dodson
and Tomasello examined closely the individual utterances produced by
children under 2;6 in all existing novel verb studies, including the unpub-
lished raw data of Braine et al. (1990). They found that virtually every to-
ken of a productive word combination by children in this age range had
the particular pronoun I or me as subject.
Theoretically, Slobin (1982) explains the developmental advantage of
morphology over word order in terms of the importance of “local cues.”
The basic idea is that a case marker on a noun is easier to learn and use as
an indicator of agent-patient relations than is word order “because it ap-
plies to a particular noun and can be interpreted without taking the entire
sentence into account” (163). It is also worth noting that word order has
no phonological content per se, and so it may be an extremely ephemeral
cue for young children, whereas morphological markers give them some
concrete phonology on which to base a semantic-syntactic distinction. As
a test of this hypothesis, Wittek and Tomasello (submitted-a) performed a
novel verb experiment—one of the very few on a case-marking language—
using German. German is a case-marking language, but with the novelty
that case relations are encoded as markings on the determiners and adjec-
Early Syntactic Constructions
133

tives that are used along with nouns (only in some cases on the nouns
themselves). The cue is thus more local than that of word-order languages
(the marking is inside the NP), but perhaps not as local as that of the clas-
sic kinds of case-marking languages such as Turkish and Russian in which
the marking is directly on the noun. Wittek and Tomasello gave children
nonce nouns, for example, in a nominative case-marked form (Der Doso
dreht sich  The doso is turning) and then tried in various ways to see if
they could, in another sentence context, produce doso with an accusative
(masculine) determiner (Der Clown schiebt den Doso  The clown is
pushing the doso). Of central interest was how the German-speaking chil-
dren’s performance in this task would compare with English-speaking
children’s performance in similar nonce word tasks (in other studies) in
which they had to demonstrate productive use of word order to mark
agent-patient relations. In support of the Local Cues hypothesis, the basic
ªnding was that the German children were more than twice as productive
in marking agent-patient relations (with case-marked articles) as are Eng-
lish-speaking children using word order. (On the Local Cues hypothesis,
see Bowerman, 1985; Weist and Konieczna, 1985.)
For English, most of the discussion of case marking has centered around
pronoun case errors, as in Me do it and Him going. About 50 percent of
English-speaking children make such errors, most typically at 2–4 years,
with much variability across children. The most robust phenomenon is
that children most often substitute accusative forms for nominative forms
(Me going) but very seldom do the reverse (He hit I). Tanz (1974) system-
atically documented this phenomenon and provided an explanation in
terms of Slobin’s (1973) operating principles. Most importantly, in English
the objective form of the personal pronoun occurs in many different con-
structions (as direct object, as the object of a preposition, as the answer to
question, and so on) whereas the nominative form is only used as subject
of a sentence. The proposal is thus that children learn that the objective
forms are promiscuous and so they generalize them quite widely, whereas
they observe no evidence that the nominative forms can generalize at all.
Tanz also notes that objective pronouns more often occur in the highly sa-
lient sentence-ªnal position in English. In contrast to these ªndings for
English, Kaper (1976) reported that Dutch-speaking children make pro-
nominal case errors in both directions. In support of Tanz’s ªrst hypothe-
sis, Kaper noted that in Dutch the objective and nominative forms of pro-
nouns occur in roughly equal numbers of constructions, thus accounting
for the presence of errors in both directions.
Another factor that almost certainly plays a role—although it has never
been systematically studied—is the fact that English objective pronouns
can occur as “subjects” in some constructions. For example:
134
Constructing a Language

Let her do it.
Make him drink it.
Help me ªnd it.
It is thus possible that children hear these sequences but do not appreciate
that the matrix verb (let, make, help) makes this a special construction in
which the second verb is non-ªnite. There are basically no conventional
constructions in English in which the nominative pronouns occur as di-
rect objects. It is important to note, however, that this factor cannot be
whole story because children make some errors that they almost certainly
could not have heard from adults because their main verbs do not occur in
these phrasal causative constructions with let, make, help, and so on. For
example:
Me like it.
Her thinks so.
Him knows that.
These verbs are almost never used in phrasal causative constructions (very
odd is Help me like/think/know it), and so these errors cannot be coming
directly from children mimicking adult sequences out of context. At the
moment there are no good explanations for these errors, although it is
possible that when children retrieve a pronoun on some occasions (condi-
tions unknown), they simply retrieve the form they command best.
Rispoli (1994, 1998) has proposed another theory. He notes again that
the particular pronouns that English-speaking children most often over-
generalize are the objective forms me and her (and not the subjective
forms I and she). But it turns out that children do make some nominative-
for-objective case errors with other pronouns, especially he for him and
they for them—as in I ride he and And kill they. Rispoli attributes these
facts to the morphophonetic structure of the English personal pronoun
paradigm:
I
she
he
they
me
her
him
them
my
her
his
their
It is easily seen that he-him-his and they-them-their each has a common
phonetic core (h- and th-) whereas I-me-my and she-her-her do not. And
indeed, the most frequent errors are ones in which children in these last
two cases use the forms that have a common initial phoneme (me-my and
her-her) to substitute for the odd-man-out (I and she), with the her-for-she
error having the overall highest rate (because of the fact, according to
Rispoli, that her occurs as both the objective and genitive form; the so-
Early Syntactic Constructions
135

called double-cell effect). The overall idea is thus that children are making
retrieval errors on the basis of both semantic and phonological factors.
Currently, there is no widely accepted explanation of children’s pro-
noun case errors in English, and indeed it is likely that several factors are
involved. Of most importance to resolve the issue in a theoretically inter-
esting way is cross-linguistic research enabling the examination of pro-
noun paradigms with different morphophonemic and syntactic properties.
In general, although more and more cross-linguistic data are being gath-
ered daily on children’s spontaneous speech, there are very few experimen-
tal studies in languages other than English. This means that we can never
be sure about the productivity of the forms these children are using at dif-
ferent ages.
4.3.3. Cue Coalition and Competition
In all languages there are multiple potential cues indicating agent-patient
relations. In many languages both word order and case marking are at
least potentially available, even though one of them may most typically be
used for other functions (for instance, in many morphologically rich lan-
guages word order is used primarily for pragmatic functions such as
topicalization). In addition, in attempting to comprehend adult utterances
children may attend to information that is not directly encoded in the lan-
guage; for example, they may use animacy to infer that the most likely in-
terpretation of an utterance containing the lexical items man, ball, and
kick is that the man kicked the ball, regardless of how those items are syn-
tactically combined.
In an extensive investigation of language acquisition in a number of lan-
guages, Slobin (reviewed in 1982) identiªed some of the different compre-
hension strategies that children use to establish agent-patient relations, de-
pending on the types of problems their particular language presents to
them. A central discovery of this research, as noted above, was that chil-
dren can more easily master grammatical forms expressed in “local cues”
such as bound morphology than forms expressed in more distributed cues
such as word order and some forms of agreement. This accounts, for ex-
ample, for the fact that Turkish-speaking children master the expression
of agent-patient relations at a signiªcantly earlier age than do English-
speaking children. In addition, it turns out that Turkish is especially “child
friendly,” even among languages that rely heavily on local morphological
cues. Slobin (1982) outlines 12 reasons why Turkish agent-patient rela-
tions are relatively easy to learn. An adaptation of that list (focusing on
nominal morphology) is as follows. Turkish nominal grammatical mor-
phemes are:
136
Constructing a Language

• postposed, syllabic, and stressed, which makes them perceptually
more salient;
• obligatory and employ almost perfect one-to-one mapping of form to
function (no fusional morphemes or homophones), which makes
them more predictable;
• bound to the noun, rather than freestanding, which makes them more
local; and
• invariably regular across different nominals and pronominals, which
makes them readily generalizable.
All of these factors coalesce to make Turkish agent-patient relations espe-
cially easy to learn, and their identiªcation is a major step in discovering
the basic processes of language acquisition that are the employed by chil-
dren in general.
A central methodological problem, however, is that in natural lan-
guages many of these cues go together naturally, and so it is difªcult to
evaluate their contributions separately. Therefore, Bates and MacWhinney
(summarized in 1989) conducted extensive experimental investigations of
the cues children use to comprehend agent-patient relations in a number
of languages. The basic paradigm is to ask children to act out utterances
using toy animals, with agent-patient relations indicated in different
ways—sometimes in semi-grammatical utterances with conºicting cues.
For example, an English-speaking child might be presented with the utter-
ance “The spoon kicked the horse.” In this case, the cue of word order is
put in competition with the most likely real-world scenario in which ani-
mate beings more often kick inanimate things than the reverse. From an
early age, English-speaking children make the spoon “kick” the toy horse,
which simply shows the power of word order in English. Italian-speaking
children, when presented with an equivalent utterance, ignore word order
and make the horse kick the spoon. This is because word order is quite
variable in Italian, and so, since there is no case marking (and in this ex-
ample agreement is no help because both the horse and the spoon are
third-person singular), semantic plausibility is the most reliable cue avail-
able. German-speaking children gradually learn to ignore both word order
and semantic plausibility (animacy) and look for nominative and accusa-
tive marking on “the horse” and “the spoon” (Lindner, in press).
Table 4.3 provides a highly schematic summary of some of the ªndings
of this research program, with special attention to children’s ability to
identify the initiator of the action when various cues are put into competi-
tion in the utterances they must act out. It can be seen in this table that in a
number of languages children rely on cues that are different from those on
which adults rely. Bates and MacWhinney’s two major explanations for
Early Syntactic Constructions
137

these developmental changes are: (1) functional readiness, in the sense of
the nature of the child’s cognitive and linguistic skills at any given time,
which determines what can be learned; and (2) various factors of cue va-
lidity and cue strength (basically the frequency and consistency with
which children experience forms; see Section 5.4.3 for more on the compe-
tition model in general) that change as the child gains more linguistic ex-
perience (and thus more exposure to the less frequently occurring regular
forms). In Chapter 5 we will look at additional factors—from grammati-
cal complexity to cognitive complexity to perceptual salience to input fre-
138
Constructing a Language
Table 4.3
Order of importance of cues to actor assignment across languages.
English
Adults
SVO  Animacy  Agreement  Stress
Under 5
SVO  Animacy  Stress  Agreement
Italian
Adults
SV Agreement  Clitic agreement  Animacy  SVO
Under 7
Animacy  SVO  SV agreement  Clitic agreement
French
Adults
SV agreement  Clitic agreement  Animacy  SVO
Under 6
SVO  Animacy (others not tested)
Dutch
Adults
Case  SVO  Animacy
Under 10
SVO  Case  Animacy
Serbo-Croatian
Adults
Case  Agreement  Animacy  SVO, VSO, SOV
Under 5
Animacy  Case  SVO, VSO, SOV  Agreement
Hungarian
Adults
Case  SV agreement  Animacy  VO agreement
Under 3
Animacy  Case  SVO  Stress (agreement not tested)
Turkish
Adults
Case  Animacy  Word order
Under 2
Case  Word order (animacy not tested)
Hebrew
Adults
Case  Agreement  Order
Under 10
Case  Order  Agreement
Warlpiri
Adults
Case  Animacy  Order
Under 5
Animacy  Case  Order
Source: Adapted from Bates and MacWhinney (1989).

quency—that constitute the learning problem facing the child attempting
to learn a particular construction in a particular language.
The research of Slobin and Bates and MacWhinney highlights, perhaps
better than any other, that a language is a complex set of symbolic forms,
with many sources of information about meaning which may in some in-
stances conºict with one another. There is no way to tease apart these
inºuences except in experiments. Even better would be competition-type
experiments using various kinds of nonce words, which have never been
done.
4.3.4. Learning Syntactic Symbols
In many ways learning to syntactically mark agent-patient relations in dif-
ferent constructions is the backbone of syntactic development; it provides
the basic “who-did-what-to-whom” structure of the utterance. We might
thus think of the use of word order and morphological marking to indi-
cate agent-patient relations as the use of second-order or syntactic sym-
bols—symbols for indicating other linguistic units’ syntactic roles in the
utterance as a whole.
Focusing on the most general verb-argument constructions of English—
since, again, this is the only language in which there is an extensive experi-
mental base—we may summarize the developmental progression of chil-
dren’s use of syntactic symbols by highlighting key characteristics of the
types of constructions used at different periods:
• First are holophrases, in which children use a single linguistic symbol
(often with a speciªc intonational contour) to express their communi-
cative intentions about an entire experiential scene. No syntactic sym-
bols are involved.
• Second are pivot schemas and other word combinations and expres-
sions in which children use multiple words to express their communi-
cative intentions, thus partitioning the experiential scene into at least
two component parts. But again no syntactic symbols are involved.
• Third are item-based constructions (such as verb island construc-
tions), in which children use syntactic marking such as word order or
grammatical morphology to indicate explicitly some participant roles
in scenes, but they do this differently for different item-based con-
structions (depending mainly on their linguistic experience with each
of these).
• Finally are abstract constructions, to be dealt with in Chapter 5, in
which children express their communicative intentions through utter-
Early Syntactic Constructions
139

ances that instantiate relatively abstract and adult-like linguistic con-
structions that syntactically mark participants for verb-general classes
of constructions.
Table 4.4 provides an overview of these steps in English-speaking chil-
dren’s mastery of syntactic symbols and construction types.
The acquisition of other languages, although different in important
ways, may also, to a ªrst approximation, be described in this general way:
ªrst no explicit marking of syntactic relations, then local marking of syn-
tax relations in constructional islands (whether they are marked with
word order or grammatical morphology), then more construction-general
marking but within limits. And the emphasis on limits is crucial because,
as argued earlier, even many adult constructions are highly constrained,
often in some relatively unpredictable ways. It is also important to empha-
size that this account applies most directly to the most “regular” construc-
tions that children are acquiring. English-speaking children, for instance,
are also acquiring many quirky, idiosyncratic constructions that may not
be generalized beyond the speciªc words and phrases that structure them.
The list is virtually endless, including everything from pat phrases such as
Here-ya-go,
I-dunno,
and
You’re-welcome
to
semi-productive
but
noncanonical constructions such as there-constructions.
4.4. Summary
The central question in the study of young children’s early syntactic devel-
opment is the nature of the underlying linguistic representations involved.
In this chapter I have argued and presented evidence that in the initial
stages—involving word combinations, pivot schemas, and item-based
constructions—these representations are highly concrete, based around in-
dividual words and phrases with some open slots whose deªnition comes
from those words and phrases (that is, in Kick X, X is simply the thing one
kicks—a slot-ªller category in the sense of Nelson, 1985). This pattern is
at least partly a reºection of the adult language children hear, which quite
often revolves around speciªc words and phrases as well. But it also very
likely reºects the fact that children at this early age have not yet heard
enough language to have made very deep generalizations. The generaliza-
tions they have made at this point have been made by a process of schema-
tization, a type of pattern-ªnding that builds linguistic constructions
around concrete pieces of language.
In the initial stages, then, children’s linguistic competence is most accu-
rately characterized not as “a grammar,” but rather as an inventory of rel-
atively isolated, item-based constructional islands. Development after
140
Constructing a Language

Table 4.4
Summary of construction types constituting children’s early syntactic development and the characteristics in terms of
which they are deªned.
Lexical partitioning
of events/scenes
Syntactic marking of partici-
pant roles in events/scenes
Categorization of
events/scenes
Holophrases



(12 months)
Pivot schemas



(18 months)
Item-based constructions



(24 months)
Abstract constructions



(36 months)
Source: From Tomasello and Brooks (1999). Reprinted with the permission of Psychology Press.

these initial stages, typically at 2–3 years of age, then proceeds gradually
and in piecemeal fashion, with some constructions becoming abstract
more rapidly than others—mainly depending on the type and token fre-
quency with which children hear particular constructions, since this is
what provides the raw material for the schematization process (see Chap-
ters 5 and 8). Regardless of details, under no circumstances does this de-
velopment look like an instantaneous setting of parameters in which all
verbs and other lexical items immediately participate in a totally abstract
construction. Contrary to Radford’s example quoted at the beginning of
this chapter, it is simply not the case that once a child is able to parse
“Close the door” she knows that all verbs in English precede their com-
plements.
The syntactic marking of agent-patient relations, the backbone of syn-
tactic development, also begins locally with particular verbs in item-based
constructions, that is, mainly in verb island constructions. The way this
marking is done differs greatly in different languages, depending both on
the speciªc kinds of cues used for this function—word order, case mark-
ing, agreement, or some combination of these—and on how these cues
present themselves to the learner in terms of such factors as cue validity,
cue reliability, and cue strength (as these are deªned by the competition
model). And so in addition to simple type and token frequencies, the lan-
guage children hear is crucial with respect to the “messiness” of the data
they have to work with—which in this case varies mainly as a function of
the typology of the language to be learned. There are still many outstand-
ing questions about how children cope with the messiness of the many
cues involved in this process, and indeed a major ªnding of the research
program of Bates and MacWhinney (1989) is that children often start off
relying on different cues than adults. Studies using nonce verbs in a com-
petition paradigm would help to answer many of these questions.
An important methodological note. It is a common practice in the study
of child language acquisition to describe a child’s utterance in terms of
adult categories of one kind or another, and this is even done in some
cases by researchers who otherwise take a more child-centered perspec-
tive. But until we do a thorough analysis of a given child’s range of uses of
all of her lexical items and constructions, we cannot know the nature of
the representations underlying them (and experiments with nonce words
would be even better). Thus, the ªrst time we hear a child say something
like “Wanna ride horsie,” we cannot jump to the conclusion that she has
mastered inªnitival complements. Perhaps she just knows how to say
“Wanna” plus the activity she wants, or perhaps it is a frozen holophrase,
or perhaps it is something else. The nature of the linguistic representations
that children are using to generate their utterances is in every case an em-
142
Constructing a Language

pirical question, and it requires systematic investigation—not just assump-
tions (that is, not the continuity assumption).
Children build up the abstractness of their item-based constructions us-
ing their general skills of intention-reading and pattern-ªnding. They un-
derstand the communicative functions of utterances that embody various
syntactic constructions, as well as some of their constituents, by reading
the intentions of the speaker. They then ªnd patterns across item-based
constructions by schematizing and making analogies. Verb island con-
structions may play an especially important role because they provide the
raw material with which children construct the most abstract construc-
tions of their language, for example, argument structure constructions. We
now turn to an account of these most abstract constructions and how chil-
dren construct them.
Early Syntactic Constructions
143

Constructing a Language
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
F I V E
Abstract Syntactic
Constructions
On the whole grammar is not a tool of logical analysis;
grammar is busy with emphasis, focus, down-shifting,
and up-grading; it is a way of organizing information
and taking alternative points of view.
—WILLIAM LABOV
DURING the preschool years, English-speaking
children begin to be productive with a variety of abstract utterance-level
constructions, including such things as transitives, intransitives, ditransi-
tives, attributives, passives, imperatives, reºexives, locatives, resultatives,
causatives, and various kinds of question constructions. Many of these are
so-called argument-structure constructions, and they are used to refer to
experiential scenes of the most abstract kind, including such things as peo-
ple acting on objects, objects changing state or location, people giving
people things, people experiencing psychological states, objects or people
being in a state, and things being acted upon (Goldberg, 1995). It is pre-
sumably the case that these abstract constructions represent children’s
generalizations across many dozen or more item-based constructions, es-
pecially in some cases verb island constructions. The major task of this
chapter is to describe, and to some degree explain the emergence of, the
abstract utterance-level constructions that English-speaking children ªrst
control—with some reference to similar constructions in other languages
where there is sufªcient research of the right kind.
In this context, two very important theoretical questions immediately
present themselves. The ªrst is the nature of the cognitive processes that
enable young children to build up these abstract constructions. Perhaps
because of the inºuence of linguistic nativism, there has been surprisingly
little investigation of this issue in the acquisition literature. I will propose
that to account for abstract constructions we must suppose that young
children make analogies across whole utterances (structure alignment and
mapping). Although the concept of analogy has a venerable history in his-

torical linguistics, in developmental psycholinguistics it has almost no his-
tory as applied to syntax. And there is exciting new work on children’s
ability to deal with analogies in nonlinguistic domains that is directly rele-
vant. Another important process in virtually all theories of syntactic devel-
opment is distributional analysis, by means of which children group to-
gether into paradigmatic categories linguistic items that behave in the
same way—where in most theories “behave in the same way” simply
means that those items co-occur sequentially with similar items. I will
propose a modiªed version of this process, calling it functionally based
distributional analysis, in which the learner groups together into cate-
gories those linguistic items that function similarly—that is, consis-
tently play similar communicative roles—in different utterances and con-
structions.
The second important question is how and why children make just the
generalizations they do, and not some others that they might reasonably
make from an adult point of view. In other words, how do children con-
strain their abstract constructions, so that they are applied only as widely
as is conventional in the linguistic community, and not more widely? This
question is fundamental to all theories of syntactic development, although
generativists have spent the most time worrying about it. Generativists
typically appeal to innate knowledge of universal grammar as the major
source of constraint and argue that, without this constraint, usage-based
theorists cannot curtail children’s rampant tendency to generalize and
overgeneralize. However, in recent years new data have emerged that sug-
gest the importance, perhaps sufªciency, of three usage-based processes:
(1) the entrenchment of constructions in conventional uses through repeti-
tion; (2) the preemption of generalizations by alternative constructions
(contrast, competition); and (3) the formation of verb classes that enable
children to predict the behavior of new verbs on the basis of their (mostly
semantic) similarities to well-known verbs. Each of these processes plays
its role at a different point in ontogeny, leading to a complex developmen-
tal dialectic between generalization and constraint.
The most important theories of syntactic development currently in the
ªeld are (1) theories based in formal linguistics, including most promi-
nently varieties of generative grammar, and (2) theories based in one or
another type of usage-based linguistics, including most prominently cogni-
tive-functional linguistics and various types of connectionist modeling. I
will argue that formal theories are insufªcient, mainly because they have
not yet solved the problems of cross-linguistic variability and developmen-
tal change. And I will argue in this chapter that while connectionist mod-
els are an extremely valuable tool, and are deªnitely on the right course in
many ways, in their current state they are not sufªcient to account for
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
145

child language acquisition because they do not include in any signiªcant
way information about communicative intention or function. This pre-
vents them from using both analogy, in the way it is very likely used by
young children, and functionally based distributional analysis, which re-
quires attention to the functioning of linguistic items in acts of communi-
cation. In the end, I will not be shy in arguing for a construction-based,
usage-based theory of syntactic development that relies crucially on chil-
dren’s understanding of communicative intentions and function.
5.1. Abstract Constructions
The primary function of an abstract utterance-level construction is to fo-
cus the listener’s attention on some aspect or portion of an experiential
scene while backgrounding her attention to other aspects. Thus, the very
same event may be described in many ways:
Fred broke the window
Fred broke the window with a rock
The rock broke the window
The window got broken
The window was broken by Fred
The window was broken by a rock
What Fred did was break the window
What got broken was the window
It was Fred that broke the window
It was the rock that broke the window
It was the window that Fred broke
It was the window that got broken
What determines the choice among constructions such as these on particu-
lar occasions of use is the speaker’s assessment of the knowledge, expecta-
tions, and perspective of the listener as she is able to assess them in the
current joint attentional frame—along with her own speech act goals.
Thus, if our conversational topic is Fred, he is likely to be the subject when
the speaker reports on the breaking of the window, whereas if we have just
been talking about the window, it is likely to be the subject—triggering a
different construction. Fisher, Gleitman, and Gleitman (1991) say that
constructions serve as a “zoom lens” which the speaker uses to direct the
listener’s attention to a particular perspective on a scene; Langacker
(1987a) speaks of constructions as forcing a certain “construal” of a situa-
tion; and Talmy (1996) describes the use of constructions to highlight cer-
tain aspects of a scene, at the expense of other aspects, as the “windowing
of attention.” And, in a point that will be elaborated later, it is indeed the
146
Constructing a Language

construction itself, and not the particular lexical items involved, that
mostly structures this construing or windowing.
The abstract constructions described below account for a large percent-
age of the utterances that young English-speaking children use habitually
during the preschool years. These English constructions have many pecu-
liarities relative to those of other languages, of course, but the empirical
work necessary to give a comparable description of the constructions used
in other languages—especially the experimental work—has yet to be done
(but see the studies in Slobin, 1985b, 1992, 1997).
Before looking in more detail at speciªc construction types, we may give
an overall accounting of the most general types of constructions children
use from an adult perspective (that is, not attributing knowledge of these
constructions to the child)—so that children’s overall proªle may be com-
pared with that of their mothers (shown in Table 4.1). This is done in
Table 5.1, which uses the same general categories as in the study of mater-
nal child-directed speech (CDS) described in Section 4.1.4 (Cameron-
Faulkner, Lieven, and Tomasello, in press). The analysis is based on data
from the same 12 2-year-old children in that study (age 1;10 to 2;7; MLU
2.00 to 2.49, Brown Stage II), as they interacted with their mothers during
the same sessions used for the analysis of CDS. As may be seen by compar-
ing Tables 4.1 and 5.1, the main difference from the mothers is that the
children do not ask nearly as many questions, and they use many more
fragments, that is, utterances without a predicate.
Turning to a more child-centered perspective, we may now enumerate
the most abstract constructions that English-speaking children use early in
development. It should be said at the outset, however, that many of the
constructions identiªed should actually be differentiated in a more ªne-
grained way (as families of sub-constructions), but again the empirical
work that would make this possible has yet to be done. The central issue—
as in the case of item-based constructions—is children’s productivity. This
is because producing creative yet canonical utterances in a verb-general
manner implies that children are working with some kinds of abstract lin-
guistic categories or constructions (not just item-based constructions).
Without information about productivity, we simply do not know the na-
ture of the underlying linguistic representations involved. Although some
researchers have used an arbitrary criterion for establishing productivity
in analyses of children’s spontaneous speech (e.g., Brown’s, 1973, criterion
of 90 percent correct use of a grammatical structure in obligatory con-
texts), the fact is that the only solid evidence of productivity—and there-
fore of abstract linguistic representations—is overextensions in spontane-
ous speech (things the child has presumably never before heard) and
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
147

productivity in experiments in which the language children hear is care-
fully controlled.
5.1.1. Identificationals, Attributives, and Possessives
Among the earliest utterance-level constructions used by many English-
speaking children are those that serve to identify an object or to attribute
to it some property, including a possessor or simple location (Lieven, Pine,
and Dresner Barnes, 1992). In adult language these would almost invari-
ably require some form of the copula, to be, although children do not al-
ways supply it. Quite often these constructions revolve around one or a
few speciªc words. Most common for the identiªcation function are such
things as:
It’s a/the X
That’s a/the X
This’s a/the X
Most common for the attributive function are such things as:
Here’s a/the X
There’s a/the X
X’s here
X’s there
148
Constructing a Language
Table 5.1
Adult categorization of utterances 2-year-old children use in talking to
their mothers (these are not child constructions).
Fragments
.69
N/NP (.39)  my ªnger
one word
.28
V/VP (.16)  nearly fell over
multi-word
.42
PP (.04)  on the blanket
Questions
.04
Wh  Where that go?
wh-
.04
Y/N  Are you writing?
yes/no
.003
Imperatives
.03
Open it now.
Copulas
.07
That’s Grandpa.
Subject-Predicate
.16
Tr  Mummy build a tower.
transitives
.09
Intr  I trip.
intransitives
.04
Oth  It make me sick.
other
.03
Complex
.002
I want you sit there too.
Source: Compiled by Thea Cameron-Faulkner.

Most common for the possessive function are such things as:
(It’s) X’s
That’s X’s/my
This is X’s/your
Clancy (2000) reports some very similar constructions for Korean-speak-
ing children, and a perusal of the studies in Slobin’s Crosslinguistic Studies
in Language Acquisition volumes reveals many other languages in which
these are frequently used child constructions for focusing attention on or
attributing a property to an external entity.
The question of whether children make any generalizations across these
item-based constructions has no answer at this time. Almost certainly they
do not relate these constructions to other major constructions with full
lexical verbs, such as transitives and intransitives, because these are not so
closely related structurally in adult language (indeed they are very diverse
structurally). There may be some relatively local generalizations within
these constructions, for example, across It’s an X and That’s an X and also
across Here’s the X and There’s the X—but not across these two pairs
since only in Here’s an X and There’s an X constructions does the copula
agree with the NP following it, as in There are my toys (see Lakoff, 1987,
on the idiosyncratic behavior of these constructions in adult language). In
all, such things as predicate nominal, predicate adjective, existential-there,
and locative-there constructions—as they are most often called in tradi-
tional analyses—most likely remain constructional islands, of a sort, even
in adult English.
5.1.2. Simple Transitives, Simple Intransitives, and Imperatives
The simple transitive construction in English is used for depicting a variety
of scenes that differ greatly from one another. The prototype is a scene in
which there are two participants and one somehow acts on the other. Eng-
lish-speaking children typically produce utterances of this type in their
spontaneous speech early in language development for various physical
and psychological activities that people perform on objects—everything
from pushing to having to dropping to knowing. The schema is thus to
some degree abstract and, in radical construction grammar representation
(in which trans-SUBJ indicates “subject in a transitive construction”)
looks something like this:
trans-SUBJ trans-VERB trans-OBJ
The major verbs young children use in the transitive construction—includ-
ing imperative uses—are presented in Table 5.2.
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
149

It is not clear, however, to what the extent young children understand
their utterances of this type as exemplars of the same syntactic construc-
tion. Akhtar and Tomasello (1997) found that it was not until 312 years of
age that children began to use new verbs modeled for them as one-word
utterances to produce and comprehend novel transitive sentences with ap-
propriate word-order marking (see Section 4.3.1). Similar ages for produc-
tivity with this construction were reported by Braine and Brooks (1995),
Maratsos et al. (1987), and Ingham (1993/94). It was also at around this
age that Bowerman’s (1982) children spontaneously said things such as
“He falled me down,” overgeneralizing the transitive construction to in-
transitive verbs.
The simple intransitive construction in English is also used for a wide
variety of scenes. In this case the only commonality is that they involve a
single participant and activity. The two main types of intransitives are the
so-called unergatives, in which an actor does something (John smiled) and
the so-called unaccusatives, in which something happens to something
150
Constructing a Language
Table 5.2
Fifty most frequent verbs used in the English transitive construction,
age 2–4.
Having objects
Moving or
transforming
objects
Acting on
objects
Psychological
activities
get
take
do
see
have
ªnd
eat
like
want
put
play
say
need
bring
write
know
buy
drop
read
watch
keep
drink
tell
hold
make
draw
show
use
open
wash
mean
ªx
wear
hear
break
catch
hurt
cut
hit
try
close
ride
love
turn
thank
throw
bite
push
touch
help
Source: Compiled by Michael Israel using a sample of seven English-speaking children from
the CHILDES database.

(The vase broke). English-speaking children typically produce utterances
of both these types early in language development, with unergatives such
as sleep and swim predominating (unaccusatives occurring most often
with the speciªc verbs break and hurt). At its most abstract the schema is
simply:
intr-SUBJ intr-VERB
The major verbs young children use in the intransitive construction—
including imperative uses—are presented in Table 5.3.
Again, the extent to which young children understand their utterances
of this type as exemplars of the same syntactic construction is not entirely
clear. Tomasello and Brooks (1998) gave young children a novel verb in a
transitive construction and then encouraged them to use it intransitively
(and vice versa). (The verb was from the fairly large class of English verbs
that can be used in both constructions; speciªcally, it was a manner-of-mo-
tion verb on analogy with roll, bounce, slide, spin, twirl, and so on.) They
found that by 212 years of age the majority of children were able to use
this novel verb productively in the intransitive construction. Children who
were taught the novel verb in the intransitive construction had much more
difªculty producing it in the transitive construction. This accords with
other research on the transitive-intransitive alternation, which generally
ªnds that children more often use an exclusively intransitive verb as a
transitive than the reverse (Braine et al., 1990; Ingham, 1993; Maratsos et
al., 1987; but see Lord, 1979). Bowerman’s (1982) examples from her two
daughters include “Don’t giggle me,” “Stay this open,” and “I’ll go it in
there.” Berman (1982, 1993) found a similar pattern for Hebrew, but
Nomura and Shirai (1997) found the opposite pattern for a young Japa-
nese child, who more often used transitives in the intransitive construction
(see also Figueira, 1984, for Portuguese). The explanation given by
Nomura and Shirai is that young Japanese children use intransitive verbs
much more frequently than transitive verbs (see also Rispoli, 1987).
5.1.3. Ditransitives, Datives, and Benefactives
All languages of the world have utterance-level constructions for talking
about the transfer of objects (and other things) between people (Newman,
1996). In English, there is a constellation of three related constructions for
doing this: the to-dative, the for-dative (or benefactive), and the double-
object dative (or ditransitive). The most abstract ditransitive form (exem-
pliªed in He gave me a book) is:
ditr-SUBJ ditr-VERB ditr-R ditr-O
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
151

This construction requires that DI-R be construed as a recipient. The prep-
ositional form of the dative is:
da-SUBJ da-VERB da-O to da-L
This is exempliªed in I sent a package to Minneapolis, and it does not
have the restriction that the object of the preposition to be a recipient (it
could be a simple location). Many verbs occur in both constructions (give,
bring, offer), with the choice of which construction to use jointly affected
by the semantic and discourse status of the participants (Erteschik-Shir,
1979). Most clearly, the prepositional form is appropriate when the recipi-
ent is new information and what is being transferred is known (compare
the natural Jody sent it to Julie with the unnatural Jody sent Julie it).
However, the selection of a construction is only partially determined by
discourse because a great many English verbs occur only in the preposi-
tional form (choose, donate) and a few occur only in the ditransitive (cost,
deny, ªne).
Most English-speaking children produce both ditransitive and preposi-
tional forms of the dative in their spontaneous speech from fairly early in
development, and some benefactives as well. Snyder and Stromswold
(1997) argued and presented some evidence that children always acquire
152
Constructing a Language
Table 5.3
Fifty most frequent verbs used in the English intransitive construction,
age 2–4.
Cause
to move
Move or
transform
Physical activities
Psychological
activities
get
go
play
sleep
look
want
come
do
eat
see
have
goes
write
cry
know
going
happen
walk
talk
move
wait
turn
hurt
stop
jump
swim
think
put
ride
run
watch
sit
ºy
say
break
help
rain
fall
dance
read
work
sing
drive
make
drink
win
ªt
laugh
open
cut
Source: Compiled by Michael Israel using a sample of seven English-speaking children from
the CHILDES database.

the double-object dative before they acquire the other two constructions.
However, Campbell and Tomasello (2001) did not replicate this result
(see also Tomasello, 1998c), but rather found variability across children.
By 3 years of age children are at least occasionally using dative construc-
tions in clearly innovative ways (such as “I’ll brush him his hair”; “You
put me just bread and butter”; Bowerman, 1978, 1988, 1990). Gropen et
al. (1989) found that use of dative constructions with novel verbs could
readily be elicited in children at age 5–6 years, seemingly expressing pro-
ductive knowledge of the different semantic-pragmatic features of the
ditransitive and prepositional dative constructions. The verbs with which
the ditransitive and prepositional datives are most frequently used are pre-
sented in Table 5.4. In general the ditransitive and prepositional dative
constructions are used with a delimited set of verbs, but the benefactive
can be used quite widely with many different verbs—as, under the appro-
priate conditions, almost anything may be done for someone else’s beneªt.
5.1.4.
Beginning with their ªrst words and pivot schemas, English-speaking chil-
dren use a variety of locative words to express spatial relationships in ut-
terance-level constructions. These include prepositions such as X up, X
down, X in, X out, on X, off X, over X, and under X, and verb ? particle
constructions such as pick X up, wipe X off, and get X down. Once chil-
dren start producing more complex structures designating events with two
or more participants, two-argument locative constructions are common.
For Tomasello’s (1992a) daughter these included such utterances as
“Draw star on me” and “Peoples on there boat,” which she produced at
20 months. By 3 years of age most children have sufªcient ºexibility with
item-based constructions to talk explicitly about locative events with three
participants, most often an agent causing a theme to move to some object-
as-location (as in He put the pen on the desk).
The acquisition of three-argument locative constructions has been of
major interest because a wide range of verbs occur in two distinct types of
locative constructions that are associated with differentiated event per-
spectives (e.g., Brinkmann, 1995; Gropen et al., 1991a, 1991b; Levin and
Rappaport Hovav, 1991; Rappaport and Levin, 1988). The “content as
object” locatives are of the form He cleared the dishes off the table or She
loaded hay onto the wagon:
loc-SUBJ loc-VERB loc-OBJ to/on/etc. LOC
The “location as object” constructions are of the form He cleared the ta-
ble of dishes or She loaded the wagon with hay:
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
153

loc-SUBJ loc-VERB LOC with/from/etc. loc-OBJ
The “content as object” constructions serve the discourse function of fo-
cusing attention on the participant that is changing location (dishes, hay)
whereas the “location as object” constructions highlight the resultant
change of state (the now-clean table, the now-loaded wagon). Bowerman
(e.g., 1978, 1982, 1988) has amply documented that preschool-age chil-
dren overgeneralize usage of these three-argument locative constructions
by producing such novel utterances as “I spilled it of orange juice” and
“She’s gonna pinch it on my foot.” Experimentally, Gropen et al. (1991a)
154
Constructing a Language
Table 5.4
Twenty-ªve most frequent verbs used in the English ditransitive and/or
prepositional dative constructions (including benefactive), age 2–4:
number of children (out of seven) using a verb in one, both, or neither
construction.
Both
Ditransitive
Prep dative
Neither
get
6
0
1
0
give
6
1
0
0
make
6
0
1
0
show
6
1
0
0
read
5
0
2
0
bring
5
1
0
1
buy
2
3
1
1
take
1
1
4
1
tell
0
5
1
1
ªnd
1
3
1
2
do
0
0
5
2
send
1
1
2
3
throw
1
1
2
3
call
0
4
0
3
ªx
0
1
3
3
leave
0
1
3
3
open
0
0
4
3
want
0
0
4
3
ask
1
2
0
4
draw
1
1
1
4
feed
0
2
1
4
have
0
0
3
4
hold
0
0
3
4
put
0
0
3
4
say
0
0
3
4
Source: Campbell and Tomasello (2001). Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge
University Press.

have found that 3- to 4-year-olds will use novel verbs in both “content as
object” and “location as object” constructions, and that they show some
sensitivity to the different discourse perspectives involved (that is, they fo-
cus on the moving participant or the change of state).
The resultative construction (as in He wiped the table clean) is of the
form:
res-SUBJ res-VERB res-OBJ res-ADJ
It is used, most typically, to indicate both an action and the result of that
action. Although no experimental studies of the resultative construction
have yet been conducted with novel verbs, the occurrence of novel
resultatives in spontaneous speech attests to the productivity of the con-
struction from sometime after the third birthday. In Bowerman’s (1982)
two daughters the following developmental progression was observed. At
around 2 years of age the children learned various combinations of “caus-
ing verb  resulting effect” such as pull
up and eat
all gone. For the
next year or so, each child accumulated an assortment of these forms
which were used in an apparently adult-like manner. Subsequently each
child, at some point after her third birthday, seemed to reorganize her
knowledge of the independently learned patterns and extracted a more ab-
stract schema. Evidence for this reorganization came from each child’s
production of a number of novel resultative utterances such as “And the
monster would eat you in pieces” and “I’ll capture his whole head off.”
Causative notions may be expressed in English utterance-level construc-
tions either lexically or phrasally. Lexical causatives are simply verbs with
a causative meaning used in the transitive construction (He killed the
deer). Phrasal causatives are important because they supply an alternative
for causativizing an intransitive verb that cannot be used transitively.
Thus, if Bowerman’s daughter had been skillful with phrasal causatives,
instead of “Don’t giggle me” she could have said “Don’t make me giggle,”
and instead of “Stay this open” she could have said “Make this stay
open.” Make is the direct causation matrix verb in English, but an impor-
tant related verb—and in fact the most frequent such verb for young Eng-
lish learners—is let, as in Let her do it, Let me help you, and so forth. An-
other common matrix verb that follows this same pattern is help, as in
Help her get in there or Help him put on his shoes. It is unknown whether
young children see any common pattern among the utterances in which
these three different matrix verbs are used, but their most abstract poten-
tial form would be:
caus-SUBJ make/let/help caus-R [CLAUSE]
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
155

5.1.5. Passives, Middles, and Reflexives
The English passive construction consists of a family of related construc-
tions that change the perspective from the agent of a transitive action (rel-
ative to active voice constructions) to the patient and what happened to it.
Thus, Bill was shot by John takes the perspective of Bill and what hap-
pened to him, rather than focusing on John’s act of shooting (with the
truncated passive Bill was shot serving to strengthen this perspective fur-
ther). In addition to this general function of the passive, Budwig (1990)
has shown that the get and be forms of the passive are themselves associ-
ated with distinct discourse perspectives. Thus, the prototypical get pas-
sive in Spot got hit by a car or Jim got sick from the water tends to be used
when there is a negative consequence which occurs when an animate pa-
tient is adversely affected by an inanimate entity or a non-agent source. In
contrast, the be passive construction in The soup was heated on the stove
is used when there is a neutral outcome of an inanimate entity undergoing
a change of state where the agent causing the change of state is unknown
or irrelevant.
pass-SUBJ get VERB-ed by pass-OBJ
pass-SUBJ be VERB-ed by pass-OBJ
In general, actional transitive verbs can be used in passive constructions
quite readily, whereas many stative verbs seem to ªt less well (She was
loved by him). This was demonstrated experimentally by Sudhalter and
Braine (1985), who found that preschoolers were much better at compre-
hending passive utterances containing actional verbs (kick, cut, dress) than
they were at comprehending passive utterances containing experiential
verbs (love, see, forget).
English-speaking children typically do not produce full passives in their
spontaneous speech until 4 or 5 years of age, although they produce trun-
cated passives (often with get) and adjectival passives much earlier (He got
dunked, He got hurt). Israel, Johnson, and Brooks (2000) analyzed the de-
velopment of children’s use of the passive participle. They found that chil-
dren tended to begin with stative participles (Pumpkin stuck), then use
some participles ambiguously between stative and active readings (Do you
want yours cut?—meaning do you want it to undergo a cutting action or,
alternatively, do you want to receive it already in a cut state), then ªnally
use the active participles characteristic of the full passive (The spinach was
cooked by Mommy). Although passive utterances are infrequent in Eng-
lish-speaking children’s spontaneous speech, a number of researchers have
observed that older preschoolers occasionally create truncated passives
with verbs that in adult English do not passivize (“It was bandaided,” “He
156
Constructing a Language

will be died and I won’t have a brother anymore”), indicating some pro-
ductivity with the construction (Clark, 1982; Bowerman, 1982, 1988).
Conªrming this observation, Pinker, Lebeaux, and Frost (1987) found
experimentally that with training 3- to 4-year-old English-speaking chil-
dren were able to produce passive utterances with novel verbs; however,
they did not report whether any of these utterances were full passives. In a
similar training study, Brooks and Tomasello (1999a) found that English-
speaking children could learn to produce full passive utterances. In just
two 30-minute sessions, 90 percent of the children 3–312 years of age
learned to produce a full passive utterance with a nonce verb—speciªcally
a get-passive with a by phrase (as in The car got meeked by Big Bird).
Tomasello, Brooks, and Stern (1998) gave 3.0-year-olds rich discourse in-
teractions containing truncated passives, passive questions, and by
phrases—all of which added up to a full passive—but they never exposed
the children to a full passive utterance as a whole. Other children were
given only models of full passive utterances. It was found that only chil-
dren who heard full passive utterances produced them, suggesting that
children do not learn to produce full passives by creatively piecing to-
gether a truncated passive with an independently learned by-phrase; they
learn them from models of full passives directly as wholes.
It is important to note that children acquiring certain non-Indo-
European languages typically produce passive sentences quite early in de-
velopment. This result has been obtained for children learning Inuktitut
(Allen and Crago, 1996), K’iche’ Mayan (Pye and Quixtan Poz, 1988),
Sesotho (Demuth, 1989, 1990), and Zulu (Suzman, 1985). Allen and
Crago (1996) report that a child at age 2;0–2;9 (as well as two slightly
older children) learning Inuktitut produced both truncated and full
passives quite regularly. Although a majority of these were with familiar
actional verbs, children also produced passives with experiential predi-
cates and several clearly innovative forms with verbs that do not passivize
in adult Inuktitut. The reasons for this precocity relative to English-speak-
ing children are hypothesized to include the facts that (1) Inuktitut
passives are very common in child-directed speech, and (2) passive utter-
ances are actually simpler than active voice constructions in Inuktitut be-
cause the passivized verb has to agree only with the subject, whereas the
transitive verb has to agree with both subject and object.
There is very little research on English-speaking children’s use of so-
called middle voice constructions (medio-passives) such as This bread cuts
easily or This piano plays like a dream (see Kemmer, 1993). The prototype
of this construction involves an inanimate entity as subject, which is held
responsible for the predicate (that is why the adverb is typically needed;
This bread cuts and This piano plays by themselves are scarcely grammati-
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
157

cal). Budwig, Stein, and O’Brien (2001) looked at a number of utterances
of young children involving inanimate subjects, and found that the most
frequent constructions of this type in young in English-speaking children’s
speech were such things as This doesn’t pour good. Reºexives are also not
common in English-speaking children’s early language (or in adult Eng-
lish), although they do produce a few things such as I hurt myself. How-
ever, reºexives are quite common in the speech of young children learning
languages in which these constructions are frequent in child-directed
speech. For example, most Spanish-speaking youngsters hear and use
quite early such things as Se cayó (It fell down), Me siento (I sit down),
Levántate (Stand up!), and Me lavo las manos (I wash my hands).
Kemmer (1993) argues that middles and reºexives are both used for
events that are only weakly elaborated in the sense that although the form
of the utterance is transitive, there are not two distinct participants con-
ceptually (as in transitive-active clauses); the true agent is either irrelevant
(the bread cuts easily no matter the agent) or is not differentiated from the
patient since it is the same entity (he washes himself).
5.1.6. Questions
Questions, of course, are used primarily to seek information from an in-
terlocutor. In many languages this is done quite simply through a charac-
teristic intonation (He bought a house?) or by the replacement of a con-
tent word with a question word (He bought a what?). Although both of
these are possible in English, English also has two more common forms:
wh-questions and yes/no questions. In the classic structural linguistic anal-
ysis, English questions are formed by subject-auxiliary inversion (some-
times with do-support) and wh- movement. These rules assume that the
speaker has available a simple declarative linguistic representation, which
she then transforms into a question by moving, rearranging, or inserting
grammatical items. Thus, John kicked the ball becomes either Did John
kick the ball? or What did John kick?
But this rule-based analysis is highly unlikely early in development for
two main reasons. First, some English-speaking children learn some wh-
question constructions before they learn any other word combina-
tions. For instance, Tomasello’s (1992a) daughter learned to ask where-
questions (“Where’s-the bottle?”) and what-questions (“What’s that?”) as
her ªrst multi-word constructions. Second, everyone who has studied chil-
dren’s early questions has found that their earliest constructions are tied
quite tightly to a small number of formulas. For example, in their classic
analysis Klima and Bellugi (1966) suggested that almost all of the wh-
questions of Adam, Eve, and Sarah emanated from two formulas: What
NP (doing)? and Where NP (going)? Fletcher’s (1985) subject produced
158
Constructing a Language

almost all of her early questions with one of three formulas: How do . . .,
What are . . ., and Where is . . . More recently, Dabrowska (2001) looked
in detail at one child’s earliest uses of wh-questions in English and found
that 83 percent of her questions during her third year of life came from
one of just 20 formulas such as Where’s THING? Where THING go? Can
I ACT? and Is it PROPERTY?
Importantly, this learning pattern is not conªned to English, as Clancy’s
(1989) study of two Korean children also found that early wh-words ini-
tially occurred with only one or two verbs, for example, the equivalent of
What is . . ., What do . . ., How do . . ., Where is . . ., and Where go. . . The
most plausible explanation of these patterns is that young children do not
create questions via transformation rules, but rather they learn them, like
other constructions, as linguistic gestalts with a characteristic function,
moving gradually from more item-based to more abstract constructions.
One phenomenon that bears on this issue is so-called inversion errors.
English-speaking children sometimes invert the subject and auxiliary in
wh-questions and sometimes not—leading to errors such as Why they’re
not going? A number of fairly complex and abstract rule-based accounts
have been proposed to account for these errors, and, as usual, some re-
searchers have claimed that children know the rules but apply them only
optionally or inconsistently (e.g., Ingram and Tyack, 1979). However, in a
more detailed analysis Rowland and Pine (2000) discovered the surprising
fact that the child they studied from age 2 to age 4 consistently inverted or
failed to invert particular wh-word–auxiliary combinations on an item-
speciªc basis. He thus consistently said such incorrect things as Why I
can . . .? What she will . . .? What you can . . .? —but at the same time he
also said such correct things as How did . . .? How do . . .? What do . . .?
In all, of the 46 particular wh-word—auxiliary pairs this child produced,
43 of them were produced either 100 percent correctly or 100 percent in-
correctly (see also Erreich, 1984, who ªnds equal number of inversion er-
rors in wh- and yes/no questions). Again, the picture is that children learn
questions as a collection of item-based constructions, moving only gradu-
ally to more abstract representations.
Across many languages a similar order of acquisition of wh-questions is
observed. Clancy (1989) reviewed data from ªve languages (English, Ger-
man, Japanese, Korean, and Serbo-Croatian) and found evidence for the
order (see also Vaidyanathan, 1988, on Tamil):
what/where  who  how/why  when
Clancy explains this consistent ordering in terms of both cognitive factors
(for example, the complexity of causal concepts relative to simple spatial
concepts) and the frequency with which and the ways in which adults use
wh-questions in their discourse with the children.
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
159

5.1.7. Constructions as Linguistic Symbols
It is clear from these analyses that each of the various utterance-level con-
structions has associated with it a relatively coherent and consistent con-
structional meaning (or set of meanings). In the two main theoretical ap-
proaches to syntactic development this fact is recognized and accounted
for in two different ways. From a strict generativist perspective there are
no constructions, and if there were they would have no meaning. More
reasonably, from the perspective of generative grammar lite, Pinker (1989)
proposes that constructional meanings derive mainly from the meanings
of the particular verbs involved. Thus, the verb give speciªes three argu-
ments—the giver, the gift, and the recipient—and so utterances with this
verb have this meaning, and any similarity to utterances with the verb
send derives totally from the fact that these verbs have similar meanings
(transferring possession, broadly construed), not from their use in an inde-
pendently meaningful ditransitive construction. The verbs donate and say
cannot be used felicitously in the ditransitive construction because their
meanings are subtly different from those of give and send. Because the
syntax is determined by the meaning of the central lexical item, the verb,
this is sometimes called the lexical rules approach.
One implication of this view is that a verb must have listed in the lexi-
con a different meaning for virtually every different construction in which
it participates (with some productive generalizations across tightly deªned
classes). For example, while the prototypical meaning of cough involves
only one participant, the cougher, we may say such things as He coughed
her his cold, in which there are three core participants. In the lexical rules
approach, in order to produce this utterance the child’s lexicon must have
as an entry a ditransitive meaning for the verb cough. Although this exam-
ple is somewhat fanciful, it takes only a moment’s reºection to see that we
regularly use verbs in constructions that are not prototypical for them; for
example, a simple transitive verb such as kick can also be used ditransi-
tively to indicate transfer of possession: She kicked him the pillow. Gold-
berg (1995) argues that it is highly implausible that the lexicon works in
the way required by the lexical rules approach; there are just too many un-
usual verb meanings that need to be attributed to particular verbs. More-
over and worse, the lexical rules approach is viciously circular: “It is
claimed that kick has an n-argument sense on the basis of the fact that
kick occurs with n complements; it is simultaneously argued that kick
occurs with n complements because it has an n-argument sense” (Gold-
berg, 1995: 11).
The alternative is a construction grammar approach, in which construc-
tions themselves are symbolic units with meaning (Fillmore, Kaye, and
O’Conner, 1988; Goldberg, 1995; Croft, 2001). In this view, much of the
160
Constructing a Language

creativity of language comes from ªtting speciªc words into linguistic con-
structions that are non-prototypical for that word on a speciªc occasion of
use, with no implication that this requires a corresponding permanent lex-
ical entry for the verb involved. For example, He smiled her the answer re-
quires an especially imaginative interpretation to make the verb ªt the
“transfer of possession” meaning of the construction, and this is not likely
to be the result of a productive generalization of a lexical rule (since smile
normally does not even involve movement). But this example makes sa-
lient a process that occurs routinely when we say such things as He kicked
her the ball or She threw him a party or He baked her a cake (since kick,
throw, and bake are not normally transfer verbs). The main point is that if
we grant that constructions may have meaning of their own, in relative in-
dependence of the lexical items involved, then we do not need to populate
the lexicon with all kinds of implausible meanings for each of the verbs we
use in everyday life. The construction grammar approach in which con-
structions have meanings is therefore both much simpler and much more
plausible than the lexical rules approach.
Interestingly and importantly, the fact that linguistic constructions have
meaning of their own creates a top-down pressure on the interpretation of
utterances. This is responsible for many derivational and metaphorical
processes (either with or without special morphology) as lexical items usu-
ally used in one syntactic role are “coerced” into another in the context of
a speciªc construction. For example:
• Properties and activities are treated as if they were objects (Blue is my
favorite color; Skiing is fun; Discovering the treasure was lucky).
• Objects and activities are treated as if they were properties (His
mousy voice shook me; His shaven head distracted her; His
Nixonesque manner offended me).
• Objects and properties are treated as if they were activities (She
chaired the meeting; He wet his pants; The paperboy porched the
newspaper).
5.2. Constructing Constructions
In the usage-based approach, children construct their abstract linguistic
representations out of their item-based constructions using general cogni-
tive, social-cognitive, and learning skills—which act on the language they
hear and produce. It is thus important that we attempt to see exactly how
they could do this. Toward that end, I outline here some pattern-ªnding
cognitive processes that would seem to be needed (there is very little rele-
vant research) to construct abstract, utterance-level constructions, citing
developmental research demonstrating that children exercise these skills at
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
161

the appropriate ages in other domains of activity. The two pattern-ªnding
skills I will focus on are: (1) analogy, including the creation of the most ab-
stract syntactic roles such as subject and object; and (2) distributional
analysis, including the creation of the most abstract paradigmatic catego-
ries such as noun and verb. In some cases, particular aspects of the lan-
guage children hear, and the way they hear it, facilitate the acquisition
process.
But before proceeding it will be useful to make explicit some aspects of
Croft’s (2001) “radical” version of construction grammar because it con-
tains some important insights relevant to the question of how children cre-
ate abstract linguistic constructions and categories. Croft’s primary aim is
to apply construction grammar systematically cross-linguistically. In doing
this—and on the basis of a very deep analysis of the ways in which lin-
guists actually attribute structure to novel languages—he concludes that
not very much in the actual items and structures of natural languages is
universal (although of course much having to do with cognitive structures
and communicative functions is). For example, there would seem to be no
universal syntactic categories (grammatical relations) of the type subject,
direct object, and so forth. But Croft has an even more radical proposal.
He claims that the whole notion of syntactic categories as free-ºoating
linguistic entities is wrong-headed. Such things as subjects and direct
objects only exist in constructions, and indeed the entities that go by these
names are actually different entities when they are in different con-
structions.
For example, in all of the following examples John is traditionally
thought of as subject:
John hit Bill.
John was struck by a car.
There is John.
But the properties of the subject in these three constructions (transitive,
passive, and there-construction, respectively) are very different—John is
either agent, patient, or located object—although there are some common-
alities as well. Croft seeks to capture the construction-speciªc nature of
these roles, along with their commonalities, by referring to the above ex-
amples as having, respectively, a transitive-subject, a passive-subject, and a
there-construction-subject (the convention we have already adopted here).
This way of conceptualizing and labeling syntactic relations allows us to
account for both continuities and emergent abstractions in the lengthy
process of children’s syntactic development.
Another very important aspect of this analysis has crucial implications
for how we conceive of the process by which children create linguistic ab-
stractions of various sorts. Croft is very careful to call such things as
162
Constructing a Language

“transitive-subject” syntactic roles, not grammatical relations, as is com-
mon in most theories (both formal and usage-based). This is because he
wants to highlight again the fact that such things as subjects and direct ob-
jects take their deªnition from the role they play in larger linguistic con-
structions. Croft claims that the term grammatical relations is misleading
because it implies that such things as subject are deªned by their relations
to other items in the construction, rather than, as in his analysis, by their
role in the construction as a whole. Transitive-subject deªnes one role in a
complex linguistic gestalt. What this means for theories of acquisition is
that we must look at syntactic roles such as subject not as word-based cat-
egories or relations to be separately learned by distributional analysis or
some other categorization process, but rather as roles that emerge natu-
rally (and, in a sense, epiphenominally) from the abstraction process when
children apply it across whole, utterance-level constructions. This can only
be done by a complex process such as analogy, which takes into account
multiple components simultaneously.
The situation is different with traditional parts of speech, such as noun
or verb, sometimes called paradigmatic or lexical categories. Unlike syn-
tactic roles, paradigmatic categories are not explicitly marked in language.
That is, whereas such things as subject are symbolically indicated by word
order or grammatical morphology in the construction, nouns and verbs
have no explicit marking (despite the fact that they often have some mor-
phology serving other functions, such as plural markers on nouns, that
can be used to identify them). Consequently, the category cannot be orga-
nized around any speciªc linguistic symbol, but can only be based on com-
monalities in the way the members of the category function (in other
words, on distribution). And this is another very large difference between
syntactic roles and paradigmatic categories. Syntactic roles such as subject
do not have speciªc linguistic items as members, whereas paradigmatic
categories such as noun have speciªc items, such as dog and tree, as mem-
bers of the category—once again suggesting that such things as subject are
not categories whereas such things as noun are. These considerations sug-
gest that paradigmatic categories such as noun and verb (and noun phrase
and verb phrase) can only be formed during development by distributional
analyses in which the child begins to see speciªc linguistic items that be-
have in the same way (in the current theory, functionally) as members of
the same category. This is very different from the process of making analo-
gies across constructions.
5.2.1. Analogy
The current hypothesis is that children begin to form abstract utterance-
level constructions by creating analogies among utterances emanating
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
163

from different item-based constructions. Analogy has a long and distin-
guished history in accounting for certain aspects of historical language
change (e.g., see Trask, 1996), including everything from the creation of
morphological paradigms to the regularization of families of syntactic
constructions. Although MacWhinney (1978) used analogy to account for
some facts in the development of children’s morphophonological skills,
and it is sometimes used to account for some processes in morphological
development more generally (e.g., Bybee and Slobin, 1982), it has a
scarcely ever been used in an attempt to account for children’s syntactic
development. Analogy has been criticized by some theorists as a vague
concept because one still has to specify the dimensions of similarity (as one
does in all forms of induction), but recent research has begun to make the
concept much more explicit.
The process of analogy is very like the process of schematization, as dis-
cussed in Chapter 4; it is just that analogies are more abstract. Thus,
whereas all instances of a particular item-based schema have at least one
linguistic item in common (for example, the verb in a verb island schema),
in totally abstract constructions (such as the English ditransitive construc-
tion) the instances need have no items in common. In terms of the over-
head transparencies analogy used to elucidate schematization, we can say
that when we make an abstract analogy between two or more structures
by laying overhead transparencies on top of one another, we can discern
no recognizable ªgures; it is all just blurs. So the question is: On what ba-
sis does the learner make the alignments among constituents necessary for
an analogy among complex structures?
The answer is that the learner must have some understanding of the
functional interrelationships that make up the two structures being
aligned. In the most systematic research program on the topic, Gentner
and colleagues (Gentner and Markman, 1995, 1997; Gentner and Me-
dina, 1998) stress that the essence of analogy is the focus on relations.
When an analogy is made, the objects involved are effaced; the only iden-
tity they retain is their role in the relational structure. Gentner and col-
leagues have much evidence that people, including young children, focus
on relations quite naturally and so are able to make analogies quite
readily. An example is as follows. People are asked to compare two pic-
tures, one of a car towing a boat and one of a truck towing a car that is
identical in appearance to the car in the other picture. After this simple
similarity rating task, the experimenter points to the car in the ªrst picture
and asks the person to point to the best match in the second picture. Peo-
ple have no trouble ignoring the literal match of cars across the two pic-
tures and choosing the truck. In essence, they identify in both pictures the
“tow-er,” or the agent, based on the role it is playing in the entire action
depicted.
164
Constructing a Language

We can make the same point with a somewhat whimsical linguistic ex-
ample. Consider the following two sequences of letters:
U R X
I M A B
Let us try to make an analogy. It is not easy because there is not much in
common between the two strings; they even have different numbers of
items. But what if we now translate them into English in a fanciful con-
text. The situation is that we are role-playing with a child in a pretend
game, and one role is to be a creature named X and another role is to be
one of several honeybees. The above sequences now translate into “You
are X” and “I am a bee.” We can now see that these are both predicate
nominative constructions, and they are analogous: you corresponds to I as
the one to be anointed, are corresponds to am as the identifying relation,
and X corresponds to the two-word phrase a bee as the new identity taken
on. Such correspondences can only be made once we know the functions
of the items and structures involved.
Gentner and colleagues also stress what they call the systematicity prin-
ciple, that in the making of analogies structures are aligned as wholes, as
“interconnected systems of relations.” In the current context this simply
means that learners align whole utterances or constructions, or signiªcant
parts thereof, and attempt to align all of the elements and relations in one
comparison. In doing this, learners search for “one-to-one correspon-
dence” among the elements involved and “parallel connectivity” in the re-
lations involved. The learner thus makes an analogy between utterances
(or constructions) by aligning the arguments one to one, and in making
this alignment she is guided by the functional roles these elements play in
the larger structure. For example, in aligning The car is towing the boat
and The truck is towing the car, the learner does not begin to match ele-
ments on the basis of the literal similarity between the two cars, but aligns
the car and the truck because they are doing the same job from the per-
spective of the functional interrelations involved. This analysis implies
that an important part of making analogies across linguistic constructions
is the meaning of the relational words, especially the verbs, involved—par-
ticularly in terms of such things as the spatial, temporal, and causal rela-
tions they encode. But there is basically no systematic research relevant to
the question of how children might align verb meanings in making linguis-
tic analogies across constructions.
Gentner and colleagues also have some speciªc proposals relevant to
learning. For example, they propose that even though in some sense neu-
tralized, the object elements that children experience in the slots of a struc-
ture can facilitate analogical processes. In particular, they propose that in
addition to type variability in the slots, also important is consistency of the
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
165

items in the slots (that is, a given item occurs only in one slot and not in
others). When all kinds of items occur promiscuously in all of the slots in
two potentially analogous relational structures, structure mapping is made
more difªcult (Gentner and Medina, 1998). For example, children ªnd it
even easier to make the analogy cited above if in the two pictures a car is
towing a boat and a car is towing a trailer, so that the “tow-er” is identical
in the two cases. This principle explains why children begin with item-
based constructions. They ªnd it easier to do structural alignments when
more of the elements and relations are not just similar functionally but
also similar, or even identical, perceptually. Children work their way up to
the totally abstract analogies gradually. There are also some proposals
from the morphological domain, that a certain number of exemplars is
needed—a “critical mass”—before totally abstract analogies can be made
(Marchman and Bates, 1994). But if this is true, the nature of this critical
mass (for example, verb types versus verb tokens) is not known at this
time; there is no research.
It is thus possible that abstract linguistic constructions are created by a
structural alignment across different item-based constructions, or the ut-
terances emanating from them. For example, some verb island construc-
tions that children have with the verbs give, tell, show, send, and so forth,
share a “transfer” meaning, and they appear in the form: NP1  V  NP2
 NP3. In the indicated transfer, NP1 is the “giver,” NP2 is the “re-
ceiver,” and NP3 is the “gift.” So the aligning must be done on the basis of
both form and function: two utterances or constructions are analogous if
a “good” structure mapping is found both on the level of linguistic form
(even if these are only categorically indicated) and on the level of commu-
nicative function. This consideration is not really applicable in non-
linguistic domains. It may also be that in many cases particular patterns of
grammatical morphology in constructions (such as X was VERBed)—
which typically designate abstract relations of one sort or another—facili-
tate, or even enable, recognition of an utterance as instantiating a particu-
lar abstract construction.
The only experimental study of children’s construction of an abstract
linguistic construction (as tested by their ability to assimilate a nonce verb
to it) was conducted by Childers and Tomasello (2001). In this training
study, 212-year-old English-speaking children heard several hundred tran-
sitive utterances, such as “He’s kicking it,” involving 16 different verbs
across three separate sessions. Half the children learned new English verbs
(and so increased their transitive verb vocabularies during training—
toward a critical mass) whereas the other half heard only verbs they al-
ready knew. Within these groups, some children heard all of the utterances
with full nouns as agent and patient, whereas others heard utterances with
166
Constructing a Language

both pronouns (He’s VERB-ing it) and also full nouns as agent and pa-
tient. They were then tested to see if they could creatively produce a transi-
tive utterance with a nonce verb. The main ªnding was that children were
best at generalizing the transitive construction to the nonce verb if they
had been trained with pronouns and nouns, regardless of the familiarity of
the trained verbs (and few children in a control condition generalized to
the novel verb at all). That is, the consistent pronoun frame He’s VERB-
ing it (in combination with type variation in the form of nouns as well)
seemed to facilitate children’s formation of a verb-general transitive con-
struction to a greater degree than the learning of additional transitive
verbs with nouns alone, in the absence of such a stabilizing pronominal
frame.
The results of this study are consistent with Gentner’s more general
analysis of the process of analogy in several ways. First, they show that
children can make generalizations, perhaps based on analogy, across dif-
ferent item-based constructions. Second and more speciªcally, they also
show that the material that goes in the slots, in this case NP slots, plays an
important role (see also Dodson and Tomasello, 1998). In English, the
pronoun he only goes in the preverbal position, and, although the pro-
noun it may occur in either position in spontaneous speech, it occurs most
frequently in postverbal position in child-directed speech, and indeed that
is the only position in which the children heard it during training. These
correspondences between processes in the creation of nonlinguistic analo-
gies and in the creation of abstract linguistic constructions constitute im-
pressive evidence that the process is basically the same in the two cases.
But there is still much that we do not know. For example, we know very
little about how many exemplars are needed. Childers and Tomasello used
16 different verbs in several hundred utterances, but Abbot-Smith et al.
(submitted) found similar learning with one-quarter of the examples. We
also do not know how similar those exemplars should be semantically
(mainly in terms of verbs semantics), the speciªc role of pronouns (since
Childers and Tomasello had no “pronoun only” condition), or whether
the timing of exemplars relative to one another plays some role as well.
As outlined above, in the process of making analogies across utterance-
level constructions, learners create certain kinds of abstract syntactic roles
(Croft, 2001). The most studied such role is the English “subject.” Many
subjects of English utterances are semantically agents, and so for many
people agentive subjects are prototypical of the category. Schlesinger
(1988) proposed a theory of semantic assimilation in which children begin
with a category of agent and then assimilate to it the non-agentive subjects
that they hear in the speech around them. Pinker’s (1984, 1989) theory of
semantic bootstrapping shares many features with this account, emphasiz-
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
167

ing that once children have used the notion of agent as a kind of anchor
for the notion of subject, they can then recognize non-agentive subjects be-
cause these are marked syntactically in the same way as the agentive sub-
jects they know (for example, with word order or case marking). The
problem is that young children learn and use many utterances and con-
structions with non-agentive subjects from the very beginning of their lin-
guistic careers—such things as It broke, It’s a tape recorder, I see it, He
likes it, It opens here, and She got splashed (see Budwig, Stein and
O’Brien, 2001). Thus, semantic bootstrapping would seem to send chil-
dren off on the wrong track early.
The English subject is a very specialized syntactic role that involves a
number of different functions, many of which do not occur together in the
same category in other languages. Bates and MacWhinney (1982) talk
about the English subject as a coalition of agent and topic, but other anal-
yses show that even this is too simple. In Keenan’s (1976) famous account,
cross-linguistically there are something like 30 features associated with
categories that approximate the English subject. These may be grouped
into two broad categories. First are coding properties: for example, the
English subject normally comes before the verb, it normally triggers agree-
ment with the verb (The boy runs, not The boy run), and when it is a pro-
noun it is a special (case-marked) form (He hits, not Him hits). Second are
behavioral properties: the subject in English determines a number of struc-
tural properties of an utterance, for example, in He hit him and left the
only one who could have left is the subject He. But in other languages
there seems to be a subject-like category that consists of a different coali-
tion of these features, the best known in this regard being some Philippine
and Australian languages (Foley and van Valin, 1984; Dryer, 1997).
Rispoli (1991) therefore argues that we should conceptualize the ontogeny
of syntactic roles such as subject as a process of “mosaic acquisition” in
which different underlying features are acquired gradually and at different
times in language-speciªc ways.
The overall developmental course of English-speaking children’s mas-
tery of the syntactic role of subject best supports Rispoli’s account. In their
early language, children simply use individual verbs in the ways they have
heard them being used, and so they are operating simply with verb-speciªc
syntactic roles. Some of these are non-agentive, and they vary greatly in
topicality. Children make some subject case errors—such as Him go or
Her do it—and leave these behind only gradually (see Section 4.3.2). The
kinds of cross-clausal control properties characteristic of adult English
subjects are simply not present in children’s early speech because there are
no relevant utterances. In comprehension experiments, young children are
notorious for identifying as subject the animate participant (if there is only
168
Constructing a Language

one of these), or the ªrst-mentioned participant, or the agent—which sug-
gests something less abstract than an adult-like notion of subject (see Cor-
rigan, 1988, for a review). The only experimental evidence that English-
speaking children have mastered the notion of subject concerns children
approaching school age. Using a training procedure, Braine et al. (1993)
taught children to place a plastic token on the picture representing the
subject of a spoken sentence—using many different kinds of subjects—and
then looked to see if they could generalize to subjects in novel sentences of
many different kinds. The ªrst evidence that they could came at 5–6 years
of age (see also Corrigan, 1988).
Following Croft (2001), one possible explanation for the late acquisi-
tion of English subject is that, in reality, each abstract construction such as
transitive, intransitive, passive, and there-construction actually has its
own subject. The generalized notion of the subject role in an utterance or
construction—which children would have to have mastered to perform
well in most of the experiments—represents the ªnding of a set of com-
monalities among these many and varied construction-speciªc subjects.
That is, subject represents a syntactic role in something like a highly gen-
eral Subject-Predicate construction at the most schematic level of the con-
structional hierarchy. Perhaps this developmental process is triggered in
the end by the need to master constructions involving cross-clausal control
as children approach school age. Importantly, in some languages this pro-
cess does not take place at all—simply because the language does not con-
tain anything as abstract as subject governing cross-clausal control and
other such behavioral properties.
And so, to summarize, it would seem quite natural to suppose that if
children are indeed learning utterance-level constructions as linguistic ge-
stalts, they are also ªnding analogies among them. There is much evidence
that they do this in nonlinguistic domains, and some evidence that they do
it in the linguistic domain as well. To make abstract constructional analo-
gies children must understand something of the functional interrelations
among elements of the constructions involved. This is made easier when
some of those elements are identical, in both form and function, and so
children’s earliest analogies are what we referred to earlier as schematiza-
tion in which constructions are created around speciªc linguistic items.
But later they are able to draw analogies with no speciªc items in common
across constructions.
5.2.2. Functionally Based Distributional Analysis
The current hypothesis is that paradigmatic categories such as noun and
verb are formed on the basis of functionally based distributional analysis.
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
169

That is, children form paradigmatic categories of linguistic items—either
words or phrases—that play similar communicative roles in the utterances
they hear around them. Thus, pencil and pen occur in many of the same
linguistic contexts in utterances—they do many of the same kinds of
things in combining with articles to make reference to an object, in indi-
cating subjects and objects as syntactic roles, and so on—and so a lan-
guage user will come to form a category containing these and similarly be-
having words.
The prototypical paradigmatic linguistic categories, and the only ones
that are even candidates for universal status, are nouns and verbs. The
classic notional deªnitions—nouns indicate person, place, or thing; verbs
indicate actions—clearly do not hold, as many nouns indicate actions or
events (party, discussion) and many verbs indicate non-actional states of
affairs that are sometime very difªcult to distinguish from things indicated
by adjectives (as in be noisy, feel good, which in different languages may
be indicated by either a verb or an adjective). However, Maratsos (1982)
points out that both nouns and verbs have characteristic small-scale com-
binatorial properties; for example, nouns occur with determiners and plu-
ral markers and verbs occur with tense and aspect markers. Although, as
noted above, these markers can be used to recognize instances of the cate-
gories once they are formed, obviously the core notions underlying nouns
and verbs are cognitively and communicatively much deeper. Evidence for
this is the simple fact, noted by Maratsos himself, that some of the most
prototypical nominals do not have the same small-scale combinatorial
properties as others: pronouns and proper names do not occur with deter-
miners or plural markers.
Langacker (1987b) has provided a functionally based account of nouns
and verbs that goes much deeper than both simplistic notional deªnitions
and purely formal properties. Langacker stresses that nouns and verbs are
used not to refer to speciªc kinds of things but rather to invite the listener
to construe something in a particular way in a particular communicative
context. Thus, we may refer to the very same experience as either explod-
ing or an explosion, depending on our communicative purposes. In gen-
eral, nouns are used to construe experiences as “bounded entities” (like an
explosion), whereas verbs are used to construe experiences as processes
(like exploding). Hopper and Thompson (1984) contend further that the
discourse functions of reference and predication provide the communica-
tive reason for construing something as either a bounded entity, to which
one may refer with a noun, or a process, which one may predicate with a
verb. Importantly, it is these communicative functions that explain why
nouns are associated with such things as determiners, whose primary
function is to help the listener to locate a referent in actual or conceptual
170
Constructing a Language

space, and verbs are associated with such things as tense markers, whose
primary function is to help the listener to locate a process in actual or con-
ceptual time (Langacker, 1991; and see Chapter 6). After an individual un-
derstands the functional basis of nouns and verbs, formal features such as
determiners and tense markers may be used to identify further instances.
Relying on the notion of prototypical categories, Bates and Mac-
Whinney (1979, 1982) proposed that early nouns are anchored in the con-
cept of a concrete object and early verbs are anchored in the concept of
concrete action—and these are generalized to other referents only later
(very similar to the hypothesis that subjects are originally anchored in
agents). The problem is that young children use adult nouns from quite
early in development to refer to all kinds of non-object entities (such as
breakfast, kitchen, kiss, lunch, light, park, doctor, night, party), and they
use many of their verbs to predicate non-actional states of affairs (like,
feel, want, stay, be; Nelson, Hampson, and Shaw, 1993). Also problematic
for accounts such as these, grounded in the reference of terms, is the fact
that early in development children also learn many words that are used as
both nouns and verbs, for example, bite, kiss, drink, brush, walk, hug,
help, and call (Nelson, 1995). It is unclear how any theory that does not
consider communicative function primary—in the sense of the communi-
cative role a word plays in whole utterances—can account for the acquisi-
tion of these so-called dual-category words.
Instead, the developmental data support the view that children initially
understand paradigmatic categories very locally and mosaically, in terms
of the particular kinds of things particular words can and cannot do com-
municatively. Thus, with respect to nouns, Tomasello et al. (1997) found
that when 22-month-olds were taught a novel name for a novel object in a
syntactically neutral context (“Look! A wuggie”) they immediately com-
bined this new word with many predicative terms (“Hug wuggie,”
“Wuggie gone,” and so on), indicating that they saw something in com-
mon between wuggies and the kinds of things one can hug or that can be
gone (perhaps aided by the article a). Children of this same tender age also
were able to indicate when they saw two “wuggies,” even though they had
never heard this word used as a plural. However, a very interesting fact
helping to specify the processes involved is that these two productive
achievements, in syntax and morphology, were very poorly correlated.
The children who could productively combine wuggie with other words
syntactically were not the same ones who could create a productive plural
with this same word. This suggests that children are forming their para-
digmatic categories for very local communicative purposes, in mosaic and
piecemeal fashion, not for all of the many more abstract and interrelated
functions that underlie these categories in adults. Exactly how these pro-
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
171

cesses might apply to words that ªt the adult category of noun less well
(non-object common nouns, proper nouns, mass nouns) is not known at
this time.
With respect to verbs, Akhtar and Tomasello (1997) did a similar study
with slightly older 2- and 3-year-old children and found that, as with
nouns, children became productive with novel verbs syntactically and
morphologically in an uncorrelated fashion—again suggesting local, func-
tionally speciªc, mosaically acquired, paradigmatic categories. Evidence
from other languages also suggests that young children’s paradigmatic cat-
egories develop in a gradual and piecemeal way as they attempt to assimi-
late to their more locally based categories the wider array of more abstract
functions that underlie the adult version of the category (see Rispoli,
1991).
Overall, children’s early paradigmatic categories are best explained in
the same theoretical terms as their other cognitive categories. As noted
above in the discussion of slot-ªller categories in early pivot schemas, Nel-
son (1985, 1996) and Mandler (2000) have both argued that the essence
of concepts lies in function; human beings group together things that be-
have in similar ways in events and activities. In the case of linguistic cate-
gories such as noun and verb, however, it is important to be clear that
these are categories not of entities in the world (that is, not referents) but
of pieces of language (words and phrases). When words and phrases
are grouped together according to similarities in what they do communi-
catively—grounded in such functions as reference and predication—cog-
nitively and linguistically coherent categories are the result. This is the es-
sence of functionally based distributional analysis (see Tomasello, 1992a,
for an earlier formulation). The data cited above demonstrate that chil-
dren do this at ªrst very locally, only later creating more broadly based
and abstract paradigmatic categories. Interestingly, a number of studies of
infant categorization show this same initial bias toward the local, with
more broad-based, adult-like categories emerging only gradually (Quinn
et al., 1996; Cohen, 1998; see Rakison and Oakes, in press, for a review).
It is also important that the formation of paradigmatic categories leads
to processes of contrast within the resulting category. The consequence is a
host of pragmatic inferences that follow from the fact that a speaker
chooses one item from the paradigm as opposed to others she could have
chosen to ªll the same basic functional role in her utterance. Thus, for ex-
ample, when a child hears a novel word (such as lend) in a context in
which she would have expected to hear a more common one (give), she is
led to search for what distinguishes the current communicative situation
from one that would have licensed the more normal expression (this is one
application of the principle of contrast). In addition, this same process of
172
Constructing a Language

paradigmatic category formation and contrast helps to account for the ex-
istence of morphological paradigms and some of the inferences (such as
the force of zero marking) that can be made within them.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that after noun and verb, there are very
few candidates for lexical categories present in all of the world’s lan-
guages. Even within a language that is traditionally considered to have a
number of clear categories, like English, in many cases the real situation is
that traditional categories from Western linguistics are applied in some-
thing less than a thoughtful manner. Thoughtful and unprejudiced linguis-
tic analyses reveal quite clearly, for example, that the things called adverbs
in English do not really form a coherent category at all, nor do preposi-
tions, nor do determiners, nor do conjunctions, nor do complementizers,
and on and on. Perhaps the most interesting recent analysis is that of
Cullicover (1999), who demonstrates with special clarity that many of the
small closed classes of English are not really classes at all, but merely loose
collections of individual lexical items, each of which has its own behav-
ioral proªle. The items in these collections are all called by the same name
(preposition, complementizer) by tradition and convenience only.
5.2.3. Input, Frequency, and Complexity
Although, to repeat yet again, there is very little speciªc research, Figure
5.1 details the kinds of utterances that children would need to hear and
the kinds of cognitive processes that they would need to engage in in order
to form each of the different kinds of constructions already identiªed: con-
crete expression (word combination), pivot schema, item-based construc-
tion, abstract construction (with syntactic roles), and paradigmatic cate-
gory. The hypothesized sets of utterances are based on the simple principle
that in order to form an abstraction type variation is needed. But the truth
is there is so little research, with a special dearth of experimental research,
that we do not know for certain that type variation is even necessary (and
indeed in some areas of developmental research children leap to make gen-
eralizations on the basis of a single exemplar; see K. Nelson, 1986). The
hypothesized cognitive skills include such things as categorization, sche-
matization, analogy, and distributional analysis.
Presumably, an important factor in all of this is simply the frequency
with which children hear a linguistic construction. An interesting example
is the passive construction (or its close equivalent cross-linguistically).
Children acquiring English typically do not produce full passive sentences
(with a by phrase) until 4 or 5 years of age, although they sometimes pro-
duce truncated passives earlier (Harris and Flora, 1982). One possible rea-
son for the relatively late acquisition of the full passive in English is that it
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
173

is a complex construction, containing several additional linguistic ele-
ments relative to active voice constructions (verbal morphology and a by
phrase). Another possible reason is that it is not a frequent construction in
children’s early linguistic experience; Gordon and Chafetz (1990) estimate
that English-speaking children hear a full passive in only 1 of every 20,000
adult utterances directed to them (1 in every 1,000 utterances for trun-
cated passives). Interestingly, as reported above, children acquiring some
other (mostly non-European) languages, such as Inuktitut, K’iche’ Mayan,
Sesotho, and Zulu, learn to produce passives quite early in development.
In some of these languages the passive construction is marked in ways as
complex as in English. The main difference would seem to be that in these
languages passives are used more frequently and saliently in adult speech
to young children.
174
Constructing a Language
Figure 5.1. Some of the requisite cognitive processes and experienced language
necessary for constructing the main types of child constructions.

Evidence for this proposal is provided by the experimental study of
Brooks and Tomasello (1999a), who found that after two 30-minute ses-
sions of extra exposure to full passive utterances in meaningful discourse
contexts, 90 percent of English-speaking children between 3 and 312 years
of age could produce a full passive utterance with a nonce verb—approxi-
mately one to two years earlier than normal. Other experimental studies
have demonstrated the key role of frequency in some other constructions.
For example, in a classic study Nelson (1977) gave one group of children
extra exposure to the English yes/no question construction and another
group extra exposure to complex verb phrase constructions (with auxilia-
ries, and so on). Each group learned the construction to which they were
given extra exposure at a signiªcantly earlier age than would normally be
the case (and than the other experimental group). It is important that in
both of these experimental studies these complex constructions were mod-
eled for children in meaningful discourse contexts, often in replies to chil-
dren’s utterances on the same topic—thus maximizing the possibility of
children’s comprehension. Another piece of interesting evidence is the
ªnding that bilingual children tend to overgeneralize syntactic structures
from the language they hear most frequently and know best to the one
they hear least frequently and know less well, rather than in the opposite
direction (Döpke, 1998).
Another obvious factor in what children learn and when they learn it is
complexity of linguistic structure—in interaction with their existing per-
ceptual, cognitive, and linguistic skills, of course—what Bates and
MacWhinney (1989) call “functional readiness.” Thus, a 1-year-old child
cannot even repeat, much less imitatively learn, an utterance with a rela-
tive clause, whereas she might be able to learn a simpler construction.
There is much traditional linguistic work on child language acquisition
that looks at the order in which children learn certain structures and infers
from this linguistic complexity. But such inferences can never be validly
made solely on the basis of order of acquisition, that is, without some in-
formation about the relative frequencies with which children hear the con-
structions in question. Input frequency and structural complexity interact
in complex ways in the developmental process.
5.3. Constraining Constructions
Importantly, there must be some constraints on children’s linguistic ab-
stractions, and this is a problem for both of the major theories of child
language acquisition. Classically, a major problem for generative theories
is that as the rules and principles are made more elegant and powerful
through theoretical analyses, they become so abstract that they generate
too large a set of grammatical utterances; and so constraints (such as the
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
175

subjacency constraint) must be posited to restore empirical accuracy. In
usage-based theories children are abstracting as they learn, but they can-
not do this indiscriminately; they must make just those generalizations
that are conventional in the language they are learning. It is thus clear that
any serious theory of syntactic development, whatever its basic assump-
tions, must address the question of why children make the generalizations
they do and not others.
Importantly in this context, both generative and usage-based theories
predict that children will mostly use language the way adults do—either
because they both have an innate universal grammar or because children
copy adults. In the generative view children should really not make errors
unless they get wrong some of the particulars of the particular language
they are learning (thus disrupting linking to universal grammar), or unless
some performance factors interfere with their competence. In the usage-
based view, children mostly begin as conservative learners and gradually
build up abstractions, so we should expect few overgeneralization errors
early; such errors should begin only after a certain age—in the domain of
syntax perhaps age 3 or so because that is when children show productiv-
ity in nonce verb experiments. At the moment there does not exist a data
base establishing the developmental histories of different kinds of syntac-
tic overgeneralization errors that would enable us to choose between these
two theories on this point.
5.3.1. Over-Generativity and Negative Evidence
We may illustrate the basic problem with so-called dative alternation con-
structions. The situation is this. Some verbs can felicitously appear in both
ditransitive and prepositional dative constructions, but others cannot:
He gave/sent/bequeathed/donated his books to the library.
He gave/sent/bequeathed/*donated the library his books.
Why should the other three verbs be felicitous in both constructions, but
donate be felicitous only in the prepositional dative? The three verbs have
very similar meanings, and so it would seem likely that they should all be-
have the same. Another example is:
She said/told something to her mother.
She *said/told her mother something.
Again, the meanings of the verbs are very close, and so the difference of
behavior seems unprincipled and unpredictable (Bowerman, 1988, 1996).
Similar alternations are the causative alternation (I rolled the ball; The
ball rolled) and the locative alternation (I sprayed paint on the wall;
176
Constructing a Language

I sprayed the wall with paint)—both of which also apply only to limited
sets of verbs.
One solution is quite simple. Perhaps children only learn verbs for the
constructions in which they have heard them. Given the evidence reviewed
in Chapter 4, this is very likely the case at the earliest stages of develop-
ment. But it is not true later in development, especially in the 3- to 5-year
age period. Children at this age overgeneralize with some regularity, as
documented most systematically by Bowerman (1982, 1988; see Pinker,
1989, for a summary of evidence). As reported above, her two children
produced things like “Don’t giggle me” (at age 3;0) and “I said her no” (at
3;1). It is thus not the case that children are totally conservative through-
out development, and so this cannot be the whole answer.
A second solution is also quite simple. It is possible that when children
make overgeneralization errors adults correct them, and so children’s
overgeneralization tendencies are constrained by the linguistic environ-
ment. But in fact adults do not explicitly correct children’s utterances for
grammatical correctness (Brown and Hanlon, 1970). Adults, at least
Western middle-class adults, do respond differently to well-formed and ill-
formed child utterances, however. For example, they continue conversing
to well-formed utterances but they revise or recast ill-formed utterances
(e.g., Farrar, 1992; Bohannon and Stanowicz, 1988). But most theorists
do not consider this kind of indirect feedback sufªcient to constrain chil-
dren’s overgeneralization tendencies, as it is far from consistent. It is also
not clear that this type of feedback is available to all children learning all
languages. Nevertheless, it is still possible that linguistic feedback from
adults may play some role—although neither a necessary nor a sufªcient
role—in constraining children’s overgeneralization tendencies.
Given the inadequacy of both of these simple solutions, generativists
have taken a different tack. The basic strategy is to let universal grammar
constrain children, which means that they should make no overgenerali-
zation errors at all. But to provide such constraint universal grammar
must make some contact with the speciªc verbs and constructions in-
volved, and this involves detailed learning about how speciªc verb mean-
ings connect to speciªc syntactic structures (Pinker, 1989). For example, a
verb can be used felicitously with both the English transitive and intransi-
tive constructions if it denotes “manner of locomotion” (walk and drive as
in I walked the dog at midnight or I walked all day and I drove my car to
New York or I drove all day), but not if it denotes a “motion in a lexically
speciªed direction” (come and fall as in *He came her to school or *She
falled him down). Because learning these things requires some time, effort,
and exposure, children make some errors—not because they have induced
an incorrect syntactic construction, but only because they are in the pro-
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
177

cess of getting their verb meanings right and so linking in the right way to
universal grammar.
To account for this process Pinker (1989) hypothesized the existence of
innate lexical rules, such as semantic classes of verbs, and innate linking
rules incorporating these semantic subclasses of verbs (see Section 5.4.1).
Given these, the process requires only that (1) children hear in the input
some verbs alternating; (2) they hear other verbs in only one construction,
but on the basis of semantic similarity to the verb that was heard to alter-
nate, they assume that these also alternate; and (3) they learn the correct
meanings for all their verbs. When these three conditions are met, the con-
nection between lexical representations and surface form should be con-
strained in the appropriate way. In this account, overgeneralization errors
are due to the fact that children do not yet have their verb meanings right,
and so they are sometimes forced into one-shot innovations in particular
circumstances (performance errors) that do not reºect their underlying
grammatical knowledge (or affect it either).
5.3.2. Entrenchment, Preemption, and Verb Classes
From a more usage-based perspective, two factors involved in syntactic
constraint have been most widely discussed: entrenchment and preemp-
tion (see Clark, 1987; Braine and Brooks, 1995; Goldberg, 1995; Bates
and MacWhinney, 1989). First, the more frequently children hear a verb
used in a particular construction (the more ªrmly its usage is entrenched),
the less likely they will be to extend that verb to any novel construction
with which they have not heard it used. Second, if children hear a verb
used in a linguistic construction that serves the same communicative func-
tion as some possible generalization, they may infer that the generalization
is not conventional—the heard construction preempts the generalization.
For example, if a child hears He made the rabbit disappear, when she
might have expected He disappeared the rabbit, she may infer that disap-
pear does not occur in a simple transitive construction—since the adult
seems to be going to some lengths to avoid using it in that way (the peri-
phrastic causative being a more marked construction). In many cases, of
course, entrenchment and preemption may work together, as a verb that is
highly entrenched in one usage is not used in some other linguistic context
but an alternative is used instead. This leads to the more general idea of a
competition among forms as argued by Bates and MacWhinney (1989).
There is evidence from two recent studies that both of these factors play
a role in the constraining process, as do semantic subclasses of verbs (and
there is even some evidence for the two neglected factors of childhood
conservativeness and adult feedback)—but they may do this to differing
178
Constructing a Language

degrees at different developmental periods. First, Brooks et al. (1999) in-
vestigated the role of entrenchment in constraining children’s overgen-
eralization tendencies. In an experimental study, they modeled the use of a
number of ªxed-transitivity English verbs for children from 3;5 to 8;0
years—verbs such as disappear that are exclusively intransitive and verbs
such as hit that are exclusively transitive. There were four pairs of verbs,
one member of each pair typically learned early by children and typically
used often by adults (and so presumably more entrenched) and the other
member of each pair typically learned later by children and typically used
less frequently by adults (less entrenched). The four pairs were come-
arrive, take-remove, hit-strike, and disappear-vanish (the ªrst member of
each pair being more entrenched). The ªnding was that, in the face of
adult questions attempting to induce them to overgeneralize, children of
all ages were less likely to overgeneralize the strongly entrenched verbs
than the weakly entrenched verbs; that is, they were more likely to pro-
duce I arrived it than I comed it. It would thus seem that young children
are less likely to overgeneralize relatively highly entrenched verbs.
One piece of evidence contrary to this conclusion is provided by the ob-
servations of Bowerman (1988, 1996). She reports that her two daughters
produced many overgeneralizations for some early light verbs that should
be highly entrenched, such as go and come. The problem, however, is that
precisely because children use these light verbs so frequently—many times
more often than heavier, more contentful verbs—they have many more
opportunities to overgeneralize them. It is thus difªcult to know if these
verbs are overgeneralized more often than other verbs on a proportional
basis. It is also possible that verb meaning is an important factor, and that
these light verbs overgeneralize more readily than heavier verbs. These are
questions for future research.
Second, there is also experimental evidence for the constraining role of
both preemption and semantic classes of verbs (à la Pinker). Brooks and
Tomasello (1999b) taught novel verbs to children 2;6, 4;6, and 7;0 years
of age in either a transitive or an intransitive construction. They then at-
tempted to induce children to generalize these novel verbs to the other
construction (as in the causative alternation). Some of these verbs con-
formed to Pinker’s (1989) semantic criteria governing verb classes (verbs
similar in meaning to break or roll that alternate), and some did not (verbs
similar in meaning to hit or enter that do not alternate). Additionally, in
some cases experimenters attempted to preempt generalizations by offer-
ing children alternative ways of using the new verb. For example, for chil-
dren who heard The ball is tamming, experimenters gave them the possi-
bility of answering What’s the boy doing? with He’s making the ball
tam—which gave them an alternative to saying He’s tamming the ball
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
179

(which in the cases of some verbs would have been infelicitous). In brief,
the study found that both of these factors were effective in constraining
children’s generalization tendencies, but only from age 4;6. That is, chil-
dren from 4;6 showed a tendency to generalize or not generalize a verb in
line with its membership in one of the key semantic subclasses of verbs,
and they were less likely to generalize a verb to a novel construction if the
adult offered them a preempting alternative construction. But younger
children were not affected by either of these factors.
These ªndings, particularly with regard to preemption, provide an ex-
planation for why adult recasts of child utterances are so effective in pro-
moting syntactic growth—as demonstrated correlationally by Farrar
(1990, 1992) and experimentally by Saxton (Saxton et al., 1998; Saxton,
2000). The basic idea is that an adult recast gives the child both a positive
exemplar of how adults say things—thus contributing to the entrenchment
of the conventional adult form—and a preemption of the child’s just-said
infelicitous structure. For example, we can imagine the following se-
quence:
Child:
She giggled me.
Adult:
Oh! She made you giggle, did she?
The child thus gets an alternative possible means of expression in immedi-
ate juxtaposition with her non-conventional construction, which enables a
clear comparison of the key aspects of the two utterances. As argued ex-
tensively by K. E. Nelson (e.g., 1986), even just one or a few experiences
of this kind might be more effective in promoting learning than many cor-
rect exemplars given at the wrong time.
These studies demonstrate that the most often discussed constraining
inºuences on syntactic constructions emerge only gradually in develop-
ment during the preschool years. In line with children’s early conservative
tendencies, entrenchment works early as particular item-based construc-
tions become either more or less entrenched depending on usage. This is
the only factor at work for some time, as children do not have many alter-
native constructions to effect preemption, and they have not yet had time
to learn semantic subclasses of verbs. Preemption and semantic subclasses
begin to work later, perhaps not until 4;6 or so, as children learn more
about the conventional uses of verbs and about all of the alternative lin-
guistic constructions at their disposal in different communicative circum-
stances. Thus, just as utterance-level constructions become more abstract
only gradually and in piecemeal fashion, so also are they constrained only
gradually and in piecemeal fashion.
Combining these ªndings on constraints with the ªndings concerning
the gradually increasing abstractness of children’s syntactic constructions,
180
Constructing a Language

we may create a hypothetical developmental scenario for processes of
both generalization and constraint. Figure 5.2 illustrates this scenario,
with three exclusively intransitive verbs very similar in meaning: laugh,
giggle, and chortle. The hypothesis is that the intransitive verb laugh is not
likely to be overgeneralized to the transitive construction because it is
learned early and entrenched through frequent use as an intransitive verb
only. Chortle is also not likely to be overgeneralized but for a different rea-
son. Even though it is not highly entrenched, it is typically learned only af-
ter the child has begun to form verb subclasses (and chortle belongs to one
that cannot be used in the transitive construction) and only after the child
has also learned preempting alternative constructions (such as That made
me chortle with glee, preserving its intransitive status). In contrast, giggle
is more likely to be overgeneralized because it is not so entrenched as
laugh and it is learned before the child has formed verb subclasses or
learned many alternative constructions that might (as in the case of chor-
tle) preempt an overgeneralization. That is, giggle may be a verb that is
learned in a highly vulnerable window of developmental time.
And so, the familiar theoretical alternatives in this case are once again:
(1) children possess innate syntactic knowledge that mostly solves the de-
velopmental problem (in this case innate lexical rules and linking rules—
with performance errors accounting for overgeneralizations); and (2) chil-
dren solve the problem gradually through general learning and cognitive
processes. In the usage-based view we do not need to posit the existence of
innate constraints in order to constrain the process. In terms of evidence,
the experimental data suggest that a number of usage-based factors, espe-
cially entrenchment and competition (preemption), play roles in constrain-
ing children’s generalizations with syntactic constructions. And over time
children make generalizations about which semantic classes of verbs can
be generalized to which kinds of constructions, allowing them to use
newly learned verbs felicitously on the basis of very little direct experience
with those verbs. Whether these three factors are together sufªcient is a
question for future research. Of most urgent need is a systematic descrip-
tion of children’s syntactic overgeneralization errors with various con-
structions over developmental time.
5.4. Theories of Syntactic Development
As is well known, there are two basic theoretical approaches to children’s
syntactic development. The ªrst includes all of those approaches that posit
an innate universal grammar—dictating some kind of dual process model
in which words, ªxed expressions, and quirky constructions are all ac-
quired by “normal” learning processes, whereas acquisition of the more
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
181

regular aspects of language is somehow guided by the innate universal
grammar. The second paradigm includes all those approaches that posit
only a single set of cognitive, social-cognitive, and learning processes to
account for the acquisition of all types of linguistic items and structures,
from simple to complex, from concrete to abstract, with all kinds of mixed
constructions thrown in for good measure. In this section I outline, very
brieºy, the major approaches within each of these two paradigms—ending
with a construction grammar account that identiªes some of the major
properties of linguistic constructions that need to be accounted for in a
theory of syntactic development.
5.4.1. Principles and Parameters
Positing an innate universal grammar creates two major problems. The
ªrst derives from the fact of linguistic diversity. The problem is how any
given child, learning any given language, can link the abstract categories
of the innate universal grammar to the particulars of the particular lan-
guage she is learning. The second derives from the fact of developmental
change. The problem in this case is how to account for changes in chil-
182
Constructing a Language
Figure 5.2. Shaded area depicts growing abstractness of the transitive construction
(as in Figure 4.4). Other speciªcations designate constraints on the tendency to
overgeneralize inappropriate verbs to this construction. Adapted from Tomasello
(2000b); reprinted with the permission of Elsevier Science.

dren’s language over time, given that the innate universal grammar itself
does not change across development (the continuity assumption).
The major theoretical move to deal with linguistic diversity in genera-
tive linguistics is the theory of principles and parameters (Chomsky,
1981). In this view, universal grammar anticipates all possible cross-
linguistic variation by setting out ahead of time a delimited number of pa-
rameters each with a delimited number of possible values (for example,
phrasal organization: either head ªrst, as in the Spanish la casa grande, or
head last, as in the English the big house). It should be noted, however,
that parameters are deªned very differently by different investigators, and
there is no agreed-upon level of analysis—or even an agreed-upon list of
best exemplars (other than, perhaps, head direction and pro-drop). This is
most clearly revealed by asking the question: Precisely how many parame-
ters are there? Fodor (2001: 734) answers: “It might turn out that there
are 20 parameters or 30 or 100 and more . . . On one recent estimate . . .
there would be at least 32 parameters controlling the landing site for verb
movement, perhaps multiplied by the number of possible verb forms
(ªnite/inªnitive/past participle, etc.).”
The more fundamental problem is the problem of linking. Such critical
components of parameters as “head” (as in the head-direction parameter)
do not come with identifying tags on them in particular languages; they
share no perceptual features in common across languages and so their
means of identiªcation cannot be speciªed in the universal grammar. In a
recent discussion on “setting syntactic parameters,” for example, Fodor
(2001: 761, 765) presents the problem this way:
It would have been more convenient for children if natural language parame-
ters were all concerned with surface facts . . . Instead . . . the relation between
word strings and their parametric generators is opaque at best.
. . . For UG [universal grammar] to be truly helpful, it should supply innate
sentence structures and ªx their relation to surface words strings . . . As long
as there is substantial crosslinguistic variation with respect to how innately
deªned structure is overtly lexicalized, there will be ambiguities of string-to-
structure alignment.
Setting a parameter thus encounters the basic problem of linking, a
problem which Atkinson (1996: 473–474), in particular, criticizes his fel-
low generativists for not addressing. As one speciªc example, Mazuka
(1996) analyzed how children might set the hypothesized head-direction
parameter.
Setting a Head Direction parameter by analyzing the syntactic structure of
the input involves a paradox. The Head Direction parameter is supposed to
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
183

determine the order in which the head and complement should appear in the
language the child is acquiring. But, for a child to set this parameter, she must
ªrst ªnd out which units are the heads and the complements in the sentence
she hears. If her linguistic skills are sophisticated enough to know which are
heads and complements, she will also know which order they came in. If she
already knows which order the head and the complements come in a sen-
tence, there is no need to set the parameter. (24–25)
The hard part is thus recognizing “heads” and “complements” in a partic-
ular language, and this difªculty is logically prior to any act of parameter
setting. To set the head-direction parameter in universal grammar, a lan-
guage learner must ªrst be able to recognize heads in the speciªc language
she is learning; once this fundamental linking problem is accomplished the
parameter setting is trivial, indeed superºuous.
The only theory attempting to address this problem is Pinker’s (1984,
1987, 1989) theory of semantic bootstrapping. Pinker proposed the fol-
lowing: (1) a list of key syntactic categories innately given to all human be-
ings, (2) a list of key experiential categories innately given to all human be-
ings, and (3) a set of innate linking rules to connect the two. In the case of
“subject of a sentence,” as one instance, the process would work like this.
“Subject” is innately linked to “agent of an action,” or, if there is no
agent, to such things as “experiencer,” “theme,” or “goal” (the so-called
linking hierarchy). Consequently, if the child saw a dog bite a man and
heard someone say “The dog bit the man,” she would know on the basis
of her general causal cognition that the dog is the agent of the action; her
innate linking rule would then connect agent to subject. Because she no-
tices the linguistic form associated with the subject, the child can also now
recognize future exemplars of “sentence subject” on the basis of this form
alone (say a particular word-order conªguration or a particular case
marker), even if they are not agents. Thus, the English-speaking child will
eventually have to deal with experiential subjects that are not agents (as in
John saw Mary) and even passive sentences in which subjects are not
agents and agents are not subjects.
However, in the speciªc case of “sentence subject” it is almost certain
that Pinker’s proposal is not correct. First of all, on general theoretical
grounds it has been known for some time that in ergative languages the
notion of “subject” does not operate as it does in English and other accu-
sative languages, and so a direct connection to “agent” is not possible.
Moreover, even if there were some solution to this problem, many lan-
guages are what is called split ergative: some of their constructions are
ergative while others are accusative based on such things as person (ªrst
and second person are accusatively structured whereas third person is
ergatively structured) or tense (present-future is accusatively structured
184
Constructing a Language

whereas past is ergatively structured; DeLancey, 1981; van Valin, 1992).
In general terms, Slobin (1997) has made a persuasive case that there is
much too much variability across languages—not to mention historical
change within languages—for any static and innate look-up table to func-
tion in the way it would need to in order to solve the problem of linking
(see also Braine, 1992).
The empirical problem with Pinker’s proposal is that at least two natu-
ralistic analyses of early child language have failed to ªnd any evidence for
innate linking rules. First, Lieven, Pine, and Baldwin (1997) analyzed the
ªrst sentences of 12 English-speaking children and found that many early
subjects came from such unremarkable utterances such as I like it, Maria
have it, I see it, and It has a hole in which there is no agent of an action at
all (see also Pye et al., 1994). More strongly still, Bowerman (1990, 1997)
found that it happens with some regularity in early child language that the
subject hierarchy is violated totally, that is, arguments that are further
down the linking hierarchy end up as subjects—as in the utterance “Pete
hurt by car” (patient  subject, agent  oblique) reported by Tomasello
(1992a) for a child at 1;8. In general, children learning English and many
other languages use many non-agentive subjects early in development—
everything from It hurts to It’s a tape recorder to He fell-down—with
basically no special advantage for agent subjects (Budwig, Stein, and
O’Brien, 2001). And so, not only do innate linking rules run into difª-
culties cross-linguistically, they also make wrong predictions for the order
of acquisition of some structures within a language. And there are no
other syntactic roles or grammatical relations—that is, other than sentence
subject—for which there is any detailed analysis or supportive evidence
at all.
The second major problem for generativist theories of language acquisi-
tion is developmental change. The problem is that, by hypothesis, univer-
sal grammar does not change ontogenetically. On the basis of its nativist
assumptions, generative grammarians make the continuity assumption:
In the absence of compelling evidence to the contrary, the child’s grammatical
rules should be drawn from the same basic rule types, and be composed of
primitive symbols from the same class, as the grammatical rules attributed to
adults in standard linguistic investigations. (Pinker, 1984: 7)
This means that once the child has set some parameter of universal gram-
mar, however that might be accomplished, her language should immedi-
ately look adult-like with respect to that parameter. To repeat our earlier
example:
Once a child is able to parse an utterance such as “Close the door!,” he will
be able to infer from the fact that the verb “close” in English precedes its
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
185

complement “the door,” that all verbs in English precede their complements.
(Radford, 1990: 61)
The prediction is thus for quick and across-the-board development of
structures of a certain type once a parameter has been set (for example, the
head-direction parameter specifying that all verbs precede their comple-
ments in English). But this manifestly does not happen in children’s spon-
taneous production, where changes seem to occur piecemeal in association
with particular linguistic items and item-based constructions. And it is
also not consistent with their behavior in experiments of both production
and comprehension, as reviewed in Chapter 4. Generativists have at-
tempted to deal with this discrepancy between theory and fact in one of
three basic ways: (1) by invoking hypothesized performance factors that
mask children’s underlying adult-like competence and parametric consis-
tency; (2) by proposing that universal grammar does indeed change devel-
opmentally, as some parts mature before others; and (3) proposing that
the linking process requires much learning of the particularities of the par-
ticular language being learned. None of these moves is fully adequate, but
for different reasons.
First, the main problem in the case of performance limitations is that
there has never been any serious attempt to actually measure and assess
them directly, and so they are simply invoked whenever they are conve-
nient. There have been strenuous objections to this practice from genera-
tivists (e.g., Roeper, 1996: 417) and non-generativists (e.g., Sampson,
1997) alike. The one partial exception to this neglect is Valian (1991). She
speciªcally predicted that young children should produce more intransi-
tive than transitive utterances, since intransitives are shorter, and that
their alternating verbs (those that could be used in either way) should be
used more often intransitively—since intransitives ªt more easily into chil-
dren’s performance limitations. She found that indeed there was an in-
crease in children’s use of transitive verbs over the third year of life, and
there was also an increase in children’s use of the transitive form of alter-
nating verbs. (But note that even here performance factors are not spe-
ciªcally and independently measured.)
In a more recent study, however, Theakston et al., (2001) examined
Valian’s claims in more detail by looking not just at children’s verb classes
but at individual verbs. In particular, they looked at 2-year-old children’s
use of particular transitive (such as hit), intransitive (such as go), and al-
ternating (such as break) verbs. The main ªndings were that (1) children
mostly used particular verbs as either transitives or intransitives only, sug-
gesting that they were not making a choice between the two on the basis
of performance factors; (2) children did not use alternating verbs more of-
ten as intransitives than as transitives; and (3) the way children used par-
186
Constructing a Language

ticular verbs was very well predicted by the way their mothers used those
same verbs. These ªndings provide no evidence that young children’s pro-
duction of transitive and intransitive utterances is affected by performance
limitations. In addition to this naturalistic study, as reviewed in Chapter 4,
a number of experiments using nonce verbs have employed control proce-
dures that have ruled out, for all practical purposes, performance limita-
tions as a viable explanation for children’s inability to demonstrate adult-
like generativity with these novel verbs (see Tomasello, 2000b, for a re-
view).
Second, maturation has been used, like performance limitations, as basi-
cally an unconstrained “fudge factor.” The basic problem is that any time
new acquisition data arise it may be invoked without any consultation of
genetic research or any independent assessment of this causal factor at
all—a procedure severely criticized by Braine (1994), Tomasello (1995c),
Sampson (1997), and others. And again there are experimental data that
are not compatible with the hypothesis. These mainly include studies
ªnding that children who use a particular construction in their spontane-
ous speech (such as the simple transitive)—presumably indicating the mat-
uration of certain underlying parameters in universal grammar—still do
not generalize this same construction to newly learned verbs in experi-
ments (and this is not due to a general inability to generalize newly learned
linguistic structures; again, see Chapter 4 and Tomasello, 2000b).
Finally, some generativists have recently begun to accommodate the de-
velopmental facts by positing that children must have a certain amount of
linguistic experience with their own language before they can set a param-
eter in universal grammar. In some generativist accounts, in order to begin
to participate in a productive system of generative grammar the child must
hear each of her lexical items in each of its appropriate syntactic contexts
(see Hyams, 1994, for a proposal very near to this). The problem is that
although this theory can explain the data—in the same way as a more us-
age-based account—it is at the cost of the whole point of a generative ac-
count, which classically posits that human beings possess and use linguis-
tic abstractions early in ontogeny and independent of speciªc linguistic
experiences other than a minimal triggering event. In all, this account
basically leaves universal grammar with nothing to do. In the words of
Mazuka (1996: 317; see also Meisel, 1995): “The strength of the gram-
matical parameter setting approach is that children can set a grammatical
parameter with minimal data. . . . If children must somehow learn to com-
bine words correctly ªrst, and then set [for example] the Head Direction
parameter by generalizing from the data, it will nullify the basic motiva-
tion for the parameter setting approach to language acquisition.”
Because of its fundamental inability to deal either with cross-linguistic
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
187

variation or with developmental change, our conclusion for the moment
must be that the theory of principles and parameters currently has very lit-
tle to offer serious students of child language acquisition.
5.4.2. Basic Child Grammar
Coming from a very different theoretical perspective, Slobin (1985a) pro-
posed that young children’s pre-linguistic cognition is organized into a
small number of basic experiential scenes. Following Fillmore’s (1977a,
1977b) proposals on the everyday interactional scenes and frames that
structure human language, Slobin proposed that much of children’s early
language is structured by (1) the manipulative activity scene in which an
animate agent causes a change of state in an inanimate patient, and (2) the
ªgure-ground scene in which a person or object moves along some spatial
path. Following the lead of Talmy (e.g., 1985, 1988), Slobin further pro-
posed that certain of the concepts in these scenes were designated innately
to be especially conducive to grammatical rather than to lexical expres-
sion. (Note that what is innate here are not any linguistic categories or
constructions, per se, but rather certain nonlinguistic concepts and their
amenability to expression in certain kinds of linguistic constructions.)
Grammatical development then consisted of children learning how their
particular language encoded these privileged concepts.
Drawing on his extensive cross-linguistic work, Slobin (1973, 1985a)
also attempted to account for such things as the order of acquisition and
ease of acquisition of particular linguistic structures in particular lan-
guages. To do this, he had to assess the cognitive and linguistic complexity
of particular linguistic structures. In addition, he needed to posit some
cognitive operating principles that reºected children’s processing tenden-
cies, including such things as (to simplify): (1) pay attention to the ends of
words, (2) pay attention to stressed syllables, (3) note frequency of use,
and (4) compare utterances heard with those you would produce in the
same situation. Generally, with some adjustments, these operating princi-
ples have held up very well as heuristics in cross-linguistic investigations.
However, the basic proposal of innate notions innately biased toward
grammatical expression has not held up so well. Slobin (1997) has pro-
vided a trenchant critique of his own earlier theory. He argues that despite
some overall commonalities, different languages grammaticize things dif-
ferently, and there is simply no way that the human genome can be pre-
adapted for this. He gives numerous examples of morphemes that are
grammatical in one language but lexical in another. For instance, in Eng-
lish noun classiªers are words, as in a piece of paper or a glass of water,
whereas in Mandarin noun classiªers are gender-like markers on the
188
Constructing a Language

noun. In some cases, morphemes for a particular set of notions can be
both lexical and grammatical within the same language (Mayan motion
verbs and directionals). In general, even when languages grammaticize the
“same” notion in something close to the same way, the details are often
very different in terms of exactly what the grammatical item designates.
Slobin’s overall conclusion on the possibility of a universal connection be-
tween function and form is thus: “To be sure, all of these examples are
consistent with a collection of ‘grammatically relevant notions’—deªnite-
ness, negation, manipulability, agent vs. experiencer—but there are too
many packagings of such semantic and pragmatic characteristics to build
in all of the possible packages in advance or to rank them in terms of ‘nat-
uralness’ or ‘accessibility’” (1997: 301).
And so, the idea that there is some innate universal grammar containing
a look-up table of form-function correspondences (Pinker’s innate linking
rules) is extremely unlikely, and so is Slobin’s milder claim that certain
cognitive notions are innately and universally biased toward grammatical
expression.
5.4.3. The Competition Model and Connectionism
If there are no universal, innate correspondences between particular com-
municative functions and particular linguistic forms, then children must
learn these correspondences. This means that a theory of language acquisi-
tion need specify a priori only a single set of general learning processes
with which to learn everything about a language, including these corre-
spondences. And it does not need to worry about how to link all this with
some hypothetical underlying entity such as universal grammar.
The most well-worked-out model along these lines is the competition
model (Bates and MacWhinney, 1987, 1989). Although complex in prac-
tice, the basic idea of the model is embodied in four simple principles:
• The basic learning problem is to directly map linguistic forms to their
conventional communicative functions.
• Particular form-function mappings vary in such things as their cue
availability (is the form there when you needed it?) and cue reliability
(does the form invariably indicate the same function?).
• As new communicative functions come into being (either historically
or ontogenetically), there is competition among forms for their ex-
pression in the language.
• Distributional analysis of form-form correspondences, along with
processes of categorization, leads to the emergence of new linguistic
categories.
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
189

The competition model has been used in the widest and deepest research
program of cross-linguistic experimental research to date. In general, the
model has been highly successful in accounting for cross-linguistic pat-
terns of sentence comprehension by both children and adults, as the pa-
pers collected in the volume edited by Bates and MacWhinney (1989)
strongly attest. Most of the work (outlined in Section 4.3.3) has focused
on young children’s and adults’ comprehension of agent-patient relations
in experimentally presented sentences in which cues such as word order,
agreement, and case role marking are put into direct competition. The
outcome has been the discovery of the actual cues that people use in differ-
ent languages to process their most basic syntactic structures. No other
model has been put to the empirical test as much as the competition
model, and thus no other model has yielded such a rich set of empirical
discoveries about speciªc processing patterns in speciªc languages.
Criticisms of the competition model have mostly focused on its lack of a
substantive linguistic theory to provide a detailed description of the adult
endpoint toward which children are working. Indeed, Rispoli (1991)
points out a number of ways in which the model assumes a kind of “the-
ory neutral” linguistic description (involving, for example, subjects,
agents, and topics as the structures whose cues children are attempting to
use)—when it would be more consistent with the spirit of the model to
leave open the nature of the structures that will eventually emerge in the
acquisition in particular languages. Most importantly, the competition
model is really a model of language comprehension and not so much a
model of language learning. Thus, the experiments demonstrate which
cues children and adults are using at different developmental periods, but
it does not really provide an account of how they learn to use those cues in
the ªrst place.
Recently a number of connectionist models have been proposed that are
similar in spirit to the competition model and that do focus directly on
processes of learning. The majority of these concern morphology, and so
they will be examined in Chapter 6. In terms of syntax, of special note is
the model of Elman (1993, 2000). In this model a computer program’s
task is to predict which word will follow as it processes incoming input.
Using this criterion, Elman showed that if built in a certain way (as a sim-
ple recurrent network) the model could predict next words quite well,
even when the input contained complex syntactic structures such as rela-
tive clauses. Interestingly for developmental theories, however, this only
worked if the network ªrst learned simple sentences and then proceeded
to the more complex ones. Initially this was accomplished by humans con-
trolling the input, but in later work it was shown that the same effect re-
sulted from limiting the working memory of the program, which effec-
190
Constructing a Language

tively ªltered out early in the process structures that were too difªcult for
the program to learn.
Models such as this are clearly not models of the way children acquire a
language, most importantly because they do not provide an account that
includes communicative function or meaning. This is of course a basic
problem in its own right in terms of psychological plausibility, but, fur-
ther, it means that connectionist models cannot make use of either of the
two major pattern-ªnding cognitive skills outlined in this chapter. Thus,
without some understanding of communicative function, analogies cannot
be made—at least, not of the kind that are needed to, for example, create
abstract utterance-level constructions. And without an understanding of
communicative function, the only kinds of distributional analyses that can
be done are those focusing solely on surface form—for instance, which el-
ements occur next to which other elements—and not functionally based
distributional analyses that group together into paradigmatic categories
linguistic elements that do the same communicative job. Whether these are
only failings of the current instantiations of connectionist models, or
whether they are in principle limitations of these models, is a question for
future research. One promising direction is a model by Chang (in press)
that seems to generalize to novel linguistic material more readily than pre-
vious models, at least partly because it incorporates some constructional
meanings.
In any case, what connectionist models have done is to provide exis-
tence proofs that the language children hear contains many patterns that
can be extracted even on the basis of form alone. In combination with the
ªndings of Saffran et al. (1997) and others that human infants are power-
ful pattern extractors on the basis of form alone (see Section 2.2.3), mod-
els such as Elman’s and others make it quite plausible that young children
can learn complex syntactic patterns from natural language input, espe-
cially since young children have additional learning tools to help them in
this process.
5.4.4. Construction Grammar
Construed in a broad way, construction grammar is a version of cognitive-
functional linguistics as practiced by researchers such as Lakoff (1987),
Fillmore (1989), Goldberg (1995), and Croft (2001), and there are also
many commonalities with the work of Langacker (1987a, 1991), who re-
lies heavily on what he calls constructional schemas. The two central ten-
ets of the theory are: (1) linguistic constructions are symbolic units with
their own holistic properties, including symbolic signiªcance of their own;
and (2) much of human linguistic competence is best characterized in
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
191

terms of concrete linguistic expressions and constructions that are contin-
uous with but different from the more regular and abstract constructions
typically studied in more formal approaches.
In terms of acquisition, Slobin (1985a) drew on some basic construction
grammar principles in positing, as noted above, that much of children’s
language is organized holistically by complex scenes (such as the manipu-
lative activity scene) and the constructions that symbolize them (that is,
basic child grammar). Goldberg (1995) used construction grammar ex-
plicitly to argue that some of the most popular lexicalist approaches to
grammar (such as that of Pinker, 1989; see section 5.1.7) were implausible
as compared with an approach in which abstract constructions have their
own independent meanings. Finally, Tomasello and Brooks (1999) fol-
lowed Slobin and Goldberg in emphasizing the developmental importance
of holistically organized constructions with independent meanings. But
they also emphasized the item-based nature of much of children’s early
language much more than these other two researchers. They stressed that
(1) initially children’s constructions are based totally on particular words
and phrases (not abstract categories) tied fairly closely to the language
they hear; (2) linguistic abstractions (categories and constructions) de-
velop continuously and relatively slowly; and (3) there are asynchronies in
the developmental trajectories of different categories and constructions
within a given child, even those that would be structurally similar from a
formal linguistic point of view. They also emphasized the important point
that this view, like the generative view, predicts that children will not make
so many errors in early language, when they are mostly learning to pro-
duce concrete linguistic expressions that they have heard adults use, but
that as development proceeds, children ªnd patterns that are not conven-
tional in the language they are learning and so make some errors.
One limitation is that none of these construction grammar accounts has
focused to any large extent on the speciªc psycholinguistic processes by
which children construct constructions and produce utterances from their
inventories of linguistic items and structures. What is needed are some us-
age-based principles of learning and production to complement construc-
tion-based accounts of linguistic structure. This book is meant to remedy
this situation by supplying a dynamic, psychological component to the
construction grammar approach. Thus, much of the book is aimed at es-
tablishing the kinds of cognitive and social-cognitive processes by means
of which children acquire different kinds of constructions and organize
them into some kind of structured inventory and use them to produce cre-
ative yet canonical utterances. The proposal is that to do these things chil-
dren use various skills of intention-reading and pattern-ªnding on the lan-
guage they hear around them, as outlined in the previous chapters—along
192
Constructing a Language

with some skills of language production. These skills will be summarized
and to some degree integrated into a coherent account in Chapter 8.
5.5. Summary
In this chapter I have attempted to account for children’s acquisition of the
most abstract constructions of their language. These constructions serve to
package information in a way that “windows attention” in a particular
manner, that is, that takes a particular perspective on some type of scene
and its participants. In their abstract form these constructions accomplish
this in a gestalt fashion, as whole constructions and not as a function of
any particular lexical items involved. This construction grammar perspec-
tive provides a more plausible account of the interaction between the con-
crete and the abstract in language development—because it focuses on ab-
stractions across whole utterances—than does a lexical rules approach in
which all depends on the meaning of the particular verbs involved
(Goldberg, 1995). The lexical rules approach would seem to be better
adapted to children’s verb island constructions and other item-based con-
structions—which are deªned by particular verbs or other words—than to
their totally abstract constructions.
The process by which children construct these abstract constructions
has been little studied. The current proposal is that they do this using the
pattern-ªnding skill of analogy, which basically categorizes together com-
plex wholes on the basis of commonalities in their relational structures. It
is very important to emphasize that abstract analogies—for example be-
tween two structures that have no elements in common—can only be
drawn if children use their intention-reading skills to discern the function
of those elements in the larger structure. It is only by doing this that chil-
dren may align the elements that correspond to one another—the elements
that do the same communicative job—across the two structures (such as
the elements that are serving as “tow-ers” in two different pictures of vehi-
cles towing each other). Indeed, in the current account (following Croft,
2001) syntactic roles such as the English subject or transitive-subject or
their equivalents in other languages are simply emergent phenomena in
this analogy-making process, based on commonalities the child sees in the
communicative functions of certain slots in certain item-based construc-
tions.
The process of distributional analysis, by means of which young chil-
dren construct paradigmatic categories such as noun and verb, also re-
quires understanding the communicative function of various linguistic ele-
ments as they appear in utterances. For this reason I have stressed that the
process should be called functionally based distributional analysis. The
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
193

empirical fact that children master some of these functions before others
within an adult-like category is crucially important here. For example,
young children learn to put plurals on “nouns” independently of learning
to use “nouns” productively in argument slots, and likewise for “verbs”
concerning the marking of tense and syntactic combination. The best
model to describe this process is Rispoli’s (1991) model of “mosaic acqui-
sition” in which some of the functions of an adult-like paradigmatic cate-
gory are learned before others and in relative independence. This is obvi-
ously a usage-based process of determining functions ªrst locally and only
later more globally.
A crucial question for any usage-based theory of syntactic develop-
ment—as well as any other kind of theory—is how children constrain
their growing abstractions. How do they learn to make just the generaliza-
tions that are conventional in their language and not others? This is also a
question for which there is shockingly little research; we do not even have
good descriptions of the nature of and frequency of children’s syntactic
overgeneralization errors. But the research that does exist suggests that
children’s growing abstractions are constrained by a number of conspiring
forces, which operate at different points in development. Constraints are
not needed early in development, when children are very conservative
learners and the language they hear and say is becoming entrenched in
conventional uses. But as they learn more language children form classes
of verbs and other words that behave similarly in some contexts, and then
generalize to new contexts within this categorical constraint (Pinker,
1989). They do not seem to use this categorical constraint, however, until
they are over 4 years of age. In addition, as children learn more construc-
tions these block or preempt potential generalizations of others. Together
these three usage-based processes—entrenchment, verb classes, and pre-
emption—provide a good starting point for further research on this very
difªcult question.
In the review of theories of syntactic development in this chapter I con-
cluded, not surprisingly, that the principles-and-parameters approach has
little to offer at this stage. The theory is saddled with an hypothesized uni-
versal grammar that seems to be doing very little except creating difªcult
problems such as how to deal with cross-linguistic diversity (the linking
problem) and developmental change (the continuity problem). Con-
nectionism is obviously an approach much more in the spirit of the current
usage-based approach, but it needs to incorporate into its models some ac-
count of communicative intentions and function before it can provide a
psychologically realistic theory of child language acquisition. Construc-
tion grammar accounts have so far provided very little in the direction of
the precise acquisition processes children use to construct their construc-
194
Constructing a Language

tions, and so it is the burden of this book as a whole to try to remedy that
situation by detailing the usage-based processes involved—those involving
intention-reading, those involving pattern-ªnding, and those, as is the case
most often, involving both.
It is important to stress in all of this theoretical debate that regardless of
whether or not there is a universal grammar, children must still learn the
individual linguistic items and constructions of the language into which
they are born, and this requires them to master many and various concrete
pieces of language and to make some straightforward abstractions across
them. To repeat: this must happen regardless of one’s theory. The question
is whether we need in addition an innate universal grammar, along with a
second set of acquisition processes to link up to it, and what functions this
extra factor might serve.
Abstract Syntactic Constructions
195

Constructing a Language
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
S I X
Nominal and Clausal
Constructions
Think of the tools in a tool-box: there is a hammer, pli-
ers, a saw, a screw-driver, a rule, a glue-pot, glue, nails,
and screws. The functions of words are as diverse as
the functions of these objects . . . Of course, what
confuses us is the uniform appearance of words when
we hear them spoken . . . For their application is not
presented to us so clearly.
—LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN
ACROSS the languages of the world utterance-
level constructions are constituted by two major types of sub-construc-
tions: nominals and clauses.* Actually, in real discourse, nominals and
clauses are often used alone as full utterances, which is one strong piece of
evidence for their reality as functionally coherent and independent con-
structions. Thus, when someone is asked “Who is that over there?” a rea-
sonable utterance in response is the nominal “Bill” or “My father,” and
when someone is asked further “What is he doing?” a reasonable utter-
ance in response is the clause “Sleeping” or “Playing tennis.” Of course
many utterances are constituted by some combination of nominals and
clauses: “My father is playing tennis.”
Nominals are used by people to make reference to “things.” In many
theories, the prototype is concrete objects (people, places, and things). But
it is well known that nominals may be used to refer to basically any kind
of entity at all, real or imagined. Thus, when the need arises, there are
ways of construing actions, properties, and relationships as if they were
things, on analogy with concrete objects. For example, we may say such
things as Skiing promotes good health, That blue looks awful in my paint-
ing, and Bigger is better. Indeed, there are some languages that do not re-
ally have a clear-cut class of concrete nouns specialized for the single func-
* The terminology here can be confusing because it differs among different theories and
even schools within theories. To simplify, I will use the term nominal to refer indiscriminately
to what are normally called nouns and noun phrases. I will use the term clause to refer indis-
criminately to what are normally called clauses, verb phrases, and verbal complexes (specify-
ing further in some cases where it is critical).

tion of reference, such as dog and tree, but rather they have a single class
composed of words that can be used as either nouns or verbs depending
on whether they are used in nominals or clauses—similar to English words
such as cut (I cut the bread, There’s a cut on my ªnger) and hammer (I’m
hammering in this nail with my hammer). Langacker (1987b) notes that
the discourse function of identifying the participants in events and states
of affairs requires language users to construe whatever they wish to talk
about as a “thing,” so it can be referred to, no matter its “true” ontologi-
cal status. And the major characteristic of a “thing” is that it is bounded,
often spatially but sometimes only conceptually (as in The disappointment
lasted all night) in a time-stable manner (Givón, 1979).
Clauses (verb phrases) are used for a variety of discourse purposes,
sometimes referred to together (though somewhat misleadingly) as predi-
cation. Clauses are about events that unfold in time, or else states that re-
main the same over some discernible span of time. They are thus used for
less time-stable entities than are nominals (Givón, 1979). In the analysis of
Hopper and Thompson (1984, 1985) the structure of predication derives
from the fact that in discourse human beings regularly and often report on
events and states of affairs, or else request that some event or state of af-
fairs be brought about. As in the case of nominals, a clausal construction
can also force a construal, although it is sometimes difªcult to construe a
word normally used to refer to a thing as a process. But still, we can un-
derstand such utterances as The newspaper boy porched the newspaper or
The dog treed the cat. Langacker (1987a) points out that one of the main
functions of the copula, in languages that have it, is to be able to predicate
using what are normally nouns and adjectives, as in He is a man or He is
pretty (so-called predicate nominal or predicate adjective constructions).
To understand how nominals and clauses work in general, it is useful to
return to the diagram introduced in Chapter 2, with a few twists (see Fig-
ure 6.1). In choosing a conventional linguistic expression to symbolize
some referential event, a speaker makes contact in various ways with the
joint attentional frame that she shares with her listener in the current us-
age event. Some of these types of contact are more listener based, as the
speaker takes into account the listener’s knowledge, expectations, and per-
spective in formulating her utterance. For example, she might choose a
pronoun over a noun  determiner as a nominal construction to refer to
an object that she and the speaker are currently focused on jointly. Also, in
English, she must make some reference to the time of the referential event
relative to now (the time of the usage event). Other types of contact with
the joint attentional frame are more speaker based. For example, the
speaker may make clear to the listener—either obligatorily or voluntarily
for various reasons—her own goals and attitude with respect to the refer-
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
197

ential event. Thus, she may express that she wants the event to happen,
that it might happen, that she heard it happened, that she’s not sure if it is
happening, that it did not happen, that it ought to happen, that she wishes
it would happen, and so forth—which are normally expressed within the
conªnes of the clause (verbal complex).
Because of all these functions, nominal and clausal constructions quite
often, though not always, are composed of multiple morphemes and/or
words. Although the speciªcs differ greatly in different languages,
nominals often have as internal constituents various functors such as arti-
cles (a, the), possessives (his, my), quantiªers (some, many), and classiªers
such as gender markers. Many of these assist listeners in the process of de-
termining the speciªc reference of a nominal, while others assist listeners
in the process of tracking a referent across clauses in discourse.* Children
learn and use nominals in their very earliest holophrastic language, but
true skill with nominals comes very slowly because successfully identifying
referents for different listeners in different discourse contexts requires so-
phisticated skills of perspective-taking (theory of mind). Although again
with much cross-linguistic variability, clauses typically contain mor-
198
Constructing a Language
* Nominal morphology can do other things as well, of course, including especially mark-
ing case and agreement to indicate the nominal’s relation to other constituents in the utter-
ance. But these are utterance-level functions, discussed in Chapter 4; here we focus on nomi-
nal morphology whose main function is to “ground” the nominal in the joint attentional
frame.
(b) Joint attentional frame
(c) Ref. event
Speaker
Goals
Attitudes
•
•
Listener
Knowledge
Expectations
Attention
•
•
•
(a) Perceptual situation
Figure 6.1. The basic adult-child communicative situation, as in Figure 2.1—but
with some speciªcs of the speaker attitudes and listener perspective that deter-
mine how utterance is grounded in the joint attentional frame.

phemes or words indicating such things as tense, aspect, modality, nega-
tion, evidentiality, and social intimacy. And again, although children begin
learning and using clauses relatively early in development, the mastery of
complex clauses takes much time, as they are both cognitively complex, in
the sense of containing many interrelated components, and pragmatically
complex, in the sense of having complex relations to the current joint
attentional frame. Perhaps of special difªculty are the functors in clauses
that depend on later-developing cognitive and social-cognitive skills in-
volving the understanding of temporal, causal, conditional, deontic,
epistemic, and other kinds of complex physical and psychological rela-
tions.
Many functions within nominals and clauses occur repeatedly in the ut-
terances of a given language, and so over historical time the symbols for
these have become grammaticized into grammatical morphemes, often
bound to a noun or verb. As documented in Chapter 4, grammatical mor-
phemes serve as “local cues,” and so children often ªnd them easier to
learn from a functional point of view than more distributed cues such as
word order or agreement. But, paradoxically, grammatical morphology
also presents special difªculties for language learners, as most clearly
evidenced by the struggles of many second-language learners and children
with speciªc language impairment. At least some of these difªculties arise
from the facts that (1) grammatical morphemes are often not perceptu-
ally salient (unstressed and in linguistically embedded positions), and
(2) grammatical morphemes are often plurifunctional—the same form is
used for multiple functions, often confounded in single instances of use—
requiring many comparisons across different utterances to isolate speciªc
functions. For these and other reasons, grammatical morphology has re-
cently become a focal point for comparing different theories of language
acquisition, crystallizing a number of different issues concerning the de-
gree to which children’s linguistic competence may be acquired via a single
set, versus two different sets, of learning and developmental mechanisms.
6.1. Reference and Nominals
Speakers do whatever they need to do in order to get listeners to share at-
tention with them to some referent or referents. Their linguistic tools for
doing this are the conventional nominal constructions of their language
(sometimes in combination with deictic gestures such as pointing). But
they must choose among these constructions in a particular usage event on
the basis of the exigencies of the communicative situation at hand. Of
most importance for this choice is the speaker’s assessment of the knowl-
edge and expectations of the listener at any given moment, an assessment
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
199

based on their currently shared perceptual situation and on their previ-
ously shared experience, especially in the immediately preceding discourse
context. In the terminology of Langacker (1991), speakers must “ground”
their conventional act of reference in the current speech situation involv-
ing particular persons in a particular usage event. In the terminology of
pragmatic theorists, speakers must assess the cognitive availability (acces-
sibility, topicality, givenness) of the referent for the listener (Givón, 1993;
Ariel, 1988; Gundel, Hedberg, and Zacharski, 1993).
Within the context of a general “availability hierarchy”—ranging from
things the speaker assumes are in the listener’s current focus of attention
to completely novel referents—we may distinguish in children’s language
three main construction types for identifying referents for listeners: (1)
deictic words (and gestures); (2) pronouns and proper names; and (3)
noun phrases containing a common noun plus some determiner(s).
Children use each of these devices in a rudimentary fashion in their earliest
language, but adult-like mastery requires in all three cases extensive learn-
ing over several years.
6.1.1. Deictics
Even before they learn any language, young children are able to direct the
attention of others to outside objects. They do this mainly gesturally, most
often by pointing (see Chapter 2). From soon after their ªrst birthdays, in-
fants begin to carefully monitor the attentional status of the adult as they
gesture, often making sure they secure her attention on themselves before
gesturing and then checking back afterwards to make sure the adult has
followed the pointing gesture successfully (Franco and Butterworth,
1996). There is no evidence in these early gestures, however, that infants
are monitoring how much and what kind of information their listener
needs. Thus, O’Neill (1996) found that it was not until after they were
2 years old that children pointed differently depending on whether their
mother had or had not witnessed a hiding event (that is, that they took
their mother’s knowledge into account).
Obviously, pointing gestures may be used only when the referent (or its
location) is perceptually available in the immediate nonlinguistic context.
Linguistically, 1-year-olds often use demonstratives, such as the English
this or that, in a similar manner (and demonstratives of one type or an-
other seem to be universal in the world’s languages; Diessel, 1999). How-
ever, at least from an adult point of view, these words also involve a
perspectival component—relative distance from speaker. The word this is
typically used for referents closer to the speaker, either physically or psy-
chologically, whereas the word that is typically used for referents further
200
Constructing a Language

away. It is highly unlikely that 1-year-olds systematically select either this
or that depending on a referent’s physical or psychological distance from
the listener. In fact, a number of studies have found that young children
struggle with this distinction until well into the preschool years. For exam-
ple, in two well-known sets of comprehension experiments (Clark and
Sengul, 1978; Tanz, 1980), an adult sat across a table from the child—
with one toy closer to her and one toy closer to the child—and asked for
“this” or “that” toy (without pointing). In general, children were not very
skillful in taking the adult’s point of view in this task until they were al-
most 4 years old (they were of course better when the adult sat beside
them so that distance was the same for speaker and listener). Children
were no better with either of the deictic pairs here and there and come
and go.
In an experimental examination of 3-year-olds’ production of this and
that, Garton (1983) also found a general lack of discrimination on the ba-
sis of distance. However, she also observed that when children used the
word this to indicate an object for an adult they most often picked up and
handled the object, whereas when they used the word that they most often
pointed to the object or offered it to the adult. Garton’s interpretation is
that 3-year-olds are just beginning to master a rudimentary contrastive
system, beginning with themselves as central reference point. The per-
spectival component—the ability to comprehend these terms from the
point of view of the speaker when it is different from that of the self—
awaits further development after age 4.
One explanation for the late development of children’s understanding of
these basic demonstrative terms might be that young children most often
experience adults using this and that along with a pointing gesture. Conse-
quently, in learning this and that children might segment the adult’s com-
municative intention inappropriately. That is, they might assume that this
and that are used to indicate objects (indiscriminately) and that the dis-
tance component of the overall communicative intention is carried by the
point. Support for this interpretation was provided by Tfouni and Klatzky
(1983), who found, not surprisingly, that 3-year-olds were much better in
an experimental task when the adult also pointed to the thing she wanted.
The other well-studied deictic pair is I/me and you. This pair is also
perspectival, but in a very different way. Unlike the case of this and that in
which the very same object may be indicated with either word depending
on where the speaker is standing, with I/me and you the perspective shift is
absolute—I am always I and you are always you—with the actual person
indicated depending on who is speaking. This absoluteness should mean
that I/me and you are easier to learn than this and that (although perhaps
more difªcult than “normal” words), and indeed they are. But it also
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
201

means that when children make errors with these terms the errors are es-
pecially salient. Such mistakes are typically called pronoun reversal errors,
as, for instance, when the child reaches up to a parent and requests “Pick
you up” (meaning “Pick me up”).
The ªrst-person pronouns I and me are among the ªrst words of many
English-speaking (and other) children, and the second-person pronoun
you is relatively early as well (Nelson, 1973; Fenson et al., 1994). Most
children make few if any reversal errors with these terms. Reliable ªgures
are not easily available, but an indirect estimate based on data reported by
Dale and Crain-Thoreson (1993) would be 20 percent of the population.
Another important fact from this same source is that children who do
make pronoun reversal errors do so only about 20 percent of the time, al-
though some children pass through periods in which they reverse very
consistently (Oshima-Takane, 1992). By far the most frequent error is
substituting you for I/me (as in asking the adult to “Pick you up”), which
occurs about four times more often than substituting I/me for you (Dale
and Crain-Thoreson, 1993).
It is unlikely that young children are confused about who is who
cognitively; after all, in most cases they use proper names for the same
people quite accurately. More likely is the hypothesis that they are con-
fused about how these special words work; what we may call pragmatic
confusion. The confusion may result either from children’s immature so-
cial-cognitive skills (poor skills of perspective-taking) or from the unique
pattern of adult-child discourse associated with these terms. Evidence for
the role of perspective-taking comes from a study by Loveland (1984),
who measured 2-year-olds’ ability to take the perspective of others in a se-
ries of social games (such as turning a picture around so that others could
see it) as well as their ability to use ªrst- and second-person pronouns ac-
curately. She found an almost perfect correlation between the two skills,
and corroborated this relationship in a follow-up longitudinal study. With
respect to discourse, Oshima-Takane (1988, 1999) hypothesized that ªrst-
and second-person personal pronouns should present less confusion to
children who have siblings because these children are able to experience
adult-child discourse from an outsider’s perspective (for example, they can
see parents referring to the sibling as you, as well as the sibling calling the
parent you), as a complement to their own direct discourse with adults. In
a series of naturalistic studies, experimental studies, and computational
models, Oshima-Takane (see 1999, for a review) has amassed very strong
evidence that additional (outside) perspectives on the operation of ªrst-
and second-person pronouns—for example, by observing sibling-adult
discourse—signiªcantly facilitates the acquisition of these terms. Oshima-
Takane and Benaroya (1989) presented evidence that autistic children,
202
Constructing a Language

who are reported to make pronoun reversal errors especially often, attend
less well to the speech of others when they themselves are outside the dis-
course.
A second important factor may be a child’s tendency toward imitation,
or more accurately, mimicry. If children simply mimic what adults say to
them (such as “Shall I pick you up?”), then they will make some pronoun
reversal errors. The simplest version of this hypothesis, however, is obvi-
ously not true. In a case study, Oshima-Takane (1992) found that rela-
tively few of the child’s reversal errors were immediate repetitions of
something the adult had just said. In addition, Dale and Crain-Thoreson
(1993) found no overall difference in the tendency of reversing and non-
reversing children (in all of their discourse with adults) to engage in imme-
diate repetitions. However, if imitation is conceived more broadly, it turns
out that many reversal errors result from the child reproducing an
unanalyzed chunk of adult speech (perhaps heard days before). This pat-
tern was reported by Loveland (1984) and Dale and Crain-Thoreson
(1993), who found that 52 percent of the reversal errors in their sample
were either immediate repetitions of the adult or the production of
unanalyzed chunks. One interesting hypothesis arising from this analysis
is that the relatively high proportion of autistic children who make pro-
noun reversal errors may result from the combination of a relatively
strong tendency to mimic and poor perspective-taking skills—both well-
known characteristics of these children (see Sigman and Capps, 1997, for
a review).
One important and robust fact that is not easily explained by either
pragmatic confusion or imitation is that children who do make pronoun
reversal errors do so only some of the time. But it is possible that imitation
is frequency dependent. Thus, continued hearing of the word you to refer
to the child herself entrenches that reference and interferes with her other
knowledge about how this word is used. (This might also explain why
children use you inappropriately more often than I or me, since you is
much more frequent in speech to children than I or me; Lieven, Pine, and
Baldwin, 1997). At least some support for this hypothesis is provided by
Dale and Crain-Thoreson (1993) who found that children made twice as
many reversal errors when the utterance they were attempting to produce
was especially complex. They hypothesized that when children’s produc-
tion capabilities are strained they often resort to imitating chunks of adult
speech, or perhaps make other sorts of performance errors such as repeat-
ing as a referential term the one they have heard most often in the past. It
is also relevant that these researchers found, surprisingly, an overall higher
percentage of children making pronoun errors in a sample of precocious
language learners than would be expected in a more typical sample. They
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
203

hypothesized that these might be “risk-taking” children who attempt to
produce sentences that stretch their production capabilities more often
than other children. Alternatively, these younger children might be more
cognitively immature (for example, in perspective-taking) than children
who learn these words on a more normal timetable.
The acquisition and use of deictic nominals thus shows an interesting
interaction between the role of children’s social-cognitive development
and the nature of the input available to them. Children cannot understand
words requiring a deictic shift until they have learned, in some rudimen-
tary way, to take the perspective of other people (Loveland, 1993). But
then, the range of uses they experience makes it either easier or harder for
them to begin zeroing in on more adult-like usage. For example, some
difªculties with learning ªrst- and second-person pronouns are at least
partially alleviated if children experience additional discourse from an ex-
ternal perspective (Oshima-Takane, 1999). The demonstratives this and
that, in contrast, present the problem that it is never quite clear which part
of the communicative intention is being conveyed by these words per se
and which part is being played by the gestures that almost invariably ac-
company them. It thus takes many years to segment accurately adults’
communicative intentions when using these terms. The speciªcs of how
children do this have yet to be spelled out.
6.1.2. Pronouns and Proper Names
Among children’s earliest words are quite often names for parents, sib-
lings, pets, or friends (Nelson, 1973). A relatively simple referential strat-
egy for young children, therefore, is simply to use a proper name. In adult
usage, proper names are used when speaker and listener are both familiar
with an individual (including speciªc people, pets, and places) and know
that they share such familiarity. Of course 1-year-olds very likely are not
actively making such assessments of common knowledge but rather sim-
ply using proper names for individuals whose name they know, regardless
of listener.
How children learn proper names is not as straightforward as it might
seem, since proper names are used to indicate single individuals, whereas
other referential terms (without determiners) typically indicate only cate-
gories. Hall and colleagues (summarized in Hall, 1999) have found that
preschoolers use a variety of cues to determine when a novel word is a
proper name rather than a common noun. Most importantly, preschool
children expect a proper name to refer to only one individual, and so if
they hear a novel word used without a determiner for single individuals
they will assume it is a proper name. And by this relatively late age they
204
Constructing a Language

also expect that certain kinds of things can receive proper names (such as
people and animals) but not others (such as inanimate objects). In the
analysis of Katz, Baker, and McNamara (1974), for animate entities
young children ªrst learn to individuate speciªc individuals (with proper
names) whereas for inanimate entities they ªrst learn to individuate cate-
gories of individuals (with common nouns). The limitation of this research
from an acquisition point of view, however, is that it deals with older chil-
dren who already know something about proper names; they are simply
tested to see how they deal with a newly introduced one. There is only one
study of how young children at the very earliest stages of language acquisi-
tion, when they are learning their ªrst proper names and common nouns,
comprehend differences in the way these two kinds of nominals work
referentially. Birch and Bloom (2002) found that 2- to 4-year-olds cor-
rectly identiªed a person whom an experimenter called Jessie as the one
they had seen her interact with—as opposed to one she had not interacted
with previously.
Pronouns are, with respect to referential range, the opposite of proper
names. Pronouns are used to refer not to one individual but to a wide ar-
ray of entities, even unknown entities. What distinguishes the entities that
are picked out by a pronoun is not anything about them as entities, but
only their “givenness” in the current perceptual and discourse context. In-
deed, Gundel, Hedberg, and Zacharski (1993) argue that pronouns are
used for the most available (or given) referents in the discourse context,
that is to say, the potential referents that the speaker believes are most
available for the listener. In this account, stressed pronouns are used for
referents that the speaker believes are already activated for the listener
(“in current awareness”), and unstressed pronouns are used for referents
that are not only activated but also in focus (“at the current center of at-
tention”). The stronger of these two criteria (“current center of atten-
tion”) is the same one these theorists use to justify null reference (for ex-
ample, when someone responds to the question “What is your sister
doing?” with the utterance “Swimming”). Pragmatic assessments of this
type obviously require some skills of social cognition on the part of the
speaker as she assesses the speciªc knowledge states of a speciªc listener
on a speciªc occasion—which might seem to be problematic for children
before the age of 4 or 5, who are notoriously poor at assessing the knowl-
edge states of other persons.
Virtually no acquisition studies have investigated the communicative
conditions in which young children choose to use a pronoun as opposed to
a noun or some other referring expression. Given our almost total igno-
rance, at least ªve hypotheses are possible. One is that young children sim-
ply use the same referring expression as the adult with whom they are con-
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
205

versing in the immediate situation; if the adult refers to an object by name
the child will also, whereas if the adult uses a pronoun the child will use a
pronoun. A second possibility is that young children follow the principle
of mutual exclusivity, and so they use an object’s name if they know it, but
use a pronoun if they do not know the name. A third possibility is that
children ªnd the lexical retrieval of pronouns easier than that of nouns
(since one can simply retrieve the same pronoun for many different enti-
ties), and so they use pronouns whenever production of a noun is espe-
cially difªcult (as when the noun is a very long word; see Gerken, 1991;
Levinsky and Gerken, 1995, for a related hypothesis). The fourth and ªfth
possibilities involve children taking account of the knowledge states of the
listener before choosing a referring expression—either on the basis of the
perceptual situation (for example, the listener is looking at the referent) or
on the basis of discourse factors (for example, the listener just heard the
referent mentioned).
Campbell, Brooks and Tomasello (2000) attempted to test each of these
ªve hypotheses experimentally with 212- and 312-year-old children. They
found that the children did not use pronouns differentially (1) when the
adult modeled either a pronoun or a noun for the target object, (2) when
the adult either did or did not witness a target event, or (3) when they
needed to use unfamiliar and difªcult nouns as opposed to familiar and
easy ones. The ªnding was that the children used pronouns differently
mainly depending on the immediately preceding discourse of the experi-
menter, in particular whether they had been asked a speciªc question such
as “What did X do?” (eliciting “He . . .” or a null reference) or a general
question such as “What happened?” (eliciting “The boy. . . .”). This was
the only effective factor observed in the study. Wittek and Tomasello (sub-
mitted-b) replicated and extended these results by ªnding that 2- and
3-year-old children did not use pronouns and nouns differentially depend-
ing on whether the referential object was (1) alone and in view, (2) on a
shelf in view along with other objects (so that pointing and pronouns were
not effective in singling out the target object), or (3) out of view (another
situation in which pointing and pronouns should not be effective). Again,
however, they found that the immediately preceding discourse had a
strong effect on children’s choice of nouns, pronouns, or null reference.
These ªndings thus suggest that young children’s referential choices rely
much more heavily on the just-previous utterances of interlocutors—pre-
sumably as evidence of the current knowledge states of these others—
than on what those interlocutors have or have not just experienced per-
ceptually.
An interesting additional ªnding that reveals something about slightly
older children’s understanding of pronouns and how they work is re-
206
Constructing a Language

ported by Tomasello, Anselmi, and Farrar (1984/85). In this study, an
adult requested clariªcation of a randomly selected set of 2- to 4-year-
olds’ referential expressions in an otherwise normal discourse interaction.
The ªnding was that when the children attempted to clarify their referen-
tial expression using a pronoun, they supplemented their utterance with a
gesture more often than when they attempted to clarify their referential
expression using a noun. This difference presumably indicates preschool
children’s understanding that pronouns cannot accomplish an effective act
of reference without some supplemental indication of the intended refer-
ent (such as a gesture) in situations in which shared knowledge by speaker
and listener cannot be assumed. It should be noted that the major cue
available to children in this study was adult discourse indicating that the
child’s original attempt at reference was unsatisfactory.
Finally, there is a literature investigating young children’s understanding
of the so-called binding principles. The basic issue in this literature is the
conditions under which young children understand that two nominals in
the same utterance are being used to refer to the same entity in the world.
The ways languages do this turn out to be fairly complex and interact in
interesting ways with the constituent structure of utterances. It thus hap-
pens that, in English, in the utterance Beside him, Bill saw a snake the ini-
tial him can be either Bill or someone else. But in the utterance He wanted
to drive Bill’s car the initial he cannot be Bill. Most of the research on
these issues is conducted in the generative grammar paradigm, and the ba-
sic ªnding is that children master these subtle principles of co-reference
only very slowly, with some aspects taking well into the school years (see
O’Grady, 1997, for a review). Although no developmental research has
been done on issues of co-reference from a cognitive-functional (usage-
based) point of view, the theoretical account of van Hoek (1997, 2002),
focusing on so-called conceptual reference points, would provide an inter-
esting starting point for such an investigation.
6.1.3. Nouns and Determiners
The other major referential strategy of young children is the use of a full
noun phrase containing some kind of common noun and some kind of de-
terminer(s). Unlike pronouns and proper names, full noun phrases do not
assume—at least not to the same degree—shared knowledge between
speaker and listener. In addition, they employ a more analytic technique of
reference than either of these other two types of nominals, typically
(though not always) using multiple words to indicate the intended refer-
ent. Thus, prototypical noun phrases comprise two separately indicated
sub-functions: a common noun (boy, yard, party) is used to indicate a cat-
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
207

egory of things, and a determiner (a, the, my) is used to help the listener to
specify an individual member of that category.
The prototypical common noun is a count noun such as dog, tree, or
man. These words only specify a category of individuals and require some
further speciªcations to pick out an individual member of the category—
the dog, my dog, a big dog, that dog, the dog that bit me. In English there
are some kinds of nouns that are not used with determiners in this same
way, however. These are mass nouns such as rice, wax, and hair. While
these can be used with some determiners in some circumstances, they most
often are not, or else they are used with a special determiner such as some
(and not normally with plurals). In the analysis of Langacker (1987b; see
also Wierzbicka, 1985), the main issue is whether the entity being indi-
cated by the noun is undifferentiated internally. He illustrates this point by
using a count noun as if it were a mass noun in a special context, for ex-
ample, The termite is having desk for breakfast. Here, desk is being con-
strued not as an individual entity with four legs and a ºat writing surface,
but as a homogeneous substance. Although there are many more subtleties
and complexities to this distinction, the important point for current pur-
poses is simply that young children begin to distinguish reliably between
count and mass nouns—and their prototypical uses with or without deter-
miners—at some point during their third year of life (McPherson, 1991).
Relatedly, during this same age range, young children begin to understand
and make generic references to whole classes of entities, rather than indi-
viduals, using common nouns (typically as plurals), as in Tigers are mean,
Skateboards are fun, Birds make nests (Pappas and Gelman, 1998).
Of special interest here is children’s early understanding and use of com-
mon nouns and determiners in a single act of reference. Children produce
such noun phrases in their very earliest multi-word speech, sometimes as
whole utterances (saying “A clown” when asked “What is that?” or “My
blanket” when asked “What do you want?”). The determiners used in
these early utterances fall mainly into three categories. The ªrst is
demonstratives, as in this ball or that cookie. As noted in Section 6.1.1,
these are often used deictically with pointing, but their perspectival aspect
(distance from speaker) is not mastered for several years. The second cate-
gory is possessives, as in my shoes or Maria’s bike. These are also used
quite early in language development, and they are of special importance
because they seem to be used quite accurately from the beginning (see,
e.g., Tomasello, 1998c). This early mastery of possessive noun phrases
means that all the trouble children have with other kinds of noun phrases,
involving such things as demonstratives and deªnite and indeªnite articles
(see below), are not due to general difªculties with forming a phrase con-
sisting of a common noun plus a determiner. Their difªculties must come
208
Constructing a Language

from somewhere else, presumably the additional perspectival and/or prag-
matic dimensions that must be mastered for appropriate use of these other
types of determiners in noun phrases.
The determiners that have been studied most extensively in English ac-
quisition are the deªnite and indeªnite articles, the and a. Appropriate use
of these is notoriously difªcult for second-language learners of English, es-
pecially for those coming from languages that do not have articles at all
(Japanese, Russian). Although textbook accounts quite often present these
words as contrasting alternatives, the fact is that each of them has a wide
range of uses, some of which are quite unrelated to one another. Indeed,
the historical situation is that across many languages the deªnite deter-
miner derives from a demonstrative—a mainly deictic function—whereas
the indeªnite determiner derives from the number word for one, a very
different function. In English, the deªnite determiner was grammaticized
from a demonstrative many generations before the indeªnite determiner
was grammaticized from the number word for one (Trask, 1996).
Naturalistic observation of English-speaking children’s use of the
deªnite and indeªnite articles supports this initial separation of functions.
Children’s ªrst uses of these words, at around their second birthdays, is
mostly bound up with the larger item-based constructions in which they
occur. In these constructions, they occur almost always immediately after
either a verb or a preposition. Thus, Pine and Lieven (1997) found that 56
percent of children’s earliest utterances containing articles (before age 2;6)
derived from one of three constructional frames. These were different for
different children, but they mostly came from the following sets:
• Deªnites: Where’s the X, In/on the X, There’s the X
• Indeªnites: That’s a X, A X, Get a X, Want a X
Interestingly, concerning the nouns involved, Pine and Martindale (1996)
found that only about 10 percent of children’s nouns that occurred with
articles at age 2;1 occurred with both articles; the ªgure was more like 20
percent at age 2;6, with the majority of children at both ages having ex-
actly zero nouns with which they used both articles. (By comparison, in
the mothers’ speech to these children, the percentages were two to three
times greater.) These ªndings provide general support for the idea that
children’s early uses of the deªnite and indeªnite articles are not closely re-
lated (Karmiloff-Smith, 1979), and thus that these two words do not form
a contrastive pair from within the same grammatical category (contra
Valian, 1991).
But there are some contexts in which the deªnite and indeªnite articles
may be used contrastively, and it is these that have been the focus of most
developmental research. Children have to overcome two main difªculties
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
209

to use English articles appropriately. The ªrst difªculty is that these words
encode two different, but highly correlated, dimensions of the referential
situation: speciªcity and givenness. On the one hand, the deªnite article
the serves to pick out a speciªc entity, as in I want the cookie (that’s in
your hand), whereas the indeªnite article a serves to pick out a non-
speciªc entity, as in I want a cookie (any cookie). On the other hand, the
deªnite article the is used when the speaker can assume that the referent is
to some degree given (or available) for the listener, as in I have the kite
(the one we just talked about), whereas the indeªnite article a is used to in-
troduce a new referent into the discourse situation even if that entity is
deªnite, as in I have a kite (you’ll ªnd it upstairs). These two aspects—
speciªcity and givenness—most often occur in a totally confounded man-
ner, and indeed it is only in somewhat special uses that they are
unconfounded. As we shall see, young children understand quite early in
development that the deªnite article indicates a speciªc referent whereas
the indeªnite article indicates a non-speciªc referent. But they do not mas-
ter the subtleties of the use of articles depending on current listener knowl-
edge and attention—givenness, the perspectival component—until much
later. Indeed, it may be that mastery of the speciªcity function gets in the
way of children’s discovery of the later-acquired perspectival function.
The second difªculty is that this second dimension of article use—
taking into account listener perspective (givenness)—requires sophisti-
cated social-cognitive skills. Much research in developmental psychology
has demonstrated that the requisite perspective-taking skills are not well
developed until 4 years of age (see Flavell, 1997, for a review). Unlike the
case of the personal pronouns I-you, there are no studies that speciªcally
correlate children’s perspective-taking skills and their skills with deªnite
and indeªnite articles. But there is much relevant research to help sort out
what children know about these words at what ages.
First, Brown’s (1973) naturalistic observations have documented that
by 3 years of age English-speaking children use the deªnite and indeªnite
articles quite ºexibly and appropriately with respect to the speciªcity of
the referent intended. However, Brown also notes that this spontaneous
usage provides little evidence one way or the other for children’s skills
with the perspectival component, especially in the most demanding case in
which the intended referent is known by the speaker but unknown to the
listener (that is, where givenness is different for speaker and listener). This
especially difªcult case has been the target of a number of experimental in-
vestigations, and not surprisingly the general ªnding is that when young
children have a referent they wish to introduce to someone for whom it is
totally new in the discourse context, they tend to overuse the deªnite arti-
cle (the egocentric error). For example, with no introductory comments
whatsoever they might tell a friend “Tomorrow we’ll buy the toy.”
210
Constructing a Language

The ªrst systematic investigation of English-speaking children’s use of
articles was reported by Maratsos (1976). Maratsos gave both compre-
hension and production tasks of various kinds to 3- and 4-year-olds. For
example, in a storytelling task the child was introduced to a story about “a
car and a boat” or about “some cars and boats.” At the end of the story
the adult asked the child about one car or boat. For stories containing
only a single exemplar, the child should have used the deªnite article the,
whereas for stories containing multiple exemplars, the child should have
used the indeªnite article a. Children were also given imitation tasks,
which essentially consisted of stories with missing articles that the child
was expected to ªll in, and comprehension tasks, in which the child had to
act either on “the X” or on “a X.” Generalizing across these and other
tasks, Maratsos concluded that whereas 3-year-olds did understand the
contrast between deªnite and indeªnite articles with respect to speciªcity
(for example, they could use indeªnite articles appropriately for referring
to generic referents or to some unspeciªed member of a class), it was not
until age 4;6 that they understood the contrast between deªnite and
indeªnite articles with respect to differences in the listener knowledge pre-
supposed (givenness, perspective). Although she focused on a much wider
variety of communicative functions and tested children across a much
wider age range, Karmiloff-Smith’s (1979) ªndings from a series of studies
on French-speaking children’s use of deªnite and indeªnite articles are in
general accord with these ªndings.
Emslie and Stevenson (1981) modiªed Maratsos’s procedure somewhat
to see if this would help 3- and 4-year-olds use articles in a manner sensi-
tive to the perspective (knowledge and attention) of the listener. Most im-
portantly, they had children tell a story from a set of pictures to another
child sitting on the other side of a partition. In line with Maratsos they
found that 3-year-olds used the articles consistently and appropriately
with regard to speciªcity. With regard to perspective, the key task was one
in which children were asked to narrate a story from a series of pictures to
another child, and in the middle of the series a picture of a completely new
and irrelevant object or person appeared—deªnitely requiring an in-
deªnite article for its introduction (“And then a snake appeared in the
grass . . .”). They found that only the 4-year-olds consistently used the
indeªnite article to introduce the novel referent for their unsuspecting lis-
tener. In the same vein, Garton (1983) found that in a similar experimental
task children before their fourth birthdays did not use the deªnite and
indeªnite articles differentially for adults either wearing or not wearing a
blindfold.
Interestingly for the question of children’s understanding of givenness or
perspective, Emslie and Stevenson (1981) noted that when children men-
tioned a referent in the same story for a second time, they tended to use,
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
211

appropriately, the deªnite article. However, this behavior is not diagnostic
because the referent being mentioned for a second time is now given for
both the child and her listener. Power and Dal Martello (1986) therefore
had Italian-speaking 4- and 5-year-olds narrate the same story twice, each
time for a different listener. But children again used more deªnite articles
the second time they told the story, even though the listener was com-
pletely new to the story—again making the egocentric error.
The ªndings of the naturalistic and experimental studies are thus quite
consistent and paint the following picture. Young children initially use ar-
ticles in complementary (almost non-overlapping) distribution. They mas-
ter the differential use of deªnite and indeªnite articles with respect to ref-
erent speciªcity by 3 years of age, if not earlier, but they do not master the
differential use of these words with respect to presupposed listener knowl-
edge (givenness, perspective) until 4 years of age, if not later. This general
ontogenetic pattern accords well both with other ªndings concerning chil-
dren’s acquisition of nominals—such as demonstratives and pronouns—
and with the general pattern of their social-cognitive development in terms
of perspective-taking skills.
A cautionary note, however, comes from a study by Thomas (1989). He
found that adults acquiring English as a second language, especially those
whose ªrst language has no articles, show the same pattern of acquisition
as young children. In particular, they master the speciªcity function ªrst
and continue to struggle with the perspectival function for some time, as
evidenced by their continued making of the egocentric error (overuse of
the deªnite article when the referent is new for the listener). This ªnding
suggests that the real problem is not necessarily perspective-taking as a
general cognitive skill that develops over early childhood, but rather the
learning problems created by plurifunctionality, speciªcally, the fact that
the use of English deªnite and indeªnite articles contrasts on two dimen-
sions simultaneously. For both young children and second-language learn-
ers the speciªcity function is for some reason more salient than the
givenness function (see Cziko, 1986)—perhaps because of the general
difªculty, for both children and adults, of taking another person’s perspec-
tive. We may therefore say that in the case of both demonstrative and arti-
cles, a reasonable hypothesis is that learners’ difªculties are a joint func-
tion of the social-cognitive difªculties they have with perspective taking
and the learning difªculties presented by plurifunctional lexical items.
One ªnal interesting ªnding is reported by Garton (1983; citing unpub-
lished data). She found that children’s use of deªnite and indeªnite articles
is strongly inºuenced by the particular question the adult asks the child at
the critical moment in the task. For example, she reports a strong tendency
for children to answer a question of the form What did the truck knock
212
Constructing a Language

over? with a deªnite reference of the form The horse, even if there are
multiple identical horses on the table. This result is reminiscent of the
ªnding of Campbell, Brooks, and Tomasello (2000) that the most impor-
tant factor in children’s choice of a referential expression—focusing on the
choice of noun, pronoun, or null—is the type of question asked. Thus, a
key variable in the experimental studies of children’s use of articles may be
the nature of the presuppositions about the questioner’s knowledge em-
bodied in the question. The potential inºuence of this variable is not re-
ported in a systematic fashion in all studies, and it may explain some of
the discrepant ªndings in the literature, such as those of Warden (1976),
who ªnds much older ages for English-speaking children’s mastery of
deªnite and indeªnite articles.
6.2. Predication and Clauses
The raison d’être of many utterances is something “new” that the speaker
wishes to point out to the listener. This new information is prototypically
contained in a clause (verb phrase). A clause typically comprises symbolic
elements indicating one or more participants in a scene (typically by some
nominal construction) and some event or state of affairs in which these
participate (typically in some verbal construction). All languages have
both clauses containing one participant, intransitives, and clauses contain-
ing two participants, transitives (and often transitivizing or detransi-
tivizing morphology that makes a verb into one or the other; see Hopper
and Thompson, 1980, for the classic account). Interacting with transitivity
to determine basic clause types is the meaning of the verb in terms of its in-
herent aspect (aktionsart). The most fundamental distinctions are among:
(1) change of state verbs, which are used to indicate events directed to-
ward some goal or end state (break, die); (2) activity verbs, which are used
to indicate internally homogeneous events with no such directedness (run,
smile); and (3) stative verbs, which indicate relatively enduring states (be,
have).
An integral part of clauses as well is their grounding in the current
speech event. Just as nominals are grounded in space, in the sense that they
help the listener to “locate” the intended referent, clauses are grounded in
time to help the listener identify which particular event is being indicated
(Langacker, 1991). This is typically done in two ways that work together.
The internal temporal contour of a clause is designated by some marking
of its grammatical aspect (for example, progressive aspect marks on-
goingness, as in X is smiling), while the external placement of the event
along a time line, grounded in the speech moment, is designated by some
marker of its tense (such as past tense) (Comrie, 1976). These work to-
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
213

gether in narrative discourse to enable such temporal juggling as While I
was Xing, she Yed. In addition, and importantly, many clauses contain
some indication of the speaker’s attitude toward the event or state of af-
fairs. For example, in English people frequently mark their attitude
through the use of modal auxiliaries such as may, can, can’t, won’t,
should, might, must, could, and would—and other languages mark such
things as how the speaker came to know what she is saying, so-called
evidentiality. All of this works together—with some grammatical mor-
phemes in some languages being plurifunctional in the extreme—in what
is called tense-aspect-modality (TAM) marking. TAM marking may be
done either with freestanding words or with grammatical morphology, de-
pending on exactly which of these things in a given language has been
grammaticized, and to what degree.
6.2.1. Early Verbs and Argument Structure
English-speaking children learn their ªrst verbs—typically in the months
preceding their second birthdays—for changes of state, for activities, and
for states, with no discernible developmental advantage for any of these.
The prototypical situation in the case of change of state verbs is a transfor-
mation deªned in terms of relatively abstract relational elements. Thus,
early-acquired verbs such as get, ªnd, stop, break, open, and fall-down in-
dicate a class of conceptual situations whose only commonality is some
pattern of spatial-temporal-causal relations (for example, “break” may
occur for any object, in any of a variety of ways, involving different
speciªc activities). The prototypical situation for activity verbs, in con-
trast, involves concrete and perceptible types of sensory-motor action.
Thus, early acquired verbs such as run, smile, jump, lick, draw, see, and
catch are not deªned by abstract spatial-temporal-causal relations, but
rather by the characteristic actions involved, deªned in terms of speciªc
objects and body parts moving in speciªc ways (sometimes involving
speciªc objects). The prototypical situation for state verbs is something
being in a state for some discernible length of time, often indicated in Eng-
lish in predicate adjective constructions such as She’s happy/nice/little/red.
A number of hypotheses have been proposed about possible cognitive
factors that might make some verbs more developmentally basic than oth-
ers. First, Huttenlocher, Smiley, and Charney (1983) hypothesized that (1)
words for movement and change (such as off, out) are acquired before
words for intentional action (get, push); and (2) these later-acquired
words for intentional action are used ªrst for self actions and only later for
the actions of others (see also Huttenlocher, Smiley, and Ratner, 1983;
Smiley and Huttenlocher, 1995). These hypotheses are based on the idea
214
Constructing a Language

that young children ªnd it difªcult to conceive of intentional action, espe-
cially that of others. However, in a diary study, Tomasello (1992a) found
only mixed support for these hypotheses. In this study the child’s earliest
verbs were indeed words for movement and change (more, gone, and so
on), but within the same early time frame she also learned intentional
verbs such as move, get, stay, push, stuck, catch, try, play, pee-pee, bite,
hurt, cut, and draw. She used many of these to comment on or request the
actions of others; for example, she said that someone was “Crying” or
that someone “Fall-down” or that someone needed to “Move” or “Get-
it” for her (see Edwards and Goodwin, 1986, for similar ªndings).
Another obvious candidate for cognitive complexity is the number of
participants involved in an event. Testing this hypothesis in the same diary
study, Tomasello (1992a) found that the child’s earliest verbs were about
single entities acting or undergoing changes of state or being acted upon
by the child herself. (The latter case refers to utterances of the type Kick
ball, as the child kicked it herself—the proposal being that for these utter-
ances the self is egocentrically presupposed and not a part of the underly-
ing conceptualization.) Relating this to Huttenlocher’s hypotheses, we
may acknowledge that movement words are typically learned ªrst, but
this is only because they typically involve a single object. Contra
Huttenlocher, intention words may be learned just as early if they involve
a single participant or the self acting on a single object. Words for an ex-
ternal agent’s intentional action on another object/person are learned later
only because they involve two cognitively represented participants.
Bloom, Lightbown, and Hood (1975) proposed another hypothesis
about the cognitive bases of early verbs: words are learned for dynamic
events before static states. They presented evidence for this proposal from
four children sampled periodically. Tomasello (1992a) provided further
support with continuous diary data, most clearly for verbs within the
same semantic domain (and especially for change of state verbs, since ac-
tivity verbs do not normally have stative counterparts). For example, this
child began very early with the global expression move as a request for ob-
ject movement and only later learned stuck and stay for the absence of ob-
ject movement. Similarly, she learned the dynamic possession verb get be-
fore the static possession verb have.
Putting these facts together, it would seem that young English-speaking
children learn verbs ªrst for dynamic events that involve only a single par-
ticipant. The event may be either intentional or not, may be construed as
either a change of state or an activity, and may involve either the child or
another person. Around the second birthday children begin to learn more
verbs that may be used to indicate static states of affairs and events involv-
ing two explicitly conceptualized participants.
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
215

A closely related issue is the nature of the nominals used as arguments
of verbs in children’s early utterances. DuBois (1987, in press) has demon-
strated that adults in a number of languages show a very consistent pat-
tern, what he calls preferred argument structure. The basic idea is that
new information, expressed in lexical noun phrases, is typically intro-
duced in either intransitive utterances (often in specialized presentational
or existential constructions such as There’s this X . . .) or else as the object
of transitive utterances. It is very rare for the subject of a transitive utter-
ance to carry new information expressed in a lexical noun phrase (see also
Chafe, 1994, on the light subject constraint). Note that this means, typi-
cally, that there is only one lexical noun phrase per clause.
Clancy (1995, 2000) documented that 2-year-old children learning Ko-
rean follow this same pattern. In particular, she found that whereas the
subjects of transitives were very rarely lexical noun phrases (13 percent),
the subjects of intransitives and the objects of transitives were much more
often lexical noun phrases (over 33 percent). The most common way in
which new referents were introduced was in existential (intransitive) con-
structions, and thereafter the same referent was referred to either with a
pronoun or with a zero (null reference). The prototypical transitive utter-
ance had either the speaker or the listener as subject, normally with a ªrst-
or second-person pronoun, acting on an inanimate entity. Clancy argues
that these transitive utterances are thus in a fundamental way iconic with
the experience of the speaker and the listener, who remain constant in the
situation but with changing objects and events across time. Allen and
Schröder (2000) have conªrmed this general pattern of preferred argu-
ment structure in the speech of 2-year-olds speaking Inuktitut, a highly
polysynthetic language in which arguments are explicitly realized much
less often overall.
Finally, it has been often noted that children speaking English and other
languages quite often do not overtly express subjects in their early utter-
ances. A number of explanations have been proposed. For example, some
investigators have claimed that transitive utterances place inordinate pro-
cessing demands on young children, especially at the beginning of utter-
ances, and so they simply drop the subject (e.g., L. Bloom, 1970; Valian,
1991; P. Bloom, 1990). A related explanation is that subjects tend to ap-
pear in utterance positions that are prosodically and metrically weak, and
so they get passed over in production (Gerken, 1990). It is also possible
that it matters how often a child hears a particular verb with or without a
subject. For example, in English children hear some verbs most often as
imperatives (without a subject) and they use those same verbs in other
constructions without subjects (for example, put, make—quite often with
216
Constructing a Language

self as actor); this account has never been tested, but some suggestive evi-
dence is provided in the study of Tomasello (1992a).
The major alternatives to these processing and input explanations are
pragmatic accounts, closely related to the notion of preferred argument
structure. Thus, Greenªeld and Smith (1976) argued and presented evi-
dence that from the beginning of language acquisition children overtly ex-
press only the most informative elements of an utterance and subjects are
typically given information. More recently, in their work on preferred ar-
gument structure, both Allen and Schröder (2000) and Clancy (1993,
2000) have shown that pragmatic factors—essentially the degree to which
the subject is given in the immediate perceptual and/or discourse situa-
tion—predict very well (although not 100 percent) when subjects will be
left out. Allen (in press) emphasizes factors such as whether the refer-
ent is new to the discourse context, whether it is physically present,
whether there are competing potential referents in the context, whether
the referent is one of the speech participants or a third person or object,
and whether the referent is an object of joint attention at the moment of
the utterance.
None of these accounts has proven totally adequate to the task of pre-
dicting when children will and will not overtly express subjects in their ut-
terances. But there is no reason to believe that null subjects result from
only one factor. It seems likely that they result from the conºuence of a
number of factors on a given occasion of use. An important line of investi-
gation to help solve this mystery, therefore, might focus on why children
sometimes do not overtly express other kinds of arguments in their utter-
ances. In one such investigation focused on the verb eat (with which the
thing eaten is often not mentioned, as in I already ate), Rispoli (1992)
found that the most important factors were discourse-pragmatic factors
involving the grounding of the current utterance in the ongoing joint
attentional frame.
6.2.2. Tense and Aspect
To ground their clauses in the current joint attentional frame, speakers
must locate the symbolized state or event in time. Weist (1986), building
on Smith (1980), proposes four stages in children’s ability to linguistically
indicate the temporal ordering of events using tense marking in an adult-
like manner:
• Age 1;6: talk about events in the here and now only.
• Age 1;6 to 3;0: talk about the past and future.
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
217

• Age 3;0 to 4;6: begin to talk about past and future relative to a refer-
ence time other than now (typically indexed with adverbs such as
when).
• Age 4;6 and older: talk about past and future relative to a reference
time other than now using adult-like tensing system (typically verb
morphology).
The problem with this neat account is that the linguistic indication of
tense interacts in complex ways with the linguistic indication of aspect,
and it does this differently in different languages. Aspect comes in two
forms, both of which concern the way the temporal unfolding of the event
is construed. In lexical aspect (or situational aspect), which concerns the
meanings of verbs in clauses, the main distinction is between change of
state and activity verbs (roughly, telic and atelic). Change of state verbs-in-
clauses are used to refer to an event bounded by an endpoint (such as
swim the English Channel), whereas activity verbs-in-clauses are used to
refer to an event not so bounded (swim around). In grammatical aspect (or
viewpoint aspect), which concerns how one construes an event (be it telic
or atelic), the most basic distinction is whether the event is viewed from
the outside, as a completed whole (perfective), or from the inside as poten-
tially incomplete (imperfective; Comrie, 1976). In English, this manifests
itself in the difference between He swam (simple past; perfective), in which
the activity is complete, and He was swimming (past progressive;
imperfective), in which the activity is in process and incomplete at some
reference time.
ASPECT AND PAST TENSE
The best-known hypothesis about children’s ability to indicate temporal
relations in their early language is the Aspect Before Tense hypothesis. Be-
ginning with Antinucci and Miller (1976), Bronckardt and Sinclair
(1973), and Bloom, Lifter, and Haªtz (1980)—studying Italian, French,
and English, respectively—many researchers have noted that children tend
to use past tense most often with change of state (telic) verbs and present
tense (or present progressive) most often with activity (atelic) verbs. In the
strongest version of the Aspect Before Tense hypothesis, Antinucci and
Miller hypothesized that until about age 2;6 children use past tense only
for changes of state in which the end state is still perceptually present, and
indeed children at this age think that the past-tense marker actually indi-
cates that an event is bounded (telic) and completed (perfective), rather
than one that occurred in the past (independent of its telicity and
perfectiveness). Thus, the ªrst past-tense verbs are prototypically things
218
Constructing a Language

like dropped, spilled, and broke in which all of these things are con-
founded.
Antinucci and Miller attributed this pattern of use to children’s imma-
ture conception of time, and Bronckardt and Sinclair elaborated this view
in a Piagetian framework. However, this strictly cognitive explanation is
no longer held by anyone. This is because, ªrst of all, even before their sec-
ond birthdays many children do on some occasions clearly refer to past
situations with activity verbs that have no current perceptual manifesta-
tions (Gerhardt, 1988; see Behrens, 2001a, for a review). Second, in a
number of comprehension experiments in which children must choose the
picture that best depicts a present-tense, past-tense, or future-tense utter-
ance regardless of aspect, they perform well from a relatively early age
(e.g., see Weist et al., 1984, 1997, for Polish-speaking children, and
McShane and Whittaker, 1988, and Wagner, 2001, for English-speaking
children). And third, a number of studies have shown that children and
adults learning a second language use tense-aspect marking in the same bi-
ased way as young children, and they presumably are not cognitively im-
mature (see below).
Nevertheless, it is a fact that in basically all languages that have been
studied children much prefer to use the past tense for events construed as
telic and perfective, such as broke and made, and they much prefer to use
present tense (or progressive) for events construed as atelic and
imperfective, such as playing and riding. Thus, it is relatively rare to hear a
1-year-old or a young 2-year-old saying things like breaking or making,
played or rode. The languages for which this has been documented include
English, Italian, French, Polish, Portuguese, German, Japanese, Mandarin
Chinese, Hebrew, and Turkish (see Li and Shirai, 2000, for a review).
Quantitatively, in a diary study Clark (1996) found that between the ages
of 1;7 and 3;0 her son used the progressive -ing with activity verbs about
90 percent of the time and used the past tense -ed with the accomplish-
ment subclass of change of state verbs about 60 percent of the time.
Tomasello (1992a) found that an even higher percentage of -ed use oc-
curred with change of state verbs in general.
It turns out that one major reason children show this pattern is quite
straightforward: this is the pattern they hear in the language around them.
In a longitudinal study of Turkish-speaking children, Aksu-Koç (1988,
1998) found that mothers tend to use tense and aspect markers with cer-
tain kinds of verbs in basically the same pattern as the children, although
the children often show the pattern in more exaggerated form. Stephany
(1981) and Shirai (1998) reported some evidence this same pattern for, re-
spectively, Greek-speaking and Japanese-speaking mothers and children.
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
219

Shirai and Andersen (1995) reported the same result in an especially ex-
tensive study focused on three English-speaking children and their moth-
ers. In a study of these same three children, Shirai (1994) reported the only
correlations between speciªc mothers and their children in this linguistic
domain. The study was designed to further test Brown’s (1973) observa-
tion that the English progressive -ing is basically never used by young chil-
dren (or adults) with totally stative verbs (like have and love). Shirai found
that only one of the three children ever used the -ing ending with a totally
stative verb with any substantial frequency (3.1 percent of her progres-
sives). Most importantly, that child’s mother was the only one of the
mothers who showed this same use (3.6 percent of her progressives).
This mother and child said comparatively unusual things like “You’re be-
ing silly,” “I’m having trouble,” “I loving Georgie,” and “My tummy’s
hurting.”
All of these ªndings accord well with what Shirai and Andersen (1995)
call the Distributional Bias hypothesis, namely, that the distribution of
tense and aspect markers with particular classes of verbs in children’s
speech (as classiªed mainly by lexical aspect) follows the distribution the
children hear in the language around them. Li and Shirai (2000) note that
the distributional bias in adult speech to children—that is, the use of telics
and perfectives with past tense and the use of atelics and imperfectives
with present tense—has historical roots. In many languages past-tense
and/or perfective markers derive historically from words indicating
completive or resultative aspect, whereas imperfective, habitual (such as
the English present tense), and stative marking quite often derive from
progressive aspect. This pattern of grammaticalization is presumably evi-
dence of a strong association in discourse over historical time of these two
tense-aspect groupings (see Bybee, Perkins, and Pagliuca, 1994).
And so, once again what we see is an adult pattern in the use of gram-
matical words and morphemes that most often conºates and/or confounds
distinctions that the child will need to segregate if she is to attain adult-like
competence with these grammatical words and morphemes. Presumably
to make all the appropriate distinctions in the current case, the child needs
to hear and comprehend enough instances of activity verbs construed
imperfectively in the past tense, change of state verbs construed in the pro-
gressive aspect, and all other possible combinations. Only wide and varied
experience with many such patterns will provide the raw material neces-
sary for the child to segment and sort out which components of a given
verbal construction are being used to indicate which components of the
temporal proªle the speaker intends to indicate. As in the case of a nomi-
nal constructions with determiners—in which the child must sort out such
things as referent speciªcity and listener perspective, which are often con-
220
Constructing a Language

founded—it is no surprise that it takes children many years to do this, and
that it is easier to do in languages in which historical grammaticalization
patterns have led to fewer conºations and confoundings of these types
(Slobin, 1985, 1997).
FUTURE TENSE AND MODALITY
In many ways the future is more salient for young children than the past.
From a very early age young children anticipate upcoming events and indi-
cate this behaviorally and linguistically. But for children learning many
languages the grammatical marking of futurity lags behind grammatical
marking of the past. This does not seem to be due to some kind of perfor-
mance or pragmatic factors inºuencing production only, as children—at
least, English-speaking children—also comprehend grammatically en-
coded references to the future less well than those to the present and past.
In two simple experiments, Herriot (1969) asked young children to
choose the picture that best ªt with an adult utterance. He had children
choose between pictures depicting past, present, and future events, and
he used past-, present-, and future-tensed utterances to describe them.
The clear ªnding was that children struggled most with the future-tense
utterances.
In a series of comprehension experiments, Harner (1976, 1981) com-
pared preschool children’s comprehension of grammatically encoded ref-
erences to the immediate past and future (within minutes) to their compre-
hension of grammatically encoded references to the more remote past and
future (previous or next day). What she found was an asymmetry hinted at
by previous researchers such as Cromer (1971). Children comprehended
grammatically encoded references to the past equally well whether it was
the immediate past or the remote past. However, they comprehended
grammatically encoded references to the immediate future much better
than references to the remote future. This did not seem to be due to con-
ceptual difªculties, as in a control condition these same children were per-
fectly capable of understanding references to the remote future when these
were indicated by temporal adverbs in phrases such as The day after today
and The day after this day.
Harner (1981) explained the observed asymmetry in terms of the rather
uncertain status of the English future tense. Linguists such as Lyons (1968)
contend that the English future as expressed by the auxiliary will is as
much about modality as about futurity, and indeed the historical roots of
this word in acts of willing is apparent. Harner’s hypothesis was thus
something parallel to the Aspect Before Tense hypothesis for the past
tense; speciªcally, she contended that immediacy of impending action and
uncertainty about it are crucial components of the child’s interpretation of
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
221

the English will-future. She therefore claimed that what is most important
in sorting out which aspects of future situations are encoded by the auxil-
iary will is children’s acquisition of other modal auxiliaries (such as can,
may, should, wanna, gonna, hafta) that can be contrasted with it (perhaps
especially gonna, which competes with will for future reference). Consis-
tent with this interpretation (and inconsistent with a cognitive hypothesis
concerning children’s difªculties in conceptualizing the future), Kuczaj
and Daly (1979) found that it is easier for children to comprehend hypo-
thetical references in the future domain than in the past domain. In any
case, the domains of futurity and modality are obviously closely inter-
twined, and this is reºected in the grammaticalization patterns in many
languages (Bybee, Perkins, and Pagliuca, 1994) and in children’s acquisi-
tion and usage as well.
This interrelation between futurity and modality is even evident in chil-
dren’s patterns of usage with the two most common future-tense terms in
English: will and gonna. Gerhardt (1985; see also Gee and Savasir, 1985)
examined six English-speaking children’s uses of these two terms in play
interactions between the ages of 3;2 and 4;2. She found that will occurred
overwhelmingly (94 percent of the time) in utterances designed to effect
some kind of interpersonal coordination, for example, offers (“If you
want I’ll help you now”), requests (“Will you give it to me?”), and compli-
ance with requests (“OK. I’ll do it”). In contrast, gonna occurred most
often as a pronouncement of upcoming plans with only a minimal inter-
personal dimension (“I’m gonna leave now”), only about half of which
were ever carried out (as opposed to 90 percent for will utterances).
Gerhardt and Savasir (1986) give a similar analysis of the English present
tense, which, as is well known, does not simply indicate present activities
(since this is normally done with the present progressive). These investi-
gators found that most often 3-year-olds use the English present tense
to implicitly refer to some norm, for example, “This goes in there,”
“Dollies sleep in houses,” and “We put her shoes on” (so that she can go
outside).
Gerhardt (1985) argues that children’s understanding of the way modal
and future terms are used to indicate all kinds of non-actual events and
states of affairs (irrealis) is intimately bound up with the way these terms
are used to regulate interpersonal interactions (modality). Further evi-
dence for this view comes from a study by O’Neill and Atance (2000) con-
cerning 2- to 5-year-old children’s use of terms to express uncertainty.
They found that children ªrst used terms like maybe, probably, and might
in connection with future intentions (and some ongoing events). They did
not use these terms to express uncertainty with respect to future events
222
Constructing a Language

per se until considerably later in development, after 3 years of age in most
cases. And so, the major difªculty in learning future tense reference for
many children—certainly those learning English—is the intimate relation
between futurity and other forms of irrealis and modality.
DISPLACED TEMPORAL REFERENCE POINTS
Finally, of special difªculty are young children’s attempts to learn and use
constructions that require a reference time other than the current moment,
and to mark past and future with respect to this remote reference point.
This ability was investigated by Weist, Wysocka, and Lyytinen (1991) in a
study of American, Polish, and Finnish children. These children were
given a comprehension task in which they had to identify the appropriate
picture when hearing utterances like “The boy had already started the ªre
when his friend arrived.” These investigators found that children in all
three languages (with a slightly different pattern for the Finnish children)
were able to handle such complexities beginning at around age 4;6. They
argue that this result is best explained by general cognitive developments
in the understanding of time and in the ability to decenter from the here-
and-now. Their conclusion is based not only on the fact that the age of ac-
quisition was similar in three very different languages, which encode these
complex tense relations in very different ways, but also on the fact that
adult second-language learners of these and other languages (in spontane-
ous settings) show a different pattern of development. Adults learning a
second language often learn both temporal words such as when and com-
plex verb tenses such as the pluperfect to set remote reference times much
more quickly than young children (Weist, Wysocka, and Lyytinen cite
Meisel, 1987, and Buczowska, 1989).
Related to this are ªndings with the English present perfect, as
exempliªed in such utterances as I have seen that before and He has been
there before. This verb form is notoriously ill-deªned, with some contro-
versies over its status as a tense or aspect marker and other controversies
over its meaning—which is most often portrayed as “past time with cur-
rent relevance” (Slobin, 1996). Weist (1986) argues that because of this
dual allegiance to past and present, mastery of the English present perfect
also requires some coordination of a remote reference time and current
time. It is thus a relatively late acquisition for British English-speaking
children, and even later for American English-speaking children—perhaps
as late as 4 or 5 years of age, depending on one’s criterion of mastery
(Fletcher, 1981). However, interestingly, this form is used in Scottish Eng-
lish-speaking communities much more frequently than in other English-
speaking communities, and perhaps with a clearer contrast to the simple
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
223

past tense. The Scottish English-speaking children thus seem to acquire
productive control over this form well before their British and American
counterparts (Gathercole, 1986).
6.2.3.
MODALITY
Modality has to do with the speaker’s “attitude” toward the content of
what she is saying, including such things as obligation, necessity, permis-
sion, volition, intention, ability, possibility, and certainty. Although such
attitudes may sometimes be expressed in adjectives (likely, necessary), ad-
verbs (maybe, necessarily), and other forms, it is the grammaticized forms
that have received the most research attention. In many languages these
take the form of utterance-level moods such as imperative, subjunctive,
optative, and conditional. In English, the grammaticized forms comprise
most importantly the modal auxiliary verbs such as must, should, have to,
got to, may, might, can, and could. Syntactically, these verbs possess some
characteristics of main verbs and some characteristics of auxiliary verbs,
but as a class they are an extremely heterogeneous lot. Not even the most
ardent nativists, who often argue for the existence of innate linguistic cate-
gories, believe that the English modal auxiliaries form a coherent syntactic
class (Pinker, 1984). Children acquire them individually and piecemeal
(Lieven, submitted).
Classically, the two basic categories of modality are deontic and epis-
temic. Deontic modality concerns actions and is “necessity based.” The
question is whether one ought to, has to, can, may, will, or wants to do
something. According to Stephany (1993), this class of attitudes has its
ontogenetic origins prelinguistically in imperatives, typically expressed
through a demanding intonation. Epistemic modality, in contrast, con-
cerns knowledge and is “possibility based.” The question is whether
something is, must, might, could, or should be the case. Historically,
deontic modality typically emerges ªrst, and then that same form often ex-
pands to epistemic uses as well (Fleischman, 1982; Traugott, 1989;
Sweetser, 1990). For example, in English we may say that someone must
do something, to indicate our attitude about that action, but this same
modal verb may also be used to say that something must be the case, to in-
dicate our relative epistemic certainty.
In ontogeny, deontic expressions also emerge before epistemic expres-
sions, often by around the second birthday (Kuczaj and Maratsos, 1975;
Bassano, 1996). Young children are very concerned with what they and
others can, must, will, and want to do (Fletcher, 1985). In English, among
the earliest modal expressions are the semi-grammaticized wanna, gonna,
224
Constructing a Language

hafta, and needta. Gerhardt (1991) analyzes these as originating from no-
tions of external compulsion (hafta), internal compulsion (needta), or in-
ternal volition/intention (wanna, gonna). As noted in the previous section,
both will and gonna as the major future tense markers in English are inti-
mately bound up with the other modal expressions, as they express voli-
tion and intention as much as futurity. Also important early on are can,
can’t, and don’t, as requests about and expressions of permissions and
wishes (and, to a lesser degree, ability). Similar notions are, for the most
part, expressed in one way or another in most of the world’s languages
very early in language development.
The ªrst epistemic attitudes to be expressed in English come out in the
use of cognitive verbs in expressions such as I think . . ., I guess . . ., I
know . . ., I bet . . ., and I wish . . ., typically around the third birthday (see
Chapter 7). Use of the modal auxiliaries to say, for example, that some-
thing must be the case or should be the case is a relatively late develop-
ment for English-speaking children, typically not before the fourth birth-
day (at least partially because children hear these very rarely; Stephany,
1993). In other languages, however, various kinds of epistemic modality
are encoded in ways that children ªnd more salient and easier to learn. For
example, Korean has obligatory verbal sufªxes that encode various
epistemic distinctions. Choi (1991) found that the three children she stud-
ied began to acquire these markers soon after their second birthdays: the
marker for new information appeared ªrst, then the marker for old infor-
mation, then the marker for certainty, and ªnally the marker for indirectly
acquired information. What this means, of course, is that children are
cognitively capable of acquiring forms for making some epistemic distinc-
tions fairly early, if these forms and their functions are of the right type
(see also Aksu-Koç and Slobin, 1986, on Turkish).
As in many other domains of child language, however, experimental
studies of comprehension—in which children do not get to choose what
they will talk about but must talk about situations experimenters con-
trive—indicate that it takes some years for children to master all the sub-
tleties of modal expressions. Hirst and Weil (1982) assessed the ability of
3- to 6-year-old English-speaking children to make strength comparisons
among different modal expressions. In the deontic domain, an experi-
menter gave them instructions about how to manipulate a doll; in doing
this she used the words must, may, and should (“You should hold it like
this”). In the epistemic domain, an experimenter gave them instructions
about where to ªnd an object; in doing this she used the words is, may,
should, and must (“It should be behind there”). In both domains, it was
not until children were 5 to 6 years old that they could discriminate the
different degrees of force indicated by these different terms. Noveck, Ho,
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
225

and Sera (1996) basically replicated these results. Using a slightly different
set of modal terms, chosen to be more familiar to younger children (and
including negatives like “It can’t be under the cup”), Byrnes and Duff
(1989) found English-speaking children to be competent about one year
earlier than this, at about 4 or 5. As might be expected, both of these stud-
ies found that children could most easily discriminate expressions that dif-
fered the most in strength. In a similar ªnding, Bascelli and Barbieri
(2002) reported that it was not until they were 5 to 6 years old that Ital-
ian-speaking children clearly differentiated the different meanings of
dovere (must) and potere (may). In the deontic domain this meant that
they had trouble differentiating obligation from permission, while in the
epistemic domain it meant that they had trouble differentiating certainty
from possibility.
There are only two systematic studies of older children involving much
subtler modal distinctions. First, Piéraut-Le Bonniec (1980) performed a
series of experiments using a variety of modal terms (with children having
to indicate which of two perceptible situations best ªt the sentence they
heard) and found that it was not until children were well into school-age
that they discriminated different types of obligation and different types of
certainty (It may be in there, It must be in there, It should be in there, It
can’t be in there, and so on). Second, Coates (1988) had children sort
cards containing many different modal terms into piles of similar terms
(including must, have to, should, ought, will, shall, gonna, intend, could,
can, able to, allowed to, may, might, possible, and probable). She found
that 8-year-olds had great difªculty in putting together similar terms and
even 12-year-olds did not show adult-like competence.
NEGATION
Negation could be considered a modality, as it clearly reºects a speaker at-
titude. But it is normally treated separately, mainly because it serves so
many different functions and comes in so many different forms.
From a functional point of view, Bloom (1970) distinguished three
kinds of negation that emerge early in development: rejection (for exam-
ple, No! to refuse an offered piece of food), nonexistence (No juice to
comment on an empty bottle), and denial (No to answer a question).
These three functions seem to emerge early in all languages that have been
carefully studied, although some researchers have subdivided some of
Bloom’s categories and added others. For example, Vaidyanathan (1991)
studied early negation in two children acquiring Tamil (one of the major
languages of India). He added to the list the category prohibition (Don’t
do that!) and found that the functions emerged in the order: rejection,
226
Constructing a Language

nonexistence, prohibition, and denial (see also Tam and Stokes, 2001, on
Cantonese).
In the largest cross-linguistic study of the development of negation,
Choi (1988) studied two English-speaking, ªve French-speaking, and four
Korean-speaking children between the ages of 1;7 and 3;4. In order to ac-
count for all the different functions observed in these languages, she differ-
entiated Bloom’s three categories into nine categories. Her most general
ªnding was that the functions of negation emerged in three phases:
• Phase 1: nonexistence, prohibition, rejection, failure (It won’t go).
• Phase 2: denial, inability (I can’t), epistemic negation (I don’t know).
• Phase 3: normative negation (We don’t do that), inferential negation
(Maybe not).
Although there were differences across the three languages, in general chil-
dren had some competence in Phase 1 before their second birthday, com-
petence in Phase 2 soon after their second birthday, and competence in
Phase 3 in the months preceding their third birthday. Choi also docu-
mented in detail the forms used in each of the three languages, and these
are displayed in Table 6.1.
It is always possible in studies of spontaneous speech that linguistic
forms or functions are emerging in a particular order either because of the
language children are hearing or because of the pragmatic functions that
arise and need to be communicated about in the daily lives of young chil-
dren. Therefore, Hummer, Wimmer, and Antes (1993; building on the
work of Pea, 1982) used an elicitation task with the speciªc goal of inves-
tigating young children’s understanding of denial. It is well known that
young children in all languages often answer yes/no questions with Yes in-
discriminately. This may be because they do not understand the notion of
a proposition and its denial or it may be because they have simply learned
that questions of this type need some kind of answer, and so they are em-
ploying a generic discourse strategy just to take their turn. To investigate
these possibilities, Hummer, Wimmer, and Antes (1993) asked 48 Ger-
man-speaking children from 1;1 to 2;7 a series of yes/no questions de-
signed to be extremely simple; for example, they held up a picture of a dog
and asked “Is this a cat?” They found that young 1-year-olds were basi-
cally clueless, with only 3 of 16 children producing a single nein response
correctly (out of a possible four). In contrast, children at around 2;6 were
very good, with 14 of 16 children answering correctly on either three or
four questions. The children in the middle, at around 2;0, were more
mixed, with no child answering correctly on all four questions, but with
most children answering correctly two or three times, with a number of in-
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
227

correct yes responses (and other responses) mixed in. Hummer, Wimmer,
and Antes use these data to argue that the denial function of negation
emerges only gradually from the earlier negation functions.
The syntactic forms of early negation are many and various, ranging
from the simple No! (and its equivalent in other languages) to a variety of
complex syntactic constructions—many of which can be seen in Table 6.1.
Klima and Bellugi (1966; see also Brown, 1973) identiªed the syntactic
phenomenon in children’s early negation that has captured the most re-
search attention. In a number of different languages an early form of syn-
tactic negation involves placing a negative word or particle at the begin-
ning of an utterance, even in constructions in which the negative word or
particle should be internal. It is thus relatively common to observe things
228
Constructing a Language
Table 6.1
Development of forms and functions of negations in English, French, and Korean.
Age
MLU
Nonexistence
Prohibition
Rejection
English
1;7–2;3
1.2–1.8
allgone
no
2;1–2;10
1.8–1.9
allgone
no
no
no N 
no V
I don’t want to
2;5–3;6
2.9–3.6
allgone
no
no
no N
don’t V
I don’t want to
you can’t V
French
1;11–2;7
1–1.9
parti
non
a plus
pas là, pas ça
1;11–2;11
1.7–2.5
parti
non
non
y a pas
pas V
pas X
je veux pas
2;5–3;6
2.5–3.5
y a pas
non
non
il y en a plus
V pas
pas ça
ça va pas
Korean
1;7–2;1
1–1.9
epta
i(:)ng
an twae
, ani
1;11–2;9
1.6–2.9
epta
ani
ani
V-ci ma
an V
an twae
2;9–3;3
3.1–4.5
epta
an twae
ani
V-ci ma
an V
sile
Source: Adapted from Choi (1988). Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press.

like “No Nathaniel a king,” “No Mommy do it,” and “No the sun is shin-
ing” (see McNeill and McNeill, 1968; Wode, 1977; on Japanese, German,
and other languages). The claim of Klima and Bellugi and others has been
that children are attempting to say what an adult would say with an utter-
ance-internal not, for instance, “The sun is not shining,” and utterances
such as these are mistakes, child inventions, incorrect grammar. Bloom
(1970) rejected this account, pointing out that many of these utterances
are instances of a so-called anaphoric negation, on a model with a dis-
course sequence such as: (Mother) “Do you want an apple?” (Child) “No,
I want a pear.” The child is just not pausing after the word no in the same
way as an adult. Wode (1977) hypothesized that children, in a sense, over-
extend this anaphoric negation illegitimately and thus produce utterances
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
229
Table 6.1 (continued)
Failure
Denial
Inability
Epistemic
Normative
Inferential
(it) can’t
no
(I) can’t
I don’t know
not ªt
not X
doesn’t V
(it) can’t
no
I can’t
I don’t know
can’t
not X
won’t
not X
AUX n’t
AUX n’t
non
non
pas arrive
(sais) pas
pas ici
pas X
non
non
je peux pas
je sais pas
faut pas
V pas
pas ça
pas X
j’arrive pas
ça va pas
ani
ani
N ani
an V
an twae
ani
mot V
molla
ninke ani
an V
N ani
an V

with inappropriate sentence external negation (see Park, 1979, for a dif-
ferent view).
However, examination of the discourse contexts of these utterances in-
dicates that Bloom’s analysis can only account for some utterances of this
type. An interesting new analysis has thus recently been proposed by
Drodz (1995). In this analysis, children are doing something similar to
anaphoric negation, but importantly different as well. The claim is that
children are essentially denying a proposition just put forth by their inter-
locutor, on analogy with an adult saying something like No way the sun is
shining. This is so-called exclamatory negation. As evidence for his analy-
sis Drodz cites the fact that sentence-external negation is actually quite
rare (though highly noticeable) in children’s speech, as is exclamatory ne-
gation. Moreover, in a new analysis of a number of English-speaking pre-
schoolers’ discourse with their mothers, it was found that almost all of
children’s
sentence
external
negations
served
as
objections
and/or
rectiªcations of the mother’s immediately preceding utterance. Indeed,
many of them actually incorporated the majority of the mother’s previous
utterance in the reply. An example of this echoic characteristic would be:
(Mother) “The cat is on the mat.” (Child) “No the cat is on the mat.” Im-
portantly, children’s utterances with sentence-internal negation at this
same (and immediately following) time are used for different functions, es-
pecially nonexistence and rejection, and are not typically echoic.
6.2.4. Integrating Constructions
One of the more difªcult problems in adult linguistics is ªnding a uniªed
account of how speakers integrate their tense-aspect-modality (TAM)
marking with particular utterance-level constructions, since this marking
is realized in different ways in different constructions. For example, yes/no
questions in English begin with an auxiliary verb that carries such things
as tense and agreement marking, whereas simple indicative utterances in
the present or past tense carry tense and agreement on the lexical verb,
which occurs after the subject. The traditional approach is to try to ªnd a
single abstract account explaining how language users do this across the
board. Another possible approach is a radical construction grammar per-
spective in which TAM marking has some unity across utterance-level
constructions but is also speciªed in different ways in these different con-
structions—and this is part of the deªnition of the construction (see Croft,
2001).
In theories of acquisition the issue is quite clear. Generative grammar
accounts posit a functional category Inºectional Phrase (IP) that either is
innately speciªed at birth or else matures at around the second birthday
230
Constructing a Language

(e.g., Rice, Wexler, and Hershberger, 1998; Radford, 1990). The predic-
tion is that all of the grammatical inºections that are part of IP, including
those for tense and agreement, should emerge at the same time in develop-
ment, and they should be immediately productive across all of the lexical
items with which they are used. But when these predictions are speciªcally
tested, they do not hold up. Wilson (in press) investigated this hypothesis
in the spontaneous speech of ªve English-speaking children. He looked at
their acquisition of three elements that instantiate IP: the copula be, the
auxiliary be, and third-person singular agreement (-s). On the basis of this
analysis, Wilson concluded that “for each child the relative pace of devel-
opment of the three morphemes studied varies signiªcantly, suggesting
that these morphemes do not depend on a unitary underlying category”
(from abstract). These ªndings are generally consistent with similar ªnd-
ings from investigators studying other languages that are much more
richly inºected than English, such as Italian (Pizzuto and Caselli, 1992,
1994), Polish (Dabrowska, 2000), and Portuguese (Rubino and Pine,
1998). It is also important that when one very speciªc version of this theo-
retical approach—Schuetze and Wexler’s (1996) agreement/tense omission
model—is tested in a different way, by examining the errors that children
do and do not make with tense and agreement, again the generative gram-
mar predictions are not upheld (Pine et al., submitted).
On the other hand, no one has yet proposed a comprehensive account
from a usage-based or construction grammar perspective of how children
integrate TAM marking with their utterance-level constructions. But pre-
sumably such an account would focus, especially early in development, on
the speciªc lexical and grammatical items involved as well as on the
speciªc utterance-level constructions involved. For example, one proposal
might be that children learn to do their TAM marking in yes/no questions
basically independently of the way they do this in their other construc-
tions—at least initially. Thus, children would ªrst learn a few dozen pair-
ings (and the kinds of things that follow them) of the following kind: Are
you, Shall we, Don’t you, Did you, Is it, Have you, Can you. Gradually,
patterns would emerge from this piecemeal learning that would allow chil-
dren to do their TAM marking productively in yes/no questions, even with
novel verbs. But at the beginning there would not be generalizations from
this marking to the TAM markings in other constructions. For example, in
their wh-questions children would be learning such pairs as: Where’s,
Where are, What’s, What does, How can, How do, When can, Why does,
Why is (and the kinds of things that follow them). Whether and to what
degree children make construction-general generalizations about TAM
marking at older ages is at this point an open question.
The predictions of these two competing accounts of TAM marking are
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
231

thus very clear, and what little empirical work there is at the moment
seems to favor the usage-based approach in which children begin with
item-speciªc and construction-speciªc learning. The one empirical study
which favors a generative grammar account (Rice, Wexler, and Hersh-
berger, 1998) reported that the average age of emergence of children’s
inºections in IP (as opposed to other inºections) were quite similar. But
these investigators did not report data for individual children, and so it is
impossible to tell how many, if any, individual children actually showed
the predicted developmental synchrony.
6.3. Learning Morphology
The need to ground nominals and clauses in the ongoing speech event is
present constantly. Although there are major differences among languages,
these constant communicative pressures have led in many cases to the
grammaticalization of forms for effecting these functions, and recurrent
functions other than grounding may also lead to the creation of grammati-
cal morphology (for example, plurals and case marking). From the point
of view of learning and generalization, grammatical morphology displays
a number of interesting properties. Among these is the fact that children
sometimes overregularize grammatical morphemes, which has put them in
the center of some major theoretical debates about the nature of cognitive
representation in general. In addition, because they are often not very sa-
lient in the speech stream—and perhaps for other reasons such as their
plurifunctionality in many cases—second-language learners and children
with speciªc language impairment often have special problems with gram-
matical morphemes.
6.3.1. The English Past Tense
One of the most intriguing phenomena of child language acquisition is
U-shaped developmental growth. That is, in some cases children seem to
learn the conventional adult way of saying things early in development,
but then become worse as they get older, saying such things as mans, feets,
comed, sticked, and putted—returning only later to the conventional adult
forms. The traditional interpretation of this developmental pattern is that
early on children learn, for example, the past-tense form came by rote as
an individual lexical item; later they learn to use the regular past-tense
morpheme -ed and apply it whenever they want to refer to the past (some-
times inappropriately, as in comed); and ªnally, before school age, they
learn that there are exceptions to the general rule and display adult-like
competence (Kuczaj, 1977; Bowerman, 1982). U-shaped developmental
232
Constructing a Language

growth is thus intriguing because it seems to signal changes in underlying
linguistic representations and processes.
Perhaps ironically, given that English is a morphologically impoverished
language, the grammatical morpheme that has been studied most inten-
sively in this regard is the English past tense -ed. Children seem to
overgeneralize the use of this morpheme relatively frequently (although
exactly how frequently is a matter of debate; see below), at least partly be-
cause of the distribution of -ed in the language they hear. Of the 30 verbs
that English-speaking children hear most frequently, 22 are irregular and
do not take -ed to form the past tense (often they employ a stem change as
in come-came and bring-brought—there are about a dozen subclasses;
Bybee, 1995). The vast majority of tokens of past-tense verbs that children
hear in English utterances are thus also irregular, by some estimates by a
margin of 3 to 1 over regulars. Of the 30 verbs that English-speaking chil-
dren hear next most frequently (ranks 31–60), 22 are regular, with verbs
that take the regular -ed past tense outnumbering irregulars in speech to
children by about 3 to 1. What this means is that children at the beginning
have little evidence for the regular pattern, but as they learn more verbs
evidence for the pattern becomes clearer and clearer. Children who
overgeneralize the -ed past tense typically do so after they have learned
about 100 verbs (Bybee and Slobin, 1982).
The largest and most systematic study of children’s acquisition of the
English past tense was conducted by Marcus et al. (1992). They examined
written transcripts of 83 English-speaking preschool-aged children and
found that overgeneralization errors were relatively rare proportionally
(2.5 percent of irregular tokens produced had, inappropriately, the -ed),
and that they occurred at this same low rate throughout the preschool pe-
riod. Typically, for a given verb children produced the correct past-tense
form before they produced the overgeneralized form, and they made the
overgeneralization error least often with the irregular verbs they heard
most often in parental speech. For a particular child’s use of a particular
verb, there was sometimes a relatively extended period (weeks to months)
in which the correct form and the overgeneralized form coexisted.
Marcus et al. explain these results with one form of a dual process
model. Children acquire the irregular forms by rote learning, but they ac-
quire the regular forms by establishing a rule. Rote learning is subject to
all the parameters of “normal” learning, such as the effects of frequency
and similarity among exemplars; rule learning is impervious to these ef-
fects. (The existence of these different processes is supposed to be of great
theoretical signiªcance, since they conªrm the existence of rule-based cog-
nitive representations that are not subject to the “normal” laws of learn-
ing; Pinker, 1991, 1999). But the speciªcs of English past-tense acquisition
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
233

clearly do not ªt this neat picture; children sometimes misapply the rule
(overgeneralize), even in some cases using both correct and incorrect
forms during the same developmental period. Marcus et al. explain these
anomalies by invoking in addition the principle of preemption (what they
call the uniqueness principle or blocking) and some factors that affect its
application. The basic idea is that the regular rule applies whenever it is
not blocked (that is, it is a default rule). This means that when children
have an irregular form (such as sang) it blocks application of the regular
-ed rule, but when they do not have such a form they might reasonably
produce singed. The problem with this account, of course, is the ªnding
that children often use both the correct and overgeneralized forms at the
same time. Marcus et al. deal with this empirical problem by hypothesiz-
ing that blocking sometimes does not work as it is supposed to, basically
because of “performance errors.” Lexical retrieval is probabilistic and fre-
quency dependent; children sometimes have trouble retrieving infrequent
irregular forms and so the rule gets applied simply because it is not prop-
erly blocked.
Recently, however, some aspects of this account have been called into
question. Maratsos (2000) points out that the error rate reported by
Marcus et al. (1992) was computed by pooling all verbs together, and con-
sequently very high-frequency verbs statistically swamped out low-
frequency verbs. Indeed, verbs that appeared infrequently for a given child
(fewer than 10 times) were excluded from some analyses altogether. Thus,
for example, one child produced 285 past tenses for the verb say, with a
very low error rate of 1 percent. This same child, however, produced 40
different verbs fewer than 10 times each (155 tokens in all). The over-
generalization error rate for these individual verbs was 58 percent. But be-
cause of their low token frequency, all of these verbs together contributed
less to the computation of the overall error rate than the verb say by itself.
In addition, Maratsos points out that many individual verbs used by indi-
vidual children are used in both correct and overgeneralized forms for a
period of many months (in a few cases years), which could only happen in
the rule-plus-blocking account if the child experienced persistent and long-
lived retrieval problems of a type Marcus et al. do not discuss.
Maratsos’ alternative account is based on the notion of competition—a
weaker, frequency-based kind of preemption (see Section 5.3.2). In this ac-
count children can produce past-tense forms either by rote or by rule, and
there may be a period in which they produce both for a given verb. The
winner of the competition will be determined eventually by the form the
child hears most often in the speech around her (and perhaps by other fac-
tors); that is, the most frequent form comes gradually to block the less fre-
quent form, regardless of which is “regular” or “irregular.” This is in con-
234
Constructing a Language

trast to the Marcus et al. account in which there is an asymmetry between
regulars and irregulars—the regular does not even need to be heard a sin-
gle time to “win,” since it is a default—and the only role for frequency is
as a performance factor that interferes with the normal mechanism.
6.3.2. The German Plural and Other “Defaults”
A number of researchers have pointed out that the English past tense is not
representative of the way morphology works in the majority of cases in
the majority of languages of the world, and it is thus a decidedly poor
choice for comparing different theories of morphological acquisition. Al-
though it does represent a relatively common pattern cross-linguistically,
there are many other patterns that children have to learn as well, and
many of these do not confound factors like the English past tense. Most
importantly: (1) the English past tense has only one truly productive form
(-ed, although with three allomorphs), with all the other patterns compris-
ing only a few verbs and being relatively nonproductive; (2) the productive
form is a sufªx, which can be afªxed to many different kinds of stems,
whereas the irregular forms are typically stem changes, none of which has
the potential to apply very widely (since they are so strongly phonologi-
cally conditioned: sing-sang, ring-rang); (3) the regular form -ed has a high
type frequency (favoring rule formation), whereas each irregular form has
a high token frequency (favoring rote learning). Two other morphological
markers that have similar drawbacks are the English plural (Marcus,
1995) and the German past participle (Marcus et al., 1995), if frequency is
counted correctly (see Bybee, 1995).
From a theoretical point of view, therefore, it has come to be recognized
that an especially interesting case is the German plural. The plural in Ger-
man can be marked by one of ªve sufªxes (-n, -e, -er, -ø, -s), some of which
may also be accompanied by stem changes to produce eight different
forms. Of crucial importance theoretically are the following facts: (1)
many of the eight forms are relatively productive; (2) many of the eight
forms operate by sufªxation; and (3) the form that is least phonologically
restricted (-s) is relatively infrequent but still applies in all kinds of “emer-
gency” situations such as loan words from other languages, proper names,
onomatopoeic words, and acronyms. Despite these obvious differences to
the English past tense, Marcus et al. (1995) have claimed that the German
plural works in an identical manner: there is one regular form, learned by
rule, and many irregular forms, learned by rote. Even though it is rela-
tively infrequent, the regular form is hypothesized to be -s because it ap-
plies in such a wide variety of phonological contexts (a so-called minority
default). The German plural is thus especially important theoretically be-
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
235

cause one of the main claims of the dual process account is that type fre-
quency (in this case the number of different nouns used with each ending)
does not determine the regular rule; what determines the rule is only its de-
fault status (see, e.g., Clahsen, 1999).
In the dual process account, only the rule-based form -s should be truly
productive for German-speaking children (although they may ªnd local
analogies among some of the irregular forms). But the facts of German ac-
quisition do not bear this out. First, young children overgeneralize virtu-
ally all of their plural markers, and the most frequent overgeneralization is
the form -n, not -s (Clahsen et al., 1992; Ewers, 1999; Köpcke, 1998). Sec-
ond, the nouns to which children overgeneralize -s are not a default group,
but rather they are a predictable subset of phonologically similar words
(mainly those ending in liquid or nasal sounds; Köpcke, 1998; Behrens,
2001b). Third, in experiments with nonce nouns, adult German speakers
most often use -n and in general supply plurals based on properties of the
stem such as -n with monosyllabic feminine nouns or feminines ending in
a schwa or -e with masculine monosyllabic nouns (Köpcke, 1988).
Clahsen et al. (1992) attempted to deal with these inconsistencies by posit-
ing that young children initially surmise incorrectly that -n is the default
plural before correcting themselves later. But there is no evidence for this
proposal, and no one has proposed a process by which children could re-
set the rule (reassign default status) after it has been incorrectly assigned
(Behrens and Tomasello, 1999). On the basis of her especially detailed and
thorough analysis of one child’s earliest overgeneralizations with the Ger-
man plural, Behrens (2001b: 24) concludes:
The proposed distinction between “regular” -s . . . and stored irregular forms
does not capture the productivity of the German plural system . . . The child
studied here quickly identiªes the full set of German plural markers and
overgeneralizes all of them . . . The overall low error rate in this period (3.2
percent) hides subgroup effects: some plural classes are virtually error free,
others show peaks of up to 40 percent errors in a given biweekly period. Such
variability in the error markers, and such selectivity in which nouns are af-
fected by errors are incompatible with a blocking and retrieval process as
proposed in the Dual Mechanism Model . . . Instead, the error patterns ob-
served are compatible with standard analyses of the German plural system as
well as learning accounts that predict that children will generalize based on
the distributional properties of the target system.
An interesting additional case that has recently come to light is the Pol-
ish genitive. There are three genitive endings in Polish, and their distribu-
tion is conditioned by gender and, in the case of masculine nouns, by a
host of semantic, morphological, and phonological factors. There is no
single ending which functions as a default for the class of nouns as a whole
236
Constructing a Language

or for masculine nouns, although feminine and neuter nouns can be con-
sidered to have a default. Thus, the Polish genitive allows us to compare
the acquisition of two subsystems which have a default ending (like Eng-
lish past tense) and one which does not (like German plurals). Dabrowska
(2001) examined transcripts from three Polish-speaking children to see if
there were any differences in the way these children treated these endings,
especially with regard to overgeneralizations. Overall, she found that the
children acquired all three inºections very early, before age 2, and made
few errors. Moreover, most errors involved overgeneralization not of any
defaults but rather of the two “irregular” masculine endings (completely
contrary to the predictions of the dual process model); and the more fre-
quent of the two irregular endings was also overgeneralized more fre-
quently. This ªnding is theoretically important because it represents a case
in which children are not presented with a pattern of input suggesting any
kind of default form, and yet they have no particular acquisition
difªculties and they do not seem inclined to try to impose a default form.
6.3.3. Single Process and Dual Process Models
Perhaps surprisingly, the debate over how tiny children learn tiny morpho-
logical markers has taken on epic proportions in cognitive science in gen-
eral. A little history explains why. As noted throughout this book, in clas-
sic structuralist accounts, language acquisition consists in the learning of
meaningful words plus empty rules for inºecting and combining them.
Rumelhart and McClelland (1986) attempted to undermine this view by
creating a computer program (connectionist model) that seemed to learn
the English past tense and that also, over time, seemed to successfully
model the well-known U-shaped developmental pattern. It did this with-
out instantiating any abstract rules; it worked only on exemplars and used
basic learning principles sensitive to both frequency and similarity. The
model was criticized for various shortcomings, especially the need for re-
searchers to feed it exemplars in a particular way (Pinker and Prince,
1988), and other researchers then created improved models (e.g., Plunkett
and Marchman, 1991, 1993).
The success of these revised models led their detractors to formulate the
dual process view, in which children learn irregular morphology in a man-
ner similar to that proposed by the connectionists, but regular morphol-
ogy is different because it participates in some way in the innate and ab-
stract rule system of universal grammar. Arguments for the dual process
view thus focus on differences between the ways regular and irregular
morphology are learned. Of central importance is the claim that the rule-
based process is insensitive to all the factors that affect the learning and
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
237

use of the items not participating in the rule. These include most impor-
tantly (1) frequency (the token frequency of a given morpheme and the
type frequency of the morpheme in terms of the number of different items
with which is used); and (2) semantic and phonological similarity among
exemplars. In the dual process view, then, rule-based items are acquired in
a manner totally insensitive to semantic and phonological similarity
among items and to type and token frequency, whereas the learning of ir-
regulars is sensitive to all of these factors. The hypothesized existence of
these rule-based cognitive representations is thus taken as evidence that
large parts of human cognition consist of abstract, formal representations,
not connectionist networks involving no forms of cognitive representation
at all (other than weighted nodes reºecting their history with individual
exemplars). This is why the debate extends well beyond issues of child lan-
guage acquisition.
The empirical problem is that the data of child language do not provide
evidence for two separate processes, and the invocation of such things as
performance factors and children misidentifying the default rule do not
rectify matters adequately. Moreover, there is no satisfactory model of
how children recognize the regular or default form in a morphological
paradigm, given that no single cue or set of cues is invariably associated
with it cross-linguistically (a morphological version of the linking prob-
lem; see Bybee, 1995; Behrens and Tomasello, 1999). Consequently, Bybee
(1985, 1995) proposes a single process model. It accounts quite well not
only for the data of child language acquisition but also for those of histori-
cal language change. The model shares much with connectionist models—
most importantly in its rejection of the notion of symbolic rules that are
immune to inºuences from normal learning processes—but it differs by
positing that on the basis of their linguistic experience children build up
abstract schemas that underlie their productivity. The nature of these
schemas is always closely tied to the exemplars it embodies and the learn-
ing processes by which it was formed—but it is still abstract in a way not
normally recognized in connectionist accounts. More speciªcally, the
model posits that words enter the child’s lexicon with a certain strength
based on token frequency. High token frequency (strength) of an item (for
example, was as a past tense) enables it to resist assimilation to any gener-
alized schema. Words similar in semantic and/or phonological form clus-
ter into schemas. The productivity of a schema is a function of (1) the sim-
ilarity among its exemplars (such as in terms of semantic or phonological
properties); and (2) its type frequency in terms of the number of different
lexemes with which it has been used.
Thus, in Bybee’s view, the German plural -s is a quite open schema in
the sense of having relatively lax phonological restrictions, but it is not so
238
Constructing a Language

productive because it is used with only a restricted set of nouns (that is, it
has low type frequency). The German -s plural is thus a “default” mor-
pheme, in the sense that it has few restrictions, but it has all of the ear-
marks of a learned schema—its productivity is conditioned by phonologi-
cal similarity and type frequency—and none of the earmarks of abstract
rules which are supposed to be immune to these factors. The English past
tense -ed is an interestingly different case, as it not only is quite open pho-
nologically and semantically but also is used with very high type frequency
(and the irregulars do not impinge on it because they are very strong as in-
dividual lexical items owing to their high token frequency). These factors
make it much more productive than morphemes such as the German -s
plural that are used by default but with low type frequency, and so Bybee
calls patterns of the English -ed type not just default but “regular.”
Empirically, there is no evidence that morphemes of any type—default,
regular, or otherwise—participate in anything other than normal pro-
cesses of language learning. Theoretically, the Bybee model needs just one
set of language learning processes, and thus has no need for an extra set of
highly abstract, content-free abstract rules—nor, therefore, for extra
blocking mechanisms to keep these abstract rules from applying too
widely. It would thus seem that on both these grounds, the Bybee single
process model—like the single process account of syntactic development—
is to be preferred.
6.3.4. Morphology as “Weak Link”
In general, the acquisition of productive systems of grammatical morphol-
ogy in natural languages is extremely difªcult. According to Klein and
Perdue (1997), most adult second-language learners, especially those
learning in more natural settings outside the classroom, develop what
these authors call the basic variety of a language. This consists of lexical
items combined in syntactic constructions, but typically with only one
morphological form of each word. Similarly, McWhorter (1998) argues
and presents evidence that one of the distinguishing characteristics of pid-
gin and Creole languages (typically new languages created under unusual
situations of language contact) is their relatively impoverished systems of
grammatical morphology. It is also well known that one of the major diag-
nostic features of children with speciªc language impairment is their rela-
tively poor mastery of the grammatical morphemes in their language
(Leonard, 1998; Bishop, 1997). Finally, when perfectly competent adult
speakers of a language are put under various kinds of processing pressure
as they listen to a story—as when the spoken language describing the story
is distorted by white noise or subjects must perform a distracting task
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
239

while listening—what falls apart most readily in subsequent tests of reten-
tion is the grammatical morphology (Dick et al., 2001).
The basic reasons that grammatical morphology is an especially weak
link in the language learning process are three. First, it is typically ex-
pressed in phonologically reduced, unstressed, monosyllabic bits in the in-
terstices of utterances and constructions. Second, in some though by no
means all cases, it carries very little concrete semantic weight, for example,
the English third-person -s agreement marker is in most cases almost to-
tally semantically redundant; and indeed research with children with
speciªc language impairment has shown that greater semantic weight in-
deed facilitates children’s acquisition of a grammatical morpheme (Leon-
ard, 1998; Bishop, 1997). Third, as is apparent in many of the analyses of
this chapter, many grammatical morphemes are plurifunctional in ways
that make acquisition of the full range of uses in appropriate contexts ex-
tremely difªcult. Perhaps for all of these reasons, Farrar (1990, 1992)
found that children’s acquisition of some particular grammatical mor-
phemes in English (such as past tense -ed, plural -s, progressive -ing) was
facilitated when mothers used these morphemes in immediate recasts of
the child’s utterances that were missing them. Recasts are well known to
help children identify elements with low salience since they provide the
child with an immediate comparison of her own immature utterance and
the corresponding full adult form with full morphology (K. E. Nelson,
1986).
The acquisition of grammatical morphology thus presents something of
a paradox. As was outlined in Chapter 4, grammatical morphemes quite
often provide “local cues” that children ªnd it relatively easy to relate to
their functions—all other things being equal—since the morpheme occurs
close to the place where it does its work. But with grammatical mor-
phemes, all other things are seldom equal. Their acquisition is problema-
tized by processing issues (lack of perceptual salience), semantic issues
(lack of communicative weight), and plurifunctionality (low cue validity in
the sense that they signal multiple functions, as in the English deªnite arti-
cle signaling both semantic speciªcity and pragmatic givenness—not to
mention cases such as German noun endings that signal all in one form
case, gender, and number). The acquisition of grammatical morphology
thus brings into focus many of the most basic processes of language acqui-
sition, often in conºicting ways. Also, since only certain forms are
grammaticized historically—typically ones that serve functions or bundles
of functions that recur repeatedly—and since any morpheme that was sim-
ply too complex to learn would not last more than one generation, the ac-
quisition of grammatical morphology should be an excellent locus for the
240
Constructing a Language

study of the interaction between historical language change and child lan-
guage acquisition.
6.4. Summary
In this chapter I have described some of the processes by means of which
young children make reference to things in the world and predicate things
about them. The main point is that in referring and predicating speakers
must always make sure that the symbols and constructions they use are
tailored, more or less precisely, to the communicative needs of their lis-
tener in the current joint attentional frame—mainly in terms of her current
knowledge and expectations. Languages have many different kinds of con-
ventional means for accomplishing these acts of communicative ground-
ing. For reference, they have everything from dedicated words for the
speaker, listener, or a mutually known third person (personal pronouns)
to special grammatical morphemes (determiners) that in concert with a
categorical term (common noun) assist listeners in identifying speciªc ref-
erents. For predication, they have special words or grammatical mor-
phemes for indicating the temporal contour of events and when relative to
now they have happened or will happen (aspect and tense) and other
words or morphemes for indicating the speaker’s attitude toward the pred-
ication (modality).
Because the communicative circumstances that require the use of these
grounding devices recur frequently in a speech community, in many cases
they become grammaticized over historical time. This keeps them close to
home, so to speak, and they can be used as local cues, often attached to
the linguistic element they are working in concert with. But grammati-
calization often leads to weak, unstressed monosyllables that can, for
some people in some circumstances, pose perceptual problems. In addi-
tion, some of these functions recur quite often in bundles and languages
grammaticize the bundles. This creates learning problems since it requires
that learners have a wide range of experiences of the right kind in order to
tease apart the different functions confounded together in a single form—
for example, the speciªcity and givenness functions of English determiners
or the notorious confoundings of many languages’ marking of tense and
aspect. Children thus have to employ their pattern-ªnding skills in this
case to ªnd patterns in how the same linguistic item is used, and how simi-
lar linguistic items are used, across many instances of use across fairly long
periods of developmental time. Moreover, since many of these functions
have to do with rather subtle assessments of the listener’s knowledge and
expectations, young children, who are notoriously bad at such perspective
Nominal and Clausal Constructions
241

taking, must sharpen their social-cognitive skills in order to acquire the
appropriate uses of these forms.
The theoretical choices in accounting for the acquisition of grammatical
morphology are essentially the same as for the acquisition of syntax. One
group of researchers believes that learners possess a set of pristine, con-
tent-free rules, and so what they must do is to identify which elements of
the language they are hearing go with which rules—and which go with no
rules, thus leading to a dual process theory. Because these rules are too ab-
stract and so overgenerate, these theorists must also posit constraints or
blocking mechanisms to keep them reined in—and sometimes perfor-
mance limitations to account for cases where the rules (or even the block-
ing mechanisms) are not applied as they should be. In contrast, I have ar-
gued here for a single-process, usage-based theory—most importantly
because it accords better with the developmental facts of children’s acqui-
sition of morphology. It ªts better with the way children acquire such
things as the German plural and the Polish genitive, which do not conform
to the neat pattern of the more studied English past tense, as well as with
their acquisition of other grammatical morphemes. And in the only real
test of whether there exists something like Inºectional Phrase that unites
various inºections such as tense and agreement under a single functional
category—as posited by modern generative grammar—Wilson (in press)
found no positive evidence, but instead found evidence for the item-based
learning of separate inºections. It thus seems most plausible that learners
of morphology come to the learning situation with a single set of cogni-
tive, social-cognitive, and learning skills that enable them both to read the
communicative intentions of the other persons in context and to ªnd pat-
terns among all of the different utterances and constituents of utterances,
including grammatical morphemes, that they hear over time. No addi-
tional theoretical machinery is needed.
242
Constructing a Language

Constructing a Language
Complex Constructions and Discourse
S E V E N
Complex Constructions and
Discourse
Today’s syntax is yesterday’s discourse.
—TALMY GIVÓN
ALL NATURAL languages have ways for talking
about multiple related events and states of affairs. In the most straightfor-
ward cases, a speaker simply strings together different clauses across time,
linking them with various kinds of appropriate connectors (or not). In
other cases, the different clauses are more tightly interrelated and thus ap-
pear as constituents in a single complex construction under a single into-
nation contour, which in most cases is an historical grammaticalization
(syntacticization) of discourse sequences in which speciªc types of clauses
have recurred together repeatedly in the speech community. The linking of
clauses—whether more loosely or more tightly—serves a variety of dis-
course functions, from expressing speaker attitudes about things (as in
inªnitival and sentential complements) to specifying referents in more de-
tail (as in relative clauses) to indicating the spatial-temporal-causal inter-
relations among events (as in adverbial clauses).
The investigation of children’s acquisition of complex constructions
has, to date, been conducted mostly by formal linguists. Usage-based ap-
proaches have mainly been applied to earlier stages of development only.
And indeed, many formal linguists believe that while usage-based ap-
proaches may be adequate for describing pivot schemas and other simple
constructions, an adequate analysis of complex constructions requires the
use of some heavier theoretical machinery, namely, some formal theory of
grammar. But functional analyses of the adult use of complex construc-
tions in spontaneous spoken discourse, as opposed to in writing, has re-
vealed that their structure is not nearly so abstract and divorced from
function as previously believed. Recent analyses of child language from

this same functional, usage-based point of view have yielded some surpris-
ing new insights into these most syntactically interesting of constructions.
As children are acquiring the various constructions of their language,
from simple to complex, they are at the same time learning how to use
these constructions to communicate more effectively in extended conver-
sational interactions with other people. Conversational and discourse
skills are concerned not so much with the mastery of the grammaticized
and conventional aspects of a language, but more with the mastery of
strategies for using those constructions to manage the ºow of information
across turns in a developing conversational interaction. Skill at conversa-
tion involves such things as taking turns appropriately, managing the con-
versational topic effectively, and repairing a conversational interaction
when it breaks down. Managing all this involves very sophisticated skills
of intention-reading and perspective-taking, many of which do not fully
develop until late in the preschool period.
As a special case, children also acquire skills of narrative discourse (and
sometimes literacy) in which the immediate context in which a given utter-
ance must be grounded is not the surrounding nonlinguistic context but
rather the linguistic context formed by the rest of the narrative. Skill with
narratives thus requires the mastery of a set of devices for providing coher-
ence and cohesion across clauses in order to tell a good story, which in
most cases means adapting previously mastered grounding devices for
these new functions (raising again issues of plurifunctionality). An espe-
cially difªcult and important component in this process is the introduction
of new referents into the discourse, and the tracking of those referents
across multiple clauses using various types of previously mastered nominal
constructions in a way that helps the listener to build in her own mind a
coherent and interesting narrative structure. Again this requires sophisti-
cated skills of intention-reading and perspective-taking, many of which do
not develop fully until the early school years and beyond.
7.1. Complex Constructions
In classic accounts such as that of Bowerman (1979), complex construc-
tions are divided into those involving coordination, in which two inde-
pendent clauses are linked in a more or less equal manner, and those in-
volving subordination, in which one clause is used to modify or
complement another (main) clause. However, the distinction between co-
ordination and subordination is not so clear-cut in young children’s spon-
taneous speech, as will be demonstrated below, and so a more helpful
classiªcation focuses on the function of the clauses relative to one another.
In the current brief overview of a complex research literature, we distin-
244
Constructing a Language

guish three (actually four) main ways in which young children use clauses
with respect to one another. First, children use clauses to express psycho-
logical attitudes (ªrst and mostly their own) toward events and states of
affairs expressed in other clauses. The psychological attitudes they most
often express are (1) intention/desire/compulsion (want to V, try to V, have
to V) and (2) perception/belief (think that P, know that P, see if P). Second,
children use clauses to help identify referents (relative clauses). For exam-
ple, a child may inform her mother, “That’s the doggie that barks all the
time,” with the second clause (involving barking) serving to help specify
(among other things) which doggie is intended. Third, children relate
events to one another by expressing multiple clauses linked in particular
ways, for example, If X then Y, X because Y, X and then Y, X but Y. The
clauses in these cases are obviously more loosely linked than the cases in
which the child expresses a psychological attitude about a state of affairs
or speciªes in more detail an intended referent. We will review research
here on all of these types, distinguishing the two different types of psycho-
logical attitudes for a total of four types.
7.1.1. Infinitival Complement Constructions
In English in the last few hundred years a number of verbs have been
grammaticalized into modal auxiliaries such as may, can, might, and
should (Krug, 2000). These auxiliaries are distinguished from main verbs
by several characteristics, but the most important are that they are not
inºected for tense or person as are main verbs (He kicks X; but He may V)
and that they are fronted in questions (May he V? but not Kicks he X?). As
outlined in Chapter 6, English modal auxiliaries mainly concern speaker
attitude and are classically subdivided into deontic uses indicating com-
pulsion (You must go) and epistemic uses indicating relative certainty (It
must be raining).
There is another set of verbs in English that are not modal auxiliaries
(they are inºected for tense and person, they are not fronted in questions)
but that are very likely on their way in that direction historically. They
also concern speaker attitudes—in most cases intention, volition, or com-
pulsion—and they are used quite frequently by young children. The most
common are wanna V, hafta V, gotta V, needta V (and perhaps gonna V),
and they typically structure the earliest complex sentences that English-
speaking children learn and use—typically emerging at around the second
birthday. Gerhardt (1991) analyzes children’s use of wanna as indicating
“internal volition” or desire, their use of hafta (and gotta) as indicating
“external compulsion” (often due to a social norm such as a rule), and
needta as indicating “internal compulsion” (almost no choice because of
Complex Constructions and Discourse
245

an internal state). As noted in Chapter 6, gonna is quite often used less as
a future marker than as an indication of the child’s intention (I’m gonna
sock you) and so is plausibly a member of this set of semi-auxiliary verbs
as well. In some cases less grammaticized predicate adjectives also serve as
matrix verbs, as in be ready to V or be fun to V or had better V.
In his classic study, Limber (1973) noted that children acquire these spe-
cial semi-modal verbs each in its own way, with no indications that they
see them as a class (similar to the modal auxiliaries; see Chapter 6). In a
larger study, Bloom, Tackeff, and Lahey (1984) studied all utterances pro-
duced by ªve 2-year-old children that contained the word to followed by a
verb complement. The most common matrix verbs in this construction are
listed in Table 7.1. However, the forms wanna V, hafta V, gotta V, and
gonna V accounted for almost all (95 percent) of the earliest uses early in
the third year of life, each being used for some time in an item-speciªc
manner. Bloom, Tackeff, and Lahey’s most controversial claim was that
for young children the word to is not a semantically empty inªnitive
marker for the second verb, but rather it is a meaningful morpheme that is
simply one more use of the word to, similar to its other uses. As evidence
for this claim (disputed by Hyams, 1984), they noted that each child
learned these expressions at the same time she was learning to as a direc-
tional preposition. Moreover, they noted that all of these semi-modal ex-
pressions may be plausibly analyzed as containing a “direction toward”
meaning (like to), and indeed historically in English the to in inªnitives de-
rives from the preposition to as used in purpose clauses (Haspelmath,
1989). One ªnal ªnding was that it was very rare for the children to use
these expressions with an intervening NP, that is, they almost never said
things like “I need her to do it.” When they did, it was only as they ap-
proached their third birthdays and in fairly formulaic expressions such as
I want you to V. Interestingly, in a study of children learning Korean, a
language in which these kinds of expressions obey a very different syntax
(many different complementizers), Kim (1989) found some very similar re-
sults; that is, he found matrix verbs with similar meanings used in item-
speciªc ways at similar ages.
Diessel (in press) reported the largest study to date of non-ªnite comple-
ment clauses. He studied a wider range of constructions—including such
things as participial and wh-inªnitive constructions—and he investigated
four children up to 5 years of age in quantitative detail. The ªrst ªnding is
that over 95 percent of children’s utterances with non-ªnite complement
clauses contained to-inªnitives, and these were the ªrst to emerge as well.
(The other 5 percent were such things as the participials Start V-ing and
Stop V-ing and a very few wh-inªnitives such as I know what to do.) Like
Bloom et al. (1984), Diessel found that the ªrst matrix verbs to appear
246
Constructing a Language

were wanna, hafta, and gotta, which emerged at about 2;3 and accounted
for over 90 percent of all the to-inªnitives over the course of the entire
study. Initially the children used these in very formulaic ways. That is, al-
most all of the ªrst to-inªnitives they produced had as subjects the ªrst-
person pronoun I, were in present tense (assuming gotta as present tense),
and were not negated—as in I wanna play ball, I hafta do that, and I gotta
go. The constructions involved may thus be represented by, for example
(leaving open the question of how a particular child at a particular point
in development might understand the abstraction involved):
I wanna VERB PHRASE
I hafta VERB PHRASE
I gotta VERB PHRASE
The two other most frequent matrix verbs for to-inªnitives were like to
VERB and try to VERB (accounting for about 4 percent of to-inªnitives).
Diessel stresses that utterances with these kinds of formulaic matrix
clauses followed by inªnitives are not really expressing two full proposi-
tions. When the child says I wanna play, she is not talking about two
acts—one of wanting and one of playing—but rather she is talking about
her current attitude toward playing, much as when she uses a modal auxil-
iary (as in I can play).
From age 2 to age 5, these children’s growing linguistic sophistication
with this class of constructions was manifest in three main ways. First,
their use of the semi-modals became less formulaic and more diverse, so
that they now included third-person subjects (“Dolly wanna drink that”)
and negatives (“I don’t like to do all this work”). Second, they learned a
wider range of matrix verbs, including such things as forget (“I forgot to
buy some soup”) and say (“The doctor said to stay in bed all day”). Third,
Complex Constructions and Discourse
247
Table 7.1
Matrix forms that provided complement verb contexts for “to.” Entries
are listed in order of frequency for all children combined.
Intention
(modals)
Inchoative
Invitative
Instructive
Negative
want
try
like
show how
forgot
go
time
supposed
know how
hard
have
ready
get
know what
used
got
about
know where
(too) far
need
tell
long way
ask
not nice
wait
Source: Adapted from Bloom et al. (1989).

they learned more complex constructions with an NP between the two
verbs. As in Bloom, Tackeff, and Lahey’s study, these ªrst emerged at
around 2;6–3;0, and were dominated by four matrix verbs which ac-
counted for 88 percent of all the utterances of this type. These were thus
constructions of the type:
See see-OBJ VERB-ing (NP)
Want want-OBJ to VERB PHRASE
Watch watch-OBJ VERB-ing (NP)
Make make-OBJ VERB PHRASE
After three years of age other matrix verbs representing a more diverse set
of constructions emerged. And so, in general, Diessel found a developmen-
tal progression from constructions in which the matrix verb and main
verb were more tightly integrated—utterances with the semi-modals
wanna, hafta, and gotta—to those in which the two verbs were more dis-
tinct, as in the constructions with an intervening NP, and two full proposi-
tions were expressed.
The classic experimental studies of non-ªnite complements are those of
C. Chomsky (1969), who investigated two relevant constructions in older
children (5–10 years). First, she compared children’s comprehension of ut-
terances like John told/persuaded/forced Bill to leave (in which Bill leaves)
to utterances like John promised Bill to leave (in which John leaves). Even
the
oldest
children
often
misinterpreted
utterances
with
promise.
Chomsky’s explanation was that children employ a “minimum distance
principle” in which they assume that the subject of the second verb is the
noun closest to it, which works for basically all verbs in English in this
construction except promise. Maratsos (1974), however, provided evi-
dence that young children do not use this principle, but rather they use a
“semantic role principle” in which the semantics of the matrix verb plays
a signiªcant role. Thus, when children were given passive versions of some
of Chomsky’s sentences—such as Bill was told by John to leave—they did
not make mistakes even though they violated the minimum distance prin-
ciple (Bill leaves). They did not make mistakes because they understood
the semantics of the verb tell (the recipient of the telling performs the ac-
tion of the second verb); they apparently did not understand the unique se-
mantics of the verb promise and/or they were misled by its disanalogy to
all the other verbs used in this construction.
The other relevant construction studied by Chomsky (1969) is that rep-
resented by the utterance The doll is easy to see, in which the doll is the
object of seeing. In most other utterances with a similar surface form the
doll would be the agent of seeing, for example, in The doll is eager to see.
248
Constructing a Language

Again, children had difªculties with the unusual item, in this case until
8 years old. Kessel (1970) found similar results. However, Fabian-Kraus
and Ammon (1980) criticized the methodology of these studies—
speciªcally, when the adult places a blindfold on the doll’s eyes and asks if
she is “easy to see,” it is a somewhat misleading situation. With a more
child-friendly methodology, these investigators found almost perfect com-
prehension of the easy to see/eager to see contrast by 5-year-olds (and very
good comprehension by many 4-year-olds).
7.1.2. Sentential Complement Constructions
Whereas many of the most common matrix verbs with inªnitival comple-
ments are generally similar to deontic modals in their concern with pur-
pose/intention/compulsion, many of the most common matrix verbs with
sentential complements are similar to epistemic modals in their concern
with certainty/perception/knowledge. But again, the matrix verbs in
sentential complements—such things as think, know, believe, see, say—
are not modal auxiliaries but tensed verbs. In addition, and in contrast to
inªnitival complements, the second clause in sentential complement con-
structions is a fully tensed clause with an overt subject (that is, a fully in-
dependent clause). The prototype, then, is utterances like I know she’s in
there and I think I can do it. Sentential complement constructions some-
times mark the second clause with the complementizer that, although this
is rare in spontaneous spoken speech of all types. Also, in some cases other
complementizers such as if and various wh- words are used, as in I’ll see if
it ºies and She knows where it is (these are different in that the wh- word
serves as an argument in the second clause).
Once again, the classic studies are by Limber (1973) and Bloom and
colleagues (Bloom et al., 1989). In analyses of young English-speaking
children’s spontaneous speech, these investigators found that sentential
complement constructions emerged later than inªnitival complement con-
structions, typically between 2;6 and 3;0. They also found that the earliest
verbs used in these constructions were a very delimited set, mainly think,
know, look, and see. Shatz, Wellman, and Silber (1983) and Bartsch and
Wellman (1995) analyzed a large corpus of utterances with these and simi-
lar psychological verbs and found that children’s earliest uses did not de-
pict psychological processes per se, but rather they were being used in for-
mulaic phrases such as ya’ know and look-a-here for discourse purposes
(as in much adult language). DeVilliers (2000) notes that when children
under 4 years of age are asked a question such as What did the girl say she
bought?—in which there is a discrepancy between what she really bought
Complex Constructions and Discourse
249

and what she said she bought—they tend to respond with what she really
bought, providing further evidence that they do not fully comprehend the
construction.
The most comprehensive study to date of sentential complement con-
structions is that of Diessel and Tomasello (2001), who analyzed the de-
velopment of ªnite complement clauses in the speech of seven English-
speaking children aged 1;2 to 5;2 (a total of 2,807 utterances). Because
their study included more children over a longer period of ontogeny than
that of Bloom et al. (1989), they identiªed a much wider range of matrix
verbs for children’s sentential complement constructions (see Table 7.2).
Nevertheless, the two studies are in general agreement about the most
common matrix verbs at the earliest stages.
What Diessel and Tomasello found was that children’s earliest sentential
complement utterances did not really have the main clause/subordinate
clause structure that comprises the textbook analysis of the adult version
of this construction. The children’s utterances did not really contain two
propositions, one concerning, for example, an act of thinking and another
concerning a state of affairs in the world. Instead, the children seemed to
be using psychological verbs in very short and formulaic clauses such as I
think P, I know P, and See if P—almost always to express their own atti-
tude toward the contents of the other clause or else to draw another per-
son’s attention to the contents of the other clause. For example, one child’s
ªrst 15 utterances containing the verb think were as follows (from age 3;1
to age 3;7):
I think I’m go in there
Think some toys over here too
I think he’s gone
It’s a crazy bone . . . I think
I think it’s in here . . . Mommy
I think I don’t know that one
Think it’s in this
I think my daddy took it
And I think . . . we need dishes
I think I play jingle bells
Oh . . . I think it’s a ball
I think it’s in here
Think it’s in there
I’m get my carriage . . . I think
I think that your hands are dirty
Note that in all cases the subject of the verb think is the ªrst person I
(sometimes not expressed). Note also that the verb think appears in invari-
ant form: it is always in the present tense, it is not negated or inºected, and
250
Constructing a Language

there are no modal auxiliaries. There is only one utterance containing the
complementizer that, and in two instances the phrase I think actually oc-
curs after the so-called subordinate clause. Indeed, what seems to be going
on here is that this child is using the phrase I think (or just think) as a kind
of parenthetical evidential marker indicating her own uncertainty with re-
gard to the rest of the utterance. Thus in most cases the phrase I think
could be replaced by an adverb such as maybe without affecting the mean-
ing. All of these characteristics ªt very well with the criteria set out by
Thompson and Mulac (1991) for identifying “clausal operators,” rather
than fully propositional main verbs, in adult speech: the subject is either
missing or in ªrst/second person; the verb is active, present tense, without
auxiliaries or other accoutrements; the matrix clause is shorter than the
dependent clause and can occur in various positions; and there is no that
complementizer. The prototype construction is thus such things as (with
CLAUSE referring to any of a number of types of simple clauses, both
ªnite and non-ªnite, including a list of verb island schemas):
I think CLAUSE
See CLAUSE
I bet CLAUSE
Watch CLAUSE
The pattern just documented is not conªned to this child or this verb; all
seven children showed this pattern early in development with all their
complement-taking verbs of the think-know variety (also including guess,
bet, mean, wish, hope, remember). What differed was how quickly differ-
ent children began to diversify in their use of these kinds of matrix verbs in
this construction. Figure 7.1 shows further developments for this child
(Sarah) as well as those for one other child (Adam) for the verb think. It
can be seen in this developmental pattern—especially when it is compared
Complex Constructions and Discourse
251
Table 7.2
Matrix verbs that provided sentential complement contexts. Entries are
listed in order of frequency for all children combined.
7 children 6 children 5 children 4 children 3 children 2 children 1 child
see
show
watch
hope
hear
forget
care
look
pretend
wonder
ªnd
ask
happen
understand
think
remember
wish
read
write
know
mean
sing
pray
guess
bet
care
like
say
tell
Source: Adapted from Diessel and Tomasello (2001).

with the emergence of other verbs for these same children—that children
begin formulaically and only gradually come to express a full proposition
with the matrix clause. Diessel and Tomasello thus conclude that English-
speaking children’s earliest utterances with think and know plus a propo-
sition are not really exemplars of a sentential complement construction;
they are much simpler constructions in which a proposition is modiªed by
some marker of the child’s epistemic attitude, in a manner very similar to
the way they mark propositions with modal auxiliaries.
Although there are some interesting differences of detail, these chil-
dren’s utterances with if complements and wh- complements were also
used in a very similar manner. In particular, children also typically began
using these with very formulaic matrix clauses such as:
See if P, Let’s see if P, Let me see if P, I’ll see if P, I want to see if P
See what/where/how . . ., Look what/how . . ., Watch what/how . . .
I wonder what/where . . ., Guess what/who . . ., Know where/who/what . . .
The main exception to this pattern were the verbs say, tell, and pretend,
which began in a much more differentiated way almost from the begin-
252
Constructing a Language
Figure 7.1. “Main” clauses of S-complements including think at different
ages for two children. Adapted from Diessel and Tomasello (2001).

ning. Even before 3 years of age children used these with a much more dif-
ferentiated set of subjects, with verb morphology and modals, and with a
much higher proportion of that complementizers. Presumably, a part of
the explanation for this difference is that these verbs are semantically
much heavier, referring less to attitudes and mental states and much more
to overt behavior.
Diessel and Tomasello consider three main types of explanation for this
overall pattern of results. First, as alluded to above, the use of formulaic
epistemic clauses as matrix clauses in sentential complement utterances
(typically with a ªrst- or second-person pronoun as subject) is also quite
common in informal adult speech (Thompson and Mulac, 1991). Conse-
quently, much of what children are doing in the data reported above is us-
ing the lexically based expressions and constructions that they have heard
adults using frequently. It then takes extra effort for them to discern other,
less formulaic uses of these same and related expressions. Second, process-
ing two full propositions—one referring to an act of thinking, for exam-
ple, and one referring to a state of affairs in the world—is cognitively very
complex. Thus, it stands to reason that children’s earliest multi-clausal ut-
terances should have one clause as a short and formulaic expression that
puts minimal demands on working memory. Third, the use of psychologi-
cal verbs such as see, think, and know involves children’s understanding of
the mental life of other people. As established by a large body of research,
this understanding undergoes signiªcant developments during the pre-
school years (especially between 4 and 5 years of age), and it is thus likely
that 2-year-old children, regardless of their linguistic skills, are not really
capable of understanding such things as He thinks that P. The fact that
children are more skillful earlier with non-mentalistic verbs like say and
tell provides support for the importance of this factor.
Finally, it should be noted that virtually all studies, including those
looking at non-European languages (e.g., Kim, 1989), have found that
inªnitival complements, as described in the previous section, emerge be-
fore sentential complements. Presumably, an important factor in explain-
ing this developmental ordering is the fact that inªnitival complements
typically deal with expressions of volition and intention, which are under-
stood by 2-year-olds, whereas sentential complements more often deal
with expressions of knowledge and belief, which are not understood until
4 years old.
7.1.3. Relative Clause Constructions
Relative clauses are not like complement clauses because they do not in-
volve coordination with a main clause at all. Rather, relative clauses serve
Complex Constructions and Discourse
253

the very different function of specifying noun phrases in detail. Textbook
descriptions focus on so-called restrictive relative clauses—such as The
dog that barked all night died this morning—in which the relative clause
serves to identify a noun by using presupposed information (both speaker
and listener already know there was barking all night—that’s why it can
be used as identifying information). Because relative clauses are a part of a
noun phrase argument, they are classically characterized as embedded
clauses, and so they have attracted much research attention in both lin-
guistics and developmental psycholinguistics.
The majority of relevant research in child language acquisition has been
experimental studies of relative clause comprehension. The focus has been
on the question of why children ªnd it harder to interpret so-called center-
embedded relative clauses, that is, in English, relative clauses that modify
the subject rather than some other utterance constituent. For example,
children ªnd it harder to comprehend The cow that jumped over the fence
kissed the pig than The cow kissed the pig that jumped over the fence—as
assessed by an act-out task in which children must manipulate toy animals
in a manner consistent with the adult utterance. There have been three
major hypotheses proposed (with variants):
• Non-Interruption hypothesis. Children have trouble interpreting cen-
ter-embedded relative clauses because they interrupt the processing of
the main clause (Slobin, 1973).
• Conjoined Clause hypothesis. Children interpret all relative clauses as
if they were simply other main clauses and so act them out as such
(Tavakolian, 1981).
• Parallel Function hypothesis. Children tend to assign single syntactic
roles to the NPs involved. This means that the only center-embedded
relative clauses that should be difªcult are those in which the same
noun plays two different roles. Thus, children should have special
difªculties with such things as The cow that the horse kicked ran
away, since the cow was recipient of the kicking but actor of the run-
ning away. Utterances such as The cow that kicked the horse ran
away should be easier since the cow is actor in both cases (Sheldon,
1974; see MacWhinney, 1999, for a similar hypothesis).
Because there are so many different kinds of relative clauses, especially
in English but also in other languages, it should be possible to distinguish
among these alternatives experimentally. However, a number of method-
ological difªculties have attended studies of this type (Correa, 1995a), and
to date no resolution has been found. One very telling symptom of these
difªculties is that many of the classic studies ªnd no age effects—older
254
Constructing a Language

children perform just as poorly as younger children—which suggests that
perhaps the task is unnatural or confusing in some way. Correa (1995b)
designed a new task that was more natural and found signiªcant age ef-
fects between 3 and 6 years. On the basis of a number of considerations,
including an analysis of children’s pattern of errors, she concluded that the
main problem for children in these tasks is simply keeping track of the
many different characters and their activities. This conclusion is in general
consistent with that of Clancy, Lee, and Zoh (1986) who found—in a
study of English, Japanese, and Korean—that a number of different infor-
mation processing demands in these comprehension experiments all af-
fected children’s performance in signiªcant ways. Yet another reason is
that children ªnd it difªcult to interpret center-embedded relative clauses
is that they have very little experience with them; they do not hear them
and they do not produce them. The subjects of English utterances tend
overwhelmingly to be pronouns, proper names, or other highly topical
NPs (Chafe, 1994), for which relative clauses are useless. In his study of
four English-speaking children from 2 to 5 years of age, Diessel (in press)
found that less than 1 percent of mothers’ relative clauses in their child-di-
rected speech modiªed the subject. Importantly, basically none of chil-
dren’s utterances with relative clauses during the early preschool period
contained subject relatives.
There is very little work on children’s use of relative clause construc-
tions in their spontaneous speech. Limber (1973, 1976) and Menyuk
(1969) discussed a few aspects of English-speaking children’s early use of
relative clauses, and Slobin (1982, 1986) compared children’s acquisition
of relative clauses in Turkish and Serbo-Croatian, identifying a number of
processing factors that make acquisition especially difªcult in Turkish.
The largest study of children’s acquisition of relative clauses is by Diessel
and Tomasello (2000), who studied four English-speaking children be-
tween ages 1;9 and 5;2 in quantitative detail. They made a surprising dis-
covery: virtually all of these children’s earliest relative clauses were of the
same general form, and this form was not the form typically described in
textbooks. Examples would be:
Here’s the toy that spins around.
That’s the sugar that goes in there.
What is noteworthy here is (1) the main clause is a presentational con-
struction (predicate nominal or closely related), basically introducing a
new topic using a proform (Here, That) and the copula (-’s); and (2) the
information in the relative clause is not presupposed, as in textbook (re-
strictive) relative clauses, but rather is new information about the just-
Complex Constructions and Discourse
255

introduced referent. Indeed, Lambrecht (1988) and Fox and Thompson
(1990) argue that these characteristics are so distinctive that we need to
posit a “presentational relative construction,” a unique utterance-level
construction with its own information structure, pragmatics, and mean-
ing. The construction is reasonably common in adult discourse, and in-
deed more than half of the relative clauses heard by the children in Diessel
and Tomasello’s study were presentational relatives.
By any reasonable analysis, presentational relatives do not involve an
embedding of one clause in another, since the construction as a whole es-
sentially has nothing other than normal topic-comment structure. The
main clause involves the copula only and is not itself a true proposition,
and the relative clause is not presupposed information but rather contains
the new information the speaker wishes to convey. Typically, the main
clause is highly formulaic, often involving the introducers That, Here,
There, or It plus the copula. The prototype is thus utterances such as
That’s the robot that fell off, Here’s the one that melts, It’s the boots
Mandy gave me. We might thus represent the construction(s) involved as
follows:
It’s the N that VERB PHRASE
Here’s the N that VERB PHRASE
There’s the N that VERB PHRASE
Whether or not these are united by some higher-level construction is at
this point unclear.
Interestingly, these kinds of utterances were often preceded by exem-
plars of what Diessel and Tomasello (following Lambrecht, 1988) call the
“presentational amalgam construction.” Their status as instances of rela-
tive clause constructions is dubious, for certain, but they otherwise resem-
ble in many respects presentational relatives. Some examples are:
That’s doggy turn around.
This is my doggy cries.
That’s a turtle swim.
Here’s a mouse go sleep.
This is the ªre engine go Woo-woo.
Quantitatively, Diessel and Tomasello established several important
facts about children’s early relative clauses. First, 75 percent of the earliest
relative clauses produced by the children during their third year of life
were exemplars of the presentational relative construction. Another 8 per-
cent occurred in nominals used as whole utterances, for example, Another
picture I made. Another 10 percent occurred in utterances using the verb
256
Constructing a Language

look to introduce a new topic in a manner very similar to the presenta-
tional relative construction, as in, for example:
Look at all the chairs Peter’s got.
Look at that train Ursula bought.
Look at that big truck going some place.
Given that the isolated nominals clearly do not involve one clause embed-
ded in another, and given that the presentational relatives (including those
with look) do not involve a classic embedding, fully 93 percent of the chil-
dren’s earliest relative clauses did not involve the embedding of one clause
inside another but rather consisted of a single complex proposition. It is
also noteworthy that more than two-thirds of all of the children’s earliest
relative clauses contained intransitive verbs, further constraining the num-
ber of event participants the child needed to keep track of.
Second, in children’s later development presentational relatives and iso-
lated nominals with relatives still played a major role—they constituted 37
percent and 23 percent, respectively, of all of the relative clauses produced
at ages 4 to 5—but in general children became much more diverse in their
usage. During this later period they came to produce much less formulaic
main clauses, and their relative clauses modiªed nouns playing several dif-
ferent roles in the main clause. This general pattern of the early predomi-
nance of presentational relatives followed by more diverse use may also be
seen in the data of Jisa and Kern (1998) on French-speaking children.
However, Dasinger and Toupin (1994) note much variability in the kinds
of relative clauses used across different languages. Thus, although presen-
tational relatives are also used quite frequently by Spanish and Hebrew
children, they are used less frequently in German and Turkish, where ma-
jor discourse participants are usually introduced by means of other con-
structions. Systematic development research on these other languages is
sorely needed.
In any case, focusing on the quantitative ªndings from English, we may
propose four explanations for the developmental pattern observed in chil-
dren’s early use of relative clauses. First, children hear many presenta-
tional relatives from their parents, 54 percent of all parental relatives in
the study of Diessel (in press). Second, the earliest relative clauses are built
on children’s highly practiced, formulaic, and item-based constructions of
the type There’s the X, Here’s the X, That’s an X, It’s an X. Lieven, Pine,
and Baldwin, (1997) document that these are among the earliest and most
frequent constructions mastered by English-speaking children. Third, the
topic-comment information structure of presentational relatives is also
quite familiar to young children from a variety of their other construc-
tions, and indeed the presentational main clause typically serves to focus
Complex Constructions and Discourse
257

attention on a referent perceptually present in the immediate context.
Fourth, presentational relatives—perhaps especially those with intransi-
tive relative clauses—simplify the processing requirements as much as pos-
sible by minimizing the number of participants involved, and, as argued
above, do not even involve embedding of the classic variety.
7.1.4. Conjoined Clause Constructions
Inªnitival complements, sentential complements, and relative clauses all
represent constructions in which two clauses are relatively tightly inte-
grated. There is another class of complex constructions in which two
clauses are integrated much more loosely, typically with connectives such
as and, but, so, because, when, and if. The loosest integration occurs in the
coordination of two independent clauses, for example, in utterances such
as:
You do this, and I’ll do that.
She whistled loudly, but Fido didn’t answer.
On the other end of the continuum are so-called adverbial clauses, which
indicate such things as temporal, causal, and conditional relations be-
tween clauses. In adverbial constructions one of the clauses is not inde-
pendent but in some sense depends on the other, as in utterances such as:
I bought it because it was cheap.
I’ll turn it on so you can watch it.
When you get there, you must call your mother.
If you come early, you’ll get a good seat.
Prototypically, an adverbial clause provides background or orienting in-
formation relative to the main clause, whereas in coordinate constructions
both clauses provide foregrounded information.
Bloom and colleagues (1980) studied the coordinate and adverbial con-
structions (along with some others) of four English-speaking children
from 2 to 3 years of age. They focused on the ages at which children
learned to use the different connectives and the ways they learned to use
them. Their results are summarized in Figure 7.2. In agreement with most
other smaller-scale studies, they found that the connective and was the
ªrst to be learned by all of the children; and during the 2- to 3-year age pe-
riod it was used for a variety of different functions, for example:
Additive: Maybe you can carry that and I can carry this.
Temporal: Jocelyn’s going home and take her sweater off.
Causal: She put a Band-Aid on her shoe and it maked it feel better.
The next connectives to be learned were because, when, so, then, if, and
but, with some individual differences among children. In terms of func-
258
Constructing a Language

tions (irrespective of which connectives expressed them) the observed or-
der was:
additive  temporal  causal  adversative
General support for this ordering was also found in a study of Dutch-
speaking children by Spooren and Sanders (submitted).
Once again, the most comprehensive and quantitatively detailed study
of coordinate and adverbial constructions is that of Diessel (in press). He
analyzed almost 5,000 utterances containing a coordinate or adverbial
connective from ªve English-speaking children during the 2- to 5-year age
period. In general agreement with Bloom et al. (1980), he found that the
ªrst connective to emerge at around 2;0 was and, and that it was used for
a variety of functions. Perhaps surprisingly, this single connective ac-
counted for over half of all of the utterances with connectives during the
course of the study. Perhaps even more surprisingly, approximately 80 per-
cent of all the utterances with and were single clauses, the connection be-
ing either to the adult’s previous conversational turn or to an immediately
preceding child utterance that was uttered independently, with its own in-
tonation contour. For example:
Complex Constructions and Discourse
259
36
34
32
30
26
26
Average age of intersection emergence
(months)
x
x
x
x
x x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Adversative*
Adversative
Object
Specification*
Causal
Average age of connective emergence (months)
Temporal
Temporal*
Temporal
Causal
Causal
Epistemic*
Epistemic
and
and then
when
because
so
then
if
but
26
28
30
32
34
36
Additive
Figure 7.2. The development of the intersection of connectives with semantic
relations. X marks intersections that were productive for only two of the four
children. Adapted from Bloom et al. (1980); reprinted with the permission of
Cambridge University Press.

Child:
Nina has dolly sleeping.
Adult:
The doll is sleeping too?
Child:
And the man’s sleeping on the big bed.
Child:
Flipper’s on TV yeah.
Child:
And Shaggy’s not on TV.
Later, of course, children used and as a connective between two clauses
somewhat more frequently, although the use with isolated clauses pre-
dominated throughout; at 4 to 5 years of age, about 30 percent of the uses
were as a clausal connective, with 70 percent introducing isolated clauses.
Interestingly, Peterson and McCabe (1987) followed children’s later uses
of and (up to 9 years old) and found that it continued to be by far the most
frequent connective used by children and that it was still used for a wide
variety of semantic relationships even though new and more speciªc con-
nectives were being learned during this time—with the prototypical use as
a simple coordinating conjunction accounting for only about 20 percent
of uses at all ages.
The next connectives to emerge were because, so, and but. The ªrst two
of these were used most often to indicate psychological causes or reasons
for happenings in the world. Because was used initially to explain or jus-
tify something in response to an adult query or challenge, mainly in the
form of the why-question. Of the ªrst 15 utterances with because pro-
duced by each of these ªve children (total  75), almost 90 percent were
in response to adult why-questions, so that the vast majority of uses of be-
cause were for introducing isolated utterances, not for introducing de-
pendent clauses in a complex construction.
Child:
You can’t have this.
Adult:
Why?
Child:
Cause I’m using it.
In contrast, so and but were used in a more self-initiative manner, typi-
cally to further expound on a previous utterance by either the child or an
adult. About 70–80 percent of the earliest uses occurred in an isolated
clause. For example:
Child:
It opened.
Child:
So the horsie could get out.
Adult:
It’s called the skin of the peanut.
Child:
But this isn’t the skin.
Later, both of these connectives were used more often to introduce de-
pendent clauses in complex constructions—about 40 percent of all uses at
age 5.
260
Constructing a Language

In addition to these early-learned and relatively frequently used connec-
tives, Diessel (in press) tracked six other less frequently used connectives
that were mostly not produced until after 3 years of age: when, if, while,
until, after, and before. These connectives were not used very often in iso-
lated clauses, but were used from the beginning as a connective of two
clauses under a single intonation contour (over 80 percent of the time
overall). In most of these cases the clause with the connective provided
background or presupposed information, for example:
And we both sleep on the ºoor when we take naps.
It’s gonna stay raining . . . if you put it down.
He bite the tongue while he was eating.
It’s getting crowded after I put all the dollies in.
Interestingly, some of these connectives were also used on occasion in the
initial clause, mostly in the 3- to 5-year age range, for example:
After it dries off . . . then you can make the bottom.
When it’s got a ºat tire . . . its need to go to the station.
If he takes all of them I’m gonna beat him up.
Diessel argues these initial adverbial clauses are late to appear because (1)
they typically supply orienting information for the following clause, and
young children are notoriously bad at providing orienting information for
others (see below on narratives); and (2) normally one must know what is
coming in the second clause before producing the ªrst orienting clause,
thus requiring the child to hold two full propositions in mind to make her
utterance.
Diessel explains the order of emergence of all these different connectives
in coordinate and adverbial constructions in terms of three factors. First,
the connectives differ in terms of the complexity of their discourse func-
tions, which means that some of them can only be acquired later. Second,
the connectives differ in terms of the linguistic complexity of the construc-
tions in which they appear; for example, utterance-initial adverbial clauses
would seem to require fairly complex linguistic and processing skills.
Third, inspection of the mothers’ uses of these same connectives reveals,
not surprisingly, that the ones the child uses earliest are, on the whole, the
ones the mother uses most frequently. In addition, Kyratzis and Ervin-
Tripp (1999) point out that many of these connectives actually have sev-
eral very different discourse functions, and that adult-like mastery of this
plurifunctionality takes many years.
As with other complex constructions, experimental studies of conjoined
clause constructions have found that young children often do not show
skills of comprehension that match their spontaneous productions. The
best-known example is Clark’s (1971) investigations of children’s under-
Complex Constructions and Discourse
261

standing of complex utterances with the connectives before and after. Into
the school years children have problems in acting out with toy characters
events that are described in such a way that the order of mention of the
clauses is discrepant with the real order of events. Clark’s hypothesis was
that they do not know the full meaning of the terms before and after.
However, French and Nelson (1985) argued and presented evidence that
children are much better with these terms when the experimental materi-
als are highly familiar to them (see also Silva, 1991). In addition, Slobin
(1982) found that young Turkish-speaking children were much better
with these terms, mainly because they occurred in simpler constructions
involving “local cues” (see Chapter 4). Kawashima and Prideaux (1992)
supported this contention by ªnding very similar performance in compre-
hension tasks by preschoolers who spoke Japanese, a language that also
uses local cues to mark temporal relationships in complex constructions.
7.1.5. Two Theories
Table 7.3 presents a very rough overview of English-speaking children’s
acquisition of the major types of complex constructions. What can be
clearly seen in this table is that children’s earliest complex constructions
form a very delimited set revolving around a relatively small number of
lexical items and item-based constructions in the so-called matrix clauses
(I wanna, I gotta, I think, Look at, See, It’s the, and so forth). Children
learn ªrst those constructions they hear most frequently, and before 3
years of age it is very unlikely that they are embedding one proposition in
another in any of these constructions. From a functional point of view, the
earliest inªnitival complements are like deontic modals (hafta V is like
must V); sentential complements are like epistemic modals (I think P is
like Maybe P); and presentational relative constructions are like simple ut-
terance-level constructions (There’s the N that Vs is like This N Vs).
Children’s later use of these constructions becomes much more varied and,
in many cases, involves the embedding of one proposition in another.
There are a number of different generative grammar accounts of the ac-
quisition of these complex constructions, but what is in common to all of
them—based on an appeal to the continuity assumption—is an analysis
utilizing highly abstract and adult-like categories. As just one example,
Pinker (1984: 214–215) proposes the following procedure for the acquisi-
tion of complement-taking predicates:
Whenever a predicate takes an argument which is itself a complete proposi-
tion, and when that proposition is represented in the tree without its subject
by a phrasal category X:
262
Constructing a Language

Table 7.3
Overall pattern of development of English-speaking children’s complex constructions.
2;0–2;6
2;6–3;0
3;0
Inªnitival
wanna V, gonna
V,
see N V-ing, want N to V,
Heavier and more diverse
complements
hafta V, gotta V
watch N V-ing, make N V
set of matrix clauses
[95% of earliest]
[88% of all of this type]
Sentential
think P, know P, see P,
Heavier and more diverse
complements
say P, look at P
set of matrix clauses
[80% of earliest]
Relative
it’s/there’s/here’s/that’s the
Heavier and more diverse
clauses
NP that . . ., the NP
set of main clauses
that . . .
[83% of earliest; 70% of total]
Conjoined
P and Q
P and Q, P but Q, P cause Q,
If/when P, then Q
clauses
P so Q, P if Q, P when Q
(i.e., preposed clauses)
[92%]
Source: Approximate percentages from Diessel (in press) or Bloom et al. (1980).

C1. Connect X as a sister of the predicate that contains the propositional
argument.
C2. Create a lexical entry for the predicate, in which the propositional ar-
gument is encoded as the function X-COMP where X is the category
label of the subjectless proposition.
C3. Add to the lexical entry of the complement-taking predicate the equa-
tion X-COMP’s SUBJ  (FUNCTION), where (FUNCTION) is the
grammatical function annotated to the matrix argument that is coin-
dexed with the missing complement subject in the contextually inferred
semantic representation . . .
C4. Add two equations to the lexical entry of the complement-taking verb.
The ªrst should have the form X-COMP’s MORPH  å, where å is inf,
ªn, perfpart [perfect participle], etc., depending on the morphology of
the embedded verb . . . The second should have the form X-COMP’s
CMPZR  ß, where ß is the word found in complementizer position
(i.e., speciªer of X in the complement).
In contrast to this totally abstract analysis, Diessel (in press) concludes
that before 3 years of age children’s skills with complex constructions are
heavily item-based, with a gradual broadening and deepening of compe-
tence after this age. Thus, just looking at the inªnitival and sentential com-
plements, we might propose the following. Children are exposed to and
acquire ªve main types of these constructions, with possible further sub-
divisions (following the classic account of Quirk et al., 1985). Given that
they already know good bit of language before they begin to learn these
constructions between 2 and 3 years of age, what they acquire initially are
patterns that are complex mixtures of speciªc lexical items and some more
abstract categories. Oversimplifying, a given child might learn something
like the following (note that the categories depicted might actually be lists,
or some mixture of lists and categories, or more concrete categories, or
speciªc words, or whatever—the following is only intended to illustrate
the kind of analysis intended):
Inªnitival: NP
wanna/hafta/gotta
VERB
Participial: See/look at/remember
NP
VERB-ing
S-complement: NP
think/know/guess
that/ø
CLAUSE
If-complement: NP
see/tell/wonder
if
CLAUSE
Wh-complement: NP
see/look/know/
what/how/when
CLAUSE-gap
It should be noted that in the analyses of Hudson (1995) and Cullicover
(1999) even adult competence must be speciªed to some degree lexically
as well, because each of these constructions has some quirks associated
with it depending on the particular complementizers and matrix verbs in-
volved.
Diessel thus argues in the case of inªnitival complements and sentential
264
Constructing a Language

complements that although children’s early productions appear to include
two propositions, one embedded in the other, in actual fact the main
clauses in all cases are more like clausal operators. The verbs in these main
clauses virtually all have to do with the child’s psychological attitudes or
those she wishes to bring about in a second person—either intention/
volition or perception/cognition—and thus they function very much like
modal auxiliaries. In the case of relative clauses, Diessel shows that the
main clause functions simply to introduce a new topic/referent, and comes
from a very small set of expressions with the copula or another light verb.
The information structure in all three of these constructions is such that
the new and interesting information appears in the supposedly subordi-
nate clause. The development of these constructions after 3 years of age
centers on children’s acquisition of a broader range of types of main
clauses, and on operating on these main clauses with modals, negatives,
and so on, in a way that makes them into full propositions. Diessel calls
this “clause expansion.”
The conjoined clause constructions work slightly differently. The vast
majority of them, especially before 3 years of age, derive from conversa-
tional replies (or follow-ups to an initial utterance) in which the ªrst word
is a connective such as and, but, or because. Gradually the child comes to
put together both of these utterances with the connective between them.
After 3 years of age, a major development is that children begin to learn
connectives that function from the start to connect two clauses. Further-
more, at this age they also learn to use some adverbials (such as if- and
when-clauses) to begin utterances, as orienting information for listeners—
which demands a higher level of utterance planning. Overall, Diessel calls
the process involved in the development of coordinate and adverbial con-
structions “clause integration.”
Explaining the order of acquisition of complex constructions, both be-
tween and within broad categories, involves a number of potential factors.
For example, children seem to learn inªnitival complements before
sentential complements. This could be because inªnitival complements are
more tightly integrated than sentential complements, because they deal
more with intentions and less with beliefs (which are cognitively more
difªcult), because they are more useful (since expressing intentions and de-
sires is so important for young children), and, not to be forgotten, because
children hear them more often in their linguistic experience. As another
example, at the outset children use mostly presentational relative clauses,
and this could be because of cognitive complexity, linguistic complexity,
familiarity with information structure, or frequency. It is crucially impor-
tant that explanations of children’s developing competence with complex
constructions also take account of the fact that adult-like competence
Complex Constructions and Discourse
265

emerges only gradually as children master a wider range lexical material
and come to terms with the plurifunctionality of some of the key function
words involved.
Systematic investigations are sorely needed. The three most important
outstanding issues concern (1) cross-linguistic comparisons, (2) compari-
sons between experimental and observational ªndings, and (3) the relation
of input to acquisition. Thus, it would be very helpful to know if children’s
acquisition of complex constructions in other languages shows the same
kinds of item-based patterns as the English, with the same kinds of fre-
quency distributions. And discrepancies between observations of this pro-
cess and experimental ªndings need to be resolved. At least part of the an-
swer seems to be that in experiments children are typically confronted
with instantiations of complex constructions drawn from adult usage, or
even worse, from written language—and their skills are much too lexically
dependent and context dependent to operate on this new and strange ma-
terial. In terms of input, Huttenlocher et al. (in press) have recently found
very
impressive
correlations
between
the
number
of
utterances
instantiating complex constructions that children hear—both at home and
at school—and their acquisition of these same constructions in both pro-
duction and comprehension. Experiments with nonce verbs—perhaps de-
picting Martians with novel psychological states—might also help to spec-
ify children’s underlying linguistic representations in more detail, or
perhaps sentence-repetition experiments in which children must repeat ut-
terances instantiating constructions with which they have different
amounts and/or types of experience.
7.2. Conversation and Narrative
The analysis of conjoined clauses illustrated how children can integrate
linguistic structures across conversational turns. But when engaged in a
conversation, the child focuses her attention not on the linguistic struc-
tures she and her partner are using but rather on the topic she is convers-
ing about. The analysis of children’s conversational skills, therefore, is
mainly concerned with how immature language users manage information
in conversation—how they establish and maintain conversational topics
across turns—which is very different from a concern with their skills in
building linguistic structures.
7.2.1. Topic Maintenance and Repair in Conversation
From soon after birth infants begin learning about turn-taking in social in-
teraction (Trevarthen, 1979). By their ªrst birthdays, infants can begin to
266
Constructing a Language

both follow into and direct adult attention to outside objects. From about
18 months of age, young children can predicate things about some already
established topic of shared attention, for example, pointing to a shoe and
commenting to an adult “Mommy’s” (Greenªeld et al., 1985). At around
24 months of age, children are able to take a fully adult-like turn in a true
conversation in which they linguistically specify in their turn both the
topic of shared interest and the comment they wish to make about it, typi-
cally containing new information (Foster, 1986). In the current frame-
work, we may say that things that are in the joint attentional frame are
shared and therefore topical (or accessible in the terms of Gundel,
Hedberg, and Zacharski, 1993, and Ariel, 1988), whereas things outside
that frame are new and so take a special effort to be placed in focus lin-
guistically.
In the beginning, children mostly make their assessments of which
things are already in the joint attentional frame and which things are new
only from their own egocentric point of view (Greenªeld and Smith,
1976). As development proceeds, they learn to make reference to topics in
various conventionally appropriate ways, given their assessment of the
current joint attentional frame from a less egocentric perspective. And so,
older children make sure to establish topics explicitly when needed by
pointing or by using pronouns or deªnite NPs, before they attempt to fo-
cus the listener’s attention more speciªcally. This gradual progression from
nonlinguistic to linguistic means for establishing topics, and its coordina-
tion with the linguistic expression of new information in comments (from
the listener’s point of view), is depicted in Table 7.4.
At 2 years of age children produce about two-thirds of their utterances
directly adjacent to an adult utterance (the other third coming after a long
pause; Bloom, Rocissano, and Hood, 1976). However, many of these ut-
terances are not semantically contingent on the adult’s previous utterance;
they are off the topic or else they are attempts to initiate a new topic. In-
deed, children at this age answer only about one-third of the questions
adults ask them (Pan and Snow, 1999). Children are also limited in their
provision of full conversational turns, that is, turns including both some
reference to the preceding topic and some new information. Bloom,
Rocissano, and Hood found that 21 percent of the turns taken by 21-
month-olds in conversations with their mothers were full conversational
turns, with that number rising to 46 percent by 36 months of age.
When they do engage in a relatively extended conversation on a single
topic, young 2-year-olds typically take only one or two turns per conversa-
tion (Foster, 1986; Tomasello and Mannle, 1985); this value doubles, or
more, by 4 years of age (Barton and Tomasello, 1991). And much of this
early conversation is dependent on a structured nonlinguistic situation as
Complex Constructions and Discourse
267

a kind of scaffolding. Thus, Lucariello and Nelson (1986) found that
mother-child dyads engaged in signiªcantly longer conversations when en-
gaged in routine nonlinguistic interactions. Similarly, Conti-Ramsden and
Friel-Patti (1987) found that the degree of “scriptedness” in the non-
linguistic interaction predicted the sophistication of 2-year-olds’ conversa-
tional skills (see also Didow and Eckerman, 1996, 2001). In a series of ex-
perimental studies, Bachrach and Luszcz (1979, 1983) attempted to set a
conversational topic with young children as they looked at pictures with
them (for example, “Here’s a story about a duck”). In general, the 3-year-
olds were more inºuenced by the particularities of the picture than by the
topic the adult tried to set, whereas the 5-year-olds attempted to stay on
the adult’s suggested topic as they described the pictures.
It is not always clear in children’s early conversations how much they
are holding up their side of the bargain versus how much parents are
structuring the interaction for them. One way to investigate this question
is to look at young children in interaction with other young children. In a
variety of studies, it has been found that child-sibling and child-peer con-
versations are shorter and less coherent than child-adult conversations
(Dunn and Shatz, 1989; see Barton and Tomasello, 1994, for a review).
For example, Mannle, Barton and Tomasello (1992; see also Tomasello
and Mannle, 1985), found that 2-year-olds’ conversations with their
mothers were two and one-half times longer than those with their 3- to 5-
year-old siblings. This would seem to indicate that adult conversational
skills play a large role in scaffolding the longer and more complex conver-
sations in which young children participate.
A surprising additional ªnding, however, is that young children are
quite skillful at joining ongoing conversations between other persons.
Dunn and Shatz (1989) found that most of children’s attempts to join an
ongoing conversation between a parent and sibling were successful in the
268
Constructing a Language
Table 7.4
Developmental sequence of topic-comment coordination using gestures
and language.
Topic
Comment
0–9 months
Protoconversations
—
—
9–12 months
Joint attention
Nonlinguistic
—
12–18 months
Holophrase
Linguistic
—
18–24 months
One-word predication
Nonlinguistic
Linguistic
24 months
True conversation
Linguistic
Linguistic
Source: Based on Tomasello (1988). Reprinted with the permission of Elsevier Science.

sense that the conversation continued on topic. Barton and Tomasello
(1991) found this as well, and in addition they found that these three-way
conversations were several times longer than the dyadic conversations that
these same children engaged in with their mothers, with the children them-
selves taking three times as many turns. These investigators hypothesized
that three-way conversations “take the pressure off” young children be-
cause in such conversations they do not need to take every other turn to
ensure its continuation, but can wait and enter into the conversation
whenever they feel competent. These ªndings support the view that young
children comprehend and can deal effectively with linguistic interactions
that do not include them directly (Akhtar, Jipson, and Callanan, 2001).
This is important because in many cultures young children get less speech
directed speciªcally to them than in Western middle-class culture (Ochs
and Schieffelin, 1986), and so they must more often eavesdrop on other
people’s conversations and assert themselves by joining in.
As they approach school age, children take the listener’s knowledge and
perspective into account in much more sophisticated ways in conversa-
tion—for example, through the use of very subtle discourse particles such
as actually, in fact, although, just, still, nevertheless, on the other hand,
and certainly (Ervin-Tripp, 1996). However, this developmental process is
extremely slow, as 10-year-olds use discourse particles of this type three
times more often than 6-year-olds but still much less often than adults
(Scott, 1984).
Another important indication of young children’s conversational skills
is their ability to repair a conversation when it has somehow derailed.
Garvey (1977) found that 3- to 5-year-olds respond appropriately to a
wide variety of requests for clariªcation from adults (which come at the
rate of about one every ªve minutes in relatively focused conversational
interactions; Mannle, Barton, and Tomasello, 1992). At 2 years of age,
about half of children’s unintelligible utterances (as judged by experiment-
ers) are queried by adults (Snow et al., 1996). Gallagher (1977, 1981) and
Wilcox and Webster (1980) investigated children from the very origins of
their language development at 18 months of age, and found that from the
beginning they can respond to adult queries such as What? or Huh? in
speciªc ways, especially by repeating themselves (see also Marcos and
Bernicot, 1994, on French-speaking children). Further along these lines,
Anselmi, Tomasello, and Acunzo (1986) found that children just after
their second birthdays responded differentially when the adult query was
more generic (Huh?) than when it was more speciªc (Put it where?). In the
latter case they responded, appropriately, by more often providing only
the requested information (as opposed to repeating the whole utterance,
for example). Overall, in this study children in the 2- to 4-year age period
Complex Constructions and Discourse
269

responded to requests for clariªcation at least somewhat appropriately
about 85 percent of the time.
In a variation on this theme, Tomasello, Farrar, and Dines (1983) found
that 2-year-old children reformulated their utterances differently when
queried by their mother than when queried by an unfamiliar adult. For
their mother, they more often repeated themselves (perhaps because they
knew she was familiar with their speech and so she must not have heard
the utterance well), whereas for the unfamiliar adult they more often re-
formulated their utterance (perhaps because they knew she was unfamiliar
with their speech and therefore needed an additional formulation). This
ªnding is important because it represents one of the earliest indications
that young children are taking into account characteristics of (if not the
speciªc knowledge and expectations of) their conversational partners in
creating their conversational contributions. Another interesting study that
underscores this mental dimension to the process is that of Schwe and
Markman (1997), who found that 2-year-olds responded differently when
adults failed to comply with their requests, as a function of their assess-
ment of whether the adult did not understand their message or understood
it but chose not to comply.
Children themselves do not request clariªcation very often. In one large-
scale longitudinal study, Pan et al. (1996) found that virtually no 14-
month-old children ever requested clariªcation of a parental utterance. By
20 months of age, almost one-third of the children requested clariªcation
at least occasionally, and by 32 months virtually all the children did so
with some regularity. Their clariªcation requests at these young ages are
generally of the generic type—typically Huh? or What?—and do not show
a detailed analysis of which part of the adult utterance caused their com-
prehension difªculties. Even at 7 years of age, when they are put into a
difªcult communicative situation (for example, on the telephone), children
seldom ask for clariªcation in a manner that appears adequate to adults
(Lloyd, 1991).
7.2.2. Narrative Discourse
At sometime around their second birthdays, young children begin to talk
not just about ongoing events but also about past events, a transition
sometimes characterized as moving from the here-and-now to the there-
and-then (Sachs, 1983). This displacement of conversational topic in time
and space is interesting in the ªrst instance because of the progress it re-
veals in children’s ability to cognitively, indeed symbolically, represent the
world.
270
Constructing a Language

In addition, however, this displacement creates some fundamentally
new communicative problems for the child. Most fundamentally, the
child’s linguistic communication until this point has relied heavily on the
shared perceptual context between herself and her listener, enabling her to
use pointing gestures and pronouns, for example, with little risk of misun-
derstanding. But when the child is recounting an event that happened yes-
terday at Grandma’s, or last summer at Disney World, the normal percep-
tual support is missing and she must ªnd new ways to ground her
utterances with respect to her listener’s perspective. In general, the child
must learn the use more so-called endophoric devices for grounding her
acts of reference and predication in already recounted parts of the narra-
tive (as opposed to exophoric or deictic devices used to ground reference
and predication in the immediate perceptual context). The problem is
that many of these endophoric devices are none other than the exophoric
devices the child has already been using for months or years for other
functions.
For example, deªnite reference and pronouns (the boy, he) must some-
how make contact with something the child has already said in the narra-
tive if the listener, who was not there for the event, is to successfully iden-
tify the intended person (the pronoun and deªnite article in true narratives
are thus anaphoric, not deictic). Also, telling stories involves a constant
monitoring of (1) which aspects of the event should be foregrounded and
emphasized (such as plot line) and which should be backgrounded and
deemphasized (such as onlookers if they do not play a central role in the
plot); and (2) what is given and what is new for the listener. These effects
are achieved by a wide variety of devices, ranging from verb tense and as-
pect (plot line is most often conveyed with perfective tenses) to complex
constructions (backgrounded information is often in one or another kind
of subordinate clause). And indeed in many accounts it is the functional
demands of narrative discourse that have led historically to some of the
more complex aspects of linguistics structure (Hopper, 1997)—although
quite often the child ªrst learns the devices on the utterance level and then
learns their use in narratives.
The more linguistically oriented studies of children’s personal narratives
have mainly focused on children’s ability to relate a coherent and cohesive
sequence of events, which typically requires some kinds of setting/orienta-
tion information in addition to plot line. The general ªnding across many
studies is that children’s earliest narratives between 2 and 3 years of age
are sorely lacking in setting/orientation information. As an example, Pe-
terson (1990) reports the following narrative from a child at age 2;3 (fol-
lowing talk about a tape recorder):
Complex Constructions and Discourse
271

Child:
He bite my leg.
Adult:
What?
Child:
Duck bite my leg.
Adult:
The dog bit your leg. Oh, oh, the duck. Oh boy!
Child:
Me go in the water.
Adult:
You went in the water?
Child:
Yeah. My leg.
The child is clearly relating a past event of great importance, but the topic
comes out of nowhere—to the degree that the adult doesn’t even know ini-
tially that a duck is the protagonist—and the child provides no informa-
tion about when, where, or how the event took place. And it is likely that
the actual sequence of the biting event and the leg-in-the-water event was
the reverse of the order in which they are recounted by the child.
Children’s personal narratives are, by deªnition, particular to individu-
als, which can make comparison across ages, groups, and languages
difªcult—as children have different events to relate. Therefore, some re-
searchers have attempted to create comparability by having children nar-
rate a standard set of events, typically in the form of a series of pictures. In
general, the ªnding here is that young children struggle even more than in
their personal narratives to craft a coherent narrative. For example,
Berman and Slobin (1994) had young children in many different lan-
guages narrate a wordless picture book. The youngest children were 3-
year-olds, and they were almost uniformly unsuccessful in providing a co-
herent narrative with a discernible beginning, middle, and end. These chil-
dren used very few cohesive devices for keeping track of the participants
and events across time, and they availed themselves of fewer of the expres-
sive options in their language for taking different perspectives on events
and packaging events into larger units for purposes of narrating. The older
children were much more skillful. Berman and Slobin invoke three main
dimensions of development that explain children’s progress with narra-
tives into the school years:
• They become better able cognitively to conceive of the full range of
encodable perspectives that may be taken on a series of events—for
example, as dynamic activities or static states.
• They become better able communicatively to assess the listener’s per-
spective—including everything from the choice of a nominal to decid-
ing what should be foregrounded and what should be backgrounded.
• They become more skillful linguistically with the full range of devices
provided by their language for accomplishing their discourse goals—
including such things as the use of past perfect forms (as in had hid-
den) and complex nominalizations (as in the destruction of the city).
272
Constructing a Language

In all of this, two of the most difªcult tasks for young children in narra-
tive discourse are (1) keeping track of speciªc referents as they participate
in different events across time (and clauses), and (2) ordering events (and
orientation information) in time. First, with respect to reference tracking,
Peterson and Dodsworth (1991) found that children aged 2;0–3;6 most
often employed pronominals (she, it) and demonstratives (this, that one)
for repeated reference to the same discourse participant in their personal
narratives. They also quite often repeated the same nominal, or a close
synonym, across clauses for the same participant. After about 3 years of
age children also used comparative reference (another cat), nominal ellip-
sis (There was a cat, or maybe two), and substitution (Birthday parties? I
went to one last week). Peterson (1990) looked more broadly at the kind
of information children provided for unfamiliar listeners to help them
identify precisely who was being talked about (and where the action took
place) in their personal narratives. She found that young children, again
aged 2;0–3;6, were very poor at this in general. Most often they used we
without specifying who was involved (although the investigators assumed
that it typically was the family) and omitted explicit reference to partici-
pants other than themselves. When they named others, they typically did
so with a ªrst name only and no further identifying information to help
their unfamiliar listeners with the task of identiªcation. There was an in-
crease across this age in the amount of information children supplied
about the spatial setting.
Bennett-Kastor (1983) took a more quantitative approach and exam-
ined a wider age range, from 2 to 5 years. The focus was on referents that
were referred to in the narrative more than once. Table 7.5 provides a
quantitative overview. The 2-, 3-, and 4-year-olds used about the same
number of nominals per story (3.5), and they repeated mentioning them
about the same number of times per story (4.5). But the 5-year-olds used
about twice as many nominals as these younger children, and they men-
tioned each of them about 50 percent more often. The ªnal two columns
in Table 7.5 indicate, respectively, the number of clauses that intervened
between repeated mentions of the same participant (clause gaps) and the
number of clauses over which a given nominal spanned (clause span).
Again the 5-year-olds look very different from the younger children. They
only needed to touch base with a given participant about half as often as
the younger children (double length of clause gaps) and that participant
was continually mentioned, on average, across a span of more than three
times as many clauses. In another set of analyses, it was found that 5-year-
olds also can introduce new participants into the story, and weave them
into the plot coherently, much later in the story than the younger children.
Bennett-Kastor concludes that there is a great leap in children’s skills with
Complex Constructions and Discourse
273

nominals in narratives at around 5 years of age. At this age they begin to
tell stories with more participants, with more events per participant, with
denser structure (less frequent reiteration of the same nominal), and with
later participant introductions.
Karmiloff-Smith (1986) proposed that until age 5 children keep track of
referents mostly by employing the “thematic subject constraint,” that is,
they tend to establish a single character as central and make her the sub-
ject of each of the succeeding utterances in the narrative (without provid-
ing much in the way of explicit connectives). After 5 years of age, children
develop more sophisticated discourse skills in which syntagmatic relations
are established across many clauses. Unfortunately for language learners,
many of the linguistic forms that are an integral part of these discourse
skills are forms that children have already been using for some time for
other communicative purposes. For example, because is ªrst used by chil-
dren only in conversation to answer why-questions (see above on con-
joined clauses), and children must later learn to use it to connect informa-
tion across clauses in narratives in a way that explains events for their
listener. Karmiloff-Smith (1986) thus stresses that many of children’s
struggles with narratives derive from the plurifunctionality of the linguis-
tic devices that must be mastered. Hickmann (1995) concurs and argues
that skills with narrative discourse in general are late-developing in chil-
dren speaking all of the languages that have been studied (mostly develop-
ing during the school years); claims to the contrary are simply based on re-
searchers ignoring this plurifunctionality and attributing to children full
knowledge of a form upon its ªrst use in a single context.
In picture-elicited narratives children also show a relatively late mastery
of the full range of devices their language offers for introducing and keep-
ing track of referents across clauses. Summarizing several series of studies,
Karmiloff-Smith (1986) argues that from 3 to 5 years of age children’s
pronouns and deªnite articles in narratives are actually functioning
deictically. They are being used appropriately at the level of the individual
274
Constructing a Language
Table 7.5
Noun phrase coherence values per story per age group.
Age
Number
of NPs
Average mention
per NP
Coherency value
per mention
Coherency value
per NP
2
3.67
4.55
1.16
5.27
3
3.50
3.86
0.88
3.38
4
3.57
4.92
1.06
5.20
5
7.20
6.39
2.19
14.00
Source: Based on Bennett-Kastor (1983).

utterance to indicate a referent, but different mentions in the same story
are not endophorically related to one another. As an example, she offers a
short narrative by a young child with many ambiguous uses of he, among
other ambiguities:
There’s a little boy in red. He’s walking along and he sees a balloon man and
he gives him a green one and he walks off home and it ºies away into the
sky so he cries.
In contrast, children over 5 years of age are much better at avoiding such
ambiguous references by grounding their nominals with respect one an-
other endophorically, as can be seen most clearly in their self-corrections
in telling part of the same story:
. . . He meets a man selling balloons and he gives the boy . . . a man selling
balloons who gives him a green balloon. He goes off really pleased.
Karmiloff-Smith also observes signiªcant developments in children after
8 years of age, especially in their ability to appreciate the plurifunc-
tionality characteristic of many, indeed most, referential terms. Similarly,
Kail and Hickmann (1992) found that only 9-year-olds chose appropri-
ately among the many referential terms available in French given experi-
mental conditions in which listeners either did or did not share with them
perceptual access to the stimulus materials. Cross-linguistic studies have
found that even though there are many speciªc differences in the devices
different languages provide for making reference in narratives (e.g.,
MacWhinney and Bates, 1978; Hickmann and Hendriks, 1999), endo-
phoric coordination of acts of reference and appreciation of the pluri-
functionality of referential devices are uniformly late acquisitions, and
may even depend to some extent on the acquisition of literacy skills during
early schooling (Hickmann, 1995).
Turning to the role of temporality in discourse narratives, the major fact
is that in their earliest personal narratives, 2- and 3-year-old children pro-
vide very little information about time orientation in the sense of when an
event happened relative to now. Indeed, Peterson (1990) observed that
such time orientation in early narratives was “almost nonexistent.” When
they do provide such information it is typically with formulaic and not-
well-understood terms such as yesterday or last night, often used indis-
criminately for past time.
These early narratives also show very little internal temporal structur-
ing, except that they most often follow the sequence of events as they actu-
ally happened. But the use of linguistic devices to modulate this iconic
structuring is minimal, and often is simply redundant with the iconic or-
dering (Peterson and McCabe, 1991a, 1991b). The most common terms
Complex Constructions and Discourse
275

are, in English, and, and then, and so, and so, which are present even in
the earliest narratives. Children’s appropriate production and comprehen-
sion of more sophisticated temporal terms such as before, after, and ªrst—
not to mention while, during, until, since, and so on—is notoriously poor
until well into the school years (see French and Nelson, 1985, for a re-
view). Moreover, in a sensitive analysis of the range of uses to which chil-
dren put some of these terms Levy and Nelson (1994) argue that temporal
language provides the paradigm case for “use before meaning,” as chil-
dren acquire temporal terms in relatively ªxed formulas or in a restricted
range of discourse uses. In a study of the picture-elicited narratives of Ger-
man- and Turkish-speaking children, Aksu-Koç and von Stutterheim
(1994: 451) found that children before 5 years of age had much difªculty
coordinating sequence and simultaneity, and only the children older than
5 years were able to organize their speech along a narrative thread so that
they could “move from a mere juxtaposition of equally weighted pieces of
information to hierarchical structures in discourse.” Once again for tem-
poral ordering, the age of 5 years seems to mark a turning point in chil-
dren’s narrative skills, with further important developments continuing to
take place throughout the school years.
7.2.3. Thinking for Speaking
Some of the researchers who have investigated discourse and narrative
skills have speculated on the role of linguistic communication in children’s
cognitive development more generally. Perhaps the most interesting pro-
posal is that of Slobin (1996), who focuses not so much on possible long-
term effects of language on nonlinguistic cognition—the conventional
construal of the Whorªan hypothesis (linguistic determinism: language de-
termines thought)—but rather on the different ways that different lan-
guages require young children to attend to things and to construe things
for purposes of formulating a linguistic utterance on-line: so-called think-
ing for speaking.
Illustrative of this perspective, Berman and Slobin (1994) found that
when children learning different languages are asked to tell a story based
on the same set of pictures, they end up conceptualizing the story in very
different ways. In “thinking for speaking” these children must learn to pay
attention to some things and to ignore others, and to construe (or per-
spectivize) things in one way rather than another, in accordance with
the linguistic conventions of the particular language they are learning—
especially those conventions involving obligatory grammatical marking.
For example, speakers of Spanish have more possible tense-aspect distinc-
tions available to them than do speakers of English, and so young Spanish
276
Constructing a Language

children must pay attention to and choose among various temporal pro-
ªles in their narrative discourse in a more differentiated way than young
English children. Slobin’s studies have gone on to document a number of
effects of language on the on-line process of conceptualization, for exam-
ple, the ways languages inºuence how children attend to speciªc types of
spatial, causal, and social relations, and perspectivize scenes (see Slobin,
1996, for a review).
More fundamentally, Nelson (1996) has proposed that a major change
in the relation of language to thought takes place when children become
skillful with narratives, at around 4 or 5 years of age. Young children be-
fore this age use language to direct and cajole, comment and question, re-
quest and exclaim, but they do not use it to represent the world explic-
itly—as they will later when they, for example, report on a trip to the
beach in narrative discourse, complete with evaluative commentary about
many aspects of the event. That is to say, before they can engage in narra-
tive discourse 2- and 3-year-old children use language in the context of
concrete activities, in effect letting those activities do much of the talking.
But when older children report on some event in which they have previ-
ously participated, the only representational medium is language, and it
does virtually all of the representational work.
Language [at 2 and 3 years of age] is used in, as part of, and in conjunction
with [cultural] activities, and not primarily as a medium of conveying knowl-
edge from one person to another. Its primary use is pragmatic, not symbolic
. . . Language uses in these shared activities help to mark them, to move them
forward, but language is not initially used to represent them as such in the
child’s cognitive or communicative productions. (Nelson, 1996: 91)
In contrast, older children use language not just to participate in and
inºuence events but also to depict them and comment on them for others.
A number of theorists have also proposed that discourse might play an
important role in children’s coming to have a “theory of mind,” that is,
coming to view other persons as mental agents who can have beliefs (in-
cluding false beliefs) about the world (Harris, 1996; Tomasello, 1999).
The basic idea is that to comprehend the communicative intentions of oth-
ers children must in some sense simulate the perspective of other persons
as they are expressing themselves linguistically, and so the back and forth
of discourse involves the child in a constant shifting of perspectives from
her own to that of others and back again. In general agreement with this
hypothesis, Peterson and Siegal (1999) found that deaf children whose
deaf parents were ºuent users of a sign language in discourse were much
faster to develop theory-of-mind skills than were deaf children whose
hearing parents did not speak a sign language ºuently.
Complex Constructions and Discourse
277

One especially important form of discourse would seem to be disagree-
ments and misunderstandings. Dunn (1988) has documented something of
the wide range of disputes and conºicts, as well as cooperative interac-
tions, in which children of the same family participate on a daily basis (see
also Dunn, Brown, and Beardsall, 1991). Perhaps of special importance,
siblings often have conºicting wants and needs as they both desire the
same toy or wish to engage in the same activity at the same time. In addi-
tion to this conºict of goals or desires, they have conºicts involving beliefs
as one expresses the view that X is the case, and the other disputes this and
claims that Y is the case. Or, similarly, they have a clear difference of
knowledge or beliefs as when one child makes a presupposition that the
other does not hold in kind (such as the presupposition of shared knowl-
edge in using He or It); or the same thing may happen in reverse as other
persons make unwarranted presuppositions about knowledge and beliefs
they share with the child. Supportive of this general view is the ªnding that
Western middle-class children with siblings tend to understand other per-
sons in terms of their mental states (false beliefs) at a younger age than
children without siblings (Perner, Ruffman, and Leekam, 1994).
There is also another kind of discourse that may be important in chil-
dren’s coming to understand others as mental agents, and that is the pro-
cess of communicative breakdown and repair (see above). As children be-
gin to engage in discourse with adults in the 2- to 3-year age period, it
happens with some regularity that someone does not understand what
they say. Golinkoff (1993) documents some cases in which even very
young infants engage in a process of what she calls “the negotiation of
meaning” in which the child says something unintelligible, the adult
guesses at its meaning, and the infant either accepts or rejects the interpre-
tation. As children get older they experience both (1) misinterpretations,
in which the adult interprets the child’s utterance in a way that she did not
intend, and (2) clariªcation requests, in which the child says something
that the adult does not understand and so the adult asks for clariªcation.
These kinds of discourse—which occur frequently for virtually all young
children learning a natural language—lead the child to try to discern why
the adult does not comprehend the utterance: perhaps she did not hear it,
perhaps she is not familiar with this speciªc linguistic formulation, and so
forth. Analysis of the cause of the breakdown then leads to the formula-
tion of a strategy for repair. In all, it would seem that these kinds of misun-
derstandings and repairs are an extremely rich source of information
about how one’s own understanding of a linguistically expressed perspec-
tive on a situation may differ from that of others.
The other two main hypotheses about the relation of language and the-
ory of mind are: (1) that the acquisition of mental state terms such as see,
278
Constructing a Language

want, think, and know in some way facilitates or enables children to con-
ceptualize others as having minds of their own (Bartsch and Wellman,
1985); and (2) that certain kinds of syntactic structures—speciªcally, the
kind of embedded syntax (sentential complements) that goes along with
many mental state terms (as in I think she’s here)—either enables or facili-
tates a theory of mind by providing the necessary representational format
for formulating propositions that refer to false beliefs (as in I think the
moon is made of green cheese) (DeVilliers, 2000). Empirical research on
the relationship between language and theory of mind has not progressed
to a state where we can choose among all these different theoretical alter-
natives, but the research does seem to indicate fairly clearly that the acqui-
sition of a language either facilitates or enables children’s appreciation
that other persons are psychological agents with their own mental lives
(see also Tomasello and Rakoczy, in press).
7.3. Summary
Historically, complex syntactic constructions are tightened versions of
looser discourse sequences. They have become tightened because similar
discourse sequences are used repeatedly for common overall functions.
Children, however, know none of this; they simply experience the modern
syntactic construction and learn it for its modern function. Indeed, in
many cases children learn ªrst the historically later construction (or the
historically later use of a construction) because it is currently more fre-
quent in their discourse experience. For instance, the use of I think as a
kind of evidential marker indicating speaker uncertainty almost certainly
emerged historically later than the use of the verb think as a true matrix
verb with a sentential complement indicating an act of thinking. But chil-
dren learn and use the later, derived form ªrst, at least partly because it is
the most common version in their experience.
The complex syntactic constructions that children learn early in devel-
opment are different from those same constructions as depicted in adult
textbook accounts. Children’s inªnitival complement constructions are
very similar to their existing simple constructions using modal verbs such
as must and should. Their constructions with sentential complements in-
volve matrix clauses that are highly formulaic and often express speaker
attitudes (or else directives to listeners). Both of these complement con-
structions initially revolve around speciªc lexical items, in particular a rel-
atively small (closed?) set of matrix verbs and complementizers. Children’s
early relative clauses come mostly in the form of presentational relatives,
which employ very simple and well-mastered copular formulae (Its the X,
There’s the X, and so on) as main clauses and which have a very familiar
Complex Constructions and Discourse
279

topic-comment structure. Many early conjoined clauses seem to be learned
as children initially produce just one of those clauses in response to an
adult utterance expressing the other; the conjoining is thus across dis-
course turns in a dialogue and uses one of a few discourse connectives
such as and and but and because.
In this chapter I have thus argued that children’s complex constructions
do not come out of nowhere. Although children learn these constructions
as complex wholes with their own gestalt properties, they are aided in the
acquisition process by the fact that many of the pieces out of which these
constructions are built are in fact simpler constructions they have already
mastered in other contexts. Children’s acquisition of complex construc-
tions may thus be explained with the same single-process, usage-based
theory that was used earlier to explain their simpler syntactic construc-
tions. Like those simpler constructions, children’s complex constructions
start out very concrete and item-based—revolving around a delimited
number of matrix verbs and function words—and only gradually become
more abstract. There is basically no evidence that the kind of highly ab-
stract analysis of these constructions proposed by Pinker (1984) and oth-
ers reºects psychological reality for young children.
Children’s skills in using their simple and complex syntactic construc-
tions to maintain topics during conversational interactions develop very
slowly. Although children take turns appropriately from very early in their
language development, their ability to participate in sustained conversa-
tional interactions continues to develop on into the school years. Con-
verting these skills for use in producing personal narratives takes even lon-
ger, as children must use already known linguistic devices for new, mostly
endophoric (within-text) functions. Much conversation and discourse thus
places special demands on children’s intention-reading and perspective-
taking skills, as they must adapt what they want to say to the particular
conversational context at hand. Determining the many functions of the
plurifunctional grammatical items that are integral parts of mature con-
versation and discourse also places special demands on children’s pattern-
ªnding skills.
As children begin to master the use of a natural language, the process of
acquisition takes in new directions the very same cognitive and social-cog-
nitive skills that enabled its acquisition in the ªrst place. This Vygotskian
ºip—interpersonal cultural processes, as in dialogue, are internalized into
individual mental processes, as in conscious thinking—is a unique aspect
of the human version of culture and cultural evolution and explains many
of the most distinctive cognitive abilities of the species Homo sapiens
(Tomasello, 1999). The inºuence of language on cognition is apparent
ªrst and most importantly in the new types of cognitive representations—
280
Constructing a Language

what I called in Chapter 2 perspectival cognitive representations—that
processes of symbolic communication create. This inºuence is also appar-
ent in the fact that children growing up learning different languages learn
to conceptualize some aspects of the world in different ways—especially in
the on-line cognitive processes they must employ in order to formulate an
utterance in their language (thinking for speaking), but possibly in terms
of more permanent cognitive representations as well. Finally, the acquisi-
tion of language—in particular the constant pressure to adjust utterance
formulations for particular listeners in particular discourse circum-
stances—may also play a necessary, or at least a facilitative, role in chil-
dren’s emerging understanding that other persons are mental agents with
thoughts and beliefs of their own (theory of mind).
Complex Constructions and Discourse
281

Constructing a Language
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
E I G H T
Biological, Cultural, and
Ontogenetic Processes
Putting together novel expressions is something that
speakers do, not grammars. It is a problem-solving ac-
tivity that demands a constructive effort and occurs
when linguistic convention is put to use in specific cir-
cumstances.
—RONALD LANGACKER
TO DESCRIBE and explain an individual human
being’s linguistic competence, we must refer to processes that have oc-
curred in three distinct time frames:
• Phylogenetic: the biological adaptations that have enabled members
of this individual’s species to communicate with one another linguisti-
cally.
• Historical: the cultural-historical forces that have changed and
shaped the particular linguistic conventions of this individual’s speech
community.
• Ontogenetic: the developmental processes by means of which this in-
dividual has acquired competence with a language during her life-
time.
The difªcult part comes in trying to ªgure out which aspects of linguistic
competence to attribute to processes in which of these time frames.
Generative grammar holds that the essence of language is grammar, and
that grammar is a product of human phylogeny. Individual languages
change over historical time, but this is only superªcial change in the lin-
guistic “periphery,” involving such things as the lexicon, the conceptual
system, irregular constructions and idioms, and pragmatics. The underly-
ing “core” of linguistic competence, in the form of an hypothesized uni-
versal grammar, is and has been at all times since some hypothesized evo-
lutionary event the same for all members of the species. Likewise,
children’s linguistic performance changes over ontogenetic time, but this
too is superªcial. It is due only to the unfolding of a ªxed maturational

program for the universal grammar, the timing of the environmental “trig-
gering” of the various parameters of the universal grammar, and children’s
growing competence with the linguistic periphery.
In contrast, usage-based linguistics holds that the essence of language is
its symbolic dimension, that is, the ways in which human beings use con-
ventional linguistic symbols for purposes of interpersonal communication.
The ability to communicate with conspeciªcs symbolically (convention-
ally, intersubjectively) is almost certainly a species-speciªc biological ad-
aptation, as the only species that communicates in this way in its natural
environment is Homo sapiens, and human children all over the world be-
gin using linguistic symbols at around the same age. In this view the gram-
matical dimension of language does not derive from a speciªc biological
adaptation, but rather from historical and ontogenetic processes. When
humans use symbols to communicate with one another, stringing them to-
gether into sequences, patterns of use emerge and are grammaticized into
constructions. New generations of children inherit these linguistic con-
structions in the sense that they are exposed to utterances that instantiate
them, from which they themselves must (re-)construct the abstract gram-
matical dimensions of the language they are learning. They do this using
biologically inherited cognitive skills falling under the general headings of
intention-reading and pattern-ªnding.
In this penultimate chapter, I take up again the issue of phylogenetic,
historical, and ontogenetic processes, and their interrelations, in the gene-
sis of linguistic structure—and different theories of how all of this might
work.
8.1. Dual Inheritance
Many of the most thoughtful theorists in human behavioral ecology are
exponents of what is known as Dual Inheritance Theory (e.g., Boyd and
Richerson, 1985; Durham, 1991). Organisms inherit both their genes and
their environments, including their social environments. Dual Inheritance
Theory emphasizes, for example, that an ant is biologically adapted for
following the pheromone trails that others have already laid down, for
feeding the larvae that are already there, and for attending to the preexist-
ing queen. In other words, an ant is biologically adapted for interacting
with other ants and the things they have made or modiªed, which exist a
priori in its species-typical environment. Homo sapiens of course follow
the same general pattern of dual inheritance. But what is different about
human beings is that they are not just adapted for speciªc preexisting
structures in their environment such as pheromone trails and larvae, but
rather they are adapted for acquiring totally new skills and knowledge
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
283

from their social-cultural environments (Tomasello, Kruger, and Ratner,
1993).
And so there is no controversy. Everyone agrees that human beings can
acquire a natural language only because they are biologically prepared to
do so and only because they are exposed other people in the culture speak-
ing a language. The difªcult part is in specifying the exact nature of this
biological preparation, including the exact nature of the cognitive and
learning skills that children use during ontogeny to acquire competence
with the language into which they are born.
8.1.1. The Role of Biology
The best-known theory about the role of biology in human linguistic com-
petence is Chomsky’s proposal that with respect to core grammar biology
is everything. In this theory, the innate language module (universal gram-
mar) does not contain things like special learning procedures and percep-
tual biases but rather real linguistic content; it is thus a theory of “repre-
sentational innateness” (Elman et al., 1996). Speciªc lists of what might
be in an innate language module are not common, but O’Grady (1997) of-
fers the lists shown in Table 8.1. Pinker (1994) offers a very different list
with very different kinds of entities: X-bar phrase structure; subject and
object; noun and verb; movement rules; and grammatical morphology. No
one who espouses principles and parameters has proposed anything re-
sembling a complete list.
But representational innateness is a very unlikely theory. Most impor-
tantly, as argued earlier, the basic problem posed by linguistic diversity has
yet to be adequately addressed. No one has described a mechanism that
could link innate universal representations to the speciªc structures in
speciªc languages, given that the language-particular structures are so var-
ious in their manifestations. Nor has anyone espousing a theory of repre-
sentational innateness proposed a satisfactory way of dealing with devel-
opmental change. As documented in earlier chapters, children’s language
development is gradual and uneven in a way that is totally incompatible
with a hypothesized mechanism in which universal parameters are instan-
taneously set. Nevertheless, taking a different tack, some theorists have re-
cently compiled a number of more general lines of evidence for linguistic
nativism having to do with such things as possible critical periods for lan-
guage development, linguistic savants, language disorders, and brain lo-
calization (summarized by Pinker, 1994).
The problems with these lines of evidence are many and diverse, but
perhaps the main one is a systematic confusion of representational innate-
ness and other types of biological inºuence. Human beings are biologi-
284
Constructing a Language

cally prepared for language, but this may or may not involve the inheri-
tance of speciªc linguistic structures. A sampling of some of the issues fol-
lows (see Tomasello, 1995c, for more detail).
GRAMMAR GENES
There is a British family many of whose members have difªculty with
grammatical morphology, and indeed a relevant genetic marker has re-
cently been identiªed (Fisher et al., 1998; Lai et al., 2001). Some linguists
(e.g., Gopnik and Crago, 1991) have taken this to mean that the grammat-
ical morphology component of the generative grammar module is geneti-
cally determined. The problem is that the afºicted members of the family
have a serious expressive problem with their speech in general (Fletcher,
1990; Vargha-Khadem and Passingham, 1990), and moreover, virtually
all of their documented deªcits are in linguistic production, not compre-
hension (Marchman, 1993). The members of this family also have other
motor problems, even in simple tasks. This all suggests that their problems
derive not from deªcits of speciªcally linguistic structures but rather from
motoric problems in general, including most importantly an oral-facial
apraxia that severely restricts their skills with human speech processing.
The fact is that neither this case nor any other provides evidence that there
are grammar genes that code for speciªc aspects of language structure
(and Pinker, 1994, agrees with this negative assessment).
LINGUISTIC SAVANTS
There are persons who have low IQ scores but produce complex gram-
matical utterances nonetheless: so-called linguistic savants. This fact is
taken by some (e.g., Yamada, 1981; Smith and Tsimpli, 1995) to indicate
that there is an innate grammar module independent of general cognitive
skills. But IQ is a ratio derived by dividing a number based on a person’s
raw score on an IQ test (so-called mental age) by the person’s chronologi-
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
285
Table 8.1
One list of the syntactic categories of universal grammar.
Lexical categories
Non-lexical (functional) categories
Noun (N)
Determiner (Det)
Verb (V)
Auxiliary (Aux)
Adjective (A)
Degree word (Deg)
Preposition/postposition (P)
Complementizer (Comp)
Adverb (Adv)
Pronoun (Pro)
Conjunction
Source: From W. O’Grady, Syntactic Development (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1997), © 1997 by The University of Chicago Press.

cal age. And despite their low IQ scores, all the so-called savants who have
been studied have been teenagers with mental ages equal to those of 4- to
6-year-old children—who, as virtually everyone agrees, have practically
adult-level linguistic skills in many respects. Recent data also demonstrate
that the language of Williams syndrome children—at one time thought by
some to be linguistic savants—is actually much delayed and in general
quite predictable from their mental age (Gosch, Stading, and Pankau,
1994).
BRAIN LOCALIZATION
There are parts of the brain that are for most people specialized for some
aspects of language processing—and this fact is thought by some to imply
an innate language module. But severely brain damaged children quite of-
ten develop language functions in atypical portions of the brain, and they
go on to display almost normal language skills as older children and adults
(Bates and Roe, 2001). And even if there were strict localization of speciªc
language functions across all members of the human population, this
would not imply anything about an innate language module. Many hy-
potheses could explain localization—for example, certain aspects of lan-
guage processing may require a certain level of complexity of brain func-
tion, and certain parts of the brain are good with complex material of
whatever type. Brain localization implies basically nothing about the ori-
gins of a cognitive function.
CRITICAL PERIOD
Newport and colleagues (Newport, 1999; Newport, Bavelier, and Neville,
in press) examined the second-language acquisition skills of adults and
children of different ages after they immigrated to a new country. After
any given length of time in the new country, the children were more skill-
ful with the new language than were adults. Newport et al. claimed to
have found a sharp discontinuity in the data such that before adolescence
language learning is faster and more natural. This led to the hypothesis
that there is a biologically based critical period for language acquisition
extending from around 1 year of age to early adolescence.
The problem is that reanalyses of these data, and some new data, do not
support the claim that there is a well-deªned critical period (e.g., Elman
et al., 1996; Hakuta, Bialystock, and Wiley, in press). It is true that chil-
dren typically make more progress in second-language acquisition in a
given amount of time than do adults, but virtually all studies following
Newport have found not a sharp but a continuous decline in skill as peo-
ple get older. The reasons for this may be multiply determined. Most im-
portantly, adults have a ªrst language that has been learned and en-
286
Constructing a Language

trenched for a longer period of time, which creates more problems of
interference. Second, in most immigrant situations children receive much
more and much better experience with language in the social settings in
which they participate (such as all-day school) than do adults (Snow and
Hoefnagel-Höhle, 1978). And ªnally, children are more ºexible learners
than adults in many skilled activities. It is usually very easy to identify in a
group of skiers or tennis players or piano players those who began learn-
ing their skill in early childhood and those who are adult learners—and
language is no exception. This ªnal consideration is especially important
in explaining the relative lack of ºuency of deaf persons who are not ex-
posed to their ªrst language (sign language) until later childhood or adult-
hood (Singleton and Newport, in press).
DEFICIENT INPUT
Bickerton (1984) claimed that the existence and structure of creole lan-
guages provides support for linguistic nativism. In some cultural situations
people who speak different languages come together in speciªc activities
and must create a common means of communication: a pidgin language,
which lacks many of the syntactic features of natural languages. It is sup-
posedly the case that some children have grown up exposed almost totally
to pidgin languages, but they end up speaking a creole language, which is
based on the pidgin but adds in many of the syntactic structures it is miss-
ing. But adult pidgin speakers by deªnition all have dominant languages
that they use in some contexts, and it is unclear in published reports (all
concerning cases from the relatively distant past, based on written re-
cords) to what extent the children heard these languages. Maratsos (1984)
points out that a number of linguistic entities in the creole data Bickerton
reports could only have come from one of the dominant natural language
from which the pidgins derived, and Samarin (1984) and Seuren (1984)
highlight a number of facts about the demographics of pidgins and creoles
showing that the children in question had much more exposure to natural
languages than Bickerton supposed. The case for children supplementing
impoverished “input” cannot be made until we know what the “input”
was.
Goldin-Meadow (1984) reported cases of deaf children whose parents
do not believe in teaching them a conventional sign language, and whose
families have developed idiosyncratic signing practices. Similar to the pid-
gin-creole example, as they are learning “home-sign” the children suppos-
edly add some syntactic features that are not in their mothers’ signing—
presumably from an innate syntax module. However, Bates (1984) points
out many of the interpretive problems involved in assigning formal syntac-
tic descriptions to idiosyncratic forms of communication. For example,
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
287

Goldin-Meadow takes as evidence of a complex recursive sentence a ges-
ture string such as “Susan/WAVE/Susan/CLOSE,” but Bates notes that it
might just be two simple sign duos concatenated and not recursively re-
lated. It is interesting and important that the remarkable Nicaraguan chil-
dren who seem to have created their own creolized sign language (e.g.,
Senghas and Coppola, 2001) all came to the process with relatively well-
developed systems of home sign developed with their parents. Even so, it
seems that processes of grammaticalization can work very quickly in some
cases.
POVERTY OF THE STIMULUS
Chomsky argues that, in general, even typically developing human beings
have some kinds of very abstract knowledge about language for which
there is no, or only ambiguous, evidence in the language they hear around
them. The result is what is called the “poverty of the stimulus.” A pro-
posed case in point is English yes/no questions. Chomsky’s (1980a: 4) ac-
count is that children begin with a statement such as He is cold and trans-
form it, by various mechanical operations, into Is he cold? Leaving aside
the question of whether this transformational, or “movement,” account is
psychologically realistic, when a child hears a question such as this she can
infer either one of two rules: that the left-most auxiliary in the statement
form begins the question or that the auxiliary of the main clause begins the
question. Either rule is possible in this simple example since it contains
only one auxiliary. But in more complex examples involving multiple
clauses with auxiliaries it becomes clear that speakers of English use the
second, structure-dependent rule—called structure-dependent because it
requires the speaker to identify the head (main clause) of the sentence,
whereas the ªrst rule simply requires reference to the linear ordering.
Chomsky’s claim is that children never hear, or virtually never hear, the
kinds of more complex examples that would allow them to see that the
structure-dependent rule and not the linear-dependent rule is at work (e.g.,
1980b: 40).
But in an analysis of some written corpora Pullum (1996, 2002) ªnds
many of just the right kind of examples that children need. All that is
needed is a sentence in which the subject NP contains a relative clause
with an auxiliary (which is left-most) and in which the main clause con-
tains an auxiliary as well. Some of his examples (the two auxiliaries are
italicized and the position where the main auxiliary would be in the corre-
sponding statement is underscored):
Can those who are leaving early __ sit near the door?
Is the boy who was crying __ still here?
Could those who are coming __ raise their hands?
288
Constructing a Language

With mundane examples such as these so easy to come by, it would seem
very likely that young children hear with some regularity the utterances
they need to hear in order to induce the structure-dependent nature of
English yes/no questions. (See van Valin, 1990, 1998, on the pragmatic
bases of the subjacency constraint on “movement” in general.)*
SUMMARY
Overall, then, the case for linguistic nativism—in the form of representa-
tional innateness—is very poor. Combining all the data and arguments
throughout this book, we can say that: (1) there are virtually no linguistic
items or structures that are universal in the world’s languages; (2) there is
no poverty of the stimulus in language acquisition; (3) linking does not
work; (4) parameters do not help; (5) the continuity assumption is demon-
strably false; (6) performance factors and the maturation of universal
grammar are simply unprincipled fudge factors used to explain recalci-
trant data; (7) invoking extensive lexical learning as necessary for trigger-
ing parameters makes the theory basically indistinguishable from other
learning theories—except that it has in addition the linking problem; and
(8) although the empirical situations cited in support of biological bases
for language acquisition mostly do demonstrate such bases, they do not
demonstrate in any form representational innateness.
It would be possible to propose that human beings have evolved special
learning mechanisms that enable them to acquire a natural language with
special facility. But no one has proposed any such mechanisms (especially
since the statistical learning of human infants has now been discovered in
other primate species; see Chapter 2). The alternative to representational
nativism, therefore, is to grant that indeed many human skills of cogni-
tion, social cognition, learning, and communication are grounded in our
primate heritage and, in many cases, require very few particular experi-
ences during ontogeny to operate normally. In addition, human beings’
species-unique symbolic abilities may require only a basic social environ-
ment to emerge on time developmentally, and humans’ species-unique
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
289
* The other example given by Chomsky (1980a: 4)—and the main other example used by
generative grammarians to illustrate the “poverty of the stimulus” argument—concerns the
way various types of pronouns connect to their antecedents, so-called binding theory (see
also Crain and Pietroski, 2001). But it is difªcult to see the problem here. There is no reason
why children cannot simply learn the structure dependencies involved in the way the various
pronouns work in their language when those are paired with the appropriate referential situ-
ations. It is also relevant that mastery of the binding principles is a fairly late accomplishment
for most English-speaking children, typically not until school age (O’Grady, 1997)—which
would imply extensive learning. (See van Hoek, 1997, 2002, for a critique of the generative
account of binding in terms of C-command and for a very different proposal which provides
a functional account of coreference based on the notion of conceptual reference points).

skills with speech may require nothing more than basic exercising of the
vocal-auditory apparatus as well. But none of this involves innate linguis-
tic structures or any other form of representational innateness. The bio-
logical foundations we are talking about involve a host of human capaci-
ties and human environments that conspire to make the learning and use
of a natural language by developing human beings basically “inevitable”
(Bates, 1979).
An especially interesting case in all of this is chimpanzees and other
great apes raised in human-like cultural environments and exposed to hu-
man-like forms of symbolic communication (e.g., Savage-Rumbaugh
et al., 1993). These apes are not biologically prepared to acquire linguistic
symbols in the way that human beings are, of course, but they are given
similar opportunities. The ªnal word is not in on what apes can do in
these situations, but they clearly learn to communicate with humans in
some interesting ways. These studies demonstrate the power of a cultural
environment—in which caretakers treat youngsters as intentional beings
and attempt to share with them all that they know and can do—to poten-
tiate certain cognitive and social-cognitive skills in beings closely related
to humans. But these individuals do not then turn into humans, and their
communicative skills differ from those of humans in many ways; for ex-
ample, basically all of their productions are imperatives, to request things,
to the neglect of the declarative sharing of information (Tomasello, 1994).
The full story of the biological and cultural foundations of human linguis-
tic communication is going to be a complicated one.
8.1.2. The Role of Culture and Cultural Learning
Human children are biologically prepared to learn any one of the world’s
6,000 natural languages—which differ from one another in profound
ways—and this would seem to suggest a fairly broad and ºexible biologi-
cal adaptation. Indeed, Tomasello (1999) proposed that the acquisition of
language is actually a part of an even wider adaptation for cultural learn-
ing in general. Human children differ from their nearest primate relatives
not only in having language but also in being able to imitatively learn
other types of social conventions, to communicate with others declara-
tively, to use material symbols such as pictures and maps, to make and use
intentionally deªned tools with a history, to collaborate using complemen-
tary roles, to teach one another, and to create social institutions such as
governments and money. This suggests a fairly general human ability to
interact with conspeciªcs culturally, that is, to create material, symbolic,
and institutional artifacts historically and to acquire their use onto-
290
Constructing a Language

genetically. No other species on the planet has this same propensity for
things cultural.
Tomasello (1999) proposed that there is a single biological adaptation
involved in all of these cultural skills, namely an understanding of the in-
tentional and mental states of other persons (an ability which persons with
severe cases of autism lack). When Homo sapiens began to understand
that other people have intentional and mental states, they naturally
wanted to manipulate these states for various cooperative and competi-
tive purposes. This engendered the creation of symbolic conventions—
uniquely human communicative devices not shared, even in part, by other
animal species in their natural environments (who do not even point or
show things to one another). This would seem to suggest that the adapta-
tion enabling symbolic communication evolved only after humans di-
verged from other primates some 6 million years ago—perhaps even in the
process of becoming modern humans some 200,000 years ago.
But when human beings started communicating with one another using
symbols, they could not suppress their already existing primate skills of
schematization, categorization, statistical learning, and analogy-making.
It thus happened that as individuals started stringing together different
symbols, they began constructing certain symbol sequences into larger
units with their own communicative signiªcance, that is, they began to
grammaticize linguistic constructions. Specialized adaptations of the vo-
cal-auditory system happening during the same time period—clearly
geared for the rapid comprehension and production of the species-unique
set of sounds known as human speech—served to facilitate the process.
Regardless of details, some such account involving both a uniquely human
cognitive adaptation for things cultural and symbolic (intention-reading)
and a primate-wide set of skills of cognition and categorization (pattern-
ªnding) would seem to be necessary to explain not only language univer-
sals, which are the sole concern of linguistic nativism, but also the many
and intricate language particulars which characterize the variegated con-
structions of the many languages of the world.
Some people cannot believe that cultural-historical processes could pos-
sibly create abstract structures such as those embodied in the grammars of
natural languages. But they can. The analogies are clearly not perfect, but
again, as argued in Chapter 2, we may simply point to other cultural-
historical phenomena such as algebra, money, and even such frivolous
things as chess. Because not all cultures engage in these activities, they
would not seem to be a part of the human genetic endowment. Of course,
like language they all rest very ªrmly on a variety of biologically evolved
cognitive and social-cognitive skills. It is just that the abstract structures
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
291

that characterize them in the end are not given in the human genome at
the beginning. The structures are created by human beings interacting
with one another over historical time. The case of language may be very
different in detail from these other much less fundamental human skills in
the way this process takes place. The main point is simply that the creation
of abstract symbolic structures via some version of a collective, cultural-
historical process is something that can happen in a variety of domains of
human activity. In the case of language, some of the relevant gram-
maticalization processes may have happened when the human species con-
sisted of a single linguistic community, whereas others happened only after
the geographical diversiªcation of the species in the last 200,000 years—
leading to the diversity we observe among modern-day languages.
8.1.3. Why Are Languages So Complicated?
In the context of thinking about the evolution and historical development
of language for purposes of human communication, we may ask the
straightforward yet revealing question: Why are languages so compli-
cated? Why have natural languages evolved so many and such different
and such complicated structures? Why can’t we get by with The cat is on
the mat and other such simple constructions? Why do we need all of the
complexities of passive constructions, cleft constructions, auxiliary verbs,
modal verbs, relative clauses, sentential complements, evidential markers,
gender marking, incorporated nouns, and on and on? Oversimplifying
considerably, we may answer these questions by specifying four basic rea-
sons—functional pressures on the grammaticalization process, if you will.
The point of this exercise is simply to demonstrate, contra many formal
linguists, that there are good functional reasons for why human beings
have conventionalized so many complex and seemingly arbitrary linguistic
items and structures.
The ªrst reason languages are so complicated is that people want to talk
about events involving multiple participants, and these must be kept track
of. In some cases the role being played by each participant in the event is
not totally clear from context, and so the role must be speciªed, for exam-
ple, by case marking or a conventional word order. Givón (1979) specu-
lates that there are two basic approaches to this problem taken by the lan-
guages of the world—both present to some degree in all languages. The
pragmatic way is to make a decision in each usage event whether syntactic
marking is required, which saves trouble in cases where marking is not
necessary, but requires continuous decision-making and pragmatic back-
ªlling. In contrast, the syntactic way is just to mark participants every time
292
Constructing a Language

obligatorily, which saves decision-making energy but means that the
marking is sometimes done unnecessarily. Either way, the problem of spec-
ifying the role of participants makes for linguistic complications.
In addition, of course, in any kind of extended conversation or dis-
course these multiple participants must be kept track of across multiple
events. Although it is not obvious at ªrst glance, many linguists in fact be-
lieve that this is the main function of many of the most seemingly useless
linguistic devices such as gender marking; that is to say, once a referent is
introduced, if it may later be referred to with a gender-marked pronoun,
determiner, or adjective, reference tracking is made signiªcantly easier.
And, naturally, when there are multiple events to be communicated about
these need to be related to one another as well, especially in terms of their
temporal and causal relations involving new uses of known linguistic
items. And so the ªrst point is simply that languages must be complicated
because the situations and events people want to talk about are compli-
cated.
Second, talking about particular events or states of affairs must be done
in different ways in different circumstances if the speaker is to communi-
cate effectively. In particular, speakers’ acts of reference to “things” in
nominal constructions and their acts of predication to “processes” in
clausal constructions must be grounded in the immediate joint attentional
frame in a manner sensitive to the current perspective, knowledge, and ex-
pectations of the listener—which involves all of the complexities of nomi-
nal choices (for example, the use of pronoun versus noun phrase versus
noun with a relative clause) and tense-aspect-modality marking (for exam-
ple, indicating time relative to now). In addition, the speaker’s utterance as
a whole must package information in a manner sensitive to the listener’s
perspective, knowledge, and expectations—which involves the appropri-
ate use of certain constructions (such as passives) as well as many other
conversational devices for expressing the given or presupposed or topical
aspects of an utterance as opposed to the new or focused information, all
from the perspective of the listener.
Importantly, this process takes on many new features in narrative dis-
course where these devices must be used with respect not to the perceptu-
ally shared context (since this is often irrelevant to a narrative about the
past or future) but to the discourse context created by the narrative—often
including many complex hypothetical worlds or “mental spaces” (“Once
upon a time . . .”; Fauconnier, 1985). And so the second point is that lan-
guages are complicated because they must provide an array of linguistic
items and constructions that may be ºexibly deployed in the never-ending
series of unique communicative partners and usage events—each requiring
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
293

a different act of perspective-taking—that human beings face throughout
their lives, including those involving the narration of events displaced in
time and space, sometimes for unfamiliar listeners.
Third, in some cases speakers want, or need, to express their psycholog-
ical attitude (or perhaps someone else’s) to a given event or state of affairs.
In a sense, it might be said that the speaker needs to ground an utterance
in her own perspective, but the speaker’s perspective is not just a cognitive
affair but also includes her wants, desires, feelings, and attitudes. The ex-
pression of speaker attitude leads to many of the complexities of modal
expressions (might, should, must, ought, may, will, and so on), as well as
to a large percentage of the complex constructions such as inªnitival and
sentential complements (I want to X, I think that X, and so on). It might
be interesting to ask exactly why people need to express so many different
kinds of modal and psychological attitudes, involving such nuanced dis-
tinctions, but that would take us far aªeld into other areas of psychology.
In general, the third point is simply that languages are complicated be-
cause they provide resources for speakers to express a wide variety of psy-
chological attitudes toward the things they are talking about.
Fourth and ªnally, when people confront certain of these functions re-
peatedly many scores of times every day, they try to take advantage of the
predictability of these recurrent communicative situations to ªnd short-
cuts of expression—mainly by reducing longer and more complex expres-
sions to shorter and more compact ones. This process of grammati-
calization creates some linguistic symbols that are perceptually relatively
indistinct because they are shorter and often not stressed (grammatical
morphemes). But more importantly, because the same morpheme may be
grammaticalized within different expressions or constructions—and even
within different genres of discourse such as conversation versus narra-
tive—this process serves to create some of the many plurifunctionalities
that so bedevil language learners, both adult and child. As opposed to the
other three factors, in this case we are talking less about the complexities
in the kinds of things people need to talk about, and more about issues of
efªcient information processing and the like. Highly grammaticized and
plurifunctional morphology is indeed the weak link from an acquisition
point of view in many situations. But it apparently serves its functions ade-
quately and is not unlearnable—or else it would not be there.
And so the fourth point is that languages are complicated because lan-
guage users in one generation exploit the predictability of certain commu-
nicative situations in order to abbreviate recurrent expressions, and this
creates for the next generation of learners a set of perceptually indistinct
and often plurifunctional linguistic symbols—and sometimes learners even
294
Constructing a Language

confront expressions or constructions in the middle of the grammaticali-
zation process.
Children thus encounter early in their lives a bewildering array of lin-
guistic items and structures that have evolved historically to meet the
many different communicative needs of their linguistic communities. In
some cases, they experience a similar need and then go and ªnd the appro-
priate linguistic devices to ªll that need. In other cases, however, they
learn a linguistic device ªrst for a single function and only later discover
some of its many other functions when they encounter it in some subtly
different use, perhaps in a different mode of discourse. The late discovery
of some of these other functions sometimes depends on children’s further
cognitive development and sometimes depends on their obtaining enough
exposure to the relevant linguistic forms to enable them to sort out all the
complexities—or both.
8.2. Pyscholinguistic Processes of Acquisition
In the current account of child language acquisition, we have done basi-
cally two things: (1) we have documented many of the most important
kinds of linguistic items and structures that children initially acquire, and
(2) we have argued and presented evidence for the existence of certain gen-
eral cognitive processes—falling under the two overall headings of inten-
tion-reading and pattern-ªnding—that account for the acquisition pro-
cess. In order to bring some coherence to the story, it is useful to now
review, and to some degree synthesize, the different processes involved in
children’s language development. There are four basic sets of processes,
each of which does its own job:
• intention-reading and cultural learning, which account for how chil-
dren learn linguistic symbols in the ªrst place;
• schematization and analogy, which account for how children create
abstract syntactic constructions out of the concrete pieces of language
they have heard;
• entrenchment and competition, which account for how children con-
strain their abstractions to those that are conventional in their lin-
guistic community;
• functionally based distributional analysis, which accounts for how
children form paradigmatic categories of various kinds of linguistic
constituents.
These are the processes by means of which children construct a lan-
guage, that is, a structured inventory of linguistic constructions. I should
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
295

emphasize again that underlying all of these processes are children’s skills
of intention-reading. It is important to stress this because young children
use communicative function (as determined by intention-reading) not only
to acquire concrete words and expressions but also to make analogies
among constructions and to form paradigmatic categories of various kinds
of linguistic items. This is a crucial theoretical point that will help to dis-
tinguish the current approach both from generative grammar and from
the otherwise very compatible approach of connectionism, which mainly
operates with little attention to communicative function (a point to be re-
visited in Chapter 9).
8.2.1. Intention-Reading and Cultural Learning
Because natural languages are conventional, the most fundamental pro-
cess of language acquisition is the ability to do things the way other people
do them, that is, social learning broadly deªned. Social learning in general
is widespread in the animal kingdom (see Heyes and Galef, 1996), but so-
cial learning comes in many forms.
As argued in Chapter 2, the acquisition of most cultural skills, including
skills of linguistic communication, depends on a special type of social
learning involving intention-reading that is most often called cultural
learning, one form of which is imitative learning (Tomasello, Kruger, and
Ratner, 1993). This can be seen most clearly in experiments in which
young children reproduce an adult’s intended action even when she does
not actually perform it (Meltzoff, 1995) and in which they selectively re-
produce only an adult’s intentional, but not her accidental, actions (Car-
penter, Akhtar, and Tomasello, 1998a). To make matters more compli-
cated, the acquisition of language involves the imitative learning of adult
behaviors expressing not just simple intentions but communicative inten-
tions (roughly, intentions toward my intentions—such as how you are try-
ing to direct my attention). Children’s ability to read and learn the expres-
sion of communicative intentions can be seen most clearly in word-
learning studies in which young children have to identify the adult’s in-
tended referent in a wide variety of situations in which word and referent
are not both present simultaneously (see Chapter 3). There is no evidence
that any other animal species engages in social learning processes that take
account of the intentions, much less the communicative intentions, of oth-
ers (Tomasello, 1996).
In human linguistic communication the most fundamental unit of inten-
tional action is the utterance as a relatively complete and coherent expres-
sion of a communicative intention, and so the most fundamental unit of
language learning is stored exemplars of utterances. This is what children
296
Constructing a Language

do in learning holophrases and other concrete and relatively ªxed linguis-
tic expressions (Thank You, Don’t mention it, and so on). But as they are
attempting to comprehend the communicative intention underlying an ut-
terance, children are also attempting to comprehend the functional roles
being played by its various components. This is a kind of “blame assign-
ment” procedure in which the attempt is to determine the functional role
of a constituent in the communicative intention as a whole—what we have
called segmenting communicative intentions. Identifying the functional
roles of the components of utterances is possible only if the child has some
(perhaps imperfect) understanding of the adult’s overall communicative
intention—because understanding the functional role of X means under-
standing how X contributes to some larger communicative structure. This
is the basic process by means of which children learn the communicative
functions of particular words, phrases, and other utterance constituents—
and, with help from pattern-ªnding skills, categories of these.
And so, the foundational process of language learning is hearing an
adult utterance, reading the communicative intention embodied in that ut-
terance, segmenting that communicative intention into component parts
(in most cases), and storing the comprehended utterance and components.
This is how all concrete pieces of language must be learned if they are later
to be used conventionally and creatively in novel communicative circum-
stances. The basic reason that other animal species do not communicate
with conspeciªcs using something like a human language is that they do
not read the intentions or communicative intentions of others, much less
segment these into component parts.
8.2.2. Schematization and Analogy
As documented in Section 4.1.4, young children hear and use—on a
numbingly regular basis—the same utterances repeated over and over but
with systematic variation, for example, as instantiated in item-based
schemas such as I wanna X, Let’s X, Gimme X, I’m Xing it, Where’s-the
X? Can you X? Forming schemas of this type means imitatively learning
the recurrent concrete pieces of language for concrete functions, as well as
forming a relatively abstract slot designating a relatively abstract function.
This process is called schematization (see Chapter 4), and its roots may be
observed in a variety of primate species who schematize everything from
food-processing skills (Byrne, 1995; Whiten, 1998) to arbitrary sequences
in the laboratory (Ramus et al., 2000; Hauser, Weiss, and Marcus, in
press; see Conway and Christiansen, 2001, for a review).
The variable elements or slots in linguistic schemas correspond to the
variable items of experience in the referential event for which that schema
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
297

is used. Thus, in Where’s-the X the speaker’s seeking is constant across in-
stances but the thing being sought changes across situations; in I’m Xing it
the acting on an object is constant but the particular action varies. The
communicative function of the item in a slot is thus constrained by the
overall communicative function of the schema, but it is still somewhat
open; it is a slot-ªller category in the sense of Nelson (1985). This primacy
of the schema leads to the kinds of functional coercion evidenced in cre-
ative uses of language in which an item is used in a schema that requires
the listener to interpret that item in an unusual way; for example, under
communicative pressure a child might say something like Allgone sticky,
as she watches Mom wiping candy off her hands. The point is simply that
the slots in item-based schemas are functionally deªned (they have almost
no phonological restrictions, as do many morphological schemas) but this
functional deªnition can be stretched to ªt individual cases—which is per-
haps the major source of syntactic creativity in the language of 1- and 2-
year-old children.
One special form of schematization is analogy—or, alternatively, we
might say that one special form of analogy is schematization (see Chap-
ter 5). Both exemplify the process by which children try to categorize, in
the general sense of this term, whole utterances and/or signiªcant other
linguistic constructions (such as nominals). In general, we may say that an
analogy can be made only if there is some understanding of the functional
interrelations of the component parts of the two entities to be analogized
across—at least in the case of syntax (in morphology there can be some
analogies based on sound patterns). To understand the analogy “an atom
is like a solar system” one has to understand something about the compo-
nent parts of atoms and solar systems and how they work and relate to
one another in each case; indeed the analogy effaces the particular objects
involved altogether. Nonhuman primates can form relational categories of
a sort (Tomasello and Call, 1997; Thompson and Oden, 2000), but the
kinds of analogies that human children make are based on a much richer
set of functional interrelations.
In the case of syntactic constructions, analogies are made not on the ba-
sis of surface form but on the basis of the functional interrelations among
components in the two constructions being analogized. Thus, the X is Y-
ing the Z and the A is B-ing the C are analogous because the same basic re-
lational situation is being referred to in each case, and X and A play the
role of actor, Y and B the activity, and Z and C the undergoer. In this way,
different constructions develop their own syntactic roles, ªrst locally in
item-based constructions (such as “thrower” and “thing thrown”), and
then more globally in abstract constructions (such as transitive-subject,
ditransitive-recipient). There may even emerge late in development, in
298
Constructing a Language

some languages, a super-abstract Subject-Predicate construction contain-
ing an abstract syntactic role such as “subject” more generally, based on
abstractions across various abstract constructions. It is possible that per-
ceptual similarity (or even identity) of the objects involved in analogies,
while not strictly necessary, does in many cases facilitate human beings in
their attempts to make analogies (see Childers and Tomasello, 2001). If
so, this explains why children begin by schematizing across utterances
with common linguistic material, thus creating item-based constructions,
before they attempt to make totally abstract analogies based on a struc-
ture mapping involving little or no common linguistic material across ut-
terances, thus creating abstract constructions.
An important part of item-based and abstract constructions is various
kinds of syntactic marking, speciªcally indicating the syntactic roles that
participants are playing in the scene or event as a whole. For example,
English-speaking children learn at some point that X’s VERBing me means
that X is doing something to me, I’m VERBing X means that I am doing
something to X, and X’s getting VERBed means that something is being
done to X. The construction thus structures the interrelations among the
basic events and participants in the referential scene, and children learn
this. Indeed, one of the major functions of particular patterns of grammat-
ical morphology in constructions (some instances of which seem to have
only a very bleached-out meaning individually, as in the passive above) is
to enable the recognition of the construction as an independent symbolic
unit in which certain roles reside (Croft, 2001). Special symbols such as
case markers and word order are the most common devices that languages
use in general to mark the basic “who’s doing what to whom” of an utter-
ance. This kind of marking of roles may be thought of as the use of sec-
ond-order symbols, since the function of the markers is to indicate how
the linguistic items they mark should be construed in the meaning of the
utterance as a whole. In their normal activities, including communicative
activities, nonhuman animals would not seem to be using anything corre-
sponding to syntactic marking in schemas (but see Zuberbühler, 2002, for
an interesting observation involving a wild monkey species).
And so, the most fundamental process in the acquisition of abstract
grammatical competence is schematizing or analogizing across utterances
and signiªcant utterance constituents and so forming syntactic construc-
tions, some parts of which are concrete and some parts of which are ab-
stract slots—the limiting case being totally abstract constructions with
abstract syntactic roles. Since every language has different speciªc con-
structions, there is really no alternative to assuming that something like
this is going on when children start to produce creative yet canonical ut-
terances in their native language. Understanding the role of some syntactic
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
299

symbols—applied either locally in item-based constructions or more gen-
erally in abstract constructions (or even more generally still)—is also an
important part of the process.
8.2.3. Entrenchment and Competition
It is easy to just say that children learn concrete pieces of language and
then generalize, without specifying how those generalizations are made.
This is the kind of blind induction that Chomsky has argued so eloquently
against, and indeed if that were the whole theory it would be little more
than hand waving. But there are principles of categorization and analogy
that determine the nature of the generalizations children make. These in-
clude both general principles (for example, Gentner’s ªndings of the im-
portant role of causal structure in analogies) and some more language-
speciªc principles (for example, ªndings about which kinds of verb mean-
ings may be reasonably classiªed together; Pinker, 1989). Moreover, and
importantly, additional constraints to the generalization process are pro-
vided by the information-processing principle of entrenchment and the
pragmatic principle of competition (contrast, preemption; see Chapter 5).
Entrenchment simply refers to the fact that when an organism does
something in the same way successfully enough times, that way of doing it
becomes habitual and it is very difªcult for another way of doing that
same thing to enter into the picture. Preemption, or contrast, is a commu-
nicative principle of roughly the form: if someone communicates to me us-
ing Form X, rather than Form Y, there was a reason for that choice related
to the speaker’s speciªc communicative intention. This motivates the lis-
tener to search for that reason and so to distinguish the two forms and
their appropriate communicative contexts. Together, entrenchment and
preemption may be thought of as a single process of competition in which
the different possible forms for effecting different classes of communica-
tive functions compete with one another on the basis of a number of prin-
ciples, including frequency/entrenchment.
It is nevertheless true that we know very little about the speciªcs of how
all of this works. Thus, we know very little about the nature and fre-
quency of the syntactic overgeneralization errors that children make at
different developmental periods. Further, there is only one empirical study
evaluating the effectiveness of entrenchment in preventing syntactic
overgeneralizations (Brooks et al., 1999), and that study has no direct
measures of the exact frequency of the verbs involved. Similarly, there is
only one study of preemption and of semantic classes of verbs as con-
straining factors (Brooks and Tomasello, 1999a), and this study worked
with only a narrow range of structures and verbs. And so, until we actu-
300
Constructing a Language

ally do some of the necessary empirical work, and see how these general
principles actually work when applied to speciªc linguistic items and
structures in speciªc languages, we will still be doing a fair amount of
hand waving about how children make exactly the generalizations they do
and not others. But of course it must be added that generative approaches
engage in a fair amount of hand waving themselves in appealing to ab-
stract principles of universal grammar to constrain children’s generali-
zations.
In terms of evolutionary roots, entrenchment is very similar to a number
of basic processes of animal learning investigated by learning theorists and
going under such names as habit-formation; it is also similar to processes
investigated by cognitive scientists under such names as routinization and
automatization. Preemption or contrast might also be thought of as simi-
lar to some basic principles of animal learning, sometimes called blocking,
in which one response tends to inhibit others to the same stimulus. How-
ever, contrast as we have conceptualized it here concerns a version of this
as manifest in communicative intentions, which means that it has to do
with understanding the choices other people intentionally make and why
they make them. Construed in this way, contrast would be a uniquely hu-
man pragmatic principle.
It is probably true that constraining linguistic generalizations appropri-
ately is the aspect of the current usage-based theory that, at the moment, is
its weakest link. The two most important ways to help remedy this situa-
tion are: (1) a closer and more detailed analysis of the kinds of “errors”
that children make and the kinds of linguistic experiences and communi-
cative pressures that might lead to these (and constrain them); and (2)
more experimental work on such things as the quantitative dimensions of
how entrenchment and preemption work to constrain generalizations in
the cases of many different particular constructions.
8.2.4. Functionally Based Distributional Analysis
Paradigmatic categories such and noun and verb provide language learn-
ers with many creative possibilities, as they enable learners to use newly
learned items the way other “similar” items have been used in the past—
with no direct experience. These categories are formed through a process
of functionally based distributional analysis in which concrete linguistic
items (such as words or phrases) that serve the same communicative func-
tion in utterances and constructions over time are grouped together into a
category. Thus, noun is a paradigmatic category based on the functions
that different words of this type serve within nominal constructions—with
related categories being such things as pronouns and common nouns,
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
301

based on the related but different functions these perform. Paradigmatic
categories are thus deªned in functional terms by their distributional-
combinatorial properties: nouns are what nouns do in larger linguistic
structures. This provides the functional basis by means of which these
paradigmatic linguistic categories cohere.
It is important to emphasize that this same process of functionally based
distributional analysis also operates on units of language larger than
words. For example, what is typically called a noun phrase may be consti-
tuted by anything from a proper name to a pronoun to a common noun
with a determiner and a relative clause hanging off it. But for many syn-
tactic purposes these may all be treated as the same kind of unit. How can
this be—given their very different surface forms? The only reasonable an-
swer is that they are treated as units of the same type because they all do
the same job in utterances: they identify a referent playing some role in the
scene being depicted. Indeed, given the very different forms of the different
nominals involved, it is difªcult to even think of an alternative to this
functionally based account.
And so again in this case, we ªnd that children’s basic pattern-ªnding
processes work on linguistic items and structures understood as symbols
with both a form and, importantly, a communicative function. Indeed, it
may be said in general that the kinds of linguistic categorization that char-
acterize human psycholinguistic processing depend most fundamentally
on the functional dimension of linguistic symbols—since the members of
many paradigmatic categories (for example, nouns or noun phrases) have
no common elements of form at all. In the case of nonhuman primates, it
is not even clear where to start to look for such categories—either with
normal animals or with those raised by humans—since virtually all of the
work on nonhuman primate categorization involves perceptual categories
only (that is, detecting perceptual similarities among objects). Perhaps the
closest thing would be studies of some human-raised apes categorizing ob-
jects on the basis of their function, for example, tools versus foods (see
Tomasello and Call, 1997). But again, humans take this functionally
based categorization to new levels in acquiring the conventional uses of
the paradigmatic categories of a natural language.
Categorization is one of the most heavily researched areas in the cogni-
tive sciences, including developmental psychology. But how children form
categories in natural languages—a process of grouping together not items
of perceptual or conceptual experience but rather items used in linguistic
communication—has been very little investigated. The arguments made
here suggest that future research on children’s skills of linguistic categori-
zation should focus on communicative function as an essential, indeed the
essential, element—analogous to the focus on function in the work of Nel-
302
Constructing a Language

son and Mandler on event categories and slot-ªller categories in non-
linguistic domains. It is only by investigating how children identify and
equate the functional roles linguistic items play in the different construc-
tions of which they are a part that we will discover how children build the
abstract categories responsible for so much of linguistic creativity.
8.2.5. But Is This Enough?
Chomsky and other generative grammarians have consistently maintained
that psycholinguistic processes such as those just enumerated are not
sufªcient to enable a human being to acquire a natural language. But it is
important to note that generative grammarians are not talking here about
concrete pieces of language, schematic idioms, quirky constructions, or
even the basic conventional syntactic constructions of a language. Indeed,
in dual process approaches (words and rules; Pinker, 1999) it is
speciªcally stated that basic psychological and learning processes are
sufªcient for acquisition of the items and structures of a language not par-
ticipating in core grammar. Thus, children are said to use basic psycho-
linguistic processes not only to acquire words and idioms but also to ac-
quire irregular rules such as forming the past tense of verbs like sing and
ring with the irregular forms sang and rang (sometimes overgeneralized to
things like brang). Everyone, of all theoretical persuasions, thus agrees
that something like the account given here—with some arguing over de-
tails—is necessary for the acquisition of a major part of human linguistic
competence.
So what is missing? Which aspects of linguistic competence cannot be
acquired in this way? As presaged above, the predictable list from genera-
tive grammarians is things like question formation and other construc-
tions where structure dependency is crucial, along with the binding princi-
ples and other so-called constraints on so-called movement. But what if
structure dependence is a simple reºection of the fact that multiple items
of a language can work together for a single communicative function and
so can form a larger functional unit, such as a complex nominal contain-
ing a relative clause aimed at effecting a single act of reference? Then
structure dependency would seem to arise quite naturally from functional,
usage-based, psycholinguistic processes of language acquisition. And what
if there is no such thing as movement—and therefore no need for con-
straints on movement? What if the formal linguists’ practice of ªnding ab-
stract patterns by formally transforming different constructions into one
another is just a meta-linguistic game with no psychological signiªcance?
Then many of the linguistic structures that seem to demand an explana-
tion over and above one based on basic psycholinguistic processes—that
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
303

is, those that seem to require the invoking of formal principles, parame-
ters, constraints, and features—simply do not exist. Then, it would be
quite logical to propose that all aspects of language structure—from the
more idiosyncratic to the more canonical—would all be acquired in the
same basic way.
The other predictable charge from generative grammarians against ap-
proaches grounded in basic psycholinguistic processes is vagueness or lack
of theoretical rigor. But if we think about other activities in which young
children engage and how they are studied, we can ask: Vague relative to
what? When developmental psychologists study children’s development of
mathematical skills, they do not take all of the mathematical complexities
of the developmental endpoint, place them in the minds of 2-year-olds,
and worry about vagueness when someone talks about such important
processes as categorizing objects in the world, ordering objects with re-
spect to some quantitative dimension, and psychologically chunking larger
quantities so as to operate with big numbers more efªciently. So why
should we worry about vagueness when we are providing a similar ac-
count of a domain that has no more formal properties than does the acqui-
sition of mathematical competence? The answer is that we should not. We
have much more important things to worry about, for example, all of the
many unanswered empirical questions that have been enumerated in the
preceding chapters.
And so we have before us the choice between a single process theory
and a dual process theory. For reasons emanating mostly from the sociol-
ogy of science and historical factors, the argument has been posed so that
the burden of proof has been mainly placed on single process theorists to
demonstrate that their approach can work. They have not succeeded in
doing this completely, and the current theory is no exception. But the
more normal conceptualization of this theoretical choice—based on
Occam’s Razor or some such—would be to place the burden of proof on
the dual process theorists. Why do we need the phlogiston/ether of univer-
sal grammar—which is what necessitates the second process—at all? What
is it doing anyway? Why not just chuck it?
It is possible that other usage-based theorists would argue that some of
the acquisition processes just enumerated are not necessary, that some of
them are redundant with one another or reducible to a more basic one,
that others are needed, or that the understanding of communicative inten-
tions is not a necessary component of some or any of them. These are all
reasonable arguments. But the attempt in this book has been to show in
each case why the hypothesized process is necessary. The basic justiªcat-
ion is that each one deals with a different aspect of the process of language
acquisition, such as acquiring concrete pieces of language, making ab-
304
Constructing a Language

stractions of different kinds, constraining abstractions, and forming para-
digmatic categories. It seems difªcult to do without any of them—
although perhaps they work in such different ways in the acquisition of
speciªc structures or in speciªc languages that sub-types should be more
clearly distinguished. These are all empirical questions.
8.3. Psycholinguistic Processes of Production
So far we have focused almost exclusively on how children build up their
inventories of linguistic items and structures. But also important is the
way they use this inventory to produce utterances on speciªc occasions of
use. Thus, sometimes they produce relatively ªxed concrete expressions.
Perhaps this provides a production shortcut avoiding deep structural anal-
yses, which may be especially helpful for young children whose skills in
this regard are not great (see Wray and Perkins, 2000, on the role of for-
mulaic language in human communication). Children also formulate
many of their early utterances using some routinized expression as a kind
of skeletal template, as in such pivot schemas as Can-we X?
In addition, of course, children construct some utterances in an even
more creative manner from various bits and pieces whose functions they
know from previous usage. This involves myriad cognitive processes fall-
ing under the general description of usage-based syntactic operations (or
so-called cut and paste operations), including everything from ªlling a slot
in an item-based construction to adding something onto a construction to
integrating two constructions in a novel way. The cognitive dimension of
these processes is sometimes called symbolic integration or conceptual
blending (Langacker, 1987a; Fauconnier, 1997). The main difference here
from traditional accounts is the recognition that children do not have to
create each of their utterances from the ground up, using meaningful
words and meaningless rules, but rather they integrate together in various
ways many different kinds of already constructed constructions, each with
an associated communicative function. Interestingly, aspects of this pro-
cess may be indexed by various parameters of ºuency in the way children
produce utterances and pieces of utterances, and the process may be
inºuenced in various ways by children’s developing capacities with respect
to working memory, presumably the processing locale for utterance con-
struction.
8.3.1. Imitation, Formulaicity, and Fluency
As outlined in Chapter 2, children can hear an utterance used for a partic-
ular communicative purpose and when they have the same communicative
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
305

purpose use that same utterance—perhaps with some small modiªcations
appropriate to the discourse context. The question that remains about
such productions is the degree to which the child understands the commu-
nicative functions of their constituents. This is obviously an empirical
question in any particular case, but a number of researchers have noted
that young children quite often produce what seem to be unanalyzed
chunks that an adult would see as multi-morphemic. This is true in both
morphologically rich languages, where children initially learn complex
multi-morphemic words as wholes, and in more isolating languages where
children learn some number of so-called frozen phrases such as Lemme-
see, I-wanna-do-it, and Gimme-that (Peters, 1983; Lieven, Pine, and
Dresner Barnes, 1992). In her classic and controversial paper, R. Clark
(1974) called this “performance without competence” (see Perkins, 2000,
for a review).
But in the usage-based view children can in addition learn chunks of
language that are nevertheless analyzed. The basic idea is this. In sponta-
neous spoken speech, adults typically speak in what has been called into-
nation units (Chafe, 1994). These are relatively ºuently produced stretches
of language, typically containing six or seven words and no more than one
new piece of information (DuBois, 1987). Intonation units correspond in
the vast majority of cases (over 90 percent) to grammatical units such as
clauses, noun phrases, and prepositional phrases (Croft, 1995). There is
much evidence that stretches of language that a person uses repeatedly be-
gin to approach unit status for purposes of language production, espe-
cially when they are used consistently for the same communicative func-
tion. For example, as noted above, Bybee and Scheibmann (1999) found
that the highly frequent English expression I-dunno is pronounced in re-
duced form, with the constituent don’t being pronounced in a totally dif-
ferent way from its pronunciation in other linguistic contexts. In a classic
series of experiments, Goldman-Eisler (1968) had adults repeat novel ex-
pressions many times, and found that over time their productions became
more ºuent, suggesting a move toward unit status (similar to I-dunno).
The existence of multi-morphemic ºuent units of speech that the child
controls as single units is of tremendous theoretical importance for theo-
ries of linguistic competence and performance. It means that children do
not have to put together every utterance from scratch and that their lin-
guistic competence consists not just of individual morphemes and words
but also of larger chunks of language with relatively complex internal
structures. Obviously, children can be learning at the same time ºuent
units of speech that are mixed in the sense of having some analyzed and
some unanalyzed parts (as in Gimme-the X). The hard part, as we will see
below, is then in coordinating these prefabricated pieces of language in
functionally coherent ways.
306
Constructing a Language

An interesting proposal by Elbers (1995), potentially relevant to these
issues, is that much of children’s syntactic development derives from their
analysis of their own linguistic productions. Thus, if a child produces an
utterance without a full adult-like understanding, upon hearing it (per-
haps along with other related utterances), she performs analyses similar to
those she would perform on adult utterances that she hears. Elbers argues
that the analysis of one’s own linguistic productions has many advantages
over the analysis of the speech of others, the most important being that
one always knows the underlying communicative intention. Perhaps of
crucial importance are analyses that work both on the language the child
hears and on that she produces.
8.3.2. Usage-Based Syntactic Operations
If children are not putting together creative utterances with meaningful
words and meaningless rules, then what exactly are they doing? In the cur-
rent usage-based view, what they are doing is constructing utterances out
of various already mastered pieces of language of various shapes, sizes,
and degrees of internal structure and abstraction—in ways appropriate to
the exigencies of the current usage event. To engage in this process of sym-
bolic integration, in which the child ªts together into a coherent whole
such things as an item-based construction and a novel item to go in the
slot, the child must be focused on both form and function.
Lieven et al. (in press) addressed this issue in a naturalistic study of one
2-year-old child learning English. The novelty was that this child’s lan-
guage was recorded using extremely dense taping intervals: 5 hours per
week for 6 weeks, roughly 5–10 times denser than most existing databases
of child language and accounting for approximately 8–10 percent of all of
the child’s utterances during this period. In order to investigate this child’s
constructional creativity, all of her 537 utterances produced during the
last one-hour taping session at the end of the 6-week period were desig-
nated as target utterances (295 multi-word utterances). Then, for each tar-
get utterance, there was a search for “similar” utterances produced by the
child (not the mother) in the previous 6 weeks of taping. The main goal
was thus to determine for each utterance recorded on the ªnal day of the
study what kinds of syntactic operations were necessary for its produc-
tion, that is to say, in what ways the child had to modify things she had
previously said (her “stored linguistic experience”) to produce the thing
she was now saying. We may call these operations “usage-based syntactic
operations” since they explicitly indicate that the child does not put to-
gether each of her utterances from scratch, morpheme by morpheme, but
rather, she puts together her utterances from a motley assortment of dif-
ferent kinds of preexisting psycholinguistic units.
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
307

What was found by this procedure was the following:
• 21 percent of all of this child’s utterances on the target day (single
word and multi-word) were novel utterances; 79 percent were things
she had said before.
• 37 percent of the multi-word utterances on the target day were novel
utterances; 63 percent were things she had said before (in exactly the
same form).
• Of the novel multi-word utterances, 74 percent consisted of repeti-
tion of some part of a previously used utterance with only one small
change, for example, some new word was “ªlled in” to a slot or
“added on” to the beginning or end. For example, the child had said
many hundreds of times previously Where’s the __? and on the target
tape she produced the novel utterance Where’s the butter? The major-
ity of the item-based, utterance-level constructions that the child used
on the last day of the study she had used many times during the pre-
vious six weeks.
• 26 percent of the novel multi-word utterances on the last tape (5 per-
cent of all utterances during the hour) differed from things this child
had said before in more than one way. These mostly involved the
combination of “ªlling in” and “adding on” to an established utter-
ance-level construction, but there were several utterances that seemed
to be novel in more complex ways.
It is important to note that there was also very high functional consistency
across different uses of this child’s utterance-level constructions, that is,
the child ªlled a given slot with basically the same kind or kinds of lin-
guistic items or phrases across the entire six-week period of the study. Fig-
ure 8.1 displays some examples of creative utterances of different types
and their hypothesized precedents from the child’s already mastered items
and item-based constructions.
In view of these ªndings, we might say that children have three basic op-
tions for producing an utterance on a particular occasion of use:
• First, they might retrieve a functionally appropriate concrete expres-
sion and just say it as they have heard it said (and probably said it be-
fore themselves). For example, they say Up! or There-ya-go.
• Second, they might retrieve an utterance-level construction and simul-
taneously tweak it to ªt the current communicative situation. The ba-
sic ways they can do this are: (1) ªlling a new constituent into a slot
in the item-based construction (as when I wanna ---- and ball com-
bine to make I wanna ball); (2) adding a new constituent onto the be-
ginning or end of an utterance-level construction or expression (as
308
Constructing a Language

when Throw it and here combine to make Throw it here); and (3) in-
serting a new constituent into the middle of an utterance-level con-
struction or expression (the way a German child might insert auch
[too] into a schema position where nothing had ever before ap-
peared).
• Third, a child might produce an utterance by combining constituent
schemas without using an utterance-level construction. In the absence
of an utterance-level construction, they presumably do this on the ba-
sis of various kinds of pragmatic principles governing the ordering of
old and new information, and so forth—although there is very little
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
309
Tiny little bit here [1]
burnt [0]
[13 ]
+
Put it on my OBJ.
plate [2]
[50 ]
+
I want a OBJ.
chair [9]
[3]
Let’s
it.
ACT
roll [5] together [4]
[50 ]
+
Down the OBJ.
stairs [4]
Get off [2]
[
]
50+
OBJ and
.
OBJ
red [45 ]
+
blue [22 ]
+
[50 ]
+
I want OBJ.
lounge [3]
tissue [9]
Key
Fill in (or insert
or substitute)
Add on
Figure 8.1. Some possible usage-based syntactic operations involving two
operations, especially “ªlling in” and “adding on” (hypothetical frequencies in
parentheses).

relevant research here. The idea is very close to Braine’s (1976)
“groping patterns.”
These processes of utterance production may be called usage-based syn-
tactic operations because the child does not begin with words and mor-
phemes and glue them together with contentless rules; rather, she starts
with already constructed pieces of language of various shapes, sizes, and
degrees of abstraction (and whose internal complexities she may control
to varying degrees), and then “cuts and pastes” these together in a way ap-
propriate to the current communicative situation. It is important to note
in this metaphor that to cut and paste effectively a speaker is always
making sure that the functions of the various pieces ªt together function-
ally in the intended manner—one does not cut and paste indiscriminately
in a word-processing document but in ways that “ªt.” These processes
may also work at the level of utterance constituents and their internal
structure.
There may be differences in the ways individual children use these three
strategies, but it is likely that all children early in development learn at
least some utterance-level constructions and expressions as production
units that allow them to ºuently and efªciently express entire communica-
tive intentions (at the very least such things as Thank-you and Bye-bye,
but also many frequent utterance schemas like I wanna X and Where’s-the
X?). Utterance-level constructions—both item-based and more abstract—
are thus a major, if not the major, target of children’s early language-learn-
ing efforts, a major way station on the road to more adult-like linguistic
competence. Nominal and clausal constructions, as major constituents of
utterance-level constructions, are also major targets of children’s early lan-
guage-learning efforts as they enable the ºuent expression of recurrent ut-
terance sub-functions ºexibly in novel utterances (see Chapter 6). There
are certainly important cross-linguistic differences in how all of this
works, but in some languages it is simply a case of children working with
bound morphemes rather than words, in many of the same ways outlined
above. That is to say, there is no difference in principle between an Eng-
lish-speaking child learning an utterance-level construction with three
adult words and an open slot, and an Inuktitut child learning an utter-
ance-level construction with one free morpheme, two bound morphemes,
and an open morpheme slot (see again Dabrowska, 2001, on syntactic
constructions as “big words”).
An intriguing source of evidence for identifying usage-based syntactic
operations comes from a close study of the units one can see in their pro-
ductions based on various parameters of intonation and ºuency, involving
such things as pauses, hesitations, false starts, and reformulations. In an
310
Constructing a Language

enlightening review of stuttering and other speech disºuencies, Karniol
(1999) provides strong evidence that young children’s sentence-produc-
tion strategies change in signiªcant ways during the 2- to 3-year age pe-
riod. The basic facts are these. Most children show an increase in disºuent
utterances in the 2- to 3-year age period, with stutterers simply represent-
ing the end of a continuum. Signiªcantly, the utterance-production prob-
lems experienced by normal children and stutterers are the same, and they
have to do not with speech, as is commonly believed, but with utterance
planning in general. Evidence for this proposal includes the following
facts: (1) stuttering children show no problem imitating or reading utter-
ances similar to those they have trouble producing; (2) stuttering children
experience most difªculties at points requiring the most planning, that is,
at utterance-initial and clause-initial locations (consistent with the behav-
ior of normal children); (3) stuttering occurs most often with utterances
that are more syntactically complex (also consistent with the behavior of
normal children); and (4) more than three-quarters of all stuttering chil-
dren recover spontaneously, and a therapy that focuses on utterance pro-
duction in general (not speech) can be quite effective. In a recent study of
normal children, Rispoli and Hadley (in press) showed that children pro-
duce the most disºuences in their most syntactically complex utterances.
Karniol (1999) argues that stuttering symptoms (word repetition,
blocking, elongation) occur in both stuttering and non-stuttering children
for the same reasons. They occur at a developmental point when children
must change their utterance-production strategies because their compe-
tence with more and more complex constructions is increasing, as is their
competence in more complex discourse interactions. Karniol argues that
at this more advanced level, children cannot simply spit out an exemplar
of an utterance-level construction, but rather they must coordinate such
preplanned elements and active on-line revisions in discourse. Of special
importance seem to be issues in coordinating the rhythmic (supraseg-
mental) properties associated with both the preplanned and the spontane-
ous linguistic structures often required in spontaneous discourse.
A study by Wijnen (1990) is generally supportive of this perspective.
Wijnen presented evidence that there may be signiªcant changes in normal
children’s utterance-production strategies at around this same 2- to 3-year
age period. The language development of a single Dutch boy was followed
from roughly age 2 to age 3. The ºuency with which this child produced
each of his utterances at different developmental periods was noted (espe-
cially in terms of repetitions, revisions, and incomplete phrases). Wijnen
found that the number of disºuent utterances increased in the middle of
the year and then decreased near the end of the year. The increase in
disºuencies was explained in terms of a change of utterance-planning
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
311

strategies necessitated by the child’s acquisition of ever more complex con-
structions. Interestingly, this child’s disºuency rate began to decline in as-
sociation with his acquisition of some new “syntactic frames” that en-
abled him to regain his ºuency using larger chunks. There are virtually no
other studies that investigate at this level of detail the relationship between
children’s emerging syntactic competence and their emerging skills of ut-
terance production.
These ªndings on children’s changing levels of ºuency during the 2- to
3-year age period might suggest a reason why children seem to have an ini-
tial tendency to focus on utterance-level constructions as the major orga-
nizer for their spontaneous utterances. The reason is that these construc-
tions contain—all in a single, at least partially prefabricated unit (either
with or without some constant linguistic material)—the basic semantics
and pragmatics that the child wishes to produce encapsulated in a well-
known rhythmic structure. But when this strategy begins to be inadequate
to meet the child’s communicative needs in complex discourse contexts,
typically as she nears her third birthday, she must begin to use more cre-
ative strategies in which utterances are produced out of a combination of
prefabricated
units
and
on-line
adaptations,
with
no
preexisting
suprasegmental prosodic package for the whole.
8.3.3. Production Limitations and Working Memory
Many researchers believe that young children have much more compe-
tence with language than their child-like productions would lead one to
believe. Despite the plausibility of positing that young children have frag-
ile skills of working memory and language processing, the fact is that there
are no cases in which children’s limited productions have been explained
by empirically identiªed processing limitations (and much evidence to the
contrary; e.g., Braine, 1974; Bloom, 1973; Brown, 1973). Nevertheless,
performance limitations continue to be used widely by some theorists as a
way of explaining why young children’s linguistic productions do not
match with their hypothesized adult-like competence (see Section 5.4.1).
It is clearly not the case that children possess fully adult-like language
processing and performance capabilities, and it is very likely that limita-
tions of these kinds affect what they can and cannot learn. This is why
measures of working memory correlate with children’s early language
skills (Adams and Gathercole, 1995, 1996, 2000). And this may well be
why deªcits in working memory appear to be at least partly responsible
for language impairments (Bishop, North and Donlan, 1996; Botting and
Conti-Ramsden, 2001). But, counterintuitively, there have been some pro-
posals that a limited working memory may actually work to young chil-
312
Constructing a Language

dren’s advantage in the learning of complex linguistic structures (not pro-
duction or performance). Thus, Newport (1990) argued that one of the
reasons young children seem to be better language learners than adults is
that “less is more”: with a limited working memory, young children are
not distracted by some of the syntactic complexities that adult learners
cannot help attending to. Elman (1993) even found that simulating such a
limitation in a connectionist model helped the computer program to learn.
In a recent review of many different lines of evidence—including ªrst-
language acquisition, second-language acquisition, and computational
modeling—Brooks and Kempe (submitted) conclude, contrary to New-
port and Elman, that a larger working memory can only be helpful in lan-
guage learning. This is demonstrated by the facts that (1) adult learners
learn more and learn more quickly than child learners when input is con-
trolled (Snow and Hoefnagel-Höhle, 1978), (2) there are positive correla-
tions between working memory and language learning (Adams and
Gathercole, 2000), and (3) new computer simulations call into question
the less-is-more hypothesis (Rohde and Plaut, 1999). Brooks and Kempe
explain the well-known ªnding that child second-language learners attain
higher levels of ultimate competence than adult second-language learners
by pointing to the greater amount of input that children are normally ex-
posed to, the simpliªcations in child-directed speech that children experi-
ence, and the lack of interference from a ªrst language. They thus claim
that less is indeed more, just not in the sense of a limited memory capacity;
receiving simpliªed input and having less interference from a ªrst lan-
guage is what really helps. But there is a dearth of experimental studies
with young children in which working memory is systematically manipu-
lated (for example, by requiring them to perform some parallel task) and
language learning is systematically assessed.
The overall conclusion would thus seem to be that more is more in
terms of working memory. Having a larger working memory enables chil-
dren to both comprehend and produce more complex syntactic structures.
But less may be more when it comes to input and interference from an-
other language, that is, it may be better to get simpliªed input initially no
matter the size of working memory—and a less entrenched ªrst language
to interfere with the second seems to be a good thing as well.
8.3.4. Pragmatic Grounding
The other thing that children must manage in parallel as they produce an
utterance in a particular usage event is the formulation of that utterance in
terms appropriate to the particular communicative context. The child
must pragmatically ground what she wants to say in the current joint
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
313

attentional frame—which involves the choice of linguistic items and struc-
tures both to indicate speaker attitude and to accommodate to listener
perspective. Accommodating to listener perspective means using appropri-
ate morpho-syntax both at the level of the utterance (using the construc-
tion type that embodies the most felicitous perspective for the listener) and
at the level of phrases (choosing the appropriate nominal form for felici-
tous reference and the appropriate tense-aspect-modality marking for fe-
licitous predication). And all of these decisions take on even more com-
plex dimensions at the level of larger stretches of discourse and narrative,
where such things as topic maintenance and reference tracking across
clauses are major concerns.
Communication within a dual level intentional structure—a joint
attentional frame within which communicative intentions are expressed—
seems to be uniquely human and based on uniquely human intention-
reading skills. As noted in Chapter 6, children struggle for some time with
pragmatic grounding (as do adults), and their skills seem to depend to
some extent on perspective-taking skills that develop in signiªcant ways
during the preschool period. Our knowledge of how children learn these
pragmatic strategies—involving an understanding of the choices other
people make based on an assessment of the listener’s knowledge and per-
spective—is very meager at this point. There are almost no experimental
studies that manipulate the shared joint attentional scene between a child
and an adult (perhaps created by discourse) and look at the constructions
the child uses as a result.
8.4. The Development of Linguistic Representations
From a cognitive science point of view, the central issue in the study of lan-
guage development is the nature of children’s underlying linguistic repre-
sentations and how these change during ontogeny. Obviously, to investi-
gate this question we need a linguistic theory in which to couch our
descriptions of children’s linguistic representations.
From a cognitive-functional linguistics point of view the ªrst stipulation
is that all representations, from morphemes to words to syntactic con-
structions, are composed of a form and a function. The function is the
communicative intention behind a linguistic item or structure, and it must
be formulated in terms of the cognitive structures with which children
conceptualize their worlds at different points in development. One exam-
ple is the diagrams presented in Chapter 3 (taken from Tomasello, 1992a),
which depict the meaning of children’s early verb island constructions in
terms of objects and their spatial and causal relations as they unfold over
discrete moments of attention (for example, an object is ªrst present and
314
Constructing a Language

then absent, or is in one location and then another, or a person causes an
object to change state, or a person engages in an activity). The constitutive
elements of these diagrams—whose overall structure was taken from the
theory of Langacker (1987a)—are based on hypotheses about what kind
of cognitive structures young children have available to them at which de-
velopmental periods. The use of such iconic diagrams is justiªed by theo-
retical approaches in cognitive science which argue that human cognition
is based, ªrst and most importantly, in processes of human perception
(Barsalou, 1999). In terms of form, we have depicted the structural form
of children’s linguistic constructions using Croft’s (2001) radical construc-
tion grammar “formalism,” which allows for a mixture of speciªc lexical
items, construction-speciªc syntactic roles, and more construction-general
paradigmatic categories. Future research should work to integrate these
ways of representing linguistic form and function in a more intimate man-
ner than has been effected in this book.
But regardless of formal representations, there are still things to be in-
vestigated in general about (1) how abstract children’s linguistic represen-
tations are at different points in early development, and (2) how children
organize their constructions cognitively at different points in development.
8.4.1. Exemplars into Abstractions
I have argued repeatedly throughout the preceding chapters that children’s
early linguistic representations are highly concrete, based in concrete and
speciªc pieces of language, not in abstract categories (although they have
some open slot-ªller categories as well). The data supporting this conclu-
sion are overwhelming. They include:
• analyses of children’s spontaneous productions showing (1) very re-
stricted ranges of application of many early linguistic items and struc-
tures, (2) asynchronous development of item-based constructions
that from an adult point of view should have similar structures, and
(3) gradual and continuous development within speciªc item-based
structures;
• production experiments in which young children use nonce verbs in
the way adults have used them, failing to generalize them to others of
their existing constructions—suggesting that these existing construc-
tions are item-based and not verb-general; and
• comprehension experiments in which young children, who know the
activity they are supposed to act out in response to a nonce verb, fail
to assign the correct agent-patient roles to the characters involved on
the basis of canonical word-order cues (in English)—again suggesting
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
315

that their constructions at this point are item-based and not totally
general.
One other recent ªnding supports this same conclusion. It is a priming
study, and unlike most other experimental approaches it does not rely on
introducing children to nonce words, but rather it exposes them to, and
lets them use, their native language. Savage, Lieven, and Tomasello (in
press) primed English-speaking children with either active or passive sen-
tences, in some cases with high lexical overlap between the priming sen-
tence and the sentence the child was likely to produce (that is, the prime
used some pronouns and grammatical morphemes that the child could use
in her target utterance even though different objects and actions were in-
volved) and in some cases with very low lexical overlap (the prime used
only nouns, which the child could not use in her target utterance since dif-
ferent objects were involved). In some ways, this method could be consid-
ered the most direct test yet of children’s early syntactic representations,
since successful priming in the “high lexical overlap” condition would
suggest that their linguistic knowledge is represented more in terms of
speciªc lexical items, whereas priming in the “low lexical overlap” condi-
tion would suggest that their linguistic knowledge is represented more ab-
stractly. Following Bock and Grifªn (2000), Pickering and Brannigan
(1999), and other adult psycholinguists, the question is thus whether chil-
dren are subject to so-called structural priming. The answer is that the
older children, around 6 years of age, could indeed be structurally primed
to produce a particular construction such as the passive. The younger chil-
dren, who had just turned 3 years old, could not be primed structurally;
but they were primed by the more lexically speciªc primes. Four-year-olds
fell somewhere between these two extremes. So once more—in this case
using a very different method, widely accepted in the adult psycho-
linguistic community—we ªnd that children’s early linguistic representa-
tions are very likely based in speciªc item-based constructions (with some
abstract slots), and it is only in the late preschool period that their utter-
ance-level constructions take on adult-like abstractness.
But rather than thinking of children’s utterance-level constructions as ei-
ther concrete or abstract, it is probably better to think of them as growing
gradually in abstractness over time as more and more relevant exemplars
are encountered and assimilated to the construction. Two sets of ªndings
support this more developmental view. The ªrst are the various preferen-
tial looking studies reviewed in Chapter 4, in which (some methodological
problems aside) it seems that children display more abstract linguistic
knowledge than in other experimental procedures (see especially Fisher,
2000, 2002). Overall this should not be surprising since in many domains
316
Constructing a Language

of cognitive development young children show skills in preferential look-
ing experiments that they do not show under more demanding experimen-
tal conditions (Haith and Benson, 1997). It may thus be that preferential
looking studies of children’s language are revealing very weak initial ab-
stractions that are strong enough to govern their looking patterns but not
strong enough to guide their behavior in situations in which they must ei-
ther act on the world or produce utterances. These stronger representa-
tions emerge gradually as children accumulate more linguistic experience.
The second set of studies are those of Akhtar (1999) and Abbot-Smith,
Lieven, and Tomasello (2001), as also reported in Chapter 4. In these
studies young children were exposed to nonce verbs in noncanonical Eng-
lish word orders (such as Gafªng the girl the boy). When later given the
opportunity to use the new verb with new characters, the 4-year-olds cor-
rected the word order to canonical English SVO—ignoring the aberrant
input. The 2-year-olds, in contrast, did not correct the weird word order
but followed the input (even though they did correct to SVO order sen-
tences in the same weird order but with a familiar verb, such as push). The
two groups of 3-year-olds were in between (see Figure 8.2), thus produc-
ing a very clear age trend. One interpretation of these results is that the
younger children could be driven by the weird input in their use of the
novel verb because their linguistic representations were not as abstract or
as “strong” as those of the older children who resisted the pull of the im-
mediate input. Perhaps it is also useful in this context to mention the study
of Brooks et al. (1999), who found that young children could be induced
to make overgeneralization transitivity errors (such as He disappeared it)
much more readily with verbs they had heard very few times than with
those they had heard many times—with this tendency being more preva-
lent at younger ages (age 3 as opposed to age 6). Again this might imply
that the more experience children have with particular linguistic items and
structures—as a function of both frequency in the environment and time
(age)—the stronger is the underlying representation.
One reasonable interpretation of all the studies directly aimed at chil-
dren’s underlying linguistic representation is thus as follows. From about
2 or 212 years of age children have only very weak verb-general represen-
tations of their utterance-level constructions, and so these show up only in
preferential looking tasks which require only weak representations. But
over the next months and years their linguistic representations grow in
strength and abstractness—on the basis of both the type and the token fre-
quency with which they hear certain linguistic structures—and so these
now begin to show themselves in tasks requiring more active behavioral
decision-making or even language production, which require stronger rep-
resentations. This hypothesis is in the general spirit of a number of pro-
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
317

posals suggesting that, if cognitive representations retain information
about the variety of individual instances, they may be felicitously de-
scribed as being either weaker or stronger mainly according to their type
and token frequency (e.g. Munakata et al., 1997). It is also consonant
with the view that “linguistic knowledge” and “linguistic processing” are
really just different aspects of the same thing. Thus, things like frequency
and the probabilistic distribution of lexical items in the input not only play
a crucial role in how children build up their linguistic representations, but
they also form an integral part of those representations themselves in the
end state (see the papers in Barlow and Kemmer, 2000; Elman et al.,
1996).
8.4.2. Building a Structured Inventory of Constructions
As their utterance-level constructions become gradually stronger and more
abstract, children may begin to ªnd links among them in various ways. We
are not in a position to say much about this at the moment, as there is very
little relevant research, and the issue is not even very well settled in adult
318
Constructing a Language
Ungrammatical
familiar verb
Ungrammatical novel
Grammatical novel
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2;4 (Abbot-Smith
et al.)
3;6 (
)
Akhtar
3;9 (Abbot-Smith
et al.)
2;8 (Akhtar)
4;4 (Akhtar)
Mismatches
Figure 8.2. Mean percentage of utterances which were mismatches, as a function
of condition and age group. Based on Akhtar (1999) and Abbot-Smith, Lieven,
and Tomasello (2001).

linguistics. But, as indicated in Chapter 4, there would seem to be two
kinds of links of most importance: instance links and part-whole links.
Instance link simply refers to the kind of abstraction process just elabo-
rated. As children make more abstractions, things lower in the hierar-
chy—more concrete pieces of language—are seen as instances of more
general and abstract constructions and categories. And so, for example,
we might observe something as in Figure 8.3 for the get-passive construc-
tion. In this diagram, at the bottom are individual utterances which a child
could, if she heard any one of them often enough, produce as concrete ex-
pressions. At the second level are speciªed the versions of the construction
with and without the by phrase. Finally, at the top of the hierarchy is a
representation of the get-passive construction incorporating both of these
variants. It is possible that there is still another level at which the get-pas-
sive is united with the be-passive.
Is there still another level at which the general passive construction is
united with other constructions of the English language? Given the diver-
sity of constructions involved—including everything from imperatives
without subjects to wh-questions with the subject (as determined by agree-
ment) following the verb to passives in which the subject is the recipient of
the action semantically—one reasonable answer is that they are united in
only a very loose way. Thus it is possible that there is something like a
Subject-Predicate construction superseding the main abstract utterance-
level constructions of English—for mature speakers, that is. But at the
same time as this super-structure represents commonalities among ab-
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
319
Figure 8.3. Hypothetical depiction of some sub-constructions of the English
passive.

stract constructions, it also fails to represent any of the special properties
of subjects and predicates in these diverse constructions. In any case, re-
gardless of how many levels there might be and how abstract these might
be, in particular instances it is very likely that human beings at all ages ac-
tually operate most of the time psycholinguistically with constructions
near the lower end of the hierarchy (Langacker, 2000).
The other important types of links, as touched upon in Chapter 6, are
the links that must be established between constructions in order to pro-
duce an utterance. Most importantly, mature individuals construct nomi-
nal constructions and clausal constructions in a partially modularized
fashion which must then be coordinated with the utterance-level construc-
tion being used. Since a number of different utterance-level constructions
use these in different ways—in particular tense-aspect-modality (TAM)
marking in such things as questions in English—this can potentially be
quite complicated.
The only substantive proposal made here is that children begin this pro-
cess in an unmodularized fashion, at least for the things associated with
verbs and clauses (nominals may be fairly modularized from the beginning
since they are used as complete utterances so often and since their speciªc
form has so little effect on the rest of the construction). The proposal is
that children’s TAM marking is initially done for each constructional is-
land separately, and only gradually and in piecemeal fashion do children
begin to abstract some notion of verb phrase or clause that is common
across all different utterance-level constructions. But again in this case the
abstraction only represents commonalities that exist at a very general
level. People probably operate most often at a much lower level in which,
for example, the TAM marking in wh-questions is done the way that par-
ticular construction does it—without much concern for other construc-
tions (or the deep similarities that linguists can, with much time and effort,
dig up).
8.5. Summary
It is clear from all that has been reported and discussed in the previous
chapters that acquiring competence with a natural language requires chil-
dren to do many different things. At the very least, they must be able to:
comprehend communicative intentions as expressed in utterances; seg-
ment communicative intentions and ongoing speech and so extract indi-
vidual words from these utterances; create linguistic schemas with slots;
mark syntactic roles in item-based constructions; form abstract construc-
tions across these schemas via analogy; perform distributional analyses to
form paradigmatic categories; learn to take their current listener’s perspec-
320
Constructing a Language

tive into account in both forming and choosing among conventional nom-
inal and clausal constructions; learn to comprehend and express different
modalities and negation (speaker attitude); acquire competence with com-
plex constructions containing two or more predicates; learn to manage
conversations and narratives, keeping track of referents over long
stretches of discourse; cut and paste together stored linguistic units to pro-
duce particular utterances appropriate to the current communicative con-
text; and on and on.
There are no fully adequate theoretical accounts of how young children
do all of this, including the current theory. But the current approach holds
out more promise than those based on formal linguistic models, mainly
because it takes account of a wider range of biological, cultural, and
psycholinguistic processes of language acquisition—including those in-
volved in the symbolic dimensions of linguistic communication, which are
programmatically ignored by formal linguists. In the current approach,
the human capacity for language is best seen as a conspiracy of many dif-
ferent cognitive, social-cognitive, information-processing, and learning
skills, some of which human beings share with other primates and some of
which are unique products of human evolution. But these processes have
something to work on during ontogeny only because linguistic symbols
and constructions have evolved culturally and historically—and so exist as
a part of the child’s species-typical environment before she arrives on the
scene. Over historical and ontogenetic time novel linguistic structures
emerge (see papers in MacWhinney, 1999).
In this chapter I have summarized, and to some degree integrated, some
of the ontogenetic processes involved children’s language acquisition and
use. These are: intention-reading and cultural learning, which account for
how children learn linguistic symbols in the ªrst place; schematization and
analogy, which account for how children create abstract syntactic con-
structions out of the concrete pieces of language they have heard; en-
trenchment and competition, which account for how children constrain
their abstractions to those that are conventional in their linguistic commu-
nity; and functionally based distributional analysis, which accounts for
how children form paradigmatic categories of various kinds of linguistic
constituents. I have proposed that skills of intention-reading are founda-
tional to all of these since they participate in most of the pattern-ªnding
processes as well. Symbolically integrating (cutting and pasting) together
in functionally appropriate ways pieces of language that children have
learned or constructed through intention-reading and pattern-ªnding in-
volves, in one way or another, all of these processes put to new uses, as
well as other processes of working memory, motor planning, and like.
As a ªnal theoretical point, it is important to stress once again that even
Biological, Cultural, and Ontogenetic Processes
321

if there were something like an innate universal grammar, children would
still need to engage in processes such as those enumerated in this chap-
ter—by everyone’s admission—in order to acquire the many lexical sym-
bols, ªxed expressions, schematic idioms, and grammatical conventions of
their particular language. The usage-based processes enumerated in this
book thus play an important role in the language acquisition process, no
matter one’s theoretical orientation. Given the relative success of this ap-
proach and even of connectionist models—employing only a subset of the
processes here enumerated—the question becomes why we need a second
mechanism of acquisition or a universal grammar at all.
322
Constructing a Language

Constructing a Language
Toward a Psychology of Language Acquisition
N I N E
Toward a Psychology of
Language Acquisition
For remember that in general we don’t use language
according to strict rules—it hasn’t been taught to us by
means of strict rules either.
—LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN
IN THE INTRODUCTION to his 1984 book, Lan-
guage Learnability and Language Development, Pinker expressed disap-
pointment in the ªeld of child language acquisition. Chomsky (1957,
1965) and others had argued that since language is the most important
and distinctive cognitive skill of human beings, the study of its origins in
human phylogeny and ontogeny should be a centerpiece of cognitive sci-
ence and should lead to signiªcant new insights into the workings of the
human mind. But in the two decades between Chomsky’s arguments and
his own book, Pinker did not see the kind of progress anticipated. He at-
tributed this lack of progress to a lack of linguistic sophistication in the
ªeld. The 1984 book was an attempt to rectify the situation by providing a
rigorous treatment of major topics in language acquisition within the
framework of a formal linguistic theory (lexical functional grammar).
Pinker intended his approach to set us on a productive new course, and in-
deed there has been a fair amount of research activity in the general direc-
tion he envisaged. But one could reasonably argue that this approach has
led to very little progress in discovering how human children become
skilled users of a natural language.
One diagnosis of the reasons for this failure is as follows. In order to
gain the theoretical rigor he wanted, Pinker (1984) invoked the theoretical
tools of lexical functional grammar. But since these tools were developed
to analyze adult language, and since children’s language on the surface
does not look like adult language, he had to make the continuity assump-
tion: underneath, the language of children is structured by the same ab-
stract categories and rules as that of adults. This was a mistake. There is

not one shred of evidence for the continuity assumption. The reason chil-
dren’s language does not look like adult language is that it is not like it in
terms of the underlying representations involved; children’s language is
structured by much weaker and more local linguistic abstractions. Per-
haps, then, we should abandon the continuity assumption and instead
adopt the developmental assumption that whereas the processes working
at different developmental stages are constant, the actual structures and
representations involved are different at these different stages.
In the modern study of child language acquisition the best-known theo-
retical alternative to generative grammar is of course connectionism (e.g.,
Elman, 2001). This approach has much to offer, as it is a single-mecha-
nism theory, it does not depend on any a priori formal linguistic theory,
and it is totally data-driven from the bottom up. But given what we have
learned from the empirical studies reviewed in this book, connectionist
models at the moment are psychologically unrealistic in two basic ways.
First, they do not deal with communicative intentions or function. Admit-
tedly, they do seem to be able to simulate many aspects of language acqui-
sition simply by looking at patterns in the surface distribution of forms.
But this is not the way children do it. Children are focused on the adult’s
communicative intentions as they attempt to comprehend her immediate
utterance, and communicative function is the main basis for their linguis-
tic generalizations over time (otherwise they would be totally bafºed by a
language’s
many
homonyms
and
proforms,
among
other
things).
Connectionist modelers are aware of all this (e.g., MacWhinney, 1999);
they are simply working for the moment with what is most tractable. But
we can hope that in the not too distant future there will be ways of deal-
ing with communicative intention and function in these computational
models.
Second, at the moment connectionist models work only with very small
units such as words and grammatical morphemes. But the data and theo-
retical arguments reviewed in this book suggest that children also work
with larger units such as whole linguistic constructions. These also have
functions, and it was argued above that making analogies across these lin-
guistic gestalts requires reference to these functions (this is especially true
in syntax, as opposed to morphology). It should also be noted that many
connectionist modelers claim that a language can be learned and used
without any linguistic abstractions at all. This is partly an issue of how
one deªnes abstractions, as connectionist models contain weighted units
whose weights are a direct function of the exemplars encountered—a kind
of pseudo-abstraction, perhaps. The empirical point is simply that chil-
dren’s productivity with nonce forms after a certain age clearly suggests
324
Constructing a Language

some form of emergent linguistic abstractions, however these might be
conceived or implemented.
The usage-based approach advocated in this book is offered up as an al-
ternative to both of these better-known theories. The novel features of the
current theory—in contrast with both formal linguistic models and
connectionist models—may be summarized in three emphases. First, the
current model is thoroughly functionalist—based explicitly in the expres-
sion and comprehension of communicative intentions (intention-reading).
This focus is shared by neither generative grammar nor connectionism (in
its current instantiations), mainly because both are concerned much more
with the acquisition of formal patterns than with the acquisition of con-
crete pieces of language for use in referring to and predicating things
about phenomena in the real world. If human cognitive representations
derive most directly from human perception (Barsalou, 1999), then our
theoretical representations of linguistic representations should contain in-
formation about how language is used to direct people’s attention to
events and entities in the current joint attentional frame. Moreover, it is
extremely difªcult to see how either generative grammar or connectionism
could ever deal adequately with the appropriate use of the many prag-
matic grounding devices by means of which people take account of the
knowledge, expectations, and perspective of their listeners. These are an
integral part of everyday linguistic communication, and they are in fact
the raison d’être for many important morphological and syntactic con-
structions of the language. Are these to simply be left out of account? Ap-
proaches that ignore function also ignore the apparent fact, as argued
above, that children use function to make many of their most basic and
important linguistic generalizations at all stages of development.
The current approach thus posits intention-reading—speciªcally, the
understanding and segmenting of communicative intentions as they are
expressed in all kinds of linguistic items and structures—as primary in the
language acquisition process, including all of the most important pro-
cesses of pattern-ªnding. The essential question, then, is whether we can
explain how human beings create and ªnd linguistic patterns without
making reference to communicative function. This is an empirical ques-
tion, and many people—from both the generativist and connectionist
camps—are betting that we can. But my assessment is that we cannot, at
least not if psychological reality is our ultimate goal.
Second, the current approach is construction-based. This has two im-
portant implications. First, it means that the focus is on whole utterances
and constructions—not isolated words or morphemes—as the most fun-
damental units of language acquisition. Utterances are the primary reality
Toward a Psychology of Language Acquisition
325

of language from a communicative point of view because they are the
most direct embodiment of a speaker’s communicative intentions. And so
it is utterances—not words or abstract categories—that children are ini-
tially focused on learning. Abstracting in various ways across these utter-
ances and their constituents leads children to utterance-level, nominal, and
clausal constructions, which are themselves meaningful linguistic symbols:
linguistic gestalts. The process by which children do this involves as an es-
sential component their cognitive skills at making analogies across com-
plex relational structures. Unfortunately, this is a process of language ac-
quisition that has received very little research attention from acquisition
theorists of any persuasion, mainly because of the almost exclusive focus
of most theorists on paradigmatic categories such as noun and verb or so-
called grammatical relations (syntactic roles) such as subject and object
(Tomasello, 1998d). These categories and syntactic roles are important as
well, of course, but they can be induced only if children ªrst have some
comprehension of the larger utterances and constructions of which they
form a part. Our conclusion in Chapter 5 was precisely that we cannot ac-
count for the facts of child language acquisition without positing some
such larger structures across which children make analogies and within
which they perform their functionally based distributional analyses.
The other main implication of a construction-based view is that we fo-
cus on children’s learning and use of particular words, phrases, and ex-
pressions, as concrete linguistic entities—a focus shared with connec-
tionism, but not with generative grammar. As children attempt to read the
intentions of other persons as expressed in utterances, they extract words
and functionally coherent phrases from these utterances, but they also cre-
ate item-based constructions with open slots on the level of whole utter-
ances. Few theorists of language acquisition deal with these humble cre-
ations, and those who have dealt with them (e.g., Braine, 1976) have not
provided an account by means of which they evolve into more abstract
and adult-like constructions. But item-based constructions are of crucial
importance to syntactic development as an important way station, and in-
deed modern construction grammar accounts of adult linguistic compe-
tence emphasize that they constitute an important component of adult lin-
guistic competence as well (e.g., Fillmore, Kaye, and O’Conner, 1988;
Fillmore, 1989; Pawley and Syder, 1983). This means that we can posit
our own kind of continuity in the process of child language acquisition. In
this case, however, we are not talking about a continuity in linguistic rep-
resentations across development, but rather a continuity of the processes
by means of which human language users, at all stages of ontogeny, are
storing linguistic units of various kinds and at the same time making many
kinds of abstractions across them as well.
326
Constructing a Language

Third, the current approach is usage-based. This perspective entails a
commitment to the proposition that language structure emerges from lan-
guage use, both historically and ontogenetically. In ontogeny, the hypothe-
sis is that a child hears and stores concrete utterances and then ªnds pat-
terns in these stored utterances. This is a gradual and uneven process that
depends crucially on the type and token frequency with which certain
structures appear in the input—which itself depends on the rate at which
they appear and on time (age). This means that over developmental time
children’s linguistic representations become stronger and more abstract,
but they can—depending on input—do this very locally as children hear
different numbers of exemplars, that vary from one another in different
ways, for different construction types.
Focusing on production, a usage-based perspective means focusing on
how children construct, from their stored linguistic experience, utterances
that are adapted for their listener in the current usage event. Usage-based
syntactic operations are the psycholinguistic mechanisms by means of
which children symbolically integrate the various kinds of units in their
linguistic inventories—from simple to complex, from concrete to ab-
stract—in creative ways on particular occasions of use. We have only just
begun to identify the speciªcs involved, but the focus on relatively com-
plex linguistic expressions and constructions as available to children in
prefabricated form—either with or without the knowledge of their inter-
nal constituency—leads us to posit a whole different set of operations
from the meaningful words and meaningless rules posited by more formal
approaches. We can thus talk about such things as ªlling slots in pivot
schemas, adding things onto item-based constructions, concatenating
clauses to create novel utterances without an utterance-level construction,
inserting things into constructions, and on and on. The main theoretical
point is simply that by taking this approach we may attempt to discover
empirically the actual syntactic operations that children are using psycho-
linguistically rather than specifying all the possibilities ahead of time on
the basis of an abstract formal theory.
Perhaps most radically, the current usage-based proposal, following
those of Langacker (1987a) and Bybee (1995), claims that children and
adults have access to their hierarchy of linguistic constructions at several
levels of abstraction simultaneously. This means that in many cases chil-
dren’s comprehension and production of relatively complex utterances are
based on a simple retrieval of stored expressions, whereas in other cases
they are based on the cutting and pasting together of stored linguistic
schemas and constructions of various kinds and degrees of abstraction.
This would seem to be the way that people master a variety of cognitive
skills, and there is no reason to think that language is any different in this
Toward a Psychology of Language Acquisition
327

regard. Importantly, when we focus in this way on language use and us-
age-based operations, we must perforce invoke in our acquisition theory a
variety of cognitive and social-cognitive processes that originate from out-
side the domain of language per se (perception, memory, joint attention,
intention-reading, categorization, analogy, and so on).
In all, these are exciting times in the language sciences, including the
study of child language acquisition. New discoveries in a science often fol-
low upon the development of novel methodologies and the new observa-
tions that these enable. And so, it is only in recent years that large corpora
of both written and spoken language have become available—with even
larger ones on the way—and many of these can be searched automatically,
enabling larger quantities and thus the use of more powerful statistical
techniques. In the study of language development, the CHILDES corpora
make it “relatively” easy to answer speciªc questions about spontaneous
spoken speech. In addition, new experimental approaches to child lan-
guage acquisition are being devised at an ever-increasing rate, drawing on
experience both from adult cognitive science (including adult psycho-
linguistics) and from other areas of developmental psychology. There are
thus a variety of new measurement techniques to identify basic psycho-
linguistic representations and processes, ranging from priming techniques
to the identiªcation of the intonational contours encapsulating utterances
to the tracking of eye movements during language comprehension and
production to the computational modeling of various learning processes.
But these new methodological techniques will be of long-term beneªt to
the ªeld only if we get our theoretical house in order. This involves, in my
opinion, adopting a view of human linguistic competence based less on an
analogy to formal languages and more on empirical research in the cogni-
tive sciences. Of special importance is integrating our theories of child lan-
guage acquisition with theory and research on children’s cognitive, social-
cognitive, and communicative development in general. How children be-
come competent users of a natural language is not a logical problem but
an empirical problem.
328
Constructing a Language

References
References
References
Acknowledgments
Index


References
Abbot-Smith, K., Lieven, E., and Tomasello, M. 2001. What children do and do
not do with ungrammatical word orders. Cognitive Development 16, 1–14.
——— Submitted. Training two-year-olds to produce the transitive.
Acredolo, L. P., and Goodwyn, S. W. 1988. Symbolic gesturing in normal infants.
Child Development 59, 450–466.
Adams, A. M., and Gathercole, S. E. 1995. Phonological working memory and
speech production in preschool children. Journal of Speech and Hearing Re-
search 38, 403–414.
——— 1996. Phonological working memory and spoken language development in
young children. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 49A(1), 216–
233.
——— 2000. Limitations in working memory: Implications for language develop-
ment. International Journal of Language and Communication Disorders 35,
95–116
Akhtar, N. 1999. Acquiring basic word order: Evidence for data-driven learning of
syntactic structure. Journal of Child Language 26, 339–356.
Akhtar, N., Carpenter, M., and Tomasello, M. 1996. The role of discourse novelty
in early word learning. Child Development 67, 635–645.
Akhtar, N., Dunham, F., and Dunham, P. 1991. Directive interactions and early
vocabulary development: The role of joint attentional focus. Journal of Child
Language 18, 41–50.
Akhtar, N., Jipson, J., and Callanan, M. 2001. Learning words through overhear-
ing. Child Development 72, 416–430.
Akhtar, N., and Montague, L. 1999. Early lexical acquisition: The role of cross-
situational learning. First Language 19, 347–358.
Akhtar, N., and Tomasello, M. 1996. Two-year-olds learn words for absent ob-
jects and actions. British Journal of Developmental Psychology 14, 79–93.
——— 1997. Young children’s productivity with word order and verb morphol-
ogy. Developmental Psychology 33, 952–965.

Aksu-Koç, A. 1988. The acquisition of aspects and modality. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
——— 1998. The role of input vs. universal predispositions in the emergence of
tense-aspect morphology: Evidence from Turkish. First Language 18, 255–
280.
Aksu-Koç, A., and Slobin, D. 1986. A psychological account of the development
and use of evidentials in Turkish. In W. Chafe and J. N. Chafe, eds.,
Evidentiality: The linguistic coding of epistemology. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Aksu-Koç, A., and von Stutterheim, C. 1994. Temporal relations in narrative: Si-
multaneity. In Berman and Slobin 1994.
Allen, S. 1996. Aspects of argument structure acquisition in Inuktitut. Amsterdam:
Benjamins.
——— In press. A discourse-pragmatic explanation for the subject-object asym-
metry in early null arguments: The principle of informativeness revisited. In
R. Shillcock, A. Sorace, and C. Heycock, eds., Proceedings of the Third
GALA Conference.
Allen, S. E. M., and Crago, M. B. 1996. Early passive acquisition in Inuktitut.
Journal of Child Language 23, 129–156.
Allen, S. E. M., and Schröder, H. 2000. Preferred argument structure in early
Inuktitut spontaneous speech data. In J. W. DuBois, L. E. Kumpf, and W. J.
Ashby, eds., Preferred argument structure: Grammar as architecture for func-
tion. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Ambalu, D., Chiat, S., and Pring, T. 1997. When is it best to hear a verb? The ef-
fects of timing and focus of verb models on children’s learning of verbs. Jour-
nal of Child Language 24, 25–34.
Anglin, J. 1993. Vocabulary development: A morphological analysis. Monographs
of the Society for Research in Child Development 58(238), 1–166.
Anisfeld, M., Rosenberg, E. S., Hoberman, M. J., and Gasparini, D. 1998. Lexical
acceleration coincides with the onset of combinatorial speech. First Language
18, 165–184.
Anselmi, D., Tomasello, M., and Acunzo, M. 1986. Young children’s responses to
neutral and speciªc contingent queries. Journal of Child Language 13, 135–
44.
Antinucci, F., and Miller, R. 1976. How children talk about what happened. Jour-
nal of Child Language 3, 167–189.
Appleton, M., and Reddy, V. 1996. Teaching three-year-olds to pass belief tests: A
conversational approach. Social Development 5, 275–291.
Ariel, M. 1988. Referring and accessibility. Journal of Linguistics 24, 65–87.
Atkinson, M. 1996. Now, hang on a minute: Some reºections on emerging ortho-
doxies. In H. Clahsen, ed., Generative perspectives on language acquisition.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bachrach, V. R., and Luszcz, M. A. 1979. Communicative competence in young
children: The use of implicit linguistic information. Child Development 50,
260–263.
——— 1983. The emergence of communicative competence: Detection of conver-
sational topics. Journal of Child Language 10, 623–637.
Baillargeon, R. 1995. Physical reasoning in infancy. In M. Gazzaniga, ed., The
cognitive neurosciences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
332
References

Bakeman, R., and Adamson, L. 1984. Coordinating attention to people and ob-
jects in mother-infant and peer-infant interactions. Child Development 55,
1278–89.
Baker, C. L., and McCarthy, J. J. 1981. The logical problem of language acquisi-
tion. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Baldwin, D. 1991. Infants’ contributions to the achievement of joint reference.
Child Development 62, 875–90.
Baldwin, D. 1993a. Infants’ ability to consult the speaker for clues to word refer-
ence. Journal of Child Language 20, 395–418.
——— 1993b. Early referential understanding: Young children’s ability to
recognize referential acts for what they are. Developmental Psychology 29, 1–
12.
——— 2000. Interpersonal understanding fuels knowledge acquisition. Current
Directions in Psychological Science 9, 40–45.
Baldwin, D. A., and Baird, J. A. 2001. Discerning intentions in dynamic human ac-
tion. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 5, 171–178.
Barlow, M., and Kemmer, S., eds. 2000. Usage based models of language acquisi-
tion. Stanford: CSLI Publications
Barnes, S., Gutfreund, M., Satterly, D., and Wells, G. 1983. Characteristics of
adult speech which predict children’s language development. Journal of Child
Language 10, 65–84.
Baron-Cohen, Simon 1995. Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of
mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Barrett, M. 1982. The holophrastic hypothesis: Conceptual and empirical issues.
Cognition 11, 47–76.
——— 1986. From education to segregation: An enquiry into the changing char-
acter of special provision for the retarded in England c. 1846–1918. Ph.D.
diss., University of Lancaster.
Barsalou, L. W. 1999. Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences
22, 577–609.
Barton, M., and Tomasello, M. 1994. The rest of the family: The role of fathers
and siblings in early language development. In C. Gallaway and B. Richards,
eds., Input and interaction in language acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
——— 1991. Joint attention and conversation in mother-sibling infant triads.
Child Development 62, 517–529.
Bartsch, K., and Wellman, H. 1995. Children talk about the mind. New York: Ox-
ford University Press.
Bascelli, E., and Barbieri, M. S. 2002. Italian children’s understanding of the
epistemic and deontic modal verbs dovere (must) and potere (may). Journal of
Child Language 29, 87–107.
Bassano, D. 1996. Functional and formal constraints on the emergence of
epistemic modality: A longitudinal study on French. First Language 16, 77–
113.
Bates, E. 1976. Language and context: The acquisition of pragmatics. New York:
Academic Press.
——— 1979. The emergence of symbols: Cognition and communication in in-
fancy. New York: Academic Press.
References
333

——— 1984. On the invention of language: An alternative view. Monographs of
the Society for Research in Child Development 49, 130–142.
Bates, E., Bretherton, I., and Snyder, L. 1988. From ªrst words to grammar: Indi-
vidual differences and dissociable mechanisms. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Bates, E., Camaioni, L., and Volterra, V. 1975. The acquisition of performatives
prior to speech. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly 21, 205–224.
Bates, E., and Goodman, J. 1997. On the inseparability of grammar and lexicon:
Evidence from acquisition, aphasia, and real time processing. Language and
Cognitive Processes 12, 507–587.
——— 1999. On the emergence of grammar from the lexicon. In B. MacWhinney,
ed., The emergence of language. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bates, E., and MacWhinney, B. 1979. The functionalist approach to the acquisi-
tion of grammar. In E. Ochs and B. Schieffelin, eds., Developmental
pragmatics. New York: Academic Press.
——— 1982. A functionalist approach to grammatical development. In Wanner
and Gleitman, 1982.
——— 1987. Competition, variation, and language learning. In B. MacWhinney,
ed., Mechanisms of language acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
——— 1989. Functionalism and the competition model. In B. MacWhinney and
E. Bates, eds., The cross-linguistic study of sentence processing. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Bates, E., MacWhinney, B., Caselli, C., Devoscovi, A., Natale, F., and Venza, V.
1984. A cross-linguistic study of the development of sentence comprehension
strategies. Child Development 55, 341–354.
Bates, E., and Roe, K. 2001. Language development in children with unilateral
brain injury. In C. A. Nelson and M. Luciana, eds., Handbook of develop-
mental cognitive neuroscience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bauer, P. 1996. What do infants recall of their lives? Memory for speciªc events by
one- to two-year-olds. American Psychologist 51, 29–41.
Bavin, E. L., and Growcott, C. 2000. Infants of 24–30 months understand verb
frames. In M. Perkins and S. Howard, eds., New directions in language devel-
opment and disorders. New York: Kluwer and Plenum.
Bavin, E. L., and Kidd, E. 2000. Learning new verbs: Beyond the input. In C. Da-
vis, T. J. van Gelder, and R. Wales, eds., Cognitive science in Australia.
Adelaide: Causal.
Behrend, D. 1990. The development of verb concepts: Children’s use of verbs to
label novel and familiar events. Child Development 61, 681–696.
Behrend, D. A., Harris, L. L., and Cartwright, K. B. 1995. Morphological cues to
verb meaning: Inºections and the initial mapping of verb meanings. Journal of
Child Language 22, 89–106.
Behrens, H. 1998. Where does the information go? Paper presented at MPI work-
shop on argument structure, Nijmegen.
——— 2001a. Cognitive-conceptual development and the acquisition of gram-
matical morphemes. In M. Bowerman and S. Levinson, eds., Language acqui-
sition and conceptual development. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——— 2001b. Learning multiple regularities: Evidence from overgeneralization
errors in the German plural. In A. H.-J. Do, L. Domínguez, and A. Johansen,
334
References

eds., Proceedings of the 26th Annual Boston University Conference on Lan-
guage Development. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Behrens, H., and Gut, U. Submitted. The relationship between syntactic and
prosodic organisation in early multiword speech.
Behrens, H., and Tomasello, M. 1999. And what about the Chinese? Behavioral
and Brain Sciences 22, 1014.
Bennett-Kastor, T. 1983. Noun phrases and coherence in child narrative. Journal
of Child Language 10, 135–149.
Berman, R. 1982. Verb-pattern alternation: The interface of morphology, syntax,
and semantics in Hebrew child language. Journal of Child Language 9, 169–
91.
——— 1993. Marking verb transitivity in Hebrew-speaking children. Journal of
Child Language 20, 641–670.
Berman, R., and Armon-Lotem, S. 1995. How grammatical are early verbs? Paper
presented at the Colloque International de Besançon sur l’Acquisition de la
Syntaxe, Besançon, France, Nov.
Berman, R., and Slobin, D. 1994. Relating events in narrative: A cross-linguistic
developmental study. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bickerton, D. 1984. The language bioprogram hypothesis. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 7, 173–221.
Birch, S. A. J., and Bloom, P. 2002. Preschoolers are sensitive to the speaker’s
knowledge when learning proper names. Child Development 73, 434–444
Bishop, D. V. M. 1997. Uncommon understanding: Development and disorders of
language comprehension in children. East Sussex, UK: Psychology Press.
Bishop, D. V. M., North, T., and Donlan, C. 1996. Nonword repetition as a be-
havioural marker for inherited language impairment: Evidence from a twin
study. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 37, 391–403.
Bloom, L. 1970. Language development: Form and function in emerging gram-
mars. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——— 1971. Why not pivot grammar? Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders
36, 40–50.
——— 1973. One word at a time. The Hague: Mouton.
——— 1992. Language development from two to three. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
——— 1993. The transition from infancy to language: Acquiring the power of ex-
pression. New York: Cambridge University Press.
——— 1994. Meaning and expression. In W. Overton and D. Palermo, eds., The
ontogenesis of meaning. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bloom, L., Lahey, M., Hood, L., Lifter, K., and Fiess, K. 1980. Complex sentences:
Acquisition of syntactic connectives and the meaning relations they encode.
Journal of Child Language 7, 235–261.
Bloom, L., Lifter, K., and Haªtz, J. 1980. The semantics of verbs and the develop-
ment of verb inºections in child language. Language 56, 386–412.
Bloom, L., Lightbown, P., and Hood, L. 1975. Structure and variation in child
language. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development
40(2).
Bloom, L., Rispoli, M., Gartner, B., and Haªtz, J. 1989. Acquisition of
complementation. Journal of Child Language 16, 101–120.
References
335

Bloom, L., Rocissano, L., and Hood, L. 1976. Adult-child discourse: Developmen-
tal interaction between information processing and linguistic knowledge.
Cognitive Psychology 8, 521–551.
Bloom, L., Tackeff, J., and Lahey, M. 1984. Learning “to” in complement con-
structions. Journal of Child Language 11, 391–406.
Bloom, L., Tinker, E., and Margulis, C. 1993. The words children learn: Evidence
for a verb bias in early vocabularies. Cognitive Development 8, 431–450.
Bloom, P. 1990. Subjectless sentences in child language. Linguistic Inquiry 21,
491–504.
——— 2000. How children learn the meanings of words. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Bock, J. K., and Grifªn, Z. M. 2000. The persistence of structural priming: Tran-
sient activation or implicit learning? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General 129, 177–192.
Bohannon, N., and Stanowicz, L. 1988. The issue of negative evidence: Adult re-
sponses to children’s language errors. Developmental Psychology 24, 684–
689.
Bonvillian, J. D., Garber, A. M., and Dell, S. B. 1997. Language origin accounts:
Was the gesture in the beginning? First-Language 17, 219–239.
Botting, N., and Conti-Ramsden, G. 2001. Non-word repetition and language de-
velopment in children with speciªc language impairment (SLI). International
Journal of Language and Communication Disorders 36, 421–432.
Bowerman, M. 1973. Early syntactic development. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
——— 1978. Systematizing semantic knowledge: Changes over time in the child’s
organization of word meaning. Child Development 49, 977–987.
——— 1979. The acquisition of complex sentences. In P. Fletcher and M. Garman,
eds., Language acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——— 1982. Reorganizational processes in lexical and syntactic development. In
Wanner and Gleitman, 1982.
——— 1985. What shapes children’s grammars? In D. I. Slobin, ed., The
crosslinguistic study of language acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
——— 1988. The “no negative evidence” problem: How do children avoid con-
structing an overgeneral grammar? In J. A. Hawkins, ed., Explaining lan-
guage universals. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
——— 1990. Mapping thematic roles onto syntactic functions: Are children
helped by innate linking rules? Linguistics 28, 1253–89.
——— 1996. Learning how to structure space for language: A cross-linguistic per-
spective. In P. Bloom, M. Peterson, L. Nadel, and M. Garret, eds., Language
and space. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——— 1997. Argument structure and learnability: Is a solution in sight? Berkeley
Linguistics Society 22, 454–468.
Bowerman, M., and Choi, S. 2001. Shaping meanings for language: Universal and
language-speciªc in the acquisition of spatial semantic categories. In
M. Bowerman and S. C. Levinson, eds., Language acquisition and conceptual
development. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Boyd, R., and Richerson, P. J. 1985. Culture and the evolutionary process. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.
336
References

Braine, M. 1963. The ontogeny of English phrase structure. Language 39, 1–14.
——— 1971. On two types of models of the internalization of grammars. In D. I.
Slobin, ed., The ontogenesis of grammar. New York: Academic Press.
——— 1974. On what might constitute learnable phonology. Language 50, 270–
299.
——— 1976. Children’s ªrst word combinations. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development 41(1).
——— 1992. What sort of innate structure is needed to bootstrap into syntax?
Cognition 45, 77–100.
——— 1994. Is nativism sufªcient? Journal of Child Language 21, 9–31.
Braine, M., Brody, R. E., Fisch, S. M., Weisberger, M. J., and Blum, M. 1990. Can
children use a verb without exposure to its argument structure? Journal of
Child Language 17, 313–342.
Braine, M., and Brooks, P. 1995. Verb-argument structure and the problem of
avoiding an overgeneral grammar. In Tomasello and Merriman 1995.
Braine, M. D. S., Brooks, P., Cowan, N., Samuels, M., and Tamis-LeMonda, C.
1993. The development of categories at the semantic/syntax interface. Cogni-
tive Development 8, 465–494.
Brent, M., and Siskind, J. M. 2000. The role of exposure to isolated words in early
vocabulary development. Cognition 81, B33–B44.
Bridges, A. 1984. Preschool children’s comprehension of agency. Journal of Child
Language 11, 593–610.
Brinkmann, U. 1995. The locative alternation: Its structure and acquisition.
Nijmegen: Thesis Katholieke Universiteit Nijmegen.
Bronckardt, J., and Sinclair, H. 1973. Time, tense, and aspect. Cognition 2 107–
130.
Brooks, P., and Kempe, V. Submitted. Less is more: Processing constraints or input
adaptations?
Brooks, P., and Tomasello, M. 1999a. Young children learn to produce passives
with nonce verbs. Developmental Psychology 35, 29–44.
——— 1999b. How young children constrain their argument structure construc-
tions. Language 75, 720–738.
Brooks, P., Tomasello, M., Lewis, L., and Dodson, K. 1999. Children’s
overgeneralization of ªxed transitivity verbs: The entrenchment hypothesis.
Child Development 70, 1325–37.
Brown, A., and Kane, M. 1988. Preschool children can learn to transfer: Learning
to learn and learning from example. Cognitive Psychology 20, 493–523.
Brown, P. 2001. Learning to talk about motion up and down in Tzeltal: Is there a
language-speciªc bias for verb learning? In M. Bowerman and S. Levinson,
eds., Language acquisition and conceptual development. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Brown, R. 1957. Linguistic determinism and the part of speech. Journal of Abnor-
mal and Social Psychology 55, 1–5.
——— 1973. A ªrst language: The early stages. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
Brown, R., and Hanlon, C. 1970. Derivational complexity and order of acquisi-
tion in child speech. In J. R. Hayes, ed., Cognition and the development of
language. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
References
337

Bruner, J. 1975. The ontogenesis of speech acts. Journal of Child Language 2, 1–
20.
——— 1981. The pragmatics of acquisition. In W. Deutsch, ed., The child’s con-
struction of language. New York: Academic Press.
——— 1983. Child’s talk. New York: Norton.
Buczowska, E. 1989. The acquisition of temporal systems in English as a native
language and English as a foreign language. Doctoral diss., Adam Mickiewicz
University, Poznan.
Budwig, N. 1990. The linguistic marking of nonprototypical agency: An explora-
tion into children’s use of passives. Linguistics 28, 1221–52.
Budwig, N., Stein, S., and O’Brien, C. 2001. Non-agent subjects in early child lan-
guage: A crosslinguistic comparison. In K. Nelson, A. Aksu-Ko, and C. John-
son, eds., Children’s language, vol. 11: Interactional contributions to lan-
guage development. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Butterworth, G. 1991. The ontogeny and phylogeny of joint visual attention. In
A. Whiten, ed., Natural theories of mind. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Bybee, J. 1985. Morphology: A study of the relation between meaning and form.
Amsterdam: Benjamins.
——— 1995. Regular morphology and the lexicon. Language and Cognitive Pro-
cesses 10, 425–455.
——— 2002. Sequentiality as the basis of constituent structure. In T. Givón and B.
Malle, eds., From Pre-language to language. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Bybee, J., Perkins, R., and Pagliuca, W. 1994. The evolution of grammar. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Bybee, J., and Scheibmann, J. 1999. The effect of usage on degrees of constituency:
The reduction of don’t in English. Linguistics 37, 575–596.
Bybee, J. L., and Slobin, D. I. 1982. Rules and schemas in the development and use
of the English past tense. Language 58, 265–289.
Byrne, R. W. 1995. The thinking ape. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Byrnes, J. P., and Duff, M. A. 1989. Young children’s comprehension of modal ex-
pressions. Cognitive Development 4, 369–387.
Cameron-Faulkner, T., Lieven, E., and Tomasello, M. In press. A construction
based analysis of child directed speech. Cognitive Science.
Campbell, A., Brooks, P., and Tomasello, M. 2000. Factors affecting young chil-
dren’s use of pronouns as referring expressions. Journal of Speech, Language
and Learning Research 43, 1337–1349.
Campbell, A., and Tomasello, M. 2001. The acquisition of English dative con-
structions. Applied Psycholinguistics 22, 253–267.
Carey, S., and Bartlett, E. 1978. Acquiring a single new word. Papers and Reports
on Child Language Development 15, 17–29.
Carpenter, M., Akhtar, N., and Tomasello, M. 1998. Sixteen-month-old infants
differentially imitate intentional and accidental actions. Infant Behavior and
Development 21, 315–330.
Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., and Tomasello, M. 1998. Social cognition, joint atten-
tion, and communicative competence from 9 to 15 months of age. Mono-
graphs of the Society for Research in Child Development 255.
Caselli, M. C., Bates, E., Casadio, P., Fenson, J., Fenson, L., Sanderl, L., and Weir,
338
References

J. 1995. A cross-linguistic study of early lexical development. Cognitive De-
velopment 10, 159–200.
Caselli, M. C., Casadio, P., and Bates, E. 1999. A comparison of the transition
from ªrst words to grammar in English and Italian. Journal of Child Lan-
guage 26, 69–111.
Chafe, W. 1994. Discourse, consciousness, and time: The ºow and displacement
of conscious experience in speaking and writing. Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press.
Chang, F. In press. Symbolically speaking: A connectionist model of sentence pro-
duction. Cognitive Science.
Chapman, R., and Miller, J. 1975. Word order in early two and three word utter-
ances: Does production precede comprehension? Journal of Speech and Hear-
ing Research 18, 355–371.
Cheney, D. L., and Seyfarth, R. M. 1990. How monkeys see the world. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Cheney, D. L., and Wrangham, R. W. 1987. Predation. In B. B. Smuts, D. L.
Cheney, R. M. Seyfarth, R. W. Wrangham, and T. T. Struhsaker, eds., Primate
societies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Childers, J., and Tomasello, M. 2001. The role of pronouns in young children’s ac-
quisition of the English transitive construction. Developmental Psychology
37, 739–748.
——— In press. Two-year-olds learn novel nouns, verbs, and conventional actions
from massed or distributed exposures. Developmental Psychology.
Choi, S. 1988. The semantic development of negation: A cross-linguistic study.
Journal of Child Language 15, 517–532.
——— 1991. Children’s answers to yes-no questions: A developmental study in
English, French, and Korean. Developmental Psychology 27(3), 407–420.
Choi, S., and Bowerman, M. 1991. Learning to express motion events in English
and Korean: The inºuence of language-speciªc lexicalization patterns. Cogni-
tion 41, 83–121.
Choi, S., Bowerman, M., Mandler, J., and McDonough, L. 2001. Early sensitivity
to language-speciªc spatial categories in English and Korean. Cognitive De-
velopment 14, 241–268.
Choi, S., and Gopnik, A. 1996. Early acquisition of verbs in Korean: A cross-
linguistic study. Journal of Child Language 22, 497–530.
Chomsky, C. 1969. Linguistics and philosophy. In S. Hook, ed., Language and
philosophy. New York: New York University Press.
Chomsky, N. 1957. Syntactic structures. The Hague: Mouton.
——— 1959. A review of B. F. Skinner’s “Verbal behavior.” Language 35, 26–
58.
——— 1965. Aspects of the theory of syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——— 1968. Language and mind. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
——— 1980a. Rules and representations. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3, 1–61.
——— 1980b. Comments in Piatelli-Palmarini, ed., Language and learning: The
debate between Jean Piaget and Noam Chomsky. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
——— 1981. Lectures on government and binding. Dortrecht: Foris.
References
339

——— 1986. Knowledge of language. Berlin: Praeger.
——— 1995. Minimalism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clahsen, H. 1999. Lexical entries and rules of language: A multidisciplinary study
of German inºection. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22, 980–999.
Clahsen, H., Rothweiler, M., Woest, A., and Marcus, G. 1992. Regular and irreg-
ular inºection in the acquisition of German noun plurals. Cognition 45, 225–
255.
Clancy, P. 1989. Form and function in the acquisition of Korean wh-questions.
Journal of Child Language 16, 323–347.
——— 1993. Preferred argument structure in Korean acquisition. In E. Clark, ed.,
Proceedings of the 25th annual child language research forum. Stanford: Cen-
ter for the Study of Language and Information.
——— 1995. Referential strategies and the co-construction of argument structure
in Korean acquisition. Typological Studies in Language 33, 33–68.
——— 2000. The lexicon in interaction: Developmental origins of preferred argu-
ment structure in Korean. In J. DuBois, ed., Preferred argument structure:
Grammar as architecture for function. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Clancy, P., Lee, H., and Zoh, M. H. 1986. Parsing strategies in the acquisition of
relative clauses: Universal principles and language-speciªc realizations. Cog-
nition 24, 225–262.
Clark, E. 1971. On the acquisition of the meaning of before and after. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 10, 266–275.
——— 1973. What’s in a name? On the child’s acquisition of semantics in his ªrst
language. In T. Moore, ed., Cognitive development and the acquisition of lan-
guage. New York: Academic Press.
——— 1982. The young word maker: A case study of innovation in the child’s lex-
icon. In Wanner and Gleitman, 1982.
——— 1983. Meanings and concepts. In J. Flavell and E. Markman, eds., Hand-
book of child psychology, vol. 3: Cognitive development. New York: John
Wiley.
——— 1987. The principle of contrast: A constraint on language acquisition. In
B. MacWhinney, ed., Mechanisms of language acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
——— 1988. On the logic of contrast. Journal of Child Language 15, 317–336.
——— 1993. The lexicon in acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——— 1997. Conceptual perspective and lexical choice in acquisition. Cognition
64, 1–37.
Clark, E., and Berman, R. 1984. Structure and use in the acquisition of word for-
mation. Language 60, 542–590.
Clark, E. V., and Sengul, C. J. 1978. Strategies in the acquisition of deixis. Journal
of Child Language 5, 457–475.
Clark, E. V., and Svaib, T. A. 1997. Speaker perspective and reference in young
children. First Language 17, 54–73.
Clark, H. 1996. Uses of language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, R. 1974. Performing without competence. Journal of Child Language 1, 1–
10.
Coates, J. 1988. Introduction. In J. Coates and D. Cameron, eds., Women in their
speech communities. London: Longman.
340
References

Cohen, L. B. 1998. An information-processing approach to infant perception and
cognition. In F. Simion and G. Butterworth, eds., The development of sensory,
motor, and cognitive capacities in early infancy. Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Comrie, B. 1976. Aspect: An introduction to the study of verbal aspect and related
problems. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Conti-Ramsden, G., and Friel-Patti, S. 1987. Situational variability in mother-
child conversations. In K. E. Nelson, ed., Children’s language, vol. 6.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Conti-Ramsden, G., and Snow, C., eds., Children’s language, vol. 7. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Conway, C. M., and Christiansen, M. H. 2001. Sequential learning in non-human
primates. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 5, 529–546.
Corkum, V., and Moore, C. 1995. Development of joint visual attention in infants.
In C. Moore and P. J. Dunham, eds., Joint attention: Its origins and role in de-
velopment. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Correa, L. 1995a. The relative difªculty of children’s comprehension of relative
clauses: A procedural account. In K. Nelson and Z. Réger, eds., Children’s
language, vol. 3. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
——— 1995b. An alternative assessment of children’s comprehension of relative
clauses. Journal of Psycholinguistics Research 24, 183–203.
Corrigan, R. 1988. Children’s identiªcation of actors and patients in prototypical
and nonprototypical sentence types. Cognitive Development 3, 285–297.
Crain, S., and Pietroski, P. 2001. Nature, nurture and Universal Grammar. Lin-
guistics and Philosophy 24, 139–185.
Croft, W. 1991. Syntactic categories and grammatical relations: The cognitive or-
ganization of information. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——— 1995. Intonation units and grammatical units. Linguistics 33(5), 839–882.
——— 2000. Explaining language change: An evolutionary approach. London:
Longman.
——— 2001. Radical construction grammar: Syntactic theory in typological per-
spective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cromer, R. F. 1971. The development of the ability to decentre in time. British
Journal of Psychology 62, 353–365.
Cullicover, P. 1999. Syntactic nuts. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cziko, G. A. 1986. Testing the language bioprogram: A review of children’s acqui-
sition of articles. Language 62, 878–898.
Dabrowska, E. 2000. From formula to schema: The acquisition of English ques-
tions. Cognitive Linguistics 11, 1–20.
——— 2001. Learning a morphological system without a default: The Polish geni-
tive. Journal of Child Language 28, 545–574.
Dale, P. S., and Crain-Thoreson, C. 1993. Pronoun reversals: Who, when, and
why? Journal of Child Language 20, 573–589.
Dasinger, L., and Toupin, C. 1994. The development of relative clauses in narra-
tive. In Berman and Slobin 1994.
Deacon, T. W. 1996. Prefrontal cortex and symbol learning: Why a brain capable
of language evolved only once. In B. M. Velichkovsky and D. M. Rumbaugh,
eds., Communicating meaning: The evolution and development of language.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
References
341

——— 1998. The symbolic species: The co-evolution of language and the human
brain. London: Penguin.
Deak, G. O., and Maratsos, M. 1998. On having complex representations of
things: Preschoolers use multiple words for objects and people. Developmen-
tal Psychology 34(2), 224–240.
DeLancey, S. 1981. An interpretation of split ergativity and related patterns. Lan-
guage 57, 626–657.
de León, L. 2000. The emergent participant: Interactive patterns in the socializa-
tion of Tzotzil (Mayan) infants. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology 8, 131–
161.
Dempster, F. 1996. Distributing and managing the conditions of encoding and
practice. In E. Bjork and R. Bjork, eds., Handbook of perception and cogni-
tion, 2d ed. New York: Academic Press.
Demuth, K. 1989. Maturation and the acquisition of the Sesotho passive. Lan-
guage 65, 56–80.
——— 1990. Subject, topic, and Sesotho passive. Journal of Child Language 17,
67–84.
DeVilliers, J. 1985. Learning how to use verbs: Lexical coding and the inºuence of
input. Journal of Child Language 12, 587–596.
——— 2000. Language and theory of mind: What are the developmental relation-
ships? In S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg, and D. J. Cohen, eds., Under-
standing other minds, 2d ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
DeVilliers, J., and DeVilliers, P. 1973. Development of the use of word order in
comprehension. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 2, 331–341.
Dick, F., Bates, E., Wulfeck, B., Utman, J., Dronkers, N., and Gernsbacher, M. A.
2001. Language deªcits, localization, and grammar: Evidence for a distribu-
tive model of language breakdown in aphasics and normals. Psychological
Review 108(4), 759–788.
Didow, S. M., and Eckerman, C. O. 2001. Toddler peers: From nonverbal coordi-
nated action to verbal discourse. Social Development 10, 170–188.
Diesendruck, G., and Markson, L. In press. Children’s avoidance of lexical over-
lap: A pragmatic account. Developmental Psychology 37(5), 630–641.
Diesendruck, G., Markson, L., Akhtar, N., and Reudor, A. In press. Two-year-
olds’ sensitivity to speakers’ intent. Child Development.
Diessel, H. 1999. Demonstratives: Form, function, and grammaticalization. Typo-
logical studies in languages, 42. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
——— In press. The acquisition of complex sentences in English. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Diessel, H., and Tomasello, M. 2000. The development of relative constructions in
early child speech. Cognitive Linguistics 11, 131–152.
——— 2001. The acquisition of ªnite complement clauses in English: A usage
based approach to the development of grammatical constructions. Cognitive
Linguistics 12, 97–141.
Dodson, K., and Tomasello, M. 1998. Acquiring the transitive construction in
English: The role of animacy and pronouns. Journal of Child Language 25,
555–574.
Döpke, S. 1998. Competing language structures: The acquisition of verb place-
342
References

ment by bilingual German-English children. Journal of Child Language 25,
555–584.
Drozd, K. F. 1995. Child English pre-sentential negation as metalinguistic exclam-
atory sentence negation. Journal of Child Language 22, 583–610.
Dryer, M. 1997. Are grammatical relations universal? In J. Bybee, J. Haiman, and
S. Thompson, eds., Essays on language function and language type. Amster-
dam: Benjamins.
DuBois, J. 1987. The discourse basis of ergativity. Language 63, 805–855.
——— In press. Discourse and grammar. In M. Tomasello, ed., The new psychol-
ogy of language, vol. 2: Cognitive and functional approaches to language
structure. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Dunbar, R. 1996. Grooming, gossip and the evolution of language. London: Faber
and Faber.
Dunham, P., Dunham, F., and Curwin, A. 1993. Joint attentional states and lexical
acquisition at 18 months. Developmental Psychology 29, 827–831.
Dunn, J. 1988. The beginnings of social understanding. Oxford: Blackwell.
Dunn, J., Brown, J., and Beardsall, L. 1991. Family talk about feeling states and
children’s later understanding of others’ emotions. Developmental Psychol-
ogy 27, 448–455.
Dunn, J., and Shatz, M. 1989. Becoming a conversationalist despite (or because
of) having an older sibling. Child Development 60, 339–410.
Durham, W. 1991. Coevolution, genes, culture and human diversity. Palo Alto:
Stanford University Press.
Eckerman, C. O., and Didow, S. M. 1996. Nonverbal imitation and toddlers’ mas-
tery of verbal means of achieving coordinated action. Developmental Psy-
chology 32, 141–152.
Edwards, D., and Goodwin, R. 1986. Action words and pragmatic functions. In
S. Kuczaj and M. Barrett, eds., The development of word meaning. New
York: Springer-Verlag.
Elbers, L. 1995. Production as a source of input for analysis: Evidence from the de-
velopmental course of a word-blend. Journal of Child Language 22, 47–71.
Elman, J. L. 1990. Finding structure in time. Cognitive Science 14, 179–211.
——— 1991. Distributed representations, simple recurrent networks, and gram-
matical structure. Machine Learning 7, 195–224.
——— 1993. Learning and development in neural networks: The importance of
starting small. Cognition 48, 71–99.
——— 2001. Connectionism and language acquisition. In M. Tomasello and
E. Bates, eds., Language development. Oxford: Blackwell.
Elman, J. L., Bates, E., Johnson, M., Karmiloff-Smith, A., Parisi, D., and Plunkett,
K. 1996. Rethinking innateness: A connectionist perspective on development.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Emslie, H., and Stevenson, R. 1981. Pre-school children’s use of the articles in
deªnite and indeªnite referring expressions. Journal of Child Language 8,
313–328.
Erreich, A. 1984. Learning how to ask: Patterns of inversion in yes-no and wh-
questions. Journal of Child Language 11, 579–592.
Erteschik-Shir, N. 1979. Discourse constraints on dative movements. In T. Givón,
References
343

ed., Syntax and semantics, vol. 12: Discourse and syntax. New York: Aca-
demic Press.
Ervin-Tripp, S. M. 1996. Context in language. In D. I. Slobin, J. Gerhardt,
A. Kyratzis, and J. Guo, eds., Social interactions, social context, and lan-
guage. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ewers, H. 1999. Schemata im mentalen Lexikon: Empirische Untersuchungen zum
Erwerb der deutschen Pluralbildung. In J. Meibauer and M. Rothweiler, eds.,
Das Lexikon im Spracherwerb. Tübingen: Francke.
Fabian-Kraus, V., and Ammon, P. 1980. Assessing linguistic competence: When
are children hard to understand? Journal of Child Language 7, 401–412.
Fantz, R. L. 1963. Pattern vision in newborn infants. Science 140, 296–297.
Farrar, J. 1990. Discourse and the acquisition of grammatical morphemes. Journal
of Child Language 17, 607–624.
——— 1992. Negative evidence and grammatical morpheme acquisition. Devel-
opmental Psychology 28, 90–98.
Farrar, M. J., Freund, M., and Forbes, J. 1993. Event knowledge and early lan-
guage acquisition. Journal of Child Language 20, 591–606.
Fauconnier, G. 1985. Mental spaces. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——— 1997. Mappings in thought and language. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Fenson, L., Dale, P., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal, D., and Pethick, S. 1994. Vari-
ability in early communicative development. Monographs of the Society for
Research in Child Development 59(5), v–173.
Fernald, A., Pinto, J. P., Swingley, D., Weinberg, A., and McRoberts, G. 1998.
Rapid gains in speed of verbal processing by infants in the second year. Psy-
chological Science 9, 228–231.
Figueira, R. A. 1984. On the development of the expression of causativity: A syn-
tactic hypothesis. Journal of Child Language 11, 109–127.
Fillmore, C. 1977a. Topics in lexical semantics. In R. Cole, ed., Current issues in
linguistic theory. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
——— 1977b. The case for case reopened. In P. Cole, ed., Syntax and semantics 8:
Grammatical relations. New York: Academic Press.
——— 1988. The mechanisms of construction grammar. Berkeley Linguistics So-
ciety 14, 35–55.
——— 1989. Grammatical construction theory and the familiar dichotomies. In
R. Dietrich and C. F. Graumann, eds., Language processing in social context.
Amsterdam: North Holland/Elsevier.
Fillmore, C., Kaye, P., and O’Conner, M. 1988. Regularity and idiomaticity in
grammatical constructions: The case of let alone. Language 64, 501–538.
Fisher, C. 1996. Structural limits on verb mapping: The role of analogy in chil-
dren’s interpretations of sentences. Cognitive Psychology 31, 41–81.
——— 2000. Who’s blicking whom? Word order in early verb learning. Poster
presented at the 11th International Conference on Infant Studies, Brighton,
England.
——— 2002. Structural limits on verb mapping: The role of abstract structure in
2.5-year-olds’ interpretations of novel verbs. Developmental Science 5(1), 55–
64.
344
References

Fisher, C., Gleitman, H., and Gleitman, L. R. 1991. On the semantic content of
subcategorization frames. Cognitive Psychology 23, 331–392.
Fisher, S. E., Vargha-Khadem, F., Watkins, K. E., Monaco, A. P., and Pembrey,
M. E. 1998. Localisation of a gene implicated in a severe speech and language
disorder. Nature Genetics 18(2), 168–170.
Flavell, J. 1997. Cognitive development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Fleischman, S. 1982. The future in thought and language: Diachronic evidence
from romance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fletcher, P. 1981. Description and explanation in the acquisition of verb-forms.
Journal of Child Language 8, 93–108.
——— 1985. A child’s learning of English. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
——— 1990. Speech and language defects. Nature 346, 226.
Fodor, J. 2001. Setting syntactic parameters. In M. Baltin and C. Collins, eds., The
handbook of contemporary syntactic theory. Oxford: Blackwell.
Foley, W., and Van Valin, R. 1984. Functional syntax and universal grammar.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Forbes, J. N., and Farrar, M. J. 1993. Children’s initial assumptions about the
meaning of novel motion verbs: Biased and conservative? Cognitive Develop-
ment 8, 273–290.
Foster, S. H. 1986. Learning discourse topic management in the preschool years.
Journal of Child Language 13, 231–250.
Foulkes, D. 1978. A grammar of dreams. New York: Basic Books.
Fox, B., and Thompson, S. 1990. A discourse explanation of “the grammar” of
relative clauses in English conversation. Language 66, 297–316.
Franco, F., and Butterworth, G. 1996. Pointing and social awareness: Declaring
and requesting in the second year. Journal of Child Language 23, 307–336.
French, L., and Nelson, K. 1985. Young children’s understanding of relational
terms: Some ifs, ors and buts. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Furrow, D., Nelson, K., and Benedict, H. 1979. Mothers’ speech to children and
syntactic development: Some simple relationships. Journal of Child Language
6, 423–442.
Gallagher, T. 1977. Revision behaviors in the speech of normal children develop-
ing language. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 20, 303–318.
——— 1981. Contingent query sequences within adult-child discourse. Journal of
Child Language 8, 51–62.
Galligan, R. 1987. Intonation with single words: Purposive and grammatical use.
Journal of Child Language 14, 1–22.
Galloway, C., and Richards, B. J. 1994. Input and interaction in language acquisi-
tion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Garton, A. 1983. An approach to the study of determiners in early language devel-
opment. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 12, 513–525.
Garvey, C. 1977. The contingent query: A dependent act in conversation. In
M. Lewis and L. A. Rosenblum, eds., Interaction, conversation, and the devel-
opment of language. New York: Wiley.
Gathercole, V. 1986. The acquisition of the present perfect: Explaining difference
in the speech of Scottish and American children. Journal of Child Language
13, 537–560.
References
345

Gathercole, V., Sebastián, E., and Soto, P. 1999. The early acquisition of Spanish
verbal morphology: Across-the-board or piecemeal knowledge? International
Journal of Bilingualism 3, 133–182.
Gee, J., and Savasir, I. 1985. On the use of “will” and “gonna”: Towards a de-
scription of activity-types for child language. Discourse Processes 8, 143–175.
Gelman, S. A., and Taylor, M. 1984. How two-year-old children interpret proper
and common names for unfamiliar objects. Child Development 55, 1535–40.
Gentner, D. 1982. Why nouns are learned before verbs: Linguistic relativity versus
natural partitioning. In S. Kuczaj, ed., Language development, vol. 2.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D., and Boroditsky, L. 2001. Individuation, relativity, and early word
learning. In M. Bowerman and S. C. Levinson, eds., Language acquisition and
conceptual development. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., and Markman, A. 1995. Similarity is like analogy: Structural align-
ment in comparison. In C. Cacciari, ed., Similarity in language, thought and
perception. Brussels: BREPOLS.
——— 1997. Structure mapping in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist
52, 45–56.
Gentner, D., and Medina, J. 1998. Similarity and the development of rules. Cogni-
tion 65, 263–297.
Gergely, G., Nádasdy, Z., Csibra, G., and Biró, S. 1995. Taking the intentional
stance at 12 months of age. Cognition 56, 165–193.
Gerhardt, J. 1985. An interpretive approach to the study of modality: What child
language can tell the linguist. Studies in Language 9, 127–229.
——— 1988. From discourse to semantics: The development of verb morphology
and forms of self-reference in the speech of a two-year-old. Journal of Child
Language 15(2), 337–393.
——— 1991. The meaning and use of the modals hafta, needta and wanna in chil-
dren’s speech. Journal of Pragmatics 16(6), 531–590.
Gerhardt, J., and Savasir, I. 1986. The use of simple present in the speech of two
three-year-olds: Normativity not subjectivity. Language in Society 15, 501–
536.
Gerken, L. A. 1990. A metrical account of children’s subjectless sentences. Pro-
ceedings of the North East Linguistics Society 20, 121–134.
——— 1991. The metrical basis for children’s subjectless sentences. Journal of
Memory and Language 30, 431–451.
——— 1994. Child phonology: Past research, present questions, future directions.
In M. A. Gernsbacher, ed., Handbook of psycholinguistics. New York: Aca-
demic Press.
Gillette, J., Gleitman, H, Gleitman, L., and Lederer, A. 1999. Human simulations
of vocabulary learning. Cognition 73(2), 135–176.
Givón, T. 1979. On understanding grammar. New York: Academic Press.
——— 1984. Syntax: A functional-typological introduction, vol. 1. Amsterdam:
Benjamins.
——— 1993. English grammar: A function-based introduction. Amsterdam:
Benjamins.
——— 1995. Functionalism and grammar. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
346
References

Gleitman, L. 1990. The structural sources of verb meaning. Language Acquisition
1, 3–55.
Gleitman, L. R., Newport, E. L., and Gleitman, H. 1984. The current status of the
motherese hypothesis. Journal of Child Language 11, 43–79.
Gleitman, L. R., and Wanner, E. 1982. Language acquisition: The state of the art.
In Wanner and Gleitman, 1982.
Goldberg, A. 1995. Constructions: A construction grammar approach to argu-
ment structure. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Goldberg, A., and Sethuraman, N. Manuscript. Learning argument structure gen-
eralizations.
Goldin-Meadow, S. 1984. Gestural communication in deaf children. Monographs
of the Society for Research in Child Development 49(3–4), 143–151.
——— 1997. When gestures and words speak differently. Current Directions in
Psychological Science 5, 138–143.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Seligman, M. E. P., and Gelman, R. 1976. Language in the
two-year-old: Receptive and productive stages. Cognition 4(2), 189–202.
Goldman-Eisler, F. 1968. Psycholinguistics: Experiments in spontaneous speech.
New York: Academic Press.
Golinkoff, R. M. 1983. The preverbal negotiation of failed messages. In R. M.
Golinkoff, ed., The transition from prelinguistic to linguistic communication.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
——— 1993. When is communication a meeting of the minds? Journal of Child
Language 20, 199–208.
Golinkoff, R., Hirsh-Pasek, K., and Hollich, G. 1999. Emergent cues for early
word learning. In B. MacWhinney, ed., Emergence of language. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Golinkoff, R., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Mervis, C., Frawley, W., and Parillo, M. 1995.
Lexical principles can be extended to the acquisition of verbs. In Tomasello
and Merriman 1995.
Golinkoff, R., Mervis, C., and Hirsh-Pasek, K. 1994. Early object labels: The case
for a developmental lexical principles framework. Journal of Child Language
21, 125–156.
Gomez, R., and Gerken, L. 1999. Artiªcial grammar learning by 1-year-olds leads
to speciªc and abstract knowledge. Cognition 70, 109–135.
Goodwyn, S., and Acredolo, L. 1993. Symbolic gesture versus word: Is there a
modality advantage for onset of symbol use? Child Development 64, 688–
701.
Gopnik, A. 1988. Three types of early word. First Language 8, 49–70.
Gopnik, A., and Choi, S. 1995. Names, relational words, and cognitive develop-
ment in English and Korean speakers: Nouns are not always learned before
verbs. In Tomasello and Merriman 1995.
Gopnik, A., and Meltzoff, A. 1986. Relations between semantic and cognitive de-
velopment in the one word stage: The speciªcity hypothesis. Child Develop-
ment 57, 1040–53.
Gordon, P., and Chafetz, J. 1990. Verb-based versus class-based accounts of
actionality effects in children’s comprehension of passives. Cognition 36,
227–254.
References
347

Gosch, A., Städing, G., and Pankau, R. 1994. Linguistic abilities in children with
Williams-Beuren Syndrome. American Journal of Medical Genetics 52, 291–
296.
Greenªeld, P. M., Reilly, J., Leaper, C., and Baker, N. 1985. The structural and
functional status of single-word utterances and their relationship to early one-
word speech. In M. Barrett, ed., Children’s single-word speech. London:
Wiley.
Greenªeld, P. M., and Smith, J. H. 1976. The structure of communication in early
language development. New York: Academic Press.
Grice, H. 1975. Logic and conversation. In P. Cole and J. Morgan, eds., Syntax
and semantics, vol. 3. New York: Academic Press.
Gropen, J., Pinker, S., Hollander, M., and Goldberg, R. 1991a. Affectedness and
direct objects: The role of lexical semantics in the acquisition of verb argu-
ment structure. Cognition 41, 153–195.
——— 1991b. Syntax and semantics in the acquisition of locative verbs. Journal
of Child Language 18, 115–151.
Gropen, J., Pinker, S., Hollander, M., Goldberg, R., and Wilson, R. 1989. The
learnability and acquisition of the dative alternation in English. Language 65,
203–257.
Gumperz, J. J., and Levinson, S. C. 1996. Rethinking linguistic relativity. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gundel, J., Hedberg, N., and Zacharski, R. 1993. Cognitive status and the form of
referring expressions. Language 69(2), 274–307.
Haith, M., and Benson, J. 1997. Infant cognition. In D. Kuhn and R. Siegler, eds.,
Handbook of child psychology, vol. 2. New York: Wiley.
Hakuta, K. 1982. Interaction between particles and word order in the comprehen-
sion and production of simple sentences in Japanese children. Developmental
Psychology 18, 62–76.
Hakuta, K., Bialystock, E., and Wiley, E. In press. Critical evidence: A test of the
critical period hypothesis for second language acquisition. Psychological Sci-
ence.
Hall, G. 1991. Perceptual and associative learning. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
——— 1999. Semantics and the acquisition of proper names. In R. Jackendoff,
P. Bloom, and K. Wynn, eds., Language logic, and concepts: Essays in honor
of John MacNamara. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Harner, L. 1976. Children’s understanding of linguistic reference to past and fu-
ture. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 5, 65–84.
——— 1981. Children’s talk about the time and aspect of actions. Child Develop-
ment 52, 498–506.
Harris, F., and Flora, J. 1982. Children’s use of get passives. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research 11, 297–311.
Harris, M., Barlow-Brown, F., and Chasin, J. 1995. The emergence of referential
understanding: Pointing and the comprehension of object names. First Lan-
guage 15, 19–34.
Harris, M., Barrett, M. D., Jones, D., and Brookes, S. 1988. Linguistic input and
early word meaning. Journal of Child Language 15, 77–94.
Harris, P. 1996. Desires, beliefs, and language. In P. Carruthers and P. Smith, eds.,
Theories of theories of mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
348
References

Hart, B., and Risley, T. R. 1995. Meaningful differences in the everyday experience
of young American children. Baltimore: Paul Brookes.
Haspelmath, M. 1989. From purposive to inªnitive—A universal path of
grammaticization. Folia Linguistica Historica 10(1–2), 287–310.
Hauser, M. D., Weiss, D., and Marcus, G. In press. Rule learning by cotton-top
tamarins. Cognition.
Heibeck, T. H., and Markman, E. M. 1987. Word learning in children: An exami-
nation of fast mapping. Child Development 58, 1021–34.
Herriot, P. 1969. The comprehension of active and passive sentences as a function
of pragmatic expectations. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior
8(2), 166–169.
Heyes, C. M., and Galef, B. G., Jr., eds. 1996. Social learning in animals: The roots
of culture. New York: Academic Press.
Hickmann, M. 1995. Discourse organization and the development of reference to
person, space, and time. In P. Fletcher and B. MacWhinney, eds., Handbook
of child language. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Hickmann, M., and Hendriks, H. 1999. Cohesion and anaphora in children’s nar-
ratives: A comparison of English, French, German, and Mandarin Chinese.
Journal of Child Language 26, 419–452.
Hirsh-Pasek, K., and Golinkoff, R. M. 1991. Language comprehension: A new
look at some old themes. In N. Krasnegor, D. Rumbaugh, M. Studdert-
Kennedy, and R. Schiefelbusch, eds., Biological and behavioral aspects of lan-
guage acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
——— 1996. The origins of grammar: Evidence from early language comprehen-
sion. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hirst, W., and Weil, J. 1982. Acquisition of the epistemic and deontic meaning of
modals. Journal of Child Language 9, 659–666.
Hoff-Ginsberg, E. 1985. Some contributions of mothers’ speech to their children’s
syntactic growth. Journal of Child Language 12, 367–385.
Hoff-Ginsberg, E., and Shatz, M. 1982. Linguistic input and the child’s acquisition
of language. Psychological Bulletin 92, 3–26.
Hopper, P. 1997. Discourse and category ‘verb’ in English. Language and Commu-
nication 17, 93–102.
Hopper, P., and Thompson, S. 1980. Transitivity in grammar and discourse. Lan-
guage 56(2), 215–299.
——— 1984. The discourse basis for lexical categories in universal grammar. Lan-
guage 60, 703–752.
——— 1985. The iconicity of the universal categories noun and verb. In
J. Haiman, ed., Iconicity in syntax. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Hopper, P. J., and Traugott, E. C. 1993. Grammaticalization. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Hornstein, D., and Lightfoot, N. 1981. Explanation in linguistics. London:
Longman.
Houston, D., Jusczyk, P. W., and Tager, J. 1997. Talker-speciªcity and the persis-
tence of infants’ word representations. Paper presented at the 22nd Annual
Boston University Conference on Language Development.
Howe, C. 1976. The meaning of two-word utterances in the speech of young chil-
dren. Journal of Child Language 3, 29–48.
References
349

Hudson, R. 1995. Competence without comp? In B. Aarts and C. F. Meyer, eds.,
The verb in contemporary English. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hummer, P., Wimmer, H., and Antes, G. 1993. On the origins of denial negation.
Journal of Child Language 20, 607–618.
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L., and Duncan, S. 1991. Categories and particulars:
Prototype effects in estimating spatial location. Psychological Review 98,
352–376.
Huttenlocher, J., Smiley, P., and Charney, R. 1983. Emergence of action categories
in the child: Evidence from verb meanings. Psychological Review 90, 72–93.
Huttenlocher, J., Smiley, P., and Ratner, H. 1983. What do word meanings reveal
about conceptual development? In T. Seiler and W. Wannenmacher, eds.,
Conceptual development and the development of word meaning. Berlin:
Springer Verlag.
Huttenlocher, J., Vasilyeva, M., Cymernan, E., and Levine, S. In press. Language
input and child syntax. Cognitive Psychology.
Hyams, N. 1984. The acquisition of inªnitival complements: A reply to Bloom,
Tackeff, and Lahey. Journal of Child Language 11, 679–684.
——— 1994. Non-discreteness and variation in child language: Implications for
principle and parameter models of language development. In Y. Levy, ed.,
Other children, other languages. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Imai, M., and Gentner, D. 1993. What we think, what we mean, and how we say
it. Chicago Linguistic Society 29, 171–186.
Imai, M., and Haryu, E. 2001. Learning proper nouns and common nouns with-
out clues from syntax. Child Development 72(3), 787–803.
Ingham, R. 1993. Critical inºuences on the acquisition of verb transitivity. In
D. Messer and G. Turner, eds., Critical inºuences on child language acquisi-
tion and development. London: Macmillan.
——— 1993/94. Input and learnability: Direct-object omissibility in English. Lan-
guage Acquisition 3(2), 95–120.
Ingram, D., and Tyack, D. 1979. The inversion of subject NP and Aux in chil-
dren’s questions. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 4, 333–341.
Israel, M., Johnson, C., and Brooks, P. J. 2000. From states to events: The acquisi-
tion of English passive participles. Cognitive Linguistics 11(1–2), 103–129.
Iverson, J. M., Capirci, O., and Caselli, M. C. 1994. From communication to lan-
guage in two modalities. Cognitive Development 9, 23–43.
Iverson, J. M., and Goldin-Meadow, S. 1998. Why people gesture when they
speak. Nature 396, 228.
Jackendoff, R. 1990. Semantic structures. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——— 1996. Twistin’ the night away. Language 73, 534–559.
Jaswal, V. K., and Markman, E. M. 2001. Learning proper and common names in
inferential versus ostensive contexts. Child Development 72, 768–786.
Jenkins, J., and Astington, J. 1996. Cognitive factors and family structure associ-
ated with theory of mind development in children. Developmental Psychol-
ogy 32, 70–78.
Jisa, H., and Kern, S. 1998. Relative clauses in French children’s narrative texts.
Journal of Child Language 25, 623–652.
Johnson, M. 1987. The body in the mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
350
References

Johnston, J. R., and Slobin, D. I. 1979. The development of locative expressions in
English, Italian, Serbo-Croatian and Turkish. Journal of Child Language 16,
529–545.
Jones, S. S., and Smith, L. B. 2002. How children know the relevant properties for
generalizing object names. Developmental Science 5(2), 219–232.
Jusczyk, P. W. 1997. The discovery of spoken language. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Jusczyk, P. W., and Aslin, R. N. 1995. Infants’ detection of the sound patterns of
words in ºuent speech. Cognitive Psychology 29, 1–23.
Jusczyk, P. W., and Hohne, E. A. 1997. Infants’ memory for spoken words. Science
277, 1984–86.
Jusczyk, P. W., Hohne, E. A., and Bauman, A. L. 1999. Infants’ sensitivity to
allophonic cues for word segmentation. Perception and Psychophysics 61,
1465–76.
Kail, M., and Hickmann, M. 1992. On French children’s ability to introduce refer-
ents in discourse as a function of mutual knowledge. First Language 12, 73–
94.
Kaper, W. 1976. Pronominal case-errors. Journal of Child Language 3, 439–442.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. 1979. A functional approach to language acquisition. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
——— 1986. From meta-process to conscious access: Evidence from children’s
metalinguistic and repair data. Cognition 23, 95–147.
Karniol, R. 1999. Stuttering, language, and cognition: A review and a model of
stuttering as suprasegmental sentence plan alignment (SPA). Psychological
Bulletin 117, 104–124.
Katz, N., Baker, E., and McNamara, J. 1974. What’s in a name? A study of how
children learn common and proper names. Child Development 45, 469–473.
Kawashima, M., and Prideaux, G. 1992. The function of local cues in the acquisi-
tion of Japanese temporal sentences. Language Sciences 14, 29–53.
Kay, P., and Fillmore, C. 1999. Grammatical constructions and linguistic general-
izations. Language 75, 1–33.
Keenan, E. L., 1976. Towards a universal deªnition of subject. In C. Li, ed., Sub-
ject and topic. New York: Academic Press.
Kemler Nelson, D., Russell, R., Duke, N., and Jones, K. 2000. Two-year-olds will
name artifacts by their functions. Child Development 71, 1271–88.
Kemmer, S. 1993. The middle voice. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Kessel, F. S. 1970. The role of syntax in children’s comprehension from ages six to
twelve. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development 35,
457.
Kim, Y. 1989. Theoretical implications of complement structure acquisition in Ko-
rean. Journal of Child Language 16, 573–598.
Kirkham, N. Z., Slemmer, J. A., and Johnson, S. P. 2002. Visual statistical learning
in infancy: Evidence for a domain general learning mechanism. Cognition
83(2), 335–342.
Klein, W., and Perdue, C. 1997. The basic variety; or, Couldn’t natural languages
be much simpler? Second Language Research 13(4), 301–347.
Klima, E., and Bellugi, U. 1966. Syntactic regularities in the speech of children. In
References
351

J. Lyons and R. J. Wales, eds., Psycholinguistic papers: The proceedings of the
1966 Edinburgh Conference. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Köpcke, K. 1998. The acquisition of plural marking in English and German revis-
ited: Schemata versus rules. Journal of Child Language 25, 293–319.
Krug, M. 1998. String frequency: A cognitive motivating factor in coalescence,
language processing, and language change. Journal of English Linguistics 26,
286–320.
——— 2000. Emerging English modals: A corpus-based study of grammati-
calization. Topics in English linguistics 32. Berlin/New York: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Kuczaj, S. 1977. The acquisition of regular and irregular past tense forms. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 16, 589–600.
——— 1987. Deferred imitation and the acquisition of novel lexical items. First
Language 7, 177–182.
Kuczaj, S., and Daly, M. 1979. The development of hypothetical reference in the
speech of young children. Journal of Child Language 6, 563–580.
Kuczaj, S., and Maratsos, M. P. 1975. What children can say before they will.
Merrill-Palmer Quarterly 21, 89–111.
Kuhl, P. K., and Miller, J. D. 1975. Speech perception by the chinchilla: Voiced-
voiceless distinction in alveolar plosive consonants. Science 190, 69–72.
Kyratzis, A., and Ervin-Tripp, S. M. 1999. The development of discourse markers
in peer interaction. Journal of Pragmatics 31, 1321–1338.
Lai, C. S. L., Fisher, S. E., Hurst, J. A., Vargha-Khadem, F., and Monaco, A. P.
2001. A forkhead-domain gene is mutated in a severe speech and language
disorder. Nature 413, 519–523.
Lakoff, G. 1978. Some remarks on AI and linguistics. Cognitive Science 2, 267–
275.
——— 1987. Women, ªre, and dangerous things: What categories reveal about
the mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lambrecht, K. 1988. Presentational cleft construction in spoken French. In
J. Haiman and S. A. Thompson, eds., Clause combining in grammar and dis-
course. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
——— 1994. Information structure and sentence form. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Langacker, R. 1987a. Foundations of cognitive grammar, vol. 1. Stanford: Stan-
ford University Press.
——— 1987b. Nouns and verbs. Language 63, 53–94.
——— 1988. A usage-based model. In B. Rudzka-Ostyn, ed., Topics in cognitive
linguistics. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
——— 1991. Foundations of cognitive grammar, vol. 2. Stanford: Stanford Uni-
versity Press.
——— 2000. A dynamic usage-based model. In M. Barlow and S. Kemmerer, eds.,
Usage-based models of language. Stanford: SLI Publications.
Lederer, A., Gleitman, L., and Gleitman, H. 1995. Verbs of a feather ºock to-
gether: Structural properties of maternal speech. In M. Tomasello and
E. Merriman, eds., Acquisition of the verb lexicon. New York: Academic
Press.
352
References

Legerstee, M. 1991. The role of person and object in eliciting early imitation. Jour-
nal of Experimental Child Psychology 51, 423–433.
Leonard, L. B. 1998. Children with speciªc language impairment. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Levin, B., and Rappaport Hovav, M. 1991. Wiping the slate clean: A lexical se-
mantic exploration. Cognition 41, 123–151.
Levinsky, S., and Gerken, L. A. 1995. Children’s knowledge of pronoun usage in
discourse. In E. Clark, ed., Proceedings of the 26th annual child language re-
search forum. Palo Alto: Stanford University Press.
Levy, E., and Nelson, K. 1994. Words in discourse: A dialectical approach to the
acquisition of meaning and use. Journal of Child Language 21, 367–389.
Lewis, L. B., Antone, C., and Johnson, J. S. 1999. Effects of prosodic stress and se-
rial position on syllable omission in ªrst words. Developmental Psychology
35, 45–59.
Li, P., and Shirai, Y. 2000. The acquisition of lexical and grammatical aspect.
Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Lieberman, P. 1985. The biology and evolution of language. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Lieven, E. 1994. Crosslinguistic and crosscultural aspects of language addressed to
children. In C. Gallaway and B. J. Richards, eds., Input and interaction in lan-
guage acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——— 1997. Variation in a crosslinguistic context. In D. I. Slobin, ed., The cross-
linguistic study of language acquisition, vol. 5. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
——— Submitted. The development of English auxiliaries.
Lieven, E., Behrens, H., Speares, J., and Tomasello, M. In press. Early syntactic
creativity: A usage-based approach. Journal of Child Language.
Lieven, E., Pine, J., and Baldwin, G. 1997. Lexically-based learning and early
grammatical development. Journal of Child Language 24, 187–220.
Lieven, E., Pine, J., and Dresner Barnes, H. 1992. Individual differences in early
vocabulary development. Journal of Child Language 19, 287–310.
Lieven, E., Pine, J., and Rowland, C. 1998. Comparing different models of the de-
velopment of the English verb category. Linguistics 36, 807–830.
Limber, J. 1973. The genesis of complex sentences. In T. Moore, ed., Cognitive de-
velopment and the acquisition of language. New York: Academic Press.
——— 1976. Syntax and sentence interpretation. In R. Wales and E. C. T. Walker,
eds., New approaches to language mechanisms. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Linder, K. In press. The development of sentence interpretation strategies in mono-
lingual German-learning children with and without speciªc language impair-
ment. Linguistics 41.
Littschwager, J. C., and Markman, E. M. 1993. Young children’s understanding of
proper versus common nouns. Paper presented at the Biennial Meeting of the
Society for Research in Child Development, New Orleans.
Lloyd, P. 1991. Strategies used to communicate route directions by telephone: A
comparison of the performance of 7-year-olds, 10-year-olds and adults. Jour-
nal of Child Language 18, 171–190.
Locke, A. 1978. The emergence of language. In A. Locke, ed., Action, gesture, and
symbol: The emergence of language. New York: Academic Press.
References
353

Lord, C. 1979. Don’t you fall me down: Children’s generalizations regarding cause
and transitivity. Papers and Reports on Child Language Development 17, 81–
89.
Loveland, K., and Landry, S. 1986. Joint attention in autism and developmental
language delay. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 16, 335–
349.
Loveland, K. A. 1984. Learning about points of view: Spatial perspective and the
acquisition of ‘I/you.’ Journal of Child Language 11, 535–556.
——— 1993. Autism, affordances, and the self. In U. Neisser, ed., The perceived
self. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lucariello, J., and Nelson, K. 1986. Context effects on lexical speciªcity in mater-
nal and child discourse. Journal of Child Language 13, 507–522.
Lyons, J. 1968. Introduction to theoretical linguistics. London: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
MacWhinney, B. 1978. The acquisition of morphophonology. Monographs of the
Society for Research in Child Development 43.
——— 1999. The emergence of language from embodiment. In B. MacWhinney,
ed.,
Emergentist
perspectives
on
language
acquisition.
Mahwah,
NJ:
Erlbaum.
MacWhinney, B., and Bates, E. 1978. Sentential devices for conveying given-
ness and newness. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 17, 539–
558.
Mandler, J. 1992. How to build a baby II: Conceptual primitives. Psychological
Review 99, 587–604.
——— 2000. Perceptual and conceptual processes in infancy. Journal of Cognition
and Development 1, 3–36.
Mannle, S., Barton, M., and Tomasello, M. 1992. Two-year-olds’ conversations
with their mothers and preschool-aged siblings. First Language 12, 57–71.
Maratsos, M. 1974. Preschool children’s use of deªnite and indeªnite articles.
Child Development 45, 446–455.
——— 1976. The use of deªnite and indeªnite reference in young children. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
——— 1982. The child’s construction of grammatical categories. In Wanner and
Gleitman, 1982.
——— 1984. How degenerate is the input to Creoles and where do its biases come
from? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 7, 200–201.
——— 2000. More overregularizations after all. Journal of Child Language 28,
32–54.
Maratsos, M., Gudeman, R., Gerard-Ngo, P., and DeHart, G. 1987. A study in
novel word learning: The productivity of the causative. In B. MacWhinney,
ed., Mechanisms of language acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Marchman, V. 1993. Constraints on plasticity in a connectionist model of the Eng-
lish past tense. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 5, 215–234.
Marchman, V., and Bates, E. 1994. Continuity in lexical and morphological devel-
opment: A test of the critical mass hypothesis. Journal of Child Language 21,
339–366.
Marcos, H. 1991. Reformulating a request at 18 months: Gestures, vocalizations
and words. First Language 11, 361–375.
354
References

Marcos, H., and Bernicot, J. 1994. Addressee co-operation and request reformula-
tion in young children. Journal of Child Language 21, 677–692.
Marcus, G. 1995. The acquisition of inºection in children and multilayered
connectionist networks. Cognition 56, 271–279.
Marcus, G. F., Brinkman, U., Clahsen, H., Wiese, R., and Pinker, S. 1995. German
inºection: The exception that proves the rule. Cognitive Psychology 29, 189–
256.
Marcus, G. F., Pinker, S., Ullman, M., Hollander, M., Rosen, T. J., and Xu, F.
1992. Overregularization in language acquisition. Monographs of the Society
for Research in Child Development 57, 34–69.
Marcus, G. F., Vijayan, S., Bandi Rao, S., and Vishton, P. M. 1999. Rule learning
by seven-month-old-infants. Science 283, 77–80.
Markman, E. 1989. Categorization and naming in children. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
——— 1992. Constraints on word learning: Speculations about their nature, ori-
gins, and word speciªcity. In M. Gunnar and M. Maratsos, eds., Modularity
and constraints in language and cognition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Markman, E. M., and Wachtel, G. A. 1988. Children’s use of mutual exclusivity to
constrain the meanings of words. Cognitive Psychology 20, 121–157.
Markson, L. 1999. Mechanisms of word learning in children: Insights from fast
mapping. Doctoral diss., University of Arizona.
Markson, L., and Bloom, P. 1997. Evidence against a dedicated system for word
learning in children. Nature 385(6619), 813–815.
Mazuka, R. 1996. How can a grammatical parameter be set before the ªrst word?
In J. Morgan and K. Demuth, eds., Signal to syntax: Bootstrapping from
speech to grammar in early acquisition. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
McCune, L. 1992. First words: A dynamic systems view. In C. Ferguson, L. Menn,
and C. Stoel-Gammon, eds., Phonological development: Models, research,
and implications. Parkton, MD: York Press.
McCune-Nicolich, L. 1981. The cognitive basis of relational words in the single
word period. Journal of Child Language 8, 15–34.
McNeil, D. 1992. Hand and mind: What gestures reveal about thought. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
McNeill, D. 1966. The creation of language by children. In J. Lyons and R. J.
Wales, eds., Psycholinguistic papers: The proceedings of the 1966 Edinburgh
Conference. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
McNeill, D., and McNeill, N. B. 1968. What does a child mean when he says no?
In E. M. Zale, ed., Proceedings of the conference on language and language
behavior. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
McPherson, L. 1991. “A little” goes a long way: Evidence for a perceptual basis of
learning for the noun categories COUNT and MASS. Journal of Child Lan-
guage 18, 315–338.
McRae, K., Ferretti, T. R., and Amyote, L. 1997. Thematic roles as verb-speciªc
concepts. Language and Cognitive Processes 12, 137–176.
McShane, J., and Whittaker, S. 1988. The encoding of tense and aspect by 3- to 5-
year-old children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 45, 52–70.
McWhorter, J. H. 1998. Identifying the Creole prototype: Vindicating a typologi-
cal class. Language 74, 788–818.
References
355

Meisel, J. 1987. Reference to past events and actions in the development of natural
second language acquisition. In C. Pfaff, ed., First and second language acqui-
sition processes. Cambridge, MA: Newbury House.
——— 1995. Parameters in acquisition. In P. Fletcher and B. MacWhinney, eds.,
The handbook of child language. Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Meltzoff, A. 1995. Understanding the intentions of others: Re-enactment of in-
tended acts by 18-month-old children. Developmental Psychology 31, 838–
850.
Meltzoff, A., and Moore, K. 1977. Imitation of facial and manual gestures by
newborn infants. Science 198, 75–78.
——— 1989. Imitation in newborn infants: Exploring the range of gestures imi-
tated and the underlying mechanisms. Developmental Psychology 25, 954–
962.
——— 1994. Imitation, memory, and the representation of persons. Infant Behav-
ior and Development 17, 83–99.
Menyuk, P. 1969. Sentences children use. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Merriman, W. E., Marazita, J., and Jarvis, L. 1995. Children’s disposition to map
new words onto new referents. In Tomasello and Merriman 1995.
Mervis, C. B., and Bertrand, J. 1995. Early lexical acquisition and the vocabulary
spurt: A response to Goldªeld and Reznick. Journal of Child Language 22,
461–468.
Mervis, C. B., Golinkoff, R. M., and Bertrand, J. 1994. Two-year-olds readily
learn multiple labels for the same basic level category. Child Development 65,
1163–77.
Michaelis, L., and Lambrecht, K. 1996. Toward a construction-based theory of
language function: The case of nominal extraposition. Language 72, 215–
247.
Moore, C., Angelopoulos, M., and Bennett, P. 1999. Word learning in the context
of referential and salience cues. Developmental Psychology 35, 60–68.
Moore, C., and D’Entremont, B. 2001. Developmental changes in pointing as a
function of parent’s attentional focus. Journal of Cognition and Development
2(2), 109–129.
Morford, M., and Goldin-Meadow, S. 1992. Comprehension and production of
gesture in combination with speech in one-word speakers. Journal of Child
Language 19(3), 559–580.
Munakata, Y., McClelland, J. L., Johnson, M. H., and Siegler, R. S. 1997. Re-
thinking infant knowledge: Toward an adaptive process account of successes
and failures in object permanence tasks. Psychological Review 104, 686–713.
Mundy, P., Sigman, M., and Kasari, C. 1990. A longitudinal study of joint atten-
tion and language development in autistic children. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders 20, 115–128.
Naigles, L. 1990. Children use syntax to learn verb meanings. Journal of Child
Language 17, 357–374.
——— 1996. The use of multiple frames in verb learning via syntactic bootstrap-
ping. Cognition 58, 221–251.
Naigles, L., Gleitman, L., and Gleitman, H. 1993. Children acquire word meaning
components from syntactic evidence. In E. Dromi, ed., Language and cogni-
tion: A developmental perspective. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
356
References

Naigles, L., and Hoff-Ginsberg, E. 1995. Input to verb learning: Evidence for the
plausibility of syntactic bootstrapping. Developmental Psychology 5, 827–
837.
——— 1998. Why are some verbs learned before others? Journal of Child Lan-
guage 25, 95–120.
Naigles, L., and Kako, E. 1993. First contact in verb acquisition: Deªning a role
for syntax. Child Development 64, 1665–87.
Namy, L. L., and Waxman, S. R. 1998. Words and gestures: Infants’ interpreta-
tions of different forms of symbolic reference. Child Development 69(2),
295–308.
Nelson, K. 1973. Structure and strategy in learning to talk. Monographs of the So-
ciety for Research in Child Development 38(149).
——— 1974. Concept, word, and sentence: Interrelations in acquisition and devel-
opment. Psychological Review 81, 267–285.
——— 1976. Some attributes of adjectives used by young children. Cognition 4,
13–30.
——— 1977. Facilitating children’s syntax acquisition. Developmental Psychol-
ogy 13, 101–107.
——— 1985. Making sense: The acquisition of shared meaning. New York: Aca-
demic Press.
——— 1986. Event knowledge: Structure and function in development. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
——— 1995. The dual category problem in the acquisition of action words. In
Tomasello and Merriman 1995.
——— 1996. Language in cognitive development. New York: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Nelson, K., Hampson, J., and Shaw, L. K. 1993. Nouns in early lexicons:
Evidence, explanations and implications. Journal of Child Language 20, 61–
84.
Nelson, K. E. 1986. Some observations from the perspective of the rare event cog-
nitive comparison theory of language acquisition. In K. E. Nelson and A. van
Kleek, eds., Children’s language. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Nelson, K. E., and Bonvillian, J. D. 1978. Early semantic development: Concep-
tual growth and related processes between 2 and 41 2years of age. In K. E. Nel-
son, ed., Children’s language, vol. 1. New York: Gardner.
Newman, J. 1996. Give: A cognitive linguistic study. Berlin/New York: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Newport, E. 1990. Maturational constraints on language learning. Cognitive Sci-
ence 14, 11–28.
Newport, E. L. 1999. Reduced input in the acquisition of signed languages: Con-
tributions to the study of creolization. In M. DeGraff, ed., Language creation
and language change: Creolization, diachrony, and development. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Newport, E. L., Aslin, R. N., and Hauser, M. D. 2001. Learning at a distance: Sta-
tistical learning of non-adjacent regularities in humans and tamarin monkeys.
Boston University Conference on Language Development, Nov.
Newport, E. L., Bavelier, D., and Neville, H. J. In press. Critical thinking about
critical periods: Perspectives on a critical period for language acquisition. In
References
357

E. Dupoux, ed., Language brain and cognitive development: Essays in honor
of Jacques Mehler. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Newport, E. L., Gleitman, H., and Gleitman, L. R. 1977. Mother I’d rather do it
myself: Some effects and non-effects of maternal speech style. In C. E. Snow
and C. A. Ferguson, eds., Talking to children: Language input and acquisi-
tion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ninio, A. 1992. The relation of children’s single word utterances to single word ut-
terances in the input. Journal of Child Language 19, 87–110.
——— 1993. On the fringes of the system: Children’s acquisition of syntactically
isolated forms at the onset of speech. First Language 13, 291–314.
——— 1999. Pathbreaking verbs in syntactic development and the question of
prototypical transitivity. Journal of Child Language 26, 619–653.
Ninio, A., and Bruner, J. 1978. The achievement and antecedents of labelling.
Journal of Child Language 5, 1–15.
Nomura, M., and Shirai, Y. 1997. Overextension of intransitive verbs in the acqui-
sition of Japanese. In E. Clark, ed., Proceedings of the 28th annual child lan-
guage research forum. Stanford: Center for the Study of Language and Infor-
mation.
Noveck, I. A, Ho, S., and Sera, M. 1996. Children’s understanding of epistemic
modals. Journal of Child Language 23, 621–643.
Nunberg, G., Sag, I., and Wasow, T. 1994. Idioms. Language 70, 491–538.
Ochs, E., and Schieffelin, B. 1986. Language socialization across cultures. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
O’Grady, W. 1997. Syntactic Development. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
O’Neill, D. K. 1996. Two-year-old children’s sensitivity to a parent’s knowledge
state when making requests. Child Development 67, 659–677.
O’Neill, D., and Atance, C. 2000. “Maybe my daddy give me a big piano”: The
development of children’s use of modals to express uncertainty. First Lan-
guage 20, 29–52.
Oshima-Takane, Y. 1988. Children learn from speech not addressed to them: The
case of personal pronouns. Journal of Child Language 15, 94–108.
——— 1992. Analysis of pronominal errors: A case study. Journal of Child Lan-
guage 19, 111–131.
——— 1999. The learning of ªrst and second person pronouns in English. In
R. Jackendoff, P. Bloom, and K. Wynn, eds., Language, logic, and concept:
Essays in memory of John MacNamara. Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Oshima-Takane, Y., and Benaroya, T. 1989. An alternative view of pronominal er-
rors in autistic children. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 19,
73–85.
Owings, D., and Morton, E. 1998. Animal vocal communication. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Owren, M. J., and Rendell, D. 2001. Sound on the rebound: Bringing form and
function back to the forefront in understanding nonhuman primate vocal sig-
naling. Evolutionary Anthropology 10, 58–71.
Pan, B. A., Imbens-Bailey, A., Winner, K., and Snow, C. 1996. Communicative in-
tents expressed by parents in interaction with young children. Merrill-Palmer
Quarterly 42(2), 248–266.
358
References

Pan, B. A., and Snow, C. E. 1999. The development of conversation and discourse.
In M. Barrett, ed., The development of language. London: UCL Press.
Pappas, A., and Gelman, S. A. 1998. Generic noun phrases in mother-child con-
versations. Journal of Child Language 25, 19–33.
Park, T. 1979. Some facts on negation: Wode’s four-stage developmental theory of
negation revisited. Journal of Child Language 6, 147–151.
Pawley, A., and Syder, F. 1983. Two puzzles for linguistic theory. In J. Richards
and R. Smith, eds., Language and communication. New York: Longman.
Pea, R. D. 1982. Origins of verbal logic: Spontaneous denials by two- and three-
year-olds. Journal of Child Language 9, 597–626.
Pearson, B. Z., Fernandez, S. C., Lewedeg, V., and Oller, D. K. 1997. The relation
of
input
factors
to
lexical
learning
by
bilingual
infants.
Applied
Psycholinguistics 18, 41–58.
Perkins, M. R. 2000. Productivity and formulaicity in language development. In
C. Schelletter, C. Letts, and M. Garman, eds., Issues in normal and disordered
child language: From phonology to narrative. Special issue of The New
Bulmershe Papers, University of Reading.
Perner, J., Ruffman, T., and Leekam, S. R. 1994. Theory of mind is contagious:
You catch it from your sibs. Child Development 65(4), 1228–38.
Peters, A. 1983. The units of language acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Peters, A., and Boggs, S. 1986. Interactional routines as cultural inºuences on lan-
guage acquisition. In E. Ochs and B. Schieffelin, eds., Language socialization
across cultures. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Peterson, C. 1990. The who, when and where of early narratives. Journal of Child
Language 17, 433–455.
Peterson, C., and Dodsworth, P. 1991. A longitudinal analysis of young children’s
cohesion and noun speciªcation in narratives. Journal of Child Language 18,
397–415.
Peterson, C., and McCabe, A. 1987. The connective and: Do older children use
it less as they learn other connectives? Journal of Child Language 14, 375–
381.
——— 1991a. Linking children’s connective use and narrative macrostructure. In
A. McCabe and C. Peterson, eds., Developing narrative structure. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
——— 1991b. On the threshold of the story realm: Semantic versus pragmatic use
of connectives in narratives. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly 37, 445–464.
Peterson, C. C., and Siegal, M. 1999. Representing inner worlds: Theory of mind
in autistic, deaf, and normal hearing children. Psychological Science 10, 126–
129.
Petitto, L. A. 1988. “Language” in the prelinguistic child. In F. Kessel, ed., The de-
velopment of language and of language researchers. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Piaget, J. 1935/1952. The origins of intelligence in children. New York: Norton.
——— 1937/1954. The construction of reality in the child. New York: Basic
Books.
——— 1970. Piaget’s theory. In P. H. Mussen, ed., Carmichael’s manual of child
psychology, 3d ed., vol. 1. New York: Wiley.
References
359

Pickering, M. J., and Branigan, H. P. 1999. Syntactic priming in language produc-
tion. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 3, 136–141.
Piéraut-Le Bonniec, G. 1980. The development of modal reasoning: Genesis of ne-
cessity and possibility notions. New York: Academic Press.
Pine, J. 1994. The language of primary caregivers. In C. Gallaway and B. J. Rich-
ards, eds., Input and interaction in language acquisition. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Pine, J., and Lieven, E. 1993. Reanalysing rote-learned phrases: Individual differ-
ences in the transition to multi word speech. Journal of Child Language 20,
551–571.
——— 1997. Slot and frame patterns in the development of the determiner cate-
gory. Applied Psycholinguistics 18, 123–138.
Pine, J., Lieven, E., and Rowland, G. 1998. Comparing different models of the de-
velopment of the English verb category. Linguistics 36, 4–40.
Pine, J., and Martindale, H. 1996. Syntactic categories in the speech of young chil-
dren: The case of the determiner. Journal of Child Language 23, 369–395.
Pine, J., Rowland, C., Lieven, E., and Theakston, A. Submitted. Testing the agree-
ment/tense omission model. Manuscript.
Pinker, S. 1981. A theory of graph comprehension. In R. Freedle, ed., Artiªcial in-
telligence and the future of testing. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
——— 1984. Language learnability and language development. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
——— 1987. The bootstrapping problem in language acquisition. In B.
MacWhinney, ed., Mechanisms of language acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
——— 1989. Learnability and cognition: The acquisition of verb-argument struc-
ture. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
——— 1991. Rules of language. Science 253, 530–535.
——— 1994. The language instinct: How the mind creates language. New York:
Morrow.
——— 1999. Words and rules. New York: Morrow.
Pinker, S., and Bloom, P. 1992. Natural language and natural selection. In J. H.
Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, eds., The adapted mind. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Pinker, S., Lebeaux, D. S., and Frost, L. A. 1987. Productivity and constraints in
the acquisition of the passive. Cognition 26, 195–267.
Pinker, S., and Prince, A. 1988. On language and connectionism: Analysis of a par-
allel distributed processing model of language acquisition. Cognition 28, 73–
193.
Pizzuto E., and Caselli, M. C. 1992. The acquisition of Italian morphology: Impli-
cations for models of language development. Journal of Child Language 19,
491–557.
——— 1994. The acquisition of Italian verb morphology in a cross-linguistic per-
spective. In Y. Levy, ed., Other children, other languages: Issues in the theory
of language acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pizzuto, E., and Volterra, V. 2000. Iconicity and transparency in sign languages: A
cross-linguistic cross-cultural view. In K. Emmorey and H. Lane, eds., The
signs of language revisited. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
360
References

Plunkett, K., and Marchman, V. 1991. U-shaped learning and frequency effects in
a multi-layered perceptron: Implications for child language acquisition. Cog-
nition 38, 43–102.
——— 1993. From rote learning to system building: Acquiring verb morphology
in children and connectionist nets. Cognition 48, 21–69.
Poplack, S. 2001. Variability, frequency and productivity in the irrealis domain of
French. In J. Bybee and P. Hopper, eds., Frequency effects and emergent gram-
mar. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Power, R., and Dal Martello, M. F. 1986. The use of the deªnite and indeªnite
articles by Italian pre-school children. Journal of Child Language 13, 145–
154.
Premack, D. 1983. The codes of man and beasts. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 6,
125–167.
Pullum, G. 1996. Learnability, hyperlearning, and the poverty of the stimulus.
Proceedings of the Berkeley Linguistics Society 22, 498–513.
——— 2002. Empirical assessment of stimulus poverty arguments. Linguistic Re-
view 19, 9–50.
Pye, C., Loeb, D., Redmond, S, and Richardson, L. 1994. When do children learn
verbs? In E. Clark, ed., Proceedings of the 25th annual child language re-
search forum. Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Pye, C., and Quixtan Poz, P. 1988. Precocious passives and antipassives in
Quiche Mayan. Papers and Reports on Child Language Development 27, 71–
80.
Quine, W. 1960. Word and object. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Quinn, P. C., Cummins, M., Kase, J., Martin, E., and Weissman, S. 1996. Develop-
ment of categorical representations for above and below spatial relations in 3-
to 7-month-old infants. Developmental Psychology 32, 942–950.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G., and Svartvik, J. 1985. A grammar of con-
temporary English. London: Longman.
Radford, A. 1990. Syntactic theory and the acquisition of English syntax. Cam-
bridge, MA: Blackwell.
Rakison, D. H., and Oakes, L. M. In press. Early category and concept develop-
ment: Making sense of the blooming, buzzing confusion. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Ramus, F., Hauser, M. D., Miller, C., Morris, D., and Mehler, J. 2000. Language
discrimination by human newborns and by cotton-top tamarin monkeys. Sci-
ence 288, 349–351.
Rappaport, M., and Levin, B. 1988. What to do with theta-roles. In W. Wilkins,
ed., Syntax and semantics, vol. 21: Thematic relations. New York: Academic
Press.
Ratner, N., and Bruner, J. 1978. Games, social exchange, and the acquisition of
language. Journal of Child Language 5, 391–402.
Redington, M., Chater, N., and Finch, S. 1998. Distributional information: A
powerful cue for acquiring syntactic categories. Cognitive Science 22, 425–
469.
Reznick, J. S., and Goldªeld, B. 1992. Rapid change in lexical development in
comprehension and production. Developmental Psychology 28, 406–413.
Rice, M. L. 1990. Preschoolers’ QUIL: Quick incidental learning of words. In
References
361

G. Conti-Ramsden and C. Snow, eds., Children’s language, vol. 7. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Rice, M. L., Wexler, K., and Hershberger, S. 1998. Tense over time: The longitudi-
nal course of tense acquisition in children with speciªc language impairment.
Journal of Speech, Language and Hearing Research 41, 1412–31.
Richards, B. J. 1990. Language development and individual differences: A study of
auxiliary verb learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rispoli, M. 1987. The acquisition of verbs in Japanese. First Language 7, 183–200.
——— 1991. The mosaic acquisition of grammatical relations. Journal of Child
Language 18, 517–551.
——— 1992. Discourse and the acquisition of eat. Journal of Child Language 19,
581–595.
——— 1994. Structural dependency and the acquisition of grammatical relations.
In Y. Levy, ed., Other children, other languages: Issues in the theory of lan-
guage acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
——— 1998. Patterns of pronoun case error. Journal of Child Language 25, 533–
544.
Rispoli, M., and Hadley, P. In press. The leading-edge: The signiªcance of sentence
disruptions in the development of grammar. Journal of Speech, Hearing and
Language Research.
Roberts, K. 1983. Comprehension and production of word order in stage 1. Child
Development 54, 443–449.
Roeper, T. 1996. The role of merger theory and formal features in acquisition. In
H. Clahsen, ed., Generative perspectives on language acquisition: Empirical
ªndings, theoretical considerations and crosslinguistic comparison. Amster-
dam: Benjamins.
Rohde, D. L. T., and Plaut, D. C. 1999. Language acquisition in the absence of ex-
plicit negative evidence: How important is starting small? Cognition 72, 67–
109.
Rollins, P. R., and Snow, C. E. 1998. Shared attention and grammatical develop-
ment in typical children and children with autism. Journal of Child Language
25, 653–654.
Rowland, C., and Pine, J. M. 2000. Subject-auxiliary inversion errors and wh-
question acquisition: “What children do know?” Journal of Child Language
27, 157–181.
Rubino, R., and Pine, J. 1998. Subject-verb agreement in Brazilian Portuguese:
What low error rates hide. Journal of Child Language 25, 35–60.
Rumelhart, D., and McClelland, J. 1986. On learning the past tenses of English
verbs. In J. McClelland, D. Rumelhart, and the PDP Research Group, eds.,
Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cogni-
tion, vol. 2. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sachs, J. 1983. Talking about the there and then: The emergence of displaced ref-
erence in parent-child discourse. In K. E. Nelson, ed., Children’s language,
vol. 4. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Saffran, J., Aslin, R., and Newport E. 1996. Statistical learning by 8-month old in-
fants. Science 274, 1926.
Saffran, J. R., Johnson, E. K., Aslin, R. N., and Newport, E. L. 1999. Statistical
362
References

learning of tone sequences by human infants and adults. Cognition 70(1), 27–
52.
Saffran, J. R., Newport, E. L., Aslin, R. N., Tunick, R. A., and Barrueco, S. 1997.
Incidental language learning: Listening (and learning) out of the corner of
your ear. Psychological Science 8, 101–105.
Samarin, W. 1984. Socioprogrammed linguistics. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 7,
206–207.
Sampson, G. 1997. Educating Eve: The language instinct debate. London: Casell
Academic.
Samuelson, L. K., and Smith, L. B. 1998. Memory and attention make smart word
learning: An alternative account of Akhtar, Carpenter and Tomasello. Child
Development 1, 94–104.
Saussure, F. 1916/1959. Course in general linguistics. New York: Philosophical Li-
brary.
Savage, C., Lieven, E., and Tomasello, M. In press. Priming active and passive con-
structions in young English-speaking children. Developmental Science.
Savage-Rumbaugh, S. 1990. Language as a cause-effect communication system.
Philosophical Psychology 3, 55–76.
Savage-Rumbaugh, S., Murphy, J., Sevcik, R., Brakke, K., Williams, S., and
Rumbaugh, D. 1993. Language comprehension in ape and child. Monographs
of the Society for Research in Child Development 58(3–4).
Saxton, M. 2000. Negative evidence and negative feedback. First Language 20,
221–252.
Saxton, M., Kulscar, B., Marshall, G., and Rupra, M. 1998. Longer-term effects of
corrective input: An experimental approach. Journal of Child Language 25,
701–722.
Saylor, M. M. 2000. Time-stability and adjective use by child and adult English
speakers. First Language 20, 91–120.
Schlesinger, I. 1971. Learning of grammar from pivot to realization rules. In
R. Huxley and E. Ingram, eds., Language acquisition: Models and methods.
New York: Academic Press.
——— 1988. The origin of relational categories. In Y. Levy, I. Schlesinger, and M.
Braine, eds., Categories and processes in language acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Schneider, W. 1999. Automaticity. In MIT encyclopedia of the cognitive sciences.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Schuetze, C., and Wexler, K. 1996. Subject case licensing and English root
inªnitives. In D. MacLaughlin and S. McEwen, eds., Proceedings of the 20th
annual Boston University conference on language development. Boston:
Cascadilla.
Schwartz, R., and Leonard, L. 1983. Some further comments on reduplication in
child phonology. Journal of Child Language 10, 441–448.
Schwartz, R., and Terrell, B. 1983. The role of input frequency in lexical acquisi-
tion. Journal of Child Language 10, 57–66.
Schwe, H., and Markman, E. 1997. Young children’s appreciation of the mental
impact of their communicative signals. Developmental Psychology 33, 630–
635.
References
363

Scollon, R. 1973. Conversations with a one year old. Honolulu: University of Ha-
waii Press.
Scott, C. M. 1984. Adverbial connectivity in conversations of children 6 to 12.
Journal of Child Language 11, 423–452.
Senghas, A., and Coppola, M. 2001. Children creating language: How Nicaraguan
sign language acquired a spatial grammar. Psychological Science 12(4), 323–
328.
Serrat, E. 1997. Acquisition of verb category in Catalan. Ph.D. diss., University of
Barcelona.
Seuren, P. 1984. The bioprogram hypothesis: Fact and fancy. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 7, 208–209.
Shanker, S. G., Savage-Rumbaugh, S., and Taylor, T. J. 1999. Kanzi: A new begin-
ning. Animal Learning and Behavior 27(1), 24–25.
Shatz, M., Wellman, H., and Silber, S. 1983. The acquisition of mental verbs: A
systematic investigation of the ªrst reference to mental state. Cognition 14,
301–321.
Sheldon, A. 1974. The role of parallel function in the acquisition of relative clauses
in English. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 13, 272–281.
Shirai, Y. 1994. On the overgeneralization of progressive marking on stative verbs:
Bioprogram or input? First Language 14, 67–82.
——— 1998. The emergence of tense-aspect morphology in Japanese: Universal
predisposition? First Language 18, 281–309.
Shirai, Y., and Andersen, R. W. 1995. The acquisition of tense/aspect morphology:
A prototype account. Language 71, 743–762.
Sigman, M., and Capps, L. 1997. Children with autism: A developmental perspec-
tive. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Siller, M., and Sigman, M. 2002. The behaviors of parents of children with autism
predict the subsequent development of their children’s communication skills.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 32(2), 77–89.
Silva, M. 1991. Simultaneity in children’s narratives: The case of when, while and
as. Journal of Child Language 18, 641–662.
Singleton, J. L., and Newport, E. L. In press. When learners surpass their models:
The acquisition of American Sign Language from inconsistent input. Cogni-
tive Psychology.
Skinner, B. F. 1957. Verbal learning. New York: Appleton-Century-Croft.
Slobin, D. 1970. Universals of grammatical development in children. In G. Flores
D’Arcais and W. Levelt, eds., Advances in psycholinguistics. Amsterdam:
North Holland.
——— 1973. Cognitive prerequisites for the development of grammar. In C. Fer-
guson and D. Slobin, eds., Studies of child language development. New York:
Holt, Rinehart, Winston.
——— 1982. Universal and particular in the acquisition of language. In Wanner
and Gleitman, 1982.
——— 1985a. Crosslinguistic evidence for the language-making capacity. In
Slobin, ed., The crosslinguistic study of language acquisition, vol. 2. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
——— 1985b. The crosslinguistic study of language acquisition, vols. 1 and 2.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
364
References

——— 1992. The crosslinguistic study of language acquisition: vol. 3. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
——— 1996. Talking perfectly: Discourse origins of the present perfect. In
W. Pagliuca and G. Davis, eds., Essays in semantics. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
——— 1997. The crosslinguistic study of language acquisition, vols. 4 and 5: Ex-
panding the contexts. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Slobin, D., and Bever, T. 1982. Children use canonical sentence schemas:
A crosslinguistic study of word order and inºections. Cognition 12, 229–
265.
Smiley, P., and Huttenlocher, J. 1995. Conceptual development and the child’s
early words for events, objects and persons. In Tomasello and Merriman
1995.
Smith, C. B., Adamson, L. B., and Bakeman, R. 1988. Interactional predictors of
early language. First Language 8, 143–156.
Smith, C. S. 1980. The acquisition of time talk: Relations between child and adult
grammars. Journal of Child Language 7, 263–278.
Smith, L. B. 2000. Learning how to learn words: An associative crane. In R. M.
Golinkoff and K. Hirsh-Pasek, eds., Becoming a word learner. Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press.
Smith, N., and Tsimpli, I. 1995. The mind of a savant. Oxford: Blackwell.
Snow, C. E., and Ferguson, C. A. 1977. Talking to children. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Snow, C. E., and Goldªeld, B. 1983. Turn the page please: Situation speciªc lan-
guage acquisition. Journal of Child Language 10, 551–570.
Snow, C. E., and Hoefnagel-Höhle, M. 1978. The critical period hypothesis: Evi-
dence from second language learning. Child Development 49, 1114–28.
Snow, C. E., Pan, B., Imbens-Bailey, A., and Herman, J. 1996. Learning how to say
what one means: A longitudinal study of children’s speech act use. Social De-
velopment 5, 56–84.
Snyder, W., and Stromswold, K. 1997. The structure and acquisition of English
dative constructions. Linguistic Inquiry 28, 281–317.
Soja, N. 1992. Inferences about the meanings of nouns: The relationship between
perception and syntax. Cognitive Development 7, 29–45.
Soja, N., Carey, S., and Spelke, E. 1991. Ontological categories guide young chil-
dren’s inductions of word meaning: Object terms and substance terms. Cogni-
tion 38, 179–211.
Spelke, E. S., Katz, G., Purcell, S. E., Ehrlich, S. M., and Breinlinger, K. 1994.
Early knowledge of object motion: Continuity and inertia. Cognition 51,
131–176.
Sperber, D., and Wilson, D. 1986. Relevance: Communication and cognition.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Spooren, W., and Sanders, T. Submitted. Relations between coherence relations:
evidence from acquisition data.
Stephany, U. 1981. Verbal grammar in modern Greek early child language. In
P. Dale and D. Ingram, eds., Child language: An international perspective.
Baltimore: University Park Press.
——— 1993. Modality in ªrst language acquisition: The state of the art. In
References
365

N. Dittmar and A. Reich, eds., Modality in language acquisition. Berlin: de
Gruyter.
Stoll, S. 1998. The acquisition of Russian aspect. First Language 18, 351–378.
Sudhalter, V., and Braine, M. 1985. How does comprehension of passives de-
velop? A comparison of actional and experiential verbs. Journal of Child Lan-
guage 12, 455–470.
Suzman, S. M. 1985. Learning the passive in Zulu. Papers and Reports on Child
Language Development 24, 131–137.
Sweetser, E. E. 1990. From etymology to pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Swingley, D., Pinto, J. P., and Fernald, A. 1999. Continuous processing in word
recognition at 24 months. Cognition 71, 73–108.
Talmy, L. 1985. Lexicalization patterns: Semantic structure in lexical forms. In
T. Shopen, ed., Language typology and syntactic description, vol. 3. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
——— 1988. The relation of grammar to cognition. In B. Rudzka-Ostyn, ed.,
Topics in cognitive linguistics. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
——— 1996. The windowing of attention in language. In M. Shibatani and
S. Thompson, eds., Grammatical constructions. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Tam, C., and Stokes, S. F. 2001. Form and function of negation in early develop-
mental Cantonese. Journal of Child Language 28(2), 373–391.
Tanz, C. 1974. Cognitive principles underlying children’s errors in pronominal
case-marking. Journal of Child Language 1, 271–276.
——— 1980. Studies in the acquisition of deictic terms. London: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Tardif, T. 1996. Nouns are not always learned before verbs: Evidence from Man-
darin speakers’ early vocabularies. Developmental Psychology 32(3), 492–
504.
Tardif, T., Gelman, S., and Xu, F. 1999. Putting the noun bias in context: A com-
parison of English and Mandarin. Child Development 70, 620–635.
Tavakolian, S. 1981. Language acquisition and linguistic theory. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Tfouni, L. V., and Klatzky, R. L. 1983. A discourse analysis of deixis: Pragmatic,
cognitive and semantic factors in the comprehension of ‘this,’ ‘that,’ ‘here’
and ‘there.’ Journal of Child Language 10, 123–133.
Theakston, A., Lieven, E., Pine, J., and Rowland, C. 2001. The role of perfor-
mance limitations in the acquisition of verb argument structure. Journal of
Child Language 28, 127–152.
Thomas, M. 1989. The acquisition of English articles by ªrst- and second-
language learners. Applied Psycholinguistics 10, 335–355.
Thompson, R. K. R., and Oden, D. 2000. Categorical perception and conceptual
judgements by nonhuman primates: The paleological monkey and the analog-
ical ape. Cognitive Science 24, 363–396.
Thompson, S. A., and Mulac, A. 1991. A quantitative perspective on the
grammaticization of epistemic parentheticals in English. In E. Heine and
E. Traugott, eds., Approaches to grammaticalization, vol. 2. Amsterdam:
Benjamins.
366
References

Tinbergen, N. 1951. The study of instinct. New York: Oxford University Press.
Tomasello, M. 1987. Learning to use prepositions: A case study. Journal of Child
Language 14, 79–98.
——— 1988. The role of joint attentional process in early language development.
Language Sciences 10, 69–88.
——— 1992a. First verbs: A case study of early grammatical development. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
——— 1992b. The social bases of language acquisition. Social Development 1,
67–87.
——— 1994. Can an ape understand a sentence? A review of Language Compre-
hension in Ape and Child by E. S. Savage-Rumbaugh et al. Language and
Communication 14, 377–390.
——— 1995a. Joint attention as social cognition. In C. Moore and P. J. Dunham,
eds., Joint attention: Its origins and role in development. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
——— 1995b. Pragmatic contexts for early verb learning. In Tomasello and
Merriman 1995.
——— 1995c. Language is not an instinct. Cognitive Development 10, 131–156.
——— 1996. Do apes ape? In J. Galef and C. Heyes, eds., Social learning in ani-
mals: The roots of culture. New York: Academic Press.
——— 1998a. The new psychology of language, vol. 1: Cognitive and functional
approaches to language structure. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
——— 1998b. Reference: Intending that others jointly attend. Pragmatics and
Cognition 6, 219–243.
——— 1998c. One child’s early talk about possession. In J. Newman, ed., The lin-
guistics of giving. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
——— 1998d. The return of constructions. Journal of Child Language 75, 431–
447.
——— 1999. The cultural origins of human cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
——— 2000a. First steps in a usage based theory of language acquisition. Cogni-
tive Linguistics 11, 61–82.
——— 2000b. Do young children have adult syntactic competence? Cognition 74,
209–253.
——— 2002. The new psychology of language, vol. 2: Cognitive and functional
approaches to language structure. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
——— In press. Could we please lose the mapping metaphor, please? Behavioral
and Brain Sciences.
Tomasello, M., and Abbot-Smith, K. 2002. A tale of two theories: Response to
Fisher. Cognition 83, 207–214.
Tomasello, M., and Akhtar, N. 1995. Two-year-olds use pragmatic cues to dif-
ferentiate reference to objects and actions. Cognitive Development 10, 201–
224.
Tomasello, M., Akhtar, N., Dodson, K., and Rekau, L. 1997. Differential produc-
tivity in young children’s use of nouns and verbs. Journal of Child Language
24, 373–87.
Tomasello, M., Anselmi, D., and Farrar, J. 1984/85. Young children’s coordina-
tion of gestural and linguistic reference. First Language 5, 199–210.
References
367

Tomasello, M., and Barton, M. 1994. Learning words in non-ostensive contexts.
Developmental Psychology 30, 639–650.
Tomasello, M., and Brooks, P. 1998. Young children’s earliest transitive and in-
transitive constructions. Cognitive Linguistics 9, 379–395.
——— 1999. Early syntactic development: A construction grammar approach. In
M. Barrett, ed., The development of language. London: Psychology Press.
Tomasello, M., Brooks, P., and Stern, E. 1998. Learning to produce passive sen-
tences through discourse. First Language 18, 223–237.
Tomasello, M., and Call, J. 1997. Primate cognition. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Tomasello, M., Call, J., and Gluckman, A. 1997. The comprehension of novel
communicative signs by apes and human children. Child Development 68,
1067–81.
Tomasello, M., and Camaioni, L. 1997. A comparison of the gestural communica-
tion of apes and human infants. Human Development 40, 7–24.
Tomasello, M., and Farrar, J. 1984. Cognitive bases of lexical development: Ob-
ject permanence and relational words. Journal of Child Language 11, 477–
493.
——— 1986a. Joint attention and early language. Child Development 57, 1454–
63.
——— 1986b. Object permanence and relational words: A lexical training study.
Journal of Child Language 13, 495–506.
Tomasello, M., Farrar, J., and Dines, J. 1984. Children’s speech revisions for a fa-
miliar and an unfamiliar adult. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 27,
359–363.
Tomasello, M., and Kruger, A. 1992. Joint attention on actions: Acquiring verbs in
ostensive and non-ostensive contexts. Journal of Child Language 19, 311–
333.
Tomasello, M., Kruger, A., and Ratner, H. 1993. Cultural learning. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences 16, 495–552.
Tomasello, M., and Mannle, S. 1985. Pragmatics of sibling speech to one year
olds. Child Development 56, 911–917.
Tomasello, M., Mannle, S., and Barton, M. 1989. The development of communi-
cative competence in twins. Revue Internationale de Psychologie Sociale 2,
49–59.
Tomasello, M., Mannle, S., and Kruger, A. 1986. Linguistic environment of one to
two year old twins. Developmental Psychology 22, 169–176.
Tomasello, M., Mannle, S., and Werdenschlag, L. 1988. The effect of previously
learned words on the child’s acquisition of words for similar referents. Journal
of Child Language 15, 505–515.
Tomasello, M., and Merriman, W., eds. 1995. Beyond names for things: Young
children’s acquisition of verbs. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tomasello, M., and Mervis, C. 1994. The instrument is great, but measuring com-
prehension is still a problem. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development 59, 174–179.
Tomasello, M., and Rakoczy, H. In press. What makes human cognition unique?
Mind and Language.
368
References

Tomasello, M., Striano, T., and Rochat, P. 1999. Do young children use objects as
symbols? British Journal of Developmental Psychology 17, 563–584.
Tomasello, M., Strosberg, R., and Akhtar, N. 1996. Eighteen-month-old children
learn words in non-ostensive contexts. Journal of Child Language 23, 157–
176.
Tomasello, M., and Todd, J. 1983. Joint attention and lexical acquisition style.
First Language 4, 197–212.
Tomasello, M., and Zuberbühler, K. 2002. Primate vocal and gestural communi-
cation. In M. Bekoff, C. Allen, and G. Burghardt, eds., The cognitive animal:
Empirical and theoretical perspectives on animal cognition. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Trask, L. 1996. Historical linguistics: An introduction. New York: St Martin’s.
Traugott, E. 1989. On the rise of epistemic meanings in English: An example of
subjectiªcation in semantic change. Language 65, 31–55.
Traugott, E., and Heine, B. 1991. Approaches to grammaticalization, vols. 1 and
2. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Trevarthen, C. 1979. Communication and cooperation in early infancy: A descrip-
tion of primary intersubjectivity. In M. M. Bullowa, ed., Before speech: The
beginning of interpersonal communication. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Vaidyanathan, R. 1988. Development of forms and functions of interrogatives in
children: A longitudinal study in Tamil. Journal of Child Language 15, 533–
549.
——— 1991. Development of forms and functions of negation in the early stages
of language acquisition: A study in Tamil. Journal of Child Language 18, 51–
66.
Valian, V. 1991. Syntactic subjects in the early speech of American and Italian chil-
dren. Cognition 40, 21–81.
van Hoek, K. 1997. Anaphora and conceptual structure. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
——— 2002. Pronouns and point of view: Cognitive principles of coreference. In
M. Tomasello, ed., The new psychology of language, vol. 2: Cognitive and
functional approaches to language structure. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Van Valin, R. 1990. Semantic parameters of split intransitivity. Language 66, 221–
260.
——— 1992. An overview of ergative phenomena and their implications for lan-
guage acquisition. In D. I. Slobin, ed., The crosslinguistic study of language
acquisition, vol. 3. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
——— 1993. A synopsis of role and reference grammar. In R. Van Valin, ed., Ad-
vances in role and reference grammar. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
——— 1998. The acquisition of wh-questions and the mechanisms of language ac-
quisition. In M. Tomasello, ed., The new psychology of language, vol. 1: Cog-
nitive and functional approaches to language structure. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Vargha-Khadem, F., and Passingham, R. 1990. Speech and language defects. Na-
ture 346, 226.
Vear, D., and Ramos, E. 2001. Pragmatic and semantic variation in children’s ear-
References
369

liest uses of verbs. Paper presented at Society for Research in Child Develop-
ment.
Vihman, M. M. 1996. Phonological development: The origins of language in the
child. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wagner, L. 2001. Aspectual inºuences on early tense comprehension. Journal of
Child Language 28, 661–682.
Wanner, E., and L. Gleitman, eds. 1982. Language acquisition: The state of the
art. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Warden, C., and Warner, L. 1928. The sensory capacities and intelligence of dogs
with a report on the ability of the noted dog “Fellow” to respond to verbal
stimuli. Quarterly Review of Biology 3(1), 1–29.
Warden, D. 1976. The inºuence of context on children’s use of identifying expres-
sions and references. British Journal of Psychology 67(1), 101–112.
Watson-Gegeo, K. A., and Gegeo, D. W. 1986. The social world of Kwara’ae chil-
dren: Acquisition of language and values. In J. Cook-Gumperz, W. Corsaro,
and J. Streeck, eds., Children’s worlds and children’s language. New York:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Weist, R. 1983. Preªx versus sufªx information processing in the comprehension
of tense and aspect. Journal of Child Language 10, 85–96.
——— 1986. Tense and aspect. In P. Fletcher and M. Garman, eds., Language ac-
quisition, 2d ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Weist, R., and Konieczna, E. 1985. Afªx processing strategies and linguistic sys-
tems. Journal of Child Language 12, 27–35.
Weist, R., Lyytinen, P., Wysocka, J., and Atanassova, M. 1997. The interaction of
language and thought in children’s language acquisition: A crosslinguistic
study. Journal of Child Language 24, 81–121.
Weist, R., Wysocka, H., and Lyytinen, P. 1991. A cross-linguistic perspective on
the development of temporal systems. Journal of Child Language 18, 67–92.
Weist, R., Wysocka, H., Witkowska-Stadnik, K., Buczowska, E., and Konieczna,
E. 1984. The defective tense hypothesis: On the emergence of tense and aspect
in child Polish. Journal of Child Language 11, 347–374.
Wells, G. 1983. Learning through interaction: The study of language development.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Werker, J. F., and Desjardins, R. N. 1995. Listening to speech in the ªrst year of
life: Experiential inºuences on phoneme perception. Current Directions in
Psychological Sciences 4(3), 76–81.
Whiten, A. 1998. Imitation of the sequential structure of actions by chimpanzees
(Pan troglodytes). Journal of Comparative Psychology 112, 270–281.
Wierzbicka, A. 1985. “Oats and wheat”: The fallacy of arbitrariness. In
J. Haiman, ed., Iconicity in syntax. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Wijnen, F. 1990. On the development of language production mechanisms. Doc-
toral diss., University of Nijmegen.
Wilcox, J., and Webster, E. 1980. Early discourse behaviors: Children’s response
to listener feedback. Child Development 51, 1120–25.
Wilcox, S., and Palermo, D. 1975. “In,” “on,” and “under” revisited. Cognition
3, 245–254.
Wilson, S. In press. Lexically speciªc constructions in the acquisition of inºections
in English. Journal of Child Language.
370
References

Wittek, A., and Tomasello, M. Submitted (a). German-speaking children’s produc-
tivity with case-marking: A test of the local cues hypothesis.
——— Submitted (b). Referential choice by two-year-olds.
Wittgenstein, L. 1955. Philosophical investigations. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Wode, H. 1977. Four early stages in the development of L1 negation. Journal of
Child Language 4, 87–102.
Woodward, A. L., and Markman, E. M. 1997. Early word learning. In W. Damon,
D. Kuhn, and R. Siegler, eds., Handbook of child psychology, vol. 2: Cogni-
tion, perception and language. New York: Wiley.
Woodward, A. L., Markman, E. M., and Fitzsimmons, C. M. 1994. Rapid word
learning in 13- and 18-month-olds. Developmental Psychology 30, 553–566.
Wray, Alison, and Perkins, M. 2000. The functions of formulaic language: An inte-
grated model. Language and Communication 20, 1–28.
Xu, F., Carey, S., and Welch, J. 1999. Infants’ ability to use object kind informa-
tion for object individuation. Cognition 70, 137–166.
Yamada, J. 1981. Evidence for the independence of language and cognition: Case
study of a “hyperlinguistic” adolescent. UCLA Working Papers in Cognitive
Linguistics 3, 93–115.
Zuberbühler, K. 2002. A syntactic rule in forest monkey communication. Animal
Behaviour 63, 293–299.
References
371


Acknowledgments
Acknowledgments
The ªrst version of this book was intended to be a textbook. But it turns out that I
am incapable of writing about things I think are either boring or wrong. So I un-
dertook a major revision and turned the project into an extended theoretical pro-
posal—much of which was implicit in the ªrst version anyway. What this means is
that I wrote my theoretical account around a fairly systematic review of the re-
search in child language acquisition—at least the part of it that does not view chil-
dren’s language through the lens of adult formal grammars—and so I think the
book can still be used as an advanced textbook by a signiªcant portion of re-
searchers in the ªeld.
To the extent that this ªnal version is a better book, the credit goes in large part
to discussions I have had over the past year with a number of my colleagues, some
of whom read portions or even all of the manuscript. Of special importance is my
colleague and social conscience, Elena Lieven, whose thoughts on language acqui-
sition are at this point inextricably intertwined with my own. Thank you, Elena.
For discussions and feedback I would also like to single out Gina Conti-Ramsden,
Kirsten Smith, Ewa Dabrowska, Nancy Budwig, Holger Diessel, Heike Behrens,
and Angelika Wittek. Also, the two reviewers from Harvard University Press—
Adele Goldberg and Stephen Wilson—provided very useful feedback, as did Eliza-
beth Knoll at HUP, especially on the ªrst chapter. I thank you all. In addition,
Jenny Speares was a big help with the references, and Camille Smith at HUP edited
the manuscript and corrected many an awkward phrasing. I also express my deep-
est gratitude to Henriette Zeidler. She did innumerable things to facilitate the
birthing of this book, including providing expert help with the ªgures and refer-
ences, securing permissions, and the like. But most important, she basically ran the
department administratively—with great skill and good cheer, natürlich—while I
was at home writing in relative peace and quiet.


Index
Index
Index
Abbot-Smith, K., 130–131, 167, 317–318
Abstractions: linguistic, 2, 6, 17n, 97, 101,
162–163; exemplars into, 315–318
Abstract syntactic constructions, 144–146,
193–195; described, 139–141, 146–161,
174; constructing, 161–175; constraining,
175–181; theories of syntactic develop-
ment, 181–193
Acquisition of language, 1–7, 20–21, 323–
328
Acredolo, L. P., 34–35
Action words, 45, 67
Activity verbs, 213–215
Acunzo, M., 269
Adams, A. M., 312–313
Adamson, L. B., 3, 65
Adjectives: as early words, 44; and word
meanings, 53, 56–57
Adverbial constructions, 258–261
Agreement, 132–136
Akhtar, N., 27, 48, 56, 66–68, 70–71, 76,
82, 86, 129–130, 150, 172, 269, 296,
317–318
Aksu-Koç, A., 219, 225, 276
Alarm calls, 10–11
Allen, S. E. M., 39, 119, 157, 216–
217
Ambalu, D., 69
American English, 223–224
American Sign Language, 34
Ammon, P., 249
Amyote, L., 106
Analogies, 4; and grammaticalization, 14,
16–17; and syntactic constructions, 144–
145, 162–169; and psycholinguistic pro-
cesses of acquisition, 295, 297–300
Andersen, R. W., 220
Angelopoulos, M., 83
Anglin, J., 52
Anisfeld, M., 51, 92
Anselmi, D., 207, 269
Antes, G., 227–228
Antinucci, F., 218–219
Antone, C., 61
Argument structure, 214–217
Ariel, M., 200, 267
Armon-Lotem, S., 119
Articles, 209–213
Aslin, R. N., 4, 28–30, 60–61
Aspect: described, 217–218; and past tense,
218–221
Aspect Before Tense hypothesis, 218–219,
221
Association, 2–3, 82–84, 87
Atance, C., 222
Atkinson, M., 183
Attributives, 148–149
Auditory patterns, 28–30
Australian languages, 168
Automatization, 15
Auxiliaries, modal, 245
Bachrach, V. R., 268
Baillargeon, R., 20, 62

Bakeman, R., 3, 65
Baker, C. L., 96
Baker, E., 75, 205
Baldwin, D., 67, 69, 118, 185, 203, 257
Barbieri, M. S., 226
Barlow, M., 5, 318
Barlow-Brown, F., 35
Barnes, S., 109
Baron-Cohen, S., 34
Barrett, M., 36, 53
Barsalou, L. W., 58, 315, 325
Bartlett, E., 73, 79
Barton, M., 38, 65, 68, 70, 108, 267–269
Bartsch, K., 249, 279
Bascelli, E., 226
Bassano, D., 224
Bates, E., 3, 18, 31–32, 38, 46, 50, 52–53,
92–93, 117, 126, 133, 137–139, 142,
166, 168, 171, 175, 178, 189–190, 275,
286–288, 290
Bauer, P., 123
Bauman, A. L., 60
Bavelier, D., 286
Bavin, E. L., 131
Beardsall, L., 278
Behavioral approach to language acquisi-
tion, 2–3, 82
Behrend, D. A., 56, 77
Behrens, H., 61, 119, 219, 236, 238
Bellugi, U., 158, 228–229
Benaroya, T., 202
Benedict, H., 109
Benefactives, 151–154
Bennett, P., 83
Bennett-Kastor, T., 273–274
Benson, J., 20, 28, 84, 317
Berman, R., 119, 129, 151, 272, 276
Bernicot, J., 269
Bertrand, J., 50, 73, 86
Bever, T., 133
Bialystock, E., 286
Bickerton, D., 13, 287
Binding principles, 207
Biology, role of, 284–290
Birch, S. A. J., 205
Bishop, D. V. M., 239–240, 312
Bloom, L., 38, 47, 75, 95, 114, 127, 215–
216, 218, 226, 229–230, 246–250, 258–
259, 263, 267, 312
Bloom, P., 13, 20, 50, 73, 79, 81, 89, 205,
216
Bock, J. K., 316
Boggs, S., 88
Bohannon, N., 177
Bonvillian, J. D., 35, 80
Boroditsky, L., 47–48
Botting, N., 312
Bowerman, M., 63–64, 70, 95, 127, 134,
150–151, 153–155, 157, 176–177, 179,
185, 232, 244
Boyd, R., 283
Braine, M., 2, 95–96, 114–115, 127, 132–
133, 150–151, 156, 178, 185, 187, 310,
312, 326
Brannigan, H. P., 316
Brazilian Portuguese, 119
Brent, M., 78
Bretherton, I., 38
Bridges, A., 131
Brinkmann, U., 153
British English, 223–224
Bronckardt, J., 218–219
Brooks, P., 117, 125, 128, 141, 150–151,
156–157, 175, 178–179, 192, 206, 213,
300, 313, 317
Brown, A., 124
Brown, J., 278
Brown, P., 66, 108
Brown, R., 37, 75, 95, 127, 147, 177, 210,
220, 228, 312
Bruner, J., 22, 65, 87–89, 132
Buczowska, E., 223
Budwig, N., 156, 158, 168, 185
Butterworth, G., 33–34, 200
Bybee, J., 5, 14, 99, 106–107, 126, 164,
220, 222, 233, 235, 238–239, 306, 327
Byrne, R. W., 297
Byrnes, J. P., 226
Call, J., 4, 11, 23, 298, 302
Callanan, M., 66, 269
Camaioni, L., 31–32
Cameron-Faulkner, T., 110, 112, 116, 147–
148
Campbell, A., 121–122, 153–154, 206, 213
Canadian French, 15
Cantonese, 227
Capirci, O., 35
Capps, L., 67, 203
Carey, S., 20, 62, 73, 76, 79
Carpenter, M., 21, 33, 65, 67–68, 82, 91,
296
Cartwright, K. B., 77
Casadio, P., 46, 93
376
Index

Case, 132–136
Caselli, M. C., 35, 46–47, 51–52, 92, 118,
231
Catalan, 119
Categorical scope, 86–87
Categorization, 4, 28, 124, 189, 302–303
Causatives, 153–155
Chafe, W., 216, 306
Chafetz, J., 174
Chang, F., 191
Change of state verbs, 213–215
Chapman, R., 117
Charney, R., 56, 214
Chasin, J., 35
Chater, N., 110
Cheney, D. L., 10
Chiat, S., 69
Child-directed speech, 109–110, 147–148
Childers, J., 46, 79–80, 122, 166–167, 299
Chimpanzees, 88, 290
Chinese, 38, 46, 59, 188–189, 219, 227
Choi, S., 38, 46, 63–64, 225, 227–229
Chomsky, C., 248
Chomsky, N., 2–3, 5, 7, 13, 96, 102, 183,
284, 288, 289n, 300, 303, 323
Christiansen, M. H., 4, 297
Clahsen, H., 102, 236
Clancy, P., 149, 159, 216–217, 255
Clark, E., 51, 53, 72–74, 86, 113, 157, 178,
261–262
Clark, E. V., 201
Clark, H., 219
Clark, R., 306
Clausal constructions, 196–199, 241–242;
predication and clauses, 213–232; early
verbs/argument structure, 214–217;
tense/aspect, 217–224; modality/nega-
tion, 224–230; integrating, 230–232; rel-
ative, 253–258; conjoined, 258–262, 265
Closed-class words, 47–48
Coates, J., 226
Cognitive dominance, 47–48
Cognitive-functional linguistics. See Usage-
based linguistics
Cohen, L. B., 172
Common ground, and linguistic communi-
cation, 89–90
Common nouns, 207–208
Communicative intentions, understanding,
21, 23–26
Competition, 295, 300–301
Competition model, 189–191
Complement constructions: inªnitival, 245–
249, 253, 264–265; sentential, 249–253,
264–265
Complex constructions, 243–245, 279–281;
inªnitival complement, 245–249, 253,
264–265; sentential, 249–253, 264–265;
relative clause, 253–258; conjoined
clause, 258–262; two theories, 262–266;
overview, 262–263
Complexity, 173–175
Comprehension, preceding production, 79–
80
Comrie, B., 213, 218
Conceptualization of referents, 62–64
Conjoined clause constructions, 258–262,
265
Conjoined clause hypothesis, 254
Connectionism, 145, 189–191, 237–238,
324–325
Constraining syntactic constructions, 175–
176; over-generativity/negative evidence,
176–178; entrenchment/preemption/verb
classes, 178–181
Constraint, 145
Constraints theory, 84–87
Constructing syntactic constructions, 161–
163; analogy, 163–169; functionally
based distributional analysis, 169–173;
input/frequency/complexity, 173–175
Constructional islands. See Early construc-
tional islands
Constructional schemas, 191–193
Construction grammar, 160–162, 181–188,
191–193
Construction grammar approach, 160–161,
231–232
Constructions. See Clausal constructions;
Complex constructions; Nominal con-
structions; Syntactic constructions
Content words, 44
Context, linguistic, 75–78
Continuity assumption, 2, 7, 96, 183, 323–
324
Conti-Ramsden, G., 268, 312
Contrast, lexical, 72–75
Conversation, 244, 266–270, 293
Conway, C. M., 4, 297
Coppola, M., 288
Core, linguistic, 5–6, 98, 284
Corkum, V., 3
Correa, L., 254–255
Corrigan, R., 169
Index
377

Crago, M. B., 157, 285
Crain, S., 289n
Crain-Thoresen, C., 202–203
Creole languages, 239, 288
Critical period, 286–287
Croft, W., 5, 14, 18, 98–99, 105–107, 119,
160, 162–163, 167, 169, 191, 193, 230,
299, 306, 315
Cromer, R. F., 221
Cues, coalition/competition, 136–139
Cullicover, P., 105, 105n, 173, 264
Cultural aspects, 13, 88–89
Cultural learning, 21, 26–29, 290–292,
295–297
Cultural processes, 282–283, 320–322
Culture, role of, 290–292
Curwin, A., 67
Cziko, G. A., 212
Dabrowska, E., 93, 159, 231, 237, 310
Dale, P. S., 151–154
Dal Martello, M. F., 212
Daly, M., 222
Dasinger, L., 257
Datives, 151–154
Deacon, T. W., 12
Deaf children, 34, 287
Deak, G. O., 73, 86
Declarative aspect of symbols, 12
“Defaults,” 235–237, 239
Deªcient input, 287–288
Deªnite articles, 209–213
Deictics, 33–34, 200–204, 271
DeLancey, S., 104, 185
De Léon, L., 46, 108
Dell, S. B., 35
Dempster, F., 81
Demuth, K., 157
Deontic modality, 224–226, 262
Desjardins, R. N., 59
Determiners, 207–213
D’Etremont, B., 33
Developmental change, 181–188
DeVilliers, J., 76, 117, 122, 127, 249, 279
DeVilliers, P., 117, 127
Dick, F., 240
Didow, S. M., 268
Diesendruck, G., 74, 83
Diessel, H., 200, 246–248, 250–253, 255–
257, 259, 261, 263–265
Dines, J., 270
Disagreements, 278
Discourse, 243–244, 266, 279–281; conver-
sation, 266–270; narrative, 270–276;
thinking for speaking, 276–279; and
complicated nature of language, 293–294
Discourse sequences, 15, 243
Displaced temporal reference points, 223–
224
Distributional analysis, 94, 145, 162, 169–
173, 189, 295, 301–303
Distributional bias hypothesis, 220
Distributional evidence, 60
Ditransitives, 151–154
Dodson, K., 133, 167
Dodsworth, P., 273
Donlan, C., 312
Döpke, S., 175
Dresner Barnes, H., 148, 306
Drodz, K. F., 230
Dryer, M., 18, 168
Dual inheritance, 283–284; role of biology,
284–290; role of culture/cultural learn-
ing, 290–292; languages as complicated,
292–295
Dual inheritance theory, 283–284
Dual process models, 237–239, 304, 314
DuBois, J., 216, 306
Duff, M. A., 226
Dunbar, R., 12
Duncan, S., 79
Dunham, F., 67
Dunham, P., 67
Dunn, J., 268, 278
Durham, W., 283
Dutch, 119, 134, 138, 259, 311
Early constructional islands, 113–114;
word combinations/pivot schemas, 114–
117; item-based constructions, 117–121;
and verbs, 121–122; processes of schema-
tization, 122–126
Early gestures, 32–36
Early holophrases, 36–40, 139, 141
Early intention-reading skills, 21–28
Early pattern-ªnding skills, 28–31
Early syntactic constructions, 94–98, 140–
143; nature of, 98–112; constructional is-
lands, 113–126; marking syntactic roles,
126–140
Early verbs, 214–217
Early words, 44–45; ªrst words, 45–50;
rates of learning, 50–52; word meanings,
52–58
378
Index

Eckerman, C. O., 268
Edwards, D., 56, 215
Elbers, L., 307
Elman, J. L., 4, 190–191, 284, 286, 313,
318, 324
Emslie, H., 211
Endophoric/exophoric devices, 271
English, 5–6, 14, 15–16, 18, 37–40, 46, 49–
51, 56–61, 63–64, 76–77, 93–94, 98–
101, 103–104, 106, 110–112, 115–121,
125, 127–140, 142, 144, 147–159, 164–
169, 173–175, 177, 179, 183–186, 188,
193, 197, 200, 202, 208–216, 218–231,
233, 235, 237, 239–242, 245–246, 248–
250, 252, 254–255, 257–259, 262–263,
266, 276–277, 288–289, 289n, 306–307,
310, 315–317, 319–320
Entrenchment, 178–182, 295, 300–301
Epistemic modality, 224–226, 262
Erreich, A., 159
Erteschik-Shir, N., 152
Ervin-Tripp, S. M., 261, 269
Eskimo languages, 39–40, 119, 157, 174,
216, 310
Evolutionary aspects, 1, 4, 9–10, 12–14,
289, 291–292, 301
Ewers, H., 236
Exemplars, into abstractions, 315–318
Fabian-Kraus, V., 249
Facilitative word learning processes, 58, 72;
lexical contrast, 72–75; linguistic context,
75–78
Fantz, R. L., 20
Farrar, J., 63, 65–67, 110, 177, 180, 207,
240, 270
Farrar, M. J., 56, 66
Fauconnier, G., 293, 305
Fenson, L., 50, 202
Ferguson, C. A., 108
Fernald, A., 60
Ferretti, T. R., 106
Figueira, R. A., 151
Fillmore, C., 54, 98–99, 101–102, 113–
114, 121, 160, 188, 191, 326
Finch, S., 110
Finnish, 116, 223
First-person pronouns, 202
First utterances, 31; early gestures, 32–36;
early holophrases, 36–40
First words, 45–50
Fisher, C., 71, 76–77, 131–132, 146, 316
Fisher, S. E., 285
Fitzsimmons, C. M., 80
Flavell, J., 210
Fleischman, S., 224
Fletcher, P., 158, 223–224, 285
Flora, J., 173
Fluency, 305–307
Fodor, J., 183
Foley, W., 18, 168
Forbes, J. N., 56, 66
Formulaicity, 305–307
Foster, S. H., 267
Foundational word learning processes, 58,
65; joint attention, 65–67; intention-
reading, 67–72
Fox, B., 256
Franco, F., 33–34, 200
French, 16, 138, 211, 218–219, 227–229,
257, 269, 275
French, L., 262, 276
Frequency, 15–16, 173–175
Frequently used nouns, 207–208
Frequently used verbs, 150, 152, 154
Frequently used words, 81–82
Freund, M., 66
Friel-Patti, S., 268
Frost, L. A., 128, 157
Functionally based distributional analysis,
145, 169–173, 295, 301–303
Functional reanalyses, 16–17
Function words, 44
Functors, 45
Furrow, D., 109
Future tense, 221–223
Galef, B. G., 296
Gallagher, T., 269
Galligan, R., 40
Galloway, C., 108
Garber, A. M., 35
Garton, A., 201, 211–212
Garvey, C., 269
Gathercole, S. E., 312–313
Gathercole, V., 119, 224
Gee, J., 222
Gegeo, D. W., 88
Gelman, R., 46, 79
Gelman, S. A., 75, 208
Generalizations, 145, 149, 178–181,
301
Generative grammar approach, 3, 5, 9, 13,
97–98, 102, 105, 110, 145, 160, 175,
Index
379

Generative grammar approach (continued)
177, 181–188, 230–232, 262, 264, 282–
285, 303–304, 323–325
Genes, grammar, 285
Genitives, 236–237
Gentner, D., 4, 45–48, 70–71, 164–167,
300
Gergely, G., 22
Gerhardt, J., 219, 222, 225, 245
Gerken, L., 4, 30, 61, 206, 216
German, 16, 98, 125, 133–134, 137, 159,
219, 227, 229, 235–240, 242, 257, 276,
309
Gestures: primate, 11; early, 32–36; deictic,
33–34, 200–204
Gillette, J., 47, 70
Givón, T., 5, 14–15, 56, 197, 200, 243, 292
Gleitman, H., 71, 76–77, 109, 146
Gleitman, L. R., 2, 76–77, 109, 146
Gluckman, A., 23
Goldberg, A., 5, 77, 98–99, 101, 106, 114,
121, 144, 160, 178, 191–193
Goldªeld, B., 50, 88
Goldin-Meadow, S., 35, 46, 79, 287–288
Goldman-Eisler, F., 306
Golinkoff, R. M., 35, 58, 70, 73, 86, 117,
131, 278
Gomez, R., 4, 30
Goodman, J., 50, 52, 93
Goodwin, R., 56, 215
Goodwyn, S. W., 34–35
Gopnik, A., 38, 45–47, 62–63, 285
Gordon, P., 174
Gosch, A., 286
Grammar, 5–6, 44, 243, 282; universal, 2–
3, 5, 7, 9, 14, 17, 19, 109, 145, 177,
181–187, 237, 283–285; and language
universals, 17–19; pivot, 95–96; adult,
96; “core,” 98, 284; and syntactic con-
structions, 105–108; construction, 160–
162, 181–188, 191–193; basic child,
188–189
Grammar genes, 285
Grammatical constructions, 8
Grammaticalization, 5, 8–10, 12–17, 243
Grammatical morphology, 199, 214, 232–
233, 239–241, 324
Grammatical relations, 163
Greek, 18, 219
Greenªeld, P. M., 36, 217, 267
Grice, H., 12, 23, 28
Grifªn, Z. M., 316
Gropen, J., 153–154
Growcott, C., 131
Gundel, J., 200, 205, 267
Gut, U., 61
Hadley, P., 311
Haªtz, J., 218
Haith, M., 20, 28, 84, 317
Hakuta, K., 133, 286
Hall, G., 73, 204
Hampson, J., 48, 171
Hanlon, C., 177
Harner, L., 221–222
Harris, F., 173
Harris, L. L., 77
Harris, M., 35, 53
Harris, P., 277
Hart, B., 79
Haryu, E., 76
Haspelmath, M., 246
Hauser, M. D., 4, 30, 61, 297
Hebrew, 119, 121, 129, 138, 151, 219,
257
Hedberg, N., 200, 205, 267
Hedges, L., 79
Heibeck, T. H., 80
Heine, B., 14
Hendriks, H., 275
Herriot, P., 221
Hershberger, S., 231–232
Heyes, C. M., 296
Hickmann, M., 274–275
Hirsh-Pasek, K., 58, 70, 73, 86, 117, 131
Hirst, W., 225
Ho, S., 225
Hoefnagel-Höhle, M., 287, 313
Hoff-Ginsberg, E., 56, 76, 79, 109, 122
Hohne, E. A., 60
Hollich, G., 58, 73
Holophrases, early, 36–40, 139, 141
Hood, L., 215, 267
Hopper, P., 14, 170, 197, 213, 271
Hornstein, D., 96
Houston, D., 60
Howe, C., 96
Hudson, R., 264
Hummer, P., 227–228
Hungarian, 24, 138
Huttenlocher, J., 56, 79, 214–215
Hyams, N., 187, 246
Iconicity, 34–35
Identiªcationals, 148–149
Imai, M., 76
380
Index

Imitation, 203, 305–307
Imitative learning, 21, 26–29
Imperatives, 149–152
Indeªnite articles, 209–213
Inªnitival complement constructions, 245–
249, 253, 264–265
Inºectional phase, 230–231
Ingham, R., 150–151
Ingram, D., 159
Input, 173–175
Integrating clausal constructions, 230–232
Intention-reading, 21, 23–26, 67–72, 89–
90, 244, 295–297
Intention-reading skills, 3–4, 21–28
Interrogative tone, 36
Intersubjective aspect of symbols, 12
Intonational patterns, 36
Intransitives, simple, 149–152
Intransitivity, 213
Inuktitut, 39–40, 119, 157, 174, 216, 310
Inversion errors, 159
IQ, 285–286
Irrealis, 222–223
Israel, M., 150, 152, 156
Italian, 35, 46, 50–52, 57, 118–119, 137–
138, 212, 218–219, 231
Item-based syntactic constructions, 117–
121, 125–126, 139, 141, 149, 164, 174
Iverson, J. M., 35
Jackendoff, R., 6, 54, 104n
Japanese, 59, 133, 151, 159, 209, 219, 229,
255, 262
Jarvis, L., 73
Jaswal, V. K., 69
Jipson, J., 66, 269
Jisa, H., 257
Johnson, C., 156
Johnson, J. S., 61
Johnson, M., 63
Johnson, S. P., 30
Johnston, J. R., 57
Joint attentional frame, 21–26, 31, 65–67,
89–90, 197–198, 217
Jones, S. S., 53
Jusczyk, P. W., 20, 59–60
Kail, M., 275
Kako, E., 76
Kane, M., 124
Kanzi apes, 60–61, 88–89
Karmiloff-Smith, A., 209, 211, 274–275
Karniol, R., 311
Kasari, C., 66
Katz, N., 75, 205
Kawashima, M., 262
Kaye, P., 101–102, 114, 160, 326
Keenan, E. L., 168
Keller, Helen, 50
Kemler Nelson, D., 53
Kemmer, S., 5, 157–158, 318
Kempe, V., 313
Kern, S., 257
Kessel, F. S., 249
K’iche’ Mayan, 157, 174, 189
Kidd, E., 131
Kim, Y., 246, 253
Kirkham, N. Z., 30
Klatzky, R. L., 201
Klein, W., 239
Klima, E., 158, 228–229
Konieczna, E., 134
Köpke, K., 236
Korean, 38, 46, 63–64, 149, 159, 216, 225,
227–229, 246, 255
Krug, M., 107, 245
Kruger, A., 3, 12, 26, 65, 69, 90, 122, 284,
296
Kuczaj, S., 80, 222, 224, 232
Kuhl, P. K., 61
Kwara’ae, 88
Kyratzis, A., 261
Labov, W., 144
Lahey, M., 246, 248
Lai, C. S. L., 285
Lakoff, G., 54, 63, 103, 114, 149,
191
Lambrecht, K., 103, 113, 256
Landry, S., 66
Langacker, R., 5, 12, 47, 54, 58, 98–99,
105–108, 113–114, 124, 146, 170–171,
191, 197, 200, 208, 213, 282, 305, 315,
320, 327
Language: acquisition of, 1–7, 20–21, 323–
328; origins, 8–42; complicated nature
of, 292–295
Language universals, 17–19
Latin, 17–18
Learning, rates of, 50–52
Learning theory, 82–84
Lebeaux, D. S., 128, 157
Lederer, A., 76
Lee, H., 255
Leekam, S. R., 278
Legerstee, M., 20
Index
381

Leonard, L. B., 61, 239–240
Levin, B., 153
Levinsky, S., 206
Levy, E., 57, 276
Lewis, L. B., 61
Lexical contrast, 72–75
Lexical rules approach, 160–161
Li, P., 219–220
Lieberman, P., 17
Lieven, E., 38, 108, 110, 118, 122, 130,
147–148, 185, 203, 209, 224, 257, 306–
307, 316–318
Lifter, K., 218
Lightbown, P., 215
Lightfoot, N., 96
Limber, J., 246, 249, 255
Limitations, production, 312–313
Lindner, K., 137
Linguistic abstractions, 2, 6, 17n, 97, 101,
162–163
Linguistic constructions, 8
Linguistic context, 75–78
Linguistic dominance, 47–48
Linguistic representations, 314–315; exem-
plars into abstractions, 315–318; struc-
tured inventory of constructions, 318–
320
Linguistic savants, 285–286
Linguistic structures, 100–101, 105–106
Linguistic symbols. See Symbols, linguistic
Littschwager, J. C., 75
Lloyd, P., 270
Local cues hypothesis, 133–134, 136, 240
Locatives, 153–155
Locke, A., 32
Loveland, K., 66, 202–204
Lucariello, J., 268
Luszcz, M. A., 268
Lyons, J., 221
Lyytinen, P., 223
MacArthur Communicative Development
Inventory, 50
MacWhinney, B., 18, 117, 126, 133, 137–
139, 142, 164, 168, 171, 175, 178, 189–
190, 254, 275, 321, 324
Mandarin Chinese, 38, 59, 188–189, 219
Mandler, J., 62–63, 124, 172, 303
Mannle, S., 65, 74, 267–269
Mapping, 87, 189
Maratsos, M., 73, 86, 128, 150–151, 170,
211, 224, 234, 248, 287
Marazita, J., 73
Marchman, V., 166, 237, 285
Marcos, H., 35, 269
Marcus, G. F., 4, 30, 61, 233–235, 297
Margulis, C., 38, 47
Markman, A., 4, 164
Markman, E. M., 69, 72–73, 75, 80, 84–
85, 270
Markson, L., 74, 79, 81
Martindale, H., 209
Matrix verbs, 246–253
Mayan, 157, 174, 189
Mazuka, R., 183–184, 187
McCabe, A., 260, 275
McCarthy, J. J., 96
McClelland, J., 237
McCune, L., 38
McCune-Nicolich, L., 54, 63
McNamara, J., 75, 205
McNeill, D., 35, 132, 229
McNeill, N. B., 229
McPherson, L., 75, 208
McRae, K., 106
McShane, J., 219
McWhorter, J. H., 239
Meanings, word, 52–58
Medina, J., 164, 166
Medio-passives, 157–158
Meisel, J., 187, 223
Meltzoff, A., 20, 26–27, 62–63, 296
Menyuk, P., 255
Merriman, W. E., 73
Mervis, C. B., 50, 70, 73, 86
Michaels, L., 103
Middle English, 16
Middles, 156–158
Middle-voice constructions, 157–158
Miller, J., 117
Miller, J. D., 61
Miller, R., 218–219
Mind, theory of, 3–4, 277
Misunderstandings, 278
Mixed constructions, 102–103
Modal auxiliaries, 245
Modality: tense-aspect, 214, 230–232, 320;
and future tense, 221–223; deontic/
epistemic, 224–226, 262
Modiªers, 45
Montague, L., 56
Moore, C., 3, 33, 83
Moore, K., 20, 26
Morford, M., 35
382
Index

Morphology, 14, 16, 136, 198–199, 214;
grammatical, 199, 214, 232–233, 239–
241, 324; English past tense, 232–235;
German plural, 235–237; Polish genitive,
236–237; single process/dual process
models, 237–239; as “weak link,” 239–
241
Morton, E., 10
Motherese, 108
Mothers, construction types used by, 108–
112, 147–148
Mulac, A., 251, 253
Multi-word utterances, 113–126
Mundy, P., 66
Munakata, Y., 318
Mutual exclusivity: constraint, 85–86; prin-
ciple, 206
Nagell, K., 21, 33, 65, 91
Naigles, L., 56, 76–77, 79, 122, 131–132
Names, proper, 73, 202, 204–205
Namy, L. L., 35
Narrative, 244, 266, 270–277, 293–294
Natural partitions hypothesis, 46–47, 49
Negation, 226–230
Negative evidence, 176–178
Nelson, K., 25, 45, 48, 53, 56–57, 78, 87–
89, 109, 124, 140, 171–173, 175, 202,
204, 262, 268, 276–277, 298, 302–
303
Nelson, K. E., 80, 180, 240
Neville, H. J., 286
Newman, J., 151
Newport, E. L., 4, 28–30, 61, 109, 286–
287, 313
Ninio, A., 36, 78, 121–122
Nominal constructions, 196–199, 241–242;
and reference, 199–213; deictics, 200–
204; pronouns/proper names, 204–207;
nouns/determiners, 207–213
Nominals: general, 45; speciªc, 45; and ref-
erence, 199–213
Nomura, M., 151
Non-interruption hypothesis, 254
North, T., 312
Nouns: as early words, 44–49; and word
meanings, 53–54, 56; and intention-read-
ing, 67–69; lexical contrast, 73–74; lin-
guistic context, 75–76; case/agreement,
133–134; and functionally based distribu-
tional analysis, 169–173; in nominal con-
structions, 207–213; and relative clause
constructions, 253–258; phrase coherence
in narratives, 273–274. See also Nominal
constructions
Noveck, I. A., 225
NPs (participant roles), 126–127
Nunberg, G., 103
Oakes, L. M., 4, 172
Object labels, 38, 53–54, 68–69, 86–87
Object scope, 86
Object words, 45, 67
O’Brien, C., 158, 168, 185
Ochs, E., 108, 269
O’Conner, M., 101–102, 114, 160, 326
Oden, D., 298
O’Grady, W., 207, 284–285, 289n
Old English, 16
O’Neill, D. K., 200, 222
Ontogenetic origins, 19; prelinguistic in-
fants, 19–21; early intention-reading
skills, 21–29; early pattern-ªnding skills,
28–31
Ontogenetic processes, 282–283, 320–
322
Open-class words, 47–48
Origins of language, 8–9, 40–42; phylogen-
etic, 9–19; ontogenetic, 19–31; children’s
ªrst utterances, 31–40
Oshima-Takane, Y., 66, 202–204
Overgeneralization, 127–128, 145, 177–
179, 181, 237
Over-generativity, 176–178
Owings, D., 10
Owren, M. J., 11
Pagliuca, W., 220, 222
Palermo, D., 57
Pan, B. A., 267, 270
Pankau, R., 286
Pappas, A., 208
Paradigmatic linguistic categories, 169–174,
301–302
Parallel function hypothesis, 254
Park, T., 230
Participant roles (NPs), 126–127
Passingham, R., 285
Passives, 156, 319
Past tense: and aspect, 218–221; English,
and morphology, 232–235
Pattern-ªnding skills, 4, 28–31
Pawley, A., 6, 102, 326
Pea, R. D., 227
Index
383

Pearson, B. Z., 79
Perdue, C., 239
Periphery, linguistic, 5–6
Perkins, M. R., 102, 305–306
Perkins, R., 220, 222
Perner, J., 278
Personal-social words, 45
Perspectival aspects of symbols, 13
Peters, A., 79, 88, 306
Peterson, C., 260, 271, 273, 275, 277
Petitto, L. A., 34
Philippine languages, 168
Phylogenetic origins, 9–10; primate commu-
nication, 10–12; symbols/
grammaticalization, 12–17; language uni-
versals, 17–19
Phylogenetic processes, 282–283, 320–
323
Piaget, J., 4, 54, 62–63, 96, 123
Pickering, M. J., 316
Piéraut-Le Bonniec, G., 226
Pietroski, P., 289n
Pine, J., 38, 109–110, 118–119, 122, 148,
159, 185, 203, 209, 231, 257, 306
Pinker, S., 2, 5, 13, 54, 96, 102, 128, 132,
157, 160, 167, 177–179, 184–185, 189,
192, 194, 224, 233, 237, 262, 280, 284–
285, 300, 303, 323
Pinto, J. P., 60
Pivot grammar, 95–96
Pivot schemas, 114–117, 123–124, 139,
141, 174
Pizzuto, E., 34, 118, 231
Plaut, D. C., 313
Plunkett, K., 237
Plural, 235–237
Polish, 93, 133, 219, 223, 231, 236–237,
242
Poplack, S., 15
Portuguese, 119, 151, 219, 231
Possessives, 148–149
Postpositions, 57
Poverty of the stimulus, 2, 7, 288–289
Power, R., 212
Pragmatic grounding, 313–314
Pragmatic inferences, 14, 17
Predication, 197, 213–232
Preemption, 178–182
Prelinguistic infants, and ontogenetic ori-
gins, 19–21
Prepositions, 57
Prerequisite word learning processes, 58–
59; processing speech, 59–62; conceptual-
izing referents, 62–64
Presentational relative constructions, 256–
258
Prideaux, G., 262
Primate communication, and phylogenetic
origins, 9–11
Prince, A., 237
Principles theory, 84–87
Pring, T., 69
Production limitations, 312–313
Production of speech, 61, 327
Pronouns: case/agreement, 132, 134–135;
ªrst-person, 202; in nominal construc-
tions, 204–207
Proper names, 73, 202, 204–207
Protoconversations, 21
Psycholinguistic processes of acquisition,
295–296, 303–305; intention-reading/
cultural learning, 296–297; schematiza-
tion/analogy, 297–300; entrenchment/
competition, 300–301; functionally based
distributional analysis, 301–303
Psycholinguistic processes of production,
305; imitation/formulaicity/ºuency, 305–
307; usage-based syntactic operations,
307–312; limitations/working memory,
312–313; pragmatic grounding, 313–314
Psychology of language acquisition, 323–
328
Pullum, G., 288
Pye, C., 157, 185
Quantitative word learning factors, 78–82
Questions, 158–159
Quine, W., 84, 86–87, 89–90
Quinn, P. C., 172
Quirk, R., 264
Quixtan Poz, P., 157
Radford, A., 98, 142, 185–186, 231
Rakison, D. H., 4, 172
Rakoczy, H., 279
Ramos, E., 53
Ramus, F., 4, 30, 61, 297
Rappaport, M., 153
Rappaport Hovav, M., 153
Rates of learning, 50–52
Ratner, H., 3, 12, 26, 88, 90, 214, 284, 296
Reanalyses, functional, 16–17
Redington, M., 110
Reference, 86, 196–197, 199–213
384
Index

Referential aspects of symbols, 12
Referential events, 25–26
Referential gestures, 34–35
Referents, conceptualizing, 62–64
Reºexives, 156–158
Relational words, 38, 47, 54
Relative clause constructions, 253–258
Rendell, D., 11
Representational innateness, 284, 289–290
Representations. See Linguistic representa-
tions
Resultatives, 153–155
Reznick, J. S., 50
Rice, M. L., 80, 231–232
Richards, B. J., 108–109
Richerson, P. J., 283
Risley, T. R., 79
Rispoli, M., 135, 151, 168, 190, 194, 217,
311
Ritualizations, 32–33
Roberts, K., 117
Rochat, P., 35
Rocissano, L., 267
Roe, K., 286
Roeper, T., 186
Rohde, D. L. T., 313
Role reversal imitation, 21, 25–28
Rollins, P. R., 66
Rovee-Collier, C., 84
Rowland, C., 118, 122, 159
Rubino, R., 119
Ruffman, T., 278
Rules, vs. syntactic construction, 98–100,
102–105
Rumelhart, D., 237
Russian, 119, 134, 209
Sachs, J., 270
Saffran, J., 4, 28–30, 191
Sag, I., 103
Samarin, W., 287
Samoan, 116
Sampson, G., 186–187
Samuelson, L. K., 82–83
Sanders, T., 259
Saussure, F., 12
Savage, C., 316
Savage-Rumbaugh, S., 61, 88, 290
Savasir, I., 222
Saxton, M., 180
Saylor, M. M., 56
Scheibmann, J., 106–107, 306
Schemas: pivot, 114–117, 123–124,
139, 141, 174; constructional, 191–
193
Schematic idioms, 103
Schematization, 122–126, 164, 295, 297–
300
Schieffelin, B., 108, 269
Schlesinger, I., 95, 167
Schneider, W., 4, 15, 106
Schnetze, C., 231
Schröder, H., 216–217
Schwartz, R., 61, 80
Schwe, H., 270
Scollon, R., 123
Scott, C. M., 269
Scottish English, 223–224
Sebastián, E., 119
Segmentation, 38–39, 59–62
Seligman, M. E. P., 46, 79
Semi-auxiliary verbs, 245–249
Senghas, A., 288
Sengul, C. J., 201
Sentential complement constructions, 249–
253, 264–265
Sera, M., 226
Serbo-Croatian, 57, 138, 159, 255
Serrat, E., 119
Sesotho, 157, 174
Sethuraman, N., 121
Seuren, P., 287
Seyfarth, R. M., 10
Shanker, S. G., 61
Shatz, M., 109, 249, 268
Shaw, L. K., 48, 171
Shirai, Y., 151, 219–220
Siegal, M., 277
Sigman, M., 66–67, 203
Silber, S., 249
Siller, M., 67
Silva, M., 262
Sinclair, H., 218–219
Single process models, 237–239, 304
Singleton, J. L., 287
Single-word utterances, 36, 39–40
Siskind, J. M., 78
Skinner, B. F., 2–3
Slemmer, J. A., 30
Slobin, D., 37, 57, 79, 95, 113, 133–134,
136, 139, 147, 149, 164, 185, 188–189,
192, 221, 223, 225, 233, 254–255, 262,
272, 276–277
Smiley, P., 56, 214
Index
385

Smith, C. B., 65
Smith, C. S., 217
Smith, J. H., 36, 217, 267
Smith, L. B., 53, 82–83
Smith, N., 285
Snow, C. E., 67, 88, 108, 267, 269, 287,
313
Snyder, L., 38
Snyder, W., 152
Social interaction context, 65–67, 89–90
Social learning, 12, 290–292
Social-pragmatic theory, 44, 49, 67, 87–91
Soja, N., 75–76
Soto, P., 119
Spacing of models, 80
Spanish, 16, 93, 119, 153, 183, 257, 276–
277
Speaking, thinking for, 276–279
Speech, processing, 59–62
Spelke, E. S., 20, 76
Sperber, D., 25, 89
Spooren, W., 259
Stading, C., 286
Stanowicz, L., 177
Stative verbs, 213–215
Stein, S., 158, 168, 185
Stephany, U., 219, 224–225
Stern, E., 157
Stevenson, R., 211
Stokes, S. F., 227
Stoll, S., 119
Stress patterns, 59
Striano, T., 35
Stromswold, K., 152
Strosberg, R., 68
Structured inventory of constructions, 318–
320
Structures, linguistic, 100–101, 105–106
Subjects, and analogies, 167–169
Sudhalter, V., 156
Superordinate category terms, 73
Suzman, S. M., 157
Svaib, T. A., 73, 86
Sweetser, E. E., 224
Swingley, D., 60
Syder, F., 6, 102, 326
Symbolic gestures, 34–35
Symbols, linguistic, 4–6, 8–9, 27–28, 87,
283; phylogenetic origins, 9–10, 12–13;
ªrst utterances as, 31, 34–35; early words
as, 52–53; syntactic constructions as,
160–161
Symbols, syntactic, 139–140
Synonyms, 72
Syntactic constructional islands. See Early
constructional islands
Syntactic constructions: early, 94–143; dif-
ferent from rules, 98–100; nature of, 98–
112; and utterances, 100–105; and gram-
mar, 105–108; utterances that children
hear, 108–112; early constructional is-
lands, 113–126; word combinations/pivot
schemas, 114–117; item-based, 117–121;
and verbs, 121–122; processes of schema-
tization, 122–126; marking syntactic
roles, 126–140; word order, 127–132;
case/agreement, 132–136; cue coalition/
competition, 136–139; learning syntactic
symbols, 139–141; abstract, 144–195;
abstract, described, 146–161;
identiªcationals/attributives/possessives,
148–149; simple transitives/simple
intransitives/imperatives, 149–151;
ditransitives/datives/benefactives, 151–
153; locatives/resultatives/causatives,
153–155; passives/middles/reºexives,
156–158; questions, 158–159; as linguis-
tic symbols, 160–161; constructing, 161–
175; analogy, 163–169; functionally
based distributional analysis, 169–173;
input/frequency/complexity, 173–175;
constraining, 175–181; over-generativity/
negative evidence, 176–178; entrench-
ment/preemption/verb classes, 178–181;
theories of syntactic development, 181–
193; principles/parameters of syntactic
development, 182–188; basic child gram-
mar, 188–189; competition model/
connectionism, 189–191; construction
grammar, 191–193
Syntactic development, 181–182; principles/
parameters, 182–188; basic child gram-
mar, 188–189; competition model/
connectionism, 189–191; construction
grammar, 191–193
Syntacticization. See Grammaticalization
Syntactic operations, usage-based, 307–312
Syntactic roles, 126–127, 162–163; word
order, 127–132; case/agreement, 132–
136; cue coalition/competition, 136–139;
learning syntactic symbols, 139–140
Syntactic symbols, 139–141
Syntax, 14–15, 76–78, 115, 117
Systematicity principle, 165
386
Index

Tackeff, J., 246, 248
Tager, J., 60
Talmy, L., 70, 146, 188
Tam, C., 227
Tamil, 159, 226
Tanz, C., 134, 201
Tardif, T., 38, 46
Tavakolian, S., 254
Taylor, M., 75
Taylor, T. J., 61
Temporality, in narratives, 275–276
Temporal words, 57–58
Tense, 217–224
Tense-aspect modality, 214, 230–232, 320
Terrell, B., 80
Tfouni, L. V., 201
Theakston, A., 109, 186
Thinking for speaking, 276–277
Thomas, M., 212
Thompson, R. K. R., 298
Thompson, S., 170, 197, 213, 251, 253,
256
Timing of models, 80–81
Tinbergen, N., 32
Tinker, E., 38, 47
Todd, J., 65
Tomasello, M., 3–5, 8, 11–13, 19, 21–23,
26–29, 32–33, 35–36, 38–39, 46, 48, 50,
53–55, 57, 63, 65–71, 74, 76, 79–80, 82,
86–87, 90–91, 108, 110, 115, 117, 119,
121–122, 124–125, 128–131, 133–134,
141, 147, 150–151, 153–154, 157–158,
166–167, 171–172, 175, 179, 182, 187,
192, 206–208, 213, 215, 217, 219, 236,
238, 250–253, 255–256, 267–270, 277,
279–280, 284–285, 290–291, 296, 298–
300, 302, 314, 316–318, 326
Topic maintenance/repair, conversational,
266–270, 278
Toupin, C., 257
Transitives, simple, 149–152
Transitive-subject, 162–163
Transitive utterances, 127–132
Transitivity, 213
Trask, L., 16, 164, 209
Traugott, E., 14, 224
Trevarthen, C., 20, 266
Tsimpli, I., 285
Turkish, 133–134, 136–138, 219, 225, 255,
257, 262, 276
Tyack, D., 159
Tzotzill, 46
Universal grammar, 2–3, 5, 7, 9, 14, 17, 19,
109, 145, 177, 181–187, 237, 283–285
Universals, language, 17–19
Usage-based linguistics, 5–7, 9, 13–14, 98–
100, 105–108, 122, 145, 176, 178, 231–
232, 243–244, 283, 304–306, 325–328
Usage-based syntactic operations, 307–312
Utterances: ªrst, 31–40; and syntactic con-
structions, 100–105; that children hear,
108–112; multi-word, 113–126; transi-
tive, 127–132; as usage-based syntactic
operations, 307–312
Vaidyanathan, R., 159, 226
Valian, V., 186, 209, 216
Van Hoek, K., 207, 289n
Van Valin, R., 18, 104, 114, 168, 185, 289
Vargha-Khadem, F., 285
Vear, D., 53
Verb island hypothesis, 117–118
Verbs: as early words, 44–48; and word
meanings, 54, 56; and intention-reading,
69–71; lexical contrast, 74; linguistic con-
text, 75–77; used by mothers, 110; and
item-based constructions, 117–121; and
early constructional islands, 121–122;
and word order, 127–132; case/agree-
ment, 133, 135; in transitives/
intransitives/imperatives, 149–152; in
ditransitives/datives/benefactives, 151–
154; in locatives/resultatives/causatives,
153–155; in passives/middles/reºexives,
156–158; and analogies, 166–167; and
functionally based distributional analysis,
169–173; classes, 178–182; change of
state/activity/stative, 213–215; early,
214–217; inªnitival constructions, 245–
249; modal auxiliaries, 245; semi-
auxiliary, 245–249; matrix, 245–253;
sentential constructions, 249–253. See
also Clausal constructions
Vervet monkeys, 10–11
Vihman, M. M., 61
Vocabulary “bursts,” 50–52
Vocalizations, primate, 11
Volterra, V., 31, 34
Von Stutterheim, C., 276
Vygotsky, L., 28, 123, 280
Wachtel, G. A., 73
Wagner, L., 219
Wanner, E., 2
Index
387

Warden, C., 60, 213
Warlpiri, 138
Warner, L., 60
Wasow, T., 103
Watson-Gegeo, K. A., 88
Waxman, S. R., 35
Webster, E., 269
Weil, J., 225
Weiss, D., 4, 30, 61, 297
Weist, R., 132–134, 217, 219, 223
Welch, J., 20, 62
Wellman, H., 249, 279
Wells, G., 110–111
Werdenschlag, L., 74
Werker, J. F., 59
Wexler, K., 231–232
Whiten, A., 297
Whittaker, S., 219
Whole object constraint, 85–86
Wierzbicka, A., 208
Wijnen, F., 311
Wilcox, J., 269
Wilcox, S., 57
Wiley, E., 286
Wilson, D., 25, 89
Wilson, S., 231, 242
Wimmer, H., 227–228
Wittek, A., 119, 133–134, 206
Wittgenstein, L., 1, 8, 43–45, 85, 94, 196,
323
Wode, H., 229
Woodward, A. L., 73, 80
Word boundaries, 29–30
Word combinations, 94–95, 114–117, 123,
139, 174
Word learning processes, 58–59; prerequi-
site, 59–64; foundational, 65–72; facili-
tating, 72–78; quantitative factors, 78–82
Word learning theories, 82; learning theory,
82–84; constraints/principles theories,
84–87; social-pragmatic theory, 87–91
Word meanings, 52–58
Word order, 16, 127–132
Words, 14, 20, 43–44, 91–93, 324; deictic,
33–34, 200–204; early, 44–58; learning
processes, 58–82; learning theories, 82–
91
Working memory, 312–313
Wrangham, R. W., 10
Wray, A., 102, 305
Wysocka, H., 223
Xu, F., 20, 46, 62
Yamada, J., 285
Zacharski, R., 200, 205, 267
Zipf’s law, 15
Zoh, M. H., 255
Zuberbühler, K., 11, 299
Zulu, 157, 174
388
Index

