
 Convergent Evolution 

 Vienna Series in Theoretical Biology 
 Gerd B. M ü ller, G ü nter P. Wagner, and Werner Callebaut, editors 
 The Evolution of Cognition,    edited by Cecilia Heyes and Ludwig Huber, 
2000 
 Origination of Organismal Form: Beyond the Gene in Development and 
Evolutionary Biology,    edited by Gerd B. M ü ller and Stuart A. Newman, 
2003 
 Environment, Development, and Evolution: Toward a Synthesis,  edited 
by Brian K. Hall, Roy D. Pearson, and Gerd B. M ü ller, 2004 
 Evolution of Communication Systems: A Comparative Approach,  edited 
by D. Kimbrough Oller and Ulrike Greibel, 2004 
 Modularity: Understanding the Development and Evolution of Natural 
Complex Systems,    edited by Werner Callebaut and Diego Rasskin-
Gutman, 2005 
 Compositional Evolution: The Impact of Sex, Symbiosis, and Modularity 
on the Gradualist Framework of Evolution,  by Richard A. Watson, 2006 
 Biological Emergences: Evolution by Natural Experiment,  by Robert 
G. B. Reid, 2007 
 Modeling Biology: Structure, Behaviors, Evolution,    edited by Manfred D. 
Laubichler and Gerd B. M ü ller, 2007 
 Evolution 
of 
Communicative 
Flexibility: 
Complexity, 
Creativity, 
and Adaptability in Human and Animal Communication,  edited by 
Kimbrough D. Oller and Ulrike Greibel, 2008 
 Functions in Biological and Artiﬁ cial Worlds: Comparative Philosophical 
Perspectives,  edited by Ulrich Krohs and Peter Kroes, 2009 
 Innovation in Cultural Systems: Contributions from Evolutionary Anthro-
pology,  edited by Michael J. O ’ Brien and Stephen J. Shennan, 2009 
 The Major Transitions in Evolution Revisited,    edited by Brett Calcott and 
Kim Sterelny, 2011 
 Transformations of Lamarckism: From Subtle Fluids to Molecular 
Biology,  edited by Snait B. Gissis and Eva Jablonka, 2011 
 Convergent Evolution: Limited Forms Most Beautiful,  by George R. 
McGhee Jr., 2011 

 Convergent Evolution 
 Limited Forms Most Beautiful 
 George R. McGhee Jr. 
 The MIT Press 
 Cambridge, Massachusetts 
 London, England 

 ©  2011  Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic 
or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and 
retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher. 
 For information about special quantity discounts, please email special_sales@mitpress
.mit.edu 
 This book was set in Syntax and Times Roman by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited. 
Printed and bound in the United States of America. 
 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 McGhee, George R. 
 Convergent evolution : limited forms most beautiful / George R. McGhee Jr. 
  p.  cm. 
 Includes bibliographical references and index. 
 ISBN 978-0-262-01642-1 (hardcover : alk. paper) 
 1. Convergence (Biology)  I. Title. 
 QH373.M34  2011 
 576.8 — dc22 
 2011007840 
 10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1 

 For Marae 
 ’ S  ò g a thug mi gr à dh dhuit. 


 Contents 
 Series Foreword  
 ix 
 Preface: Limited Forms Most Beautiful  
 xi 
 1 
 What Is Convergent Evolution?  
 1 
 Recognizing Convergent Evolution  
 1 
 Convergent Evolution versus Parallel Evolution?  
 5 
 Evolutionary Constraint and Convergent Evolution  
 7 
 Mimicry, Camouﬂ age, and Convergent Evolution  
 8 
 On the Organization of This Book  
 9 
 2 
 Convergent Animals  
 13 
 Locomotion  
 13 
 Carnivores: Prey Detection  
 30 
 Carnivores: Prey Capture  
 42 
 Herbivores: Plant Processing  
 50 
 Defense: Antipredator Adaptations  
 60 
 Organ Systems  
 66 
 Reproduction  
 81 
 3 
 Convergent Plants  
 93 
 Arborescence  
 93 
 Photoautotrophs: Light Capture  
 97 
 Photoautotrophs: Carbon Processing  
 101 
 Defense: Antiherbivore Adaptations  
 105 
 Defense: Antidehydration Adaptations  
 112 
 Reproduction  
 115 
 4 
 Convergent Ecosystems  
 135 
 One Ecological Role, Many Convergent Players  
 135 
 One Ecosystem Play, Many Convergent Casts of Actors  
 155 
 Isochronous and Heterochronous Ecosystem Convergence  
 163 
 A Periodic Table of Niches?  
 168 

viii 
Contents
 5 
 Convergent Molecules  
 177 
 Convergent Molecules?  
 177 
 DNA  
 178 
 Proteins and Protein Functions  
 189 
 Enzymes and Enzyme Functions  
 199 
 Convergent Evolution of Cellular and Tissue Structures?  
 205 
 6 
 Convergent Minds  
 209 
 Convergent Minds?  
 209 
 Problem-Solving Behavior  
 209 
 Group Behavior  
 228 
 Convergent Mentalities  
 238 
 7 
 Functional and Developmental Constraint in Convergent Evolution  
 245 
 Convergent Evolution in Theoretical Morphospace  
 246 
 Life as We Know It  
 252 
 Life as We Do Not Know It  
 253 
 A Periodic Table of Life?  
 260 
 8 
 Philosophical Implications of Convergent Evolution  
 265 
 The Argument for Unpredictability: Creative Freedom or Chaotic 
Randomness?  
 266 
 The Argument for Predictability: Comforting Certainty or Depressing 
Inevitability?  
 269 
 Judging the Arguments: Evolutionary Views on Trial  
 271 
 The Question of Extraterrestrial Life  
 276 
 In Conclusion: A Rewrite of Darwin ’ s View of Life  
 276 
 Appendix: A Phylogenetic Classiﬁ cation of Life  
 279 
 References  
 287 
 Index of Common Names  
 303 
 Index of Species  
 309 
 Index of Topics  
 319 

 Biology is becoming the leading science in this century. As in all other 
sciences, progress in biology depends on interactions between empirical 
research, theory building, and modeling. But whereas the techniques and 
methods of descriptive and experimental biology have evolved dramati-
cally in recent years, generating a ﬂ ood of highly detailed empirical data, 
the integration of these results into useful theoretical frameworks has 
lagged behind. Driven largely by pragmatic and technical considerations, 
research in biology continues to be less guided by theory than seems 
indicated. By promoting the formulation and discussion of new theoreti-
cal concepts in the bio-sciences, this series intends to help ﬁ ll the gaps in 
our understanding of some of the major open questions of biology, such 
as the origin and organization of organismal form, the relationship 
between development and evolution, and the biological bases of cogni-
tion and mind. 
 Theoretical biology has important roots in the experimental biology 
movement of early-twentieth-century Vienna. Paul Weiss and Ludwig 
von Bertalanffy were among the ﬁ rst to use the term  theoretical biology 
in a modern scientiﬁ c context. In their understanding the subject was not 
limited to mathematical formalization, as is often the case today, but 
extended to the conceptual problems and foundations of biology. It is 
this commitment to a comprehensive, cross-disciplinary integration of 
theoretical concepts that the present series intends to emphasize. Today 
theoretical biology has genetic, developmental, and evolutionary com-
ponents, the central connective themes in modern biology, but also 
includes relevant aspects of computational biology, semiotics, and cogni-
tion research, and extends to the naturalistic philosophy of sciences. 
 The  “ Vienna Series ” grew out of theory-oriented workshops organized 
by the Konrad Lorenz Institute for Evolution and Cognition Research 
(KLI), an international center for advanced study closely associated with 
 Series Foreword 

x 
Series Foreword
the University of Vienna. The KLI fosters research projects, workshops, 
archives, book projects, and the journal  Biological Theory , all devoted to 
aspects of theoretical biology, with an emphasis on integrating the devel-
opmental, evolutionary, and cognitive sciences. The series editors 
welcome suggestions for book projects in these ﬁ elds. 
 
 Gerd B. M ü ller, University of Vienna and KLI 
 G ü nter P. Wagner, Yale University and KLI 
 Werner Callebaut, Hasselt University and KLI 

 In 1859, Charles Darwin concluded his momentous book  On the Origin 
of Species by musing on the grandeur of the evolutionary view of life: 
 “ from so simple a beginning endless forms most beautiful . . . have been, 
and are being, evolved ”  (Darwin 1859, 490). A century and a half after 
Darwin published those words, many evolutionary biologists are ques-
tioning whether the evolution of life actually does produce  “ endless 
forms. ”  In fact, in many cases we see that evolution has produced the 
same form — or a very similar one — over and over again in many inde-
pendent species lineages, repeatedly, on timescales of hundreds of mil-
lions of years. 
 The phenomenon of convergent evolution has led many of us to 
suggest that that famous sentence should perhaps be rewritten to read, 
 “ from so simple a beginning  limited forms  most beautiful . . . have been, 
and are being, evolved. ”  The purpose of this book is to reveal to the 
reader how ubiquitous the phenomenon of convergent evolution is in 
life and that it occurs on all levels of evolution, from tiny organic mol-
ecules to entire ecosystems of species, and even in the way in which we 
think. 
 Why does evolution produce limited forms most beautiful? The phe-
nomenon of convergent evolution leads directly to the concept of evo-
lutionary constraint — that is, the number of evolutionary pathways 
available to life is in fact not endless, but is quite restricted. In the ﬁ nal 
two chapters of the book, the causes of convergent evolution and the 
implications of evolutionary constraint will be examined in detail. Those 
implications are not only of scientiﬁ c but also of philosophical interest. 
And those implications all concern, in one way or another, an essential 
question: How predictable is the evolutionary process? 
 My fascination with convergent evolution dates back to my ﬁ rst visit, 
as a small boy, to a natural history museum and zoological garden. I was 
 Preface: Limited Forms Most Beautiful 

xii 
Preface
astonished to see that the eyes of the deadly pit viper, gazing coldly 
at me through the glass enclosure of its pen, were identical to the eyes 
of my beloved black cat back at home. Both animals had eyes with very 
odd-looking vertical-slit pupils and irises of a beautiful gold color. How 
could it be that this deadly snake, a cold-blooded scaly reptile so vastly 
different from a warm, furry mammal, had eyes like a cat? In my later 
university studies I began to realize that the number of evolutionary 
possibilities was not endless, and that there was a very good reason 
why the eyes of a predatory snake and a predatory mammal are so 
similar. By the end of this book, I hope the reader will also share my 
fascination with an evolutionary process that produces limited forms 
most beautiful. 
 I thank the Konrad Lorenz Institute for Evolution and Cognition 
Research, Altenberg, Austria, for the fellowship that enabled me to work 
at the institute in 2010 and to bring this book to completion. I thank 
Gerd M ü ller, director of the KLI, for all of his help in preparing this 
book for the Vienna Series in Theoretical Biology. I thank all my col-
leagues (in particular Karl Niklas and Doug Erwin) who have discussed 
the scientiﬁ c implications of convergent evolution with me over the 
years. I thank Simon Conway Morris, Celia Deane-Drummond, and 
Michael Ruse for our discussions of the philosophical implications of 
convergent evolution while we attended a conference on the subject at 
the Vatican Observatory, Castel Gandolfo, Italy (and I thank Simon for 
inviting me to the conference). Needless to say, philosophical opinions 
expressed in this book are my own. Finally, I thank my wife, Marae, for 
her patient love. 

 1 
 The question  “ How common is convergence? ”  remains unanswered and may be 
unanswerable. Our examples indicate that even the minimum detectable levels 
of convergence are often high, and we conclude that at all levels convergence 
has been greatly underestimated. 
 — Moore and Willmer (1997, 1) 
 Recognizing Convergent Evolution 
 A porpoise looks like a ﬁ sh. It has a fusiform, streamlined body like that 
of a swordﬁ sh or a tuna. It has four ﬁ ns on the ventral side of its body, 
instead of four legs. It has a large ﬁ n at its posterior end, instead of a tail. 
And it even has a vertical ﬁ n centered on its back, so it looks very much 
like a shark when it is swimming through the water toward you. 
 Astonishingly, all appearances to the contrary, a porpoise is not a ﬁ sh; 
it is a mammal. It possesses all the distinctive combination of mammalian 
traits: a porpoise is placental, gives live birth, nurses its young with spe-
cialized mammary glands, has an endothermic metabolism, has three 
bones in its inner ears, has mammalian milk teeth, reproduces via inter-
nal fertilization, and so on. But it has lost other traits that are found in 
most mammals: it has no legs, no tail, no fur, and has instead evolved ﬁ ns 
like those of a ﬁ sh in place of legs and a tail. 
 The porpoise inherits its mammalian traits from its mammalian 
ancestors, and the possession of these traits indicates to us that the por-
poise belongs to the evolutionary lineage, or clade, of the Mammalia. 
These traits are synapomorphies, derived traits that are inherited from 
a common ancestor and that deﬁ ne membership within a particular 
clade. 
 The ﬁ ns of the porpoise are not directly inherited from ﬁ sh ancestors; 
they are independently derived convergent traits. That is, porpoises 
have evolved ﬁ ns that have converged on the morphology of the ﬁ ns that 
 What Is Convergent Evolution? 

2 
Chapter 1
are seen in the ﬁ sh, and, even though the ﬁ ns of the porpoise look very 
much like those of a ﬁ sh, they are in fact not ﬁ sh ﬁ ns but rather are 
mammal ﬁ ns. 
 Distinguishing synapomorphic traits from convergent traits is critical 
in the recognition of convergent evolution. In the literature (particularly 
the older literature), synapomorphic traits are sometimes called second-
ary homologous traits, and convergent traits are called homoplastic traits 
(Lecointre and Le Guyader 2006). Thus, the critical determination, for 
the purpose of recognizing convergent evolution, is sometimes referred 
to as the determination of secondary homology versus homoplasy (a 
term that I have always found to be most uneuphonious — it sounds like 
some type of disease). 
 There are actually three ways in which homoplastic traits — traits that 
look similar but that are not inherited from a common ancestor — might 
arise in evolution: convergence, parallelism, and reversion. Let us con-
sider a hypothetical example in which we know the evolutionary rela-
tionships between six species, illustrated by the cladogram given in  ﬁ gure 
1.1 . Species 1, 2, and 3 all possess synapomorphy S, and thus belong to 
the monophyletic clade S. Species 4, 5, and 6 all possess synapomorphy 
T, and thus belong to the monophyletic clade T. Although clade S and 
clade T have diverged in their evolution, they nevertheless evolved from 
a common ancestor that evolved the derived trait R, a trait that all six 
species still possess by inheritance; thus, trait R is a synapomorphy 
for the larger monophyletic clade R, which contains both clade S and 
clade T.  
 So far, so good. Now let us suppose that in clade S, the new trait Z 
arises by evolutionary modiﬁ cation of the preexisting trait A, as seen in 
species 3 ( ﬁ gure 1.2 ). However, in clade T a new trait very similar to trait 
 Figure 1.1 
 Cladogram of evolutionary relationships between six hypothetical species. 

What Is Convergent Evolution? 
3
Z also arises, but by evolutionary modiﬁ cation of the preexisting trait B, 
as seen in species 6 (  ﬁ gure 1.2 ). Trait Z is thus a convergent trait, a 
homoplastic trait, having evolved independently in species 3 and species 
6. If we were to mistakenly think that trait Z was a synapomorphic trait, 
we would mistakenly think that species 3 and species 6 were closely 
related sister species, since they both possess trait Z, and we would thus 
mistakenly include species 3 and species 6 in the new clade Z. The erro-
neous clade Z would thus be a polyphyletic clade. If, for example, 
we were to include swordﬁ sh and porpoises together in the clade 
 “ ﬁ ns ”  because we mistakenly believed that ﬁ ns were a synapomorphic 
trait, we would have created an erroneous polyphyletic clade because 
the ﬁ ns present in these two species are convergent traits, not 
synapomorphies.  
 Parallel evolution is a particular type of convergent evolution, where 
parallelism is  “ a similarity that has appeared independently in different 
closely related taxa, ”  closely related in that the same trait has indepen-
dently evolved  “ from the same ancestral character in different taxa. A 
parallelism is a special case of convergence ”  (Lecointre and Le Guyader 
2006, 541). A hypothetical case of parallel evolution is illustrated in   ﬁ gure 
1.3 . All six species possess the same ancestral character R in the original 
cladogram given in   ﬁ gure 1.1 . In   ﬁ gure 1.3 , however, trait R has been 
modiﬁ ed into trait Z independently, in parallel, in both species 3 and 
species 6.  
 The conceptual difference between the evolutionary scenarios illus-
trated in   ﬁ gures 1.2 and 1.3  lies in the traits that have been modiﬁ ed in 
producing the convergent trait Z. In   ﬁ gure 1.2 , two separate traits, A and 
B, have been modiﬁ ed in two separate lineages to produce the same 
convergent trait Z. In  ﬁ gure 1.3 , only one trait, the ancestral trait R, has 
 Figure 1.2 
 Convergent evolution of trait Z in species 3 and 6. 

4 
Chapter 1
been modiﬁ ed in two separate lineages to produce the parallel conver-
gent trait Z. 
 Last, a homoplastic trait can also be produced by the process of reverse 
evolution. In   ﬁ gure 1.4 , trait R has been modiﬁ ed into trait B, a new 
derived trait possessed by species 4 and species 5. In species 6, however, 
trait B has been modiﬁ ed back into trait R — an evolutionary reversion. 
Species 1, 2, and 3 all possess trait R by inheritance from a common 
ancestor. Since species 6 did not inherit trait R directly from that ances-
tor, trait R is a homoplastic reversion in this species. Consequently, it 
would be erroneous to conclude that species 6 was more closely related 
to species 1, 2, and 3 than it is to species 4 and 5 simply because it also 
possesses trait R. We would create an erroneous polyphyletic clade if we 
were to mistakenly include species 6 in clade S along with species 1, 2, 
and 3. Instead, species 6 possesses synapomorphy T (  ﬁ gure 1.1 ) and 
belongs in clade T along with species 4 and 5, even though it does not 
 Figure 1.3 
 Parallel evolution of trait Z in species 3 and 6. 
 Figure 1.4 
 Reverse evolution of trait R in species 6 within clade T, whereas all the species of clade S 
simply inherit trait R from a common ancestor.  

What Is Convergent Evolution? 
5
possess trait B as species 4 and 5 do (  ﬁ gure 1.4 ). At present, the impor-
tance and amount of homoplasy in evolution that is produced by rever-
sion is uncertain (Spinney 2007).  
 It is easy for us to see the conceptual differences between convergent, 
parallel, and reverse evolution in   ﬁ gures 1.2 – 1.4  because we already 
knew the true evolutionary relationships of the six hypothetical species 
( ﬁ gure 1.1 ). In real life, however, evolutionary relationships are not 
known beforehand, and we must carefully analyze all traits that we see 
are shared by different species. Do these species share these traits simply 
because they all inherit them from a common ancestor? Or are these 
traits convergent — have they independently arisen in species that belong 
to separate evolutionary lineages, in separate clades? A porpoise is not 
a ﬁ sh, even though it looks like one. 
 Convergent Evolution versus Parallel Evolution? 
 In modern phylogenetic systematics, we see that parallel evolution is 
simply a special case of convergent evolution (Lecointre and Le Guyader 
2006). In the literature (particularly the older literature), not only is 
parallel evolution sometimes erroneously considered to be different 
from convergent evolution, but in some cases it is considered to be the 
actual disproof of convergent evolution. For example, in the next chapter 
we will see that eyes have convergently evolved in animals in some 49 
independent lineages (table 2.15). It was long thought that each separate 
animal lineage convergently evolved its type of eye from separate origi-
nal traits, in a case of classic convergent evolution as illustrated in   ﬁ gure 
1.2 . However, we now know that all animal eyes are produced by modify-
ing the same conserved regulatory gene present in the animal genome 
(the  Pax-6  gene), and thus the evolution of eyes is a case of parallel 
convergent evolution, as illustrated in   ﬁ gure 1.3 . The recent molecular 
discovery that the same ancestral character was independently, in paral-
lel, modiﬁ ed in the evolution of eyes was mistakenly taken by Rey et al. 
(1998) to be a disproof of convergent evolution:  “ An oft invoked example 
of convergent evolution has been compound eyes of insects versus sin-
gular eyes of vertebrates. This proved to be a wrong example, however, 
because development of all metazoan eyes recently has been shown to 
be under control of the same regulatory gene that encodes Pax-6 protein ”  
(Rey et al. 1998, 6212). 
 All life on Earth evolved from a single common ancestor. We know 
this because all life on Earth uses the exact same coding molecule, DNA, 

6 
Chapter 1
and the exact same molecular construction: DNA codes for RNA, and 
RNA codes for the same 20 amino acids that are assembled to produce 
proteins, the building blocks of life. This fact leads us to the concept of 
 “ deep homology ”  and parallelism in evolution:  “ One of the most impor-
tant, and entirely unanticipated, insights in the past 15 years was the 
recognition of an ancient similarity in patterning mechanisms in diverse 
organisms, often among structures not thought to be homologous on 
morphological or phylogenetic grounds. In 1997, prompted by the 
remarkable extent of similarities in genetic regulation between organs 
as different as ﬂ y wings and tetrapod limbs, we suggested the term 
 ‘ deep homology ’  to describe the sharing of the genetic regulatory appa-
ratus that is used to build morphologically and phylogenetically dispa-
rate animal features ”  (Shubin et al. 2009, 818). However, rather than 
viewing deep homology as a disproof of convergent evolution, Shubin 
et al. (2009) recognize that it is proof of parallel convergent evolution: 
 “ The deep homology of generative processes and cell-type speciﬁ cation 
mechanisms in animal development has provided the foundation for 
the  independent evolution  of a great variety of structures . . . common 
genetic mechanisms are used to generate diverse adaptations and can 
lead to the  parallel evolution  of novelties ”  (Shubin et al. 2009, 818; italics 
mine). 
 In actual practice it is sometimes quite difﬁ cult to differentiate con-
vergent and parallel evolution. Rokas and Carroll (2008) give unambigu-
ous examples of both types of evolution at the molecular level: both 
dolphins and rhinos have independently evolved the amino acid valine 
at the same amino acid site. The dolphins, however, modiﬁ ed alanine to 
valine at that site, whereas the rhinos modiﬁ ed tyrosine to alanine. The 
same amino acid, valine, was independently evolved from two different 
amino acid precursors in a process of convergent evolution (the process 
illustrated in   ﬁ gure 1.2 ). In contrast, the ﬁ lamentous ascomycetes  Asper-
gillus clavatus  and  Aspergillus oryzae  have independently evolved glu-
tamic acid at the same amino acid site in parallel, in that both modiﬁ ed 
their ancestral amino acid asparagine to glutamic acid at that site (the 
process illustrated in  ﬁ gure 1.3 ). 
 In other cases the determination is not so easy. The wings of birds and 
bats are overwhelmingly used in the literature as examples of convergent 
evolution. And indeed these are two very distantly related animals — the 
bats belong to the clade Mammalia and the birds to the clade Dinosauria. 
We have to go back in time to the Carboniferous, some 340 million years 
ago, to ﬁ nd a common ancestor for these two animals. Both have wings, 

What Is Convergent Evolution? 
7
but the birds modiﬁ ed dinosaurian forelimbs to wings whereas bats 
modiﬁ ed mammalian forelimbs to wings in what was a process of con-
vergent evolution (the process illustrated in   ﬁ gure 1.2 ). Or perhaps it was 
not? Even though dinosaurian forelimbs are very different from mam-
malian forelimbs, they are both forelimbs. And both dinosaurs and 
mammals have inherited (and modiﬁ ed) their forelimbs from their 
ancient amphibian ancestors. One could thus just as well argue that the 
evolution of wings in birds and bats is a case of parallel evolution: the 
same ancestral character (forelimbs) was modiﬁ ed in parallel to produce 
wings in birds and in bats (the process illustrated in   ﬁ gure 1.3 ). Argu-
ments of deep homology would push that parallelism even further back 
in time, in that the genetic regulatory mechanisms used to produce fore-
limbs were evolved before the Cambrian diversiﬁ cation of animal life 
over 540 million years ago. 
 In the chapters that follow, I will not draw a sharp distinction between 
convergent evolution and parallel evolution. Again, from the perspective 
of modern phylogenetic systematics, parallel evolution is simply a type 
of convergent evolution (Lecointre and Le Guyader 2006). Where I think 
the distinction is useful, and reasonably well demonstrated, I will point 
out examples of these two evolutionary processes in operation. 
 Evolutionary Constraint and Convergent Evolution 
 Convergent evolution was once thought to be almost exclusively pro-
duced by functional constraint, the old maxim that  “ form follows func-
tion. ”  Given the same function, evolution via natural selection will 
produce the same form to serve that function. However, modern studies 
in evolutionary development ( “ evo-devo ”  to its practitioners) have 
revealed that a great deal of convergent evolution of life on Earth is in 
fact due to developmental constraint: the phenomenon of  “ deep homol-
ogy ”  that we considered in the previous section of the chapter is just one 
example. Ancient homologous regulatory genes have been indepen-
dently switched on and off many times in the evolution of life to produce 
convergent forms, such as the many types of eyes seen in animals (which 
we will consider in the next chapter). The same forms have been pro-
duced by the repeated channeling of evolution along the same develop-
mental trajectory. Natural selection has a limited repertoire of potential 
forms from which to choose, and convergent evolution is the result. 
 In order to understand the phenomenon of convergent evolution, 
we now need to carefully consider the action of both functional and 

8 
Chapter 1
developmental constraints in the evolutionary process:  “ Patterns of par-
allel evolution can provide even stronger illustrations of the need to 
distinguish explanations based on the similarity of natural selection from 
those involving developmental bias or genetic channeling ”  (Brakeﬁ eld 
2006, 364). Throughout this book I will point out examples of functional 
and developmental constraint in operation. The theoretical analysis of 
evolutionary constraint in producing convergent evolution will be con-
sidered in detail in chapter 7. 
 Mimicry, Camouﬂ age, and Convergent Evolution 
 Mimicry is a form of convergent evolution in which one species indepen-
dently evolves a morphology very similar to that of another species 
simply in order to fool a third species. In Batesian mimicry, a harmless 
mimic converges on the morphology of a harmful model species in a case 
of false warning — potential predators will avoid the harmless mimic, 
thinking it is the harmful model. An example is the harmless New Mexico 
milk snake ( Lampropeltis triangulum celaenops ), which looks almost 
identical to the deadly Arizona coral snake ( Micruroides euryxanthus ). 
In M ü llerian mimicry, two harmful species converge on a common mor-
phology in a case of real warning — potential predators easily recognize 
the harmful species because the warning morphology is twice as abun-
dant in nature as it would be if it was characteristic of only a single 
species. An example is the yellow-and-black striping seen in both bees 
and wasps. 
 Mimicry is similar to camouﬂ age, where species evolve morphologies 
that converge on the form of either a living or a nonliving model in order 
to blend into the surroundings so that the camouﬂ aged species cannot 
be seen. An example of the former is the giant walkingstick ( Mega-
phasma dentricus ), an insect that so closely resembles the leaﬂ ess twig 
of a plant that it is unnoticed by predators. An example of the latter is 
the white fur color that is convergently evolved by numerous animal 
species that live in snowy habitats, such as the Asian snow leopard ( Uncia 
uncia ) and the Arctic polar bear ( Thalarctos maritimus ). 
 All the myriad forms of mimicry and camouﬂ age convergence serve a 
single function: deception. Predator species repeatedly and indepen-
dently evolve forms that deceive prey animals into not noticing them 
(until it is too late), and prey animals independently evolve forms that 
deceive predators so that the prey either are not noticed or are noticed 
but avoided. Although the convergence in form that is seen in mimicry 

What Is Convergent Evolution? 
9
and camouﬂ age in nature is sometimes spectacular, the fundamental 
function of that convergence is rather simple, in that it is all deception. 
Entire books have been written on the evolution of mimicry and cam-
ouﬂ age, and I will not consider these forms of convergence in more detail 
in this book, with the exception of the carrion-mimic ﬂ owers, discussed 
in chapter 3. 
 On the Organization of This Book 
 This book is not intended to be an  “ Encyclopedia of Convergent Evolu-
tion ”  (an effort that would run to many volumes). Instead, I have con-
centrated on listing a single species example from as many separate and 
disparate phylogenetic lineages that I am aware of in which a trait has 
originated independently by convergent evolution. 
 A phylogenetic classiﬁ cation of life is absolutely essential in determin-
ing whether a similar trait found in separate species is shared by those 
species simply because they inherited it from a common ancestor — that 
is, a synapomorphic trait — or whether that trait has arisen independently 
in each separate species lineage — and is thus a convergent trait. The 
phylogenetic classiﬁ cation that I use throughout this book is given in 
abbreviated form in   table 1.1  and in detail in the appendix. This classiﬁ -
cation is modiﬁ ed chieﬂ y from the phylogenetic classiﬁ cation of living 
life forms by Lecointre and Le Guyader (2006) and the APG II (2003); 
additional information on extinct life forms is taken from Benton (2005), 
Donoghue (2005), and Niklas (1997).  
 For each species example given in the chapters that follow, I have 
provided an abbreviated list of the major nodes in its phylogenetic clas-
siﬁ cation, which will allow the reader to quickly see the close or distant 
relationship of a group of species that have independently evolved a 
similar trait by convergent evolution. I have not repeated the entire 
sequence of nodes, as that would be redundant with the appendix and 
would burden the lists of species with information overload. The major 
clades I have used in the text of this book are given in   table 1.1  and are 
set in boldface type in the appendix, allowing the reader to quickly 
assemble the entire evolutionary sequence of nodes for any species 
lineage in which he or she is particularly interested. 
 For each individual convergent structure or trait that is discussed in 
the chapters that follow, I will list the phylogenetic lineages of species 
that have independently evolved that structure or trait in a  “ step down ”  
fashion from least derived to most derived; that is, I will list lineages that 

10 
Chapter 1
 Table 1.1 
 The major lineages of life on Earth 
 Eubacteria 
 Archaea 
 Eukarya 
 – Bikonta 
 –  – Chlorobiota 
 –  –  – Embryophyta 
 –  –  –  – Tracheophyta 
 –  –  –  –  – Lycophyta 
 –  –  –  –  – Euphyllophyta 
 –  –  –  –  –  – Moniliformopses 
 –  –  –  –  –  – Lignophyta 
 –  –  –  –  –  –  – Spermatophyta 
 –  –  –  –  –  –  –  – Angiospermae 
 –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  – Euangiosperms 
 – Unikonta 
 –  – Metazoa 
 –  –  – Cnidaria 
 –  –  – Bilateria 
 –  –  –  – Protostomia 
 –  –  –  –  – Lophotrochozoa 
 –  –  –  –  – Ecdysozoa 
 –  –  –  – Deuterostomia 
 –  –  –  –  – Echinodermata 
 –  –  –  –  – Chordata 
 –  –  –  –  –  – Vertebrata 
 –  –  –  –  –  –  – Chondrichthyes 
 –  –  –  –  –  –  – Osteichthyes 
 –  –  –  –  –  –  –  – Actinopterygii 
 –  –  –  –  –  –  –  – Sarcopterygii 
 –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  – Tetrapoda 
 –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  – Batrachomorpha 
 –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  – Reptiliomorpha 
 –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  – Amniota 
 –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  – Sauropsida 
 –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  – Diapsida 
 –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  – Lepidosauromorpha 
 –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  – Archosauromorpha 
 –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  – Synapsida 
 –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  – Therapsida 
 –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  – Mammalia 
 Note: The complete phylogenetic classiﬁ cation of life used in this book is given in the 
appendix. 

What Is Convergent Evolution? 
11
occur at the top of   table 1.1  ﬁ rst and arrange subsequent lineages in their 
sequence of evolution as outlined in   table 1.1 . Thus, in the discussion of 
the convergent evolution of eyespots in animals given in chapter 2, the 
nonbilaterian jellyﬁ sh species  Leuckartiara octona  (lineage Metazoa: 
Cnidaria in   table 1.1 ) is listed before the more derived bilaterian rotifer 
species  Asplanchna brightwelli  (lineage Metazoa: Bilateria: Protostomia: 
Lophotrochozoa in   table 1.1 ), which itself is listed before the deuteros-
tomous sea cucumber species  Synaptula lamperti  (lineage Metazoa: Bila-
teria: Deuterostomia: Echinodermata in  table 1.1 ). 
 I will take the list of nodes for each pair of convergent lineages back 
to the point where the lineages diverged in evolution so the reader can 
see how distantly related species are that have independently acquired 
a convergent trait. Thus, in the previous example, the living sea cucumber 
 Synaptula lamperti  and the rotifer  Asplanchna brightwelli  both have 
eyespots, yet you have to go all the way back to the evolutionary split 
between the protostomous and deuterostomous lineages of bilaterian 
animals to ﬁ nd a common ancestor for the two species (Bilateria: Proto-
stomia versus Bilateria: Deuterostomia). In order to ﬁ nd a common 
ancestor for these bilaterian animals and the cnidarian jellyﬁ sh  Leuck-
artiara octona , you have to go all the way back to the evolution of 
the metazoans themselves, over 600 million years ago (i.e., Metazoa: 
Cnidaria versus Metazoa: Bilateria). 
 Published sources for all the convergent lineages discussed in this 
book are given in the references. These have partially come from my own 
lists of convergences, amassed over many years, and all the many text-
books and encyclopedia articles on evolution I have read, all of which 
contain examples of convergent evolution (in many cases, the same 
ones). In addition, three compendia that are exclusively devoted to the 
subject of convergent evolution, and that have been particularly helpful 
in my analyses, are Conway Morris ’ s  Life ’ s Solution (2003), Barlow ’ s  Let 
There Be Sight! A Celebration of Convergent Evolution  (2005), and 
Berg ’ s  Nomogenesis, or Evolution Determined by Law  (1922), and I 
recommend these to the reader as they also contain many additional 
examples not included in this volume. 
 The reader can quickly grasp the structure of my analysis of the 
phenomenon of convergent evolution by reading the section headings 
within each of the individual chapters given in the table of contents of 
the book. Throughout the book I will discuss the functional and devel-
opmental constraints that have resulted in convergent evolution at every 
level of life, from the external forms of living organisms down to the very 

12 
Chapter 1
molecules from which they are constructed, from their ecological roles 
in nature to the way in which their minds function. I will also use the 
analytical techniques of theoretical morphology in that discussion 
(McGhee 1999, 2001, 2007). In theoretical morphology, the consideration 
of nonexistent biological form is just as important as that of existent 
biological form, and can give us valuable insights into the phenomenon 
of convergent evolution. 
 
 
 
 

 2 
 In all cases of two very distinct species furnished with apparently the same 
anomalous organ, it should be observed that, although the general appearance 
and function of the organ may be the same, yet some fundamental difference can 
generally be detected. I am inclined to believe that in nearly the same way as 
two men have sometimes independently hit on the very same invention, so 
natural selection, working for the good of each being and taking advantage of 
analogous variations, has sometimes modiﬁ ed in very nearly the same manner 
two parts in two organic beings, which owe but little of their structure in common 
to inheritance from the same ancestor. 
 — Darwin (1859, 193 – 194) 
 Locomotion 
 Some of the most spectacular examples of convergent evolution are 
clearly due to the functional constraints of locomotion. Consider one 
of the most frequently cited cases of convergent evolution: the aston-
ishing morphological similarity between the extinct Mesozoic marine 
reptile  Ichthyosaurus platyodon and the living marine mammal  Pho-
caena phocaena , the harbor porpoise, or  Tursiops truncatus , the bottle-
nose dolphin. Not only do they look amazingly similar to one another, 
but they all look amazingly similar to large, fast-swimming ﬁ shes like 
 Xiphias gladius , the swordﬁ sh, or  Carcharodon carcharias , the great 
white shark. The cartilaginous ﬁ shes and the bony ﬁ shes both solved the 
physics of swimming in the dense medium of water back in the Silurian 
by evolving streamlined, fusiform morphologies (  table 2.1 ). Some 230 
million years later, a group of land-dwelling reptiles rediscovered this 
same morphology in their evolutionary return to the sea. And around 
175 million years after that, a group of land-dwelling mammals also 
rediscovered this same morphology in their own evolutionary return to 
the sea.  
 Convergent Animals 

14 
Chapter 2
 Table 2.1 
 Convergent evolution of animal swimming morphologies 
 1   Convergent structure and function: FUSIFORM BODY (missile-shaped form for drag 
reduction) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1   Great white shark (Vertebrata: Chondrichthyes: Elasmobranchii: Lamnidae; 
 Carcharodon carcharias ) 
 1.2  Swordﬁ sh (Vertebrata: Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Xiphiidae;  Xiphias 
gladius ) 
 1.3  Ichthyosaur (Osteichthyes: Saurcopterygii: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: 
Diapsida: Ichthyosauria: Ichthyosauridae;  Icthyosaurus platyodon  † Jurassic) 
 1.4  Harbor porpoise (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: 
Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Cetacea: Odontoceti: Phocaenidae;  Phocaena 
phocaena ) 
 2   Convergent structure and function: EEL-SHAPED BODY (elongated, cylindrical form 
for drag reduction) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1  Reed ﬁ sh (Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii: Cladista: Polypteridae;  Erpetoichthyes 
calabaricus ) 
 2.2   European eel (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Elopomorpha: Anguillidae;  Anguilla 
anguilla ) 
 2.3  South American lungﬁ sh (Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: Dipnoi: Lepidosirenidae; 
 Lepidosiren paradoxa ) 
 2.4   Mosasaur 
(Sarcopterygii: 
Reptiliomopha: Amniota: 
Sauropsida: 
Diapsida: 
Lepidosauromorpha: 
Squamata: 
Scleroglossa: 
Autarchoglossa: 
Anguimorpha: 
Mosasauridae;  Platecarpus ictericus  † Cretaceous) 
 2.5   Geosaur (Diapsida: Archosauromorpha: Crurotarsi: Crocodilia: Metriorhynchidae; 
 Geosaurus giganteus  † Jurassic) 
 3   Convergent structure and function: PADDLE-FORM APPENDAGES (walking 
appendages modiﬁ ed to paddle shapes for paddling/rowing through water) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 3.1   Sea scorpions (Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Cheliceriformes: 
Merostomata: Eurypterida: Eurypteridae;  Eurypterus remipes  † Silurian) 
 3.2   Marbled diving beetle (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Dytiscidae; 
 Thermonectes marmoratus ) 
 3.3   Green sea turtle (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: 
Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: Anapsida: Testudines: Chelonioidae;  Chelonia 
mydas ) 
 3.4  Plesiosaur 
(Sauropsida: 
Diapsida: 
Lepidosauromorpha: 
Sauropterygia: 
Elasmosauridae;  Muraenosaurus leedsii  † Jurassic) 
 3.5   King penguin (Diapsida: Archosauromorpha: Ornithodira: Dinosauria: Saurischia: 
Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Sphenisciformes: Spheniscidae;  Aptenodytes patagonica ) 
 3.6   African manatee (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: Afrotheria: 
Sirenia: Trichechidae;  Trichechus senegalensis ) 
 3.7   California sea lion (Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Carnivora: Caniformia: Otariidae; 
 Zalophus californianus ) 
  Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a  † . 

Convergent Animals 
15
 The evolution of an ichthyosaur or a porpoise morphology is not 
trivial. It can be correctly described as nothing less than astonishing that 
a group of land-dwelling tetrapods, complete with four legs and a tail, 
could devolve their appendages and tails back into ﬁ ns like those of a 
ﬁ sh, while also reevolving a dorsal ﬁ n. Highly unlikely, if not impossible? 
Yet it has happened twice, convergently in the reptiles (sauropsid amni-
otes) and the mammals (synapsid amniotes), two groups of animals that 
are not closely related. We have to go back in time as far as the Carbon-
iferous to ﬁ nd a common ancestor for the mammals and the reptiles; thus, 
their genetic legacies are very different. Nonetheless, the ichthyosaur and 
the porpoise both independently reevolved ﬁ ns. 
 An extremely ancient form of swimming morphology can be seen in 
some of the ﬁ rst chordate animals to evolve back in the Cambrian, not 
long after the evolution of animals themselves some 600 million years 
ago. These animals have elongated cylindrical bodies, usually laterally 
compressed, with caudal ﬁ ns located along the dorsal and ventral sur-
faces of the posterior one-third or so of the body. Superﬁ cially, these 
animals look somewhat like arrows, but rather than moving rigidly like 
an arrow, these animals undulate through the water, with a sinusoidal 
motion of the body, propelled by the caudal ﬁ ns at the rear. Such eel-like 
morphologies can be seen in the extinct conodonts, such as  Eoconodon-
tus notchpeakensis (the  “ dawn conodont ” from Notchpeak) from the 
Late Cambrian, which were very ancient craniate chordates possessing 
a skull but no jaws or vertebrae. The same plesiomorphic, eel-like mor-
phology can be seen in the modern myxinoid hagﬁ sh  Myxine glutinosa , 
which also have no jaws or vertebrae, and in the modern sea lamprey 
 Petromyzon marinus , which does possess vertebrae but still has no jaws. 
 Surprisingly advanced, derived animals have repeatedly converged on 
this ancient swimming morphology — including the modern eels them-
selves, such as the European eel  Anguilla anguilla ( table 2.1 ). Modern 
eels are highly modiﬁ ed teleost ﬁ sh, the Elopomorpha, and the teleost 
ﬁ shes themselves are highly derived actinopterygian ﬁ sh. Yet a modern 
eel looks very much like an ancient Cambrian craniate, and swims in the 
same undulatory fashion, propelled by caudal ﬁ ns. The teleost ﬁ shes were 
not the ﬁ rst to evolve eel-forms among the ray-ﬁ n ﬁ shes, however, as this 
same form was convergently evolved within the plesiomorphic cladistian 
ﬁ shes, a basal group of actinopterygian ﬁ shes, as can be seen in the 
modern reed ﬁ sh. 
 This same morphology has been convergently evolved in the second 
major extant branch of the bony ﬁ shes, the lobe-ﬁ nned sarcopterygians, 

16 
Chapter 2
as can be seen in the South American lungﬁ sh  Lepidosiren paradoxa , 
which is virtually identical to an eel. And, as one might expect from the 
previous example of the convergent evolution of fusiform swimming 
morphologies, these convergences are not conﬁ ned to disparate types of 
ﬁ sh (  table 2.1 ). The Cretaceous mosasaurs were eel-like marine reptiles, 
closely resembling the mythical sea serpent, and evolved from land-
dwelling lizards. The Jurassic geosaurs were eel-like marine archosaurs, 
a more derived form of reptile than the lizards, yet they too evolved from 
land-dwelling tetrapods that devolved the tetrapods back into ﬁ ns and 
returned to the sea. Both the mosasaurs and geosaurs developed caudal 
ﬁ ns by dorsoventrally elongating, and laterally compressing, the caudal 
vertebrae themselves. 
 In analyzing evolution from the perspective of theoretical morphology, 
it is important to consider both nonexistent convergent form and existent 
convergent form (McGhee 2001, 2007). There is one major group of land 
animals that has not yet convergently evolved an eel-like swimming 
morphology — the mammals (see   table 2.1 ). Mammalian  “ ﬁ sh-forms ” 
have evolved in the Cenozoic (porpoises, etc.), but no mammalian  “ eel-
forms ” have evolved as yet. Why not? At present, the sea otters ( Enhydra 
lutris ), with their webbed feet, elongated bodies, and long ﬂ attened tails 
used in swimming, might be the best example of a precursor to the con-
vergent evolution of the eel-form in mammals. Careful consideration of 
nonexistent convergent form may give us valuable insights into the phe-
nomenon of convergent evolution, and we shall return to this topic 
throughout this book. 
 Last, extensive convergence in form is seen in animals that have sec-
ondarily evolved the capability to paddle or row through water with their 
former walking appendages (  table 2.1 ). Among the arthropods, the 
extinct sea scorpions (ancestors of modern land scorpions) modiﬁ ed a 
pair of their fore appendages into two paddles back in the Silurian, and 
420 million years later the modern diving beetles have modiﬁ ed a pair 
of their hind appendages into paddles. All four of the tetrapods of 
modern sea turtles have been modiﬁ ed into paddles, and appear very 
similar in form to the four paddles of the ancient plesiosaurs, reptiles 
that underwent this same modiﬁ cation some 170 million years before. 
Among the advanced dinosaurian reptiles, the modern-day penguins 
have modiﬁ ed their wings — forelimb structures that were themselves 
modiﬁ ed from walking appendages back in the Jurassic — into paddles 
for use in swimming rather than in ﬂ ight. Two separate groups of modern 
mammals have convergently modiﬁ ed their forelimbs into paddles: the 

Convergent Animals 
17
manatees and their kin, and the sea lions and their kin (  table 2.1 ). 
Although a manatee and a walrus look very similar, they are very differ-
ent types of mammals. The afrotherian manatee is more closely related 
to an elephant, and the laurasiatherian walrus is more closely related to 
a wolf, than they are to each other. Their apparent similarity in form is 
entirely due to convergent evolution. 
 The second most commonly cited example of amazing feats in conver-
gent evolution is the evolution of ﬂ ying in land animals. No fewer than 
three separate groups of tetrapods have modiﬁ ed their forelimbs into 
wings: the extinct pterosaurs and the living birds and bats (  table 2.2 ). At 
ﬁ rst glance, it would seem to be extremely unlikely that an originally 
quadrupedal animal, using all four legs for walking, would somehow be 
able to evolve into an animal in which the forelimb is now used as a 
ﬂ ying structure. Yet not only has this occurred in the evolution of life, it 
has occurred three times independently! The wings of birds, bats, and 
pterosaurs have an amazingly similar appearance, which is clearly due to 
the functional constraints of locomotion via ﬂ ying in the thin gaseous 
medium of the Earth ’ s atmosphere. This similarity is deceptive, however, 
for closer examination reveals that the wings of the three groups of 
animals are constructed differently. The wing of a bat largely consists of 
its hand, in which the ﬁ ngers are vastly elongated and between which is 
stretched a webbed membrane of skin. The wing of a pterosaur is similar, 
but consists of a single ﬁ nger (the fourth digit) from which a membrane 
of skin is stretched all the way to the side of the animal. The wing of a 
bird is even more different, in that the surface of the wing is not con-
structed of skin membranes, but consists of elongated ﬂ ight feathers 
attached to its arm. Still, wings in all three groups are convergent modi-
ﬁ cations of an original walking structure, the forelimb.  
 The wings of insects, the fourth major group of animals to evolve 
powered ﬂ ight (  table 2.2 ), are radically different from those of the tet-
rapods. The insects did not modify their forelimbs in the evolution of 
wings. Rather, insect wings consist of modiﬁ ed gill branches originally 
present only in the larval stages. Originally present on multiple segments 
in the abdomens of larvae, these gill structures were expanded in some 
body segments while being developmentally suppressed in others, leading 
to the four-wing condition seen in primitive adult insects such as mayﬂ ies 
(Carroll 2006). 
 In examining the convergent evolution of wings (  table 2.2 ), we begin 
to see the effect of a different constraint on the evolution of form in 
nature, in addition to that of functional constraint. All three tetrapod 

18 
Chapter 2
Table 2.2
Convergent evolution of animal ﬂ ying morphologies
1 Convergent structure and function: WINGS (ﬂ at to curved planar structures for 
generating lift in active ﬂ ying)
Convergent lineages:
1.1 Green darner dragonﬂ y (Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Panarthropoda: 
Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Odonata: Aeschnidae; Anax junius)
1.2 Hairy devil pterosaur (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: 
Sarcopterygii: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: Diapsida: Archosauromorpha: 
Ornithodira: Pterosauria: Rhamphorhynchidae; Sordes pilosus †Jurassic)
1.3 Great blue heron (Archosauromorpha: Ornithodira: Dinosauria: Saurischia: 
Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Ciconiiformes: Ardeidae; Ardea 
herodias)
1.4 Mouse-eared bat (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: 
Laurasiatheria: Chiroptera: Microchiroptera: Vespertilionidae; Myotis myotis)
2 Convergent structure and function: GLIDER MEMBRANES (expanded skin 
membranes stretched between fore and hind limbs for retarding falling speed in passive 
ﬂ ying)
Convergent lineages:
2.1 Flying Mesozoic mammal (Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Volaticotheria: 
Volaticotheridae; Volaticotherium antiquum †Cretaceous)
2.2 Flying possum or sugar glider (Mammalia: Marsupialia: Diprotodontia: Petauridae; 
Petaurus breviceps)
2.3 Feathertail glider (Marsupialia: Diprotodontia: Acrobatidae; Acrobatus pygmaeus)
2.4 Greater glider (Marsupialia: Diprotodontia: Pseudocheiridae; Petauroides volans)
2.5 True ﬂ ying squirrel (Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: Sciuridae; 
Glaucomys volans)
2.6 Scaly-tailed ﬂ ying squirrel (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: Anomaluridae; 
Anomalurus derbianus)
2.7 Flying lemur or colugo (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Dermoptera: Cynocephalidae; 
Cynocephalus volans)
3 Convergent structure and function: GLIDER BODIES (dorsoventrally ﬂ attened, 
laterally expanded body for retarding falling speed in passive ﬂ ying)
Convergent lineages:
3.1 Flying diapsid reptile (Sauropsida: Diapsida: Weigeltisauridae; Coelurosauravus 
jaekeli †Permian)
3.2 European ﬂ ying Mesozoic lizard (Diapsida: Lepidosauromorpha: Kuehneosauridae; 
Kuehneosaurus latus †Triassic)
3.3 North American ﬂ ying Mesozoic lizard (Lepidosauromorpha: Kuehneosauridae; 
Icarosaurus siefkeri †Triassic)
3.4 Black-bearded ﬂ ying lizard (Lepidosauromorpha: Lepidosauria: Squamata: Iguania: 
Agamidae; Draco melanopogon)
3.5 Flying paradise snake (Lepidosauria: Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: 
Anguimorpha: Serpentes: Colubridae; Chrysopelea paradisi)
4 Convergent structure and function: GLIDER FEET (expanded skin membranes 
stretched between elongated toes in feet for retarding falling speed in passive ﬂ ying)
Convergent lineages:
4.1 Wallace’s ﬂ ying tree frog (Tetrapoda: Batrachomorpha: Lissamphibia: Batrachia: 
Anura: Rhacophoridae; Rhacophorus nigropalmatus)
4.2 Costa Rican ﬂ ying tree frog (Lissamphibia: Batrachia: Anura: Hylidae; Agalychnis 
spurrelli)

Convergent Animals 
19
groups modiﬁ ed their forelimbs in the evolution of wings because only 
those structures were present for potential modiﬁ cation: unlike the 
ancient insects, the tetrapods had no gill branches to modify. The triple 
modiﬁ cation of forelimbs to wings in the tetrapods is an example of 
developmental constraint, a constraint that did not apply to the insects 
in this instance. Hypothetically, a group of insects could have modiﬁ ed 
their forelimbs to wings, like the tetrapods, but they were not conﬁ ned 
to that developmental pathway and, as the geological record demon-
strates, they evolved along another developmental pathway not open to 
the tetrapods. 
 One of the analytical techniques of theoretical morphology involves 
the generation of nonexistent biological form, usually by mathematical 
modeling and computer simulation (McGhee 2007). As a thought experi-
ment in theoretical morphology, we can consider the nonexistent mythi-
cal animal the dragon, a reptile-like animal with functional fore and hind 
limbs and functional wings as well. From our previous discussion of the 
convergent evolution of wings in tetrapods and insects, we can easily see 
why dragons are nonexistent. First, a group of tetrapods would have to 
develop an additional pair of forelimbs (the serial replication of a pair 
of limbs is not developmentally impossible, but extremely rare in the 
vertebrates) and, secondly, it would have to develop wings from the new 
Table 2.2
(continued)
4.3 Kuhl’s ﬂ ying gecko (Tetrapoda: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: Diapsida: 
Lepidosauromorpha: Squamata: Scleroglossa: Gekkonta: Gekkonidae; Ptychozoon 
kuhli)
5 Convergent structure and function: GLIDER FINS (greatly elongated, horizontally 
oriented pectoral ﬁ ns for retarding falling speed in passive ﬂ ying)
Convergent lineages:
5.1 Flying ﬁ sh (Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii: Exocoetidae; Exocetus volitans)
5.2 Flying gurnard ﬁ sh (Actinopterygii: Dactylopteridae; Dactylopterus volitans)
6 Convergent structure and function: GLIDER APPENDAGES (elongated, ﬂ attened 
appendages and wide, ﬂ anged heads for retarding falling speed in passive ﬂ ying)
Convergent lineages:
6.1 Giant gliding ant (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: Myrmicinae: 
Cephalotini; Cephalotes atratus)
6.2 Mexican gliding ant (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: 
Pseudomyrmecinae; Pseudomymex gracilis)
6.3 South American gliding ant (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: 
Formicinae; Camponotus heathi)
Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a †. For data sources, see text.

20 
Chapter 2
pair of forelimbs. For the insects, such a morphological transition would 
have been relatively simple, as they already possessed three pairs of 
walking appendages, and it is interesting to note that they never took 
this potential developmental pathway. Instead, they modiﬁ ed a different 
structure, their larval gill branches, into ﬂ ying structures. Later in this 
chapter we shall consider another group of insects who in fact have 
convergently modiﬁ ed their ﬁ rst pair of walking appendages into struc-
tures no longer used in locomotion. 
 Considerably more animals have convergently evolved gliding mor-
phologies than powered-ﬂ ight morphologies (  table 2.2 ). At least seven 
separate groups of mammals have evolved the capability to glide by 
stretching skin membranes between their fore and hind limbs, beginning 
with the volaticoterian mammals in the Cretaceous. These ancient gliders 
looked amazingly similar to modern-day southern ﬂ ying squirrels,  Glau-
comys volans , in North America. The true ﬂ ying squirrels are widely 
distributed around the planet, except in Africa. Thus, it is fascinating to 
note that in Africa a separate group of rodents, the scaly-tailed ﬂ ying 
 “ squirrels ”  (which are not squirrels at all), have convergently evolved 
the same morphology. In Southeast Asia, another group of mammals, the 
ﬂ ying lemurs or colugos, have converged on this morphology, and these 
animals are not any type of rodent at all but dermopterans, more closely 
related to primates than to rodents. Last, this same convergent morphol-
ogy was evolved by very distantly related marsupial mammals, and is 
found in three different groups of ﬂ ying possums and marsupial gliders 
in Australia and parts of Southeast Asia ( table 2.2 ). 
 Glider morphologies have repeatedly been evolved in the diapsid 
reptiles, but in a form very different from that found in the mammals. 
Reptilian gliders have bodies that are dorsoventrally ﬂ attened and later-
ally widened. Within their bodies, the ribs are ﬂ attened and greatly elon-
gated laterally, away from the anteroposterior axis of the vertebral 
column. Species of the modern ﬂ ying lizard genus  Draco  have bodies 
that resemble a discus in ﬂ ight — with a pair of forelimbs and a head 
attached at one side and a pair of hind limbs and a tail attached to the 
opposite side. This identical morphology was evolved more than a quarter 
of a billion years ago by ancient diapsid weigeltisaurid reptiles in the 
Permian (  table 2.2 ). A very interesting example of parallel evolution of 
this morphology occurred in the Triassic, where the lepidosauromorph 
 Kuehneosaurus latus  evolved in Europe and a second group of lepido-
sauromorphs separately evolved the same form in North America, as 
seen in  Icarosaurus siefkeri  (Kuhn-Schnyder and Rieber 1986). Last, a 

Convergent Animals 
21
modiﬁ cation of the same glider morphology has been evolved by the 
ﬂ ying paradise snakes. Rather than ﬂ attening and ﬂ aring the ribs in the 
midsection of the body, the entire snake is ﬂ attened like a ribbon, and it 
ﬂ ares its ribs laterally outward as it glides through the air. 
 Both groups of animals — the mammals and the reptiles — have conver-
gently evolved glider morphologies with expanded surface-area struc-
tures. The construction of those glider structures is very different in the 
two groups of animals, however: the mammals repeatedly evolve skin 
membranes stretched between their fore and hind limbs, and the reptiles 
repeatedly evolve ﬂ attened bodies with laterally ﬂ ared rib cages (  table 
2.2 ). Apparently no reptiles ever evolved skin-membrane gliding mor-
phologies, and no mammals ever evolved glider bodies with ﬂ attened, 
ﬂ ared rib cages. The two groups of animals appear to be developmentally 
constrained to a particular convergent form for each group. 
 Skin-membrane gliding structures are also found in another group of 
animals, but with quite a different construction from those produced by 
the mammals. These are the ﬂ ying tree frogs, which possess skin mem-
branes stretched between the elongated toes of their feet. The ﬂ ying tree 
frogs also present a modern example of parallel evolution. The Old 
World frogs, such as Wallace ’ s ﬂ ying tree frog, belong to an entirely dif-
ferent family from the New World frogs, such as the Costa Rican ﬂ ying 
tree frog; we can see that the same glider morphology has independently 
been evolved by the frogs in two separate regions of the Earth. Lizards 
have also convergently evolved webbed feet for gliding, as in Kuhl ’ s 
ﬂ ying gecko and related species (  table 2.2 ). Interestingly, these geckos 
also have added a narrow strip of skin running along the sides of their 
head, body, and tail to provide extra gliding surface area, as their webbed 
feet are not nearly as large in proportion to their bodies as those found 
in the ﬂ ying tree frogs. If any of the lizards are to converge in the future 
on the glider-membrane morphology found in the mammals, these gecko 
lizards are perhaps the most likely candidates. 
 Convergent evolution of gliding morphologies is not conﬁ ned to land 
animals. At least two separate groups of ﬁ shes have evolved gliding 
morphologies by expanding and elongating their pectoral ﬁ ns, which are 
held horizontally as wing surfaces while the ﬁ sh leap and then glide 
through the air (  table 2.2 ). Again, this convergent morphology appears 
to be conﬁ ned to actinopterygian ﬁ shes, but it is interestingly similar to 
the modiﬁ cation of forelimbs to wings in the descendants of another 
group of ﬁ sh, the sarcopterygians (these descendants being the ptero-
saurs, birds, and bats; see  table 2.2 ). 

22 
Chapter 2
 Last, convergent gliding morphologies have evolved in at least three 
separate groups of ants (  table 2.2 ). Curiously, members of two of these 
gliding ant groups (the cephalotini and pseudomyrmecinae) glide back-
ward, abdomen ﬁ rst (Yanoviak et al., 2005). What is perhaps more odd 
is the evolution of gliding morphology at all in the ants, given that so 
many species of these animals have wings and powered ﬂ ight. 
 Most all discussions of convergent evolution begin with the spectacu-
lar examples of convergence of form in fast swimming animals (fusiform 
bodies,   table 2.1 ) and ﬂ ying animals (wings,   table 2.2 ). They often end 
there as well. Convergence of form due to locomotory functional con-
straints does not stop with swimming and ﬂ ying morphologies, however, 
so let us consider further convergent consequences of these constraints. 
The act of walking in the gravitational ﬁ eld of the Earth requires that an 
animal not only resist the pull of gravity in standing up, but also remain 
standing and balanced in the progressive falling-forward motion used in 
walking locomotion. Walking requires legs, which are lever assemblages 
composed of rigid structural elements with connecting tissues and 
powered by muscle contractions. 
 Two major groups of animals have convergently evolved legs: the 
arthropods and the tetrapods (  table 2.3 ). As in the convergent evolution 
of wings (  table 2.2 ), close examination of the legs of arthropods and 
tetrapods reveals interesting differences to solving the same functional 
problem, that of walking via lever assemblages. In tetrapod legs, the rigid 
structural elements (bones) are located inside the leg, and the connecting 
tendons and muscles are located on the outside of the leg (and covered 
with a thin layer of skin tissue). Arthropod legs are exactly the reverse: 
the rigid structural elements (composed of chitin) are located on the 
outside of the leg, and the connecting tendons and muscles are located 
inside the leg. A disadvantage of tetrapod endoskeletal legs is that the 
soft-tissue muscles and tendons are located on the outside of the leg, and 
thus are easily damaged (as we all painfully discover at one time or 
another in our lives). On the other hand, the soft-tissue muscles and 
tendons of the arthropod exoskeletal leg are protected by the enclosing 
chitin shell of the leg. A disadvantage of arthropod legs, however, is 
growth of the leg itself. Arthropods must periodically split and shed the 
outside rigid covering of the exoskeletal leg (molting), a process not 
necessary in growth of the endoskeletal legs of the tetrapod.  
 Walking locomotion has been hugely successful in the evolution of 
animal life on Earth: there are more species of arthropods on Earth than 
all other animals species combined, and tetrapod species of vertebrates 

Convergent Animals 
23
are much more diverse than nontetrapod. However, one particular form 
of tetrapod walking locomotion is curiously quite restricted: that of 
bipedalism. The ﬁ rst tetrapods evolved in the Late Devonian, and were 
quadrupedal amphibians (nonamniote tetrapods). The plesiomorphic 
quadrupedal condition is the norm for almost all living tetrapods; very 
few have made the transition to standing up and walking solely on their 
hind limbs. 
 The adaptive signiﬁ cance of bipedalism is still open to debate. Stand-
ing erect on the hind limbs clearly gives an animal the ability to see much 
farther in the distance, thus giving it an early-warning capability in preda-
tor detection. Walking only on the hind limbs also gives an animal the 
capability to use the forelimbs for functions other than locomotion: both 
theropod maniraptoran dinosaurs and primate mammals convergently 
 Table 2.3 
 Convergent evolution of animal walking morphologies 
 1   Convergent structure and function: LEGS (articulated, muscle-controlled lever 
assemblages for standing and walking in a gravitational ﬁ eld) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1   Giant walkingstick arthropod (Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Panarthropoda: 
Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Phasmatodea: Phasmidae;  Megaphasma 
dentricus ) 
 1.2   Giraffe tetrapod (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: 
Tetrapoda: Reptiliomorpha: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: 
Cetartiodactyla: Girafﬁ dae;  Giraffa camelopardalis ) 
 2   Convergent structure and function: BIPEDALISM (adaptation for [1] maximum oxygen 
uptake during sustained running or hopping, [2] predator detection at a distance, [3] freeing 
the forelimbs for functions other than locomotion) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1  Bolosaurs (Amniota: Sauropsida: Anapsida: Bolosauridae:  Eudibamus  cursoris 
 † Permian) 
 2.2  Ornithosuchids (Diapsida: Archosauromorpha: Crurotarsi: Ornithosuchidae; 
 Ornithosuchus longidens  † Triassic) 
 2.3  Dinosauromorphs (Archosauromorpha: Archosauria: Ornithodira: Dinosauro-
morpha: Lagosuchidae;  Marasuchus illoensis  † Triassic) 
 2.4   Dinosaurs (Archosauria: Ornithodira: Dinosauria: Herrerasauridae;  Herrerasaurus 
ischigualastensis  † Triassic) 
 2.5   Red kangaroo (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Marsupialia: 
Diprotodontia: Macropodidae;  Macropus rufus ) 
 2.6  Fawn hopping mouse (Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: Muridae; 
 Notomys cervinus ) 
 2.7   California kangaroo rat (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: Heteromyidae; 
 Dipodomys californicus ) 
 2.8  Springhaas (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: Pedetidae;  Pedetes  capensis ) 
 2.9   Humans (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: Catarrhini: Hominidae: Hominini; 
 Ardipithecus ramidus  † Pliocene) 
  Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a  † . For data sources, see text. 

24 
Chapter 2
evolved prehensile hands in their forelimbs. Another possible bipedal 
adaptation is allowing greater expansion of the lungs and rib cage during 
fast running or hopping, for greater oxygen uptake. Many species of 
quadrupedal lizard will stand up on their hind limbs in order to rapidly 
run away from danger. This behavior is most notorious in the brown 
basilisk lizard,  Basiliscus basiliscus , of Central and South America, where 
it is known as the  Lagartija Jesucristo  (Jesus Christ lizard) because of its 
ability to run so fast on its hind limbs that it can actually run across the 
surface of water without sinking. 
 Bipedal locomotion has convergently arisen multiple times in both 
reptiles and mammals (  table 2.3 ). The oldest currently known bipedal 
reptile is the Late Paleozoic anapsid species  Eudibamus cursoris (Berman 
et al. 2000). Although it was a very ancient type of reptile, it was not only 
bipedal but digitigrade, standing on its toes. Following the end-Permian 
mass extinction, bipedal locomotion reevolved independently in two 
major groups of the archosaurs, the advanced reptiles, in the Triassic. The 
ornithosuchids, or  “ birdlike crocodiles, ”  were bipedal predators much 
more closely related to living crocodiles than other archosaurians 
(Benton 2005). Much more signiﬁ cantly, in terms of subsequent evolu-
tion, is the convergent appearance of bipedalism in the advanced orni-
thodires and the earliest dinosaurs in the Triassic.  Marasuchus  was a 
bipedal dinosauromorph predator — not quite a dinosaur — and the earli-
est dinosaurs  Herrerasaurus  and  Eoraptor  were bipedal predators 
(Benton 2005). In further dinosaurian evolution, the earliest of the other 
major branch of the dinosaurs, the ornithischians, were bipedal fabrosau-
rids, such as  Lesothosaurus  (Benton 2005). Thus, bipedalism may well be 
a synapomorphy for the entire Dinosauria, with subsequent quadrupe-
dalism in dinosaurs evolving as a secondary trait. All of the living dino-
saurs, the birds, are bipedal. 
 Bipedalism has convergently arisen in two major groups of mammals: 
the marsupials and the placentals (  table 2.3 ). The fascinating bipedal 
marsupials of Australia are well known, particularly the largest, the red 
kangaroo. Within the placentals, bipedalism has evolved independently 
several times in the rodents, and notably in the primates. The fawn 
hopping mouse is typical of Australian hopping-mice placental species 
that coexist with marsupial bipedal species. Independently, in North 
America, the Californian kangaroo rat (which is not a rat at all) and 
related species have evolved bipedal locomotion. And in South Africa, 
yet another independent group of rodents has evolved bipedalism, the 
Springhaas  Pedetes capensis , which has been described as the  “ kangaroo 

Convergent Animals 
25
rabbit ” although it is neither a rabbit nor a kangaroo. Last, bipedalism 
arose independently in a group of primates in Africa, the Hominini, and 
is a synapomorphy for all of the various human species. 
 Why is bipedalism so rare in the mammals in contrast to the dino-
saurs? The dinosaurian ecosystem was enormously successful; it per-
sisted for some 150 million years, and it contained numerous bipedal 
animal groups. All of the theropods, the predators of the dinosaurian 
ecosystem, were bipedal. Numerous herbivore groups, both saurischian 
prosauropods and ornithischian ornithopods, were bipedal, and many of 
these were quite large animals, such as the hadrosaurs. Why are preda-
tory bipedal lions or tigers nonexistent in mammalian ecosystems? Why 
are there no large, herbivorous bipedal horses or buffalos? 
 The rarity of bipedal mammalian animals is probably a function of 
developmental constraint, as opposed to functional constraint, for the 
earliest mammals and their ancestors were quadrupedal. The persistence 
of this symplesiomorphic trait in mammalian evolution may be due more 
to  “ developmental inertia, ” in that the quadrupedal condition is the 
inherited norm, than to any possible nonfunctionality of bipedal mam-
malian forms. In contrast, bipedalism is a synapomorphy for the Dino-
sauria — their earliest forms, both carnivores and herbivores, were bipedal. 
Only when they evolved such large and heavy animals as the gigantic 
sauropods, the massively armored ankylosaurs, and ceratopsids with 
enormously large skulls did dinosaurs depart from this developmental 
norm because bipedalism was no longer functional; at that point, they 
secondarily reevolved quadrupedal forms. 
 To conclude this section on walking-locomotion morphologies, I would 
like to take another thought-experiment excursion into theoretical mor-
phology. The mythical centaur is described as a vertebrate animal with 
four walking legs present on a horselike posterior, and two arms present 
on a humanlike anterior. In considering this nonexistent form, Maclaurin 
and Sterelny (2008, 104) ask:  “ No six-limbed vertebrates have ever 
evolved from four-limbed ancestors. Is this evidence of the developmen-
tal impossibility of centaurs? How can we tell from the fact that the 
elements in a trait cluster  did not diverge independently of one another, 
that they  could not  evolve independently of one another? ”  This is an 
interesting question, and it illustrates the difﬁ culty of proving develop-
mental constraint. But, as in our previous thought experiment on the 
nonexistence of dragons, we can argue for developmental constraint on 
the grounds of improbability. In order to evolve a centaur-form, a group 
of tetrapods would have to ﬁ rst develop an additional pair of legs (not 

26 
Chapter 2
impossible, but highly improbable for vertebrates) and, second, develop 
arms from the new pair of legs. It is interesting to note here that the 
insects have in fact developed a centaur-form: the praying mantis,  Mantis 
religiosa . Evolved from ancestors for whom the six-legged condition is 
the developmental norm, the mantid has four walking appendages on its 
posterior and two arms on the upright thorax below the head, like a 
centaur. And not only have the insects evolved centaurs, but they did it 
twice! Centaur morphologies very similar to true mantids (Hexapoda: 
Mantodea: Mantidae) have been independently evolved by the  “ false 
mantid ” mantidﬂ ies (Hexapoda: Neuroptera: Mantispidae), a group of 
insects more related to ant lions than mantids. The green mantidﬂ y of 
southeastern North American,  Zeugomantispa minuta , looks virtually 
identical in form to  Mantis religiosa but is smaller, being only about one-
ﬁ fth the length of the mantid. Thus, even centaurs have been conver-
gently evolved, but only by insects. 
 So far we have considered animal locomotion under water (swim-
ming), aloft in the air (ﬂ ying), and on the surface of the Earth (walking). 
Now let us consider animal locomotion under the surface of the Earth: 
burrowing. The number of independent convergences on burrowing 
morphologies is amazing (  table 2.4 ), particularly when it would seem that 
these morphologies are related to a rather restrictive and highly special-
ized way of life.  
 The evolution of the four walking limbs of the earliest amphibians 
from their ﬁ sh ancestors ’  lobed ﬁ ns is a complicated process spanning 
Table 2.4
Convergent evolution of animal burrowing morphologies
1 Convergent structure and function: SNAKE-SHAPED BODIES (penetrator adaptations: 
streamlined, pointed heads for soil penetration; elongated, thin cylindrical bodies to 
minimize drag resistance in burrows; loss of fore and hind limbs no longer used in 
locomotion)
Convergent lineages:
1.1 Aistopods (Tetrapoda: Lepospondyli: Aistopoda: Phlegethontiidae; Phlegethonia 
linearis †Carboniferous)
1.2 Greater yellow-banded caecilian (Tetrapoda: Batrachomorpha: Lissamphibia: 
Gymnophiona: Cecelidae; Ichthyophis glutinosus)
1.3 Florida worm lizard (Tetrapoda: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: Diapsida: 
Lepidosauromorpha: 
Lepidosauria: 
Squamata: 
Scleroglossa: 
Amphisbaenea: 
Amphisbaenidae; Rhineura ﬂ oridana)
1.4 Burton’s legless lizard (Lepidosauria: Squamata: Scleroglossa: Gekkonta: 
Pygopodidiae; Lialis burtonis)
1.5 Brazilian bachian lizard (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Scincomorpha: 
Gymnophthalmidae; Bachia oxyrhinus)

Convergent Animals 
27
Table 2.4
(continued)
1.6 California legless lizard (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: 
Anniellidae; Anniella pulchra)
1.7 Eastern glass lizard (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: 
Anguidae; Ophisaurus ventralis)
1.8 Scarlet snake (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: Serpentes: 
Colubridae; Cemophora coccinea)
2 Convergent structure and function: MOLE-SHAPED BODIES (excavator adaptations: 
compact cylindrical bodies to ﬁ t within burrows, powerful forelimbs or hind limbs with 
enlarged claws or shovel structures for digging, rudimentary eyes)
Convergent lineages:
2.1 Mole cricket (Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Mandibulata: 
Hexapoda: Orthoptera: Gryllotalpidae; Gryllotalpa gryllotalpa)
2.2 Mexican burrowing toad (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: 
Sarcopterygii: 
Tetrapoda: 
Batrachomorpha: 
Lissamphibia: 
Batrachia: 
Anura: 
Rhinophrynidae; Rhinophrynus dorsalis)
2.3 Couch’s spadefoot toad (Batrachomorpha: Lissamphibia: Batrachia: Anura: 
Pelobatidae; Scaphiopus couchii)
2.4 Guinea shovel-snout frog (Lissamphibia: Batrachia: Anura: Hemisotidae; Hemisus 
guineensis)
2.5 Mole salamander (Lissamphibia: Batrachia: Urodela: Ambystomidae; Ambystoma 
talpoideum)
2.6 Southern marsupial mole (Tetrapoda: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Synapsida: 
Therapsida: Mammalia: Marsupialia: Notoryctemorpha: Notoryctidae; Notoryctes 
typhlops)
2.7 Pink 
fairy 
armadillo 
(Mammalia: 
Eutheria: 
Xenarthra: 
Dasypodidae; 
Chlamydophorus truncatus)
2.8 Cape golden mole (Mammalia: Eutheria: Afrotheria: Afrosoricida: Chrysochloridae; 
Chrysochloris asiatica)
2.9 European mole (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Eulipotyphles: Talpidae; 
Talpa europaea)
2.10 Ancient palaeanodonts (Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Pholidota: Palaeanodonta: 
Epoicotheridae; Epoicotherium unicum, Xenocranium pileorivale †Oligocene)
2.11 Common vole (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: Myomorpha: Arvicolidae; 
Microtus arvalis)
2.12 Lesser mole rat (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: Myomorpha: Spalacidae; 
Spalax leucodon)
2.13 Siberian zokor (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: Myomorpha: Cricertidae: 
Mylospalacinae; Myospalax myospalax)
2.14 Asian bamboo rat (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: Myomorpha: 
Rhizomyidae; Rhizomys sumatraensis)
2.15 Chilean 
coruro 
(Eutheria: 
Euarchontoglires: 
Rodentia: 
Hystricomorpha: 
Octodontidae; Spalacopus cyanus)
2.16 Rio Negro tuco-tuco (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: Hystricomorpha: 
Ctenomyidae; Ctenomys rionegrensis)
2.17 African mole rat (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: Hystricomorpha: 
Bathyergidae; Cryptomys hottentotus)
2.18 Plains pocket gopher (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: Sciuromorpha: 
Geomyidae; Geomys bursarius)
Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a †. For data sources, see text.

28 
Chapter 2
millions of years in the Late Devonian and Early Carboniferous. So it is 
astonishing to note that some ancient amphibians promptly devolved 
these same hard-earned appendages and became limbless in the later 
Carboniferous. These are the aistopods, like  Phlegethonia linearis , which 
has a morphology virtually identical to a modern snake (Benton 2005) 
but is not a snake. Amphibian convergence on penetrator-form burrow-
ing morphologies did not end in the Carboniferous, for an entire group 
of legless amphibians exist today, the Gymnophiona, whose caecilian 
members strongly resemble earthworms. In addition, they have second-
arily evolved a hydrostatic system for burrowing and locomotion that is 
convergent on the ancient plesiomorphic hydrostatic system seen in true 
earthworms (O ’ Reilly et al. 1997). 
 These amphibians are not alone, as the amphisbaenid Florida worm 
lizard is also identical in overall appearance to an earthworm, even to 
its pinkish-purple color, yet it is a lepidosaurian reptile. Lee and Shine 
(1998) have demonstrated that the amphisbaenid worm lizards are more 
closely related to gekko lizards than to the snakes. But other groups of 
lizards have evolved snakelike penetrator morphologies, like the ancient 
amphibian aistopods. These modern reptiles include the California 
legless lizard of western North America, the legless glass lizards of 
eastern North America, the pygopodid legless lizards of Australia, and 
the recently discovered gymnophthalmid legless lizard  Bachia oxyrhinus 
of Brazil, South America. The true penetrator-form burrowing snakes, 
like the very pretty scarlet snake of southeastern North America, are 
more closely related to modern varanid lizards, such as the very impres-
sive predator  Varanus komodensis , the Komodo dragon (Lee and Shine 
1998), and more distantly related to the ancient marine snakelike mosa-
saurs (see eel-form swimmers in  table 2.1 ). 
 When burrowing animals are mentioned, most people think of the 
mole, with its short, compacted, cylindrical body and powerful digging 
forelimbs — typical excavator-form burrowers. However, this same form 
can be found in the insects, as seen in the mole crickets. And, just as the 
mammalian mole is considered by many to be a pest, the mole cricket is 
injurious to garden plants and crops. Excavator-form burrowers are also 
found in the amphibians. For example, ambystomid mole salamanders 
have short, compacted, cylindrical bodies and blunt heads for burrowing. 
The amphibian toads have convergently evolved excavator-forms twice, 
but in a backward fashion: both the Mexican burrowing toads and the 
spadefoot toads burrow with their powerful hind limbs, not their fore-
limbs, and in both groups the hind feet of the animals have been enlarged 

Convergent Animals 
29
and stiffened into spadelike digging structures. Last, excavator forms are 
also found in the frogs, as in the Guinea shovel-snout frog. 
 In modern placental mammals, the mole-form has independently 
evolved in three very distantly related groups: the laurasiatherian true 
talpid moles, so common in Europe and North America; the afrotherian 
golden chrysochlorid moles; and the xenarthran armadillos (  table 2.4 ). 
In the Oligocene, some 30 million years ago, another group of placental 
mammals independently evolved the mole-form, the ancient epoicother-
ids (Rose and Emry 2005). An even more distantly related mole-form 
has been convergently evolved by the marsupial mammals, as is seen in 
the modern southern marsupial mole. 
 Last, multiple convergent evolutions of excavator-form morphologies 
have taken place in another group of placental mammals, the rodents, as 
documented by Nevo (1999). Mole-forms have been convergently 
evolved in four groups of myomorph rodents around the world: the voles, 
the lesser mole rats, the Siberian zokors, and the Asian bamboo rats. In 
South America, two groups of hystricomorph rodents have evolved 
mole-forms: the coruros, endemic to Chile, and the tuco-tucos, found far 
to the southeast in Uruguay. In Africa, another group of hystricomorph 
rodents have evolved mole-forms: the African mole rats. And last, in 
North America, the sciuromorph rodents have produced the pocket 
gophers. 
 From the perspective of theoretical morphology, it is interesting to 
note that burrowing mammals have never produced penetrator-forms —
 there exist no mammalian snake-forms. Yet it is easy to envision 
an elongated, furry, snakelike mammal, one that has secondarily lost its 
legs. Of all the mammals, the weasels and ferrets — with their elongated 
bodies and small legs — are perhaps the best candidates for producing 
a hypothetical snake-form mammal. In contrast, the reptiles have never 
produced excavator mole-forms; many reptiles excavate (turtles come 
to mind) but usually only sporadically and shallowly, as when they 
are preparing to hibernate. The burrowing reptiles ’  preference for 
penetrator-forms and the burrowing mammals ’  preference for excavator-
forms again raise the question of the role of functional versus 
developmental constraint in explaining the absence of theoretically 
possible morphologies in evolution. 
 In the animals, mode of locomotion is usually independent of how the 
animal feeds; that is, whether it is a carnivore or an herbivore. Some 
burrowing mammals are carnivores, like talpid moles, while others are 
herbivores, like tuco-tucos (Nevo 1999). Some ﬂ ying birds are carnivores, 

30 
Chapter 2
like hawks; others are herbivores, like parrots. Similary, some ﬂ ying bats 
are carnivores, like the insectivorous microbats, while others are herbi-
vores, like the frugivorous megabats. In addition to locomotion, the 
particular mode of feeding of an animal imposes additional functional 
constraints, which again are reﬂ ected in subsequent convergent evolu-
tion, as we shall see in the next section of the chapter. 
 Carnivores: Prey Detection 
 As heterotrophic organisms, animals are incapable of synthesizing their 
own food, unlike plants, which we shall consider in the next chapter. 
Because all animals need food, it is no surprise that many different 
animal groups have repeatedly, convergently, evolved the same success-
ful forms and structures used in food acquisition. 
 In order to survive, carnivores must be able to detect, capture, and kill 
prey animals. One very obvious way to detect prey is to be able to see 
the prey animal, that is, to have eyes. The convergent evolution of eyes 
themselves will be considered later in this chapter; of interest here are 
the modiﬁ cations of eyes found in the carnivores. An oft-repeated rule 
for animals is that carnivorous animals have binocular vision — their eyes 
are located forward enough on their skulls to give the animal overlap-
ping ﬁ elds of vision, which gives the animal three-dimensional depth 
perception and thus enables it to precisely locate a prey animal in space. 
In contrast, herbivorous animals usually have eyes located on either side 
of their heads, giving them an almost 360-degree ﬁ eld of vision for the 
detection of a predator in front of them, to either side, or even behind 
them. The disadvantage of herbivorous-animal vision is that the animal 
has either no binocular vision at all or only very restricted binocular 
vision directly in front of it. In some carnivores, highly developed binocu-
lar vision has the disadvantage that their ﬁ eld of vision is restricted to 
the front of the animal, so that they must turn their heads in order to see 
to their sides or to look behind themselves. 
 Exceptions to this rule are numerous. For example, the primates have 
highly developed binocular vision that is, in general, unrelated to a car-
nivorous mode of life. Instead, many primates need binocular vision 
because they are arboreal — they need precise depth perception in order 
to jump from tree branch to tree branch without missing the branch, and 
perhaps falling to their deaths to the forest ﬂ oor below. 
 Binocular vision is a very ancient condition for chordate animals. Even 
though their eyes are placed on either side of their laterally ﬂ attened 

Convergent Animals 
31
bodies, many ﬁ sh still possess a limited degree of binocular vision 
directly in front of their bodies, where their visual ﬁ elds brieﬂ y overlap. 
For this reason, the rainbow trout,  Oncorhynchus mykiss , can accurately 
stalk and precisely bite a ﬂ oating insect resting on the water surface 
above it. 
 Thus, in many cases the possession of binocular vision in a carnivore 
is simply a plesiomorphic trait that the animal inherited from a distant 
ancestor, and not a newly derived or convergent trait. What is often 
convergent, however, is the  degree of binocular vision — the degree to 
which the eyes have been moved forward on the skull. Consider the owl 
and the cat. These are very different animals — one is an avian dinosaur 
and the other is a placental mammal, and they represent two branches 
of the evolutionary tree that diverged over 340 million years ago (the 
sauropsids and the synapsids). Yet both animals have eyes rotated so far 
anterior on their skulls that they face directly forward, a convergent 
condition also found in humans. These animals have very highly devel-
oped three-dimensional depth perception, as we do. 
 However, if we closely examine the eyes of the owl, cat, and human, 
we immediately spot a major difference — the cat has eyes with vertical-
slit pupils. The vertical-slit pupil has been repeatedly and independently 
evolved many times throughout the evolutionary history of animals 
(  table 2.5 ). In the seas, three separate groups of modern cartilaginous 
ﬁ shes have convergently evolved eyes with vertical-slit pupils. The angel 
sharks (species of  Squatina ) are bottom dwellers with ﬂ attened bodies, 
and lie in wait for passing prey that they then ambush. They often 
operate in dim light or at night, where it is difﬁ cult for prey animals to 
detect them lying on the sea bottom. The carcharhinid sharks, such as 
the whitetip shark, have eyes with vertical-slit pupils and gold irises that 
are astonishingly similar to those often found in black cats. Last, the 
myliobatid rays, such as the beautiful spotted eagle ray, have indepen-
dently evolved the same type of pupil.  
 On land, the vertical-slit pupil has repeatedly evolved independently 
in the eyes of amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals (  table 2.5 ). In 
the amphibians, the great majority of frogs and toads have eyes with 
horizontal-slit pupils (a trait we shall consider in more detail later). 
However, some tree frogs have evolved eyes with vertical-slit pupils, a 
pupil type that has also been convergently evolved in the peculiar tailed 
frogs, which are aquatic carnivores that inhabit streams and creeks. Ver-
tical-slit pupils have evolved independently in two families of fossorial 
toads: the rhinophrynid burrowing toads and the pelobatid spadefoot 

32 
Chapter 2
Table 2.5
Convergent evolution of predator eye structures and vision systems
1 Convergent structure and function: VERTICAL-SLIT PUPILS IN EYES (allows [1] full 
usage of the diameter of the lens of the eye in bright light as well as in very low light 
intensities, with well-focused images in all light intensities; [2] particular detection of 
motion in the horizontal plane)
Convergent lineages:
1.1 Paciﬁ c angel shark (Vertebrata: Chondrichthyes: Elasmobranchii: Squatinidae; 
Squatina californica)
1.2 Whitetip shark (Chondrichthyes: Elasmobranchii: Carcharhinidae; Charcharhinus 
longimanus)
1.3 Spotted eagle ray (Chondrichthyes: Elasmobranchii: Myliobatidae; Aetobatus 
narinari)
1.4 Brownbelly leaf frog (Vertebrata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: Tetrapoda: 
Batrachomorpha: Lissamphibia: Batrachia: Anura: Hylidae; Phyllomedusa tarsius)
1.5 Tailed frog (Batrachomorpha: Lissamphibia: Batrachia: Anura: Ascaphidae; 
Ascaphus truei)
1.6 Mexican burrowing toad (Lissamphibia: Batrachia: Anura: Rhinophrynidae; 
Rhinophrynus dorsalis)
1.7 Couch’s spadefoot toad (Lissamphibia: Batrachia: Anura: Pelobatidae; Scaphiopus 
couchii)
1.8 Helmeted gecko (Tetrapoda: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: Diapsida: 
Lepidosauromorpha: Lepidosauria: Squamata: Scleroglossa: Gekkonta: Gekkonidae; 
Tarentola chazaliae)
1.9 Burton’s legless lizard (Lepidosauria: Squamata: Gekkonta: Pygopodidae; Lialis 
burtonis)
1.10 Granite night lizard (Lepidosauria: Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: 
Scincomorpha: Xantusidae; Xantusia henshawi)
1.11 Indian python (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: Serpentes: 
Boidae; Python molurus)
1.12 Timber rattlesnake (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: 
Serpentes: Viperidae: Crotalinae; Crotalus horridus)
1.13 Nile crocodile (Diapsida: Archosauromorpha: Archosauria: Crurotarsi: Crocodylia: 
Crocodylidae; Crocodylus niloticus)
1.14 Black skimmer (Archosauria: Ornithodira: Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: 
Maniraptora: Aves: Charadriiformes: Rhynchopidae; Rhynchops niger)
1.15 Small cats (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: 
Carnivora: Feliformia: Felidae; Felis sylvestris catus)
1.16 Red fox (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Carnivora: Caniformia: Canidae; 
Vulpes vulpes)
1.17 Harp seal (Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Carnivora: Caniformia: Phocidae; Pagophilus 
groenlandicus)
1.18 Slow loris (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: Lorisiformes; Nycticebus 
coucang)
2 Convergent structure and function: HORIZONTAL-SLIT PUPILS IN EYES (allows 
[1] full usage of the diameter of the lens of the eye in bright light as well as in very low 
light intensities, with well-focused images in all light intensities; [2] particular detection of 
motion in the vertical plane)
Convergent lineages:
2.1 Common octopus (Bilateria: Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: Mollusca: Cephalopoda: 
Coleoidea: Octopodidae; Octopus vulgaris)

Convergent Animals 
33
Table 2.5
(continued)
2.2 Common toad (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: 
Tetrapoda: Batrachomorpha: Lissamphibia: Batrachia: Anura: Bufonidae; Bufo bufo)
2.3 Bullfrog (Batrachomorpha: Lissamphibia: Batrachia: Anura: Ranidae; Rana 
catesbeiana)
2.4 Green tree frog (Lissamphibia: Batrachia: Anura: Hylidae; Hyla cinerea)
2.5 Asian palm civet (Tetrapoda: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: 
Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Carnivora: Viveridae; Paradoxurus hermaphroditus)
2.6 Bottlenose dolphin (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Cetacea: 
Odontoceti: Delphinidae; Tursiops truncatus)
3 Convergent structure and function: ENLARGED EYES (increases retinal surface area 
for low-light-intensity vision in nocturnal predators)
Convergent lineages:
3.1 Common octopus (Bilateria: Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: Mollusca: Cephalopoda: 
Coleoidea: Octopodidae; Octopus vulgaris)
3.2 Squirrelﬁ sh (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii: 
Beryciformes: Holocentridae; Holocentrus adscensionis)
3.3 Great horned owl (Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: 
Sauropsida: Diapsida: Archosauromorpha: Ornithodira: Dinosauria: Saurischia: 
Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Strigiformes: Strigidae; Bubo virginianus)
3.4 Tasmanian devil (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Marsupialia: 
Dasyuromorpha: Dasyuridae; Sarcophilus harrisii)
3.5 Small cats (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Carnivora: Feliformia: Felidae; 
Felis sylvestris catus)
3.6 Lesser bushbaby (Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: Lorisiformes: 
Galagidae; Galago senegalensis)
3.7 Philippine tarsier (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: Tarsiiformes: Tarsiidae; 
Tarsius syrichta)
4 Convergent structure and function: INFRARED “VISION” ([1] pit organs in snakes 
that detect infrared light, used for detecting heat from warm-blooded, endothermic prey 
animals even in total darkness; [2] infrared receptors in insects, used to detect forest ﬁ res)
Convergent lineages:
4.1 Pyrophyllic beetle (Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Mandibulata: 
Hexapoda: Coleptera: Buprestidae: Buprestinae; Melanophila acuminata)
4.2 Australian ﬁ re beetle (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Coleptera: Buprestidae: 
Chrysobothrinae; Merimna atrata)
4.3 Australian ﬂ at bug (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Heteroptera: Aradidae; 
Aradus albicornis)
4.4 Indian python (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: 
Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: Diapsida: Lepidosauromorpha: Squamata: 
Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: Serpentes: Boidae; Python molurus)
4.5 Timber rattlesnake (Lepidosauromorpha: Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: 
Anguimorpha: Serpentes: Viperidae: Crotalinae; Crotalus horridus)
5 Convergent structure and function: ELECTRIC-FIELD “VISION” (electroreceptive 
organs allowing the detection of moving prey by the electrical-ﬁ eld activity associated with 
muscle contractions)
Convergent lineages:
5.1 Cephalaspid osteostracans (Vertebrata: Osteostraci: Cephalaspidae; Hemicyclaspis 
murchisoni †Devonian)
5.2 Marbled electric ray (Vertebrata: Chondrichthyes: Elasmobranchii: Batoidea: 
Torpediniformes: Torpedinidae; Torpedo marmorata)

34 
Chapter 2
toads. These toads burrow into the ground during the day, and emerge 
to hunt at night. 
 In the lepidosaurian reptiles, the great majority of both lizards and 
snakes have eyes with round pupils. But among the lizards, we ﬁ nd 
vertical-slit pupils in the helmeted geckos (whose bizarre eyes are unique 
in many ways) and in all the nocturnal species of the gecko family. On 
opposite sides of the planet, the xantusid night lizards of North America 
and many species of the pygopodid legless lizards of Australia, like Bur-
ton ’ s legless lizard, have eyes with vertical-slit pupils. Among the snakes, 
the two deadliest snake groups have convergently evolved eyes with 
vertical-slit pupils: the boid constrictors and the venomous pit vipers. 
Both of these predator groups have also evolved infrared-sensitive pit 
organs, and are able to hunt warm-blooded animals in total darkness (a 
trait that we shall consider in more detail in a moment). 
 The advanced archosaurian reptiles, such as the crocodiles and 
alligators, are aquatic carnivores that have independently evolved eyes 
with vertical-slit pupils. Since the great majority of the archosaurian 
dinosaurs are extinct, we may never know what type of eyes they pos-
sessed. This fact does not prevent the makers of science ﬁ ction movies 
from usually portraying extinct theropod predators, such as the veloci-
raptors, with eyes with vertical-slit pupils. In this context, it is interesting 
to note that only one species of the modern avian dinosaurs has eyes 
with vertical-slit pupils: the black skimmer  Rhynchops niger  (Zusi and 
Bridge 1981). The many species of modern owls, which are avian noctur-
nal predators, all have eyes with round pupils. Zusi and Bridge (1981) 
Table 2.5
(continued)
5.3 Winter skate (Chondrichthyes: Elasmobranchii: Batoidea: Rajiformes: Rajidae; 
Raja ocellata)
5.4 Paciﬁ c stargazer (Vertebrata: Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Perciformes: 
Uranoscopidae; Astroscopus zephyreus)
5.5 Banded knifeﬁ sh (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Gymnotiformes: Gymnotidae; 
Gymnotus carapo)
5.6 Peters’ 
elephant-nose 
ﬁ sh 
(Actinopterygii: 
Teleostei: 
Osteoglossiformes: 
Mormyridae; Gnathonemus petersii)
5.7 African electric catﬁ sh (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Siluriformes: Malapteruridae; 
Malapterurus electricus)
5.8 Duckbill platypus (Osteichtyes: Sarcopterygii: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Synapsida: 
Therapsida: Mammalia: Monotremata: Ornithorhynchidae; Ornithorhynchus anatinus)
5.9 Australian echidna (Mammalia: Monotremata: Tachyglossidae; Tachyglossus 
aculeatus)
Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a †. For data sources, see text.

Convergent Animals 
35
suggest that the wide range of light intensities encountered by the black 
skimmer, which seeks prey during both the dark of night and brilliant 
daylight, led it to evolve vertical-slit pupils to protect its eyes during 
daylight ﬁ shing. 
 In the placental mammals, eyes with vertical-slit pupils are most char-
acteristic of the small cats, such as the European wildcat  Felis sylvestris 
or the North American bay lynx  Lynx rufus . All the large cats that hunt 
during daylight, such as the African lion  Panthera leo , have eyes with 
round pupils. However, eyes with vertical-slit pupils have been conver-
gently evolved within the canid predators as well, even though these 
animals are so unlike the cats in many ways. One example is the modern 
red fox,  Vulpes vulpes . The small foxes are in essence honorary cats, 
converging on a felid way of life. Many of the marine carnivores, such as 
the harp seal, have also evolved eyes with pupils that are round when 
the animal is hunting in the water, but that contract to vertical slits 
when in the air. Last, eyes with vertical-slit pupils have independently 
evolved within the primates themselves, and are present in the lorisiform 
nocturnal carnivore the slow loris,  Nycticebus coucang (Malmstr ö m and 
Kr ö ger 2006). 
 In summary, the vertical-slit pupil has repeatedly evolved in carnivores 
that are nocturnal, hunting at night, or crepuscular, hunting in the dim 
light of twilight or just before sunrise, as well as in those that hunt in 
environments that normally have low light intensities, as in many aquatic 
habitats. Malmstr ö m and Kr ö ger (2006) have argued that in animals with 
multifocal lenses, the slit-pupil system allows the full usage of the diam-
eter of the lens of the eye in bright light as well as in very low light 
intensities, with well-focused images at all light intensities. In contrast, 
the round-pupil system shades the peripheral zones of the lens of the 
eye as it is constricted, leading to the loss of well-focused images at 
wavelengths of light that are normally focused in those regions of the 
lens. Zusi and Bridge (1981) report that, in the eyes of small cats, the 
slit-pupil system allows a greater reduction in pupil size than is possible 
with a round-pupil sphincter system; this is particularly important to 
animals that have very large pupils when the pupillary opening is at its 
maximum dilation. Thus, for animals with large pupils, the slit-pupil 
system offers much better protection to the retina of the eye in bright 
light conditions than a round-pupil system. 
 The catch in the reasoning of these two studies is this: it does not 
matter how the slit in the slit-pupil system is oriented in order to obtain 
both of these superior-focus and retinal-protection advantages. That is, a 

36 
Chapter 2
horizontal-slit pupil would work just as well as a vertical-slit pupil. And 
indeed we shall see that many animals — both carnivores and herbi-
vores — have convergently evolved eyes with horizontal-slit pupils. Why, 
then, do we ﬁ nd the vertical-slit pupil only in carnivore eyes, and never 
in herbivores? The answer appears to involve the type of motion detec-
tion that is important to a predator. The vertical-slit-pupil system in the 
eye is particularly good at detecting motion in a horizontal plane. And 
since most prey animals are moving in a near-horizontal plane, parallel 
to the surface of the ground or to the sea ﬂ oor, predators with vertical-
slit pupils in their eyes have an advantage in spotting prey motion, even 
in very low light intensities. 
 Although the frogs and toads are carnivores, the great majority of frogs 
and toads have eyes with horizontal-slit pupils, not vertical. These include 
the true toads (bufonids), most of the true frogs (ranids), and most of 
the true tree frogs (hylids); see  table 2.5 . In these animals, the horizontal-
slit-pupil system is particularly good at detecting motion in a vertical 
plane. Because many of their prey species are ﬂ ying insects, which move 
in three dimensions off the surface of the Earth, the horizontal-slit 
pupils of toads and frogs give these predators an advantage in spotting 
ﬂ ying prey. Many also are diurnal predators, hunting during the daylight 
hours, as opposed to nocturnal or crepuscular predators. 
 Otherwise, the horizontal-slit pupil is rare in predators. The catlike 
Asian palm civet has convergently evolved horizontal-slit-pupil eyes, but 
its adaptive signiﬁ cance is open to question, as these animals hunt in a 
fashion similar to true cats, which have vertical-slit-pupil eyes. Curiously, 
eyes with horizontal-slit pupils have also convergently arisen in a few 
marine predators like the bottlenose dolphin and the octopus, animals 
with radically different evolutionary backgrounds but with similar eyes. 
As with the palm civets, it is unclear what selective advantage these eye 
systems may possess, if any, in the habitats frequented by the bottlenose 
dolphin and the octopus. 
 In addition to pupil type, the size of the eye itself is subject to conver-
gent evolution depending on the hunting behavior of the animal. Noc-
turnal predators have much larger eyes, relative to the size of their skulls, 
than diurnal predators. Within the avian clade, the diurnal-hunting hawk 
has small eyes, while the nocturnal-hunting owl has enormous eyes. 
Within the felid clade, the diurnal-hunting lion has small eyes, while the 
nocturnal-hunting small cats have enormous eyes. I have listed only a 
few notable examples of this convergent trait in   table 2.5 , as it is rife 
throughout the animal kingdom. What is not common among animals is 

Convergent Animals 
37
an extreme, but highly advantageous, form of nocturnal  “ vision ” : the 
ability to  “ see ” infrared light. 
 The evolution of infrared vision would obviously give a predator an 
extremely deadly advantage over warm-blooded, endothermic prey 
animals in that the predator would be able to detect the prey animal 
even in total darkness simply by detecting its body heat. Yet no predator 
has evolved eyes that are capable of seeing the infrared spectrum of light. 
It may well be that there are limits on the maximum wavelength of light 
that can be detected by the vertebrate eye (the same appears to be true 
for the compound eyes of the insects, as we shall see in a moment). In 
the classic work  On Growth and Form , Thompson (1942) suggested that 
there is a minimum size to the vertebrate eye, below which the eye simply 
cannot function given the wavelengths of visible light (around 400 nm 
to 700 nm for humans), and Purnell (1995) has marshaled evidence from 
divergent vertebrates that indicates this limit is in the range of 1.0 to 1.5 
millimeters in diameter. Thus, at the maximum end of the visible light 
spectrum, it may well be impossible to evolve an eye that can detect 
electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths greater than 800 nanome-
ters, the beginning of the infrared spectrum. 
 However, two convergent groups of snakes have evolved pit organs 
capable of detecting infrared radiation (  table 2.5 ). In the crotaline pit 
vipers, a heat-sensitive facial pit is located between the eye and the 
nostril on each side of the head. In boid constrictors, heat-sensitive pits 
are located in the lip scales. The sensory information from the pit organs 
is processed in the same region of the snake ’ s brain as the sensory infor-
mation from the eyes; thus, this may be the only way in which vertebrates 
may  “ see ” infrared light. This type of convergent  “ vision ” may also be 
attainable only by ectothermic predators, as an endothemic predator ’ s 
own body heat may overwhelm, and hence render useless, the heat-at-a-
distance detection ability of such an infrared-perception organ. Although 
at ﬁ rst glance the convergent evolution of infrared  “ vision ”  via heat-
sensitive facial pits in two separate groups of snakes is remarkable, the 
selective advantage of being able to detect endothermic prey in total 
darkness leads one to wonder why more ectothermic predators have not 
convergently evolved this capability. 
 There exists another group of animals that have evolved the capability 
of  “ seeing ”  infrared light — the bizarre pyrophilous beetles and ﬂ at 
bugs — but they also cannot detect infrared light with their compound 
eyes. Twice within the buprestid beetle family (Evans 1966; Schmitz 
et al. 2008) and once within the aradid ﬂ at bug family (Schmitz et al. 

38 
Chapter 2
2008), three groups of insects have convergently evolved specialized 
infrared-receptor organs (  table 2.5 ). These insects actually hunt for forest 
ﬁ res, seeking out burnt wood in order to feed on fast-growing postﬁ re 
fungi. As such, they are not strictly predators because their intended prey 
are fungi, not other animals. But, as the fungi are much more closely 
related to metazoans than either of these two groups are to the plants 
(see appendix of this book), I include them here. 
 The fact that both the camera-eyed vertebrates and the compound-
eyed arthropods independently evolved the capability of detecting infra-
red radiation — but not with their eyes — argues for functional constraint 
rather than developmental constraint in the absence of infrared vision 
in animals. Surely, if it were functionally possible, some group of animals 
with these very different types of eyes would have evolved a modiﬁ ed 
eye structure that could detect electromagnetic radiation with wave-
lengths greater than 800 nm in the past 600 million years of evolution. 
But could the absence of infrared vision also be considered a develop-
mental constraint peculiar to Earth-type life? In an interesting case of 
deep homology, it is now known that all animal eyes — both camera and 
compound — contain highly conserved transcription factor  Pax-6 gene 
homologs (a fact that we shall consider in more detail later in the 
chapter). Might some alien forms of life elsewhere in the universe, life 
forms that evolved eyes with a different genetic coding and totally dif-
ferent eye structure for detecting electromagnetic radiation, easily see 
long-wavelength light as well as short-wavelength light? We shall return 
to this question in chapter 7, when we consider the possibility that there 
might exist organic forms that function perfectly well, but that neverthe-
less cannot be developed by Earth life. 
 An even more exotic prey-detection system is the electric ﬁ shes ’ ability 
to  “ see ” an electric ﬁ eld itself, and not just electromagnetic radiation, in 
that the same regions of the brain that process visual information also 
process electrosensory information in these ﬁ sh (Bastian 1982; Moller 
1995). Seven different lineages of ﬁ sh have convergently evolved the 
capability of detecting an electric ﬁ eld ( table 2.5 ). These include two 
different groups of rays and skates in the cartilaginous ﬁ shes, four dif-
ferent groups of modern bony ﬁ shes, and one group of ancient agnathan 
ﬁ shes. This latter group, the cephalaspid osteostracans, is particularly 
interesting. These primitive jawless ﬁ shes possessed three sensory ﬁ elds 
on their bony head shields, two lateral and one on the top of the head. 
Thick bundles of nerves led from these sensory ﬁ elds back to the brain, 
but appear to have led to the auditory region of the brain (Stensi ö 1963) 

Convergent Animals 
39
rather than to the visual region. These ancient ﬁ shes therefore may have 
evolved the capability to  “ hear ” the static of an electric ﬁ eld, rather than 
 “ seeing ” the electric ﬁ eld. 
 Modern electric ﬁ shes are predators, and use their electroreceptive 
organs to locate moving prey by detecting the electric-ﬁ eld activity asso-
ciated with muscle contractions in the prey organisms. Many are able to 
 “ see ” the electric ﬁ eld of their prey even in total darkness, similar to the 
ability of the pit viper to  “ see ”  the infrared radiation emitted by endo-
thermic prey species in total darkness. For example, the African electric 
catﬁ sh is a voracious nocturnal predator, but in contrast to most noctur-
nal predators, it has very small eyes (even smaller than those of diurnal 
ﬁ shes). Instead of using visual detection to hunt its prey, it uses electro-
sensory detection. 
 Water is an excellent conductor of electricity, and seven groups of 
ﬁ shes have independently evolved the capability to detect an electric 
ﬁ eld in water. But these ﬁ shes are not alone: two separate groups of 
primitive monotreme mammals — the duckbill platypus and the Austra-
lian echidna — have also evolved the capability of detecting electric ﬁ elds 
(  table 2.5 ). The duckbill platypus is a semiaquatic predator capable of 
hunting in total darkness under water (Gregory et al. 1987; Proske and 
Gregory 2003); it has thus converged on the same hunting strategy used 
by the electric ﬁ shes. The Australian echidna is a land-dwelling animal, 
however, and electric ﬁ eld intensities in air are very weak compared to 
those that can be developed in water. The echidna uses the electrorecep-
tors on its beak to detect an electric ﬁ eld in the moist soil of its rainforest 
habitat, produced by moving earthworms (Manger et al. 1997). 
 Charles Darwin found the convergent evolution of electroreception in 
the electric ﬁ shes to be so unusual and so improbable that he included 
it in  On the Origin of Species  in his list of difﬁ culties for the theory of 
natural selection to explain:  “ The electric organs offer another and more 
serious difﬁ culty; for they occur in only about a dozen ﬁ shes, of which 
several are widely remote in their afﬁ nities. Generally when the same 
organ appears in several members of the same class, especially if in 
members having very different habits of life, we may attribute its pres-
ence to inheritance from a common ancestor; and its absence in some of 
the members to its loss through disuse or natural selection. But if the 
electric organs had been inherited from one ancient progenitor thus 
provided, we might have expected that all electric ﬁ shes would have been 
specially related to each other ” (Darwin 1859, 193). Today we know that 
the convergent distribution of electrosensory organs in ﬁ sh is much more 

40 
Chapter 2
widespread than Darwin realized, and that they have convergently 
appeared even in the mammals. Rather than posing a difﬁ culty for the 
theory of natural selection, the convergent evolution of electrosensory 
organs in distantly related animals is seen today as a prime example of 
functional constraint and the process of natural selection in action 
(Zakon and Unguez 1999, Hopkins 2008). 
 Many animals on Earth have developed the capability of detecting a 
magnetic ﬁ eld as well, but I know of no animal that uses this capability 
to locate prey (presumably because prey animals do not produce detect-
able magnetic ﬁ elds). Rather than hunting, animals use magnetosensory 
capabilities to orient themselves relative to the magnetic ﬁ eld of the 
Earth, particularly in migratory species. 
 In addition to electromagnetic waves, many carnivores can detect pres-
sure waves in water or air when locating prey. The possession of the 
tympanic-membrane system of hearing, or sound detection, in land 
animals is a trait that can be traced back to the early tetrapods in the 
Late Devonian and Carboniferous (more on the convergent evolution 
of this trait later in the chapter). However, tympanal hearing systems 
have been convergently modiﬁ ed in surprising ways by more derived 
tetrapod predators, particularly nocturnal predators. For example, as 
ﬂ ying nocturnal predators, owls need to be able to locate prey animals 
in all three spatial dimensions; otherwise, they might overshoot or under-
shoot the prey animal when they swoop down out of the sky. Norberg 
(1977) has argued that asymmetric ear systems for three-dimensional 
stereophonic hearing have been convergently evolved by at least ﬁ ve 
separate groups of owls, independently of one another (  table 2.6 ). In the 
tytonid owls, asymmetric ears have been independently evolved by 
species of the genus  Tyto  and the genus  Pholidus . In the strigid owls, 
asymmetric ears of similar structure are found in owl species in the 
genera  Bubo ,  Strix  (such as the Eurasian tawny owl,  S. aluco ), and 
 Ciccaba  (such as the mottled owl,  C. virgata ). Asymmetric ears of differ-
ent structure are found in strigid owl species of the genera  Asio ,  Rhinop-
tynx  (such as the striped owl,  R. clamator ), and  Pseudoscops  (such as the 
Jamaican owl,  P. grammicus ). Last, yet another group of strigid owls, 
consisting of species of the genus  Aegolius , have asymmetric ears that 
are different from the two other strigid owl groups.  
 An even more radical alteration of the hearing system occurs in 
animals that have essentially evolved an organic form of sonar (  table 
2.6 ). These animals can produce very high-pitched ultrasonic sound 
waves that are bounced off the surrounding environment — including 

Convergent Animals 
41
potential prey animals — and have ears that can hear the ultrasonic 
echoes, or return waves. Echolocation thus allows these animals not only 
to hunt prey animals by ultrasound but to safely locomote without sight. 
The most spectacular example of echolocation is that seen in bats ﬂ ying 
after insects in the dim light of an early summer evening (while we can 
still see them). Two separate groups of birds have also convergently 
evolved ultrasonic hearing and echolocation capabilities: the apodid 
swiftlets of the tropical Indo-Paciﬁ c and the steatornithid oilbirds of 
South America. The edible-nest swiftlets are crepuscular-to-nocturnal 
ﬂ ying insectivores that inhabit dark caves, and thus are ecological equiva-
lents to bats. Yet the swiftlet is an avian dinosaur, whereas the bat is a 
placental mammal. The closest common ancestor for the two is found 
back in the Carboniferous, over 340 million years ago, yet they have 
 Table 2.6 
 Convergent evolution of predator ear structures and auditory systems 
 1   Convergent structure and function: ASYMMETRIC EARS (allows three-dimensional 
stereophonic hearing — distance perception in both the vertical and horizontal plane — for 
precise prey location) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1   Barn owl (Archosauromorpha: Archosauria: Ornithodira: Dinosauria: Saurischia: 
Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Strigiformes: Tytonidae;  Tyto alba ) 
 1.2   Asian bay owl (Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Strigiformes: 
Tytonidae;  Phodilus badius ) 
 1.3   Great horned owl (Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: 
Strigiformes: Strigidae;  Bubo virginianus ) 
 1.4  Long-eared owl (Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: 
Strigiformes: Strigidae;  Asio otus ) 
 1.5   Boreal owl (Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Strigiformes: 
Strigidae;  Aegolius funereus ) 
 2  Convergent structure and function: ULTRASONIC HEARING ( “ sonar ” adaptation: 
three-dimensional depth perception by echolocation for precise prey location) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1   Edible-nest 
swiftlet 
(Amniota: 
Sauropsida: 
Diapsida: Archosauromorpha: 
Archosauria: Ornithodira: Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: 
Apodiformes: Apodidae;  Aerodramus fuciphagus ) 
 2.2  Oilbird (Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Caprimulgiformes: 
Steatornithidae;  Steatornis caripensis ) 
 2.3   Lesser hedgehog tenrec (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: 
Afrotheria: Afrosoricida: Tenrecidae;  Echinops telfairi ) 
 2.4   Eurasian shrew (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Eulipotyphles: Soricidae; 
 Sorex araneus ) 
 2.5   Mouse-eared 
bat 
(Eutheria: 
Laurasiatheria: 
Chiroptera: 
Microchiroptera: 
Vespertilionidae;  Myotis myotis ) 
 2.6   Bottlenose dolphin (Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Cetacea: Odontoceti: 
Delphinidae;  Tursiops truncatus ) 
 Note: For data sources see text. 

42 
Chapter 2
convergently evolved the ability to hear ultrasound. The South American 
oilbirds are included here as an anomaly — they have independently 
evolved echolocation, as they are birds that are nocturnal and inhabit 
caves, but they are frugivores, not carnivores. Thus, they do not use echo-
location to hunt. 
 Ground-dwelling organisms have also convergently evolved echoloca-
tion. Many of the fascinating little tenrecs of Madigascar, such as the 
lesser hedgehog tenrec, have evolved the capability to locate their insect 
prey using echolocation (Gould 1965). They produce very high-pitched 
squeaks and then analyze the pattern of the ultrasound echoes, a capabil-
ity that has been convergently evolved by species of two genera of 
insectivorous shrews:  Sorex  and  Blarina . Nevertheless, these two groups 
of mammals are very distantly related: the shrews are laurasiatherians, 
while the tenrecs are afrotherians. Last, ocean-dwelling animals have 
convergently evolved echolocation. The predaceous toothed cetaceans, 
such as the bottlenose dolphin, produce high-frequency clicks and 
can use the subsequent submarine echoes to echolocate as well as to 
detect prey. 
 Carnivores: Prey Capture 
 The possession of teeth in animals is a symplesiomorphic trait that can 
be traced back to the early gnathostomes in the Devonian, and the pos-
session of claws is a symplesiomorphic trait that can be traced back to 
the early tetrapods in the Carboniferous. However, both teeth and claws 
have been repeatedly, convergently, modiﬁ ed to produce highly efﬁ cient 
killing structures in animal predators. The most widely cited example of 
remarkable convergence in predator dentary evolution is the convergent 
modiﬁ cation of normally conical fang teeth into saber teeth in three 
separate groups of mammals in the Cenozoic (  table 2.7 ). Elongation of 
the fang teeth in creodont oxyaenid carnivores, such as  Machaeroides 
simpsoni , began during the Paleocene and is seen as a precursor to the 
evolution of saber-tooth predators in the placental mammals (Turner 
1997). The Creodonta are a sister lineage to the true Carnivora, and by 
the late Eocene the ﬁ rst saber-tooth predators evolve in the nimravids, 
or false cats, such as  Hoplophoneus mentalis . Saber-tooth nimravid pred-
ators persisted throughout the Oligocene, producing the lion-sized saber-
tooth  Barbourofelis fricki  in the Miocene (Turner 1997). The ﬁ rst true 
cats evolve in the Oligocene, and by the late Miocene are convergently 
producing saber-tooth species, culminating in the Pleistocene saber-tooth 

Convergent Animals 
43
great cat,  Smilodon fatalis . As such, it would appear that the evolution 
of saber-tooth predators in the nimravids and felids is an interesting, but 
hardly remarkable, case of parallel evolution in the Carnivora. Not so. 
During the same interval of time in which felid saber-tooth cats roamed 
North America, Europe, and Asia, the marsupial mammals of South 
America evolved a saber-tooth predator,  Thylacosmilus atrox , that is 
almost identical in morphology to  Smilodon fatalis  (Turner 1997, 136). 
Although we have to go back in time 100 million years or so, to the mid-
Cretaceous, to ﬁ nd a common ancestor between the placental and mar-
supial mammals, the two groups converged on the same predator 
morphology in the Pliocene and Pleistocene.  
 Elongated, saber-shaped teeth are an adaptation for producing shear-
ing bites, bites that can tear off whole chunks of prey ﬂ esh and that 
produce gaping wounds, leading to massive blood loss and shock in the 
prey animal. Shearing bites to the neck can rip out the entire neck of the 
prey animal below the cervical vertebrae, or a saber-tooth bite can crush 
and collapse the windpipe of large prey animals, quickly causing uncon-
sciousness due to oxygen deprivation (Turner 1997, 125). The extinction 
of the saber-tooth predators in the Pleistocene appears to be ecologically 
linked to the extinction of the large-prey species that formed their chief 
source of food. 
 The modern cats are well known for another highly derived trait: 
retractable claws. Most predators, like bears and wolves, have claws that 
can cause serious damage to a prey animal, but that are very dull com-
pared to the razor-sharp claws of the cat. The cat ’ s claws are usually 
retracted, and thus do not come into contact with the ground when they 
are walking; hence they are not dulled by constant wear and abrasion, 
like the claws of the dog. When the cat deploys its claws, its entire paw 
expands as the toe digits are extended, and the sickle-shaped claws may 
be used for either slashing the prey animal or clinging to it while the cat ’ s 
fang teeth are in use. 
 Interestingly, retractable claws were ﬁ rst evolved by the dinosaurs, not 
by the cats (  table 2.7 ). Both the dromaeosaurids and the troodontids 
evolved a retractable claw on the second digits of their hind feet. Like 
the cat ’ s claws, these claws were sickle-shaped and were retracted 
when not in use. The dromaeosaurids and troodontids were related mani-
raptoran theropods, but their retractable claws were independently 
evolved in parallel and differ in several aspects of their anatomy (Var-
ricchio 1997). A third example of convergent evolution of this trait is 
seen in the very plesiomorphic Late Cretaceous bird  Rahonavis ostromi , 

44 
Chapter 2
Table 2.7
Convergent evolution of predator killing structures
1 Convergent structure and function: SABER TEETH (fang teeth elongated and laterally 
ﬂ attened for shearing bites to produce gaping wounds)
Convergent lineages:
1.1 Marsupial 
saber-tooth 
“cat” 
(Mammalia: 
Marsupialia: 
Sparassodonta: 
Thylacosmilidae; Thylacosmilus atrox †Pliocene)
1.2 False saber-tooth “cat” (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Carnivora: Feliformia: 
Nimravidae; Barbourofelis fricki †Miocene)
1.3 True saber-tooth cat (Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Carnivora: Feliformia: Felidae; 
Smilodon fatalis †Pleistocene)
2 Convergent structure and function: RETRACTABLE CLAWS (protection of claws 
when not in use, enhances sharpness of sickle claws for ripping prey)
Convergent lineages:
2.1 Dromaeosaurs (Amniota: Sauropsida: Diapsida: Archosauromorpha: Archosauria: 
Ornithodira: Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Dromaeosauridae; 
Velociraptor mongoliensis †Cretaceous)
2.2 Troodontids (Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Troodontidae; 
Saurornithoides mongoliensis †Cretaceous)
2.3 Rahonaves (Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: incertae sedis; 
Rahonavis ostromi †Cretaceous)
2.4 Red-legged seriema (Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: 
Gruiformes: Cariamae: Cariamidae; Cariama cristata)
2.5 Nimravid “cats” (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: 
Laurasiatheria: Carnivora: Feliformia: Nimravidae; Hoplophoneus mentalis †Eocene)
2.6 True cats (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Carnivora: Feliformia: Felidae; 
Proailurus lemanensis †Oligocene)
2.7 Banded palm civet (Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Carnivora: Feliformia: Viverridae; 
Hemigalus derbyanus)
3 Convergent structure and function: RAPTORIAL BEAK (laterally compressed, hooked 
beak for piercing and tearing ﬂ esh)
Convergent lineages:
3.1 Common octopus (Bilateria: Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: Mollusca: Cephalopoda: 
Coleoidea: Octopodidae; Octopus vulgaris)
3.2 Snapping turtle (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: 
Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: Anapsida: Testudines: Chelydridae; Macroclemys 
temmincki)
3.3 Peregrine falcon (Sauropsida: Diapsida: Archosauromorpha: Archosauria: 
Ornithodira: Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Falconiformes: 
Falconidae; Falco peregrinus)
3.4 Red-tailed hawk (Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: 
Accipitriformes: Accipitridae; Buteo jamaicensis)
3.5 Secretary 
bird 
(Dinosauria: 
Saurischia: 
Theropoda: 
Maniraptora: 
Aves: 
Accipitriformes: Sagittaridae; Sagittarius serpentarius)
3.6 Osprey (Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Accipitriformes: 
Pandionidae; Pandion haliaetus)
3.7 Turkey 
vulture 
(Dinosauria: 
Saurischia: 
Theropoda: 
Maniraptora: 
Aves: 
Ciconiiformes: Cathartidae; Cathartes aura)
3.8 Great horned owl (Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: 
Strigiformes: Strigidae; Bubo virginianus)
3.9 Red-legged seriema (Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: 
Ralliformes: Cariamae: Cariamidae; Cariama cristata)

Convergent Animals 
45
Table 2.7
(continued)
4 Convergent structure and function: POISON-INJECTING FANGS (hollow fangs 
connected with poison glands for injection of poison into prey)
Convergent lineages:
4.1 Black widow spider (Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Cheliceriformes: 
Arachnida: Araneae: Theridiidae; Latrodectus mactans)
4.2 Amazonian giant centipede (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Myriapoda: Chilopoda: 
Scolopendridae; Scolopendra gigantea)
4.3 European ant lion larvae (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Neuroptera: 
Myrmeleontidae; Euroleon nostras)
4.4 Four-spotted owlﬂ y larvae (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Neuroptera: 
Ascalaphidae; Ululodes quadripunctatus)
4.5 Timber rattlesnake (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: 
Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: Diapsida: Lepidosauromorpha: Squamata: 
Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: Serpentes: Viperidae: Crotalinae; Crotalus 
horridus)
5 Convergent structure and function: POISONOUS STINGERS (stingers coated with 
poison or connected with poison glands for injection of poison into prey)
Convergent lineages:
5.1 Portuguese man-of-war (Metazoa: Cnidaria: Siphonophora: Physaliidae; Physalia 
physalis)
5.2 Striated cone-shell snails (Metazoa: Bilateria: Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: 
Mollusca: Gastropoda: Prosobranchiata: Neogastropoda: Conidae; Conus striatus)
5.3 Babylonian 
auger-shell 
snails 
(Mollusca: 
Gastropoda: 
Prosobranchiata: 
Neogastropoda: Terebridae; Terebra babylonia)
5.4 Giant desert hairy scorpion (Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Cheliceriformes: 
Arachnida: Scorpiones: Iuridae; Hadrurus arizonensis)
5.5 Giant cicada-killer wasp (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: 
Sphecidae; Sphecius speciosus)
5.6 Giant short-tailed stingray (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Chondrichthyes: 
Elasmobranchii: Batoidea: Dasyatidae; Dasyatis brevicaudata)
6 Convergent structure and function: ELECTRIC-FIELD GENERATION (generation 
of an electric ﬁ eld to stun or kill prey)
Convergent lineages:
6.1 Marbled electric ray (Vertebrata: Chondrichthyes: Elasmobranchii: Batoidea: 
Torpediniformes: Torpedinidae; Torpedo marmorata)
6.2 Paciﬁ c stargazer (Vertebrata: Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Perciformes: 
Uranoscopidae; Astroscopus zephyreus)
6.3 South American 
electric 
eel 
(Actinopterygii: Teleostei: 
Gymnotiformes: 
Electrophoridae; Electrophorus electricus)
6.4 African electric catﬁ sh (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Siluriformes: Malapteruridae; 
Malapterurus electricus)
Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a †. For data sources, see text.

46 
Chapter 2
which looked very similar to the Late Jurassic bird  Archaeopteryx 
lithographica  (it still possessed three ﬁ ngers with claws on its wing, 
and had caudal vertebrae along with tail feathers), but differed 
markedly in possessing retracted, enlarged sickle-shaped claws on the 
second digits of its feet. This last convergence has been questioned by 
some, who argue that  Rahonavis  was not a bird but a dromaeosaurid 
with wings, and thus conclude that its sickle claw was not a convergent 
character. That proposal, however, would require the convergent evolu-
tion of the wing within the maniraptors. And indeed, Mayr et al. (2005) 
have proposed that birds — winged maniraptors — independently evolved 
twice, although that conclusion remains controversial (Mayr and 
Peters 2006). 
 The dromaeosaurids, troodontids, and rahonaves did not survive the 
mass extinction at the end of the Cretaceous, but some of their living 
maniraptoran relatives — the seriema birds — have convergently evolved 
a retracted, sickle-shaped claw in the second digits of their feet that is 
eerily similar to that seen in the second hind digits of the troodontids. 
This convergent retracted sickle claw is well developed in the feet of the 
modern red-legged seriema,  Cariama cristata , of South America. The 
seriemas are long-legged, mostly terrestrial predators that are ecologi-
cally convergent with the secretary birds of Africa. Only two species of 
seriemas survive today, but these cariamaen birds are part of a long 
lineage of terrestrial avian predators that includes the Eocene  “ terror 
bird ”  Phorusrhacos longissimus , a ﬂ ightless raptor that stood almost 3 
meters tall. 
 Is the reappearance of the retracted sickle claw in the Cenozoic car-
iamaen birds an example of convergence due to functional or to devel-
opmental constraint? The number of ways a claw might be modiﬁ ed is 
limited, and a sickle claw serves a clear function. Yet why not develop 
the retracted sickle claw on the third digit, or the fourth digit, of the foot? 
Is there a developmental predisposition within the cariamaen birds to 
modify the second digit of the foot, like their ancient troodontid relatives, 
and not the third or fourth? Or does the sickle claw simply function best 
if it is placed in the second digit of the foot? 
 Within the placental mammals, fully retractable claws evolved in paral-
lel in three separate lineages during the Cenozoic: the nimravid false cats, 
the true cats, and the civets (  table 2.7 ). Not all of the civets have retract-
able claws and, of those that do, the number of digits on the foot that 
have retractable claws is variable from species to species. Thus, the 
pattern of convergent evolution of retractable claws in the civets is 

Convergent Animals 
47
strikingly different from the pattern seen in the troodontids and the 
cariamaen birds. On the other hand, the pattern of convergent evolution 
in the true cats and the nimravid false cats is identical — both groups 
developed fully retractable claws on all of their digits. 
 Not all predators have teeth like the sharks in the sea and the cats on 
the land. The cephalopods, such as the modern octopus, are ancient mol-
luscan predators that grasp their prey with multiple tentacles, and bite 
with a beak that is surprisingly similar in form to the raptorial beak seen 
in a hawk (  table 2.7 ). But because the cephalopods evolved in the Late 
Cambrian, some 340 million years before the evolution of the ﬁ rst avian 
dinosaurs in the Late Jurassic, it would be more correct to state that the 
hawks have beaks like the octopus rather than vice versa. Raptorial 
beaks appear to be a synapomorphy for the entire Cephalopoda, where 
the beaks seen in modern coleoid cephalopods are more similar to the 
extinct ammonites than to the modern living ectocochleate cephalopod 
 Nautilus pompilius . 
 Raptorial beaks have been convergently evolved by gnathostome ver-
tebrates that have secondarily lost an ancient characteristic trait of most 
jawed animals — their teeth. The raptorial beak is well developed in many 
types of turtles, themselves very ancient sauropsids, as seen in the modern 
snapping turtle. But the raptorial beak is most characteristically, and 
convergently, developed in a more derived group of sauropsids, the the-
ropod dinosaurs, as seen in the modern hawks ( table 2.7 ). 
 The accipitriform raptors include a very diverse group of bird species: 
hawks, eagles, kites, and Old World vultures (Accipitridae), the secretary 
birds (Sagittaridae), and the ospreys (Pandionidae). The hawks, eagles, 
and kites hunt on the wing, whereas the secretary birds are largely ter-
restrial hunters. The ospreys are specialized piscivores that catch ﬁ sh with 
the talons of their feet (the single species  Pandion haliaetus  is considered 
to be so different from the other accipitriform birds that it constitutes 
the entire family Pandionidae). And the Old World vultures are mostly 
scavengers instead of hunters. Although these birds differ greatly in their 
morphologies and ecologies, the raptorial beak may be a synapomorphy 
for the entire Accipitriformes, rather than three separate convergences 
in the three separate families of accipitriforms ( table 2.7 ). 
 The falconiform raptors, the falcons and caracaras, are more distantly 
related to the accipitriforms, and a more substantial argument may be 
made for the convergent development of the raptorial beak in this group. 
The New World vultures, such as the familiar turkey vulture in the skies 
of North America, are ciconiiform birds even more distantly related to 

48 
Chapter 2
the accipitriforms (and the ecologically convergent Old World vultures), 
and have convergently evolved the raptorial beak. The strigiform owls, 
specialized nocturnal predators, are more closely related to humming-
birds than they are to hawks (Lecointre and Le Guyader 2006), yet they 
too have convergently developed the raptorial beak. And last, the modern 
seriemas and their ancient  “ terror bird ”  cousins,  Phorusrhacos longissi-
mus , are basal neoavians very distantly related to all the other modern 
bird groups (Benton 2005), yet they too have convergently evolved the 
raptorial beak. In all, some ﬁ ve to seven different groups of raptorial 
birds have developed beaks convergent on those seen in the ancient 
turtles and cephalopods. 
 Some carnivores have evolved even more specialized structures for 
killing prey animals than the convergent teeth, claws, and beaks that we 
have considered so far. These animals have evolved fangs like hypoder-
mic needles: fangs that are capable of injecting poison directly into the 
body of the prey animal. Poison-injecting fangs have been independently 
evolved in widely separated groups of arthropods (  table 2.7 ). The most 
familiar to us are the spiders and the centipedes. These two predator 
groups are very distantly related; the spiders are cheliceriforms and the 
centipedes are mandibulates. Yet they have evolved very similar poison-
injecting fangs, as have the larvae of two additional groups of neurop-
teran hexapods: the ant lions and the owlﬂ ies. Although one might 
suppose that the development of such a specialized structure as a hypo-
dermic fang must surely be conﬁ ned to the arthropods and their exoskel-
etal mode of growth, this is not the case. The vertebrate snakes, such as 
the timber rattlesnakes and their pit viper kin, have convergently evolved 
hollow, poison-injecting fangs. 
 Other predators have taken a backward approach to poisoning their 
prey: rather than attacking with poisonous fangs on the front of their 
bodies, they use poisonous stingers located on the back of their bodies 
(  table 2.7 ). Of these, the most familiar to us are the scorpions and the 
wasps. Once again, although these two groups are both arthropods, they 
are very distantly related: the scorpions are cheliceriforms and the wasps 
are mandibulates. The wasps are a very highly diverse group of ﬂ ying 
predators, yet some have even devolved their wings and become ground 
dwellers. One particularly notable example is the velvet ant, also known 
as the cow killer ant, which is not an ant at all (as anyone who tries to 
pick one up will painfully discover). Just as with poison-injecting fangs, 
poisonous stingers are not conﬁ ned to the arthropods. The vertebrate 

Convergent Animals 
49
stingrays, a group of cartilaginous ﬁ shes, have also convergently evolved 
a poisonous stinger located on the rear of the animals. 
 Stingers are not conﬁ ned to the rear end of animals (  table 2.7 ). The 
cone-shell snails, voracious predators of other marine invertebrates, have 
a long tonguelike proboscis with tiny radulae, or teeth. Most snails use 
these barbed tongues to drill holes into the bodies of their prey, but the 
cone-shell snails have evolved radulae that can inject an extremely 
deadly neurotoxin. This poison is so deadly it can kill animals as large as 
humans, animals much larger than the snail can actually use as a food 
resource. A related group of snails, the auger-shell snails, have also 
evolved stinger tongues, but the venom they inject is not nearly as poi-
sonous as that of the cone-shell snails. 
 Stingers are also not conﬁ ned to highly derived, protostomous and 
deuterostomous bilaterian animals. Near the base of the metazoan phy-
logenetic tree, the cnidaria have evolved barbed, poisonous stingers that 
are contained in specialized explosive cells, the cnidocytes. The tentacles 
of the cnidarians are lined with cnidocytes, which project the stingers into 
the body of the prey animal, injecting a paralyzing poison. The cnidarian 
then contracts its tentacles to pull the prey to its mouth. Some cnidarians, 
like the Portuguese man-of-war jellyﬁ sh, are mobile predators of ﬁ sh and 
zooplankton, while others, such as the corals, are sessile predators that 
simply wait for prey animals to come within striking distance. 
 Perhaps the most exotic prey-capture capability has been indepen-
dently evolved by four of the groups of electric ﬁ shes: the ability to 
generate an electric ﬁ eld strong enough to stun, and some cases even kill, 
the prey animal (  table 2.7 ). These ﬁ shes have gone beyond the already 
unusual ability to detect an electric ﬁ eld in prey hunting that we consid-
ered previously (  table 2.5 ). For example, the freshwater electric eels and 
electric catﬁ sh can use their electric organs to discharge amplitudes 
between 300 to 600 volts, and the marine electric rays and stargazers 
discharge amplitudes between 15 to 50 volts (Moller 1995). The electric 
eels and electric catﬁ sh are thus in many cases able to directly kill their 
target frogs and ﬁ sh with an electric shock, while the electric rays and 
stargazers stun their prey into immobility or disorientation, and then 
proceed to attack. Interestingly, the electric catﬁ sh no longer possess the 
poisonous stingers on their ﬁ ns (a trait we shall consider in more detail 
later in the chapter) that are found in so many other groups of catﬁ sh —
 since they can directly use their electric-ﬁ eld generative ability to defend 
themselves, the stingers have been lost. 

50 
Chapter 2
 Herbivores: Plant Processing 
 Land plants cover extensive areas of the surface of the Earth; thus, 
life would at ﬁ rst glance seem to be much easier for a plant-eating her-
bivore than for a carnivore. That is, plant food is generally abundant, 
and plants cannot run away, as hunted prey can. The major problem 
for herbivores is that plant food is difﬁ cult to digest, and essential nutri-
ents are difﬁ cult to obtain in sufﬁ cient quantities from plants. For 
example, consider many plant seeds and grains. They are rich in nutrients, 
but they are also very hard, particularly when dried, and can crack your 
teeth if you try to chew them. Yet think of the common domestic chicken, 
 Gallus gallus , an animal that survives on a diet of seeds and grains but 
has no teeth. The chicken has evolved an alternative method of grinding 
up hard plant material — it has a gastric mill, or gizzard. The chicken 
actually deliberately swallows sharp stone fragments, which are then 
held in the muscular walls of its gizzard and are used to grind up seeds 
and grains. 
 Gastric mills have been convergently evolved by an astonishing variety 
of animals, from earthworms to mammals (  table 2.8 ). The gizzard of the 
domestic chicken is most familiar to us, and some consider it to be a 
delicacy. But gizzards are not just found in the galliform birds or just in 
herbivorous or granivorous birds. The gaviiform red-throated loon, 
 Gavia stellata , is more closely related to a penguin than a chicken, yet it 
also possesses a gastric mill that it uses to grind up the bones of frogs 
and the exoskeletons of crustaceans that form part of its diet. The plesio-
morphic paleognathaean ostrich,  Struthio camelus , a modern large ﬂ ight-
less bird, also possesses a gastric mill that it uses to grind the grasses, 
roots, and leaves that it normally eats, plus the occasional insect, lizard, 
or small mammal.  
 Curiously, we even have a fossil record for gastric mills. The sharp 
stones located within the gizzard are termed  “ gastroliths, ”  or stomach 
stones, and they become worn and rounded in a characteristic fashion 
with usage. Gastroliths are occasionally found within the skeletal remains 
of fossil birds and other animals, indicating that these animals possessed 
gastric mills in life. Thus, we know that the Cretaceous maniraptoran 
dinosaur  Caudipteryx zoui  had a gizzard — and it was not a bird, although 
closely related (note, however, that Marya n´ ska et al. [2002] consider the 
oviraptorosaurians to be secondarily ﬂ ightless birds, and so the gastric 
mill of  Caudipteryx zoui  may be an avian synapomorphy rather than 
convergent within the maniraptorans). 

Convergent Animals 
51
 From the fossil record, we know that gastric mills were convergently 
evolved by the second major branch of the saurischian dinosaurs, the 
herbivorous sauropodomorphs. Characteristic gastroliths have been 
found with the skeletal remains of plesiomorphic prosauropods, like 
 Plateosaurus engelhardti , of the Triassic and at the very base of the sau-
ropodomorph clade. Gastroliths are later found in the rib cages of giant 
herbivorous sauropod dinosaurs, like  Seismosaurus , that apparently 
swallowed all of their plant food whole and ground it up internally in 
their gastric mill (McIntosh 1997). As many as 50 polished gastroliths 
have been found in several psittacosaur skeletons, indicating that gastric 
mills were convergently evolved in the herbivorous ornithischian dino-
saurs as well (Sereno 1997). 
 Table 2.8 
 Convergent evolution of gastric mills in herbivores and other animals that require 
mechanical assistance to digestion 
 Convergent structure and function: GASTRIC MILLS (muscular gizzards with embedded 
stones or teeth for grinding/processing plant material) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1  Common European earthworm (Bilateria: Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: Annelida: 
Oligochaeta: Lumbricidae;  Lumbricus terrestris ) 
 2  Great pond snail (Lophotrochozoa: Mollusca: Gastropoda: Pulmonata: Lymnaeidae; 
 Lymnaea stagnalis ) 
 3   Priapulid worm (Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Introverta: Priapulida: Priapulidae; 
 Priapulus caudatus ) 
 4   Hermit crab (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Malacostraca: Decapoda: Paguridae; 
 Eupagurus bernhardus ) 
 5   Madagascar hissing cockroach (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Blattodea: 
Blattellidae;  Gromphadorhina portentosa ) 
 6   Striped mullet (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii: 
Perciformes: Mugilidae;  Mugil cephalus ) 
 7   American gizzard shad (Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii: Clupeiformes: Clupeidae; 
 Dorosoma cepedianum ) 
 8   Nile crocodile (Osteichtyes: Sarcopterygii: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: 
Diapsida: Archosauromorpha: Crurotarsi: Crocodylia: Crocodylidae;  Crocodylus 
niloticus ) 
 9   Sauropodomorph dinosaur (Archosauromorpha: Ornithodira: Dinosauria: Saurischia: 
Sauropodomorpha: Plateosauridae;  Plateosaurus engelhardi  † Triassic) 
 10   Caudipteryx 
oviraptor 
(Dinosauria: 
Saurischia: 
Theropoda: 
Maniraptora: 
Oviraptorosauria: Caudipterygidae;  Caudipteryx zoui  † Cretaceous) 
 11  Ostrich (Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Paleognathae: 
Struthionidae;  Struthio camelus ) 
 12  Psittacosaurid dinosaur (Dinosauria: Ornithischia: Cerapoda: Marginocephalia: 
Psittacosauridae;  Psittacosaurus mongoliensis  † Cretaceous) 
 13   Giant scaly anteater (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: 
Laurasiatheria: Pholidota: Manidae;  Manis gigantea ) 
     Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a  † . For data sources, see text. 

52 
Chapter 2
 Distant cousins to the dinosaurs, the modern crocodiles and alligators, 
have also evolved gastric mills, but not for grinding tough plant material 
or hard seeds. These animals are carnivores, but they swallow their food 
whole, including the prey ’ s very hard bones. The crocodiles thus have 
convergently evolved a gastric mill for the same reason, but not for the 
same food type, as the extinct sauropodomorphs. The bones of their prey 
are cracked and ground up by their gastric mills, and then sent onward 
to their very high-acid-content stomachs for further processing. 
 Gastric mills are not a convergent phenomenon to be found only in 
the archosaurian clade of tetrapods. Among the mammals, the giant scaly 
anteater has evolved a gastric mill to grind the carapaces of the ants that 
form the bulk of its diet. It actually has no teeth in its mouth and swal-
lows stones just as granivorous birds do, depending upon its gizzard to 
process the hard exoskeletons of its food. The gizzard of the giant scaly 
anteater contains an additional element to aid in its grinding function —
 stomach teeth. This gizzard innovation, too, has been convergently 
evolved at least twice in the arthropods. The stomatogastric systems of 
the decapod malacostracans contain gizzards with three hard, chitinous 
stomach teeth that assist in the grinding function of the gastric mill. 
Diverse decapods such as the red swamp crayﬁ sh,  Procambarus clarkii , 
a common freshwater dweller in streams of southeastern North America, 
and the familiar hermit crab,  Eupagurus bernhardus , all possess gizzards 
with teeth. Many of the hexapod insects, such as the spectacular Mada-
gascar hissing cockroach, have convergently evolved gizzards with chitin-
ous teeth similar to those found in the decapods. 
 Gastric mills have been convergently evolved in molluscs as well (  table 
2.8 ). Many snails, such as the great pond snail, deliberately ingest sand 
for their gizzards, and use these gizzards to process tough plant material. 
Even the earthworms have evolved gizzards to grind the detritus and 
plant fragments that form their diet. The peculiar priapulid worms in the 
oceans, more carnivores than detritivores, have also convergently evolved 
gizzards to grind up the carapaces of their prey, as well as ingested detri-
tus from sediment. The priapulid worms are ecdysozoans, more closely 
related to arthropods than to the lophotrochozoan annelid worms, yet 
the two distantly related groups of worms independently evolved similar 
gastric mills. 
 Last, gastric mills have been convergently evolved at least twice in the 
ﬁ shes. The striped mullet and the American gizzard shad both ingest sand 
for their gizzards, and use these gizzards to grind the small invertebrates 
and detritus that form their diets. The striped mullet is a perciform ﬁ sh 

Convergent Animals 
53
and the gizzard shad is a clupeiform ﬁ sh, and their gizzards are indepen-
dently evolved. 
 The alternative to grinding up plant material in an internal gizzard is 
to grind it up in the mouth itself. In the modern world, mammals are the 
undisputed masters of processing food in the mouth. The characteristic 
heterodont dentition of the mammals is a veritable toolbox, in that 
mammals have specialized teeth for slicing, piercing, shearing, crushing, 
and grinding. Moreover, these specialized teeth meet in a precise arrange-
ment when the jaws of the mammal are closed, an arrangement known 
as dental occlusion. Mammals represent an extreme in the development 
of dental occlusion, where the complex crowns of the molar teeth in the 
upper and lower jaw ﬁ t together in a precise mortar-and-pestle fashion, 
even to the extent of facilitating tooth wear on the crowns to produce 
wear facets resulting from tooth-to-tooth contact (DeMar and Bolt 1981; 
Benton 2005, 292). In particular, the mammals possess tribosphenic 
molars in which a cusp in the upper-jaw molar, the protocone, ﬁ ts into 
an opposing basin in the lower-jaw molar, the talonid (Benton 2005, 
307). These complex molars are capable of both shearing and grinding 
occlusal functions, and it was long thought that they were a unique 
autapomorphy of the therian clade of extinct and extant marsupial and 
placental mammals. However, we now know that an extinct group of 
australosphenid mammals, the Ausktribosphenida, convergently evolved 
the tribosphenic molar ( table 2.9 ). Luo et al. (2001) argue that the 
tribosphenic molar evolved vicariantly in the southern continent of 
Gondwana (as seen in  Ausktribosphenos nyktos ), and in the northern 
continent of Laurasia (as seen in marsupials and placentals) during the 
Cretaceous. In addition, yet another group of even more distantly related 
Jurassic mammals, the Shuotheriidae, evolved a reversed, or  “ pseudo-
tribosphenic, ”  molar in which the position of a pseudo-talonid basin is 
shifted from the posterior part of the molar to the anterior in order to 
receive the pseudo-protocone cusp (Luo et al. 2007). The functional end 
result is the same as that for the tribosphenic molar, and Luo et al. (2007) 
argue that early mammalian dental evolution may be much more itera-
tive and parallel than currently recognized.  
 Hunter and Jernvall (1995) point out that many of the more derived 
tribosphenic mammals have added an additional cusp, a hypocone, to the 
original three cusps found in the upper molar. They argue that the acqui-
sition of the hypocone is a key evolutionary adaptation for herbivory, 
and that it has been convergently evolved over twenty separate times 
within the tribosphenic mammals (see table 1 in Hunter and Jernvall 

54 
Chapter 2
 Table 2.9 
 Convergent evolution of teeth and dental systems in herbivores and other animals that 
require mechanical assistance to digestion 
 1  Convergent structure and function: TRIBOSPHENIC MOLARS (complex molars 
capable of both shearing and grinding occlusal functions) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1   Shuotheriid mammal (Mammalia: Yinotheria: Shuotheriidae;  Pseudotribos robustus 
 † Jurassic) 
 1.2  Ausktribosphenid mammal (Mammalia: Australosphenida: Ausktribosphenida: 
Ausktribosphenidae;  Ausktribosphenos nyktos  † Cretaceous) 
 1.3   Virginia opossum (Mammalia: Theria: Marsupialia: Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae; 
 Didelphis virginiana ) 
 2  Convergent structure and function: OCCLUSAL DENTITION (dentition capable of 
interlocking occlusion for crushing and chewing food) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1  Idiognathodontid conodont (Chordata: Craniata: Conodonta: Ozarkodinida: 
Idiognathodontidae;  Idiognathodus claviformis  † Carboniferous) 
 2.2  Queensland lungﬁ sh (Chordata: Vertebrata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: Dipnoi: 
Ceratodontidae;  Neoceratodus forsteri ) 
 2.3  Procolophonoid reptile (Sarcopterygii: Tetrapoda: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: 
Sauropsida: Anapsida: Procolophonoidea;  Procolophon trigoniceps  † Triassic) 
 2.4  Trilophosaurid reptile (Sauropsida: Diapsida: Archosauromorpha: Trilophosauridae; 
 Trilophosaurus buettneri  † Triassic) 
 2.5   Chimaerasuchid notosuchian (Archosauromorpha: Crurotarsi: Crocodylomorpha: 
Notosuchia: Chimaerasuchidae;  Chimaerasuchus paradoxus  † Cretaceous) 
 2.6   Pakasuchid notosuchian (Archosauromorpha: Crurotarsi: Corcodylomorpha: 
Notosuchia: Pakasuchidae;  Pakasuchus kapilimai  † Cretaceous) 
 2.7   Diademondontid cynodont (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Cynodontia: 
Diademodontidae;  Scalenodon angustifrons  † Triassic) 
 2.8  Traversodontid 
cynodont 
(Therapsida: 
Cynodontia: 
Traversodontidae; 
 Massetognathus pascuali  † Triassic) 
 2.9   Tritylodontid cynodont (Therapsida: Cynodontia: Tritylodontidae;  Kayentatherium 
wellesi  † Triassic) 
 2.10   Triassic mammal (Therapsida: Cynodontia: Mammalia:  Adelobasileus cromptoni 
 † Late Triassic) 
 3   Convergent structure and function: DENTAL BATTERIES (multiple rows of teeth in 
jaw to form a grinding/shearing surface for processing plant material) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 3.1  Hadrosaurid dinosaur (Archosauria: Ornithodira: Dinosauria: Ornithischia: 
Cerapoda: Ornithopoda: Hadrosauridae;  Parasaurolophus walkeri  † Cretaceous) 
 3.2   Ceratopsid dinosaur (Dinosauria: Ornithischia: Cerapoda: Marginocephalia: 
Ceratopsia: Ceratopsidae;  Chasmosaurus belli  † Cretaceous) 
     Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a  † . For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Animals 
55
1995). Jernvall (2000) argues that only small developmental changes are 
needed to produce major changes in cusp numbers and sizes in mam-
malian teeth, and that this explains the frequent convergent evolution of 
new cusps. 
 Just as the tribosphenic molar in mammals is convergent, dental occlu-
sion itself is not a unique trait of the mammals. In fact, mammals are 
only one of four separate groups of cynodont therapsids that conver-
gently evolved complex dental occlusion in the Triassic (  table 2.9 ). The 
tritylodontids, such as  Kayentatherium wellesi , are the closest relatives to 
the most ancient mammal known to us,  Adelobasileus cromptoni (Benton 
2005, 290), but they independently evolved dental occlusion. The traver-
sodontids are more distantly related, and the diademondontids even 
more so, yet they too independently evolved dental occlusion (Rowe 
1993; Martinez et al. 1996). Interestingly, all three of these cynodont 
groups were secondarily herbivorous, in that most of the cynodonts were 
carnivores or omnivores. Thus, in the Triassic, evolution produced four 
separate and different cynodont experiments in complex dental occlu-
sion and extensive food processing in the mouth, only one of which 
survives to the present day (the mammals). 
 Dental occlusion is also not a unique trait of the synapsid amniotes. 
The other branch of the amniote animals, the reptilian sauropsids, also 
evolved independent lineages of animals with at least partial dental 
occlusion. This is particularly interesting in that the sauropsids usually 
replace their teeth continually throughout life, whereas the mammals 
have only two sets of teeth — the early deciduous teeth, and the later set 
of permanent teeth. Occlusion is particularly difﬁ cult to maintain in a 
jaw that contains teeth of differing ages, and hence different shapes and 
positions, as is commonly the case in sauropsids. 
 Even so, the convergent evolution of dental occlusion has been 
reported in some extinct archosaurs and primitive sauropsids. Wu et al. 
(1995, 678) describe a Cretaceous notosuchian crocodylomorph from 
China,  Chimaerasuchus paradoxus , that has teeth  “ very similar to that of 
the postcanine teeth of tritylodontid synapsids and represents a particu-
larly striking example of convergent evolution. ”  This animal was second-
arily herbivorous, as most of the crocodile-like animals were carnivores, 
and thus also represents an ecological convergence to the tritylodontid 
cynodonts, which were also secondary herbivores. A second, indepen-
dent, evolution of molariform teeth and occlusal precision in Cretaceous 
notosuchians is reported from Tanzania for  Pakasuchus kapilimai ( table 
2.9 ). This species belongs to a separate notosuchian clade than the 

56 
Chapter 2
Chinese  Chimaerasuchus paradoxus , yet it also evolved molariform teeth 
 “ paralleling the level of occlusal complexity seen in mammals ” (O ’ Connor 
et al. 2010, 748). Noting that ancient mammals were rare on the southern 
supercontinent Gondwana in the Cretaceous, in contrast to the northern 
supercontinent Laurasia, O ’ Connor et al. (2010, 748) suggest that these 
 “ notosuchians probably ﬁ lled niches and inhabited ecomorphospaces 
that were otherwise occupied by mammals on northern continents. ”  (The 
phenomenon of ecological-niche convergence by other disparate phylo-
genetic lineages will be considered in detail in chapter 4.) Finally, the 
convergent evolution of  “ complex, multi-cusped, mammal-like teeth ” has 
also been reported in another Cretaceous crocodylomorph from Africa 
(Clark et al. 1989, 1064), and the evolution of dental occlusion has been 
reported in even more distantly related archosauromorph diapsids,  Trilo-
phosaurus buettneri  and  Tricuspisaurus thomasi  (Robinson 1956; DeMar 
and Bolt 1981), and in a procolophonoid anapsid (Carroll and Lindsay 
1985), all from the Triassic ( table 2.9 ). 
 Leaving terrestrial ecosystems, we ﬁ nd that occlusal dentition has only 
rarely been reported for aquatic animals. The Queensland lungﬁ sh devel-
ops a series of tooth plates within its mouth, which are cusped and which 
occlude to form a crushing surface that it uses to eat shelled invertebrates 
such as snails and prawns (Kemp 1977). Far back in time, the Carbonifer-
ous conodont  Idiognathodus claviformis  apparently crushed food with 
the complex, interpenetrative oral surfaces of its molariform Pa ele-
ments. These were toothlike structures reminiscent of gastric mill teeth 
in that, because the conodonts had no jaws, these element structures 
were located in the throat posterior to other teethlike elements near the 
opening of the mouth. Still, microwear patterns on their oral surfaces 
indicate that these conodonts  “ developed dental occlusion of mammal-
like complexity ” (Donoghue and Purnell 1999, 58). 
 In the end, mammals still remain the evolutionary masters of chewing 
efﬁ ciency. Or perhaps they are not? There exist two groups of herbivo-
rous dinosaurs that clearly rivaled — if not surpassed — the mammals in 
specialized masticatory adaptation. These were the hadrosaurids and the 
ceratopsids. Of all the sauropsids, only the ornithopod ornithischians 
were able to chew their food with the efﬁ ciency of a mammal, although 
they did so in a different fashion (Benton 2005, 207). The highly derived 
hadrosaurid ornithopods further increased their chewing efﬁ ciency by 
evolving multiple rows of teeth in each jaw, not just the normal one row. 
These multiple rows of teeth, known as dental batteries, contained 40 to 
60 teeth per battery, with the result that the typical hadrosaur contained 

Convergent Animals 
57
hundreds of teeth in its mouth. Moreover, the hadrosaurs continued to 
grow and replace teeth in the dental batteries throughout their lifespan 
(a plesiomorphic sauropsid feature), so a typical animal produced thou-
sands of teeth, replacing them constantly as the older teeth were worn 
down. The hadrosaurs have been argued to have been  “ Mesozoic ungu-
lates ”  (Carrano et al. 1999), ecologically and morphologically convergent 
on modern ungulate mammals (we shall consider ecological convergence 
in detail in chapter 4). Unlike the hadrosaurs, modern grazing ungulates 
that eat tough grass, like the horse or cow, have only one set of perma-
nent teeth. Because these teeth have very high crowns, they can last the 
lifetime of the animal, as the tooth is worn away progressively from the 
top down (Janis 1990). 
 Dental batteries are not unique to the hadrosaurs. The ceratopsid 
ornithischians also evolved multiple rows of teeth, but their dental bat-
teries are different in structure from those of the hadrosaurs. The sur-
faces of the ceratopsid dental batteries are more bladelike, rather than 
the rasplike batteries of the hadrosaurs, and were used more for shearing 
than for grinding. The ceratopsids are descendants of the psittacosaurs, 
animals that simply swallowed their food whole and processed it inter-
nally in a gastric mill (Sereno 1997). Thus, the peculiar evolution of 
multiple rows of teeth in the jaw occurred twice, independently, in the 
ornithischian dinosaurs ( table 2.9 ). 
 A major problem for herbivores is the digestion of cellulose. Some-
times mechanical crushing and shredding of cellulose is simply not suf-
ﬁ cient, and so chemical fermentation is used as an alternative digestive 
route. Multiple lineages of mammals have convergently evolved special-
ized digestive structures to house and protect anaerobic bacteria, and to 
allow these bacteria to ferment cellulose within the structures. Speciﬁ -
cally, two types of cellulose fermentation systems have evolved: stom-
achal-fermentation systems, in which specialized stomach compartments 
house the anaerobic bacteria, and cecal-fermentation systems, in which 
an intestinal cecum houses the anaerobic bacteria (Lecointre and Le 
Guyader 2006). Stomachal-fermentation systems have convergently 
arisen in three groups of cetartiodactyls — the ruminants, the camels, and 
the hippopotamuses — one group of primates — the colobus monkeys —
 and even in one type of herbivorous bird (  table 2.10 ). Lecointre and Le 
Guyader (2006) argue that the stomachal-fermentation system evolved 
independently and in parallel in the three cetartiodactyl groups, and that 
it is not a synapomorphy for these groups. The four-chambered stomachs 
of the many ruminant groups are quite different from those of the 

58 
Chapter 2
tylopod camels, guanocos, and their kin, and yet more different from the 
stomachs of the hippopotamuses. The colobus monkeys are primates, 
very different animals from the cetartiodactyls, yet they too have con-
vergently evolved a stomachal-fermentation system to deal with their 
exclusively leaf-eating herbivorous diet. And last, the peculiar hoatzin or 
 “ stink bird ”  is an avian dinosaur, very far removed from the clade of the 
mammals, yet it also has independently evolved a stomachal-fermenting 
system ( table 2.10 ).  
 The cecal-fermentation system also has been convergently evolved by 
a phylogenetically diverse group of mammals (  table 2.10 ): euarchonto-
glirean lagomorphs (rabbits, hares, and pikas), afrotherian hyracoids 
 Table 2.10 
 Convergent evolution of chemical digestive structures and systems in herbivores 
 1   Convergent structure and function: STOMACHAL-FERMENTATION SYSTEM 
(specialized stomach compartments house anaerobic bacteria for fermentation of cellulose 
in digestion) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1   Hoatzin (Amniota: Sauropsida: Diapsida: Archosauromorpha: Ornithodira: 
Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Aves: Opisthocomiformes: Opisthocomidae; 
 Opisthocomus hoatzin ) 
 1.2   Dromedary camel (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: 
Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Tylopoda: Camelidae;  Camelus dromedarius ) 
 1.3  Red deer (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Ruminantia: 
Cervidae;  Cervus elaphus ) 
 1.4   Hippopotamus (Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Hippopotamidae; 
 Hippopotamus amphibius ) 
 1.5   Western red colobus monkey (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: Cercopithecidae; 
 Colobus badius ) 
 2   Convergent structure and function: CECAL-FERMENTATION SYSTEM (intestinal 
cecum houses anaerobic bacteria for fermentation of cellulose in digestion) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1   Yellow-spotted hyrax (Mammalia: Eutheria: Afrotheria: Hyracoidea: Procaviidae; 
 Heterohyrax brucei ) 
 2.2  Mountain zebra (Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Perissodactyla: Equidae;  Equus zebra ) 
 2.3  European rabbit (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Lagomorpha: Leporidae;  Oryctolagus 
cuniculus ) 
 3  Convergent structure and function: RUMINANT-STOMACH SYSTEM (multiple-
stomach food processing to allow delayed mastication, thus decreasing actual feeding time 
and predator exposure) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 3.1   Red kangaroo (Mammalia: Marsupialia: Diprotodontia: Macropodidae;  Macropus 
rufus ) 
 3.2  Red deer (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Ruminantia: 
Cervidae;  Cervus elaphus ) 
 3.3   Dromedary camel (Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Tylopoda: Camelidae; 
 Camelus dromedarius ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Animals 
59
(hyraxes), and laurasiatherian perissodactyls (horses, rhinos, and tapirs). 
The lagomorphs are particularly interesting in that they recycle the cel-
lulose-rich part of their diet: the food passes ﬁ rst through the cecum, 
where the bacteria degrade the cellulose and the cecum absorbs the 
released nutrients, leaving behind a soft fecal pellet enriched in vitamins 
and bacteria. These soft pellets are defecated, reswallowed, and redi-
gested by the rabbit, so that the pellet ’ s vitamins are absorbed and the 
symbiotic bacteria are digested as food. This peculiar digestive process, 
termed  “ caecotrophy ”  (Lecointre and Le Guyader 2006, 438), is conver-
gent — at least in its digestive effects — on the regurgitation and rediges-
tion process used by the ruminant cetartiodactyls. 
 Rumination has been convergently evolved by three separate groups 
of mammals (  table 2.10 ): twice independently in two groups of placental 
cetartiodactyls (ruminants and camels), and a third time in the very 
distantly related marsupial mammals, the kangaroos (Lecointre and Le 
Guyader 2006, 469). Ruminants minimize feeding time and predator 
exposure by eating their food rapidly, and thus usually chew it poorly. 
Later, in more protected settings, the partially digested food is regurgi-
tated, remasticated, and reswallowed for further digestive processing. 
 Before moving on to consider convergent antipredator adaptations, let 
us consider the pattern of evolution of one last feeding structure: animal 
beaks. We are all familiar with the distinctive beaks of modern ducks and 
parrots. Parrots use their pincerlike, hooked beaks to manipulate, crack 
open, and extract food from seeds and nuts. Ducks use their ﬂ attened 
beaks to ﬁ lter food material from water. Both of these modern animals 
are highly derived theropod dinosaurs. In the Cretaceous another group 
of dinosaurs, the psittacosaurs and their ceratopsian descendants, inde-
pendently evolved beaks that are astonishingly similar to parrot beaks, 
yet these dinosaurs were highly derived marginocephalian ornithischi-
ans, not theropods (  table 2.11 ). Analyses of tooth wear in a recently 
discovered, exceptionally well-preserved psittacosaur from Mongolia 
has led Sereno et al. (2009) to the conclusion that the diet of this 
psittacosaur was identical to that of a parrot, that is, it was a  “ nucivore ”  
(nut eater).  
 The closest common ancestor for these two groups of animals (psit-
tacosaurs and parrots) lived over 240 million years ago, in the Middle 
Triassic. In the Triassic there existed another group of animals that con-
vergently evolved parrotlike beaks, the rhynchosaurid reptiles. Parrotlike 
beaks are not conﬁ ned to the sauropsid amniotes, however, as in the 
Permian a group of dicynodontid therapsids in the synapsid amniote 

60 
Chapter 2
lineage also independently evolved parrotlike beaks. All of these animals 
were herbivorous. 
 There are no living synapsids that still possess parrotlike beaks, but 
there are some that possess beaks that are identical to those of ducks —
 the duckbill platypuses (  table 2.11 ). As occurred with parrot beaks, a 
group of distantly related ornithischian dinosaurs, the hadrosaurs, inde-
pendently evolved beaks like those of theropod ducks. Mechanically, the 
mammalian platypus uses its beak exactly as a duck does, ﬁ ltering small 
aquatic animals out of the water with the transverse ridges of its beak, 
ridges that are similar to the teethlike serrations of the duck ’ s beak. The 
hadrosaurs, however, were not aquatic animals. Their beak usage was 
probably more like that of modern geese, which use their ducklike beaks 
to crop grass and other plant material. 
 Defense: Antipredator Adaptations 
 Many of the same structures that predators use to kill prey can also be 
used to defend themselves from other predators. In this section of the 
chapter, I will concentrate on the convergent evolution of structures and 
 Table 2.11 
 Convergent evolution of parrot and duck beaks 
 1  Convergent structure and function: PARROT BEAK (laterally ﬂ attened, dorsoventrally 
ﬂ ared, pincerlike hooked beak for holding, cracking open, and extracting food from seeds 
and nuts) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1  Rhynchosaurid reptile (Amniota: Sauropsida: Diapsida: Archosauromorpha: 
Rhynchosauria: Rhynchosauridae;  Hyperodapedon gordoni  † Triassic) 
 1.2  Scarlet macaw (Archosauromorpha: Archosauria: Ornithodira: Dinosauria: 
Saurischia: Therapoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Psittaciformes: Psittacidae;  Ara macao ) 
 1.3  Psittacosaurid dinosaur (Dinosauria: Ornithischia: Cerapoda: Marginocephalia: 
Psittacosauridae;  Psittacosaurus mongoliensis  † Cretaceous) 
 1.4   Dicynodontid 
therapsid 
(Amniota: 
Synapsida: 
Therapsida: 
Dicynodontia: 
Dicynodontidae;  Pristerodon mackayi  † Permian) 
 2   Convergent structure and function: DUCK BEAK (dorsoventrally ﬂ attened, laterally 
ﬂ ared, horn beak for ﬁ ltering food from water) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1  Wood duck (Amniota: Sauropsida: Diapsida: Archosauromorpha: Ornithodira: 
Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Anseriformes: Anatidae;  Aix 
sponsa ) 
 2.2   Hadrosaurid dinosaur (Dinosauria: Ornithischia: Cerapoda: Ornithopoda: 
Hadrosauridae;  Anatotitan copei  † Cretaceous) 
 2.3  Duckbill platypus (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Monotremata: 
Ornithorhynchidae;  Ornithorhynchus anatinus ) 
     Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a  † . For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Animals 
61
systems that are primarily for defense. Although a few predators have 
evolved eyes with horizontal-slit pupils (as we have previously discussed), 
eyes of this type are very widespread in herbivores. Most familiar, 
perhaps, are the odd-looking eyes of domestic goats, although the same 
type of eye is present in sheep, cows, deer, elks, hippopotamuses, and so 
on. It is a near universal trait of the cetartiodactyl mammals. However, 
horses and their kin also have eyes with horizontal-slit pupils; thus, this 
characteristic has clearly evolved independently in the perissodactyl 
mammals. A third group of mammals, the afrotherian manatees, have 
convergently evolved the horizontal-slit pupil in the eye as well (  table 
2.12 ). In all cases, this type of eye is used by herbivores for predator 
detection at a distance, in all directions, and thus for predator 
avoidance.  
 A typical herbivore strategy of predator avoidance is simply to run 
away — as fast as possible. The evolution of fast running has anatomical 
consequences, a functional constraint that leads directly to convergent 
evolution. Bakker (1983) has demonstrated that six morphological 
 Table 2.12 
 Convergent evolution of herbivore predator-avoidance systems 
 1   Convergent structure and function: HORIZONTAL-SLIT PUPILS IN EYES (allows 
[1] full usage of the diameter of the lens of the eye in bright light as well as in very low 
light intensities, with well-focused images in all light intensities, and [2] in combination with 
near 360-degree vision, continuous viewing of almost total horizon for predator detection 
in all light intensities) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1   African manatee (Mammalia: Eutheria: Afrotheria: Sirenia: Trichechidae;  Trichechus 
senegalensis ) 
 1.2   Mountain zebra (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Perissodactyla: Equidae; 
 Equus zebra ) 
 1.3   Domestic goat (Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Ruminantia: Bovidae; 
 Capra aegagrus ) 
 2   Convergent structure and function: DIGIT-NUMBER REDUCTION (reduction of 
muscle mass in the distal parts of limbs, elongation of the bones in the feet, loss of digits 
in the foot, and the aquisition of hooves to protect the digits from shock in running, to 
produce fast-running spindly-limbed animals) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1   Modern horse (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Perissodactyla: Equidae; 
 Equus caballus ) 
 2.2  Litoptern 
 “ horse ” 
(Eutheria: 
Laurasiatheria: 
Meridiungulata: 
Litopterna: 
Proterotheriidae;  Thoatherium minusculum  † Miocene) 
 2.3  Red deer (Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Ruminantia: Cervidae;  Cervus 
elaphus ) 
 2.4   Guanaco (Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Tylopoda: Camelidae;  Lama 
guanicoe ) 
     Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a  † . For data sources, see text. 

62 
Chapter 2
transitions occur in the evolution of fast runners from slow, and that 
these morphological changes have repeatedly occurred in distantly 
related animal groups that convergently evolved fast runners. These 
evolutionary changes involve lengthening and attenuation of the distal 
bone shafts in the limbs while the proximal bones of the limbs become 
shorter, lengthening and attenuation of the metapodial bones in the feet 
as the animals locomote ﬁ rst on their toes and then on the tips of their 
toes, shortening of the phalangeal bones in the foot, and transformation 
of claws into hooves to protect the ends of the toes from shock and 
damage while running. Last, the number of hoofed toes in the foot are 
reduced, leading in some cases to the animal standing upon a single 
hoofed toe. The spindly legs of red deer are a familiar example of this 
morphological transition: the upper bone of the hind limb (femur) is 
short and surrounded by a compact mass of muscle (which controls the 
limb) held next to the body of the deer, the lower limb bone shafts (tibia 
and ﬁ bula) are elongated away from the deer ’ s body and contain much 
less muscle mass, the foot is enormously elongated into a thin shaft of 
very low mass, and the animal stands on the tips of only two hoofed toes. 
This form of limb, so common in many ruminant cetartiodactyls, has been 
independently evolved in the tylopod cetartiodactyls as well, even to the 
extent of reduction of the number of digits in the foot to two (  table 2.12 ). 
The more distantly related perissodactyls have not only independently 
evolved the same type of running limb but have further reduced the 
number of hoofed digits in the foot to one, as is seen in the modern horse. 
In the Miocene, a group of distantly related South American meridiun-
gulates convergently evolved limbs like those seen in modern horses. The 
ancient one-toed litopterns that ran across the plains of South America 
looked like horses, but were not ( table 2.12 ). 
 Another antipredator adaptation is to acquire armor. An armored 
body can be of the passive, tanklike form or the actively offensive, spine 
armor form. Very distantly related animals have repeatedly evolved 
tanklike body armor: the saurposid turtles, the dinosaurian ankylosaurs, 
and the mammalian glyptodonts, armadillos, and pangolins (  table 2.13 ). 
When confronted by a predator, these animals retreat within their armor 
and passively wait until the predator gives up trying to attack them and 
moves on to more vulnerable prey. The morphological convergence 
between the Cretaceous ankylosaurid dinosaurs and the Pleistocene 
glyptodontid mammals is astonishing — not just in the similarity of the 
body armor, but even down to the offensive club located at the ends of 
their tails, which these animals used to strike out at a predator while 

Convergent Animals 
63
 Table 2.13 
 Convergent evolution of body armor in animals 
 1   Convergent structure and function: TANKLIKE BODY ARMOR (shell of rigid to 
semirigid plates that enclose soft body tissues for defense against predators) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1  Eastern box turtle (Amniota: Sauropsida: Anapsida: Testudines: Emydidae; 
 Terrapene carolina ) 
 1.2   Ankylosaur (Diapsida: Archosauromorpha: Ornithodira: Dinosauria: Ornithischia: 
Thyreophora: Ankylosauridae;  Ankylosaurus magniventris  † Cretaceous) 
 1.3   Glyptodont (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: Xenarthra: 
Cingulata: Glyptodontidae;  Doedicurus clavicaudatus  † Pleistocene) 
 1.4   Nine-banded armadillo (Mammalia: Eutheria: Xenarthra: Dasypodidae;  Dasypus 
novemcinctus ) 
 1.5   Giant scaly anteater (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Pholidota: Manidae; 
 Manis gigantea ) 
 2   Convergent structure and function: SPINOSE BODY ARMOR (external covering of 
sharp spines that enclose soft body tissues for defense against predators) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1   Australian echidna (Mammalia: Monotremata: Tachyglossidae;  Tachyglossus 
 aculeatus ) 
 2.2   Greater hedgehog tenrec (Mammalia: Eutheria: Afrotheria: Afrosoricida: 
Tenrecidae;  Setifer setosus ) 
 2.3   European hedgehog (Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Eulipotyphles: Erinaceidae; 
 Erinaceus europaeus ) 
 2.4  North American porcupine (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: Caviomorpha: 
Erethizontidae;  Erethizon dorsatum ) 
 2.5   Crested porcupine (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: Hystricomorpha: 
Hystricidae;  Hystrix cristata ) 
 3   Convergent structure and function: CHEMICAL BODY ARMOR (poison concentrated 
in skin or body tissues for defense against predators) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 3.1   Mamor nudibranch snail (Bilateria: Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: Mollusca: 
Gastropoda: 
Opisthobranchia: 
Nudibranchia: 
Dendrodorididae; 
 Dendrodoris 
grandiﬂ ora ) 
 3.2  Monarch butterﬂ y (Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: 
Lepidoptera: Danaidae;  Dananus plexippus ) 
 3.3   Margined blister beetle (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Coleoptera: 
Meloidae;  Epicauta pestifera ) 
 3.4  Pyralis ﬁ reﬂ y (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Coleoptera: Lampyridae; 
 Photinus pyralis ) 
 3.5  Puffer ﬁ sh (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Actinoptergyii: 
Tetraodontiformes: Tetraodontidae;  Takifugu vermicularis ) 
 3.6  Bumblebee 
poison-arrow 
frog 
(Osteichtyes: 
Sarcopterygii: 
Tetrapoda: 
Batrachomorpha: Lissamphibia: Batrachia: Anura: Dendrobatidae;  Dendrobates 
leucomelas ) 
 3.7   Fire salamander (Lissamphibia: Batrachia: Urodela: Salamandridae;  Salamandra 
salamandra ) 
 3.8  Crested auklet (Tetrapoda: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: Diapsida: 
Archosauromorpha: Ornithodira: Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: 
Aves: Charadriiformes: Alcidae;  Aethia cristatella ) 
 3.9   Hooded pitohui (Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: 
Passeriformes: Pachycephalidae;  Pitohui dichrous ) 
     Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a  † . For data sources, see text. 

64 
Chapter 2
crouched down under their armor. Both creatures had to live with deadly 
predators — the ankylosaurids were preyed upon by the tyrannosaurs, 
and the glyptodontids had to deal with saber-tooth cats — and they 
evolved the same morphological solution, even though they are vastly 
different animals.  
 Besides passively protecting the bearer, spinose body armor also 
presents the danger of injury to the predator. Animals bristling with 
sharp spines have repeated evolved in widely separated lineages — 
monotreme echidnas, laurasiatherian hedgehogs, and afrotherian 
tenrec  “ hedgehogs ” — and twice independently have evolved among the 
rodents — the North American porcupines and the African porcupines 
( table 2.13 ). 
 A third type of body armor is not mechanical but chemical. Animals 
with chemical defenses are also some of the prettiest, most colorful, and 
most deadly in nature (  table 2.13 ). Their brightly colored bodies are a 
visible warning to predators that their body tissues are loaded with 
poison. In the oceans, the wildly colorful nudibranch snails not only 
manufacture their own poison, such as sesquiterpene toxin (Cimino et 
al. 1985), but can store and concentrate poisons found in their environ-
ment. The bizarre puffer ﬁ sh have deadly tetrodotoxin in their skin and 
organs; if eaten, the predator swiftly dies. 
 On land, diverse arthropods such as pretty orange-and-black monarch 
butterﬂ ies store and accumulate cardenolide poison from the milkweeds 
on which they feed (we shall consider poisonous plants in detail in the 
next chapter); blister beetles can burn with cantharidin toxin if eaten; 
and brilliant ﬂ ashing ﬁ reﬂ ies contain lucibufagin poison — and insecti-
vores avoid them all (Agosta 1996). In the amphibians, the beautifully 
colored poison-arrow frogs are deadly, and toxin from their skin has been 
used by humans to poison the tips of arrows (hence their name). Fire 
salamanders have independently evolved poison glands along the tops 
of their backs. Even a few birds have convergently evolved chemical 
body armor; the skin and feathers of the hooded pitohui are poisonous 
(Agosta 1996), and the crested auklet secretes antiectoparasite toxins 
(Douglas et al. 2005), creating its own mosquito repellant. 
 A last line of antipredator defense is to ﬁ ght back. In the seas, ﬁ ve 
different groups of bony ﬁ shes have evolved poisonous stinger spines for 
defense (  table 2.14 ). The scorpion ﬁ shes are diverse and deadly: some 
are very pretty, like the red lionﬁ sh that is popular in aquariums even 
though it is dangerous; others are nondescript and cryptic, like the stone-
ﬁ sh  Synanceia horrida , which can kill a human if inadvertently stepped 

Convergent Animals 
65
 Table 2.14 
 Convergent evolution of specialized defensive structures in animals 
 1   Convergent structure and function: STINGER SPINES (poison-bearing spines for 
defensive use against predators) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1  Red 
lionﬁ sh 
(Osteichthyes: 
Actinopterygii: 
Teleostei: 
Scorpaeniformes: 
Scorpaenidae;  Pterois volitans ) 
 1.2  Weever ﬁ sh (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Perciformes: Trachinidae;  Trachinus vipera ) 
 1.3  Coral rabbitﬁ sh (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Perciformes: Siganidae;  Siganus 
corallinus ) 
 1.4  Poison toadﬁ sh (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Batrachoidiformes: Batrachoididae; 
 Thalassophryne megalops ) 
 1.5  Striped eel catﬁ sh (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Siluriformes: Plotosidae;  Plotosus 
lineatus ) 
 1.6   Duckbill platypus (Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: Tetrapoda: Reptiliomorpha: 
Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Monotremata: Ornithorhynchidae; 
 Ornithorhynchus anatinus ) 
 2   Convergent structure and function: STINGERS (poison stingers for defensive use 
against predators) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1   Honeybee (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: Apidae;  Apis 
mellifera ) 
 2.2   Fire ant (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: Formicidae; 
 Solenopsis geminata ) 
 2.3   Long-horned 
beetle 
(Arthropoda: 
Mandibulata: 
Hexapoda: 
Coleoptera: 
Cerambycidae;  Onychocerus albitarsis ) 
 3  Convergent structure and function: CHEMICAL SPRAY (poisonous chemical sprays 
for defensive use against predators) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 3.1   Common millipede (Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Mandibulata: 
Myriapoda: Diplopoda: Spirobolidae;  Narceus annularis ) 
 3.2   Flat-backed millipede (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Myriapoda: Diplopoda: 
Polydesmidae;  Polydesmus angustus ) 
 3.3   Neotropical arboreal termite (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Isoptera: 
Termitidae;  Nasutitermes corniger ) 
 3.4   Bombardier beetle (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Coleoptera: Carabidae; 
 Brachinus explodens ) 
 3.5   Green stinkbug (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hemiptera: Pentatomidae; 
 Acrosternum hilare ) 
 3.6   Striped skunk (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: 
Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: 
Carnivora: Mephitidae;  Mephitis mephitis ) 
 3.7   European polecat (Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Carnivora: Mustelidae;  Mustela 
putorius ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

66 
Chapter 2
on. The weever ﬁ shes, rabbitﬁ shes, toadﬁ shes, and catﬁ shes have all con-
vergently evolved this line of defense — as has the duckbill platypus on 
land, with stinger spurs on its hind feet.  
 We have previously considered predators that sting; three groups of 
arthropods have convergently evolved stingers for defense. These are the 
bees, some ants, and some long-horned beetles (  table 2.14 ). The social 
bees in particular will defend their nests by stinging, which is an act of 
self-sacriﬁ ce as the bee dies afterward. Most ants bite to defend their 
nests, but a few have independently modiﬁ ed their ovipositors to produce 
stingers, in parallel evolution with their relatives the bees. The long-
horned beetle  Onychocerus albitarsis  has evolved hypodermic antennae; 
that is, it uses its antennae as stingers with  “ a delivery system almost 
identical to that found in the stinger of a deadly buthid scorpion ”  (Berkov 
et al. 2008, 257). 
 Rather than use a stinger, which requires close contact with the preda-
tor, other animals have convergently evolved systems to spray poisonous 
chemicals at the predator from a distance (  table 2.14 ). In the mammals, 
the New World skunks and Old World polecats are legendary as well as 
interesting, in that most mammals do not use chemical defenses. In the 
arthropods, the bombardier beetle is most famous because it not only 
sprays noxious liquids with quinone (Agosta 1996) but heats the liquid 
to boiling before spraying. The common millipede also will spray quinone 
if disturbed, whereas the polydesmid millipedes spray deadly hydrogen 
cyanide. 
 Why is chemical defense so rare in terrestrial mammals and birds, 
but so common in terrestrial panarthropods and amphibians? From the 
perspective of theoretical morphology, one can easily visualize a non-
existent poison-skinned mouse or sparrow, convergent on a poison-
arrow frog, that has evolved a chemical defense to deter a cat or hawk 
predator. Yet the poison-arrow frog exists, whereas the poison-skinned 
mouse or sparrow does not. Does a developmental constraint exist 
for the generation and maintenance of skin poisons in endothermic 
animals? Or is the constraint functional, in that other forms of defense, 
perhaps less metabolically costly and complicated, are adequate in endo-
thermic animals? 
 Organ Systems 
 We have previously considered the convergent evolution of pupil shapes 
in the eyes of carnivores (  table 2.5 ) and herbivores (  table 2.12 ). But what 

Convergent Animals 
67
about the eye itself? In the classic study of the convergent evolution of 
the eye, Salvini-Plawen and Mayr (1977) presented evidence for the 
deﬁ nite independent evolution of light-detection organs in 40 separate 
animal lineages, and the probable independent origination of light-
detection organs in 20 additional lineages, bringing the total to 60 sepa-
rate convergences. They also document the convergent evolution of the 
process of eye evolution itself: from single photoreceptor cells scattered 
across the body of an animal, to distinct aggregations of photoreceptor 
cells into eyespots, to ocellar pits, to ocellar cups, to simple eyes, and to 
complex compound and camera eyes. This same evolutionary sequence 
can be observed in multiple independent lineages of animals. 
 In   table 2.15  I have conservatively taken the 40 deﬁ nite cases of con-
vergent eye evolution given by Salvini-Plawen and Mayr (1977), reana-
lyzed each case in terms of a phylogenetic classiﬁ cation of life (see 
appendix), and added additional convergent cases that modern phyloge-
netic analyses have revealed. These additional factors have altered the 
reasoning of Salvini-Plawen and Mayr (1977) somewhat; for example, 
because Salvini-Plawen and Mayr considered the arthropods to be 
descendants of the annelids, they considered the possible homology of 
light-detection structures found in both groups of animals. We now know 
that the arthropods are ecdysozoan protostomes more closely related to 
introvert worms like the priapulids and nematodes, whereas the annelids 
are lophotrochozoan protostomes more closely related to molluscs 
(Lecointre and Le Guyader 2006), and thus the two are not closely 
related. These considerations have resulted in bringing the number of 
deﬁ nite convergences to 49 ( table 2.15 ).  
 It is clear that eyes and other light-detection organs are ancient inven-
tions of the animals. Simple eyespots, more complex ocellar cups, and 
even complex camera eyes can be found in some of the most plesiomor-
phic animals still alive, the most simple of the eumetazoa, the cnidarians. 
Complex camera eyes in our own lineage, the Chordata, were developed 
over 500 million years ago in the craniate conodonts of the Cambrian 
(Purnell 1995). 
 Light-detection organs have been repeatedly evolved, lost, and 
reevolved to varying degrees of complexity throughout the past 600 
million years. Thus, we ﬁ nd simple, isolated photoreceptor cells scattered 
across the tissues of bilaterian animals as widely divergent as lophotro-
chozoan protostome rock chitons, ecdysozoan protostome earthworms, 
and even in the tails of the ammocoete larvae of deuterostome sea 
lampreys (  table 2.15 ). These are all highly derived animals compared 

68 
Chapter 2
Table 2.15
Convergent evolution of eyes and light-detection systems in animals
1 Convergent structure and function: PHOTORECEPTOR CELLS (cells with enlarged 
surface areas containing photopigment for light detection)
Convergent lineages:
1.1 Common European earthworm (Bilateria: Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: Annelida: 
Oligochaeta: Lumbricidae; Lumbricus terrestris)
1.2 Common rock chiton (Lophotrochozoa: Mollusca: Polyplacophora: Chitonidae; 
Acanthopleura spiniger)
1.3 Soft-shelled clam (Mollusca: Bivalvia: Myoida: Myidae; Mya arenaria)
1.4 Marine nematode (Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Introverta: Nematozoa: Nematoda: 
Oncholaimidae; Oncholaimus vesicarius)
1.5 Sea lamprey (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Vertebrata: Petromyzontiformes: 
Petromyzontidae; Petromyzon marinus)
2 Convergent structure and function: EYESPOTS (photoreceptor cells aggregated into 
distinct spot regions for increased light-detection abilities)
Convergent lineages:
2.1 Pandeid jellyﬁ sh (Metazoa: Cnidaria: Hydrozoa: Anthomedusae: Pandeidae; 
Leuckartiara octona)
2.2 Asplanchnid rotifer (Metazoa: Bilateria: Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: Syndermata: 
Rotifera: Asplanchnidae; Asplanchna brightwelli)
2.3 Green spoon worm larvae (Lophotrochozoa: Annelida: Echiuria: Bonelliidae; 
Bonellia viridis)
2.4 Palola worm (Annelida: Polychaeta: Eunicemorpha: Eunicidae; Palola viridis)
2.5 Sabellid bristle worm (Annelida: Polychaeta: Sabellidae; Notaulax rectangulata)
2.6 Serpulid bristle worm (Lophotrochozoa: Sipuncula: Sipunculidea: Sipunculidae; 
Sipunculus nudus)
2.7 Planarian ﬂ atworm (Lophotrochozoa: Parenchymia: Platyhelminthes: Turbellaria: 
Microstomidae; Microstomum lineare)
2.8 Lampert’s sea cucumber (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Echinodermata: Holothuroidea: 
Apoda: Synaptidae; Synaptula lamperti)
3 Convergent structure and function: OCELLAR PIT (photoreceptor cells located in an 
open pit, connected to an optic nerve, for directional light detection)
Convergent lineages:
3.1 Spiral tufted bryozoa larvae (Bilateria: Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: Bryozoa: 
Cheilostomata: Bugulidae; Bugula neritina)
3.2 Megathyrid lamp shell larvae (Lophotrochozoa: Brachiopoda: Terebratulida: 
Megathyrididae; Argyrotheca cistellula)
3.3 Loxosomatid goblet worm larvae (Lophotrochozoa: Spiralia: Entoprocta: 
Loxosomatidae; Loxosomella cochlear)
3.4 Common 
starﬁ sh 
(Bilateria: 
Deuterostomia: 
Echinodermata: 
Asteroidea: 
Forcipulatida: Asteriidae; Asterias rubens)
3.5 Tornarian larvae of Balanoglossus proterogonius (Deuterostomia: Phryngotremata: 
Hemichordata: Enteropneusta: Tornaria: Tornaria ancoratae)
4 Convergent structure and function: OCELLAR CUP (photoreceptor cells located in 
partially enclosed cup-shaped structure, connected to an optic nerve, for increased precision 
in directional light detection)
Convergent lineages:
4.1 Bougainvillid 
jellyﬁ sh 
(Metazoa: 
Cnidaria: 
Hydrozoa: 
Anthomedusae: 
Bougainvillidae; Bougainvillea principis)

Convergent Animals 
69
Table 2.15
(continued)
4.2 Tiaropsid jellyﬁ sh (Cnidaria: Hydrozoa: Leptomedusae: Tiaropsidae; Tiaropsis 
multicirrata)
4.3 Moon jellyﬁ sh (Cnidaria: Scyphozoa: Semaeostomae: Ulmaridae; Aurelia aurita)
4.4 Pectinariid trumpet worm (Metazoa: Bilateria: Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: 
Annelida: Polychaeta: Terebellomorpha: Pectinariidae; Pectinaria gouldii)
4.5 Opheliid bristle worm (Annelida: Polychaeta: Opheliidae; Armandia brevis)
4.6 Nephthyid bristle worm (Annelida: Polychaeta: Phyllodocemorpha: Nephthyidae; 
Nephthys ciliata)
4.7 Lineid ribbon worm (Lophotrochozoa: Parenchymia: Nemertea: Lineidae; Lineus 
ruber)
4.8 Echinoderid kinorhynch (Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Introverta: Cephalorhyncha: 
Kinorhyncha: Echinoderidae; Echinoderes aquilonius)
4.9 Salpid sea squirt (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Urochordata: Thaliacea: 
Salpidae; Salpa cylindrica)
4.10 Florida lancet (Chordata: Myomerozoa: Cephalochordata: Branchiostomidae; 
Branchiostoma ﬂ oridae)
5 Convergent structure and function: SIMPLE EYE (globular eyes with pinhole openings, 
closed openings, or closed openings with a simple lens for increased precision in directional 
light detection)
Convergent lineages:
5.1 Onitochiton (Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: Mollusca: Polyplacophora: Chitonidae; 
Onitochiton neglectus)
5.2 Queen scallop (Mollusca: Bivalvia: Pectenacea: Pectenidae; Pecten maximus)
5.3 Pterotracheid snail (Mollusca: Gastropoda: Caenogastropoda: Littorinimorpha: 
Pterotracheidae; Pterotrachea mutica)
5.4 Common garden snail (Mollusca: Gastropoda: Pulmonata: Helicidae; Helix aspersa)
5.5 Paragordian hair worm (Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Introverta: Nematozoa: 
Nematomorpha: Gordiidae; Paragordius varius)
5.6 Peripatid velvet worm (Panarthropoda: Onychophora: Peripatidae; Peripatus 
antiguensis)
5.7 Sagittid arrow worm (Protostomia: Chaetognatha: Aphragmophora: Sagittidae; 
Sagitta enﬂ ata)
6 Convergent structure and function: COMPOUND EYE (complex eye with multiple 
lenses for image resolving)
Convergent lineages:
6.1 Sabellid bristle worm (Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: Annelida: Polychaeta: 
Sabellidae; Bispira volutacornis)
6.2 Sabellid bristle worm (Annelida: Polychaeta: Sabellidae; Branchiomma bombyx)
6.3 Sabellid bristle worm (Annelida: Polychaeta: Sabellidae; Megalomma vesiculosum)
6.4 Sabellid bristle worm (Annelida: Polychaeta: Sabellidae; Pseudopotamilla occelata)
6.5 Noah’s ark shell (Mollusca: Bivalvia: Arcoida: Arcidae; Arca noae)
6.6 Mydocopid ostracode (Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Mandibulata: 
Crustacea: Ostracoda: Mydocopida: Azygocypridina lowryi)
6.7 Praying mantis (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Mantodea: Mantidae; 
Mantis religiosa)
6.8 Eukrohnid arrow worm (Protostomia: Chaetognatha: Phragmophora: Eukrohniidae; 
Eukrohnia hamata)

70 
Chapter 2
to the nonbilaterian cnidarians, where one might expect to ﬁ nd only 
simple photoreceptor cells and eyespots — but that is not so: the simple 
carybdeid box jellyﬁ sh have convergently evolved camera eyes (Martin 
2002). 
 The independent evolution of complex camera eyes in the chordates 
(humans and our kin) and in the molluscs (the octopus and their kin) is 
a classic case of amazing convergent evolution, oft cited along with the 
convergent evolution of wings in tetrapods. Yet we now know that camera 
eyes have also been evolved by alciopid annelid worms (Wald and 
Raypart 1977) and by two separate groups of spiders (Williams and 
McIntyre 1980; Laughlin 1980), in addition to some box jellyﬁ sh. The 
ogre-faced spiders are nocturnal predators, and have the largest single-
lens eyes described among all the arthropods (Laughlin 1980), a large-
eyed predatory convergence seen repeatedly in vertebrate nocturnal 
carnivores (  table 2.5 ). The telescopic eyes of the jumping spider  Portia 
ﬁ mbriata  are convergent on those of raptorial birds, who use a similar 
morphological trick to increase the focal length of their eyes:  “ a parallel 
to the pit [of the eye] of  P. ﬁ mbriata  is the deep convexiclivate fovea 
found in some vertebrates, notably falconiform birds. . . . [B]oth a group 
of vertebrates and an invertebrate have therefore adopted the same 
strategy to improve visual acuity despite a restricted cephalic space ”  
(Williams and McIntyre 1980, 580). 
 Phylogenetic analyses by Fitzhugh (1989) have revealed that com-
pound eyes have independently evolved four separate times in sabellid 
Table 2.15
(continued)
7 Convergent structure and function: CAMERA EYE (complex eye with a single lens for 
image resolving)
Convergent lineages:
7.1 Carybdeid box jellyﬁ sh (Metazoa: Cnidaria: Cubozoa: Carybdeidae; Carybdea 
marsupialis)
7.2 Alciopod annelid worm (Metazoa: Bilateria: Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: 
Annelida: Polychaeta: Alciopidae; Torrea candida)
7.3 Common 
octopus 
(Lophotrochozoa: 
Mollusca: 
Cephalopoda: 
Coleoidea: 
Octopodidae: Octopus vulgaris)
7.4 Jumping spider (Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Cheliceriformes: Arachnida: 
Salticidae; Portia ﬁ mbriata)
7.5 Ogre-faced spider (Arthropoda: Cheliceriformes: Arachnida: Deinopidae; Dinopsis 
subrufus)
7.6 Dawn conodont (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Myomerozoa: Craniata: 
Conodonta: Cordylodontidae; Eoconodontus notchpeakensis †Cambrian)
Note: For data sources, see text.

Convergent Animals 
71
bristle worms, not just once. Molecular analyses by Oakley and Cun-
ningham (2002) have revealed that the compound eyes of mydocopid 
ostracodes have an origin independent from those in other arthropods. 
Thus, Salvini-Plawen and Mayr ’ s (1977) upper estimate of 60 indepen-
dent origins of light-detection organs may ultimately prove to be closer 
to the actual mark. Modern analyses do not always increase the number 
of convergences discovered, however. Fitzhugh ’ s (1991) phylogenetic 
analysis revealed that the pygidial eyes of the sabellid bristle worms 
 Fabriciola  and  Pseudofabriciola  were a synapomophy, and not indepen-
dently derived. 
 It is interesting to note that the complex camera eye has been inde-
pendently evolved in deuterostome chordates, protostome molluscs and 
arthropods, and nonbilaterian cnidarians (  table 2.15 ), but that complex 
compound eyes have appeared only in the protostomes. Compound eyes 
have independently evolved eight different times within the three major 
types of protostomes (lophotrochozoans, ecdysozoans, and chaeto-
gnaths), but not outside of the protostome clade, to my knowledge. Is 
there a developmental constraint limiting compound eyes to the proto-
stome lineage? This question leads to the consideration of the develop-
ment of the eye itself. 
 Modern developmental studies have revealed that all animal eyes 
contain highly conserved transcription factor  Pax-6  gene homologs, 
and the ubiquitous presence of the photopigment opsin proteins (Salvini-
Plawen 2008). This discovery has led to the proposal of two different 
models for eye evolution: (1) prototype photoreceptor structures and 
their developmental genes evolved only once, and further evolution 
has elaborated them along independent lines, or (2) photoreceptor 
structures evolved independently multiple times, each time co-opting 
homologous genes for use in developing those structures (Oakley and 
Cunningham 2002, 1429). The ﬁ rst model is, in essence, a model of paral-
lel evolution of the eye, and the second model is a model of convergent 
evolution of the eye. Both models thus can be used to argue for func-
tional and developmental constraints in the evolution of the eye — eyes 
function only if they are constructed in a limited number of ways, and 
there are a limited number of genes available that can be used for their 
development. 
 Both Oakley and Cunningham (2002) and Salvini-Plawen (2008) argue 
for the second model. Oakley and Cunningham (2002) point out that the 
ﬁ rst model requires a photoreceptor structure to be present in all 
common ancestors, whereas their analyses indicate that compound eyes 

72 
Chapter 2
were not present in ostracode ancestors. Conway Morris (2003) has also 
argued for the second model, and points out that in mammals alone the 
 Pax-6  gene is redeployed multiple times for other functions, as it is 
associated with the development of the brain, nose, pituitary gland, pan-
creas, and the gut. The  Pax-6  gene is, in essence, equivalent to the homol-
ogous tetrapod limb that has convergently evolved into wings for ﬂ ying 
in three separate groups of vertebrates (  table 2.2 ), and into ﬁ ns and 
paddle-form swimming appendages in seven other groups of vertebrates 
( table 2.1 ). 
 We have previously considered the convergent evolution of asymmet-
ric positioning and ultrasonic hearing in the ears of carnivores (  table 2.6 ). 
But what about the ear itself? As an organ for detecting pressure waves 
in air, or for hearing, the ear is an adaptation of land animals. The ances-
tors of land animals, the ﬁ sh, possess lateral line systems for detecting 
pressure waves in water, which is much denser than air, and these lateral 
line systems are still present in many aquatic amphibians, the tetrapod 
descendants of ﬁ sh. Experimentation has shown that lateral line systems 
are extremely sensitive to minute differences in water pressure (Dijkgraaf 
1967), and that ﬁ sh and aquatic amphibians have well-developed direc-
tional  “ hearing ” under water (Kuroki 1967). 
 Lateral line systems are not a unique synapomorphy of the verte-
brates, however. Both molluscs and arthropods have evolved species that 
have convergently evolved lateral line systems (  table 2.16 ). In the mol-
luscs, many cephalopods have evolved lines of ciliated tissue on their 
heads and arms, and these epidermal lines have been shown to function 
like the lateral line systems of ﬁ sh, allowing the cephalopods to have 
directional hearing underwater. In addition to the convergent evolution 
of the complex camera eye (  table 2.15 ), these epidermal lateral line 
systems are  “ another example of convergent evolution between a sophis-
ticated cephalopod and vertebrate sensory system ” (Budelmann and 
Bleckmann 1988, 1). In the marine arthropods, some pelagic decapod 
crustaceans have evolved very long antennae that are held parallel to 
the long axis of the body of the animal on either side, and these structures 
also function as lateral line systems for pressure-wave detection (Denton 
and Gray 1985).  
 The thin gaseous mixture of the Earth ’ s atmosphere has very low pres-
sure compared to underwater habitats; consequently, land tetrapods have 
evolved tympanal ear systems in order to hear in air, and have lost the 
lateral line system. However, some tetrapods that have secondarily 
returned to aquatic habitats have convergently reevolved a lateral line 

Convergent Animals 
73
 Table 2.16 
 Convergent evolution of ears and sound-detection systems in animals 
 1   Convergent structure and function: LATERAL LINE SYSTEMS (lateral line row of 
pores with nerve endings for detecting minute changes in water pressure, used for 
directional hearing in aqueous habitats) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1   Shallow-water brief squid (Bilateria: Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: Mollusca: 
Cephalopoda: Coleoidea: Loliginidae;  Lolliguncula brevis ) 
 1.2   Penaeid shrimp (Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Malacostraca: 
Decapoda: Penaeidae;  Acetes sibogae ) 
 1.3  Astrapid 
jawless 
ﬁ sh 
(Bilateria: 
Deuterostomia: 
Chordata: 
Vertebrata: 
Pteraspidomorphi: Astrapida: Astrapidae;  Astrapis desiderata  † Ordovician) 
 1.4   Florida manatee (Vertebrata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: Reptiliomorpha: 
Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: Afrotheria: Sirenia: Trichechidae; 
 Trichechus manatus ) 
 2   Convergent structure and function: TYMPANAL EAR SYSTEMS (tympanum-based 
hearing system for detecting minute changes in air pressure, used for directional hearing 
in terrestrial habitats) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1  Field cricket (Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Mandibulata: 
Hexapoda: Orthoptera: Gryllidae;  Gryllus pennsylvanicus ) 
 2.2  Cricket-parasite tachinid ﬂ y (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Diptera: 
Tachinidae;  Ormia ochracea ) 
 2.3   Green lacewing (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Neuroptera: Chrysopidae; 
 Chrysopa carnea ) 
 2.4   Grand western cicada (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hemiptera: Cicadidae; 
 Tibicen dorsata ) 
 2.5   Praying mantis (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Mantodea: Mantidae; 
 Mantis religiosa ) 
 2.6   Tiger beetle (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Coleptera:  Cincindela  marutha ) 
 2.7   Ornate tiger moth (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Lepidoptera: Noctuoidea: 
Arctiidae;  Apantesis ornata ) 
 2.8  Mallow moth (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Lepidoptera: Geometroidea: 
Geometridae;  Larentia clavaria ) 
 2.9  Red postman butterﬂ y (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Lepidoptera: 
Papilionoidea: Nymphalidae;  Heliconius erato ) 
 2.10  Butterﬂ y moth (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Lepidoptera: Hedyloidea; 
Hedylidae;  Macrosoma nigrimacula ) 
 2.11  Balanerpeton amphibian (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: 
Sarcopterygii: Tetrapoda: Batrachomorpha: Dendrerpetonidae;  Balanerpeton woodi 
 † Carboniferous) 
 2.12  Eastern box turtle (Tetrapoda: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: Anapsida: 
Testudines: Emydidae;  Terrapene carolina ) 
 2.13   Granite night lizard (Diapsida: Lepidosauromorpha: Squamata: Scleroglossa: 
Autarchoglossa: Scincomorpha: Xantusidae;  Xantusia henshawi ) 
 2.14   Nile crocodile (Diapsida: Archosauromorpha: Crurotarsi: Crocodylia: Crocodylidae; 
 Crocodylus niloticus ) 
 2.15   Duckbill platypus (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Monotremata: 
Ornithorhynchidae;  Ornithorhynchus anatinus ) 
 2.16  Mouse-eared 
bat 
(Mammalia: 
Eutheria: 
Laurasiatheria: 
Chiroptera: 
Microchiroptera: Vespertilionidae;  Myotis myotis ) 
     Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a  † . For data sources, see text. 

74 
Chapter 2
system. In addition to losing their tetrapods and reevolving ﬁ ns, the 
manatees have acquired a body covering of sinus tactile hairs (which are 
usually conﬁ ned to the head region) that function as a lateral line system 
underwater (Reep 2002). 
 Two major groups of animals have invaded the land from the water: 
the panarthropods and the tetrapods. Among the tetrapods, many of the 
early amphibians still possessed lateral line systems — evidence that they 
continued to spend a great deal of time in the water. With the evolution 
of the amniotes, tetrapod invasion of the land began in earnest. It was 
long thought that tetrapod tympanal ear systems were inherited from 
the ﬁ rst fully terrestrial amphibian ancestors, and thus that ears evolved 
very early and only once in the tetrapod lineage. But this is not so. The 
phylogenetic analyses of Clack (2002) have revealed that tympanal ear 
systems evolved independently in at least ﬁ ve different tetrapod lineages: 
once in the ancient batrachomorph amphibians and still present in their 
lissamphibian descendants (frogs, salamanders, and kin), three additional 
separate times in the sauropsid amniotes (ancestors of living turtles, 
lizards, and archosaurs), and independently in the synapsid amniotes 
(ancestors of mammals). It is now known that the mammalian tympanal 
ear, with its characteristic inner-ear stapes, incus, and malleus bones, 
evolved twice independently in the synapsid lineage: once in the mono-
tremes, and independently in the therians (  table 2.16 ). This fact was 
revealed by the discovery of the basal monotreme species  Teinolophus 
trusleri  from the Early Cretaceous of Australia, in which the three inner-
ear bones had not yet separated from the mandible of the animal 
(Rich et al. 2005). Therefore, the divergence of the australosphenids 
and monotremes from the therian lineage occurred before the evolution 
of the characteristic mammalian typanal ear, and the separation of the 
three inner-ear bones from the mandible and the evolution the mam-
malian inner ear occurred independently in the monotreme and therian 
lineages. 
 We can hear birds sing, and birds can hear humans sing, but our ears 
do not have a common origin. As summarized by Clack (2002, 300):  “ The 
evolution of hearing in air was a slow and complicated process; far from 
being achieved and perfected in the earliest tetrapods, it was separately 
invented many times by different groups — and a long time after tetra-
pods ﬁ rst gained the land. ”  Clack (2002, 300) surmises that a natural-
selective impetus for the evolution of tympanal ears may have been the 
evolution of noisy, buzzing insects in the Carboniferous:  “ the timing of 
the evolution of the characteristics of an ear capable of receiving air-

Convergent Animals 
75
borne sound well certainly corresponds to the huge radiation of insects 
that can be seen in the fossil record of the Late Permian. ”  Tetrapods that 
could hear insects, as well as see them, would certainly be more successful 
in hunting insects for food than a tetrapod that could not hear. 
 Insectivory-triggered ear evolution is not unique to the tetrapods. 
Within the hexapods themselves, today there exist the cricket-parasite 
tachinid ﬂ ies, which have evolved tympanal ears that allow them speciﬁ -
cally to hear the crickets that they hunt for food (Robert et al. 1992; 
Robert and Willi 2000). Tympanal ears have independently evolved in 
seven different orders of hexapods, and four times independently within 
the lepidopteran order itself (Hoy and Robert 1996), for a total of at 
least ten convergent originations ( table 2.16 ). The hexapods show much 
greater inventiveness in the evolution of their ears than tetrapods, as they 
variously have placed the tympanum on their abdomens, their thoraxes, 
their wing bases, and so on. The early evolution of ears in hexapods may 
have had more to do with their social interactions — calling, courtship, 
and territorial signals — than with predation, with subsequent ear evolu-
tion as antipredator adaptations, such as ultrasonic hearing in moths as 
a means of evading bats (Hoy and Robert 1996). 
 In addition to sight and hearing, another major animal sensory capabil-
ity is that of smell. To my knowledge, very little attention has been given 
to the phylogenetic distribution of different olfactory organs as a means 
to determining how often these organs have been independently evolved. 
Most mentions of convergence in olfactory organs are of the notably 
unusual convergences, as in star-nosed moles (Conway Morris 2003). 
Although possible convergences in the olfactory organs of hexapods and 
vertebrates have been discussed, at present  “ a deﬁ nitive answer is not 
yet possible, but given the differences in the molecular genetics of olfac-
tory receptor coding, the evidence points strongly to convergence ”  
(Conway Morris 2003, 180). 
 Related to the chemosensory process of detecting molecules in air, or 
smelling, is the process of breathing itself in the thin atmosphere of the 
terrestrial realm. The two major groups of animals that have invaded the 
land from the water have evolved two different organ systems to deal 
with gas exchange. The panarthropods use a tracheal system of tubes to 
carry oxygen from the outside air deep into their tissues, and to remove 
carbon dioxide waste from those tissues and expel it to the outside envi-
ronment. The tetrapods use lungs instead, with oxygen absorbed across 
the surface area of the lung tissue and diffused into the blood of the 
circulatory system, where it is then transported to interior tissues. Carbon 

76 
Chapter 2
dioxide waste is transported in the reverse direction; it is expelled across 
the surface area of the lung tissue, and exhaled to the outside environ-
ment. Thus, the circulatory system of tetrapods serves the dual function 
of transporting both oxygen and nutrients to interior tissues and remov-
ing both carbon dioxide and chemical metabolic wastes from those 
tissues. The tracheal system of the panarthropods is used only for gas 
exchange; chemical metabolic wastes are removed by other excretory 
systems. 
 As such, these two breathing systems would be an example of diver-
gent evolution in two separate groups of animals, and of no particular 
interest in the consideration of convergent evolution. However, it appears 
that the panarthropods have evolved the tracheal system of breathing 
not just once but ﬁ ve separate times: in the Onychophora (land-dwelling 
velvet worms), in Cheliceriformes (land-dwelling scorpions and arach-
nids), and three times in the Mandibulata — the land-dwelling myriapods, 
malacostracan isopods, and the hexapods (Klok et al. 2002). Klok et al. 
(2002) give further evidence that the ability to open and close the spir-
acles of the trachael system (to produce discontinuous gas exchange) has 
independently evolved four separate times in separated species of tra-
cheated panarthropods. In all cases, the evolution of the tracheal system 
of breathing is linked to the developmental invagination of the respira-
tory surfaces of the aquatic panarthropod forms (Pritchard et al. 1993). 
 Convergent evolution has also occurred in the lung-breathing tetra-
pods. The plesiomorphic condition is to have lungs like bellows and to 
breathe in a biﬂ ow system, where oxygen is inhaled and carbon dioxide 
is exhaled. In a biﬂ ow breathing system, the same pathway for air trans-
port is used both in inhaling and in exhaling. The birds, however, have a 
much more efﬁ cient uniﬂ ow system of breathing, where air is ﬁ rst inhaled 
into a system of interior air sacs, then moved from the air sacs to the 
lungs, then exhaled from the lungs to the outside environment. The 
pathway of air through the bird ’ s breathing system thus moves only in 
one direction, in a looped pathway rather than in and out along the same 
pathway, as with other tetrapods. This efﬁ cient uniﬂ ow system of breath-
ing and oxygen extraction allows birds to easily breathe in regions of 
low-oxygen partial pressure, as is encountered high in the sky, whereas 
humans at the same altitude may need the assistance of breathing masks 
and oxygen cylinders. 
 It was long thought that the uniﬂ ow system of breathing was an auta-
pomorphy of the birds, and related to the evolution of ﬂ ight in dinosaurs. 
However, exceptionally well-preserved fossils of the plesiomorphic the-

Convergent Animals 
77
ropod  Majungatholus atopus  reveals that the animal had the avian pul-
monary air-sac system, and that the avian style of breathing evolved very 
early in the evolution of the theropod clade of dinosaurs (O ’ Connor and 
Claessens 2005). Now, a more careful examination of other skeletons of 
the ornithodires in general reveals that the pterosaurs also had a pulmo-
nary air-sac system and uniﬂ ow respiration (Claessens et al. 2009). In 
essence, the pterosaurs evolved the uniﬂ ow system of breathing 70 
million years before the birds did. As the pulmonary air-sac system is 
demonstrably absent in dinosauromorphs and in the herrerasaurids (the 
basal dinosaurs), the breathing system clearly evolved convergently 
twice within the archosaurs — once in the pterosaurs, and once in the 
theropod dinosaurs. 
 It is interesting that the panarthropods have never evolved lungs. 
This may well be another example of developmental constraint on the 
number of evolutionary possibilities open to a group of animals, and a 
limit to convergent evolution. The tracheal system of breathing limits the 
size of an animal, and only in the Carboniferous — when oxygen partial 
pressure in the atmosphere was higher than at present — did very large 
insects evolve, such as meganeurid dragonﬂ ies with wingspans of 75 
centimeters. 
 The small size of insects has allowed these animals to converge on a 
thermoregulatory system that is usually thought to be possessed only by 
the birds and mammals — endothermy. Like all ectotherms, insects use a 
variety of behavioral mechanisms to warm up, such as basking in the sun 
or shivering. Due to the insects ’ small size, the heat produced by their 
muscular actions alone is large relative to the volume of their bodies, 
and the insects have evolved a series of organ systems to retain their 
heat once it is acquired: insulating air sacs around their thoracic muscles, 
an insulating air sac between their thorax and their abdomen, a circula-
tory system with countercurrent heat exchange, and external body 
insulation, like the scales of moths and the setae fuzz of bees (Heinrich 
1993, 1996). 
 Large ectotherms, like amphibians and reptiles, have a much larger 
volume of body tissue to warm up, and a much smaller body surface to 
absorb heat by basking. The larger the animal, the more serious the 
problem, because volume increases as a cubic function of dimension, 
whereas surface area increases only as a square function. One way to 
solve this problem would be to somehow increase the surface area of the 
body, in order to absorb more heat while basking. At least six different 
groups of tetrapods have increased their body surface areas by vastly 

78 
Chapter 2
elongating the neural spines of their vertebrae, thus creating a large  “ sail 
ﬁ n ”  structure on their backs (  table 2.17 ). Interestingly, both the derived 
synapsid pelycosaurs and the ancient batrachomorph amphibians con-
vergently evolved this surface-area-increase structure in the Permian. 
Sail ﬁ ns were convergently evolved twice, at the same time, by the pely-
cosaurs, as the sail ﬁ ns of the carnivorous sphenacodontids are structur-
ally very different from those of the herbivorous edaphosaurids (Bennett 
1996). The fact that the large pelycosaurs evolved sail ﬁ ns is taken as 
evidence that these synapsids were still ectotherms, and that endothermy 
had not yet evolved in the synapsid lineage.  
 Even more interesting, three separate groups of dinosaurs indepen-
dently evolved sail ﬁ ns (  table 2.17 ). As I shall discuss in a moment, the 
dinosaurs have been argued to have been endotherms, so why would they 
evolve sail ﬁ ns like an ectotherm? If the dinosaurs were endotherms, it 
may well be that the sail ﬁ n structure was primarily used to shed excess 
heat and to cool the body down, rather than to absorb heat. 
 Two modern groups of highly active, energetic animals are known for 
their endothermic metabolisms — the birds and the mammals. But when 
did endothermy evolve in these two separate lineages? The ﬁ rst bird, 
 Archaeopteryx lithographica , dates from the Late Jurassic. However, the 
discovery of fossil non-avian coelurosaurian theropods with feathers but 
no wings indicates that feathers evolved ﬁ rst as body insulation to retain 
heat, and that the coelurosaurs were endothermic. Is endothermy thus a 
theropod trait? The fact that many small ornithopod ornithischians, such 
as the hypsilophodonts, have ﬁ brolamellar bone (an endothermic char-
acteristic) has been used to argue that they also were endothermic. Did 
endothermy convergently arise twice in the dinosaurs, once in the the-
ropod saurischians and once in the ornithopod ornithischians, or is endo-
thermy a synapomorphy of the entire clade of dinosaurs? Bakker (1986) 
has been the most vocal advocate of the latter position, though others 
still dispute the uniform distribution of endothermy within all of the 
dinosaurs (see the discussion in Benton 2005, 219 – 223). 
 The ornithodiran pterosaurs have also been argued to have been endo-
thermic (see Benton 2005, 226 – 228). As discussed above, the uniﬂ ow 
system of breathing using lungs and pulmonary air sacs was indepen-
dently evolved by the pterosaurs and the birds (Claessens et al. 2009), 
and the evidence is strong that endothermy also independently evolved 
in the pterosaurs and the dinosaurs (  table 2.17 ). Endothermy clearly 
arose independently in the synapsid amniote lineage, far removed from 
the sauropsid dinosaur and pterosaur lineages. Most date the evolution 

Convergent Animals 
79
 Table 2.17 
 Convergent evolution of animal thermoregulation systems 
 1   Convergent structure and function: HEAT TRANSFER SURFACE (organic surface-
area structures for absorbing heat from the external environment or shedding excess heat 
to the external environment) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1   Dissorophid amphibians (Tetrapoda: Batrachomorpha: Dissorophidae;  Platyhystrix 
rugosus  † Permian) 
 1.2   Spinosaur 
(Tetrapoda: 
Reptiliomorpha: 
Amniota: 
Sauropsida: 
Diapsida: 
Archosauromorpha: Ornithodira: Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Carnosauria: 
Spinosauridae;  Spinosaurus maroccanus  † Cretaceous) 
 1.3   Amargasaur 
(Dinosauria: 
Saurischia: 
Sauropodomorpha: 
Dicraeosauridae; 
 Amargasaurus cazaui  † Cretaceous) 
 1.4   Ouranosaur (Dinosauria: Ornithischia: Cerapoda: Ornithischia: Iguanodontidae; 
 Ouranosaurus nigeriensis  † Cretaceous) 
 1.5   Edaphosaurid synapsid (Amniota: Synapsida: Edaphosauridae;  Edaphosaurus 
cruciger  † Permian) 
 1.6  Sphenocodontid synapsid (Synapsida: Sphenacodontidae;  Dimetrodon grandis 
 † Permian) 
 2   Convergent system and function: ENDOTHERMY (active internal generation and 
maintenance of body heat via metabolism) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1   Salmon shark (Vertebrata: Chondrichthyes: Elasmobranchii: Lamnidae;  Lamna 
ditropis ) 
 2.2   Common thresher shark (Chondrichthyes: Elasmobranchii: Alopidae;  Alopias 
 vulpinus ) 
 2.3   Tuna (Vertebrata: Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Scombridae;  Thunnus 
alalunga ) 
 2.4  Butterﬂ y mackerel (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Scombridae;  Gasterochisma 
 melampus ) 
 2.5  Swordﬁ sh (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Xiphiidae;  Xiphias gladius ) 
 2.6  Pterosaur  “ hairy devil ” (Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: 
Sauropsida: 
Diapsida: 
Archosauromorpha: 
Ornithodira: 
Pterosauria: 
Rhamphorhynchidae;  Sordes pilosus  † Jurassic) 
 2.7   King penguin (Archosauromorpha: Ornithodira: Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: 
Aves: Sphenisciformes: Spheniscidae;  Aptenodytes patagonica ) 
 2.8   Polar bear (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: 
Carnivora: Ursidae;  Thalarctos maritimus ) 
     Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a  † . For data sources, see text. 

80 
Chapter 2
of endothermic metabolisms in the synapsids to the evolution of the 
mammalian clade itself; thus it is intriguing that endothermic metabo-
lisms arose three times, independently, in amniote tetrapods (pterosaurs, 
dinosaurs, and mammals) at the same time — in the Late Triassic. 
 Yet endothermy is not, as we might conclude, an advanced, derived 
condition of active terrestrial animals, because it has also convergently 
arisen in the ﬁ shes. Block et al. (1993) have demonstrated that endother-
mic metabolisms have convergently evolved ﬁ ve separate times in the 
ﬁ shes, twice in the cartilaginous ﬁ shes and three times in the bony ﬁ shes 
(  table 2.17 ). In the ﬁ shes, it has been argued that the evolution of endo-
thermy is not primarily a result of the adaptive beneﬁ ts of energetic 
lifestyles with sustained high activity levels, but rather the niche expan-
sion of these ﬁ sh groups into cold-water regions of the oceans (Watson 
1993; Block et al. 1993). 
 Last in our consideration of organ systems, it has been recently pro-
posed (Schierwater et al. 2009) that the nervous system itself is conver-
gent, and has independently evolved in two separate metazoan lineages 
(  table 2.18 ). In the current classiﬁ cation used in this book (see appendix), 
the nervous system evolved in the cnidarians, and is thus a synapomor-
phy for subsequent metazoan evolution (  table 2.18 ). In the cnidarians, 
the nerve cells form a network without a central nervous system. In the 
 Table 2.18 
 The alternative classiﬁ cation of metazoans proposed by Schierwater et al. (2009) 
 Current classiﬁ cation 
 Alternative classiﬁ cation 
 Metazoa 
 Metazoa 
 – Placozoa 
 – Diploblasta 
 – Demospongiae 
 –  – Placozoa 
 – Hexactinellida 
 –  –  – Porifera 
 – Calcarea 
 –  –  –  – Calcarea 
 – Eumetazoa 
 –  –  –  – Demospongiae 
 –  – Ctenophora 
 –  –  –  – Hexactinellida 
 –  – Cnidaria* 
 –  –  – Ctenophora 
 –  – Bilateria 
 –  –  – Cnidaria* 
 –  –  – Protostomia 
 – Bilateria* 
 –  –  – Deuterostomia 
 –  – Protostomia 
 –  – Deuterostomia 
 Note: The alternative classiﬁ cation of Schierwater et al. (2009) would require the indepen-
dent evolution of nervous systems in the cnidarians and the bilaterians (marked by 
asterisks in the table). 

Convergent Animals 
81
bilaterians, a central nerve system is present, organized around a cephalic 
ganglion from which the central nerve cord emerges; it is considered to 
have evolved from the simpler cnidarian nervous system (Lecointre and 
Le Guyader 2006).  
 Schierwater et al. (2009) have argued that two basal monophyletic 
groups of metazoans exist: the Diploblasta and the Bilateria (  table 2.18 ). 
In the current classiﬁ cation, an evolutionary grade exists at the base of 
the metazoan clade, running from the simple placozoans through to the 
more complex cnidarians ( table 2.18 ). All of these animals have a roughly 
radial symmetry, and are sometimes referred to as the  “ Radiata, ”  a taxon 
that has no formal status, as it is paraphyletic. In the alternative classiﬁ ca-
tion, the placozoans are proposed to be the basal group of a monophy-
letic clade consisting of three phyla: the Porifera (which are paraphyletic 
in the current classiﬁ cation,   table 2.18 ), the Ctenophora, and the Cni-
daria. In this alternative classiﬁ cation, the cnidarians are not ancestral to 
the bilaterians; therefore, the evolution of the network nervous system 
of the cnidarians would be independent of the evolution of the central 
nervous system of the bilaterians, as these two groups of animals occur 
in two separate metazoan lineages ( table 2.18 ). 
 Needless to the say, the argument of Schierwater et al. (2009) remains 
controversial at present. The peculiar placozoans play a pivotal part in 
the alternative classiﬁ cation (  table 2.18 ). These organisms are known 
from a single species,  Trichoplax adhaerens , which was ﬁ rst discovered 
in a saltwater aquarium in Austria and subsequently has been found in 
marine waters worldwide. Lecointre and Le Guyader (2006) suggest that 
placozoan morphological simplicity may be secondary, and that they are 
derived from more complex eumetazoans, based upon preliminary 
molecular studies. Schierwater et al. (2009, 37) argue that placozoan 
morphological simplicity is primary, and that these organisms possess  “ a 
living fossil genome ”  that shows that  “ complex genetic tool kits arise 
before morphological complexity ” (in that they were present prior to the 
Diploblasta-Bilateria bifurcation in evolution) and that  “ these kits may 
form similar morphological structures in parallel, ”  such as nervous 
systems. 
 Reproduction 
  “ Classic textbook examples of convergence, such as the evolution of 
ﬂ ight, and fusiform body shapes in aquatic vertebrates, pale beside those 
relating to viviparity and matrotrophy ”  (Blackburn 1992, 320). This 

82 
Chapter 2
observation, surprising as it might appear at ﬁ rst glance, is true, as we 
shall see in this ﬁ nal section of the chapter. Viviparous animals give live 
birth, and matrotrophic females provide nutrients for the internally 
developing embryo. Both of these conditions, complex though they may 
be, have repeatedly and independently evolved in an astonishing number 
of animals. 
 In the plesiomorphic condition for animals, the female produces the 
egg, the male produces sperm, and the fertilization of the egg by sperm 
takes place external to the female ’ s body. In marine invertebrates, the 
egg may contain only enough nutrient for development to the larval 
stage, after which the larva is on its own and must ﬁ nd its own food to 
survive, a condition known as planktotrophy. Alternatively, the female 
can develop a larger egg, one that contains enough yolk nutrient for 
substantial larval development, a condition known as lecithotrophy. In 
terms of bioeconomics, it costs the female more energy to produce leci-
thotrophic larvae than planktotrophic, but in terms of reproductive 
success lecithotrophic larvae have a better chance of survival than 
planktotrophic. 
 In external fertilization, the female ﬁ sh lay a gelatinous mass of eggs 
over which the male ﬁ sh sprays a milky cloud of sperm. This is the plesio-
morphic reproductive condition for many oviparous, egg-laying ﬁ sh and 
some aquatic amphibians. A more certain form of fertilization, and one 
that is less costly in terms of sperm numbers, is internal, in which the 
sperm is introduced into the body of the female, fertilization of the eggs 
occurs internally, and the female then lays the fertilized eggs. Simple 
internal fertilization requires the alignment of the female and male 
cloacal vents so that sperm may be transferred between them. Many 
male ﬁ sh, such as sharks, have evolved clasping appendages from the 
pelvic ﬁ ns which can be used to hold onto the female during mating, 
maintaining contact between the male and female cloacae. Terrestrial 
tetrapods are able to hold one another by their appendages, and males 
have evolved the ability to somewhat protrude their cloaca so that it ﬁ ts 
a slight distance within the cloaca of the female. Some primitive saurop-
sids have added barbs to their cloaca, which can be used to hold the 
male ’ s everted cloaca within the female ’ s during fertilization. 
 In the most efﬁ cient mode of internal fertilization, the male evolves 
an inﬂ atable copulatory organ that can deposit the sperm as close to the 
eggs within the female ’ s body as possible, and that can be deﬂ ated when 
it is not in use so that it is not a liability in locomotion: in other words, 
a penis (Kelly 2002). The hydrostatic penis has been convergently evolved 

Convergent Animals 
83
at least six separate times by amniote animals: four separate times within 
the sauropsids, and once within the synapsids (  table 2.19 ). A single penis 
is present in anapsid turtles and archosaurian crocodiles but, curiously, 
two penises, or  “ hemipenes, ”  were evolved by the lepidosaurian lizards 
and passed down to their snake descendants. Although the lizards and 
snakes have two penises, they only use one at a time in intercourse. 
Equally curious, the penis was lost in highly derived archosaurs like the 
avian dinosaurs, which reverted back to the use of the cloaca-versus-
cloaca method of fertilization. Only a very few birds, such as the ostrich 
and the duck, have secondarily reevolved a penis organ (King 1981; Kelly 
2002).  
 In the nonamniote tetrapods, males of the caecilian amphibians have 
an evertable rear part of the cloaca, or phallodeum, that they use to 
transfer sperm into the cloaca of the female (Wake 1993). Among the 
frogs, species members of only one genus, the tailed frog  Ascaphus , have 
evolved a similar penislike extension of the cloaca. Of the invertebrate 
animals, the snails are unique in that both dioecious and hermaphroditic 
species of gastropods have evolved a penis. Some other marine inverte-
brates, such as the male octopus, secondarily use one of their tentacles 
 Table 2.19 
 Convergent evolution of male internal fertilization organs 
 Convergent structure and function: HYDROSTATIC PENIS (inﬂ atable copulatory organ 
for passing sperm directly into the body of the female) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1  Golden apple snail (Bilateria: Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: Mollusca: Gastropoda: 
Caenogastropoda: Ampullariidae;  Pomacea bridgesii ) 
 2   Cayenne caecilian (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: 
Tetrapoda: 
Batrachomorpha: 
Lissamphibia: 
Gymnophiona: 
Typhlonectidae; 
 Typhlonectes compressicauda ) 
 3   North American tailed frog (Lissamphibia: Batrachia: Anura: Ascaphidae;  Ascaphus 
truei ) 
 4   Snapping turtle (Tetrapoda: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: Anapsida: 
Testudines: Chelydridae;  Macroclemys temmincki ) 
 5   Green anole (Sauropsida: Diapsida: Lepidosauromorpha: Squamata: Iguania: 
Polychrotidae;  Anolis carolinensis ) 
 6   Nile crocodile (Archosauromorpha: Crurotarsi: Crocodylia: Crocodylidae;  Crocodylus 
niloticus ) 
 7  Ostrich (Archosauromorpha: Ornithodira: Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: 
Maniraptora: Aves: Paleognathae: Struthionidae;  Struthio camelus ) 
 8   Argentine lake duck (Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: 
Neognathae: Anseriformes: Anatidae;  Oxyura vittata ) 
 9   Nine-banded armadillo (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: 
Xenarthra: Dasypodidae;  Dasypus novemcinctus ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

84 
Chapter 2
as a pseudopenis, or gonopod, to transfer sperm packets to the female. 
Most curious, the female dwarf seahorse  Hippocampus zosterae , a pecu-
liar bony ﬁ sh, uses a gonopod-like organ to transfer eggs from her body 
into the body of the male seahorse, where they are fertilized (Mason-
jones and Lewis 1996), in what could be argued to be the convergent 
evolution of a pseudopenis by a female animal. 
 Internal fertilization is a precursor to the evolution of viviparity, in 
which the female does not lay the eggs but rather gives live birth to the 
offspring. As in fertilization modes, there is a spectrum of modes or 
degrees of viviparity. The simplest is lecithotrophic viviparity, in which 
the female produces eggs with large yolks but does not lay them; instead, 
the embryo develops within the body of the female (this reproductive 
mode is also sometimes called ovoviviparity). A very simple placenta is 
present for gas exchange between the female and the eggs, as the devel-
oping embryos must respire. The opposite extreme is obligate placentot-
rophy, in which the female produces small eggs with little or no yolk and 
the necessary nutrient is directly provided by the female across the pla-
centa to the developing embryos (Thompson and Speake 2006). The 
spectrum between these two extrema is usually divided into four modes 
or types of matrotrophy (Blackburn 1993): Type I (lecithotrophic vivipar-
ity), Type II, Type III, and Type IV (obligate placentotrophy). 
 As mammals, many of us have the impression that giving live birth is 
a unique mammalian trait. This is not true — the convergent evolution of 
viviparity is rampant in all kinds of animals, from very simple to very 
complex (  tables 2.20, 2.21, 2.22 ). It is often also thought that viviparity 
is associated only with highly derived land animals, the amniotes who 
have adapted to life in harsh terrestrial habitats, but this also is not true, 
as many marine animals have evolved viviparity (  table 2.20 ). Viviparity 
is not even a vertebrate trait, for it has independently evolved in both 
main branches of the invertebrate protostomes, from lophotrochozoan 
marine bristle worms (Baskin and Golding 1970) to ecdysozoan velvet 
worms, and in invertebrate deuterstomes as well, such as marine starﬁ sh 
and sea cucumbers, where it has independently evolved at least four 
separate times (Byrne 2005).  
 The evolution of viviparity is also ancient, as fossils of the Devonian 
placoderm ﬁ sh  Materpiscis  (mother ﬁ sh) have revealed (Long et al. 
2008). In the living sharks, descendants of the ancient placoderms, phy-
logenetic analyses have revealed that viviparity has independently 
evolved in nine separate lineages (Dulvy and Reynolds 1997). In   table 
2.20 , I have listed examples of basal or near-basal species for each inde-

Convergent Animals 
85
pendent evolution of viviparity in sharks from the cladogram of Dulvy 
and Reynolds (1997); subsequent evolution within some of these clades 
has resulted in the presence of viviparity in 40 percent of all living shark 
species. Fossils of extinct Carboniferous chondrichthyan ﬁ sh also reveal 
that viviparity has been sporadically evolved within the cartilaginous 
ﬁ shes for over 300 million years (Dulvy and Reynolds 1997). 
 In living actinopterygian bony ﬁ shes, viviparity has independently 
evolved in 14 families, or about 3 percent of living actinopterygian 
species, still not nearly as prevalent as in the cartilaginous ﬁ shes (Wourms 
and Lombardi 1992). It also has been convergently evolved in the sar-
copterygian bony ﬁ sh, and is present in the living-fossil coelocanths 
(Wourms and Lombardi 1992). 
 In the transition to terrestrial habitats, viviparity has convergently 
evolved within both the protostome panarthropods and the deutero-
stome amphibians. Living insects exhibit sporadic incidences of the inde-
pendent evolution of viviparity, as it is present in ten separate groups 
(Hagan 1951). All three groups of living nonamniote tetrapods, the 
amphibians, have convergently made the evolutionary transition from 
oviparity to viviparity (  table 2.20 ): twice each in frog lineages and cae-
cilian lineages, but only once within the salamanders (Wake 1992, 1993). 
In both groups, however, viviparous species are quite rare compared to 
the large number of species that still lay eggs. 
 Of the two lineages of amniote tetrapods, the sauropsids and the syn-
apsids, the sauropsids exhibit an astonishing number of separate acquisi-
tions of viviparity, a trait normally thought of as characteristic of synapsid 
mammals. Estimates of the independent evolution of viviparity in squa-
mate sauropsids have ranged from 98 times (Blackburn 1992) to 100 
times (Blackburn 1993) to 105 times (Blackburn 2000). Rigorous phylo-
genetic analyses for all sauropsids are currently not available, but Lee 
and Shine (1998) have conducted the most complete phylogenetic analy-
sis of the incidence of viviparity within the reptiles. Phylogenetic rela-
tionships within the speciose clades of scincid lizards, colubrid snakes, 
and elapids snakes were too inadequate to be included in their study, but 
phylogenetic analyses of the remaining reptiles (Lee and Shine 1998) 
reveals the independent evolution of viviparity 39 separate times (  table 
2.21 ). In   table 2.21 , I have listed examples of basal or near-basal species 
for each independent evolution of viviparity in sauropsids from the 
cladograms of Lee and Shine (1998); future inclusion of the colubrid and 
elapid snake and scincid lizard species will certainly increase the length 
of this list. Evolution of viviparity in the sauropsids is also ancient, as 

86 
Chapter 2
Table 2.20
Convergent evolution of animal reproductive systems: viviparity in nonamniote animals
Convergent structure and function: VIVIPARITY (development of embryos within the 
body of the female in order to produce more highly developed offspring at birth to enhance 
their potential for survival)
Convergent lineages:
1 Oligohaline bristle worm (Bilateria: Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: Annelida: 
Polychaeta: Nereidae; Nereis limnicola)
2 Peripatid velvet worm (Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Panarthropoda: Onychophora: 
Peripatidae; Peripatus antiguensis)
3 Paciﬁ c 
beetle-mimic 
cockroach 
(Panarthropoda: Arthropoda: 
Mandibulata: 
Hexapoda: Blattodea: Blaberidae; Diploptera punctata)
4 Megathrips (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Thysanoptera: Phlaeothripidae; 
Megathrips lativentris)
5 Body louse (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Anoplura: Pediculidae; Pediculus 
corporis)
6 Viviparous caddisﬂ y (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Ephemeroptera: 
Ephemeridae; Notanatolica vivipara)
7 Brown soft-scale insect (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Homoptera: Coccidae; 
Lecanium hesperidum)
8 Viviparous moth (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Lepidoptera: Tineidae; 
Tinea vivipara)
9 Flesh ﬂ y (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Diptera: Sarcophagidae; Sarcophaga 
carnaria)
10 Leaf beetle (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae; 
Chrysomela varians)
11 Ichneumon ﬂ y (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: Ichneumonidae; 
Paniscus testaceus)
12 Viviparous 
earwig 
(Arthropoda: 
Mandibulata: 
Hexapoda: 
Dermaptera: 
Hemimeridae; Hemimerus vosseleri)
13 Sea star (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Echinodermata: Asteroidea: Asterinidae; 
Cryptasterina hystera)
14 Deep-water feather star (Echinodermata: Crinoidea: Comasteridae; Comatilia 
iridometriformis)
15 Sea cucumber (Echinodermata: Holothuroidea: Apodida: Synaptidae; Leptosynapta 
clarki)
16 Small brittle star (Echinodermata: Ophiuroidea: Amphiuridae; Amphipholis 
squamata)
17 Placoderm “mother ﬁ sh” (Deuterostomia: Chordata: Vertebrata: Gnathostomata: 
Placodermi: Ptyctodontida: Materpiscis attenboroughi †Devonian)
18 Carboniferous ratﬁ sh (Vertebrata: Chondrichthyes: Holocephali; Delphyodontus 
dacriformes †Carboniferous)
19 Blunt-nose cow shark (Chondrichthyes: Elasmobranchii: Squalea: Hexanchiformes: 
Hexanchidae; Hexanchus griseus)
20 Short-tailed nurse shark (Chondrichthyes: Elasmobranchii: Galeomorphii: 
Orectolobiformes: Ginglymostomatidae; Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum)
21 Cobbler wobbegong shark (Chondrichthyes: Elasmobranchii: Galeomorphii: 
Orectolobiformes: Orectolobidae; Sutorectus tentaculatus)
22 Goblin shark (Chondrichthyes: Elasmobranchii: Galeomorphii: Lamniformes: 
Mitsukurinidae; Mitsukurina owstoni)

Convergent Animals 
87
Table 2.20
(continued)
23 African sawtail catshark (Chondrichthyes: Elasmobranchii: Galeomorphii: 
Carcharhiniformes: Scyliorhinidae; Galeus polli)
24 Speckled 
catshark 
(Chondrichthyes: 
Elasmobranchii: 
Galeomorphii: 
Carcharhiniformes: Scyliorhinidae; Halaelurus boesemani)
25 Cuban ribbontail catshark (Chondrichthyes: Elasmobranchii: Galeomorphii: 
Carcharhiniformes: Proscylliidae; Eridacnis barbouri)
26 Slender smooth-hound shark (Chondrichthyes: Elasmobranchii: Galeomorphii: 
Carcharhiniformes: Proscylliidae; Gollum attenuatus)
27 Barbeled 
hound 
shark 
(Chondrichthyes: 
Elasmobranchii: 
Galeomorphii: 
Carcharhiniformes: Leptochariidae; Leptocharius smithii)
28 Reef 
ocean 
perch 
(Vertebrata: 
Osteichthyes: 
Actinoptergyii: 
Teleostei: 
Scorpaeniformes: Sebastidae; Helicolenus percoides)
29 Large 
Baikal 
golomyanka 
(Actinoptergyii: 
Teleostei: 
Scorpaeniformes: 
Comephoridae; Comophorus baicalensis)
30 Four-eyed ﬁ sh (Actinoptergyii: Teleostei: Cyprinodontiformes: Anablepidae; 
Anableps anableps)
31 Black sailﬁ n goodeid (Actinoptergyii: Teleostei: Cyprinodontiformes: Goodeidae; 
Giardinichthys viviparous)
32 One-sided livebearer (Actinoptergyii: Teleostei: Cyprinodontiformes: Jenynsidae; 
Jenynsia lineata)
33 Live-bearing tooth-carp ﬁ sh (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Cyprinodontiformes: 
Poeciliidae; see Table 2.21)
34 Mousey klipﬁ sh (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Perciformes: Clinidae; Fucomimus mus)
35 Pile perch (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Perciformes: Embiotocidae; Rhacochilus 
vacca)
36 Redrump blenny (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Perciformes: Labrisomidae; Xenomedea 
rhodopyga)
37 Viviparous eelpout (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Perciformes: Zoacidae; Zoarces 
viviparous)
38 Viviparous 
brotula 
(Actinopterygii: 
Teleostei: 
Ophidiiformes: 
Brotulidae; 
Dinematichthys ilucoeteoides)
39 Viviparous bythithid (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Ophidiiformes: Bythitidae; Bythites 
islandicus)
40 False cusk (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Ophidiiformes: Parabrotulidae; Parabrotula 
plagiophthalmus)
41 Viviparous halfbeak (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Beloniformes: Hemiramphidae; 
Zenarchopterus gilli)
42 Coelacanth (Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: Actinistia: Coelacanthidae; Latimeria 
chalumnae)
43 Cayenne caecilian (Sarcopterygii: Tetrapoda: Batrachomorpha: Lissamphibia: 
Gymnophiona: Typhlonectidae; Typhlonectes compressicauda)
44 Banded caecilian (Lissamphibia: Gymnophiona: Scolecomorphidae; Scolecomorphus 
vittatus)
45 African 
live-bearing 
toad 
(Lissamphibia: 
Batrachia: 
Anura: 
Bufonidae; 
Nectophynoides occidentalis)
46 Golden coqui (Lissamphibia: Batrachia: Anura: Leptodactylidae; Eleutherodactylus 
jasperi)
47 Fire salamander (Lissamphibia: Batrachia: Urodela: Salamandridae; Salamandra 
salamandra)
Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a †. For data sources, see text.

88 
Chapter 2
Table 2.21
Convergent evolution of animal reproductive systems: viviparity in amniote animals
Convergent structure and function: VIVIPARITY (development of embryos within the 
body of the female in order to produce more highly developed offspring at birth to enhance 
their potential for survival)
Convergent lineages:
1 Ichthyosaur (Amniota: Sauropsida: Diapsida: Ichthyosauria: Ichthyosauridae; 
Icthyosaurus platyodon †Jurassic)
2 Plesiosaur (Sauropsida: Diapsida: Lepidosauromorpha: Sauropterygia: Pachypleuro-
sauridae; Keichousaurus hui †Triassic)
3 Black-headed dwarf chameleon (Lepidosauromorpha: Lepidosauria: Squamata: 
Iguania: Chameleonidae; Brachypodion melanocephalum)
4 Side-striped chameleon (Lepidosauria: Squamata: Iguania: Chameleonidae; 
Chamaeleo bitaeniatus)
5 Pygmy lizard (Squamata: Iguania: Agamidae; Cophotis ceylanica)
6 Arabian toad-headed lizard (Squamata: Iguania: Agamidae; Phrynocephalus 
arabicus)
7 Helmeted basilisk (Squamata: Iguania: Agamidae; Corytophanes cristatus)
8 Patagonian lizard (Squamata: Iguania: Iguanidae; Phymaturus patagonicus)
9 Rock horned lizard (Squamata: Iguania: Iguanidae; Phrynosoma ditmarsi)
10 Chihuahua desert horned lizard (Squamata: Iguania: Iguanidae; Phrynosoma 
orbiculare)
11 Santa Cruz Island spiny lizard (Squamata: Iguania: Iguanidae; Sceloporus angustus)
12 Trans-volcanic bunchgrass lizard (Squamata: Iguania: Iguanidae; Sceloporus 
bicanthalis)
13 Crevice swift lizard (Squamata: Iguania: Iguanidae; Sceloporus torquatus)
14 Mexican emerald spiny lizard (Squamata: Iguania: Iguanidae; Sceloporus formosus)
15 Florida worm lizard (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Amphisbaenia: Amphisbaenidae; 
Rhineura ﬂ oridana)
16 Jewelled gecko (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Gekkonta: Gekkontidae; Naultinus 
gemmeus)
17 Skinks (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Scincomorpha: Scincidae; see 
Table 2.22)
18 Cape grass lizard (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Scincomorpha: 
Cordylidae; Chamaesaura anguina)
19 Arizona night lizard (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Scincomorpha: 
Xantusiidae; Xantusia arizonae)
20 Common lizard (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Scincomorpha: Lacertidae; 
Lacerta vivipara)
21 Gobi racerunner lizard (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Scincomorpha: 
Lacertidae; Eremias przewalskii)
22 California apod lizard (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: 
Anguidae: Anniellinae; Anniella pulchra)
23 Peloponnesa 
slow-worm 
lizard 
(Squamata: 
Scleroglossa: 
Autarchoglossa: 
Anguimorpha: Anguidae: Anguinae; Anguis cephallonica)
24 Striped grass lizard (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: 
Anguidae: Diploglossinae; Ophiodes striatus)
25 Imbricate alligator lizard (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: 
Anguidae; Barisia imbricata)
26 Flathead knob-scaled lizard (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: 
Xenosauridae; Xenosaurus platyceps)
27 Mosasaur (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: Mosasauridae; 
Platecarpus ictericus †Cretaceous)

Convergent Animals 
89
Table 2.21
(continued)
28 Blind snake (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: Serpentes: 
Typhlopidae; Typhlops diardi)
29 False coral snake (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: Serpentes: 
Aniliidae; Anilius scytale)
30 Western sand boa (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: 
Serpentes: Boidae: Erycinae; Eryx jaculus)
31 Banded dwarf boa (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: 
Serpentes: Tropidophiidae; Tropidophis feicki)
32 Rasp-skinned water snake (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: 
Serpentes: Acrochordidae; Acrochordus granulatus)
33 Brown snake (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: Serpentes: 
Colubridae; Storeria dekayi)
34 Northern death adder (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: 
Serpentes: Elapidae; Acanthophis praelongus)
35 Massasauga rattlesnake (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: 
Serpentes: Viperidae: Crotalinae; Sistrurus catenatus)
36 Green pit viper (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: Serpentes: 
Viperidae: Crotalinae; Trimerosurus albolabris)
37 Gabon viper (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: Serpentes: 
Viperidae: Viperinae; Bitis gabonica)
38 Common European adder (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: 
Serpentes: Viperidae: Viperinae; Vipera berus)
39 Russell’s viper (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: Serpentes: 
Viperidae: Viperinae: Daboia russelli)
40 Mongolian multituberculate (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: 
Multituberculata: Djadochtatheriidae; Kryptobaatar daszevegi †Cretaceous)
41 Virginia opossum (Mammalia: Theria: Marsupialia: Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae; 
Didelphis virginiana)
Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a †. For data sources, see text.
seen in the fossil record (Carter 2008) and in particular in the marine 
reptiles that convergently returned to the marine realm from the ter-
restrial in the Mesozoic — the ichthyosaurs, plesiosaurs, and mosasaurs 
(Lee and Shine 1998; Cheng et al. 2004; Carter 2008).  
 The numerous incidences of convergent evolution of viviparity within 
the squamates are evidence of the adaptive value of this reproductive 
mode, or the role of functional constraint in convergent evolution, but 
evidence of developmental constraint may be present as well. Thompson 
and Speake (2006) argue that the unique development of an intravitel-
line mesoderm and the formation of an isolated yolk sac makes it par-
ticularly easy for squamates to make the developmental shift to viviparity, 
which they have done repeatedly (  table 2.21 ). On the other hand, the 
highly speciose clades of both the plesiomorphic turtles and highly 
derived archosaurs have remained oviparous. Lee and Shine (1998) 
suggest that this also may be due to developmental constraint, in that 

90 
Chapter 2
 Table 2.22 
 Convergent evolution of animal reproductive systems: complex placentae 
 1   Convergent structure and function: COMPLEX PLACENTAE (extensive matrotrophy 
for the production of highly developed offspring at birth to enhance their potential for 
survival) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1  Dwarf livebearer ﬁ sh (Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Cyprinodontiformes: 
Poeciliidae;  Heterandria formosa ) 
 1.2  Live-bearing tooth-carp ﬁ sh (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Cyprinodontiformes: 
Poeciliidae;  Poeciliopsis paucimaculata ) 
 1.3  Live-bearing tooth-carp ﬁ sh (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Cyprinodontiformes: 
Poeciliidae;  Poeciliopsis proliﬁ ca ) 
 1.4  Live-bearing tooth-carp ﬁ sh (Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Cyprinodontiformes: 
Poeciliidae;  Poeciliopsis turneri ) 
 2   Convergent structure and function: OBLIGATE PLACENTOTROPHY (Type IV full 
matrotrophy for the production of highly developed offspring at birth to enhance their 
potential for survival) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1   Brazilian scincid lizard (Amniota: Sauropsida: Diapsida: Lepidosauromorpha: 
Lepidosauria: Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Scincomorpha: Scincidae; 
 Mabuya heathi ) 
 2.2   Italian three-toed skink (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Scincomorpha: 
Scincidae;  Chalcides chalcides ) 
 2.3   Australian grass skink (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Scincomorpha: 
Scincidae;  Pseudemoia entrecasteauxii ) 
 2.4   Western serpentiform skink (Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Scincomorpha: 
Scincidae;  Eumecia anchietae ) 
 2.5  Placental mammal  “ dawn mother ” (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: 
Theria: Eutheria;  Eomaia scansoria  † Cretaceous) 
     Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a  † . For data sources, see text. 
embryonic diapause is widespread in both turtle and archosaur species, 
but not in squamates. In embryonic diapause, the egg will suspend devel-
opment if retained in the uterus of the female, and only resumes develop-
ment after it is laid. Thus, prolonged retention of the egg within the 
female will not result in signiﬁ cant development of the embryo in utero, 
a process that is a precursor to hatching the egg in utero and live birth. 
 In synapsid amniotes, it was long thought that lecithotrophic viviparity 
was evolved once by the marsupials (  table 2.21 ) and obligate placentot-
rophy once by the eutherians (  table 2.22 ). Evidence now suggests that 
the extinct multituberculate mammals independently evolved lecithotro-
phic viviparity as well (Kielan-Jaworowska 1979), bringing the total to 
twice for the mammals as opposed to 39 times for the reptiles.  
 The evolution of extensive matrotrophy (Types III and IV) with 
complex placentae and obligate placentotrophy is much rarer than the 
evolution of viviparity (Thompson and Speake 2006). Obligate placen-

Convergent Animals 
91
totrophy was long considered to be an autapomorphy and deﬁ ning char-
acteristic of the eutherians, the placental mammals, the ﬁ rst of which 
evolved 125 million years ago in the Early Cretaceous (Ji et al. 2002). 
This view was overturned with the discovery of Type IV matrotrophy in 
the Brazilian scincid lizard  Mabuya heathi (Blackburn et al. 1984), and 
subsequent discoveries of obligate placentotrophy in three other skink 
species (Blackburn 1993, 2000; Flemming and Blackburn 2003). Thus, 
both the synapsid and sauropsid lineages of amniotes have convergently 
evolved obligate placentotrophy (  table 2.22 ). The mammalian evolution-
ary pathway from oviparity (monotremes) to lecithotrophic viviparity 
(marsupials) to obligate placentotrophy (eutherians) has been indepen-
dently traveled by the squamate reptiles. 
 Is complex placentation thus a unique trait of land animals? Perhaps 
not. Reznick et al. (2002) have developed a  “ matrotrophy index ” (MI) 
for species comparisons, which they have used to argue that complex 
placentation has convergently evolved four separate times in ﬁ sh ( table 
2.22 ). They point out that species with lecithotrophic viviparity typically 
have an MI of 0.6 to 0.7, whereas the ﬁ sh species  Poeciliopsis retropinna 
has an MI of 117. Although the argument for the evolution of complex 
placentation remains controversial (see Morell 2002), many of the vivip-
arous ﬁ sh species remain to be analyzed using the methodology of 
Reznick et al. (2002). 
 In concluding this section of the chapter on the convergent evolution 
of reproductive traits in animals, I would like to mention the land plants. 
Plants are very different organisms from animals; for one thing, they can 
synthesize their own food. Nevertheless, as we shall see in the next 
chapter, plants faced the same functional problems that animals faced in 
their transition from the sea to the land, and thus their evolution is as 
rife with convergence as we have seen in this chapter among the animals. 
That convergence extends even to the plants ’  mode of reproduction, for 
the early free-spore-reproducing land plants were as dependent on a 
source of water for their reproduction as were the amphibian animals, 
and the evolution of the seed by land plants was the equivalent of the 
evolution of the amniote egg by tetrapods, a key trait in their respective 
successful invasion of terrestrial habitats (Niklas 1997).  


 3 
 Phenotypic correspondence among unrelated species provides strong circum-
stantial evidence for adaptive evolution because it shows that organisms differing 
in genetic and developmental capabilities can converge on comparable solutions 
to life ’ s exigencies when confronted with the same or very similar selection pres-
sures. Here we shall consider a much touted example of convergent evolution —
 arborescence, the tree growth habit. 
 — Niklas (1997, 316) 
 Arborescence 
 The reverse of the old adage  “ not seeing the forest for the trees ”  — the 
condition in which people overlook a larger overall pattern because they 
are too narrowly focused on individual particulars — is  “ not seeing the 
trees for the forest. ”  The trees in a forest do vary — an oak tree is differ-
ent from a maple tree — but the apparent similarity of tree form that can 
be seen throughout thousands of trees in a forest may give one the 
impression that all trees are variants of a single common ancestor. This 
is not so. Nine separate groups of plants have independently and con-
vergently evolved the tree form (Niklas 1997; Donoghue 2005; Stein 
et al. 2007). 
 Trees are an adaptation to life on land. Plant growth in a two-
dimensional plane soon leads to crowding and overgrowth, with one 
plant shading out another plant in the competition for light from the sun, 
the energy source for the survival of the plant. Just as in human cities, 
when crowding occurs in the two-dimensional plane of the land surface, 
the solution is to move into the third dimension above the land surface —
 to construct towering skyscraper buildings or to evolve trees. 
 In order to grow into the third dimension of height, a major force must 
be overcome — gravity. Tree forms all have a central support structure, 
the trunk, that rises vertically from the land surface. At some distance 
 Convergent Plants 

94 
Chapter 3
above the ground, branches extend out from the tree trunk in order to 
capture as much sunlight as possible for the tree ’ s survival and, in order 
to ensure the survival of the species, to facilitate fertilization and disper-
sal of the tree ’ s offspring. 
 The ﬁ rst trees appeared in the Middle Devonian, over 390 million 
years ago. Plants began their full-scale invasion of the terrestrial realm 
in the Late Devonian and Carboniferous, and huge forests spread across 
the landscapes of the Earth. The trees in those forests were very different 
from those that constitute the forests of the Earth today. The famous 
Gilboa fossil forest in New York State, from the Middle Devonian, gives 
us a glimpse of the earliest forests on Earth. Numerous upright trunks 
of trees are preserved as sandstone casts, each one broken off about a 
meter above the ancient ground surface. The trunks range in size from 
about a half meter to a meter in diameter with a wider, bulbous base 
with numerous small anchoring roots, revealing that these earliest trees 
had no taproot system for anchoring. The morphology of the upper por-
tions of the trees was completely unknown until the spectacular discov-
ery in 2007 of fossils of the complete tree, logs that had fallen over and 
were preserved horizontally, in rock outcrops only 13 kilometers east of 
the Gilboa forest (Stein et al. 2007). Some of these trees were over 8 
meters tall and, most surprisingly, had no laminar leaves or horizontal 
branches. Instead, they were topped with a crown resembling a spiky 
pipe brush or shaving brush, consisting of numerous digitately branched 
offshoots held at an acute angle to the trunk stem. The complete tree 
 Wattieza (Eospermatopteris) erianus  belongs to an extinct group, the 
Cladoxylopsida (  table 3.1 ), that is related to modern surviving horsetail 
rushes (see the appendix). Stein et al. (2007, 906) note that the cladoxy-
lopsid tree ’ s  “ body plan now stands unequivocally as the oldest known 
arborescent terrestrial plant form ”  and that it is  “ therefore interesting to 
see how instantly recognizable and, in a signiﬁ cant sense,  ‘ modern ’ the 
tree-like architecture of  Wattieza seems to be. ”  
 Both the more plesiomorphic lycophyte club mosses and the 
cladoxylopsid-related equisetophyte horsetail rushes independently 
evolved towering trees (  table 3.1 ), although the tallest members of these 
groups today is around 10 centimeters. In the lycophytes, the ancient 
lepidodendrid scale trees constructed their trunks with two outer layers 
of cortex beneath an outermost layer of leaf cushions, whereas in the 
equisetophytes, the ancient calamite horsetail trees had trunks supported 
by internal wedges of wood (Niklas 1997). 

Convergent Plants 
95
 Three separate groups of the ferns have convergently evolved the tree 
form through time: the psaronis-type tree ferns in the Carboniferous, the 
tempskya-type tree ferns in the Cretaceous, and the tree ferns that 
survive today (  table 3.1 ). Each group invented a different type of trunk 
in their evolution: the Carboniferous tree ferns had trunks supported by 
an outer mantle of adventitious roots, the Cretaceous tree ferns had 
trunks consisting of interweaved stems bound together by adventitious 
roots, and living tree ferns have a lower columnar base of adventitious 
roots and an upper trunk supported by an outer layer of cortex and 
external layer of leaf bases (Niklas 1997). 
 The ﬁ rst of the lignophyte trees that are so abundant today appeared 
in the Devonian, particularly the archaeopterid-type woody trees of the 
Late Devonian, which still reproduced with spores but had trunks sup-
ported by innermost concentric layers of heartwood (Niklas 1997). These 
trees gave rise to the ﬁ rst seed plants in the Late Devonian, a reproduc-
tive event in plant evolution equivalent to the evolution of the amniote 
egg in the tetrapods that we considered in the previous chapter, thus a 
 Table 3.1 
 Convergent evolution of arborescent plant morphologies 
 Convergent structure and function: TREE TRUNK (vertical support structure to resist 
gravity for the elevation and spatial dispersal of photosynthetic and reproductive 
substructures) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1  Lepidodendrid 
scale 
tree 
(Tracheophyta: 
Lycophyta: 
Lepidodendracea; 
 Lepidodendron rhodumnense  † Carboniferous) 
 2   Gilboa-forest cladoxylopsid tree (Tracheophyta: Euphyllophyta: Moniliformopses: 
Cladoxylopsida: Pseudosporochnaceae;  Wattieza (Eospermatopteris) erianus  † Middle 
Devonian) 
 3   Calamite 
horsetail 
tree 
(Euphyllophyta: 
Moniliformopses: 
Equisetophyta: 
Calamitaceae;  Calamites cistiiformes  † Carboniferous) 
 4  Psaronis-type tree ferns (Euphyllophyta: Moniliformopses: Filicophyta: Marattiaceae; 
 Psaronius schopﬁ i  † Carboniferous) 
 5  Tempskya-type 
tree 
ferns 
(Euphyllophyta: 
Moniliformopses: 
Filicophyta: 
Tempskyaceae;  Tempskya dernbachii  † Cretaceous) 
 6   Australian tree fern (Euphyllophyta: Moniliformopses: Filicophyta: Cyatheaceae; 
 Cyathea cooperi ) 
 7   Archaeopterid-type woody trees (Euphyllophyta: Lignophyta: Archaeopteridales: 
Archaeopteridaceae;  Archaeopteris hibernica  † Late Devonian) 
 8   Cycad palm (Euphyllophyta: Lignophyta: Spermatophyta: Cycadophyta: Cycadaceae; 
 Cycas media ) 
 9  Date 
palm 
(Euphyllophyta: 
Lignophyta: 
Spermatophyta: 
Angiospermae: 
Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Aracaceae;  Phoenix dactylifera ) 
     Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a  † . For data sources, see text. 

96 
Chapter 3
vital event in the plant conquest of the terrestrial realm. The spermato-
phyte seed plants are incredibly diverse. Although they descend from the 
original lignophyte trees, at least two groups of spermatophytes have lost 
and secondarily reevolved the tree form: the cycad palms and the date 
palms (  table 3.1 ). The cycad palms have trunks that are supported by an 
outermost layer of persistent leaf bases, whereas the date palms have 
trunks supported by a ﬁ brous complex of primary vascular bundles, 
increasing in density of occurrence from the center to the outer margin 
of the trunk (Niklas 1997), very different from the heartwood trunks of 
most lignophyte trees today. 
 Niklas (1997, 316) argues strongly for the role of functional constraint 
in the evolution of the tree form:  “ convergence among so many different 
plant lineages for many biomechanical traits rather than only one or a 
few important ones strongly suggests that these traits are the result of 
adaptive evolution and not fortuitous expressions of diffusive evolution. ”  
Would not these same functional constraints produce the same evolu-
tionary result in alien worlds, as they have nine independent times here 
on Earth? If sessile multicellular photoautotrophic organisms evolve on 
distant Earth-like worlds, and if those organisms emerge from the seas 
to invade the land, then they should necessarily — and convergently —
 evolve the geometry of the tree form. Or, in the spirit of theoretical 
morphology, can we conceive of an alternative geometry that these 
organisms might evolve to solve the problems of overcrowding, gravity, 
and maximizing surface area for photosynthesis? We shall return to this 
question in the next chapter, when we consider the possible evolution of 
balloon-like plants, plants that could ﬂ oat in the air, and why such hypo-
thetical plants do not exist on the Earth. 
 Niklas (1997) points out that both the ancient lepidodendrid scale 
trees and the calamite horsetail trees not only convergently evolved tree-
trunk support structures, but also independently evolved traits such as 
wood tissue, leaves, cones for sporangia, and heterosporous reproduc-
tion. These ancient trees depended upon a readily available and depend-
able supply of water for their free-spore mode of reproduction, and thus 
were conﬁ ned to swampy regions of the terrestrial realm — a develop-
mentally imposed constraint similar to that seen in early tetrapod invad-
ers of the terrestrial realm, the amphibians (as discussed in the previous 
chapter). And just as the tetrapods escaped that constraint in the evolu-
tion of the amniotes, the plants escaped it in the evolution of the seed 
plants, an event in reproductive evolution that we shall consider in detail 
later in this chapter. 

Convergent Plants 
97
 Because land plants are surrounded by air, not water, they require a 
system to transport water from the soil below to the plant tissues above, 
where it is needed. The simplest of the embryophytes, land plants such 
as liverworts, have no roots and no vascular system. The derived and 
highly successful vascular land plants are classiﬁ ed as tracheophytes, as 
they possess tracheids, specialized cells for the transport of water up the 
stem of the plant against the force of gravity (Lecointre and Le Guyader 
2006). Advanced embryophytes, such as  Cooksonia hemisphaerica from 
the Late Silurian and  Aglaophyton major  from the Devonian, are now 
considered to be transitional to the earliest true tracheophytes (Niklas 
1997). These horneophytes had no roots or leaves, but did have small 
stems that stood up against the force of gravity and bifurcated to produce 
multiple tips that contained the sporangia. The tracheids of the earliest 
tracheophytes were arranged in a series of circular rings, stacked one 
atop another up the stem of the plant, or in a continuous climbing 
helix. The walls of the tracheids were ligniﬁ ed, and thus also provided 
some support to hold the stem of the plant erect against the force of 
gravity. The question is still open as to whether tracheids are a synapo-
morphy, arising only once in plant evolution, and whether the Tra-
cheophyta are monophyletic. A possible alternative is that tracheids are 
convergent, independently evolved in the lycophytes and the euphyllo-
phytes (Niklas 1997). 
 The next evolutionary step beyond tracheids for water transport within 
the plant is the evolution of vessels for rapid and higher-volume water 
transport. The evolution of vessels is clearly convergent: at least nine 
separate phylogenetic lineages of tracheophytes have independently 
evolved vessels (  table 3.2 ). The angiosperms alone have convergently 
evolved vessels several times (Niklas 1997); for example, the basal angio-
sperm nymphaealeans have independently evolved vessels at least twice 
(Schneider and Carlquist 1995). Rates of water and food transport within 
a plant are size limiting; with the convergent evolution of vessels, plants 
began to achieve large sizes, and with the convergent evolution of trunks 
( table 3.1 ) the invasion of land was in full force.  
 Photoautotrophs: Light Capture 
 Plants are photoautotrophs: they produce their own food via photosyn-
thesis. Early land plants, such as  Cooksonia hemisphaerica  some 425 
million years ago, had small green stems and no leaves. A stem is a small 
cylinder, with a fairly large surface area where photosynthesis can take 

98 
Chapter 3
place, and a small volume of internal tissue in need of food. The key word 
in the last sentence is  “ small ” : the larger the cylinder, the smaller its 
surface area relative to its volume, as surface area increases as a square 
function of linear dimension whereas volume increases as a cubic func-
tion. Thus, the larger the stem of the plant, the smaller its surface area, 
where photosynthesis occurs, relative to its volume of internal tissue, 
where food is needed. 
 The solution to this classic area-volume problem is to somehow 
increase the surface area of the plant that is capable of photosynthesizing 
food — that is, to evolve leaves. The evolution of the leaf has occurred 
independently in at least nine different phylogenetic lineages of land 
plants (  table 3.3 ). Interestingly, eight of these lineages convergently 
developed leaves in the Devonian, from the simple liverworts to the ﬁ rst 
of the derived lignophyte trees. Thus, the many leaves we see around us 
each day, from ferns to maple tree leaves, can be traced back in time to 
that explosion of convergent evolution in the Devonian.  
 Botanists divide leaves into two types: microphylls, which are small 
with only one vein and no leaf gaps, and macrophylls, which are large 
with complex venation and leaf gaps (Tomescu 2008). Not surprisingly, 
microphylls were convergently evolved by Devonian liverworts, mosses, 
 Table 3.2 
 Convergent evolution of water-conducting structures in plants 
 Convergent structure and function: VESSELS (water-conducting cellular structures for 
rapid water transport within the plant) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1   Resurrection 
plant 
(Tracheophyta: 
Lycophyta: 
Selaginellaceae; 
 Selaginella 
 lepidophylla ) 
 2  Woodland horsetail (Tracheophyta: Euphyllophyta: Moniliformopses: Equisetopyta: 
Equisetaceae;  Equisetum sylvaticum ) 
 3   Bracken fern (Euphyllophyta: Moniliformopses: Filicophyta: Dennstaedtiaceae; 
 Pteridium aquilinum ) 
 4  Gigantopterid 
seed 
fern 
(Euphyllophyta: 
Lignophyta: 
Spermatophyta: 
Gigantopteridales: Gigantopteridaceae;  Gigantopteris nicotianaefolia  † Permian) 
 5   Arizona ephedra (Euphyllophyta: Lignophyta: Spermatophyta: Gnetophyta: 
Ephedraceae;  Ephedra fasciculata ) 
 6  Malaysian  “ water lily ” (Euphyllophyta: Lignophyta: Spermatophyta: Angiospermae: 
Nymphaeales: Nymphaeaceae;  Barclaya kunstleri ) 
 7  Giant  “ water lily ” (Euphyllophyta: Lignophyta: Spermatophyta: Angiospermae: 
Nymphaeales: Nymphaeaceae;  Victoria amazonica ) 
 8  Pumpkin 
(Euphyllophyta: 
Lignophyta: 
Spermatophyta: 
Angiospermae: 
Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Cucurbitaceae;  Cucurbita maxima ) 
     Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a  † . For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Plants 
99
and lycopods (Gensel and Kasper 2005); that is, in land plants that are 
small and thus less in need of increased surface area for photosynthesis. 
The analyses of Boyce and Knoll (2002) demonstrate that macrophylls 
evolved convergently at least four separate times in the equisetophytes, 
ﬁ licophytes,  “ progymnosperms ” (nonspermatophyte lignophytes), and 
spermatophytes. In   table 3.3  I have listed a leaf species that is one of the 
most ancient for each of these groups, taken from the analyses of Boyce 
and Knoll (2002). Tomescu (2008) agrees that macrophylls originated 
independently a minimum of four times, but presents phylogenetic analy-
ses that suggest the actual number of convergences may be nine. He 
demonstrates that leaves were independently developed at least twice in 
the ferns (separately in the Psilotaceae and the Zygopteridaceae), and 
perhaps as many as ﬁ ve times. Likewise, he argues that leaves arose 
independently in both the aneurophyte and archaeopterid nonspermato-
phyte lignophytes ( table 3.3 ). 
 Before leaving this section on photosynthetic light-capture structures 
in plants, I would like to touch brieﬂ y on the convergent evolution of a 
different type of light-capture structure: eyes. Eyes are usually con-
sidered to be unique to animals, and we examined their convergent 
 Table 3.3 
 Convergent evolution of leaves in plants 
 Convergent structure and function: LEAVES (expanded-surface-area phototrophic 
structures for light capture and photosynthesis) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1   Devonian liverwort leaf (Embryophyta: Marchantiophyta: Pallavincinaceae; 
 Pallavicinites devonicus  † Late Devonian) 
 2   Devonian moss leaf (Embryophyta: Stomatophyta: Hemitracheophyta: Bryophyta 
 sensu stricto : Sporogitales;  Sporogonites exuberans  † Early Devonian) 
 3   Devonian lycopod leaf (Hemitracheophyta: Polysporangiophyta: Tracheophyta: 
Lycophyta: Protolepidodendraceae;  Leclercqia andrewsii  † Middle Devonian) 
 4   Devonian 
horsetail 
leaf 
(Tracheophyta: 
Euphyllophyta: 
Moniliformopses: 
Equisetophyta: Sphenopsidaceae;  Sphenophyllum involutum  † Late Devonian) 
 5   Whisk fern leaf (Euphyllophyta: Moniliformopses: Filicophyta: Psilotaceae;  Psilotum 
nudum ) 
 6  Devonian fern leaf (Euphyllophyta: Moniliformopses: Filicophyta: Zygopteridaceae; 
 Ellesmeris sphenopteroides  † Late Devonian) 
 7   Devonian 
aneurophyte 
leaf 
(Euphyllophyta: 
Lignophyta: 
Aneurophytales: 
Pseudosporochnaceae;  Rellimia thomsonii  † Middle Devonian) 
 8   Devonian archaeopterid leaf (Euphyllophyta: Lignophyta: Archaeopteridales: 
Archaeopteridaceae;  Archaeopteris hibernica  † Late Devonian) 
 9   Carboniferous 
seed-fern 
leaf 
(Euphyllophyta: 
Lignophyta: 
Spermatophyta: 
Lyginopteridales: Lyginopteridaceae;  Telangium biﬁ dum  † Early Carboniferous) 
     Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a  † . For data sources, see text. 

100 
Chapter 3
evolution in detail in the previous chapter (see table 2.15). However, not 
only have eyes evolved in the unikontan branch of the eukaryote phy-
logenetic tree — the branch leading to animals — but they have conver-
gently evolved in the bikontan branch as well, the branch that leads to 
the plants (see the appendix). And not just once — simple eyespots have 
independently evolved in a wide variety of phototactic algae and algal 
phytoﬂ agellates (  table 3.4 ). Eyespots have independently evolved no less 
than 11 separate times in groups as diverse as green algae, brown algae, 
yellow-green algae, and many algal ﬂ agellates (Foster and Smyth 1980; 
Kivic and Walne 1983). Kivic and Walne (1983) document the convergent 
evolution of different types of eyespots in the algae ( table 3.4 ), and 
Foster and Smyth (1980, 619) also demonstrate that the phototaxis 
 Table 3.4 
 Convergent evolution of eyes in algae and algal phytoﬂ agellates 
 Convergent structure and function: EYESPOTS (photoreceptor cells aggregated into 
distinct spot regions for light-detection abilities) 
 1  EYESPOT TYPE A: 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1   Chroomonas cryptophyte (Eukarya: Bikonta: Chromoalveolata: Cryptophyta; 
 Chroomonas salina ) 
 1.2  Perdinium dinoﬂ agellate (Eukarya: Bikonta: Chromoalveolata: Dinophyta; 
 Peridinium westii ) 
 1.3   Chlamydomonas green alga (Eukarya: Bikonta: Green eukaryotes: Chlorobionta: 
Ulvophyta: Chlorophyceae;  Chlamydomonas reinhardtii ) 
 1.4  Platymonas ﬂ agellated alga (Eukarya: Bikonta: Green eukaryotes: Chlorobionta: 
Prasinophyta;  Platymonas subcordiformis ) 
 2  EYESPOT TYPE B: 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1   Pavlova coccolithophorid (Eukarya: Bikonta: Chromoalveolata: Haptophyta; 
 Pavlova helicata ) 
 2.2  Ochromonas golden alga (Eukarya: Bikonta: Chromoalveolata: Stramenopiles: 
Chrysophyceae;  Ochromonas villosa ) 
 2.3   Fucus 
brown 
alga 
(Eukarya: 
Bikonta: 
Chromoalveolata: 
Stramenopiles: 
Phaeophyceae;  Fucus serratus ) 
 2.4  Heterococcus 
yellow-green 
alga 
(Eukarya: 
Bikonta: 
Chromoalveolata: 
Stramenopiles; Xanthophyceae;  Heterococcus pleurococcoides ) 
 3  EYESPOT TYPE C: 
 Convergent lineages: 
 3.1   Euglena euglenophyte (Eukarya: Bikonta: Excavobionta: Euglenobionta;  Euglena 
gracilis ) 
 3.2  Wolozynskia dinoﬂ agellate (Eukarya: Bikonta: Chromoalveolata: Dinophyta; 
 Wolozynskia coronata ) 
 3.3  Polydriella 
eustigmatophyte 
alga 
(Eukarya: 
Bikonta: 
Chromoalveolata: 
Stramenopiles: Eustigmatophyceae;  Polydriella helvetica ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Plants 
101
control system for the motile species often has  “ dramatically different 
machinery ” and has been independently derived in each group.  
 While present in some of the most plesiomorphic Chlorobionta, like 
the green algae, eyespots are lost in higher plants, particularly sessile land 
plants. Land plants have evolved a series of phototropic mechanisms 
instead, as seen in plant species that slowly turn in the light, tracking the 
path of the sun across the sky, or opening and closing their ﬂ owers in 
response to the rising and setting of the sun. Charles Darwin was fasci-
nated with heliotropic movement in plants, and discovered in his experi-
ments that his plants stopped tracking the sun during the day if a ﬁ lter 
removing blue wavelength light was placed between them and the sun. 
We now know that the genes encoding for heliotropic movement in 
plants have been convergently evolved in animals, where they are used 
in maintaining circadian rhythms (this example of molecular conver-
gence will be considered further in chapter 5). 
 Photoautotrophs: Carbon Processing 
 Life has evolved a variety of autotrophic pathways: chemoautotrophic 
eubacteria obtain energy for organic synthesis from oxidizing methane, 
ammonia, nitrites, sulﬁ tes, or other inorganic mineral compounds present 
on the Earth. Photoautotrophic eubacteria obtain the energy they need 
from a source not on the Earth, namely by capturing photons from the 
sun. The oxygenic type of photosynthesis was evolved by the cyanobac-
teria over 3.5 billion years ago, as witnessed by the presence of stromato-
lite bacterial mounds in the Earth ’ s fossil record; the subsequent 
production of free oxygen by these bacteria has transformed the very 
atmosphere of the planet. In the Cenozoic, some 3.47 billion years later, 
oxygen levels in the atmosphere have risen to such high levels, and 
carbon dioxide content fallen to such low levels, that they actually inter-
fere with the photosynthetic process the cyanobacteria evolved such a 
long time ago. 
 The chloroplasts in the cells of all photosynthetic eukaryotes, and 
hence all plants, are symbiotic cyanobacteria. Carbon ﬁ xation for the 
production of hydrocarbon molecules, or food, by plants is catalyzed 
by  Rubisco  (ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase) in an 
ancient process known as C 3  photosynthesis. In the normal C 3 photosyn-
thetic pathway, carbon is ﬁ xed directly by Rubisco carboxylation in 
mesophyll-tissue chloroplasts. However, if carbon dioxide partial pres-
sures in the atmosphere are low and oxygen partial pressures are high, 

102 
Chapter 3
the presence of oxygen can interfere with Rubisco carboxylation and 
produces oxygenation instead; ﬁ xed carbon is then wastefully lost in 
photorespiration. 
 About 30 to 50 million years ago this threshold was reached in the 
evolution of the Earth ’ s atmosphere. This event was partially due to the 
activity of land plants themselves, as they have been extracting carbon 
dioxide from the atmosphere and releasing free oxygen back into the 
atmosphere for the past 425 million years, ever since the rapid spread of 
land plants in the Late Silurian. It was also partially due to the formation 
of the gigantic Himalayan mountain chain in the Cenozoic, produced by 
the plate-tectonic-driven collision of the Indian subcontinent with Asia, 
and subsequent weathering processes that have removed a substantial 
amount of carbon dioxide from the Earth ’ s atmosphere. In any event, 
plants began to experience difﬁ culty in ﬁ xing carbon using the C 3 pho-
tosynthetic pathway. 
 To deal with the problem of Rubisco oxygenation, plants have evolved 
a more efﬁ cient C 4  photosynthetic pathway, one that builds upon the 
original C 3  pathway but adds an additional carbon dioxide – concentrating 
pathway. In the C 4  photosynthetic pathway, carbon is primarily ﬁ xed by 
PEPC (phosphoenol pyruvate carboxylase) carboxylation in the meso-
phyll tissue, and then four carbon acids are shuttled into bundle-sheath 
tissue regions of the leaf where Rubisco and the chloroplasts have been 
concentrated (Sage 1999, 2001a). This more efﬁ cient C 4 photosynthetic 
pathway of carbon dioxide concentration can overcome photorespira-
tion that would normally be triggered by high oxygen levels in the 
atmosphere. 
 Evolution of the C 4  photosynthetic pathway is not trivial. Land plants 
were developmentally constrained by the original ancient Rubisco-based 
biochemistry and cellular systems evolved over 425 million years ago 
(Sage 1999). Thus, it might appear that only a few types of plants (or 
perhaps only one) could have made the biochemical and cellular changes 
necessary to evolve a new photosynthetic pathway. But this is not the 
case: the C 4  photosynthetic pathway has been independently evolved, 
over and over, by different plant groups in the past 30 million years ( table 
3.5 ). The phylogenetic analyses of Kellogg (1999) have revealed that the 
C 4  photosynthetic pathway was independently evolved by 18 separate 
angiosperm families, and that it has convergently arisen at least four 
independent times in the grass family Poaceae alone (Sinha and Kellogg 
1996). In   table 3.5  I have listed basal or near basal species for each clade 
of plants that have independently evolved C 4  photosynthesis from the 

Convergent Plants 
103
cladograms of Kellogg (1999) and Sinha and Kellogg (1996). At present, 
the known number of convergences of C 4  photosynthesis stands at 33, 
but future analyses of previously unstudied angiosperm groups are 
almost certainly going to lengthen the list of convergences in the future 
(Sage 2001a, 2001b).  
 Is C 4  photosynthesis developmentally constrained to the ﬂ owering 
plants? Sage (2001b) notes that it is surprising that C 4  photosynthesis has 
not been evolved by the nonangiosperm tracheophytes, particularly the 
ferns, and suggests that only the ﬂ owing plants have the developmental 
ﬂ exibility to evolve the biochemical and cellular changes necessary for 
C 4  photosynthesis. In addition, some geochemical models suggest that 
atmospheric oxygen and carbon dioxide levels may have approached 
today ’ s levels back in the Carboniferous, largely due to the effects of 
the explosive spread of the Earth ’ s ﬁ rst forests. The fact that tracheal-
breathing size-limited hexapods, such as the dragonﬂ ies, could evolve 
species with 75-centimeter wingspans supports the model predictions of 
higher oxygen levels in the Carboniferous. Yet no evidence exists that 
any of the Carboniferous plants groups (all nonangiosperm, for the 
angiosperms evolved much later in the Cretaceous) evolved the C 4 pho-
tosynthetic pathway (Sage 1999). 
 Although at present it is known that only about 3 percent of angio-
sperm species are C 4 photosynthesizers, that 3 percent accounts for 
about 30 percent of total terrestrial primary productivity on a global 
scale, and up to as much as 80 percent of the primary productivity in 
certain ecosystems, such as tropical grasslands (Sage 2001b). Following 
the expectations of the theory of natural selection, one would predict the 
further convergent evolution of C 4  photosynthesis in new angiosperm 
groups, and continued ecological expansion of existing C 4 photosynthe-
sizers (  table 3.5 ) into the future. However, Sage (2001a) has noted that 
human burning of fossil fuels in the past several hundred years has led 
to progressively increasing levels of carbon dioxide in the Earth ’ s atmo-
sphere, a process that favors the original C 3  photosynthesizers, while 
other human activities, such as slash-and-burn agriculture and deforesta-
tion in the tropics, has favored the spread of C 4  grasslands and weeds. 
Thus, predicting the future direction of plant evolution appears to be 
more a function of predicting the future activity of humans than that 
of plants. 
 In the past two sections of the chapter we have considered some of 
the functional problems associated with a photoautrophic mode of life, 
and the convergencies that necessarily result from those functional 

104 
Chapter 3
Table 3.5
Convergent evolution of the C4 photosynthetic pathway in plants in the past 30 million 
years
Convergent pathway and function: C4 PHOTOSYNTHESIS (more efﬁ cient photosynthetic 
pathway to counteract Rubisco oxidation and photorespiration)
Convergent lineages:
1 Water thyme (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Alismatales: Hydrocharitaceae; 
Hydrilla verticillata)
2 Switchgrass (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Commelinidae: 
Poaceae; Panicum virgatum)
3 Maize (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Commelinidae: 
Poaceae; Zea mays)
4 Australian eriachne grass (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: 
Commelinidae: Poaceae; Eriachne triodioides)
5 Sand dropseed (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Commelinidae: 
Poaceae; Sporobolus cryptandrus)
6 Flatspike 
sedge 
(Euangiosperms: 
Monocotyledons: 
Eumonocotyledons: 
Commelinidae: Cyperaceae; Abildgaardia ovata)
7 Egyptian 
papyrus 
(Euangiosperms: 
Monocotyledons: 
Eumonocotyledons: 
Commelinidae: Cyperaceae; Cyperus papyrus)
8 Amphibious 
sedge 
(Euangiosperms: 
Monocotyledons: 
Eumonocotyledons: 
Commelinidae: Cyperaceae; Eleocharis vivipara)
9 Rhynchospora 
(Euangiosperms: 
Monocotyledons: 
Eumonocotyledons: 
Commelinidae: Cyperaceae; Rhynchospora rubra)
10 Mongolian calligonum (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: 
Polygonaceae; Calligonum mongolicum)
11 Pindan 
pink 
(Euangiosperms: 
Eudicots: 
Core 
eudicots: 
Caryophyllales: 
Caryophyllaceae; Polycarpaea longiﬂ ora)
12 Tassel 
ﬂ ower 
(Euangiosperms: 
Eudicots: 
Core 
eudicots: 
Caryophyllales: 
Amaranthaceae; Amaranthus edulis)
13 Black 
saxual 
(Euangiosperms: 
Eudicots: 
Core 
eudicots: 
Caryophyllales: 
Chenopodiaceae; Haloxylon aphyllum)
14 Suaeda halophyte (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: 
Chenopodiaceae; Suaeda aralocaspica)
15 Four-wing saltbush (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: 
Chenopodiaceae; Atriplex canescens)
16 Slender snakecotton (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: 
Chenopodiaceae; Froelichia gracilis)
17 Bienertia halophyte (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: 
Chenopodiaceae; Bienertia sinuspersici)
18 Little hogweed (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: 
Portulacaceae; Portulaca oleracea)
19 Australian anacampseros (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: 
Portulacaceae; Anacampseros australiana)
20 Shoreline purslane (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: 
Aizoaceae; Sesuvium portulacastrum)
21 Scarlet spiderling (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: 
Nyctaginaceae; Boerhavia coccinea)
22 Naked-stem carpetweed (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: 
Molluginaceae; Mollugo nudicaulis)
23 Hawaiian spurge (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Euphorbiaceae; 
Chamaecyce forbesii)

Convergent Plants 
105
constraints on possible evolutionary pathways. One way around these 
constraints would be to switch from an autotrophic mode of life to a 
heterotrophic one; that is, to evolve a mode of life similar to that seen in 
the animals and the fungi. In the next chapter we shall consider plants 
that have done just that: the convergent evolution of carnivorous plants 
(plants that eat animals) and herbivorous plants (plants that eat other 
plants). 
 Defense: Antiherbivore Adaptations 
 Herbivores are to plants what carnivores are to animals. A typical animal 
anticarnivore defense is to run away, as discussed in the previous chapter 
(see table 2.12), but this option is not open to plants. Being unable to 
ﬂ ee, plants have evolved both physical and chemical defensive systems, 
in many ways convergent on the defensive spines, stingers, and poison 
defenses evolved by the animals (see tables 2.13, 2.14). 
 The leaves of a plant are its food factories, and one could predict that 
there is a selective advantage for plants that defend those structures. It 
is not surprising that a wide range of distantly related plants all have 
convergently evolved leaf spines, from the nonﬂ owering cycads to highly 
derived asterid angiosperms (  table 3.6 ). The similarity of some of these 
Table 3.5
(continued)
24 Desert forb (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Zygophyllales: 
Zygophyllaceae; Zygophyllum simplex)
25 Arizona poppy (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Zygophyllales: 
Zygophyllaceae; Kallstroemia grandiﬂ ora)
26 Purple mistress (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids II: Brassicaceae; 
Moricandia arvensis)
27 Spider wisp (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids II: Brassicaceae; Cleome 
gynandra)
28 Pineland 
heliotrope 
(Euangiosperms: 
Eudicots: 
Asteridae: 
Euasterids 
I: 
Boraginaceae; Heliotropium polyphyllum)
29 Blepharis (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Acanthaceae; 
Blepharis ciliaris)
30 Anticharis bush (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Scrophulariaceae; 
Anticharis linearis)
31 Australian yellow weed (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids II: 
Asteraceae; Flaveria australasica)
32 Narrow-leaf lemon weed (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids II: 
Asteraceae; Pectis linifolia)
33 Rock anethum (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids II: Asteraceae; 
Glossocardia bosvallea)
Note: For data sources, see text.

106 
Chapter 3
Table 3.6
Convergent evolution of physical defenses in plants
1 Convergent structure and function: LEAF SPINES (spines on apices of leaf lobes or 
around leaf margins to discourage herbivore biting)
Convergent lineages:
1.1 Cycad (Euphyllophyta: Lignophyta: Spermatophyta: Cycadophyta: Cycadales: 
Zamiaceae; Encephalartos ferox)
1.2 Aloe yucca (Spermatophyta: Angiospermae: Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: 
Eumonocotyledons: Liliales: Liliaceae; Yucca aloifolia)
1.3 Cogon grass (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Commelinidae: 
Poaceae; Imperata cylindrical)
1.4 Black oak (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Fagaceae; Quercus 
velutina)
1.5 Scorpion weed (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Boraginaceae; 
Phacelia purshii)
1.6 European holly (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids II: Aquifoliaceae; 
Ilex aquifolium)
1.7 Bull thistle (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids II: Asteraceae; Cirsium 
vulgare)
2 Convergent structure and function: TWIGS/BARK WITH THORNS/SPINES (thorns 
or spines on twigs and/or trunk bark to discourage herbivores)
Convergent lineages:
2.1 Candle cactus (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: Cactaceae; 
Pilocereus lanuginosus)
2.2 Knotweed (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: Polygonaceae; 
Polygonum pennsylvanicum)
2.3 Madagascar spiny plant (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: 
Didiereaceae; Alluaudia montagnacii)
2.4 Canary Island spurge (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Euphorbiaceae; 
Euphorbia canariensis)
2.5 French rose (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Rosaceae; Rosa 
gallica)
2.6 European buckthorn (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Rhamnaceae; 
Rhamnus cathartica)
2.7 Honey locust (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Fabaceae; Gleditsia 
triacanthos)
2.8 Common prickly-ash (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids II: Rutaceae; 
Zanthoxylum americanum)
2.9 Bottle tree (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Apocynaceae; 
Pachypodium lealii)
3 Convergent structure and function: STINGERS (stinging poison hairs and needles to 
discourage herbivores)
Convergent lineages:
3.1 Stinging nettle (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Urticaceae; Urtica 
dioica)
3.2 Spurge stinging nettle (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: 
Euphorbiaceae; Cnidoscollus stimulosus)
3.3 Cowhage vine (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Fabaceae; Mucuna 
pruriens)

Convergent Plants 
107
biological structures to human deadly devices is often apparent; for 
example, the aloe yucca is also known as the  “ Spanish bayonet ”  because 
of the shape of its sharp-edged leaves. Cogon-grass blades contain silica 
crystals that render the margins of the leaf as sharp as the blade of a 
serrated saw, and every child quickly learns not to run barefoot around 
holly trees. Scotland is said to have chosen the thistle as its national 
emblem because ancient Scots were warned of approaching invaders in 
the night when one of the invaders inadvertently stepped on a thistle 
and let out a loud yelp of pain.  
 Other plants have convergently evolved defensive structures for the 
twigs and bark of the plant as well as its leaves (  table 3.6 ). Cactus and 
spurge spines are familiar convergent examples of armor covering the 
entire plant. Rose thorns are a hazard every gardener learns to be wary 
of, and this same family of plants produces the cockspur hawthorn,  Cra-
taegus crus-galli , a name illustrating the convergence of a plant structure 
to one seen in animals. Another animal-form convergent example in the 
family of the thorny honey locusts is the catclaw acacia,  Acacia greggii , 
with sharp sickle-shaped spines that can shred the clothing and skin, 
ruining many a hiking experience in southwestern North America. 
 Still other plants add poison to their defensive structures (  table 3.6 ), 
producing stingers convergent to those found in animals (see tables 2.7, 
2.14). The poisonous tiny hairs of the stinging nettle produce painful 
burns if brushed against skin tissue; this same family produces the Aus-
tralian stinging tree,  Dendrocnide moroides , with tiny spines containing 
neurotoxin. The  “ cnide ”  in the plant ’ s generic name is apt, as the sting 
Table 3.6
(continued)
4 Convergent structure and function: HOSTED INSECT DEFENDERS (mutualistic 
relationship with animals who also serve to defend the host plant)
Convergent lineages:
4.1 Ant rattan (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Commelinidae: 
Aracaceae; Daemonorops formicaria)
4.2 Whistling-thorn acacia (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Fabaceae; 
Acacia drepanolobium)
4.3 Valley oak (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Fagaceae; Quercus 
lobata)
4.4 Common ﬁ gs (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Moraceae; Ficus 
carica)
4.5 Ant plant (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Rubiaceae; 
Hydnophytum formicarum)
Note: For data sources, see text.

108 
Chapter 3
of this tree is like that of a cnidarian jelly ﬁ sh and can actually be fatal 
(Stewart 2009). The Euphorbiaceae family is famous for its eerie conver-
gence on numerous cactus forms, which we shall consider later in this 
chapter, but it has also produced a convergent stinging nettle that is 
virtually identical to a true nettle ( table 3.6 ). 
 Last, some plants have recruited animals to defend them (  table 3.6 ). 
The defender species are sometimes ants, like those hosted by the 
whistling-thorn acacia, or wasps, hosted by the valley oak. This conver-
gent mutualism is not common; much more abundant is the convergent 
assistance of animals in plant reproduction, a topic that will be taken up 
later in the chapter. 
 Convergent with animals (see table 2.13), plants have evolved chemi-
cal defenses as well. Unlike animals, however, plants have independently 
acquired a staggering number of chemical defense systems (  table 3.7 ). 
This is not surprising, as the number of defensive strategies available to 
organisms that cannot ﬂ ee or actively ﬁ ght is more limited. In   table 3.7  
I have listed numerous examples of the convergent evolution of poison 
in different plant structures, from leaves to seeds to roots, taken largely 
from the works of Stewart (2009) and Agosta (1996) and phylogeneti-
cally cross-checked using the APG II (2003). The most poisonous plant 
families are the nightshades (Solanaceae), cashews (Anacardiaceae), 
spurges (Euphorbiaceae), and parsleys (Apiaceae), groups that Stewart 
(2009, 71) collectively terms  “ botanical crime families. ”  But this designa-
tion is only from our perspective; from the plant ’ s perspective, it is simply 
defending itself. Although these families contain the most numerous, and 
most infamous, species of poisonous plants, poison tissues are found scat-
tered across the plant phylogenetic spectrum, from nonﬂ owering pines 
and cycads, to more basal core angiosperms like magnoliids and mono-
cotyledons, to highly derived eudicots like rosids and asterids. For each 
separate clade of plants, I have listed a single species example in   table 
3.7 , regardless of whether the clade contains many poisonous species or 
only a few, in order to illustrate the extent of convergent evolution of 
chemical defenses across all clades.  
 The poison produced in convergent chemical defense is not always the 
same, but even here biochemical convergence is widespread (Stewart 
2009). For example, cyanide has been independently developed in mono-
cotyledons (Johnsongrass leaf), eurosids (rubber tree seeds), and asterids 
(black elderberry), to name only a few examples. Poisonous alkaloid 
neurotoxins like nicotine and cocaine have been independently evolved 
by monocotyledons (betel nut), basal eudicots (monkshood plant), rosids 

Convergent Plants 
109
Table 3.7
Convergent evolution of chemical defenses in plants
1 Convergent structure and function: LEAF/STEM POISON (poison concentrated in 
leaves and/or stems to protect phototrophic structures from herbivores)
Convergent lineages:
1.1 Jack-in-the-pulpit leaf (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Alismatales: Araceae; 
Arisaema triphyllum)
1.2 False hellebore leaf (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Liliales: 
Liliaceae; Veratrum viride)
1.3 Yellow lady’s slipper leaf (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: 
Asparagales: Orchidaceae; Cypripedium calceolus)
1.4 Blue 
agave 
stem 
(Euangiosperms: 
Monocotyledons: 
Eumonocotyledons: 
Asparagales: Agavaceae; Agave tequilana)
1.5 Johnsongrass 
leaf 
(Euangiosperms: 
Monocotyledons: 
Eumonocotyledons: 
Commelinidae: Poaceae; Sorghum halepense)
1.6 Swallowwort leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Ranunculales: Papaveraceae; 
Chelidonium majus)
1.7 Mayapple 
leaf 
(Euangiosperms: 
Eudicots: 
Ranunculales: 
Berberidaceae; 
Podophyllum peltatum)
1.8 Curare vine leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Ranunculales: Menispermaceae; 
Chondrodendron tomentosum)
1.9 Kratom leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: Cactaceae; 
Trichocereus pachanoi)
1.10 Soapwort leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: 
Caryophyllaceae; Saponaria ofﬁ cinalis)
1.11 Marijuana leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Cannabinaceae; 
Cannabis sativa)
1.12 Khat shrub leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Celastraceae; 
Catha edulis)
1.13 Coca shrub leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Erythroxylaceae; 
Erythroxylum coca)
1.14 Ratbane tree leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Dichapetalaceae; 
Dichapetalum toxicarium)
1.15 Pencil cactus stem (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Euphorbiaceae; 
Euphorbia tirucalli)
1.16 Upas tree leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Moraceae; Antiaris 
toxicaria)
1.17 Black locust bark (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Fabaceae; 
Robinia pseudoacacia)
1.18 Tansy mustard leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids II: Brassicaceae; 
Descurainia pinnata)
1.19 Poison sumac leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids II: Anacardiaceae; 
Toxicodendron vernix)
1.20 Tea leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Ericales: Thaeaceae; Thea sinensis)
1.21 Common rhododendron leaf (Euangiosperms: Asteridae: Ericales: Ericaceae; 
Rhododendron ponticum)
1.22 Strychnine vine leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: 
Loganiaceae; Strychnos toxifera)
1.23 Tobacco leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Solanaceae; 
Nicotiana tabacum)
1.24 Diviner’s sage leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Lamiaceae; 
Salvia divinorum)

110 
Chapter 3
Table 3.7
(continued)
1.25 Kombe vine leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Apocynaceae; 
Strophanthus kombe)
1.26 Sweet woodruff leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Rubiaceae; 
Galium odoratum)
1.27 Indian tobacco leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids II: 
Campanulaceae; Lobelia inﬂ ata)
1.28 White snakeroot leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids II: 
Asteraceae; Eupatorium rugosum)
1.29 English ivy leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Eurasterids II: Araliaceae; 
Hedera helix)
1.30 Blister bush leaf (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids II: Apiaceae; 
Peucedanum galbanum)
2 Convergent structure and function: SEED/FRUIT POISON (poison concentrated in 
seeds and/or fruit to protect reproductive structures from herbivores)
Convergent lineages:
2.1 Sweet shrub seed (Euangiosperms: Magnoliidae: Laurales: Calycanthaceae; 
Calycanthus ﬂ oridus)
2.2 Betel nut (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Commelinidae: 
Arecaceae; Areca catechu)
2.3 Opium poppy seedpod (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Ranunculales: Papaveraceae; 
Papaver somniferum)
2.4 Blue cohosh seed (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Ranunculales: Berberidaceae; 
Caulophyllum thalictroides)
2.5 Castor bean (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Euphorbiacea; Ricinus 
communis)
2.6 Rosary pea seed (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Fabaceae; Abrus 
precatorius)
2.7 Habanero chile pod (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Solanaceae; 
Capsicum chinense)
2.8 Squirting cucumber (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Cucurbitaceae; 
Ecballium elaterium)
2.9 Coyotillo berries (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Rhamnaceae; 
Karwinskia humboldtiana)
2.10 Cacao bean (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids II: Malvaceae; 
Theobroma cacao)
2.11 Fetid buckeye (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids II: Sapindaceae; 
Aesculus glabra)
2.12 Lime fruit (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids II: Rutaceae; Citrus 
aurantifolia)
2.13 Coffee bean (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Rubiaceae; 
Coffea arabica)
2.14 Suicide-tree seed (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Apocynaceae; 
Cerbera odollam)
2.15 Lantana berries (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Verbenaceae; 
Lantana camara)
2.16 Morning glory seed (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: 
Convolvulaceae; Ipomoea tricolor)
2.17 Black elderberry (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids II: Adoxaceae; 
Sambucus nigra)

Convergent Plants 
111
Table 3.7
(continued)
3 Convergent structure and function: ROOT/BULB POISON (poison concentrated in 
roots and/or bulbs to protect nutrient uptake and reproductive structures from herbivores)
Convergent lineages:
3.1 Fly-poison bulb (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Liliaceae; 
Amianthium muscaetoxicum)
3.2 Bloodroot 
root 
(Euangiosperms: 
Eudicots: 
Ranunculales: 
Papaveraceae; 
Sanguinaria canadensis)
3.3 Pokeberry root (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: 
Phytolaccaceae; Phytolacca americana)
3.4 Cassava root (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Euphorbiaceae; 
Manihot esculenta)
3.5 Potato tuber (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Solanaceae; 
Solanum tuberosum)
3.6 Iboga root (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Apocynaceae; 
Tabernanthe iboga)
3.7 Water hemlock root (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Eurasterids II: Apiaceae; 
Cicuta maculata)
4 Convergent structure and function: ENTIRE PLANT POISON (poison distributed 
throughout entire plant to repel herbivores)
Convergent lineages:
4.1 Sago palm (Euphyllophyta: Lignophyta: Spermatophyta: Cycadophyta: Cycadaceae; 
Cycas revoluta)
4.2 European yew tree (Euphyllophyta: Lignophyta: Spermatophyta: Pinophyta: 
Taxaceae; Taxus baccata)
4.3 Split-leaf 
philodendron 
(Spermatophyta: 
Angiospermae: 
Euangiosperms: 
Monocotyledons: Alismatales: Araceae; Philodendron selloum)
4.4 Autumn crocus (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Liliaceae; 
Colchicum autumnale)
4.5 Monkshood (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Ranunculales: Ranunculaceae; Aconitum 
napellus)
4.6 Peyote cactus (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: Cactaceae; 
Lophophora williamsii)
4.7 Black snakeroot (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Geraniales: Melanthiaceae; 
Zigadenus venenosus)
4.8 Daphne shrub (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids II: Thymelaeaceae; 
Daphne mezereum)
4.9 Mountain laurel (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Ericales: Ericaceae; Kalmia 
latifolia)
4.10 Oakleaf hydrangea shrub (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Cornales: 
Hydrangeaceae; Hydrangea quercifolia)
4.11 Deadly nightshade (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Solanaceae; 
Atropa belladona)
4.12 Buttonbush (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Rubiaceae; 
Cephalanthus occidentalis)
4.13 Common 
foxglove 
(Euangiosperms: 
Eudicots: Asteridae: 
Euasterids 
I: 
Plantaginaceae; Digitalis purpurea)
4.14 Butterﬂ y weed (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Asclepiadaceae; 
Asclepias tuberosa)
4.15 Yellow jessamine vine (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: 
Gelsemiaceae; Gelsemium sempervirens)
Note: For data sources, see text.

112 
Chapter 3
(coca leaf), and asterids (tobacco leaf). Deadly paralysis-inducing muscle 
toxins have been independently developed in plants ranging from basal 
eudicots (curare vine leaf) to highly derived asterids (strychnine vine 
leaf), and heart-muscle poisons have independently evolved in rosids 
(upas tree leaf) and asterids (kombe vine leaf). Psychoactive toxins, 
targeting the brain, have been independently developed by basal core 
eudicots (kratom leaf), rosids (marijuana leaf), and asterids (diviner ’ s 
sage leaf). Powerful skin-destructive irritants have been independently 
developed by monocotyledons (blue agave stem), rosids (poison sumac 
leaf), and asterids (blister bush leaf). 
 Some of these plants are not really dangerous to humans; morning 
glory seeds, for example, contain only tiny amounts of the psychoactive 
toxin LSD, and hydrangea bushes only small amounts of cyanide. But 
then, morning glories and hydrangea bushes are not defending them-
selves against large animals like humans; they have smaller animals in 
target. Others are surprising: cassava roots and potato tubers are poison-
ous (the latter less so than the former), but are rendered harmless if they 
are cooked properly, and they are a widely used food source for humans. 
Humans even deliberately enjoy the effects of the neurotoxin caffeine 
in tea leaves and coffee beans, and some enjoy the neurotoxin nicotine 
in tobacco leaves (although the delivery system, burning cigarettes, even-
tually kills them). 
 Defense: Antidehydration Adaptations 
 Dehydration is a very serious problem for land-dwelling organisms. 
Many of the morphological and physiological changes that took place in 
the evolution of tetrapods from ﬁ sh were adaptations for preventing 
water loss in the dry, hostile terrestrial environment. (Other changes 
were linked to two other serious problems on land: the crushing force of 
gravity and rapid temperature ﬂ uctuations, as compared to the sea, 
where neutrally buoyant ﬁ sh feel no gravity and temperatures vary very 
little, even on seasonal scales.) Even so, if an animal feels thirsty, it is able 
to go hunting for water and to replenish its water loss by drinking as 
much water as it can ﬁ nd. 
 In contrast, plants cannot go hunting for water. Plants are entirely 
dependent on the vagaries of terrestrial weather patterns in bringing rain 
and groundwater, weather patterns that are usually unreliable. A wet 
spring this year might be followed by a drought next year. One way to 
deal with an unreliable source of water is to store up as much water as 

Convergent Plants 
113
possible when it is available, so the plant can survive periods of time 
when water is scarce. One such water-storage adaptation among plants 
is the evolution of succulent stems and leaves, structures that store large 
amounts of water in ﬂ eshy pith and cortex cells (Niklas 1997), resulting 
in a plant that possesses stems and leaves that appear swollen or fat. 
 Plants of widely differing phylogenetic lineages have repeatedly and 
convergently evolved succulent stems and leaves (  table 3.8) ; interest-
ingly, even some animals have converged on a succulent water-storage 
adaptation, such as the desert-adapted dromedary camel,  Camelus dro-
medarius , which can store enormous amounts of water in its tissues. In 
  table 3.8  I have listed examples from families containing the largest 
numbers of succulent species known to me, such as the Cactaceae (cac-
tuses), Euphorbiaceae (spurges), Aizoaceae (stone plants), and Crassu-
laceae (jade plants). Many, many other families of plants have a few 
species, or sometimes only one, that have also convergently evolved 
succulent stems or leaves while living in semiarid environments; thus 
the list given in   table 3.8  cannot be taken in any sense to be exhaustive. 
 Table 3.8 
 Convergent evolution of water-retention structures in plants 
 Convergent structure and function: SUCCULENT STEMS/LEAVES (water-storage 
structures to ensure sufﬁ cient water for plant survival in semiarid environments or 
environments in which the water source is unreliable) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1   Quiver tree (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Asparagales: 
Asphodelaceae;  Aloe dichotoma ) 
 2  Agave 
(Euangiosperms: 
Monocotyledons: 
Eumonocotyledons: 
Asparagales: 
Agavaceae;  Agave ﬂ exispina ) 
 3   Rosette plant (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Commelinidae: 
Bromeliaceae;  Abromeitiella lorentziana ) 
 4   Candle cactus (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: Cactaceae; 
 Pilocereus lanuginosus ) 
 5   Stone plant (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: Aizoaceae; 
 Carpobrotus edulis ) 
 6   Madagascar spiny plant (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: 
Didiereaceae;  Alluaudia montagnacii ) 
 7   Jade plant (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Saxifragales; Crassulaceae; 
 Crassula ovata ) 
 8   Canary Island spurge (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Euphorbiaceae; 
 Euphorbia canariensis ) 
 9   Bottle tree (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Apocynaceae; 
 Pachypodium lealii ) 
 10   Pickle plant (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids II: Asteracea;  Senecio 
stapeliiformis ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

114 
Chapter 3
It can, however, illustrate how phylogenetically widespread the phenom-
enon is — independently arising in numerous monocotyledons, core eudi-
cots, and highly derived rosids and asterids — and how geographically 
widespread — from Africa (quiver tree) to North America (candle 
cactus) to South America (rosette plant) to Madagascar (bottle tree; 
Niklas 1997).  
 The most spectacular examples of the convergent evolution of identi-
cal morphological structures to prevent dehydration are the desert-
adapted cactuses of the Western Hemisphere and spurges of the Eastern 
Hemisphere (  table 3.9 ). Niklas (1997) documents that both groups 
started out from morphologically similar beginnings, from tropical broad-
leafed trees, such as the leaf cactus and the honey spurge (  table 3.9 ). In 
subsequent evolution in more arid environments, both groups of plants 
reduced the amount of their woody stem tissues, the number of their 
branches, and the sizes of their leaves — progressing from tall, treelike 
cactus forms to shorter, sparsely branched cactus forms, to squat, barrel-
shaped stems, and ﬁ nally to rounded sea-urchin-shaped domes ( table 
3.9 ). Both groups of plants lost their leaves and evolved thorns (cactuses 
evolved thorns from modiﬁ ed leaves and spurges from modiﬁ ed 
branches) that not only deter herbivores (  table 3.6 ) but also dissipate 
heat and break up wind currents from the stem surface, both of which 
can increase water loss (Niklas 1997).  
 Table 3.9 
 Convergent evolution of cactus forms in arid-adapted desert plants of the Western 
Hemisphere (Cactaceae) and the Eastern Hemisphere (Euphorbiaceae) 
 Ancestral morphological condition: tropical broad-leafed tree species 
 Cactaceae: Leaf cactus ( Pereskia sacharosa ) 
 Euphorbiaceae: Honey spurge ( Euphorbia mellifera ) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1  Tall tree-forms with multiple succulent branches from a central trunk 
 Cactaceae: Candle cactus ( Pilocereus lanuginosus ) 
 Euphorbiaceae: Canary Island spurge ( Euphorbia canariensus ) 
 2  Shorter, sparsely branched succulent stems with zigzag vertical ridges and furrows 
 Cactaceae: Snake cactus ( Peniocereus serpintinus ) 
 Euphorbiaceae: Devil ’ s backbone spurge ( Euphorbia cryptospinosa ) 
 3  Squat, barrel-shaped succulent stem with ﬂ at ridges separating recessed furrows 
 Cactaceae: Compass-barrel cactus ( Ferocactus cylindraceus ) 
 Euphorbiaceae: Velvet spurge ( Euphorbia valida ) 
 4  Rounded, sea-urchin-shaped succulent dome 
 Cactaceae: Sea-urchin cactus ( Astrophytum asterias ) 
 Euphorbiaceae: Baseball spurge ( Euphorbia obesa ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Plants 
115
 Reproduction 
 In the last chapter we saw that animals have repeatedly and indepen-
dently evolved the same reproductive systems, particularly viviparity. The 
same is true of plants, except the convergent reproductive system for 
these organisms is heterospory. The repeated evolution of heterospory 
in independent phylogenetic lineages has been called  “ the most iterative 
key innovation in the evolutionary history of the plant kingdom ”  
(Bateman and DiMichele 1994, 345). 
 The original Devonian tracheophytes had sporophytes that shed their 
spores freely into the air; the spores, which were all the same size, then 
produced free-living gametophytes that produced the next generation of 
sporophytes. The free-living gametophytes were bisexual, and required 
moist conditions not only for their vegetative growth but also for sperm 
transfer and fertilization of their eggs, as well as the survival of the devel-
oping new sporophyte embryo (Niklas 1997). The production of bisexual 
gametophytes is an ancient reproductive condition known as homospory, 
which still exists in many living species of club mosses (lycophytes), 
horsetails (equisetophytes), and ferns (ﬁ licophytes). In many ways, 
homosporous plants  “ may be thought of as the amphibians of the plant 
kingdom in the sense that the completion of their sexual life cycle 
requires a  ‘ return to water ’ ” (Niklas 1997, 190). 
 A major evolutionary shift in plants ’  mode of reproduction occurred 
independently in many separate plant lineages during the Late Devonian 
(  table 3.10 ). This was the convergent evolution of heterospory, where 
plants now produced two distinctly different types of spores: numerous, 
very small microspores and relatively few but much larger megaspores. 
Specialized plants producing the new microspores developed into sperm-
producing gametophytes, and plants producing the larger megaspores 
developed into egg-bearing gametophytes; thus, heterosporous plants 
had now evolved gametophytes that were unisexual, not bisexual like the 
homosporous plants (Niklas 1997). The evolution of heterospory and 
unisexual gametophytes occurred independently at least eleven separate 
times in disparate groups of plants (Bateman and DiMichele 1994). Two 
separate groups of lycopods, one major group of equisetophytes, and 
three separate groups of ﬁ licophytes convergently became heterospo-
rous (  table 3.10 ), although homosporous species of these types of plants 
exist to the present day. The ﬁ licophytes are particularly interesting in 
that they have convergently evolved heterospory repeatedly throughout 
geologic time: at least once in the Late Devonian, at least once in the 

116 
Chapter 3
Late Cretaceous (the ancestors of living giant water ferns), and sepa-
rately in the modern European water-clover ferns and Australian 
platyzoma ferns (  table 3.10 ). Four separate groups of lignophytes inde-
pendently evolved heterospory in the span of time from the Middle 
Devonian to the Late Carboniferous: the major plant lineages of the 
aneurophytales and archaeopteridales, and the more enigmatic noeg-
gerathiales and cecropsidales, all of which are now extinct. In the midst 
of this rampant convergent evolution of heterospory in plant lineages, 
one plant group took the next major evolutionary step in plant reproduc-
tion: the evolution of the seed ( table 3.10 ).  
 The evolution of heterospory, the partitioning of resources between 
numerous small microspores and a few large megaspores, set the stage 
for the evolution of the seed (Niklas 1997). Production of microspores 
required minimal resources, and because they were so very small they 
 Table 3.10 
 Convergent evolution of heterosporous reproduction, and ultimately of the seed 
 Convergent structure and function: HETEROSPORES (differentiated microspores and 
megaspores for the production of unisexual gametophytes) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1   Devonian 
barinophyte 
spores 
(Tracheophyta: 
Lycophyta: 
Barinophytales: 
Barinophytaceae;  Protobarinophyton pennsylvanicum  † Late Devonian) 
 2   Devonian 
selaginellalean 
spores 
(Tracheophyta: 
Lycophyta: 
Selaginellales: 
Protolepidodendraceae;  Barsostrobus famennensis  † Late Devonian) 
 3   Carboniferous calamite spores (Tracheophyta: Euphyllophyta: Moniliformopses: 
Equisetophyta: Equisetales: Archaeocalamitaceae;  Protocalamostachys farringtonii 
 † Early Carboniferous) 
 4   Devonian stauropterid spores (Euphyllophyta: Moniliformopses: Filicophyta: 
Stauropteridales: Gillespieaceae;  Gillespiea randolphensis  † Late Devonian) 
 5   Giant water-fern spores (Euphyllophyta: Moniliformopses: Filicophyta: Salviniales: 
Salviniaceae;  Salvinia molesta ) 
 6   European water-clover fern spores (Euphyllophyta: Moniliformopses: Filicophyta: 
Marsileales: Marsileaceae;  Marsilea quadrifolia ) 
 7   Australian platyzoma-fern spores (Euphyllophyta: Moniliformopses: Filicophyta: 
Filicales: Platyzomataceae;  Platyzoma microphylla ) 
 8  Devonian aneurophyte spores (Euphyllophyta: Lignophyta: Aneurophytales: 
Chaleuriaceae;  Chaleuria cirrosa  † Middle Devonian) 
 9  Devonian archaeopterid spores (Euphyllophyta: Lignophyta: Archaeopteridales: 
Archaeopteridaceae;  Archaeopteris latifolia  † Late Devonian) 
 10  Carboniferous 
noeggerathialean 
spores 
(Euphyllophyta: 
Lignophyta: 
Noeggerathiales: Noeggerathiaceae;  Noeggerathiostrobus vicinalis  † Late Carboniferous) 
 11  Carboniferous cecropsidalean spores (Euphyllophyta: Lignophyta: Cecropsidales: 
Cecropiaceae;  Cecropsis luculentum  † Late Carboniferous) 
 12  Devonian 
elkinsia 
seeds 
(Euphyllophyta: 
Lignophyta: 
Spermatophyta: 
Lagenstomales: Elkinsiaceae;  Elkinsia polymorpha  † Late Devonian) 
     Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a  † . For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Plants 
117
were easily and widely distributed by wind, ensuring an enlarged geo-
graphic dispersal of genetic information and the reduced probability of 
inbreeding in plants. The concentration of more resources in a few mega-
spores, or in only one megaspore, increased the probability of successful 
production of new sporophytes by these megagametophytes. The next 
step in plant reproductive evolution would be for the sporophyte to 
retain the megaspores rather than releasing them to produce free-living 
megagametophytes. Hence the evolution of the seed:  “ The seed is an 
adaptive solution to life on land functionally analogous to the way amni-
otic animals reproduce. . . . The evolution of the seed unquestionably 
released vascular plant reproduction from the ecological requirement for 
an external source of water for the growth and survival of the megaga-
metophyte, the fertilization of its eggs, and the early development of the 
sporophyte embryo. Thus the seed opened the door for the adaptive 
radiation of vascular plants into habitats drier than those favoring the 
survival and reproductive success of free-sporing plants ”  (Niklas 1997, 
343 – 344). 
 The ﬁ rst known spermatophytes, the seed plant  Elkinsia polymorpha , 
are found as fossils in Late Devonian strata of the Appalachian Moun-
tains of eastern North America. Just as multiple plant lineages converged 
on the evolution of heterospory, the fossil record suggests that several 
plant lineages were converging on the evolution of the seed. Spermato-
phytes are heterosporous plants that retain the megagametophyte, and 
its developing embryos, within sporophyte tissues. Niklas (1997) argues 
that heterosporous species of the ancient lepidodendrid lycophyte  Lepi-
docarpon and the ancient calamite equisetophyte  Calamocarpon were 
well on the way to developing the seed habit. However, as far as we yet 
know from the fossil record, only one lineage of plants successfully 
developed the seed, and that group, the spermatophytes, dominates the 
terrestrial plant biosphere just as the amniotes dominate the terrestrial 
animal biosphere. 
 The spermatophytes evolved in the Late Devonian and the amniotes 
soon after in the Early Carboniferous. The amniotes quickly diverged 
into two distinct phylogenetic lineages — the sauropsids and the synap-
sids (see appendix) — and the subsequent evolution of members of these 
lineages has been discussed in chapter 2. The spermatophytes were more 
divergent in their evolution: they produced three distinct lineages that 
are now extinct (the lyginopteridales, medullosanales, and gigantopteri-
dales) and the ﬁ ve living ginkgophyte, cycadophyte, pinophyte, gneto-
phyte, and angiosperm lineages (see appendix). Just as the spermatophytes, 

118 
Chapter 3
the seed plants, are the most successful of all the land plants, the angio-
sperms, the ﬂ owering plants, are the most successful of all the 
spermatophytes. 
 Why ﬂ owers? The plant seed, like the animal amniote egg, is a repro-
ductive structure clearly linked to antidehydration adaptations in the 
hostile dry air of terrestrial habitats. Much of the success of ﬂ owering 
plants is linked to solving not dehydration problems but a different 
reproductive problem: the problem of fertilization in organisms that 
cannot move about in search for a mate. 
 The problem of fertilization in sessile organisms is an ancient one that 
extends back to life in the sea. Many sessile marine animals simply 
release their gametes directly into the sea water and depend upon water 
currents to transport them to other animals for fertilization. These 
animals are often astonishingly convergent to plants in their morpholo-
gies: crinoids are deuterostomous bilaterians, closely related to chordate 
animals such as ourselves, yet many ancient crinoids had root systems 
that looked like those of land plants, stems like plant trunks, and branch-
ing arms like plant branches. Plant similarities are often seen in both the 
colloquial and scientiﬁ c names of sessile marine animals: stalked echino-
derms are known as  “ sea lilies ”  because their long stems and calyxes look 
like the stems and ﬂ owers of lilies, the bryozoa are named  “ moss animals ”  
because their colonies look like moss, the gorgonian cnidarian  “ sea fans ”  
whose central colonial stem and lateral branches look like palm leaves, 
the colorful polyps of an anthozoan cnidarian colony appear similar to 
a garden of  “ sea ﬂ owers, ” and so on. 
 The apparent convergence in form between many sessile marine 
animals and land plants is in fact reversed: it is the land plants that have 
converged on the sessile marine animals, not the other way around, as 
the marine animals evolved these forms ﬁ rst and the plants converged 
on them secondarily. Rather than currents in the dense water of marine 
habitats, land plants must depend upon wind in the thin atmosphere of 
terrestrial habitats to disperse their gametes. Just as many sessile marine 
animals have elevated themselves above the sea ﬂ oor in order to catch 
stronger marine currents, plants have evolved stems and trunks to 
elevate them up in the air in order to catch the wind with their spores 
and pollen. 
 Many land plants are thus not only dependent upon the vagaries of 
terrestrial weather patterns in bringing rain; they are also dependent 
upon these same weather patterns in bringing wind for successful fertil-
ization. The spermatophytes largely depended upon wind for fertilization 

Convergent Plants 
119
for over 240 million years, from the Late Devonian until the evolution 
of the ﬁ rst angiosperms some 115 to 125 million years ago (Thien et al. 
2009). At that time, the angiosperm spermatophytes evolved an interest-
ing new fertilization strategy: they began to involve a sexual partner who 
was mobile. Although a few nonangiosperm spermatophytes use pollen-
eating insects as pollination assistants, the really elaborate plant-animal 
reproductive  pas de deux  began with the evolution of the ﬁ rst ﬂ owering 
plants in the Early Cretaceous (and with the evolution of the dioecious 
angiosperms, which have separate male and female plants, the plant-
animal interaction becomes a  m é nage  à trois ). 
 The basal angiosperms consist of three sequential cladogram branches, 
in what has been termed the ANITA grade of angiosperm evolution 
(Thien et al. 2009). These branches are: ﬁ rst, the Amborellales, second, 
the Nymphaeales, and third, the Austrobaileyales (APG II 2003; Lecoin-
tre and Le Guyader 2006), based upon molecular phylogenies. Although 
molecular evidence places the Amborellales at the very base of the 
angiosperm clade, the oldest fossil ﬂ owers found thus far belong to the 
Nymphaeales, one branch up from the base of the clade. 
 The oldest ﬂ ower yet discovered is quite small, only about 1 centimeter 
in diameter. Somewhat younger nymphaealean ﬂ owers, around 90 million 
years old, have fossil morphologies very similar to modern-day ﬂ owers 
that are pollinated by beetles, reinforcing long-held views that beetle 
pollination was a major form of plant-animal reproductive interaction 
in the earliest of the ﬂ owering plants (Bernhardt 2000; Thien et al. 
2009). Examination of living members of the basal angiosperms reveal 
that ﬂ ies are the primary pollinators of six families, beetles the primary 
pollinators of ﬁ ve families, and bees are major pollinators in only one 
family (Thien et al. 2009). Plant-animal interactions surely must have 
evolved in the 115 to 125 million years that have passed since the evolu-
tion of the ﬁ rst ﬂ owering plant, and so the reproductive pattern seen in 
living basal angiosperms cannot be taken as proof of identical relation-
ships in the Early Cretaceous. Still, it is interesting that living basal 
angiosperms are pollinated preferentially by ﬂ ies and beetles, and only 
rarely by bees. More derived angiosperms not only added bees to the list 
of sexual partners but added butterﬂ ies, moths, wasps, birds, and mammals 
as well. 
 Four different types of ﬂ ower morphologies have been evolved by 
angiosperms that are pollinated exclusively by beetles: bilobate, brush, 
chamber-blossom, and painted-bowl ﬂ owers (Bernhardt 2000). These 
cantharophilous ﬂ ower types have been convergently evolved over and 

120 
Chapter 3
over again in even highly derived angiosperms (  table 3.11 ); that is, beetle 
pollination is not a reproductive mode conﬁ ned to the basal angiosperms 
or plesiomorphic magnoliids. Nine independent groups of monocotyle-
dons, eight of them derived eumonocotyledons, have independently 
evolved cantharophilous ﬂ owers (  table 3.11 ). In the derived eudicot 
angiosperms, cantharophilous ﬂ owers have convergently appeared 12 
separate times, ranging from basal eudicots like the Ranunculalaes to the 
highly derived Rosidae and Asteridae (Bernhardt 2000).  
 Giant ﬂ owers are rarer and more specialized than cantharophilous 
ﬂ owers, yet they too have convergently evolved multiple times in the 
angiosperms ( table 3.12 ). Floral gigantism is deﬁ ned as the possession of 
blossoms — either ﬂ owers or ﬂ owerlike inﬂ orescences — that exceed 30 
centimeters in diameter (Davis et al. 2008). Very large ﬂ owers can be up 
to a meter in diameter, such as those found in rafﬂ esia, or up to three 
meters in height, like as those found in the corpse lilies (  table 3.12 ). These 
giant ﬂ owers attract a wide range of pollinators: beetles, ﬂ ies, moths, 
birds, fruit bats, and even lemur primates (Davis et al. 2008). However, 
the great majority of pollinators of giant ﬂ owers are ﬂ ies and small-
bodied beetles. It appears that the large ﬂ ower size facilitates the tem-
porary trapping of these smaller animals by the ﬂ ower, and the animals 
subsequently pollinate the ﬂ ower as they seek an escape route. The phy-
logenetic distribution of the convergent evolution of ﬂ oral gigantism is 
across the entire spectrum of the angiosperm clade: from the most basal 
angiosperms, like the Nymphaeales, to the highly derived Eurasterids 
( table 3.12 ).  
 Even more specialized than giant ﬂ owers are ﬂ owers that smell like 
rotting meat. One would think that such a specialized type of ﬂ ower, 
speciﬁ cally adapted to the restricted role of attracting carrion-eating 
animals, would be unique in the evolution of ﬂ owering plants, but this is 
not the case: sapromyiophilous, or carrion-mimic, ﬂ owers have conver-
gently evolved in the angiosperms no less than seven separate times 
(  table 3.13 ). Some carrion-mimic ﬂ owers are also giant, like the corpse 
lilies and rafﬂ esia (  table 3.12 ), but others are normal sized or even small 
(Davis et al. 2008; Stewart 2009). Sapromyiophilous ﬂ owers have inde-
pendently evolved in plesiomorphic angiosperms like the magnoliid 
pawpaws; in monocotyledons like the corpse lilies and carrion ﬂ owers; 
in basal eudicots like the stinking hellebore; and in highly derived euaste-
rids like the Zulu giant carrion plant (  table 3.13 ).  
 Derived ﬂ owers have evolved shapes, colors, and odors to attract the 
attention of potential pollinators. Flowers also offer food rewards to 

Convergent Plants 
121
 Table 3.11 
 Convergent evolution of cantharophilous ﬂ owers for plant pollination by beetles in 
angiosperms  
 Convergent structure and function: CANTHAROPHILOUS FLOWERS (evolution of 
specialized ﬂ ower morphologies that facilitate pollination by beetles) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1   Corpse lily (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Alismatales: Araceae;  Amorphophallus 
titanum ) 
 2  Split-leaf 
cyclanthus 
(Euangiosperms: 
Monocotyledons: 
Eumonocotyledons: 
Pandanales: Cyclanthaceae;  Cyclanthus bipartitus ) 
 3  Sun ’ s eye tulip (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Liliales: 
Liliaceae;  Tulipa agenensis ) 
 4   Peacock iris (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Asparagales: 
Iridaceae;  Moraea glaucopis ) 
 5   Giant orchid (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Asparagales: 
Orchidaceae;  Pteroglossaspis ecristata ) 
 6  Star 
of 
Bethlehem 
(Euangiosperms: 
Monocotyledons: 
Eumonocotyledons: 
Asparagales: Hyacinthaceae;  Ornithogalum umbellatum ) 
 7   Cape star (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Asparagales: 
Hypoxidaceae;  Spiloxene capensis ) 
 8   Orchidantha (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Commelinidae: 
Lowiaceae;  Orchidantha maxillarioides ) 
 9  Root-spine 
palm 
(Euangiosperms: 
Monocotyledons: 
Eumonocotyledons: 
Commelinidae: Arecaceae;  Crysophila warscewiczii ) 
 10   Persian buttercup (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Ranunculales: Ranunculaceae; 
 Ranunculus asiaticus ) 
 11   Corn poppy (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Ranunculales: Papaveraceae;  Papaver 
rhoeas ) 
 12   Sundew (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: Droseraceae; 
 Drosera pauciﬂ ora ) 
 13   Autograph tree (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Clusiaceae;  Clusia 
rosea ) 
 14   Tropical chestnut (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids II: Malvaceae; 
 Sterculia stipulata ) 
 15   Malasian vatica (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids II: Dipterocarpaceae; 
 Vatica parvifolia ) 
 16   Indian mastixia (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Cornales: Cornaceae;  Mastixia 
arborea ) 
 17   Indian persimmon (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Ericales: Ebenaceae; 
 Diospyros malabarica ) 
 18   Ballhead ipomopsis (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Ericales: Polemoniaceae; 
 Ipomopsis congesta ) 
 19   Unamkodi (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Convolvulaceae; 
 Erycibe paniculata ) 
 20   African iodes (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Icacinaceae;  Iodes 
africana ) 
 21   Naked bluebell (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids II: Campanulaceae; 
 Wahlenbergia gymnoclada ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

122 
Chapter 3
 Table 3.12 
 Convergent evolution of ﬂ oral gigantism in plants 
 Convergent structure and function: FLORAL GIGANTISM (blossoms with a diameter of 
30 centimeters or greater that facilitate pollination by ﬂ ies and small-bodied beetles) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1  Giant  “ water lily ” (Euphyllophyta: Lignophyta: Spermatophyta: Angiospermae: 
Nymphaeales: Nymphaeaceae;  Victoria amazonica ) 
 2   Big-leaf magnolia (Angiospermae: Euangiosperms: Magnoliidae: Magnoliales: 
Magnoliaceae;  Magnolia macrophylla ) 
 3  Pelican ﬂ ower (Euangiosperms: Magnoliidae: Piperales: Aristolochiaceae;  Aristolochia 
grandiﬂ ora ) 
 4   Corpse lily (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Alismatales: Araceae;  Amorphophallus 
titanum ) 
 5   Lady slipper orchid (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: 
Asparagales: Orchidaceae;  Phragmipedium grande ) 
 6  Sacred lotus (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Proteales: Nelumbonaceae;  Nelumbo 
 nucifera ) 
 7  Rafﬂ esia (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Rafﬂ esiaceae;  Rafﬂ esia 
arnoldii ) 
 8   Beobab (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids II: Malvaceae;  Adansonia 
digitata ) 
 9   Zulu giant carrion plant (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: 
Apocynaceae;  Stapelia gigantea ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 
 Table 3.13 
 Convergent evolution of sapromyiophilous ﬂ owers that smell like rotting meat 
 Convergent structure and function: CARRION-MIMIC FLOWERS (production of 
rotting-meat smell to attract carrion-eating animals for pollination purposes) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1  Pawpaw (Euangiosperms: Magnoliidae: Magnoliales: Annonaceae;  Asimina  triloba ) 
 2   Corpse lily (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Alismatales: Araceae;  Amorphophallus 
titanium ) 
 3  Carrion ﬂ ower (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Liliales: 
Liliaceae;  Smilax herbacea ) 
 4   Stinking iris (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Asparagales: 
Iridaceae;  Iris foetidissima ) 
 5   Stinking hellebore (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Ranunculalaes: Ranunculaceae; 
 Helleborus foetidus ) 
 6  Rafﬂ esia (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Rafﬂ esiaceae;  Rafﬂ esia 
arnoldii ) 
 7   Zulu giant carrion plant (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: 
Apocynaceae;  Stapelia gigantea ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Plants 
123
animal pollinators: the ancient ﬂ owers offered only excess pollen for 
pollen-eating animals, a trait that is actually older than the angiosperms, 
as it is found in some nonangiosperm spermatophytes like cycads and 
conifers as well (Labandeira et al. 2007). Derived ﬂ owers offer not only 
excess pollen but also sweet nectar, starchy food bodies, stigmatic secre-
tions, perianth segments, and edible stamenodia (Bernhardt 2000; Thien 
et al. 2009). 
 One particularly specialized type of food reward system, known as 
ornithophily, is adapted speciﬁ cally to attract nectar-feeding birds. Orni-
thophilous, or hummingbird, ﬂ owers have no smell; they are of a brick-
red monocolor, are trumpet-shaped, and produce copious amounts of 
nectar. The evolution of hummingbird ﬂ owers in western North America 
has been extensively studied by Grant and Grant (1968), who document 
the independent evolution of ornithophilous ﬂ owers in 18 separate fami-
lies of angiosperms in this region of the world alone (  table 3.14 ). For 
each family, I have listed a single species representative, but some fami-
lies have more hummingbird-ﬂ owered species than others. For example, 
the Scrophulariaceae contain eight genera and 74 species with humming-
bird ﬂ owers, and a more detailed phylogenetic analysis of the family 
would be needed to determine how many of these hummingbird-
ﬂ owered species are independently derived and how many are synapo-
morphic. Other families, like the Cactaceae, Nyctaginaceae, Saxifragaceae, 
Fouquieriaceae, Convolvulaceae, and Rubiaceae contain a single species 
with hummingbird ﬂ owers, and it is clear that each of these is an inde-
pendent convergence on ornithophily (Grant and Grant 1968). Last, of 
the 18 convergently evolved hummingbird ﬂ owers listed in   table 3.14 , 
seven belong to species that are the sole red-ﬂ owered representative of 
all of the other variously hued ﬂ owers belonging to other species within 
each particular genus:  Silene laciniata ,  Ribes speciosum ,  Astragalus coc-
cineus ,  Gilia aggregata ,  Ipomoea coccinea ,  Monardella macrantha , 
 Mimulus cardinalis ; and only two red-ﬂ owered species are found in the 
generally blue- and white-ﬂ owered species of the genus  Delphinium ,  D. 
cardinale and  D. nudicaule (Went 1971).  
 Worldwide, some 65 families of angiosperms have evolved ornithophi-
lous ﬂ owers (Cronk and Ojeda 2008). It will take a detailed analysis of 
the phylogenetic distribution of these ﬂ owers to determine how many 
are independent originations of ornithophily. For example, species in all 
eight families of the monocotyledon order Zingiberales are pollinated 
by birds (Cronk and Ojeda 2008). Do these eight families represent eight 
independent convergencies on ornithophily within the Zingiberales, or 

124 
Chapter 3
 Table 3.14 
 Convergent evolution of ornithophilous hummingbird ﬂ owers of western North America 
 Convergent structure and function: HUMMINGBIRD FLOWERS (odorless, brick-red, 
trumpet-shaped ﬂ owers rich in nectar that attract nectar-feeding birds for pollination 
purposes) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1   Firecracker plant (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Liliales: 
Liliaceae;  Brodiaea ida-maia ) 
 2  Schott ’ s century plant (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: 
Asparagales: Agavaceae;  Agave schottii ) 
 3   Scarlet larkspur (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Ranunculalaes: Ranunculaceae; 
 Delphinium cardinale ) 
 4  Indian 
pink 
(Euangiosperms: 
Eudicots: 
Core 
eudicots: 
Caryophyllales: 
Caryophyllaceae;  Silene laciniata ) 
 5   Hedgehog cactus (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: 
Cactaceae;  Echinocereus triglochidiatus ) 
 6   Scarlet four o ’ clock (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: 
Nyctaginaceae;  Allionia coccinea ) 
 7  Fuchsia-ﬂ owered gooseberry (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Saxifragales: 
Saxifragaceae;  Ribes speciosum ) 
 8   California fuchsia (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Myrtales: Onagraceae; 
 Zauschneria californica ) 
 9   Locoweed (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Fabaceae;  Astragalus 
coccineus ) 
 10   Ocotillo (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Ericales: Fouquieriaceae;  Fouquieria 
splendens ) 
 11  Scarlet skyrocket (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Ericales: Polemoniaceae; 
 Gilia aggregata ) 
 12  Star-glory (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Convolvulaceae; 
 Ipomoea coccinea ) 
 13   Scarlet monardella (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Lamiaceae; 
 Monardella macrantha ) 
 14  Crimson monkey-ﬂ ower (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: 
Scrophlariaceae;  Mimulus cardinalis ) 
 15   Desert honeysuckle (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Acanthaceae; 
 Anisacanthus thurberi ) 
 16   Scarlet bouvardia (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Rubiaceae; 
 Bouvardia glaberrima ) 
 17  Cardinal ﬂ ower (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids II: Campanulaceae; 
 Lobelia cardinalis ) 
 18   Arizona honeysuckle (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids II: 
Caprifoliaceae;  Lonicera arizonica ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Plants 
125
is ornithophily a synapomorphy for the entire order, with nonornithophi-
lous species within the order having secondarily lost the bird-pollination 
mode of reproduction? In other cases convergent evolution has clearly 
occurred, as with the species-rich eudicot family Asteraceae that pos-
sesses a single South American genus,  Mutisia , that is bird-pollinated 
(Cronk and Ojeda 2008). 
 In the Western Hemisphere, ornithophilous ﬂ owers are pollinated by 
species of hummingbirds (family Trochilidae), in Africa and Asia by 
species of sunbirds (family Nectariniidae), and in Australia and New 
Zealand by species of honeyeaters (family Meliphagidae) — a striking 
ecological convergence that we shall examine in more detail in the next 
chapter. Regardless of the particular pollinating bird species, ornithophi-
lous ﬂ owers around the world are remarkably convergent in form and 
color. The nectar-producing capabilities of the ﬂ owers are easily under-
standable, as this is the food reward system that the plants use to attract 
nectar-feeding birds. But why are the ﬂ owers all red? Curiously, the red 
color is thought to be as much for bee deterrence as much as it is for 
bird attraction (Cronk and Ojeda 2008). Bees see color up to light wave-
lengths of 550 nanometers, whereas birds can see colors that extend to 
wavelengths of 660 nanometers, much further into the red end of the 
electromagnetic spectrum. The red color of many ornithophilous ﬂ owers 
has a wavelength of 585 nanometers, outside the visual range of bees but 
clearly visible to birds (Cronk and Ojeda 2008). 
 Other aspects of ornithophilous ﬂ ower morphology also act to deter 
bees. Hummingbirds with long, curved bills can easily drink nectar from 
trumpet- or tubular-shaped ﬂ owers, whereas bees cannot. Since hum-
mingbirds feed while hovering, hummingbird ﬂ owers typically have no 
landing platforms that bees might use. In addition, most birds have a very 
poor sense of smell (excepting carrion hunters, such as vultures), and so 
ornithophilous ﬂ owers have no scent that might attract unwanted insects. 
 In summary, convergent fertilization systems are rife in the seed plants. 
Even such highly specialized systems as cantharophily, sapromyiophily, 
and ornithophily have been evolved over and over again in independent 
plant lineages. There appear to be a limited number of successful fertil-
ization systems, and plant evolution has been constrained to reusing 
these systems repeatedly in independent plant lineages. 
 While there are a limited number of ways to achieve fertilization in 
spermatophytes, there also appear to be a limited number of ways to 
disperse the product of fertilization: the seed. Species whose members 
are geographically widespread are more resistant to extinction than 

126 
Chapter 3
geographically endemic, locally restricted species. Whereas animal 
species can expand their geographic ranges by simply walking or ﬂ ying 
to new territories, plants cannot. Thus, the sessile nature of plants pre-
sents two reproductive problems, not just one: the problem of fertiliza-
tion in organisms that cannot move about in search for a mate, which we 
have just considered, and the problem of attaining geographic dispersal 
for the plant ’ s offspring. Spermatophytes have evolved two pathways to 
try to obtain geographic dispersal for their fertile seeds: physical seed-
dispersal systems and the evolution of fruit, in which the plant once again 
uses an attract-and-reward system to elicit the help of a mobile partner 
in carrying the plant ’ s offspring away to other territories. 
 Just as many plants use wind for pollination, they also depend upon 
wind for dispersal of their seeds. Some of these plants have evolved seeds 
with ﬁ ne, ﬁ lamentous tufts with much larger surface areas than those of 
the seed; these tufts can catch breezes which lift the seed up into the air 
to be carried away by the wind (Loewer 1995; Stewart 2009). Tufted seeds 
have independently appeared in both the rosid and asterid eudicot 
clades, and are perhaps most familiar in the cottonwoods and common 
dandelion (  table 3.15 ). Other plants have seeds that develop wings —
 enlarged surface-area structures that extend away from the seed cen-
ter — that can not only catch breezes to be lifted up into the air, but can 
also maintain themselves in the air for considerable distances due to the 
helicopter-lift effect of their spinning wings even if the initial breeze has 
died. Winged seeds have been independently developed throughout the 
clade of seed plants, from nonangiosperm spermatophytes like pino-
phytes to plesiomorphic angiosperm spermatophytes like magnoliids and 
to highly derived asterid eudicots (  table 3.15 ). The spinning seeds of 
maple trees are perhaps the most familiar example of this type of seed-
dispersal system in eastern North America. However, the East Indian 
cucurbit vine, which aptly bears the species name  macrocarpa , has seeds 
with wings that are 15 centimeters in total length, and the falling seeds 
descend in a spiral path with a 7-meter diameter (Loewer 1995), a feat 
our most massive maples cannot duplicate.  
 An alternative physical-dispersal system that does not use wind is the 
development of seeds that are capable of hitching a ride on mobile 
animals. In this case the animal is not rewarded for carrying the seed 
away, as often the animal is not even aware that a seed has attached itself 
to its body. I have termed this type of seed-dispersal system the  “ Velcro 
system, ”  as it is a historical fact that the idea for the creation of Velcro 
came from the observation of the adhesive capabilities of the thistle-

Convergent Plants 
127
shaped burrs of the greater burdock,  Arctium lappa  (Stewart 2009). 
Many different plant lineages, from the monocotyledon foxtails and 
needle grasses to highly derived asterid devil ’ s claws, beggar ’ s lice, and 
cockleburs have independently evolved seeds with tiny barbs or hooks 
that attached themselves to moving animals  (table 3.15 ). 
 A last physical-dispersal system is to produce seed containers that 
actually explode, sending the seeds of the plant rocketing off into the 
distance. The eastern dwarf mistletoe is capable of blasting its seeds away 
at the velocity of 90 kilometers an hour, and gorse seedpods explode with 
a noise like that of a gunshot (Stewart 2009). The wild geranium can 
throw its seeds some 3 meters away; squirting cucumbers and Indian 
sword beans can propel their seeds up to 6 meters away; exploding witch 
hazel seedpods send their seeds up to 10 meters away; and the exploding 
fruit of the sandbox tree is able to propel its seeds up to 100 meters into 
the distance (Loewer 1995; Stewart 2009). The exploding-seed-container 
dispersal system has been developed multiple times independently 
throughout the eudicot clade   (table 3.15 ). The list of convergent species 
given in  table 3.15 is not exhaustive, but was chosen to illustrate the 
widespread phylogenetic distribution of independent origins of the same 
dispersal system across the spermatophyte clade. A rigorous analysis of 
the phylogenetic distribution of all physical-dispersal systems in sper-
matophytes has yet to be conducted. However, such analyses have been 
conducted, at least in part, for those plants that have evolved an alterna-
tive dispersal system: ﬂ eshy fruit. 
 By far the most familiar angiosperm seed-dispersal system is the evo-
lution of fruit, in which the mobile animal partner is enticed to eat the 
sweet fruit and swallow the enclosed seeds, which are defecated by the 
animal much later, hopefully (from the plant ’ s point of view) to then 
sprout and grow at some distance removed from the original fruit-
bearing plant. Fleshy fruit and berry structures have convergently and 
independently evolved in so many plant lineages that it will take many 
detailed systematic analyses to sort out the many separate phylogenetic 
originations of the fruit habit. The fruit habit is also not an exclusively 
angiosperm trait: the odiferous fruit of the nonangiosperm spermato-
phyte  Ginkgo biloba  is familiar to many, as are the aromatic  “ berries ”  of 
the common juniper, a nonangiosperm pinophyte spermatophyte. 
 Commercially produced fruit that are popular with human consumers 
have convergently evolved in many branches of the eudicot clade. The 
highly derived Eurosid-I family Rosaceae in particular contains many 
fruit-bearing species, giving us apples, plums, peaches, pears, and cherries. 

128 
Chapter 3
Table 3.15
Convergent evolution of physical seed-dispersal systems in plants
1 Convergent structure and function: TUFTED SEEDS (ﬁ ne, ﬁ lamentous, parachute-like 
tufts for geographic dispersal of seeds by wind)
Convergent lineages:
1.1 Fireweed (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Myrtales: Onagraceae; Epilobium 
angustifolium)
1.2 Eastern cottonwood (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Salicaceae; 
Populus deltoides)
1.3 Common 
milkweed 
(Euangiosperms: 
Eudicots: Asteridae: 
Euasterids 
I: 
Asclepiadaceae; Asclepias syriaca)
1.4 Dogbane (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Apocynaceae; 
Apocynum cannabinum)
1.5 Common dandelion (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids II: Asteraceae; 
Taraxacum ofﬁ cinale)
2 Convergent structure and function: WINGED SEEDS (helicopter-like wings for 
geographic dispersal of seeds by wind)
Convergent lineages:
2.1 Eastern white pine (Euphyllophyta: Lignophyta: Spermatophyta: Pinophyta: 
Pinaceae; Pinus strobus)
2.2 Yellow poplar (Spermatophyta: Angiospermae: Euangiosperms: Magnoliidae: 
Magnoliales: Magnoliaceae; Liriodendron tulipifera)
2.3 Curly dock weed (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: 
Polygonaceae; Rumex crispus)
2.4 Winged elm (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Ulmaceae; Ulmus 
alata)
2.5 East Indian cucurbit vine (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: 
Cucurbitaceae; Macrozanonia macrocarpa)
2.6 Silver maple (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids II: Sapindaceae; Acer 
saccharinum)
2.7 Alianthus (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids II: Simaroubaceae; 
Alianthus altissima)
2.8 Common hoptree (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids II: Rutaceae; 
Ptelea trifoliata)
2.9 Alpine rockcress (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids II: Brassicaceae; 
Arabis alpina)
2.10 Horseradish tree (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids II: Moringaceae; 
Moringa pterygosperma)
2.11 White ash (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Oleaceae; Fraxinus 
americana)
2.12 Princess tree (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Scrophulariaceae; 
Paulownia tomentosa)
3 Convergent structure and function: VELCRO SEEDS (geographic dispersal of seeds by 
adhesion to mobile animals)
Convergent lineages:
3.1 Foxtail (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Commelinidae: 
Poaceae; Hordeum murinum)
3.2 Sand-tick trefoil (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Fabaceae; 
Desmodium lineatum)
3.3 Devil’s claw (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Pedaliaceae; 
Harpagophytum procumbens)
3.4 Beggar’s lice (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Boraginaceae; 
Cynoglossum ofﬁ cinale)

Convergent Plants 
129
Table 3.15
(continued)
3.5 Unicorn plant (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Martyniaceae; 
Proboscidea louisianaca)
3.6 Queen Anne’s lace (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids II: Apiaceae; 
Daucus carota)
3.7 Cocklebur (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids II: Asteraceae; 
Xanthium strumarium)
4 Convergent structure and function: EXPLODING SEED CONTAINERS (exploding 
seed pods or fruit for geographic dispersal of seeds)
Convergent lineages:
4.1 Eastern dwarf mistletoe (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Santalales: 
Santalaceae; Arceuthobium pusillum)
4.2 Witch hazel (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Saxifragales: Hamamelidaceae; 
Hamamelis virginiana)
4.3 Wild geranium (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Geraniales: Geraniaceae; 
Geranium maculatum)
4.4 Sandbox tree (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Euphorbiacea; Hura 
crepitans)
4.5 Gorse (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Fabaceae; Ulex europaeus)
4.6 Squirting cucumber (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Cucurbitaceae; 
Ecballium elaterium)
4.7 Creeping woodsorrel (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Oxalidaceae; 
Oxalis corniculata)
4.8 Pale touch-me-not (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Ericales: Balsaminaceae; 
Impatiens pallida)
Note: For data sources, see text.
But melons are produced by a different Eurosid-I family, Cucurbitaceae, 
and grapes are even more distantly placed, in the basal rosid family 
Vitaceae. Tart persimmons come from a much more distantly related 
family in the asterid clade (Ebenaceae), as do our popular tomatoes and 
eggplants (Solanaceae). A modern molecular phylogeny for the family 
Brassicaceae in the eudicot Eurosid-II clade has revealed that fruit has 
evolved three separate times independently in this single family alone 
(Mummenhoff et al. 2008). 
 While sorting out the many convergent occurrences of the fruit habit 
in the huge clade of the eudicots is going to take some time, rigorous 
phylogenetic analyses of convergent fruit evolution have been com-
pleted for the clade of the monocotyledons (Givnish et al. 2005). Fleshy 
fruits have independently evolved in 22 separate lineages within the 
monocolyledons (  table 3.16 ). In   table 3.16  I have listed basal or near-
basal species for each independent evolution of fruit in the cladogram 
of Givnish et al. (2005); subsequent evolution in some of these clades 
have produced numerous fruit-bearing species (such as the clade of 

130 
Chapter 3
 Table 3.16 
 Convergent evolution of ﬂ eshy fruit in monocotyledon angiosperms 
 Convergent structure and function: FLESHY FRUIT (geographic dispersal of seeds by 
fruit-eating animals) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1  Settler ’ s ﬂ ax (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Alismatales: Araceae;  Gymnostachys 
anceps ) 
 2  White bat ﬂ ower (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Dioscoreales: 
Dioscoreaceae;  Tacca integrifolia ) 
 3   Screwpine (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Pandanales: 
Pandanaceae;  Pandanus tectorius ) 
 4   Giant lily (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Liliales: Liliaceae; 
 Cardiocrinum giganteum ) 
 5   Supplejack vine fruit (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Liliales: 
Ripogonaceae;  Ripogonum scandens ) 
 6  Night heron (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Liliales: 
Colchicaceae;  Disporum cantoniense ) 
 7  Large-ﬂ owered trillium (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: 
Liliales: Melanthiaceae;  Trillium grandiﬂ orum ) 
 8  Forest smilax (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Asparagales: 
Agavaceae;  Behnia reticulata ) 
 9  Smooth Solomon ’ s seal (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: 
Asparagales: Ruscaceae;  Polygonatum biﬂ orum ) 
 10  Hyacinthina (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Asparagales: 
Amaryllidaceae;  Grifﬁ nia hyacinthina ) 
 11   Cardwell lily (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Asparagales: 
Amaryllidaceae;  Proiphys amboinensis ) 
 12   Scrambling lily (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Asparagales: 
Hemerocalidaceae;  Geitonoplesium cymosum ) 
 13   Palm grass (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Asparagales: 
Hyperoxidaceae;  Curculigo capitulata ) 
 14   Tasmanian Christmas bells (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: 
Asparagales: Blandfordiaceae;  Blandfordia punicea ) 
 15  Neuwiedia 
orchid 
(Euangiosperms: 
Monocotyledons: 
Eumonocotyledons: 
Asparagales: Orchidaceae;  Neuwiedia veratrifolia ) 
 16  ‘ Ohe (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Commelinidae: 
Poales: Joinvilleaceae;  Joinvillea ascendens ) 
 17   Whip vine (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Commelinidae: 
Poales: Flagelliariaceae;  Flagellaria indica ) 
 18   Brocchinia bromeliad (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: 
Commelinidae: Poales: Bromeliaceae;  Brocchinia reducta ) 
 19   Rattan palm (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Commelinidae: 
Arecales: Arecaceae;  Calamus laoensis ) 
 20   Malaysian hanguana (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: 
Commelinidae: Commelinales: Hanguanaceae;  Hanguana malayana ) 
 21   Amischolotype commelinid (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: 
Commelinidae: Commelinales: Commelinaceae;  Amischolotype hispida ) 
 22   Wild ginger (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Commelinidae: 
Zingiberales: Zingiberaceae;  Siphonochilus aethiopicus ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Plants 
131
the Arecaceae), while others have not (such as the clade of the 
Ruscaceae).  
 Interestingly, Givnish et al. (2005) also have demonstrated that former 
fruit-bearing species have secondarily lost the fruit habit 11 separate 
times within the clade of the monocotyledons. Their careful ecological 
analyses of the phylogenetic distribution of fruit occurrence within the 
monocotyledons reveals that species that have invaded shaded habitats 
have often subsequently evolved ﬂ eshy fruit, whereas species possessing 
fruit have often lost the fruit habit if those species returned to open 
habitats. Apparently animal dispersal of seeds is needed for plants 
growing under closed canopies, whereas in open habitats less costly 
mechanisms of wind dispersal seem to sufﬁ ce. Up to 95 percent of woody 
understory species in neotropical rain forests have evolved ﬂ eshy fruits, 
a phenomenon that Givnish et al. (2005, 1481) have termed  “ concerted 
convergence ” ; they point out that this pattern is among  “ the strongest 
ever demonstrated for evolutionary convergence in individual traits and 
the predictability of evolution. ” 
 Even more specialized than the evolution of fruit and subsequent seed 
dispersal by vertebrate animals is the evolution of seed dispersal by ants, 
or myrmecochory (Dunn et al. 2007). Myrmecochorous plants have 
evolved elaiosome, a specialized lipid-rich structure that ants use as a 
handle in carrying the seed from the plant back to their nest. At the nest, 
the ants remove the elaiosome (which is the plant ’ s reward to the ants), 
and the seed is discarded in a midden or outside of the nest itself. The 
elaiosome has clearly been convergently evolved by numerous different 
plants, as the structure has multiple developmental origins (Dunn et al. 
2007). 
 As phylogenetic relationships within the clade of the monocotyledons 
have now been resolved (Givnish et al. 2005), Dunn et al. (2007) have 
used this phylogeny to study the distribution of elaiosome origins. Myr-
mecochory has independently evolved 19 separate times within the clade 
of the monocotyledons (  table 3.17 ). In   table 3.17  I have listed basal or 
near-basal species for each independent evolution of elaiosomes in the 
cladogram of Dunn et al. (2007). Unlike monocotyledons that have con-
vergently evolved fruit ( table 3.16 ), Dunn et al. (2007) have demon-
strated that the evolution of myrmecochory in monocotyledons is 
independent of whether habitats are shaded or open, and hence inde-
pendent of the evolution of ﬂ eshy fruits themselves. Rather, the evolu-
tion of myrmecochory in plants appears to be directly linked to the 
evolutionary diversiﬁ cation and increase in population sizes of ants 

132 
Chapter 3
 Table 3.17 
 Convergent evolution of myrmecochory in monocotyledon ﬂ owering plants 
 Convergent structure and function: MYRMECOCHORY (geographic dispersal of seeds 
by ants) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1  Large-ﬂ ower bellwort (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: 
Liliales: Colchicaceae;  Uvularia grandiﬂ ora ) 
 2   Men-in-a-boat (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Liliales: 
Colchicaceae;  Androcymbium striatum ) 
 3   Dogtooth violet (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Liliales: 
Liliaceae;  Erythronium americanum ) 
 4  Yellow Star-of-Bethlehem (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: 
Liliales: Liliaceae;  Gagea lutea ) 
 5  Bigelow ’ s adder ’ s tongue (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: 
Liliales: Liliaceae;  Scoliopus bigelovii ) 
 6  Large-ﬂ owered trillium (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: 
Liliales: Melanthiaceae;  Trillium grandiﬂ orum ) 
 7   Palm grass (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Asparagales: 
Hypoxidaceae;  Curculigo capitulata ) 
 8  Cyanastrum (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Asparagales: 
Tecophilaeaceae;  Cyanastrum cordifolium ) 
 9   Turbinate hensmannia (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: 
Asparagales: Hemerocallidaceae;  Hensmannia turbinata ) 
 10  Summer 
snowﬂ ake 
(Euangiosperms: 
Monocotyledons: 
Eumonocotyledons: 
Asparagales: Amaryllidaceae;  Leucojum aestivum ) 
 11   Yellow iris (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Asparagales: 
Iridaceae;  Iris pseudacorus ) 
 12  Hooker ’ s dasypogon (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: 
Commelinidae: Dasypogonaceae;  Dasypogon hookeri ) 
 13   Pennsylvania 
sedge 
(Euangiosperms: 
Monocotyledons: 
Eumonocotyledons: 
Commelinidae: Poales: Cyperaceae;  Carex pensylvanica ) 
 14   Switchgrass (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Commelinidae: 
Poales: Poaceae;  Panicum virgatum ) 
 15   Silver vase bromeliad (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: 
Commelinidae: Poales: Bromeliaceae;  Aechmea fasciata ) 
 16   Blushing 
bromeliad 
(Euangiosperms: 
Monocotyledons: 
Eumonocotyledons: 
Commelinidae: Poales: Bromeliaceae;  Nidularium fulgens ) 
 17  Spiral ginger (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Commelinidae: 
Zingiberales: Costaceae;  Costus barbatus ) 
 18  Zebra plant (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: Commelinidae: 
Zingiberales: Marantaceae;  Calathea zebrina ) 
 19  Dancing girl ginger (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: 
Commelinidae: Zingiberales: Zingiberaceae;  Globba winitii ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Plants 
133
beginning in the Late Eocene, some 37 million years ago. The peak in 
the evolution of ﬂ eshy fruit in the monocotyledons began earlier, some 
85 million years ago, and was triggered by the spread of Late Cretaceous 
forests and closed-canopy habitats (Givnish et al. 2005).  
 Although myrmecochorous plants are equally likely to be found in 
either open habitats or closed-canopy habitats, Dunn et al. (2007) do 
demonstrate that monocotyledons in open habitats that are ﬁ re-prone, 
such as in Mediterranean ecosystems, have preferentially evolved myr-
mecochory. They suggest that transport of seeds to ant nests confers the 
selective advantage of reducing the risk of seed mortality due to ﬁ re, in 
addition to the selective advantage of geographic dispersal of the seeds. 
This conclusion is supported by the documented convergent evolution 
of myrmecochory in the ﬁ re-prone shrub lands of both South African 
and Australian ecosystems (Milewski and Bond 1982), which provides 
an example of ecosystem convergence as well, the subject of the next 
chapter of this book. 
 In summary, the incidences of reproductive convergence in plants, just 
as in the animals we considered in the previous chapter, vastly over-
shadow the classic examples of convergent evolution that are usually 
offered for both groups. The spectacular convergent evolution of wings 
in animals pales in comparison with the astonishing number of indepen-
dent origins of viviparity, and the convergent evolution of towering trees 
in plants pales in comparison with the astonishing number of indepen-
dent origins of the fruit habit. I predict the 22 separate convergences on 
the fruit habit discovered in the monocotyledons alone (  table 3.16 ) are 
going to be a small number indeed when rigorous phylogenetic analyses 
are eventually applied to mapping the number of independent origins of 
ﬂ eshy fruit in the huge clade of the eudicots. 
 In many ways, plant evolution is more complex and more interesting 
than animal evolution because of its overtly multispecies aspect. Plants 
coevolve with the numerous animal partners that they have involved in 
their reproduction and defense, and these beetles, ﬂ ies, bees, wasps, but-
terﬂ ies, moths, ants, birds, and mammals have themselves evolved in 
response to plant evolution. In the next chapter we shall focus on the 
phenomenon of convergent evolution at the multispecies level: that is, 
the convergent evolution of entire ecosystems. 


 4 
 In chemistry, the urge of scientists to order and classify natural phenomena 
resulted in the well-known periodic table of the elements, which allowed 
chemists to predict new elements and their chemical properties. . . . Some ecolo-
gists wonder whether something like a  “ periodic table of niches ”  might be 
possible. 
 — Pianka (1978, 267) 
 One Ecological Role, Many Convergent Players 
 Imagine a universe in which there are an unlimited number of ways to 
make a living. In such a universe, each species would have its own unique 
way of making a living, different from all other species. When we examine 
the ecological structure of living organisms on Earth, we can clearly see 
that we do not inhabit such a universe. 
 In our universe the number of ways of making a living, of ecological 
roles or niches, is demonstrably limited. Multiple species are constrained 
in their evolution to playing the same ecological role, ﬁ lling the same 
ecological niche, as best they can given their own phylogenetic and 
developmental backgrounds. The ecological role is the same, but the 
species players are from many different evolutionary pathways that have 
independently converged on ﬁ lling that niche. 
 Ecological niche convergence is best recognized by ﬁ rst considering 
truly bizarre ways of making a living — ecological roles that are so strange 
that, at ﬁ rst glance, it would seem probable that only one species would 
have evolved such a restricted pathway. And then one realizes that, 
astonishingly, the ecological evolution of life on Earth is so constrained 
that multiple species have converged on that pathway. 
 One such bizarre pathway is that of plants that eat animals — an eco-
logical role so strange that it fascinated Darwin (1875). Carnivorous 
plants have evolved adaptations to actively trap, kill, and digest animals. 
 Convergent Ecosystems 

136 
Chapter 4
Although such adaptations seem so improbable that one might think 
they could have evolved only once in the plants, Darwin ’ s (1875) own 
researches convinced him that the carnivorous plants were polyphyletic, 
and led him to believe that plants had independently evolved carnivory 
in three separate lineages. Over a century and a quarter later, modern 
phylogenetic analyses reveal that carnivory has arisen independently in 
at least six separate plant clades: within the commelinid monocotyledons, 
the caryophyllalean core eudicots, the eurosids-I eudicots, the ericalean-
asterid eudicots, and at least twice in the eurasterids-I eudicots (Albert 
et al. 1992; Cameron et al. 2002; Ellison and Gotelli 2009). 
 Not only is the trait of carnivory convergent in plants, but the means 
of carnivory itself is also convergent, in that independent plant lineages 
have evolved the same mechanism for it. Although six separate plant 
clades have evolved carnivory, carnivorous plants use only three differ-
ent types of animal traps: ﬂ ypaper traps, pitcher traps, and mechanical 
traps (  table 4.1 ). Carnivorous plants with ﬂ ypaper traps have leaves 
or hairs that ooze sticky droplets to capture animals that touch them. 
Flypaper-type traps have convergently evolved at least ﬁ ve separate 
times (  table 4.1 ), and it is possible that they have independently arisen 
more than once in the clade of the Caryophyllales. Within the carnivo-
rous Caryophyllales, the sundews (Droseraceae) are basal; thus, at ﬁ rst 
one might conclude that ﬂ ypaper traps are a synapomorphy for all plants 
in this clade with that trait, and so I have listed its evolution only once 
in   table 4.1 . However, higher in the clade, the dewy pines (Drosophyl-
laceae) and the African lianas ( Triphyophyllum peltatum , Dioncophyl-
laceae) may have reevolved ﬂ ypaper traps a second time, in that the 
Nepenthaceae are below these two families in the clade of the Caryo-
phyllales, and the Nepenthaceae do not have ﬂ ypaper-type traps (Ellison 
and Gotelli 2009).  
 Carnivorous plants with pitcher traps have tubular leaves or ﬂ owers 
with a pool of digestive ﬂ uids at the base of the tube. Animals that enter 
the plant ’ s tubes fall into the cup at its base to drown and be consumed. 
In some cases the plant ’ s tubes have downward-pointing hairs or spines 
that prevent the prey from trying to climb back out of the tube structure 
to escape. Pitcher traps have convergently evolved at least four separate 
times (  table 4.1 ). In some plant lineages, pitcher traps are developmental 
modiﬁ cations of preexisting ﬂ ypaper traps (Asian pitcher plants in the 
Caryophyllales), whereas in other lineages pitcher traps have evolved 
independently of any lineage possessing ﬂ ypaper traps (Australian 
pitcher plants, Brocchinia bromeliads). While insects are the prey of 

Convergent Ecosystems 
137
choice for most carnivorous plants, species of the pitcher-type carnivores 
are known to trap and eat animals as large as mice (Stewart 2009). 
 The most complicated of carnivorous-plant capture mechanisms are 
the mechanical traps, the most famous of which is the snap trap of the 
Venus ﬂ ytrap (  table 4.1 ). These snap traps are highly modiﬁ ed leaves 
with projecting antennae-like spikes around their perimeters. Animals 
alighting on the leaf, or touching the spikes in approaching the leaf, 
trigger the snap and the leaf folds shut, trapping the animal inside, with 
a rapidity that is the fastest movement known to exist in plants (Cameron 
et al. 2002). Darwin (1875) argued that the snap traps of the Venus 
ﬂ ytrap,  Dionaea muscipula , and the waterwheel,  Aldrovanda vesiculosa , 
were independently evolved. Ecologically the two species are very dif-
ferent: the Venus ﬂ ytrap is a terrestrial plant whereas the waterwheel is 
fully aquatic and does not possess roots; in addition, the Venus ﬂ ytrap 
 Table 4.1 
 Convergent evolution of carnivory in plants 
 Convergent ecological role: CARNIVOROUS PLANTS ( “ Venus ﬂ ytrap niche ” ) 
 1  Convergent lineages with  “ ﬂ ypaper ” traps: 
 1.1   Sundew (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: Droseraceae; 
 Drosera intermedia ) 
 1.2   Roridula (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Ericales: Roridulaceae;  Roridula 
gorgonias ) 
 1.3   Devil ’ s claw (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Martyniaceae; 
 Ibicella lutea ) 
 1.4   Rainbow plant (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Byblidaceae; 
 Byblis gigantea ) 
 1.5   Butterwort (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Lentibulariaceae; 
 Pinguicula vulgaris ) 
 2  Convergent lineages with  “ pitcher ” traps: 
 2.1  Brocchinia bromeliad (Euangiosperms: Monocotyledons: Eumonocotyledons: 
Commelinidae: Bromeliaceae;  Brocchinia reducta ) 
 2.2   Asian pitcher plant (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: 
Nepenthaceae;  Nepenthes truncata ) 
 2.3  Australian pitcher plant (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: 
Cephalotaceae;  Cephalotus follicularis ) 
 2.4   American 
pitcher 
plant 
(Euangiosperms: 
Eudicots: 
Asteridae: 
Ericales: 
Sarraceniaceae;  Sarracenia purpurea ) 
 3  Convergent lineages with  “ mechanical ” traps: 
 3.1  Venus ﬂ ytrap (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Caryophyllales: 
Droseraceae;  Dionaea muscipula ) 
 3.2   Bladderwort (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Lentibulariaceae; 
 Utricularia inﬂ ata ) 
 3.3   Corkscrew plant (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Lentibulariaceae; 
 Genlisea margaretae ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

138 
Chapter 4
captures ﬂ ying animals whereas the waterwheel captures underwater 
swimming animals. However, Darwin ’ s (1875) hypothesis of the conver-
gent evolution of snap traps has been disproved by modern phylogenetic 
molecular analyses, which reveal that the Venus ﬂ ytrap and the water-
wheel are sister taxa, and that the snap trap is a synapomorphy, thus not 
convergent (Cameron et al. 2002; Ellison and Gotelli 2009). 
 The bladderworts are also aquatic, but rather than having snap-trap 
leaves like the waterwheel, they have modiﬁ ed their leaves into bladder-
like structures with a snap-trigger lid. When triggered, these bladders 
develop an internal negative pressure that is capable of sucking swim-
ming animals into the bladder and closing the lid, trapping the animal 
inside to be digested. The Venus ﬂ ytrap usually eats only insects, but the 
bladderworts can trap and eat animals as large as tadpoles, and they can 
reset their traps every thirty minutes, making them one of the most vora-
cious of the carnivorous plants (Stewart 2009). 
 The corkscrew plants have modiﬁ ed some of their leaves into geomet-
ric traps, twin corkscrews that meet at a feeding pit containing digestive 
ﬂ uid. These corkscrewed leaves are actually developed underground, in 
the place of roots, and primarily capture bacteria. Upon entering the 
corkscrew, the prey organism is unable to leave because inward-pointing 
hairs and the geometry of the screw prevent backward movement, and 
the prey can only move forward to its death in the feeding pit. 
 The bladderworts and the corkscrew plants both belong to the 
family of the Lentibulariaceae (  table 4.1 ), yet the nature of their me -
chanical leaf traps is so different that it is believed that the two types 
of trap were independently developed; that is, neither plant is in an 
ancestor-descendant relationship to the other, and their different traps 
represent separate modiﬁ cations of the ﬂ ypaper-type trap of the basal-
lentibulariacean butterworts (Ellison and Gotelli 2009). 
 What is convergent in all of these plants is the ecological role of car-
nivory, rather than the overall morphology of the plants (as in chapter 
3). There is an underlying ecological trigger, a selective advantage, that 
is found in most carnivorous plants: they are able to invade nitrogen-
poor habitats preferentially over other plants. Most carnivorous plants 
are found in boggy or swampy environments where nutrients are in short 
supply, and therefore these plants have evolved a new way to acquire 
additional nutrients, namely by eating animals. Nitrogen, in particular, is 
preferentially allocated to reproductive structures in many carnivorous 
plants (Ellison and Gotelli 2009), triggering the differential reproductive 
process of natural selection in their favor. 

Convergent Ecosystems 
139
 Plants by deﬁ nition are multicellular photoautotrophs — that is, they 
produce their own food by the process of photosynthesis. Even the car-
nivorous plants still have green leaves and photosynthesis, so they have 
not fully abandoned photoautotrophy. Still other plants have taken 
another bizarre evolutionary pathway: they have become heterotrophic, 
like animals. Such plants have drastically reduced their reliance on pho-
tosynthesis, and some have eventually lost it entirely, becoming parasitic 
like many animal species or saprophytic like many fungal species, who 
are close relatives to the animals. These are plants that, in essence, eat 
other plants. 
 Perhaps the most notorious of the parasitic plants is the dodder vine 
(  table 4.2 ), a parasite that one botanist describes as resembling  “ an alien 
life form that has come to suck the life out of [E]arth ’ s vegetation ” 
(Stewart 2009, 147). Dodder vines lack the green color of chlorophyll, 
and instead are eerie shades of orange, red, and yellow. Dodder leaves 
have been reduced to near-microscopic scalelike structures, such that 
the vines appear to be naked, brightly colored strings smothering the 
plant that is being parasitized. The dodder vine is a highly derived asterid 
eudicot, yet the very distantly related, near-basal-Euangiosperms clade 
of the magnoliids has convergently evolved its ecological equivalent in 
the macabre-named  “ love vine, ”  although its embrace is just as unloving 
as that of the dodder, at least from the point of view of the parasitized 
plant (  table 4.2 ). All in all, at least seven independent phylogenetic 
 Table 4.2 
 Convergent evolution of heterotrophy in plants 
 Convergent ecological role: PARASITIC AND SAPROPHYTIC PLANTS ( “ dodder 
niche ” ) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1  Love vine (Euangiosperms: Magnoliidae: Laurales: Lauraceae;  Cassytha ﬁ liformis ) 
 2   Coral 
root 
orchid 
(Euangiosperms: 
Monocotyledons: 
Eumonocotyledons: 
Asparagales: Orchidaceae;  Corallorhiza maculata ) 
 3   Eastern dwarf mistletoe (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Core eudicots: Santalales: 
Santalaceae;  Arceuthobium pusillum ) 
 4  Rafﬂ esia (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Rosidae: Eurosids I: Rafﬂ esiaceae;  Rafﬂ esia 
arnoldii ) 
 5   Indian pipe (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Ericales: Ericaceae;  Monotropa 
uniﬂ ora ) 
 6   Witch weed (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Scrophulariaceae; 
 Striga asiatica ) 
 7  Dodder (Euangiosperms: Eudicots: Asteridae: Euasterids I: Convolvulaceae;  Cuscuta 
epithymum ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

140 
Chapter 4
lineages of plants have converged upon the ecological role of heterotro-
phy, the most aptly named of which is perhaps the  “ witch weed ”  
( table 4.2 ).  
 Striking and seemingly improbable examples of ecological niche con-
vergence are not limited to the plants. Consider the ecological role of 
insectivory. Insects are an abundant source of food on land, and so it is 
not surprising that many animals have evolved insectivorous modes of 
life. Ecological convergence exists at all levels and types of insectivory, 
such as the fairly restricted ecological role of eating-insects-on-the-wing, 
in which the insectivore captures and eats insects in the air without 
pausing from insect to insect. Dragonﬂ ies, which are themselves insects 
(Odonata), avian swifts (Apodidae), and mammalian bats (Microchirop-
tera), to name only a few separate phylogenetic lineages, are all species 
that have converged on ﬁ lling this same ecological niche. 
 Let us consider an extremely specialized form of insectivory: eating 
insects found only in tree bark. There exists a highly specialized group 
of species that have evolved adaptations to ﬁ ll this ecological niche: the 
avian woodpeckers (Picidae). These birds have evolved long, sharp, 
pointed beaks for boring and digging into tree bark, and very long 
tongues for extracting exposed insects. The jaws and cranium of the 
woodpecker are structured in a fashion that cushions the brain of the 
bird as it hammers away, preventing concussion. In the foot of the wood-
pecker, the fourth digit has been rotated backward, joining the ﬁ rst digit, 
such that the bird has feet with two toes pointing forward and two back-
ward. These clawed feet, combined with the stiffened tail feathers of the 
woodpecker, allow the bird to ﬁ rmly anchor itself against a tree and to 
forcefully hammer the bark of the tree without becoming dislodged from 
its triangular base of two grasping feet and supporting prop of tail 
feathers. 
 Thus, the woodpeckers are unique, highly specialized animals that 
have evolved to ﬁ ll an extremely specialized and restricted ecological 
role, yes? Not so. They are not unique, in that no less than six additional 
phylogenetic lineages of animals have converged on ﬁ lling the ecological 
niche of eating wood-boring insects (  table 4.3 ). Three of these lineages 
are avian, but they are very different types of birds from woodpeckers, 
with very different adaptations. Both the akiapola ’ au honeycreepers of 
Hawaii and the sickle-billed vangas of Madagascar extract insects from 
tree bark with their bills, but their bills are not like those of woodpeckers. 
The akiapola ’ au honeycreeper has a thick lower beak that is only half as 
long as its curved upper beak. It drills and digs into tree bark with its 

Convergent Ecosystems 
141
lower beak, and then extracts insects from the bark with the hooked 
upper beak. As their name implies, the sickle-billed vangas have sickle-
shaped beaks, which they insert into bark cracks and openings; they then 
use a lever action to pull out the insect.  
 The woodpecker ﬁ nches of the Galapagos have evolved a totally 
different approach to extracting wood-boring insects — they use tools. 
These birds use their beaks, not to drill with, but to hold a long, sharp 
tool, usually a cactus spine. They insert the cactus spine into bark 
cracks and openings, and also use a lever action to pull out insects, but 
using the tool rather than a specialized beak morphology. We shall con-
sider the convergent evolution of tool usage by animals in detail in 
chapter 6. 
 Not only did tool usage and three distinctly different types of beak 
morphologies evolve in independent bird lineages to ﬁ ll the same eco-
logical niche, but no less than three separate lineages of mammals have 
also converged on the same restricted ecological role of eating wood-
boring insects (  table 4.3 ). All three of these mammal groups use very 
elongated ﬁ ngers, tipped with claws, to insert into tree bark and to pull 
out enclosed insects. The particular ﬁ ngers used, however, are different 
in each group. The striped possum of New Guinea, a marsupial mammal, 
has evolved a very elongated fourth digit (the ring ﬁ nger in humans) for 
this function, whereas the aye-aye of Madagascar, a placental mammal, 
 Table 4.3 
 Convergent evolution of woodpecker ecological equivalents in animals 
 Convergent ecological role: EATERS OF WOOD-BORING INSECTS ( “ woodpecker 
niche ” ) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1   Red-headed woodpecker (Amniota: Sauropsida: Archosauromorpha: Dinosauria: 
Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Piciformes; Picidae; 
 Melanerpes erythrocephalus ) 
 2  Akiapola ’ au honeycreeper (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Drepanididae; 
 Hemignathus munroi ) 
 3   Sickle-billed vanga (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Vangidae;  Falculea 
palliata ) 
 4  Woodpecker ﬁ nch (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Emberizidae; 
 Cactospiza pallida ) 
 5   Striped possum (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Marsupialia: 
Diprotodontia: Petauridae;  Dactylopsila trivirgata ) 
 6   Apatemyid (Mammalia: Eutheria: Boreoeutheria: Apatemyidae;  Apatemys chardini 
 † Paleogene) 
 7   Aye-aye (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: Lemuriformes: Daubentoniidae; 
 Daubentonia madagascariensis ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

142 
Chapter 4
has evolved an elongated third digit (the middle ﬁ nger in humans) for 
the same function. These two groups of mammals are alive today, but 
there existed a third group, the extinct apatemyids, that also converged 
on this same ecological role (  table 4.3 ). The apatemyids evolved two 
elongated ﬁ ngers rather than one, the second digit (the pointing ﬁ nger 
in humans) and the third digit, for use in extracting insects from tree 
bark (Koenigswald and Schierning 1987). 
 Again, what is convergent in all of these animals is the ecological role 
of eating wood-boring insects, not the morphologies of the animals as 
previously considered in detail in chapter 2. Birds, bats, pterosaurs, and 
butterﬂ ies have all convergently evolved a morphologically similar struc-
ture, namely wings, to accomplish the same function: powered ﬂ ight (see 
chapter 2). Here, greatly different morphological structures and behav-
iors have evolved in independent phylogenetic lineages in order to con-
vergently ﬁ ll the same ecological niche: eating wood-boring insects. A 
bat superﬁ cially looks like a bird, but a red-headed woodpecker looks 
very different from a striped possum. Morphologically, these animals are 
very different, but ecologically they are equivalents. 
 Consider yet another highly specialized form of insectivory: attacking 
and eating ants in their nests. Huge numbers of ants can inhabit an ant 
colony, and they are highly aggressive in defending that colony. Thus, 
attacking an ant nest is not a trivial task, and one might conclude that 
only one type of highly specialized animal would ﬁ ll the niche of such a 
restrictive mode of food acquisition. But within the mammals alone, ﬁ ve 
separate groups have converged on myrmecophagy, three times indepen-
dently in the placental mammals, once in the marsupial mammals, and 
once in the monotreme mammals (  table 4.4 ). Interestingly, in the placen-
tal mammals both morphological convergence and ecological conver-
gence have occurred, in that the South American giant anteater, the 
Asian pangolin, and the African aardvark have all evolved long claws 
and strong forelimbs for tearing into ant nests. All three groups of animals 
have evolved tubular-shaped mouths that contain a very long, sticky 
tongue for capturing ants. The anteaters and pangolins have totally lost 
their teeth, and the aardvark retains only a few teeth. All three groups 
have highly developed salivary glands, which assist in swallowing copious 
amounts of ants, and all three have convergently evolved strongly mus-
cular pyloric regions in their stomachs to assist in digesting ants (Lecoin-
tre and Le Guyader 2006). Yet these animal groups are only very distantly 
related: the anteaters are xenarthrans, basal eutherians; the aardvarks 
are afrotherians; and the pangolins are laurasiatherians (  table 4.4 ). 

Convergent Ecosystems 
143
Although today these animal groups are geographically separated 
ecological equivalents, the enigmatic fossil species  Eurotamandua 
joresi , from the Eocene Messel strata in Germany, indicates that the 
xenarthrans once extended their range into that of the laurasiatherian 
pangolins (Gaudin and Branham 1998).  
 The marsupial mammals and the plesiomorphic, egg-laying mono-
treme mammals are even more distantly related, but they too have 
converged on the ecological role of myrmecophagy with the numbat of 
Australia and the long-beaked echidna of New Guinea (  table 4.4 ). Like 
the placental mammals, the myrmecophagous echidnas have evolved 
toothless, tubular-shaped mouths with long, sticky tongues for capturing 
ants (Lecointre and Le Guyader 2006). 
 Last, the ecological niche of myrmecophagy has also been conver-
gently ﬁ lled by three independent groups of animals in the clade of 
sauropsid amniotes, the reptiles. The desert horned lizards of North 
American, phrynosomatid lepidosaurs, and the thorny devil lizards of 
Australia, agamid lepidosaurs, have independently evolved myrmecoph-
agy (  table 4.4 ). Both of these lizard groups have reduced their dentition, 
a morphological trait convergent on the myrmecophagous mammals, 
have expanded their stomachs to assist in digesting large numbers of ants, 
and have strikingly similar dorsoventrally ﬂ attened bodies covered with 
sharp spines (Pianka and Parker 1975). These two lizard groups have also 
convergently evolved much quicker prey capture and processing behav-
iors than any other iguanian lizards; with their particularly rapid tongue 
 Table 4.4 
 Convergent evolution of myrmecophagous ecological equivalents in animals 
 Convergent ecological role: ANT-EATING ANIMALS ( “ anteater niche ” ) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1  Thorny devil lizard (Amniota: Sauropsida: Diapsida: Lepidosauromorpha: Squamata: 
Iguania: Agamidae;  Moloch horridus ) 
 2   Desert horned lizard (Lepidosauromorpha: Squamata: Iguania: Phrynosomatidae; 
 Phrynosoma platyrhinos ) 
 3  “ Desert bird ” alvarezsaurid (Diapsida: Archosauromorpha: Dinosauria: Saurischia: 
Theropoda: Coelurosauria: Maniraptora: Alvarezsauridae;  Shuvuuia deserti  † Cretaceous) 
 4   Long-beaked echidna (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Monotremata: 
Tachyglossidae;  Zaglossus bruijni ) 
 5  Numbat (Mammalia: Marsupialia: Myrmecobiidae;  Myrmecobius fasciatus ) 
 6   Giant anteater (Mammalia: Eutheria: Xenarthra: Myrmecophagidae;  Myrmecophaga 
tridactyla ) 
 7  Aardvark (Eutheria: Afrotheria: Tubulidentata: Orycteropodidae;  Orycteropus afer ) 
 8  Giant pangolin (Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Pholidota: Manidae;  Manis gigantea ) 
     Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a  † . For data sources, see text. 

144 
Chapter 4
protrusion and retraction, the thorny desert lizards can consume up to 
2,000 ants per day (Meyers and Herrel 2005). 
 Myrmecophagy also appears to have evolved within the clade of the 
dinosaurs, as evidenced by the peculiar alvarezsaurids of the Cretaceous 
( table 4.4 ). One of the best preserved of these is the  “ desert bird, ” 
 Shuvuuia deserti , which is not a true bird but a related maniraptoran 
theropod. It has powerful forearms and hands with a single ﬁ nger, tipped 
with a very large, hooked claw that is hypothesized to have been used to 
rip open ant or termite nests, as the living mammalian anteaters do. Its 
snout is also elongated and roughly tubular, but the morphology of the 
tongue contained inside is unknown. These Cretaceous animals are enig-
matic in that ants did not become a signiﬁ cant part of the terrestrial 
ecosystem until the Eocene, as discussed in chapter 3 in the discussion 
of the convergent evolution of myrmecochory in plants (see table 3.17). 
Thus, they may not have been exclusively specialized for eating only ants, 
but may have also preyed on wood-nesting termites (Longrich and 
Currie 2008). 
 In general for the major heterotrophic organisms, animals are different 
types of carnivores or herbivores, ultimately using living organisms as a 
source of food, whereas the closely related fungi are saprophytes, feeding 
on dead and decaying organisms. However, there exist some animals, the 
carrion-eaters, who have converged on the saprophytic, necrophagous 
mode of life. The corpse-seeking carrion beetles and hyenas are very 
different-looking types of animals, one an arthropod and the other a 
mammal, yet they are ecological equivalents (  table 4.5 ). However, the 
most spectacular convergence on the ecological role of necrophagy is 
exhibited by the birds, where morphological convergence has paralleled 
ecological convergence. The Eurasian black vulture looks very similar to 
the North American turkey vulture, but the accipitrid Eurasian black 
vulture is a member of the clade of the Falconiformes, closely related to 
hawks and eagles, whereas the cathartid North American turkey vulture 
is a member of the clade of the Ciconiiformes, closely related to the 
storks and ﬂ amingos (Lecointre and Le Guyader 2006). Nevertheless, 
both bird groups have independently evolved featherless, bald heads and 
necks that allow them to push their heads into rotting carcasses without 
fouling their body feathers. Both bird groups have also evolved extremely 
acidic stomachs to protect them from bacterial poisoning in eating 
carrion. Even more amazing, both bird groups have independently 
evolved similar behaviors: both Eastern Hemisphere and Western Hemi-
sphere vultures aggregate in social ﬂ ocks in trees, and both have evolved 

Convergent Ecosystems 
145
the soaring-in-circular-formation ﬂ ight pattern in searching for rotting 
corpses (we shall consider the convergent evolution of behavior in 
animals in detail in chapter 6).  
 The North American ciconiiform cathartid vultures also contain the 
largest ﬂ ying bird species alive on the Earth today, the California condor, 
 Gymnogyps californianus , with a wingspan of three meters. Yet the cico-
niiform birds apparently converged on the ecological role of necrophagy 
at least twice in their evolutionary history (  table 4.5 ): in the Miocene, 
some 10 million years ago, they produced another family of gigantic 
vultures, the Teratornithidae, with wingspans of 6 meters, the largest 
ﬂ ying birds known in Earth ’ s history (Benton 2005). 
 Compared to necrophages, convergent animals who survive by eating 
rotting corpses, the ecological role of eating nectar would seem to be a 
sweet alternative. Nectarivory is a very highly specialized ecological 
niche, one that (at ﬁ rst glance) would not seem to be easy to ﬁ ll. Nectar 
is very sugar-rich, but it is very difﬁ cult to survive on a diet of sugar. The 
proteins, amino acids, vitamins, and trace minerals necessary for animal 
growth and reproduction are present in nectar in extremely low levels, 
if at all (Gartrell 2000). The best-known nectarivores, the hummingbirds, 
have evolved a suite of adaptations directly related to the difﬁ culty of 
surviving on nectar: small body sizes, lowered metabolic rates, lowered 
protein requirements, and substantial changes in both their digestive and 
renal physiologies (Gartrell 2000). All this is in addition to their evolu-
tion of extremely long beaks and tubular tongues in order to feed from 
ﬂ owers, and glossy feathers packed tightly to their bodies, an adaptation 
 Table 4.5 
 Convergent evolution of necrophagous ecological equivalents in animals 
 Convergent ecological role: CARRION-EATING ANIMALS ( “ vulture niche ” ) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1   American carrion beetle (Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Hexapoda: 
Coleoptera: Staphylinoidea: Silphidae;  Necrophila americana ) 
 2   Eurasian black vulture (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: 
Sarcopterygii: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: Archosauromorpha: Dinosauria: 
Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Falconiformes: 
Accipitridae;  Aegypius monachus ) 
 3   Turkey vulture (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Ciconiiformes: Cathartidae;  Cathartes 
aura ) 
 4  Teratorn (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Ciconiiformes: Teratornithidae;  Argentavis 
magniﬁ cens  † Miocene) 
 5   Striped hyena (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: 
Carnivora: Feliformia: Hyaenidae;  Hyaena hyaena ) 
     Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a  † . For data sources, see text. 

146 
Chapter 4
believed to prevent their feathers from being soiled by sticky nectar 
(Gartrell 2000). 
 Thus, the hummingbird would seem to be an exquisite but unique 
animal highly adapted to a very restrictive ecological role. But it is not 
unique — no less than eleven other phylogenetic lineages of animals have 
independently converged on the ecological role of nectarivory (  table 
4.6 ). The hummingbirds, avian family Trochilidae, are found only in the 
Western Hemisphere, in both North and South America (Cronk and 
Ojeda 2008). In the tropics of the Eastern Hemisphere, from Africa to 
Asia and Australia, a separate group of birds have independently evolved 
to ﬁ ll the nectarivore ecological role: the sunbirds, avian family Nectari-
niidae (  table 4.6 ). In Australia, New Zealand, and Paciﬁ c islands as far 
away as Hawaii, a third group of birds have convergently ﬁ lled the nec-
tarivore niche: the honeyeaters, avian family Meliphagidae.  
 The trochilids, nectariniids, and meliphagids constitute the three 
main phylogenetic lineages of birds that have converged on ﬁ lling the 
 Table 4.6 
 Convergent evolution of ﬂ ying nectarivorous ecological equivalents in animals 
 Convergent ecological role: FLYING NECTAR FEEDERS ( “ hummingbird niche ” ) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1   Hummingbird clearwing moth (Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: 
Hexapoda: Lepidoptera: Sphingidae;  Hemaris thysbe ) 
 2   Ruby-throated hummingbird (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: 
Sarcopterygii: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: Archosauromorpha: Dinosauria: 
Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Apodiformes: 
Trochilidae;  Archilochus colubris ) 
 3   Ruby-cheeked sunbird (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Nectariniidae; 
 Chalcoparia singalensis ) 
 4   Red-throated honeyeater (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Meliphagidae; 
 Myzomela eques ) 
 5   Red-legged American honeycreeper (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: 
Thraupidae;  Cyanerpes cyaneus ) 
 6  ‘ I ’ iwi Hawaiian honeycreeper (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: 
Drepanididae;  Vestiaria coccinea ) 
 7   Japanese white-eyes (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Zosteropidae; 
 Zosterops japonicus ) 
 8   South African sugarbird (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Promeropidae; 
 Promerops cafer ) 
 9   Tennessee warbler (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Parulidae:  Vermiuora 
peregrina ) 
 10   Swift parrot (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Psittaciformes: Psittacidae;  Lathamus 
discolor ) 
 11   Mexican long-tongued bat (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: 
Laurasiatheria: Chiroptera: Microchiroptera: Phyllostomidae;  Choeronycteris mexicana ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Ecosystems 
147
nectarivore ecological niche (Cronk and Ojeda 2008). But they are not 
alone, for no less than ﬁ ve other families of passeriform birds and one 
family of psittaciform birds have convergently evolved nectarivory (  table 
4.6 ). In the Western Hemisphere the red-legged American honeycreep-
ers (Thraupidae) and Tennessee warblers (Parulidae) have convergently 
evolved nectarivory, and coexist with hummingbirds. In the Eastern 
Hemisphere, the South African sugarbirds (Promeropidae) and Japanese 
white-eyes (Zosteropidae) have convergently evolved nectarivory, and 
coexist with the sunbirds. In Australia the swift parrots (Psittacidae) and 
in Hawaii the  ‘ I ’ iwi honeycreepers (Drepanididae) have convergently 
evolved nectarivory, and coexist with honeyeaters. All of these birds have 
independently evolved many of the nectarivorous adaptations seen in 
the hummingbirds: lowered metabolic rates and protein requirements in 
honeyeaters; glossy feathers and slender, thin beaks in swift parrots; 
extensible brush tongues independently in both honeyeaters and swift 
parrots, and so on (Gartrell 2000). 
 Convergence on this extremely specialized way of surviving is not 
limited to the birds. In North America, the hummingbird clearwing moth 
is an insect that has not merely converged on the ecological role of nec-
tarivory, it is also a hummingbird morphological mimic. This moth has 
converged so closely on the shape and color of a hummingbird that it is 
often mistaken for one — only when one notices a pair of antennae on 
the head of the animal does one suddenly realizes that it is not a bird at 
all. And last, even the mammals have evolved nectarivory (  table 4.6 ). The 
Mexican long-tongued bat, aptly named as its tongue can be as long as 
one-quarter of its body length, has convergently ﬁ lled the nectarivore 
ecological niche even though it looks nothing like a hummingbird. 
 I will use one last — and major — example of ecological niche conver-
gence to conclude this section of the chapter, and to set the stage for the 
next section, in which we will consider the ecological convergence of 
entire ecosystems. This is the convergent evolution of ground-dwelling, 
ﬂ ightless birds. Many different phylogenetic lineages of birds have inde-
pendently devolved the ability to ﬂ y, losing the characteristic set of traits 
that sets them apart from the other theropod dinosaurs (Roff 1994; 
Roots 2006). Their wings become reduced and vestigial, with the shorten-
ing and weakening of the humerus, ulna, and radius within the wing. 
Their sterna become ﬂ at, losing the prominent keel for anchoring power-
ful ﬂ ight muscles. Flight feathers in the wing and tail are shortened until 
they become useless for ﬂ ight. Finally, the feathers lose their aerody-
namic asymmetry and their smooth aerodynamic contours, which were 

148 
Chapter 4
maintained by barbules and microscopic hooklets, and become loosely 
constructed and hairlike, giving a shaggy appearance to many ﬂ ightless 
birds (Feduccia 1996). 
 Not all changes in the evolution of ﬂ ightlessness in birds are trait 
losses. Because they no longer ﬂ y and no longer need to be lightweight, 
constraints on body size are lifted and ﬂ ightless birds can become quite 
large. To adapt to their new life as bipedal ground dwellers, they develop 
larger legs and powerful thigh muscles, not only to outrun predators or 
to run down prey but also to defend themselves with powerful kicks of 
their hind limbs (Roots 2006). As summarized by Feduccia (1996, 289), 
 “ whatever the group of birds, when ﬂ ightlessness occurs, the same general 
morphological features appear time and time again, convergently, pro-
viding a veritable lesson in the rules of evolutionary design. ” 
 From an ecological perspective, what is particularly striking is the 
convergent evolution of multiple mammalian ecological equivalents in 
ﬂ ightless birds — these birds do not converge on a single mammalian 
ecological role, but rather have evolved to ﬁ ll a suite of niches usually 
occupied by the ground-dwelling mammals (  table 4.7 ). Ground-dwelling 
birds have evolved carnivores, insectivores, omnivores, herbivores, and 
frugivores that convergently play the mammalian ecological roles of cats, 
moles, badgers, ungulates, and tapirs. Other ﬂ ightless birds have become 
swimmers, occupying both marine and freshwater habitats, converging 
on the ecological role of pinniped mammals (  table 4.7 ). Ecologically 
considered, the penguin is a bird that has convergently evolved into 
a seal.  
 Not long after the destruction of the dinosaurian ecosystem in the 
end-Cretaceous mass extinction, a major group of ground-dwelling pred-
atory birds, the phorusrhacids or  “ terror birds, ”  evolved in the Paleocene 
(Benton 2005). Anatomically, some of these birds are eerily similar to 
the Mesozoic dromaeosaurs and troodontids, as discussed in chapter 2 
(see table 2.7). Therefore, rather than saying that the birds converged on 
the mammalian role of a ground-dwelling felid carnivore in the Ceno-
zoic, it would be more accurate to argue that the felids convergently ﬁ lled 
the ecological niche of the extinct coelurosaurs. Some of the extinct 
phorusrhacids were quite large; the typical species of  Phorusrhacos were 
1.5 meters tall, but the Eocene  Phorusrhacos longissimus  reached almost 
3 meters and the titan phorusrhacid,  Titanus walleri , was slightly taller 
than 3 meters (Feduccia 1996; Benton 2005). The red-legged seriema of 
South America is a surviving cousin of the extinct phorusrhacids, but 

Convergent Ecosystems 
149
this ground-dwelling predator is only about 40 centimeters in height 
(Feduccia 1996). 
 The phorusrhacids survived from the Paleocene to the Pliocene and, 
although early members of the group are found in Europe, the family 
diversiﬁ ed and ﬂ ourished in isolation in South America. Another group 
of ground-dwelling avian carnivores, the diatrymids, were more success-
ful in the Northern Hemisphere, but persisted only from the Paleocene 
through the Eocene. Some of these birds were also quite large: the 
Eocene  Diatryma gigantea  stood at a height of 2 meters (  table 4.7 ). Their 
diet may have been more diversiﬁ ed than the felid-like phorusrhacid 
carnivores in that some may have been primarily scavengers and some 
more omnivorous, eating some plant material as well as animal prey 
(Feduccia 1996; Benton 2005). 
 No other group of birds has produced as many convergent ﬂ ightless 
species as the rails (family Rallidae;   table 4.7 ). At least 24 living species 
of rails have independently evolved ﬂ ightlessness (Roff 1994; Roots 
2006), and the number of extinct species of ﬂ ightless rails that existed on 
tropical Paciﬁ c islands before the arrival of humans (and the mammalian 
predators they brought with them) is estimated to have been between 
500 to 1,600 (Steadman 2006). However, the New Zealand weka rails are 
formidable predators that have added human-introduced rats and mice 
to their own diet, rather than the other way around (Feduccia 1996). I 
have listed some 13 species of rails whose diet primarily consists of 
animal prey (although they also consume some plant material) in   table 
4.7 . Rather than felids, these 13 rail species are probably more conver-
gent on omnivorous predators like the canids, and may be considered as 
ecological equivalents of foxes. Other species of rails clearly are more in 
the category of foraging omnivores, and a few are herbivores (  table 4.7 ). 
The South Island takahe of New Zealand is the largest living rail, yet its 
diet is exclusively vegetarian (Roots 2006). 
 The living ostriches, rheas, and the extinct palaeotids are plesiomor-
phic paleognath ﬂ ightless birds that have converged on ﬁ lling the eco-
logical niche of foraging omnivores. Their diet consists primarily of plant 
material (for which they convergently evolved gizzards to process, as 
discussed for the ostrich in chapter 2), but they consume a considerable 
number of animals as well, chieﬂ y insects, small mammals, and small 
reptiles. Captive rheas in zoos are even known to have developed a taste 
for sparrows (Roots 2006). As such, these ground-dwelling birds have 
converged on mammalian ecological roles ranging from badgers ’ to wild 

150 
Chapter 4
Table 4.7
Convergent evolution of mammalian ecological equivalents in birds
1 Convergent 
ecological 
role: 
FLIGHTLESS, 
GROUND-DWELLING 
AVIAN 
CARNIVORES (“cat niche, fox niche”)
Convergent lineages:
1.1 Giant diatrymid (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gastornithiformes: Diatrymidae; 
Diatryma gigantea †Eocene)
1.2 Titan phorusrhacid (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Cariamae: 
Phorusrhacidae; Titanus walleri †Pliocene)
1.3 Red-legged seriema (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Cariamae: 
Cariamidae; Cariama cristata)
1.4 North Island weka rail (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; 
Gallirallus australis grayi)
1.5 Black weka rail (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; Gallirallus 
australis australis)
1.6 Stewart Island weka rail (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; 
Gallirallus australis scotti)
1.7 New Britain rail (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; Gallirallus 
insignis)
1.8 New Caledonia wood rail (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Guiformes: Rallidae; 
Gallirallus lafresnayus)
1.9 Calayan rail (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Guiformes: Rallidae; Gallirallus 
calayanensis)
1.10 Okinawa rail (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; Rallus okinawa)
1.11 Henderson Island rail (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; Porzana 
atra)
1.12 Aldabra rail (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; Canirallus cuvieri 
aldabranus)
1.13 Snoring rail (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; Aramidopsis 
plateni)
1.14 Guam rail (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; Rallus owstoni)
1.15 Lord Howe Island rail (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; 
Tricholimnas sylvestris)
1.16 Auckland Island rail (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; Rallus 
pectoralis muelleri)
2 Convergent 
ecological 
role: 
FLIGHTLESS, 
GROUND-DWELLING 
AVIAN 
INSECTIVORES (“mole niche”)
Convergent lineages:
2.1 Kiwi (Aves: Paleognathae: Struthioniformes 3: Apterygidae; Apteryx haasti)
2.2 Kagu (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rhynochetidae; Rhynchetos 
jubatus)
3 Convergent 
ecological 
role: 
FLIGHTLESS, 
GROUND-DWELLING 
AVIAN 
FORAGING OMNIVORES (“badger niche, wild pig niche”)
Convergent lineages:
3.1 Palaeotis (Aves: Paleognathae: Lithornithiformes: Palaeotidae; Palaeotis weigelti 
†Eocene)
3.2 Ostrich (Aves: Paleognathae: Struthioniformes 1: Struthionidae; Struthio camelus)
3.3 Rhea (Aves: Paleognathae: Struthioniformes 2: Rheidae; Rhea americana)
3.4 New Guinea ﬂ ightless rail (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; 
Megacrex inepta)
3.5 Inaccessible Island rail (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; 
Atlantisia rogersi)

Convergent Ecosystems 
151
Table 4.7
(continued)
3.6 Woodford’s rail (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; Nesoclopeus 
woodfordi)
3.7 Samoan moorhen (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; Gallinula 
paciﬁ cus)
3.8 San Cristobal moorhen (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; 
Gallinula silvestris)
3.9 Gough Island moorhen (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; 
Gallinula nesiotis comeri)
3.10 Giant coot (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; Fulica gigantea)
3.11 Zapata rail (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; Cyanolimnus 
cerverai)
4 Convergent 
ecological 
role: 
FLIGHTLESS, 
GROUND-DWELLING 
AVIAN 
HERBIVORES (“ungulate niche”)
Convergent lineages:
4.1 Emu 
(Aves: 
Paleognathae: 
Struthioniformes 
3: 
Dromaiidae; 
Dromaius 
novaehollandiae)
4.2 Moa-nalo 
(Aves: 
Neognathae: 
Galloanserae: 
Anseriformes: 
Anatidae; 
Chelychelynechen quassus †Holocene)
4.3 Kakapo parrot (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Psittaciformes: Psittacidae; Strigops 
habroptilus)
4.4 Broad-billed parrot (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Psittaciformes: Psittacidae; 
Lophopssittacus mauritianus †Holocene)
4.5 South Island takahe (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; Notornis 
mantelli hochsteteri)
4.6 Tasmanian native hen (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; Tribonyx 
mortieri)
4.7 Invisible rail (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Gruiformes: Rallidae; Habroptila 
wallaci)
5 Convergent 
ecological 
role: 
FLIGHTLESS, 
GROUND-DWELLING 
AVIAN 
FRUGIVORES (“tapir niche”)
Convergent lineages:
5.1 Eremopezus (Aves: Paleognathae: Aepyornithiformes: Eremopezidae; Eremopezus 
eocaenus †Oligocene)
5.2 Elephant 
bird 
(Aves: 
Paleognathae: 
Aepyornithiformes: 
Aepyornithidae; 
Mullerornis agilis †Holocene)
5.3 Cassowary (Aves: Paleognathae: Struthioniformes 3: Casuariidae; Casuarius 
casuarius)
5.4 Dodo (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Columbiformes: Raphidae; Raphus cucullatus 
†Holocene)
5.5 Solitaire (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Columbiformes: Raphidae; Pezophaps 
solitaria †Holocene)
6 Convergent ecological role: FLIGHTLESS, SWIMMING AVIAN PISCIVORES 
(“pinniped niche”)
Convergent lineages:
6.1 Patagopteryx (Aves: Ornithothoraces: Patagopterygiformes: Patagopterygidae; 
Patagopteryx deferrariisi †Cretaceous)
6.2 Hesperornis 
(Aves: 
Ornithurae: 
Hesperornithiformes: 
Hesperornithidae; 
Hesperornis regalis †Cretaceous)
6.3 Steamer duck (Aves: Neognathae: Galloanserae: Anseriformes: Anatidae; Tachyeres 
brachypterus)

152 
Chapter 4
pigs ’ , depending upon the proportions of plant and animal content in 
their diet. 
 It was long thought that the living  “ ratite ”  ground-dwelling birds —
 ostriches, rheas, emus, cassowaries, and kiwis — all descended from a 
single common ancestor. Today they exist geographically scattered across 
the Earth: ostriches in Africa, rheas in South America, emus and casso-
waries in Australia, and kiwis in New Zealand. The classic explanation 
for this puzzling geographic dispersal was that the ﬂ ightless ancestors of 
these birds evolved on the Mesozoic supercontinent of Gondwana, which 
consisted of the present-day landmasses of South America, Africa, Mad-
agascar, India, Australia, the New Zealand islands, and Antarctica all 
combined. It is known that Gondwana began to break up in the Creta-
ceous, and thus it was hypothesized that the present-day ratites evolved 
separately, each on its own fragment of Gondwana, a process of vicariant 
evolution driven by plate-tectonic continental drift. 
 However, the monophyletic origin of the ratites came into question 
when molecular phylogenies for these birds began to be constructed. 
Recent molecular analyses reveal that the ratites are polyphyletic, and 
that the close morphological similarities between these paleognath birds 
are not synapomorphies, but rather are due to convergence (Harshman 
et al. 2008). In retrospect, this is not surprising, given the incredible 
number of independent morphological convergences seen in other ﬂ ight-
less birds (  table 4.7 ). Molecular evidence now indicates that the ostriches 
(Struthionidae) and the rheas (Rheidae) independently evolved ﬂ ight-
Table 4.7
(continued)
6.4 Auckland Islands teal (Aves: Neognathae: Galloanserae: Anseriformes: Anatidae; 
Anas aucklandica)
6.5 Law’s diving goose (Aves: Neognathae: Galloanserae: Anseriformes: Anatidae; 
Chendytes lawi †Holocene)
6.6 King penguin (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Sphenisciformes: Spheniscidae; 
Aptenodytes patagonica)
6.7 Flightless 
cormorant 
(Aves: 
Neognathae: 
Neoaves: 
Pelecaniformes: 
Phalacrocoracidae; Nannopterum harrisi)
6.8 Murres (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Charadriiformes: Alcidae; Uria aalge)
6.9 Titicaca grebe (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Podicipediformes: Podicipedidae; 
Rollandia microptera)
6.10 Junín grebe (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Podicipediformes: Podicipedidae; 
Podiceps taczanowskii)
6.11 Atitlán grebe (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Podicipediformes: Podicipedidae; 
Podilymbus gigas †Holocene)
Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a †. For data sources, see text.

Convergent Ecosystems 
153
lessness. It also indicates that the living emus (Dromaiidae), cassowaries 
(Casuariidae), and kiwis (Apterygidae), as well as the extinct moas 
(Dinornithidae), are a monophyletic group that evolved ﬂ ightlessness 
independently of both the ostriches and the rheas (Harshman et al. 
2008). Thus, in   table 4.7,  I have divided the Struthioniformes — the 
 “ ostrich-like ”  birds — into the Struthioniformes 1, 2, and 3 to indicate that 
they are polyphyletic and that they represent three separate convergent 
lineages. 
 The end result is not only two independent morphological convergen-
ces on ﬂ ightlessness in the ostrichs and the rheas, but also two indepen-
dent ecological convergences on foraging omnivory (  table 4.7 ). In 
contrast, the Australian emus and their New Zealand cousins the moas 
( Dinornis giganteus , now extinct due to human activities) are considered 
to be ecologically equivalent to browsing ungulate mammals (Daugherty 
et al., 1993). In addition to some rail species, the ecological role of brows-
ing herbivory is convergently ﬁ lled by two species of ﬂ ightless parrots 
and one species of a ﬂ ightless browsing  “ goose, ” the moa-nalo. These 
ground-dwelling birds convergently ﬁ lled the ecological niche of ungu-
late mammals in widely separated regions of the Earth: the kakapo 
parrot still survives in New Zealand, whereas the recently extinct broad-
billed parrot was a native of Mauritius, and the moa-nalo lived in Hawaii 
(Roots 2006). 
 Rather than these ground-dwelling birds converging on the ecological 
role of browsing herbivorous mammals, it may well be that the Cenozoic 
browsing herbivorous mammals were themselves convergent on the eco-
logical role of the Mesozoic browsing herbivorous dinosaurs. Barrett 
(2005) argues that the ornithomimosaurs were herbivores, and points out 
that many traits now associated with herbivory in living birds, such as 
gastric mills and large intestines, were also a feature of these extinct 
theropods. Thus, rather than being convergent on mammals, the living 
herbivorous ground-dwelling birds may have reevolved a more ancient 
ecological role, that of the ornithomimosaur niche. 
 Even though the emu-cassowary-kiwi clade is now proved to be 
monophyletic (Harshman et al. 2008), the members of the clade are 
ecologically divergent (  table 4.7 ). The peculiar New Zealand kiwis are 
not herbivores, but rather are ecologically convergent on the mammalian 
mole ecological role, specialized in hunting down and eating animals 
that dwell in the soil. While they do not tunnel through the soil like 
moles, they do live in burrows and hunt for insects at night in the dark, 
using their highly developed sense of smell and long beaks to locate 

154 
Chapter 4
earthworms and other burrowing prey underground, as moles do subter-
raneally (Daugherty et al. 1993). Far to the north of New Zealand, in 
New Caledonia, another group of ground-dwelling birds have conver-
gently ﬁ lled the mole ecological niche. These are the kagu, which special-
ize in locating underground prey in a manner similar to the kiwis (Roots 
2006). 
 The Australian cassowaries are also not herbivores, but frugivores 
(  table 4.7 ). They are the last surviving large ground-dwelling birds that 
have convergently ﬁ lled the mammalian frugivore niche. The large mam-
malian frugivores themselves are in danger of extinction — the largest 
remaining South American frugivore is the 300-kilogram Brazilian tapir, 
compared to the extinct 7,580-kilogram gomphothere and the extinct 
6,300-kilogram giant ground sloth (Hansen and Galetti 2009). The 
recently extinct elephant bird of Madagascar was a 450-kilogram frugi-
vore (Hansen and Galetti 2009) that may have been related to the more 
ancient giant ﬂ ightless eremopezus, a bird of Egypt. Eremopezus is 
argued not to have been related to the African ostrich (Rasmussen et al. 
2001), and molecular evidence indicates that the elephant bird also was 
 “ clearly not the result of a recent divergence from the ostrich, or any 
other ratite lineage ”  (Cooper et al. 2001). Yet another group of birds, the 
columbiform pigeons, independently ﬁ lled the ground-dwelling frugivore 
ecological niche on isolated islands further to the east from Madagascar 
and Africa. The recently extinct dodo was a large, ground-dwelling fru-
givore on Mauritius Island, and the recently extinct solitaire indepen-
dently ﬁ lled the ground-dwelling frugivore niche on Rodriguez Island 
(Feduccia 1996). In all cases, the extinction of these large frugivores —
 whether mammal or ﬂ ightless bird — has led to serious disruption of 
seed-dispersal interactions in the affected ecosystems (Hansen and 
Galetti 2009). 
 Ground-dwelling birds are not the only birds to have converged on 
mammalian ecological roles. Multiple lineages of birds have become 
ﬂ ightless swimming and diving piscivores, converging on the pinniped 
mammal niche (  table 4.7 ). Just as the seals and sea lions have devolved 
their walking legs into ﬂ ippers for swimming (as discussed in chapter 2; 
see table 2.1), so have the penguins devolved their wings. Unlike the 
ground-dwelling ﬂ ightless birds, the penguins have not lost the strong 
keel on their sternum, nor have they lost their powerful pectoral muscles. 
Instead of using these traits for ﬂ ight, however, they are used for swim-
ming in water. As water is much denser than air, swimming through this 
dense medium is even more energetic than ﬂ ying (Roots 2006). One has 

Convergent Ecosystems 
155
only to observe the graceful, seemingly effortless, swimming of seals in 
any zoo large enough to have underwater viewing stations in the seal 
exhibit area, and to repeat those observations in the penguin exhibit 
area, to appreciate the power of convergent evolution (I recommend the 
Sch ö nbrunn zoo in Vienna, my favorite, where the seal and penguin 
exhibition areas are side by side). 
 Other swimming birds did not devolve their wings into ﬂ ippers, and 
thus have convergently lost their keeled sternum and powerful pectoral 
muscles, as the ground-dwelling birds have (Roff 1994; Roots 2006). 
Instead of using their wings as ﬂ ippers, they have evolved powerful leg 
muscles and large, webbed feet. They hold their vestigial wings tight 
against their bodies and smoothly propel themselves through the water 
with their feet. The large ﬂ ightless cormorant of the Galapagos, the large 
steamer ducks of South America, and the murres of the North Atlantic 
swim in this fashion (  table 4.7 ). Two other groups of the duck family have 
independently converged on the swimming piscivore niche: the Auckland 
Island teal and the recently extinct Law ’ s diving goose of western North 
America. 
 The convergent evolution of ﬂ ightless, swimming piscivorous birds is 
not conﬁ ned to the marine realm. Three species of grebes are known to 
have independently ﬁ lled this ecological niche in freshwater lakes in 
South America, two of which survive today (  table 4.7 ). How many other 
instances there may be of the convergent evolution of swimming birds 
in freshwater habitats is unknown, as the fossil record of these environ-
ments is very poor. 
 However, the fossil record does reveal that the convergent evolution 
of ﬂ ightless, swimming birds is an ancient phenomenon that predates the 
destruction of dinosaurian ecosystems in the Cretaceous and the subse-
quent evolution of the mammalian ecosystems of the Cenozoic (Benton 
2005). Two independent lineages of birds are known to have devolved 
their wings and converged on the swimming piscivore niche in the Cre-
taceous (  table 4.7 ), long before the evolution of pinniped mammals. Thus, 
the pinniped mammals may themselves be viewed as having converged 
on a more ancient ecological role, the hesperornithid niche. 
 One Ecosystem Play, Many Convergent Casts of Actors 
 In the previous section of the chapter, we have seen that the number of 
ecological roles or niches available for Earth organisms is demonstrably 
limited, in that species from many different phylogenetic lineages have 

156 
Chapter 4
been constrained in their evolution to ﬁ lling the same ecological niche, 
even if that ecological role is extremely specialized. Ecological niche 
convergence is the rule, rather than the exception, in evolution. 
 In this section we shall consider the ecological level of communities 
and ecosystems, which are assemblages of multiple ecological roles. Com-
parisons of ecosystems from different regions of the Earth, both in space 
and in time, reveal a remarkable similarity in the assemblages of ecologi-
cal roles within those ecosystems. One might think of an ecosystem as 
being analogous to a theatrical performance: in any given region of the 
Earth, an ecosystem play is being performed with a script specifying the 
interaction of the various ecological roles in that play. What is unex-
pected is one ’ s observation that the ecosystem play — the script of eco-
logical roles — seems to be very similar in many parts of the Earth, even 
though the casts of animal and plant actors in those ecological roles may 
be very different. 
 The ﬂ ightless, ground-dwelling birds of New Zealand reveal a conver-
gent phenomenon that is larger than that of the  “ one ecological role, 
many convergent players ”  thesis of the previous section of this chapter. 
The kiwis have convergently ﬁ lled the mammalian mole niche, and three 
other bird lineages have convergently ﬁ lled mammalian ungulate-herbi-
vore niches: the recently extinct moas ﬁ lled the antelope niche of a 
browsing ungulate, and the kakapo parrots and takahe rails have ﬁ lled 
the sheep niche of a grazing ungulate (Daugherty et al. 1993). The suite 
of ecological roles ﬁ lled by mammals elsewhere in the world are thus 
ﬁ lled by birds in New Zealand. 
 New Zealand split off early in the fragmentation of the Gondwanan 
supercontinent in the Mesozoic, and was geographically isolated from 
subsequent mammalian evolution in the Cenozoic following the destruc-
tion of the dinosaur-dominated ecosystems of the Earth in the end-
Cretaceous mass extinction. There are no native ground-dwelling 
mammals on New Zealand, and there are only two species of bats, whose 
ancestors ﬂ ew there across the waters (Roots 2006). In the absence of 
mammalian moles, antelopes, and sheep, the birds convergently evolved 
the ecological roles of these animals. It is as if these ecological roles exist 
in the absence of either mammals or birds, and that they would be con-
vergently found by evolution within some other phylogenetic lineage if 
they had not been discovered by birds in New Zealand and mammals in 
other regions of the world. 
 The peculiar fauna of New Zealand therefore suggest that ecological 
convergence exists at the level of ecosystems and communities as well 
as at the level of individual ecological roles. In the absence of mammalian 

Convergent Ecosystems 
157
predators, other phylogenetic lineages have ﬁ lled predatory niches in 
New Zealand — not only the Weka rail, but also ancient reptiles, giant 
molluscs, and giant myriapod arthropods. These nonmammal predators 
have convergently evolved many mammalian traits — such as long life 
spans, low reproductive rates, and large body sizes — that are not charac-
teristic of normal molluscs and arthropods (Daugherty et al. 1993). The 
predatory tuatara,  Sphenodon punctatus , is a reptilian  “ living fossil ” 
(Benton 2005, 237 – 239) that is not a lizard (although it resembles a 
lizard) but rather is the sole remaining survivor of a lepidosaurian sister 
group to the Squamata, the Sphenodontia (see appendix). The tuatara 
has a life span of over 70 years, and reproduces only every four years 
after taking 13 years to reach sexual maturity (Daugherty et al. 1993), a 
life history more similar to that of a mammal than of a reptile. Its ances-
tors survived the end-Cretaceous mass extinction, while the New Zealand 
non-avian dinosaurs did not. The giant predatory snail  Paryphanta busbyi , 
which has a shell 115 millimeters in diameter, can live up to 40 years and 
takes 15 years to reach sexual maturity (Daugherty et al. 1993). The giant 
predatory centipede  Cormocephalus rubriceps  can grow to the length of 
250 millimeters, and its females brood only about 20 eggs (Daugherty 
et al. 1993). In the omnivore ecological role, the cricket-like giant 
weta insect,  Deinacrida heteracantha , has converged on the rat niche, 
reaching the comparable body length of 150 millimeters and a weight of 
70 grams. Like rats, they forage at night and congregate in diurnal shel-
ters (Daugherty et al. 1993). 
 The New Zealand islands are very unusual, but not unique. The island 
of Madagascar has not been separated from the African mainland as long 
as New Zealand has been isolated by water, but ecosystem convergences 
have occurred there as well, on a smaller scale. There are no laurasiathe-
rian hedgehogs and shrews on Madagascar. Instead, afrosoricid mammals 
have convergently evolved these same ecological roles in the greater 
hedgehog tenrec,  Setifer setosus , and in the lesser long-tailed shrew 
tenrec,  Microgale longicaudata . On the African mainland itself, the lau-
rasiatherian otter niche and mole niche have been convergently ﬁ lled by 
the afrosoricid giant otter  “ shrew, ”  Potamogale velox , and the cape 
golden  “ mole, ”  Chrysochloris asiatica  (Lecointre and Le Guyader 2006). 
Thus, the same suite of ecological niches — hedgehog, shrew, otter, mole —
 exist in African ecosystems, but they are not ﬁ lled by hedgehogs, shrews, 
otters, or moles. 
 The classic, most frequently cited example of ecosystem convergence 
is provided by the marsupial fauna of Australia and Tasmania. The iso-
lated marsupial mammals of these regions have independently evolved 

158 
Chapter 4
Table 4.8
Convergent evolution of ecological-analog compositions of marsupial-dominated ecosys-
tems in isolated Australian and Tasmanian regions and placental-dominated ecosystems in 
the rest of the world
1 Convergent ecological analog: LARGE AMBUSH PREDATOR (“great cat niche”)
Placental-mammal ecosystems: Lion (Eutheria: Felidae; Panthera leo)
Australian ecosystem: Marsupial lion (Marsupialia: Thylaconidae; Thylacoleo carnifex 
†Pleistocene)
2 Convergent ecological analog: SMALL AMBUSH PREDATOR (“small cat niche”)
Placental-mammal ecosystems: Wild cat (Eutheria: Felidae; Felis sylvestris)
Australian ecosystem: Marsupial quoll “cat” (Marsupialia: Dasyuridae; Dasyurus 
viverrinus)
3 Convergent ecological analog: PURSUIT PREDATOR (“wolf niche”)
Placental-mammal ecosystems: Wolf (Eutheria: Canidae; Canis lupus)
Australian ecosystem: Tasmanian wolf (Marsupialia: Thylacinidae; Thylacinus 
cynocephalus †Holocene)
4 Convergent ecological analog: NOCTURNAL FORAGING PREDATOR (“wolverine 
niche”)
Placental-mammal ecosystems: Wolverine (Eutheria: Mustelidae; Gulo gulo)
Australian ecosystem: Tasmanian devil (Marsupialia: Dasyuridae; Sarcophilus harrisi)
5 Convergent ecological analog: ANT EATER (“anteater niche”)
Placental-mammal ecosystems: Anteater (Eutheria: Myrmecophagidae; Myrmecophaga 
tridactyla)
Australian ecosystem: Numbat (Marsupialia: Myrmecobiidae; Myrmecobius fasciatus)
6 Convergent ecological analog: FOSSORIAL INSECTIVORE (“mole niche”)
Placental-mammal ecosystems: Mole (Eutheria: Talpidae; Talpa europea)
Australian ecosystem: Marsupial mole (Marsupialia: Notoryctidae; Notoryctes typhlops)
7 Convergent ecological analog: SMALL COMMUNAL-NESTING OMNIVORE (“rat 
niche”)
Placental-mammal ecosystems: Black rat (Eutheria: Muridae; Rattus rattus)
Australian ecosystem: Brown marsupial rat (Marsupialia: Dasyuridae; Antechinus 
stuartii)
8 Convergent ecological analog: TINY COMMUNAL-NESTING OMNIVORE (“mouse 
niche”)
Placental-mammal ecosystems: Mouse (Eutheria: Muridae; Mus musculus)
Australian ecosystem: Fat-tailed marsupial mouse (Marsupialia: Dasyuridae; 
Sminthopsis crassicandata)
9 Convergent ecological analog: GLIDING ARBOREAL OMNIVORE (“ﬂ ying squirrel 
niche”)
Placental-mammal ecosystems: Flying squirrel (Eutheria: Sciuridae; Glaucomys volans)
Australian ecosystem: Marsupial ﬂ ying opossum (Marsupialia: Petauridae; Petaurus 
australis)
10 Convergent ecological analog: SEMI-FOSSORIAL HERBIVORE (“woodchuck 
niche”)
Placental-mammal ecosystems: Woodchuck (Eutheria: Sciuridae; Marmota monax)
Australian ecosystem: Wombat (Marsupialia: Phascolomidae; Phascolomys ursinus)
11 Convergent 
ecological 
analog: 
MID-SIZED 
FAST-RUNNING 
BROWSING 
HERBIVORE (“deer niche”)
Placental-mammal ecosystems: Red deer (Eutheria: Cervidae; Cervus elaphus)
Australian ecosystem: Red kangaroo (Marsupialia: Macropodidae; Macropus rufus)

Convergent Ecosystems 
159
an ecological analog structure, a series of 13 ecological roles, that mirror 
those found in placental mammalian ecosystems in other regions of 
the world (  table 4.8 ). The isolated marsupials convergently evolved both 
of the two principal placental-mammal predatory strategies: the stalk-
and-ambush strategy of the placental felids, in which the stalked prey 
animal is not aware that it is in danger until the split second in which 
the felid pounces upon it, and the pursuit-and-charge strategy of the 
placental canids, in which the prey animal is well aware of its pack pursu-
ers, who run it to exhaustion and then charge upon it en masse. Both 
the large marsupial lion and the Tasmanian wolf are extinct (the latter 
only recently), but the small marsupial quoll  “ cat ”  still survives (Turner 
1997; Lecointre and Le Guyader 2006). In addition, the marsupials 
have convergently evolved the nocturnal foraging predator niche, 
with the voracious Tasmanian devil ﬁ lling the role of the placental 
wolverine.  
 Two insectivore niches have been convergently evolved by the Austra-
lian marsupials, with the numbat ﬁ lling the anteater niche and the mar-
supial mole ﬁ lling the mole niche. These two highly specialized ecological 
roles have independently appeared a surprising number of times in 
ecosystems in widely separated regions of the Earth (see   tables 2.4, 4.4, 
and 4.7 ). 
 Three omnivore ecological analogs have been convergently evolved 
by the isolated Australian fauna, with the brown marsupial rat and the 
fat-tailed marsupial mouse respectively ﬁ lling the placental rat niche and 
mouse niche (Lecointre and Le Guyader 2006), and the marsupial ﬂ ying 
opossum has independently evolved the ecological role of the placental 
ﬂ ying squirrel ( table 4.8 ). 
Table 4.8
(continued)
12 Convergent ecological analog: LARGE HERDING MIXED-FEEDING HERBIVORE 
(“bison niche”)
Placental-mammal ecosystems: Bison (Eutheria: Bovidae; Bison bison)
Australian ecosystem: Diprotodon (Marsupialia: Diprotodontidae; Diprotodon optatum 
†Pleistocene)
13 Convergent ecological analog: SMALL MIXED-FEEDING HERBIVORE (“rabbit 
niche”)
Placental-mammal ecosystems: Rabbit (Euarchontoglires: Lagomorpha: Leporidae; 
Oryctolagus cuniculus)
Australian ecosystem: Wallaby (Marsupialia: Macropodidiae; Macropus agilis)
Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a †. For data sources, see text.

160 
Chapter 4
 Last, Australian marsupials have independently evolved four herbi-
vore ecological roles that are analogs of those found in placental-mam-
mal ecosystems: the wombat not only ﬁ lls the ecological niche of the 
woodchuck, it even resembles a woodchuck. The red kangaroo does not 
look like a deer, yet  “ it lives roughly the same way ”  (Benton 2005, 313). 
In addition, both the deer and the kangaroo have independently evolved 
the ruminant-stomach system of digestion (see table 2.10). The wallaby 
is the native Australian player of the rabbit ecological role, a role that is 
now increasingly being ﬁ lled by the invasive European rabbit (and to the 
detriment of the wallaby). The Australian diprotodons are now gone, 
dying out in the extinction of many large land animals in the Pleistocene, 
but these bison-sized marsupials once formed great herds (Benton 
2005) of mixed-feeding herbivores, eating the twigs and leaves of shrubs 
as well as grass, like the once-great herds of bison in placental ecosystems 
( table 4.8 ). 
 As in the previous discussion of the peculiar fauna of New Zealand, 
it is as if these 13 ecological roles exist in the absence of either placental 
or marsupial mammals and, since the placentals were not present in 
Australia, the marsupials independently discovered them in their own 
separate evolution. This impression can be tested by considering the 
pattern of animal evolution on yet another isolated, continental-sized 
island: South America. South America is not an island today, but for most 
of the 65 million years of the Cenozoic it was surrounded by water, cut 
off from both Africa to the east (from which it split apart in the frag-
mentation of the supercontinent Gondwana in the Mesozoic) and from 
North America to the north (Benton 2005). 
 During their period of isolation, the mammals of South America inde-
pendently evolved a series of at least 12 ecological roles that are analogs 
of those found in terrestrial ecosystems in other regions of the world 
(  table 4.9 ). Some of these convergences are spectacular: not only did the 
ambush-predator niche independently evolve in North and South 
America, as it did in Australia, but this ecological role was played by 
highly specialized saber-toothed placental cats in North America and 
almost identical-appearing saber-toothed marsupial  “ cats ” in South 
America (as discussed in chapter 2, table 2.7). And not only did the fast-
running, browsing herbivore niche independently evolve in North and 
South America, but in both regions the animals also convergently reduced 
the number of digits on their feet down to one large hoofed toe —  Plio-
hippus pernix  in the north and  Thoatherium minusculum  in the south —
 and at the same time, in the Miocene. The two animals never met one 

Convergent Ecosystems 
161
another, yet they existed at the same time and were remarkably similar 
in appearance.  
 Many of the South American ecological convergences were made by 
meridiungulate mammals, a group of mammals that are now extinct (see 
appendix). Completely in isolation, the meridiungulates convergently 
ﬁ lled the ecological niches of wild pigs, woodchucks, mastodons, horses, 
rabbits, camels, hippopotamuses, beavers, and tapirs with their own 
analogs (Prothero and Schoch 2002). 
 It is interesting that 13 ecological niches in Australia and 12 ecological 
niches in South America, each evolving in isolation, converged with 
niches in other regions of the world. However, by comparing the lists of 
ecological analogs given in   tables 4.8 and 4.9 , we can see that the two 
sets of niches listed are not all the same. In fact, only 5 of the 12 (or 13) 
in the two sets are the same: the great cat, anteater, woodchuck, deer, 
and rabbit niches. The South American mammals evolved a series of 
ecological roles that are analogs of those independently evolved in North 
America, but that appear not to have been discovered by the Australian 
marsupials. These include the elephant, camel, hippopotamus, tapir, 
beaver, and wild pig niches. Amphibious herbivores and large frugivores, 
in particular, appear to be missing in Australian ecosystem evolution. 
These absent ecological roles may well be due to the aridity of Australian 
ecosystems and its effect on the Australian ﬂ ora. Yet if that is the reason, 
why did the Australian marsupials not evolve the camel niche, an ecologi-
cal role that independently appeared in both South and North American 
ecosystems? 
 In the reverse comparison, several predator niches appear to be 
missing in South American ecosystem evolution. Why did the South 
American marsupials not evolve the wild cat, wolf, and wolverine 
niches? Why were there no South American marsupial mole, rat, or 
ﬂ ying squirrel analogs? Some of these absences may be artiﬁ cial, and 
simply due to the vagaries of fossil preservation. All of the Australian 
animals listed in  table 4.8 either are alive today or have only relatively 
recently become extinct (that is, going back in time at most about two 
million years, to the beginning of the Pleistocene). In contrast, the pat-
terns of South American ecosystem evolution examined in   table 4.9  
extend back in time to the Eocene, some 55 million years into the past 
(Prothero and Schoch 2002). Thus, some of these missing niches may 
in fact have been ﬁ lled in the past, but their fossil species either have 
not been found yet or were never preserved in the fossil record in the 
ﬁ rst place. 

162 
Chapter 4
Table 4.9
Convergent evolution of ecological-analog compositions of terrestrial ecosystems in iso-
lated South American regions and terrestrial ecosystems in the rest of the world in the 
Cenozoic
1 Convergent ecological analog: LARGE SABER-TOOTHED AMBUSH PREDATOR 
(“sabertooth tiger niche”)
North American ecosystem: Sabertooth tiger (Eutheria: Felidae; Smilodon fatalis 
†Pleistocene)
South American ecosystem: Marsupial sabertooth tiger (Marsupialia: Thylacosmilidae; 
Thylacosmilus atrox †Pliocene)
2 Convergent ecological analog: ANT EATER (“anteater niche”)
Asian ecosystem: Giant pangolin (Laurasiatheria: Manidae; Manis gigantea)
South American 
ecosystem: 
Giant 
anteater 
(Xenarthra: 
Myrmecophagidae; 
Myrmecophaga tridactyla)
3 Convergent ecological analog: FORAGING OMNIVORE (“wild pig niche”)
North American ecosystem: Musk-hog peccary (Cetartiodactyla: Suina: Tayassuidae; 
Pecari tajacu)
South American ecosystem: Notoungulate “warthog” (Meridiungulata: Notoungulata: 
Toxodonta: Isotemnidae; Thomashuxleya rostrata †Eocene)
4 Convergent ecological analog: SUBTERRANEAN HERBIVORE (“gopher niche”)
North American ecosystem: Plains pocket gopher (Rodentia: Sciuromorpha: Geomyidae; 
Geomys bursarius)
South American ecosystem: Chilean coruro (Rodentia: Hystricomorpha: Octodontidae; 
Spalacopus cyanus)
5 Convergent ecological analog: SEMIFOSSORIAL HERBIVORE (“woodchuck niche”)
North American ecosystem: Woodchuck (Rodentia: Sciuridae; Marmota monax)
South American ecosystem: Archaeohyrax (Meridiungulata: Notoungulata: Typotheria: 
Archaeohyracidae; Archaeohyrax concentricus †Eocene)
6 Convergent ecological analog: LARGE HERDING AND BROWSING HERBIVORE 
(“elephant niche”)
North American ecosystem: Mastodon (Afrotheria: Proboscidea: Mammutidae; 
Mammut americanum †Pleistocene)
South American ecosystem: Pyrotherian “mastodon” (Meridiungulata: Pyrotheria: 
Pyrotheriidae; Pyrotherium romeri †Oligocene)
7 Convergent 
ecological 
analog: 
ONE-TOED, 
FAST-RUNNING 
BROWSING 
HERBIVORE (“horse niche”)
North American ecosystem: Western horse (Perissodactyla: Equidae; Pliohippus pernix 
†Miocene)
South American 
ecosystem: 
Litoptern “horse” 
(Meridiungulata: 
Litopterna: 
Proterotheriidae; Thoatherium minusculum †Miocene)
8 Convergent ecological analog: SMALL MIXED-FEEDING HERBIVORE (“rabbit 
niche”)
North American ecosystem: Eastern cottontail rabbit (Euarchontoglires: Lagomorpha: 
Leporidae; Sylvilagus ﬂ oridanus)
South American ecosystem: Notoungulate “rabbit” (Meridiungulata: Notoungulata: 
Typotheria: Hegetotheriidae; Propachyrucos ameghinorum †Oligocene)
9 Convergent ecological analog: SEMI-ARID-ADAPTED FORAGING HERBIVORE 
(“camel niche”)
North American ecosystem: Western camel (Cetartiodactyla: Camelidae; Camelops 
hesternus †Pleistocene)
South American ecosystem: Litoptern “camel” (Meridiungulata: Litopterna: 
Macraucheniidae; Macrauchenia patagonica †Pleistocene)

Convergent Ecosystems 
163
 Isochronous and Heterochronous Ecosystem Convergence 
 The pattern of ecosystem convergence seen in the Australian example, 
  table 4.8 , would support the hypothetical analogy of a convergent ter-
restrial ecological play being in existence on the Earth at the present 
time, with its ecological roles being ﬁ lled by a cast of marsupial mammals 
in Australia and by a cast of placental mammals in other regions of the 
Earth. Such a pattern of ecosystem convergence can be technically 
termed  isochronous , that is, at the same point in time. In contrast, the 
pattern of ecosystem convergence seen in the South American example, 
 table 4.9 , suggests that the scripted roles in the ecological play have 
remained the same in time, that is, these roles have not signiﬁ cantly 
changed in the past 55 million years. The wild pig niche existed in the 
Eocene, and was ﬁ lled by a notoungulate  “ warthog ”  in South America, 
and the one-toed litoptern  “ horse ”  ran in the grasslands of the Miocene, 
much as modern horses do today (Prothero and Schoch 2002). Such a 
pattern of ecosystem convergence is  heterochronous , that is, occurring in 
different periods of time. 
 Has the script, the cast of ecological roles, in the terrestrial ecosystem 
play remained unchanged for the past 55 million years? Or is this appar-
ent heterochronous ecosystem convergence simply due to the fact that 
the roles are all being played by the same types of animals during this 
Table 4.9
(continued)
10 Convergent ecological analog: LARGE HERDING AMPHIBIOUS HERBIVORE 
(“hippopotamus niche”)
North American ecosystem: Anthracotherium “hippopotamus” (Cetartiodactyla: 
Anthracotheriidae; Anthracotherium magnus †Oligocene)
South 
American 
ecosystem: 
Notoungulate 
“hippopotamus” 
(Meridiungulata: 
Notoungulata: Toxodonta: Toxodontidae; Toxodon platensis †Pleistocene)
11 Convergent ecological analog: SMALL AMPHIBIOUS HERBIVORE (“beaver 
niche”)
North American ecosystem: Canadian beaver (Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: Castoridae; 
Castor canadensis)
South American ecosystem: Notoungulate “beaver” (Meridiungulata: Notoungulata: 
Typotheria: Mesotheriidae; Mesotherium cristatum †Pleistocene)
12 Convergent ecological analog: LARGE FRUGIVORE (“tapir niche”)
North American ecosystem: Tapir (Perisodactyla: Tapiridae; Tapirus californicus 
†Pleistocene)
South American ecosystem: Astropotherian “tapir” (Meridiungulata: Astrapotheria: 
Astrapotheriidae; Astrapotherium magnum †Miocene)
Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a †. For data sources, see text.

164 
Chapter 4
span of the Cenozoic? The extinct South American meridiungulates were 
laurasiatherian mammals, after all, and thus related to the modern peri-
sodactyl and cetartiodactyl mammals that are still playing these ecologi-
cal roles today (see appendix). 
 One way to examine the question of the reality of heterochronous 
ecosystem convergence is to go even further back in time, to a time 
before terrestrial ecosystems were dominated by mammals of any type 
at all, to a time when the dinosaurs reigned instead. The Mesozoic and 
Cenozoic eras of time are separated by the second-greatest ecological 
disruption of terrestrial ecosystems in Earth ’ s history (McGhee et al. 
2004). Surely the dinosaur-dominated ecosystems of the Mesozoic must 
have been fundamentally different from the mammal-dominated ecosys-
tems of the Cenozoic — the script of ecological roles in the Mesozoic must 
have described a completely different ecological play. 
 Not so. The dinosaurs of the Mesozoic independently evolved a series 
of at least 12 ecological roles that are analogs of those found in Cenozoic 
terrestrial ecosystems (  table 4.10 ). Since the Mesozoic world was so dif-
ferent from the Cenozoic, I have expanded the ecological comparisons 
between these two eras of time to include ﬂ uvial, marine, oceanic, and 
aerial ecological roles, and not just the roles of ground-dwelling terres-
trial animals. All in all, a series of at least 19 ecological roles existed in 
the Mesozoic world that are analogs of those played by Cenozoic animals 
( table 4.10 ).  
 Dinosaurs independently evolved the ecological roles of lions, wild 
cats, wolves, wolverines, anteaters, elephants, deer, bison, rhinoceroses, 
glyptodonts, goats, and ground sloths. However, since the dinosaurs ﬁ lled 
these ecological niches long before the mammals, it is more correct to 
say that the Cenozoic mammals have convergently reﬁ lled the ecological 
niches of allosaurs, coelophysises, velociraptors, troodonts, alvarezsau-
rids, sauropods, hypsilophodonts, hadrosaurs, triceratopses, ankylosaurs, 
pachycephalosaurs, and therizinosaurs. Although some of these two 
groups of animals resemble each other morphologically (triceratopses 
and rhinoceroses, ankylosaurs and glyptodonts, therizinosaurs and 
ground sloths), the others appear radically different — the mammalian 
predators are all quadrupeds, whereas the dinosaurian predators walked 
on their hind legs only. Yet they all were ecological analogs of each other, 
making their living in roughly the same way. The goats, for example, have 
a ruminant stomach system to process plant material, while the pachy-
cephalosaurs had a gizzard-like gastric mill to accomplish the same 
purpose. The similarity to ungulate mammals in the herbivorous ecologi-

Convergent Ecosystems 
165
cal roles of many of the ornithopod dinosaurs, such as the hypsiloph-
odonts and hadrosaurs, has prompted Carrano et al. (1999, 256) to 
conclude:  “ Although late Mesozoic and late Cenozoic terrestrial ecosys-
tems were profoundly different in terms of both animal and plant taxa, 
there may be universal constraints on the ecological roles played by large 
herbivores, resulting in convergence in morphology (and, by implication, 
behavioral ecology) between groups as taxonomically distinct as dino-
saurs and mammals. ”  Thus, Carrano et al. (1999) suggest that Mesozoic 
hadrosaurs and Cenozoic ungulates perhaps provide an example of both 
ecological and behavioral convergence (we shall consider behavioral 
convergence in animals in detail in chapter 6). 
 Not all dinosaurian ecological roles are ﬁ lled by Cenozoic mammals, 
and not all mammalian roles were ﬁ lled by dinosaurs. Although the otter 
is a ﬂ uvial piscivore, the gavialid crocodile is a much closer modern eco-
logical analog to the toothy spinosaur (  table 4.10 ). The dinosaurs were 
exclusively terrestrial animals, but if we examine marine and oceanic 
habitats, we ﬁ nd that other Mesozoic animals independently evolved 
ecological roles that are now played by Cenozoic mammals: the plesio-
saur, ichthyosaur, and pliosaur ecological niches have been convergently 
reﬁ lled by Cenozoic sea lions, porpoises, and killer whales. In the air, the 
insectivorous pterosaur and frugivorous pterosaur niches have been 
independently reevolved by the microbats and the frugivorous bats. And 
the modern pelican, itself an avian dinosaur, convergently reﬁ lled the 
niche of the Mesozoic pteranodon and even resembles a small pteran-
odon in appearance. Mammals also have convergently evolved ﬂ ying 
piscivores, such as the greater bulldog bat,  Noctilio leporinus , although 
it looks nothing like a pteranodon (excepting the wings). 
 In these 19 ecological roles (  table 4.10 ), the Cenozoic ecosystem play 
is scripted in the same way as the Mesozoic ecosystem play. The roles of 
the ecological play have not changed, although the casts of actors have 
changed dramatically following the end-Cretaceous mass extinction. Yet, 
just as in the comparison of the Australian and South American ecosys-
tems, there are missing roles in the Mesozoic. In the terrestrial realm, 
where are the dinosaurian moles, rats, woodchucks, rabbits, camels, and 
beavers? Were these missing niches, these ecological roles, in fact ﬁ lled 
by dinosaurs, whose fossil species have yet to be discovered? Or are these 
ecological roles newly evolved by the Cenozoic mammals? If the latter, 
then the Cenozoic ecosystem is not entirely convergent upon the Meso-
zoic — it would, instead, be a  “ revised ”  play. Given the ancientness of the 
dinosaur-dominated ecosystem, some 65 to 220 million years ago, we may 

166 
Chapter 4
Table 4.10
Convergent evolution of ecological-analog compositions of Mesozoic dinosaur-dominated 
ecosystems and Cenozoic mammal-dominated ecosystems
1 Convergent ecological analog: LARGE AMBUSH PREDATOR (“great cat niche”)
Cenozoic ecosystem: Lion (Mammalia: Felidae; Panthera leo)
Mesozoic ecosystem: Allosaur (Dinosauria: Allosauridae; Allosaurus fragilis †Jurassic)
2 Convergent ecological analog: SMALL AMBUSH PREDATOR (“small cat niche”)
Cenozoic ecosystem: Wild cat (Mammalia: Felidae; Felis sylvestris)
Mesozoic ecosystem: Coelophysis (Dinosauria: Coelophysidae; Coelophysis rhodesiensis 
†Triassic)
3 Convergent ecological analog: PURSUIT PREDATOR (“wolf niche”)
Cenozoic ecosystem: Wolf (Mammalia: Canidae; Canis lupus)
Mesozoic ecosystem: Velociraptor (Dinosauria: Dromaeosauridae; Velociraptor 
mongoliensis †Cretaceous)
4 Convergent ecological analog: NOCTURNAL FORAGING PREDATOR (“wolverine 
niche”)
Cenozoic ecosystem: Wolverine (Mammalia: Mustelidae; Gulo gulo)
Mesozoic ecosystem: Troodont (Dinosauria: Troodontidae; Saurornithoides mongoliensis 
†Cretaceous)
5 Convergent ecological analog: ANT EATER (“anteater niche”)
Cenozoic ecosystem: Anteater (Mammalia: Myrmecophagidae; Myrmecophaga 
tridactyla)
Mesozoic ecosystem: “Desert bird” alvarezsaurid (Dinosauria: Alvarezsauridae; 
Shuvuuia deserti †Cretaceous)
6 Convergent ecological analog: LARGE HERDING BROWSING HERBIVORE 
(“elephant niche”)
Cenozoic ecosystem: Elephant (Mammalia: Elephantidae; Loxodonta africana)
Mesozoic 
ecosystem: 
Sauropod 
(Dinosauria: 
Titanosauridae; 
Titanosaurus 
madagascariensis †Cretaceous)
7 Convergent 
ecological 
analog: 
MID-SIZED 
FAST-RUNNING 
BROWSING 
HERBIVORE (“deer niche”)
Cenozoic ecosystem: Deer (Mammalia: Cervidae; Cervus elaphus)
Mesozoic ecosystem: Hypsilophodont (Dinosauria: Hypsilophodontidae; Hypsilophodon 
foxii †Cretaceous)
8 Convergent ecological analog: LARGE HERDING MIXED-FEEDING HERBIVORE 
(“bison niche”)
Cenozoic ecosystem: Bison (Eutheria: Bovidae; Bison bison)
Mesozoic ecosystem: Hadrosaur (Dinosauria: Hadrosauridae; Parasaurolophus walkeri 
†Cretaceous)
9 Convergent ecological analog: LARGE HORNED GRAZING HERBIVORE 
(“rhinoceros niche”)
Cenozoic ecosystem: Rhinoceros (Mammalia: Rhinocerotidae; Rhinoceros unicornus)
Mesozoic ecosystem: Triceratops (Dinosauria: Ceratopsidae; Triceratops albertensis 
†Cretaceous)
10 Convergent ecological analog: LARGE ARMORED GRAZING HERBIVORE 
(“glyptodont niche”)
Cenozoic ecosystem: Glyptodont (Mammalia: Glyptodontidae; Doedicurus clavi-
caudatus †Pleistocene)
Mesozoic ecosystem: Ankylosaur (Dinosauria: Ankylosauridae; Ankylosaurus 
magniventris †Cretaceous)

Convergent Ecosystems 
167
Table 4.10
(continued)
11 Convergent ecological analog: MID-SIZED RUMINANT GRAZER (“goat niche”)
Cenozoic ecosystem: Goat (Mammalia: Bovidae; Capra hircus)
Mesozoic 
ecosystem: 
Pachycephalosaur 
(Dinosauria: 
Pachycephalosauridae; 
Pachycephalosaurus wyomingensis †Cretaceous)
12 Convergent ecological analog: GIANT FRUGIVORE (“ground sloth niche”)
Cenozoic ecosystem: Giant ground sloth (Mammalia: Megatheriidae; Nothrotheriops 
shastensis †Pleistocene)
Mesozoic ecosystem: “Sloth-claw” therizinosaur (Dinosauria: Therizinosauridae; 
Nothronychus mckinleyi †Cretaceous)
13 Convergent ecological analog: FLUVIAL PISCIVORE (“gavialid niche”)
Cenozoic ecosystem: Gavialid crocodile (Archosauria: Crocodilidae; Gavialis 
gangeticus)
Mesozoic ecosystem: Spinosaur (Dinosauria: Spinosauridae; Spinosaurus maroccanus 
†Cretaceous)
14 Convergent ecological analog: SHALLOW-MARINE PISCIVORE (“sea-lion niche”)
Cenozoic ecosystem: Sea lion (Mammalia: Otariidae; Zalophus californianus)
Mesozoic 
ecosystem: 
Plesiosaur 
(Diapsida: 
Sauropterygia: 
Cryptocleididae; 
Cryptocleidus oxoniensis †Jurassic)
15 Convergent ecological analog: SMALL OPEN-OCEAN CARNIVORE (“porpoise 
niche”)
Cenozoic ecosystem: Porpoise (Mammalia: Phocaenidae; Phocaena phocaena)
Mesozoic 
ecosystem: 
Ichthyosaur 
(Diapsida: 
Ichthyosauria: 
Ichthyosauridae; 
Ichthyosaurus platyodon †Jurassic)
16 Convergent ecological analog: LARGE OPEN-OCEAN CARNIVORE (“killer whale 
niche”)
Cenozoic ecosystem: Killer whale (Mammalia: Delphinidae; Orcinus orca)
Mesozoic 
ecosystem: 
Pliosaur 
(Diapsida: 
Sauropterygia: 
Rhomaleosauridae; 
Rhomaleosaurus megacephalus †Jurassic)
17 Convergent ecological analog: FLYING INSECTIVORE (“bat niche”)
Cenozoic ecosystem: Bat (Mammalia: Vespertilionidae; Myotis myotis)
Mesozoic ecosystem: “Frog-jaw” pterosaur (Ornithodira: Pterosauria: Aneurognathidae; 
Batrachognathus volans †Jurassic)
18 Convergent ecological analog: FLYING FRUGIVORE (“fruit bat niche”)
Cenozoic ecosystem: Fruit bat (Mammalia: Pteropodidae; Rousettus aegyptiacus)
Mesozoic ecosystem: “Bakony dragon” pterosaur (Ornithodira: Pterosauria: 
Azhdarchidae; Bakonydraco galaczi †Cretaceous)
19 Convergent ecological analog: FLYING PISCIVORE (“pelican niche”)
Cenozoic ecosystem: Pelican (Aves: Pelecanidae; Pelecanus occidentalis)
Mesozoic ecosystem: Pteranodon (Ornithodira: Pterosauria: Pteranodontidae; 
Pteranodon longiceps †Cretaceous)
Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a †. For data sources, see text.

168 
Chapter 4
never be able to reconstruct all the complexities of its structure, particu-
larly for small animals whose fragile bones have a very low probability 
of preservation in the fossil record. 
 Thus far we have examined and compared lists of ecological roles that 
have independently evolved in ecosystems that are separated from one 
another in space or time. An alternative approach to examining the 
phenomenon of convergent ecosystem evolution is to examine the eco-
logical-role composition of ecosystems that have evolved in equivalent 
physical environmental regions, or biomes, such as tundra regions, desert 
regions, and so on. The hypothesis to be tested here is whether ecosys-
tems that develop in equivalent biomes will also develop equivalent 
compositions of ecological roles, or niches. Several isochronous studies 
have examined Mediterranean-style climatic regions of the Mediterra-
nean, of course, and equivalent biomes in Chile and California (Went 
1971; Mooney 1977; Peet 1978). The studies included in Mooney (1977) 
documented extensive ecosystem convergence in the types of ecological 
roles played by both plants and vertebrate animals, but much less con-
vergence in the roles played by invertebrate animals, particularly insects. 
On the other hand, Milewski and Bond (1982) document the convergent 
evolution of the same seed-dispersal ecological roles in insects in 
Mediterranean-style climatic regions in Australia and South Africa 
(particularly myrmecochory, which we considered in the last chapter). 
 Extensive ecosystem convergence is not a phenomenon conﬁ ned to 
terrestrial biomes. McKinney (2007) and McKinney et al. (2007) docu-
ment the heterochronous convergent evolution of Paleozoic-structured 
marine ecosystems in the unusual oligotrophic (low-nutrient level) 
biomes in the Northern Adriatic Sea of Europe. Only 2 percent of the 
species present are survivors of the ancient Paleozoic faunas; the other 
species are all modern, yet they have converged on lifestyles that are 250 
million years out of date! These include 30-centimeter-high polychaete 
worms,  Sabella spallanzanii , that have convergently reﬁ lled the ecologi-
cal niche of Paleozoic crinoids, and numerous bivalve molluscs, such as 
the scallop  Aequipecten opercularis , that have convergently reﬁ lled the 
ecological niche of Paleozoic brachiopod shellﬁ sh. While the ecological 
roles are the same as those in the Paleozoic, the players of those roles 
are modern marine species. 
 A Periodic Table of Niches? 
 In the previous section of the chapter we examined data suggesting that 
the script of ecological roles in nature seems to exist in the absence of 

Convergent Ecosystems 
169
the identity of the players, whether they are dinosaurs or mammals ( table 
4.10 ), placentals or marsupials (  table 4.8 ), and that these players have 
convergently ﬁ lled those roles independently in different positions in 
both space and time. While stressing the importance of the phenomenon 
of ecological convergence, Pianka (1978: 300) also cautions that  “ evolu-
tionary convergence can easily be read into a situation by placing undue 
emphasis upon superﬁ cial similarities but failing to appreciate fully 
the inevitable dissimilarities between pairs of supposed ecological 
equivalents. ” 
 Thus, an alternative approach to the comparison of existent ecosys-
tems would be to attempt to compare existent ecosystems with nonexis-
tent ecosystems; then we could seek to understand what it is about 
existent ecosystems that has led organisms to construct them repeatedly 
rather than constructing theoretically possible but nonexistent ecosys-
tems. That is, we can apply the analytical techniques of theoretical mor-
phology (McGhee 2007) to ecology. As Maclaurin and Sterelny (2008, 
128 – 129) argue,  “ one way of thinking about ecological diversity is in 
terms of a phenomenological ecospace. The dimensions of that space 
. . . deﬁ ne a space of possibilities, ”  analogous to a theoretical morpho-
space; but they also caution that  “ [a]s with morphospace, though, a total 
ecospace is of high and somewhat arbitrary dimensionality ” (Maclaurin 
and Sterelny 2008, 111). 
 Pianka (1978) in fact used this approach in his attempt not only to 
create an empty niche — to specify an ecological role a priori without 
reference to any living organism — but also to arrange those empty niches 
into a  “ periodic table of niches, ”  a space of potential ecological roles, 
again analogous to a theoretical morphospace. He used two dimensions 
to construct that space: a trophic-niche dimension and a life-history-
niche dimension (  table 4.11 ). The trophic-niche dimension spans the 
possible trophic spectrum of autotrophy (primary producers) to heter-
otrophy (herbivores and carnivores). The life-history-niche dimension 
spans the possible spectrum from  r -selected organisms (those with high 
reproductive rates, low parental care for offspring, and short life spans) 
to  K -selected organisms (those with low reproductive rates, high parental 
care for offspring, and long life spans).  
 Within this space, Pianka (1978) thus created nine permutation posi-
tions, empty niches, or potential ecological roles, in the absence of any 
actual living organisms. The next step in the analysis is to ask: are these 
potential niches actually empty in nature? The answer is no — Pianka 
(1978) discovered that actual living organisms have evolved each of the 
nine potential ecological roles (  table 4.11 ). Pianka (1978) then added an 

170 
Chapter 4
 Table 4.11 
 The ecological periodic table of niches 
 Ecological life-history 
niche 
 Trophic niche 
 Primary producers 
 Herbivores 
 Carnivores 
 r -selected organisms 
 Annual plants 
 Aphids, 
Caterpillars 
 Mantids 
 Midpoint of  r-K 
continuum 
 Shrubs 
 Lemmings 
 Weasels 
 K -selected organisms 
 Perennial plants 
(especially trees) 
 Deer, Bison 
 Cougars, Wolves 
 Note: Modiﬁ ed from Pianka (1978). 
additional dimension to the analysis: the dimension of space utilization. 
This dimension spans the spectrum of organisms that exploit space in 
only two dimensions to those that exploit space in three (  table 4.12 ). As 
in the previous analysis (  table 4.11 ), he discovered that the additional six 
potential empty niches of three-dimensional space utilization by hetero-
trophs were in fact ﬁ lled by actual animals in nature ( table 4.12 ).  
 However, the three ecological niches of three-dimensional space 
exploitation by primary producers are not ﬁ lled — Pianka (1978) had 
created possible but nevertheless nonexistent ecological roles (  table 
4.12 ), although he did not comment further upon these possibilities. In 
the spirit of theoretical morphology, it is possible to predict what such 
an organism might look like: a plant that has evolved a gas-ﬁ lled bladder 
(or multiple bladders) that allows it to ﬂ oat in the air. Such an organism 
could easily photosynthesize in midair (in fact, it could avoid competition 
for light from other plants by doing just that, and thus would have a 
selective advantage over ground-dwelling plants), but it would also 
require water and nutrients. Water is obtainable from water vapor in 
clouds or from the atmosphere itself in humid regions of the Earth. 
Nutrients are a problem, though. Such a hypothetical plant would prob-
ably have to be carnivorous, obtaining its necessary nutrients by preying 
on ﬂ ying insects or other animals, in a manner convergent on that of 
ground-dwelling carnivorous plants ( table 4.1 ). 
 A balloon-like, ﬂ oating carnivorous plant has never evolved on Earth; 
this potential ecological role remains empty (  table 4.12 ). Why? The 
reason is probably the extreme instability of such a habitat in the Earth ’ s 
existent weather patterns; sessile ground-dwelling plants have had to 
evolve complex mechanisms to solve their own serious weather-related 

Convergent Ecosystems 
171
problems, as discussed in chapter 3. These problems might be exacer-
bated, perhaps fatally, for a hypothetical ﬂ oating plant with no control 
over where it might be carried by the winds; if blown into desert regions, 
it could die of dehydration; if blown out over the ocean, it could perish 
by being unable to feed on ﬂ ying insects. But might such a plant exist on 
another world, a world with weather patterns radically different from 
those found on Earth? The concept of entirely possible ecological roles, 
roles that are nevertheless nonexistent on Earth, has implications for the 
concept of convergent evolution itself, implications that will be examined 
in detail in chapter 7. 
 Pianka (1978) noted in passing that a potential periodic table of niches 
for marine organisms would differ from that for terrestrial organisms in 
that there are relatively few  K -selected marine organisms. Bambach 
(1983) used a similar approach to Pianka (1978) to create an ecospace 
for marine organisms by using a similar trophic-niche dimension, but he 
abandoned the  r-K  life-history-niche dimension of Pianka (1978) in favor 
of a habitat-mobility-niche dimension. In   table 4.13,  I have simpliﬁ ed 
Bambach ’ s original trophic-niche dimension by creating a detritivore 
niche, one that combines the organic-detritus collection mechanisms of 
ﬁ lter feeding and deposit feeding. I have further simpliﬁ ed the habitat-
mobility-niche dimension to cover the spectrum from pelagic (habitats 
 Table 4.12 
 Pianka ’ s inclusion of organisms that exploit space in three dimensions (3D), as opposed 
to just two dimensions (2D), in his periodic table of niches 
 Ecological 
life-history niche 
 Trophic niche 
 Primary producers 
 Herbivores 
 Carnivores 
 r -selected 
organisms 
 2D: Annual plants 
 2D: Aphids, 
Caterpillars 
 2D: Mantids 
 3D:  — 
 3D: Bees, 
Butterﬂ ies 
 3D: Dragonﬂ ies 
 Midpoint of  r - K 
continuum 
 2D: Shrubs 
 2D: Lemmings 
 2D: Weasels 
 3D:  — 
 3D: Squirrels, 
Fruit bats 
 3D: Flycatchers, 
Insectivorous 
bats 
 K -selected 
organisms 
 2D: Perennial plants 
(especially trees) 
 2D: Deer, Bison 
 2D: Cougars, 
Wolves 
 3D:  — 
 3D: Parrots 
 3D: Eagles, 
Falcons 
 Note: Modiﬁ ed from Pianka (1978). Note that the three possible ecological niches of 
three-dimensional space exploitation by primary producers are not ﬁ lled. 

172 
Chapter 4
in the water column) to epibenthic (habitats on the sea bottom) to endo-
benthic (habitats within the sediments below the sea bottom). On the 
other hand, I have made his original analysis a bit more complicated by 
exhausting all possible permutations of these ecological states along 
these two ecological dimensions and considering all of these permuta-
tions as possible ecological roles (  table 4.13 ). In his original analysis, 
Bambach (1983) omitted some of these permutations, a point I will 
return to later.  
 Further, Bambach (1983) added an important new dimension not 
present in Pianka ’ s analyses: geological time. He then proceeded to 
analyze the pattern of marine ecosystem evolution for the past 545 
million years since the evolution of multicellular heterotrophs, that is, 
the animals (autotrophs were not included in the analysis). Of the 15 
possible ecological roles in Bambach ’ s ecospace, only six were evolved 
by animals in the Cambrian — the other nine niches were empty (  table 
4.13 ). By the middle of the Paleozoic, animals had evolved 11 of the 
possible ecological roles, and only four niches remained empty ( table 
4.14 ). And by the Mesozoic, only three possible ecological roles remained 
unﬁ lled ( table 4.15 ).  
 Note that although the permutations of ecological roles are exactly 
the same in   tables 4.13, 4.14, and 4.15 , the animals playing those roles 
change through time. Trilobites played the pelagic-detritivore role in the 
Cambrian but were replaced by conodonts and hemichordates in the 
mid-Paleozoic, who themselves were replaced by crustaceans and 
 Table 4.13 
 Occupation of marine-niche ecospace in the Cambrian 
 Habitat-mobility 
niche 
 Trophic niche 
 Detritivores 
 Herbivores 
 Carnivores 
 Pelagic 
 Trilobites 
 — 
 — 
 Epibenthic 
 1. Sessile 
 Brachiopods, 
Eocrinoids 
 — 
 — 
 2. Mobile 
 Trilobites, Ostracodes 
 Monoplacophorans, 
Ostracodes 
 — 
 Endobenthic 
 1. Mobile, shallow 
 Trilobites, Bristle 
worms, Brachiopods 
 — 
 Bristle 
worms 
 2. Mobile, deep 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 Note: Modiﬁ ed from Bambach (1983). 

Convergent Ecosystems 
173
 Table 4.14 
 Occupation of marine-niche ecospace in the Middle Paleozoic 
 Habitat-mobility 
niche 
 Trophic niche 
 Detritivores 
 Herbivores 
 Carnivores 
 Pelagic 
 Conodonts, 
Hemichordates 
 — 
 Cephalopods, 
Placoderm ﬁ shes, 
Sea scorpions 
 Epibenthic 
 1. Sessile 
 Brachiopods, Crinoids, 
Bryozoans, Sponges 
 — 
 Cnidarians 
 2. Mobile 
 Agnathan ﬁ shes, 
Monoplacophorans, 
Gastropods 
 Echinoids, 
Gastropods, 
Ostracodes 
 Cephalopods, 
Crustaceans, 
Starﬁ sh 
 Endobenthic 
 1. Mobile, shallow 
 Trilobites, Bivalves, 
Bristle worms 
 — 
 Merostomes, 
Bristle worms 
 2. Mobile, deep 
 Bivalves 
 — 
 Bristle worms 
 Note: Modiﬁ ed from Bambach (1983). 
 Table 4.15 
 Occupation of marine-niche ecospace in the Mesozoic 
 Habitat-
mobility niche 
 Trophic niche 
 Detritivores 
 Herbivores 
 Carnivores 
 Pelagic 
 Crustaceans, 
Gastropods 
 Osteichthyans 
 Osteichthyans, 
Chondrichthyans, 
Marine reptiles, 
Cephalopods 
 Epibenthic 
 1. Sessile 
 Bivalves, 
Bryozoans, 
Barnacles, 
Sponges 
 — 
 Cnidarians 
 2. Mobile 
 Bivalves, 
Gastropods, 
Crustaceans 
 Gastropods, 
Polyplacophorans, 
Crustaceans 
 Gastropods, 
Crustaceans, 
Starﬁ sh 
 Endobenthic 
 1. Mobile, 
shallow 
 Bivalves, 
Echinoids, Sea 
cucumbers 
 — 
 Gastropods, 
Crustaceans, 
Bristle worms 
 2. Mobile, 
deep 
 Bivalves, 
Bristle worms 
 — 
 Bristle worms 
 Note: Modiﬁ ed from Bambach (1983). 

174 
Chapter 4
gastropods in the Mesozoic. Brachiopods were important sessile epiben-
thic detritivores throughout the Paleozoic ( tables 4.13 and  4.14 ), and 
indeed are known as the shellﬁ sh of the Paleozoic. Their ecological role 
was taken over by the bivalve molluscs (  table 4.15 ) following the end-
Permian mass extinction, the greatest ecological disruption in Earth 
history, both in the sea and on the land (McGhee et al. 2004). 
 Marine reptiles, especially ichthyosaurs and pliosaurs, were important 
players of the pelagic-carnivore role in the Mesozoic (  table 4.15 ). Today 
that same ecological role still exists, but it is now being played by marine 
mammals, such as porpoises and killer whales. That last conclusion we 
had already reached by comparing the actual existent Mesozoic and 
Cenozoic ecosystems (  table 4.10 ). Bambach ’ s analysis is importantly dif-
ferent, however, in that he created the pelagic-carnivore niche not by 
examining lists of actual animals and their ecologies, but by considering 
the possible permutations of ecological states along a spectrum of two 
different ecological dimensions, trophic-niche and habitat-mobility-
niche. This is the same analytic procedure that is used in theoretical 
morphology (McGhee 2007), and Bambach and his colleagues are now 
engaged in the explicit construction of a theoretical ecospace that is 
analogous to a theoretical morphospace (Bush et al. 2007). 
 Originally, however, Bambach (1983, 726) considered some of the 
permutations of his two ecological dimensions to be  “ not biologically 
practical adaptive strategies. ”  These include the three possible but cur-
rently empty niches that are listed in   table 4.15 . Two of these roles belong 
to mobile endobenthic herbivores, an ecological role unﬁ lled in marine 
ecosystems. Yet this same ecological role has been evolved in terrestrial 
ecosystems (the subterranean herbivore, or gopher, niche; see  table 4.9 ). 
The absence of animals ﬁ lling this niche in marine ecosystems probably 
reﬂ ects the different morphologies and ecologies of marine plants, which 
generally do not have extensive root systems, and terrestrial plants, which 
do. Thus, while this same ecological role may be nonfunctional in marine 
ecosystems, it is clearly functional in terrestrial ecosystems. 
 The last empty niche listed in   table 4.15  is the ecological role of a 
sessile epibenthic herbivore. This ecological-dimension permutation may 
indeed represent an impossible ecological role. Sessile epibenthic carni-
vores exist — the cnidarians — who simply wait for prey animals to come 
within reach of their tentacles. A sessile herbivore has never evolved on 
Earth, mainly because on Earth the plants themselves are sessile and 
thus would never move to be within reach of the sessile herbivore. But 
might such an animal exist on another world, a world that has evolved 

Convergent Ecosystems 
175
mobile plants? Might this odd ecological role be possible after all, if only 
theoretically? In chapter 7 we will explore in more detail the implications 
of theoretically possible, but nevertheless nonexistent, ecological roles 
on Earth for the concept of convergent evolution. 
 The phenomenon of ecosystem convergence supports the idea that 
there may be  “ universal constraints on the ecological roles ”  played in 
those ecosystems (Carrano et al. 1999, 256), just as the phenomenon of 
morphological convergence argues for evolutionary constraint on the 
spectrum of possible forms available to animals and plants, as discussed 
in chapters 2 and 3. In the case of ecosystems, the nature of these poten-
tial universal constraints is far from clear, and is part of the larger debate 
concerning the degree of integration and structure of ecosystems them-
selves (for an overview of this larger question, see Maclaurin and Sterelny 
2008, 106 – 131). The creation of theoretical ecospaces could add much 
more rigor to the debate concerning ecosystem convergence by revealing 
the total spectrum of what is ecologically possible, and what is not, in 
potential ecosystems. The works of Pianka (1978), Bambach (1983), and 
Bush et al. (2007) are ﬁ rst steps in this direction, an analytic approach 
to theoretical morphospace that needs much more attention from 
ecologists. 
 Thus far in this book, we have considered the phenomena of conver-
gence in individual animal and plant forms and, on a larger scale, in the 
ecological roles of entire assemblages of animal and plant species. In the 
next chapter we shall consider convergence on much smaller scales; that 
is, in the very molecules that make up living animals and plants. 


 5 
 Recent advances in protein chemistry suggest that at least one set of biological 
forms — the basic protein folds — is determined by physical laws similar to those 
giving rise to crystals and atoms. . . . If it does turn out that a substantial amount 
of higher biological form is natural, then the implications will be radical and 
far-reaching. It will mean that physical laws must have had a far greater role in 
the evolution of biological form than is generally assumed . . . underlying all the 
diversity of life is a ﬁ nite set of natural forms that will recur over and over again 
anywhere in the cosmos where there is carbon-based life. 
 — Denton and Marshall (2001, 417) 
 Convergent Molecules? 
 The source code for all life on Earth is contained in the deoxyribonu-
cleic-acid molecule, DNA. DNA codes for RNA molecules, ribonucleic 
acids, and RNA codes for the assembly of amino acids into proteins, 
the building blocks of life. Each of the essential molecules of life has a 
ﬁ nite number of possible states. Since DNA and RNA molecules contain 
only four different nucleotides, the code for Earth life is a base-four 
system. As such, the probability,  p , of convergent molecular evolution of 
the same nucleotide at the same site in two different DNA or RNA 
molecules, via random mutation, is one in four ( p  = 0.25 per site). Protein 
molecules contain only 20 different amino acids; thus, the probability of 
the convergent molecular evolution of the same amino acid at the same 
site in two different protein molecules is one in twenty ( p  = 0.05 per 
site). Proteins are complex molecules, and the function of the protein is 
often determined not only by its amino acid composition but also by the 
complex manner in which the molecule is folded. Basic protein folds also 
exist in a ﬁ nite number of geometries, and the number of fold geometries 
that are potentially functional are only a tiny subset of all possible folds 
(Axe 2004). Denton and Marshall (2001) estimate that the number of 
 Convergent Molecules 

178 
Chapter 5
different protein-fold geometries that exist in life on Earth are between 
500 and 1,000; therefore, the probability of independently evolving 
protein molecules with the same fold geometry is one in ﬁ ve hundred 
( p = 0.002) to one in a thousand ( p = 0.001). 
 Even though some of these probabilities are quite high, many biolo-
gists consider the occurrence of convergent molecular evolution in 
nature to be quite unlikely. Biological molecules are typically very large, 
and the possibility of many independent site convergences is improbable. 
For example, even though the probability of the convergent evolution of 
the same nucleotide at the same site in two different DNA molecules is 
one in four ( p  = 0.25), the probability of ﬁ ve such independent site con-
vergences occurring in two molecules is only two in 10,000 ( p  =  p 1  ×  p 2 
 ×  p 3  ×  p 4  ×  p 5  = 0.0002). Numerous independent site convergences are 
thus unlikely. 
 But what if the probabilities are not independent? Castoe et al. (2009, 
8990) point out that mitochondrial DNA codes for metabolic genes that 
are functionally related, and that  “ directional selection may thus tend to 
affect many mitochondrial genes at once, leading to large-scale conver-
gence if similar selective events occur in different lineages. ”  Weinreich 
et al. (2006) point out that pervasive biophysical pleiotropic effects, or 
intermolecular interactions, in proteins constrain much of protein evolu-
tion. In two separate protein studies, they point out that only 15 to 29 
percent of all possible mutational trajectories in these proteins are acces-
sible to natural selection, and thus the probability that evolution will 
convergently occur along  “ largely identical mutational trajectories ” is 
quite high (Weinreich et al. 2006, 113). Further theoretical analyses of 
mutational pathways in molecular adaptive landscapes reveal that few 
pathways are evolvable, leading to the implication that  “ evolution might 
be more reproducible than is commonly perceived, or [might] even be 
predictable ”  (Poelwijk et al. 2007, 386). Rokas and Carroll (2008, 1943) 
stress that the twin roles of positive selection for particular amino acid 
substitutions in proteins and purifying selection against others  “ con-
strains substitutions to a small number of functionally equivalent amino 
acids, ”  and that the action of natural selection has therefore produced 
 “ frequent and widespread parallel evolution of protein sequences. ” 
 DNA 
 The analysis of convergent evolution at the level of the DNA molecule 
is difﬁ cult at present due to the lack of data. Although we have entered 

Convergent Molecules 
179
the  “ age of complete genomes, ”  Castoe et al. (2010) point out that only 
in the past ﬁ ve to seven years have substantial numbers of mitochondrial 
genome data sets become available for the vertebrates, and that com-
plete nuclear genome data sets number only in the tens for these highly 
derived animals (bacterial genomes are densely sampled, but these 
organisms have ancient phylogenies and thus the number of changes 
separating their genomes are large, making the detection of convergent 
evolution difﬁ cult; Castoe et al. 2010). 
 The few data that do exist are startling. Vision in vertebrate animals 
is due to the activation of the visual pigments in the eye by impacting 
photons. The visual pigments are composed of opsin proteins and a 
chromophore. Most vertebrates have a single type of chromophore, but 
ﬁ ve groups of opsin proteins exist: rhodopsin (RH1) and RH1-like 
(RH2), which are maximally activated by light in the blue-green part of 
the spectrum (about 480 nm to 530 nm); short-wavelength-sensitive 
opsin-1 (SWS1), which is maximally activated by violet-blue wavelengths 
(about 410 nm to 490 nm); short-wavelength-sensitive opsin-2 (SWS2), 
which is maximally activated by ultraviolet-violet wavelengths (about 
355 nm to 440 nm); and a long-wavelength- to medium-wavelength-
sensitive opsin (LWS/MWS), which is maximally activated by green-red 
wavelengths (about 490 nm to 570 nm; Zhang 2003; Bowmaker and Hunt 
2006). 
 The DNA coding for the opsin proteins has been intensively investi-
gated, and early studies suggested that the evolution of red-sensitive 
opsins in humans and some ﬁ sh independently evolved from green-
sensitive opsins by the same nucleotide substitutions in the encoding 
DNA (Yokoyama and Yokoyama 1990). Subsequent studies of the evolu-
tion of trichromatic color vision in primates revealed that the precise 
same three substitutions in DNA nucleotides that coded for LWS/MWS 
opsins independently evolved in Old World primates (Catarrhini) and 
New World primates (Platyrrhini;   table 5.1 ). Parallel evolution in the 
LWS/MWS opsin amino acid sequences in both primate groups (Hunt 
et al. 1998) resulted in the replacement of serine with alanine at site 180 
(substituting G for T in the ﬁ rst position in the DNA codon for serine), 
the replacement of tyrosine with phenylalanine at site 277 (substituting 
T for A in the second position in the DNA codon for tyrosine), and the 
replacement of threonine with alanine at site 285 (substituting G for A 
in the ﬁ rst position in the DNA codon for threonine).  
 These DNA coding changes resulted in a 30-nanometer spectral shift 
in the maximum activation of the LWS/MWS opsin, from 530 to 560 

 Table 5.1 
 Convergent evolution of identical nuclear DNA molecules coding for photosensitive opsin 
proteins 
 1   Convergent molecule and function: LWS/MWS OPSIN – ENCODING DNA (30 nm 
spectral shift in vision produced by the identical three nucleotide substitutions in the DNA 
coding for the long-wavelength/medium-wavelength-sensitive cone opsin protein) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1  Capuchin monkey (Primates: Simiiformes: Platyrrhini: Cebidae;  Cebus apella ) 
 1.2  Human (Primates: Simiiformes: Catarrhini: Hominidae;  Homo sapiens ) 
 2   Convergent molecule and function: SWS1 OPSIN – ENCODING DNA (66 nm spectral 
shift in vision produced by the identical nucleotide substitution in the DNA coding for the 
short-wavelength-sensitive cone opsin protein) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1   Tammar wallaby (Mammalia: Marsupialia: Diprotodontia: Macropodidae;  Macropus 
eugeni ) 
 2.2  Cow (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Ruminantia: Bovidae; 
 Bos taurus ) 
 3   Convergent molecule and function: SWS1-ultraviolet OPSIN – ENCODING DNA (35 
nm spectral shift in vision produced by the identical nucleotide substitution in the DNA 
coding for the ultraviolet-wavelength-sensitive cone opsin protein) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 3.1  Rhea (Aves: Paleognathae: Struthioniformes 2: Rheidae;  Rhea americana ) 
 3.2   Herring gull (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Ciconiiformes: Laridae;  Larus  argentatus ) 
 3.3  Zebra ﬁ nch (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Passeridae;  Taeniopygia 
guttata ) 
 3.4  Gray parrot (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Psittaciformes: Psittacidae;  Psittacus 
erithacus ) 
 4   Convergent molecule and function: SWS1-violet OPSIN – ENCODING DNA (spectral 
tuning shifts in vision produced by the identical nucleotide substitutions in the DNA coding 
for the violet-wavelength-sensitive cone opsin protein) 
 Convergent lineages (three identical site changes): 
 4.1.1   African clawed frog (Tetrapoda: Batrachomorpha: Lissamphibia: Batrachia: 
Anura: Pipidae;  Xenopus laevis ) 
 4.1.2  Human (Tetrapoda: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Synapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: 
Euarchontoglires: Primates: Hominidae;  Homo sapiens ) 
 Convergent lineages (one identical site change): 
 4.2.1  Zebra ﬁ nch (Amniota: Sauropsida: Archosauromorpha: Ornithodira: Dinosauria: 
Saurischia: Theropoda: Aves: Passeriformes: Passeridae;  Taeniopygia guttata ) 
 4.2.2  Budgerigar (Aves: Psittaciformes: Psittacidae;  Melopsittacus undulatus ) 
 4.2.3   Human (Amniota: Synapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: 
Hominidae;  Homo sapiens ) 
 Convergent lineages (one identical site change): 
 4.3.1  Malawi ﬁ sh (Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Perciformes: Cichlidae; 
 Metriaclima zebra ) 
 4.3.2   African clawed frog (Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: Tetrapoda: Batrachomorpha: 
Lissamphibia: Batrachia: Anura: Pipidae;  Xenopus laevis ) 
 4.3.3  Chicken (Tetrapoda: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: Archosauromorpha: 
Ornithodira: Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Galliformes: 
Phasianidae;  Gallus gallus ) 
 5   Convergent molecule and function: RH1 RHODOPSIN – ENCODING DNA (10 nm 
spectral shift in vision produced by the identical nucleotide substitution in DNA coding 
for the RH1 rhodopsin protein) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 5.1  Longﬁ n Baikal sculpin (Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Scorpaeniformes: 
Cottocomephoridae;  Cottocomephorus inermis ) 
 5.2  Baikalian 
deepwater 
sculpin 
(Osteichthyes: 
Actinopterygii: 
Teleostei: 
Scorpaeniformes: Abyssocottidae;  Abyssocottus korotnefﬁ  ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Molecules 
181
nanometers. Hunt et al. (1998, 3299) suggest that these changes were 
adaptive, the functional result of visual foraging for yellow and orange 
fruits against a green foliage background, and that  “ the separate origin 
of trichromacy in New and Old World primates would indicate that the 
selection of these three [amino acid] sites is the result of convergent 
evolution. ” 
 The catarrhine and platyrrhine primates are closely related — both are 
members of the simiiform clade (table 5.1) — and the two lineages 
diverged only some 35 million years ago in the Eocene (Benton 2005). 
One could thus argue that these two lineages demonstrate parallel 
molecular evolution; that is, independent parallel nucleotide substitu-
tions in similar DNA molecules. In contrast, the marsupial mammals and 
placental mammals diverged some 125 million years ago, in the Early 
Cretaceous (Benton 2005). Yet even in these two ancient, independent 
lineages of mammals, convergent evolution in opsin-encoding DNA has 
been demonstrated (table 5.1). 
 Deeb et al. (2003) report that the identical nucleotide substitution in 
DNA coding for the SWS1 opsin amino acid sequence occurred inde-
pendently in the marsupial tammar wallaby and in the placental cow: 
replacement of phenylalanine by tyrosine at site 86 (substituting A for 
T in the second position in the DNA codon for phenylalanine). This 
DNA coding change resulted in a 66-nanometer spectral shift in the 
maximum activation of the SWS1 opsin, from 358 to 424 nanometers. 
The tammar wallaby grazes on grass and low tree branches in the late 
afternoon, and Deeb et al. (2003) suggest that the convergent evolution 
in SWS1-encoding DNA observed in it and in the placental grazing 
ungulates enables the animals to visually distinguish features in grasses 
with differing shades of green. 
 Primates are unique among mammals in having trichromatic color 
vision, in that most mammals have only dichromatic vision. In contrast, 
some ﬁ sh, reptiles, and birds have tetrachromatic vision, and may be 
able to see twice the number of colors that even trichromatic primates 
can see ( Ö deen and H å stad 2003). Many of these same animals can 
see ultraviolet light, which has much shorter wavelengths than the 
400-nanometer violet light that we are able to see.  Ö deen and H å stad 
(2003) have demonstrated that ultraviolet vision evolved four times inde-
pendently in the birds (table 5.1) by the identical nucleotide substitution 
in DNA coding for the SWS1 opsin amino acid sequence: replacement 
of serine by cysteine at site 90 (substituting G for C in the second posi-
tion in the DNA codon for serine). This DNA coding change results in 

182 
Chapter 5
a 35-nanometer spectral shift, from 406 down to 371 nanometers, in the 
maximum activation of the SWS1 opsin.  Ö deen and H å stad (2003, 859) 
suggest that the observed convergent evolution is adaptive, although its 
precise function is not clear: the difference in ultraviolet and violet vision 
 “ is quite dramatic and changes not only the perception of objects that 
reﬂ ect light solely in the UV or violet ranges but also the perception of 
objects that reﬂ ect both UV/violet and longer wavelengths. This should 
have important consequences for foraging, habitat use, social signaling, 
and mate choice. ” 
 An exhaustive analysis of the evolution of ultraviolet vision in the 
vertebrates (Shi and Yokoyama 2003; Zhang 2003) has revealed even 
more convergent molecular evolution in the SWS1 opsin – encoding DNA 
(table 5.1). Such phylogenetically divergent lineages as frogs and pri-
mates have convergently evolved the same three nucleotide substitutions 
in DNA coding for the SWS1 opsin: the replacement of phenylalanine 
by leucine at site 49 (substituting A or G for T or C in the third position 
in the DNA codon for phenylalanine), replacement of threonine by 
proline at site 93 (substituting C for A in the ﬁ rst position in the DNA 
codon for threonine), and replacement of serine by threonine at site 118 
(substituting A for T in the ﬁ rst position in the DNA codon for serine). 
Primates and two different groups of avian dinosaurs have indepen-
dently evolved an SWS1 opsin that replaced alanine with glycine at site 
114 (substituting G for C in the second position in the DNA codon for 
alanine). And the very distantly related ﬁ sh, frog, and chicken lineages 
have independently evolved an SWS1 opsin that replaced leucine with 
valine at site 116 (substituting G for C in the ﬁ rst position in the DNA 
codon for leucine). 
 The SWS1 opsin protein contains over 300 amino acids, yet Shi and 
Yokoyama (2003) argue that only nine amino acid positions are involved 
in spectral shifting. For all the opsin proteins, Bowmaker and Hunt (2006, 
R484) argue that  “ there are only a limited number of sites within opsin 
that can be altered without producing a non-functional pigment. ”  They 
demonstrate that natural selection targets these sites in deepwater ﬁ sh, 
producing  “ classic examples of spectral tuning of visual pigments within 
speciﬁ c opsin classes which correlate with photic environments ”  (Bow-
maker and Hunt 2006, R486). Adaptation of vision to different light 
intensities in different water depths extends to the rods of the eye as well 
as the color-sensitive cones; for example, Bowmaker and Hunt (2006) 
show that two separate species of deepwater Lake Baikal ﬁ sh indepen-
dently evolved the same RH1 rhodopsin protein by replacing aspartic 

Convergent Molecules 
183
acid with asparagine at site 83 (substituting A for G in the ﬁ rst position 
in the DNA codon for aspartic acid) in the RH1-encoding DNA, produc-
ing a spectral shift from 505 to 495 nanometers (table 5.1). 
 Convergent evolution has also been demonstrated to occur in the 
genes encoding for photoreceptor proteins that are not primarily used 
in vision, but in the maintenance of circadian rhythms in animals and 
heliotropic movement in plants (Cashmore et al. 1999). Charles Darwin 
himself discovered that his plants ceased their daily movement if a ﬁ lter 
was placed between them and the sun, a ﬁ lter that removed blue wave-
length light. It is now known that cryptochrome genes,  cry , encode for 
cryptochrome proteins, photoreceptors that respond to light in the 
400-to-500-nanometer wavelength. These genes are present throughout 
the green eukaryotes, from algae to land plants. Cashmore et al. (1999, 
763) demonstrate that they have independently evolved in the metazoa: 
 “ cryptochromes represent an example of repeated evolution, a special 
case of convergent evolution in which a new genetic function arises 
independently in two different lineages from orthologous (or paralo-
gous) genes. . . . This phenomenon contrasts with classic convergent 
evolution, where the ancestral genes are unrelated. ”  As discussed in 
chapter 1, the phenomenon in a strict sense would be termed  “ parallel 
evolution. ” 
 Other examples of convergent molecular evolution come from the 
analysis of digestive proteins. Five independent lineages of animals have 
convergently evolved stomachal-fermentation systems, as discussed in 
chapter 2 (see table 2.10). Three of these lineages have also experienced 
convergent molecular evolution of the enzymes found in those special-
ized stomachs (  table 5.2 ), in which a conventional lysozyme was inde-
pendently recruited for digestive purposes in the stomach (Stewart et al. 
1987; Kornegay et al. 1994; Zhang and Kumar 1997). The production of 
the stomach lysozyme was independently produced in these three lin-
eages by the identical two nucleotide substitutions in the DNA coding 
for amino acid sequences in the stomach lysozomes: replacement of 
asparagine with aspartic acid at site 75 (substituting G for A in the ﬁ rst 
position of the DNA codon for asparagine), and replacement of aspartic 
acid with asparagine at site 87 (substituting A for G in the ﬁ rst position 
of the DNA codon for aspartic acid). Interestingly, a third parallel nucle-
otide substitution occurred in the stomach lysozymes of the hoatzin, a 
bird, and the ungulate mammals — the replacement of alanine with 
glycine at site 76 (substituting G for C in the second position of the DNA 
codon for alanine) — which does not occur in the langur monkey. This 

184 
Chapter 5
suggests a closer convergence in stomachal-fermentation function in the 
hoatzins and ungulates, as the statistical analyses of Zhang and Kumar 
(1997) found that the patterns of amino acid substitutions at these sites 
in the enzyme were signiﬁ cantly unusual and could be taken as evidence 
for the action of nonneutral natural selection. Similar to the convergent 
molecular evolution in opsin proteins, Kornegay et al. (1994, 927) suggest 
that there may be a limited number of ways to convert a conventional 
vertebrate lysozyme- c  gene into a stomach lysozyme gene,  “ a set of spe-
ciﬁ c structural changes that are necessary and sufﬁ cient to convert a 
lysozyme for stomach function even when different genes have been 
separated by more than 300 million years of independent evolution, ”  as 
in the case of the avian dinosaurs and the placental mammals (table 5.2).  
 Further study of the stomachal-fermenting colobine monkeys reveals 
parallel evolutionary changes in pancreatic ribonuclease – encoding DNA 
 Table 5.2 
 Convergent evolution of identical nuclear DNA and mitochondrial DNA molecules coding 
for digestive proteins 
 1   Convergent molecule and function: STOMACH LYSOZYME – ENCODING DNA 
(conversion of conventional lysozymes to digestive stomach lysozymes produced by the 
identical two nucleotide substitutions in the DNA coding for the stomach lysozymes) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1   Hoatzin (Amniota: Sauropsida: Archosauromorpha: Ornithodira: Dinosauria: 
Saurischia: Theropoda: Aves: Opisthocomiformes: Opisthocomidae;  Opisthocomus 
hoatzin ) 
 1.2   Cow (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: 
Cetartiodactyla: Ruminantia: Bovidae;  Bos taurus ) 
 1.3   Langur monkey (Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: Cercopithecidae; 
 Presbytis entellus ) 
 2   Convergent molecule and function: PANCREATIC RIBONUCLEASE – ENCODING 
DNA (decrease in pH for the maximum ribonucleolytic activity of the enzyme produced 
by the identical three nucleotide substitutions in the DNA coding for the pancreatic 
RNase) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1  Asian douc langur monkey (Primates: Cercopithecidae: Colobinae;  Pygathrix 
nemaeus ) 
 2.2   African guereza monkey (Primates: Cercopithecidae: Colobinae;  Colobus  guereza ) 
 3  Convergent 
molecules 
and 
function: 
METABOLIC 
PROTEIN – ENCODING 
MITOCHONDRIAL DNA (44 nonrandom parallel amino acid substitutions across all 13 
mtDNA genes coding for oxidative phosphorylation metabolic proteins) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 3.1   Australian bearded dragon (Lepidosauria: Squamata: Iguania: Agamidae;  Pogona 
vitticepes ) 
 3.2   Blind snake (Lepidosauria: Squamata: Scleroglossa: Autarchoglossa: Anguimorpha: 
Serpentes: Typhlopidae;  Typhlops diardi ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Molecules 
185
that occurred independently in Asian colobine monkeys and African 
colobine monkeys (table 5.2), two lineages that diverged some 13 million 
years ago (Prud ’ homme and Carroll 2006). Zhang (2006) reports that 
three identical nucleotide substitutions in the DNA coding for the pan-
creatic RNase amino acid sequence independently occurred in these two 
lineages: replacement of arginine with glutamine at site four (substituting 
A for G in the second position in the DNA codon for arginine), replace-
ment of lysine by glutamic acid at site six (substituting G for A in the 
ﬁ rst position in the DNA codon for lysine), and replacement of arginine 
by tryptophan at site 39 (substituting T for C or A in the ﬁ rst position in 
the DNA codon for arginine). This DNA coding change resulted in the 
lowering of the pH of the maximum ribonucleolytic activity of the 
enzyme from 7.4 to 6.3 (Zhang 2006). The end result is a pancreatic 
RNase with maximum activities at more acid conditions than usual, 
conditions that match those of the acidic environment of the colobine 
monkey ’ s small intestine. Zhang (2006, 819) concludes that  “ the new 
genes acquired enhanced digestive efﬁ ciencies through parallel amino 
acid replacements driven by darwinian selection ”  and that  “ molecular 
evolution has a certain degree of repeatability and predictability under 
the pressures of natural selection. ” 
 As in the nuclear genome data sets, initial analyses of some of the 
mitochondrial genome data sets that do exist have produced startling 
results. Castoe et al. (2009, 2010) have documented that 44 amino acid 
substitutions have occurred in parallel in all 13 mitochondrially encoded 
metabolic proteins in agamid lizards and snakes, an unexpected result 
that they summarize by stating:  “ convergent molecular evolution in mito-
chondria can occur at a scale and intensity far beyond what has been 
documented previously ”  (Castoe et al. 2009, 8986). Although they are 
both squamate reptiles, the agamid lizards and the snakes are only dis-
tantly related: the agamid lizards are iguanians, a basal group of squa-
mates, whereas the snakes are highly derived anguimorphs, located many 
nodes up in the squamate clade (table 5.2; see also the appendix). 
 Further, Castoe et al. (2009, 2010) argue that the observed convergent 
evolution of mitochondrial DNA, mtDNA, is driven by natural selection. 
The convergent sites occur primarily at the ﬁ rst and second positions in 
the mtDNA codons, as is the case in the previously discussed cases of 
nuclear DNA convergence. The affected mtDNA codes for core oxida-
tive phosphorylation proteins, which are some of the most highly con-
served proteins in the genome. As in the previously discussed cases of 
convergent molecular evolution, Castoe et al. (2009, 2010) argue that 

186 
Chapter 5
there appear to be a limited number of ways in which amino acid 
sequences can be modiﬁ ed and yet remain functional in these proteins, 
and that sustained selective pressure may preferentially target the 
mtDNA encoding these proteins if there are only a few possible ways to 
achieve the same functional innovation. In addition, Naylor et al. (1995) 
and Yee (1999) have argued that the mtDNA molecule itself may be 
limited in its number of nucleotide permutations. They point out that the 
functional requirement for hydrophobicity in many mitochondrial pro-
teins biases the second codon position in the encoding mtDNA to either 
T or C, and that molecular evolution may be constrained to cycle between 
these two nucleotide states at the second codon position. In summary, 
Castoe et al. (2010, 67) conclude that  “ molecular convergence can happen 
en masse in nature, affecting multiple genes . . . [and] the result implies 
that the protein adaptive landscape is sometimes highly constrained. ” 
 The extent of the newly discovered convergence in mtDNA has pro-
found implications for molecular phylogenetic analyses, implications that 
Castoe et al. (2009, 8990) ﬁ nd worrisome:  “ contrary to widespread belief, 
. . . non-neutral convergence can be a major force in molecular evolution, 
and . . . it should be considered more seriously as a cause of phylogenetic 
incongruence among datasets. ”  They point out that mtDNA molecular 
phylogenies would place agamid lizards and snakes in the same clade, 
whereas both morphological data and nuclear genome data place the 
agamid lizards with the basal Iguania and the snakes many nodes away 
in the highly derived Anguimorpha (table 5.2). But what about the 
numerous cases in nature where the morphological data and the nuclear 
genome data clash? In those cases, it is generally assumed that similari-
ties in morphological traits have arisen by convergent evolution and are 
not synapomorphies, because the nuclear genome data can be trusted to 
be almost free from molecular convergences. What if this is not true? 
Other studies have identiﬁ ed parallel amino acid replacements across 
families of closely linked genes, such as the histocompatibility complex 
in humans (Yeager and Hughes 1999) and toxin-resistant sodium chan-
nels in puffer ﬁ sh (Jost et al. 2008), that are also argued to be due to 
nonrandom natural selection. 
 In an intriguing study, Rodr í guez-Trelles et al. (2003) document the 
convergent evolution of the aldehyde oxidase gene in two independent 
gene-duplication events combined with identical amino acid replace-
ments in the duplicated DNA (  table 5.3 ). The aldehyde oxidase gene,  Ao , 
which codes for the aldehyde oxidoreductase enzyme, AOX, is known to 
have evolved by gene duplication of the xanthine dehydrogenase gene, 

Convergent Molecules 
187
 Xdh , in eukaryotes before the evolution of multicellular life. The AOX 
enzyme is present in metazoans up to the evolution of the primitive 
chordates, as it is still present in the urochordate sea peach  Ciona intes-
tinalis , after which point it was evidently lost. The AOX enzyme was then 
independently reevolved in the osteichthyan ﬁ shes by a second duplica-
tion event in the  Xdh  gene, producing a new  Ao  gene, and is present in 
subsequent vertebrates, including humans.  
 What is particularly interesting in these gene duplication events is 
the fact that  “ after each duplication, the  Ao  duplicate underwent a 
period of rapid evolution during which identical sites across the two 
molecules . . . were subjected to intense positive Darwinian selection ”  
(Rodr í guez-Trelles et al. 2003, 13413), shifting the substrate acted upon 
by the enzyme from hypoxanthine in the ancestral gene coding to alde-
hydes in the new genes. In total, 10 sites in the DNA of the two indepen-
dent  Ao  genes have identical nucleotide substitutions, as seen in the 
match of the two independent AOX enzyme amino acid sequences. The 
two convergent  Ao genes  “ originated from  Xdh  by duplications sepa-
rated by approximately one billion years (i.e., the time span from the 
origin of multicellular eukaryotes to the last common ancestor of verte-
brates), ”  yet the very same nucleotide substitutions still occurred in 
the DNA of the independent gene duplicates due to natural selection 
for the same enzymatic function (Rodr í guez-Trelles et al. 2003, 13417). 
 At present, relatively few examples of adaptive convergent molecular 
evolution at the level of DNA nucleotide sequences are known. However, 
Castoe et al. (2010) point out that (1) we are only now beginning 
to acquire large, complete genome data sets that can be analyzed for 
convergence, (2) systematic surveys for molecular convergence are 
usually not conducted, and (3) it is difﬁ cult to distinguish random, neutral 
 Table 5.3 
 Convergent evolution of identical nuclear DNA molecules coding for aldehyde oxidore-
ductase enzymes 
 Convergent molecule and function: ALDEHYDE OXIDOREDUCTASE – ENCODING 
DNA (identical 10 nucleotide substitutions in the DNA coding for the aldehyde 
oxidoreductase enzyme that catalyzes the oxidation of aldehydes into acids) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1  Asian rice (Eukarya: Bikonta: Chlorobiota: Embryophyta: Euangiosperms: 
Monocotyledons: Poaceae;  Oryza sativa ) 
 2  Puffer ﬁ sh (Eukarya: Unikonta: Metazoa: Vertebrata: Osteichthyes: Actinoptergyii: 
Tetraodontidae;  Fugu rubripes ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

188 
Chapter 5
molecular convergence from nonneutral, adaptive molecular conver-
gence. They suggest that the phenomenon may be much more widespread 
than believed, and that  “ greater detection of adaptive convergence events 
in nature may also provide important insight into the diversity of protein 
adaptive landscapes in nature, and help to explain why in some cases 
these landscapes appear highly constrained ”  (Castoe et al. 2010, 69). 
 Last, Stern and Orgogozo (2009, 747) also argue that the phenomenon 
of parallel genetic evolution is much more common than believed, as in 
their study they examined 350 different mutations that produce pheno-
typic variation and found that  “ more than half of these represent cases 
of parallel genetic evolution. ”  Noting that some of these clearly involve 
DNA coding for gene products (such as photosensitive optical proteins 
and digestive proteins that we have considered previously; see tables 5.1 
and 5.2, respectively), they point out that  “ gene function explains part 
but not all of the observed pattern of parallel genetic evolution. In 
several cases, parallelism has been observed even though mutations in a 
large number of genes can produce similar phenotypic changes. ” 
 Stern and Orgogozo (2008, 2009) and Stern (2010) point out that there 
are two fundamentally different types of DNA coding for genes: one 
DNA region that codes for the gene product (protein or RNA), and 
another adjacent  cis -regulatory DNA region that encodes the instruc-
tions determining when and where the gene product will be produced. 
They point out that, given the molecular data presently at hand, the 
overwhelming number of mutations that produce morphological varia-
tion between species occur in these  cis -regulatory regions, and not in the 
gene product regions. Stern and Orgogozo (2009, 750) further argue that 
 “ [a]lthough mutations are thought to occur randomly in the genome, the 
distribution of mutations that cause biological diversity appears to be 
highly nonrandom ”  (that is, preferentially in  cis -regulatory DNA), and 
that the  “ genetic basis of phenotypic evolution thus appears to be some-
what predictable. ”  Convergent molecular evolution is here seen to be a 
product of preferential mutational changes in a limited subset of  cis -
regulatory DNA regions, which they term  “ hot spots ” :  “ evolutionary 
relevant mutations are expected to accumulate in a few hot-spot genes 
and even in particular regions within a single gene ”  that control develop-
ment (Stern and Orgogozo 2009, 750). 
 To summarize this section of the chapter, at the DNA level of molecu-
lar evolution we have examined examples of (1) the convergent evolu-
tion of identical nuclear DNA molecules and (2) the convergent evolution 
of identical mitochondrial DNA molecules, both produced by identical 

Convergent Molecules 
189
nucleotide substitutions occurring in the molecules of very distantly 
related organisms. The DNA molecule possesses only four nucleotides, 
and has a relatively simple geometry: the double helix. In the next section 
we shall examine the convergent evolution of the complex geometries 
and chemical compositions of the huge protein molecules. 
 Proteins and Protein Functions 
 The independent evolution of two convergent protein molecules with 
the same amino acid sequences does not necessarily mean that the DNA 
coding for those two convergent proteins is itself exactly the same. This 
is due to the fact that most amino acids are coded for by more than one 
DNA codon; for example, the six codons TCT, TCC, TCA, TCG, AGT, 
and AGC all code for the same amino acid, serine. Identical amino acid 
sequences may be encoded by two quite different DNA nucleotide 
sequences. Thus, the phenomenon of convergent evolution in protein 
molecules is at least semi-independent of the phenomenon of convergent 
evolution at the level of the DNA molecules. 
 Indeed, Chen et al. (1997) have demonstrated the convergent evolu-
tion of an antifreeze protein molecule in two independent groups of 
cold-water ﬁ shes that are encoded by totally different DNA (Logsdon 
and Doolittle 1997). The convergent molecule is an antifreeze glycopro-
tein, AFGP, found in paracanthopterygian gadiform ﬁ sh in the Arctic 
waters of the Northern Hemisphere of the Earth; it is also found in 
acanthopterygian perciform ﬁ sh in Antarctic waters on the opposite 
side of the planet (  table 5.4 ). The two groups of ﬁ shes are adapted for 
existence in subfreezing temperatures, and have evolved independently 
in isolation at the two poles of the planet, geographically separated 
by the wide expanse of temperate- and tropical-temperature waters 
in between.  
 The AFGP of the Antarctic notothenioid ﬁ sh is encoded by a gene 
that is largely constructed of previously noncoding DNA, combined with 
bits of DNA coding for a pancreatic trypsinogen gene that is used in 
digestion. This gene may have been modiﬁ ed for preventing freezing in 
the intestinal ﬂ uid, a function that was later expanded throughout the 
circulatory system in the evolution of the new AFGP gene, whereas the 
AFGP gene of the Arctic cod ﬁ sh shows no DNA nucleotide sequence 
identity with the trypsinogen gene, and arose from a completely unre-
lated genomic locus (Chen et al. 1997; Logsdon and Doolittle 1997). 
Nonetheless, the Antarctic notothenioid and Arctic cod AFGP molecules 

190 
Chapter 5
 Table 5.4 
 Convergent evolution of identical antifreeze protein molecule in independent lineages, and 
of different molecules that serve the same antifreeze molecular function 
 A  Convergent molecule (same molecule, different convergent lineages) 
 1   Convergent protein and function: AFGP (blood serum glycoprotein used to lower the 
freezing temperature of tissue to prevent cell rupture) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1   Artic cod (Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Euteleosti: Paracanthopterygii: 
Gadiformes: Gadidae;  Boreogadus saida ) 
 1.2  Antarctic notothenioid (Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Euteleosti: 
Acanthopterygii: Perciformes: Notothenidae;  Dissostichus mawsoni ) 
 2   Convergent protein and function: AFP Type II (blood serum protein used to lower the 
freezing temperature of tissue to prevent cell rupture) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1  Atlantic 
herring 
(Osteichthyes: 
Actinopterygii: 
Teleostei: 
Clupeomorpha: 
Clupeiformes: Clupeidae;  Clupea harengus ) 
 2.2  American 
smelt 
(Osteichthyes: 
Actinopterygii: 
Teleostei: 
Euteleosti: 
Protocanthopterygii: Osmeriformes: Osmeridae;  Osmerus mordax ) 
 2.3  Sea raven (Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Euteleosti: Acanthopterygii: 
Scorpaeniformes: Cottidae;  Hemitripterus americanus ) 
 B   Convergent molecular function (same function, different convergent molecules): 
Molecular function: Antifreeze protection 
 Convergent molecules: 
 1  AFP Type I 
 Lineage : Winter ﬂ ounder (Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Euteleosti: 
Acanthopterygii: Pleuronectiformes: Pleuronectidae;  Pleuronectes americanus ) 
 2  AFP Type III 
 Lineage : Ocean pout (Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Euteleosti: Acanthopterygii: 
Perciformes: Zoarcidae;  Macrozoarces americanus ) 
 3  AFP Type IV 
 Lineage : Longhorn sculpin (Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii: Teleostei: Euteleosti: 
Acanthopterygii: Scorpaeniformes: Cottidae;  Myoxocephalus octodecimspinosus ) 
 4  AFP Cf 
 Lineage : Spruce budworm (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Lepidoptera: 
Tortricidae;  Choristoneura fumiferana ) 
 5  AFP Tm 
 Lineage : Yellow mealworm beetle (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Coleoptera: 
Polyphaga: Tenebrionidae;  Tenebrio molitor ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Molecules 
191
are nearly identical in amino acid composition and are comprised mainly 
of threonine-alanine-alanine repeats, usually encoded by ACA-GCT/G-
GCA codons in the Antarctic notothenioids, whereas the Arctic cod use 
DNA codons rarely observed in the notothenioid ﬁ sh (Logsdon and 
Doolittle 1997). The convergent amino acid triplet-repeating structure of 
AFGP appears to be required for antifreeze-ice interaction to occur, and 
probably evolved in the notothenioids about 10 to 14 million years ago, 
as the Antarctic Ocean began to freeze, and about two to three million 
years ago in the cod, during the Arctic glaciation (Chen et al. 1997; 
Logsden and Doolittle 1997). 
 Subsequent work has revealed the convergent evolution of yet another 
antifreeze molecule: AFP Type II. This molecule evolved independently 
in cold-water clupeomorph ﬁ sh (Atlantic herring) and in two clades of 
euteleostian ﬁ shes, the protocanthopterygian American smelts and the 
acanthopterygian sea ravens (table 5.4). Unlike in the case of AFGP, the 
convergent evolution of AFP Type II in these three ﬁ sh groups appears 
to have been a case of parallel independent changes in the same C-type 
lectin genes ancestrally found in all three groups (Fletcher et al. 2001). 
 Convergence in antifreeze protein function does not always produce 
convergent evolution, or parallel evolution, of the same antifreeze mol-
ecules, as in the case AFGP or AFP Type II. Consider the convergent 
evolution of wings in insects, pterosaurs, birds, and bats (see table 2.2), 
all of which serve the common function of generating lift for powered 
ﬂ ight. The structure of the wing is different in each animal group, but the 
function is the same. Fletcher et al. (2001) point out that three additional 
antifreeze proteins have evolved in the cold-water ﬁ shes — AFP Types I, 
III, and IIV — and Davies et al. (2002) discuss the evolution of two more 
antifreeze proteins that have evolved in the arthropods, AFP Cf and Tm 
(table 5.4). 
 The amino acid sequences in these additional antifreeze proteins are 
different, but aspects of their geometries are very similar (Davies et al. 
2002), and their functions are the same. In particular, Davies et al. (2002, 
932) point out that the helical geometries of AFP Cf and AFP Tm are 
such that  “ their ice-binding sites are virtually superimposable ”  even 
though AFP Cf is a left-coiled  β -helix and AFP Tm is a right-coiled  β -
helix. Davies et al. (2002, 932) describe this geometric result as a  “ remark-
able example of convergent evolution ”  in that the  “ two ranks of threonine 
residues line up perfectly because the threonines are in the same rota-
meric conﬁ guration ” in the helices. 

192 
Chapter 5
 Preventing tissue freezing is a specialized problem in a restricted eco-
logical setting, namely the polar regions of the Earth. Transporting 
oxygen from one region of tissues to another is a functional challenge 
that is ubiquitous to life itself. Three different types of proteins have 
convergently evolved to fulﬁ ll the same oxygen-binding function: hemo-
globin, hemocyanin, and hemerythrin (  table 5.5 ). Of these three, hemo-
globin is by far the most widespread in life on Earth (Hardison 1996). 
All three molecules are ancient: Bailly et al. (2008) argue that  α -helical 
bundles were the earliest protein folds to emerge in the evolution of life, 
as they are well adapted to binding metal ions. Thus, the globins and the 
hemerythrins represent two ancient families of molecules that evolved 
the functions of sequestering reduced iron and sensing and controlling 
oxygen concentrations, as corrosive oxygen was lethal to the earliest 
 Table 5.5 
 Convergent evolution of similar oxygen-binding protein molecules in independent lin-
eages, and of different molecules that serve the same oxygen-binding molecular function 
 A  Convergent molecule (same molecule, different convergent lineages): 
 1   Convergent protein and function: HEMOCYANIN (protein that uses copper to bind 
oxygen for the function of oxygen transport) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1   Common octopus (Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: Eutrochozoa: Mollusca: 
Cephalopoda: Octopodidae;  Octopus vulgaris ) 
 1.2   Horseshoe crab (Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Cheliceriformes: Limulidae; 
 Limulus polyphemus ) 
 2   Convergent protein and function: HEMERYTHRIN (co-option of the ancient nonheme 
oxygen-sensor molecule hemerythrin for the function of oxygen transport) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1  Terebratulid 
brachiopod 
(Protostomia: 
Lophotrochozoa: 
Lophophorata: 
Brachiopoda: Cancellothyrididae;  Terebratulina retusa ) 
 2.2   Serpulid bristle worm (Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: Eutrochozoa: Spiralia: 
Sipuncula: Sipunculidae;  Sipunculus nudus ) 
 2.3   Priapulid worm (Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Introverta: Priapulida: Priapulidae; 
 Priapulus caudatus ) 
 3  Convergent protein and function: two-CCP-domain HAPTOGLOBIN (modiﬁ ed 
hemoglobin-binding plasma protein with the ability to form high-molecular-weight 
oligomers) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 3.1   Cow (Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Ruminantia: Bovidae;  Bos taurus ) 
 3.2   Human (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: Catarrhini: Hominidae;  Homo 
sapiens ) 
 B   Convergent molecular function (same function, different convergent molecule): 
Molecular function: oxygen transport; convergent molecule: HEMOGLOBIN 
 Lineage : Earthworm (Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: Eutrochozoa: Spiralia: Annelida: 
Lumbricidae;  Lumbricus terrestris ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Molecules 
193
forms of anaerobic life (Bailly et al. 2008). With the evolution of aerobic 
life, transport of oxygen within the organism for metabolic purposes is a 
critical function, and van Holde et al. (2001, 15566) hypothesize that 
oxygen-transport proteins developed  “ in several independent ways, 
hemoglobins from myoglobins, hemerythrins from myohemerythrins, 
and the two kinds of hemocyanins from two different classes of phenol 
oxidases. ”  
 Hemocyanins evolved twice, independently, in the clade of the mol-
luscs (lophotrochozoans) and the clade of the arthropods (ecdysozoans; 
table 5.5). In the molluscs, Class 3a hemocyanins are used for oxygen 
transport in the blood of cephalopods, such as the octopus, and of gas-
tropods, including both marine and terrestrial snails. In the arthropods, 
Class 3b hemocyanins are present in the blood of cheliceriformes, such 
as the horseshoe crab, and mandibulate crustaceans, such as the true 
crabs (van Holde et al. 2001). 
 The hemocyanins bind oxygen with copper (thus, the blood of an 
octopus is bluish-green when it is oxygenated, not red like ours), but 
copper used as an oxygen-binding metal is not as efﬁ cient as iron. Both 
hemoglobin and hemerythrin use iron, but the latter is a nonheme protein 
(despite its deceptive name) unlike hemocyanin and hemoglobin, and is 
less efﬁ cient in oxygen transport than hemoglobin. The hemerythrins are 
patchily present throughout life, from bacteria to archaea to the eukarya, 
and are used in a variety of functions, the most ancient of which is oxygen 
sensing (Bailly et al. 2008). Only late in the evolution of life have three 
groups of protostome invertebrates — the brachiopods, serpulids, and pri-
apulids (table 5.5) — independently co-opted the hemerythrin protein for 
the primary function of oxygen transport. Blood sufﬁ ciently enriched in 
hemerythrin is pale violet when oxygenated, not blue-green as for hemo-
cyanin or red as for hemoglobin. 
 Last, mammals possess a specialized plasma protein, haptoglobin, that 
can be used to inhibit hemoglobin ’ s oxidative activity, if needed. A 
variant of this protein, two-CCP-domain haptoglobin, independently 
evolved in the ruminant mammals and, curiously, in humans (table 5.5). 
Because the two-CCP-domain haptoglobin is found throughout the 
clade of the ruminants, the mutation producing this protein occurred 
early in the Cenozoic for these mammals (Wicher and Fries 2007). The 
same protein evolved much more recently in humans, for it is not present 
in our close primate cousins. In both cows and humans, the convergent 
duplication of the gene segment coding for the CCP domain of the  α -
chain in the haptoglobin molecule resulted in a much longer  α -chain in 

194 
Chapter 5
the new protein, which contains two CCP domains in tandem. Wicher 
and Fries (2007) point out that the new protein can form much higher-
molecular-weight oligomers than the conventional protein, and suggest 
that the different binding properties of this molecule is useful in prevent-
ing infection in the ruminant mammals. Its function in humans is less 
clear, but data do exist that indicate humans with the mutated haptoglo-
bin molecule are more resistant to life-threatening streptococcus infec-
tions, and possibly to malarial infections (Wicher and Fries 2007). 
 Preventing tissue death by freezing or oxygen starvation is a matter 
of life or death, yet convergent molecular evolution also occurs in situ-
ations that are not so dire. Mundy (2005) reviews the recent discovery 
that melanic polymorphism in three groups of distantly related wild birds 
has evolved in parallel, in that the plumage color variations seen in these 
birds are produced by point mutations in amino acid substitution in the 
same gene coding for the MC1R protein (  table 5.6 ). Many birds are well 
known for the dazzling colors of their plumage, and so it was unexpected 
to ﬁ nd parallel changes in the same gene to be producing the color varia-
tions in such distantly related species. Mundy (2005, 1638) concludes by 
noting that the  “ examples discussed here clearly only represent the tip 
of the iceberg as far as avian plumage colouration genetics in the wild is 
concerned. Over 300 avian species exhibit plumage polymorphisms ” ; 
thus, he implies that more examples of parallel evolution of the MC1R 
protein may soon be discovered.  
 Likewise, Protas et al. (2005) have shown that mutations in the 
protein-encoding sequences of the same gene, the one coding for 
 Table 5.6 
 Convergent evolution of similar melanin-controlling protein molecules 
 1   Convergent protein and function: MC1R (protein producing plumage color variations 
in birds) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1   Snow goose (Aves: Neognathae: Galloanserae: Anseriformes: Anatidae;  Anser 
caerulescens ) 
 1.2  Bananaquit (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Coerebidae;  Coereba 
ﬂ aveola ) 
 1.3   Arctic skua (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Charadriiformes: Stercorariidae; 
 Stercorarius parasiticus ) 
 2  Convergent protein and function: OCA2 (protein producing albinism in ﬁ sh) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1  Molino cave populations of the Mexican tetra,  Astyanax mexicanus 
 2.2  Pach ó n cave populations of the Mexican tetra,  Astyanax mexicanus 
 2.3  Japon é s cave populations of the Mexican tetra,  Astyanax mexicanus 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Molecules 
195
OCA2, produces albinism in three independent populations of cave ﬁ sh 
(table 5.6). Animals living in the perpetually dark environment of caves 
routinely lose the function of their eyes and experience pigment loss. This 
same evolutionary trend repeatedly occurs across phylogenetically 
diverse lineages, in very distantly related organisms such as spiders, 
isopods, ﬁ sh, and salamanders. As a result, it was a surprise when, in 
studying pigment loss in the Mexican tetra caveﬁ sh in two widely sepa-
rated caves in Mexico, Molino and Pach ó n, Protas et al. (2005, 109) 
discovered that  “ albinism evolved independently in these two caves, by 
convergent evolution in the same gene. ”  Preliminary analyses indicate 
that yet another independent cave population of these ﬁ sh, Japon é s, 
also has experienced melanin loss by convergent evolution of the gene 
producing OCA2. The independent evolution of albinism was an expected 
given, but the fact that three independent populations of caveﬁ sh 
experienced mutations in the very same gene to produce that albinism 
was not. 
 An even more unexpected demonstration of convergent evolution in 
the same gene has been discovered by Colosimo et al. (2005) in 14 inde-
pendent freshwater populations of the three-spine stickleback ﬁ sh 
species  Gasterosteus aculeatus ( table 5.7 ). The  Gasterosteus aculeatus 
species complex contains two strikingly different end-member pheno-
types: a heavily armored ecomorph, typically possessing a row of over 
30 bony armor plates extending along the length of the body of the ﬁ sh, 
and a lightly armored ecomorph, possessing at most nine plates only at 
the anterior end of the ﬁ sh. The heavily armored ecomorph is found 
exclusively in marine waters, and the lightly armored ecomorph in fresh-
water streams and lakes. These end-member phenotypes are so different 
that they were classiﬁ ed as separate species by the great French mor-
phologist Georges Cuvier in 1829, but subsequent observation has dem-
onstrated that the two ecomorphs freely interbreed and hybridize 
(Colosimo et al. 2005).  
 Of particular interest is the fact that the lightly armored ecomorph 
repeatedly and independently evolved from members of the heavily 
armored marine ecomorph that invaded the new freshwater stream 
and lake habitats which had been created around the world following 
the retreat and melting of the glaciers from 20,000 to 10,000 years 
ago. The greater maneuverability and ﬂ exibility of the lightly armored 
ecomorph is believed to be of selective advantage in freshwater pre d-
atory regimes, as opposed to open-ocean marine ones (Colosimo 
et al. 2005). 

196 
Chapter 5
 The protein EDA is used in constructing the body armor of  Gaster-
osteus aculeatus , and Colosimo et al. (2005) have demonstrated that 
four mutations in the  Eda  protein-encoding gene repeatedly and inde-
pendently occur in 13 freshwater populations of lightly armored eco-
morphs around the world. One exception to the convergent evolution 
of the freshwater stickleback  Eda  gene is the Nakagawa Creek popula-
tion in Japan (table 5.7), a population with a lightly armored phenotype 
that  “ is due to an independently derived allele of  Eda ” different from 
those of the other 13 freshwater populations examined (Colosimo et al. 
2005, 1929). 
 Other examples of the convergent evolution of structural proteins are 
due not to convergent changes in the same gene in independent lineages, 
but to identical structural repeats in the amino acid sequences compris-
ing those proteins. Four different types of ﬁ broelastic structural proteins 
have independently evolved in the arthropods and vertebrates, all of 
which have multiple glycine-glycine-leusine-glycine-tyrosine amino acid 
repeats in the protein (  table 5.8 ). The amino acid sequence convergences 
 Table 5.7 
 Convergent evolution of the EDA protein in independent freshwater populations of the 
three-spine stickleback ﬁ sh species  Gasterosteus aculeatus 
 Convergent protein and function: EDA (protein used in constructing rows of bony armor 
plates on the bodies of stickleback ﬁ sh) 
 Convergent populations: 
 A  European populations 
 1  Schwale (Germany) freshwater  G. aculeatus 
 2  Loch Fada (Scotland) freshwater  G. aculeatus 
 3  Norway stream (Norway) freshwater  G. aculeatus 
 4  Blautaver (Iceland) freshwater  G. aculeatus 
 B  Eastern North American population 
 5  Olmstead Park (Massachusetts) freshwater  G. aculeatus 
 C  Western North American populations 
 6  Santa Clara River (California) freshwater  G. aculeatus 
 7  Friant (California) freshwater  G. aculeatus 
 8  San Francisco Creek (California) freshwater  G. aculeatus 
 9  Conner Creek (Washington) freshwater  G. aculeatus 
 10  Paxton Lake (Canada) freshwater  G. aculeatus 
 11  Salmon River (Canada) freshwater  G. aculeatus 
 12  Wallace Lake (Alaska) freshwater  G. aculeatus 
 13  Alaska stream (Alaska) freshwater  G. aculeatus 
 D  Japanese population 
 14  Nakagawa Creek (Japan) freshwater  G. aculeatus 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Molecules 
197
seen in these proteins are  “ driven by structural or functional properties 
imparted to the protein by the shared sequence, ”  producing the ability 
of these  “ predominantly hydrophobic proteins to self-organize into a 
polymeric, ﬁ brillar matrix ” (Robson et al. 2000, 1751). Twenty-eight of 
the amino acids in the cockroach oothecin protein are in precisely the 
same sequence in the sea lampry lamprin protein, an amino acid sequence 
convergence that  “ may represent one of the best examples of primary 
sequence convergence so far identiﬁ ed ”  (Robson et al. 2000, 1751). These 
two animals are very distantly related: the cockroach is a protostomous 
bilaterian, and the sea lampry is a deuterostome.  
 Rey et al. (1998, 6212) report an  “ unexpected homology ”  found in 
comparing a fungal and an insect protein: fully 25.3 percent of the amino 
acid sequence is identical in the fungal Qid74 protein and the insect BR3 
protein (table 5.8). The fungal protein is used in cell wall construction, 
 Table 5.8 
 Convergent evolution of similar structural protein molecules 
 1   Convergent proteins and functions: OOTHECIN, CHORION CLASS B, LAMPRIN, 
and ELASTIN (ﬁ broelastic structural proteins used in the construction of chordate 
cartilages, arthropod silks, and insect egg cases) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1   American cockroach (Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Hexapoda: 
Blattodea: Blatellidae;  Periplaneta americana ) 
 1.2   Domestic silk moth (Arthropoda: Hexapoda: Lepidoptera: Bombycidae;  Bombyx 
mori ) 
 1.3   Sea lamprey (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Vertebrata: Petromyzontiformes: 
Petromyzontidae;  Petromyzon marinus ) 
 1.4   Norwegian rat (Chordata: Vertebrata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: Reptiliomorpha: 
Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: Muridae;  Rattus norvegicus ) 
 2   Convergent proteins and functions: QID74 and BR3 (proteins used to construct cell 
walls by ﬁ lamentous fungus and to construct external tube walls by midges) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1  Mycoparasitic ﬁ lamentous fungus (Unikonta: Fungi: Eumycetes: Ascomycota: 
Hypocreaceae;  Trichoderma harzianum ) 
 2.2   Midge (Unikonta: Metazoa: Protostomia: Arthropoda: Hexapoda: Chironomidae; 
 Chironomus tentans ) 
 3   Convergent protein and function: APOLIPOPROTEIN(a) (adaptive function uncertain; 
possibly protects against certain infectious diseases by inhibiting plasminogen activation. 
Otherwise similar to lipoproteins that bind ﬁ brin and deliver cholesterol in reconstructing 
damaged tissue) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 3.1   European hedgehog (Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Eulipotyphles: Erinaceidae; 
 Erinaceus europeus ) 
 3.2   Human (Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: Catarrhini: Hominidae;  Homo 
 sapiens ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

198 
Chapter 5
whereas the insect protein is secreted in the midge ’ s saliva, and is used 
in constructing external tube walls within which the insect lives. Rey et 
al. (1998, 6215) note that the two genes coding for the two proteins, one 
fungal and one insect, had to have originated independently of each 
other, and that the  “ ancestor of each new gene created  de novo  has to 
be a noncoding DNA sequence that abounds in every eukaryotic 
genome ” ; furthermore, the observed protein convergence  “ was not 
between the genes but between the similar noncoding repeats whence 
the two [new] genes sprung quite independently of each other. ” 
 More enigmatic is the convergent evolution of the protein 
apolipoprotein(a), or apo(a), in the hedgehog and in humans (table 5.8). 
Apo(a) is part of the low-density lipoprotein complex (LDL) that is a 
known risk factor in the development of atherosclerosis in humans, 
hence its research interest in medicine. It is known that apo(a) is found 
in Old World primates (Catarrhini), but it was a surprise to ﬁ nd the same 
protein in the very distantly related European hedgehogs: Lawn et al. 
(1997, 11992) conclude that it is  “ a remarkable example of  ‘ parallel gene 
evolution. ’  . . . By apparent remodeling of a plasminogen-like gene, 
hedgehog and human ancestors independently evolved an apo(a) 
protein ”  that functions identically in both organisms. Unfortunately, 
some of those functions increase the risk of cerebral stroke in humans, 
which is one of the reasons the protein was under study in the ﬁ rst place. 
 Last, we have the convergent evolution of protein function in which 
multiple independent proteins with their own independent functions are 
co-opted to serve the convergent protein function, a process known as 
gene sharing. Convergent evolution of protein function by gene sharing 
was ﬁ rst discovered in the crystallin proteins of the eye lens in animals: 
 “ The term  ‘ gene sharing ’  was used initially to generalize the ﬁ nding that 
crystallins with a structural, optical function in the lens may also be 
expressed in other tissues [in the body], where they have a metabolic, 
nonrefractive function. Thus, the protein encoded in the  identical gene 
may perform entirely different functions depending upon its expression 
pattern . . . gene regulation is a critical factor for gene sharing, leading 
to the use of a metabolic [enzyme] or stress protein as a structural 
crystallin. It is ironic that the abundantly expressed crystallins, long 
considered inert bricks as it were, squirreled away in a tiny transparent 
tissue . . . have become landmarks for multifunctional uses of widely 
expressed proteins that illustrate the dynamism of evolutionary change! ”  
(Piatigorsky 2007, 55 – 56; author ’ s emphasis). 

Convergent Molecules 
199
 Subsequent analysis has revealed the convergent evolution of J-
crystallins,  Ω -crystallins, S-crystallins, and drosocrystallins in invertebrate 
animals ( table 5.9 ). The  α -,  β -, and  γ -crystallins are found in the eye lenses 
of all known vertebrates, but the vertebrate  β γ -crystallins are believed 
to have evolved from the Ci- β γ -crystallin of the urochordates (table 5.9), 
and thus are not independent originations (Piatigorsky 2007). Within the 
vertebrates,  δ -crystallins independently evolved in the sauropsid clade, 
and are present in modern reptiles and avian dinosaurs. Other crystallins 
are more restricted in their phylogenetic distribution, and are called 
 “ taxon-speciﬁ c. ”  These include the  ρ -,  π -,  ι -, and  ρ B-crystallins in some 
frogs and geckos,  τ -crystallins in some ﬁ sh and turtles, and  ε -crystallins 
in the archosaurs (table 5.9). Within the mammals,  υ -crystallins indepen-
dently evolved in the monotremes,  μ -crystallins in the marsupials, and 
 η -,  ζ -, and  λ -crystallins in separate branches of the placental mammal 
clade (table 5.9). In conclusion, Piatigorsky (2007, 65) states:  “ the diver-
sity and taxon-speciﬁ city of lens crystallins throughout the animal 
kingdom are consistent with overlapping functions by different proteins, 
indicative of convergent evolution for crystallin roles. ”  
 To summarize this section of the chapter, at the protein level of molec-
ular evolution we have examined examples of (1) the convergent evolu-
tion of similar amino acid sequences in unrelated proteins, (2) the 
convergent evolution of similar structural geometries in proteins with 
different amino acid sequences, and (3) the convergent evolution of 
similar protein function by gene sharing, in which the same protein-
encoding gene is used for two entirely different functions depending 
upon its regulatory expression. Proteins converge in every possible way. 
 Enzymes and Enzyme Functions 
 Enzymes are specialized protein molecules that catalyze the chemical 
reactions of other molecules. Theoretically, it is the catalytic function 
itself that is subject to natural selection, not the speciﬁ c molecule produc-
ing that function, hence opening the possibility that different types of 
molecular structures might be selected if they could be modiﬁ ed to 
produce the same catalytic function. Thus, the phenomenon of conver-
gent evolution in enzyme function is at least semi-independent of the 
phenomenon of convergent evolution of identical protein molecules. 
 We have previously examined the convergent evolution of some 
enzymes, such as stomach lysozyme (table 5.1) and aldehyde oxidore-

200 
Chapter 5
 Table 5.9 
 Convergent evolution of crystallin protein molecules by gene sharing 
 Convergent molecular function: Construction of a transparent eye lens that optimizes the 
refractive index for focusing and image formation 
 Convergent molecules: 
 1  J1-, J2-, J3-CRYSTALLINS 
 Lineage : Box jellyﬁ sh (Metazoa: Cnidaria: Cubozoa: Carybdeidae;  Tripedalia 
 cystophora ) 
 2  Ω /L-CRYSTALLIN 
 Lineage : Sea scallop (Metazoa: Bilateria: Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: Mollusca: 
Bivalvia: Pectinidae;  Placopecten magellanicus ) 
 3  SL11/Lops4-, S-CRYSTALLINS 
 Lineage : Octopus (Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: Mollusca: Cephalopoda: Octopodidae; 
 Octopus vulgaris ) 
 4  DROSOCRYSTALLIN 
 Lineage : Fruit ﬂ y (Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Hexapoda: Drosophilidae; 
 Drosophila melanogaster ) 
 5  Ci- β γ -CRYSTALLIN 
 Lineage : Sea squirt (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Urochordata: Ascidiacea: Cionidae; 
 Ciona intestinalis ) 
 6  τ -CRYSTALLIN 
 Lineage : Sea lamprey (Deuterostomia: Chordata: Vertebrata: Petromyzontiformes: 
Petromyzontidae;  Petromyzon marinus ) 
 7  ρ -CRYSTALLIN 
 Lineage : 
Leopard 
frog 
(Chordata: 
Osteichthyes: 
Sarcopterygii: 
Tetrapoda: 
Batrachomorpha: Lissamphibia: Anura: Ranidae;  Rana pipiens ) 
 8  π -,  ι -,  ρ B-CRYSTALLINS 
 Lineage : Striped day gecko (Tetrapoda: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: 
Lepidosauromorpha: Scleroglossa: Gekkonidae;  Phelsuma lineata ) 
 9  ε -CRYSTALLIN 
 Lineage : Crocodile (Sauropsida: Archosauromorpha: Crurotarsi: Crocodylidae; 
 Crocodylus niloticus ) 
 10  δ 1-,  δ 2-CRYSTALLINS 
 Lineage : Chicken (Sauropsida: Archosauromorpha: Ornithodira: Dinosauria: Saurischia: 
Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Galliformes: Phasianidae;  Gallus gallus ) 
 11  υ -CRYSTALLIN 
 Lineage : Platypus (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Monotremata: 
Ornithorhynchidae;  Ornithorhynchus anatinus ) 
 12  μ -CRYSTALLIN 
 Lineage : Kangaroo (Mammalia: Marsupialia: Diprotodontia: Macropodidae;  Macropus 
rufus ) 
 13  η -CRYSTALLIN 
 Lineage : 
Elephant 
shrew 
(Mammalia: 
Eutheria: 
Afrotheria: 
Macroscelidea: 
Macroscelididae;  Elephantulus rozeti ) 
 14  ζ -CRYSTALLIN 
 Lineage : Camel (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Camelidae; 
 Camelus dromedarius ) 
 15  λ -CRYSTALLIN 
 Lineage : Rabbit (Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Lagomorpha: Leporidae; 
 Oryctolagus cuniculus ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Molecules 
201
ductase (table 5.3), that is caused by the convergent evolution of the 
DNA directly coding for those proteins. Therefore, in these instances 
the convergent enzyme function is a result of convergent evolution of 
the same protein producing that function. In a case of  “ convergent evolu-
tion of similar enzymatic function on different protein folds, ”  Bork et al. 
(1993, 31) argue that the  “ enzymatic function of sugar phosphorylation 
appears to have evolved independently . . . by convergent evolution ”  on 
three different protein geometries: the hexokinase, ribokinase, and galac-
tokinase families of protein folds (  table 5.10 ). Although proteins in each 
of these three families have different three-dimensional folds and strik-
ingly different sequence patterns,  “ each catalyzes chemically equivalent 
reactions on similar or identical substrates ”  (Bork et al. 1993, 31). More-
over, enzymatic functions for speciﬁ c sugars have independently evolved 
within the three kinase families: fructoskinase speciﬁ city has indepen-
dently evolved in both the hexokinase and ribokinase families, and 
glucose speciﬁ city has evolved several times independently within the 
hexokinase family. Bork et al. (1993, 38) argue that two different types 
of molecular convergence are exhibited by the kinase enzymes: (1) from 
different protein structures to the same enzymatic function, and (2) from 
 Table 5.10 
 Convergent evolution of different enzyme molecules that serve the same metabolic 
catalytic function 
 1   Convergent enzyme function: SUGAR PHOSPHORYLATION (enzymes that catalyze 
the ﬁ rst step in sugar metabolism) 
 Convergent molecules: 
 1.1  HEXOKINASE family 
 Lineage : Human (Eukarya: Unikonta: Metazoa: Deuterostomia: Vertebrata: Hominidae; 
 Homo sapiens ) 
 1.2  RIBOKINASE family 
 Lineage : E. coli bacterium (Eubacteria: Proteobactia:  γ -Proteobacteria;  Escherichia 
coli ) 
 1.3  GALACTOKINASE family 
 Lineage : Lactobacillus (Eubacteria: Firmicutes:  Bacillus  group;  Lactobacillus helveticus ) 
 2  Convergent enzyme function:  β -ELIMINATION MECHANISM (enzymes that catalyze 
the  β -elimination of sugar uronic acids) 
 Convergent molecules: 
 2.1  POLYGALACTURONIC ACID LYASE Pel10A 
 Lineage : Cellvibrio soil bacterium (Eubacteria: Proteobactia:  γ -Proteobacteria; 
 Cellvibrio japonicus ) 
 2.2  POLYGALACTURONIC ACID LYASE Pel1C 
 Lineage : Erwinia plant-pathogen bacterium (Eubacteria: Proteobactia:  γ -Proteobacteria; 
 Erwinia chrysanthemi ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

202 
Chapter 5
different functional speciﬁ cities to similar functional speciﬁ cities within 
the same protein structure.  
 In examining enzymes that catalyze the  β -elimination of sugar 
uronic acids, Charnock et al. (2002, 12067) found that the  “ active center 
provides a stunning example of convergent evolution ”  between two bac-
terial enzymes (table 5.10). The catalytic center of the  Cellvibrio soil 
bacterium ’ s Pel10A enzyme is  “ isostructural with the catalytic center of 
the totally unrelated family PL-1 enzyme Pel1C ”  of the  Erwinia plant-
pathogen bacterium (Charnock et al. 2002, 12067), an  “ essentially identi-
cal disposition of six active-center groups despite no topological similarity 
between these enzymes ”  in a case of  “ convergent evolution of catalytic 
mechanism ” (Charnock et al. 2002, 12070). 
 Serine protease enzymes serve a variety of important functions, from 
digestive to blood clotting. Reardon and Farber (1995) demonstrate that 
three very different serine proteases have converged on the same enzy-
matic function, peptide bond hydrolysis, in bacteria, plants, and animals 
( table 5.11 ). In their analysis of the  α / β barrel proteins, they cite these 
three serine proteases as  “ the best example of convergent evolution to 
a similar active site, ”  noting that the  “ three proteins have entirely differ-
ent 3-dimensional structures ”  and yet the  “ catalytic triad is essentially 
identical in the three proteins ” (Reardon and Farber 1995, 501). They 
further suggest that this convergence is due more to physics than selec-
tion:  “ convergent molecular evolution occurs when there is only one 
energetically reasonable pathway for a chemical reaction, ”  such as 
peptide bond hydrolysis (Reardon and Farber 1995, 497).  
 Tripp et al. (2001) document the convergent evolution of carbonic 
anhydrases in the archaea, plants, and animals (table 5.11). The  α -,  β -, 
and  γ -classes of carbonic anhydrase found in these independent lineages 
have no signiﬁ cant amino acid sequence identity, and their very different 
fold geometries  “ underscore their independent origins. Despite gross 
structural differences, the active sites of all three classes function with 
[a] single zinc atom . . . [and] all three classes employ a two-step iso-
mechanism ” (Tripp et al. 2001, 48615). 
 We have previously examined the convergent evolution of the stomach 
lysozymes (table 5.1), used in the digestion of cellulose. Another difﬁ cult 
molecule to digest is chitin. Shen and Jacobs-Lorena (1999) document 
the convergent evolution of chitinases in animals and plants (table 
5.11). Arthropods use chitinase to digest the chitin of their exoskeletons 
during molting, whereas plants use chitinase to defend themselves against 
fungal and insect infections by breaking down the structural chitin 

Convergent Molecules 
203
 Table 5.11 
 Convergent evolution of different enzyme molecules that serve the same catalytic 
function 
 1  Convergent enzyme function: PEPTIDE BOND HYDROLYSIS (enzymes that catalyze 
the hydrolysis of a peptide bond using a Ser nucleophile) 
 Convergent molecules: 
 1.1  SUBTILISIN 
 Lineage : Hay bacillus (Eubacteria: Firmicutes:  Bacillus group;  Bacillus subtilis ) 
 1.2  WHEAT SERINE CARBOXYPEPTIDASE 
 Lineage : Bread wheat (Eukarya: Bikonta: Chlorobionta: Tracheophyta: Angiospermae: 
Poaceae;  Triticum aestivum ) 
 1.3  CHYMOTRYPSIN 
 Lineage : Cow (Eukarya: Unikonta: Metazoa: Deuterostomia: Vertebrata: Bovidae;  Bos 
taurus ) 
 2  Convergent enzyme function: CO 2  HYDRATION (enzymes that catalyze the reversible 
hydration of carbon dioxide) 
 Convergent molecules: 
 2.1  γ -Class CARBONIC ANHYDRASE 
 Lineage : Methanosarcinalean archaeon (Archaea: Euryarchaeota: Methanosarcinales; 
 Methanosarcina thermophila ) 
 2.2  β -Class CARBONIC ANHYDRASE 
 Lineage : Pea (Eukarya: Bikonta: Chlorobiota: Tracheophyta: Angiospermae: Fabaceae; 
 Pisum sativum ) 
 2.3  α -Class CARBONIC ANHYDRASE 
 Lineage : Human (Eukarya: Unikonta: Metazoa: Deuterostomia: Vertebrata: Hominidae; 
 Homo sapiens ) 
 3   Convergent enzyme function: CHITIN DIGESTION (digestive enzymes that break 
down glycosidic bonds in chitin) 
 Convergent molecules: 
 3.1  Plant CHITINASE CBD 
 Lineage : Tobacco (Bikonta: Chlorobiota: Tracheophyta: Angiospermae: Solanaceae; 
 Nicotiana tabacum ) 
 3.2  Animal CHITINASE CBD 
 Lineage : Domestic silk moth (Unikonta: Metazoa: Protostomia: Arthropoda: Hexapoda: 
Bombycidae;  Bombyx mori ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 
present in these organisms. The plant and animal chitinase proteins are 
very different in structure, and the chitin binding domains (CBDs) of the 
two enzymes do not share signiﬁ cant amino acid sequence similarity; 
nevertheless, the fact that  “ plant and invertebrate CBDs share a common 
core structure and chitin-binding mechanism while being unrelated in 
evolution, argue[s] in favor of convergent evolution ”  of these molecules 
(Shen and Jacobs-Lorena 1999, 343). 
 Last, convergent evolution also exists in enzymatic functions involving 
RNA molecules, as well as the proteins. Within the cell, the aminoacyl-
tRNA synthetases are responsible for the synthesis of the substrates for 

204 
Chapter 5
ribosomal translation of messenger RNA, with 20 aminoacyl-tRNA syn-
thetases corresponding to the 20 amino acids used in protein synthesis. 
Terada et al. (2002, 257) document the convergent evolution of two lysyl-
tRNA synthetases in independent archaean and bacterial lineages (  table 
5.12 ), and point out that the  “ identical, sophisticated reaction occurs 
within two unrelated architectures ”  of the lysyl-tRNA synthetases-I 
(LysRS-I) and lysyl-tRNA synthetases-II (LysRS-II) molecules; further-
more, the  “ functional convergence of the two enzymes . . . is illustrated 
by the mirror images of LysRS-I and LysRS-II structures. . . . LysRS-I 
and LysRS-II can be docked simultaneously on the tRNA Lys molecule 
without any steric clashes ” (Terada et al. 2002, 260).  
 The  “ hammerhead ” macromolecular ribozyme structure occurs spo-
radically in both viruses and animals (  table 5.13 ), and Salehi-Ashtiani 
and Szostak (2001) argue that the hammerhead ribozyme has evolved 
independently many times. Their experiments with this molecule  “ ﬁ rmly 
suggest that the hammerhead ribozyme is the simplest RNA motif 
capable of catalysing RNA strand cleavage at rates between 1.0 and 
 Table 5.12 
 Convergent evolution of different enzyme molecules that serve the same RNA catalytic 
function 
 Convergent enzyme function: LYSYL-tRNA SYNTHESIS (enzymes that catalyze the 
synthesis of the substrate for tRNA Lys ) 
 Convergent molecules: 
 1  LYSYL-tRNA SYNTHETASE-I 
 Lineage : Thermococcalean archaeon (Archaea: Euryarchaeota: Thermococcales; 
 Pyrococcus horikoshii ) 
 2  LYSYL-tRNA SYNTHETASE-II 
 Lineage : E. coli bacterium (Eubacteria: Proteobactia:  γ -Proteobacteria;  Escherichia 
coli ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 
 Table 5.13 
 Convergent evolution of the same ribozyme molecular structure 
 Convergent enzyme and function: HAMMERHEAD RIBOZYME (enzyme that catalyzes 
RNA strand cleavage at rates between 0.1 and 1.0 per minute) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1   Cave cricket (Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Hexapoda: Orthoptera: 
Rhaphidophoridae;  Dolichopoda linderi ) 
 2  Newt 
(Bilateria: 
Deuterostomia: 
Chordata: 
Osteichthyes: 
Sarcopterygii: 
Batrachomorpha: Urodela: Salamandridae;  Notophthalamus viridescens ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Molecules 
205
1.0 ”  per minute (Salehi-Ashtiani and Szostak 2001, 82). They argue that 
their  “ results suggest that the evolutionary process may have been chan-
nelled . . . towards repeated selection of the simplest solution to a bio-
chemical problem ”  (Salehi-Ashtiani and Szostak 2001, 82), and that 
 “ purely chemical constraints (that is, the ability of only certain sequences 
to carry out particular functions) can lead to the repeated evolution 
of the same macromolecular structures ”  (Salehi-Ashtiani and Szostak 
2001, 84).  
 In summary, we have examined examples of (1) the convergent evolu-
tion of the same enzyme function produced by the convergent evolution 
of the same protein producing that function, (2) the convergent evolu-
tion of the same catalytic core structure in enzyme molecules that have 
no similarity in amino acid sequence or in the three-dimensional struc-
ture of the molecules, and (3) the convergent evolution of the same 
macromolecular structure in unrelated enzymes. Enzymes converge in 
every possible way. 
 Convergent Evolution of Cellular and Tissue Structures? 
 The self-assembly of molecules into crystals is a natural process driven 
by the laws of physics and, as we believe the laws of physics to be invari-
ant in space, the same molecules will self-assemble into the same crystal 
structure throughout the universe. That is, a salt crystal (NaCl) that forms 
on Mars will have the identical crystal structure as a salt crystal that 
forms on the Earth. Denton and Marshall (2001) have argued that the 
same might be true for protein folds: the same amino acids will self-
assemble into the same protein-fold geometries throughout the universe, 
as they are driven by the laws of physics to do so. They imply that con-
vergent molecular evolution may be driven more by the laws of physics 
than by natural selection; in essence, natural selection has no choice. 
Selection for a given function will necessarily result in convergent molec-
ular evolution. 
 Denton et al. (2002) further argue that, above the molecular level of 
protein-fold geometries, two other microbiological levels exhibit evi-
dence of self-assembly that is determined by the laws of physics, similar 
to the nonbiological self-assembly of molecules into crystals. First are the 
cellular microtubules, whose forms  “ are not speciﬁ ed directly in the 
DNA, nor does any genetic program direct their assembly; ”  rather, they 
are generated by the dynamic interactions of a few basic components of 

206 
Chapter 5
the cell (Denton et al. 2002, 339). Second is cell form itself which, when 
experimentally altered by microsurgery, can  “ recover its proper form by 
searching a conformational space for its correct conformation, just like 
a folding protein ”  (Denton et al. 2002, 340). Therefore, like the molecules 
composing them, the macromolecular structures of the cell itself 
converge. 
 West et al. (1999) assert that biological convergence in form due to 
the laws of physics extends upward from the cell to entire tissue systems, 
such as capillary, intestinal, and lung geometries and surface areas in 
animals and root, branch, and leaf geometries and surface areas in 
plants. They note that biological form follows an allometric quarter-
power scaling, rather than the expected third-power from Euclidean 
geometric scaling, and argue that this follows from the fractal-like archi-
tecture of all vascular branching systems in living organisms:  “ The vast 
majority of organisms exhibit scaling exponents very close to 3/4 for 
metabolic rate and 1/4 for internal times and distances. These are the 
maximal and minimal values, respectively, for the effective surface 
area and linear dimensions for a volume-ﬁ lling fractal-like network . . . 
it is testimony to the severe geometric and physical constraints on meta-
bolic processes, which have dictated that all of these organisms obey a 
common set of quarter-power scaling laws ”  (West et al. 1999, 1679). They 
continue:  “ [u]nlike the genetic code, which has evolved only once in the 
history of life, fractal-like distribution networks that confer an additional 
effective fourth dimension have originated many times ”  (West et al. 1999, 
1679). 
 In summary, convergent evolution occurs across the entire spectrum 
of molecules that make up life. We have studied examples of the conver-
gent evolution of identical nucleotide substitutions in nuclear and 
mtDNA molecules of distantly related organisms, similar amino acid 
sequences in unrelated protein molecules, similar structural geometries 
in proteins with different amino acid sequences, and similar protein func-
tions by gene sharing; the convergent evolution of the same enzyme 
function produced by the convergent evolution of the same protein 
producing that function; the same catalytic core structure in enzyme 
molecules that have no similarity in amino acid sequence or in the three-
dimensional structure of the molecules; and the convergent evolution of 
the same macromolecular structure in unrelated enzymes. The effects of 
functional constraint can be seen throughout molecular evolution, in that 
selection for a given function repeatedly produces convergent molecular 
compositions and/or molecular geometries. The number of functional 

Convergent Molecules 
207
molecular evolutionary pathways available to life is not endless but is 
quite restricted, and convergent evolution is the direct result. 
 In the next chapter we shall examine what, at ﬁ rst glance, might seem 
to be even more improbable than the convergent evolution of molecules. 
Animals have minds; we all think (some animals more than others). Can 
it be that convergence extends to minds, and even to the ways in which 
we think?              


 6 
 Discussions of the evolution of intelligence have focused on monkeys and apes 
because of their close evolutionary relationships to humans. Other large-brained 
social animals, such as corvids, also understand their physical and social worlds. 
. . . Because corvids and apes share these cognitive tools, we argue that complex 
cognitive abilities evolved multiple times in distantly related species with vastly 
different brain structures in order to solve similar socioecological problems. . . . 
[T]his convergent evolution of cognition has not been built on a convergent 
evolution of brains. 
 — Emery and Clayton (2004, 1903) 
 Convergent Minds? 
 How can minds be said to converge? We consider our mental states to 
be a function of our brain structures and sensory inputs. At ﬁ rst glance, 
then, organisms with radically different brain structures would be 
expected to have radically different minds. Take, for example, the brains 
of a magpie and a human. One is a bird brain, possessed by an avian 
dinosaur in the sauropsid clade of amniotes, and the other is a primate 
brain, possessed by a placental mammal in the synapsid clade of amni-
otes. The sauropsid and synapsid lineages diverged back in the Carbon-
iferous, and have evolved along independent pathways ever since. Magpie 
brains and human brains are structurally very different, separated by a 
vast chasm of 340 million years of independent evolution. Yet it can be 
demonstrated that, in many ways, magpies think like humans (Emery 
and Clayton 2004; Prior et al. 2008). Our minds have converged. 
 Problem-Solving Behavior 
 It was long thought that the tool was the unique invention of the human 
mind. Only the human mind had the ability to understand the limits to 
 Convergent Minds 

210 
Chapter 6
accomplishing a task using the body alone, and thus to conceive of 
extending those limits by using an external object to accomplish that 
task. We now know that this long-held belief is not true; other minds 
have made that conceptual leap as well. Quite a few other minds — no 
less than 12 independent lineages of animals use tools (table 6.1).  
 Within our own lineage, we can trace the manufacture of stone tools 
back some 2.6 million years ago to our ancestor  Homo habilis , aptly 
named the  “ handyman ”  (evidence of tool usage in our lineage goes as 
far back as  Australopithecus afarensis , some 3.39 million years ago, but 
it is not clear if  A. afarensis  manufactured stone tools or simply used 
naturally occurring sharp stones as tools; see McPherron et al. 2010). 
 Table 6.1 
 Convergent evolution of tool-using and tool-making behavior 
 1   Convergent behavior and function: TOOL USAGE (using an existing external object as 
a tool to attain an immediate goal) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1   Black-and-yellow mud wasp (Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: 
Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: Vespoidea: Sphecidae;  Sceliphron caementarium ) 
 1.2   Forest ant (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: Formicidae: 
Myrmicinae;  Aphaenogaster rudis ) 
 1.3  Woodpecker ﬁ nch (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: 
Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: Archosauromorpha: Dinosauria: Saurischia: 
Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Emberizidae; 
 Cactospiza pallida ) 
 1.4  Egyptian vulture (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Falconiformes: Accipitridae; 
 Neophron percnopterus ) 
 1.5  Asian elephant (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: Afrotheria: 
Proboscidea: Elephantidae;  Elephas maximus ) 
 1.6   Sea otter (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Carnivora: Mustellidae;  Enhydra 
lutris ) 
 1.7   Polar bear (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Carnivora: Ursidae;  Ursus 
maritimus ) 
 1.8   Bottlenose dolphin (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Cetacea: 
Odontoceti: Delphinidae;  Tursiops truncatus ) 
 1.9   Black-striped capuchin monkey (Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: 
Platyrrhini: Cebidae;  Cebus libidinosus ) 
 1.10   Yellow baboon (Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: Catarrhini: 
Cercopithecoidea: Cercopithecidae;  Papio cynocephalus ) 
 2   Convergent behavior and function: TOOL CONSTRUCTION (modifying an existing 
external object or objects to create a tool to attain an immediate goal) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1   New Caledonian crow (Amniota: Sauropsida: Archosauromorpha: Dinosauria: 
Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: 
Corvidae;  Corvus moneduloides ) 
 2.2   Orangutan (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: 
Primates: Catarrhini: Hominoidea: Hominoidae: Pongidae;  Pongo pygmaeus ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Minds 
211
Before the invention of these Paleolithic tools, species in the Hominini 
certainly must have created tools out of wood and other organic matter, 
tools that decomposed and thus are not preserved in the fossil record. 
The classic studies of ﬁ eld anthropologists in Africa, beginning with Jane 
Goodall (Wade 2006), have demonstrated to us that our close Panini 
cousins, the chimpanzees ( Pan troglodytes ) and the bonobos ( Pan panis-
cus ), also create and use tools made of wood and other organic matter; 
thus, tool construction is found throughout the Homininae. Since then, 
gorillas ( Gorilla gorilla ) and now orangutans ( Pongo pygmaeus ) have 
been observed making tools (van Schaik et al. 1996), and so tool-
construction behavior is a synapomorphy for the entire clade of the 
Hominoidae, all of the great apes, not just ourselves. 
 Rather than being a unique product of the human mind, is tool con-
struction a unique product of the great ape mind? Not so. Both labora-
tory experimentation and ﬁ eld observation have demonstrated that 
corvid birds, such as the New Caledonian crow, make tools (table 6.1). 
When in the wild, these birds are particularly adept at making hook tools 
by carefully choosing suitable twigs and then modifying them to form 
hooks, and will do the same thing with metal wires in laboratory condi-
tions (Emery and Clayton 2004). We are not unique; the vastly different 
brains of these avian dinosaurs can also conceive of taking an external 
object and transforming it into another object for the purpose of solving 
a problem or achieving a goal. Our minds have converged. 
 Ten other lineages of animals are known to use tools, but at present 
are not known to make them (table 6.1). Tool usage is a somewhat 
simpler mental concept, in which the animal looks for an existing object 
to use as a tool but does not conceive of modifying that object into 
another object to use as a tool. Old World monkeys (Catarrhini) and 
New World monkeys (Platyrrhini) have independently evolved tool-
using behavior; capuchin monkeys pick up and carry stones with the 
express purpose of using them later to hammer nuts, and baboons do the 
same in hammering hard fruit, as well as using sticks for various purposes 
(Baber 2003). Nonprimate minds have also converged on hammer-using 
behavior: sea otters use stones to hammer mollusc shells, Egyptian vul-
tures use stones to hammer ostrich eggs, and polar bears have been 
observed to drop stones on seals to stun them (Baber 2003). Even the 
vastly different, and tiny, mind of the wasp has convergently evolved 
hammer-using behavior: the black-and-yellow mud wasp will collect and 
carry  “ stones ”  (to them; small grains of sand to us) in their mandibles, 
and use these to hammer mud into burrows in which it has laid its eggs 

212 
Chapter 6
to protect the eggs from predators (Baber 2003). Other insects, such as 
the forest ant, collect and use leaves as containers in which to carry food. 
In chapter 4 we considered the case of the ﬁ nch that has converged on 
the ecological role of the woodpecker (see table 4.3). The woodpecker 
ﬁ nch searches for and carries away a tool, a cactus spine, which it uses 
to extract wood-boring insects. And last, the mighty elephant has been 
routinely observed to carry and use branches to scratch itself (Baber 
2003), and the ocean-dwelling bottlenose dolphin collects and uses 
sponges to protect its skin from abrasion while foraging on the sea 
bottom (Hansell and Ruxton 2008). Animals with extremely different 
brains, scattered across very distantly related phylogenetic lineages, have 
independently evolved tool-using behavior (table 6.1). 
 Taking a different perspective, Hansell and Ruxton (2008, 77) argue 
that entirely too much emphasis has been placed on tool behavior in 
animals because it is always interpreted in terms of human evolution: 
 “ Those who feel that tools are  ‘ special ’  might be correct — but they might 
be more special to researchers than to the animals that use them. ”  As 
they point out, a great deal of attention was given to the discovery that 
gorillas make tools, while at the same time researchers ignored the fact 
that these animals build complicated nest structures out of modiﬁ ed 
branches and twigs on a daily basis. Likewise, relatively few birds make 
or use tools (table 6.1), but the majority of birds build nests, some of 
which are structurally very complex. 
 Before considering the convergent evolution of architectural behavior 
in animals, let us brieﬂ y review the evolution of architectural behavior 
in the most diversiﬁ ed animal architect on the planet at present, namely 
humans. Our ancestors, like our living cousins the chimpanzees and 
bonobos, surely built nests in trees, habitats constructed to provide a safe 
and comfortable place to sleep, high above the ground and thus out of 
the reach of ground-dwelling predators. In contrast, many of our ground-
dwelling ancestors looked for preexisting natural structures, such as 
caves, that could be used as habitats. Caves and other naturally occurring 
habitats are rare, and with further growth in human population numbers, 
humans took the next step: the construction of an artiﬁ cial habitat on 
the ground. Two potential construction materials are readily available: 
vegetative matter, such as wood, and dirt. Humans began to build habi-
tats made of modiﬁ ed wood, an architectural behavior still widely in use 
today, or with adobe, which many people also still use today. Only later 
did we begin to build habitats with cut stone, ﬁ red bricks (which are 
much more durable than adobe), and concrete (artiﬁ cial stone). At 

Convergent Minds 
213
present, we have added metal, glass, and plastic to the construction mate-
rials used for our habitats. 
 Other animals have evolved the exact same sequence of architectural 
behavior, and they did so long before we existed (table 6.2). Hansell 
(2005, 33) argues that  “ [a]rchitecture results from the application of 
behaviour to materials ” ; for this reason, I have omitted the behavioral 
step where animal species simply hunt for preexisting structures that can 
be used for habitats, like hermit crabs that use snail shells, and will move 
directly to animals that actively gather and modify material to construct 
a habitat. Like humans, other animal species construct habitats with 
material that is either vegetative or earthen. Unlike humans, however, 
animals have not evolved the capability of working with materials like 
metal, glass, or plastic in their construction, although some do steal and 
inventively use our worked materials in their habitats!  
 Hansell (2005) identiﬁ es ﬁ ve architectural behaviors found in nest-
building birds, listed here in terms of increasing behavioral complexity: 
stacking, entangling, Velcro-fastening, stitching, and weaving. At present 
there exists no comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of how many inde-
pendent times each of these behaviors have evolved in separate groups 
of birds. Thus, I will discuss as many convergent examples that I am aware 
of, knowing that future phylogenetic analyses will almost certainly 
expand that list. 
 The eagle (table 6.2) is an example of a bird that constructs its nest by 
ﬁ rst searching for and collecting branches of the desired length and 
diameter, and then transporting those branches back to the tree it has 
chosen for the nest. The eagle simply stacks the branches atop one 
another until a bowl-shaped nest has been created. This same nest-
building architectural behavior is used by some ground-nesting birds as 
well, such as the swan (table 6.2). In general, many of the large tree-
dwelling or ground-dwelling birds use stacking to build their nests: storks 
(Cicioniidae), pelicans (Pelicanidae), and herons (Ardeidae), in addition 
to eagles and swans (Hansell 2005). 
 Nests built by entangling architectural behavior are sturdier than those 
built by simple stacking, as the ends of the branches or twigs in these 
nests are actively bent and pulled back into the core of the nest by the 
bird. The familiar wood pigeon (table 6.2) is an example of a bird that 
constructs its nest using entangling (Hansell 2005). The same method is 
used by the gorilla (table 6.2) and chimpanzee (and presumably many 
of our ancestors), who search out a spot in the trees with an upright fork 
and then bend branches back into this foundation while holding them in 

214 
Chapter 6
Table 6.2
Convergent evolution of architectural behaviors
1 Convergent behavior and function: CONSTRUCTION USING VEGETATIVE 
MATERIAL (collecting and modifying vegetative material to build a wicker-like bowl, 
globe, baglike, or tentlike construction for use as a protective shelter)
Convergent lineages:
1.1 Veined octopus (Bilateria: Protostomia: Lophotrochozoa: Mollusca: Cephalopoda: 
Coleoidea: Octopodidae; Amphioctopus marginatus)
1.2 Arctic 
yellow 
jacket 
(Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: 
Mandibulata: 
Hexapoda: 
Hymenoptera: Vespoidea: Vespidae: Polistinae; Dolichovespula norwegica)
1.3 Neotropical paper wasp (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: 
Vespoidea: Sphecidae; Microstigmus comes)
1.4 Mute swan (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: 
Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: Archosauromorpha: Dinosauria: Saurischia: 
Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Neognathae: Galloanserae: Anseriformes: Anatidae; 
Cygnus olor)
1.5 Bald eagle (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Falconiformes: Accipitridae; Haliaeetus 
leucocephalus)
1.6 Wood pigeon (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Columbiformes: Columbidae; Columba 
palumbus)
1.7 European penduline tit (Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Remizidae; Remiz 
pendulinus)
1.8 Long-tailed tit (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Aegithalidae; Aegithalos 
caudatus)
1.9 Gray-backed camaroptera (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Cisticolidae; 
Camaroptera brevicondata)
1.10 Village weaverbird (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Ploceidae: 
Ploceinae; Ploceus cucullatus)
1.11 Montezuma oropendola (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Fringillidae: 
Icterinae; Gymnostinops montezuma)
1.12 Great bowerbird (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Ptilonorhynchidae; 
Chlamydera nuchalis)
1.13 Dusky-footed wood rat (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida:Mammalia: Eutheria: 
Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: Myomorpha: Cricetidae; Neotoma fuscipes)
1.14 European harvest mouse (Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: 
Myomorpha: Muridae; Micromys minutus)
1.15 Gray squirrel (Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: Sciuromorpha: 
Sciuridae; Sciurus carolinensis)
1.16 Peter’s tent-making bat (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Chiroptera: 
Microchiroptera: Phyllostomidae; Uroderma bilobatum)
1.17 Short-nosed fruit bat (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Chiroptera: 
Megachiroptera: Pteropodidae; Cynopterus sphinx)
1.18 Gorilla (Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: Catarrhini: Hominoidea: 
Hominidae: Gorillinae; Gorilla gorilla)
2 Convergent 
behavior 
and 
function: 
CONSTRUCTION 
USING 
ANIMAL-
GENERATED MATERIAL (collection and modiﬁ cation of animal-generated material 
to build a woven bowl, globe, baglike, or tentlike construction for use as a protective 
shelter)
Convergent lineages:
2.1 Common tailorbird (Amniota: Sauropsida: Archosauromorpha: Dinosauria: 
Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: 
Cisticolidae; Orthotomus sutorius)

Convergent Minds 
215
Table 6.2
(continued)
2.2 Chafﬁ nch (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Fringillidae; Fringilla 
coelebs)
2.3 Modern 
human 
(Amniota: 
Synapsida: Therapsida: 
Mammalia: 
Eutheria: 
Euarchontoglires: Primates: Catarrhini: Hominoidea: Hominidae: Homininae; Homo 
sapiens)
3 Convergent 
behavior 
and 
function: 
CONSTRUCTION 
USING 
EARTHEN 
MATERIAL (collecting and modifying earthen material to build an adobe-like dome, 
cylindrical, pyramidal, or globelike construction for use as a protective shelter)
Convergent lineages:
3.1 Neotropical 
mud 
wasp 
(Bilateria: 
Protostomia: 
Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: 
Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: Vespoidea: Sphecidae; Trigonopsis cameronii)
3.2 Malasian hover wasp (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: 
Vespoidea: Vespidae: Stenogastrinae; Liostenogaster ﬂ avolineata)
3.3 Ceylonese potter wasp (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: 
Vespoidea: Vespidae: Eumeninae; Paraleptomenes mephitis)
3.4 Warlike termite (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Isoptera: Termitidae: 
Macrotermitinae; Macrotermes bellicosus)
3.5 Cliff swallow (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: 
Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: Archosauromorpha: Dinosauria: Saurischia: 
Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Hirundinidae; 
Hirundo pyrrhonota)
3.6 White-necked rockfowl (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Picathartidae; 
Picathartes gymnocephalus)
3.7 Rufous hornero (Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Furnariidae; Furnarius 
rufus)
3.8 North American beaver (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: 
Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: Castorimorpha: Castoridae; Castor canadensis)
3.9 Modern human (Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: Catarrhini: 
Hominoidea: Hominidae: Homininae; Homo sapiens)
Note: For data sources, see text.
place with their feet; ﬁ nally, they tuck leafy twigs growing around the rim 
of the nest back into the core of the nest (von Frisch 1974). Unlike birds, 
however, apes construct their sleeping nests on a daily basis. 
 Many plants have convergently evolved seeds with the tiny barbs and 
hooks that provided the inspiration for the modern fastening product 
Velcro (see table 3.15). Some birds use this same fastening principle in 
building their nests: they actively seek out materials with tiny projecting 
processes and position these in the nest so that they ensnare each other, 
thereby creating even sturdier nests than those built using entangling. 
The long-tailed tit (table 6.2) uses small-leaved mosses for Velcro, and 
the related bushtit ( Psaltiparus minimus ) uses lichen (Hansell 2005). 
These nests are so sturdy that they can be totally enclosed into a baglike 
or socklike nest, with an opening at one end, as seen in the nests built 
by European penduline tits (table 6.2; von Frisch 1974). Rather than 

216 
Chapter 6
using Velcro-fastening, other birds actually stitch their nests together, 
pushing thin plant ﬁ ber through leaf margins, grasping it on the other 
side, and pushing it through again until separate leaves are stitched 
together. The gray-backed camaroptera (table 6.2) is an example of a 
bird that uses stitching behavior to build its nests (Hansell 2005). 
 Last, the most complex architectural behavior seen in birds is actual 
weaving, a suite of multiple behaviors including creating  “ loops, half-
hitches, hitches, bindings, slip knots, and overhand knots, as well a more 
regular over-and-under pattern of weft through warp that deﬁ nes human 
weaving ”  (Hansell 2005, 73 – 74), as can be seen in the nests built by the 
village weaverbird (table 6.2). Unlike most bird architectural behavior, 
which appears to be totally instinctual, weaving involves a learning 
component: young weaverbirds must practice and observe older weav-
erbirds in order to perfect the weaving technique (Hansell 2005). Yet this 
most complex architectural behavior in birds is not unique:  “ Weaving 
has arisen independently in two taxa of birds, the Old World weaver 
birds (Ploceinae) and the New World oropendolas, orioles, and caciques 
(Icterini, Fringillidae) ” (table 6.2; Hansell 2005, 74). 
 In addition to using vegetative material, many birds also use animal-
generated materials such as silk and mammal hair to construct nests. 
Hansell (2005) notes that 56 percent of passeriform families of birds 
actively search for arthropod silk, particularly spider silk, to use as strong 
threads in their nest building; this is seen in the stitching-constructed 
nests of the common tailorbird (table 6.2). Other birds, such as the chaf-
ﬁ nch (table 6.2), use mammal hair. Gould and Gould (2007, 194) docu-
ment the case of a Carolina wren ( Thryothorus ludovicianus ) that 
constructed its nest using human-made ﬁ shing line, rather than spider 
silk, to build its nest — incorporating the ﬁ shing hooks and lead sinkers 
into the nest! Humans have converged on these avian habitat architec-
tures in the building of tents constructed of woven wool and other animal 
hairs. 
 The birds are avian dinosaurs that evolved in the Jurassic, some 100 
million years before the destruction of the dinosaurian ecosystem and 
its replacement by the mammalian, as discussed in chapter 4. In the 
Cenozoic Era, mammalian architectural behavior has converged on that 
of the more ancient avian, as seen in the entangling-constructed nests 
built by modern apes. The European harvest mouse (table 6.2) builds a 
globular-shaped enclosed nest, with an entrance hole on one side, sus-
pended in the branches of shrubs or the stems of oats (von Frisch 1974). 
Gray squirrels (table 6.2) build similar, but larger enclosed globular nests 

Convergent Minds 
217
in trees; these myomorph and sciuromoph rodents have converged on 
the architecture of the weaverbird. 
 The tent-making bats have evolved an architectural behavior not seen 
in birds. These bats seek out suitably placed large leaves in trees and then 
bite into the veins of the leaves, creating a line of perforation along which 
the leaf folds down on either side under the pull of gravity (Hansell 
2005). The bats use different bite techniques for different leaf types in 
order to create the three-dimensional tent structure. Odd as this archi-
tectural behavior is, it is not unique. Tent-making behavior has indepen-
dently evolved in both Neotropical microbats, like Peter ’ s tent-making 
bat in Costa Rica, and in Paleotropical megabats, like the short-nosed 
fruit bat in India (table 6.2; Kunz et al. 1994). 
 The wasps have also evolved an architectural behavior not seen in 
birds. They use vegetative material in their nest constructions, but it is a 
material that they manufacture themselves — paper. These wasps chew 
plant material to produce pulped and blended fragments that adhere 
together, and that are further held together by the wasp ’ s dried spit, to 
form sheets of paper that are both light in weight but also strong in 
tension (Hansell 2005). Complex paper-constructed nests are built by 
both social wasps, such as the vespid Arctic yellow jacket, and solitary 
wasps, such as the sphecid Neotropical paper wasp (table 6.2). Humans 
have converged on these wasp architectures in the constructing of rice-
paper shoji that are used for lightweight walls in many Japanese 
buildings. 
 Like humans, animals also use vegetative material to build habitats on 
the ground level, but these architectures are not as common as those that 
are constructed with earthen material. The dusky-footed wood rat (table 
6.2) builds lodges of branches and twigs that can be up to one meter high, 
and that contain as many as ﬁ ve separate chambers or rooms that are 
used for different purposes, such as a nursery, a living room, and a lava-
tory (von Frisch 1974). The bowerbirds of Australia and New Guinea 
(table 6.2) are famous for their elaborate ground constructions that, 
unlike all the other architectural examples discussed here, are not used 
as functional protective habitats but as artistic constructions designed to 
attract mates. These display stages — and stage it is — may be furnished 
with  “ curtains ”  made of leaves or vines, decorated with  “ ﬂ oodlight ” 
borders of ﬂ owers, colored stones, berries, or snail shells. They have 
enormous (for the size of the bird) arched stage roofs of branches that 
are sometimes painted with berry juice, and are fronted by  “ theatre aisle ”  
walkways leading to the stage. If a female appears, the male gives an 

218 
Chapter 6
elaborate performance of dancing and singing on the stage. If the female 
is unimpressed, she walks away; if she is attracted, she joins the male in 
the dance. 
 Have the bowerbirds convergently invented art? Gould and Gould 
(2007, 221 – 222) argue that bowerbird behavior  “ may be very close to 
crossing some important line between the mental experiences of humans 
and other animals. Bowerbirds can indulge in this frivolity, if that is what 
it is, because there are few predators and little competition in their 
habitat much of the year, and many species have a very long or continu-
ous breeding season — factors that have allowed artistic creativity to 
ﬂ ourish among humans as well. . . . At the cognitive level, these creations 
are the most complex seen in birds. Only beavers and humans undertake 
work with more steps and greater ﬂ exibility in design, materials, and 
execution. ” 
 Perhaps even more striking, however, is the recent discovery that the 
veined octopus (table 6.2), a marine mollusc species, has innovatively 
seized human-made vegetative objects to build habitats: coconut half-
shells. In the last several decades, an abundance of this new building 
material appeared in the octopus ’ s shallow marine realm, as humans eat 
the coconuts and then discard the clean and lightweight shell halves into 
the waters surrounding their coastal communities in Indonesia. Over 20 
individual veined octopi have been observed collecting, transporting, and 
assembling the coconut shell halves into protective habitats to hide in. 
When ﬂ ushed from the shells by human scuba divers, the octopi quickly 
return and reassemble the shell-constructed habitats, leaving Finn et al. 
(2009, R1070) to conclude that  “ even marine invertebrates engage in 
behaviours that we once thought the preserve of humans. ” 
 Returning to the terrestrial realm, and on the ground level, many 
humans lived in caves ﬁ rst (in essence, holes in the ground), and then 
began to build adobe habitats (in essence, artiﬁ cial caves). Many birds 
have followed this same behavioral pathway in their evolution, with the 
exception that their adobe habitats are built on vertical cliff faces rather 
than on horizontal ground surfaces. Molecular phylogenies of swallows 
and martins (Hirundinidae; table 6.2) reveal the multiple independent 
evolution of the behavioral pathway of ﬁ rst dwelling in preexisting cliff 
cavities, then constructing open mud cups attached to cliff faces as nests, 
and ﬁ nally constructing enclosed adobe globes attached to cliff faces as 
nests (Gould and Gould 2007). In contrast to the small adobe nests of 
the cliff swallow, the picathartid white-necked rockfowl (table 6.2) builds 
a two-kilogram adobe nest, even though the bird itself weighs only 200 

Convergent Minds 
219
grams (Hansell 2005). Gould and Gould (2007, 184) comment:  “ The 
invention of adobe cups that then develop into enclosed cavities, so 
evident in the progression from barn to cliff swallows, is also seen in 
some birds that build in trees. ”  The most striking example of a tree-
dwelling adobe builder is the rufous hornero of South America (table 
6.2), nicknamed the  “ ovenbird ”  because its vertical adobe nest looks like 
a baker ’ s oven (von Frisch 1974). The globe-shaped nest contains a large 
interior room that is used as a brooding chamber and a narrow, hall-like 
entrance passage that opens into a ten-centimeter-diameter hole to the 
outside. Both the male and female birds cooperate in its construction, 
which takes them over two weeks to complete (von Frisch 1974). 
 Wasps have evolved a similar behavioral pathway in their habitat 
constructions, as noted by Hansell (2005, 232):  “ I have identiﬁ ed two 
alterations in nest building behaviour that are associated with the transi-
tion from solitary to social behaviour of wasps. . . . The ﬁ rst is the transi-
tion from an excavated to a constructed nest. . . . This occurred in both 
the Sphecidae and Vespidae (Eumeninae). The second change was in the 
choice of the building material from mud to paper. ”  Both paper-building 
behavior and adobe-building behavior is convergent in wasps (table 6.2). 
An interesting transition between excavating tunnels for below-ground 
habitats to constructing above-ground adobe habitats is seen in the 
eumenin funnel wasp ( Paralastor emarginatus ) of Australia. This wasp 
ﬁ rst digs a tunnel, lines it with mud, and then extends these mud walls 
above ground to build an external cylinder, which it increases in diameter 
to build a downward-pointing funnel opening (Gould and Gould 2007). 
The funnel serves the purpose of concealing the entrance to the tunnel 
from parasites while the female is hunting for caterpillars to paralyze 
and place in the tunnel as food for her later-developing larvae. Solitary 
sphecid wasps, such as the Neotropical mud wasp (table 6.2), do no 
excavating but build adobe brood chambers entirely above ground. 
While adobe building is the norm for many sphecid wasps, the eusocial 
Malasian hover wasp (Stenogastrinae) also builds with adobe, as does 
the Ceylonese potter wasp (Eumeninae) within a subfamily of wasps that 
normally builds with paper (table 6.2; Hansell 2005). 
 Termites also have converged on the extension of their below-ground 
excavations to above-ground adobe-building behavior (table 6.2). Com-
pared to the size of their inhabitants, termite adobe dwellings are huge: 
the Australian compass termite,  Amitermes meridionalis , builds above-
ground nests that are up to 5 meters high and 3 meters long, but only 
around 30 centimeters thick. The species is given the name  “ compass ” 

220 
Chapter 6
because its slablike buildings are always oriented with the long direction 
north-south, such that the habitat always has a broad side warmed by 
the sun (either to the east or the west, depending upon the time of day), 
and an opposite side that is cool and shaded (von Frisch 1974). The 
temperature difference between the two broad sides of the habitat pro-
duces air ﬂ ow from the cool side of the habitat through to the warm 
side — the termites have invented buildings with air conditioning! And 
not just one type of air-conditioning system — the much-studied African 
warlike termite (table 6.2) builds ﬁ ve-meter-high pyramidal-shaped 
dwellings with hard, cement-like adobe outer walls and an interior adobe 
nest that is suspended within the outer walls by a series of pillars, arches, 
and buttresses. The inner dwelling is surrounded by an air space, through 
which warm air rises from the bottom of the building, creating a lower-
pressure region that then draws cooler, denser air into the interior of the 
building from the outside. The source of heat at the bottom of the dwell-
ing is the fermentation in fungus gardens arranged in special adobe 
chambers — the termites have thus also invented agriculture (a point that 
we shall consider in more detail below). A large habitat of the warlike 
termite can contain as many as two million termites. The various air-
conditioning systems that termites build also serve the purpose of ﬂ ush-
ing the carbon-dioxide-rich air created by their breathing out the top of 
the building; oxygen-enriched air is drawn in through the ventilation 
holes in the side of the building (von Frisch 1974). 
 Australian compass termites and African warlike termites inhabit gen-
erally arid regions; in wet tropical regions, termites change the architec-
ture of their dwellings to deal with the problem of frequent rainfall. The 
termite species  Cubitermes fungifaber  builds tall, cylindrical-shaped 
adobe dwellings with multiple roofs that are slanted downward and 
extend out beyond the diameter of the main habitat (Gould and Gould 
2007). These multiroofed towers are reminiscent of the pagodas build by 
humans in Asia. 
 Last, beavers have evolved diversiﬁ ed architectural behaviors that 
converge on those of humans: they build with logs, adobe, and stone. The 
beavers are the largest rodents alive today, and may weigh up to 30 
kilograms (von Frisch 1974). The North American beaver habitat, or 
lodge, is constructed of both vegetative and earthen material; it is archi-
tecturally very similar to the log cabins constructed by early European 
settlers in North America (table 6.2). The beavers ﬁ rst build a domelike 
habitat with cut tree branches and logs, and then carefully plaster and 
caulk the openings between the branches in the walls of the lodge with 

Convergent Minds 
221
mud and clay. Unlike a log cabin, however, the door to the lodge is under 
water, and the lodge itself is located on an artiﬁ cially created island in a 
pond or lake. Both of these features serve to protect the beavers ’  dwell-
ing from invasion by predators. These round dome-shaped dwellings, 
isolated from the shore out in a lake, are reminiscent of the crannogs 
built by prehistoric humans in Scotland. 
 The pond or lake that surrounds the beavers ’  lodge is often the cre-
ation of the beavers themselves:  “ beavers are experts not only in the 
building of dwellings but also in hydro-engineering, and have performed 
tremendous feats in this line long before man attempted anything of the 
kind ”  (von Frisch 1974, 268). Blocking a ﬂ owing stream or river with a 
dam is not an easy task, yet beavers do so by ﬁ rst ramming cut branches 
and logs into the river bed, supporting these against the ﬂ ow of the river 
with forked branches pointing upstream, and adding further anchoring 
by bringing heavy stones to hold the dam superstructure in place. They 
further excavate the river bed on the upstream side of the dam, which 
not only reduces the speed of water ﬂ ow but also provides the beavers 
with the earthen material they need to ﬁ nish sealing the dam. The ﬁ n-
ished dam is higher in the center than at the termini, thus forcing the 
dammed river to ﬂ ow over the dam near the two river banks. The beavers 
then actively control the level of the lake by either lowering or raising 
these two overﬂ ow sluices — they frequently lower the level of the lake 
during winter to created a breathing space under the ice of the frozen 
surface of the lake, an air space that extends the entire area of the lake, 
providing them with a swimming region protected from the winter cold. 
Von Frisch (1974) reports that the largest beaver dam on record was 700 
meters long, and was strong enough to support the weight of human 
riders on horseback. 
 Do convergent architectures reveal convergent minds? Gould and 
Gould (2007, 271 – 272) argue that  “ [m]ental activity is, by its nature, 
private; what goes on in the brain has to be inferred. In tracing the evolu-
tion of cognitive strategies, the most tangible evidence is found among 
animals that build. . . . These abilities seem to have evolved independently 
in several different groups, but always apparently in about the same 
order, and to serve analogous ends. ”  That is, given the same problem —
 such as building a protective habitat — animals with radically different 
brains have evolved the same architectural behaviors. Those analogous 
behaviors thus reﬂ ect analogous mental activities and cognitive strate-
gies taking place in independent lineages, which is convergent mental 
evolution. 

222 
Chapter 6
 On the other hand, do humans really think like termites when they 
build an adobe habitat? Gould and Gould (2007, 5) also note that 
 “ [w]e know that animal building, like most tasks animals accomplish, 
depends on many different neural mechanisms. For most creatures, 
though, instinct rather than learning seems to guide behavior. ”  This con-
clusion was revealed in the pioneering work with animal instinctive 
behavior by Konrad Lorenz, Niko Tinbergen, and Karl von Frisch, work 
for which they were awarded the 1973 Nobel prize in physiology or 
medicine. Behavioral evolution by the trial-and-error process of natural 
selection requires very long periods of time and generations of reproduc-
tive cycles. Behavioral evolution by learning, in contrast, is very rapid: 
one generation simply teaches the next generation the new behavioral 
innovations discovered by the parent generation. Cognitive strategies are 
transmitted by teachers, not by genes. Yet stereotypic instinctive behav-
iors and ﬂ exible learned behaviors have both converged on the same 
result in architecture (table 6.2). 
 The discipline of theoretical morphology (McGhee 2007) takes a dif-
ferent perspective on the question of convergent architectural behavior 
by examining the geometries of the architecture itself: Are there only a 
limited number of ways to build structures? If so, convergent behavior 
must necessarily result because independent lineages of organisms have 
a limited number of building options to discover. The convergent usage 
of the cantilever and the arch by such disparate organisms as mud wasps, 
termites, cliff swallows, and humans results from the fact that cantilevers 
and arches are necessary in the construction of adobe architectures. 
Convergent minds are here the product of the functional constraints of 
geometry. The implications of this theoretical morphologic perspective 
on convergent evolution will be explored in more detail in chapters 7 
and 8, but I would point out here that we should not be surprised to ﬁ nd 
cantilevers and arches on Earth-like worlds elsewhere in the universe, 
produced by totally alien minds. 
 To conclude this section of the chapter, let us consider one last 
extremely complex problem-solving behavior: agriculture. Modern 
humans,  Homo sapiens , are the only vertebrate species that has evolved 
agriculture. Agricultural behavior is convergent, however, in that several 
populations of humans made the transition from hunter-gatherers to 
agriculturalists independently of each other around the world about 
10,000 years ago: in the Tigris and Euphrates valleys in the Near East, in 
South Asia, in Central Asia, and in Central America (Gupta 2004). 

Convergent Minds 
223
 Was agriculture clearly an idea whose time had come, beginning about 
10,000 years ago, as a unique behavioral trait of the human species? Not 
so. In contrast to the single human species, the hexapod arthropods have 
independently evolved agriculture nine separate times in different lin-
eages (table 6.3). The transition from hunter-gatherer to agriculturalist 
was made once by the ants, once by the termites, and no less than seven 
separate times by the ambrosia beetles (Farrell et al. 2001; Mueller et al. 
2005). And they did so long before humans existed: the platypodine 
ambrosia beetles evolved agricultural behavior 60 million years ago 
 Table 6.3 
 Convergent evolution of agricultural behaviors 
 1  Convergent behavior and function: CROP AGRICULTURE (cultivation of crops for 
nourishment) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1  Attine ant (Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: 
Hymenoptera: Formicidae: Myrmicinae: Attini: Paleoattini;  Apterostigma auriculatum ) 
 1.2   Xyleborine ambrosia beetle (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Coleoptera: 
Curculionidae: Xyleborini;  Dryocoetoides cristatus ) 
 1.3   Hyorrhynchine ambrosia beetle (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Coleoptera: 
Curculionidae: Hyorrhynchini;  Sueus niisimai ) 
 1.4   Platypodine ambrosia beetle (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Coleoptera: 
Curculionidae: Platypodini;  Australoplatypus incompertus ) 
 1.5   Bothrosternine ambrosia beetle (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Coleoptera: 
Curculionidae: Bothrosternini;  Cseninus lecontei ) 
 1.6   Xyloterine ambrosia beetle (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Coleoptera: 
Curculionidae: Xyloterini;  Indocryphalus pubipennis ) 
 1.7   Scolytoplatypodine ambrosia beetle (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: 
Coleoptera: Curculionidae: Scolytoplatypodini;  Scolytoplatypus macgregori ) 
 1.8   Corthyline ambrosia beetle (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Coleoptera: 
Curculionidae: Corthylini;  Gnathotrupes quadrituberculatus ) 
 1.9   Black-winged subterranean termite (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: 
Isoptera: Termitidae: Macrotermitinae;  Odontotermes formosanus ) 
 1.10  Modern human (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: 
Reptiliomorpha: 
Amniota: 
Synapsida: 
Therapsida: 
Mammalia: 
Eutheria: 
Euarchontoglires: Primates: Catarrhini: Hominoidea: Hominidae: Homininae;  Homo 
sapiens ) 
 2   Convergent behavior and function: ANIMAL HUSBANDRY (cultivation of animals for 
nourishment) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1   Japanese ant (Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Mandibulata: 
Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: Formicidae: Formicinae;  Formica yessensis ) 
 2.2   Modern human (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: 
Reptiliomorpha: 
Amniota: 
Synapsida: 
Therapsida: 
Mammalia: 
Eutheria: 
Euarchontoglires: Primates: Catarrhini: Hominoidea: Hominidae: Homininae;  Homo 
sapiens ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

224 
Chapter 6
(Farrell et al. 2001), the ants did so 50 million years ago (Schultz and 
Brady 2008), and the termites evolved agricultural behavior between 34 
to 24 million years ago (Mueller et al. 2005).  
 Agricultural behavior is incredibly complex. It includes (1) preparing 
the substrate to be used for growing the crops, (2) planting the crops, (3) 
monitoring the growth and potential disease status of the crops, (4) pro-
tecting the crops from disease, (5) protecting the crops from crop-eating 
species other than the farmers, (6) weeding invasive species out of the 
crops, (7) using chemical herbicides for weed control, (8) using microbes 
for biological pest control, (9) using microbial symbionts to procure 
nutrients for the crops, and (10) the sustainable harvesting of the crops 
for food (Mueller et al. 2005). This list is not a list of agricultural behav-
iors found in humans — it is a list of behaviors found in ants! In fact, 
Mueller et al. (2005, 564) argue that  “ [b]ecause of the universality of crop 
diseases in both human and insect agriculture, it may be fruitful to 
examine the . . . solutions that have evolved convergently in insect agri-
culture for possible application to human agriculture. ”  Here we should 
note that ant agriculturalists use microbes for biological pest control, 
whereas most human agriculturalists (thus far) use chemical pesticides. 
 There is one major difference in human and hexapod agriculture: 
hexapods cultivate fungus crops, whereas humans usually cultivate plant 
crops (although we do also farm mushrooms). The most advanced 
hexapod agriculturalists have in fact evolved a new way to digest cellu-
lose: rather than digesting it internally with the usage of anaerobic bac-
teria and specialized stomachs like many vertebrate animals (itself a 
convergent trait; see table 2.10), advanced hexapods use fungus gardens. 
Indeed, Schultz and Brady (2008, 5435) argue that a colony of leaf-cutter 
ants is  “ the ecological equivalent of a large mammalian herbivore in 
terms of collective biomass, lifespan, and quantity of plant material 
consumed. ” 
 Fungi are the only major group of organisms that are able to digest 
cellulose in the presence of free oxygen (Gould and Gould 2007). They 
also do not need light, as they are not photoautotrophs like plants, but 
they do need heat and humidity for efﬁ cient digestion. Both ants and 
termites have independently evolved the behaviors needed to create 
warm, moist agricultural chambers for fungus gardens, the ants under-
ground and the termites in their above-ground adobe buildings. The ants 
are particularly important in analyzing the evolution of agricultural 
behavior, in that living ants still use ﬁ ve distinctly different agricultural 
systems that can be demonstrated to have evolved in a sequence of 

Convergent Minds 
225
increasing agricultural sophistication (Schultz and Brady 2008).  “ Lower 
agriculture, ”  in which a wide range of fungal species are cultivated, ﬁ rst 
appeared in paleoattine ants some 50 million years ago (table 6.3). About 
30 million years later, there was a bifurcation in agricultural behavior. 
 “ Yeast agriculture, ”  in which neoattine ants specialize in cultivating leu-
cocoprineaceous fungi in the single-celled yeast phase, evolved 20 million 
years ago, and  “ coral fungus agriculture, ”  in which paleoattine ants spe-
cialize in cultivating nonlecocoprineaceous fungi in the clade of Pteru-
laceae, evolved 15 million years ago. Also about 20 million years ago a 
separate clade of neoattine ants evolved  “ domesticated agriculture, ” in 
which the fungal species have coevolved so much with their ant cultiva-
tors that they are no longer capable of existing on their own outside of 
the ant gardens. These domesticated fungi also produce nutritious swollen 
hyphal tips, or gongylidia, that the ants harvest for food (Schultz and 
Brady 2008). Last, some 12 million years ago the leaf-cutting neoattine 
ant farmers evolved. The leaf-cutter ants specialize in cutting and pro-
cessing fresh vegetation for substrates on which to grow their fungus 
crops, unlike all the other ants, who use dead organic detritus. These ants, 
who in effect  “ eat ”  living plants, are the dominant  “ herbivores ”  in the 
New World tropics in terms of the quantity of the plant material that 
they remove from the ecosystem (Schultz and Brady 2008). 
 Unlike the versatile ant farmers, termite farmers (table 6.3) cultivate 
species of a single genus of fungus,  Termitomyces , which they have 
domesticated (Mueller et al. 2005). Termite domestic fungi produce veg-
etative nodules that are harvested by the termites for food, similar to the 
domestic fungi of the ants. Like many ant farmers, termites grow their 
fungus crops in specialized agricultural chambers on a prepared substra-
tum of dead plant material, and have not (yet) evolved the ability to 
process living plants as the leaf-cutter ants have. 
 Unlike ants and termites, the ambrosia beetles do not build specialized 
agricultural chambers for growing fungus gardens. They bore into tree 
trunks and excavate extensive galleries of tunnels within the living 
phloem layer of the tree, and then grow their fungal crops along the walls 
of their galleries. Besides providing food for the beetles, the fungi also 
block the chemical pesticides produced by the tree to defend itself from 
infection — thus, invasion by these beetles can be devastating to forests 
(Farrell et al. 2001). 
 Also unlike the ants and termites, agricultural behaviors have inde-
pendently evolved in seven separate lineages of beetles (table 6.3). Dif-
ferent beetle lineages farm different species of the ophiostomatoid fungi, 

226 
Chapter 6
some species of which they have domesticated (Farrell et al. 2001). Dif-
ferent beetle lineages also use different tree hosts, in that some infest 
species of conifers, and others attack species of angiosperms. 
 Animal husbandry in agriculture, where animals are domesticated 
instead of crops, is also convergent, but rare (table 6.3). Humans 
domesticated sheep, goats, cattle, and pigs for food some 7,000 years ago 
(Gupta 2004). In the hexapods, the formicine and dolichoderine ants in 
particular are known for their domestication of aphids (Aphididae), soft 
scale insects (Coccidae), tree hoppers (Membracidae), and mealy bugs 
(Pseudococcidae; Delabie 2001; Stadler and Dixon 2005). 
 Aphids are herbivores that feed on the phloem sap of plants, which is 
rich in sugar but poor in nitrogen. To obtain enough nitrogen, aphids 
have to consume large amounts of sap, and they excrete the excess sugar 
as honeydew. This honeydew waste product is a food source for ants, who 
collect it from the aphids. Thus begins the evolution of the trophobiotic 
relationship between the aphid herbivore and the ant farmer. When 
tended by the ant farmers, aphids produce much more honeydew, and 
higher-quality honeydew, than they do when solitary. To offset this meta-
bolic cost, the aphids beneﬁ t by being protected from predators by the 
ant farmers. The ants are so good at protecting their aphid herbivores 
that farmed aphids can become very numerous and gregarious. The cost 
of protecting the aphids is therefore offset by the production of aphid 
 “ herds, ”  which provide a food source for the ants that is concentrated in 
a small farmed area — rather than having a diffuse source of food scat-
tered over a wide geographic region. Some aphids have become so 
domesticated that they depend upon the ant farmer for existence; for 
example, the aphid  Stomaphis quercus  is cultivated by the ant  Lasius 
fuliginosus , and is only found on oak trees farmed by this ant (Stadler 
and Dixon 2005). 
 Ants are known to construct protective shelters out of plant debris for 
some of their farmed insects, both to shelter the insects from the weather 
and to conceal them from predators. The ant  Formica obscuripes goes 
further and shelters its herd of aphids in galleries within its own under-
ground dwelling, leading the herd of aphids out to  “ pasture ” during the 
day, and herding them back underground for the night (Delabie 2001). 
Other ants will pick up and transport their farmed insects, particularly 
soft scale insects, to more favorable plant  “ pastures ”  for them to feed. 
When an ant farmer feeds, it will either drum the aphid ’ s abdomen with 
its antennae or stroke the aphid ’ s sides to encourage it to excrete hon-
eydew droplets, which the ant collects (Delabie 2001). 

Convergent Minds 
227
 At ﬁ rst glance, it would appear that ants have converged on the animal 
husbandry behavior of the human dairy farmer (table 6.3). The dairy 
farmer beneﬁ ts from a herd of cows, which are a concentrated source of 
milk for food. The cows beneﬁ t from being protected from wolves and 
other predators by the farmer, and farmed cows produce much more 
milk than wild ones. The farmer leads the herd of cows out of a barn 
shelter to the open pasture on a daily basis, and later strokes the mammary 
glands of the cows to encourage them to excrete milk, which the farmer 
collects. The problem with this analogy is the fact that ants evolved aphid 
farming in the Early Oligocene, some 30 million years before the exis-
tence of humans (Stadler and Dixon 2005). It is the human dairy farmer 
that has converged on the animal husbandry behavior of ants, not the 
other way around. 
 In summary, it took ant agriculturalists 30,000,000 years to go from 
farming fungus to domesticating fungus: from the Early Eocene paleoat-
tine ants to the Early Miocene neoattine ants (Schultz and Brady 2008). 
In contrast, human farmers have accomplished the same feat with plants 
in less than 10,000 years. Yet, as we also saw with the evolution of archi-
tectural behaviors, the evolution of stereotypic instinctive behaviors in 
ants and ﬂ exible learned behaviors in humans have both converged on 
the same result: farming of domesticated crops (table 6.3). Ants and 
humans also convergently evolved animal husbandry, but in this case the 
fossil record does not reveal how long it took the ants to accomplish the 
feat of domesticating aphids. 
 The complex of agricultural behaviors independently evolved by 
hexapod arthropods and vertebrate humans is astonishingly convergent. 
However, as with architecture, using the analytical technique of theoreti-
cal morphology to examine the question of convergent agricultural 
behavior provides a different perspective by focusing on the cultivation 
process instead: Is there only a limited number of ways to successfully 
cultivate crops? If so, convergent behavior must necessarily result, for 
independent lineages of organisms have a limited number of farming 
options to discover. The convergent usage of chemical herbicides by such 
disparate organisms as ants and humans results from the fact that such 
pesticides are necessary for the cultivation of crops. As with architecture, 
convergent agricultural minds are here the product of functional con-
straint on evolution. 
 It is difﬁ cult for a single individual to run a really efﬁ cient farm. 
Farming is labor intensive, and is usually the sum product of many indi-
viduals who have taken on different tasks. Task partitioning and the 

228 
Chapter 6
division of labor in farming have evolved convergently in both humans 
and hexapods, but some hexapods have taken it to an extreme not seen 
in humans — they have become eusocial. Eusociality is an ultimate form 
of group behavior and, as we shall see in the next section of the chapter, 
it is also convergent. 
 Group Behavior 
 In the ﬁ rst edition of  On the Origin of Species , Darwin considered 
convergent minds to present special difﬁ culties for his theory of 
natural selection. He was troubled by observed cases of identical behav-
ior, or  “ instincts, ”  in animals within independent evolutionary lineages, 
and the very worst of these cases was that of the eusocial hexapods:  “ No 
doubt many instincts of very difﬁ cult explanation could be opposed to 
the theory of natural selection . . . instincts almost identically the same 
in animals so remote in the scale of nature, that we cannot account for 
their similarity by inheritance from a common parent, and must there-
fore believe that they have been acquired by independent acts of 
natural selection. . . . I allude to the neuters or sterile females in insect-
communities ”  (Darwin 1859, 235 – 236). The very heart of the theory of 
natural selection is the effect of differential reproductive success of indi-
viduals with different phenotypes; thus, how can natural selection produce 
social behaviors in which the majority of individuals do not reproduce 
at all? Yet eusocial cooperative societies, in which the majority of indi-
viduals in those societies have sacriﬁ ced their own reproduction, have 
convergently evolved at least 17 independent times (table 6.4).  
 In honeybee societies, for example, there is only one fertile female, the 
queen. The rest of the society consists of numerous female workers, who 
are the sterile daughters of the queen, and the male drones, who are the 
fertile sons. Darwin knew nothing of genetics, yet it is in the peculiar 
haplodiploid genetics of honeybee reproduction that a clue can be seen 
in the evolution of eusocial behavior. The queen produces both fertilized 
eggs, which develop into diploid females, and unfertilized eggs, which 
develop into haploid males. In the classic model of eusocial evolution, 
Hamilton (1964) pointed out that the haplodiploid genetic system pro-
duces sisters that are more closely related to one another than they 
would be to their own offspring. This is due to the fact that all sisters 
share an identical set of chromosomes from their father (as the male is 
haploid), and thus are 75 percent related to one another, whereas they 
would share only half their chromosomes with a daughter (50 percent 

Convergent Minds 
229
 Table 6.4 
 Convergent evolution of eusocial behavior 
 Convergent behavior and function: EUSOCIALITY (cooperative social system in which 
only one female is reproductive, and labor behaviors are complexly divided among the 
numerous other individuals within the colony, resulting in a highly stable and competitive 
colonial organization able to sustain high population densities) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1  Regalis sponge-dwelling shrimp (Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: 
Mandibulata: Malacostraca: Decapoda: Alpheidae;  Synalpheus regalis ) 
 2   Chacei sponge-dwelling shrimp (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Malacostraca: Decapoda: 
Alpheidae;  Synalpheus chacei ) 
 3  Small 
paraneptunus 
sponge-dwelling 
shrimp 
(Arthropoda: 
Mandibulata: 
Malacostraca: Decapoda: Alpheidae;  Synalpheus  “ paraneptunus small ” ) 
 4   Honeybee (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: Apoidea: Apidae: 
Apini;  Apis mellifera ) 
 5   Stingless bee (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: Apoidea: Apidae: 
Meliponini;  Mellipona compressipes ) 
 6   Halictus sweat bee (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: Apoidea: 
Halictidae;  Halictus (Halictus) quadricinctus ) 
 7   Lasioglossum sweat bee (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: 
Apoidea: Halictidae;  Lasioglossum (Dialictus) ﬁ gueresi ) 
 8  Augochlorella sweat bee (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: 
Apoidea: Halictidae;  Augochlorella pomoniella ) 
 9   Yellow-jacket wasp (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: Vespoidea: 
Vespidae: Vespinae;  Vespula maculifrons ) 
 10   Hover wasp (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: Vespoidea: 
Vespidae: Stenogastrinae;  Parischnogaster mellyi ) 
 11  Dracula ant (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: Vespoidea: 
Formicidae: Ponerinae;  Amblyopone pallipes ) 
 12   Galling thrip (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Thysanoptera: Tubuliferidae: 
Phlaeothripinae;  Oncothrips tepperi ) 
 13   Horned-soldier 
aphid 
(Arthropoda: 
Mandibulata: 
Hexapoda: 
Hemiptera: 
Hormaphididae: Cerataphidini;  Pseudoregma sundanica ) 
 14   Australoplatypus 
ambrosia 
beetle 
(Arthropoda: 
Mandibulata: 
Hexapoda: 
Coleoptera: Curculionidae: Platypodini;  Australoplatypus incompertus ) 
 15   Damp-wood termite (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Isoptera: Termopsidae; 
 Zootermopsis nevadensis ) 
 16   Naked mole rat (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: 
Reptiliomorpha: 
Amniota: 
Synapsida: 
Therapsida: 
Mammalia: 
Eutheria: 
Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: Hystricognatha: Bathyergidae;  Heterocephalus glaber ) 
 17   Damaraland mole rat (Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Rodentia: 
Hystricognatha: Bathyergidae;  Cryptomys damarensis ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

230 
Chapter 6
related; Holmes et al. 2009). Under the predictions of the theory of 
natural selection, it is more advantageous for sisters to help raise more 
sisters (produced by their mother, the queen) than it is for them to 
produce their own offspring. Of the 17 evolutionary lineages that have 
convergently evolved eusocial behavior (table 6.4), over half are haplo-
diploid: the bees, in ﬁ ve independent lineages (Cameron and Mardulyn 
2001; Brady et al. 2006); the wasps, two independent lineages (Hines 
et al. 2007); the ants, one lineage (Thorne and Traniello 2003); and the 
thrips, one lineage (Crespi et al. 1997). 
 At ﬁ rst glance, the convergent evolution of eusocial behavior 
might be seen as a function of developmental constraint, in that it is 
associated with the haplodiploid genetic system. However, eusocial 
behavior has also convergently evolved in lineages that are diploid 
(table 6.4), lineages that have no asymmetric degrees of relationships 
between siblings and offspring of either sex: shrimp, in three lineages 
(Duffy et al. 2000); aphids, one lineage (Shingleton and Foster 2001); 
beetles, one lineage (Mueller et al. 2005); termites, one lineage (Johns 
et al. 2009); and rodents, two lineages (Scantlebury et al. 2006; Holmes 
et al. 2009). 
 In contrast to haplodiploid lineages, the convergent evolution of euso-
cial behavior in diploid lineages has been argued to be the product of 
functional constraint:  “ the inability of the haplodiploid hypothesis to 
explain all eusocial evolution has returned some attention to the ecologi-
cal beneﬁ ts of eusocial behavior ”  (Johns et al. 2009, 17452). In addition, 
many have argued that eusocial species have a competitive advantage in 
highly crowded environments (Duffy et al. 2000; Wilson and H ö lldobler 
2005). Indeed, all of the 17 eusocial lineages are found in organisms that 
inhabit sheltered, enclosed nesting sites: sponge-dwelling shrimp, plant-
gall-dwelling aphids and thrips, wood-boring beetles, hive-dwelling bees 
and wasps, and subterranean-dwelling ants, termites, and mole rats (table 
6.4). Because similarly protected nesting sites may be difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd or 
construct, Holmes et al. (2009) assert, it is less risky to remain at the 
original site than to seek another, leading to overlapping generations of 
crowded adults living in a single group, cooperative breeding within the 
group, and division-of-labor behaviors within the group. 
 There still exists no universally accepted causal hypothesis for the 
evolution of all eusocial behavior. Some suggest that the phenomenon 
is analogous to the convergent self-assembly of molecules (Camazine 
et al. 2001), while others suggest that it is analogous to the evolution of 
multicellularity (Boomsma 2009). Wilson and H ö lldobler (2005) propose 

Convergent Minds 
231
a mix of selective causal factors — an interplay of group selection, kin 
selection, and individual selection. Others stress ecological factors: the 
 “ convergent similarities in behavior . . . suggest that highly eusocial orga-
nization has limited permutations. Each tribe has been channeled along 
a similar behavioral track, responding in similar fashion to similar con-
tingencies ” (Cameron and Mardulyn 2001, 209). 
 In summary, the independent evolution of eusocial behavior may be 
produced by developmental constraint (intrinsic genetic systems), func-
tional constraint (extrinsic habitat ecologies), or the action of the two 
constraints in concert. The convergent evolution of hive minds can be 
spectacularly successful: the number of species of haplodiploid ants and 
diploid termites constitutes only 2 percent of all known insect species, 
yet they together constitute more than half of the biomass of all insects 
on Earth (Wilson and H ö lldobler 2005). 
 Another highly convergent form of group behavior is the collective 
mind of the herd (table 6.5):  “ Herding is a form of convergent social 
behaviour that can be broadly deﬁ ned as the alignment of the thoughts 
or behaviours of individuals in a group (herd) through local interaction 
and without centralized coordination ”  (Raafat et al. 2009, 420). Everyone 
in Europe and North America is familiar with the huge ﬂ ocks of migrat-
ing European starlings that ﬂ ow through our skies like a veritable river 
of birds. Unlike a river of water acting under the inﬂ uence of gravity, a 
bird ﬂ ock is a river of minds that are acting in concert:  “ Consider a ﬂ ock 
of starlings under attack by a peregrine falcon: The ﬂ ock contracts, 
expands, and even splits, continuously changing its density and structure. 
Yet, no bird remains isolated, and soon the ﬂ ock reforms as a whole ” 
(Ballerini et al. 2008, 1232). This group behavior is not unique to the birds 
nor to the terrestrial realm — far out in the oceans,  “ striking similarities 
between the internal organization of bird ﬂ ocks and ﬁ sh schools ”  can be 
seen in the silvery schools of ﬁ sh responding to the attack of a shark 
predator (Couzin and Krause 2003, 37).  
 Couzin (2007, 715) considers the collective minds of a moving herd to 
function like  “ an integrated self-organizing array of sensors, ”  in that 
critical information, like the detection of a source of food or an oncoming 
predator,  “ may often be detected by only a relatively small proportion 
of group members. . . . [B]ehavioural coupling among near neighbours, 
however, allows a localized change in direction to be ampliﬁ ed, creating 
a rapidly growing and propagating wave of turning across the group. This 
positive feedback results from the ability of individuals to inﬂ uence and 
be inﬂ uenced by others, and allows them to experience an  ‘ effective 

232 
Chapter 6
 Table 6.5 
 Convergent evolution of collective animal behavior 
 1  Convergent behavior and function: HERDING IN TWO DIMENSIONS (behavioral 
coupling in a large group of animals to produce an integrated self-organizing array of 
sensors distributed over a large two-dimensional geographic area to detect food or 
predators) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1   Desert locust (Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Mandibulata: 
Hexapoda: Orthoptera: Acrididae;  Schistocerca gregaria ) 
 1.2  Leptothorax ant (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: Vespoidea: 
Formicidae: Myrmicinae;  Leptothorax albipennis ) 
 1.3   Alamosaur (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: 
Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: Archosauromorpha: Dinosauria: Saurischia: 
Sauropoda: Titanosauridae;  Alamosaurus sanjuanensis  † Cretaceous) 
 1.4  Maiasaur (Dinosauria: Ornithischia: Cerapoda: Ornithopoda: Hadrosauridae; 
 Maiasaura pebblesorum  † Cretaceous) 
 1.5   African elephant (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: 
Afrotheria: Proboscidea: Elephantidae;  Loxodonta africana ) 
 1.6   Blue wildebeest (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Ruminantia: 
Bovidae;  Connochaetes taurinus ) 
 1.7   Modern human (Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: Catarrhini: 
Hominoidea: Hominidae: Homininae;  Homo sapiens ) 
 2   Convergent behavior and function: HERDING IN THREE DIMENSIONS (behavioral 
coupling in a large group of animals to produce an integrated self-organizing array of 
sensors distributed over a large three-dimensional spatial volume to detect food or 
predators) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1   Antarctic krill (Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Mandibulata: 
Malacostraca: Euphausiacea: Euphausiidae;  Euphausia superba ) 
 2.2   Honeybee (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: Apoidea: Apidae: 
Apini;  Apis mellifera ) 
 2.3  Monarch butterﬂ y (Arthropoda: Mandibulata: Hexapoda: Lepidoptera: Danaidae; 
 Danaus plexippus ) 
 2.4   Atlantic herring (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Actinopterygii: 
Clupeiformes: Clupeidae;  Clupea harengus ) 
 2.5   European starling (Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: 
Sauropsida: Archosauromorpha: Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: 
Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Sturnidae;  Sturnus vulgaris ) 
 2.6  Bottlenose dolphin (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: 
Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Cetacea: Odontoceti: Delphinidae;  Tursiops truncatus ) 
     Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a  † . For data sources, see text. 

Convergent Minds 
233
range ’  of perception much larger than their actual sensory range. ”  In the 
European starling (table 6.5), this behavioral coupling is a function of 
topological distance: each bird interacts with a ﬁ xed number of neighbor-
ing birds, typically six or seven, instead of with all birds contained in a 
ﬁ xed volume of metric space (Ballerini et al. 2008). This topological 
interaction allows the size of the ﬂ ock of birds to expand and contract 
without altering the behavioral coupling between the birds. 
 Field studies with the desert locust (table 6.5) have revealed a critical 
threshold effect that triggers herd behavior. Buhl et al. (2006, 1402) 
observed that each locust behaves individually until the number of 
locusts present per square meter of land area reaches the number eight, 
at which point  “ a rapid transition occurs from [the] disordered move-
ment of individuals within the group to highly aligned collective motion. ”  
Buhl et al. (2006) further argue that this critical density effect is a key 
triggering factor in all herding behavior, although the threshold number 
is different for different animal groups. 
 In table 6.5 I have listed as many disparate convergent lineages that 
have evolved collective minds, or herd behavior, that I am aware of. I 
have made no effort to try to determine how many times herd behavior 
may have convergently arisen within these major lineages; future phylo-
genetic studies of within-lineage convergence in herd behavior will cer-
tainly expand the list given in table 6.5. Within the mammalian clade, I 
have listed examples of convergent lineages in the three major branches 
of existent mammals: the afrotherians, laurasiatherians, and euarchonto-
glires. Some ruminant ungulates form enormous self-organized groups, 
as seen in the behavior coupling that produces the wavelike front of 
100,000 moving individuals in a wildebeest herd in Africa (Couzin and 
Krause 2003). Elephants form smaller herds, and even we humans exhibit 
markedly different behavior when in groups than when alone, and 
unconsciously adopt coordinated behavior when we are moving as 
pedestrians along the sidewalks of our cities (Raafat et al. 2009). At the 
opposite extreme, swarming ants and marching locust juveniles can form 
even larger herds that cover many kilometers in area even though the 
individual animals themselves are tiny (Buhl et al. 2006; Conradt and 
Roper 2005). 
 The independent evolution of herding behavior by the Mesozoic dino-
saurs is yet another example of the ecosystem convergence that exists 
between the dinosaurian and mammalian ecosystems (see table 4.10). In 
table 6.5 I have listed examples of convergent lineages in the two major 
branches of the dinosaur clade, the saurischians and the ornithischians. 

234 
Chapter 6
Preserved fossil trackways demonstrate that sauropods, such as the ala-
mosaur, moved in herds of over 30 individuals. The actual size of the herd 
was undoubtedly much larger. In the ornithischians, trackways of more 
than 80 ornithopods in a herd have been found (Martin 2006). In one 
spectacular example, a herd of maiasaurs was poisoned by gases from a 
volcanic eruption, producing a mass-kill horizon containing over 10,000 
individuals in a bone bed preserved under a layer of volcanic ash in 
present-day Montana. A range of ages is evident in the herd, from juve-
nile maiasaurs only 3 meters in length to older adults over 7.5 meters in 
length (Weishampel and Horner 1990). 
 Flocking starlings and schooling ﬁ sh, like the Atlantic herring (table 
6.5), have already been mentioned in the introduction to this section of 
the chapter. Here I simply wish to emphasize that although birds and 
ﬁ sh are radically different kinds of animals and live in radically different 
environments (air versus water), their minds have still converged on the 
same group behavior. These animals are vertebrates, but the same con-
vergence occurs in the arthropods, as seen in the swarming Antarctic krill 
in the oceans and the ﬂ ocking monarch butterﬂ ies in our skies (table 
6.5). Consensus decision in groups is equally found in large-brained 
dolphin vertebrates and the tiny-brained honeybee arthropods (Conradt 
and Roper 2005). 
 In summary, Sumpter (2006, 5) argues that all herding behavior is 
driven by the same behavioral principles:  “ These principles, such as posi-
tive feedback, response thresholds and individual integrity, are repeat-
edly observed in very different animal societies. The future of collective 
behaviour research lies in . . . asking why they have evolved in so many 
different and distinct natural systems. ”  Buhl et al. (2006, 1402) note that 
 “ models from theoretical physics have predicted that mass-migrating 
animal groups may share group-level properties, irrespective of the type 
of animals in the group. ”  Taking these points into consideration, Couzin 
(2007, 715) concludes that  “ group behaviour holds clues about the evolu-
tion of sociality, and also for the development of novel technological 
solutions, from autonomous swarms of exploratory robots to ﬂ ocks of 
communicating software agents that help each other navigate through 
complex and unpredictable data environments. ” 
 Swarms of robots? Robots are machines, not living organisms. Yet 
we could construct and program mechanical robots to sense and 
respond to the presence of, say, six to seven neighboring robots in a 
topological distance algorithm just like that of European starlings. Would 
large numbers of such programmed robots spontaneously self-assemble 

Convergent Minds 
235
to produce swarm behavior? In addition, from the perspective of 
theoretical morphology, could it be that there exist only a limited 
number of ways in which a group of objects can move in a two-dimen-
sional plane, or a three-dimensional volume of space? How much of 
convergent group behavior in animals is driven by the laws of physics 
and geometry? 
 Herding behavior (table 6.5) can serve multiple, disparate functions: 
predator avoidance, food detection, selective protection of the juvenile 
members of the herd from predators, successful mass migration from one 
distant region of the Earth to another without signiﬁ cant loss of group 
members, and so on. However, there exists one type of group behavior 
that has a very speciﬁ c function: pack hunting. Pack hunting is a form of 
social, coordinated hunting that enables a group of small predators to 
kill prey animals that are much larger than they are. In table 6.6 I have 
listed all of the disparate convergent lineages that have evolved pack-
hunting behavior that I am aware of. In one instance we know that a 
 Table 6.6 
 Convergent evolution of social hunting behavior 
 1   Convergent behavior and function: PACK HUNTING (social, coordinated hunting by 
a group of small predators, enabling them to kill prey animals that are much larger than 
they are) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1   New World army ant (Bilateria: Protostomia: Ecdysozoa: Arthropoda: Mandibulata: 
Hexapoda: Hymenoptera: Vespoidea: Formicidae: Ecitoninae;  Eciton burchelli ) 
 1.2   Deinonychosaur (Bilateria: Deuterostomia: Chordata: Osteichthyes: Sarcopterygii: 
Reptiliomorpha: Amniota: Sauropsida: Archosauromorpha: Dinosauria: Saurischia: 
Theropoda: Maniraptora: Dromaeosauridae;  Deinonychus antirrhopus  † Cretaceous) 
 1.3   White pelican (Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Neognathae: 
Neoaves: Pelicaniformes: Pelicanidae;  Pelecanus erythrorhynchus ) 
 1.4  African wild dog (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: 
Laurasiatheria: Carnivora: Caniformia: Canidae;  Lycaon pictus ) 
 1.5   Wolf (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Carnivora: Caniformia: Canidae;  Canis 
lupus ) 
 1.6  African lion (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Carnivora: Feliformia: Felidae; 
 Panthera leo ) 
 1.7   Modern human (Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: Catarrhini: 
Hominoidea: Hominidae: Homininae;  Homo sapiens ) 
 2   Convergent behavior and function: CARRION SCAVENGING (carrion scavenging in 
social groups for reasons that are not well understood) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1   Eurasian black vulture (Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: 
Neognathae: Neoaves: Falconiformes: Accipitridae;  Aegypius monachus ) 
 2.2   Turkey vulture (Dinosauria: Saurischia: Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Neognathae: 
Neoaves: Ciconiiformes: Cathartidae;  Cathartes aura ) 
     Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a  † . For data sources, see text. 

236 
Chapter 6
previously accepted example of the convergent evolution of pack hunting 
turns out to be not convergent at all: the army ants. It was long thought 
that pack-hunting behavior in army ants was a convergent trait, and that 
the New World army ants (Ectoninae) and two lineages of Old World 
army ants (Aenictinae and Dorylinae) all independently evolved collec-
tive minds. This hypothesis has been disproved by the molecular phylo-
genetic analyses of Brady (2003), which revealed that all the army ants 
come from a single common ancestor that evolved pack-hunting behav-
ior 105 million years ago, before the Cretaceous breakup of the southern 
supercontinent Gondwana. Thus, the current existence of army ants in 
Africa and South American is due to continental drift, and not due to 
convergent evolution. Army ants hunt in the tens of thousands, and liter-
ally tear apart the prey animals that they attack. Apocryphal tales of 
unstoppable army ant hordes that are capable of entirely deﬂ eshing farm 
animals or even humans abound in Africa.  
 Pack-hunting behavior has also convergently evolved in the sauropsid 
dinosaurian and synapsid mammalian lineages of amniote vertebrates, 
but these animals hunt in much smaller packs. In table 6.6 I have listed 
one Mesozoic dinosaurian lineage, the dromaeosaurs, for which we have 
solid fossil evidence of pack-hunting behavior. It is possible that social 
hunting may have independently evolved in other Mesozoic theropods 
as well, such as the coelurids (i.e.,  Coelophysis baurri ; Martin 2006), and 
may be revealed in future ﬁ eld work. The dromaeosaur  Deinonychus 
antirrhopus  hunted in packs of six or more individuals, enabling this rela-
tively small predator (50 to 100 kilograms) to kill large ornithopod prey 
such as  Tenontosaurus tilleti , which weighed 1,000 kilograms (Ostrom 
1990; Martin 2006). Most modern avian dinosaur predators are solitary 
hunters, like the hawks and the owls. A few birds have convergently 
evolved coordinated hunting behavior, but not as an adaptation for 
hunting large prey animals. The white pelican (table 6.6) is a herding 
animal, migrating in large numbers, but in addition  “ [t]hey often capture 
ﬁ sh cooperatively, forming a long line, beating their wings and driving 
the prey into shallow water, where they seize the ﬁ sh in their large, 
pouched bills ” (Bull and Farrand 1988, 425). 
 In the mammalian lineage, pack-hunting behavior has independently 
evolved at least twice in the canids (table 6.6). Ecologically, the modern 
wolf is the mammalian equivalent of a Cretaceous dromaeosaur (see 
table 4.10; Ostrom 1990). The smaller African wild dogs are even more 
vicious than wolves. Nicknamed the  “ super beast of prey, ”  packs of these 
canids are seemingly unstoppable when they have chosen a prey animal, 

Convergent Minds 
237
and will run down, attack en masse, rip to shreds, and entirely eat a 
gazelle in ten minutes (Wilson 1980). As such, they approach the deﬂ esh-
ing abilities of the army ants. 
 The top carnivores of the mammalian ecosystem, the felids, are mostly 
solitary predators. But one lineage, the African lion, has convergently 
evolved pack-hunting behavior (table 6.6). These cats form social prides, 
or herds, of numerous females and one to two males. Pack-hunting 
behavior in the lions is also a gendered behavior, in that the females hunt 
as a cohesive social unit but the males do not. Last, modern humans are 
pack hunters but the reverse of the lions, in that the males were tradition-
ally the hunters and the females the gatherers. Pack-hunting behavior 
enabled our small ancestors (1.5 to 1.8 meters tall, 50 to 100 kilograms 
in weight) to bring down large prey like the woolly mammoths ( Mam-
muthus primigenius ) in Europe, which were 3 to 4 meters tall and weighed 
8,000 kilograms. 
 Another odd form of social hunting has convergently evolved in the 
carrion-eating birds (table 6.6). As discussed in chapter 4, Old World and 
New World carrion-eating birds have independently evolved many mor-
phological features associated with their feasting on carcasses. Curiously, 
they also have converged in aspects of their behavior: Eurasian black 
vultures and North American turkey vultures are gregarious, roosting 
together in large numbers at night, and often assembling in large groups 
during the day as well, perched in trees or on top of buildings. Yet Eur-
asian vultures are related to hawks and eagles, which are usually not 
gregarious birds, unlike the storks and ﬂ amingos that are the close rela-
tives of the turkey vultures. In both Eurasia and North America, these 
birds use a soaring-in-circular-formation ﬂ ight pattern in searching for 
rotting corpses and, when a carcass is discovered, they will often continue 
to soar in circles until other vultures arrive. Once a group has been 
assembled, the ﬂ ock descends to feed. 
 The function of this convergent behavior is not well understood. Some 
have proposed that the vultures continue to circle in order to make sure 
the target animal is indeed dead, or that there are no ground-dwelling 
predators in the area that might pose a danger to the bird. However, the 
frequency of this behavior seems to lend more weight to the suggestion 
that the vultures are actually waiting for other birds to arrive, or even 
summoning them. They certainly do not need a larger number of vultures 
to complete the kill, because the prey animal is already dead. Carrion 
is an unpredictable food resource, and vultures must often wait long 
periods between feedings. When a carcass is discovered, a vulture will 

238 
Chapter 6
often gorge itself to the point that it has difﬁ culty ﬂ ying away. It might 
seem advantageous to the bird to selﬁ shly keep the discovery of a carcass 
to itself, but at the same time, a large animal carcass is usually too much 
food for a single bird to consume by itself. Thus, it might be advantageous 
to share the information with other hungry vultures, in anticipation that 
they will return the favor in the future when they discover a carrion 
source, in a case of reciprocal altruism. Whatever the real function 
of vulture group behavior, it is clear the minds of these birds have 
converged. 
 Convergent Mentalities 
 When confronted with a mirror, or a window acting as a mirror, a territo-
rial bird like a cardinal ( Cardinalis cardinalis ) clearly thinks that it is in 
the presence of another cardinal, and will attack the image in the mirror 
as if it were another bird encroaching on its territory. Many animals, 
when viewing a mirror, realize that another animal of their own kind is 
present (kittens will often try to play with the kittens they see in the 
mirror), but they never make the mental leap to the conclusion that 
the animal they are viewing in the mirror is themselves. They are not 
self-aware. 
 Humans are self-aware, and self-awareness was once thought to be a 
unique human trait. As is the case with so many other mental traits that 
were once thought to be unique to humans, we now know that self-
awareness has independently evolved in other lineages of animals. Within 
the primates, self-awareness — just like tool construction and usage (table 
6.1) — is a synapomorphy for the clade of the Hominoidae, all of the great 
apes, and not conﬁ ned to the human species. We did not evolve self-
awareness with the evolution of our large brains; we simply inherited it 
from our ancestors. 
 Experiments with mirror self-recognition have thus far revealed that 
elephants, cetaceans, and corvid birds are also consciously aware of their 
own individual existence (table 6.7): Asian elephants (Prior et al. 2008), 
bottlenose dolphins (Marino 2002), and magpies (Prior et al. 2008) all 
have been demonstrated to be aware that the animal they are seeing in 
the mirror is themselves, and will use the mirror to investigate their own 
bodies. All of these animals have relatively large brains, but curiously it 
is difﬁ cult to directly compare their brain sizes. The brain of the magpie 
is tiny compared to the brain of a human, but then the body size of the 
magpie is also tiny compared to that of the human. If we devise a metric 

Convergent Minds 
239
measuring the weight of the brain relative to the weight of the body 
(Prior et al. 2008), the magpie has a brain-body weight index of 31, which 
is greater than the index of 21 for a human. The bottlenose dolphin has 
an index of only 9.0, and the Asian elephant an index of 1.6. Clearly the 
brain-body weight index favors animals of small size over those of large 
(Prior et al. 2008).  
 In chapter 5 we considered the effect of size and allometric scaling in 
producing convergent tissue structures (West et al. 1999). If we plot the 
logarithm of brain mass versus the logarithm of body mass, most mammals 
and birds fall along a single linear function of allometric scaling (Gould 
and Gould 2007). Primates, cetaceans, corvids, and elephants plot above 
this line, however, indicating that they have larger brains than are strictly 
necessary for neural control of their body masses. Humans and porpoises 
have brains that plot the farthest away from the general allometric 
scaling, but even here problems of brain-size comparison arise. The por-
poise lives in a state of weightlessness, of neutral buoyancy in water, and 
does not need the large muscle masses (which require neural control) 
that land animals must have in order to exist in the gravitational ﬁ eld of 
the Earth. Much of their body mass is actually blubber fat, which they 
 Table 6.7 
 Convergent evolution of self-awareness and metacognition 
 1   Convergent mentality: SELF-AWARENESS (the ability of an animal to be consciously 
aware of its own existence) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1   Magpie (Amniota: Sauropsida: Archosauromorpha: Dinosauria: Saurischia: 
Theropoda: Maniraptora: Aves: Neognathae: Neoaves: Passeriformes: Corvidae;  Pica 
pica ) 
 1.2  Asian elephant (Amniota: Synapsida: Therapsida: Mammalia: Eutheria: Afrotheria: 
Proboscidea: Elephantidae;  Elephas maximus ) 
 1.3   Bottlenose dolphin (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Cetacea: 
Odontoceti: Delphinidae;  Tursiops truncatus ) 
 1.4   Orangutan 
(Mammalia: 
Eutheria: 
Euarchontoglires: 
Primates: 
Catarrhini: 
Hominoidea: Hominoidae: Pongidae;  Pongo pygmaeus ) 
 2   Convergent mentality: METACOGNITION (the ability of an animal to monitor or 
regulate its own cognitive state) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1   Bottlenose dolphin (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Cetacea: 
Odontoceti: Delphinidae;  Tursiops truncatus ) 
 2.2   Barbary macaque monkey (Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: 
Catarrhini: Cercopithecoidea: Cercopithecidae;  Macaca sylvanus ) 
 2.3   Human (Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: Catarrhini: Hominoidea: 
Hominidae;  Homo sapiens ) 
 Note: For data sources, see text. 

240 
Chapter 6
use for thermal insulation in the cold waters of the ocean (Gould and 
Gould 2007). Thus, their large brains may be even more unusual than 
that of humans. 
 Although self-aware animals all have unusually large brains (in the 
allometric sense), their brain structures are radically different:  “ primate-
cetacean cognitive and behavioral convergence is a dramatic example of 
functional convergence in the face of profound structural or mechanistic 
divergence ”  (Marino 2002, 30). Even though the elaboration of the corti-
cal circuitry in primates and cetaceans is very different, they are both 
members of the clade of the eutherian mammals and share much of their 
subcortical neuroanatomy (Marino 2002). The corvid birds, however, do 
not even have a prefrontal cortex! Although these animals are avian 
dinosaurs, with vastly different brain structures from those of mammals, 
 “ intelligence in both corvids and primates has evolved through a process 
of divergent brain evolution yet convergent mental evolution . . . [showing 
that] intelligence can evolve in the absence of a prefrontal cortex ”  
(Clayton and Emery 2008, 138 – 139). 
 Another mental state associated with high degrees of intelligence is 
metacognition, the ability of an animal not only to be aware of its own 
existence, but to think about its own thinking. Humans know when they 
are uncertain, are aware of that cognitive condition, and are able to think 
about how to deal with their uncertainty — to seek further information, 
or to defer a response and to wait (Smith 2009). Thus far in this new area 
of research, experimentation has revealed that the bottlenose dolphin 
and the Barbary macaque monkey are aware of their own cognitive 
states (table 6.7), that capuchin monkeys ( Cebus apella ) show equivocal 
evidence of metacognition, and that pigeons ( Columba livia ) show no 
evidence of being aware of their cognitive state (Smith 2009). Smith 
(2009, 395) notes that the corvid birds,  “ having proven themselves cog-
nitively sophisticated, would be the usual suspects for testing in this 
area, ”  as are elephants and great apes other than humans. It is known 
that both New World and Old World monkeys have convergently evolved 
tool use (see table 6.1), and the evidence that macaque monkeys have 
metacognition suggests that these monkeys should be carefully exam-
ined for evidence of possible mirror self-recognition as well. 
 Finally, another mental state associated with convergent intelligence 
is the awareness of death, as well as the experience of grief and sorrow 
at the loss of another individual (table 6.8). Both gorillas and dolphins 
have been observed to mourn the death of their parent or their offspring. 

Convergent Minds 
241
Both in the wild and in zoos, gorilla and chimpanzee mothers carefully 
carry around their dead infants for days, caressing them, or placing them 
on the ground and pacing in circles around them, checking over and over 
again to see if they have resumed breathing. Dolphin mothers repeatedly 
lift their infants up in the water for days in apparent attempts to help 
the calf breathe. The mothers do not eat during this period, and make 
repeated distress cries.  
 Other animals are known to extend their mourning behavior to other 
members of their own kind that are not members of their immediate 
family (table 6.8). Elephants repeatedly touch the skulls and tusks of 
long-dead elephants, gently lifting the bones up and down or moving 
them around. They also repeatedly pace away and then return to the 
remains of the dead elephant. In a stunning photograph, Monica Szczu-
pider (2009, 12 – 13) captured the facial expressions and body language 
of 16 chimpanzees who were mourning the death of an elder female at 
the Sanaga-Yong Chimpanzee Rescue Center. 
 Two human species evolved a mourning behavior not seen in our 
great ape cousins: the burial of our dead. The oldest fossils of anatomi-
cally modern humans found to date are 200,000 years old, and are from 
northeast Africa (modern Ethiopia). The Neanderthal humans have long 
roots in Europe, going back some 400,000 years. It is thought that the 
Neanderthal humans evolved from  Homo heidelbergensis  in Europe, 
 Table 6.8 
 Convergent evolution of mourning 
 1   Convergent mentality: FAMILIAL MOURNING (parent mourning the death of an 
offspring, or offspring mourning the death of a parent) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 1.1   Bottlenose dolphin (Mammalia: Eutheria: Laurasiatheria: Cetartiodactyla: Cetacea: 
Odontoceti: Delphinidae;  Tursiops truncatus ) 
 1.2   Gorilla (Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: Catarrhini: Hominoidea: 
Hominidae: Gorillinae;  Gorilla gorilla ) 
 2   Convergent mentality: GROUP MOURNING (mourning the death of one ’ s own kind, 
even if only distantly related) 
 Convergent lineages: 
 2.1   African elephant (Mammalia: Eutheria: Afrotheria: Proboscidea: Elephantidae; 
 Loxodonta africana ) 
 2.2  Chimpanzee (Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: Catarrhini: 
Hominoidea: Hominidae: Homininae: Panini;  Pan troglodytes ) 
 2.3   Neanderthal human (Mammalia: Eutheria: Euarchontoglires: Primates: Catarrhini: 
Hominoidea: Hominidae: Homininae: Hominini;  Homo neanderthalensis  † Holocene) 
 2.4  Modern human (Hominidae: Homininae: Hominini;  Homo sapiens ) 
     Note: The geological age of extinct species is marked with a  † . For data sources, see text. 

242 
Chapter 6
sometimes described as  “ archaic humans, ”  and that  H. heidelbergensis is 
derived from  H. erectus , the ﬁ rst species of human to become geographi-
cally widespread outside of Africa (Benton 2005). Modern humans, in 
contrast, are thought to have evolved from  H. ergaster  back in Africa 
(Wade 2006). 
 Thus, modern humans and Neanderthal humans do not share a 
common species ancestor, but are cousins in the human family tree. Yet 
both Neanderthal humans and modern humans buried their dead — a 
mourning behavior that independently evolved in these two separately 
derived species. We have no evidence that either  H. ergaster , our ances-
tor, or  H. heidelbergensis , the Neanderthal ’ s ancestor, buried their dead. 
Our two geographically separated species came into contact with one 
another around 100,000 years ago, in the ﬁ rst attempt of our species to 
migrate out of Africa through the region that is now Israel. We were 
stopped by the Neanderthals, who appear to have destroyed all the emi-
grant modern human populations (Wade 2006). Only 50,000 years ago 
did modern humans successfully migrate out of Africa, and the last 
of the Neanderthal human populations went extinct 30,000 years ago 
(Wade 2006). 
 In summary, Emery and Clayton (2004, 1903) propose that animals 
have evolved intelligence not to solve physical problems, but rather to 
solve social ones:  “ we argue that complex cognitive abilities evolved 
multiple times in distantly related species with vastly different brain 
structures in order to solve similar socioecological problems. ”  That is, 
rather than evolving as a function of the limited number of ways that 
exist to solve physical problems with objects, as seen in the convergent 
evolution of tool-using behavior or architectural behavior, convergent 
intelligence evolves as a function of the limited number of ways that exist 
to solve interactive social problems with other individuals. Greater 
awareness of the behavior and potential motivation of other individuals 
is hypothesized to lead to the greater awareness of one ’ s own existence 
as an individual, and of one ’ s own behavior and motivation. 
 Convergent social systems have evolved in radically different environ-
mental systems on Earth: on land and in the oceans. Whitehead (2008, 
114) notes that  “ terrestrial and oceanic environments provide a tough 
challenge for convergence. When traits do converge, something remark-
able has occurred. Despite the radically different physical environments 
. . . the social structures and cultures of sperm and killer whales have 
much in common with those of elephants and humans, ” and  “ there are 
also non-mammalian species, especially birds, that have social, cognitive, 

Convergent Minds 
243
cultural, and life-history characteristics in common with the apes, odon-
tocetes [toothed cetaceans], and elephants ”  (Whitehead 2008, 157). The 
extension of these observations to alien ecologies and environments is 
obvious: If the same convergent minds arise in such vastly different eco-
logical settings as the oceans and terrestrial regions of the Earth, what 
is the probability that they will also arise on extrasolar planets circling 
alien stars? Will alien minds converge on ours, even though their brain 
structures may be radically different?         


 7 
 Our results strongly support the hypothesis that the essential elements of organic 
structure are highly constrained by geometric rules, growth processes, and the 
properties of materials. This suggests that, given enough time and an extremely 
large number of evolutionary experiments, the discovery by organisms of  “ good ”  
designs — those that are viable and that can be constructed with available mate-
rials — was inevitable and in principle predictable. 
 — Thomas and Reif (1993, 342) 
 Was mich eigentlich interessiert, ist, ob Gott die Welt h ä tte anders machen 
k ö nnen. 
 — Einstein (quoted in Seelig 1956, 72) 
 Albert Einstein once mused,  “ What really interests me is whether God 
could have made the world in a different way. ”  To Einstein, God repre-
sented the laws of nature. He was asking whether the evolution of the 
universe was so constrained by the initial conditions of the Big Bang, by 
the observed constants of nature, that only the present universe could 
have evolved? Or were alternative universes possible, universes that 
would have evolved along physical pathways not followed by our present 
universe? 
 This question can be framed with respect to biological evolution as 
well. Is the evolution of life so constrained by the geometry of the uni-
verse, by the physical constants of nature, that its outcome is predictable? 
Or are so many alternative evolutionary pathways possible that it would 
never be possible to predict the trajectory of the evolution of life? We 
can easily visualize a universe in which every species is morphologically 
different from every other species, and in which each species has its own 
unique ecological role, or niche, in nature. That universe does not exist. 
Instead, we live in a universe where convergence in evolution is rampant 
at every level, from the external forms of living organisms down to the 
 Functional and Developmental Constraint in Convergent 
Evolution 

246 
Chapter 7
very molecules from which they are constructed, from their ecological 
roles in nature to the way in which their minds function. 
 Since convergent evolution is so ubiquitous in nature, as we have seen 
in the previous ﬁ ve chapters, the total extent of convergent evolution 
might best be revealed by studying its opposite:  unique evolution . That 
is, rather than compiling lists of convergences, we might compile lists of 
solitary evolutionary innovations in species that have not been indepen-
dently discovered by other species in their evolutionary pathways. 
Vermeij (2006) set out to do just that, and compiled a list of evolutionary 
innovations said to be unique. He discovered that  “ purportedly unique 
innovations either arose from the union and integration of previously 
independent components or belong to classes of functionally similar 
innovations ”  and that  “ important ecological, functional, and directional 
aspects of the history of life are replicable and predictable ”  (Vermeij 
2006, 1804). 
 What are the possibilities for evolution in our universe? Can we 
even think about considering the total spectrum of what is possible and 
not possible in biological evolution? The answer is yes, by using the 
analytical techniques of theoretical morphology, in particular by the 
construction of theoretical morphospaces (McGhee 2001, 2007). The 
concept of the theoretical morphospace originated in evolutionary 
biology (McGhee 1999), but it has subsequently caught the attention of 
philosophers (Maclaurin 2003), linguists, cultural anthropologists, and 
neuroscientists (Hauser 2009) who are seeking to explore the spectrum 
of both possible and impossible languages and cultures. Here we will 
use the concept to analyze the phenomenon of convergent evolution 
with respect to the spectrum of existent, nonexistent, and impossible 
biological form. 
 Convergent Evolution in Theoretical Morphospace 
 The analytical techniques of theoretical morphology allow us to take a 
spatial approach to the concept of convergent evolution. Any given bio-
logical form, or  f  in abbreviation, may be described by a set of measure-
ments taken from that form — how tall is it, how wide, how long? Each 
type of measurement (height, width, length, etc.) can be considered as a 
dimension of form. The total set of the possible dimensions of form can 
be used to construct a hyperdimensional morphospace of possible form 
coordinates (ﬁ gure 7.1). Each point within this theoretical morphospace 
represents a speciﬁ c combination of form measurements that will produce 

Functional and Developmental Constraint in Convergent Evolution 
247
the form coordinate for a hypothetical form  f . Convergence occurs when 
forms originally present in different regions of the morphospace evolve 
in such a way that they move to the same spatial region in the morpho-
space (ﬁ gure 7.2).  
 Returning to ﬁ gure 7.1, we can begin to consider the effects of 
evolutionary constraint in producing convergent evolution. First, we 
know that some types of forms function in nature: these are the myriad 
forms of life that surround us here on Earth. The opposite of this 
observation is the concept that there exist forms that do not function 
in nature, and that if a living organism were to produce one of these 
forms, it would be lethal. Mutations that produce nonfunctional, lethal 
forms are well known in biology. We can thus conceptually divide 
the spectrum of form within the morphospace into spatial regions 
that contain nonfunctional form and functional form (ﬁ gure 7.3). The 
boundary between the spatial regions of form separates nonfunctional 
from functional forms, and is itself a spatial representation of the 
concept of functional constraint. That is, if the evolving form is to 
remain functional, it must remain within the functional region of forms 
in the morphospace (an aside: these boundaries are not mere idle 
 Figure 7.1 
 A theoretical hyperdimensional space of possible form (modiﬁ ed from McGhee 2007). 
Each dimension of the space represents a morphological trait that may be measured on a 
given biological form,  f . All possible coordinate combinations (points) within the theoreti-
cal morphospace represent the set of all possible biological forms. Although only eight 
dimensions are shown in this schematic diagram, the dimensionality of an actual hyper-
space of form will be much larger. 

248 
Chapter 7
 Figure 7.2 
 Convergent evolution of form within a theoretical morphospace. Organisms in different 
regions of the morphospace, and thus possessing different initial morphologies, have evo-
lutionary trajectories that take them to the same region within the morphospace, and their 
morphologies converge. 
 Figure 7.3 
 Functional constraint in theoretical morphospace. Functional forms are found within the 
rectangular region in the morphospace, and nonfunctional forms are found outside the 
rectangular region. The boundaries of the rectangle thus delimit the functional constraint 
boundary on possible form within the morphospace. 

Functional and Developmental Constraint in Convergent Evolution 
249
specu lation, but can actually be mapped in theoretical morphospaces; 
see McGhee 2007).  
 Second, we know that organisms develop biological form from an 
original cell. We also know that the possible types of form that can be 
developed from a given cell are limited, that they depend upon the DNA 
coding within the cell and the interaction of the different molecules and 
tissue geometries produced as the cell grows. These observations lead to 
the concept of developmental constraint: the different types of forms that 
different organisms can develop are limited. 
 Now let us consider the spatial representation of these two types of 
evolutionary constraint within the morphospace (ﬁ gure 7.4). The func-
tional constraint boundary in ﬁ gure 7.4 is the same as in ﬁ gure 7.3, but 
now we have added a developmental constraint boundary as well (the 
dotted line in ﬁ gure 7.4). That is, the evolving form must remain within 
the developmentally possible regions of forms in the morphospace. As 
can be seen in ﬁ gure 7.4, the functional constraint boundary within the 
morphospace does not have to coincide spatially with the developmental 
constraint boundary.  
 Figure 7.4 
 Combining functional and developmental constraint in theoretical morphospace. The 
boundaries of the dotted-line rectangle delimit the developmental constraint boundary on 
possible form within the morphospace: forms within the dotted-line rectangle are devel-
opmentally possible, while forms outside the dotted-line rectangle are developmentally 
impossible. Forms  f:0  are thus both nonfunctional and developmentally impossible, forms 
 f:1  (shaded region) are both functional and developmentally possible, forms  f:2  are non-
functional but developmentally possible, and forms  f:3  are functional but developmentally 
impossible. See text for discussion. 

250 
Chapter 7
 We now are in the position to consider the spectrum of all possible 
existent, nonexistent, and impossible biological forms. Let us consider 
the developmental constraint boundary present in ﬁ gure 7.4 to spatially 
portray the spectrum of all biological forms that can be developed by 
life on Earth. That is, forms within this region can be developed by organ-
isms present on Earth, but forms outside this region cannot. We now see 
that four different regions of potential form exist within the morpho-
space, in the form of a Venn diagram: 
 (1)   Biological forms that do not function and that cannot be developed 
by Earth life, abbreviated  f:0 . These are all of the hypothetical forms 
shown in ﬁ gure 7.1 that fall outside the two intersecting rectangles shown 
in ﬁ gure 7.4. 
 (2)   Biological forms that do function and that can be developed by 
Earth life, abbreviated  f:1 . These are all of the hypothetical forms shown 
in ﬁ gure 7.1 that fall in the region where the two rectangles shown in 
ﬁ gure 7.4 intersect (the shaded region). 
 (3)   Biological forms that could be developed by Earth life, but that do 
not function and thus are lethal, abbreviated  f:2 . These are all of the 
hypothetical forms shown in ﬁ gure 7.1 that are located in ﬁ gure 7.4 in 
the region bounded by the dotted-line rectangle but not located in the 
region where it intersects with the solid-line rectangle (the shaded 
region). 
 (4)  Biological forms that do function but that cannot be developed by 
Earth life, abbreviated  f:3 . These are all of the forms shown in ﬁ gure 7.1 
that are located in ﬁ gure 7.4 in the region bounded by the solid-line 
rectangle but are not in the region where it intersects with the dotted-line 
rectangle (the shaded region). 
 Now let us consider these four regions of possible form from the point 
of view of actual existent life on Earth. The myriad forms of life that 
surround us here on Earth clearly are both functional and developable, 
and we can collect all of these forms into a set of forms { f:1 }. Every living 
thing on Earth, from butterﬂ ies to bacteria, belong to the form set { f:1 }. 
Needless to say, all of the convergent forms of life that we have consid-
ered throughout this book are also members of the form set { f:1 }. The 
phenomenon of convergent evolution immediately reveals to us that the 
size of form set { f:1 } is not inﬁ nite, in that life on Earth has been con-
strained to repeatedly reevolve the same forms within this set over and 
over. The hypothetical universe in which every species has its own unique 

Functional and Developmental Constraint in Convergent Evolution 
251
functional morphology, is morphologically different from every other 
species, does not exist. 
 Biologists over the ages have studied the many different mutant forms 
of life — two-headed snakes, three-legged frogs, and so on — that are lethal 
mutations (which are important in that they give us valuable clues about 
the process of development; see the discussions in Alberch 1989 and 
Blumberg 2009). Developmental abnormalities like two-headed snakes 
and frogs with three hind legs instead of two are real and are also non-
functional, in that they do not survive in the wild (as opposed to in the 
laboratory). We can collect all such developmental  “ freaks of nature ”  
(Blumberg 2009) into the set of forms { f:2 }. 
 Visualizing the types of forms that are both nonfunctional and that 
cannot be developed by life on Earth is a bit more difﬁ cult, but it can be 
done mathematically (see McGhee 2007), and we can place all of these 
hypothetical form coordinates within the morphospace into the form set 
{ f:0 }. They do not really matter for our discussion here, but they do need 
to be listed so that we will have considered the complete spectrum of all 
possible existent, nonexistent, and impossible biological forms. So, thus 
far we have three sets of form with respect to Earth life: one functional 
set of forms of Earth life, { f:1 }; one nonfunctional set of forms of Earth 
life, { f:2 }; and one impossible set of forms, { f:0 }. 
 The last possible set of forms is crucial to our understanding of the 
implications of the phenomenon of convergent evolution. These are the 
possible forms of life that are functional, that work just ﬁ ne in nature, 
but that nevertheless cannot be developed by life on Earth. We will place 
these possible but nonexistent forms on Earth in the ﬁ nal set of forms, 
{ f:3 }. We have now arrived at the critical question in the analysis of con-
vergent evolution: Does the form set { f:3 } exist in the universe? We know 
that it does not exist on Earth, but do living forms exist elsewhere on 
alien worlds that belong to the form set { f:3 }? 
 At ﬁ rst this question may seem to be so abstract as to be of no real 
importance, but it is of critical importance in our consideration of the 
question of predictability in evolution (which we will consider in detail 
in the next chapter). We know that much of the convergent evolution of 
life on Earth is driven by developmental constraint, yet we do not know 
the answer to two of the most fundamental questions concerning devel-
opmental constraint itself:  “ How did development originate [on Earth]? ”  
and  “ How did the developmental repertoire evolve? ” (M ü ller 2007, 944). 
Only when we have the answers to those two questions can we make 
predictions about the possible evolution of alien developmental 

252 
Chapter 7
repertoires, and whether or not those developmental repertoires might 
be similar to those found in Earth life. The existence of the form set { f:3 } 
would imply that there exists somewhere in the universe an alien set of 
functional biological forms that nevertheless cannot be developed by 
Earth life, and thus these alien life forms would  not be convergent  on any 
of the forms of life seen on Earth. 
 Life as We Know It 
 All life on Earth belongs to the form set { f:1 }, biological forms that both 
function and can be developed by Earth life. As we have seen in chapters 
2 through 6 in this book, life on Earth is highly convergent. The spectrum 
of forms in the set { f:1 } have been reevolved over and over again in the 
history of life on Earth. 
 The set of existent forms of life on Earth, { f:1 }, is a function of the 
functional constraint boundary and the developmental constraint bound-
ary in the theoretical morphospace (ﬁ gure 7.4). We believe the functional 
constraints of physics and geometry to be the same throughout the uni-
verse and to be extrinsic with respect to biology (McGhee 2007); there-
fore, this constraint boundary should also apply to life forms throughout 
the universe. That is, the spatial position of the functional constraint 
boundary shown in ﬁ gure 7.4, relative to the spectrum of hypothetical 
forms shown in ﬁ gure 7.1, should remain the same throughout the uni-
verse. Alien life forms should belong to the same set of forms { f:1 } that 
Earth life forms belong to, given the same physical conditions on that 
alien planet. 
 Thus, we could predict that those alien organisms with powered ﬂ ight 
will have evolved wings, just as animals on Earth have done (table 2.2), 
and fast-swimming organisms in alien seas will evolve streamlined, fusi-
form bodies (table 2.1). Land-dwelling, sessile, photoautotrophic organ-
isms will evolve tree forms, just as plants on Earth have done (table 3.1), 
and those tree forms will have leaﬂ ike structures (table 3.3). The laws of 
physics and geometry also extend to activities, in that there are a limited 
number of ways to build structures (table 6.2) and to successfully culti-
vate crops (table 6.3). The geometries of alien buildings, and the algo-
rithms of farming procedures, should be similar to those found on 
Earth. If they live in highly social groups, natural selection should drive 
evolution to produce aliens that are self-aware, just as it has on Earth 
(table 6.7). 

Functional and Developmental Constraint in Convergent Evolution 
253
 Life as We Do Not Know It 
 It is the second boundary in theoretical morphospace — the developmen-
tal constraint boundary — that undermines our ability to conﬁ dently 
predict that life throughout the universe will converge on the same forms 
seen here on Earth. Developmental constraints are intrinsic (McGhee 
2007), imposed by the laws of biology of speciﬁ c organisms, in this case 
the biology of Earth organisms. Will these constraints be the same for 
alien organisms? 
 Even in the case of Earth organisms themselves, developmental con-
straint introduces an element of uncertainty into our ability to precisely 
predict convergence. We can be conﬁ dent in predicting that animals that 
ﬂ y will have wings — but how many? Birds, bats, and pterosaurs are devel-
opmentally constrained to have only two wings, as their tetrapod phylo-
genetic legacy provides them with only two forelimbs that can be modiﬁ ed 
in convergent evolution. This developmental constraint does not apply 
to insects, however, and so the dragonﬂ y has four wings, not just two. The 
mythical centaurs have never been evolved by mammals; their tetrapod 
phylogenetic legacy provides them with only four appendages to modify, 
not six. The insects, however, are developmentally provided with six 
appendages, and they have indeed independently evolved centaur forms 
twice: the mantids and the mantispids (as discussed in chapter 2). Hence, 
alien organisms, with a totally different developmental repertoire, might 
evolve forms never even dreamed of in human mythology. 
 We have already considered one possible example of a potential func-
tional structure that apparently cannot be developed by Earth life: eyes 
that can see infrared light (chapter 2). Multicellular life with eyes has 
existed on Earth for over 600 million years, yet never has been able to 
develop eyes that can see light with long wavelengths, wavelengths in the 
infrared, even though possession of those eyes would give a signiﬁ cant 
selective advantage to predators. Both camera-eyed animals and com-
pound-eyed animals have had to evolve alternative organ systems in 
order to  “ see ”  infrared (table 2.5). And we humans have constructed 
machines that enable us to  “ see ”  into the infrared region of the spectrum. 
Could an alien life form exist that has been able to do so organically? If 
so, that alien would have a form that belongs to form set { f:3 }. Or does 
alien life elsewhere experience the same developmental constraints that 
forms of life on Earth do? If so, the form set { f:3 } does not exist — there 
are no functional forms of life that cannot be developed by life on Earth 

254 
Chapter 7
simply because life on other planets cannot develop these forms either. 
Several lines of reasoning, however, suggest that this may not true, and 
that the set of forms { f:3 } potentially exists in the universe. NASA, the 
space exploration agency of the United States, is also very interested in 
the possible existence of non-Earth-type life, as discussed in Peter Ward ’ s 
book  Life as We Do Not Know It  (2005). In trying to conceive of possible 
forms of life that are nonexistent on Earth, the scientists at NASA are 
engaging in classic theoretical morphology. 
 Let us also engage in a theoretical-morphology thought experiment. 
Development of life on Earth starts from a single cell and, as far as we 
currently understand it, depends upon the genetic coding within the cell 
and the interaction of the different molecules and tissue geometries 
produced as the cell grows. Fundamentally, we are dealing with mole-
cules and geometries: all Earth life is carbon-based, uses DNA to code 
for amino acid assembly, and is constructed of amino acids that have 
left-coiled geometries; furthermore, multicellular life develops complex 
tissue geometries from simple, spherical, topologically solid cell clusters 
(Newman 2010). So, let us consider each of these characteristics in 
turn with regard to the question: Could hypothetical life elsewhere be 
different? Can we conceive of possible life forms that are nonexistent 
on Earth? 
 All life on Earth is carbon-based: non-carbon-based life would surely 
experience different developmental constraints than those present in 
Earth life, and therefore could possibly develop functional biological 
forms that Earth life cannot. The most widely discussed chemical alterna-
tive to carbon is silicon-based life. From the periodic table of elements, 
we see that silicon can form four bonds like carbon (for example, in the 
formation of monosilane, SiH 4 , the analog of methane, CH 4 ), which is so 
important for building the carbon-backboned molecules of Earth life. 
Unfortunately, silicon bonding simply cannot produce the huge macro-
molecules that carbon can — macromolecules that are very strong and 
stable at normal Earth temperatures and pressures. Curiously, however, 
it is thought that silicon-based life might be possible at either very high 
temperatures or very low temperatures (Ward 2005). At very low tem-
peratures, silicon can form polymers, large macromolecules that are 
analogs to those formed by carbon. Rather than using water as a solvent, 
as with carbon-based life, silicon-based life could use liquid methane or 
nitrogen. As a result, it has been hypothesized that silicon-based life 
might exist in the methane lakes that exist on Titan, Saturn ’ s planet-like 
moon that possesses its own nitrogen atmosphere, or in possible liquid 

Functional and Developmental Constraint in Convergent Evolution 
255
nitrogen lakes on Triton, the larger moon of Neptune, and, obviously, in 
similar worlds elsewhere in the universe (Ward 2005). In particular, 
McKay and Smith (2005) have shown that is energetically possible for a 
hypothetical Titan life form to metabolize acetylene (C 2 H 2 ), present on 
the surface of Titan, using atmospheric hydrogen (H 2 ) to produce 
methane (CH 4 ), analogous to Earth life that metabolizes sugar (C 6 H 12 O 6 ) 
with atmospheric oxygen (O 2 ) to produce carbon dioxide (CO 2 ). They 
further predict that the presence of such a hypothetical methanogenic 
life form on Titan should result in chemically anomalous depletions of 
acetylene on the surface of Titan, and the anomalous depletion of hydro-
gen in Titan ’ s lower atmosphere. Interestingly, as of this writing, both of 
these predictions have been observed to occur on Titan by the orbiting 
Cassini spacecraft (Strobel 2010; Clark et al. 2010), precipitating renewed 
debate concerning possible life on Titan. 
 Such hypothetical life forms on cold planets would have developmen-
tal pathways radically different from those present in Earth life, and thus 
could evolve functional morphologies in their cold habitats totally unlike 
any seen on Earth. If these biological forms exist, they would belong to 
form set { f:3 }. Since Earth life cannot exist on Titan or Triton, it is obvious 
that Earth life cannot develop a biological form that could function in a 
lake of liquid methane. 
 Ward (2005) points out that the zone within our solar system contain-
ing cold-type environments in which methane and nitrogen are liquids 
is much wider than the narrow zone in which water is liquid. Only the 
Earth and Mars exist in this zone today, and Mars is at its very outermost 
fringe. Consequently, silicon-based life, if it exists, would have a much 
larger suite of worlds and moons within our own solar system upon which 
it could exist compared to carbon-based life, and this will be true of other 
solar systems as well. Could silicon-based life be more abundant in the 
universe than carbon-based life? 
 Conway Morris (2003) argues that we should expect to ﬁ nd that life 
is carbon-based wherever life exists in the universe. According to this 
argument, functional constraints in molecular evolution will always drive 
natural selection for the uniquely versatile carbon atom in the formation 
of polymers, or complex macromolecules, throughout the universe. No 
other element in the periodic table of elements has carbon ’ s chemical 
ability to form four bonds that are strong, to form double bonds, to 
link together to form stable rings and chains, and to form a gas by com-
bining with oxygen (CO 2 ; silicon readily combines with oxygen, but pro-
duces rigid crystalline SiO 2 , which presents serious problems if the 

256 
Chapter 7
silicon-based life is to use oxygen in its metabolism). If molecular evolu-
tion always converges on carbon in the formation of life, then all life 
elsewhere will be conﬁ ned to Earth-like worlds with liquid water. This 
reasoning also leads Conway Morris (2003) to conclude that life could 
be quite rare in the universe, as the temperature zone around a star that 
could contain Earth-like worlds is narrow (Ward 2005). 
 In summary, if silicon-based life exists in the universe, it could poten-
tially develop forms that belong to form set { f:3 }, life forms that could 
potentially not be convergent with any life found on Earth. On the other 
hand, if all life in the universe is carbon-based and found only on Earth-
like worlds, then life elsewhere could be highly convergent on the same 
life forms found on Earth. 
 All life on Earth is coded for by base-four DNA, coding with the 
nucleotides ATCG, which are read in a triplet. Could life exist elsewhere 
that is not thus coded? Life that uses a different coding system would 
surely experience different developmental constraints than base-four 
DNA-coded life, and so could possibly develop functional biological 
forms that Earth life cannot. The easiest way to envision such life forms 
would be to keep the same sugar-phosphate chains that are present in 
DNA, but then to add or subtract the number of nucleotides that code 
for protein. Laboratory experiments have actually produced synthetic 
base-six DNA, molecules having six nucleotides rather than four (Ward 
2005). Could life have arisen elsewhere that uses base-six DNA coding 
as part of its developmental system? 
 Conway Morris (2003) argues that we should expect to ﬁ nd that life 
uses base-four DNA with triplet codons wherever life exists in the uni-
verse. Just as with the element carbon, Conway Morris (2003) points out 
that computer simulations of alternative coding systems have shown that 
base-four DNA coding is vastly more efﬁ cient than any other hypotheti-
cal coding system: less than base-four coding is too limited and restricted, 
and greater than base-four coding is too cumbersome and error-prone. 
Freeland and Hurst (1998) have further experimented with base-four 
DNA with triplet codons by randomizing the codon positions to produce 
alternative genetic codes. They discovered that, in a sample of over a 
million alternative codes, only one code was more efﬁ cient than the 
natural code found in life on Earth. While this result can be used to 
support the view that carbon-based life elsewhere will convergently 
evolve the same genetic code that was evolved by life on Earth (Conway 
Morris 2003), from the perspective of theoretical morphology the dis-
covery of a more efﬁ cient but nonexistent code is of more interest. Even 

Functional and Developmental Constraint in Convergent Evolution 
257
here, however, the nonexistent code  “ shows behavior very similar to that 
of the natural code ”  (Freeland and Hurst 1998, 247); thus, it is not clear 
whether life evolved using this alternative code would be that much dif-
ferent from life on Earth. 
 The amino acid molecules that are used as the building blocks of pro-
teins in Earth life are all left-coiled. Could life exist elsewhere that uses 
right-coiled amino acids? Experiment shows that chemical selection in 
protein synthesis produces homochirality, the use of only one type of 
amino acid geometry. But proteins can be constructed in the laboratory 
with either all left-coiled or all right-coiled amino acids, and it is not clear 
why life on Earth has chosen the left-coiled chemical pathway (Castelvec-
chi 2007). Both right-coiled and left-coiled amino acids are produced by 
inorganic chemical processes in nature, and so perhaps chance has pro-
duced life forms elsewhere that are constructed of proteins made with 
right-coiled amino acids. Would such life produce biological forms that 
are simply the chemical mirror-image of Earth life forms? Or would 
those forms be different from anything seen on Earth, and might they 
belong to form set { f:3 }? 
 Just as the element carbon has unique properties and the DNA coding 
system found in Earth life is highly efﬁ cient, some have argued that 
molecular evolution preferentially produces left-coiled amino acids. 
Experiments have suggested (1) that left-coiled amino acids are slightly 
more stable than right-coiled, and thus could have accumulated more 
readily in prebiotic environments than right-coiled, and (2) that left-
coiled amino acids crystallize slightly faster than right-coiled, and thus 
could have become more enriched in prebiotic environments than right-
coiled (Castelvecchi 2007). Either process would result in prebiotic envi-
ronments containing more left-coiled amino acids than right-coiled 
amino acids as potential building blocks for proteins. Still, a chirality-
biasing process would not rule out the possibility that life constructed 
with right-coiled amino acids could exist in the universe; it would simply 
mean that such life forms would be less abundant in the universe than 
life forms with left-coiled amino acids. 
 Modern molecular studies have revealed that a great deal of conver-
gent evolution of life here on Earth is in fact due to developmental 
constraint: the phenomenon of  “ deep homology ”  that we considered in 
chapter 1.  “ Studies of deep homology are showing that new structures 
need not arise from scratch, genetically speaking, but can evolve by 
deploying regulatory circuits that were ﬁ rst established in early animals. 
. . . The more that researchers look, the more they will ﬁ nd that the same 

258 
Chapter 7
tools have been used to build a great variety of structures long thought 
to have independent histories ”  (Shubin et al. 2009, 822). Would life else-
where in the universe, even if it is also carbon-based, coded for by base-
four DNA, and composed of proteins made of left-coiled amino acids, 
have evolved the same developmental regulatory systems seen in Earth 
life? If so, the form set { f:3 } would not exist, but this at ﬁ rst seems 
unlikely. The deep-homology regulatory circuits discussed by Shubin 
et al. (2009) can be traced back to the Cambrian diversiﬁ cation of animal 
life some 540 to 600 million years ago. Yet life existed on Earth 3.5 billion 
years ago, and animals are a late addition to the history of life. It took 
roughly 3 billion years of evolution for life to evolve the deep-homology 
regulatory circuits present in animal life on Earth — what is the probabil-
ity that the very same regulatory system would convergently evolve with 
the convergent evolution of multicellular, heterotrophic life elsewhere? 
Multicellular, heterotrophic life forms — animals — that have evolved 
with a different set of deep-homology regulatory circuits could poten-
tially be able to develop forms that cannot be developed by life on Earth, 
forms that could belong to the set { f:3 } and that would not be convergent 
on Earth life. 
 Because we do not know the answer to the question of how develop-
ment originated in multicellular life forms on Earth, we also do not know 
how development might originate in life forms elsewhere in the universe. 
Theoretical modeling, however, suggests that a signiﬁ cant part of devel-
opmental constraint might indeed be a function of physical and geomet-
ric constraints (Newman et al. 2006; M ü ller 2007; Newman 2010), and 
therefore that developmental systems in alien life might be similar to 
those found in Earth life. In modeling the evolution of the development 
of multicellular organisms, Newman et al. (2006) start with four different 
kinds of physical and chemical patterning mechanisms: diffusion gradi-
ents, sedimentation gradients, reaction-diffusion mechanisms, and chemi-
cal oscillation mechanisms. Most importantly, these four patterning 
mechanisms are found in nonliving as well as living chemical systems. 
Then Newman et al. (2006) add two basic cell properties: differential 
adhesion and cell polarity. Differential adhesion in pairs of tissues that 
differ in cohesivity produces mixing behavior like that seen in immiscible 
liquids, a behavior that is found in nonliving chemical systems and thus 
not unique to life. Likewise, the acquisition of polarization in the adhe-
sion of cells is a mechanism not unique to life. Newman et al. (2006) next 
explored the possible interactions of the four patterning mechanisms 
with the two cell properties in a manner similar to that used in theoretical 

Functional and Developmental Constraint in Convergent Evolution 
259
morphology, producing a spectrum of hypothetical morphological out-
comes. In one spectrum, hollow spheres of tissue are produced when 
diffusion gradients are combined with the cellular properties of differ-
ential adhesion and polarity in development, whereas invaginated 
spheres are produced when sedimentation gradients are applied instead. 
In the other spectrum, radially periodic tissue structures are produced 
when reaction-diffusion mechanisms are combined with the cell proper-
ties, whereas serially periodic structures are produced when chemical 
oscillation mechanisms are applied instead. Newman et al. (2006, 289) 
point out that the spectrum of these hypothetical forms, produced by 
physical and chemical patterning mechanisms that are not unique to life, 
are very similar to  “ the hollow, multilayered and segmented morpho-
types seen in the gastrulation stage embryos of modern-day metazoa as 
well as in Ediacaran fossil deposits of approximately  ≈ 600 Ma. ” In an 
extended study, Newman (2010, 285) argues that nine  “ dynamical pat-
terning modules ”  (or DPMs) in particular exist within the spectrum of 
hypothetical developmental forms, and that  “ the DPMs, in conjunction 
with cell-type-deﬁ ning and switching networks, transformed simple, 
spherical, topologically solid cell clusters into hollow, multilayered, elon-
gated, segmented, folded, and appendage-bearing structures. They thus 
founded the pathways that evolved into the developmental programs of 
modern animals. ” 
 In conclusion, Newman et al. (2006) and Newman (2010) suggest that 
the evolution of development on Earth may have been a two-stage 
process: metazoans originated from multicellular forms and structures 
ﬁ rst assembled by predominantly physical mechanisms, and then subse-
quently evolved genetic mechanisms to perpetuate the functionally suc-
cessful morphologies formed in the ﬁ rst stage. The ﬁ rst step in this 
process is subject to the laws of physics and geometry, which are assumed 
to be same throughout the universe. Assembling tissues on alien worlds 
should also form hollow spheres, invaginated spheres, radially periodic 
structures, and serially periodic structures in the early evolution of mul-
ticellular alien life forms, just as on Earth. 
 If the early stages of developmental constraint are indeed a function 
of physical and geometric constraints, then the set { f:3 } might indeed be 
empty — multicellular alien life forms may develop (at least initially) 
in a very similar fashion to those found on Earth. However, the second 
step in this hypothetical process — the evolution of genetic mechanisms 
to perpetuate the functionally successful morphologies formed in the 
ﬁ rst step — returns us to the question of the evolution of the coding 

260 
Chapter 7
mechanism of life that we have considered previously: How likely is it 
that life elsewhere will evolve the DNA coding system present in Earth 
life? 
 On Earth, almost all of the developmental-genetic  “ tool kit ”  genes 
used by the multicellular metazoans (Unikonta: Opisthokonta: Choano-
zoa: Metazoa; see appendix) are found in the genome of the unicellular 
choanoﬂ agellate  Monosiga brevicollis  (Unikonta: Opisthokonta: Cho-
anozoa: Choanoﬂ agellata); therefore, the metazoan tool-kit genes 
predate the evolution of animals themselves (King et al. 2003). Only a 
few additional tool-kit genes appear in the origin of the Metazoa (the 
placozoans and sponges), and a few more in the evolution of the simplest 
Eumetazoa (ctenophores and cnidarians), and then  “ all the triploblastic 
metazoan body plans emerged within the space of no more than 20 
million years ”  in the Cambrian explosion of animal evolution (Newman 
2010, 284). Since they are determined by the laws of physics and geom-
etry, the multicellular DPMs should be the same for alien life, but could 
alien life duplicate the feat of the Cambrian explosion in encoding the 
DPMs into heritable body plans without the preexisting DNA coding 
system of tool-kit genes? Or does it matter — regardless of the coding 
system evolved by alien life, will that system not also have to accomplish 
the exact same result in achieving multicellularity if that alien life is to 
survive and evolve? 
 A Periodic Table of Life? 
 An alternative approach to analyzing the potential existence of the bio-
logical form set { f:3 } elsewhere in the universe would be to try to visual-
ize what these functional forms that are nonexistent on Earth might look 
like. One of the key features of theoretical morphology is the ability to 
create both existent and nonexistent form by considering all the possible 
permutations of form dimension parameters. We have previously seen in 
chapter 4 that nonexistent ecological roles on Earth could be examined 
by such a procedure (see table 4.12), resulting in the consideration of the 
functional possibility of a nonexistent plant that ﬂ oats in the air by means 
of a gas-ﬁ lled bladder or bladders, and in the conclusion that such a plant 
would have to be carnivorous in addition to being photoautotrophic. 
 Analogous to the  “ periodic table of niches ”  (Pianka 1978) that we 
considered in chapter 4, it is possible to create a  “ periodic table of life ”  
in a simple theoretical-morphology thought experiment (McGhee 2008). 
The periodic table of elements allows chemists to predict not only the 

Functional and Developmental Constraint in Convergent Evolution 
261
behavior of existent elements but the behavior of nonexistent yet 
possible elements, such as the heavy elements that chemists have 
subsequently created in nuclear laboratories, elements that do not exist 
in the natural state. In essence, the rows of the periodic table of elements 
are based on the complexity of the atomic structure of the elements: 
elements in the ﬁ rst row have only the electron shell  K , elements in 
the second row have the electron shells  K and  L , third-row elements 
have electron shells  K ,  L , and  M , and so on. These rows also reﬂ ect the 
evolutionary sequence of the appearance of the elements, with elements 
in the ﬁ rst row (hydrogen and helium) appearing ﬁ rst in the evolution 
of the universe, elements in the second row evolving next, and so on. We 
can use the chemical concepts of elemental complexity and evolutionary 
sequence in an analogous fashion by arranging the major groups of 
multicellular life in a similar series of rows of morphological complexity 
and biological evolutionary sequence (table 7.1).  
 The columns of the periodic table of elements can be considered to 
characterize the mobility of the elements in those rows, with highly 
mobile elements in some columns (elements that chemically combine 
readily, such as the column containing hydrogen, lithium, sodium, etc.) 
and low-mobility elements in other columns (elements that are chemi-
cally inert, such as the column containing helium, neon, argon, etc.). In 
an analogous fashion, we can consider the mobility of multicellular forms 
 Table 7.1 
 A periodic table of life, based upon locomotory type and evolutionary sequence of 
origination  
 Spectrum of 
locomotion 
 None 
 2D locomotion 
 3D locomotion 
 Sequence of 
evolution 
 Sessile 
 Crawling 
(legless) 
 Walking 
(legs) 
 Swimming 
(fusiform 
body) 
 Flying 
(wings) 
 Plants 
 Plants 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 Invertebrates 
 Barnacles 
 Worms 
 Arthropods 
 Squid 
 Insects 
 Amphibians 
 — 
 Caecilians 
 Amphibians 
 Tadpoles 
 — 
 Reptiles 
 — 
 Snakes 
 [reptiles] 
 Ichthyosaurs 
 Pterosaurs 
 Dinosaurs 
 — 
 — 
 [dinosaurs] 
 Penguins 
 Birds 
 Mammals 
 — 
 — 
 [mammals] 
 Porpoises 
 Bats 
 Note: Modiﬁ ed from McGhee (2008). See text for discussion. 

262 
Chapter 7
of life on the basis of locomotory type arranged in a series of columns 
(table 7.1; I thank George Ellis of Capetown, South Africa, for suggesting 
to me that I add the column of  “ no locomotion ”  to the original thought 
experiment in McGhee 2008). 
 Even such a simple attempt to create a periodic table of life immedi-
ately reveals major incidences of convergent evolution (table 7.1). Not 
only is the convergent evolution of fast-swimming fusiform morpholo-
gies in tetrapod vertebrates (reptilian ichthyosaurs, mammalian por-
poises, and dinosaurian penguins) apparent, but we also see that certain 
invertebrates animals have also convergently evolved this same fast-
swimming morphology (most notably in modern-day squid and cuttleﬁ sh 
cephalopods and their extinct orthoconic and belemnitellid relatives). 
The major convergences in the evolution of wing structures for powered 
ﬂ ight in arthropods (insects), reptiles (pterosaurs), dinosaurs (birds), and 
mammals (bats) are also apparent in the table. 
 Two major groups of animals have convergently evolved leg structures 
for walking: the arthropods and the ancestral amphibians. (The tetrapod 
reptiles, dinosaurs, and mammals are listed in brackets in the walking 
column in table 7.1 because their legs are not independent convergences 
but rather symplesiomorphic structures simply inherited from their 
amphibian ancestors.) Note, however, that both the amphibians and the 
reptiles have separately and independently reevolved legless morpholo-
gies (amphibian caecilians and reptilian snakes) and morphologically 
have converged on annelid worms. All of the life forms listed in table 7.1 
exist on the Earth and belong to the form set { f:1 }. 
 Of major interest are the empty permutations in table 7.1 — these are 
potential candidates for functional life forms that are nonexistent on 
Earth but could belong to the form set { f:3 }. Currently, there are no ﬂ ying 
frogs on Earth, but we do have gliding frogs that are heading in that 
evolutionary direction (see table 2.2). No legless, feathered avian-snake 
forms nor furry mammalian-snake forms exist on Earth, though then 
again weasels and ferrets — with their elongated bodies and small legs —
 are headed in this evolutionary direction. These are also life forms that 
could conceivably be developed by existent frogs, birds, and mammals, 
and so is their absence on Earth due entirely to functional constraint, 
and not to developmental constraint? 
 The major predicted life forms that are nonexistent on Earth revealed 
in table 7.1 are mobile plants and sessile terrestrial animals. We have 
previously considered the possibility of ﬂ ying plants in chapter 4, and 
concluded that the absence of such forms on Earth was probably due to 

Functional and Developmental Constraint in Convergent Evolution 
263
functional constraint (i.e., inability to deal with the habitat instability 
produced by weather patterns existent on the Earth). That conclusion 
might be wrong — could it be instead that Earth plants are unable to 
develop the gas bladders that would be needed by a ﬂ ying plant? The 
closest thing we have in terrestrial ecosystems to the sessile animals that 
exist in marine ecosystems are the web-spinning spiders. These spiders 
are mobile, but when feeding, they simply sit sessile in the centers of their 
webs and wait for prey animals to impact and stick to the web. Ecologi-
cally, they are like marine sessile carnivores such as corals. Is the absence 
of truly sessile terrestrial predators due entirely to functional constraint 
(i.e., inability to obtain sufﬁ cient prey by an immobile carnivore)? 
 Writers of science ﬁ ction have been engaging in theoretical morphol-
ogy for years, although they are unaware of it. Hypothetical walking 
plants, the trifﬁ ds, were created by the science ﬁ ction writer John 
Wyndham in his novel  The Day of the Trifﬁ ds  (1951). These plants grew 
normally, using roots for nutrient uptake and leaves for photosynthesis, 
until they reached maturity, at which time they uprooted and used three 
specialized root prongs for clumsy walking. The springlike root-prong 
mechanism used by the trifﬁ ds for walking is not unlike the springlike 
trap mechanisms present in Venus ﬂ y traps. Interestingly, Wyndham con-
cluded that his mature trifﬁ ds would have to be carnivorous, just as we 
concluded in chapter 4 that ﬂ ying plants would have to use carnivory for 
nutrient acquisition. Larry Niven (1968a) created hypothetical ﬂ ying 
plants, called stage trees, that used rocket propulsion for seed dispersal 
in his short story  “ A Relic of the Empire. ”  These plants grew as low 
shrubs or bushes until their reproductive phase, when they grew tall tree 
trunks enriched with organic explosives. During the dry season, forest 
ﬁ res would ignite the stage trees, which would lift off like rockets and 
explode in the skies, scattering their seeds over huge geographic dis-
tances. Niven also created sessile mammal-like terrestrial predators, the 
grogs, in his short story  “ The Handicapped ”  (1968). These hypothetical 
animals evolved a unique adaptation to lure prey animals within striking 
distance of the sessile predator ’ s long, prehensile tongue (I will not be a 
spoiler and reveal what the adaptation is). If they existed, trifﬁ ds, stage 
trees, and grogs would ﬁ ll the empty permutations of walking plants, 
ﬂ ying plants, and sessile mammals in table 7.1, and they certainly are 
developmentally impossible for life forms on Earth. Are they candidates 
for the form set { f:3 }? 
 In summary, using the techniques of theoretical morphology, we can 
visualize possible, but nonexistent, biological forms. But we do not know 

264 
Chapter 7
if the nonexistence of those forms is simply due to functional constraint 
(that is, that those forms belong to form set { f:2 }), or if the nonexistence 
of those forms is due to developmental constraint (that they belong to 
form set { f:3 }). The possibility that life elsewhere, evolving with different 
developmental constraints, might be able to develop functional forms 
that cannot be developed by life on Earth limits our ability to predict 
the outcome of evolution with certainty. Only when we fully understand 
the evolution of the developmental regulatory system present in Earth 
life will we able to make predictions about possible alien developmental 
systems. 
 A strong case has been made in this chapter, however, for the conver-
gent evolution of similar developmental constraints in alien life forms 
that are carbon-based and that inhabit Earth-type worlds. That is, I 
suggest that developmental constraints in this restricted context are a 
function of physical and geometric constraints, just as functional con-
straints are. If this is true, we should expect radically different develop-
mental constraints to have been evolved only in life forms that are not 
carbon-based, or that inhabit non-Earth-type planets that are either very 
hot or very cold, or are gas giants. In our own solar system, Titan is 
perhaps the best possible candidate for exploration for life forms unlike 
any seen on Earth. 
 
 
 
 

 8 
 Complexity theory also suggests a new take on an old question, long a staple of 
science ﬁ ction and speculative science: When we do ﬁ nd aliens, or they ﬁ nd us, 
what will they look like? By revealing many forms of Earth life to be governed 
by deep geometrical rules of self-organization in nature, complexity suggests a 
universal geometry of life that should transcend worlds. . . . There is no way to 
predict precisely what aliens will look like, but the fractal geometry of life gives 
us reason to believe that when they do ﬁ nally land on the White House lawn, 
whatever walks or slithers down the gangplank may look strangely familiar. 
 — Grinspoon (2003, 272 – 273) 
 The laws of physics, it is believed, are the same everywhere in the universe. This 
is unlikely to be true of biology. 
 — Crick (1988, 138) 
 Most scientists tend to ignore philosophers. In evolutionary biology, the 
scientist Ernst Mayr (1964, xi – xii) traced this tendency back to Charles 
Darwin himself:  “ No one resented Darwin ’ s independence of thought 
more than the philosophers. How could anyone dare to change our 
concept of the universe and man ’ s position in it without arguing for or 
against Plato, for or against Descartes, for or against Kant? Darwin had 
violated all the rules of the game by placing his argument entirely outside 
the traditional framework of classical philosophical concepts and termi-
nologies. . . . No other work advertised to the world the emancipation of 
science from philosophy as blatantly as did Darwin ’ s  Origin . ” Among 
other things, philosophers concern themselves with questions about 
purpose and meaning in life, questions that are unanswerable using the 
materialistic methodology of science. Because metaphysical questions 
are unanswerable by science, many scientists consider such questions to 
be meaningless. 
 I am a scientist, yet I also ﬁ nd philosophy to be interesting. A scientiﬁ c 
commitment to a materialistic methodology does not mean one also has 
 Philosophical Implications of Convergent Evolution 

266 
Chapter 8
to commit oneself to a materialistic philosophy, although many scientists 
do. In this chapter I will touch on philosophical questions concerning 
freedom, purpose, design, destiny, teleology, spirituality, and even God —
 not usual topics for a scientist. I do so because I am not alone — these 
questions have been raised by other scientists as well, with reference to 
a very speciﬁ c natural phenomenon: convergent evolution. 
 The difference of opinion between the astrobiologist David Grinspoon 
and Francis Crick, co-discoverer of the molecular structure of DNA, 
given in the two epigraphs at the beginning of this chapter, sets the stage 
for the spectrum of topics to be considered here. In the chapter I will 
follow the model of discussion used by John Casti in his philosophical-
scientiﬁ c book  Paradigms Lost (1989), in which arguments for and 
against a point of view are presented as if in a trial in a courtroom, fol-
lowed by a ruling from the judge on the bench. I, of course, shall act as 
judge and, of course, the reader is free to disagree with the bench! 
 The Argument for Unpredictability: Creative Freedom or Chaotic Randomness? 
 The best-known evolutionary essayist of the twentieth century, the 
Harvard paleontologist Stephen Jay Gould, was fond of a thought experi-
ment of his own that he called  “ replaying life ’ s tape ”  (Gould 1989). That 
is, consider the history of the evolution of life on Earth to be similar to 
a videotape of a popular movie. Imagine what would happen if you could 
take a copy of the videotape and rewind it to a point early in the movie, 
erasing everything on the tape that happened after that point, and then 
could rerun the tape to see what would happen this time on the now 
blank tape. Would the historical sequence of events in the evolution of 
life in the rerun of the tape resemble the original? Or would evolution 
take radically different pathways in the new narrative, producing animal 
and plant forms totally unlike those of the original? Gould (1989, 51) 
argues strongly for the second scenario:  “ Any replay of the tape would 
lead evolution down a pathway radically different from the road actually 
taken. . . . The diversity of possible itineraries does demonstrate that 
eventual results cannot be predicted at the outset. Each step proceeds 
for cause, but no ﬁ nale can be speciﬁ ed at the start, and none would ever 
occur a second time in the same way, because any pathway proceeds 
through thousands of improbable stages. ” 
 In short, in Gould ’ s view, evolution is totally unpredictable: evolution 
has no predictable direction and no predictable destination. An evolu-
tionary trend in time is solely a chain of contingent historical events, and 

Philosophical Implications of Convergent Evolution 
267
could not have been deduced from any laws of nature:  “ Contingency is 
the afﬁ rmation of control by immediate events over destiny. . . . Our own 
evolution is a joy and a wonder because such a curious chain of events 
would probably never happen again, but having occurred, makes eminent 
sense ” (Gould 1989, 284 – 285). 
 Some evolutionary biologists ﬁ nd Gould ’ s view of evolution as an 
unpredictable, nonrepeatable, and historically contingent process to be 
liberating and uplifting. For example, Stuart Kauffman (2008, 5) com-
ments on Gould ’ s view that the path of evolution cannot be deduced 
from any laws of nature:  “ a  ‘ natural law ’  is a compact description before-
hand of the regularities of a process. But if we cannot even prestate the 
possibilities, then no compact descriptions of these processes beforehand 
can exist. These phenomena, then, appear to be partially beyond natural 
law itself. This means something astonishingly and powerfully liberating. 
We live in a universe, biosphere, and human culture that are not only 
emergent but radically creative. We live in a world whose unfoldings we 
often cannot prevision, prestate, or predict — a world of explosive creativ-
ity on all sides. ” 
 Similarly, in writing of Gould ’ s view that evolution could not be 
repeated, Kauffman (2008, 130) expands on this concept with obvious 
joy:  “ The vast nonrepeatability, or nonergodicity, of the universe at all 
levels of complexity above atoms — molecules, species, human history —
 leaves room for a creativity in the way the universe unfolds at these 
levels, a creativity that we cannot predict. . . . Now I want to make my 
outrageous claim: the evolution of the biosphere is radically nonpredict-
able and ceaselessly creative. ” 
 And last, as I promised at the beginning of this chapter, the concepts 
of spirituality and of God also arise from this consideration of evolution 
as an unpredictably creative process:  “ I believe we can reinvent 
the sacred. We can invent a global ethic, in a shared space, safe to all 
of us, with one view of God as the natural creativity in the universe ”  
(Kauffman 2008, xiii). 
 Other biologists welcome Gould ’ s view of evolution as the ultimate 
dismissal of the older idea of teleology, that evolution is design-like and 
progressive, and thus has a direction and ultimately a destination. But 
Reiss (2009, 174) goes beyond Gould to attack the very idea of adaptive 
improvement in evolution as being teleological, as in his discussion of 
Sewall Wright ’ s concept of the adaptive landscape and Darwin ’ s concept 
of natural selection:  “ Wright seems never to have realized that while in 
the context of domestic breeds it may be reasonable to speak of  ‘ improve-

268 
Chapter 8
ment ’  by selection of  ‘ superior ’  herds, where the standard of value is 
determined by the goals of the breeder, no such a priori standard of 
overall value exists in nature. In fact, by focusing on the hypothetical 
ways in which organisms could evolve toward a future state of improved 
adaptation, Wright introduced a teleological element into his evolution-
ary theory, just as Darwin had into his. ”  He further argues,  “ Darwin 
introduced a teleological determinism into the heart of his theory. This 
teleology is expressed in two related conceptions: (1) that evolution is a 
process going from a less-adapted to a better-adapted state and (2) that 
natural selection is a deterministic force, or agent, that directs the evo-
lutionary process toward this better-adapted state ” (Reiss 2009, 140). 
 Rather than leading to thoughts of spirituality and God, as in the case 
of Kauffman (2008), the view that evolution is unpredictable and direc-
tionless produces a totally different reaction in Reiss (2009, 356):  “ In 
short, when we recognize that organisms exist only by virtue of the fact 
that they are satisfying their conditions of existence, and that features of 
organisms likewise exist because they are satisfying  their  conditions for 
existence, we are freed to consider evolution in a dispassionate manner. 
Life is not designed, or at least it shows no evidence of design for any-
thing other than continued existence, which needs no designer. ” 
 Gould (1989, 290) himself was well aware that his stance on evolution 
was partially a reaction to  “ traditionalist ”  and teleological ideas of evolu-
tion:  “ ultimately, the question of questions boils down to the placement 
of the boundary between predictability under invariant law and the 
multifarious possibilities of historical contingency. Traditionalists like 
[Charles Doolittle] Walcott would place the boundary so low that all 
major patterns of life ’ s history fall above the line into the realm of pre-
dictability (and, for him, direct manifestation of divine intentions). But 
I envision a boundary sitting so high that almost every interesting event 
in life ’ s history falls into the realm of contingency. ” 
 As one might expect, reaction to Gould ’ s argument from those scien-
tists whose view of evolution he characterized as  “ traditional ”  has not 
been positive; Gould ’ s idea that evolution is unpredictable, contingent, 
nonrepeating, and directionless has been viewed with horror. Rather 
than agreeing with Kauffman (2008, 5), who felt Gould ’ s view of evolu-
tion is  “ liberating ” and  “ radically creative, ” Gould ’ s critics see an abyss 
of chaotic randomness and meaninglessness:  “ To say that any of this is 
in the broadest sense  ‘ adaptive ’  simply begs the question of how the 
world came to be ordered in the ﬁ rst place. It is, of course, no accident 
that the incidental, the chance occurrence, the contingent happenstance, 

Philosophical Implications of Convergent Evolution 
269
is so inﬂ uential in our deracinated and nihilistic culture, especially as 
reﬂ ected in the biological sciences that have spent the last century trying 
to square the circle of a meaningless process, that is, evolution, leading 
to the appearance of a sentient species that sees meaning all around 
itself ” (Conway Morris 2008, 61). 
 The Argument for Predictability: Comforting Certainty or Depressing 
Inevitability? 
 Surprisingly, some of the strongest statements for evolution as a predict-
able, law-driven process come from the molecular biologists:  “ Whether 
or not there are other sets of lawful organic forms, there is no doubt that 
the universe of protein folds represents a Platonic universe . . . a universe 
where abstract rules, like the rules of grammar, deﬁ ne a set of unique 
immaterial templates which are materialized into a thousand or so 
natural forms — a world of rational morphology and pre-ordained evolu-
tionary paths. . . . [A]s far as the 1000 protein folds are concerned, we 
may be sure that they will be present everywhere in the cosmos where 
there is carbon-based life, utilizing the same 20 protogenic amino acids ”  
(Denton et al. 2002, 340). These authors further claim:  “ For the lawful 
nature of the folds provides for the ﬁ rst time evidence that the laws of 
nature may not only be ﬁ ne-tuned to generate an environment ﬁ t for life 
(the stage) but may also be ﬁ ne-tuned to generate the organic forms (the 
actors) as well, in other words that the cosmos may be even more bio-
centric than is currently envisaged . . . raising the possibility that all 
organic forms and indeed the whole pattern of life may ﬁ nally prove to 
be the determined end of physics and life a necessary feature of the 
fundamental order of nature ” (338). 
 Denton et al. ’ s view of an evolutionary process with  “ pre-ordained 
evolutionary paths ” and a lawlike behavior such that  “ the whole pattern 
of life may ﬁ nally prove to be the determined end of physics ”  is the very 
antithesis of the view of Gould (1999) and Kauffman (2008). Yet it is 
mirrored by the statements of other molecular biologists:  “ Darwinian 
evolution can follow only very few mutational paths to ﬁ tter proteins. 
. . . [W]e conclude that much protein evolution will be similarly con-
strained. This implies that the protein tape of life may be largely repro-
ducible and even predictable ”  (Weinreich et al. 2006, 111); and:  “ Our 
results show that, despite the dominance of contingency (historical acci-
dent) in some recent discussions of evolutionary mechanisms (Gould 
1989), purely chemical constraints (that is, the ability of only certain 

270 
Chapter 8
sequences to carry out particular functions) can lead to the repeated 
evolution of the same macromolecular structures ”  (Salehi-Ashtiani and 
Szostak 2001, 84). 
 On the macroscopic scale of biological form, the paleontologist Simon 
Conway Morris (2003, 309) argues that most of the potential hyperspace 
of form is empty, and that the pathways through that hyperspace have 
been repeatedly traveled in evolution due to evolutionary constraint: 
 “ The phenomenon of evolutionary convergence indicates that . . . the 
number of alternatives is strictly limited, with the interesting implication 
that the vast bulk of any given  ‘ hyperspace ’  not only never will be visited 
during evolutionary exploration but it never can be. These are the 
howling wildernesses of the maladaptive, the 99.9% recurring of biologi-
cal space where things don ’ t work, the Empty Quarters of biological 
non-existence. ”  That is, life is constrained to evolve in only a tiny fraction, 
0.1 percent, of the potential form hyperspace, and it is this constraint that 
produces convergent evolution. 
 Conway Morris (2003, 309 – 310) further argues that the available evo-
lutionary pathways in the hyperspace, and the nodes within the hyper-
space where functional forms can exist, have been preset from the very 
beginning of the universe:  “ It is my suspicion that . . . the nodes of occu-
pation are effectively predetermined from the Big Bang. ”  The idea that 
evolution must follow predetermined pathways, set by the constants and 
laws of nature from the very beginning of the universe, leads to the idea 
that evolution in these predetermined pathways is not only predictable 
but also inevitable:  “ The principal aim of this book has been to show that 
the constraints of evolution and the ubiquity of convergence make the 
emergence of something like ourselves a near-inevitability ”  (Conway 
Morris 2003, 328). 
 Is evolution predictable, preordained, and inevitable? If so, it should 
have not only a direction but also an ultimate destination. This was cer-
tainly the view of another paleontologist, Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, as 
described by Aczel (2007, 75 – 76):  “ the ideas of evolution became so 
powerful that they convinced him that everything in the universe, inani-
mate objects and living systems alike, was in constant ﬂ ux, ever evolving 
as decreed by God. The goal was a point where everything would con-
verge to form the body of Christ. This was Teilhard ’ s Omega Point. ”  
Teilhard was religious, a Jesuit priest, and it is notable that both Conway 
Morris ’ s  Life ’ s Solution  (2003) and Barlow ’ s  Let There Be Sight! A Cel-
ebration of Convergent Evolution  (2005) have a religious component to 
their argumentation. 

Philosophical Implications of Convergent Evolution 
271
 Other scientists have also come to the conclusion that evolution is 
predictable and lawlike, but from a materialist rather than religious 
viewpoint, such as the Russian zoologist Leo Berg in his book  Nomo-
genesis: Or Evolution Determined by Law  (1922). From an admittedly 
materialist viewpoint, the astrobiologist David Grinspoon (2003, 412) 
also writes of predictable, goal-directed evolution:  “ what I mean by spiri-
tuality is the religious impulse stripped of religion. . . . I believe the 
phenomenon of humanity on Earth is a local example of a trend toward 
higher consciousness and spiritual enlightenment that transpires all over 
this universe. . . . Cosmic spiritual advancement by Darwinian natural 
selection! ”  Kauffman (2008) was able to ﬁ nd spirituality in the view that 
evolution was unpredictable, contingent, nonrepeating, and directionless, 
as discussed in the previous section of this chapter. Thus, it is very inter-
esting that spirituality has also been found in the exact opposite view 
that evolution is predictable, preordained, and inevitable. 
 It is clear that many who believe that evolution is predictable, preor-
dained, and inevitable ﬁ nd comfort in the lawlike certainty of this point 
of view. Others react with horror to this point of view, and ﬁ nd it depress-
ingly deterministic, stultifying rather than creative, enslaving rather than 
liberating. Where is individual freedom, where is creativity, in an evolu-
tionary process that already has a predetermined destination? 
 Judging the Arguments: Evolutionary Views on Trial 
 We have now reviewed the arguments for the view that evolution is 
unpredictable, contingent, nonrepeating, and directionless and those for 
the view that evolution is predictable, predetermined, and inevitable. 
What are the implications of the phenomenon of convergent evolution, 
the subject of this book, with regards to these radically different views 
of evolution? 
 First, the view that the evolutionary process is nonrepeating (noner-
gotic) is demonstrably false. Chapters 2 through 6 of this book have 
demonstrated that evolution is a highly repeatable process. In fact, 
repeatability in evolution is rampant at every level of life on Earth, from 
tiny organic molecules to entire ecosystems of species, and even to the 
ways in which we think. 
 Second, the view that evolution is entirely historically contingent, and 
thus unpredictable (and nonrepeating), is demonstrably false. Conver-
gent evolution — the repeated, independent, evolution of the same trait 
in multiple phylogenetic lineages at different points in geological time —

272 
Chapter 8
 reveals to us the limits imposed upon evolution by functional constraints. 
Once we know what those limits are, we can use them to predict the 
trajectory of future evolution by predicting that those constraints will 
continue to operate in the future, just as they have in the past. Given an 
Earth-like world elsewhere in the universe, we can also predict that the 
same functional constraints that exist on Earth will be in operation on 
that world as well. Each step in the evolution of a Jurassic ichthyosaur 
and a Cenozoic porpoise has its unique contingent aspects, yet the end 
result was the same: a fusiform body, the same body form that is found 
in a shark or a swordﬁ sh (see table 2.1). If any large, fast-swimming 
organisms exist in the oceans of Jupiter ’ s moon Europa, swimming under 
the perpetual ice that covers their world, I predict with conﬁ dence that 
they will have streamlined, fusiform bodies; that is, they will look very 
similar to a porpoise, an ichthyosaur, a swordﬁ sh, or a shark. 
 Third, the view that evolution is directionless needs more careful 
examination. Reiss ’ s view that there is no adaptive improvement in evo-
lution is demonstrably false. Reiss (2009, 140) objects to the idea that 
 “ evolution is a process going from a less-adapted to a better-adapted 
state ”  under the inﬂ uence of the  “ deterministic force ”  of natural selec-
tion because he considers that idea to be teleological. Is it teleological 
that water ﬂ ows downhill? That it goes from a state of higher potential 
energy to a state of lower potential energy under the inﬂ uence of the 
deterministic force of gravity? Philosophers may argue about whether 
that phenomenon is teleological or not, but in science it is an empirical 
observation, an established fact. 
 It is an empirical observation that adaptive improvement occurs in 
much of biological evolution. In fact, the adaptive landscape concept of 
Sewall Wright (which Reiss objects to as teleological) can be used to 
analyze actual cases of adaptive improvement in biological evolution 
(McGhee 2007). However, there does exist one model of evolution that 
corresponds to Reiss ’ s view: the Red Queen hypothesis (Van Valen 
1973), named after the Red Queen in Lewis Carroll ’ s  Alice ’ s Adventures 
in Wonderland (1865), who told Alice that she had to constantly keep 
running just in order to stay in the same place. In such a scenario, a 
species can only evolve fast enough to exactly maintain its same position 
on a moving adaptive peak; that is, it evolves fast enough to avoid sliding 
downslope with time (and thus to eventual extinction), yet it cannot 
evolve fast enough to climb upslope on the peak to higher levels of 
adaptation (McGhee 2007, 27 – 28). The species is constantly evolving, but 
perpetually stuck at the same degree of adaptation. The Red Queen 

Philosophical Implications of Convergent Evolution 
273
hypothesis is a rather bleak evolutionary possibility, in that no adaptive 
improvement ever takes place, and the probability of the species going 
extinct is always a constant regardless of whether the species is young, 
in existence only a few hundred years, or has been present on the Earth 
for millions of years. 
 Reiss (2009, 140) further objects to the idea that natural selection is a 
deterministic force that directs the evolutionary process toward a better 
adapted state because that idea appears to be goal directed, or teleologi-
cal. Is it teleological that water ﬂ ows in rivers toward the future  “ goal ”  
of reaching a sea or lake? The ﬂ ow of water is mindless, and water has 
no goal in sight, but nevertheless it will reach its lowest possible potential 
energy state under the deterministic force of gravity, which means that 
it will wind up in a sea or lake. 
 Part of Reiss ’ s goal-directed objection stems from the fact that both 
Darwin and Wright used the analogy of human artiﬁ cial selection in 
trying to explain the process of nonhuman natural selection. As quoted 
earlier, Reiss complains:  “ Wright seems never to have realized that while 
in the context of domestic breeds it may be reasonable to speak of 
 ‘ improvement ’ by selection of  ‘ superior ’ herds, where the standard of 
value is determined by the goals of the breeder, no such a priori standard 
of overall value exists in nature ”  (Reiss 2009, 174). That is, Reiss argues 
that a human breeder may have a standard value or goal that he or she 
is trying to achieve in artiﬁ cial selection, but that no such standard value 
or goal exists in nature. This argument is demonstrably false, because the 
phenomenon of convergent evolution abundantly demonstrates that the 
environment does have a priori standards of overall value. The laws of 
physics impose the functional constraints, the a priori standards, that 
fast-swimming organisms must be fusiform in shape (see table 2.1) and 
that ﬂ ying organisms must have wings (see table 2.2). And so on, for all 
the myriad examples of convergent evolution that have been considered 
in chapters 2 through 6 of this book. 
 However, there is a real difference between the a priori standards of 
human artiﬁ cial selection and nonhuman natural selection: the human 
mind. The a priori standards of nature are mindless functional constraints 
imposed by the laws of physics and geometry. It is part of Darwin ’ s genius 
that he realized that the mindless a priori standards of nature would sort 
out organic variation in a process of mindless natural selection (for a 
book-length discussion of modern misconceptions regarding teleology 
and adaptation, see Ruse 2003). Natural selection has a direction only in 
the sense that it will, in general, operate to move evolving organisms up 

274 
Chapter 8
the slopes of the adaptive landscape to higher states of adaptation 
(McGhee 2007). It is the empirical observation that the number of these 
higher states of adaptation, or adaptive peaks, is  limited  that gives evolu-
tion its direction. If the number of adaptive peaks were inﬁ nite, then each 
species on Earth would be morphologically different from every other 
species, and each species would have its own unique ecological role, or 
niche. Such an Earth does not exist. Instead, repeated evolutionary con-
vergence on similar morphologies, niches, molecules, and even mental 
states is the norm on Earth. 
 Fourth: while evolution is not directionless, it has not been proved that 
the constraint on evolutionary pathways available for life to evolve along 
was predetermined from the beginning of the universe. It is certainly a 
possibility, as Einstein himself wondered if there was any freedom left 
for alternative ways for the physical universe to evolve once the con-
stants and laws of nature were established at the Big Bang, and the same 
could be true for biological evolution, as discussed in chapter 7. Thus, 
one could indeed argue that functional constraints, which are themselves 
a function of the laws of physics and geometry, have been invariant since 
the beginning of the universe if those same laws of physics and geometry 
have been. 
 It is the role of developmental constraint in convergent evolution that 
leads to uncertainty in the argument for predetermined constraints. 
Although Stern (2010) has argued for a  “ predictable genome ”  and 
Brakeﬁ eld (2006, 364) notes that  “ patterns of parallel morphological 
evolution given similar ecological opportunities are to be expected and 
that, given sufﬁ cient knowledge of developmental processes, they could 
be predictable, ”  this possible predictability refers solely to the develop-
mental regulatory processes evolved by Earth life. Would life elsewhere 
in the universe evolve the same developmental constraints? How much 
of developmental constraint is lawlike and predictable, a function of 
the laws of physics and geometry at the level of molecules, cells, and 
tissues (Newman et al. 2006; M ü ller 2007; see also chapter 5), and how 
much is it a function of chance in the evolution of life speciﬁ c to the 
Earth, and unpredictable? As we saw in chapter 7, the possibility that 
life elsewhere, evolving with different developmental constraints, 
might be able to develop functional forms that cannot be developed by 
life on Earth limits our ability to predict the outcome of evolution with 
certainty. 
 Fifth: it has not been proved that biological evolution is inevitable, that 
it has a destination. And even if it did, it is not clear how we might deter-

Philosophical Implications of Convergent Evolution 
275
mine what that destination might be. Even our models for the physical 
evolution of the universe have changed radically over the past century: 
once it was thought the universe was steady-state, and would inﬁ nitely 
persist. Then it was thought that the universe would eventually cease to 
expand, and then collapse upon itself in a sort of reverse-Big-Bang ﬁ re-
ball. Now it is generally thought the universe will continue to expand 
inﬁ nitely and that all the stars will eventually burn out, one by one, in a 
cold, dark universal death. But, as we currently still do not truly under-
stand dark matter or dark energy, that model of the ultimate destination 
of the physical evolution of the universe may change in the future as 
well. As yet, we have no equivalent models for the ultimate destination 
of biological evolution. If we cannot, at present, conﬁ dently predict the 
ultimate destination of the physical evolution of the universe, how can 
we hope to predict the ultimate destination of the vastly more complex 
process of biological evolution? 
 There are hints that such a destination might exist: the increase in 
complexity produced by evolution in the past 3.5 billion years of Earth 
history, and the evolution of self-awareness in the past 5 to 10 million 
years in multiple independent lineages (see table 6.7). The universe has 
become aware of itself (Grinspoon 2003). Is such a trend intrinsic to the 
process of biological evolution? The self-assembling properties of bio-
logical evolution, and its constant building upon previous evolutionary 
steps via the process of natural selection, would lead us to predict that 
such a process should produce increasing complexity in other life forms 
as well, on other worlds. 
 Have life forms on other worlds become self-aware? Has matter awak-
ened, has the universe become aware of itself elsewhere? We have no 
evidence that this has occurred, although we keep searching the skies for 
possible electromagnetic or other signals that would point to the exis-
tence of extraterrestrial civilizations of self-aware organisms in search of 
other self-aware organisms. On Earth, the convergent evolution of self-
awareness has been linked to the convergent evolution of complex social 
systems, as discussed in chapter 6. The fact that, on Earth, life in the sea 
and life on land — life in radically different environments — both have 
evolved convergent social systems and self-awareness would lead us to 
predict that self-awareness would evolve on extraterrestrial worlds as 
well. 
 Or is self-awareness an intrinsic property of the developmental regula-
tory systems present in animal life on Earth? Would life elsewhere, 
evolving under different developmental constraints, have evolved social 

276 
Chapter 8
systems similar to those convergently evolved by Earth life, and hence 
self-awareness? 
 The Question of Extraterrestrial Life 
 The phenomenon of convergent evolution demonstrates that life  repeat-
edly  evolves in a ﬁ nite number of preferred directions and, as such, is in 
principle predictable. Analysis of that phenomenon reveals that it is 
driven by functional and developmental constraints on evolution. 
However, we have only one example of that phenomenon in operation: 
Earth life. Thus, given the existence of an extraterrestrial planet with 
Earth-like physical conditions, we can predict that the same functional 
constraints that have shaped the evolution of life on Earth will operate 
in a similar fashion on that extraterrestrial planet. Life on that planet 
will look  “ strangely familiar, ”  as David Grinspoon (2003) argues in the 
epigraph at the beginning of this chapter. 
 Francis Crick (1988) may also be right, as well. Convergent evolution 
of life forms on Earth has also been driven by developmental constraints. 
Totally different life forms, such as silicon-based life, would undoubtedly 
evolve with developmental constraints different from those that operate 
in life on Earth. The  “ laws of biology ” would be different for those life 
forms, and they might evolve forms that are totally unlike those seen on 
Earth. 
 The question of the existence of extraterrestrial life is of crucial impor-
tance to the question of the predictability of evolution. Short of intelli-
gent extraterrestrials contacting us and discussing their biochemistry 
with us, we must search for such life ourselves. Within our own solar 
system (since, at present, we can only dream of spacecraft that could take 
us to other star systems), if life is present on Mars or even in the water 
oceans of Jupiter ’ s moon Europa, it is likely to be convergent on the 
carbon-based model found on Earth. Only the far-distant planet-like 
moons Titan and Triton offer physical conditions and chemistries radi-
cally different from those found on Earth, and the possibility of discover-
ing life  “ as we do not know it. ” 
 In Conclusion: A Rewrite of Darwin ’ s View of Life 
 Darwin (1859, 490), in a philosophical mood, closed the ﬁ rst edition of 
 On the Origin of Species with the sentence:  “ There is grandeur in this 
view of life, with its several powers, having been originally breathed into 

Philosophical Implications of Convergent Evolution 
277
a few forms or into one; and that, whilst this planet has gone cycling on 
according to the ﬁ xed law of gravity, from so simple a beginning endless 
forms most beautiful and most wonderful have been, and are being, 
evolved. ” 
 We now have the beneﬁ t of an additional 150 years of analysis of 
biological evolution. The phenomenon of convergent evolution leads us 
to reconsider Darwin ’ s closing sentence, at least for carbon-based life, 
and to suggest that it be rewritten (with the modern alterations in the 
original sentence indicated by italics):  “ There is grandeur in this view of 
life  in the universe , with its several powers  of functional and developmen-
tal constraint , having been originally breathed into a few forms  of life or 
into  just the  one  that is carbon based ; and that, whilst this planet  and 
others have  gone cycling on according to the ﬁ xed law of gravity, from 
so simple a beginning  limited  forms most beautiful and most wonderful 
have been, and are being,  re- evolved  throughout the universe . ” 


 Appendix: A Phylogenetic Classiﬁ cation of Life 
  
 
Table A.1
A phylogenetic classiﬁ cation of life forms discussed in this book
Eubacteria
Archaea
Eukarya
– Bikonta
– – Excavobionta
– – Rhizaria
– – Chromoalveolata
– – Green eukaryotes
– – – Glaucophyta
– – – Metabionta
– – – – Rhodobionta
– – – – Chlorobiota > see Table A.3
– Unikonta
– – Amoebozoa
– – Opisthokonta
– – – Fungi
– – – Choanozoa
– – – – Choanoﬂ agellata
– – – – Metazoa
– – – – – Placozoa
– – – – – Demospongiae
– – – – – Hexactinellida
– – – – – Calcarea
– – – – – Eumetazoa
– – – – – – Ctenophora
– – – – – – Cnidaria
– – – – – – Bilateria
– – – – – – – Protostomia

280 
Appendix
Table A.1
(continued)
– – – – – – – – Lophotrochozoa
– – – – – – – – – Lophophorata
– – – – – – – – – – Bryozoa
– – – – – – – – – – Phoronozoa
– – – – – – – – – – – Phoronida
– – – – – – – – – – – Brachiopoda
– – – – – – – – – Eutrochozoa
– – – – – – – – – – Syndermata
– – – – – – – – – – – Rotifera
– – – – – – – – – – – Acanthocephala
– – – – – – – – – – Spiralia
– – – – – – – – – – – Entoprocta
– – – – – – – – – – – Annelida
– – – – – – – – – – – Sipuncula
– – – – – – – – – – – Mollusca
– – – – – – – – – – – Parenchymia
– – – – – – – – – – – – Platyhelminthes
– – – – – – – – – – – – Nemertea
– – – – – – – – Cuticulata
– – – – – – – – – Gastrotricha
– – – – – – – – – Ecdysozoa
– – – – – – – – – – Introverta
– – – – – – – – – – – Nematozoa
– – – – – – – – – – – – Nematoda
– – – – – – – – – – – – Nematomorpha
– – – – – – – – – – – Cephalorhyncha
– – – – – – – – – – – – Kinorhyncha
– – – – – – – – – – – – Loricifera
– – – – – – – – – – – – Priapulida
– – – – – – – – – – Panarthropoda
– – – – – – – – – – – Onychophora
– – – – – – – – – – – Tardigrada
– – – – – – – – – – – Arthropoda
– – – – – – – – – – – – Cheliceriformes
– – – – – – – – – – – – Mandibulata
– – – – – – – – Chaetognatha
– – – – – – – Deuterostomia
– – – – – – – – Echinodermata
– – – – – – – – Pharyngotremata
– – – – – – – – – Hemichordata

A Phylogenetic Classiﬁ cation of Life 
281
Table A.1
(continued)
– – – – – – – – – Chordata
– – – – – – – – – – Urochordata
– – – – – – – – – – Myomerozoa
– – – – – – – – – – – Cephalochordata
– – – – – – – – – – – Craniata
– – – – – – – – – – – – †Conodonta
– – – – – – – – – – – – Myxinoidea
– – – – – – – – – – – – Vertebrata > see Table A.2
Note: Major clades used frequently in the text for comparative purposes are in boldface 
type. Extinct taxa are marked with a †. Classiﬁ cation modiﬁ ed from Lecointre and Le 
Guyader (2006) and Benton (2005).
Table A.2
A phylogenetic classiﬁ cation of vertebrate taxa discussed in this book
Vertebrata
– Petromyzontiformes
– †Pteraspidomorphi
– †Osteostraci
– Gnathostomata
– – †Placodermi
– – Chondrichthyes
– – †Acanthodii
– – Osteichthyes
– – – Actinopterygii
– – – Sarcopterygii
– – – – Dipnoi
– – – – Crossopterygii
– – – – – Actinistia
– – – – Tetrapodomorpha
– – – – – Tetrapoda
– – – – – – Batrachomorpha
– – – – – – – †Dendrerpetontidae
– – – – – – – †Dissorophidae
– – – – – – – Lissamphibia
– – – – – – – – Gymnophiona
– – – – – – – – Batrachia
– – – – – – – – – Anura
– – – – – – – – – Urodela
– – – – – – †Lepospondyli

282 
Appendix
Table A.2
(continued)
– – – – – – Reptiliomorpha
– – – – – – – †Seymouriamorpha
– – – – – – – †Diadectomorpha
– – – – – – – Amniota
– – – – – – – – Sauropsida
– – – – – – – – – Anapsida
– – – – – – – – – – Testudines
– – – – – – – – – Diapsida
– – – – – – – – – – †Ichthyosauria
– – – – – – – – – – Lepidosauromorpha
– – – – – – – – – – – †Sauropterygia
– – – – – – – – – – – Lepidosauria
– – – – – – – – – – – – Sphenodontia
– – – – – – – – – – – – Squamata
– – – – – – – – – – – – – Iguania
– – – – – – – – – – – – – Scleroglossa
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – Amphisbaenia
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – Gekkonta
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – Autarchoglossa
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Scincomorpha
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Anguimorpha
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – †Mosasauridae
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Serpentes
– – – – – – – – – – Archosauromorpha
– – – – – – – – – – – Archosauria
– – – – – – – – – – – – Crurotarsi
– – – – – – – – – – – – Ornithodira
– – – – – – – – – – – – – †Pterosauria
– – – – – – – – – – – – – Dinosauria
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – Saurischia
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – †Sauropodomorpha
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Theropoda
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – †Ceratosauria
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Tetanurae
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – †Carnosauria
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Coelurosauria
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Maniraptora
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Aves
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Paleognathae
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Neognathae
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Galloanserae
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Neoaves

A Phylogenetic Classiﬁ cation of Life 
283
Table A.2
(continued)
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – †Ornithischia
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – †Fabrosauridae
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – †Genasauria
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – †Thyreophora
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – †Cerapoda
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – †Ornithopoda
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – †Marginocephalia
– – – – – – – – Synapsida
– – – – – – – – – †Ophiacodontidae
– – – – – – – – – †Edaphosauridae
– – – – – – – – – †Sphenacodontidae
– – – – – – – – – Therapsida
– – – – – – – – – – †Dinocephalia
– – – – – – – – – – †Dicynodontia
– – – – – – – – – – †Gorgonopsia
– – – – – – – – – – Cynodontia
– – – – – – – – – – – Mammalia
– – – – – – – – – – – – †Volaticotheria
– – – – – – – – – – – – †Yinotheria
– – – – – – – – – – – – Australosphenida
– – – – – – – – – – – – – †Ausktribosphenida
– – – – – – – – – – – – – Monotremata
– – – – – – – – – – – – †Multituberculata
– – – – – – – – – – – – Theria
– – – – – – – – – – – – – Marsupialia
– – – – – – – – – – – – – Eutheria
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – Xenarthra
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – Epitheria
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Afrotheria
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Boreoeutheria
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – †Apatemyidae
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Laurasiatheria
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Eulipotyphles
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Scrotifera
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Chiroptera
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Fereungulata
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Ferae
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – †Creodonta
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Carnivora
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Pholidota

284 
Appendix
Table A.2
(continued)
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Perissodactyla
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – †Meridiungulata
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Cetartiodactyla
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Euarchontoglires
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Glires
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Lagomorpha
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Rodentia
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Euarchonta
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Dermoptera
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Primates
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Strepsirrhini
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Haplorrhini
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Tarsiiformes
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Simiiformes
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Platyrrhini
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Catarrhini
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Cercopithecoidea
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Hominoidea
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Hylobatoidae
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Hominoidae
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Pongidae
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Hominidae
Note: Major clades used frequently in the text for comparative purposes are in boldface 
type. Extinct taxa are marked with a †. Classiﬁ cation modiﬁ ed from Lecointre and Le 
Guyader (2006) and Benton (2005).
Table A.3
A phylogenetic classiﬁ cation of plant taxa discussed in this book
Chlorobionta
– Ulvophyta
– Prasinophyta
– Streptophyta
– – Chlorokybophyta
– – Klebsormidiophyta
– – Phragmoplastophyta
– – – Zygnematophyta
– – – Plasmodesmophyta
– – – – Chaetosphaeridiophyta
– – – – Charophyta

A Phylogenetic Classiﬁ cation of Life 
285
Table A.3
(continued)
– – – – Parenchymophyta
– – – – – Coleochaetophyta
– – – – – Embryophyta
– – – – – – Marchantiophyta
– – – – – – Stomatophyta
– – – – – – – Anthocerophyta
– – – – – – – Hemitracheophyta
– – – – – – – – Bryophyta sensu stricto
– – – – – – – – Polysporangiophyta
– – – – – – – – – †Horneophyta
– – – – – – – – – Tracheophyta
– – – – – – – – – – Lycophyta
– – – – – – – – – – Euphyllophyta
– – – – – – – – – – – Moniliformopses
– – – – – – – – – – – – †Cladoxylopsida
– – – – – – – – – – – – Equisetophyta
– – – – – – – – – – – – Filicophyta
– – – – – – – – – – – Lignophyta
– – – – – – – – – – – – †Aneurophytales
– – – – – – – – – – – – †Archaeopteridales
– – – – – – – – – – – – Spermatophyta
– – – – – – – – – – – – – †Lyginopteridales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – †Medullosanales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – †Gigantopteridales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – Ginkgophyta
– – – – – – – – – – – – – Cycadophyta
– – – – – – – – – – – – – Pinophyta
– – – – – – – – – – – – – Gnetophyta
– – – – – – – – – – – – – Angiospermae
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – Amborellales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – Nymphaeales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – Austrobaileyales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – Euangiosperms
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Chloranthales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Ceratophyllales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Magnoliidae
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Magnoliales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Laurales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Canellales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Piperales

286 
Appendix
Table A.3
(continued)
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Monocotyledons
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Acorales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Alismatales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Eumonocotyledons
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Miyoshiales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Dioscoreales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Pandanales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Liliales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Asparagales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Commelinidae
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Eudicots
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Ranunculalaes
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Sabiales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Proteales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Buxales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Trochodendrales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Core eudicots
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Berberidopsidales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Santalales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Dilleniales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Caryophyllales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Saxifragales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Vitales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Rosidae
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Crossosomatales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Geraniales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Myrtales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Eurosids I
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Eurosids II
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Asteridae
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Cornales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Ericales
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Euasteridae
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Euasterids I
– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – – Euasterids II
Note: Major clades used frequently in the text for comparative purposes are in boldface 
type. Extinct taxa are marked with a †. Classiﬁ cation modiﬁ ed from Lecointre and Le 
Guyader (2006), Donoghue (2005), APG II (2003), and Niklas (1997).

 Aczel ,  A. D.  2007 .  The Jesuit and the skull .  New York :  Riverhead Books . 
 Agosta ,  W.  1996 .  Bombardier beetles and fever trees: A close-up look at chemical warfare 
and signals in animals and plants .  Reading, Mass. :  Helix Books . 
 Alberch ,  P.  1989 .  The logic of monsters: Evidence for internal constraint in development 
and evolution.  Geobios (Lyon, France): Memoire Special  12 : 21 – 57 . 
 Albert ,  V. A. ,  S. E.  Williams , and  M. W.  Chase .  1992 .  Carnivorous plants: Phylogeny and 
structural evolution.  Science  257 : 1491 – 1495 . 
 APG II .  2003 .  An update of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group classiﬁ cation for the orders 
and families of ﬂ owering plants: APG II.    Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 
 141 : 399 – 436 . 
   Axe ,  D. D.   2004 .  Estimating the prevalence of protein sequences adopting functional 
enzyme folds.  Journal of Molecular Biology  341 : 1295 – 1315 . 
 Baber ,  C.  2003 .  Cognition and tool use: Forms of engagement in human and animal use of 
tools .  London :  Taylor and Francis . 
 Bailly ,  X. ,  S.  Vanin ,  C.  Chabasse ,  K.  Mizuguchi , and  S. N.  Vinogradov .  2008 .  A phylogenetic 
proﬁ le of hemerythrins, the nonheme diiron binding respiratory proteins.    BMC Evolution-
ary Biology  8 : 244 , doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-8-244 . 
 Bakker ,  R. T.  1983 .  The deer ﬂ ees, the wolf pursues: Incongruencies in predator-prey coevo-
lution . In   Coevolution , ed.  D. J.  Futuyma and  M.  Slatkin ,  350 – 382 .  Sunderland, Mass. : 
 Sinauer Associates, Inc . 
 Bakker ,  R. T.  1986 .  The dinosaur heresies .  New York :  William Morrow . 
 Ballerini ,  M. ,  N.  Cabibbo ,  R.  Candelier ,  A.  Cavagna ,  E.  Cisbani ,  I.  Giardina ,  V.  Lecomte ,  A. 
 Orlandi ,  G.  Parisi ,  A.  Procaccini, M.  Viale , and V.  Zdravkovic .  2008.  Interaction ruling 
animal collective behavior depends on topological rather than metric distance: Evidence 
from a ﬁ eld study .   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America  105 (4):  1232 – 1237 . 
   Bambach ,  R. K.   1983 .  Ecospace utilization and guilds in marine communities through the 
Phanerozoic . In  Biotic interactions in recent and fossil benthic communities , ed.  M. J. S. 
 Tevesz and  P. M.  McCall ,  719 – 746 .  New York :  Plenum . 
 Barlow ,  C.  2005. Let there be sight! A celebration of convergent evolution.  http://www
.thegreatstory.org . 
  Barrett ,  P. M.   2005.   The diet of ostrich dinosaurs (Theropoda: Ornithomimosauris) .   Palae-
ontology  48 (2):  347 – 358 . 
 Baskin ,  D. G. , and  D. W.  Goldring .  1970 .  Experimental studies on the endocrinology 
and reproductive biology of the viviparous polychaete annelid,  Nereis limnicola Johnson. 
 Biological Bulletin  139 : 461 – 475 . 
 References 

288 
References
   Bastian ,  J.   1982 .  Vision and electroreception: Integration of sensory information in the optic 
tectum of the weakly electric ﬁ sh  Apteronotus albifrons.  Journal of Comparative Physiol-
ogy  147A : 287 – 297 . 
 Bateman ,  R. M. , and  W. A.  DiMichele .  1994 .  Heterospory: The most iterative key innovation 
in the evolutionary history of the plant kingdom.    Biological Reviews of the Cambridge 
Philosophical Society  69 : 345 – 417 . 
   Bennett ,  S. C.   1996 .  Aerodynamics and thermoregulatory function of the dorsal sail of 
 Edaphosaurus .  Paleobiology  22 ( 4 ): 496 – 506 . 
 Benton ,  M. J.  2005 .  Vertebrate palaeontology .  3rd ed.  Oxford :  Blackwell Publishing . 
 Berg ,  L. S.  1922 .  Nomogenesis; or, evolution determined by law .  Cambridge, Mass. :  Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology Press (1969 reprint). 
 Berkov ,  A. ,  N.  Rodr í guez , and  P.  Centeno .  2008 .  Convergent evolution in the antennae of 
a cerambycid beetle,  Onychocerus albitarsis , and the sting of a scorpion.    Naturwissen-
schaften  95 ( 3 ): 257 – 261 . 
 Berman ,  D. S. ,  R. R.  Reisz ,  D.  Scott ,  A. C.  Henrici ,  S. S.  Sumida , and  T.  Martens .  2000 .  Early 
Permian bipedal reptile.  Science  290 : 968 – 972 . 
 Bernhardt ,  P.  2000 .  Convergent evolution and adaptive radiation of beetle-pollinated 
angiosperms.  Plant Systematics and Evolution  222 : 293 – 320 . 
   Blackburn ,  D. G.   1992 .  Convergent evolution of viviparity, matrotrophy, and specializations 
for fetal nutrition in reptiles and other vertebrates.  American Zoologist  32 : 313 – 321 . 
 Blackburn ,  D. G.  1993 .  Chorioallantoic placentation in squamate reptiles: Structure, func-
tion, development, and evolution.  Journal of Experimental Zoology  266 : 414 – 430 . 
   Blackburn ,  D. G.   2000 .  Reptilian viviparity: Past research, future directions, and appropriate 
models.  Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology Part A  127A : 391 – 409 . 
 Blackburn ,  D. G. ,  L. J.  Vitt , and  C. A.  Beuchat .  1984 .  Eutherian-like reproductive specializa-
tions in a viviparous reptile.    Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America  81 : 4860 – 4863 . 
 Block ,  B. A. ,  J. R.  Finnerty ,  A. F. R.  Stewart , and  J.  Kidd .  1993 .  Evolution of endothermy in 
ﬁ sh: Mapping physiological traits on a molecular phylogeny.  Science  260 : 210 – 214 . 
 Blumberg ,  M. S.  2009 .  Freaks of nature: What anomalies tell us about development and 
evolution .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
   Boomsma ,  J. J.   2009 .  Lifetime monogamy and the evolution of eusociality.    Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London: Series B, Biological Sciences  B364 : 3191 – 
3207 . 
 Bork ,  P. ,  C.  Sander , and  A.  Valencia .  1993 .  Convergent evolution of similar enzymatic func-
tion on different protein folds: The hexokinase, ribokinase, and galactokinase families of 
sugar kinases.  Protein Science  2 : 31 – 40 . 
 Bowmaker ,  J. K. , and  D. M.  Hunt .  2006 .  Evolution of vertebrate visual pigments.  Current 
Biology  16 ( 13 ): R484 – R489 . 
 Boyce ,  C. K. , and  A. H.  Knoll .  2002 .  Evolution of developmental potential and the 
multiple independent origins of leaves in Paleozoic vascular plants.    Paleobiology  28 
( 1 ): 70 – 100 . 
   Brady ,  S. G.   2003 .  Evolution of the army ant syndrome: The origin and long-term 
evolutionary stasis of a complex of behavioral and reproductive adaptations.    Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  100 ( 11 ): 6575 – 
6579 . 
 Brady ,  S. G. ,  S.  Sipes ,  A.  Pearson , and  B. N.  Danforth .  2006 .  Recent and simultaneous origins 
of eusociality in halictid bees.    Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London: 
Series B, Biological Sciences  B273 : 1643 – 1649 . 
 Brakeﬁ eld ,  P. M.   2006 .  Evo-devo and constraints on selection.    Trends in Ecology and Evolu-
tion  21 ( 7 ): 362 – 368 . 

References 
289
 Budelmann ,  B. , and  H.  Bleckmann .  1988 .  A lateral line analogue in cephalopods: Water 
waves generate microphonic potentials in the epidermal head lines of  Sepia and  Lolligun-
cula .  Journal of Comparative Physiology  164A : 1 – 5 . 
 Buhl ,  J. ,  D. J. T.  Sumpter ,  I. D.  Couzin ,  J. J.  Hale ,  E.  Despland ,  E. R.  Miller , and  S. J.  Simpson . 
 2006 .  From disorder to order in marching locusts.  Science  312 : 1402 – 1406 . 
 Bull ,  J. , and  J.  Farrand .  1988 .  The Audubon Society ﬁ eld guide to North American birds .  New 
York :  Alfred A. Knopf . 
 Bush ,  A. M. ,  R. K.  Bambach , and  G. M.  Daley .  2007 .  Changes in theoretical ecospace utiliza-
tion in marine fossil assemblages between the mid-Paleozoic and late Cenozoic.    Paleobiol-
ogy  33 ( 1 ): 76 – 97 . 
   Byrne ,  M.   2005 .  Viviparity in the sea star Cryptasterina hysteria (Asterinidae): Conserved 
and modiﬁ ed features in reproduction and development.  Biological Bulletin  208 : 81 – 91 . 
 Camazine ,  S. ,  J.-L.  Deneubourg ,  N. R.  Franks ,  J.  Sneyd ,  G.  Theraulaz , and  E.  Bonabeau . 
 2001 .  Self-organization in biological systems .  Princeton :  Princeton University Press . 
 Cameron ,  K. M. ,  K. J.  Wurdack , and  R. W.  Jobson .  2002 .  Molecular evidence for the common 
origin of snap-traps among carnivorous plants.    American Journal of Botany  89 ( 9 ):
 1503 – 1509 . 
 Cameron ,  S. A. , and  P.  Mardulyn .  2001 .  Multiple molecular data sets suggest independent 
origins of highly eusocial behavior in bees (Hymenoptera: Apinae).    Systematic Biology  50 
( 2 ): 194 – 214 . 
 Carrano ,  M. T. ,  C. M.  Janis , and  J. J.  Sepkoski .  1999 .  Hadrosaurs as ungulate parallels: Lost 
lifestyles and deﬁ cient data.  Acta Palaeontologica Polonica  44 ( 3 ): 237 – 261 . 
 Carroll ,  L.  [C. W. Dodgson].  1865 .  Alice ’ s adventures in Wonderland .  London :  Macmillan .  
   Carroll ,  R. L. , and  W.   Lindsay .  1985 .  Cranial anatomy of the primitive reptile  Procolophon . 
 Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences  22 : 1571 – 1587 . 
 Carroll ,  S. B.  2006 .  Endless forms most beautiful: The new science of EvoDevo .  New York : 
 W. W. Norton and Co . 
   Carter ,  A. M.   2008 .  What fossils can tell us about the evolution of viviparity and placenta-
tion.  Placenta  29 : 930 – 931 . 
 Cashmore ,  A. R. ,  J. A.  Jarillo ,  Y.-J.  Wu , and  D.  Liu .  1999 .  Cryptochromes: Blue light recep-
tors for plants and animals.  Science  284 : 760 – 765 . 
   Castelvecchi ,  D.   2007 .  Alien pizza, anyone? Biochemistry may have taken a different turn 
on other worlds.  Science News  172 : 107 – 109 . 
 Casti ,  J. L.  1989 .  Paradigms lost: Tackling the unanswered mysteries of modern science . 
 New York :  Avon Bard . 
 Castoe ,  T. A. ,  A. P. J.  de Koning ,  H.-M.  Kim ,  B. P.  Noonan ,  G.  Naylor ,  Z. J.  Jiang ,  C. L.  Par-
kinson , and  D. D.   Pollock .  2009 .  Evidence for an ancient adaptive episode of convergent 
molecular evolution.    Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 
of America  106 ( 22 ): 8986 – 8991 . 
 Castoe ,  T. A. ,  A. P. J.  de Koning , and  D. D.  Pollock .  2010 .  Adaptive molecular convergence: 
Molecular evolution versus molecular phylogenetics.    Communicative and Integrative 
Biology  3 ( 1 ): 67 – 69 . 
 Charnock ,  S. J. ,  I. E.  Brown ,  J. P.  Turkenburg ,  G. W.  Black , and  G. J.  Davies .  2002 .  Convergent 
evolution sheds light on the anti- β -elimination mechanism common to family 1 and 10 
polysaccharide lyases.    Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 
of America  99 ( 10 ): 12067 – 12072 . 
 Chen ,  L. ,  A. L.  DeVries , and  C.-H. C.  Cheng .  1997 .  Convergent evolution of antifreeze 
glycoproteins in Antarctic notothenioid ﬁ sh and Arctic cod.    Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  94 : 3817 – 3822 . 
 Cheng ,  Y.-N. ,  X.-C.  Wu , and  Q.  Ji .  2004 .  Triassic marine reptiles gave birth to live young. 
 Nature  432 : 383 – 386 . 

290 
References
 Cimino ,  G. ,  S.  De Rosa ,  S.  De Stefano ,  R.  Morrone , and  G.  Sodano .  1985 .  The chemical 
defense of nudibranch molluscs: Structure, biosynthetic origin and defensive properties of 
terpenoids from the dorid nudibranch  Dendrodoris grandiﬂ ora .  Tetrahedron  41 
( 6 ): 1093 – 1100 . 
 Clack ,  J. A.  2002 .  Gaining ground: The origin and evolution of tetrapods .  Bloomington : 
 Indiana University Press . 
 Claessens ,  L. P. A. M. ,  P. M.  O ’ Connor , and  D. M.  Unwin .  2009 .  Respiratory evolution 
facilitated the origin of pterosaur ﬂ ight and aerial gigantism.    PLoS ONE  4 ( 2 ): e4497 .  www
.plosone.org . 
 Clark ,  J. M. ,  L. L.  Jacobs , and  W. R.  Downs .  1989 .  Mammal-like dentition in a Mesozoic 
crocodylian.  Science  244 : 1064 – 1066 . 
 Clark ,  R. N. ,  J. M.  Curchin ,  J. W.  Barnes ,  R.  Jauman ,  L.  Sonderblom ,  D. P.  Cruikshank , 
 R. H.   Brown ,  et al.   2010 .  Detection and mapping hydrocarbon deposits on Titan .   Journal 
of Geophysical Research-Planets , doi: 10.1029/2009JE003369 . 
   Clayton ,  N. S. , and  Emery ,  N. J.   2008 .  Canny corvids and political primates: A case for 
convergent evolution in intelligence . In   The deep structure of biology , ed.  S. Conway  Morris , 
 128 – 142 .  West Conshohocken, Pa. :  Templeton Foundation Press . 
 Colosimo ,  P. F. ,  K. E.  Hosemann ,  S.  Balabhadra ,  G.  Villarreal ,  M.  Dickson ,  J.  Grimwood , 
 J.  Schmutz ,  R. M.  Myers ,  D.  Schluter , and  D. M.  Kingsley .  2005 .  Widespread parallel 
evolution in sticklebacks by repeated ﬁ xation of  Ectodysplasin alleles .  Science  307 : 1928 – 
1933 . 
 Conradt ,  L. , and  T. J.  Roper .  2005 .  Consensus decision making in animals.  Trends in Ecology 
and Evolution  20 ( 8 ): 449 – 456 . 
 Conway Morris ,  S.  2003 .  Life ’ s solution: Inevitable humans in a lonely universe .  Cambridge : 
 Cambridge University Press . 
   Conway Morris ,  S.   2008 .  Evolution and convergence: Some wider considerations . In   The 
deep structure of biology , ed.  S.  Conway Morris ,  46 – 67 .  West Conshohocken, Pa. :  Templeton 
Foundation Press . 
 Cooper ,  A. ,  C.  Lalueza-Fox ,  S.  Anderson ,  A.  Rambaut ,  J.  Austin , and  R.  Ward .  2001 .  Com-
plete mitochondrial genome sequences of two extinct moas clarify ratite evolution.    Nature 
 409 : 704 – 707 . 
 Couzin ,  I. D.  2007 .  Collective minds.  Nature  445 : 715 . 
 Couzin ,  I. D. , and  J.  Krause .  2003 .  Self-organization and collective behavior in vertebrates. 
 Advances in the Study of Behavior  32 : 1 – 75 . 
 Crespi ,  B. J. ,  D. A.  Carmean , and  T. W.  Chapman .  1997 .  Ecology and evolution of galling 
thrips and their allies.  Annual Review of Entomology  42 : 51 – 71 . 
 Crick ,  F. H. C.  1988 .  What mad pursuit: A personal view of scientiﬁ c discovery .  New York : 
 Basic Books . 
 Cronk ,  Q. , and  I.  Ojeda .  2008 .  Bird-pollinated ﬂ owers in an evolutionary and molecular 
context.  Journal of Experimental Botany  59 ( 4 ): 715 – 727 . 
 Darwin ,  C.  1859 .  On the origin of species by means of natural selection, or the preservation 
of favoured races in the struggle for life .  London :  John Murray . 
 Darwin ,  C.  1875 .  Insectivorous plants .  London :  John Murray . 
 Daugherty ,  C. H. ,  G. W.  Gibbs , and  R. A.  Hitchmough .  1993 .  Mega-island or micro-conti-
nent? New Zealand and its fauna.  Trends in Ecology and Evolution  8 ( 2 ): 437 – 442 . 
 Davies ,  P. L .,  J.  Baardsnes ,  M. J .  Kuiper , and  V. K .  Walker .  2002 .  Structure and function of 
antifreeze proteins .   Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London: Series B, 
Biological Sciences  B357 :  927 – 935 . 
 Davis ,  C. C .,  P. K .  Endress , and  D. A .  Baum .  2008 .  The evolution of ﬂ oral gigantism .   Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology  11 : 49 – 57 . 

References 
291
 Deeb ,  S. S. ,  M. J.  Wakeﬁ eld ,  T.  Tada ,  L.  Marotte ,  S.  Yokoyama , and  J. A. M.  Graves .  2003 . 
 The cone visual pigments of an Australian marsupial, the Tammar wallaby ( Macropus 
eugenii ): Sequence, spectral tuning, and evolution.    Molecular Biology and Evolution  20 
( 10 ): 1642 – 1649 . 
 Delabie ,  J. H. C.  2001 .  Trophobiosis between Formicidae and Hemiptera (Sternorrhyncha 
and Auchenorrhyncha): An overview.    Neotropical Entomology  30 ( 4 ): 501 – 516 . 
 DeMar ,  R. , and  J. R.  Bolt .  1981 .  Dentitional organization and function in a Triassic reptile. 
 Journal of Paleontology  55 : 967 – 984 . 
 Denton ,  E. J. , and  J.  Gray .  1985 .  Lateral-line-like antennae of certain of the Penaeidea 
(Crustacea, Decapoda, Natantia).  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London: Series B, Biological Sciences  B226 : 249 – 261 . 
 Denton ,  M. , and  C.  Marshall .  2001 .  Laws of forms revisited.  Nature  410 : 417 . 
 Denton ,  M. J. ,  C. J.  Marshall , and  M.  Legge .  2002 .  The protein folds as Platonic forms: New 
support for the pre-Darwinian conception of evolution by natural law.    Journal of Theoreti-
cal Biology  219 : 325 – 342 . 
 Dijkgraaf ,  S.  1967 .  Biological signiﬁ cance of the lateral line organs . In   Lateral line detectors , 
ed.  P. H.  Cahn ,  83 – 95 .  Bloomington :  Indiana University Press . 
 Donoghue ,  M. J.  2005 .  Key innovations, convergence, and success: Macroevolutionary 
lessons from plant phylogeny.  Paleobiology  31 ( 2  Supplement ): 77 – 93 . 
 Donoghue ,  P. C. J. , and  M. A.  Purnell .  1999 .  Mammal-like occlusion in conodonts.  Paleobiol-
ogy  25 ( 1 ): 58 – 74 . 
 Douglas ,  H. D. ,  III ,  J. E.  Co ,  T. H.  Jones ,  W. E.  Conner , and  J. F.  Day .  2005 .  Chemical odorant 
of colonial seabird repels mosquitos.  Journal of Medical Entomology  42 ( 4 ): 647 – 651 . 
 Duffy ,  J. E. ,  C. L.  Morrison , and  R.  R í os .  2000 .  Multiple origins of eusociality among sponge-
dwelling shrimps ( Synalpheus ).  Evolution: International Journal of Organic Evolution  54 
( 2 ): 503 – 516 . 
 Dulvy ,  N. K. , and  J. D.  Reynolds .  1997 .  Evolutionary transitions among egg- laying, live-
bearing and maternal inputs in sharks and rays.    Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society of London: Series B, Biological Sciences  B264 : 1309 – 1315 . 
 Dunn ,  R. R. ,  A. D.  Gove ,  T. G.  Barraclough ,  T. J.  Givnish , and  J. D.  Majer .  2007 .  Convergent 
evolution of an ant-plant mutualism across plant families, continents, and time.    Evolution-
ary Ecology Research  9 : 1349 – 1362 . 
 Eisner ,  T. ,  M.  Eisner , and  M.  Siegler .  2005 .  Secret weapons: Defenses of insects, spiders, 
scorpions, and other many-legged creatures .  Cambridge, Mass. :  Belknap Press . 
   Ellison ,  A. M. , and  N. J.   Gotelli .  2009 .  Energetics and the evolution of carnivorous plants —
 Darwin ’ s  “ most wonderful plants in the world. ”  Journal of Experimental Botany  60 
( 1 ): 19 – 42 . 
 Emery ,  N. J. , and  N. S.  Clayton .  2004 .  The mentality of crows: Convergent evolution of 
intelligence in corvids and apes.  Science  306 : 1903 – 1907 . 
 Evans ,  W. G.  1966 .  Perception of infrared radiation from forest ﬁ res by  Melanophilia acu-
minata De Geer (Buprestidae, Coleoptera).  Ecology  47 : 1061 – 1065 . 
 Farrell ,  B. D. ,  A. S.  Sequeira ,  B. C.  O ’ Meara ,  B. B.  Normark ,  J. H.  Chung , and  B. H.  Jordal . 
 2001 .  The evolution of agriculture in beetles (Curculionidae: Scolytinae and Platypodinae).  
 Evolution: International Journal of Organic Evolution  55 ( 10 ): 2011 – 2027 . 
 Feduccia ,  A.  1996 .  The origin and evolution of birds .  New Haven, Conn. :  Yale University 
Press . 
 Finn ,  J. K. ,  T.  Tregenza , and  M. D.  Norman .  2009 .  Defensive tool use in a coconut-carrying 
octopus.  Current Biology  19 ( 23 ): R1070 . 
 Fitzhugh ,  K.  1989 .  A systematic revision of the Sabellidae-Caobangiidae-Sabellongidae 
complex (Annelida: Polychaeta).    Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 
 192 : 1 – 104 . 

292 
References
   Fitzhugh ,  K.   1991 .  Further revisions of the Sabellidae subfamilies and cladistic relationships 
among the Fabriciinae (Annelida: Polychaeta).    Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 
 102 : 305 – 332 . 
 Flemming ,  A. F. , and  D. G.  Blackburn .  2003 .  Evolution of placental specializations in vivipa-
rous African and South American lizards.  Journal of Experimental Zoology  299A : 33 – 47 . 
 Fletcher ,  G. L. ,  C. L.  Hew , and  P. L.  Davies .  2001 .  Antifreeze proteins of teleost ﬁ shes. 
 Annual Review of Physiology  63 : 359 – 390 . 
 Foster ,  K. W. , and  R. D.  Smyth .  1980 .  Light antennas in phototactic algae.  Microbiological 
Reviews  44 ( 4 ): 572 – 630 . 
   Freeland ,  S. J. , and  L. D.   Hurst .  1998 .  The genetic code is one in a million.    Journal of 
Molecular Evolution  47 : 238 – 248 . 
   Gartrell ,  B. D.   2000 .  The nutritional, morphologic, and physiologic bases of nectarivory in 
Australian birds.  Journal of Avian Medicine and Surgery  14 ( 2 ): 85 – 94 . 
 Gaudin ,  T. J. , and  D. G.  Branham .  1998 .  The phylogeny of the Myrmecophagidae (Mam-
malia, Xenarthra, Vermilingua) and the relationship of  Eurotamandua  to the Vermilingua.  
 Journal of Mammalian Evolution  5 ( 3 ): 237 – 265 . 
 Gensel ,  P. G. , and  A. E.  Kasper .  2005 .  A new species of the Devonian lycopod genus, 
 Leclercqia , from the Emsian of New Brunswick, Canada.    Review of Palaeobotany and 
Palynology  137 : 105 – 123 . 
 Givnish ,  T. J. ,  J. C.  Pires ,  S. W.  Graham ,  M. A.  McPherson ,  L. M.  Prince ,  T. B.  Patterson ,  H. 
S.   Rai ,  et al.   2005 .  Repeated evolution of net venation and ﬂ eshy fruits among monocots 
in shaded habitats conﬁ rms a priori predictions: Evidence from an  ndhF phylogeny.  Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London: Series B, Biological Sciences 
 B272 : 1481 – 1490 . 
 Gould ,  E.  1965 .  Evidence for echolocation in the Tenrecidae of Madagascar.  Proceedings 
of the American Philosophical Society  109 ( 6 ): 352 – 360 . 
 Gould ,  J. L. , and  C. G.  Gould .  2007 .  Animal architects: Building and the evolution of intel-
ligence .  New York :  Basic Books . 
 Gould ,  S. J.  1989 .  Wonderful life: The Burgess Shale and the nature of history .  New York : 
 W. W. Norton . 
 Grant ,  K. A. , and  V.  Grant .  1968 .  Hummingbirds and their ﬂ owers .  New York :  Columbia 
University Press . 
 Gregory ,  J. E. ,  A.  Iggo ,  A. K.  McIntyre , and  U.  Proske .  1987 .  Electroreceptors in the platypus. 
 Nature  326 : 386 – 387 . 
 Grinspoon ,  D.  2003 .  Lonely planets: The natural philosophy of alien life .  New York : 
 HarperCollins Publishers Inc . 
   Gupta ,  A. K.   2004 .  Origin of agriculture and domestication of plants and animals linked to 
early Holocene climate amelioration.  Current Science  87 ( 1 ): 54 – 59 . 
 Hagan ,  H. R.  1951 .  Embryology of the viviparous insects .  New York :  Ronald Press . 
 Hamilton ,  W. D.  1964 .  The genetical evolution of social behavior I, II.  Journal of Theoretical 
Biology  7 : 1 – 52 . 
 Hansell ,  M.  2005 .  Animal architecture .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
   Hansell ,  M. , and  G. D.   Ruxton .  2008 .  Setting tool use within the context of animal construc-
tion behaviour.  Trends in Ecology and Evolution  23 ( 2 ): 73 – 78 . 
 Hansen ,  D. M. , and  M.  Galetti .  2009 .  The forgotten megafauna.  Science  324 : 42 – 43 . 
   Hardison ,  R. C.   1996 .  A brief history of hemoglobins: Plant, animal, protist, and bacteria.  
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 93 : 5675 – 5679 . 
 Harshman ,  J. ,  E. L.  Braun ,  M. J.  Braun ,  C. J.  Huddleston ,  R. C. K.  Bowie ,  J. L.  Chojnowski , 
 S. J.   Hackett ,  et al.   2008 .  Phylogenetic evidence for multiple losses of ﬂ ight in ratite birds.  

References 
293
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 105 : 13462 – 13467 . 
 Hauser ,  M. D.  2009 .  The possibility of impossible cultures.  Nature  460 : 190 – 196 . 
 Heinrich ,  B.  1993 .  The hot-blooded insects: Strategies and mechanisms of thermoregulation . 
 Cambridge, Mass. :  Harvard University Press . 
 Heinrich ,  B.  1996 .  The thermal warriors: Strategies of insect survival .  Cambridge, Mass. : 
 Harvard University Press . 
 Hines ,  H. M. ,  J. H.  Hunt ,  T. K.  O ’ Connor ,  J. J.  Gillespie , and  S. A.  Cameron .  2007 .  Multigene 
phylogeny reveals eusociality evolved twice in vespid wasps.  Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  104 ( 9 ): 3295 – 3299 . 
 Holmes ,  M. M. ,  B. D.  Goldman ,  S. L.  Goldman ,  M. L.  Seney , and  N. G.  Forger .  2009 .  Neu-
roendocrinology and sexual differentiation in eusocial mammals.    Frontiers in Neuroendo-
crinology  30 : 519 – 533 . 
 Hopkins ,  C. D.  2008 .  Commentary: Evolution of electric organs.  Journal of Physiology, Paris 
 102 : 162 – 163 . 
 Hosler ,  J.  2003 .  The Sandwalk adventures: An adventure in evolution told in ﬁ ve chapters . 
 Columbus, Ohio :  Active Synapse . 
 Hoy ,  R. R. , and  D.  Robert .  1996 .  Tympanal hearing in insects.  Annual Review of Entomology 
 41 : 433 – 450 . 
 Hunt ,  D. M. ,  K. S.  Dulai ,  J. A.  Cowing ,  C.  Julliot ,  J. D.  Mollon ,  J. K.  Bowmaker ,  W.-H.  Li , 
and  D.   Hewett-Emmett .  1998 .  Molecular evolution of trichromacy in primates.    Vision 
Research  38 : 3299 – 3306 . 
 Hunter ,  J. P. , and  J.  Jernvall .  1995 .  The hypocone as a key innovation in mammalian evolu-
tion.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 92 : 10718 – 10722 . 
   Janis ,  C. M.   1990 .  The correlation between diet and dental wear in herbivorous mammals, 
and its relationship to the determination of diets in extinct species . In   Evolutionary paleo-
biology of behavior and coevolution , ed.  A. J.  Boucot ,  241 – 259 .  Amsterdam :  Elsevier Press . 
   Jernvall ,  J.   2000 .  Linking development with generation of novelty in mammalian teeth.  
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 97 : 2641 – 2645 . 
 Ji ,  Q. ,  Z.-X.  Luo ,  C.-X.  Yuan ,  J. R.  Wible ,  J.-P.  Zhang , and  J. A.  Georgi .  2002 .  The earliest 
known eutherian mammal.  Nature  416 : 816 – 822 . 
 Johns ,  P. M. ,  K. J.  Howard ,  N. L.  Breisch ,  A.  Rivera , and  B. L.  Thorne .  2009 .  Nonrelatives 
inherit colony resources in a primitive termite.    Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America  106 ( 41 ): 17452 – 17456 . 
 Jost ,  M. C. ,  D. M.  Hillis ,  Y.  Lu ,  J. W.  Kyle ,  H. A.  Fozzard , and  H. H.  Zakon .  2008 .  Toxin-
resistant sodium channels: Parallel adaptive evolution across a complete gene family.  
 Molecular Biology and Evolution  25 ( 6 ): 1016 – 1024 . 
 Kauffman ,  S. A.  2008 .  Reinventing the sacred: A new view of science, reason and religion . 
 New York :  Basic Books . 
 Kellogg ,  E. A.  1999 .  Phylogenetic aspects of the evolution of C 4 photosynthesis . In  C 4 plant 
biology , ed.  R. F.  Sage and  R. K.  Monson ,  411 – 444 .  San Diego :  Academic Press . 
   Kelly ,  D. A.   2002 .  The functional morphology of penile erection: Tissue designs for increas-
ing and maintaining stiffness.  Integrative and Comparative Biology  42 : 216 – 221 . 
 Kemp ,  A.  1977 .  The pattern of tooth plate formation in the Australian lungﬁ sh,  Neocera-
todus forsteri Krefft.  Biological Journal of the Linnean Society  60 : 223 – 258 . 
   Kielan-Jaworowska ,  Z.   1979 .  Pelvic structure and nature of reproduction in Multitubercu-
lata.  Nature  277 : 402 – 403 . 
 King ,  A. S.  1981 .  Phallus . In  Form and function in birds .  Vol. 2, ed.  A. S.  King and  J.  McLel-
land ,  107 – 147 .  London :  Academic Press . 

294 
References
 King ,  N. ,  C. T.  Hittinger , and  S. B.  Carroll .  2003 .  Evolution of key cell signaling and adhesion 
protein families predates animal origins.  Science  301 : 361 – 363 . 
   Kivic ,  P. A. , and  P. L.   Walne .  1983 .  Algal photosensory apparatus probably represent mul-
tiple parallel evolutions.  Bio Systems  16 : 31 – 38 . 
 Klok ,  C. J. ,  R. D.  Mercer , and  S. L.  Chown .  2002 .  Discontinuous gas-exchange in centipedes 
and its convergent evolution in tracheated arthropods.    Journal of Experimental Biology 
 205 : 1019 – 1029 . 
 Koenigswald ,  W. v. ,  K. D.  Rose ,  L.  Grande , and  R. D.  Martin .  2005 .  First apatemyid skeleton 
from the Lower Eocene Fossil Butte Member, Wyoming (USA), compared to the Euro-
pean apatemyid from Messel, Germany.  Palaeontographica Abteilung  A272 : 149 – 169 . 
 Koenigswald ,  W. v. , and  H.-P.  Schierning .  1987 .  The ecological niche of an extinct group of 
mammals, the early Tertiary apatemyids.  Nature  326 : 595 – 597 . 
 Kornegay ,  J. R. ,  J. W.  Schilling , and  A. C.  Wilson .  1994 .  Molecular adaptation of a leaf-eating 
bird: Stomach lysozyme of the Hoatzin.  Molecular Biology and Evolution  11 ( 6 ): 921 – 928 . 
 Kuhn-Schnyder ,  E. , and  H.  Rieber .  1986 .  Handbook of paleozoology .  Baltimore :  Johns 
Hopkins University Press . 
 Kunz ,  T. H. ,  M. S.  Fujita ,  A. P.  Brooke , and  G. R.  McCracken .  1994 .  Convergence in tent 
architecture and tent-making behavior among Neotropical and Paleotropical bats.    Journal 
of Mammalian Evolution  2 : 57 – 58 . 
   Kuroki ,  T.   1967 .  Theoretical analysis of the role of the lateral line in directional hearing . In 
 Lateral line detectors , ed.  P. H.  Cahn ,  217 – 237 .  Bloomington :  Indiana University Press . 
 Labandeira ,  C. C. ,  J.  Kva cˇ ek , and  M. B.   Mostovski .  2007 .  Pollination drops, pollen, and insect 
pollination of Mesozoic gymnosperms.  Taxon  56 : 663 – 695 . 
 Laughlin ,  S. ,  A. D.  Blest , and  S.  Stowe .  1980 .  The sensitivity of receptors in the posterior 
median eye of the nocturnal spider,  Dinopis .  Journal of Comparative Physiology 
 141 : 53 – 65 . 
 Lawn ,  R. M. ,  K.  Schwartz , and  L.  Patthy .  1997 .  Convergent evolution of apolipoprotein(a) 
in primates and hedgehog.    Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America  94 : 11992 – 11997 . 
 Lecointre ,  G. , and  H.  Le Guyader .  2006 .  The tree of life: A phylogenetic classiﬁ cation .  Cam-
bridge, Mass. :  Belknap Press of Harvard University Press . 
   Lee ,  M. S. Y.   1998 .  Convergent evolution and character correlation in burrowing reptiles: 
Towards a resolution of squamate relationships.    Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 
 65 : 369 – 453 . 
 Lee ,  M. S. Y. , and  R.  Shine .  1998 .  Reptilian viviparity and Dollo ’ s law.  Evolution: Interna-
tional Journal of Organic Evolution  52 ( 5 ): 1441 – 1450 . 
 Loewer ,  P.  1995 .  Seeds: The deﬁ nitive guide to growing, history, and lore .  Portland, Ore. : 
 Timber Press . 
   Logsdon ,  J. M. , and  W. R.   Doolittle .  1997 .  Origin of antifreeze protein genes: A cool tale in 
molecular evolution.    Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 
of America  94 : 3485 – 3487 . 
 Long ,  J. A. ,  K.  Trinajstic ,  G. C.  Young , and  T.  Senden .  2008 .  Live birth in the Devonian 
period.  Nature  453 : 650 – 653 . 
 Longrich ,  N. R. , and  P. J.  Currie .  2008 .  Albertonykus borealis , a new alvarezsaur (Dinosauria: 
Theropoda) from the Early Maastrichtian of Alberta, Canada: Implications for the system-
atics and ecology of the Alvarezsauridae.  Cretaceous Research  30 ( 1 ): 239 – 252 . 
 Luo ,  Z.-X. ,  R. L.  Cifelli , and  Z.  Kielan-Jaworowska .  2001 .  Dual origin of tribosphenic 
mammals.  Nature  409 : 53 – 57 . 
 Luo ,  Z.-X. ,  Q.  Ji , and  C.-X.  Yuan .  2007 .  Convergent dental adaptations in pseudo-tribos-
phenic and tribosphenic mammals.  Nature  450 : 93 – 97 . 

References 
295
 Maclaurin ,  J.  2003 .  The good, the bad and the impossible.  Biology and Philosophy 
 18 : 463 – 476 . 
 Maclaurin ,  J. , and  K.  Sterelny .  2008 .  What is biodiversity?  Chicago :  University of Chicago 
Press . 
 Malmstr ö m ,  T. , and  R. H. H.  Kr ö ger .  2006 .  Pupil shapes and lens optics in the eyes of ter-
restrial vertebrates.  Journal of Experimental Biology  209 : 18 – 25 . 
 Manger ,  P. R. ,  R.  Collins , and  J. D.  Pettigrew .  1997 .  Histological observations on presumed 
electroreceptors and mechanoreceptors in the beak skin of the long-beaked echidna, 
 Zaglossus bruijnii .  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London: Series B, 
Biological Sciences  B264 : 165 – 172 . 
   Marino ,  L.   2002 .  Convergence of complex cognitive abilities in cetaceans and primates.  
 Brain, Behavior and Evolution  59 : 21 – 32 . 
 Martin ,  A. J.  2006 .  Introduction to the study of dinosaurs .  Oxford :  Blackwell . 
 Martin ,  V. J.  2002 .  Photoreceptors of cnidarians.  Canadian Journal of Zoology  80 :
 1703 – 1722 . 
 Martinez ,  R. N. ,  C. L.  May , and  C. A.  Forster .  1996 .  A new carnivorous cynodont from the 
Ischigualasto Formation (Late Triassic, Argentina), with comments on eucynodont phylog-
eny.  Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology  16 : 271 – 284 . 
 Marya n´ ska ,  T. ,  H.  Osm ó lska , and  M.  Wolsan .  2002 .  Avialan status for Oviraptorosauria. 
 Acta Palaeontologica Polonica  47 : 97 – 116 . 
   Masonjones ,  H. D. , and  S. M.   Lewis .  1996 .  Courtship behavior in the dwarf seahorse,  Hip-
pocampus zosterae .  Copeia ( 3 ): 634 – 640 . 
 Mayr ,  E.  1964 .  Introduction . In  A facsimile of the ﬁ rst edition of  On the origin of species , 
ed.  E.  Mayr ,  vii – xxvii .  Cambridge, Mass. :  Harvard University Press . 
 Mayr ,  G., and  D. S.  Peters.  2006 .  Response to comment on  “ A well-preserved Archaeopteryx 
specimen with theropod features. ”  Science  313 :  1238c , doi:  10.1126/science.1130964 . 
 Mayr ,  G. ,  B.  Pohl , and D. S.  Peters .  2005 .  A well-preserved Archaeopteryx specimen with 
theropod features .   Science  310 :  1483 – 1486 . 
 McGhee ,  G. R.  1999 .  Theoretical morphology: The concept and its applications .  New York : 
 Columbia University Press . 
   McGhee ,  G. R.   2001 .  Exploring the spectrum of existent, nonexistent and impossible bio-
logical form.  Trends in Ecology and Evolution  16 : 172 – 173 . 
 McGhee ,  G. R.  2007 .  The geometry of evolution: Adaptive landscapes and theoretical 
morphospaces .  Cambridge :  Cambridge University Press . 
   McGhee ,  G. R.   2008 .  Convergent evolution: A periodic table of life?  In   The deep structure 
of biology , ed.  S.  Conway Morris ,  17 – 31 .  West Conshohocken, Pa. :  Templeton Foundation 
Press . 
 McGhee ,  G. R. ,  P. M.  Sheehan ,  D. J.  Bottjer , and  M. L.  Droser .  2004 .  Ecological ranking of 
Phanerozoic biodiversity crises: Ecological and taxonomic severities are decoupled.    Pal-
aeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology  211 : 289 – 297 . 
 McIntosh ,  J. S.  1997 .  Sauropoda . In  Encyclopedia of dinosaurs , ed.  P. J.  Currie and  K.  Padian , 
 654 – 658 .  San Diego :  Academic Press . 
   McKay ,  C. P. , and  H. D.   Smith .  2005 .  Possibilities for methanogenic life in liquid methane 
on the surface of Titan.  Icarus  178 : 274 – 276 . 
 McKinney ,  F. K.  2007 .  The Northern Adriatic ecosystem: Deep time in a shallow sea . 
 New York :  Columbia University Press . 
 McKinney ,  F. K. ,  S. J.  Hageman , and  A.  Jaklin .  2007 .  Crossing the ecological divide: 
Paleozoic to modern marine ecosystem in the Adriatic Sea.    Sedimentary Record  5 
( 2 ): 4 – 8 . 

296 
References
 McPherron ,  S. P. ,  Z.  Alemseged ,  C. W.  Marean ,  J. G.  Wynn ,  D.  Reed ,  D.  Geraads ,  R.  Bobe , 
and  H. A.  B é arat .  2010 .  Evidence for stone-tool-assisted consumption of animal tissues 
before 3.39 million years ago at Dikika, Ethiopa.  Nature  466 : 857 – 860 . 
 Meyers ,  J. J. , and  A.  Herrel .  2005 .  Prey capture kinematics of ant-eating lizards.  Journal of 
Experimental Biology  208 : 113 – 127 . 
 Milewski ,  A. V. , and  W. J.  Bond .  1982 .  Convergence of myrmecochory in Mediterranean 
Australia and South Africa . In   Ant-plant interactions in Australia , ed.  R. C.  Buckley ,  89 – 98 . 
 The Hague :  Dr. W. Junk Publishers . 
 Moller ,  P.  1995 .  Electric ﬁ shes: History and behavior .  London :  Chapman and Hall . 
 Mooney ,  H. A.  1977 .  Convergent evolution in Chile and California: Mediterranean climate 
ecosystems .  Stroudsburg, Pa. :  Dowden, Hutchinson and Ross, Inc . 
 Moore ,  J. , and  P.  Willmer .  1997 .  Convergent evolution in invertebrates.  Biological Reviews 
of the Cambridge Philosophical Society  72 : 1 – 60 . 
 Morell ,  V.  2002 .  Placentas may nourish complexity studies.  Science  298 : 945 . 
 Mueller ,  U. G. ,  N. M.  Gerardo ,  D. K.  Aanen ,  D. L.  Six , and  T. R.  Schultz .  2005 .  The evolution 
of agriculture in insects.    Annual Review of Ecology Evolution and Systematics 
 36 : 563 – 595 . 
 M ü ller ,  G. B.  2007 .  Evo-devo: Extending the evolutionary synthesis.  Nature Reviews: Genet-
ics  8 : 943 – 949 . 
 Mummenhoff ,  K. , A.  Polster , A.  M ü hlhausen , and G.  Thei ß en.  2008.  Lepidium as a model 
system for studying the evolution of fruit development in Brassicaceae .   Journal of Experi-
mental Biology online , doi: 10.1093/jxb/ern304 . 
   Mundy ,  N. I.   2005 .  A window on the genetics of evolution:  MC1R  and plumage colouration 
in birds.    Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London: Series B, Biological 
Sciences  B272 : 1633 – 1640 . 
 Naylor ,  G. J. P. ,  T. M.  Collins , and  W. M.  Brown .  1995 .  Hydrophobicity and phylogeny.  Nature 
 373 : 565 – 566 . 
 Nevo ,  E.  1999 .  Mosaic evolution of subterranean mammals: Regression, progression, and 
global convergence .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Newman ,  S. A.  2010 .  Dynamical patterning modules . In  Evolution: The extended synthesis , 
ed.  M.  Pigliucci and  G. B.  M ü ller ,  281 – 306 .  Cambridge, Mass. :  Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology Press . 
 Newman ,  S. A. ,  G.  Forgacs , and  G. B.  M ü ller .  2006 .  Before programs: The physical origina-
tion of multicellular forms.  International Journal of Developmental Biology  50 : 289 – 299 . 
 Niklas ,  K.  1997 .  The evolutionary biology of plants .  Chicago :  University of Chicago Press . 
 Niven ,  L.  1968 .  The handicapped . In  Neutron star ,  209 – 235 .  New York :  Ballantine Books . 
 Niven ,  L.  1968a .  A relic of the empire . In  Neutron star ,  29 – 49 .  New York :  Ballantine 
Books . 
   Norberg ,  R.  Å .   1977 .  Occurrence and independent evolution of bilateral ear asymmetry in 
owls and implications on owl taxonomy.  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London: Series B, Biological Sciences  B280 : 375 – 408 . 
 Oakley ,  T. H. , and  C. W.  Cunningham .  2002 .  Molecular phylogenetic evidence for the inde-
pendent evolutionary origin of an arthropod compound eye.  Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  99 : 1426 – 1430 . 
 O ’ Connor ,  P. M. , and  L. P. A. M.  Claessens .  2005 .  Basic avian pulmonary design and ﬂ ow-
through ventilation in non-avian theropod dinosaurs.  Nature  436 : 253 – 256 . 
 O ’ Connor ,  P. M. ,  J. J. W.  Sertich ,  N. J.  Stevens ,  E. M.  Roberts ,  M. D.  Gottfried ,  T. L.  Hiero-
nymus ,  Z. A.  Jinnah ,  R.  Ridgely ,  S. E.  Ngasala , and  J.  Temba .  2010 .  The evolution of 
mammal-like crocodyliforms in the Cretaceous Period of Gondwana.    Nature  466 : 
748 – 751 . 

References 
297
 Ö deen ,  A. , and  O.  H å stad .  2003 .  Complex distribution of avian color vision systems revealed 
by sequencing the SWS1 opsin from total DNA.    Molecular Biology and Evolution  20 
( 6 ): 855 – 861 . 
 O ’ Reilly ,  J. C. ,  D. A.  Ritter , and  D. R.  Carrier .  1997 .  Hydrostatic locomotion in a limbless 
tetrapod.  Nature  386 : 269 – 272 . 
   Ostrom ,  J. H.   1990 .  Dromaeosauridae . In   The Dinosauria , ed.  D. B.  Weishampel ,  P.  Dodson , 
and  H.  Osm ó lska ,  269 – 279 .  Berkeley :  University of California Press . 
 Peet ,  R. K.  1978 .  Ecosystem convergence.  American Naturalist  112 : 441 – 459 . 
 Pianka ,  E. R.  1978 .  Evolutionary ecology .  2nd ed.  New York :  Harper and Row . 
   Pianka ,  E. R. , and  W. S.   Parker .  1975 .  Ecology of horned lizards: A review with special refer-
ence to  Phrynosoma platyrhinos .  Copeia  1975 : 141 – 162 . 
 Piatigorsky ,  J.  2007 .  Gene sharing and evolution .  Cambridge, Mass. :  Harvard University 
Press . 
 Poelwijk ,  F. J. ,  D. J.  Kiviet ,  D. M.  Weinreich , and  S. J.  Tans .  2007 .  Empirical ﬁ tness landscapes 
reveal accessible evolutionary paths.  Nature  445 : 383 – 386 . 
 Popov ,  I. Y.  2002 .  “ Periodical systems ” in biology (a historical issue).  Verhandlungen zur 
Geschichte und Theorie der Biologie  9 : 55 – 68 . 
 Prior ,  H. ,  A.  Schwarz , and  O.  G ü nt ü rk ü n .  2008 .  Mirror-induced behavior in the magpie 
( Pica pica ): Evidence of self-recognition.  PLoS Biology  6 ( 8 ): 1642 – 1650 . 
 Pritchard ,  G. ,  M. H.  McKee ,  E. M.  Pike ,  G. J.  Scrimgeour , and  J.  Zloty .  1993 .  Did the ﬁ rst 
insects live in water or in air?  Biological Journal of the Linnean Society  49 : 31 – 44 . 
 Proske ,  U. , and  E.  Gregory .  2003 .  Electrolocation in the platypus: Some speculations.  Com-
parative Biochemistry and Physiology: Part A, Molecular and Integrative Physiology  136 
( 4 ): 821 – 825 . 
 Protas ,  M. E. ,  C.  Hersey ,  D.  Kochanek ,  Y.  Zhou ,  H.  Wilkens ,  W. R.  Jeffery ,  L. I.  Zon ,  R. 
 Borowsky , and  C. J.  Tabin .  2005. Genetic analysis of caveﬁ sh reveals molecular convergence 
in the evolution of albinism.  Nature Genetics 38(1): 107 – 111. 
 Prothero ,  D. R. , and  R. M.  Schoch . 2002.  Horns, tusks, and ﬂ ippers: The evolution of hoofed 
mammals .  Baltimore :  Johns Hopkins University Press . 
 Prud ’ homme ,  B. , and  S. B.  Carroll .  2006 .  Monkey see, monkey do.  Nature Genetics  38 
( 7 ): 740 – 741 . 
 Purnell ,  M. A.  1995 .  Large eyes and vision in conodonts.  Lethaia  28 : 187 – 188 . 
 Raafat ,  R. M. ,  N.  Chater , and  C.  Frith .  2009 .  Herding in humans.  Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences  13 ( 10 ): 420 – 428 . 
 Rasmussen ,  D. T. ,  E. L.  Simons ,  F.  Hertel , and  A.  Judd .  2001 .  Hindlimb of a giant terrestrial 
bird from the Upper Eocene, Fayum, Egypt.  Palaeontology  44 ( 2 ): 325 – 337 . 
 Reardon ,  D. , and  G. K.  Farber .  1995 .  The structure and evolution of  α / β  barrel proteins.  
 Journal of the Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology  9 : 497 – 503 . 
 Reep ,  R. L. ,  C. D.  Marshall , and  M. L.  Stoll .  2002 .  Tactile hairs on the postcranial body in 
Florida manatees: A mammalian lateral line?    Brain, Behavior and Evolution  59 : 141 – 154 . 
 Reiss ,  J. O.  2009 .  Not by design: Retiring Darwin ’ s watchmaker .  Berkeley :  University of 
California Press . 
 Rey ,  M. ,  S.  Ohno ,  J. A.  Pintor-Toro ,  A.  Llobell , and  T.  Benitez .  1998 .  Unexpected homology 
between inducible cell wall protein QID74 of ﬁ lamentous fungi and BR3 salivary protein 
of the insect  Chironomus .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America  95 : 6212 – 6216 . 
 Reznick ,  D. N. ,  M.  Mateos , and  M. S.  Springer .  2002 .  Independent origins and rapid evolu-
tion of the placenta in the ﬁ sh genus  Poeciliopsis .  Science  298 : 1018 – 1020 . 
 Rich ,  T. H. ,  J. A.  Hopson ,  A. M.  Musser ,  T. F.  Flannery , and  P.  Vickers-Rich .  2005 .  Indepen-
dent origins of middle ear bones in monotremes and therians.  Science  307 : 910 – 914 . 

298 
References
 Robert ,  D. ,  J.  Amoroso , and  R. R.  Hoy .  1992 .  The evolutionary convergence of hearing in 
a parasitoid ﬂ y and its cricket host.  Science  258 : 1135 – 1137 . 
 Robert ,  D. , and  U.  Willi .  2000 .  The histological architecture of the auditory organs in the 
parasitoid ﬂ y  Ormia ochracea .  Cell and Tissue Research  301 : 447 – 457 . 
 Robinson ,  P. L.  1956 .  An unusual saurposid dentition.  Zoological Journal of the Linnean 
Society  43 : 283 – 293 . 
 Robson ,  P. ,  G. M.  Wright ,  J. H.  Youson , and  F. W.  Keeley .  2000 .  The structure and organiza-
tion of lamprin genes: Multiple-copy genes with alternative splicing and convergent evolu-
tion with insect structural proteins.  Molecular Biology and Evolution  17 ( 11 ): 1739 – 1752 . 
 Rodr í guez-Trelles ,  F. ,  R.  Tarrio , and  F. J.  Ayala .  2003 .  Convergent neofunctionalization by 
positive Darwinian selection after ancient recurrent duplications of the  xanthine dehydrog-
enase gene.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 100 ( 23 ): 13413 – 13417 . 
 Roff ,  D. A.  1994 .  The evolution of ﬂ ightlessness: Is history important?    Evolutionary Ecology 
 8 : 639 – 657 . 
 Rokas ,  A. , and  S. B.  Carroll .  2008 .  Frequent and widespread parallel evolution of protein 
sequences.  Molecular Biology and Evolution  25 ( 9 ): 1943 – 1953 . 
 Roots ,  C.  2006 .  Flightless birds .  Westport, Conn. :  Greenwood Press . 
 Rose ,  R. D. , and  R. J.  Emry .  2005 .  Extraordinary fossorial adaptations in the Oligocene 
palaeanodonts  Epoicotherium  and  Xenocranium (Mammalia).  Journal of Morphology 
 175 : 33 – 56 . 
   Rowe ,  T.   1993 .  Phylogenetic systematics and the early history of mammals . In   Mammal 
phylogeny: Mesozoic differentiaton, multituberculates, monotremes, early therians, and mar-
supials , ed.  F. S.  Szalay ,  M. J.  Novacek , and  M. C.  McKenna ,  129 – 145 .  Berlin :  Springer-
Verlag . 
 Ruse ,  M.  2003 .  Darwin and design: Does evolution have a purpose?  Cambridge, Mass. : 
 Harvard University Press . 
 Sage ,  R. F.  1999 .  Why C 4 photosynthesis? In  C 4  plant biology , ed.  R. F.  Sage and  R. K. 
 Monson ,  3 – 16 .  San Diego :  Academic Press . 
 Sage ,  R. F.  2001a .  C 4 plants . In  Encyclopedia of biodiversity . V ol. 1, ed.  S. A.  Levin ,  575 – 598 . 
 San Diego :  Academic Press . 
   Sage ,  R. F.   2001b .  Environmental and evolutionary preconditions for the origin and diver-
siﬁ cation of the C 4 photosynthetic syndrome.  Plant Biology  3 : 202 – 213 . 
 Salehi-Ashtiani ,  K. , and  J. W.  Szostak .  2001 .  In vitro  evolution suggests multiple origins of 
the hammerhead ribozyme.  Nature  414 : 82 – 84 . 
   Salvini-Plawen ,  L. von .  2008 .  Photoreception and the polyphyletic evolution of photore-
ceptors (with special reference to Mollusca).    American Malacological Bulletin  26 
( 1/2 ): 83 – 100 . 
 Salvini-Plawen ,  L. von, and E.  Mayr .  1977 .  On the evolution of photoreceptors and eyes. 
 Evolutionary Biology  10 : 207 – 263 . 
 Scantlebury ,  M. ,  J. R.  Speakman ,  M. K.  Oosthuizen ,  T. J.  Roper , and  N. C.  Bennett .  2006 . 
 Energetics reveal physiologically distinct castes in a eusocial mammal.    Nature 
 440 : 795 – 797 . 
 Schierwater ,  B. ,  M.  Eitel ,  W.  Jakob ,  H.-J.  Osigus ,  H.  Hadrys ,  S. L.  Dellaporta ,  S.-O.  Koloko-
tronis , and  R.   DeSalle .  2009 .  Concatenated analysis sheds light on early metazoan evolution 
and fuels a modern  “ urmetazoan ” hypothesis.  PLoS Biology  7 ( 1 ): 36 – 44 . 
 Schmitz ,  A. ,  M.  Gebhardt , and  H.  Schmitz .  2008 .  Microﬂ uidic photomechanic infrared 
receptors in a pyrophilous ﬂ at bug.  Naturwissenschaften  95 : 455 – 460 . 
 Schneider ,  E. L. , and  S.  Carlquist .  1995 .  Vessel origins in Nymphaeaceae:  Euryale and 
 Victoria .  Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society  119 : 185 – 193 . 

References 
299
 Schultz ,  T. R. , and  S. G.  Brady .  2008 .  Major evolutionary transitions in ant agriculture. 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  105 
( 14 ): 5435 – 5440 . 
 Seelig ,  C.  1956 .  Helle Zeit — Dunkle Zeit. In Memoriam Albert Einstein .  Zurich :  Europa 
Verlag . 
 Sereno ,  P.  1997 .  Psittacosauridae . In  Encyclopedia of dinosaurs , ed.  P. J.  Currie and 
 K.  Padian ,  611 – 613 .  San Diego :  Academic Press . 
 Sereno ,  P. ,  Z.  Xijin , and  T.  Lin .  2009. A new psittacosaur from Inner Mongolia and the 
parrot-like structure and function of the psittacosaur skull.   Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society of London: Series B, Biological Sciences , doi: 10.1098/rspb.2009.0691 . 
 Shen ,  Z. , and  M.  Jacobs-Lorena .  1999 .  Evolution of chitin-binding proteins in invertebrates . 
 Journal of Molecular Evolution  48 :  341 – 347 . 
 Shi ,  Y. , and  S.  Yokoyama .  2003 .  Molecular analysis of the evolutionary signiﬁ cance of 
ultraviolet vision in vertebrates.    Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America  100 ( 14 ): 8308 – 8313 . 
 Shingleton ,  A. W. , and  W. A.  Foster .  2001 .  Behaviour, morphology and the division of labour 
in two soldier-producing aphids.  Animal Behaviour  62 : 671 – 679 . 
 Shubin ,  N. ,  C.  Tabin , and  S.  Carroll .  2009 .  Deep homology and the origins of evolutionary 
novelty.  Nature  457 : 818 – 823 . 
   Sinha ,  N. R. , and  E. A.   Kellogg .  1996 .  Parallelism and diversity in multiple origins of C 4 
photosynthesis in the grass family.  American Journal of Botany  83 ( 11 ): 1458 – 1470 . 
 Smith ,  J. D.  2009 .  The study of animal metacognition.  Trends in Cognitive Sciences  13 
( 9 ): 389 – 396 . 
 Spinney ,  L.  2007 .  Back to their roots.  New Scientist  194 ( 2608 ): 48 – 51 . 
 Stadler ,  B. , and  A. F. G.  Dixon .  2005 .  Ecology and evolution of aphid-ant interactions. 
 Annual Review of Ecology Evolution and Systematics  36 : 345 – 372 . 
 Steadman ,  D. W.  2006 .  Extinction and biogeography of tropical Paciﬁ c birds .  Chicago : 
 University of Chicago Press . 
 Stein ,  W. E. ,  F.  Mannolini ,  L. V.  Hernick ,  E.  Landing , and  C. M.  Berry .  2007 .  Giant cladoxy-
lopsid trees resolve the enigma of the Earth ’ s earliest forest stumps at Gilboa.    Nature 
 446 : 904 – 907 . 
   Stensi ö  ,  E.   1963 .  The brain and the cranial nerves in fossil lower craniate vertebrates. 
 Skrifter utgitt av det Norske Videnskaps-Akademi i Oslo. I. Matematisk-Naturvidenskapelig 
Klasse  13 : 1 – 120 . 
 Stern ,  D. L.  2010 .  Evolution, development, and the predictable genome .  Greenwood Village, 
Colo. :  Roberts and Company . 
 Stern ,  D. L. , and  V.  Orgogozo .  2008 .  The loci of evolution: How predictable is genetic evolu-
tion?  Evolution: International Journal of Organic Evolution  62 ( 9 ): 2155 – 2177 . 
 Stern ,  D. L. , and  V.  Orgogozo .  2009 .  Is genetic evolution predictable?  Nature  323 :
 746 – 751 . 
 Stewart ,  A.  2009 .  Wicked plants .  Chapel Hill :  Algonquin Books . 
 Stewart ,  C. B. ,  J. W.  Schilling , and  A. C.  Wilson .  1987 .  Adaptive evolution in the stomach 
lysozymes of foregut fermenters.  Nature  330 : 401 – 404 . 
 Strobel ,  D. F.  2010 .  Molecular hydrogen in Titan ’ s atmosphere: Implications of the mea-
sured tropospheric and thermospheric mole fractions.    Icarus , doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2010.03.003 . 
 Sumpter ,  D. J. T.  2006 .  The principles of collective animal behaviour.  Philosophical Transac-
tions of the Royal Society of London: Series B, Biological Sciences  B361 : 5 – 22 . 
 Szczupider ,  M.  2009 .  Visions of Earth: Cameroon Sanaga-Yong chimpanzee rescue center. 
 National Geographic  216 ( 5 ): 12 – 13 . 

300 
References
 Terada ,  T. ,  O.  Nureki ,  R.  Ishitani ,  A.  Ambrogelly ,  M.  Ibba ,  D.  S ö ll , and  S.  Yokoyama .  2002 . 
 Functional convergence of two lysyl-tRNA synthetases with unrelated topologies.    Nature 
Structural Biology  9 ( 4 ): 257 – 262 . 
 Thien ,  L. B. ,  P.  Bernhardt ,  M. S.  Devall ,  Z.-D.  Chen ,  Y.-B.  Luo ,  J.-J.  Fan ,  L.-C.  Yuan , and 
 J. H.   Williams .  2009 .  Pollination biology of basal angiosperms (ANITA grade).    American 
Journal of Botany  96 ( 1 ): 166 – 182 . 
 Thomas ,  R. D. K. , and  W.-E.  Reif .  1993 .  The skeleton space: A ﬁ nite set of organic designs.  
 Evolution: International Journal of Organic Evolution  47 : 341 – 360 . 
 Thompson ,  D ’ A. W.  1942 .  On growth and form.  Cambridge :  Cambridge University 
Press . 
   Thompson ,  M. B. , and  B. K.   Speake .  2006 .  A review of the evolution of viviparity in lizards: 
Structure, function and physiology of the placenta.    Journal of Comparative Physiology 
 176B : 179 – 189 . 
   Thorne ,  B. L. , and  J. F. A.   Traniello .  2003 .  Comparative social biology of basal taxa of ants 
and termites.  Annual Review of Entomology  48 : 283 – 306 . 
   Tomescu ,  A. M. F.   2008 .  Megaphylls, microphylls and the evolution of leaf development.  
 Trends in Plant Science  14 ( 1 ): 5 – 12 . 
 Tripp ,  B. C. ,  K.  Smith , and  J. G.  Ferry .  2001 .  Carbonic anhydrase: New insights for an ancient 
enzyme.  Journal of Biological Chemistry  276 ( 52 ): 48615 – 48618 . 
 Turner ,  A.  1997 .  The big cats and their fossil relatives .  New York :  Columbia University 
Press . 
 van Holde ,  K. E. ,  K. I.  Miller , and  H.  Decker .  2001 .  Hemocyanins and invertebrate evolu-
tion.  Journal of Biological Chemistry  276 ( 19 ): 15563 – 15566 . 
 van Schaik ,  C. P. ,  E. A.  Fox , and  A. F.  Sitompui .  1996 .  Manufacture and use of tools in wild 
Sumatran orangutans.  Naturwissenschaften  83 ( 4 ): 186 – 188 . 
 Van Valen ,  L.  1973 .  A new evolutionary theory.  Evolutionary Theory  1 : 1 – 30 . 
 Varricchio ,  D. J.  1997 .  Troodontidae . In  Encyclopedia of dinosaurs , ed.  P. J.  Currie and 
 K.  Padian ,  749 – 754 .  San Diego :  Academic Press . 
   Vermeij ,  G. J.   2006 .  Historical contingency and the purported uniqueness of evolutionary 
innovations.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America  103 ( 6 ): 1804 – 1809 . 
 von Frisch ,  K.  1974 .  Animal architecture .  New York :  Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 
 Wade ,  N.  2006 .  Before the dawn: Recovering the lost history of our ancestors .  New York : 
 Penguin Press . 
   Wake ,  M. H.   1992 .  Evolutionary scenarios, homology and convergence of structural spe-
cializations for vertebrate viviparity.  American Zoologist  32 : 256 – 263 . 
 Wake ,  M. H.  1993 .  Evolution of oviductal gestation in amphibians.  Journal of Experimental 
Zoology  266 : 394 – 413 . 
 Wald ,  G. , and  S.  Raypart .  1977 .  Vision in annelid worms.  Science  196 : 1434 – 1439 . 
 Ward ,  P. D.  2005 .  Life as we do not know it .  New York :  Viking Penguin . 
 Watson ,  T.  1993 .  Why some ﬁ shes are hotheads.  Science  260 : 160 – 161 . 
 Weinreich ,  D. M. ,  N. F.  Delaney ,  M. A.  DePristo , and  D. L.  Hartl .  2006 .  Darwinian evolution 
can follow only very few mutational paths to ﬁ tter proteins.  Science  312 : 111 – 114 . 
 Weishampel ,  D. B. , and  J. R.  Horner .  1990 .  Hadrosauridae . In  The Dinosauria , ed.  D. B. 
 Weishampel ,  P.  Dodson , and  H.  Osm ó lska ,  534 – 561 .  Berkeley :  University of California 
Press . 
 Went ,  F. W.  1971 .  Parallel evolution.  Taxon  20 : 197 – 226 . 
 West ,  G. B. ,  J. H.  Brown , and  B. J.  Enquist .  1999 .  The fourth dimension of life: Fractal 
geometry and allometric scaling of organisms.  Science  284 : 1677 – 1679 . 

References 
301
   Whitehead ,  H.   2008 .  Social and cultural evolution in the ocean: Convergences and contrasts 
with terrestrial systems . In   The deep structure of biology , ed.  S.  Conway Morris ,  143 – 160 . 
 West Conshohocken, Pa. :  Templeton Foundation Press . 
 Wicher ,  K. B. , and  E.  Fries .  2007 .  Convergent evolution of human and bovine haptoglobin: 
Partial duplication of the genes.  Journal of Molecular Evolution  65 : 373 – 379 . 
   Williams ,  D. S. , and  P.   McIntyre .  1980 .  The principal eyes of a jumping spider have a tele-
photo component.  Nature  288 : 578 – 580 . 
 Wilson ,  E. O.  1980 .  Sociobiology: The abridged edition .  Cambridge, Mass. :  Harvard Univer-
sity Press . 
 Wilson ,  E. O. , and  B.  H ö lldobler .  2005 .  Eusociality: Origin and consequences.  Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  102 ( 38 ):
 13367 – 13371 . 
 Wourms ,  J. P. , and  J.  Lombardi .  1992 .  Reﬂ ections on the evolution of piscine viviparity. 
 American Zoologist  32 : 276 – 293 . 
 Wu ,  X.-C. ,  H.-D.  Sues , and  A.  Sun .  1995 .  A plant-eating crocodyliform reptile from the 
Cretaceous of China.  Nature  376 : 678 – 680 . 
 Wyndham ,  J.  1951 .  The day of the trifﬁ ds .  New York :  Doubleday and Company . 
 Yanoviak ,  S. P. ,  R.  Dudley , and  M.  Kaspart .  2005 .  Directed aerial descent in canopy ants. 
 Nature  433 : 624 – 626 . 
 Yeager ,  M. , and  A. L.  Hughes .  1999 .  Evolution of the mammalian MHC: Natural selection, 
recombination, and convergent evolution.  Immunological Reviews  167 : 45 – 58 . 
 Yee ,  M. S. Y.  1999 .  Molecular phylogenies become functional.  Trends in Ecology and Evolu-
tion  14 ( 5 ): 177 – 178 . 
 Yokoyama ,  R. , and  S.  Yokoyama .  1990 .  Convergent evolution of the red- and green-like 
visual pigment genes in ﬁ sh,  Astyanax fasciatus , and human.    Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  87 : 9315 – 9318 . 
 Zakon ,  H. H. , and  G. A.  Unguez .  1999 .  Development and regeneration of the electric organ. 
 Journal of Experimental Biology  202 : 1427 – 1434 . 
   Zhang ,  J.   2003 .  Paleomolecular biology unravels the evolutionary mystery of vertebrate 
UV vision.    Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
 100 ( 14 ): 8045 – 8047 . 
   Zhang ,  J.   2006 .  Parallel adaptive origins of digestive RNases in Asian and African leaf 
monkeys.  Nature Genetics  38 ( 7 ): 819 – 823 . 
   Zhang ,  J. , and  S.   Kumar .  1997 .  Detection of convergent and parallel evolution at the amino 
acid sequence level.  Molecular Biology and Evolution  14 ( 5 ): 527 – 536 . 
   Zusi ,  L. , and  D.   Bridge .  1981 .  On the slit pupil of the Black Skimmer ( Rhynchops niger ). 
 Journal of Field Ornithology  52 ( 4 ): 338 – 340 . 


 Index of Common Names 
 Aardvark, African, 142 
 Acacia 
 catclaw, 107 
 whistling-thorn, 108 
 Ant 
 animal-domesticating, 226 – 227 
 army, 236 
 farming, 223 – 225, 227 
 ﬁ re, 66 
 forest, 212 
 gliding, 22 
 leaf-cutter, 224 – 225 
 velvet, 48 
 Anteater 
 great scaly, 52 
 South American giant, 142, 158 – 159, 162, 
166 
 Aphid, 226 – 227, 230 
 Armadillo, 29 
 Auklet, crested, 64 
 Aye-aye, 141 
 
 Bat 
 greater bulldog, 165 
 Mexican long-tongued, 147 
 short-nosed fruit, 217 
 tent-making, 217 
 Bayonet, Spanish, 107 
 Bear, polar, 8, 211 
 Beaver, Canadian, 161, 163, 218, 220 – 221 
 Beetle 
 ambrosia, 223, 225 – 226, 230 
 blister, 64 
 bombardier, 66 
 ﬁ re, 37 
 long-horned, 66 
 Bison, 159 – 160, 166 
 Bladderwort, 138 
 Bonobo, 211 – 212 
 Bowerbird, 217 – 218 
 Bug, ﬂ at, 37 
 Burdock, greater, 127 
 Butterﬂ y, monarch, 64, 234 
 Butterwort, 138 
 
 Cactus, 113 – 114 
 Camel 
 dromedary, 57 – 58, 113 
 western, 161 – 162 
 Cassowary, 152 – 154 
 Cat 
 European wild, 35, 43, 158 – 159, 166 
 false saber-tooth, 42 – 44, 160, 162 
 marsupial, 158 – 159 
 true saber-tooth, 42 – 44, 160, 162 
 Catﬁ sh, African electric, 39, 49 
 Centaur, 25 – 26, 253 
 Chicken, common domestic, 50 
 Chimpanzee, 211 – 212, 241 
 Chiton, rock, 67 
 Civet, palm, 36, 46 
 Coca, 112 
 Cockroach, 52, 197 
 Coffee, 112 
 Condor, California, 145 
 Corkscrew, 138 
 Cormorant, ﬂ ightless, 155 
 Coruro, Chilean, 29, 162 
 Cow, common domestic, 57, 181, 193, 227 
 Crab 
 hermit, 52, 213 
 horseshoe, 193 
 Crayﬁ sh, red swamp, 52 
 Cricket, mole, 28 
 Crocodile 
 gavialid, 167 
 Nile, 34, 52 
 Crow, New Caledonian, 211 
 
 Deer, red, 58, 62, 158, 160, 166 
 Dinosaur (excluding avian dinosaurs) 
 allosaur, 164, 166 
 alvarezsaur, 144, 166 
 ankylosaur, 62 – 64, 164, 166 

304 
Index of Common Names
 ceratopsid, 56 – 57, 59, 164, 166 
 coelophysid, 164, 166, 236 
 coelurosaur, 78, 148 
 dromaeosaur, 43, 148, 236 
 fabrosaur, 24 
 hadrosaur, 56 – 57, 164 – 166 
 herrerasaur, 24, 77 
 hypsilophodont, 164 – 166 
 maiasaur, 234 
 ornithomimosaur, 153 
 oviraptor, 50 
 pachycephalosaur, 164, 167 
 psittacosaur, 51, 59 
 sauropod, 51, 166, 234 
 spinosaur, 164, 167 
 therizinosaur, 164, 167 
 troodontid, 43, 148, 164, 166 
 velociraptor, 164, 166 
 Dodder, 139 
 Dodo, 154 
 Dolphin, bottlenose, 6, 13, 36, 42, 212, 234, 
238 – 241 
 Dragon 
 Komodo, 28 
 mythical, 19 – 20, 25 
 Dragonﬂ y, 77, 103, 140, 253 
 Duck 
 Aukland Island teal, 155 
 steamer, 155 
 wood, 59 
 Duckbill platypus, 39, 59, 66 
 
 Eagle, 213 
 Earthworm, common, 52, 67 
 Echidna, 39, 64, 143 
 Eel 
 electric, 49 
 European, 15 
 Elderberry, black, 108 
 Elephant 
 African, 166, 233, 241 
 Asian, 212, 238 – 239 
 Emu, 152 – 154 
 
 Fern 
 European water-clover, 116 
 giant water, 116 
 Finch, woodpecker, 141, 212 
 Fireﬂ y, 64 
 Fish 
 ﬂ ying Gunnard, 21 
 puffer, 64 
 rabbit, 66 
 red lion, 65 
 scorpion, 65 
 stickleback, 195 – 196 
 stone, 65 
 toad, 66 
 weever, 66 
 Flying lemur, 20 
 Flying squirrel 
 marsupial, 158 – 159 
 scaly-tailed, 20 
 true, 20, 158 – 159 
 Fox, red, 35 
 Frog 
 Costa Rican ﬂ ying tree, 21 
 Guinea shovel-snout, 29 
 poison arrow, 64 
 tailed, 31, 83 
 tree, 31 
 Wallace ’ s ﬂ ying tree, 21 
 
 Gecko 
 ﬂ ying, 21 
 helmeted, 34 
 Geosaur, 16 
 Goat, domestic, 61, 167 
 Gopher, pocket, 29, 162 
 Gorilla, 211, 213, 240 – 241 
 Grass 
 cogon, 107 
 Johnson, 108 
 Grog, 263 
 
 Hagﬁ sh, 15 
 Hawthorn, cockspur, 107 
 Hedgehog, European, 64, 198 
 Hellebore, stinking, 120 
 Heron, 213 
 Herring, Atlantic, 191 
 Hippopotamus, 57 – 58, 61 
 Honeybee, 66, 228 – 230, 234 
 Honeycreeper 
 akiapola ’ au, 140 
 ‘ i ’ iwi, 147 
 red-legged, 147 
 Honeyeater, 146 
 Horse, modern, 57, 62, 160, 162 
 Human 
 modern, 23, 179, 193 – 194, 198, 209 – 212, 
218, 220 – 225, 227, 237 – 239, 241 – 242 
 Neanderthal, 241 – 242 
 Hummingbird, 145 – 146 
 Hydrangea, 112 
 Hyrax, yellow-spotted, 59 
 
 Ichthyosaur, 13, 167, 262, 272 
 
 Jellyﬁ sh 
 box, 70 
 Portuguese man-of-war, 49 
 
 Kagu, 154 
 Kangaroo, red, 24, 59, 158, 160 
Dinosaur (cont.)

Index of Common Names 
305
 Kiwi, 152 – 154, 156 
 Krill, Antarctic, 234 
 
 Lamprey, sea, 15, 67, 197 
 Leopard, snow, 8 
 Lily, corpse, 120 
 Lion 
 African, 35, 158 – 159, 166, 237 
 marsupial, 158 – 159 
 Lizard 
 brown basilisk, 24 
 desert horned, 143 
 Florida worm, 28 
 ﬂ ying, 20 
 legless, 28, 34 
 night, 34 
 skink, 91 
 thorny devil, 143 – 144 
 Locust, desert, 233 
 Loon, red-throated, 50 
 Loris, slow, 35 
 Lungﬁ sh 
 Queensland, 56 
 South American, 16 
 Lynx, North American bay, 35 
 
 Magpie, 209, 238 – 239 
 Mammoth, 237 
 Manatee 
 African, 17, 61 
 Florida, 74 
 Mantidﬂ y, green, 26, 253 
 Marijuana, 112 
 Martin, 218 
 Mastodon, 162 
 Millipede 
 common, 66 
 ﬂ at-backed, 66 
 Mistletoe, dwarf, 127 
 Mole 
 Cape golden, 29, 157 
 European, 29, 153 – 154, 158 
 southern marsupial, 29, 158 
 Monkey 
 Barbary macaque, 240 
 capuchin, 211, 240 
 colobus, 57 – 58, 184 – 185 
 langur, 183 
 Monkshood, 108 
 Morning glory, 112 
 Mosasaur, 16 
 Moth, hummingbird clearwing, 
147 
 Mouse 
 fawn hopping, 24 
 harvest, 216 
 marsupial, 158 – 159 
 Mullet, striped, 52 
 
 Nettle, stinging, 107 – 108 
 Numbat, 143, 158 – 159 
 
 Octopus 
 common, 36, 47, 83, 193 
 veined, 218 
 Oilbird, 41 
 Orangutan, 211 
 Ostrich, 50, 149, 152 – 153 
 Ovenbird, 219 
 Owl 
 European tawny, 40 
 Jamaican, 40 
 mottled, 40 
 striped, 40 
 
 Pangolin, Asian, 142, 162 
 Parrot 
 broad-billed, 153 
 kakapo, 153, 156 
 swift, 147 
 Pawpaw, 120 
 Peccary, musk-hog, 161 – 162 
 Pelican, 213, 236 
 Penguin, king, 17, 148, 154 – 155, 262 
 Pigeon, wood, 213, 240 
 Pitcher plant 
 Asian, 136 
 Australian, 136 
 Pithui, hooded, 64 
 Plesiosaur, 16, 167 
 Pliosaur, 167 
 Polecat, European, 66 
 Porcupine 
 African, 64 
 North American, 64 
 Porpoise, harbor, 1, 3, 5, 13, 167, 262, 272 
 Possum, striped, 141 – 142 
 Praying mantis, 26, 253 
 Pteranodon, 165, 167 
 Pterosaur, 17, 77 – 78, 167, 253, 262 
 
 Rabbit, European, 58 – 59, 159 – 160, 
161 – 162 
 Rail 
 South Island takahe, 149, 156 
 wekka, 149, 157 
 Rat 
 bamboo, 29 
 black, 158 – 159 
 kangaroo, 24 
 marsupial, 158 – 159 
 mole, 29, 230 
 Ray 
 electric, 49 
 spotted eagle, 31 
 sting, 49 
 Rhea, 149, 152 – 153 

306 
Index of Common Names
 Rhinoceros, 6, 59, 166 
 Rockfowl, white-necked, 218 
 
 Scorpion 
 land, 66, 76 
 sea, 16 
 Seahorse, dwarf, 84 
 Seal, harp, 35, 148, 154 – 155 
 Sea lion, California, 17, 167 
 Sea otter, 16, 211 
 Sea raven, 191 
 Sea serpent, 16 
 Seriema, red-legged, 46 
 Shad, gizzard, 52 
 Shark 
 angel, 31 
 great white, 13 
 whitetip, 31 
 Shrimp, sponge-dwelling, 230 
 Skimmer, black, 34 
 Skunk, striped, 66 
 Sloth, giant ground, 167 
 Smelt, American, 191 
 Snail 
 auger-shell, 49 
 cone-shell, 49 
 great pond, 52 
 Snake 
 constrictor, 34, 37 
 coral, 8 
 ﬂ ying paradise, 21 
 milk, 8 
 pit viper, 34, 37, 48 
 Spider 
 jumping, 70 
 ogre-faced, 70 
 web-spinning, 263 
 Springhaas, 24 
 Spurge, 113 – 114 
 Squirrel, gray, 216 
 Starﬁ sh, 84 
 Stargazer, 49 
 Starling, European, 231 – 234 
 Stink bird (hoatzin), 58, 183 
 Stork, 213 
 Sugarbird, South African, 147 
 Sumac, poison, 112 
 Sunbird, 146 
 Sundew, 136 
 Swallow, 218 – 219 
 Swan, 213 
 Swiftlet, edible-nest, 41 
 Swordﬁ sh, 1, 3, 13, 272 
 
 Tailorbird, 216 
 Tapir, Brazilian, 154, 161, 163 
 Tasmanian devil, 158 – 159 
 Tenrec 
 hedgehog, 42, 64, 157 
 shrew, 157 
 Termite 
 compass, 219 – 220, 224 – 225 
 subterranean, 223, 224 – 225, 230 
 warlike, 220 
 Tit, 215 
 Toad, burrowing, 28, 31 
 Tobacco, 112 
 Tree 
 bottle, 114 
 fern, 95 
 horsetail, 96, 117 
 maple, 98 
 palm, 96 
 quiver, 114 
 rubber, 108 
 sandbox, 127 
 scale, 96, 117 
 stage, 263 
 stinging, 107 
 Trifﬁ d, 263 
 Trout, rainbow, 31 
 Tuatara, 157 
 Tuco-tuco, Rio Negro, 29 
 Turtle 
 sea, 16 
 snapping, 47 
 
 Vanga, sickle-billed, 140 – 141 
 Venus ﬂ ytrap, 137 – 138, 263 
 Vulture 
 Egyptian, 211 
 Eurasian black, 144 – 145, 237 – 238 
 North American turkey, 47, 144 – 145, 
237 – 238 
 
 Walkingstick, giant, 8 
 Wallaby, 159 – 160, 181 
 Warbler, Tennessee, 147 
 Wasp 
 funnel, 219 
 hover, 219 
 mud, 211, 219 
 paper, 217, 219 
 potter, 219 
 Waterwheel, 137 – 138 
 Weaverbird, 216 – 217 
 Whale 
 killer, 167, 242 
 sperm, 242 
 White-eyes, Japanese, 147 
 Wild dog, African, 236 – 237 
 Wildebeest, 233 
 Witch hazel, 127 
 Witch weed, 140 

Index of Common Names 
307
 Wolf 
 European, 158, 166, 236 
 marsupial, 158 – 159 
 Wolverine, 158 – 159, 166 
 Wombat, 158, 160 
 Woodchuck, 158, 160, 161 – 162 
 Woodpecker, red-headed, 140, 142 
 Worms 
 bristle, 71, 84 
 velvet, 76, 84 
 Wren, Carolina, 216 
 
 Yellow jacket, 217 
 Yucca, aloe, 107 
 
 Zokor, Siberian, 29 


 Index of Species 
 Abildgaardia ovata , 104 
 Abromeitiella lorentziana , 113 
 Abrus precatorius , 110 
 Abyssocottus korotnefﬁ  , 180 
 Acacia drepanolobium , 107 
 A. greggii , 107 
 Acanthophis praelongus , 89 
 Acanthopleura spiniger , 68 
 Acer saccharinum , 128 
 Acetes sibogae , 73 
 Aconitum napellus , 111 
 Acrobatus pygmaeus , 18 
 Acrochordus granulatus , 89 
 Acrosternum hilare , 65 
 Adansonia digitata , 122 
 Adelobasileus cromptoni , 54 – 55 
 Aechmea fasciata , 132 
 Aegithalos caudatus , 214 
 Aegolius funereus , 41 
 Aegypius monachus , 145, 235 
 Aequipecten opercularis , 168 
 Aerodramus fuciphagus , 41 
 Aesculus glabra , 110 
 Aethia cristatella , 63 
 Aetobatus narinari , 32 
 Agalychnis spurrelli , 18 
 Agave ﬂ exispina , 113 
 A. schottii , 124 
 A. tequilana , 109 
 Aglaophyton major , 97 
 Aix sponsa , 60 
 Alamosaurus sanjuanensis , 232 
 Aldrovanda vesiculosa , 137 
 Alianthus altissima , 128 
 Allionia coccinea , 124 
 Allosaurus fragilis , 166 
 Alluaudia montagnacii , 106, 113 
 Aloe dichotoma , 113 
 Alopias vulpinus , 79 
 Amaranthus edulis , 104 
 Amargasaurus cazaui , 79 
 Amblyopone pallipes , 229 
 Ambystoma talpoideum , 27 
 Amianthium muscaetoxicum , 111 
 Amischolotype hispida , 130 
 Amitermes meridionalis , 216 
 Amorphophallus titanium , 121 – 122 
 Amphioctopus marginatus , 214 
 Amphipholis squamata , 86 
 Anableps anableps , 87 
 Anacampseros australiana , 104 
 Anas aucklandica , 152 
 Anatotitan copei , 60 
 Anax junius , 18 
 Androcymbium striatum , 132 
 Anguilla anguilla , 14 – 15 
 Anguis cephallonica , 88 
 Anilius scytale , 89 
 Anisacanthus thurberi , 124 
 Ankylosaurus magniventris , 63, 166 
 Anniella pulchra , 27, 88 
 Anolis carolinensis , 83 
 Anomalurus derbianus , 18 
 Anser caerulescens , 194 
 Antechinus stuartii , 158 
 Anthracotherium magnus , 163 
 Antiaris toxicaria , 109 
 Anticharis linearis , 105 
 Apantesis ornata , 73 
 Apatemys chardini , 141 
 Aphaenogaster rudis , 210 
 Apis mellifera , 65, 229, 232 
 Apocynum cannabinum , 128 
 Aptenodytes patagonica , 14, 79, 152 
 Apterostigma auriculatum , 223 
 Apteryx haasti , 150 
 Ara macao , 60 
 Arabis alpina , 128 
 Aradus albicornis , 33 
 Aramidopsis plateni , 150 
 Arca noae , 69 
 Arceuthobium pusillum , 129, 139 
 Archaeohyrax concentricus , 162 
 Archaeopteris hibernica , 95, 99 

310 
Index of Species
 A. latifolia , 116 
 Archaeopteryx lithographica , 46, 78 
 Archilochus colubris , 146 
 Arctium lappa , 127 
 Ardea herodias , 18 
 Ardipithecus ramidus , 23 
 Areca catechu , 110 
 Argentavis magniﬁ cens , 145 
 Argyrotheca cistellula , 68 
 Arisaema triphyllum , 109 
 Aristolochia grandiﬂ ora , 122 
 Armandia brevis , 69 
 Ascaphus truei , 32, 83 
 Asclepias syriaca , 128 
 A. tuberosa , 111 
 Asimina triloba , 122 
 Asio otus , 41 
 Aspergillus clavatus , 6 
 A. oryzae , 6 
 Asplanchna brightwelli , 11, 68 
 Asterias rubens , 68 
 Astragalus coccineus , 123 – 124 
 Astrapis desiderata , 73 
 Astrapotherium magnum , 163 
 Astrophytum asterias , 114 
 Astroscopus zephyreus , 34, 45 
 Astyanax mexicanus , 194 
 Atlantisia rogersi , 150 
 Atriplex canescens , 104 
 Atropa belladonna , 111 
 Augochlorella pomoniella , 229 
 Aurelia aurita , 69 
 Ausktribosphenos nyktos , 53 – 54 
 Australopithecus afarensis , 210 
 Australoplatypus incompertus , 223, 229 
 Azygocypridina lowryi , 69 
 
 Bachia oxyrhinus , 26, 28 
 Bacillus subtilis , 203 
 Bakonydraco galaczi , 167 
 Balanerpeton woodi , 73 
 Balanoglossus proterogonius , 68 
 Barbourofelis fricki , 42, 44 
 Barclaya kunstleri , 98 
 Barisia imbricata , 88 
 Barsostrobus famennensis , 116 
 Basiliscus basiluscus , 24 
 Batrachognathus volans , 167 
 Behnia reticulata , 130 
 Bienertia sinuspersici , 104 
 Bison bison , 159, 166 
 Bispira volutacornis , 69 
 Bitis gabonica , 89 
 Blandfordia punicea , 130 
 Blepharis ciliaris , 105 
 Boerhavia coccinea , 104 
 Bombyx mori , 197, 203 
 Bonellia viridis , 68 
 Boreogadus saida , 190 
 Bos taurus , 180, 184, 192, 203 
 Bougainvillea principis , 68 
 Bouvardia glaberrima , 124 
 Brachinus explodens , 65 
 Brachypodion melanocephalum , 88 
 Branchiomma bombyx , 69 
 Branchiostoma ﬂ oridae , 69 
 Brocchinia reducta , 130, 137 
 Brodiaea ida-maia , 124 
 Bubo virginianus , 33, 41, 44 
 Bufo bufo , 33 
 Bugula neritina , 68 
 Buteo jamaicensis , 44 
 Byblis gigantea , 137 
 Bythites islandicus , 87 
 
 Cactospiza pallida , 141, 210 
 Calamites cistiiformes , 95 
 Calamocarpon , 117 
 Calamus laoensis , 130 
 Calathea zebrina , 132 
 Calligonum mongolicum , 104 
 Calycanthus ﬂ oridus , 110 
 Camaroptera brevicondata , 214 
 Camelops hesternus , 162 
 Camelus dromedarius , 58, 113, 200 
 Camponotus heathi , 19 
 Canirallus cuvieri aldabranus , 150 
 Canis lupus , 158, 166, 235 
 Cannabis sativa , 109 
 Capra aegagrus , 61 
 C. hircus , 167 
 Capsicum chinense , 110 
 Carcharodon carcharias , 13 – 14 
 Cardinalis cardinalis , 238 
 Cardiocrinum giganteum , 130 
 Carex pensylvanica , 132 
 Cariama cristata , 44, 46, 150 
 Carpobrotus edulis , 113 
 Carybdea marsupialis , 70 
 Cassytha ﬁ liformis , 139 
 Castor canadensis , 163, 215 
 Casuarius casuarius , 151 
 Catha edulis , 109 
 Cathartes aura , 44, 145, 235 
 Caudipteryx zoui , 50 – 51 
 Caulophyllum thalictroides , 110 
 Cebus apella , 180, 240 
 C. libidinosus , 210 
 Cecropsis luculentum , 116 
 Cellvibrio japonicus , 201 – 202 
 Cemophora coccinea , 27 
 Cephalanthus occidentalis , 111 
 Cephalotes atratus , 19 
 Cephalotus follicularis , 137 

Index of Species 
311
 Cerbera odollam , 110 
 Cervus elaphus , 58, 61, 158, 166 
 Chalcides chalcides , 90 
 Chalcoparia singalensis , 146 
 Chaleuria cirrosa , 116 
 Chamaecyce forbesii , 104 
 Chamaeleo bitaeniatus , 88 
 Chamaesaura anguina , 88 
 Charcharhinus longimanus , 32 
 Chasmosaurus belli , 54 
 Chelidonium majus , 109 
 Chelonia mydas , 14 
 Chelychelynechen quassus , 151 
 Chendytes lawi , 152 
 Chimaerasuchus paradoxus , 54 – 56 
 Chironomus tentans , 197 
 Chlamydera nuchalis , 214 
 Chlamydomonas reinhardtii , 100 
 Chlamydophorus truncatus , 27 
 Choeronycteris mexicana , 146 
 Chondrodendron tomentosum , 109 
 Choristoneura fumiferana , 190 
 Chroomonas salina , 100 
 Chrysochloris asiatica , 27, 157 
 Chrysomela varians , 86 
 Chrysopa carnea , 73 
 Chrysopelea paradisi , 18 
 Ciccaba virgata , 40 
 Cicuta maculata , 111 
 Cincindela marutha , 73 
 Ciona intestinalis , 187, 200 
 Cirsium vulgare , 106 
 Citrus aurantifolia , 110 
 Cleome gynandra , 105 
 Clupea harengus , 190, 232 
 Clusia rosea , 121 
 Cnidoscollus stimulosus , 106 
 Coelophysis baurri , 236 
 C. rhodesiensis , 166 
 Coelurosauravus jaekeli , 18 
 Coereba ﬂ aveola , 194 
 Coffea arabica , 110 
 Colchicum autumnale , 111 
 Colobus badius , 58 
 C. guereza , 184 
 Columba livia , 240 
 C. palumbus , 214 
 Comatilia iridometriformis , 86 
 Comophorus baicalensis , 87 
 Connochaetes taurinus , 232 
 Conus striatus , 45 
 Cooksonia hemisphaerica , 97 
 Cophotis ceylanica , 88 
 Corallorhiza maculata , 139 
 Cormocephalus rubriceps , 157 
 Corvus moneduloides , 210 
 Corytophanes cristatus , 88 
 Costus barbatus , 132 
 Cottocomephorus inermis , 180 
 Crassula ovata , 113 
 Crataegus crus-galli , 107 
 Crocodylus niloticus , 32, 51, 73, 83, 200 
 Crotalus horridus , 32 – 33, 45 
 Cryptasterina hystera , 86 
 Cryptocleidus oxoniensis , 167 
 Cryptomys damarensis , 229 
 C. hottentotus , 27 
 Crysophila warscewiczii , 121 
 Cseninus lecontei , 223 
 Ctenomys rionegrensis , 27 
 Cubitermes fungifaber , 220 
 Cucurbita maxima , 98 
 Curculigo capitulata , 130, 132 
 Cuscuta epithymum , 139 
 Cyanastrum cordifolium , 132 
 Cyanerpes cyaneus , 146 
 Cyanolimnus cerverai , 151 
 Cyathea cooperi , 95 
 Cycas media , 95 
 C. revoluta , 111 
 Cyclanthus bipartitus , 121 
 Cygnus olor , 214 
 Cynocephalus volans , 18 
 Cynoglossum ofﬁ cinale , 128 
 Cynopterus sphinx , 214 
 Cyperus papyrus , 104 
 Cypripedium calceolus , 109 
 
 Daboia russelli , 89 
 Dactylopsila trivirgata , 141 
 Dactylopterus volitans , 19 
 Daemonorops formicaria , 107 
 Dananus plexippus , 63, 232 
 Daphne mezereum , 111 
 Dasyatis brevicaudata , 45 
 Dasypogon hookeri , 132 
 Dasypus novemcinctus , 63, 83 
 Dasyurus viverrinus , 158 
 Daubentonia madagascariensis , 141 
 Daucus carota , 129 
 Deinacrida heteracantha , 157 
 Deinonychus antirrhopus , 235 – 236 
 Delphinium cardinale , 123 – 124 
 D. nudicaule , 123 
 Delphyodontus dacriformes , 86 
 Dendrobates leucomelas , 63 
 Dendrocnide moroides , 107 
 Dendrodoris grandiﬂ ora , 63 
 Descurainia pinnata , 109 
 Desmodium lineatum , 128 
 Diatryma gigantea , 149 – 150 
 Dichapetalum toxicarium , 109 
 Didelphis virginiana , 54, 89 
 Digitalis purpurea , 111 

312 
Index of Species
 Dimetrodon grandis , 79 
 Dinematichthys ilucoeteoides , 87 
 Dinopsis subrufus , 70 
 Dinornis giganteus , 153 
 Dionaea muscipula , 137 
 Diospyros malabarica , 121 
 Diploptera punctata , 86 
 Dipodomys californicus , 23 
 Diprotodon optatum , 159 
 Disporum cantoniense , 130 
 Dissostichus mawsoni , 190 
 Doedicurus clavicaudatus , 63, 166 
 Dolichopoda linderi , 204 
 Dolichovespula norwegica , 214 
 Dorosoma cepedianum , 51 
 Draco melanopogon , 18, 20 
 Dromaius novaehollandiae , 151 
 Drosera intermedia , 137 
 D. pauciﬂ ora , 121 
 Drosophila melanogaster , 200 
 Dryocoetoides cristatus , 223 
 
 Ecballium elaterium , 110, 129 
 Echinocereus triglochidiatus , 124 
 Echinoderes aquilonius , 69 
 Echinops telfairi , 41 
 Eciton burchelli , 235 
 Edaphosaurus cruciger , 79 
 Electrophorus electricus , 45 
 Eleocharis vivipara , 104 
 Elephantulus rozeti , 200 
 Elephas maximus , 210, 239 
 Eleutherodactylus jasperi , 87 
 Elkinsia polymorpha , 116 – 117 
 Ellesmeris sphenopteroides , 99 
 Encephalartos ferox , 106 
 Enhydra lutris , 16, 210 
 Eoconodontus notchpeakensis , 15, 70 
 Eomaia scansoria , 90 
 Eoraptor , 24 
 Ephedra fasciculata , 98 
 Epicauta pestifera , 63 
 Epilobium angustifolium , 128 
 Epoicotherium unicum , 27 
 Equisetum sylvaticum , 98 
 Equus caballus , 61 
 E. zebra , 58, 61 
 Eremias przewalskii , 88 
 Eremopezus eocaenus , 151 
 Erethizon dorsatum , 63 
 Eriachne triodioides , 104 
 Eridacnis barbouri , 87 
 Erinaceus europaeus , 63, 197 
 Erpetoichthyes calabaricus , 14 
 Erwinia chrysanthemi , 201 – 202 
 Erycibe paniculata , 121 
 Erythronium americanum , 132 
 Erythroxylum coca , 109 
 Eryx jaculus , 89 
 Escherichia coli , 201, 204 
 Eudibamus cursoris , 23 – 24 
 Euglena gracilis , 100 
 Eukrohnia hamata , 69 
 Eumecia anchietae , 90 
 Eupagurus bernhardus , 51 – 52 
 Eupatorium rugosum , 110 
 Euphausia superba , 232 
 Euphorbia canariensis , 106, 113 – 114 
 E. cryptospinosa , 114 
 E. mellifera , 114 
 E. obesa , 114 
 E. tirucalli , 109 
 E. valida , 114 
 Euroleon nostras , 45 
 Eurotamandua joresi , 143 
 Eurypterus remipes , 14 
 Exocetus volitans , 19 
 
 Falco peregrinus , 44 
 Falculea palliata , 141 
 Felis sylvestris , 35, 158, 166 
 F. sylvestris catus , 32 – 33 
 Ferocactus cylindraceus , 114 
 Ficus carica , 107 
 Flagellaria indica , 130 
 Flaveria australasica , 105 
 Formica obscuripes , 226 
 F. yessensis , 223 
 Fouquieria splendens , 124 
 Fraxinus americana , 128 
 Fringilla coelebs , 215 
 Froelichia gracilis , 104 
 Fucomimus mus , 87 
 Fucus serratus , 100 
 Fugu rubripes , 187 
 Fulica gigantea , 151 
 Furnarius rufus , 215 
 
 Gagea lutea , 132 
 Galago senegalensis , 33 
 Galeus polli , 87 
 Galium odoratum , 110 
 Gallinula nesiotis comeri , 151 
 G. paciﬁ cus , 151 
 G. silvestris , 151 
 Gallirallus australis australis , 150 
 G. australis grayi , 150 
 G. australis scotti , 150 
 G. calayanensis , 150 
 G. insignis , 150 
 G. lafresnayus , 150 
 Gallus gallus , 50, 180, 200 
 Gasterochisma melampus , 79 
 Gasterosteus aculeatus , 195 – 196 

Index of Species 
313
 Gavia stellata , 50 
 Gavialis gangeticus , 167 
 Geitonoplesium cymosum , 130 
 Gelsemium sempervirens , 111 
 Genlisea margaretae , 137 
 Geomys bursarius , 27, 162 
 Geosaurus giganteus , 14 
 Geranium maculatum , 129 
 Giardinichthys viviparous , 87 
 Gigantopteris nicotianaefolia , 98 
 Gilia aggregata , 123 – 124 
 Gillespiea randolphensis , 116 
 Ginkgo biloba , 127 
 Giraffa camelopardalis , 23 
 Glaucomys volans , 18, 20, 158 
 Gleditsia triacanthos , 106 
 Globba winitii , 132 
 Glossocardia bosvallea , 105 
 Gnathonemus petersii , 34 
 Gnathotrupes quadrituberculatus , 223 
 Gollum attenuatus , 87 
 Gorilla gorilla , 211, 214, 241 
 Grifﬁ nia hyacinthina , 130 
 Gromphadorhina portentosa , 51 
 Gryllotalpa gryllotalpa , 27 
 Gryllus pennsylvanicus , 73 
 Gulo gulo , 158, 166 
 Gymnogyps californicus , 145 
 Gymnostachys anceps , 130 
 Gymnostinops montezuma , 214 
 Gymnotus carapo , 34 
 
 Habroptila wallaci , 151 
 Hadrurus arizonensis , 45 
 Halaelurus boesemani , 87 
 Haliaeetus leucocephalus , 214 
 Halictus (Halictus) quadricinctus , 229 
 Haloxylon aphyllum , 104 
 Hamamelis virginiana , 129 
 Hanguana malayana , 130 
 Harpagophytum procumbens , 128 
 Hedera helix , 110 
 Helicolenus percoides , 87 
 Heliconius erato , 73 
 Heliotropium polyphyllum , 105 
 Helix aspersa , 69 
 Helleborus foetidus , 122 
 Hemaris thysbe , 146 
 Hemicyclaspis murchisoni , 33 
 Hemigalus derbyanus , 44 
 Hemignathus munroi , 141 
 Hemimerus vosseleri , 86 
 Hemisus guineensis , 27 
 Hemitripterus americanus , 190 
 Hensmannia turbinata , 132 
 Herrerasaurus ischigualastensis , 23 – 24 
 Hesperornis regalis , 151 
 Heterandria formosa , 90 
 Heterocephalus glaber , 229 
 Heterococcus pleurococcoides , 100 
 Heterohyrax brucei , 58 
 Hexanchus griseus , 86 
 Hippocampus zosterae , 84 
 Hippopotamus amphibius , 58 
 Hirundo pyrrhonota , 215 
 Holocentrus adscensionis , 33 
 Homo erectus , 242 
 H. ergaster , 242 
 H. habilis , 210 
 H. heidelbergensis , 242 
 H. neanderthalensis , 241 – 242 
 H. sapiens , 180, 192, 197, 201, 203, 215, 
222 – 223, 232, 235, 239, 241 – 242 
 Hoplophoneus mentalis , 42, 44 
 Hordeum murinum , 128 
 Hura crepitans , 129 
 Hyaena hyaena , 145 
 Hydnophytum formicarum , 107 
 Hydrangea quercifolia , 111 
 Hydrilla verticillata , 104 
 Hyla cinerea , 33 
 Hyperodapedon gordoni , 60 
 Hypsilophodon foxii , 166 
 Hystrix cristata , 63 
 
 Ibicella lutea , 137 
 Icarosaurus siefkeri , 18, 20 
 Ichthyophis glutinosus , 26 
 Ichthyosaurus platyodon , 13 – 14, 88, 167 
 Idiognathodus claviformis , 54, 56 
 Ilex aquifolium , 106 
 Impatiens pallida , 129 
 Imperata cylindrical , 106 
 Indocryphalus pubipennis , 223 
 Iodes africana , 121 
 Ipomoea coccinea , 123 – 124 
 I. tricolor , 110 
 Ipomopsis congesta , 121 
 Iris foetidissima , 122 
 I. pseudacorus , 132 
 
 Jenynsia lineata , 87 
 Joinvillea ascendens , 130 
 
 Kallstroemia grandiﬂ ora , 105 
 Kalmia latifolia , 111 
 Karwinskia humboldtiana , 110 
 Kayentatherium wellesi , 54 – 55 
 Keichousaurus hui , 88 
 Kryptobaatar daszevegi , 89 
 Kuehneosaurus latus , 18, 20 
 
 Lacerta vivipara , 88 
 Lactobacillus helveticus , 201 

314 
Index of Species
 Lama guanicoe , 61 
 Lamna ditropis , 79 
 Lampropeltis triangulum celaenops , 8 
 Lantana camara , 110 
 Larentia clavaria , 73 
 Larus argentatus , 180 
 Lasioglossum (Dialictus) ﬁ gueresi , 229 
 Lasius fuliginosus , 226 
 Lathamus discolor , 146 
 Latimeria chalumnae , 87 
 Latrodectus mactans , 45 
 Lecanium hesperidum , 86 
 Leclercqia andrewsii , 99 
 Lepidocarpon , 117 
 Lepidodendron rhodumnense , 95 
 Lepidosiren paradoxa , 14, 16 
 Leptocharius smithii , 87 
 Leptosynapta clarki , 86 
 Leptothorax albipennis , 232 
 Lesothosaurus , 24 
 Leuckartiara octona , 11, 68 
 Leucojum aestivum , 132 
 Lialis burtonis , 26, 32 
 Limulus polyphemus , 192 
 Lineus ruber , 69 
 Liostenogaster ﬂ avolineata , 215 
 Liriodendron tulipifera , 128 
 Lobelia cardinalis , 124 
 L. inﬂ ata , 110 
 Lolliguncula brevis , 73 
 Lonicera arizonica , 124 
 Lophophora williamsii , 111 
 Lophopssittacus mauritianus , 151 
 Loxodonta africana , 166, 232, 241 
 Loxosomella cochlear , 68 
 Lumbricus terrestris , 51, 68, 192 
 Lycaon pictus , 235 
 Lymnaea stagnalis , 51 
 Lynx rufus , 35 
 
 Mabuya heathi , 90 – 91 
 Macaca sylvanus , 239 
 Machaeroides simpsoni , 42 
 Macrauchenia patagonica , 162 
 Macroclemys temmincki , 44, 83 
 Macropus agilis , 159 
 M. eugeni , 180 
 M. rufus , 23, 58, 158, 200 
 Macrosoma nigrimacula , 73 
 Macrotermes bellicosus , 215 
 Macrozanonia macrocarpa , 126, 128 
 Macrozoarces americanus , 190 
 Magnolia macrophylla , 122 
 Maiasaura pebblesorum , 232 
 Majungatholus atopus , 77 
 Malapterurus electricus , 34, 45 
 Mammut americanum , 162 
 Mammuthus primigenius , 237 
 Manihot esculenta , 111 
 Manis gigantea , 51, 63, 143, 162 
 Mantis religiosa , 26, 69, 73 
 Marasuchus illoensis , 23 – 24 
 Marmota monax , 158, 162 
 Marsilea quadrifolia , 116 
 Massetognathus pascuali , 54 
 Mastixia arborea , 121 
 Materpiscis attenboroughi , 84, 86 
 Megacrex inepta , 150 
 Megalomma vesiculosum , 69 
 Megaphasma dentricus , 8, 23 
 Megathrips lativentris , 86 
 Melanerpes erythrocephalus , 141 
 Melanophila acuminata , 33 
 Mellipona compressipes , 229 
 Melopsittacus undulates , 180 
 Mephitis mephitis , 65 
 Merimna atrata , 33 
 Mesotherium cristatum , 163 
 Methanosarcina thermophila , 203 
 Metriaclima zebra , 180 
 Microgale longicaudata , 157 
 Micromys minutus , 214 
 Microstigmus comes , 214 
 Microstomum lineare , 68 
 Microtus arvalis , 27 
 Micruroides euryxanthus , 8 
 Mimulus cardinalis , 123 – 124 
 Mitsukurina owstoni , 86 
 Mollugo nudicaulis , 104 
 Moloch horridus , 143 
 Monardella macrantha , 123 – 124 
 Monosiga brevicollis , 260 
 Monotropa uniﬂ ora , 139 
 Moraea glaucopis , 121 
 Moricandia arvensis , 105 
 Moringa pterygosperma , 128 
 Mucuna pruriens , 106 
 Mugil cephalus , 51 
 Mullerornis agilis , 151 
 Muraenosaurus leedsii , 14 
 Mus musculus , 158 
 Mustela putorius , 65 
 Mutisia , 125 
 Mya arenaria , 68 
 Myospalax myospalax , 27 
 Myotis myotis , 18, 41, 73, 167 
 Myoxocephalus octodecimspinosus , 190 
 Myrmecobius fasciatus , 143, 158 
 Myrmecophaga tridactyla , 143, 158, 162, 166 
 Myxine glutinosa , 15 
 Myzomela eques , 146 
 
 Nannopterum harrisi , 152 
 Narceus annularis , 65 

Index of Species 
315
 Nasutitermes corniger , 65 
 Naultinus gemmeus , 88 
 Nautilus pompilius , 47 
 Necrophila americana , 145 
 Nectophynoides occidentalis , 87 
 Nelumbo nucifera , 122 
 Neoceratodus forsteri , 54 
 Neophron percnopterus , 210 
 Neotoma fuscipes , 214 
 Nepenthes truncata , 137 
 Nephthys ciliata , 69 
 Nereis limnicola , 86 
 Nesoclopeus woodfordi , 151 
 Neuwiedia veratrifolia , 130 
 Nicotiana tabacum , 109, 203 
 Nidularium fulgens , 132 
 Noctilio leporinus , 165 
 Noeggerathiostrobus vicinalis , 116 
 Notanatolica vivipara , 86 
 Notaulax rectangulata , 68 
 Nothronychus mckinleyi , 167 
 Nothrotheriops shastensis , 167 
 Notomys cervinus , 23 
 Notophthalamus viridescens , 204 
 Notornis mantelli hochsteteri , 151 
 Notoryctes typhlops , 27, 158 
 Nycticebus coucang , 32, 35 
 
 Ochromonas villosa , 100 
 Octopus vulgaris , 32 – 33, 44, 70, 192, 200 
 Odontotermes formosanus , 223 
 Oncholaimus vesicarius , 68 
 Oncorhychus mykiss , 31 
 Oncothrips tepperi , 229 
 Onitochiton neglectus , 69 
 Onychocerus albitarsis , 65 – 66 
 Ophiodes striatus , 88 
 Ophisaurus ventralis , 27 
 Opisthocomus hoatzin , 58, 184 
 Orchidantha maxillarioides , 121 
 Orcinus orca , 167 
 Ormia ochracea , 73 
 Ornithogalum umbellatum , 121 
 Ornithorhynchus anatinus , 34, 60, 65, 73, 
200 
 Ornithosuchus longidens , 23 
 Orthotomus sutorius , 214 
 Orycteropus afer , 143 
 Oryctolagus cuniculus , 58, 159, 200 
 Oryza sativa , 187 
 Osmerus mordax , 190 
 Ouranosaurus nigeriensis , 79 
 Oxalis corniculata , 129 
 Oxyura vittata , 83 
 
 Pachycephalosaurus wyomingensis , 167 
 Pachypodium lealii , 106, 113 
 Pagophilus groenlandicus , 32 
 Pakasuchus kapilimai, 54 – 55 
 Palaeotis weigelti , 150 
 Pallavicinites devonicus , 99 
 Palola viridis , 68 
 Pan paniscus , 211 
 P. troglodytes , 211, 241 
 Pandanus tectorius , 130 
 Pandion haliaetus , 44, 47 
 Panicum virgatum , 104, 132 
 Paniscus testaceus , 86 
 Panthera leo , 35, 158, 166, 235 
 Papaver rhoeas , 121 
 P. somniferum , 110 
 Papio cynocephalus , 210 
 Parabrotula plagiophthalmus , 87 
 Paradoxurus hermaphroditus , 33 
 Paragordius varius , 69 
 Paralastor emarginatus , 219 
 Paraleptomenes mephitis , 215 
 Parasaurolophus walkeri , 54, 166 
 Parischnogaster mellyi , 229 
 Paryphanta busbyi , 157 
 Patagopteryx deferrariisi , 151 
 Paulownia tomentosa , 128 
 Pavlova helicata , 100 
 Pecari tajacu , 162 
 Pecten maximus , 69 
 Pectinaria gouldii , 69 
 Pectis linifolia , 105 
 Pedetes capensis , 23 – 24 
 Pediculus corporis , 86 
 Pelecanus erythrorhynchus , 235 
 P. occidentalis , 167 
 Peniocereus serpintinus , 114 
 Pereskia sacharosa , 114 
 Peridinium westii , 100 
 Peripatus antiguensis , 69, 86 
 Periplaneta americana , 197 
 Petauroides volans , 18 
 Petaurus australis , 158 
 P. breviceps , 18 
 Petromyzon marinus , 15, 68, 197, 200 
 Peucedanum galbanum , 110 
 Pezophaps solitaria , 151 
 Phacelia purshii , 106 
 Phascolomys ursinus , 158 
 Phelsuma lineata , 200 
 Philodendron selloum , 111 
 Phlegethonia linearis , 26, 28 
 Phocaena phocaena , 13 – 14, 167 
 Phodilus badius , 41 
 Phoenix dactylifera , 95 
 Phorusrhacos longissimus , 46, 48, 148 
 Photinus pyralis , 63 
 Phragmipedium grande , 122 
 Phrynocephalus arabicus , 88 

316 
Index of Species
 Phrynosoma ditmarsi , 88 
 P. orbiculare , 88 
 P. platyrhinos , 143 
 Phyllomedusa tarsius , 32 
 Phymaturus patagonicus , 88 
 Physalia physalis , 45 
 Phytolacca americana , 111 
 Pica pica , 239 
 Picathartes gymnocephalus , 215 
 Pilocereus lanuginosus , 106, 113 – 114 
 Pinguicula vulgaris , 137 
 Pinus strobus , 128 
 Pisum sativum , 203 
 Pitohui dichrous , 63 
 Placopecten magellanicus , 200 
 Platecarpus ictericus , 14, 88 
 Plateosaurus engelhardi , 51 
 Platyhystrix rugosus , 79 
 Platymonas subcordiformis , 100 
 Platyzoma microphylla , 116 
 Pleuronectes americanus , 190 
 Pliohippus pernix , 160, 162 
 Ploceus cucullatus , 214 
 Plotosus lineatus , 65 
 Podiceps taczanowskii , 152 
 Podilymbus gigas , 152 
 Podophyllum peltatum , 109 
 Poeciliopsis paucimaculata , 90 
 P. proliﬁ ca , 90 
 P. retropinna , 91 
 P. turneri , 90 
 Pogona vitticepes , 184 
 Polycarpaea longiﬂ ora , 104 
 Polydesmus angustus , 65 
 Polydriella helvetica , 100 
 Polygonatum biﬂ orum , 130 
 Polygonum pennsylvanicum , 106 
 Pomacea bridgesii , 83 
 Pongo pygmaeus , 210 – 211, 239 
 Populus deltoides , 128 
 Portia ﬁ mbriata , 70 
 Portulaca oleracea , 104 
 Porzana atra , 150 
 Potamogale velox , 157 
 Presbytis entellus , 184 
 Priapulus caudatus , 51, 192 
 Pristerodon mackayi , 60 
 Proailurus lemanensis , 44 
 Proboscidea louisianaca , 129 
 Procambarus clarkii , 52 
 Procolophon trigoniceps , 54 
 Proiphys amboinensis , 130 
 Promerops cafer , 146 
 Propachyrucos ameghinorum , 162 
 Protobarinophyton pennsylvanicum , 116 
 Protocalamostachys farringtonii , 116 
 Psaltiparus minimus , 215 
 Psaronius schopﬁ i , 95 
 Pseudemoia entrecasteauxii , 90 
 Pseudoginglymostoma brevicaudatum , 86 
 Pseudomymex gracilis , 19 
 Pseudopotamilla occelata , 69 
 Pseudoregma sundanica , 229 
 Pseudoscops grammicus , 40 
 Pseudotribos robustus , 54 
 Psilotum nudum , 99 
 Psittacosaurus mongoliensis , 51, 60 
 Psittacus erithacus , 180 
 Ptelea trifoliata , 128 
 Pteranodon longiceps , 167 
 Pteridium aquilinum , 98 
 Pteroglossaspis ecristata , 121 
 Pterois volitans , 65 
 Pterotrachea mutica , 69 
 Ptychozoon kuhli , 19 
 Pygathrix nemaeus , 184 
 Pyrococcus horikoshii , 204 
 Pyrotherium romeri , 162 
 Python molurus , 32 – 33 
 
 Quercus lobata , 107 
 Q. velutina , 106 
 
 Rafﬂ esia arnoldii , 122, 139 
 Rahonavis ostromi , 43 – 44, 46 
 Raja ocellata , 34 
 Rallus okinawa , 150 
 R. owstoni , 150 
 R. pectoralis muelleri , 150 
 Rana catesbeiana , 33 
 R. pipiens , 200 
 Ranunculus asiaticus , 121 
 Raphus cucullatus , 151 
 Rattus norvegicus , 197 
 R. rattus , 158 
 Rellimia thomsonii , 99 
 Remiz pendulinus , 214 
 Rhacochilus vacca , 87 
 Rhacophorus nigropalmatus , 18 
 Rhamnus cathartica , 106 
 Rhea americana , 150, 180 
 Rhineura ﬂ oridana , 26, 88 
 Rhinoceras unicornus , 166 
 Rhinophrynus dorsalis , 27, 32 
 Rhinoptynx clamator , 40 
 Rhizomys sumatraensis , 27 
 Rhododendron ponticum , 109 
 Rhomaleosaurus megacephalus , 167 
 Rhynchetos jubatus , 150 
 Rhynchops niger , 32, 34 
 Rhynchospora rubra , 104 
 Ribes speciosum , 123 – 124 
 Ricinus communis , 110 
 Ripogonum scandens , 130 

Index of Species 
317
 Robinia pseudoacacia , 109 
 Rollandia microptera , 152 
 Roridula gorgonias , 137 
 Rosa gallica , 106 
 Rousettus aegyptiacus , 167 
 Rumex crispus , 128 
 
 Sabella spallanzanii , 168 
 Sagitta enﬂ ata , 69 
 Sagittarius serpentarius , 44 
 Salamandra salamandra , 63, 87 
 Salpa cylindrica , 69 
 Salvia divinorum , 109 
 Salvinia molesta , 116 
 Sambucus nigra , 110 
 Sanguinaria canadensis , 111 
 Saponaria ofﬁ cinalis , 109 
 Sarcophaga carnaria , 86 
 Sarcophilus harrisii , 33, 158 
 Sarracenia purpurea , 137 
 Saurornithoides mongoliensis , 44, 166 
 Scalenodon angustifrons , 54 
 Scaphiopus couchii , 27, 32 
 Sceliphron caementarium , 210 
 Sceloporus angustus , 88 
 S. bicanthalis , 88 
 S. formosus , 88 
 S. torquatus , 88 
 Schistocerca gregaria , 232 
 Sciurus carolinensis , 214 
 Scolecomorphus vittatus , 87 
 Scoliopus bigelovii , 132 
 Scolopendra gigantea , 45 
 Scolytoplatypus macgregori , 223 
 Selaginella lepidophylla , 98 
 Senecio stapeliiformis , 113 
 Sesuvium portulacastrum , 104 
 Setifer setosus , 63, 157 
 Shuvuuia deserti , 143 – 144, 166 
 Siganus corallinus , 65 
 Silene laciniata , 123 – 124 
 Siphonochilus aethiopicus , 130 
 Sipunculus nudus , 68, 192 
 Sistrurus catenatus , 89 
 Smilax herbacea , 122 
 Smilodon fatalis , 43 – 44, 162 
 Sminthopsis crassicandata , 158 
 Solanum tuberosum , 111 
 Solenopsis geminata , 65 
 Sordes pilosus , 18, 79 
 Sorex araneus , 41 
 Sorghum halepense , 109 
 Spalacopus cyanus , 27, 162 
 Spalax leucodon , 27 
 Sphecius speciosus , 45 
 Sphenodon punctatus , 157 
 Sphenophyllum involutum , 99 
 Spiloxene capensis , 121 
 Spinosaurus maroccanus , 79, 167 
 Sporobolus cryptandrus , 104 
 Sporogonites exuberans , 99 
 Squatina californica , 31 – 32 
 Stapelia gigantea , 122 
 Steatornis caripensis , 41 
 Stercorarius parasiticus , 194 
 Sterculia stipulata , 121 
 Stomaphis quercus , 226 
 Storeria dekayi , 89 
 Striga asiatica , 139 
 Strigops habroptilus , 151 
 Strix aluco , 40 
 Strophanthus kombe , 110 
 Struthio camelus , 50 – 51, 83, 150 
 Strychnos toxifera , 109 
 Sturnus vulgaris , 232 
 Suaeda aralocaspica , 104 
 Sueus niisimai , 223 
 Sutorectus tentaculatus , 86 
 Sylvilagus ﬂ oridanus , 162 
 Synalpheus chacei , 229 
 S.  “ paraneptunus small, ” 229 
 S. regalis , 229 
 Synanceia horrida , 64 
 Synaptula lamperti , 11, 68 
 
 Tabernanthe iboga , 111 
 Tacca integrifolia , 130 
 Tachyeres brachypterus , 151 
 Tachyglossus aculeatus , 34, 63 
 Taeniopygia guttata , 180 
 Takifugu vermicularis , 63 
 Talpa europaea , 27, 158 
 Tapirus californicus , 163 
 Taraxacum ofﬁ cinale , 128 
 Tarentola chazaliae , 32 
 Tarsius syrichta , 33 
 Taxus baccata , 111 
 Teinolophus trusleri , 74 
 Telangium biﬁ dum , 99 
 Tempskya dernbachii , 95 
 Tenebrio molitor , 190 
 Tenontosaurus tilleti , 236 
 Terebra babylonia , 45 
 Terebratulina retusa , 192 
 Termitomyces , 225 
 Terrapene carolina , 63, 73 
 Thalarctos maritimus , 8, 79 
 Thalassophryne megalops , 65 
 Thea sinensis , 109 
 Theobroma cacao , 110 
 Thermonectes marmoratus , 14 
 Thoatherium minusculum , 61, 160, 162 
 Thomashuxleya rostrata , 162 
 Thryothorus ludovicianus , 216 

318 
Index of Species
 Thunnus alalunga , 79 
 Thylacinus cynocephalus , 158 
 Thylacoleo carnifex , 158 
 Thylacosmilus atrox , 43 – 44, 162 
 Tiaropsis multicirrata , 69 
 Tibicen dorsata , 73 
 Tinea vivipara , 86 
 Titanosaurus madagascariensis , 166 
 Titanus walleri , 148, 150 
 Tornaria ancoratae , 68 
 Torpedo marmorata , 33, 45 
 Torrea candida , 70 
 Toxicodendron vernix , 109 
 Toxodon platensis , 163 
 Trachinus vipera , 65 
 Tribonyx mortieri , 151 
 Triceratops albertensis , 166 
 Trichechus manatus , 73 
 T. senegalensis , 14, 61 
 Trichocereus pachanoi , 109 
 Trichoderma harzianum , 197 
 Tricholimnas sylvestris , 150 
 Trichoplax adhaerens , 81 
 Tricuspisaurus thomasi , 56 
 Trigonopsis cameronii , 215 
 Trillium grandiﬂ orum , 130, 132 
 Trilophosaurus buettneri , 54, 56 
 Trimerosurus albolabris , 89 
 Tripedalia cystophora , 200 
 Triphyophyllum peltatum , 136 
 Triticum aestivum , 203 
 Tropidophis feicki , 89 
 Tulipa agenensis , 121 
 Tursiops truncatus , 13, 33, 41, 210, 232, 239, 
241 
 Typhlonectes compressicauda , 83, 87 
 Typhlops diardi , 89, 184 
 Tyto alba , 41 
 
 Ulex europaeus , 129 
 Ulmus alata , 128 
 Ululodes quadripunctatus , 45 
 Uncia uncia , 8 
 Uria aalge , 152 
 Uroderma bilobatum , 214 
 Ursus maritimus , 210 
 Urtica dioica , 106 
 Utricularia inﬂ ata , 137 
 Uvularia grandiﬂ ora , 132 
 
 Varanus komodensis , 28 
 Vatica parvifolia , 121 
 Velociraptor mongoliensis , 44, 166 
 Veratrum viride , 109 
 Vermiuora peregrina , 146 
 Vespula maculifrons , 229 
 Vestiaria coccinea , 146 
 Victoria amazonica , 98, 122 
 Vipera berus , 89 
 Volaticotherium antiquum , 18 
 Vulpes vulpes , 32, 35 
 
 Wahlenbergia gymnoclada , 121 
 Wattieza (Eospermatopteris) erianus , 94 – 95 
 Wolozynskia coronata , 100 
 
 Xanthium strumarium , 129 
 Xantusia arizonae , 88 
 X. henshawi , 32, 73 
 Xenocranium pileorivale , 27 
 Xenomedea rhodopyga , 87 
 Xenopus laevis , 180 
 Xenosaurus platyceps , 88 
 Xiphias gladius , 13 – 14, 79 
 
 Yucca aloifolia , 106 
 
 Zaglossus bruijni , 143 
 Zalophus californianus , 14, 167 
 Zanthoxylum americanum , 106 
 Zauschneria californica , 124 
 Zea mays , 104 
 Zenarchopterus gilli , 87 
 Zeugomantispa minuta , 26 
 Zigadenus venenosus , 111 
 Zoarces viviparous , 87 
 Zootermopsis nevadensis , 229 
 Zosterops japonicus , 146 
 Zygophyllum simplex , 105 

 Index of Topics 
 β -elimination, 201 – 202 
 Biological form 
 convergent ( see Convergent evolution) 
 impossible, 250 – 252 
 nonexistent, 12, 16, 19, 21, 25, 29, 38, 66, 
96, 103, 170 – 171, 174 – 175, 250 – 254, 
260 – 264 
 Bipedalism, 23 – 25 
 Bird-pollinated ﬂ owers, 123 – 125 
 Birds, ground-dwelling, 147 – 155 
 Breathing systems, 75 – 77 
 Burrowing forms, 26 – 29 
 
 C 4 photosynthesis, 101 – 105 
 Cactus forms, 112 – 114 
 Camera eyes, 38, 70 – 72 
 Camouﬂ age, 8 – 9 
 Cantharophilous ﬂ owers, 119 – 121 
 Carbon-based life, 254 – 256 
 Carnivores 
 animals, 30 – 49 
 plants, 135 – 138 
 Carrion-mimic ﬂ owers, 120 – 122 
 Cecal fermentation, 57 – 59 
 Cellular structures, 205 – 206 
 Cellulose digestion, 57 – 59 
 Chemical armor, 63 – 64 
 Chitin digestion, 202 – 203 
 Claws, retractable, 43 – 47 
 CO 2 hydration, 202 – 203 
 Compound eyes, 38, 69 – 72 
 Constraints.  See Evolutionary constraints 
 Contingency, 265 – 277 
 Convergent evolution 
 animals and, 13 – 91 
 ecosystems and, 135 – 175 
 minds and, 209 – 243 
 molecules and, 177 – 207 
 plants and, 93 – 133 
 recognition of, 1 – 5 
 theoretical morphospaces and, 246 – 252 
 Crystallin proteins, 198 – 200 
 
 Acetylene digestion, 255 
 Adaptive improvement, 267 – 268, 272 – 273 
 Adriatic ecosystems, 163 
 Agricultural limitations, 227 
 Agriculture, 222 – 228 
 Aldehyde oxidoreductase, 186 – 187 
 Animals 
 armored, 63 – 64 
 carnivores, 30 – 49 
 convergent, 13 – 91 
 herbivores, 50 – 60 
 locomotion and, 13 – 30 
 poisonous, 45, 48 – 49, 64 – 66 
 reproduction, 81 – 91 
 Antidehydration 
 cactus forms and, 112 – 114 
 succulent structures and, 112 – 114 
 Antifreeze proteins, 189 – 192 
 Arborescence, 93 – 97 
 Architectural limitations, 222 
 Architecture, 212 – 222 
 Armor 
 chemical, 63 – 64 
 spinose, 63 – 64 
 tanklike, 63 – 64 
 Art, 218 
 Astrobiology, 254, 265 – 266, 276 
 Asymmetric ears, 40 – 41 
 Australian ecosystems, 157 – 160 
 
 Beaks 
 ducklike, 59 – 60 
 parrotlike, 59 – 60 
 raptorial, 44, 47 – 48 
 Beetle-pollinated ﬂ owers, 119 – 121 
 Behavior 
 agricultural, 222 – 228 
 architectural, 212 – 222 
 artistic, 218 
 eusocial, 228 – 231 
 herding, 231 – 235 
 hunting, 235 – 238 

320 
Index of Topics
 “ Deep homology, ” 6, 38, 71, 101, 257 – 260 
 Defense 
 antidehydration, 112 – 114 
 antiherbivore, 105 – 112 
 antipredator, 60 – 66 
 Determinism, 265 – 277 
 Developmental constraint, 7 – 8, 19, 21, 25, 
29, 38, 46, 66, 71, 77, 103, 245 – 262 
 Developmental inertia, 25 
 Digestion 
 acetylene and, 255 
 cecal-fermentation, 57 – 59 
 cellulose and, 57 – 59 
 chitin and, 202 – 203 
 digestive proteins, 183 – 185 
 gastric mills and, 50 – 53 
 ruminate, 57 – 59 
 stomachal-fermentation, 57 – 59 
 Directionality of evolution, 265 – 277 
 DNA 
 aldehyde oxidoreductase – encoding, 
186 – 187 
 cis -regulatory, 188 
 mitochondrial, 185 – 186 
 opsin-encoding, 179 – 183 
 pancreatic ribonuclease – encoding, 
184 – 185 
 rhodopsin-encoding, 179 – 183 
 stomach lysozyme – encoding, 183 – 184 
 Ducklike beaks, 59 – 60 
 
 Ears 
 asymmetric, 40 – 41 
 tympanal, 40 – 41, 72 – 75 
 Ecological equivalents 
 birds and mammals, 147 – 153 
 insectivorous, 140 – 142 
 marsupials and placentals, 160 – 163 
 Mesozoic and Cenozoic, 57, 153, 155, 
163 – 168, 216, 233 – 234 
 myrmecophagous, 142 – 144 
 necrophagous, 144 – 145, 235, 237 – 238 
 nectarivorous, 145 – 147 
 South American, 62 
 Ecospace, 168 – 175 
 Ecosystems 
 Adriatic, 163 
 Australian, 157 – 160 
 convergent, 155 – 175 
 Madagascar, 157 
 Mesozoic and Cenozoic, 160 – 163 
 New Zealand, 156 – 157 
 South American, 160 – 163 
 EDA protein, 195 – 196 
 Electric ﬁ elds 
 detection, 33, 38 – 40 
 generation, 45, 49 
 Endothermy, 77 – 80 
 Enlarged eyes, 33, 36 
 Enzyme functions 
 β -elimination, 201 – 202 
 chitin digestion, 202 – 203 
 CO 2 hydration, 202 – 203 
 hammerhead ribozyme, 204 – 205 
 lysyl-tRNA synthesis, 203 – 204 
 peptide-bond hydrolysis, 202 – 203 
 sugar phosphorylation, 201 – 202 
 Eusociality, 228 – 231 
 Evolution 
 convergent ( see Convergent 
evolution) 
 parallel, 3 – 7, 71, 81, 178, 183, 188 
 predictability of, 265 – 277 
 reverse, 4 – 5 
 unique, 246 
 Evolutionary constraints 
 developmental, 7 – 8, 19, 21, 25, 29, 38, 46, 
66, 71, 77, 103, 245 – 262 
 extrinsic, 252 
 functional, 7 – 8, 13, 17, 22, 25, 29, 38, 46, 
66, 96, 125, 245 – 264 
 intrinsic, 253 
 Evolutionary development (evo-devo), 7 
 Exploding seeds, 127, 129 
 Extraterrestrial life 
 developmental constraint and, 258 – 260, 
276 
 non-carbon-based, 254 – 256 
 non-DNA-coded, 256 – 257 
 right-coiled amino acid – constructed, 
257 – 258 
 Extrinsic constraints, 252 
 Eyes 
 camera, 38, 70 – 72 
 compound, 38, 69 – 72 
 crystallin proteins, 198 – 200 
 enlarged, 33, 36 
 horizontal-slit pupils, 32, 36, 61 
 photoreceptor proteins, 179 – 183 
 types of, 67 – 72 
 vertical-slit pupils, 31 – 35 
 
 Flowers 
 cantharophilous (beetle-pollinated), 
119 – 121 
 gigantism and, 120 – 122 
 ornithophilous (bird-pollinated), 
123 – 125 
 sapromyiophilous (carrion-mimic), 
120 – 122 
 Flying forms, 17 – 20, 260 – 264 
 Form 
 convergent ( see Convergent evolution) 
 impossible, 250 – 252 

Index of Topics 
321
 nonexistent, 12, 16, 19, 21, 25, 29, 38, 66, 
96, 103, 170 – 171, 174 – 175, 250 – 254, 
260 – 264 
 Freedom, 265 – 277 
 Fruit, 127, 129 – 133 
 Functional constraint, 7 – 8, 13, 17, 22, 25, 
29, 38, 46, 66, 96, 125, 245 – 264 
 
 Gastric mills, 50 – 53 
 Gliding forms, 20 – 22 
 Ground-dwelling birds, 147 – 155 
 
 Hammerhead ribozyme, 204 – 205 
 Haptoglobin, 192 – 193 
 Hemerythrin, 192 – 193 
 Hemocyanin, 192 – 193 
 Hemoglobin, 192 – 193 
 Herbivores, 50 – 60 
 Herding, 231 – 235 
 Heterosporous reproduction, 115 – 118 
 Homology, 2 
 “ deep homology, ” 6, 38, 71, 101, 257 – 260 
 Homoplasy, 2 
 Horizontal-slit pupils, 32, 36, 61 
 Hunting, 235 – 238 
 Hydrogen, 255 
 
 Impossible forms, 250 – 252 
 Infrared detection, 37 – 38 
 Insectivore niche, 140 – 142 
 Intrinsic constraints, 253 
 
 Lateral-line system, 72 – 73 
 Leaves, 97 – 99 
 Life 
 carbon-based, 254 – 256 
 periodic table of, 260 – 264 
 silicon-based, 254 – 256, 276 
 Titan and, 254 – 255, 264, 276 
 Locomotion 
 burrowing, 26 – 29 
 ﬂ ying, 17 – 20, 260 – 264 
 gliding, 20 – 22 
 swimming, 13 – 17, 260 – 264 
 walking, 22 – 26, 260 – 264 
 Lysyl-tRNA synthesis, 203 – 204 
 
 Madagascar ecosystems, 157 
 Marine-niche ecospace, 171 – 175 
 Marsupial ecological equivalents, 160 – 163 
 Melanin-controlling proteins, 194 – 195 
 Mentalities 
 metacognitive, 239 – 240 
 mourning, 240 – 242 
 self-aware, 238 – 240 
 Mesozoic-Cenozoic ecosystems, 160 – 163 
 Metacognition, 239 – 240 
 Methane, 254 – 255 
 Mimicry, 8 – 9 
 Minds, convergent, 209 – 243 
 Mitochondrial DNA, 185 – 186 
 Molecules 
 convergent, 177 – 209 
 DNA, 178 – 189 
 enzymes, 199 – 208 
 proteins, 189 – 199 
 Morphology 
 convergent ( see Convergent evolution) 
 impossible, 250 – 252 
 nonexistent, 12, 16, 19, 21, 25, 29, 38, 66, 
96, 103, 170 – 171, 174 – 175, 250 – 254, 
260 – 264 
 Morphospaces.  See Theoretical 
morphospaces 
 Mourning, 240 – 242 
 Myrmecochory, 131 – 133 
 
 Nervous systems, 80 – 81 
 New Zealand ecosystems, 156 – 157 
 Niches 
 carnivorous plant, 135 – 138 
 insectivore, 140 – 142 
 myrmecophage, 142 – 144 
 necrophage, 144 – 145, 235, 237 – 238 
 nectarivore, 145 – 147 
 parasitic plant, 139 – 140 
 periodic table of, 168 – 175 
 Nonexistent forms, 12, 16, 19, 21, 25, 29, 66, 
103, 170 – 171, 174 – 175, 250 – 252, 254, 
260 – 264 
 
 Occlusive teeth, 53 – 57 
 Opsin, 179 – 183 
 Ornithophilous ﬂ owers, 123 – 125 
 Oxygen, 255 
 
 Pancreatic ribonuclease, 184 – 185 
 Parallel evolution, 3 – 7, 71, 81, 178, 183, 
188 
 recognition of, 3 – 7 
 Parasitic plants, 139 – 140 
 Parrotlike beaks, 59 – 60 
 Penis, 82 – 84 
 Peptide-bond hydrolysis, 202 – 203 
 Periodic table 
 of life, 260 – 264 
 of niches, 168 – 175 
 Photosynthesis, 101 – 105 
 Placentae, 90 – 91 
 Placental ecological equivalents, 160 – 163 
 Plants 
 arborescent, 93 – 97 
 carnivorous, 135 – 138 
 convergent, 93 – 133 

322 
Index of Topics
 dehydration and, 112 – 114 
 eyespots and, 99 – 101 
 herbivores and, 105 – 112 
 heterotrophic, 139 – 140 
 leaves, 97 – 99 
 photosynthesis, 101 – 105 
 poisonous, 108 – 112 
 reproduction, 115 – 133 
 spines/thorns, 105 – 108 
 vessels, 97 – 98 
 Poison 
 fangs, 45, 48 
 plants, 108 – 112 
 sprayers, 65 – 66 
 stingers, 45, 48 – 49, 64 – 66 
 Predictability of evolution, 265 – 277 
 Proteins 
 antifreeze, 189 – 192 
 crystallin, 198 – 200 
 digestive, 183 – 185 
 EDA, 195 – 196 
 haptoglobin, 192 – 193 
 hemerythrin, 192 – 193 
 hemocyanin, 192 – 193 
 hemoglobin, 192 – 193 
 melanin-controlling, 194 – 195 
 photoreceptor, 179 – 183 
 structural, 196 – 198 
 Pupils 
 horizontal-slit, 32, 36, 61 
 vertical-slit, 31 – 35 
 
 Red Queen hypothesis, 272 – 273 
 Reproduction 
 animals and, 81 – 91, 119 – 133 
 heterosporous, 115 – 118 
 penis and, 82 – 84 
 placentae and, 90 – 91 
 plants and, 115 – 133 
 viviparous, 84 – 91 
 Respiration 
 hydrogen and, 355 
 oxygen and, 355 
 Retractable claws, 43 – 47 
 Reverse evolution, 4 – 5 
 Rhodopsin, 179 – 183 
 Ribozyme, hammerhead, 204 – 205 
 Rumination, 57 – 59 
 
 Saber teeth, 42 – 44, 162 
 Sapromyiophilous ﬂ owers, 120 – 122 
 Seed dispersal 
 exploding seeds and, 127, 129 
 fruit and, 127, 129 – 133 
 myrmecochory, 131 – 133 
 tufted seeds and, 126, 128 
 velcro-like, 128 
 winged seeds and, 127 – 128 
 Self-recognition, 238 – 240 
 Silicon-based life, 254 – 256, 276 
 South American ecosystems, 160 – 163 
 Spines, 105 – 108 
 Spinose armor, 63 – 64 
 Spirituality, 265 – 277 
 Spores, 115 – 118 
 Stomachal fermentation, 57 – 59 
 Stomach lysozyme, 183 – 184 
 Structural proteins, 196 – 198 
 Succulent forms, 112 – 114 
 Sugar phosphorylation, 201 – 202 
 Swimming forms, 13 – 17, 260 – 264 
 
 Tanklike armor, 62 – 64 
 Teeth 
 batteries, 54, 56 – 57 
 occlusive, 53 – 57 
 poison fangs, 45, 48 
 saber, 42 – 44, 162 
 tribosphenic, 53 – 55 
 Teleology, 265 – 277 
 Theoretical morphology, 12, 16, 19, 25, 29, 
66, 96, 169 – 170, 175, 222, 227, 235, 246, 
254, 260, 263 
 Theoretical morphospaces, 168 – 175, 
246 – 252, 260 – 264 
 convergent evolution and constraint in, 
246 – 252 
 Thermoregulation, 77 – 80 
 Thorns, 105 – 108 
 Tissue structures, 205 – 206 
 Titan, possible life and, 254 – 255, 264, 276 
 Tools, 209 – 212 
 Trees, 93 – 97 
 Tribosphenic teeth, 53 – 55 
 Tufted seeds, 126, 128 
 Tympanal ears, 40 – 41, 72 – 75 
 
 Ultrasound detection, 41 – 42 
 
 Velcro seeds, 128 
 Vertical-slit pupils, 31 – 35 
 Viviparous reproduction, 84 – 91 
 
 Walking forms, 22 – 26, 260 – 264 
 Winged seeds, 127 – 128 
 Wings, 17 – 20, 260 – 264 
Plants (cont.)

