
Peter M. Kappeler · Carel P. van Schaik (Eds)
Cooperation in Primates and Humans
Mechanisms and Evolution

Peter M. Kappeler
Carel P. van Schaik (Eds.)
123
Cooperation 
in Primates 
and Humans
Mechanisms and Evolution
With 61 Figures and 18 Tables

Professor Dr. Peter M. Kappeler
Department of Behavioral
Ecology & Sociobiology
German Primate Center (DPZ)
Kellnerweg 4
37077 Göttingen
Germany
Cover:
Gray mouse lemur (Microcebus murinus) mother with infants, Forêt de Kirindy, Madagascar, 
© Manfred Eberle, www.phocus.org
ISBN-10 3-540-28269-6 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg New York
ISBN-13 978-3-540-28269-3 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg New York
Libary of Congress Control Number: 2005930634
This work is subjekt to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the material is con-
cerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, re-
production on microfilms or in any other way, and storage in data banks. Duplication of this publication or 
parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the German Copyright Law of September 9, 1965, in 
its current version, and permission for use must be obtained from Springer-Verlag. Violations are liable to 
prosecution under the German Copyright Law.
Springer is a part of Springer Science+Business Media
springeronline.com
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2006
Printed in Germany
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, etc. in this publications does not imply, 
even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws 
and regulations and therefore free for general use.
Product liability: The publishers cannot guarantee the accuracy of any information about dosage and appli-
cation contained in this book. In every individual case the user must check such information by consulting 
the relevant literature.
Editor: Dr. Dieter Czeschlik, Heidelberg
Desk Editor: Anette Lindqvist, Heidelberg
Typesetting: Satz-Druck-Service, Leimen
Cover-Design: design & production, Heidelberg
Printed on acid-free paper   31/3151Re   5 4 3 2 1 0
Professor Dr. Carel P. van Schaik
Anthropological Institute
and Museum
University of Zürich
Winterthurerstr. 190
8057 Zürich
Switzerland

Preface
Cooperative behavior is a hallmark of the primate order. Cooperation is there-
fore an area of intensive theoretical research in biology, anthropology, political 
sciences and economics, as well as a salient feature of the socially complex soci-
eties of humans and primates, where a large body of observational and experi-
mental data has accumulated. This volume features a summary of recent work 
and progress in these related areas, integrating inter-related theoretical prob-
lems and their evolutionary and proximate solutions by humans and primates 
for the first time.
Cooperation refers to social interactions characterized by costs to an actor 
and benefits to other conspecifics. Because such behavior is, at first glance, dif-
ficult to reconcile with the selfish drive to maximize individual fitness, coopera-
tion posed a problem for evolutionary biology until new theories in the 1960s 
invoked genetic relatedness (kin selection) and the logic of repeated interactions 
(reciprocal altruism). While these concepts have since been successfully applied 
to many cases and species, more recent reviews have emphasized the widespread 
nature of cooperation among unrelated individuals, for which humans provide 
many examples that cannot be explained by kin selection theory. Much recent 
research in a variety of disciplines has therefore focused on such alternative ex-
planations for cooperative phenomena, ranging from prebiotic evolution to the 
evolution of human language (Hammerstein 2003a).
In this recent wave of inter-disciplinary research, biologists have adopted 
game-theoretical approaches from economics and analyzed the outcomes of 
evolutionary games in which frequency-dependent selection acts on genotypes. 
Anthropologists, economists and political scientists, on the other hand, have in-
corporated evolutionary logic into their models of learning and cultural trans-
mission of cooperative behavior. However, there has been little direct contact 
between theoreticians and students of human behavior, and both groups have 
interacted very little with primatologists, even though non-human primates 
provide the best living models for many aspects of human cooperation. This vol-
ume provides a first attempt to initiate a more intensive dialogue among these 
three disciplines.
This volume has two immediate goals: (1) It documents and summarizes the 
range of cooperative behaviors among non-human primates and relates it to their 
diversity in social systems and genetic structure. Whereas some aspects of pri-
mate cooperation have been reviewed recently (Chapais & Berman 2004), many 
empirical and experimental data addressing other topics await to be synthesized. 
This volume, therefore, provides a comprehensive and up-to-date summary of 

VI
the primate literature on social grooming, coalition formation, conflict manage-
ment, cooperative hunting, alloparenting, food sharing and other relevant top-
ics. (2) The range of behavioral mechanisms underlying cooperative behavior in 
primates and humans is documented and critically assessed to identify mecha-
nisms of, and prerequisites for, cooperation that are uniquely human. Because 
primates exhibit such wide variation in social systems and cognitive abilities, 
they provide a natural link between humans and other animals to explore these 
questions productively. By clearly defining similarities and differences between 
human and non-human primates in such a salient aspect of social behavior, this 
volume will hopefully inform and focus future research in both disciplines.
These ambitious goals motivated us to organize a conference (Fourth Göt-
tinger Freilandtage) at the German Primate Center in December 2003 to discuss 
these issues with more than 250 participants. Various aspects of cooperation in 
mammals as well as human and non-human primates were presented in more 
than 50 oral and poster papers, including 16 talks by invited speakers. Follow-
ing the conference, 15 contributions were solicited in written form, and each one 
was subjected to rigorous peer review. They constitute a representative sample 
of the contributions to the conference, encompassing specific case studies, com-
prehensive reviews, theoretical analyses, as well as studies of non-primates that 
provide important comparative perspectives on general principles related to the 
issues raises above. We think that together they provide an up-to-date account 
of research on cooperation in primates and humans, as well as numerous stimu-
lating suggestions for future research on these topics.
The conference, as well as the resulting volume, would not have been pos-
sible without the support of many people and organizations. The Fourth Göt-
tinger Freilandtage were made possible by generous grants and support from the 
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), the Niedersächsisches Ministerium 
für Wissenschaft und Kultur, the German Primate Center (DPZ), the Universität 
Göttingen, the city of Göttingen and the Sparkasse Göttingen. Michael Lankeit 
crucially supported this conference from the first moment on in many ways. 
Claudia Fichtel did an amazing job of organizing every logistical detail before 
and during the meeting to everyone’s satisfaction. The members of the Abteilung 
Soziobiologie at the DPZ, in particular Manfred Eberle, Eckhard Heymann, Ul-
rike Walbaum and Dietmar Zinner helped beyond the call of duty with the prep-
aration of this conference.
The quality of the present volume is to a large extent due to the constructive 
comments of all contributors, who served as internal referees, as well as Rebecca 
Lewis, Craig Stanford and Roman Wittig, who provided additional comments 
on individual chapters. Christina Oberdieck double-checked every single refer-
ence. Julia Barthold prepared the index, and Claude Rosselet carefully checked 
it against the proofs. We thank all of them wholeheartedly. Finally, it is our plea-
sure to dedicate this volume to Claudia & Maria, Theresa & Anna and Jakob & 
Jaap, for their understanding, support and inspiration during the preparation of 
this volume.
Göttingen/Zürich, May 2005
Peter Kappeler and Carel van Schaik
Preface

Contents
Part I
Introduction
Chapter 1
Cooperation in primates and humans: closing the gap 
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Carel P. van Schaik, Peter M. Kappeler
Part II
Kinship
Chapter 2
Practicing Hamilton’s rule: kin selection in primate groups 
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Joan B. Silk
Chapter 3
Kinship, competence and cooperation in primates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Bernard Chapais
Part III
Reciprocity
Chapter 4
Reciprocal altruism: 30 years later  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Robert L. Trivers
Chapter 5
Simple and complex reciprocity in primates 
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Frans B. M. de Waal, Sarah F. Brosnan
Chapter 6
Reciprocal exchange in chimpanzees and other primates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
John C. Mitani
Chapter 7
Causes, consequences and mechanisms of reconciliation:
the role of cooperation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
Filippo Aureli, Colleen Schaffner

VIII
Part IV
Mutualism
Chapter 8
Cooperative hunting in chimpanzees: kinship or mutualism?  . . . . . . . . . . . 139
Christophe Boesch, Hedwige Boesch, Linda Vigilant
Chapter 9
Toward a general model for male-male coalitions in primate groups  . . . . . 151
Carel P. Van Schaik, Sagar A. Pandit, Erin R. Vogel
Chapter 10
Cooperative breeding in mammals 
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
Tim Clutton-Brock
Chapter 11
Non-offspring nursing in mammals:
general implications from a case study on house mice  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 191
Barbara König
Part V
Biological Markets
Chapter 12
Monkeys, markets and minds: 
biological markets and primate sociality 
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209
Louise Barrett, S. Peter Henzi
Chapter 13
Digging for the roots of trading 
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233
Ronald Noë
Part VI
Cooperation in Humans
Chapter 14
Reputation, personal identity and cooperation in a social dilemma  . . . . . . 263
Manfred Milinski
Chapter 15
Human cooperation from an economic perspective  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 275
Simon Gächter, Benedikt Herrmann
References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303
Index 
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 345
Contents

Contributors
Aureli, Filippo
Research Centre in Evolutionary 
Anthropology and Palaeoecology, 
School of Biological & Earth Sciences, 
Liverpool John Moores University, 
UK
f.aureli@livjm.ac.uk
Barrett, Louise
School of Biological Sciences, 
University of Liverpool, UK
& Behavioural Ecology Research 
Group, University of Natal, 
South Africa
L.Barrett@liverpool.ac.uk
Boesch, Christophe
Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology
Leipzig, Germany
boesch@eva.mpg.de
Boesch, Hedwige 
Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology
Leipzig, Germany
Brosnan, Sarah F.
Living Links, Yerkes National 
Primate Research Center
Emory University
Atlanta, GA 30329, USA
Chapais, Bernard
University of Montreal
Dept. Anthropology
Montreal, Canada
bernard.chapais@Umontreal.Ca
Clutton-Brock, Tim
Department of Zoology
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK 
thcb@cam.ac.uk
De Waal, Frans B. M.
Living Links, Yerkes National 
Primate Research Center
Emory University
Atlanta, GA  30329, USA 
dewaal@emory.edu 
Gächter, Simon
University of Nottingham
CESifo & IZA
simon.gaechter@unisg.ch
Henzi, S. Peter
Behavioural Ecology Research Group, 
University of Natal, South Africa
Department of Psychology, 
University of Central Lancashire, UK
Herrmann, Benedikt
Universität Göttingen
& Harvard University

X
Kappeler, Peter M.
Dept. Behavioral Ecology & 
Sociobiology
Deutsches Primatenzentrum
Göttingen, Germany
pkappel@gwdg.de
König, Barbara
Zoologisches Institut
Universität Zürich
Winterthurerstr. 190
8057 Zürich, Switzerland
bkoenig@zool.unizh.ch
Milinski, Manfred
MPI for Limnology
Plön, Germany
milinski@alpha1.mpil-ploen.mpg.de
Mitani, John C.
Department of Anthropology
University of Michigan
550 East University Avenue
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1092, USA
mitani@umich.edu
Noë, Ronald
Ethologie des Primates – 
CEPE (CNRS 9010)
University Louis-Pasteur
7, rue de l‘Université
67000 Strasbourg, France
Ronald.Noe@wanadoo.fr
Pandit, Sagar A.
Department of Biological, 
Chemical and Physical Sciences
Illinois Institute of Technology, 
Chicago, IL 60616, USA
Schaffner, Colleen
Department of Psychology
University College Chester, UK
Silk, Joan B.
Department of Anthropology
University of California 
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
jsilk@anthro.ucla.edu
Trivers, Robert L.
Center for Human Evolutionary 
Studies
Rutgers University
131 George St
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1414, USA
trivers@rci.rutgers.edu
van Schaik, Carel P.
Anthropologisches Institut & 
Museum
Universität Zürich
Winterthurerstr. 190
8057 Zürich, Switzerland
vschaik@aim.unizh.ch
Vigilant, Linda
Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology
Leipzig, Germany
Vogel, Erin R. 
Department of Ecology 
and Evolution, 
SUNY at Stony Brook, 
Stony Brook, NY, 11794, USA
Contributors

Part I
Introduction

Cooperation in primates and humans: 
closing the gap
Carel P. van Schaik, Peter M. Kappeler
1.1
Why does cooperation pose a challenge?
In common usage, we speak of cooperation if individuals actively assist or sup-
port others: the emphasis is on behavior. For evolutionary biologists, coopera-
tion involves actions or traits that benefit other individuals. They stress the out-
comes of these behaviors, in particular the consequences for the fitness of the 
interacting individuals. Cooperative acts that are beneficial for both actor and 
recipient are said to be mutualistic. A cooperative act that is costly to the actor is 
termed altruistic; if the recipient is a relative, the interaction is sometimes called 
nepotistic1. The behavioral definition and the outcome-based definition usually 
label the same phenomena cooperative.
Cooperation has been described at all levels of biological organization, from 
molecules, organelles and cells, to individuals or groups of the same species 
and even individuals of different species (Hammerstein 2003b). The contribu-
tions to this volume focus on cooperation in the form of behavioral interac-
tions between individuals, largely within species. This kind of cooperation can 
be manifested through single behavioral acts, such as giving an alarm call or 
providing a conspecific with agonistic support, but also through long-term be-
havioral tactics or roles, such as helping relatives raise their offspring, or even 
through organismal adaptations, such as renouncing reproductive activity. Fre-
quently encountered examples of cooperative behaviors in nature are coalition 
formation, the exchange of grooming or other forms of body care, alarm call-
ing, predator inspection, protection against attacks by predators or conspecif-
ics, supporting injured group members, helping in the reproduction of others 
(cooperative breeding), egg trading among hermaphrodites, nursing of other 
females’ infants, communal defense of food sources or territory boundaries, 
interactions between neighboring territory owners, sharing of special skills 
or information, food sharing and cooperative hunting (see Dugatkin 1997, 
Clutton-Brock 2002).
1 Note that we adhere to a broad definition of cooperation, in that both actor and recipient or only 
the recipient can benefit. The narrow definition requires the presence of altruistic acts, i.e. only 
the recipient benefits. We prefer the broad definition because it may be extremely difficult in 
practice to determine whether some action is altruistic; it includes mutualism, and it complies 
more closely with common usage.
Chapter 1

4
Carel P. van Schaik, Peter M. Kappeler
As indicated by these examples, cooperative acts come in a myriad of forms. 
Nevertheless, they all share a central problem: the vulnerability of the coopera-
tor to being exploited by selfish partners. Opportunities for exploitation come 
in two main forms, depending on the context of cooperation. First, they may 
arise due to the time delay inherent in reciprocity. When altruistic acts are ex-
changed reciprocally between members of a dyad, the partner who benefited 
from an earlier altruistic act can defect, either by reneging when his turn arises, 
or by returning less than he received. The second opportunity for exploitation 
is free riding, which arises when an individual does not (equally) contribute to 
the creation or maintenance of a shareable benefit or good (this can happen at 
the level of the dyad or at that of the group, in which case the benefit is called 
a public good). An additional threat to evolutionary stability of cooperation is 
risk-avoidance in mutualism. It arises when a mutualistic benefit can only be 
produced through some costly collective action by two or more partners, and 
one individual bows out at the moment of the dangerous collective action, there-
by exposing the partner(s) to considerable risk of injury (see van Schaik, this 
volume). Agonistic coalitions or cooperative hunting of dangerous prey provide 
exemplary contexts for such risk. These three problems make cooperation less 
likely in nature. In some cases, such as high-risk altruistic support in agonistic 
conflicts or high-risk collective action, where opportunities for exploitation go 
hand in hand with risk avoidance, cooperation may be particularly unlikely or 
unstable.
However, cooperation is rife in nature, and an explanation for its origin and 
maintenance is therefore needed. Consequently, it has been the focus of much 
empirical and theoretical work for over a century. In the first section of this 
introductory chapter, we provide a brief overview of the history of the study of 
cooperation, from Darwin to the mid-1990s, for novices to the field. Although 
much progress has been made, this work has not led to a definitive solution of 
the cooperation problem. Nonetheless, much contemporary research on coop-
eration is building on three pillars of earlier efforts, namely nepotism, reciproc-
ity and mutualism. We revisit these three pillars in the next section, which also 
serves as an overview of the contributions to this volume. However, it should not 
be forgotten that these explanatory models focus on selected acts of cooperation, 
and that animals in nature may be involved in multiple forms of cooperation 
with the same partners simultaneously.
A major rationale for this book is that an explosion of recent work on hu-
mans has done much to highlight the contrasts in cooperative behavior between 
humans and other animals, in particular great apes. In the next section of this 
introduction, we therefore explore the major differences and preview the chap-
ters that focus on humans. We also address the important question as to why hu-
man cooperation became so fundamentally different from that among all other 
primates and non-eusocial animals. We close this chapter by drawing attention 
to some unresolved questions, in particular with respect to work on non-human 
primates.

5
1 Cooperation in primates and humans: closing the gap
1.2
Cooperation: a brief history of the main ideas
The struggle for life and the survival of the fittest are concepts that emerged 
from Darwin’s (1859) reasoning that led him to identify natural selection as the 
agent responsible for adaptations. Accordingly, individuals who out-compete 
their conspecifics in the struggle for access to resources and mates enjoy greater 
reproductive success and, hence, pass on more copies of their genes to the next 
generation. Thus, competition naturally emerged as the main concept in explain-
ing many aspects of organismal adaptation in evolutionary biology. Against this 
background, it is particularly difficult to explain the existence of behaviors that 
benefit others at the expense of the ego. Darwin was well aware that such coop-
erative acts do occur in nature at different levels, in different forms, and with 
different consequences for the actors involved, and he clearly recognized that 
altruistic behaviors presented ‘a special difficulty’, potentially fatal to his whole 
theory of natural selection. All subsequent work on the evolution of cooperation 
has focused on identifying the conditions under which altruistic acts can be evo-
lutionarily stable against exploitation (see Dugatkin 1997).
Kropotkin (1902) re-affirmed the importance of cooperation in nature. He 
dealt with the defection problem, albeit implicitly, by relying on group selection 
or its even more improbable cousin, species selection, to explain all coopera-
tive behavior in nature. Moreover, many of his examples would nowadays be as-
cribed to byproduct mutualism (see below).
Group selection continued to be invoked as an explanatory device for coop-
eration throughout the first half of the 20th century by influential scholars, such 
as Allee (1938, 1951), and later most explicitly Wynne-Edwards (1962). It was 
the rejection of group selection, inspired by Wynne-Edwards’s book, more than 
any other development that pushed evolutionary and behavioral biologists who 
rejected group selection to systematically search for explanations for seemingly 
altruistic behaviors in nature (Hamilton 1963, 1964, Maynard Smith 1964, Wil-
liams 1966). By the early 1970s, these biologists had responded to this challenge 
by erecting two major explanatory frameworks to explain this kind of vulner-
able cooperative behavior: kin selection and reciprocity (Hamilton 1964, Trivers 
1971).
For ultimate explanations of altruism, the most fundamental distinction is 
that between interactions between either related or unrelated individuals. As 
first pointed out by Hamilton (1964), kin selection theory can provide a potent 
explanation for nepotistic behavior. Because a disposition to help close relatives 
will automatically enhance the propagation of genes in other individuals that 
are identical by descent from a common ancestor, the benefits of altruistic acts 
(B) towards relatives also accrue to the actor, discounted by the degree of relat-
edness, r, between the two, i.e. the probability that they share the same allele 
through descent from a common ancestor. This makes altruistic acts, with cost 
C, more likely to evolve between relatives, as expressed in Hamilton’s now fa-
mous inequality Br > C.
The explanation of altruistic acts directed at unrelated individuals requires 
a different approach. Trivers (1971) offered the groundbreaking idea that re-

6
Carel P. van Schaik, Peter M. Kappeler
ciprocal altruism, now generally called reciprocity, in which two individuals 
alternate between providing and obtaining benefits, can provide a simple, but 
sufficient evolutionary mechanism for many cases of cooperation between un-
related individuals. He suggested that reciprocity is especially common among 
long-lived animals, because they have more opportunities to exchange altruistic 
acts. Moreover, reciprocity should flourish in species that live in stable groups 
in which individuals recognize each other, as well as in species characterized by 
social tolerance, because dominants do not prevent others from reciprocating. 
In his contribution to this volume, Trivers reviews the evidence for reciprocal 
altruism that has accumulated over the last three decades.
Reciprocity differs from mutualism by the presence of a time delay between 
incurring the cost of the altruistic act and receiving the benefit when the part-
ner reciprocates. As the duration of the time delay approaches zero, reciprocity 
grades into mutualism (e.g. Rothstein & Pierotti 1988). Thus, a discrete time 
delay is usually considered necessary before reciprocity needs to be invoked. 
However, as it gets longer, discounting of the benefits should make it harder for 
reciprocity to be stable (Stephens et al. 2002).
Reciprocity “may be the most perplexing and difficult category of coopera-
tion to explain” (Dugatkin 1997). Accordingly, Trivers’s idea has been explored 
in great detail (Trivers, this volume). Most tests have used the formal similar-
ity of the problem to that modeled by the two-person Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD) 
game developed in game theory (Axelrod & Hamilton 1981). The ESS (evolution-
arily stable strategy: Maynard Smith 1982) solution to the one-shot PD game is 
to defect, but examination of the situation in which players interact again in the 
future suggested that cooperation could be robust (Axelrod & Hamilton 1981). 
In particular, a strategy called ‘Tit-for-tat’, which starts out as a cooperator and 
then simply repeats the move of the other player in the previous round, provided 
a robust solution in that it was never exploited by other strategies and produced 
high payoffs when paired with other cooperative strategies. Dissatisfaction with 
the lack of biological reality of this approach has spawned the development of 
the biological markets framework, in which the choice of partners and commu-
nication receive special attention (Noë et al. 1991, Noë & Hammerstein 1994, see 
below).
Kin selection and reciprocity remain the most important explanations for 
altruistic acts by animals, and for cooperation in general, to this day. However, 
more recently, a new and improved form of group selection, called trait-group, 
intrademic or multi-level selection, has been added to our explanatory arsenal 
(Wilson 1983, Sober & Wilson 1998). A trait group comprises all individuals that 
affect each other’s fitness. Natural selection operates both within and between 
such trait groups. If groups with more cooperators out-produce other groups, 
cooperation can be favored by between-group selection, but only if this effect is 
greater than the result of within-group selection, which acts against cooperators. 
This approach did not acquire a great following, however, although it can be ar-
gued that selective association of cooperating dyads within a larger group (as in 
many primate groups) is equivalent to the formation of trait-groups.
A separate strand of thought drew attention to the possibility that we may 
misinterpret much animal behavior and see altruistic acts where none exist. 

7
1 Cooperation in primates and humans: closing the gap
Thus, some of what is labeled as reciprocity may in fact represent byproduct 
mutualism (Dugatkin 1997). In such cases, one animal benefits from what a sec-
ond animal is doing but would also be doing in the absence of the first animal. 
One good example is the phenomenon of group augmentation, where animals 
directly benefit from being in a group, and are therefore expected to coordinate 
their behavior (Kokko et al. 2001). The behavioral definition of cooperation ex-
cludes such byproduct mutualism from cooperation, because we cannot observe 
any special cooperative acts, even if the animals coordinate or synchronize their 
activities (cf. Clutton-Brock 2002). Usually, byproduct mutualism is easily dis-
tinguished based on this definition, but there are some cases that look decep-
tively like true cooperation. In several species of fish, piercing the skin, for ex-
ample due to predator attack, causes the release of a compound (‘Schreckstoff’) 
that elicits alarm in other fishes. However, the compound has its own immediate 
function in protecting the fish against fungal infection, and its production is 
therefore not altruistic (Magurran et al. 1996).
A variation on this theme is that seemingly altruistic acts, such as grooming 
another individual or giving an alarm call, are not altruistic at all because they 
impose no costs on the actor or may even carry an immediate benefit (e.g. Dun-
bar & Sharman 1984). Thus, such interactions are in effect mutualistic. How-
ever, even if they are, this does not mean that there is nothing left to study; even 
in mutualistic interactions, there may be plenty of opportunities for conflict or 
asymmetric distribution of benefits. Moreover, the presence of undeniable ex-
amples of truly altruistic acts (e.g. risky alarm calls: Sherman 1977; blood dona-
tion: Wilkinson 1984; predator mobbing: e.g. van Schaik et al. 1983) suggests 
that this alternative cannot explain all forms and examples of cooperation.
Finally, individuals may be coerced into cooperative behavior. For instance, 
breeders may force younger relatives into helping them raise more young (Emlen 
& Wrege 1992), dominants may force subordinates into providing services (Teb-
bich et al. 1996) or group members may harass owners of food into food sharing 
(Stephens & Gilby 2004). However, the conditions under which such coercion 
leads to stable cooperation are probably quite restrictive (Kokko et al. 2001), so 
that cooperation for these reasons is probably rare.
1.3
The pillars of cooperation
1.3.1
Kin selection
Hamilton’s (1964) fundamental insight was that altruistic behaviors could be 
explained evolutionarily if we focus on the gene rather than the individual as the 
unit of selection. Theoreticians have repeatedly re-evaluated Hamilton’s rule by 
making the genetic assumptions increasingly explicit and realistic. Perhaps sur-
prisingly, this very simple rule was found to hold up fairly well under such close 
scrutiny (Michod 1982). Empirically, as reviewed by Silk (this volume), many of 
the cooperative and altruistic acts performed by animals, including non-human 

8
Carel P. van Schaik, Peter M. Kappeler
and human primates, are directed towards relatives, and thus potentially best 
explained by kin selection (see also Griffin & West 2002). Silk also demonstrates 
for non-human primates that alternative explanations of behavior, or theoreti-
cal objections to preferential association by kin, do not obviate the need for kin 
selection.
Although many phenomena in animal behavior can be adequately explained 
by nepotism, this does not mean that all interactions between kin are nepotistic 
(West et al. 2002). Nor does it mean that all cooperation among kin is necessar-
ily nepotism (unilateral altruism); kin also engage in mutualistic cooperation or 
in reciprocity (Clutton-Brock, this volume). The reason that this simple fact is 
often overlooked is that mutualism and reciprocity are often studied explicitly 
among non-kin in order to control for nepotism. Indeed, as stressed by both Silk 
(this volume) and Chapais (this volume), other forms of cooperation may also 
be more common among kin, because relatives tend to be available as partners, 
cooperation with relatives produces additional inclusive fitness benefits, and 
because kinship may act to stabilize mutualistic and reciprocal actions because 
it reduces the benefits of defection (cf. Wrangham 1982). Thus, reciprocity and 
risky mutualism may well have originated among kin and provided the lineage 
with the basic behavioral and emotional mechanisms, which were then in place 
to be applied to the same acts with non-kin. However, Chapais (this volume) 
warns that kin-biased cooperation may be less common than this argument sug-
gests because only non-relatives may be competent partners for particular kinds 
of cooperation, for example agonistic coalitions.
Kin selection may also contribute to a deeper understanding of altruistic 
phenomena typically examined from other angles. For example, kin selection 
may be a critical component of reproductive skew theory, which, using different 
models, attempts to explain why reproduction is not equally distributed among 
the members of a social unit (Johnstone 2000). The concession model posits that 
moderate reproductive skew is the result of dominants granting some reproduc-
tion to subordinates. Genetic relatedness is a crucial variable when it comes to 
predicting which individuals should be granted which share of total reproduc-
tion. The most important prediction of the concession model is that high relat-
edness among the members of a social unit should produce high reproductive 
skew (Keller & Reeve 1994). Forfeiting individual reproduction in favor of a close 
relative could be interpreted as altruistic behavior. Such high reproductive skew 
is indeed found among related males in coalitions of lions or howler monkeys: 
the top-ranking male monopolizes all or most of the reproduction (Pope 1990, 
Packer & Pusey 1991, see also Cooney & Bennet 2000). However, viable alterna-
tive explanations for reproductive skew exist that do not involve concessions and 
do not make this prediction (Clutton-Brock 1998a, Johnstone 2000). 
Kin may make the best collaborators, but at the same time they are the worst 
possible mates because incest carries a high risk of leading to deleterious effects 
(Keller & Waller 2002). Inbreeding avoidance is now known to be widespread 
and underlies sex differences in dispersal (Clutton-Brock 1989a, Lehmann & Per-
rin 2003). Sex-linked dispersal, in turn, may strongly affect the degree to which 
members of the dispersing sex remain spatially associated (e.g. Vigilant et al. 
2001, Fredsted et al. 2004), the critical precondition for cooperation in all species 

9
1 Cooperation in primates and humans: closing the gap
but humans. The fact that mating with kin is to be avoided has imposed clear 
limitations on the reach of kin selection. Due to the modest fecundity of most 
individual birds and mammals, the number of relatives that can be clustered in 
space is rather small, especially if they subsequently mate with non-relatives and 
relatedness is diluted again. More obviously, inbreeding avoidance and sex-biased 
dispersal explain the rarity of strong intersexual kin-based cooperation (again 
with the exception of humans; cf. Rodseth et al. 2003). The exceptions to this rule 
among animals may be found where the stability provided to cooperative interac-
tions by kinship is extremely important (Clutton-Brock, this volume).
1.3.2
Reciprocity 
The debate on reciprocity over the past quarter century has been dominated by 
the two-player PD model, in both its one-shot and iterated versions (see above). 
This model assumes that defection in a one-shot game is the ESS, and efforts 
focus on overcoming this tendency to defect. Increasingly sophisticated math-
ematical models have been developed in increasingly fine and arcane detail to 
explore the conditions and consequences of reciprocity in this model (reviewed 
by Dugatkin 1997). However, Noë (1990, 1992) and Hammerstein (2003b), among 
others, have questioned the extent to which the PD adequately describes the situ-
ation in mobile organisms from fishes to primates (but see Trivers, this volume). 
In the words of Hammerstein (2003b), “some theoretical ideas appear to be so 
compelling that the lack of supporting evidence is indulged by major parts of the 
scientific community”.
The main reason for this criticism is that animals in nature only rarely seem 
to engage in repeated PD games. The PD model focuses only on one component, 
partner control (decisions for future interactions based on outcomes of previous 
interactions), whereas there are additional important components of coopera-
tive relationships among animals: partner selection and communication about 
willingness to undertake a cooperative interaction or about payoff distribution. 
Partner choice, for example in the form of switching to another partner when the 
current partner defected, allows for selective association of trustworthy players. 
The notion of partner choice naturally leads to consideration of the role of other 
potential partners available to the players, and hence to the idea of cooperation 
markets, where partners select the most profitable partners and the value of 
commodities or services depends on their relative demand and supply. Biologi-
cal market theory (Noë et al. 1991, Noë & Hammerstein 1994, see Noë, this vol-
ume) therefore contributes to developing a broader alternative in general, and 
it provides a powerful explanatory tool for the understanding of primate social 
behavior, in particular (Barrett & Henzi, this volume).
Likewise, communication about the intentions of each player before the in-
teractions and negotiation with them about payoffs is likely to make reciprocity 
much more stable than under the conditions of PD games. Thus, communication 
before engaging in risky cooperation is frequently observed in primates (Smuts 
& Watanabe 1990, Noë 1992). Subtle communication may also take place about 
the price of a service. For instance, in the grooming market of primates, dis-

10
Carel P. van Schaik, Peter M. Kappeler
cussed in detail by Barrett & Henzi (this volume), females must groom longer to 
get access to desirable infants of other females when there are fewer infants in 
the group, and the price is set by the refusal of mothers to provide access to the 
infants after shorter grooming bouts (R. Noë & T. Weingrill pers. com.).
Cooperation in nature offers a paradox. Lots of (unrelated) animals seem to 
engage in cooperation, yet only quite rarely do we see them engage in contingen-
cy-based reciprocity (Noë 1990, Hammerstein 2003b), even though experiments 
indicate that they are capable of it (Hemelrijk 1994). There may be two main 
reasons for this discrepancy. The first reason is still largely speculative. Animals 
in stable social units can use their previous experience with any of the group 
members to make decisions about whether to cooperate in the future, and thus 
engage in generalized reciprocity. This cognitively non-demanding behavioral 
rule is theoretically most likely in small groups (Pfeiffer et al., in press), and has 
been demonstrated experimentally (Rutte & Taborksy, in review), but it is not 
known how important this mechanism is in nature.
The second reason for the absence of contingency in cooperation that in-
volves altruistic acts is well established. Pairs (dyads) of cooperating animals 
seem to be concerned with costs and benefits on a much longer time scale than 
that of the interaction; they form social relationships, such as bonds or friend-
ships, within which a broad range of cooperative acts is usually exchanged. Thus, 
in addition to altruistic acts of the same kind, as envisaged by reciprocity, they 
also exchange altruistic acts of different kinds, for example grooming for sup-
port in agonistic conflicts (see Mitani, this volume) and various kinds of mutu-
alism and perhaps byproduct mutualism. Individuals in a bond do not evaluate 
the immediate costs and benefits of their behavioral decisions, as demanded by 
the theory of reciprocal altruism, but rather evaluate the long-term balance of 
the benefits and costs of all the acts exchanged in the relationship (cf. Pusey & 
Packer 1997). 
The presence of these bonds is well documented in primates (Cheney et al. 
1986), and recent work has shown that bonds have a positive impact on fitness, 
even after controlling for rank effects (Silk et al. 2003). Similar observations are 
available for friendships in humans. Aureli & Schaffner (this volume) note that 
these bonds, because of the important benefits they provide to both partners 
(cf. van Schaik & Aureli 2000), must be protected against the negative impacts 
of conflicts. It is important to remember that animals in every cooperative rela-
tionship also encounter many opportunities for conflict, and thus face the chal-
lenge of maintaining their relationship, with the net benefits it brings, in the face 
of the potentially disruptive effects of these conflicts. This threat to the relation-
ship explains the ubiquity of reconciliation in primates and other social animals 
(Aureli & Schaffner, this volume).
Because so many altruistic acts and commodities are exchanged in these re-
lationships, it is difficult to imagine that the players can maintain careful score 
cards on these actions, let alone on the costs and benefits they entail. Animals 
and even humans usually seem to cooperate without carefully calculating the 
costs and benefits of each act. This perspective also reduces the concern about 
the cognitive demands of engaging in reciprocity (Dugatkin 2002a, Hammer-
stein 2003b, Stevens & Hauser 2004). As detailed by de Waal & Brosnan (this vol-

11
1 Cooperation in primates and humans: closing the gap
ume), most cooperating dyads in most species use emotion-based mechanisms 
involving attitudinal symmetries that are cognitively simple. Chimpanzees are 
capable of the ‘calculated reciprocity’ required by reciprocity models, as obvi-
ously are humans, but this mechanism may be rare among other species, if it 
occurs at all (see also Brosnan & de Waal 2002, Stevens & Hauser 2004).
The stress on social relationships should not be taken to mean that all reci-
procity takes place in the framework of bonds. However, one would expect such 
cases to be associated with greater emphasis on strict reciprocity (see also Bar-
rett & Henzi, this volume). Indeed, in humans strict reciprocity is seen only 
among ‘casual acquaintances’ (Silk 2003). Reciprocity in nature among animals 
that do not necessarily have bonds may likewise be rather strict (e.g. grooming 
among impala, which have unstable associations: Hart & Hart 1992; egg-trad-
ing among simultaneously hermaphrodite fishes: Fischer 1980). These cases may 
derive their stability from the fact that the altruistic services or commodities are 
parceled out in small packages, leading to frequent alternation taking place in 
rapid sequence.
1.3.3
Mutualism
Mutualism as an explanation for cooperative behavior is theoretically simple. 
Numerous examples exist, from living in groups, which dilutes predation risk, to 
coalitions, where all participants gain in rank or gain access to limiting resourc-
es (Clutton-Brock 2002). However, this simplicity is only apparent. Mutualism 
is vulnerable to free riding, where partners (in the case of dyadic mutualism) or 
other group members (if group-level, or public benefits are produced) can har-
vest benefits without providing corresponding benefits in return. In dyadic mu-
tualism, the costs are often opportunity costs because partner switching might 
produce greater benefits. In the case of group-level benefits, the costs tend to be 
real because the acts themselves, while providing a clear net benefit to the ac-
tors, are costly. The free riders who do not join-in in producing the benefit, thus 
harvest a larger net benefit. This problem is known in the social sciences as the 
collective action problem, and it is also demonstrably present in primate groups 
(van Schaik 1996, Nunn 2000, Nunn & Deaner 2004). We should only expect to 
see mutualism where these threats are somehow dealt with.
Mutualism and byproduct mutualism can be seen within and between spe-
cies, and our focus here is on intra-specific interactions. Byproduct mutual-
ism (e.g. individual escape behavior against predators that serves to alert other 
group members) does not require the presence of bonds or even stable associa-
tion. However, dyad-level mutualistic exchanges usually take place within an 
existing long-term relationship, in which both partners have an interest in keep-
ing the beneficial cooperation going, and incentives to large-scale defection are 
therefore minimal. Hence, the distinction between reciprocity and mutualism 
becomes somewhat artificial and may be of no concern to the animals. Similarly, 
as discussed for the case of reciprocity, kinship may shore up the stability of 
these relationships.

12
Carel P. van Schaik, Peter M. Kappeler
At least among non-human primates, examples of dyadic cooperative rela-
tionships are far more numerous than mutualism that involves more players or 
even entire groups. And where particular cases of mutualism can involve two or 
more players, those involving only two tend to be more common. For instance, 
the agonistic coalitions among primate males described by van Schaik et al. (this 
volume) almost always contain only two members, especially the risky variet-
ies where coalition members attack a higher-ranking male to take over his top-
dominant position. Similarly, the communal nursing among female house mice 
described by König (this volume) most commonly involves only two females. 
The relationship perspective may explain why this is so. First, when animals 
cooperate in pairs, it is easier to exert control over the partner’s behavior. In 
pairs, the costs of partner control, for example by punishment (Clutton-Brock 
& Parker 1995), can be recouped again when the partner subsequently behaves 
in a more cooperative manner. In group-level mutualism, this punishment is 
altruistic (Fehr & Gächter 2002), because all other group members benefit as 
well without incurring any costs. Second, in dyadic cooperation, it is also easier 
to exert partner choice. A dissatisfied individual can usually switch to another 
partner in the group, whereas in group-level mutualism it would require either 
expulsion of free-riding partners or dispersal to other groups with more coop-
erative partners, both of which are likely to carry considerable cost. The rarity of 
smooth collective action among animals other than eusocial species is perhaps 
the main distinction between humans and other animals in this context.
One of the few well-documented cases of multi-player mutualism in primates 
is the cooperative hunting described among chimpanzees in the Taï Forest by 
Boesch et al. (this volume). The very existence of this behavior shows that the 
individuals somehow deal with free riding, whereas among chimpanzees else-
where, dominant males, who did not necessarily participate in the hunt itself, 
tend to end up with the prey and control its distribution. Multiple males also 
participate in other areas, but it is only in the Taï Forest that individuals take 
on complementary roles, resulting in the ability to subdue larger prey (Boesch 
et al., this volume). The authors note that the forest structure in Taï makes such 
close cooperation critical to achieving success. At other sites, group hunting is 
more like byproduct mutualism; males merely hunt simultaneously but still end 
up better off, despite attempts by dominants to monopolize the distribution of 
meat. The true cooperation in the Taï Forest is made possible by the ‘fair’ dis-
tribution of meat, but why this works there and not elsewhere is not clear. The 
answer is eminently important for the evolution of the strong tendency to mutu-
alism we see in humans.
Other instances of mutualism near the group-level end of the spectrum also 
exist. For instance, helpers in cooperative breeders that are not related to the 
breeders may help because of the advantages of being in the social unit (group 
augmentation: Kokko et al. 2001, Clutton-Brock, this volume). Residents allow 
them to join and stay, not only due to benefits gained from the help, but also from 
reduced risk of predation or attacks by neighboring groups. Helpers gain these 
same benefits, but are expected to contribute to the semi-public goods through 
helping, such as providing sentinel service. Experimental evidence on helpers in 
a cooperatively-breeding cichlid fish suggests that helpers prevented from help-

13
1 Cooperation in primates and humans: closing the gap
ing are attacked more and work harder upon return (Balshine-Earn et al. 1998, 
Bergmüller & Taborsky 2005).
In all successful cases of mutualism, free riding is kept in check. In the be-
havioral examples discussed above, this is done through behavioral control. 
Sometimes, however, mutualism works due to restraint by dominants. Thus, in 
groups, dominants may peripheralize the subordinates to gain greater safety, 
but the benefit of the selfish herd tends to be a sufficient incentive for the subor-
dinates to stay (Hamilton 1971), if only because dominants refrain from stronger 
peripheralization because that would entice the subordinate to leave and join 
other groups.
In cases without obvious behavioral control, the presence of successful mu-
tualism requires that the conditions restrict either the opportunities or the 
incentives for free-riding. A good example is provided by the distribution of 
communal nursing described by König (this volume). Here, females are unable 
to recognize their young; they are therefore unable to favor their young over 
those of others. Because this ability to recognize young emerges some time be-
fore weaning, however, it is probably no coincidence that most of the observed 
cases of communal nursing involve related females. A more subtle example is 
provided by the formation of fruiting bodies in normally solitary amoebas that 
form colonies to reproduce. The cells of Dictyostelium discoideum cooperatively 
form fruiting bodies that produce spores. These sit on top of stalks, which are 
therefore reproductive dead ends. Yet, all cell lines are represented equally in 
the production of stalks and fruiting bodies (Foster et al. 2004), probably be-
cause defection is prevented biochemically. The gene DimA is involved in the 
production of stalks. Hence, the absence of DimA would potentially allow the 
cell to forgo participation in stalk production. However, absence of the gene also 
pleiotropically results in exclusion from the stalk, thus keeping such a benefit to 
defection in check. 
Perfectly stable mutualism should be found where defection is impossible, 
and hence no additional mechanisms of partner control are required. The coop-
eration among components within entities, such as the organelles within a cell, 
or by cells within a body, might be stable because the opportunities for defection 
by partner cells have largely been eliminated. The very long delay between the 
origin of simple unicellular organisms, and the eukaryotic cell and multicellular 
organisms, however, suggests that this transition may not be easy, and that ac-
tive policing remains necessary (e.g. Michod 2003).
1.4
Cooperation among humans
Primates differ from many other animal lineages in that they show rather good 
evidence for cooperation, especially in long-term relationships (beyond simple 
protection of offspring by mothers), although it remains to be seen to what extent 
this picture is due to poor documentation for other lineages (Dugatkin 1997). 
One thing is clear, however; humans are dramatically different even from other 
primates. “Human cooperation represents a spectacular outlier in the animal 

14
Carel P. van Schaik, Peter M. Kappeler
world” (Fehr & Rockenbach 2004). We are a species in which there is far more 
cooperation than in any other non-eusocial species. In this section, we will try 
to document exactly how humans differ from other primates, then examine the 
proximate mechanisms (emotional, cognitive) that underlie these differences, 
and finally briefly address the possible selective agents that gave rise to these 
differences.
First, humans tend to engage much more commonly in group-level coopera-
tion, whereas most cooperation in nature is at the level of dyads. Human groups 
can behave almost as superorganisms (allowing functionalism in sociology to 
treat social groups, rather than individuals, as the unit of analysis), setting com-
munal goals and engaging in communal tasks. One expression of the strong or-
ganization at the group level is individual specialization and division of labor, 
often by sex.
Undertaking cooperation at the group level rather than that of the dyad poses 
more serious cheater detection problems. As we noted earlier, it is easier for an 
individual to control the behavior of a partner in a dyad than it is to control 
the behavior of a group of individuals; selective association or punishment are 
likely to be costlier, and the required coordination in the case of group-level 
action may be cognitively complex as well (see also Boyd & Richerson 1988). 
Humans must therefore possess cognitive and emotional mechanisms that act to 
detect even subtle ways of defection and control the behavior of group members. 
Gächter & Hermann (this volume) review an array of mechanisms that act to 
stabilize the intrinsically very fragile group-level cooperation.
Second, humans tend to engage in extremely high-risk cooperation, much 
more than other animals, even than chimpanzee males. Coalitionary killing by 
male chimpanzees is otherwise unique among primates, but tends to involve se-
rious asymmetries in the collective strength of the opposing parties (Wrangham 
1999, Wilson & Wrangham 2003). In the typical case, three or more males from 
one community attack and kill a single male from a neighboring community. As 
a result, risk of injury to the attackers is limited. Chimpanzee males also attack 
large and potentially dangerous prey (adult red colobus monkeys: see Boesch 
et al., this volume), but the literature contains no references to males getting 
injured. In both cases, the risk of injury is kept low because of the close coordi-
nation of the attacks.
Human war is similar to coalitionary killing of males in many respects, and 
probably predates the origin of states (Keeley 1996), although it is perhaps not ho-
mologous with that among chimpanzees. However, human coalitionary killing, 
at least among contemporary humans, differs from that among chimps in that 
it also occurs between parties with much more symmetric collective strengths. 
The more balanced power of human armies implies higher individual risks to 
fighters. The appalling loss of life in many historically-documented wars attests 
to this, yet in numerous cases soldiers are not forced into battle and fighting is 
largely voluntary.
The third difference is more gradual than the other ones, but still worth not-
ing. Humans tend to cooperate with non-kin more than other primates. In non-
human primates, “the most costly forms of cooperation are reserved for close 
kin” (Silk, this volume). There is some evidence that male baboons and Bar-

15
1 Cooperation in primates and humans: closing the gap
bary macaques that form leveling coalitions are non-relatives (see van Schaik et 
al., this volume). Chimpanzee males represent the strongest exception to Silk’s 
generalization. As we saw, they engage in risky collective combat, yet surpris-
ingly, the collaborators need not be close (maternal) kin (Mitani, this volume). 
Humans, of course, are arguably even more extreme than chimpanzees in this 
respect. Human military history is littered with descriptions of acts of amazing 
bravery aimed at comrades who are not relatives, although descriptions often in-
voke kin-colored terminology, such as brothers-in-arms. There is no firm expla-
nation for these anomalies as yet, although Chapais’ (this volume) competence 
principle may play a major role; where the competence of the partner becomes 
an increasingly important factor in deciding the success of cooperative actions, 
it is increasingly less likely that a close relative is at hand that is sufficiently com-
petent. Yet, there is probably far more to it than that.
Fourth, humans are willing to incur some cost to punish non-cooperators in 
the group-level kind of cooperation in which individuals contribute to common 
goals and free riders risk the breakdown of all cooperative effort. Thus, strong 
reciprocity (Gintis 2000) combines altruistic rewarding of cooperators with al-
truistic punishment of defectors (called moralistic aggression in Trivers 1971), 
both of which are costly to the actor. 
So far, there is no evidence for altruistic punishment among animals in na-
ture, as suggested by studies of species engaging in collective, high-risk defense 
of territories against neighboring social groups, in ring-tailed lemurs (Nunn & 
Deaner 2004), lions (Heinsohn & Packer 1995) or even chimpanzees (D. Watts 
pers. com.). However, de Waal & Brosnan (this volume) describe experimental-
ly-induced costly refusal to cooperate, thus challenging the categorical unique-
ness of altruistic punishment. However, even if confirmed in capuchins and/or 
chimpanzees, this does not mean that its presence in other primate species can 
be generalized, because these two genera are among the most socially tolerant 
and intensely cooperative among all primates. Moreover, it is possible that al-
truistic punishment in non-human primates is always directed at cheating part-
ners, whereas humans often direct altruistic punishment at individuals they 
observed cheating in interactions with third parties. The difference critically 
depends on the presence of societal norms, for which there is no evidence so far 
in non-humans.
A fifth difference concerns the role of reputation in facilitating reciprocity. 
Reputation is almost certainly much more important in human than in non-
human primates. The three basic preconditions for reputation are individual 
recognition, variation in personality traits, and curiosity about the outcome 
of interactions involving third parties. The first two of these are met in most 
non-human primates, but the third may require awareness of third-party rela-
tions, which involves cognitive abilities so far demonstrated in only a few spe-
cies (Cheney & Seyfarth 2003), although it may be more widespread. There is 
good evidence that primates use information on their experience with others 
in the past to predict their behavior in the future (Silk 2002a), and it is almost 
inevitable that this information is also used to select partners in whom they 
invest in order to establish social bonds. Yet, there is no evidence that they use 
reputation based on third-party interactions. Obviously, this does not mean 

16
Carel P. van Schaik, Peter M. Kappeler
that none do, but it would take careful observations and experiments to dem-
onstrate it.
Humans, in contrast, commonly engage in indirect reciprocity (Alexander 
1979), in which an ego’s tendency to cooperate with a partner depends on the 
latter’s reputation, which is established not only based on the ego’s direct expe-
rience with the individual but also on this individual’s behavior toward others, 
which is either observed directly by ego or reported to ego by third parties. 
No doubt, this use of reputation is enhanced by language. The displacement 
quality of language allows one to learn about the behavior of others even if the 
acts were not observed and the actors are not present, although the reliability 
of this information is subject to manipulation due to the very same quality of 
displacement. 
Reputation is vital for an individual’s success in society, and individuals 
show great concern over their reputation. Milinski (this volume) shows that 
reputation is also an unexpectedly powerful mechanism for maintaining group-
level mutualism (the creation of public goods), which is especially vulnerable to 
the free-riding problem. In experiments, players became more cooperative when 
such public goods games were alternated with indirect reciprocity games. In 
other words, the concern with maintaining a good reputation, with its obvious 
benefits in indirect reciprocity, spills over into the public-goods situation. Since 
humans are normally engaged in multiple cooperative relationships simultane-
ously, this finding spells hope for improvement of the management of common 
or public resources.
The final difference is that humans exchange goods and services using to-
ken-based (‘mercantile’) exchange; we trade. At least among members of the 
same society, this usually works, even if the participants are perfect strangers 
without too much risk of exploitation or worse, because of guarantees put in 
place by societies. This trade requires not only the ability to weigh the value of 
goods or services relative to those of other goods or services of different kinds, 
but also to manipulate symbolic representations of values, and subsequently to 
accept in themselves arbitrary tokens as intermediary payment that can later be 
exchanged for other goods or services (Ofek 2001). These abilities could not have 
evolved if a system of trust had not been put in place; our subsistence style would 
be all but impossible without it, since we critically depend on the products and 
services of others. Obviously, nothing among animals in nature compares to this 
system, although the generous food sharing and trading of these favors for sub-
sequent services in chimpanzees (see Boesch, this volume; Mitani, this volume) 
is clearly the foundation upon which our trade is built.
These differences can be summed up as follows: humans are far more likely 
to cooperate, both at the dyadic and especially at the group level, and we do 
so with non-relatives and often in situations of extremely high risk, apparently 
even with strangers (but see Trivers, this volume). This tendency would seem 
to expose us to unacceptably great risks of defection, but we have evolved spe-
cial mechanisms, including cheater detection, the use of reputation to gauge the 
quality of potential partners and, most spectacularly, altruistic punishment to 
keep the tendencies toward defection by partners in check. According to Fehr 
& Fischbacher (2003), all of this boils down to our unique capacity to establish 

17
1 Cooperation in primates and humans: closing the gap
and enforce social norms: rules of social conduct that are internalized and are 
upheld even if the individual is not directly affected.
Given this uniquely derived level of cooperation, we must expect the pres-
ence of derived psychological mechanisms that provide the proximate control 
mechanisms for these cooperative tendencies (cf. Trivers 1971). It is tempting 
to look to other uniquely derived human features, such as language, advanced 
intelligence or cultural transmission of social norms, as functional prerequisites 
for the evolution of these mechanisms. While they are undoubtedly involved, the 
evidence suggests a critical role for unique emotions as the main mechanisms. 
Extreme vigilance toward cheaters, a sense of gratitude upon receiving support, 
a sense of guilt upon being detected at free riding, willingness to engage in do-
nation of help and a zeal to dole out altruistic punishment at free riders – all 
these are examples of mechanisms and the underlying emotions that are less 
developed in even our closest relatives. Moreover, many of the emotions reflect 
societal equivalence in norms, such as those of fairness and justice. Emotions 
can be seen as the mechanisms used by evolution to achieve the optimum (‘ra-
tional’) outcomes without explicit reasoning or calculation (cf. van Hooff 2001). 
This might explain the emotional flavor to virtually all human decision-making 
(as no doubt in animal decision making).
Some of these mechanisms are also present in animals (see Brosnan & de 
Waal 2004), but they are certainly much exaggerated in our species (see also 
McGuire 2003). Uniquely, humans dispense the costliest of tendencies, altruis-
tic punishment, even toward perfect strangers whose free-riding did not affect 
them (Fehr & Gächter 2002). Evolutionary biologists have a serious challenge ex-
plaining these tendencies, and Gächter & Hermann (this volume) briefly review 
the lively debate that has ensued about altruistic punishment, although no doubt 
the last word on this has not yet been spoken (see also Fehr & Henrich 2003).
The critical difference as we now see it, is that in humans these emotions have 
become normative, i.e. we have these emotions also when we are not directly 
involved, whereas the bulk of the evidence for animals still supports the notion 
of self-centered emotions, although great apes may turn out to be an exception 
(Flack & de Waal 2000).
The question obviously arises as to how humans could have become such 
a spectacular outlier in just a few million years. This question has recently 
spawned an active research effort. The dramatic differences with even our clos-
est relatives suggest that the regular processes of kin selection or relationship-
based cooperation involving reciprocity and mutualism are inadequate. More-
over, because the greatest qualitative difference is in group-level cooperation, 
one could argue that coordinated group activities, such as cooperative hunting 
and gathering accompanied by a division of labor and especially warfare, may 
underlie the amazing willingness to invest in cooperative relationships among 
humans. This has led to suggestions involving language and culture as the key 
pacemakers of group-level cooperation. 
The most detailed hypothesis is the cultural group selection model offered by 
Richerson et al. (2003). They argue that conformist transmission (Boyd & Rich-
erson 1985), a regular adaptation, can create groups that differ systematically 
and persistently from other groups, even in the absence of genetic differentia-

18
Carel P. van Schaik, Peter M. Kappeler
tion and in the presence of migration between groups. Suppose that the Pleisto-
cene saw major, rapid changes in the environment, destroying local adaptations. 
Further suppose that a successful novel invention gets established in one group, 
and is subsequently maintained by conformist transmission, and that some of 
these inventions favored group-level cooperation and strong group coordination 
(Boyd & Richerson 2002), with its attendant massive fitness benefits in a hostile 
environment. Successfully cooperating groups could now out-compete and dis-
place other groups that lacked this invention. 
A simpler alternative has recently been proposed (Panchanathan & Boyd 
2004). Our interdependence at the dyadic level, including extensive indirect reci-
procity with people we hardly know, has led to a critical reliance on reputation. 
Our pursuit of a good reputation in all contexts has, as a byproduct, created 
prosocial behavior at the group level, including altruistic punishment (which 
enhances reputation: see Milinski, this volume). We should expect to see major 
advances in this area in the near future. Trivers (this volume) provides a set of 
constructive suggestions and criticisms of previous approaches that should help 
focus future work on human cooperation on realistic assumptions and predic-
tions.
1.5
Summary and outlook
Let us now briefly review the important advances that have been made in re-
search on cooperation among individuals in dyads and groups, as well as flag 
issues that still remain to be solved by future work. The frontier of cooperation 
research has recently moved to humans, and many of the theoretical problems 
surrounding cooperation in animals seem to have been settled. However, that 
does not mean that there is no need for further empirical work on animal coop-
eration. Here, as in the rest of this book, we focus largely on primates.
Although altruism directed at kin is theoretically straightforward, some 
questions nonetheless remain. Thus, it is still unknown whether animals have 
a cut-off relatedness for all kinds of altruistic acts (i.e. consider those above a 
particular r value family, regardless of the kinds of acts they direct at them), 
or whether they differentiate among relatives depending on the cost of the acts 
involved (e.g. protecting only closer kin against higher-ranking opponents or 
predators: see Chapais, this volume; see also chapters in Chapais & Berman 
2003). Likewise, debate continues to rage as to whether non-human primates 
recognize and classify kin entirely on the basis of association history or wheth-
er they also use other clues, summarized under the header phenotype match-
ing. These questions are obviously related; differentiation among degrees of 
kin requires mechanisms of kin recognition that permit finer estimates of re-
latedness than using a simple cut-off point. The recent development of non-
invasive genetic techniques will no doubt help us to find answers to both these 
questions.
Kin discrimination can strongly improve the power of kin selection and thus 
the behavioral reach of nepotism. In particular, if kin recognition is extended to 

19
1 Cooperation in primates and humans: closing the gap
the paternal component of kinship, we should expect richer patterns of nepotism 
in group-living animals. New studies that estimate the paternal component of re-
latedness suggest that kin discrimination among non-human primates is based 
on more than familiarity through association (Widdig et al. 2001, Buchan et al. 
2003), but because other studies suggest otherwise (see Paul & Kuester 2003), it 
is important to identify the causes of these discrepancies.
At a more practical level, the use of non-invasive genetic techniques brought 
to light some clear mismatches between clustering of kin due to differential dis-
persal and the importance of kinship in social behavior. Thus, several prosim-
ians (and perhaps orangutans) show evidence for female philopatry (Kappeler et 
al. 2002, Wimmer et al. 2002), but at least in some (e.g. Mirza coquereli), females 
do not seem to engage in any social behaviors that might benefit from having kin 
as partners. On the other hand, male chimpanzees are both philopatric and form 
strong alliances, yet they do not seem to select close kin more than expected 
(Vigilant et al. 2001). The necessary re-evaluation of the importance of nepotis-
tic cooperation in philopatry (e.g. Wrangham 1980, Waser 1988) suggested by 
these cases will be facilitated by more descriptions from the field.
Turning now to cooperation among unrelated animals, we saw that animals 
generally do not play a PD-kind of game. Some of the theoretical work spawned 
by the PD model has actually begun to address these concerns. Models suggest 
that the ability to select partners, and subsequent selective association with 
them, favors the evolution of cooperation (e.g. Peck 1993), as does, obviously, 
communication, for instance in the form of the ability to punish non-coopera-
tors (Boyd & Richerson 1992). 
Our discussion was organized according to the three classic explanatory 
models of cooperation: nepotism, reciprocity and mutualism. However, coop-
eration among animals observed in naturalistic conditions often contains a mix 
of these categories of cooperation. Variables affecting the presence of coopera-
tive behaviors in nature are the number of players and the degree to which the 
cooperative acts are enacted within a stable local context. Thus, three categories 
of naturalistic cooperation can readily be recognized: (i) dyadic cooperation, 
but without social relationships between the partners, (ii) dyadic cooperation in 
the context of long-term relationships, and (iii) group-level cooperation in stable 
groups. Table 1.1 groups some of the examples mentioned in the text so far into 
these three categories, which are characterized by different threats to the sta-
bility of cooperation and hence by different behavioral solutions. Not included 
in the table are the cases where the solutions do not require behavioral action. 
These include, for dyadic, anonymous cooperation, byproduct mutualisms, such 
as a selfish herd effect, and for group-level cooperation, cases of mutualism that 
are stabilized by structural safeguards against free-riding, such as in the amoe-
ba example.
The value of this table should be heuristic, in that it suggests new approaches. 
Noë (1990), Hammerstein (2003b), Silk (2002b) and others have pointed at the 
large gap between theory and empirical observations on animals that are mobile 
and form long-term relationships. Market models provide a promising avenue 
(Bshary & Noë 2003) to examine partner choice, especially for dyadic coopera-
tion, but active attempts to model real cases might produce new questions for 

20
Carel P. van Schaik, Peter M. Kappeler
other aspects of cooperation, for example for partner control through communi-
cation (see also Bowles & Hammerstein 2003). For primates, we need more work 
on the natural history of alarm calls and mobbing; it is quite conceivable that a 
rich interpretation is needed, in which animals undertake these acts in order to 
establish and maintain reputation (of the immediate, not the third-party vari-
ety), which would favor their being accepted as group members or as partners in 
dyadic bonds (cf. Maklakov 2002).
Of special interest to biological anthropology would be a more precise map-
ping of differences between humans and great apes. We noted that great apes 
seem to be more prone to collaboration with non-kin than other primates; this 
is not only true for male chimpanzees but also for female bonobos (Hohmann 
et al. 1999). Great apes also show remarkable tolerance toward curious imitators 
of their skills (van Schaik 2003). If these copiers are unrelated, and if their ac-
quiring the skills improves their fitness, are those who allow themselves to have 
their skills copied not altruistic? Generous food sharing, as seen in chimpanzees 
(Boesch, this volume; Mitani, this volume) can be regarded as investments into 
a good reputation (as in humans: Bird et al. 2001), but if reputation is the key 
to understanding group-level cooperation, this might explain why chimpanzees 
show more of it than other non-human primates. The same holds true for the 
possibility of norms in chimpanzees. It is therefore conceivable that more de-
tailed work on primates will show that cooperation provides yet another case 
where the actual gap between human and non-human primates is less wide than 
generally perceived.
Table 1.1. Cooperation among independent animals, such as non-human primates.
Category
Threat
Solutions
Examples, labels
Dyadic, with-
out relation-
ships
Absence of 
reciproca-
tion
1. Partner con-
trol: parceling 
altruism in small 
packets;
2. Leave
1. Strict reciprocity;
2. Anonymous donations in 
humans
Dyadic, in 
long-term 
relationship
Asymmet-
ric invest-
ment
1. Partner 
change;
2. Negotiation 
about payoffs
1. Unilateral altruism toward 
kin;
2. Friendships, alliances
Group-level
Free-rid-
ing; taking 
of larger 
shares than 
‘fair’
1. Switch groups;
2. Altruistically 
expel or punish 
free-riders; 
3. Altruistically 
reward coopera-
tors
1. Helping by paying for stay-
ing + group augmentation;
2. Group-level mutualisms (e.g. 
communal defense, nursing);
3. Generosity: establishment 
of reputation through alarm 
calling, mobbing, food shar-
ing, etc.

21
1 Cooperation in primates and humans: closing the gap
Acknowledgments
We thank Tim Clutton-Brock, Barbara König, Ronald Noë and Claudia Rutte for 
discussion and comments.

Part II
Kinship

Practicing Hamilton’s rule: 
kin selection in primate groups
Joan B. Silk
“ ‘Kin selection’ …has become a bandwagon, and when bandwagons start to roll 
attitudes sometimes polarise. The rush to jump on provokes a healthy reaction. 
So it is today that the sensitive ethologist with his ear to the ground detects a 
murmuring of skeptical growls, rising to an occasional smug baying when one 
of the early triumphs of the theory encounters new problems. Such polarisation 
is a pity...” (Dawkins 1979, p. 184).
2.1
Introduction
The kin selection bandwagon has been rolling for several decades in behav-
ioral ecology, gaining speed and momentum. There is abundant evidence for 
kin biases in behavior (nepotism) in many animal species, and most behavioral 
ecologists have taken this as crude, but convincing evidence that kin selection 
(Hamilton 1964) is operating. However, Dawkins’ ‘sensitive ethologist’ may 
have begun to detect a new chorus of ‘skeptical growls’ about the role of kin se-
lection in shaping cooperative behavior in animal groups (Chapais 2001, Clut-
ton-Brock 2002). These critiques focus on three issues. First, in cooperatively 
breeding vertebrates, behavior that has been commonly attributed to kin selec-
tion may actually enhance individual fitness directly (Clutton-Brock 2002). In 
a broad range of species, some types of behavior that have been categorized as 
altruistic may actually benefit the actor (Chapais 2001, Chapais & Bélisle 2004, 
Chapais, this volume). In these cases, mutualism or simple self-interest may 
operate, not kin selection. Second, competition between relatives may counter-
act the effects of kin selection, limiting the prospects for the evolution of altru-
ism by this route (West et al. 2002). Third, kin biases in behavior may be the 
product of processes besides kin selection. If social interactions are enhanced 
by familiarity, then initial kin biases in association patterns may lead to kin 
biases in behavior, but the dynamics of interactions may be shaped by mutual-
ism, reciprocity, or individual benefits rather than kin selection (Chapais 2001, 
Chapais & Bélisle 2004).
All three of these issues are potentially relevant to non-human primates. Co-
operative breeding occurs among the callitrichids, and group members share the 
burden of carrying, protecting, and provisioning offspring (Goldizen 1987b). It 
is not clear whether kin selection fully explains the deployment of help in these 
species. Within-group competition is thought to be a major force influencing 
Chapter 2

26
Joan B. Silk
the evolution of social organization in primate groups (e.g. Sterck et al. 1997). 
In cooperatively-breeding species, competition among female kin is manifest 
in reproductive inhibition. In solitary prosimians, the balance between coop-
eration and competition among mothers and their daughters influences social 
organization (Kappeler et al. 2002), and may shape birth sex ratios (Clark 1978). 
Female philopatry, strong female bonds, and matrilineal dominance hierarchies 
are expected to occur when it is beneficial for females to form nepotistic alli-
ances in within-group contests. Finally, primate females form strong and en-
during ties with their offspring, and this may inadvertently generate high rates 
of association among siblings and other types of maternal kin (Chapais 2001, 
Chapais & Bélisle 2004). Kin biases in association may be reflected in kin biases 
in behavior, but interactions among kin may be regulated by processes other 
than kin selection.
Here, my goal is to review the evidence for nepotism and kin selection in 
primate groups from the perspective of these recent critiques. This exercise is 
complicated by the fact that it is very difficult to quantify the costs and benefits 
of behavior in long-lived animals like non-human primates. It is usually impos-
sible to be certain whether particular categories of behavior or specific instances 
of particular kinds of behavior are altruistic, mutualistic, or selfish. Attempts 
to estimate the costs incurred and benefits derived from social interactions are 
further confounded by the fact that cost-benefit ratios may not be constant over 
time or across individuals. The first scrap of meat that one chimpanzee shares 
with another may be more valuable than the second or third bit. In addition, the 
benefits derived from particular types of service may depend on the recipient’s 
age or reproductive status. Thus, agonistic support may have greater value to 
an adolescent female who is trying to establish her dominance position than to 
an aged female whose reproductive value has declined almost to zero. The phe-
notypic gambit (Grafen 1991), which has been one of the behavioral ecologist’s 
most productive tools, falters when there is so much uncertainty about the fit-
ness consequences of behavior.
Comparative analyses of the extent of kin biases in behavior are also com-
plicated by difficulties in estimating relatedness. Until recently, measures of 
relatedness were based entirely on genealogical data. Kinship was traced only 
through maternal lines because information about paternal kinship was gener-
ally unavailable. Only recently, have molecular genetic techniques made it pos-
sible to generate true estimates of genetic relatedness (Morin & Goldberg 2004, 
Woodruff 2004). Further, although relatedness varies continuously from zero to 
one, investigators often consider kinship as a categorical variable. For example, 
‘close kin’ may be compared to ‘distant kin’, or ‘kin’ may be compared with ‘non-
kin’. For the most part, these categories are based on arbitrary criteria about 
what constitutes close or distant kin ties or what distinguishes kin from non-kin, 
and do not necessarily represent categories that are meaningful to the animals 
themselves.
Nonetheless, I will argue that there is evidence for kin selection in primate 
groups, and that this evidence extends beyond the extensive list of examples of 
matrilineal kin biases in cooperative behavior. At the same time, as many of the 

27
2 Practicing Hamilton’s rule: kin selection in primate groups
other chapters in this volume attest, there is growing evidence that kin selection 
is not the only force shaping cooperation in primate groups.
2.2
Cooperative breeding in primates: 
one for all or all for kin?
Kin selection is usually invoked to explain the evolution of cooperative breed-
ing in vertebrate species (Emlen 1997). Griffin & West (2003) recently completed 
a meta-analysis of helping behavior in vertebrate species. Their analysis dem-
onstrates that individuals discriminate among their relatives, and the extent of 
discrimination is linked to the benefits derived from helping. However, Griffin 
& West’s analysis was based mainly on data from cooperatively-breeding birds, 
and included few mammalian species. Clutton-Brock (2002) argues that much of 
the ‘cooperative’ behavior that occurs in communally-breeding mammals may 
actually enhance individual fitness. This conclusion is based partly on the ob-
servation that genetic relatedness does not influence the extent of helpers’ con-
tributions as predicted by Hamilton’s rule. For example, in meerkats, Suricata 
suricatta, immigrants who are not related to other group members, take their 
turn at standing guard as often as natal group residents (Clutton-Brock et al. 
1999b). Careful analyses of helper’s activity budgets and weight gains indicate 
that the cost of helping is quite low. In addition, group size is positively associ-
ated with reproductive performance. Thus, Clutton-Brock argues that the ben-
efits of living in large groups, and the relatively low costs of helping, may make 
it profitable for individuals to perform behaviors that benefit other group mem-
bers.
Callitrichids typically live in small, territorial, bisexual groups of 4-15 indi-
viduals (French 1997, Tardiff 1997). Although there is considerable variation in 
the mating systems of these species, most groups of most species contain only 
one breeding female, one or more breeding males, and some number of non-
breeding helpers (Dietz 2004, French 1997, Tardiff 1997). Callitrichids are un-
usual among anthropoid primates, because females typically give birth to twins 
and can produce two litters per year. Group members cooperate in infant care 
and defense of home ranges and important resources.
In females, high reproductive skew is maintained by pheromonal reproduc-
tive suppression, behavioral inhibition, or inbreeding avoidance (Garber 1997). 
For females, high reproductive skew is probably linked to competition for help-
ers. In free-ranging tamarins and marmosets, the reproductive success of fe-
males is influenced by the presence of helpers, particularly adult males (Garber 
1997, Dietz 2004). In one population of common marmosets, the breeding efforts 
of subordinate females were only successful if their infants were born at a time 
that the dominant female did not have dependent infants (Digby 1995). In two 
cases, dominant females have killed infants produced by subordinate females 
(Digby 2001).
There is good evidence that helping is costly. Helpers suffer reductions in 
feeding time, vigilance and sociality (Achenbach & Snowdon 2002). In captive 

28
Joan B. Silk
settings, males lose weight while they are caring for infants, sometimes losing as 
much as 10% of their bodyweight, and the extent of their weight loss is linked to 
the number of other available helpers (Achenbach & Snowdon 2002). This weight 
loss is striking because these males lived in undemanding environments with 
free access to food, no need to move from one feeding site to another, and no 
predators.
Both kinship and direct benefits may sustain cooperation in callitrichid 
groups (Garber 1996). Kinship seems to affect the extent of reproductive skew 
among females in one population of golden lion tamarins. Approximately 10% 
of females share reproduction with subordinate females for one or two years. 
Females are most likely to share breeding with their own daughters, less com-
monly with sisters, and rarely with unrelated females. Only mothers and daugh-
ters were both successful in rearing infants in the same season (Baker et al. 2002, 
cited in Dietz 2004). When sisters or unrelated females bred, only one female’s 
infants survived. Overall, the number of surviving infants per female is lower in 
groups in which two females breed than in groups in which only one female re-
produces (Dietz & Baker 1993). However, mothers gain inclusive fitness benefits 
when their daughters reproduce, particularly when their daughters are unre-
lated to group males, as was typically the case when both mothers and daughters 
mated. Demographic models suggest that the cost of allowing daughters to breed 
is relatively low when unrelated mates are available and daughters do not pose a 
threat to the mothers’ social status within their groups.
Infant care is one of the most important forms of cooperation in callitri-
chid groups. If groups are composed of a breeding pair and their descendant 
offspring, then alloparental care toward all group offspring may be favored by 
kin selection. On the other hand, if the genetic composition of social groups is 
more complicated, then we might expect helpers to discriminate among infants. 
Genetic data are now available for a small number of wild callitrichid groups. 
In two groups of common marmosets, Callithrix jacchus, the dominant male 
fathered all of the infants and all group members were closely related (Niev-
ergelt et al. 2000). Elsewhere, the pattern seems to be more variable. Six of 10 
wild groups of common marmosets included adults that were unrelated to the 
breeding pair (Faulkes 2003). In a genetic survey of the composition of eight 
groups of wild tamarins, three included adults unrelated to the breeding pair 
and a fourth group included an adult male only distantly related to other group 
members (Huck et al. 2004).
The effect of kinship on helping behavior is variable. In one group of wild 
tamarins, infants were carried equally often by related and unrelated helpers 
(Savage 1990, cited by Dietz 2004). In seven groups of golden lion tamarins (Le-
ontopithecus rosalia), kinship influenced the amount of help provided by males, 
but not by females (Baker 1991, cited in Dietz 2004). In captivity, helpers provide 
care for all group infants, and do not discriminate on the basis of relatedness 
(Cleveland & Snowdon 1984, Wamboldt et al. 1988, Achenbach & Snowdon 1998, 
reviewed by Dietz 2004) or even familiarity (Cleveland & Snowdon 1984). Dietz 
(2004) concludes that, “although there is considerable individual variation in 
degree of help provided, callitrichid alloparents generally care for all infants in 
the groups, regardless of kinship”.

29
2 Practicing Hamilton’s rule: kin selection in primate groups
Clutton-Brock’s analysis of cooperative breeding in vertebrates emphasizes 
the importance of documenting the genetic relationships among group mem-
bers, the contributions of individuals to communal activities, and the oppor-
tunity costs associated with helping. It is not yet known how relatedness influ-
ences the amount of work that group members perform in callitrichid groups. 
However, the genetic data raise the possibility that helpers may derive individual 
benefits from cooperation. This is an important area for future work in coopera-
tively-breeding primates.
2.3
Competition among kin
Socioecological theory tells us that gregariousness will evolve when the benefits 
of associating with conspecifics, such as improved ability to defend access to 
food or reduced risk of predation, outweigh the costs which include greater com-
petition over access to resources from group members, cuckoldry, contagion, 
infanticide, and cannibalism (Krebs & Davies 1993). The social systems that we 
see in primate groups reflect the balance of these forces. Even when primates live 
in social groups, competition among kin is not entirely muted.
The idea that competition among kin may offset inclusive fitness benefits 
derived from helping kin is not a new one. The effects of density-dependent mor-
tality on the evolution of social behavior have been considered before (Hamilton 
1970, Boyd 1982). The local resource competition model of sex ratio adjustment 
(Clark 1978, Silk 1984) is explicitly built on the assumption that competition over 
access to highly concentrated resources reduces the benefits derived from pro-
ducing daughters, who compete locally, and favors sex biases in favor of males, 
who disperse over longer distance and compete globally.
In most cases, it is impossible to assess the balance between the benefits of 
associating with kin and the costs of competition among kin because we can-
not measure the fitness outcomes associated with particular behavioral acts. 
But there are some cases in which the tradeoffs are dramatic. For example, in 
callitrichid groups, subordinates provide valuable help in rearing young, often 
their own siblings, but do not breed successfully themselves (references above). 
Helping may be the best response when prospects for dispersing successfully are 
limited, as in saturated environments, or when helpers are closely related to the 
resident breeders (Dietz 2004). However, increments to the breeding pairs’ fit-
ness are partly offset by decrements to the fitness of related helpers.
Strong nepotism may coexist with competition among kin. For example, Jap-
anese macaque (Macaca fuscata) females typically rise in rank over their older 
sisters, and sisters are eventually ranked in inverse order of their ages. Young 
females ‘target’ their older sisters for rank reversals (Chapais et al. 1994), and 
older sisters sometimes resist vigorously. When females intervene in disputes 
involving their older sisters and subordinate non-kin, they are as likely to inter-
vene against their sisters as they are to support them. In contrast, when females 
intervene in conflicts involving kin that are not targeted for rank reversals, fe-

30
Joan B. Silk
males are much more likely to intervene on behalf of their relatives than their 
opponents (Chapais et al. 1994). Chapais (1995) notes that females “apparently 
solve the conflict of interest between egotism and nepotism by maximizing their 
own rank among their kin on the one hand, and by maximizing the rank of their 
kin in relation to non-kin on the other” (p. 129).
2.4
Kin biases in primate groups
2.4.1
Nepotism among females
Among primate females, kin biases in behavior seem to be common whenever 
females form lasting associations (Stewart & Harcourt 1987). Female nepotism 
emerges in the tightly structured matrilineal dominance hierarchies in ma-
caque groups (Chapais 1992), alloparental care in vervet monkeys (Cercopithe-
cus aethiops, Fairbanks 1990a), jockeying over recruitment of natal females in 
red howler groups (Alouatta seniculus, Crockett 1984), and the composition of 
local communities of solitary lemurs (Kappeler et al. 2002). Although disper-
sal patterns, social organization and reproductive skew structure the genetic 
composition of social groups and influence females’ opportunities to interact 
with kin, kin biases in females’ behavior emerge under a wide range of circum-
stances.
2.4.1.1 Solitary species
In some ‘solitary’ primates, kinship structures the social environment of females. 
Coquerel’s dwarf lemurs (Mirza coquereli) in the Kirindy Forest of Western Mad-
agascar forage alone during the night and make their own nests where they rest 
during the day. Females occupy home ranges that may overlap with the home 
ranges of one to eight other females. Genetic analyses of mitochondrial DNA re-
veal that closely related females cluster in neighboring home ranges (Kappeler et 
al. 2002). Females tend to settle near their mothers, creating a matrilineal com-
munity of females, which includes females of several generations. Males tend to 
disperse farther than females, sometimes over large distances. The matrilineal 
structure of this population emerges from genetic analyses, not from behavioral 
observations as females are not gregarious and do not participate in cooperative 
activities or share nests.
In grey mouse lemurs, Microcebus murinus, this pattern is elaborated slight-
ly further. The home ranges of matrilineal female kin are clustered in space, as 
they are in dwarf lemurs, and females forage alone at night. However, during 
the day females often gather together to sleep. These sleeping groups are rela-
tively stable. New genetic analyses indicate that sleeping groups are composed 
of matrilineal female kin (Radespiel et al. 2001, Wimmer et al. 2002, Eberle & 
Kappeler 2004). Similar patterns have been suggested in solitary galagos (Clark 
1978).

31
2 Practicing Hamilton’s rule: kin selection in primate groups
2.4.1.2 Species with female philopatry
Female philopatry, close female bonds, cohesive matrilines, and high degrees of 
nepotism are well documented in several genera of Old World monkeys, particu-
larly baboons, macaques and vervets. In these species, females remain in their 
natal groups throughout their lives and members of several generations may live 
in the same group at the same time. In baboon, macaque and vervet groups, 
rates of grooming, association, co-feeding, reconciliation, and coalitionary sup-
port are substantially elevated among close maternal kin, such as mothers and 
daughters (reviewed by Chapais 2001, Gouzoules & Gouzoules 1987, Silk 1987, 
2001, 2002a, Chapais & Bélisle 2004, Kapsalis 2004).
These sorts of kin biases may be important to females for at least two rea-
sons. First, sociality enhances reproductive success of female baboons (Silk et 
al. 2003), and these effects are independent of variation in female dominance 
rank or ecological conditions. Second, coalitionary support has a direct impact 
on the acquisition of maternal dominance rank and the formation of matrilineal 
dominance hierarchies (see Chapais 1992 for a detailed analysis of this process). 
Juveniles receive support from their mothers and other close kin, and this sup-
port enables them to acquire dominance ranks just below their mothers. Coali-
tionary support is generally thought to play some role in stabilizing dominance 
relationships among adult females (e.g. Silk 1987, Kapsalis 2004), although the 
existence of stable matrilineal hierarchies in baboon groups where very few co-
alitions occur among adult females suggests that coalitionary support may not 
be necessary for maintaining dominance ranks among adults (Henzi & Barrett 
1999, Silk et al. 2004). High dominance rank is positively linked to female repro-
ductive success in a number of cercopithecine groups (Harcourt 1987, Silk 1987, 
van Noordwijk & van Schaik 1999, Altmann & Alberts 2003, Setchell et al. 2003), 
although significant relationships between dominance rank and reproductive 
success are not found in all groups (Packer et al. 1995, Cheney et al. 1988, 2004). 
We know much less about the effects of kinship on the behavior of females 
in other species with female philopatry, which include Hanuman langurs (Pres-
bytis entellus), capuchins (Cebus spp.), blue monkeys (Cercopithecus mitis) and 
squirrel monkeys (Saimiri sciureus). These species have not been studied as 
extensively as the cercopithecine primates, and information about kinship re-
lationships among adult females is available for relatively few individuals in a 
small number of groups of each of these species (Kapsalis 2004).
In Hanuman langur groups, females typically remain in their natal groups 
throughout their lives. Unlike cercopithecine primate females, female Hanuman 
langurs form age-graded dominance hierarchies. Young adult females hold high-
ranking positions, while older females occupy lower-ranking positions (Hrdy & 
Hrdy 1976, Borries et al. 1991). In one long-term study, mothers and daughters 
groomed one another more often than they groomed all other females or other 
females of similar dominance rank (Borries et al. 1994). Coalitions among adult 
females are very rare, but when they do occur, they nearly always involve close 
kin (Borries et al. 1991, Borries 1993).
Female capuchins typically remain in their natal groups and are very so-
ciable. Females groom, form coalitions with other females, and establish domi-
nance hierarchies. In three groups of wedge-capped capuchins, Cebus olivaceus, 

32
Joan B. Silk
offspring of high-ranking females inherit their mother’s ranks, but offspring of 
low-ranking females do not. Moreover, mother-daughter dyads do not have the 
strongest social bonds, unlike what we see in cercopithecine primates. Instead, 
females seem to have the greatest affinities for unrelated females who hold ad-
jacent ranks (O’Brien 1993, O’Brien & Robinson 1993, Kapsalis 2004). We know 
little about the nature of kin relationships among white-faced capuchins (Cebus 
capucinus), but at one site, two known mother-daughter pairs groomed often 
and were closely ranked, while one pair at another site held disparate ranks 
(Manson et al. 1999).
2.4.1.3 Species with female dispersal
When females disperse from their natal groups, opportunities for nepotism are 
much more variable. However, selective associations among female kin seem 
to be common, even when females do not remain in their natal groups. Most 
mountain gorilla (Gorilla gorilla berengei) females emigrate from their na-
tal groups (Stewart & Harcourt 1987), but dispersing females sometimes join 
groups that contain females who formerly belonged to their natal group. In some 
cases, females who are likely to be full or half-sisters emigrate together (Stewart 
& Harcourt 1987). Thus, even though females are not philopatric, nearly 70% 
of females spend at least some of their reproductive years in the company of fe-
male kin (Watts 1996). When females live with related females, they tend to show 
strong nepotistic preferences. Adult female mountain gorillas spend more time 
resting and feeding near their relatives than non-relatives, rarely fight with kin, 
and are more likely to groom and support kin than non-kin (Harcourt & Stewart 
1987, 1989, Watts 1991, 1994, 1996).
Female chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) usually leave their natal groups when 
they reach sexual maturity while males are philopatric (Nishida 1996). However, 
at Gombe not all females emigrate permanently, and some females maintain close 
bonds with their adolescent and adult daughters (Goodall 1986, Williams et al. 
2002). Recent analyses of the long-term records indicate that mother-daughter 
dyads spend much more time together than pairs of unrelated females do (Wil-
liams et al. 2002).
Adult orangutans (Pongo spp.) are largely solitary. There is no evidence that 
females form affiliative relationships with one another or establish differenti-
ated social bonds (van Schaik & van Hooff 1996). However, at some sites, some 
females’ ranges overlap extensively, while other females’ ranges overlap very 
little. Researchers suspect that males disperse further than females, and that fe-
males who share much of their home ranges are close kin (Galdikas 1988, Watts 
& Pusey 1993, van Schaik & van Hooff 1996, Singleton & van Schaik 2002).
Female hamadryas baboons, Papio cynocephalus hamadryas, disperse from 
their natal groups. Females move from group to group several times during their 
lives, and often move to groups that include females that they lived with in the 
past (Sigg et al. 1982, Stammbach 1987). Hamadryas baboons are usually de-
scribed as cross-sex bonded (Byrne et al. 1989) because females have strong rela-
tionships to their ‘leader’ males and weak links to other females (Abegglen 1984, 
Stammbach 1987). New data from the Awash National Park in Ethiopia, however, 
present a different picture. There, females spend as much time socializing with 

33
2 Practicing Hamilton’s rule: kin selection in primate groups
other adult females as they do with resident males, and sometimes socialize with 
females from other one-male groups (Swedell 2002). It is not known whether 
females interact at higher rates with kin than non-kin, but levels of genetic re-
latedness among females are high in other hamadryas groups in the same area, 
(Woolley-Barker 1998, 1999, cited in Swedell 2002). Moreover, evidence from 
captive groups and other wild populations suggests that contacts among females 
from different one-male groups may often involve kin (Swedell 2002).
In the Gambia, female red colobus monkeys, Colobus badius temminckii, 
disperse from their natal groups, often in the company of female age-mates. Af-
ter dispersal, these sets of females continue to socialize together, and rarely be-
have aggressively to one another (Starin 1994). Females cooperate in intergroup 
encounters and collectively attack potentially infanticidal nonresident males. 
If there is high reproductive skew within red colobus groups in the Gambia, 
then kinship might underlie high rates of cooperation within these female peer 
groups.
In red howler (Alouatta seniculus) groups, opportunities for nepotism vary 
over the course of time. New groups are formed when solitary migrating fe-
males meet, form ties, attract males, establish territories, and begin to repro-
duce (Pope 2000a). Female group size is strictly limited, as small groups cannot 
defend their territories and large groups have difficulty maintaining access to 
sufficient resources to feed them all and are more vulnerable to male takeovers 
and subsequent infanticide (Pope 2000a). Recruitment of natal females depends 
on the number of adult females already present. When groups are smaller than 
the modal group size, natal females may remain in their natal groups. But when 
groups are larger than the modal size, all natal females are forced to leave (Crock-
ett & Pope 1993, Pope 1998). Dispersal can be a risky strategy for young females, 
particularly when habitats are saturated and available territories are limited. 
Dispersing females do not produce their first infant until they are about 7-years-
old (Crockett 1984, Crockett & Pope 1993), while females that breed in their natal 
groups produce their first infant at the age of 5 years (Crockett & Pope 1993). In 
addition, females in newly-established groups have fewer surviving infants per 
year than females in well-established groups do (Pope 2000a).
The high costs of dispersal are linked to intense competition among females 
over recruitment opportunities for their daughters. Adult females actively ha-
rass maturing females in an apparent effort to force them to emigrate. Females 
actively intervene on behalf of their daughters in these contests, and daughters 
manage to stay only if their mothers are present in the group (Crockett 1984, 
Crockett & Pope 1993). Nonrandom recruitment of breeding females influences 
the genetic relationship among resident females. In newly-established groups, 
females are unrelated to one another. In long-established groups, the average 
degree of relatedness approaches 0.5 (Pope 1998, 2000a, 2000b). This has adap-
tive consequences, as female reproductive success is correlated with the degree 
of relatedness within their groups (Pope 2000a).
In summary, female sociality is grounded in kinship. Kin biases seem to 
emerge reliably when females have an opportunity to interact with their rela-
tives, and when there are benefits to be gained by cooperating with other fe-
males. For females, nepotism is an integral part of the structure of social life.

34
Joan B. Silk
2.4.2
Nepotism among males 
Evidence for nepotistic associations among male primates is more limited than 
among female primates. There may be several related reasons for this. If nepo-
tism is linked to philopatry (e.g. van Hooff & van Schaik 1992, 1994, Boinski 
1994, Hill 1994), then nepotism among males may be uncommon simply because 
male philopatry is rare. It is also possible that nepotism among males is uncom-
mon because males derive fewer benefits from cooperating with their relatives 
than females do (van Hooff 2000, van Hooff & van Schaik 1992, 1994). Finally, 
it is possible that constraints on paternal kin recognition limit the potential for 
nepotism among males.
2.4.2.1 Species with male philopatry
Male philopatry and female dispersal characterize members of the genus Pan 
(Nishida & Hasegawa-Hiraiwa 1987), members of the subfamily Atelinae (Rob-
inson & Janson 1987), red colobus monkeys (Struhsaker & Leland 1987), and 
Central American squirrel monkeys (Saimiri oerstedii; Boinski 1994). In these 
species, kinship among members of the philopatric sex is expected to facilitate 
the development of close bonds and cooperative behavior. However, there is a 
key difference between species with female and male philopatry. In species with 
male philopatry, kinship will accumulate along paternal kin lines. Because pa-
ternity is difficult to detect from observational data, this complicates efforts to 
evaluate the effects of kinship on behavior among males. Moreover, paternal 
kinship will only influence behavior if animals are able to discriminate between 
paternal kin and others (see below).
Male chimpanzees form strong and durable social relationships. Males spend 
much of their time with other males, and males groom, hunt, share meat, aid, 
and patrol the borders of their territories with one another (reviewed by Nishida 
& Hasegawa-Hiraiwa 1987, Nishida & Hosaka 1996, Watts 2002). At some sites, 
maternal brothers form particularly close relationships (Nishida 1979, Goodall 
1986), but these dyads may be the exception rather than the rule. Analyses of 
mitochondrial DNA patterns among chimpanzees in East Africa indicate that 
males do not selectively associate with maternal kin (Goldberg & Wrangham 
1999, Mitani et al. 2000, 2002a). Males do seem to prefer age-mates and males 
close in rank to themselves. If reproductive skew is high, then age-mates might 
be paternal kin (Mitani et al. 2002a). However, the average degree of relatedness 
among males in chimpanzee communities in the Taï Forest and in Budongo, is 
surprisingly low (Vigilant et al. 2001), potentially reducing the scope for mater-
nal or paternal nepotism among adult males.
In bonobos, Pan paniscus, males are the philopatric sex, but bonds among 
male bonobos are weaker than bonds between males and females or between 
females (reviewed by Hohmann & Fruth 2002). Like chimpanzees, maternal 
brothers in bonobo groups do not consistently form close bonds (Furiuchi & 
Ihobe 1994, Hashimoto et al. 1996).
Male muriquis (Brachyteles arachnoides) are well-known for their peace-
ful temperaments and high degree of tolerance (Strier et al. 2000). Males spend 

35
2 Practicing Hamilton’s rule: kin selection in primate groups
much of their time in proximity to other males, embrace one another, and share 
sexual access to receptive females (Strier et al. 2002). Aggression among males 
of the same community is very uncommon. However, limited evidence from the 
only long-term study of muriquis suggests that maternal kinship is not linked 
to the quality of male social relationships; the only two known pairs of maternal 
brothers did not form particularly close bonds (Strier et al. 2002).
Among red colobus monkeys, females disperse from their natal groups. 
Males may leave their groups temporarily at adolescence, but are rarely able to 
join new groups; many eventually return to their natal groups. In the Kibale 
Forest, males groom one another relatively more often than they groom females 
and jointly fight against members of other groups (Struhsaker & Leland 1987, 
Struhsaker 2000). In contrast, in the Gambia, social bonds among males are very 
weak. Adult males rarely groom one another, do not rest together, and do not 
support one another in agonistic interactions (Starin 1994).
In Costa Rican squirrel monkeys, males remain in their natal groups. Males 
form close social bonds, and rarely behave aggressively to other males within 
their groups (Boinski 1994). Males cooperate in sexual inspections of females, 
intergroup encounters, and defense against predators. Males tend to form the 
closest bonds with age-mates. In these squirrel monkey groups, the dominant 
male monopolizes reproductive activity (Boinski 1987), so age-mates might be 
paternal kin. However, it is not known whether maternal or paternal kinship 
influences the quality of males’ social relationships.
2.4.2.2 Species with male dispersal
In species with male dispersal, males sometimes emigrate in the company of 
other males. This seems to be particularly common in seasonally-breeding spe-
cies with well-defined birth cohorts (Pusey & Packer 1987). South American 
squirrel monkeys (Saimiri sciureus) form migratory alliances of two to four 
males (Mitchell 1994). These sets of males tend to be age-mates and occupy ad-
jacent positions in the dominance hierarchy. One or two males monopolize re-
productive activity each year, so age-mates might be paternal relatives (Mitchell 
1990, cited in Mitchell 1994). In red-fronted lemurs (Eulemur fulvus rufus), the 
dominant male fathers the majority of infants (Kappeler & Wimmer 2002) and 
natal males often migrate together (Ostner & Kappeler 2004). Reproductive skew 
is high in black-capped capuchins and males sometimes disperse with natal kin 
(Izawa 1994, cited in Strier 2000, Jack & Fedigan 2002, 2004). Peer migration is 
also observed in vervet monkeys (Cheney 1983a, Cheney & Seyfarth 1983), sev-
eral species of macaques (van Noordwijk & van Schaik 1985), ring-tailed lemurs 
(Lemur catta), and sifaka (Propithecus verreauxi; Pusey & Packer 1987).
At some sites, Hanuman langurs form one-male groups. Males disperse from 
their natal groups as juveniles, and then join all-male bands. These all-male 
bands attempt to take over bisexual groups and oust resident males. Typically, 
the most dominant male in the band becomes the new resident male (Rajpurohit 
& Sommer 1993), and the others return to the all-male band. Resident males 
monopolize reproductive activity within their groups, and are thought to sire 
the majority of infants conceived during their tenure in the group (Rajpurohit & 
Sommer 1993, Launhardt et al. 2001). Paternal kinship influences dispersal pat-

36
Joan B. Silk
terns of young males; 85% of juvenile males disperse with paternal brothers, and 
about half live for some period in all-male groups with their fathers. Mortality is 
high in the months after emigration; males who leave with their fathers tend to 
be more likely to survive than other males (Rajpurohit & Sommer 1993).
In other langur species, the demographic composition of groups changes 
over time. Some one-male groups become two- or three-male groups. As the 
resident male ages, one or more natal males may remain, creating an age-graded 
group. Sterck & van Hooff (2000) argue that these cases “are not based on an in-
ability of the dominant male to exclude others, but must be based on tolerance 
on his part and an interest in their staying” (p. 128). Resident males may tolerate 
young natal males because they cooperate in intergroup encounters and protect 
the group’s infants from infanticide (Sterck & van Hooff 2000, Steenbeek et al. 
2000). Interestingly, in Thomas’ langurs, Presbytis thomasi, age-graded groups 
were not formed unless the original resident male’s tenure was long enough for 
his male offspring to mature (Steenbeek et al. 2000). This suggests that nepotism 
underlies males’ tolerance of younger males, and younger males’ participation 
in group defense and protection of infants.
There is limited evidence of nepotistic social behavior among males in spe-
cies with male dispersal. Juvenile male rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) as-
sociate, affiliate, and form alliances with their maternal brothers while they are 
in their natal groups (Colvin 1983). Male bonnet macaques (Macaca radiata) 
intervene frequently in conflicts involving other males (Simonds 1974, Raha-
man & Parthasarathy 1978) and groom, greet, and huddle with other males at 
high rates (Sugiyama 1971, Simonds 1974). In one captive group, maternal kin-
ship increased rates of support (Silk 1992a) and decreased rates of aggression 
(Silk 1994), but did not affect rates of affiliative behavior (Silk 1994). Dispersing 
macaque and vervet males often join groups that members of their natal group 
have previously moved to. The presence of familiar, or possibly related, males 
may enhance males’ chances of gaining entry into the group or enhance their 
chance of achieving high rank after they join (Pusey & Packer 1987). In one case, 
it is known that maternal siblings tend to support one another in conflicts in 
non-natal groups (Meikle & Vessey 1981).
Examples of nepotistic behavior can also be found in species in which mem-
bers of both sexes disperse. In red howler groups, males sometimes form coop-
erative alliances, and these partnerships often involve paternal kin. When local 
habitats are saturated and groups are large, single males have difficulty defend-
ing groups of females. In these situations, red howler males sometimes form co-
alitions. Males collectively defend females against incursions by foreign males 
and males jointly challenge residents for access to groups of females. Some coali-
tions are composed of related males, often fathers and sons (Sekulic 1983). Kin-
ship enhances the stability of coalitions as pairs of related males stay together 
about 3.5 times as long as pairs of unrelated males (Pope 1990). In addition, rank 
relationships are more stable when allies are related than when allies are unre-
lated. This has important adaptive consequences because the dominant male 
monopolizes reproductive activity within the group (Pope 1990). Thus, males 
seem more likely to tolerate their subordinate status and reduced individual fit-
ness when their allies are close kin than when their allies are unrelated.

37
2 Practicing Hamilton’s rule: kin selection in primate groups
Nepotistic associations are also suspected to occur in mountain gorillas and 
hamadryas baboons. Hamadryas baboons typically form one-male units, which 
are clustered together in clans, and clans are clustered in bands (Stammbach 
1987). ‘Leader’ males are sometimes succeeded and subsequently tolerated by 
males who are likely to be their sons (Sigg et al. 1982). Although one-male units 
spend much of their time near one another, leaders of one-male units rarely at-
tempt to take females from other males in their clans and are quite tolerant of 
the males in their clans. Based on phenotypic similarities, males in the same 
band are thought to be related (Stammbach 1987).
Gorillas generally form one-male groups, but multi-male groups sometimes 
occur (Stewart & Harcourt 1987, Watts 2000a). In mountain gorilla groups, multi-
male groups can be formed when silverbacks have ‘followers’, who are younger 
and initially subordinate to them. In some instances, followers are recruited 
from the natal group, but they can also come from an all-male group the resi-
dent previously lived in. Followers cooperate with dominant males in aggression 
against males from outside the group (Stewart & Harcourt 1987, Watts 2000a). In 
the majority of cases, natal followers are the putative sons of the dominant male, 
or occasionally putative paternal siblings (Watts 2000a). When lowland gorilla 
(Gorilla g. gorilla) males leave their natal groups, they may settle nearby. New 
genetic analyses indicate that silverbacks in neighboring lowland gorilla groups 
are often closely related (Bradley et al. 2004). This pattern of relatedness may be 
linked to the relatively low levels of competition and aggression observed among 
male silverbacks from neighboring territories.
Callitrichid groups typically contain one breeding female and one or more 
adult males (Dietz 2004). In one well-studied population of golden lion tamarins 
(Leontopithecus rosalia) in Brazil, multiple adult males were present in groups 
about half of the time (Dietz 2004). Like red howlers, dominant male tamarins 
tend to monopolize reproductive activity. In the majority of cases, co-resident 
males were close kin, and related pairs tended to remain together longer than 
unrelated pairs (Baker et al. 2002, cited in Dietz 2004).
In summary, evidence for nepotism among males is much more limited than 
evidence for nepotism among females. This may be partly due to the fact that 
males often disperse from their natal groups and this limits opportunities for 
extended relationships with maternal kin. The problems inherent in paternal 
kin recognition may limit nepotism among males in species in which males are 
the philopatric sex. Nonetheless, it is striking that cooperation among males is 
often grounded in kinship, although chimpanzees seem to represent an excep-
tion to this general rule.
2.5
Processes underlying nepotism 
Kin biases in grooming, coalition formation, food sharing, and association pat-
terns are common in primate groups (references above). In general, primates 
interact at higher rates with kin than non-kin, and interact more often with close 
kin than with distant kin. Both these patterns are consistent with qualitative 

38
Joan B. Silk
predictions derived from Hamilton’s rule. When r = 0, the inequality cannot be 
satisfied; and the conditions for altruism become considerably more restrictive 
as r declines. When r = 0.5, the degree of relatedness between mothers and off-
spring or full siblings, the benefits must exceed just twice the costs in order to 
satisfy the inequality br > c. But for the offspring of half-siblings (half-cousins), 
who are related by r = 0.0625, the benefits to the recipient must exceed 16 times 
the cost to the actor. In nature, situations in which the benefits to the actor are 
so many times greater than the costs to the actor may be rare; so altruism may 
commonly be limited to relatively close kin.
Even though we cannot measure or even make reasonable estimates of the 
fitness consequences of these kinds of behavioral interactions on actors or re-
cipients, and we cannot evaluate Hamilton’s rule precisely, most primatologists 
are confident that these kin biases are the product of kin selection. However, 
there are at least two other processes that could generate high rates of interaction 
among kin. Kin biases could reflect an attraction to animals of similar rank or 
kin biases could be a byproduct of extended associations between mothers and 
their offspring. I consider each of these alternatives in more detail below.
2.5.1
Nepotism reflects an attraction to individuals of similar rank 
In species with matrilineal dominance, hierarchies may reflect an attraction to 
animals of similar rank, not an attraction to kin per se. This argument was first 
proposed by Seyfarth (1977, 1983). He hypothesized that females might exchange 
grooming for support in agonistic conflicts. Because the most powerful females 
make the most attractive allies, females will direct their grooming efforts toward 
the highest-ranking females in their groups. However, time budgets constrain 
the amount of time available for grooming (Dunbar 1991), so females must com-
pete for access to the highest-ranking females. High rank confers competitive 
advantages, so females are forced to settle for grooming partners of adjacent 
rank and trade grooming in kind. In species that form matrilineal dominance 
hierarchies, kin occupy adjacent ranks. Thus, kin biases in grooming reflect the 
outcome of competition for high-ranking partners, not the action of kin selec-
tion. However, Seyfarth (1983) recognized that both kin selection and reciprocity 
might contribute to high rates of interactions among females of adjacent ranks. 
Later, de Waal (1991b) and de Waal & Luttrell (1986) suggested that females will 
be attracted to those who most closely resemble them in rank, age and kinship 
because these individuals are the ones with whom exchange relationships are 
most likely to be profitable.
There has been considerable debate about Seyfarth’s hypothesis. Monkeys 
trade grooming for support in some situations and they interact at high rates 
with those of similar rank. Vervets are more likely to respond to tape-recorded 
screams of animals that have previously groomed them than they are to respond 
to the tape-recorded screams of the same partners under other circumstances 
(Seyfarth & Cheney 1984). Similarly, when disputes among long-tailed macaques 
are artificially induced, females are more likely to support monkeys who have 
recently groomed them than they are to support others (Hemelrijk 1994). How-

39
2 Practicing Hamilton’s rule: kin selection in primate groups
ever, in nonexperimental settings, associations between grooming and support 
have been harder to find (reviewed by Schino 2001), producing some skepticism 
about the importance and regularity of this process in nature (Henzi & Barrett 
1999).
However, there are several reasons to suspect that even if females do trade 
grooming for support, this is not sufficient to fully explain the patterns of 
grooming and affiliation that we see in nature. First, in Seyfarth & Cheney’s ex-
periment, the contingency between grooming received and subsequent respons-
es to screams disappears when partners are close kin. That is, close kin respond 
whether or not they have been groomed recently. This suggests that reciprocity 
may promote high rates of interaction among unrelated females of adjacent rank, 
while kin selection may promote high rates of interaction among maternal kin.
Second, in baboons and macaques, females’ attraction to maternal kin is 
stronger than their attraction to females of adjacent rank. For example, my col-
leagues and I compared the effects of rank distance and maternal kinship on 
rates of grooming among female baboons in the Moremi Reserve of Botswana. 
We found that females groomed close maternal kin at much higher rates than 
they groomed unrelated females who occupied adjacent ranks (Silk et al. 1999). 
Similarly, female bonnet macaques (Silk 1982) and rhesus macaques preferen-
tially groom maternal kin, and these preferences persist when rank distance is 
controlled (Kapsalis & Berman 1996a, 1996b).
Third, dominance rank and maternal kinship are disassociated in Hanuman 
langur groups in Jodphur, but strong maternal rank effects persist. Adult fe-
males groom their own daughters at higher rates than they groom other females 
in their daughters’ rank class, and adult females groom their mothers at higher 
rates than they groom other females in their mother’s rank class (Borries et al. 
1994). Nepotistic biases are also reported in gorillas, another species in which 
kin do not occupy adjacent ranks (Watts & Pusey 1993).
Taken together, these data demonstrate that matrilineal kin biases in groom-
ing are not simply an artifact of females’ attraction to animals of similar rank. At 
the same time, kin biases may be amplified in some cases by the correlated effect 
of attraction to animals of similar rank.
2.5.2
Nepotism is a byproduct of extended maternal ties
Chapais (2001, this volume) and Chapais & Bélisle (2004) have recently suggest-
ed that some forms of nepotism may be byproducts of mother-infant association 
patterns. They point out that mothers form close and enduring ties with their 
older offspring. As mothers wean one infant and produce another, they continue 
to associate with their juvenile offspring. Mother-daughter ties continue into 
adulthood. Maternal siblings are drawn together by their joint association with 
their mother. If familiarity promotes the formation of social bonds, by simply 
creating ample opportunities to interact or providing information about the re-
liability or motivational state of potential partners, then kin biases in interac-
tions patterns among siblings, cousins, grandmothers and grandchildren, and 
other kinds of maternal kin may emerge. The dynamics of social interactions 

40
Joan B. Silk
among maternal kin may be regulated by reciprocity, mutualism, or self-inter-
est, not by kin selection.
This hypothesis is plausible. Extended maternal associations are thought to 
be the foundation of maternal kin recognition in primates and other mammals 
(Sherman et al. 1997). This means that it is difficult to untangle the evolutionary 
mechanisms that underlie kin biases in many contexts. We can neither eliminate 
nor confirm the possibility that nepotism is the product of kin selection. Howev-
er, there are certain instances in which we can confidently eliminate other kinds 
of explanations for kin biases. These include: (i) mother daughter rank reversals 
in baboons, (ii) paternal kin biases in behavior among baboons and macaques, 
and (iii) examples of unilateral altruism.
2.5.2.1 Mother-daughter rank reversals
In cercopithecine primate species, females acquire ranks just below their moth-
ers early in their adult lives. As young females mature, they usually rise in rank 
over their older sisters, creating matrilineal units in which mothers rank above 
all their daughters, and sisters are ranked in inverse order of their age (reviewed 
by Chapais 1992). The rank ordering among sisters may reflect their present re-
productive value; reproductive value is high just after females mature, and then 
declines (Chapais & Shulman 1980).
Combes & Altmann (2001) applied a similar logic to explore the timing and 
pattern of rank changes between mothers and daughters in baboon groups. Fe-
male baboons usually maintain their ranks throughout their adult lives, but some 
females drop in rank well before they die. They generated two hypotheses to ac-
count for mother-daughter rank reversals. First, senescence might contribute to 
rank loss. As females get older, their physical powers may decline, making them 
less able to maintain their rank. If this is the case, all females should be equally 
vulnerable to rank challenges as they grow older. However, there is another pos-
sibility. Kin selection might favor ‘consensual’ rank reversals among maternal 
kin. As mothers grow older, their reproductive value declines; the reproductive 
value of their daughters follows the same trajectory but is offset in time. Thus, 
the senescence hypothesis predicts that rank decline will be independent of the 
presence of kin, while the kin selection model predicts that rank decline will 
depend on the presence and age of kin, particularly daughters.
Combes & Altmann used Hamilton’s rule to derive a prediction for the tim-
ing of kin-selected rank reversals between mothers and daughters. They set b 
equal to the reproductive value of the female who wins the rank challenge (VW) 
and c to the reproductive value of the female who loses the rank challenge (VL). 
So, rank reversals would occur when br > c, or VW/VL > 2. Note that females are 
not expected to drop in rank below unrelated females, for whom r = 0.
Combes & Altmann were able to test their prediction using the extensive long-
term demographic data from the Amboseli baboon population. They found that 
the threshold for mother-daughter rank reversals is reached at about 15 years 
of age for females who have daughters approximately 8-12 years younger than 
themselves, but is not reached until about 17 years for females who have daugh-
ters just six years younger than themselves. Females who have no adult daugh-
ters typically maintain their rank throughout their lives. However, for females 

41
2 Practicing Hamilton’s rule: kin selection in primate groups
who have adult daughters, the picture is very different. Females with mature 
daughters are much more likely to decline in rank. This pattern is particularly 
striking because we might expect the presence of mature female kin, who pro-
vide coalitionary support, to enhance female dominance rank and enable older 
females to maintain their ranks. However, females without mature daughters are 
more likely to maintain their rank than females with mature daughters.
This set of results cannot be explained as a byproduct of early kin biases in 
association between mothers and their offspring. Instead, the occurrence and 
temporal pattern of rank decline fits predictions derived from Hamilton’s rule.
2.5.2.2 Paternal kin preferences
Conventional wisdom tells us that primates do not recognize paternal kin (Ren-
dall 2004). According to the standard view, paternal kin recognition is precluded 
because females often mate with several different males near the time of concep-
tion, and primates cannot make use of phenotypic cues of relatedness, such as 
MHC. This conclusion is supported by negative results from a number of studies 
of paternal kin recognition (reviewed by Rendall 2004). However, the conven-
tional wisdom must be reconsidered in light of recent evidence that shows that 
macaques and baboons can discriminate between paternal kin and non-kin.
Female macaques and baboons seem to recognize and interact preferentially 
with their paternal half-sisters. Female baboons in Amboseli groom, rest, and 
associate with paternal half-siblings as often as they do with maternal half-sib-
lings, and prefer both types of siblings to non-kin (Smith et al. 2003). Similarly, 
in Cayo Santiago, female rhesus macaques associate and groom with maternal 
half-sisters at much higher rates than with paternal  half-sisters, but they inter-
act with paternal  half-sisters at higher rates than with true non-kin (Widdig 
et al. 2001, 2002). Paternal kin discrimination does not extend to all behaviors. 
Females do not support paternal  half-sisters at higher rates than non-kin, even 
though they selectively groom them (Widdig 2002).
This pattern might be a byproduct of early biases in association patterns 
if mothers selectively associate with the fathers of their offspring. In baboons, 
mothers of newborn infants form close associations with adult males (reviewed 
by Palombit 1999) who may be the fathers of their infants. If two females associ-
ate with the same male at the same time, their infants may develop close ties. 
However, this explanation does not seem to explain paternal kin recognition in 
rhesus macaques. Females’ associations with one another do not map onto their 
mother’s associations with one another when they were infants (Widdig et al. 
2001).
In Amboseli, male baboons selectively support their own offspring in ago-
nistic disputes (Buchan et al. 2003). Males provide a greater fraction of support 
to their own immature offspring than they do to unrelated immatures. Males 
are more likely to support their own offspring than they are to support unre-
lated offspring of former mates (females that they mated with, but whose infants 
were sired by other males). In contrast, males do not distinguish between unre-
lated offspring of former mates and unrelated offspring whose mothers they did 
not mate with. It is not entirely clear how males are able to recognize their own 
offspring, but it seems likely that behavioral cues may play an important role. 

42
Joan B. Silk
There is considerable variation in the extent to which males monopolize access 
to females near the time of conception. The proportion of a female’s available 
consort time that a male monopolizes is linked to the probability that the same 
male will father her infant. The extent of male monopolization is also linked to 
the probability that males provide care for offspring. This suggests that males 
or females may make use of information about prior mating behavior to assess 
paternity. However, we cannot exclude the possibility that phenotypic cues play 
some role in paternal kin recognition.
Additional evidence for paternal kin recognition and paternal kin biases in 
behavior comes from the growing body of data on infanticide in primate groups. 
Infanticidal males selectively target other male’s infants and avoid killing their 
own infants (reviewed by van Schaik 2000). Males also selectively defend their 
own infants from attacks by other males (Borries et al. 1999). These data imply 
that males are able to distinguish their own offspring from other male’s offspring 
and channel investment selectively to their own offspring.
2.5.2.3 The distribution of unilateral altruism
Functional analyses of the deployment of social behavior are plagued by three 
problems. First, there are relatively few kinds of affiliative behaviors that oc-
cur often enough to quantify at the dyadic level (Cords 1997). Second, there are 
considerable uncertainties about fitness consequences of the behaviors that do 
occur often enough to analyze, i.e. grooming and proximity. Third, high rates of 
interaction within related dyads may be the product of kin selection or recipro-
cal altruism. To avoid these problems, we need to focus on unilateral behaviors 
with clear costs to actors and obvious benefits to recipients. There are at least 
two candidates for unilateral altruism in primate groups – food sharing and co-
alitionary support.
Females are generally more tolerant of kin than non-kin during feeding (de 
Waal 1986a, Stewart & Harcourt 1987, Bélisle & Chapais 2001) and more active 
forms of food sharing are often biased in favor of close kin (McGrew 1975). These 
sorts of data are often interpreted to mean that food sharing is favored by kin 
selection. However, these kinds of data are difficult to interpret because the 
costs and benefits of sharing are not easy to measure. If animals only give up 
food when they are satiated, then food sharing may not be altruistic. Moreover, 
food sharing may be the best response to scrounging in some situations (Blurton 
Jones 1984, Stevens 2004), not an unconstrained form of altruism (Chapais & 
Bélisle 2004).
In order to examine the evolutionary processes underlying food sharing more 
carefully, Bélisle & Chapais (2001) conducted a series of experiments on Japanese 
macaques in the laboratory. In these experiments, food could be monopolized by 
one individual. The frequency of co-feeding, or food sharing, increased as ma-
ternal relatedness increased (Bélisle & Chapais 2001), but the extent of nepotism 
was limited. Females shared selectively with their daughters, granddaughters 
and sisters, but not their aunts or nieces. However, when the costs of defend-
ing food were reduced by altering the experimental protocol, dominant females 
become more selfish (Bélisle 2002, cited in Bélisle & Chapais 2001). These data 

43
2 Practicing Hamilton’s rule: kin selection in primate groups
suggest that unilateral altruism is nepotistic, as Hamilton’s rule predicts, and 
that females are sensitive to benefit-cost ratios.
Coalitionary support in agonistic disputes is often considered to be a form 
of altruism (e.g. Bernstein 1991, Silk 1992a, Bradley 1999). However, several au-
thors have pointed out that most interventions are aimed at lower ranking op-
ponents (Bernstein 1991, Chapais 2001). If subordinates are unlikely to retaliate 
against higher-ranking individuals, as is the case in groups with rigid domi-
nance hierarchies, then intervention against lower-ranking targets may not be 
very costly to allies. In fact, the benefits gained by intervening against a lower-
ranking opponent may outweigh the costs, making this type of intervention a 
form of mutualism (Datta 1983b, Chapais 2001). If intervention against subordi-
nate opponents is shaped by mutualism, then we would not necessarily expect 
nepotistic biases in these interactions. However, intervention is strongly biased 
toward maternal kin in macaques (Kaplan 1977, 1978, Kurland 1977, Massey 
1977, Silk 1982, Berman 1983a, 1983b, 1983c, Chapais 1983, Cheney 1983b, Col-
vin 1983, Datta 1983a, 1983b), baboons (Walters 1980, Pereira 1988, 1989, Silk et 
al. 2004), vervets (Hunte & Horrocks 1986), gorillas (Harcourt & Stewart 1987, 
1989, Watts & Pusey 1993), Hanuman langurs (Borries et al. 1991) and ring-tailed 
lemurs (Pereira 1993). At the very least, these results suggest that kin selection 
supplements mutualism in the evolution of intervention behavior.
It is generally agreed that when individuals intervene against animals higher 
ranking than themselves, they risk retaliation and incur more substantial costs. 
Support against dominant opponents is strongly kin-biased (Kurland 1977, 
Watanabe 1979, Walters 1980, Silk 1982, Chapais 1983, Cheney 1983a, Hunte & 
Horrocks 1986, Netto & van Hooff 1986, Pereira 1988, 1989, Harcourt & Stewart 
1989, Chapais et al. 1991). Moreover, monkeys are more likely to intervene on be-
half of close kin against higher-ranking opponents than on behalf of distant kin 
(Datta 1983c, Chapais et al 1997). Much of this support is performed on behalf of 
immatures, who cannot effectively reciprocate.
2.6
Summary and conclusions
Kin biases in behavior are common among non-human primates, ranging from 
tiny grey mouse lemurs who forage alone but sleep in hollow trees with their 
mothers, sisters and nieces, to female baboons who selectively groom and asso-
ciate with maternal and paternal kin, and red howler fathers and sons who joint-
ly defend access to groups of females. The patterning of cooperative activities 
generally fits qualitative predictions derived from Hamilton’s rule. That is, co-
operation is more common among kin than non-kin, and the most costly forms 
of cooperation are reserved for close kin. But this does not mean that kin selec-
tion operates in every case or that kin selection is the only mechanism promot-
ing cooperation. In cooperatively-breeding primates, not all helpers are closely 
related to the infants that they care for. In these species, individual benefits may 
favor cooperation, much as has been suggested for other cooperatively-breeding 
mammals. In many primate species, extended ties between mothers and their 

44
Joan B. Silk
offspring may promote the development of social relationships among mater-
nal kin, creating nepotistic biases which are sustained through reciprocity or 
mutualism. In addition, the inclusive fitness benefits derived from associating 
with kin may be offset by costs of competition. These factors must be taken into 
account when weighing the importance of kin selection in the evolution of co-
operation in primate groups. However, there are certain forms of cooperation 
for which kin selection seems to be the only plausible evolutionary mechanism. 
These include consensual mother-daughter rank reversals in baboon groups, af-
finities among paternal half-sisters in macaque and baboon groups, and coali-
tionary support against higher-ranking opponents. Taken together, the evidence 
suggests that kin selection has played an important role in the evolution of coop-
eration in primate groups. Hamilton’s insights about the evolution of coopera-
tion have transformed our understanding of primate societies.
There are important gaps in our knowledge of nepotism in primate groups. 
We know a lot about kin biases in behavior in a small number of closely-related 
species, particularly baboons, macaques and vervets. This body of data provides 
us with a richly-detailed case study of how kinship is woven into the fabric of 
female monkey’s lives. However, the cercopithecine primates share a common 
phylogenetic history (DiFiore & Rendall 1994) and represent a single branch in 
the evolutionary history of the primate order. Much less is known about the ex-
tent and pattern of nepotism in most prosimians, New World monkeys, colo-
bines, or the great apes. What we do know suggests that maternal kin biases in 
behavior emerge whenever females form stable associations with their relatives. 
Even for solitary prosimians and orangutans, kinship structures the commu-
nities of females. However, the extent and consistency of kin biases across the 
primate order is difficult to evaluate because we know so little about so many 
species.
Most of our analyses are limited to maternal kinship relationships, but it is 
becoming clear that nepotism may extend to paternal kin. In multi-male groups 
of macaques and baboons, females preferentially affiliate with their paternal 
half-sisters. In red howlers, paternal ties between fathers and sons facilitate co-
operation. In Amboseli, male baboons selectively support their own juvenile 
offspring in agonistic encounters. Male silverback gorillas in neighboring ter-
ritories that maintain peaceful relationships are typically close paternal kin. In 
a range of infanticidal species, males protect their own offspring and launch 
attacks on unrelated infants.
There is reason to suspect that paternal kinship might facilitate nepotism 
in other species as well. Any primate species with high reproductive skew and 
well-defined birth cohorts are likely candidates for paternal kin recognition and 
paternal nepotism. Migratory alliances of age-mates are observed in a number 
of primate species with seasonal reproduction, including vervets, rhesus ma-
caques, Hanuman langurs and red colobus. Affinities among age-mates, as seen 
in male squirrel monkeys in Costa Rica, male chimpanzees at Ngogo, and female 
red colobus monkeys in the Gambia, may reflect affinities for paternal half-sib-
lings.

45
2 Practicing Hamilton’s rule: kin selection in primate groups
This work draws attention to the mechanisms underlying kin recognition in 
primates. There is a strong consensus that kin recognition in primates is based 
on familiarity, not on phenotypic cues such as MHC (e.g. Rendall 2004). This 
point of view is based partly on laboratory studies designed to decouple kinship 
and familiarity. In these studies, monkeys are generally unable to discriminate 
between unfamiliar kin and non-kin (Rendall 2004), suggesting that kin recog-
nition is based on familiarity. The new data from the field suggest that monkeys 
may rely on multiple cues to assess relatedness in nature (Buchan et al. 2003). 
Familiarity, age-similarity, mating history, and phenotypic features may all con-
tribute to kin recognition. Like other kinds of signals in nature, redundancy of 
signals about kinship may enhance their accuracy.
There is no reason to expect that kin selection will be the only process shap-
ing the evolution of social behavior in primate groups. In cooperatively-breed-
ing primates, related and unrelated helpers participate in infant care and other 
cooperative activities. Animals may gain direct benefits from helping others, or 
benefits may be reciprocated. Mutualism and reciprocity may often complement 
kin selection. If animals choose related partners for mutualistic interactions, 
they will gain direct benefits as well as inclusive fitness benefits. Similarly, kin-
ship facilitates the initiation and maintenance of reciprocal interactions. Thus, 
kin selection, mutualism and reciprocity may jointly contribute to the high rates 
of cooperation among kin that we see in primate groups. This may create unwel-
come complications when we try to identify the mechanisms that shape coopera-
tion in primate groups, but nature is not arranged for our convenience.
To more fully understand the role that kin selection plays in the evolution 
of cooperation in primate groups, we will need to take advantage of all the tools 
at our disposal. Evolutionary theory arms us with quantitative and qualitative 
predictions about the dynamics of cooperative interactions that evolve through 
individual selection, kin selection, mutualism and reciprocity. Molecular genet-
ics provides us with the methods to assess relatedness systematically, a critical 
parameter in Hamilton’s rule. Fieldwork conducted on a range of primate species 
allows us to examine the effects of social structure, demography and ecological 
conditions on the dynamics of cooperation among males and females. Statistical 
methods, which allow us to cope with the complexities of dyadic interactions, 
will help us to unravel the causal processes shaping the patterns in our data. 
In carefully-designed experiments, we can examine the effects of manipulat-
ing benefit-cost ratios and evaluate the importance of previous interactions on 
future behavior. It will take careful, critical and creative work to make progress, 
but the first steps have already been taken.
Acknowledgments
I thank Peter Kappeler for the invitation to participate in the Fourth Göttinger 
Frielandtage and the opportunity to contribute to this edited volume. I thank 
Bernard Chapais, James Dietz, Ellen Kapsalis, Drew Rendall, and Jeff Stevens 
for providing me with copies of forthcoming papers. Bernard Chapais posed 
the challenge for interpreting evidence about nepotism in primate groups, and 

46
Joan B. Silk
much of my thinking about this issue is derived from his thoughtful critique. 
I thank my colleagues, Susan Alberts and Jeanne Altmann, for sharing access 
to the Amboseli baboon groups, a venue in which these themes are played out 
on a daily basis. This project was funded in part by grants from the National 
Science Foundation (BCS-0003245), the LSB Leakey Foundation, the National 
Geographic Society, and the UCLA Academic Senate.

Kinship, competence 
and cooperation in primates
Bernard Chapais
3.1
Introduction
In primate groups composed of several individuals varying in their degrees of 
relatedness to each other, cooperative activities, defined as interactions provid-
ing participants with direct benefits, are often expected, either implicitly or ex-
plicitly, to take place preferentially among closest kin (e.g. Silk, this volume). In 
contrast to this view, I will argue here that the role of kinship in the patterning 
of cooperation has probably been overestimated, that cooperation is expected 
to be kin-biased only under certain specific conditions, and that competence, 
rather than kinship, should drive the selection of partners for many coopera-
tive activities. The widespread expectation that cooperative activities should be 
consistently kin-biased is based on solid empirical evidence, but on evidence 
which apparently underwent some important shifts in meaning. The expecta-
tion derives from two categories of observations: (1) some types of cooperative 
activities are indeed kin-biased, and (2) some types of non-cooperative social 
activities, namely altruistic ones, for which Hamilton (1964) proposed kin selec-
tion theory, may be extremely kin-biased, if not entirely restricted to kin when 
altruism is directed unilaterally.
When a mother protects her newborn against an aggressor or a predator, she 
does not gain any direct, personal benefits, whether immediate or delayed. She 
is altruistic, and unilaterally so. Unilateral altruism is not restricted to mother-
offspring relationships in primate groups; it may be performed by other catego-
ries of kin, for example by grandmothers and sisters in the form of aiding in 
conflicts (Chapais et al. 2001). Inclusive fitness theory (Hamilton 1964), which 
posits that donors obtain indirect fitness benefits by contributing to the fitness 
of their kin, has proven especially useful to account for unilateral altruism, for 
which the theory of reciprocal altruism (Trivers 1971) is of no use, by defini-
tion. Accordingly, unilateral altruism is expected to be highly kin-biased, and 
kin selection has been consistently invoked to account for altruism in primate 
groups (Kurland 1977, Chapais & Schulman 1980, Silk 1982, 1987, 2002a, this vol-
ume, Walters 1987, Dunbar 1992, Maestripieri 1993, Schaub 1996, Chapais 2001, 
Chapais et al. 2001, Combes & Altmann 2001, Chapais & Bélisle 2004).
But the situation is different with cooperation. As mentioned above, the 
term cooperation subsumes various types of interactions that provide partici-
pants with direct, personal benefits (Pusey & Packer 1997). As a first possibil-
ity, referred to as mutualism, the benefits may be obtained concurrently by the 
Chapter 3

48
Bernard Chapais
participants in the course of the interaction itself. Examples include coalitions, 
group-hunting and food-sharing. In theory, the benefits could also be obtained 
through the reciprocation of altruistic acts that are immediately costly to the 
donor, but provide mutual benefits in the long run (reciprocal altruism, Trivers 
1971). However, interactions that unambiguously meet the criteria of reciprocal 
altruism have barely been documented in non-human primates. Although the 
“donor” may incur a slight cost in terms of time and energy, the possibility of its 
simultaneously obtaining significant benefits cannot be eliminated (Dunbar & 
Sharman 1984, Bercovitch 1988, Chapais et al. 1991, Hemelrijk et al. 1992, Noë 
1992, Chapais et al. 1994, Prud’homme & Chapais 1996, Widdig 2000, Chapais 
2001). Rather, cooperation through reciprocation appears to involve actions 
which simultaneously provide both partners with a net benefit, but which are 
initiated or performed alternatively by each of them. Possible examples include 
reciprocal aiding against third parties, reciprocal grooming, and exchange of 
grooming for tolerance, access to food, or aiding (see below). Such interactions 
have much in common with mutualism, but differ in that partners take turns in 
initiating or performing the same or different behaviors.
Importantly, because partners in cooperative activities obtain direct (person-
al) benefits whether they are related or not, cooperation can take place between 
non-kin just as well as between kin. Nevertheless, kin selection theory may be 
used to predict that cooperation should be performed preferentially among kin 
because when kin cooperate together they benefit both directly, through the co-
operative act itself, and indirectly, through the fitness benefits accrued via kin 
selection (Wrangham 1982; see below). Partly on this basis, it has become com-
mon to explain nepotism in general, whether altruistic or cooperative, in terms 
of kin selection (e.g. Gouzoules 1984, Walters 1987, Morin et al. 1994, Kapsalis & 
Berman 1996, Silk 2002a), as if kinship should have a similar impact on the two 
functional categories of interactions.
In this chapter, I argue that the impact of kinship on the patterning of co-
operation should be much less extensive than its impact on unilateral altruism, 
and that in many circumstances, cooperation should not take place between 
closest kin in primate groups. I first describe two theoretical arguments for the 
existence of kin biases in cooperation. I then define the conditions under which 
one expects cooperation to be kin-biased, and those under which cooperation 
should not necessarily be kin-biased. I conclude that cooperative activities 
whose payoff is significantly affected by the partners’ relevant qualifications, 
that is, by their competence, should not be consistently kin-biased. In reviewing 
the relevant empirical evidence, I focus on the striking difference in the degree 
of kin bias between male philopatric species, such as chimpanzees (Pan troglo-
dytes), which exhibit relatively low levels of nepotism among matrilineal kin, 
and female philopatric species such as macaques, characterized by compara-
tively much higher levels of matrilineal nepotism. I argue that this comparison 
is deceptive, that a number of factors help considerably reduce the discrepancy, 
and that the role of kinship in shaping cooperation in primates has probably 
been overestimated.
Given the paucity of studies on the influence of patrilineal kinship on be-
havior in primates (reviewed by Strier 2004), let alone on the effect of patrilineal 

49
3 Kinship, competence and cooperation in primates
kinship on the patterning of cooperative activities, I test the present ideas on 
matrilineal kinship only. Nonetheless, I assess the possibility that patrilineal 
kinship might affect my interpretations.
3.2
Why should cooperation be kin-biased?
At least two different forces may generate kin biases in cooperation. The first 
requires kin selection and was proposed most explicitly by Wrangham (1982). 
When a female cooperates with a relative, she benefits in two ways. She obtains 
the direct (personal) benefits of the cooperative act B, and she also derives in-
direct fitness benefits that amount to a fraction r (degree of relatedness) of the 
direct benefits accruing to her kin Br. If the same female cooperates with a non-
relative instead, she derives only the direct fitness benefits B of the cooperative 
act. Because B + Br > B, and considering only these factors, cooperation between 
kin pays more than cooperation between non-kin, hence cooperation should 
be kin-biased. In sum, when individuals have equal access to kin and non-kin 
(Wrangham 1982), those who choose kin as partners obtain a fitness bonus Br. 
Because the fitness bonus is obtained reciprocally between kin, kin partners are 
mutually dependent on two accounts: (i) to obtain the direct benefits of coop-
eration and (ii) to obtain its indirect benefits, which dictates their cooperating 
together. By comparison, non-kin are mutually dependent only to obtain B; they 
would not lose any fitness bonus by defecting. For this reason, kin would consti-
tute more reliable partners compared to non-kin, and kin partnerships would be 
more stable as a result.
An alternative explanation for the occurrence of kin biases in cooperation is 
based essentially on the direct benefits of cooperation, and thus does not require 
kin selection (Chapais 2001). In group-living primates, maternal investment of-
ten extends throughout the lifespan, mothers maintaining long-term supportive 
and affiliative relationships with their daughters in female philopatric species 
(Fairbanks 2000), and with their sons in male philopatric species (Goodall 1986, 
Furuichi 1997). The very existence of lifelong bonds between mothers and off-
spring entails that siblings meet around the same mother on a regular basis and 
become disproportionately available and familiar to each other compared to 
non-kin. This bias is independent of any intrinsic attraction between the siblings 
themselves; it is a consequence of the siblings’ common attraction to the same 
mother. Then, if siblings are suitable social partners, and if disproportionate 
availability and familiarity per se increase the chances of forming partnerships, 
it follows that siblings should cooperate preferentially with each other.
The two explanations differ fundamentally in that the second one does not 
require kin selection. It states that kin cooperate together for the same reason 
non-kin cooperate together, namely for the direct fitness benefits of coopera-
tion, but that kin may cooperate more often than non-kin because they are more 
readily available as partners. While the indirect fitness bonus of kin coopera-
tion is a central component in the first explanation, it is ancillary in the second 
(Chapais 2001). The two explanations should prove extremely difficult to differ-

50
Bernard Chapais
entiate because even if kin-biased cooperation was driven by the greater avail-
ability of kin, rather than by indirect fitness benefits, the fact is that kin obtain 
the indirect fitness bonus in any case. Fortunately, this problem does not matter 
for the present discussion.
3.3
The effect of competence
Whatever their relative merits, the two explanations have a central aspect in 
common; they do not take into account the qualifications and relative compe-
tences of partners as a criterion in the formation of cooperative partnerships. 
Not all types of activities call for competence. For example, suppose that two 
animals cooperate to keep warm in the context of huddling or co-sleeping (An-
derson 1984, Takahashi, 1997). In this situation, the main qualification required 
from each partner is the ability to produce heat, which requires a minimal body 
size. Because kin easily meet this qualification, the two explanations for kin bi-
ases in cooperation should apply. First, the equation B + Br > B is always satis-
fied; cooperation provides the same direct benefits B whether one cooperates 
with kin or with non-kin, but by cooperating with kin, individuals obtain ad-
ditional indirect fitness benefits. Second, because close kin are no less valuable 
than non-kin for the task, but close kin are disproportionately available and fa-
miliar, they could be chosen as partners if only for this reason. I refer to coop-
erative activities such as social thermoregulation, whose payoff is little affected 
by variation in the partner’s qualifications, as low-competence cooperation. The 
expression “attribute-independent cooperation” was used in a previous paper; 
Chapais & Bélisle 2004. Low-competence cooperation should be markedly and 
consistently kin-biased.
In contrast, competence differentials may be crucial in other situations. For 
example, suppose that an individual’s goal is to gain access to resources monop-
olized by a high-ranking individual, and that this relationship translates into a 
grooming-for-tolerance cooperative partnership. The dominant partner’s main 
qualification is its absolute power, determined to a large extent by its absolute 
rank. In this situation, kin are not necessarily the best partners. Which partner, 
then, should ego cooperate with? Let B represent the direct benefits of coopera-
tion with a given kin, and q the ratio of competence between a potential non-kin 
partner and that kin, so that cooperating with the non-kin yields qB. For coop-
eration to be more advantageous with the non-kin, qB > B + Br, which reduces to 
q > 1 + r; that is, the ratio of competence between the non-kin and kin partners 
must be greater than one plus the degree of relatedness between ego and its kin. 
For example, a female having a choice between cooperating with a half-sibling 
(r = 0.25) or a non-kin, should choose the non-kin if its competence for the task 
is more than 1.25 times (or 25%) higher than the kin’s competence. This condi-
tion may be easily satisfied considering that kin of the wrong age or rank may be 
considerably less competent than non-kin. I refer to such cooperative activities, 
whose payoff is markedly affected by variation in the partners’ qualifications, 
as competence-dependent cooperation. The expression “attribute-dependent 

51
3 Kinship, competence and cooperation in primates
cooperation” was used in Chapais & Bélisle 2004. Competence-dependent coop-
eration should not be strongly and consistently kin-biased.
3.3.1
Low-competence cooperation
Table 3.1 classifies a sample of cooperative activities according to whether 
they belong to the low-competence category or to the competence-dependent 
category, specifying for each the nature of the partnership, the qualifications 
required, whether kin may meet these qualifications, and whether one expects 
kin biases as a result. Besides social thermoregulation, another possible form of 
low-competence cooperation is reciprocal grooming, assuming that grooming 
is performed for hygienic or comfort-related reasons (Hutchins & Barash 1976, 
Barton 1985, Schino et al. 1988, Boccia et al. 1989, Keverne et al. 1989, Tanaka 
& Takefushi 1993, Aureli et al. 1999). In this situation, a partner’s qualification 
is its ability to reciprocate grooming, which only requires a minimal age. Be-
cause an individual’s kin are likely to include such suitable grooming partners, 
one expects grooming to be kin-biased for the same reasons given in the case of 
social thermoregulation; that is, both because kin are readily available and be-
cause cooperating with them yields additional indirect fitness benefits. If, on the 
other hand, grooming is performed to obtain social benefits such as increased 
tolerance levels (Hemelrijk et al. 1992, Muroyama 1994, Henzi & Barrett 1999), 
access to food (de Waal 1997a), or coalitionary support (Seyfarth 1977, Seyfarth 
& Cheney 1984, Hemelrijk 1994), kin are not necessarily the most competent 
partners and grooming should not necessarily be kin-biased.
To test the present hypothesis about the differential impact of kinship on 
grooming distribution, one needs to differentiate and analyze separately the 
grooming episodes that individuals perform to obtain social benefits (compe-
tence-dependent cooperation), and those they perform to obtain grooming in re-
turn (low-competence cooperation). The difficulty of this task is commensurate 
to that of establishing clear causal relationships between behavioral categories, 
as exemplified by the relationship between grooming given and aiding received, 
first proposed by Seyfartyh (1977) and still debated 25 years later; e.g. contrast 
Schino (2001) with Henzi & Barrett (1999) and Henzi et al. (2003). But another 
way of testing the present hypothesis would be to compare whole grooming dis-
tributions in two situations: (i) when grooming is performed to obtain social 
benefits and (ii) when it is performed for its own value; only in the latter situa-
tion should grooming be reciprocal within dyads and markedly kin-biased.
Data on grooming among female chacma baboons (Papio ursinus) lend them-
selves to such a test. Henzi et al. (2003) compared the distribution of grooming 
in the same group between two periods, when ecological conditions favored con-
test competition for food, and later when this was not the case. When food com-
petition was profitable, females had more diverse grooming partners in terms of 
rank distance, presumably because they sought to exchange grooming for toler-
ance at food sites with higher-ranking females. In contrast, when food competi-
tion was lower, females had a smaller number of partners, who ranked closer to 
themselves on average, presumably because they exchanged grooming only for 

52
Bernard Chapais
Table 3.1. Non-exaustive classification of cooperative activities in primates according to 
whether the activity’s payoff is affected by the partners’ qualifications (competence-de-
pendent cooperation) or not (low-competence cooperation). See text for references.
Goal of 
coopera-
tion
Nature of 
partner-
ship
Qualifi-
cations 
required
Determi-
nants of 
qualifica-
tions
Do kin 
meet qual-
ifications?
Kin bias 
expected?
Low-competence cooperation
Thermo-
regulation
Huddling/
co-sleep-
ing
Minimal 
heat
produced
Minimal 
size
Yes
Yes
Receive 
grooming
Reciprocal 
grooming
Ability to 
groom
Minimal 
age
Yes
Yes
Gain mater-
nal experi-
ence
Allomoth-
ering
Caring for 
an infant
Minimal 
age
Yes
Yes
Competence-dependent cooperation
Gain 
access to 
resourcesa
Grooming 
for toler-
ance
Absolute 
power
High rank
Not 
necessarily
No
Obtain aid/
rise in rankb
Grooming 
for aiding
Absolute 
power
High rank
Not 
necessarily
No
Rise in rankc
Mutual 
aiding
Relative 
power
Rank 
similarity
Not 
necessarily
No
Maintain 
one’s rankd
Mutual 
aiding and 
grooming
Relative 
power
Rank 
similarity
Yes 
(matrilineal 
hierarchies)
Yes but 
amplifiede
Gain 
access to 
resources
Mutual 
sharing
Relative 
power
Rank/age 
similarity
Not 
necessarily
No
Practice 
motor/
social skills
Social play
Size 
similarity
Age 
similarity
Not 
necessarily
No
Catch preys/
obtain meat
Group 
hunting/
meat-
sharing
Hunting 
experi-
ence
Absolute 
age
Not 
necessarily
No
a In exchange for grooming.
b Bridging alliance (Chapais 1995) formed between A and C in a A > B > C rank order.
c Revolutionary alliance (Chapais 1995) formed between B and C in a A > B > C rank order.
d In exchange for grooming and/or aiding
e In matrilineal hierarchies, kin rank close to each other, which may amplify nepotism. See text.

53
3 Kinship, competence and cooperation in primates
its own value (Henzi et al. 2003). Given that in baboons females close in rank are 
usually kin (Lee & Oliver 1979, Walters 1980, Hausfater et al. 1982, Johnson 1987, 
Silk et al. 1999), the data suggest that grooming was more kin-biased when food 
competition was lower and social benefits were less at stake. In a previous study, 
Barrett et al. (1999) also reported that when competition was lower grooming 
was exchanged reciprocally, presumably because females needed not exchange 
it for social benefits with high-ranking females. In sum, these data support the 
hypothesis that when grooming is performed in the context of a low-competence 
cooperative activity, it is more kin-biased, as predicted.
A third possible example of low-competence cooperation is the care of infants 
by individuals other than the mother, or allomothering. For allomothering to 
qualify as a low-competence cooperative activity, it must in the first place qualify 
as a cooperative one. Although not all allomothering is cooperative (Hrdy 1976, 
Nicolson 1987), Fairbanks (1990a) reported the existence of a system of mutual-
istic cooperation between helpers and mothers in vervet monkeys (Cercopithe-
cus aethiops). Females who spent more time allomothering were more successful 
in keeping their first-born infant alive, presumably due to their greater maternal 
experience, and mothers using allomothers had shortened inter-birth intervals. 
Thus, both the helpers and the recipient mothers derived direct fitness benefits 
from allomothering. Second, for allomothering to qualify as a low competence 
activity, it should require few qualifications on the part of both the allomother 
and the infant and its mother. From the perspective of a helper seeking to gain 
maternal experience, the infant’s qualifications and competence are probably 
irrelevant; any infant will do. But infant kin (e.g. sisters) are more available and 
familiar, and taking care of them provides additional inclusive fitness benefits 
(Fairbanks 1990a). From the infant’s and mother’s viewpoint, the same reason-
ing applies; older sisters are readily available to allomother their younger sib-
lings, and allowing them to allomother provides the infant and the mother with 
inclusive fitness benefits (Fairbanks 1990a). Kin allomothers may also be less 
likely to harm the infant (Nicolson 1987).
Thus, even though allomothering may require some competence (e.g. experi-
ence), it is open to a large array of individuals, kin and non-kin, because specific 
qualifications which are often found among non-kin, such as a high rank or age 
similarity, are not required. In this sense, cooperative allomothering would be a 
low-competence activity, which could explain why it is often kin-biased (Nicol-
son 1987, Chism 2000).
3.3.2
Competence-dependent cooperation
Table 3.1 also lists possible examples of competence-dependent cooperative ac-
tivities. In these examples, the partners’ qualifications vary between absolute 
power (a correlate of high rank), relative power (a correlate of closeness in rank), 
experience (determined by absolute age) and size similarity (a correlate of age 
similarity among immatures). Because kin do not necessarily meet these crite-
ria, the corresponding partnerships should not be consistently kin-biased. For 
example, as mentioned above, individuals might use grooming as a currency to 

54
Bernard Chapais
obtain aid (Seyfarth 1977, Schino 2001) or tolerance at food sites (Henzi & Bar-
rett 2003), from high-ranking individuals. Hence, such cooperative partnerships 
should not be markedly kin-biased. However, they could be among members of 
high-ranking matrilines because in this situation, the targeted partners are both 
related and high-ranking. Interestingly, rates of affiliative relationships were re-
ported to be higher within high-ranking matrilines than within lower-ranking 
ones in baboons (Silk et al. 1999).
Social play provides another illustration of competence-dependent coopera-
tion. Social play is hypothesized to provide mutual benefits to partners through 
its role in the development of motor and social skills (Fagen 1993). Thus, al-
though social play is rarely viewed as a cooperative activity, it satisfies the cri-
teria for mutualistic cooperation; partners gain direct benefits and they do so 
in the course of the interaction itself. When individuals have a choice between 
partners, age similarity proves to be a major determinant in the formation of play 
partnerships, presumably because age similarity correlates positively with peer 
familiarity and similarity in size and strength (Fagen 1981). Similar-age part-
ners are often not available among close kin (e.g. siblings), even though older or 
younger close kin are often available. Thus, similar-age unrelated partners seem 
to be favored over dissimilar-age kin. In this sense, social play is a competence-
dependent activity whose major qualification is age similarity. Accordingly, play 
is slightly or not kin-biased (Walters 1987, Janus 1989, Berman 2004).
Primates may also form partnerships on the basis of rank similarity. For 
example, among the chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) of the Ngogo community 
(Uganda), Mitani et al. (2000) found that matrilineally-related males did not 
associate or cooperate preferentially. Cooperation was measured by mutual 
participation in alliances, meat sharing and boundary patrols. In a subsequent 
study, Mitani et al. (2002b) reported that males selected their partners on the 
basis of age similarity (same age class) and rank similarity (same rank class), 
and reasoned that the absence of nepotism reflected the non-availability of kin 
partners of the right age and rank due to the long birth interval of chimpanzees 
(5-6 years). Stated differently, chimpanzees gave priority to age and rank rather 
than to kinship; they were non-nepotistic because they engaged in competence-
dependent cooperation. Chimpanzees are male-philopatric and live with several 
patrilineal relatives. I consider the possibility of patrilineal nepotism in a later 
section.
The effect of the rank similarity criterion on cooperation also operates 
among females, but then it may be confounded by kinship in situations where 
close-ranking females are also kin, as commonly happens in matrilineal domi-
nance hierarchies. The observed high levels of attraction between female kin 
in matrilineal societies are commonly attributed to the effect of kinship per se 
because the respective effect of its correlate, rank similarity, is most often not 
assessed. But two studies that analyzed the separate influences of kinship and 
rank similarity revealed that both factors contributed to attraction and toler-
ance among close-ranking female kin. De Waal (1991b) found that closeness in 
rank significantly increased levels of proximity and co-drinking in two groups 
of rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) independently of kinship, and, similarly, 
Kapsalis & Berman (1996) reported that rank similarity significantly increased 

55
3 Kinship, competence and cooperation in primates
levels of affiliation (approaches, proximity, contact and grooming) among free-
ranging rhesus monkeys, independently of kinship. Both sets of results indicate 
that competence-dependent cooperative activities driven by rank similarity 
were probably underestimated in groups characterized by matrilineal domi-
nance systems (see below). Both studies also found that kinship increased rates 
of behaviors independently of closeness in rank. Thus, in these studies and in 
others (e.g. Silk et al. 1999), the effect of kinship is real; it is not an artifact of the 
rank similarity correlate (see Silk, this volume).
3.3.3
The relationship between kinship and competence
The foregoing argument about the relative role of kinship and competence in 
patterning cooperation was framed in dichotomous terms. I argued that coop-
erative activities whose outcomes are minimally affected for competence dif-
ferentials should be kin-biased, whereas cooperative activities whose outcomes 
vary substantially in relation with the partners’ qualifications should not be kin-
biased. At first sight, this dual classification may appear justified because any 
given cooperative activity can either require some well-defined qualifications 
(e.g. rank-based power and the capacity to offer help), or not (e.g. the capacity to 
provide heat). Although heuristically useful, the dichotomy is nonetheless some-
what simplistic because competence is a continuous variable.
As stated previously, ego should prefer a more competent non-kin over a less 
competent kin when q > 1 + r, where q reflects the competence ratio between the 
non-relative and the relative. When the competence ratio is higher than 1.5, ego 
should always choose the non-kin partner over all potential kin partners, even 
its closest kin because the maximal degree of kinship (in outbred populations) is 
0.5. But when q is lower than 1.5, some kin could be advantageously chosen over 
the non-kin partner. For example, half-siblings (r = 0.25) should be chosen over 
non-kin when q < 1.25. Thus, competence-dependent cooperation could be kin-
biased provided q is relatively low. In the previous discussion of competence-
dependent cooperation, I assumed that high levels of competence were required 
for the activities considered (Table 3.1), and that there were no reasons to believe 
that kin partners were better qualified than non-kin. This assumption appears 
generally reasonable in light of the examples reviewed.
However, even when q is higher than 1.5, cooperation might be performed 
among kin for two reasons. First, kin might be the most competent partners. Two 
examples have already been mentioned. Assuming that the main qualification 
for a given cooperative activity is rank similarity, that criterion coincides with 
kinship in matrilineal hierarchies; hence, cooperation among females would be 
kin-biased because female kin have similar ranks. The other example concerned 
the high-rank qualification in matrilineal hierarchies. For members of the high-
est-ranking matriline, high-ranking partners are also close-ranking individu-
als so that cooperation among highest-ranking individuals could be kin-biased 
because it is rank-biased.
Second, competence-dependent cooperation could be kin-biased because 
competent non-kin are not available, even though they are present in the group. 

56
Bernard Chapais
In such a situation, individuals would have no choice but to cooperate with kin. 
For example, low-ranking individuals might be unable to interact with high-
ranking non-kin if they are prevented from doing so by mid-ranking individu-
als, as in Seyfarth’s (1977) grooming model. Such a situation would favor coop-
eration among kin.
I have hitherto discussed situations where competence-dependent coopera-
tion could be kin-biased contrary to the main argument presented here. The 
reciprocal may also be true. Low-competence cooperation, which is expected to 
be kin-biased, could take place both among kin and non-kin if not enough kin 
are available. This is expected when matrilines are small as in decreasing popu-
lations (Dunbar 1988), or due to random demographic fluctuations.
I conclude that, in general, kinship should have little effect on the selection 
of partners for cooperative activities: (i) when the competence ratio (q) is high, 
or more specifically, higher than 1.5, and (ii) provided individuals have equal 
access to both kin and non-kin. Cooperation should be kin-biased when q is low 
and kin are available.
3.4
Matrilineal kinship and competence: 
the contrast between male and female philopatric societies
In this section, I pursue the investigation of the relative role of competence and 
kinship in the patterning of cooperation by examining an apparent contradiction 
between the importance of matrilineal kinship in male and female philopatric 
species. In female philopatric species, such as macaques and baboons, matrilin-
eal kinship has a strong impact on the behavior of the philopatric sex (reviewed 
by Gouzoules 1984, Walters 1987, Bernstein 1991, Chapais 2001, Silk 2002a, Ber-
man 2004, Kapsalis 2004). In contrast, available data on male philopatric species 
indicate that matrilineal kinship has little effect on the behavior of the philo-
patric sex (males). The male philopatric species for which we have the best data 
both on kinship and social interactions is the chimpanzee. Three studies carried 
out in three different populations of chimpanzees found that affiliation and co-
operation among males were not biased towards matrilineal kin as assessed by 
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) haplotype sharing (Goldberg & Wrangham 1997, 
Mitani et al. 2000, 2002b, Boesch et al., this volume, see also Strier 2004). Similar 
results, but on smaller samples, were obtained for other male philopatric spe-
cies: bonobos, Pan paniscus (Hashimoto et al. 1996) and muriquis, Brachyteles 
arachnoïdes (Strier et al. 2002). In light of these studies, the instances of coop-
eration between maternal brothers observed among the Gombe chimpanzees by 
Goodall (1986) would constitute the exception rather than the rule.
Why would matrilineal kinship promote cooperation among philopatric fe-
males, but much less so among philopatric males? One might think that this 
question is biased, or even irrelevant, because it does not take into account the 
other half of genetic relatedness, patrilineal kinship. Future studies might indeed 
reveal that male chimpanzees are nepotistic with their male patrilineal kin even 
though they are not with their matrilineal kin. I consider the issue of patrilineal 

57
3 Kinship, competence and cooperation in primates
kinship in a separate section (see below). However, treating matrilineal kinship 
separately in male philopatric societies, as was done by Hashimoto et al. (1996), 
Goldberg & Wrangham (1997) and Mitani et al. (2001, 2002b), is no less relevant 
than treating it separately in female philopatric societies, as was done in almost 
all studies on kinship in these species. If philopatric females are nepotistic with 
their matrilineal relatives, philopatric males should be as well. So, why do the 
available data apparently fail to support this prediction? I will examine three 
different reasons, dwelling on the last two.
First, the discrepancy might reflect a sex difference in the role of competence 
in the formation of cooperative partnerships. If cooperation in chimpanzees is 
not kin-biased because it is mostly competence-dependent, as argued above, 
conversely the high levels of nepotism of philopatric females might reflect a fe-
male bias for low-competence cooperative activities. For example, allomother-
ing is practiced essentially by females and is markedly kin-biased (see above). 
Whether other cooperative activities display such a sex bias – for example 
whether grooming between males more often aims at obtaining social benefits, 
and grooming between females more often at obtaining further grooming – re-
mains to be explored.
Two other factors help account for the greater importance of kin biases in 
female philopatric societies: (i) kin compositions and (ii) the confounding ef-
fect of rank similarity on kinship. I examine these factors in the next two sec-
tions.
3.4.1
Philopatry patterns and differences in kin compositions
Networks of matrilineal kin differ fundamentally between male and female 
philopatric societies. In female philopatric groups, females co-reside with sev-
eral categories of matrilineal kin and discriminate some of them. For example, 
experiments on Japanese macaques (Macaca fuscata) revealed that the degree 
of kinship beyond which females treated their kin as non-kin was the same for 
three different categories of behavior: (i) aiding in conflicts (Chapais et al. 1997, 
2001), (ii) tolerance at a monopolizable food source (Bélisle & Chapais 2001) and 
(iii) homosexual inhibition among females (Chapais & Mignault 1991, Chapais 
et al. 1997). Kin discrimination was manifest between mothers and daughters, 
grandmothers and grandoffspring, great-grandmothers/great-grandoffspring 
(tested for only one behavioral category: aiding), and between sisters. Kin dis-
crimination was not manifest between aunts and nieces, and only inconsistently 
so between aunts and nephews. Using a different methodology, Kapsalis & Ber-
man (1996) reported very similar results for free-ranging rhesus monkeys. Gen-
eralizing from these studies, philopatric females would discriminate a minimum 
of four or five categories of matrilineal kin among all those present.
The number of discriminated categories of matrilineal kin is substantially 
smaller in male philopatric species, such as chimpanzees, due to the dispersal 
pattern. Assuming that all males are resident and that most females disperse 
(Vigilant et al. 2001, Doran et al. 2002), male matrilineal kin reduce to a single 
category, maternal brothers, because female transfer entails that sons do not co-

58
Bernard Chapais
reside with their mother’s kin. Even assuming that some females reproduce in 
their natal group so that these females’ sons co-reside with their maternal uncles, 
given that kin discrimination is inconsistent between aunts and nieces in female 
philopatric societies (see above), the same may apply between uncles and neph-
ews. Matrilineal kin also include mother-son dyads but I focus here on dyads of 
male matrilineal kin. Hence, to compare adequately the relative importance of 
matrilineal nepotism between male philopatric societies and female philopat-
ric ones, one should focus on siblings, the only kin that are both available and 
discriminated on a regular basis in the two types of societies. The question then 
becomes: does the discrepancy in matrilineal nepotism remain, i.e. do maternal 
sisters in female philopatric societies cooperate more than maternal brothers in 
male philopatric societies?
It is not easy to answer this question because very few studies on female re-
lationships partitioned data according to degree of kinship, and further differ-
entiated between cooperative interactions and altruistic ones. But three sets of 
factors appear to reduce the discrepancy. First, sisters in matrilineal hierarchies 
have similar ranks and their cooperation may be rank-driven. In other words, 
if sisters ranked independently of each other, as do maternal brothers in chim-
panzees, they might be less kin-biased (see below). Second, much of the coopera-
tion between sisters may be of the low-competence type (e.g. reciprocal groom-
ing, allomothering), which could account for a further portion of the kin bias. 
Third, it is noteworthy that levels of nepotism between sisters are much lower 
than between mothers and daughters (Kaplan 1977, Kurland 1977, Massey 1977, 
Glick et al. 1986, Kapsalis & Berman 1996, Chapais et al. 1997, Chapais & Bélisle 
2004), and may even be lower than between grandmothers and granddaughters 
(Chapais et al. 1997) despite these two categories of kin sharing the same degree 
of kinship (r = 0.25), and sisters being even more closely related on average, if 
some sisters are full-siblings. Relatively low levels of nepotism between sisters 
probably reflect the intense and long-lasting dominance competition between 
them (Datta 1988, Chapais et al. 1994), whereas it is weak between grandmoth-
ers and granddaughters. Dominance competition was indeed found to act as a 
significant constraint on sister nepotism in Japanese macaques (Chapais et al. 
1994).
The point here is that by limiting the comparison of the nepotistic tendencies 
of philopatric males and philopatric females to siblings, the discrepancy in the 
overall extent of kin biases between the two categories of species is reduced.
3.4.2
The amplifying effect of rank similarity on female nepotism
All female-philopatric societies for which we have good data on both kinship and 
behavior exhibit matrilineal hierarchies in which, by definition, kin rank close 
to each other. As mentioned above, both kinship and rank similarity contribute, 
independently, to increase attraction between individuals (de Waal 1991b, Kap-
salis & Berman 1996). Thus, observed levels of nepotism in female-philopatric 
species are consistently amplified to a variable extent and this factor artificially 

59
3 Kinship, competence and cooperation in primates
increases the discrepancy in nepotism between these species and male-philo-
patric ones.
To better understand how rank similarity amplifies kin biases in coopera-
tion, I have modeled the effect of rank similarity as if females chose their part-
ners on that basis alone; that is, independently of kinship. Consider a matrilineal 
hierarchy composed of three matrilines (a, b and c) of four females each (a1, a2, 
and so on, in decreasing rank order). Suppose that any female cooperates prefer-
entially with the two females ranking immediately below her, and the two rank-
ing immediately above her. The female’s four partners may be kin or non-kin. 
For example, of the four females that rank closer to b1, two are kin (b2, and b3), 
and two are non-kin (a3 and a4); thus, 50% are kin. I calculated this percentage 
for each of the 12 females composing the hierarchy; the average is 75%. In other 
words, assuming that females in a nepotistic hierarchy choose their partners 
solely on the basis of closeness in rank, 75% of the partners nonetheless hap-
pen to be kin. If the rank order were not matrilineal (i.e. if female kin ranked 
independently of kinship in relation to each other), the average percentage of 
kin among a female’s close ranking partners would be 27% (the proportion of 
kin dyads out of all dyads). The difference between the two percentages repre-
sents the maximal amplification of nepotism due to rank similarity per se in this 
particular hierarchy.
I calculated the percentages of close-ranking females that are kin for various 
matriline sizes, from three females per matriline (hierarchy of nine females) to 
seven females per matriline (hierarchy of 21 females), and for various defini-
tions of closeness in rank, from one rank on each side of ego (two close-ranking 
partners) to three ranks on each side of ego (six close-ranking partners). The re-
sults are summarized in Fig. 3.1. The top curve defines closeness in rank as one 
rank on each side of ego and shows how the percentages of close-ranking females 
that are kin vary according to matriline size. The second and third curves define 
closeness in rank as two and three females on each side of ego, respectively. The 
bottom curve gives the percentage of close-ranking females that are kin when 
kinship and closeness in rank are decoupled in non-matrilineal hierarchies. The 
three curves are well above the baseline, indicating that nepotism is amplified 
for all three definitions of closeness in rank.
All three curves are ascending, indicating that for all three definitions of 
closeness in rank, the amplification of nepotism increases with matriline size. 
This is because in hierarchies composed of very small matrilines, close-ranking 
females are more likely to belong to different kin groups. But the larger the mat-
rilines, the more likely close-ranking females are kin. The most detailed data on 
matrilineal kinship structures in primates come from provisioned populations 
of only two species, the rhesus macaques of Cayo Santiago (Rawlins & Kessler 
1986) and various populations of Japanese macaques (Fedigan & Asquith 1991). 
Provisioned populations are often growing, and therefore have particularly ex-
tensive kinship structures (Dunbar 1988), which easily extend over four genera-
tions in macaques. Thus, given that our best data on the effect of matrilineal 
kinship on behavior come from provisioned groups composed of especially large 
matrilines, the amplification of the role of kinship in female cooperation, and 
our expectations of kin biases have been maximized.

60
Bernard Chapais
Fig. 3.1 also shows that for any matriline size, the amplification of nepotism 
increases as the definition of closeness in rank becomes narrower, being maxi-
mal for adjacent-ranking females (one rank position). In this situation, the clos-
est-ranking female is almost always a relative, whereas in the case of larger rank 
distances, partners may belong to different matrilines. How close in rank to ego 
a female must be to be treated preferentially can only be determined through 
empirical studies. For example, data in de Waal (1991b, Fig. 3) show that a rank 
distance of one stands out from all other rank distances as having the maximal 
effect on attraction. If this result is representative of other groups and species, 
the one-rank curve in Fig. 3.1, nepotism maximally amplified, would be closer 
to reality than the other two curves.
In sum, both historical biases in the selection of populations for which we 
have the best data on kinship, and the meaning of closeness in rank from the 
animals’ perspective, may have contributed in amplifying our perception of the 
importance of nepotism in female relationships. It follows that in order to as-
sess the effect of kinship per se on female relationships, one needs data on fe-
male philopatric species that do not exhibit matrilineal hierarchies. Examples 
include Hanuman langurs, Presbytis entellus (Hrdy & Hrdy 1976, Borries 1993, 
Koenig 2000) and captive sooty mangabeys, Cercocebus torquatus atys (Gust & 
Gordon 1994), wherein females establish well-defined dominance relationships, 
Fig. 3.1. Maximal amplification of nepotism due to kin ranking close to each other in matrilineal 
dominance hierarchies. The model assumes that females form cooperative partnerships solely on 
the basis of closeness in rank, which is defined in three ways: 1 rank: any female cooperates only 
with the female ranking immediately below her and the one ranking immediately above her; 2 
ranks: the female cooperates with the two females immediately below her and the two above her; 
3 ranks: the female cooperates with the three females immediately below her and the three above 
her. For any matriline size, the percentage of close-ranking females which happen to be kin in-
creases the narrower the definition of closeness in rank. For any definition of closeness in rank, 
the percentage increases the larger the size of matrilines. The bottom curve (baseline) gives the 
percentage of close-ranking females that are kin when kinship and closeness in rank are decoupled 
in non-matrilineal hierarchies.
1 rank
2 ranks
3 ranks

61
3 Kinship, competence and cooperation in primates
but do not rank close to their kin. Kin biases in behavior should be weaker in 
such societies if only because nepotism is not amplified by closeness in rank. 
Unfortunately, detailed data on kinship are not yet available for these species. 
Even if they were, however, testing the prediction should prove difficult because 
non-matrilineal societies could exhibit lower levels of nepotism for another, 
confounding, reason. If female kin do not form alliances to transmit, acquire 
and maintain their birth rank, as they do in matrilineal hierarchies, levels of 
altruism and cooperation among female kin should be significantly lower. Thus, 
levels of nepotism in non-matrilineal societies could be lower both because they 
are not amplified by rank similarity and because females are socially less depen-
dent on their kin. This is not to say that kin biases should be absent altogether. 
Kin biases should be clearly manifest in the females’ low-competence coopera-
tive activities.
In any case, when data on kinship and behavior become available for female-
philopatric societies lacking matrilineal hierarchies, the discrepancy in levels 
of nepotism between maternal sisters in these groups, and maternal brothers in 
male-philopatric groups, should be much reduced, if still significant.
3.4.3
What about patrilineal kinship?
Although male chimpanzees do not cooperate preferentially with their matrilin-
eal kin, they might do so with some of their patrilineal kin. One possible process 
of patrilineal kin discrimination derives from male reproductive skew. The fact 
that single males may fertilize several females over a limited period of time gen-
erates paternal sibships among the resulting offspring. The more pronounced 
male reproductive skew, the larger the resulting paternal sibships within a given 
birth cohort. Hence, age similarity might reflect paternal relatedness to some 
extent (Altmann & Altmann 1979, van Hooff & van Schaik 1994, Strier 2004). 
Interestingly, as mentioned above, age similarity was found to pattern coopera-
tion among male chimpanzees, along with rank similarity (Mitani et al. 2002b). 
If age similarity does reflect patrilineal kinship, males might in fact be coop-
erating with their paternal half-brothers, a possibility evoked by Mitani et al. 
(2002b), Silk (2002a) and Strier (2004). To understand the implications of this 
idea, however, it is useful to distinguish clearly between two possibilities.
The first possibility is that males discriminate their paternal brothers among 
all their age mates, and cooperate preferentially with them through the opera-
tion of kin selection. No data on patrilineal kin recognition are available for 
male philopatric groups, but some data are available for female philopatric 
groups. Although a number of studies failed to find kin discrimination between 
paternal sisters (Fredrikson & Sackett 1984, Kuester et al. 1994, Ehardt et al. 
1997), other studies reported kin discrimination between paternal sisters close 
in age in rhesus macaques (Widdig et al. 2001) and savanna baboons (Smith et al. 
2003). On this basis, suppose that male chimpanzees do discriminate their pa-
ternal brothers among their age mates. Because males are expected to be equally 
familiar with all age mates, regardless of their degree of relatedness with them, 
patrilineal kin recognition could not be based on familiarity differentials. An-

62
Bernard Chapais
other mechanism would be involved, for example phenotype matching, as sug-
gested by Widdig et al. (2001) and Smith et al. (2003) for macaques and baboons. 
In male-philopatric societies, males co-reside with several categories of male 
patrilineal kin besides same-aged brothers, including their younger and older 
paternal brothers, their fathers, sons and uncles. Thus, if males use phenotype 
matching to recognize their similar-age paternal brothers, they should be able 
to use it to recognize their younger and older brothers as well as other categories 
of patrilineal kin, and they should cooperate preferentially with kin of various 
ages and ranks. This prediction is not easily reconcilable with the observation 
that male chimpanzees cooperate preferentially with males close in age and rank 
(Mitani et al. 2002b).
The second possibility is that males do not discriminate their paternal broth-
ers among their age mates. Nonetheless, they would have been selected to co-
operate preferentially with age mates because these are often paternal brothers. 
Thus, by cooperating with age mates in general, males would increase their in-
clusive fitness. In other words, males would use the age similarity criterion as a 
marker of potential paternal kinship, the age bias would be in fact a kin bias, and 
cooperation would be driven by kin selection. There are four problems with this 
hypothesis. First, only a fraction of same-age males are paternal brothers if male 
reproductive skew is weak. For example, in chimpanzees, Constable et al. (2001) 
reported that only 36% of paternities in the Kasakala community of Gombe 
could be attributed to the males that were in the alpha position at the time of 
conception (see also Strier 2004). Second, age similarity between males is a poor 
marker of patrilineal kinship in a male-philopatric society, as mentioned above. 
Only a fraction of all patrilineal kin would correctly identify each other through 
age similarity. Paternal brothers belonging to different age cohorts would not, 
nor would fathers and sons, for example. Note that age similarity is a much bet-
ter marker of patrilineal kinship between females in a female-philopatric society 
because most patrilineal kin are paternal sisters. Third, if males use age similar-
ity essentially as a marker of kinship, they should cooperate with all the kin that 
they can recognize, for example their maternal brothers. But this is apparently 
not the case, as mentioned above. Fourth, males also choose their partners on 
the basis of rank similarity. They do so independently of age similarity (Mitani 
at al. 2002b), and there is no reason to believe that rank similarity correlates 
with kinship. Thus, if the rank similarity qualification is used for its own sake, 
the age similarity criterion could be as well. The four arguments suggest that age 
similarity is not used as a marker of kinship.
Based on the available evidence, I conclude that it is unlikely that coopera-
tion between age mates reflects patrilineal kinship in a male philopatric society. 
As argued above, if the cooperative activities of males are mostly competence-
dependent, and age similarity a criterion of competence, partner selection may 
be driven by the direct benefits of cooperation, not by kin selection.

63
3 Kinship, competence and cooperation in primates
3.5
Summary and conclusions
The expectation that individuals should consistently cooperate with their kin 
implicitly assumes that kin and non-kin make equally valuable partners, or 
that individuals are unable to assess competence and its determinants, such as 
relative age and rank. Both assumptions are amply contradicted by empirical 
evidence, supporting the hypothesis that low-competence cooperation should 
be markedly kin-biased, but high-competence cooperation should not be, ex-
cept when kin are more competent, or when competent non-kin are not acces-
sible. Although much remains to be done to test this hypothesis, the evidence 
reviewed here provides preliminary support for it.
The expectation that cooperation should be kin-biased derives essentially 
from the role attributed to kin selection in its evolution. One important correlate 
of the preponderant role attributed to kin selection in the evolution of behavior 
in general is the idea that any kin-biased behavior is the likely product of kin 
selection. This correlate has also been re-examined recently. In a previous paper 
(Chapais 2001), I questioned the assumption that a number of kin-correlated 
behaviors, including certain forms of grooming, allomothering and aiding, were 
altruistic and the product of kin selection. Several such behaviors seem to have 
been forced into an altruism framework, with the emphasis being put on the 
costs to their performers rather than their benefits. If kin-correlated behaviors 
provide performers with direct benefits, they might evolve through mechanisms 
other than kin selection (see above), or kin selection might be involved, but sec-
ondarily (Chapais 2001; but see Silk, this volume). A similar line of argument 
has been made for cooperative breeding in vertebrates. Kin selection is widely 
invoked to explain why non-breeding individuals help others raise their young 
while apparently incurring a net cost, but a growing body of evidence reviewed 
by Clutton-Brock (2002) points to an underestimation of the direct benefits to 
helpers and the overestimation of the indirect benefits of helping. The role of 
mutualism in the evolution of cooperative breeding in vertebrates appears to 
have been relatively neglected (Clutton-Brock, this volume).
Due to its powerful logic and to its position as the unique evolutionary theory 
specifically devoted to kinship, inclusive fitness theory has had a deep impact 
on our view of kin-biased behavior. Perhaps as a consequence, we tend to attri-
bute all forms of interactions between kin to the operation of kin selection, even 
though empirical tests of kin selection and alternative mechanisms are badly 
needed (Chapais 2001, Clutton-Brock 2002). By consistently equating nepotism 
with kin selection, we have come to view kinship as such a powerful determi-
nant of behavior that we expect genetic relatedness to explain the distribution 
of cooperation as much as it explains the distribution of altruism. Such a view 
probably owes much to the fact that our knowledge about kinship in primates is 
predominantly derived from a few species and populations in which nepotism is 
particularly important, if not paramount (Chapais & Berman 2004). In particu-
lar, we should obtain a more balanced view of the explanatory value of kinship in 
female relationships when we obtain data on female-philopatric societies lack-
ing matrilineal hierarchies.

Acknowledgments
I am greatly indebted to Peter Kappeler for inviting me to participate in the 
highly stimulating Göttinger Freilandtage on cooperation in primates. Carol 
Berman, Peter Kappeler, Jean Prud’homme, Joan Silk, Carel van Schaik, Shona 
Teijeiro and one anonymous reviewer provided most helpful comments on the 
manuscript.
64
Bernard Chapais

Part III
Reciprocity

Reciprocal altruism: 30 years later
Robert Trivers
“Two are better than one; because they have a good reward for their labour. For if 
they fall, the one will lift up the other: but woe to him that is alone when he fall-
eth; for he hath not another to help him up. Again, if two lie together, then they 
have heat: but how can one be warm alone? And if one prevails against him, two 
shall withstand him; and a three-fold cord is not easily broken.” (Ecclesiastes 4, 
9–12; King James Version).
4.1
Introduction
A little over 30 years ago, I had the good fortune of publishing my first scientific 
paper on reciprocal altruism, a subject that had not yet been addressed from an 
evolutionary standpoint. Hamilton’s (1964) great work on kinship and altruism 
made it clear that in humans there existed a major form of altruism that could 
not be explained by kinship. Its elaboration was responsible for the complex 
economic systems in which we now live and its regulation could plausibly be 
explained by a system of interconnected human emotions, including feelings of 
friendship, gratitude, sympathy, guilt, moralistic aggression, a sense of justice 
and (I would now add) forgiveness.
I brought no great talents to this enterprise, beyond a willingness to take the 
evolutionary problem seriously and to model evolutionary logic on easily in-
ferred psychological facts regarding our own behavior (for a description of how 
the paper was written, see Trivers 2002). The paper was certainly timely. My 600 
reprints were quickly exhausted and the evolutionary idea was off and running. 
There now exists a very large literature on the subject and many subareas have 
advanced far beyond my original paper.
The purpose of the present paper is to provide a personal review of some ma-
jor developments since my paper. These include the Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD) as 
a model for reciprocal altruism, other models and third-party observer effects. 
I concentrate on the human sense of justice and the selective forces likely to 
have molded it. In the process, I discuss recent empirical work (using economic 
games) that bears on our sense of fairness and what seems to me the most plau-
sible way to interpret these results. I neglect many important topics, for example, 
discrimination against cheaters in symbioses (see Sachs et al. 2004).
Chapter 4

68
Robert Trivers
4.2
What was accomplished in 1971
It is well to pause for a moment and remember what the pre-evolutionary pe-
riod looked like. Although Charles Darwin and George Williams had devoted 
a sentence or two to the subject of reciprocal altruism, both anthropology and 
social psychology were thoroughly pre-Darwinian in their thinking. Anthropol-
ogy recognized the importance of reciprocity but not the problem of the cheater 
within the system. Conceptual confusion was illustrated by the effort to define 
parental investment as an example of ‘reciprocity between the generations’. You 
invest in your children and they in theirs. Social psychology saw that ‘proso-
cial’ tendencies were important in life but failed to see any problem in how they 
evolved (indeed, did not even raise the question) and therefore failed to differ-
entiate between obvious subcategories such as kin-directed versus reciprocal 
altruism. Evolutionary theory had nothing to offer beyond group selection and 
general inattention.
In my paper, elementary distinctions were emphasized. Altruism is suffer-
ing a cost to confer a benefit. Reciprocal altruism is the exchange of such acts 
between individuals so as to produce a net benefit on both sides. Reciprocal al-
truism is one kind of return-benefit altruism. There can be a variety of ways in 
which an act of altruism can initiate a causal chain leading to a return benefit to 
the actor, of which reciprocal altruism is but one example. A warning call which 
keeps group members alive may bring an immediate return benefit and eating 
your cleaner may bring a cost in lost interaction with the now dead cleaner. I was 
primarily interested in reciprocal altruism and would probably have skipped 
these two examples of return-benefit altruism if I had any nonhuman examples 
of reciprocal altruism. At the same time, the cleaning symbiosis example dem-
onstrated altruism without kinship and the bird example provided a host of re-
turn-effect alternatives to a kinship explanation. In any event, the larger area 
of return-benefit altruism has become much more important, although it is not 
always conceptualized this way. Thus, group selection language is often formally 
equivalent to the language of return effects, though this may be obscured or de-
nied. A good recent review, especially in the context of symbioses, can be found 
in Sachs et al. (2004).
A second distinction of some importance concerns the cheater or non-re-
ciprocator in the system. I deliberately chose the term cheater, even though the 
neutral term non-reciprocator (later, defector) was more precise, because the 
emotive and intuitive powers of ‘cheater’ were attractive to me. The key point 
is to figure out how the cheater may harm itself, often by the counteraction of 
others. For me, the simplest was simply to break off the relationship, thereby 
cutting one’s own losses and coincidentally reducing the benefits of cheating. 
The second is direct punishment, but since this is itself costly, I imagined that 
it would evolve after mere non-reciprocation. I called it ‘moralistic aggression’ 
deliberately, since it had a moral flavor but was not necessarily moral.
I naturally wanted the domain of my paper to be as large as possible, so I 
avoided, wherever possible, any limiting assumptions. Both Darwin (1871) and 
Williams (1966) quickly restricted reciprocal altruism to species with complex 

69
4 Reciprocal altruism: 30 years later
cognitive powers, while I preferred to imagine that once reciprocity got under-
way, the requisite cognitive powers would quickly evolve. More recently, possible 
cognitive limitations to the evolution of reciprocity have been emphasized (Ste-
phens & Hauser 2004).
Finally, the paper sketched out a few obvious ways in which the analysis 
could be extended to a complex, multi-party system, with norms, infractions of 
norms, observer effects, collective punishment, and so on. These are topics that 
have become very active (and, in some cases, contentious) areas of research in 
recent years.
4.3
Tit-for-tat
My approach began with reality and attempted to model its evolution. In par-
ticular, I turned to everyday life for an account of what seemed to me the key 
emotions regulating the system and I dressed these up with data from social psy-
chology. This can be a very effective first step, and indeed a continuing source 
of ideas for theoretical development, but one soon wants to have theory that 
begins with fundamental assumptions and generates different possible worlds. 
The key first advance was provided by Axelrod & Hamilton (1981). Building on 
the results of Axelrod’s computer tournaments to see who could devise the best 
strategy for playing iterated games of PD (Rapaport’s tit-for-tat [TfT] was the 
winner), they were able to show that TfT is evolutionarily stable as long as there 
is sufficient probability of future interaction (always-defect is also stable). TfT 
was the simplest strategy introduced in the original tournaments and has only 
two rules: begin cooperative and then on the next move do whatever your part-
ner did on the previous one (i.e. cooperate or defect).
The simplicity is itself beguiling. It immediately widens the range of situa-
tions in which to look for reciprocal relations. Why not bacteria? They certainly 
are capable of a contingent strategy with neighbors in which an individual pro-
duces a (cooperative) chemical first and then produces whichever chemical the 
neighbor does (cooperative or selfish). There is no question that a rich world of 
social interactions will be found in bacteria, sometimes unifying the behavior 
of millions or billions of separate bacteria, but disentangling kinship, green 
beard and reciprocal effects will not be easy. A defector mutant in a sea of coop-
erators will initially be unrelated to neighbors at the key locus, and vice versa. 
Exciting empirical work is now emerging on the PD and cooperation in viruses 
(Turner & Chao 1999), bacteria (Velicer & Yu 2003) and yeast (Greig & Travi-
sano 2004).
The success of the TfT strategy also gives new meaning to the value in life 
of imitation or, at least, responding in kind. Imitation is classically viewed as a 
valuable form of learning but it may also often be the appropriate response in 
reciprocal relations. Do unto others as they have just done unto you. If someone 
is nice, be nice; if not so nice, not so nice; if nasty, be nasty, and so on. But there 
are limitations to the value of this rule, as seen in the large costs associated with 
outbreaks of reciprocal spite (see below).

70
Robert Trivers
TfT and Axelrod & Hamilton (1981) spread like wildfire through the behav-
ioral literature, so that soon all reciprocal interactions seemed to be formulated 
in terms of the PD. The effect was to distance the analysis from subjective ex-
perience to the point where I had to translate papers back into English in order 
to understand what was being said; for example, the excellent work on predator 
inspection in sticklebacks (Milinksi 1987, Milinski et al. 1990). It soon seemed 
that theorists and empiricists alike were forgetting that iterated games of PD 
amount to a highly artificial model of social interactions; each successive inter-
action simultaneous, costs and benefits never varying, options limited to only 
two moves, no errors, no escalated punishment, no population variability within 
traits and so on. In fact, almost all of these simplifying assumptions have now 
been shown to introduce important effects.
4.4
Beyond tit-for-tat in the Prisoner’s Dilemma 
In a brilliant series of papers, Nowak, Sigmund and colleagues explored the con-
sequences of relaxing the assumptions built into the original game of iterated 
PDs. In the process, they outlined a plausible account of the way in which new 
strategies may displace old ones in an evolving two-dimensional social world 
where the two dimensions are the probabilities that an individual will cooper-
ate in response to either the partner’s cooperation or defection on the previous 
move. Nowak (1990) first showed that the introduction of errors into the system 
brought forth the value of some degree of forgiveness by the tit-for-tatter and 
some relaxation in the rigidity of always doing what your partner just did. In a 
simple iterated PD between two tit-for-tatters, a mistaken move by one on any 
move (say, defect on the first) will put the two actors permanently out of syn-
chrony with each other, one cooperating, the other defecting, then vice versa, 
and so on, never achieving a relationship of strong reciprocal benefits. Various 
strategies of partial forgiveness can cut through this dilemma and outcompete 
TfT. The first to be described was ‘generous tit for tat’ (gen TfT) in which a modi-
fied tit-for-tatter responds always to cooperation with cooperation but responds 
to defection some of the time with cooperation; in effect, forgiving the part-
ner for that defection (Nowak & Sigmund 1992). If the partner is a tit-for-tatter 
(generous or original), cooperation will have been re-established, the error cor-
rected. The expected frequency of forgiving is determined by the precise pay-
off matrix of the game (one-third in the original payoff conditions of Axelrod’s 
tournament).
This work invites us to consider the many mistakes that can be made in life, 
not just accidental breakdowns in the underlying causal machinery. We can try 
to second-guess the situation and guess wrong, we can be in a negative state 
because of other interactions which spill over into this situation; there are ‘inno-
cent bystanders’ (Nowak & Sigmund 1992) and so on. Error is intrinsic to life but 
perhaps more frequent with some kinds of strategies or in some kinds of settings 
than in others, an avenue of investigation that may prove fruitful.

71
4 Reciprocal altruism: 30 years later
Nowak & Sigmund (1993) then showed that yet another strategy did very well 
in a world of tit-for-tatters, generous tit-for-tatters and full-time cooperators 
(all-c). Called ‘win-stay, lose-shift’, it merely repeats the same move as on the 
previous if it was rewarded and changes its move if it was punished. Put another 
way, if your partner just cooperated, keep doing what you are doing; if the part-
ner just defected, switch. This strategy has three benefits: (i) it protects against 
exploitation, (ii) corrects errors and (iii) exploits a naive cooperator. Note that 
it cannot invade in a world of defectors, because it switches every other interac-
tion to cooperate, where it is exploited. But if TfT and gen TfT have driven out 
all-defect (all-d), then all-c will spread by drift, inviting the success of win-stay, 
lose-shift.
Nowak & Sigmund (1994) have also analyzed the alternating PD where, in-
stead of acting simultaneously, players alternate roles of donor and recipient. 
This would seem to mimic real life more closely, though including some (non-
zero) probability of repeating the same role would do even better. Generous TfT 
does relatively better than win-stay, lose-shift and the latter can only work well 
in the alternating game if memory extends back more than one move. When 
students play iterated PD games that are either simultaneous or alternating, they 
are more successful in the simultaneous game with win-stay, lose-shift strate-
gies but, as expected, more successful in the alternating game with gen TfT (We-
dekind & Milinksi 1996). In addition, the win-stay, lose-shift people adjusted 
their strategy to protect better against all-d and exploit better all-c.
The greater cognitive complexity of win-stay, lose-shift has also been nicely 
confirmed by Milinski & Wedekind (1998). They asked students to play the iter-
ated PD either continuously or interrupted after each round by a memory task 
(playing the game ‘Memory’) that acts to reduce working memory capacity. Most 
people playing the regular game end up adopting win-stay, lose-shift strategies, 
while the remaining play gen TfT. With the memory task imposed, people play 
the cognitively simpler gen TfT relatively more often. In addition, students who 
continued to use complex win-stay, lose-shift strategies were successful doing so 
but became less good at playing the Memory game.
There have been additional developments along these lines, e.g. modeling 
the effect of the spatial structure of the social neighborhood in selecting for co-
operation (Nowak & May 1992) or imagining different levels of satisfaction for 
win-stay, lose-shift strategies (Posch et al. 1999). More generally, it has been ar-
gued that most two-party games should be modeled as a series of interactions in 
which partners negotiate the final outcome (McNamara et al. 1999).
4.5
Expanding beyond the Prisoner’s Dilemma
Important findings have appeared which evade the limitations of the PD (and 
my cursory treatment of the area is purely a function of my ignorance). Intro-
ducing individual variation alone tends to drive out the inflexible strategies we 
have reviewed above (Johnson et al. 2002). Cooperation can thrive through the 
appearance of a strategy that begins small and then, when matched, raises in-

72
Robert Trivers
vestment (Roberts & Sherratt 1998). Another way to make reciprocity more vi-
able, is simply to break down a large transfer into a series of contingent small 
ones. If as a hermaphroditic sea bass I approach you laden with eggs, and give 
you all to fertilize, I have nothing left with which to bargain for the privilege of 
fertilizing your eggs (sperms being less expensive than eggs). You are free to 
swim away and seek sperm elsewhere. But if I offer you a few and then no more 
unless you offer a few in return, we can spend a happy afternoon in recipro-
cal egg exchanges, which eventually add up to what we could have achieved in 
one exchange (Fischer 1988). Similar behavior may have evolved in polychaete 
worms (Sella et al. 1997). And in impalas, mutual grooming is broken down into 
a series of short bouts which can be terminated on evidence of non-reciprocation 
(Hart & Hart 1992). Certainly in human life, we recognize the principle as well, 
much more willing to make a loan or extend some help, if it can be broken down 
into smaller parts, with evidence of some positive effect available from earlier 
dispensations before the later ones are extended. A general theory of when par-
celing is expected (and how) would be most welcome.
Recently, a new game has been introduced as a metaphor for cooperation, 
the snowdrift game. This is the same as ‘hawk vs. dove’ in aggressive encoun-
ters. Two cars are stuck in a snowdrift. Each driver can free its car by remov-
ing the drift, which also frees the other car, or the two can work together (and 
the relative fraction of effort can be made to vary). The key is that cooperative 
behavior produces direct benefits to another individual and to self simultane-
ously. Analysis of this model produces striking departures from findings in the 
PD. For example, in the PD, spatial structure often favors cooperation, but in 
the snowdrift, the opposite is true (Hauert & Doebeli 2004). Spatial structure 
reduces the frequency of cooperation for a wide range of parameters. This is 
because the payoff is greatest if one’s strategy differs from that of one’s partner 
or neighbor. Hauert & Doebeli (2004) show that (depending on assumptions 
regarding payoffs) many situations modeled already as PD games may better be 
modeled as snowdrift games. In the continuous snowdrift game in which a cost 
is incurred to transfer a benefit to self and other, a uniform population often 
gives way to a bifurcated one, with a stable proportion of individuals making 
large (cooperative) investments coexisting with a set of defectors who invest 
little (Doebeli et al. 2004).
4.6
Possible green beard effects
When I first tried to model reciprocal altruism, I gave each individual in a two-
party interaction a different locus guiding their reciprocal tendencies. I did this 
to avoid a so-called green-beard effect (alleles at a locus able, in effect, to recog-
nize themselves in another individual, even if the rest of the genome is uncor-
related between the two: Hamilton 1964) but I quickly became convinced (with 
Bill Hamilton’s encouragement) that such complexities were better left to the 
future. Yet, they may be important. While kinship can be excluded as a factor 
in some cases, this is not so easy for green beard effects. Consider TfT models 

73
4 Reciprocal altruism: 30 years later
which conventionally assume genes at a single (haploid) locus, in which case, by 
definition, when two individuals hook up, they aid themselves but also identi-
cal copies at the same locus in another individual. Thus, by its very definition, 
reciprocal altruism, similarity between partners is expected, perhaps at the loci 
directing the altruism.
A start in this direction has been made by Riolo et al. (2001a) who claim to 
have shown that cooperation without reciprocity can evolve via tag-based altru-
ism where a tag is any observable phenotypic trait (including behavioral) toward 
whom tag-bearers direct their altruism. The problem with such systems is that 
they are vulnerable to the evolution of individuals who display the tag but not 
the altruism, leading to the rapid collapse of tag-based cooperation (Roberts & 
Sherratt 2001). It is clear that any successful tag-based model requires a series of 
additional assumptions whose plausibility has not been addressed (Riolo et al. 
2001b). For another attempt to model greenbeard effects in human reciprocal 
altruism, see Price (in press).
An interesting example of green beard cooperation has been described in 
some detail for the side-blotched lizard, Uta stansburiana (Sinervo & Clobert 
2003). Three color morphs occur in males. The blue morph is cooperative and 
two such males will settle close to each other, without regard to relatedness, and 
cooperate in driving off yellow males who attempt to sneak copulations within 
the territories of blue males. The orange morph, in turn, dominates blue males. 
Although individuals assort themselves non-randomly by color, it remains un-
clear if this also truly occurs at an underlying switch gene controlling color and 
functionally-related behavioral characters. Another oft-cited example of green-
beard effects was described in fire ants but has not been confirmed in subse-
quent work (Keller & Ross 1998, KG Ross pers. com.). The only clear examples 
of genetic green-beard effects operate at the level of cell-cell interactions, as in 
gametophytic factors in plants, cell-adhesion molecules in cellular slime molds 
and, probably, in mother-fetal interactions in mammals (reviewed by Burt & 
Trivers 2006).
4.7
Intrapersonal reciprocity?
Let us briefly consider another genetic hypothesis. It is possible to imagine in-
ternal genetic conflict within an individual that may, in part, be ameliorated 
by reciprocal effects within the genome. This is a completely novel perspective 
that remains to be confirmed (or disconfirmed) but the logic is fairly simple to 
describe. The outbred, heterozygous genetic system can be conceived of as an 
example of reciprocal cooperation between (usually) unrelated genomic halves 
(maternal and paternal). A kinship-based system would show high internal re-
latedness (i.e. inbreeding between parents) but with the costly side-effect of in-
creased homozygosity. Although the two halves are typically unrelated, no con-
flict is expected most of the time, because the fates of the two genomes are tightly 
bound together in the survival of the same individual. But at reproduction, the 
genes are separated and sent into new individuals and this gives rise to multiple 

74
Robert Trivers
avenues for conflict in the germline as genes are selected to increase their own 
replication at the expense of the larger organism (a massive topic, reviewed by 
Burt & Trivers 2006). Axelrod & Hamilton (1981) imagined that even here re-
ciprocal relations could restrain selfish tendencies, if, for example, a chromo-
some in one cell could respond to evidence of transmission ratio distortion by 
its homolog in another cell by doing the same. This would sometimes lead to 
both chromosomes driving, producing a trisomic individual. In principle, this 
argument could partly explain the dramatic increase in trisomy 21 in humans 
associated with maternal age.
In humans, there is one striking exception to the rule that internal genetic 
conflict is limited to conflict over genetic transmission. Genomic imprinting 
permits parent-specific gene expression, so that maternal and paternal genes 
can act according to their exact degrees of relatedness to each parent (and rela-
tives related through them; reviewed by Haig 2002). This conflict is now well 
established for early life in mice and humans, paternally-active genes (with the 
maternal copy silent) tending to extract more resources from the mother and 
vice versa for maternally-active ones. And there are strong hints of conflict later 
in life as well (e.g. effects on adult behavior and brain structure).
An interesting possibility is that within-individual reciprocal relations may 
develop between the maternal and paternal halves of our genomes (Haig 2003). 
There are many situations in which the two could benefit by foregoing the costs 
of opposing each other and agreeing on some fair bargain. Haig (2003) wonders 
whether oppositely-imprinted genes might, over time, evolve complex strate-
gies of cooperation, defection and punishment that are conditional upon the 
expression of oppositely-imprinted genes. It would be very interesting if such 
genes could create stable paternal and maternal personalities that interacted as 
individuals. If so, interactions with parental molding would be expected, since 
one set of genes in the offspring, associated with one personality, has interests 
exactly aligned with one parent but not the other, and vice versa. Does the de-
gree of reciprocity between a couple affect the degree of reciprocity within their 
children?
4.8
A false negative
Every living theory generates a backlash of some sort, often, new theoretical 
work claiming to undermine or sharply limit the original argument. Sometimes 
this leads to a lively exchange, which helps to clarify matters, as in the case of 
my theory of parent-offspring conflict (Trivers 1974), countered immediately 
by Alexander (1974; logic and evidence reviewed by Godfray 1995a). My paper 
on reciprocal altruism generated no such initial attack. Indeed, the paper was 
followed a decade later by Axelrod & Hamilton (1981), which only served to 
strengthen the underlying theory and point the way toward many future devel-
opments. It fell to Boyd & Richerson (1988) to publish the first serious challenge, 
not to the logic itself but to the notion that it could work in any but small groups 
(5 individuals is a large group, 25 very large). The paper is now often cited as 

75
4 Reciprocal altruism: 30 years later
a reason to skip quickly beyond reciprocal altruism (and the iterated PD) to a 
group-beneficial view of our sense of fairness (e.g. McElreath et al. 2003). Fehr 
(2004) goes the extra step and tells us that reciprocal altruism can only evolve in 
groups of two, a depressing fact, were it true.
Boyd & Richerson (1988) claim that their “model closely resembles models 
of reciprocity in pairs” and from it, one can safely conclude that “the condi-
tions necessary for the evolution of reciprocity become extremely restrictive 
as group size increases”. In fact, their model does not model reciprocity within 
pairs and their pessimism is entirely a result of artificial assumptions at the 
outset, primarily that “If an individual switches from defection to cooperation 
every other member of the group is better off”. This strange assumption is jus-
tified because it “formalizes the idea that cooperation benefits other members 
of the group”. But why insist that cooperation between two must benefit all? 
If I groom you (or feed you or protect you), why does every one else have to 
benefit? Boyd & Richerson (1988) are pretending to model dyadic relations but 
have forced on such interactions a large group effect, which inevitably grows 
in power with group size. They have created a world in which defectors auto-
matically benefit from the trading of favors between reciprocators. This is an 
unnatural assumption.
Put differently, Boyd and Richerson seem to think that when we move to n-
person groups, the natural extension of 2-person model is to impose the same 
kind of payoff structure on the entire n-person group. Indeed, a two-person in-
teraction within an n-person group can not, by assumption, occur because it au-
tomatically affects all other members of the n-party group. This is highly unreal-
istic. In fact, the opposite is more likely, that most interactions within the group 
continue to be dyadic or triadic. Most interaction in real time is a sequence of 
fast decisions about how to behave toward a small number of individuals who are 
immediately present. What group size of n does is to affect whom one is likely to 
be interacting repeatedly with. It is a mistake to collapse all these interactions 
into one large n-adic interaction with the additional restriction near-universal 
benefit or cost for any act.
Elementary logic suggests that there can be no dramatic limitation to recip-
rocal altruism as groups include more than a few. Even in groups of 40, a tit-
for-tatter should be able to learn in 40 costly interactions who are the fellow 
cooperators, hence capping its losses early, say after a week or a month, with 
months and perhaps years of benefits to flow from successful cooperation. Re-
cent mathematical modeling, using the PD in finite populations, shows that TfT 
invades at very low frequencies in moderate-sized (N ~ 30) groups (Nowak et al. 
2004). We now turn to the way in which reciprocal altruism can be extended to 
n-party interactions within such groups.

76
Robert Trivers
4.9
Indirect reciprocity, image scoring and reputation
What were just a few sentences in my original paper, the possibility of three-par-
ty interactions with important observer effects, has in the past 10 years become 
an entire sub-discipline. Although Alexander (1987) appreciated the importance 
of the subject, the key step was to model the evolution of ‘image scoring’, the ten-
dency to assign an individual a positive image or a negative image, depending on 
whether that individual was seen to act altruistically or selfishly toward a third 
party (Nowak and Sigmund 1998a,b). Positive images induce altruism from 
others and negative images selfishness. Since in this model a strategy was also 
included of being indifferent to the images, it was possible to show that image-
scoring itself could evolve. Observer effects, in turn, are strong enough to induce 
cooperation and fairness, along with punishment of non-cooperators (Sigmund, 
Hauert and Nowak 2001). This entire subject has now been beautifully reviewed 
by Sigmund and Nowak (in press), with numerous novel insights. A subtlety of 
some importance is that an actor who is seen to fail to give to another can be so 
acting because the actor is stingy or because the recipient is unworthy (i.e. itself 
stingy in interactions with others). Likewise, punishing an unworthy individual 
may improve your image, while punishing a worthy one will have the opposite 
effect. But how is the observer to have this kind of detailed knowledge? Opportu-
nities for deception would seem to be rife, increasing furthe the cognitive com-
plexity of reciprocal altruism, with associated selection on mental traits.
Once again, a pleasing feature of the explicit theory is that it has been coupled 
to laboratory experiments – games played for money – that explore the underly-
ing dynamics with real people. For example, under experimental conditions of 
anonymity, in which individuals can respond to whether other have been gen-
erous or not, donations go more frequently to those who themselves have been 
more generous in earlier interactions (Wedekind and Milinski 2000). Also, while 
generosity induced generosity, it did not produce a net benefit, but this turned 
out to be an effect of how long the game was played (n=6). When the game is 
twice as long, a significant positive effect emerges (Wedekind & Braithwaite 
2002). The work shows that cooperation through image scoring does occur even 
when individuals are known only by an arbitrary marker. It provides an easy 
way out of measuring the net effect, which turns out to be more positive the more 
rounds that are played. For additional work along these lines, consult chapter 14 
(see also Milinski et al 2001, 2002).
4.10
A sense of justice
Perhaps the most important implication of my paper (for me, at least) was that 
it laid the foundation for understanding how a sense of justice evolved. At the 
time, the sense of justice in humans was usually considered a product of culture 
and upbringing with no biological component. I thought that grounding a sense 
of justice in biology would only strengthen our attachment to it and naively as-

77
4 Reciprocal altruism: 30 years later
sumed that those with a self-professed interest in justice would greet the work 
warmly. This turned out to be true for the great philosopher of the subject, John 
Rawls (1971), while the pseudo-radicals of the 1970s tore after my work (and 
sociobiology more generally) like so many rabid dogs after a fleeing rabbit, miss-
ing the point entirely (Trivers 1981).
I was surprised on rereading my paper recently to find no reference to jus-
tice itself but only to the weaker term ‘norms’. I apparently did not get around 
to using the proper term until Trivers (1981, 1985). The argument, in any case, 
is the same. Even in two-party interactions, but especially in multi-party ones, 
one needs a standard by which to judge deviations from symmetrical (or fair) 
interactions, the better to detect cheaters. Such cheating is expected to generate 
strong emotional reactions because unfair arrangements, repeated often, may 
exact a very strong cost in inclusive fitness. In that sense, an attachment to fair-
ness or justice is self-interested and we repeatedly see in life, as expected, that 
victims of injustice feel the pain more strongly than do disinterested bystand-
ers and far more than do the perpetrators. This is not to say that we have no 
response to injustice visited on people very far from us in space (or even time) 
but this does not imply that our sense of justice evolved with these distant events 
in mind.
The first appearance of the concern in children is thoroughly self-interested 
(‘but that’s not fair, mommy’) and those who would push a group selection (or 
mere cultural diffusion) view of the sense of justice would do well to ask them-
selves when last they heard a child say, ‘mommy, daddy, I am acting unfairly, 
please stop me’. Self-interest is often confused with selfishness, a mistake given 
wide prominence by Dawkins’ (1976) misuse of the word ‘selfish’. ‘Enlightened 
self-interest’, after all, is meant to call attention to the value for our own selves of 
funneling certain benefits through others.
It is easy (in the United States, at least) to underestimate the power of our 
sense of justice. For example, the neoconservative architects of the current U.S. 
bloodletting in Iraq are fond of saying that the United States is disliked in oth-
er countries not because its policies are perceived as unjust (and certainly not 
because they are unjust) but because the U.S. is envied for its size, power and 
wealth. Envy, however, is a trivial emotion compared to our sense of injustice. 
To give one possible example, you do not tie explosives to yourself to kill others 
because you are envious of what they have, but you may do so if these others 
and their behavior represent an injustice being visited on you and yours day 
after day and year after year, often with little alternative action available to you, 
as in Palestine, where the people suffer robbery of land, water and life and are 
denied little more than rifles in self-defense, while their next-door Israeli neigh-
bors (and occupiers) are armed with nuclear weapons and the latest in U.S. lethal 
technology.
There is growing evidence that something like a sense of fairness has evolved 
in a range of non-human primates who, in turn, practice reciprocal altruism (see 
de Waal & Brosnan, this volume; for chimp reciprocity in the wild, see Watts 
2002). Thus, there appears to be an aversion to inequity in both capuchins and 
chimpanzees (Brosnan & de Waal 2003, Brosnan et al. 2004). In chimpanzees, 
ungenerous individuals are attacked when they beg for food, as are those who do 

78
Robert Trivers
not support those who just supported them (de Waal 1992b). These observations 
are consistent with the view that a sense of fairness evolved slowly over a long 
period of time, first in dyadic relationships and then more widely. The number 
of dyadic relationships should not be underestimated; there may be a fair split 
between the interests of parent and offspring, sibling and sibling, near-neighbor 
and near-neighbor, and so on.
4.11
The experimental study of reciprocal altruism
One of the more welcome developments in the study of reciprocity, and the hu-
man sense of justice, is the development of economic games that attempt to mim-
ic real life situations but can be played in the lab for real money. These games 
can be played cross-culturally and altered in a series of ways to explore relevant 
causal factors. This is a considerable advance over the world of social psychol-
ogy, with its reliance on paper-and-pencil tests of human dispositions, artificial 
situations difficult to interpret and (sometimes) deception of the subjects un-
der study. Indeed, Rapaport & Chammah (1965) saw this very clearly when they 
argued not only for the theoretical utility of the PD but its value in generating 
empirical data to test the theory. As we have seen, experiments in which people 
play iterated games of PD have provided valuable evidence on the cost-benefit 
ratio of such strategies as win-stay, lost-shift or gen TfT.
There is now a very large and excellent literature on economic games (see 
Roth 1995, Smith 2003). Many have been played in the laboratory under con-
trolled conditions, games with names like the ultimatum game, dictator game, 
public goods game and so on. They can be played single shot or iterated, anony-
mous or non-anonymous, with and without onlookers, and they can be analyzed 
theoretically with simple models.
One game will serve as an example, the single-shot, anonymous ultimatum 
game. The game is played once by a proposer and a responder (Güth et al. 1982, 
Burnham 2002). The proposer is given an amount of money (by the experiment-
er) to split with an unknown responder. He (or she) proposes a split and if the 
responder accepts the offer, the two split the money accordingly, but if player 
two rejects the offer, neither player receives any money. No further interactions 
occur between the two. In the standard economic model of maximizing finan-
cial gain, responders are expected to take whatever they are offered, as long as it 
is not zero, and, thus, proposers are expected to make very low offers and to try 
to keep most of the money. But this is not what research shows (Forsythe et al. 
1994). Offer modes and medians are 40-50%, offer means are 30-40%, and offers 
below 20% are usually rejected (Camerer 2003). This result now has been repli-
cated, with some interesting variation, in scores of studies, with varying stakes, 
around the world (Henrich et al. 2005).
The problem arises in how to interpret these results. It is generally agreed that 
they show our attachment to a sense of fairness, even when this costs us money 
but why do we act this way? To many evolutionists, including myself, this sense 
of justice or fairness benefits us in everyday life by protecting us from unfair ar-

79
4 Reciprocal altruism: 30 years later
rangements that harm our inclusive fitness. We are expected to react negatively 
to unfair offers by others, not out of envy of their extra portion, but because they 
chose to inflict this unfair offer on us and the unchallenged repetition of such 
behavior is expected in the future to inflict further costs on our inclusive fit-
ness. Consistent with this, people accept lower offers from a computer than they 
do from another person, even though both offers offer identical payoffs to two 
humans (Blount 1995). This approach assumes that our responses were never 
selected to perform in the highly unusual, one-shot, anonymous interaction in 
a lab, with payoffs underwritten by a third party. Put another way, these experi-
mental results seem on their face neither unexpected nor puzzling.
By contrast, some social scientists now playing these games have opted for a 
very different view (e.g. Fehr & Fischbacher 2003, Gintis et al. 2003). According 
to them, the results prove that our sense of fairness cannot have a self-interested 
function, all possibility of return effects having been removed. Instead, it must 
have been selected to benefit the group or appeared by some process of cultural 
diffusion. This they call ‘strong reciprocity’, to differentiate it from the ‘weak’ 
reciprocity of classic reciprocal altruism
4.12
‘Strong reciprocity?’
In defense of this interpretation of the ultimatum game, Bowles & Gintis (2003) 
tell us “We do not think that subjects are unaware of the one-shot setting, or 
unable to leave their real-world experiences behind with repeated interactions 
at the laboratory door”. Surely, awareness is irrelevant. You can be aware that 
you are in a movie theatre watching a perfectly harmless horror film and still 
be scared to death. As for leaving real-world experiences at the laboratory door, 
I know of no species, humans included, that leaves any part of its biology at 
the laboratory door; not prior experiences, nor natural proclivities, nor ongoing 
physiology, nor arms and legs, nor whatever. That is the whole point of experi-
mental work. You bring living creatures into the lab (ideally, whole) to explore 
causal factors underlying their biology, the mechanisms in action. You do not 
imagine that you have thereby solved the problem of evolutionary origin; that is, 
that you can shortcut the problem of evolutionary function by simply assuming 
that the organism’s actions in the lab represent evolved adaptations to the lab.
People do not leave their religion at the laboratory door and this alone can in-
duce ‘observer effects’ for those who imagine that God is scrutinizing their every 
action (D. Stahl, pers. com.). Indeed, the impression that God will punish male-
factors may have been promoted to encourage cooperation (Johnson & Krüger 
2004). Nor do people leave their culture at the door, and it has been claimed 
cross-culturally that the higher the degree of market integration and coopera-
tion in daily life, the more prosocial individuals act in anonymous games in the 
lab (Henrich et al. 2005). Nor do people leave their testosterone at the lab door 
and unpublished work shows that such levels are positively associated with re-
jection rates in men (T. Burnham unpubl. data). Apparently, those who promote 
‘strong reciprocity’ believe that a little verbiage (‘you know not who the other 

80
Robert Trivers
actor is nor will you ever know – and vice versa’) is sufficient to put the human 
being into a state of suspended animation such that he or she automatically and 
appropriately adjusts to the full evolutionary implications of this novel, experi-
mental situation.
This argumentation is supported, they argue, by the fact that humans do 
make discriminations in everyday life based on chance of future interaction, di-
minishing cooperation as frequency of interaction decreases (exactly as expect-
ed according to the theory of reciprocal altruism). But the fact that y, a function 
of x, is decreasing as x approaches zero, does not mean that the function passes 
through zero simultaneously on both axes. How do they handle this deficiency? 
With a little jargon, “individuals should be fully capable of taking a ‘zero-base-
line’ of cooperation” (Fehr & Henrich 2003). This merely assumes what needs to 
be shown and is unlikely on its face.
These authors (and others) also claim that human evolution was character-
ized by frequent one-shot encounters with important fitness effects (Fehr & 
Henrich 2003). Leaving aside murder, this seems most unlikely, especially when 
one considers that what is meant is one-shot anonymous interactions of the form 
of an ultimatum game. As I have pointed out elsewhere, social interactions are 
intrinsically repeat interactions, certainly over very small time scales of seconds 
and minutes but almost always over longer time periods as well (Trivers 2004). 
What they are calling one-shot encounters were really repeat interactions last-
ing at least minutes and hours, if not days and months. Imagine I am walking 
through the woods with a man I have never met before and am unlikely to see 
after the walk, with not a soul in sight. He points to five low-hanging apples and 
suggests that he stand on my shoulders to pick them, after which he will give me 
one. I am likely to argue the point immediately (and a chance to communicate 
even once prior to an anonymous ultimatum game has been shown to affect the 
interaction; Rankin 2003). Even if I agree with him, as he lands on the ground, I 
may knock three apples out of his hand and run, or strangle him, taking apples 
and any other property he has (after all, observer and other return effects have 
been ruled out). This interaction all takes place over a span of several minutes. 
Thus, even an imaginary ‘one-shot’ encounter really consists of a series of inter-
actions.
I have a close relative who, among other virtues, has a well-developed sense 
of spite. She has a long memory for slights and will repay in kind. As I described 
the ultimatum game to her, with her share of the pie (as recipient) now reduced 
to 30%, her fingernails began (literally) to dig into the table and her face con-
torted with anger (looks just like her everyday self to me, I thought). The inten-
sity was remarkable. Those fingers were set to dig into someone’s face, if need 
be. When Jamaican youngsters are given low offers, they often respond with a 
flash of anger and something like, ‘this is all I get?’. Anger is not a mere emo-
tion, it is (costly) physiological arousal for immediate aggressive action. Anger 
makes no sense without the possibility of future interaction. Neurophysiological 
work on the ultimatum game is also consistent with biological arousal for future 
interaction. Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) work shows that 
unfair offers are met with activation of part of the recipient’s brain (the ante-
rior cingulate) involved in negative emotions, primarily anger and disgust, and 

81
4 Reciprocal altruism: 30 years later
control functions involving conflict, and the higher the activation, the greater 
the chance that such an offer will be rejected (Sanfey et al. 2003). In short, in 
our everyday behavior and neurophysiology we respond to so-called one-shot 
encounters as if they were the first in a chain of interactions.
The errors I have drawn attention to are but a few of many. An individual 
who turns down an 80:20 offer hardly benefits the group; 100% of resources dis-
appear at once (Burnham & Johnson 2005). Indeed, moral philosophers have 
shown how the group-benefit approach to justice is inferior to ‘justice as fair-
ness’, in which a fair arrangement is defined not by whether it maximizes group 
output, but by whether individuals would accept it if they did not know in ad-
vance which position they occupied (Rawls 1971). For those seeking a more in-
depth treatment of the ‘strong reciprocity’ approach and its failings, see Burn-
ham & Johnson (2005). These include idiosyncratic use of language. A lifetime 
of trading benefits with others in a fair manner is apparently ‘weak reciprocity’ 
while ‘strong reciprocity’ is a single, take-it-or-leave-it interaction with no pos-
sible reciprocity, underwritten by a third party. Likewise, punishment of unfair 
behavior is called ‘altruistic punishment’ on the assumption that such behavior 
has a net cost for the actor while benefiting others, something that needs to be 
shown, not assumed.
Finally, for me there is a feeling in all of this of déjà vu, all over again. There 
has been a long history in the social sciences of assuming whatever is necessary 
in order to make the argument that is desired. Is it necessary to assume that 
there is little or no genetic variation in human social traits in order to push an 
extreme environmental interpretation? So be it. Can we assume that humans are 
rational utility maximizers, where utility is anything the organism wishes to see 
maximized, and that on this foundation we can safely build social theory? Be 
our guest. May we assume that people’s behavior in the highly unusual one-shot 
ultimatum game reflects how they were selected to act in precisely this situation? 
So let it be granted. On the bright side, there is actually some progress here. The 
first position denies both genetics and evolution. The second merely assumes 
that these subjects are irrelevant, while the third embraces evolutionary logic in 
principle but promptly gives it a truncated form.
4.13
Forgiveness and revenge
Forgiveness may play an important role in a system of reciprocal altruism, es-
pecially where the latter has degenerated into a system of reciprocal spite. For-
giveness tends to short-cut the spite, potentially saving enormous amounts of 
energy, both outward-directed and inner-consumed. There is strong evidence 
that positive emotions are associated with high immune performance (Rosen-
kranz et al. 2003) and that manipulations of mood which increase positive affect, 
e.g. through meditation, are themselves associated with an increase in immune 
response (Davidson et al. 2003). There is no direct evidence for similar benefits 
from forgiveness, but certainly many who have suffered grievous loss through 
the action of others have spoken of the corrosive internal effects of retaining the 

82
Robert Trivers
spiteful mentation of hatred and revenge (Cole 2004). As we saw earlier, the ex-
istence of mistakes automatically selects for a degree of forgiveness in everyday 
life. Forgiveness may also be efficient from a cognitive perspective, dropping a 
contradiction in one’s mind between past losses, present failure to redress the 
injustice, which then requires planning for future activity. Letting go is letting 
go of a burdensome scheme of mentation. Set against this, is the impulse toward 
revenge and retribution. This seems most likely in social arrangements that 
endure over long periods of time, including several generations, so that long-
delayed revenge is both possible and possibly instrumental in protecting later-
borne relatives. A careful treatment of the evolutionary dynamics of forgiveness 
and/or revenge would be most welcome.
4.14
Justice and truth
Elementary logic suggests a possible connection in individuals between appre-
hension of the truth and commitment to justice in social relations. An immoral 
stance often requires deception, with its inevitable effects on self-deception 
(Trivers 2000). This tendency may be more pronounced at the top of a social hi-
erarchy, where truth-telling by others is emphasized as a necessary virtue, while 
an illusion of the same by self is promulgated. There is a natural inclination to 
over-emphasize the justice of one’s own position and thus to under-emphasize 
that of one’s opponent, thereby underestimating the strength of their resistance. 
This asymmetry is especially striking in aggressive invasions of the land of oth-
ers, where there ought to be a natural (moral and physical) presumption in favor 
of the prior occupants.
4.15
Torture
The demonstration that altruistic punishment (or moralistic aggression) is plea-
surable to the punisher, as judged neurophysiologically (de Quervain et al. 2004), 
invites the speculation that this has made the appearance of torture more likely. 
Torture is the laser-like application of highly spiteful activities toward inducing 
pain, fear, shame, madness, and so on, in others. It may provide pleasure for 
the torturers, especially if they believe such action is morally justified, as in the 
words of U.S. Vice President Cheney, that the ‘worst of the worst’ are incarcer-
ated in Guantanamo, Cuba and in Iraq. Recently, we have learned in the United 
States that internal government documents argue that torture is not torture if 
there is no organ failure or imminent death, a redefinition that eliminates nearly 
all non-fatal forms of torture. Such are the achievements of self-deception in the 
service of moralistic aggression.

83
4 Reciprocal altruism: 30 years later
4.16
Summary
Since 1971, an enormous and very sophisticated literature has grown up on re-
ciprocal altruism and cooperation more generally, both in biology and econom-
ics. Noteworthy has been the success of generating a detailed series of theoretical 
findings, both within and outside the Prisoner’s Dilemma paradigm. In the lat-
ter, we see conditions under which a series of strategies can displace each other 
or survive together: all-d, TfT, gen TfT, all-c and win-stay, lose-shift. We have 
seen alternatives to the PD such as the snowdrift game, which may produce very 
different effects (e.g. of spatial structure). And we have considered two genetic 
hypotheses of interest, green-beard altruism and within-individual genetic reci-
procity, both of which await confirmation. We have outlined the way in which re-
ciprocal altruism may generate a sense of justice as a means of guarding against 
cheaters and we have explored an alternative interpretation, popular in some 
circles, that our sense of fairness evolved without regard to return effects, a view 
for which there is as yet no useful, positive evidence. All of these areas of research 
are unusually vibrant and productive at the present time and much valuable new 
work is published literally every month. This work shows every promise of unit-
ing, at last, important parts of economics with evolutionary biology.
Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Jim Bull, Terry Burnham, Peter Godfrey-Smith, Christoph Hau-
ert, Marc Hauser, Peter Kappeler, Martin Nowak, Carel van Schaik, Dale Stahl, 
Claus Wedekind, Richard Wrangham and Darine Zaatari for many, helpful com-
ments. I am grateful to Terry Burnham for first alerting me to the difficulty of 
interpreting the results of economic games.

Simple and complex reciprocity in primates
Frans B. M. de Waal, Sarah F. Brosnan
5.1
Introduction
Ever since Kropotkin (1902), the proposed solution to the evolution of coopera-
tion among non-relatives has been that helping costs should be offset by return-
benefits, either immediately or after a time interval. Formalized in modern 
evolutionary terms by Trivers (1971), this principle became known as reciprocal 
altruism.
Reciprocal altruism presupposes that: (i) the exchanged acts are costly to 
the donor and beneficial to the recipient, (ii) the roles of donor and recipient 
regularly reverse over time, (iii) the average cost to the donor is less than the av-
erage benefit to the recipient, and (iv) except for the first act, donation is contin-
gent upon receipt. Although the initial work on cooperation (especially from the 
prisoner’s dilemma perspective) focused primarily on the payoff matrix to dis-
tinguish between reciprocity and mutualism, more recent efforts have included 
a significant time-delay between given and received services as an additional 
requirement for reciprocal altruism (e.g. Rothstein & Pierotti 1988, Taylor & Mc-
Guire 1988). Given that a distinction between immediate and delayed benefits 
is theoretically richer, we include a time-delay in our definition of reciprocal 
altruism.
The above considerations outline the steps of an evolutionary argument about 
how reciprocal cooperation may have come into existence. As such, it applies 
to organisms from fish to humans. This should not be taken to mean, though, 
that reciprocal help in human society is essentially the same as in guppies. This 
would be a fundamental error; the above theoretical framework only deals with 
the ultimate reasons for the existence of reciprocal exchange. That is, it provides 
an explanation for why animals engage in such behavior, and which fitness ben-
efits they derive from it. It provides no explanation for how such cooperation is 
achieved, commonly referred to as the proximate explanation, as discussed by 
Brosnan & de Waal (2002). While it should be noted that, in the larger scheme 
of things, it is unlikely that human reciprocity deviates substantially from that 
of other animals, such as the apes, with which we share a long evolutionary his-
tory, humans probably have added unique complexities. The most parsimonious 
assumption with regards to recently-diverged species is that if they act similarly 
under similar circumstances, the psychology behind it is most likely similar too 
(de Waal 1991a).
Chapter 5

86
Frans B.M. de Waal, Sarah F. Bosnan
One can imagine forms of reciprocal altruism in which the time-delay be-
tween the exchanged services is short, hence the need for record keeping mini-
mal. Individual recognition is perhaps not necessary in such cases. This mecha-
nism would approach mutualism as the time interval between exchanged favors 
becomes shorter. But also in the case of significant time-delays, exchanges are 
not necessarily based on give-and-take contingencies. They may simply reflect 
underlying characteristics of the relationship between individuals. If so, the role 
of memory would be minimal. This means that not all forms of reciprocal al-
truism require the cognition we tend to associate with it, such as scorekeeping, 
punishment of cheaters, attribution of intentions, and awareness of the respec-
tive costs of behavioral currencies.
Skeptics of reciprocal altruism in non-human animals sometimes fail to 
recognize this distinction between (i) the ultimate explanation, which merely 
postulates that the cost of help given be offset by the benefits of help received, 
and (ii) the proximate mechanism, which concerns the precise way in which ben-
efits find their way back to the initial altruist. Satisfied with the most advanced 
mechanism only, they ignore simpler forms of reciprocity (Hammerstein 2003b, 
Stevens & Hauser 2004). Instead of wondering why reciprocity in animals is so 
rare, however, the real question is why we feel animals need to operate at the cog-
nitive level that we are capable of, and even more pertinently, how we can be sure 
that we ourselves operate at that level most of the time? As soon as we move away 
from anthropocentric assumptions about the mechanism, reciprocity turns out 
to be widespread indeed (e.g. Dugatkin 1997).
This is not to say that determination of which behaviors evolved as recipro-
cal altruism, or not, is an easy task. Numerous examples have been posited, but 
often it is found that either the animals are related, and an alternative expla-
nation for the observed altruistic exchange is kin selection (Wilkinson 1988), 
or else previously unnoticed benefits to the presumed altruist are found, indi-
cating that the observed behavior is better described as byproduct mutualism 
(e.g. both animals benefit simultaneously: Koenig 1988, Clements & Stephens 
1995; or pseudo-reciprocity: Connor 1986). Furthermore, it is difficult to assess 
reciprocity in situations in which the exchanged behaviors are dissimilar since 
the fitness value of different currencies is hard to compare (Seyfarth & Cheney 
1988). Even within the same currency, fitness costs and benefits may vary for the 
parties involved due to individual differences in rank, size and age (Boyd 1992).
More than two decades ago, chimpanzee society was characterized as a 
‘marketplace’ in which a variety of services are traded back and forth among 
indi viduals (de Waal 1982a). Here we will go into the quantitative details of this 
marketplace as expressed in coalitions, grooming and food-sharing among 
chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). Chimpanzees, for instance, have a wide range of 
goods and services that can be exchanged, including coalitionary support, mat-
ing privileges, grooming and food-sharing.
The exchange of these commodities indicates a fairly high level of cognitive 
accounting in these marketplaces. Experiments on brown capuchin monkeys 
(Cebus apella) further illuminate the proximate side of cooperation and recipro-
cal altruism. Animals pursue immediate goals which, in the end, often beyond 
the cognitive horizon of the actors themselves, translate into benefits that form 

87
5 Simple and complex reciprocity in primates
the material for natural selection. A study of proximate mechanisms helps to de-
termine if evolutionary hypotheses are predicting behavior within the animal’s 
range of abilities, because no matter how elegant or compelling an evolutionary 
scenario, it is useless if the organism lacks the capacity of behaving as the theory 
predicts (Stamps 1991).
5.2
Observational studies
5.2.1
Reciprocal coalitions and revenge
De Waal & Luttrell (1988) applied a matrix permutation technique to correlations 
between given and received agonistic support in over two thousand instances 
observed over a period of five years in the Arnhem Zoo chimpanzee colony as 
well as a large sample of interventions in mixed-sex groups of rhesus (Macaca 
mulatta) and stumptail macaques (M. arctoides) at the Wisconsin Primate Cen-
ter. In all three studies, agonistic intervention was defined as a third individual 
responding with an aggressive act against one, and only one, of two participants 
in a dyadic confrontation. Interventions were recorded as triplets; individual A 
helps B against C. Reciprocity could occur in the domains of both pro (A helps 
B) and contra interventions (A goes against C), hence may reflect two kinds of 
quid pro quo as in “One good turn deserves another” and “An eye for an eye”. 
The latter kind of punitive reciprocity has received far less theoretical attention 
than the first (but see Clutton-Brock & Parker 1995).
Table 5.1 presents Pearson correlations as well as partial correlations after 
statistical removal of the effects of symmetrical relationship characteristics. 
These effects are removed because any characteristic that is symmetrical be-
tween two individuals can be used to create reciprocal distributions of behav-
ior if the characteristic causes both partners to show the behavior in question. 
The analysis controlled for symmetrical characteristics such as (i) time spent in 
proximity, (ii) matrilineal kinship and (iii) same-sex combination. The partial 
correlations resulted after correction for all of these characteristics at once.
The table confirms a significant level of reciprocity in pro interventions 
among adults of all three species, even after statistical adjustment for sym-
metrical relationships. The chimpanzees showed considerably higher reciproc-
ity correlations than the macaques, however. An even more significant differ-
ence emerged with regards to harmful contra interventions. These interventions 
were significantly reciprocal in chimpanzees, but significantly anti-reciprocal 
in macaques. That is, if macaque A often intervenes against B, B will rarely do 
so against A, whereas in chimpanzees we find that if chimpanzee A often goes 
against B, B will do the same to A.
De Waal & Luttrell (1988) explain the absence of reciprocal contra interven-
tions in macaques by their stricter hierarchy, which prevents subordinates from 
intervening against dominants. Most data in their study came from females, 
however. A similar analysis restricted to male bonnet monkeys (Macaca ra-

88
Frans B.M. de Waal, Sarah F. Bosnan
diata) did yield evidence for reciprocal contra interventions, perhaps reflecting 
a looser dominance structure among male than female macaques (Silk 1992b). 
There is also evidence for indirect retaliation among macaques, when defeated 
subordinates redirect aggression against their opponent’s relatives (Aureli et 
al. 1992). The squaring of accounts in the negative domain, dubbed a revenge 
system by de Waal & Luttrell (1988), may represent a precursor to human jus-
tice, since justice can be viewed as a transformation of the urge for revenge, 
euphemized as retribution, in order to control and regulate behavior (Jacoby 
1983, de Waal 1996b).
Symmetrical relationship characteristics are (or ought to be) an issue in ev-
ery correlational approach to given and received acts of assistance across dyadic 
relationships, such as social grooming, food-sharing and agonistic support (e.g. 
Seyfarth 1980, de Waal & Luttrell 1988, de Waal 1989). Before concluding from a 
positive correlation that giving depends on receiving, the most obvious variable 
to control for is time spent in association; if members of a species preferentially 
direct favors to close associates, the distribution of favors will automatically be 
reciprocal due to the symmetrical nature of association. A similar argument ap-
plies to any symmetrical relationships characteristic (e.g. kinship, age or gender 
similarity). This mechanism for cooperation, dubbed symmetry-based reci-
procity, needs to be distinguished from calculated reciprocity, which is based on 
mental score-keeping of given and received favors (de Waal & Luttrell 1988). In 
most species for which reciprocal altruism has been reported through observa-
tional methods, symmetry-based reciprocity has not been excluded and hence, 
remains the most likely mechanism (e.g. blood sharing in vampire bats, Desmo-
dus rotundus, Wilkinson 1984; allogrooming in impala, Aepyceros melampus, 
Hart & Hart 1992).
Table 5.1. Pearson reciprocity correlations (r) between given and received agonistic in-
terventions for three primate species. The pro rate concerns beneficial interventions, the 
contra rate harmful interventions. Partial correlation coefficients (pr) have been adjusted 
for the effects of multiple symmetrical relationships characteristics. Probability levels (p) 
evaluate the partial correlations based on a permutation technique. From de Waal & Lut-
trell (1988).
Measure
Correlation
Rhesus
Stumptail
Chimpanzee
Pro rate
r
0.36
0.35
0.61
pr
0.28
0.18
0.55
p
0.005
0.025
0.005
Contra rate
r
–0.17
–0.23
0.33
pr
–0.19
–0.29
0.32
p
0.005
0.005
0.025

89
5 Simple and complex reciprocity in primates
This is not to say that uncorrected positive correlations are meaningless; ob-
viously, symmetries are part of evolved social life. If they assist reciprocal rela-
tions that confer benefits, this is all that matters from an evolutionary perspec-
tive. Evidence limited to positive correlations, however, does not permit con-
clusions about contingencies between giving and received behavior. Although 
we know from experiments (see below) that monkeys are capable of contingent 
exchange, and although analyses that have gone beyond dyadic relationships, 
such as in biological markets (cf. Noë & Hammerstein 1994), show behavioral 
distributions that seem too finely tuned to the supply and demand of benefits 
as well as partners to be accounted for by symmetry-based reciprocity (e.g. Bar-
rett & Henzi, this volume), we would still argue that correlations cannot reveal 
underlying processes and that it is best, therefore, to adhere to conservative in-
terpretations.
In view of these problems, observational studies should add sequential anal-
yses, which look at the unfolding of behavior over time. Does a beneficial act by 
individual A towards B increase the probability of a subsequent beneficial act by 
B towards A? These analyses get around the problem posed by symmetries. Pre-
liminary sequential evidence for an exchange between affiliative behavior and 
agonistic support, and vice versa, exists for cercopithecine monkeys. De Waal 
& Yoshihara (1983) found increased post-conflict attraction and grooming be-
tween previous alliance partners in rhesus monkeys. Seyfarth & Cheney (1984) 
employed playbacks of calls that vervet monkeys (Cercopithecus aethiops) use to 
both threaten an aggressor and solicit support to gauge the reaction of individu-
als that had recently been groomed by the caller. They reported increased atten-
tion to previous grooming partners. Finally, Hemelrijk (1994) examined ago-
nistic support after experimentally manipulating grooming among long-tailed 
macaques (M. fascicularis) and found indications that individuals supported 
those who had groomed them, i.e. individual A supported individual B more if B 
had groomed A, but not if A had groomed B.
The last study comes closest to demonstrating a temporal relation between 
one service and another, but what is still missing is evidence for partner-specific-
ity, i.e. that the return service specifically targets the individual who offered the 
original service. The alternative is generalized reciprocity, or the ‘good mood’ 
hypothesis (see below), according to which the receipt of services leads to an 
indiscriminate increase in beneficial behavior. Our research on food-sharing in 
chimpanzees attempted to address this important distinction.
5.2.2
Food for grooming in chimpanzees
Although food-sharing outside the mother-offspring or immediate kin-group 
is rare in the primate order (Feistner & McGrew 1989), it is common in both 
capuchin monkeys and chimpanzees. Food-sharing lends itself uniquely to ex-
perimental research, because the quantity and type of food available, the initial 
possessor, and even the amount of food shared can be manipulated by the ex-
perimenter. Second, food-sharing provides a quantifiable currency. An observer 
can see exactly how many times the non-possessor obtains food and can esti-

90
Frans B.M. de Waal, Sarah F. Bosnan
mate quantities shared. Finally, the observer can tell whether the sharing was 
active or passive.
Active food-sharing, a rare behavior, consists of one individual handing or 
giving food to another individual, while passive food-sharing, by far the more 
common type, consists of one individual obtaining food from another without 
the possessor’s active help (Fig. 5.1). The sharing is selective, however, in that 
possessors are not equally tolerant of all individuals; only approximately half of 
the interactions between a possessor and an interested non-possessor resulted in 
an actual transfer of food. 
There are three common hypotheses to explain food-sharing in primates: (i) 
the sharing-under-pressure hypothesis, (ii) the sharing-to-enhance-status hy-
pothesis and (iii) the reciprocity hypothesis (reviewed by de Waal 1989, 1996b). 
The sharing-under-pressure hypothesis, similar to the tolerated-theft hypoth-
esis of Blurton-Jones (1987), predicts that individuals will share in order to be 
left alone by potentially aggressive conspecifics (Wrangham 1975, Stevens 2004). 
This hypothesis is contradicted by the fact that the most generously sharing indi-
viduals are often fully dominant, hence have little to fear from anybody around 
them, and that most of the aggression in feeding clusters, rather than being by 
non-possessors against possessors, is directed the other way around (de Waal 
1989). This confirms the remarkable ‘respect of possession’ (cf. Kummer 1991) 
already noted by Goodall (1971) in her first accounts of meat sharing among wild 
chimpanzees. The sharing-under-pressure hypothesis also fails to explain food 
transfers in experimental set-ups in which negative consequences of non-shar-
ing are eliminated by physical separation (see below).
What remains, then, are the sharing-to-enhance-status hypothesis and the 
possibility of reciprocity. The first hypothesis predicts that generosity increases 
the altruist’s standing in the community (Hawkes 1990), but there is as yet no ev-
idence for this effect in non-human animals. The reciprocity hypothesis predicts 
that food is part of a service economy, hence that it is exchanged reciprocally for 
other favors. These two hypotheses are, of course, not mutually exclusive.
Our initial studies approached food-sharing by means of matrix correla-
tions. This matrix approach yielded significant results in the predicted direc-
tion. However, food-sharing among chimpanzees correlates positively with 
proximity and grooming, hence the amount of time individuals spend together 
in non-food situations. As explained before, the effects of association must be 
removed before any explanation other than symmetry-based reciprocity may be 
invoked. When the matrix analysis was redone while statistically controlling for 
the effects of association, the correlation continued to be significant.
Statistical elimination of a variable is not as powerful as experimentally con-
trolling for it, however. A new experiment was designed to measure temporal 
patterning within each dyad, thereby holding the effect of association constant. 
Partner specificity was addressed, i.e. whether a beneficial act by individual A 
towards B specifically affects B’s behavior towards A (de Waal 1997a). The dif-
ficulty in measuring food-sharing across time is that after a group-wide food-
sharing session, as used in these experiments, the motivation to share is changed 
(the animals are more sated). Hence, food-sharing cannot be the only variable 
measured. A second service that is unaffected by food consumption needs to 

91
5 Simple and complex reciprocity in primates
be included. For this, grooming between individuals prior to food-sharing was 
used. The frequency and duration of hundreds of spontaneous grooming bouts 
among the chimpanzees was measured during 90 minute observation sessions. 
Within half an hour after the end of these observations, the apes were given two 
tightly bound bundles of leaves and branches. Nearly 7000 interactions over food 
were carefully recorded by observers and entered into a computer according to 
strict empirical definitions described by de Waal (1989). The resulting database 
on spontaneous services exceeds that for any non-human primate.
It was found that adults were more likely to share food with individuals who 
had groomed them earlier in the day. In other words, if A groomed B in the 
morning, B was more likely than usual to share food with A later in the same 
day (Fig. 5.2). This result, however, could be explained in two ways. The first is 
the so-called ‘good mood’ hypothesis according to which individuals who have 
received grooming are in a benevolent mood leading to generalized reciprocity, 
i.e. increased sharing with all group members. The second explanation is the ex-
change hypothesis, in which the individual who has been groomed responds by 
sharing food specifically and only with the groomer. The data indicated that the 
sharing was specific to the previous groomer. In other words, each chimpanzee 
remembered who had just performed a service (i.e. grooming) and responded by 
sharing more with this particular individual. Also, aggressive protests by food 
possessors to approaching individuals were aimed more at those who had not 
groomed them than at previous groomers. All of this is compelling evidence for 
the reciprocal exchange hypothesis.
Fig. 5.1. A cluster of food-sharing chimpanzees at the Yerkes Field Station. The female in the top-
right corner is the possessor. The female in the lower left corner is tentatively reaching out for the 
first time, whether or not she can feed will depend on the possessor’s reaction. Photograph by 
Frans de Waal.

92
Frans B.M. de Waal, Sarah F. Bosnan
It was further found that grooming between individuals who rarely did so 
had a greater effect on subsequent food-sharing than grooming between part-
ners who commonly groomed. Among partners in which little grooming was 
usually exchanged, there was a more pronounced effect of grooming on shar-
ing. There are several interpretations. It could be that grooming from a partner 
who rarely grooms is more noticeable, leading to increased sharing by the food 
possessor. Chimpanzees may recognize unusual effort and reward accordingly. 
Secondly, individuals who groom frequently tend to be close associates, and fa-
vors may be less carefully tracked in these relationships. Close friendships may 
be characterized by symmetry-based reciprocity, which does not have the high 
degree of conditionality found in more distant relationships. These explanations 
are not mutually exclusive; both will lead to a reduced level of conditionality the 
more common exchanges are in a relationship.
Of all existing examples of reciprocal altruism in non-human animals, the 
exchange of food for grooming in chimpanzees comes closest to fulfilling the 
requirements of calculated reciprocity. This study strongly suggests memory-
based, partner-specific exchange in chimpanzees. It goes beyond symmetry-
based reciprocity inasmuch as symmetry is a constant feature of relationships 
that cannot explain contingencies across time, as demonstrated here. There 
existed a significant time delay between favors given and received (from half 
an hour to two hours); hence, the favor was acted upon well after the previous 
Fig. 5.2. Mean (+SEM) food-getting success per dyadic direction between adult chimpanzees dur-
ing food trials. Two conditions are distinguished: either individual A had groomed B in the hours 
prior to the food trial, or no previous grooming by A to B had occurred. The left-hand side of the 
graph shows the success of A in obtaining food from B (A gets from B); the right-hand side shows 
the success of B in obtaining food from A (B gets from A). Success is defined as the percentage of 
approaches to a food possessor resulting in a transfer of food (regardless of whether the transfer is 
active or passive) from possessor to non-possessor. It was found that A’s success in obtaining food 
from B increased significantly after A had groomed B, whereas B’s success in obtaining food from A 
was unaffected by A’s previous grooming. From de Waal (1997a).

93
5 Simple and complex reciprocity in primates
positive interaction. Apart from memory of past events, for this to work we need 
to postulate that the memory of a received service, such as grooming, induces 
a positive attitude towards the same individual, a psychological mechanism de-
scribed as ‘gratitude’ by Trivers (1971), and further explored by Bonnie & de 
Waal (2004).
5.3
Experiments on capuchin monkeys
Even though laboratory work on primate cooperation goes back to Crawford 
(1937), few experimental studies have been conducted since. What is especially 
lacking is the experimental manipulation of ‘economic’ variables, such as the re-
lation between effort, reward allocation, and reciprocity. Recently, this situation 
has changed thanks to experiments on brown, or tufted, capuchin monkeys.
The Cebus genus seems particularly suited for cooperation research. These 
monkeys show high levels of social tolerance around food and other attractive 
items, sharing them with a wide range of group members both in captivity and 
in the field (Izawa 1980, Janson 1988, Thierry et al. 1989, de Waal et al. 1993, de 
Waal 1997b, Fragaszy et al. 1997). This level of tolerance is unusual in non-hu-
man primates, and its evolution may well relate to cooperative hunting. Perry 
& Rose (1994) confirmed reports by Newcomer & de Farcy (1985) and Fedigan 
(1990) that wild Cebus capucinus capture coati pups (Nasua narica) and share 
the meat. Since coati mothers defend their offspring, coordination among nest-
raiders conceivably could increase capture success. This has also been suggested 
for hunting by capuchins on giant squirrels (Sciurus variegatoides; Rose 1997). 
Rose (1997) proposed convergent evolution of food-sharing in capuchins and 
chimpanzees based on group hunting. The precise level of cooperation of the 
hunt is not relevant for such evolution to occur; all that matters is that hunting 
success increases with the number of hunters. Under such circumstances, every 
hunter has an interest in the participation of others, something promoted by 
subsequent sharing.
5.3.1
Reciprocal food-sharing
In the delayed exchange test, or DET, a pair of monkeys is placed in a test cham-
ber, separated from each other by a mesh partition that allows for food-sharing. 
Monkey A is given a bowl of cucumber pieces, placed well out of reach of monkey 
B. After 20 minutes, the cucumber is removed, and a bowl of apples is given to 
monkey B (second test phase). The same pair is given another DET later, on a 
different day, with the order reversed between the monkeys (Fig. 5.3).
In years of testing with this paradigm, our capuchins displayed an astonish-
ing amount of social tolerance, sharing food on a reciprocal basis. Males tended 
to share more than females regardless of the sex of the partner. A matrix analysis 
found that, for the 14 female-female dyads in which the possessor was dominant, 
more sharing occurred between partners who in the group in which they lived 

94
Frans B.M. de Waal, Sarah F. Bosnan
had: (i) fewer agonistic interactions, (ii) shorter rank distances (i.e. were close 
in the dominance hierarchy) and (iii) higher levels of proximity and grooming. 
Furthermore, the number of tolerant food transfers in the first test phase was 
significantly correlated with the number of tolerant food transfers in the sec-
ond phase (de Waal 1997b). The most parsimonious explanation of this result is 
symmetry-based reciprocity, i.e. reciprocity based on the symmetrical nature of 
relationships. The capuchins were already familiar with each other (pair mem-
bers lived in the same group), and food-sharing might have resulted from a com-
bination of affiliation and tolerance towards conspecifics. Our next concern was 
whether or not reciprocity could be attributed to anything besides the symmetry 
inherent in the relationship.
For this, changes within each relationship over time were examined. The test 
was similar to the previous one, but incorporated six DETs on each pair. For 
each DET, individual A was given apple pieces for 20 minutes, then these were 
removed and individual B was given carrot pieces for 20 minutes. The roles be-
tween individuals remained the same over the six tests. The results were com-
pared across tests to see how sharing in the second test phase was affected by 
sharing in the first phase between the same two individuals. This approach al-
lowed us to correlate events over time, rather than across relationships, tight-
ening a possible argument for causality between the behaviors in both dyadic 
directions. Sharing rates were found to significantly covary over time within 
each pair of individuals, indicating something more than symmetry-based reci-
procity (de Waal 2000c).
Calculated reciprocity, or mental scorekeeping, however, may still be too 
complex a mechanism. To explain these results, de Waal (2000c) proposed ‘atti-
tudinal reciprocity’, that is, each individual’s behavior mirrors the partner’s atti-
tude in close temporal succession. Instead of the monkeys keeping careful track 
Fig. 5.3. Sketch from an actual video still showing active food-sharing in a pair of capuchin mon-
keys. The monkeys are separated by a mesh partition, and the monkey on the right has access to a 
food bowl containing apples. Active food-sharing is rare, but facilitated taking, in which the food 
possessor drops pieces by the mesh and allows the other monkey to take them, is common. Draw-
ing by Frans de Waal, from de Waal (1997b).

95
5 Simple and complex reciprocity in primates
of how much they gave and received, they may merely have responded positively 
(i.e. with proximity and tolerance) to a positive attitude in their partner. Such 
mirroring of social predispositions might explain the reciprocal distribution of 
food-sharing without the requirement of scorekeeping.
5.3.2
Cooperation
Despite indications of cooperation among wild capuchins, tests of their coopera-
tive abilities in the laboratory initially failed. Early tests used electronically-me-
diated or other complex devices that were beyond the monkeys’ comprehension 
(Chalmeau et al. 1997, Visalberghi et al. 2000, Brosnan & de Waal 2002). Adop-
tion of the paradigm pioneered by Crawford (1937), on the other hand, quickly 
led to success. This paradigm, in which two individuals pull food towards them-
selves, is entirely mechanical. As such, it is intuitive; the monkeys can see how 
their pulling causes the food to move towards themselves and they also immedi-
ately feel the effect of their partner’s pulling.
In our case, two capuchin monkeys had to work together to pull in a coun-
terweighted tray, at which point one or both of them would be rewarded (Fig. 
5.4). They were placed in the test chamber separated from each other by a mesh 
partition, giving them the option to share food. Each monkey had its own bar to 
pull in the tray, although these bars could be removed for control tests. Food was 
placed in transparent bowls so that each monkey could see which one was about 
to receive the food.
Initially, monkeys were taught to pull in the tray individually, which they 
quickly learned. At this point (and throughout the experimental period, which 
lasted three years) each monkey was given regular strength tests to determine 
how much weight he or she could pull in individually. For trials in which only 
one monkey pulled, the tray was weighted just under what this individual 
could pull. For trials in which both monkeys pulled, the tray was weighted 
more heavily than the strongest individual could pull alone, but somewhat 
lighter than their combined strengths. Each test consisted of four 10-minute 
trials conducted on seven same-sex pairs of adult capuchins. The five test con-
ditions were:
▬ Solo effort test (SOL), in which only one monkey had a pull-bar and only this 
individual received food, although both monkeys were present in the test 
chamber. This required no cooperation.
▬ Mutualism, or double test (DBL), in which both monkeys were required to 
pull together and both cups were baited.
▬ Cooperation test (COP), in which both monkeys were required to pull to-
gether but only one food cup was baited. This represented altruism on the 
part of the helper.
▬ Obstructed view test (OBS), which was the same as the above COP test except 
that the mesh partition was replaced by an opaque one. This eliminated vi-
sual communication between the monkeys, but they still could both see both 
cups on the tray, and that only one was baited.

96
Frans B.M. de Waal, Sarah F. Bosnan
▬ Unrestricted cooperation test (UCP), which was the same as the COP test, 
except that the partner was free to move in and out of the test chamber, which 
had an open connection to part of the group cage. This meant that the helper, 
needed for successful pulls, was not always at hand.
As expected, the success rate of cooperative trials was significantly lower than 
that of mutualism tests or solo efforts. In the unrestricted cooperation tests, bar-
pulling attempts by the food possessor significantly decreased when the partner 
left the test chamber, indicating that the monkeys had learned to associate their 
partner’s presence with successful pulling. They might even have made the more 
complex association that they could succeed only with their partner’s help (Men-
dres & de Waal 2000).
Bar-pulling success also decreased significantly in the obstructed view tests 
as opposed to the cooperation tests. In the obstructed view test, vocal commu-
nication was still possible and the monkeys continued to make pulling efforts at 
the same rate they did in the cooperation tests. Since both monkeys could see the 
food cups, their success rates should not have decreased if the impetus to pull 
simply stemmed from seeing food. What changed was their ability to see each 
other’s behavior, indicating that success was at least partially dependent on visu-
al coordination with the partner. The failure to succeed when visual access was 
cut off indicates that the monkeys were paying attention to each other’s actions 
and coordinating their efforts. This result countered the claim of Chalmeau et 
Fig. 5.4. The test chamber used for the cooperative pulling task in capuchin monkeys inspired by 
Crawford’s (1937) classical study. Two monkeys are situated in adjacent sections of the test chamber, 
separated by a mesh partition. The apparatus consists of a counter-weighted tray with two pull 
bars, with each monkey having access to one bar. The bars can be removed. In the solo effort test, 
two monkeys were in the test chamber, but only one monkey had a pull bar and only this individu-
al’s food cup was baited. In the mutualism test, both monkeys were required to pull their respective 
pull bars, and both food cups were baited. In the cooperation test depicted here, both monkeys 
were required to pull, but only one individual’s food cup was baited. Drawing by Sarah Brosnan.

97
5 Simple and complex reciprocity in primates
al. (1997) that capuchins do not understand the need for a partner in cooperative 
tasks (Mendres & de Waal 2000).
5.3.3
Sharing following cooperation
The central question underlying this project was whether food-sharing would 
increase in the context of a cooperative enterprise. In a service economy, food 
can be exchanged for assistance in cooperation, or the converse. Our analyses of 
the amount of food-sharing indicated that capuchins share significantly more 
in successful cooperative trials than in solo effort trials, in which the partner is 
present, but does not, and actually cannot, assist (de Waal & Berger 2000).
Furthermore, the partner pulled more frequently after successful trials. 
Since 90% of successful trials included food transfers to the helper, capuchins 
are assisting more frequently after having received food in a previous trial. The 
simplest interpretation of this result is that motivational persistence results in 
continued pulling after successful trials. But a causal connection is also pos-
sible, i.e. that pulling after successful trials is a response to the obtained reward 
and the expectation of more.
The most cognitively-demanding interpretation of these results is that the 
food possessor understands that its partner has helped and that the partner must 
be rewarded for cooperation to continue. This would represent calculated reci-
procity, in which the exchange of favors on a one-on-one basis drives reciprocal 
altruism. Each individual understands the other’s costs (assistance in pulling or 
loss of food) and out of gratitude returns the favor.
However, a simpler explanation of the cooperation and food-sharing in these 
trials is a variation on attitudinal reciprocity (cf. de Waal 2000c), in which the 
possessor and partner feel closer after a coordinated effort. The attention and 
coordination that cooperation entails may induce a positive attitude in the part-
ner, which is expressed in social tolerance and mutual attraction, which trans-
late into food-sharing. After a food-sharing episode, similar mechanisms lead to 
increased pulling by the partner and hence further cooperation.
The conclusion from these experiments is that capuchins are quite good at 
performing, and probably also understanding, cooperative tasks. The mecha-
nism most likely to underlie cooperation and sharing in these monkeys is at-
titudinal reciprocity in which cooperation partners mirror the attitude shown 
by their partner. This is different from symmetry-based reciprocity in that re-
ciprocation is not induced by symmetrical relationship characteristics but by 
attitudes that vary over time. This rather conservative explanation does not 
preclude the possibility of more complex processes, though. Indeed, the results 
of a recent experiment on cotton-top tamarins (Saguinus oedipus) indicate that 
monkeys are sensitive to benefits received from others, and that they may even 
recognize whether or not these benefits were intended (Hauser et al. 2003). If 
confirmed, these capacities have the potential of adding considerable complex-
ity to attitudinal reciprocity.

98
Frans B.M. de Waal, Sarah F. Bosnan
5.3.4
Cooperation based on projected returns
Group hunting is characterized by a phase of coordination followed by a phase 
in which the parties collect around the captured prey. The latter phase decides 
who gets what for their efforts. In a variation on the above cooperation para-
digm, de Waal & Davis (2003) mimicked this situation by allowing individuals to 
move around freely during the pulling task instead of being confined to separate 
areas, as done previously. This way, cooperation partners could compete over 
the acquired resource. We further manipulated (i) opportunities for competi-
tion by presenting the resource in clumped versus dispersed distribution (i.e. the 
cups with food could be placed far apart at both extremes of the tray or side-by-
side, touching each other, in the center), and (ii) the tendency for competition by 
comparing unrelated pairs and adult mother-daughter pairs. Numerous primate 
studies indicate greater tolerance and more co-feeding among kin than non-kin 
(Yamada 1963, Feistner & McGrew 1989, de Waal 1989, 1991b, Schaub 1996).
In investigating how cooperative tendency varied with the potential for com-
petition (clumped versus dispersed rewards), we were particularly interested in 
the speed of the decision-making process. Monkeys may need to learn incremen-
tally which specific conditions are favorable for cooperation, or they may be able 
to make instantaneous adaptive decisions. In the first case, the pros and cons 
of each specific condition need to be learned through direct experience; hence, 
behavior will gradually change in response to any new condition. In the second 
case, there is a fast adjustment to new conditions since decisions are based on 
generalization from pre-existing knowledge.
Questions regarding the role of food distribution and the speed of adjustment 
are relevant to models of the evolution of cooperation. Imagine a genetic variant 
that cooperates readily with any member of its group to obtain resources, yet is 
a slow learner. The variant would have enormous trouble distinguishing profit-
able from unprofitable partnerships; it would need to go through many reiter-
ated interactions before it understands which partners and situations provide 
optimal payoffs. Each time a new situation arises it would need to go through 
this learning process. Unless the cooperative tendencies of this individual selec-
tively favor kin, they would impose serious costs. On the other hand, a variant 
that could quickly distinguish profitable from unprofitable partnerships would 
minimize costs in any interaction and hence enjoy higher fitness.
After pre-training, each of eleven pairs of monkeys was subjected to multiple 
tests consisting of fifteen 2-minute trials each, with rewards available to both 
parties. Clumped reward distribution had an immediate negative effect on coop-
eration, which was visible from the first trial (Fig. 5.5). Even in tests in which we 
alternated clumped and dispersed conditions across trials, there was an adjust-
ment on each trial. The drop in cooperation under the clumped condition was 
far more dramatic for non-kin than kin, which was explained by the tendency of 
dominant non-kin to claim most rewards. The immediacy of responses suggests 
a decision-making process based on predicted outcome of cooperation rather 
than the totality of rewards available. Decisions about cooperation thus take 

99
5 Simple and complex reciprocity in primates
into account both the opportunity for and the likelihood of subsequent competi-
tion over the spoils.
The decisions observed probably reflected a lifetime of exposure to a vari-
ety of partners (e.g. dominant versus subordinate, or kin versus non-kin) under 
competitive conditions. The monkeys thus showed an ability to generalize previ-
ous knowledge to the novel test condition. It is particularly important to stress 
the generalizability of knowledge and the complexity of the variables that enter 
into decision-making given that social considerations are almost entirely absent 
from traditional learning research. For example, there is no mention of coopera-
tion or almost any other socioemotional skills (e.g. conflict resolution, alliance 
formation, empathy) in a recent 700-page book on human and animal cognition 
(Shettleworth 1998). Many biologists, in contrast, believe that the social milieu 
has provided the main impetus for the evolution of intelligence in the large-
brained order of primates (Humphrey 1976, Byrne & Whiten 1988). ‘Planning’ 
and ‘foresight’ are terms used in relation to chimpanzee power struggles (de 
Waal 1982a), and social intelligence is accorded special status in these highly 
social animals (Gigerenzer 1997, Dunbar 2001).
The study by de Waal & Davis (2003) supports the assumption that primates 
are extraordinarily sensitive to the reactive social field within which they oper-
ate. An anecdote (transcribed from a videotaped test) helps show how this sensi-
tivity sometimes expresses itself. In a cooperation task on two female capuchins, 
Bias was paired with higher-ranking Sammy. Both females pulled in the tray to-
gether. Sammy quickly grabbed all of the food on her side, and released the tray 
Fig. 5.5. Percentage of trials with successful cooperation for 15 consecutive trials per test in which 
the two food bowls are far apart (dispersed) or close together (clumped). The latter condition 
makes monopolization of the food by the dominant partner easy since, in these tests, there is no 
mesh between the partners. Since the data on all 11 pairs are pooled for each trial number, this 
graph provides no error data. The graph shows that the rate of success is lower right from the start 
in the clumped condition.

100
Frans B.M. de Waal, Sarah F. Bosnan
without locking it into place, so that the counterweight pulled it away. Bias was 
left with her food cup out of reach. While Sammy was consuming her rewards, 
Bias started screaming at her partner until Sammy approached her bar again. 
While looking at each other, Sammy helped Bias pull in the tray again. Sammy 
did not do this for herself, because by this time her own cup was empty. This in-
cident suggests protest by Bias for having lost the rewards ‘deserved’ for the first 
pull, and Sammy’s corrective response.
5.3.5
Expectations about reward division
During the evolution of cooperation, it may have become critical for actors to 
compare their own efforts and payoffs with those of others (Brosnan, in press). 
Negative reactions may ensue in case of violated expectations. A recent theory 
proposes that aversion to inequity can explain human cooperation within the 
bounds of the rational choice model (Fehr & Schmidt 1999). Similarly, coop-
erative non-human species seem guided by a set of expectations about the out-
come of cooperation and access to resources. De Waal (1996b, p. 95) proposed a 
“sense of social regularity”, defined as: “A set of expectations about the way in 
which oneself (or others) should be treated and how resources should be divided. 
Whenever reality deviates from these expectations to one’s (or the other’s) dis-
advantage, a negative reaction ensues, most commonly protest by subordinate 
individuals and punishment by dominant individuals”.
The sense of how others should or should not behave is essentially egocentric, 
although the interests of individuals close to the actor, especially kin, may be 
taken into account (hence the parenthetical inclusion of others). Note that the 
expectations have not been specified; they are species-typical (de Waal 1996b). 
Our experiment on clumped versus dispersed rewards (above) supports the role 
of expected returns in that it shows that cooperation disappears when subor-
dinates anticipate a disadvantageous outcome. To further explore expectations 
held by capuchin monkeys, we made use of their ability to judge and respond to 
value. The ability to notice and respond when either reward value or efforts vary 
promotes cooperation by allowing individuals to recognize beneficial interac-
tions. We knew from previous studies that capuchins easily learn to assign value 
to tokens, both through direct interaction with the items and through social 
learning (Brosnan & de Waal 2004a,b). Furthermore they can use these assigned 
values to complete a simple barter (Brosnan & de Waal 2004b). This allowed a 
test to elucidate inequity aversion by measuring the reactions of subjects to a 
partner receiving a superior reward for the same tokens.
We paired each monkey with a group mate and watched their reactions when 
their partners got a better reward for doing the same bartering task. This con-
sisted of an exchange in which the experimenter gave the subject a token that 
could immediately be returned for a reward (Fig. 5.6). Each session consisted 
of 25 exchanges by each individual, and the subject always saw the partner’s ex-
change immediately before their own. Food rewards varied from lower value re-
wards (i.e. a cucumber piece), which they are usually happy to work for, to higher 
value rewards (i.e. a grape), which were preferred by all individuals tested. All 

101
5 Simple and complex reciprocity in primates
subjects received four tests, including: (i) an Equity Test, in which subject and 
partner did the same work for the same lower-value food, (ii) an Inequity Test, in 
which the partner received a superior reward (grape) for the same amount of ef-
fort, (iii) an Effort Control Test, designed to elucidate the role of effort, in which 
the partner received the higher-value grape without any task-performance, and 
(iv) a Food Control Test, designed to elucidate the effect of the presence of the 
reward on subject behavior, in which grapes were visible but not given to another 
capuchin.
Fig. 5.7 shows that individuals who received lower value rewards showed 
both passive negative reactions (e.g. refusing to exchange the token, ignoring 
the reward) and active negative reactions (e.g. throwing out the token or the 
reward). Compared to tests in which both received identical rewards, the capu-
chins were far less willing to complete the exchange or accept the reward if their 
partner received a better deal (Brosnan & de Waal 2003). Capuchins refused to 
participate even more frequently if their partner did not have to work (exchange) 
to get the better reward, but was handed it for ‘free’. Of course, there is always 
the possibility that subjects were just reacting to the presence of the higher value 
food, and that what the partner received (free or not) did not affect their reac-
tion. However, in the Food Control Test, in which the higher-value reward was 
visible but not given to another capuchin, the reaction to the presence of this 
high-valued food decreased significantly over the course of testing, which is the 
opposite change from that seen when the high value reward went to an actual 
partner. In the latter case, the frequency of refusals to participate rose over the 
Fig. 5.6. A monkey in the test chamber returns 
a token to the experimenter with her right hand 
while steadying the human hand with her left 
hand. Her partner looks on. The capuchin does 
not see the reward she is to receive prior to 
successful exchange. Drawing by Gwen Bragg 
and Frans de Waal after a video still.

102
Frans B.M. de Waal, Sarah F. Bosnan
course of testing (Brosnan & de Waal 2004). While it has been suggested that 
these differences are not significantly variable (Wynne 2004), it is important to 
note that: (i) some reaction is always expected to the mere presence of a higher 
value reward, as it is inherently more desirable and (ii) the decrease in the level 
of response when no partner receives the reward is significantly different than 
when the partner does, demonstrating that the capuchins make the distinction 
between the two situations (Brosnan & de Waal 2004c).
Whereas the capuchins’ reactions to this situation may not be identical to 
those of people (Henrich 2004), they fit well with the proposed evolutionary tra-
jectory of inequity aversion (Brosnan & de Waal 2004). In fact, like humans, 
capuchin monkeys seem to measure reward in relative terms, comparing their 
own rewards with those available, and their own efforts with those of others. 
Although our data cannot elucidate the precise motivations underlying these 
responses, one possibility is that monkeys, like humans, are guided by social 
emotions. These emotions, known as ‘passions’ by economists, guide human 
reactions to the efforts, gains, losses and attitudes of others (Hirschleifer 1987, 
Frank 1988, Sanfey et al. 2003). As opposed to primates marked by despotic hi-
erarchies, tolerant species with well-developed food-sharing and cooperation, 
such as capuchins, may hold emotionally-charged expectations about reward 
distribution and social exchange that lead them to dislike inequity.
5.4
Summary and conclusions
Although theories about the evolution of cooperation and reciprocal altruism 
are well established, proximate mechanisms have been little studied. There 
probably exist several levels of reciprocity, ranging from the more complex end 
of the spectrum, such as the kind originally proposed by Trivers (1971), which 
Fig. 5.7. Mean percentage + SEM of failures to exchange for females across the four test types. 
Black bars (RR) represent the proportion of non-exchanges due to refusals to accept the reward, 
white bars (NT) represent those due to refusals to return the token. SEM is for combined non-ex-
changes. ET = Equity Test, IT = Inequity Test, EC = Effort Control, FC = Food Control. The y-axis shows 
the percentage of non-exchanges. From Brosnan & de Waal (2003).

103
5 Simple and complex reciprocity in primates
involves obligations and punishment of cheaters, to reciprocity merely reflecting 
social symmetries. The evolutionary perspective simply postulates that the cost 
of help given be offset by the benefits of help received, which can be achieved in 
multiple ways, all of which fall under the general rubric of reciprocal altruism. 
Two decades of research on coalitions, grooming and food-sharing in macaques, 
chimpanzees and capuchin monkeys has allowed us to gauge the cognitive level 
of cooperation. Table 5.2 proposes three potential mechanisms, but we cannot 
exclude the possibility of more.
The cognitively least demanding explanation of reciprocal altruism is that in-
dividuals interact based on symmetrical features of dyadic relationships, which 
cause both parties to behave similarly to each other (de Waal & Luttrell 1988, de 
Waal 1992a). This mechanism requires no scorekeeping since reciprocation is 
based on pre-existing features of the relationship, such as kinship, mutual as-
sociation, and similarities in age or sex. It produces reciprocity without a strong 
contingency between given and received behavior. A certain mutuality in the 
exchange of benefits is probably required for the stability of any social relation-
ship, but this can be achieved without careful record keeping. All that is required 
is an aversion to major, lasting imbalances in incoming and outgoing benefits. 
We believe that such moderately conditional mutual aid is common in primates, 
including people, not only among kin but also among close friends and associ-
ates. The prediction, then, is that the contingency between given and received 
benefits decreases with closeness of the relationship. Conversely, the impact of a 
single act on future exchanges will be greatest in more distant relationships, as 
found by de Waal (1997a) in chimpanzees. Similar issues have been addressed 
in close versus distant human relationships by Clark & Mills (1979) and Clark & 
Grote (2003).
Table 5.2. Three poximate mechanisms proposed by de Waal & Luttrell (1988) and de Waal 
(2000) to explain reciprocal distributions of benefits over dyadic relationships. The mecha-
nisms are arranged from the least to the most cognitively demanding.
Mechanism
Catch phrase
Definition
Symmetry-based 
reciprocity
‘We’re buddies’
Symmetrical relationship charac-
teristics prompt similar behavior in 
both dyadic directions: low degree 
of contingency in close relation-
ships
Attitudinal reciprocity
‘If you’re nice, 
I’ll be nice.’
Parties mirror each other’s social 
attitudes: high degree of 
immediate contingency
Calculated reciprocity
‘What have you done 
for me lately?’
Scorekeeping of given and 
received benefits: high degree 
of delayed contingency

104
Frans B.M. de Waal, Sarah F. Bosnan
The second proposed mechanism is attitudinal reciprocity in which an indi-
vidual’s willingness to cooperate cofluctuates with the attitude the partner shows 
or has recently shown (de Waal 2000c). This ‘If you’re nice, I’ll be nice’ principle 
divorces cooperative interactions from the symmetrical state of the relationship, 
making them contingent upon the partner’s immediately preceding behavior. 
The principle appears to approximate mutualism, but with the difference that 
both parties do not benefit at the same time. The involvement of memory and 
scorekeeping seems rather minimal, as the critical variable is general social dis-
position rather than specific costs and benefits of exchanged behavior.
The third and final mechanism is calculated reciprocity, in which individu-
als reciprocate on a behavioral one-on-one basis with a significant time interval. 
This requires memory of previous events, some degree of scorekeeping, part-
ner-specific contingency between favors given and received, and perhaps also 
punishment of cheaters. The best evidence for this ‘What have you done for me 
lately?’ principle of reciprocity in non-human animals concerns, perhaps not co-
incidentally, our closest relative, the chimpanzee (de Waal 1997a). Whereas ac-
tive punishment was not demonstrated in chimpanzees, we did find aggressive 
protest against partners trying to obtain services without previous payment. In 
addition, the demonstrated principle of exchange entails passive punishment in 
that it predicts forfeited services for those who fail to provide services them-
selves.
It is logical to expect that calculated reciprocity, with its higher cognitive 
requirements, will be found only in a few species whereas cognitively less de-
manding forms will be more widespread. For any species for which reciprocal 
exchange is reported, we suggest that the default mechanism is symmetry-based. 
The burden of proof rests on those who assume more complex mechanisms. With 
respect to primates, it could be argued that we know enough, based on studies 
such as those reported here, to consider complex exchange within their capacity. 
This sounds reasonable, but should never be taken to mean that these animals 
necessarily rely on these capacities all the time. So as to reduce memory over-
load, non-human primates, and probably humans as well, can most of the time 
be expected to follow processes simpler than calculated reciprocity. We therefore 
recommend that correlational studies on primate behavior always be comple-
mented with sequential ones, in which behavior is tracked over time. Such stud-
ies allow a more careful monitoring of exchange, including the establishment of 
contingency between given and received behavior. Such monitoring is necessary 
given that seemingly complex levels of reciprocity can easily be explained by a 
combination of symmetry-based and attitudinal reciprocity.
One factor that has made scholars skeptical about reciprocity among unre-
lated individuals has been a concern about how such behavior could possibly 
have evolved in the face of its high initial costs. It has recently been suggested, 
however, that cooperation could evolve if the initial investment were minimal 
after which cooperators increased their investment contingent upon increasing 
confidence in the relationship (Roberts & Sherratt 1998). All of the above forms 
of reciprocity have been found in relatively low-cost exchanges and may well 
have provided the evolutionary starting point for more risky and costly forms of 
reciprocity. Our findings suggest that primates keep a close eye on exchanges, 

105
5 Simple and complex reciprocity in primates
respond immediately if the outcome of cooperation risks being asymmetrical, 
and react negatively if they receive less than others. These findings are consis-
tent with the view that cooperation is not pursued purely for the probability that 
it will be rewarded but rather as a social enterprise in which payoffs are com-
pared between individuals and decisions are based on the likelihood of equitable 
outcomes. The study of proximate mechanisms thus enriches our view, adding a 
cognitive component that seems more variable than commonly assumed.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful for constructive comments from John Mitani, Peter Kappeler 
and one anonymous referee. The authors thank the technicians, animal care 
staff and undergraduate students who helped during their projects. The capu-
chin work was supported by the National Science Foundation (IBN-0077706) to 
the first author, and a grant from the National Institutes of Health (RR-00165) to 
the Yerkes Regional Primate Research Center. The Center is fully accredited by 
the American Association for Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care.

Reciprocal exchange in chimpanzees 
and other primates
John C. Mitani
6.1
Introduction
A central problem in the study of animal behavior concerns why individuals 
cooperate and exchange altruistic acts (Dugatkin 1997). Considerable theoreti-
cal attention has focused on explaining the evolution of cooperation and altru-
ism in taxa as diverse as insects and primates (Hamilton 1964a, 1964b, Trivers 
1971, Brown 1983). Empirically, cooperation among males generates substantial 
interest because the resource over which they primarily compete, females, is not 
easily divided and shared (Trivers 1972).
Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) have played a significant role in discus-
sions of cooperative behavior among males. Chimpanzees live in ‘unit groups’ 
or ‘communities’ whose membership is open due to female dispersal (Nishida 
1968, Nishida & Kawanaka 1972, Pusey 1979, Goodall 1986, Boesch & Boesch-
Achermann 2000). Philopatric male chimpanzees form strong social bonds and 
cooperate to compete with conspecifics between and within communities. Males 
engage in boundary patrols to defend their territories against neighbors (Good-
all et al. 1979, Boesch & Boesch-Achermann 2000, Watts & Mitani 2001). Inter-
actions between individuals of different communities are typically hostile, and 
during these males some times join forces to kill others (Wilson & Wrangham 
2002). Within communities, male chimpanzees cooperate by grooming and by 
forming short-term coalitions and long-term alliances (Simpson 1973, Nishida 
1983, Nishida & Hosaka 1996, Watts 1998, Watts 2000b). In coalitions, two or 
more individuals direct aggression toward others, while alliances involve endur-
ing cooperative relationships between animals (de Waal & Harcourt 1992). Male 
chimpanzees also hunt vertebrate prey and frequently share meat, a scarce and 
valuable resource, with conspecifics (Boesch & Boesch 1989, Nishida et al. 1992, 
Mitani & Watts 2001).
The extent and diversity of cooperative behavior displayed by chimpanzees 
provide the basis for investigating reciprocity in acts given and received between 
pairs of individuals. Studies conducted in captivity reveal that chimpanzees 
exchange commodities that are both similar and different in kind (de Waal & 
Brosnan, this volume). For example, chimpanzees groom each other recipro-
cally and exchange grooming for food at the Arnhem Zoo and Yerkes Primate 
Center, respectively (de Waal 1989, 1997, Hemelrijk & Ek 1991). Until recently, 
evaluating these observations has been difficult given the absence of compara-
ble data from chimpanzees living in their natural environmental and social set-
Chapter 6

108
John C. Mitani
tings. Our recent observations of an unusually large community of chimpanzees 
at Ngogo, Kibale National Park, Uganda, have furnished an ideal opportunity 
to investigate cooperation and reciprocity between males (Mitani & Watts 1999, 
2001, Mitani et al. 2000, 2002b, Watts 2000b, 2002). In this paper, I present new 
analyses that indicate male chimpanzees at Ngogo trade services in the contexts 
of grooming, coalition formation, and meat-sharing. I compare these findings 
with those reported earlier from this same community and from other anthro-
poid primates. I conclude by considering the processes that might account for 
the evolution of reciprocal exchange in wild chimpanzees.
6.2
Methods
6.2.1
Study site and subjects
I observed chimpanzees at the Ngogo study site in Kibale National Park, Ugan-
da, for 13 months over four years between 1999 and 2002: June–August 1999; 
May–August 2000; June–August 2001; May–July 2002. Ngogo lies at an interface 
between lowland and montane rain forest and is covered primarily with moist, 
evergreen forest. Ghiglieri (1984), Butynski (1990) and Struhsaker (1997) pro-
vide detailed descriptions of the Ngogo study area.
The size of chimpanzee communities ranges from 19–95 individuals at other 
sites (mean = 42, SD = 26, n = 11 communities; data from Wrangham 2000). In 
contrast, the Ngogo chimpanzee community is unusually large and contained 
approximately 150 individuals between 1999 and 2002. I restricted observations 
and analyses to the 22 adult male chimpanzees that were present throughout the 
four years of study. We have worked with the Ngogo chimpanzees since 1995 and 
do not know the precise age of any of the adult males. To derive estimates of the 
ages of males, I used morphological and behavioral criteria to classify them into 
three categories originally established and defined by Goodall (1968): young 
adult males (16–20-years-old); prime and middle-aged adult males (21–33-years-
old); and old adult males (≥33-years-old).
6.2.2
Behavioral observations and statistical analyses
I sampled the behavior of target males during hour-long periods. Targets were 
selected on a pseudorandom basis, with priority given to those individuals who 
had been sampled infrequently. While following targets, I recorded their asso-
ciations with other males and conducted scan samples at 10-minute intervals. 
During scans, I noted grooming activity between targets and other males. I re-
corded coalitions between males ad libitum whenever two or more individuals 
directed aggression toward third parties. I also recorded meat-sharing between 
males ad libitum during hunting events involving mammalian prey. Subordi-
nate chimpanzees give a distinctive call, the pant grunt, to higher-ranking indi-

109
6 Reciprocal exchange in chimpanzees and other primates
viduals (Bygott 1979, Hayaki et al. 1989). I recorded these calls as they occurred 
and used them to rank males. The analyses presented here are based on 1681 
hours of observations with each of the 22 males followed a minimum of 68 hours 
(mean ± SD = 76 ± 8).
I employed Kr matrix correlation tests (Hemelrijk 1990a) to investigate reci-
procity in grooming given and received between males. I performed similar tests 
to examine reciprocity in coalition formation and meat-sharing. Matrix correla-
tion tests furnish information regarding the pattern of interaction between male 
chimpanzees at a group level. To examine whether acts were exchanged evenly 
between individuals within dyads, I constructed reciprocity indices for groom-
ing, coalition formation and meat-sharing. Reciprocity indices were created by 
computing the cumulative binomial probabilities that two males initiated in-
teractions with each other in samples of dyadic grooming, coalition formation 
and meat-sharing events. An index for each pair was calculated as the ratio of 
the two probabilities, with the probability of the individual who initiated fewer 
events placed in the numerator (Silk et al. 1999). The reciprocity index ranges 
from zero to one. Zero values reflect cases where interactions are always initi-
ated by one individual of the pair, while values of one indicate that interactions 
are perfectly balanced.
I used the tau Kr matrix partial correlation procedure (Hemelrijk 1990b) 
to test the null hypothesis that correlations between the number of acts given 
and received were unaffected by the amount of time males spent together. For 
these tests, I constructed a third matrix of association frequencies between dy-
adic pairs of males based on observations made during following episodes of 
target individuals. I performed two comparisons, testing reciprocity in groom-
ing given and grooming received, and support given and support received while 
controlling for association frequency. I conducted an additional test examining 
the relationship between meat given and meat received while controlling for the 
number of times males participated together in hunts.
I carried out three additional sets of matrix partial correlation analyses to 
investigate reciprocity in behavior while controlling for the effects of other po-
tentially confounding variables. In the first set of analyses, I examined the rela-
tionship between the number of acts given and received while holding the effect 
of male age constant. For these analyses, I used an age matrix containing values 
of ones and zeros that represented pairs of males of the same and different age 
classes, respectively. I employed the distribution of pant grunts to create a 22 × 
22 dominance matrix and used the MatMan software package (Version 1.0; de 
Vries et al. 1993) to assign ranks to males. In a second set of analyses, I built a 
male dominance rank matrix in which the ranks of males were entered in col-
umns (Hemelrijk 1990a). I then calculated correlations between grooming, sup-
port and meat-sharing while controlling for male rank. In a final set of analyses, 
I performed similar tests of reciprocity controlling for male genetic relatedness. 
For these, I created a matrix consisting of ones and zeros that reflected mito-
chondrial DNA (mtDNA) haplotype identity and non-identity between males, 
respectively. MtDNA haplotypes were constructed using information derived 
from sequences of a 1038 bp region of the mitochondrial D loop (Mitani et al. 
2002b). The 22 males possessed 11 different haplotypes. Six males had unique 

110
John C. Mitani
haplotypes. Two other haplotypes were shared by pairs of males, while three 
more males displayed another haplotype. A group of six males shared the elev-
enth haplotype.
In the following, I use the same data in matrix correlation tests to perform 
multiple tests. To reduce the probability of committing Type I errors, I employed 
a sequential Bonferroni procedure adjusting the criteria of significance down-
ward for each family of tests (Holm 1979). For k tests, I set the adjusted alpha 
level, α’, to α’ = α / / (1 + k – i), where α = 0.05 is the overall experiment-wise 
error rate and i is the ith sequential test from first to last. I considered a family 
of tests to involve a set of comparisons that evaluated the same general hypoth-
esis. For example, I regarded tests of reciprocity in grooming, meat-sharing, and 
coalition formation as one set of tests, while another family of tests investigated 
whether acts given and received were affected by association frequency.
6.3
Results
6.3.1
Reciprocity in grooming, coalition formation and meat-sharing
Adult male chimpanzees at Ngogo groomed each other reciprocally at a group 
level. There was a significant correlation between the amount of grooming giv-
en and received between males (Tau Kr = 0.35, p = 0.0002, α’ = 0.02; Table 6.1). 
Ngogo males also displayed reciprocity in coalition formation and meat-shar-
ing (coalitions: Tau Kr = 0.44, p = 0.0002, α’ = 0.025; meat-sharing: Tau Kr = 
0.28, p = 0.0002, α’ = 0.05; Table 6.1). The pattern of reciprocity in grooming, 
coalition formation and meat-sharing characterized the majority of all indi-
Table 6.1. Matrix correlation results of reciprocity in grooming, coalitionary support, 
and meat-sharing. Two-tailed p values derived from 10000 permutations of the data are 
shown.
Tau Kr
p
Grooming given and received
0.35
0.0002
Support given and received
0.44
0.0002
Meat given and received
0.28
0.0002
Grooming given and received, 
association controlled
0.33
0.0002
Support given and received, 
association controlled
0.34
0.0002
Meat given and received, 
joint hunting participation controlled
0.25
0.0002

111
6 Reciprocal exchange in chimpanzees and other primates
vidual males in the group, with most (18–21 of 22) showing positive row-wise 
correlations.
While results of matrix correlation tests reveal that male chimpanzees re-
ciprocated grooming, coalition formation and meat-sharing at the group level, 
they do not indicate whether acts were balanced within dyads. Additional analy-
ses failed to reject the hypothesis that individuals exchange all three behaviors 
evenly within dyads. Grooming took place between 166 of 231 possible dyads 
(72%). Reciprocity indices in these 166 pairs ranged from zero to one, with many 
clustering around the middle of the distribution (Fig. 6.1a). Only in a very few 
cases (14/166 = 8%) did one male initiate significantly more than one-half of 
Fig. 6.1. Frequency distribution of 
reciprocity indices for (a) grooming, 
(b) coalition formation and (c) meat-
sharing. Values near zero indicate that 
one male initiated more acts than the 
other within dyads, while values near 
one indicate that the exchange of be-
haviors was evenly balanced between 
males.

112
John C. Mitani
all dyadic grooming bouts (Binomial test, p < 0.05). Male chimpanzees formed 
coalitions in 96 dyads or slightly less than half of all those possible (42%). Reci-
procity indices again clustered in the middle of the distribution around 0.5 
(Fig. 6.1b). Coalition formation was balanced between males in the vast majority 
of all dyads. One male initiated significantly more than one-half of all coalitions 
in only one of the 96 dyads (Binomial test, p < 0.5). Males shared meat between 
themselves in about one half of all possible dyads (120/231 = 52%). Meat was 
typically shared evenly between males within each dyad, with several reciproc-
ity indices at or near one (Fig. 6.1c). In a single case, one male shared with an-
other individual significantly more than one half of all times meat was swapped 
between the two (Binomial test, p < 0.05).
Given the fission-fusion nature of their society, chimpanzees do not as-
sociate with all members of their community equally often. Thus, reciprocal 
exchanges could result as byproducts of association if males directed behav-
iors toward those with whom they remained in contact frequently (de Waal & 
Luttrell 1988, Hemelrijk & Ek 1991). Additional analyses did not support this 
suggestion. Partial Kr tests revealed that correlations between grooming given 
and grooming received, and support given and support received remained sig-
Table 6.2. Matrix partial correlation results of reciprocity in grooming, coaltionary sup-
port, and meat-sharing. Two-tailed p values derived from 10000 permutations of the data 
are shown.
Tau Kr
p
Grooming given and received, 
age controlled
0.34
0.0002
Grooming given and received, 
rank controlled
0.34
0.0002
Grooming given and received, 
mtDNA haplotype controlled
0.34
0.0002
Support given and received, 
age controlled
0.41
0.0002
Support given and received, 
rank controlled
0.39
0.0002
Support given and received, 
mtDNA haplotype controlled
0.41
0.0002
Meat given and received, 
age controlled
0.27
0.0002
Meat given and received, 
rank controlled
0.21
0.0034
Meat given and received, 
mtDNA haplotype controlled
0.27
0.0002

113
6 Reciprocal exchange in chimpanzees and other primates
nificant after controlling for association frequency (p = 0.0002 for both tests; 
Table 6.1). Similarly, the correlation between meat given and meat received held 
after controlling for the number of times individuals were together at hunts 
(p = 0.0014; Table 6.1).
Before concluding that giving depends on receiving, it is important to ex-
clude other variables that might confound the relationship (de Waal & Luttrell 
1988, deWaal 1997, Hemelrijk & Ek 1991). In rhesus macaques, for example, simi-
larity in age and rank affect association patterns (de Waal & Luttrell 1986) lead-
ing to the expectation that reciprocity in behavior may result from exchanges 
between closely bonded individuals who share common characteristics. In fact, 
recent observations indicate that at Ngogo males who are similar in age and rank 
tend to engage in coalitions and to share meat more than one would expect by 
chance (Mitani et al. 2002b). Nevertheless, results of partial Kr tests revealed 
that reciprocity in grooming, support and meat-sharing persisted after control-
ling for the effects of male age and rank (p ≤ 0.003 for all six tests; Table 6.2). 
In addition, reciprocity in all three behaviors was still evident after holding the 
effects of genetic relatedness between males constant (p = 0.0002 for all three 
tests; Table 6.2).
6.3.2
Reciprocal exchange of different behaviors
The preceding results indicate that male chimpanzees at Ngogo exchange ser-
vices that are similar in kind. Additional analyses show that males at Ngogo 
also trade services in different currencies. A positive and significant correlation 
existed between grooming given and support received (Tau Kr = 0.26, p = 0.0006; 
α’ = 0.002; Table 6.3). This relationship persisted after controlling for the effects 
of association frequency, male age, rank and genetic relatedness (p ≤ 0.0056 for 
all four tests; Table 6.3). Males also traded grooming for the meat that they obtain 
in hunts. A significant correlation existed between grooming given and meat re-
ceived (Tau Kr = 0.30, p = 0.0002, α’ = 0.025; Table 6.3). The correlation between 
these two variables held after controlling for the effects of association frequency, 
joint participation in hunts, male age, rank and genetic relatedness (p ≤ 0.001 
for all five tests; Table 6.3). Male chimpanzees at Ngogo also exchanged meat for 
support (Tau Kr = 0.27, p = 0.0002, α’ = 0.05; Table 6.3). As in the prior examples, 
this correlation persisted after controlling for the effects of several other poten-
tially confounding variables (p ≤ 0.0008 for all five tests; Table 6.3).
6.3.3
Comparisons with previous studies at Ngogo
The results presented here are consistent with those obtained from previous 
studies at Ngogo. Using independently-collected observations, Watts (2000b, 
2002) has shown that the Ngogo males reciprocate grooming and coalitionary 
support. These correlations hold after controlling for the effects of male domi-
nance rank and association frequency (Watts 2000b, 2002). In other studies, we 
have reported that males at Ngogo share meat reciprocally (Mitani & Watts 1999, 

114
John C. Mitani
Table 6.3. Matrix correlation results of reciprocal exchange of different behaviors. Two-
tailed p values derived from 10000 permutations of the data are shown.
Tau Kr
p
Grooming given and support received
0.26
0.0006
Grooming given and support received,
association controlled
0.21
0.0056
Grooming given and support received,
age controlled
0.25
0.0008
Grooming given and support received,
rank controlled
0.21
0.0030
Grooming given and support received,
mtDNA haplotype controlled
0.25
0.0008
Grooming given and meat received
0.30
0.0002
Grooming given and meat received,
association controlled
0.27
0.0006
Grooming given and meat received,
joint hunting participation controlled
0.28
0.001
Grooming given and meat received,
age controlled
0.29
0.0002
Grooming given and meat received,
rank controlled
0.23
0.0028
Grooming given and meat received,
mtDNA haplotype controlled
0.29
0.0004
Meat given and support received
0.27
0.0002
Meat given and support received,
association controlled
0.27
0.0002
Meat given and support received,
joint hunting participation controlled
0.24
0.0008
Meat given and support received,
age controlled
0.26
0.0004
Meat given and support received,
rank controlled
0.24
0.0002
Meat given and support received,
mtDNA haplotype controlled
0.26
0.0004

115
6 Reciprocal exchange in chimpanzees and other primates
2001a). Here I show that this correlation cannot be attributed to the effects of 
association frequency or joint male presence at hunts.
The preceding results also replicate previously reported observations of re-
ciprocal exchange of different behaviors between male chimpanzees at Ngogo. 
Watts (2000b, 2002) has found that males at Ngogo exchange grooming for co-
alitionary support. This result holds after controlling for several potential con-
founds, including reciprocity in grooming, and in support and relationships 
between grooming, support and male rank (Watts 2002). Elsewhere, we have 
shown that the Ngogo males trade meat for agonistic support (Mitani & Watts 
2001). Based on the preceding analyses, I now demonstrate that this relation-
ship is not the byproduct of association frequency between males or their joint 
presence at hunts. Given these findings, it is perhaps not surprising that males at 
Ngogo additionally exchange grooming for meat. The observations that I pres-
ent here are also consistent with our prior studies that indicate genetic related-
ness as assayed by mtDNA haplotype sharing does not have any consistent effect 
on patterns of social behavior and relationships among the Ngogo chimpanzees 
(Mitani et al. 2000, 2002b).
6.4
Discussion
These new observations and analyses confirm those obtained from prior re-
search and show that male chimpanzees living in an unusually large community 
at Ngogo cooperate in several behavioral contexts. Cooperation involves the re-
ciprocal exchange of acts in similar and different currencies. At Ngogo, males 
reciprocate grooming, support and meat-sharing at the group level. The ex-
change of grooming, support and meat was evenly balanced within dyads; only 
rarely did one individual in a pair initiate more interactions than the other. Male 
chimpanzees at Ngogo also reciprocally exchange grooming for support, groom-
ing for meat, and meat for support. These exchanges are unaffected by several 
potentially confounding variables that include association frequency, male age, 
rank and genetic relatedness.
6.4.1
Comparisons with other primates
Individuals in many Old World anthropoid primates reciprocally exchange be-
haviors that are similar in kind. The evidence is strongest and most extensive for 
reciprocity in coalitionary support and in grooming. Like male chimpanzees, 
individuals in other primate species engage in coalitionary behavior (Harcourt 
& de Waal 1992). In several species of macaques, individuals provide coalition-
ary support reciprocally (de Waal & Luttrell 1988, Silk 1992b, Widdig et al. 2000). 
Reciprocity in support has also been reported in vervet monkeys and gorillas 
(Hunte & Horrocks 1986, Watts 1997). Primates spend an extraordinary amount 
of time grooming each other (Dunbar 1988), and reciprocity in grooming has 

116
John C. Mitani
been documented in several cercopithecine primates, including Japanese ma-
caques, blue monkeys and chacma baboons (Muroyama 1991, Rowell et al. 1991, 
Barrett et al. 1999, Silk et al. 1999). Food-sharing between adults occurs only 
rarely in primates, limiting the possibilities for reciprocal food exchange in this 
taxon. Some New World monkeys regularly share food with conspecifics, but 
investigations have produced mixed results with respect to reciprocity in this 
behavior. Captive golden lion tamarins share food spontaneously with others 
but do not do so reciprocally (Rapaport 2001). In contrast, recent experiments 
with cotton-top tamarins indicate that animals give food to genetically unre-
lated conspecifics, who have consistently shared with them in the past; these 
same animals fail to give food to those who have behaved selfishly by not sharing 
(Hauser et al. 2003). Similarly, brown capuchin monkeys share food reciprocally 
under captive experimental conditions (de Waal 2000c).
Some of the best evidence that primates reciprocally trade services in dif-
ferent currencies comes from studies of captive chimpanzees. Chimpanzees at 
the Yerkes Primate Center were more likely to share food with others after being 
groomed by them (de Waal 1989, 1997a). There is a paucity of other examples that 
demonstrate primates other than chimpanzees reciprocally exchange behaviors 
differing in kind. Studies of captive bonnet macaques reveal that males support 
those who groom them and intervene against those who intervened against them 
(Silk 1992b). Likewise, individuals trade coalitionary support for grooming in 
captive long-tailed macaques (Hemelrijk 1994). In the wild, unrelated female pa-
tas monkeys appear to exchange grooming for allomothering (Muroyama 1994). 
Considerable controversy exists over some examples of primates trading servic-
es in different currencies. Seyfarth (1980) reported that female vervet monkeys 
exchange grooming for agonistic support. The apparent pattern of exchange, 
however, may be due to relationships between these two variables and addi-
tional confounds. For example, Hemelrijk (1990b) showed that the relationship 
between grooming given and support received in vervets vanished after control-
ling for the effect of dominance rank. Female vervets directed their grooming 
toward high-ranking individuals preferentially, while these same high-ranking 
animals supported others frequently. Similarly, Vervaecke et al. (2000) reported 
a significant relationship between grooming given and support received in a 
captive group of bonobos, but this correlation disappeared after controlling for 
the effect of dominance rank.
Several other studies do not support the hypothesis that primates recipro-
cally exchange different behaviors (Henzi & Barrett 1999). Female white-faced 
capuchin monkeys fail to exchange grooming for coalitionary support (Perry 
1996). In captive golden lion tamarins, animals exchanged grooming for coali-
tionary support, but this occurred in only one of three groups (Rapaport 2001). 
Among free-ranging and captive macaques, females do not provide agonistic 
support to those who groom them (Silk 1982, de Waal & Luttrell 1988, Kapsalis 
& Berman 1996, Matheson & Bernstein 2000). Even in captive chimpanzees, evi-
dence for the reciprocal exchange of different behaviors is not always consistent. 
Hemelrijk & Ek (1991) found a significant positive correlation between groom-
ing given and support received during periods with a clear alpha male, but these 
relationships disappeared after controlling for other potentially confounding 

117
6 Reciprocal exchange in chimpanzees and other primates
associations. In sum, there is good evidence that primates reciprocally exchange 
behaviors that are similar in kind. It remains unclear, however, whether pri-
mates regularly engage in the reciprocal exchange of different behaviors.
6.4.2
Evolutionary processes underlying reciprocity in wild chimpanzees
Male chimpanzees are thought to derive important fitness benefits by develop-
ing social bonds with each other and cooperating (Riss & Goodall 1977, Nishida 
1983, Nishida et al. 1992, Nishida & Hosaka 1996, Watts 1998, Mitani & Watts 
2001). For example, coalitionary support is often necessary for males to achieve 
and maintain a high dominance rank (Riss & Goodall 1977, Nishida 1983, Nishi-
da et al. 1992). High male rank in turn is related to mating success (Nishida 1983, 
Watts 1998, Watts & Mitani 2001). Given the importance of these coalitions, 
male chimpanzees appear to cultivate social relationships to obtain this valu-
able social service. The results presented here are consistent with our previous 
findings that indicate male chimpanzees exchange meat, a scarce and valuable 
resource, for support in agonistic contests (Mitani & Watts 2001). To develop and 
maintain their social relationships, male chimpanzees cooperate by exchang-
ing behavioral acts that not only differ in kind but that are also similar. For 
instance, male chimpanzees display well-differentiated grooming relationships, 
and the preceding analyses are consistent with prior studies that show males at 
Ngogo groom each other reciprocally (Watts 2000b, 2002). These results also 
accord with observations of chimpanzees at other sites; reciprocity in grooming 
between males has been documented in the Taï chimpanzees (Boesch & Boesch-
Achermannn 2000).
While reciprocal exchanges of grooming, support and meat-sharing are likely 
to have important fitness consequences for male chimpanzees, the evolutionary 
processes that account for them remain unclear. The preceding results indicate 
that male chimpanzees balance the number of behavioral acts that they give and 
receive, but they do not reveal the processes that have produced these recipro-
cal exchanges over evolutionary time. Three well-known evolutionary processes 
that have been used to account for reciprocity include kin selection, reciprocal 
altruism and mutualism (Dugatkin 1997).
Kin selection has historically been invoked to explain the evolution of co-
operative relationships among philopatric male chimpanzees (e.g. Morin et al. 
1994). Thus far, our findings from Ngogo are not consistent with this explana-
tion. Using mtDNA haplotype sharing to assay genetic relatedness between indi-
viduals, we have previously shown that kinship is a poor predictor of who coop-
erates with whom (Mitani et al. 2000, 2002b). The results presented here indicate 
that reciprocity in grooming, support and meat-sharing persist after taking into 
account the effect of mtDNA genetic relatedness. These mtDNA data are admit-
tedly only crude assays of kinship, and we are currently working to obtain better 
estimates of relatedness using data derived from nuclear DNA and Y chromo-
some markers (Langergraber et al., in prep.). With these data in hand, we will be 
in a better position to examine the role of kin selection in the evolution of male 
chimpanzee social behavior at Ngogo.

118
John C. Mitani
Reciprocal altruism occurs if individuals restrict their help to those who 
aid them in return (Trivers 1971). Though sometimes cited as an evolutionary 
mechanism leading to cooperation (e.g. Packer 1977, Seyfarth & Cheney 1984), 
potential examples of reciprocal altruism are often shown to involve mutualism 
where both partners benefit (Bercovitch 1988, Noe 1992, Clements & Stephens 
1995). Theoretical analyses of reciprocal altruism emphasize the contingent na-
ture of interactions; in situations where partners defect, reciprocity dissolves 
(Axelrod & Hamilton 1981). The results presented here document reciprocity us-
ing correlational procedures applied to the behavior of several individuals at a 
group level over the course of four years. Additional analyses indicate that both 
individuals typically contribute, with exchanges only rarely unbalanced within 
dyads. Though consistent with reciprocal altruism, these results cannot be used 
to test the hypothesis that reciprocal exchanges between male chimpanzees at 
Ngogo have evolved as a result of this process. A rigorous test would involve as-
sessing the contingent nature of a male’s interactions with his partners. Such an 
analysis is more likely to be derived from carefully-designed experiments in the 
laboratory where the temporal sequence of interactions between specific pairs 
of males can be monitored in detail. Experiments conducted by de Waal (1997a) 
and Hauser et al. (2003) provide good models of this kind of work and some 
of the strongest evidence for the evolution of cooperative relationships through 
reciprocal altruism.
Mutualism occurs in situations where actors and receivers benefit immedi-
ately through interaction and has been proposed to explain patterns of coali-
tionary behavior, grooming and meat-sharing in primates. Male barbary ma-
caques show reciprocity in coalition formation, but most interventions are by 
males who outrank both opponents and risk few costs by doing so (Widdig et al. 
2000). In this case, interveners reinforce their own dominance ranks, and coali-
tionary behavior represents a low cost behavior in which both partners obtain 
immediate benefits. Henzi & Barrett (1999) have suggested that female primates 
trade grooming for the mutual benefits that grooming itself provides over the 
short term and that time matching and reciprocation during the same grooming 
bout will be common. Recent observations of female chacma baboons furnish 
support for this latter hypothesis (Barrett et al. 1999). Finally, Stevens & Gilby 
(2004) argue that meat-sharing in primates frequently involves coercion; here 
sharers are forced to accept an immediate cost such that the net benefit of coop-
erating exceeds that of behaving selfishly by not sharing.
Recent observations support the hypothesis that male coalitions at Ngogo 
are relatively low risk behaviors; the vast majority of coalitions there form be-
tween males who outrank their opponents (Watts 2002). Additional work will 
be necessary to examine whether male chimpanzees at Ngogo time match and 
reciprocate their grooming efforts. Further study is also required to investigate 
the extent to which meat is shared under pressure. In sum, investigations into 
the evolutionary mechanisms underlying reciprocal exchanges in chimpanzees 
and other primates remain a fertile ground for future research.

119
6 Reciprocal exchange in chimpanzees and other primates
Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Peter Kappeler for inviting me to participate in the Göttinger 
Freilandtage Conference and to contribute to this volume. My fieldwork has been 
sponsored by the Ugandan National Parks, Uganda National Council for Science 
and Technology, and the Makerere University. I thank G. I. Basuta, J. Kasenene 
and the staff of the Makerere University Biological Field Station for logistic sup-
port. Comments by R. Noe, C. van Schaik, and an anonymous reviewer improved 
the manuscript. S. Amsler, C. Businge, K. Langergraber, J. Lwanga, A. Magoba, 
G. Mbabazi, G. Mutabazi, L. Ndagizi, H. Sherrow, S. Teelen, J. Tibisimwa, A. Tu-
musiime, M. Wakefield and D. Watts provided help in the field. My field research 
at Ngogo has been supported by grants from the Detroit Zoological Institute, 
L.S.B. Leakey Foundation, National Geographic Society, the NSF (SBR-9253590 
and BCS-0215622), University of Michigan, and the Wenner-Gren Foundation to 
J. C. Mitani and L.S.B. Leakey Foundation and National Geographic Society to 
David Watts.

Causes, consequences 
and mechanisms of reconciliation: 
the role of cooperation
Filippo Aureli, Colleen Schaffner
7.1
Introduction
The term reconciliation was first used by de Waal & van Roosmalen (1979) to 
describe a specific pattern of post-conflict behavior of the chimpanzees housed 
at the Burgers’ Zoo in Arnhem, the Netherlands. Reconciliation was used as a 
heuristic label for the friendly exchanges witnessed between former opponents 
in the aftermath of an aggressive conflict. There had been earlier descriptive ac-
counts of such friendly reunions in various primate species (see de Waal 2000a 
for a historical review), but the Arnhem study was the first systematic investiga-
tion. Since then, post-conflict friendly reunions between former opponents have 
been demonstrated in over 30 primate species and a few non-primate species as 
well (Aureli & de Waal 2000, de Waal 2000b, Schino 2000, Aureli et al. 2002, Ar-
nold & Aureli, in press). The function of restoration of the damaged relationship 
implied by use of the term reconciliation has also been demonstrated in all stud-
ies that tested for this function (see below). Thus, for the rest of the chapter, we 
use the term reconciliation to refer to post-conflict friendly reunions between 
former opponents.
The aim of the chapter is to explore the role of cooperation between partners 
in the occurrence of reconciliation after their conflicts. We start by reviewing 
the assumptions at the basis of the concept of reconciliation, the evidence sup-
porting these assumptions, and the implications of accepting these assumptions 
for the role of cooperation in reconciliation as cause and consequence. We then 
focus on the cause-consequence relationship linking cooperation and reconcili-
ation by reviewing the evidence for higher rates of reconciliation after conflicts 
between individuals with more cooperative relationships. We also present cases 
that qualify the set of circumstances in which a high degree of cooperation be-
tween partners is associated with a high likelihood of reconciliation after their 
conflicts. Next, we focus on the role of cooperation as a mechanism, i.e. in the 
act of reconciliation itself. Here, two aspects are explored in detail: the act of 
reconciliation as a tool for relationship negotiation and as a means of commu-
nication about the relative value each partner attaches to the social relationship. 
We conclude by suggesting emotional mediation as a proximate mechanism that 
can be at the basis of the role of cooperation in reconciliation patterns.
Chapter 7

122
Filippo Aureli, Colleen Schaffner
7.2
Assumptions underlying the concept of reconciliation
The fact that reconciliation may take place after an aggressive conflict implies 
that the latter produces a situation that requires resolution. Thus, the first as-
sumption in the concept of reconciliation is that aggressive conflict produces 
disturbance in the social relationship between the two opponents. The second 
critical assumption is that the post-conflict friendly reunion between the two 
opponents functions in restoring their social relationship disturbed by the pre-
vious conflict. We first review the evidence for these two assumptions.
Post-conflict disturbance can affect the degree of tolerance between two 
partners and, as a consequence, the degree of uncertainty in interaction and the 
emotional state of each partner. Recipients of aggression are more likely to be at-
tacked again by the original aggressor in the period following the attack relative 
to control periods (York & Rowell 1988, Aureli & van Schaik 1991, Aureli 1992, 
Cords 1992, Watts 1995, Silk et al. 1996, Castles & Whiten 1998, Schino 1998, 
Kutsukake & Castles 2001). In contrast, there is no evidence that former aggres-
sors are targets of elevated rates of aggression following the conflict (Castles & 
Whiten 1998, Das 1998). Recipients of aggression may also experience negative 
socioecological consequences as a result of increased post-conflict uncertainty. 
Wild long-tailed macaques (Macaca fascicularis) reduce their foraging time af-
ter receiving aggression, possibly because of the need for social vigilance to keep 
a close watch on the former aggressor’s actions and avoid further attacks (Aureli 
1992).
A critical test of the damage that aggressive conflict can inflict upon social 
relationships was carried out in an experimental setting by Cords (1992). Fol-
lowing aggressive conflict, pairs of long-tailed macaques showed reduced toler-
ance around a limited resource relative to baseline conditions. Thus, aggressive 
conflict is likely to produce uncertainty about the future of the relationship and 
the potential loss of benefits (Aureli et al. 2002).
Data on self-scratching and other self-directed behavior have been used to 
investigate the possible increase of anxiety-like emotion in post-conflict peri-
ods. There is behavioral and pharmacological evidence that some self-directed 
behavior is a reliable indicator of emotional states similar to human anxiety 
associated with uncertain situations (Maestripieri et al. 1992, Schino et al. 1996, 
Troisi 2002). Recipients of aggression increase the rates, relative to baseline, 
of self-directed behavior following a conflict (Aureli et al. 1989, Aureli & van 
Schaik 1991, Aureli 1992, Castles & Whiten 1998, Schino 1998, van den Bos 1998, 
Kutsukake & Castles 2001, but see Manson & Perry 2000 and Arnold & Whiten 
2001). Similarly, former aggressors also increase post-conflict rates of self-di-
rected behavior (Aureli 1997, Castles & Whiten 1998, Das et al 1998, Schino 
1998). The post-conflict increase in anxiety cannot be explained only in terms 
of immediate potential negative consequences, as no increased risk of post-con-
flict aggression is present for aggressors. It is likely therefore that at least some 
of the post-conflict anxiety in both former opponents is due to the uncertainty 
about their relationship (Aureli 1997).

123
7 Causes, consequences and mechanisms of reconciliation: the role of cooperation
The evidence presented above supports the first assumption in the concept of 
reconciliation, that is, that aggressive conflict produces disturbance in the social 
relationship between opponents. To provide support for the second assumption, 
we review studies that explored the role of post-conflict friendly reunions be-
tween former opponents in restoring their social relationship disturbed by the 
previous conflict.
Post-conflict reunions reduce the hostility between former opponents by re-
ducing the rates of attacks to baseline levels (Aureli & van Schaik 1991, Cords 
1992, de Waal 1993, Silk et al. 1996, Castles & Whiten 1998, Koyama 2001, Kutsu-
kake & Castles 2001, Wahaj et al. 2001, see also Bshary & Wurth 2001 for inter-
specific evidence). Post-conflict reconciliation also restores tolerance between 
former opponents, which normally is reduced following aggressive conflict 
(Cords 1992; Wittig & Boesch 2005). Interestingly, post-conflict interspecific 
reconciliation in the form of tactile stimulation functions in re-establishing in-
teraction between cleaner fish and client reef fish (Bshary & Wurth 2001).
The occurrence of reconciliation reduces self-directed behavior of both op-
ponents compared to post-conflict periods without reconciliation (Aureli & 
van Schaik 1991, Castles & Whiten 1998, Das et al. 1998, Schino 1998, Arnold 
& Whiten 2001, Kutsukake & Castles 2001). Support for an uncertainty-reduc-
tion function of reconciliation also comes from playback experiments on wild 
chacma baboons (Papio ursinus), which use soft grunts during post-conflict 
reunions (Cheney et al. 1995, Silk et al. 1996). After the playback of grunts of 
former aggressors, recipients of aggression approached them and tolerated their 
approaches more often than during periods without playbacks (Cheney & Sey-
farth 1997).
The reduction of post-conflict uncertainty and anxiety after reconciliation 
does not seem to be due simply to the calming effect of friendly behavior in 
general. Post-conflict friendly contacts with third parties do not reduce the rate 
of self-scratching of the original aggressor (Das et al. 1998). Similarly, recon-
ciliation reduces post-conflict heart rates of former opponents to baseline levels 
faster than post-conflict friendly contacts with third parties (Smucny et al. 1997, 
Aureli & Smucny 2000).
The two assumptions find further support from a study that investigated the 
long-term effect of aggressive conflict. If reconciliation does not take place, Jap-
anese macaques (Macaca fuscata) experience long-term negative consequences 
(Koyama 2001). In the ten days following conflicts, affiliation rates between for-
mer opponents are lower and aggression rates higher than at baseline. By con-
trast, if reconciliation takes place no such negative changes occur, suggesting 
that the post-conflict friendly reunions reconciled the opponents and prevent 
disruption of their interaction patterns and thus of their relationship.
7.3
Cooperation as cause and consequence of reconciliation
Based on the evidence for the first assumption in the concept of reconciliation, 
it is easy to identify a potential role of cooperation in the causation of recon-

124
Filippo Aureli, Colleen Schaffner
ciliation. The disturbance in the social relationship between the two opponents 
produced by the aggressive conflict would certainly entail a post-conflict dis-
ruption of cooperation between such partners. Thus, the post-conflict anxiety 
associated with the potential loss of benefits due to the disruption of cooperation 
is expected to serve as a strong incentive for each former opponent to pursue rec-
onciliation (Aureli 1997, cf. the ‘relational model’ in de Waal 1996a, 2000b).
Similarly, the evidence for the second assumption in the concept of recon-
ciliation provides the background to view cooperation as a natural consequence 
of reconciled conflicts. The restoration of the social relationship between the 
two opponents obtained through post-conflict friendly reunions is expected to 
include the re-establishment of cooperation between such partners, which was 
disrupted by the previous conflict.
The potential roles of cooperation as a cause and consequence of reconcili-
ation are clearly not independent and stem from the very same function at the 
basis of reconciliation implied in the two assumptions. Thus, we can review 
support for such interlinked roles together by reviewing evidence for a relation 
between the degree to which partners cooperate and the likelihood of reconcilia-
tion after their conflicts. Given the beneficial outcomes following reconciliation 
reviewed in the previous section, we can predict that conflicts between partners 
with more cooperative relationships would be reconciled at higher rates. This 
prediction fits well with both the view of cooperation as a cause (i.e. stronger 
interest in reconciling of partners with highly cooperative relationships given 
the greater loss of benefits and post-conflict anxiety due to the post-conflict dis-
ruption of the relationship) and the view of cooperation as a consequence (i.e. 
greater benefits to be regained by the restoration of the relationship between 
partners usually involved in highly cooperative actions). Below, we review the 
evidence available to test this prediction.
Experimental evidence supports the prediction. Pairs of long-tailed ma-
caques were trained to depend on each other in order to obtain food in a coop-
erative task (Cords & Thurnheer 1993). The training aimed to make the relation-
ship more cooperative and thus increase the value of the partner. Reconciliation 
was measured before and after the training, and was found to have increased 
dramatically after the training. Thus, the monkeys adjusted their conciliatory 
tendency to the increased cooperative value of the partner.
The relative cooperative value of social relationships can also be measured by 
directly recording naturally-occurring behavior and then calculating the rates 
of certain interactions exchanged between group members. Obvious candidates 
for such interactions are coalitions in which a third party provides support to 
one of the two combatants in an ongoing aggressive interaction (Harcourt & de 
Waal 1992). A reliable supporter would be a great asset in competition for any 
resource and thus individuals are expected to be highly interested in restoring 
such relationships after potentially damaging conflicts. Early attempts to find 
support for a positive relation of reconciliation levels and frequencies of agonis-
tic support failed. Kappeler & van Schaik (1992) investigated whether there was 
a correlation between reconciliation frequencies and rates of polyadic conflicts 
(i.e. conflicts in which multiple opponents are involved) across species, but no 
such relationship was found. However, one could argue that the overall rate of 

125
7 Causes, consequences and mechanisms of reconciliation: the role of cooperation
polyadic conflicts in a group or species is not the fine-grained measure needed 
to investigate the potential correlation between reconciliation and aggressive 
support at the relationship level.
Two studies used rates of support between group members, but they did not 
find any relation between reconciliation and coalition rates. The first one fo-
cused on juvenile long-tailed macaques and the authors argued that a possible 
cause of failing to find such a relation was due to the asymmetry in the value of 
the social relationship between the juveniles and the adult supporters (Cords & 
Aureli 1993). Such relationships may not be very cooperative because juveniles 
cannot return effective agonistic support, and the primary interest of supporters 
might be to direct aggression at the other opponent rather than to aid the juve-
nile. The second study was on a captive group of chimpanzees, and the authors 
argued that their negative finding might be due to the low overlap between af-
filiation and support networks and to the highly asymmetrical support relation-
ships (Preuschoft et al. 2002).
More recently, three studies found support for the prediction. Wild female 
Assamese macaques showed higher reconciliation rates with females with whom 
they exchanged higher rates of agonistic support (but this was not the case for 
males: Cooper et al. 2005). A similar result was found in Japanese macaques, 
even when the effect of kinship was controlled (Koyama in prep.). Contrary to 
previous studies, social relationships characterized by high exchanges of affili-
ative interactions were those in which agonistic support was given. In a study 
on wild chimpanzees, dyads that supported and shared food with one another 
reconciled more often than other types of dyads, although analyses of the effect 
of either of these factors alone did not yield significant results (Wittig & Boesch 
2003). It seems therefore that coalition and reconciliation rates are positively 
correlated only when agonistic support is exchanged between partners for sup-
port on other occasions or for other services (e.g. food-sharing or grooming). 
This finding, of course, supports our prediction because those relationships in 
which the exchange is more symmetrical are the most cooperative.
There is also indirect evidence for the prediction of more reconciliation in 
more cooperative relationships from studies that inferred the relative coopera-
tive value of relationships from the general pattern of interaction of the group 
or species. For example, in those macaque species, in which matrilineal kin 
cooperate closely, reconciliation occurs more often after conflicts between kin 
than non-kin (reviewed by Aureli et al. 1997, Demaria & Thierry 2001, cf. Thi-
erry 1990). In chimpanzees, in which males typically form coalitions with one 
another for within- and between-group conflicts, male-male conflicts are rec-
onciled more often than female-female conflicts (de Waal 1986b, Goodall 1986, 
Arnold & Whiten 2001, Wittig & Boesch 2003, but see Kutsukake & Castles 2004). 
In mountain gorillas, where females receive support from adult males during fe-
male-female conflicts as well as protection against potentially infanticidal males 
from outside, females only reconcile conflicts with adult males (Watts 1995). 
Variation in reconciliation between groups of the same species can also be in-
terpreted in support for the prediction. In a study of two groups of pig-tailed 
macaques (Macaca nemestrina) living in very similar enclosures, the average 
reconciliation frequency in the well-established group was twice as high as the 

126
Filippo Aureli, Colleen Schaffner
frequency in the newly-formed group (Castles et al. 1996). This finding suggests 
that reconciliation is influenced by the possibility for group members to form 
reliable cooperative relationships with one another over several years.
Interspecies comparisons of rates and patterns of reconciliation can also be 
useful to examine possible links with cooperation. For example, there is varia-
tion in average reconciliation rates across macaque species (Thierry 1986, 2000, 
de Waal & Ren 1988, Aureli et al. 1997, Petit et al. 1997, Demaria & Thierry 2001). 
One possible reason for this variation can be related to the relative value of the 
average group member that may vary depending on the need of cooperative ac-
tions requiring several group members, such as the protection from external 
threats (e.g. predators, other groups of the same species, or infanticidal males). 
In species where such need is high, subordinates have leverage over dominant 
individuals and the latter are expected to be more tolerant towards other group 
members in exchange for support in such cooperative actions (e.g. van Schaik 
1989). This would result in variation in the degree of despotism and tolerance 
towards unrelated group members across macaque species. In particular, in 
species in which more cooperative actions with the average group member are 
needed, a weaker power asymmetry (i.e. a less strict effect of the dominance 
hierarchy) is expected in contests.
Using a combined data set of eleven groups of nine macaque species, we 
have recently tested whether the variation in reconciliation rates is associated 
with interspecific differences in power asymmetry (Thierry et al., in prep.). We 
found a positive correlation between conciliatory tendency and the percentage 
of counter-aggression in contests (i.e. a proxy of power asymmetry). We also 
found that in species with a higher percentage of counter-aggression (i.e. lower 
power asymmetry) there was a smaller difference in the conciliatory tenden-
cies between kin and non-kin. Both findings suggest that reconciliation rates 
are higher and less kin-biased in macaque species with lower power asymmetry. 
If our reasoning about the higher need of cooperation among group members 
in less despotic species holds true, then these findings support the prediction of 
more reconciliation in more cooperative relationships.
Based on the evidence reviewed above, we can conclude that there is clear 
support for a relation between the degree of partners’ cooperation and the like-
lihood of reconciliation after their conflicts. Specifically, conflicts between 
partners with more cooperative relationships are reconciled at higher rates. Al-
though this relation is true in most cases, there are some caveats that we address 
in the next two sections.
7.3.1
The case of callitrichids
Obvious test cases for the prediction of a positive association between the degree 
of cooperation and the level of reconciliation are cooperatively-breeding species. 
Among primates, the best examples of such species are callitrichids, i.e. marmo-
sets and tamarins (Solomon & French 1997). In these species, individuals live in 
extended family groups in which older offspring delay dispersal from the natal 
groups and help parents to raise their younger siblings (French 1997). Group 

127
7 Causes, consequences and mechanisms of reconciliation: the role of cooperation
members cooperate in virtually all tasks: (i) rearing of young, (ii) travel coordi-
nation, (iii) food-sharing and (iv) anti-predator surveillance (reviewed by Caine 
1993, Schaffner & Caine 2000). Marmosets and tamarins also pack together dur-
ing sleep (Caine et al. 1992) and affiliate with each other at high rates (Price 
1992a, Wormell 1994). Given the highly cooperative nature of their relationships 
and the high degree of tolerance, callitrichids are expected to reconcile at high 
rates.
Two studies have been carried out on reconciliation in callitrichids. In red-
bellied tamarins (Saguinus labiatus), no evidence for reconciliation was found 
(Schaffner & Caine 2000). In common marmosets (Callithrix jacchus), the oc-
currence of reconciliation was demonstrated, but only if cases of mere proximity 
(i.e. without affiliative overture) between former opponents were included in the 
analysis (Westlund et al. 2000). Based on evidence from other primate species 
and given the highly tolerant nature of callitrichids, post-conflict reunions in 
these species are expected to include overt friendly behavior, such as grooming 
or special contacts not usually common outside the post-conflict context (cf. 
‘explicit reconciliation’ in de Waal 1993). Thus, post-conflict proximity in mar-
mosets may have a different meaning (see below), and Westlund et al.’s (2000) 
findings are probably better interpreted as another failure to demonstrate rec-
onciliation in callitrichids. This is clearly surprising given the highly coopera-
tive nature of their relationships.
One possible explanation for the surprising results is that in the above study 
groups, the first assumption of the concept of reconciliation (see above) does 
not hold. Aureli et al. (2002) emphasized that the critical issue is whether ag-
gressive conflicts disrupt cooperative relationships and jeopardize the benefits 
associated with such valuable relationships. Thus, it is paramount to investigate 
whether there is evidence for post-conflict disturbance of the social relation-
ships between the two opponents in callitrichids.
Using the same data set of Schaffner & Caine’s (2000) study on red-bellied 
tamarins, we tested for evidence of post-conflict disturbance of social relation-
ships (Schaffner et al. 2005). First, we did not find evidence for a reduction of 
post-conflict tolerance between former opponents as their proximity levels after 
aggression did not decrease compared to baseline levels. Second, this finding 
held even in those cases in which post-conflict renewal of aggression between 
opponents took place. Third, there was no evidence for a post-conflict disrup-
tion of opponents’ mutual activities as they resume the activity (e.g. feeding in 
close proximity grooming, or playing) they were engaged in before the conflict 
as often as they would in control periods.
Close inspection of the results of Westlund et al.’s (2000) study on common 
marmosets reveals striking similarities with the findings for our study on red-
bellied tamarins. First, there was no evidence for a post-conflict decrease in tol-
erance between opponents as their proximity levels were actually higher in post-
conflict periods than in control periods (see above). Second, there was circum-
stantial evidence for rapid post-conflict resumption of the same activity former 
opponents were engaged in prior to the conflict. Third, the authors reported that 
the marmosets hardly showed any behavioral sign of distress in the aftermath of 
aggressive conflicts (Westlund et al. 2000).

128
Filippo Aureli, Colleen Schaffner
The findings of the two studies suggest that reconciliation does not take place 
because there is no post-conflict disturbance of social relationships, probably 
due to their high predictability and resilience (i.e. highly secure relationship; 
cf. Cords & Aureli 2000; see below). The lack of disruption may be the result of 
alternative conflict management mechanisms that reduce the frequency and in-
tensity of aggressive conflicts (Schaffner & Caine 2000). The findings, however, 
are important because they point out that it is critical to test for the assumptions 
underlying the reconciliation concept. Thus, the case portrayed by the two stud-
ies has more general implications for other species as well; it is the exception that 
confirms the rule. If there is no post-conflict disruption of cooperation, there is 
no need to restore it with reconciliation.
7.3.2
Biological market effects
Reconciliation frequency within a social relationship may change over time 
when changes in the way partners value each other occur. The experimental 
study by Cords & Thurnheer (1993) reported above is a brilliant illustration of 
these interlinked changes. Reconciliation frequency within a social relation-
ship may also change depending on modifications in the social environment. In 
particular, partner value (relative to others) is expected to change as a function 
of the availability of alternative partners. This dynamic view of partner value 
is best interpreted within a biological market framework in which animals are 
considered as traders engaging in exchanges of commodities (Noë et al. 1991, 
Noë & Hammerstein 1995). As in human economic markets, the animal trad-
ers would select the social partner that offers the best value on the basis of the 
supply and demand of the commodity. Thus, the levels of supply and demand 
as well as competition among traders determine the value of commodities and 
ultimately the relative value of potential partners (Barrett & Henzi 2001). Several 
empirical studies confirmed the predictions of the framework for exchanges of 
grooming and other commodities in various animal species (Barrett & Henzi, 
this volume, Noë, this volume). Thus, if the cooperative value of group mem-
bers varies depending on local biological markets, reconciliation patterns are 
expected to vary accordingly. Reconciliation frequency within a social relation-
ship is likely to change depending on the availability of alternative partners and 
their overall relative value. Below, we illustrate this rationale with three possible 
scenarios.
In pair-living species, the pair members have a valuable relationship with 
each other as they rely on the other for sharing tasks and cooperative actions. 
As they depend so highly on each other, aggressive conflicts are expected to 
be rare. In addition, post-conflict reconciliation may not be needed as their 
relationships are valuable, but also highly secure (Cords & Aureli 2000). The 
situation can change if there is an external threat that undermines the pair 
bond. We would predict higher investment in the pairmate including concil-
iatory overtures if an alternative partner appears on the scene. Although no 
data on reconciliation are available to test this prediction, experimental data 
of challenges of established pairs with intruders suggests that this could be 

129
7 Causes, consequences and mechanisms of reconciliation: the role of cooperation
possible. For example, pair-living titi monkeys (Callicebus moloch) spent more 
time in close proximity to each other when experimentally exposed to conspe-
cific strangers than during baseline conditions (Anzenberger et al. 1986). The 
increase in overall proximity included a higher proportion of time spent hud-
dling with each other. In addition, the pairmates joined in agonistic displays 
toward the strangers, and these displays often culminated in mutual vocal 
calls (i.e. duets), which were never performed in other circumstances (Anzen-
berger et al. 1986). These findings suggest that behavioral changes elicited by 
the presence of strangers may serve to strengthen the bond between pairmates 
when exposed to a potential challenge to their relationship security. Under 
this scenario, reconciliation is also expected to occur to maintain the valuable 
relationship between pairmates.
Another possible scenario is the case of cooperative breeders. As discussed 
above, there is no evidence for post-conflict relationship disturbance in the two 
studies of callitrichids carried out so far. Similarly to pair-living species, group 
members in cooperatively-breeding species are strongly interdependent on one 
another for survival and reproductive success. Their relationships are therefore 
valuable and secure, and aggression is rare (Schaffner & Caine 2000). Variation 
in relationship quality across group members can however be expected with 
changes in group size. When groups are small, every group member is needed 
to perform the various cooperative tasks for successful rearing of the young. 
The overall positive disposition toward other group members when group size 
is small can be illustrated by the high degree of tolerance the breeding female 
shows toward strangers when no subadult or adult helpers are present in the 
group (Schaffner & French 1997). However, when group size is larger, tolerance 
towards strangers is absent. Furthermore, in large family groups, severe instanc-
es of aggression against some subadult or adult helpers are observed (Schaffner 
& Caine 2000). This form of aggression is likely to disrupt opponents’ relation-
ships. It is, however, unlikely that reconciliation would take place in these cases 
because the most likely outcome of the prolonged hostility is the eviction of the 
targeted individual, indicating that such relationships are no longer valuable 
(and it is difficult to reintroduce ejected individuals into the group; see Inglett et 
al. 1989). In support of this view, the breeding female of large groups shows high 
intolerance towards intruders when tested in experimental settings (Schaffner 
& French 1997). Thus, a possible scenario for the occurrence of reconciliation in 
callitrichids is when in middle-sized groups mild aggression results in a loss of 
benefits because individuals can ‘shop around’ for alternative cooperative part-
ners (cf. Lazaro-Perea 2001). Under these circumstances, former opponents are 
likely to be interested in reconciling their conflicts to reaffirm the co-depen-
dency to each other and thus maintain the benefits associated with their rela-
tionships.
A third scenario to illustrate the effect of biological markets on reconcili-
ation can take place in all those species in which cooperative actions, such 
as coalitions, may involve different partners. For example, in many macaque 
species, coalitions occur between matrilineal kin, but also between individu-
als belonging to different matrilines (Chapais, this volume, Silk, this volume). 
In most despotic macaque species, there is however a bias toward matrilineal 

130
Filippo Aureli, Colleen Schaffner
kin to serve as coalition partners (Chapais, this volume, Thierry 1990, 2000). 
This is usually the case in long-tailed macaques (de Waal 1976, 1977) in which 
matrilineal kin reconcile more often than non-kin (Aureli et al. 1989, 1997). 
The relative preference for matrilineal kin as coalition partners can also be af-
fected by their relative availability. We could thus hypothesize that in groups 
where only a few matrilineal kin are available relatively more non-kin serve 
as coalition partners. Under these circumstances, we would expect non-kin 
to have relatively more valuable relationships and therefore to reconcile rela-
tively more often. We tested this prediction with data from two captive groups 
of long-tailed macaques; one group had typically well-developed matrilines, 
whereas the other group contained only a few matrilineal kin (the group was 
formed by splitting a large group to minimize the number of kin for unrelated 
study). As predicted, we found that reconciliation between non-kin was higher 
in the group with short matrilines than in the group with the typical matri-
line structure (Fig. 7.1). Although we need to be cautious in our conclusion as 
we did not test directly for differences in non-kin cooperation between the 
groups, this finding suggests that reconciliation is affected by what is available 
in the market place.
7.4
Cooperation in the act of reconciliation
Reconciliation is usually a dyadic phenomenon. Individuals may differ in their 
interest in reconciling, but both former opponents need to participate for the 
post-conflict friendly reunion to occur. One of the former opponents may take 
the initiative for the reunion, but the other needs to accept or reciprocate the 
friendly overture for reconciliation to really take place. One-sided attempts may 
occur, but they are not expected to function as reconciliation (i.e. fulfilling the 
second assumption of the concept of reconciliation). Thus, it seems that coop-
eration between former opponents in the very act of friendly reunions can be at 
Fig. 7.1. The mean (+SE) percentage of post-conflict observations in which a post-conflict friendly 
reunion between non-kin opponents occurred during the first three minutes in two groups of long-
tailed macaques differing in their matrilineal structure. Typical: a group with the typical matriline 
structure; Short: a group with short matrilines.

131
7 Causes, consequences and mechanisms of reconciliation: the role of cooperation
the basis of the resumption of pre-conflict interaction and restoration of their 
social relationship.
A critical test of the functional importance of cooperation in the act of rec-
onciliation is to examine whether only reunion attempts that are accepted by the 
partner restore their social relationship. No published study on nonhuman pri-
mates examined the functional consequences of attempts to reconcile depend-
ing on their success, probably due to the difficulty for researchers to recognize 
failed or aborted attempts (Cords & Aureli 2000). There is at least one study 
on children that addresses this issue (Ljungberg et al. 1999). There are many 
similarities in the principles and actual patterns of conflict resolution between 
nonhuman primates and children (Cords & Killen 1998, Butovskaya et al. 2000), 
and the use of language can facilitate the researchers’ discrimination between 
accepted and ignored attempts to reconcile in children. Ljungberg et al. (1999) 
found that among 5-year-old boys when reconciliation attempts were accepted, 
both post-conflict stress-related behavior and hostility were reduced (Fig. 7.2). 
In contrast, reconciliation attempts that were ignored did not reduce post-con-
flict stress-related behavior and even increased post-conflict hostility between 
former opponents (Fig. 7.2). Here, we need to be cautious about the direction of 
causality as the boys may ignore reconciliation attempts due to persistent hos-
tility or instead become more hostile as a result of the rejected reconciliation. 
Hence, this study supports the view that the cooperation required in accepted 
reconciliation attempts may convey the mutual interest of former opponents to 
end the hostility and start the process of relationship repair.
Evidence for such a role of cooperation in the act of reconciliation may be 
gathered in nonhuman primates by distinguishing the patterns of friendly re-
unions. For example, attempts that are reciprocated by the partner (e.g. mutual 
grooming) or that require direct participation from the partner (e.g. the ‘hold-
bottom’ ritual in stumptailed macaques, Fig. 7.3) can be more effective in terms 
of restoring the relationship than attempts that are characterized only by unidi-
rectional friendly contacts (e.g. brief gentle touch by one individual without any 
overt response from the partner). If this prediction is supported by empirical 
data, it will point out that the degree of cooperation involved in the act of recon-
Fig. 7.2. The mean percentage of post-conflict observations in which aggressive behavior be-
tween former opponents occurred before and after accepted and ignored reconciliation attempts 
in 4 to 6-year-old boys (modified from Ljungberg et al. 1999).

132
Filippo Aureli, Colleen Schaffner
ciliation can be directly related to its effectiveness in restoring social relation-
ships. After all, what can be more convincing for former opponents about the 
reciprocal interest in repairing their social relationship than an act of coopera-
tion taking place right after an aggressive conflict?
7.5
Reconciliation as a tool for relationship negotiation
Given the need for both former opponents to participate at least to some extent 
in the post-conflict friendly reunion, it is possible that the acceptance of rec-
onciliation attempts is open to negotiation. The likely asymmetry in the ben-
efits obtained from their social relationship is expected to underlie differential 
interest between former opponents in repairing the disrupted relationship and 
thus in initiating and accepting reconciliation attempts (Cords & Aureli 2000). 
Within a dyad, the individual with less at stake in the social relationship is in a 
more powerful bargaining position for negotiation about the future course of 
their interactions (cf. Dunbar 1988). Accepting or not accepting a reconciliation 
attempt can, therefore, be used as a tool for relationship negotiation (de Waal 
1996a) and may affect future cooperation.
The implications of the differential bargaining power between former op-
ponents for the process of conflict resolution were clearly recognized by de Waal 
(1986b). He suggested that aggressors could make conditions for reconciliation to 
take place and labeled the process as ‘conditional reassurance’ (de Waal 1986b). 
Reconciliation can serve as a reassurance mechanism when it alleviates distress 
(see above for evidence) and can be conditional when it is granted depending on 
Fig. 7.3. The ‘hold-bottom’ ritual in stumptailed macaques, which is often used for reconciliation. 
Photograph by Josep Call.

133
7 Causes, consequences and mechanisms of reconciliation: the role of cooperation
whether the partner exhibits a wanted behavior or stops an unwanted behav-
ior. De Waal (1986b) proposed a mother’s behavior toward the offspring during 
weaning as a clear illustration of conditional reassurance in species where the 
mother-offspring relationship extends beyond the weaning period. After having 
pushed the offspring away from her breast, a chimpanzee mother, for example, 
allows it to return in contact with her, so reducing the distress caused by the 
forced separation, on condition that the offspring refrains from reestablishing 
nipple contact. This is a case of conditional reassurance in which the partner 
needs to stop an unwanted behavior. An example of the condition in which the 
partner needs to display a wanted behavior is the granting of post-conflict rec-
onciliation only after the partner gives a signal of submission. De Waal (1986b) 
illustrated this case by reporting on dominance struggles between male chim-
panzees. During the last phase of the struggles, the winner of a conflict avoided 
to accept conciliatory overtures from the loser until the latter displayed a sub-
missive greeting.
A similar interpretation of conflict resolution in terms of relationship nego-
tiation was proposed by Aureli et al. (1989). They emphasized the emotional and 
physiological costs of receiving aggression and the role of reconciliation in re-
ducing such costs. Then, they predicted reconciliation patterns according to the 
relationship value from the winner’s point of view because the loser is expected 
to be the one more likely to seek reconciliation due to the higher post-conflict 
costs. Winners would offer or withhold reconciliation as a means to increase or 
decrease the post-conflict costs to the loser depending on whether it is in the 
winners’ interest to maintain a positive relationship with the loser (Aureli et al. 
1989). Thus, according to this view, the granting of reconciliation is ultimately a 
means for manipulation of the loser’s post-conflict costs depending on its value 
to the winner.
The possibility of post-conflict relationship repair through reconciliation 
may also strengthen the feasibility of using aggression as punishment to ma-
nipulate others (cf. Clutton-Brock & Parker 1995). Aggression can be used more 
effectively as a tool for relationship negotiation because mechanisms for conflict 
resolution, such as reconciliation, can undo the damage to the social relation-
ship (de Waal 1996a, 2000a). Based on the views outlined above (de Waal 1986b, 
Aureli et al. 1989), we would like to take this perspective one step further and 
relate the relationship negotiation more directly to cooperation.
Individuals not only can aggressively punish partners that are unwilling to 
cooperate, but they can withhold reconciliation as a potentially additional pun-
ishment. It is likely that this tactic also entails some short-term costs for the 
individuals withholding reconciliation as they cannot count on the benefits of 
their relationship with the former opponent in the aftermath of a conflict (this 
claim is supported by increased post-conflict rates of self-directed behavior of 
former aggressors; Aureli 1997, Castles & Whiten 1998, Das et al 1998, Schino 
1998). However, additional punishment through withholding reconciliation is 
possible when the short-term costs are outweighed by the benefits of successful 
instigation of future cooperation. As the benefits may be substantial, such a tac-
tic is expected to occur regularly to negotiate cooperation (i.e. altruistic punish-
ment; Gächter & Herrmann, this volume).

134
Filippo Aureli, Colleen Schaffner
7.6
Reconciliation as a means of communication
The need for cooperation between former opponents in the act of reconciliation 
opens the possibility that the act itself can be used as a means of communication 
about their relationship. In particular, the behavior of each opponent during 
the reconciliation process can convey information about the relative value each 
individual attaches to the relationship. Because each opponent needs to attend 
and respond appropriately to the partner’s behavior to achieve successful recon-
ciliation (see above), the sequence and patterning of the exchange can have an 
important communicative value. The readiness to attempt reconciliation and 
the willingness to accept it are obviously related to each partner’s interest in 
repairing the relationship. The mutual behavior of the two partners during such 
a process can, therefore, communicate their relative interest in the relationship 
and possible future cooperation.
The communicatory value of the act of reconciliation has been emphasized 
by Silk (1996, 1997). She suggested that post-conflict reunions may communi-
cate that the signaler’s future behavior will be non-aggressive and perhaps be-
nign. This is clearly important in reducing uncertainty about future interactions 
between former opponents. When former opponents are both interested in coor-
dinating their post-conflict interactions for mutual benefit, they can use signals 
of benign intent that are inexpensive and inconspicuous (Silk 1997). A good ex-
ample of such signals is the use of soft grunts by baboons during post-conflict 
reunions (Cheney et al. 1995, Silk et al. 1996).
Our suggestion for a communicatory value of the act of reconciliation is 
complementary to Silk’s interpretation, but it focuses on post-conflict exchang-
es that require more coordination between former opponents. Many behaviors 
exchanged during post-conflict reunions are conspicuous and involve the par-
ticipation of both partners (de Waal 1993, Aureli et al. 2002; e.g. Fig. 7.3). In 
addition, many of these reunions involve close body contact between the former 
opponents. Thus, whereas vocalizations, such as the baboon grunts, are given 
at a distance and entail little cost, contact reunions can be highly risky. After 
all, they require close proximity between individuals that have just exchanged 
hostility. The relative readiness of former opponents to exchange post-conflict 
friendly contacts despite the risk of renewed aggression can therefore convey 
information about their interest in the future of the relationship.
Risky post-conflict reunions could also serve as tests of the strength of the 
bond between former opponents with insecure relationships (i.e. relationships 
in which the partner’s behavior is rather unpredictable; Cords & Aureli 2000). 
Zahavi (1977b) proposed that such tests require imposing a stressful stimulus 
on the partner. Such a stimulus typically has a strong sensual component that 
can be perceived by the recipient as pleasant if the bond is strong (possibly lead-
ing to reciprocation) or unpleasant if the relationship is weak (likely leading to 
withdrawal). The recipient’s response then provides reliable information about 
the recipient’s current interest in the relationship (Zahavi 1977b). The poten-
tial close body contact with a former opponent in the aftermath of a conflict is 
likely to be perceived as stressful by partners with insecure relationships. The 

135
7 Causes, consequences and mechanisms of reconciliation: the role of cooperation
partner’s response to engage in such contact or to avoid it could then serve as a 
signal of the partner’s interest in the relationship and of the partner’s reliability 
in future cooperative actions.
7.7
Summary and conclusions
Our review of the role of cooperation in the occurrence of reconciliation reveals 
a close link between the two phenomena in terms of causes, consequences and 
mechanisms. The potential disruption of cooperation due to aggressive con-
flict is probably one of the most important factors at the basis of the post-con-
flict emotional changes (e.g. post-conflict anxiety) that mediate reconciliation 
and the restoration of cooperative interaction (cf. Aureli & Smucny 2000). This 
cause-consequence relation linking cooperation and reconciliation is supported 
by several studies showing higher rates of reconciliation after conflicts between 
individuals with more cooperative relationships.
Whether the pattern of reconciliation across group members is based on long-
term planning by single individuals for future cooperation is an issue still open 
to investigation. Although the possible involvement of long-term planning has 
intriguing implications for the cognitive abilities underlying reconciliation, the 
influence of relationship quality on the conciliatory process may be based more 
on the history of previous interactions between former opponents than on an 
evaluation of potential future exchanges. Relationship quality could influence 
reconciliation patterns via emotional mediation (Aureli 1997, Aureli & Smucny 
2000) when emotional experiences with partners are viewed as ‘summaries’ of 
the history of previous interactions with such individuals (Aureli & Schaffner 
2002, Aureli & Whiten 2003).
Involvement of long-term planning is not necessary from a functional point 
of view. The function of reconciliation in relationship repair and restoration of 
cooperation can occur through short-term changes that bring the interaction 
quality between former opponents back to what it was before the aggressive con-
flict (Cords & Aureli 1996). This short-term view of the conciliatory process does 
not imply that reconciliation does not have medium- or long-term effects. There 
is actually evidence for reconciliation functioning in undoing long-term nega-
tive damage caused by aggressive conflicts (Koyama 2001).
The relation between a high degree of cooperation between partners and a 
high likelihood of reconciliation after their conflicts is not unconditional. We 
presented cases that qualify which sets of circumstances modulate such a rela-
tion. The case of callitrichids pointed out that if aggressive conflict does not 
disrupt cooperation between former opponents, there is no need for reconcili-
ation (cf. Aureli et al. 2002). The framework of biological markets (Barrett & 
Henzi, this volume, Noë, this volume) helped us to interpret cases in which the 
likelihood of reconciliation may vary as a function of changes in partner value 
relative to other individuals. If the cooperative value of group members varies 
depending on local biological markets, reconciliation frequency within a so-
cial relationship is likely to change depending on the availability of alternative 

136
Filippo Aureli, Colleen Schaffner
partners and their overall relative value. A focused research effort is needed to 
explore the role of biological markets in modulating the relation between coop-
eration and reconciliation.
Cooperation also plays an important role as a mechanism in the concil-
iatory process. Both former opponents need to participate in a post-conflict 
friendly reunion for such an act to function as reconciliation. This critical role 
is nicely supported by the finding of a study on children that only accepted at-
tempts at reconciliation reduced post-conflict stress and hostility (Ljungberg 
et al. 1999). 
The role of cooperation in the conciliatory act also has implications for the 
possible use of reconciliation as a means of relationship negotiation and as a 
means of communication about the relative value each partner attaches to the 
social relationship. Further investigation of these two aspects is critical because 
both are expected to play a role in future cooperation between the partners. If 
empirical evidence supports these views, cooperation and reconciliation will be 
even more interlinked than presented in this chapter.
Acknowledgments
We thank Peter Kappeler and the German Primate Center for organizing the 
conference, funding the first author’s attendance and inviting us to write the 
chapter; Frans de Waal, Peter Kappeler, Joe Manson, Carel van Schaik and other 
participants of the Freilandtage in Göttingen 2003 for their comments; and Josep 
Call for permission to use his photograph in Fig. 7.3.

Part IV
Mutualism

Cooperative hunting in chimpanzees: 
kinship or mutualism?
Christophe Boesch, Hedwige Boesch, Linda Vigilant
8.1
Introduction
Cooperation characterizes human societies today and is thought to have been 
important in our evolutionary past as one of the main characteristics that al-
lowed humans to dominate the planet (Isaac 1978, Mithen 1996). The funda-
mental role of cooperation is, for example, evident in hunter-gatherer societies, 
where the prevalence of food-sharing combined with a sexual division of labor 
is the basis of the economic system (Kaplan et al. 2000, Heinrich et al. 2001, Hill 
2002). Analysis of the factors favoring the evolution of cooperation is, therefore, 
vital for the understanding of the course of human social evolution.
Cooperation can be defined as two or more individuals acting together to 
achieve a common goal. Cooperation can evolve when two basic conditions are 
fulfilled. First, the benefits of the common action must be shared sooner or later 
between the participants, and second, the benefits to the participants must ex-
ceed the costs of the common action. However, cooperation can be rather unsta-
ble, as it is very susceptible to cheaters, individuals that are not investing in the 
cooperative task, but are nonetheless trying to gain access to the benefits. The 
greater the extent of cheating, the less likely cooperation is going to occur (Axel-
rod & Hamilton 1981, Maynard Smith 1982). Therefore, theories of the evolution 
of cooperation rely on four different mechanisms to explain its evolution. First, 
kin selection can facilitate cooperation among related individuals, as each agent 
will not only benefit directly, but also indirectly from the gains of the others the 
more they are related to them (Hamilton 1964). Second, in a mutualistic sce-
nario, all partners in a cooperative act would directly profit from the outcome. 
Third, reciprocity in repeated interactions could allow each partner in turn to 
obtain the benefit of the cooperative act (Trivers 1971). Finally, the byproduct of 
sociality scenario suggests that individuals have been selected to live together 
for other reasons and, by virtue of their proximity, may happen to engage in co-
operative acts even when not directly profiting from them (Mesterton-Gibbons 
& Dugatkin 1992). It is important to note that these explanations for cooperation 
are not mutually exclusive and several mechanisms may operate simultaneously. 
Kin selection theory has convincingly explained the evolution of some dramatic 
forms of cooperation, such as worker sterility in eusocial insects (Reeve et al. 
1998). However, it is possible that the indirect benefits of cooperative behavior 
have been overestimated and little consideration given to direct benefits in other 
animal societies. This is illustrated by the exemplary work of Clutton-Brock and 
Chapter 8

140
Christophe Boesch et al.
colleagues, in which careful field observation and experimentation using large 
numbers of wild meerkats has led to a greater appreciation of direct benefits 
as an explanation for helping in that species (Clutton-Brock et al. 2001b, 2001c, 
Clutton-Brock, this volume).
An important distinction between mutualism and reciprocity is that in a mu-
tualistic scenario, the benefits to actors are immediate, whereas the benefits to 
one partner are deferred in a reciprocal interaction. This is important because 
some observations have shown that most animals appear wholly or mostly inca-
pable of keeping track of past or future exchanges and so mutualism rather than 
reciprocity might be more likely to be observed in nature (Clements & Stephen 
1995; but see de Waal & Brosnan, this volume).
Many carnivores hunt in groups, but even studies of the same species differ 
with regard to explanations of the mechanisms promoting this possibly coop-
erative behavior. In some populations of lions and cheetahs, group hunts have 
not been observed to provide a direct benefit to all hunters, so that in many 
instances it would seem better for individuals to hunt alone (Packer et al. 1990, 
Caro 1994). Accordingly, byproduct mutualism has been suggested to be the 
main mechanism explaining the observed group hunting in those populations. 
In other populations living in more difficult or less prey-rich habitat, lions and 
cheetahs were observed to hunt in groups more frequently and it could be shown 
that under these conditions, individual benefits increased with group size (Coo-
per 1991, Stander 1992, Creel & Creel 1995c). In carnivores, group hunting and 
the benefit extracted from it is not a fixed characteristic of a species, as it is 
the conditions of the habitats where the hunt take place that will determine the 
outcomes for the different participants in the hunt. Thus, viewing cooperation 
in hunting as a constant in a species living in different populations in different 
habitats is misleading and additional studies may be required to understand the 
features of the cooperative abilities of a particular species.
We are going to concentrate in this chapter on group hunting in wild chim-
panzees (Pan troglodytes) and discuss which mechanisms could be responsible 
for its evolution and maintenance.
8.2
The puzzle of chimpanzee hunting
Wild chimpanzees live in large multi-male, multi-female communities that 
may contain from 10 to more than 100 individuals. Membership in these com-
munities is very stable, except for females that normally transfer once, upon 
reaching maturity. Males are philopatric, remaining in their natal group their 
entire lives (Goodall 1986, Nishida 1990, Boesch & Boesch-Achermann 2000, 
Mitani & Watts 2002). Cooperation in chimpanzees has been observed in two 
main contexts. First, the territory of one community is defended by macro-
coalitions of adult and adolescent males that regularly patrol the borders, re-
pelling all intruders they see or hear (Goodall 1986, Boesch & Boesch-Acher-
mann 2000). Encounters between communities are normally aggressive and in 
some instances, have been seen to lead to the deaths of individuals (Goodall et 

141
8 Cooperative hunting in chimpanzees: kinship or mutualism?
al. 1979, Goodall 1986, Boesch & Boesch-Achermann 2000, Wilson & Wrang-
ham 2003). Hunting of small mammalian prey is the second typical context in 
which cooperation among varying numbers of males has been observed (Boesch 
& Boesch-Achermann 2000). Hunting by wild chimpanzees has been observed 
throughout the area of distribution of the species and it represents a special chal-
lenge, as it involves the pursuit and capture of small monkeys fleeing through 
the forest canopy. As in many apparently cooperative activities, the outcome of 
a hunt is dependent upon the spontaneous participation of different actors. In 
fact, hunting success increases with the number of individuals actively hunting 
(Boesch 1994, Boesch & Boesch-Achermann 2000).
Hunting seems to be a universal behavior in chimpanzees as it has been ob-
served in all populations subject to long-term study (Boesch & Boesch-Acher-
mann 2000). However, detailed observations have been limited to only a few of 
the long-term studies on that species. First, Geza Teleki (1973) described hunting 
behavior of the Gombe chimpanzees and detailed some of the tactics used by 
the male hunters. Subsequent studies at Gombe have complemented our under-
standing of the hunting behavior in that population (Busse 1978, Goodall 1986, 
Stanford et al. 1994, Stanford 1998). Studies of hunting behavior have also been 
conducted on the chimpanzees in Mahale Mountains National Park, some 200 
km south of Gombe, and revealed a rather similar picture of the hunting be-
havior (Nishida et al. 1983, 1992, Uehera et al. 1992). Our understanding of this 
behavior in chimpanzees was broadened when new observations of the behav-
ior of the Taï chimpanzees in Côte d’Ivoire became available (Boesch & Boesch 
1989), revealing surprisingly large variation in the hunting behavior within this 
species. Lastly, observations of an exceptionally large community in Ngogo, 
Uganda, have complemented this view of a very flexible behavior in chimpan-
zees (Watts & Mitani 2000, Mitani et al. 2002a).
Hunting in chimpanzees is puzzling because while there are many similari-
ties in hunting behavior between different populations, important differences 
have also been observed (Nishida et al. 1983, Goodall 1986, Boesch & Boesch 
1989, Uehara et al. 1992,  Boesch 1994, Boesch & Boesch-Achermann 2000, Mi-
tani et al. 2002a). First, all chimpanzee populations have been observed to hunt 
mainly arboreal monkey species and, of those, red colobus monkeys (Procolobus 
badius) are generally the preferred species whenever they are present (Table 8.1). 
Second, since monkeys are the preferred prey, hunting occurs mostly in the 
trees. Finally, hunting success in chimpanzees is rather high, compared to many 
other predatory animal species (Table 8.1). For example, wolves are successful in 
8% and 25% of their hunts of moose and deer, respectively (Mech 1970), which 
is two to five times lower than chimpanzee success rates. Similarly, lions in the 
Serengeti capture prey in 61% of purely opportunistic cases, but in only 19% of 
instances when they are stalking the prey, and in 8% of hunts that occur in the 
open plains (Schaller 1972). Hyenas in the Kalahari are successful in 32% of their 
hunting attempts (Mills 1990). One possible explanation for the chimpanzee’s 
high rate of success may lie in the fact that, not relying on meat for survival, they 
tend to hunt only when the likelihood of a capture appears high, whereas social 
carnivores, being much more dependent on meat, hunt more depending on their 
level of hunger rather than according to the likelihood of success.

142
Christophe Boesch et al.
Differences in hunting behavior among populations of chimpanzees are 
quite striking (Table 8.2). However, consideration of the differences is compli-
cated by the fact that in arboreal hunts with limited visibility, it is not always 
easy to distinguish hunters from non-hunters. This makes it difficult to com-
pare observations from different chimpanzee populations. For example, if the 
hunt happens in a dense part of the forest or when a large number of individuals 
are present, it becomes very difficult to distinguish whether a given individual 
is actually actively trying to capture a prey or is simply looking on. This has 
led some not to distinguish between hunters and non-hunters (Ngogo: Mitani 
& Watts 1999, 2001, Watts & Mitani 2000; Gombe: Teleki 1973, Stanford 1995, 
1998, Stanford et al. 1994a, 1994b), thereby making any discussion about the 
evolution of cooperation impossible because per definition hunters and cheat-
ers are treated equally. Others have concentrated their analyses on hunts in 
which the distinction between hunters and non-hunters was based on the be-
havior of the individuals present (Gombe: Busse 1977, 1978, Goodall 1986; Taï: 
Boesch & Boesch 1989, Boesch 1994, Boesch & Boesch-Achermann 2000). In 
such cases, however, individuals may alternate between hunting for some time 
and just looking at hunting by others. In other instances, a pursued prey may 
fall to the ground, whereupon one of the individuals watching the hunt would 
capture it and by its action immediately become a hunter. This distinction be-
tween hunters and non-hunters should be made whenever possible, because it 
permits the proposal of scenarios concerning the evolution and stability of co-
operation in hunting.
Despite the different approaches toward observation of chimpanzee hunting, 
it remains possible to see some clear differences between different chimpanzee 
populations. First, the tendency to hunt in groups is highly variable and is ob-
served in only one-third of the hunts by Gombe chimpanzees, while group hunt-
ing is the rule in Taï and even more so in Ngogo (Table 8.2). Even more strik-
ing is the fact that the level of organization during hunts seems very different. 
Collaboration, in which different hunters perform different but complementary 
roles during a hunt to capture a prey (Boesch & Boesch 1989), has been regularly 
Table 8.1. Similarities in chimpanzee hunting behavior.
Gombea
Mahaleb
Ngogoc
Taïd
Prey selection
Red colobus
55%
53%
88%
81%
Hunting success
52%
61%
82%
52%
a Goodall (1986)
b Nishida et al. (1983), Uehara et al. (1992)
c Watts & Mitani (2002)
d Boesch & Boesch-Achermann (2000)

143
8 Cooperative hunting in chimpanzees: kinship or mutualism?
observed only in Taï chimpanzees (Table 8.2). In Ngogo, despite the fact that the 
chimpanzees hunt exclusively in groups, collaboration among hunters has been 
observed only rarely (David Watts & John Mitani pers. com.).
We now are going to discuss possible explanations of differences observed 
among chimpanzee populations in the level of cooperation in their hunting 
strategies. More specifically, is chimpanzee hunting better explained by kin-
ship or mutualism? These explanations are not mutually exclusive, in the sense 
that if hunting is beneficial to all participants, it would also pay to hunt with 
kin and we would not be able to conclude whether kin selection or mutualism 
favors cooperation. If, however, kin do not hunt together, even though hunting 
is beneficial, we may argue that kin selection is not the prime factor explaining 
cooperation.
8.2.1
Kin selection hypothesis
The kin selection hypothesis predicts that related individuals will experience, 
through indirect benefits, greater paybacks from cooperating than would non-
kin. There are exceptional circumstances in which kin selection might not be 
favored, such as when substantial levels of competition among kin exist (West et 
al. 2002) or when individuals vary in other ways in their suitability as coopera-
tive partners (Chapais, this volume). However, substantial evidence exists for a 
role of kin selection in the social behavior of female-philopatric primates (Pope 
2000a, Chapais et al. 1997; see Silk, this volume). For male-philopatric chim-
panzees, we can make three testable predictions concerning the distribution 
of kin in social groups. First, males should be more related than females, since 
males are the primary hunters in chimpanzees. Second, to explain differences 
between Gombe and Taï, we would expect Taï males to be more related than 
Gombe males, as the first hunt so much more often in groups. Third, and even if 
the two first predictions are not supported, we should expect individual males 
within a group to choose to hunt more frequently with those individuals that are 
more related to them.
Table 8.2. Differences in chimpanzee hunting behavior.
Gombea
Mahaleb
Ngogoc
Taïd
Group hunt
36%
72%
100%
84%
Collaboration
19%
0%
rare
77%
a Busse 1977, 1978, Goodall 1986
b Nishida et al. 1983, Uehara et al. 1992
c Watts & Mitani 2002
d Boesch & Boesch-Achermann 2000

144
Christophe Boesch et al.
Fig. 8.1 shows the average relatedness of the Taï chimpanzees as measured 
with microsatellite nuclear DNA markers (Vigilant et al. 2001). It shows very 
clearly that despite the fact that in Taï chimpanzees, males are philopatric and 
almost all females transfer between groups before reaching maturity, in each 
of the three groups on average the males are not significantly more related 
than the females. In addition, males in Taï chimpanzees and in Gombe chim-
panzees have very similar, near zero average relatedness values. Therefore, the 
presently available data do not support the first two predictions that would 
originate from a kin selection explanation for male cooperative hunting.
However, the most interesting test is at the individual level, because males 
may selectively hunt with the individuals most related to them. The matrix in 
Table 8.3 shows the relevant data for joint hunting in Taï chimpanzees during 
two different time periods in 1987–1989 and in 1990–1994. Taï chimpanzees 
hunt mainly in groups containing an average of 3.5 individuals. To test for se-
lective hunting according to relatedness, we established a second matrix with 
a pairwise comparison of genetic similarity for those males that we could sam-
ple (three individuals observed during the first period could not be sampled 
as they died before the initiation of the genetics project). Table 8.4 reveals that 
only one dyad out of 21 was judged significantly more likely to represent a half-
sibling rather than an unrelated pair (using the program Kinship). The ability 
to determine a half-sibling from typical genotype information alone is lim-
ited (Blouin 2003), as is illustrated by the fact that a known maternal brother 
pair (Kendo-Fitz) was not significantly supported as a sibling pair when using 
Kinship. Nonetheless, all other dyads had low or negative (indicating lower 
relatedness than a random pair from the population) relatedness estimates, 
suggesting that no other pairs of relatives were present.
Fig. 8.1. Estimated relatedness (R) of the various demographic categories at Taï and Gombe.

145
8 Cooperative hunting in chimpanzees: kinship or mutualism?
Table 8.5 presents the results of the correlation between these two matrices 
and clearly shows that relatedness had no significant relationship with joint 
hunting over both time periods. We checked for the importance of two addi-
tional factors, age and social rank, often proposed to be important in social 
interactions in chimpanzees. Of these, age had no effect but social rank played 
a significant role, in that males tended to hunt more frequently with males of 
Table 8.3. Dyadic frequency of joint hunting in Taï males between 1987 and 1989 (upper 
half), and between 1990 and 1994 (lower half). Joint hunting was calculated as the num-
ber of hunts where two individuals were actively hunting divided by the number of hunts 
where both were present regardless of whether they were hunting or not.
Bru
Dar
Ken
Mac
Rou
Sno
Uly
Ali
Fit
Bru
*
0.22
0.47
0.47
0.29
0.50
0.48
0.57
0.44
Dar
0.26
*
0.32
0.28
0.18
0.57
0.28
0.22
0.33
Ken
0.36
0.15
*
0.29
0.24
0.67
0.46
0.35
0.44
Mac
0.54
0.33
0.44
*
0.26
0.48
0.47
0.42
0.63
Rou
*
0.50
0.26
0.17
0.21
Sno
*
0.43
0.33
1.00
Uly
*
0.54
0.61
Ali
0.64
0.17
0.31
0.42
*
0.43
Fit
0.60
0.31
0.42
0.68
0.67
*
Mar
0.54
0.27
0.33
0.67
1.00
0.86
Table 8.4. Pairwise relatedness estimates for Taï male chimpanzees. In bold is the only 
dyad that was judged from genotype information to be significantly likely to be related at 
the half-sibling level, and underlined is the only dyad known to have the same mother.
Bru
Dar
Ken
Mac
Ali
Fit
Mar
Bru
*
–0.186
–0.197
0.019
–0.080
0.002
–0.225
Dar
*
0.218
–0.166
0.038
–0.102
0.096
Ken
*
–0.021
–0.054
0.184
–0.065
Mac
*
–0.129
–0.033
0.016
Ali
*
–0.064
–0.092
Fit
*
–0.074
Mar
*

146
Christophe Boesch et al.
similar social rank. Social rank was important in both time periods considered, 
despite the fact that some individual males died between the two periods and 
others occupied different social ranks (e.g. Macho decreased from the alpha 
position during the first period to the third position in the second, while Fitz 
was the seventh-ranking male in the first period but the alpha male in the sec-
ond one).
Therefore, we can say that none of the three predictions were supported by 
the data and therefore kin selection generally appears not to be an important 
factor in explaining the hunting behavior of chimpanzees in the Taï Forest.
8.2.2
Mutualistic hypothesis
We now turn our attention to a mutualistic explanation, whereby we expect 
chimpanzees to hunt because they profit directly from taking part in this activ-
ity. Here again, we can make three different predictions. First, hunters should 
gain more when hunting in groups than when hunting alone. This would provide 
males with a strong incentive to wait for others to join or enlist others in the 
hunting activity. Second, for a given group size, we should expect hunters to gain 
more than non-hunters. If that were not true, we would not expect to see group 
hunting, as it would be better to cheat rather than to invest energy in a hunt. 
Third, we expect the first two predictions to apply more clearly to the situation 
in Taï chimpanzees than in Gombe chimpanzees and that this would explain the 
difference we have observed in the group hunting tendencies observed between 
these two populations (Table 8.2).
Fig. 8.2 shows the net benefit of three hunting strategies of male chimpan-
zees of the Taï Forest; namely hunter, bystander and latecomer. With regards 
to the first prediction, the success of hunters increases steadily and reaches a 
maximum when five individuals hunt together. This increase is significant and 
individual hunters gain significantly less when hunting in groups of three to five 
(rs = 0.78, n = 7, p < 0.05; Boesch 1994). Similarly, Fig. 8.3 reveals that for hunt-
ing groups of three to five individuals, it pays an individual to be a hunter rather 
than a bystander or a latecomer (Wilcoxon signed-rank test: Hunter versus By-
Table 8.5. Rowwise matrix correlations (Kr-test) of joint hunting with relatedness, age and 
rank in Taï male chimpanzees.
Relatedness
Age
Rank
Joint hunt
Kr
1018
1480
1
1987-1989
p value
0.203
0.296
0.0002
Joint hunt
Kr
2308
232
1
1990-1994
p value
0.461
0.046
0.0002

147
8 Cooperative hunting in chimpanzees: kinship or mutualism?
stander: for group size 3: T+ = 32, n = 8, p < 0.05; for group size 4: T+ = 31, n = 8, 
p < 0.05; Hunter versus Latecomer: for group sizes 3 to 5; T+ ≥ 30, n = 8, p < 0.05) 
(Boesch 1994). Therefore, there is not only an incentive for hunters to hunt in 
groups, but also for non-hunters to become hunters.
In Fig. 8.3, it is also possible to compare the relative success of both hunters 
and bystanders in Taï or in Gombe chimpanzees. There is a clear difference, 
for in Gombe bystander success does not differ from hunter success, except for 
groups of five hunters, in which case it is better to be a bystander (Wilcoxon 
signed-rank test: T+ = 30, n = 8, p < 0.05) (Boesch 1994).
In conclusion, a mutualistic explanation, in which hunters receive direct 
benefits from cooperating appears to explain hunting in Taï chimpanzees. 
However, this does not appear to be the case in Gombe and this may explain 
why group hunting there is less frequent. An interesting correlate of this re-
sult is that meat-sharing among the males is done according to different rules 
in each population. In Taï chimpanzees, it is the behavior of the male that is 
the strongest predictor of the amount of meat he receives, with hunters re-
ceiving more than non-hunters and good hunters receiving the most (Boesch 
1994, Boesch & Boesch-Achermann 2000). In Gombe, social dominance is the 
strongest predictor of meat access, with higher-ranking individuals receiving 
more, either through sharing or through stealing from the owner (Goodall 
1986, Stanford et al. 1993, Boesch 1994). In Mahale chimpanzees, the domi-
nant males secure the captured prey in the vast majority of the cases and favor 
allies when distributing meat (Nishida et al. 1992). Similarly, in Ngogo chim-
panzees, meat-sharing occurs reciprocally with coalition partners of the meat 
owners (Mitani & Watts 2001). Thus, it seems that within each chimpanzee 
population, additional social factors are important and interact with the hunt-
ing behavior to result in different meat-sharing rules. It is notable that only in 
Taï chimpanzees do the sharing rules appear to support the stability of coop-
eration between individual active hunters.
Fig. 8.2. Hunting success and weight captured as a function of the number of males participating 
in the hunt.

148
Christophe Boesch et al.
8.3
Discussion
Our analyses have revealed that cooperation in hunting among Taï chimpanzees 
is not readily explained by kin selection, but rather is the result of a mutualistic 
process in which all participants gain more than if they were acting alone. This 
result is consistent with investigations in two other chimpanzee populations of 
the importance of kin selection in explaining social behavior. A first study of the 
Kanyawara chimpanzees in the Kibale National Park of Uganda revealed that 
maternal genetic relatedness, estimated using mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), did 
not predict social interactions such as association patterns or grooming interac-
tions between individuals (Goldberg & Wrangham 1997). Similarly, in Ngogo 
chimpanzees of the Kibale National Park, Uganda, maternal genetic relatedness 
Fig. 8.3. Net benefit of different strategies used by chimpanzees when hunting red colobus mon-
keys in (a) Taï and (b) Gombe.

149
8 Cooperative hunting in chimpanzees: kinship or mutualism?
did not predict association patterns, grooming interactions, alliance between 
individuals, meat-sharing interactions or patrol participation among the males 
(Mitani et al. 2000).
The role of kinship in influencing behavior in social insects has been well 
documented, and there has been an expectation that kin selection would be a 
major factor for explaining social behavior in other animal taxa as well (Ham-
ilton 1964, Wilson 1975, Maynard Smith & Szathmary 1995). In mammals, the 
role of kinship has been generally confirmed in social systems where disper-
sal patterns allow for related individuals to remain together, as in cooperatively 
breeding species in which helpers are often close kin or within female matrilines 
found in different primate species where social support may be given accord-
ing to degree of relatedness (Chapais et al. 1997, Clutton-Brock 2002, West et 
al. 2002). However, in other studies, such as those on chimpanzees mentioned 
above, the influence of kin selection has not been found (Clutton-Brock et al. 
2001b).
Two factors have been proposed to limit the generality of kin selection. First, 
groups of social animals may contain a high proportion of relatives and so com-
petition between relatives may become a problem. It has been shown that com-
petition between relatives can drastically limit the benefit of kin selection and 
that this might be a much more general phenomenon than previously estimated 
(West et al. 2002). Second, for some tasks it might be preferable to cooperate with 
particular individuals regardless of relatedness, as for example in a situation in 
which cooperation with an individual with particular skills is likely to lead to a 
better outcome (Chapais, this volume). In addition, motivation and predictabil-
ity might be factors that explain why in Taï and possibly in Ngogo chimpanzees, 
it is similarity in rank and sometimes age for Ngogo (Table 8.5) rather than re-
latedness that are more important in predicting the distribution of social inter-
actions and joint participation in hunting. Individuals of similar rank and age 
seem to share more similar social interests and are more likely to cooperate.
Mutualism has long been recognized as one of the mechanisms leading to the 
evolution of cooperation, but because of its obvious nature, ‘if both gain more, 
then they should cooperate’, theoreticians have neglected it and concentrated 
on less obvious mechanisms, such as delayed reciprocity and altruism (May-
nard Smith 1982, Dugatkin 1997). However, a growing body of studies shows that 
mutualism has been underestimated because the costs of participating in the 
cooperative act have been overestimated and the direct benefits of cooperation 
have probably been underestimated (Clutton-Brock 2002). Hunting in Taï chim-
panzees is best explained by a mutualistic process where each hunter gains more 
by hunting together with others. Cheaters that try to get access to meat without 
investing in the hunt have some success in obtaining meat, but clearly less than 
hunters, and that contributes to the stability of hunting in Taï (Boesch 1994).
The variability in chimpanzee hunting behavior seems to reflect an ecologi-
cal difference, namely the difficulty of the habitat where the hunt is taking place. 
In the dense tropical forest of the Taï Forest, where monkey prey species have the 
possibility to escape in all directions, the hunting success of the chimpanzees 
is very low if they do not hunt in groups (Boesch 1994, Watts & Mitani 2002). 
In contrast, if they hunt monkeys in a disrupted forest, they can more easily 

150
Christophe Boesch et al.
corner them and hunting success seems much less affected by group size (Stan-
ford et al. 1993, Boesch 1994, Watts & Mitani 2002). An additional demographic 
factor plays a role in which a larger number of hunters are able to disrupt prey 
defenses by overpowering numbers. This is best illustrated in the exceptionally 
large community at Ngogo where many individuals (up to 25 adult males) have 
been observed to hunt at the same time in a not very coordinated way but with a 
very high success rate (Watts & Mitani 2002). This has been observed in Gombe 
as well, where many individuals hunting at the same time in a non-coordinated 
way are able to make multiple captures (Goodall 1986, Boesch 1994). Similarly, 
in the Taï Forest, the number of potential hunters, for example adult males, in 
the community, has been found to influence both the frequency of hunts and the 
number of hunters (Boesch & Boesch-Achermann 2000).
Once they hunt, chimpanzees seem to have the ability to use the benefit of 
the hunt in a flexible manner. We suggest that when hunting is difficult, they are 
constrained to guarantee the stability of cooperation and therefore meat-shar-
ing has to favor the hunters. However, when hunting is easier, cooperation is not 
necessary and the meat can be used to pursue other social goals. Thus, meat can 
become a currency used to pay for social services, allies in Mahale, social part-
ners in Ngogo or simply to be taken away by dominant individuals in Gombe. 
This is somehow reminiscent of the situation that has been described for human 
hunter-gatherers. Among the Hadza, meat acquisition can be a quite solitary un-
dertaking for men and meat-sharing then follows quite flexible social goals not 
directly related to hunting (Hawkes et al. 2001, Marlowe 2003), while for the net 
hunters like the Aka pygmies, meat-sharing follows very strict rules to ensure 
the cooperation of the different hunters (Bahuchet 1985).
In conclusion, cooperation in hunting among Tai chimpanzees does not 
seem to result from a kin selection process but rather from a mutualistic pro-
cess. Mutualism not only explains some of the differences in the frequency of 
group hunts observed within the species but also the way meat is shared after 
a successful hunt. The importance of mutualism seen in chimpanzees has also 
been reported for other animal species and might lead to a revision of the rela-
tive importance of the different mechanisms that can lead to the evolution of 
cooperation in nature.
Acknowledgments
We thank the Ivorian authorities for supporting this study since it began in 1979, 
especially the Ministry of the Environment and Forests as well as the Ministry of 
Research, the Director of the Taï National Park, and the Swiss Research Centre 
in Abidjan. We thank Grégoire Kouhon Nohan and Honora Néné who helped to 
collect chimpanzee samples and behavioral data. We thank the organizers of 
the Freilandtage meeting in Goettingen in 2003 for inviting us to contribute to 
this volume. The Max Planck Society and the Swiss National Science Foundation 
supported this work financially.

Toward a general model for male-male coalitions 
in primate groups
Carel P. van Schaik, Sagar A. Pandit, Erin R. Vogel
9.1
Introduction
Of the many forms cooperation can take in nonhuman primates, the formation 
of coalitions is perhaps the most spectacular. Coalitions can be defined as coor-
dinated attacks by at least two individuals on one or more targets, often preced-
ed by signaling between the attackers (side-directed communication: de Waal & 
van Hooff 1981, de Waal 1992a; cf. Smuts & Watanabe 1990). They may serve to 
protect against attacks by more powerful individuals, to defend or gain access 
to resources or to acquire the dominance rank of the target individual. Animals 
forming the coalitions often are friends, as defined by Silk (2002c), although this 
is not true in all cases (Noë & Sluijter 1995). Friendships that involve coalitions 
are commonly called alliances (Harcourt & de Waal 1992a).
Mothers of many mammalian species protect immature offspring, but coali-
tions among adults are remarkably limited in their taxonomic distribution to 
carnivores, cetaceans and primates (Harcourt 1992). This pattern suggests that 
there are obstacles to the evolution of adult coalitions. We will briefly discuss 
the two major ones. First, in a functional sense, coalitions may contain altru-
istic acts (Packer 1977, de Waal 1982a, Noë 1990, Chapais 1995, Dugatkin 1997). 
Theorists often consider the presence of delays between providing the agonistic 
support and reaping possible rewards an important differentiating factor be-
tween the non-nepotistic categories of cooperation. In coalitionary interactions, 
delays are common, even when the eventual outcome is mutualistic in that all 
coalition partners increase their rank, perhaps after several initially unreward-
ed coalitions. The delays can also be quite variable, depending on the rather 
unpredictable outcomes of coalitions and the unpredictable time until the next 
opportunity. Long and variable delays may make it hard for coalitions to become 
established.
A second obstacle to the evolution of coalitions is that most of them at least 
potentially involve a high risk of injury. This is especially clear where lower-
ranking animals team up to attack a higher-ranking target (but even if high-
ranking individuals team up to attack a single low-ranking target, there is al-
ways some chance that others, either powerful or simply numerous, will come 
to the victim’s aid). In general, there is a serious risk of injury when a coalition 
partner defects in the middle of an escalated coalitionary fight. Thus, coalitions 
will tend to involve some cost to the participants, unless the partners can trust 
Chapter 9

152
Carel P. van Schaik et al.
each other not to defect during the fight. We believe that this trust problem may 
be another serious obstacle to the evolution of coalitions.
The presence of these obstacles may explain the limited taxonomic distribu-
tion of coalitions (Trivers 1971). Coalitions are common in organisms that are 
long-lived, live in stable associations, and form friendships (Cheney et al. 1986). 
Living for years in a stable group provides frequent opportunities for reciproca-
tion, and the trust needed to form coalitions is built and maintained in friend-
ships in which a variety of social services are exchanged.
Coalitions are common among primates, but that does not mean that all spe-
cies display them. The conditions giving rise to coalitions among female primates 
have received much theoretical attention (Wrangham 1980, van Schaik 1989, Isbell 
1991, Sterck et al. 1997). The basic idea is that a high potential for contest compe-
tition (either within or between groups) leads related females to form nepotistic 
alliances and to be philopatric. It also produces predictable patterns of rank in-
heritance, the details of which may vary as a result of demography (Datta 1988, 
Chapais 1995) or the age trajectory of reproductive value (Chapais & Schulman 
1980).
Coalitions among males, however, have not received similarly intensive scru-
tiny (but see Noë 1994), although their incidence is at least as spotty (van Schaik 
1996) and within-taxon variation is also appreciable (Noë 1992, Pandit & van 
Schaik 2003). Although there is a trend for males to support relatives more than 
non-relatives (cf. Silk 1992a), nepotism does not explain much of the variation, 
if only because in many species the males in a group are not closely related. For 
instance, in male-philopatric chimpanzees, where close kin is at hand, allies are 
generally not close relatives (Goldberg & Wrangham 1997, Mitani et al. 2000, 
Vigilant et al. 2001). A different framework is therefore needed for males.
When we tally all the male-male coalitionary interactions observed in a 
group of primates over a given period, the emerging pattern may seem confus-
ingly complex. Coalitions may occur in many configurations (Chapais 1995; see 
below for details), in various contexts (Noë 1992), in many different combina-
tions, and not always consistently in support of the same partners or aimed at 
the same target (e.g. Silk 1993). They may occur spontaneously or as interven-
tions in ongoing conflicts (de Waal et al. 1976), and some of them apparently 
beat their opponent(s) whereas others end in some kind of stalemate. It is not 
easy to identify the underlying strategic goals governing each male’s decisions 
but it is a reasonable working hypothesis that their general goal is an increase in 
fitness. The most promising avenue for modeling, therefore, is to try to predict 
those outcomes that can be explicitly linked to fitness gains. If this approach can 
explain a considerable portion of the coalitions observed, we may then be able to 
identify the more intermediate tactical goals or as yet unknown strategic goals 
served by the remaining coalitions that are not immediately explained by the 
model. Here, we will adopt this approach, and will return to the coalitions not 
explained by the model in the discussion.
For the purpose of modeling, then, we are mainly concerned with outcomes. 
The aim of this chapter is to begin explaining the distribution of within-group 
male-male coalitions by developing and testing a general cost-benefit model for 
one class of male-male coalitions, offensive coalitions. We have so far produced 

153
9 Toward a general model for male-male coalitions in primate groups
two technical papers on this subject (Pandit & van Schaik 2003, van Schaik et al. 
2004). Our purpose here is to explain the basic logic underlying the models rather 
than the mathematical details, present the predictions and their tests, and discuss 
how the coalitions considered in this model fit into the overall scheme of coalition-
ary behavior in primates. To explain the basis for the model, we will begin with a 
review of the nature of male-male competition and coalitions in primates.
9.1.1
Male-male competition and coalitions in primates
Whether or not successful coalitions produce fitness benefits depends largely 
on the relationship between fitness and dominance rank. For males in a primate 
group, this curve is invariably and inevitably concave (at best approaching linear-
ity), never convex (see Fig. 9.1). The reason for this is that males compete through 
contest for a set of constant-sum resources, fertilizations, which leads to a dis-
tribution of fertilizations determined by priority of access (Altmann 1962), also 
referred to as queuing (Alberts et al. 2003); the top-ranking male takes whatever 
he can monopolize of what is left, and so on down. In this model, a male’s payoff 
is affected only by the number of males ranking above him, not by the number of 
males ranking below him or the total number of males in the group (as in Lom-
nicki’s 1988 strict definition of contest). This process leads to negative exponential 
payoff curves with rank, except in the limiting case of complete scramble competi-
tion where males share all matings and therefore fertilizations equally.
Studies of primate males competing over females have generally confirmed 
the priority-of-access model (Altmann 1962, Bulger 1993, Weingrill et al. 2000, 
Alberts et al. 2003). We previously introduced the parameter β to describe the 
shape of the relationship or degree of despotism (Pandit & van Schaik 2003); 
β is the proportional reduction in payoff from one male to the next-lower rank-
ing male. When β is near its upper limit of 1, virtually all fertilizations will be 
Fig. 9.1. The basic payoff curves with rank, for males competing over mating access to females: 
contest through priority of access in a constant-sum situation. Dotted line: β = 1.0; solid line: β = 0.5; 
broken line: β = 0.1

154
Carel P. van Schaik et al.
concentrated in the top-ranking males, whereas β approaching zero indicates 
pure scramble, in which all males will have approximately equal chances of fer-
tilization regardless of their dominance rank, as a result of frequent matings by 
all and sperm competition.
The value of β is determined by a variety of factors: (i) demography (number of 
females in the group), (ii) ecology (degree of reproductive seasonality, producing 
more or less overlap in female mating periods), (iii) female reproductive physiol-
ogy (the number of cycles per conception, the duration of the fertile window in 
each cycle, the presence of non-fertile mating periods, and the degree to which 
females actively synchronize or desynchronize their cycles), and (iv) female be-
havior (preferences for mating with dominant or subordinate males, or for polyan-
drous mating). We will postpone the discussion of how to estimate β until later.
For females in primate groups, on the other hand, the curve relating domi-
nance to fitness will generally be near linear or even somewhat convex, but rare-
ly concave. Females generally compete for access to food. Where food occurs in 
defensible patches, access to it can be contested. These patches can usually hold 
several females, who will all acquire approximately equal intakes. Even where 
the patches are smaller, however, high-ranking females will generally not sys-
tematically exclude others because that would deprive them from a major benefit 
of gregariousness; protection against predators (van Schaik 1983, Janson 1992). 
Moreover, the displaced individuals can usually find other food nearby or wait 
and subsequently gain access to the same food (albeit perhaps at higher risk). 
Thus, high-ranking females will show restraint to prevent the lower-rankers 
from avoiding them and forming a group on their own. Males generally have no 
such concerns since they tend to associate with groups of females.
We note that the resources over which the males in a group compete generally 
come in a fixed total amount (van Hooff & van Schaik 1992, van Schaik 1996). 
The number of fertilizations in a particular group during a particular period of 
time will be constant, and coalitions will not change this amount. As a result, the 
areas under each of the different curves drawn in Fig. 9.1 are all equal (an impor-
tant factor in the modeling). Another implication of constant-sumness concerns 
leveling coalitions. Whereas these coalitions should always increase the number 
of matings with fertile females, they will not automatically bring increased fit-
ness for both partners because they have to share this access. This property will 
therefore make it more difficult for them to gain a fitness benefit from forming 
coalitions; we assume approximately equal sharing of access to fertile females 
and hence paternity (see below; but see Noë 1990).
In sum, because of the sex difference in the shape of the curves and because 
nepotism is usually not a major factor among males (unlike the situation among 
females, we must develop an independent approach to modeling male-male co-
alitions within groups.

155
9 Toward a general model for male-male coalitions in primate groups
9.2
The Model
We always consider coalitions with a single target; this is also by far the most 
common pattern of within-group coalitions among primates. The basic ap-
proach is to identify the conditions in which coalitions are viable, i.e. expected 
to occur. We recognize two components of viability that have to be met simul-
taneously: profitability and feasibility. Coalitions are profitable when, for each 
coalition member, the direct benefits in terms of increase in fitness exceed the 
costs in terms of reduction in fitness (both relative to the situation without 
coalitions) through risk of injury or death and energy expenditure or stress. 
We will therefore employ a parameter, C, that denotes these costs, which we 
assume to be equal for all members (this assumption is especially reasonable 
for coalitions in which animals attack a higher-ranking target). Coalitions are 
feasible if they are strong enough to beat their target (and exceed their cost, 
again denoted by C), which requires that we have some way of adding up the 
fighting ability of the individual players.
Before proceeding to present the model, we need to insert a comment on 
terminology, because game theorists and behavioral biologists use coalition in 
a different sense. In animal behavior, the unit of analysis is the coalition, which 
is the actual interaction. In contrast, what in game theory (Kahan & Rapoport 
1984) is called a coalition is what a behavioral biologist would call a successful 
alliance, i.e. the situation that arises when the alliance has achieved its goal. 
This difference is most acute for rank-changing coalitions, in which numer-
ous coalitionary interactions may be needed before rank change is achieved 
and then may continue to be needed occasionally to maintain the new ranks. 
All of this is considered a single ‘coalition’ in the model. These different terms 
do not affect the model because costs and benefits are measured in the same 
units: fitness components per unit time. Incidentally, our model is not a game-
theoretical model; it merely borrows useful concepts and terminology from 
Kahan & Rapoport (1984).
We consider three basic configurations of coalition members relative to 
their (single) target (Fig. 9.2): (i) all-down, (ii) bridging, and (iii) all-up. Chapa-
is (1995) calls these conservative, bridging and revolutionary, respectively. It is 
obvious that all-down coalitions are always feasible; a combination of higher-
rankers can always beat single lower-rankers. However, because there is no 
immediate fitness gain when the coalition members are already high-ranking 
and have priority of access to the limiting resources, they are not profitable 
in the sense used in the model (in the discussion, we will consider situations 
where they may bring indirect benefits to the participants). Bridging coali-
tions against a single target are always feasible as well because the highest-
ranking coalition member acting alone can always beat the target. However, 
they are not profitable for the higher-ranking member of the coalition unless 
1 Alternatively, the supported individual is a non-relative providing some essential support to the 
high ranker in return, something we only expect in humans.

156
Carel P. van Schaik et al.
the lower-ranking individual in the coalition is a relative, and the support can 
therefore improve the inclusive fitness of the supporter1. All-up coalitions may 
be feasible, when several low-rankers gang up to attack a higher-ranking tar-
get. When they succeed, they should also generally be profitable because of the 
improved ranks of the coalition partners, unless they are prohibitively costly 
due to high risk of injury or stress.
Both bridging and all-up coalitions can be profitable in two very different 
ways (Fig. 9.3). Coalitions can improve the ranks of the coalition members, but 
Fig. 9.2. Basic configurations of within-group coalitions (after Chapais 1995). Arrows indicate 
attacks.
Fig. 9.3. The rank-changing and leveling varieties of both all-up and bridging coalitions.

157
9 Toward a general model for male-male coalitions in primate groups
they can also improve the payoffs of their members by providing instantaneous 
(if temporary) access to the limiting resource, usually fertilizable females, with-
out changing the ranks of the coalition members, a phenomenon we call level-
ing. In the case of bridging coalitions, this leveling takes the form of protection 
of lower-ranking relatives in contexts linked to competition. In the all-up con-
figuration, such leveling is accomplished by coordinated attacks on a high-rank-
ing male who is in consort with an estrous female. This context has been studied 
in detail in baboons (Packer 1977, Smuts 1985, Bercovitch 1988, Noë 1990, 1992), 
but in theory the same all-up leveling coalitions may also be found when no 
resource is directly at stake and then serve to induce the high-ranking male to 
show some restraint in mating competition. The model is really about these four 
kinds of situations: the rank changing and leveling varieties of bridging and all-
up coalitions.
Feasibility needs to be estimated as well. To assess it, we have to solve the 
problem of determining the ‘value’ (i.e. strength) of the coalition. This prob-
lem has two components. First, we must decide how to estimate the strength 
of the coalition. We opted for the simplest assumption and simply added the 
strengths of the individuals in it, ignoring a possible effect of the number of 
participants. Second, we must determine which aspect of the individuals we 
need to sum. Here, again, we opted for the simplest solution and used the pay-
off before coalitions as the best estimate of a male’s contribution to the alli-
ance’s strength (Pandit & van Schaik 2003, van Schaik et al. 2004). Ideally, we 
would like to use fighting ability, but that is very difficult to estimate, even if 
experiments are possible (cf. Noë 1990, 1994). Payoff, on the other hand, can 
be estimated by paternity analysis. Where β is modest, payoff and fighting 
ability are expected to show very similar functional forms with rank, allowing 
us to use payoff as our estimate of strength. At steep β, we expect the payoff 
differences to exceed those in strength, but fortunately, the model indicates no 
all-up coalitions (the only configuration for which feasibility is non-trivial) for 
β > 0.5, thus keeping the error modest.
We also incorporate a cost to feasibility because the allies need to coordinate 
their attacks with great precision and need to be prepared to do so at all times, 
and hence face some ecological and social cost. For simplicity, we have assumed 
that the cost C used to calculate profitability can be employed here as well. This 
assumption is probably not entirely correct, but the error is not likely to affect 
the predictions by much.
Although mathematically cumbersome, it is straightforward to calculate for 
each possible coalition (set of males attacking a particular target) whether it is 
profitable from the perspective of changing the ranks or payoffs of the allies, i.e. 
whether the formation of coalitions exceeds its costs, for each member. Feasibil-
ity can similarly be calculated. If for a given coalition, both conditions are satis-
fied for each member of the coalition, we predict the coalition to occur, although 
its frequency relative to other kinds of coalitions should of course depend on the 
net increase in payoff. We can then examine the features of these viable coali-
tions, such as the β range in which they are found, their sizes, the ranks of the 
participants, etc. 

158
Carel P. van Schaik et al.
Here, we give an intuitive account of the predictions for the rank changing 
and leveling varieties of each of the two relevant configurations (all-up and 
bridging). Readers interested in the details should consult the technical papers 
(Pandit & van Schaik 20032, van Schaik et al. 2004). The predictions for each 
context are summarized in Table 9.1.
9.2.1
All-up, within-group coalitions: rank-changing
At constant C, the profitability of rank-changing coalitions increases as despo-
tism increases, whereas their feasibility decreases. Hence, we expect them at in-
termediate values of β (and given our rule of calculating feasibility by comparing 
the sum of the coalition members’ payoffs with that of the target, at β < 0.5). 
Because of the concave shape of the payoff curve, we expect these coalitions to 
be concentrated among the higher ranks; benefits are highest in that region. For 
the same reason, coalitions are expected to be small (larger coalitions will neces-
sarily involve lower rankers for whom moving up in rank makes little difference 
in payoff). We therefore expect coalitions to concern the highest ranks, be fairly 
small, and involve mid- to high-ranking individuals.
2 We have abandoned some terms and procedures used in that paper, which was our first explo-
ration of the problem.  In particular, we now let leveling refer strictly to the process of flattening 
the payoff curve (rather than to all-up as done in that paper). Moreover, we no longer assign a 
role to motivation in estimating the strength of the coalition, because the motivations (expected 
payoff differentials due to coalition formation) of the target and the coalition members may tend 
to cancel.
Table 9.1. Summary of predictions for within-group, male-male coalitions.
Type
Target
Members
Size
Despotism
All-up, rank-
changing
Top or near-
top
Just below 
top
Small (two or 
three)
Medium
All-up, level-
ing
Top or near-
top
Mid- and low-
rankers
Small-large
Low-me-
dium
Bridging, 
rank-chang-
ing
Near-top
Top-ranker 
and relative 
not far below
Small (usually 
two)
More as 
despotism 
higher
Bridging, 
leveling
Anywhere
Variable
(variable)
Variable
All-down
Low-rankers 
threatening 
to form all-up 
coalitions
Top- and near-
top-rankers
Probably 
small
(whenever 
all-up and 
bridging 
occur)

159
9 Toward a general model for male-male coalitions in primate groups
We can sharpen these predictions by including another consideration. High-
ranking males can form effective counter-coalitions in an all-down configura-
tion (which are always feasible) that prevent the occurrence of successful all-up 
coalitions. This is especially likely for the all-up, rank-changing configuration 
where the fitness loss of losing rank position is likely to outweigh the moderate 
cost of an all-down coalition (largely in the form of opportunity costs). Because 
the top ranker cannot form counter-coalitions with a male that ranks even high-
er than him, he would be the preferred target. Thus, the sharpened prediction 
is that all-up, rank-changing coalitions should generally be formed by a small 
number of males ranking immediately below the top-ranking male.
9.2.2
All-up, within-group coalitions: leveling
We use the same rule for estimating the feasibility of all-up leveling coalitions 
as for all-up, rank-changing coalitions. This may not be quite correct since the 
maximum risk level may be slightly lower, but as with other assumptions it 
should be close enough for this kind of strategic model. The profitability is obvi-
ously very different from the rank-changing variety; we are now asking whether 
the members gain enough in fitness from improved access to mates to outweigh 
the costs. To calculate this profitability, we have to resort to yet another simpli-
fication. For each particular coalition that is feasible, we check whether leveling 
the payoff curve leads to profitability for the top-ranking member of the coali-
tion. Because he is the most likely not to gain from forming the coalition, if the 
coalition is profitable for him, it will be so for each member of the coalition. If 
so, we accept it as a viable coalition3.
As can be intuited from comparison of the two curves in Fig. 9.3, the predic-
tions are that all-up, leveling coalitions are expected to be relatively large and 
to be formed by mid- to low-ranking males targeting very high-ranking males. 
Mid- to low-ranking males stand to gain the most from these leveling coalitions 
in terms of improved fitness. They are expected to target very high-ranking 
males because those are the ones with access to the estrous females. Coalitions 
need to be relatively large in order to be able to beat the target (see Pandit & van 
Schaik 2003 for details). The curves in Fig. 9.3 also suggest that at higher values 
of b, individuals derive greater fitness benefits from rank-changing coalitions, 
3 We achieved this by introducing a new parameter α, which flattens the payoff curve, yielding a 
payoff function for the 1th male as a function of α and β (Pandit & van Schaik 2003). We calculate 
the optimum value of α, which is right where the highest-ranking member of the coalition starts 
losing payoff compared to not forming the coalition. If this optimum value of α is less than one, 
the payoff curve is flattened and the coalition is accepted as profitable. In practice, we therefore 
assume that the coalition will systematically attempt to intimidate all members ranking above 
the coalition, but because intimidating the top-ranking male will effectively intimidate all males 
ranking below him, we expect that most harassment will be aimed at the top-ranking male. This 
procedure introduces a small error in that it also changes the payoffs of those not participating 
in the coalition (ranking below them), but we considered this error acceptable relative to the 
complexity of alternative ways of modeling.

160
Carel P. van Schaik et al.
and thus would prefer to form those, so the leveling coalitions are especially 
likely at lower values of β.
All-down counter-coalitions are still feasible, but against all-up, leveling co-
alitions, we expect that they are less likely to be profitable. Perhaps the most 
important reason for this is that the payoff of other high-ranking males is not 
affected because they are not targeted and their ranks are not at risk. They may 
also face an opportunity cost to forming the all-down coalition if at the time of 
the coalition they are in consort with another female or with no female at all. If 
counter-coalitions occur, however, they should act to suppress leveling coali-
tions altogether.
9.2.3
Bridging, within-group: rank-changing
These kinds of coalitions are always feasible because they involve at least one 
member outranking the target. Assuming that they contain only two members, 
it is clear that they will never be directly profitable for the higher-ranking mem-
ber. When the lower-ranking member is a close relative, however, kin selection 
may make it profitable for the higher-ranking male (we assume that they will 
always be profitable for the lower-ranker) if the rank increase of the lower-rank-
ing member, corrected for the degree of relatedness with the high-ranker, out-
weighs the cost. Since these benefits increase as degree of despotism increases, 
we expect these coalitions especially at higher β values, and among males in the 
higher regions of the dominance hierarchy. Chapais (in press) has developed a 
similar argument for females.
9.2.4
Bridging, within-group: leveling
Higher-ranking males may always be available to protect lower-ranking relatives. 
However, to qualify as the equivalent among the bridging coalitions to the level-
ing among the all-up coalitions, this protection must increase the lower-ranking 
relative’s access to receptive females. This requires that these coalitions happen 
in the context of males competing directly over access to receptive females. We 
expect them to be viable in a broad range of conditions, but they may be difficult 
to distinguish from the protection of relatives against attacks by others.
9.2.5
Estimating β
There are many different ways in which one could estimate β, the degree of des-
potism in payoffs. Payoffs can be estimated as fertilization rates (rather than, 
for instance, mating success), which we assume to correlate closely with fitness 
(perhaps best estimated as the number of offspring sired that survive to adult-
hood, but obviously rarely possible in naturalistic studies). Fertilization rates 
can be estimated through paternity analysis, or in some obvious cases behavior-
ally. Studies that estimate paternity through molecular techniques (e.g. micro-

161
9 Toward a general model for male-male coalitions in primate groups
satellites) are proliferating, and we rely on a recent compilation of these studies 
here (van Noordwijk & van Schaik 2004).
There are various ways of estimating β from a set of paternities across a range 
of male ranks: (i) the paternity of the top-ranking male (designated as pater-
nity concentration in van Noordwijk & van Schaik 2004), (ii) the ratio of the 
paternity of the second-ranking male to that of the top-ranking male, and (iii) 
the slope of the regression of log (paternity) on rank (cf. Fig. 9.1). What is the 
best estimate depends on two main factors: sample size of fertilizations and the 
number of males (N). In smaller samples, the number of paternities going to 
individual lower-ranking males is likely to vary dramatically due to chance, and 
as a result we expect measure (iii), and even measure (ii), to be more dependent 
on sample size than the first one. This is indeed what we found in a simulation 
experiment where we had groups of 10 males compete for fertilizations and used 
sample sizes of 5, 10, 20 and 50 infants. Especially among smaller sample sizes, 
paternity concentration was both less biased and especially was more precise 
(i.e. it had far lower variance) than the other two measures. On the other hand, 
measure (i) is strictly speaking only valid for infinite N and should therefore be 
increasingly biased as the number of males decreases. Fortunately, however, the 
bias is largest at low β, where we expect N to be larger in any case (Fig. 9.4). We 
will, therefore, use paternity concentration (paternity of the top-ranking male) 
as our estimate of β.
Fig. 9.4. The deviation between paternity concentration (payoff for the top-ranking male) and β. 
Note that the discrepancy increases as the number of males in the group (N) decreases.

162
Carel P. van Schaik et al.
9.3
Observations on primates
9.3.1
Model fit and discrepancies
The model attempts to explain only a subset of the many coalitions that can 
be seen among males in primate groups: all offensive coalitions that are strict-
ly within a group with basically stable ranks, apart from the changes brought 
about by the coalitions. We have shown previously that the predictions of the 
model for these coalitions generally show a good fit with observations, despite 
the many simplifying assumptions (Pandit & van Schaik 2003, van Schaik et al., 
in press). Thus, the predictions listed in Table 9.1 by and large also represent the 
observations.
We found only four unambiguous cases in four species, in which a higher-
ranking male supported a lower-ranking relative to the point that the latter 
moved up in rank to just below his supporter. Nonetheless, these nepotistic co-
alitions were observed in the very conditions where they were expected: des-
potic situations where the high-ranking relative is (near-) top-ranking. We did 
not encounter any reports of bridging, leveling coalitions in primates, in which 
higher-ranking males supported lower-ranking relatives in direct competition 
over access to females, although anecdotal accounts of support of presumed 
male relatives exist.
It is possible that bridging, rank-changing coalitions are so rare because 
close male relatives rarely find themselves together in the same group following 
dispersal and if they do, they may fail to recognize each other with sufficient 
reliability. Alternatively, the rarity of reported bridging coalitions may be an ar-
tifact. One would expect such situations to be rather common where the number 
of immigration targets for dispersing males is limited, if kin recognition rules 
are sufficiently reliable and β is high enough to produce high relatedness among 
male peers. New data on male relatedness will probably lead to a large increase 
in data on bridging coalitions and hence to further tests of the model. These data 
should at least show whether one form of nepotistic behavior (not modeled here) 
is quite common: males showing restraint to their lower-ranking relatives and 
thus smoothing their way to the top if the latter are pre-prime.
We identified seven cases in four species of all-up coalitions where males suc-
cessfully challenged a high-ranker and switched rank, as envisioned in Fig. 9.3. 
The features of these coalitions were in close agreement with the model: chal-
lengers ranked near the top and challenged a top-ranker. We also identified six 
cases in six species of all-up, leveling coalitions. The review of empirical studies 
also found the predicted contrast between the rank changing and leveling vari-
eties of the all-up coalitions, although the number of cases was small (see Table 
9.1). While the targets of both tend to be top-rankers, the participants in leveling 
coalitions are mainly mid-rankers, whereas they tend to rank just below the top 
in rank-changing coalitions. However, we did not find the predicted larger mean 
size of leveling coalitions, although some of the leveling coalitions were indeed 
quite large. We will discuss leveling coalitions in more detail below.

163
9 Toward a general model for male-male coalitions in primate groups
The various kinds of observed within-group coalitions also showed different 
ranges of β values, as expected under the model (Table 9.2; including free-rang-
ing groups in nature only), although the observed range tended to be higher than 
the predicted one: rank-changing all-up coalitions were expected only at β < 0.5. 
We would caution, however, that estimates of β are not always from the same 
group or the same time period, and therefore the conclusion as to the effects of β 
is still preliminary. Moreover, there is a risk of circularity attached to this kind 
of post hoc testing, because successful alliances may actually produce reduced β 
in that males will be less likely to press their full advantage knowing that doing 
so may unleash all-up coalitions.
The good fit between model and observations suggests that the simplifying 
assumptions we have made (simple addition of the values of players to calculate 
the values of the coalition; use of payoff rather than some estimate of fighting 
ability to calculate this value; use of the α parameter in leveling coalitions) were 
not so far off from reality as to diminish the model’s predictive value (see Pandit 
& van Schaik 2003 and van Schaik et al. 2004 for further details). However, the 
finding that coalitions are seen in a systematically higher range of β values than 
expected deserves comment. It indicates that simply adding up the participating 
players’ strengths (payoff values) to arrive at the strength (‘value’) of their coali-
tion is inadequate. This discrepancy may indicate some independent effect of 
the number of coalition members or of fighting abilities. What remains surpris-
ing, however, is not the presence of this effect but its rather modest influence. 
Still, there is an urgent need for field-based estimates of coalition strength based 
on natural variation (cf. Noë 1990, 1994).
9.3.2
More on leveling coalitions
Leveling coalitions show the only real discrepancy between model predictions 
and observations in that observed coalitions were smaller than expected. There 
may be several explanations for the model’s failure. Our predictions assumed 
that all coalitions that moved the α parameter from one to a lower value would 
actually occur. In practice, many of these potential coalitions reduced α by tiny 
Table 9.2. The number of reported cases for each of the three main kinds of coalitions 
examined here (see van Schaik et al., 2004 for details) in relation to the estimated values 
of β in groups of wild primates. Each β class covers a 0.25-section of the range from zero 
to one.
low
medium
high
very high
All-up, leveling
4
2
All-up, rank-changing
3
2
Bridging, rank-changing
1
1
1

164
Carel P. van Schaik et al.
amounts, and the presence of costs would almost certainly make them unprofit-
able in nature. Pandit & van Schaik (2003) attempted to deal with the issue of 
costs. Here, we re-examine this question: a fixed cost (corresponding to g1 in our 
paper) does indeed reduce mean coalition size (Fig. 9.5). This cost will especially 
reduce the involvement of higher-ranking males.
A second problem is that we did not make N dependent on β. This issue will 
be discussed in more detail below, but in most cases we expect fewer males in 
groups with higher β. If we had made N dependent on β, the model would have 
generated fewer large coalitions, and hence fewer coalitions involving very low-
ranking and rather high-ranking males.
Finally, we assumed that costs were constant for all males, but cost may be a 
function of rank distance between the coalition member and the target. If this 
modified assumption is used, the lowest-ranking males will be less likely to be-
come coalition members, again reducing coalition size.
These three technical reasons contribute to explaining the discrepancy be-
tween model and predictions, but there may be biological reasons as well. In 
particular, it is possible that pre-prime males may avoid taking any risks that 
jeopardize their future rise to the top, or that males have trouble finding suit-
able partners for other reasons. More quantitative exploration of both model and 
empirical data is needed to fully resolve this problem.
Within savanna baboon groups (Papio cynocephalus), paternity monopoli-
zation by the top-dominant varies over time, due to demographic variation and 
the relative strength of the top-dominant male. Leveling coalitions vary widely 
in these groups. Consistent with the model, “dominance rank failed to predict 
mating success” (i.e. β approached zero) “when the number of adult males in the 
group was large, when males in the group differed greatly in age, and when the 
highest-ranking male maintained his rank for only short periods” (Alberts et 
Fig. 9.5. The effect of introducing a fixed cost on the size of leveling coalitions through its effect 
on profitability.

165
9 Toward a general model for male-male coalitions in primate groups
al. 2003). It is therefore possible that, as suggested above, a demographic factor, 
namely the presence of many past-prime males, (even as the number of females 
remains constant) allows the formation of larger leveling coalitions, which the 
model predicts can then take place at higher β values (see Fig. 1 in Pandit & van 
Schaik 2003).
Because the observed paternity distribution includes the effects of effective 
leveling coalitions on mating access, there is some risk of circularity when testing 
the predictions (see Pandit & van Schaik 2003). Hence, either detailed compari-
sons or, if possible, experiments must be done. Pandit & van Schaik (2003) noted 
that the comparison between chacma (Papio ursinus) and savanna baboons sup-
ported the model because in chacma baboons, in which leveling coalitions are 
absent, top-dominant males show a strong tendency to monopolize paternity 
(Bulger 1993, Weingrill et al. 2000, Henzi & Barrett 2003), whereas that is usually 
not the case among savanna baboons (e.g. Alberts et al. 2003).
Similar coalitions involving various combinations of lower-ranking males 
and aimed at the top male can be seen in the absence of any direct competition 
over females. Such coalitions are often observed in chimpanzees (Goodall 1986). 
We believe they are best considered leveling coalitions as well, for the following 
reasons. One possible explanation for them is that they are attempts at unseat-
ing the top males. However, this interpretation lacks plausibility because they 
are formed in many different combinations and by (usually post-prime) males 
ranking well below the top rank, with little prospect of attaining that position. A 
second possibility is that their function is to reduce harassment by the top male, 
who frequently directs violent displays at subordinate males. The top-ranker may 
use harassment to reduce the likelihood of the formation of alliances that might 
later threaten to topple him. However, the involvement of past-prime males in 
these coalitions makes this possibility less plausible. The third interpretation is 
that these coalitions serve the same function as in baboons and macaques, i.e. 
to reduce the degree to which the top male will monopolize the matings in the 
community. Bettinger et al. (1993) mention that these all-up coalitions are more 
likely in the presence of swollen females. Thus, the mere possibility of leveling 
coalitions may intimidate the top male, who might therefore insist less on his 
priority of access.
9.4
Discussion
9.4.1
Further tests and extensions
One benefit of explicit modeling is that we can now also examine situations in 
which all-up, rank-changing or leveling coalitions are not expected because β is 
too high. We already noted the chacma baboons, but there may be other exam-
ples as well. For instance, Table 9.3 presents a summary of all male-male coali-
tions observed during 18 months of observation in one group of long-tailed ma-
caques (Macaca fascicularis) containing between six and seven sexually mature 

166
Carel P. van Schaik et al.
non-natal males. Table 9.3 confirms that coalitions among males in this group 
occurred in a variety of contexts (see below), but not to achieve top rank (cf. 
van Noordwijk & van Schaik 2001). A high β value in this population has been 
confirmed (de Ruiter et al. 1994). More detailed work along these lines in popu-
lations with known β values will be useful in evaluating the model in greater 
depth.
The model also draws attention to puzzling exceptions. For example, male 
rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) have never been seen to form all-up coali-
tions, although low and medium β values are common. Dario Maestripieri (pers. 
com.) suggests that this absence may be due to the fact that female rhesus mon-
keys make good allies (see Chapais 1986, 1995), especially if they can easily re-
cruit additional members of their matriline, thus diminishing the value of males 
to each other as allies. Alternative explanations might also be possible, but the 
important point is that the absence of male-male coalitions now becomes an is-
sue to be examined.
9.4.2
The impacts of β
It is clear that the critical variable in the model is β. Fig. 9.6 presents the range of 
outcomes of male-male interactions over the full range of β values, as predicted 
by the model and supported by the preliminary tests conducted to date. The β 
values for the transitions between these outcomes are only approximately indi-
cated because they depend on additional parameters. The appearance of clear 
dominance ranks depends on the cost of agonistic interactions relative to their 
benefit, which are a function of β. Above this β threshold, we expect all-up level-
ing coalitions; whether the ranks effectively disappear again as a result of the 
leveling coalitions is a function of both β and N, the number of males in the 
group (perhaps explaining why this is found only in the largest groups; Pandit & 
Table 9.3. Observed coalitions among males in group H of long-tailed macaques at Ket-
ambe over an 18 month period during 1980-1981 (M. A. van Noordwijk & C. P. van Schaik, 
unpubl.)
Offensive within-group
All-up (rank-changing or leveling)
0
Bridging, leveling
2
Defensive within-group
Challenger from within
21
Challenging immigrant
16
All-down, conservative
15
Bridging, protective
17
Between-group
0
Other
(low-ranking male joins opportunistically)
3

167
9 Toward a general model for male-male coalitions in primate groups
van Schaik 2003). The switch from leveling to rank-changing coalitions is deter-
mined by both β and the costs of coalition formation. Above β = 0.5 (or a some-
what higher value, depending on the detailed implementation of the feasibility 
rules), all-up coalitions should disappear, and the only coalitions expected are 
the bridging, rank-changing variety.
The influence of β reaches well beyond that of coalitions, however. Indeed, 
we expect to see major differences between low- and high- β situations, even 
within species. Van Noordwijk & van Schaik (2004) note that males in low- β 
situations tend to achieve top rank through a queuing or succession process 
rather than through active challenges, as at high β. In high- β situations, the 
top-ranking males are therefore males in their early prime, whereas as β de-
creases, the age of top-rankers will gradually rise, until in the very large groups, 
such as those of Japanese macaques, males rise to the top by default when the 
old top male dies or disappears. As a result, very old and visibly aged males can 
occupy top rank (e.g. Watanabe 2001). In high- β situations, we not only expect 
escalated fights over dominance to be much more common, but also for them 
to be concentrated among the top ranks (see Nishida & Hosaka 1996). In low- β 
situations, males tend to immigrate into groups with more favorable adult sex 
ratios, whereas males in high- β situations tend to move to groups in which the 
demographic situation is such that future prospects of achieving top rank are 
best, although older males understandably fall back on the low- β strategy. Male-
female friendships may also differ predictably. Hence, the degree to which top 
males can achieve full priority of access to females is an important organizing 
variable for male socio-sexual strategies.
Another obvious impact of β is on N. Imagine the effect of imposing a vari-
able cost to a male of living in a mixed-sex group, either due to the risk of injury 
because of attacks by other males or females (tangible even if males refrain from 
overtly participating in mating contests) or due to ecological costs imposed by 
differences in dietary preferences between males and females (van Schaik & van 
Noordwijk 1986). We assume that the males for whom ecological or social costs 
Fig. 9.6. A summary of the predicted offensive male-male coalitions in multi-male groups in relati-
on to β. Switch points are approximate because their β value depends on additional parameters.

168
Carel P. van Schaik et al.
outweigh the mating benefit can join all-male bands if there is also a cost to be-
ing solitary, or alternatively can join other groups in the population with lower 
β. Not surprisingly, such a small cost of group membership makes lower-rank-
ing males more likely to leave the group as β increases, because lower-ranking 
males achieve increasingly reduced payoffs due to fertilizations. As a result, the 
relationship between β and N becomes concave, suggesting that the product β × 
N is approximately constant (Fig. 9.7). This expected concave shape of the rela-
tionship is actually consistent with observations (see figures in van Noordwijk 
& van Schaik 2004).
Within-group coalitions are only possible where there are at least three sex-
ually active males in a group. It is therefore possible that an additional reason 
for the absence of coalitions at high β values is that there may not always be at 
least three males in the group (cf. Henzi et al. 1999)4. However, the most obvious 
relevance of the negative correlation is that it draws attention to the situation 
where N is unusually large despite fairly high β, which may produce leveling 
coalitions that would not otherwise occur. Two main conditions are expected 
to bring this about. First, the number of males may be largely independent of 
β; this could be due to male philopatry, as in chimpanzees, or the presence of 
(non-exclusive) pair bonds, as in humans. Second, females may reduce effec-
tive β if they benefit from the presence of additional males (e.g. van Schaik & 
Hörstermann 1994, Ostner & Kappeler 2004). Clearly, more work is needed to 
4 Obviously, the other predictions of the model still hold. The number of males does not explain 
the contrasting features (β-range, size, ranks of members and targets) of the three main types of 
male-male coalitions examined here.
Fig. 9.7. The predicted relationship between degree of despotism (β) and the number of males in a 
group (N) of female primates when group membership entails a finite fitness cost (C).

169
9 Toward a general model for male-male coalitions in primate groups
establish the relationship between β and the number of sexually active males 
per group, both within and between populations, as well as its socio-ecological 
correlates.
9.4.3
Other kinds of coalitions
The model has explained some of the great variety of coalitionary interactions 
among male primates, but obviously it does not cover many others. We focused 
on one class, the offensive coalitions that bring explicit fitness benefits, either 
because one or more of the members of the coalitions rose in rank or because 
they managed to increase their payoffs by taking some of the resources away 
from high-rankers.
The presence of offensive coalitions may also have produced several other 
interesting social behaviors. First, the threat of all-up offensive coalitions may 
have led to separating interventions by high-ranking males (de Waal 1982a, 
1992a, Perry 1998). The intervening male prevents affiliative contacts between 
possible coalition partners that may allow the latter to build up enough mutual 
trust to launch coalitionary all-up attacks. The presence of preventive all-down 
coalitions where leveling coalitions occur needs to be confirmed. Second, we 
see opportunistic all-down coalitions where males who normally form high-
risk, all-up coalitions attack a weak target, who is unlikely to ever attack them. 
These coalitions have been suggested to test the partners’ willingness to engage 
in more risky coalitionary interactions of the offensive type modeled here or the 
preventive types that follow from them (e.g. de Waal 1992a, Noë 1992). Alterna-
tively, such opportunistic coalitions could be random acts to keep subordinates 
stressed and therefore less likely to mount challenges to higher-ranking indi-
viduals, as suggested by Silk (2002c) for dyadic aggression, although we should 
then see males of all ranks, and especially the higher-ranking ones, engage in 
them. Under either interpretation, their function is not linked to the outcome of 
the interaction, but rather to the maintenance of the alliance itself.
Many defensive coalitions directly follow from the existence of the offensive 
coalitions we modeled. Every successful all-up, rank-changing coalition will 
subsequently produce persistent all-down conservative coalitions in order to 
prevent a reversal to the original situation. Such all-down (conservative) coali-
tions that serve to maintain the status quo are well known for females (Chapais 
1995, Preuschoft & van Schaik 2000). The threat of these preventive coalitions 
was also thought to affect the features of the all-up and bridging coalitions con-
sidered by the model. Thus, even though they are not part of the model, such 
defensive coalitions directly follow from it.
We believe that there are two classes of coalitions that require separate or 
additional modeling: (i) defensive coalitions against unranked targets and (ii) 
coalitions against coalitions. This second kind of defensive coalition does not 
directly follow from the model, which only considers situations in which male 
fighting abilities are stable and where males have explicit ranks (thus excluding 
both immigrants and disequilibria between ranks and fighting ability). First, 
resident males often form coalitions against (individual) immigrant males, 

170
Carel P. van Schaik et al.
where these cannot be ranked yet. Where these immigrants aim at achieving top 
rank, the highest-ranking residents form a defensive alliance (e.g. in long-tailed 
macaques; van Noordwijk & van Schaik 2001; see also Table 9.3). Second, very 
similar coalitions aimed at defending the participants’ rank positions are seen 
against low-ranking individuals that are improving in fighting ability, usually 
due to maturation, to the point that they can soon pass several others to chal-
lenge for top rank. The benefit of these successful defensive coalitions is that 
all members maintain their rank positions, and thus the payoff rates associated 
with them, for a longer time than they would without having formed the coali-
tion. Such coalitions need further modeling to assess the possible effect of β on 
their presence (perhaps they are most likely where β is high but not very high) 
and the possibility of rank changes within the coalitions.
The other class of coalitions not elaborated in the model is when the targets 
of coalitions are other coalitions. For within-group coalitions against coalitions, 
the model can easily be generalized. All-up, rank-changing coalitions will tend 
not to target multiple males because the steep β will make these attacking coali-
tions non-feasible and make the defensive all-down coalitions generally success-
ful (as we saw above). For leveling coalitions, coalitions against coalitions are 
more likely to be feasible but require large numbers of males in the group; maybe 
they will be seen in very large groups.
When the coalitions reside in different groups (as in lions: Packer & Pusey 
1982; howler monkeys: Pope 1990; or chimpanzees: Goodall 1986), the model 
no longer applies mainly because the competition is no longer over a constant 
amount of resources. In primates, coalitionary takeovers of groups, as in brown 
lemurs or capuchin monkeys (Jack & Fedigan 2004, Ostner & Kappeler 2004) 
also fall under this rubric. A separate model is probably needed to account for 
these between-group coalitions.
9.5
Summary and conclusions
In this chapter, we presented a model for within-group coalitions among pri-
mate males. Coalitions occur if they are both feasible, i.e. can beat the target, and 
profitable, i.e. lead to a fitness benefit for all coalition members. Based on sim-
ple logic, we predict the existence of different kinds of coalitions, whose main 
characteristics are the relative ranks of members and targets, and whether or 
not they change the dominance ranks of the participants. The key predictor for 
the different kinds of coalitions is the value of β, the degree to which dominant 
males can monopolize mating access to females.
The model fits what we know about primates rather well, but its main func-
tion is to draw renewed attention to male-male coalitions, which in turn should 
help the development of more encompassing models. Such an empirical cycle 
will not only produce a better understanding of the phenomenon of male coali-
tions (which in general are much more opportunistic than those found among 
females: de Waal 1982a, 1992a, Nishida 1983), but will also allow us to identify 
the decision rules used by males (cf. van Noordwijk & van Schaik 2001) and the 

171
9 Toward a general model for male-male coalitions in primate groups
flexibility in these rules when β varies. The latter task will help us to develop a 
far better appreciation of the cognitive complexity associated with coalitionary 
behavior.
Given the importance of β, it is not surprising to see the presence of behav-
ioral tactical decisions of males that correlate with its value. Some of the varia-
tion in male socio-sexual strategies is observed intraspecifically, especially well 
documented among Japanese macaques (e.g. Sprague et al. 1998). Individual 
male tactics also change with age, especially with respect to dispersal decisions. 
Males also make opportunistic decisions. Groups with rank instability at the top 
attract more immigrating males, probably because monopolization by top-rank-
ers is reduced at such times, and the additional males tend to disappear again 
after the ranks have stabilized (van Noordwijk & van Schaik 2001). Similar in-
traspecific variation is seen for coalitions (see van Schaik et al. 2004).
All of this suggests some flexibility in decision-making that is linked to the 
value of β, although the way(s) in which males derive their implicit estimate of 
β is completely unknown. Despite various attempts (Matsuzawa 2001, de Waal 
2003), our ability to estimate the complexity of social behavior patterns used by 
nonhuman primates is limited. Hence, revealing the existence of these mecha-
nisms may help us to estimate the cognitive demands of various social deci-
sions.
Acknowledgments
We thank Peter Kappeler for the invitation to the fourth Freilandtage, Maria 
van Noordwijk for tallying the coalition data on the long-tailed macaques, and 
Bernard Chapais, Peter Kappeler, Dario Maestripieri and John Mitani for very 
helpful comments.

Chapter 10
Cooperative breeding in mammals
Tim H. Clutton-Brock
10.1
Introduction
Cooperative behavior between group members is common among mammals liv-
ing in stable social groups (Dugatkin 1997) but cooperative care of young is less 
common and varies widely in development between species (Russell 2004). It 
is useful to distinguish four different types of cooperative breeding. In group 
breeders, multiple breeding females live and breed in the same social group. 
Group members may cooperate to defend resources against neighboring groups 
or to detect or deter predators, but direct alloparental care is limited or uncom-
mon. Societies of this kind are common among macropods, bats and ungulates 
as well as in some families of primates and carnivores (Bradbury & Vehrencamp 
1974a, 1974b, Jarman 1974, Clutton-Brock 1989b). In communal breeders, groups 
include multiple breeding females who share care of young born in the group. 
Not all females breed in each reproductive attempt and parents may be assisted 
by temporarily non-breeding females or by males. Well-studied examples in-
clude a number of social carnivores, including African lions, banded mongooses 
and spotted hyenas (Gittleman 1989, Lewis & Pusey 1997), and some bats also 
show communal care of offspring (Wilkinson 1987, 1992). In several cercopi-
thecine primates, breeding females belonging to the same matriline cooperate 
to protect and support each other’s offspring and these species, too, should, 
perhaps, be regarded as communal breeders (see Cheney 1977, 1990, Hrdy 1977, 
Chapais 1992).
In facultative cooperative breeders, neonates and juveniles are cared for by 
their parents and by non-breeding helpers of either or of both sexes, but the 
average number of helpers is usually low and parents are capable of breeding 
successfully without helpers and often do so. Well-studied examples include 
silver-backed jackals and European foxes (Moehlman 1979, 1989), marmosets 
and tamarins (Goldizen 1987b, French 1997), and a substantial number of social 
rodents (Solomon & Getz 1997). These species resemble avian societies where 
parents are often (but not always) assisted by helpers at the nest (Stacey & Koe-
nig 1990).
Finally, in specialized cooperative breeders, breeding adults are seldom able 
to breed successfully without assistance from non-breeding helpers. Species 
of this kind are sometimes referred to as ‘obligate’ cooperative breeders but I 
use the term ‘specialized’ to avoid the objection that very occasionally parents 
may breed successfully without helpers. In most of these species, non-breed-

174
Tim H. Clutton-Brock
ing helpers out-number breeders and often contribute more heavily to some or 
all cooperative activities, so that young receive most of their care from help-
ers. Specialized cooperative breeders include African wild dogs (Courchamp 
et al. 2000a, 2000b, Creel & Creel 2002), Kalahari meerkats (Clutton-Brock et 
al. 2001b, Russell et al. 2003b) and naked mole-rats (Lacey & Sherman 1997). 
In at least two of these species, females that attain alpha status subsequently 
increase in size and weight (O’Riain et al. 2000b, Russell et al. 2005), presum-
ably because this increases their reproductive potential (Clutton-Brock et al., 
in prep.) while helpers may also show physiological or behavioral adaptations 
(Clutton-Brock et al. 2004). A further distinction is sometimes made between 
obligate cooperative breeders and eusocial species (Sherman et al. 1995) but 
there is a disagreement over the criteria used to define eusociality (Crespi & 
Yanega 1995). For the purposes of this chapter, I include eusocial species within 
obligate cooperative breeders.
While the evolution of all forms of cooperative behavior poses problems to 
evolutionary biologists (Dugatkin 1997), the evolution of specialized coopera-
tive breeding generates the most striking paradoxes since many helpers forego 
Fig. 10.1. Meerkat group. Meerkat groups consist of two to forty individuals with an approximately 
equal sex ratio. Typically, one dominant female and one dominant male are the parents of over 75% 
of pups born in the group, which are reared by all group members. Cooperative activities include 
allolactation, guarding the pups at the natal burrow, feeding pups of one to three months, clear-
ing burrows and sentinel duty. Males normally leave their natal group voluntarily after they are 
2-years-old while females may either inherit the breeding role or may be forced out of the group 
by the dominant female. Groups habituate very closely to observers, making it possible to weigh 
individuals repeatedly during the day and to estimate their foraging success in terms of weight 
gain per hour.

175
10 Cooperative breeding in mammals
reproductive success for several years after reaching maturity and only a small 
proportion of individuals born ever attain dominant status. The central question 
of why helpers should forego reproduction and spend part or all of their time as-
sisting in rearing the offspring of other group members is commonly broken 
down into three parts or sub-questions (Russell 2004). First, why instead of leav-
ing immediately they reach sexual maturity should helpers delay dispersal from 
their group of origin? Second, why do they not attempt to breed themselves in 
their natal group? And, third, why do they assist in the reproductive attempts of 
dominants instead of remaining and conserving resources against a time when 
they will either disperse or attempt to displace the dominant breeder in their 
group? Below, I consider each of these three questions in turn, drawing exten-
sively on our long-term study of Kalahari meerkats (Clutton-Brock et al. 1998a, 
1998b, 1999a, 1999b, 2000, 2001c, Russell et al. 2002, 2003b)(see Fig. 10.1).
10.2
Why do helpers delay dispersal?
Students of cooperative birds have commonly argued that delayed dispersal oc-
curs where available breeding habitat is saturated so that dispersers have little 
chance of locating suitable breeding habitat (Emlen 1984, Koenig et al. 1992, Ek-
man et al. 2004). Experiments with acorn woodpeckers have demonstrated that 
the creation of vacant territories close to a group’s range increases rates of dis-
persal by helpers (Koenig & Mumme 1987, Koenig et al. 2000). Habitat saturation 
is also implicated as a cause of delayed dispersal in some communal or coopera-
tive mammals (Doncaster & Woodroffe 1993, Creel & Macdonald 1995) but, in 
other cases, dispersal decisions appear to be independent of habitat availability 
(Cheeseman et al. 1993, Creel & Creel 2002). For example, in our study popula-
tion of Kalahari meerkats, a prolonged period of drought led to the extinction 
of nearly two-thirds of all groups. Subsequent increases in rainfall led to the 
restoration of normal conditions and to successful breeding, but although the 
remaining groups increased in size, dispersal rates did not increase and many 
of the original territories remained vacant for several years (Clutton-Brock et 
al. 1999a). These results suggest that while habitat saturation may commonly 
depress dispersal rates, other factors are also likely to be involved.
One possible explanation of the failure of individuals to disperse when suit-
able breeding habitat is available is that the process of dispersal has high and 
inevitable dangers. Dispersal is associated with substantial increases in mortal-
ity rate in many mammals and especially in those living in closed social groups 
(Lucas et al. 1997, Creel & Creel 2002). However, where vacant habitat is avail-
able so that dispersers can settle rapidly, the costs of dispersal would need to be 
extremely high to offset the potential benefits of independent breeding and it 
seems unlikely that the risks associated with dispersal are as high as this.
An alternative possibility is that the potential benefits of remaining in an 
established breeding group to the individual’s survival or subsequent chances of 
successful reproduction are large and exceed the benefits of dispersing (Clutton-
Brock et al. 1999c). There is progressive evidence that these benefits can be large 

176
Tim H. Clutton-Brock
in a wide variety of social mammals and can operate through several differ-
ent ecological mechanisms. In many social mammals, the risk of predation and 
time spent on vigilance behavior decline in larger groups (Bertram 1978, Clut-
ton-Brock 1989b). In other cases, hunting or foraging success increases while 
the costs of hunting decline. For example, large packs of African wild dogs are 
more successful in catching prey, spend less time running it down, hunt more 
frequently and catch larger prey than those in small packs and, as a result, the 
amount of meat available to each dog per day increases. In addition, where spot-
ted hyenas are abundant, large wild-dog packs are better able to defend their 
prey and consume a larger proportion of it (Fanshawe & Fitzgibbon 1993, Creel 
& Creel 2002).
In other cases, large group size may play an important role in allowing 
groups to protect their ranges against neighbors. In many mammals, larger 
groups consistently displace smaller ones and individuals in smaller groups may 
suffer increased risk of being wounded or killed in fights with larger parties of 
neighbors, and parts (or, in some cases, all) of their ranges may be absorbed into 
those of neighboring groups (Wrangham 1980, van Schaik 1983, van Hooff & 
van Schaik 1992, Young 2003). One further consequence of these incursions for 
species that keep their dependent young in burrows or dens is that litters may 
be killed if neighboring groups locate the breeding burrow (Clutton-Brock et 
al. 1998b). Lastly, in cooperative breeders where helpers play an important role 
in raising young, the workload of all individuals is substantially lower in large, 
Fig. 10.2. Relation between helper number and contributions to (a, b) babysitting, (c, d) pupfeed-
ing in Kalahari meerkats (from Clutton-Brock et al. 2004). For each activity, the first graph presented 
shows contributions as absolute measures and the second shows relative measures calculated as a 
percentage of total contributions by all group members.

177
10 Cooperative breeding in mammals
established groups than in small groups of founders, a phenomenon referred to 
as ‘load lightening’. For example, in meerkats, per capita contributions to bab-
ysitting and feeding young decline with increasing group size (see Fig. 10.2). 
Where the benefits of remaining in a large, established breeding group are large, 
individuals may maximize their fitness by remaining in their natal group and 
queuing for breeding opportunities (Kokko & Johnstone 1999). This presumably 
explains why, in some mammals, members of one sex seldom or never leave their 
natal groups voluntarily, only dispersing if they are evicted by force (Clutton-
Brock et al. 1998b, Russell et al. 2002, Ekman et al. 2004).
If the benefits of remaining in established breeding groups play an important 
role in discouraging dispersal, variation in the level of benefits should gener-
ate changes in the timing or frequency of dispersal. Though extensive data on 
dispersal rates is scarce in cooperative breeders, there is some evidence that this 
is the case (Russell 2004). For example, in marmots, delayed dispersal is more 
frequent when the thermodynamic benefits of communal hibernation are high 
and individuals that fail to reach adult body size in their first year are less likely 
to disperse (Armitage 1981, 1999, Blumstein & Armitage 1999).
10.3
Why don’t helpers breed?
In many social mammals, females commonly remain and breed in their natal 
group (Pusey 1987, Clutton-Brock 1989b), so that failure to disperse need not pre-
vent reproduction. In several cooperative mammals, subordinate females show 
lower levels of luteinising hormone (LH) or estrogen than dominant females, 
either throughout the breeding season or over the period of estrus (French 1997, 
O’Riain et al. 2000a, Creel & Creel 2002, Carlson, in prep.). In some cases, these 
differences disappear if subordinates are challenged with gonadotropin-releas-
ing hormone (GnRH), indicating that suppression is temporary but, in others 
(including naked mole-rats), differences in LH levels between dominants and 
subordinates are not removed by GnRH challenge, and suppression is evidently 
more profound (Faulkes et al. 1990, Bennett et al. 1993, 1994, Faulkes & Abbott 
1997).
At least three different processes probably contribute proximately to the 
failure of helpers to breed in cooperative mammals. First, in many mammals, 
females have a weight or age threshold below which conception does not occur 
(Albon et al. 1983, Creel & Creel 2002). In many cooperative mammals, some 
(but not all) helpers fall below this threshold and so are unlikely to breed. Pre-
sumably, the evolution of fecundity thresholds of this kind relate to the effects 
of age and weight on the costs of breeding or on the probability that individuals 
will raise offspring successfully. In meerkats, for example, individual foraging 
skills increase until animals are around 18-months-old and they rarely conceive 
before this age (Clutton-Brock et al. 2001b, 2001c).
Second, adult subordinates commonly lack access to unrelated breeding 
partners in the same group and (as in many social species) may delay reproduc-
tion until one or more unrelated males join the group (Greenwood 1980, Pusey 

178
Tim H. Clutton-Brock
1987, Clutton-Brock 1989a). In several species, the absence of unrelated males is 
associated with reductions in LH and estrogen as well as in breeding in subordi-
nate females (Russell 2004). For example, in subordinate female meerkats, levels 
of circulating estrogen and breeding frequency are both lower when there is no 
unrelated male in the group (see Fig. 10.3). Differences in estrogen level (but not 
breeding frequency) between subordinates and dominants disappear in groups 
where subordinate and dominant females both have access to unrelated males 
(Carlson et al., in prep.). Similarly, in captive groups of Damaraland mole-rats, 
experimental replacement of resident breeding males rapidly generates repro-
ductive competition in previously quiescent subordinates (Cooney & Bennett 
2000).
Third, the presence of dominant females may be associated with reduced 
levels of sex hormones or breeding frequency in subordinates. For example, in 
subordinate cotton-top tamarins, ovarian function is depressed by the presence 
of dominant females and is restored if they are removed (French et al. 1984, Wid-
owski et al. 1990). Similarly, in meerkats, both the absence of unrelated males 
Fig. 10.3. Effects of absence of unrelated males on reproduction in subordinate female meerkats 
(from Clutton-Brock et al. 2001b). (a) Median levels of estrogen metabolites (±interquartile ranges) 
in fecal samples from non-pregnant dominant and subordinate adult females during the breeding 
season. (b) Median levels of estrogen metabolites in fecal samples from subordinate females of 
breeding age (>10 months) in groups with and without unrelated males. (c) Probability that sub-
ordinate females will breed in the presence and absence of unrelated males (with other factors 
affecting breeding frequency controlled). (d) Probability of breeding by subordinate females from 
the same generation (sibling or littermate) as the dominant versus a different generation (daughter 
or niece).

179
10 Cooperative breeding in mammals
and the presence of dominant females appear to depress estrogen levels in subor-
dinate females (Clutton-Brock et al. 2001c, Clutton-Brock, unpubl.). How domi-
nants influence the fecundity of subordinates is unclear (Russell 2004). Though 
it was once thought that reproductive suppression in subordinates might be 
caused by high cortisol levels and social stress induced by dominants, recent evi-
dence shows that, in several species (including wild dogs and meerkats), domi-
nants commonly have cortisol levels that are higher than those of subordinates 
(Creel 2001, Creel & Creel 2002, Carlson et al. in prep.). However, it could still be 
that dominants inflict even higher stress levels on subordinates that challenge 
them, and that intermittent peak values rather than average cortisol levels pre-
vent subordinates from breeding successfully. In several cooperative mammals, 
dominants commonly kill litters born to subordinate females (Clutton-Brock et 
al. 1998a) and, in these cases, it is possible that subordinate females increase 
their fitness by avoiding breeding when a dominant is present (Russell 2004).
While subordinate females seldom breed in cooperative societies, in most 
cases they do so occasionally. Two separate reasons why dominant females do 
not always prevent subordinates from breeding have been suggested. First, dom-
inant females may, in some cases, be unable to control subordinate breeding, 
either because they are physically incapable of doing so or because the costs of 
suppression outweigh the benefits (Reeve et al. 1998). Under these conditions, 
the division of reproduction between dominants and subordinates may resem-
ble a ‘tug of war’ whose outcome is affected by the relative asymmetry of their 
power as well as by a number of other variables, including their relatedness to 
each other (Johnstone et al. 1999, 2000). Alternatively, dominants may permit 
subordinates a share of reproduction if doing so reduces the risk that they will 
either challenge the dominant for her position or disperse (thus depriving the 
dominant of her subsequent contributions to raising young) (Keller & Reeve 
1994, Johnstone 2000). Models of this kind are derived from studies of commu-
nal-nesting birds (Vehrencamp 1983a, 1983b) and are sometimes referred to as 
‘concession’ or ‘optimal skew’ models since they assume that the dominant fe-
male has the ability to control subordinate reproduction but chooses not to do so 
in order to gain fitness benefits (Magrath et al. 2004). Two common predictions 
based on these models are that dominants should be less likely to allow subor-
dinates to breed where the costs of dispersal are high (because they then have 
little option except to remain) or where the subordinate is closely related to them 
(because the subordinates then gain increased indirect benefits from rearing the 
dominant’s pups) (Keller & Reeve 1994)
Satisfactory tests of these two predictions present problems and opinion is di-
vided on the relative importance of concessions versus limited control in deter-
mining the frequency of subordinate breeding (see Clutton-Brock 1998a, 1998b, 
Emlen et al. 1998, Magrath et al. 2004). Some studies of cooperative mammals 
have produced evidence that supports the predictions of concession models. For 
example, in dwarf mongooses, older subordinate females are both more likely 
to disperse and are more likely to breed in their natal group than younger ones 
(Creel & Waser 1991). Similarly, in a number of cooperative animals, helpers that 
are closely related to dominant females are less likely to breed than more dis-
tant relatives or unrelated individuals (Reeve et al. 1998). However, these trends 

180
Tim H. Clutton-Brock
could also occur for other reasons; older subordinates may be more difficult for 
dominants to control while subordinates that are closely related to dominant 
females are commonly the offspring of the dominant pair and may consequently 
lack access to unrelated breeding partners (Clutton-Brock 1998b). As yet, few 
attempts have been made to control for effects of this kind and studies that have 
tried to do so have found little unequivocal evidence that concessions play an 
important role in affecting the distribution of subordinate breeding in coopera-
tive societies (Clutton-Brock et al. 2001c, Haydock & Koenig 2002, 2003, Magrath 
et al. 2004).
In addition, there is still little firm evidence that reproduction modifies 
the behavior of subordinates to the dominant female’s advantage, as conces-
sion models assume. For example, in meerkats, subordinates that have bred are 
no less likely to disperse or to contribute generously to rearing the dominant 
female’s subsequent litters (Clutton-Brock et al. 2001c). Finally, several stud-
ies suggest that subordinates which breed are generally those that are likely to 
be most difficult for the dominant to control. For example, in meerkats, older, 
heavier subordinates are more likely to breed than younger, lighter ones; the 
dominant female’s sisters are more likely to breed than her daughters; subordi-
nate breeding is more frequent in years of high rainfall, when food is abundant 
and the animals are in good condition; and subordinates most commonly at-
tempt to breed shortly after a dominant female has acquired alpha status, when 
her ability to control group members is weak (Clutton-Brock et al. 2001c).
10.4
Why do helpers help?
The question of why helpers should help lies at the heart of research on the evolu-
tion of cooperative societies since subordinates remain in their natal group and 
either breed ineffectively or fail to breed in a number of social species (Russell 
2004). Since delayed dispersal and reproductive suppression in subordinates oc-
cur in a number of mammalian societies that do not breed cooperatively, the evo-
lution of helping behavior presumably represents a separate development from 
failure to leave the natal group as well as from failure to breed. Explanations of 
the evolution of helping fall into four main groups. In some cases, apparently 
cooperative behavior may have immediate direct benefits to the helper’s fitness 
and any effects on other group members may be coincidental (Bednekoff 1997, 
Dugatkin 1997). A second possibility is that group members are coerced into 
contributing to cooperative activities through harassment or the threat of pun-
ishment or eviction by dominant breeders (Gaston 1977, Clutton-Brock & Parker 
1995). Theoretical models suggest that coercion is only capable of maintaining 
specialized cooperative behavior under rather restrictive conditions (Kokko 
et al. 2002). A third possibility is that cooperative behavior is usually directed 
principally at kin and is maintained through its effect on indirect components of 
inclusive fitness (Emlen 1984, 1991). Finally, helping may have evolved through 
mutualistic benefits shared by all members of large groups (Brown 1987, Kokko 
et al. 2001, Clutton-Brock 2002).

181
10 Cooperative breeding in mammals
To assess the importance of different mechanisms in the evolution of help-
ing, it is important to know what effects helpers have on other group members; 
whether or not helping has substantial costs; which individuals contribute most 
to cooperative activities; and how the level of contribution is controlled. The rest 
of this section considers each of these issues before assessing the relative impor-
tance of different evolutionary mechanisms.
10.4.1
Do helpers help?
In social birds, relationships between the presence or number of helpers and the 
reproductive success of breeders vary. In some cooperative species, the presence 
of non-breeding helpers apparently has little effect (Leonard et al. 1989); in oth-
ers, the presence of a single helper increases the success of some breeders but 
the presence of multiple helpers either has no additional effect or depresses the 
success of breeders (Komdeur 1994b); and in some species, the success of breed-
ers rises in an approximately linear fashion in relation to the number of helpers 
in the group (Heinsohn 1992, Ridley 2003). A similar range of effects occurs in 
communal and cooperative mammals. In European badgers, where several non-
breeding females may share a set with breeders, their presence has no obvious 
effect on the reproductive success of breeders (Woodroffe & Macdonald 1995). 
Studies of several facultatively cooperative rodents, including pine voles and 
Mongolian gerbils, have also found no obvious relationship between the presence 
or number of helpers and litter size at weaning (French 1994), while in prairie 
voles, reproductive success increases with helper number in some populations 
but not in others (Solomon & Getz 1997). Positive relationships between helper 
number and breeding success have been found in several facultatively coopera-
tive carnivores, including golden and silver-backed jackals as well as in several 
marmosets and tamarins (Goldizen 1987a, 1987b, Goldizen & Terborgh 1989), 
as well as in most of the specialized cooperative breeders that have been studied 
so far, including dwarf mongooses (Rood 1990), meerkats (Clutton-Brock et al. 
1999b) and African wild dogs (Courchamp et al. 2000a, Creel & Creel 2002).
The presence of strong positive correlations between group size and breeding 
success in specialized cooperative breeders strongly suggests that helpers have 
a substantial influence on breeding success. For example, in meerkats, both the 
food intake of pups increases with helper number across groups (Fig. 10.4) and 
pups born in groups with multiple helpers are more likely to survive (Russell et 
al. 2002). However, it is still possible that these relationships could occur because 
some aspect of parental phenotype or territory quality leads to high juvenile sur-
vival in successive breeding attempts, generating positive correlations between 
the number of subadults in groups and the survival of juveniles. One way of 
testing whether the presence of helpers causes an increase in breeding success 
is to remove helpers from breeding groups (Brown et al. 1982). Experiments of 
this kind with colonies of prairie voles suggest that the effects on the develop-
ment of young vary with environmental conditions; in colonies maintained at 
relatively low temperatures, the removal of alloparents reduced growth rates 
and delayed development in dependent young (Solomon 1991) while no effects of 

182
Tim H. Clutton-Brock
the presence of helpers were found in colonies maintained at room temperature 
(Wang & Novak 1992). An alternative way of examining the effects of helpers is 
to manipulate the ratio of helpers to young. For example, in Kalahari meerkats, 
temporary reductions in pup number increased the weight gain of the remain-
ing pups while increasing the number of pups (by adding pups of approximately 
similar age from another litter) reduced their weight gain (see Fig. 10.5a,b). In 
meerkats (as well as in prairie voles), early growth rates are related to weight at 
independence as well as in survival so these studies provide firm evidence of 
the effects of helpers on breeding success (Solomon 1991, Solomon & Getz 1997, 
Clutton-Brock et al. 2001a).
Recent studies suggest that the effects of helper number and group size are 
larger and more pervasive than has been supposed since early growth rates com-
monly have ‘downstream’ effects on survival and breeding success throughout 
the lifespan (Solomon & Getz 1997, Lindström 1999). In meerkats, the effects of 
helper number on growth and size at independence influences the subsequent 
survival of juveniles, their chance of breeding as subordinates and their chance 
of acquiring alpha status (Clutton-Brock et al. 2001a, 2002). In addition, larger 
breeding groups produce larger ‘splinter’ groups of dispersers which are able to 
feed more effectively after leaving their natal group and have a better chance of 
establishing themselves as new breeding groups than smaller splinters (Young 
2003).
10.4.2
Is helping costly?
While the benefits of helpers in specialized cooperative societies may have been 
underestimated, the costs of helping have probably been overestimated. Where 
it is in the interests of subordinates to remain in their natal group even if they are 
prevented from breeding (see above), the costs of helping should not include the 
Fig. 10.4. Effects of helper number on (a) estimates of food intake and (b) daily weight gain of 
pups in Kalahari meerkats (Clutton-Brock et al. 2002).

183
10 Cooperative breeding in mammals
costs of delayed dispersal or the associated loss of reproductive opportunities 
and should be confined to the costs of helping per se (Russell 2004). 
There is no doubt that helping can have energetic costs, both in cooperative 
mammals as well as in cooperative birds (Heinsohn & Legge 1999, Heinsohn 
2004, Russell 2004). For example, in tamarins, helpers that carry infants spend 
less time foraging and suffer reduced calorie intake (Goldizen 1987a, 1987b, 
Price 1992, Tardif 1997). In meerkats, helpers that babysit pups at the burrow 
lose around 5% of their total body weight while those that forage with the group 
gain around 6% in the course of the day (Clutton-Brock et al. 1998b). In addition, 
helpers feeding pups give away around 40% of all the food items they locate and 
tend to give pups a high proportion of the larger, more valuable items (Brother-
ton et al. 2001). As would be expected, experimental reductions in pup:helper 
ratios tend to raise daily weight gain of helpers while increases in pup:helper 
ratios reduce helper weight gain (see Fig. 10.5c,d). When groups are babysitting 
or feeding pups, the average growth rate of younger group members is reduced 
to a greater extent in generous helpers than less generous ones (see Fig. 10.6).
Despite the obvious energetic costs of helping, firm evidence that helping 
incurs fitness costs is rare. For example, there is no evidence that generous meer-
kat helpers are less likely to survive, though they are slightly less likely to breed 
as subordinates (Russell et al. 2003b). One possible reason why the fitness costs 
of helping may be low despite the energetic costs is that contributions to most 
cooperative activities are conditional. For example, in meerkats, the level of con-
Fig. 10.5. Effects of manipulating helper:pup ratios on daily weight gain of pups and helpers in 
Kalahaari meerkats (from Clutton-Brock et al. 2001a). In this experiment, helper-pup ratios were 
either temporarily increased by removing 75% of pups or were reduced by increasing litter size 
by 75%. Control values were mean measures of daily weight gain in pups and helpers in the same 
group within two days of the experiment.

184
Tim H. Clutton-Brock
tributions increases with body weight and daily weight gain, and experimen-
tal feeding raises the contributions of female individual helpers (see Fig. 10.7). 
In addition, helpers alternate between being ‘generous’ and ‘mean’ in sequen-
tial breeding attempts so that although the weight of generous helpers is lower 
immediately after a breeding attempt, there is no effect on growth measured 
over the whole year (Russell et al. 2003b). Recent studies of other communal 
and cooperative mammals suggest that contributions to cooperative activities 
may usually be conditional (Gilchrist 2001, Hodge 2003, Ridley 2003) and, if so, 
the fitness costs of helping may be commonly lower than has generally been as-
sumed.
10.4.3
Division of labor
To understand the evolution of helping behavior, it is also important to under-
stand the extent to which different group members contribute to cooperative ac-
tivities and the factors that affect their workload. In most cooperative societies, 
Fig. 10.6. Effects of stage of breeding cycle and relative contributions to cooperative activities 
on helper growth rates (g/day) in Kalahari meerkats (from Russell et al. 2003b). (a) Nonbreed: no 
breeding; Babysit: during periods of babysitting; Pupfeed: during periods of pupfeeding. (b) Low, 
medium and high refer to relative contributions to cooperative activities. (c) Association between 
cumulative contribution to cooperation and survival to two years in helpers. (d) Association be-
tween cumulative contribution to cooperation and probability of female helpers breeding as sub-
ordinates.

185
10 Cooperative breeding in mammals
the contributions of helpers initially increase with age. For example, in meer-
kats, juveniles only begin to make substantial contributions to babysitting and 
feeding subsequent litters of pups after they are 6-months-old (see Fig. 10.8). 
Subsequently, their contributions increase before declining as dispersal ap-
proaches (Clutton-Brock et al. 2002). Individual differences in average contribu-
tions are large and are consistently related to body weight and foraging success 
(see above). 
The sex of helpers also affects their level of contributions. In cooperative so-
cieties where helpers include males as well as females, there are commonly dif-
ferences in the overall level of contributions between the sexes (Stacey & Koenig 
1990, Cockburn 1998). In many cooperative societies, members of the ‘philopat-
ric’ sex (the sex that tends to remain and breed in the group) generally contribute 
more to rearing young than members of the other sex (Clutton-Brock 2002). For 
example, in meerkats (see Fig. 10.8) and brown hyenas, females may remain and 
breed in their natal group, and females helpers typically contribute more to rear-
ing young than males whereas in African wild dogs (where males may remain 
and breed in their natal group), males generally contribute more than females 
Fig. 10.7. Effects of daily weight gain (g/hour; an index of foraging success) on contributions by 
male and female meerkat helpers over 1-year-old to (a) babysitting and (c) pupfeeding (expressed 
as a percentage of total contributions to each activity) (from Clutton-Brock et al. 2002). Effects of 
experimental feeding of helpers on their contributions to (b) babysitting and (d) pupfeeding in the 
same breeding event.

186
Tim H. Clutton-Brock
(Malcolm & Marten 1982, Owens & Owens 1984, Rood 1986, 1990). One addition-
al line of evidence supports an association between workload and philopatry. 
In naked mole-rats, a small number of subordinate males adopt a contrasting 
growth to most other individuals, laying down more body fat, contributing little 
to cooperative activities and showing evidence of sexual behavior at an earli-
er stage. O’Riain, who described these morphs, categorizes them as “fat, lazy 
and promiscuous” and has shown that, unlike other individuals of both sexes, 
they commonly disperse from their natal colony (O’Riain et al. 1996). Male and 
female helpers also differ in the extent to which they contribute to particular 
cooperative activities. For example, in meerkats, females contribute more than 
males of the same age to babysitting and to feeding pups while males contribute 
more than females to sentinel duty (Clutton-Brock et al. 2002). Sex differences 
in contributions to different cooperative activities are most pronounced in large 
groups, where the demands on individuals are relatively low as well as in well-fed 
individuals.
In contrast to social insects, there is little evidence that individual helpers 
specialize in particular activities. Early studies of naked mole-rats described 
smaller helpers that were principally involved in the maintenance of tunnels and 
food collection, and larger ones that played an increased role in colony defense; 
Fig. 10.8. Age-related changes in percentage contributions by male and female meerkat helpers 
to (a) babysitting, (b) pupfeeding, (c) social digging and (d) raised guarding (from Clutton-Brock 
et al. 2002). Juveniles: 3-6 months; Subadults: 6-12 months; Yearlings: 12-24 months; Adults: >24 
months.

187
10 Cooperative breeding in mammals
it was speculated that the latter animals might be a soldier caste (Jarvis 1981). 
However, subsequent studies have suggested that smaller helpers are younger 
animals and that the contrast in contributions to different activities repre-
sents an age-related polyethism (Lacey & Sherman 1991, 1997). In meerkats, the 
youngest helpers contribute relatively little to babysitting (which involves a full 
day without food) as well as to sentinel duty (Clutton-Brock et al. 2002) but these 
differences are temporary and change with age. When age effects are allowed 
for, there are still large differences in the extent to which individuals contrib-
ute to particular activities but the level of contribution is positively correlated 
across activities so that some individuals are consistently ‘generous’ and others 
are consistently ‘mean’ (Clutton-Brock et al. 2003).
The existence of large individual differences in the ‘generosity’ of helpers 
has stimulated attempts to investigate whether or not these are correlated with 
kinship. As yet, there is little evidence that helpers adjust their workload in re-
lation to their degree of kinship to breeders or juveniles (Clutton-Brock 2002). 
For example, in meerkats, individual contributions to cooperative rearing are 
not consistently correlated with kinship when the effects of age and body weight 
are controlled (Clutton-Brock et al. 2000, 2001b). Although the great majority 
of helpers are related to the young they are rearing, some male helpers are un-
related immigrants (Clutton-Brock et al. 2000, 2001b). These animals seldom 
breed with the dominant female but contribute as much as other group members 
to guarding and raising her pups (Clutton-Brock et al. 2000, 2001b). The scarcity 
of convincing evidence that non-breeding helpers adjust their workload in rela-
tion to their kinship to the young they are rearing contrasts with a recent meta-
analysis of helping behavior in cooperative vertebrates which suggests that help 
is most closely focused on relatives in societies where it has the greatest impact 
on offspring fitness (Griffin & West 2003). However, this analysis is not confined 
to resident helpers and includes a proportion of species where failed breeders 
subsequently rejoin and assist relatives. There is good evidence from several 
birds that failed breeders selectively join and assist relatives (Emlen & Wrege 
1988, Russell & Hatchwell 2001), and this tendency is probably responsible for 
the relationships demonstrated by this meta-analysis.
10.4.4
The control of cooperative behavior
In bi-parental birds, parents adjust the rate at which they feed chicks to the fre-
quency and intensity with which chicks beg for food, which, in turn, is related 
to their hunger level (Horn & Leonard 2002, Kilner 2002). A similar process of 
negotiation (Godfray 1995a, 1995b, Johnstone 2004) between juveniles and help-
ers probably controls the rate at which juveniles are fed in cooperative mam-
mals. For example, dependent meerkat pups beg continuously for food during 
periods when the group is foraging (Manser 1998). The rate at which pups give 
begging calls is related to their hunger level and can be manipulated by feeding 
or food-depriving pups (White 2001). Helpers respond to increases in call rate by 
increasing the proportion of food items that they find which they give to pups; 
experimental playback of pup begging calls increase the rate at which helpers in 

188
Tim H. Clutton-Brock
groups with dependent young bring food to pups and can cause helpers that 
have ceased to feed pups to start again. As pups develop and spend more time 
foraging independently, the rate at which they beg declines and helpers gradu-
ally cease to bring food to them (Manser 1998).
In some cooperative societies, lazy or recalcitrant helpers may be punished 
by breeders and coercion may play a role in maintaining helping behavior (Mul-
der & Langmore 1993, Clutton-Brock & Parker 1995, Balshine-Earn et al. 1998), 
though there is no firm evidence that lazy helpers are more likely to be ejected 
from breeding groups than generous helpers in cooperative mammals (see Young 
2003). In several cooperative mammals, breeders ‘stimulate’ inactive helpers 
and direct more frequent aggression at lazy helpers than at generous ones. For 
example, in naked mole-rats, breeding females shove inactive helpers and their 
removal causes a reaction in the level of helper activity, especially among less-
related individuals (Reeve & Sherman 1991), though effects of this kind are not 
found in all colonies (Jacobs 2000). In meerkats, coercive tactics may be used to 
stimulate cooperative activities in males; individuals that feed pups relatively 
infrequently receive more aggression (mostly from breeders) than those that 
feed pups frequently (see Fig. 10.9). No similar relationships between workload 
and received aggression were found in females.
While it seems unlikely that breeders control the cooperative behavior of 
helpers directly, they may be able to influence the level of helper contributions 
through their effect on the hormonal status of helpers. The hormonal basis of 
cooperative behavior is still poorly understood but several studies of coopera-
Fig. 10.9. Cooperation and rates of 
received aggression in meerkats (from 
Clutton-Brock et al., in press). Plots 
show the rate of aggressive interactions 
received by subordinate males and 
females over 12-months-old that fed 
pups at different rates. Absolute levels 
of aggression received are exaggerated 
in these plots since only individuals that 
were observed to receive at least one 
aggressive interaction were included.

189
10 Cooperative breeding in mammals
tive birds have found that individual differences in workload among helpers are 
positively correlated with prolactin levels (see Vleck et al. 1991, Schoech et al. 
1996, 2004) and there is also evidence of an association between prolactin levels 
and alloparental care in common marmosets (Roberts et al. 2001). In contrast, 
contributions to pupfeeding among meerkat helpers appear to be more closely 
correlated with cortisol levels than with prolactin (Carlson, in prep.). This rais-
es the possibility that breeders could manipulate the contributions of helpers 
through the imposition of social stress but an alternative possibility is that high 
cortisol levels are a consequence rather than a cause of elevated contributions 
to cooperative activities. In line with this suggestion, playback of pup begging 
calls to helpers also raises cortisol levels in helpers as well as the frequency with 
which they feed pups (see Carlson, in prep.).
10.5
The evolution of helping behavior
Detailed studies of cooperative behavior in helpers help to discriminate between 
alternative explanations of its evolution (Cockburn 1998, Clutton-Brock 2002, 
Koenig & Dickinson 2004). Both the energetic costs of helping behavior, the ex-
tent to which contributions vary between individuals and the adaptation of work 
levels to the need of juveniles suggest that, at least in specialized cooperative 
societies, it is unlikely that cooperative behavior is an unselected consequence 
of parental care (Jamieson 1989) or a byproduct of some activity which has an 
immediate benefit to the helper’s survival (Bednekoff 1997). Coercion appears 
to occur occasionally in most cooperative societies (see above) but lazy helpers 
are rarely, if ever, ejected from breeding groups (see above) and in most cases, 
helpers appear to determine their own level of contributions and adjust these to 
the needs of dependent young. Moreover, models suggest that coercion is likely 
to maintain specialized cooperative behavior only under rather restrictive con-
ditions (Kokko et al. 2002).
Kin selection (Hamilton 1964) is widely thought to play a dominant role in 
the evolution of specialized cooperative societies, where breeding individuals 
rely on the assistance of non-breeding helpers to raise their young (Brown 1987, 
Emlen 1991, Dugatkin 1997, Cockburn 1998). In all specialized cooperative birds 
and mammals, most helpers are relatives of dominant breeders that have not yet 
left their group. However, the view that kin selection provides a satisfactory gen-
eral explanation of cooperative societies now appears less compelling than it did 
twenty years ago (Cockburn 1998, Clutton-Brock 2002) for several reasons. First, 
most permanent groups of social animals consist of relatives and, if the haplo-
diploid Hymenoptera are excluded, it is not clear that the degree of relatedness is 
consistently higher in cooperative species than in other species that live in stable 
groups but do not breed cooperatively (though see Griffin & West 2003). In many 
societies of vertebrates as well as invertebrates, differences in contributions to 
rearing young do not appear to vary with the relatedness of helpers (Strassmann 
et al. 1997, Cockburn 1998, Queller & Strassmann 1998, Clutton-Brock et al. 
2000), and several studies have shown that helpers can be unrelated to the young 

190
Tim H. Clutton-Brock
they are raising and that unrelated helpers invest as heavily as close relatives 
(Dunn et al. 1995, Magrath & Whittingham 1997, Clutton-Brock et al. 2000). In 
addition, the relative importance of ‘indirect’ fitness benefits acquired by help-
ing collateral kin may have been overestimated. Estimates of indirect benefits 
have sometimes incorporated the effects of helping on direct descendants (off-
spring and grand-offspring) as well on collateral kin. Benefits received by help-
ers from their kin and those they confer on kin have often both been included, 
leading to double accounting of kin-selected benefits (Creel 1990). Also, costs 
arising from competition between relatives for resources or mates have seldom 
been set against the indirect benefits of cooperation (West et al. 2001).
In contrast, evidence that helpers may gain substantial direct benefits from 
cooperative behavior has increased. Although reciprocal altruism (Trivers 
1970) does not provide a satisfactory framework for the evolution of coopera-
tive breeding since helpers and dependent young rarely exchange benefits, it is 
now clear that helpers can gain a variety of direct benefits from their actions 
and that shared benefits or ‘generalized reciprocity’ is common (Clutton-Brock 
2002). In particular, positive correlation between group size, survival and breed-
ing success appear to be usual in specialized cooperative societies (see above) 
and ‘group augmentation’ models show that, where group members automati-
cally share benefits derived from increased group size, cooperative behavior can 
be maintained in small groups by mutualistic benefits even if their members 
are unrelated (Kokko et al. 2001). Where the benefits of increasing group size 
are not automatic and depend on the contributions of group members to coop-
erative activities, cooperation can still be maintained by group augmentation, 
but its initial evolution requires some previous tendency to help which could be 
provided by byproduct mutualism (Jamieson 1989, Bednekoff 1997) or by kin 
selection. The behavior of group members in specialized cooperative societies is 
consistent with the view that direct benefits play an important role in maintain-
ing cooperative behavior. For example, members of whichever sex is more likely 
to remain and breed in the natal group generally contribute more to rearing 
young, and unrelated individuals commonly contribute as much as close rela-
tives (Clutton-Brock 2002) while unrelated individuals commonly contribute 
as much as close relatives (Cockburn 1998, Clutton-Brock 2002). Moreover, the 
benefits of increasing group size may explain why group members sometimes 
kidnap unrelated juveniles from neighboring groups (Heinsohn 1991) and why 
groups commonly kill litters born to their neighbors if they discover them (Clut-
ton-Brock et al. 1998a).
While both kin selection and mutualism could, in theory, maintain coop-
erative breeding on their own, the empirical evidence that helpers are generally 
close relatives of breeders (Emlen 1984, 1991) emphasizes the artificiality of at-
tempting to distinguish between these explanations. The current need is to as-
sess the relative importance of direct and indirect benefits in maintaining coop-
erative behavior, and the extent to which variation in benefits of these two kinds 
predicts the distribution of cooperative behavior within and between species.

Chapter 11
Non-offspring nursing in mammals: 
general implications from a case study on house mice
Barbara König
11.1
Introduction
Reproduction in female mammals is associated with lactation, which involves 
relatively high energetic costs and influences a mother’s future reproduction 
(Fuchs 1981, Bronson 1989, Clutton-Brock 1991). Because of these high costs, we 
do not expect females to provide milk to non-offspring. Hence, if they engage in 
such potentially altruistic or mutualistic behavior, careful study of its evolution-
ary causes and mechanisms is warranted.
Non-offspring nursing (also communal nursing or allonursing) is known 
from both breeding and non-breeding individuals, most probably exclusively 
done by females (to my knowledge, there has been only one rather anecdotal 
documentation of lactating males in free living Dayak fruit bats, Dyacopterus 
spadiceus; Francis et al. 1994).
Among species with some kind of communal care of young, singular breed-
ers (i.e. typically one breeding female per social unit) form the majority in most 
mammalian taxa, as they do in social birds and insects. Singular breeders are 
species with high reproductive skew, and frequently with helpers-at-the-nest 
(non-breeding individuals that help caring for the dominant’s offspring). Some-
times, a subordinate female can also produce pups, as in suricates, dwarf mon-
gooses, callitrichids or wild dogs. For recent reviews, see Stacey (1990), Emlen 
(1991), Jennions (1994), Creel (1997) and Solomon (1997).
Plural breeders, instead, are species with several breeding females per group 
and more egalitarian reproduction among females, as in lions, house mice, most 
bats, most primates and most ungulates. Females in some of these species coop-
erate in some kind of communal care, as for example babysitting, social thermo-
regulation, communal defence of young, provisioning of food to pups, or non-
offspring nursing (Packer et al. 1992, Jennions & Macdonald 1994, König 1997, 
Solomon & French 1997).
Nevertheless, there are principal differences between singular breeders with 
helpers-at-the-nest and cooperating plural breeders. As Lewis & Pusey (1997) 
have emphasized, non-breeding helpers sacrifice their direct reproductive ef-
fort in the short term, whereas cooperation among breeders does not necessarily 
imply a loss of current direct fitness. In singular breeders, the focus of interest 
is primarily on the following questions addressing non-breeding subordinates: 
(i) Why not disperse? (ii) Why delay breeding? (ii) Why help? In plural breeders, 
instead, questions regarding the value of breeding in groups rather than alone 

192
Barbara König
are most important: (i) Why live and breed in groups? (ii) Why help or nurse 
non-offspring?
Cooperative care of young has mainly been studied in singular breeders, and 
relatively fewer studies analyze species with shared reproduction among breed-
ing group members. Here, I will focus on communal nursing as an example of a 
specific cooperative behavior, and I will discuss for a species with plural breeders 
why lactating females nurse non-offspring. I will summarize our understanding 
of the ultimate causation of non-offspring nursing, and will present experiments 
analyzing its proximate mechanisms. Furthermore, I will suggest a novel hy-
pothesis for why it occurs, and speculate on its distribution among mammals.
11.2
Non-offspring nursing in mammals
Non-offspring nursing has been described for approximately 70 species in 12 
orders. Field observations indicate that it is more common in pigs than in other 
Artiodactyls, and that it is more common among rodents and carnivores than 
in primates and bats. In carnivores, non-offspring nursing is ubiquitous in ca-
nids, but also occurs in felids like lions and domestic cats. Furthermore, it has 
been observed in otters, coatis and some populations of Eurasian badgers. In 
primates, it has been documented in the field among marmosets (Callithrix), in 
Alouatta, Cebus, Erythrocebus, Homo sapiens, Lemur, Microcebus, Miopithecus, 
Presbytis, Varecia, and maybe in Goeldi’s monkeys (Callimico). In rodents, non-
offspring nursing has been documented for members of the Cricetidae, Gliridae, 
Muridae, Sciuridae, Cavidae and Hydrochoeridae. However, in only 10% of all 
species in which non-offspring nursing is recorded were non-offspring nursed as 
much as one’s own young (for recent reviews, see Packer et al. 1992, König 1997, 
Lewis & Pusey 1997, Solomon & French 1997, Hayes 2000).
11.2.1
Why do females nurse non-offspring?
Several hypotheses have been suggested to explain the phenomenon of non-off-
spring nursing, and there is some controversy as to whether communal nursing 
confers a reproductive advantage or not.
11.2.1.1 Non-adaptive hypotheses
Two non-adaptive hypotheses have been proposed. First, some authors consid-
er non-offspring nursing to be milk theft by other females’ young, making it 
obviously non-adaptive for the donor (McCracken 1984, Boness 1990). The sec-
ond hypothesis is that it represents a byproduct of providing parental care in a 
group-living context. Jamieson & Craig (Jamieson 1989, Jamieson & Craig 1987) 
suggested that alloparental behavior occurs simply because the social structure 
of those species in which it is found provides an opportunity for parent-like 
behavior. A similar explanation was offered by Pusey & Packer (1994) for non-
offspring nursing in lions. Female lions live in groups and raise their young in 

193
11 Non-offspring nursing in mammals: general implications from a case study on house mice
crèches because of the advantages of defense against infanticidal males. Non-
offspring nursing then occurs as an inevitable consequence of group rearing, 
with the costs of rejecting non-offspring being higher than the costs of allowing 
some nursing by non-offspring.
11.2.1.2 Adaptive hypotheses
Adaptive explanations, on the other hand, include kin selection, or direct ben-
efits. Such direct benefits can accrue due to improved survival, growth, or future 
reproduction of own offspring, or due to improved breeding success of mothers 
in the presence of lactating peers. I will discuss later which mechanisms can 
result in direct benefits for either mothers or pups.
11.3
Non-offspring nursing in house mice: a case study
In order to assess which of these hypotheses best account for non-offspring 
nursing, we study this phenomenon in house mice. We are interested in non-
offspring nursing at both the ultimate and proximate level, to complement evo-
lutionary approaches with mechanistic ones.
House mice (Mus domesticus) are short-lived rodents with a high reproduc-
tive output. They have a rather flexible social structure, but most typically they 
live in small groups that consist of a dominant male, one or several adult fe-
males with their litters and several subordinate animals (DeLong 1967, Lidicker 
1976, Bronson 1979, Berry 1981a, Singleton 1983, Gray et al. 2000). Litter size of 
wild house mice increases from the first to the second lactation, and decreases 
again after the fifth lactation (Pelikán 1981, König & Markl 1987). Fifty years 
ago, Southwick (1955) published for the first time that females of the same repro-
ductive group can pool their litters in communal nests. Since then, this behavior 
has been documented both in the field and in captivity (Sayler & Salmon 1969, 
Wilkinson & Baker 1988, König 1993, Manning et al. 1995).
To analyze whether non-offspring nursing in house mice is adaptive, we 
quantified the fitness consequences of communal rearing of young under labo-
ratory conditions. Experimental animals were first- to third-generation wild-
caught house mice, born and reared in the lab. Under otherwise standardized 
conditions, we simulated different social structures that are known to occur in 
feral or commensal house mice, and measured the females’ lifetime reproductive 
success. We defined lifetime reproductive success as the number of offspring 
weaned during an experimental lifespan of six months (for a detailed descrip-
tion of the methods used see König 1993, 1994b). Although average life expec-
tancy of newborn house mice is only 100-150 days, an experimental lifespan of 
six months is realistic for females that survived at least until maturity (Berry 
1971, Berry 1981b, Pennycuik et al. 1986).
In all experiments, females always reared litters in a communal nest as soon 
as more than one female in a group gave birth to pups. Moreover, nursing of pups 
within a communal nest was indiscriminate (König 1989, 1993).

194
Barbara König
We manipulated group size (the number of adult females per group) and re-
latedness among females. At the age of 7-8 weeks, females were mated with an 
adult, unrelated male and during the following four months lived either monog-
amously (one female plus one male) or in polygynous groups (for further details 
see König 1993, 1994a, 1994b). In polygynous groups, females were either two 
or three genetically full-sibs, reared together (simulating the situation of sisters 
staying together), or two or three genetically unrelated and previously unfamil-
iar females (simulating the situation of females immigrating into a group).
Lifetime reproductive success of individual females differed significantly as 
a function of both group size and relatedness among the females, and reached 
a peak for females living with one sister (Fig. 11.1). In a group of three females, 
however, individual lifetime reproductive success was lower than in a monoga-
mous situation, irrespective of the females’ relatedness. Offspring weight at 
weaning did not differ significantly among the groups (König 1993, 1994b).
The reason why females differed in individual reproductive success as a func-
tion of group size and relatedness is that females varied in the probability of re-
production and of successfully weaning young within the experimental lifespan. 
Not all females weaned young, due to competition over reproduction despite 
communal nesting. The extent of this competition is illustrated by the index of 
reproductive skew for the females involved (Fig. 11.2; index of reproductive skew 
according to Reeve & Keller 1995; data on house mice from König 1994a).
This index varies between zero and one. When a single individual produces 
all the offspring, the skew is one, reflecting a despotic society; when reproduc-
tion is perfectly equitable among all group members, the skew is zero, indicating 
egalitarian reproduction among females.
Fig. 11.1. Number of offspring weaned during an experimental lifespan of six months (median ± 
SE) of female house mice as a function of group size (number of females per group ranged between 
one and three) and of genetic relatedness. Sisters were familiar full-sibs that grew up together; un-
related females were previously unfamiliar and genetically unrelated females. An unrelated adult 
male was always present. Independent sample sizes (number of groups per treatment): 1 Female: 
n = 21; 2 Sisters: n = 21; 2 Unrelated: n = 24; 3 Sisters: n = 10; 3 Unrelated: n = 10. Data modified from 
König (1994a).

195
11 Non-offspring nursing in mammals: general implications from a case study on house mice
The lowest index was found for pairs of sisters. In such units, females are not 
only egalitarian in terms of the probability of reproduction but also in terms of 
the number of offspring weaned. The median degree of reproductive skew in-
creased significantly towards despotic relationships with decreasing relatedness 
among the females within a group, and with increasing group size.
These findings permit two conclusions. First, non-offspring nursing is an 
integral part of the reproductive behavior of female house mice in egalitarian 
groups. Thus, the non-adaptive hypothesis that it is milk theft by young can be 
rejected in this case. The milk theft hypothesis should result in more variable 
occurrences of non-offspring nursing, with an increase with increasing age and 
mobility of young. Furthermore, female house mice have the option to breed 
solitarily even when another female reproduces within their territory (Weidt 
& König, unpublished observations from a population of wild house mice in a 
barn), which allows us to exclude the hypotheses of misdirected maternal care, 
and of a byproduct of group living.
Second, where a female established an egalitarian reproductive relationship, 
communal nursing increased her individual lifetime reproductive success, irre-
spective of the degree of relatedness or familiarity to the female partner (König 
1994c). However, the probability for such mutualistic cooperation was highest 
when a female shared a nest with a familiar sister to form a low-skew society. As a 
consequence, non-offspring nursing of female house mice in pairs with egalitar-
ian reproduction proved to be adaptive, and involved mutualistic, direct fitness 
benefits for both partners. The fact that communal nursing was most efficient 
among familiar relatives may indicate that kin selection played a role during the 
evolution of communal nursing. However, because neither familiarity during 
Fig. 11.2. Index of reproductive skew (median ± SE) among female house mice as a function of 
group size (two or three females) and relatedness. The index was calculated according to Reeve & 
Keller (1995), for all groups in which at least one female produced a litter and in which individual re-
productive success was known (groups in which females gave birth to litters on the same day were 
excluded, because of lack of information about maternity). Independent sample sizes: 2 Sisters: 
n = 20; 2 Unrelated: n = 20; 3 Sisters: n = 6; 3 Unrelated: n = 7. Data on individual lifetime reproduc-
tive success is from König (1994a).

196
Barbara König
juvenile development nor high relatedness are necessary pre-requisites, direct 
benefits of cooperation seem to stabilize non-offspring nursing among female 
house mice.
11.4
Direct benefits of allomaternal care
The experiment demonstrated that female mice gained a direct mutualistic ben-
efit from forming a communal unit characterized by allonursing. Several hy-
potheses have been suggested to explain why female mammals or their offspring 
gain direct benefits when mothers exhibit allomaternal care (licking, huddling 
over, or carrying non-offspring) or nursing non-offspring (for previous reviews 
see Packer et al. 1992, Lewis & Pusey 1997, Hayes 2000, Hayes & Solomon 2004).
11.4.1
Improved survival of pups
Communal nursing can reduce pup predation either by the dilution effect 
(Hoogland 1989; in analogy to communal care of eggs in birds as in ostriches, 
Bertram 1992), or due to improved protection against infanticide committed by 
non-group members, as suggested by Manning et al. (1992). When females al-
ternate nursing pups in a communal nest, offspring are left alone less often and 
thus have a lower probability to be killed by unfamiliar conspecifics compared 
with pups reared by a single female.
11.4.2
Improved future reproduction of pups
Packer and co-workers further raised the idea of improved cooperation, based 
on their long-term observations of lions. Group size is critical for reproductive 
success in both male and female lions (Packer et al. 1990, 1991, Pusey & Packer 
1997). Thus, communal care would result in their own young having more po-
tential allies later in life, even if no full-sib survived.
Nevertheless, both hypotheses mentioned so far cannot explain why commu-
nally nursing female house mice weaned more offspring within their lifespan in 
our experiments under rather luxurious environmental conditions, with unlim-
ited food, in a favorable climate, and in the absence of predators or cannibalistic 
non-group members.
11.4.3
Improved growth of pups
According to Caraco & Brown (1986), allomaternal (pluriparental) care may re-
duce starvation of young if at least one of the participating parents finds suffi-
cient food to allow for lactation. When there is a cost of starvation, cooperative 
provisioning of young might evolve through reciprocity given that breeders feed 

197
11 Non-offspring nursing in mammals: general implications from a case study on house mice
the young asynchronously. The authors further suggest that even when food is 
plentiful, offspring may benefit because of reduced time between meals. In house 
mice, communally nesting females do not nurse simultaneously so that pups are 
almost always cared for by one lactating female (unpubl. pers. obs.). Litters that 
grew up in a communal nest have a relatively high weaning weight compared 
to same-sized litters from solitarily nursed mothers (König 1993; see also Ta-
ble 11.1). It is not known, however, whether shorter time intervals between meals 
cause this effect, or whether other energetic benefits of communal nesting are 
involved, as suggested by the following hypotheses.
11.4.4
Immunological benefits for pups
As an alternative hypothesis to explain intra- and inter-specific variation in al-
losuckling frequency, Roulin & Heeb (1999) suggested immunological benefits 
(the immunological function of the allosuckling hypothesis). We modified the 
authors’ hypothesis and tested the prediction that house mouse pups gain a 
more variable immunocompetence through milk provided by several females 
(Ramsauer & König, submitted).
Newborn mammals do not yet have a functioning immune system and are 
dependent on immune factors received through maternal milk. During the first 
two weeks of lactation in house mice, immunoglobulin and lymphocytes reach 
the pups’ intestines through the milk, and then are passed on into the blood 
(Janeway & Travers 1997). Due to indiscriminate nursing of own and alien young 
in communal nests, pups might benefit by acquiring a broader immunocom-
petence when reared communally in comparison to pups raised by just one fe-
male. The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is crucial for the production 
of immunocomponents and plays an important role in pathogen recognition. 
Receiving variable MHC products through maternal milk supplied by both the 
mother and another lactating female might thus allow for a better defense of 
pups against pathogens and be of importance for the growth and viability of 
offspring.
Immunocompetence typically is a matter of genetics and experience. The 
social behavior of female house mice, however, might offer a non-genetic tool 
to influence offspring immunocompetence through cooperative nursing. We 
therefore predicted improved growth and/or earlier weaning of pups reared by 
females of different MHC, and differences in the immunocompetence of subadult 
house mice that have been nursed by two mothers compared to those receiving 
milk from one mother. We tested these predictions by cross-fostering newborn 
house mouse pups from our population of wild-caught animals to a communal 
nest of two lactating foster mothers either of the same or of different MHC types 
(Ramsauer & König, submitted).
Foster mothers were from two congenic strains differing in the MHC 
(‘A’ = B10BR/OlaHsd and ‘B’ = C57BL/10ScSnOlaHsd). Each replicate consisted 
of three newborn full-sisters: one reared by ‘AA’-foster mothers, one by ‘BB’-fe-
males, and the third by one ‘A’- and one ‘B’-female. Litter size of communal nests 
was always standardized and consisted of 13 congenic offspring, with a sex ratio 

198
Barbara König
of seven males and six females, plus one wild female pup; independent sample 
size was 12.
Growth and weaning weight did not differ significantly for females reared by 
two foster mothers of either the same or different MHC. In collaboration with 
Andrew MacPherson from the Institute of Immunology at Zürich University, we 
measured immunocomponents in the pups’ blood. Our treatment did not signif-
icantly influence immunoglobulin concentrations (IgA, IgM and IgG) of young 
at day 15 (before the immune system of pups is fully functional). Lymphocyte 
concentrations (B220 representing B-cells, and CD4 representing T-cells), how-
ever, differed significantly at day 28, with intermediate values in females raised 
by ‘AB’-foster mothers (at the age of four weeks, subadult house mice are already 
immunocompetent). ‘A’-females had rather high concentrations of CD4 lympho-
cytes in their milk which is reflected in high concentrations in pups that had 
been nursed by ‘AA’-foster mothers; ‘B’-females, on the other hand, had rather 
high concentrations of B220 lymphocytes resulting in similarly high values in 
their offspring (Ramsauer & König, submitted).
Immunological components that are transferred via milk influence the im-
munocompetence of wild-type house mouse pups irrespective of their own gen-
otype. Such influence on immunocompetence, however, did not result in ener-
getic benefits of young as reflected in improved growth or earlier weaning under 
our experimental conditions. Nevertheless, a female house mouse that chooses a 
partner for communal nursing according to MHC characteristics might be able 
to influence her offspring’s future survival and reproduction. Under more natu-
ral conditions, when offspring encounter a variety of pathogens, we therefore 
may expect that MHC characteristics contribute to structuring among females 
within social groups in house mice. Even if the influence of maternal milk on 
offspring immunocompetence cannot explain our observation of improved re-
productive success of communally nursing females, it might influence a female’s 
choice of a social partner, which remains to be tested.
11.4.5
Physiological benefits for the mother
Wilkinson (1992) suggested that female evening bats, Nycticeius humeralis, 
nurse non-offspring to dump excess milk prior to the next feeding trip, thereby 
obtaining immediate energetic benefits and maintaining maximum milk pro-
duction. House mouse pups, however, are limited in their growth by the milk 
available from the mother (König et al. 1988), and especially in communal nests 
with many pups, it is not plausible that females have to face the problem of get-
ting rid of excess milk before they leave for a foraging trip.
For relatively small mammals such as rodents, communal care might involve 
direct energetic or metabolic benefits as improved thermoregulation or im-
proved milk production, and thus allow for a higher weaning success of females 
that nurse non-offspring (Sayler & Salmon 1969, Boyce & Boyce 1988, Hayes & 
Solomon 2004).
To test whether females are more efficient in converting solid food into off-
spring body mass during cooperative care of young, we measured the energy 

199
11 Non-offspring nursing in mammals: general implications from a case study on house mice
costs of lactation of females rearing litters either solitarily or communally with 
a familiar sister. Litter size of experienced females (rearing at least the second 
litter) was standardized to 6–7 pups directly after birth, and litters of commu-
nally nursing sisters did not differ by more than six days in age. The animals had 
ad libitum access to food and water, but were kept in a climatic chamber at an 
ambient temperature of 15°C. This should reflect rather natural conditions for 
house mice and avoid missing an effect due to climate conditions that are too 
luxurious (Barnett 1965, DeLong 1967, Berry 1981a; for detailed methods, see 
Diedrichsen 1993).
Daily food consumption of females was measured from day 2 until day 13 
of lactation with the help of an automatic feeding device (Neuhäusser-Wespy 
& König 2000). This device allows measuring individual food consumption of 
group-living animals without any disturbance. At day 14, we milked females 
with a milking device (König et al. 1988) and measured the amount of milk pro-
duced (after four hours of separation from the litters), and its energy content 
from lipids and total solids.
Neither litter weight at birth and weaning, nor the individual female’s food 
consumption or milk production differed significantly for solitarily or commu-
nally nursing females (Table 11.1).
To quantify the females’ allocation of energy into lactation versus mainte-
nance, we calculated Calow’s index of reproduction (Calow 1979). This index (I) 
was analyzed for day 14 of lactation, by using the following equation:
 
(Energy consumed) – (Energy invested)
I = 1 – 
 
(Energy consumed when non-reproducing)
Energy consumed = energy equivalents of maternal food consumption at day 14 
of lactation; Energy invested = total energy of milk produced at day 14; Energy 
consumed when non-reproducing = energy equivalents of daily amount of food 
eaten (averaged over five consecutive days) when the adult females were non-
pregnant and non-lactating. Energy equivalents of food pellets (Altromin rat 
and mouse) were 12.5 kJ/g (information according to the producer).
The index, I, relates a female’s energy investment during lactation to her 
maintenance metabolism. A value equal or less than zero indicates that females 
compensate the energetic demand of reproduction (or lactation) through in-
creased food consumption. For a value larger than zero, females meet the en-
ergetic costs of lactation at the expense of their maintenance metabolism, or by 
using lipid stores or other reserves that they accumulated before reproduction.
Energy allocation during reproduction did not differ significantly in both 
social groups (Table 11.1). Females did not allocate more energy to milk produc-
tion, and did not lactate more efficiently, when nursing communally compared 
to mothers nursing solitarily.

200
Barbara König
11.4.6
Metabolic peak load reduction
In the experiment described before, both solitarily and communally nursing fe-
males met the energy need for lactation through increased food consumption 
from days 1–4 until days 13–16 (see also König et al. 1988). Lactating house mice 
were able to rear a growing litter both by increasing the amount of milk pro-
duced and by improving the quality through an increase in total solid and fat 
concentrations until day 16 of lactation. At the age of 17 days, offspring shift to 
solid food and are fully weaned when they are 23-days-old (König & Markl 1987). 
As a consequence, females go through a period of peak energy demand during 
lactation that is reflected in a drastic increase in daily food consumption, by 
over 200% in comparison to the non-reproducing state. This energetic demand 
can be further increased by simultaneous pregnancy during lactation. Concep-
tion during the postpartum estrus results in the birth of one litter every 28 days, 
on average. Nevertheless, female house mice are limited in their maximal (or 
peak) sustainable metabolism especially when nursing a large litter (Hammond 
& Diamond 1992). This effect is called ‘metabolic ceiling’.
Table 11.1. Energy allocation during lactation of female house mice rearing litters soli-
tarily or communally with a familiar sister. Litter size was standardized at birth to six pups.
Females rearing litters
Solitarily
(n = 7)
Communally
(n = 11 pairs)
z (U-test)
Female weight day 
1 (g)
30.1 ± 5.5
31.3 ± 3.0
–0.498
ns
Female weight day 
23 (g)
30.9 ± 5.6
31.3 ± 3.0
–0.045
ns
Offspring weight day 
1 (g)
1.6 ± 0.1
1.5 ± 0.1
–0.126
ns
Offspring weight day 
23 (g)
8.5 ± 1.4
9.2 ± 1.4
–1.907
p < 0.10
Maternal food consump-
tion (days 2-13; kJ)
1971 ± 98.9
2002 ± 113.8
–0.226
ns
Milk production at day 
14 (g)
1.0 ± 0.3
1.0 ± 0.3
–0.317
ns
Energy provided through 
milk (at day 14; kJ/day)
63.7 ± 29.1
67.1 ± 24.9
–0.402
ns
Calow’s index I (see text 
for explanation)
–0.7 ± 0.3
–1.1±0.6
–1.407
ns

201
11 Non-offspring nursing in mammals: general implications from a case study on house mice
In our population of house mice kept in polygynous groups over an extended 
period, litters in communal nests showed an average age difference of eight days 
(König 1994b). Due to indiscriminate care of young, females in such a situation 
are nursing more or less continuously. Based on these observations, we assumed 
that the energy budget of communally nursing females remains at a rather con-
stant and medium level because both litters do not simultaneously reach the pe-
riod of highest energy need (Fig. 11.3). We therefore formulated the hypothesis 
of benefits due to peak load reduction (Müller & König, submitted). By nursing 
litters communally, lactating females avoid peak energy demand. Because peak 
energy demands at the metabolic ceiling are especially costly, females that avoid 
such peaks will benefit by improved reproductive success.
To test this hypothesis, we manipulated the energy demand of females rear-
ing litters alone, so that other possible benefits of communal breeding were ab-
sent. We analyzed the energy output of two groups of lactating females in which 
the total amount of energy spent on rearing a litter was the same, but energy 
allocation was timed differently.
In the manipulated group, we simulated a constant, medium-level energy 
output for lactating females by cross-fostering two older pups against younger 
ones every 2–3 days, beginning at day 8 of the first lactation, and continuing 
during the females’ second lactation. As a control, we used females in which 
handling was done in the same way, but without cross-fostering. Manipulated 
and control females reared similar-sized litters (litter size was standardized at 
day 1 of lactation: six pups for the first litters, and seven for the second ones). 
Energetic demand of the manipulated females during lactation was assumed to 
have the same mean but lower variance as that of the control females, without 
a prominent peak two weeks after giving birth (for further details see Müller & 
König, submitted).
Fig. 11.3. Model of the relative energetic demand during lactation of a female house mouse over 
two consecutive litters. Thin line: female rearing litters solitarily. Bold line: female rearing litters 
communally with a female conspecific, the two litters differing in age by eight days. Dotted line: 
average demand in both situations. Maximum demand is set to one. The curves were derived from 
data of laboratory mice rearing a medium-sized litter (König et al. 1988), calculated as daily amount 
of milk produced times the proportion of dry weight. For the communal situation, we assumed 
equal contributions of both females to both litters.

202
Barbara König
To quantify energy output, we measured the females’ food consumption and 
resting metabolic rate. As fitness correlates, we analyzed the interbirth intervals 
and the size and weight of the females’ second and third litters.
In accordance with our assumption, total energy output was similar for ma-
nipulated and control females that consumed similar amounts of food when 
rearing both the first and the second litters (there was a tendency for higher total 
food consumption in manipulated females during the first lactation). Daily food 
consumption of control females increased significantly from day 9 until day 15 
of lactation and significantly decreased afterwards. No such variation was ob-
served in manipulated females, with significantly lower food consumption at 
peak lactation, and higher food consumption during day 28 than in control ani-
mals, both during then first and the second litter.
Resting metabolic rates (RMR) of manipulated and control females were mea-
sured twice during each lactation period (at day 14 and at day 28), which allows 
further examination of the assumption of a rather constant energetic burden 
throughout lactation in manipulated females. RMR of control females decreased 
significantly, as expected, from peak lactation to weaning in both lactation peri-
ods. The RMR of manipulated females, however, did not change significantly.
Given that the assumptions of our model were fulfilled, we tested the predic-
tion that females not experiencing peak loads had lower reproductive costs than 
control females, reflected in shorter interbirth intervals and/or larger litter sizes 
of manipulated females on the next reproductive occasion.
Neither the number of young at birth of the second and third litters, nor the 
proportion of females that mated post partum differed significantly between 
manipulated and control females (Müller & König, submitted). These observa-
tions support data from a former study on house mice by Fuchs (1981, 1982), who 
found an effect of the burden of lactation on the interval to the following litter, 
but not on its size.
As predicted, intervals between the first and second litters were shorter in 
manipulated than in control females. This effect, however, was only significant 
for those females where standardization of litter size directly after birth resulted 
in an experimentally increased litter (manipulated females gave birth to the sec-
ond litter two days earlier than control ones, on average). Females, whose litters 
had been decreased in size at day 1 of lactation, might not have been confronted 
with an energy demand at their metabolic ceiling.
These data suggest that peak load reduction results in lower future repro-
ductive costs at least for females that suffer an energetic burden near or at their 
maximum metabolic capacity.
Intervals between the second and the third litters, however, did not differ 
significantly between the two groups (Müller & König, submitted). Recent work 
by Johnson et al. (2001) has shown that the metabolic ceiling does not remain 
constant throughout the life of a house mouse but that it increases from the first 
to the second litter. Presumably, with a litter size of seven young, females were 
not forced to invest at their metabolic ceiling during the second lactation, and 
peak load reduction therefore did not result in lowered reproductive costs.
Nevertheless, the experiment suggests that communal nursing can modify a 
female’s energy output, and can reduce peak energy demand of lactating females 

203
11 Non-offspring nursing in mammals: general implications from a case study on house mice
if litters differ in age by several days. Peak load reduction may thus affect fit-
ness parameters of lactating house mice, and we further suggest that this effect 
is most pronounced if the peak forces them to approach their metabolic ceiling. 
However, it remains to be shown that this is not only the case in the rather ar-
tificial setting used during the experiments, but also under conditions of com-
munal nursing.
11.5
Can peak load reduction explain non-offspring nursing 
in mammals?
Metabolic benefits due to peak load reduction are a prime candidate for explain-
ing the observed higher reproductive output of communally versus solitarily 
nursing females. It is therefore tempting to speculate that such energetic benefits 
can also underlie other cases of non-offspring nursing, including those that have 
been interpreted as non-adaptive.
Packer et al.’s (1992) investigation of the effects of a variety of factors on the 
frequency of non-offspring nursing (excluding data from captive studies!) re-
vealed three significant findings. First, non-offspring nursing increases with lit-
ter size across taxa. Second, non-offspring nursing is more common and better 
tolerated in polytocous (average litter size larger than one) than in monotocous 
species. In species that typically nurse only one pup, non-offspring nursing is 
more likely to be classified as milk theft (as for example in Mexican free-tailed 
bats, or Northern elephant seals). In contrast, in polytocous species, non-off-
spring nursing is less likely to be classified as milk theft, and also occurs in spe-
cies where females can discriminate their own from foreign young, as in African 
lions (Pusey & Packer 1994). In both situations, non-offspring nursing correlates 
with increased energetic costs of lactation that peak shortly before weaning (Of-
tedal 1984, Oftedal & Gittleman 1989), increasing the probability that females 
invest at their metabolic ceiling. These two findings are consistent with the peak 
load reduction hypothesis; females are not expected to carry such a heavy ener-
getic burden when litters are small and their life history is not as fast-paced.
Their third finding was that non-offspring nursing is most common in po-
lytocous species when group size is small, and decreases significantly as group 
size increases. This observation is also in accordance with the hypothesis of 
peak load reduction if the probability of avoiding simultaneous peaks during 
lactation decreases with increasing number of breeding females in a group. Fur-
thermore, the risk of exploitation by non-mutualistic individuals increases with 
group size and thus will hinder the evolution of stable cooperation.
The hypothesis of peak load reduction requires that females increase energy 
allocation during lactation up to their metabolic ceiling. Furthermore, females 
within a group have to be synchronized in reproduction, so that there is con-
siderable overlap in lactation (perfect synchrony, however, that is giving birth 
on the same day, should not occur). Such constraints might explain why non-
offspring nursing, although not very rare, nevertheless is limited to rather few 
taxa.

204
Barbara König
11.6
Concluding remarks
During communal nursing, female house mice do not discriminate between own 
and non-offspring, and gain direct, mutualistic benefits. Non-offspring nursing 
therefore is a cooperative behavior that allows females to improve weaning suc-
cess of pups in a reciprocal manner, even among unrelated partners, once they 
have established an egalitarian relationship.
Such cooperation, however, may run the risk of being exploited. The most 
extreme case would be a highly pregnant female that drops her litter into anoth-
er lactating female’s nest and deserts. The benefits of such free-riding behavior 
are high. A non-lactating female will give birth to her next litter on average six 
days earlier than a female simultaneously being pregnant and lactating (König & 
Markl 1987). The deserted female, on the other hand, has to invest into non-off-
spring because she cannot tell them apart from own young (König 1989, 1993). 
It is not known whether such brood parasitism exists in house mice, but some 
aspects of the females’ social behavior suggest protection against exploitation by 
non-cooperative partners.
First, female aggression is rather rare within groups and among relatives. 
Females, however, are very aggressive towards foreign females, not belonging to 
the same group, and especially so, when they are lactating (Crowcroft & Rowe 
1963, Haug 1978, Kareem & Barnard 1982). Second, females preferentially share 
nests with a familiar relative (Manning et al. 1992, Dobson et al. 2000). Interest-
ingly, familiarity during juvenile development is of paramount importance for 
improved reproductive success of females in egalitarian pairs, and overrides the 
effect of genetic relatedness (König 1994c), despite the fact that house mice of 
both sexes use genetic cues to discriminate against unfamiliar kin during mate 
choice (for a recent review, see Penn 2002). The importance of familiarity may 
suggest either that a physiological mechanism is involved which requires some 
period of adaptation to or synchronization with a partner, or that information 
about the partner is of significance for successful cooperation. The rather simple 
rules of thumb to communally nurse with a familiar group member and to ag-
gressively keep away strangers might prevent females from being exploited by 
the opportunistic free-riding of other females.
Nevertheless, even during communal nursing females might benefit when 
reducing their investment, given that the partner will do more. In rodents, lacta-
tion performance is influenced by litter size in utero, which determines pre par-
tum mammary growth (Jameson 1998), but more so by the number of sucking 
pups (Mann et al. 1983). Due to indiscriminate nursing, we assume that lactating 
females do not adjust milk production according to their own litter size but that 
energetic investment is shared equally among the members of a communal nest 
(we are currently testing this assumption). Such equalized investment therefore 
might be a prerequisite for stable cooperation among female house mice.

205
11 Non-offspring nursing in mammals: general implications from a case study on house mice
Acknowledgments
For stimulating discussions and helpful comments, I cordially thank Carel van 
Schaik. I further thank Gabi Stichel for excellent animal care and help with some 
experiments. Financial support of the Swiss National Science Foundation (31-
50740.97/1 and 31-59609.99/1) is gratefully acknowledged.

Part V
Biological Markets

Chapter 12
Monkeys, markets and minds: 
biological markets and primate sociality
Louise Barrett, S. Peter Henzi
12.1
Introduction
The sight of a monkey group, huddled together in pairs, each individual taking 
turns to comb diligently through the other’s fur inevitably brings to mind the 
old cliché, “you scratch my back and I’ll scratch yours” and makes it obvious 
why primate grooming behavior is often seen as the quintessential act of coop-
eration and reciprocity. Among the monkeys and apes, grooming is also seen 
as the defining act of sociality; the fact that individuals put considerable effort 
into their grooming relationships, groom some group members more than oth-
ers, and work to sustain time for grooming in the face of opposing pressures 
(Sade 1972, Dunbar & Sharman 1984), suggests that grooming helps to serve an 
individual’s social goals, as well as enabling animals to stay clean and healthy. 
Understanding how primates cooperate and perform successfully in the social 
world means, to a great extent, understanding the dynamics of grooming.
Traditionally, it has been assumed that dominance and competition are the 
factors that explain the intensity with which female primates, in particular, en-
gage in grooming (e.g. Seyfarth 1977, Harcourt 1988). Competition among female 
primates arises as a consequence of group living. Living together in a cohesive 
social group can itself be seen as a cooperative act; joining together with oth-
ers enables animals to receive benefits, like reduced predation risk or decreased 
vulnerability to infanticidal males (van Schaik & Kappeler 1997, Henzi & Bar-
rett 2003), that are unavailable to solitary animals. However, living in a group 
is not cost-free; the unavoidable corollary of living in close proximity to others 
is conflict over access to scarce local resources, such as food or predator-risk 
reducing spatial positions (van Schaik 1989, van Schaik & Kappeler 1997). Al-
though these effects may be ameliorated by the fact that females often reside in 
kin-based groups, they nonetheless remain trapped by the need to remain safe, 
on the one hand, and the need to secure sufficient resources for themselves and 
their offspring, on the other. This dilemma, seen in both proximate and ultimate 
perspective, generates the subtle and complex patterns of cooperative interac-
tion that are associated with female-bonded primate social systems.
Among the most important of these cooperative interactions, and the ones 
most frequently linked to grooming in a causal manner, are the coalitions that 
females form during aggressive encounters, whereby one individual comes to 
the aid of another to help fight off an attacking individual (Silk 1987). The con-
sensus view is that, among the primates, females form long-term mutually-ben-

210
Louise Barrett, S. Peter Henzi
eficial alliances with specific individuals in order to buffer themselves against 
the negative effects of competition within their groups. This buffering is thought 
to take the form of coalitionary support during agonistic interactions combined 
with the use of grooming to build trust and alleviate stress. Grooming, thus, has 
two (non-exclusive) functions within this scenario; it builds bond strength and 
thereby establishes the trust on which coalitionary relationships may be built 
(Dunbar 1984) and/or it acts as a currency that can be exchanged in anticipation 
of future coalitionary support (Seyfarth & Cheney 1984).
12.2
The problem with chacma baboons
This idea that grooming is a means of servicing coalitionary relationships is 
neat, coherent and fits well with notions that monkeys and apes are highly ‘po-
litical’ animals (see e.g. Byrne & Whiten 1988). However, there is a problem with 
the above scenario: chacma baboons, (Papio hamadryas ursinus), our chosen 
study animal, very rarely form coalitions, despite the fact that females sustain 
grooming relationships and compete over access to resources (Ron et al. 1994, 
1996, Silk et al. 1999, Barrett & Henzi 2002). At De Hoop, our current study site, 
for example, we have seen only two female-female coalitions in approximately 
30000 observer-hours. Moreover, recent work on yellow baboons in Amboseli, 
Kenya, reveals that females form coalitions against other adult females at ex-
tremely low rates in this population as well (1-4 interventions per 100 disputes) 
(Silk et al. 2004). Low rates of coalition formation may therefore be characteris-
tic of all baboons, and not just the southern African sub-species. Silk et al. (2004) 
suggest that coalitions confer significant individual benefits on the females that 
participate in their formation but, as suggested by Henzi & Barrett (1999), their 
overall rarity makes it unlikely that they are the organizing principle of female 
social strategies.
Another pertinent fact is the finding that chacma females from the Drak-
ensberg Mountains continue to form grooming relationships and adjust their 
time budgets to conserve grooming time despite the fact that the distribution of 
resources in their environment means that they experience almost no competi-
tion for food and consequently show little aggression (Henzi et al. 1997). Spe-
cifically, once the size of the female cohort of a group exceeds a critical number, 
Drakensberg females cut back the number of different individuals with whom 
they engage in grooming. This allows them to increase the length of individual 
grooming bouts with their chosen partners and, more importantly it seems, 
keeps levels of grooming reciprocation high (Henzi et al. 1997); female clique 
size is reduced at precisely the point at which reciprocal grooming with all other 
female group members can no longer be sustained.
The significance of these findings is further highlighted by other data from 
Amboseli revealing that grooming has significant fitness benefits for baboons, 
even though grooming is not causally related to coalition formation in this 
population. Females that are highly social and who groom frequently have sig-

211
12 Monkeys, markets and minds: biological markets and primate sociality
nificantly higher offspring survival rates than less sociable females (Silk et al. 
2003).
Among baboon females, then, grooming remains significant and has positive 
fitness effects even in the virtual absence of coalition formation. Consequently, 
the notion that the function of grooming is to cement coalitionary alliances can-
not be taken as a general explanation for the prevalence of grooming across the 
primates as a whole. On a more personal and immediate level, the rarity of coali-
tion formation among chacma females meant that, in our own studies, we had 
to start thinking about grooming and its dynamics differently, resulting in a 
simple and very obvious insight into the problem; namely, that a comprehensive 
explanation of the role of grooming in primate societies should encompass its 
utilitarian benefits, as well as its social ones (Barrett et al. 1999, Henzi & Barrett 
1999, Barrett & Henzi 2001).
It is clear that grooming retains its original hygienic value, despite its social 
importance, since animals spend time grooming themselves as well as directing 
it to others, and because the grooming they receive from others is generally di-
rected at areas they cannot easily reach (Barton 1985). The targets of this groom-
ing are ectoparasites such as fleas and lice (Tanaka & Takafushi 1993). A greater 
parasite load means a greater loss of blood, greater irritation, and increases the 
probability of infection (Johnson et al. 2004), so keeping levels low is of clear 
benefit to animals. In addition, it is possible that grooming has thermoregula-
tory benefits by maintaining the loft of the fur, thus aiding heat retention and 
dissipation. It is also clear that the physical contact that grooming involves is 
highly pleasurable for the recipient and is, in fact, associated with the produc-
tion of β-endorphins (Keverne et al. 1989). This latter feature cannot be viewed 
in the same utilitarian light as the removal of parasites, as it is presumably a 
derived feature that proximately reinforces grooming behavior. Nevertheless, 
it can result in grooming being exchanged for its own hedonic benefits, rather 
than for ‘political’ reasons.
Grooming is also costly for its participants. Not only are there opportunity 
costs associated with grooming another animal (an individual could be engaged 
in other activities like foraging, or indeed being groomed themselves) but there 
is also a risk of acquiring parasites from grooming partners if the parasites are 
able to move from one animal to another during the course of a grooming bout 
(see Johnson et al. 2004 for a theoretical approach based on the ideal free distri-
bution). Removing another animal’s parasites therefore comes with the simulta-
neous cost of acquiring a few of them oneself; a problem that will be exacerbated 
in larger groups because these tend to have higher average parasite loads than 
small groups (Johnson et al. 2004). Grooming is therefore a cooperative act since 
animals cannot obtain all the grooming they require to be parasite-free by their 
own actions, and the benefits of grooming another must be traded off against 
the costs of doing so.

212
Louise Barrett, S. Peter Henzi
12.3
The social market place
While this idea is obviously not new, the focus on the social function of groom-
ing has pushed aside the rather more mundane role that grooming serves. By 
highlighting the broader utility of grooming, it becomes easier to appreciate that 
grooming is a valuable commodity in itself. The fact that an animal must trade 
with other individuals in order to reduce its parasite load means that, regard-
less of its ability to facilitate other social interactions, grooming is a valuable 
service that one animal can supply for another. Johnson et al. (2004) go fur-
ther than this, however, by emphasizing that levels of parasite infestation can 
produce patterns of behavior (e.g. group fission) that have traditionally been 
attributed solely to complex social processes. Social dynamics may actually be 
linked to parasite loads in a fundamental way, making it impossible to divorce 
the hygienic from the social function of grooming in the way that some authors 
have suggested (e.g. Dunbar 1988).
A more utilitarian perspective on grooming also frees us from the assump-
tion that coalition formation is inevitably tied to grooming; although females 
potentially are able to trade grooming for this service, there is no necessary link 
between these two behaviors from our perspective. Other conceptual approaches 
to the issue require that they are connected (e.g. Dunbar 1988, van Schaik 1989), 
even though the evidence to support such a mandatory link is equivocal at best 
(Henzi & Barrett 1999).
This notion of grooming as a tradable commodity thus leads neatly to the 
adoption of biological market (BM) theory as an explanatory framework. BM 
theory, as put forward by Ronald Noë and Peter Hammerstein (Noë et al. 1991, 
Noë & Hammerstein 1994, 1995), holds that (i) where individuals control re-
sources or can provide a service to others, these constitute commodities that can 
be exchanged but not taken by force (they are ‘inalienable’); (ii) trading partners 
are chosen from a range of alternatives, via a mechanism of outbidding com-
petition, in such a way that profit is maximized. This, in turn, means that the 
prevention of defection is not a driving force in a BM framework, in contrast 
to models based on the iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma (Axelrod 1986). (iii) Sup-
ply and demand determine the bartering value of commodities exchanged; thus, 
within primate groups, animals may trade grooming with each other on a mu-
tualistic basis in order to reap the benefits that grooming itself offers (reciprocal 
traders), or they can exchange grooming for other commodities that are, in some 
sense, value equivalent (interchange traders) (Hemelrijk & Ek 1991). It should 
therefore be possible to distinguish ‘trader classes’ of females that exchange 
grooming in different ways. Possible sources of interchange commodities are 
tolerance around feeding or drinking sites, mating opportunities, tolerance and 
access to infants (for further details see Barrett & Henzi 2001). Coalitionary sup-
port is also a potential interchange commodity for species other than baboons, 
although there are reasons to suspect that this is less likely to occur than other 
exchanges (see below).
In the absence of coalitions and alliances, adult female baboons generally 
gain access to resources on the strength of their own power (females can gener-

213
12 Monkeys, markets and minds: biological markets and primate sociality
ally be placed in a linear, transitive dominance hierarchy, which describes pri-
ority of access to resources). Consequently, we predict that interchange trad-
ing should occur only when the ‘power differential’ between two participants is 
great enough that access to the commodity cannot be achieved by the less power-
ful individual alone. Power differentials among adult females can be expressed 
in terms of the distance between the animals’ respective dominance ranks, and 
the gradient (or ‘steepness’) of the hierarchy (Barrett & Henzi 2001). As Fig. 12.1 
shows, the same power differential may represent a difference of only one rank 
position in troops where the dominance gradient is steep (upper line) but can en-
compass the whole dominance hierarchy in troops where the gradient is shallow. 
Thus, the power differential between the highest- and lowest-ranked females in 
the latter group is equivalent to the differential between two adjacently-ranked 
females in the former.
Gradients are expected to be shallow when competition is low and resources 
are non-monpolizable. In such cases, reciprocal traders should dominate the 
market place since females cannot exert sufficient power over others to induce 
interchange trading. As competition increases and resources become monopo-
lizable, gradients are expected to become steeper. Rank distance will therefore 
exert a stronger influence over females’ ability to obtain access to resources, and 
they will be in a position to trade grooming for access to commodities; inter-
change traders should therefore come to make up a significant proportion of 
the market. Importantly, this implies that reciprocal grooming should make up 
a significant proportion of grooming under all circumstances in all groups, re-
gardless of dominance gradients. This is because all females will always have the 
ability to exchange this commodity with each other; a notion similar to Chapa-
is’s notion of low-competence cooperation (Chapais, this volume). Interchange 
Fig. 12.1. A notional graph to illustrate the concept of a power differential. As dominance rank gets 
lower, the energy costs associated with receiving aggression from others increase. High-ranking 
females can therefore exert a much greater effect on another female’s fitness than low-ranking 
females. The two slopes represent groups with different dominance gradients. When gradients are 
steep (upper line), the negative effect exerted by one female on another can be achieved at lower 
rank distances than in a group where the gradient is shallower. Adapted from Barrett & Henzi (2001) 
with permission.

214
Louise Barrett, S. Peter Henzi
traders, on the other hand, should only be seen under competitive circumstances 
(cf. Chapais’s competence-dependent cooperation).
12.4
Why markets?
So far, so good. But does the notion of a market place really add value over a stan-
dard optimality analysis of behavior? Does a view of grooming as valuable in its 
own right necessarily require buying into a whole new theoretical framework? 
Are terms like ‘commodities’ or ‘trader classes’ really essential to understand-
ing how females use grooming for their own particular ends? Not surprisingly, 
perhaps, we would argue that the answer to these questions is ‘yes’ and that a BM 
framework is more than just a new bottle for some rather old wine. The value of 
BM from our perspective is three-fold. First, unlike other models of cooperation, 
BM explicitly focuses on partner choice as a factor influencing the kinds and 
levels of cooperation that one sees; it thus recognizes the inherent dynamism 
represented by primate social groups. This means that, as well as giving some 
insight into the ultimate function of cooperative behavior, a BM framework also 
places great emphasis on the proximate mechanisms by which these cooperative 
outcomes are negotiated.
This focus on the process by which individuals choose partners in relation 
to the state of the market means that ‘noisy’ relationships can be transformed 
into highly informative ones: the variance around a mean level of interaction 
between two individuals does not have to be viewed as potential error, but can be 
investigated as a contingent response to fluctuations in the supply and demand 
of the commodities on offer. In addition to the relative balance between recip-
rocal and interchange traders in the market place, potential partners can also 
vary in value depending on their health, reproductive state, seasonal changes in 
the competitive regime, and on the presence or absence (through migration or 
death) of other individuals. A BM approach can deal with this kind of dynamic 
change within groups in a way that simply cannot be matched by analyses based 
on a static assessment of the costs and benefits of interacting with others.
Second, a market-based analysis does not treat primate groups as monoliths 
in which all females are assumed to show the same response to a given competi-
tive regime (Barton et al 1996); rather, it takes a more individual-based approach 
in which traders are predicted to behave differently depending on what they are 
trading and with whom (see also Silk et al. 2004, who make a similar argument 
for individual benefits in the context of coalition formation). This is in contrast 
to more standard socioecological models that characterize groups as ‘despotic’ 
or ‘egalitarian’ and implicitly assume that all females will follow the same set 
of behavioral ‘rules’ (see e.g. Sterck et al. 1997). In a BM formulation, a female 
can be both egalitarian and despotic in her interactions at the same time; she 
may trade in a reciprocal (egalitarian) manner with one female, but interchange 
(despotically) with another. Again, this emphasis on individual dynamics over 
time is a more realistic approach to understanding primate social interactions. It 
exploits potentially informative variability within and between females, rather 

215
12 Monkeys, markets and minds: biological markets and primate sociality
than attempting to smooth out all the bumps and wrinkles in order to force them 
into a specific category of social interaction.
Third, and on a more practical level, perhaps, BM offers a way out of the kin 
selection-reciprocal altruism impasse. While BM was originally envisaged as a 
way of explaining how unrelated individuals (even those of different species) 
could achieve cooperation, there is actually no reason why kin should not trade 
commodities with each other if trade is necessary for each of them to achieve 
their goal. As Silk (this volume) and Chapais (this volume) both point out, one 
should not mistake kin-biased behavior for kin selection, nor should we expect 
individuals to always favor kin for cooperative tasks. A BM approach does not 
force an immediate distinction between kin selection and reciprocal altruism as 
explanations for cooperation, but allows one to remain agnostic on this thorny 
issue, while including factors like relatedness as variables likely to influence 
partner choice and commodity exchange rates.
In addition to these benefits concerning the analysis of cooperation within 
groups, we also feel that the BM approach has the potential to add to other areas 
of research beyond understanding cooperation. As detailed below, we believe 
that a view of primate groups as market places, with trade as central to group so-
cial dynamics, can help to shed light on other areas of evolutionary significance, 
such as the cognitive differences that have evolved within the primate order.
12.5
When is a primate group also a market?
There is one more point about a BM framework that needs emphasizing before 
we go on; any attempt to investigate whether market forces structure the groom-
ing dynamics of primate groups requires a focus on the dynamic part of the 
equation, and not just the grooming. The BM approach is concerned with the 
manner in which individual behavior reflects changes in the market place and 
the supply and demand of valuable commodities. In other words, it is concerned 
with responses to variation in local circumstance. If circumstances do not vary, 
then it becomes impossible to test whether supply and demand for commodities 
structure the market, since by definition both of these variables will remain con-
stant. Valid tests of a BM framework therefore require fluctuation in the market; 
if this is not the case, then one may rightly conclude that market forces do not 
explain behavior, but for the wrong reason; if markets do not vary, then market 
forces will not be apparent, but this does not mean that they do not exist at all. 
As is recommended in all cases where a particular theoretical framework is ap-
plied, a priori reasons for why dynamic market effects are expected should be 
generated, rather than merely assuming that they are present.
The other reason for emphasizing this dynamic element is that BM has been 
seen by some as an alternative to Seyfarth’s (1977) model of primate grooming 
when, as Noë & Hammerstein (1995) originally pointed out, the latter is actually 
a form of market model. As in a standard BM formulation, the key components 
of Seyfarth’s model are partner choice and competition for partners that differ in 
value. However, the crucial difference between the BM approach and Seyfarth’s 

216
Louise Barrett, S. Peter Henzi
(1977) model is that the latter is entirely static; it assumes that the value of high-
ranking females remains constant over time. Seyfarth’s model also deviates 
more significantly from a BM approach in that the competition between females 
does not take the form of ‘outbidding’ competition, whereby females who sup-
ply a better quality product (or ask a lower price) do better within the market. 
Instead, competition applies on a ‘first come, first served’ basis where females 
are able to prevent others from grooming merely by virtue of their rank; high-
ranking females get to choose first and they remove females from the ‘grooming 
pool’. In doing so, they prevent other females from entering into a ‘bidding war’ 
because the excluded females never get an opportunity to engage with such part-
ners and make them a better offer. This again results in a static, as opposed to a 
dynamic, market place, where partner choice precludes outbidding rather than 
promoting it. In this sense then, Seyfarth (1977) does not present us with a true 
market-based model.
Finally, not all instances of grooming need represent ‘market trading’: in 
some instances, individuals will groom for purposes related to tension-reduc-
tion, bonding with offspring and the like, in a manner that is not dictated by 
market forces. Again, this means that it is important to give a priori reasons as 
to why market effects should be in operation, and to test this assumption, rather 
than merely proceed under it.
12.6
Testing the framework: 
market forces and grooming reciprocity
So, how well does market theory do when put to the test? As a first step in explor-
ing the applicability of a market-based approach, we tested whether grooming 
reciprocity between females was influenced by dominance gradients and pow-
er differentials, using data from two contrasting populations of South African 
chacma baboons. Data from two troops living in the Drakensberg Mountains of 
Kwa-Zulu Natal were compared with two troops at De Hoop, an area of coastal 
fynbos (Mediterranean scrub vegetation) in the Western Cape (see Barrett & 
Henzi 2002 for an overview of this site), matched for female cohort size.
Differences in the level of food competition experienced by females in the 
two populations were substantial. In the Drakensberg Mountains, the sparse 
and relatively even distribution of food (Henzi et al. 1992) meant that agonistic 
events between females occurred at a rate of only one in every 500 hours of ob-
servation, whereas at De Hoop, individual females were engaged in aggression 
at least once per hour on average (Barrett et al. 1999, Barrett et al. 2002). Conse-
quently, females at De Hoop could be ranked in a strong linear dominance hier-
archy, whereas this was not possible for the two mountain troops. We inferred 
from this that interchange trading would be possible at De Hoop since power 
differentials were likely to be high, whereas this was unlikely to be the case in 
the Drakensberg. In the latter population, we predicted that females would be 
limited to reciprocal exchange, able only to trade grooming for its own intrinsic 
value.

217
12 Monkeys, markets and minds: biological markets and primate sociality
In line with our prediction that reciprocal traders should make up a signifi-
cant share of the market, regardless of the potential for interchange trading, we 
found that females in both populations showed significant levels of ‘time-match-
ing’; that is, there was a significant positive correlation between the grooming 
contributions of individuals to a grooming bout (Barrett et a. 1999) (Fig. 12.2). 
The fact that females showed a significant tendency to match their partners’ 
grooming contribution (they ‘give as good as they get’; Barrett et al. 2000) sug-
gested that being a good value partner required ‘fair trade’. Experimental stud-
ies of capuchin monkeys support this notion that individuals are capable of gen-
Fig. 12.2. Time-matching across four chacma baboon troops from two different South African 
populations. WA2 and HT are from the Drakensberg Mountains, Kwa-Zulu Natal, and ST and VT 
are from De Hoop, Western Cape. Troops were matched for female cohort size (WA2 and ST: n = 7; 
HT and VT: n = 12). In each case, there is a significant relationship between the amount of time spent 
grooming by the initiator of bout (groomer 1) and its reciprocating partner (groomer 2). However, 
time-matching is more precise for the Drakensberg populations in terms of both explained vari-
ance and a slope that more closely approximates a 1:1 fit (WA2: r2 = 0.588, b = 0.50; HT: r2 = 0.588, 
b = 0.67; ST: r2 = 0.163, b = 0.25; VT: r2 = 0.168, b = 0.42). See Barrett et al. (1999). Reprinted from Pro-
ceedings of the Royal Society, Series B, London.

218
Louise Barrett, S. Peter Henzi
erating expectancies about what they can expect to receive based on what their 
partner gets (Brosnan & de Waal 2003).
It is also interesting to note that individuals did not supply their grooming 
partners with a single lengthy bout of grooming, which was then reciprocated 
in kind. Rather, individuals divided their grooming into a number of short 
bursts that were traded back and forth over the course of the bout (see Barrett 
et al. 2000). This ‘parceling’ of grooming fits with Connor’s (1995) theoretical 
demonstration that such behavior increases the costs of finding an alternative 
partner by ensuring that one always remains a valuable partner, thus removing 
any temptation to defect. The need to be a good value partner in a market place 
where many other individuals can supply the commodity in question, plus the 
parceling of bouts into short grooming bursts, appears to keep females honest 
and well out of the clutches of the Prisoner’s Dilemma.
12.7
Partner control as well as partner choice?
In the Drakensberg, females time-matched more precisely than those at De 
Hoop; the relationship between individual partners’ contributions was much 
stronger for the Drakensberg troops in terms of both the amount of explained 
variance and a slope coefficient that was closer to a one-to-one fit (see Fig. 12.2). 
Originally, we suggested that this reflected the limited potential for interchange 
trading in the Drakensberg (Barrett et al. 1999), with the result that the market 
place contained only reciprocal traders. The poorer fit at De Hoop was attributed 
to the fact that dominance effects, and hence the potential for interchange, in-
troduced more noise into the relationship found, thus resulting in poorer time-
matching.
However, it is also possible that high power differentials at De Hoop provide 
dominant animals with more ‘leverage’ (sensu Lewis 2002) to extract a higher 
amount of grooming from subordinates during reciprocal bouts (so that, for ex-
ample, one unit of grooming from a dominant requires two in return from a 
subordinate). This in turn could be due to a market effect created by coercion, 
punishment or other forms of partner control (Barrett & Henzi 2001, Bshary & 
Nöe 2003). Support for this interpretation is provided by a significant relation-
ship between rank distance and time-matching of bouts in the De Hoop popula-
tion; subordinate individuals tended to groom for much longer than dominant 
individuals within bouts. Overall, for each unit increase in rank, there was a 28 
second discrepancy in the amount of grooming provided by the subordinate ani-
mals compared to the dominant. This suggests that dominant individuals were 
indeed able to use their increased power to extract a higher price in grooming 
from their subordinate counterparts. 
The introduction of partner control into the mix represents a departure from 
the original BM formulation, which dealt only with trade and outbidding in the 
absence of physical force or coercion. However, as Noë (2001) points out, mul-
tiple sources of power are needed to understand cooperative interactions com-
pletely. Thus, while it is true that the original BM formulation dealt only with 

219
12 Monkeys, markets and minds: biological markets and primate sociality
inalienable resources, this does not imply that market forces cannot coexist with 
the use of coercion or other forms of leverage (Ronald Noë, pers. com.). In line 
with Bshary & Nöe’s (2003) views on cleaner fish, partner control seems to be 
crucial to an understanding of the baboon market.
Moreover, Bowles & Hammerstein (2003) note that human economic mod-
els which take account of power have long existed, and that market theory in 
economics now “takes as its foundational assumptions the incomplete nature 
of contracts (biologically speaking, the possibility of cheating, exploitation 
etc.)” (p. 157). Another factor that may also be relevant is that of asymmetric 
price transmission, whereby variation in supply and demand is not passed on to 
consumers and producers equally. This can cause prices to ‘stick’ at artificially 
high or low levels depending on whether transmission fails to consumers or pro-
ducers, respectively (e.g. Azzam 1999, Goodwin & Holt 1999, Bunte & Peerlings 
2003). Thus, we should view partner control as itself determined by a market 
situation in which partner choice options are exercised.
Overall then, these initial results showed how differences in ecology, and 
hence competitive regime, have the effect of setting up differential market forces 
that influence the strength of grooming reciprocation seen between partners. 
This, in turn, leads to an asymmetry in the payoff for grooming bouts between 
distantly-ranked animals compared to closely-ranked animals (see Barrett et al. 
1999 and Barrett & Henzi 2001 for a more detailed discussion).
12.8
Time-matching in other primate species
Time-matching and rank effects have also been investigated in samango mon-
keys (Payne et al. 2003), capuchins and captive bonnet macaques (Manson et 
al. 2004). Among samango monkeys, time-matching occurred at approximately 
the same level as the Drakensberg baboons and overall levels of reciprocated 
grooming were similar (50% and 40%, respectively). This is a point worth noting 
because samango monkeys have been characterized as an archetypal ‘egalitar-
ian’ species (Rowell et al. 1991), with the reciprocal nature of female grooming 
held up as a key characteristic of egalitarian societies in general. The fact that 
‘despotic’ baboons show a pattern of grooming similar to that of the ‘egalitarian’ 
samango illustrates our point that a BM approach cuts across static categorical 
designations, and emphasizes that individual females and populations will show 
patterns that reflect their individual circumstances.
Similarly, capuchins and bonnet macaques also time-matched significantly 
(Manson et al. 2004). This study demonstrated, too, that the length of time that 
an individual spent grooming was a significant predictor of whether its partner 
would reciprocate at all. However, when the two species were analyzed separate-
ly, time-matching remained significant only for the capuchins and the relation-
ship was much weaker than in either the baboons or samangos. Interestingly, 
immediately-reciprocated bouts accounted for only 5–7% of the total groom-
ing observed among the two bonnet macaque groups and only 12–27% among 
the capuchin monkeys. Moreover, among the macaques, grooming was signifi-

220
Louise Barrett, S. Peter Henzi
cantly unbalanced over longer time spans (although this needs to be interpreted 
cautiously since it is difficult a priori to determine the timeframe over which 
data should be analyzed; Barrett et al. 1999). This figure is much lower than for 
baboons and samangos suggesting that reciprocation is of less importance to 
capuchins and macaques and that the nature of the market place thus differs. 
One major source of difference is likely to be the fact that, unlike baboons and 
samangos, female capuchins (O’Brien 1993, Di Bitteti 1997, Parr et al. 1997) and 
bonnet macaques (Sinha 1997) are known to direct grooming down the domi-
nance hierarchy from high-ranking to low-ranking animals. It is therefore pos-
sible that a higher proportion of capuchin and bonnet macaque grooming rep-
resents appeasement of subordinates by more dominant animals; it is a signal 
of ‘benign intent’ towards subordinates (Silk 1996), rather than an example of 
market-based trade for hygienic/hedonic benefits.
Despite these differences in reciprocity, rank effects were nevertheless ap-
parent in both bonnet macaques and capuchins, with distantly-ranked dyads 
showing greater grooming discrepancy than closely-ranked dyads. However, for 
each unit difference in rank distance, a 5.8 second discrepancy in grooming was 
predicted for the capuchins and a 2.25 second discrepancy was predicted for the 
bonnet macaques; values far lower than the 28 second discrepancy predicted for 
the baboons. As Manson et al. (2004) suggest, rank may therefore provide a rela-
tively poor measure of a partner’s market value in these species. Alternatively, 
grooming simply may be a more valuable commodity for baboons compared to 
capuchins and bonnet macaques. As wild terrestrial animals, baboons are more 
likely to have higher ectoparasite loads than arboreal animals, like capuchins, or 
captive animals, like the bonnet macaques in Manson et al.’s (2004) study. The 
value of grooming is likely to be greater among baboons in much the same way 
that a glass of water is worth more if one is dying of thirst in the Sahara desert 
than if one is sitting in the middle of a lake.
12.9
Shifting power relations and the balance of trade
In addition to these cross-population and cross-species effects, a market-based 
approach can also help explain behavioral differences within populations of 
the same species over time. By monitoring temporal ecological variability, it 
is possible to test whether females are able to track the value of commodities 
and adjust their behavior accordingly. As such, it entails a more dynamic and 
individual-based approach to issues of power and dominance among females. 
Therefore, the ability to test for such effects requires that ecological conditions 
vary sufficiently to have an impact on the competitive regime. Fortuitously, this 
was possible at one of our study sites, De Hoop, where the ecological regime of 
one of our study troops, VT, changed markedly over a short period of time (see 
Barrett et al. 2003 for details). This involved the loss of an entire habitat type, a 
dry lake bed, through natural flooding. The net result of this was a significant 
reduction in food competition as the troop was forced to range and feed in areas 
where resources were more uniformly distributed and less monopolizable.

221
12 Monkeys, markets and minds: biological markets and primate sociality
As a consequence of this change in habitat availability, aggressive interac-
tions dropped from over two agonistic interactions per female per hour to less 
than one interaction per female per hour (Barrett et al. 2003). This was because, 
during the low competition post-flood period, there was little benefit to be gained 
from using dominance to exclude females from food resources. As a result, the 
dominance gradient became shallower and power differentials were significant-
ly reduced (Fig. 12.3a). Conditions at De Hoop therefore became much more like 
those in the Drakensberg. Related to this, we also found that aggression was 
targeted much more towards females of adjacent rank during the low competi-
tion period, so that there was a negative relationship between aggression rates 
and rank distance (Fig. 12.3b). No such significant relationship had existed dur-
ing the period of high competition, indicating that females were equally likely 
to direct aggression to distantly-ranked, as well as closely-ranked, opponents 
(Fig. 12.3b). Thus, the changes in the competitive regime produced by the flood 
resulted in dominant females losing some of their leverage over low-ranking fe-
males; acting aggressively no longer imposed such severe costs on subordinate 
females or achieved high benefits for dominant females.
Given this loss of leverage by high-ranking females, and the more relaxed 
competitive regime reminiscent of the Drakensberg, patterns of grooming were 
predicted to show increased levels of time-matching, reflecting both the loss 
of opportunity for interchange trading for feeding tolerance and the reduced 
leverage of dominant females to secure themselves a better rate of exchange 
through the threat of potential force. In line with this prediction, time matching 
was more precise during the period of low competition than during the period 
of high competition and much more like that of HT, the Drakensberg group of 
equivalent size (De Hoop VT: r2 = 0.298, b = 0.558l; Drakenberg HT: r2 = 0.331; 
b = 0.67) (Fig. 12.4; Barrett et al. 2003). In addition, the relationship between 
rank distance and grooming time discrepancy found prior to the flood was no 
longer present during the subsequent period when competition was low (Barrett 
et al. 2003). Thus, our notion that, during the high competition period, the ex-
change rate for reciprocal bouts was determined by the capacity for interchange 
plus the increased leverage of dominant females was supported by these data.
Our most recent analyses (Henzi et al. 2003) have tackled long-term patterns 
of grooming in relation to ecological variability and show the same patterns as 
these within-bout analyses. During the period of high resource competition, we 
found that female grooming clique size (the number of other individuals that a 
given female grooms) and partner diversity were higher than during the post-
flood period of low competition. This is because the steeper power gradient 
meant that more females were in a position to exchange tolerance for grooming 
when competition was high. In the absence of strong competition during the 
post-flood period, females needed to exchange grooming only for itself, which 
they were able to do with a smaller set of closely-ranked partners (Henzi et al. 
2003).
These results are particularly interesting because, when making our predic-
tions regarding changes in social dynamics, we also took Seyfarth’s model and 
determined the predictions this would make if it contained a dynamic element. 
According to this model, when resource competition is high, competition among 

222
Louise Barrett, S. Peter Henzi
Fig. 12.3. (a) Relationship between aggression ratio (aggression given by a female – aggression re-
ceived by a female) and rank for De Hoop females. The aggression ratio represents the dominance 
gradient of the group (Barrett et al. 2003). During the post-flood low competition period (closed tri-
angles, solid line), the relationship between aggression ratio and rank has a significantly shallower 
slope than during the pre-flood, high competition period (open triangles, dotted line), indicating 
that the dominance gradient was reduced during the post-flood period (low-competition period: 
b = 0.16; high competition period: b = 0.39; t19 = 3.5, p < 0.005). (b) Relationship between overall 
rates of aggression and rank distance between females at De Hoop. During the low competition 
period (closed triangles, solid line), aggression rates decline significantly as rank distance increases 
(r2 = 0.77, p = 0.001), indicating that aggression is mainly directed at females of adjacent rank. Dur-
ing the high competition period (open triangles, dotted line), there is no significant relationship 
between the two (r2 = 0.025, p = 0.645), indicating that aggression is directed to females of all ranks 
(see Barrett et al. 2003). Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.

223
12 Monkeys, markets and minds: biological markets and primate sociality
low-ranking females to gain access to high-ranking females should result in a 
grooming distribution where females spend most of their time grooming those 
of adjacent rank. Consequently, under conditions when competition is reduced 
and the pressure to seek out high-ranking females is relaxed, a wider grooming 
distribution is predicted. As should be apparent, our results are directly opposed 
to this prediction, demonstrating that even when a dynamic element is brought 
into Seyfarth’s (1977) model, it still does not function as a true market-based 
model. This probably stems from the model’s assumptions about why females 
seek particular partners. The fact that baboon females increase the rank diver-
sity of their partners at times of high competition suggests that, as mentioned 
above, partner choice and dynamic outbidding competition structure the mar-
ket, and not exclusion by dominants; when there is a greater need to interchange 
grooming for tolerance, high-ranking females are more often sought out as part-
ners by all females and they are able to gain sufficient access to achieve these 
goals. Alternatively, Payne (in prep.) suggests that high-ranking females may 
use their increased leverage during high competition periods to ‘extort’ groom-
ing from a wider variety of females, forcing lower-ranked females to give them 
more grooming. According to this argument, females do not groom to gain tol-
erance, but to avoid increased intolerance from dominant females. Either way, 
these findings support Chapais’s (this volume) ideas regarding partner choice in 
relation to kinship. Baboon females apparently choose their partners in relation 
to their competence at providing a particular service, rather than directing all 
behavior preferentially to kin because of presumed inclusive fitness benefits.
Lazaro-Perea et al. (2004), in a study of wild marmosets, also found evidence 
for competence-dependent trade. In this study, the breeding female in a marmo-
Fig. 12.4. Time-matching between De Hoop females during the periods of high competition and 
low competition. Time-matching is more precise during the low competition period (closed tri-
angles, solid line), when dominant females’ leverage is reduced, than during the high competition 
period (open triangles, dotted line) as indicated by greater explained variance and a slope that 
more closely approximates a 1:1 fit (low competition period: r2 = 0.298, b = 0.558; high competition 
period: r2 = 0.099, b = 0.237) (see Barrett et al. 2003). Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.

224
Louise Barrett, S. Peter Henzi
set group tended to groom non-breeding females in an asymmetrical manner, 
giving much more than she received. This was interpreted as ‘payment’ for the 
services that non-breeding subordinate females had to offer; subordinate females 
are known to carry and share food with infants, are more active in territorial de-
fense, and participate in alarm calling and mobbing behavior (Lazaro-Perea et 
al. 2004). These findings are particularly gratifying because they come from a 
species of non-female bonded New World monkey, showing that a market-based 
approach applies more broadly than just female-bonded societies in general, and 
Old World monkeys in particular.
12.10
The baby market: supply, demand and leverage
Although the above findings are consistent with a BM interpretation, and imply 
that interchange trading occurs, they do not actually show that this is the case. 
In order to provide full support for the BM framework, we need to show that the 
behavioral interaction of two trader classes is determined by fluctuations in the 
supply and demand of a commodity that can be exchanged for grooming.
To demonstrate interchange grooming in the De Hoop population, we ex-
ploited the fact that new-born infants are a source of great attraction for female 
baboons. Adult females frequently attempt to interact with both infants and 
their mothers in the first few months post partum, despite the fact that moth-
ers are very reluctant to expose their young infants to the attentions of other 
group members. This set-up allowed us to measure the impact of grooming on 
an individual’s ability to interact with new infants. If grooming increased toler-
ance around infants, then females could potentially ‘buy’ access to these com-
modities by grooming the mother (Henzi & Barrett 2002; see also Muroyama 
1994 who initially made this suggestion with reference to allomothering in patas 
monkeys). More specifically, the length of the grooming bout associated with 
infant handling should vary according to the supply of infants so that the ‘price’ 
(in terms of grooming bout length) should be higher when fewer infants were 
available. In order to test for this, we partitioned our data set into cases where 
the mother was lower ranking than the female handling the infant (‘handlers’ 
hereafter) and cases where the mother was higher ranking. This was both to 
control for the effects of dominance on interchange indicated in our previous 
work and to test whether dominance-related differences in leverage influenced 
exchange rates between mothers and handlers.
As predicted, grooming bout lengths were significantly influenced by the 
number of infants present in the group for cases where the handler outranked 
the mother and there was a strong trend in cases where the mother ranked above 
the handler (Henzi & Barrett 2002). Specifically, an increase in the supply of 
infants led to a reduction in the grooming bout length needed to gain tolerance, 
representing a classic market effect within the group. The influence of partner 
control within the market place was also apparent in these analyses, with high-
er-ranking mothers apparently able to gain more grooming than lower-rank-
ing mothers for a given supply of infants. Plotting the relationship between the 

225
12 Monkeys, markets and minds: biological markets and primate sociality
rank distance of handlers and mothers against grooming time revealed a sig-
nificant negative correlation; higher-ranking mothers could demand a higher 
price for access to their infants (Henzi & Barrett 2002). This was interpreted as 
a form of asymmetric price transmission; for dominant mothers, an increase in 
the supply of infants was not transmitted to handlers in form of reduced price. 
Instead, their price seemed able to stick at a higher level compared to the situa-
tion when handlers outranked mothers. However, re-analysis of these data with 
an enlarged data set reveals that, while a much stronger market effect is pres-
ent across all females (Fig. 12.5a,b: two-way ANOVA, number of other infants 
available: F3,32 = 3.276, p = 0.034), there is no significant main effect of maternal 
rank (F1,32 = 0.929, p = 0.342) nor any interaction between maternal rank and in-
fant number (F3,32 = 0.881, p = 0.461), and the correlation between rank distance 
and grooming bout length is no longer significant (rs = –0.279, n = 40, p = 0.08, 
two-tailed; Fig. 12.6). However, a trend is still apparent in the data, at least for 
instances where there are one or fewer other infants available (Fig. 12.5a,b), and 
it is possible that partner control and asymmetric price transmission can only 
be exercised by the very highest-ranking females. The inclusion of more middle-
ranking females into the dataset suggests that, overall, market forces prevail; 
the supply of infants is the main factor that determines the exchange value of 
grooming in the baby market.
Lazaro-Perera et al. (2004) also looked for interchange trading in their study 
of marmosets. Contrary to their predictions, breeding females did not groom 
other females more in times of greater need; for example, when there were more 
dependent infants in the group or following inter-group encounters. Payne et al. 
(2003) obtained similar results from samango monkeys, suggesting either that 
services are not, in fact, interchanged or that the exchange of services is not im-
mediate, a point we return to below.
Fig. 12.5. The baby market. As the number of other infants present, in addition to the focal infant 
in the group, increases, so the amount of grooming given to its mother to obtain tolerance de-
creases. The value of the commodity (infants) is thus dictated by the supply of infants relative to the 
demand for handling.

226
Louise Barrett, S. Peter Henzi
12.11
A market for brain power
The value of a market-based approach to understanding patterns of primate so-
ciality seems clear and, on the strength of these results, it seems appropriate 
to extend work on primate markets to other species and to other arenas where 
commodity exchange is to be expected, such as access to resources, mating op-
portunities and coalitionary support. The manner in which market-based trad-
ing influences other aspects of primate social behavior, such as reconciliation 
and other forms of conflict-management, is also worth considering (see Aureli 
& Schaffner, this volume). In addition, we feel that a BM approach may also pay 
great dividends in studies of primate cognition and tests of the ‘Machiavellian 
intelligence’ (Byrne & Whiten 1988) or ‘social brain’ hypotheses (Dunbar 1998). 
In particular, we suggest that differences in market structure may help explain 
differences in monkey and ape cognitive capacities, which seem to exist, yet re-
main poorly characterized (Barrett et al. 2003).
In primate market places, individuals track the price of commodities and re-
spond flexibly to changes in supply and demand as we have shown. This requires 
cognitive and behavioral flexibility; an ability to learn rapidly and to update 
one’s view of the world swiftly in the light of new information. A market-based 
approach to primate cognition therefore agrees with the ‘Machiavellian intel-
ligence’ hypothesis (Byrne & Whiten 1988) that sociality has driven brain evolu-
tion. It differs, however, by discarding the assumption that animals have been 
selected to cope with increasingly elaborate strategies and counter-strategies, 
Fig. 12.6. Relationship between the rank distance of mothers relative to handlers and the groom-
ing bout length given to mothers. There is a non-significant trend for higher-ranking mothers to 
receive relatively more grooming than lower-ranking mothers in exchange for infant-handling.

227
12 Monkeys, markets and minds: biological markets and primate sociality
the goals of which are to ‘outwit’ the competition. We argue that brain size and 
structure have, instead, been driven by a need to track short-term fluctuations 
in commodity value.
Monitoring the market place is intrinsically complex; the value of a particu-
lar partner is contingent on the value of others. Each of these values may shift 
with changes in reproductive state, health, dominance and ongoing social be-
havior. Those who are good value today may not be so tomorrow. This constant 
state of flux means that keeping tabs on the social market is very different from 
the other kinds of contingent monitoring that primates must do, such as track-
ing fluctuations in fruit availability (Milton 1988). Fruits, unlike conspecifics, 
do not make decisions in response to primate behavior (except in an evolution-
ary sense). This inherent contingency in primate market places thus requires 
the ability to track the contingencies between one’s own behavior in relation to 
others. More importantly perhaps, it also requires the ability to track the behav-
ior of third parties in relation to each other and the behavioral consequences 
that this may have for one’s own behavior. This has clearly selected for what 
Call (2001) refers to as a ‘knowledge-based’ understanding of others, as evidence 
from monkeys and, to an even greater degree, apes has shown. Nevertheless, 
there remains a cognitive difference between monkeys and apes that, although 
not precisely identified, is apparent when comparing their performance on psy-
chological tests (Tomasello & Call 1997, Hare et al. 2001, 2003).
Our suggestion is that these differences arise as a consequence of both in-
creased spatial and temporal dispersion in ape market places compared to those 
of monkeys. While monkeys are all highly gregarious and live in cohesive groups 
in which individuals encounter every member of their group every day, the apes 
(in particular, the chimpanzee and orangutan) live in more fragmented societies 
due to the impact of food competition, which forces females to forage in small 
parties or on their own. The apparent exceptions to this distinction, group-liv-
ing gorillas and fission-fusion spider monkeys, are less problematic than they 
appear. Among gorillas, group living may be a relatively recent adaptation in 
response to infanticide by adult males (Harcourt & Greenberg 2001), and fission-
fusion is likely to have been the ancestral ape state. The nature of spider monkey 
fission-fusion is not well studied and may differ from apes in important ways. 
If, however, their behavior is truly ape-like, then we have an ideal test case; we 
would predict that they manifest ape-like cognitive abilities.
In fission-fusion societies, individuals see each other only at infrequent in-
tervals, often weeks apart, yet each recognizes and remembers the members of 
its community and is capable of maintaining long-standing relationships. In 
such systems, there will be greater pressures on individuals to mentally repre-
sent those animals that are not currently present and to retain and manipulate 
information about them for substantially longer periods of time than is common 
in spatially- and temporally-stable monkey groups, where animals are only out 
of view for hours at the most. This is not to say that monkeys are incapable of 
representation; their high performance on delayed response tasks shows that 
they are able to represent objects in their absence (see Tomasello & Call 1997 
for a review). Rather, the issue at hand is the length of time over which this in-
formation must be retained and manipulated. Thus, while the studies we have 

228
Louise Barrett, S. Peter Henzi
reviewed here reveal that baboons are highly competent market-traders, they 
also highlight the fact that most of the social decisions made by these animals 
occur over a very short timeframe; females respond to current need (access to 
an infant, high resource competition) when making their grooming decisions, 
with little indication that they plan strategically for the future by grooming in 
anticipation of future need (see also Barrett & Henzi 2002).
In a fission-fusion society, however, monitoring the state of the social market 
place requires the ability to track and update any changes observed in the inter-
actions of others after coming into contact after a period of absence, and ani-
mals must use individuals’ absence, as well as presence, to predict reliably the 
occurrence of certain behaviors in others. Thus, while all anthropoid primates 
are capable of tracking ‘third-party relations’ (relationships between two other 
animals without reference to self) (Tomasello & Call 1997), the ability to gen-
erate a causal understanding of such behavioral interactions in the absence of 
certain individuals would seem to be much more demanding cognitively. Thus, 
the key to social survival in dispersed systems is the ability to work with a so-
cial world that is partially virtual, rather than purely physically instantiated. 
The fact that chimpanzees are apparently able to represent the relative spatial 
locations of crude stone tools (hammer stones and anvils) and to use this infor-
mation in a flexible manner (Boesch & Boesch 1984) supports the notion for a 
similar capacity in the social domain.
Recent work by Boroditsky (2000) arguing that, in humans, the sense of time 
emerges via a metaphorical analogy from a sense of space provides us with a 
means of extending our argument beyond the spatial domain. A sense of space 
could, with sufficient additional cognitive control, be used to develop an ex-
tended sense of time. This would then enable animals to predict future states of 
the market place, as well as track current changes, in a very effective way and 
to be able to project key aspects of social interaction and relationships onto an 
uncertain future. An animal with this predictive capacity would have a clear 
advantage over one that could only track current states and respond after the 
fact. Evolutionarily, once animals had a well-developed ability to understand a 
virtual spatial world of trading partners, this could have scaffolded the devel-
opment of an understanding of temporally-dispersed trading partners as well, 
enabling animals to sequence social events into causal chains. This ability would 
enable animals to start predicting the likely consequences of behavior beyond 
the immediate present, enabling them to plan ahead effectively and to inhibit 
responses that could have negative repercussions (Barrett et al. 2003; see also 
Tulving 1983, Suddendorf & Corballis 1997).
One important point to note here is that we are not arguing that a dispersed 
social system per se selected for these higher cognitive abilities. After all, there 
are many species of lemurs and other prosimians that have dispersed social sys-
tems (see e.g. Eberle & Kappeler 2002), but that apparently have brains some-
what smaller than their testes (Peter Kappeler, pers. com.). Rather, it is the spe-
cific historical contingency of evolutionary events in the anthropoid line that 
produced this state of affairs. The shift to a diurnal lifestyle and group living 
that arose with the evolution of the anthropoids created the selection pressures 
for social market places like those described above. The skills needed to trade 

229
12 Monkeys, markets and minds: biological markets and primate sociality
grooming for other goods, to respond to fluctuations in the value of goods, and 
to play individuals off against each other were honed in the context of these 
stable diurnal social groups, which is why both monkeys and apes have relatively 
large brains, relative to prosimians and other mammals.
The evolution of the great apes as ripe fruit specialists then gave rise to dis-
persed social systems in which the group-based social skills of these animals 
were placed under the new selection pressures we outline above. A further point 
to emphasize is that only the social changes within the market place created the 
pressure to expand brain size; the ephemeral and dispersed nature of fruit sup-
plies served to create a more fluid social system, but did not have any impact on 
brain size per se according to our hypothesis (cf. Potts 2004). Thus, ours is not 
a general explanation of the consequences of dispersion on brain size and intel-
ligence, since we assume that most of the skills needed for dealing with a market-
based system were already in place by the time such systems arose. Instead, it is a 
historically-based hypothesis dealing with the particular evolutionary pathway 
taken by the anthropoid apes (see also Potts 2004).
12.12
(Neuro)biological markets
In humans, the ability to plan ahead, to contemplate the future and reflect on 
the past, are all faculties associated with the pre-frontal cortex (PFC) (see Fuster 
1989). Miller & Cohen (2001) have suggested that the actions of the PFC enable a 
high level of ‘cognitive control’ of exactly the kind that we suggest is required in 
a dispersed market place; namely, the ability to take charge of one’s actions and 
direct them towards future, unseen goals. Put simply, they suggest that the role 
of the PFC is to guide activity flow along the neural pathways needed to solve 
the task, ensuring that these pathways are activated even when there is strong 
competition from more frequently used, but inappropriate, pathways (Miller 
& Cohen 2001). The impressive expansion of the PFC across the primate order 
suggests that monkeys, apes and humans will differ in their ability to achieve 
cognitive control. Both the frontal lobes (Semendeferi et al. 1997) and the PFC 
(Fuster 1989, Passingham 1993) of monkeys are significantly smaller than those 
of humans and apes (in the latter case, 11% of total cortical volume, compared 
to 17% and 36% for chimpanzees and humans, respectively; Fuster 1989). Neu-
robiological evidence thus backs up our argument that monkeys should be more 
limited than apes and that, by the same token, apes should be more limited than 
humans in their ability to plan ahead effectively over more than a few hours, or 
to inhibit behavior in order to achieve long-term goals.
The PFC is not the only element crucial for producing cognitive control, how-
ever. The allocation of such control is thought to be dependent on the anterior 
cingulate cortex (ACC), an area variously associated with error detection, re-
sponse selection and, most relevant here, conflict monitoring (Carter et al. 1998, 
Botvinick et al. 1999, Bush et al. 2000). By detecting conflict, the ACC is able to 
signal to the PFC that additional control needs to be allocated to a task. It has 
also been suggested that the upgrading of the ACC would have been critical for 

230
Louise Barrett, S. Peter Henzi
enabling animals to generate a ‘virtual group’ of spatially-dispersed individuals 
since it is linked to generating a sense of self in relation to others (“the troop in 
the head”: Skoyles & Sagan 2002). In this respect, it is intriguing that spindle 
cells, a class of large projection neurons found principally in the ACC region, are 
found only in apes and humans and not in monkeys (Nimchinsky et al. 1999). 
Allman et al. (2001) have speculated that these cells are involved in coordinat-
ing widely distributed neural activity involving emotion and cognition, fitting 
well with our speculations on the need for greater cognitive control within a 
dispersed hominoid market place.
12.13
Implications for primate cognition and cooperation
Having introduced the notion of improved cognitive control as the key to cop-
ing with a dispersed market place, we can predict how cognitive abilities should 
differ between monkeys and apes. In essence, apes should possess an analogical 
reasoning ability that monkeys lack, show greater abilities to solve problems that 
require the completion of sub-tasks while keeping an overall goal in mind, better 
inhibition of pre-potent responses, increased planning abilities and finally, an 
ability to construct and sequence longer causal chains of events. Apes are known 
to show higher performance than monkeys in both causal (Limongelli et al. 
1994, Visalberghi & Limongelli 1995) and analogical reasoning tasks (Thomp-
son & Oden 2001), but there have been, as yet, few attempts to test for differences 
in the latter two abilities. Anecdotal evidence suggests that monkeys show ex-
treme ‘myopia for the future’ (Roberts 2002), while recent work reveals that apes 
show extended memory for accumulated quantity (Beran & Beran 2004). Most 
importantly, we can also predict that, compared to apes, monkeys will show no 
evidence of generating ‘contingency plans’ for future events.
This has implications for the nature of monkey trading within a market, 
bringing us back to our initial arguments concerning the value of grooming to 
female primates. If our hypothesis is correct, and monkeys are unable to plan for 
the future, then grooming should only be exchanged for something immediately 
obtainable (like access to infants) or something that does not require any moni-
toring of checks and balances over time. This cognitive perspective therefore 
provides a further reason why coalitionary support is unlikely to be traded for 
grooming, at least among monkeys, because the need for support is unpredict-
able and highly variable across time. Coalitionary support may thus be needed 
immediately leaving no time for support to be ‘bought’ from others. However, 
the ‘myopia’ of monkeys means that they will be unable to plan ahead and groom 
potential partners before they are needed. In any case, this would be a wasted 
effort due to the myopia of the partners themselves who may fail to retain the 
relevant information regarding the price paid. Coalitions are thus most likely to 
occur when there are immediate and direct benefits for the females taking part, 
as seems to be the case at Amboseli (Silk et al. 2004a), rather than as a result of 
trading favors over time in a reciprocal manner (see also Stevens & Hauser 2004 
who argue for similar cognitive limitations on reciprocal altruism).

231
12 Monkeys, markets and minds: biological markets and primate sociality
Trading for something like feeding tolerance is different, both because it may 
be immediately obtainable and because some form of ‘attitudinal reciprocity’ 
can work as a mechanism (De Waal 2000c); regular grooming may change the 
general attitude of the groomee towards the groomer, putting them in a more 
relaxed state about the groomee, so that grooming could have a long-term ef-
fect with little loss of value over time and without requiring extensive ‘book-
keeping’. The same may be true for helping behavior (Lazaro-Perea et al. 2004). 
However, it seems unlikely that reducing tension in a partner would have the 
effect of increasing the willingness of such a partner to take aggressive risks on 
another’s behalf and engage in coalitionary support (we thank Ronald Noë for 
pointing this out).
A focus on tolerance, how it is traded and the timeframe over which it op-
erates, is the logical next step in our analyses, since it has important implica-
tions for our assumptions about what can and cannot be traded. If the cognitive 
timeframe over which baboons operate is fairly short, animals will be unable to 
groom too far in advance to achieve their goals. If so, then grooming “is not a 
hard currency but chocolate money that melts away” (R. Noë, pers. com.). Deter-
mining whether baboons are dealing in hard cash or perishable goods, and how 
this affects exchange rates over time, is an important goal for the future.
12.14
Summary and conclusions
Data from baboons, and an increasing number of other primate species, support 
the notion that primate groups represent ‘biological markets’, within which in-
dividuals ‘trade commodities’ with each other (e.g. grooming, tolerance, helping 
behavior) according to the laws of supply and demand. Grooming reciprocity 
among female chacma baboons is driven by market forces generated by the eco-
logical and competitive circumstances under which they live, so that levels of co-
operation vary across both space and time. Females also interchange grooming 
for tolerance around infants, with the ‘price’ of grooming set by the local supply 
of infants as economic theory predicts. Thus, the dynamic, individual-based ap-
proach of BM theory, with its emphasis on partner choice, is a much more appro-
priate framework within which to analyze primate cooperation than alternative 
models, like those based on the iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma (Axelrod 1986).
Market-based theories can also shed light on other aspects of primate so-
ciality, including the evolution of primate cognition. Monitoring a social mar-
ket place that is in a constant state of flux requires high levels of cognitive and 
behavioral flexibility, but does not require that primates have to be especially 
‘Machiavellian’ in their attitude to others. Differences between ape and monkey 
market places in terms of the spatial and temporal dispersion of individuals, and 
the timeframe of social decision-making provide us with a plausible and testable 
hypothesis concerning the evolution of primate social intelligence.
This, in turn, has implications for human evolutionary psychology and, spe-
cifically, the notion of ‘massive modularity’, the idea that selection has produced 
a mind comprised of computational algorithms designed to solve specific re-

232
Louise Barrett, S. Peter Henzi
curring problems. If, as we suggest, primate groups, including those of humans 
(La Cerra & Bingham 1998), constitute market places, then a massively modular 
psychology seems unlikely; the contingency inherent in a market means that 
what constitutes a fair trade today may actually be a dodgy deal tomorrow. A 
computational cheat-detection module, for example, triggered by certain condi-
tions such as ‘taking the benefit without paying the cost’ (Cosmides & Tooby 
1992) will be doomed to giving the wrong answer most of the time, because the 
truth of such a statement is entirely contingent on the state of the market. As La 
Cerra & Bingham (1998) point out, a more flexible form of decision-making is 
needed under such circumstances; one that can cope with these ever-changing 
contingencies and one for which the human PFC is well designed.
In line with this, it is clear from the work of Gächter & Herrmann (this vol-
ume) and Millinski (this volume) that human decisions regarding cooperation 
and cheating are contingent on the context in which individuals find themselves. 
While these may be emotionally-mediated actions, as opposed to perfectly ra-
tional ones, they are not automatic, involuntary or mandatory as a modular re-
sponse would require. Nor do these decision ‘mistakes’ reflect the operation of 
ancient decision-making mechanisms selected for in small kin-based groups; 
if female baboons, who live in small kin-based groups, can differentiate among 
their kin according to the services they have to offer, as our work demonstrates, 
then it seems unreasonable to expect human decisions to be based on a much 
more crude rule of thumb. Rather, our decisions are the creative, flexible and 
contingent responses of a primate well versed in the workings of a biological 
market, with a flexible mind and brain to match.
Acknowledgments
We thank Peter Kappeler for inviting us to take part in the excellent Göttinger 
Freilandtage on Cooperation. We are also very grateful to Claudia Fichtel who, 
most importantly, made sure we actually made it to Göttingen, and was im-
mensely patient regarding our ever-changing travel plans. Our work in the 
Drakensberg and De Hoop has been supported by the NRF (South Africa), The 
National Geographic Society, the University of Liverpool Research Development 
Fund and The Leverhulme Trust. We thank the Natal Parks Board and Cape Na-
ture Conservation for permission to work in their reserves, plus our collabora-
tor, Drew Rendall, and all the other members of the De Hoop Baboon project, 
past and present, for all their efforts with the baboons. We also thank Filippo 
Aureli, Sarah Brosnan, Peter Hammerstein, Colleen Schaffner and, in particular, 
Bernard Chapais for some very interesting discussions of the ideas presented in 
this paper. Finally, we are extremely grateful to Ronald Noë and Peter Kappeler 
for their clever, insightful and, in Ronald’s case, forthright comments on an ear-
lier draft of this chapter.

Chapter 13
Digging for the roots of trading
Ronald Noë
13.1
Introduction
Cooperative behavior is commonplace in human social interactions. It is easy 
to recognize equivalent forms of behavior of non-human animals, such as mu-
tual support among kin and cooperative hunting. Other forms, such as trading 
and large-scale collective action, are perhaps not uniquely human, but are much 
more widespread among humans than among non-humans. Here, I use the term 
trading as shorthand for interactions in which individuals exchange goods and 
services; bartering, vendor-customer and employer-employee interactions and 
so forth. Trading may not be recognized by everybody as a typical cooperative 
interaction, but it has the hallmarks of cooperation: (i) two or more individuals 
exchange goods and services in such a way that the participants involved are 
usually better off after the interaction, than before it, and (ii) the participants 
have to invest something in the interaction without a full guarantee of net gain. 
In this paper, I want to reflect on the evolutionary roots of human coopera-
tive behavior in all its forms, with the exception of cooperation among close rela-
tives. I start this discussion without knowing whether humans pursue the same 
strategies and use the same toolbox of mechanisms to implement those strate-
gies when engaged in different forms of cooperation. Are, for example, the same 
mechanisms involved when two neighbors build a fence, when all inhabitants 
of a valley build a common irrigation system and when people trade goods at 
the weekly village market? The same question can also be asked when compar-
ing different species. Do cooperatively hunting humans follow the same strate-
gies towards their companions as cooperatively hunting lions? Does a customer 
use the same mechanisms to get what he wants from his barber as a reef fish 
does when he visits a cleaner wrasse? The most likely answer is that some basic 
mechanisms are common to all forms of cooperation while others are specific 
to a limited set of cooperative interactions only. The main question I want to ask 
in this chapter is thus: can the mechanisms we use in cooperation and trading 
be traced across species borders and down to the roots of our particular phy-
logeny? A related question is whether cooperation and trading are fundamen-
tally different phenomena or merely represent different ends of a continuum. 
Tracing mechanisms back down the phylogenetic tree implies that I will only be 
considering evolved mechanisms, such that other descendants of the same re-
mote ancestor living today might also use them, if confronted with comparable 
problems. In other words, I am looking for mechanisms that have evolved under 

234
Ronald Noë
natural selection, rather than cultural selection, which is a strong force in the 
evolution of human behavior (Richerson et al. 2003). A further task is therefore 
to try to distinguish naturally-selected from culturally-selected mechanisms.
13.2
A comparison between cooperation and trading
Not everybody will accept that trading among humans can and should be com-
pared to, for example, pollination; an interaction in which plants pay insects 
with nectar for the transportation of their gametes. For me, however, the simi-
larities are striking and, together with several colleagues, I therefore introduced 
the ‘biological market’ paradigm (see Box 1). Our main goal was to point out 
the analogies between cooperation among non-human organisms and trading 
among humans in order to pave the way for the introduction of theoretical in-
sights derived from economics into the field of behavioral ecology. Before I try to 
identify mechanisms used in cooperation and trading that are homologous, i.e. 
can be traced back to a common origin, I will first make clear what I understand 
by the terms cooperation and trading. I then proceed by making an inventory of 
analogies between human trading and cooperation among non-human organ-
isms.
13.2.1
What is cooperation?
Intuitively, most of us have an idea what is meant by the term ‘cooperation’ but 
when it comes to precise definitions, it is apparent that the term is used to cov-
er a wide range of behaviors (Noë 2005, in press). I use the term ‘cooperation’ 
broadly for all activities that as a rule result in net benefit to both the actor and 
the recipient(s). In the following, I will concentrate on interactions in which one 
or both parties have to invest under uncertainty, without making any distinction 
between (intra-specific) cooperation, (inter-specific) mutualism and symbiosis. 
The only thing that counts theoretically is whether cooperating individuals are 
sufficiently closely related that their strategies can be explained by kin selection 
(Hamilton 1964). Nor do I distinguish mutualism (immediate benefits to both 
participants) from reciprocity or reciprocal altruism (delayed benefits received 
in an alternating manner). I am less interested in the delay between investments 
and eventual returns, because I consider this to be only one of several factors 
that determine the level of control that participants exert over their partners (see 
Noë 2005, in press for a more detailed discussion). I will examine both one-shot 
and repeated interactions, although the majority of my examples will be of the 
latter kind.

235
13 Digging for the roots of trading
13.2.2
Models of cooperation
Models of cooperation can be divided into those focusing on partner control 
and those focusing on partner choice (Bshary & Noë 2003). Models of partner 
control take the formation of cooperating partnerships for granted and concen-
trate on the mechanisms that each participant uses to prevent being cheated by 
their partner. Bob Trivers (1971) was one of the first to propose the use of the 
two-player Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma (IPD) as a paradigm for what he called 
‘reciprocal altruism’, although it required some adaptations to deal with asyn-
chronous choices (for the ‘alternating’ PD see Frean 1994, Nowak & Sigmund 
1994, Hauert & Schuster 1998, Neill 2001).
Partner choice models include extensions of the IPD-model (Dugatkin & 
Wilson 1991, Batali & Kitcher 1995, Ashlock et al. 1996, Roberts 1998) and the 
biological markets paradigm (Noë & Hammerstein 1994, 1995; see Box 1). In a 
two-player IPD model, a player sanctions an uncooperative partner by aborting 
the relationship, thereby losing the advantages of cooperation in the process. 
The price paid for imposing sanctions on a partner can be considerably reduced, 
however, if one switches to another partner, even if the latter is less profitable. In 
my papers on biological markets, I did not make a distinction between choices 
made on the basis of intrinsic attributes of the partner itself (‘attributes-based 
partner choice’) and choice on the basis of characteristics of the commodity of-
fered by the partner (‘commodity-based partner choice’). However, this distinc-
tion becomes important when one reflects on the mechanisms involved. Take, 
for example, a cleaner fish that chooses between two clients that present them-
selves simultaneously (see Bshary 2001 or Bshary & Noë 2003 for a description). 
The client can choose on the basis of the amount of resources carried by the cli-
ent, for which he can take body size as a proxy, or he can choose on the basis of 
characteristics of the client that are independent of its parasite load (predatory 
or not; resident or floater; aggressive in previous interactions etc.)
X Box 1.
Biological markets
In a series of papers, my colleagues and I have pointed out the analogies between 
the cooperation between unrelated individuals, reproductive behavior and hu-
man trading (Noë et al. 1991, Noë 1992, 2001, Noë & Hammerstein 1994, 1995, 
Bshary & Noë 2003). Our main purpose has been to stimulate the development of 
new models for cooperation based on knowledge accumulated in two well-de-
veloped fields: (i) sexual selection theory and (ii) economics. Peter Hammerstein 
and I coined the phrase ‘biological markets’, because the common denominators 
of the three fields are reminiscent of human economic markets: exchange of ser-
vices and goods, choice of partners, competition by outbidding etc.
The biological market paradigm stresses some aspects of cooperation that were 
ignored in earlier models (reviewed by Sachs et al. 2004), notably partner choice 

236
Ronald Noë
and partner switching, competition in the form of outbidding among potential 
partners, the division of benefits and the exchange rates of commodities. Models 
based on the 2-player Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma (IPD) and related paradigms, 
which include reciprocal altruism (Trivers 1971), put the problem of partner con-
trol under the magnifying glass, assuming that possible cheating by the partner 
poses the greatest challenge to a cooperating individual and therefore to the 
evolution of cooperation itself (see Dugatkin 1997 and Sachs et al. 2004 for re-
views). Thus, the biological market paradigm emphasizes the context in which 
cooperative interactions take place, while IPD-models emphasize the dynamics 
of repeated interactions between pairs of individuals.
Biological market theory shows its economic character in the prediction that 
changes in the supply-demand ratio should result in clearly specified directional 
shifts in the division of benefits communally gained by cooperation or in the ex-
change values of goods and services. In an analogy to sexual selection theory, 
biological market theory predicts that partner choice can lead to selection for 
specific traits. We assumed, therefore, that the same skills that are known to play 
a role in mate selection would also be important in the selection of cooperation 
partners: (i) judging the partner’s quality, (ii) a memory for the partner’s qual-
ity and location, (iii) searching strategies, (iv) judging the honesty of signals and 
so on. ‘Market selection’ can run counter to sexual selection, for example, when 
dominant males accept only satellite males that do not show the exuberant or-
naments typical for the males of the species (Noë & Hammerstein 1994, Greene 
et al. 2000). In recent years, a number of empirical studies have shown that the 
biological markets approach leads to new insights in a variety of studies of intra-
specific cooperation (grooming markets in primates: Barrett et al. 1999, Henzi & 
Barrett 1999, 2002, Barrett & Henzi 2001, this volume, Leinfelder et al. 2001, Payne 
et al. 2003, Lazaro-Perea 2004, Manson et al. 2004) and inter-specific mutualism 
(nutrient exchange mutualisms in mycorrhiza: Schwartz & Hoeksema 1998, Hoek-
sema & Schwartz 2001, Hoekesema & Kummel 2003; cleaner fish-client mutualism 
Bshary 2001, Bshary & Grutter 2002a, 2002b, Bshary & Noë 2003), and interactions 
between groups of different species of primates (Eckardt & Zuberbühler 2004). 
For further examples, see reviews by Bronstein 1998, Hoeksema & Bruna 2000, 
Noë 2001, Wilkinson & Sherratt 2001, Simms & Taylor 2002, Bshary & Noë 2003, 
Sachs et al. 2004, Bshary & Bronstein, in press).
13.2.3
What is trading?
The following strike me as typical attributes of trading interactions: (i) There is 
an exchange of goods and/or services. In advanced forms of trading, one party 
may use tokens of value (clams, money etc.) in exchange for the goods/services, 
or different tokens of value (dollars, euros) are exchanged for themselves. (ii) 
The goods and services traded have an exchange value that fluctuates with sup-
ply and demand. In advanced forms of trading, the value of different goods and 

237
13 Digging for the roots of trading
services can have a ‘market value’ expressed in a common currency. (iii) Choice 
among trading partners and their goods or services is the main mechanism that 
causes exchange rates to follow changes in supply and demand. (iv) Trading can 
take place between total strangers and in one-off interactions.
13.2.4
Human trading compared to examples of non-human cooperation
Human economic interactions are very rich in form and I will not attempt to 
cover all relevant aspects here. Instead, I intend to classify different forms of 
trading in a manner that corresponds loosely to the categories of cooperative 
and mutualistic interactions observed in nature. The purpose of this list is to 
give the reader a feel for the similarities between the two. Both human and bio-
logical markets can be classified by the degree of lopsidedness in the freedom of 
choice possessed by different classes of trader. Many causes of asymmetry reflect 
the idiosyncrasies of specific markets, but two general factors can be identified: 
(i) differences in mobility and (ii) in size. Broadly speaking, more mobile trad-
ers possess a wider array of options, unless they are so much smaller than their 
trading partners that they have to pay a high price to move out of the partner’s 
sphere of influence. Neither the human trading nor the non-human coopera-
tion categories are mutually exclusive and the classification of some examples is 
therefore arbitrary.
1. Bartering. In its simplest form, different goods or services are directly ex-
changed against each other during short interactions. Traders play sym-
metrical roles; each of them can choose the other as a partner and initiate a 
transaction. Interactions take place in the larger context of similar interac-
tions by the same and other traders. Shifts in supply and demand alter the 
exchange ratio between two commodities in a predictable direction in the 
long term, but there is little left to haggle about when two traders interact. Bi-
ological examples: non-specific pollination and seed dispersal interactions, 
which are both food-for-transport barters with large numbers of different 
individuals and species in both camps.
2. Shopkeepers-customers. Asymmetrical interactions in which a usually small 
class of traders exchanges goods or services with a usually large class of cus-
tomers. The customers can exert choice more easily than the shopkeeper 
thanks to their mobility, but each of them contributes only a small portion 
to the latter’s ‘wealth’. Biological examples: (i) Cleaner fish with clients that 
roam over a wide area (‘floaters’; Bshary & Noë 2003). (ii) Baboon mothers 
trading grooming for permission to touch infants (Henzi & Barrett 2002, Bar-
rett & Henzi, this volume). (iii) The obligate and species-specific pollination 
mutualisms between yuccas and the yucca moths (James et al. 1994, Pellmyr 
& Huth 1994, Marr & Pellmyr 2003).
3. Large employers-employees. In contrast to the category above, these are 
asymmetrical interactions in which many individuals offer services in re-
turn for goods (money) provided by a few. The latter are usually sessile, but 
nevertheless able to exert choice by controlling a scarce commodity locally. 
The ‘employees’ have to pay a high cost to reach another employer. One could 

238
Ronald Noë
think of a village with a single big factory or coal mine. Biological examples: 
(i) Ants in several ant-protection mutualisms. Each colony, acting as a single 
trader, exchanges protection against nutrients (e.g. nectar provided by lycae-
nid larvae, Axèn 2000; honeydew produced by homopterans, Fischer et al. 
2001; food bodies growing on plants, Fischer et al. 2002; or housing facilities, 
e.g. domatia provided by plants, Izzo & Vasconcelos 2002). (ii) Plants that 
control the exchange of nutrients with much more numerous and smaller 
individuals by excluding those that provide small quantities; for example: 
mycchorrizal fungi (Schwartz & Hoeksema 1998, Hoeksema & Schwartz 
2001, Hoekesema & Kummel 2003), soil bacteria such as rhizobia (West et 
al. 2002, Denison et al. 2003, Kiers et al. 2003; see also reviews by Agrawal 
2001 and Simms & Taylor 2002). (iii) Symbiont choice by fungus-growing 
ants (Mueller et al. 2004).
4. Business partnerships. These are usually symmetrical relationships in which 
two or more parties produce a commodity that is exchanged with a third 
party; i.e., there are two interconnected cooperative interactions at differ-
ent levels. Example: An architect and a contractor who construct a house 
together for a client. The contribution of each individual partner can be very 
different in quality and quantity, but the important characteristic is that all 
contributions are needed to produce the commodity to be traded. Biological 
examples: cooperative displays by two or more conspecific males to attract 
females; for example: manakins (McDonald 1989a, 1989b) and ruffs (van 
Rhijn 1973, 1983). Complex three-way mutualisms also fall into this category; 
for example between (i) leaf-cutter ants, (ii) the fungus grown by the ants on 
their gardens of leaf cuttings and (iii) the bacteria that keep the fungus gar-
dens free from a virulent parasitic fungus (Currie et al. 1999).
Human economic transactions, like other cooperative interactions, can also be 
classified along another dimension: (i) isolated ‘one-off’ interactions, (ii) repeat-
ed interactions and (iii) (semi-)permanent relationships.
13.2.5
Is trading a form of cooperation?
My conclusion is that trading cannot be considered as merely a special category 
of cooperation, although the two phenomena strongly overlap. This is because 
some forms of modern human trading have become so emancipated from di-
rect, dyadic interactions between individuals that the connection to coopera-
tion is lost; cooperation is not the first term that comes to mind, for example, 
with respect to computer algorithms that buy and sell stock automatically when 
certain price levels are reached. I also think it makes sense to use the term trad-
ing for interactions among non-human organisms when these are clearly likely 
to be influenced by ‘market effects’ (Noë et al. 1991). This helps to distinguish 
them from other forms of cooperation in which supply and demand do not play 
any role, such as many forms of collective action (Nunn & Lewis 2001, Ostrom 
2001), the cooperation between genes (Hoekstra 2003) and cells (Michod 2003, 

239
13 Digging for the roots of trading
Szathmary & Wolpert 2003), and the acceptance of a mutually respected border 
between territorial neighbors (Whitehead 1987, Hyman 2002).
13.2.6
Cultural versus natural selection
In their very inspiring paper on emotions as mechanisms used by boundedly 
rational agents, Muramatsu & Hanoch (2005) state “...we think that some emo-
tional programs have been shaped by natural selection to help individuals re-
solve adaptive problems observed as far back as the Pleistocene era” (p. 213). 
Similar remarks can be found in other texts written by behavioral economists, 
evolutionary psychologists, biological anthropologists and their hybrids (see 
e.g. Tooby & Cosmides 1995, p. 1189 and Richerson et al. 2003, p. 367). However, 
the reference to the Pleistocene as the period during which crucial elements of 
human cooperative behavior evolved strikes me as odd. The Pleistocene, which 
runs from about 1.8 million years till about 12000 years before present, is the era 
of the more ‘advanced’ hominids, such as Homo erectus (ergaster), H. heidelber-
gensis, H. neanderthalensis and of course H. sapiens.
Given that human cooperative behavior is very likely to be a mosaic of be-
havioral traits produced by the actions of both natural and cultural selection, 
and that strategies produced by natural selection can easily be much older than 
the species in which they are expressed, I therefore have a hunch that some of 
the mechanisms that play a crucial role in cooperation are rooted much deeper 
in our phylogeny than the Pleistocene. Indeed, we may have to think in terms of 
primate phylogeny as a whole, i.e. a history stretching back more than 80 mil-
lion years (Tavare et al. 2002), and perhaps much further back still. Behavioral 
strategies under cultural evolution, in contrast, are likely to be very recent. Most 
of the strategies relevant today probably evolved in the Holocene, i.e. in the last 
12000 years (Richerson & Boyd 2001), although some forms of cooperation and 
trading, such as adhering to traffic rules or auctioning via Ebay, are very re-
cent indeed and are clearly new strategies that have developed to cope with such 
situations. I am not suggesting that nothing interesting happened during the 
Pleistocene, but I do think that present day human cooperative behavior can be 
divided into elements that were selected by a process of individual natural selec-
tion starting long before the Pleistocene and elements that were selected under 
a process of cultural group selection that occurred mainly after the Pleistocene. 
The Pleistocene may, however, have been the period in which some behavioral 
elements typical for trading and bargaining evolved.
In this chapter, I want to concentrate on mechanisms that have evolved un-
der natural selection, and which I suspect to have deep phylogenetic roots. I will 
concentrate on forms of cooperation and trading in which each actor typically 
has multiple dyadic encounters with multiple partners, because I assume that 
cooperation in which many unrelated individuals act simultaneously is largely 
limited to humans (but see Nunn & Lewis 2001) and that the mechanisms used 
are largely a product of cultural evolution (the ‘cultural group selection hypoth-
esis’; Boyd & Richerson 1985, 2002, Bowles & Gintis 2003, Richerson et al. 2003, 
Panchanathan & Boyd 2004).

240
Ronald Noë
First, after a brief discussion of homology and units of selection, I make an 
inventory of problems that are common to many forms of trading and coopera-
tion. Thereafter, I discuss the likelihood that the mechanisms used to solve these 
problems are homologous. Finally, I consider the consequences of our evolution-
ary history for our present-day trading behavior. Is our behavior fully adapted 
to our role in economic life or do we see sub-optimal behavior that can be ex-
plained by phylogenetic inertia?
13.2.7
Analogies and homologies
Two traits or characteristics are called ‘analogous’ when natural selection hits 
upon the same solution independently in different phylogenetic lineages, a 
process called convergence. For example, wings of bumblebees, birds and bats 
are all used for flying, but have very different structures. Two structures are 
called ‘homologous’ when they share the same evolutionary history, i.e. the same 
‘Bauplan’, which is the case, for example for the anterior extremities (front legs, 
wings, arms) of baleen whales, bears, birds and bats. I deliberately introduced 
confusion by mentioning birds and bats in both contexts in order to make a fur-
ther point: bird and bat wings are homologous in the sense that each bone in the 
bird wing has a homologous counterpart in the bat wing, but the essential air-
foil is formed in a very different way. This point is worth making clear because 
this kind of ambiguity can also lead to confusion when we consider mechanisms 
used in cooperation and trading (see Box 2).
Both analogies and homologies are useful in the pursuit of answers to evo-
lutionary questions. For example, looking for analogous solutions to the same 
evolutionary problem can allow us to identify a common denominator that can 
be used as the basis of common models; this is the message of our previous pa-
pers on ‘biological markets’ (Box 1). A second incentive is to identify systems 
that can be used as models for more complex forms of cooperation. For example, 
the mycorrhiza markets, which have been explored by Schwartz & Hoeksema 
(1998), Hoeksema & Schwartz (2001), and Kummel & Salant (in prep.) may turn 
out to be good alternatives to computer simulations if one wants to model com-
plex human markets. Plants and fungi exchange nutrients in mycorrhiza that 
are easily quantified in both field and laboratory conditions, and the interaction 
is sensitive to changes in supply and demand. The third reason, and the one 
which drives me to look closer at analogies, is that similar-looking strategies 
used by different species could turn out to be implemented using homologous 
mechanisms.
13.2.8
Units of selection and modularity of the brain
A discussion of the evolution of behavioral strategies specific to cooperation only 
makes sense when one accepts that there are specific units of behavior (and/or 
the psychological mechanisms that implement them) that are adapted to fulfill 
specific functions. In other words, one has to accept that the mind is ‘modular’ 

241
13 Digging for the roots of trading
in the sense of Fodor’s seminal book of 1983 (see Whiten & Byrne 1997, Todd & 
Gigerenzer 2000, Barrett et al. 2002a and references therein). Note that ‘a mod-
ule of the mind’ is not necessarily the equivalent of ‘a nucleus in the brain’. The 
modules that I have in mind are what Gigerenzer (1997) calls ‘domain-specific’; 
i.e., modules that evolved as units with a single function connected to a single ul-
timate cause, such as repeatedly dealing with untrustworthy cooperation part-
ners. Such modules are, however, much harder to identify than morphological 
traits, which is one reason I use the latter more frequently in examples. I follow 
Gigerenzer and colleagues in assuming domain-specific modules have evolved 
for those functions that require fast decisions using rules of thumb. Moreover, 
in cases in which it is plausible that our ancestors were confronted by similar 
problems, I assume that the corresponding module was shaped by natural selec-
tion deep in the past. I used the term ‘similar’ and not ‘the same’, because I also 
assume that modules can be emancipated from the narrow purpose they served 
when they first evolved (the ‘proper’ domain sensu Gigerenzer 1997) to a wider 
use (Gigerenzer’s ‘actual’ domain).
In principle, it is possible to trace the use of a certain strategy across many 
species boundaries, all the way back to animals with very little brain or even no 
brain at all. Natural selection had time enough, in most cases, to fine-tune con-
ditional strategies in such a way that they work well in most of the circumstances 
that the species encounters. There is little reason why natural selection would 
have replaced such mechanisms with more sophisticated cognitive ones, if they 
still work reasonably well for their more brainy descendants. Selection has to 
overcome considerable friction to drive evolution from a ‘hardwired’ strategy to 
a ‘cognitive’ strategy, because this implies traveling from one peak to another in 
Wright’s (1932) ‘adaptive landscape’. Even in animals with big brains, including 
humans, there will be selection against the use of complicated strategies that are 
costly in time and processing power, if a simple rule-of-thumb can do the trick 
(Gigerenzer 1997). It turns out that people use ‘fast and frugal’ simple heuris-
tics in many circumstances where economic theory had predicted sophisticated 
and, above all, rational decisions. The outcome is not necessarily worse than 
the outcome of rational decision processes and may well be better under many 
circumstances, although at times they are bound to lead to sub-optimal choices 
(contributions in Gigerenzer et al. 1999, Todd & Gigerenzer 2000, 2003).
13.3
Choice and control: the basic problems of cooperation
13.3.1
Partner choice
The first problem a would-be cooperator needs to solve is picking a partner. He 
should then be ready to switch to another partner, if this is likely to lead to an 
increase in net benefit. On biological and mating markets, profitability trans-
lates to net fitness gain; on economic markets, to net utility gain. In proximate 
terms, this translates into items like a net amount of energy, reduced predation 

242
Ronald Noë
risk, more surviving offspring, an amount of money and so forth, depending on 
which commodities are traded. The other side of the coin is competition over 
potential partners. When a competitor cannot be excluded by brute force, the 
favors of an attractive partner must be won by placing a higher bid than all other 
competitors. A skilled competitor should outbid the competition without mak-
ing concessions that are unnecessarily high. Thus, choosers and bidders have to 
be able to estimate the relative market value of themselves and their potential 
partners. The most important factors involved are the following:
▬ Comparison of offers. Partner choice requires an estimate of relative future 
benefit to be expected from interactions with different partners. This is rela-
tively easy when the partners can be compared directly and when the com-
modities they offer are visible and tangible. An example is an ant colony in-
teracting with different species of aphids that all offer honeydew in exchange 
for protection. Aphids occur in aggregations that can be considered as single 
traders when they are clones produced by parthenogenetic reproduction, 
as is often the case. The ants most frequently visit those aphids that have 
most to offer by laying pheromone trails, which correspond in strength to 
the amount of honeydew produced (Fischer et al. 2001). Moreover, the ant 
colony can compare partners belonging to different taxa that produce the 
same commodity using the same method; for example, aphids and plants 
that each offer sugar-rich rewards (Engel et al. 2001).
The ants quantify the difference between commodities offered using a 
direct, analogue method; more food translates in to more pheromone on the 
trail. Not all quantitative comparisons will be this straightforward, however. 
Some animals potentially must be able to compare quantities that differ in 
the number of items, volume, energy content and so forth. In many cases, 
these quantities cannot be compared directly, because they are offered by 
different partners in different locations and at different times. We know that 
monkeys have difficulty discriminating between food resources that dif-
fer in the number of items, even if they are offered (almost) simultaneously 
(Hauser et al. 2000, Stevens & Hauser 2004). On the other hand, most animals 
cope fairly well with the problem of choosing between food patches of differ-
ent quality (see Sugrue et al. 2004 for a recent neurobiological study). In fact, 
this is what the ants in the aphid-protection example are doing, as are many 
other animals involved in food-based cooperative exchange. The close con-
nection between foraging and commodity-based choice in the many food-
related cooperative relationships observed in nature leads me to hypothesize 
that commodity-based choice mechanisms are likely to be homologous to 
mechanisms used in the selection of food items, even in cases in which com-
modities are other tangible items besides food.
▬ Honesty of advertisements of offers. If signals are used to advertise com-
modities that cannot be assessed directly, selection is likely to put a premium 
on paying attention to honest advertisements only. The problem of honest 
signaling has been studied extensively in the context of sexual selection (Za-
havi 1975, 1977a, Grafen 1990, Johnstone 1995), but hardly at all in the con-
text of biological markets. In the social sciences, this idea is widely known 
as ‘costly signalling’ or ‘signalling theory’. In economics, the idea goes all 

243
13 Digging for the roots of trading
the way back to the ‘conspicuous consumption’ of Veblen (1899; see also the 
reference to Spence 1973 in Bowles & Hammerstein 2003). An example of 
honest advertising within a biological market is the petal disk (corolla) of 
flowers. The potential of cheating by a plant is high when the anatomies of 
flower and pollinator allow for the transfer of pollen before the pollinator 
can assess the reward (Bell 1986, Thakar et al. 2003). I discuss this example at 
some length, because the potential of cheating is a factor in many cooperative 
interactions.
A mechanism that ensures the honesty of the petal disk signal has been 
described by Blarer et al. (2002); bumble bees learn the association between 
the size of the petal disk and quantity of the reward again and again for each 
new population of flowers visited. This mechanism can only work when 
flowers occur in large aggregations and are genetically identical, e.g. mul-
tiple flowers on single plants or trees, or stands of clones. However, neither 
this mechanism, nor the mechanism I proposed myself, which was based 
on honest signaling theory (Noë 2001), can explain why cheaters with large 
petal disks and low amounts of nectar could not invade populations of ge-
netically heterogeneous individuals. The only answer I can think of is that 
nectar quantity directly influences stay times and thus the amount of pol-
len transferred to the pollinator’s body, or that pollinators can assess nectar 
quantities directly once they land on the flower. Both of these options render 
‘false advertising’ pointless.
In many cases, the benefits obtained in interactions with different part-
ners in the past will provide the best proxy indicator for future benefits. The 
sexually selected parallel of this is repeated courtship feeding before mat-
ing, which can be used by females to assess the ability of a male to feed their 
future offspring (e.g. Wiggins & Morris 1986). The potential for deceit is 
obvious and the ‘Concorde fallacy’ (Dawkins & Carlisle 1976) looms, but a 
mate that is not even able to bring in food before mating will almost certainly 
be a lousy caretaker after mating. The direct benefits that females receive, 
often before actual mating takes place, make this a low-cost form of mate 
sampling. An individual choosing between two cooperation partners faces a 
similar problem: information about a past difference between the two part-
ners may not be worth much, but is better than no information at all and at 
least it provides information about potential contributions. During periods 
in which two competitors try to outbid each other, they both may be forced to 
produce their commodity at the maximum possible level. Their output from 
such periods thus provides reliable information about their long-term poten-
tial. Attractive offers at the beginning of long-lasting trading relationships 
are commonplace. For example, one should always closely inspect the small 
print in price tariff listings in the advertisements of internet and mobile 
phone providers; the large print only gives the price for the first few months 
of service.
▬ Cost of sampling and discounting the future. The variation in benefit be-
tween partners must be large enough to make an investment in sampling 
worthwhile; if differences are very small, the cost of sampling does not out-
weigh the benefits of making a better choice. The costs of sampling depend in 

244
Ronald Noë
the main on the decision rule used. Search times using relaxed strategies like 
‘accept the first partner that provides a benefit over a certain threshold’ can 
be considerably shorter than more ambitious strategies like ‘best-of-n’ with 
a large n. The cost of sampling is modest when potential partners are aggre-
gated in time and space, and can be compared directly. Sampling problems 
have been modeled extensively in the sexual selection literature (reviewed by 
Harvey & Bradbury 1991 and Gibson & Langen 1996) and in the vast optimal 
foraging literature (Stephens & Krebs 1986). Similar considerations play a 
role in the choice of consumer goods; for example, clients of supermarkets 
tend to search longer in order to compare prices of different brands for more 
expensive products (Oliveira-Castro 2003). Shopping has in fact been likened 
to foraging directly (Rajala & Hantula 2000, DiClemente & Hantula 2003, 
Smith & Hantula 2003). 
Discounting the future can have a strong effect on sampling rules and 
partner choices: most hungry animals are known to prefer receiving a small 
quantity of food immediately over waiting or searching for a larger quantity 
(Green et al. 2004, Stephens et al. 2004 and references therein). Similar results 
have been found for human subjects (Myerson et al. 2003). This means that 
partners that provide a small quantity immediately are likely to be preferred 
over partners that provide large quantities after a delay (Stephens 2000, Ste-
phens et al. 2002). In terms of the sampling strategies mentioned above, this 
is equivalent to using a threshold strategy with a rather low threshold.
▬ Estimating market value of self. The most successful human traders can 
fine-tune their strategies to their own market value. This seems a tall order 
for non-human traders. Estimating exchange rates is much easier when the 
two commodities exchanged can be valued in a common currency. Sampling 
the market by tapping ‘communal knowledge’ can also help a lot. A hunter 
coming out of the forest can ask around and easily discover the current value 
of a dead tapir in terms of turnips. In an analysis of ‘lonely hearts’ advertise-
ments, Pawłovski & Dunbar (1999, 2001) showed that both men and women 
have a keen perception of their own value on the mating market. This shows 
that humans are able to estimate their relative market value in a market in 
which values are not expressed in money. The advantage they have compared 
to most non-humans is that they can gather a lot of information about the 
other traders in the same market in a short time. In biological systems, selec-
tion can lead to conditional strategies that are tuned to shifts in the market as 
long as these are predictable. Plants, for example, could theoretically ‘decide’ 
to put out more reward for pollinators after harsh winters, if such weather 
conditions hit pollinators harder than plants (Noë 2001). More research on 
non-human traders is needed before anything more conclusive about this 
topic can be said, however.
▬ Adjusting to market value. There is a difference between increasing an offer 
to obtain more of the partner’s commodity and increasing an offer out of 
fear of losing the partner. For example, lyceanid larvae increase the amount 
of nectar they produce to reward ants for protecting them in reaction to in-
creased predation risk (Leimar & Axèn 1993, Agrawal & Fordyce 2000). They 
also increase the amount of reward when ant attendance is too low, but then 

245
13 Digging for the roots of trading
decrease it again when there are many ants around them (Leimar & Axèn 
1993). The larvae thus balance ant attendance and predation pressure with-
out receiving any direct information about the amount of nectar produced by 
conspecifics or about other sources of sugars available to the ants.
How do baboon mothers adjust to the value of their infant in the baby 
market? The lower the number of babies in a group, the longer baboon moth-
ers can apparently demand to be groomed before they allow another female 
to touch their newborn (Henzi & Barrett 2002, Barrett & Henzi, this volume). 
The question is how they manage to turn their higher market value into lon-
ger grooming? Systematic observations are still underway, but I guess, based 
on my own experience with baboons, that would-be handlers try to touch 
the infant once in a while and that mothers block her advances until the mo-
ment is reached that the groomer stops grooming and starts showing a lack 
of interest in the infant. The mother would in that way be able to fathom the 
motivation of the handler. The motivation to handle a particular infant will 
depend on the number of other options the handler has and/or the number 
of infants she has handled in the recent past. An underlying mechanism was 
suggested to me by Louise Barrett (pers. com.), namely that grooming pro-
motes the production of β-endorphins (Barrett & Henzi, this volume), which 
leads to a reduction in tension. The fewer mothers there are in a group, the 
more they are surrounded by would-be handlers. This means that they might 
start at higher levels of stress and thus need more grooming to be relaxed 
enough to accept the handling of their infants.
Playing off partners. The option of switching partners is a double-edged 
sword; a new partner can bring more profit, but the old one may also yield 
more when facing the threat of being deserted. A credible signal that a switch 
is imminent helps to increase the pressure considerably. Baboon males can 
signal their intention to switch allies by the way in which they interfere in 
their partner’s conflicts. The most obvious signals we have seen are (i) males 
that turned away while their ally begged for help (signaled by ‘head-flagging’ 
and screaming) and (ii) switching allegiance during a conflict between two 
potential partners (Noë & Sluijter 1995, pers. obs.). The latter conflicts were 
markedly different in their duration, intensity and form from ‘normal’ con-
flicts with multiple males. The baboon mothers mentioned above can play-
off handlers directly when two of the latter approach a mother-infant pair 
simultaneously. The mother can simply hold on to her baby until one of the 
two stops grooming. She can also invite further potential handlers, while be-
ing groomed by a single handler. Baboons have several facial expressions for 
such invitations at a distance.
13.3.2
Partner control
The second problem is to control for the continuation of net benefit from ongo-
ing partnerships. Fear of being cheated by the partner should keep each trader 
on edge. And since one’s partner is driven by the same fears, the other side of 
that coin is that one has to overcome mistrust by the partner. Building trust is 

246
Ronald Noë
thus another useful skill. This can be achieved by sending reliable signals that 
commodities will be (and continue to be) delivered. The obvious alternative is 
to deceive the partner, giving rise to selection for another pair of antagonistic 
skills; deception and the detection of deception.
Theoretical treatises of cooperation are dominated by the ‘cheating’ problem. 
Cheating can take many forms from subtly reducing the value of the commodity 
offered to not delivering the commodity at all. Expectations may be based on 
advertisements (e.g. petals, billboards), a pattern of taking turns in giving and 
receiving, or past interactions. Strategies that make participants less vulner-
able to being cheated are thus seen as crucial for stable cooperation. Many such 
strategies have been proposed: ending the relationship; all kinds of sanctions 
(running from physical damage to damage to the cheater’s reputation); reducing 
risks by offering the commodity exchanged in small parcels and so forth (see 
reviews by Dugatkin 1997, 2002b and Sachs et al. 2004)
‘Cheating’ between mutualistic partners belonging to different species is not 
necessarily controlled by behavioral counter-strategies. Co-evolution between 
two species can also have resulted in morphological structures that make it hard 
to exploit the partner. Take for example the interaction between figs and fig-
wasps. The wasps are essential for the pollination of figs, but lay their eggs in 
the ovaries of the figs, which are then lost to the plant. Figs therefore have to de-
fend themselves against overexploitation by the wasps. Several species of fig tree 
have ovaries that cannot be reached by the wasps (reviewed in Cook & Rasplus 
2003). Other ‘transport for food’ and ‘protection for food’ mutualisms offer fur-
ther examples of cooperation in which for one or both partners little scope is 
left for cheating after a long process of co-evolution. In many cases, the food re-
ward cannot be reached without taking on the load to be transported, but subtle 
cheating is possible in some cases, as discussed above under ‘honest advertising’. 
Selection for this sort of hardware defense can be accelerated under pressure of 
parasites that exploit the mutualism. There is often a thin line between mutual-
ism and parasitism anyway (Bronstein 2001, Johnstone & Bshary 2002).
In human trading, we can also find such hardware solutions against cheating, 
such as burglar alarms and safes. However, thieves are similar to the parasites of 
mutualisms, rather than to the participants. What, for example, prevents cheat-
ing in simple human transactions like buying a loaf of bread? What prevents 
the customer from walking off without paying? Some mechanisms are typically 
human: the baker may call the police or may damage the reputation of the cus-
tomer. Such mechanisms do not work well, however, when the customer visits 
the baker and his community only once. However, the customer may also decide 
to pay, even if he is a total stranger and the baker has no telephone. He may do 
so because he fears physical sanctions by the baker. This may even be true when 
the baker is much weaker than the customer; the risk of injury may neverthe-
less outweigh the benefit of getting a free loaf. The customer may also not know 
whether the baker has a weapon or can call for allies. The latter forms of cheat-
ing control backed up by physical sanctions can also be found throughout the 
animal kingdom. Using sanctions blends seamlessly with using harassment or 
punishment to control partners (see Noë 2005, in press and references therein 
for an explanation of these phenomena and their difference). Punishment also 

247
13 Digging for the roots of trading
forms an important ingredient of ‘strong reciprocity’ (Fehr & Fischbacher 2003, 
2004, Fehr & Gächter 2002, Gächter & Herrmann, this volume) but, in contrast to 
punishment used by animals, it is thought to have evolved under group selection 
during recent cultural evolution in humans. Yet, another very human explana-
tion is that the customer adheres to internalized ‘norms’ (Gintis 2003, Young 
2003), which may be adapted to a life in a close-knit community. Whether or not 
strong reciprocity and such norms are adapted or not to one-off interactions is 
currently a hotly debated issue (Fehr & Henrich 2003)
13.4
Potentially homologous mechanisms
13.4.1
Homology at two levels: strategies and mechanisms
Theoreticians, both biologists and economists, attempt to determine which strat-
egies individuals should use to get most out of cooperation or trade. In order to 
identify the critical elements of the problem, the real-life situation is reduced to 
a bare-bones model, usually based on a theoretical game. The same game, for 
example the Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma, may turn out to be a paradigm that 
closely resembles cooperation among both baboons and bacteria.
Strategies are rather abstract algorithms that prescribe what to do in a man-
ner that is conditional upon the situation at hand. Species as diverse as baboons 
and bacteria are assumed to play the same conditional strategies; for example, 
‘PAVLOV’ or ‘TIT-FOR-TAT’, when confronted with the same kind of problem. 
However, the actual mechanisms that these species use to implement the strate-
gy are likely to be very different. Baboons may acquire a strategy largely through 
learning, whereas bacteria use largely ‘hard-wired’ mechanisms produced over 
many generations by the action of natural selection. Thus, while the strategies 
used by two species can very well be analogous, the mechanisms used to imple-
ment them need be neither homologous nor analogous.
It is also possible that the same mechanisms are used to implement differ-
ent strategies, which are then employed in different behavioral domains. For 
example, certain brain areas are highly sensitive to symmetry. This symmetry-
detecting mechanism can be used both to select mates with symmetrical faces 
and select prey with asymmetrical bodies (Sasaki et al. 2005).
13.4.2
Homologies can be intra-specific or inter-specific
Two mechanisms used in cooperation by different species are homologous when 
they derive from a cooperative mechanism used by a common ancestor (‘verti-
cal homology’). ‘Horizontal homology’ is a term I will use to refer to all cases 
in which members of the same species apparently use the same mechanism in 
different contexts (see Box 2). ‘Horizontally homologous’ can be replaced by 

248
Ronald Noë
‘identical’ if it can be shown that exactly the same neurons, neurotransmitters, 
learning processes etc. are involved. I prefer to use the former, more fuzzy, term 
for two reasons. First, I want to avoid a futile debate over which of the building 
blocks of a strategy should be identified as separate mechanisms. Second, mech-
anisms may be based on the same morphological and physiological substrate, 
but contain elements of learning that may result in differences in the details be-
tween behavioral domains. Hybrids between the two forms of homology are also 
possible; for example, two species may have inherited a mechanism that plays a 
role in mate choice from a common ancestor and this mechanism may have de-
veloped into a mechanism used in cooperation in each lineage independently.
Two mechanisms are likely to be vertically homologous when two species 
that descended from a recent common ancestor use the same mechanism under 
comparable circumstances. Macaques and humans, for example, both use the 
same brain nuclei to recognize symmetry (Sasaki et al. 2005).
What are plausible cases of horizontally homologous mechanisms? An al-
most trivial example would be a bird species in which females prefer to eat red 
fruit and prefer to mate with males with a red breast. In both cases, the same 
photo-pigments and neurons in the visual cortex are implicated in seeing red. 
It is likely that selection for finding red fruits resulted in a sensory bias in the 
visual system which males can then exploit, a phenomenon known as ‘sensory 
exploitation’ (Basolo 1990, Ryan et al. 1990). Other plausible sources of mecha-
nisms (pre-adaptations or exaptations) used in cooperation, apart from foraging 
behavior, are mate choice mechanisms (for mechanisms used in the choice of co-
operation partners) and the mutual control of mates in species with bi-parental 
care (for the mutual control among cooperation partners).
Interesting homologies, both vertical and horizontal, can be found in fMRI-
studies in which human and non-human subjects show activity in the same 
brain nuclei, such as the nucleus accumbens, which, in humans, is activated in 
response to a very diverse range of stimuli, for example pretty faces of the op-
posite sex (Aharon et al. 2001), money (Knutson et al. 2001) and sports cars Erk 
et al. (2002). It remains to be seen, however, whether it is the same populations 
of neurons or different intermingled populations which are implicated in each 
case.
X Box 2.
Horizontal and vertical homologies
Fig. 13.1 illustrates the idea of horizontal and vertical homologies. Imagine three 
species A, B and C that belong to the same lineage (A being the oldest, or ‘ances-
tral’, species). All three species use the same choice strategy, say ‘best-of-n’ (see 
below). Of the many mechanisms needed to implement such a strategy, one is 
‘sensitivity to the relevant signal of quality’. I use three qualities here: symmetry, 
color and quantity. It is perhaps useful to think of a certain population of neurons 
that are specifically sensitive to one of these characteristics (e.g. Sasaki et al. 2005 
for symmetry; Nieder et al. 2002 for quantities). Species A prefers symmetry when 

249
13 Digging for the roots of trading
selecting both mates and cooperation partners, and uses mechanisms that are 
likely to be horizontally homologous. Species A prefers red items when foraging. 
This preference is inherited by species B, which makes it a plausible case of verti-
cal homology. Species B also shows preference for red when selecting coopera-
tive partners, a horizontal homology, etc.
I also illustrate one case where the use of identical mechanisms in the same do-
main by two species is unlikely to be homologous. Species A and C both prefer 
symmetrical cooperation partners, but the intermediate species B does not. Spe-
cies A is likely to use a mechanism evolved in the context of mating and species 
C is likely to use one that evolved in the context of foraging. For the interpreta-
tion of evolutionary pathways of mechanisms, it is thus important to consider in 
which domain the strongest selection pressure was exerted (see Discussion in 
the main text).
Whether or not two strategies are homologous is another story. Suppose each 
of the three species uses either ‘ best-of-n’ or ‘threshold’ as choice strategy. An 
individual that uses ‘best-of-n’ will sample all individuals, whether food sourc-
es or commodities, that are found within a certain time or area and then return 
to the best one encountered. Using the ‘threshold’ strategy means that the in-
dividual will pick the first individual/resource/commodity that is better than a 
certain fixed threshold value. Assume further that all three mechanisms can be 
used in the implementation of both strategies and that each strategy-mechanism 

250
Ronald Noë
combination can have evolved independently in each domain for each species. 
This means that any pair of identical strategies or identical mechanisms can in 
principle be either analogous or homologous. Strategies can be considered ho-
mologous when all mechanisms involved in the implementation of the strategy 
are homologous. This becomes increasingly less likely with increasing distance 
between species, with increasing complexity of the mechanisms involved and 
with an increased contribution of learning.
13.4.3
The phylogeny of a mechanism may explain how well it is adapted 
to its present cooperative function
Depending on its phylogenetic history, a mechanism may be more or less specifi-
cally adapted to its task in the context of cooperation or trading (cf. Gigerenzer’s 
1997 discussion of the adaptation of modules of social intelligence to ‘proper’ 
and ‘actual’ domains). I see the following possibilities:
▬ The mechanism evolved de novo in the context of a specific form of coopera-
tion. Examples are morphological adaptations to mutualistic interactions; 
for example, the nectar organ of lycaenid larvae, domatia and food-bodies of 
plants, all of which are rewards for insects that serve as protectors. Several 
mechanisms involved in the cooperative mating display of male ruffs, which 
are not found in closely related species, also belong to this category. Males 
belonging to different color morphs cooperate to attract females. The differ-
ences in the color of the ruff, as well as differences in behavior, are genetically 
determined (van Rhijn 1973, 1983).
▬ The mechanism evolved in a different context. A hypothetical example 
would be adaptations to bi-parental care, which act as pre-adaptations for 
cooperative hunting. Both forms of cooperation resemble a ‘synergistic mu-
tualism’ game (Maynard-Smith 1983) in which it is better to compensate the 
inadequate input of the partner, at least partially, than to punish the partner 
by ending the cooperation instantly (for compensation in bi-parental care, 
see Smiseth & Moore 2004 and references therein). In both domains, partner 
control is a problem.
▬ The mechanism stems from another non-cooperative context, but is eman-
cipated from that context and thereafter only used in (a specific form of) co-
operation. Examples are grooming and preening behaviors, which have their 
roots in parental care, but are now largely emancipated from their function 
of removal of ecto-parasites in several animal groups, such as the primates, 
and can be used as payment for ‘tolerance’ (Barrett & Henzi 2001, this vol-
ume, Barrett et al. 2002b, Henzi & Barrett 2002).
▬ The mechanism evolved in a non-cooperative context and is now used in 
both its old function and in cooperation. Examples are the dancing approach 
and the caressing of clients by cleaner wrasses, both of which are also used in 
the mating context (see below under ‘Trust’).

251
13 Digging for the roots of trading
13.4.4
Reproductive relationships
Reproduction and cooperation resemble each other in so many aspects that it 
is questionable whether one should see them as independent domains. Repro-
ductive relationships can be seen as a special form of cooperation in which the 
partners, by definition, belong to the same species and in which kin selection 
plays no role. The vast sexual selection literature (reviewed in Andersson 1994) 
describes an enormous variation in reproductive relationships. The operational 
sex ratio (OSR), i.e. the relative numbers of males and females available for mat-
ing at a particular time, is the basic supply-demand parameter of mating mar-
kets (Emlen & Oring 1977, see also Noë & Hammerstein 1995).
The OSR is largely determined by the amount of time each sex is bound by 
the production of a batch of offspring. In species that mate on leks (display are-
nas), the relationships do not last much longer than the copulation itself and 
males return to the market immediately, whereas females may return only in the 
next season. In such skewed markets, sexual selection results in competitiveness 
in one sex (usually males) and choosiness in the other (usually females). Species 
with obligate bi-parental care are at the other extreme. The OSR is much more 
balanced and both sexes have an interest in choosing their mates carefully. The 
division of labor and sexual fidelity can be major sources of conflict and partner 
control is an important issue. In general, the longer the relationship lasts, the 
more the emphasis shifts from partner choice to partner control.
The distinction between ‘mating markets’ and ‘economic markets’ becomes 
blurred where differences in market value between the sexes are compensated 
for by goods and services offered by the members of the competing sex to the 
members of the choosy sex; for example, in the form of nuptial gifts, safe nesting 
locations, territories containing resources etc. Human mating markets provide 
good examples of the linkage between the two (reviewed in Barrett et al. 2002a) 
and, as I will argue below, this may partially explain why we behave in one of 
these markets as if we were acting in the other. Thus, for each mechanism used 
in cooperation, one should consider the possibility that it initially evolved under 
sexual selection.
13.4.5
Emotions
Emotions, such as fear, trust, envy and guilt, can be seen as “discrete mecha-
nisms crafted by evolutionary processes” (Fessler & Haley 2003, p. 9) that play an 
important role in the implementation of cooperative strategies. There is a clear 
continuum between emotions felt by humans and emotions observed in non-hu-
man animals (Muramatsu & Hanoch 2005, Panksepp 2005, in press). Therefore, 
emotions are prime candidates for cooperation/trade-related mechanisms that 
have deep roots in our phylogenetic tree. It is not easy to pin down exactly what 
emotions are and people in different disciplines certainly have different ideas 
about what constitutes an emotion. In connection with human cooperation, Fes-
sler & Haley (2003) see emotions as psychological attributes, shaped by natural 

252
Ronald Noë
selection, that “enhance the individual’s ability to engage in, and profit from, 
cooperative enterprises” (p. 8). Fessler & Haley go on to discuss 13 different emo-
tions that play a role in human cooperative interactions, but do not consider 
their phylogenetic roots. I will do just that, but discuss only a small subset: trust, 
fear, envy-jealousy and a complex of related emotions: sympathy, liking and 
wanting. I will discuss the latter under the heading ‘choice’, which is the driving 
force behind biological, mating and economic markets.
▬ Fear of being cheated. Cosmides & Tooby (1992) have argued that our modu-
lar mind contains a ‘cheat detection module’, which evolved specifically in 
the context of cooperation. However, no module drops out of the blue, evo-
lutionary speaking. Two brain structures play a major role in second-guess-
ing the immediate behavior of others: the amygdala and the ventro-medial 
prefrontal cortex (Adolphs 1999, 2003). The amygdala is also known for its 
role in the emotion of fear. It is therefore likely that natural selection took a 
shortcut from fear in general, via fear of aggression from conspecifics, to fear 
of being deceived by conspecifics.
▬ Trust-distrust. The amygdala is only part of the hypothetical cheat-detec-
tor module; one needs to recognize the danger of being deceived before one 
can fear it. Several nuclei, including the amygdala, are involved in the judg-
ment of the untrustworthiness of faces (Winston et al. 2002, Adolphs 2003). 
Detection of cheating can be specific to the context of cooperation, but it is 
also possible that it is part of a more general sensitivity to ‘deception’. Decep-
tion is a major problem for animals involved in agonistic interactions with 
conspecifics. The combatants have an interest in not giving away their next 
moves, while at the same time trying to detect the true intentions of the ad-
versary (Enquist 1985). Reading the other’s intentions correctly, from facial 
expressions or otherwise, can make all the difference. Such interactions are 
likely to have had more impact on the early evolution of an eventual cheat-
detection module than cooperation.
Trust is the other side of the cheating coin. One needs to trust other indi-
viduals at some point to make cooperation possible. In an experiment with 
human subjects, Zak and colleagues found that oxytocin levels rose when 
people experienced trust from anonymous partners in an ‘investment game’ 
and responded in a ‘trustworthy’ manner themselves (Zak 2004, Zak et al. 
2004, submitted). Higher levels of oxytocin apparently reduce the anxiety 
caused by ‘mistrusting’ others, possibly acting via receptors found in the 
amygdala. Oxytocin is a hormone well-known for its role in regulating lacta-
tion and the enhancement of the bond between parents and offspring, as well 
as in breeding pairs in mammals (Carter 1998). A second hormone, vasopres-
sin, is also important for pair bonding in mammals, notably in males (Lim 
et al. 2004 and references therein). Both oxytocin and vasopressin evolved by 
one amino-acid substitution from vasotocin, the hormone that plays a role in 
egg-laying and nest-building in some reptiles (Konner 2004).
Familiar people are also likely to be trusted more than unfamiliar peo-
ple. DeBruine (2002) found that players in a two-person trust game are more 
likely to trust players shown on a computer screen with faces manipulated to 
resemble themselves. This result conforms to kin selection theory (Hamilton 

253
13 Digging for the roots of trading
1964) with phenotypic matching as the mechanism used to recognize kin. 
Using fMRI in people playing repeated trust games, King-Casas et al. (2005) 
showed that the caudate nucleus plays a role both in the judgment of the fair-
ness of the partner’s offer and in the intention of self to return trust. Activity 
in the caudate nucleus, a structure connected to the dopamine system, which 
in turn is important in the ‘wanting module’ (see below under ‘Choice’) in-
creasingly anticipated the intention to trust, showing evidence of a learning 
effect in a series of interactions with a specific partner.
Overcoming fear and mistrust is not only a problem for individuals ea-
ger to cooperate, but also for prospective sexual partners. Accounts of pair 
formation in animals are full of descriptions of ‘appeasement’ behavior and 
postures that are the exaggerated opposites of aggressive and threatening 
postures, for example turning away the dark face and bill in several gulls 
(Tinbergen 1959). Appeasement behavior, evolved in the context of mating, 
can be transferred to the context of cooperation, even between members of 
different species. The cleaner fish mutualism provides two examples: firstly, 
the zig-zag dances with which the cleaner Labroidus dimidiatus and its para-
sitic mimicry Aspidontus taeniatus approach their ‘clients’ (Grutter 2004). 
This dance, which is similar to the famous zig-zag dance of the stickleback, 
is used in the mating context in these species and several of their congeners 
(Wickler 1963). Secondly, cleaner fish (Labroidus) often calm their clients 
down by stroking their backs with their pelvic and pectoral fins (Bshary & 
Würth 2001). This too is a behavior that has also been observed in the context 
of mating (R. Bshary, pers. com.).
▬ Envy and jealousy. I follow Fessler & Haley (2003, p. 14) in their distinction 
between ‘envy’ as an emotion caused by a disparity in possession of a val-
ued item and ‘jealousy as the emotion experienced by individuals desiring to 
take the role of another individual in a social relationship. This distinction 
between envy and jealousy maps onto my distinction between ‘commod-
ity-based partner choice’ and ‘attributes-based partner choice’, respectively. 
Both emotions can play a role in cooperation and trading, but in a different 
way. Jealousy can be a factor in alliance formation. Envy can be a mecha-
nism that changes the way communally-produced resources are shared, for 
example meat after a cooperative hunt. ‘Envy’ may also drive individuals to 
react strongly when they feel they have been short-changed after cooperative 
interactions. The expectation of such passionate reactions may in turn stabi-
lize cooperative relationships (Fessler & Haley 2003). Such strong reactions 
are described by Brosnan & de Waal (2003) and Brosnan et al. (2005). In their 
experiments, capuchin monkeys and chimpanzees would throw tantrums if 
they observed a conspecific in an adjacent cage obtain a preferred food item 
from an experimenter, when they themselves had only obtained a non-pre-
ferred food item from the same experimenter.
In their coverage of this work, the popular press often used the term 
‘envy’. The authors themselves avoided this label and used ‘inequity avoid-
ance’ instead, probably for good reason. Showing envy in animals would be 
another nice example of a human-non-human emotional continuum, but I 
suspect it will be very hard to show the existence of envy beyond reasonable 

254
Ronald Noë
doubt. In the good old Lorentzian tradition, I use anecdotal observations of 
my cat and dog to explain why. When I stroke my cat, the dog comes over to 
me straight away and tries to wriggle herself between me and the cat. The dog 
is apparently afraid that my relationship with the cat will come at a cost to her 
relationship with me. I think I can call that being jealous. This would make 
sense for a group-living wolf; social relationships can have a lot of value, be-
cause they may mean support, grooming, tolerance etc. The cat could not 
care less if I stroke the dog or not; he belongs to a more solitary species. Now 
what happens at feeding time? When I fill the dog’s bowl, the cat comes run-
ning too, and vice versa. When they are not fed almost simultaneously, they 
both show signs of frustration. My guess is that the same happens when a 
capuchin or chimpanzee expects grapes, but receives cucumber. The feeding 
of another individual acts as a stimulus that predicts the imminent arrival 
of a certain kind of food for the subject animal, because the two have been 
linked together contingently in the past: a classical conditioned response. 
The same basic idea was also expressed by Tim Clutton-Brock (pers. com.) 
during the conference on which this book is based. The tantrum thrown by 
Brosnan & De Waal’s capuchin monkeys, for example, can be interpreted as a 
sign of frustrated expectations (Wynne 2004) and this frustration may be so 
strong that the cucumber is not eaten. It is therefore unnecessary to invoke 
either ‘envy’, or the more cautious term ‘inequity avoidance’ to explain the 
behavior of the primates and the pets.
The use of the word envy would perhaps be warranted if I were to feed 
the cat and discover that the dog also runs to the cat’s bowl, even though 
she has a full bowl of her own. My dog goes to her own food bowl, however, 
even if it is still empty, and so does the cat if I feed the dog first. I would still 
not feel the need to use the word envy if the dog tried to steal the food from 
the cat, because her behavior is typical for situations of food competition in 
many species. The use of the word envy does not add any explanatory value, 
because my dog runs to any form of food at any place and tries to get it. In 
the primate case, envy (or inequity avoidance for that matter) would only 
be apparent if monkey A stopped eating the cucumbers he had been happily 
munching before monkey B was given grapes, even though A had never re-
ceived any grapes himself simultaneously with any other monkey in his life, 
and had no chance getting B’s grapes during the experiment.
13.4.6
Choice 
Choice is the mechanism that makes markets turn. A major chunk of sexual se-
lection works through mate choice and one cannot imagine the outbidding com-
petition that typically occurs within markets if there were no choosing agents. 
Many, if not most, ‘choices’ in life are made by natural selection on behalf of the 
organism. Giraffes do not hunt zebras, and lions do not eat leaves in treetops. 
Nevertheless the life of any animal remains a string of choices. Where to go? 
What to eat? Who to mate with? Choice seems such a general mechanism that an 
attempt to identify a common denominator and a common origin may be futile. 

255
13 Digging for the roots of trading
Nevertheless, work on humans seems to point to a central ‘choice module’, which 
can in turn be divided into a ‘wanting’ module, active in the anticipation of plea-
sure, and a ‘liking’ module, active during pleasant experiences (Berridge 2003). 
The wanting module, which roughly coincides with the dopamine system, was 
shown to be active in different mammal species, but notably humans, in reaction 
to a wide range of stimuli (food: Berridge 1996, Pagnoni et al. 2002, Arana et al. 
2003; beautiful faces: Kampe et al. 2001, Aharon et al. 2001; pornographic mate-
rial: Bocher et al. 2001, Karamara et al. 2002; sports cars: Erk et al. 2002; money: 
Knutson et al. 2001a, 2001b). Berridge (1996) showed that, as far as food prefer-
ences are concerned, the wanting module can be clearly distinguished from the 
liking module, which is linked to opioids rather than dopamine. According to 
Berridge (2003), this separation holds for other stimuli as well, such as monetary 
rewards in humans.
Anatomically, as well as functionally, these two hypothetical modules are 
closely connected and partially overlap. The ‘wanting’ part could be considered 
as the genuine choice module, but the ‘liking’ module is bound to be important 
for learning which choices are worth repeating. Tremblay & Schultz (1999) (see 
also comment by Watanabe 1999) and Arana et al. (2003) showed that the or-
bitofrontal cortex (the ventral part of the prefrontal cortex) plays a role in the 
relative choice of food items; i.e., a mechanism needed to perform a sampling 
strategy such as ‘best-of-n’. This area of the brain is related to the liking module 
rather than the wanting module, which seems logical when the association with 
learned tastes determines the choices made. The fact that the choice module gov-
erns the selection of food items suggests that this module is rather archaic. I 
imagine that it evolved first in the context of foraging, then developed further 
in the context of mating and is now implicated in all kinds of choices, including 
economic ones like the purchase of consumer goods.
Mate choice and economic decisions may be related because they partially 
rely on the same mechanisms, but they are also directly connected, as I argued 
above. According to sexual selection theory, an asymmetry between the sexes 
in the direct investment in the offspring can be compensated by indirect in-
vestments. The sex with the larger direct investment is usually in a position to 
base mate choice on commodities offered such as nuptial gifts, high quality ter-
ritories, safe nesting places etc. Economic decisions play a major role in mate 
choice in most human cultures (reviewed in Barrett et al. 2002a, chapter 8). The 
economic consequences of the pair bond play a role notably in the choice of long-
term partners, for example the historical Krummhörn population described by 
Voland and colleagues (Voland & Engel 1990, Voland & Dunbar 1995, Voland 
2000). This is quite different from the choice of partners for ‘one-night stands’, 
where the physical qualities of the partner play a much larger role. The latter is 
known as the ‘good genes’ explanation in sexual selection. However, one-night 
stands can also take the form of prostitution with an obvious economic com-
ponent. Thus, within mating markets, mate choice can be based on the mate’s 
qualities and/or on the basis of commodities offered by the mate. Above, I have 
proposed a similar distinction between attributes-based partner choice and 
commodity-based partner choice on biological markets. The question now is, 
do the different choice criteria evoke entirely different or partially overlapping 

256
Ronald Noë
mechanisms in the selection of sexual partners and does this apply to the selec-
tion of cooperation and trading partners too?
So far, I have assumed that there is a single ‘choice module’ with two parts, 
one for ‘liking’ and the other for ‘wanting’. This runs parallel with the idea that 
there is a single decision-making centre in the brain that may or may not be 
homologous between humans and macaques (Rorie & Newsome 2005). Liking 
food is, however, a rather different emotion from liking a conspecific. Above, 
I proposed a split between two modes of partner choice, because I suspect that 
they are at least partly based on different mechanisms. ‘Liking a conspecific’ 
should be further separated into several sub-categories, depending on whether 
the conspecific is a sexual partner, a parent of one’s offspring, a relative, or a 
frequent coalition partner. In human terms, we are talking about emotions like 
sexual desire, romantic love, sympathy and so forth. Trust plays a role in all of 
these, of course, so some remarks made above apply here too.
In the psychological literature, ‘friendship’ tends to be compared ‘horizon-
tally’ with other human relationships, notably of a romantic or sexual nature 
(e.g. Sprecher & Regan 2002). The term friendship has also been used by several 
primatologists (Smuts 1985, Cords 1997, Hemelrijk et al. 1999, Palombit et al. 
2001, Silk 2002). It seems worthwhile, therefore, to think in terms of phylogeny 
and to consider the possible homology between the feelings for an ally in non-
human species and the feelings for friends and business partners in humans. De 
Waal (2000) has described what he calls ‘attitudinal reciprocity’ as a mechanism 
that stabilizes cooperation; instead of detailed, quantitative ‘book-keeping’ of 
past interactions, he envisages a more fuzzy, qualitative building up of a certain 
attitude, one could say sympathy, towards those group members with whom one 
has had positive interactions.
13.5
Is human trading behavior well-adapted?
Until recently, most economists considered economic decisions by humans to be 
the result of rational cognitive processes, and many perhaps still do. However, 
a number of recent studies show that our ‘rationality’ is rather limited (Chase 
et al. 1998, Colman 2003a, 2003b, Todd & Gigerenzer 2000, 2003, contributions 
in Gigerenzer et al. 1999). Gigerenzer et al.’s ‘fast and frugal’ algorithms, men-
tioned above, are assumed to be products of natural selection, which implies that 
they are optimally adapted to the circumstances in which their effect on fitness 
was, or is, the greatest. The process of natural selection inevitably incurs some 
inertia, making it likely that decision rules do not always follow fast cultural 
changes. One example is the recent surge in eating disorders that seem to be a 
mal-adaptation to a world of plenty. One should, however, not expect to see mal-
adaptations all over the place. Even if genetic evolution was too slow, cultural 
evolution and learning processes might have papered over some of the cracks.
Sub-optimal decisions in modern circumstances may therefore be telltale 
signs that they are made using archaic mechanisms. The question is, sub-op-
timal for what? Utility maximization may have been the proximate mechanism 

257
13 Digging for the roots of trading
for fitness maximization for most of human history, but that connection now 
seems mostly lost for those living in industrialized societies. People appear to 
seek compromises between the two, but compromises are not necessarily opti-
mal solutions. Take my own guild, the academics. We postpone having kids till 
it is often too late; most of us could have done better in a material sense if we had 
learned an honest trade and we only have to look at the half-life of journal cita-
tions to see that we will not do very well in the cultural evolution theater either. 
Nevertheless, we spoil weekends with beautiful weather in order to finish book 
chapters. I will, however, limit myself here to behavior that seems irrational in 
the eyes of classical economists and propose some bold hypotheses about sub-
optimality in trading behavior:
1. Suppose we take decisions about trading goods using mechanisms from for-
aging, does that explain sub-optimal consumer behavior?
2. Suppose we choose our cooperation partners using mechanisms from mating 
behavior, does this lead to sub-optimal choices by employers when recruiting 
new personnel?
3. A related question, I will not try to answer in keeping with my promise to 
limit myself to cooperation and trading among unrelated individuals is: 
Suppose our trust in trading partners is based on mechanisms that evolved 
under kin selection, such as the resemblance of the partner’s face to faces of 
family members, does that hamper our trade with unfamiliar individuals?
13.5.1
Consumer behavior
Above we have seen that an eventual choice module would affect our choices in 
a wide range of domains. The hypothesis I put forward is that the selection pres-
sure on this module would have been, and probably still is, strongest in activities 
with large implications for fitness, such as partner choice, parental behavior and 
foraging behavior. Consequently, the module would be less adapted to choices 
with less existential value, such as the purchase of luxury goods and gadgets. 
I also predict gender differences in choice behavior, because sexual selection 
would drive male and female behavior in different directions. There is a catch, 
however. Buying, and showing off with, luxury goods can influence mate ac-
quisition. Some items are bought to impress the other sex, to adorn the body to 
attract the other sex or, explicitly to buy the favors of the other sex. I therefore 
propose to distinguish at least three categories of consumer behavior for which 
different predictions can be formulated.
A. Commodities for maintenance (e.g. food, housing, insurances etc.). In eco-
nomical terms, this is a plain consumer choice problem (Frank 1994), which 
can be tackled with the theory of rational consumer choice. Products are 
chosen depending on their quality, price, cost of purchase (including cost of 
sampling and traveling) etc. A gender difference is not predicted. Biologists 
would be inclined to apply optimal foraging theory and assume that decision 
rules are at least partially a product of natural selection. Optimal foraging 
theory has indeed been applied to consumer behavior by some economists 
and it turns out that the behavior of customers can be described pretty well 

258
Ronald Noë
by this biological theory (Rajala & Hantula 2000, DiClemente & Hantula 
2003, Smith & Hantula 2005). 
B. Commodities that play a role in mate choice. A broad category that includes 
all relatively expensive possessions visible to the prospective mate during the 
process of mate choice. These can be items that are normally in the ‘mainte-
nance’ category, but acquire a second function as signals to potential mates. 
I predict that many goods bought impulsively fall into this category and that 
consumer behavior under these circumstances is not what an economist 
would consider rational, unless he somehow succeeds in squeezing the acqui-
sition of a mate into a utility function. In biological terms, sexual selection 
reigns. H. sapiens is a species with reciprocal mate choice, but the criteria of 
choice are rather different between the sexes. A strong gender difference is 
therefore predicted. Two sub-categories can further be distinguished (Bus-
ton & Emlen 2003, Borgerhoff-Mulder 2004):
a. Choice of a short-term partner (one-night stands)
b. Choice of a long-term partner (marriage)
C. Commodities that represent parental investment. The roles of parents differ, 
but the interests of parents coincide. A moderate gender difference is pre-
dicted.
There is a surprising lack of research in consumer preferences by gender (Moss & 
Colman 2001), but some consistent patterns emerge. Apart from factors related 
to mate choice, there are, of course, a number of other explanations for gender 
differences in consumer preferences, for example consistent differences in tech-
nical knowledge of the items bought, in purchase power, or in sensory acuteness. 
An example: women rarely suffer from color-blindness in contrast to men and 
have a stronger preference for more colorful consumer goods (Moss & Colman 
2001). Note that it is an open question whether color-blindness, or better dichro-
matism, has adaptive value or is a sad consequence of having a Y-chromosome 
(see Dominy et al. 2001). In addition, there may be social causes for a gender 
difference, such as consistent differences in social relationships with vendors 
and shopkeepers. All such differences would not compromise the rational choice 
hypothesis. Other differences are clearly related to the role an item plays in the 
mating market, however. Impulsive buying by women has, in general, more to do 
with appearance; that of men more with status (Dittmar et al. 1995, 1996). Men 
are more interested in sports cars than in ‘useful’ cars, such as a family-friendly 
hatchback. We have seen above that the same brain nuclei are activated when 
men see sports cars, sexual stimuli, beautiful female faces and money. Buying a 
sports car rather than a car suited for plain transport, may enable men to give a 
handicap signal of wealth (Erk et al. 2002). The latter authors compare the sports 
car to the peacock’s tail. This is a risky comparison as humans have bi-paternal 
care, while peacocks do not. Thus, the fancy car is perhaps a good signal for 
women seeking ‘good genes’, or even direct material reward, during a one-night 
stand, but a woman looking for a good caretaker may do better by avoiding the 
dandy with a tendency to spend money on sports cars, rather than the education 
of his children.

259
13 Digging for the roots of trading
Conclusion: if we use our skills evolved in the domains of foraging and pa-
ternal care when purchasing goods and services, we remain pretty close to what 
economists would consider rational behavior. When it comes to buying com-
modities that have an impact on our mating behavior, however, we may mix up 
fitness maximization with utility maximization. Notably, in an era of birth con-
trol we may end up behaving irrationally in both domains.
13.5.2
Hiring by employers
The employment market has been likened to a ‘marriage market’ by economists 
ever since the classic papers on matching models by Gale & Shapley (1962) and 
Becker (1973). Animal mating markets, in turn, have been compared to human 
economic markets by biologists (Noë & Hammerstein 1995, Miller & Todd 1998). 
It seems obvious that several mechanisms used on both markets are identical, 
which is confirmed by the fact that the same people tend to be successful in both 
(Harper 2000). However, there is not only an analogy between the problems that 
traders on either market need to solve, but apparently the same mechanisms 
are also used in spite of the fact that this can lead to sub-optimal choices in the 
employment market. Good-looking people are more successful in their careers; 
they are preferentially hired as employees, get higher salaries etc. This phenom-
enon is known as ‘the beauty premium’. A citation from Aharon et al. (2001): 
“The strong motivational influence of beauty has been shown in studies of la-
bor markets suggesting that there is a ‘beauty premium’ and ‘plainness penalty’ 
(Hamermesh & Biddle 1994) such that attractive individuals are more likely to 
be hired, promoted, and to earn higher salaries than unattractive individuals 
(Marlowe et al. 1996, Frieze et al. 1990, 1991)”.
The phenomenon can be explained partially by rational economic behavior 
of the employer; by preferring signs of health, he gets a better employee, every-
thing else being equal. There are also examples of businesses that gain directly 
as a result of having good-looking employees (Pfann et al. 2000). The ‘sexual 
selection’ hypothesis would also predict an ‘ugliness premium’ for people hired 
by same-sex staff managers, but I have found no proof of that in the literature. 
Nevertheless, it seems to me that in many cases an employer behaves irrational-
ly, when he ignores reliable signals such as CVs and follows his sexually-selected 
hunches.
13.6
Summary
The trading of commodities, like goods, services and information between hu-
man beings, is almost certainly the most widespread form of cooperation be-
tween unrelated members of the same species on earth. Trading would not take 
place if it did not normally result in a net benefit for all participants, but the 
potential for conflict over exchange rates looms large. It is therefore crucial for 
each trader to have a number of mechanisms at his disposal that ensure optimal 

260
Ronald Noë
profit. In this chapter, I have speculated about the evolutionary roots of such 
mechanisms. The main question I asked was whether we can trace mechanisms 
used in cooperation and trading by modern humans back to homologous mech-
anisms used by ancestral species. I speculated that, for some mechanisms, many 
species borders must be crossed in order to arrive at their evolutionary origin.
Two sets of mechanisms can be bracketed together as ‘partner choice mecha-
nisms’ and ‘partner control mechanisms’. Choice is what makes markets turn; it 
forms the link between supply-demand ratios and exchange rates of commodi-
ties. Partner choice can be based on certain attributes of the potential partners 
themselves (‘attribute-based partner choice’) or on the basis of the goods or ser-
vices they offer (‘commodity-based partner choice’). Partner control becomes 
important only after trading relationships have formed; it ensures continuing 
profit from ongoing relationships.
Mechanisms used in cooperation can be homologous in two different ways. 
The same mechanism can be used by multiple living species that share a com-
mon ancestor. It is then reasonable to assume that the mechanism evolved for 
the first time in that common ancestor or even earlier. I baptized this classical 
form of homology ‘vertical homology’ in order to distinguish it from another 
form of homology, which I called ‘horizontal homology’, the use of the same 
mechanism in different domains by members of the same species. Within do-
mains, I referred to behavioral complexes such as ‘foraging’ and ‘reproduction’ 
that are under more or less independent selective forces.
In order to identify candidate homologies, I first considered analogies, 
mechanisms that resemble each other and are used by members of different spe-
cies cooperating in comparable circumstances or mechanisms used by the same 
individuals in cooperation and in other domains. I then speculated as to whether 
some of these analogies could also be homologies. I identified some domains 
that are likely to have spawned pre-adaptations (‘exaptations’) for mechanisms 
used in cooperation. Mechanisms used in foraging are, for example, likely to be 
used in commodity-based partner choice as well and skills evolved in connec-
tion with the choice of sexual partners are likely to be used in attribute-based 
mate choice.
In the case of vertical homologies of mechanisms used by humans in coop-
eration and trade, one has to split mechanisms into those evolved under natural 
selection and those evolved under cultural selection. The mechanisms I am in-
terested in, those that evolved under natural selection, are more likely to have 
evolved long before bipedal primates turned the planet into a dangerous place 
to live. I tried to identify candidate mechanisms by looking at emotions, such as 
fear, trust and jealousy, which are shared by humans and animals and by looking 
more closely at mechanisms used in partner choice. A number of studies, among 
them several using advanced techniques like fMRI, have identified sub-cortical 
brain areas that are active in both cooperative and non-cooperative contexts in 
human as well as non-human primates.
The homology between a mechanism used by modern humans in trading 
and a mechanism used by a distantly-related species in cooperation shows best 
when the former is not optimally adapted to its modern use. Sub-optimal adap-
tation of a genetically-determined mechanism is likely when it has to adapt to a 

261
13 Digging for the roots of trading
fast-moving target or when it is used in different domains. In the latter case, the 
mechanism is likely to be adapted to the domain in which it has, or recently had, 
its biggest impact on fitness. I identified such apparent ‘mal-adaptations’ in two 
forms of human economic interaction: (i) consumer behavior and (ii) the hiring 
of personnel.
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Peter Kappeler and his fellow organizers of the “4. Göt-
tinger Freilandtage” for inviting me to a very inspiring meeting. I owe Peter, 
Carel van Schaik, Louise Barrett and an anonymous reviewer for their construc-
tive comments on an earlier version that was even more chaotic than this one. 
Louise also greatly improved language and flow. I would finally like to thank 
Tim Clutton-Brock for pointing out the unsolved problem of price setting in the 
baby market.

Part VI
Cooperation in Humans

Chapter 14
Reputation, personal identity 
and cooperation in a social dilemma
Manfred Milinski 
14.1
Introduction
Many problems of human society, such as overexploiting fish stock or the dif-
ficulty of sustaining the global climate, are problems of achieving cooperation. 
When individuals, groups or states are free to overuse a public good, they usu-
ally overuse it. Thus, public goods are at risk of collapsing, which happens to 
health insurance systems, fish stock and most probably the global climate (Has-
selmann et al. 2003). This problem is known as the ‘tragedy of the commons’ 
(Hardin 1968, 1998). Social and political scientists, economists and recently evo-
lutionary biologists have studied this issue intensively (e.g. Ledyard 1995, Os-
trom 1999, Fehr & Fischbacher 2003, Nowak & Sigmund 2004). Several potential 
solutions to this social dilemma have been proposed and/or shown in experi-
ments with human subjects: (i) punishment of uncooperative group members 
(Boyd & Richerson 1992, Gintis 2000, Sigmund et al. 2001, Fehr & Gächter 2000b, 
2002), (ii) costly signaling with altruistic acts (Gintis et al. 2001), (iii) voluntary 
participation in the public goods game (Hauert et al. 2002, Semmann et al. 2003), 
(iv) a kind of interaction with both indirect reciprocity situations (see 14.3; Mi-
linski et al. 2002a, Semmann et al. 2004, 2005) and a trust game (Barclay 2004). 
There are several examples from human societies where the social dilemma has 
been successfully avoided, at least for some time, by mechanisms such as control 
of access to public goods by the local community (Berkes et al. 1989). Neverthe-
less, tragedies of the commons are usually found to be tragedies.
The ‘tragedy of the commons’ problem can be formalized as a ‘public goods 
game’ (e.g. Ledyard 1995). The classic public goods game consists of four play-
ers, who are given the opportunity to contribute money into a public pool. The 
content of the pool is doubled, divided by the number of players and evenly paid 
to all players, irrespective of their contributions. The social dilemma lies in the 
conflict between the group and the individual’s interest. The group does best 
when all players cooperate. However, a rational individual should never contrib-
ute anything, because each money unit paid into the pool yields, doubled and 
then divided by four, only a return of a half-unit to the contributor. Interestingly, 
public goods games played by human subjects usually start with unpredicted 
cooperation but cooperation collapses within a few rounds. Fig. 14.1 gives an 
example of groups of six human subjects each playing the public goods game 
for eight consecutive rounds. Had they all cooperated during all eight rounds, 

266
Manfred Milinski
everybody would have gained a net income of 8 Euros, but they actually earned 
much less; hence, the social dilemma.
14.2
Indirect reciprocity: give and you shall receive 
In direct reciprocity (Trivers 1971, Axelrod & Hamilton 1981), donor and recipi-
ent of an altruistic act meet repeatedly in alternating roles. If the cost to the 
donor is smaller than the gain to the recipient, both have a net benefit in the 
long run. Recently, theorists (Nowak & Sigmund 1998a, 1998b, Lotem et al. 1999, 
Fishman 2003, Mohtashemi & Mui 2003) have shown that cooperation can also 
evolve through indirect reciprocity (Alexander 1987, Zahavi 1991); “give and you 
shall receive”, as the bible says. By helping others, who do not have the possibil-
ity of returning the help to the donor in the future, people build up good reputa-
tion or a positive image score, whereas refusing to help damages the reputation 
(Table 14.1). If one helps those who have helped others, one helps those who have 
a reputation for helping. Third parties reciprocate the altruistic act.
Nowak & Sigmund (1998a, 1998b) provided the first formal proof of the po-
tential evolution of cooperation through indirect reciprocity. They assumed that 
each player has an image score, which is increased by each act of helping and 
Fig. 14.1. Percentage of cooperation (‘YES’) per group of six subjects in each round of the public 
goods game. From Milinski et al. (2002a).
Table 14.1. The idea of indirect reciprocity:.
1) A observes that B helps C 
2) A helps B 

267
14 Reputation, personal identity and cooperation in a social dilemma
is decreased by each act of withhold helping. Now, a rule is needed that defines 
which minimum image score B has to have so that A would help him. Such rules 
for helping ranged from –5 to +6. A –5 strategy helps everybody who has an im-
age score of at least –5, which means almost unconditional helping. A +6 strat-
egy helps everybody who has an image score of at least +6, which means almost 
unconditional defecting. A zero-strategy is maximally discriminating; it helps 
everybody who has a zero or positive image score. Nowak & Sigmund (1998a) 
found that this most discriminating strategy dominated the population after 150 
generations in their computer simulations.
We designed an experiment to test whether students would give money to 
others even if they know that there is no hope for direct reciprocity. If they do 
give money, would they help preferentially those who have a positive image 
score? Wedekind & Milinski (2000) tested eight groups with 10 students each 
from a first year biology course at the university of Bern.
All the subjects were anonymous throughout and after the game. Each sub-
ject was randomly assigned a number and a box with two button keys, one for 
‘YES’, which would light a green lamp on the central desk, and one for ‘NO’ 
which would light a red lamp. A special procedure insured that nobody could 
hear who was responding. Each subject was provided with a starting account. 
The benefit of giving was always 4 Swiss Francs for the receiver, whereas the cost 
for the donor was 2 Swiss Francs. Each group played six rounds. Each subject 
played once per round both as a ‘donor’ and as a ‘receiver’. The students knew 
that they would never meet the same player again with alternated roles; direct 
reciprocity was excluded. Each pair of players was randomly chosen, and the 
one who was chosen as a ‘donor’ was plugged to the lamps. The donor’s decision 
(Would you give 2 Swiss Francs to player no. x? ‘YES’ or ‘NO’?) was written down 
on a protocol sheet that was fixed to the blackboard behind the operator (left 
donor, right receiver). So everybody could see all of the previous choices in each 
interaction. Then the next pair was chosen and two other protocol sheets were 
displayed. After the game, everybody received her or his money in a way that did 
not disclose the players’ identity.
The receivers’ history of giving had a significant effect on the donors’ deci-
sions whether to give money; the image score of receivers who were given money 
was on average higher than the score of those who got nothing in all but one of 
the eight groups (Fig. 14.2; Wedekind & Milinski 2000). Furthermore, those who 
gave rarely, supported only players that had a very high image score. Other ex-
perimental studies found similar results (Bolton et al. 2001, Milinski et al. 2001, 
2002b, Seinen & Schram 2001, Wedekind & Braithwaite 2002, Semmann et al. 
2004, 2005). Hence, human subjects who have been helpful in the past are more 
likely to receive help from others through indirect reciprocity.
The success of the image scoring strategy (Nowak & Sigmund 1998a, 1998b) 
has been questioned by other theorists (Leimar & Hammerstein 2002, Panchan-
athan & Boyd 2003) who showed, by using a more complex population structure, 
that Sugden’s (1986) ‘standing’ strategy is superior in establishing cooperation 
through indirect reciprocity. They argued that if according to the image scoring 
strategy a player would correctly refuse to help an individual with a low score, 
thereby reducing his own score, this player would suffer from not being helped 

268
Manfred Milinski
thereafter. In Sugden’s (1986) model, everybody is initially in good standing. An 
individual loses good standing by failing to help a recipient in good standing, 
whereas failing to help recipients who lack good standing does not damage the 
standing of a potential donor. This appears to make sense intuitively. Recent-
ly, both Brandt & Sigmund (2004) and Ohtsuki & Iwasa (2004) have done an in 
depth analysis of these two and several other updating rules for the indirect reci-
procity game, and found standing strategies to be more successful than scoring 
strategies in most cases.
Now, it would be interesting to know, which strategy human subjects adopt 
when they cooperate in indirect reciprocity games. Since the results of previous 
experimental studies are compatible with either strategy, Milinski et al. (2001) 
addressed the question of standing versus scoring in a specific experiment. Each 
group included a secretly instructed NO-player who always refused to help. 
Strategies of either type would always refuse to give aid to such a player. The 
decisive question was, would their potential donors in turn penalize these play-
ers? Image scorers would penalize them, standing players would not. Fig. 14.3 
shows that these donors of the NO-players were penalized almost as often as 
predicted for scoring but much more than expected from standing. Moreover, 
they appeared to compensate for ‘NOs’ to the NO-player by fewer ‘NOs’ to others, 
which would not make sense if they expect their co-players to follow a standing 
strategy. Providing the subjects with first plus second order information (‘much 
information’) compared with first order information only (‘little information’) 
appeared to have no obvious effect on the donors’ strategy (Fig. 14.3), probably 
because all players had directly observed all previous interactions. Bolton et al. 
(2002) obtained similar results.
Why do humans not behave according to ‘standing’ as theory suggests? In 
order to decide whether a potential receiver is in good standing after he had 
refused help three times, one needs to know whether his last three receivers had 
been in good or bad standing, which implies that one must also know whether 
Fig. 14.2. Grey columns show the average image score of all the receivers who received something 
and white columns show the average image score of all the receivers who did not receive anything 
in each of the eight groups. Data are shown as deviations from the means per group and round to 
correct for group and round effects. From Wedekind & Milinski (2000).

269
14 Reputation, personal identity and cooperation in a social dilemma
their receivers had been in good or bad standing, which implies… etc. The evolu-
tion of a less demanding strategy such as image scoring may therefore reflect the 
constraints imposed by our limited working memory capacity (Milinski & We-
dekind 1998). Because theorists mostly restricted their analysis to binary scores, 
taking only the score or standing of each player’s last round into account (i.e. 
having a plus or minus score, good or bad standing), neither standing’s memory 
problems nor scoring’s advantage among cooperators could be fully expressed; 
in a mostly cooperative environment, image scorers would not be penalized for 
refusing help to rare defectors because their image score remains positive.
14.3
Reputation helps solve the ‘tragedy of the commons’
Because individuals and countries often participate in several social games si-
multaneously, the interaction of these games may provide a sophisticated way by 
which to maintain the public resource. In order to gain profit in indirect reci-
procity situations, it is important to build up and maintain a high reputation 
(image score or standing). If public goods and indirect reciprocity situations 
alternate, it would be worth not damaging one’s reputation in a public goods sit-
uation by withholding help, because one meets the same co-players in both situ-
Fig. 14.3. Mean (+SE) probabilities 
of donors of NO-players receiving 
NO per round (during 16 rounds) of 
12 groups with much information 
and 11 groups with little informa-
tion of six subjects plus one NO-
player each. (a) Expectation for 
image scoring; measured probabili-
ties (grey bars) are compared with 
expected probabilities (white bars). 
(b) Expectation for standing. From 
Milinski et al. (2001).

270
Manfred Milinski
ations again. To test the potential interaction between public goods and indirect 
reciprocity games, Milinski et al. (2002a) performed an experiment with groups 
of six students, each of the university of Hamburg. Nine groups first played eight 
rounds of the public goods game followed by eight rounds of the indirect reci-
procity game; 10 other groups played indirect reciprocity rounds alternated with 
public goods rounds. Both the rules of the game and the complete game itself 
were projected onto a big screen that everybody could see. Thus, everybody had 
complete information about everything except for the real identity of the play-
ers. All players had individual pseudonyms that lasted throughout the games, as 
in Milinski et al. (2001). Cooperation declined as usual in groups that began with 
eight rounds of public goods and built up during the subsequent indirect reci-
procity rounds. However, when rounds of both games were alternated, the high 
starting level of cooperation was maintained during all eight rounds of public 
goods (Fig. 14.4). A bad reputation from not contributing to the public pool was 
recognized in the indirect reciprocity game where players refused to support 
such individuals. However, they supported individuals who had contributed to 
the public pool. Through this transfer of reputation between games, cooperation 
was maintained throughout the experiment. Cooperation in the public goods 
game paid off. Groups that alternated rounds of indirect reciprocity and public 
goods games, and thus were more cooperative in the public goods games, earned 
significantly more money during the eight rounds of the public goods game than 
did groups that played the two games in blocks of eight rounds each. The com-
mons became productive and could be harvested.
Fig. 14.4. Percentage of cooperation (‘YES’) per group of six subjects in each round of the public 
goods game (filled symbols) and in each round of the indirect reciprocity game (open symbols). In 
one treatment, the groups alternated between rounds of indirect reciprocity and rounds of public 
goods until round 16 (black); in the other treatment, groups started with eight consecutive rounds 
of the public goods game and continued with eight rounds of the indirect reciprocity game (grey); 
in rounds 17-20, groups of both treatments played the public goods game, which was either an-
nounced, “from now on only this type of game until the end” (squares), or not announced (dia-
monds). From Milinski et al. (2002a).

271
14 Reputation, personal identity and cooperation in a social dilemma
Four additional rounds of public goods directly tested the hypothesis that 
interaction with the indirect reciprocity game keeps up cooperation in the public 
goods game.  Groups in both treatments played public goods in rounds 17-20. Ev-
ery second group was told before round 17 that from then on only public goods 
rounds would follow until the end of the game. In these groups, cooperation 
declined during the four public goods rounds, whereas cooperation was main-
tained when the risk of further rounds of indirect reciprocity was not excluded 
(Fig. 14.4). Obviously, refusing to give in the public goods game reduced the 
reputation of a player to a similar extent as if this person had refused to give in 
the indirect reciprocity game; his potential donor in the next round of indirect 
reciprocity just followed the rules for indirect reciprocity and refused to give to 
someone with a low image score.
Reputation can therefore maintain all-around contributions to public goods, 
and does so in the absence of a special punishing rule or motivation. The poten-
tial donor actually saves money by refusing to give, whereas punishing would be 
costly. Also, a recent theoretical analysis suggests that reputation is essential for 
fostering social behavior among selfish agents (Sigmund et al. 2001). In another 
empirical study, Wedekind & Braithwaite (2002) suggested that costly invest-
ment in reputation pays off in a subsequent direct reciprocity game (two-per-
sons Prisoner’s Dilemma), although cooperative persons being cooperative in 
both situations could have caused their result as well. Barclay (2004) showed that 
the need for becoming trustworthy in a future dyadic trust game maintained co-
operation during the preceding five rounds of a public goods game. Here a kind 
of competitive altruism helped solve the tragedy of the commons.
14.4
Strategic investment in reputation
The previous results suggest that humans are aware of the possibility that their 
current behavior might affect their future gains depending on whether a situa-
tion where reputation pays off is likely to occur in the future or not. However, 
if this future situation will occur for sure but the subject knows that he/she will 
not be recognizable as the person that cooperated or did not cooperate in a pre-
vious game, will the person cooperate less than if he/she knows he/she will be 
recognized? In other words, do humans invest strategically in reputation when 
they know that their costly investment has a high probability of paying off in 
inevitable future interactions (Pollock & Dugatkin 1992, Ostrom 2003), and do 
they stop investing when this is not the case?
To test for strategic investment in reputation, Semmann et al. (2004) again 
alternated rounds of the public goods and the indirect reciprocity game but this 
time allowed for reputation transfer from the public goods to the indirect reci-
procity game in some rounds but blocked this transfer in other rounds. They 
achieved this manipulation of the reputation transfer by providing the subjects 
each with two different new identities, i.e. two different pseudonyms. One name, 
the non-transferable name, was used only in some public good rounds, whereas 
the other name, the transferable name, was used in rounds of both games. Dur-

272
Manfred Milinski
ing each round of the public goods game, the subjects knew whether they played 
with their transferable or non -transferable name. Would they invest less in the 
public pool when playing with the non- transferable name?
After some training rounds during which all subjects experienced the al-
ternation of public goods rounds with the non-transferable name and indirect 
reciprocity rounds, and the same with the transferable name, 10 groups with six 
subjects each played 10 consecutive public goods rounds with their transferable 
names followed by five rounds with their non-transferable names. To control 
for sequence effects, 10 other groups played their first 10 consecutive rounds of 
public goods with their non-transferable names followed by five rounds with 
their transferable names.
Fig. 14.5 shows that the level of cooperation was much higher during the 
rounds with the transferable name. Hence, the subjects used different strategies 
in the public goods game, conditional on whether the player knew that his deci-
sion would be either known or unknown in another social game. The knowledge 
of being recognized as the same individual in both games motivated players 
to invest in their reputation and thus sustain the public resource. The subjects 
earned significantly more money in public goods rounds with the transferable 
name than in rounds with the non-transferable name. If the circumstances ren-
der people recognizable, they will invest in the public good and because every 
one else does too, profit themselves. Humans strategically invest in various ways 
to preserve their good reputation within their own social group (Engelmann & 
Fig. 14.5. For the public goods (PG) rounds (circles) and indirect reciprocity (IR) rounds (squares), 
the group mean ‘YES’ per round for both treatments are shown. In treatment 1 (black line), the 
groups played PG rounds, from round 11 to round 20 with their transferable name (filled symbols) 
and from round 21 to 25 with their non- transferable name (open symbols). In treatment 2 (dotted 
line), the groups played PG rounds, from round 11 to round 20 with their non-transferable name 
and from round 21 to 25 with their transferable name. The period from round 1 to 10 was identical 
in both treatments (three PG rounds played with the non-transferable name, two IR rounds with the 
transferable name, three PG rounds with the transferable name and two IR rounds with the transfer-
able name. From Semmann et al. (2004).
Treatment ONE
Treatment TWO
Transferable name
Non-transferable name
Public goods round
Indirect reciprocity round
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
% Cooperation
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
Round

273
14 Reputation, personal identity and cooperation in a social dilemma
Fischbacher 2002). Also, in non-human animals, strategic reputation building 
seems possible. Bshary (2002) suggested that tactical deception in cleaner fish 
should occur if it pays to alter optimal behavior in a situation to induce respons-
es in bystanders (clients), which will produce benefits during future interactions 
with these bystanders that exceed the momentary costs.
14.5
Reputation is valuable within and outside one’s own social group
Players reward cooperative behavior of their group members in the public goods 
game and refuse to reward uncooperative behavior; this may be a kind of direct 
reciprocity (see also Engelmann & Fischbacher 2002). The interaction with in-
direct reciprocity should therefore sustain cooperation in public goods games 
only when the same players play in both games. The incentive for donating in 
public goods games would be direct reciprocity, not reputation building. We ex-
pect that cooperative players from another public goods group should not be 
rewarded in indirect reciprocity games.
To test this prediction, Semmann et al. (2005) had 12 students playing simul-
taneously, but in groups with six players each. The 12 subjects sat in one half 
circle watching a big screen. They were told that six of them would play together 
in one group for the pair (i.e. indirect reciprocity) game and the other six in an-
other group for the same type of game. The same six people would play the pair 
game repeatedly and they could recognize their co-players by their pseudonyms. 
Every second round, they would play the group (i.e. public goods) game. For this 
game, three people of each group for the pair game would be combined with three 
people of the other pair game group (Fig. 14.6). Also, this group composition 
would remain stable whenever they played the group game. Again, they would 
recognize their co-players by their pseudonyms. Everybody could observe every 
interaction on the screen, and the sequence of ‘YES’ and ‘NO’ decisions of each 
potential receiver was displayed in the indirect reciprocity rounds. There were 
Fig. 14.6. Group composition in public goods (PG) and indirect reciprocity (IR) rounds. See text 
for details.

274
Manfred Milinski
six rounds of each type of game. This procedure was explained several times in 
detail and the subjects were asked whether they had understood it completely.
Fig. 14.7 shows the overall results from all the 20 groups with 12 players each. 
The level of cooperation is again higher in public goods games than in indirect 
reciprocity games and it dropped after the announcement that there would be 
only group games until the end (black rhombs in Fig. 14.7). However, were group 
members and non-group members treated differently in indirect reciprocity 
rounds? Now one can test whether subjects coerce preferentially their co-players 
from their own public goods group.
Fig. 14.8 shows the percentage reward that subjects who played ‘NO’ or ‘YES’ 
in the public goods game received from members of their own public goods 
group (grey) and from members of the other public goods group (white) in the 
Fig. 14.7. Average level of cooperation (‘YES’) per round per group of six subjects each. Open cir-
cles represent indirect reciprocity (IR) rounds; black symbols represent public goods (PG) rounds. 
From Semmann et al. (2005).
Fig. 14.8. Mean (+SE probability per group of receiving ‘YES’ in a round depending on whether the 
recipient had either given or not given in the previous public goods (PG) round, and on whether 
the recipient and the donor had played together or not together in the same PG group. From Sem-
mann et al. (2005).

275
14 Reputation, personal identity and cooperation in a social dilemma
indirect reciprocity game. YES-players received significantly more rewards than 
NO-players in either case. Surprisingly, donors did not take into account who 
came from their own group and who was a foreigner.
Had the players not understood the procedure of reshuffling players between 
groups?  In anticipation of this potential problem, all players had been asked in 
a questionnaire after the experiment: did you realize that a person with whom 
you played in a ‘pair-round’ had/had not been in your ‘group-round’ (yes/no)? 
Did you use this information in the game (always/often/seldom/never)? The data 
were analyzed, again taking into account only those players who had responded 
‘YES’ and ‘always’ or ‘often’. These subjects should have both understood the 
procedure and used the information.
The new results are shown in Fig. 14.9; they look almost exactly the same as 
when all data were taken into account (Fig. 14.8). Obviously, the subjects did not 
treat own group members and foreign group members differently, even though 
they recognized them. This suggests that reputation is a label that is taken into 
account in social interactions irrespective of where this reputation was gained.
14.6
Gaining good reputation through donations to charity
If reputation is transferable between social groups, transporting the signal that a 
person is a valuable and trustworthy social partner, the same kind of reputation 
could be gained by giving to charity. It has to be insured, however, that people 
know about it. Milinski et al. (2002b) did an experiment, in which groups of 
six subjects each played several rounds of the indirect reciprocity game. After 
Fig. 14.9. Mean (+)SE probability per group to receive ‘YES’ in a round depending on whether the 
recipient had either given or not given in the previous public goods (PG) round, and on whether the 
recipient and the donor had played together or not together in the same PG group. Only decisions 
of participants who had answered in the questionnaire that they were conscious as to whether or 
not they had played together with the current receiver in the PG round and in addition had also 
used this information for their decision finding always or often are included. From Semmann et al. 
(2005).

276
Manfred Milinski
each episode of being asked: “Do you want to give DM 2.50 to this person?” (if 
‘YES’, the receiver obtained DM 4), the player was asked: “Do you want to give 
DM 2.50 to UNICEF?” (if ‘YES’, UNICEF obtained DM 4). It was made clear that 
the amount of money on UNICEF’s account would be sent to UNICEF and every 
player would receive a copy of the receipt.
Fig. 14.10 shows that the more money subjects gave to players of their group, 
the more money they received from players of their group as expected for an 
indirect reciprocity game. The black dots depict players who donated more than 
Fig. 14.10. Human subjects received money indirectly related to the amount they gave to oth-
ers; i.e., the more they gave to others the more they received. The solid line depicts linear regres-
sion. Black circles are charitable donors (UNICEF) who gave more than the median, open circles 
are donors who gave less than the median and grey circles are median donors. From Milinski et al. 
(2002b). 
Fig. 14.11. Mean (+SE) residual number of donations per group of charitable donors (UNICEF) who 
gave more than the median (grey column) and who gave less than the median (white column) re-
ceived from members of their group in indirect reciprocity rounds. From Milinski et al. (2002b).

277
14 Reputation, personal identity and cooperation in a social dilemma
the median amount to UNICEF and the open dots depict players who donated 
less than the median. There are more red dots above and more open dots below 
the regression line. This means that players of the group rewarded reputation 
gained by donating to UNICEF and withheld reward from persons who donated 
little or nothing to UNICEF. This can be shown more directly by comparing the 
residuals of black and open dots to the regression line (Fig. 14.11). 
Even a reputation gained through giving money away from the group is 
rewarded in indirect reciprocity rounds. However, this only worked when do-
nations to UNICEF were made ‘in public’, i.e. appeared on the screen. In a few 
control groups, in which the subjects knew that no information about their do-
nations would be announced to the group, dramatically less money was donated 
privately to UNICEF. These results were expected based on the results of the 
previous experiment, illustrated in Figs. 14.8 and 14.9.
Relief organizations could probably collect more money if they would of-
fer a way by which donations could be made in public. The Swiss radio station 
DRS has regularly asked people and companies to donate money (‘Glückskette’) 
whenever there was a catastrophe anywhere in the world, for example a flood in 
Bangladesh. The money had to be sent to a specific account that was observed 
by DRS. Every hour, just before the news, long lists of donations specifying the 
donor and the amount of money sent (e.g. a little boy has donated 2 Swiss Francs, 
a company 500) were read. Obviously, the radio station had found out that more 
money would be donated if donors would be named with their donations before 
the news. This is a very common procedure in the USA (Peter Kappeler, pers. 
com.).
14.7
Summary and conclusions
Many problems of human society, such as overexploiting fish stock or the dif-
ficulty of sustaining the global climate, are problems of achieving cooperation. 
When individuals, groups or states are free to overuse a public good, they usually 
overuse it. Thus, public goods are at risk of collapsing, which happens to health 
insurance systems, fish stock and probably the global climate. This problem that 
is known as the ‘tragedy of the commons’, has been studied intensively by social 
and political scientists and economists for decades, and recently by evolutionary 
biologists. Except for allowing for punishing defectors, no scenario that strongly 
facilitates a cooperative solution of the tragedy of the commons has been demon-
strated yet. We could show that an unexpectedly efficient solution of the problem 
can be achieved when personal reputation, which is important for other social 
interactions such as gaining support through indirect reciprocity (“give and you 
shall receive”), is at stake in the public goods situation. When this interaction is 
allowed for, the public good is not only sustained but also provides all partici-
pants with a high payoff. Humans strategically invest in various ways to preserve 
their good reputation within their own social group; the subjects used different 
strategies in the public goods game conditional on whether the player knew that 
his/her decision would be either known or unknown in another social game. The 

278
Manfred Milinski
knowledge of being recognized as the same individual in both games motivated 
players to invest in their reputation. Reputation gained in social interactions is 
transferable to other social groups, where it seems to be valued just as highly as 
within one’s own social group. If reputation signals that a person is a valuable 
and trustworthy social partner, the same kind of reputation can be gained by 
giving to charity. Humans rewarded reputation gained by donating to UNICEF 
‘in public’ and withheld reward from persons who donated little or nothing to 
UNICEF. Relief organizations could probably collect more money if they would 
offer a way by which donations could be made in public, which is already prac-
ticed in some countries. A good reputation is a valuable currency, which can be 
accumulated during observable actions. Direct observation, gossip and modern 
telecommunication can transmit the signal. Many social interactions are based 
on a person’s trustworthiness, which has a name, reputation.
Acknowledgments
I thank Dirk Semmann and Derk Wachsmuth for help with preparing the figures 
and Peter Kappeler for his patience.

Chapter 15
Human cooperation from an economic perspective
Simon Gächter, Benedikt Herrmann
15.1
Introduction
Many important economic and social situations are characterized by a conflict 
of interest between individual and group benefits. The ‘tragedy of the commons’ 
(Hardin 1968) is probably one of the best known examples of this problem. Each 
individual farmer has an incentive to put as many cattle on the common meadow 
as possible. The tragic consequence may be overgrazing from which all farmers 
suffer. Collectively, all farmers would be better off if they were able to constrain 
the number of cattle that simultaneously graze on the commons. Yet, each indi-
vidual farmer is better off by letting his cattle graze. A similar tension between 
individual and collective rationality is typical in such diverse areas like warfare, 
cooperative hunting and foraging, environmental protection, tax compliance, 
voting, the participation in collective actions like demonstrations and strikes, 
the voluntary provision of public goods, donations to charities, teamwork, col-
lusion between firms, embargos and consumer boycotts, and so on.
While the logic of self-interest is straightforward, the facts seem to be at odds 
with theoretical predictions derived under the joint assumptions of rationality 
and selfishness. At the societal level, our societies have achieved a degree of co-
operation and division of labor among genetically unrelated individuals that is 
unprecedented in the animal kingdom (see Seabright 2004 for a recent account). 
At a lower level, the fact that people even in anonymous situations vote, take 
part in collective actions, often manage not to overuse common resources, care 
for the environment, mostly do not evade taxes on a large scale, donate to public 
radio, as well as to charities, etc. suggests that the strict self-interest hypothesis 
is inconsistent with the degree of cooperation that we observe around us.
How can we explain this? This paper presents evidence from systematic ex-
perimental investigations on how people solve cooperation problems. Labora-
tory experiments are probably the best tool for studying cooperation. The reason 
is that in the field many factors are operative at the same time. The laboratory 
allows for a degree of control that is not feasible in the field. In all the laboratory 
experiments that we will discuss below participants, depending on their deci-
sions, earned considerable amounts of money. Thus, the laboratory allows ob-
serving real economic behavior under controlled circumstances (see Friedman 
& Sunder 1994 for an introduction to methods in experimental economics and 
Kagel & Roth 1995 for an overview of important results).

280
Simon Gächter, Benedikt Herrmann
In the next section, we will introduce two prototypical cooperation games 
that have been extensively investigated in experiments: (i) the ‘Prisoner’s Di-
lemma’ (PD) and (ii) the ‘public goods experiment’. These games are simple 
and contain the essence of the cooperation problems introduced above. Many 
of them are structured such that purely selfish individuals would not cooperate 
in these games. Yet, we will show that there is substantial cooperation even in 
completely anonymous one-shot situations. This finding has been termed ‘al-
truistic cooperation’ or ‘altruistic rewarding’ (e.g. Fehr & Fischbacher 2003) be-
cause apparently some people are prepared to benefit others by cooperating. Yet, 
most of this ‘altruistic cooperation’ takes the form of ‘conditional cooperation’; 
people cooperate if others cooperate as well. ‘Altruistic rewarding’ has also been 
observed in other contexts (for surveys, see Fehr & Gächter 2000a and Camerer 
2003, chapter 2).
One of the most important insights from the laboratory experiments is that 
in the absence of extrinsic incentives like reputation, social (dis-)approval and 
punishment, cooperation is fragile. Cooperation almost inevitably breaks down 
in repeated interactions. The reason is that conditional cooperators can only 
avoid being exploited by the free riders if they stop cooperating themselves. The 
lack of targeted punishment leaves the cooperators with the only option they 
have, stopping cooperation.
In Section 15.3, we will look at reputation, communication and social ap-
proval. These important mechanisms are frequently available in reality and may 
help to sustain cooperation. Reputation mechanisms have recently gained a lot of 
attention. It turns out that reputation can have a strong cooperation-enhancing 
effect. The same holds for communication. Similarly, there is also experimental 
evidence that social approval can lead to a substantial increase in cooperation. 
Section 15.4 presents evidence that shows that many people are prepared to 
engage in altruistic cooperation but also in ‘altruistic punishment’. They do this 
even in anonymous one-shot situations in which future benefits from recipro-
cal altruism (Trivers 1971), indirect reciprocity and reputation (Alexander 1987, 
Nowak & Sigmund 1998), signaling (Zahavi & Zahavi 1997, Gintis et al. 2001) and 
kinship (Hamilton 1964) are excluded by the experimental design. This punish-
ment is altruistic, because it is costly to the individual and beneficial for some-
one else who interacts with the punished (and now well-behaved) individual in 
the future.
Section 15.5 discusses the role of emotions as a proximate mechanism that 
can explain altruistic punishment. Section 15.6 looks at evolutionary explana-
tions for the observed behavior. Section 15.7 presents a summary and some con-
cluding remarks.
15.2
Some stylized facts on cooperation
We start our discussion with a brief presentation about what is known about 
factors influencing cooperation and free riding. The most important vehicles for 

281
15 Human cooperation from an economic perspective
studying cooperation problems in controlled laboratory experiments are the PD 
and the ‘public goods experiment’.
Table 15.1 illustrates the prototype cooperation game, the famous PD (see 
Poundstone 1992 for an illuminating discussion of this game). In the game of 
Table 15.1, two players are told that they can choose simultaneously between 
‘Cooperate’ and ‘Defect’. If both choose ‘Cooperate’, both earn 80 Euros each. If 
player 1, for instance, chooses ‘Defect’, while player 2 chooses ‘Cooperate’, player 
1 earns 100 Euros, while player 2 gets nothing. If player 1 cooperates and player 2 
defects, player 1 will earn nothing and player 2 will earn 100 Euros. If both play-
ers defect, they earn 35 Euros each.
If this game is played only once, selfishness predicts no cooperation. Yet, if 
‘the shadow of the future’ is important, i.e, if players interact for an unknown 
length of time, and if people are not too impatient and therefore care for the 
future, then strategic cooperation becomes possible, because defection can be 
punished by withholding future cooperation and even more complicated pun-
ishment strategies (e.g. Fudenberg & Maskin 1986). The most famous idea is 
probably reciprocal altruism (Trivers 1971) and the related strategy of ‘tit-for-
tat’, which turned out to be a very successful strategy in an ‘evolutionary contest’ 
where strategies played against each other in a computer simulation (Axelrod & 
Hamilton 1981). Its essence is the idea that favors are reciprocated (“I’ll scratch 
your back if you’ll scratch mine”) and that unhelpful behavior is reciprocated by 
withholding future help.
Yet, the assumption that players are forced together for an unknown num-
ber of interactions may not hold (see Hammerstein 2003b for an extensive cri-
tique). In reality, people stop interacting with disliked partners and change 
social groups. Moreover, throughout (evolutionary) history, social groups were 
frequently disbanded by warfare, famine and other catastrophes (e.g. Knauft 
1991, Gintis 2000, Fehr & Henrich 2003). These arguments suggest that studying 
short-term cooperation games is worthwhile. Moreover, though highly insight-
ful, the studies by Axelrod & Hamilton (1981) are not about real behavior but are 
computer simulations. Therefore, we will turn next to some selected behavioral 
evidence on cooperation in finite PD games.
The PD game is probably one of the most extensively investigated games (see 
Rapoport & Chammah 1965, Colman 1999 and Ledyard 1995 for overviews on the 
Table 15.1. The Prisoner’s Dilemma. The amounts in each cell refer to the players’ payoff. 
In each cell, the left payoff refers to player 1’s payoff, and the right payoff to player 2’s 
payoff.
Player 2
Cooperate
Defect
Player 1
Cooperate
Defect
€80, €80
€100, €0
€0, €100
€35, €35

282
Simon Gächter, Benedikt Herrmann
experimental evidence). Fig. 15.1 illustrates the results of two studies (by Coo-
per et al. 1996 and Andreoni & Miller 1993) in each of which the subjects played 
the game 10 times under two different conditions. In one condition, called the 
‘Stranger’ condition, each player was matched with a new player in each of the 
10 periods. In the second condition, the ‘Partner’ condition, the opponent stayed 
the same throughout all repetitions of the game. The subjects were informed 
about this. Thus, under the assumption of selfishness and rationality, all play-
ers in both conditions are predicted to defect. In the ‘Stranger’ condition, this 
prediction holds because each play of the game is against a new opponent and 
hence ‘one-shot’. In the ‘Partner’ condition, the prediction holds with backward 
induction; in the last period, both players (who are assumed to be rational and 
selfish) will defect. Therefore, in the penultimate period, there is no incentive to 
cooperate, since players will surely defect in the last period. Hence, there is also 
no incentive to cooperate in the period prior to the penultimate one. Continuing 
this logic further implies that rational and selfish players will defect throughout. 
By contrast, if people are not completely sure that everyone is selfish, then it 
might pay to build up a reputation by cooperating if others cooperate until the 
final rounds, where a selfish player should defect for sure (see Kreps et al. 1982 
for a game-theoretical explanation and Selten & Stoecker 1986 for a bounded 
rationality approach).
In both studies, the results in the ‘Stranger’ condition are at odds with this 
prediction. People cooperate on average in slightly more than 20% of the cases. 
To have a common future, if only for 10 rounds increases cooperation substan-
tially. In the ‘Partner’ condition, the average cooperation rate is at least 50%. 
Thus: (i) people are prepared to cooperate even in one-shot games and (ii) the 
possibility of behaving strategically strongly increases cooperation.
Clark & Sefton (2001) studied an interesting variation of the game of Table 15.1. 
Instead of playing the game simultaneously, their subjects played the game se-
quentially, i.e. player 1 first made his or her choice, which was then observed 
Fig. 15.1. Cooperation rates in the Prisoner’s Dilemma. The figure shows the average cooperation 
rates from two studies, by Andreoni & Miller (1993) and Cooper et al. (1996), where players inter-
acted for 10 periods, either with the same opponent (‘Partner’) or a randomly-matched opponent 
(‘Stranger’). The prediction in both set-ups is a zero cooperation rate. Yet, in both set-ups, people 
cooperate, but substantially more in the ‘Partner’ than in the ‘Stranger’ set-up.

283
15 Human cooperation from an economic perspective
by player 2 before deciding whether to cooperate or to defect. The subjects also 
played the game for 10 rounds in the ‘Stranger’ set-up. Clark & Sefton (2001) find 
that between 37% and 42% of the subjects cooperate conditionally on others’ 
cooperation. Such conditional cooperation is also observed in two further treat-
ments, ‘double temptation’, where the defection payoff was doubled, and ‘double 
stakes’, in which all payoffs were doubled. A statistical analysis shows that under 
‘double temptation’, the fraction of conditional cooperation is reduced relative 
to the baseline, whereas ‘double stakes’ did not significantly affect the extent of 
conditional cooperation. Experiments on the sequential PD where the two play-
ers could also choose intermediate cooperation levels confirm the importance 
of conditional cooperation (e.g. Fehr et al. 1993, Fehr et al. 1997, Falk et al. 1999, 
Gächter & Falk 2002; see Fehr & Gächter 2000a for an overview).
These results are interesting, because the PD is such a simple and generic co-
operation game. The fact that people cooperate (conditionally) even in one-shot 
games casts doubt on the selfishness assumption. The observation that there 
are strong effects of repeated interaction suggests that straightforward eco-
nomic incentives are very helpful for successful cooperation. There can thus be 
no doubt that reciprocal altruism and the strategic gains from cooperation that 
come from repeated interactions are a powerful force in explaining real-world 
cooperation in small and stable groups. Yet, the success of reciprocal altruism 
in sustaining cooperation may be limited if groups become bigger. As has been 
shown theoretically (see Boyd & Richerson 1988), cooperation in the PD can only 
be sustained in groups larger than n > 2 if all other group members cooperated 
in the previous period. Thus, the basin of attraction for cooperation is very small 
because a few free riders can undermine cooperation. For this theoretical rea-
son, it is worthwhile to move beyond dyadic relationships.
The most commonly used game for studying n-person cooperation problems 
is the public goods game. In contrast to a private good, a public good is a good 
which can be consumed even if one has not paid for it, or not contributed to its 
provision. Clean air, environmental quality and national security, but also col-
lective reputations or team output are common examples of public goods.
An economic model of public goods provision is the public goods game. This 
game underlies many experiments that study cooperation for the provision of 
public goods. In a typical public goods experiment, four people form a group. 
All group members are endowed with 20 tokens. Each subject i has to decide in-
dependently how many tokens (between zero and 20) to contribute to a common 
project (the public good). The contributions of the whole group are summed up. 
The experimenter then multiplies the sum of contributions by 1.6 and distrib-
utes the resulting amount equally among the four group members. Thus each 
subject i’s payoff is
The first term (20 – gi) indicates the payoff from the tokens not contributed to 
the public good (the ‘private payoff’). The second term is the payoff from the 
public good. Each token contributed to the public good becomes worth 1.6 to-
πi = 20 – gi + 1.6  gj
         4 Σ
4
j=1

284
Simon Gächter, Benedikt Herrmann
kens. The resulting amount is distributed equally among the four group mem-
bers, irrespective how much an individual has contributed. Thus, an individual 
benefits from the contributions of other group members, even if he or she has 
contributed nothing to the public good. Therefore, a rational and selfish indi-
vidual has an incentive to keep all tokens for him- or herself, since the ‘return’ 
per token from the public good for him- or herself is only 0.4 (1.6/4), whereas it 
is one if he or she keeps the token. By contrast, the group as a whole is best off if 
everybody contributes all 20 tokens.
Since the public goods game is an n-person cooperation problem that is easy 
to implement and since it also reflects the tension between individual incen-
tives and collective benefits, it has been frequently used in experimental studies 
(see Ledyard 1995 for an overview). Fig. 15.2 depicts a typical finding of a public 
goods experiment, where the exact same game is repeated 10 times and subjects 
know this. In each period, subjects receive 20 tokens and decide how many of 
them to keep or contribute to the public good. After each round, subjects are 
informed about what the other group members have contributed. Fig. 15.2 shows 
the resulting cooperation patterns in a ‘Stranger’ condition, where group mem-
bers change randomly from round to round, and a ‘Partner’ condition, in which 
groups stay constant for all rounds.
Look at the ‘Strangers’ data first. Mean contributions start at about 6.5 tokens 
and decline to about two tokens in the 10 iterations of the public good game. In 
other words, by the end of the experiment, cooperation has almost entirely col-
lapsed. As in the repeated PD, we find that cooperation in the ‘Partner’ condition 
is higher from the very beginning of the experiment. Yet, by the tenth round, 
cooperation has collapsed as well.
Fig. 15.2 illustrates two stylized facts from dozens of public goods experi-
ments. First, as in the PD experiments reported above, ‘Partners’ contribute more 
than ‘Strangers’ (see Keser & van Winden 2000, and Andreoni & Croson 1998 for 
an overview). This result has also been found in other cooperation games (e.g. 
Fig. 15.2. Contributions to a public good in constant (‘Partner’) and randomly-changing groups 
(‘Strangers’) over 10 repetitions. Cooperation gains are maximized with full contributions (20 to-
kens). Selfishness predicts zero contributions. The figure shows that ‘Partners’ contribute more 
than ‘Strangers’ and that cooperation collapses in both treatments. From Fehr & Gächter (2000b).

285
15 Human cooperation from an economic perspective
Falk et al. 1999, Gächter & Falk 2002, Fehr & Fischbacher 2003). The significance 
of this and related findings is that people are immediately able to distinguish 
whether they are in a situation that requires strategic cooperation (the ‘Partner’ 
condition) or not (the ‘Stranger’ condition) and to adopt their behavior accord-
ingly.
A second stylized fact is that cooperation is very fragile and tends to collapse 
with repeated interactions. Why is this so? One explanation is that people have 
to learn how to play this game. Since errors can only go in one direction, any er-
roneous decision looks like a contribution. Over time, people learn and commit 
fewer errors, which is why contributions decline (Palfrey & Prisbrey 1997). The 
problem with this explanation is that it is inconsistent with the fact that after a 
so-called ‘restart’ (after the tenth round, participants are told that they will play 
another 10 rounds), cooperation jumps up again and basically starts at the same 
level as in the first period. If learning would explain the decay in cooperation, 
then, after the restart, cooperation should have continued at the level at which 
cooperation was in the tenth round (see Andreoni 1988). A second explanation 
is that people are heterogeneous with respect to their cooperative inclinations. 
Some people are free riders who try to maximize their monetary income, ir-
respective of other group members’ contribution. Other people are ‘conditional 
cooperators’, who cooperate if others cooperate.
To test this idea, Fischbacher et al. (2001) invented a design that allows mea-
suring the ‘type’ of a player by observing each participant’s contribution to the 
public good as a function of other group members’ contributions. Specifically, 
subjects were asked to indicate for each possible average contribution of the oth-
er group members how much they would like to contribute to the public good. 
The payoff function is the same as in the other public goods experiments; i.e., in-
centives are such that, given others’ average contribution, the monetary income 
is always highest if one contributes nothing. Thus, a free rider type will always 
contribute zero to the public good. A conditional cooperator type will increase 
his or her contribution in the average contribution of others.
Fig. 15.3 shows the results of experiments that applied the Fischbacher et al. 
(2001) design. Fig. 15.3 contains the pooled results of the experiments by Fis-
chbacher et al. (2001) and Fischbacher & Gächter (2004) who conducted their 
experiments in Switzerland with n = 44 and n = 140 subjects, respectively. The 
authors also ran experiments with n = 148 subjects in various cities in Russia.
24% percent of the Swiss subjects turned out to be free riders who contribute 
nothing for all contributions of the other group members. In our Russian subject 
pools, this frequency is markedly lower. Only 7% turned out to be free riders. 
By contrast, the fraction of conditional cooperators who cooperate if others co-
operate is strikingly similar in Russia and Switzerland. In Switzerland, 54% of 
the subjects show contributions that increase in others’ contribution, whereas in 
Russia this is true for 57%. Fig. 15.3 shows the average contribution of all condi-
tional cooperators. We find that not only the fraction of conditional cooperators, 
but also the average contribution schedules are very similar. The only differ-
ence is that our Russian subjects are prepared to contribute slightly more for a 
given contribution of the other group members than the Swiss subjects. A fur-
ther remarkable result is that the average contribution schedule of conditional 

286
Simon Gächter, Benedikt Herrmann
cooperators is ‘self-servingly biased’ because it is below the diagonal. Although 
conditional cooperators increase their contribution in the average contribution 
of the other group members, they do not fully match others’ contribution.
How can the heterogeneity of types explain the fragility of cooperation that is 
so typical of repeatedly-played cooperation experiments (see Fig. 15.2)? The idea 
is simple. Conditional cooperators are prepared to cooperate if others cooperate. 
If they realize that others are taking a free ride, they reduce their contribution 
because they do not want to be ‘suckered’. Moreover, even conditional coopera-
tors have a ‘self-serving bias’. Therefore, cooperation is bound to be fragile, even 
if most people are conditional cooperators (see Fischbacher & Gächter 2004 for 
a rigorous analysis).
Cooperation is even fragile if there is a leader who first decides on the contri-
bution to the public good (e.g. Moxnes & van der Heijden 2003, Gächter & Renner 
2004, Güth et al. 2004). This is remarkable, since one would expect that a leader 
should be able to utilize conditional cooperation by setting a good example. Yet, 
although conditional cooperation exists, free riding is there as well. Thus, the 
followers’ cooperation is insufficient for inducing leaders to keep up their good 
example. Leaders get frustrated and stop setting a good example.
Fig. 15.3. The figure shows the mean contributions of different types of players to the public good 
as a function of other group members’ average contributions. Free riders contribute nothing to the 
public good, irrespective of how much other group members contribute. In Switzerland [Russia], 
24% [7%] of the subjects were free riders. Conditional cooperators increase their contributions the 
more others contribute. The graph ‘Conditional Cooperators’ is the average contribution of all sub-
jects who report a contribution pattern that is increasing in other group members’ contribution. In 
Switzerland [Russia], 54% [57%] of the subjects were conditional cooperators. From Fischbacher et 
al. (2001), Fischbacher & Gächter (2004) and new data from various places in Russia.

287
15 Human cooperation from an economic perspective
If it is indeed the mixture of types in a randomly-composed group that makes 
cooperation a fragile business, then an implication is that groups, where players 
know that others are of their type, should behave differently than randomly-
composed groups. Specifically, conditional cooperators, who know that others 
are conditional cooperators as well, should find it easy to cooperate. To test this 
idea, Gächter & Thöni (in prep.) first had subjects play a one-shot public goods 
game. Then new groups were formed on the basis of the contribution to the pub-
lic good in the one-shot game. The top cooperators were put in one group, the 
second to top in the next group and so on. After people had been sorted into the 
new groups, they were informed about this mechanism. Then they played the 
public goods experiment as ‘Partners’ for 10 rounds. It turned out that coop-
erators who knew that they were among other ‘like-minded’ cooperators, were 
able to maintain almost full cooperation until the final rounds. Surprisingly, 
even groups composed of free riders contributed to the public good. Yet, in stark 
contrast to the cooperator groups, cooperation among free riders entirely col-
lapsed in the final period. Thus, they cooperated for purely strategic reasons 
and stopped doing so, when there was no future gain from cooperation anymore. 
The significance of this result is that the type composition and the knowledge of 
it (i.e. knowing that one is among like-minded players) matters strongly for the 
fragility of cooperation.
The experiments discussed so far looked at the most basic cooperation prob-
lem that exists in the absence of any extrinsic incentives, like reputation, so-
cial (dis-)approval and punishment. Any achieved cooperation must come from 
people’s intrinsic readiness to cooperate, be it for strategic reasons and/or co-
operative preferences. The results show that strategic incentives in a repeated 
interaction clearly help, but that cooperation is nevertheless fragile, with the 
exception of cooperators who know that they are among other like-minded co-
operators. In the following, we look at evidence of how extrinsic incentives other 
than punishment mitigate the cooperation problem.
15.3
Reputation, communication and social approval
Humans often help each other or cooperate even if this act of altruism is not like-
ly to be reciprocated. An important mechanism that may explain this kind of be-
havior in reality is reputation. One’s behavior is often observed by third parties 
who may then decide to cooperate or not. Richard Alexander (1987) has coined 
the term ‘indirect reciprocity’ for such behavior, to distinguish it from direct 
reciprocity that occurs between two people. The idea is that helping someone, or 
refusing to help, changes ones social status, called ‘image score’. People with a 
high image score are more likely to receive help from others: “Give and you shall 
receive”. Game-theoretic analyses show that indirect reciprocity can be an evo-
lutionary stable strategy (Nowak & Sigmund 1998). Seinen & Schram (in prep.), 
Engelmann & Fischbacher (2002) and Milinski and colleagues (see chapter 14) 
confirmed this experimentally; players with high image scores received more 
help than those with low image scores. Thus, indirect reciprocity is a mechanism 

288
Simon Gächter, Benedikt Herrmann
that can sustain cooperation even in situations in which direct reciprocity is not 
feasible. Milinski et al. (2002b also showed that a good reputation helps a player 
also in other social activities that involve the same partners (see Milinski, chap-
ter 14 and Panchanathan & Boyd 2004 for a theoretical model).
In addition to the straightforward economic incentives conferred by reputa-
tion, people in reality also sometimes have the chance to communicate about 
their cooperation problem. To the extent that such communication does not lead 
to binding agreements, but is merely ‘cheap talk’, it might not necessarily help 
to solve the cooperation problem. A free rider might well promise to cooperate 
but then go on and defect, if his or her cooperation cannot be enforced. There-
fore, theoretically, it is not at all clear why communication should reduce free 
riding. However, casual evidence and intuition suggest that communication has 
an impact. Thus, there are competing hypotheses and the lab may be the judge. 
Dawes et al. (1977) and Isaac & Walker (1988) were among the first to study the 
role of communication in cooperation. In the public goods experiments of Isaac 
& Walker (1988), group members could talk between the 10 rounds of the game. 
In a control treatment, communication was not possible. In this latter treatment, 
again, cooperation collapsed during repeat play. When face-to-face communica-
tion was possible, cooperation was substantially higher relative to the control 
treatment. Almost full efficiency, even in the final rounds, was achieved. Bochet 
et al. (in prep.) found that even anonymous ‘chat-room’ communication can lead 
to very high cooperation rates. Thus, communication can be a very powerful 
device for sustaining cooperation (see also Brosig et al. 2003 and Sally 1995 for 
an overview).
Yet, it is not entirely clear why exactly communication works. If many people 
are conditional cooperators, communication may help coordinating on a certain 
cooperation level. However, communication, in particular if it is face to face, is 
also a highly loaded psychological process that creates social ties and dissemi-
nates social (dis-)approval. People might fear the disapproval of others or might 
want to win their approval.
Rege & Telle (2004) developed a very simple one-shot experiment to test 
for social approval effects. In the control experiment, subjects simply made an 
anonymous contribution decision. In the main treatment, a subject’s decision 
was publicly but silently recorded on a blackboard. All other participants could 
see the decision. From a standard economic viewpoint, this treatment manipu-
lation should be ineffective. However, contributions were substantially higher 
when they could be observed than when they were anonymous.
Gächter & Fehr (1999) also tested the influence of social approval on coop-
eration. In their experiments, groups of four played the game for 10 repetitions 
as ‘partners’. There were four treatments. In the benchmark ‘Anonymity treat-
ment’, contributions and group members were anonymous throughout. In the 
‘Social Exchange treatment’, group members were informed that they would get 
to know each other at the end and that then they would also learn each other’s in-
dividual contributions during the game. In the ‘Group Identity treatment’, group 
members were introduced to each other before they played the game. Thus, a 
group identity could be formed. At the end of the experiment, they left the build-
ing individually such that they could not meet each other. Subjects were aware of 

289
15 Human cooperation from an economic perspective
this. In the ‘Group Identity & Social Exchange treatment’, group members met 
before they played and where informed about the post-experimental meeting. 
In all four treatments, during the experiment subjects could not talk to each 
other. Between each round, they were only informed about the group average 
contribution. How can these treatments influence cooperation? Social exchange 
theory (e.g. Blau 1964) argues that people might exchange cooperation for so-
cial approval. Therefore, if people anticipate social approval effects, cooperation 
might be higher than under anonymity. Likewise, as suggested by psychological 
theory and previous evidence, group identity might increase cooperation (see 
for example Dawes et al. 1988). Fig. 15.4 shows the results.
The results show that, contrary to the hypotheses, neither group identity, 
nor social exchange alone, were able to increase cooperation. Only if both group 
identity and social exchange were possible did cooperation increase substan-
tially relative to the anonymity benchmark. This result is consistent with the 
findings of Rege & Telle (2004). Yet, Rege & Telle (2004) only played their game 
once. The results from Fig. 15.4 show that social exchange, even if it increases 
cooperation, is not able to break the downward trend in cooperation. Coopera-
tion is still very fragile, albeit at a higher level.
In summary, under appropriate circumstances, there is no doubt that re-
ciprocal altruism, indirect reciprocity and reputation, and communication as 
well as social approval can enhance cooperation. A reason for observing higher 
cooperation when social approval is possible might be that the threat of disap-
proval of known group members induces higher cooperation rates. Thus, dis-
approval works like punishment. In fact, the group discussions at the end of 
the social exchange treatments often revealed quite some anger and frustration 
Fig. 15.4. The influence of group identity and social exchange on cooperation. The figure shows 
the mean contributions of ‘Partners’ to the public good. ‘Group Identity’ means that group mem-
bers know each other’s identity before they play; ‘Social Exchange’ means that subjects meet after 
the experiment to discuss what they did. In the ‘Anonymity treatment’, people neither meet before 
nor after the game. The figure shows that in this experiment only a combination of ‘Group Identity’ 
and ‘Social Exchange’ possibilities increases contributions. Cooperation is fragile in all treatments. 
From Gächter & Fehr (1999).

290
Simon Gächter, Benedikt Herrmann
towards the free riders. Since during the experiment ‘social disapproval’ could 
not be targeted at a free rider, it might not have been enough of a deterrent. In the 
next section, we therefore look at targeted punishment as a means to enhance 
cooperation.
15.4
Altruistic punishment and cooperation
Casual evidence as well as the observation reported above suggests that many 
people are in principle prepared to cooperate but want to avoid being the ‘sucker’ 
in social dilemma situations. Recall from Fig. 15.3 that roughly half of our sub-
ject pools are conditional cooperators who cooperate if others cooperate. If these 
people encounter a free rider in a typical anonymous standard public goods ex-
periment, the only way to avoid being the ‘sucker’ is to withhold one’s own co-
operation. Since people typically strongly dislike being the ‘sucker’, they may be 
prepared to punish free riders if they could target them individually and even if 
it were costly for the punisher.
Yamagishi (1986) and Ostrom et al. (1992) were among the first to allow for 
punishment in interesting games. Yamagishi (1986) looked at people’s willing-
ness to provide a sanctioning system that itself is a public good. Ostrom et al. 
(1992) studied punishment in a common pool extraction system. Yet, these stud-
ies were not primarily interested in how people punish free riders. This was the 
focus of Fehr & Gächter (2000b) who developed an experimental design that al-
lowed studying punishment in a public goods game. Specifically, after subjects 
had made their contributions to the public good, they entered a second stage, 
where they were informed about each individual group member’s contribution. 
They could then assign up to 10 punishment points to each individual group 
Fig. 15.5. Mean contributions to the public good in the presence of a punishment opportunity. 
The figure shows that contributions are substantially higher among ‘Partners’ than among ‘Strang-
ers’. A comparison with Fig. 15.2 shows that contributions to the public good are much higher and 
more stable when punishment is possible. From Fehr & Gächter (2000b).

291
15 Human cooperation from an economic perspective
member. Punishment was costly for the punishing subject and each punishment 
point received reduced the punished subject’s income from the first stage by 
10%. Fehr & Gächter (2000b) played this experiment under two treatment con-
ditions, a ‘Partner’-treatment, where group members knew that they would play 
the game with the same four group members for 10 periods, and the ‘Stranger’-
treatment, where group composition was changed from period to period. Fehr 
& Gächter (2000b) also ran control experiments in which punishment was not 
possible (see Fig. 15.2). Fig. 15.5 shows the results in the treatments with punish-
ment.
As the comparison with Fig. 15.2 shows, contributions to the public good are 
strongly increased in the presence of a punishment opportunity. This is true 
for both the ‘Partner’- and the ‘Stranger’-treatment. In the case of the ‘Part-
ner’-treatment, contributions approach almost 100% of the endowment; in the 
‘Stranger’-treatment contributions amount to 60% of the endowment. Thus, 
again we see that ‘Partners’ contribute more than ‘Strangers’. From the very first 
period onward, contributions are significantly higher in the ‘Partner’-treatment 
than in the ‘Stranger’-treatment.
A theoretically very important question concerns the relevance of future in-
teractions. In the ‘Partner’-treatment, the likelihood of future interaction is one; 
in the ‘Stranger’-treatment, where groups are randomly re-matched, it is much 
smaller (depending on the size of the pool from which groups are re-matched), 
but still positive. An interesting benchmark case is the situation where the likeli-
hood of future interaction is zero, i.e. groups play a one-shot game. This situa-
tion is interesting, because neither reciprocal altruism and indirect reciprocity, 
nor any other form of reputation building is possible, since they require some 
future interactions. Therefore, Fehr & Gächter (2002) set up a so-called ‘Perfect 
Stranger’ design where in each of the six repetitions all groups were composed 
of completely new members, and participants knew this. Subjects played both 
games with no punishment and games with punishment. Half of the subjects 
started with the no-punishment condition and then were introduced to the pun-
ishment condition. For the other half, this order was reversed. Fig. 15.6 contains 
the results on the cooperation rates achieved.
The results are very clear-cut. When punishment is not available, coopera-
tion collapses, as in all previous experiments. The picture changes dramatically, 
when punishment is possible. For instance, in the experiments that started with 
the punishment option (labeled ‘1. punishment, 2. no punishment’), contribu-
tions in the very first period were significantly higher than in the experiment 
that started with the no punishment option. In the experiments where punish-
ment was introduced in the second sequence, cooperation jumped up immedi-
ately. This is remarkable, because in this sequence subjects experienced a strong 
decline in the games with no punishment. Still, after punishment had been in-
troduced, cooperation jumped up to a level that even exceeded cooperation in 
the very first period. In both sequences, cooperation in the presence of a punish-
ment opportunity strongly increased over time. Thus, contrary to theoretical 
predictions, in the presence of punishment, cooperation can flourish even in 
purely one-shot interactions.

292
Simon Gächter, Benedikt Herrmann
The reason why cooperation strongly increased in the presence of punish-
ment is that cooperators were prepared to punish the free riders. Fig. 15.7 shows 
(separately for the ‘Partner’-, the ‘Stranger’- and the ‘Perfect Stranger’-experi-
ments in Zurich) the punishment expenditures for a given deviation from the 
other group members’ average contributions. Fig. 15.7 also shows the punish-
ment in a ‘Partner’-experiment conducted in Samara (Russia). We will discuss 
this experiment below.
A couple of observations can be made from Fig. 15.7. First, the more a sub-
ject’s contribution falls short of the average contribution of the other group 
members, the stronger is the punishment for the deviating group member. This 
is true in all treatments. Second, with the exception of very strong negative de-
viations (which comprise only a few cases, however) punishment is very similar 
between treatments. This is quite remarkable because cooperation levels dif-
fer strongly between the ‘Partner’, ‘Stranger’ and ‘Perfect Stranger’ treatments 
(compare Figs. 15.2, 15.5 and 15.6). In our view, this suggests that punishment 
is to a very large degree non-strategic. This view is also corroborated by the fact 
that the punishment pattern of Fig. 15.7 is temporally stable; i.e., some people 
are prepared to harm a free rider even in the final periods.
Why is punishment so successful in increasing cooperation? The most im-
portant reason is probably that it gives the selfish subjects, who care most about 
their individual payoff, a material incentive to cooperate. Since altruistic pun-
ishment is frequent, it apparently is a credible threat and induces selfish indi-
viduals to cooperate. It is exactly this feature that makes punishment altruistic; 
Fig. 15.6. Mean contributions to the public good among ‘Perfect Strangers’ in the absence and 
presence of a punishment option. In the sequence labeled “’1. no punishment, 2. punishment’, 
subjects first played six rounds without the punishment option and were then introduced to an 
environment where they had a punishment option available in each of the following six rounds. 
In the sequence ‘1. punishment, 2. no punishment’, subjects started in the game with punishment 
and were after the sixth round informed that there would be no punishment option in the next six 
rounds. The results show that contributions increase in the presence of punishment and decrease 
in its absence. From Fehr & Gächter (2002).

293
15 Human cooperation from an economic perspective
a punished free rider might in his next encounter abstain from defecting, which 
benefits his or her future interaction partners.
By now, these results have been replicated by many researchers (see for ex-
ample, Bowles et al. 2001, Sefton et al. 2002, Gächter et al. 2003, Masclet et al. 
2003, Carpenter 2004, Carpenter et al. 2004, Falk et al. 2004, Gürerk et al. 2004, 
Anderson & Putterman, in prep., Bochet et al., in prep., Page et al. in prep., Car-
penter in prep., Noussair & Tucker, in prep.). For lack of space, they cannot all 
be discussed here. We focus on three issues: (i) the perception of punishment, 
(ii) the demand for punishment, and (iii) cross-societal differences in norms of 
cooperation and punishment.
▬ The perception of punishment. A punishment may contain two messages. On 
the one hand, punishment directly inflicts a payoff reduction. On the other 
hand, punishment may also signal disapproval; i.e., it sends a message about 
socially inappropriate behavior. Both may be perceived as punishment and 
may therefore increase cooperation. Masclet et al. (2003) tested this intuition 
and studied ‘formal and informal’ sanctions. The structure of both formal 
and informal sanctions was the same as in Fehr & Gächter (2000b). Yet, while 
the formal sanctions were costly both for the punisher and the punished sub-
jects, the informal sanctions were free; they neither caused costs for the pun-
isher, nor the punished individual. Thus, they are tantamount to a symbolic 
disapproval. Consistent with the evidence on social approval effects reported 
above, it turned out that even informal sanctions were able to increase con-
tributions. Yet, cooperation was more stable with formal than with informal 
punishment. In the experiments of Noussair & Tucker (in prep.), subjects 
Fig. 15.7. Mean expenditures on punishment as a function of the deviation of the punished group 
member’s cooperation from the average cooperation of the other members. The data are from 
experiments with ‘Partners’ and (‘Perfect’) ‘Strangers’ in Zurich and Samara. Each money unit spent 
on punishment reduced the income of the punished member by three money units. For example, 
group members spent 10 money units on punishing individuals whose contribution to the public 
good deviated between –20 and –14 units from the group average contribution. The data show 
that the more people free ride, the more altruistic punishment prevails. There is also some punish-
ment of above-average contributors, in particular in the Samara subject pool. From Fehr & Gächter 
(2000b, 2002), Gächter et al. (2003).

294
Simon Gächter, Benedikt Herrmann
could use both formal and informal sanctions. It turned out that their com-
bination led to higher contributions than either formal or informal sanctions 
alone.
▬ The demand for punishment. One of the most fundamental concepts in eco-
nomics that underlies much of economic theory is the ‘Law of Demand’, ac-
cording to which people will demand less of a certain commodity or activity 
the higher its price. Thus, from an economic viewpoint, an important ques-
tion is whether this ‘Law of Demand’ also holds for punishment. Fig. 15.7 
and all papers that have studied punishment in the context of a coopera-
tion game confirm that many people do have a ‘demand for punishment’, in 
the sense that they are willing to pay a certain amount of money to inflict 
punishment on others (i.e. they ‘buy’ punishment). The more a subject free 
rides, the higher is the demand for punishment. Yet, studying the ‘Law of 
Demand’ requires a systematic variation of the cost of punishment. This is 
what Anderson & Putterman (in prep.) and Carpenter (2004) did. Their sub-
jects played the cooperation and punishment game in the ‘Stranger’ set-up 
to minimize strategic effects. In each of the games, subjects faced different 
costs for inflicting a punishment unit on the punished subject. The results 
confirm that people demand less punishment, for a given amount of free rid-
ing, the higher the costs of punishing are. Thus, the ‘Law of Demand’ holds 
for punishment.
▬ Cross-societal differences. Cross-societal differences in norms of fair shar-
ing have recently attracted a lot of attention (e.g. Henrich et al. 2001, Ooster-
beek et al. 2004). It is therefore an interesting question to what extent there 
are differences in cooperation and punishment norms. To examine this ques-
tion, Gächter et al. (2003) ran experiments in Russia, where they exactly rep-
licated the Zurich ‘Partner’-experiments. Fig. 15.7 also contains the punish-
ment pattern for the Samara subjects. We find that the punishment of free 
riders is very similar to that in Zurich. Yet, above-average contributors in 
Samara experienced substantially more punishment than their counterparts 
in Zurich. Fig. 15.8 looks at the consequences of such punishment for coop-
eration behavior.
A comparison with the ‘Partner’-experiments in Fig. 15.5 yields a striking dif-
ference, in particular when a punishment option is available. In the exact same 
experiment, the Zurich subjects were able to achieve almost full cooperation. 
By contrast, the presence of a punishment option is only able to prevent the col-
lapse of cooperation. The average cooperation the Samara subjects achieve is 
only 68% of the level the Zurich subjects manage to maintain. Another stark 
difference is that in the Zurich experiments the presence of a punishment option 
strongly increased cooperation relative to cooperation in the absence of punish-
ment (compare Figs. 15.2 and 15.5). This is not at all the case in Samara. Here, 
cooperation is not statistically significantly higher when subjects have a punish-
ment option available. A potential explanation lies in the punishment behavior. 
As was shown in Fig. 15.7, the Samara subjects often substantially punished the 
above-average cooperators. This probably scared them off and thereby prevent-
ed the average cooperation level from increasing.

295
15 Human cooperation from an economic perspective
In our view, the significance of this result is that different social groups may 
have widely differing social norms of cooperation, and in particular of punish-
ment. This preliminary result suggests that it is worthwhile to understand logic 
and scope of cross-societal differences in norms of cooperation and punish-
ment.
15.5
Emotions as a proximate mechanism
Given punishment, subjects’ cooperation behavior looks quite rational. To avoid 
punishment, subjects cooperate in accordance with the group norm. Yet, why do 
people punish free riders in a one-shot context although this is costly? Emotions 
may play a decisive role here (Fessler & Haley 2003) and negative emotions, in 
particular, may provide a proximate explanation. Free riding may cause strong 
negative emotions among the cooperators and these emotions, in turn, may trig-
ger the willingness to punish the free riders. If this conjecture is correct, we 
should observe particular emotional patterns in response to free riding. To elicit 
these patterns, the participants of the Fehr & Gächter (2002) experiments and 
the subjects in the Samara experiments were confronted with the following two 
hypothetical scenarios after the final period of the second treatment. The num-
bers in square brackets relate to the second scenario.
“You decide to invest 16 [5] francs to the project. The second group member 
invests 14 [3] and the third 18 [7] francs. Suppose the fourth member invests 2 
[20] francs to the project. You now accidentally meet this member. Please indi-
cate your feeling towards this person.”
After they had read a scenario, subjects had to indicate the intensity of their 
anger and annoyance towards the fourth person (the free rider) on a seven-point 
Fig. 15.8. The figure shows the mean contributions to the public goods in the absence and pres-
ence of punishment in a 10 times repeated ‘Partner’ experiment in Samara (Russia). In stark contrast 
to the results from Figs. 15.5 and 15.6, contributions are not significantly higher when punishment 
is possible. From Gächter et al. (2003).

296
Simon Gächter, Benedikt Herrmann
scale (1 = ‘very angry’, 4 = ‘neither angry nor happy’, 7 = ‘very happy’). The dif-
ference between Scenario 1 and 2 is that the other three persons in the group con-
tribute relatively much in Scenario 1 and relatively little in Scenario 2. Fig. 15.9 
documents the results for our experiments in Zurich and Samara.
Subjects report that they are angry if the fourth group member contributes 
less than they did. This effect is certainly more pronounced in the scenario 
where they contributed 16 than in the scenario where they contributed 5. The 
difference is highly significant, both in the Zurich and the Samara sample (p < 
0.001, Mann-Whitney tests). When the fourth group member contributes more 
than the pivotal subject, then people report to be quite happy. Surprisingly, sub-
jects are equally happy about the contribution of 20 of the fourth member both 
when they have contributed 5 or 16 tokens. In other words, the gain in happiness 
seems not to depend on the own contribution, whereas the intensity of the nega-
tive emotions strongly depends on the own contribution.
When we compare the Zurich subjects with the Samara subjects, we find 
qualitatively very similar results. Yet, a striking difference is that the Samara 
subjects reported significantly less intensive negative emotions towards the free 
rider (for an own contribution of 16) than the Zurich subjects. Likewise, for the 
Samarians, the reported positive emotions were also highly significantly less in-
tense than for the Zurich subjects (p < 0.0001, Mann-Whitney tests). Thus, there 
seem to be strong cross-societal differences in the reported emotions.
Overall, the results suggest that free riding causes negative emotions. More-
over, the emotional pattern is consistent with the hypothesis that emotions trig-
14-16(own)-18
3-5(own)-7
Fig. 15.9. Emotions as a proximate mechanism. The data are elicited in scenarios that describe 
own and others’ contributions and then elicit one’s own emotion toward a contribution of a ‘fourth 
group member’. For instance, in Zurich, subjects who in the scenario contributed 16 tokens (where-
as two others contributed 14 and 18 tokens, respectively) expressed an emotion score of 2.6 toward 
the fourth group member who only contributed 2 tokens. The emotion score is 5.9 if the fourth 
member contributes 20 tokens. The results show that people experience negative emotions toward 
a free rider more strongly the higher their own contribution level. The Samara subjects expressed 
less intensive emotions both toward the free rider and the high contributor. From Fehr & Gächter 
(2002; n = 240) and new results (n = 220).

297
15 Human cooperation from an economic perspective
ger punishment. First, the majority of punishments are executed by above-aver-
age contributors and imposed on below-average contributors. Second, recall that 
punishment increases with the deviation of the free rider from the other mem-
bers’ average contribution. This is consistent with the observation that negative 
emotions are the more intense the more the free rider deviates from the others’ 
average contribution. Third, evidence from neuroscientific experiments sup-
ports the interpretation that emotions trigger punishment. For instance, San-
fey et al. (2003) had their subjects play the ultimatum game, while the subjects’ 
brains were scanned (using fMRI). The ultimatum game (invented by Güth et 
al. 1982) is a two-player game in which player 1 is asked to split an amount of 
money, say 10 Euros, between him- or herself and a player 2. Player 2 can only 
accept or reject the proposal. If he accepts, the offer is implemented; if he rejects, 
both get nothing. A rejection of a positive offer in the ultimatum game is also 
an instance of altruistic punishment. The brain scans showed that in the recipi-
ents who received an unfairly low offer by a human player 1, areas in the brain 
lit up that are related to negative emotions. When the unfair offer came from a 
computerized player 1, recipients were much less negatively aroused. Bosman & 
van Winden (2002) investigated the ‘power-to-take game’, which is related to the 
ultimatum game. They elicited self-reported emotions and found that unfair be-
havior triggers negative emotions that are correlated with punishment. de Quer-
vain et al. (2004) studied neural activations of punishing subjects. They found 
that punishment activates the ‘reward centre’ of the brain; i.e., to punish is re-
warding. Hence, the proverb “revenge is sweet”. They were also able to show that 
subjects, for whom punishment was more rewarding, actually punished more. 
Taken together, these regularities are consistent with the view that emotions are 
an important factor in the process triggering altruistic punishment. Yet, more 
research is certainly needed here. The emerging field of neuroeconomics (see 
Camerer et al., in prep.) will certainly play an important role in this endeavor.
15.6
The evolution of strong reciprocity
The evidence presented above shows that many people, but not all, behave re-
ciprocally. They reward nice behavior and punish misdeeds. Since this takes 
place even in one-shot games, this kind of reciprocity has been termed ’strong 
reciprocity’ (e.g. Gintis 2000), to distinguish it from reciprocal altruism that oc-
curs in repeated games. Reciprocal altruism is strategic reciprocity that can also 
be exhibited by a completely selfish individual, who would never cooperate or 
punish in a one-shot context. In economics, the kind of evidence presented in 
this chapter helped to pave the way for replacing the once ubiquitous selfishness 
assumption with more realistic assumptions about human’s social preferences. 
A recent and very fruitful development in economic theory has been to take up 
the experimental evidence and model it. For instance, Fehr & Schmidt (1999) 
and Bolton & Ockenfels (2000) assume that people have a dislike for inequality. 
A free rider puts himself into a payoff advantage and inequality-averse people 
punish to reduce this inequality. Rabin (1993), Falk & Fischbacher (in prep.) and 

298
Simon Gächter, Benedikt Herrmann
Dufwenberg & Kirchsteiger (2004) assume that many people punish unkind in-
tentions (to free ride reveals a greedy intention) and that they reward kind be-
havior (i.e. they cooperate to reward others’ cooperation). Falk et al. (2004) show 
that intentions indeed play an important role in punishment since people also 
punish when they cannot diminish payoff inequities through punishment.
These new models, whose power extends beyond cooperation games, can be 
seen as proximate theories, but what explains the existence of strong reciprocity? 
Specifically, if sufficiently many people punish free riders sufficiently strongly, 
then free riders have no incentive to free ride anymore. Yet, why should anyone 
punish and not free ride on other’s punishment, since altruistic punishment is 
just a second-order public good? The answer will probably be found in the evo-
lutionary conditions of the human species that caused a propensity for strongly 
reciprocal behavior among a significant fraction of the population. The evidence 
presented suggests that strong reciprocity cannot easily be explained by kin se-
lection (Hamilton 1964), reciprocal altruism (Trivers 1971, Axelrod & Hamil-
ton 1981), indirect reciprocity (Alexander 1987, Nowak & Sigmund 1998) and by 
costly signaling theory (Zahavi & Zahavi 1997, Gintis et al. 2001).
In our view, one promising approach is ‘gene-culture co-evolution’ (Gintis 
2000, Henrich & Boyd 2001, Bowles et al. 2003, Boyd et al. 2003, Gintis et al. 
2003, Boyd & Richerson 2004). One line of reasoning (e.g. Boyd et al. 2003) goes 
as follows. Assume that in a population there are two behavioral types, coop-
erators and defectors. The cooperators incur a cost c to produce a benefit b that 
accrues to all group members. Defection is costless and produces no benefit. 
If the fraction of cooperators is x, then the expected payoff for cooperators is 
bx – c, whereas defectors get bx. Thus, the payoff difference is c, independent 
of the number of cooperators. Cooperators would always be at an evolutionary 
disadvantage under such circumstances. Now assume that there is a fraction y of 
‘punishers’ who cooperate and punish defectors. Punishment reduces the payoff 
of the punished defector (by p) but also of the punishing subject (by k). The pay-
off of cooperators who cooperate but do not punish (‘second-order free riders’) 
is b(x + y) – c; the punished defectors get b(x + y) – py, and the punishers earn 
b(x + y) – c – k(1 – x – y). If the cost of punishments exceed the costs of coopera-
tion (i.e. if py > c), then cooperators have a higher fitness than defectors and the 
fitness disadvantage of punishers relative to the second-order free riders is k(1 
– x – y). Thus, punishment is altruistic and the cooperation and punishment 
game can have multiple equilibria.
This line of reasoning reveals two things. First, there is an important asym-
metry between altruistic cooperation and punishment. In an environment with-
out punishment, cooperators are always worse off than defectors, irrespective 
of how numerous they are. Second, by contrast to the first observation, the cost 
disadvantage of altruistic punishment declines as defection becomes infrequent 
because punishment is not needed anymore. The selection pressure against al-
truistic punishers is weak in this situation.
This latter observation suggests that within-group forces, like copying suc-
cessful and frequent behavior (see Henrich & Boyd 2001) can stabilize coopera-
tion. Boyd et al. (2003) formally investigate another mechanism, cultural group 
selection. Recall that in the presence of strong reciprocators the cooperation 

299
15 Human cooperation from an economic perspective
game may have multiple equilibria, equilibria which imply cooperation, and 
defection equilibria. Different groups may settle at different equilibria. Here, 
cultural group selection may come into play. The main idea is that groups with 
more cooperators are more likely to win inter-group conflicts and are less likely 
to become extinct, because they may better survive during famine, manage their 
common resources better etc. (see also Soltis et al. 1995). Therefore, this kind of 
group selection will tend to increase cooperation because groups who arrived 
at a cooperative equilibrium are more likely to survive. Moreover, cooperative 
groups will tend to have more punishers. Since the within-group selection ef-
fect is weak if there is a lot of cooperation, cultural group selection can support 
the evolution of altruistic punishment and maintain it, once it is common. To 
test this intuition rigorously, Boyd et al. (2003) developed a simple model and 
simulated it for important parameters, like group size, migration rates between 
groups and the cost of being punished. The parameters were chosen to mimic 
likely evolutionary conditions. The simulation results are very interesting be-
cause they show that cultural group selection can support altruistic punishment 
under a wide range of parameters. First, in the absence of punishment, group 
selection can only sustain cooperation in very small groups, whereas in the pres-
ence of punishment, high and stable cooperation rates can be achieved even in 
large groups. Second, higher migration rates between groups decrease coopera-
tion rates. If the cost of being punished is small, then cooperation breaks down. 
This result is also consistent with the experimental evidence (see Anderson & 
Putterman, in prep. and Carpenter 2004). The significance of this and related 
models is to show that individual selection and cultural factors, like conform-
ism and group selection may coexist (and not be incompatible as in purely gene-
based models) and can explain why strong reciprocity may survive. Of course, 
further models that highlight the links between individual and cultural group 
selection should and will arise.
We conclude this section with a short discussion of frequent critiques that 
are leveled at evolutionary explanations of strong reciprocity (see Johnson et 
al. 2003, Fehr & Gächter 2003 and Fehr & Henrich 2003). One critique concerns 
group selection. According to the critics, strong reciprocity is merely a byprod-
uct of reciprocal altruism, indirect reciprocity, or signaling. The skepticism 
against group selection arguments is probably founded in the view that genetic 
group selection is an implausible mechanism (see also Sober & Wilson 1998). 
Yet, as the above account of the Boyd et al. (2003) model should make clear, 
cultural group selection models work completely differently from genetic group 
selection models.
The second line of critique is that strong reciprocity is a ‘mal-adaptation’ (see 
e.g. Johnson et al. 2003). According to this argument, humans evolved in small 
and mostly stable groups and thereby acquired the psychology needed for sus-
taining cooperation. Thus, the human brain applies ancient cooperative heuris-
tics even in modern environments, where they are mal-adaptive. Humans did not 
evolve to play one-shot games and therefore, when they are in a novel environ-
ment like a one-shot game in the experimental lab, they behave as if they were in 
a repeated game. In our view, this argument is problematic for two reasons. First, 
it is obvious that people did not evolve to play one-shot lab experiments and the 

300
Simon Gächter, Benedikt Herrmann
strong reciprocity observed there does not represent adaptive behavior. Yet, lab 
experiments allow us to test to what extent people distinguish between one-shot 
and repeated games and to what extent they think strategically. As demonstrated 
repeatedly above (compare Figs. 15.1, 15.2 and 15.5, and the references therein), 
people cooperate substantially more with ‘Partners’ than with ‘Strangers’. Peo-
ple also report stronger negative emotions when they are cheated by a ‘Partner’ 
than by a ‘Stranger’ (Fehr & Henrich 2003). Moreover, there is also systematic 
evidence that people respond strongly to increased costs of punishment; they 
punish less and therefore cooperate less (Fehr et al. 1997, Anderson & Putter-
man, in prep., Carpenter 2004). Second, research by anthropologists shows that 
group dispersal, migration and thereby the possibility of meeting strangers was 
quite common (see Fehr & Henrich 2003, in particular p. 69-76). Thus, vigilant 
individuals who are able to distinguish whether they deal with a ‘Partner’ or a 
‘Stranger’ should have a fitness advantage.
Irrespective of one’s take in this debate, one should notice that the phenom-
enon of strongly reciprocal behavior sheds new light on important economic 
issues (see Fehr & Gächter 2000a, Fehr et al. 2002 and Fehr & Fischbacher 2002). 
Even if strong reciprocity is a mal-adaptation, it is an important element in ex-
plaining patterns of human behavior.
15.7
Summary and conclusions
Humans have achieved a level of cooperation in large groups of genetically un-
related individuals that is outstanding in the animal kingdom. Understanding 
why this is so is a challenge for all social and behavioral sciences. A theoretically 
important question in all behavioral sciences is to establish to what extent the 
observed behavior can be explained by selfishness alone. People might cooper-
ate for various (selfish) reasons. They might cooperate strategically to secure 
long-term benefits, to gain a favorable reputation in other social activities, to 
avoid social disapproval and punishment and to gain a high social status and 
approval. In reality, these motives are in most cases inextricably intertwined. In 
this paper, we have demonstrated that the experimental laboratory allows the 
researcher to separate motivations. The most important findings from experi-
mental research are as follows:
▬ People cooperate even in one-shot PDs and public goods experiments.
▬ Relative to one-shot encounters, cooperation is strongly increased in stable 
groups.
▬ In the absence of communication and/or punishment, cooperation in ran-
domly-composed groups is very fragile. Even stable groups cannot maintain 
cooperation.
▬ There seem to be two main types of players: (i) selfish free riders, who in 
one-shot experiments do not contribute to the public good but may cooperate 
strategically in repeated games and (ii) conditional cooperators who coop-
erate if others cooperate. In randomly-composed groups, the interaction of 
these two types of players explains why cooperation is fragile. The exception 

301
15 Human cooperation from an economic perspective
to this rule is groups that are composed of like-minded cooperators, who 
know that the other group members share their cooperative attitude.
▬ Communication, possibilities for exchanging social (dis-)approval and repu-
tation building substantially enhance cooperation. Yet, cooperation may still 
be fragile.
▬ Many people are prepared to punish free riders if they have the possibility to 
do so. Such punishment is often ‘altruistic’ because it can be observed even in 
one-shot games where the punishing subject does not benefit from induced 
cooperation. Altruistic punishment can substantially increase and stabilize 
cooperation.
▬ Negative emotions toward free riders may be a proximate mechanism that 
can explain altruistic punishment.
From a theoretical point of view, the most important observation is the existence 
of ‘strong reciprocity’, the fact that people are prepared to cooperate and to pun-
ish free riders even in anonymous one-shot encounters where there are no future 
interactions. While the existence of strong reciprocity can be considered an un-
disputed fact, evolutionary explanations are still open to debate.
Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge financial support by the Grundlagenforschungs-
fonds of the University of St. Gallen through the research project “Soziale In-
teraktionen, Unternehmenskultur und Anreizgestaltung”. We also thank Peter 
Kappeler, Carel van Schaik, and the participants of the Freilandtage in Göttin-
gen 2003 for their very helpful comments.

 
References
Achenbach GG, Snowdon CT (1998) Response to sibling birth in juvenile cotton-top tamarins (Sa-
guinus oedipus). Behaviour 135:845−862
Achenbach GG, Snowdon CT (2002) Costs of caregiving: weight loss in captive adult male cotton-
top tamarins (Saguinus oedipus) following the birth of infants. Int J Primatol 23:179−190
Adolphs R (1999) Social cognition and the human brain. Trends Cogn Sci 3:469−479
Adolphs R (2003) Cognitive neuroscience of human social behaviour. Nat Rev Neurosci 4:165−178
Agrawal AA (2001) Nectar, nodules and cheaters. Trends Ecol Evol 16:123−124
Agrawal AA, Fordyce JA (2000) Induced indirect defence in a lycaenid-ant association: the regula-
tion of a resource in a mutualism. Proc R Soc Lond B 267:1857−1861
Aharon I, Etcoff N, Ariely D, Chabris CF, O’Connor E, Breiter HC (2001) Beautiful faces have variable 
reward value: fMRI and behavioral evidence. Neuron 32:537−551
Alberts SC, Watts H, Altmann J (2003) Queuing and queue jumping: long- term patterns of repro-
ductive skew in male savannah baboons, Papio cynocephalus. Anim Behav 65:821−840
Albon SD, Mitchell B, Staines BW (1983) Fertility and body weight in female red deer: a density de-
pendent relationship. J Anim Ecol 52:969−980
Alexander RD (1974) The evolution of social behavior. Ann Rev Ecol Syst 5:325−383
Alexander RD (1979) Darwinism and Human Affairs. Univ of Washington Press, Seattle
Alexander RD (1987) The Biology of Moral Systems. De Gruyter, New York
Allee WC (1938) The Social Life of Animals. Henry Schuman, New York
Allee WC (1951) Cooperation among Animals. Henry Schuman, New York
Altmann SA (1962) A field study of the sociobiology of the rhesus monkey, Macaca mulatta. Ann NY 
Acad Sci 102:338−435
Allman JM, Hakeem A, Erwin JM, Nimchinsky E, Hof P (2001) The anterior cingulate cortex: the evolu-
tion of an interface between cognition and emotion. Ann NY Acad Sci 935:107−117
Altmann JM, Alberts SC (2003) Variability in reproductive success viewed from a life-history per-
spective in baboons. Am J Hum Biol 15:401−409
Anderson J (1984) Ethology and ecology of sleep in monkeys and apes. Adv Stud Behav14:165−229 
Anderson CM, Putterman L (2005) Do non-strategic sanctions obey the law of demand? Games 
Econ Behav, in press
Andreoni J (1988) Why free ride? Strategies and learning in public goods experiments. J Publ Econ 
37:291−304 
Andreoni J, Croson R (1998) Partners versus strangers: random rematching in public goods experi-
ments. In: Plott C, Smith V (eds) Handbook of Experimental Economic Results. Elsevier Press, 
Amsterdam
Andreoni J, Miller J (1993) Rational cooperation in the finitely repeated prisoner’s dilemma: experi-
mental evidence. Econ J 103:570−585
Anzenberger G, Mendoza SP, Mason WA (1986) Comparative studies of social behavior of Callicebus 
and Saimiri: behavioral and physiological responses of established pairs to unfamiliar pairs. Am 
J Primatol 11:37−51
Arana FS, Parkinson JA, Hinton E, Holland AJ, Owen AM, Roberts AC (2003) Dissociable contribu-
tions of the human amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex to incentive motivation and goal selec-
tion. J Neurosci 23:9632−9638
Armitage KB (1981) Sociality as a life history tactic of ground squirrels. Oecol 48:36−49 

304
References
Armitage KB (1999) Evolution of sociality in ground squirrels. J Mammal 80:1−10 
Arnold K, Aureli F (2005) Postconflict reconciliation. In: Campbell CJ, MacKinnon KC, Panger M, 
Fuentes A, Bearder S (eds) Primates in Perspective. Univ of Chicago Press, Chicago
Arnold K, Whiten A (2001) Post-conflict behaviour of wild chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes schwein-
furthii) in the Budongo forest, Uganda. Behav 138:649−690
Ashlock D, Smucker MD, Stanley EA, Tesfatsion L (1996) Preferential partner selection in an evolu-
tionary study of prisoner’s dilemma. Biosystems 37:99−125
Aureli F (1992) Post-conflict behaviour among wild long-tailed macaques (Macaca fascicularis). Be-
hav Ecol Sociobiol 31:329−337
Aureli F (1997) Post-conflict anxiety in nonhuman primates: the mediating role of emotion in con-
flict resolution. Aggr Behav 23:315−328
Aureli F, de Waal FBM (2000) Natural Conflict Resolution. Univ of California Press, Berkeley
Aureli F, Schaffner CM (2002) Relationship assessment through emotional mediation. Behaviour 
139:309−420
Aureli F, Smucny DA (2000) The role of emotion in conflict and conflict resolution. In: Aureli F, de 
Waal FBM (eds) Natural Conflict Resolution. Univ of California Press, Berkeley, pp 199−224
Aureli F, van Schaik CP (1991) Post-conflict behaviour in long-tailed macaques (Macaca fascicularis). 
II. Coping with the uncertainty. Ethology 89:101−114
Aureli F, Whiten A (2003) Emotions - The mediation of behavioral flexibility. In: Maestripieri D (ed) 
Primate Psychology - The Mind and Behavior of Human and Nonhuman Primates. Harvard Univ 
Press, Cambridge/MA, pp 289−323 
Aureli F, van Schaik CP, van Hooff JARAM (1989) Functional aspects of reconciliation among captive 
long-tailed macaques (Macaca fascicularis). Am J Primatol 19:39−51
Aureli F, Cozzolino R, Cordischi C, Scucchi S (1992) Kin-oriented redirection among Japanese ma-
caques: an expression of a revenge system? Anim Behav 44:283−291
Aureli F, Das M, Veenema HC (1997) Differential kinship effect on reconciliation in three species of 
macaques (Macaca fascicularis, M. fuscata and M. sylvanus). J Comp Psychol 111:91−99
Aureli F, Preston SD, de Waal FBM (1999) Heart rate responses to social interactionsin free-moving 
rhesus monkeys: a pilot study. J Comp Psychol 113:59−65
Aureli F, Cords M, van Schaik CP (2002) Conflict resolution following aggression in gregarious ani-
mals: a predictive framework. Anim Behav 64:325−343
Axelrod R (1984) The Evolution of Cooperation. Basic Books, New York 
Axelrod R, Hamilton W (1981) The evolution of cooperation. Science 211:1390−1396
Axén AH (2000) Variation in behavior of lycaenid larvae when attended by different ant species. 
Evol Ecol 14:611−625
Azzam AM (1999) Asymmetry, rigidity in farm retail price transmission. Am J Agric Econ 
81:525−534
Bahuchet S (1985) Les Pygmés Aka et la Forêt Centrafricaine. Selaf, Paris
Baker AJ (1991) Evolution of the social system of the golden lion tamarin. PhD thesis, Univ of Mary-
land, College Park/MD
Baker AJ, Bales K, Dietz JM (2002) Mating system and group dynamics in golden lion tamarins (Le-
ontopithecus rosalia). In: Kleiman DG, Rylands AB (eds) The Lion Tamarins of Brazil. Smithsonian 
Institution Press, Washington/DC, pp 188−212
Balshine-Earn S, Neat FC, Reid H, Taborsky M (1998) Paying to stay or paying to breed? Field evidence 
for direct benefits of helping behavior in a cooperatively breeding fish. Behav Ecol 9:432−438
Barclay P (2004) Trustworthiness and competitive altruism can also solve the “tragedy of the com-
mons”. Evol Hum Behav 25:209−220 
Barnett SA (1965) Adaptation of mice to cold. Biol Rev 40:5−51
Barrett L, Henzi SP (2001) The utility of grooming in baboon troops. In: Noë R, van Hooff JARAM, 
Hammerstein P (eds) Economics in Nature − Social Dilemmas, Mate Choice and Biological Mar-
kets. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 119−145
Barrett L, Henzi SP (2002) Constraints on relationship formation among female primates. Behaviour 
139:263−289
Barrett L, Henzi SP, Weingrill T, Lycett JE, Hill RA (1999) Market forces predict grooming reciprocity in 
female baboons. Proc R Soc Lond B 266:665−670

305
References
Barrett L, Henzi SP, Weingrill T, Lycett JE, Hill RA (2000) Female baboons do not raise the stakes but 
they give as good as they get. Anim Behav 59:763−770
Barrett L, Dunbar RIM, Lycett J (2002a) Human Evolutionary Psychology. Palgrave, Houndsmills
Barrett L, Gaynor D, Henzi SP (2002b) A dynamic interaction between aggression and grooming 
reciprocity among female chacma baboons. Anim Behav 63:1047−1053
Barrett L, Henzi SP, Dunbar RIM (2003) Primate cognition: from “what now?” to “what if?” Trends 
Cog Sci 11:494−197
Barton RA (1985) Grooming site preferences in primates and their functional implications. Int J Pri-
matol 6:519−532
Barton RA, Byrne RW, Whiten A (1996) Ecology, feeding competition and social structure in ba-
boons. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 38:321−329
Basolo AL (1990) Female preference predates the evolution of the sword in swordtail fish. Science 
250:808−810
Batali J, Kitcher P (1995) Evolution of altruism in optional and compulsory games. J theor Biol 
175:161−171
Becker GS (1973) A theory of marriage. Part I. J Polit Econ 81:813−846
Bednekoff PA (1997) Mutualism among safe, selfish sentinels: a dynamic game. Am Nat 
150:373−392
Bélisle P, Chapais B (2001) Tolerated co-feeding in relation to degree of kinship in Japanese ma-
caques. Behaviour 138:487−509
Bell G (1986) The evolution of empty flowers. J theor Biol 118:253−258
Bennett NC, Jarvis JUM, Faulkes CG, Millar RP (1993) LH responses to single doses of exogenous GnRH 
by freshly captured Damaraland mole-rats, Crypotmys damerensis. J Reprod Fertil 99:81−86
Bennett NC, Jarvis JUM, Millar R, Sasano H, Ntshinga KV (1994) Reproductive suppression in eu-
social Cryptomys damarensis colonies − socially-induced infertility in females. J Zool Lond 
233:617−630
Beran MJ, Beran MM (2004) Chimpanzees remember the results of one-by-one addition of food 
items to a set over extended time periods. Psychol Sci 15:94−99 
Bercovitch FB (1988) Coalitions, cooperation and reproductive tactics among adult male baboons. 
Anim Behav 36:1198−1209
Bergmüller R, Taborsky M (2004) Experimental manipulation of helping in a cooperative breeder: 
helpers “pay to stay” by pre-emptive appeasement. Anim Behav 69:19−28
Berkes F, Feeny D, McCay BJ, Acheson JM (1989) The benefits of the commons. Nature 340:91−93 
Berman CM (1983a) Matriline differences and infant development. In: Hinde RA (ed) Primate Social 
Relationships: An Integrated Approach. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland/MA, pp 132−134
Berman CM (1983b) Early differences in relationships between infants and other group members 
based on the mother’s status: their possible relationship to peer-peer rank acquisition. In: 
Hinde RA (ed) Primate Social Relationships: An Integrated Approach. Sinauer Associates, Sun-
derland/MA, pp 154−156
Berman CM (1983c) Influence of close female relations on peer-peer rank acquisition. In: Hinde RA 
(ed) Primate Social Relationships: An Integrated Approach. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland/
MA, pp 157−159
Berman CM (2004) Developmental aspects of kin bias in behavior. In: Chapais B, Berman C (eds) Kin-
ship and Behavior in Primates. Oxford Univ Press, New York, pp 317−346
Bernstein IS (1991) The correlation between kinship and behaviour in non-human primates. In: Hep-
per PG (ed) Kin Recognition. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 6−29
Berridge KC (1996) Food reward: brain substrates of wanting and liking. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
20:1−25
Berridge KC (2003) Comparing the emotional brains of humans and other animals. In: Davidson RJ, 
Scherer KR, Goldsmith HH (eds) Handbook of Affective Sciences. Oxford Univ Press, pp 25−51
Berry RJ (1971) Life and death in an island population of the house mouse. Exp Geront 6:187−197
Berry RJ (1981a) Biology of the House Mouse. Academic Press, London
Berry RJ (1981b) Town mouse, country mouse: adaptation and adaptability in Mus domesticus (M. 
musculus domesticus). Mammal Rev 11:91−136

306
References
Bertram BCR (1978) Living in groups: predators and prey. In: Krebs JR, Davies NB (eds) Behavioural 
Ecology: An Evolutionary Approach. Blackwell, Oxford, pp 64−96
Bertram BCR (1992) The Ostrich Communal Nesting System. Princeton Univ Press, Princeton/NJ
Bettinger T, Walis J, Goodall J (1993) Male-male chimpanzee interactions from the alpha male’s per-
pective. Am J Primatol 30:298−299
Bird RR, Smith EA, Bird DW (2001) The hunting handicap: costly signaling in human foraging strate-
gies. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 50:9−19 
Blarer A, Keasar T, Shmida A (2002) Possible mechanisms for the formation of flower size preferences 
by foraging bumblebees. Ethology 108:341−351
Blau P (1964) Exchange and Power in Social Life. Transaction Publishers, New Brunswick
Blouin M (2003) DNA-based methods for pedigree reconstruction and kinship analysis in natural 
populations. Trends Ecol Evol 18:503−511
Blount S (1995) When social outcomes aren’t fair: the effect of causal attributions on preferences. 
Org Behav Hum Dec Proc 63:131−144 
Blumstein DT, Armitage KB (1999) Cooperative breeding in marmots. Oikos 84:369−382
Blurton-Jones NG (1984) A selfish origin of human food sharing: tolerated theft. Ethol Sociobiol 
5:1−3
Blurton-Jones NG (1987) Tolerated theft, suggestions about the ecology and evolution of sharing, 
hoarding, and scrounging. Soc Sci Info 26:31−54
Boccia ML, Reite M, Laudenslager M (1989) On the physiology of grooming in a pigtail macaque. 
Physiol Behav 45:667−670
Bocher M, Chisin R, Parag Y, Freedman N, Weil YM, Lester H, Mishani E, Bonne O (2001) Cerebral acti-
vation associated with sexual arousal in response to a pornographic clip: a 15O-H2O PET study 
in heterosexual men. NeuroImage 14:105−117
Bochet O, Page T, Putterman L (2005) Communication and punishment in voluntary contribution 
experiments. J Econ Behav Org, in press
Boesch C (1994) Cooperative hunting in wild chimpanzees. Anim Behav 48:653−667
Boesch C, Boesch H (1984) Mental map in wild chimpanzees: an analysis of hammer transports for 
nut cracking. Primates 25:160−170
Boesch C, Boesch H (1989) Hunting behavior of wild chimpanzees in the Tai National Park. Am J Phy 
Anthropol 78:547−573
Boesch C, Boesch-Achermann H (2000) The Chimpanzees of the Taï Forest: Behavioural Ecology and 
Evolution. Oxford Univ Press, Oxford
Boinski S (1987) Mating patterns in squirrel monkeys (Saimiri oerstedi): implications for seasonal 
sexual dimorphism. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 21:13−21
Boinski S (1994) Affiliation patterns among male Costa Rican squirrel monkeys. Behaviour 
130:191−209
Bolton G, Ockenfels A (2000) A theory of equity, reciprocity and competition. Am Econ Rev 
100:166−193
Bolton GE, Katok E, Ockenfels A (2001) What´s in a reputation? Indirect reciprocity in an image scor-
ing game. Working paper, Smeal College of Business Administration, Penn State University
Boyd R, Richerson PJ (1992) Punishment allows the evolution of cooperation (or anything else) in 
sizable groups. Ethol Sociobiol 13:171−195 
Boness DJ (1990) Fostering behavior in Hawaiian monk seals: is there a reproductive cost? Behav 
Ecol Sociobiol 27:113−140
Bonnie KE, de Waal FBM (2004) Primate social reciprocity and the origin of gratitude. In: Emmons 
RA, McCullough ME (eds) The Psychology of Gratitude. Oxford Univ Press, Oxford, pp 213−229
Borgerhoff Mulder M (2004) Are men and women really so different? Trends Ecol Evol 19:3−6
Boroditsky L (2000) Metaphoric structuring: understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cog-
nition 75:1−28
Borries C (1993) Ecology of female social relationships: Hanuman langurs (Presbytis entellus) and the 
van Schaik model. Fol Primatol 61:21−30 
Borries C, Sommer V, Srivastava A (1991) Dominance, age, and reproductive success in free-ranging 
female Hanuman langurs. Int J Primatol 12:231−257

307
References
Borries C, Sommer V, Srivastava A (1994) Weaving a tight social net: allogrooming in free-ranging 
female langurs (Presbytis entellus). Int J Primatol 15:421−443
Borries C, Launhardt K, Epplen C, Epplen JT, Winkler P (1999) Males as infant protectors in Hanuman 
langurs (Presbytis entellus) living in multimale groups − defence pattern, paternity and sexual 
behaviour. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 46:350−356
Bos R van den (1998) Post-conflict stress response in confined group-living cats (Felis silvestris catus). 
Appl Anim Behav Sci 59:323−330
Bosman R, van Winden F (2002) Emotional hazard in a power-to-take experiment. Econ J 
112:147−169
Botvinick M, Nystrom LE, Fissell K, Carter CS, Cohen JD (1999) Conflict monitoring versus selection-
for-action in ACC. Nature 402:179−181
Bowles S, Gintis H (2003) Origins of human cooperation. In: Hammerstein P (ed) Genetic and Cul-
tural Evolution of Cooperation. MIT Press, Cambridge/MA, pp 429−443
Bowles S, Hammerstein P (2003) Does market theory apply to biology? In: Hammerstein P (ed) Ge-
netic and Cultural Evolution of Cooperation. MIT Press, Cambridge/MA, pp 153−165
Bowles S, Carpenter J, Gintis H (2001) Mutual Monitoring in Teams: Theory and Evidence on the Im-
portance of Residual Claimancy and Reciprocity. Mimeo, Univ of Massachusetts, Amherst
Bowles S, Fehr E, Gintis H (2003) Strong reciprocity may evolve with and without group selection. 
Theoret Primatol Proj Newslett 1, December issue
Boyce CCK, Boyce JLI (1988) Population biology of Microtus arvalis. I. Lifetime reproductive success 
of solitary and grouped breeding females. J Anim Ecol 57:711−722
Boyd R (1982) Density dependent mortality and the evolution of social behavior. Anim Behav 
30:972−982
Boyd R (1992) The evolution of reciprocity when conditions vary. In: Harcourt AH, de Waal FBM (eds) 
Coalitions and Alliances in Humans and other Animals. Oxford Univ Press, Oxford, pp 493−510
Boyd R, Richerson PJ (1985) Culture and the Evolutionary Process. Univ of Chicago Press, Chicago
Boyd R, Richerson PJ (1988) The evolution of reciprocity in sizable groups. J theor Biol 132:337−356
Boyd R, Richerson PJ (1992) Punishment allows the evolution of cooperation (or anything else) in 
sizable groups. Ethol Sociobiol 13:171−195
Boyd R, Richerson PJ (2002) Group beneficial norms can spread rapidly in a structured population. 
J theor Biol 215:287−296
Boyd R, Richerson PJ (2004) Not by Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed Human Evolution. Univ 
of Chicago Press, Chicago
Boyd R, Gintis H, Bowles S, Richerson PJ (2003) Evolution of altruistic punishment. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA 100:3531−3535
Bradley BJ (1999) Levels of selection, altruism, and primate behavior. Q Rev Biol 74:171−194
Bradley BJ, Doran-Sheehy DM, Lukas D, Boesch C, Vigilant L (2004) Dispersed male networks in 
Western gorillas. Curr Biol 14:510−513
Brandt H, Sigmund K (2004) The logic of reprobation: assessment and action rules for indirect reci-
procity. J theor Biol 231:475−486
Bronson FH (1979) The reproductive ecology of the house mouse. Q Rev Biol 54:265−299
Bronson FH (1989) Mammalian Reproductive Biology. Univ of Chicago Press, Chicago
Bronstein JL (1998) The contribution of ant plant-protection studies to our understanding of mutu-
alism. Biotropica 30:150−161
Bronstein JL (2001) The exploitation of mutualisms. Ecol Lett 4:277−287
Brosig J, Ockenfels A, Weimann J (2003) The effect of communication media on cooperation. Germ 
Econ Rev 4:217−241
Brosnan SF (in prep) A sense of fairness in animals
Brosnan SF, de Waal FBM (2002) A proximate perspective on reciprocal altruism. Hum Nat 
13:129−152
Brosnan SF, de Waal FBM (2003) Monkeys reject unequal pay. Nature 425:297−299
Brosnan SF, de Waal FBM (2004a) Social learning about value in capuchin monkeys, Cebus apella. J 
Comp Psychol, 118:133−139
Brosnan SF, de Waal FBM (2004b) A concept of value during experimental exchange in brown capu-
chin monkeys, Cebus apella. Fol Primatol, in press

308
References
Brosnan SF, de Waal FBM (2004c) Fair refusal by capuchin monkeys. Nature 428:140
Brosnan SF, Schiff HC, de Waal FBM (2004) Tolerance for inequity may increase with social closeness 
in chimpanzees. Proc R Soc Lond B 272:253−258
Brotherton PNM, Clutton-Brock TH, O’Riain MJ, Gaynor D, Sharpe L, Kansky R, McIlrath GM (2001) 
Offspring food allocation by parents and helpers in a cooperative mammal. Behav Ecol 
12:590−599
Brown JL (1983) Cooperation: a biologist’s dilemma. Adv Stud Behav 13:1−37
Brown JL (1987) Helping and Communal Breeding in Birds. Princeton Univ Press, Princeton/NJ
Brown JL, Brown ER, Brown SD, Dow DD (1982) Helpers: effects of experimental removal on repro-
ductive success. Science 215:421−422
Bshary R (2001) The cleaner fish market. In: Noë R, van Hooff JARAM, Hammerstein P (eds) Eco-
nomics in Nature. Social Dilemmas, Mate Choice and Biological Markets. Cambridge Univ Press, 
Cambridge, pp 146−172
Bshary R (2002) Biting cleaner fish use altruism to deceive image-scoring client fish. Proc R Soc Lond 
B 269:2087−2093 
Bshary R, Bronstein JL (2005) Game structures in mutualistic interactions: what can the evidence tell 
us about the kind of models we need? Adv Stud Behav, in press
Bshary R, Grutter AS (2002a) Asymmetric cheating opportunities and partner control in a cleaner 
fish mutualism. Anim Behav 63:547−555
Bshary R, Grutter AS (2002b) Experimental evidence that partner choice is a driving force in the pay-
off distribution among cooperators or mutualists: the cleaner fish case. Ecol Lett 51:130−136
Bshary R, Noë R (2003) Biological markets: the ubiquitous influence of partner choice on the dy-
namics of cleaner fish-client reef fish interactions. In: Hammerstein P (ed) Genetic and Cultural 
Evolution of Cooperation. MIT Press, Cambridge/MA, pp 167−184
Bshary R, Würth M (2001) Cleaner fish Labroides dimidiatus manipulate client reef fish providing 
tactile stimulation. Proc R Soc Lond B 268:1495−1501
Buchan JC, Alberts SC, Silk JB, Altmann J (2003) True paternal care in a multi-male primate society. 
Nature 425:179−181
Bulger JB (1993) Dominance rank and access to estrous females in male savanna baboons. Behav-
iour 127:67−103
Bunte F, Peerlings J (2003) Asymmetric price transmission due to market power in the case of supply 
shocks. Agribusiness 19:19−28
Burnham TC (2002) Ultimatum games. In: Nadel L (ed) The Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science. Na-
ture Publishing Group, London, pp 238−245
Burnham TC, Johnson D (2005) The biological and evolutionary logic of human cooperation. Anal 
Kritik 27, in press
Burt A, Trivers R (2005) Genes in Conflict: The Biology of Selfish Genetic Elements. Harvard Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge/MA
Bush G, Luu P, Posner MI (2000) Cognitive and emotional influences in anterior cingulate cortex. 
Trends Cogn Sci 4:215−222
Busse C (1977) Chimpanzee predation as a possible factor in the evolution of red colobus monkey 
social organization. Evolution 31:907−911
Busse C (1978) Do chimpanzees hunt cooperatively? Am Nat 112:767−770
Buston PM, Emlen ST (2003) Cognitive processes underlying human mate choice: the relation-
ship between self-perception and mate preference in Western society. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
100:8805−8810
Butovskaya M, Verbeek P, Ljungberg T, Lunardini A (2000) A multicultural view of peacemaking 
among young children. In: Aureli F, de Waal FBM (eds) Natural Conflict Resolution. Univ of Cali-
fornia Press, Berkeley, pp 243−258
Butynski T (1990) Comparative ecology of blue monkeys (Cercopithecus mitis) in high- and low-den-
sity subpopulations. Ecol Monogr 60:1−26
Bygott D (1979) Agonistic behavior and dominance among wild chimpanzees. In: Hamburg D, Mc-
Cown L (eds) The Great Apes. Benjamin-Cummings, Menlo Park, pp 405−427
Byrne RW, Whiten A (1988) Machiavellian Intelligence: Social Expertise and the Evolution of Intellect 
in Monkeys, Apes, and Humans. Clarendon Press, Oxford

309
References
Byrne RW, Whiten A, Henzi SP (1989) Social relationships of mountain baboons: leadership and af-
filiation in a nonfemale-bonded monkey. Am J Primatol 18:191−207
Caine NG (1993) Flexibility and co-operation as unifying themes in Saguinus social organization and 
behavior: the role of predation pressures. In: Rylands AB (ed) Marmosets and Tamarins: System-
atic, Behavior, and Ecology. Oxford Univ Press, Oxford, pp 200−219
Caine NG, Potter MP, Mayer KE (1992) Sleeping site selection by captive tamarins (Saguinus labiatus). 
Ethology 90:63−71
Call J (2001) Chimpanzee social cognition. Trends Cogn Sci 5:388−393
Calow P (1979) The cost of reproduction − a physiological approach. Biol Rev 54:23−40
Camerer CF (2003) Behavioral Game Theory: Experiments in Strategic Interaction. Princeton Univ 
Press, Princeton/NJ
Camerer CF, Loewenstein G, Prelec D (2005) Neuroeconomics: how neuroscience can inform eco-
nomics. J Econ Lit, in press
Caraco T, Brown JL (1986) A game between communal breeders: when is food-sharing stable? J 
theor Biol 118:379−393
Carlson AA, Young AJ, Russell AF, Bennett NC, McNeilly A, Clutton-Brock TH (2004) Hormonal cor-
relates of dominance in meerkats (Suricata suricatta). Horm Behav 46:141−150
Carpenter J (2004) The Demand for Punishment. Mimeo, Middlebury College
Carpenter J (2005) Punishing free-riders: how group size affects mutual monitoring and the provi-
sion of public goods. Games Econ Behav, in press
Carpenter J, Matthews HP, Ong’ong’a O (2004) Why punish? Social reciprocity and the enforcement 
of prosocial norms. J Evol Econ 14:407−430
Carter CS (1998) Neuroendocrine perspectives on social attachment and love. Psychoneuroendo-
crinology 23:779−818
Carter CS, Braver TS, Barch DM, Botvinick MM, Noll D, Cohen JD (1998) ACC, error detection and on-
line monitoring of performance. Science 280:747−749
Caro TM (1994) Cheetahs of the Serengeti plains: group living in an asocial species. Univ of Chicago 
Press, Chicago
Castles DL, Whiten A (1998) Post-conflict behaviour of wild olive baboons. II. Stress and self-direct-
ed behaviour. Ethology 104:148−160
Castles DL, Aureli F, de Waal FBM (1996) Variation in conciliatory tendency and relationship quality 
across groups of pigtail macaques. Anim Behav 52:389−403
Chalmeau R, Visalberghi E, Gallo A (1997) Capuchin monkeys (Cebus apella) fail to understand a 
cooperative task. Anim Behav 54:1215−1225
Chapais B (1983) Dominance, relatedness, and the structure of female relationships in rhesus mon-
keys. In: Hinde RA (ed) Primate Social Relationships: An Integrated Approach. Sinauer Associ-
ates, Sunderland/MA, pp 209−219
Chapais B (1986) Why do adult male and female rhesus monkeys affiliate during the birth season? In: 
Rawlins RG, Kessler MJ (eds) The Cayo Santiago Macaques: History, Behavior and Biology. State 
Univ of New York Press, Albany/NY, pp 173−200
Chapais B (1992) The role of alliances in social inheritance of rank among female primates. In: Har-
court AH, de Waal FBM (eds) Coalitions and Alliances in Humans and other Animals. Oxford 
Science Publications, Oxford, pp 29−59
Chapais B (1995) Alliances as a means of competition in primates: evolutionary, developmental, and 
cognitive aspects. Ybk Phys Anthropol 38:115−136
Chapais B (2001) Primate nepotism: what is the explanatory value of kin selection? Int J Primatol 
22:203−229
Chapais B (2005) How kinship generates dominance structures: a comparative perspective. In: Thi-
erry B, Singh M, Kaumanns W (eds) How Societies Arise: The Macaque Model. Cambridge Univ 
Press, Cambridge, in press
Chapais B, Bélisle P (2004) Constraints on kin selection in primate groups. In: Chapais B, Berman C 
(eds) Kinship and Behavior in Primates. Oxford Univ Press, New York, pp 365−386
Chapais B, Berman C (2003) Kinship and Behavior in Primates. Oxford Univ Press, New York
Chapais B, Berman C (2004) The kinship black box. In: Chapais B, Berman C (eds) Kinship and Behav-
ior in Primates. Oxford Univ Press, New York, pp 3−11

310
References
Chapais B, Mignault C (1991) Homosexual incest avoidance among females in captive Japanese ma-
caques. Am J Primatol 23:171−183
Chapais B, Schulman S (1980) An evolutionary model of female dominance relationships in pri-
mates. J theoret Biol 82:47−89
Chapais B, Girard M, Primi G (1991) Non-kin alliances and the stability of matrilineal dominance rela-
tions in Japanese macaques. Anim Behav 41:481−491
Chapais B, Prud’homme J, Teijeiro S (1994) Dominance competition among siblings in Japanese 
macaques: constraints on nepotism. Anim Behav 48:1335−1347
Chapais B, Gauthier C, Prud’homme J, Vasey P (1997) Relatedness threshold for nepotism in Japa-
nese macaques. Anim Behav 53:1089−1101
Chapais B, Savard L, Gauthier C (2001) Kin selection and the distribution of altruism in relation to 
degree of kinship in Japanese macaques. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 49:493−502
Chase VM, Hertwig R, Gigerenzer G (1998) Visions of rationality. Trends Cogn Sci 2:206−214
Cheeseman LL, Mallinson PJ, Ryan J, Wilesmith JW (1993) Recolonisation by badgers in Gloucester-
shire. In: Hayden TJ (ed) The Badger. Royal Irish Academy, Dublin, pp 78−93
Cheney DL (1977) The acquisition of rank and the development of reciprocal alliances among free-
ranging immature baboons. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 2:303−318
Cheney DL (1983a) Extrafamilial alliances among vervet monkeys. In: Hinde RA (ed) Primate Social 
Relationships: An Integrated Approach. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland/MA, pp 278−286
Cheney DL (1983b) Proximate and ultimate factors related to the distribution of male migration. 
In: Hinde RA (ed) Primate Social Relationships: An Integrated Approach. Sinauer Associates, 
Sunderland/MA, pp 241−249
Cheney DL, Seyfarth RM (1983) Non-random dispersal in free-ranging vervet monkeys: social and 
genetic consequences. Am Nat 122:392−412
Cheney DL, Seyfarth RM (1997) Reconciliatory grunts by dominant female baboons influence vic-
tims’ behaviour. Anim Behav 54:409−418
Cheney DL, Seyfarth RM, Smuts BB (1986) Social relationships and social cognition in non-human 
primates. Science 234:1361−1366
Cheney DL, Seyfarth RM, Andelman SJ, Lee PC (1988) Reproductive success in vervet monkeys. In: 
Clutton-Brock TH (ed) Reproductive Success. Univ of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 384−402
Cheney DL, Seyfarth RM, Silk JB (1995) The role of grunts in reconciling opponents and facilitating 
interactions among adult female baboons. Anim Behav 50:249−257
Cheney DL, Seyfarth RM, Fischer J, Beehner J, Berman T, Johnson SE, Kitchen DM, Palombit RA, Silk 
JB (2004) Factors affecting reproduction and mortality among baboons in the Okavango Delta, 
Botswana. Int J Primatol 25:401−428
Chism J (2000) Allocare patterns among cercopithecines. Fol Primatol 71:55−66
Clark AB (1978) Sex ratio and local resource competition in a prosimian primate. Science 
201:163−165
Clark MS, Grote NK (2003) Close relationships. In: Millon T, Lerner MJ (eds) Handbook of Psychology: 
Personality and Social Psychology. John Wiley & Sons, New York, pp 447−461
Clark MS, Mills J (1979) Interpersonal attraction in exchange and communal relationships. J Pers Soc 
Psychol 37:12−24
Clark K, Sefton M (2001) The sequential prisoner’s dilemma: evidence on reciprocation. Econ J 
111:51−68
Clements KC, Stephens DW (1995) Testing models of non-kin cooperation: mutualism and the pris-
oner’s dilemma. Anim Behav 50:527−535
Cleveland J, Snowdon CT (1984) Social development during the first twenty weeks in the cotton-
top tamarin (Saguinus o. oedipus). Anim Behav 32:432−444
Clutton-Brock TH (1989a) Female transfer and inbreeding avoidance in social mammals. Nature 
337:70−72
Clutton-Brock TH (1989b) Mammalian mating systems. Proc R Soc Lond B 236:339−372
Clutton-Brock TH (1991) The Evolution of Parental Care. Monographs in Behavior and Ecology. 
Princeton Univ Press, Princeton/NJ
Clutton-Brock TH (1998a) Reproductive skew, concessions and limited control. Trends Ecol Evol 
13:288−292

311
References
Clutton-Brock TH (1998b) Reproductive skew: disentangling concessions from control. A reply to 
Emlen and Reeve. Trends Ecol Evol 13:459
Clutton-Brock TH (2002) Breeding together: kin selection and mutualism in cooperative verte-
brates. Science 296:69−72
Clutton-Brock TH, Parker GA (1995) Punishment in animal societies. Nature 373:209−216
Clutton-Brock TH, Brotherton PNM, Smith R, McIlrath G, Kansky R, Gaynor D, O’Riain MJ, Skinner 
JD (1998a) Infanticide and expulsion of females in a cooperative mammal. Proc R Soc Lond B 
265:2291−2295
Clutton-Brock TH, Gaynor D, Kansky R, MacColl ADC, McIlrath G, Chadwick P, Brotherton PNM, 
O’Riain JM, Manser M, Skinner JD (1998b) Costs of cooperative behaviour in suricates, Suricata 
suricatta. Proc R Soc Lond B 265:185−190
Clutton-Brock TH, MacColl ADC, Chadwick P, Gaynor D, Kansky R, Skinner JD (1999a) Reproduction 
and survival of suricates (Suricata suricatta) in the southern Kalahari. Afr J Ecol 37:69−80
Clutton-Brock TH, O’Riain MJ, Brotherton PNM, Gaynor D, Kansky R, Griffin AS, Manser M (1999b) 
Selfish sentinels in cooperative mammals. Science 284:1640−1644
Clutton-Brock TH, Gaynor D, McIlrath GM, MacColl ADC, Kansky R, Chadwick P, Manser M, Skinner 
JD, Brotherton PNM (1999c) Predation, group size and mortality in a cooperative mongoose, 
Suricata suricatta. J Anim Ecol 68:672−683
Clutton-Brock TH, Brotherton PNM, O’Riain MJ, Griffin AS, Gaynor D, Sharpe L, Kansky R, Manser M, 
McIlrath GM (2000) Individual contributions to babysitting in a cooperative mongoose, Suricata 
suricatta. Proc R Soc Lond B 267:301−305
Clutton-Brock TH, Russell AF, Sharpe L, Brotherton PNM, McIlrath GM, White S, Cameron EZ (2001a) 
Effects of helpers on juvenile development and survival in meerkats. Science 293:2446−2449
Clutton-Brock TH, Brotherton PNM, O’Riain MJ, Griffin AS, Gaynor D, Kansky R, Sharpe L, McIlrath 
GM (2001b) Contributions to cooperative rearing in meerkats. Anim Behav 61:705−710
Clutton-Brock TH, Brotherton PNM, Russell AF, O’Riain MJ, Gaynor D, Kansky R, Griffin A, Manser M, 
Sharpe L, McIlrath GM, Small T, Moss A, Monfort S (2001c) Cooperation, control and concession 
in meerkat groups. Science 291:478−481
Clutton-Brock TH, Russell AF, Sharpe LL, Young AJ, Balmforth Z, McIlrath GM (2002) Evolution and 
development of sex differences in cooperative behavior in meerkats. Science 297:253−256
Clutton-Brock TH, Russell AF, Sharpe LL (2003) Meerkat helpers do not specialize in particular activi-
ties. Anim Behav 66:531−540
Clutton-Brock TH, Russell AF, Sharpe LL (2004) Behavioural tactics of breeders in cooperative meer-
kats. Anim Behav 68:1029−1140
Cockburn A (1998) Evolution of helping behaviour in cooperatively breeding birds. Ann Rev Ecol 
System 29:141−177
Cole E (2004) Bone to Pick: Of Forgiveness, Reconciliation, Reparation and Revenge. Atria Books, 
New York
Colman AM (1999) Game Theory and its Applications in the Social and Biological Sciences. Rout-
ledge, London, New York
Colman AM (2003a) Cooperation, psychological game theory, and limitations of rationality in social 
interaction. Behav Brain Sci 26:139−198
Colman AM (2003b) Depth of strategic reasoning in games. Trends Cogn Sci 7:2−4
Colvin J (1983) Description of sibling and peer relationships among immature male rhesus mon-
keys. In: Hinde RA (ed) Primate Social Relationships: An Integrated Approach. Sinauer Associ-
ates, Sunderland/MA, pp 20−27
Combes S, Altmann J (2001) Status change during adulthood: life-history by-product or kin selec-
tion based on reproductive value? Proc R Soc Lond B 268:1367−1373
Connor RC (1986) Pseudo-reciprocity: investing in mutualism. Anim Behav 34:1562−1584
Connor RC (1995) Impala allogrooming and the parcelling model of reciprocity. Anim Behav 
49:528−530
Constable JL, Ashley MV, Goodall, Pusey A (2001) Noninvasive paternity assignment in Gombe 
chimpanzees. Mol Ecol 10:1279−1300
Cook JM, Rasplus J-Y (2003) Mutualists with attitude: coevolving fig wasps and figs. Trends Ecol Evol 
18:241−248

312
References
Cooney R, Bennett N (2000) Inbreeding avoidance and reproductive skew in a cooperative mam-
mal. Proc R Soc Lond B 267:801−806
Cooper MA, Bernstein IS, Hemelrijk CK (2005) Reconciliation and relationship quality in Assamese 
macaques (Macaca assameusis). Am J Primatol 65:269−282
Cooper SM (1991) Optimal hunting group size: the need for lions to defend their kills against loss to 
spotted hyaenas. Afr J Ecol 29:130−136
Cooper R, DeJong D, Forsythe R, Ross T (1996) Cooperation without reputation: experimental evi-
dence from prisoner’s dilemma games. Games Econ Behav 12:187−218
Cords M (1992) Post-conflict reunions and reconciliation in long-tailed macaques. Anim Behav 
44:57−61
Cords M (1997) Friendship, alliances, reciprocity and repair. In: Whiten A, Byrne RW (eds) Machiavel-
lian Intelligence II. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 24−49
Cords M, Aureli F (1993) Patterns of reconciliation among juvenile long-tailed macaques. In: Pereira 
ME, Fairbanks LA (eds) Juvenile Primates: Life History, Development and Behavior. Oxford Univ 
Press, Oxford, pp 271−284
Cords M, Aureli F (1996) Reasons for reconciling. Evol Anthropol 5:42−45
Cords M, Aureli F (2000) Reconciliation and relationship qualities. In: Aureli F, de Waal FBM (eds) 
Natural Conflict Resolution. Univ of California Press, Berkeley, pp 177−198
Cords M, Killen M (1998) Conflict resolution in human and nonhuman primates. In: Langer J, Kil-
len M (eds) Piaget, Evolution and Development. Lawrence Earlbaum Associates, Mahwah/NJ, 
pp 193−219
Cords M, Thurnheer S (1993) Reconciliation with valuable partners by long-tailed macaques. Ethol-
ogy 93:315−325
Cosmides L, Tooby JH (1992) Cognitive adaptations for social exchange. In: Barkow JH, Cosmides L, 
Tooby JH (eds) The Adapted Mind. Oxford Univ Press, Oxford, pp 163−228
Courchamp F, Clutton-Brock T, Grenfell BT (2000a) Multipack dynamics and the Allee effect in the 
African wild dog Lycaon pictus. Anim Conserv 3:277−285
Courchamp F, Grenfell BT, Clutton-Brock TH (2000b) Impact of natural enemies on obligately coop-
erative breeders. Oikos 91:311−322
Crawford M (1937) The cooperative solving of problems by young chimpanzees. Comp Psychol 
Monogr 14:1−88
Creel SR (1990) How to measure inclusive fitness. Proc R Soc Lond B 241:229−231
Creel SR (2001) Social dominance and stress hormones. Trends Ecol Evol 16:491−497
Creel SR, Creel NM (1995) Communal hunting and pack size in African wild dogs, Lycaon pictus. Anim 
Behav 50:1325−1339
Creel SR, Creel NM (2002) The African Wild Dog. Princeton Univ Press, Princeton/NJ
Creel SR, Macdonald D (1995) Sociality, group size and reproductive suppression among carnivores. 
Adv Stud Behav24:203−257
Creel SR, Waser PM (1991) Failures of reproductive suppression in dwarf mongooses (Helogale par-
vula): accident or adaptation? Behav Ecol 2:7−15
Creel SR, Waser PM (1997) Variation in reproductive suppression among dwarf mongooses: inter-
play between mechanisms and evolution. In: Solomon NG, French JA (eds) Cooperative Breed-
ing in Mammals. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 150−170
Crespi BJ, Yanega D (1995) The definition of eusociality. Behav Ecol 6:109−115
Crockett CM (1984) Emigration by female red howler monkeys and the case for female competition. 
In: Small MF (ed) Female Primates: Studied by Women Primatologists. Alan R Liss, New York, 
pp 159−173
Crockett CM, Pope TR (1993) Consequences for sex difference in dispersal for juvenile red howler 
monkeys. In: Pereira ME, Fairbanks LA (eds) Juvenile Primates: Life History, Development and 
Behavior. Oxford Univ Press, Oxford, pp 104−118
Crowcroft P, Rowe FP (1963) Social organization and territorial behaviour in the wild house mouse. 
Proc R Soc Lond B 140:517−531
Crozier R, Pamilo P (1996) Evolution of Social Insect Colonies: Sex Allocation and Kin Selection. Ox-
ford Univ Press, New York

313
References
Currie CR, Mueller UG, Malloch D (1999) The agricultural pathology of ant fungus gardens. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA 96:7998−8002
Darwin C (1859) On the Origin of Species. Murray, London
Das M (1998) Conflict management and social stress in long-tailed macaques. PhD thesis, Univ of 
Utrecht/NL
Das M, Penke Z, van Hooff JARAM (1998) Post-conflict affiliation and stress-related behavior of 
long-tailed macaque aggressors. Int J Primatol 19:53−71
Datta SB (1983a) Relative power and the acquisition of rank. In: Hinde RA (ed) Primate Social Rela-
tionships: An Integrated Approach. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland/MA, pp 93−103
Datta SB (1983b) Relative power and the maintenance of dominance. In: Hinde RA (ed) Primate So-
cial Relationships: An Integrated Approach. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland/MA, pp 103−112
Datta SB (1983c) Patterns of agonistic interference. In: Hinde RA (ed) Primate Social Relationships: 
An Integrated Approach. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland/MA, pp 289−297
Datta SB (1988) The acquisition of dominance among free-ranging rhesus monkey siblings. Anim 
Behav 36:754−772
Davidson RJ, Kabat-Zinn J, Schumacher J, Rosenkranz M, Muller D, Santorelli SF, Urbanowski F, Har-
rington A, Bonus K, Sheridan JF (2003) Alterations in brain and immune function produced by 
mindfulness meditation. Psychosom Med 65:564−570
Dawes RM, McTavish J, Shaklee H (1977) Behavior communication and assumptions about other 
people’s behavior in a commons dilemma situation. J Pers Soc Psychol 35:1−11
Dawes RM, van de Kragt AJC, Orbell JM (1988) Not me or thee, but we: the importance of group 
identity in eliciting cooperation in dilemma situations − experimental manipulations. Acta Psy-
chol 68:83−97
Dawkins R (1979) Twelve misunderstandings of kin selection. Z Tierpsychol 51:184−200
Dawkins R, Carlisle TR (1976) Parental investment, mate desertion and a fallacy. Nature 262:131−133
DeBruine LM (2002) Facial resemblance enhances trust. Proc R Soc Lond B 269:1307−1312
DeLong KT (1967) Population ecology of feral house mice. Ecology 48:611−634
Demaria C, Thierry B (2001) A comparative study of reconciliation in rhesus and Tonkean macaques. 
Behaviour 138:397−410
Denison RF, Bledshoe C, Kahn M, O’Gara F, Simms EL, Thomasow LS (2003) Cooperation in the rhizo-
sphere and the “free rider” problem. Ecology 84:838−845
Di Bitteti MS (1997) Evidence for an important social role of grooming in a platyrrhine primate. Anim 
Behav 54:199−211
DiClemente DF, Hantula DA (2003) Optimal foraging online: increasing sensitivity to delay. Psychol 
Mark 20:785−809
Diedrichsen U (1993) Ethophysiologie der Energieallokation der Jungenaufzucht von Hausmäusen 
(Mus domesticus) in unterschiedlichen Sozialsystemen. Diploma thesis, Julius-Maximilians-Uni-
versity, Würzburg
Dietz JM (2004) Kinship structure and reproductive skew in cooperatively breeding primates. 
In: Chapais B, Berman C (eds) Kinship and Behavior in Primates. Oxford Univ Press, Oxford, 
pp 223−241
Dietz JM, Baker AJ (1993) Polygyny and female reproductive success in golden lion tamarins, Leon-
topithecus rosalia. Anim Behav 46:1067−1078
Di Fiore A, Rendall D (1994) Evolution of social organization: a reappraisal for primates by using 
phylogenetic methods. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91:9941−9945
Digby L (1995) Infant care, infanticide and female reproductive strategies in polygynous groups of 
common marmosets (Callithrix jacchus). Behav Ecol Sociobiol 37:51−61
Digby L (2001) Infanticide by female mammals: implications for the evolution of social systems. In: 
van Schaik CP, Janson CH (eds) Infanticide by Males and its Implications. Cambridge Univ Press, 
Cambridge, pp 423−446
Dittmar H, Beattie J, Friese S (1995) Gender identity and material symbols: objects and decision 
considerations in impulse purchases. J Econ Psychol 16:491−511
Dittmar H, Beattie J, Friese S (1996) Objects, decision considerations and self-image in men’s and 
women’s impulse purchases. Acta Psychol 93:187−206

314
References
Dobson FS, Jacquot C, Baudoin C (2000) An experimental test of kin association in the house mouse. 
Can J Zool 78:1806−1812
Doebeli M, Hauert C, Killingback T (2004) The evolutionary origin of cooperators and defectors. 
Science 306:859−862
Dominy NJ, Lucas PW, Osorio D, Yamashita N (2001) The sensory ecology of primate food percep-
tion. Evol Anthropol 10:171−186
Doncaster CP, Woodroffe R (1993) Den site can determine shape and size of badger territories: im-
plications for group living. Oikos 66:88−93
Doran DM, Jungers WL, Sugiyama Y, Fleagle J, Heesy CP (2002) Multivariate and phylogenetic ap-
proaches to understanding chimpanzee and bonobo behavioral diversity. In: Boesch C, Hohm-
ann G, Marchant LF (eds) Behavioral Diversity in Chimpanzees and Bonobos. Cambridge Univ 
Press, Cambridge, pp14−34
Dufwenberg M, Kirchsteiger G (2004) A theory of sequential reciprocity, games and economic. Be-
havior 47:268−298
Dugatkin LA (1997) Cooperation among Animals. An Evolutionary Perspective. Oxford Series in 
Ecology and Evolution, Oxford Univ Press, Oxford
Dugatkin LA (2002a) Animal cooperation among unrelated individuals. Naturwissenschaften 
89:533−541
Dugatkin LA (2002b) Cooperation in animals: an evolutionary overview. Biol Philos 17:459−476
Dugatkin LA, Wilson DS (1991) ROVER: a strategy for exploiting cooperators in a patchy environ-
ment. Am Nat 138:687−701
Dunbar RIM (1984) Reproductive decisions an economic analysis of gelada baboon social strate-
gies. Princeton Univ Press, Princeton/NJ
Dunbar RIM (1988) Primate Social Systems. Cornell Univ Press, Ithaca, New York
Dunbar RIM (1991) Functional significance of social grooming in primates. Fol Primatol 57:121−131
Dunbar RIM (1992) Social behaviour and evolutionary theory. In: Jones S, Martin R, Pilbeam R and 
D (eds) The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Human Evolution. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, 
pp 145−149
Dunbar RIM (1998) The social brain hypothesis. Evol Anthropol 6:178−190
Dunbar RIM (2001) Brains on two legs: group size and the evolution of intelligence. In: de Waal FBM 
(ed) Tree of Origin. Harvard Univ Press, Cambridge/MA, pp 175−91
Dunbar RIM, Sharman M (1984) Is social grooming altruistic? Z Tierpsychol 64:163−173
Dunn PO, Cockburn A, Mulder RA (1995) Fairy wren helpers often care for young to which they are 
unrelated. Proc R Soc Lond B 259:339−343
Eberle M, Kappeler PM (2002) Mouse lemurs in space and time: a test of the socioecological model. 
Behav Ecol Sociobiol 51:131−139
Echeverria-Lozano G (2004) Aggression and conflict management in adult and juvenile Chacma 
baboons. PhD thesis, Univ of Liverpool/UK
Eckardt W, Zuberbühler K (2004) Cooperation and competition in two forest monkeys. Behav Ecol 
15:400−411
Ekman J, Dickinson JL, Hatchwell B, Grieszer M (2004) Delayed dispersal. In: Koenig W, Dickinson 
J (eds) Ecology and Evolution of Cooperative Breeding in Birds. Cambridge Univ Press, Cam-
bridge, pp 35−47
Emlen ST (1984) Cooperative breeding in birds and mammals. In: Krebs JR, Davies NB (eds) Behav-
ioural Ecology: An Evolutionary Approach. Blackwell, Oxford, pp 305−339
Emlen ST (1991) Evolution of cooperative breeding in birds and mammals. In: Krebs JR, Davies NB 
(eds) Behavioural Ecology: An Evolutionary Approach. Blackwell, Oxford, pp 301−337
Emlen ST (1997) Predicting social dynamics in social vertebrates. In: Krebs JR, Davies NB (eds) Behav-
ioural Ecology: An Evolutionary Approach. Blackwell, Oxford, pp 228−253
Emlen ST, Oring LW (1977) Ecology, sexual selection, and the evolution of mating systems. Science 
197:215−223
Emlen ST, Wrege PH (1988) The role of kinship in helping decisions among white-fronted bee-eat-
ers. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 23:305−315
Emlen ST, Wrege PH (1992) Parent-offspring conflict and the recruitment of helpers among bee-eat-
ers. Nature 356:331−333

315
References
Emlen ST, Reeve HK, Keller L (1998) Reproductive skew: disentangling concessions from control. 
Trends Ecol Evol 13:458−459
Engel V, Fischer MK, Wäckers FL, Völkl W (2001) Interactions between extrafloral nectaries, aphids 
and ants: are there competition effects between plant and homopteran sugar sources? Oeco-
logia 129:577−584
Engelmann D, Fischbacher U (2002) Indirect reciprocity and strategic reputation building in an ex-
perimental helping game. IEW Working Paper No.132, Univ of Zürich, Zürich 
Enquist M (1985) Communication during aggressive interactions with particular reference to varia-
tion in choice of behaviour. Anim Behav 33:1152−1161
Erhart EM, Coelho AM, Bramblett CA (1997) Kin recognition by paternal half-siblings in captive Papio 
cynocephalus. Am J Primatol 43:147−157
Erk S, Spitzer M, Wunderlich AP, Galley L, Walter H (2002) Cultural objects modulate reward circuitry. 
NeuroReport 13:2499−2503
Fagen R (1981) Animal Play Behavior. Oxford Univ Press, Oxford
Fagen R (1993) Primate juveniles and primate play. In: Pereira ME, Fairbanks LA (eds) Juvenile Pri-
mates: Life History, Development and Behaviour. Oxford Univ Press, NewYork, pp 182−196
Fairbanks LA (1990) Reciprocal benefits of allomothering for female vervet monkeys. Anim Behav 
40:553−562
Fairbanks LA (1993) Juvenile vervet monkeys: establishing relationships and practicing skills for 
the future. In: Pereira ME, Fairbanks LA (eds) Juvenile Primates. Oxford Univ Press, New York, 
pp 211−227
Fairbanks LA (2000) Maternal investment throughout the life span in Old World monkeys. In: White-
head PF, Jolly CJ (eds) Old World Monkeys. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 341−367
Falk A, Fischbacher U (2005) A theory of reciprocity. Games Econ Behav, in press
Falk A, Fehr E, Fischbacher U (2004) Driving forces behind informal sanctions. IEW Working paper 
No. 59, Univ of Zürich, Zürich
Falk A, Gächter S, Kovács J (1999) Intrinsic motivation and extrinsic incentives in a repeated game 
with incomplete contracts. J Econ Psychol 20:251−284
Fanshawe JH, Fitzgibbon CD (1993) Factors influencing the hunting success of an African wild dog 
pack. Anim Behav 45:479−490
Faulkes CG, Abbott DH (1997) The physiology of a reproductive dictatorship: regulation of male and 
female reproduction by a single breeding female in colonies of naked mole-rats. In: Solomon 
NG, French JA (eds) Cooperative Breeding in Mammals. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, 
pp 302−334
Faulkes CG, Abbott DH, Jarvis JUM (1990) Social suppression of ovarian cyclicity in captive and wild 
colonies of naked mole-rats (Heterocephalus glaber). J Reprod Fert 88:559−568
Faulkes CG, Arruda MF, Monteiro da Cruz AO (2003) Matrilineal genetic structure within and among 
populations of the cooperatively breeding common marmoset, Callithrix jacchus. Mol Ecol 
12:1101−1118
Fedigan LM, Asquith PJ (eds) (1991) The Monkeys of Arashiyama. Thirty-five Years of Research in 
Japan and the West. State Univ of New York Press, Albany, New York
Feh C (1999) Alliances and reproductive success in Camargue stallions. Anim Behav 57:705−713
Fehr E (2004) Don’t lose your reputation. Nature 432:449−450
Fehr E, Fischbacher U (2002) Why social preferences matter − the impact of non-selfish motives on 
competition, cooperation and incentives. Econ J 112:C1−33
Fehr E, Fischbacher U (2003) The nature of human altruism. Nature 425:785−791
Fehr E, Fischbacher U (2004) Third-party punishment and social norms. Evol Hum Behav 25:63−87
Fehr E, Gächter S (2000a) Fairness and retaliation: the economics of reciprocity. J Econ Perspect 
14:159−181
Fehr E, Gächter S (2000b) Cooperation and punishment in public goods experiments. Am Econ Rev 
90:980−994
Fehr E, Gächter S (2002) Altruistic punishment in humans. Nature 415:137−140
Fehr E, Gächter S (2003) The puzzle of human cooperation − reply. Nature 421:912
Fehr E, Henrich J (2003) Is strong reciprocity a maladaptation? In: Hammerstein P (ed) Genetic and 
Cultural Evolution of Cooperation. MIT Press, Cambridge/MA, pp 55−82

316
References
Fehr E, Kirchsteiger G, Riedl A (1993) Does fairness prevent market clearing? Q J Econ 108:437−459
Fehr E, Rockenbach B (2003) Detrimental effects of sanctions on human altruism. Nature 
422:137−140
Fehr E, Schmidt KM (1999) A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation. Q J Econ 
114:817−868
Fehr E, Gächter S, Kirchsteiger G (1997) Reciprocity as a contract enforcement device: experimental 
evidence. Econometrica 65:833−860
Fehr E, Fischbacher U, Gächter S (2002) Strong reciprocity, human cooperation, and the enforce-
ment of social norms. Hum Nat 13:1−25
Feistner ATC, McGrew WC (1989) Food-sharing in primates: a critical review. In: Seth PK, Seth S 
(eds) Perspectives in Primate Biology. Today, Tomorrow’s Printers and Publishers, New Delhi, 
pp 21−36
Fessler DMT, Haley KJ (2003) The strategy of affect. Emotions in human cooperation. In: Hammer-
stein P (ed) Genetic and Cultural Evolution of Cooperation. MIT Press, Cambridge/MA, pp 7−36
Fischbacher U, Gächter S (2004) Heterogeneous Social Preferences and the Dynamics of Free Riding 
in Public Goods. Mimeo, Univ of St. Gallen
Fischbacher U, Gächter S, Fehr E (2001) Are people conditionally cooperative? Evidence from a pub-
lic goods experiment. Econ Lett 71:397−404
Fischer EA (1980) The relationship between mating system and simultaneous hermaphroditism in 
the coral reef fish, Hypoplectrus nigricans. Anim Behav 28:620−633
Fischer EA (1988) Simultaneous hermaphroditism, Tit-for-Tat, and the evolutionary stability of social 
systems. Ethol Sociobiol 9:119−36
Fischer MK, Hoffmann KH, Völkl W (2001) Competition for mutualists in an ant-homopteran interac-
tion mediated by hierarchies of ant attendance. Oikos 92:531−541
Fischer RC, Richter A, Wanek W, Mayer V (2002) Plants feed ants: food bodies of myrmecophytic Pip-
er and their significance for the interaction with Pheidole bicornis ant. Oecologia 133:186−192
Fishman MA (2003) Indirect reciprocity among imperfect individuals. J theor Biol 225:285−292
Flack JC, de Waal FBM (2000) “Any animal whatever”: Darwinian building blocks of morality in mon-
keys and apes. J Conscious Stud 7:1−29
Fodor J (1983) The modularity of the mind. MIT Press, Cambridge/MA
Forsythe R, Horowitz J, Savin NE, Sefton M (1994) Fairness in simple bargaining experiments. Games 
Econ Behav 6:347−369
Foster KR, Shaulsky G, Strassmann JE, Queller DC, Thompson CRL (2004) Pleiotropy as a mechanism 
to stabilize coopeeration. Nature 431:693−696
Fragaszy DM, Feuerstein JM, Mitra D (1997) Transfers of food from adults to infants in tufted capu-
chins (Cebus apella). J Comp Psychol 111:194−200
Francis CM, Anthony ELP, Brunton JA, Kunz TH (1994) Lactation in male fruit bats. Nature 
367:691−692
Frank RH (1988) Passions Within Reason: The Strategic Role of the Emotions. Norton, New York
Frank RH (1994) Microeconomics and Behavior. McGraw-Hill, New York
Frean MR (1994) The prisoner’s dilemma without synchrony. Proc R Soc Lond B 257:75−79
Fredrikson WT, Sackett G (1984) Kin preferences in primates, Macaca nemestrina: relatedness or fa-
miliarity? J Comp Psychol 98:29−34
Fredsted T, Pertoldi C, Olesen J, Eberle M, Kappeler PM (2004) Microgeographic heterogeneity in 
spatial distribution and mtDNA variability of gray mouse lemurs (Microcebus murinus, Primates: 
Cheirogaleidae). Behav Ecol Sociobiol 56:393−403
French JA (1994) Alloparents in the Mongolian gerbil: impact on long-term reproductive perfor-
mance of breeders and opportunities for independent reproduction. Behav Ecol 5:273−279
French JA (1997) Proximate regulation of singular breeding in callitrichid primates. In: Solomon 
NG, French JA (eds) Cooperative Breeding in Mammal. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, 
pp 34−75
French JA, Abbott DH, Snowdon CT (1984) The effects of social environment on oestrogen secre-
tion, scent marking and sociosexual behavior in tamarins (Saguinus oedipus). Am J Primatol 
6:155−167

317
References
Friedman D, Sunder S (1994) Experimental Methods. A Primer for Economists. Princeton Univ Press, 
Princeton/NJ
Fuchs S (1981) Consequences of premature weaning on the reproduction of mothers and offspring 
in laboratory mice. Z Tierpsychol 55:19−32
Fuchs S (1982) Optimality of parental investment: the influence of nursing on the reproductive suc-
cess of mother and female young house mice. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 10:39−51
Fudenberg D, Maskin E (1986) The folk theorem in repeated games with discounting or with incom-
plete information. Econometrica 54:533−556
Furuichi T (1997) Agonistic interactions and matrifocal dominance rank of wild bonobos (Pan panis-
cus) at Wamba. Int J Primatol 18:855−875
Furuichi T, Ihobe H (1994) Variation in male relationships in bonobos and chimpanzees. Behaviour 
130:212−228
Fuster J (1989) The Prefrontal Cortex. Raven Press, New York
Gächter S, Falk A (2002) Reputation and reciprocity − consequences for the labour relation. Scand 
J Econ 104:1−26
Gächter S, Fehr E (1999) Collective action as a social exchange. J Econ Behav Org 39:341−369
Gächter S, Renner E (2004) Leading by Example in the Presence of Free Rider Incentives. Mimeo, 
Univ of Nottingham
Gächter S, Thöni C (2005) Social learning and voluntary cooperation among like-minded people. J 
Eur Econ Assoc, in press
Gächter S, Herrmann B, Thöni C (2003) Understanding Determinants of Social Capital. Cooperation 
and Informal Sanctions in a Cross-Societal Perspective. Mimeo, Univ of St. Gallen
Galdikas BMF (1988) Orangutan diet, range, and activity at Tanjung Putting, Central Borneo. Int J 
Primatol 9:1−35
Gale D, Shapely LS (1962) College admissions and the stability of marriage. Am Math Month 
69:9−15
Garber P (1997) One for all and breeding for one: cooperation and competition as a tamarin repro-
ductive strategy. Evol Anthropol 5:187−199
Gaston AJ (1977) Social behaviour within groups of jungle babblers Turdoides striatus. Anim Behav 
25:828−848
Ghiglieri M (1984) The Chimpanzees of the Kibale Forest. Columbia Univ Press, New York
Gibson RM, Langen TA (1996) How do animals choose their mates? Trends Ecol Evol 11:468−470
Gigerenzer G (1997) The modularity of social intelligence. In: Whiten A, Byrne R (eds) Machiavellian 
Intelligence. II. Extensions and Evaluations. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 264−288
Gigerenzer G, Todd PM, ABC Research Group (eds) (1999) Simple heuristics that make us smart. 
Oxford Univ Press, Oxford
Gilchrist JS (2001) Reproduction and pup care in the communal breeding banded mongoose. PhD 
thesis, Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge
Gintis H (2000) Strong reciprocity and human sociality. J theor Biol 206:169−179
Gintis H (2003) The hitchhikers guide to altruism: genes, culture and the internalization of norms. J 
theor Biol 220:407−418
Gintis H, Smith EA, Bowles S (2001) Costly signaling and cooperation. J theor Biol 213:103−119
Gintis H, Bowles S, Boyd R, Fehr E (2003) Explaining altruistic behavior in humans. Evol Hum Behav 
24:153−172
Gittleman JL (1989) Carnivore group living: comparative trends. In: Gittleman JL (ed) Carnivore Be-
haviour, Ecology and Evolution. Cornell Univ Press, Ithaca/NY, pp 183−207
Glick BB, Eaton GG, Johnson DF, Worlein J (1986) Social behavior of infant and mother Japanese ma-
caques (Macaca fuscata): effects of kinship, partner sex and infant sex. Int J Primatol 7:139−155
Godfray HCJ (1995a) Evolutionary theory of parent-offspring conflict. Nature 376:133−138
Godfray HCJ (1995b) Signaling of need between parents and young: parent-offspring conflict and 
sibling rivalry. Am Nat 146:1−24
Goldberg T, Wrangham RW (1997) Genetic correlates of social behaviour in wild chimpanzees: evi-
dence from mitochondrial DNA. Anim Behav 54:559−570
Goldizen AW (1987a) Facultative polyandry and the role of infant carrying in wild saddle-back tama-
rins (Saguinus fusicollis). Behav Ecol Sociobiol 20:99−109

318
References
Goldizen AW (1987b) Tamarins and marmosets: communal care of offspring. In: Smuts BB, Cheney 
DL, Seyfarth RM, Wrangham RW, Struhsaker TT (eds) Primate Societies. Univ of Chicago Press, 
Chicago, pp 34−43
Goldizen AW, Terborgh J (1989) Demography and dispersal patterns of a tamarin population: pos-
sible causes. Am Nat 134:208−224
Goodall J (1968) The behaviour of free-living chimpanzees in the Gombe Stream area. Anim Behav 
Monogr 1:161−311
Goodall J (1971) In the Shadow of Man. Houghton Mifflin, Boston
Goodall J (1986) The Chimpanzees of Gombe: Patterns of Behavior. Harvard Univ Press, Cambridge/
MA
Goodall J, Bandora A, Bergmann E, Busse C, Matama H, Mpongo E, Pierce A, Riss D (1979) Intercom-
munity interactions in the chimpanzee population of the Gombe National Park. In: Hamburg D, 
McCown L (eds) The Great Apes. Benjamin-Cummings, Menlo Park, pp 13−54
Goodwin BK, Holt MT (1999) Price transmission and asymmetric adjustment in the US beef sector. 
Am J Agric Econ 81:630−638
Gouzoules S (1984) Primate mating systems, kin association and cooperative behavior: evidence for 
kin recognition? Ybk Phys Anthropol 27:99−134
Gouzoules S, Gouzoules H (1987) Kinship. In: Smuts BB, Cheney DL, Seyfarth RM, Wrangham RW, 
Struhsaker TT (eds) Primate Societies. Univ of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 299−305
Grafen A (1990) Sexual selection unhandicapped by the Fisher Process. J theor Biol 144:473−516
Grafen A (1991) Modelling in behavioural ecology. In: Krebs JR, Davies NB (eds) Behavioural Ecology: 
An Evolutionary Approach. Blackwell, Oxford, pp 5−31
Gray SJ, Jensen SP, Hurst JL (2000) Structural complexity of territories: effects on preference, use 
of space and territorial defence in commensal house mice (Mus domesticus). Anim Behav 
60:765−772
Green L, Myerson J, Holt DD, Slevin JR, Estle SJ (2004) Discounting of delayed food rewards in pi-
geons and rats: is there a magnitude effect? J Exp Anal Behav 81:39−50
Greene E, Lyon BE, Muehter VR, Ratcliffe L, Oliver SJ, Boag PT (2000) Disruptive sexual selection for 
plumage coloration in a passerine bird. Nature 407:1000−1003
Greenwood PJ (1980) Mating systems, philopatry and dispersal in birds and mammals. Anim Behav 
28:1140−1162
Greig D, Travisano M (2004) The prisoner’s dilemma and polymorphism in yeast and SUC genes. 
Proc R Soc Lond B 271:S25−26
Griffin AS, West SA (2002a) Kin discrimination and the benefit of helping in cooperatively breeding 
vertebrates. Science 302:634−636
Griffin AS, West SA (2002b) Kin selection: fact and fiction. Trends Ecol Evol 17:15−21
Griffin AS, West SA (2003) Kin discrimination and the benefit of helping in cooperatively breeding 
vertebrates. Science 302:634−636
Gürerk Ö, Irlenbusch B, Rockenbach B (2004) On the evolement of institutions in social dilemmas. 
Mimeo, Univ of Erfurt
Güth W, Schmittberger R, Schwartze B (1982) An experimental analysis of ultimatum bargaining. J 
Econ Behav Org 3:367−388
Güth W, Levati MV, van der Heijden E, Sutter M (2004) Leadership and cooperation in public goods 
experiments. Discussion Paper 28-2004, Papers on Strategic Interaction, Max Planck Institute 
for Research into Economic Systems
Gust DA, Gordon TP (1994) The absence of a matrilineally based dominance system in sooty mang-
abeys, Cercocebus torquatus atys. Anim Behav 47:589−94
Grutter AS (2004) Cleaner fish use tactile dancing behavior as a preconflcit management strategy. 
Curr Biol 14:1080−1083
Haig D (2002) Kinship and Genomic Imprinting. Rutgers Univ Press, New Brunswick
Haig D (2003) On intrapersonal reciprocity. Evol Hum Behav 24:418−425
Hamilton WD (1963) The evolution of altruistic behavior. Am Nat 97:354−356
Hamilton WD (1964) The genetical evolution of social behavior. I and II. J theoret Biol 7:17−52
Hamilton WD (1970) Selfish and spiteful behavior in an evolutionary model. Nature 228:1218−1220
Hamilton WD (1971) Geometry for the selfish herd. J theoret Biol 31:295−311

319
References
Hammerstein P (2003a) Genetic and Cultural Evolution of Cooperation. MIT Press, Cambridge/MA
Hammerstein P (2003b) Why is reciprocirty so rare in social animals? A protestant appeal. In: Ham-
merstein P (ed) Genetic and Cultural Evolution of Cooperation. MIT Press, Cambridge/MA, 
pp 83−93
Hammond KA, Diamond J (1992) An experimental test for a ceiling on sustained metabolic rate in 
lactating mice. Physiol Zool 65:952−977
Harcourt AH (1987) Dominance and fertility among female primates. J Zool Lond 213:471−487
Harcourt AH (1988) Alliances in contests and social intelligence. In: Byrne RW, Whiten A (eds) Ma-
chiavellian Intelligence. Clarendon Press, Oxford, pp 132−152
Harcourt AH (1992) Coalitions and alliances: are primates more complex than non-primates. In: Har-
court AH, de Waal FBM (eds) Coalitions and Alliances in Humans and other Animals. Oxford Univ 
Press, Oxford, pp 445−471
Harcourt AH, de Waal FBM (1992) Coalitions and Alliances in Human and other Animals. Oxford Univ 
Press, Oxford
Harcourt AH, Greenberg H (2001) Do gorilla females join males to avoid infanticide? Anim Behav 
62:905−915
Harcourt AH, Stewart KJ (1987) The influence of help in contests on dominance rank in primates: 
hints from gorillas. Anim Behav 35:182−190
Harcourt AH, Stewart KJ (1989) Functions of alliances in contests within wild gorilla groups. Behav-
iour 109:176−190
Hardin G (1968) Tragedy of commons. Science 162:1243−1248
Hardin G (1998) Extensions of “the tragedy of the commons”. Science 280:682−683
Hare B, Call J, Tomasello M (2001) Do chimpanzees know what conspecifics know? Anim Behav 
61:139−151
Hare B, Addessi E, Call J, Tomasello M, Visalberghi E (2003) Do capuchin monkeys, Cebus apella, 
know what conspecifics do and do not see? Anim Behav 65:131−142
Harper B (2000) Beauty, stature and the labour market: a British cohort study. Oxford Bull Econ Stat 
62:771−800
Hart BL, Hart LA (1992) Reciprocal allogrooming in impala, Aepyceros melampus. Anim Behav 
44:1073−1083
Harvey PH, Bradbury JW (1991) Sexual selection. In: Krebs JR, Davies NB (eds) Behavioural Ecology: 
An Evolutionary Approach. Blackwell, Oxford, pp 203−233
Hashimoto C, Furuichi T, Takenaka O (1996) Matrilineal kin relationship and social behavior of 
wild bonobos (Pan paniscus): sequencing the D-loop region of mitochondrial DNA. Primates 
37:305−318
Hasselmann K, Latif M, Hooss G, Azar C, Edenhofer O, Jaeger CC, Johannessen OM, Kemfert C, Welp 
M, Wokaun A (2003) The challenge of long-term climate change. Science 302:1923−1925
Hauert C, Doebeli M (2004) Spatial structure often inhibits the evolution of cooperation in the 
snowdrift game. Nature 428:643−646
Hauert C, Schuster HG (1998) Extending the iterated prisoner’s dilemma without synchrony. J theo-
ret Biol 192:155−166
Hauert C, de Monte S, Hofbauer J, Sigmund K (2002) Volunteering as red queen mechanism for 
cooperation in public goods games. Science 296:1129−1132
Haug M (1978) Attack by female mice on “strangers”. Aggress Behav 4:133−139
Hauser MD, Carey S, Hauser LB (2000) Spontaneous number representation in semi-free-ranging 
rhesus monkeys. Proc R Soc Lond B 267:829−833
Hauser MD, Chen MK, Chen F, Chang E, Chuang E (2003) Give unto others: genetically unrelated 
cotton-top tamarin monkey preferentially give food to those who altruistically give food back. 
Proc R Soc Lond B 270:2363−2370
Hausfater G, Altmann J, Altmannn SA (1982) Long-term consistency of female dominance relations 
among female baboons (Papio cynocephalus). Science 217:752−754
Hawkes K (1990) Showing off: tests of an hypothesis about men’s foraging goals. Ethol Sociobiol 
12:29−54
Hawkes K, O’Connell J, Blurton-Jones N (2001) Hadza meat sharing. Evol Hum Behav 22:113−142

320
References
Hayaki H, Huffman M, Nishida T (1989) Dominance among male chimpanzees in the Mahale Moun-
tains National Park, Tanzania. Primates 30:187−197
Haydock J, Koenig WD (2002) Reproductive skew in the polygynandrous acorn woodpecker. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA 99:7178−7183
Haydock J, Koenig WD (2003) Patterns of reproductive skew in the polygynandrous acorn wood-
pecker. Am Nat 162:277−289
Hayes LD (2000) To nest communally or not to nest communally: a review of rodent communal nest-
ing and nursing. Anim Behav 59:677−688
Hayes LD, Solomon NG (2004) Costs and benefits of communal rearing to female prairie voles (Mi-
crotus ochrogaster). Behav Ecol Sociobiol 56:585−593
Heinrich J, Boyd R, Bowles S, Camerer C, Fehr E, Gintis R, McElreath R (2001) In search of Homo eco-
nomicus: behavioural experiments in 15 small-scale societies. Am Econ Rev 91:73−78
Heinsohn RG (1991) Kidnapping and reciprocity in cooperatively breeding white-winged choughs. 
Anim Behav 41:1097−1100
Heinsohn RG (1992) Cooperative enhancement of reproductive success in white-winged choughs. 
Evol Ecol 6:97−114
Heinsohn RG (2004) Parental care, load lightening and costs. In: Koenig W, Dickinson J (eds) Ecology 
and Evolution of Cooperative Breeding in Birds. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 67−80
Heinsohn RG, Packer C (1995) Complex cooperative strategies in group-territorial African lions. Sci-
ence 269:1260−1262
Heinsohn RG, Legge S (1999) The cost of helping. Trends Ecol Evol 14:53−57
Hemelrijk CK (1990a) Models of and tests for reciprocity, unidirectionality and other social interac-
tion patterns at a group level. Anim Behav 39:1013−1029
Hemelrijk CK (1990b) A matrix partial correlation test used in investigations of reciprocity and other 
social interaction patterns at group level. J theoret Biol 143:405−420
Hemelrijk CK (1994) Support for being groomed in long-tailed macaques, Macaca fascicularis. Anim 
Behav 48:479−481
Hemelrijk CK, Ek A (1991) Reciprocity and interchange of grooming and “support” in captive chim-
panzees. Anim Behav 41:923−935
Hemelrijk CK, van Laere GJ, van Hooff JARAM (1992) Sexual exchange relationships in captive chim-
panzees? Behav Ecol Sociobiol 30:269−275
Hemelrijk CK, Meier C, Martin RD (1999) “Friendship” for fitness in chimpanzees? Anim Behav 
58:1223−1229
Henrich J (2004) “Inequity aversion” in capuchins? Nature 428:139
Henrich J, Boyd R (2001) Why people punish defectors: weak conformist transmission can stabilize 
costly enforcement of norms in cooperative dilemmas. J theoret Biol 208:79−89
Henrich J, Boyd R, Bowles S, Camerer C, Fehr E, Gintis H, McElreath R (2001) In search of Homo eco-
nomicus − behavioral experiments in 15 small-scale societies. Am Econ Rev 91:73−78
Henrich J, Boyd R, Bowles S, Camerer C, Fehr E, Gintis H, McElreath R, Alvard M, Barr A, Ensminger 
J, Henrich NS, Hill K, Gil-White F, Gurven M, Marlowe FW, Patton JQ, Tracer D (2005) “Economic 
man” in cross-cultural perspective: behavioral experiments in 15 small-scale societies. Behav 
Brain Sci, in press
Henzi SP, Barrett L (1999) The value of grooming to female primates. Primates 40:47−59
Henzi SP, Barrett L (2002) Infants as a commodity in a baboon market. Anim Behav 63:915−921
Henzi SP, Barrett L (2003) Evolutionary ecology, sexual conflict, and behavioral differentiation 
among baboon populations. Evol Anthropol 12:217−230
Henzi SP, Byrne RW, Whiten A (1992) Patterns of movement by baboons in the Drakensberg moun-
tains: primary responses to the environment. Int J Primatol 13:601−629
Henzi SP, Lycett JE, Weingrill T (1997) Cohort size and the allocation of social effort by female moun-
tain baboons. Anim Behav 54:1235−1243
Henzi SP, Weingrill T, Barrett L (1999) Male behaviour and the evolutionary ecology of chacma ba-
boons. South Afr J Sci 95:240−242
Henzi SP, Barrett L, Gaynor D, Greeff T, Weingrill T, Hill RA (2003) Effect of resource competition on 
the long-term allocation of grooming by female baboons: evaluating Seyfarth’s model. Anim 
Behav 66:931−938

321
References
Hill D (1994) Affiliative behavior among adult males of the genus Macaca. Behaviour 130:293−308
Hill K (2002) Altruistic cooperation during foraging by the Ache and the evolved human predisposi-
tion to cooperate. Hum Nat 13:105−128
Hirschleifer J (1987) On the emotions as guarantors of threats and promises. In: Dupre J (ed) The Lat-
est on the Best: Essays in Evolution and Optimality. MIT Press, Cambridge/MA, pp 307−326
Hodge SJ (2003) The evolution of cooperation in the communal breeding banded mongoose. PhD 
thesis, Univ of Cambridge, Cambridge
Hoeksema JD, Bruna EM (2000) Pursuing the big questions about interspecific mutualism: a review 
of theoretical approaches. Oecologia 125:321−330
Hoeksema JD, Kummel M (2003) Ecological persistence of the plant-mycorrhizal mutualism: a hy-
pothesis from species coexistence theory. Am Nat 162:S40−50
Hoeksema JD, Schwartz MW (2003) Expanding comparative-advantage biological market models: 
contingency of mutualism on partners’ resource requirements and acquisition trade-offs. Proc 
R Soc Lond B 270:913−919
Hoekstra RF (2003) Power in the genome. Who suppresses the outlaw? In: Hammerstein P (ed) Ge-
netic and Cultural Evolution of Cooperation. Cambridge/MA, MIT Press, pp 257−270
Hohmann G, Fruth B (2002) Dynamics in social organization of bonobos (Pan paniscus). In: Boesch 
B, Hohmann G, Marchant LF (eds) Behavioural Diversity in Chimpanzees and Bonobos. Cam-
bridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 138−155
Hohmann G, Gerloff U, Tautz D, Fruth B (1999) Social bonds and genetic ties: kinship, association 
and affiliation in a community of bonobos (Pan paniscus). Behaviour 136:1219−1235
Horn AG, Leonard MC (2002) Efficacy and design of begging signals. In: Wright J, Leonard M (eds) 
The Evolution of Begging. Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht/NL, pp 127−142
Hooff JARAM van (2000) Relationships among non-human primate males: a deductive approach. 
In: Kappeler PM (ed) Primate Males. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 183−191
Hooff JARAM van (2001) Conflict, reconciliation and negotiation in non-human primates: the value 
of long-term relationships. In: Noë R, van Hooff JARAM, Hammerstein P (eds) Economics in Na-
ture. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 67−90
Hooff JARAM van, van Schaik CP (1992) Cooperation in competition: the ecology of primate bonds. 
In: Harcourt AH, de Waal FBM (eds) Coalitions and Alliances in Humans and other Animals. Ox-
ford Univ Press, Oxford, pp 357−389
Hooff JARAM van, van Schaik CP (1994) Male bonds: affiliative relationships among nonhuman pri-
mate males. Behaviour 130:309−337
Hoogland JL, Tamarin RH, Levy CK (1989) Communal nursing in prairie dogs. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 
24:91−95
Hrdy SB (1976) The care and exploitation of nonhuman primate infants by conspecifics other than 
the mother. In: Rosenblatt J, Hinde RA, Shaw E, Beer C (eds) Advances in the Study of Behavior. 
Vol 6. Academic Press, New York, pp 101−158
Hrdy SB (1977) The Langurs of Abu: Female and Male Strategies of Reproduction. Harvard Univ 
Press, Harvard/MA
Hrdy SB, Hrdy DB (1976) Hierarchical relations among female Hanuman langurs (Primates: Colobi-
nae, Presbytis entellus). Science 193:913−915
Huck M, Loettker P, Boehle U-R, Heymann EW (2005) Paternity and kinship patterns in polyandrous 
moustached tamarins (Saguinus mystax). Am J Phys Anthropol, in press
Humphrey NK (1976) The social function of intellect. In: Bateson PPG, Hinde RA (eds) Growing Points 
in Ethology. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 303−321
Hunte W, Horrocks JA (1986) Kin and non-kin interventions in the aggressive disputes of vervet 
monkeys. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 20:257−263
Hutchins M, Barash DP (1976) Grooming in primates: implications for its utilitarian function. Pri-
mates 17:145−150
Hyman J (2002) Conditional strategies in territorial defense: do Carolina wrens play tit-for-tat? Be-
hav Ecol 13:664−669
Inglett BJ, French JA, Simmons LG, Vires KW (1989) Dynamics of intrafamily aggression and social 
reintegration in lion tamarins. Zoo Biol 8:67−78
Isaac G (1978) The food sharing behavior of protohuman hominids. Sci Am 238:90−108

322
References
Isaac M, Walker J (1988) Communication and free-riding behavior: the voluntary contribution 
mechanism. Econ Inq 26:585−608
Isbell LA (1991) Contest and scramble competition: patterns of female aggression and ranging be-
havior among primates. Behav Ecol 2:143−155
Izawa K (1980) Social behavior of the wild black-capped capuchin (Cebus apella). Primates 
21:443−467
Izawa K (1994) Group division of wild black-capped capuchins. Field Stud New World Monkeys, La 
Macarena, Colombia 9:5−14
Izzo TJ, Vasconcelos HL (2002) Cheating the cheater: domatia loss minimizes the effects of ant cas-
tration in an Amazonian ant-plant. Oecologia 133:200−205
Jack KM, Fedigan L (2003) Male dominance and reproductive success in white-faced capuchins (Ce-
bus capucinus). Am J Phys Anthropol 36:S121−122
Jack KM, Fedigan L (2004a) Male dispersal patterns in white-faced capuchins, Cebus capucinus. Part 
1: patterns and causes of natal emigration. Anim Behav 67:761−769
Jack KM, Fedigan L (2004b) Male dispersal patterns in white-faced capuchins, Cebus capucinus. Part 
2: patterns and causes of secondary dispersal. Anim Behav 67:771−782
Jacoby S (1983) Wild Justice: The Evolution of Revenge. Harper, Row, New York
Johnson D, Stopka P, Knights S (2003) The puzzle of human cooperation. Nature 421:911−912
James CD, Hoffman MT, Lightfoot DC, Forbes GS, Whitford WG (1994) Fruit abortion in Yucca elata 
and its implications for the mutualistic association with yucca moths. Oikos 69:207−216
Jameson EW (1998) Prepartum mammogenesis milk production and optimal litter size. Oecologia 
114:282−291
Jamieson IG (1989) Behavioral heterochrony and the evolution of birds’ helping at the nest: an un-
selected consequence of communal breeding? Am Nat 133:394−406
Jamieson IG, Craig JL (1987) Critique of helping behavior in birds: a departure from functional ex-
planations. Vol 7. In: Bateson P, Klopfer P (eds) Perspectives in Ethology. Plenum Press, New 
York, pp 79−98
Janeway CA, Travers P (1997) Immunology. Current Biology. Ltd/Garland Publishing Inc, New York
Janson CH (1988) Food competition in brown capuchin monkeys (Cebus apella): quantitative effects 
of group size and tree productivity. Behaviour 105:53−76
Janson CH (1992) Evolutionary ecology of primate social structure. In: Smith EA, Winterhalder B 
(eds) Evolutionary Ecology and Human Behavior. Aldine de Gruyter, New York, pp 95−130
Janus M (1989) Reciprocity in play, grooming and proximity in sibling and non-sibling young rhesus 
monkeys. Int J Primatol 10:243−261
Jarman PJ (1974) The social organisation of antelopes in relation to their ecology. Behaviour 
48:215−267
Jarvis JUM (1981) Eusociality in a mammal: cooperative breeding in naked mole-rat colonies. Sci-
ence 212:571−573
Jennions MD, Macdonald DW (1994) Cooperative breeding in mammals. Trends Ecol Evol 9:89−93
Johnson JA (1987) Dominance rank in juvenile olive baboons Papio anubis: the influence of gender, 
size, maternal rank and orphaning. Anim Behav 35:1694−1708
Johnson DDP, Krüger O (2004) The good of wrath: supernatural punishment and the evolution of 
cooperation. Polit Theol 5:159−176
Johnson MS, Thomson SC, Speakman JR (2001) Limits to sustained energy intake. II. Inter-relation-
ships between resting metabolic rate, life-history traits and morphology in Mus musculus. J Exp 
Biol 204:1937−1946
Johnson DDP, Stopka P, Bell J (2002) Individual variation evades the prisoner’s dilemma. BMC Evol 
Biol 2:1−8
Johnson DDP, Stopka P, MacDonald DW (2004) Ideal flea constraints on group living: unwanted 
public goods and the emergence of cooperation. Behav Ecol 15:181−186
Johnstone RA (1995) Sexual selection, honest advertisement and the handicap principle: reviewing 
the evidence. Biol Rev 70:1−65
Johnstone RA (2000) Models of reproductive skew: a review and synthesis. Ethology 106:5−26
Johnstone RA (2004) Begging and sibling competition: how should offspring respond to their ri-
vals? Am Nat 163:388−406

323
References
Johnstone RA, Bshary R (2002) From parasitism to mutualism: partner control in asymmetric inter-
actions. Ecol Lett 5:634−639
Johnstone RA, Woodroffe R, Cant MA, Wright J (1999) Reproductive skew in multi-member groups. 
Am Nat 153:315−331
Kagel J, Roth AE (eds) (1995) Handbook of Experimental Economics. Princeton Univ Press, Princ-
eton/NJ
Kahan JP, Rapoport A (1984) Theories of Coalition Formation. Erlbaum, Hillsdale/NJ
Kampe KKW, Frith CD, Dolan RJ, Frith U (2001) Psychology: reward value of attractiveness and gaze. 
Nature 413:589
Kaplan JR (1977) Patterns of fight interference in free-ranging rhesus monkeys. Am J Phys Anthropol 
47:279−288
Kaplan JR (1978) Fight interference and altruism in rhesus monkeys. Am J Phys Anthropol 
49:241−249
Kaplan H, Hill K, Lancaster J, Hurtado A (2000) A theory of human life history evolution: diet, intel-
ligence and longevity. Evol Anthropol 9:156−185
Kappeler PM, van Schaik CP (1992) Methodological and evolutionary aspects of reconciliation 
among primates. Ethology 92:51−69
Kappeler PM, Wimmer B, Zinner D, Tautz D (2002) The hidden matrilineal structure of a solitary 
lemur: implications for primate social evolution. Proc R Soc Lond 269:1755−1763
Kapsalis E (2003) Matrilineal kinship and primate behavior. In: Chapais B, Berman C (eds) Kinship and 
Behavior in Primates. Oxford Univ Press, Oxford, pp 153−176
Kapsalis E, Berman CM (1996) Models of affiliative relationships among free-ranging rhesus mon-
keys (Macaca mulatta). I. Criteria for kinship. Behaviour 133:1209−1234
Karama S, Roch Lecours A, Leroux J-M, Bourgouin P, Beaudoin G, Joubert S, Beauregard M (2002) 
Areas of brain activation in males and females during viewing of erotic film excerpts. Hum Brain 
Mapp 16:1−13
Kareem AM, Barnard CJ (1982) The importance of kinship and familiarity in social interactions be-
tween mice. Anim Behav 30:594−601
Keeley L (1996) War before Civilization. Oxford Univ Press, New York
Keller L, Reeve HK (1994) Partitioning of reproduction in animal societies. Trends Ecol Evol 
9:98−103
Keller L, Waller D (2002) Inbreeding effects in wild populations. Trend Ecol Evol 17:230−241
Keser C, van Winden F (2000) Conditional cooperation and voluntary contributions to public goods. 
Scand J Econ 102:23−29
Keverne EB, Martensz ND, Tuite B (1989) Beta-endorphin concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid of 
monkeys are influenced by grooming relationships. Psychoneuroendocrinology 14:155−161
Kiers ET, Rousseau RA, West SA, Denison RF (2003) Host sanctions and the legume-rhizobium mu-
tualism. Nature 425:78−81
Kilner RM (2002) The evolution of complex begging displays. In: Wright J, Leonard ML (eds) The 
Evolution of Nestling Begging: Competition, Cooperation and Communication. Kluwer, Dor-
drecht/NL
King-Casas B, Tomlin D, Anen C, Camerer CF, Quartz SR, Montague PR (2005) Getting to know you: 
reputation and trust in a two-person economic exchange. Science 308:78−83
Knauft B (1991) Violence and sociality in human evolution. Curr Anthropol 32:391−428
Knutson B, Adams CM, Fong GW, Hommer D (2001) Anticipation of increasing monetary reward 
selectively recruits nucleus accumbens. J Neurosci 21:RC159:1−5
Knutson B, Fong GW, Adams CM, Varner JL, Hommer D (2001) Dissociation of reward anticipation 
and outcome with event-related fMRI. NeuroReport 12:3683−3687
Koenig A (2000) Competitive regimes in forest-dwelling Hanuman langur females (Semnopithecus 
entellus). Behav Ecol Sociobiol 48:93−109
König B (1989) Behavioural ecology of kin recognition in house mice. Ethol Ecol Evol 1:99−110
König B (1993) Maternal investment of communally nursing female house mice (Mus musculus do-
mesticus). Behav Process 30:61−74
König B (1994a) Communal nursing in mammals. Verh Dtsch Zool Ges 87:115−127

324
References
König B (1994b) Components of lifetime reproductive success in communally and solitarily nursing 
house mice − a laboratory study. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 34:275−283
König B (1994c) Fitness effects of communal rearing in house mice: the role of relatedness and 
familiarity. Anim Behav 48:1449−1457
König B (1997) Cooperative care of young in mammals. Naturwissenschaften 84:95−104
König B, Markl H (1987) Maternal care in house mice. I. The weaning strategy as a means for parental 
manipulation of offspring quality. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 20:1−9
König B, Riester J, Markl H (1988) Maternal care in house mice (Mus musculus): II. The energy cost of 
lactation as a function of litter size. J Zool Lond 216:195−210
Koenig WD (1988) Reciprocal altruism in birds: a critical review. Ethol Sociobiol 9:73−84
Koenig WD, Dickinson J (2004) Ecology and Evolution of Cooperative Breeding in Birds. Cambridge 
Univ Press, Cambridge
Koenig WD, Mumme RL (1987) Population Ecology of the Cooperatively Breeding Acorn Woodpeck-
er. Princeton Univ Press, Princeton/NJ
Koenig WA, Pitelka FA, Carmen WJ, Mumme RL, Stanback MT (1992) The evolution of delayed disper-
sal in cooperative breeders. Q Rev Biol 67:111−150
Kokko H, Johnstone RA (1999) Social queuing in animal societies: a dynamic model of reproductive 
skew. Proc R Soc Lond B 266:571−578
Kokko H, Johnstone RA, Clutton-Brock TH (2001) The evolution of cooperative breeding through 
group augmentation. Proc R Soc Lond B 268:187−196
Kokko H, Johnstone RA, Wright J (2002) The evolution of parental and alloparental effort in coop-
eratively breeding groups: when should helpers pay to stay? Behav Ecol 13:291−300
Komdeur J (1994) Experimental evidence for helping and hindering by previous offspring in the 
cooperative breeding Seychelles warbler, Acrocephalus seychellensis. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 
34:175−186
Konner M (2004) The ties that bind. Nature 429:705
Koyama NF (2001) The long-term effects of reconciliation in Japanese macaques (Macaca fuscata). 
Ethology 107:975−987
Kreps D, Milgrom P, Roberts J, Wilson R (1982) Rational cooperation in the finitely repeated prison-
ers’ dilemma. J Econ Theor 27:245−252
Kropotkin P (1972 [1902]) Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution. New York Univ Press, New York
Kuester J, Paul A, Arnemann J (1994) Kinship, familiarity and mating avoidance in Barbary macaques, 
Macaca sylvanus. Anim Behav 48:1183−1194
Kummel M, Salant SW (2004) The economics of mutualisms: optimal utilisation of mycorrhizal mu-
tualistic partners by plants. Working paper presented during the 5th Toulouse Conference on 
Environment and Resource Economics “Advances in Economics and Biology” (Toulouse June 
1−2, 2004)
Kummer H (1991) Evolutionary transformations of possessive behavior. In: Rudmin FW (ed) To 
Have Possessions: A Handbook on Ownership and Property. Special Issue of J Soc Behav Pers 
6:75−83
Kurland JA (1977) Kin Selection in the Japanese Monkey. Contributions to Primatology. Vol. 12. 
Karger, Basel
Kutsukake N, Castles DL (2001) Reconciliation and variation in post-conflict stress in Japanese ma-
caques (Macaca fuscata fuscata): testing the integrated hypothesis. Anim Cogn 4:259−268
Kutsukake N, Castles DL (2004) Reconciliation and post-conflict third-party affiliation among wild 
chimpanzees in the Mahale Mountains, Tanzania. Primates 45:157−165
La Cerra P, Bingham R (1998) The adaptive nature of the human neurocognitive architecture: an 
alternative model. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:11290−11294
Lacey EA, Sherman PW (1991) Social organisation of naked mole-rat colonies: evidence for divisions 
of labour. In: Sherman PW, Jarvis JUM, Alexander RD (eds) The Ecology of the Naked Mole Rat. 
Princeton Univ Press, Princeton/NJ, pp 275−336
Lacey EA, Sherman PW (1997) Cooperative breeding in naked mole-rats. In: Solomon NG, French JA 
(eds) Cooperative Breeding in Mammals. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 267−301

325
References
Launhardt K, Borries C, Hardt C, Epplen JT, Winkler P (2001) Paternity analysis of alternative male 
reproductive routes among the langurs (Semnopithecus entellus) of Ramnagar. Anim Behav 
61:53−64
Lazaro-Perea C (2001) Intergroup interactions in wild common marmosets, Callithrix jacchus: territo-
rial defence and assessment of neighbours. Anim Behav 62:11−21
Lazaro-Perea C, De Fatima Arruda M, Snowdon CT (2004) Grooming as a reward? Social function of 
grooming between females in cooperatively breeding marmosets. Anim Behav 67:627−636
Ledyard JO (1995) Public goods: a survey of experimental research. In: Kagel JH, Roth AE (eds) Hand-
book of Experimental Economics. Princeton Univ Press, Princeton/NJ, pp 111−194 
Lee PC, Oliver JI (1979) Competition, dominance and the acquisition of rank in juvenile  yellow ba-
boons (Papio cynocephalus). Anim Behav 27:576−585
Lehmann L, Perrin N (2003) Inbreeding avoidance through kin recognition: choosy females boost 
male dispersal. Am Nat 162:638−652
Leimar O, Axén A (1993) Strategic behaviour in an interspecific mutualism: interactions between 
lycaenid larvae and ants. Anim Behav 46:1177−1182
Leimar O, Hammerstein P (2001) Evolution of cooperation through indirect reciprocity. Proc R Soc 
Lond B 268:745−753
Leinfelder I, de Vries H, Deleu R, Nelissen M (2001) Rank and grooming reciprocity among females in 
a mixed-sex group of captive hamadryas baboons. Am J Primatol 55:25−42
Leonard ML, Horn AG, Eden SF (1989) Does juvenile helping enhance breeder reproductive success? 
A removal experiment on moorhen. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 25:357−361
Lewis RJ (2002) Beyond dominance the importance of leverage. Q Rev Biol 77:149−164
Lewis SE, Pusey AE (1997) Factors influencing the occurrence of communal care in plural breeding 
mammals. In: Solomon NG, French JA (eds) Cooperative Breeding in Mammals. Cambridge Univ 
Press, Cambridge, pp 335−363
Lidicker WZJ (1976) Social behaviour and density regulation in house mice living in large enclosures. 
J Anim Ecol 45:677−697
Lim MM, Wang Z, Olazábal DE, Ren X, Terwilliger EF, Young LJ (2004) Enhanced partner preference in 
a promiscuous species by manipulating the expression of a single gene. Nature 429:754−757
Limongelli L, Boysen S, Visalberghi E (1995) Comprehension of cause-effect relationships in a tool-
using task by chimpanzees. J Comp Psychol 109:18−26
Lindström J (1999) Early development and fitness in birds and mammals. Trends Ecol Evol 
14:343−347
Linklatter WL, Cameron EZ (2000) Tests for cooperative behaviour between stallions. Anim Behav 
60:731−743
Ljungberg T, Westlund K, Lindqvist Forsberg AJ (1999) Conflict resolution in 5-year-old boys: does 
postconflict affiliative behaviour have a reconciliatory role? Anim Behav 58:1007−1016
Lomnicki A (1988) Population Ecology of Individuals. Princeton Univ Press, Princeton/NJ
Lotem A, Fishman MA, Stone L (1999) Evolution of cooperation between individuals. Nature 
400:226−227
Lucas JR, Creel SR, Waser PM (1997) Dynamic optimisation and cooperative breeding: an evalua-
tion of future fitness. In: Solomon NG, French JA (eds) Cooperative Breeding in Mammals. Cam-
bridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 171−198
Maestripieri D (1993) Vigilance costs of allogrooming in macaque mothers. Am Nat 141:744−753
Maestripieri D, Schino G, Aureli F, Troisi A (1992) A modest proposal: displacement activities as indi-
cators of emotions in primates. Anim Behav 44:967−979
Magrath RD, Whittingham LA (1997) Subordinate males are more likely to help if unrelated to the 
breeding female in cooperatively breeding white-browed scrubwrens. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 
41:185−192
Magrath RD, Johnstone RA, Heinsohn RG (2004) Reproductive skew. In: Koenig W, Dickinson J (eds) 
Ecology and Evolution of Cooperative Breeding in Birds. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, 
pp 157−176
Magurran AE, Irving PW, Henderson PA (1996) Is there a fish alarm pheromone? A study and critique. 
Proc R Soc Lond B 263:1551−1556

326
References
Maklakov AA (2002) Snake-directed mobbing in a cooperative breeder: anti-predator behaviour or 
self-advertizement for the formation of dispersal coalitions. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 52:372−378
Malcolm JR, Marten K (1982) Natural selection and the communal rearing of pups in African wild 
dogs, Lycaon pictus. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 10:1−13
Mann MA, Miele JL, Kinsley CH, Svare B (1983) Postpartum behavior in the mouse: the contribution 
of suckling stimulation to water intake, food intake and body weight regulation. Physiol Behav 
31:633−638
Manning CJ, Wakeland EK, Potts WK (1992) Communal nesting patterns in mice implicate MHC 
genes in kin recognition. Nature 360:581−583
Manning CJ, Dewsbury DA, Wakeland EK, Potts WK (1995) Communal nesting and communal nurs-
ing in house mice, Mus musculus domesticus. Anim Behav 50:741−751
Manser MB (1998) The evolution of auditory communication in suricates Suricata suricatta. PhD the-
sis, Univ of Cambridge, Cambridge
Manson JH, Rose LM, Perry S, Gros-Louis J (1999) Dynamics of female-female relationships in wild 
Cebus capucinus: data from two Costa Rican sites. Int J Primatol 20:679−706
Manson JH, Navette CD, Silk JB, Perry S (2004) Time-matched grooming in female primates? New 
analyses from two species. Anim Behav 67:493−500
Marlowe F (2003) A critical period for provisioning by Hadza men: implications for pair bonding. 
Evol Hum Behav 24:217−229
Marr DL, Pellmyr O (2003) Effect of pollinator-inflicted ovule damage on floral abscission in the 
yucca-yucca moth mutualism: the role of mechanical and chemical factors. Oecologia 
136:236−243
Masclet D, Noussair C, Tucker S, Villeval M-C (2003) Monetary and non-monetary punishment in the 
voluntary contributions mechanism. Am Econ Rev 93:366−380
Mason JH, Perry S (2000) Correlates of self-directed behaviour in wild white-faced capuchins. Ethol-
ogy 106:301−307
Massey A (1977) Agonistic aids and kinship in a group of pig-tail macaques. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 
2:31−40
Matheson M, Bernstein I (2000) Grooming, social bonding, and agonistic aiding in rhesus monkeys. 
Am J Primatol 51:177−186
Matsuzawa T (2001) Primate foundations of human intelligence: a view of tool use in nonhuman 
primates and fossil hominids. In: Matsuzawa T (ed) Primate Origins of Human Cognition and 
Behavior. Springer, Tokyo, pp 3−25
Maynard Smith J (1964) Group selection and kin selection. Nature 201:1145−1147
Maynard Smith J (1982) Evolution and the Theory of Games. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge
Maynard-Smith J (1983) Game theory and the evolution of cooperation. In: Bendall DS (ed) Evolu-
tion from Molecules to Men. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 445−456
Maynard-Smith J, Szathmary E (1995) The Major Transitions in Evolution. Freeman, Oxford
McCracken GF (1984) Communal nursing in Mexican free-tailed bat maternity colonies. Science 
223:1090−1091
McDonald DB (1989a) Cooperation under sexual selection: age-graded changes in a lekking bird. 
Am Nat 134:709−730
McDonald DB (1989b) Correlates of male mating success in a lekking bird with male-male coopera-
tion. Anim Behav 37:1007−1022
McElreath R, Clutton-Brock TH, Fehr E, Fessler DMT, Hagen EH, Hammerstein P, Kosfeld M, Millinski 
M, Silk JB, Tooby J, Wilson MI (2003) Group report: the role of cognition and emotion in co-
operation. In: Hammerstein P (ed) Genetic and Cultural Evolution of Cooperation. MIT Press, 
Cambridge/MA, pp 125−152
McGrew WC (1975) Patterns of plant food sharing by wild chimpanzees. In: Kawai M, Kondon S, 
Ehara A (eds) Contemporary Primatology: Proceedings of the Fifth Congress of the Interna-
tional Primatological Society. Karger, Basel, pp 304−309
McGuire AM (2003) “It was nothing” − extending evolutionary models of altruism by two social cog-
nitive biases in judgments of the costs and benefits of helping. Soc Cogn 21:363−394
McNamara JM, Gasson CE, Houston AI (1999) Incorporating rules for responding into evolutionary 
games. Nature 401:368−371

327
References
Mech DL (1970) The Wolf. Natural History Press, New York
Meikle DB, Vessey SH (1981) Nepotism among rhesus monkey brothers. Nature 29:160−161
Mendres KA, de Waal FBM (2000) Capuchins do cooperate: the advantage of an intuitive task. Anim 
Behav 60:523−529
Mesterton-Gibbons M, Dugatkin LA (1992) Cooperation among unrelated individuals: evolutionary 
factors. Q Rev Biol 67:267−281
Michod RE (1982) The theory of kin selection. Ann Rev Ecol Syst 13:23−55
Michod RE (2003) Cooperation and conflict mediation during the origin of multicellularity. In: Ham-
merstein P (ed) Genetic and Cultural Evolution of Cooperation. MIT Press, Cambridge/MA, 
pp 291−307
Milinski M (1987) TIT FOR TAT in sticklebacks and the evolution of cooperation. Nature 
325:433−437
Milinski M, Külling D, Kettler R (1990) Tit for Tat: stickleback (Gastereus aculeatus) “trusting” a coop-
erative partner. Behav Ecol 1:7−11
Milinski M, Semmann D, Krambeck HJ (2002a) Reputation helps solve the “tragedy of the Com-
mons”. Nature 415:424−426
Milinski M, Semmann D, Krambeck HJ (2002b) Donors to charity gain in both indirect reciprocity 
and political reputation. Proc R Soc Lond B 269:881−883
Milinski M, Semmann D, Bakker TCM, Krambeck HJ (2001) Cooperation through indirect reciprocity: 
image scoring or standing strategy? Proc R Soc Lond B 268:2495−2501
Miller EK, Cohen JD (2001) An integrative theory of pre-frontal cortex function. Ann Rev Neurosci 
24:167−202
Miller GF, Todd PM (1999) Mate choice turns cognitive. Trends Cogn Sci 2:190−198
Mills MGL (1990) Kalahari Hyenas: The Comparative Behavioural Ecology of Two Species. Chapman 
& Hall, London
Milton K (1988) Foraging behaviour and the evolution of primate intelligence. In: Byrne RW, Whiten 
A (eds) Machiavellian Intelligence. Clarendon Press, Oxford, pp 285−305
Mitani JC, Watts DP (1999) Demographic influences on the hunting behavior of chimpanzees. Am J 
Phys Anthropol 109:439−454
Mitani JC, Watts DP (2001) Why do chimpanzees hunt and share meat? Anim Behav 61:915−924
Mitani JC, Watts DP (2002) Demographic and social constraints on male chimpanzee behaviour. 
Anim Behav 64:727−737
Mitani JC, Merriwether D, Zhang C (2000) Male affiliation, cooperation and kinship in wild chimpan-
zees. Anim Behav 59:885−893
Mitani JC, Watts DP, Muller M (2002a) Recent developments in the study of wild chimpanzee behav-
ior. Evol Anthropol 11:9−25
Mitani JC, Watts DP, Pepper JW, Merriwether AD (2002b) Demographic and social constraints on 
male chimpanzee behaviour. Anim Behav 64:727−737
Mitchell CL (1990) The ecological basis for female social dominance: a behavioral study of the squir-
rel monkey (Saimiri sciureus sciureus) in the wild. PhD thesis, Princeton Univ Press, Princeton/NJ
Mitchell CL (1994) Migration alliances and coalitions among adult male South American squirrel 
monkeys (Saimiri sciureus). Behaviour 130:169−190
Mithen S (1996) The Prehistory of Mind: The Cognitive Origin of Art and Science. Thames & Hudson, 
London
Moehlman PD (1979) Jackal helpers and pup survival. Nature 277:382−383
Mohtashemi M, Mui L (2003) Evolution of indirect reciprocity by social information: the role of trust 
and reputation in evolution of altruism. J theor Biol 223:523−531
Morin PA, Goldberg TL (2004) Determination of genealogical relationships from genetic data: a 
review of methods and applications. In: Chapais B, Berman C (eds) Kinship and Behavior in Pri-
mates. Oxford Univ Press, Oxford, pp 15−45
Morin PA, Moore JJ, Chakraborty R, Jin L, Goodall J, Woodruff DS (1994) Kin selection, social struc-
ture, gene flow and the evolution of chimpanzees. Science 265:1193−1201
Moss G, Colman AM (2001) Choices and preferences: experiments on gender differences. J. Brand 
Manage 9:89−98

328
References
Moxnes E, van der Heijden E (2003) The effect of leadership in a public bad experiment. J Confl 
Resolut 47:776−795
Müller C, König B (submitted) Energetic peak load reduction in lactating wild-bred house mice can 
diminish reproductive costs. Front Zool
Mueller UG, Poulin J, Adams RMM (2004) Symbiont choice in a fungus-growing ant (Attini, Formici-
dae). Behav Ecol 15:357−364
Mulder RA, Langmore NE (1993) Dominant males punish helpers for temporary defection in superb 
fairy-wrens. Anim Behav 45:830−833
Muller M, Wrangham RW (2001) The reproductive ecology of male hominoids. In: Ellison PT (ed) 
Reproductive Ecology and Human Evolution. Aldine de Gruyter, Hawthorne/NY, pp 397−427
Muramatsu R, Hanoch Y (2005) Emotions as a mechanism for boundedly rational agents: the fast 
and frugal way. J Econ Psychol 26:201−221
Muroyama Y (1991) Mutual reciprocity of grooming in female Japanese macaques (Macaca fuscata). 
Behaviour 119:161−170
Muroyama Y (1994) Exchange of grooming for allomothering in female pata monkeys. Behaviour 
128:103−119
Myerson J, Green L, Hanson JS, Holt DD, Estle SJ (2003) Discounting delayed and probabilistic re-
wards: processes and traits. J Econ Psychol 24:619−635
Neill DB (2001) Optimality under noise: higher memory strategies for the alternating prisoner’s di-
lemma. J theor Biol 211:159−180
Netto WJ, van Hooff JARAM (1986) Conflict interference and the development of dominance rela-
tionships in immature Macaca fasicularis. In: Else JG, Lee PV (eds) Primate Ontogeny, Cognition 
and Social Behaviour. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 291−300
Neuhäusser-Wespy F, König B (2000) Living together − feeding apart. How to measure individual 
food consumption in a social species. Behav Res Methods Instruments Comput 32:169−172
Newcomer DM, de Farcy DD (1985) White-faced capuchin (Cebus capucinus) predation on a nestling 
coati (Nasua narica). J Mammal 66:185−186
Nicolson NA (1987) Infants, mothers and other females. In: Smuts BB, Cheney DL, Seyfarth RM, Wrang-
ham RW, Struhsaker TT (eds) Primate Societies. Univ of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 330−342
Nieder A, Freedman DJ, Miller EK (2002) Representation of the quantity of visual Items in the pri-
mate prefrontal portex. Science 297:1708−1711
Nievergelt CM, Digby LJ, Ramakrishnan U, Woodruff D (2000) Genetic analysis of group compo-
sition and breeding system in a wild common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus) population. Int J 
Primatol 21:1−20
Nimchinsky EA, Gilissen E, Allman JM, Perl DP, Erwin JM, Hof PR (1999) A neuronal morphologic type 
unique to humans and great apes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:5268−5273
Nishida T (1968) The social group of wild chimpanzees in the Mahale Mountains. Primates 
9:167−224
Nishida T (1979) The social structure of chimpanzees in the Mahale Mountains. In: Hamburg DA, Mc-
Cown ER (eds) The Great Apes. Benjamin/Cummings, Menlo Park/CA, pp 73−121
Nishida T (1983) Alpha status and agonistic alliance in wild chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes schwein-
furthii). Primates 24:318−336
Nishida T (1990) The Chimpanzees of the Mahale Mountains: Sexual and Life History Strategies. Univ 
of Tokyo Press, Tokyo
Nishida T, Hasegawa-Hiraiwa M. (1987) Chimpanzees and bonobos: cooperative relationships 
among males. In: Smuts BB, Cheney DL, Seyfarth RM, Wrangham RW, Struhsaker TT (eds) Pri-
mate Societies. Univ of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 165−177
Nishida T, Hosaka K (1996) Coalition strategies among adult male chimpanzees of the Mahale Moun-
tains, Tanzania. In: McGrew WC, Marchant LF, Nishida T (eds) Great Ape Societies. Cambridge 
Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 114−134
Nishida T, Kawanaka K (1972) Inter-unit-group relationships among wild chimpanzees of the Mahale 
mountains. Kyoto Univ Afr Stud 7:131−169
Nishida T, Uehara S, Nyondo R (1983) Predatory behavior among wild chimpanzees of the Mahale 
Mountains. Primates 20:1−20

329
References
Nishida T, Hasegawa T, Hayaki H, Takahata Y, Uehara S (1992) Meat-sharing as a coalition strategy 
by an alpha male chimpanzee? In: Nishida T, McGrew WC, Marler P, Pickford M, de Waal F (eds) 
Topics in Primatology. Vol 1: Human Origins. Karger, Basel, pp 159−174
Noë R (1990) A veto game played by baboons: a challenge to the use of the prisoner’s dilemma as a 
paradigm for reciprocity and cooperation. Anim Behav 39:78−90
Noë R (1992) Alliance formation among male baboons: shopping for profitable partners. In: Har-
court AH, de Waal FBM (eds) Coalitions and Alliances in Humans and other Animals. Oxford Univ 
Press, Oxford, pp 285−322
Noë R (1994) A model of coalition formation among male baboons with fighting ability as the cru-
cial parameter. Anim Behav 47:211−213
Noë R (2001) Biological markets: partner choice as the driving force behind the evolution of mutual-
isms. In: Noë R, Hammerstein P, van Hoof JARAM (eds) Economics in Nature: Social Dilemmas, 
Mate Choice and Biological Markets. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 93−118
Noë R (2005) Cooperation experiments: coordination through communication versus acting apart 
together. Anim Behav, in press
Noë R, Hammerstein P (1994) Biological markets: supply and demand determine the effect of part-
ner choice in cooperation, mutualism and mating. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 35:1−11
Noë R, Hammerstein P (1995) Biological markets. Trends Evol Ecol 10:336−339
Noë R, Sluijter AA (1995) Which adult male savanna baboons form coalitions? Int J Primatol 
16:77−105
Noë R, van Schaik CP, van Hooff JARAM (1991) The market effect: an explanation for pay-off asym-
metries among collaborating animals. Ethology 87:97−118
Noordwijk MA van, van Schaik CP (1985) Male migration and rank acquisition in wild long-tailed 
macaques. Anim Behav 33:849−861
Noordwijk MA van, van Schaik CP (1999) The effects of dominance rank and group size on female 
lifetime reproductive success in wild long-tailed macaques, Macaca fascicularis. Primates 
40:105−130
Noordwijk MA van, van Schaik CP (2001) Career moves: transfer and rank challenge decisions by 
male long-tailed macaques. Behaviour 138:359−395
Noordwijk MA van, van Schaik CP (2004) Sexual selection and the careers of primate males: pater-
nity concentration, dominance acquisition tactics and transfer decisions. In: Kappeler PM, van 
Schaik CP (eds) Sexual Selection in Primates: New and Comparative Perspectives. Cambridge 
Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 208−229
Noussair C, Tucker S (2005) Combining monetary and social sanctions to promote cooperation. 
Econ Inq, in press
Nowak MA (1990) Stochastic strategies in the prisoner’s dilemma. Theroet Popul Biol 38:93−112
Nowak MA, May RM (1992) Evolutionary games and spatial chaos. Nature 359:826−829
Nowak MA, Sigmund K (1992) Tit for tat in heterogeneous populations. Nature 355:250−253
Nowak MA, Sigmund K (1993) A strategy of win-stay, lose-shift outperforms tit-for-tat in the prison-
er’s dilemma game. Nature 364:56−58
Nowak MA, Sigmund K (1994) The alternating prisoner’s dilemma. J theoret Biol 168:219−226
Nowak MA, Sigmund K (1998a) Evolution of indirect reciprocity by image scoring. Nature 
393:573−577
Nowak MA, Sigmund K (1998b) The dynamics of indirect reciprocity. J theor Biol 194:561−574
Nowak MA, Sigmund K (2004) Evolutionary dynamics of biological games. Science 303:793−799
Nowak MA, Sigmund K (in press) Evolution of indirect reciprocity. Nature
Nowak MA, Sasaki A, Taylor C, Fudenberg D (2004) Emergence of cooperation and evolutionary 
stability in finite populations. Nature 428:646−649
Nunn CL (2000) Collective benefits, free-riders and male extragroup conflict. In: Kappeler PM (ed) 
Primate Males. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge
Nunn CL, Deaner R (2004) Patterns of participation and free riding in territorial conflicts among 
ringtailed lemurs (Lemur catta). Behav Ecol Sociobiol 57:50−61
Nunn CL, Lewis RJ (2001) Social dilemmas and human behaviour. In: Noë R, van Hooff JARAM, Ham-
merstein P (eds) Economics in Nature. Social Dilemmas, Mate Choice and Biological Markets. 
Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge

330
References
O’Brien TG (1993) Allogrooming behavior among adult female wedge-capped capuchin monkeys. 
Anim Behav 46:499−510
O’Brien TG, Robinson JG (1993) Stability of relationships in female wedge-capped capuchin mon-
keys: effects of age, rank and relatedness. In: Pereira ME, Fairbanks LA (eds) Juvenile Primates: 
Life History, Development and Behavior. Oxford Univ Press, New York, pp 197−210
Ofek H (2001) Second Nature: Economic Origins of Human Evolution. Cambridge Univ Press, Cam-
bridge
Oftedal OT (1984) Milk composition, milk yield and energy output at peak lactation: a comparative 
review. Symp Zool Soc Lond 51:33−85
Oftedal OT, Gittleman JL (1989) Patterns of energy output during reproduction in carnivores. 
In: Gittleman JL (ed) Carnivore Behavior, Ecology and Evolution. Chapman & Hall, London, 
pp 355−378
Ohtsuki H (2004) Reactive strategies in indirect reciprocity. J theor Biol 227:299−314
Oliveira-Castro JM (2003) Effects of base price upon search behavior of consumers in a supermar-
ket: an operant analysis. J Econ Psychol 24:637−652
Oosterbeek H, Sloof R, van de Kuilen G (2004) Cultural differences in ultimatum game experiments: 
evidence from a meta-analysis. Exp Econ 7:171−188
O’Riain MJ, Jarvis JUM, Faulkes CG (1996) A dispersive morph in the naked mole-rat. Nature 
380:619−621
O’Riain MJ, Bennett NC, Brotherton PNM, McIlrath G, Clutton-Brock TH (2000a) Reproductive sup-
pression and inbreeding avoidance in wild populations of cooperatively breeding meerkats 
(Suricata suricatta). Behav Ecol Sociobiol 48:471−477
O’Riain MJ, Jarvis JUM, Alexander R, Buffenstein R, Peeters C (2000b) Morphological castes in a ver-
tebrate. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97:13194−13197
Ostner J, Kappeler PM (2004) Male life history and the unusual sex ratios of redfronted lemur (Eul-
emur fulvus rufus) groups. Anim Behav 67:249−259
Ostrom E (1999) Governing the Commons. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge 
Ostrom E (2001) Social dilemmas and human behaviour. In: Noë R, van Hooff JARAM, Hammerstein 
P (eds) Economics in Nature. Social Dilemmas, Mate Choice and Biological Markets. Cambridge 
Univ Press, Cambridge
Ostrom E (2003) Trust, reciprocity: interdisciplinary lessons from experimental research. In: Ostrom 
E, Walker J (eds) The Russel Sage Foundation Series on Trust. Vol VI. Russel Sage Foundation, 
New York
Ostrom E, Walker J, Gardner R (1992) Covenants with and without a sword: self-governance is pos-
sible. Am Polit Sci Rev 86:404−417
Owens DD, Owens MJ (1984) Helping behaviour in brown hyenas. Nature 308:843−845
Packer C (1977) Reciprocal altruism in Papio anubis. Nature 265:441−443
Packer C, Pusey A (1982) Cooperation and competition within coalitions of male lions: kin selection 
or game theory? Nature 296:740−742
Packer C, Scheel D, Pusey AE (1990) Why lions form groups: food is not enough. Am Nat 136:1−19
Packer C, Gilbert DA, Pusey AE, O’Brien SJ (1991) A molecular genetic analysis of kinship and coop-
eration in African lions. Nature 351:562−565
Packer C, Lewis S, Pusey AE (1992) A comparative analysis of non-offspring nursing. Anim Behav 
43:265−282
Packer C, Collins DA, Sindimwo A, Goodall J (1995) Reproductive constraints on aggressive competi-
tion in female baboons. Nature 373:60−63
Page T, Putterman L, Unel B (2005) Voluntary association in public goods experiments: reciprocity, 
mimicry and efficiency. Econ J, in press
Pagnoni G, Zink CF, Montague PR, Berns GS (2002) Activity in human ventral striatum locked to er-
rors of reward prediction. Nat Neurosci 5:97−98
Palfrey TR, Prisbrey JE (1997) Anomalous behavior in public goods experiments: how much and 
why? Am Econ Rev 87:829−846
Palombit RA (1999) Infanticide and the evolution of pairbonds in nonhuman primates. Evol An-
thropol 7:117−128

331
References
Palombit RA, Cheney DL, Seyfarth RM (2001) Female-female competition for male “friends” in wild 
chacma baboons, Papio cycocephalus ursinus. Anim Behav 61:1159−1171
Panchanathan K, Boyd R (2003) A tale of two defectors: the importance of standing for evolution of 
indirect reciprocity. J theor Biol 224:115−126
Panchanathan K, Boyd R (2004) Indirect reciprocity can stabilize cooperation without the second-
order free rider problem. Nature 432:499−502
Pandit SA, van Schaik CP (2003) A model for leveling coalitions among male primates: towards a 
theory of egalitarianism. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 55:161−168
Panksepp J (2005) Affective cosnciousness: core emotional feelings in animals and humans. Con-
scious Cogn, in press
Parr LA, Matheson MD, Bernstein IS, de Waal FBM (1997) Grooming down the hierarchy: allogroom-
ing in captive brown capuchin monkeys, Cebus apella. Anim Behav 54:361−367
Passingham R (1993) The Frontal Lobes and Voluntary Action. Oxford Univ Press, Oxford
Paul A, Kuester J (2003) The impact of kinship on mating and reproduction. In: Chapais B, Berman 
CM (eds) Kinship and Behavior in Primates. Oxford Univ Press, New York, pp 271−291
Pawlowski B, Dunbar RIM (1999) Impact of market value on human mate choice decisions. Proc R 
Soc Lond B 266:281−285
Pawlowski B, Dunbar RIM (2001) Human mate chocie strategies. In: Noë R, van Hooff JARAM, Ham-
merstein P (eds) Economics in Nature. Social Dilemmas, Mate Choice and Biological Markets. 
Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge
Payne HFP (in preparation) Competition, tolerance and grooming among samango monkey and 
chacma baboon females. PhD thesis, Univ of Natal, South Africa
Payne HFP, Lawes MJ, Henzi SP (2003) Competition and the exchange of grooming in female sa-
mango monkeys (Cercopithecus mitis erytharcus). Behaviour 140:453−471
Peck JR (1993) Friendship and the evolution of co-operation. J theor Biol 162:195−228
Pelikán J (1981) Patterns of reproduction in the house mouse. Symp Zool Soc Lond 47:205−229
Pellmyr O, Huth CJ (1994) Evolutionary stability of mutualism between yuccas and yucca moths. 
Nature 372:257−260
Penn DJ (2002) The scent of genetic compatibility: sexual selection and the major histocompatibil-
ity complex. Ethology 108:1−21
Pennycuik PR, Johnston PG, Westwood NH, Reisner AH (1986) Variation in numbers in a house 
mouse population housed in a large outdoor enclosure: seasonal fluctuations. J Anim Ecol 
55:371−391
Pereira ME (1988) Agonistic interactions of juvenile savanna baboons. I. Fundamental features. 
Ethology 79:195−217
Pereira ME (1989) Agonistic interactions of juvenile savanna baboons. II. Agonistic support and rank 
acquisition. Ethology 80:152−171
Pereira ME (1993) Agonistic interaction, dominance relation and ontogenetic trajectories in ring-
tailed lemurs. In: Pereira ME, Fairbanks LA (eds) Juvenile Primates. Oxford Univ Press, New York, 
pp 285−305
Perry S (1998) Male-male social relationships in wild white-faced capuchins, Cebus capucinus. Be-
haviour 135:139−172
Perry S, Rose L (1994) Begging and transfer of coati meat by white-faced capuchin monkeys, Cebus 
capucinus. Primates 35:409−415
Petit O, Abegg C, Thierry B (1997) A comparative study of aggression and conciliation in three cerco-
pithecine monkeys (Macaca fuscata, Macaca nigra, Papio papio). Behaviour 134:415−432
Pfann GA, Biddle JE, Hamermesh DS, Bosman CM (2000) Business success and businesses’ beauty 
capital. Econ Lett 67:201−207
Pfeiffer T, Rutte C, Killingback T, Taborsky M, Bonhoeffer S (2005) Evolution of cooperation through 
generalized reciprocity. Proc R Soc Lond B, in press
Pollock G, Dugatkin LA (1992) Reciprocity and the emergence of reputation. J theor Biol 159:25−37
Pope TR (1990) The reproductive consequences of male cooperation in the red howler monkey: 
paternity exclusion in multi-male and single-male troops using genetic markers. Behav Ecol 
Sociobiol 27:439−446

332
References
Pope TR (1998) Effects of demographic change on group kin structure and gene dynamics of popu-
lations of red howling monkeys. J Mammal 79:692−712
Pope TR (2000a) Reproductive success increases with degree of kinship in cooperative coalitions of 
female red howler monkeys (Alouatta seniculus). Behav Ecol Sociobiol 48:253−267
Pope TR (2000b) The evolution of male philopatry in neotropical monkeys. In: Kappeler PM (ed) 
Primate Males. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 219−235
Posch M, Pichler A, Sigmund K (1999) The efficiency of adapting aspiration levels. Proc R Soc Lond 
B 266:1427−1435
Potts R (2004) Palaoenvironmental basis of cognitive evolution in Great Apes. Am J Primatol 
62:209−228
Poundstone W (1992) Prisoner’s Dilemma. Anchor Books, New York
Preuschoft S, van Schaik CP (2000) Dominance and communication: conflict management in vari-
ous social settings. In: Aureli F, de Waal FBM (eds) Natural Conflict Resolution. Univ of California 
Press, Berkeley, pp 77−105
Preuschoft S, Wang X, Aureli F, de Waal FBM (2002) Reconciliation in captive chimpanzees: a re-
evaluation with controlled methods. Int J Primatol 23:29−50
Price EC (1992a) Changes in the activity of captive cotton-top tamarins (Saguinus oedipus) over the 
breeding cycle. Primates 33:99−106
Price EC (1992b) The costs of infant carrying in captive cotton-top tamarins. Int J Primatol 
13:125−141
Price ME (2005) Monitoring, reputation and “greenbeard” reciprocity in a Shuar work team. J Org 
Behav, in press
Prud’homme J, Chapais B (1996) Development of intervention behavior in Japanese macaques: 
testing the targeting hypothesis. Int J Primatol 17:429−443
Pusey AE (1979) Intercommunity transfer of chimpanzees in Gombe National Park. In: Hamburg D, 
McCown L (eds) The Great Apes. Benjamin-Cummings, Menlo Park, pp 465−479
Pusey AE, Packer C (1987) Dispersal and philopatry. In: Smuts BB, Cheney DL, Seyfarth RM, Wrang-
ham RW, Struhsaker TT (eds) Primate Societies. Univ of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 250−266
Pusey AE, Packer C (1994) Non-offspring nursing in social carnivores: minimizing the costs. Behav 
Ecol 5:362−374
Pusey AE, Packer C (1997) The ecology of relationships. In: Krebs JR, Davies NB (eds) Behavioural 
Ecology: An Evolutionary Approach. Blackwell, Oxford, pp 254−283
Queller DC, Strassmann JE (1998) Kin selection and social insects. BioScience 48:165−175
Quervain DJ-F de, Fischbacher U, Treyer V, Scellhammer M, Schnyder U, Buck A, Fehr E (2004) The 
neural basis of altruistic punishment. Science 305:1254−1258
Rabin M (1993) Incorporating fairness into game theory and economics. Am Econ Rev 
83:1281−1302
Radespiel U, Sarikaya Z, Zimmermann E, Bruford MW (2001) Sociogenetic structure in a free-living 
nocturnal primate population: sex-specific differences in the grey mouse lemur (Microcebus 
murinus). Behav Ecol Sociobiol 50:493−502
Rajpurohit LS, Sommer V (1993) Juvenile male emigration from natal one-male trops in Hanuman 
langurs. In: Pereira ME, Fairbanks LA (eds) Juvenile Primates. Oxford Univ Press, New York, 
pp 86−103
Rahaman H, Parsatharathy MD (1978) Behavioural variants of bonnet macaque (Macaca radiata) in-
habiting cultivated gardens. J Bombay Nat Hist Soc 75:405−425
Rajala AK, Hantula DA (2000) Towards a behavioural ecology of consumption: delay-reduction ef-
fects on foraging in a simulated internet mall. Manag Decis Econ 21:145−158
Rankin FR (2003) Communication in ultimatum games. Econ Lett 81:267−271
Rapaport L (2001) Food transfer among adult lion tamarins: mutualism, reciprocity or one-sided 
relationships? Int J Primatol 22:611−628
Rapaport A, Chammah AM (1965) Prisoner’s Dilemma. Univ of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor
Rawlins RG, Kessler MJ (1986) The Cayo Santiago Macaques: History, Behavior and Biology. State 
Univ of New York Press, Albany
Rawls J (1971) A Theory of Justice. Harvard Univ Press, Cambridge/MA

333
References
Reeve HK, Keller L (1995) Partitioning of reproduction in mother-daughter versus sibling associa-
tions: a test of optimal skew theory. Am Nat 145:119−132
Reeve HK, Sherman PW (1991) Intracolonial aggression and nepotism by the breeding female naked 
mole-rat. In: Sherman PW; Jarvis JUM, Alexander, RD (eds) The Biology of the Naked Mole-Rat. 
Princeton Univ Press, Princeton/NJ, pp. 337−357
Reeve HK, Emlen S, Keller L (1998) Reproductive sharing in animal societies: reproductive incentives 
or incomplete control by dominant breeders? Behav Ecol 9:267−278
Rege M, Telle K (2004) The impact of social approval and framing on cooperation in public good 
situations. J Public Econ 88:1625−1644
Rendall D (2004) “Recognizing” kin: mechanisms, media, minds, modules and muddles. In: Chapais 
B, Berman C (eds) Kinship and Behavior in Primates. Oxford Univ Press, Oxford, pp 295−316
Rhijn JG van (1973) Behavioural dimorphism in male ruffs, Philomachus pugnax (L). Behaviour 
47:153−229
Rhijn JG van (1983) On the maintenance and origin of alternative strategies in the Ruff, Philomachus 
pugnax. Ibis 125:482−498
Richerson PJ, Boyd R (2001) Institutional evolution in the Holocene: the rise of complex societies. In: 
Runciman WG (ed) The Origin of Human Social Institutions. Proc Br Acad 110:197−204
Richerson PJ, Boyd RT, Henrich J (2003) Cultural evolution of human cooperation. In: Hammerstein P 
(ed) Genetic and Cultural Evolution of Cooperation. MIT Press, Cambridge/MA, pp 357−388
Ridley AR (2003) The causes and consequences of helping behaviour in the cooperatively breeding 
Arabian babbler. PhD thesis, Univ of Cambridge, Cambridge
Riolo R, Cohen MD, Axelrod R (2001a) Evolution of cooperation without reciprocity. Nature 
414:441−443
Riolo R, Cohen MD, Axelrod R (2001b) Does similarity breed cooperation. Nature 418:500
Riss D, Goodall J (1977) The recent rise to the alpha rank in a population of free-living chimpanzees. 
Fol Primatol 27:134−151
Roberts G, Sherratt TN (1998) Development of cooperative relationships through increasing invest-
ment. Nature 394:175−179
Roberts G, Sherratt TN (2002) Does similarity breed cooperation? Nature 418:499−500
Roberts RL, Jenkins KT, Lawler JT, Wegner F, Norcross JL, Bernhards DE, Newman JD (2001) Prolac-
tin levels are elevated after infant carrying in parentally inexperienced common marmosets. 
Physiol Behav 72:713−720
Roberts WA (2002) Are animals stuck in time? Psychol Bull 128:473−489
Robinson JG, Janson CH (1987) Capuchins, squirrel monkeys and atelines: socioecological conver-
gence with Old World primates. In: Smuts BB, Cheney DL, Seyfarth RM, Wrangham RW, Struhsa-
ker TT (eds) Primate Societies. Univ of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 69−82
Rodseth L, Wrangham RW (2003) Human kinship: a continuation of politics by other means? In: 
Chapais B, Berman CM (eds) Kinship and Behavior in Primates. Oxford Univ Press, New York, 
pp 389−419
Ron T, Henzi SP, Motro U (1994) A new model of fission in primate troops. Anim Behav 47:223−226
Ron T, Henzi SP, Motro U (1996) Do female chacma baboons compete for a safe spatial position in a 
woodland habitat in Zululand, South Africa? Behaviour 133:475−490
Rood JP (1986) Ecology and social evolution in the mongooses. In: Rubenstein DI, Wrangham RW 
(eds) Ecological Aspects of Social Evolution. Princeton Univ Press, Princeton/NJ, pp 131−152
Rood JP (1990) Group size, survival, reproduction and routes to breeding in dwarf mongooses. 
Anim Behav 39:566−572
Rose L (1997) Vertebrate predation and food-sharing in Cebus and Pan. Int J Primatol 18:727−765
Rosenkranz MA, Jackson DC, Dalton KM, Dolski I, Ryff CD, Singer BH, Muller D, Kalin NH, Davidson 
RJ (2003) Affective style and in vivo immune response: neurobehavioral mechanisms. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA 100:11148−11152
Roth AE (1995) Bargaining experiments. In: Kagel JH, Roth AE (eds) Handbook of Experimental Eco-
nomics. Princeton Univ Press, Princeton/NJ
Rothstein SI, Pierotti R (1988) Distinctions among reciprocal altruism, kin selection and cooperation 
and a model for the initial evolution of beneficent behavior. Ethol Sociobiol 9:189−209
Roulin A, Heeb P (1999) The immunological function of allosuckling. Ecol Lett 2:319−324

334
References
Rowell T, Wilson C, Cords M (1991) Reciprocity and partner preference in grooming of female blue 
monkeys. Int J Primatol 12:319−336
Ruiter JR de, van Hooff JARAM, Scheffrahn W (1994) Social and genetic aspects of paternity in wild 
long-tailed macaques (Macaca fascicularis). Behaviour 129:203−224
Russell AF (2004) Mammals: comparisons and contrasts. In: Koenig W, Dickinson J (eds) Ecology and 
Evolution of Cooperative Breeding in Birds. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 210−227
Russell AF, Hatchwell BJ (2001) Experimental evidence for kin-biased helping in a cooperatively 
breeding vertebrate. Proc R Soc Lond B 268:2169−2174
Russell AF, Clutton-Brock TH, Brotherton PNM, Sharpe LL, McIlrath GM, Dalerum FD, Cameron EZ, 
Barnard JA (2002) Factors affecting pup growth and survival in cooperatively breeding meer-
kats Suricata suricatta. J Anim Ecol 71:700−709
Russell AF, Sharpe LL, Brotherton PNM, Clutton-Brock TH (2003a) Cost minimization by helpers in 
cooperative vertebrates. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100:3333−3338
Russell AF, Brotherton PNM, McIlrath GM, Sharpe LL, Clutton-Brock TH (2003b) Breeding success in 
cooperative meerkats: effects of helper number and maternal state. Behav Ecol 14:486−492
Russell AF, Carlson AA, McIlrath GM, Sharpe L, Clutton-Brock TH (2005) Morphological modifica-
tions of breeders in cooperative mammals. Evolution, in press
Rutte C, Taborksy M (in review) Generalized reciprocity in female rats
Sachs J, Mueller UG, Wilcox TP, Bull JJ (2004) The evolution of cooperation. Q Rev Biol 79:135−160
Sade DS (1972) Sociometrics of Macaca mulatta: linkages and cliques in grooming matrices. Fol Pri-
matol 18:196−223
Sally D (1995) Conversation and cooperation in social dilemmas: a meta-analysis of experiments 
from 1958 to 1992. Ration Soc 7:58−92
Sanfey AG, Rilling JK, Aronson JA, Nystrom LE, Cohen JD (2003) The neural basis of economic deci-
sion-making in the ultimatum game. Science 300:1755−1758
Savage A (1990) The reproductive biology of the cotton-top tamarin (Saguinus oedipus oedipus) in 
Colombia. PhD thesis, Univ of Wisconsin, Madison
Sayler A, Salmon M (1969) Communal nursing in mice: influence of multiple mothers on the growth 
of the young. Science 164:1309−1310
Schaffner CM, Caine NG (2000) The peacefulness of cooperatively breeding primates. In: Aureli F, de 
Waal FBM (eds) Natural Conflict Resolution. Univ of California Press, Berkeley, pp 155−169
Schaffner CM, French JA (1997) Group size and aggression: “recruitment incentives” in a coopera-
tively breeding primate. Anim Behav 54:171−180
Schaffner CM, Aureli F, Caine NG (2005) Following the rules: why small groups of tamarins do not 
reconcile conflicts. Fol Primatol 76:67−76
Schaik CP van (1983) Why are diurnal primates living in groups? Behaviour 87:120−144
Schaik CP van (1989) The ecology of social relationships amongst female primates. In: Standen V, 
Foley R (eds) Comparative Socioecology: The Behavioural Ecology of Humans and other Mam-
mals. Blackwell, Oxford, pp 195−218
Schaik CP van (1996) Social evolution in primates: the role of ecological factors and male behaviour. 
Proc Brit Acad 88:9−31
Schaik CP van (2000) Infanticide by male primates: the sexual selection hypothesis revisited. In: 
van Schaik CP, Janson CH (eds) Infanticide by Males and its Implications. Cambridge Univ Press, 
Cambridge, pp 27−60
Schaik CP van (2003) Local traditions in orangutans and chimpanzees: social learning and social 
tolerance. In: Fragaszy DM, Perry S (eds) The Biology of Traditions: Models and Evidence. Cam-
bridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 297−328
Schaik CP van, Aureli F (2000) The natural history of valuable relationships in primates. In: Aureli F, 
de Waal FBM (eds) Natural Conflict Resolution. California Press, Berkeley, pp 307−333
Schaik CP van, Hörstermann M (1994) Predation risk and the number of adult males in a primate 
group: a comparative test. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 35:261−272
Schaik CP van, Kappeler PM (1997) Infanticide risk and the evolution of permanent male-female 
association in non-human primates: a new hypothesis and comparative test. Proc R Soc Lond 
B 264:1687−1694

335
References
Schaik CP van, van Hooff JARAM (1996) Toward an understanding of the orangutan’s social system. 
In: McGrew WC, Marchant LF, Nishida T (eds) Great Ape Societies. Cambridge Univ Press, Cam-
bridge, pp 3−15
Schaik CP van, van Noordwijk MA (1986) The hidden costs of sociality: intra-group variation in feed-
ing strategies in Sumatran long-tailed macaques (Macaca fascicularis). Behaviour 99:296−315
Schaik CP van, van Noordwijk MA, Warsono B, Sutriono E (1983) Party size and early detection of 
predators in Sumatran forest primates. Primates 24:211−221
Schaik CP van, Pandit SA, Vogel ER (2005) A model for within-group coalitionary aggression among 
males. Behav Ecol Sociobiol, in press
Schaller GB (1972) The Serengeti Lion. Univ of Chicago Press, Chicago
Schaub H (1996) Testing kin altruism in long-tailed macaques (Macaca fascicularis) in a food-sharing 
experiment. Int J Primatol 17:445−467
Schino G (1998) Reconciliation in domestic goats. Behaviour 135:343−356
Schino G (2000) Beyond the primates: expanding the reconciliation horizon. In: Aureli F, de Waal 
FBM (eds) Natural Conflict Resolution. Univ of California Press, Berkeley, pp 225−242
Schino G (2001) Grooming, competition and social rank among female primates: a meta analysis. 
Anim Behav 62:265−271
Schino G, Scucchi S, Maestripieri D, Turillazzi PG (1988) Allogrooming as a tension- reduction mech-
anism: a behavioral approach. Am J Primatol 16:43−50
Schino G, Perretta G, Taglioni AM, Monaco V, Troisi A (1996) Primate displacement activities as an 
ethopharmacological model of anxiety. Anxiety 2:186−191
Schoech SJ, Mumme RL, Wingfield JC (1996) Prolactin and helping behaviour in the cooperatively 
breeding Florida scrub-jay, Aphelocoma c. coerulescens. Anim Behav 52:445−456
Schoech SJ, Reynolds SJ, Boughton RK (2004) Endocrinology. In: Koenig W, Dickinson J (eds) 
Ecology and Evolution of Cooperative Breeding in Birds. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, 
pp 128−141
Schwartz MW, Hoeksema JD (1998) Specialization and resource trade: biological markets as a model 
of mutualisms. Ecology 79:1029−1038
Seabright P (2004) The Company of Strangers. A Natural History of Economic Life. Princeton Univ 
Press, Princeton/NJ
Sefton M, Shupp R, Walker J (2002) The effect of rewards and sanctions in provision of public goods. 
CeDEx Working Paper 2002-2, Univ of Nottingham
Seinen I, Schram A (2001) Social status and group norms: indirect reciprocity in a helping experi-
ment. Discussion Paper TI2001-003/1, Tinbergen Institute, Amsterdam
Seinen I, Schram A (2005) Social status and group norms: indirect reciprocity in a helping experi-
ment. Eur Econ Rev, in press
Sekulik R (1983) Male relationships and infant deaths in red howler monkeys (Alouatta seniculus). 
Primates 24:475−485
Sella G, Premoli MC, Turri F (1997) Egg trading in the simultaneously hermaphroditic polychaete 
worm Ophryotrocha gracilis (Huth). Behav Ecol 8:83−86
Selten R, Stoecker R (1986) End behavior in sequences of finite prisoner’s dilemma supergames. A 
learning theory approach. J Econ Behav Org 7:47−70
Semendeferi K, Damasio H, Frank R, van Hoesen GW (1997) The evolution of the frontal lobes: a 
volumetric analysis based on three-dimensional reconstructions of magnetic resonance scans 
of human and ape brains. J Hum Evol 32:375−388
Semmann D, Krambeck HJ, Milinski M (2003) Volunteering leads to rock-paper-scissors dynamics in 
a public goods game. Nature 425:390−393
Semmann D, Krambeck HJ, Milinski M (2004) Strategic investment in reputation. Behav Ecol Socio-
biol 56:248−252
Semmann D, Krambeck HJ, Milinski M (2005) Reputation is valuable within and outside one’s own 
social group. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 57:611−616
Setchell JM, Lee PC, Wickings EJ, Dixson AF (2002) Reproductive parameters and maternal invest-
ment in mandrills. Int J Primatol 23:51−68
Sethi R, Somanathan E (2003) Understanding reciprocity. J Econ Behav Org 50:1−27

336
References
Seyfarth RM (1977) A model of social grooming among adult female monkeys. J theoret Biol 
65:671−698
Seyfarth RM (1980) The distribution of grooming and related behaviours among adult female ver-
vet monkeys. Anim Behav 28:798−813
Seyfarth RM (1983) Groming and social competition in primates. In: Hinde RA (ed) Primate Social 
Relationships: An Integrated Approach. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland/MA, pp 182−190
Seyfarth RM, Cheney DL (1984) Grooming, alliances and reciprocal altruism in vervet monkeys. Na-
ture 308:541−543
Seyfarth RM, Cheney DL (1988) Empirical tests of reciprocity theory: problems in assessment. Ethol 
Sociobiol 9:181−187
Sherman PW (1977) Nepotism and the evolution of alarm calls. Science 197:1246−1253
Sherman PW, Lacey EA, Reeve HW, Keller L (1995) The eusociality continuum. Behav Ecol 6:102−108
Sherman PW, Reeve HK, Pfennig DW (1997) Recognition systems. In: Krebs JR, Davies NB (eds) Be-
havioural Ecology: An Evolutionary Approach. Blackwell, Oxford, pp 69−96
Shettleworth SJ (1998) Cognition, Evolution and Behavior. Oxford Univ Press, New York
Sigg H, Stolba A, Abegglen JJ, Dasser V (1982) Life history of hamadryas baboons: physical de-
velopment, infant mortality, reproductive parameters and family relationships. Primates 
23:473−487
Sigmund K, Hauert C, Nowak MA (2001) Reward and punishment. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
98:10757−10762
Silk JB (1982) Altruism among female Macaca radiata: explanations and analysis of patterns of 
grooming and coalition formation. Behaviour 79:162−188
Silk JB (1984) Local resource competition and the evolution of male-biased sex ratios. J theoret Biol 
108:203−213
Silk JB (1987) Social behaviour in evolutionary perspective. In: Smuts BB, Cheney DL, Seyfarth 
RM, Wrangham RW, Struhsaker TT (eds) Primate Societies. Chicago, Chicago Univ Press, 
pp 318−329
Silk JB (1992a) Patterns of intervention in agonistic contests among male bonnet macaques. In: 
Harcourt AH, de Waal FBM (eds) Coalitions and Alliances in Humans and other Animals. Oxford 
Univ Press, Oxford, pp 215−232
Silk JB (1992b) The patterning of intervention among male bonnet macaques: reciprocity, revenge 
and loyalty. Curr Anthropol 33:318−325
Silk JB (1993) Does participation in coalitions influence dominance relationships among male bon-
net macaques? Behaviour 126:171−189
Silk JB (1994) Social relationships of male bonnet macaques: male bonding in a matrilineal society. 
Behaviour 130:271−291
Silk JB (1996) Why do primates reconcile. Evol Anthropol 5:39−42
Silk JB (1997) The function of peaceful post-conflict contacts among primates. Primates 
38:265−279
Silk JB (2001) Ties that bond: the role of kinship in primate societies. In: Stone L (ed) New Directions 
in Anthropological Kinship. Rowman and Littlefield, Boulder/CO,  pp 71−92
Silk JB (2002a) Kin selection in primate groups. Int J Primatol 23:849−875
Silk JB (2002b) Grunts, girneys and good intentions: the origins of strategic commitment in non-
human primates. In: Nesse R (ed) Commitment: Evolutionary Perspectives. Russell Sage Press, 
New York, pp 138−157
Silk JB (2002c) Practice random acts of aggression and senseless acts of intimidation: the logic of 
status contests in social groups. Evol Anthropol 11:221−225
Silk JB, Cheney DL, Seyfarth RM (1996) The form and function of post-conflict interactions between 
female baboons. Anim Behav 52:259−268
Silk JB, Cheney DL, Seyfarth RM (1999) The structure of social relationships among female savannah 
baboons in Moremi Reserve, Botswana. Behaviour 136:679−703
Silk JB, Alberts SC, Altmann J (2003) Social bonds of female baboons enhance infant survival. Sci-
ence 302:1231−1234
Silk JB, Alberts SC, Altmann J (2004) Patterns of coalition formation by adult female baboons in 
Amboseli, Kenya. Anim Behav 67:573−582

337
References
Simms EL, Taylor DL (2002) Partner choice in nitrogen-fixation mutualisms of legumes and rhizobia. 
Integr Comp Biol 42:369−380
Simonds PE (1974) Sex differences in bonnet macaque networks and social structure. Arch Sex Be-
hav 3:151−166
Simpson M (1973) Social grooming of male chimpanzees. In: Crook J, Michael R (eds) Comparative 
Ecology and Behaviour of Primates. Academic Press, London, pp 411−505
Sinervo B, Clobert J (2003) Morphs, dispersal behavior, genetic similarity and the evolution of coop-
eration. Science 300:1949−1951
Singleton GR (1983) The social and genetic structure of a natural colony of house mice, Mus muscu-
lus, at Healesville Wildlife Sanctuary. Aust J Zool 31:155−166
Singleton I, van Schaik CP (2002) The social organisation of a population of Sumatran orang-utans. 
Fol Primatol 73:1−20
Skoyles JR, Sagan D (2002) Up from Dragons: The Evolution of Human Intelligence. McGraw-Hill, 
New York
Smiseth PT, Moore AJ (2004) Behavioral dynamics between caring males and females in a beetle 
with facultative biparental care. Behav Ecol 15:621−628
Smith V (2003) Constructivist and ecological rationality in economics. Am Econ Rev 93:465−508
Smith K, Alberts SC, Altmann J (2003) Wild female baboons bias their social behaviour towards pa-
ternal half-sisters. Proc R Soc Lond B 270:503−510
Smucny DA, Price CS, Byrne EA (1997) Post-conflict affiliation and stress reduction in captive rhesus 
macaques. Adv Ethol 32:157
Smuts BB, Smuts RW (1993) Male aggression and sexual coercion of females in nonhuman primates 
and other animals: evidence and theoretical implications. Adv Stud Behav 22:1−63
Smuts BB, Watanabe JM (1990) Social relationships and ritualized greetings in adult male baboons 
(Papio cynocephalus anubis). Int J Primatol 11:147−172
Sober E, Wilson DS (1998) Unto Others: The Evolution and Psychology of Unselfish Behavior. Har-
vard Univ Press, Cambridge/MA
Solomon NG (1991) Current indirect fitness benefits associated with philopatry in juvenile prairie 
voles. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 29:277−282
Solomon NG, French JA (ed.) (1997) Cooperative Breeding in Mammals. Cambridge Univ Press, Cam-
bridge
Solomon NG, Getz LL (1997) Examination of alternative hypotheses for cooperative breeding in 
rodents. In: Solomon NG, French NG (eds) Cooperative Breeding in Mammals. Cambridge Univ 
Press, Cambridge
Soltis J, Boyd R, Richerson PJ (1995) Can group-functional behaviors evolve by cultural group selec-
tion? An empirical test. Curr Anthropol 36:473−494
Southwick CH (1955) Regulatory mechanisms of house mouse populations: social behavior affect-
ing litter survival. Ecology 36:627−634
Spence M (1973) Job market signalling. Q J Econ 87:355−374
Sprague DS, Suzuki S, Takahashi H, Sato S (1998) Male life history in natural populations of Japa-
nese macaques: migration, dominance rank and troop participation of males in two habitats. 
Primates 39:351−363
Stacey PB, Koenig WD (1990) Cooperative Breeding in Birds. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge
Stammbach E (1987) Desert, forest and montane baboons. In: Smuts BB, Cheney DL, Seyfarth 
RM, Wrangham RW, Struhsaker TT (eds) Primate Societies. Univ of Chicago Press, Chicago, 
pp 112−120
Stamps JA (1991) Why evolutionary issues are reviving an interest in proximate behavioral mecha-
nisms. Am Zool 31:338−348
Stander PE (1992) Cooperative hunting in lions: the role of the individual. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 
29:445−454
Stanford CB (1995) The influence of chimpanzee predation on group size and anti-predator behav-
iour in red colobus monkeys. Anim Behav 49:577−587
Stanford CB (1998) Chimpanzee and Red Colobus: The Ecology of Predator and Prey. Harvard Univ 
Press, Cambridge/MA
Stanford CB (1999) The Hunting Apes. Princeton Univ Press, Princeton/NJ

338
References
Stanford CB, Wallis J, Matama H, Goodall J (1994a) Patterns of predation by chimpanzees on red col-
obus monkeys in Gombe National Park, Tanzania, 1982−1991. Am J Phys Anthropol 94:213−229
Stanford CB, Wallis J, Mpongo E, Goodall J (1994b) Hunting decisions in wild chimpanzees. Behav-
iour 131:1−20
Starin ED (1994) Philopatry and affiliation among red colobus. Behaviour 130:253−270
Steenbeek R, Sterck EHM, de Vries H, van Hooff JARAM (2000) Costs and benefits of the one-male, 
age-graded and all-male phases in wild Thomas’s langur groups. In: Kappeler PM (ed) Primate 
Males. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 130−145
Stephens DW (2000) Cumulative benefit games: achieving cooperation when players discount the 
future. J theor Biol 205 (1):1−16
Stephens DW, Krebs JR (1986) Foraging Theory. Princeton Univ Press, Princeton/NJ
Stephens DW, McLinn CM, Stevens JR (2002) Discounting and reciprocity in an iterated prisoner’s 
dilemma. Science 298:2216−2218
Sterck EHM, van Hooff JARAM (2000) The number of males in langur groups: monopolizability of 
females or demographic processes? In: Kappeler PM (ed) Primate Males. Cambridge Univ Press, 
Cambridge, pp 120−129
Sterck EHM, Watts DP, van Schaik CP (1997) The evolution of female social relationships in nonhu-
man primates. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 41:291−309
Stevens JR (2004) The selfish nature of generosity: harassment and food sharing in primates. Proc 
R Soc Lond B 271:451−456
Stevens JR, Gilby IC (2004) A conceptual framework for nonkin food sharing: timing and currency of 
benefits. Anim Behav 67:603−614
Stevens JR, Hauser M (2004) Why be nice? Psychological constraints on the evolution of coopera-
tion. Trends Cogn Sci 8:60−65
Stewart KJ, Harcourt AH (1987) Gorillas: variation in female relationships. In: Smuts BB, Cheney DL, 
Seyfarth RM, Wrangham RW, Struhsaker TT (eds) Primate Societies. Univ of Chicago Press, Chi-
cago, pp 155−164
Strassmann JE, Solis CR, Hughes CR, Goodnight KF, Queller DC (1997) Colony life-history and de-
mography of a swarm-founding social wasp. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 40:71−77
Strier KB (2000) From binding brotherhoods to short-term sovereignty: the dilemma of male Cebi-
dae. In: Kappeler PM (ed) Primate Males. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 72−83
Strier KB (2004) Patrilineal kinship and primate behavior. In: Chapais B, Berman C (eds) Kinship and 
Behavior in Primates. Oxford Univ Press, New York, pp 177−199
Strier KB, Carvalho DS, Bejar NO (2000) Prescription for peacefulness. In: Aureli F, de Waal FBM (eds) 
Natural Conflict Resolution. Univ of California Press, Berkeley, pp 315−317
Strier KB, Dib LT, Figueira JEC (2002) Social dynamics of male muriquis (Brachyteles arachnoides hy-
poxanthus). Behaviour 139:315−342
Struhsaker TT (1997) Ecology of an African Rain Forest. Univ Press of Florida, Gainesville
Struhsaker TT (2000) Variation in adult sex ratios of red colobus monkey groups: implications for 
interspecific comparisons. In: Kappeler PM (ed) Primate Males. Cambridge Univ Press, Cam-
bridge, pp 108−119
Struhsaker TT, Leland L (1987) Colobine infanticide. In: Smuts BB, Cheney DL, Seyfarth RM, Wrang-
ham RW, Struhsaker TT (eds) Primate Societies. Univ of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 83−97
Suddendorf TT, Corballis MC (1997) Mental time travel and the evolution of the human mind. Genet 
Soc Gen Psychol Monogr 123:133−167
Sugden R (1986) The Economics of Rights, Cooperation and Welfare. Basil Blackwell, Oxford
Sugiyama Y (1971) Characteristics of the social life of bonnet macaques (Macaca radiata). Primates 
12:247−266
Swedell L (2002) Affiliation among females in wild hamadryas baboons (Papio hamadryas hama-
dryas). Int J Primatol 23:1205−1226
Takahashi H (1997) Huddling relationships in night sleeping groups among wild Japanese macaques 
in Kinkayan island during winter. Primates 38:57−68
Tanaka I, Takefushi H (1993) Elimination of external parasites (lices) is the primary function of groom-
ing in free-ranging Japanese macaques. Anthropol Sci 101:187−193

339
References
Tardif SD (1997) The bioenergetics of parental behaviour and the evolution of alloparental care in 
marmosets and tamarins. In: Solomon NG, French JA (eds) Cooperative Breeding in Mammals. 
Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 11−33
Taylor CE, McGuire MT (1988) Reciprocal altruism: 15 years later. Ethol Sociobiol 9:67−72
Tebbich S, Taborsky M, Winkler H (1996) Social manipulation causes cooperation in keas. Anim Be-
hav 52:1−10
Teleki G (1973) The Predatory Behavior of Wild Chimpanzees. Bucknell Univ Press, Brunswick
Thakar JD, Kunte K, Chauhan AK, Watve AV, Watve MG (2003) Nectarless flowers: ecological corre-
lates and evolutionary stability. Oecologia 136:565−570
Thierry B (1986) A comparative study of aggression and response to aggression in three species of 
macaque. In: Else JG, Lee PC (eds) Primate Ontogeny, Cognition and Social Behavior. Cambridge 
Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 307−313
Thierry B (1990) Feedback loop between kinship and dominance: the macaque model. J theoret 
Biol 145:511−521
Thierry B (2000) Covariation of conflict management patterns across macaque species. In: Aureli F, 
de Waal FBM (eds) Natural Conflict Resolution. Univ of California Press, Berkeley, pp 106−128
Thierry B, Wunderlich D, Gueth C (1989) Possession and transfer of objects in a group of brown 
capuchins (Cebus apella). Behaviour 110:294−305
Thompson RKR, Oden DL (2000) Categorical perception and conceptual judgments by non-human 
primates: the paleological monkey and the analogical ape. Cogn Sci 24:363−396
Tinbergen N (1959) Comparative studies on the behaviour of gulls (Laridae): a progress report. Be-
haviour 15:1−70
Todd PM, Gigerenzer G (2000) Précis of simple heuristics that make us smart. Behav Brain Sci 
23:727−780
Todd PM, Gigerenzer G (2003) Bounding rationality to the world. J Econ Psychol 24:143−165
Tomasello M, Call J (1997) Primate Social Cognition. Oxford Univ press, Oxford
Tremblay L, Schultz W (1999) Relative reward preference in primate orbitofrontal cortex. Nature 
398:704−708
Trivers RL (1971) The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Q Rev Biol 46:25−57
Trivers RL (1972) Parental investment and sexual selection. In: Campbell B (ed) Sexual Selection and 
the Descent of Man. Aldine, Chicago, pp 136−179
Trivers RL (1974) Parent-offspring conflict. Am Zool 14:249−264
Trivers RL (1981) Sociobiology and politics. In: White E (ed) Sociobiology and Human Politics. Lex-
ington Books, Lexington, pp 1−43
Trivers RL (1985) Social Evolution. Benjamin/Cummings, Menlo Park
Trivers R (2000) The elements of a scientific theory of self-deception. Ann NY Acad Sci 907:114−131
Trivers R (2002) Natural Selection and Social Theory: Selected Papers of Robert Trivers. Oxford Univ 
Press, New York
Trivers R (2004) Mutual benefits at all levels of life. Science 304:965
Trivers RL, Hare H (1976) Haplodiploidy and the evolution of the social insects. Science 30:253−269
Troisi A (2002) Displacement activities as a behavioral measure of stress in nonhuman primates and 
human subjects. Stress 5:47−54
Tulving E (2002) Episodic memory: from mind to brain. Ann Rev Psychol 53:1−25
Turner PE, Chao L (1999) Prisoner’s dilemma in an RNA virus. Nature 398:441−443
Uehara S, Nishida T, Hamai M, Hasegawa T, Hayaki H, Huffman M, Kawanaka K, Kobayashi S, Mitani 
J, Takahata Y, Takasaki H, Tsukahara T (1992) Characteristics of predation by the chimpanzees 
in the Mahale Mountains National Park, Tanzania. In: Nishida T, McGrew WC, Marler P, Pickford 
M, de Waal F (eds) Topics in Primatology. Vol 1: Human Origins. Univ of Tokyo Press, Tokyo, 
pp 143−158
Veblen T (1899) The Theory of the Leisure Class: An Economic Study of Institutions. The Macmillan 
Company, New York
Vehrencamp SL (1983a) A model for the evolution of despotic versus egalitarian societies. Anim 
Behav 31:667−682
Vehrencamp SL (1983b) Optimal degree of skew in cooperative societies. Am Zool 23:327−335

340
References
Velicer GC, Yu YN (2003) Evolution of novel cooperative swarming in the bacterium Myxococcus 
xanthus. Nature 425:75−78
Vervaecke H, de Vries H, van Elsacker L (2000) The pivotal role of rank in grooming and support 
behavior in a captive group of bonobos (Pan paniscus). Behaviour 137:1463−1485
Vigilant L, Hofreiter M, Siedel H, Boesch C (2001) Paternity and relatedness in wild chimpanzee com-
munities. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:12890−12895
Visalberghi E, Limongelli (1994) Lack of comprehension of cause-effect relations in tool using capu-
chin monkeys. J Comp Psychol 108:15−22
Visalberghi E, Quarantotti BP, Tranchida F (2000) Solving a cooperation task without taking into 
account the partner’s behavior: the case of capuchin monkeys (Cebus apella). J Comp Psychol 
114:297−301
Vleck CM, Mays NA, Dawson JW, Goldsmith A (1991) Hormonal correlates of parental and helping 
behavior in cooperatively breeding Harris’ hawks, Parabuteo unicinctus. Auk 108:638−648
Voland E (2000) Contributions of family reconstruction studies to evolutionary reproductive ecol-
ogy. Evol Antropol 9:134−146
Voland E, Dunbar RIM (1995) Resource competition and reproduction. The relationship between 
economic and parental strategies in the Krummhörn population (1720−1874). Hum Nat 
6:33−49
Voland E, Engel C (1990) Female choice in humans: a conditional mate selection strategy of the 
Krummhoern women (Germany, 1720−1874). Ethology 84:144−154
Vries H de, Netto W, Hanegraaf P (1993) MatMan: a program for the analysis of sociometric matrices 
and behavioural transition matrices. Behaviour 125:157−175
Waal FBM de (1982 [1998]) Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex among Apes. Johns Hopkins Univ 
Press, Baltimore
Waal FBM de (1986a) Class structure in a rhesus monkey group; the interplay between dominance 
and tolerance. Anim Behav 34:1033−1040
Waal FBM de (1986b) The integration of dominance and social bonding in primates. Q Rev Biol 
61:459−479
Waal FBM de (1989) Food sharing and reciprocal obligations among chimpanzees. J Hum Evol 
18:433−459
Waal FBM de (1991a) Complementary methods and convergent evidence in the study of primate 
social cognition. Behaviour 118:297−320
Waal FBM de (1991b) Rank distance as a central feature of rhesus monkey social organization: a 
sociometric analysis. Anim Behav 41:383−398
Waal FBM de (1992a) Coalitions as part of reciprocal relations in the Arnhem chimpanzee colony. In: 
Harcourt AH, de Waal FBM (eds) Coalitions and Alliances in Humans and other Animals. Oxford 
Univ Press, Oxford, pp 233−257
Waal FBM de (1992b) The chimpanzees sense of social regularity and its relation to the human sense 
of justice. In: Masters RD, Gruter M (eds) The Sense of Justice: Biological Foundations of Law. 
Sage, Newbury Park, pp 241−255
Waal FBM de (1993) Reconciliation among primates: a review of empirical evidence and unre-
solved issues. In: Mason WA, Mendoza SP (eds) Primate Social Conflict. SUNY Press, Albany, 
pp 111−144
Waal FBM de (1996a) Conflict as negotiation. In: McGrew WC, Marchant LF, Nishida T (eds) Great Ape 
Societies. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 159−172
Waal FBM de (1996b) Good Natured: The Origins of Right and Wrong in Humans and other Animals. 
Harvard Univ Press, Cambridge/MA
Waal FBM de (1997a) The chimpanzee’s service economy: food for grooming. Evol Hum Behav 
18:375−386
Waal FBM de (1997b) Food transfers through mesh in brown capuchins. J Comp Psychol 
111:370−378
Waal FBM de (2000a) The first kiss: foundations of conflict resolution research in animals. In: Aureli F, 
de Waal FBM (eds) Natural Conflict Resolution. Univ of California Press, Berkeley, pp 15−33
Waal FBM de (2000b) Primates − a natural heritage of conflict resolution. Science 289:586−590

341
References
Waal FBM de (2000c) Attitudinal reciprocity in food sharing among brown capuchin monkeys. Anim 
Behav 60:253−361
Waal FBM de (2003) Social syntax: the if-then structure of social problem solving. In: de Waal FBM, 
Tyack PL (eds) Animal Social Complexity. Harvard Univ Press, Cambridge/MA, pp 230−248
Waal FBM de, Berger ML (2000) Payment for labour in monkeys. Nature 404:563
Waal FBM de, Davis JM (2003) Capuchin cognitive ecology: cooperation based on projected returns. 
Neuropsychologia 41:221−228
Waal FBM de, Harcourt AH (1992) Coalitions and alliances: a history of ethological research. In: Har-
court AH, deWaal FBM (eds) Coalitions and Alliances in Humans and other Animals. Oxford Univ 
Press, Oxford, pp 1−19
Waal FBM de, Luttrell LM (1986) The similarity principle underlying social bonding among female 
rhesus monkeys. Fol Primatol 46:215−34
Waal FBM de, Luttrell LM (1988) Mechanisms of social reciprocity in three primate species: sym-
metrical relationship characteristics or cognition? Ethol Sociobiol 9:101−118
Waal FBM de, Ren R (1988) Comparison of the reconciliation behavior of stumptail and rhesus ma-
caques. Ethology 78:129−142
Waal FBM de, van Hooff JARAM (1981) Side-directed communication and agnoistic interactions in 
chimpanzees. Behaviour 77:164−198
Waal FBM de, van Roosmalen A (1979) Reconciliation and consolation among chimpanzees. Behav 
Ecol Sociobiol 5:55−66
Waal FBM de, Yoshihara D (1983) Reconciliation and redirected affection in rhesus monkeys. Behav-
iour 85:224−241
Waal FBM de, van Hooff JARAM, Netto WJ (1976) An ethological analysis of types of agnostic interac-
tion in a captive group of java-monkeys (Macaca fascicularis). Primates 17:257−290
Waal FBM de, Luttrell LM, Canfield ME (1993) Preliminary data on voluntary food sharing in brown 
capuchin monkeys. Am J Primatol 29:73−78
Wahaj SA, Guse KR, Holekamp KE (2001) Reconciliation in spotted hyena (Crocuta crocuta). Ethology 
107:1057−1074
Walters JR (1980) Interventions and the development of dominance relationships in female ba-
boons. Fol Primatol 34:61−89
Walters JR (1987) Kin recognition in nonhuman primates. In: Fletcher DF, Michener CD (eds) Kin 
Recognition in Animals. John Wiley, New York, pp 359−393
Wamboldt MZ, Gelhard RE, Insel TR (1988) Gender differences in caring for infant Cebuella pygmaea: 
the role of infant age and relatedness. Dev Psychobiol 21:187−202
Wang ZX, Novak MA (1992) Influence of the social environment on parental behaviour and pup de-
velopment of meadow voles (Microtus pennsylvanicus) and prairie voles (Microtus ochrogaster). 
J Comp Psychol 106:163−171
Waser PM (1988) Resources, philopatry and social interactions among mammals. In: Slobodchikoff 
CN (ed) The Ecology of Social Behavior. Academic Press, San Diego, pp 109−130
Watanabe K (1979) Alliance formation in a free-ranging troop of Japanese macaques. Primates 
20:459−474
Watanabe M (1999) Attraction is relative not absolute. Nature 398:661−662
Watanabe K (2001) A review of 50 years of research on the Japanese monkeys of Koshima: status and 
dominance. In: Matsuzawa T (ed) Primate Origins of Human Cognition and Behavior. Springer, 
Tokyo, pp 405−417
Watts DP (1991) Harassment of immigrnt female mountain gorillas by resident females. Ethology 
89:135−153
Watts DP (1994) Social relationships of immigrant and resident female mountain gorillas. II. Related-
ness, residence and relationships between females. Am J Primatol 32:13−30
Watts DP (1995) Post-conflict social events in wild mountain gorillas (Mammalia, Hominoidea) I. 
Social interactions between opponents. Ethology 100:139−157
Watts DP (1996) Comparative socio-ecology of gorillas. In: McGrew WC, Marchant LF, Nishida T (eds) 
Great Ape Societies. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 16−28
Watts DP (1997) Agonistic interventions in wild mountain gorilla groups. Behaviour 134:23−57

342
References
Watts DP (1998) Coalitionary mate-guarding by male chimpanzees at Ngogo, Kibale National Park, 
Uganda. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 44:43−55
Watts DP (2000a) Causes and consequences of variation in male mountain gorilla life histories. In: 
Kappeler PM (ed) Primate Males. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 169−179
Watts DP (2000b) Grooming between male chimpanzees at Ngogo, Kibale National Park. I. Partner 
number and diversity and grooming reciprocity. Int J Primatol 21:189−210
Watts DP (2002) Reciprocity and interchange in the social relationships of wild male chimpanzees. 
Behaviour 139:343−370
Watts DP, Mitani J (2000) Hunting behavior of chimpanzees at Ngogo, Kibale National Park, Uganda. 
Int J Primatol 23:1−28
Watts DP, Mitani J (2001) Boundary patrols and intergroup encounters in wild chimpanzees. Behav-
iour 138:299−327
Watts DP, Pusey AE (1993) Behavior of juvenile and adolescent great apes. In: Pereira ME, Fairbanks 
LA (eds) Juvenile Primates. Oxford Univ Press, New York, pp 148−171
Wedekind C, Braithwaite VA (2002) The long-term benefits of human generosity in indirect reci-
procity. Curr Biol 12:1012−1015
Wedekind C, Milinski M (2000) Cooperation through image scoring in humans. Science 
288:850−852
Weingrill T, Lycett JE, Henzi SP (2000) Consortship and mating success in chacma baboons (Papio 
cynocephalus ursinus). Ethology 106:1033−1044
West SA, Murray MG, Machado CA, Griffin AS, Herre EA (2001) Testing Hamilton’s Rule with competi-
tion between relatives. Nature 409:510−513
West SA, Pen I, Griffin A (2002) Cooperation and competition between relatives. Science 296:72−75
Westlund K, Ljungberg T, Borefelt U, Abrahamsson C (2000) Post-conflict affiliation in common mar-
mosets (Callithrix jacchus jacchus). Am J Primatol 52:31−46
White SM (2001) Juvenile development and conflicts of interest in meerkats. PhD thesis, Cambridge 
Univ Press, Cambridge
Whiten A, Byrne RW (1997) Machiavellian intelligence. II: Extensions and Evaluations. Cambridge 
Univ Press, Cambridge
Wickler W (1963) Zum Problem der Signalbildung am Beispiel der Verhaltens-Mimikry zwischen As-
pidontus und Labroides (Pisces, Acanthopterygii). Z Tierpsychol 20:657−679
Widdig A (2000) Coalition formation among male Barbary macaques (Macaca fascicularis). Am J 
Primatol 50:37−51
Widdig A, Streich WJ, Tembrock G (2000) Coalition formation among male barbary macaques (Ma-
caca sylvanus). Am J Primatol 50:37−51
Widdig A, Nürnberg P, Krawczak M, Streich WJ, Bercovitch FB (2001) Paternal relatedness and age 
proximity regulate social relationships among adult female rhesus macaques. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA 98:13769−13773
Widdig A, Nürnberg P, Krawczak M, Streich WJ, Bercovitch FB (2002) Affiliation and aggression 
among adulgt female rhesus macaques: a genetic analysis of paternal cohorts. Behaviour 
139:371−391
Widowski TM, Ziegler TW, Elonson AM, Snowdon CT (1990) The role of males in stimulating repro-
ductive function in female cotton-top tamarins (Saguinus oedipus). Anim Behav 40:731−741
Wiggins DA, Morris RD (1986) Criteria for female choice of mates: courtship feeding and parental 
care in the common tern. Am Nat 128:126−129
Wilkinson GS (1984) Reciprocal food sharing in the vampire bat. Nature 308:181−184
Wilkinson GS (1987) Altruism and cooperation in bats. In: Fenton NB, Racey P, Rayner JMV (eds) Re-
cent Advances in the Study of Bats. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 299−323
Wilkinson GS (1988) Reciprocal altruism in bats and other mammals. Ethol Sociobiol 9:85−100
Wilkinson GS (1992) Communal nursing in the evening bat Nycticeius humeralis. Behav Ecol Socio-
biol 31:225−235
Wilkinson GS, Baker AEM (1988) Communal nesting among genetically similar house mice. Ethology 
77:103−114
Wilkinson DM, Sherratt TN (2001) Horizontally acquired mutualisms, an unsolved problem in ecol-
ogy? Oikos 92:377−384

343
References
Williams GC (1966) Adaptation and Natural Selection: A Critique of Some Current Evolutionary 
Thought. Princeton Univ Press, Princeton/NJ
Williams JM, Liu H-Y, Pusey AE (2002) Costs and benefits of grouping for female chimpanzees at 
Gombe. In: Boesch B, Hohmann G, Marchant LF (eds) Behavioural Diversity in Chimpanzees and 
Bonobos. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 192−203
Wilson DS (1983) The group selection controversy: history and current status. Ann Rev Ecol Syst 
14:159−187
Wilson EO (1975) Sociobiology. Harvard Univ Press, Cambridge/MA
Wilson ML, Wrangham RW (2003) Intergroup relations in chimpanzees. Ann Rev Anthropol 
32:363−392
Wimmer B, Kappeler PM (2002) The effects of sexual selection and life history on the genetic struc-
ture of redfronted lemur, Eulemur fulvus rufus, groups. Anim Behav 64:557−568
Wimmer B, Tautz D, Kappeler PM (2002) The genetic population structure of the gray mouse lemur 
(Microcebus murinus), a basal primate from Madagascar. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 52:166−175
Winston JS, Strange BA, O’Doherty J, Dolan RJ (2002) Automatic and intentional brain responses 
during evaluation of trustworthiness of faces. Nat Neurosci 5:277−283
Wittig RA, Boesch C (2003) The choice of post-conflict interactions in wild chimpanzees (Pan troglo-
dytes). Behaviour 140:1527−1559
Wittig RM, Boesch C (2005) How to repair relationships − reconciliation in wild chimpanzees (Pan 
troglodytes). Ethology 111:736−763
Woodroffe R, Macdonald DW (1995) Female/female competition in European badgers, Meles meles: 
effects on breeding success. J Anim Ecol 64:12−20
Woodruff DS (2004) Noninvasive genotyping and field studies of free-ranging nonhuman primates. 
In: Chapais B, Berman C (eds) Kinship and Behavior in Primates. Oxford Univ Press, Oxford, 
pp 46−68
Woolley-Barker T (1998) Genetic structure reflects social organization in hybrid hamadryas and 
anubis baboons. Am J Phys Anthropol 26:S235
Woolley-Barker T (1999) Social organization and genetic structure in a baboon hybrid zone. PhD 
thesis, New York Univ, New York
Wormell D (1994) Relationships in male-female pairs of pied tamarins Saguinus bicolor bicolor. Dodo 
30:133−144
Wrangham RW (1975) The behavioural ecology of chimpanzees in Gombe National Park, Tanzania. 
PhD thesis, Cambridge Univ, Cambridge
Wrangham RW (1980) An ecological model of female-bonded primate groups. Behaviour 
75:262−300 
Wrangham RW (1982) Mutualism, kinship and social evolution. In: Group KsCS (ed) Current Prob-
lems in Sociobiology. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 269−289
Wrangham RW (1999) Evolution of coalitionary killing. Ybk Phys Anthropol 42:1−30
Wrangham RW (2000) Why are male chimpanzees more gregarious than mothers? A scramble com-
petition hypothesis. In: Kappeler PM (ed) Primate Males. Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, 
pp 248−258
Wright S (1932) The roles of mutation, inbreeding, crossbreeding and selection in evolution. Proc 
Sixth Int Congr Genet 1:356−366.
Wynne CDL (2004) Fair refusal by capuchin monkeys. Nature 428:140
Wynne-Edwards V (1962) Animal Dispersion in Relation to Social Behaviour. Oliver, Boyd, Edin-
burgh
Yamada MA (1963) study of blood-relationship in the natural society of the Japanese macaque − 
an analysis of co-feeding, grooming and playmate relationships in Minoo-B-troop. Primates 
4:43−65
Yamagishi T (1986) The provision of a sanctioning system as a public good. J Pers Soc Psychol 
51:110−116
York AD, Rowell TE (1988) Reconciliation following aggression in patas monkeys, Erythrocebus patas. 
Anim Behav 36:502−509
Young AJ (2003) Subordinate tactics in cooperative meerkats: breeding, helping and dispersal. PhD 
thesis, Univ of Cambridge, Cambridge

344
References
Young PH (2003) The power of norms. In: Hammerstein P (ed) Genetic and Cultural Evolution of 
Cooperation. MIT Press, Cambridge/MA, pp 389−399
Zahavi A (1975) Mate selection − a selection for a handicap. J theor Biol 53:205−214
Zahavi A (1977a) The cost of honesty (further remarks on the handicap principle). J theor Biol 
67:603−605
Zahavi A (1977b) The testing of a bond. Anim Behav 25:246−247
Zahavi A (1991) Arabian babblers: the quest for social status in a cooperative breeder. In: Stacey PBK, 
Koenig WD (eds) Cooperative Breeding of Birds: Long-Term Studies of Ecology and Behavior. 
Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, pp 105−130
Zahavi A (1997) The Handicap Principle: A Missing Piece of Darwin’s Puzzle. Oxford Univ Press, New 
York
Zak PJ (2004) Neuroeconomics. Phil Trans R Soc Lond B 359:1737−1748
Zak PJ, Kurzban J, Matzner WT (2004) The neurobiology of trust. Ann NY Acad Sci 1032:224−227
Zak PJ, Kurzban J, Matzner WT (submitted) Oxytocin is associated with interpersonal trust in hu-
mans. Proc Natl Acad Sci

Subject Index
A
agonistic support (see coalitions)
alliances  19−20, 35−36, 44, 54, 61, 107, 151−152, 
163, 165, 210−212
allomothering  53, 58, 63, 116, 224
allonursing  183, 188
alloparental care  24, 26, 165, 173, 181, 184
altruism  5−6, 8, 10, 18, 20, 38, 40, 42−43, 
47−48, 61, 63, 67ff, 85−86, 82, 92, 95, 97, 
102−103, 107, 117−118, 149, 190, 215, 230, 
234−236, 271, 280−281, 283, 287, 289, 291, 
297−299
− nepotistic altruism (see nepotism)
− reciprocal altruism (see reciprocity)
− return-benefit altruism  68
− unilateral altruism  8, 20, 40, 42−43, 47−48
− tag-based altruism  73
altruistic punishment  15−18, 80, 82, 280, 290, 
293, 297−299, 301
Atelinae  34
B
Baboons  14, 31−32, 37, 39−41, 43−44, 51, 
53−54, 56, 61, 116, 118, 123, 134, 157, 165, 
210, 212, 216, 219−220, 224, 228, 231−232, 
245, 247
Badger  181, 192
Barbary macaques  118
Bats  88, 173, 191−192, 199, 203, 240
Birds  9, 27, 175, 179, 181, 183, 187, 189, 191, 196, 
240
biological markets  2, 89, 128−129, 135−136, 
209ff, 235−236, 240, 242, 255
− and evolution of cognition  226, 230−231
− baby market  224−225, 261
− grooming market  9, 236
− mating market  241, 244, 251, 255, 258−259
− neurobiological markets  229
biological markets paradigm  235
Black-capped capuchins  35
Blue monkeys  31, 116
Bonnet macaques  36, 39, 116, 219−220
Bonobos  20, 34, 56, 116
brain  74, 810, 226−229, 232, 240−241, 247−248, 
252, 255−256, 258, 260, 297, 299
− modularity  231, 240
− size expansion  229
breeders  7, 12, 29, 129, 173−177, 180−181, 
187−192, 196
brood parasitism  204
Brown capuchins  86, 116
Brown lemurs  35
byproduct mutualism  5, 7, 10−12, 19, 86, 140, 
190
− defined  5
C
Callitrichids  25, 27−29, 37, 126−127, 129, 135, 
191
Capuchins  15, 31−32, 35, 77, 86, 89, 93−97, 
100−103, 116, 170, 192, 217, 219−220, 
253−254
Central American squirrel monkeys  34
Chacma baboons  51, 116, 118, 123, 165, 210, 
216−217, 231
cheating  15, 68, 76, 139, 219, 232, 236, 243, 246, 
252
− cheating avoidance  68, 246, 252
− cheat detection  14, 16, 232, 252
− cheater discrimination  67, 72
Cheetahs  140
Chimpanzees  11−12, 14−16, 19−20, 32, 34, 37, 
44, 48, 54, 56−57, 61−62, 77, 86−87, 89−93, 
103−104, 107ff, 121, 125, 139ff, 152, 165, 168, 
170, 228−229, 253
choice  6, 9, 12, 19, 50, 54−55, 72−73, 100, 197, 
204, 214−216, 218−219, 223, 231, 235−238, 
241−244, 248−249, 251−260, 267, 282
coalitions  4, 8, 11−12, 15, 31, 36, 48, 86−87, 103, 
107−108, 110, 112−113, 118, 124−125, 129, 
151ff, 209−210, 212, 230
− male-male  151ff
− female-female  210
Coatis  192
coercion  7, 118, 180, 188−189, 218−219

346
Subject Index
cognition  15, 18, 34, 37, 40−42, 44−45, 61, 86, 
99, 162, 198, 226, 230−231
− and brain areas  229
collective action problem  11
Common marmosets  27−28, 127, 189
communication  9, 19, 95, 134, 136, 151, 280, 
287−289, 301
competence  47ff
competence-dependent cooperation  50−63, 
213−214
competition  5, 25−27, 29, 33, 37−38, 44, 51, 53, 
58, 98−99, 124, 128, 143, 153−154, 157, 162, 
165, 170, 178, 190, 194, 209, 210, 213, 215, 
216, 220−223, 227−229, 235−236, 242, 254
− among kin  29, 143
− food competition  216, 220, 227, 254
− male-male competition  153
concession model  8, 179
conflict resolution  99, 131−133
cooperation 
− among humans  13, 276, 287, 299
− among male Chimpanzees  61−62, 107, 117
− and reconciliation  121, 135, 136
− and reproduction  251
− conditional cooperation  280, 283, 286
− defined  3
− dyadic cooperation  12, 19
− effect of age similarity  54, 61−62
− effect of rank similarity  58−59
− group-level (multi-player) cooperation  14, 
17−20
− high-risk cooperation  14
− impact of kinship  48, 51
− phylogeny of cooperation  239, 250
− proximate mechanisms  14, 86, 102, 105, 
192, 214
− homology and analogy of strategies and 
mechanisms  247
cooperation markets  9, 209ff, 233ff
cooperative breeding  3, 27, 29, 63, 173ff
cooperative hunting  3−4, 12, 17, 93, 139ff, 233, 
250, 279
Cotton-top tamarin  97, 116, 178
Coquerel’s dwarf lemur  19, 30, 
cultural group selection  17, 239, 299
D
DNA  30, 34, 56, 109, 117, 144, 148
− mitochondrial DNA  30, 34, 56, 109, 112, 
114−115, 117, 148
− nuclear DNA  117, 144
decision-making  17, 98−99, 171, 231−232, 256
defection  5, 8−9, 11, 13−14, 16, 70, 74−75, 212, 
281, 283, 298−299
despotism  126, 153, 158, 160, 168
Dictator game  78
division of labor  14, 17, 139, 184, 251, 279 
dispersal  8−9, 12, 32−36, 57, 107, 126, 149, 162, 
171, 175, 177, 179−180, 183, 185, 237, 300
− and genetic composition of social groups  
28
− female  32, 34, 107
− time delay of ‘helpers-at-the-nest’  175
− male  35−36
Domestic cats  192
dominance  26, 30−31, 35, 38−39, 41, 43, 54−55, 
58, 60, 87, 94, 109, 116−118, 126, 133, 147, 
151, 153−154, 160, 164, 166−167, 170, 209, 
213, 216, 218, 220−222, 224, 227
− dominance rank and reproductive success  
31
dominance gradients and power differentials  
213, 216
− matrilineal hierarchies  31, 55, 60
E
economic games  67, 77−78, 83
emotions  17, 67, 69, 80−81, 102, 239, 251−253, 
256, 258, 260, 280, 295−297, 300−301
envy  77−78, 251−255
Erythrocebus  192
eusociality  174
exploitation  4−5, 16, 71, 203−204, 219, 248
F
fairness  17, 67, 75−78, 80, 82
fishes  7, 9, 11
forgiveness  67, 70, 81
food sharing  3, 7, 16, 20, 37, 42
Foxes  173
free-riding  12−13, 16−17, 19, 204
friendship  10, 20, 67, 92, 151−152, 167, 256
G
genetic composition of social groups  28
gene-culture co-evolution  298
Giant squirrels  93
gratitude  17, 67, 93, 97
good mood hypothesis  89, 91
Gorillas  32, 37, 39, 43−44, 115, 125, 227
− Lowland gorilla  37
− Mountain gorilla  32, 37, 125
Goeldi’s monkeys  192
Golden lion tamarins  28, 37, 116
green-beard effect  73
Grey mouse lemur  30, 43
group augmentation  7, 20, 190
group hunting (see cooperative hunting)
group selection  5−6, 17, 68, 76, 239, 247, 299
− cultural group selection  17, 239, 299

347
Subject Index
− trait-group selection  6
grooming  3, 7, 9−11, 31, 37−39, 42, 48, 50−54, 
56−58, 65, 72, 86, 88−94, 103, 107−118, 125, 
127−128, 131, 148−149, 209−221, 223−226, 
228−231, 236−237, 245, 250, 254
H
Hamadryas baboons  32−33, 37
Hamilton’s rule  7, 25ff
Hanuman langurs  31, 35, 43−44, 60
‘helpers-at-the-nest’  173, 191
honest signaling theory  242
hormones  177−178, 252
House mice  12, 191ff
Howler monkeys  8, 170
Hyenas  141, 173, 176, 185
I
image scoring  76, 268−269
imitation  69
Impalas  11, 72, 88
inbreeding avoidance  8−9, 27
inclusive fitness theory (see kin selection)
inequity aversion  100, 102
infanticide  29, 33, 36, 42, 196, 227 
J
Jackals  173, 181
Japanese macaques  29, 42, 57−59, 123, 167, 171
jealousy  252−253, 260
justice  17, 67, 76−78, 80−82, 88
K
kin-biased behavior  63, 215
kin discrimination  18−19, 41, 57−58, 61
kin recognition  18, 34, 37, 40−42, 44−45, 61, 
162
− maternal kin recognition  40
− paternal kin recognition  34, 41−42, 44
kin selection  5−9, 17−18, 25ff, 46−49, 61−63, 
86, 117, 139−144, 146, 148−150, 160, 
189−170, 193, 195, 215, 234, 251−252, 257
− critiques  25−26
− defined  5
− or effect of age similarity  54, 61−62
− or effect of availability and familiarity  49
− or mutualism  17, 25, 40, 43, 45, 48, 63, 86, 
117, 139−141, 143, 145, 149−150, 190, 234
− or effect of rank similarity  58−59
L
lactation  191, 193, 196−203
Lemurs  15, 30, 35, 43, 170, 192, 228
lions  8, 15, 140−141, 170, 173, 191−192, 196, 203, 
233, 254
local  resource competition model of sex ratio 
adjustment  29
Long-tailed macaques  38, 116, 122, 125, 130, 
165−166, 171
M
Macaques  15, 29, 31, 35−36, 38−44, 48, 56−59, 
61, 87−89, 103, 113, 115−116, 118, 122−123, 
125−126, 129−132, 165−167, 171, 219−220, 
248, 256
‘Machiavellian intelligence’ hypothesis  226, 
231
Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC)  198
Marmosets  27−28, 126−127, 173, 181, 189, 192, 
223, 225
Microcebus  30, 192
Miopithecus  192
Meerkats  27, 140, 174−188
Mole-rats  174, 177−178, 186, 188
Mongooses  173, 179, 181
moralistic aggression (see altruistic punishment)
mutualism  3−8, 10−13, 16−17, 19−20, 25, 40, 43, 
45, 47−48, 63, 85−86, 95−96, 104, 117−118, 
139ff, 190, 234, 236−238, 246, 253
− byproduct mutualism  5, 7, 10−11, 12, 19, 86, 
140, 190
− defined  3
Muriquis  34−35, 56
N
natural selection  5−6, 86, 234, 239−241, 247, 
252, 254, 256−257, 260
nepotism  4, 8, 18−19, 25−26, 29−34, 36−40, 42, 
44−45, 48, 52, 54, 57−61, 63, 152, 154
− among females  30, 37
− among males  34, 37
− defined  3 
− effect of age similarity  54, 61−62
− effect of availability and familiarity  49
− effect of rank similarity  54, 57−59, 61
O
observer effects  67, 69, 76, 79
Otters  192
Orangutans  19, 32, 44, 227
P
partner choice  9, 12, 19, 72−73, 214−216, 
218−219, 223, 231, 235−236, 241−242, 244, 
251, 253, 255−257, 260
partner control  9, 12−13, 20, 218−219, 225, 235, 
245, 251, 260
Patas monkeys  116
phenotype matching  61

348
Subject Index
philopatry  19, 26, 31, 34, 57, 168, 186
− and genetic composition of social groups  
28
− female philopatry  19, 26, 31
− male philopatry  34, 168
Pigs  192
Pig-tailed macaques  125
post-conflict behavior  121
Presbytis  36, 60, 192
Prosimians  26, 44, 228−229
Prisoner’s Dilemma (PD)  6, 67, 70−71, 212, 218, 
231, 235−236, 247, 271, 281−282
public goods  12, 16, 78, 265, 269−276, 279−281, 
283−285, 287−288, 290, 295, 300
public goods game  16, 78, 265, 269−274, 276, 
283−284, 290
punishment  12, 14−18, 68−70, 74, 80, 84, 100, 
103−104, 133, 218, 246−247, 265, 280, 287, 
289−295, 297−301
R
rank reversal between mother and daughter  
40, 44
rational choice model  100, 258
reciprocity  4−11, 15−17, 19−20, 25, 38−40, 
44−45, 68−69, 72−80, 82, 85ff, 107−113, 
115−118, 139−140, 149, 190, 196, 209, 216, 
220, 231, 234, 247, 256, 265−278, 280, 
287−289, 291, 297−301
− and cognition  86, 99
− attitudinal reciprocity  97, 103−104, 231, 256
− calculated reciprocity  11, 88, 92, 94, 
103−104
− contingency-based reciprocity  10
− defined  5
− effect of age similarity  113
− effect of rank similarity  113
− generalized reciprocity  10, 89, 91, 190
− indirect reciprocity  16, 76, 265−266, 
268−278, 280, 287, 289, 291, 298−299
− intrapersonal reciprocity  74
− proximate mechanisms  86, 102, 105
− reciprocal exchange  85, 91, 107−108, 
113−119
− symmetry-based reciprocity  88−90, 92, 94, 
97
− strong reciprocity  78−80, 247, 297−301
reconciliation  10, 31, 121ff, 226
Red-bellied tamarins  127
Red colobus monkeys  14, 33−35, 44, 141
Red-fronted lemur  35
Red howler monkeys  30, 33, 36−37, 44
Rhesus macaques  36, 39, 41, 59, 61, 113, 166
reproductive inhibition  26
reproductive suppression  179−180
reproductive skew  8, 27−28, 30, 33−35, 44, 
61−62, 191, 194−195
− concession model  8, 179
reputation  15−16, 18, 20, 76, 246, 265ff, 280, 
282−283, 287−289, 291, 300
revenge  81, 87−88, 297
Ring-tailed lemurs  15, 35
Rodents  173, 181, 192−193, 199, 204
S
Samango monkeys  219, 225
Savanna baboons  61, 164−165
self-directed behavior  122−123, 133
selfish herd effect  13, 19
sense of fairness  67, 75, 77−78, 82
sense of justice  67, 76−77, 82
sense of self  230
sense of social regularity  100
sense of space  228
sense of time  228
Sifakas  35
skew (see reproductive skew)
snowdrift game  72, 82
‘social brain’ hypothesis  226
social dilemma  265ff, 290
social (dis-)approval  280, 288, 301
social groups  14−15, 28−30, 143, 173, 175, 
199−200, 214, 275−276, 281, 295
− female-bonded  209, 224
− genetic composition  28
social intelligence  99, 231, 250
social norms  17, 295
social play  52, 54
social relationship  10−11, 19, 34−35, 44, 117, 
122−126, 128, 130−132, 136, 253−254, 258
− social relationship negotiation  121, 
132−133, 136
− social relationship value  133
social thermoregulation  50−51
Sooty mangabey  60
Spider monkeys  227
Squirrel monkeys  31, 34−35, 44
Stumptailed macaques  131−132
T
Tamarins  27−28, 37, 97, 116, 126−127, 173, 178, 
181, 183
Thomas’ langurs  36
Tit-for-Tat  6, 69−71, 247
Titi monkeys  128
torture  82

349
Subject Index
trading  3, 16, 75, 80, 116, 212−214, 216−218, 
221, 224−225, 228, 230−231, 233ff
− human trading behavior  256
‘tragedy of the commons’  265, 270−271, 276, 
279
trust  16, 151−152, 169, 210, 245, 250−253, 
256−257, 260, 265, 271
truth  75−76, 222
U
Ultimatum game   78−81, 297
V
Varecia  192
Vervet monkeys  30, 35, 53, 89, 115−116
W
Wedge-capped capuchins  31
White-faced capuchins  32, 93
Wild dogs  174, 176, 179, 181, 185, 191
Wolves  141
Y
Yellow baboons  210

