Corona Phenomenon
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

The titles published in this series are listed at brill.com/vibs and brill.com/socp
Value Inquiry Book Series
Founding Editor
Robert Ginsberg
Managing Editor
J.D. Mininger
volume 376
Social Philosophy
Editor
Andrew Fitz-​Gibbon 
 (State University of New York, Cortland)
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

LEIDEN | BOSTON
Corona Phenomenon
Philosophical and Political Questions
Edited by
Pegah Mossleh
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Typeface for the Latin, Greek, and Cyrillic scripts: “Brill”. See and download: brill.com/brill-​typeface.
issn 0929-​8436
isbn 978-​90-​04-​51291-​7 (hardback)
isbn 978-​90-​04-​51292-​4 (e-​book)
Copyright 2022 by Pegah Mossleh. Published by Koninklijke Brill nv, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Koninklijke Brill nv incorporates the imprints Brill, Brill Nijhoff, Brill Hotei, Brill Schöningh, Brill Fink, 
Brill mentis, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Böhlau and V&R unipress.
Koninklijke Brill nv reserves the right to protect this publication against unauthorized use. Requests for 
re-use and/​or translations must be addressed to Koninklijke Brill nv via brill.com or copyright.com.
This book is printed on acid-​free paper and produced in a sustainable manner.
Cover illustration: Image by Kiki Zhang (from stocksnap.io).
The Library of Congress Cataloging-​in-​Publication Data is available online at https://cata​log.loc.gov
lc record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022016832​
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Contents
	
Preface ix
	
Contributors xx
	 	
Introduction 
Questioning within the Roaring Waves of the Phenomenon 1
Pegah Mossleh
part 1
Reflections on Living in the Pandemic Situation
1	
Lessons We Have Learned 17
Charles Taylor
2	
Historical Continuities and Historical Ruptures 
The Quest for “Lessons Learned” 21
Jacalyn Duffin
3	
How a Limit Situation Made Us All More Philosophical 32
Jean Grondin
part 2
Corona Phenomenon and Philosophical Questions
4	
Corona Pandemic from the Philosophical Perspective 39
Michael Quante
5	
What Can the Corona Phenomenon Teach Us about Our Conceptions of 
Subject and Nature? 52
Anton Friedrich Koch
6	
With the Emergence of the “Corona Phenomenon”, What Aspects of the 
Idea of Modern Subject Have Become More Visibly Problematic? 61
Frank Chouraqui
7	
covid-​19: Scientific and Ethical Ambiguity 69
Richard Bradley
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

vi
Contents
8	
On What the Real Moral Conflict in the covid-​19 Pandemic Is –​ and 
What It Is Not 77
Sabine Döring
9	
Lockdowns and Living Well 
Life-​Value Ethics in the Age of covid-​19 87
Jeffrey Noonan
10	
Spirituality and the Role of Religion in the Contemporary Pandemic 94
Neal DeRoo
11	
The Consequences of the Pandemic for Our Lives and for Philosophical 
Anthropology 105
David Weberman
12	
Corona Phenomenon, the Gateway to the Era of 
Post-reactionary-Criticism 111
Pegah Mossleh
part 3
Corona Phenomenon and Political Questions
13	
In What Sense Is the “Corona Phenomenonˮ Political? 125
Paul Patton
14	
The Impact of covid-​19 on Federal Countries 133
David Cameron
15	
Is a Virus a Dispositif? 
Pandemics as Thanatopolitics 146
Eduardo Mendieta
16	
Speaking Truth to Power 
Political Courage in the Age of covid-​19 155
Martin Breaugh
17	
States of Crisis 
Pandemic, Policing—​and Resistance 162
Jeff Shantz
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Contents
vii
18	
Will covid-​19 Health Emergency Be the Pretext to Further Transform 
the EU Legal Order? 
Importance and Present Relevance of Walter Benjamin’s State of 
Emergency Analysis 168
Vicente Ordóñez Roig
19	
sars-​cov-​2: What Role for Political Philosophy? 174
Beatrice Magni
20	
Reflections from Perfidious Albion 
The Pandemic as Prism 182
Huw L. Williams
21	
The Potential Subjective and Objective Consequences of covid-​19 on 
the Process of Democratization in the Maghreb 198
Ewa Szczepankiewicz-​Rudzka
part 4
Corona Phenomenon and Interdisciplinary Questioning
22	
The Plague, the Anthropocene, and covid-​19 215
Marcel Wissenburg
23	
covid-​19 and Identity 222
Georgia Warnke
24	
Three Questions of Distributive Justice 228
Christopher Lowry
25	
covid-​19, Poverty, and Imperialism 
Epidemics and Syndemics in Historical Perspective 233
Spyros Marchetos
26	
Information and Human Behavior in Times of covid-​19 270
Marcel Becker
	
Index of Names 279
	
Index of Subjects 281
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Preface
This volume is the outcome of a study project with the title of “Corona 
Phenomenon: Philosophical and Political Questions” that I, as a faculty mem­
ber of the Academic-​Research Institute for Humanities and Cultural Studies 
(ihcs), presented and led. In the face of the current crisis caused by the global 
outbreak of covid-​19, the lack of coherent and synergistic academic reaction, 
especially in the fields of philosophy and political science was clear. Of course, 
this does not mean that there is no cooperation and dialogue between phi­
losophers and political scientists. Certainly, academics of the two disciplines 
have and will have discussions at conferences. What is at stake is that, in gen­
eral, academics in both two fields have not cooperated sufficiently and espe­
cially in a synergistic way at the international level, in the face of pandemic 
catastrophe, either separately or interdisciplinarily. We need to present large-​
scale collective projects that have the capacity to invite many more scholars 
from around the world to think together and answer purposeful academic 
questions. In this way, we will be able to effectively compensate for the lack of 
knowledge in the humanities and social sciences in the face of such disasters.
Although in other fields such as vaccine development and health econom­
ics, it is often obvious that competition, even sometimes destructive, has 
replaced cooperation and synergy, in the humanities and social sciences, espe­
cially at the international level, there is far less effective collaboration. While 
these fields of knowledge are in a crucial position to guide actions and policies 
in various domains, to deal properly with this damaging phenomenon.
Looking at reactions to previous disasters, such as the terrible flu of 1918–​
1920, mistakenly known as the “Spanish flu”, one can see the lack of global 
academic initiatives. There is a decisive need for a model that in such situa­
tions can provide the basis for a rapid, deep, and multifaceted response to the 
intellectual needs of society and decision-​making institutions. It is the duty 
of academics, especially in the field of philosophy and politics, to try to over­
come the confusion in such situations as much as possible by presenting useful 
ideas. The most important base for doing this is to practice asking the proper 
and directive questions. If we have broad, profound, and guiding questions, 
we can quickly and consistently re-​ask them about the new critical situations 
in any disaster and respond more appropriately. Also, with such a practical 
model, more academics from around the world can collaborate to pose more 
questions. And this may help to collect a vast supply of valuable questions and 
ideas, and finally leads to the accumulation of knowledge in confronting the 
major global troubles.
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

x
Preface
In my studies on covid-​19 and previous pandemics, I found that only spo­
radic questions have been raised in the field of philosophy and politics, which 
were often useful for limited journalistic works. Hence, the idea of practice of 
posing questions and creating a relatively comprehensive philosophical and 
political project in confrontation with the present pandemic came to my mind. 
What was important was that this event should be considered not merely as 
a disease or a problem in the field of medicine, or even beyond, as a prob­
lem in the human socio-​biological realm, but as a Phenomenon. To Consider 
the phenomenal nature of this event means that “Corona” should not be seen 
as just a virus, and covid-​19 not just as a disease with descriptive and causal 
characteristics. Such an approach is necessary for a proper and philosophical 
understanding of what is happening.
The least filter was applied for the invitation of scholars. No special points 
were considered in terms of geography, ranking of universities, age and gender 
of professors, and their official position in the academic hierarchy. To invite 
the scholars, only their specialization and their research interests were con­
sidered. The only criterion applied was that all participants in the project be 
faculty members of the departments of philosophy and political science at 
universities. The reason for applying this criterion was that this project was 
basically implemented to encourage the cooperation of academics in the field 
of humanities. In addition, applying this criterion could help to make the proj­
ect more feasible and prevented the scope of inviting scholars from being too 
wide. But maintaining this criterion does not in any way mean that there are 
no political and philosophical experts among the scholars of other faculties, or 
among thinkers outside the academic space. Of course, I invited some schol­
ars from other faculties who are experts in philosophy or political science and 
have written several valuable books and articles in these two fields to join us, 
but they were not able to contribute for their personal reasons.
In submitting the invitation to scholars, no privilege or priority was consid­
ered in terms of their school of thought or their views on political and phil­
osophical issues. It was very important to observe the principle of plurality 
and diversity of attitudes. Certainly, the greater the diversity of attitudes, the 
more aspects of global problems such as the current pandemic are explored 
and more productive results will be achieved.
Another point is that, in line with the purpose of the project, scholars were 
not asked to write necessarily formal and uniform articles, as they usually do 
for scholarly journals and pure academic books. Facing an unusual phenome­
non –​ with unknown dimensions that quickly disrupts everyone’s normal life 
and engages all people with complex issues –​ requires freer and creative writ­
ing and ideation. It is not a predetermined subject and it does not have the 
long-​standing scientific literature that we would like to edit a book about it 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Preface
xi
in normal academic life. Rather, during the progress of the project, it became 
even more obvious and tangible that the same restrictive constraints in the 
usual academic routine, the constant publication of formal papers for pro­
motion, etc., in various ways, are serious obstacles to broader and more agile 
cooperation to carry out the true duty of knowledge in confrontation with such 
catastrophes. Also, the structure of the project, which suddenly involved the 
scholars with several serious questions, created a kind of mental storm, and in 
response to a different number of questions, they inevitably wrote their essays 
in different lengths and forms. Therefore, the chapters are varied in approach 
and form; Some of them are more formal and scholarly, with more citations 
and references, and some are written as quick ideation or as formulation of 
thought in the early months of the pandemic. This can be considered as a 
strength for a book whose audience may include a wider range of university 
professors themselves, and its aim is to relate both the long-​term theoretical 
studies of scholars and their creative and immediate thinking to the concrete 
pervasive problem of the pandemic.
Also, the manner of inviting the scholars was not the same. In fact, as the 
work progressed, I learned from experience how it would make the project 
more interesting and increases the willingness of colleagues to take part. It 
was necessary to consider the cultural differences between scholars in differ­
ent countries, also, differences in academic culture and customs in different 
continents and countries, differences in the official position of professors, and 
even their individual differences and expectations of how to conduct an inter­
national study influenced the way of invitation and its continuous change. An 
important factor in choosing the manner of inviting professors was to consider 
their works in terms of focus and broadness of their studies. For scholars who 
focus on one area of study or even a specific topic, invitations contained fewer 
questions, or even just one question. But it was more difficult for scholars with 
broader research interests. In such cases, the invitation contained more ques­
tions, and it is clear that it was not easy to select questions that correspond 
exactly to the topics they were studying. This difficulty becomes even more 
clear if we consider the language diversity of the resumes of scholars in differ­
ent countries. Some universities do not even have an English version or a lan­
guage other than their native language on their websites. I personally reviewed 
the resumes and lists of books and articles of scholars in English, German, 
Dutch, Spanish, Italian, Greek, Russian, French, Portuguese, etc, and out of all 
sixty questions, I selected questions that fit their study topics. It was gratifying 
that the scholars often found most of the questions I chose for them as proper. 
Some of them even expressed their interest in answering all the questions. It 
may seem that it was simply possible to submit all questions to the scholars 
and leave the selection to them. Although all questions were submitted to 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

xii
Preface
some scholars, I gradually realized that this was not a good idea. In cases that 
I submitted to some scholars all the questions, due to the broadness of their 
research interests, or at their own request, several problems appeared. Despite 
my emphasis in the invitation that they could answer one or more questions, 
some of them thought they had to answer all the questions, and I found out 
about this misunderstanding later. This very misunderstanding discouraged 
some of them from answering. Because either they did not consider them­
selves able to answer sixty questions related to the different branches of the 
two disciplines, which of course is very natural, or they did not find enough 
time to do so, which is also understandable. In addition, scholars who received 
all of the questions naturally preferred to answer more questions. They cer­
tainly had different reasons for this, and, of course, it was their responsibility 
and kindness that they tried to answer more questions. But taking on more 
questions to answer could also lead to summarized answers. Another problem 
was that, due to lack of enough time to fulfill their other commitments, it was 
difficult for them to read sixty questions, even once, and to think and select 
one or more. So I tried to remove this difficulty from my colleagues as much 
as possible, and I took it upon myself to select the proper questions for them.
Despite the many difficulties I faced in carrying out this project, the encour­
agement of many colleagues at universities in different countries made me 
more resolute to bring it to an end. Due to the time constraints and multi­
plicity of commitments, although, most of them could not participate, their 
comments about the importance of such an initiation strengthened my impe­
tus to advance the project. Professor Anthony Giddens and Professor Quentin 
Skinner kindly praised the project and congratulated me on it. Professor 
Skinner expressed his interest to take part but could not contribute due to the 
deadline for a book. Professor Jane Bennett from Johns Hopkins University and 
Professor Philip Pettit from the Australian National University described the 
questions as serious, important, and excellent. Professor Christian List from 
lse, Christof Mauch, Professor of History at Ludwig-​Maximilian-​Universität 
of München and director of Rachel Carson Center for Environment and soci­
ety, Prof. Antonio Hermosa Andújar from the University of Seville, and the pro­
fessors from the University of Maastricht, University of Innsbruck and several 
other universities described the project as innovative, important, and remark­
able. Some scholars, such as Professor James Tully from Victoria University 
and Professor Douglas Moggach, Distinguished Professor Emeritus at the 
University of Ottawa, kindly acknowledged the importance of the project and 
introduce other scholars to participate. I would also like to thank Professor 
Valentine Moghadam from Northeastern University, who kindly participated 
in the project but since she did not find enough time to prepare her article for 
this book, I published her responses to the questions in a journal.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Preface
xiii
The process of implementing this project itself has the potential to be a sub­
ject for a specific study of how the academic community responds to pervasive 
problems and global disasters. It is worth investigating why university profes­
sors in certain continents or countries more or less responded to such an invi­
tation. This issue also needs serious consideration as to why in some countries, 
despite the heavy casualties caused by covid-​19, humanities professors have 
paid little attention to participate in such a project. It should also be explored 
why, even when people in some of these countries protested, against the poli­
cies and decisions taken by the governments, in the streets and in riots of tens 
of thousands that led to violence, many Professors did not prioritize answering 
the questions that could have provided better solutions for policymakers; and, 
instead, they preferred to do their usual official works. Unfortunately, many 
professors, while were invited to participate in the project, instead of thinking 
about the topics and trying to strengthen such collaborations, from the begin­
ning just cared about where the final outcome of the project was published 
and, also, other formal issues. This unfavorable treatment is not accidental but 
arises from the academic lifestyle and strategies that academics have become 
accustomed to, since the early years of their education and teaching. In fact, 
many academics, due to the pressure of the rules that universities and the 
totality of the publishing industry have imposed on faculty members, in the 
long term, forget that the real task of a scholar is not to publish more articles 
in several well-​known journals but to engage responsibly in pervasive prob­
lems and help solve them. We academics spend many years of our lives on 
theoretical study so that when people around the world are faced with a tragic 
situation, we can help with deeper and more accurate insights. And, of course, 
this does not negate the importance of the intellectual endeavors of academ­
ics for a deeper understanding of the general and long-​term issues of human 
existence.
Since the identity and distinguishing feature of this project is questioning 
and sixty philosophical and political questions in relation to the pandemic 
that I have posed, and given that all contributors have written their essays in 
response to one or more of these questions, the end of the preface seems to be 
a good place to list them all. In the introduction, it will be mentioned which 
question(s) each scholar has tried to answer; Although, in most articles, the 
title reflects the author’s preferred question. Also, it seems that the title of my 
article needs to be clarified very briefly here. The idea and content of the arti­
cle needed a title that could cover both post reactionary-criticism and post-­
reactionary criticism, which, perhaps needless to say, are not the same. So, it is 
constructed in the form of post-reactionary-criticism. 
I hope that more scholars will enter into dialogue with the contributors of 
this book to make the list of questions more comprehensive.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

xiv
Preface
	
Philosophical Questions
	 1	
How would the Corona Phenomenon affect the question of the meaning 
of life?
	 2	
May the Corona Phenomenon lead to a decisive change in the way of 
Being of the human? And in general, what characteristics should perva­
sive phenomena have to lead to such a change?
	 3	
Considering the Corona Phenomenon’s capacity to shed new lights 
on Being-​towards-​Death (Sein-​zum-​Tode), and on awareness of death 
(Todesbewusstsein), what changes may occur in human life in the short 
and long term?
	4	
Given the fact that ambiguity and uncertainty have become very serious 
in people’s daily lives, as well as in the decision-​making of the institu­
tions responsible for dealing with the covid-​19, what would be, from a 
philosophical point of view, the possible consequences of this ambiguity 
and living in a vague situation? And what may be the effect of this situa­
tion on philosophizing itself?
	 5	
If the covid-​19 would be considered as a cause of increasing importance 
of the body and situatedness in ontology, what may be the philosophical 
implications of such importance?
	6	
How have existential differences with pre-​modern life changed the con­
frontation with the covid-​19, compared to facing phenomena such as 
the Black Death in the late middle ages?
	 7	
According to the horizon of human wisdom today, what is the difference 
between the discussion of good and evil regarding the covid-​19 and the 
same discussion at the occurrence of similar phenomena in pre-​modern 
and early modern times?
	8	
With the increasing importance of the natural sciences, especially medi­
cal science, in confrontation with the covid-​19, what change may occur 
in the status of philosophical knowledge?
	9	
With the emergence of the Corona Phenomenon, what aspects of the 
idea of modern Subject have become more apparent to be problematic?
	10	
Given the ambivalent role of technology in the Corona Phenomenon –​ 
as the main cause in some approaches, and as an important factor in 
overcoming the disease, in some others –​ what development may be 
imagined in the philosophy of technology?
	 11	
How the differences between the ideas of continuity and discontinuity/​ 
rupture in the philosophy of history may impact the study on the Corona 
Phenomenon and its consequences?
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Preface
xv
	12	
Which major problems of moral philosophy have become more promi­
nent in confronting the covid-​19? What is the response of moral philos­
ophy to the [inevitable?] process of inclusion and exclusion –​ preferring 
some patients to continue treatment?
	13	
What effect may the confrontation with the Corona Phenomenon have 
on our philosophical understanding of the relation of the Rational and 
the Emotional in the social life of human beings?
	14	
If we consider Corona Phenomenon and the consequential crisis, with 
its pervasive and global dimensions, as an opportunity to evaluate the 
epistemic systems, what effects may the relativist attitudes –​ that assert 
equivalence of epistemic systems –​ have on the confrontation with the 
phenomenon and crisis management?
	15	
How may the event of contagion and the necessity of social distancing 
on the one hand, and feeling the need to be-​with and need to other’s 
help against the disease in the days of the pandemic, on the other hand, 
improve our philosophical insights about other?
	16	
How would the current crisis provide the requisite concrete ground for 
re-​discussing the relation of theory and practice?
	17	
What may be the results of the idea of unrepeatability of phenomena for 
philosophical reflection on the Corona Phenomenon and anticipation 
of the world after that?
	18	
What different effects may confrontation with the Corona Phenomenon 
have on rethinking the concept of Nature?
	19	
What impact may the taking priority of survival strategy in confrontation 
with the covid-​19 have on the goal-​oriented/​ instrumental rationality 
(Zweckrationalität) on the one hand and critical thinking –​ especially 
critique of contemporary overvaluation to survival –​ on the other hand?
	20	
What effect may the necessity of fighting against the pathogenic micro­
organism (Coronavirus), that is a part of nature, have on the revision and 
re-​evaluate of the ideas of early modern thinkers, for instance, Francis 
Bacon who considered the domination over nature as a divine mission 
in the service of humanity?
	21	
What would be the implications of confronting the covid-​19, especially 
implementing the preventive policies such as quarantine and social 
distancing and isolation, for contemplation about the relation of Right 
and Good?
	22	
What shortcomings or dysfunctions of academic philosophical educa­
tion and research have been highlighted in reaction to covid-​19?
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

xvi
Preface
	23	
What effect may the general direction of artistic activities during the 
confrontation with Corona Phenomenon, as was seen in the hard days 
of totally quarantine around the world, have on the evaluations of differ­
ent theories in philosophy of art such as representational theory, expres­
sion theory, formalist theory, aesthetic experience theory, and the topic 
of committed art?
	24	
How can philosophical hermeneutics help to understand the Corona 
Phenomenon and can also impact the process of dealing with it?
	25	
Considering the consequences of experiencing a pervasive global cri­
sis such as covid-​19 and increasing the importance of the role of non-​
divine factors and the natural sciences, what would be the response of 
philosophy of religion to the question of the function of Religion and the 
Divine in this age?
	26	
How have the long-​term dualities of linguistic-​philosophical traditions 
emerged in the theoretical approaches and practical reactions to the 
Corona Phenomenon, and what consequences may those dualities actu­
ally have?
	27	
Some philosophers of language suppose all philosophical problems only 
as linguistic misunderstandings; how might the problems arising from 
confrontation with the covid-​19 be explained by such an attitude?
	28	
Given the experience of the procedure of identifying truths about dif­
ferent aspects of the Corona Phenomenon, what significance would 
intersubjectivity take on in the social epistemology affected by this 
phenomenon?
	29	
Considering the intertwining of natural and social-​cultural aspects of 
covid-​19, what is the relation of causality and agency in this phenome­
non, and what methodological consequences may this relation have for 
the philosophical approach?
	30	
What are the philosophical implications of hope in the situation of 
global confrontation with the covid-​19 –​ considering the possible con­
sequences of this situation?
	
Political Questions
	1	
In what sense is the Corona Phenomenon political? And what effect may 
this being political have on similar future phenomena to become political 
or more political?
2		
In confronting the covid-​19, which political systems and cultures have 
been more efficient so far, and would probably be able to manage the 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Preface
xvii
consequences better? What strengths and weaknesses of democratic sys­
tems and cultures have appeared in practice?
3		
How has the confrontation with the covid-​19 impacted the recognition 
of the importance of political leaders and/​or political structures in dif­
ferent political systems?
4		
Does covid-​19 show the necessity of hardening the borders and main­
taining the nation state-​based political structures, or the need for reduc­
tion of borders and constitution of new political structures for easier 
interaction?
5		
Given the procedure of crisis management in different countries with 
different power structures, would covid-​19 push the states toward more 
centralism or decentralization?
6	
How will the covid-​19 in the short and long term impact the three rival 
political-​economic theories (neoliberal theory, welfare state, and social 
democracy) and governance based on them?
7		
What mutual influence there is between the political conflicts –​ in dif­
ferent countries –​ and the management of the pandemic?
8		
What may be the effect of subjective and objective consequences of 
the covid-​19 on the process of democratization in different political 
systems?
9	
How would the pandemic change the importance of ideology and effi­
ciency in the political philosophy of states and in the political culture of 
countries?
10	
How may the discussion on the problem of equality and social-​political 
and global justice develop in the face of the covid-​19?
11	
What change would we see in the limits of freedom, given the [need for] 
greater intervention of governments in confronting the covid-​19? And 
what would be the duty of academics, especially political philosophers?
12	
How have the links between knowledge, power, and truth become more 
apparent in the confrontation with the covid-​19?
13	
What role have political psychological factors played or can play in the 
confrontation of political institutions and actors with the covid-​19?
14	
How would the clash of citizenship rights with the necessities of public 
health, in dealing with the covid-​19, impact political theory and prac­
tice? And what controls and restrictions –​ and for how long –​ govern­
ments are legitimate to impose on citizens?
15	
How has the level of political development actually affected –​ or may 
affect –​ the three phases of prevention, overcoming the crisis, and man­
aging the consequences, in the confrontation of governments with the 
covid-​19?
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

xviii
Preface
	16	
How may the severity of the crisis, and the confrontation of political 
institutions with it in different countries, affect the revision of the con­
stitutions of each country or the process of and criteria for passing 
new laws?
	17	
How does covid-​19 impact the relations between government and civil 
society in different political systems?
	18	
What would be the most important causes of possible protests or rebel­
lions after covid-​19, and what differences –​ in comparison with the 
past –​ would/​ should be in the governments’ responses to them?
	19	
How may change the place of political ethics in politics and political 
relations after the covid-​19?
	20	
To what extent is the impact of covid-​19 on global political relations, 
comparable to the impact of the long-​standing problems of human soci­
ety, such as the problems of the environment, immigration, terrorism, 
and so on?
	21	
What changes have the actions of seeking help and aid in the covid-​19 
outbreak made –​ and can make –​ in the foreign relations of the states?
	22	
With which phenomenon we may compare the covid-​19 from the point 
of view of political history?
	23	
How may the encounter with Coronavirus affect the definition of the 
enemy in political sciences?
	24	
May the encounter with Coronavirus be considered War? What effect 
will a positive or negative answer to this question have on the definition 
of war, on the one hand, and perhaps on the governments’ responses to 
similar phenomena in the future?
	25	
Given the political implications of the covid-​19, what opportunities 
have emerged or will emerge for social-​political movements such as 
peace movements and environmentalism?
	26	
Considering the multiple social-​political-​psychological aspects of the 
“Corona Phenomenon”, to encounter more effectively with the current 
crisis what changes are needed in information policy? Which option 
would be preferable: more transparency or more governmental control/​ 
censorship? How may the pandemic impact media in long term?
	27	
What is the mutual effect of political jurisprudence and political theol­
ogy with the procedure of confrontation with the Corona Phenomenon 
and its consequences?
	28	
What impacts would the Corona Phenomenon have on the health and 
cultural policy? Given the shortcomings and dysfunctions in the process 
of encountering the covid-​19, what changes do we need in attitude and 
policies in relation to such global problems?
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Preface
xix
	29	
With a critical look at the measures taken by governments to confront 
the pandemic, what changes seem to be needed in domestic and foreign 
science policy?
	30	
What shortcomings or dysfunctions of academic political education 
and research have been highlighted by the covid-​19?
Pegah Mossleh
Autumn 2021
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Contributors
Marcel Becker
Associate Professor of Philosophy, Radboud University.
Richard Bradley
Professor of Philosophy, London School of Economics and Political 
Science (lse).
Martin Breaugh
Associate Professor of Political Theory, York University.
David Cameron
Professor of Political Science, Dean of the University of Toronto’s Faculty of 
Arts & Science.
Frank Chouraqui
Associate Professor of Philosophy, Leiden University.
Neal DeRoo
Professor of Philosophy, King’s University (Alberta).
Sabine Döring
Professor of Philosophy, University of Tübingen.
Jacalyn Duffin
m.d & Ph.D., Professor Emerita of History of Medicine, Department of 
Philosophy, Queen’s University; Former President of the American Association 
for the History of Medicine and Canadian Society for the History of Medicine.
Jean Grondin
Professor of Philosophy, University of Montreal.
Anton Friedrich Koch
Professor of Philosophy, Heidelberg University.
Christopher Lowry
Associate Professor of Philosophy, University of Waterloo.
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Contributors
xxi
Beatrice Magni
Associate Professor of Political Philosophy, University of Milan.
Spyros Marchetos
Assistant Professor of Political Science, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki.
Eduardo Mendieta
Professor of Philosophy, Penn State University.
Pegah Mossleh
m.d & Ph.D., Assistant Professor of Political Theory, Academic-​Research 
Institute for Humanities and Cultural Studies.
Jeffrey Noonan
Professor of Philosophy, University of Windsor.
Vicente Ordóñez Roig
Associate Professor of Social and Political Philosophy, Universidad Nacional de 
Educación a Distancia (uned).
Paul Patton
Hongyi Chair of Philosophy, Wuhan University; Emeritus Professor of 
Philosophy, University of New South Wales.
Michael Quante
Professor of Philosophy, and Vice-​Rector for Internationalization and 
Knowledge Transfer, University of Münster.
Jeff Shantz
Professor of Social-​Political science and Criminology, Kwantlen Polytechnic 
University.
Ewa Szczepankiewicz-​Rudzka
Assistant Professor of Political Studies and International Relations, Jagiellonian 
University.
Charles Taylor
Professor Emeritus of Philosophy, McGill University.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

xxii
Contributors
Georgia Warnke
Professor of Political Science, University of California-​Riverside.
David Weberman
Associate Professor of Philosophy, Central European University.
Huw Williams
Senior Lecturer of Political Philosophy, Cardiff University.
Marcel Wissenburg
Professor of Political Science, Radboud University.
newgenprepdf
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Pegah Mossleh, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_002
Introduction
Questioning within the Roaring Waves of the Phenomenon
Pegah Mossleh
It may be surprising and, of course, sad that in today’s world the only place we 
use the prefix pan correctly is in pan-​demic, referring to a pervasive disaster. 
The word pandemic better indicates that we are a combination of pan and 
demia, that is, all people of a true temporal-​spatial unit. This is exactly contrary 
to divisive uses of the pan –​ especially in the political domain –​ that always 
refer to artificial and partial and often harmful and devastating units. In a fan­
tastic image, let us imagine the Corona not as a virus but as a crowned king 
who has attacked us with a huge army from another planet. Perhaps in this 
way, we can better understand the true use of pan and the truer signification 
of we. But the issue is not so simple. In reality, Coronavirus is not a completely 
foreign invader. It is a part of the very nature that we are also a part of it. In 
other words, we (human and virus) share a larger we in some way. Countless 
numbers of the viruses, maybe of the same family of Corona, live normally in 
our bodies and around us. In this sense, our living conditions and our destiny 
can be understood only in relation to them. Perhaps this brief paragraph can 
express that to what extent both the phenomenon we call pandemic and the 
word pandemic itself have revealed our need for further reflection.
But why questioning? And why during the occurrence of the phenomenon 
and not after it? As we often hear when one can sit down and calmly think phil­
osophically about what happened. Do we not remember that Hegel described 
philosophy as the Owl of Minerva spreads its wings only with the falling of the 
dusk? (Hegel, 1989, 28). So, should not we wait for the passage of time until all 
its dimensions would be disclosed then think deeply about this phenomenon? 
Here I will try to discuss these questions briefly, which fits the introduction. 
For this purpose, I will focus on the two issues of questioning and phenome­
nality and avoid discussing the covid-​19 which is so much talked about every­
where now.
Heidegger once said: “Questioning builds a way … The way is a way of think­
ing” (Heidegger, 2000, 7). As is well known, Heidegger correctly realized that 
thinking is the same as questioning. Really, questioning is not just a tool for 
thinking but it is thinking itself in the true sense. Thinking is not any move­
ment of the mind, willingly or unwillingly, in response to the constant stim­
uli of a living human. It is realized only if there is meaning-​finding/​making 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

2
Mossleh
and well-​oriented questioning. In the same way, in this situation that the need 
for collective thinking, in face of a pan-​demic, has been certainly revealed 
more than ever, in fact, the need for collective and comprehensive question­
ing has become more apparent. From this perspective, we can understand 
why we have not yet had collective thinking, in the true sense of the word, in 
the face of the pandemics of history. Because no comprehensive questioning 
proportionate to those events in the different fields of humanities has been 
conducted. Collective thinking is precisely meant to find the most comprehen­
sive and profound questions through continuous dialogue. Thus, questioning 
is not a completed task, but a process to understand together what has not 
been thought of. This process does not need to start just after a phenomenon. 
In fact, every phenomenon initiates questioning about itself from the very 
beginning. In addition, thinking always has a constructive aspect, and so the 
questioning which is equivalent to thinking has the same constructive aspect.1 
This attitude is different from the view that considers the role of thought, espe­
cially philosophical thought, as “descriptive”. In Post-​Metaphysical Thought, 
Habermas even separated theoretical philosophy from Enlightenment, and 
interpretive role of philosophy from its role as Stand-​In (Habermas, 1992, 14). 
Thus, although there is definitely a constructive aspect in any interpretation, it 
is also important to pay special attention to the distinction and preservation of 
the interpretive, directing, and constructive aspects of the questioning.
Not only it is not enough to wait for all the dimensions of the phenomenon 
to be disclosed and then think about it, but also by asking creative questions 
and achieving deeper and more comprehensive questions, we should actively 
move in the direction of understanding the phenomenon and at the same 
time influence the course of developments of the phenomenon. Certainly, this 
action of questioning is exactly the opposite of engaging with trivial, platitu­
dinous, and scattered journalistic questions. Moreover, the inherent aspect of 
such questioning, as is evident from the word itself, is to put in question, or in 
other words, its critical aspect. This critical aspect can also be productive and 
useful during the confrontation with the phenomenon and should not be post­
poned. In the face of pan-​demia questioning is, in fact, rather, to put in ques­
tion all, not to put in question somebody or some entity like a particular state 
or system. This means initiating a new critical collective self-​understanding in 
the light of the particular situation that has appeared. Heidegger saw such self-​
understanding as a historical task achieved through the “gegenseitigen Sich-​in-​
die-​Frage-​Stellens” (Heidegger, 1983, 17). We should not let significant questions 
	1	 Heidegger considered the learning of thinking as being underway (Heidegger, 2002, 10).
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Introduction
3
remain unasked. The pervasive disaster that has taken place, regardless of its 
negative and painful effects, has created an opportunity to put in question all 
aspects of human life. This questioning does not only involve the objective 
situation but can also include accepted and popular theories and ideas. When 
some theories and doctrines have become, by popular acceptance or at least 
in the academic community, themselves a form of popular belief or doxa, we 
should, as Gadamer warned, prevent questions from being suppressed under 
such doxas (Gadamer, 1990, 371–​373).
My purpose in this introduction is not to express the importance of ques­
tioning, which, of course, is known to all scholars, but a kind of reminder that 
the academic community cannot rely on scattered questions to strengthen 
collective and synergistic thinking in the face of the great problems of human 
society. The first step to realizing something called collective thinking is not to 
answer scattered and pre-​existing questions, but to achieve the most compre­
hensive and effective questions through continuous dialogue.
The reason I coined the term “Corona Phenomenon” in the early months of 
the pandemic and used it in the title of the project is not absolute validation of 
the method of phenomenology, especially in the classical Husserlian sense with 
an obsolete “epoche”, but rather an emphasis on the phenomenal nature of the 
set of events that people of the world have encountered with the mediation of 
the Coronavirus. This means that the complex set of events would be no longer 
reduced to a disease called covid-​19 and its study also will not be reduced to a 
causal explanation. As mentioned, a mere description, which was characteris­
tic of the old phenomenology does not seem to be enough. Fortunately, many 
of the scholars involved in the project found the term “Corona Phenomenon” 
proper and useful and incorporated it into their articles.
Here we should pay attention to the importance of the phenomenality of 
the topic from another point. If any event or set of events is considered as a 
phenomenon and any phenomenon is considered as a text that we, as inter­
pretive beings, try to understand, we should also see it as an answer to spe­
cific questions that could have been asked before that phenomenon occurred. 
Basically, the fact that hermeneutics is no longer considered merely a method 
today means that interpretation is not limited to the written text, but the phe­
nomenal world is considered as the text. Thus, any phenomenon, as a com­
plex text before interpretive beings, can in fact be the answer to the questions 
to be found. For example, if a phenomenon such as the French Revolution, 
which is made up of a set of specific historical events, is considered, it is in 
fact an answer to a question that could have been posed earlier: what could 
be the consequence of the complex and problematic situation of eighteenth-​
century France, given the historical features of that time? In other words, if the 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

4
Mossleh
person or persons in France in the 1770s and 1780s raised the big question of 
what the consequences of that difficult and complex situation would be, the 
answer could be: Revolution. Therefore, questioning in the face of a phenome­
non must involve two paths. The first is to find important questions before the 
phenomenon that could make us aware of the occurrence of the current phe­
nomenon or similar phenomena. Of course, this does not mean that Husserl’s 
Rückfragen (Questioning Back) should be reproduced in the pursuit of a tran­
scendental phenomenological philosophy.2 Finding such questions goes even 
beyond Ricoeur’s methodological conception of Husserl’s Rückfragen: under­
standing the present by questioning the past in terms of “genesis of meaning” 
and achieving “historical intentionality” and “meaning of the noetic intention” 
(Ricoeur, 1984). Going beyond, here, means that achieving such questions is to 
update and sharpen their critical aspect. In fact, in the light of the phenome­
non that has taken place, the major interrogative and critical questions in the 
humanities over the past century can be retrieved and reconsidered, not just to 
repeat them, but because the ground has been prepared for their impact more 
than ever. There is another important aspect in this path of questioning: in 
the light of the present phenomenon, some past judgments about approaches 
and thinkers could/​ should be re-​examined. The question of which judgments 
are worth revisiting has certainly not a definite and predetermined answer. 
The second path involves questions that begin with a confrontation with the 
phenomenon. In this project, I tried to include both trajectories in the ques­
tioning. Where the question of the problematic aspects of the modern Subject 
or the concept of Nature is posed, it is in fact a return to the major philosoph­
ical questions of the last century that such a phenomenon might be consid­
ered as an answer to such questions. In other words, if a few decades ago the 
question had been posed what could be the consequences of problems arising 
from the idea of the modern subject and the attitude of such a subject towards 
nature, or the destructive militarism dominating international relations, one 
of the answers might be the occurrence of phenomena such as the current 
pandemic. On the other hand, for example, the question about the impact of 
the Corona Phenomenon on the possibility of similar phenomena becoming 
more political in the future arises with the emergence of the phenomenon 
itself. The scope of such a question extends from now to an uncertain future 
and allows analysis to be intertwined with the imagination in a creative way. In 
this project, each question is asked of different scholars. In this way, the mon­
ovocity in the approach to different aspects of the phenomenon is prevented 
	2	 See Husserl's discussion in Chapter 3 of The Crisis in European Science (Husserl, 1976, 105ff).
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Introduction
5
as much as possible. Of course, it is worth examining that scholars with closer 
approaches have responded more. It seems that professors who have more 
critical approaches to the current world situation, in general, are more inclined 
to reformulate and express their criticisms in the face of such a disaster. With 
this introduction, in the following, a brief recount of the main theme of each 
scholar’s contribution will come.
In the first part of the volume, we have the general reflections of three expe­
rienced scholars about living in a pandemic and the lessons we can learn from 
three political, historical, and philosophical perspectives. Charles Taylor in 
response to the three project questions about the efficiency of political sys­
tems in dealing with the pandemic, weaknesses of democracies, and rival 
political theories has emphasized that neoliberalism has been discredited. He 
considers the neoliberal claims about the efficacy of markets as illusions, and 
the result of such illusions is that the public services –​ especially the health 
system and care for the elderly in the face of the pandemic –​ are squeezed and 
incompetent. Taylor explains why in the pandemic situation we find that our 
democracies need a revitalization of organizations for the reconstruction of 
the devastations caused by traditional industry.
Jacalyn Duffin also seeks to know what lessons we can learn from the 
Corona Phenomenon, given the question about historical continuities and/​ 
or ruptures. The historical-​comparative view provides a useful framework for 
understanding what is happening. Duffin, as a medical historian, has been able 
to devote her contribution to such an exploration. With her active participa­
tion, she rewrote the question she chose to answer in a way that it became, 
in fact, her own so that she could arrive at an existential conclusion with a 
historical analysis. In answering the question of what is the existential differ­
ence between human beings in the time of covid-​19 and the time of the Black 
Plague, she has tried to help us to understand the present, to explain how we 
got to where we are even if where we are seems wrong.
Mentioning the negative results of the pandemic, Jean Grondin intends to 
remind that positive possibilities can also lie in such a difficult situation. He 
points to a kind of revolution that has occurred in attitudes about the invulner­
ability of the modern subject. Grondin has borrowed the “limit situations” from 
Karl Jaspers and considered the current pandemic as such a situation during 
which the frailty of life is revealed and we become more philosophical and 
aware that we are finite and vulnerable beings. In the end, he has expressed the 
hope that when this crisis is over, something of this philosophical and medita­
tive life might survive.
The second part, devoted to philosophical questions about the Corona 
Phenomenon, begins with Michael Quante’s philosophical perspective on the 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

6
Mossleh
pandemic. He has formulated his ideas in the form of answering five questions 
of the project, on the meaning of life, modern subject, the relation of Right and 
Good, moral philosophy, and status of philosophical knowledge in the pan­
demic days. He asserts that meaning in life is something human beings can 
and have to realize in social interaction and can not be realized as an individ­
ual project. Quante relates the understanding of the problem of the subject to 
acknowledge three dimensions of the finiteness of human beings. He explains 
these three during the discussion on: misunderstanding of the autonomy, 
embodiment of human beings, and ontological and ethical individualism in 
the modern conception of subjectivity. His article emphasizes that if philoso­
phy is to be helpful in this difficult situation, it should be empirically informed 
and in touch with social reality.
One of the most important philosophical questions throughout the twen­
tieth century –​ and, of course, in this project –​ which was at the center of 
critical thinking, was the question of the modern Subject. The revision of this 
question in the current situation, as can be seen in Quante’s contribution, has 
been considered by the participating scholars. Anton Koch has addressed this 
question intertwined with the question of Nature. He has criticized the Myth of 
Transparency in the western philosophical tradition from Plato onward which 
has overshadowed the issue of subject and nature simultaneously. The Corona 
Phenomenon may illustrate the tendency of physis to be hidden and proves 
that the subject is not the ruler of nature. From his point of view, that Myth is 
inconsistent and self-​contradictory, and the globalized scientistic popular cul­
ture is driven by it. The social-​political result of these reflections is the eman­
cipatory aspect of reviewing the subject-​nature relation. We may learn from 
the Corona Phenomenon that it is essential for human beings to live in many 
separate political states with their particular substantial Sittlichkeiten but in 
one universal ethical community.
But, Frank Chouraqui before answering the same question has distinguished 
two ways to think of modern Subject: modern subject as a concept, and modern 
subject as a form of life that inhabits modernity. In addition, he has also incor­
porated his ideas on the project’s questions of hermeneutics and ambiguity 
in his answer to the question of the subject. He argues that for understand­
ing the problematic aspects of the idea of the modern subject in relation to 
the Corona Phenomenon it is not sufficient to address the institutional notion 
of the modern subject. Corona Phenomenon exposes the instability and the 
conflicting vocations of cardinal structures of modern life, and beyond this, it 
threatens the modern narrative of a unified subject, a universal human world, 
and the unity of individual and universal will through the rational agency. The 
modern concept of subjectivity presupposes a harmony between the internal 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Introduction
7
and external definitions of the individual, and between the collective and indi­
vidual welfare. Also, this notion rejects the arbitrariness that brings along the 
rejection of hermeneutic freedom and hermeneutic decision-​making. All of 
these assumptions have been challenged by the current crisis and this may 
lead to hermeneutic freedom.
Although Chouraqui and Quante have mentioned the difficulty of living in 
recent ambiguity, Richard Bradley has devoted the main line of his essay to the 
question of ambiguity and uncertainty arising from the pandemic. Detecting 
the ethical and scientific uncertainty, he moves from ambiguity, as the point of 
departure, toward the hard ethical question of what criteria should be applied 
in making decisions to save lives. His contribution includes a detailed exam­
ination of the measures of the value of saving the life of a person, such as Value 
of a Statistical Life (vsl), Value of a Statistical Life Year (vsly), Quality Adjusted 
Life Years (qaly s). Bradley shows that policy-​making on human lives in the 
conditions of ambiguity is very difficult and multifaceted and can not fully 
meet all expectations.
In her article, Sabine Döring also by pointing out the need to make difficult 
decisions in confronting covid-​19, has tried to address the conflict between 
different rights and between Right and Good, as important issues that the 
moral philosophy in dealing with the pandemic faces. With a focus on the 
theory of specificationism, she has discussed this problem that whether there 
are real moral conflicts or everything is just dependent on the situation. Her 
chapter includes a very significant and challenging discussion on freedom and 
its limits in the time of the pandemic. Criticizing the concept of Laissez-​faire, 
Döring advocates a conception of freedom that embraces the rational guid­
ance of the scientific insight of experts and argues that cooperation to impose 
contact restrictions in pandemic conditions does not mean domination or 
denial of freedom. Rather, such cooperation can be understood as an expres­
sion of freedom.
Jeffrey Noonan has looked at limitations like Lockdown from a different 
perspective. In response to the question of ethicality in confrontation with 
the Corona Phenomenon, Noonan has tried to reach a materialist ethics with 
the help of a combination of the life-​value philosophy, and his own humanist 
interpretation of Marxism. He asserts that ethical problems and the problem 
of the meaning of life should be seen as social problems, not just as abstracted 
theoretical ones. A good and meaningful life depends on good relationships 
with each other and with the world, and, as pandemic has underlined, capital­
ism with its exploitation ruins it. Neal DeRoo, like Noonan, is focused on the 
meaning of the world and life, but with an approach to giving importance to 
the divine in an age that Charles Taylor has called the “secular age”. DeRoo, who 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

8
Mossleh
is the only scholar who has answered the question of the role of religion and 
the divine in the age of Corona Phenomenon, argues for the functional and 
secular benefits of religion in society and in response to the disasters such as 
pandemics. With a distinction of religion and the divine, he tries to present a 
phenomenological understanding of spirituality that refers to the meaningful­
ness of the world itself. His article seeks to justify that religion should, instead 
of taking responsibility for answering theological questions about all-​knowing 
God, provide a sense of existential comfort, peace, and hope in such a painful 
situation. It is also important to David Weberman how human beings would 
live in the world, given the consequences of the pandemic. With focusing on 
the relation of pandemic and philosophical anthropology, Weberman has tried 
to answer, and also pose some questions about the way of being and living with 
others in the condition of the pandemic. He states that in the current situa­
tion two aspects of being-​with-​others have been highlighted that Heidegger 
had not included in his discussion on the issue: the harm-​benefit aspect and 
sociability. Also, in relation to being-​towards-​death, according to Weberman 
there is not any new point with Corona pandemic different from any threat to 
our lives. But, its consequences present something new because it makes us live 
differently.
At the end of this part, while acknowledging the importance of the critique 
of modern scientism and technologism, Pegah Mossleh criticizes the reaction­
ary critiques and demonization of modern philosophy, science, and technol­
ogy, as well as some twentieth-​century approaches such as the “death of the 
subject”, which in his view were hasty and loose. Referring to Heidegger’s dis­
cussion of technology and his concept of “Bestand”, Mossleh states, with a crit­
ical approach and considering what has become clearer through the current 
pandemic, that the Corona Phenomenon may become the gateway to an age 
that can be called the era of Post-reactionary-Criticism, in which more proper 
and efficient attitudes about Nature, Subjectivity, and the effective agency may 
be reached. From this perspective, the Coronavirus reminded us, as a We/​Pan 
and as a part of Nature, that we are still –​ as in the time of the Black Plague –​ 
exposed to terrible invasions of Nature. Thus, we can now better understand 
that what was thought of the modern subject, and the ideas of early modern 
thinkers about it, to be merely aggressive and dominating, was, in fact, more 
defensive. Now, instead of hostility to modern science and technology, we need 
to learn how to understand and practice how to use them better, and instead of 
allocating our resources to war with each other and develop unjust consump­
tion, we need to revise our attitudes and reorganize our resource allocation.
At the beginning of the third part, we find Paul Patton’s answer to the 
most general political question of the project: In what sense is the Corona 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Introduction
9
Phenomenon political? Patton asserts that it is necessary to understand the 
pandemic as a complex event. This event is entangled in power relations at dif­
ferent levels between individuals, institutions, and states. So, it is in different 
ways political. He distinguishes the factor of origin of the pandemic from the 
consequences of that event and mentions that the pandemic due to the geo­
political circumstances of its origin and because of the historical condition of 
China, from the beginning, became political. Then, He explains how the conse­
quences of the event and the challenges it poses to the accepted mechanisms 
of governance are other ways of making it political. Certainly, one of the conse­
quences and challenges mentioned by Patton can be observed in the impact of 
covid-​19 on federal countries, which is the subject of David Cameron’s article. 
In fact, one of the questions about the governance and political structure that 
has been highlighted in the current pandemic is the question of centralism, 
decentralism, and federalism. Observing the concrete conditions in federal 
countries, Cameron argues that due to the need for control over the market 
and commercial activities in confronting the pandemic, the power of national 
governments has increased and has been more concentrated at the center. 
With the detection of two major dimensions in management of the pandem­
ic’s impact on federations, he explains that covid-​19 has revealed that the first, 
that is management of the impacts on the public health, requires the leader­
ship at all levels of the federation with an emphasis on the significant role of 
the cities and local leadership. But, the second, management of the impacts on 
the economy, needs a more prominent role for the central government. Then 
he examines the reactions of some governments, like Malaysia, South Africa, 
Canada, and Germany, to the pandemic.
As it has been pointed out in one of the project questions, the Corona 
Phenomenon can be seen as an opportunity to evaluate twentieth-​century 
ideas about the relationship between knowledge, power, and truth. In address­
ing this question, Eduardo Mendieta has formulated his critical approach to 
the global hegemonic power system. with a focus on Anthropocene, Mendieta 
describes it as a misnomer because it conceals global capitalism with its unsus­
tainable economics, colonization, slavery, imperialism, global wars, human 
trafficking, and genocides. Using the concept of dispositif in the Foucauldian 
analysis of power, he tries to explain how Coronavirus has become a dispositif 
in neoliberal governmentality. Stating that pandemics were never a mere natu­
ral disaster, but always were social events and political realities, he warns that 
in this pandemic governmentality, we face a kind of racism deployed by the 
sovereign to make some die and others live.
Also, Martin Breaugh in his essay which is concerned with equality has com­
bined the response to the question of the relation of knowledge, power, and 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

10
Mossleh
truth, with the discussion about systematic inequality. He has found the com­
parison of the movement of “Black Lives Matter” with the January 6th insur­
rection in Washington D.C. as a theme in which the combination of the two 
mentioned issues can be examined. Explaining that the blm movement was 
based on a fact that many witnessed and was often peaceful, but on the con­
trary, the insurrection was based on a lie and was violent throughout, Breaugh 
intends to clarify the discriminatory nature of the government’s response to 
the two events. From his point of view, under the conditions of covid-​19, the 
interplay between knowledge, power, and the truth reveals that the forces of 
disorder or extraordinary politics on the streets have the strength to accept the 
truth based on knowledge and the courage to speak it to power; Although, 
authorities of the State respond to it with violence. Jeff Shantz has also chosen 
the blm movement as a basis for answering the question of opportunities that 
have emerged or will emerge for social-​political movements, given the political 
implications of the covid-​19. He argues that the dual crises of covid-​19 and 
the struggles erupting over police violence and racial inequality put a sharp 
focus on contradictions within capitalism and also show the disparities and 
inequalities inherent in the system. With reference to the blm movement, he 
states that such uprisings have started to shape a new infrastructure of resis­
tance and the pandemic may provide the appropriate condition for moving 
from defensive to offensive struggle.
The analysis of the pandemic issues based on a critique of capitalism can also 
be seen in the essays of other authors. Vicente Ordóñez Roig in response to the 
question of freedom has criticized what he calls callousness of neo-​liberalism, 
and also the nationalist-​capitalist system of western countries. Using Walter 
Benjamin’s considerations on the state of emergency, he tries to provide an 
analysis of the current situation. Unlike Döring, Ordóñez is critical of recent 
restrictions on citizens in the European Union and warns that not only the 
lives of the most vulnerable and oppressed people, including the elderly, refu­
gees, migrants, or displaced populations are threatened by the covid-​19, but 
also by authorities limiting basic rights and liberties.
Many important political questions raised by the Corona phenomenon 
belong to the field of political philosophy. Beatrice Magni has focused on the 
role of political philosophy in confronting the pandemic. Although Grondin 
and Quante have emphasized the importance of human vulnerability in their 
articles, Magni’s contribution focuses much more on vulnerability. She argues 
that because of the individualism that dominates western societies, vulnera­
bility, as the nature of the human condition, has been missed from political 
philosophy. Acceptance of vulnerability, in the time of the pandemic, is the 
antithesis of autonomy as the basic tenet of individualism, and the threat to it, 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Introduction
11
because it represents the contingency of human affairs and sheds light on the 
individual’s dependence and lack of self-​sufficiency. Now, it has been clearer 
that political philosophy should take on the responsibility of understanding 
politics and its contingency. Political philosophy is expected to learn how to 
cooperate with others for the achievement of common goods and to reduce 
injustices. Huw Williams has tried, like Magni but with his special attitude, 
to clarify the role of political philosophy in the face of the pandemic, albeit 
by using it to answer questions of freedom, justice, the relation between the­
ory and practice, and the relation of Right and Good. He emphasizes that we, 
situated scholars, should see the pandemic in its historical context and from 
the location in which we stand. Using the Gramscian analysis of the crisis, and 
with a post-​Rawlsian view, Williams argues about the legitimacy and qual­
ity of neoliberal capitalism in confrontation with the pandemic. He tries to 
explain why this pandemic has revealed the need for more practically-​oriented 
approaches and why political philosophy should pay more attention to local 
and concrete governance.
At the end of this section, we have Ewa Szczepankiewicz-​Rudzka’s article, 
which contains a study with a theoretical-​analytic approach. She has tried 
to answer the question of subjective and objective impacts of the Corona 
Phenomenon on the process of democratization, with a focus on the Maghreb. 
In her contribution can be found an updated comparison of the economic and 
political situation, and the reactions of the governments and social-​political 
forces of Tunisia, Morocco, Algeria, and Libya in confrontation with the pan­
demic. She has found that although according to the common belief in mod­
ernism, the factors that weaken the economy perpetuate the political status 
quo of autocratic regimes and lead to the weakening of the democratization 
process, observations of the current political processes in the region do not 
confirm such a conclusion. Szczepankiewicz concludes that despite such cri­
ses that have recently emerged in Tunisia, in the face of the pandemic civil 
society has been strengthened and virtual spaces have been extended. Such 
transformations may offer new opportunities for social debate and the devel­
opment of deliberative democracy in North Africa.
Part four, which includes interdisciplinary approaches to the Corona 
Phenomenon, begins with the contribution of Marcel Wissenburg. The ques­
tion of the project he has focused on is which phenomenon in political history 
can be compared to the Corona Phenomenon? In dealing with this question, 
Wissenburg has firstly examined the very historical comparison itself. Arguing 
that a comparison to the 14th Century Plague can be instructive mostly because 
of the differences, he concludes that the comparison helps us to understand 
what changes have taken place in the world today. Also, he has addressed the 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

12
Mossleh
question of opportunities pandemic has made for social movements, espe­
cially for environmentalism. He explains, in this direction, the critical attitudes 
to the wrong relationship between human and nature, and also the harmful 
consequences of globalization. Finally, his article contains the message that 
we should not miss the chance to reform our relationship with the “eco”sys­
tem, after covid-​19.
The question of justice is both a philosophical and a political question. 
Especially when it comes to issues such as identity, it should be addressed as 
an interdisciplinary issue. In this regard, Georgia Warnke has formulated her 
concern for social justice in the pandemic time with a focus on racial inequal­
ity. She argues that as in hermeneutic the understanding of the whole and the 
part are interdependent, our identities depend upon the whole of which oth­
ers are a part. Warnke mentions that focusing on racial and ethnic differences 
in rates of illness and death from covid-​19 leads to a misunderstanding. This 
should be seen as a problem of poor and marginalized people. It needs to crit­
icize the political economy of a country that does not care how its workers 
live. The Concern for equality and justice has also led to Christopher Lowry’s 
involvement in the project. He has examined the usefulness of some parts of 
Rawls’ theory of justice in the face of covid-​19. Lowry points out that Rawls 
argues in favor of what he calls a property-​owning democracy and against a 
capitalist welfare state. Because the problem with welfare-​state capitalism is 
that it aims to meet only basic needs, but it permits very large inequalities so 
that the control of the economy and much of political life rests in a few hands. 
From his point of view, the current pandemic has revealed that the question of 
whether some people have too much should be given more attention.
Spyros Marchetos’ motive is also seeking justice and his approach is critical 
of capitalism and imperialism. He emphasizes that covid-​19 is a syndemic, in 
the sense that synergistic health problems affect public health within the con­
text of persistent social and economic inequalities. With a historical argument 
about epidemics, Marchetos tries to show the relations between epidemics 
and problems arising from colonialism and capitalist imperialism. He asserts 
that we need to reflect on the multiple threads that connect epidemics, cap­
italism, capitalist imperialism, patriarchy, and poverty, but the world-​system 
and powerful public and private institutions, whose priority is to reproduce 
the accumulation of capital, prevent it by spreading a kind of anti-​rationality. 
After a detailed discussion, his description of the pandemic crisis is a huge 
magnifying glass showing in bold relief capitalism’s complex and contradic­
tory social patterns and tendencies.
This part finally ends with Marcel Becker’s multidimensional approach 
to the project’s question about information technologies in the time of the 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Introduction
13
pandemic. With an epistemological view, Becker has mentioned that digital 
technologies have an important impact on our understanding of the disease 
and the way we deal with it. Becker’s analysis has focused on two topics of 
newsworthiness and privacy. In relation to newsworthiness, He explains the 
different kinds of wrong information and the challenges between politics and 
science and asserts that what is important is to distinguish scientific truth and 
integrate the results of scientific works in our life and policy-​making. Also, pri­
vacy in this situation has become more important because it is connected to 
Autonomy that, as Magni has also pointed out, is currently the object of criti­
cism more than ever. In response to the implicit concern of the project ques­
tion, Becker warns that the lack of transparency is problematic, and special 
attention must be paid that the flows of information do not fall prey to govern­
mental power and capitalistic structures.
At the end of this introduction, it should be said that despite the valuable 
answers of the contributors, and despite the new questions they have posed 
in their articles, there are still unanswered questions in this project that need 
to be considered by thinkers. Also, as the pandemic period gets longer, more 
than everyone initially thought, the need for active interaction of academics to 
achieve more and more effective questions becomes more tangible.
	
References
Gadamer, Hans-​Georg (1990), Gesammelte Werke, Band 1: Wahrheit und Methode: 
Grundzüge einer philosophischen Hermeneutik, Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck.
Habermas, Jürgen (1992), Postmetaphysical Thinking, translation by: William Mark 
Hohengarten, mit Press.
Hegel, G.W.F (1989), Werke 7: Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts, Frankfurt am 
Main: Suhrkamp.
Heidegger, Martin (1983), Gesamtausgabe, Band 13: Aus der Erfahrung des Denkens, 
Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio Klostermann.
Heidegger, Martin (2000), Gesamtausgabe, Band 7: Vorträge und Aufsätze, Frankfurt 
am Main: Vittorio Klostermann.
Heidegger, Martin (2002), Gesamtausgabe, Band 8: Was Heisst Denken?, Frankfurt am 
Main: Vittorio Klostermann.
Husserl, Edmund (1976), Die Krisis der Europaischen Wissenschaften und die 
Transzendentale Phanomenologie, Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Ricoeur, Paul (1984), Time and Narrative, Vol. 1, Translated by Kathleen McLaughlin 
and David Pellauer, University of Chicago Press.
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

∵
part 1
Reflections on Living in the Pandemic Situation
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Charles Taylor, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_003
­chapter 1
Lessons We Have Learned
Charles Taylor
1	
What have we learned from the crisis of covid-​19? What are the 
inadequacies in our Western democracies that it shows up? And 
what should be done about these?
First (1), it is clear that the public services that underpin our welfare states had 
been continually and progressively underfunded over decades. Particularly rel­
evant here are the health systems. These had even squeezed over a long period 
on the alleged grounds that they had been costing too much, and could only be 
more fully funded at the cost of an irresponsible increase in deficits.
But what created that obsession was the creeping hegemony of neo-​liberal 
illusions about the efficacy of markets, efficacy not only in realizing growth of 
production and wealth globally, and not only helping lift millions out of dire 
poverty –​ which they did, but also supposedly in ensuring that this wealth was 
distributed in the proper proportions to different sectors and classes in soci­
ety –​ which turned out to be a gigantic illusion. So in the end, public services 
were squeezed; and they were affected disproportionately in lesser centers as 
against in big cities.
All this went along with a rise in inequalities of income and wealth, in a 
rising curve that has reached dizzying heights. And this in turn helped increase 
the power of wealth, whether in the hands of individuals and corporations, to 
impose a regime of maldistribution and starvation of the public sector, on the 
grounds that we lack the money to do better.
The most recent phase of this, in the aftermath of the banking crisis of 
2007, has seen the imposition everywhere of policies of austerity, which have 
rendered maldistribution and the shriveling of the public sector even more 
marked.
(2) This irrational faith in the beneficent power of markets has hardened 
into an ideology about growth, whereby real wealth is measured by the 
level of production of goods for individual consumption. From this stand­
point, expenditures on public services come to be seen as an impediment to 
wealth ­creation, and the imperative is to reduce them to the strict minimum 
necessary.
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

18
Taylor
Moreover, since governments are judged in large part on their ability 
to bring about full employment, and since, given steady increases in effi­
ciency, this can only come about through steadily increasing production of 
individually-​consumed goods, we have been dominated by an ideology of con­
tinued growth, which is helping to devastate the planet, at the same time as it 
is starving the public sector –​ as though this sector properly funded could not 
also create jobs.
(3) The two areas where this running down of public services has proved 
obviously and visibly catastrophic in face of the Coronavirus are: health sys­
tems and care for the elderly. Already the provision for the elderly was under 
pressure due to the aging of the population. In Quebec and many other coun­
tries, residences for the aged offered many too few beds. Old people of frail 
health were lodged in hospitals for months while awaiting a place. Then the 
virus hit and these hospital places were put under immense pressure, forc­
ing in some circumstances a kind of grim and tragic triage, where staff had to 
decide whom to help; situations like the Titanic with too few lifeboats.
(4) So lesson number 1 here is that we can not let this kind of rundown of 
public services, particularly in these two key areas, continue. Rather, it must 
be reversed; and societies must imperatively extract the resources from the 
productive sector to make this rebuilding possible, putting an end to creative 
corporate book-​keeping and a resort to fiscal paradises on the part of corpora­
tions and wealthy individuals.
(5) But we must also avoid the under-​funding of services in certain regions 
and which serve populations who have fewer resources than the majority. And 
we must take into account the fact that the disadvantage is often even greater 
when these populations belong to racial or ethnic minorities. In the United 
States, this is particularly striking in the case of African Americans. Now with 
covid-​19, we see the effects of structural racism laid bare –​ starkly in the num­
ber of deaths daily –​ even hourly –​ of African Americans, as well as certain 
immigrant communities. (But similar imbalances exist in other countries, 
including Canada).
(6) In the present crisis, we hear talk of essential workers, by which we 
often mean pre-​eminently health workers, particularly in hospitals and icu s. 
Uppermost. In our minds are doctors and nurses. But in the end, the list of 
essential workers includes more than these. In our present situation, it is 
already obvious that truck drivers, and sanitary workers, and people in the 
food supply chain belong to this category. And we also have to enlarge our list 
of essential institutions –​ obviously to include homes for the elderly, which 
have been the scene of multiple avoidable deaths owing to general conditions 
of under-​staffing, which in turn often results from under-​payment.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Lessons We Have Learned
19
The list of such essential institutions could go on, but certainly also includes 
educational institutions, starting with the schools which our children are man­
dated to attend. And this means looking again at the often meager pay of teach­
ers. In short, we have to get our priorities straight and fund adequately the 
really important things, and this is starkly at variance with the present practice 
where the funding of essential functions often falls dangerously behind, some­
thing which is often the case where these functions are provided by govern­
ments and supported by taxation.
One of the key lessons of the crisis is that we cannot afford this kind of imbal­
ance, where such a large proportion of national wealth goes to the production 
of non-​essential consumer goods, not to speak of the increase of reserves of 
wealth in the hands of large corporations and of very rich individuals.
2	
One Extraordinarily Positive Message
All the above point to the negative lessons we have learned; what went wrong. 
But there is one extraordinarily positive message, and that is the surprising, 
encouraging, heart-​warming wave of solidarity among the vast majority of 
the populations in our Western democracies, many of which until yesterday 
was deeply divided, between rural and urban, between populists and liberals, 
between rival versions of the national identity.
This has found expression in the great balcony demonstrations of gratitude 
to and support for the hard-​pressed medical staff. Can we carry this undimin­
ished out of the crisis, as we turn to rebuild our economies? Or will we return 
with a sigh of relief to the old ruts of growth at any price?
The latter looks all too likely. The Coronavirus has united us because it 
feels like a war has been declared on us, and we have to do everything to fight 
the invader. This analogy has been constantly evoked. But it is not only that 
it would be a relief to return to the familiar ways. It is also that just keeping 
our economy from total collapse, and many of our people from starvation, has 
been very costly in increased debt. Many people will be claiming that we can 
not afford to do anything but return to the status quo.
And yet … Our most massive and frightening crisis both before and after 
the Coronavirus comes from global warming. There will undoubtedly also be 
a movement to start again on a new basis, which really takes account of this 
major threat. Of course, the climate crisis is long-​term. It does not have the 
urgency of a foreign invasion; that is why we can psychologically go on ignor­
ing it until we hit a turning point when it’s too late.
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

20
Taylor
Imagine a powerful movement around a program that has been gestured 
at within the US by the term Green New Deal; combining ecological responsi­
bility with a rebuilding of the public sector, and rectification of the galloping 
growth in inequality of recent decades.
This would involve something other than a simple return to globalization as 
we have known it. Our over-​reliance on air travel, for instance (1) At present, 
we are giving the planet a short break. Apparently, you can see great swathes 
of central China from outer space; And you can see the Himalayas from the 
plains of the u.p. What if we cut down on air travel, at least until such time as 
solar-​driven aircraft become a practical alternative? Domestically, with North 
America, within Europe, India, planes could be to some considerable extent 
replaced with tgv.
And (2) globalized trade in food. At present we have a very ecologically disas­
trous pattern; where monoculture on a vast scale with all the damage it involves 
to the environment, and eventually to yields, go along with exchanges in large 
quantities, which in fact seems to involve a great deal of wastage in the process 
of storage and transport. Example: the Bolsonaro-​encouraged burning down of 
vast areas of the Amazon, to open the land for large-​scale farming, while experts 
predict a drying of the climate in the area cleared, and possible dramatic shrink­
age of the remaining forest itself, with incalculable negative consequences for 
the whole planet. Or forest clearances to allow large-​scale palm oil production 
in Indonesia. Or Europe’s cap, which has also encouraged pushing wetlands 
and other such waste terrains to the edge. Experiments have shown that taking 
proper care of the land can allow the same yields on a smaller area, allowing 
woods, wetlands, hedges to play their part in the renewal of the land.
(3) Our democracies could benefit greatly from a revitalization of organi­
zations at the local or regional level, where realistic plans to reconstruct areas 
devastated by the departure of the traditional industry can be worked out, tak­
ing account of local needs and capacities; and where state and national poli­
ticians can be called to account if they fail to support these plans. It becomes 
much harder to con voters in such organized regions into voting for dreams 
like “making America great again” (Taylor et al., 2020).
(4) And so on, and so on. Let’s think this through before we rush back to our 
favorite pathologies …..
	
References
Taylor, Charles, Patrizia Nanz, and Madeleine Beaubien Taylor (2020), Reconstructing 
Democracy: How citizens are building from the ground up, Harvard University Press.
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Jacalyn Duffin, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_004
­chapter 2
Historical Continuities and Historical Ruptures
The Quest for “Lessons Learned”
Jacalyn Duffin
It is often said that human reactions to pandemics follow constant stages, 
somewhat like the five stages of grief as defined by Elisabeth Kübler-​Ross 
(1969).
1	
Stages of  a Pandemic
	1.	
Denial, delayed acceptance
	2.	
Panic, terror, chaos, flight
	3.	
Explanatory frameworks and perceived causes, which might be social, 
religious, or biological
	4.	
Control measures –​ usually based on 3 above –​ and often opposed
	5.	
Resumption of normal life; with new knowledge and new policies for 
prevention.1
These responses and their sequence are the product of immutable human traits 
in confrontation with uncertainty. We can find equivalent parallels in accounts 
of contagious disease, from Thucydides’ Plague of Athens in the fifth century 
bce (Thucydides, 1919, Vol.1, 45–​49) to the outbreaks of our time Ebola,2 sars,3 
H1N1,4 Zika,5 and covid-​19.6 Nature is endlessly inventive. There will always be 
new, unimagined, infectious threats to our existence. Fact.
When journalists call me searching for lessons learned from past epidem­
ics, I refer to the stages as a historical continuity that helps us to understand 
what is happening in the present and to anticipate, if not thwart, their extreme 
	1	 These stages are inspired by conversations with Stephen J. Peitzman and the writings of 
Charles E. Rosenberg, especially Rosenberg, 1989: 1–​17, reprinted in Rosenberg, 1992, 278–​292.
	2	 See Crawford & Crawford, 2016; Qureshi, 2018.
	3	 See Abraham, 2005.
	4	 See Fineberg, 2014; Esparza, 2020.
	5	 See Diniz, 2017; McNeil, Jr., 2016.
	6	 See Keane & Neal, 2020; Sim et al., 2020.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

22
Duffin
manifestations rooted in selfishness and intolerance. The journalists always 
want reassurance that we are safer now. There is good news on that score 
thanks to many achievements of the previous centuries, most prompted by 
the legacy of specific diseases, often called lessons, which constitute the new 
knowledge of each Stage 5. For example,
	–​	 Plague helped to codify the concept of quarantine.7
	–​	 Smallpox taught the principles of vaccination.8
	–​	 Cholera displayed the imperative of clean water, sanitation, and hygiene.9
	–​	 Tuberculosis helped to establish germ theory and continues to generate 
ideas for public health around the globe.10
	–​	 Influenza from 1918 to 2009 reminded us of collective control relying on all 
of the above.11
	–​	 sars led to changes in public health surveillance in Canada, China, and 
elsewhere.12
The advent of these controls established the preventive measures now being 
marshaled against a novel pathogen, the new knowledge of which is slowly 
being uncovered as I write.
Beyond prevention, there is more good news in terms of treatment. Today, 
if we are unlucky and actually fall ill, we have a better chance of surviving 
because of respirators, antibiotics, and other medications. Even collective sur­
vival and recovery ought to benefit from the advent of the welfare state. These 
technological and social achievements were unavailable during the great 
Influenza pandemic of only a century ago; however, they are finite in number, 
and historians and physicians caution against comparisons.13 The technologies 
can save us, provided we flatten the curve and do not overwhelm resources by 
all becoming infected at the same time.
But the question was about existential differences between now and the 
fourteenth century. Again, it is important to reiterate those parallels in all 
	7	
See Blažina-​Tomić & Blažina, 2015; Slack, 1988.
	8	
See the special issue of Bulletin of the History of Medicine volume83 issue 1, January 2009 
on the history and impact of smallpox vaccination around the world.
	9	
See the special issue of International Journal of Epidemiology on the history and impact of 
John Snow’s report on cholera, Volume 42, issue 6, December 2016.
	10	
See for example, Smith-​Nonini, 2005; Welshman & Bashford, 2006; Bukhman & Kidder, 
2008; Vilaplana & Cardona,  2010; Bowden & Sadler, 2015; Abrams, 2013; Balcazar & 
Castro, 2011.
	11	
See Opdycke, 2014; Bristow, 2012; Fahrni & Jones, 2012; MacDougall, 2007.
	12	
See Tyshenko & Paterson, 2010; Mason, 2016.
	13	
See Brown, 2020; Webel & Freeman, 2020.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Historical Continuities and Historical Ruptures
23
epidemics and to ask if there are any differences at all, especially between 
stages one and two.
Delay in acceptance still exists, although it probably lasts for a much shorter 
time owing to the rapid communication of our world. Indeed, we had advanced 
warning of covid-​19 well before it was named, and we have been mesmer­
ized by watching the growing numbers of countries and peoples infected –​ 
something that average medieval people could not have known. Despite all 
the information, however, prominent, democratically elected world leaders 
continued to deny the gravity of the problem even as their citizens are dying 
in large numbers.
Panic, terror, chaos, xenophobia, and flight were all present then and now, 
although they took different forms. Recall the early covid-​19 panic-​buying of 
drugs and supplies, especially toilet paper –​ no doubt a commodity that would 
have been much appreciated in the fourteenth century. Then and now, peo­
ple with means, including physicians, fled cities for the countryside; caregivers 
who stayed behind died. The ten fictional young people in the Decameron of 
Giovanni Boccaccio (1313–​1375) were sheltered from plague in the Florentine 
church of Santa Maria Novella. And flight these days can take us much fur­
ther and faster than seven centuries ago. Our young people scrambled to 
return home rapidly across oceans and time zones before the borders closed 
and air traffic was grounded. Some were trapped abroad. But, then as now, 
the flight is what spread the contagion. It is uncanny how ships were quickly 
seen as a vector for the medieval plague –​ those famous Genoese vessels –​ and 
how cruise ships became a fearsome locus of early Coronavirus.14 As we live 
through covid-​19, uncertainty, anxiety, and impatience pervade the lives of 
the healthy as well as the sick for months on end, distorting our perception 
of time.15 Experiencing the angst of this ever-​changing pandemic reminds us 
that a similar kind of timeless durée (longue ou courte) probably tracked those 
distant plagues, which we tend to view as homogeneous nuggets because they 
are long past.
It is perhaps in stages three and four where the greatest epistemic differ­
ences may be felt, mostly in the perceived causes. To identify causes, religion 
held greater explanatory power in the fourteenth century than it does now, and 
disease had long been accepted as a divine punishment or a test. Consequently, 
people sought signs of God’s displeasure –​ in the papal schism, the degeneracy 
of the clergy, the tolerance of Jews (therefore they should be persecuted).16 
	14	
See Ditrich, 2017; Sonne, 2016.
	15	
See Jordheim et al., 2020.
	16	
See Horrox, 1995; Cantor, 2001.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

24
Duffin
Nevertheless, all understood that the result was contagious; however, no 
mechanism had been established to explain how contagious causes could 
operate: air, fomites, toxins, spiritual or physical perversions? Medieval scien­
tists in Paris –​ to their credit, wrote one historian in a presentist vein –​ sought 
natural causes in the alignment of stars and planets, although this hypothesis 
was of little help in generating control measures.17 Responses included prayers, 
processions, flagellants, mass burials, burning of homes and clothing of the 
infected, and the aforementioned invention of quarantine (from quarante, 
quaranta, forty-​the religious connection being the duration of Christ’s Lenten 
time in the wilderness).18 In some places, the quarantine measures could be 
draconian, such as the Milanese edict to seal homes of sickness with everyone 
inside.19 Controls also encompassed remedies to be ingested or as fumigations, 
together with prayers and incantations, and in later epidemics, those creepy 
protective garments that foreshadow our own personal protective equipment 
(ppe).20 Perhaps there was greater social acceptance of the inevitability of 
death, an attitude that could generate complacency. We cannot know for cer­
tain, because scant sources are skewed toward the handful of literates and the 
municipalities that kept statistics.21
In the twenty-​first century, science has displaced religion as the dominant 
form of explanation –​ causes must exist in nature. What’s more, attitudes to 
death have shifted. The success of modern biomedicine has “contributed to 
the misguided fancy by which each of us denies our own individual mortal­
ity” (Nuland, 1995, 10). The triumph of germ theory is so great that the process 
of naming, typing, and sequencing the virus was announced in early January 
2020 before the infection was known to have spread beyond China (Wee & 
McNeil Jr., 2020). Scientists immediately embarked on creating vaccines and 
immune sera and seeking antivirals in older and new drugs. Religion has not 
gone; its practice remains as a solace, occasionally a source of infection or of 
pushback against controls.22 Within the democratic, death-​denying societies, 
	17	
Robert P. Hudson (1987, 35) wrote “To their credit [Paris] physicians, almost to a man, 
insisted that the plague was a natural rather than a divine visitation”. See also, Horrox, 
1995, 158–​205; Cohn, 2002b, 230–​231.
	18	
See Blažina-​Tomić & Blažina, 2015; Aberth, 2005.
	19	
See Carmichael, 1991.
	20	
See Earnest, 2020.
	21	
See Ariès, 1974; Bovey, 2015; Korpiola & Lahtinen, 2015.
	22	
See for example these commentaries on coronavirus from various religious perspectives, 
none of which deny the scientific studies: Pope Francis and Bergoglio. Strong in the Face of 
Tribulation. Words During the Coronavirus Pandemic: The Church in Communion: A Sure 
Support in Time of Trial. Vatican: Libreria Editrice Vaticana; Jeremiah, 2020; Hitchcock, 
2020; Naseem, 2020.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Historical Continuities and Historical Ruptures
25
we see opponents of controls, including masks and lockdowns, motivated 
by money, civil liberties, belief in conspiracy theories, and deep suspicion of 
authority –​ be it political or medical.23
Lurking behind the germ-​theory cause is the realization that it is necessary 
but not sufficient. The burden of the disease varies greatly between countries 
and even within cities. Predisposition to infection and mortality includes not 
only the biological conditions of age, diabetes, hypertension, and obesity –​ but 
also the social factors of poverty, nutrition, and race, and the political factors 
of governmental commitment and authority.24 Were people aware of those 
variables in the fourteenth century? Somehow, I doubt it, although historians 
are increasingly applying these perspectives to the past.25 The challenge for 
us, having recognized these social factors, is to do something about them –​ to 
incorporate social determinants into public health prevention.
Finally, for stage five, the medieval world never really returned to normal, 
although the plague went away for a while –​ only to recur, often, and for many, 
many years. The impacts of plague are a matter of dispute among historians, 
although several observations persist despite warnings against generaliza­
tions (Cohn, 2002a). Some contend that it ended feudalism and caused the 
Renaissance. After the plague, the economy of Europe shifted from a feudal, 
agrarian society to one of increasing urbanization with independent owner­
ship and commerce.26 The authority of the Christian Church in Europe was 
challenged: clerics seemed no less vulnerable to illness than ordinary folk 
and criminals; furthermore, the impulse to treat disease could be a manifes­
tation of, rather than an insult to God’s work on earth.27 And for medicine, 
the authority of Galen was destabilized since his voluminous works had not 
described the great pestilence. The new medical knowledge included a will­
ingness to investigate diseases and how they differ one from another, as well 
as the use of quarantine and sanitation and the creation and acceptance of 
governmental institutions to regulate behavior and movement.28 The positive 
spin that historians place on their analyzes of the impact of plague impelled 
a few others to wonder about how much they may be have been motivated by 
Whiggish, wishful thinking in contemplating a horrible past.29
	23	
See Fisher, 2020.
	24	
See Burström & Tao, 2020; Afifi, et al., 2020.
	25	
See Carmichael, 1986; Sumich, 2013; Epstein, 1992.
	26	
See Herlihy, 1997; Cohn, 2002b; Scheidel, 2017, 291–​313; Byrne, 2006.
	27	
See Dols, 1977; Stearns, 2009; Tuchman, 1978, 122–​123.
	28	
See for example, Byrne, 2006, 33–​56; Kelly, 2005, 162–​182; Keiser, 2003; Heinrichs, 2018; 
Cohn, 2009; Aberth, 2021.
	29	
See Getz, 1991. See also Henderson, 2003.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

26
Duffin
It is too early to say what stage five will bring for covid-​19 and wise his­
torians know not to predict the future. The endings of epidemics vary con­
siderably.30 One difference between now and then is the recognition that 
economies can be shattered and that social welfare is a matter for governments. 
Consequently, many nations are offering financial support to not only the ill, 
but those who have lost their jobs, providing immediate help for the suffering 
and a means of kick-​starting the recovery. Similarly, the pandemic is directing 
greater attention to other chronic problems. For example, shortages of drugs 
had already been a serious concern for at least a decade prior to the pandemic; 
the lack of pharmaceutical and other resources prompted by the pandemic 
unmasked the need for greater transparency in supply chains and more inter­
national cooperation.31 And the pandemic forces us to enter the unknown ter­
ritory in the realm of prevention. Vaccines were promised and being tested 
in early autumn 2020 as I wrote the first version of this essay; by mid-​2021, 
four billion doses had been given and were proving effective. Nevertheless, 
they may need constant renewal annually as is done for influenza. It is striking 
that vaccination, which had zero currency in medieval times, is eclipsing the 
rhetoric of prevention, pharmaceuticals, and even serotherapy to take center 
stage in the media’s optimistic predictions.32 It is also striking that opposition 
had emerged even before the vaccines had been released and that it continues 
in the face of mounting evidence of their value and safety.33 But if a historian 
cannot predict the future, she can hope.
I hope that the new normal following this pandemic will incorporate mea­
sures to address those ancillary, sufficient causes that we have learned to rec­
ognize: proper care for the elderly, the elimination of poverty, and better child 
care for working women.34 And as a by-​product, may it also validate the feeble 
steps taken so far toward reversing the even greater plague of environmental 
degradation that threatens our entire planet, so that we will be better placed, 
within the inevitable stages, to face the next deadly pathogen. Did Nature –​ 
Gaia –​ generate this new plague to heal herself from the harm we have done 
to her?35
	30	
Jeremy A. Greene and Dora Varga. Chapter 1: The Ends of Epidemics, and Margaret 
MacMillan, Chapter 2: The World After covid: The Perspective from History, in Brands & 
Gavin, 2020, 23–​99 and 40–​55, respectively.
	31	
See Duffin, 2020.
	32	
See Schiffer, 2020; Hansen, 2020.
	33	
See Jolley & Cookson, 2020; Morris & Glucroft, 2020.
	34	
See Schulz et al., 2020.
	35	
See Cazzolla Gatti, 2020; Berchin & Guerra, 2020.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Historical Continuities and Historical Ruptures
27
	
Bibliography
Aberth, John (2005), The Black Death: The Great Mortality of 1348. A Brief History with 
Documents, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Aberth, John (2021), Doctoring the Black Death: Europe’s Late Medieval Medical Response 
to Epidemic Disease, London: Rowman and Littlefield.
Abraham, Thomas (2005), Twenty-​First Century Plague: The Story of SARS. Johns 
Hopkins University Press.
Abrams, Jeanne E. (2013), “Spitting is Dangerous, Indecent, and against the Law! 
Legislating Health Behavior during the American Tuberculosis Crusade”, in Journal 
of the History of Medicine & Allied Sciences 68.3: 416–​450.
Afifi, Rima A., N. Novak, P. A. Gilbert, B. Pauly, S. Abdulrahim, S. F. Rashid, F. Ortega, 
and R. A. Ferrand (2020), “Most at Risk for COVID-​19? The Imperative to Expand the 
Definition from Biological to Social Factors for Equity”, in Preventive Medicine 139, 
106229 https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.ypmed. 2020.106229 (accessed, 20 July 2021).
Ariès, Philippe (1974), Western Attitudes Toward Death from the Middle Ages to the 
Present, Johns Hopkins University Press.
Balcazar, Hector, and Felipe G. Castro (2011), “Tuberculosis in Mexicans: Learning 
from the Past to Provide Lessons for the Present”, in American Journal of Public 
Health 101.7: 1211–​1212.
Berchin, Issa Ibrahim, and José B. S. O. de Andrade Guerra (2020), “GAIA 3.0: Effects of 
the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-​19) Outbreak on Sustainable Development 
and Future Perspectives”, in Research in Globalization, December 2. https://​www.sci 
enc​edir​ect.com/​ science/​article/​pii/​ S2590051X20300034 (accessed, 20 July, 2021).
Blažina-​Tomic﻿́, Zlata, and Vesna Blažina (2015), Expelling the Plague: The Health Office 
and the Implementation of Quarantine in Dubrovnik, 1377–​1533. McGill-​Queen’s 
University Press.
Bovey, Alixe (2015), “Death and the Afterlife”, in British Library, April 30, https://​www 
.bl.uk/​the-​mid​dle-​ages/​artic​les/​death-​and-​the-​afterl​ife-​how-​dying-​affec​ted-​the-​liv​
ing (accessed, 20 July, 2021).
Bowden, Sue, and Alex Sadler (2015), “Getting it right? Lessons from the Interwar 
Years on Pulmonary Tuberculosis Control in England and Wales”, in Medical History 
59.1:101–​135.
Brands, Hal, and Francis J. Gavin (eds.) (2020), COVID-​19 and World Order: The Future of 
Conflict, Competition, and Cooperation, Johns Hopkins University Press.
Bristow, Nancy K. (2012), American Pandemic: The Lost Worlds of the 1918 Influenza 
Epidemic, Oxford University Press.
Brown, Jeremy (2020), “The Coronavirus is No 1918 Pandemic”, in The Atlantic, 3 March. 
https://​www.thea​tlan​tic.com/​ideas/​arch​ive/​2020/​03/​were-​not-​fac​ing-​sec​ond-​span​
ish-​flu/​607​354/​ (accessed, 20 July, 2021).
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

28
Duffin
Bukhman, Gene, and Alice Kidder (2008), “Cardiovascular Disease and Global Health 
Equity: Lessons from Tuberculosis Control Then and Now”, in American Journal of 
Public Health 98.1: 44–​54.
Burström, Bo, and Wenjing Tao (2020), “Social Determinants of Health and Inequalities 
in COVID-​19”, in European Journal of Public Health 30.4: 617–​618. https://​acade​mic 
.oup.com/​eur​pub/​arti​cle/​30/​4/​617/​5868​718 (accessed, 20 July, 2021).
Byrne, Joseph P. (2006), Daily Life During the Black Death. Westport, CT: Greenwood 
Publishing Group.
Cantor, Norman F. (2001), In the Wake of Plague. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Carmichael, Ann G. (1986),  Plague and the Poor in Renaissance Florence, Cambridge 
University Press.
Carmichael, Ann G. (1991), “Contagion Theory and Contagion Practice in Fifteenth-​
Century Milan”, in Renaissance Quarterly 44.2: 213–​256.
Cazzolla Gatti, Roberto (2020), “Coronavirus Outbreak is a Symptom of Gaia’s Sickness”, 
in Ecological Modelling 426: 109075. Doi:10.1016/​j. ecolmodel.2020.109075.
Cohn, Samuel K. (2002a), “The Black Death: End of a Paradigm”, in American Historical 
Review 107.3: 703–​738.
Cohn, Samuel K. (2002b), The Black Death Transformed: Disease and Culture in Early 
Renaissance Europe, Oxford University Press.
Cohn, Samuel K. (2009), Cultures of Plague: Medical Thinking at the End of the 
Renaissance, Oxford University Press.
Crawford, E.B., and Dorothy H. Crawford (2016), Ebola: Profile of a Killer Virus. Oxford 
University Press.
Diniz, Debora (2017), Zika: from the Brazilian Backlands to Global Threat, trans. Diane 
Grosklaus Whitty, London: Zed Books.
Ditrich, Hans (2017), “The Transmission of the Black Death to Western Europe: A Critical 
Review of the Existing Evidence”, in Mediterranean Historical Review 32.1: 25–​39.
Dols, Michael W. (1977), The Bla#BIB_​ch02_​0028ck Death in the Middle East Princeton 
University Press.
Duffin, Jacalyn (2020), “An Activist History of Drug Shortages and Its Silos”, in Lancet, 
September 12.
Earnest, Mark (2020), “On Becoming a Plague Doctor”, in New England Journal of 
Medicine 383, 3 September: e64 DOI: 10.1056/​NEJMp2011418.
Epstein, P.R. (1992), “Commentary: Pestilence and Poverty–​Historical Transitions and 
the Great Pandemics”, in American Journal of Preventive Medicine 8.4: 263–​265.
Esparza, Jose (2020), “Lessons from History: What Can We Learn From 300 Years of 
Pandemic Flu That Could Inform the Response to COVID-​19?”, in American Journal 
of Public Health 110.8: 1160–​1161.
Fahrni, Magdalena, and Esyllt W. Jones (eds.) (2012), Epidemic Encounters: Influenza, 
Society, and Culture in Canada 1918–​20, Vancouver: ubc Press.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Historical Continuities and Historical Ruptures
29
Fineberg, Harvey V. (2014), “Pandemic Preparedness and Response: Lessons from the 
H1N1 Influenza of 2009”, in New England Journal of Medicine 370.14: 1335–​1342.
Fisher, Max (2020), “Why Coronavirus Conspiracy Theories Flourish and Why It 
Matters”, in New York Times, April 8.
Getz, Faye (1991), “The Black Death and the Silver Lining: Meaning, Continuity, and 
Revolutionary Change in Histories of Medieval Plague”, in Journal of the History of 
Biology 24: 265–​289.
Hansen, Bert (2020), “The Story of Serum Therapy. How a 19th Century Invention 
Could Save Lives Today”, in Distillations, April 28. https://​www.sci​ence​hist​ory.org/​
distil​lati​ons/​the-​story-​of-​serum-​ther​apy (accessed, 20 July, 2021).
Heinrichs Erik A. (2018), Plague, Print, and the Reformation: The German Reform of 
Healing, 1473–​1573, London: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group.
Henderson, John (2003), “Historians and Plagues in Pre-​Industrial Italy over the 
Longue Durée”, in History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences 25.4: 481–​499.
Herlihy, David (1997), The Black Death and the Transformation of the West, Harvard 
University Press.
Hitchcock, Mark (2020), Corona Crisis: Plagues, Pandemics, and the Coming Apocalypse, 
Nashville: Thomas Nelson.
Horrox, Rosemary (1995), The Black Death, Manchester University Press.
Hudson, Robert P. (1987), Disease and Its Control, New York: Praeger.
Jeremiah, David (2020), Shelter in God: Your Refuge in Times of Trouble, Nashville: Thomas 
Nelson.
Jolley, Daniel, and Darel Cookson (2020), “Coronavirus Anti-​vaxxers: One in Six British 
People Would Refuse a Vaccine”, in Conversation, July 8. https://​thec​onve​rsat​ion 
.com/​coro​navi​rus-​anti-​vaxx​ers-​one-​in-​six-​brit​ish-​peo​ple-​would-​ref​use-​a-​vacc​ine 
-​heres-​how-​to-​cha​nge-​their-​minds-​142​207 (accessed, 20 July, 2021).
Jordheim, Helge, Anne K. Lie, E. Ljungberg, and E. Wigen (2020), “Epidemic Times”, 
in Somatosphere: Science Medicine and Anthropology, 2 April. http://​somat​osph​ere.
net/​2020/​epide​mic-​times.html (accessed, 20 July, 2021).
Keane, Michael, and Timothy Neal (2020), “Consumer Panic in the COVID-​19 
Pandemic”, in Journal of Econometrics, 25 Aug. doi:10.1016/​j.jeconom. 2020. 07.045.
Keiser, G.R. (2003), “Two Medieval Plague Treatises and their Afterlife in Early Modern 
England”, in Journal of the History of Medicine & Allied Sciences 58.3: 292–​324.
Kelly, John (2005), The Great Mortality: An Intimate History of the Back Death, 
New York: Harper Collins.
Korpiola, Mia, and Anu Lahtinen (2015), Cultures of Death and Dying in Medieval 
and Early Modern Europe, Helsinki: Collegium: Studies across Disciplines in the 
Humanities and Social Sciences, Vol. 18. https://​ oarklibrary.com/​search/​result/​
e6cd2863-​7763-​4337-​a861-​92d1ff89ff35 (accessed, 20 July, 2021).
Kübler-​Ross, Elizabeth (1969), On Death and Dying, London: Routledge.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

30
Duffin
MacDougall, Heather A. (2007), “Toronto’s Health Department in Action: Influenza 
in 1918 and SARS in 2003”, in Journal of the History of Medicine and Allied Sciences 
62: 56–​89.
Mason, Katherine A. (2016), Infectious Change: Reinventing Chinese Public Health after 
an Epidemic, Stanford University Press.
McNeil Jr, Donald G. (2016), Zika: The Emerging Epidemic. New York: Norton.
Morris, Loveday, and William Glucroft (2020), “Prospect of Coronavirus Vaccine Unites 
Anti-​vaxxers, Conspiracy Theorists, and Hippie Moms in Germany”, in Washington 
Post, July 3.
Naseem, Iqbal (2020), “Patience, Sacrifice, and Zakat: An Islamic Response to 
Coronavirus”, in Al Jazeera, May 21.
Nuland, Sherwin (1995), How We Die: Reflections on Life’s Final Chapter, New York: Vintage.
Opdycke, Sandra (2014), The Epidemic of 1918: America’s Experience in the Global Health 
Crisis, New York: Routledge.
Qureshi, Adnan I. (2018), Ebola Virus Disease: From Origin to Outbreak. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier Academic.
Rosenberg, Charles E. (1989), “What is an Epidemic? AIDS in Historical Perspective”, 
in Daedalus 118, No. 2: 1–​17.
Rosenberg, Charles E. (1992) Explaining Epidemics and Other Studies in the History of 
Medicine. Cambridge University Press.
Scheidel, Walter (2017), The Great Leveler: Violence and the History of Inequality from 
the Stone Age to the Twenty-​First Century, Princeton University Press.
Schiffer, Joshua (2020), “Against COVID-​19, Imperfect Measures do the Most Good”, in 
New York Times, October 4.
Schulz Amy J., R. Mehdipanah, L. M. Chatters, A. G. Reyes, E. W. Neblett Jr.,and B. 
A. Israel (2020), “Moving Health Education and Behavior Upstream: Lessons 
From COVID-​19 for Addressing Structural Drivers of Health Inequities”, in Health 
Education & Behavior 47.4: 519–​524.
Sim, Kang, H. C. Chua, E. Vieta, and G. Fernandez (2020), “The Anatomy of Panic 
Buying Related to the Current COVID-​19 Pandemic”, in Psychiatry Research 288 
June: 113015. DOI: 10.1016/​j.psychres.2020. 113015.
Slack, Paul (1988), “Responses to Plague in Early Modern Europe: The Implications of 
Public Health”, in Social Research 55.3: 433–​453.
Smith-​Nonini, Sandy (2005), “When ‘the Program is Good, but the Disease is 
Better’: Lessons from Peru on Drug-​resistant Tuberculosis”, in Medical Anthropology 
24.3: 265–​296.
Sonne, Ole (2016), “Plague, Rats, and Ships; The Realization of the Infection Routes of 
Plague”, in Dansk Medicin historisk Arbog. 44: 101–​133.
Stearns, Justin (2009), “New Directions in the Study of Religious Responses to the 
Black Death”, in History Compass 7.5: 1363–​1375.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Historical Continuities and Historical Ruptures
31
Sumich, Christi (2013), “A Broom in the Hand of the Almighty: the Plague and the 
Unruly Poor”, in Clio Medica 91: 216–​259.
Thucydides (1919), History of the Peloponnesian War, Book 2, trans. C. F. Smith, Harvard 
University Press.
Tuchman, Barbara W. (1978), A Distant Mirror: The Calamitous Fourteenth Century. 
New York: Knopf.
Tyshenko, Michael G., and Cathy Paterson (2010), SARS Unmasked: Risk Communication 
of Pandemics and Influenza in Canada, McGill-​Queen’s University Press.
Vilaplana, Cristina, and Pere–​Joan Cardona (2010),  “Tuberculin Immunotherapy: Its 
History and Lessons to be Learned”, in  Microbes & Infection 12.2: 99–​105.
Webel, Mari, and Megan C. Freeman (2020), “Compare the Flu Pandemic of 1918 and 
Coronavirus with Caution –​ the Past is Not a Prediction”, in The Conversation, 4 
June. https://​thec​onve​rsat​ion.com/​comp​are-​the-​flu-​pande​mic-​of-​1918-​and-​covid-​
19-​with-​caut​ion-​the-​past-​is-​not-​a-​pre​dict​ion-​138​895 (accessed, 20 July, 2021).
Wee, Sui-​Lee, and Donald G. McNeil Jr. (2020), “China Identifies New Virus Causing 
Pneumonialike Illness”, in New York Times, 8 January.
Welshman, John, and Alison Bashford (2006), “Tuberculosis, Migration, and Medical 
Examination: Lessons from History”, in Journal of Epidemiology & Community 
Health 60.4: 282–​284.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Jean Grondin, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_005
­chapter 3
How a Limit Situation Made Us All More 
Philosophical
Jean Grondin
The Corona pandemic reminded us of the forgotten fragility of human life. 
Forcing us to stay at home as much as possible, to work, to teach, and to learn 
from home, brought about a more reflective attitude toward life and a reas­
sessing of our priorities. We all became more philosophical. Life was follow­
ing its quiet, normal course until it was hit head-​on by a largely unforeseen 
pandemic (kudos to the few, Bill Gates is supposed to be one of them, who 
had warned about the imminence of such a pandemic). Feeling secure in our 
sleepy routines and our health systems, we all believed plagues belonged to 
the history books. We were proven wrong, and this is always a significant phil­
osophical (hermeneutical) experience since it challenges our assumptions and 
certainties.
In the middle of it all, one cannot but think that, in spite of the terrible suf­
fering, it could have been a whole lot worse. What if the virus had proven far 
more deadly, say, if 50% of those infected died? What if there had been more 
fatalities amongst children than older people? What if common mosquitoes 
could transmit such a deadly virus? What if we had to suffer from massive food 
and water shortages in our cities? That there weren’t too many is almost a mir­
acle. There are a lot of what ifs in this crisis, that were hitherto unthinkable and 
that will now be part of our outlook on life.
The basic routine of life that we took for granted was taken from us, like the 
simple act of shaking hands, going to work or to school, meeting friends and 
relatives. Who would have thought at the beginning of 2020 that it would be 
possible for democratic governments to ban gatherings, even family gatherings 
on important holidays? Among our basic rights, we usually cherish the rights to 
life, freedom of expression and religious belief, the right to self-​determination, 
and the like, but the right to meet other people and family members was never 
believed to be one of them. This just goes on to show to what extent our basic 
life expectations have been upended.
On a more positive note, this rediscovered fragility brought out, in many 
cases, the best of human initiative. I am thinking here of the admirable her­
oism of front-​line workers, the medical personnel, but also of the anonymous 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

How a Limit Situation Made Us All More Philosophical
33
workers in the grocery stores, the truck drivers, and the newfound solidarity 
that emerged in our communities, which many had thought implausible in this 
age of rabid individualism. It demonstrated the courage and heroism of which 
humans are often capable. I am also thinking about the intense Promethean 
effort invested in the search for a cure. All this is most uplifting, especially in a 
climate in which most news were rather depressing.
The fact that this transformation happened so suddenly reminds us of the 
manner in which most revolutions happen. Many intellectuals are fond of 
instructing us about how we should change the world and our way of doing 
things. As is well documented, they are seldom successful. Yet, revolutions do 
happen, mostly because they are forced upon us, as has happened with this 
pandemic. More often than not, revolutions happen without much planning 
or foresight. All of a sudden, they are there and engulf us. It can be said that 
those who were involved in the American or the French Revolution, to say 
nothing of the Industrial Revolution, did not really see what was coming either. 
Momentous upheavals in recent times also largely happened overnight: the fall 
of the Berlin Wall and 9/​11. With the Corona crisis, it is amazing how swiftly 
and widely such a transformation occurred in our behavior and outlook on life.
It is probably too early to foresee what lasting changes will ensue from the 
current epidemic. We do not yet have the 20/​20 hindsight on the pandemic of 
2020. The salutary wisdom of temporal distance, which Hans-​Georg Gadamer 
heralded in his philosophy of understanding, has not yet set in. In the middle 
of it all, we are experiencing something like the fog of war. The situation we 
are going through, with its suffering, its limits on movements and gatherings, 
its economic impact, which is devastating in many cases, is indeed akin to a 
war-​like experience, especially for those in the West who have had no direct 
experience of war-​like conditions. In the history of humanity, times of war, 
epidemic, and widespread suffering were far more common. The digital age, 
in which everything was supposed to run smoothly thanks to artificial intel­
ligence, has just learned that these times are not behind us. We are not just 
brains that could be hardwired like computers. We are living beings still and 
always confronted with the vicissitudes of life, sickness, and death.
Modernity heralded the autonomy and self-​sufficiency of the human sub­
ject. Charles Taylor (2007, 27) coined the felicitous idea of the “buffered self” 
to underline the idea that the modern subject thought of itself as self-​secured, 
self-​assured, and immune to the assaults of the outside world. It could freely 
determine its own way of thinking, being, and interacting with others. The 
current crisis has revealed that the subject is indeed more vulnerable and sub­
jected to the hazards of the outside world than the buffered and pampered self-​
thought possible.
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

34
Grondin
The revolution in our outlook on life that befell us is akin to what Karl Jaspers 
called a “limit situation” (Jaspers, 1919,202; 1989, 18). For Jaspers, the basic limit 
situations were those of death, suffering, tragedy, despair, and defeat, experi­
ences that confront life with its inescapable frailty, thus revealing existence 
to itself. This pandemic is certainly such a limit situation. It put things into 
perspective, relativizing many of the petty concerns of our pre-​covid rou­
tine. One only has to think about the preoccupations that were frontline news 
before this crisis hit. In Quebec, one of the big issues was a law that was passed 
that aimed to ban all face-​covering (in the name of Secularism). Now we all 
have to wear masks.
This new limit situation confronted us all with the question of what is mean­
ingful for us in the breathtakingly short time span that is imparted to us. The 
pace of life slows down tremendously. It is as if, for the first time in 200 years, 
the industrial society has come to a halt, unexpectedly. We have become less 
busy (in many cases, at least; this will not be true of front-​line workers), less 
absorbed by our outside and often superficial obligations. There was almost 
no commuting, no traveling, there were fewer distractions and social life was 
reduced to a minimum. Our cities have become more silent, certainly less pol­
luted, and this situation has forced all of us to focus on the things that mat­
ter. This brought about a more reflective stance toward life which led many 
to reassess their priorities and what gives purpose to their lives. Many of the 
habits that we have adopted over the last months–​reading more, spending 
more time with loved ones, developing more healthy routines (walking, jog­
ging and cycling have gained new recruits), discovering new hobbies–​might 
stick around after this crisis is over.
It transformed the social animal that we are. We were told to avoid others 
and all gatherings. The notion of “social distancing” is itself quite a concep­
tual creation. Yet, this contradictio in adjecto has quickly become a household 
word and a life imperative. When we meet people on the sidewalk, we have all 
developed the habit of making an ark around them. When we watch movies 
or television shows, we marvel at how closely people used to interact with one 
another without “social distancing”. Will we become more touchy-​feely after 
this is over or will some of the new habits remain with us?
I hail from a discipline, philosophy, whose motto is the Delphic oracle, gnô­
tis te auton, know thyself. How is it that we learn to know ourselves? As Hans-​
Georg Gadamer reminded us, it is through suffering that we learn. He liked to 
quote the old saying of Aeschylus patheimathos: it is through suffering that we 
become wise (Gadamer, 1990, 362). This pandemic has confirmed the insight 
of Aeschylus: we learn through experiences that call into question our expec­
tations because they force us to rethink our ways and become more reflective, 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

How a Limit Situation Made Us All More Philosophical
35
more philosophical about things. What is it to become more philosophical? It 
does not mean that we start to study philosophy or to read difficult books of 
philosophy. Fundamentally, it means that we learn to display calm, wisdom, 
and serenity in the presence of adversity. Limit situations make us more philo­
sophical and certainly more aware of our basic condition of finite and vulner­
able beings, which we tend to forget when the breakneck pace of normal life 
takes hold of us.
We have all become more philosophical, but have we also become more 
religious? For the Greeks, gnôtis te auton obviously had a religious dimension 
to it since the Delphic oracle meant, as we all know: remember that you are a 
mere and vulnerable mortal, not a god. In our secularized societies, it would 
be a stretch to claim that the pandemic has made us more religious, unless 
one understands religiosity, as one popular, almost faddish etymology has it, 
as a renewed awareness of the important links (re-​ligare) that bind us. This 
new limit situation has certainly taught us that. To my modest knowledge, 
there were however few meaningful religious or theological readings of this 
pandemic. A religious revival did not happen either. We are too stuck in our 
technophilia for that to happen anytime soon.
Yet, the Divine was by no means absent. In my mind, it was present in the 
engagement of the frontline workers in the er s and the nursing homes. These 
martyrs of our time sacrificed their lives to save others. These selfless acts are 
expressions of the human capability for the divine, i.e., for transcendence and 
something that goes beyond the all too human concern for self-​preservation 
(as if there is much that we could do to add a single hour to our lives, thinking 
here of Matthew 6:27).
There was also something of a religious solemnity in the new rituals we 
adopted and in the manner in which we all changed our ways of being: wear­
ing masks, refraining from going out and partying, limiting our movements. We 
all became more cautious, more respectful of others and the environment. We 
were (in most cases at least) very receptive to the behavior guidelines provided 
by the public health experts and irritated by the few (the sinners, as it were) 
who did not respect the sacred guidelines, those who refused to wear masks, 
those who partied as if nothing had happened. Confined to our domestic cells 
and to our new daily routines, our lives became on the whole more monastic. 
It was, of course, exasperating, excruciating even, for many, but monastic life 
can be conducive to philosophy. Here’s hoping that, when this crisis is over, 
something of this philosophical, monastical, and meditative life might survive, 
so that we might become less blinded by the frenzied pace of our modern lives 
and its electronic mirages. Should this happen, this crisis will not have been a 
total wasteland.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

36
Grondin
	
References
Gadamer, Hans-​Georg (1990), Hermeneutik 1: Wahrheit und Methode, Tübingen: J. C. B. 
Mohr (Paul Siebeck).
Jaspers, Karl (1919), Psychologie der Weltanschauungen, Heidelberg: Springer-​Verlag.
Jaspers, Karl (1989), Einführung in die Philosophie, München: Piper.
Taylor, Charles (2007), A Secular Age, The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

∵
part 2
Corona Phenomenon and Philosophical Questions
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Michael Quante, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_006
­chapter 4
Corona Pandemic from the Philosophical 
Perspective
Michael Quante
	
Introduction
In this paper, I wish to present some reflections from a philosophical point 
of view concerning the Corona pandemic. Their starting point is five ques­
tions chosen from a far longer list of possible questions offered to me by Pegah 
Mossleh. My choice is a result of both the following: the expertise which as 
a practical philosopher I can contribute to this ongoing debate and my own 
evaluation which of the many problems and questions deserve philosophical 
reflection.1
Before I start unfolding my answers I want to make explicit firstly that these 
reflections are intended as a contribution to a complex debate that can be 
restricted neither to philosophy nor to the area of science as such. The Corona 
pandemic causes vast problems which need the political debate on our soci­
eties as a whole and which need solutions based on democratic decisions. For 
this, scientific knowledge (of all kinds) is needed to find rational and effective 
strategies to overcome this crisis and the many challenges we face now and 
in the coming years. But these answers cannot be delivered by the sciences 
alone. Furthermore, facing the Corona ​pandemic from a scientific perspective 
needs interdisciplinary dialogue and cooperation.2 We face a multilayered 
and many-​faceted problem that cannot be reduced to one (or a few) scientific 
discipline(s).
Secondly, my contribution is intended to start a debate. and not to deliver 
final answers. Nobody these days is in a position to have a complete overview 
of all data, all complexities, and all complications the Corona ​pandemic has 
brought and will bring worldwide in the years to come. We have to deal with 
options and decisions that are risky in many ways. We are all, as mankind, as 
societies, and as individual persons, in the position to decide and act under 
	1	 In the following, I will hint at some of my works for further information concerning my own 
philosophical positions.
	2	 Cf. Gethmann et al. (2014), for a philosophical analysis.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

40
Quante
uncertainty.3 We have to deal with a target which is not only moving very fast 
but also changing its face in doing so. Taking responsibility as a philosopher 
and a scientist means, at least I am committed to this, to develop solutions and 
to give answers which neither end in pessimistic fatalism (or naïve optimism). 
Nor —​ maybe this is addressed to me as a philosopher, as much as to anyone 
else —​ which evade into categorical principles or conceptual abstractions. As 
philosophers, we should aim at contributions that are not frictionlessly spin­
ning in the void. But we also should be open to corrections and revisions, and 
we should accept the limits of our disciplinary competencies. On the other 
hand, we also should trust our philosophical arguments and fight for them to 
be heard and taken seriously both in interdisciplinary discourse and political 
debate.
Thirdly, I will allow myself to use the five questions as starting points. Since 
they have been posed in a certain way, I feel free to modify and develop them 
in directions I myself regard as philosophically illuminating and conducive 
within an inter-​and trans-​disciplinary discussion.
1	
How Would the “Corona Phenomenon” Affect the Question of the 
Meaning of Life?
Withstanding to deliver prognoses we can ask how the question of life’s mean­
ing should be affected in a philosophically reasonable way based on the expe­
rience we have made and the lessons we have learned so far. For sure, this 
question can be understood in many different ways both in philosophy and 
in common sense. Dealing with the different answers we can find in the phil­
osophical tradition is not an option here. Therefore, I will base my thoughts 
on a simplification that consists of two parts: Firstly, I presume that there is 
a shared understanding of this question (of the meaning of life) within phi­
losophy (a kind of overlapping consensus concerning this question so to say). 
Secondly, I presume that this shared philosophical understanding overlaps 
with a non-​ or pre-​theoretical understanding we can find in common sense.4
Having said this, we can distinguish two variants of the question. Firstly, we 
(as philosophers) can ask what the consequences of the experiences we have 
made in dealing with the Corona ​pandemic should be for our philosophical 
	3	 In the context of bioethics the ethical dimension of this is not discussed very often; cf. the 
papers in Koehler & Harvey (2004) and in Roeser et al. (2012).
	4	 The relation between common sense and scientific images of the world is discussed in 
Quante (2000).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Corona Pandemic from the Philosophical Perspective
41
conception of a meaningful life. To start with we should avoid the variant of 
this question in which we ask for the meaning of life instead of looking for what 
delivers meaning in life. The former version is in danger of being answered from 
sideways on, either ignoring the perspective of the human being whose life is 
considered or shifting towards the meaning of (human) life as such which is 
referring to individual lives as mere tokens of a kind of universal. In both ver­
sions the essential feature of leading a life as a person is ignored —​ to be the 
author of one’s life, to make it one’s own life thereby. If we ask what the con­
sequences are for the question of meaning in the life of human beings, we (as 
philosophers) should integrate into our conception my answer, which is pretty 
simple (and in no way original or new): On the one hand, we should put more 
emphasis on the fact that meaning in an individual’s life is deeply connected 
with being part of a social community. On the other hand, we should not for­
get that the fulfillment of very basic needs is as important as the right to lead 
a life of one’s own design, based on freedom and autonomy being respected. 
Meaning in life is a socially constituted result of social interaction realized in 
mutual recognition of all kinds of sorts. And even in its highly individualized 
and culturally mediated variants (e.g. in reading poems, in visiting the opera, 
or in doing philosophy) meaning in life depends on some basic things (like 
health, stability of the social surroundings, social contact, and a meaningful 
perspective given one’s aims and ends). That these are basic does not mean 
that realizing or guaranteeing them is a trivial affair. Quite the opposite: This 
is fragile and always in danger of breaking down. Maybe the most difficult and 
important lesson philosophers should learn from the experience of the Corona ​
pandemic is that meaning in life is and should be an option for human beings 
given dependency, fragility, and all kinds of breakdown threads. Avoiding to 
look for a deeper meaning behind our lives and not giving up the aspiration 
to lead a meaningful life in solidarity and responsibility in the face of all the 
obstacles we face (not only due to Corona) should become essential parts of 
a reasonable philosophical answer what meaning in life could be for human 
persons. At least this is what I would like to claim.5
Secondly, we (as philosophers) can ask what the consequences of the 
experiences we have made in dealing with the Corona ​pandemic should be 
for our practical stance (as part of common sense) in striving for a personally 
successful and socially shared good life. Relying on the presumed overlap of 
philosophical perspective and common sense it comes as no surprise that my 
final remarks concerning the philosophical variant are also my answer to this 
	5	 Cf. Quante (2018a) and (2020) for an elaborated conception of this.
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

42
Quante
question’s second variant. We can see that meaning in life is something we as 
humans can and have to realize in social interaction. It is not an objective fact 
somewhere out there neither in transcendence nor in nature. Meaning is what 
we do and it is based on solidarity and sharing our lives. Although autonomy 
and individuality are essential features of it (at least within the conception of 
a modern subject) it is not something someone can realize without or in total 
opposition to her social contexts. Meaning in life should be something we do 
together, helping each other to realize it. Furthermore, doing this is realized 
in daily and sometimes very basic forms of interaction: touching, sharing sor­
row and hope, being emotionally close, and creating social settings in which 
humans can experience stability, reliability, and support of all kinds. To put it 
this way: Meaning in life needs trust and therefore, meaningful social struc­
tures (of all kinds and sizes). This cannot be realized as individual projects and 
it cannot be reduced to formal recognition of abstract rights. The damage the 
Corona ​pandemic has done and is still doing shows that it is not a mere health 
issue but affects all dimensions of our attempts to lead meaningful lives as 
human persons.6
2	
What Aspects of the Problematic Idea of  Modern Subject Have 
Become More Apparent by the “Corona Phenomenon”?
Since this question is not asking for a prognosis but for a diagnosis it can be 
taken as a genuine philosophical one (this is not to deny that empirical social 
sciences might also contribute a lot to delivering a plausible comprehensive 
answer).
Nevertheless, I would like to modify this question a little bit by rephras­
ing it thus: Which problematic aspects of the idea of a modern subject have 
become more apparent during the Corona ​pandemic? Since there is more than 
one philosophical conception of a modern subject even within the tradition 
of modern western philosophy I have to rely on my first simplification made 
explicit above once more.7 Besides that, I have to add that in my view there is 
no clear conception of a modern subject to be found in common sense, at least 
not one made explicit within. But in many Western cultures, such a conception 
can be identified as being implicit in a lot of our social practices, moral claims, 
and personal aspirations. Maybe we can say that in common sense in these 
	6	 Cf. Maydell et al. (2005) for a book-​length treatment of these issues.
	7	 Cf. Kühler & Quante (2019).
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Corona Pandemic from the Philosophical Perspective
43
modern societies the conception of a modern subject is a widely shared living 
option in the sense of William James. We have to presume once more that this 
socially and individually realized living option on the one hand and the main 
shared philosophical conception of a modern subject (in the sense of an over­
lapping consensus among philosophers of many traditions) on the other hand 
somehow fit together (or even match each other).
Given all this, I think that there are three problematic aspects of the con­
ception of a modern subject which become visible if we focus on three dimen­
sions of the finiteness of human beings.
Firstly, finiteness is a constitutive feature of the conditio humana in the 
sense of liability to break down. Both as individual organisms and as societ­
ies we always live in situations and surroundings which neither are stable nor 
fully under our control. One problematic aspect of the mainstream conception 
of a modern subject is its being closely combined with an also problematic 
and very limited notion of autonomy. The latter very often is reduced to indi­
vidual negative liberty in which individual control is taken to be a necessary 
condition for being autonomous. Accepting being finite in the sense of always 
being liable to break down or to be heavily influenced by (potential or actual) 
threats beyond control is nearly impossible if one is in the grip of such a lim­
ited conception of autonomy.8 Based on such a conception the need for strict 
planning or ruling contingencies via technologies is growing both on the social 
and on the individual level. The Corona ​pandemic is such a distorting threat 
not only because of all the damage it causes but also because it demonstrates 
the idleness of striving for autonomy in form of strict control and overcoming 
all life-​risks.
Secondly, finiteness is a constitutive feature of human beings in the sense 
of their vulnerability stemming from their being essentially embodied beings 
that have needs of all kinds. One problematic aspect of the conception of a 
modern subject is that being a rational being or even being a rational men­
tal being is taken to be the most important or even the only essential feature 
of human persons. Autonomy then is very often understood as rational plan­
ning and overcoming all aspects related to our being embodied persons having 
emotions, passions, or needs. The more we ignore this vulnerable aspect of our 
being human persons the less we are able to develop conceptions or strategies 
in which our finitude is integrated in an apt way.
Thirdly, another problematic aspect of the conception of a modern subject 
is the strong individualism in both an ontological and an ethical sense. I think 
	8	 Cf. Quante (2011b) and (2017).
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

44
Quante
we are impressed by the experiences we made during the lockdowns and while 
following different rules dealing with our social rituals including physical dis­
tance and bodily contact. Even a moderate version of lockdown (which took 
place e.g. in Germany) demonstrated how deeply social human beings are and 
how we all suffer in times where physical distance, social distancing, or even 
cocooning (i.e. isolating groups of persons especially at risk) are practiced. For 
sure, all this can be tolerated for a short time and in a certain measure that 
can be justified concerning the other relevant goods which are at stake here. 
But on an ontological level, our policies dealing with the Corona ​pandemic 
have delivered overwhelming evidence that human beings are primarily and 
deeply social beings. It is difficult to deliver ethical conclusions directly from 
this, but this widely and interculturally widespread experience should give 
philosophers very good reason to give ontological individualism some sec­
ond thought. And it should also have an impact on our ethical and political 
thoughts and policies since something so deeply rooted in our anthropological 
and biological nature cannot be ignored in ethics or metaethics (at least not if 
we want to have ethical theories fitting our lebensform).9
Before I come to the third question one remark must be made as a warn­
ing: Recognizing the three dimensions of our finitude as human beings might 
seduce some to weaken or even abandon the claim and the right to lead auton­
omous lives as human persons. Maybe there is some need to replace them with 
transcendent offers of orientation and meaning of life.
Following such a train of thought might result in not talking about prob­
lematic aspects of our conceptions of a modern subject (as I do here) but in 
talking about modern subject as a genuine problematic conception. Against 
the threatening regression into authoritarian social or political institutions 
and structures, we should stick to the diagnostic claim that we face problem­
atic aspects of our conception of a modern subject which can and should be 
corrected within this conception. It is a fact that such alternative conceptions 
have been developed even within the tradition of modern western philosophy 
(e.g. in Hegel, Feuerbach, or Marx to name a few) in which the deficiencies 
identified above have been overcome (in varying ways and to different degrees 
of course).10 Therefore, we are not forced philosophically to draw such a radi­
cal conclusion and to claim that we have to give up our conception of a mod­
ern subject completely.
	9	
Cf. Quante (2018a) and (2020).
	10	
I have defended such a reading of Hegel, Feuerbach, and Marx in several places; Cf. 
Quante (2004), (2010), (2011a), (2015) and (2018b).
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Corona Pandemic from the Philosophical Perspective
45
In the face of all those bitter experiences of living within totalitarian sys­
tems of all kinds which are hostile to autonomy and individuality during the 
last two centuries, everything speaks against this radical conclusion from an 
ethical point of view. There is a lot of evidence of various kinds to be found in 
our history, in the tradition of philosophy, and in our modern societies which 
speaks for corrections but nothing which speaks in favor of giving up the con­
ception of a modern subject as such. The Corona ​pandemic is one very clear 
case to be made for the former, but it also provides very clear evidence for not 
leaving this paradigm of a modern subject, whilst neither hinting forward in 
utopian fashion nor hinting backward in a reactionary mood.
3	
What Would Be the Implications of Confronting the covid-​19, 
Especially Implementing the Preventive Policies Such as 
Quarantine and Social Distancing and Isolation, for Contemplation 
about the Relation of Right and Good?
These policies will have implications for contemplation about the relation 
between right and good on three levels (the first and the second consist of phil­
osophical considerations, the third one is a hybrid one including the perspec­
tive of philosophy and common sense).
The first level can be classified as metaethical: In the background of the 
relation between the right and the good lurk two paradigm types of philo­
sophical ethics: deontological and consequentialist theories.11 In deontologi­
cal thinking, the aspect of the right (including subjective rights and justice) is 
taken to be basic, in consequentialism the good (as a result or consequence of 
our actions) is considered to be basic. In their purest forms, both types deny 
that aspects of the other camp can or should be taken into account. In some 
approaches, it is assumed that one of both (good or right) can be reduced to 
the other. The Corona ​pandemic and the evaluation of the ethical problems we 
face in dealing with this crisis is one more lesson that this metaethical debate is 
neither presenting the correct options nor helpful in delivering useful answers.
On the second level, which can be named the ethical one, the lesson is 
this: All attempts to understand the complexity of the ethical problems and to 
have in view the many aspects to be taken into account evaluating our policies 
demonstrate that both, the right and the good, are relevant, cannot be reduced 
to each other and can come into conflict in many ways. No general rules of 
	11	
I will ignore here virtue ethics as a third main type of ethical theories.
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

46
Quante
dominance deliver plausible results or can be applied meaningfully toward 
complex situations. At least in all societies in which personal autonomy and 
subjective rights are accepted policies cannot be justified by consequentialist 
considerations alone. But in this world, no ethical theory can address real-​life 
problems without taking the consequences of our actions and considerations 
of efficiency ethically serious. This results in the metaethical conclusion that 
our ethical thinking includes (at least) two irreducible sources (axiological and 
deontological ones) and final judgments have to make case by case.12
The third level can be classified as the level of application; this level is a 
hybrid one since the philosophical implications and the conclusions drawn 
on the level of common sense (including every single individual and policy­
makers) are interfering here in many ways. Presupposing that philosophy has 
accepted the lessons on the metaethical and ethical level just described we 
can ignore the distinction between philosophical and common sense at this 
place: All our measures and problems show beyond a doubt that we have to 
find concrete solutions fitting for specific situations and constellations (which 
in addition have to be found under uncertainties of all kind). Identifying the 
values and norms in play, balancing and weighing them to find an overall con­
clusion in which all aspects are integrated in a plausible way -​this is what has 
to be done. In philosophy the faculty of judgment (Kant), wisdom (Aristotle), 
and perceptiveness (Weber) are the sources identified as relevant here —​ the 
same can be said for the realm of politics and in the context of individual life 
decisions.
Taken together the overall lesson to be learned is that ethics cannot deliver 
simple answers or remedies fitting for all times and places. Philosophical eth­
ics should not strive for such answers overemphasizing theoretical design and 
common sense should not expect philosophy (better: individual philosophers) 
to deliver such kinds of answers. For sure, in times of crisis, such a need for 
advice and orientation arises but nobody should succumb to this temptation. 
But also, I would like to add, nobody should draw the conclusion that philo­
sophical considerations are merely idiosyncratic or useless because they are 
complex, fallible, and restricted to concrete situations.
Let me add one more conclusion, which is far more specific: In the west­
ern world, we have learned during this crisis that there is a kind of normative 
priority of the right in theory and an opposing kind of normative priority of 
the good in practice (in form of saving lives and health first). This is a conflict, 
	12	
This leads to a version of ethical particularism which is pluralistic at least on the metaeth­
ical level accepting a set of prima facie values (and/​or norms). See Quante & Vieth (2002) 
and Vieth & Quante (2010) for a detailed discussion.
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Corona Pandemic from the Philosophical Perspective
47
at least it creates a tension which -​from a philosophical perspective —​ sets a 
double task to social policies: In the first phase of overcoming the crisis (or the 
most severe threads) considerations of the good will have to dominate. But 
in a second step, the aspects of the right have to be added in forms of deon­
tological side-​constraints which can block or set limits to our policies. Such 
side-​constraints are based on political strategy and therefore not in need of 
strong deontological backing (although in Germany these considerations have 
been brought into play using very strong deontological rhetoric). If this second 
step is framed in terms of fundamental rights or even justified by the princi­
ple of human dignity this can be understood and accepted as a political move 
aiming at strong effects. It should not be taken as re-​installing deontological 
ethics against crude utilitarian strategies. To overcome a crisis like the Corona ​
pandemic we have to find good balances between the good and the right based 
on the concrete situations. For this task, neither fighting for categorical deon­
tological principles nor transferring all questions into the matrix of quantifica­
tion and maximization will be helpful.
4	
Which Major Problems of Moral Philosophy Have Become More 
Prominent in Confronting the covid-​19? For Example, What Is 
the Response of Moral Philosophy to the [Inevitable?] Process of 
Inclusion and Exclusion-​ Preferring Some Patients to Continue 
Treatment?
In Germany (and some other European countries) the political debate has 
taken the idea that no lives will be lost by measures and decisions we have 
to make in the crisis as the all-​ruling maxim. The norm behind this is that 
weighing the lives of human individuals against each other is ethically unac­
ceptable in principle and has to be avoided at all costs. In German discourse, 
the notion of human dignity (in a Kantian or theological reading mainly) 
takes the quality of life decisions to be ethically wrong in principle since 
they imply an instrumentalization of human individuals.13 Sometimes in 
societies shaped by utilitarian ethics, the aspect of human dignity is ignored 
or downplayed in the name of maximizing good. In such contexts health 
	13	
I analyzed and rejected the assumption that quality-​of-​life-​decisions and human dignity 
are incompatible in principle in detail in Quante (2005). In some special contexts it is well 
known and inevitable that such decisions have to be made due to the shortage of means 
and resources; cf. Quante & Wiedebusch (2006) for organ transplantation and Derpmann 
& Quante (2015) for blood donation.
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

48
Quante
(as a special variant of the good) and quality-​of-​life (as a measuring instru­
ment) overrule aspects of autonomy and justice very easily. Therefore, it is 
important not to think that the metaethical position of utilitarianism and 
the acceptance of quality-​of-​life decisions are identical. In a situation of 
scarcity, hard choices have to be made and efficiency (in the sense of making 
optimal use of spare resources) is demanded in a deontological setting, too. 
As long as deontological aspects are not ignored or overruled in these poli­
cies they are unavoidable.14
Those working in this field (e.g. physicians, nurses, or bioethicists) know 
very well that hard decisions and even tragic choices among individual lives 
competing for the same resource cannot in reality be avoided. Even if we 
were to use all our resources for securing health it wouldn’t be enough to 
avoid such decisions of allocation (or even triage). Besides that, such a pol­
icy would reduce our resources in other areas (e.g. in the educational sys­
tem or in other systems constituting a social state) and would cause deaths 
there. For sure, very often it is complicated to demonstrate the causal chains 
in concrete cases. But many effects can be proven on a statistical level (sci­
ence will show us which lives during the Corona ​pandemic have been lost 
because of measures we have taken to save lives in other places in a few 
years).
Given that shortage of resources cannot be overcome in principle we 
have to be honest: The question is not how to avoid losing lives at all costs 
but whose lives to put at risk. In a pluralistic and democratic society, we 
have to discuss which risks, which burdens and which options we want to 
give to whom (individuals or special groups). We have to make transparent 
the criteria we use to make allocation-​decisions and we have to say explic­
itly how the different kinds of risks are allocated (including the options of 
future generations affected by financial burdens resulting from our current 
decisions).
First of all, we should not accept the claim avoided (neither justified by 
abstract ethical principles or paternalistic considerations) that such discus­
sions and decisions are immoral in principle and should be abandoned. Such 
a strategy cannot avoid these hard decisions or the risks; it simply bypasses 
discussion and societal control. But this is both: politically dangerous and eth­
ically unacceptable.
	14	
Cf. Mooren & Quante (2020) for this.
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Corona Pandemic from the Philosophical Perspective
49
5	
With the Increasing Importance of the Natural Sciences, Especially 
Medical Science, in Confrontation with the covid-​19, What 
Change May Occur in the Status of Philosophical Knowledge?
The change that may occur concerning the status of philosophical knowledge 
will have a dialectical character: upgrading and downgrading at the same time, 
depending on context. In the western world, philosophy has been replaced by 
science as the main source of orientation for more than a century. To some 
extend covid-​19 has strengthened this in demonstrating that many questions 
are not philosophical questions at all (in the sense that philosophy cannot 
solve the problems at stake or cannot even meaningfully contribute to deliver­
ing solutions). But the experiences we (as individuals, politicians, or societies 
as such) have made can be taken as an upgrade of philosophical knowledge 
and expertise, too. This is due to the fact that the Corona ​pandemic cannot 
be reduced to a medical problem or a problem to be solved by technological 
innovation alone. The current crisis affects our way of being in the world as 
human persons in all its dimensions. In this situation philosophy as a source 
for orientation and ethical justification (including critique) has demonstrated 
its importance in many forms. Thereby, inter-​and transdisciplinary relevance 
of philosophy has been shown and is recognized in many ways.
Even within philosophy itself, the Corona ​pandemic will probably cause 
a dialectic in philosophers’ position concerning the status of philosophical 
knowledge (and expertise). For those who are still in the grip of the picture 
that philosophy should deal with eternal knowledge and abstract principles 
the way we dealt with Coronavirus may be delusional or even an insult. It is 
evident that philosophy needs to be empirically informed to contribute to 
solutions for problems such as those caused by the Corona ​pandemic. For 
those who suffered from philosophy being unheard or powerless, it might be 
an encouraging and positive experience to be able to contribute something of 
worth in this crisis. Such contribution can take many different forms address­
ing a diverse set of needs and requests by many different individuals, groups, 
or institutions. Therefore, the upgrading of philosophy can take many different 
forms and the worth ascribed to philosophical knowledge (and expertise) can 
vary a lot.
	
Conclusion
During the Corona ​pandemic, we, as philosophers, have learned that our 
expertise is needed in various forms to deliver acceptable solutions. In this 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

50
Quante
sense both within politics and society, the relevance of philosophy has become 
visible and has been accepted more broadly. Given some longstanding tradi­
tions in philosophy, the lesson is that neither armchair philosophy nor abstract 
ethical theorizing is of any help in such situations of crisis. The more formal 
and abstract ethical principles are the less possible is their meaningful and 
context-​sensitive use.15 Furthermore, philosophical talk which is neither 
empirically well informed nor in touch with social reality will not help persons 
and societies to find plausible and ethically acceptable ways to deal with the 
many problems the Corona ​pandemic and our modern globalized world con­
front us with. There is a lot we as philosophers have to reflect on to improve our 
theories and our theorizing. There are a lot of philosophers who have to reflect 
concerning their intervention into and their service for our societies. But there 
is also reason to be optimistic that modern societies, i.e. the political institu­
tions, the scientific system, and the individuals, have learned that philosophy 
can be helpful despite not giving final answers or definite solutions.16 And all 
we have learned is that without philosophy being engaged in the crises and 
struggles of our time we are in a less good position to find ethically acceptable 
solutions for all human beings in a free and just society.
…
I wish to thank Anna M. Blundell for the linguistic revision and helpful 
suggestions.
	
Bibliography
Derpmann, S., and M. Quante (2015), “Money for Blood and Markets for Blood”, in 
Healthcare Ethics Committee Forum 27:331–​345.
Gethmann, C.F. et al. (2014), Interdisciplinary Research and Trans-​disciplinary Validity 
Claims, Cham: Springer.
Koehler, D.J., and N. Harvey (eds.) (2004), Blackwell Handbook of Judgment and Decision 
Making, Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Kühler, M., and M. Quante (2019), “The Self”, in M. Wagner-​Egelhaaf (ed.), Handbook of 
Autobiography /​ Autofiction, Vol. I: Theory and Concepts, Berlin: de Gruyter, 390–​397.
Maydell, B.v. et al. (2005), Enabling Social Europe, Berlin: Springer.
	15	
Cf. Quante & Vieth (2002) and Vieth & Quante (2010) for further discussion of these 
metaethical issues.
	16	
Cf. Gethmann et al. (2014) for an analysis of inter-​and transdisciplinary roles.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Corona Pandemic from the Philosophical Perspective
51
Mooren, N. and M. Quante (2020), “Utilitarianism and Care at the End of Life”, in N. 
Emmerich et al. (eds.), Contemporary European Perspectives on the Ethics of End of 
Life Care. Cham: Springer, 37–​54.
Quante, M. (2000), “Manifest versus Scientific Worldview: Uniting the perspectives”, in 
Epistemologia 23: 211–​242.
Quante, M. (2004), Hegel’s Concept of Action, Cambridge University Press.
Quante, M. (2005), “Quality of life assessment and human dignity: against the 
incompatibility-​assumption”, in Poiesis and Praxis 3: 168–​180.
Quante, M. (2010), “After Hegel. The Realization of Philosophy through Action”, in D. 
Moyar (ed.), Routledge Companion to 19th Century Philosophy. London: Routledge, 
197–​237.
Quante, M. (2011a), “Recognition as the Social Grammar of Species Being in Marx”, in 
H. Ikäheimo and A. Laitinen (eds.): Recognition and Social Ontology, Leiden: Brill, 
239–​267.
Quante, M. (2011b), “In Defense of Personal Autonomy”, in Journal of Medical Ethics 
37: 597–​600.
Quante, M. (2015), “Marx (1818–​1883)”, in M. N. Forster and K. Gjesdal (eds.), The Oxford 
Handbook of German Philosophy in the Nineteenth Century, Oxford University Press, 
149–​170.
Quante, M. (2017), Personal Identity as a Principle of Biomedical Ethics, Springer.
Quante, M. (2018a), Pragmatistic Anthropology, Münster: Mentis/​Brill.
Quante, M. (2018b), Spirit’s Actuality, Paderborn: Mentis/​Brill.
Quante, M. (2020), Human Persons, Paderborn Mentis/​Brill.
Quante, M., and A. Vieth (2002), “Defending Principlism Well Understood”, in Journal 
of Medicine and Philosophy 27 (6): 621–​649.
Quante, M., and S. Wiedebusch (2006), “Overcoming the Shortage of Transplantable 
Organs: Ethical and Psychological Aspects”, in Swiss Medical Weekly 136: 523–​528.
Roeser, S. et al. (eds.) (2012), Handbook of Risk Theory, Dordrecht: Springer.
Vieth, A., and M. Quante (2010), “The Structure of Perception in Particularist Ethics”, in 
Ethical Perspectives 17: 5–​39.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Anton Friedrich Koch, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_007
­chapter 5
What Can the Corona Phenomenon Teach Us about 
Our Conceptions of Subject and Nature?
Anton Friedrich Koch
In what follows I will discuss the two related questions: (1) What aspects of the 
idea of the modern subject have become more apparent to be problematic with 
the emergence of the Corona Phenomenon, and (2) what different effects may 
confrontation with the Corona Phenomenon have on rethinking the concept 
of nature?
Let me make one thing clear from the outset: Whatever the Corona 
Phenomenon may be able to teach us about our notions of subject and nature 
has been obvious anyway, even though not widely accepted. Our received 
notions are distorting –​ and in turn grossly distorted by a powerful underlying 
myth, the Myth of Transparency, which goes back all the way to Plato’s con­
ception of the “really realˮ (ontôs on), i.e. the realm of forms or ideas, which he 
conceived as epistemically transparent for philosophical thought. The “really 
realˮ can, at least in principle, be known without remainders. Plato did not 
extend this ideal of transparency to spatiotemporal nature, which he under­
stood as a murky mixture of being and non-​being. The Extension only hap­
pened when his teachings were, so to speak, baptized by Augustine and other 
Christian thinkers in the tradition of Platonism. They conceived of God as the 
omniscient Creator of nature and thus conceived of nature as epistemically 
transparent in principle and as actually transparent to God: He knew every­
thing and all the way down to the tiniest grain of sand. In modern times, start­
ing with the mathematization of physics by Galileo Galilei, Johannes Kepler, 
and then Isaac Newton, this idea has been secularised. Take Rudolf Carnap 
as a case in point, who had certainly been told by his pious Christian parents 
that God knows and sees all things and has a name for everything, however 
inconspicuous. The son later deleted God and kept the rest –​ the recipe for 
state descriptions was found: Imagine an ideal scientific language, call it S1, 
in which there is a name for everything and a predicate for every basic prop­
erty and relation, and form a “class of sentences in S1 which contains for every 
atomic sentence either this sentence or its negation, but not both, and no 
other sentencesˮ (Carnap, 1956, 9). The result is a state description in S1, i.e. the 
complete description of a possible world. Of all alternative state descriptions, 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

What Can the Corona Phenomenon Teach Us?
53
exactly one will be true and will describe the actual world completely. This 
true state description would, if it were possible (but it is not), with its atomic 
sentences, be a kind of order catalog for what the world has to offer, and with 
its negations a kind of counter catalog: “Things like these are not in the world’s 
basic assortmentˮ. Now, if microphysics had already provided us, not with a 
state description of our world, but with a general theoretical recipe for devis­
ing local fragments of that state description, and if chemistry had exhaustively 
taught us how elements and chemical compounds are formed above the fun­
damental level, and biology how protein compounds are formed from them, 
and so on up, we would be able to understand and control viruses and diseases 
and anything else.
But sober philosophy can show that the Myth of Transparency is not only 
an unattainable ideal but even inconsistent, self-​contradictory. By sober phi­
losophy I mean the fundamental hermeneutic inquiry a priori of being and 
thinking and their interrelation, which understands and justifies the dictum of 
Heraclitus that nature, physis, has the essential tendency to conceal itself (phy­
sis kryptesthai philei), precisely by partially revealing itself. All this has been 
known in hermeneutic philosophy for decades (cf. for instance Heidegger’s 
talks and essays of the 1950s), but is rarely believed in the globalized scientistic 
popular culture driven by the Myth of Transparency and the capitalist adver­
tising industry. And although it looks as if the scientistic pop and advertising 
culture are man-​made and there is of course a sense in which it is, it is much 
more powerful than human arguments, decisions and actions. So it is here to 
stay and will continue to be stronger than sober philosophy in the decades to 
come. The Corona Phenomenon is just another piece of evidence that nature 
is not transparent, neither to a god nor to a future super-​scientist, and that 
Heraclitus was right. But just as biased police and the judicial system create 
a situation where justice is impossible (“is a game”, sings Bob Dylan), so the 
Myth of Transparency that dominates our culture creates a situation where 
unwelcome evidence is systematically neglected. So much for the effects that 
confrontation with the Corona Phenomenon might (but will not) have on 
rethinking the prevailing concept of nature.
The conception of nature is the flipside of our conception of the sub­
ject. When nature is presented as possibly cataloged by means of a state 
description, prima facie this seems to amount to a self-​empowerment of 
the human subject, as if we were in a position to control nature and rule 
the world. But the opposite is the case. Humanity becomes an anthropo­
morphism for itself, as a common socio-​critical dictum has it. Indeed, we 
are beginning to see ourselves in the image of artificial intelligence and to 
ignore the fact that talk of artificial intelligence is just a sloppy metaphor, 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

54
Koch
albeit perhaps a metaphor that is effective in advertising. Again, the Corona 
Phenomenon is further evidence that could, but will not, lead us to a more 
adequate understanding of ourselves, an understanding that is already phil­
osophically elaborated but largely neglected. Before I try to outline it, first a 
word about the aforementioned opposition between humanity as ruler and 
humanity as anthropomorphism. This is of course a sad and –​ fortunately –​ 
incomplete alternative. But in fact, for proponents of either side, it will not 
even seem to be an opposition. For, both sides are happily combined in the 
idea that humans are the de facto ruling intelligent bio-​machines. Hence 
the fear of some that real, non-​organic machines might one day take over, a 
ridiculous fear sometimes simulated in science fiction. Poor vain and fearful 
rulers! The Corona Phenomenon as one phenomenon among many could 
soothe you to realize that there are not and cannot be any rulers of nature 
or kings and queens of the world –​ if only you could escape the grip of the 
Myth of Transparency.
Here now finally a very sketchy sketch of what nature is and subjects are, 
according to hermeneutic philosophy. Subjects and nature, thinking, and 
being are logically entangled. This entanglement is foreign to physics and 
foreign to the natural sciences, foreign also to cognitive psychology, cognitive 
science, neuroscience, and linguistics; it is a genuinely philosophical topic. 
Due to this entanglement, the bare field of nature, viz. space and time, is at 
the same time the field of consciousness, which is centered differently around 
each thinking and perhaps also each sentient being. Qualia thus are not in 
the head but out there in space and time, i.e. in the common, intersubjective 
field of our extended minds. We and spacetime belong together essentially. 
Thought is carnal, i.e. embodied, with logical (Wittgenstein would have said 
“grammatical”, in order to indicate that not even logic can be fully formalized) 
necessity, and every possible space-​time system must, again with logical neces­
sity, sooner or later grow knowers of itself within itself. People like us or aliens 
quite similar to us are therefore necessary as inhabitants of the world (are 
inhabitants of every possible world). As said before, thinking and being are 
logically entangled: Thinking subjects are necessarily embodied (and know it, 
pretheoretically and a priori), and the material space-​time system necessarily 
contains thinking subjects. This dual claim is usually referred to as the sub­
jectivity thesis. According to it, we humans have, in Aristotle’s word, a natural 
ergon, i.e. work or function or profession. The biological species homo sapi­
ens is the philosophical species zôon logon echon: We have or hold or admin­
ister speech (logos) that binds thinking and being into the unity due to them. 
In this sense, we are, as Heidegger once put it, the guardians of being (Hüter 
des Seins). Neither are we the rulers of being nor are we in competition with 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

What Can the Corona Phenomenon Teach Us?
55
allegedly intelligent machines. There just are and will be no rulers of being and 
no intelligent machines.
Now, to continue with our sketch, let us ask how the embedding framework 
around the subjectivity thesis, which we have just hinted at and which we may 
call hermeneutic realism (hr), relates to some common oppositions of theory 
formation, such as realism vs. pragmatism in truth theory, Cartesianism vs. 
materialism in the philosophy of mind, and poststructuralism vs. The theory 
of subjectivity in anthropology. We shall briefly consider these oppositions 
in turn.
Realism holds that the real is independent of our beliefs and desires and 
that a belief is true if it corresponds to reality (in ways that require further 
specification). Pragmatism holds that truth is warranted assertibility accord­
ing to intersubjective rules of verification and that thereby our beliefs and 
desires are somehow linked to reality. Extreme or metaphysical realism 
(Hilary Putnam’s term) states that the real is absolutely independent of our 
beliefs and desires and that therefore our best theories could all be wrong. 
As a consequence, metaphysical realism cannot help but collapse the real 
into an unknowable thing in itself and end up as a realistic brand of agnos­
ticism or skepticism. Pragmatism on the other hand as consistently thought 
through by (more than anyone else) Michael Dummett acknowledges that 
if the truth is warranted assertibility, there will be truth-​value gaps –​ and 
corresponding gaps in the ontic fabric of the world –​ that are irreconcilable 
with the law of excluded middle and thus with classical logic (but here the 
epithet “classicalˮ is just a coy subterfuge because there are no alternatives 
to logic proper, only various logic-​like uninterpreted formal calculi). hr 
can steer a safe course between the Scylla of realistic agnosticism and the 
Charybdis of pragmatist departure from logic because it sees and teaches 
that truth has three essential aspects, a realist, a pragmatic and a phenome­
nal aspect, and that the correlated flaws in metaphysical realism and in prag­
matist antirealism consist in identifying truth with only one of its aspects, 
the realist or the pragmatic aspect respectively. It is indeed difficult to com­
bine these two aspects as long as the third one is not in view, which in turn, 
according to Heidegger, was unilaterally identified with truth in pre-​Socratic 
thought. In contradistinction, hr insists on the full concept of truth that 
unites (1) truth qua correspondence with (2) truth qua assertibility through 
(3) truth qua unconcealment. Of course, unconcealment, i.e. truth is phe­
nomenal aspect, points to perception as the locus where things reveal them­
selves to us through their phenomenal qualities. And it is precisely here that 
hr turns against a numbing flaw in much of the current philosophy of mind, 
namely against representationalism, i.e. the doctrine, meant as a departure 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

56
Koch
from behaviorism in the 1950s and 1960s, that there are philosophically 
interesting inner representations couched in a language of thought that can 
be accounted for by some form of functionalism (computer functionalism, 
causal role functionalism or what have you). It sounds like a joke of history 
that some theorists (we kindly disregard their names) have argued that the 
creativity of speakers, underestimated by behaviorists, ought to be recog­
nized by introducing recursive operations on internal representations. This 
was, of course, a leap from fire to a frying pan, because recursive functions 
are computable functions and computability is the exact opposite of creativ­
ity which brings us to our second opposition.
With his appeal to a res extensa as the universal sphere of primary qualities, 
Descartes wanted to open up a field for mathematical physics in which it could 
operate undisturbed by metaphysics, and was prepared to pay the price –​ he 
likely even considered it a gain –​ that the res cogitans also remained with him 
as a second substance and as the locus of phenomenal, secondary qualities. 
With this dualism of substances, however, the problem of the interaction of 
mind and matter in perception and action arose, and ever since then Cartesian 
dualists have had “the melancholy office of talking physicists out of their cher­
ished conservation lawsˮ (Quine, 1981, 18). Hence the appeal of modern materi­
alism. But materialism makes things worse. Instead of overcoming two-​legged 
dualism it is content with only one leg, the res extensa, and gives up the res 
cogitans. Materialism is a truncated Cartesianism that replaces the res cogitans 
with functional or causal roles to be physically realized within the res extensa, 
a dualism of role and realization. To illustrate, consider the pieces in chess by 
way of example: Qua abstract roles, they are to be understood holistically, but 
qua wooden or plastic items they are distinct objects. This corresponds to the 
picture that functionalism, i.e. dualistic materialism, draws of thinking activ­
ity. hr is monistic instead and conceives thinking as an embodied activity of 
a living organism. Roles and realizations are then seen as logically entangled 
so that holism and distinctness cannot be assigned to different sides, holism 
to roles, and distinctness to realizations. In thinking organisms, we have both, 
holism and distinctness, all the way down. Thought is language, and language 
is embodied, non-​computable, in principle public behavior in the intersubjec­
tive field of consciousness which is our common mens extensa, our extended 
mind (pace Descartes). The problem of consciousness is certainly not solved 
by bringing it spatially closer to us. On the contrary, placed proximally in our 
brain, it becomes harder, not easier, than if we leave it distally in the spatiotem­
poral field where the phenomenal qualities really belong, for after all “qualia 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

What Can the Corona Phenomenon Teach Us?
57
ain’t in the headˮ.1 The question remains whether hr can respect the conser­
vation laws of physics. Yes, it can, by way of a libertarian theory of freedom 
based on a meta-​compatibilism (second-​order compatibilism) of freedom, 
determinism, and their first order incompatibility; but it is impossible to show 
this in a short essay. Suffice it to say that according to hr, physics is essen­
tially too thin and philosophy essentially too thick: Physics is too thin because 
it uses the artificial, non-​perspectival, incomplete language of mathematics. 
Philosophy is too thick because it is bound to natural language which is essen­
tially perspectival –​ fraught with indexicals –​ and semantically closed and 
therefore over-​complete, i.e. inconsistent, as the so-​called Liar testifies: “The 
sentence you are presently reading is not trueˮ. Therefore we will always find 
little lacunae in the latest physics and little pieces of fat, little inconsistencies 
in the latest philosophy, and never a “tight fitˮ (Quine’s term) on either side. 
Here, incidentally, lies the reason why the ideal of a state description is incon­
sistent: completeness of coverage would already generate inconsistency.
To get ahead and come to an end with our story let’s move on to our third 
opposition. With regard to it, hr is not so much a mediator as a party, and 
here neither party is wed to the Myth of Transparency. Poststructuralists –​ plus 
Richard Rorty, by the way –​ insist that it is all a matter of discourse, indeed of 
a plurality of discourses, so that the world, in Rorty’s words, is well lost (Rorty, 
1972). This circumvents problems such as the interaction between subject and 
nature, mind and world. Talking about mental phenomena is one kind of dis­
course and physics is another; still, others are chemistry, biology, psychology, 
sociology, etc. At first sight, this position may look like a variant of idealism, 
but it is not. All phenomena are postulates or posits, certainly, but posits not 
devised by human subjects, rather posited by anonymous strands of discourse. 
Not only nature but also the human subject is thus dissolved into discourse. Of 
course, the Corona Phenomenon, like any personal, local, national, or global 
disaster, is evidence to the contrary. Yet there is a kernel of truth in the post­
structuralist highlighting of the anonymous power of discourses that prevail 
over subjective human plans and undertakings, as is shown by the unyielding 
dominance of the Myth of Transparency in contemporary global thinking. If 
this were not so, poststructuralism would have had no evidence base to begin 
with. But it overshoots the mark when it tries to dissolve persistent phenom­
ena into discourse. For although it is true that the Corona Phenomenon has 
stimulated much discourse about it, it can in no way be identified with or dis­
solved into that discourse. Small wonder, then, that, with all the many disasters 
	1	 See the article so entitled by Alex Byrne and Michael Tye (2006).
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

58
Koch
that afflict us, theorists have long since begun to challenge poststructuralist 
discoursism, for example, and especially the French philosopher Quentin 
Meillassoux in his 2006 book Après la finitude. But Meillassoux’s réalisme 
spéculatif is ultimately just another version of bad old metaphysical realism 
(which despite its aporetic consequences is widespread in contemporary ana­
lytic philosophy). The real opponent of poststructuralism is therefore herme­
neutic (rather than speculative or metaphysical) realism, with its perspectival 
ontology and its affirmative, non-​Cartesian, non-​materialist theory of subjec­
tivity. hr is a species of realism in that it does not assert a one-​way, but rather 
a two-​way logical dependence or an entanglement of human subjectivity and 
nature. The real is independent of any of our knowledge claims, but not of the 
general fact that there are beings in its midst who raise those claims. Any one 
of them can be false, but even a false claim will entail truths, and besides, there 
is a logical guarantee that the probability of truth for serious knowledge claims 
is in general close to 1 (although in particular cases the probability is zero). 
If you have qualms about the term “subjectivityˮ here, you may as well speak 
of Dasein with the early Heidegger, or of humans or mortals with the later 
Heidegger. In verbis simus faciles!
So, what about the Corona Phenomenon in relation to all of this? The phe­
nomenon illustrates that nature (physis) essentially loves to hide and will 
always remain a source of surprises, good and bad. But hermeneutic philos­
ophy already knew that. It also illustrates that the human subject is not the 
ruler of nature. But hermeneutic philosophy knew that too. How many more 
illustrations do we need so that everyone can learn? An unlimited number will 
follow, and it will not be enough. We could have known all along; for we are all 
vulnerable to illness, suffering, and death, all vulnerable to natural, technolog­
ical, political, and moral disasters, to tsunamis, plane crashes, war, and geno­
cide. And in the end, every one of us will die anyway, just like our ancestors did.
The basis and core of the Corona Phenomenon is a dangerous, contagious 
disease, in fact, a pandemic. So perhaps the phenomenon may at least teach 
us something about public health and the science and practice of medicine. 
Urban Wiesing, philosopher and physician at the University of Tübingen, 
in his brand-​new book Heilswissenschaft: Über Verheißungen der modernen 
Medizin,2 quotes Mark Zuckerberg with the very optimistic forecast –​ in view 
of 9.5 million cancer deaths in 2018, with an increasing tendency –​ that it will 
	2	 The title is a pun, “Heil(ung)” meaning salvation in religion and healing in medicine, 
thus: “Science of Salvation/​Healing: On the Promises of Modern Medicine”, 2020. Wiesing’s 
main critical thesis is that medicine (parts of it) today is about to turn into secularised 
religion.
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

What Can the Corona Phenomenon Teach Us?
59
be possible to cure, prevent or treat all diseases in the lifetime of his children 
(Wiesing, 2020, 84), and Ray Kurzweil with his (in)famous prediction that in 
2045 artificial intelligence will surpass human intelligence and that this will 
be the redemption of mankind from mortality (66). Of course, both state­
ments are extremely ridiculous in content, but perfectly rational as advertising 
measures. This shows a lot about us humans. We are gullible to the extreme, 
tending to be “dumber than the police allowˮ (dümmer als die Polizei erlaubt, a 
German saying), at least in certain essential contexts of life and economy. The 
Corona Phenomenon could in principle open our eyes, but we will prefer to 
keep them “wide shutˮ.
So, in the case of the Corona phenomenon, is there really nothing new, com­
pared to other relevant phenomena known for a long time, and nothing new 
in terms of our ideas about subject or nature? Perhaps so much is new in rela­
tion to human subjectivity and intersubjectivity: We tended to misinterpret 
Aristotle’s second definition of the human being. The human being is, firstly, 
the animal that administers speech, the zôon logon echon, but secondly, at the 
same time, it is the animal that lives in a state, the zôon politikon. We tended 
to believe that this amounted to the triviality that the human being is a social 
being. In fact, however, the political reactions to the Corona Phenomenon in 
all affected states of the world show that it is essential for human subjects to 
live not only socially, but in one out of a plurality of states, for the individ­
ual states proved to be the acting units of organized protection against the 
pandemic. The human being is politically connected to humanity through 
the mediation of a respective state, while on the other hand, it is morally con­
nected to humanity in a more immediate way. This reminds us of Kant’s thesis 
in his Religion Within the Limits of Reason Alone that we are not only obliged to 
step out of the political state of nature into a particular political community 
but that we are also obliged to step out of the ethical state of nature into a 
universal ethical community (a universal “church”, says Kant, one with a purely 
rational, moral faith and without any external hierarchy). A political state –​ 
even the most democratic one –​ is a coercive system whose laws are reinforced 
by the threat of punishment. Therefore, a global unitary state, from which one 
could not emigrate or at least flee, would be a horror vision and a nightmare. 
Rational moral laws, on the other hand, unlike moralizing, spiteful gossip and 
related phenomena of hypocrisy, are always self-​addressed, i.e. directed only 
at the first person, but of course for every person alike, and their observance 
is completely voluntary. The ideal of a unified global ethical community is 
therefore not totalitarian but emancipative, an ideal of human freedom –​ and 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

60
Koch
a corrective to particular forms of substantial Sittlichkeit (Hegel’s term),3 i.e. 
to any respective set of informal rules of conduct of an ethnic group without 
which, on the one hand, we cannot live, but from which we must, if necessary, 
emancipate ourselves on the other. So, the Corona Phenomenon may even­
tually teach us that it is essential for human beings to live in many individual 
political states with their particular substantial Sittlichkeiten, but in one uni­
versal ethical community only. Again, however, at least the Kantians already 
knew that too.
	
Bibliography
Byrne, Alex and Michael Tye (2006), “Qualia ain’t in the Headˮ in Noûs 40: 141–​155.
Carnap, Rudolf (1956), Meaning and Necessity, University of Chicago Press.
Quine, W.V (1981), Theories and Things, Harvard University Press.
Rorty, Richard (1972), “The World Well Lost”, in The Journal of Philosophy 69: 649–​665.
Wiesing, Urban (2020), The Science of Healing: The Promises of Modern Medicine, 
Frankfurt am Main: S. Fischer.
	3	 In German “ethisch”, “moralisch” and “sittlich” are more or less equivalent semantically, 
though not etymologically, “ethisch” being of Greek, “moralisch” of Latin, and “sittlich” of 
Germanic origin. Hegel uses “moralisch” to refer to formal, individual, and purely rational 
(i.e. Kantian) normativity and “sittlich” to refer to substantial, collective, and historical 
normativity.
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Frank Chouraqui, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_008
­chapter 6
With the Emergence of the “Corona Phenomenon”, 
What Aspects of the Idea of Modern Subject Have 
Become More Visibly Problematic?
Frank Chouraqui
The “Corona Phenomenonˮ is ongoing, and we may expect that it will receive 
a new definition as it recedes into the past. That future definition will most 
likely seem more reliable than any we could come up with at the moment. It 
will certainly emphasize some of the aspects that we may or may not be able 
to identify at present and de-​emphasize others, but which ones these are, we 
cannot predict. Provisionally, this pleads in favor of a broader and inevitably 
more vague definition of the phenomenon. It seems uncontroversial that such 
a definition will address at least the following four dimensions: an embodied-​
medical one, a socio-​political one, an economical one, and an existential one. 
In other words, and regardless of details that remain open to discussion, it is a 
phenomenon that affects all dimensions of the modern subject.
In turn, there are two ways to think of the modern subject. The first way 
associates it with a certain intellectual movement and thinks of the subject in 
substantial terms. It appeals to the conceptual innovations that have marked 
the modern age, from the integrity of the cogito in Descartes (Ricoeur, 1992, 14), 
to the corporate designation of the free subject in Hobbes and Locke (Picciotto, 
2009), the universalization of the subject as citizen in Rousseau or the tran­
scendental bearer of duties in Kant. The other envisages the modern subject 
as the form of life that inhabits modernity. It, therefore, considers the subject 
in constructivist terms. This is a line taken by Marx, Nietzsche, and Foucault 
among others. This dual approach leads us to ask how we are to cash out the 
consonances and dissonances between the two and how either of them inter­
acts with the “Corona Phenomenonˮ.
If we are to ask how the “Corona Phenomenonˮ does the theoretical work 
of bringing out some underlying problems in modern subjectivity, we must 
therefore address the constructivist notion of the modern subject as a point of 
convergence of institutions as well as the substantialist notion of the human 
as a unified, and universalizable entity. What follows can only be very sketchy, 
preliminary, and vague. It is also inevitably tainted by my own, western expe­
rience. In particular, it pays outsize attention to the consequences of the 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

62
Chouraqui
Corona-​experience for a battery of democratic concepts such as the separa­
tion of the public and the private, the existential consequences of capitalism, 
or the fantasies related to the nation-​state. Yet, of course, this is a phenomenon 
whose geographical spread far exceeds the turf in which such concepts are 
operative at all. I hope this bias can be blamed on the fog that is an intrinsic 
part of the Corona phenomenon, although I suspect, this is too convenient an 
explanation.
	
1	
 
So, the modern subject has an institutional or corporate dimension: subjects 
are caught up in a field of relations with each other which is mediated by his­
torically localized institutions, including economic, political, and healthcare 
institutions, and this network of relations constitutes the lifeworld of the sub­
ject and determines the nature of our existence. In this sense, asking about 
the viability of the modern notion of subjectivity involves asking about the 
viability of the modern life-​world in general. Now, how does the current crisis 
question this institutional world? I think the main relevant remark one can 
make here is that it threatens the organic cohesion of this institutional world, 
by slackening the links between these four dimensions: modernity presup­
poses that the boundaries and the claims of the political, the economical, the 
medical, and the existential are fixed, legitimate and objectively justified. In 
Coronatimes, these boundaries are no longer fixed or recognized, but rather, 
they are contested, and subject to redefinition. The Corona-​crisis places pres­
sure on what we thought was a reliable harmony between them, one ultimately 
grounded in human nature.
Take the relations between economics and health: the promised synergy 
between the two, which was both the grounds of the capitalistic promotion of 
big pharma as well as the underlying presupposition according to which health 
and prosperity cannot conflict (since they are both components of the welfare 
of the unified, nuclear modern subject) is, to say the least, renegotiated: we 
protect our health by impairing the economy, so goes the rationale for lock­
downs and other measures as presented by state agents. And this renegotiation 
is in most cases left up to the arbitration of politics, whose function is now 
no longer to synergize but to arbitrate between the two, hitherto conflicting, 
demands. As I shall outline below this leads to renewed pressure on the rela­
tions between individual and collective welfare. To return to subjectivity, one 
can conclude that in a context in which the relations between the four stake­
holders are to be redefined, the subject is now transformed into a negotiator 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

PROBLEMATIC ASPECTS OF THE IDEA OF THE MODERN SUBJECT
63
and a decision-​maker (or as I shall argue below, a hermeneutic agent) when 
she was meant to be fully accounted for as a universal agent.
In this sense, we could say that the “Corona Phenomenonˮ exposes the 
instability and the conflicting vocations of four of the cardinal structures of 
modern life, and beyond this, it threatens the modern narrative of a unified 
subject, a universal human world, and the unity of individual and universal 
will through the rational agency.
	
2	
 
If we now move from the material to the substantialist notion of modern sub­
jectivity, it seems again we must begin with empirical tensions as markers of 
conceptual shortcomings. I see three such families of tensions:
2. 1. First, the conflict between public health and personal health. This is 
a problem that has a number of ramifications. Much of the daily subjective 
experience of living in Coronatimes has to do with second-​guessing, critical 
interpretation, and risk-​assessment. Are the directives coming from govern­
ments and local authorities legitimate? Are they sufficient to protect me or 
should I create further guidelines for myself? Should I take the liberty to ignore 
some of them? How much can I trust that others stick to such guidelines? Am 
I in a special category that requires further care? Am I being a better citizen 
by getting tested or by avoiding being tested? Do I owe health to myself or to 
another, or to society? All of these questions presuppose a certain discrepancy 
between collective and individual welfare: we are well aware that the guidelines 
that protect collective welfare do not automatically protect individual welfare, 
and the individual is left to arbitrate the competing claims of the individual 
and the collective. This cuts deep into the legitimizing discourses of the State 
in the modern age by questioning one of its founding presuppositions: that 
the good of the individual and the good of the community are aligned. This is 
a presupposition that animates much of the modern literature, most systemat­
ically in Kantian deontology and its scaling up model (see for example Wren, 
2002): generalization to the universalization of maxims at the highest level 
determines the validity of specific given instantiations at the bottom level.
2. 2. The second point is related to the previous. Living in Coronatimes 
involves the necessity to interact with an invisible (always) and absent (often) 
threat. This leads to anxiety of two kinds.
2. 2. 1. First: and following on the above, it leads to a conflict of allegiances 
between individuals and group, giving rise to several types of subjectivities, 
each of which will be regarded as deviant from a modern perspective: their 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

64
Chouraqui
place in the crisis comes to define their place in society, and therefore it vio­
lates the notion of an abstract interchangeable citizen. It places vulnerable 
populations like the elderly or the obese in a certain position, the young in 
another, the carers in yet another. This also leads to the stigmatization of those 
whose individual needs place a greater burden on the others and encourages 
talk of the desert when certain groups suffer from greater exposure through 
perceived negligence. Against a cliché that has been repeated in the early 
stages of the pandemic, and in spite of the modern fantasy that surely moti­
vated it: covid-​19 is not the great equalizer, it is the great differentiator. In 
short, this is a situation that creates micro-​ or sub-​identities that conflict with 
the abstract and universal notion of the modern subject, and with its cognate 
normative view that only such abstract definition has its place in the public 
sphere.
2. 2. 2. This first kind of anxiety is differentiating, and it confronts the pan­
demic subjects with their own singularity. This leads to the second form of 
anxiety which has to do with an ambivalent experience of significance. Once 
social differentiation is institutionalized, each individual is left to their own 
devices: the rules are by nature general, and they therefore only apply to an 
abstract and generalizable subject. Yet, in a society reorganized by a biological 
concern, this means that the rules apply to an abstract and generalizable body, 
which is a contradiction. What the pandemic requires of us, therefore, is that 
we interact directly as owners of this or that body with the dangers associated 
with the virus and with the rules put in place. Interaction with the virus, when 
mediated by the law, will be insufficient, or rather, choosing to interact with 
the virus only by abiding by regulations is itself seen as a personal choice; one 
that ignores the aforementioned differentiations. As a consequence, each indi­
vidual is left with the task of stopping the virus in the context of their own 
singular life. This heightens the sense of consequence of our life: the differ­
ence between life and death passes through our everyday actions. At the same 
time, this heightened sense of significance is matched by a heightened sense 
of insignificance: our life is threatened and subject to randomness and to the 
whims of our neighbors. As a result, the level of meaning in our life is exposed 
to the extent that the level of meaninglessness is exposed too. As a conse­
quence, each individual is left to their own devices when it comes to inter­
preting the specific constellation between rules, information (mediated by 
different levels of trust), our own bodily identity, and the demands of the cur­
rent situation. “Should I go to the supermarket?ˮ now carries with it a height­
ened hermeneutic dilemma. As I will try to briefly sketch out below, increased 
pressure on interpretation conflicts with some of the ideals of agency in an age 
of enlightenment.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

PROBLEMATIC ASPECTS OF THE IDEA OF THE MODERN SUBJECT
65
2. 3. This leads to a third point: The variety of responses to the crisis is polar­
ized by anxiety on one end of the spectrum and dismissiveness on the other 
(the latter is often coupled with conspiracy theories). This puts pressure on 
two ambivalences contained in the modern notion of subjectivity:
2. 3. 1. The first is the ambivalent notion of life and of the subject as principle 
ʻofʼ life: in one sense the modern subject is regarded as a principle that provides 
life through meaning-​giving. This appeals to a qualitative notion of life and 
builds the subject into an animating and creating principle. This is a tendency 
encapsulated in the hubristic tradition of modernity (Peguy, 2001): it is the 
human that replaces and transcends the natural basis of their life, and histor­
ically, in so doing, it takes over from God. Only the human creates a human 
world. Paradoxically, a tendency such as this, which is in the literal sense, 
humanistic, constitutes the basis of current Coronascepticism, and the inabil­
ity to take the threat of the virus seriously: the fantasy according to which the 
human cannot be destroyed by the non-​human, seems to be in the background 
of the argument made by Coronasceptics (and with the climate science deniers 
and others). Often, the rejection of the legal restrictions is expressed in terms 
of life: “we have to go on livingˮ. Of course, it is also in the name of life that said 
restrictions are set in place too: in the material and medical sense of life this 
time, the restrictions are life-​preserving, not life-​threatening (they do threaten 
life taken in other senses: economic life, nightlife, sex life, and social life in 
some cases). The source of these paradoxes, as is visible, is the ambivalence in 
the notion of life promoted by the discourse of modernity: a double discourse 
that makes the human subject both a creator of life as meaning and a discov­
erer of life as biological object, making the modern notion of subjectivity one 
that both dominates and is dominated by nature. The ambiguous response to 
the virus that we are witnessing seems to reveal these two tendencies and the 
impossibility of finding a balance between them, pulling the modern notion of 
the subject at the seams.
2. 3. 2. The second kind of ambivalence is the modern ambivalent relation to 
meaning-​making. This ambivalence is in turn illustrated by two points.
The first concerns the relations of meaning and truth. In a modern frame­
work, interpretation aims at both meaning and truth indiscriminately; that is, 
modernity identifies meaning with the truth. As a consequence, it abusively 
identifies “living byˮ (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980/​2008; Midgley, 2003)1 (which is 
the human response to meaning) with “believingˮ (which aims at the truth). 
The upshot is the following: as per the discourse of modernity, we can only live 
	1	 See also Merleau-​Ponty, 1964; Garelli, 1992.
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

66
Chouraqui
by what we believe. In underdetermined situations such as the current crisis, 
where the lack of information and knowledge is only matched by the impor­
tance and urgency to act upon it, this leads either to paralysis (the impossi­
bility to “live byˮ anything) or to arbitrary belief (in the form of conspiracy 
theories). Enters ambivalence, therefore: arbitrary belief seems to be a natu­
ral consequence of the modern ban on arbitrary belief. Such arbitrary belief, 
although it would take much more space to demonstrate, lies at the root of the 
conspiracy theories that surround the Coronacrisis.
The second point concerns the modern account of the order in which belief, 
action, and meaning are to be organized. In the modern framework, belief pre­
cedes meaning, and action follows. Call this cognitivism: we respond to the 
world on the basis of what we believe to be true, and not on the basis of the 
meaning we assign to events and entities. The fact that x means y to me so does 
the story, only polarizes my actions if I entertain a truth-​belief about x (at least, 
that it exists) and about y (at least that it picks up objective properties of x). 
There is increasing phenomenological evidence that this is a distorted account 
of experience (Deigh, 1994). The Coronacrisis not only offers some supplemen­
tary such evidence (we live by what the virus means to us much more than by 
what we know of it—​hence the conspiracy theories surrounding it) but further, 
it confronts us with the contradictions latent in the modern notion of agency 
which is bound up with the notion of autonomy. Autonomy, as Kant famously 
spells it out, is a kind of freedom indistinguishable from obedience (Curtler, 
1979). It is also the only appropriate kind of freedom and the modern subject 
is an agent only insofar as their actions are autonomous: actions that obey the 
moral Law (Ibid.). So, this is a notion of agency that equally bans arbitrariness 
and apathy. In other words, we return to the point made above: the modern 
subject is an agent who must act (against apathy) but must not act arbitrarily. 
Rather, she must only act by applying a rule that she is not the source of. Yet the 
Coronacrisis forces us to interpret more than we are entitled to, and this excess 
cannot be justified or unjustified fully. Unlike the modern notion of agency, the 
Coronatimes require a form of agency irreducible to autonomy, or the applica­
tion of any rules: it presents us with a fundamentally indeterminate yet highly 
morally relevant field of action which demands individual action and the exer­
cise of hermeneutic freedom (Lacour, 2016).
The Coronacrisis, like any contingent phenomenon, can only throw into 
starker light a number of conceptual fissures that were visible, but overlooked, 
thus far. One of the core concepts that is thus being challenged by the crisis we 
are now experiencing is the modern concept of subjectivity. It seems that the 
collision between this concept and the current crisis is threefold: first, the insti­
tutional notion of subjectivity presupposes a harmony between the internal 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

PROBLEMATIC ASPECTS OF THE IDEA OF THE MODERN SUBJECT
67
and external definitions of the individual, which is being currently tested; 
secondly, it presupposes a harmony between collective and individual welfare 
that is also challenged currently in the guise of the tensions between public 
and individual health; and finally (and probably consequently), the modern 
paradigm presupposes a treatment of the human relation to meaning whose 
naivety is now on full display: in particular, the investment by modernity in the 
rejection of arbitrariness has brought along the rejection of hermeneutic free­
dom and hermeneutic decision-​making. The renewed sense of individual and 
context-​dependent responsibility that comes with the fact of being a potential 
victim, potential carrier and potential rampart against the spread of the virus 
brings with it renewed focus on hermeneutic freedom. In so doing, it opens 
up a zone of conflict between the subject caught up in a pandemic and the 
subject as portrayed and illustrated by the modern paradigm. Finally, this pro­
vides us with an angle to understand the social pathologies that accompany 
the spread of the virus, such as conspiracy theories, as attempts to avoid facing 
the defeat of the modern model. The pandemical subject is worked through 
with tensions between their private and public duties, their commitment to 
an objective and a qualitative notion of life, the need for circumspection, and 
the necessity to face the emergency of now, at the risk of making arbitrary her­
meneutic choices. Modern subjectivity bet everything on the hope that these 
divides would never take pre-​eminence. The pandemic, among other current 
events, is proving it wrong.
	
References
Curtler, Hugh Mercer (1979), “Freedom and Civil Obedienceˮ, in Journal of Thought, 
Vol. 14, No. 2: 153–​163.
Deigh, John (1994), “Cognitivism in the Theory of Emotionsˮ, in Ethics, Vol. 104, No. 
4: 824–​854.
Garelli, Jacques (1992), “Voir ceci et voir selonˮ, in Marc Richir et Etienne Tassin 
(eds.), Merleau-​Ponty, phénoménologie et expériences, Paris: Jérôme Millon: 79–​99.
Lacour, Philippe (2016), “Le jugement et salogique dans la philosophie de Ricoeurˮ, in 
Ricoeur Studies, Vol 7, No 2: 187–​199.
Lakoff, George and Mark Johnson (2008), Metaphors We Live by, University of 
Chicago Press.
Merleau-​Ponty, Maurice (1964) “Eye and Mindˮ, in The Primacy of Perception. Edited by 
James M. Edie, Northwestern University Press.
Midgley, Mary (2003), The Myths We Live by, London: Routledge.
Peguy, Charles (2001), Temporal and Eternal, Indianapolis: Liberty Press.
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

68
Chouraqui
Picciotto, Joanna (2009), “The Public Person and the Play of Fact”, in Representations, 
Vol. 105, No. 1, 85–​132.
Ricoeur, Paul (1992), Oneself as Another, Translated by Kathleen Blamey, University of 
Chicago Press.
Wren T. (2002) Cultural Identity and Personal Identity, in A.W Musschenga, W. van 
Haaften, B. Spiecker, M. Slors (eds.), Personal and Moral Identity, Library of Ethics 
and Applied Philosophy, Vol. 11, Dordrecht: Springer.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Richard Bradley, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_009
­chapter 7
covid-​19: Scientific and Ethical Ambiguity
Richard Bradley
Even as some countries emerge from the most recent wave of the covid-​19 
pandemic, many countries are facing a third or fourth wave. Until a vaccination 
program is rolled out across the whole world or inexpensive new treatments 
become available (neither is imminent), governments and other institutions 
continue to have to consider measures that have significant consequences for 
people’s freedoms and livelihoods. And while overcoming the public health 
crisis is essential to restoring the economy, some trade-​offs between people’s 
lives and health, on the one hand, and their livelihoods, on the other, have 
to be made when policies are assessed. In this note, I will examine the impli­
cations of the two kinds of uncertainty that we face regarding the pandemic 
for how these trade-​offs should be made by policymakers: uncertainty arising 
from limits to our scientific knowledge and uncertainty arising from ethical 
problems in valuing lives.
Let’s start by looking at an idealized, but widespread, view about how ratio­
nal policymaking should proceed. The policymaker is confronted with a set of 
policies that are both feasible and morally permitted from which they wish to 
choose the one with the best outcome. To do so they must overcome two sig­
nificant challenges. Firstly, policies of the kind under consideration typically 
have very different consequences for different groups of people. The expected 
effects of contracting covid-​19, for instance, varies enormously with age, for 
instance, with the young typically suffering only mild illness, while the elderly 
face significant mortality risk and the likelihood of a period of severe illness. 
So the policymaker will need to assess the health impacts of their policies on 
individuals belonging to different age groups and balance these against each 
other and against the other kinds of impacts on individuals, such as on their 
livelihoods. Only then will they be able to determine the overall value of the 
outcome of a policy.
Secondly, policies may have very different consequences depending on 
what the prevailing situation is. A policy such as restricting international 
travel, for instance, can be effective in fighting the spread of the virus in a par­
ticular country, so long as domestic infection rates are very low. If they are not, 
the policy has little, if any, benefit. So the policymaker will want to know of 
the various possible circumstances they face, how probable each of them is (at 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

70
Bradley
least comparatively). Similarly, they will want to know how likely are each of 
the possible causal effects of adopting a particular policy. Only then will they 
be will able to assess what the expected outcome of its adoption is.
Making both kinds of assessment in the context of the covid-​19 pandemic 
can be very difficult and in practice, the authorities have relied on the exper­
tise of others to make them: on natural scientists to provide the probabilistic 
assessments both of the possible effects of the pandemic and of various policy 
measures and, to a much lesser extent, on the tools of cost-​benefit analysis to 
furnish them with a measure of the overall value of these consequences. Little 
attention has been directed however to the fact that the models and theories 
underpinning these judgments are in many cases are either highly uncertain 
or subject to scientific and ethical disagreement. In reality, policymakers face 
what decision theorists term ambiguity: a situation where lack of evidence 
or agreement means that precise answers on questions crucial to rational 
decision-​making are not available to them.
1	
Ambiguity in the Value of a Life
Perhaps the biggest challenge facing policymakers, though rarely acknowl­
edged by them, is the need to compare the value of saving lives against other 
policy goals. The most widely used technique for doing so is a form of benefit-​
cost analysis in which all desired outcomes are given a monetary measure, 
so that policy effects can be compared in terms of financial gains and losses 
(Hammitt, 2020). This practice is often strongly resisted on the grounds that 
it is ethically unacceptable to put a price on a life, so to speak, but in practice, 
policymakers do this all the time (for instance in deciding how much money to 
spend on road safety or on health care).
The monetary measure of the value of saving the life of a person most widely 
used in benefit-​cost analyzes of public health policies is that of the Value of 
a Statistical Life (or vsl). It is worth therefore looking carefully and critically 
at this measure. vsl values are derived from the monetary values individuals 
attribute to a reduction in mortality risk; more exactly from their marginal rate 
of substitution between income and risk. This in turn is estimated from indi­
viduals’ reported preferences or from those that they reveal in workplace and 
consumption behavior, such as the choices they make amongst jobs involving 
different levels of risk or their purchases of risk-​reducing, but costly, equip­
ment. For example, if someone has to be paid $10,000 per year more to take on 
a task that will increase their annual risk of mortality by 1%, then we say that 
the monetary value of their statistical life is $1,000,000.
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19: Scientific and Ethical Ambiguity
71
Note this is not the same as saying that they would be willing to accept 
$1,000,000 in return for certain death (they may be willing to, of course –​ 
people buy life insurance and kill themselves so that their family can get the 
money –​ but this fact about them is not what vsl measures). Nor is it the same 
as saying that they would pay this amount to guarantee their survival. Rather 
it means that 100 people, identical in all relevant ways, would be willing to 
pay their fair share of a $1,000,000 cost to reduce by one the average number 
of them that will die in one year. So we should not think of vsl as a monetary 
measure of the value of life but as a measure of the monetary value of mortal­
ity risk reduction.
As should be evident from the manner in which the vsl is obtained, its value 
is likely to depend on the characteristics of the person to which it refers: for 
example, their age, or their income and wealth, or the overall level of risk they 
face.1 But does the associated difference in vsl s for different individuals give 
us a reason to put different weights on their interests in mortality risk reduc­
tion? Quite clearly: not in all cases.
Firstly, someone who is well-​off is likely to place a higher monetary value 
on risk reduction than someone who is less well-​off. Not because in some 
meaningful sense a well-​off person places more intrinsic value on their own 
life than a less well-​off person places on theirs, but because, for the well-​off, 
money is a relatively less scarce good, and therefore relatively less valuable. 
So if individual-​specific vsl s are used in a benefit-​cost analysis of a policy, 
the interests of the well-​off will count more than those of the less well-​off. 
For instance, standard bca will prefer a policy that saves the lives of 10 well-​
off individuals to one which saves the lives of 10 of the less well-​off because 
the former attributes a higher monetary value to risk reduction than the latter. 
Nonetheless, we would not want the interests of the former to weigh more 
heavily than those of the latter, just because their vsl is higher. The fact that 
a well-​off person is willing to pay more to reduce mortality risk than someone 
who is less well-​off does not mean that in evaluating policy impacts we should 
give more weight to saving the life of the former.2
Secondly, someone whose baseline mortality risk is high will be willing to 
pay more for an amount of risk reduction than someone whose baseline risk is 
high. Intuitively this is because the money is worthless to someone the lower 
the chance of them getting to enjoy it. But this isn’t a good reason to attach a 
higher value to saving the lives of those who face a greater baseline risk. (There 
	1	 See Kniesner & Viscusi, 2019
	2	 See Adler, 2020
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

72
Bradley
may be other reasons for giving them priority; for instance, if the fact that they 
face a higher baseline risk reflects some injustice. But this is not what is at 
issue here).
In contrast to income and baseline risk, it does seem reasonable to treat 
people in different age groups differently when assessing health policies. It is 
surely wrong, for instance, to attach the same significance to the death of a 20-​
year old who can expect 60 more years of life as to a 70-​year who can expect far 
fewer. But this fact doesn’t depend on whether or not the 20-​year old is willing 
to pay more for risk reduction than the 60-​year old (Because of correlations 
with income and attitudes to risk, they may well not be).
The problem of income dependence is avoided by using a single vsl, such 
as the population average, rather than individual-​specific ones. But using a sin­
gle value has disadvantages. In particular, if different parts of the population 
are differentially exposed to some risk then the average vsl may not align with 
the monetary value that those who are exposed to it assign to its reduction. 
This makes the issue of age dependence all the more pressing, especially in 
light of the well-​documented skewed age distribution of covid-​19 fatalities.
A common way of dealing with this problem is to use a different measure for 
policy evaluation: Value of a Statistical Life Year (or vsly). The vsly is obtained 
by dividing the average vsl of the population by the average life expectancy. 
The value of saving the life of someone in any particular age cohort is then 
given by the product of the population vsly and the life expectancy for the 
cohort. This yields a value of life figure that varies systematically by age.
One criticism of both vsl and vsly as measures is that they do not take into 
account quality of life. Most people would not value a year of life spent bed­
ridden as equivalent to a year of life in excellent health, for instance. Quality-​
Adjusted Life Years (qaly s) are a way of allowing the value attributed to a life 
saved to depend on its quality. A typical way of measuring the quality of life 
is to derive it from people’s subjective preferences over health states, either by 
asking them how certain health states compare to the state of full health or by 
eliciting their preferences between states of less than full health and ‘lotteries’ 
between full health and death. On the latter method, for instance, the value of 
the quality of life associated with the loss of a limb, for some individual, is set 
at x times the value of full health, where x is such that the individual is indif­
ferent between an x chance of full health and a 1–​ x chance of death.
The use of qaly s in public health decision-​making is widespread but con­
troversial. One concern is that when it comes to life extension, it regards as 
more valuable the life-​years gained by people who would, if saved, be in good 
health than the life-​years gained by people who would, if saved, live with dis­
abilities or in poor health because extending the lives of the former would 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19: Scientific and Ethical Ambiguity
73
generate higher health-​related quality of life. For this reason, the Institute for 
Clinical and Economic Review (icer, 2018) in the USA recommends against it. 
There are also significant questions about how good people are at imagining 
what life would be like in states of less-​than-​full health. On the other hand, 
using qaly s to measure the effect on the pandemic has one significant advan­
tage: it allows us to take into account the effect of contracting the illness on 
people’s quality of life even when they do not die from it.
Conversion rates for vsl s, vsly s, and qaly s into money vary enormously 
between countries. In the U.S., a figure of a little over $10,000,000 is typi­
cally used for one vsl (Kniesner & Viscusi, 2019) and the value of one vsly/​
qaly (i.e., a full year of optimal health) is conventionally valued at anywhere 
from $100,000 to $150,000in cost-​effectiveness assessments for clinical pro­
cedures and equipment purchases (icer sets an upper bound at $200,000). 
Robinson et al. (2019) recommend calculating vsl by multiplying a country’s 
per capita Gross National Income by 160. To obtain a vsly, they further rec­
ommend dividing vsl by the remaining years of life expectancy for persons at 
the average age of adults in a country. This yields a vsly for the USA in 2020 of 
$311,194. The British National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (nice) 
on the other hand applies figures in the $25,000 to $40,000 range for one qaly, 
in the region of one-​tenth of the Robinson et al recommendation and a quarter 
of US values. In France, a vsl is equated to $3,000,000 –​ less than a third of US 
values. The fact that these countries have different per capita gni s only par­
tially explains the differences and does even less to justify them.
Differences of this magnitude have a very significant impact on policy 
assessment, so large indeed that they probably dwarf the differences arising 
from the scientific uncertainty discussed below. That is, benefit-​cost analyzes 
of policies will reach very different verdicts depending on which measure of 
the value of saving a life is adopted and what estimate is used for that measure. 
But there is little agreement on which measure should be used or indeed by 
what ethical standards they are to be judged. Rejecting benefit-​cost analysis 
(which is perfectly sensible) does not solve the problem, since the problem of 
estimating the measure of the value of saving a life also plagues methods (like 
welfare analysis) that are better-​grounded theoretically.3
The upshot of this is that is critical to rational policy-​making in response to the 
pandemic that immediate and sustained attention be given to the ethical prob­
lem of determining the value of saving lives and how it compares to the values of 
other goals.
	3	 For further discussion, see Adler et al., 2020.
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

74
Bradley
2	
Scientific Uncertainty
Science, and in particular epidemiological models of the pandemic, plays a 
crucial role by supplying predictions about how many people will be infected, 
how many will be hospitalized, and how many will die under various stylized 
policy scenarios. In the UK for instance the government’s adoption of social 
distancing measures was very strongly influenced by a model of the pandemic 
produced by the Imperial College covid-​19 team (Ferguson et al., 2020). But 
many other models have been developed, based on different hypotheses about 
the main causal variables driving the pandemic and the relationships between 
them (such as between the infection rate and sociability), or using different 
estimates of the values of crucial parameters (such as what the fatality rate is 
amongst the infected) or state of the population (such as how many people are 
already infected). And these different models give quite different predictions 
about the numbers that will be infected, hospitalized, or die.
Underlying these differences is the simple fact that there is a good deal of 
uncertainty about all of these elements. Take estimates of the infection-​fatality 
ratio, for instance. These have varied enormously between countries and times. 
In the early part of 2020 for instance the recorded ratio in Italy was over 10% 
and just over 1% in Germany, while recent estimates in many European coun­
tries put the ratio below 1%. Although there are numerous possible explana­
tions for these differences, one important one is clearly the amount of testing 
for infection being conducted. Indeed, without knowing the percentage of the 
population that is infected it is very difficult to say what the true infection-​
fatality ratio is, and on this question answers also vary considerably. A differ­
ent kind of uncertainty surrounds the question of what factors to model. The 
initial Imperial model for instance didn’t include the effect of the swamping 
of health systems on fatalities due to causes other than the covid-​19, nor the 
endogenous effect on social distancing of its spread (e.g. due to people’s fear). 
Other models incorporate one of these, few incorporate both.
With time estimates will improve, as will the modelling that draws on them. 
But in the meantime, it is critical that the amount of uncertainty contained in the 
predictions they make is adequately captured so that policymakers know what 
they are dealing with. Uncertainty about inputs to the models (e.g. estimates 
about numbers currently infected) can be captured by making probabilistic 
predictions of outcomes e.g. by giving predictions of the form “With proba­
bility x, more than 100 000 people will die, with probability x+​y more than 
10 000 will, …ˮ (something that is standard practice in other domains, such 
as forecasting natural catastrophes or stock market movements, which face 
similar uncertainty). But we still need to account for the other uncertainties, in 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19: Scientific and Ethical Ambiguity
75
particular those regarding the models themselves. Failure to do so risks induc­
ing unjustified confidence in the models’ predictions. For instance, it can lead 
policymakers to think that one course of action can be expected to yield more 
benefits than another when the real situation is that whether or not this is 
true depends on very particular parameter values or assumptions about causal 
relationships.
One way of capturing the remaining uncertainty that has found increas­
ing support of late is to specify not just a single probability distribution over 
the outcomes of interest, but a family of them (Bradley, 2017). If we think of 
each member of the family as being the distribution that we get from partic­
ular choices of parameter values and modelling assumptions, then we can 
see that size of the family will give a measure of just how much uncertainty 
we face about the consequences of our policy choice. And by looking at the 
range of associated estimates of the expected benefits of a policy one gets a 
measure of how robust an assessment of a policy’s usefulness is to scientific 
uncertainty.
Presenting policymakers with ranges of estimates rather than a single pre­
cise one is of little help of course unless it allows them to make decisions in 
a different way. This new way of thinking about our uncertainty allows pol­
icymakers to choose actions that can be expected to yield benefits across a 
very wide range of choices in preference to those that do not, even if amongst 
the latter are those that are optimal for some very specific choices. Or even 
to choose very cautiously, by choosing actions that have acceptable expected 
consequences under all possible choices. Suppose for instance that you have 
to choose between making two investments, each costing £1000, one of which 
is guaranteed to yield some small benefit (say £2000) and the other yielding 
either nothing or £21,000 depending on whether you complete it successfully 
or not. If the probability of success in the latter case is greater than 5%, then 
its expected return is higher than the former. Suppose your best estimate of 
the probability is 6%, but regard any estimate between 1% and 15% is reason­
able. Then although the first action is optimal, it is not robustly so –​ on some 
estimates you are expected to lose your investment. On the other hand, the 
second action is robustly beneficial, though far from optimal on your best 
estimate.
Making it possible for policymakers to calibrate their choices of policy to 
the amount of uncertainty around the model-​based predictions that they 
draw on for policy assessment, does not of course answer the question of just 
how much robustness they should seek or how cautious they should be. But 
it forces this question into the open, where it can be answered in a way that 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

76
Bradley
is appropriate to the nature of what is at stake, i.e. by debate amongst those 
affected by the policies and not implicitly by modelers.4
	
Bibliography
Adler, M.D. (2020), “What Should We Spend to Save Lives in a Pandemic? A Critique of 
the Value of Statistical Lifeˮ, Duke Law School Public Law and Legal Theory Series, 
No. 2020–​40.
Adler, M.D. R. Bradley, M. Ferranna, M. Fleurbaey, J.K. Hammitt, and A. Voorhoeve 
(2020), “Assessing the Well-​Being Impacts of the COVID-​19 Pandemic and Three 
Policy Types: Suppression, Control, and Uncontrolled Spread”, T20 Policy Brief. 
https://​www.g20-​insig​hts.org/​policy​_​bri​efs/​assessing-​the-​wellbeing-​impacts 
-​of-​the-​covid-​19-​pandemic-​and-​three-​policy-​types-​suppression-​control-​and 
-​uncontrolled-​spread (accessed, 20 July, 2021).
Bradley, R. (2017), Decision Theory with a Human Face, Cambridge University Press.
Bradley, R. and J. Roussos (2021), “Following the Science: Pandemic Policy and 
Reasonable Worst-​Case Scenarios”, lse Public Policy Review 1(4).
Ferguson, N.M., D. Laydon, G. Nedjati-​Gilani, N. Imai, K. Ainslie, M. Baguelin, S. Bhatia, 
A. Boonyasiri, Z. Cucunubá, G. Cuomo-​Dannenburg, A. Dighe (2020), Impact of 
Non-​Pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs) to Reduce COVID-​19 Mortality and 
Healthcare Demand. Imperial College COVID-​19 Response Team, London, March 
16.  https://​www.imper​ial.ac.uk/​mrc-​glo​bal-​inf​ecti​ous-​dise​ase-​analy​sis/​covid-​19/​
rep​ort-​9-​imp​act-​of-​npis-​on-​covid-​19 (accessed, 20 July, 2021).
Hammitt, J.K. (2020), “Valuing Mortality Risk in the Time of COVID-​19ˮ, in Journal of 
Risk and Uncertainty, 11:1–​26.
icer (Institute for Clinical and Economic Review) (2018), “ICER Value Frameworkˮ. 
https://​icer-​rev​iew.org/​wp-​cont​ent/​uplo​ads/​2018/​05/​ICER-​value-​framew​ork-​v1-​21 
-​18.pdf (accessed, 20 July, 2021).
Kniesner, T. J. and W. K. Viscusi (2019), “The Value of a Statistical Lifeˮ, in Oxford 
Research Encyclopedia of Economics and Finance. https://​doi.org/​10. 1093/​acrefore/​
9780190625979.013.138 (accessed, 20 July, 2021).
Robinson L., J. K. Hammitt, and L. O’Keeffe (2019), “Valuing Mortality Risk Reductions 
in Global Benefit-​Cost Analysisˮ, in Journal of Benefit-​Cost Analysis 10 (S1): 15–​50.
	4	 For further discussion, see Bradley & Roussos, 2021, 6.
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Sabine Döring, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_010
­chapter 8
On What the Real Moral Conflict in the covid-​19 
Pandemic Is –​ and What It Is Not
Sabine Döring
The spread of the novel virus sars-​CoV-​2 and the resulting disease covid-​
19 confront our societies with difficult decisions, rendering moral theorizing 
in real-​world conditions more relevant than ever. Although I doubt the pan­
demic has created genuinely new moral problems, it highlights apparent con­
flicts between different fundamental human or moral concerns, such as life 
and health protection, freedom, and material well-​being. Prima facie it seems 
that these concerns must be balanced or weighed as and when they conflict. 
For instance, to prohibit certain forms of assembly in order to slow down the 
spread of sars-​CoV-​2 seems to amount to assigning greater weight to peo­
ple’s right to life and health protection than to people’s right to freedom of 
assembly. At a second glance, however, it is not at all clear that people’s right to 
freedom of assembly contains a right to these specific forms of assembly inde­
pendently of circumstances. Perhaps this right is not definite enough to serve 
as the starting point for practical reasoning but has first to be “specified“ so as 
to enable us to decide what it would mean in these circumstances and whether 
or not it applies. Perhaps it turns out that the conflict of rights is merely appar­
ent because the right to freedom of assembly was not engaged in the situation 
(Shafer-​Landau, 1995).
My aim in this essay is to illustrate how the covid-​19 pandemic on the one 
hand invites a specificationist account of practical reasoning: government 
interventions to contain sars-​CoV-​2, such as contact restrictions or mask 
regulations, are justified in such a way that compliance with them could be 
understood as an expression rather than a restriction of freedom. On the other 
hand, however, the pandemic highlights one of specificationism’s core prob­
lems. According to specificationism, there are no real moral conflicts; instead, 
what we perceive as such are, at the bottom, summonses to continue reflecting 
on the concerns at stake (rights, values, pro tanto duties, reasons, or virtues) 
and specifying what they demand in this specific situation, with the aim of 
reconciling them (Richardson, 1990, 2018). (The main source of inspiration for 
this endeavor is the pragmatist tradition, which goes back to Charles Peirce, 
William James, and John Dewey). It has been objected that specificationism 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

78
Döring
thereby fails to make sense of the appropriateness of emotions of regret, com­
pensation, and so forth, even in cases where one did the right thing, leaving 
a “moral residueˮ (Thomson, 1990). I shall try to explicate this notion for the 
situation of the covid-​19 pandemic, arguing that, in these circumstances, we 
are facing a genuine conflict between the Right and the Good. This explains 
why compliance with Corona measures has been a “huge sacrifice“ and has 
come “at an extraordinary cost, which has exhausted all of us, regardless of 
where we live, or what we doˮ (Kluge, 2020). People struggle to comply not 
only for social, political, or economic reasons but also because they are morally 
required to act in ways that are incompatible with the good life.
1	
Freedom in the Time of the Pandemic
The world is facing the worst pandemic in a century, caused by a new form of 
Coronavirus, sars-​CoV-​2. Some nations have had remarkable success in fight­
ing this virus and the resulting disease covid-​19. Let’s assume that one reason 
for this success has been that most citizens consented to and even actively 
supported the Corona measures. Do these people thereby sacrifice their free­
dom on the altar of combatting the virus? Or is it that, on the contrary, their 
cooperation could be understood as an expression of freedom? The pandemic 
has led to fierce arguments about what freedom means in these specific 
circumstances.
Two extreme positions have emerged. One side criticizes state measures as 
disproportionate restrictions on freedom, while the other side, in the face of 
yet another wave (i.e. a new phase of high incidence), urges even tougher state 
action with even harsher restrictions. On the latter view, victory over the virus 
is gambled away because freedom is misunderstood as a mere license to do 
what one wants. The charge against this view is that one is an Untertan who 
craves strict leadership and seeks to shift individual responsibility to the state. 
This debate will undoubtedly continue after the Corona pandemic.
It goes without saying: one person’s right to freedom ends where another 
person’s right to freedom begins. There is no such thing as a right just to do 
what you want. Laissez-​faire is not a serious conception of freedom. Any seri­
ous conception of freedom will be prepared to accept restrictions of individ­
ual freedom. A liberal conception will, however, put the onus of justification 
on “those who are against liberty; who contend for any restriction or prohibi­
tionˮ (Mill, 1963). “The a priori assumption”, John Stuart Mill says, “is in favor 
of freedomˮ. As this is common ground among recent liberal thinkers (such 
as Joel Feinberg or John Rawls) as well, Gerald Gaus has dubbed this “The 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

On What the Real Moral Conflict in the covid-19 Pandemic
79
Fundamental Liberal Principleˮ (Gaus, 1996). According to this principle, a lib­
eral state is one that does not restrict individual freedom without compelling 
justification.
Is there a compelling justification of the corona measures –​ or of some of 
them at least? covid-​19 poses new challenges to liberal democracies. Political 
decision-​making is characterized by a combination of importance, require­
ment of scientific expertise, uncertainty, and utmost urgency unknown in this 
form. To illustrate this by way of comparison to climate change: climate change 
is the more important problem in the mid and long term. Both problems are 
highly theory-​loaded and mostly invisible in everyday life. What will happen 
to us if we implement the measures recommended by science is predictable 
only with great uncertainty. However, in the case of a spreading virus, every 
day counts, whereas in the case of climate change we count in years. The pro­
cesses which underlie climate change are additive (although there are tipping 
points), while the spreading of a virus is a multiplicative process.
Both crises require collective action. In both cases, climate change and the 
covid-​19 pandemic, there are external effects; market prices do not reflect 
real scarcity. More generally speaking, external effects (or externalities) are 
effects of one’s actions on others not accounted for by the decision-​maker, be 
it intentionally or unintentionally. First, individual action has significant con­
sequences for others: while in the case of climate change the individual carbon 
footprint adds to global emissions, in the case of the pandemic people can 
become massive propagation factors (in contrast to summands). Second, there 
is a free-​rider problem insofar as those who do not bear the costs also benefit 
from a solution. Third, for managing both crises scientific expertise is indis­
pensable since the individual cannot foresee the global impact of his actions. 
This means, technically speaking, that a private bargaining solution according 
to the Coase theorem is off the table: the transaction costs would be prohibi­
tively high. State intervention is indispensable.
From a liberal point of view, optimal government intervention to slow down 
climate change relies on market incentives. co2 is an inevitable by-​product of 
highly valued goods such as electricity, heat, or the production of commodities, 
and the aim is to reduce the sum of global emissions. Creating artificial scar­
city through a Pigou tax or, more efficiently still, through certificates leaves the 
manner of reduction to the market. It is difficult to find comparable starting 
points for market-​based measures in a pandemic, especially since the aim is 
not reduction, as with co2, but elimination: we all want sars-​CoV-​2 to disap­
pear, with as little collateral damage as possible to goods we care about besides 
health and the saving of lives. Even if everyone were rational and altruistically 
motivated, this goal could not be achieved without coordination through 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

80
Döring
government regulations, because strictly individual attempts to fight the pan­
demic would be unprepared, uncoordinated, and thus ineffective. (Think of 
Kant’s essential point that the necessity of a civil state follows from the fact 
that in the state of nature each person is her own judge). To leave crisis and 
emergency management to individual initiative alone would mean to dispense 
with collective and long-​term integration of research, decision-​making compe­
tence, and human and material resources. One can not be that stupid.
Most scientists argue that, as long as the population is not fully vaccinated, 
an early and hard lockdown is required to get us back to a situation in which a 
containment strategy is possible (see, e.g., the position paper published in The 
Lancet, which was signed by more than 300 leading scientists from various dis­
ciplines across Europe in December 2020, and the 2021-​comment sars-​CoV-​2 
elimination, not mitigation, creates the best outcomes for health, the econ­
omy, and civil liberties which was also published in The Lancet). Thus, coordi­
nation alone will not do; people must cooperate. It lies in the nature of a virus 
pandemic that everyone must avoid physical contact, including those who are 
unreasonable or stubborn. Cooperation must be enforced by the state, and this 
is just for the sake of prudence, and not yet morality: it is in our own rational 
interest to cooperate. Accordingly, state measures that are necessary to combat 
the pandemic do not restrict freedom, but unreasonableness or stubbornness. 
Cooperation is not equivalent to morality. However, if stupidity endangers our 
ability to control the pandemic and thus restricts the freedom of others, then 
it is also morally wrong. Because one’s own right to freedom ends where the 
freedom of others begins.
As long as the vaccination rate required to control covid-​19 is not achieved, 
each individual must be prevented from becoming a link in the chain of infec­
tions. If incentives are not sufficient to defeat a pandemic, even the liberal 
must resort to state regulation. While the climate does not care who does the 
co2 reduction (only the global sum counts), the elimination of a virus fails 
if the privileged and the obstinate do not comply too. The latter can only be 
achieved with general regulatory measures, such as contact restrictions or 
mask regulations.
I will not discuss individual Corona measures here but assume that contact 
restrictions and requirements to wear masks are justified. I will come back to 
this below. For now, let’s grant that these measures are justified. Provided that 
this is so, what does people’s right to freedom mean in the circumstances of the 
covid-​19 pandemic? There are competing conceptions of (political) freedom 
(or liberty). We owe the now standard conception of “negative freedom”, that 
is freedom as “non-​interference”, to Isaiah Berlin: people are free to the extent 
that their choices are not interfered with (Berlin, 1969). However, freedom as 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

On What the Real Moral Conflict in the covid-19 Pandemic
81
non-​interference commits us to call slaves free if they have a well-​meaning 
master who prefers to leave them alone. In the condition of slavery, the lat­
ter has an institutionally-​protected right to treat his slaves more or less as he 
pleases. Nevertheless, to the extent that this well-​meaning master does not 
interfere with his slaves’ choices, we are committed to saying –​ on the non-​
interference view of freedom –​ that the slaves enjoy freedom. The deeper prob­
lem with the non-​interference view of freedom, that examples like this reveal, 
is that (political) freedom “might best be understood as a sort of structural 
relationship that exists between persons or groups, rather than as a contingent 
outcome“ (Lovett, 2018). This insight underlies the “republican conception of 
(political) freedom”, on which freedom consists in the secure enjoyment of 
non-​domination by the arbitrary or uncontrolled power of a master (Pettit, 
1997). I will take this conception of freedom as a basis in discussing the ques­
tion of whether regulatory corona measures like contact restrictions and mask 
regulations are in fact restrictions of freedom.
It is important that we are not currently experiencing domination by the 
arbitrary power of a master but rational guidance by the scientific insight of 
experts. sars-​CoV-​2 calls for expertise because our knowledge of how to fight 
a pandemic is sufficiently robust to reduce politicians’ legitimate decision-​
making power to very few options. It is right and in our interest that corona 
measures are based on scientific expertise. This is demonstrated not least by 
the failure of governments that have ignored this expertise. Quite a few even 
hope for an end to what Quassim Cassam has called “epistemic insouciance“ 
by which he means an epistemic attitude that leads to bullshit (Cassam, 2019). 
Does scientific guidance nonetheless illegitimately restrict freedom? Is politi­
cal legitimacy inadmissibly tied to epistemic justification? Does political legit­
imacy depend on epistemic justification at all? Is democracy to be measured 
by whether it makes the right decisions? Anyone who denies this must ask 
himself what liberal democracy is worth if it fails to act to the best of its knowl­
edge. In the case of a multiplicative process, this is particularly virulent, as we 
are faced with the choice of prudently eliminating or stupidly letting explode 
and thus destroying the lives of many: there is hardly a more massive form of 
interference with the freedom of the individual.
On the other hand, those who see epistemic justification as necessary for 
political legitimacy must be careful not to instrumentalize democracy in the 
service of truth. It is often claimed that experts only advise and do not make 
political decisions themselves, but the political power that experts can have 
due to their superior grasp of what policy interventions a particular situation 
requires must not be masked. Experts may be influenced by their own political 
agenda or act as representatives of an interest group. There is also the risk that 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

82
Döring
politically naïve experts will be exploited by corrupt politicians. To counter 
this, as Fabienne Peter never tires of arguing, the unjustified epistemic privi­
lege must be excluded by the process of democratic decision-​making as such, 
so as to resist authoritarian tendencies and to ensure that all citizens are heard 
(Peter, 2008).
Provided that this is what domination in the covid-​19 pandemic amounts 
to: is it domination at all? I deny that rational guidance by scientific experts 
is domination. Not only does scientific knowledge of how to manage the 
pandemic leave very little political wriggle room. This knowledge is also in 
principle accessible to everyone and should ideally be communicated as trans­
parently as possible. In these circumstances, every citizen can recognize why 
contact restrictions or mask regulations are rationally required and why it is 
right to comply with these regulatory measures. Because of this, compliance 
can be understood as an expression rather than a restriction of freedom. After 
all, (political) freedom is not simply something that entitles people to a variety 
of claims; freedom rather demands from us to make it our second nature to 
strive for reasons (in the standard normative sense) so as to act on those rea­
sons as an expression of freedom.
2	
The Right, the Good, and the Rational Role of the Emotions
So far, I have argued that, in the circumstances of the covid-​19 pandemic, the 
conflict between our concern to protect life and health on the one hand and 
our concern for freedom, on the other hand, is merely apparent. Once we have 
specified what freedom means in these circumstances, the two concerns do 
not clash. It should be emphasized, though, that robust expertise tends not to 
be available in the normal case. One might object that even in the corona cri­
sis experts do disagree on what needs to be done, leaving us with much more 
leeway than I have assumed. However, it is important to note that disagree­
ment between experts is much more prominent in the public debate than it 
is in the scientific debate. Public debate is often characterized by what has 
been dubbed false balance or even bothsidesism, i.e. a bias which leads jour­
nalists and politicians to present the views on an issue as being more balanced 
than the evidence supports. Furthermore, a distinction must be made between 
two strategies with regard to what goal we actually want to achieve with the 
Corona measures: the first strategy has been called “NoCovidˮ or “hammerˮ 
and aims at containment by crushing the virus with early hard restrictions in 
the hope that those outside the container will enjoy much more freedom or 
that, after choking a local outbreak, all will enjoy much more freedom. The 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

On What the Real Moral Conflict in the covid-19 Pandemic
83
second strategy has been called “learning to live with the virusˮ or “danceˮ and 
aims at mitigation. Although I am in favor of the first strategy, I will not argue 
for it here. I shall focus on mask regulations and contact restrictions which 
are an integral part of both strategies. We are confronted with bans on vari­
ous forms of assembly, ranging from parties and (political) demonstrations to 
larger gatherings with colleagues, friends, or family members. It is in this sense 
that I am using the term “contact restrictionsˮ here when claiming that these 
restrictions are justified. To comply with such restrictions is the right thing to 
do. Still, I think, there remains an irresolvable moral conflict. Let me explain.
In order to maintain “normative controlˮ of practical reasoning, speci­
ficationists need to specify moral concerns (such as freedom or health pro­
tection) in such a way that right and wrong ways of specifying could be 
distinguished (Milgram, 1996). Some have attempted to meet this challenge 
by positing a requirement of coherence: a specification of a moral concern 
needs to be coherent with the specifications of one’s other moral concerns, 
principles, more or less backgrounded theoretical views, emotional responses 
to particular cases, and so forth (Richardson, 1990). My hypothesis is that in 
the circumstances of the covid-​19 pandemic such coherence is not achiev­
able. Even when we accept that contact restrictions (in the above sense) ought 
to be respected, emotions of regret and suffering do persist. Judging and “see­
ing what to doˮ fall apart (Döring, 2007). The crucial point is that, in this case, 
the relevant emotions are not merely recalcitrant, i.e. persistent despite one’s 
all things considered judgment, but are also appropriate, indicating a genu­
ine moral conflict between the Right and the Good. Had one come to judge 
that contact restrictions ought to be ignored –​ to pay a last visit to one’s dying 
grandmother in the nursing home, say –​ one would also experience conflicting 
emotions.
The underlying and by now well-​established view of emotion pictures them 
not as mere feelings or blind instigators but as intentional mental states which 
represent things as being a certain way and are thus assessable for appropriate­
ness (or fittingness). On this view, to experience regret about something nec­
essarily involves seeing that thing as regrettable (in a sense to be explained). 
Therefore, the fact that one continues to feel regret even though one judges 
that one is doing the right thing indicates a rational conflict (Döring, 2015). For 
how could it be regrettable to do the right thing? However, the regret one feels 
about complying with covid-​19 contact restrictions is not about one’s right to 
freedom being defeated by others’ right to the protection of health and life. It 
is rather about giving up an essential part of the good life by renouncing social 
interaction, or physical interaction at least. Insofar as social interaction is an 
essential part of the good life, regret is not merely recalcitrant; it is appropriate. 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

84
Döring
The conflict between the Right and the Good which it implies is real (and not 
merely apparent). As pointed out at the beginning, this explains why we see ris­
ing levels of what the who recently called “covid-​19 fatigueˮ. It also explains 
why corona measures, when they take the shape of mere non-​sanctioned coor­
dination aids, are not efficient, and why they have to come as coercive gov­
ernmental interventions. Meanwhile, a whole bunch of explanations has been 
offered for why people fail to comply with Corona measures. Why do people 
have such difficulties with limiting contact with family members or friends? 
Why are they even still out partying? There are three straightforward expla­
nations that are all plausible so far as they go but, ultimately, fail to capture 
what’s going on (Mounk, 2020). The first is an epistemic explanation: people 
simply fail to realize the severity of the pandemic. We may add that quite a few 
people invoke conspiracy theories. A second explanation focuses on selfish­
ness. Typically, it is younger people who attend parties. Although sars-​CoV-​2 
does not spare the young, data suggest that they are far more likely to sur­
vive. Therefore, from a selfish perspective, it is less obviously irrational to risk 
social encounters. A third explanation highlights an aspect already mentioned 
above: for many of us, covid-​19 is invisible or at least distant in everyday life. 
Unfortunately, this makes it difficult for creatures like us –​ humans –​ to recog­
nize obligations: we feel obliged to take action against danger or suffering that 
is right in front of our eyes, but not against danger or suffering that is distant 
or difficult to see. As one might not know the people who one infects at a party 
and might never learn about the terrible consequences of one’s action, this 
general human characteristic might explain why people continue partying.
Ignorance is at best a partial explanation of why people go on indulging 
in risky social practices. Many of them do not lack the means or education to 
recognize what, from a scientific and rational perspective, they ought to do (or 
omit). Selfishness also falls short as an explanation, because many older people 
do not accept bans on family celebrations either; and younger people should 
understand that their behavior endangers their loved ones. Consequently, 
the distance to potential victims is not a suitable comprehensive explanation 
either.
Yascha Mounk gives a fourth explanation, focusing “on what kind of actions 
we are accustomed to evaluating from a moral point of viewˮ (Mounk 2020). 
According to Mounk, we are not used to morally judging acts of social exchange 
such as meeting friends or other parents with their children in the park or play­
ground or chatting with colleagues. “No matter how dangerous such actions 
might be right now”, Mounk says, “they feel completely benignˮ and cannot be 
perceived as morally equivalent to immoral actions such as pulling a revolver 
and pulling the trigger (Mounk, 2020). On this explanation, people fail to 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

On What the Real Moral Conflict in the covid-19 Pandemic
85
comply with corona measures and are still out partying because our “moral 
instincts have not been honed to guide us well in this extraordinary crisisˮ.
While this explanation points out the right direction, it fails by reducing 
our emotional reactions to misguided “moral instinctsˮ. On Mounk’s account –​ 
which is obviously influenced by Peter Singer’s ethics –​ the effectiveness of a 
rational moral insight is blocked by opposing arational instincts (“by following 
your instincts rather than your reason, you are putting yourself, your friends, 
and your neighbors at riskˮ). As I have argued, however, the blocking is not 
by arational instincts but by rational emotions. It is not because our “moral 
instinctsˮ are not (yet) trained in the right way that we violate the norm of 
not endangering others. Instead, we struggle to understand social interactions 
as instances of this norm since social interaction is an indispensable part of 
the good life, as is indicated by our regret and suffering. How could it be that 
morality requires us to give up the good life, or at least part of it? The tragedy 
is that –​ as paradoxical as it might seem at first sight –​ in demanding social (or 
physical) distancing, morality requires us to act in ways that are incompatible 
with the good life. In this sense, the novel virus sars-​CoV-​2 and the resulting 
disease covid-​19 confront us with a genuine moral conflict between the Right 
and the Good.
I have argued that, while the conflict between health protection and free­
dom is merely apparent, there is a real and irresolvable conflict between health 
and life protection and the good life. Let me conclude by dismissing what may 
seem like an obvious objection. It may be tempting to insist that the good life 
also necessarily integrates freedom –​ especially if it is to be a life of dignity. This 
is by no means doubted here. Still, there is a crucial difference between limit­
ing one’s own freedom in favor of the freedom of others and denying oneself 
social contact with others. For, the former is an act of solidarity for the sake of 
the human community, whereas the latter forces us into social alienation. For 
the zoon politikon this couldn’t be a long-​term solution: social health needs 
community.
	
References
Berlin, Isaiah (1969), Four Essays on Liberty, Oxford University Press.
Cassam, Quassim (2019), Vices of the Mind: From the Intellectual to the Political, Oxford 
University Press.
Döring, Sabine (2007), “Seeing What to Do: Affective Perception and Rational 
Motivation”, in Dialectica 61: 363–​394.
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

86
Döring
Döring, Sabine (2015), “What’s Wrong with Recalcitrant Emotions: From Irrationality 
to Challenge of Agential Identity”, in Dialectica 69: 381–​402.
Gaus, Gerald (1996), Justificatory Liberalism: An Essay on Epistemology and Political 
Theory, Oxford University Press.
Kluge, Hans (2020), “Rising Levels of Pandemic Fatigue are being Seen in Europe, 
WHO Warns”, in cnbc: Health and Science. https://​www.cnbc. com/​2020/​10/​06/​
who-​warns-​of-​pandemic-​fatigue-​in-​europe. html (accessed, 20 July 2021).
Lovett, Frank (2018), “Republicanism”, in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2018 Edition), URL =​ https://​plato.stanf​ord.
edu/​archi​ves/​sum2​018/​entr​ies/​republ​ican​ism/​.
Milgram, Elijah (1996), Review of the Book: Practical Reasoning about Final Ends, by 
Henry Richardson, in Mind 105: 504–​506.
Mill, John Stuart (1963), Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, Edited by J. M. Robson, 
University of Toronto Press.
Mounk, Yascha (2020), Four Theories for Why People are Still Out Partying. Our Moral 
Instincts don’t Match This Crisis. https://​www.thea​tlan​tic.com/ideas/archive/​2020/​
03/​moral-​instincts-​coronavirus/​608305 (accessed, 20 July 2021).
Peter, Fabienne (2008), Democratic Legitimacy, New York: Routledge.
Pettit, Philipp (1997), Republicanism: A Theory of Freedom and Government, 
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Richardson, Henry S. (1990), Specifying Norms as a Way to Resolve Concrete Ethical 
Problems, in Philosophy & Public Affairs 19: 279–​310.
Richardson, Henry S. (2018), Articulating the Moral Community: toward a Constructive 
Ethical Pragmatism, Oxford University Press.
Shafer-​Landau, Russ (1995), “Specifying Absolute Rightsˮ, in Arizona Law Review 
37: 209–​225.
Thomson, Judith J. (1990), The Realm of Rights, Harvard University Press.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Jeffrey Noonan, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_011
­chapter 9
Lockdowns and Living Well
Life-​Value Ethics in the Age of covid-​19
Jeffrey Noonan
The covid-​19 pandemic has been treated by politicians and the press as a pub­
lic health and economic crisis. However, like any social crisis, the pandemic 
also poses fundamental philosophical problems. While these problems are not 
matters of physical life and death in the same way access to personal protec­
tive equipment or the equitable distributions of a vaccine are, they are prob­
lems of equal human significance. covid-​19 brought the ordinary rhythms of 
life to a crashing halt. The disruption of these routines forced us to step out­
side of them. Much in the same way that songs in a Brecht play were meant 
to alienate the viewer from the action on stage so they could think about the 
drama’s meaning, the forced cessation of normal activity allowed everyone to 
ask: is normal good enough? Concrete questions like that are the occasion for 
deeper questions: what do we mean by good, and how do we make compara­
tive evaluations of different possibilities for social organization and individual 
life-​projects?
My approach to ethical problems is informed by the life-​value philosophy 
of John McMurtry and my own humanist interpretation of Marxism.1 I have 
called the synthesis I have labored to bring about between these traditions 
“materialist ethicsˮ (Noonan, 2011). I believe that its basic principles are well-​
suited to Inform and guide reflections about the problems with current modes 
of social organization and individual life-​projects that the covid-​19 crisis 
has exposed. Materialist ethics, despite the technical-​sounding name, is not 
difficult to understand and should be accessible to anyone concerned (and, 
ultimately, everyone must be concerned) with the question of how social orga­
nization shapes human possibilities for good lives.
The basic principle of materialist ethics is that the good for human beings 
must cohere with our nature as biological social self-​conscious agents. I drive 
this principle from McMurtry’s idea of the life-​ground of value. The life-​ground 
of value is “the connection of life to life’s resources as a felt bond of beingˮ 
	1	 See McMurtry, 2011, Volumes 1 and 2.
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

88
Noonan
(McMurtry, 1998, 23). The last idea is the conceptual hinge which takes life-​
value thinking from being a mere observation of natural facts (if we cannot 
access needed resources we die) to a comprehensive philosophy of the value 
and meaning of life. Human beings, higher life forms, and perhaps, in their own 
way, all life forms normally care about living. The life that they desire to lead 
is not confined to perpetuating metabolic activity: living beings, and humans 
most of all, want to live for the sake of realizing their defining capacities to feel 
and think, to move, produce, and create, to connect and relate to others, and 
(for human beings) to find or create meaning over the course of their finite 
time on the planet. The question of good and bad forms of life thus comes 
down to the question of what, concretely, different living beings are able to do 
or not do over the course of their lifetime. A squirrel that gets run over has led 
an objectively worse life than a squirrel that stays safely in the trees and lives 
out its natural life span.
There is nothing essentially different about the problem of good human 
lives. Our needs are more complex, our potentialities more expansive, and our 
capacities for reflective evaluation unique (so far as we know), but a person’s 
life that ends prematurely is objectively worse than one which extends across a 
full lifespan. If nothing else, covid-​19 has reminded us all of the reality of bio­
logical vulnerability to unexpected pathogens. Yet it has also reminded us that 
although biological vulnerabilities are objectively real, they are also always 
socially mediated. Neither the risks of contracting covid-​19, nor dying from it, 
nor accessing vaccines were and are equally distributed but depended on one’s 
class, one’s race, and the country where one lives.
Human lives give rise to a myriad of ethical theories because life has differ­
ent dimensions. Different ethical theories have typically isolated one dimen­
sion (outcomes, for example) elevated them to the status of sole significance 
intentions. Since isolating one factor and elevating it over the others leads to 
one-​sidedness, other ethical theories arise in opposition. Thus deontologists 
respond to utilitarians with the counter-​argument that intentions matter more 
than outcomes because our intentions are all that are under our control. In 
truth, all dimensions of human life: outcomes, intentions, character, etc., mat­
ter. Materialist ethics tries to simplify these theories into a comprehensive and 
straightforward rendering of ethical problems as social problems. The influ­
ence of humanist Marxism becomes apparent here. No life can be good if it is 
deprived of everything that it needs (total deprivation equals death). By like 
reasoning, the more the natural and social conditions of life are satisfied, the 
better that life is, other things being equal. Need-​satisfaction is the material 
condition of valuable forms of sensuous enjoyment, creative and scientific 
thought, productive activity, and mutually valuable forms of interpersonal 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Lockdowns and Living Well
89
interaction and relationships. For a mortal being, with an indefinite but fixed 
span of life, their good has to be determined relative to the quantity and quality 
of experiences achieved over time. But the quantity and quality of experiences 
possible over time are determined by the structure and dynamics of the soci­
ety within which one lives and one’s relative position within it as determined 
by one’s class, ethnicity, gender, etc. identity. In an oppressive society, those 
whose identity is marked as inferior will lead, other things being equal, worse 
lives, because they will be relatively more deprived of the natural and social 
needs that humanly good lives require.
The covid-​19 crisis has tracked and provided further evidence for the exis­
tence of deep material inequalities. Workers have suffered more than bosses, 
precarious workers have suffered more than unionized and full-​time work­
ers; single mothers have suffered more than single men and blacks, in racially 
oppressive societies, have suffered more than whites, and those in the Global 
South have not had the same level of access to vaccines as those in the Global 
North. When viewed through the lens of the inequalities that covid-​19 did not 
create but certainly highlights, the explosion of anti-​racist action in the United 
States that began six months into the pandemic and continues today comes as 
no surprise. The endemic police violence to which Black Americans have been 
subject conjoined with the higher costs the pandemic has imposed on their 
communities has pushed them to the point of mass resistance. The general 
ethical significance of these and analogous struggles is that they demonstrate 
concretely how questions of the good life are really questions about how the 
societies in which we live are organized and what values steer them. Ethical 
problems are problems of accessing the resources that one needs in order to 
realize their life-​capacities in meaningful and life-​valuable ways. Hence ethical 
problems are really practical problems of social organization and not the puz­
zles that some philosophers like to spend their time-​solving.
However, because human beings live together on a planet with limited 
resources there is an added question for materialist ethics. Ethical questions 
not only concern the good life for each person considered as a separate indi­
vidual, but they also concern the impact, now and in the future, of the separate 
and cumulative implications of living out the choices that we make. Again, 
choice is not an abstract capacity of individuals considered as separate entities 
it is rather a concrete capacity to choose between real, socially concrete, alter­
natives. The reality of alternatives is again determined by one’s social position. 
Where social priorities are not aligned with the limitations that define mortal, 
dependent, and interdependent human lives, the cumulative, social effects of 
individual choices can be life-​destructive. No individual intends to contribute 
to the destruction of the conditions of life, but the unintended effects playing 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

90
Noonan
out over time can do just. This general danger is exacerbated in social systems 
whose values subordinate conscious contribution to healthy lives and sustain­
able environments to money and the power of ruling classes. Capitalist society 
demands the maximization of money-​value, which requires the exploitation 
of natural resources, animals and plants, and human labor, and which imposes 
conditions of life on the majority of people that deprive them of that which 
they need to live full, free, meaningful lives. In McMurtry’s terms, capitalism, 
and other exploitative societies, are “life-​incoherentˮ (McMurtry, 2011, 184). 
That is, their ruling value system and the patterns of life they impose upon 
people are cumulatively destructive of the conditions of good lives.
The covid-​19 crisis has underlined the truth of this argument in two ways. 
First, the lockdowns and shutdowns it imposed (and in some areas is still 
requiring) on normal economic activity underscored their unsustainability. 
covid-​19 most likely leaped from bats to humans. The leap was not moti­
vated by any animosity that bats might harbor towards humans, but because 
the demand for economic growth drives the geographical proliferation of 
human society. From this side, covid-​19 allows us to see clearly the deep con­
tradictions of capitalist society. It exploits nature, destroys the life conditions 
of other living things, and harms the ecological balance upon which all life 
depends. Socially, it exploits labor and puts older forms of oppressive hierar­
chy to work for its purposes. At the deepest level, it is indifferent to life. It trots 
out slogans like “we are all in this togetherˮ to distract from these contradic­
tions. covid-​19 was not an equal opportunity killer. Mortality rates track class, 
race, sex, and age differences. All human beings are shaped by the same types 
of natural and social needs, but the actual goods and services that we require 
can differ. Capitalism responds to these concrete differences with a one size 
fits all policy: if you can pay, buy what you want. But if you cannot pay, you will 
take what we give you. For the most oppressed, that which was offered was far 
short of what was required. Poorer nations struggle to vaccinate their citizens 
even as the Delta variant rages while richer countries hoard vaccines. covid-​
19 simply highlighted what was already apparent about the social disease of 
unmet needs.
However, there is a (potentially) positive side to this otherwise negative 
exposure of capitalism’s social realities. On the one hand, the pause it imposed 
on the normal rhythms of the capitalist economy forced governments to inter­
vene in ways which, even if for a moment, offered a glimpse of an alternative 
form of social and economic life. The rapid development of multiple vaccines 
and their efficient roll-​out (with the qualifications noted above) have demon­
strated the life-​affirmative potential of science and the cooperative heart of 
human social life. However, I do not want to focus on the different policy 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Lockdowns and Living Well
91
responses of different government or their connection to practical alternatives 
to capitalism. Rather, I want to focus on the way in which the imposed paus 
created a space for deeper ethical reflection on the purposes, priorities, and 
ultimate values of human social life.
Every confrontation with mortality is an invitation to such reflection. Life 
cannot be properly valued unless we reflect on its meaning and value, and we 
cannot reflect on its meaning and value if we are simply mechanically exe­
cuting prescribed routines. covid-​19 forced us out of those routines, and phi­
losophers have a duty to encourage everyone to seize this occasion to reflect 
upon whether the competitive, high-​consumption lifestyle that purportedly 
embodies the highest good for human beings really is good or whether it actu­
ally masks what is most valuable about human life.
The most difficult challenge to people that the lockdown strategy posed was 
how to survive social isolation. As painful as it was (is) to be forced to primarily 
stay indoors and do our best to connect virtually (if we had the means of virtual 
connection available to us), it also taught us a most valuable lesson. Humans 
learn through reflection in contrasting experiences. One does not normally 
pay attention to the joy of breathing until one holds one breath underwater 
for too long. We do not value ordinary, everyday social interaction until we are 
enjoined to not leave our house. Art and poetry tend to celebrate the extraordi­
nary: all-​consuming passion and love, or all-​destroying failure to achieve it. But 
most of our connections with people are mundane and, in the normal course 
of events, treated as meaningless.
Yet through this myriad, often anonymous interactions, our human world 
is built. Total alienation from these interactions can help us understand how 
meaning can be created in life. Too often “meaningˮ is treated as some Saul-​on-​
the-​road-​to-​Damascus, like an epiphany: something drastic happens to make 
us see how it all makes sense. covid-​19 stopped us in our tracks just as God 
stopped Saul in his tracks, but I think that the most profound lesson it teaches 
about the meaning of life is that most of what makes life valuable lies in every 
day and in the unnoticed. We do not have to undergo a world-​shattering trans­
formation to live a meaningful life, we have to be valued, and value ourselves, 
as contributors to the survival, development, and ethical improvement of our 
collective and individual selves. covid-​19 suddenly made us realize that as 
profound and incomprehensible as the works of our greatest artists and scien­
tists might be, our lives depend as much on far more humble labor.
I live three blocks away from the busiest commercial border crossing in 
North America: the Ambassador Bridge that connects Windsor, Ontario, and 
Detroit, Michigan. Normally it is bumper-​to-​bumper truck traffic, 24/​7. At the 
end of March 2020, the Canadian and American governments closed the border 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

92
Noonan
to all but essential travel. For three weeks there were almost no trucks, as the 
North American economy ground to halt. To see an empty bridge was incom­
prehensibly strange, but it also woke people up from their ignorant slumbers. 
Suddenly everyone realized just how dependent the goods we depend upon 
were in turn dependent upon the labor of truckers, normally objects of disdain 
because of their traffic slowing rigs. In a single unexpected moment, every­
one was aware of how much of their health care depended upon underpaid, 
mostly immigrant women care workers. I could multiply examples, but my 
point should be clear: these workers and millions more like them around the 
world, are the connective tissue that links human beings together and enables 
all of the higher pursuits of life.
My point is not to contrast this material labor to “spiritualˮ labor as lower to 
higher or necessary free. Rather, my point is that for human beings, the spiri­
tual lie in the material contribution to others’ well-​being. These material con­
tributions are also spiritual because they are the source of such meaning as 
there is in human life. We need meaning every bit as much as we need oxygen 
because we are self-​conscious, vulnerable, and mortal beings. That is, we know 
that life can be better or worse and that it is going to end for each of us as mor­
tal individuals. Its finitude, therefore, puts a premium on making sense of why 
it matters today if tomorrow it might end. Its finitude explains the tragedy of 
irredeemable suffering but also motivates us to work together to overcome the 
causes of that suffering. Oftentimes we simply move mechanically through life, 
but when these ordinary rhythms crash into a wall like covid-​19, the survivors 
are thrown back upon ourselves to ask: “what really matters in life?ˮ
From my perspective, the covid-​19 crisis proves that what makes life mean­
ingful is having the chance to contribute to others’ well-​being, and beyond 
that, to sensuously enjoy our relationships with the world and other people. 
Even though those who had access to the technology could connect remotely, 
the risky abandon with which people have embraced the chance to get back 
together in real space proves that human sociality is not simply an artifact of 
our evolution, it is our deepest felt “spiritual needˮ. Without mutually affirma­
tive connection with other people across a range of practices (work, family, 
friendship, sexuality) life ceases to matter. When life matters, we commit our­
selves to it; when it ceases to matter, we commit suicide.
The problem of the meaning of life, like the problem of the good life, is not 
a problem for abstract speculation, it is problem that demands social action. 
The good life depends upon the quality of our connections with the natural 
world, with other people, and the ranges of activity and experience we are 
able to enjoy. Imposed isolation exposes the folly of believing that each indi­
vidual is only in it for themselves and the essential importance of freely giving 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Lockdowns and Living Well
93
ourselves over to building relationships that make our lives meaningful by 
making others’ lives better. If any good comes out of the pandemic, it will be 
that people develop a deeper understanding of the ways in which the high-​
energy, high-​consumption, high-​competition drives of global capitalism ruin 
our relationships with each other and the natural world. Despite its shop­
ping mall hedonism, capitalism ruins sensuously enjoyable relationships and 
drains the life of purpose and meaning.
	
References
McMurtry, John (1998), Unequal Freedoms: The Global Market as an Ethical System, 
Toronto: Garamond.
McMurtry, John (2011), Philosophy and World Problems, Vol. 1, Oxford: eolss Publishers.
Noonan, Jeff (2011), Materialist Ethics and Life-​Value, Montreal: McGill-​Queen’s 
University Press.
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Neal DeRoo, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_012
­chapter 10
Spirituality and the Role of Religion in the 
Contemporary Pandemic
Neal DeRoo
We live, as Charles Taylor has so famously articulated, in a “secular ageˮ. What 
role, then, can religion or the divine play in response to social and communal 
crises, such as that brought on by the Coronavirus pandemic? This depends in 
large part on how we understand religion, the divine, and the relation between 
them. My claim here will be that the pandemic has further highlighted what 
I might call the secular1 benefits of religion (Section 1). But this has not been 
accompanied by any widespread affirmation of the divine as a super empir­
ical2 reality.3 As such, religion may have a societal role to play (for example, 
in public health), but there is no necessary role to play for the divine. This 
distinction —​ between religion and the divine —​ strikes me as a sound and 
important distinction, but one that requires further exploration if we are to 
fully appreciate the function of religion in society. Introducing the concept of 
spirituality (section 2) will, I argue, help us see a new function for religion in 
response to the pandemic: uncovering and articulating our basic orientation 
in the world (Section 3).
	1	 I use “secularˮ in quotation marks, as the term is itself contestable and often ambiguously 
used. I am using it mainly in the sense of that which does not require the affirmation of the 
existence of realities beyond the world (cf. Taylor (2007), A Secular Age), that is, does not 
require belief in “superempirical” realities. This is different from its use to indicate a belief 
system that denies the existence of such realities and/​or practice of denying the legitimacy 
of any “religious” beliefs, practices, institutions, etc.
	2	 I use the term “superempiricalˮ here for it is more inclusive than something like “the divineˮ. 
Many streams of Buddhism, for example, have no affirmation of anything divine, though 
they do maintain a conception of something that is true beyond the empirical world. For 
more on the term “superempirical” and its relationship to contemporary definitions of reli­
gion, cf. Schilbrack, 2013.
	3	 In a recent survey from the Pew Research Center, 24% of Americans polled said their reli­
gious faith has become stronger as a result of the pandemic—​but the vast majority of those 
people were already religious, to begin with. There is little evidence that people who were 
previously not religious have become religious as a result of the pandemic (prc, 2020).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Spirituality and the Role of Religion IN THE PANDEMIC
95
1	
The “Secularˮ Benefits of Religion
We begin, then, by highlighting the most obvious role that religion has played 
in response to the crisis. This role is most obvious insofar as it is largely secular, 
and therefore available for anyone to see, regardless of their own beliefs about 
“superempiricalˮ reality. That there is a secular element to religion should not 
surprise us. The ritual and material practices and phenomena that play a large 
part in religion, as highlighted in the recent material turn in religious stud­
ies,4 are examples of such secular elements insofar as they can be affirmed by 
all people, regardless of religious beliefs or affiliations: everyone, for example, 
can acknowledge that Christians eat bread and drink wine as part of a certain 
religious ritual known variously as Mass, the Eucharist, the Lord’s Supper, or 
Communion, just as everyone can acknowledge that there is a system of beliefs 
and rituals that constitutes each of the various religious traditions (even if 
some people might disagree about the truth of some of those beliefs, or about 
which of the beliefs or rituals are essential to which religious tradition). At 
least part of what is going on in religion, then, is a series of things that people 
do (believe, perform, enact, participate in, etc.) in particular ways as part of 
particular socio-​historical institutions and/​or communities.
Increasingly we seem to find an affirmation of the benefits of these secular 
elements of religion. The physical and psychological benefits of meditation, 
contemplative prayer, or other spiritual disciplines, for example, are touted 
across the internet,5 and public health researchers are noticing.6 Even institu­
tions of higher learning are coming to see that such practices can help reduce 
anxiety and promote mental health.7 Similarly, the importance of religious 
communities in helping individuals combat social isolation and feel a sense 
of communal belonging is increasingly being both recognized and affirmed 
as a good in and of itself.8 In short, people are beginning to see that practicing 
religion may have benefits, whether or not someone thinks religion is true.
This, in turn, suggests a shift in how religion functions in society. Traditionally, 
religion was thought to function as the philosophical or intellectual bedrock 
	4	 Cf. Schilbrack, 2019.
	5	 A few examples: Thorpe, 2017; “Meditation: A simple, fast way to reduce stress” in Mayo 
Clinic, 2020; “The Importance and Benefits of Contemplative Practice”, in Rupert’s Land 
News, 2017.
	6	 An important summary of the research on this topic can be found in Koening, 2015.
	7	 For example see Idler, 2008.
	8	 Cf. Putnam & Campbell, 2010, especially Chapter 13 “Religion and Good Neighborliness”; 
Freeborne, 2019.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

96
DeRoo
or foundation of moral positions and notions of the social order.9 But with 
the emerging realization of the individual and social benefits of participat­
ing in certain religious communities and/​or practices, a new role for religion 
emerges, in the area of public health rather than political or moral justifica­
tion. It is not inconceivable, therefore, to imagine public figures in the future 
touting the benefits of prayer or attending communal worship services, though 
we might expect those figures to be Chief Medical Officers or mental health 
advocates rather than politicians stumping for a vote.
2	
Spirituality: On the Relation between Religion and the Divine
Affirming the secular benefits of religion, however, can easily unmoor religion 
from a connection to the superempirical. It is easy, for example, to simply write 
off all of religion as a strictly human endeavor and sunder it entirely from any 
relation to superempirical reality. This seems to be the position both of the 
“New Atheistsˮ (for whom religion is only a human matter since there is nothing 
superempirical) and of many who self-​identify as “spiritual but not religiousˮ 
(who affirm the superempirical but deny any necessary relation between it and 
religion). Yet this seems counter-​intuitive: if we fully cut the tie between reli­
gion and the superempirical, we seem to lose the common sense intuition that 
things pertaining to the superempirical are religious in some way, and things 
pertaining to religion necessarily make some appeal to the superempirical.10
To avoid this over-​separation of religion and the superempirical, we must 
wonder whether there isn’t some way for the superempirical to be at work in 
religion. One popular way of doing so runs counter to precisely the affirmation 
of the human element of religion that we have been discussing to this point. 
For we could explain the relationship between religion and the superempirical 
simply by conflating all of religion as the work of a divine or superempirical 
being like God. On such an understanding of religion (one that, it must be 
noted, is not likely to be recognized by most people who would self-​identify as 
	9	
This is most obvious in the rise of the “Moral Majority” and the “Religious Right” as polit­
ical forces in the United States (and, to a lesser extent, in Canada) beginning in the 1980s, 
though the presence of religious language in the preamble to foundational political docu­
ments (e.g., the American constitution, the Canadian charter of rights and freedoms, etc.) 
suggests the notion has been around for quite a bit longer.
	10	
The latter of which is necessary to the defining religion by its affirmation of superempiri­
cal realities.
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Spirituality and the Role of Religion IN THE PANDEMIC
97
religious),11 the distinction between, for example, Christianity and the “will/​
kingdom of Godˮ does not really appear: what the Church does is what God 
does, and vice versa. On such an understanding, any human elements seem 
to be a deviation from, or corruption of, religion that ought to be purged from 
the purest sense of religion or religious practice. Therefore the human and the 
divine elements of religion seem to be mutually exclusive: something is either 
human or it is divine (in its practice, its inspiration, its provenance, etc.), and 
calling a religious practice, belief, or institution a human or secular element 
would, on this view, make it no longer a genuine religious element.
Insofar as this leaves us unable to affirm the value of the secular elements 
of religion and their benefits, this view seems insufficient for understanding 
religion and the divine in the current age. What is needed, instead, is a notion 
of how the superempirical can be at work in human activity and experience. 
For this, I think the phenomenological understanding of spirituality could 
prove helpful. Whereas traditional notions of spirituality tend to have an oth­
erworldly and/​or immaterial focus, in phenomenology spirituality refers to the 
very meaningfulness of the world itself.12 This meaningfulness is not simply 
cognitive or linguistic but operates primarily as a pre-​theoretical orientation 
that affects our very intuition of the world itself.13 In shaping our horizons, this 
spirituality is therefore operative in any and every engagement we have with 
the world. It is not simply the product of the subject but is found within the 
material conditions of the world itself, a world that gives itself to us primarily 
as meaningful. Indeed, the very notion of the lifeworld that is so important to 
much of phenomenology from Husserl’s later period onward is premised on 
something like this account of spirituality: the world we encounter is not just 
“raw stuffˮ but always already a world that is shot through with the meaning, 
vestiges, or traces of the living beings who inhabit the world.
While this meaningfulness, qua spirituality, is not simply added by the sub­
ject, neither is it simply present in the world, waiting to be read or understood 
by the subject. Rather, it is a dynamic force that constitutes and shapes sub­
jects within it in particular ways, even as it itself is also shaped by the actions 
	11	
Of course, those traditions for whom the superempirical is not a personal entity (e.g. 
Buddhism) would not think of religion as the work of the superempirical; but also in the 
Abrahamic religious traditions, there is a strong tendency to differentiate between God/​
the Creator and God’s people or God’s world/​creation.
	12	
Because of its necessary tie to materiality, spirituality is sometimes referred to in the phe­
nomenological literature in hyphenated form as the material-​spiritual (Husserl, 1952, 238/​
250; Heinämaa, 2010, 8).
	13	
Through a fleshing out of the clarifying mode of intuition; cf. Husserl, 1966, 79–​80.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

98
DeRoo
of those subjects. Spirituality shapes how subjects are able to bring the world 
to intuition and therefore shapes both their experience of the world and the 
world itself.14 Such spirituality is necessarily expressed in and through culture 
as our mode of (meaningfully) engaging with the world. That is, spirituality is 
both manifested in particular actions located within particular socio-​historical 
Stiftungen15 and is shaped or affected by one’s position in this or that particular 
Stiftung:16 I engage the world differently depending on the (spiritual) context 
I am in, and I engage in spirituality differently depending on the (cultural) 
context I am in. The relation between spirituality and socio-​cultural circum­
stances is mutually constitutive.
In phenomenology, such spirituality is, therefore, not divine or superempir­
ical in any significant sense.17 But it can, perhaps, provide us with a way of 
explaining how the divine could be operative in human experiencing: divinity 
could be operative as a force shaping people’s pre-​theoretical engagements 
with the world, rather than simply as an object of belief, adoration, or worship. 
Such a force may be expressed in and through various cultural achievements, 
and as such the relationship between the human or secular elements of reli­
gion and the divine can be articulated precisely as a relationship of expression. 
This relationship is significant for the way that it constitutes its relata from 
out of the differential nature of the expressing relationship: like the differen­
tial calculus, this expressive relationship measures the rate of change of its 
	14	
Two examples of how this shapes the material world itself: first, climate change can be 
understood as the result of a set of human actions that have altered, among other things, 
the chemical make-​up of our atmosphere. Insofar as those human actions were them­
selves driven by a particular spirituality —​ one that Michel Henry refers to as “barba­
rism”, but we could talk about simply as consumerism —​ we see here that spirituality has 
shaped the very chemical make-​up of our atmosphere. A second example would be in the 
Black Lives Matter movement, which is almost as significant a cultural event in 2020 as 
is the pandemic. Here we see that white supremacy has so shaped how black bodies are 
given to the intuition of law enforcement officials that their very presence is constituted 
as a threat authorizing lethal force in self-​defense. As a result of this spiritual situation, 
several formerly living bodies are no longer living: the material world, again, is altered as 
a result of spirituality.
	15	
For more on the significance of this term, see Merleau-​Ponty, 2010, and Vallier, 2005.
	16	
For more on this, and its relation specifically to religion, cf. DeRoo, 2020.
	17	
Though it is not simply empirical either. Rather, it operates as a (phenomenological) tran­
scendental, and as such is necessarily bound with empirical and historical circumstances 
without being wholly conflated with them; cf. Husserl’s Origin of Geometry, published 
with Derrida’s commentary in: Derrida, 1989. Derrida discusses the phenomenologi­
cal significance of this in detail in The Problem of Genesis in Husserl’s Philosophy, 2003. 
Whether this is enough to render it superempirical (in Schilbrack’s sense) is something 
that remains to be explored.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Spirituality and the Role of Religion IN THE PANDEMIC
99
relata, rather than simply fixing a stable connection between distinct identi­
ties.18 As such, claiming that spirituality is expressed in religion (and other cul­
tural achievements) is to claim that both spirituality and religion are mutually 
implicated in each other’s historical unfolding: what religion means and how 
religion develops are influenced by the spirituality that it is expressing, and 
vice versa. If the divine functions in human experiencing as spirituality19 —​ a 
claim that is left hypothetical here, for reasons of time and also perhaps for 
necessary methodological reasons20 —​ then divinity itself, at least qua phe­
nomenon,21 is altered or shaped by the religion that expresses it, even as that 
religion can be further broken down to various elements or strata of experi­
ence: the spirituality it expresses (which may or may not itself be an expres­
sion of the divine), its expression qua religion (rather than qua art, or ethics, or 
some other facet of culture),22 its expression qua religious tradition [Stiftung] 
	18	
I expand on this notion in much greater detail in The Political Logic of Experience: Expression 
in Phenomenology (Fordham University Press, 2022).
	19	
This claim is not as strange as it may seem: it is akin to understanding religion as oper­
ating as a fundamental orientation in and to the world, akin, perhaps, to a worldview; 
cf. Naugle, 2002. The Reformed tradition of Protestant Christianity, at least, has a long 
history of viewing religion this way, from the “Reformed Epistemologists” (e.g. Alvin 
Plantinga, Nicholas Wolterstorff, Kelly James Clark) in analytic philosophy of religion to 
the followers of Herman Dooyeweerd (James Olthuis, Lambert Zuidervaart, James K.A. 
Smith) in continental thought.
	20	
It is not clear whether phenomenology can decide the ontological or theological nature 
of the phenomena in question (i.e., is this the divine or something else?); rather, it can 
provide insight into how we might experience x as divine, or how we might have an expe­
rience of the divine if such a thing were to exist and be experienceable. Hence, my claim 
about spirituality here should not be read as a refusal of the possibility of the divine, but 
simply a limit of (phenomenological, but perhaps also philosophical) methodology: phe­
nomenology cannot determine the ontological or theological status of the divine, and 
perhaps philosophy cannot either. This does not preclude religious phenomenologies 
or philosophies; it merely claims that those begin from within certain (metaphysical 
or theological) assumptions that they cannot prove in a non-​circular fashion. Since we 
always begin within some hermeneutic circle or other (as Heidegger makes clear in Being 
and Time), this is not particularly problematic.
	21	
And here we can distinguish also between divinity-​in-​itself (if there is such a thing) and 
divinity-​as-​it-​manifests-​itself, a distinction that is very familiar to most religious tradi­
tions, and certainly to the Abrahamic ones, as the venerable tradition of negative theology 
in the latter attests. In other words, our experience of God may be constituted by the 
religion in and by which that experience is expressed without this necessarily meaning 
that God-​in-​itself is constituted by that experience.
	22	
For more on religion, art, ethics, and other cultural phenomena as expressions of spiritu­
ality, cf. Henry, 2012.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

100
DeRoo
(e.g., as Christianity or as Judaism or as Buddhism), and its expression in vari­
ous concrete phenomena (institutions, rituals, beliefs, objects, etc.).
There is, of course, much more to be said about how this works and, also, 
about its concrete and wide-​ranging implications.23 But for now, let this suffice 
to highlight that any particular action or phenomenon that is deemed religious 
can therefore be understood according to at least four different strata or levels 
of our experiencing of it. One of these levels (spirituality) indicates how divin­
ity could operate in and through our experience in a way that affects all levels 
of our experience without diminishing their value, though we can account 
for the spirituality (or inherent meaningfulness) of a particular phenomenon 
without having to affirm that that spirituality is necessarily an expression of 
some divinity. As such, we can differentiate the psychological or sociological 
benefits of particular religious phenomena from the role of divinity at work 
in those phenomena without losing the essentially spiritual nature of the 
phenomena itself. This enables us to affirm the human or secular elements of 
religion without requiring us to reduce all of the religion strictly to human or 
secular activity.
3	
Responding to the Pandemic
Let us now briefly conclude by discussing how the previous analysis helps us 
clarify the role or function of religion in the pandemic crisis our world is cur­
rently facing. On the one hand, it perhaps helps us better understand the role 
that religious phenomena could play in helping individuals navigate some of 
the psychological and social difficulties brought on by the pandemic. That is, 
it opens the door for all of us (religious or otherwise) to investigate and poten­
tially affirm things like the psychological and physical health benefits that 
can come from various religious practices like meditation and contemplative 
prayer or the psychological and social benefits of belonging to a religious com­
munity. Whether or not we ascribe divine activity to them, we can all poten­
tially affirm the human or secular value that religious phenomena can offer 
during these difficult times —​ a value that is, at least, psychological, sociolog­
ical, and health-​related.
On the other hand, this analysis of religion can also help us examine the 
crisis from a different perspective. Several op-​eds have emerged, for example, 
questioning whether the individualist ethos predominant in the United States 
	23	
For more on that, cf. DeRoo, 2020.
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Spirituality and the Role of Religion IN THE PANDEMIC
101
of America is sufficient to cope with a pandemic of this kind.24 Taking seri­
ously the role that spirituality (as defined in this essay) plays in our experience 
can help us better understand the depth of the problem, and open us to seeing 
a spiritual (and not simply a biological or public health) dimension to the pan­
demic. Similarly, understanding the expressive (and so mutually constitutive) 
relationship between spirituality and cultural phenomena (like religion) can 
help us better understand how such an ethos is generated and, theoretically, 
how a new ethos could begin to emerge from the old. It, therefore, provides us 
both understanding of the present and hope for the future.
Finally, understanding this expressive relationship between spirituality 
and religious phenomena can help clarify the kinds of questions we ought to 
ask of religion in light of a crisis like the pandemic. Traditional philosophy 
of religion —​ which has sometimes been little more than theology (usually 
Christian theology) in philosophical drag —​ has often sought explanations of 
how a good, powerful, and all-​knowing God could permit these kinds of trag­
edies to occur. These are, no doubt, interesting philosophical questions, but 
they may not be the most pertinent questions to someone who cannot visit 
their mother who is dying of covid-​19 or someone who fears the loss of their 
house because the business they worked for has had to shut down amidst the 
crisis.25 Rather than seeking sound philosophical bases for various theological 
or ethical positions, it is reasonable to think that such people may look to reli­
gion, instead, for a sense of comfort, peace, or hope that is not merely intellec­
tual or psychological but existential: they may want to live differently, and not 
simply think differently. Paying attention to the role that spirituality plays in 
constituting our experience, becoming aware of the spirituality at play in our 
own lives and how it expresses itself in various ways (religious and otherwise), 
and discerning how to begin to change that spirituality (if one wants to) would 
all seem important in altering our existential orientation in and to the world, 
and so to change how we live.26
My hope, then, is that this essay helps us begin to see that religion and 
the divine do not need to function simply as background explanations for 
human actions, but can instead be understood as motivating forces driving 
	24	
Cf., for example, O’Rourke, 2020; Urback, 2020; Strachan, 2020.
	25	
The pastoral limitations of theodicies as philosophical explanations of the problem of evil 
have long been recognized, even by philosophers of religion; cf. most notably McCord 
Adams, 2018. But, see also Plantinga, 1974, 63–​4; Conway, 1988, 35; and Adams, 1985, 225 
and 240.
	26	
For more on the insufficiency of thinking (philosophical, theological, or otherwise) to 
change our embodied living in the world, cf. Smith, 2016.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

102
DeRoo
our engagements with the world in profound and innumerable ways. This can 
help us see a spiritual and religious tenor to the pandemic that is neither theo­
logically apologetic (e.g., explaining how this or that understanding of God can 
remain true, in light of the pandemic) nor otherworldly and escapist (e.g., find­
ing meaning for the pandemic in some supernatural purpose or will). Rather, 
there is a meaningfulness to the pandemic and our response to it that is histori­
cal and empirical, but also transcendental and constitutive.27 Spirituality gives 
us a way of accounting for this meaningfulness, even as it enables religion to 
yield distinct benefits that can be widely affirmed without thereby secularizing 
religion to the point that it loses its meaningfulness qua religion.
Through this, we can see that religion has at least two significant roles to play 
in light of the contemporary covid-​19 crisis: to provide psychological, social, 
and physical health and comfort to individuals and communities, and to help 
better elucidate the spiritual factors at play in the crisis and our response to it.
	
Bibliography
Adams, Robert (1985), “Plantinga on the Problem of Evil”, in H. Tomberlin and P. van 
Inwagen (eds.), Alvin Plantinga, Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 225–​255.
Conway, David A. (1988), “The Philosophical Problem of Evil”, in Philosophy of Religion, 
24: 35–​66.
DeRoo, Neal (2020), “Phenomenological Spirituality and Its Relationship to Religion”, 
in Forum Philosophicum 25:1, 53–​70.
Derrida, Jacques (1989), Edmund Husserl’s Origin of Geometry: An Introduction, trans. 
John P. Leavey, Nebraska University Press.
Derrida, Jacques (2003), The Problem of Genesis in Husserl’s Philosophy, trans. Marian 
Hobson, University of Chicago Press.
Freeborne, Nancy (2019), “The Health Benefits of Congregational Life”, in Psychology 
Today, April 26. https://​www.psyc​holo​gyto​day.com/​us/​blog/​the-​power-​commun​
ity/​201​904/​the-​hea​lth-​benef​its-​con​greg​atio​nal-​life (accessed, 20 July, 2021).
Heinämaa, 
Sara 
(2010), 
“Embodiment 
and 
Expressivity 
in 
Husserl’s 
Phenomenology: From Logical Investigations to Cartesian Meditations”, in 
sats: Northern European Journal of Philosophy, 11: 1–​15.
Henry, Michel (2012), Barbarism, trans. Scott Davidson, London: Continuum.
	27	
Put simply, one could read the crisis as happening, in part, because of the consumerist 
spirituality that drives our mode of living in the west. This consumerist spirituality is nei­
ther a series of theological dictums nor a moral failing, but a dynamic force that shapes 
how we intuit the world.
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Spirituality and the Role of Religion IN THE PANDEMIC
103
Husserl, Edmund (1952), “Ideen zu einer Reinen Phänomenologie und Phänomenolo­
gischen Philosophie, Zweites Buch: Phänomenologische Untersuchungen zur 
Konstitution”, Husserliana Band 4. Edited by M. Biemel, The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff.
Husserl, Edmund (1966), “Analyzen zur passiven Synthesis: Aus Vorlesungs-​ und 
Forschungsmanuskripten 1918–​1926”, Husserliana Band 11. Edited by M. Fleischer, 
The Hague: MartinusNijhoff.
Idler, Ellen (2008), “The Psychological and Physical Benefits of Spiritual/​ Religious 
Practices”, in Spirituality in Higher Education Newsletter 4:2, 1–​5.
Koenig, Harold G. (2015), “Religion, Spirituality, and Health: a Review and Update”, in 
Advances in Mind-​Body Medicine 29:3, 19–​26.
Mayo Clinic (2020), “Meditation: A Simple, Fast Way to Reduce Stress”, April 22. 
https://​www.may​ocli​nic.org/​tests-​pro​cedu​res/​med​itat​ion/​in-​depth/meditation/​
art-​20045858 (accessed, 20 July 2021).
McCord Adams, Marilyn (2018), Horrendous Evils and the Goodness of God, Cornell 
University Press.
Merleau-​Ponty, Maurice (2010), Institution and Passivity: Course Notes from the Collège 
de France (1954–​1955), trans. Leonard Lawlor and Heath Massey, Northwestern 
University Press.
Naugle, David (2002), Worldview: The History of a Concept, Grand Rapids: Eerdmans.
O’Rourke, Meghan (2020), “The Shift America Must Make to Fight the Coronavirus”, 
in The Atlantic, March 12. https://​www.thea​tlan​tic.com/​ideas/archive/​2020/​03/​
we-​need-​isolate-​ourselves-​during-​coronavirus-​outbreak/607840/​ (accessed, 20 
July 2021).
Pew Research Center (prc) (2020), “Few Americans Say Their House of Worship is 
Open, But a Quarter Say Their Faith has Grown Amid Pandemic”, April 30. https://​
www.pewr​esea​rch.org/​fact-​tank/​2020/​04/​30/​few-​americ​ans-​say-​their-​house-​of 
-​wors​hip-​is-​open-​but-​a-​quar​ter-​say-​their-​religi​ous-​faith-​has-​grown-​amid-​pande​
mic/​ (accessed, 20 July 2021).
Plantinga, Alvin (1974), God, Freedom, and Evil, New York: Harper and Row.
Putnam, Robert D., and David E. Campbell (2010), American Grace: How Religion 
Divides and Unites Us, New York: Simon and Schuster.
Rupert’s Land News (2017), “The Importance and Benefits of Contemplative Practice”, 
April 14. http://​rupe​rtsl​andn​ews.ca/​the-​imp​orta​nce-​and-​benef​its-​of-​contem​plat​
ive-​pract​ice (accessed, 20 July 2021).
Schilbrack, Kevin (2013), “What isn’t Religion?”, in The Journal of Religion 93:3, 291–​318. 
https://​doi.org/​10.1086/​670​276 (accessed, 20 July 2021).
Schilbrack, Kevin (2019), “The Material Turn in the Academic Study of Religions”, in 
The Journal of Religion, 99:2: 219–​227.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

104
DeRoo
Smith, James K.A. (2016), You are What You Love: The Spiritual Power of Habit, Grand 
Rapids: Brazos.
Strachan, Maxwell (2020), “The American Ethos of Personal Responsibility is Failing 
Us”, in Vice, March 18. https://​www.vice.com/​en_​us/​arti​cle/​v74​jz4/​ the-​american 
-​ethos-​of-​personal-​responsibility-​is-​failing-​us (accessed, 20 July 2021).
Taylor, Charles (2007), A Secular Age, Harvard University Press.
Thorpe, Matthew (2017), “12 Science-​Based Benefits of Meditation”, in Healthline, July 
5. https://​www.hea​lthl​ine.com/​nutrit​ion/​12-​benef​its-​of-​med​itat​ion (accessed, 20 
July 2021).
Urback, Robyn (2020), “A Culture of Rugged Individualism is Great, Except When You 
are Fighting a Pandemic”, in Globe and Mail, July 17. https://​ www.theg​lobe​andm​
ail.com/​opin​ion/​arti​cle-​a-​cult​ure-​of-​rug​ged-​indivi​dual​ism-​is-​great-​exc​ept-​when 
-​youre/​ (accessed, 20 July 2021).
Vallier, Robert (2005), “Institution: The Significance of Merleau-​Ponty’s 1954 Course at 
the Collège de France”, in Chiasmi International 7: 281–​302.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© David Weberman, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_013
­chapter 11
The Consequences of the Pandemic for Our Lives 
and for Philosophical Anthropology
David Weberman
The year 2020 will certainly be remembered as the year of the Coronavirus 
pandemic. It has doubtless become a global crisis endangering millions of 
lives and livelihoods. Even worse, it is not a self-​contained crisis, and this is 
for two reasons. First, virologists tell us it may well be a harbinger of our vul­
nerability to more pandemics yet to come. Second, this crisis can interact with 
other kinds of crises we are already undergoing or that we may soon begin to 
undergo. I have in mind here: serious economic crises of financial instability, 
wealth inequality, and unemployment or underemployment; political crises of 
the functioning of and trust in our governmental institutions and electoral pro­
cesses; social crises of instability, fragmentation, intolerance, and exclusion; 
and, of course, ecological crises of climate change and other grave ills of the 
Anthropocene age. Complexity theorists tell us that collapse can result from 
the interactions between systems with tipping points that can bring about a 
domino effect. Thus, the consequences of lockdowns or climate dislocations 
causing unemployment causing social unrest causing political instability, and 
all of this looping back on itself. One can’t help but wonder with trepidation 
what the next two decades might look like.
The word crisis comes from the Greek root to judge or separate or decide. 
Edmund Husserl, writing in the years 1934–​1937, about a different crisis, the 
crisis of the European sciences, but more widely he says about, European cul­
ture and mankind, argues that that crisis puts us at a moment of judgment or 
decision between “downfallˮ and “estrangementˮ on the one hand and a kind 
of “rebirth“ on the other (Husserl, 1970, 299). Perhaps our predicament and our 
crises force on us today some decisions and perhaps will make some good ones.
In this essay, I will first make some general remarks about the nature of the 
crisis and what the discipline of philosophy might say about it. Then I will 
develop the idea that the crisis and its consequences force on us a reconsider­
ation of philosophical anthropology, i.e. the question of what it is to be human, 
and even open the door to rethinking normative and prudential adjustments 
in how best to live our lives.
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

106
Weberman
1	
The Coronavirus Pandemic and the Discipline of Philosophy
Do philosophers have much to contribute to our understanding of the current 
Coronavirus pandemic and its consequences? Can they learn something from 
this cataclysm? Regarding contribution: philosophers as well-​educated, think­
ing, public intellectuals should be as able as others to shed some light on these 
issues, particularly with regard to their role in clarifying the relevant concepts 
and values. I look forward to reading the other essays in this collection and 
other philosophical interventions to come. As for learning from the events: I 
think there is real potential here too. It seems to me we might learn not so 
much from the disease and its spread itself as from the consequences. In what 
follows I’d like to venture some thoughts about what we can learn from social 
distancing and lockdown conditions, from the state of being “cabined, cribbed 
and confinedˮ even if not always “bound into saucy doubts and fearsˮ.1
There is of course the very grim experience of death, disease, and jobless­
ness. Many of us are privileged to have so far escaped these enabling us to 
direct our attention to other aspects and effects of the corona pandemic. The 
experience of being confined and curtailed in the way we now are is something 
very new. It is something we as individuals experience and observe about our­
selves and those we know. It is something that can be observed at the level of 
groups and populations. It is not always immediately clear how we are expe­
riencing it, what is going on, what impact it has on our feelings and behavior. 
Yet something seems to be happening and certain shifts have occurred, some 
of which may last well into the future. It seems to me that it is particularly 
novel due to its coming after a revolution in digital technologies from the tele­
phone and television of the last century to this century’s internet, social media, 
and zoom boom. These technologies give us alternatives that we did not use 
to have and which may no longer be rightly regarded as alternatives if they 
become the default settings of the way we think and operate. They also might 
teach us something about the way we always are but have not yet noticed.
2	
The Pandemic and Its Implications for Philosophical Anthropology
First, a bit of background: In Being and Time (1996), Martin Heidegger’s express 
purpose is to reawaken and further the question of being, what it is for any­
thing at all to be. The necessary starting point, he argues, is what he calls the 
	1	 From Shakespeare’s Macbeth (2005, 59).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

The Consequences of the Pandemic
107
analytic of Dasein, which is what we human beings are.2 This analysis identi­
fies the core features of being human –​ the features that make possible and 
structure existence as we know it. Of course, biological and physical features 
also make possible and structure our existence but Heidegger is not concerned 
with these (they are contingent), but only with those features which are not 
only universal but necessary and, as necessary, constitutive of what we are. 
He calls these features existentialia. They include being being-​towards-​death 
(Sein-​zum-​Tode), being social (Mitdasein), being goal-​directed (Sich-​vorweg-​
sein), always having a mood or emotional state (Befindlichkeit), making sense 
of the world and its things in terms of managing our lives practically (Verstehen 
and Auslegung), having a capacity for language, being historical, among other. 
These existentialia govern and structure our existence, as mentioned, though 
they do so in ways that can differ from one person to the next and one cul­
ture to another. These different ways of exemplifying the constitutive features 
Heidegger calls existentiell modes of the existentialia. He provides interesting 
discussions of the more particular existentiell exemplifications. Some of these 
exemplifications take the form of denials of or obliviousness to the existen­
tialia they exemplify –​ which Heidegger calls deficient modes. There are two 
things to bear in mind here. First, in his more modest moments (which for 
Heidegger are rare), he acknowledges that his analytic of Dasein is provisional 
and revisable, as when he says that its formulation is “ontically rootedˮ, mean­
ing that is based on a particular historical and personal set of observations. 
Second, it is certainly incomplete. It has little or nothing to say about embod­
iedness, gender, sexuality, or even humor, the capacity to laugh at ourselves, all 
of which to be core features of being what we are and existence as we know it 
(even if some of them might not be features that are necessary enabling condi­
tions for an understanding of being). The analytic of Dasein really amounts to 
a kind of philosophical anthropology, something that most philosophers have 
not regarded as important or possible.3
Now, is there any interesting relation between the pandemic and philosoph­
ical anthropology (in this sense)? To me, the answer seems to be: no and yes. 
More specifically, no on the subject of the disease and death itself; yes, on the 
subject of the changes in our lives we need to get used to in order to prevent 
the spread of the disease.
	2	 Dasein and human beings are not identical terms. Dasein could apply to other species if they 
turn out to fit Heidegger’s description. Still, Dasein certainly applies to all functioning human 
beings.
	3	 For a sustained argument that the analysis of Dasein amounts to viable philosophical anthro­
pology, see Cartlidge, 2021.
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

108
Weberman
First, let me explain the negative part. As devastating as the disease itself is, 
with over a million deaths as I write, and as much as virology and public health 
has to teach and learn about the disease, philosophy has, as far as I can see, 
nothing to teach or learn here. There have been viral epidemics and pandem­
ics in the past and whatever philosophy has to learn and teach about infec­
tious disease and death, it had this to learn and teach in the past, and there is 
nothing new about this pandemic that goes beyond what was already there. 
Perhaps, we can re-​teach and re-​learn and re-​consider but doing so is really 
just more of the same. For example, Heidegger’s main point in his chapter on 
being-​towards-​death –​ that my own death is something present for every one 
of us within our live existence and that it requires of every one of us some sort 
of reckoning, even and especially when it is pushed to the side –​ this point is 
unchanged by the Coronavirus and applying it to the Coronavirus is no dif­
ferent from applying it to any threat to our lives. My negative answer is rather 
deflationary and may be short-​sighted, but maybe it is enough to say that the 
value of philosophy in this regard is no more but no less than it has always been.
Second, my positive answer: I think it is the consequences of the Coronavirus 
that present something genuinely new, namely, the consequences of having to 
live differently, in the short and long term, so as to save lives, especially in con­
ditions of more advanced technologies, in particular, digital communication 
technologies. I single out here two aspects of philosophical anthropology.
Spatiality: In his analysis of Dasein, Heidegger includes spatiality as one of 
the existentialia. He does not mean physical or geometrical measurable space 
but space as we experience it. This notion of space, for Heidegger, makes possi­
ble so-​called objective space and makes possible existence as we know it. This 
kind of space depends upon one having a particular location and other things 
having a relation to that location. It also depends on one’s having particular 
abilities and goals according to which things can have a particular spatial rela­
tion to ourselves of being near or far or having a place to which they belong or 
from which other things can be gathered. Nearness or farness is not so much 
a matter of measuring distances but of taking into account what is accessible 
and what is less so. Thus, what is in front of us is nearer than what is behind us 
because we can see it immediately and touch or grasp it more easily.
In the new world of the internet and zoom chats and classes, spatiality, in 
the Heideggerian sense, is very much part of our lives, but the experience of 
space is now of a virtual space. One might be inclined to say that virtual space 
(like mental space) is not really space at all, but just a metaphorical shortcut. 
But this objection seems implausible in light of the fact that nearness, farness, 
and place are still coherent terms when it comes to virtual space. So, virtual 
space (and maybe mental space as well) is more than just a metaphorical 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

The Consequences of the Pandemic
109
convenience. Virtual space is real. Of course, virtual space pre-​dates by a cou­
ple of decades at least the 2020 pandemic. But I mention it here because 2020 
has, I think, meant that we are living suddenly much more intensively in vir­
tual space than ever before. Many of us now do most of our work (teaching, 
meeting students and colleagues, and signing documents) in virtual space. 
Some proportion of socializing now is also carried out there. We need to think 
more about this phenomenon. Heidegger’s discussion offers some metrics for 
examining the spatiality of virtual space. Conversely, observing our experience 
will allow us to expand the structure Heidegger identified in ways he could not 
have foreseen. Its intensification under the virus will bring us there.
Being-​with-​others: This is Heidegger’s term (Mit-​sein, Mitdasein) for the fact 
that our existence is such that we find ourselves in a world with others like 
ourselves, that is other Daseins structured by the same conditions as we are. 
For Heidegger, this is how things are immediately given; we do not need to 
prove, or even infer, the existence of others like ourselves. Heidegger has a 
number of things to say about being-​with-​others. On the one hand, it opens 
communicative channels through which the world can be made intelligible, 
for example, through learning a public language and becoming acculturated. 
(I take the liberty here of drifting away from Heidegger’s own vocabulary). On 
the other hand, the ease by which we take on the habits of the public and 
the pressure to do so means that we can easily lose our own individuality and 
become inauthentic. Heidegger speaks of the inevitable impulse to compare 
ourselves to others, wanting not to be behind or inferior, wanting not to stick 
out too much or blend in too much. Yet there are two aspects of being-​with-​
others that Heidegger does not include. Being-​with-​others means depending 
on them to cooperate for mutual (or one-​sided) benefit in reaching certain 
ends or goals and in protecting ourselves from others who may represent a 
threat to our survival or prospering, whether that threat is intentional or not. 
Call this aspect of our being-​with-​others the harm/​benefit aspect. The second 
aspect I want to point to is that others provide us company or companionship, 
whether close or quite casual. Most of us need this to some degree, a few might 
not. Let me call this aspect sociability (the German, Geselligkeit, conveys the 
associations best). This year, 2020, has brought about a sudden shift in these 
two aspects and a heightened consciousness of just how we live them out. We 
now avoid closeness to others, see them as potential threats, knowing all the 
while that we depend on them. As for sociability, we are getting to know our­
selves better. Are you becoming or have you always been claustrophile (a new 
word worth remembering now)? Or are you -​ like many others more and more, 
according to some accounts -​ suffering from life-​debilitating loneliness? Can 
our sociability be satisfied by those with whom we live? Will the very ideas 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

110
Weberman
of what is private and what is public shift or get blurry? Our new lockdown 
and social distancing experiences are putting these questions to the test. Once 
again, philosophical anthropology can learn from this new phenomenon and 
the study of philosophical anthropology can, in turn, help us better observe 
that same phenomenon.
We are just beginning with all of this. We do not yet know where it is leading. 
Self-​examination will most likely move in unforeseen directions. It won’t save 
lives through a medical cure, but it may provide therapies and useful behav­
ioral and attitudinal advice of some importance.
	
Bibliography
Cartlidge, James (2021), Interpreting and Developing Heidegger’s Analysis of Dasein as 
Philosophical Anthropology, PhD. diss., Central European University.
Heidegger, Martin (1996), Being and Time, State University of New York.
Husserl, Edmund (1970), “The Vienna Lecture: Philosophy and the Crisis of European 
Humanity”, in The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology, 
Translated by David Carr, Northwestern University Press.
Shakespeare, William (2005), Macbeth, Webster’s German Thesaurus Edition, San 
Diego: icon.
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Pegah Mossleh, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_014
­chapter 12
Corona Phenomenon, the Gateway to the Era 
of Post-reactionary-Criticism
Pegah Mossleh
Many people around the world woke up every morning, washed their hands 
with soap, brushed their teeth, took some foods out of the refrigerator for 
breakfast –​ pasteurized milk probably had an important place on their table –​ 
then they put on their clothes, which had been washed with detergents, and 
went to work. So far, this set of actions were full-​scale warfare, or, to be more 
precise, a sound defensive struggle against the relentless invasion of the 
old and perhaps main inhabitants of the planet Earth, which constitute an 
important and indispensable part of the natural world and the environment. 
It is conceivable that few people at the time noticed that soap, toothbrushes, 
refrigerators, detergents, and the action of washing and pasteurizing were all 
warfare tools and actions, and in particular, it should be emphasized that they 
were/​ are defensive. All of us –​ the true we whose nature has been painfully 
more clarified by the current pan-​demic –​ are constantly under attack by 
countless natural beings that threaten our entire being. Today and in recent 
decades, most people were even born because of such a battle. The parents, 
the community health system, and the medical team of the hospital start a 
proxy war before the birth of each of us, and this is just apart from the war that 
takes place endlessly inside the mother’s body and then inside the fetus’ body, 
to prepare the ground for the birth of every new human being. Most of us had 
forgotten that the history of this warfare goes back to an indefinite time in the 
history of the planet and Edward Jenner, Louis Pasteur, Alexandre Yersin, and 
Alexander Fleming were, in fact, the intelligent and determined fighters to 
whom we owe our lives. At the same time, we should not ignore the fact that 
their mentality was part of the realization of the idea of modern subjectivity. 
Those scientists/​ fighters were in fact the successors of modern thinkers (such 
as Francis Bacon) who in postmodern critical thinking have been more uni­
laterally criticized or even rebuked.1 With this introduction, I intend to devote 
	1	 In the case of Francis Bacon, for example, some scholars have noted that Bacon’s ideas were 
“savagelyˮ criticized in the nineteenth century (Agassi, 2013, 8).
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

112
Mossleh
this article to the discussion on the necessity of rethinking subjectivity, which 
was a very important and key theme of philosophy throughout the twenti­
eth century and which is still quite current and problematic, in the light of 
the Corona Phenomenon. However, since it is the nature of subjectivity to 
be connected with many other things, and any discussion about subjectivity 
requires engaging in interdisciplinary topics, during the development of the 
main theme of the article, some other questions of the project will also be 
addressed.
My purpose in this article is neither to defend the Cartesian subject against 
the profound philosophical critiques of more than a century nor, on the other 
hand, to acknowledge those who formulated the death of the subject in an 
extreme way. Even today, in the face of the corona phenomenon, it seems that 
for some writers the simplest reaction is to blame modern philosophy, espe­
cially modern subject and science and technology, for all the problems. This 
has become a simple way to stand in a risk-​free position without offering a 
positive solution. It is as if they themselves do not use science and technology 
in all moments and affairs of their lives and it seems to have been forgotten 
that the most terrible pandemic of the last thousand years, the plague called 
the Black Death, occurred at the end of the fourteenth century and before the 
dawn of modern philosophy, science, and technology. It is time for critics of 
extremist scientism, technologicalism, unbridled capitalism, and arrogant 
anthropocentrism to separate their way from reactionary thinking against sci­
ence and technology, and also from anti-​subjectivity extremism. The current 
pandemic has shown that all those who blame science and technology, and 
opponents of humanism and subjectivity-​based agency, in a state of fear and 
hope around the clock are waiting for the vaccine to be made, have their eyes 
on the hands of scientists whose work is entirely based on science and technol­
ogy, and most importantly, on the idea of subjectivity and the mission that the 
founders of modern science had in mind for the human subject. The Corona 
Phenomenon may become the gateway to an age that can be called the era 
of Post-reactionary-Criticism and Post-​extremist Antisubjectivity. That period is 
over that any idea of subjectivity was rejected in the name of the critique of 
the Cartesian subject, which, for its part, was certainly very necessary. Even 
Michel Foucault himself who once declared, without sufficient reflection, the 
“death of the subject”, later in an obvious turn wrote in an article entitled The 
Subject and Power: Why Study Power: The Question of the Subject: “We have to 
promote new forms of subjectivity through the refusal of this kind of individu­
ality which has been imposed on us for several centuriesˮ (Dreyfus & Rabinow, 
1983, 216). Of course, it should be noted here that subjectivity is not something 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

The Gateway to the Era of Post-Reactionary-Criticism
113
that is created or eliminated by the approval and denial of a thinker or intel­
lectual. Any thinker can only contribute to the process I call Process of Genesis-​
Gnosis of Subjectivity.
Let’s review some sentences from a historical text: “After sunset on Saturday 
the 23rd of May, in the year of our Lord 1349, my ears were wounded by the dis­
tressing news of the death of my special and most excellent friend, Paganino 
of Milanˮ (Wilkins, 1961, 83).
Also: “Our Giovanni, born to my toiling and my sorrow, brought me heavy 
and constant cares while he lived, and bitter grief when he died. He had known 
few happy days. He died in the year of our Lord 1361, in the 25th year of his age, 
in the night between Friday and Saturday the 9th and 10th of July. The news 
of his death reached me in Padua late on the afternoon of the 14th. He died in 
Milan in the unexampled general devastation wrought by the plague, which 
hitherto had left that city immune from such evils, but now has found it and 
has invaded itˮ (179).
These two passages are taken from two letters of Petrarch, which were writ­
ten twelve years apart, during the domination of the plague on Europe in the 
fourteenth century, in which he has expressed his grief over the death of his 
beloved ones because of the plague. It is obvious that throughout the men­
tioned period of time, and of course much more than that, the people of the 
Petrarch era were constantly facing the death of their beloved ones and suf­
fering. It is important to pay attention to the way he describes the situation in 
Milan as an “invasionˮ and “unexampled general devastationˮ caused by the 
plague. It was not just a metaphor. Petrarch, who was well educated in vocab­
ulary, has rightly indicated that humans were invaded, although intelligent 
microorganisms were not yet known to cause such diseases.
In another letter written in 1362, he speaks of the ravages of the plague 
in Venice: “Everywhere you hear weeping and lamentation; everywhere you 
see corpses that are still warm; everywhere you see the carrying of coffinsˮ 
(193). Also, in letters written by Petrarch’s friends, we read that they have 
described the terrible situation in different Italian cities and have narrated 
of people fleeing the cities and intense fear in the hearts of those who 
remained (250).
Now, in 2021, we can better understand the nature of the “invasionˮ men­
tioned by Petrarch; The invasion, which was caused by the countless bacilli of 
Yersinia pestis with the help of fleas and mice. In fact, speaking in allegorical 
language, the man was being eliminated under the empire of [micro]organ­
isms. When Francis Bacon wrote at the beginning of the seventeenth century 
in Novum Organum about the “triumph of art [read it as technology] over 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

114
Mossleh
natureˮ2 and about “empire over natureˮ (Bacon, 1762, 111–​116), Europe was in 
such a state of endless suffering for more than two centuries. In his day, peo­
ple still did not think of recreation outside the city or the pristine Amazon 
forest when they heard the word nature. Mankind merely wished to be saved 
from destruction by unknown forces in any possible way.3 Whenever “about 
natureˮ was spoken of, in fact, the meaning was “about what isˮ in units, in the 
sense understood in the works of thinkers such as Melissus in the fifth century 
bc: Περὶ φύσεως ἢ περὶ του ὄντος.
Bacon’s expression of “Natureˮ and “universe of thingsˮ as synonymous, 
and his way of expressing the power and empire of mankind has reflected 
exactly the desire of all humanity at that time: “Quod si quis humani generis 
ipsius potentiam & imperium in rerum Universitatem instaurare & amplifi­
care conetur … Hominis autem imperium in Res, in solis Artibus & Sceintiis 
ponitur. Natura enim non imperatur, nisi parendoˮ (126). And this supremacy 
over things, which Bacon sees as the noblest human ambition that benefits all 
human beings, is “onlyˮ possible through science and art. Bacon states in the 
book’s introduction that such goals cannot be achieved through superstition. 
Bacon’s struggle, and also others who tried to go in the same direction, was 
simultaneously a struggle on two fronts: fight and stand against the violent and 
destructive aspect of nature and fight against superstitious people.4 The resis­
tance of thinkers like Bacon against the powerful reactionaries –​ who at that 
time were also opposed to science, technology, and art, and who considered 
these things to be the cause of malitia and luxuria (evil and luxury) –​ to rebuild 
humanity’s declining power, is evident in his words. But the important point to 
note here is that Bacon, in response to the reactionaries, relied on two things 
	2	 We should bear in mind that for Bacon technology is inseparable from the idea of exper­
imental science, which he sees as redemptive knowledge (Zittel et al., 2008, 22). Perhaps 
Jean-​François Lyotard had also such a connection in mind when he used the term “techno-​
scienceˮ in his discussion of modern science and technology (Lyotard, 1984, 76).
	3	 Those “invasionˮ and “victoryˮ are expressed by today’s researchers in a more scientific and 
accurate language. For example, David Clark, in his study of the relation of civilization and 
microbes has said: “Through the millennia, a never-​ending stream of hostile microbes has 
attacked and decimated human populations … throughout the course of human history 
infectious disease has been responsible for more deaths than war, famine, or any other cause 
… Indeed, the victories we have achieved over infectious disease are among modern man’s 
greatest triumphs. Today industrialized nations have largely brought the infectious disease 
under controlˮ (Clark, 2010, 5–​6).
	4	 It should be mentioned that during the plague pandemic, superstitious people were massa­
cring others who they blamed for disease and evil. David Deming has explained in detail how 
the Black Death sparked superstition, nervous actions, and the sacrifice of Jews as the cause 
of disease (Deming, 2012, 9–​11).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

The Gateway to the Era of Post-Reactionary-Criticism
115
to guide science and technology properly in line of realization of mankind’s 
rights in nature, which he believed to be a ex dotatione divina (divine gift) to 
human: recta Ratio (right and reliable Reason) and sana Religio (sane-​sound-​
sober Religion) (127). That was the very misplaced trust of Bacon –​ and all opti­
mists –​ in man that events such as the two world wars of the twentieth century, 
which will always be a disgrace to humanity, proved to be wrong. However, the 
responsibility for the calamities arising from the wrongdoings of some human 
beings certainly should not have been put on the shoulders of thinkers like 
Bacon; Nor should such wrongdoings have been considered a proof against 
science and technology for new reactionaries to find again favorite pretexts. 
The persistent efforts of thinkers and scientists to establish a scientific method 
is in fact an attempt to contribute to the process of constructing modern sub­
jectivity, without which effective agency to save human beings could not have 
been possible. The emphasis on power and victory over nature was initially not 
an offensive position, but a defense against the fierce invasions that Petrarch 
had spoken of. In this way, the modern subject was formed in the process of 
defending against deadly invasions. Thinkers critical of modernity generally 
may not notice that their actions are nothing more than a continuation of 
modern defensive subjectivity when they wash their hands with soap or vacci­
nate their children in the most careful planning.
If we recall Heidegger’s discussion of the “Bestandˮ in the Question 
Concerning Technology, he intended to use this term to assert that mod­
ern technology, whose characteristic is the revealing (Entbergen), regu­
lates everything as a resource and standing-​reserve for exploitation, and 
shapes the attitude of contemporary human in the same way. According to 
Heidegger, modern technology instead of leading to creation or bringing-​
forth (Her-​vor-​bringen) in the sense of ποίησισ, confronts and challenges 
(Herausfordern) the nature for the extraction of “hidden energy in natureˮ. 
Thus nature becomes a storehouse where everything would be in order to 
be regulated and available for human demand (Heidegger, 2000, 15–​17). 
However, Heidegger’s remark is very relevant and important in raising aware­
ness and warning about wrongdoings with [some parts of] nature, and more 
importantly, in warning that our understanding of reality and the world is 
exposed to “Enframingˮ (Gestell), and I do not intend to deny or downplay 
it. But now, in the days of the pandemic and in the face of what I have called 
the Corona Phenomenon, we need to look at the topic from a different and 
critical point of view, in order –​ in addition to not getting caught up in the 
reactionary and harmful side of Heideggerian view5 –​ to achieve a more 
	5	 In relation to Heidegger’s thinking on technology, Richard Wolin reminded that: “his claim 
concerning the total domination of technology qua enframing, coupled with his wholesale 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

116
Mossleh
accurate understanding of the nature of technology and the practice-​oriented 
science underlying it. Of course, this article is not a good place to critique the 
foundations of Heidegger’s thought, on which his critique of modern tech­
nology and science is based, and it does not intend to.6 Therefore, I will briefly 
explain my approach only to the extent necessary to initiate the discussion.
Heidegger rightly recognized the challenging feature of technology. But this 
challenge is not, as he thought, a mere exploitative invasion versus Nature. He 
did not pay proper attention to the fact that this challenge was, fundamentally 
from the outset, not an aggressive and exploitative challenge but a defensive 
challenge. In fact, the condition for understanding the defying and challeng­
ing character of technology –​ and modern science –​ is to understand both its 
defensive and offensive aspects simultaneously. In the first place, technology 
emerged from the battle in which man found himself, and, the question is 
what is the origin of this battle? Nature itself; Not in the form of on the one and 
other hands, but in the continuous interrelation of the existence of human as 
a part of Nature, and presence of invasive factors, whether organism or non-​
organism, as other parts of Nature. Heidegger is right about the challenge of 
technology, but it is not against Nature; It is within Nature. In a way, it might 
be said that the mentioned battle is imposed on the being of man. So, technol­
ogy –​ and science –​ with its challenging character should be analyzed as the 
Existential. Hence, the technological being of the [modern and contemporary] 
human should not be considered as an accidental and non-​authentic being. 
Now, it is important to recognize that the Subject should not be considered as 
the initiator of that battle or challenge. Modern subjectivity was constructed 
precisely during the defense of human beings against the invasions, and sub­
jects found themselves thrown into the process of understanding themselves 
as subjects. As Alain Touraine has once pointed out: “The individual or the 
group are not subjects when they lord it over forms of practical behavior. The 
subject is stronger and more conscious of itself when it defends itself against 
attacks that threaten its autonomy and capacity to grasp itself as an integrated 
subject, or at least struggling to be one, to recognize itself, and be recognized 
as suchˮ (Touraine, 2007, 95). Perhaps this insight can better explain why the 
devaluation of the powers of human action, in the end only prove conducive to further res­
ignation and passivity vis-​ii-​vis Seins-​geschick the mysterious fate that humanity has been 
sentˮ (Wolin, 1990, 165).
	6	 I have only mentioned here the reactionary aspect of Heidegger’s philosophical stance 
on modern technology, but Tom Rockmore has elaborated on the relationship between 
Heidegger’s philosophy of technology and his inclination towards Nazism (Rockmore, 1992, 
204–​244).
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

The Gateway to the Era of Post-Reactionary-Criticism
117
process of construction-​cognition of the modern subject –​ and science that 
is dependent on it –​ has accelerated and intensified after the Black Death, 
and this may also be meaningful for us who are struggling with the covid-​19 
pandemic today. Indeed, what needs to be properly understood, and viruses 
reminded us without the need to speak, is that for every part of nature –​ we 
are currently restricting speech to living nature –​ the all other components 
are as Re-​sources. Man, as a natural being, especially in the process of becom­
ing a modern subject, creates modern science and technology in defense of 
himself against this inherent resourcization in nature. But, due to his mode 
of being, this resourcization by him may lead to Re-​sourcism; And since one 
of the existential conditions of human is temporality and time-​awareness, it 
may also lead to the consideration of things as standing-​reserve and ultimately 
end up in a situation Heidegger described with “Bestandˮ. It is noticeable 
that the direction of the process is inverse to, or at least different from, what 
is described in Heidegger’s discussion on Bestand. Modern technology, there­
fore, and the Bestandization of a part of nature for it, is a natural continuation 
of the inherent resourcization in nature itself, and not something other than 
nature imposed from the outside on a passive and quiet nature. When we talk 
about the relation of modern technology with Nature, we should not think only 
about the painful movement of cranes in forests. The work of sophisticated 
modern devices for mass vaccination and drug-​production –​ and its under­
lying intelligent agency –​ against deadly viruses, should also be kept in mind.
Even if we argue in Heidegger’s own language and according to his concep­
tion of truth as aletheia, what is happening in the process of technological 
relations with nature is the Entbergung of truth in the confrontation of Nature 
against Nature, which is happening precisely through poiesis. It is important 
that We, as natural beings, in the future, after overcoming the Coronavirus, as 
another natural being, need a more accurate understanding of our relationship 
to different parts of Nature, and to achieve this understanding, we should go 
beyond any kind of considering the Nature as other. In different features, even 
in the title of defending nature or the environment, we need to stop repro­
ducing this otherness. In this regard, in the mentioned discussion on technol­
ogy, one of the serious problems of Heidegger’s Dasein is further highlighted. 
Contrary to the existential analysis of Dasein, in Heidegger’s discussion on 
technology, Dasein has been characterized as a separate entity from nature 
and natural beings. Although some of its characteristics such as In-​der-​Welt-​
sein and Mit-​sein solved some of the problems of the Cartesian Subject, did not 
solve the problem of the duality of Cartesian Subject and Nature sufficiently, 
and reproduced it in the form of the duality of Dasein and Nature. Whenever 
Heidegger speaks of modern technology as an external entity imposed on and 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

118
Mossleh
exploiting nature, this fundamental [false] dichotomy is revealed. It should be 
remembered that Hegel had tried to solve this problem with the phenomenol­
ogy of “Geistˮ. In his philosophy, whole nature and all the achievements and 
constructions of the human subject, whether good or evil, were in fact parts 
of the objectification of the Geist and the process of the development of rea­
son in history. The human subjectivity was a historical moment of Geist who 
consciously looks at itself and nature which is in fact not something separate 
but the objectification of the Geist itself. Heidegger, whose thought, according 
to Gadamer (1987, 90), always circles around Hegel (um Hegel kreist) and try 
to keep distance from Hegel’s dialectical Geist-​centrism, has not been able to 
reach a better solution in this debate while abandoning the Hegelian solution.7
It is now well known that the first human attempts at the social-​political 
organization were tied to man-​made narratives of the relations of the gods 
with nature. The social-​political order of ancient Greece depended completely 
on the epic view of Zeus’ victory over the natural world. How the police or 
the city-​state should be governed was in line with a narrative that described 
how Zeus ruled nature. According to an interpretation, “there is a close soli­
darity between the physical and political spaces; they both reflect a pyramidal 
structure. In sum, nature and society are confoundedˮ (Naddaf, 2005, 83). The 
story of Zeus and every other narrative should always be seen as an attempt 
at something important: the construction of the Subject according to a par­
ticular pattern. Now, also, all critics of the status quo, if they hope to play a 
role in creating the proper conditions for a better socio-​political order, the first 
step is to re-​think the Subjectivity from critical and innovative perspectives. 
We now realize that subjectivity was neither eliminated by the decree of some 
post-​modern thinkers, nor the replacement of Dasein solved its problems. 
Even raising “inter-​subjectivityˮ attached to a formal factotum-​dialectic before 
resolving the problems of the idea of subjectivity itself –​ and achieving a more 
reasonable and convincing theory about it –​ could not reconstruct the effec­
tive power of agency.
If an effective human agency was formed in modern times that could both 
prevent the destruction of man and the continuous erosion of successive gen­
erations due to the aforementioned invasions, and, on the other hand, have 
	7	 Moreover, Heidegger, at least when expressing his views on the relation of technology and 
modern science to Nature, seems to abandon a fundamental meaning of Nature/​fusis in 
Greek philosophy which is the nature of things. It is as if when he speaks of nature and of 
technological exploitation, he often thinks of the Black Forest around Todtnauberg. Just as 
metaphors such as “Lichtungˮ have been the result of his walks around his chalet in that 
forest.
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

The Gateway to the Era of Post-Reactionary-Criticism
119
great achievements in all areas of human life, it was because of the efforts of 
many thinkers and scientists to make a significant contribution to the con­
struction of the modern subject. Of course, the negative consequences of 
anthropocentric attitude towards human subjectivity should be criticized, but 
maybe it could be hoped that from now on neither by neglecting the great 
achievements nor in a reactionary way. One of the factors of paralysis of social 
agency in the contemporary era, that –​ despite recognizing the miseries caused 
by unbridled capitalism and the militarism associated with it –​ weakened the 
possibility of changing status quo, was the simplistic and hasty attempts to 
present bizarre ideas such as the death of the subject. Even if we do not fully 
accept it, Habermas’s conception that such attitudes are tantamount to neo­
conservatism should not be underestimated.8
When Rousseau challenged modern civilization, he already guessed that 
some might draw this biased conclusion from his words that we should 
destroy communities and overthrow property and return to forests and live 
like bears. So, to emphasize that he was aware of the irreversibility of civilized 
life he called them “enemiesˮ who should be ashamed of such a perception 
(Rousseau, 1987, 94). Also, today, our presence in the world is irreversibly 
scientific-​technological.9 And there could be no other “authenticˮ way of 
being. Therefore, we should try to reach multilateral and insightful attitudes of 
science and technology instead of returning to extremist scientism or extrem­
ist reactionary demonization of science and technology. This We that exists in 
Pan-​ demia may have needed to go through an age in its history, the modern 
age, in which goal-​oriented/​ instrumental rationality (Zweckrationalität) and 
scientism grew and flourished rapidly, and then another age, the postmodern 
age, in which the negative effects of this kind of instrumental rationality and 
scientism were severely criticized and denied. Now, on the one hand, we are 
experiencing the destruction of a large part of the forests and the unprece­
dented pollution and warming of the earth, and on the other hand, we are 
facing the deadly invasion of the Coronavirus and constant invasion of other 
microorganisms. Therefore, two existential aspects of human beings, defense 
and aggression, are revealed more than ever. That is, on the one hand, we suffer 
from the negative consequences of modern technology, and on the other hand, 
we better understand that we needed and will need science and technology 
in confronting the invasions. Thus, more than ever, we can understand the 
	8	 A collection of important discussions about this Habermas critique of postmodern thought 
can be read in Michael Kelly’s book Critique and Power (Kelly, 1994).
	9	 Heidegger was also aware of the rapid advancement and unstoppability of technology but 
expressed it as an evil (Heidegger, 1969, 51).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

120
Mossleh
different aspects of the relation of We not with the Nature but with other parts 
of the Nature –​ away from the extremes and outdated controversies of ratio­
nalism and romanticism, anthropocentrism and anti-​humanism, and their 
contemporary sequels.10 Confronting the Corona Phenomenon can reveal that 
even if we have moved beyond metaphysical essentialism with the advent of 
social ontology and the philosophy of existence, we should make ourselves a 
“kindˮ in the face of the constant deadly invasions of other parts of Nature. 
In this way, we may be able to better understand where we should spend our 
resources instead of spending on building terrible weapons for the destruction 
of human beings, and also those investments that only increase the morbid 
consumption in unbridled global capitalism.
Just as we, as interpretive beings, need continuous criticism of the ideo­
logical aspects of our language and attitude, we need a constant philosoph­
ical and political critique of the technological and scientific aspects of our 
being in the world. To do this, perhaps the first step is to reconsider attitudes 
about Subjectivity. And only then we can come up with more efficient theo­
ries about effective agency and action in the contemporary world. The Corona 
Phenomenon, with all its painful consequences, may provide an appropriate 
basis for such revisions.
	
References
Agassi, Joseph (2013), The Very Idea of Modern Science: Francis Bacon and Robert Boyle, 
New York: Springer.
Bacon, Francis (1762), Novum Organum, Venetiis: Typis Gasparis Giardi.
Clark, David (2010), Germs, Genes, & Civilization: How Epidemics Shaped Who We Are 
Today, Upper Saddle River: ft Press.
	10	
Some writers blame the “humanˮ entirely for the emergence of the Corona Phenomenon. 
Even if we accept the role of humans in this pandemic, we must not forget that the exis­
tence of such invasive microorganisms dates back to millions and even billions of years 
before humans appeared on Earth. Secondly, the invasion of these creatures started from 
the beginning of human creation and it can not be considered a reaction to the current 
human activity, or even the activity of primitive man. Thirdly, the emergence of man was 
the result of the constant battle of the defense forces within the body of primates against 
viruses and bacteria. Now, although we need to criticize our actions and the role of the 
human agency in such phenomena, instead of constantly blaming ourselves, it is better 
for everyone to remember that while speaking, a huge army of natural defense cells inside 
their bodies is constantly fighting against the endless invasion of natural creatures, and 
any kind of anti-​humanist and nature-​oriented theories can not stop it.
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

The Gateway to the Era of Post-Reactionary-Criticism
121
Deming, David P. (2012), Science and Technology in World History: Volume 
3: The Black Death, the Renaissance, the Reformation, and the Scientific Revolution, 
London: McFarland &Company, Inc., Publishers.
Dreyfus, Hubert and Rabinow, Paul (1983), Michel Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and 
Hermeneutics, University of Chicago Press.
Gadamer, Hans-​Georg (1987), Gesammelte Werke, Band 3: Neuere Philosophie 1: Hegel, 
Husserl, Heidegger, Tübingen: Mohr.
Heidegger, Martin (1969), Discourse on Thinking, A Translation of Glassenheit by John 
M. Anderson and E. Hans Freund, New York: Harper & Row.
Heidegger, Martin (2000), Gesamtausgabe, Band 7: Vorträge und Aufsätze, Frankfurt 
am Main: Vittorio Klostermann.
Kelly, Michael (1994), Critique and Power: Recasting the Foucault-​Habermas Debate, 
mit Press.
Lyotard, Jean-​Francois (1984), The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge, 
Manchester University Press.
Naddaf, Gerard (2005), The Greek Concept of Nature, State University of New York Press.
Rockmore, Tom (1992), On Heidegger’s Nazism and Philosophy, University of 
California Press.
Rousseau, Jean-​Jacques (1987), Basic Political Writings, Translated by Donald A. Cress, 
Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company.
Touraine, Alain (2007), A New Paradigm for Understanding Today’s World, Translated 
by Gregory Elliott, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Wilkins, Ernest Hatch (1961), Life of Petrarch, University of Chicago Press.
Wolin, Richard (1990), The Politics of Being: The Political Thought of Martin Heidegger, 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Zittel, Clau, G. Engel, R. Nanni, and N. C. Karafyllis (eds.) (2008), Philosophies of 
Technology: Francis Bacon and his Contemporaries, Leiden: Brill.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

∵
part 3
Corona Phenomenon and Political Questions
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Paul Patton, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_015
­chapter 13
In What Sense Is the “Corona Phenomenonˮ 
Political?
Paul Patton
In order to answer this question, we need to be clear, firstly, about what is meant 
by the “Corona Phenomenonˮ and, secondly, what is meant by political. Let 
us say that the Corona phenomenon refers to the pandemic event that is the 
result of the proliferation in human populations of the sars-​CoV-​2 virus that 
causes covid-​19. I was going to say emergence in human populations, which 
would imply that this was the first time sars-​CoV-​2 had taken hold among 
human hosts, but the precise origins and pathways followed by the virus up to 
the outbreak in Wuhan are among the most hotly contested and highly politi­
cal questions surrounding the pandemic. I will say more about this dimension 
of the event below. For the moment, let me focus on this characterization of 
the Corona phenomenon as an event.
It is far from obvious what we mean when we describe something as an 
event, especially when we qualify it as a major or world-​changing event, one 
of those historical moments after which nothing is the same as it was before. 
Jacques Derrida began an interview on the event of September 11, 2001, 
that involved the use of civilian aircraft to destroy the Twin Towers in lower 
Manhattan and that killed almost 3,000 people by asking what is an event 
and in particular what is a “major eventˮ? He answers by distinguishing “the 
thing itselfˮ from the impression of the thing that is formed by an established 
framework for understanding things of this kind. This impression or public 
appearance of the thing is further transformed by the “organized information 
machine (language, communication, rhetoric, image, media, and so on)ˮ that 
disseminates the impression and that “is from the very outset political, techni­
cal, economicˮ.1
My concern here is not so much with the ways in which events are trans­
formed by their interpretation or description in various hermeneutic frame­
works as with their complexity. Major historical events are multi-​dimensional 
	1	 “Autoimmunity: Real and Symbolic Suicides –​ A Dialogue with Jacques Derridaˮ, in Borradori, 
2003, 88–​89.
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

126
Patton
and multi-​layered. The Coronavirus pandemic is at once a virological, epide­
miological, and public health event, but also an economic and geopolitical 
event. It is an extremely complex event that unfolds in all of these dimensions, 
evolving and mutating as a consequence of interactions between the different 
dimensions or layers of the event? Understanding the pandemic event in this 
manner also helps us to appreciate the variety of ways in which it is political. 
At every level, the covid-​19 pandemic is entangled in power relations between 
individuals, institutions, states, and species that make it political. In these brief 
remarks, I will use the complex structure of this event as a guide for identifying 
the different ways in which it is political.
Questions about the nature and origins of a particular virus are not always 
political, but the virological dimensions of the current pandemic have become 
politicized by virtue of the geopolitical circumstances under which the 
first cases of covid-​19 were recorded in Wuhan. These include the epochal 
moment at which China has become the largest economy in the world and is 
rapidly acquiring the military, diplomatic and soft power that typically accom­
panies such economic pre-​eminence. This has produced the kind of relation­
ship between the rising power and the existing global hegemonic power that, 
in the past, has often led to conflict.2 It is in the context of tensions over trade, 
the projection of military and diplomatic power, and influence that sars-​
CoV-​2 was labeled “the Chinese virusˮ by US government officials. Chinese 
officials responded by blaming US troops attending the World Military Games 
in Wuhan in October 2019 for importing the virus. Accusations back and 
forth about the origins of the virus have provided the context of one who-​
sponsored enquiry and fuelled calls for another. While the predominant view 
of the origins of the virus throughout 2020 was that it came from bats, possibly 
by way of another intermediary animal species, via one of the markets that 
sold exotic wild animals, 2021 saw a resurgence of the alternative view that 
it escaped from a research institution such as the Wuhan Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention, close by the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market that 
was the supposed site of zoonotic transmission, or the Wuhan Institute of 
Virology (Eban, 2021). A variety of claims have been made about the nature 
of the research being undertaken, from the inflammatory suggestion that the 
virus was deliberately engineered as a bioweapon, to the more mundane sug­
gestion that it was being investigated with a view to treatment and prevention. 
	2	 Graham Allison (2017) notes that in 12 out 16 cases over the last 500 years competition 
between an emerging and an established power has led to conflict.
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

In What Sense Is the “Corona Phenomenonˮ Political?
127
One consequence of such suggestions was the imposition of strict controls in 
China on the publication of research into the origins of the virus.
The geopolitical circumstances, in which the covid-​19 pandemic took 
hold, provide one frame in which it has become a political event. However, 
the Wuhan outbreak was already politicized by virtue of the domestic politi­
cal environment in which it occurred. The initial response of Hubei provincial 
authorities and the municipal government of Wuhan included withholding 
information from the public, the punishment and public humiliation of one 
whistle-​blower who later died from covid-​19, and continuing to hold public 
events that facilitated the local spread of the virus. This response contributed to 
spreading the virus throughout China and beyond as people left Wuhan for the 
New Year holidays before the city was shut down on 23 January. Commentators 
suggest that the centralized and hierarchical structure of the Chinese govern­
ment provides powerful incentives to local officials to avoid passing potentially 
disruptive information up the chain (Zhou, 2017).3
The emergence of covid-​19 in the population of Wuhan was the con­
sequence of prior events of cross-​species transmission that are political in 
another sense. While the precise pathway followed in this inter-​species jour­
ney is not known, there is consensus that the most likely source was a par­
ticular bat species found in southern Yunnan province. Some argue that the 
increasing frequency of viral transmission from non-​human to human popu­
lations is an inevitable consequence of the disappearance of habitats and the 
increasing proximity of wild animal and human populations. This makes all 
such inter-​species viral outbreaks biopolitical in a broad sense of the term that 
includes the “increasingly dysfunctional relationship between human commu­
nities, other animals, and the broader environmentˮ (Van Dooren, 2020). This 
is a broader sense of the term “biopoliticalˮ than the one with which Foucault 
introduced the term into contemporary political theory (Foucault, 1978). He 
used “biopoliticalˮ specifically in relation to the role of states in taking respon­
sibility for the biological conditions of human life. Viruses are another mat­
ter altogether: not so much single species that interact with the human but 
rather “quasi-​speciesˮ made up of swarms of “mutant cloudsˮ of closely related 
viral material (Guttinger, 2020). The interaction of viruses and human hosts is 
mediated by the range of ecological, environmental, and economic dynamics 
that produce a politics of interspecies relations.
As well as a virological and epidemiological event that involves the spread 
of sars-​CoV-​2 throughout the global human population, the pandemic is also 
	3	 See also, interview with Zhou (2020).
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

128
Patton
an economic crisis. This introduces a further layer of the event and a more 
mundane sense in which it is political, namely the familiar sense that involves 
making decisions with regard to competing claims on public resources in 
relation to recognized public goods. The economic dimension of the event 
is largely a consequence of the measures implemented by governments to 
stem the progress of the virus through local populations. These include the 
closure of international and domestic borders, with devastating effects on 
transport industries such as airlines and the many industries that depend on 
them, such as tourism and accommodation. They include measures designed 
to limit opportunities for transmission and thereby contain the virus, such 
as the closure of non-​essential businesses that involve large clusters of peo­
ple in confined spaces, including professional sport, entertainment, lifestyle, 
and service industries. These policies have the greatest impact on the indus­
tries that employ most people, especially in those economies that rely less on 
the material production of goods and more on services and immaterial goods. 
The result was a sudden increase in unemployment to levels not seen since the 
Great Depression of 1929–​1933. This in turn had consequences in other areas 
such as retail shopping, real estate, and construction.
The overall economic impact of the pandemic was the deepest recession 
since the end of World War ii involving a global economic contraction of 3.5% 
according to the International Monetary Fund (imf). Economic recovery is 
likely to be rapid once effective immunization is in place, however, the effects 
of the pandemic are likely to continue, especially for low-​income countries. 
imf projections in 2021 suggest that in 2024 the World gdp will be 3% below 
what it would have been without covid-​19, while for low-​income countries 
the figure will be 6% (Yeyati & Filippini, 2021, 1). In response to mass unem­
ployment and the threat of widespread business failure, governments have 
provided unprecedented levels of income support and economic stimulus. 
Global fiscal support reached nearly $16 trillion in 2020, which amounted to 
around 15 percent of global gdp. However, the capacity of countries to imple­
ment such measures varied significantly between high and low-​income econ­
omies, and even though initial impact and rates of death were higher in some 
advanced economies, the longer-​term economic cost is likely to be greater for 
poorer countries (Yeyati & Filippini, 2021, 2–​5).
This sudden increase in levels of government spending to maintain house­
hold incomes and support businesses has led some to argue that the capitalist 
world has moved into a new era of macroeconomic policy in which the basis of 
government spending is no longer tied to government income via taxation but 
to the government’s capacity to create money either by fiat or by loans at rates 
of interest close to zero. Some commentators have suggested that one effect of 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

In What Sense Is the “Corona Phenomenonˮ Political?
129
the pandemic may be a re-​evaluation of government priorities and a return to 
a more direct role in building and sustaining national economies.4
Governments are not only responsible for the performance of local econ­
omies but also the security of their citizens, from the most basic corporeal 
security to the less tangible security of property and life prospects. The core 
business of government has always been the protection of citizens against 
internal as well as external threats. In the European tradition, at least since the 
eighteenth century, the business of government has expanded to include pro­
tection against public health and industrial accidents, as well as the impact of 
natural disasters and environmental degradation. Pandemics such as the one 
caused by sars-​CoV-​2 expose tensions between the different responsibilities 
of government. Policymakers are caught in a dilemma that pits the health and 
wellbeing of populations, including the lives of many of the most vulnerable 
citizens, against the health of the economy. Nor are these entirely separate 
concerns. A healthy economy sustains employment for the bulk of the popula­
tion and, in the absence of universal basic income, employment remains one 
of the largest single determinants of individual wellbeing. Personal health of 
course is another.
In the face of covid-​19, the tensions extend deep into the governmental 
responsibility for health. The restrictions on movement and social interaction 
imposed to control the spread of covid-​19 have direct consequences for the 
mental as well as physical health of individual citizens. Increases in suicide, 
domestic violence, and mental illness have all been recorded, thereby putting 
measures imposed to protect the physiological well-​being of the population 
in direct conflict with measures required to protect other dimensions of men­
tal and physical health. Utilitarian philosophers and economists debate the 
most effective ways of quantifying the economic versus the health costs of 
shutdown policies. Is it possible to estimate the number of quality-​adjusted 
years of human life that would be gained through lockdown policies and com­
pare this with the years that would be lost as a consequence of a smaller econ­
omy and increased unemployment? Or should the comparison be carried out 
directly in terms of individual wellbeing? (Singer & Plant, 2020).
Measurement of the costs of sars-​CoV-​2 seems implausible given the 
uncertainty that remains over the long-​term impact on those affected, includ­
ing effects on the heart and central nervous system as well as the lungs. The 
complex and irreducible trade-​off between the economic and health effects 
of the pandemic and responses to it, coupled with the trade-​offs between 
	4	 See for example, Heisbourg, 2020.
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

130
Patton
different policies and their impact on health more broadly understood, means 
that there is a biopolitical aporia at the heart of government responses to the 
pandemic: measures designed to protect the health of the population have 
adverse effects on the economic well-​being of the population and, in some 
cases, on other aspects of health. Like all such aporia, these are irresolvable in 
principle but regularly resolved in practice, with varying outcomes for public 
health and local economies.
Another way in which the pandemic is a political event involves the manner 
in which it has challenged accepted views about the nature and mechanisms 
of government. From the mid-​twentieth century onwards, the means by which 
governments provide for the security of their citizens have increasingly been 
cast in neoliberal terms of responsibility for markets and the responsibilization 
of individuals. This has led to an imperative to reduce the size of government 
and limit its role in relation to economic and social processes. Public enter­
prises have been privatized in sectors ranging from transport to health, energy 
and water supply, banking, and even defense. Government services in relation 
to aged care, social security, education, employment, and imprisonment have 
been required to operate on cost recovery rules where they have not been con­
tracted out to private providers. The US has been the outstanding example of 
the resultant hollowing out of the capacity of government, but the tendency 
towards a reduced effectiveness of government and a corresponding greater 
reliance on private service providers has been apparent in many countries. The 
current pandemic has highlighted the inadequacy of such policies in the face 
of a public health emergency.5 An outcome of the re-​evaluation of government 
priorities may well be increased public spending on agencies directly respon­
sible for the wellbeing of citizens, from aged care to public health and disaster 
management.
The world post-​covid-​19 will be different in a variety of ways from how 
it was before. From international relations to everyday life, the virus and its 
effects are irreducibly political in different senses of the term. The senses in 
which it is political vary from one dimension to the next of the complex pan­
demic event: virological, epidemiological, economic, public institutional, and 
geopolitical. Clausewitz famously suggested that war was politics by other 
means. Contemporary strategists use the term “hybrid warˮ to refer to the 
	5	 “According to the American Hospital Association, the number of in-​patient hospital beds 
declined by an extraordinary 39% between 1981 and 1999. The purpose was to raise profits 
by increasing the census (the number of occupied beds). But management’s goal of 90% 
occupancy meant that hospitals no longer had the capacity to absorb patient influx during 
epidemics and medical emergenciesˮ. Cited in: Davis, 2020.
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

In What Sense Is the “Corona Phenomenonˮ Political?
131
conflict that takes place by economic, informational, and intellectual as well as 
military means. In its geopolitical dimensions, the current pandemic provides 
multiple occasions for the hybrid conflicts between the leading world powers, 
as well as those underways between vested interests in domestic politics.
In everyday life, people have become used to the idea that everything is polit­
ical, whether the causes and effects of climate change, the uses of social media 
platforms, or the role of historical monuments. So too, responses to covid-​
19 have become caught up in culture wars that oppose freedom-​loving liber­
tarians to politically correct champions of an increasingly totalitarian nanny 
state, supporters of various conspiracy theories to more rational supporters 
of scientifically informed responses. In addition to the multiple ways in which 
it is the less well-​off who suffer most from the pandemic, it feeds an emerg­
ing social division between the informationally rich and poor that has already 
begun to tear at the political fabric of even the most settled democracies. From 
the politics of wearing masks to the geopolitics of developing and then supply­
ing vaccines, the sars-​CoV-​2 pandemic represents a new phase in the hyper-​
politicization of social life. It foreshadows the possibility of future hitherto 
unimagined catastrophes that will be natural as well as political events.
	
Bibliography
Allison, Graham (2017), Destined for War: Can America and China Escape Thucydides 
Trap?, New York: Houghton Mifflin.
Borradori, Giovanna (ed.) (2003), Philosophy in a Time of Terror: Dialogues with Jürgen 
Habermas and Jacques Derrida, University of Chicago Press.
Davis, Mike (2020), “The Coronavirus Crisis is a Monster Fueled by Capitalism”, in In 
These Times, March 20.
Eban, Katherine (2021), “The Lab-​Leak Theory: Inside the Fight to Uncover COVID-​
19’s Origins”, in Vanity Fair, June 3, 2021. https://​www.van​ityf​air. com/​news/​2021/​
06/​the-​lab-​leak-​theory-​inside-​the-​fight-​to-​uncover-​covid-​19s-​origins (accessed, 28 
July, 2021).
Foucault, Michel (1978), The History of Sexuality, Vol. 1: An Introduction, trans. Robert 
Hurley, London: Allen Lane/​Penguin.
Guttinger, Stephan (2020), “A Virus is Not a Thing, Part 1: The Case for a Process View 
of Virusesˮ. https://​www.lse.ac.uk/​phi​loso​phy/​blog/​2020/​07/​06/​a-​virus-​is-​not-​a 
-​thing-​1 (accessed, 28 July, 2021).
Heisbourg, François (2020), “From Wuhan to the World: How the Pandemic Will 
Reshape Geopoliticsˮ, in Survival, 62: 3, 7–​24.
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

132
Patton
Singer, Peter, and Michael Plant (2020), When Will the Pandemic Cure Be Worse Than the 
Disease? April 6, 2020. https://​www.proj​ect-​syndic​ate.org/​ commentary/​when-​will 
-​lockdowns-​be-​worse-​than-​covid19-​by-​peter-​singer-​and-​michael-​plant (accessed, 
28 July, 2021).
Van Dooren, Thom (2020), “Pangolins and Pandemics: The Real Source Of This Crisis 
is Human Not Animal”, in New Matilda, March 22, 2020. https://​new​mati​lda.com/​
2020/​03/​22/​pangol​ins-​and-​pandem​ics-​the-​real-​sou​rce-​of-​this-​cri​sis-​is-​human 
-​not-​ani​mal/​ (accessed, 28 July, 2021).
Yeyati, Eduardo Levy, and Federico Filippini (2021), Social and Economic Impact of 
COVID-​19, Brookings Global Working Paper #158, June 2021, Brookings Institute. 
https://​www.brooki​ngs.edu/​resea​rch/​soc​ial-​and-​econo​mic-​imp​act-​of-​covid-​19/​ 
(accessed, 28 July, 2021).
Zhou, Xueguang (2017), “The Institutional Logic of Governance in China: 
An Organizational Approach”. https://​sgs.stanf​ord.edu/​publi​cati​ons/​instit​utio​nal 
-​logic-​gov​erna​nce-​china-​org​aniz​atio​nal-​appro​ach (accessed, 28 July, 2021).
Zhou, Xueguang (2020), “Coronavirus Crisis Exposes Fundamental Tension in 
Governing China”, Interview with Zhou, February 3, 2020, https://​fsi.stanf​ord.edu/​
news/​coro​navi​rus-​cri​sis-​expo​ses-​fund​amen​tal-​tens​ion-​govern​ing-​china-​says-​stanf​
ord-​soci​olog​ist-​and (accessed, 28 July, 2021).
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© David Cameron, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_016
­chapter 14
The Impact of covid-​19 on Federal Countries
David Cameron
	
Introduction
The covid-​19 pandemic has upended patterns of behavior, challenged estab­
lished institutions, fractured economies, and radically altered the lives of peo­
ple across the globe, sometimes in surprising and unexpected ways. This paper 
looks at the pandemic in some federal countries –​ countries that distribute 
constitutional authority between national and sub-​national governments –​ 
and makes some observations on their behavior. The paper was prepared in 
the autumn of 2020 and broadly covers the pre-​vaccine stage of the disease 
when individuals, governments, communities, and health facilities were seek­
ing to control the spread of covid-​19 and to relieve the extraordinary pres­
sures the disease was imposing on national health services.
During this period, how did federal countries cope? How did they behave? 
Did the management of covid-​19 in the early stages push federations to cen­
tralize or decentralize? Was it difficult for federal countries to develop a coher­
ent, consistent approach to what was an unfamiliar, fast-​moving disease? As 
we have seen, the virus had many surprises in store for us. Governments and 
communities that started out well have flagged and faltered later, and some 
communities that did a poor job managing the disease at the outset shone 
when it came to the distribution of the vaccine. This paper should be regarded 
as a tentative interim report, sketching out how some federal countries man­
aged in the early innings. But we should recognize that there were and are 
many more steps to go, and a definitive account of performance must wait 
until the virus has been conquered, or at least turned into a manageable sea­
sonal illness rather like the flu.
Before we consider the pandemic’s impact within federations, it is worth 
pausing to consider the impact of the pandemic on government and society 
in general.
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

134
Cameron
1	
How Countries React to Traumatic Shocks
I’d like to suggest that it is possible to discern patterns in the way in which 
modern governments and societies –​ federations included –​ react to traumatic 
shocks. By shocks, I am referring to such things as wars, sudden economic 
meltdowns (such as the financial crisis of 2008), terrorist attacks (such as 9/​
11) –​ that is to say, mortal threats to the body politic. There are typically a half 
dozen shifts that occur, sometimes very rapidly:
	–​	 A shift in the balance between the state and the private sector in favor of the 
former.
	–​	 A shift towards more centralized control in governments.
	–​	 A shift in the landscape of government priorities.
	–​	 A shift in the balance between security and liberty in favor of the former.
	–​	 A shift towards hardened borders and constraints on movement.
	–​	 A shift back –​ to home, community, basic values.
I believe that these shifts can be generally discerned in the way in which coun­
tries have reacted to the shock of the Coronavirus pandemic that has swept 
the globe. Not always and not always in exactly the same way, but in broadly 
applicable patterns.
As countries have grappled with this unfamiliar enemy, governments have 
assumed greater control over the marketplace and commercial activity, in an 
attempt to control the spread of the virus. Governments in many countries 
put the economy into an induced coma in the early stages of the outbreak 
to control runaway infection rates. As the economy came to a virtual stand­
still, governments around the world have had to spend massively to support 
individuals and companies. Now they are trying delicately to re-​open without 
letting the beast loose in the country again. The power of the national govern­
ment, especially based on its fiscal capacity, has typically increased, and power 
within the national government has been concentrated at the center. In most, 
but not all nations, a radical shift in priorities has placed public health ahead 
of everything else on the public agenda, marked out as the foundation of the 
economy and the sine qua non of a functioning society. Governments have 
abruptly announced policies and imposed measures entailing intrusive inter­
vention into the lives and activities of citizens and private actors. Globalization 
has been stopped in its tracks, as states have imposed barriers to the free move­
ment of individuals, and companies have struggled to keep international sup­
ply chains operating. Physical communication –​ air, rail, and road travel –​ has 
collapsed, while virtual communication capacities are at a premium. In some 
instances, subnational governments have hardened borders to keep outsiders 
away. And populations, confined to their homes, distanced from one another 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

The Impact of covid-19 on Federal Countries
135
and separated by ppe, rediscover –​ by loss and re-​invention –​ the value of com­
munity and the primordial need for face-​to-​face human association.
2	
The Experience of Some Federations
All of these forces have been at work in both federal and unitary states, but 
the impacts in federal countries varying according to the specific character of 
the federal regime. By their very nature, federal states, with the constitutional 
distribution of power between two or more orders of government, react to 
the shock in more complex ways and experience the forces of centralization 
differently from unitary states. In unitary states, with sovereign power held 
unequivocally by the national government, there is one center, the national 
government; in federal states, with constitutional authority distributed cen­
trally and regionally, it might be said that there are centers –​ sites of possible 
centralization –​ in two places: at the national and the sub-​national level.
There are two major dimensions to consider when examining the impact 
of the pandemic on federations. One is the direct management of the public-​
health response. In many federations, the predominant jurisdictional responsi­
bility for public health rests with the sub-​national governments, which means 
that in most federations they have had a critical role in managing the virus and 
providing public-​health leadership to their communities. Federal-​government 
leaders and their health officials have, however, provided an important infor­
mation and coordination role, and often regulatory oversight; in many cases, 
the federal government has made significant fiscal transfers to the subnational 
units in support of health care. As well, the federal authority is often responsi­
ble for the regulation and approval of drugs and medicines. Many federal gov­
ernments have engaged with pharmaceutical companies to ensure guaranteed 
early access to vaccines.
The second dimension to bear in mind is the management of the often-​
dreadful economic effects that the response to the crisis unleashes in a given 
society. The first dimension requires leadership at all levels of the federation, 
from the national to the local. Indeed, cities have been playing significant 
public-​health roles in several federations. The relative roles and responsibili­
ties of the various actors will vary from one federation to another. But when it 
comes to the management of the economy, the central government comes into 
its own. Typically, it has responsibility for international trade, and for the man­
agement of the national economy and the public debt. It possesses the fiscal 
capacity required to respond to an economic shock of this magnitude. In the 
spring of 2020, when country after country virtually shut down its economy, 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

136
Cameron
it was the national government that possessed the clout and the reach to take 
the measures necessary to support citizens and businesses through the sudden 
and unexpected collapse of economic activity –​ and, in many cases, to sup­
port the states and cities as well. Sub-​national governments, typically, did not 
have the fiscal capacity or the economic-​management tools that were needed 
to respond, quickly and massively, to the human and economic impact of the 
pandemic. This was as true in federations as it was in devolved unitary states.
Let’s have a look now at how several federations have coped with the crisis, 
examining chiefly the impact on the roles of the respective orders of govern­
ment. There are three general patterns.1 The first is the concentration of polit­
ical and administrative initiatives in the central government of the federation. 
The second is the strengthening of the roles of both the subnational and the 
national governments –​ heightened initiative and activity in what we have 
called the two centers, national and subnational. The third pattern is a clearly 
stronger role for the states of the federation at the expense of the central gov­
ernment. We will note below instances of each.
The first possibility, then, is that the pandemic leads to a concentration of 
power in the central government. Arguably, that is what has been happen­
ing in Malaysia. Already a highly centralized federation, Malaysia’s federal 
government holds responsibility for the regulation of hospitals and most 
aspects of public health; with the exceptions being shared jurisdiction. The 
National Security Council, chaired by the Prime Minister, has been the critical 
decision-​making forum; state-​government heads were not included in its first 
meeting, but, after strong opposition, they were brought to the table. Some 
observers have argued, however, that, paradoxically, the experience of central 
dominance in Malaysia in the management of the covid-​19 crisis is fostering 
decentralist pressures “that will change public administration in Malaysia for 
goodˮ (Yeoh, 2020).
Like Malaysia, South Africa is a highly centralized federation, both con­
stitutionally and fiscally. The nine provinces are almost entirely dependent 
on financial transfers from the central government for their operations. 
The covid-​19 crisis has further enhanced the already dominant role of the 
national government. It declared a national state of disaster in response to the 
virus, which permitted it to issue regulations applicable throughout the coun­
try and in all jurisdictions. It instituted a severely enforced lockdown, entailing 
several instances of human-​rights abuses. One observer stated: “Not only has 
	1	 The fourth theoretical possibility, namely, that neither order of government reacts actively to 
the Coronavirus, is not plausible, and, so far as I know, there is no empirical instance of this 
behavior.
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

The Impact of covid-19 on Federal Countries
137
the national government assumed the leadership role, but one of the casu­
alties has been constitutionalism, both with reference to the multilevel gov­
ernment but also the rule of lawˮ (Steytler, 2020).2 Nevertheless, the national 
government’s early management of the crisis attracted widespread public 
acceptance. The difference between the current President Cyril Ramaphosa’s 
energetic, evidence-​based leadership in combatting the Coronavirus and the 
passive resistance and magical thinking that marked former President Thabo 
Mbeki’s handling of hiv/​aids could not be starker. The long-​term impact of 
the Coronavirus on South Africa’s model of federalism or quasi-​federalism 
remains to be seen.
India offers another example of a federation that has gathered power at the 
center in response to the crisis. This appears not to be just a matter of a tem­
porary assertion of federal authority, designed to support the national lead­
ership deemed necessary to fashion coherent policies to address the virus. It 
appears that the crisis is also being used –​ more explicitly and self-​consciously 
than in other instances –​ as an opportunity to initiate long-​term structural 
changes in the assignment of state responsibilities in favor of the federal gov­
ernment. Both the federal government and a number of state governments 
invoked legislation permitting them a sweeping capacity to act in response to 
the pandemic. It is the federal government, however, that primarily exercised 
these powers, with the states accepting central government leadership, lead­
ing to a nationwide lock-​down, the sealing of state borders, the suspension of 
transportation service, and the imposition of quarantine and social-​distancing 
measures. Neither Indian legislatures nor courts have imposed significant con­
straints on this bold exercise of executive authority (Bhatia, 2020). While sub­
sequent stages of the process saw a degree of balance restored, the lockdown 
weakened the states fiscally, leading to their increased reliance on the cen­
tral authority. In addition, the central government introduced changes in the 
approved debt liability of the states, and proceeded with significant reforms 
in the agricultural sector, a field in which the states have been the principal 
actors. Perhaps surprisingly, these moves have occasioned little opposition 
from state governments. As Anirudh Burman writes: “Both measures —​ the 
increase in borrowing limits and the agricultural reforms —​ are examples of 
the center using the pandemic as an opportunity to address long-​standing gov­
ernance issues in many Indian states. In doing so, it has been recognized that 
the pandemic has created unique financial and political vulnerabilities in state 
	2	 See also, Qinot, 2020.
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

138
Cameron
governments. This has increased the likelihood of them acquiescing to the gov­
ernance priorities of the centerˮ (Burman, 2020).
If the crisis has led to the concentration of power in the central government 
in some federations, the second pattern we have mentioned is that the pan­
demic fosters the accumulation of greater power and higher levels of activity 
in both orders of government, national and subnational. Both are galvanized 
into action by the challenges of covid-​19. Arguably, that is what has happened 
in such federations as Canada and Germany.
In Canada, much more decentralized than either Malaysia or South Africa, 
both the federal and provincial governments have assumed enhanced lead­
ership roles, and there has been an unusual level of cooperation between the 
two orders of government. Prime Minister Trudeau has held regular confer­
ence calls with his provincial counterparts to coordinate a comprehensive 
response, and to gather information about provincial needs. Through part of 
the first phase of the virus, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau appeared almost 
nightly to speak to the country about the Coronavirus and the steps his gov­
ernment was taking to address both the public health and economic issues 
confronting Canadians. In March 2020, his government initiated a massive 
economic response to the crisis, committing more than $25 billion to support 
Canadian workers and businesses and to prop up the ailing economy. Health 
care rests predominantly with the provinces in Canada, although there is a fed­
eral Canada Health Act, which, together with substantial fiscal health transfers 
to provinces, gives Ottawa a voice in health policy, if not in the day-​to-​day man­
agement of the health care system. There are public-​health officers in the ten 
provinces (and many cities) as well as at the federal level. The provinces have 
been very active, moving their communities through the different pandemic-​
control stages, and even in some cases closing their provincial borders to 
other Canadians. Indeed, the Atlantic provinces created their own regional 
bubble, allowing free movement within the participating four provinces of 
New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia, and Newfoundland and 
Labrador, but blocking entry or requiring quarantine for those entering from 
elsewhere in Canada or from other parts of the world. It seems highly likely 
that the courts will be asked to determine whether these domestic barriers 
offend the constitutional guarantee of free movement within the country.
Unlike Canadian federalism, which provides virtually no institutional rep­
resentation of the provinces in the halls of the federal government and which 
generally separates constitutional powers into two watertight compartments, 
the German federal system provides for decisive representation of the states or 
lander in the German upper house, the Bundesrat, and allocates to the lander 
the responsibility to implement and administer much federal legislation. This 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

The Impact of covid-19 on Federal Countries
139
system has led to deeply institutionalized executive federalism, in which the 
two orders of government work continuously and closely together on national 
issues, and to high levels of cooperation between the two orders of govern­
ment. Both of these features of German federalism have been on display in 
Germany’s response to the pandemic. A remark German Chancellor Angela 
Merkel made early in the pandemic is emblematic of the approach German 
federal and lander governments take to the challenge, especially in the context 
of an emergency, such as the pandemic: “Federalism is not there so people can 
push away responsibility. It is there so that everyone takes responsibility in 
their areaˮ (Merkel, 2020).
Both orders of government in Germany have roles to play in a pandemic, the 
federal government via a concurrent power in Article 74 (19) of the Basic Law, 
which refers to “measures to combat human and animal diseases which pose 
a danger to the public or are communicableˮ. In 2001, the federal parliament 
passed an Infection Protection Act (Infektionsschutzgesetz, IfSG) which allows 
the federal government to coordinate intergovernmental activity in the event 
of an epidemic. It has been within this legislative framework that the reflexive 
impulse of German federalism in favor of consultation and coordination has 
been channeled. Chancellor Angela Merkel has met frequently with the pre­
miers of the lander: the result has been a coherent national response to the 
pandemic with variation at the margins (Schnaubel & Hegele, 2020).3 Each 
order of government has had a role to play, and each has played it actively, 
consistent with the operating ethic of German federalism.
A third pattern, of course, is that, for any of several reasons, the pandemic 
might precipitate a decentralist response, with responsibility for fighting the 
virus flowing to the sub-​national governments and away, relatively speaking, 
from the central government. This is not what one would normally expect in 
a crisis of this kind, but a case could be made that this was what happened in 
the United States. Partly as a result of the perverse national leadership of then-​
President Trump, who challenged the actual seriousness of covid-​19 and the 
need to take public health measures to combat it, the states were left to their 
own devices to a much greater extent than would otherwise have been the 
case.4 President Trump downplayed the Coronavirus, contradicted his senior 
	3	 See also, Saurer, 2020.
	4	 But see Gordon et al. (2020), “What Federalism means for the US Response to Coronavirus 
Disease 2019”. They argue that: “In this pandemic, US public health federalism assures that the 
coronavirus response depends on zip code. A global pandemic has no respect for geographic 
boundaries, laying bare the weaknesses of federalism in the face of a crisis”. As Kumanan 
Wilson et al., point out, the United States along with Canada and Australia do confront “the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

140
Cameron
public-​health officials, encouraged the early re-​opening of the economy, and 
asserted that the states have the primary responsibility to combat covid-​19 
and to secure the ppe they need. His abdication of national leadership fostered 
a confused national response to the Coronavirus, which encouraged a patch­
work of state policies and approaches, and contributed to the poor perfor­
mance of the United States in combating the disease (Camacho & Glickman, 
2020). The fragmented, partly public, partly private US healthcare system 
added to the mix. At the time of writing, the United States led the world in the 
total number of cases and deaths from the Coronavirus (jhu, 2020). When 
the state of New York became the epicenter of the pandemic in the US in the 
spring of 2020, Governor Andrew Cuomo became the unquestioned political 
authority leading the fight against the virus within his jurisdiction, appearing 
night after night on television, reporting on the progress of the disease, speak­
ing home truths to his citizens about what they had to do, taking measures as 
needed to stop the spread of the virus. At times, Governor Cuomo seemed to be 
the de facto national leader as well, at least for those Americans who took the 
virus seriously. All in all, the US federation’s response to the pandemic in the 
early going was highly regionalized, with States pursuing often contradictory 
approaches. The confused and fragmented leadership offered opportunities 
for some Americans to contest the seriousness of the virus and for some to turn 
the refusal to wear masks into a badge of liberty. On the evidence, this overall 
approach proved to be a highly ineffective way of managing the pandemic.
On the other hand, if we shift our focus from pandemic management to 
management of the economy during this period, the picture looks quite dif­
ferent, with Washington playing a leading role. Congress and the President 
approved the largest relief assistance program in US history with the pas­
sage in March 2020, of the $2 trillion cares Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief and 
Economic Security Act) providing financial relief and assistance to workers and 
their families, businesses, and state, local, tribal and territorial governments.
A second large federation has broadly speaking followed an approach sim­
ilar to that of the United States, with similarly poor results. At the time of 
writing, Brazil had the third largest number of covid-​19 cases and the sec­
ond largest number of deaths. Once a leader in combatting infectious diseases, 
particularly hiv/​aids, Brazil is seriously under-​performing, owing primarily 
to a failure of national leadership and the incoherent policy and administra­
tive response that has been the result. The acute poverty in which millions 
challenge that authority over several of the core capacity requirements (is) primarily located 
at the state or province level” (Wilson et al., 2008, 217).
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

The Impact of covid-19 on Federal Countries
141
of Brazilians live exacerbated the situation. Emulating Donald Trump, Brazil’s 
populist President, Jair Bolsonaro, downplayed the seriousness of covid-​
19, calling it a “little fluˮ, and focused more attention on economic recovery 
than on controlling the spread of the virus. Many of Bolsonaro’s most mili­
tant supporters followed his example, noisily resisting the subnational govern­
ments’ struggle to contain the virus within their jurisdictions. The President’s 
approach led to major conflicts within his administration, further confusing 
the national response and engendering resistance to national policy among 
the states.5 President Bolsonaro’s health minister was dismissed early in the 
crisis, followed shortly thereafter by the resignation of his successor.6
	
Conclusion
This highly abbreviated survey of several federations suggests that federalism 
mediates responses to the pandemic, but it does not define or pre-​determine 
what those responses will be. The constitutional distribution of powers estab­
lishes grooves through which policy and administrative action are inclined to 
flow. The two-​centers reality adds a level of complexity to the response, but 
also provides scope for regionally sensitive policy and practice. However, the 
actual pattern of response relies on a variety of factors, such as political lead­
ership, the state of the healthcare system, and political culture, that go far 
beyond the constitutional structures for assigning power in the given coun­
try. Just as there are diverse federations, and varied political, cultural, and 
economic circumstances within those federations, so there is a multiplicity of 
policy responses and administrative strategies for dealing with the virus. Both 
a decentralized, “water-​tight compartmentsˮ federation like Canada and an 
interlocking, mutually dependent federation like Germany can accommodate 
activist government on the part of both orders of the federation in response to 
the pandemic. A moderately centralized federation like the United States can 
nevertheless experience a relatively passive federal-​government public-​health 
response to the pandemic, largely through a failure of leadership, even though 
one would have anticipated a vigorous national response, based on historical 
experience. At the same time, Congress and the President managed to approve 
	5	 Unlike the United States, Brazil has a system “in which necessary legislative authority exists 
at the federal level and regional governments are dependent on central governments for 
funding, which allows conditions to be attached to funding” (Wilson et al., 2008, 217).
	6	 The information in this paragraph is drawn from: Urban & Saad-​Diniz (2020). See 
also: Queiroz Cunha, 2020; Abrucio et al., 2020.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

142
Cameron
some significant economic support measures to counteract the highly negative 
effects of widespread infection in the US. What is perhaps more predictable 
is that in centralized federations, especially those with established central-​
government emergency powers, the federal government has tended to conclu­
sively lead the way.
If the federal structure of government, then, appears to be but one factor 
shaping a country’s response to the pandemic, and not normally the most sig­
nificant one, what are some of the others? I would note several in closing.
First, as a condition of much else, the willingness of leaders and citizens 
to address the pandemic on its own terms, as a health crisis, rather than as 
a priority among competing priorities, is likely to shape the effectiveness of 
the public-​health response. There is a clear, enduring tension in a pandemic 
between protecting public health and maintaining the health of the economy. 
Shutting things down to control the virus does serious damage to the economy 
and the material wellbeing of the population. Opening things up to get the 
economy going again uncages the virus. There is a brutal calculus here that 
political and health officials all over the world are seeking to make. We saw 
that the central government in India appeared to be seeking long-​term power 
advantages for itself, not directly related to its management of the public-​
health crisis. Several governments have spoken of the need to “build back bet­
terˮ, that is, to take advantage of the unsettling of the population to achieve 
some unrelated political goals. All this is tricky because it blurs the purity of 
the focus on the health crisis and raises questions of the bona fides of those 
leading the attack on the virus.
This leads us to a second point: leadership, both political and expert. 
Politicians who consistently convey a humane, grounded concern for their citi­
zens, and who help people to understand and give shape to the challenges they 
are confronting, neither inflating nor diminishing the scope of what must be 
confronted or its duration, will receive the support and understanding of their 
public. Experts, too, have an unusually critical role to play, as can be seen in 
the fact that public health professionals assume prominent leadership roles in 
their own right if they exhibit the qualities indicated above. During the period 
discussed here, Anthony Fauci was a highly trusted expert in the United States, 
just as was, at the subnational level, Bonnie Henry, the Provincial Health Officer 
of British Columbia, who was followed closely by the public –​ and not only in 
British Columbia –​ for her calm, authoritative guidance and reassurance.
In a sphere such as public health, science and evidence come into their 
own, our third point. The virus is implacable and untouched by politics or 
preference. The first and most important point is to understand it and what 
it can do. This is a task for scientists and public-​health professionals. Credible 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

The Impact of covid-19 on Federal Countries
143
and authoritative science communication is a godsend in such a crisis. We 
have seen how its importance can survive even the reversal of advice as to 
the understanding of the disease advances. Masks were initially thought to 
be unnecessary and possibly even unhelpful; as research led to a deepening 
understanding of the virus, scientists realized the importance of aerosol trans­
mission of the infection and reversed their advice. Most people understood 
this evolving guidance to be the product of following the evidence, not the 
result of shoddy thinking or phony expertise.
Which leads us to a fourth point, namely, the indispensable element of trust 
that links the leaders and the led? Why should we believe the scientists or 
the politicians? One can readily see the real-​world, destructive consequences 
of a loss of trust in science in the anti-​vaccine movement, which has gained 
strength in a number of countries. This limits the reach and effectiveness of 
vaccines in driving down the incidence of the disease. A willingness to believe 
what scientists and political leaders say is a treasured resource whose loss 
imperils good government and timely and effective action to combat an insid­
ious menace. Former President Trump so adulterated political discourse in 
the United States that a majority of citizens refused to believe a word he says. 
His capacity to provide rational leadership was destroyed as a result. Citizens 
do not expect their political leaders to be right all the time; they do not even 
expect to agree with them all the time, but they do need them to be honest 
and straightforward on the critical issues and demonstrate in their words and 
deeds respect for the people they serve.
We have already touched on our final point several times, since it is a 
thread that runs through so much of what we have been saying: the impor­
tance of public communication, of speech. Politics is speech. A liberal demo­
cratic society rests heavily on voluntary compliance shaped by speech, rather 
than on coercive measures. This is doubly true in a pandemic where rules and 
guidelines are necessarily changing frequently and where the central issue is 
the shaping of appropriate personal conduct, which is not readily suscepti­
ble to enforcement or control by agents of the state. Persuasive, authoritative 
communication from trusted public figures is in all likelihood the most pow­
erful instrument in effecting a rapid change in political culture and human 
practice, at least in a democracy. It may need to be buttressed by active regu­
lation and by the pressure of public opinion, but it is difficult to see how the 
required behavior can be produced at short notice in the absence of effective 
communication.
These, then, I would suggest, are considerations that play a decisive role in 
shaping a country’s response to the shock of a pandemic, whether that country 
is constituted as a federation or a unitary state.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

144
Cameron
	
Bibliography
Abrucio, Fernando Luiz, E. J. Grin, C. Franzese, C. İ. Segatto, and C. G. Couto (2020), 
“Combating COVID-​19 under Bolsonaro’s Federalism: a Case of Intergovernmental 
Incoordination”, Revista de Administracao Publica Vol. 54, No. 4, August 2020.
Bhatia, Gautam (2020), “India’s Executive Response to COVID-​19”, in The Regulatory 
Review, University of Pennsylvania Law School, May 4. https://​www.there​grev​iew 
.org/​2020/​05/​04/​bha​tia-​ind​ias-​execut​ive-​respo​nse-​covid-​19 (accessed 20 July, 2021).
Burman, Anirudh (2020), “How COVID-​19 is Changing Indian Federalism”, in East Asia 
Forum, July 28. https://​www.eastas​iafo​rum.org/​2020/​07/​28/​how-​covid-​19-​is-​chang​
ing-​ind​ian-​fed​eral​ism (accessed 20 July, 2021).
Camacho, Alejandro E., and Robert L. Glickman (2020), “The Trump Administration’s 
Pandemic Response is Structured to Fail”, in The Regulatory Review, University of 
Pennsylvania Law School, May 19. https://​www. theregreview.org/​2020/​05/​19/​
camacho-​glicksman-​trump-​administration-​pandemic-​response-​structured-​fail 
(accessed 20 July, 2021).
Gordon, Sarah H., Nicole Huberfeld, and David K. Jones (2020), “What Federalism 
Means for the US Response to Coronavirus Disease 2019”, in Jama Health Forum, 
May 8. https://​jama​netw​ork.com/​chann​els/​hea​lth-​forum/​ fullarticle/​2766033 
(accessed 20 July, 2021).
Johns Hopkins University (jhu) Coronavirus Resource Center (2020), October 
6. https://​coro​navi​rus.jhu.edu (accessed 20 July, 2021).
Merkel, Angela (2020), “Germany Federalism Analysis” in cnn, April 16. https://​edit​
ion.cnn.com/​2020/​04/​16/​eur​ope/​mer​kel-​trump-​germ​any-​fed​eral​ism-​analy​sis-​intl/​
index.html (accessed 20 July, 2021).
Qinot, Geo (2020), “Regulatory Justification and Coordination in South Africa”, in The 
Regulatory Review, University of Pennsylvania Law School, April 29. https://​www 
.there​grev​iew.org/​2020/​04/​29/​qui​not-​reg​ulat​ory-​justif​icat​ion-​coord​inat​ion-​south 
-​afr​ica (accessed 20 July, 2021).
Queiroz Cunha, Bruno (2020), “Brazil’s COVID-​19 Response is Caught Between 
Denialism and Technocratic Hubris”, in The Regulatory Review, University of 
Pennsylvania Law School, June 1. https://​www.there​grev​iew.org/​ 2020/​06/​01/​
cunha-​brazil-​covid-​19-​response-​caught-​between-​denialism-​technocratic-​hubris 
(accessed 20 July, 2021).
Saurer, Johannes (2020), “COVID-​19 and Cooperative Administrative Federalism in 
Germanyˮ, in The Regulatory Review, University of Pennsylvania Law School, May 
13. https://​www.there​grev​iew.org/​2020/​05/​13/​sau​rer-​covid-​19-​coop​erat​ive-​adm​inis​
trat​ive-​fed​eral​ism-​germ​any (accessed 20 July, 2021).
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

The Impact of covid-19 on Federal Countries
145
Schnabel, Johanna, and Yvonne Hegele (2020), “COVID-​19 and Federal Dynamics in 
Germany: Business as Usual”, in Uacesterrpol, June 9. https://​ uacesterrpol.word 
press.com/​2020/​06/​09/​covid-​19-​and-​federal-​dynamics-​in-​germany-​business-​as 
-​usual (accessed 20 July, 2021).
Steytler, Nico (2020), “Federalism and the COVID-​19 Crisis: A Perspective on South 
Africa”, in Forum of Federations. http://​www.forum​fed.org/​publi​cati​ons/​ 9017 
(accessed 20 July, 2021).
Urban, Mariana, and Eduardo Saad-​Diniz (2020), “Why Brazil’s COVID-​19 Response is 
Failing”, in The Regulatory Review, University of Pennsylvania Law School, June 22. 
https://​www.there​grev​iew.org/​2020/​06/​22/​urban-​saad-​diniz-​bra​zil-​covid-​19-​respo​
nse-​fail​ing (accessed 20 July, 2021).
Wilson, Kumanan, C. McDougal, D. P. Fidler, and H. Lazar (2008), “Strategies for 
Implementing the New International Health Regulations in Federal Countries”, in 
Bulletin of the World Health Organization, March, 86 (3).
Yeoh, Tricia (2020), “Federalism and the COVID-​19 Crisis: State-​Federal Tensions 
Arise in Malaysia”, in Forum of Federations. http://​www.forum​fed. org/​publica 
tions/​federalism-​and-​the-​covid-​19-​crisis-​state-​federal-​tensions-​arise-​in-​malaysia 
(accessed 20 July, 2021).
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Eduardo Mendieta, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_017
­chapter 15
Is a Virus a Dispositif?
Pandemics as Thanatopolitics
Eduardo Mendieta
1	
The Anthropocenic Virus
“Yes” is the emphatic answer to the question in the title of my contribution 
to this anthology. How, however, can a virus, an event, and fact of nature, be a 
device, a mechanism, an apparatus? In the following I will argue that in some 
pre-​historical time “nature” was left to its own tectonic, cyclical, timeless, or 
non-​temporal temporalities, the time of sedimentation and erosion, but that 
over the last centuries, at least since the so-​called “discovery” of the New World, 
we have entered an era in which human time and natural time have begun 
to converge, intermingle and reciprocally disrupt planetary time (Mendieta, 
2020). This is exactly what the term “Anthropocene” is meant to explain, or 
grapple with, namely the way in which human history and natural history have 
become so interlinked and mutually clocking that we now live in one time: the 
time of natural catastrophe that turns out to be the time of human disas­
ter. Many processes, factors, and dynamics are gathered under the name of 
“Anthropocene”. Anthropocene is the part and parcel of globalization, began 
with the Colombian Exchange that brought planetary life into a new biotic 
effluvial kiss that resulted in the intended and unintended exchange of viruses, 
bacterias, and microbial high-​jackings and colonizations. Anthropocene also 
means mega-​urbanization along with mega-​industrialization of agriculture, 
and thus, with deforestation and the depletion of biotic commons of life on the 
planet. This is what the Anthropocene is the other face of what has been called 
the “Sixth Extinction”. Anthropocene also means that humans have become 
a geological force that has already left its tectonic stigmata on the surface of 
the earth (Mendieta, 2019). If a meteorite had not killed off the dinosaurs, we 
would have, along with millions of living species that we have already eradi­
cated. Just as humans have become agents of extinction, we have potentiated 
certain types of killers of human life by the way we facilitate and enable their 
virulence and contagion. The Anthropocene, then, is another name for a new 
form of thanatopolics. Anthropocene, it must be underscored, is also a dissim­
ulator, and a misnomer, for behind the anodyne “Anthropos” concealed is a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Is a Virus a Dispositif?
147
global system of unsustainable economics: capitalism, with its own archeology 
and genesis in colonization, slavery, imperialism, global wars, human traffick­
ing, and genocides is not simply “anthropos” as the malevolent or naive agent. 
There is no Anthropocene that is not a Capitalocene, a Plantationcene, and 
Total Warcene, and thus A Thanatocene.
The Anthropocene means that there is no place on the earth that is deso­
late and untouched by the acquisitive hands of homo economicus. There is no 
naked, brute, isolated, virginal, and undisturbed life. All life has become pre­
carious because of the way we have organized our lives. Life itself, human, veg­
etable, sea, air, life, all life, is now caught in the machinations of our institutions 
and systems of chaotic governance and gigantic machines of production and 
commerce. Pandemic, or epidemics, were never a mere natural disaster. They 
were always social events, social facts, and political realities. How we prepare 
for the encounter between humans and pushed to the border of social inter­
action of hitherto unknown zoonotic viruses has always been and has become 
more of a social fact than ever. In order to offer some warrants for my hypoth­
eses, I want to, first and briefly, discuss Foucault’s work from the latter part of 
his life, when he turns to what he called “a critical ontology of our present”. The 
aim is to offer an insight into the centrality of the concept of dispositif in this 
new Foucauldian analytics of power. Then, I want to focus on how a “virus” can 
and has become a “dispositif” in a new form of governmentality: neoliberal 
governmentality, one that has turned pandemic governmentality.1
2	
From Archeology to Critical Ontology
A handy and useful way to think about the evolution of Michel Foucault’s work 
is to talk about three stages: the archeological, the genealogical, and the onto­
logical. To the former period belongs his work with The Order of Things: An 
Archeology of the Human Sciences (1966); to the second belong his History of 
Sexuality, in 4 volumes (1976–​2018), and to the third, belongs his texts dealing 
with “critique and Enlightenment” from the late seventies and early 80s, the 
period shortly before his death (these texts have been gathered in the volume 
The Politics of Truth, 1997).2 While there are overlaps between the genealogical 
and ontological periods, they are also distinctive. The ontological period has 
also been referred to as the ethical turn in Foucault’s thinking, although this 
	1	 See Mendieta, 2021.
	2	 See Elden, 2016 and Elden, 2017.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

148
Mendieta
may be a misleading moniker. In any event, in the last years of his life, Foucault 
made the following distinctions:
Three domains of genealogy are possible. First, an historical ontology 
of ourselves in relation to truth through which we constitute ourselves 
as subjects of knowledge; second an historical ontology of ourselves in 
relation to a field of power through which we constitute ourselves as sub­
jects acting on others; third, an historical ontology in relation to ethics 
through which we constitute ourselves as moral agents.
dreyfus and rabinow, 1983, 237
Thus, we can see that Foucault is making legible three distinct historical or 
genealogical domains: knowledge, domination, and subjectivity. Now, how­
ever, under the critical ontological lens, they are to be studied along the fol­
lowing lines: the history of knowledge, what he used to call the archeology 
of the human sciences, has become a study of the “forms of verdiction”, i.e. 
the forms of the production of truth and domains of truth; the history of 
domination now is to be studied under the rubric of procedures of govern­
mentality or history of regimes of governance, i.e. how we govern others and 
ourselves; and finally, the history of subjectivity is now to be studied under 
the rubric of technologies or, what Foucault sometimes called “pragmatics” 
of the self, that is, how we constitute others as subjects and how we con­
stitute ourselves as subjectivities. Foucault, however, was interested in how 
these “three domains” conditioned our historical ontology, how they created 
specific conditions for the crystallization of certain forms of power, truth, 
and subjectivities. This is why Foucault shifted from talking about epistemes 
towards “dispositifs”. In a 1977 interview, talking about his project of a History 
of Sexuality, Foucault explains what he meant by dispositif, and this bears 
quoting at length:
What I’m trying to pick out with this term is, firstly, a thoroughly het­
erogeneous ensemble consisting of discourses, institutions, architectural 
forms, regulatory decisions, laws, administrative measures, scientific 
statements, philosophical, moral, and philanthropic propositions-​ in 
short, the said as much as the unsaid. Such are the elements of the appa­
ratus. The apparatus itself is the system of relations that can be estab­
lished between these elements. Secondly, what I am trying to identify 
in this apparatus is precisely the nature of the connection that can 
exist between these heterogeneous elements. Thus, a particular dis­
course can figure at one time as the program of an institution, and at 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Is a Virus a Dispositif?
149
another it can function as a means of justifying or masking a practice 
which itself remains silent, or as a secondary re-​interpretation of this 
practice, opening out for it a new field of rationality. In short, between 
these elements, whether discursive or non-​discursive, there is a sort 
of interplay of shifts of position and modifications of function which 
can also vary very widely. Thirdly, I understand by the term ‘apparatus’ 
a sort of-​ shall we say formation which has as its major function at 
a given historical moment that of responding to an urgent need. The 
apparatus thus has a dominant strategic function. This may have been, 
for example, the assimilation of a floating population found to be bur­
densome for an essentially mercantilist economy: there was a strategic 
imperative acting here as the matrix for an apparatus which gradually 
undertook the control or subjection of madness, mental illness, and 
neurosis.
foucault, 1980, 194–​195
From this informative, if sometimes disorienting, definition, I want to under­
score three aspects: a dispositif is an “ensemble” of discursive and materials 
elements; a dispositif is an apparatus made of both material and immaterial 
(ideological, one might say) elements.3 Thus, for instance, the “prison” is a dis­
positif that is a central material and discursive formation of the disciplinary 
and punitive society. It is made of brick, mortar, and iron bars, but also of all 
the punitive justice discourse and sociological theories about criminality, and 
so on. Second, the dispositif is a connector, perhaps we can say a switching 
station, which connects and allows the circulation of power, among the mate­
rial and the ideological (or discursive) ensemble of relations. Returning to the 
prison, as a dispositif, it allows certain kinds of relations to be materialized 
and ideologized between class, race, gender, criminality, and social order. We 
can say then that the prison is a racializing and class branding, and increas­
ingly a gendering, dispositif because it enables for race and class to be materi­
alized and ideologized in specific forms. The third element that is important to 
underscore, is what Foucault calls the “dominant strategic function”, by which 
Foucault means that dispositifs assume their centrality given certain political 
and class interests: the criminalization of Black and poor people becomes both 
a sanction not to address economic injustice and a means for the perpetuation 
of those economic inequities.
	3	 See Agamben, 2009, 1–​24.
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

150
Mendieta
3	
The Virus as a Dispositif
In the preface to the paperback edition of his now indispensable book, 
Epidemics and Society: From the Black Death to the Present, Prof. of History and 
the History of Medicine Frank M. Snowden, writes very tellingly: “Epidemics 
afflict societies through the specific vulnerabilities people have created by 
their relationships with the environment, other species, and each other … 
covid-​19 flared up and spread because it is suited to the society we have 
made” (Snowden, 2020, ix). A dispositif is meant to be a strategic ensemble 
of both material and ideological institutions, and nothing like covid-​19 has 
made this most brutally clear. As Snowden writes: covid-​19 “is suited to the 
society we made”. And to that extent we may say, we invented it, even if we did 
not create it. In what follows, I will focus on the US, and its failure to deal with 
covid-​19 to illustrate how this virus is a dispositif. This focus is warranted by 
at least three reasons: first, we do not have enough information about how the 
virus is ravaging economies, lives, and social systems across the planet; second, 
the US is 4 % of the world population, and yet it accounts for 20 % of deaths 
due to the pandemic –​and this is so far a conservative estimate. Third, like few 
other countries in the world, the US political elite has politicized the pandemic 
thus making nakedly evident, how viruses are social and political events, just 
as they are natural happenings. We will focus on three striking aspects of the 
ensemble and strategic function of the virus.
First, the covid-​19 pandemic has made it starkly evident how the mod­
ern neoliberal global economy is an economy of precarity. Neoliberalism is a 
form of governmentality that rules by means of precarity. Neoliberalism’s gos­
pel has been that the best government is the government that rules the least, 
governing the least, meant dismantling the “Welfare” or “Social” state that was 
forged after centuries of worker struggles for basic income and a basic social 
safety net. In the US this precarity is expressed in the following simple statis­
tic. In its May 2020 “Report on the Economic Well-​Being of U.S. Households in 
2019, featuring supplemental date for April 2020” the Board of Governors of 
the Federal Reserve System, reports that in 2019 approximately 63% of adults 
could cover an unexpected $ 400 expense by using saving, cash, or credit card, 
while the remaining 37 % would not have been able to do, having to put it on a 
credit card, and not being able to meet their debts for the moth (bgfrs, 2020, 
p.29).4 This means that 37 % of US households do not have the liquid assets, or 
	4	 Compare with p. 23, where we get a more granular overview of this precarity. See Box 3: “The 
Credit Card Debt Puzzle”.
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Is a Virus a Dispositif?
151
savings, to deal with an unexpected expense, such as either a car breakdown or 
a medical expense. At the same time, 1 in 5 adults reported that they wanted to 
work more, or were underemployed, or experienced employment fluctuations. 
The employment sectors more affected by these fluctuations, often due to the 
seasonal character of the work, are in the service, entertainment, construction, 
and other social services sectors. Precarity is tethered to job security, and most 
job security is in the sector of the labor market that requires college and post­
graduate education.
Second, the covid-​19 pandemic has made it bluntly clear how the so-​called 
“social contract” is a “racial contract”, this means that the privilege of whites is 
shouldered by the sacrifices of Black and other racial minorities, who are more 
disproportionally represented in those sectors of the economy most vulner­
able to the demands of having to work while also having to be more directly 
exposed to the danger of contagion. The Pew Center, a non-​partisan research 
center, has reported that 61 % of Latino/​as have lost their jobs due to the pan­
demic, while 44 % of Blacks have lost theirs, in contrast to only 38 % of Whites. 
Latino/​as are experiencing a higher rate of unemployment than the average US 
citizen. In April of 2020, it spiked at 18.5 % to then come down in June to 14.5 
% (Krogstad & Lopez, 2020).
Third, while in April of 2020 the US hit the 14.7% unemployment milestone, 
which has now recovered to 7.9 in September, the fact is that unemployed con­
tinues to remain higher among Latino/​as and Black (bls, 2020). This means 
that labor precarity is pegged to race and ethnicity. When we linked financial 
precarity, labor precarity, with health precarity, we are not surprised to find 
out that Blacks have a mortality rate of 3.4, while Latino/​as have a 3.3 mortality 
rate, compare to Whites.5 We live in an economy in which race and ethnicity 
are indisputable factors in longevity or life expectancy. Longevity has become 
an index of both social justice and economic well-​being. In the US, longevity 
is clearly and explicitly affected by one’s race, class, and ethnicity. This means 
that longevity is racialized because the adverse effects of race are exacerbated 
with both class and ethnicity. This has resulted in what we could call one of the 
antinomies of this pandemic, namely that the most essential workers –​ whose 
work is the most indispensable but also least protected and remunerated job –​ 
are also the most expendable. Our biopolitical economy has as its Janus’s face, 
a thanatological side, its necrological side, in which some are left to die and put 
	5	 See apm Research Lab, 2021. The apm Research Lab has continued to update its statistic, but 
the rates and percentages have remained essentially unchanged. See the updated version of 
their report from March 5th, 2021 (accessed June 29th, 2021).
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

152
Mendieta
in the front lines of contagion, while others are made to live, by being quaran­
tine behind the medical system of care and health.
4	
Pandemic Governmentality
Foucault distinguished between Hobbesian and Biopolitical Sovereignty; while 
the former abided by the dictum: “make die and let live”, the latter abided by 
the dictum: “make live and let die”. Racism, and in particular racism as politi­
cally legislated and legitimated by state apparatuses and popular sovereignty, 
became the dispositif through which the sovereign, a designated bearer of the 
sovereignty of the people, reclaimed its right to make die. The virus, whether 
covid-​19, sars, aids, and so on, have become dispositifs to make die and 
make live, which means that some who have been branded are made to die 
and some are made to live. Under neoliberalism, we can call this biopolitical 
split, “necrological political arithmetic” (Mendieta, 2021, 20–​22). I can think of 
no better exemplar that illustrates this than how Donald Trump (mis)handled 
the covid-​19 pandemic. He knew, from both the who and members of the 
cdc that the covid-​19 was highly contagious, worse than your average flu. 
Yet, his rhetoric dismissed and downplayed the urgency of the coming health 
crisis. More egregious and grotesque is that as the Pandemic spread across the 
world and the US, Trump used the virus as both a political carrot and a pun­
ishing stick.6 Above I illustrated how some are made to die, through exposure 
	6	 On November 27th, 2020, The New York Times published an amazing article on the sequence 
of events that led to Trump pulling the United States out of the who, an organization that 
the U.S. helped created and had historically funded generously. The article details that Trump 
had sent Andrew Bemberg, the U.S. ambassador in Geneva to meet with the Tedros Adhanom 
Ghebreyesus, the General Director of the who. He brought a list of seven demands. The 
General Director considered them but saw them exactly as what they were: blackmails by 
Trump. The demands required the who to investigate China, to coordinate with the US on 
travel bans, and to develop with the US, a pre-​approval system for potential vaccines and 
cures, it also demanded that the who send a team to Taiwan to investigate how the coun­
try had succeeded in controlling the pandemic. Acquiescing to the demands would have 
meant that the who would have turned into a political tool of Trump, another means to 
continue his war on China and against a properly global response to the Pandemic. In con­
junction with the speech Trump gave on April 27th, 2020, these demands constitute one of 
the most vulgar and egregious attacks on an essential “global” institution that was set up to 
monitor and facilitate global responses to global threats to global health. See Apuzzo et al., 
2020. Additionally, United States Congressman Lloyd Doggett of Texas has kept track of the 
absurd pronouncements from Trump on the Covid-​19 Pandemic. See Doggett, 2021. See also, 
Abutaleb and Paletta, 2021.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Is a Virus a Dispositif?
153
and the systematization of certain pre-​condition, i.e. vulnerabilities, which are 
the systematization of “precarity”. Modern pandemics have become a means 
for the exercise in the sovereign right, of a certain kind of strategically identi­
fied version of the sovereign –​ the healthy, White, non-​criminal, good, citizen 
that is the genetically strong stock of the people –​ to make die and make live. 
Thus, a new form of state has arisen: the biosecurity state, which is just an aug­
mented version of the biopolitical state. We may be tempted to think that this 
new biosecurity state is going to exercise and imposed what Giorgio Agamben 
(2020, 15) has called “technological-​sanitarian despotism”. But this is a naïve 
and misguided reading of how neoliberal, i.e. biopolitical, i.e. thanatological 
politics is exercised. Some get to stay home and leave cities that are infection 
hot spots, most are not allowed, or have the luxury, to work remotely and safely. 
Neoliberalism exacerbates inequities that capitalism both creates and preys 
on; capitalism immiserates the many so that the very few can enrich. By the 
same logic, the un-​health of the many is the well-​being of the few, and thus 
public health becomes yet another commodity to privatize and sell as a com­
modity. To this extent, Agamben is mixing categories. If anything, we should 
not talk about “despotism” but rather, as Donatella Di Cesare (2020) does, of 
neoliberal and capitalist “asphyxia”.
Despotism that has got you pegged by race, class, ethnicity, and gender, and 
zip code, is not “despotism”; rather, it is racism deployed by the sovereign to 
make some die and let others live. Viruses are ensembles of dna, ideologies, 
non-​existing hospitals, respirators, as well as both national and international 
airports, container ships that cross the many seas, and discourses about who is 
essential, who matters, who is disposable, and economies entangled in a plan­
etary contagious kiss.
	
Bibliography
Abutaleb, Yasmeen, and Damian Paletta (2021), Nightmare Scenario: Inside the 
Trump Administration’s Response to the Pandemic That Changed History, 
New York: HarperCollins.
Agamben, Giorgio (2009), What is an Apparatus? And Other Essays, translated by David 
Kishik and Stefan Pedatella, Stanford University Press.
Agamben, Giorgio (2020), A che punto siamo? L’epidemia come politica, 
Roma: Quodlibert srl.
apm Research Lab (2021), “The Color of Coronavirus: COVID-​19 Death by Race and 
Ethnicity in the U.S”. March 5. https://​www.apm​rese​arch​lab.org/​ covid/​deaths-​by 
-​race (accessed 28 July, 2021).
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

154
Mendieta
Apuzzo, Matt, Noah Weiland, and Selam Gebrekidan (2020), “Trump Gave W.H.O. a 
List of Demands. Hours Later, He Walked Away”, in The New York Times, November 
27. https://​www.nyti​mes.com/​2020/​11/​27/​world/​eur​ope/​ trump-​who-​tedros-​china 
-​virus.html (accessed 28 July, 2021).
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (bgfrs) (2020), “Report on the 
Economic Well-​Being of U.S. Households in 2019”, featuring supplemental date for 
April 2020, p. 29. https://​www.fed​eral​rese​rve.gov/​ publications/​files/​2019-​report 
-​economic-​well-​being-​us-​households-​202005.pdf (accessed 28 July, 2021).
Bureau of Labor Statistic (bls) (2020), “The Labor Situation, September 2020”. https://​
www.bls.gov/​news.rele​ase/​pdf/​emp​sit.pdf. (accessed 28 July, 2021).
Di Cesare, Donatella (2020), Immunodemocracy: Capitalist Asphyxia, Translated by 
David Broder, South Pasadena, CA: Semiotext(e) interventions series.
Doggett, Lloyd (2021), “Timeline of Trump’s Coronavirus Responses”. https://​dogg​
ett.house.gov/​media-​cen​ter/​blog-​posts/​timel​ine-​trump-​s-​coro​navi​rus-​respon​ses 
(accessed 28 July, 2021).
Dreyfus, Hubert L., and Paul Rabinow (1983), Michel Foucault: Beyond Structuralism 
and Hermeneutics, Second Edition, University of Chicago Press.
Elden, Stuart (2016), Foucault’s Last Decade, Cambridge: Polity.
Elden, Stuart (2017), Foucault: The Birth of Power, Cambridge: Polity.
Foucault, Michel (1980), Power/​Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972–​
1977, Edited by Colin Gordon, New York: Pantheon.
Krogstad, Jens Manuel, and Mark Hugo Lopez (2020), “Coronavirus Economic 
Downturn has Hit Latinos Especially Hard”, The Pew Center. https://​www.pewr​esea​
rch.org/​hispa​nic/​2020/​08/​04/​coro​navi​rus-​econo​mic-​downt​urn-​has-​hit-​lati​nos-​esp​
ecia​lly-​hard/​. (accessed 28 July, 2021).
Mendieta, Eduardo (2019), “Edge City: Reflections on the Urbanocene and the 
Plantationcene”, in Critical Philosophy of Race, special issue on “The Anthropocene 
and Race”, Vol. 7, No.1, 81–​106.
Mendieta, Eduardo (2020), “Anthropocenic Temporalities: The Time of the End and 
the End of Time”, in Environmental Philosophy, Vol. 17, No. 1 Spring: 125–​141.
Mendieta, Eduardo (2021), “The Invisible Hand That is an Iron Fist: Neoliberal 
Biopolitical Cruelty”, in Filosofía de la Liberación: Descolonización y Transmodernidad, 
Numero 1: 13–​23.
Snowden, Frank M. (2020), Epidemics and Society: From the Black Death to the Present, 
Yale University Press.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Martin Breaugh, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_018
­chapter 16
Speaking Truth to Power
Political Courage in the Age of covid-​19
Martin Breaugh
On May 25, 2020, 17-​year old Darnella Frazier and her 9-​year old cousin stum­
bled upon one of the most horrific scenes of recent times: the extra-​judicial 
torture and killing of George Floyd by a 19-​year veteran of the Minneapolis 
police force, Derek Chauvin assisted by his fellow officers Alexander Kueng, 
Thomas Lane, and Tou Thao. In Frazier’s now-​infamous video of the murder, 
we can distinctly hear bystanders pleading with officer Chauvin to remove his 
knee from Floyd’s neck because he is “killing him“. We can also hear onlook­
ers imploring the three other officers to intervene and force Chauvin to spare 
Floyd’s life. Despite such pleas, and despite those of George Floyd himself 
(“I cannot breathe”), the officers did nothing except help Chauvin physically 
detain Floyd, thus contributing to his murder. After almost eight minutes, 
Chauvin was ordered to release his hold by the Emergency Medical Response 
Unit who had arrived on the scene. Floyd was officially pronounced dead 
shortly afterward. In this era-​defining moment, the bystanders, all ordinary 
people, found the courage to speak truth to power. And those who wielded the 
“legitimate use of violence” (Max Weber) were unable or unwilling to acknowl­
edge this truth and thus moderate their use of power.
Hannah Arendt famously argued that courage is “the political virtue by 
excellence” for “whoever entered the political realm had first to be ready to 
risk his life” (Arendt, 1989, 36). To reflect on the links between knowledge, 
power, and truth in the age of covid-​19, I will examine what I consider to be 
one of the most important political development of the times, the Black Lives 
Matter (blm) movement1 and the protests held in the aftermath of the killing 
of George Floyd, with a view to analyzing how the persistence of racialized 
police brutality renews the knowledge of racism and systemic inequalities 
in the Western world. As we can see in Frazier’s heart-​wrenching video, this 
	1	 As Jeff Shantz argues in this volume, blm is not alone in its struggle today. Indigenous rights 
groups, as well as lbgtq +​ and other movements, partake in similar struggles for a deepening 
of equality, freedom, and solidary across the globe. Cf. Jeff Shantz “States of Crisis: Pandemic, 
Policing –​ And Resistance”, p.162.
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

156
Breaugh
knowledge of stark racial inequalities emboldens the Many to speak truth to 
power via protests and organizing at the grassroots level. The risks associated 
with the spread of the sars-​CoV-​2 virus required the type of courage that 
Arendt describes for the Many to take the streets and demand justice for racial­
ized minorities in America today. Such courage was particularly significant 
because, as Eduardo Mendieta points out in this volume, “Blacks and other 
racial minorities […] are more directly exposed to the dangers of contagion” 
since they are “disproportionally represented in those sectors of the economy 
most vulnerable” to covid-​19 infections.2 To take the streets together with 
like-​minded Americans thus called for real audacity in the face of an unpre­
dictable contagion. The authoritarian reaction of the Trump administration 
to the protests added to the very real dangers of protesting and thus obliging 
additional courage to take the streets.
In order to understand the richness of the blm movement, I will first sketch 
out its historical genesis, organizational forms, and ultimate goals before turn­
ing, by way of conclusion, to the interplay between knowledge, power, and 
truth, in the midst of a global pandemic, on the streets across the United States 
as well as on Capitol Hill in Washington D.C.
1	
Historical Genesis, Organizational Forms and Ultimate Goals
Black Lives Matter began as a Twitter hashtag used by African American com­
munity organizers who were outraged by the acquittal of George Zimmerman, 
who shot and killed Trayvon Martin in Florida in February 2012. By 2013, the 
persistence of extrajudicial killings of African American citizens across the 
United States, notably that of Michael Brown in Ferguson, led to the transfor­
mation of the hashtag into a diverse social movement. For Deva Woodly (2016), 
blm is the most recent iteration of “black democratic insurgency”.
Since its inception, Black Lives Matter has recognized the intersectional­
ity of the African American experience of domination, from slavery to mass 
incarceration (Alexander, 2010). The movement is horizontally organized as an 
association of local chapters across the US and elsewhere. The different chap­
ters are required only to adhere to a set of common principles; each individual 
division preserves the right to decide the type of action they deem necessary 
in order to advance the cause. There is no hierarchy or centralized leadership 
and the membership remains the driving force of each chapter. In fact, Alicia 
	2	 Eduardo Mendieta, “Is a Virus a Dispositif? Pandemics as Thanatopolitics”,p.146
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Speaking Truth to Power
157
Garza, one of the three community organizers at the forefront of the move­
ment, insists on the non-​centrality of her own participation in Black Lives 
Matter (Cobb, 2016). Garza also contends that blm is not leaderless; rather, 
it is “leaderful“ because each individual member partakes in the leadership of 
the movement (McClain, 2017).
Detailing the organizational autonomy of local chapters embedded within 
a larger decentralized movement, Keeanga-​Yamahtta Taylor (2016, 174–​177) 
draws parallels between the structure of Black Lives Matter and Occupy Wall 
Street, highlighting the hostility levied against them both for the lack of formal 
structures and leadership. While such criticism is a common tactic to delegit­
imize the action of the Many (Breaugh, 2019), Taylor argues that Black Lives 
Matter’s grassroots and intersectional approach stands in stark contrast to pre­
vious examples, including the Civil Rights Movement, by enabling the Many to 
partake in the articulation of the struggle. In terms of the diversity of action, 
some chapters emphasize the consolidation of the bonds between African 
American parents and their children (Denver Chapter) while others stress 
the need to cultivate historical memory in order to help create community 
(Vancouver-​Washington Chapter).3 As Christopher Lebron (2017, 14) writes 
“#BlackLivesMatter represents an ideal that motivates, mobilizes, and informs 
the actions and programs of [the] many local branches of the movement”.
An important conflict emerged, however, regarding the ultimate ends of the 
movement. For some activists, Black Lives Matter needs to be policy-​oriented, 
for others it must engage in local politics, while for others still, it should remain 
the locus of protests and demonstrations against the status quo. One of the 
main criticisms of the movement is that it is “beset by debilitating internal rifts 
[…] preventing the movement from doing much at all to accomplish its aims“ 
(Sands, 2017). Against this position which is predicated upon an efficiency-​
oriented view of political action as a means to an end, I would argue that the 
conflicts and divisions in blm testify to its commitment to equality and its 
rejection of hierarchy and of “title to govern”. The pursuit of different objec­
tives such as developing policy, engaging in local politics, and protesting the 
status quo is the result of a refusal of homogeneity and an acceptance of plu­
rality. As Woodly argues, blm is “avowedly collaborative, networked and non-​
hierarchical” (Woodly, 2016).
In addition, the aforementioned challenges (policy, local involvement, and 
protesting) need to be met in order to put an end to systemic racism. Indeed, 
	3	 Information regarding the different chapters of the Black Lives Matter movement can be 
found on the blm website: https://​black​live​smat​ter.com/​take-​act​ion/​find-​a-​chap​ter/​.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

158
Breaugh
such a task requires that issues of policy must be dealt with by the Many who 
are dominated. As for the question of local political engagement, politics first 
terrain is local, even the neighborhood, since it is within a neighborhood that 
systemic racism manifests itself the most cruelly in terms of housing, police 
harassment, access to healthy food, employment, etc. At the same time, Black 
Lives Matter can also be at the forefront of the protests against police brutality 
and violence, as we recently witnessed in the aftermath of the extra-​judicial 
killing of Ahmaud Arbery, Breonna Taylor, and George Floyd (Cobb, 2020). In 
short, the fact that the movement is divided on what should be done is not 
a problem since the mobilization of the Many who are active in the differ­
ent chapters of blm unleashes democratic energies that are able to focus on a 
myriad of issues blocking the establishment of systemic equality. The fact that 
blm accepts this indicates that equality does not preclude conflict within the 
movement. It is precisely the ability to suppress conflict and conceal division, 
through edifying words like “make America great again”, that is a marker of 
regimes predicated on hierarchy and the assignment of each to their “proper” 
place in society.
2	
Knowledge, Power, and Truth in the Streets
In the face of widespread and sustained protests across the United States, the 
Trump administration has repeatedly argued that systemic inequality does 
not exist (Benner, 2020). This refusal of an established social scientific fact 
(Shapiro, 2017) is in continuity with the Administration’s repeated denial of 
the scientific consensus on climate change as well as with its ambiguity on the 
need to wear face masks in order to prevent the spread of covid-​19. In other 
words, the former Administration’s reliance on “alternate facts”, such as the oft-​
repeated claim by President Trump that he has “done more for the Black com­
munity than any other President other than Abraham Lincoln”, will not abate 
under the pressure of the streets because it is a fundamental characteristic of 
its use of political and bureaucratic power (Woodward, 2020, 583).
In fact, there is a decisive contrast between those who seek meaningful 
change for racialized Americans and the partisans of the status quo. For the 
former, it is the knowledge of the truth of systemic inequalities in America 
that drives their courage whereas, for the latter, it is a refusal of that same 
truth which fuels their fear. Under the conditions of covid-​19, the interplay 
between knowledge, power and the truth reveals that the forces of “disorder” 
or “extraordinary politics” (Kalyvas, 2008) on the streets have the strength to 
accept the truth based on knowledge and the courage to speak it to power. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Speaking Truth to Power
159
Those who control the awesome powers of the State, however, respond with 
violence and force to the demands of the Many. This reaction can be seen as an 
avowal of failure and assertion of weakness. A political community devoid of 
systemic inequality would not require violence to resolve this conflict; it would 
rather respond, for example, with public policy intended to reinforce already 
existing equality. The recourse to force and violence, as well as to a discourse 
of “law and order” betrays a political falsehood aimed at covering up the per­
sistence of inequality in America.
The mass protests of the bml movement during the first pandemic sum­
mer of 2020, as well as the reaction of the different levels of government in 
the United States, can be fruitfully contrasted with the insurrection of Trump 
supporters on Capitol Hill on January-​6 2021. This physical attack of the leg­
islative branch of the American government was based on the false assertion 
by President Trump and his main surrogates that widespread voter fraud led 
to the defeat of the incumbent President in the November 2020 Presidential 
election, thus supposedly depriving him of a “landslide victory“ (Trump, 
2021). Commonly referred to as the “Big Lie”, Trump supporters gathered in 
Washington D.C. to hear President Trump speak and then to march on the 
Capitol in order to force Vice-​President Michael Pence to refuse the pro forma 
certification of the 2020 results. The violence of the attack by Trump sup­
porters is now well documented and even sanctioned by U.S. courts of law 
(Hosenball, 2021): “Many of those crashing through the outer barricades [of 
the Capitol Building] were wearing military gear and carrying Trump flags, and 
some were wielding pipes, batons, and cans of bear spray. A few had climb­
ing gear, and some even brought night-​vision goggles and fire-​retardant gloves. 
Some engaged in hand-​to-​hand combat with the police officers, who chose not 
to fire on the crowd for fear of triggering gruesome violence” (Rucker, 2021).
At least two major points of contrast appear. First, the blm protests rested 
upon an event –​ the murder of George Floyd –​that can only be qualified as 
true, both because it was witnessed by many, as well as video recorded and 
because it illustrated, yet again, the social scientific fact of systemic racism in 
policing. The blm protests were therefore grounded in truth and knowledge. 
By comparison, the events of January-​6th were predicated upon a lie and on 
the rejection of facts that invalidated the desires of the Trump rioters. Second, 
most blm demonstrations were peaceful, and the occurrences of violence 
were limited to acts of vandalism. Conversely, the January-​6 insurrection was 
characterized by threats against politicians and acts of violence against the 
U.S. Capitol Police.
But there is more, since, as I have argued above, the reaction of the State 
to the blm protests was violent and repressive. By contrast, the January-​6th 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

160
Breaugh
insurrection was met with admiration, silence, and inaction: President Trump 
was reportedly “riveted” by the scenes of the riot on television and cheered on 
his supporters by tweeting “Mike Pence did not have the courage to do what 
should have been done to protect our Country and our Constitution” as well 
as by further tweeting his “understanding” and even his “love” for the rioters. 
In fact, the 45th President did not authorize additional troops to help secure 
the Capitol, nor did he try to speak to his ever-​loyal Vice-​President, whose 
life was clearly in danger during the riot (Rucker, 2021). The crushing and 
the concomitant political vilification of peaceful blm protests by the Trump 
Administration thus encounters its polar opposite in the affectionate and lov­
ing response of Donald J. Trump to this violent assault by his supporters on the 
legislative branch of the oldest democratic regime in the world.
Hannah Arendt, who reminded us of the importance of courage in politics, 
also claimed that “from the revolutions of 1848 to Hungarian revolution of 
1956”, the working class of Europe wrote, “one of the most glorious and prob­
ably most promising chapter[s]‌ of recent history” (Arendt, 1989, 215). I think 
that we could now claim that in this turbulent, young, and perplexing 21st cen­
tury, the Black Lives Matter movement, and its allies in resistance across the 
globe, are accomplishing the same with the pressing problems and tenacious 
fears that plague democracies today.
	
Bibliography
Alexander, Michelle (2010), The New Jim Crow, New York: The New Press.
Arendt, Hannah (1989), The Human Condition, University of Chicago Press.
Benner, Katie (2020), “Barr Says There is No Systemic Racism in Policing”, in The 
New York Times, June 7, 2020. https://​www.nyti​mes.com/​2020/​06/​ 07/​us/​politics/​
justice-​department-​barr-​racism-​police.html (accessed July 20, 2021).
Breaugh, Martin (2019), “The Plebeian Experience and the Logic of (Radical) 
Democracy”, in Constellations 26, No. 4: 581–​590.
Cobb, Jelani (2016), “The Matter of Black Lives”, in The New Yorker, March 14, 2016. 
https://​www.newyor​ker.com/​magaz​ine/​2016/​03/​14/​where-​is-​black-​lives-​mat​ter 
-​hea​ded (accessed July 20, 2021).
Cobb, Jelani (2020), “American Spring”, in The New Yorker, June 22, 2020: 15–​16.
Hosenball, Mark (2021), “Florida Man Gets 8 Months in Prison in U.S. Capitol Attack”, in 
Reuters, July 19, 2021. https://​www.reut​ers.com/​legal/​government/​us-​court-​sentences 
-​paul-​hodgkins-​prison-​role-​jan-​6-​attack-​2021-​07-​19/​ (accessed 20 July, 2021).
Kalyvas, Andreas (2008), Democracy and the Politics of the Extraordinary, Cambridge 
University Press.
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Speaking Truth to Power
161
Lebron, Christopher J. (2017), The Making of Black Lives Matter, Oxford University Press.
McClain, Dani (2017), “Can Black Lives Matter Win in the Age of Trump?”, in The 
Nation, September 19, 2017. https://​www.thenat​ion.com/​arti​cle/​can-​black-​lives 
-​mat​ter-​win-​in-​the-​age-​of-​trump (accessed 20 July, 2021).
Rucker, Philip, and Carol D. Leonnig (2021), “‘I Alone Can Fix It’ Book Excerpt: The 
Inside Story of Trump’s Defiance and Inaction on Jan. 6”, in Washington Post, July 15, 
2021. https://​www.was​hing​tonp​ost.com/​polit​ics/​ 2021/​07/​15/​jan-​6-​i-​alone-​can-​fix 
-​it-​book-​excerpt (accessed July 19, 2021).
Sands, Darren (2017), “What Happened To Black Lives Matter?”, in Buzzfeed, June 28, 
2017. https://​www.buzzf​eedn​ews.com/​arti​cle/​darr​ensa​nds/​what-​happe​ned-​to 
-​black-​lives-​mat​ter (accessed 20 July, 2021).
Shapiro, Thomas (2017), Toxic Inequality: How America’s Wealth Gap Destroys Mobility, 
Deepens the Racial Divide and Threatens Our Future, New York: Basic Books.
Taylor, Keeanga-​Yamahtta (2016), From #BlackLivesMatter to Black Liberation, 
Chicago: Haymarket Books.
Trump, Donald J. (2021), Full Transcript of Speech Delivered on January 6, 2021, 
Washington D.C. npr. https://​www.npr.org/​2021/​02/​10/​966396​848/​read-​tru​mps 
-​jan-​6-​spe​ech-​a-​key-​part-​of-​impe​achm​ent-​trial?t=​162670​1731​704 
(accessed 
July 
19, 2021).
Woodly, Deva (2016), “Black Lives Matter: The Politics of Race and Movement in the 
21st Century”, Public Seminar, 18 January 2016. https://​public​semi​nar.org/​2016/​
01/​black-​lives-​mat​ter-​the-​polit​ics-​of-​race-​and-​movem​ent-​in-​the-​21st-​cent​ury 
(accessed 20 July, 2021).
Woodward, Bob (2020), Rage, New York: Simon & Schuster.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Jeff Shantz, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_019
­chapter 17
States of Crisis
Pandemic, Policing—​and Resistance
Jeff Shantz
Crisis is a central feature of capitalism. It is rooted in the many contradictions 
of capitalist systems. The contradictions between collective production and 
private ownership, forces, and relations of productions. The contradiction 
between working-​class needs, use-​values, and capital’s requirements for profit, 
exchange values. The division between production and consumption. The 
fundamental struggles between capital and labor within production. Workers’ 
needs for the value they produce (higher pay in limited terms) and capital’s 
need for surplus-​value and profit. And the existential contradiction between 
capital’s expropriation of nature as “resource“ and the ecological necessities 
for sustainable life on the planet.
Notably, these crises are not extraordinary manifestations, the system losing 
its way, but rather are intrinsic to capitalist systems. Crises erupt as more or 
less disruptive at periods within capitalist economies. At certain points more 
than others the nature and extent of crises under capitalism become more 
clearly visible or grasped.
The current period provides one such moment of clarity. The dual crises of 
covid-​19 and the struggles erupting over police violence and racial inequality 
put a sharp focus on contradictions within capitalism but also show the dis­
parities and inequalities inherent in the system. Behind them is a context of 
planetary ecological crises and threats to survival.
These crises also show that struggles (not least of which involve class) are at 
the center of capitalism as fundamentally—​struggles over nature, over social 
resources, over necessities, over the means of subsistence and sustenance. 
They show that the demands of the system (ownership, profit, relations of pro­
duction) are sharply, irreconcilably, at odds with the needs of the majority of 
people within it (for health, safety, wellbeing).
1	
covid-​19 Crises
covid-​19 has served as a concentration point bringing together impacts and 
effects of intersecting systemic crises of Capitalism. It has intensified burdens 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

States of Crisis
163
on working-​class people and communities who have been faced with lost jobs, 
lost work hours, lost pay—​all while having to pay rent and being faced with 
possibilities of evictions (by landlords who would never accept having to do 
without).
At the same time, the health impacts of covid-​19 have been dispro­
portionately devastating in working-​class communities, particularly for 
working-​class people and communities of color, given the stratified and 
unequal character of the labor market in countries like Canada and the 
United States. Workers of color disproportionately make up labor forces in 
service sector industries. They have had to keep the grocery store shelves 
stocked with essentials. They have done the delivery work, both in supply­
ing stores but also doing delivery work for restaurants through the falsely 
named “gig economy” or “gig labor” jobs for companies like Skip-​the-​Dishes 
and Uber Eats.
Workers of color, especially migrant workers, have had to continue the labor 
of planting, growing, and harvesting crops and ensuring foods are available 
to make it to the grocery stores and restaurants in the first place. The awful 
burden to health and wellbeing, borne by farmworkers, especially precarious 
migrant workers, under covid-​19 has played out in stark terms in agricultural 
centers like Windsor-​Essex in Ontario, Canada.1
The “hothouse of Canada”, Leamington, Ontario, was the location of severe 
covid-​19 outbreaks centered on farms employing numerous migrant workers 
who were most harmed by covid-​19 outbreaks.
Migrant workers in Canada are granted few rights, whether employment 
rights, civil rights, or basic human rights. They are typically denied basic 
workplace protections, proper and adequate housing, basic health and safety 
protections. They are denied organizing and union rights. Even more, they 
are often made to work when sick, facing threats, explicit or implicit, that 
refusal to work will lead to deportation and ineligibility to work in future 
seasons.
Housing conditions are often abysmal, with several workers sheltered 
together in what are best described as shacks in close quarters in small spaces 
that make social distancing impossible. Often these shelters lack clean, pota­
ble water, or proper washroom facilities. All while farm owners and operators 
receive subsidies from the government.
	1	 My own birthplace and hometown area.
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

164
Shantz
2	
Policing in Crisis
With lower paid and precarious labor, the experience for many workers of 
color, and with impacts of job loss and health crises in their communities, 
there have been intersections with the other crisis of the time—​racist policing.
The economic crises and threats to health, housing, and employment—​threats, 
in no small part, to survival—​in working-​class communities, especially communi­
ties of color, have intensified already incendiary conditions for a more generalized 
uprising against ongoing, historic, police violence in these communities. Sparked 
by events caught on camera, the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis and the 
shooting in the back of Jacob Blake in Kenosha, rebellions in defense of Black 
lives, and against police brutality—​but more generally against state practices of 
oppression and repression against racialized working-​class people.
In Canada, similar struggles have arisen in response to recent lethal police 
violence inflicted on Black and Indigenous people, including Regis Korchinski-​
Paquet in Toronto, Chantal Moore, and Rodney Levi in New Brunswick. 
Notably, these killings occurred during so-​called “wellness checks” for people 
experiencing mental health distress. This too has shown the social inequalities 
and lack of adequate health care and social supports available to working-​class 
people—​the very inequity laid bare by covid-​19.
At the same time this exposes a contradiction between the needs of 
working-​class people for health, wellness, care, and sustenance, which remain 
under-​resourced, and the massive expenditure of social resources plowed into 
policing and carceral structures, institutions, and agencies—​which are viewed 
by capital and states as essential. And, indeed, which are essential for business 
and property owners within capitalism. As critical criminologists have long 
pointed out, modern policing has its roots as the standing force for maintain­
ing systems of inequality and exploitation. Capitalism could not have devel­
oped without the police as a force for colonialism and class stratification and 
the protection of property relations.
One can see all of this in the grotesque form in the ignorant, uncaring 
response by the Trump administration contrasted with their “law and order” 
promotion of their re-​election campaign and Republican National Convention 
as a police pageant.
3	
Crisis States
Crises do not occur as natural phenomena. They are wielded in various 
ways politically, economically, and culturally. What is sometimes called the 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

States of Crisis
165
neoliberal period has been affected through what I have referred to as the 
Crisis States. Building on the works of Italian critical theorists like Antonio 
Negri and Maurizio Lazzarato this analysis examines political shifts from the 
welfare state to the repressive states of the neoliberal offensive on behalf of 
capital.
Through the Crisis States, capital and governments impose various crises 
on working-​class communities, transforming labor markets and production 
relations to benefit capital more completely. Dismantling the Planner State 
(the social welfare projects of the post-​war decades of Keynesianism) from the 
1970s onward. Crisis States have involved destruction and retooling of social 
services and programs that have some utility to the working class and poor 
(welfare, rent controls, health care, etc.) while building up the repressive func­
tions of the state (police, prisons, military). This has all involved a transferring 
of social resources, from health care to housing to utilities to media over to 
capital through privatization, P3s (public-​private partnerships, etc).
It is no coincidence that this is the period of mass incarceration. The 1994 
Crime Bill is an expression of Crisis State lawmaking. The War on Drugs is its 
cultural form. This has significantly coincided with shifts in production rela­
tions, movement of production centers out of “the rustbelt“ in the US, moves 
to service industries, increased unemployment, poverty, and homelessness, 
especially impacting blue-​collar Black workers and communities. The rise of 
prison industries and private and for-​profit prisons are also part of this Crisis 
State transformation.
Crisis States have also involved outright attacks on organized labor through 
anti-​union laws, strikebreaking, intensified policing of strikes (and other 
working-​class mobilizations), etc. These have created intersecting crises 
within the working class. The response to these crises from the state has not 
been social commitments to health and wellbeing, but rather, anti-​social com­
mitment to state violence, force, and repression.
4	
The Other Side of Capitalist Crisis: Resistance
Like other aspects of capitalism, such as the labor market, wages, the work­
ing day, production, or profit, the crisis must be viewed from two perspectives. 
Crisis States, and the push for increased accumulation of capital, represent the 
perspective of capital. But crises under capitalism must also be viewed from 
working-​class viewpoints. The working-​class standpoint (and intervention in) 
is grasped through resistance and social struggles. In this, the present period 
of crisis poses important challenges to the unilateralism of the capitalist crisis.
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

166
Shantz
The Black Lives Matter movements and mobilizations against state violence 
offer the most striking, and noted, of these. But we must also recognize ongo­
ing Indigenous struggles for sovereignty and return of land (“Land Back”). And 
the widespread, growing expressions of workers’ rebellion, including wildcat 
strikes and calls for general strikes that have emerged with a vigor not seen in 
generations in state contexts like Canada and the United States.
Not only have these uprisings moved politics beyond the realms of elector­
alism, representational politics, and a politics of appeal (to hegemonic author­
ities). They have started to form and shape new infrastructures of resistance, 
the more enduring, generative, resources that sustain struggles over time and 
allow for the move from defensive to offensive struggle.
Perhaps most significantly in the context of the current crises are mutual 
aid and solidarity organizing as people have worked collectively to support 
their neighbors and communities. From the mutual aid societies preparing 
meals and care packages of essentials (toilet paper, sanitizer, soap, etc.) for 
people isolated under covid-​19, to those distributing tents, clothing, food, etc. 
for unhoused people in collective tent cities, mutual aid groups have stepped 
forward to assist with medical care and self-​defense during street uprisings 
against police.
There have also been examples of rent strikes and anti-​eviction defenses in 
numerous cities as working-​class people collectively oppose the brutality of 
landlords demanding rent (even as governments have offered mortgage relief 
for owners) while people are without work or have reduced incomes.
Wildcat strikes in and against workplaces have also happened, including 
strike actions by service workers and delivery drivers (such as Amazon and 
Purdue Farms workers). One telling example saw miners walk out at Hudbay’s 
Lalor mine in northern Manitoba over their covid-​19 concerns after contrac­
tors were flown into town even after a request by the town council that the 
company suspends air travel into the region.
This has resonated too with longstanding concerns of Indigenous com­
munities resisting resource extraction industries on their territories. Some 
Indigenous communities in British Columbia (unceded territories) set up 
blockades to stop tourists from entering their territories during the crisis.
Already dots have been connected and there have been calls for a general 
strike. This is a potentially transformational development for a radical, revo­
lutionary, working-​class rising, putting forward the idea of the general strike 
and making it familiar to new generations of workers in ways that have not 
been seen in contexts like Canada and the US in decades. #GeneralStrike was 
the top trend on social media for a couple of days in mid-​March. It returned 
in August when a stunning wildcat strike by National Basketball Association 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

States of Crisis
167
players spread to professional baseball, soccer, and perhaps most surprisingly, 
hockey. While the strike was undercut by professional politicians (acting in the 
service of owners) to defuse and divert the strikes into electoralism once again, 
there was a moment of some anticipation.
	
Conclusion
Crises are always in the end about struggles. The intersecting crises of the cur­
rent period have been met by struggles bringing together working-​class com­
munities across lines of stratification, if incompletely yet. Organizing remains 
a key. Capital organizes. That is what the Crisis State projects represent and 
manifest. The working class organizes too, if under conditions of duress, des­
peration, even despair. The moment of covid-​19 authoritarianism, of pan­
demic and policing, shows renewed forms of working-​class organizing beyond 
the conventions of stabilizing, reactive, politics.
Organized labor remains quarantined in part in the ossified structures of 
business union managerialism. Might the emerging politics place revolution­
ary unionism, syndicalism, back in the heart of working-​class resistance, as its 
tools, wildcats, and the general strike, become more familiar? Might the new 
struggles raise the specter of class solidarity—​of class struggle? Might the ter­
rain of crisis shift, with force, to become not a crisis of capital but a crisis for 
capital?
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Vicente Ordóñez Roig, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_020
­chapter 18
Will covid-​19 Health Emergency Be the Pretext 
to Further Transform the EU Legal Order?
Importance and Present Relevance of Walter Benjamin’s State of Emergency 
Analysis
Vicente Ordóñez Roig
Despite the personal and social tragedy it continues to unleash, the covid-​19 
crisis has nonetheless opened up a potential to live differently. It has revealed 
the inadequacy of capitalism and has sent the governing structures into a spi­
ral of crisis. Tellingly, the pandemic has demonstrated the centrality of coura­
geous workers and their knowledge rather than the State. It also has shown the 
callousness of neo-​liberalism –​ let people die to save the economy, as Johnson’s 
advisor Cummings is reported to have suggested –​ and its mistaken view of 
human beings as individualistic egoists concerned only with material gain and 
competitive, contractual and impersonal relations. Furthermore, it has high­
lighted weaknesses in the nationalist-​capitalist alternative, as western coun­
tries’ dependency on global labor and skilled migrants is made clear. However, 
as the fundamentals of class society still seem to be in place, the prognosis is 
bleak. Once the virus is under control, shall EU governments not use the large-​
scale unemployment and a massive balance of payments deficit as a pretext to 
further cut social benefits and employment rights? The legal order for most of 
the affected countries, and in particular the EU, will force institutions to adopt 
strict measures affecting citizens’ rights. Some government measures taken to 
address the public health emergency in the EU context can be considered not 
only invasive but dangerous in democratic terms. As emphasized by EU think 
tank researchers (Crego et al., 2020, 2), one of the most controversial mecha­
nisms triggered by the certain EU States in response to the Coronavirus crisis 
has been the legitimation of the state of emergency legislation. For instance, 
the Italian response to Coronavirus was led by the use of governmental legal 
instruments in the form of decree-​laws, sometimes criticized for lack of legal 
certainty and the suspicion of abuse of government prerogatives to the det­
riment of Parliament. France declared the state of public health emergency 
by Law No 2020-​290 for a period of two months throughout the national ter­
ritory. Spain addressed the situation caused by the Coronavirus pandemic by 
declaring a state of alarm on March 14, 2020 –​ as reflected in article 116 of the 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

WILL COVID-19 FURTHER TRANSFORM THE EU LEGAL ORDER?
169
Spanish Constitution, together with Organic Law 4/​1981, the law foresees the 
declaration of three different states of emergency in three different objective 
scenarios: a state of alarm, a state of emergency and a state of siege (martial 
law). Hence, under the state of alarm fundamental rights enshrined in the 
Constitution can be limited (Article 11 Organic Law 4/​1981). The relevant policy 
question is thus to ask to what extent the entrustment of special powers to 
specific institutions could lead to the suspension of civil rights and to roll back 
hard-​won freedoms.
Given that historical considerations render the application of these emer­
gency laws highly controversial (see for instance the fatal role a legal regime 
of emergencies played in German history), I, therefore, intend to examine 
the aforementioned issue through a critical lens. In particular, I would like to 
take into account Walter Benjamin’s considerations on the state of emergency 
(Aufnahmezustand) in order to reflect upon this essential question. Why pre­
cisely Walter Benjamin? Because Benjamin analyzed the profound meaning 
of “state of exception” in several of his works, especially in the last essay he 
was able to write and complete: the eighteen theses on the philosophy of his­
tory or On the Concept of History. In this oracular work, Benjamin anticipates 
topics and problems that are inextricably linked with topics and problems of 
our most immediate reality. Thus, I shall try to connect his reflections with 
the exceptional situation that, in normative terms, it has been lived in the EU 
under the pandemic threat.
“State of emergency” permeates Walter Benjamin’s reflections, from Origin of 
the German Trauerspiel, a work submitted in 1925 to the University of Frankfurt 
in order to get his Habilitation, to the last of his great texts, On the Concept 
of History, written shortly before his death on the Franco-​Spanish border in 
September 1940. In thesis number viii, perhaps the most complete synthe­
sis of his thought, Benjamin (2010, 97) writes: “The tradition of the oppressed 
teaches us that the ‘state of emergency’ in which we live is not the exception 
but the rule. We must attain a conception of history that accords with this 
insight. Then we will clearly see that it is our task to bring about a real state of 
emergency, and this will improve our position in the struggle against fascism”.1
	1	 “Die Tradition der Unterdrückten belehrt uns darüber, daß der Ausnahmezustand, in 
dem wir leben, die Regel ist. Wir müssen zu einem Begriff der Geschichte kommen, der 
dem entspricht. Dann wird uns als unsere Aufgabe die Herbeiführung des wirklichen 
Ausnahmezustands vor Augen stehen; und dadurch wird unsere Position im Kampf gegen 
den Faschismus sich verbessern. Dessen Chance besteht nicht zuletzt darin, daß die Gegner 
ihm im Namen des Fortschritts als einer historischen Norm begegnen”.
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

170
Ordóñez Roig
The paragraph is like a funnel, squeezing the central ideas of Benjamin’s 
philosophy of history –​ a discipline he used to interpret his time not as some­
thing neutral and objective, but as the result of a set of forces that tend towards 
the realization of an uncertain future, catastrophic or triumphant depend­
ing on whether the action of the actors intervening in a particular histori­
cal moment is capable of blowing up the power structures projected by the 
ruling class. Why did Benjamin state the tradition of the oppressed warns us 
that the state of exception is the rule? Because he thought Europe’s turmoil in 
the interwar period was perceived to be normal? Benjamin showed that the 
state of emergency is all-​time winners’ rule –​ the Reichstag arson attack and 
von Hindenburg’s emergency decree to suspended civil liberties and pursued 
German communists was the visible tip of an iceberg deeply immersed in the 
icy waters of history.
The oppressed or Unterdrückten,2 pushed towards the bottomless depths 
of the abyss, constitute, like those anonymous multitudes painted by Juan 
Genovés, the porous substance that shapes the empty time of history’s vic­
tors. It is they, the oppressed in an absolute sense, defeated again and again 
by barbarism and unreason, which live in a state of permanent exception. 
Why? According to Benjamin, in fighting fascism from a progressive position, 
the left had bitten the bullet: neither social democracy nor state communism 
understood that in order to stop the advance of the nsdap “the lighted fuse 
must be cut“ (Benjamin 1991, 122). For Benjamin, there was no doubt: fascism 
is not the atavistic residue of an archaic society mystified and mythicized, 
but the last stage of progress. Paradoxically, the ideology of progress is retro-​
progressive: the alliance between industry, legal doctrine, and fascism causes 
an unparalleled social, juridical and moral setback. What to do in a situation 
in which any hint of organization of the oppressed seemed doomed to failure?
For Benjamin, the most urgent task was a twofold one. First, reality might 
not be falsified, that is, the oppressed ones should be aware of the political, 
military, and legal capacity of authoritarianism. Being aware of this particu­
lar issue could have helped them to understand the problems related to their 
historical development as a class. Second, the oppressed might know their 
place in history in order to recognize the hysteria that dominates everything. 
This would be the unavoidable task Benjamin proposed as a means to fight in 
better conditions against “the forces of darkness” (Benjamin 1980, 316) and to 
	2	 In Dora Benjamin’s typographical manuscript, Benjamin uses the term Unterlegenen, the 
vanquished, those who have been ground down as a result of the terrible conditions of his­
tory. In any case, both concepts belong to the same semantic field: people repeatedly torn 
asunder by the space of power (Benjamin 2010, 87).
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

WILL COVID-19 FURTHER TRANSFORM THE EU LEGAL ORDER?
171
establish der wirkliche Ausnahmezustand –​ the real state of emergency. Now, 
what are the differences, if any, between the state of emergency in which the 
oppressed ones were stuck in time and the real state of emergency? Is it possi­
ble to speak, not of a state, but of states of emergency?
The concept of “state of emergency” was coined by the Crown Jurist of the 
Third Reich, Carl Schmitt, in his work Political Theology (2004, 9): “Souverän 
ist, wer über den Ausnahmezustand entscheidet”. Many puzzles of Schmitt 
interpretation, including the so-​called “Carl Schmitt Question” (Carrino 1999, 
190), take this claim as a starting axiom: the sovereign is he or she who decides 
any kind of severe legal, economic or political disturbance that requires the 
application of extraordinary measures. A state of emergency does not need to 
have an existing order as a reference point because the violation of law may 
be excused by necessity (necessitas non habetlegem). Necessity exempts from 
law and justifies individuals in doing, as a means to obtain their goals, what is 
forbidden thereby.
Much of what Schmitt has written about sovereignty is already to be found 
in Jean Bodin. Bodin (1993, 160) conceived the concept of sovereignty as 
a supreme, perpetual, and indivisible power, marked by the ability to make 
law without the consent of any other.3 The sovereign was the sole judge of 
divine and natural law; he or she could tax without consent in emergencies; 
and could decide that contracts were no longer operative when, in his or her 
view, a subject had ceased to benefit from them. In this regard, Schmitt (2004, 
19) highlighted that the exception reveals the essence of the state’s author­
ity: “authority proves that to produce law it need not be based on law”.4 When 
Benjamin, who studied Schmitt’s work in-​depth,5 asserts that the state of 
emergency is a precept (Regel) among the oppressed, did he refer to a legal 
system that, emptied of all legal content, is imposed on civil society through 
force? Probably. The Decree of the Reich President for the Protection of the 
People and the State, extended indefinitely in the Enabling Act of 1933, would 
represent the synthesis of that state of exception to which I will refer in the 
first place: civil liberties were suspended by virtue of an arbitrary law that the 
	3	 “La première marque du prince souverain, c’est la puissance de donner loi à tous en général, 
et à chacun en particulier”.
	4	 “Die Autorität beweist, daß sie, um Rechtzuschaffen, nicht Rechtzuhabenbraucht”.
	5	 Benjamin (1997, 558) made clear the influence that Schmitt’s concept of “state of emergency” 
has had on his reflections in a letter dated December 9, 1930, addressed to Schmitt: “Sie 
werdensehr schnell bemerken, wieviel das Buch in seiner Darstellung der Lehre von der 
Souveränitätim 17. Jahrhundert Ihnen verdankt”, i.e.: “you will very quickly recognize how 
much my book is indebted to you for its presentation of the doctrine of sovereignty in the 
seventeenth century”.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

172
Ordóñez Roig
sovereign, represented in the person of the chancellor, applied to his whim. 
The constitution, therefore, was submitted to a process of normative epoché 
but, in order not to lead to pure chaos, an arbitrary legality was implemented 
to allow the authorities to act according to the desires of the establishment.
The real state of emergency has a very different meaning. First, the histor­
ical subject is not represented by the sovereign, but by his antagonist. It is, 
in fact, the working class in struggle who must rise up in order to subvert the 
status quo –​ Korsch (1981 iii 3) and Lukács (1971, 80) critical sieve are loom­
ing in Benjamin’s Marxist interpretation: the revolutionary self-​liberation of 
the working class through its conscious action necessarily entailed a trans­
formation of the economic-​social processes of life. Second, the oppressed 
forces might be aware that in their struggle they fight not only against an 
external enemy but above all against the devastating effects that the capi­
talist system of production has on their own class consciousness. Benjamin 
had these ideas in mind when he developed his notion of the “real state of 
emergency”. However, his reflections –​ due to the precise historical moment 
in which he writes his theses –​ did in fact differ from theirs. Just as the pen­
dulum that measured the oscillations of the old seismographs has ceased 
to be useful, Benjamin suspected that the political arsenal of the left would 
need a strong dialectical counterweight. Indeed, it was urgent to open up 
the semantic field of the subject of social transformation: it was that plural 
subject, indefinite and without qualities, it was the oppressed ones who had 
to become a class for themselves. And who belonged to the oppressed? Not 
only the working-​class but those who have been systematically stigmatized, 
the nameless and faceless people, the human waste which history is made of 
(Benjamin, 1982, 460).
Are the mechanisms allowing certain EU governments that with recourse 
to a state of emergency establish parallelism with the state of emergency as 
conceived by Walter Benjamin? Although the health threat the pandemic 
poses and the challenge it represents for human health are overriding, no less 
important is the strain it puts on the legal order (Ponte Iglesias, 2020, 352). The 
lives of the most vulnerable people, including the elderly, refugees, migrants, 
or displaced populations, are threatened by the covid-​19, but also by author­
ities limiting basic rights and liberties enjoyed fully by citizens under normal 
circumstances. In Spain, we recently have witnessed how thousands of elder 
people have been crammed into nursing homes without personal care assis­
tants. They have been found in nursing homes completely abandoned, or even 
dead in their beds, as the Minister of Defence, Margarita Robles, stated on 
March 24, 2020. Thus, to address the Coronavirus pandemic certain EU mem­
ber States have transformed legal order and imposed important restrictions 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

WILL COVID-19 FURTHER TRANSFORM THE EU LEGAL ORDER?
173
on public freedom which resulted in (1) the lack of legal protection and (2) the 
abandonment, painful solitude, and death of thousands of elder people.
Does the decree declaring the state of alarm in Spain reproduce the authori­
tarian policies implemented less than a century ago? After the tortuous experi­
ence of the short twentieth century, on the margins of the continent, we must 
face scraps of this disturbing scenario. Is there still a need, then, for a theory of 
history that allows the oppressed ones to unmask different ways of submission 
or the resulting legal order will impose serious restrictions on citizens and will 
perpetuate legal despotism and arbitrariness? The jury is out on whether and 
to what extent these two questions could be satisfactorily answered.
	
Bibliography
Benjamin, W. (1982), Das Passagen-​Werk, GS V, 1. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.
Benjamin, W. (1991), Einbahnstraße, in GS IV, 1. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.
Benjamin, W. (1997), Gesammelte Briefe, Bd. iii, Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.
Benjamin, W. (2010), Über den Begriff der Geschichte, in Werke und Nachlaß: Kritische 
Ausgabe, Berlin: Suhrkamp.
Benjamin, Walter, and Gershom Scholem (1980), Briefwechsel, Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.
Bodin, Jean (1993), Les six livres de la République, Paris: Librairie générale française.
Carrino, A. (1999), Carl Schmitt and European Juridical Science, in Challenge of Carl 
Schmitt (ed. C. Mouffe). London: Verso.
Crego, Maria Diaz, Silvia Kotanidis, et al. (2020), States of Emergency in Response to 
the Coronavirus Crisis: Situation in Certain Member States, Brussels: European 
Parliament. https://​www.europ​arl.eur​opa.eu/​thinkt​ank/​en/​ document.html?refer 
ence=​EPRS_​BRI(2020)652002 (accessed 20 July, 2021).
Korsch, Karl (1981), Karl Marx: Marxistische Theorie und Klassenbewegung. 
Hamburg: Rowohlt.
Lukács, György (1971), History and Class Consciousness: Studies in Marxist Dialectics, 
Translated by R. Livingstone, Cambridge: mit Press.
Ponte Iglesias, M. T. (2020), “La Unión Europea frente a las emergencias de salud 
pública mundial. La crisis de la COVID-​19”, in Araucaria. Revista Iberoamericana de 
Filosofía, Política, Humanidades y Relaciones Internacionales, 22(45).
Schmitt, Carl (2004), Politische Theologie: Vier Kapitel zur Lehre von der Souveränität, 
Berlin: Duncker & Humboldt.
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Beatrice Magni, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_021
­chapter 19
sars-​cov-​2: What Role for Political Philosophy?
Beatrice Magni
Since its appearance (Wuhan, December 2019), sars-​CoV-​2 and the global emer­
gency that followed have raised theoretical and practical challenges in many 
areas that are worth exploring in a timely manner: medical assistance, public 
health, economics, social interactions, law and politics. The global crisis that 
we are all enduring has put stress on many aspects of our highly interconnected 
lives: the tension between globalization and the national management of the 
crisis, the harsh constraints over our sociality with other people, the request to 
trust government and experts in making complex decisions with no time and 
not enough information about the virus itself.
One fundamental aspect of this crisis seems to be the lack of any form of 
certainty. A wide-​spread uncertainty affects agents’ ability to rational rea­
soning as well as raise concerns about the vulnerability of individuals and 
the legitimacy of political decisions, with wide-​ranging effects on people’s 
lives. The reliability of means-​ends evaluations is endangered by probabilis­
tic uncertainty and from the normative perspective is exceedingly difficult to 
establish responsibilities and assess adequate political and social courses of 
action to deal with the crisis. We are all witnessing public re-​evaluations about 
the theoretical and practical connections between moral, social and political 
values, guidelines and normative principles, policies’ goals and the social role 
of science and experts.
Since uncertainty –​ and the consequent search for stability criteria –​ is one 
of the most fundamental horizons of the philosophical enterprise, I believe 
that is important to start analyzing this crisis from the standpoint of social and 
political theory. In her work on the differences between political science, polit­
ical theory, and politics, Ruth Grant identifies –​ starting from Berlin’s seem­
ingly critical estimation of the scientific project of political philosophy1 –​ what 
	1	 “Nevertheless, attempts made by the philosophers of the eighteenth century to turn philos­
ophy, and particularly moral and political philosophy, into an empirical science, into indi­
vidual and social psychology did not succeed. They failed over politics because our political 
notions are part of our conception of what is to be human, and this is not solely a question 
of fact, as facts are conceived by the natural sciences; nor the product of conscious reflection 
upon the specific discoveries of anthropology or sociology or psychology, although all these 
are relevant and indeed indispensable to an adequate notion of the nature of man in general, 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

sars-cov-2: What Role for Political Philosophy?
175
she calls the “practical and theoretical problem” (Grant, 2002, 578) inherent 
in the humanities: political theory would never become a science because of 
the character of the concerns it addresses: normative concerns, which indi­
cate how political agents and political institutions should act in the domain 
of politics. When one makes a normative claim, one expresses an evaluation 
of something; when one evaluates something, it is assessed relative to some 
standards, ideals or possible alternatives. In other words, something is, in some 
respect, better, worse or on a par with some standard, ideal, or alternative. 
Normative questions and concerns contain an element of evaluation and ulti­
mately remain –​ in political theory in general –​ obstinately philosophical, and 
consequently, their claims cannot be either validated or falsified definitively 
through any scientific method.
Grant sees three possible answers to this sort of characterization: the first 
is simply to accept it because the main aim in the humanities should be not 
so much about acquiring scientific knowledge but to provide a type of edu­
cational experience that can be inspirational, revelatory, and transformative 
of our common world. The second response posits that some elements of 
uncertainty are inevitable, even in the most formal sciences; therefore, the 
distance between the so-​called “hard” sciences and the “social” sciences is 
smaller than its followers (on both sides) are willing to admit. Both lines 
of argument, Grant continues, have some merit, but they are not sufficient 
to define the character of political theory and its importance for the study 
of politics. The third possibility, then, is to acknowledge that humanities 
research requires a special defense, a defense on its own terms: the dis­
tinctiveness of humanities research, to which political philosophy belongs, 
has its own particular characteristics and should be defended as integrally 
related to the aims and the limits of humanistic inquiry, i.e., the means of 
interpretation and judgment (or, following Grant’s vocabulary, the historical 
understanding):
There is nothing arbitrary about the methodological approach [of polit­
ical theory, e.d.]. You cannot discover either what something means or 
or of particular groups of men in particular circumstances. Our conscious idea of man –​ of 
how men differ from other entities, of what is human and what is not human or inhuman –​ 
involves the use of some among the basic categories in terms of which we perceive and order 
and interpret data. To analyze the concept of man is to recognize these categories for what 
they are. To do this is to realize that they are categories, that is, they are not themselves sub­
jects for a scientific hypothesis about the data which they order” (Berlin, 1999, 162–​163).
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

176
Magni
why it matters without both interpretation and historical understanding. 
The characteristic uncertainty, disagreement, and lack of closure found 
in the discourse of humanities are not arbitrary either. These characteris­
tics reflect both historical and epistemological realities […]. I would sug­
gest that, whereas the sciences are primarily concerned with knowledge 
of cause and effect, the humanities are primarily concerned with the 
understanding of meaning and judgment of significance.
grant, 2002, 581–​582
My position concerning where political philosophy must begin and what it 
ought to take into account when so doing, therefore, considers two distinct and 
equally much-​needed commitments underlying the meaning and the aims of 
political philosophy: as we know we can engage in political philosophy in a 
descriptive –​ trying to find how things are –​ and normative way. We could state 
that normative political philosophy strives to establish principles and values 
that ought to shape our most relevant public and political practices. What is 
distinctive about political philosophy is its prescriptive or evaluative concern, 
in short, its concern with how political societies should be, how policies and 
institutions can be justified, how we and our political leaders ought to behave 
in our public lives.2
Political philosophy should therefore descriptively remain at a certain 
distance from political events and contingencies to normatively develop 
appropriate criteria and categories that can make some specific difference in 
politics. The problem, though, is that by placing itself at a certain distance 
from its object in relation to politics, political philosophy may, of course, 
respond adequately to its philosophical commitments and meet the demands 
of theoretical rigor but appears to be less able to honor another commitment, 
which is also indispensable. Political philosophy appears to be less committed 
to putting categories and criteria into place that make a difference and can be 
useful in politics. What I pose here is, therefore, not only a problem of dis­
tance, the recurrent trouble of the correct distance at which the philosophy 
must be placed to fruitfully examine politics and its contingencies. The prob­
lem I am raising concerns how political philosophy, once the gap has been 
	2	 More specifically, normative political philosophy considers that action, institutions, and 
political structures are neither independent nor can be independent of (usually moral) 
extra-​political reasons. Political Philosophy investigates whether, on what grounds, and to 
what extent political authority can be justified. It is first and foremost, then, a normative 
discipline –​ that is, one concerned less with questions about how political life is or was, and 
more with how it should be.
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

sars-cov-2: What Role for Political Philosophy?
177
exploited with respect to policy and contingency, can claim its usefulness, 
how it can make categories and criteria that it processes relevant while stay­
ing away from contingencies relevant to politics. Thus, the problem I raise 
appears to be an epistemic problem and concerns how political theory mat­
ters today, i.e., the way in which political philosophy should justify itself by 
conceiving or reconstructing the link between its principles that are theoret­
ically elaborated, on the one hand, and the politics and its contingencies on 
the other. The tension between philosophy and politics is reformulated in a 
question of guidance: where must one go to engage in political philosophy?
I suggest it is at this point where the political philosopher is faced with a 
choice, and I think that covid-​19 is directly connected with this (new) polit­
ical philosophy’s stance and status. What exactly does political philosophy 
bring to contrast covid-​19? To make a brief summary by points, this pandemic 
on a planetary scale gave raise to problems such as (but not limited to):
	–​	 the connections between public health and democracy, through the role 
of experts in providing epistemic authority in support of highly contested 
political decisions;
	–​	 the democratic procedures under pressure over health emergency, that is, 
the requirement of granting political legitimacy for decisions and coer­
cive actions that ought to be taken in a timely manner and under deep 
uncertainty;
	–​	 the re-​thinking the globalized world and the intersubjective, economic and 
political interconnections, both at the macro and micro level;
	–​	 the welfare models and the different paths to cope with this crisis;
	–​	 the role that EU should play –​ and consequently its responsibility in case it 
does not take adequate actions –​ in establishing correct remedies under the 
perspective of public health as well as envisioning a way out from the eco­
nomic downturn and high unemployment rates in the foreseeable future for 
all the member states;
	–​	 the far-​reaching social consequences of covid-​19 that open up debates 
within theories of justice and distributive (in)equality of wealth, opportuni­
ties, mental and body health;
	–​	 “the green new deal” and a deeper investigation of the relationship between 
environmental justice and social justice;
	–​	 the human vulnerability and risk management in the face of the virus’ 
challenge.
The question therefore arises: what difference to moral and political theory 
would it make, if we were to treat the facts of vulnerability –​ our last point in 
the list above –​ and affliction and the related facts of dependence as central to 
the human condition, as is this pandemic proving they are?
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

178
Magni
Vulnerability is regarded in philosophy as encompassing everyone by their 
very nature (Gert, 2004), as a part of the human condition (Callahan, 2000; 
Kottow, 2003; Kottow, 2004), or as an expression of the finitude of the human 
condition (Rendtorff & Kemp, 2000). Vulnerability in this broad sense is mostly 
linked to having a body (Hoffmaster, 2006), the possibility of encountering 
harm (Harrosh, 2012), or being mortal (Rendtorff & Kemp, 2000; Rendtorff, 
2002). I contend that vulnerability is indeed missing from political philosophy 
because it is antithetical to the ethos of individualism that pervades and dom­
inates the moralities of Western societies. The individualistic ideal is to make 
one’s own way in the world, to make one’s mark on the world through one’s 
accomplishments, and to be rewarded for those accomplishments. In pursuit 
of that ideal, individualism seeks and requires self-​sufficiency and insulation 
from the risks that vulnerability poses. Respect for autonomy is, in large mea­
sure, a moral proxy for that individualistic ideal. Vulnerability threatens indi­
vidualism, however, because it is enveloped in contingency and chance: the 
tragedy and suffering that vulnerability can bring mean dependence, and 
dependence means the failure of self-​sufficiency.
In this sense, we could state that vulnerability marks the limits of individ­
ualism: human beings are rational, but human beings also have bodies, and 
because they have bodies, they are vulnerable. In fact, vulnerability is an even 
more basic feature of our human constitution than rationality because, while 
all human beings are vulnerable, not all human beings are rational or even 
possess the potential to become rational. All human beings are born into vul­
nerability and remain deeply vulnerable for some time: moreover, our univer­
sal vulnerability resonates with moral significance. For one thing, it is our very 
vulnerability that creates the need for morality. We cannot understand the 
persons we are, and thus how to live well, without recognizing vulnerability 
as an ineluctable feature of our embodied humanity. Saying that vulnerability 
engages our feelings as much as, if not more than, our reason means that we 
cannot know vulnerability except as we feel vulnerability. And we need to feel 
our vulnerability to affirm our humanity (MacIntyre, 1999). On the other hand, 
I think that vulnerability exists because we have welfare and agency interests 
which can be frustrated. But it is the moral importance of these interests, 
rather than vulnerability itself, which grounds moral obligations. Vulnerability 
is thus one indicator, amongst others, that we and our interests should be 
treated respectfully, impartially, and justly.
Particularly vulnerable individuals are those who –​ in particular and 
extraordinary circumstances like covid-​19 is –​ are more likely not to have 
their welfare and agency interests fairly taken into consideration. They are 
in need of additional attention and special protection in order to be afforded 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

sars-cov-2: What Role for Political Philosophy?
179
what is due to everyone, but what they are likely to fail to receive (Hurst, 2008). 
This will reduce or cancel their risk of being wrong. Some persons are compar­
atively more likely to be subjected to unjustified manifestations of vulnerabil­
ity. Namely, they have an increased risk of having their claims intentionally or 
unintentionally disregarded or unfairly considered. Therefore, they are more 
likely to incur wrongful harm or mere wrongs. Hence, for instance in health 
care or in the workplace, those individuals can be considered as particularly 
vulnerable who encounter an increased likelihood not to have their claims 
taken into just consideration by those responsible.
The crucial and highly dramatic lesson of covid-​19 is that not even a virus 
can be considered, in the last resort, democratic: the pandemic has indeed 
amplified another kind of vulnerability, that derives primarily from blocked or 
impeded social functioning. For that reason, it is largely the result of human 
causes and human creations. Some of those causes are individual: the inca­
pacity or unwillingness of individuals to follow the rules or to provide them 
in a manner she can comprehend and retain. Some of those causes are cul­
tural. Despite those differences, though, there is a crucial similarity between all 
those kinds of vulnerabilities. What does not come out explicitly in the com­
mon concept of “vulnerable”, but what is most important about vulnerability, is 
what every vulnerable subject experience the most: the loss of power that vul­
nerability imposes and signifies, and the attendant loss of control that ensues. 
We fear vulnerability most immediately because of the particular harms we 
seek to avoid. But we fear vulnerability most profoundly because of the power 
we seek to retain or, to use MacIntyre’s words:
We need others to help us avoid encountering and falling victim to dis­
abling conditions, but when, often inescapably, we do fall victim, either 
temporarily or permanently, to such conditions as those of crippling 
injury, debilitating disease, or psychological disorder, we need others to 
sustain us, to help us in obtaining needed, often scarce, resources, to help 
us discover what new ways forward there may be, and to stand in our 
place from time to time, doing on our behalf what we cannot do for our­
selves. Different individuals, disabled or vulnerable in different ways and 
degrees, can have their own peculiar talents and possibilities, and their 
own difficulties … and it is important to remember that there is a scale 
of disability/​vulnerability on which we all find ourselves. Vulnerability, 
in this sense, is a matter of more or less, both in respect of the degree of 
disability and in respect of the time periods in which we are disabled or 
vulnerable. And at different periods of our lives we find ourselves, often 
unpredictability, at very different points on that scale.
macintyre, 1999
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

180
Magni
In this sense, we need from political philosophy, and not only from our 
political institutions, the possibility to learn how to become an “independent 
practical reasoner” (MacIntyre, 1999), namely learn how to cooperate with 
others in forming and sustaining those same relationships that make possi­
ble the achievement of common goods by independent practical reasoners. 
Such cooperative activities presuppose some degree of shared understanding 
of present and future possibilities. We can conceive of vulnerability as being 
the resource for ethical and political responses. If we persist with the simple, 
reductive, and negative conception of vulnerability that is frequently presup­
posed, then vulnerability will remain something to avoid, and ignorance of it 
is perceived as justified. To refuse to conflate vulnerability in its most profound 
and general sense –​ openness to being affected and altered –​ with specifically 
negative forms of vulnerability, such as susceptibility to harm, is to make room 
for positive and constructive attitudes with respect to this the fundamental 
condition of our existence. Advancing such attitudes –​ even and mostly in 
every perspective of political theory –​ is vital if a disavowal of vulnerability is 
formative of oppressive types of subjectivity and, consequently, of oppressive 
social relations. In this sense, political philosophy should take on the respon­
sibility for the long term to understand politics and meet the contingencies, 
ask the right questions, find possible and reasonable answers, and contribute 
to reducing injustices. The “possible-​accessible“ is what we call for in political 
philosophy today: the priority of the actual over the possible. The priority of 
actuality is the only path to any form of possibility in political theory.
There is, in sum, a good deal of further philosophical work to be done.
	
References
Berlin, Isaiah (1999), Concepts and Categories, Princeton University Press.
Callahan, Daniel (2000), “The Vulnerability of the Human Condition”, in Bioethics 
and Biolaw: Four Ethical Principles, Edited by Peter Kemp, Jacob Rendtorff, Niels M. 
Johansen, pp. 115–​122, Copenhagen: Rhodos International.
Gert, Bernard (2004), Common Morality: Deciding What to Do, Oxford University Press.
Grant, Ruth (2002), “Political Theory, Political Science, and Politics”, in Political Theory, 
30(4), 577–​595.
Harrosh, Shlomit (2012), “Identifying Harms”, in Bioethics 26 (9): 493–​498.
Hoffmaster, Barry (2006), “What does Vulnerability mean?” Hastings Center Report, 
36, n. 2, March-​April, 38–​45.
Hurst, Samia A. (2008), “Vulnerability in Research and Health Care: Describing the 
Elephant in the Room?”, in Bioethics, May 22 (4), 191–​202.
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

sars-cov-2: What Role for Political Philosophy?
181
Kottow, Michael H. (2003), “The Vulnerable and the Susceptible”, in Bioethics 17, (5–​6), 
460–​471.
Kottow, Michael H. (2004), “Vulnerability: What Kind of Principle is It?”, in Medicine, 
Health Care, and Philosophy 7 (3), 281–​287.
MacIntyre, Alasdair (1999), Dependent Rational Animals: Why Human Beings Need the 
Virtues, Chicago: Open Court Press.
Rendtorff, Jacob (2002), “Basic Ethical Principles in European Bioethics and 
Biolaw: Autonomy, Dignity, Integrity and Vulnerability-​-​towards a Foundation of 
Bioethics and Biolaw”, in Med Health Care Philosophy, 5, 3: 235–​244.
Rendtorff, Jacob, and Peter Kemp (eds.) (2000), Autonomy, Dignity, Integrity and 
Vulnerability, Vol. 1 of Basic Ethical Principles in European Bioethics and Biolaw, 
Copenhagen: Center for Ethics and Law.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Huw L. Williams, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_022
­chapter 20
Reflections from Perfidious Albion
The Pandemic as Prism
Huw L. Williams
The experience of the pandemic, from one particular corner of the United 
Kingdom, has made it impossible not to interpret events within the wider 
narrative of the trials and tribulations of this island state –​ one that has once 
more been referred to by a moniker from the Imperial age. Perfidious Albion 
returned to our political lexicon when Boris Johnson’s government (or at that 
time we might say Dominic Cummings’) declared its intent to renege on its own 
Withdrawal Agreement with the EU, openly admitting that it will be breaking 
international law. Such a stark admission, in the Mother of Parliaments no 
less, may from the outside appear striking, even by the standards of a political 
culture that has recently cast off its moorings in the rational and reasonable. 
However, a marked disinterest (to put it kindly) in democratic convention and 
the rule of law has from the outset been a characteristic of Westminster’s most 
recent regime.
The government’s mishandling of the pandemic, the subplots in a story 
that swings between farce and tragedy, and all the subsequent consequences, 
present themselves as the latest twists and turns in a traumatic decline that 
Anthony Barnett (2017) most lucidly elaborated in his analysis of Brexit. That 
this decline encourages us to regard covid-​19 as a chapter within a wider 
unfolding narrative in the UK can be a salutary influence, placing the pan­
demic in its historical context, as one of a multitude of forces as work. We 
may, indeed, conceive of the pandemic in symbolic terms as a prism, through 
which various narratives or developments are being refracted and in many 
cases heightened –​ so that the image of our political and social world we are 
now presented with is both stark and illuminating.
In the case of the UK, the wounds it has deepened and the legions it has 
widened are the latest developments in the deepening crisis of a nation-​state 
that is fracturing at the end of its long retreat from empire. In other parts of the 
world, covid-​19 is signified in different ways within other stories. For exam­
ple, and in contrast, the story of New Zealand –​ at least in how it is recited in 
this part of the world –​ is of a competent and radical response from a bright, 
articulate female Prime Minister of firm socialist conviction. One needs little 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Reflections from Perfidious Albion
183
encouragement to regard the failures in the US and Brazil in tandem with the 
story of the UK. Moreover -​and important to some of the suggestions in this 
essay-​ the stories can vary within states as much as they do between them, with 
the relative successes of regions such as Asturias in Spain, or Ceredigion in the 
UK, belying the failures of their neighbors.
This essay, therefore, begins on the premise of interpreting covid-​19 as an 
event that has exposed the underlying tendencies and trajectory –​ both macro 
and micro –​ of various developments across the world. It is what the pandemic 
exposes about long-​term trends, and emphasizes in terms of the required 
response, that is of most importance and interest. There are many tendencies –​ 
such as the decline of the UK –​ that have been a long time coming, but it is only 
the pandemic that has moved us to an explicit recognition of this, and where 
there will be no turning back. In this way, it encourages us to locate the pan­
demic within the type of Gramscian analysis recently offered by Nancy Fraser 
(2019), which depicts the political crisis in the US embodied by Trump as a 
symptom of a wider ecological, economic and social crisis. Gramsci’s picture 
of the “old dying”, and a new common sense “that cannot be born” is an anal­
ogy that captures the manner in which the neoliberal hegemony at the state 
and global level has lost consent amongst a substantial grouping of forces –​ 
whilst at the same accounts for why a counterhegemonic force is yet to emerge 
amongst progressive forces. A new alignment has yet to be truly articulated 
or its intellectuals successfully deployed in local and global wars of position. 
Whether recognition of the crises translates to a change in action is, therefore, 
an open question, and there is no guarantee that we will “build back better”.
In the same vein, it is what the pandemic suggests and lays bare about the 
study and practice of political philosophy at the level of the state, global soci­
ety, and the local, that also merits attention. If a challenge for those in political 
philosophy who preach justice and equality is to hasten change in a positive 
direction, one might ask about the extent to which this can be done where 
there is a marked distance from specific social groupings and their interests. 
In this regard, the essay is also constructed on a premise that it seeks to artic­
ulate –​ that we as scholars are situated and that one of our duties is to address 
the issues from our place in the world (in my case, Cardiff, the capital of a sub-​
state nation within the UK).
In traversing these themes, there are certain questions I am aiming to 
respond to in both a direct and indirect manner. They relate to how covid-​19 
has impacted upon, amongst other things: the question of freedoms in the face 
of interventions and technological tools justified by the pandemic; the prob­
lem of equality and socio-​political and global justice; the relation between the­
ory and practice and in particular the impact on this relation by the clashes 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

184
Williams
between rights and the logic of public health; the responsibilities of academ­
ics; and what implications there might be for the relationship between the 
Right and the Good in light of these multiple unfolding events.
The response may be circuitous at times in attempting to stop off at all of 
these staging posts, but there will be some theoretical presumptions expressed 
and key claims I aim to elucidate whilst developing these thoughts. The ideas 
put forward, emerge from a perspective that largely accepts the Gramscian 
analysis of the crisis, whereby in the UK we can view the pandemic as the lat­
est act in a crisis of the legitimacy of neoliberal capitalism that extends back 
to at least the 2008 recession. In terms of our approach to the study of politics, 
I adopt views that might be broadly couched as post-​Rawlsian, but to my mind 
speak to a more general need to move beyond what I take to be the strictures 
of contemporary Western political philosophy.
For instance, I suggest that the pandemic has moved us further towards a 
recognition that the traditional focus on the state, and its centrality as a touch­
stone and beginning point for other discussions, is ripe for being superseded 
by a methodological approach that broadly speaking embodies a multilevel 
and non-​hierarchical model of analysis. Tied to this claim is an emphasis on 
the fact that those who produce scholarship in political philosophy are as a 
rule situated locally, nationally, and internationally and that this should be 
reflected in the work of scholars. This is particularly so given the benefits of, 
and the need for academic activists (organic intellectuals in Gramsci’s par­
lance) in such a bleak age –​ one that Judith Butler (2020) has recently referred 
to as anti-​intellectual. This entails a move beyond discussions of ideal and 
non-​ideal theory to more practice-​orientated theory. Finally, and more phil­
osophically, in setting out our stall for a powerful and meaningful response 
that moves us from recognition to change, the necessity of right relating to a 
more substantive notion of a common good will be discussed –​ and the turn to 
localism that this entails.
1	
Whose Freedom? Equality of What?
It is an irony that will not have escaped many observers in the UK that the ini­
tial logic emanating from Number 10 Downing Street, which focused on min­
imal measures so as not to disrupt economic and everyday freedoms, resulted 
in eventual consequences that amounted to a harsh and prolonged lockdown. 
The initial preference for herd immunity was expressed publicly on the sofa of 
a morning chat show by Boris Johnson, where he suggested there was some­
thing to be said for allowing the virus to run through the population. What 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Reflections from Perfidious Albion
185
was not emphasized was the necessity of creating sufficient protections for the 
most vulnerable in society –​ a difficult policy to enact, even where such con­
cerns were accounted for in such an approach, as they were in Sweden.
Whether the initial British response is interpreted as the classical liberal 
instincts of an Old Etonian, an inevitable expression of the neoliberal ortho­
doxy, or a simple act of callousness, the results dismissed very quickly the 
notion that the pandemic would somehow be a great leveller. It has been the 
working classes, the poor, and people of color that have suffered disproportion­
ately. Even a Conservative government of the red-​blooded variety blanched at 
the statistics and decided –​ too late of course –​ that the potential numbers of 
deaths would not be politically expedient. As such, the events of the pandemic 
have led us back to some fundamental questions about freedom, equality, and 
justice, whilst simultaneously opening up new avenues for discussion. As well 
as considering the risks of foreclosing freedoms in the name of public health, 
we might also ask whose freedom is at stake, what types, and what the impli­
cations are for equality. We can also reflect on whether our purview of justice 
could be expanded more explicitly in view of the impacts of the pandemic.
To simplify a complex situation, and to speak in somewhat categorical 
terms, the preference of the ruling conservative class for a response that pro­
tected negative freedom (i.e. non-​intervention in both the public and private 
realm), came at the expense of the basic positive freedoms of the vulnerable, 
the lower and working classes, whose right to protection by the state in face 
of a lethal pandemic was compromised (this form of expression implies the 
securitization of covid-​19, of course, one which seems entirely apt given the 
global public health risk posed). In this regard, the pandemic serves not to sig­
nal a pivot in the development of discussions of equality and justice, rather 
as a force that has laid bare the inequalities in (global) society –​ within states 
more than between states –​ and the manner in which governance structures 
under the guise of promoting freedom often do so only for a fraction of the 
population, and more often than not work to undermine the very basic free­
doms of the majority. In sum, the pandemic has seen a stark reduction in the 
basic capabilities of those citizens who were already worse off –​ in particular 
their entitlement to good health. Ensuing unemployment, the lack of a genu­
ine alternative such as Universal Basic Income, means other basic capabilities 
are compromised. Many subaltern groups are further alienated from the state 
and their consent is eroded.
There are aspects to the discussion around surveillance that focus our minds 
on asking whose freedom? –​ and what type of freedoms? we are concerned about 
being curtailed. Again the pandemic has highlighted the potential and far-​
reaching scale of contemporary technology, in particular of course due to the 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

186
Williams
successful development and use of applications and software in countries such 
as China and Taiwan. The recognition of their success in the UK is also tinged 
with a warning about the excesses of such technology and the boon to authori­
tarian regimes that they offer. There is the sense in which the virus has pushed 
open the door to mass surveillance on a scale hitherto unheard of, and that we 
must resist the temptations of such developments if we are to maintain our 
values and greatly cherished freedoms here.
Whilst there are, of course, serious grounds for concern, such attitudes sug­
gesting that we have remained thus far largely immune to such excesses are 
naive, given for example the time that gps has been with us, and the extent 
of technology’s reach even in the most libertarian society. Is it not somewhat 
illusory to be pushing back against such technologies in the name of some 
presumed freedom that long ago disappeared, especially when those technol­
ogies are now being used to protect the most vulnerable? To emphasize, this 
is not to say that technology’s use should not be a concern, nor to deny that 
there are substantial differences between the use of technology depending on 
your location in the world –​ but again this is the virus placing in stark relief 
issues that have been an ongoing concern (witness, for example, the problem­
atic use of often inaccurate Facial Recognition Technology by South Wales 
Police (Dermody, 2019)). Moreover, there needs to be a reasonable, rational 
discussion about the limits of the surveillance society that we already live in, 
rather than spurious knee-​jerk reactions that fail to recognize a reality that 
has been with us for a long time and the sometimes salutary potential of these 
developments.
As with any technology, it is their use, not their capabilities that are of ulti­
mate concern, and the philosopher who is concerned with freedom, equality, 
and justice must be brave in recognizing and articulating both their potential 
for the most vulnerable in society as well as their potential for the oppression 
of those very same people –​ in addition to their invasiveness of the negative 
freedoms enjoyed by the most privileged. With respect to the philosopher, it is 
certainly one area where she has a huge role to play in mitigating and regulat­
ing our relationship with the technology that we have developed and attempt­
ing to influence discourse around such advances in reasonable and civilized 
ways. She can help us recognize where civil liberties are truly under threat both 
home and abroad, and reflect on where the equilibrium is between surveil­
lance and promoting the general good.
It was ever thus, perhaps, but in days when the capabilities are so astounding 
and advances happen at breakneck speed, the need for studied reflection and a 
robust ethical dialogue from a local to global scale is more pressing. Balancing 
the public good with private rights has never been more complex, and it has 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Reflections from Perfidious Albion
187
never been so necessary. The circumstances of the pandemic are a reminder 
that, in this case, the philosophical community has been slow to grasp and 
promote their significance in this area –​ and it requires greater engagement on 
the part of political philosophers with philosophy colleagues who are subject-​
specialists, as well as those who are activists in this sphere. It raises the ques­
tion also of distributive justice with regards to technology, and the power that 
is in the hands of those in possession, and the relative weakness of those who 
are not.
Other examples abound of how the societal symptoms of the pandemic have 
favored some and punished other groups, whilst deepening and entrenching 
inequalities –​ that speak to the need to expand our purview of justice. In the 
case of a state such as the UK, an initial move to keep the economy moving, 
and inexplicably persisting with allowing the free movement of travelers in 
and out, has brought about lockdowns that have created a mental health crisis 
that we as yet have no measure of, whilst the relative costs of long covid-​19 
will take us some time to grasp. Given the notice served of the virus and the 
natural advantages of an island it is right and inevitable that over and above 
the lost lives, there is huge anger at this ongoing human cost.
In a very different context, and on a global scale, the impact on endangered 
languages is sure to be felt, where it is often community elders who play a key 
role in sustaining them. In the case of a vulnerable language such as Welsh, the 
ramifications are implicit in the potential damage to the rural economy and in 
a very different context, and on a global scale, the impact on endangered lan­
guages is sure to be felt, where it is often community elders who play a key role 
in sustaining them. In the case of Wales, where the native language Cymraeg 
is a vulnerable language, the ramifications are implicit in the damage to the 
rural economy of the Welsh-​speaking heartlands. There is also the unintended 
consequence of these rural areas warding off the worst effects of covid-​19 –​ 
namely an influx of in-​migrants whose capital prices out locals from the hous­
ing market, further eroding the delicate ecology of the language. Again, in the 
shadow of unesco’s upcoming decade of indigenous languages, we are yet to 
count the cost of what is unfolding in terms of the prospects for many of our 
7000, disappearing languages.
In terms of social and global justice, these are two good examples of how 
certain issues and phenomena are given far less attention both in the aca­
demic and political debate than they merit. In an atmosphere where there 
is some appetite for the idea of a new beginning, and where environmental 
concerns, in particular, have been given a greater impetus, there is reason to 
hope that other concerns such as these that are often overlooked, are acknowl­
edged as being of far greater importance and centrality to human flourishing. 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

188
Williams
As much as the Rawlsian paradigm and the Capability Approach provide the­
oretical underpinnings that have proved broad enough to consider and inspire 
the further analysis of such issues on a global scale, it is rare in practice for the 
focus to move beyond the presumption in favor of traditional political rights 
and economic resources.
In alluding to Rawls at the end of these brief reflections on freedom, equal­
ity, and justice in the face of covid-​19, it is difficult not to suggest that if the 
impact of the virus has been to place in stark relief the epochal changes at 
work and to accelerate them in some cases, then the incompatibility of late 
capitalism with the values espoused by him and all those who have followed 
in his wake has been laid bare. For the US and the UK in particular, where 
individual freedom, economic activity, and the needs of the market have taken 
precedent, the limits of this ideology have been cruelly exposed and indeed for 
the UK, it could be the final crisis of this capitalist state, at least in its current 
form. Fraser’s eloquent analysis of the collapse of the neoliberal progressive 
hegemony embedded in the Clinton-​Blair era points explicitly and helpfully 
towards the need for the emergence of a counterhegemonic bloc that is anti-​
capitalist and inclusive of all marginalized groups that must embrace the 
white working class.
There are broader questions tied to this realization that capitalism cannot 
respond to the wider ecological, economic and social crisis she notes that the 
political crisis is a symptom of. For political philosophers can no longer take 
the Rawlsian view that his egalitarian vision can be achieved either through 
the market or socialist systems, but it is not so simple as embracing the latter. 
In fact, for a new hegemony to emerge a new political economy for progres­
sives must be embraced that begins with recognition of the climate emergency 
and which works back from there. It is difficult if not impossible to see how 
the late western capitalist state has any answers, and it is only a new, bottom-​
up, communitarian vision that uses ideas such as the foundational economy 
(Bentham et al, 2013) that can offer a potential alternative. Greater equality 
and social justice are now more likely delivered outside of the structures of the 
state, at least in the UK.
The pandemic has only hastened this realization. One could describe the 
consequences of covid-​19 as the denouement of the neoliberal atomized 
order, as our social and spiritual isolation has been physically enacted through 
social distancing that condemns us to an isolation on a societal level allevi­
ated only by our closest family –​ if we are indeed lucky enough to live with 
them. Those older members of our society who have died alone, isolated, in 
homes, perhaps with only the comforting touch of a partial stranger to ease 
them into their final sleep, are martyrs to a way of life that no longer seems 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Reflections from Perfidious Albion
189
sustainable if we wish to uphold some of the most basic values and acts that 
make us human. covid-​19 has confirmed what our dying natural world and 
our dying languages have long suggested, that capitalism and justice cannot 
reach a final reconciliation, and political philosophy that espouses substantive 
and meaningful equality between persons and peoples must recognize this.
2	
Revisiting the Relation of Theory and Practice?
As noted, these reflections in response to the impact of covid-​19 are proffered 
from a particular place in the world –​ and in a manner self-​conscious of this 
situatedness. Indeed, a key premise is that the pandemic is a phenomenon that 
has taken very different forms dependent on place, and thus its effects are dif­
ferent and our understanding of it is tied to location. This global experience 
has been mediated not only by the nation-​state in this sense. There have been 
regional –​ or in the UK’s case –​ devolved administrations at work, and even 
below the level of Northern Ireland, Scotland, and Wales’s governance there 
have been stark variations at the local level. A most striking example has been 
Ceredigion, (the home of Aberystwyth University, for students of international 
politics), which has stolen a number of headlines in the UK because of its rel­
ative success in staving off the ravages of the pandemic. Much has been made 
of their home-​made track and trace system that they developed independently, 
but there are myriad factors including geography, social capital, and working 
patterns that meant the impact on the residents of the pandemic has been 
very different to those living within an hour’s drive.
The intertwining of local and state-​level factors with a global phenomenon 
bears some consideration in terms of the continuing conventions of political 
theory. That is to say, despite there being approaches that consider disaggre­
gating the different levels of analysis, and an increasing inclination towards 
the study of the political phenomenon at a global level, the state remains in a 
relatively staunch manner the starting point for our political theoretical analy­
sis. It is now over 40 years since Charles Beitz (1979) suggested we should view 
global society –​ in particular from the perspective of justice –​ as one integrated 
whole, and it is even longer since dependency and world-​systems theorists 
began with the assumption that world politics is best understood as the epi­
phenomena of a global capitalist system. Moreover, for at least the last twenty 
years if not more, the climate crisis has prevailed upon us to view international 
politics from the perspective of a thoroughly global phenomenon that –​ in a 
way that surpasses a pandemic –​ has a relative disregard for the structures of 
the state.
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

190
Williams
Yet whilst the pandemic accentuates the overriding force of global, natural 
phenomenon, as well as the impact of collective behavior at the level of global 
governance, it also has drawn attention to the possibility of sub-​state actors and 
factors intervening to affect substantial differences. Whilst talk of the demise 
of the state is of course thoroughly premature, the experience of the pandemic 
here in the UK does at least raise the question of whether we have for too long 
persisted in prioritizing the state in our political analysis, and whether it is too 
simplistic a generalization or abstraction, to begin with as the primary unit of 
concern. I am not suggesting here that we dispense with its prevalence but that 
we recognize that in terms of people’s lived experience –​ which by and large 
happens in specific communities and locales –​ it is mediated by numerous 
levels of government all of which may quite possibly influence their lives in 
equal measure.
Those, therefore, who have argued in favor of theoretical approaches that 
are more situated, that recognize the vertical distribution of power and that 
acknowledge that global phenomenon is mitigated at several levels have with 
covid-​19 validation and encouragement for taking political philosophy in the 
direction of a far more disaggregated analysis. In particular, whilst theoretical 
advancements in the traditions of Rawls and Habermas by and large given due 
attention to the interaction between state and global or transnational level, 
it is time to see that advancement work in the other direction as well. This 
development has been perhaps implicit in the work of Amartya Sen (1999), 
given the emphasis he has frequently laid upon Kerala in his discussions on 
capabilities, but this emphasis on sub-​state governance has not, it seems, been 
incorporated into a more self-​conscious and sustained integration of local gov­
ernment into the serious business of political philosophy.
Perhaps, with our worlds shrinking under the influence of the pandemic, 
and longer-​term awareness of the importance of curtailing our travel, and 
seeking answers for our energy and other living needs at a local level, it is time 
for political philosophy more generally to take a self-​conscious sociological 
turn in recognizing the glocalization of politics –​ and thinking through the 
ramifications. One example is the fact that our rights –​ although tied to the 
notion of citizenship and the structures of the state –​ are more often than not 
negotiated at a local level and that their fulfillment will depend upon a whole 
range of factors. Being able to speak in your native language, for example, will 
depend on the nature of the services available, the structures in place, and the 
linguistic topography of the place where you are.
An emphasis on the situated and particular, in place of the abstract and 
the universal, lends itself potentially to more historically nuanced and sensi­
tive analysis that recognizes and attempts to account for sub-​state variation. 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Reflections from Perfidious Albion
191
Moreover, it encourages a more practically-​orientated approach whereby what 
is studied and reflected upon demands that recognition of particularity. Such 
a perspective can also conceive of politics as the inter-​relation of individuals 
and groups within a given community, where the respect for rights and the 
maintenance of duties are experienced and negotiated in concrete ways.
Here the concern with the supposed clash between individual rights and 
the demands of public health can seem like an abstract or marginal phenome­
non that is not manifest in this oppositional way within real, lived-​in commu­
nities. In the everyday life, people rely on each other to respect norms and rules 
and to respect each other, and the limits and the expectations are negotiated 
in this context on a practical, microscale (rather than, in contrast, the perfor­
mance of a protest by libertarians and anti-​vaxers against unspecified viola­
tions of individual freedom). Quarantine, social distancing, and self-​isolation 
are here acts that are born from respect for one’s neighbors and community, 
and whilst wearing masks or sacrificing certain behaviors might from a lib­
ertarian perspective be regarded as an undeniable bad, it is also possible to 
consider that the opportunity to show one’s commitment and respect to others 
has its own value (never mind the prospect that, as in the case of Sweden, sac­
rificing some behaviors can lead to greater average liberty than in the case of 
more laissez-​faire approaches, which result in greater numbers of individuals 
suffering). Such behaviors may not only stem from more communitarian val­
ues, or a more republican conception of active citizenship but also a willing­
ness to work on the practical business of building solidarity within any given 
community. Indeed this is where enacting duties to one’s community can even 
become a form of activism.
It is in this context that we can also conceive of a wider role for the situated 
political philosopher –​ in their locality. It seems fair to assert that the instinct 
amongst professional philosophers to serve their immediate community is 
not one that is necessarily fostered as part of their training. Indeed the first 
community that an academic might typically think of is the national –​ more 
likely international –​ community of scholars that they are part of. However, 
it is interesting that at this particular historical moment two crises are inter­
secting: firstly the pandemic, which is changing academic behaviors and will 
no doubt move that scholarly community online in a permanent fashion, 
and secondly, what Judith Butler has recently referred to as a fast developing 
culture of anti-​intellectualism. Both may have the potential to precipitate a 
positive change in terms of encouraging more philosophers to consider their 
wider duties. Few need to be reminded of the dangers of prevailing cultural 
winds howling against the edifices of knowledge, reason, and logic, yet in the 
UK very few public intellectuals have pushed back against the attacks that 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

192
Williams
began in earnest with Michael Gove’s pronouncement during the EU refer­
endum campaign that the public is fed up of experts. a.c. Grayling and his 
unrelenting anti-​Brexit activity on social media is an obvious exception, but 
as a whole the descent of public discourse and the degradation of the public 
sphere has not been met by any perceptible, co-​ordinated widespread public 
opposition by the academic fraternity (and this not just a duty for philoso­
phers, of course).
The worst excesses of the referendum campaign seem in many ways to be 
entrenched and this can be seen in the disregard for precedent and demo­
cratic convention shown by the government prior to the pandemic, whilst the 
event itself has illustrated all the worst characteristics of a political culture 
where statistics are manipulated, policies are obtuse at best, and confusion is 
seemingly manufactured in the style of Russia’s Vladislav Surkov. These ten­
dencies are pervasive and are experienced at a sub-​state and local level as 
well as at the level of national discourse; politics is confusing, citizens are 
disenfranchised, and communities are left grasping for influence and control 
over their own futures. Local government too has, in the age of social media, 
seemingly honed their skills in diffusing their responsibility and disorientat­
ing the electorate.
In an age of unreason, the analytical, and critical skills of philosophers 
would seem essential to allowing civil society to get a better grasp on reality. 
This, however, requires some reflection on the part of philosophers about 
their place in the world and the nature of their subject. Kristie Dotson’s notion 
of philosophy as a culture of praxis (Dotson, 2013) is in this respect helpful, 
grounded as it is in a critique of contemporary academic philosophy, and 
situating intellectual activity within particular communities facing partic­
ular challenges –​ ones which draw on particular historical experiences. It is 
such a change in self-​perception that is required for philosophers of politics 
to become properly political philosophers, who engage with their world in 
order to change it. Whilst Rawlsian ideal theory provided political philosophy 
with an exquisite vision and an intellectual architecture that may be difficult 
to emulate, 50 years on, and in the face of a crisis of liberalism, it is only fair 
to question whether mainstream philosophy’s lack of a grounding in practi­
cal activity has been detrimental to progressive politics. More generally, given 
the political malaise in the Anglophone world so exposed by the pandemic, 
and the accompanying lack of inspiration and vision, it begs the question as 
to the need for a rapprochement between theory and practice, where it is the 
political rather than intellectual challenges that orientate our philosophical 
thinking.
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Reflections from Perfidious Albion
193
3	
Contemplation about the Relation of the Right and the Good
A characteristic of Rawls’ later political philosophy was of course the priority 
of the right over the good, with the idea that the modern liberal state should 
not endorse a comprehensive idea of the good. Part of the problem is that such 
an idea of the good might limit the right people have to live their lives as they 
see fit (in accordance with maintaining the same right for others). There is a 
debate around the extent to which Rawls’ political liberalism can be extracted 
from a comprehensive liberal conception of the good, especially in view of 
his aim that a minimum “moral conception” (Rawls, 2005, 147) is required as 
part of an overlapping consensus, which underpins right in a liberal society. 
The limiting of a substantive common good to a political conception was, 
of course, in opposition to those arguments emphasizing the possibility and 
indeed need for a political community to endorse a substantive form of the 
good –​ with warnings of what might be lost to the modern, ethical society 
where some form of ‘telos’ not maintained or recovered.
It is difficult not to feel that in the present day, these warnings were some­
what justified, in so far as a society such as the UK appears increasingly 
divided, bereft of explicitly progressive shared values, and ridden with spiritual 
emptiness. This is not to suggest that liberalism as a project was necessarily 
doomed to fail, and there are plenty of other candidates for causes alongside 
the liberal emphasis on the right over the good –​ economic collapse for one, 
not to mention the decline of organized religion and the cultural pervasiveness 
of the more nihilistic tendencies of postmodernism. But it seems difficult to 
deny that any semblance of a shared moral political conception, not to men­
tion any wider ethical shared sense of the good, has long since escaped us. It is 
no surprise for any of us with any sense of history that the far-​right has pros­
pered in developing a chauvinist, often explicitly racist form of revanchism 
aimed at repatriating powers from the EU, which has now slipped rather too 
comfortably into our mainstream. Their notion of the “common good” has cer­
tainly gained sufficient enough currency to impose itself on our public politi­
cal culture.
From such a starting point, the possibility that the pandemic might, through 
its immediate and rather overwhelming demands for a form of collectivism, 
impinge upon the right, may be rather less of a concern if is able to regain some 
ground for a moral conception of politics. Indeed in some ways the response to 
the pandemic, in particular at a local level beyond the levers of both devolved 
and Westminster governments, has for good reason been recognized by some 
as an opportunity to build greater reciprocity into our political and social 
life; it has in some ways provided a boon for solidarity and more self-​reliant 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

194
Williams
communities. In particular, with the governmental response being so inept 
in so many areas, the situation has led to civic society filling the gaps. The 
informal networks created in the UK for the purchase of Personal Protective 
Equipment from China for the National Health Service is one example.
The crisis has in some ways therefore been a reminder of our shared pur­
pose and the values we must hold in common in order to succeed as a political 
community. The isolation and suffering it has forced on some, the extra time 
with family it has forced on others, and the need to enjoy somewhat more sim­
ple pleasures have opened the space for a re-​evaluation of both our personal 
and shared good. Ultimately, one might suggest, without a readjustment in 
favor of the good –​ namely an attempt to articulate transcendent values that 
we hold in common –​ we will only continue to see that right, or at least the 
rights of very many in our society, are at best fragile, at worst non-​existent. If 
we are unable to articulate and live by some explicit common (political) good 
that has egalitarian values at its core, then the right to live as we choose will be 
an empty one for the majority who do not live in privilege. Indeed, as we have 
seen in the UK’s hostile environment, the type of ideas that have been traded 
as some form of the common good during these last years are aimed at extin­
guishing the rights of others.
These preoccupations return us to the question of the local-​national-​global 
intersections and how they might be both analyzed and negotiated in ways 
that respond to the challenges of our age of crisis. With respect to the problem 
of establishing a common political good that is able to generate the necessary 
stability and support for the nation-​state, whilst not at the same time becom­
ing exclusionary, it appears to be a circle that is ever more difficult to square. 
With Thatcher’s erosion of the egalitarian ethic of the post-​war settlement (a 
settlement which in some ways approached Rawls’ political conception of jus­
tice), any sense of such a good has, it can be asserted, been largely tied to narra­
tives of patriotism and nationalism on both the right and the left, at least in the 
UK, and any coherent form of British citizenship that is not couched in paro­
chial, culturally morbid forms are now few and far between. This sense has 
only been deepened in recent years by the emergence of a form of British nos­
talgia that has affected the left and driven a dangerous revanchism on the right 
and is illustrated in an institutionalized manner by a citizenship test that pres­
ents a very prescribed notion of citizenship that excludes both indigenous and 
immigrant communities. Given the manner in which such a British identity is 
deeply entrenched in a racist, imperialist history and a new-​found nostalgia 
for our position as war victors (Leaman, 2020), the need for its reinvention 
to embrace a progressive politics that welcomes the realities of 21st-​century 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Reflections from Perfidious Albion
195
society and articulates a new citizenship is a chronic one –​ but not one that 
shows any sign of being forthcoming.
If attempts at forging a substantive conception of the good are hamstrung 
by the entrenching of an economically stratified society and mired in such 
an exclusionary nationalism then political philosophers must begin to artic­
ulate alternatives. In the UK the independent movements in both Scotland 
and Wales may represent such opportunities, where such substate politics is 
couched in opposition to the prevailing politics of the ascendant British right, 
and so tends to embrace far more open and welcoming notions of a common 
political good –​ with its substance more generally emancipatory. Certainly, the 
national narratives of Scotland and Wales are ones that can be reconstructed 
in such ways that lend themselves to the formation of amelioratory goods. 
However, there is always a very real danger that secessionist narratives eventu­
ally recreate and emulate those of larger nation-​states whilst entrenching the 
worst excesses of capitalism.
This is why discussion of any such secession and fracturing of the UK must 
be accompanied by an emphasis on a far more radical distribution of power 
and politics that relates to other groupings. In the case of Britain there are sub­
stantial communities across its three constituent nations with strong munic­
ipal, metropolitan and regional identities that might allow a thicker political 
common good that reflects local histories, traditions, and values, whilst at the 
same time operating on a scale that allows for a more genuine democratic par­
ticipation, ensuring inclusion and a counterpoint to the systematic exclusion 
of minority groups, so characteristic of the modern nation-​state. Tied with the 
need to work towards economic sustainability and reform on a local scale, this 
turn away from the nation-​state and embracing a form of egalitarian localism 
is one prospect that allows a few shards of light to pierce the enfolding dark­
ness of our times.
It also brings with it the possibility of global solidarity built on alternative 
grounds to those of the shaky foundations of self-​serving nation-​states, which 
remain staunchly resistant to embracing a form of co-​operative international 
politics articulated in Rawls’ ideals of peoples (Rawls, 1999). A global society 
that values reciprocity, fairness, and freedom is more likely when its founda­
tion stone is the solidarity of groups across the minority and majority world, 
forged in the furnace of political struggle. No doubt liberals will balk at the 
suggestion that a thinker such as Alasdair MacIntyre (1998a) might be refer­
enced with a view to such emancipation, but in his later political writings, he 
presented many philosophical reflections that ring true at the moment and 
point to the emancipatory potential of the local.
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

196
Williams
In particular the reconstruction of these units as communities of joint 
inquiry and learning –​ that continuously rearticulate their common good –​ 
speak to the centrality of warding off the potential for oppression, for it can 
of course occur in violent forms at the local as well. However, there is greater 
hope for the perpetual reform and recalibration of ideas of the good, the insti­
tutionalization of dissent as legitimate, and ultimately democratic responsive­
ness, where our primary politics occurs at this level. The impact and influence 
of the national and global are not peripheral, of course; the main preoccupa­
tion of local politics in the first instance is about how communities mitigate 
against and adapt to the challenges of a global age, and are ultimately able to 
maintain their integrity and build their power to influence their circumstances 
and protect themselves –​ against global pandemics, for example.
In ending this exploration of the significance of the current pandemic it is 
somewhat poignant for me to do so with reference to MacIntyre. It was per­
haps no coincidence that a Scot when imagining the type of political commu­
nity that reflected a robust, shared ethical life and the common good, should 
refer to those others who share the Celtic periphery of the UK: in this case 
the historic Welsh valleys communities of the former coalfield (MacIntyre, 
1998b: 143). Poignant, because the material base that sustained MacIntyre’s 
example of an ideal-​type community was destroyed by Thatcher’s neoliberal 
project, with its subsequent economic and social problems illustrating the 
effects of a community stripped of its sense of purpose, as well as its mate­
rial sustenance. Poverty, physical and mental ill-​health have left a social fabric 
woven in ebullience fraying at its edges, and it is predictable that the most 
famous of the valleys, the Rhondda, has been one of the areas in the UK worst 
hit by the impact of the pandemic. With the increasing automation of work, 
the albeit empty promise of work returning to post-​industrial communities no 
longer holds, even in theory. Indeed, the economic ravages of the pandemic 
and the way it has highlighted inescapable long-​term tendencies means that 
in this particular corner of the world, as with many others, political philoso­
phy has much to do –​ both in having to ask new questions and finding better 
answers.
	
Bibliography
Barnett, Anthony (2017), The Lure of Greatness: England’s Brexit and America’s Trump, 
London: Unbound.
Beitz, Charles (1979), Political Philosophy and International Relations, Princeton 
University Press.
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Reflections from Perfidious Albion
197
Bentham, Justin, A. Bowman, M. de la Cuesta, E. Engelen, I. Ertürk, P. Folkman, J. 
Froud, S. Johal, J. Law, A. Leaver, M. Moran, K. Williams (2013), Manifesto for the 
Foundational Economy, cresc Working Paper No.131.
Butler, Judith (2020), in “Judith Butler on the Culture Wars, JK. Rowling and Living 
in Anti-​Intellectual Times”, in The New Statesman. https://​www. newstatesman.
com/​international/​2020/​09/​judith-​butler-​culture-​wars-​jk-​rowling-​and-​living-​anti 
-​intellectual-​times. (Retrieved 22 September, 2020).
Dermody, Nick (2019), Facial Recognition Technology: Ed Bridges appeals Human 
Rights Ruling, bbc. https://​www.bbc.co.uk/​news/​uk-​wales-​50495​575 (Retrieved 12 
July, 21).
Dotson, Kristie (2013), How is this Paper Philosophy?, in Comparative Philosophy 3 
(1): 3–​29.
Fraser, Nancy (2019), The Old is Dying and the New Cannot be Born, London: Verso.
Leaman, Gareth (2020), The British Virus, Undod. https://​undod.cymru/​ en/​ 2020/​06/​
14/​feirws-​prydeinig-​british-​virus/​ (Retrieved 20 July, 2021).
MacIntyre, Alasdair (1998a), “Politics, Philosophy and the Common Good”, in The 
MacIntyre Reader, Edited by Kelvin Knight, Cambridge: Polity Press.
MacIntyre, Alasdair (1998b), Dependent Rational Animals, London: Duckworth.
Rawls, John (1999), The Law of Peoples, Harvard University Press.
Rawls, John (2005), Political Liberalism, Columbia University Press.
Sen, Amartya (1999), Development as Freedom, Oxford University Press.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Ewa Szczepankiewicz-​Rudzka, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_023
­chapter 21
The Potential Subjective and Objective 
Consequences of covid-​19 on the Process 
of Democratization in the Maghreb
Ewa Szczepankiewicz-​Rudzka
1	
The covid-​19 Pandemic as a Crash Test for Democracy: 
Introductory Remarks
Democracy and revolution are in close symbiosis with each other. Revolution, 
which necessarily involves great change, can be a triggering event for democ­
racy; it can also effectively impede it or even lead to a retreat into an author­
itarian system. The processes of democratization were initiated during the 
French Revolution, the colorful revolutions of the post-​Soviet area, and the 
Arab Spring in the Middle East and North Africa. In many cases, however, bru­
tal phenomena –​ coups d’état –​ soon brought democratization to an end. Is 
the pandemic caused by the sars-​CoV-​2 virus a revolutionary situation –​ a 
border event crowning the end of a certain era, radically leading to changes 
in the social and political structures of countries and the whole world? An 
affirmative answer, though it may appear evident, would be too hasty. Half a 
year of this pandemic crisis is too short a period of time to judge its long-​term 
consequences. A pandemic has one fact in common with revolutions. They 
appear suddenly. As Jack Goldstone said, revolutions are like earthquakes, we 
know that they can happen, but they surprise us every time (Goldstone, 1982). 
Previous cases of the virus, H1N1 in 2009, Polio and Ebola in 2014 and 2019, and 
Zika in 2016, although smaller in scope and impact, gave us a kind of foretaste 
of what a global pandemic could be. Bill Gates already announced the possi­
bility of an outbreak in 2015. From the 2009 cia report we read: “If a pandemic 
disease breaks out, it will be in a densely populated area, with close proxim­
ity between humans and animals, such as exists in some markets in China or 
Southeast Asia, where people live close to livestock”. Given the place and cir­
cumstances of the pandemic’s origin in Wuhan in China in 2019, this sentence 
sounds prophetic (Duclos, 2020).
On theoretical grounds, considering the covid-​19 pandemic a revolution­
ary situation in the strict sense of the word is an exaggeration. The definition –​ 
(total social fact) introduced by French anthropologist Marcel Mauss is more 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

CONSEQUENCES OF COVID-19 ON DEMOCRATIZATION IN THE MAGHREB
199
adequate. His concept assumes that certain facts of social life cannot be exam­
ined on a single level because they set the whole society and its institutions in 
motion (Mauss, 2004).
Following Mauss’s theory, it is hard to resist the impression that the covid-​
19 pandemic is a total social fact. The health crisis has become an economic, 
social, and humanitarian crisis in the blink of an eye. In a sense, it is also a 
crisis of institutions and the legitimacy of power. The condition of contem­
porary political regimes in terms of covid-​19 has been much analyzed in a 
multi-​disciplinary sense at the juncture of political science, economics, and 
philosophy. The rhetoric used, which likens the pandemic to a game-​changer, 
or a kind of crash test to which modern regimes are being subjected, clearly 
emphasizes faith in covid’s power. How the democratic systems of the mod­
ern world will fare with this test is in question. Will they come out stronger, or 
will we have to deal with a reverse wave of authoritarianism and dictatorial 
regimes? The second scenario seems to be prevailing in the discourse, which 
sinisterly heralds the end of Fukuyama’s history, preaching a crisis of democ­
racy and the strengthening of undemocratic regimes.
The fact is that, in a pandemic, the systems of liberal democracy are weak­
ened, particularly as it exists in the West. The existence of a special sanitary 
regime undermines the full exercise of individual and political freedoms. 
Prohibition of assembly, restrictions on freedom of movement, and sur­
veillance of individuals by geolocation systems are instruments that fit the 
description of an authoritarian rather than a democratic state. Institutions are 
also weakened, and the democratic principle of checks and balances is being 
undermined. Parliaments, which are limited in their deliberative functions, are 
giving up their legislative power. The President or Prime Minister is, however, 
prominent and, from the point of view of combating the crisis, expected to play 
a leading role. Being a leader in difficult times, a decision-​maker in responding 
to emergencies, in this case, viral, brings political and image benefits. What is 
more, these decisions are generally socially accepted, although they involve 
restrictions on civil liberties and the right to privacy.
The increase in support for European leaders is noteworthy, given the fact 
that the extent and speed of the response to the crisis in many countries have 
left much to be desired. Since March, the increase in support for Boris Johnson 
has risen by 18%. Giuseppe Conte and Angela Merkel saw an increase of 11%. 
A 10% increase in confidence was also recorded for both Emmanuel Macron 
and Pedro Sanchez, and even though his domestic policies have been contro­
versial, Donald Trump received a 1% increase in support (Navarro, 2020).
Economic forecasts do not bode well for democracy. Democracy needs pros­
perity to last. According to the theories of modernism, liberalism and the free 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

200
Szczepankiewicz-Rudzka
market guarantee economic growth. This, in turn, induces democratization. 
Prosperity is a signpost of political and economic stabilization, whereas crisis 
is a signpost of economic collapse and protectionist behavior in foreign policy. 
Provided the imf’s forecasts are accurate that the global losses caused by the 
covid-​19 pandemic will amount to usd 12 trillion over the period 2020–​2021 
and, more strikingly, that we are facing the biggest recession since the Second 
World War, twice as severe as the crisis of 2008 –​ a crisis of democracy is essen­
tial (Goalkeepers Report, 2020).
According to the logic presented above, one would expect that the sars CoV-​
2 pandemic and the accompanying economic crisis are not serving democracy 
but are rather strengthening autocratic regimes. This trend could continue but 
is not likely to be dominant. It is difficult to imagine waves of authoritarian­
ism in Europe, especially in the West. However, dictatorships outside of the 
western hemisphere that has been tested by the covid-​19 crisis may emerge 
strengthened.
At first sight, this general statement seems justified, but a more detailed 
analysis of specific regions or countries leads to different conclusions. This 
paper attempts to analyze political processes in the Maghreb regions in terms 
of covid-​19. It seeks to prove the hypotheses that: (1) The process of democ­
ratization in Tunisia, despite the variable effectiveness in covid-​19 crisis 
management will not be blocked. (2) The military regime in Algeria will be 
weakened, and the economic collapse, which occurred long before the pan­
demic, does not serve to maintain the political status quo (3) In the short 
term, the pandemic and its consequences will not change the regime of the 
Moroccan monarchy. In the long term, Muhammad vi’s way of managing the 
crisis will soften its authoritarian style of government (4) covid-​19 has not 
blocked the process of Libya’s collapse and has not strengthened the dynamics 
of regional cooperation in this matter.
2	
The Resilience and Weaknesses of Regimes in the Maghreb
The Maghreb region is particularly interesting and heterogeneous in analyzing 
the effects of the pandemic on political systems. Over the course of less than 
a decade, countries with quasi similar political systems which we can boldly 
call undemocratic, pseudo-​democratic, or authoritarian (civil and military dic­
tatorships in the case of Algeria, Libya, and Tunisia, and monarchy with fea­
tures of absolutism in Morocco) have evolved towards opposite poles. Algeria 
is struggling with a mass social protest against the regime embodied in the 
hirak movement. Tunisia, the only democratizing country in the aftermath of 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

CONSEQUENCES OF COVID-19 ON DEMOCRATIZATION IN THE MAGHREB
201
the Arab Spring, is struggling with the ills of regime transition. Against this 
background, the Kingdom of Morocco appears to be an oasis of stability. King 
Muhammad vi skilfully maintains social peace by introducing reforms time 
and again, seemingly steering Morocco towards a democratic European-​style 
monarchy. In the intervening decade, Libya has been mired in a civil war and 
political gridlock, exacerbated by competing power centers. What’s more, 
Libya has become a proxy war area of third countries and parastatal groups 
looking to pursue their own interests and strengthen their geostrategic posi­
tion in the region rather than build a peaceful Libya.
covid-​19’s balance sheet varies in the four Maghreb countries. In the fight 
against the pandemic, the countries of the region have one thing in common. 
While they came out relatively unscathed from the first wave of the pandemic, 
especially in comparison with Western European countries, their situation in 
the current third wave of the covid-​19 is not optimistic anymore. The Tunisia 
case deserves particular attention in this regard. The pandemic trajectory in 
this country, and hence the fight against it, is characterized by variable dynam­
ics. As it has had low levels of infection at the end of its first wave, in July 
2020, the average incidence was around 50 cases per day, the number of people 
infected in July 2021, one year later, reaches a level of 6000 cases per day. The 
situation is even worse when we compare the daily mortality rates of sars-​
CoV-​2 per one million inhabitants, year to year. This figure was 0 for Tunisia on 
18 July 2020 and reaches the level of 12,27 on 18 July 2021.1 Thus, Tunisia has reg­
istered its highest number of daily covid-​19 deaths since the start of the pan­
demic. And became the country with the highest Coronavirus mortality rate 
per capita in the Middle East region and in Africa. For the rest of the Maghreb 
countries, the year-​on-​year change in daily mortality rates per million people 
due to covid-​19 infection was not as drastic as in the Tunisia case. This figure 
was 0,33 for Algeria on 18 July 2021; for Morocco, 0,31; and for Libya, 0,85.2
The variable dynamics in Tunisia’s pandemic crisis management is an inter­
esting phenomenon. A skillful and rapid response to the signals coming from 
Asia and Europe has helped to contain the threat of the spread of the virus. 
On 22 March 2020, the government introduced a nationwide quarantine. 
In parallel, the Solidarity Fund (for combating the effects of the pandemic)
was launched, consisting of a special financial line from the state budget and 
private donations. Its value in April was 187 million Dinara/​eur 58 million 
(Realities Online, 2020).
	1	 www.our​worl​dind​ata.org
	2	 ibid.
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

202
Szczepankiewicz-Rudzka
The long pandemic and its socio-​economic consequences have highlighted 
the weaknesses of the 2nd Tunisian Republic. It would be a mistake to argue 
that covid-​19 in its consequences leads to the processes of de-​democratization 
of the system, but it has nevertheless exacerbated the crises that existed before 
the pandemic and which are now likely to weaken Tunisia’s political transfor­
mation processes.
The crisis caused by the sars-​CoV-​2 actually overlapped with a number of 
problems that Tunisia has been struggling with since 2011. We can consider 
them from a local as well as global perspective. On the local ground, the pro­
cesses of systemic transformation are accompanied by a crisis of legitimacy 
of the newly established institutions and a conflict over the norms and val­
ues that should guide the young republic. The friction between the president-​
prime minister and parliament, which translates into an ideological dispute, 
but also is a dispute over power between President Kais Saied and the larg­
est party in the National Assembly, Ennahda, has been ongoing since January 
2020. Therefore, it is difficult to associate them with a pandemic, but they cre­
ate a context in which managing the sanitary situation in the country is partic­
ularly difficult. As the experience of the first year of the pandemic shows, the 
assessment of the fight against sars-​CoV-​2 is not clear. In the first wave of the 
pandemic, the government was able to successfully keep Tunisia among coun­
tries with low disease rates and almost zero covid-​19 deaths. In the second 
year of the pandemic, the situation changed dramatically. The rates showing 
high morbidity and mortality due to the Coronavirus seem to be against the 
administration in its fight against the pandemic. It is worth noting that the 
instability of institutions manifested in frequent changes of the ruling team is 
certainly not conducive to a coherent and forward-​looking policy. Since 2011, 
the government has changed 12 times. During this period, the public health 
ministry was headed by 16 ministers, which has a special, not necessarily posi­
tive, overtone in a pandemic.
In the global field, the covid-​19 pandemic highlighted the weaknesses 
resulting from Tunisia’s position as a peripheral country with a low degree of 
international economic and political integration. Tunisia’s weak inclusion in 
the international Covax program that guarantees access to vaccines, or delays 
in contracts for the supply of medical equipment, is proof of this. The pan­
demic additionally froze tourism, a sector that has been in trouble in Tunisia 
for several years due to the unstable post-​revolutionary situation and the threat 
of terrorism. The economic crisis as a result of the pandemic affects Tunisia in 
a special way and affects the problems that existed in Tunisia long before 2020.
While Tunisia’s democracy is going through this pandemic, it should not 
be forgotten that covid-​19 overlaps with other crises in Tunisia. The test for 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

CONSEQUENCES OF COVID-19 ON DEMOCRATIZATION IN THE MAGHREB
203
this young democracy will not so much be if it can skillfully manage the pan­
demic, but rather what the government will do to deal with its greatest conse­
quence –​ the economic collapse. Bearing in mind that the revolutions of the 
Arab Spring were an expression of dissatisfaction with the economic situation, 
a lack of prospects, and growing social inequalities, it can be expected that, in 
this case too, the economic situation will be a factor of paramount importance 
for the continuation of the transition process. The Tunisian economy was not 
looking good on the eve of the pandemic. In 2019, economic growth was 1%, 
inflation was in the order of 6%, and unemployment was around 15%, affect­
ing, in particular, the generation of young people aged between 19 and 35. In 
2020 Tunisia has experienced a sharp decline having entered this crisis with 
slow growth and rising debt levels. gdp growth contracted by 8.8% in 2020. 
Unemployment increased from 15% prior to the pandemic to 17.8% by the end 
of the first quarter of 2021 (Worldbank, 2021).
The country’s economic situation cannot be considered in isolation from 
global economic trends and the market behavior of its foreign partners. The 
policies of its most important trading partner, the EU, with which the Deep and 
Comprehensive Free Trade Area Agreement has been being negotiated since 
2016, and from which a flow of aid of around eur 300 million per year flows 
via the financial instrument supporting the European Neighborhood Policy, 
will be crucial for Tunisia. The pandemic crisis will also affect the European 
Union, overlapping with a number of problems in Europe, and may potentially 
strengthen “securitarian” approaches towards the immediate environment 
and a move away from the role of normative power.
This assessment comes from a series of analyzes that clearly confirm that 
the issues of European hard security outweigh the promotion of democracy. 
In its relations with neighboring countries, it uses cooperation channels to 
better control its borders and reduce illegal migration. Observing the pro­
cess of negotiating the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area Agreement 
between the EU and Tunisia makes it clear that there is a correlation between 
the readiness to open up European markets to Tunisian goods and the ‘neigh­
borhood country taking over’ the migration problem. To put it briefly, the tar­
iff concessions for Tunisian goods and services entering European markets, 
including visa facilitation for Tunisian citizens providing services in the EU (or 
concessions on another important subject for Tunisia, the lifting of annual 
quota restrictions on imports of untreated oil into Europe) depend on prog­
ress in negotiations on the readmission agreement for Tunisian migrants. It is 
worth highlighting a controversial clause in the agreement for Tunisians, allow­
ing the return of illegal migrants who do not have citizenship or resident status 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

204
Szczepankiewicz-Rudzka
in Tunisia, for whom the country was a transit point to Europe. Moreover, this 
agreement, which has been being negotiated since 2014 within the framework 
of the so-​called Mobility Partnership, in its present form, is unrelated to the 
dcfta. Expecting the migration problem in the EU to become more acute 
as one of the consequences of this global pandemic, it can be predicted that 
Europe’s securitistic and protectionist course will be tightened and that nego­
tiations on free trade agreements already at an impasse will be stuck for good.
Analyzing the impact of covid-​19 on the political situation in Tunisia, 
one should not forget that the democratization of the system, which began 
in 2011, was accompanied by an economic crisis from the outset. In fact, the 
origins of Tunisia’s democratization lay in its poor socio-​economic situation. 
It can be expected that this time too, the young democracy will endure. At the 
moment, the moves of President Kais Saied, who decided on 25 July 2021, to 
suspend the work of parliament and take over the head of government, cannot 
be interpreted as a threat to democracy. This action, although it raises a lot of 
controversy in terms of its compliance with the constitution, will probably in 
its consequences lead to an acceleration of the processes of Tunisia’s democ­
ratization. Even if the far-​reaching consequences of Kais Saied’s decision were 
the opposite, it certainly should not be associated with the phenomenon of a 
pandemic.
Just as sars-​CoV-​2 will not weaken democracy in Tunisia, the military 
regime in Algeria will not be strengthened. Neither President Abdelmadjid 
Tebboune, nor Prime Minister M. Abdelaziz Djertad is riding a wave of pop­
ularity for autocratic leadership. Although it sounds perverse, the pandemic 
situation has proved to be salutary for Algerian democracy. On the surface, it 
seems otherwise: the national quarantine introduced on 17 March, together 
with a ban on assemblies and restrictions on movement, has seemingly fro­
zen the social hirak movement. The mass Friday protests disappeared from 
the political landscape of Algeria but, though they achieved the removal of 
Buteflika from power, they have not stopped demanding the departure of the 
entire regime. Contrary to appearances, the momentum of the hirak move­
ment has not disappeared. Admittedly, it has lost its classic space of action –​ 
public space and its modus operandi –​ protest marches in the larger cities, but 
it has also gained a new one –​ the Internet. It uses this one very well. On the 
one hand, it integrates the national resistance movement against the power 
of the regime and discredits its incompetent actions. On the other hand, it is 
a platform for organizing self-​help actions to combat the effects of the pan­
demic, social exclusion, the risk of poverty, and so on.
The health crisis has inevitably highlighted problems in Algeria that can 
be dealt with on many levels. A crisis of legitimacy and economic collapse 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

CONSEQUENCES OF COVID-19 ON DEMOCRATIZATION IN THE MAGHREB
205
are just some of the difficulties that the state is facing. The fall in the price of 
energy raw materials on the world markets is not a good sign for an economy 
that relies on energy raw materials for 60% of its budget revenue. Economic 
growth, under optimistic scenarios, was estimated at between 1.5% and 2% 
with, it is worth noting, an outlet price of usd 50 per barrel of oil. Its current 
value of usd 25–​30 portends budgetary difficulties for the largest country in 
Africa. For Algeria, this means the melting of foreign exchange reserves and 
further depreciation of the Algerian dinar, which has already lost 50% of its 
value between 2014 and 2018 (imf, 2020a). The pandemic, exacerbating eco­
nomic weaknesses, has also highlighted the issues of employment, the housing 
system, and health care, which had been already pressing pre-​covid.
The above economic and social reasons, and the vitality of the hirak protest 
movements, indicate that the process of grassroots democratization will con­
tinue. The sars-​CoV-​2 pandemic has redirected it to other points of focus, but 
it has not destroyed it.
The growing economic crisis is not serving the regime. Its inertia and inabil­
ity to carry out reforms may, in this case, be one of the reasons for its collapse 
and the democratization of Algeria. The dynamics of this process will, in the 
long term, depend on the regime’s ability to maintain the status quo by resort­
ing to repressive measures and also, and perhaps above all, international con­
sent to its continuation.
There is no doubt that the economic crisis highlighted by the global pan­
demic will ricochet and hit the Kingdom of Morocco. Here, too, the health 
and economic crisis will overlap with a number of dysfunctions that existed 
in Morocco before covid-​19. Losses from the freezing of tourism, representing 
15% of budget revenue and 40% of employment, will be difficult to make up 
in the short term. The financial situation of households has been weakened 
by a drought, which has disrupted food security on a macroeconomic scale as 
well. The loss of income from seasonal work undertaken by Moroccans abroad, 
mainly in Spain, is another factor weakening the economy of the Kingdom, 
whose growth rate in the first half of the year was less than 1%, with an estimate 
of 3.2% for the whole of 2020 (imf, 2020b). Looking at the official statistics 
on morbidity and deaths, with much higher dynamics than in other countries 
in the region, it is also not difficult not to speak of a health crisis.
Contrary to the unfavorable social and economic context, the Alawite mon­
archy seems to be unchanged in its political countenance. The circular the­
sis about the resistance of the Middle Eastern monarchies to various types of 
shocks seems to be true in the event of a health crisis. Using the legitimacy 
of power, not only political but also, and perhaps above all, historical and 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

206
Szczepankiewicz-Rudzka
religious, King Muhammad vi is strengthening his position by presenting him­
self as the providential father and true leader of the nation in difficult times.
In the second week of March 2020, he established the Solidarity Fund 
for combating the effects of the pandemic to the tune of 32 billion Dirhams 
(approximately eur 3 billion). During his July speech on the 21st anniversary 
of his accession to the throne, he announced the creation of a Strategic Social 
Fund for Economic Recovery and Health Reform, with a budget of 120 billion 
Dirhams (eur 12 billion) (Le Point, 2020). Muhammad vi is also dynamiz­
ing South-​South cooperation, strengthening his involvement in sub-​Saharan 
Africa. The example of so-​called ‘mask diplomacy’ by supplying medical 
equipment to the 15 most needy sub-​Saharan countries, on a scale and value 
that far exceeds China’s involvement in this area, is clear evidence of his claim 
to play the role of soft power in Africa.
Assessing the condition of the Moroccan political system in light of covid-​
19, it is difficult to resist the impression that the Alawite monarchy, with its 
incarnation of an absolute but enlightened monarch, is being strengthened. 
On the other hand, the King’s activity in many fields, in terms of communica­
tion and ways of managing the crisis, may support speeding up the slow pro­
cess of democratizing the monarchy.
The classical authoritarian regimes of the Arab world, contrary to assump­
tions and often their own intentions, if they do not democratize themselves, 
soften in form. In the longer term, as noted by Joseph Maïla, this may have an 
impact on the reconfiguration of these ossified political systems. Centralized 
power is beginning to play roles that have so far been absent or little seen. In 
the first place, this power takes over the function of the administrative state. It 
effectively manages the crisis situation in a more personalized and unbureau­
cratic way. The second role which it effectively develops is that of the welfare 
state It launches programs of short-​term and far-​reaching support for pan­
demic victims, often a novelty for Middle Eastern regimes, in public-​private 
partnership. Finally, it issues instructions on matters relating to religion and 
freedom of worship, closes mosques, and introduces regulations governing the 
celebration of religious holidays (Maïla, 2020).
These roles are also noticeable in the case of the Alawite monarchy. The 
organization of a crisis headquarters strengthens the monarchy’s functioning 
as a state administrator, often in an accelerated manner. It cannot be denied 
that Muhammed vi has been effective in fulfilling the role of a welfare state, 
bearing in mind the multitude and scale of measures to protect against the 
negative effects of the health crisis. As for issues relating to religious manage­
ment, the change in the case of Muhammad vi is less visible. Unlike the sec­
ular dictatorships of North Africa and the Middle East, the King of Morocco 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

CONSEQUENCES OF COVID-19 ON DEMOCRATIZATION IN THE MAGHREB
207
has a constitutionally defined function as guarantor and protector of Islam. 
Nevertheless, bearing in mind that the sars-​CoV-​2 pandemic occurred during 
the two most important Muslim holidays, Id al Fitr and Id al Adha, the role of 
“promoter of worship” has become particularly important.
3	
The Libyan Imbroglio and Horizontal Mehrabian Disintegration 
during the Pandemic
The current situation in Libya qualifies it as close to a failed state. The lack of uni­
form, legitimate power, the loss of a monopoly on the use of force, and external 
crisis management rule out placing it on the spectrum of democracy and dic­
tatorship. A decade after Gadhafi was overthrown, oil-​rich Libya is still divided 
between rival forces, with an estimated-​ 20,000 mercenaries and foreign fight­
ers on the Libyan soil. Since 2011 the country is divided between two opposing 
centers of power. The Libyan National Army led by Khalifa Haftar, based in 
Tobruk, controls 2/​3 of the Libyan territory. The General National Assembly 
succussed by the Government of National Unity in 2016, administers the rest 
of north-​western Libya, including Tripoli. The new Government of National 
Unity (gnu) led by interim Prime Minister Abdul Hamid Dbeibah, selected 
through an UN-​supported process, is the latest (March 2021) internationally-​
backed bid to end a decade of chaos in the North African nation and unite 
rival administrations. The new administration is hoped to replace both the 
gna in Tripoli and a parallel cabinet headquartered in the east of Khalifa 
Haftar. Nevertheless, as far as Libya is concerned, it is difficult to predict future 
developments, hence, to expect its peaceful political transition. The parties 
to the conflict remain unmoved in their fossilized positions, moreover, seem 
reluctant to make concessions, both as regards internal entities (Haftar and 
the lna) and external countries competing for zones of influence and control 
over the oil-​producing areas of Libya (Turkey, the Russian Federation, Qatar, 
the uae, Saudi Arabia, Egypt).
Thus, an attempt to assess the impact of covid-​19 on the evolution of its 
political system is impossible at the moment. Torn by civil war since 2011, it 
has not been spared by the pandemic crisis. Mastering a pandemic in a coun­
try undergoing civil war is a difficult procedure. The first cases of the pan­
demic were recorded in Libya in March 2020. It turned out to be a delusion 
that closing the international airport in Tripoli (as a result of military action) 
and sealing the borders with neighboring countries would be a barrier against 
the pandemic. The current confirmed sars-​CoV-​2 cases per million people are 
estimated, with caution as to the reliability of the data, at around 368 cases per 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

208
Szczepankiewicz-Rudzka
day (data as of 18 July 2021). It is worthy to mention that one year earlier daily 
reported covid-​19 cases in Libya oscillated around the rate of 9 cases of daily 
infection per million people.3
The Libyan example illustrates the weakness of regional cooperation. 
The three Maghreb countries are trying to mediate for peace on their own, 
thus creating regional powers able to shape the situation in their immedi­
ate neighborhood. Tunisia, apparently neutral, oscillates around a coalition 
of Qatar and Turkey, supporting the internationally legitimized government 
of al-​Sarraj. On the other hand, Ennahda, a political Islamist Party and the 
greatest power in parliament, is closer to Haftar, supported by the uae, Saudi 
Arabia, and Russia. By playing the card of a neutral observer, Tunisia offers 
good services and a favorable ground for negotiations. Significant in this 
respect was the League of Arab States Summit held in Tunis in September 
2019 (Delmas, 2020).
Morocco is also active in peace mediation. At the beginning of September 
2020, a meeting was held between the belligerent parties in the Libyan dispute 
in Bouznika, near Rabat. It is worth emphasizing that in the Moroccan town of 
Shirkat, negotiations under the aegis of the United Nations were already under 
way that in 2016 led to the signing of an agreement between the conflicting 
parties to form the Sarraj Government.
The Libyan Dossier is particularly important for Algeria. The increased 
diplomatic offensive in this regard, which has been particularly evident since 
Abdelmajid Tebboune took office, is not surprising given that Algeria is linked 
to Libya by a border almost 1,000 km long. Moreover, Algeria is also competing 
with Morocco for leadership in the region (rfi, 2020).
The natural platform for solving the crisis should be the Arab Maghreb 
Union, an integration organization that has brought together the four Maghreb 
countries since 1989. The lack of political cooperation, as demonstrated by 
individual actions on the Libyan question, is only one of the manifestations 
of the absence of synergy between its Member States. Among the political fac­
tors paralyzing cooperation is the Algerian-​Moroccan dispute over the status 
of Western Sahara. This conflict, which escalated in the 1990s, led to closing 
the border between the two countries in 1994. Economic factors are key factors 
in the presence or absence of the horizontal cooperation of states. Countries 
having similar production and export structure is not conducive to integration 
and affects the volume of mutual trade, which does not exceed 3% of total 
foreign trade on average for each of the four Maghreb countries.
	3	 www.our​worl​dind​ata.org
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

CONSEQUENCES OF COVID-19 ON DEMOCRATIZATION IN THE MAGHREB
209
It is therefore not surprising that the pandemic crisis has not intensified the 
synergy of actions within the group. What is more, it has intensified compe­
tition in the Maghreb for markets and development aid donors. In addition, 
the borders remain closed, not only between Morocco and Algeria, but also 
between Libya and Tunisia and Algeria and Libya because of the war, and 
partly between Tunisia and Algeria due to the pandemic. In a symbolic man­
ner, this fact can be interpreted as a sign of the closure of countries as they 
focus on integration within their own borders.
	
Conclusions
The prefix “pan” in the term “pandemic” in relation to sars-​CoV-​2 takes on 
particular significance. In Greek etymology, the term pandemic is a sign of 
totality and globality. It affects everything and everyone. There is no country 
that has not experienced it in the slightest. It hits almost all spheres of individ­
ual and collective life. It is also capable of reconfiguring political systems. The 
prevailing belief is that in a period of pandemics, and indeed in any crisis sit­
uation, the authoritarian style of state governance works better in battle, and 
societies are able to give up the full range of individual and collective freedoms 
that liberal democracy guarantees. What is more, in line with the theories of 
modernism, a weak economic situation does not support systemic liberaliza­
tion and perpetuates the political status quo of autocratic regimes.
According to this line of argument, the undemocratic regimes of the 
Maghreb, Algeria, and the Kingdom of Morocco, will be strengthened and the 
young Tunisian democracy will be weakened. Rapid observation of the current 
political processes in the region leads to the opposite conclusion. The crises 
caused by the covid-​19 pandemic will certainly not strengthen the processes 
currently taking place in Tunisia. For this small country, they are another crash 
test on the bumpy road of political transformation. The pandemic may slow 
down and hinder these processes, but it is not a factor leading directly to the 
phenomena of de-​democratization of the system.
In the case of Algeria, the health crisis, which coincides with a number of 
other crises, is strengthening society on a common front against a military dic­
tatorship. As far as Morocco is concerned, the form and scope of the mon­
arch’s activity in the fight against the pandemic have unleashed new dynamics 
within the regime which, in the long term, could become the proverbial spark 
that triggers democratic processes.
In the face of the pandemic, civil society has been strengthened, despite 
appearances. Third sector organizations in all the Maghreb countries remain 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

210
Szczepankiewicz-Rudzka
extremely active and effective actors in the fight against the covid-​19 pan­
demic. Their informative, organizational, and management role in preventing 
and combating the spread of the virus and helping those affected by the pan­
demic is invaluable. The role of fulfillment, sometimes not in addition, but in 
cooperation with the government administration, is a novelty in the dynamics 
of the mena countries’ social movements but also has the potential to recon­
figure the political situation in the region. What is more, civil society, limited 
by the quarantine in its natural and primordial space of action in the physical 
sense –​ the streets, is developing another –​ a virtual one. The acceleration of 
computerization and digitization, as one of the few positive effects of the pan­
demic, has also reached the global south. The extended space for interaction 
offers new opportunities for social debate and the development of deliberative 
democracy, in the spirit of the ideas of Jürgen Habermas and John Rawls.
	
References
Delmas, B. (2020), La Tunisie face au guêpier libyen, Le Point, July 4. https://​www 
.lepo​int.fr/​afri​que/​la-​tuni​sie-​face-​au-​guep​ier-​lib​yen-​03-​07-​2020-​23829​27_​3​826.php 
(Retrieved 27 July, 2021).
Duclos M. (2020), Is COVID-​19 a Geopolitical Game-​Changer? Institute Montaigne, 
March 24. from https://​www.instit​utmo​ntai​gne.org/​en/​blog/​COVID-​19-​geopolitical 
-​game-​changer (Retrieved 18 September, 2020).
Goalkeepers Report (2020), COVID-​19. A Global Perspectives, Goalkeepers, September 
2020. Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. https://​www. gatesfoundation.org/​goal 
keepers/​report/​2020-​report/​#GlobalPerspective. (Retrieved 27 July, 2021).
Goldstone J. (1982), “The Comparative and Historical Studies of Revolutions”, in Annual 
Review of Sociology. No. 8.
International Monetary Fund (imf). Country News Algeria (2020a), https://​ www.imf 
.org/​en/​Countr​ies/​DZA (Retrieved 27 July, 2021).
International Monetary Fund (imf). Country News Morocco (2020b), https://​ www 
.imf.org/​en/​Countr​ies/​MAR#coun​tryd​ata (Retrieved 27 July 2021).
Le Point (2020), Maroc –​ Mohammed VI : ce qu’il faut retenir du discours du trône, July 
31. https://​www.Lepoint.fr/​afrique/​maroc-​mohammed-​vi-​ce-​qu-​il-​faut-​retenir 
-​du-​discours-​du-​trone-​31-​07-​2020-​2386280_​3826.php# (Retrieved 27 July, 2021).
Maïla, J. (2020), Les conséquences géopolitiques et stratégiques du COVID-​19 au Moyen-​
Orient et en Afrique, Master class essec Alumni. https://​www.essecalumni.com/​
article/​masterclass-​essec-​les-​consequences-​geopolitiques-​et-​strategiques-​du 
-​covid-​19-​au-​moyen-​orient-​et-​en-​afrique-​par-​joseph-​maila/​28/​05/​2020/​4163 
(Retrieved 27 July, 2021).
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

CONSEQUENCES OF COVID-19 ON DEMOCRATIZATION IN THE MAGHREB
211
Mauss, M. (2004), Essai sur le don: Forme et raison de l’échange dans les sociétés 
archaïques PUF. Collection Quadrige Grands textes, Paris: puf.
Navarro, J. (2020), Le COVID-​19: un danger pour la démocratie? “Diplomacy –​ Your 
Questions, Our Answers”. Vienna School of International Studies, June 16. https://​
www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​zYF6​Mh7h​qHM www. ourworldindata.org (Retrieved 
27 July, 2021).
Réalités Online (2020), 1818: les dons ont atteint près de 187 millions de Dinars, April 16. 
https://​www.realit​ies.com.tn/​2020/​04/​1818-​les-​dons-​ont-​atte​int-​pres-​de-​187-​milli​
ons-​de-​din​ars/​ (Retrieved 27 July, 2021).
rfi (2020), L’offensive diplomatique de l’Algérie sur le dossier libyen, June 16. https://​
www.rfi.fr/​fr/​afri​que/​20200​616-​libye-​offens​ive-​diplo​mati​que-​alge​rie (Retrieved 27 
July, 2021).
Worldbank (2021), Tunisia Remains a Country of Contrasts, June 21. https://​ www 
.worldb​ank.org/​en/​coun​try/​tuni​sia/​overv​iew (Retrieved 27 July, 2021).
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

∵
part 4
Corona Phenomenon and 
Interdisciplinary Questioning
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Marcel Wissenburg, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_024
­chapter 22
The Plague, the Anthropocene, and covid-​19
Marcel Wissenburg
1	
Is There an Example in Political History to Compare the Corona 
Crisis To?
Our planet has faced potential and real pandemics before, and every time (at 
least in the Global West) comparisons are made to the Plague that eradicated 
untold millions in the 1320s to 1370s. covid-​19 is no exception –​ indeed, such 
comparisons are even more popular in this case because both viruses suppos­
edly originated in China and traveled through Italy to the rest of the world. Of 
course, this comparison is mostly based on old and modern mythology: we do 
not know the exact route Yersinia pestis took even though we have sufficient 
sources to tentatively trace parts of its European path, and covid-​19 most cer­
tainly did not travel from China directly through Italy to any other place.
Historical comparisons are interesting phenomena in themselves. We 
would not need to make them if we did not feel confronted either with an 
exceptionally rare (yet hopefully not truly unique) problem or an insoluble one; 
otherwise, our problem would be business as usual, with a standard solution 
readily available. In either case, the quest for historical parallels is indicative of 
a refusal to believe that the problem at hand is truly unique or insoluble. If we 
just look carefully and closely enough at history, we will find clues to a way out. 
There may even be a degree of desperate circular reasoning in such quests: “this 
must have happened before and been survived, otherwise we would not be 
here today, therefore we must be able to learn from history”. What does not 
make the search for historical parallels completely illogical is that we engage 
with it most in moments of perceived crisis when we (humanity, a country or 
people, a generation, a profession) deal with a vital threat rather than a perma­
nent nuisance. We do not normally look for historical comparisons between 
this year’s common cold epidemic and last year’s or this year’s weather on 
25 November and last year’s. We look for knowledge that may have gone lost 
because of the exceptional rareness of the phenomenon –​ whatever it took to 
get over it, however, well it may have worked (and the more likely if it worked) 
never became standard operating procedure, part of the universal handbook 
survival-​for-​Dummies.
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

216
Wissenburg
So then why compare covid-​19 to a plague that was never vanquished, that 
simply killed off everyone it could kill as long as it could, and that petered out 
only when it had realized its full and ghastly potential? In this case, I would 
argue that a comparison to the Plague can be instructive mostly because of the 
differences. The Plague moved across the planet in fifty years, not fifty days –​ 
can there be a more vivid illustration of globalization, of the reconnection of 
all humanity? (It has been a while since we left Mother Africa). And for those 
who fear the open society, can there be a better illustration of what global­
ization destroys (or technology, imperialism, (neo-​)liberalism, enlightenment, 
humanism, atheism, etc.)?
Where it hit, the Plague easily and indiscriminately killed half or all of the 
local population; covid-​19 kills a far lower percentage and is far more likely 
to kill only the old, the sick, the weak. What makes the difference? Certainly 
not lockdowns, apps, masks, social distancing, fines, and penalties, or further 
variations on the classic instruments of oversight and oppression so eagerly 
adopted by totalitarian and democratic regimes alike, with a spurious appeal 
to the doctrine of supreme emergency.1 All such measures ultimately rely on 
human self-​control, cooperation, and trust –​ and all have proven to have, at one 
time or another, failed. The fundamental difference between the Plague and 
covid-​19 lies not in the modernization of biopolitics2 but in medicine. This is 
bad news for anti-​modernists: it illustrates not just the centuries of progress 
made in science, medicine, and care but also, more importantly, two socio-​
political effects of globalization –​ substantially higher standards of living for 
an ever greater number of humans, and increasing global equality in access to 
basic medical needs. (This is not in any way to deny that poverty and material 
misery still exist, nor that they need to be addressed –​ quite to the contrary).
Comparing covid-​19 to the Plague is, finally, also very interesting from a 
political philosophical perspective. Because of its (at the time) indiscriminate 
nature, effective responses to the Plague could have been based on equal treat­
ment and solidarity, therefore squared with modern notions of justice –​ but 
they were not. All historical sources of the 14th Century indicate that the Black 
Death (as it was later called) was experienced as the great equalizer: there was 
no way to predict whom it might touch and whom it would take. In modern 
terms, this would be an argument for equal coverage by universal health care, 
there being no substantive grounds for exclusion or priority of, after all, any­
one in a population with a perfectly equal risk of exposure. But only the rich 
	1	 Cf. Michael Walzer, 1977.
	2	 Cf. Bruno Latour, 2020.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

The Plague, The Anthropocene, and covid-19
217
bought themselves care (however inadequate) and had the opportunity to iso­
late themselves (however imperfectly); the rest of society was far worse off if 
not abandoned.
Remarkably, covid-​19 is anything but a great equalizer. Effective answers to 
covid-​19 seem instead to require segregation and differentiated (read: divisive 
and exclusionary) treatment, seriously challenging notions of civic equality 
and solidarity. Governments have an increasingly hard time convincing the­
oretically less vulnerable groups, who show increasing impatience with the 
disruption of “normalcy”, to make sacrifices on behalf of those who, as some 
of the less sensitive citizens say, “will die sooner or later anyway, just a bit 
sooner now”.
What lessons to take from this last comparison? First and foremost, I would 
say, this one: we have evolved from a world of divine justice to one of social 
justice, from subjection and fatalism to responsibility. We no longer just live 
in our world, we create it. The debates on the distribution of the benefits and 
burdens of social co-​operation, in the case of covid-​19 mostly burdens, are a 
small price to pay for the creation of a world where billions rather than mil­
lions can have decent and fulfilling lives rather than poor, nasty, brutish and 
short lives. In some sense, these debates are a blessing even: they help rein­
force the awareness that this world is ours to shape.
To this day, ruins survive all over the world of villages abandoned and 
extinguished during the Plague. The Plague disrupted complete societies for 
decades and generations because they were small, relatively autarchic, poor, 
and non-​resilient –​ and because they had neither the inclination nor the abil­
ity to resist “divine” vengeance. We live in post-​Nietzscheian times, beyond 
God and submission, and in a world where scientific, economic, cultural, and 
moral globalization encourages mutual aid and support. The effects of covid-​
19 can and will pass in a decade, at least anywhere that’s part of the evolving 
highly resilient open global society.
2	
How Does (And How Should) covid-​19 Affect Our Relationship 
with Nature and the Environment?
Some 30 years ago, Andrew Dobson (2000/​1990) introduced a distinction 
between (political) ecologism and (political) environmentalism. I have over the 
years adopted and adapted that distinction to describe two extremes in “green” 
political thought. Environmentalists care about the environment, read, about 
the responsible management of our natural resources; they care because of 
its meaning to humans, their ethics labeled “anthropocentric”; they embrace 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

218
Wissenburg
the Brundtland interpretation of sustainability (meeting the needs of present 
generations of humans without compromising the ability of future genera­
tions to meet theirs); they seek a balance between environmental and other 
concerns –​ economic, social and moral. Ecologists care about nature, read, 
the autonomous self-​reproducing natural and ecological system of which all 
life including humans is part; they care for nature because of its value inde­
pendent of human taste, preference, or folly, making their ethics “ecocentric”; 
if they use the term sustainability at all, it is to describe as desirable a world 
where humans adapt and subject their physical existence and values to the pro­
tection of and life in a maximally resilient and biodiverse, minimally artificial, 
ecosystem. From their point of view, sustainability, as it is usually understood 
(Brundtlandian, environmental), is just another word for the most efficient and 
effective exploitation and ultimately eradication of nature.3
Among ecologist philosophers and activists, the emergence of covid-​19 
has been linked to everything that would be wrong with humanity’s current 
relationship with nature.4 The gist of the ecologists’ message is that modern 
civilization has moved away from the wilder parts and aspects of nature –​ we 
create nature reserves as parks, the wilderness is far away and accessed, if at 
all, via safely supervised over-​organized safaris. The dark and gruesome side of 
nature has been excluded from our lives, and now hits back to remind us that 
we are inseparably part of it and that we ignore the balance of nature at our 
own risk. covid-​19 is a typical product of the Anthropocene, the Age of the 
Human, where the planet is radically transformed into the most efficient and 
effective possible global factory spewing out resources for human consump­
tion. What remains is a seriously impoverished, unbalanced, and weak ecosys­
tem with a natural resilience that replaced extreme vulnerability to the tiniest 
invasion. And what is tinier than a virus? covid-​19, the ecologist will assert, 
would be far less of an epidemic if we individually and our societies as a whole 
weren’t so greedy, consuming so much, trading so much globally, part of global 
capitalism.
There is good reason to question the link between globalization (as the 
last phase of the Anthropocene) and covid-​19. covid-​19 did not result from 
an unnatural exploitative relationship between humans and animals typical 
of our modern age and vulnerability –​ zoonosis, the jumping of an infection 
from one species to another, is a natural phenomenon and has had humans 
both as source and target since long before we climbed out of the trees. One 
	3	 Cf. Marcel Wissenburg, 1998.
	4	 See for example, Bruce Byers, 2020.
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

The Plague, The Anthropocene, and covid-19
219
might even (from the perspective of species) argue that the increased contact 
between ecosystems brought about by globalization is beneficial: it helps to 
develop immunity and in the end, improves the resilience of species and eco­
system. It is instead isolated ecosystems that are really vulnerable –​ as anyone 
passing customs in Chile, Australia or New Zealand will realize.
But even if covid-​19 could somehow be blamed on mismanagement of an 
ecosystem, I do not think this message is going to impress many. Corona is a 
virus, and viruses are in our minds and actions medicalized, i.e., seen not as 
natural but as physical, as medical issues, to be understood in a medical con­
text. Virtually no one cares or even considers the effects that the eradication 
of the malaria virus will have on the ecosystems in which it exists; certainly, 
no one cares about the intrinsic value of hiv –​ and no one will care about the 
ecological effects of eradicating corona either.
Which is a pity, because, as Bruno Latour in his own vocabulary also indi­
rectly suggested,5 the creation of a vaccine for covid-​19 will be another sad 
victory for short-​sighted goal-​rationality over critical, evolutionary, enlight­
ening value-​rationality –​ in simpler terms, a victory for continuing life as 
business-​as-​usual, over critically reconsidering why we live as we do in the 
physical and socio-​political circumstances that we find ourselves in. Or ecol­
ogist terms: we are about to once more and maybe for the last time miss the 
change to radically reform our increasingly artificial and, through lack of delib­
eration, increasingly complex and vulnerable “eco”systems.
At this point I need to make a couple of mental leaps to a conclusion for 
which I cannot offer a conclusive argument yet –​ this is a work in progress. First 
leap: I just wrote “eco”system for a reason. It no longer makes sense to think in 
terms of ecosystems as self-​contained ‘naturally’ evolved entities made up of 
co-​existing “original inhabitants” in dynamic balance, at best inhabited and at 
worst infested by H. Sapiens. Ecosystems are no longer pure and pristine, and 
even if left to themselves will devolve further and further. The cultivation of 
land by humans has led to the introduction (or escape) to surrounding nature 
of countless alien organisms that have made themselves home there, and will 
continue to do so on an ever-​increasing scale, sometimes replacing original 
species, resulting in new and unexpected forms of life and “eco”systems that 
are in one sense unnatural but in another not directly and certainly not inten­
tionally produced by humans.6
	5	 Cf. Latour, op. Cit.
	6	 For this mode of representation of “eco”systems, see Pena-​Rodriguez & Lira, 2019. For the 
same argument in different voices, see e.g. Latour, op. cit.; Biermann, 2020; Châtaignier, 2019, 
v–​xix; Fremaux & Barry, 2019, 171–​190.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

220
Wissenburg
Second leap:7 against the background of the Anthropocene, and of “eco”sys­
tems in which we can no longer sensibly distinguish between alien and native 
species, artificial and natural, evolving and devolving, we inherit a responsi­
bility to relate to our environment with deliberation rather than uninten­
tionally. Having become the accidental creators of post-​nature, we now need 
value-​rational reflection rather than goal-​rational reflection on the shaping of 
our natural and socio-​political environment, or as I call it, our body ecologic 
(Wissenburg, 2016) –​ including the existence and function of viruses.
In other words and in conclusion: covid-​19 is both another argument in 
support of the Baconian mission for humanity and one for Weberian value-​
rationality and his political ethics of responsibility.
	
Bibliography
Biermann, Frank (2020), “The Future of Environmental Policy in the Anthropocene: 
Time for a Paradigm Shift”, in Environmental Politics, 30:1–​2, 61–​68.
Byers, Bruce (2020), “Ecology and COVID-​19 #5: Coronavirus, Human Hubris, and Life 
in the Coevolving Biosphere”, in Public Affairs, August 25, 2020. https://​www.esa 
.org/​esab​log/​2020/​08/​25/​ecol​ogy-​and-​covid-​19-​5-​coro​navi​rus-​human-​hub​ris-​and 
-​life-​in-​the-​coe​volv​ing-​biosph​ere/​, (accessed 12 July, 2021).
Châtaigner, Jean-​Marc (2019), “Foreword: Coviability as a Premise of a New Shared 
Model for Sustainable Development”, in Olivier Barrière et al., Coviability of Social 
and Ecological Systems: Reconnecting Mankind to the Biosphere in an Era of Global 
Change, Cham: Springer.
Dobson, Andrew (2000), Green Political Theory, 3rd Edition, London: Routledge.
Fremaux, Anne, and John Barry (2019), “The Good Anthropocene and Green Political 
Theory: Rethinking Environmentalism, Resisting Ecomodernism”, in Frank 
Biermann and Eva Lövbrand (eds.), Anthropocene Encounters: New Directions in 
Green Political Thinking, Cambridge University Press.
Karlsson, Rasmus, and Jonathan Symons (2014), “Scalability and Realist Climate 
Insights”, in Weather, Climate and Society, 6: 289–​292.
Latour, Bruno (2004), Politics of Nature: How to Bring the Sciences into Democracy, 
Harvard University Press.
	7	 Here I would argue I have the support, in one form or another, not just of ecomodernists like 
Karlsson and Symons, “Scalability and Realist Climate Insights” (2014), but also of Latour, 
“Politics of Nature: How to Bring the Sciences into Democracy” (2004), of McNeely, “Nature 
and COVID-​19: The pandemic, the environment, and the way ahead” (2021), and of Fremaux 
& Barry, op. cit.
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

The Plague, The Anthropocene, and covid-19
221
Latour, Bruno (2020), “Is This a Dress Rehearsal?”, in Critical Inquiry, 47(2): 25–​27.
McNeely, Jeffrey A. (2021), “Nature and COVID-​19: The Pandemic, the Environment, 
and the Way Ahead”, in Ambio, 50: 767–​781.
Pena-​Rodriguez, P.J., and C.F. Lira (2019), “The Bio-​Evolutionary Anthropocene 
Hypothesis: Rethinking the Role of Human-​Induced Novel Organisms in Evolution”, 
in Biological Theory 14, 141–​150.
Walzer, Michael (1977), Just and Unjust Wars: A Moral Argument with Historical 
Illustrations, New York: Basic Books.
Wissenburg, Marcel (1998), Green Liberalism: The Free and the Green Society, 
London: ucl Press/​Routledge.
Wissenburg, Marcel (2016), “The Anthropocene, Megalomania, and the Body 
Ecologic”, in Philipp Pattberg and Fariborz Zelli (eds.), Environmental Governance 
in the Anthropocene: Institutions and Legitimacy in a Complex World, London: 
Routledge, 15–​30.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Georgia Warnke, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_025
­chapter 23
covid-​19 and Identity
Georgia Warnke
	
Missed Opportunity
In April 2020 when it became clear that covid-​19 was killing African Americans 
at rates disproportionate to their share of state populations, American news 
media began reporting differences in the rates of death between white 
Americans and Americans of color. That month, The Washington Post reported 
that in Louisiana, for example, African Americans made up 32 percent of 
Louisiana’s population but 70 percent of Coronavirus deaths. In Michigan, 
the rates were 14 percent and 40 percent respectively. In July of 2020, the Post 
turned to Hispanic and Native American deaths. In California, Hispanics make 
up 31 percent of the state’s population but by midway through 2020 46 percent 
of deaths from covid-​19 while, adjusted for population, during the same time 
period, the Navajo Nation recorded more deaths than any U.S. state.
This attention to disparities in covid deaths between white Americans and 
Americans of color may have been an understandable reaction to America’s 
continuing problem with racial injustice. At the same time, while there has 
been some responsible reporting (apm Research Lab, 2021), major media rou­
tinely omit or downplay context and, by doing so, reinforce ideas linking dif­
ferences in susceptibility to disease to differences in race. Thus, chronicling an 
unexpected rise in deaths among young Americans, cnbc began a story with 
the news that “covid-​19 has killed at least 121 people under 21 years old across 
the U.S., nearly two-​thirds of whom were Black and Hispanic people” (Feuer, 
2020). The Washington Post began a similar story by writing, “The Coronavirus 
is killing Hispanic, Black and American Indian children at much higher num­
bers than their White peers” (Wan, 2020). The cnbc report explored no possi­
ble reasons for the disproportion in the deaths of Black and Hispanic children 
while the Post article offered a mishmash. It said that “about 75 percent of 
those who died had at least one underlying condition, and the most frequent 
were asthma and obesity”, adding, without explanation, that these two con­
ditions “disproportionately occur in minority youths”. The article went on to 
point to “social disparities” such as “crowded living conditions, food and hous­
ing insecurity, parents who are essential workers and cannot work from home 
… and difficulty accessing health care because of a lack of family resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19 and Identity
223
including insurance, child care, transportation or sick leave”. Yet the article also 
said, “the racial gap in fatalities suggests genetic or biologic factors could be at 
play” (Wan, 2020).
The “social disparities” to which the Post pointed are features of poverty and 
consequences of the reluctance of American companies to pay their workers 
a living wage. Certainly, Americans of color are over-​represented in low-​wage 
jobs. Yet in leading with racial and ethnic differences, claiming that asthma 
and obesity “occur in minority youths” and suggesting genetic and biological 
attributes as factors, the Post along with other news outlets suggested that 
these impoverished conditions, as well as susceptibility to disease, were fea­
tures of Americans of color themselves.
Ideas about ethnic and racial differences pertinent to disease have a long 
and continuing history. Some medical websites still call sickle-​cell anemia a 
“Black” disease although it is related to places prone to malarial infestations 
including the Arabian Peninsula and parts of the Mediterranean.1 Tay-​Sachs 
is meant to be the Jewish disease even though people with French-​Canadian 
and Irish heritages may also have the gene. Patricia J. Williams writes that to 
this day:
American medical schools teach that African Americans have greater 
muscle mass than whites. This is a fiction that dates to slavery, yet it 
informs how kidney disease is treated, for creatinine levels are used 
to measure kidney function, and greater muscularity can increase the 
release of creatinine in blood … But rather than assessing individual 
patients’ actual muscle mass, most hospitals rely on an algorithm that 
automatically lowers black patients’ scores thus delaying treatment in 
some instances by making all black people appear healthier than they 
may be.
williams, 2020
Some racially and ethnically focused reactions to the disparities in deaths 
caused by covid-​19 were less biological than cultural. One example: during 
a hearing on the pandemic, Ohio State Senator Stephen A. Huffman asked 
whether the disparity in covid-​19 victims “could … just be that African 
Americans or the colored population [sic] do not wash their hands as well as 
other groups? Or wear a mask? Or do not socially distance themselves?” (Chiu, 
2020). At the same time, it does not really matter if we consider the racial and 
	1	 See msd Manual, 2021.
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

224
Warnke
ethnic characteristics salient to susceptibility to covid-​19 to be biological 
or cultural. The problem, in either case, is that a focus on race and ethnicity 
attends to group or social identities and looks away from the impoverished and 
marginalizing conditions in which too many Americans live, especially a dis­
proportionate number of Americans of color. These conditions have generally 
either not been mentioned at all in hearings or news reports or they have been 
noted only in passing, with the result that the covid-​19crisis in the United 
States has entirely failed to increase attention to an obvious wrong: the num­
ber of Americans who live precarious and poverty-​stricken lives.
There are many questions the Coronavirus pandemic could and should have 
prompted Americans to ask: Why were there essential workers –​ health care 
workers, grocery store cashiers, delivery people, and so on –​ who were both 
badly paid and without adequate protection against the virus? Why do there 
continue to be working Americans who do not earn a living wage and have an 
increased susceptibility to various illnesses because they live in overcrowded, 
unhealthy situations or on the streets? Why are there Americans who are with­
out provisions for sick leave in their employment and, perhaps most urgently, 
why are there Americans who do not have access to decent health care? If 
the covid-​19 pandemic has not prompted a pursuit of these questions with 
any depth or concerted concern, it is at least in part because death from the 
virus has been seen as a feature of certain racially and ethnically defined social 
groups rather than as a grievous consequence of a country’s indifference to 
poverty.
Indeed, even if one were to insist on attending to social groups rather than 
to social and economic conditions in considering pandemic harms, racial and 
ethnic groups would be the wrong ones to refer to. In a rather perplexing rever­
sal of the anti-​essentialist work of the 1980s and 90s,2 the emphasis on race and 
ethnicity revives essentialism and ignores the extent to which identities are 
context-​dependent. The old idea of the hermeneutic circle of whole and part 
in textual interpretation is relevant here. In reading a text, we project a mean­
ing for the whole of the text in reading its first parts and check this understand­
ing as we read further, revising our understanding of the part if it no longer 
allows for an understanding of the whole and revising our understanding of 
that whole in trying to integrate each subsequent parts into a coherent mean­
ing. This means that what we take each part to mean it means as part of a 
whole just as what we take to be the meaning of the whole depends on what 
	2	 See for example, Appiah & Gutmann, 1996; Butler, 1990; Crenshaw, 1989; Crenshaw 1990; 
Dupré, 1986; Spelman, 1988; And Zack, 1995.
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19 and Identity
225
we take to be the meaning of the parts.3 The same holds of the characters who 
populate the text. Our understanding of Captain Ahab –​ what we take to be his 
identity –​ depends upon our understanding of the novel of which he is a part 
just as what we take to be the meaning of the novel Moby Dick depends in part 
on our understanding of Ahab. The upshot is that if we extract Ahab from our 
reading of Moby Dick, he has no meaning and hence no identity at all. Inserted 
into an interpretation of, say, The Mill on the Floss, he cannot be who he is just 
as The Mill on the Floss cannot be what it is if Captain Ahab is its protagonist.
The same holds or our understanding of identity outside of texts. One can­
not be coherently understood or coherently understand oneself as a medieval 
knight in a modern democracy nor can the latter be coherently understood 
as a democracy if it is populated by medieval knights. Likewise, although one 
might plausibly count as a Black person or a Latina within the context of the 
United States, this understanding of who one is need not hold outside of that 
context. As with characters in a text, our identities –​ the ways we can be intel­
ligibly understood –​ depend upon their integration with the whole of which 
they are a part. Yet such contextual conditions also mark our identities in 
more local settings. We are active in schools, religious organizations, market­
places, families, and so on and we possess different identities in each of these 
as parts of different wholes. In the context of education, we are students or 
teachers; in the context of religion, we are Muslims, Jews, Christians, and so 
on; in the context of holidays and celebrations, we are Irish Americans, African 
Americans, Vietnam vets, and so on. “Driving while Black” is a jarring quip pre­
cisely because it expresses a failure to integrate part and whole. Unless we rad­
ically and transparently change the rules of the road, racial identities are not 
coherent parts of the context of driving.4 But nor, as the examples of sickle cell 
anemia, Tay-​Sachs disease, and muscle mass make clear, are racial and ethnic 
identities coherent parts of any helpful response to disease. Instead, focusing 
on racial and ethnic differences in rates of illness and death from illnesses such 
as covid-​19 betrays a severe misunderstanding that who its victims were and 
are. In the context of the pandemic, they are not Blacks or Latinx but rather 
people who are poor and work at low-​wage jobs and the questions raised by 
their identities as poor people and low-​wage workers are not questions about 
race or ethnicity. They are rather questions of political economy –​ about a 
country that does not seem to care whether its workers make a living wage, 
whether those who cannot work are provided for or whether there is adequate 
	3	 See Dilthey, 1972, esp. p.243; Gadamer, 1996, esp. p.265–​7; And Schleiermacher, 1998, esp. p.28.
	4	 Also see, Warnke, 2007.
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

226
Warnke
housing and health care for its citizens. Properly contextualized with economic 
explanations, the attention to race and ethnicity in investigating the covid-​19 
pandemic may have been benign. Yet it was and remains a diversion. Whether 
those stressing racial and ethnic differences in illness and death from covid-​
19 did and do so out of anti-​racist or racist proclivities, their focus was and is 
on the wrong identities. The consequence has been a missed opportunity to 
illuminate the unconscionable conditions under which too many Americans 
suffer and a missed opportunity to demand their elimination.
	
Bibliography
apm Research Lab (2021), “The Color of Coronavirus: COVID-​19 Death by Race and 
Ethnicity in the U.S”, March 5. https://​www.apm​rese​arch​lab.org/​ covid/​deaths-​by 
-​race (accessed 20 July, 2021).
Appiah, Anthony, and Amy Gutmann (1996), Color Conscious: The Political Morality of 
Race, Princeton University Press.
Butler, Judith (1990), Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity, 
London: Routledge.
Chiu, Allyson (2020), “Ohio GOP Lawmaker Fired from ER Job over Remarks about 
Colored Population and COVID-​19”, in The Washington Post, June 11: https://​www 
.was​hing​tonp​ost.com/​nat​ion/​2020/​06/​11/​black-​coro​navi​rus-​ohio-​gop/​ 
(accessed 
20 July, 2021).
Crenshaw, Kimberlé (1989), “Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex: A Black 
Feminist Critique of Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory, and Antiracist 
Politics”, in University of Chicago Legal Forum,1: 139–​167.
Crenshaw, Kimberlé (1990), “Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics, 
and Violence Against Women of Color”, in Stanford Law Review, 43(6): 1241–​1299.
Dilthey, Wilhelm (1972), “The Rise of Hermeneutics”, in New Literary History, Vol. 3, No. 
2, On Interpretation: I.
Dupré, John (1986), “Sex, Gender, and Essence”, in Peter A. French, Theodore E. 
Uehling, Jr., and Howard K. Wettstein (eds.), Studies in Essentialism, University of 
Minnesota Press.
Feuer, Will (2020), “The Coronavirus has killed at least 121 Young People in the U.S., 
Mostly Minorities, CDC Says”, in cnbc, September 15. https://​www.cnbc.com/​2020/​
09/​15/​the-​Coro​navi​rus-​has-​kil​led-​at-​least-​121-​young-​peo​ple-​in-​the-​us-​mos​tly-​min​
orit​ies-​cdc-​says.html (accessed 20 July, 2021).
Gadamer, Hans-​Georg (1996), Truth and Method, Second Revised. Ed., ed. and trans. 
Joel Weinsheimer and Donald G. Marshall, New York: Continuum.
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19 and Identity
227
msd Manual (2021), Sickle Cell Disease, April, https://​www.msd​manu​als. com/​home/​
blood-​disorders/​anemia/​sickle-​cell-​disease.
Schleiermacher, F. D. E. (1998), Hermeneutics and Criticism: And Other Writings, ed. and 
trans. Andrew Bowie, Cambridge University Press.
Spelman, Elizabeth V. (1988), Inessential Woman: Problems of Exclusion in Feminist 
Thought, Boston: Beacon Press.
Wan, William (2020), “Coronavirus Kills Far More Hispanic and Black Children than 
White Youths, CDC Study Finds”, in The Washington Post, September 15: https://​
www.was​hing​tonp​ost.com/​hea​lth/​2020/​09/​15/​covid-​dea​ths-​hispa​nic-​black-​child​
ren/​ (accessed 20 July, 2021).
Warnke, Georgia (2007), After Identity: Rethinking Race, Sex, and Gender, Cambridge 
University Press.
Williams, Patricia J. (2020), “The Endless Looping of Public Health and Scientific 
Racism”, in S. Burris, S. de Guia, L. Gable, D.E. Levin, W.E. Parmet, N.P Terry (eds.), 
Assessing Legal Responses to COVID-​19, Boston: Public Health Law Watch, July 
31: https://​ssrn.com/​abstr​act=​3681​399 (accessed 20 July, 2021).
Zack, Naomi (ed.) (1995), American Mixed Race: The Culture of Microdiversity, Lanham, 
MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Christopher Lowry, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_026
­chapter 24
Three Questions of Distributive Justice
Christopher Lowry
This essay addresses the question: How may the discussion of the importance of 
equality and socio-​political justice develop in the face of covid-​19? I will focus on 
material (in)equality and distributive justice. I have an interest in identifying 
what parts of Rawls’s justice as fairness-​ a beautiful piece of theory with many 
shortcomings-​ are worth preserving or further developing. So, my narrower 
question is: Are there parts of Rawls’s theory that are more useful, interest­
ing, or relevant in the face of covid-​19? In Canadian politics, the pandemic 
has led to some increased interest in, among other things, guaranteed annual 
income (also called universal basic income) and a wealth tax.1 There are parts 
of Rawls’s theory that may be helpful in thinking about these issues.
Rawls’s account of justice raises three questions of distributive justice: (1) 
Does everyone have enough? (2) Does anyone have too much? (3) Is there fair­
ness in who has less and who has more? Egalitarians have tended to focus on 
the third of these questions. Sufficientarians have rightly argued for greater 
attention to the first question, and the pandemic has strengthened this point. 
I will explain below why I think that the pandemic also gives us reason to 
attend more to the second question.
Before continuing, it will be useful to provide a very brief account of justice 
as fairness. Rawls describes his view as having two principles of justice: the 
liberty principle and the equality principle; but I find that it is better to think 
of the view as having five principles. This is because the liberty principle has 
two parts (namely, equal basic liberties and fair value of political liberties), the 
equality principle has two parts (namely, fair equality of opportunity and the 
difference principle), and there is an underemphasized principle that is prior 
to the liberty principle: the principle of basic needs. This gives us, in order of 
priority: (1) the principle of basic needs, (2) the guarantee of equal basic liber­
ties, (3) the guarantee of the fair value of the political liberties, (4) fair equal­
ity of opportunity, and (5) the difference principle. In the face of covid-​19, 
I believe we have even more reason to discuss the principle of basic needs and 
	1	 There are other at least equally important issues that have been amplified by covid-​19, such 
as Black Lives Matter, Indigenous resurgence, and climate justice.
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Three Questions of Distributive Justice
229
fair value of political liberties, which are relevant for the first and second of 
the three questions above, respectively. (Those questions could, of course, be 
discussed apart from Rawls’s theory as well).
I will briefly explain each of the five pieces and how they fit together in jus­
tice as fairness. I find that the best place to start is Rawls’s idea of the value or 
worth of liberty. The guarantee of equal basic liberties (the second piece of jus­
tice as fairness) guarantees that everyone in a society has the same rights and 
liberties, and that appropriate steps are taken to protect people against viola­
tions thereof. The basic liberties, then, are formally equal. However, although 
everyone has the same basic liberties, people’s ability to make use of their lib­
erties is sometimes unequal. For example, a person with less wealth has com­
parably less ability to make use of their freedom of movement than a person 
with greater wealth who can afford more transportation options. In this case, 
Rawls would say that the two people have the same liberty of movement, but 
the value that this liberty has for them is unequal. Rawls places the principle 
of basic needs prior to the principle of equal basic liberties because unmet 
basic needs are such a significant obstacle to being able to make use of one’s 
liberties that meeting basic needs should have first priority. He writes that the 
liberty principle “may be preceded by a lexically prior principle requiring that 
basic needs be met” (Rawls, 2001, 44).2 He argues that “measures are required 
to assure that the basic needs of all citizens can be met so that they can take 
part in political and social life. … [B]‌elow a certain level of material and social 
well-​being, and of training and education, people simply cannot take part in 
society as citizens, much less as equal citizens” (Rawls, 1993, 166). The third, 
fourth, and fifth pieces of justice as fairness also have to do with the value of 
basic liberties. The third piece guarantees the fair value of political liberties. 
A just government would need to take a variety of significant steps to make 
sure that a person’s ability to be successful in politics is determined by their 
talent and dedication to politics, and not by factors such as wealth (especially 
inherited wealth), gender, race, disability, sexuality, religion, and so on. The 
fourth piece —​ fair equality of opportunity —​ is likewise about guaranteeing 
the fair value of liberties related to education and employment. All reasonable 
steps should be taken to make sure that a person’s likelihood of success in com­
petitive school programs and careers should be determined only by their tal­
ent and dedication. The final piece —​ the difference principle —​ is about the 
value of the basic liberties that are not about politics, education, or employ­
ment. These are the liberties that give people the freedom to use the rest of 
	2	 Cf. Rawls, 1993, 7.
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

230
Lowry
their time to shape the kind of life they want, which they often do in associa­
tions with others. Rawls does not guarantee the fair value of these liberties. The 
difference principle is meant to specify the conditions under which inequality 
in the value of these liberties is permissible and desirable. In short, Rawls’s 
view is that justice tells us to meet everyone’s basic needs, make sure that the 
basic liberties are formally equal, and give value to those liberties (which is the 
job of the third, fourth, and fifth pieces).
For obvious reasons, the pandemic has increased the importance of think­
ing about basic needs: What is a basic need? Why should society be committed 
to meeting the basic needs of all its members? How best to do so? These, of 
course, have always been more urgent questions than the finer details of egal­
itarianism that have often received more scholarly attention. The urgency is 
now even more obvious since the direct and indirect health and work impacts 
of the pandemic have put more people in positions of being unable —​ or being 
at risk of being unable —​ to meet their basic needs. Furthermore, ongoing 
discussions of post-​pandemic economic recovery plans often include calls for 
seeing this as an opportunity to rebuild in ways that make societies more resil­
ient against future events like the covid-​19 pandemic by introducing some 
form of universal basic income or by strengthening other basic needs supports. 
Thus, I expect that the question “Does everyone have enough?” will (and should) 
receive more attention than the question “Is there fairness in who has more and 
who has less?”. Are Rawls’s remarks about his principle of basic needs worth 
developing? I think there are at least two reasons to think so.
First, if an account of basic needs can be provided within a Rawlsian frame­
work, this is helpful for the debate about sufficientarianism and egalitarianism, 
because it would allow us to see them as complementary, not competing, parts 
of our thinking about justice. I have written about this elsewhere (Lowry, 2018).
Second, Rawls’s view suggests an interesting (even if perhaps not unique) 
account of basic needs. He asks us to think about what people need in order to 
be equal citizens. A key part of that is what you need in order to do your part in 
making sure that the needs of you and people like you are understood by the 
larger political community and are given due weight in the business of politics. 
Thinking about basic needs like this may help make sure that everyone’s needs 
are met because it should reduce political marginalization.
This brings us back to the idea of a guaranteed annual income. There are a 
number of different ways to argue for this, many of which are compatible, such 
as: cost savings, reducing suffering, enlarging freedom, reducing exploitation, 
and so on. A Rawlsian account of basic needs might add another: that a guar­
anteed annual income could be defended as something to help make demo­
cratic processes more inclusive and accountable. This is important because it 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Three Questions of Distributive Justice
231
could reduce the likelihood that pandemic-​prompted policies that aim to help 
meet people’s basic needs may neglect some folks.
Next, consider a wealth tax. Why might this be more appealing as a result 
of the pandemic?
One reason is that a wealth tax may seem to be a way to help pay for the 
extra spending governments have been doing to help individuals and econ­
omies whether the pandemic and rebuild afterward. A wealth tax could be 
a way to increase tax revenue while having comparatively smaller personal 
impacts on the people affected (i.e., the wealthy). This is essentially an “ability 
to pay” argument: that is, when something important and expensive must be 
done, those who have the most ability to pay should pay (or should pay more 
than others).
A second reason is somewhat more radical and takes us back to our second 
question: Does anyone have too much? The pandemic seems to be generating 
some greater interest in considering larger systemic changes. This may make 
Rawls’s idea of the fair value of political liberties more interesting or relevant 
because it-​ more than any other part of justice as fairness-​ is what makes 
Rawls claim that his view is “an alternative to capitalism” (Rawls, 2001, 135–​
136). It might seem surprising to think of Rawls as an opponent of capitalism, 
given the usually tight association between liberalism and capitalism; but he 
is clear: he argues in favor of what he calls a property-​owning democracy and 
against a capitalist welfare state. The problem with welfare-​state capitalism is 
that it aims to address the question of whether everyone has enough, but it 
neglects the question of whether anyone has too much. Welfare-​state capital­
ism aims “that none should fall below a decent minimum standard of life, one 
in which their basic needs are met, but [i]‌t permits very large inequalities in 
the ownership of real property (productive assets and natural resources) so 
that the control of the economy and much of political life rests in a few hands” 
(138–​139). In contrast, in a property-​owning democracy, “background institu­
tions must work to keep property and wealth evenly enough shared overtime 
to preserve the fair value of the political liberties and fair equality of opportu­
nity over generations. They do this by laws regulating bequest and inheritance, 
and other devices such as taxes, to prevent excessive concentrations of private 
power” (51).
What makes this radical is that Rawls is defending the use of taxes not merely 
to raise revenue so that a government can make sure that everyone has enough 
(i.e., that their basic needs are met), but also to prevent anyone from having 
too much (i.e., great enough wealth to exert excessive economic and political 
influence). He writes, “the progressive principle of taxation might … be applied 
… solely to prevent accumulations of wealth that are judged to be inimical to 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

232
Lowry
… the fair value of the political liberties and to fair equality of opportunity” 
(161). This is not an easy position to defend, since it seems to be vulnerable 
to the leveling down objection that egalitarians usually fear: the objection that 
egalitarianism is a politics of envy that would be willing to worsen the situa­
tion of the rich simply to reduce inequality without thereby yielding material 
improvements for the poor. Rawls’s idea of the fair value of political liberties 
urges us to take seriously the question, does anyone have too much? His view 
is that a just government must take steps to prevent excessive concentrations 
of wealth in order to have healthy democratic processes, even if doing so does 
not yield material benefits for low-​income citizens. The difference principle is 
fueled by a desire for such material benefits, but it has less priority in Rawls’s 
framework. After meeting basic needs and securing formal equality of the 
basic liberties, the next highest priority is providing genuinely equal opportu­
nities in the business of politics. A wealth tax is one tool that could be helpful 
in a larger multi-​faceted plan used to help achieve that, by aiming to prevent 
excessive concentrations of wealth.
Why should we give such high priority to guaranteeing the fair value of 
political liberties? Rawls’s argument depends only on the instrumental value 
of political participation (even though he acknowledges that some people do 
see politics as itself an essential part of their conception of a flourishing life). 
When a group in society experiences political marginalization, it is more likely 
that the government will neglect to securely meet their basic needs or protect 
their basic liberties. These considerations have heightened relevance today 
because the pandemic has increased the quantity and degree of this kind of 
vulnerability. The unpopular question of whether some people have too much 
may now be timely.
	
References
Lowry, Christopher (2018), “Universalism, Vulnerability, and Egalitarianism”, in 
From Disability Theory to Practice, Edited by Christopher A. Riddle, Lanham, 
MD: Lexington Books, pp.5–​24.
Rawls, John (1993), Political Liberalism, Columbia University Press.
Rawls, John (2001), Justice as Fairness: A Restatement, Edited by Erin Kelly, Harvard 
University Press.
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Spyros Marchetos, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_027
­chapter 25
covid-​19, Poverty, and Imperialism
Epidemics and Syndemics in Historical Perspective
Spyros Marchetos
1	
Problems and Definitions
“The most likely forecast about the future of infectious disease is that it will 
be very dull” (MacFarlane Burnet & White, 1972, 263), declared an illustrious 
virologist and immunologist plus Nobel laureate. Expressed with little nuance, 
this was to be the mainstream opinion for the next half-​century. In hindsight, 
however, we see that the West had ascribed epidemics to the past too soon, 
after erecting all kinds of borders to insulate itself from the richer experience 
of poorer countries.
Historical perspective arguably reveals Western policymaking and public 
discourse as saturated for decades by narcotic ideologies, planted in the soil of 
social and cultural nonchalance by organic intellectuals of its state-​financial 
complex. Fertilized by the liberal belief in progress, navel-​gazing academic 
sophistry, moral nihilism, and technocratic arrogance, their fruits matured in 
the hubristic credo of American might, “We’re an empire now, and when we 
act, we create our own reality”.1 As usual, few expected Nemesis to strike.
Reality proved stubborn, but in the final pre-​pandemic decades the Empire 
sailed with the ambitious Project for a New American Century on its compass. 
Epidemiologists’ regular protests went unheeded (Fauci, 2001, 675). Political 
radicals and dissident historians warning about capitalism having already 
passed its zenith, its terminal crisis announced by the “world revolution of 
1968” (Immanuel Wallerstein), and the end of monetary stability, were sum­
marily dismissed. Mainstreamers rarely reflected on the rise of multipolarity 
and the resurgence of Asia, while financialization, a defining feature of the 
last half-​century but not as novel as many think, was still undetected and the 
word itself was unknown.2 In the meantime, ideological constructs about 
the End of History, the Clash of Civilizations, or the elusive Green Capitalism 
	1	 As explained by a top US functionary in Suskind, 2004.
	2	 On this term see Lapavitsas, 2009. On the history of the phenomenon see Arrighi, 2010.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

234
Marchetos
were exposed as oligarchic projects or vapid self-​congratulation, but their 
soothing aura continued to tranquilize those holding the seats of power. Debt 
and poverty increased by the day but stock markets broke records one after 
another and corrections seemed to be only temporary.
Modern biomedicine remained beyond reach for the global majority till the 
pandemic struck. Notwithstanding its older roots, it was a novel form of medi­
cine, that had crystallized around the mid-​nineteenth century in Germany but 
really matured only in the twentieth century. “In essence”, remark collectively 
three pioneers of medical anthropology,
Biomedicine subscribes to a type of physical reductionism that radically 
separates the body from the nonbody […] emphasizes curing over prevention 
and spends much more money on hospitals, clinics, ambulance services, drugs, 
and “miracle curesˮ than it does on public health facilities, preventive edu­
cation, cleaning the environment, and eliminating the stress associated with 
modern life. Biomedicine constitutes the predominant ethnomedical system of 
European and North American societies and has become widely disseminated 
throughout the world (Baer et al., 2003, 11–​12).3
Biomedicine’s proponents often overlook its obvious and constant tension 
with the “multi-​site traditionˮ of epidemiology, that presented and still pres­
ents a blurred global picture, with a constantly disputed status “of its actors 
and their personal and professional relations, and of its particular place within 
twentieth-​century biomedical scienceˮ.4
	3	 The volume contains an accessible introduction to the concept of Biomedicine. Αn overview 
of the main theories about it and the criticisms addressed to it→ Singer et al., 2019, p.175ff. 
The chapter of Singer and Baer on postmodernist medical anthropology facilitates a critical 
approach of current medical anthropology (Singer & Baer, 2018, p.113ff).
	4	 See primarily the Chapter 13 in: Rosenberg, 1992. As regards the historicity and the relativ­
ity of this term see also: Hays, 2009, p.4ff. A standard English-​language specialist dictionary 
holds: “epidemiology The study of the distribution and determinants of health-​related 
states or events in specified populations, and the application of this study to control of 
health problems. “Studyˮ includes surveillance, observation, hypothesis testing, analytic 
research, and experiments. “Distributionˮ refers to analysis by time, place, and classes of 
persons affected. “Determinantsˮ are all the physical, biological, social, cultural, and behav­
ioral factors that influence health. “Health-​related states and eventsˮ include diseases, causes 
of death, behaviors such as use of tobacco, reactions to preventive regimens, and provision 
and use of health services. “Specified populationsˮ are those with identifiable characteris­
tics such as precisely defined numbers. “Application to control …ˮ makes explicit the aim of 
epidemiology –​ to promote, protect, and restore health. There have been many definitions 
of epidemiology. In the past 50 years or so, the definition has broadened from concern with 
communicable disease epidemics to take in all phenomena related to health in populations. 
The Oxford English Dictionary (oed) gives as a definition: “That branch of medical science 
which treats of epidemicsˮ and cites Parkin (1873) as a source. However, there was a “London 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19, Poverty, and Imperialism
235
Biomedicine, which primarily focuses on the treatment of ailments in spe­
cific individuals, epidemiology addresses the larger level of the population 
with the intention of preventing new illnesses. In other words, the goal of epi­
demiology is assessing the distribution of disease with the intention of identi­
fying “the risk factors that enable intervention and, ultimately, controlˮ (Baer 
et al., 2003, 25).
As the twentieth century waned, the preconditions and limits of biomedi­
cine’s success receded more and more to the background in Western thought. 
In this context, the history of epidemics was forgotten by policymakers and 
even specialists, with the exception of some self-​effacing physicians and his­
torians attuned to social service rather than power or money. Histories of the 
twentieth century ignoring epidemics and passing in silence matters of public 
health became the rule rather than the exception.
In the previous half-​century, few challenged the ideological construct 
of constant and inevitable Progress in public health, even though critical 
insights appeared in celebrated liberal historians’ works.5 Already in 1968 
however, the most prominent cultural anthropologist of the time, a politi­
cal radical, had proposed that the life of prehistoric foragers was healthier 
and generally preferable to that of the first agriculturalists (Sahlins, 2017). 
In the next decade, more critical voices were raised. A top British physician 
with rich clinical experience raised eyebrows when he challenged funda­
mental analytical notions of modern biomedicine, focussing on how cap­
italism had imposed, in the last four centuries, a mechanistic conception 
of the human body that still informs dominant ideas on health (McKeown, 
 1979).6
The notion of epidemic was also subjected to scrutiny and reformulated, 
now being linked to political sentiments, and especially to the dramatic spread 
of fear by a sudden wave of mass death (Honigsbaum & Méthot, 2020), while 
older definitions of the term epidemic focussed simply on increased incidence. 
For example, as per Last (2001, 60):
Epidemiological Societyˮ in the 1850s. The identity of the scholar who first used the word at 
that time has been lost. Epidemiologia appears in the tide of a Spanish history of epidemics, 
Epidemiologiaespanola, Madrid, 1802. Epidemic is much older. The word appears in Johnson’s 
Dictionary (1775), and oed gives a citation dated 1603. The word was, of course, used by 
Hippocrates” (Last, 2001, 62).
	5	 See for example: Porter, 1999; And, attuned to the general public, Porter, 1997.
	6	 A complementary perspective on the same issues is presented in chapters of another semi­
nal work: Federici, 2004.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

236
Marchetos
epidemic [from the Greek epi (upon), demos (people)] The occurrence 
in a community or region of cases of an illness, specific health-​related 
behavior, or other health-​related events clearly in excess of normal expec­
tancy. The community or region and the period in which the cases occur 
are specified precisely. The number of cases indicating the presence of 
an epidemic varies according to the agent, size, and type of population 
exposed; previous experience or lack of exposure to the disease; and time 
and place of occurrence. Epidemicity is thus relative to the usual fre­
quency of the disease in the same area, among the specified population, 
at the same season of the year.
Official medical thought noticed belatedly social factors of health and only 
in 1995 the World Health Organization declared, in its first report, that the 
“world’s most ruthless killer and the greatest cause of suffering on earth [is] 
extreme povertyˮ (who, 1995, 1). Poverty, however, causing mass death but nor­
mally not arriving unannounced, is a scourge endemic in capitalism, and not 
an epidemic. Analytical terms and similes more congenial to analyzing epi­
demics are offered by another social phenomenon whose health costs spread 
ever more widely among populations, i.e. modern war (Hodge & Singer, 2010). 
Specialists and governments alike often discuss covid-​19 is in terms of mili­
tary conflict.
Till the Pandemic Crisis of 2020–​21(comprising both the public health 
emergency and the subsequent economic crisis, with all their personal 
or subjective aspects and entanglements) epidemiological caution was 
ignored, if not ridiculed, in policymaking and non-​specialist discourse 
alike. This seems to have resulted from systemic pr rather than sober assess­
ments of risk. As governments, mainstream scholars, and media repeated 
ad nauseam, capitalism had made human life better and a tangible proof of 
this was its doing away with epidemics. Capital might exploit people but it 
did this for their own good, offering real progress, for example in hygienisa­
tion of daily living and longer survival expectancy. This entailed the stealthy 
confiscation of knowledge and science commons, but capital presented it 
as its own achievement, thus providing a common-​sense legitimation of the 
system.7
Throughout the twentieth century, medical progress was hailed as justifi­
cation for capitalism (primarily by the capitalists themselves). For example, in 
Greece, the USA employed Nazi death squads and napalm bombs in the Civil 
	7	 Brilliantly analyzed in: Harvey, 2018.
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19, Poverty, and Imperialism
237
War (1946–​1949) but also used carrots such as medical expeditions to help the 
local population and hygienize the inhabitable environment.8 Many other 
examples, mentioned in the studies presented in the following pages, show 
biomedical knowledge boosting capitalist imperialism.9 Epidemics however 
also bolstered capitalism in the course of the last five centuries. Even if badly 
managed by governments and institutions, they scarcely brought popular 
radicalization, on the contrary hitting harder usually the weak who failed to 
organize and react politically. The historical record seems to show that, unfor­
tunately, in capitalist centuries pandemics mostly fuelled inequality and 
poverty (Alfani, 2020).10 They thus facilitated the launching of new cycles of 
capital accumulation.
covid-​19 abruptly broke Western illusions. Aptly described not as a simple 
epidemic or pandemic, but as a syndemic, meaning at its simplest level two 
or more epidemics interacting synergistically with each other inside human 
bodies and thus resulting in the excess burden of disease (Baer et al., 2003, 
15), it exploded public health problems within the context of persistent social 
and economic inequalities (Horton, 2020). Excess mortality in 2020 in sev­
eral worst-​affected countries surpassed by half the expected annual mortality, 
while research suggests that the true covid-​19 death toll in several countries 
is over an order of magnitude larger than the official death count (Karlinsky 
& Kobak, 2021). Following other watersheds –​ the Great Crisis of 2007–​9, the 
2001 terrorist hit on the capitalist metropolis, and the 1989–​92 crumbling of 
the Soviet Block –​ the Pandemic Crisis of 2020–​21 marks a thirty-​year period of 
historical acceleration.
Whatever its eventual outcome, this unexpected contingency magnifies 
existing tensions and frictions between classes, states, regions, and cities, 
making them more acute and more visible. If comprehending means first of 
all correct framing, then comprehending the Pandemic Crisis means that we 
must find frameworks of reference that highlight its salient points and bring 
its essential aspects into relief. Rather than being a work for the medical sci­
ences alone, this seems to call for combined efforts in the direction of what 
Wallerstein (1996) had termed unidisciplinarity.11
	8	
See indicatively Gardikas, 2008.
	9	
On the differences between capitalist and previous forms of imperialism see Harvey, 2003.
	10	
The author of this informative and considered overview fails however to question whether 
the Black Death’s egalitarian consequences were linked to the fact that it occurred before 
the capitalist system had been put in place.
	11	
On the renewed emphasis placed upon the context in the historical and social sciences, 
see Skinner, 2002.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

238
Marchetos
In the pages that follow I survey modern opinions on the prehistoric ori­
gins and the later history of epidemics. Next, I present the important notion 
of pathocoenosis plus the work of pioneering scholars who dissected the social 
factors influencing epidemics and connected them with capitalism and impe­
rialism from a historical perspective. Further, I highlight the unjustly neglected 
work of earlier authors on the effects of poverty in public health, and I record 
the gradual waning of interest in epidemics, during the twentieth century, 
among Western historians and policymakers.
This chapter, based mainly on secondary sources, does not present original 
medical or epidemiological research. It simply tries to connect dots, juxtapos­
ing crucial contributions to the historiography and anthropology of epidemics, 
as seen from the perspective of a historian of ideologies and refracted through 
current political priorities of Europe. Hopefully, it will kindle discussion on 
useful notions and ideas developed in these disciplines, neglected in main­
stream discourse, that may be pertinent in understanding our present con­
juncture and in evaluating alternative courses of action.
Crucial among these is the already mentioned notion of syndemic, and 
also macroparasitism, that will be brought up later. Highlighting them, plus 
others elaborated in the fields of paleopathology, epidemiology, and critical 
anthropology of health, I broadly connect the economic and social conse­
quences of the present syndemic with existing social alternatives whose con­
tours appear ever more clearly. And the first point that needs to be stressed, 
I think, is that epidemics did not accompany humanity since the beginning. 
The popular idea that we supposedly emerged from a dark age of epidem­
ics, dating from times immemorial, to the modernity that conquered illness 
thanks to scientific and technological progress, finds little support among 
specialists today.
2	
When Did Epidemics Appear?
Modern scientific research documents that the so-​called “primitive“ humans 
were not threatened by epidemics. Hunters and gatherers, forming all of 
humanity until the last glacial period that ended about twelve thousand years 
ago, had a life that was hard and short indeed but nonetheless precluded the 
development of epidemics. Small mobile groups, scattered around huge geo­
graphical areas, had scarce chances to pass illnesses to each other. Hesiod, a 
Greek poet probably contemporary with Homer (around 700 b.c), may have 
recorded memories of this era (Hesiod, 2006, 90–​105):
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19, Poverty, and Imperialism
239
In older times human tribes lived on the earth protected from all evil 
and toil and the hard work that Fates bring to humans, free from these 
all. Because men who live miserably grow old fast. But then the woman 
[the artificially created Pandora] with her own hands opened the big ves­
sel and scattered all these scourges around and sent to the humans all 
kinds of cares and troubles. Only Hope stayed inside the vessel, in her 
unbreakable home beneath its opening. She did not fly away, because 
the will of Zeus, who holds the Aegis and moves the clouds, replaced the 
lid. Thousands of evils were thus unleashed against the humans, the land 
being full of them and equally the sea. Virulent illnesses are thus thrown 
upon us now, some by day and others by night, unprovoked and silent, 
because their voice was retained by the sage Zeus.12
Epidemics arrived in the era of civilization. Their early ravages are being 
detailed by paleopathology, a discipline developed in the last half-​century, 
which arguably allowed for the first time objective scientific evaluations of 
whether, and in what senses, various social formations and historic periods 
signify “progressˮ. One of its unexpected conclusions was that agriculture did 
not arise as a simple result of human ingenuity, inventiveness, or free choice, 
but only when rulers subjugated groups of producers whose health clearly 
deteriorated afterward (Cohen & Crane-​Kramer, 2007, 2–​4).13
Initially, in Mesopotamia, human life seems that changed radically about 
twelve thousand years ago. Then, and more or less concurrently, deep changes 
happened whose consequences marked all history till our own time. An “accu­
mulation of domestications”, as the veteran Yale professor James C. Scott called 
them, focused on control of reproduction by elites, which of course included 
control of human reproduction.
Humans became sedentary and usually subaltern, animals were domesti­
cated, and also plants. Agriculture grew with mass employment of slave labor 
(but plowing appeared only five thousand years ago), patriarchy was imposed 
	12	
Πρὶν μὲν γὰρ ζώεσκον ἐπὶ χθονὶ φῦλ’ ἀνθρώπων νόσφιν ἄτερ τε κακῶν καὶ ἄτερ χαλεποῖο 
πόνοιο νούσων τ’ ἀργαλέων, αἵ τ’ ἀνδράσι κῆρας ἔδωκαν [αἶψα γὰρ ἐν κακότητι βροτοὶ κατα 
γηράσκουσιν]. ἀλλὰ γυνὴ χείρεσσι πίθου μέγα πῶμ’ ἀφελοῦσα ἐσκέδασ’, ἀνθρώποισι δ’ ἐμήσατο 
κήδεα λυγρά. μούνη δ’ αὐτόθι Ἐλπὶς ἐν ἀρρήκτοισι δόμοισιν ἔνδον ἔμεινε πίθου ὑπὸ χείλεσιν οὐδὲ 
θύραζε ἐξέπτη· πρόσθεν γὰρ ἐπέμβαλε πῶμα πίθοιο [αἰγιόχου βουλῇσι Διὸς νεφεληγερέταο]. 
ἄλλα δὲ μυρία λυγρὰ κατ’ ἀνθρώπους ἀλάληται· πλείη μὲν γὰρ γαῖα κακῶν, πλείη δὲ θάλασσα· 
νοῦσοι δ’ ἀνθρώποι σινἐφ’ ἡμέρῃ, αἳ δ’ ἐπὶ νυκτὶ αὐτόματοι φοιτῶσι κακὰ θνητοῖσι φέρουσαι 
σιγῇ, ἐπεὶ φωνὴν ἐξείλετο μητίετα Ζεύς. οὕτως οὔ τί πη ἔστι Διὸς νόον ἐξαλέασθαι.
	13	
The element of asymmetric social power is sidelined in the best-​selling but shallow lib­
eral synthesis of Yuval Noah Harari (2015), Sapiens. A Brief History of Humankind.
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

240
Marchetos
on women and children, and towns were erected, as well as social structures 
functionally similar to what today is called “the state“. Class societies were 
organized, in the sense of societies based on labor forced on many by a few 
who confiscated the product of their toil. Antiquity, therefore, produced nar­
ratives like Hesiod’s, some nostalgic of a Paradise Lost or a Golden Age, others 
detailing the consequent Fall from Grace.
Were all these interconnected developments “progressiveˮ? Archaeological 
research says no. Combining recent research results on prehistory, archaeology, 
ancient history, and anthropology, Scott hits the nail on the head:
Agriculture, it was assumed, was a great step forward in human well-​being, 
nutrition, and leisure. Something like the opposite was initially the case. The 
state and early civilizations were often seen as attractive magnets, drawing 
people in by virtue of their luxury, culture, and opportunities. In fact, the early 
states had to capture and hold much of their population by forms of bondage 
and were plagued by the epidemics of crowding. The early states were fragile 
and liable to collapse, but the ensuing “dark ages“ may often have marked an 
actual improvement in human welfare. Finally, there is a strong case to be made 
that life outside the state –​ life as a “barbarianˮ –​ may often have been materi­
ally easier, freer, and healthier than life at least for non-​elites inside civilization 
(Scott, 2017, xii).14
Copious historical studies detail and romantic literature attests, that this 
held true until the twentieth century. This “process of secondary primitivismˮ 
being often an attractive option, Scott estimates that states got the upper hand 
in the struggle against their twin “barbarianˮ societies only in the last four cen­
turies. Until the 1600s of the Christian era, most people probably lived in areas 
best described as stateless, where “nonappropriable subsistence practicesˮ 
prevailed (Scott, 2017, 253).15 But this is another story.
	14	
Archaeologists however have argued that this was not always the case. For example, they 
found in the prehistoric civilization of the Indus Valley agriculture developed through 
a less conflictual relationship with hunting/​gathering, and perhaps this was connected 
with the absence of organized war and state power, which may be signified by the lack 
of fortifications and monumental buildings (McIntosh, 2008). For Scott (2017, 118) the 
existence of walls, tax collection, and officials constituted the hard core of these archaic 
states.
	15	
Scott sees this modern period of state preponderance as inaugurated during the first 
great phase of expansion of the capitalist system described by Wallerstein (The Modern 
World-​System, Vols. I–​III, 1974–​1988, and Vol. IV, 2011). States needed even more centuries 
to entirely prevail. Τo takes an example from the Greek cultural space, overlapping with 
many others from the Aegean to Anatolia and to the Balkans, life outside the state was 
feasible for many Christian and Muslim men and women who chose to become pirates 
on the sea until the 1830s or brigands in the mountains until ww2. Famous bandits served 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19, Poverty, and Imperialism
241
The “accumulation of domesticationsˮ mentioned above affected margin­
ally the total number of humans, which Scott estimates to have risen from 
four to five million in the next five thousand years. He ascribes this demo­
graphic stagnation principally to the spread of disease: “epidemiologically, 
this was perhaps the most lethal period in human historyˮ (Scott, 2017, 97). 
Written records from subsequent periods seem to corroborate this specula­
tion, and cultivated crops succumbed to epidemics as well, producing famine 
(Scott, 2017, 109–​110).
The Neolithic was not only an unprecedented gathering of people but, at 
the same time, a wholly unprecedented gathering of sheep, goats, cattle, pigs, 
dogs, cats, chickens, ducks, geese. To the degree that they were already “herdˮ 
or “flockˮ animals, they would have carried some species-​specific pathogens of 
crowding. Assembled for the first time around the Domus, in close and contin­
uous contact, they quickly came to share a wide range of infective organisms. 
Estimates vary, but of the fourteen hundred known human pathogenic organ­
isms, between eight hundred and nine hundred are zoonotic diseases, origi­
nating in nonhuman hosts. […] The multispecies resettlement camp was, then, 
not only a historic assemblage of mammals in numbers and proximity never 
previously known, but it was also an assembly of all the bacteria, protozoa, 
helminths, and viruses that fed on them. The victors, as it were, in this pest race 
were those pathogens that could quickly adapt to new hosts in the Domus and 
multiply. What was occurring was the first massive surge of pathogens across 
the species barrier, establishing an entirely new epidemiological order (Scott, 
2017, 103–​104).16
The early history of epidemics is presented in an absorbing reference work 
of the American medical anthropologist Mark Nathan Cohen. Cohen (1989, 
3), deconstructing like Scott the stereotypes of “civilizedˮ and “uncivilized”, 
reminds us that the ideological tenet of “progressˮ had originally been sub­
jected to critical scrutiny by Marxism. By studying civilization’s influence on 
the health of ancient populations as regards both zoonotic infections and 
chronic diseases, he estimates that earlier groups were exposed to fewer ill­
nesses, while in later times epidemics spread together with civilization as 
as national heroes and are still elevated to the status of role models for rebellious youths. 
Popular novels detailing contemporary brigands’ exploits became instant hits in Greece 
until they were outlawed themselves by a dictatorship in the 1930s.
	16	
“Little wonder, then”, Scott added, “that southeast China, specifically Guangdong, proba­
bly the largest, most crowded, and historically deepest concentration of Homo sapiens, 
pigs, chickens, geese, ducks, and wild animal markets in the world, has been a major 
world petri dish for the incubation of new strains of bird and swine flu” (105).
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

242
Marchetos
human populations grew more numerous and dense. He notes that the same 
tendency seems to hold, in general, till our own days.
Scientific proof that prehistoric ancestors suffered from maladies unknown 
to us is lacking, although illnesses easily defeated by modern organisms possi­
bly presented in previous times stronger forms. The passage from nomadism 
to sedentary living had rather a negative impact on human health, facilitating 
the development of all types of parasites and illnesses, from schistostomiasis 
to malaria (historically the latter proving the prime cause of premature death). 
Domesticated animals passed to us new pathogens, and many illnesses that 
today spread among humans were originally taken from them. On the other 
hand, human impact on the environment, as well as the storing and cooking of 
food, had mixed consequences. Cohen’s findings produced heated discussion, 
but in general, they have been validated by recent studies.17 For Scott, “hyper­
sedentismˮ of Neolithic populations subject to states gave rise to epidemics 
mainly connected with “scale, trade, and warfareˮ (Scott, 2017, 191).
This formative period, ranging from the end of the last Ice Age to the begin­
nings of recorded history, marked prehistoric humanity long before capital­
ism made its appearance. Our present system however reproduces at a deep 
level and on a gigantic scale features developed in that first era of organized 
state power and mass subjugation. They include domestication and controlled 
reproduction of humans and animals, forced population transfers intertwined 
with crowding, monoculture, and simplification of the non-​human environ­
ment. Exploitation, subjugation, and oppression expanded in scope and were 
refined in implementation. Has this affected the overall health of human soci­
eties? In answering this question we need to revisit an analytical notion artic­
ulated in the 1960s but subsequently marginalized in mainstream discourse, 
both learned and lay.
3	
Pathocoenosis
The French /​ Yugoslav historian Mirko Grmek, a resistant active during the Nazi 
occupation of his country and a celebrated historian of medicine in the 1960s, 
was the first to study, under the supervision of Fernand Braudel, illness in clas­
sical antiquity. Writing within the framework of the Annales school, he aimed 
at a sociologically informed historiography that would render a full picture of 
	17	
For example, a study, based on results of skeletal pathology, of twenty one regions from all 
over the world: Cohen & Crane-​Kramer, 2007; see also: Scott, 2017, 93–​115.
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19, Poverty, and Imperialism
243
the human past by recognizing the importance of daily life. “In this global his­
torical vision, diseases take on prime significance as mass phenomena affecting 
economics, demography, and social behaviorˮ (Grmek, 1989).18 This certainly 
holds for epidemic diseases, whose best descriptions in Antiquity, Grmek adds, 
were written not by medics but by historians and men of letters. A case in point 
was the Great Plague during the Peloponnesian War that destroyed the imperi­
alist system of Athens. But endemic illnesses influence the biological potential 
of societies in ways even deeper and more permanent.
Grmek’s theoretical reflections on how notions of illness were formed in our 
civilization, as well as in older ones, usher to his important distinction between 
disease as an interpreting idea and disease as a pathological reality in the realm 
of human experience. All kinds of biological organisms get sick or cause mal­
adies to others. But the abstractions that we call today measles, or diabetes, do 
not form part of external empirical reality. They are, on the contrary, analytical 
notions that we humans collectively construct in our own minds. We elaborate 
on them in order to interpret, according to our pre-​existing models, the com­
plex empirical realities that we encounter. Every disease (as an interpretive 
abstraction, not as particular diseased individuals populating the empirical 
world) presupposes a certain medical philosophy, a given system of patholog­
ical reference. The abstraction that we call this or that “disease”, for example, 
measles or diabetes, is but a model for explaining empirical reality. Constructed 
by ourselves, it is not a constitutive element of the external world; made inside 
our minds, it does not exist out there. It is an idea, not a thing. Furthermore, it 
is constructed historically.
Different societies may elaborate different abstract notions for the same 
pathological empirical realities, as we readily see when we compare modern 
Western medicine, crafted about two hundred years ago, to the classical Indian 
or Chinese medical traditions that sprung from different historical roots and 
developed different interpretive abstractions. For example, the Hippocratic 
conception of disease stood apart from our own, based as it was fundamen­
tally on clinical and not anatomical images, and also anchored on empirical 
realities of the ancient Greek society. In order to interpret correctly the ancient 
medical texts and understand the pathological realities that they describe, 
Grmek (1989, 1) says, we must first leave behind our own notions.19
	18	
Grmek’s insights are developed today in the journal History and Philosophy of the Life 
Sciences, which he had helped establish. His influence on the syndemic approach devel­
oped later in the scientific field of critical anthropology of health, in its turn irrigated 
from the world-​systems approach, has not passed unnoticed. See Herring & Swedlund, 
2010, 151.
	19	
The Hippocratic view of disease is presented in p.284ff.
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

244
Marchetos
While developing his materialist conception, Grmek introduced a new 
notion valuable for the historical study of both endemic and epidemic dis­
eases. Pathocoenosis means fundamentally the sum total of pathological con­
ditions that exist in a given population at a given point in time. By studying the 
systemic characteristics of a particular pathocoenosis we can define nosolog­
ical parameters quantitatively and qualitatively. Seen from another angle, the 
frequency and distribution of diseases in any given population at a specific 
moment in time are interdependent. In the context of a particular pathoco­
enosis, the distribution and incidence of any disease interact not only with 
endogenous and ecological (exogenous) factors but also with the distribu­
tion and incidence of any other disease.20 According to Grmek, pathocoeno­
sis tends towards equilibrium, especially when ecological conditions remain 
stable.
This notion highlights the fact that diseases in the ancient world, while dif­
ferent from our own in analytic terms (having different names and frames of 
reference) were not necessarily different as regards their empirical nosological 
data. Here is an especially pertinent remark on agrarian Greek pathocoenosis 
from a historical perspective:
As for the way Greek peasants live, that has changed more in the past 
fifty years than it did in the previous three millennia. A modern medical 
inquiry, such as the one recorded by Richard and Eva Blum during their 
fieldwork in Greece from 1957 to 1962, can produce useful information 
and unexpected insights even for a specialist in classical medicine. The 
inhabitants of three Greek villages were interviewed and examined by 
this American medical team and were found to be suffering from the 
following important ailments: malaria, typhoid fever, amebic dysentery, 
pulmonary tuberculosis, scrofula, diabetes, jaundice and hepatitis, pneu­
monia, meningitis, diphtheria, undulant fever, scarlet fever, cataracts, and 
eye diseases. Acute respiratory diseases, gastrointestinal disorders, and 
rheumatic pains constituted the overwhelming majority of ills seen by 
the team in this population of peasants and shepherds. If we include the 
relatively frequent diagnosis of nutritional dystrophy, high blood pres­
sure, tonsillitis, peptic ulcers, hernia, gout, and sciatica, it is striking how 
closely this pathocoenosis resembles the one suggested to us by reading 
the Hippocratic texts. Aside from a decline in malaria, the villages of 
	20	
On the reasons for the eclipse of the notion of pathocoenosis in western historical dis­
course, connected with the “cultural turn”, See Jones, 2005.
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19, Poverty, and Imperialism
245
Dhadhi, Panorio, and Saratzani confronted these American researchers 
with a nosological reality essentially the same as the one confronting an 
itinerant physician in the fifth century b.c.21
grmek, 1989, 14
Having for decades sidelined pathocoenosis, epidemiologists and specialist 
anthropologists however invoke now the syndemic model of health. More elab­
orate and detailed than the older notion, and also differing from it in import­
ant aspects, it is broadly equivalent to it from the functional point of view, as 
it focuses
on the biosocial complex, which consists of interacting, co-​present, or 
sequential diseases and the social and environmental factors that pro­
mote and enhance the negative effects of disease interaction. This emer­
gent approach to health conception and clinical practice reconfigures 
conventional historical understanding of diseases as distinct entities in 
nature, separate from other diseases and independent of the social con­
texts in which they are found. Rather, all of these factors tend to interact 
synergistically in various and consequential ways, having a substantial 
impact on the health of individuals and whole populations. Specifically, 
a syndemics approach examines why certain diseases cluster (i,e. mul­
tiple diseases affecting individuals and groups); the pathways through 
which they interact biologically in individuals and within populations, 
and thereby multiply their overall disease burden, and the ways in which 
social environments, especially conditions of social inequality and injus­
tice, contribute to disease clustering and interaction as well as to the 
vulnerability.
singer et al., 2017
The syndemic model of health and the notion of pathocoenosis become even 
more interesting when used for evaluating the anti-​covid-​19 policy mixes used 
by states today. They can also be applied beyond bodily afflictions, on what is 
called psychological illness as well, rampant in the capitalist and patriarchal 
societies straddling the globe today. Their application in search of empirical 
corroboration for radical hypotheses and perspectives explored by critical 
sociologists, jurists, theorists, psychiatrists, psychologists, and psychoanalysts 
	21	
As regards the imprint of malaria on the history of the Greek world, see ibid, p.277ff, 
where one also finds interesting data on the contribution of the late nineteenth century 
Greek doctors in diagnosing and treating this disease (p.298ff).
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

246
Marchetos
like Juliet Mitchell, Alice Miller, Catharine McKinnon, Mary Daly, Judith 
Herman, and Gabor Maté, remains an open wager. Such an approach could 
perhaps strengthen with quantitative data, or alternatively prove false, intel­
lectually fertile notions elucidating many types of politically important social 
phenomena and syndromes, including psychological trauma, sexual abuse, 
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (adhd), stress and depression, addic­
tion, pornography and pornification, hysteria, and of course the social insti­
tution of gender. Its incorporation in many branches of social science would 
probably prove beneficial. Psychological conditions created by the Pandemic 
Crisis, especially by mass trauma, new poverty, and quarantines, have already 
spawned a large specialist literature.
4	
Epidemics of Imperialism
Grmek’s work was soon overshadowed by Plagues and Peoples, written by 
William H. McNeill (1976), the liberal pupil of Arnold Toynbee and father of 
World History as a scientific field. McNeill, a Canadian who had fought in 
Greece during ww2 and studied Greek society in depth, contributed to the 
world-​systems theory whose best-​known exponents are radical thinkers such 
as Immanuel Wallerstein, Terence Hopkins, and Giovanni Arrighi.
Focussing on later eras than Grmek, McNeill outlined three historic turning 
points at the outset of the three big epidemic waves known in history. First the 
interconnection, twenty centuries ago, of China, India, and the Mediterranean 
through sea and land routes that also crossed Iran. Second the consolidation, 
seven hundred years ago, of the Mongolic empire that similarly unified from 
a northern route these three cradles of civilization. Third, the European con­
quest of America five centuries ago.
McNeill’s huge and precious work cannot be paraphrased here, but one of 
its findings merits mention. The class societies that developed together with 
agriculture, he says, were characterized by a form of “macroparasitismˮ that 
sheds light not only on ancient social relationships but also on those of our 
own time, including debt, and thus, is especially pertinent to our modern pro­
ductive system and culture.22
	22	
On the roots of the social relationship of debt, that until recently (in historical terms) was 
condemned not only by Islam but also by the main strands of Christianity, See Hudson, 
2018. Also, Graeber, 2011. On debt today: Toussaint, 2017. In a particular way, public debt 
was used after 2010 to enslave Greece, See Truth Committee on Public Debt, June 2015.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19, Poverty, and Imperialism
247
A conqueror could seize food from those who produced it, and by con­
suming it himself become a parasite of a new sort on those who did the 
work. In especially fertile landscapes it even proved possible to establish 
a comparatively stable pattern of this sort of macroparasitism among 
human beings. Early civilizations, in fact, were built upon the possibility 
of taking only a part of the harvest from subjected communities, leaving 
enough behind to allow the plundered community to survive indefinitely, 
year after year.
mcneill, 1976, 6
The successful institution of state structures meant the creation of a fear-​
inducing society of specialists in violence, able to subjugate other people who 
were absorbed into collecting or producing food. As Scott (2017, 175ff) remarked, 
conquered peoples were then often transferred en masse to areas closer to the 
imperial center, where they could be more easily controlled and exploited. But 
societies who had these state structures also employed a weapon even more 
lethal, their own illnesses.
Endemic forms of infection from bacteria or viruses produced antibodies, 
and in time they caused forms of immunity in the originally infected popula­
tions. When they spread beyond them, however, arriving in societies that were 
simpler and, until then, healthier, these same infections caused epidemics. In 
other words, the macroparasitism of the classes that controlled the state did 
not simply produce strong forms of political and military organization, but it 
was accompanied by the development of viral and bacterial micro parasitism 
in the subject populations, that created biological defenses lacking in adjacent 
free populations.
War was closely connected to disease for thousands of years before the 
appearance of the tactical armies that spread newcomer diseases in America 
and other invaded territories. Childhood maladies to which “civilizedˮ societ­
ies were gradually accustomed turned into biological weapons able to destroy 
neighboring groups, thus facilitating the expansion of exploitative societies 
in new areas. Often the victims belonged mainly to productive groups of the 
defeated and decimated societies, which had also to face devastating psycho­
logical and mental consequences (McNeill, 1976, 49–​50,61). For Scott (2017, 
218), this recurrent form of unplanned genocide brought “a dark age of epic 
proportions among peoples without histories that went unnoticed by history 
itselfˮ.
Another good starting point for the historical study of epidemics is the work 
of Sheldon Watts, a black professor of cultural and social history who chose 
to live in poor countries and taught in Nigeria and Egypt. Using comparative 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

248
Marchetos
methods in his huge synthesis, plus tools borrowed from many branches of 
social and medical science, Watts highlighted the interplay between epidem­
ics and social responses, and also the facilitation of epidemics by the colonial 
spread of European capitalism. Focussing on power relations between the 
dominant few and the subjected many, and also connecting social parameters 
with political choices that are usually examined under different headings and 
by different disciplines, he dissected the relationship between the spread of 
epidemics in the last five centuries and the development of financial capital­
ism in the West. In another pioneering move, he discussed the nefarious con­
sequences that the institution of debt has on social health.
Besides recovering the advanced health systems of the pre-​capitalist non-​
Western world, as well as their precious heritage destroyed by colonialism, in 
an important study, Disease and Medicine in World History, Watts also touched 
upon issues of current topical interest, like the flawed functioning of the who. 
Highlighting the “differences, disconnectedness, and discontinuitiesˮ among 
distinct medical traditions (of extinct civilizations like the ancient Egyptian 
and the pre-​conquest American ones, plus the Great Tradition based on Greek 
medicine and reworked in medieval Islam with Persian, Arab, and Egyptian 
inputs, and also the Indian ayurvedic medicine, as well as the various Chinese 
systems) he pinpointed the conceptual system of modern biomedicine that 
rose in the last two centuries in the West, separate from all previous medical 
systems. Significant continuities, on the other hand, included the mindset of 
Western officials that did not perceptibly change between the colonial era and 
our own times, in which two-​fifths of the world population remains excluded 
from modern biomedicine (Watts, 2003, 13–​14).
In another seminal study, Epidemics and History, Watts (1997) examined 
systematically epidemics using a double framework for each one of them, 
Western and non-​Western. Starting with the arrival of the Black Death in 
Europe and the Levant, he further detailed the medieval spread of so-​called 
leprosy in West and in the tropics, and then of measles in Europe and con­
quered America, syphilis in Western Europe and Asia, and nineteenth-​century 
cholera in Britain and the British Indias. He concluded with the slave-​owning 
nineteenth-​century societies of America and Western Africa when faced with 
malaria and yellow fever.
Insisting on the connection between Western medicalization and impe­
rialist expansion,23 Watts threw light on issues especially pertinent to the 
	23	
The meaning of the notion of medicalization, fostered by biomedicine, is presented 
in: Baer et al., 2003, 14.
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19, Poverty, and Imperialism
249
covid-​19 era. Notably the rise of state interventionism in health and hygiene 
matters, plus its use in social disciplining, the interaction between epidemics 
and popular uprisings, the birth of the so-​called tropical medicine in the con­
text of imperialism, and the gradual disconnection between elite and popu­
lar conceptions of protection from epidemics. Even historians who criticized 
aspects of his work, or an occasional lack of focus, praised his synthesis as 
indispensable, deep, and moving.24 A real pioneer, he managed to write one of 
those books which, when read, are never forgotten.
In short, both McNeill and Watts offered tools useful for analyzing important 
aspects of the current syndemic. Highlighting the interplay between micropar­
asitism and macroparasitism is even more pertinent today, as financialization 
ushered macroparasitism in a novel phase where a state-​controlling oligarchic 
class grows richer while impoverishing producers through market mechanisms 
and expropriative accumulation (Zucman, 2019). By now macroparasitic capi­
tal claims ownership, through a logistically created pyramid of debt, of roughly 
all wealth on earth (Lapavitsas, 2013).
Similarly in our own days, divergent methods and results of countering 
covid-​19 microparasitism in China, the USA, and elsewhere may reveal differ­
ent state priorities, related to the extent to which states succumb to capitalist 
macroparasitism. Inside the Western block itself, weaker states shackled by this 
macroparasitism are denied the financial means to counter the syndemic. For 
example, twenty months after covid-​19’s onset, Greece has not added even 
one physician or nurse to its struggling public health system, having further­
more compressed the 2021 state budget for health compared to the previous 
year. It still channels around 15% of this budget to creditors, mainly oligarchs, 
as debt and interest repayment, obeying a policy imposed by the European 
Union and the imf.
Both McNeill and Watts delineate how the spread of disease inside the cap­
italist world system, and also through it, connect to geographic hierarchies. 
Accentuating the interdependence of class and interstate relations,25 they illu­
minate in historical perspective capitalist imperialism, a form essentially dis­
tinct from its pre-​capitalist predecessors in both its logic and manifestations.26 
Their analyzes enhance realist interpretations of imperialist attacks during the 
	24	
See especially Professor Michael Worboys’ review of  Epidemics and History: Disease, 
Power and Imperialism, 2000.
	25	
A central tenet of the Marxist theory of international relations is that, as “a structure of 
socialization and determination, a mode of foreign relations is also a constitutive force in 
the shaping of class relations” (Van der Pijl, 2007, 23).
	26	
Its particularities are analyzed in: Harvey, 2003.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

250
Marchetos
present syndemic, for example, those affected through political and economic 
sanctions against Iran, Cuba, and other resisters.
5	
The Poverty Virus
The class dimension of epidemics, and more generally the class parameters 
of health provision, were highlighted by an important pupil of McNeill in a 
study building upon the insights of Grmek and Watts and also displaying inci­
sive style, analytical brilliance, and acute social conscience. Extending his time 
frame from the late Western antiquity till our own days, the social historian of 
medicine Jo Hays (2009, 116) developed his basic argument that, contrary to 
nineteenth-​century British orthodoxy, for which poverty was caused by disease, 
in fact, the opposite held true. Epidemics and other diseases spread because of 
poverty. Nonetheless, the West systematically denied, and still denies, this fact. 
Contradicting positivist histories of medicine, and also underlining the ravages 
of imperialism and the anti-​public-​health policies and interventions of insti­
tutions like the World Bank and imf, Hays put on center stage the relationship 
between disease and power.
In Epidemics and Pandemics, a prime medical history handbook, Hays (2005) 
aims to provide accurate and up-​to-​date historical information, highlighting 
social and political issues, on fifty significant epidemics and pandemics rang­
ing from the Great Plague of Athens in classical Greece to contemporary out­
breaks of aids, Mad Cow Disease, malaria and tuberculosis. Organized as a 
reference work, Epidemics and Pandemics provides clearly delineated sections 
for each of these outbreaks, covering social context, significance, background, 
current understandings of basic nosological parameters, responses caused by 
each outbreak, and remaining unresolved issues, plus basic primary sources 
and bibliography.
Jo Hays (2009/​1998) had touched upon more theoretical matters previ­
ously, in The Burdens of Disease. Epidemics and Human Response in Western 
History. There he dissected the historicity of notions of health and disease, 
as well as social responses to the latter, plus the social determinants of ther­
apeutic notions and practices, technical equipment, state policies, institu­
tional infrastructure, and mentalities, together with concomitant moral 
issues.  His outlines of sensitive subjects -​ such as the resisted development 
of public hygiene in late nineteenth-​century Britain, the manipulation of 
scientific data by state authorities for political ends and the creation and dis­
semination of pseudo-​science, the failure of who to counter epidemics post-​
1992, the political factors in the production of antibiotics and the malignant 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19, Poverty, and Imperialism
251
priorities of Big Pharma, and the impact of public debt on public health -​ are 
especially pertinent today. Among other examples, Hays (2009, 101ff, 117ff) 
detailed the links between epidemics in colonial India and the destruction 
of its thriving public hygiene and health systems by the invaders in order to 
facilitate financial exploitation, as well as the lack of medical provision to 
European fighting armies till the late nineteenth century.27
Other topics of the book include the insufficient or plainly wrong reaction 
of established Galenic medicine to the Black Death in late medieval Europe, 
the destruction of indigenous Americans through epidemics cum genocide 
after the Spanish invasion, the hygienistic insights of the Enlightenment, the 
pre-​scientific ways of thought and the recent (on the historical scale) rise of 
scientific medicine in late nineteenth-​century Germany (thanks to strong state 
support, among other factors), the development of epidemiology and the tri­
umph of biomedicine, the rise of Western eugenics and Nazism, the troubled 
history of vaccines, the employment of hygienism against refugees and other 
weak groups, and the variable social position of healers.
Hays’ skepticism as regards the possibility of ending epidemics in a cap­
italist framework, unpopular at the time of writing his book, makes it even 
more attractive today. Its final chapter proved prophetic on important issues 
that had previously been thought resolved in the West, but in fact, remained 
unresolved in the rest of the world and even in parts of the capitalist center. It 
put the case against an undue emphasis on the cultural factors of the disease:
The apparent conquest of epidemics left the field open for concern with 
ailments more easily conceived in terms of social deviance and hence 
cultural construction (especially mental illness), and for situations where 
the intervention of biomedical technology raised issues of values and the 
quality of life above and beyond its simple preservation. The developed 
Western world has therefore moved beyond thinking of disease in purely 
objective, biological terms, and we have applied our broadened cultural 
conceptions to disease’s past as well as to its present. Undoubtedly many 
examples can be shown of ways in which past Western societies have 
configured disease in cultural terms; such examples are dotted through­
out this book. But this recognition of the cultural past of disease may lead 
us to forget those dimensions of disease recognized by scientific biomed­
icine, dimensions that still have primary meaning in many parts of the 
	27	
On the impact of public debt on public health in Latin America and Asia, from a historical 
perspective, see p.128ff.
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

252
Marchetos
world, especially in those parts called “developing”. Our understanding of 
the relationship of disease and poverty in the past may have relevance in 
the present, particularly in those societies that do not yet have the luxury 
of forgetting acute epidemics in order to concentrate on the more value-​
laden, problematic, chronic ailments, conditions of aging, and mental 
illnesses.
hays, 2009, 309–​310
Revolving around intellectual and cultural history, Epidemics and Ideas, a col­
lective volume edited by Terence Ranger and Paul Slack, covered issues ranging 
from the ancient Athenian notions of “epidemicˮ to medieval ideas accusing 
popular strata for the Black Death, and to aids. It also examined the role played 
by disease in the genocide of native Americans and Oceanic populations. Here 
I will only present some pertinent findings of a chapter by the noted liberal his­
torian Richard J. Evans (1992), examining the connection between epidemics 
and revolutions in the European nineteenth century.
Evans notes that the new input of the nineteenth century was cholera, “the 
quintessential disease of colonialismˮ (Watts, 1997, xvi). Six successive waves, 
springing generally from India, hit the rest of Asia and then the Europeans, 
shaking their sense of cultural and biological superiority. A malady coming 
from the East and highlighting the widespread poverty of capitalist metrop­
olises, it turned upside down bourgeois notions of propriety and necessitated 
strong state intervention, from the imposition of quarantines to hygienization 
zones that, in their turn, mobilized popular opposition.
Cholera, like most epidemics, hit proletarians worse than the powerful 
strata, but contrary to previous outbreaks, in the nineteenth century, this 
became a politically important fact, widely noticed and criticized. Evans 
records a significant change after the French Revolution. While in the Middle 
Ages epidemics usually turned the populace against lepers, Jews, and other 
social outcasts, now the spread of literacy and natural science helped popu­
lar reaction find new targets; also the masses had entered the political scene 
by now. Rumors about aristocratic conspiracies aimed at destroying the poor 
mobilized peasants against notables, while hygienist official decrees created 
uproar, for example when they forbade traditional funeral customs. Medics 
were often targeted, metaphorically and even literally. Popular turbulence, 
or simply its fear, frustrated official plans for quarantines and hygienization 
zones. The epidemic spread was now recognized as connected to wars, army 
movements and refugees, population transfers, and prisoner camps. Evident 
was also its relationship with long-​distance commerce and with the famines 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19, Poverty, and Imperialism
253
that recurred regularly till modern cultivation methods spread, around two 
centuries ago.28
The popular riots of the 1830s were not noted for their radicalism and lacked 
clear political demands, but they prepared the ground for the revolutionary 
wave of 1848. That same year the worst epidemic outbreak of the century hit 
Europe after political revolts had already commenced. Western states replying 
in a rather organized way to the epidemic, and the people also having given 
political focus to their anger, few riots ensued in the West after 1848, but in the 
tsar’s empire, a series of ferocious local revolts against state and local notables 
continued until the 1880s (Evans, 1992, 169ff).
If health became a political issue in the decades before wwi through the 
process of medicalization, Evans notes, capitalist metropolises were treated 
differently from subject states. In the colonies Europeans usually imposed 
strict spatial separation for the locals, developing systematic forms of oppres­
sion. Another scholar concludes that colonial urbanistic apartheid created 
models used in Europe itself till our own days for the exclusion of unwanted 
groups like the Roma (Picker, 2017). In any case, historical experience shows 
that, as long as mortality remained at levels below 40% of the population, epi­
demics did not bring revolutions, usually not even reforms (Evans, 1992, 170).
Countries that were neither colonies nor metropolises fell somewhere in 
the middle. Their authorities did not respond to epidemics as energetically as 
the West, but neither did they suffer the paralysis described by Watts and Hays 
in Africa or India. For example, Iran, hit for obvious geographical and social 
reasons by all cholera waves, and especially damaged by the Third Cholera 
Epidemic after 1846, created its first public health policy-​making institution in 
1881, and employed it in campaigns against epidemics between 1904 and 1920 
(Azizi & Azizi, 2010, 53).
But again, we should not overestimate the authorities’ hygienistic vigilance 
even in the metropolitan West.29 The splendors of nineteenth-​century sci­
entific and industrial development hardly counterbalanced the sad realities 
of the so-​called Belle Epoque. In fact, the European order that was shaken 
by wwi and overturned after ww2 had more continuities with the Ancient 
Regime than usually recognized. The great radical historian Arno Mayer 
indicated the “marked tendency to neglect or underplay, and to disvalue, the 
endurance of old forces and ideas and their cunning genius for assimilating, 
	28	
On the debate between those who explained epidemics through the idea of contagion 
and the proponents of miasma see Hays, 2009, 138ff.
	29	
Paradigmatic on this field is the pioneering work, focussing on France: Murard & 
Zylberman, 1996.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

254
Marchetos
delaying, neutralizing, and subduing capitalist modernization, even including 
industrialization. The result is a partial and distorted view of the nineteenth 
and early twentieth centuries” (Mayer, 1981, 3). Furthermore,
the “premodern” elements were not the decaying and fragile remnants 
of an all but vanished past but the very essence of Europe’s incumbent 
civil and political societies. This is not to deny the growing importance 
of the modern forces that undermined and challenged the old order. But 
it is to argue that until 1914 the forces of inertia and resistance contained 
and curbed this dynamic and expansive new society within the ancient 
regimes that dominated Europe’s historical landscape (6–​7).
The social implications of ruling conservatism soon became obvious. Among 
other consequences, the disease was often understood in two convenient ways 
by state, medical, and religious authorities alike. Advanced capitalist countries 
continued to officially ascribe epidemics to imaginary miasmas till the twen­
tieth century, even though the British physician John Snow had shown since 
1849 that they spread through excreta-​contaminated drinking water. In late-​
nineteenth-​century Greece, both “‘the Christians and the Turks were ecstatic’ 
when the relics of St. Nikolaos of Metsovon eased the plague in the town of 
Tríkala and averted locusts” (Mazower, 2002, 97). Religious leaders often under­
took medical duties and even treated acolytes from other religions. Witchcraft 
also being alive and kicking, in their eyes, they gladly nourished the particu­
larly vicious misogynism developed in the early capitalist West.30 The London 
Times still hurled witchcraft accusations in the twentieth century, while the 
Norwegian authorities received denunciations of witches in the 1980s (Hays, 
2009, 77ff).31
Probably the best, or perhaps the worst example of politics trumping sci­
ence in our own world is the fact that almost two years after the start of the 
covid-​19 syndemic and twenty months after its being contained in China, and 
notwithstanding radical initiatives like Zero covid32 that demand a financially 
	30	
The employment of witch-​hunts for strengthening the nascent capitalism was brilliantly 
exposed in: Federici, 2004.
	31	
Chapter Five: “Continuity and Change. Magic, Religion, Medicine, and Science, 500–​1700”.
	32	
The Zero Covid strategy basically demands a full lockdown until new cases in the commu­
nity approach zero, plus an effective find, test, trace, isolate and support (fttis) system 
run locally in the public sector to quickly squash any further outbreaks, and also screen­
ing or quarantine at points of entry to the national territory, and guaranteed livelihood 
for those who are hit by the pandemic. Mass vaccination is necessary, but not the main 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19, Poverty, and Imperialism
255
unpalatable (for state and capital) policy of eradication rather than manage­
ment of the pandemic, Western policymakers still refuse to discuss what the 
Chinese did right but other countries wrong, with the result that successive 
pandemic waves continue to ravage their societies and economies.
6	
A Century without Epidemics?
As wwi ended a new influenza epidemic, starting from the USA (but it was 
later called the Spanish Flu), spread fast around the world and killed at least 
thirty million people, mainly young. The causes of its propagation, the con­
comitant social changes, and the reasons for the urgent, active, and effective 
suppression of its memory were presented by an American historian; Alfred 
Crosby (1989, 314–​315) described the three waves of the epidemic, as well as 
the hows, whens, and whys it hit the various regions of the USA plus their army 
abroad and even diplomats’ peace talks. Crosby also records the state’s indiffer­
ence for researching and countering the disease, and its complete and prima 
facie curious eclipse in almost all historiographical syntheses covering that 
period. His well-​written book however does not dwell upon political choices 
and contexts.
Pandemics disappeared, lay Westerners used to think, between the so-​
called Spanish Flu of 1919 and the present syndemic. Two influenza pandemics 
in 1957 and 1968, the first ones in history to merit laboratory research and to be 
successfully countered in developed countries boasting public health systems, 
had few victims (Kilbourne, 2006, 9–​10). However, cholera was endemic during 
the same time in colonial Indies and their successor states, while Western Asia 
and Egypt suffered from it as well.
The Sixth Cholera Pandemic broke out after the Mecca pilgrimage in 1902. 
From Egypt, it spread to Syria, Palestine, Mesopotamia, Persia, the Ottoman 
Empire, and Russia, and after 1910 it hit Italy as well as Hungary. During wwi 
it arrived in Germany and all Balkan countries, Greece included. In the East, it 
reached Indochina, China, and Japan, plus many colonies, and did not subside 
in the 1920s (Barua & Greenough iii, 1992, 15). In short, during twentieth cen­
tury cholera continued to ravage colonies and ex-​colonial states or protector­
ates where state mechanisms and the privileged classes did not agonize over 
weapon in this approach. See the main points of the British campaign at http://​zeroco​vid 
.uk/​found​ing-​statem​ent/​.
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

256
Marchetos
defeating it. But it rarely visited capitalist metropolises. In the words of Jo Hays 
(2009, 243),
Scientific biomedicine had combined with sanitary engineering, sophis­
ticated political machinery, and widespread public enthusiasm for the 
dictates of health to bring to apparent fruition the promises of science 
first made in the seventeenth century. One by one the perils of various 
infectious epidemic diseases seemed to fade away under the combined 
assault of enlightened public health and sanitation, the extension of the 
preventive principle of vaccination, and the curative powers of labora­
tory products, among which antibiotics created the greatest sensation 
and held out the most exciting prospects. In many ways, twentieth-​
century scientific medicine changed the relations between humans and 
disease both decisively and for the better.
An exception was the Seventh Cholera Pandemic that commenced in 1961 and 
continues uninterrupted till our days. Peaking in the 1970s, when it arrived in 
Europe too (Hays, 2009, 16–​23), in recent years it infects around three million 
persons yearly and kills a hundred thousand per the who estimates. It still 
ravages poor countries, but also rich countries marked by social inequality 
like Saudi Arabia. In Africa, more than forty million live in areas with frequent 
outbreaks.
Intricately connected to the effects of earlier capitalist encroachment and 
to contemporary political priorities, cholera often accompanies processes of 
expropriative accumulation. Climate change, compulsory migration, political 
conflict, urban gigantism, and lack of access to medical services are numbered 
among its reasons. More than two billion people today live in conditions pro­
pitious to it. “Cholera is spread when people consume contaminated food or 
water. To put it bluntly, cholera spreads when people have no choice but to eat 
food or drink water that contains faeces” (who, 2018).
Investment in water provision, sanitation, and environment hygienization is 
necessary to protect populations from epidemics, but capitalist state and econ­
omy have other priorities. Many countries suffering from cholera are pillaged 
by the International Monetary Fund, or face military interventions directed by 
the USA. The Seventh Cholera Pandemic became the longest in history even 
though scientific and technical knowledge for its eradication exist. The neces­
sary finance also exists but is being channeled towards other objectives. One 
could fairly call this pandemic a progeny of capitalism, like all others spread­
ing in conditions of expropriatory accumulation. Arguably the same holds for 
the resurgence of covid-​19 that continues to ravage the West, in contrast to 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19, Poverty, and Imperialism
257
non-​capitalist countries, such as Cuba and maybe China, that seem to manage 
it effectively.
7	
Geopolitics of Health
Almost two years after the pandemic broke out, humanity has not con­
quered it. Countries present variable outcomes. Leaving aside outliers such 
as Cuba, whose small size and other particularities preclude their paradig­
matic use, we can organize our thought around two poles which we may 
schematically call China and the West. The notions presented in the previ­
ous pages may help us discern similarities and differences between these 
opposite poles.
Biomedicine was born in the West and reigns supreme here, while in China 
it is being developed and applied concurrently to different forms of medicine. 
Progress is being measured with other benchmarks and on a different time 
scale in China. covid-​19 was early on treated as a syndemic, and not as an 
epidemic without prominent class characteristics. State mechanisms proved 
prepared for its onset, showing that they had scarcely bought the triumphalist 
story about the supposed end of epidemics.
In China poverty had already been tremendously reduced (Zucman, 2019), 
and this was a deliberate state policy however one characterizes its social and 
political system, whether as “socialism with Chinese characteristics for a new 
era” (the official designation) or as a non-​oligarchic form of capitalism where 
the state defines collective interest more inclusively than in the West. On the 
contrary, in the financialized West poverty steadily expands, often furthered by 
policies of expropriatory accumulation and financial expropriation in favor of 
the oligarchy, such as those imposed on Greece; bar political changes, the pan­
demic will worsen it and inequality will climax. It remains to be seen whether 
“socialism with Chinese characteristics for a new era” will successfully counter 
financial macroparasitism in this country. Probably a global debt and financial 
crisis will prove the criterion.
Furthermore, we should note that the Chinese approach has a more ambi­
tious goal than the Western one, namely eliminating rather than simply man­
aging covid-​19. It also seems at present incredibly more successful than the 
Western one.
China is the first important state that flattened the curve of covid-​19 deaths 
(without having resorted, initially, to vaccinations), and this has happened 
since March 2020. For a population almost double the combined EU and Us 
numbers (roughly China 1,440, USA 330, and EU 450 million inhabitants), at 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

258
Marchetos
the time of writing its total of victims was a minuscule percentage of the US 
and EU losses.
China has less than 5,000 dead according to official data, while the USA had 
around 635,000, and the EU had around 745,000.33 Total confirmed covid-​19 
deaths per million inhabitants are around five hundred times less in China (3.22 
in China, against 1,677 in the EU and 1,867 in the USA) (Our World in Data, 
2021).34 Arguably these statistical differences are mainly attributable to state 
policies. They certainly show that popular racist and Cold War discourses not­
withstanding, human life is valued more in China than in the West. Stating this 
fact tastes bitter for many, but it may serve as a wake-​up call.
The objection that Chinese data distort reality more than other official 
statistics has little supporting evidence and looks improbable. In the current 
stage of the USA versus China strategic competition, often described as a Cold 
War, any hard data proving Chinese mendacity would be first-​page news in 
the West. On the other hand, economic and social life in China has generally 
recovered its pre-​pandemic rhythms and norms, an impossible feat had the 
virus been again spreading in the community. This country hopes now to face 
the fourth pandemic wave with the same success as the three first ones.
The West, including both strong states of the capitalist core and weaker 
states of the semiperiphery and the periphery, fares differently. A reason may 
be that current Western state policy and biomedical practice, overlooking the 
new disease’s syndemic aspect and even avoiding the term syndemic itself, 
jeopardize the population. Framing covid-​19 in centuries-​old terms of plague 
(Mendenhall et al., 2017), or in more recent ones of our familiar flu, they give 
scant attention to social context. Preventive interventions focus narrowly, ini­
tially on breaking transmission and then on vaccination, while the syndemic’s 
long-​term effects are taken lightly and the fact that China leveled the covid-​19 
curve in early 2020 without using vaccines is seldom mentioned (Gerotziafas 
et al., 2021). Public health systems, generally weakened, even face cuts, as is 
the case in neocolonial Greece, and are often incapable of proper therapeutic 
interventions. In Greek hospitals, certain icu s have had 100% mortality since 
the beginning of the pandemic.
Western states opted for policies favoring Big Pharma after they overcame 
their initial shock, and often place excessive emphasis on the use of mass vac­
cination. “International covid-​19 funding was overwhelmingly dedicated to 
	33	
On the methodological problems of comparing EU-​ and USA –​ wide covid-​19 data See 
Aparicio & Grossbard, 2020.
	34	
Similar numbers are found in almost all databases, but most lack an aggregate entry for 
the European Union countries.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19, Poverty, and Imperialism
259
vaccines, at the expense of other strategies”, notes a specialist paper, stressing 
the limitations of the
vaccine-​focused“ strategy especially neglects the therapeutics, diagnos­
tics, and health system needs. It plausibly concludes that “the current 
strategy of staking everything on vaccines, without sufficient hindsight 
on its risk-​benefit ratio, and at the expense of complementary strate­
gies (treatment, health system strengthening, non-​pharmaceutical pre­
vention, promotion of safe conditions that prevent transmission, and 
healthy lifestyles), was –​ and may still remain –​ insufficient, reactive, 
short-​sighted, and an unnecessary high-​stakes wager that is a tempting 
fortune.
paul et al., 2021
By 2021 the Western policy mix, judging by its results compared to the Chinese, 
proved incapable of protecting common people and often heavily slanted in 
favor of mass vaccination. This may even be an inexact term since the covid-​
19 “vaccines” currently used do not fulfill the formal criteria of being called 
vaccines.35 Routinely calling “vaccines” what can be called at most “experi­
mental” or “candidate vaccines” promotes terminological laxity no less than 
calling this novel practice a discursive Big Pharma coup. At any rate programs 
of mass vaccination were implemented, overcoming varying degrees of pop­
ular reluctance or resistance. Presently they are saving many lives, but with 
results inferior to those expected. Israel, previously hailed as a vaccine success 
story, in August 2021 presents more covid-​19 deaths and cases than before 
vaccinations had started (Reuters covid-​19 Tracker, 2021), and biomedical sci­
ence has yet to explain these data. It now administers a third vaccine booster 
dose, with scant scientific evidence of the consequences (Wadman, 2021).
As regards its political and social consequences, the Pandemic Crisis allows 
states, oligarchs, and smaller capitalist interests to promote their own particu­
lar agendas, thus turning the crisis into an opportunity, as they often say them­
selves. Authoritarian power structures are strengthened and the remnants of 
social provision are further demolished, while oligarchs indifferent to the resul­
tant overall harm for society unload the costs of the crisis upon labor. There is 
nothing new in this. Capital typically functions in this way, until either abol­
ished or compelled to change course, amid geopolitical upheavals, by a strong 
	35	
The latest who requirements for the products can be called vaccines are at who (2016), 
Guidelines on Clinical Evaluation of Vaccines: Regulatory Expectations. Revision of who trs 
924, Annex 1. None of the currently available vaccines fulfill them.
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

260
Marchetos
state. In actually existing capitalism public health policy, drifting towards a 
massive redistribution of power and resources in favor of oligarchs36 opens 
in many countries new rounds of expropriatory accumulation. Weaponizing 
syndemic conditions often bulldozes reactionary “reforms”, reminiscent of the 
oligarchic restoration in post-​soviet Eastern Europe.
An aspect of the syndemic is that it hits sexes in different ways.37 Women 
are worst affected for many reasons, and the most vulnerable ones face the 
harshest challenges. Extreme conditions prevail, for example, in refugee 
camps.38 All women, however, and especially the poorer ones, are hit in var­
ious ways. Rising mortality in old age concerns mainly this demographic. 
Psychological conditions created by the syndemic, in conjunction with capital­
ism’s economic crisis, contribute to waves of male violence in the daily life of 
middle and popular strata, thus heightening the risk for quarantined women. 
The pre-​existing social care crisis worsens, even more, the position of proletar­
ian women employed, often informally, in the worst paid and most necessary 
tasks, ranging from cleaning public and private spaces to supporting children 
and infirm or aged persons. Finally, the dramatically worsening position of 
those women who survive by allowing men to sexually abuse them (this is in 
essence the institution of prostitution) augurs a worse position for all women 
(Farley, 2020).
We should not overlook significant differentiations inside the West itself. 
Countries like Greece, which had been previously weakened by extreme and 
prolonged austerity, proved less capable to react to authoritarian government 
policies during the pandemic and arguably they will recover with more dif­
ficulty than others. Yet dread, pessimism, and other political sentiments cul­
tivated by the Pandemic Crisis do not augur well for Western societies in 
general,39 especially as waves of fear and insecurity released by covid-​19 
	36	
On the historic trend of transferring resources upwards in post-​1970s capitalism See 
Piketty, 2014. On the notion of oligarchy as currently used in the social sciences See 
Winters, 2011.
	37	
Data on these differences are presented by: Global Health 5050, 2021.
	38	
In the case of Greece: “Already not having safe, sex-​segregated spaces that would allow 
the women to take care of their basic needs away from the male gaze and harassment, 
without privacy to change their menstrual pads, breastfeed their babies or take showers –​ 
already subjected to ongoing sexual violence from men, including gang rape and forced 
marriage, the females in the camps will also have to take the brunt of caring for the sick, 
mitigating the risk of infections and mediating new conflicts and male violence inevita­
bly erupting in the midst of the crisis” (Migrant Women Network, 2020).
	39	
On political sentiments see Robin, 2004.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19, Poverty, and Imperialism
261
around the world compound others that had been created earlier by capitalist 
mechanisms of expropriative accumulation, rampant in the West after 2008.
The pandemic has created a split, a “before” and an “after”, in both personal 
and social time. We remember our life before the pandemic, we live the pres­
ent time of covid-​19, and we wonder how things will be in the hoped-​for 
“afterwards”. The same holds for society. A feminist poet visualized the pan­
demic crisis as a vortex, “a movement spiraling down at increasing speed [that] 
seems to be getting ever deeper, swirling ever faster and wider, ever more out 
of control” (Hawthorne, 2020, xiii, 1).
Ideological factors reflecting the domination of biomedicine worsen the 
severe impact of covid-​19 in the West compared with China, where capital 
had fewer opportunities to sideline syndemic approaches. Worse, few coun­
tercurrents at the present conjuncture resist an extreme Right thriving among 
Western elites in its conservative, liberal, or even fascist versions, and tending 
to dominate weakened states.
Worse, dominant Western narratives and state policies concerning the 
Pandemic Crisis when discredited turn into plausible targets of the popular 
objection, ridicule, and even rage, as they incorporate liberal priorities and 
ideations. Popular reactions, often deviating towards questioning the peril or 
even the existence of covid-​19, intensify every time the official “scientifically 
informed” narratives change according to political or financial priorities. In 
countries where people often see such changes, public cynicism, obscuran­
tism, and even anti-​scientific nihilism results. The responsibility however lies 
with the state-​financial complex rather than with its confused and panicked 
subjects.
Besides the Western and the Chinese approaches currently emerges a third 
one, geared on pharmaceutical intervention (mainly mass distribution by the 
health systems of ivermectin, colchiquine, and other inexpensive medicines). 
This was widely adopted in 2021, usually for pragmatic reasons, by less pros­
perous capitalist states unable to secure the needed vaccines or novel drugs. 
For example, ivermectin is now officially administered in countries covering 
a large part of the world. India is its flagship, but they include among others 
Iran, Egypt, Indonesia, Bolivia, Bangladesh, and South Africa, plus peripheral 
EU states (Portugal, Bulgaria, Slovakia) and the Czech Republic.40 Often antag­
onizing China, their ruling and governing classes calculate power politics dif­
ferently than the strong capitalist core elites benefiting from financialization. 
	40	
See a list at “Global ivermectin adoption for covid-​19: 30%”, available at https://​ivmsta​
tus.com/​.
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

262
Marchetos
Ill affording mistakes that might diminish their power, most of these groups 
dread their captive states being relegated from the semi-​periphery to the 
periphery of the capitalist world, if we may use World-​Systems terminology 
here. The results have been questioned but they look promising enough, and 
the experiment has not been abandoned.41
8	
Concluding Thoughts
At this stage of the Pandemic Crisis, one can only speculate about the mid-​and 
long-​term public health, political, and social results of these differing policies. 
Time will tell the costs and benefits involved in choosing one of them or the 
other. This chapter can be concluded by indicating a few obvious facts worth 
reflecting upon.
At the global level, the Pandemic Crisis returned states to the fore. Few count 
on its being solved by the invisible hand of the market. States however differ 
widely as regards their priorities and even their nature; hence their responses 
to the pandemic are also divergent, similarly their repercussions. They invoke 
“science” to legitimize all sorts of policies, but these policies may depend less 
on “science” and more on political projects or other factors connected to par­
ticular configurations of power inside each state. According to an impeccably 
systemic source, policy decisions on covid-​19 issues are currently taken in “con­
fused” instead of optimal ways (Chi et al., 2020). Unsurprisingly, as of summer 
2021, covid-​19 seems to have enhanced the legitimacy of states that successfully 
countered it, such as China, while it reduced public acceptance of political sys­
tems that failed to do so.
Following previous watersheds –​ the Great Crisis of 2007–​9, the 2001 ter­
rorist hit on the capitalist metropolis, and the 1989–​92 crumbling of the Soviet 
Block –​ the Pandemic Crisis of 2020–​21 marks a thirty-​year period of histor­
ical acceleration. As the editor of the present volume remarks, the “Corona 
Phenomenon” is much more political than previous pandemics.42 This 
	41	
The European Medicines Agency insists on utilizing ivermectin only in the context 
of clinical trials (ema, 2021). The case for ivermectin as expounded by the Front Line 
covid-​19 Critical Care Alliance is at https://​covi​d19c​riti​calc​are.com/​about/​.
	42	
Pegah Mossleh came up with this idea in an abstract titled “Corona Phenomenon, 
Future Pandemics’ Becoming More Political, and the Need for More Active Involvement 
of Political Thinkers”, for his speech, which was requested to be presented at the con­
ference “Crises, Wars, and Epidemics in Modern Europe: New Directions in Social and 
Historical Research”, organized by: The Interdisciplinary Laboratory of the Black Sea 
and Mediterranean Studies, of the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. Also, this idea is 
reflected in his preface to this book.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19, Poverty, and Imperialism
263
unexpected contingency, whatever its eventual outcome, magnifies existing 
tensions and frictions between classes, states, regions, and cities, making them 
both more acute and more visible.
More acute because covid-​19 functions as a force multiplier to powerful 
social actors, often strengthening established societal tendencies. On the one 
hand, in rich countries it enlarged the room for economic maneuver available 
to central banks and governments, often killing austerity policies. On the other 
hand, it derailed all kinds of political projects, both of the Right (of Bolsonaro, 
Boris Johnson, Modi, and Trump, for instance) and of the nominal Left (e.g. in 
Argentina, Mexico, and Spain).
More visible too. The Pandemic Crisis operates as a huge magnifying glass 
showing in bold relief capitalism’s complex and contradictory social pat­
terns and tendencies. It feeds geopolitical tensions, polarizes class structures, 
mutates political systems, and stocks racism, nativism, and national and reli­
gious conflicts. As for misogynism, the Pandemic Crisis also reveals that patri­
archy is alive and well at a cellular level. It never went away and returns with 
a vengeance, like a victorious virus, whenever conditions allow. “covid-​19 
has unleashed the most severe setback to women’s liberation in my lifetime”, 
writes a Western feminist (V, 2021).
As regards public discourse and beliefs, the Coronavirus syndemic upturned 
narcissistic liberal narratives about the supposedly still dominant West with its 
democratic rule of law. But if articulate radical narratives and political forces 
do not emerge, West is bound to replace liberals with conservatives trying to 
supplant liberal cultural norms with their own conservative ones, while leav­
ing essentially intact the exploitation and oppression generated by capital and 
patriarchy. They will not tackle the lack of social justice entailing epidemic 
spread, and neither will injustice heal by itself. Jo Hays (2009, 313) puts this in 
historical perspective:
Perhaps in the light of the history of disease in the West we should not 
be surprised at the “little recognition . . . of the close interrelationship 
between poverty and ill-​health”; perhaps that history may suggest that 
Western societies have perceived that relationship only too well, the 
better to turn their backs on it. Lepers were expected to furnish their 
own coffin nails, so not finding public money for vaccines is hardly 
new. Fifteenth-​century Florence located plague in its poorer quarters 
as a defining excuse to marginalize those quarters. Nineteenth-​century 
tuberculosis was interesting when Keats, Chopin, the king of Rome, and 
Thérèse de Lisieux suffered from it; when the extent of its ravages of 
poorer populations became clearer some middle and professional classes 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

264
Marchetos
decided its incidence stemmed from the moral fiber (or lack thereof) of 
its sufferers. Many of the past Western cultural configurations of disease 
have associated it with the social margins. In doing so the confident elites 
of the West have created something of a self-​fulfilling prophecy: the mar­
ginalized groups live in social conditions that make disease more likely, 
and when their disease rates soar the elite can nod knowingly while fur­
ther isolating themselves from the dangers that the diseased represent. 
Will our insistence that disease is a cultural construct (however convinc­
ingly founded) now blind us, once again, to the physical reality of disease 
among the less favored?
History however shows an alternative path of egalitarian and liberatory ten­
dencies, resistances, and collective plans. Rooted in social realities and cul­
tural norms that were in previous times clothed in religious or philosophic 
language, these persist and even proliferate in modern society among work­
ing people, women, and ex-​colonial subjects. In periods of systemic destabi­
lization, the outcome is not decided in advance, and collective human action 
influences crucially the paths that societies take. The path to be taken is the 
alternative one.
Our world system has probably reached the end of its tether.43 In the West 
however powerful public and private institutions, from states and corporations 
to academic and professional bodies, prioritize the reproduction of capital and, 
deserting their public functions, influence accordingly public policy and the dif­
fusion of scientific knowledge (Graeber, 2019). Spreading anti-​rationalism “from 
above”,44 they do not generally encourage reflection upon the present syndemic 
and its results, bringing forth the multiple threads that connect epidemics, cap­
italism, capitalist imperialism, patriarchy, and poverty. Shouldn’t this change?
…
I would like to thank, for their kind remarks on my earlier drafts, Andreas 
Canellidis, Sergi Cutillas, Euphemia Karakantza, Marina Karakantza, Costas 
Lapavitsas, Evi Neokosmidou, Stergios Polyzos, Ira Sinigalia, and Lia Yioka.
	43	
See Wallerstein, 2004; Harvey, 2010; Wallerstein et al., 2013; Galtung, 2000.
	44	
As regards the cultural and political framework that helps in capitalist societies an anti-​
rationalism spread “from above”, see indicatively: Hind, 2008. More specifically Patrick 
Zylberman (2013) points to the global health approach used by modern states, that invokes 
imaginary threats in order to control populations. It exploits the principles of prevention, 
precaution, and preparation, which had different historical origins.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19, Poverty, and Imperialism
265
	
Bibliography
Alfani, Guido (2020), “Pandemics and Inequality: A Historical Overview”, Vox 
EU,  October 15. https://​voxeu.org/​arti​cle/​pandem​ics-​and-​ine​qual​ity-​his​tori​cal 
-​overv​iew (accessed 23 August, 2021).
Aparicio, Ainoa, and Shoshana Grossbard (2020), “Are COVID-​19 Fatalities in the 
US Higher than in the EU, and If So, Why?”, iza Institute of Labor Economics, 
iza Discussion Paper No. 13683, September 2020. http://​ftp.iza. org/​dp13683.pdf 
(accessed 23 August, 2021).
Arrighi, Giovanni (2010), The Long Twentieth Century. Money, Power, and the Origins of 
Our Times, London: Verso.
Azizi, M.H., and F. Azizi (2010), “History of Cholera Outbreaks in Iran during the 19th 
and 20th Centuries”, in Middle East Journal of Digestive Diseases 2.1: 51–​55.
Baer, Hans A., Merrill Singer, and Ida Susser (eds.) (2003), Medical anthropology and 
the World System, London: Praeger.
Barua, Dhiman, and William B. Greenough iii (eds.) (1992), Cholera, New York: Springer.
Chi, Y-​Ling, P. Ashmore, K. Chalkidou, A. Vassall, and P. Baker (2020), “Seeing the 
Wood for the Trees: What does the ‘Science Say’ on COVID-​19?”, Center for Global 
Development, July 30. https://​www.cgdev.org/​ blog/​seeing-​wood-​trees-​what-​does 
-​science-​say-​covid-​19 (accessed 23 August, 2021).
Cohen, Mark N. (1989), Health and the Rise of Civilization, Yale University Press.
Cohen, Mark N., and Gillian M. M. Crane-​Kramer (2007), Ancient Health. Skeletal 
Indicators of Agricultural and Economic Intensification, University Press of Florida.
Crosby, Alfred W. (1989), America’s Forgotten Pandemic: The Influenza of 1918, Cambridge 
University Press.
European Medicines Agency (ema) (2021), “EMA Advises against Use of Ivermectin 
for the Prevention or Treatment of COVID-​19 Outside Randomized Clinical Trials”, 
March 22. https://​www.ema.eur​opa.eu/​en/​news/​ema-​advi​ses-​agai​nst-​use-​ive​rmec​
tin-​pre​vent​ion-​treatm​ent-​covid-​19-​outs​ide-​ran​domi​sed-​clini​cal-​tri​als (accessed 23 
August, 2021).
Evans, Richard J. (1992), “Epidemics and Revolutions: Cholera in Nineteenth-​Century 
Europe”, in Terence Ranger and Paul Slack (eds.), Epidemics and Ideas: Essays on the 
Historical Perception of Pestilence, Cambridge University Press.
Farley, Melissa (2020), “Prostitution, the Sex Trade, and the COVID-​19 Pandemic”, in 
Logos: A Journal of Modern Society & Culture 19.1.
Fauci, Anthony S. (2001), “Infectious Diseases: Considerations for the 21st Century”, in 
Clinical Infectious Diseases 32.5.
Federici, Silvia (2004), Caliban and the Witch. Women, Body, and Primitive Accumulation, 
Νew York: Autonomedia.
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

266
Marchetos
Galtung, Johan (2000), “Leaving the Twentieth Century, Entering the Twenty-​first: Some 
Basic Conflict Formations”, in Johan Galtung and Carl G. Jacobsen, Searching for 
Peace, London: Pluto Press.
Gardikas, Katerina (2008), “Relief Work and Malaria in Greece, 1943–​1947”, in Journal of 
Contemporary History 43.3: 493–​508.
Gerotziafas, Grigoris T. et al. (2021), “The COVID-​19 Pandemic and the Need for an 
Integrated and Equitable Approach: An International Expert Consensus Paper”, 
in Thieme, June 24. https://​www.thi​eme-​conn​ect.com/​produ​cts/​ ejournals/​pdf/​
10.1055/​a-​1535-​8807.pdf (accessed 23 August, 2021).
Global Health 5050 (2021), The Sex, Gender, and COVID-​19 Project: “The COVID-​19 Sex-​
Disaggregated Data Tracker”, July 28. https://​globa​lhea​lth5​050. org/​the-​sex-​gender 
-​and-​covid-​19-​project/​the-​data-​tracker/​ (accessed 23 August, 2021).
Graeber, David (2011), Debt. The First 5.000 Years, New York: Melville House.
Graeber, David (2019), Bullshit Jobs: A Theory, Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Grmek, Mirko D. (1989), Diseases in the Ancient Greek World, Translated by Mireille 
Muellner, and Leonard Muellner, Johns Hopkins University Press.
Harari, Yuval Noah (2015), Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind, New York: Vintage 
Books.
Harvey, David (2003), The New Imperialism, Oxford University Press.
Harvey, David (2010), The Enigma of Capital and the Crises of Capitalism, Oxford 
University Press.
Harvey, David (2018), Marx, Capital and the Madness of Economic Reason, Oxford 
University Press.
Hawthorne, Susan (2020), Vortex. The Crisis of Patriarchy, Melbourne: Spinifex Press.
Hays, Jo N. (2005), Epidemics and Pandemics: Their Impacts on Human History, Santa 
Barbara: abc-​clio.
Hays, Jo N. (2009), The Βurdens of Disease: Epidemics and Human Response in Western 
History, Rutgers University Press.
Herring, D. Ann, and Alan C. Swedlund (eds.) (2010), Plagues and Epidemics: Infected 
Spaces Past and Present, Oxford: Berg.
Hesiod (2006), Theogony and Works and Days, Translated by Catherine M. Schlegel and 
Henry Weinfield, University of Michigan Press.
Hind, Dan (2008), The Threat to Reason: How the Enlightenment was Hijacked and How 
We Can Reclaim It, London: Verso.
Hodge, G. Derrick, and Merrill Singer (eds.) (2010), The War Machine and Global 
Health: A Critical Medical Anthropological Examination of the Human Costs of Armed 
Conflict and the International Violence Industry, Lanham: AltaMira Press.
Honigsbaum, Mark, and Pierre-​Olivier Méthot (2020), “Introduction: Microbes, 
Networks, Knowledge –​ Disease Ecology and Emerging Infectious Diseases in Time 
of COVID-​19”, in History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences 42.3, No.28: 1–​9.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19, Poverty, and Imperialism
267
Horton, Richard (2020), “Offline: COVID-​19 is not a Pandemic”, in Τhe Lancet Vol. 
396, September 26. https://​www.thelan​cet.com/​journ​als/​ lancet/​article/​PIIS0140 
-​6736(20)32000-​6/​fulltext (accessed 23 August, 2021).
Hudson, Michael (2018), … and Forgive Them Their Debts: Lending, Foreclosure and 
Redemption from Bronze Age Finance to the Jubilee Year, Dresden: islet-​Verlag.
Jones, Colin (2005), “The Pathocenosis Moment: Mirko Grmek, the Annales and the 
Vagaries of the Longue Durée”, in History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences 27.1: 5–​11.
Karlinsky, Ariel, and Dmitry Kobak (2021), “The World Mortality Dataset. Tracking 
Excess Mortality across Countries during the COVID-​19 Pandemic”, in medRxiv, 
June 4. https://​doi.org/​10.1101/​2021.01.27.21250​604 (accessed 23 August, 2021).
Kilbourne, E.D. (2006), “Influenza Pandemics of the 20th Century”, in Emerging Infectious 
Diseases 12.1: 9–​14.  http://​dx.doi.org/​10.3201/​eid1​201. 051254 (accessed 23 August, 2021).
Lapavitsas, Costas (2009), “Financialised Capitalism: Crisis and Financial 
Expropriation”, in Historical Materialism 17: 114–​148.
Lapavitsas, Costas (2013), Profiting without Producing. How Finance Exploits Us 
All, London: Verso.
Last, John M. (ed.) (2001), A Dictionary of Epidemiology: Edited for the International 
Epidemiological Association, Oxford University Press.
MacFarlane Burnet, Frank, and David O. White (1972), Natural History of Infectious 
Disease, Cambridge University Press.
Mayer, Arno J. (1981), The Persistence of the Old Regime: Europe to the Great War, 
New York: Pantheon Books.
Mazower, Mark (2002), The Balkans: A Short History, New York: Random House.
McIntosh, Jane (2008), The Ancient Indus Valley. New Perspectives, Santa 
Barbara: abc-​clio.
McKeown, Thomas (1979), The Role of Medicine. Dream, Mirage, or Nemesis?, Princeton 
University Press.
McNeill, William H. (1976), Plagues and People, Νew York: Anchor Books.
Mendenhall, Emily, B. A. Kohrt, S. A. Norris, D. Ndetei, and D. Prabhakaran (2017), 
“Non-​Communicable Disease Syndemics: Poverty, Depression, and Diabetes among 
Low-​Income Populations”, in The Lancet, March 4. https://​doi. org/​10.1016/​S0140 
-​6736(17)30402-​6 (accessed 23 August, 2021).
Migrant Women Network (2020), “Global Feminist Perspective on the Pandemic: What 
Normal do We Expect When the Crisis is Over?”, March 31. https://​www.migr​antw​
omen​netw​ork.org/​2020/​03/​31/​glo​bal-​femin​ist-​pers​pect​ive-​on-​the-​pande​mic 
-​what-​nor​mal-​do-​we-​exp​ect-​when-​the-​cri​sis-​is-​over/​ (accessed 23 August, 2021).
Murard, Lion, and Patrick Zylberman (1996), L’Hygiène dans la République. La santé 
publique en France ou l’utopie contrariée (1870–​1918), Paris: Fayard.
Our World in Data (2021), COVID-​19 Deaths per Million People, https://​our​worl​dind​
ata.org/​explor​ers/​coro​navi​rus-​data-​explo​rer (accessed 23 August, 2021).
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

268
Marchetos
Paul, Elisabeth, Garrett W. Brown, Andreas Kalk, and Valéry Ridde (2021), “Playing 
Vaccine Roulette: Why the Current Strategy of Staking Everything on COVID-​19 
Vaccines is a High-​Stakes Wager”, in Vaccine Vol. 39,35: 4921–​4924. doi:10.1016/​
j.vaccine.2021.07.045.
Picker, Giovanni (2017), Racial Cities: Governance and the Segregation of Romani People 
in Urban Europe, New York: Routledge.
Piketty, Thomas (2014), Capital in the Twenty-​First Century, Translated by Arthur 
Goldhammer, The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Porter, Roy (1999), The Greatest Benefit to Mankind. A Medical History of Humanity from 
Antiquity to the Present, New York: HarperCollins.
Porter, Roy (ed.) (1997), Medicine. A History of Healing. Ancient Traditions to Modern 
Practices, London: Ivy Press.
Reuters covid-​19 Tracker (2021), “Israel: the Latest Coronavirus Counts, Charts and 
Maps”, August 17. https://​graph​ics.reut​ers.com/​world-​coro​navi​rus-​trac​ker-​and 
-​maps/​countr​ies-​and-​terr​itor​ies/​isr​ael/​ (accessed 23 August, 2021).
Robin, Corey (2004), Fear: The History of a Political Idea, Oxford University Press.
Rosenberg Charles E. (1992), Explaining Epidemics and Other Studies in the History of 
Medicine, Cambridge University Press.
Sahlins, Marshall (2017), Stone Age Economics, London: Routledge.
Scott, James C. (2017), Against the Grain: A Deep History of the Earliest States, Yale 
University Press.
Singer, Merrill, and Hans Baer (2018), Critical Medical Anthropology, London: crc Press.
Singer, Merrill, Hans A. Baer, Debbi Long, and Alex Pavlotski (2019), Introducing 
Medical Anthropology: A Discipline in Action, Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield.
Singer, Merrill, Nicola Bulled, Bayla Ostrach, and Emily Mendenhall (2017), “Syndemics 
and the Biosocial Conception of Health”, in The Lancet, March 4. https://​doi.org/​
10.1016/​S0140-​6736(17)30003 -​X (accessed 23 August, 2021).
Skinner, Quentin (2002), Visions of Politics, Vol. Α΄: Regarding Method, Cambridge 
University Press.
Suskind, Ron (2004), “Faith, Certainty and the Presidency of George W. Bush”, in 
New York Times, October 17. https://​www.nyti​mes. com/​2004/​10/​17/​ magazine/​faith 
-​certainty-​and-​the-​presidency-​of-​george-​w-​bush.html (accessed 23 August, 2021).
Toussaint, Éric (2017), Le système dette. Histoire des dettes souveraines et de leur répudi­
ation, Paris: Les Liens qui Liberent.
Truth Committee on Public Debt (2015), Preliminary Report. June 2015, Athens: Hellenic 
Parliament.
v (formerly Eve Ensler) (2021), “Disaster Patriarchy. How the Pandemic has Unleashed 
a War on Women”, in The Guardian, 1 June. https://​www. theguardian.com/​lifeand 
style/​2021/​jun/​01/​disaster-​patriarchy-​how-​the-​pandemic-​has-​unleashed-​a-​war-​on 
-​women (accessed 23 August, 2021).
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

covid-19, Poverty, and Imperialism
269
Van der Pijl, Kees (2007), Nomads, Empires, States. Modes of Foreign Relations 
and Political Economy, Vol. 1, London: Pluto Press.
Wadman, Meredith (2021), “A Grim Warning from Israel: Vaccination Blunts, But 
does Not Defeat Delta”, in Science Magazine, August 16. https://​www. sciencemag 
.org/​news/​2021/​08/​grim-​warning-​israel-​vaccination-​blunts-​does-​not-​defeat-​delta 
(accessed 23 August, 2021).
Wallerstein, Immanuel (1974–​1988), The Modern World-​System, Vols. i–​iii, Νew 
York: Academic Press.
Wallerstein, Immanuel (1996), Open the Social Sciences: Report of the Gulbenkian 
Commission on the Restructuring of the Social Sciences, Stanford University Press.
Wallerstein, Immanuel (2004), World-​Systems Analysis: An Introduction, Duke 
University Press.
Wallerstein, Immanuel (2011), The Modern World-​System, Vol. iv, University of 
California Press.
Wallerstein, Immanuel, R. Collins, M. Mann, G. Derluguian, and C. Calhoun (2013), 
Does Capitalism Have a Future?, Oxford University Press.
Watts, Sheldon J. (1997), Epidemics and History. Disease, Power, and Imperialism, Yale 
University Press.
Watts, Sheldon J. (2003), Disease and Medicine in World History, London: Routledge.
Winters, Jeffrey A. (2011), Oligarchy, Cambridge University Press.
Worboys, Michael (2000), Book Review No.104: Epidemics and History: Disease, Power 
and Imperialism, by Sheldon Watts. https://​revi​ews.history.ac.uk/​review/​104 
(accessed 23 August, 2021).
World Health Organization (who) (1995), The World Health Report 1995: Bridging the 
Gaps, Geneva.
World Health Organization (who) (2016), Guidelines on Clinical Evaluation of 
Vaccines: Regulatory Expectations. Revision of WHO TRS 924, Annex 1, https://​www 
.who.int/​biol​ogic​als/​exper​t_​co​mmit​tee/​Clinic​al_​c​hang​es_​I​K_​fi​nal. pdf (accessed 
23 August, 2021).
World Health Organization (who) (2018), “Cholera: The Forgotten Pandemic”, 
October 22. https://​www.who.int/​chol​era/​the-​forgot​ten-​pande​mic/​en/​ (accessed 
23 August, 2021).
Zucman, Gabriel (2019), “Global Wealth Inequality”, in Annual Review of 
Economics 11: 109–​138.
Zylberman, Patrick (2013), Tempêtes microbiennes: Essai sur la politique de sécurité san­
itaire dans le monde transatlantique, Paris: Gallimard.
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

© Marcel Becker, 2022 | DOI:﻿10.1163/9789004512924_028
­chapter 26
Information and Human Behavior in Times 
of covid-​19
Marcel Becker
According to Marxist historical materialism, the development of technique 
determines the course of history. This might be exaggerated but one need not 
be a Marxist to state that a vital way to get a better understanding of human 
actions and experiences runs via technological infrastructure. The way we 
experience things and the choices we make are for the main part determined 
by the technical facilities that are available. Standing in the tradition of phe­
nomenology Don Ihde has made school with his famous claim that human 
action and understanding is “technologically mediated” (Achterhuis, 2001).
covid-​19 pandemic has come to us in times of digitalization. Digital tech­
nologies play an important role in our understanding of the disease, the dilem­
mas we face, and the way we deal with them. To get a grip on these processes 
Luciano Floridi’s descriptions of digitalization might be helpful. He states that 
digitalization has brought us into the “era of information”. Of course, in the 
long course of human history information has always played an important 
role. Man is a social animal, and communication is just an ongoing exchange 
of information. But digitalization has not only intensified existing communica­
tion processes but has also given information a larger role in our definition of 
the nature of things. The way we experience and consider things is determined 
by information technologies. Material welfare is not anymore that glittering 
heap of pebbles, as a classic philosopher once described it, material welfare is 
a certain information code, stored at the bank or the stock exchange. Safety is 
not only understood as physical safety guaranteed by weapon systems. Safety 
is for an important part determined by the knowledge that the “enemy“ and “I” 
possess about each other.
The growing flows of information however bring along a serious problem 
regarding the meaning of information. Meaning is contextually embedded. 
The distinctions between different domains of society, each with its own mean­
ing structures, have been a red threat throughout the 20th-​century analysis of 
modern society. Philosophy and sociology have developed a rich vocabulary 
to express processes of differentiation. People are caught in language games 
(Wittgenstein), autopoietic social systems (Luhmann), spheres (Walzer), social 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Information and Human Behavior in Times of covid-19
271
systems (Parsons), etc. How divergent these notions may be, they have in com­
mon the idea that normative expectations about good behavior and values and 
ideas about substantial goods to be realized are very different from one domain 
to another. The heterogeneity also extends to the way information is treated. 
The way information is interpreted and valued differs from context to context. 
Digitalization brings in a new challenge. The digital infrastructure facilitates 
rapid flows of information from one domain to another. This cross-​over makes 
boundaries between contexts disappear. The familiar frameworks of interpre­
tation come under pressure. I discuss two cases in which these problems give 
rise to serious ethical concerns: Newsworthiness and Privacy.
1	
Newsworthiness
Already in the first stage of the covid-​19 pandemic, the World Health 
Organization mentioned “infodemic” as a serious problem. The amount 
of information and the significant percentage of false information (“that 
spreads faster than the virus” (Binjola & Patel, 2020)) became objects of 
concern. Information is of vital importance for a healthy public discussion, 
and in covid-​19 times the need for good information has extra dimensions. 
Information about the disease directly influences people’s behavior. When 
people are convinced that social distancing reduces the spread of the virus 
they adjust their behavior and the spread is reduced. When people consider 
scientific advices about social distance as fake news, the spread of the virus 
goes faster. This problem has at least two dimensions: the information must be 
of good quality and it must reach people. Unfortunately, there is not always a 
fluent transition from the first to the second.
But let’s not be too pessimistic: there are no indications that information 
streams are completely going in the wrong direction. Only a small part of the 
population intentionally evades those news sources that are generally con­
sidered to be reliable. People want to be informed, and empirical research 
does not confirm the dystopia of people completely locked up in filter bub­
bles (Dubois & Blank, 2018). Admittedly, people select news according to their 
preferences, but only to a certain extent do they avoid news that goes against 
their ideas. Inadvertent news plays an important role in the prevention of filter 
Bubbles. In most countries, the quality of information has played a positive 
role in vaccination strategies. Before the widespread distributions of vaccines 
started there was a fear that large-​scale misinformation would lead to dimin­
ished willingness to vaccinate. But the vaccination reluctance was not as great 
as expected.
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

272
Becker
Nevertheless, there are serious problems. Let’s start with the quality of infor­
mation. The first step to tackle the viral spread of wrong information consists 
of making some distinctions:
	–​	 Misinformation, just wrong information;
	–​	 Disinformation, information spread with a clear intention to mislead 
(Marin, 2020);
	–​	 Conspiracy beliefs, explanations in terms of a secret plot by a covert alliance 
of powerful individuals or organizations -​ and the experts are part of the 
conspiracy.
When distinctions like these are not clear, people are tempted to consider all 
news they do not like (bad journalism, commercials) as fake news. In the digi­
tal era, these distinctions are not always easy to make, because the background 
and characteristics of information are less visible. Whereas different spheres 
once used to have their own publication channels, in digital news media (for 
many people these are social media) all forms of information merge. In these 
media, the meaning of the expert is presented next to the fake news message 
from the internet trolls. The well-​conceived statement of the policymaker 
stands next to the whim-​statement of the influencer. The image arises that 
social media are a battlefield where different kinds of information struggle for 
domination, all pressed through the same digital sources. This hinders proper 
judgment of the information and contributes to the false suggestion that dif­
ferent sources of information can be valued equally. This process of leveling 
information has huge consequences for the perception and interpretation of 
scientific knowledge. The surplus value of this kind of knowledge runs the risk 
of being underestimated.
Another complication is, that the emotional infrastructure of social media 
can be a serious obstacle to a good discussion. People do not primarily use 
social media to gain knowledge about the state of affairs in the world. Social 
media are often platforms for emotional gratification. Marin speaks even 
about “attention bulimia”. Information is not only shared to inform others and 
start serious discussions, it is also shared to meet personal needs, for instance, 
to express concerns. These mechanisms are not by definition objectionable, 
but they differ from scientific work, and indeed make people more susceptible 
to misleading information.
The emotional infrastructure of social media goes hand in hand with a 
development that sharpens political debates, and in its extreme form disturbs 
proper flows of information: identity politics. With the erosion of ideological 
narratives and religions, other frameworks have become helpful in defining 
the political landscape. One of them is identity. We see this development in 
right-​wing populism as well as in emancipatory leftish movements, where 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Information and Human Behavior in Times of covid-19
273
people refer to their background and their own living experiences. More than 
ever personal feelings and concerns determine public expressions. This of 
course brings politics “closer to the people” and lays bare hidden discontent. 
But there is another side of the coin. Political positions that are prompted by 
personal characteristics may end in “deep disagreement”, insurmountable dif­
ferences of opinion. More than for instance ideological convictions people’s 
background and personal characteristics are fixed. Discussions that take these 
as a starting point run the risk of an “I” who stand against the other that does 
not understand “me”. When this frame dominates, de debate becomes unfruit­
fully polarized. In such a discussion culture it is hard to agree upon objective 
and neutral facts.
How to deal with the challenges concerning the diffused status of informa­
tion? In any case, there is a shared responsibility to maintain the distinction 
between on the one hand the domain where information stems from and on 
the other hand the way information is communicated. Indeed, the medium 
is not the message. The fact that scientific knowledge is widely available and 
easily transmitted should not tempt us to think that it is the object of a quasi 
“democratic” debate in which scientifically proven facts can be disputed freely. 
What is the object of democratic debate is the question of how we integrate 
the results of scientific work in our life and policy-​making.
Scientists have a special responsibility to inform others about the true 
characteristics of their activities. But this is not easy. In confronting the false 
information, the reaction of the scientist is often that it must be countered by 
the truth. Accurate information must be put in the driver’s seat of epidemic 
response (Garrett, 2020), and accurate information is given by science, which 
is “the ultimate arbiter in truth-​finding”. Therefore, scientists are happy with 
the explosion of fact-​checking activities.1 But it can be questioned whether 
this emphasis on science as guardian of the truth is the perfect solution to 
the problem of information heterogeneity. The experts may speak derogatorily 
about the “far reach of social media armchair-​experts”, but the influence of 
these people is huge. A “truth versus nonsense” opposition does not help fruit­
fully to the discussion in society.
The tension can be reduced when we look closer at an intriguing char­
acteristic of scientists’ use of the notion of truth. On the one hand, they 
work with the presupposition that truth must be found as if the truth were 
something hidden and must be laid bare or discovered. On the other hand, 
they recognize that “the” truth does not exist. I suggest finding a way out of 
	1	 Marin (2020) refers to a rise of 900% in English-​speaking countries.
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

274
Becker
this ambivalence by laying more emphasis on the process of truth-​finding. 
There are several ways of truth-​finding, each with its own rationality. The 
judge in court is, like the scientist, looking for the truth. But his aim is to 
reach a verdict, a final decision within a limited time frame, that has grave 
consequences for people involved. In contrast to this, scientists embrace the 
never-​ending discussion. A good scientific article ends with questions for 
further discussion. The judge and the scientist both look for truth, but at a 
closer look, their activities differ.
Our emphasis on the process of truth-​finding would lead to a better under­
standing of the characteristics of science. At the same time, it mitigates the 
tension between, on the one hand, science as oriented towards objective facts 
and, on the other hand, society and politics as led by subjectivity and arbi­
trariness. It is better to distinguish them in the following way. Science is a pro­
cess in which people work with rigorous methods (and open discussion is part 
of it), and politics and public discussion deal with competing claims about 
’just and meaningful life arranged by good institutions’.2 In these descriptions, 
the distinction between science, and politics and public discussion entails 
more than:
	–​	 (objective) facts versus (subjective, arbitrary) norms and values. The notion 
of fact is derived from the Latin word facere, which means making, produc­
ing. Facts are created by (the methodologies of) scientists. And society can 
not exist without a basic consensus about vital norms and values.
	–​	 possession of knowledge versus laity. Every layperson can derive informa­
tion from the internet. What characterizes scientists is not that they exclu­
sively possess the truth but that they use rigoristic methods.
The difference between scientific knowledge and discussion in society as one 
between methodological skills that require specialist training versus questions 
of meaning, about which everyone has a say is of vital importance in policy 
questions. Take for instance social distancing. There is clear scientific evidence 
that social distancing reduces the risk of infection. But it is a discussion in 
society about the price we want to pay to reduce this risk. Price in terms of 
money and in terms of health. The discussion about the price to be paid is a 
discussion about values and has to be made by society as a whole (with pol­
iticians as spokesman and trustees). In recent discussions about vaccination, 
the distinction must be made between the scientific evidence that vaccination 
is effective and subjective notions of bodily integrity that stand in the way of 
compulsory vaccination.
	2	 Inspired by: Ricoeur’s Oneself as Another (1994).
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Information and Human Behavior in Times of covid-19
275
It is a hard challenge to maintain a delicate balance between the two, and 
problems arise easily when one of these exceeds its limits and enters the site of 
the other. In one extreme, expertocracy, the knowledge of experts pushes aside 
the open discussion about values. The other extreme is a discussion culture in 
which scientific knowledge is neglected by people who are preoccupied with 
their own values.
2	
Privacy
In covid-​19 times questions about the meaning and importance of privacy 
are in the focus of attention. Think for instance about discussions on health 
data and data about vaccination. A key to understanding the privacy notion at 
stake is the contextual embedding of information. In the digital era, philosoph­
ical underpinnings and justifications of privacy have become objects of recon­
sideration. Privacy once used to be described in physical terms. As the classic 
description of Warren and Brandeis goes: privacy is ‘the right to be let alone’. 
In the era of digitalization, the definition of privacy has changed: privacy is 
defined in terms of information flows. Often the emphasis on the individual 
prevailed. Privacy is important because the individual needs a personal sphere 
to develop himself. Autonomy counted as a classic justification of privacy: the 
individual decides about what happens with his data. We see this conviction 
mirrored in the endless streams of terms of the agreement that individuals 
have to approve before entering websites.
But the relation between autonomy and privacy has come under criticism. 
There turned out to be ambivalence in the notion of autonomy. On the one 
hand, autonomy is the goal to be realized: by selecting what information he 
will (not) receive, the individual makes sure that he will not be bothered by 
unwelcome information. At the same time autonomy is the precondition that 
is supposed. A person is only able to choose according to his own values and 
interests when he possesses the basic capacities to make distinctions and act 
accordingly. The literature about autonomy has extensively elaborated on the 
shortcomings of the latter; it is widely recognized that people are not rational 
self-​conscious beings that independently make the right choices.
Privacy discussions in times of digitalization and particularly covid-​19 
times have made clear that the idea of the free-​floating atomistic individual is 
unrealistic. Digitalization makes our lives inextricably connected, and covid-​
19 strengthens the adagium that my life-​conditions are linked with others. We 
are connected by a common risk. People transfer the virus without knowing. 
Personal data, in particular health data, play a central role in understanding 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

276
Becker
how the virus spreads. It seriously can be questioned to what extent my data 
exclusively are my data. Of course, this problem is not new. Also in the classic 
‘safety versus privacy’ debate people had to recognize that safety is a common 
value, that connects us all. But covid-​19 intensifies the problem. The notion of 
privacy in terms of individuals that live in closed circles is further away.
A proper defense of privacy requires that we stay faithful to core values like 
individual development and dignity, but give up the illusion of a free-​floating 
individual. In dealing with this tension the idea that information is contextually 
embedded has become highly relevant, as Helen Nissenbaum has made clear 
in her theory of contextual integrity. She defines privacy in terms of “appropri­
ate flows of information”. People have provided information for certain goals, 
related to a context, where the information has a meaning. Digitalization may 
facilitate the “blurring of boundaries” but certain boundaries must be main­
tained. This is one of the core ideas of the European “General Data Protection 
Regulation” (gdpr). “Purpose limitation” plays an important role in the gdpr. 
For instance, this regulation does not allow that employers acquire the health 
data of their employees. Processing health data, including a person’s tempera­
ture, is classed as special category data and is prohibited. The health condition 
of an employee is a separate domain that only a physician can enter -​ in this 
case a company doctor. The distinction between contexts of meaning is also 
important in information flows about vaccination. More and more we see that 
institutions, agencies, and countries are eager to know who is and who is not 
vaccinated. It should not be taken self-​evident that this kind of personal infor­
mation automatically transgresses borders.
A strong separation between spheres requires strong institutions, that func­
tion independently. It is a challenge for healthcare institutions to maintain 
this independence and to keep the healthcare data within the -​digital-​ walls 
of their institutions. Sharp norms and institutional measures are required, that 
steer flows of information.
Of course, it might be possible that in urgent cases new “overruling” consid­
erations come in, and a trade-​off is necessary between the value of personal 
health data and public interest. The best way to deal with such a situation is 
to define a new context, with guiding values. Also in this case the data must 
circulate within a properly defined domain, within clear boundaries. Special 
attention must be paid that the new flows of information remain within this 
context and do not fall prey to two all-​embracing in situations:
	–​	 Governmental Power. Governmental power pervades all public institutions. 
Digital techniques make it possible that within government bureaucracy 
data that are transferred to authorities for one goal are used for other goals. 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Information and Human Behavior in Times of covid-19
277
This is not allowed. Government institutions should not use collected health 
data for other purposes than originally intended.
	–​	 Capitalistic Structures. Data are becoming extremely valuable assets. Not 
only Silicon Valley giants but all kinds of commercial organizations slurp 
data, in order to better adjust their products to the needs of their consumers 
… and enrich themselves by using algorithms that are completely inacces­
sible. The lack of transparency is problematic, as it hides possible misuse. 
Healthcare data are very much in demand, as in healthcare the financial 
interests are very high. A less limited flow of data for covid-​19 control mea­
sures may not as side-​effect enrich commercial parties.
As a final note, digital tools play an important role in the fight against Covid-​19. 
But the use of digital tools also has side effects that in the long-​term severely 
damage our welfare. In making considered choices we have to do justice to 
the fact that every kind of information, also information that is digitally trans­
ferred, derives significance from particular contexts.
	
Bibliography
Achterhuis, Hans (ed.) (2001), American Philosophy of Technology: The empirical Turn, 
Indiana University Press.
Binjola, Himani, and Keshav Patel (2020), “Fake News Swamping Interpersonal 
Communication”, in International Journal of Mass Communication 5:8–​13.
Dubois, Elizabeth, and Grant Blank (2018), “The Echo Chamber is Overstated: 
the Moderating Effect of Political Interest and Diverse Media”, in Information, 
Communication & Society 21:729–​745. doi: 10.1080/​1369118X.2018.1428656.
Garrett, Laurie (2020), “COVID-​19: The Medium is the Message”, in The Lancet, March 
11. https://​www.thelan​cet.com/​arti​cle/​S0140-​6736(20)30600-​0/​fullt​ext (accessed 20 
July, 2021).
Marin, Lavinia (2020), “Three Contextual Dimensions of Information on Social Media: 
Lessons from the COVID-​19 Infodemic”. in Ethics and Information Technology, Online 
First. Doi: https://​doi.org/​10.1007/​s10​676-​020-​09550-​2.007/​s10676-​020-​09550-​2 
(accessed 20 July, 2021).
Ricoeur, Paul (1994), Oneself as Another, University of Chicago Press.
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Index of Names
Adhanom, Tedros 152
Aeschylus 34
Agamben, Giorgio 149n, 153
Allison, Graham 126n
Arendt, Hannah 155, 156, 160
Aristotle 46, 54, 59
Arrighi, Giovanni 233n, 246
Augustine 52
Bacon, Francis xv, 111, 113–​115, 220
Barnett, Anthony 182
Beitz, Charles 189
Benjamin, Walter 10, 168–​172
Berlin, Isaiah 80, 174, 175n
Blair, Tony 188
Boccaccio, Giovanni 23
Bodin, Jean 171
Bolsonaro, Jair 20, 141, 263
Braudel, Fernand 242
Brecht, Bertolt 87
Burman, Anirudh 137
Buteflika, Abdelaziz 204
Butler, Judith 184, 191, 224n
Carnap, Rudolf 52
Cassam, Quassim 81
Chopin, Frédéric 263
Clark, Kelly James 99n
Clausewitz, Carl 130
Clinton, Bill 188
Cohen, Mark Nathan 241–​242
Conte, Giuseppe 199
Crosby, Alfred 255
Daly, Mary 246
Derrida, Jacques 98n, 125
Descartes Rene 56, 61
Dewey, John 77
Di Cesare, Donatella 153
Djertad, Abdelaziz 204
Dooyeweerd, Herman 99
Dotson, Kristie 192
Dummett, Michael 55
Dylan, Bob 53
Evans, Richard J. 252–​253
Feinberg, Joel 78
Feuerbach, Ludwig 44
Fleming, Alexander 111
Floridi, Luciano 270
Floyd, George 155, 158, 159, 164
Foucault, Michel 9, 61, 112, 127, 147–​149, 152
Fraser, Nancy 183, 188
Fukuyama, Francis 199
Gadamer, Hans-​Georg 3, 33, 34, 118, 225n
Galen 25, 251
Galilei, Galileo 52
Gates, Bill 32, 198
Gaus, Gerald 78
Giddens, Anthony xii
Goldstone, Jack 198
Gramsci, Antonio 11, 183–​184
Grant, Ruth 174–​176
Grmek, Mirko 242–​246, 250
Habermas, Jürgen 2, 119, 190, 210
Harari, Yuval Noah 239n
Hays, Jo 234n, 250–​256, 263
Hegel, G.W.F 1, 44, 60, 118, 139
Heidegger, Martin 1, 2, 8, 53–​55, 58, 99n, 
106–​109, 115–​119
Henry, Michel 98n, 99n
Heraclitus 53
Herman, Judith Lewis 246
Hesiod 238, 240
Hippocrates 235
Hobbes, Thomas 61, 152
Homer 238
Hopkins, Terence 246
Husserl, Edmund 3–​4, 97–​98, 105
Ihde, Don 270
James, William 43, 77
Jaspers, Karl 5, 34
Jenner, Edward 111
Johnson, Boris 168, 182, 184, 199, 263
Kant, Immanuel 46, 47, 59, 60, 61, 
63, 66, 80
Keats, John 263
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

280
Index of Names
Kepler, Johannes 52
Korsch, Karl 172
Kurzweil, Ray 59
Latour, Bruno 216n, 219–​220
Lazzarato, Maurizio 165
Lebron, Christopher 157
Lincoln, Abraham 158
Locke, John 61
Luhmann, Niklas 270
Lukács, György 172
Lyotard, Jean-​François 114n
MacIntyre, Alasdair 178–​180, 195–​196
Macron, Emmanuel 199
Maïla, Joseph 206
Marx, Karl 44, 61
Maté, Gabor 246
Matthew 35
Mauss, Marcel 198–​199
Mayer, Arno 253
Mbeki, Thabo 137
McKinnon, Catharine 246
McMurtry, John 87–​88, 90
McNeill, William H. 246–​247, 249–​250
Meillassoux, Quentin 58
Melissus 114
Merkel, Angela 139, 199
Merleau-​Ponty, Maurice 65n, 98n
Mill, John Stuart 78
Miller, Alice 246
Mitchell, Juliet 246
Modi, Narendra 263
Mounk, Yascha 84–​85
Muhammad vi, King 200, 201, 206
Negri, Antonio 165
Newton, Isaac 52
Nietzsche, Friedrich 61, 217
Nissenbaum, Helen 276
Olthuis, James 99n
Parsons, Talcott 271
Pasteur, Louis 111
Peirce, Charles 77
Peter, Fabienne 82
Petrarch, Francesco 113, 115
Plantinga, Alvin 99n, 101n
Plato 6, 52
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Index of Subjects
absolutism 200
abstract 42, 48, 49, 50, 64, 89, 92, 190, 243
academic ix–​xiii, 3, 184, 191, 192, 233, 264
accidental 116, 220
accumulation ix, 12, 138, 165, 231, 237, 241, 
249, 256, 257, 260, 261
action 3, 46, 51, 53, 56, 64, 66, 75, 78, 79, 84, 
89, 92, 97, 98, 100, 101, 111, 115, 116n.5, 
120, 141, 156, 157, 170, 172, 174, 176n, 177, 
183, 204, 208–​210, 219, 238, 264, 270
activism 191
actuality 51, 180
addiction 246
affirmative 58, 90, 92, 198
agency xvi, 6, 8, 63, 64, 66, 112, 115, 117–​
120, 178
aggression 119
agnosticism 55
agricultural 137, 163
agriculturalist 235
agriculture 146, 239, 240, 246
aids 30, 137, 140, 152, 250, 252
aletheia 117
ambiguity xiv, 6, 7, 69, 70, 158
analytic 11, 99n.19, 107, 234n.4, 244
ancient Greece 118
anthropocene 9, 105, 146, 147, 215, 218, 220
anthropocentrism 112, 119, 217
anthropomorphism 54
anthropos 146, 147
anticipation xv, 167
anti-​humanism 120
anti-​intellectual 184, 191
antiquity 240, 242, 243, 250
antirealism 55
anti-​social 165
anti-​subjectivity 112
anti-​vaccine 143
anxiety 23, 63–​65, 95
apathy 66
apparatus 146, 148, 149, 152
Arab spring 198, 201, 203
arbitrariness 7, 66, 67, 173
archaic 170, 240n.14
archeology 147–​148
atheism 216
atomistic 275
austerity 17, 260, 263
authentic 109, 116, 119
authoritarian 44, 82, 156, 173, 186, 198–​200, 
206, 209, 259, 260
authoritarianism 5, 170, 199, 200
authority 25, 133, 135, 137, 140, 141n.5, 171, 
176n, 177
autonomous 43, 44, 66, 218
autonomy 6, 10, 13, 33, 41–​43, 45, 46, 48, 66, 
116, 157, 178, 275
awareness of death xiv
barbarism 98n.14, 170
behavior 25, 35, 56, 70, 106, 116, 133, 143, 
190, 191, 200, 203, 234n.4, 236, 243, 
270, 271
behaviorism 56
Being xiv, 107–​109, 116, 117, 119, 120
being-​towards-​death xiv, 8, 107, 108
being-​with-​others 8, 109
benefit-​cost 70, 71, 73
Bestand 8, 115, 117
bioethics 40n.3
biological x, 21, 25, 44, 54, 64, 65, 87, 88, 
101, 107, 127, 223, 224, 234n.4, 243, 247, 
251, 252
biology 53, 57
biomedicine 24, 234, 235, 237, 248, 251, 
256–​261
biopolitical 127, 130, 151–​153, 216
Black Death xiv, 112, 114n.4, 117, 150, 216, 
237n.10, 248, 251, 252
Black Lives Matter 10, 98n.14, 155–​160, 
166, 228n
Body xiv, 64, 111, 120n, 134, 177, 178, 220, 
234, 235
bothsidesism 82
Brexit 182, 192
buddhism 94, 97, 100
buffered self 33
bureaucratic 158, 206
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

282
Index of Subjects
capitalism 162, 164, 165, 168, 184, 188, 189, 
195, 218, 231, 233, 235–​238, 248, 254n.30, 
256, 257, 260, 263
capitalocene 147
cartesianism 55, 56
causal x, xvi, 3, 48, 56, 70, 74, 75
censorship xviii
centralism xvii, 9
centralization xvii, 135
chaos 21, 23, 172, 207
chaotic 147
chauvinist 193
chemical 53, 98n.14
chemistry 53, 57
christianity 97, 99n.19, 100, 246n
church 24n.22, 25, 59, 97
citizenship xvii, 194, 195, 203
civilization 114n.3, 119, 218, 239, 240, 241, 
243, 245
civil society xviii, 11, 171, 192, 209, 210
classical 3, 55, 185, 206, 242–​244, 250
claustrophile 109
climate change 79, 98n.14, 105, 131, 158, 256
coercive 59, 84, 143, 177
cogito 61
cognitive science 54
cognitivism 66
collapse 19, 55, 105, 136, 188, 193, 200, 203–​
205, 240
collectivism 193
colonialism 12, 164, 248, 252
colonization 9, 146, 147
commercial 9, 91, 134, 272, 277
common sense 40–​42, 45, 46, 96, 183, 236
communication 23, 108, 125, 134, 143, 
206, 270
communism 170
communitarian 188, 191
compatibilism 57
competition ix, 54, 93, 126n, 209, 258
complexity 45, 105, 125, 141
computability 56
concept xv, 4–​9, 22, 52, 53, 55, 62, 66, 94, 
106, 147, 169–​171, 175n, 179, 234n.3
concrete xi, xv, 9, 11, 46–​48, 87–​90, 100, 191
consciousness 54, 56, 109, 172
consequentialism 45
conservatism 119, 254
conservative government 185
conspiracy 25, 65–​67, 84, 131
constellation 46, 64
constitution xvii, xviii, 96n.9, 160, 169, 172, 
178, 204
constitutionalism 137
construction-​cognition 117
consumerism 98
consumption 17, 70, 91, 93, 120, 162
contemplation xv, 45, 193
contingency 11, 177, 178, 238, 263
control xvii, xviii, 9, 12, 21, 24, 25, 43, 48, 
53, 80, 81, 83, 88, 126, 127, 129, 133, 134, 
138, 143, 149, 159, 179, 192, 203, 207, 216, 
234n.4, 235, 239, 247, 249, 261, 264n.44
coronascepticism 65
counterhegemonic 183, 188
coups d’état 198
creativity 56
Crime Bill 165
criminal 25, 149, 153
crisis ix, xv, xvii, xviii, 5, 7, 11, 12, 17–​19, 32–​
35, 39, 45–​47, 49, 50, 62, 64–​66, 69, 80, 
85, 87, 89, 90, 92, 95, 100–​102, 105, 128, 
134–​143, 152, 162–​167, 168, 174, 177, 182–​
184, 187–​189, 192, 194, 198–​209, 215, 224, 
233, 236, 237, 246, 257, 259–​263
critical approach 5, 9, 234n.3
critical interpretation 63
critical thinking xv, 6, 111
criticism 5, 8, 72, 111, 112, 120, 157, 234n.3, 275
cultural policy xviii
cyclical 146
cynicism 261
Dasein 58, 107–​109, 117–​118
debt 19, 135, 137, 150, 203, 235, 246, 248, 249, 
251, 257
decentralized 138, 141, 157
decentralism 9
decision-​making ix, xiv, 7, 67, 70, 72, 79, 80, 
82, 136
defense 98n.14, 115–​117, 119, 120n, 130, 164, 
166, 175, 247, 276
defensive 8, 10, 111, 115, 116, 166
deforestation 146
democracy 11, 12, 81, 143, 170, 177, 198–​200, 
202–​205, 209, 210, 225, 231
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Index of Subjects
283
democratization xvii, 11, 198, 200, 202, 204, 
205, 209
demography 243
demonization 8, 119
deontological 45–​48, 63
depression 128, 246
descriptive x, 2, 176
despotism 153, 173
determinism 57
development xvii, 91, 118, 155, 166, 170, 182, 
183, 186, 209, 210, 240, 248, 253, 270, 
272, 276
dialectical 49, 118, 172
dichotomy 118
dictatorial regime 199
dictatorship 200, 206, 241n.15
digital age 33
digitalization 270, 271, 275, 276
diplomacy 206
diplomatic 126, 208
discontinuity xiv, 248
discourse 40, 47, 57, 63, 65, 143, 148, 149, 153, 
159, 176, 186, 192, 199, 233, 236, 238, 242, 
258, 263
discoursism 58
discovery 146
disinformation 272
dispositif 9, 146–​152
distributive 177, 187, 228
divine xv, xvi, 7, 8, 23, 24n.17, 35, 94, 96–​101, 
115, 171, 217
domination xv, 7, 81, 82, 113, 115n, 148, 156, 
261, 272
drama 87
dualism 56
earth 25, 111, 119, 120n, 146, 147, 198, 236, 
239, 249
Ebola 21, 198
ecocentric 218
ecological 20, 90, 105, 127, 162, 183, 188, 218, 
219, 244
ecologism 217
economy 9, 11, 12, 19, 25, 59, 62, 69, 90, 92, 
126, 129, 134, 135, 138, 140, 142, 149–​151, 
156, 163, 168, 187, 188, 203, 205, 231
ecosystem 218, 219
education xiii, xix, 84, 130, 151, 225, 229
efficiency 5, 46, 48, 157
egalitarian 188, 194, 195, 228, 232, 
237n.10, 264
egalitarianism 230, 232
election 159, 164
electoral 105
electoralism 167
elite 150, 239, 240, 249, 261, 264
emancipation 195
emancipative 59
emancipatory 195, 272
embodiment 6, 102
emergency 10, 67, 80, 130, 139, 142, 168–​172, 
174, 177, 188, 216, 236
emotional xv, 83, 85, 107, 272
empire 113, 114, 182, 233, 246, 253, 255
empirical 42, 63, 94n.2, 98n.17, 102, 174n, 
243–​246
employment 18, 129–​130, 151, 158, 163–​164, 
168, 205, 224, 229, 239, 251, 254n.30
endemic 89, 236, 243, 244, 247, 255
enemy xviii, 134, 172, 270
energy 115, 130, 190, 205
enlightenment 2, 64, 147, 216, 251
entertainment 128, 151
environment xii, xviii, 20, 35, 90, 111, 117, 127, 
129, 150, 177, 187, 217, 218, 220, 234, 237, 
242, 245, 256
environmentalism xviii, 12, 217
epidemic 12, 23, 24, 33, 108, 130n, 139, 147, 
150, 215, 218, 233–​257, 263, 264, 273
epidemiological 74, 127, 130, 236, 238, 241
epidemiology 234, 235, 238, 251
epistemic xv, 23, 81, 82, 84, 177
epistemic insouciance 81
epistemological 13, 176
epoche 3, 172
equality xvii, 9, 12, 155n, 157–​159, 177, 183–​
186, 188–​189, 216, 217, 228–​232
essentialism 120, 224
ethicality 7
ethics 7, 44–​47, 85, 87–​89, 99, 148, 217, 
218, 220
ethnicity 89, 151, 153, 224–​226
etymology 35, 209
event x, xv, 2, 3, 9, 66, 91, 125–​131
evil xiv, 101n.25, 113, 114, 118, 119n.9, 239
evolution 92, 147, 207
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

284
Index of Subjects
exclusion xv, 47, 105, 195, 204, 216, 253
existential xiv, 5, 8, 22, 61, 62, 101, 117, 
119, 162
existentialia 107, 108
existentiell 107
expertocracy 275
explanation 3, 24, 62, 84, 85, 101, 222, 
226, 272
exploitation 7, 82, 90, 115, 116, 118, 164, 218, 
230, 236, 242, 247, 251, 263
extraordinary politics 10, 158
extremism 112
fascism 169, 170
factotum-​dialectic 118
fairness 195, 228, 230
fatalism 40, 217
fate 116n, 239
federal countries 9, 133, 135
federalism 9, 137–​139, 141
feminist 226, 261, 263
feudalism 25
financial 26, 48, 70, 105, 134, 136, 137, 140, 
151, 201, 203, 205, 233, 248, 249, 251, 257, 
261, 277
finiteness 6, 43, 251
finitude 43, 44, 92, 178
flu ix, 22, 26, 133, 141, 152, 241n, 255, 258
foreign relations xviii, 249n.25
freedom xvii, 7, 10, 32, 41, 57, 59, 66, 67, 69, 
77–​79, 81–​83, 85, 96n.9, 131, 155n, 169, 
173, 183–​188, 191, 195, 199, 206, 209, 
229, 230
functionalism 56
Geist 118
gender x, 89, 107, 149, 153, 229, 246
genealogical 147, 148
generalization 25, 63, 190
generation 48, 166, 203, 215, 217, 218, 231
genesis 4, 98n.17, 113, 147, 156
genetic 223
genocide 9, 147, 247, 251, 252
geographical 62, 90, 253
geological 146
geometrical 108
geopolitical 126, 127, 130, 131, 259, 263
globalization 12, 20, 134, 146, 174, 216–​219
global justice xvii, 183, 187
global society 189, 195, 217
glocalization 190
god 8, 23, 25, 35, 52, 53, 65, 91, 96, 97, 99n.21, 
101, 102, 118, 143, 217
Good xiv, xv, 6, 7, 11, 45–​48, 58, 63, 78, 82–​85, 
118, 184, 186, 193–​196, 236
good life 41, 78, 83, 85, 89, 92
governance xvii, 9, 11, 147, 148, 185, 189, 
190, 209
government xvii–​xix, 9–​11, 18, 26, 32, 
63, 69, 74, 77, 79–​81, 90, 91, 128–​130, 
133–​143, 150, 163, 165, 166, 168, 174, 190, 
192, 217, 229–​232, 236, 237, 260, 263, 
276, 277
governmentality 9, 147, 150, 152
grammatical 54
Greek philosophy 118n
harmony 6, 62, 66, 67
healing 58n, 268
hedonism 93
hegemony 17, 183, 188
hermeneutic xvi, 3, 6, 7, 12, 53, 54, 58, 63–​67, 
99n.20, 125, 224
hermeneutic realism 55
hierarchy x, 59, 156–​158
historical analysis 5
historical context 11, 182
historical continuity 21
historical moment 118, 125, 149, 172, 191
historical perspective 233, 238, 244, 249, 
251n, 263
Hobbesian 152
holism 56
homo economicus 147
homogeneity 157
homo sapiens 241n
hope xvi, 8, 42, 81, 82, 101, 112, 119, 187, 196, 
239, 258, 261
human dignity 47
humanism 112, 216
humanities ix, x, 2, 4, 175, 176
human rights 136, 163
human trafficking 9, 147
hypersedentism 242
hypocrisy 59
hysteria 170, 246
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Index of Subjects
285
idealism 57
identity 12, 19, 64, 89, 194, 222, 225, 272
ideological 120, 149, 150, 202, 233, 235, 241, 
261, 272, 273
ideology xvii, 17, 18, 170, 188
illusion 5, 17, 237, 276
imagination 4
immaterial 97, 128, 149
immigrant 18, 92, 194
immigration xviii
imperialism 9, 12, 147, 216, 233, 237, 238, 246, 
249, 250, 264
inclusion xv, 47, 195
incompatibility 57, 188
indigenous 155n, 164, 166, 187, 194, 228n, 251
individualism 6, 10, 33, 43, 44, 178
individuality 42, 45, 109, 112
industrialization 146, 254
industry 5, 20, 53, 170
inequality 10, 12, 20, 105, 158, 159, 162, 164, 
230, 232, 237, 245, 256, 257
influenza 22, 26, 255
infodemic 271
information xviii, 12, 13, 64, 66, 125, 127, 250, 
270–​277
innovation 49, 61
instability 6, 63, 105, 202
instrumental rationality xv, 119
intelligence 33, 53, 59
intentionality 4
intercultural 44
interdisciplinary 11, 12, 39, 40, 112
intergovernmental 139
international relations 4, 130, 249n.25
internet 95, 106, 108, 204, 272, 274
intersubjectivity xvi, 54–​56, 59, 177
intolerance 22, 105
intuition 96–​98
invasion 8, 19, 111, 113–​116, 118–​120, 218, 251
irreversibility 119
islam 207, 246n, 248
islamist 208
isolation xv, 45, 91, 92, 95, 188, 191, 194, 203
Janus 151
journalism 272
judaism 100
judgment 46, 83, 105, 175, 176, 272
judicial system 53
jurisdiction 135, 136, 140, 141
justice xvii, 11, 12, 45, 48, 53, 72, 149156, 
177, 183, 185–​189, 194, 216, 228–​231, 
245, 277
distributive justice 187, 228
racial justice 222
social justice 151, 217, 263
justification 49, 78, 79, 81, 96, 236, 275
Keynesianism 165
labor 90–​92, 151, 162–​167, 168, 239, 240, 259
laissez-​faire 7, 78, 191
language xiii, xvi, 52, 56, 57, 96n.9, 107, 109, 
113, 114n.3, 117, 120, 125, 187, 189, 190, 
264, 270
leadership 9, 78, 135, 137–​143, 156, 157, 
204, 208
legal order 168, 172, 173
legal restrictions 65
legality 172
legislation 137, 138, 168
legitimacy 11, 81, 94n.1, 174, 177, 184, 199, 202, 
204, 205, 262
liberal democracy 79, 81, 143, 199, 209
liberalism 192, 193, 199, 216, 231
liberalization 209
libertarian 57, 186, 191
liberty 43, 63, 78, 80, 109, 134, 140, 191, 
228, 229
lifestyle xiii, 91, 128, 259
life-​value 7, 87
lifeworld 62, 97
limit situation 5, 32, 34, 35
linguistic xvi, 50, 54, 98, 190
local 9, 11, 20, 53, 57, 63, 82, 127–​130, 135, 
140, 156–​158, 186, 187, 189–​196, 202, 216, 
225, 237
localism 184, 195
lockdown 7, 25, 44, 80, 87, 90, 91, 105, 106, 
110, 129, 136, 137, 184, 187, 216, 254n.32
logic 54, 55, 153, 184, 191, 200, 249
logical 54, 58
logos 54
loneliness 109
longevity 151
luxuria 114
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

286
Index of Subjects
macroparasitism 238, 246, 247, 249, 257
madness 149
magical thinking 137
malitia 114
managerialism 167
mankind 39, 59, 105, 114, 115
marginalization 230, 232
marginalized groups 188, 264
market 5, 9, 17, 79, 126, 130, 134, 151, 163, 165, 
187, 188, 198, 200, 203, 205, 209, 234, 
249, 262
Marxism 7, 87, 88, 241
materialist ethics 7, 87–​89
mathematics 57
mathematization 52
meaningfulness 8, 97, 100, 102
meaning-​giving 65
meaninglessness 64
meaning-​making 65
media xviii, 26, 106, 125, 131, 165, 166, 192, 
222, 236, 272, 273
medical xiv, 19, 25, 32, 49, 61, 62, 65, 96, 110, 
111, 151, 152, 166, 174, 202, 206, 216, 219, 
223, 234–​238, 241, 243, 244, 248, 250, 
251, 254, 256
medicalization 248, 253
medicine x, 25, 58, 150, 216, 234, 243, 244, 
248–​251, 254n.31, 256, 257, 261
meditative life 5, 35
mega-​industrialization 146
mega-​urbanization 146
melancholy 56
mens extensa 56
mentality 111
meta-​compatibilism 57
metaethical 45, 46, 48, 50n.15
metaethics 44
metaphor 53, 54, 108, 113, 118n
metaphysical realism 55, 58
metaphysics 56
methodological xvi, 4, 99, 175, 184, 
258n.33, 274
methodology 99n.20
microorganism xv, 113, 119, 120n
microparasitism 249
microphysics 53
middle ages xiv, 252
middle east 198, 201, 2005, 206
migration 31, 203, 204, 256
militarism 4, 119
military 126, 131, 159, 165, 170, 200, 204, 207, 
209, 236, 247, 256
minority 195, 222, 223
misinformation 271
misogynism 254, 263
mission xv, 112, 220
modernism 11, 199, 209
modernity 6, 33, 61, 62, 65, 67, 115, 238
modern philosophy 8, 112
modern science 8, 112, 114n.2, 116, 117, 118n
monarchy 200, 201, 205, 206
monetary value 70–​72
monistic 56
monovocity 4
moral conflict 7, 77, 83, 85
mortality 24, 25, 59, 69–​71, 90, 91, 151, 201, 
202, 237, 253, 258, 260
movement xviii, 10, 12, 19, 20, 25, 33, 35, 61, 
74, 117, 129, 134, 138, 143, 155–​158, 165, 
187, 195, 199, 200, 204, 205, 210, 229, 252, 
261, 272
muslim 207, 225, 240n.15
myth 6, 52–​54, 57, 170
mythology 215
narcissistic 263
narrative 6, 63, 118, 182, 194, 195, 240, 261, 
263, 272
nationalism 194, 195
nationalist-​capitalist 10, 168
nation-​state 62, 182, 189, 194, 195
natural sciences xiv, xvi, 49, 54, 175n, 252
nature x, xv, 1, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 21, 24, 26, 42, 44, 
52–​54, 57–​59, 62, 65, 76, 80, 82, 87, 90, 
111–​118, 120, 126, 130, 146, 162, 175n, 178, 
217–​220, 245
necessity 54, 60, 171
necrological 151, 152
nemesis 233, 267
neoconservatism 119
neoliberal xvii, 9, 11, 130, 147, 150, 153, 165, 
183–​185, 188, 196
neoliberalism 5, 150, 152, 153
network 62, 157, 194
neuroscience 54
neurosis 149
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Index of Subjects
287
new atheists 96
newsworthiness 13, 271
nihilism 193, 233, 261
noetic 4
non-​being 52
non-​cartesian 58
non-​circular 99n.20
non-​computable 56
non-​hierarchical 184
non-​ideal 184
non-​interference 80, 81
non-​oligarchic 257
non-​temporal 146
normalcy 217
normal life x, 21, 35
normative 46, 64, 82, 83, 105, 169, 172, 174–​
176, 203, 271
nostalgia 194
nostalgic 240
obedience 66
objectification 118
objective xvii, 3, 11, 42, 66, 67, 108, 157, 169, 
170, 198, 239, 251, 256, 273, 274
obscurantism 261
offensive 10, 115, 116, 165, 166, 208
oligarchy 257, 260n.36, 269
ontological 6, 43, 44, 99n.20, 147, 148
ontology xiv, 51, 58, 63, 120, 147, 148
oppression 164, 186, 196, 216, 242, 253, 263
optimism 40
optimistic 26, 50, 58, 201, 205
organism 43, 56, 113, 116, 219, 241–​243
orthodoxy 185, 250
other xv, 8, 9, 11, 12, 33–​35, 79, 80, 83, 85, 
88, 92, 93, 109, 114n.4, 117, 120, 148, 152, 
153, 157, 179, 180, 191, 193, 194, 196, 230, 
273, 275
otherness 117
ownership 25, 162, 231, 249
paleopathology 238, 239
panic 21, 23, 261
paradigm 45, 67, 121, 188
parliament 139, 168, 199, 202, 204, 208
participation 157, 195, 232
pathocoenosis 238, 242, 244, 245
patriarchy 12, 239, 263, 264
patriotism 194
peace xviii, 8, 101, 201, 208, 255
perception 23, 55, 56, 192
pessimism 260
phenomenality 1, 3
phenomenology 3, 97–​99, 118, 270
philanthropic 148
philosophical anthropology 8, 105–​110
philosophical reflection xv, 39, 195
philosophical understanding x, xv, 40
philosophy of history xiv, 169, 170
philosophy of mind 55
philosophy of religion xvi, 99n.19, 101
physics 52, 54, 56, 57
physiological 129
physis 6, 53, 58
plague 5, 8, 11, 21–​26
plantationcene 147
platonism 52
pluralistic 46n, 48
plurality x, 57, 59, 157
poiesis 117
policing 159, 162, 164, 165, 167
policy-​making 7, 13, 73, 253, 273
political conflict xvii, 256
political courage 155
political culture xvii, 141, 143, 182, 192, 193
political development xvii, 155
political ethic xviii, 220
political history xviii, 11, 215
political leaders xvii, 141, 143, 176
political malaise 192
political philosophy xvii, 10, 11, 174–​180, 183, 
184, 189, 190, 192, 193, 196
political science 174, 180, 199
political sentiments 235, 260
political structure xvii, 9, 176n, 198
political system xvi–​xviii, 5, 200, 206, 207, 
209, 257, 262, 263
political theory xvii, 127, 174, 175, 177, 
180, 189
politicization 131
politics ix, x, xviii, 10, 11, 13, 46, 50, 62, 127, 
130, 131, 142, 143, 153, 157, 158, 160, 166, 
167, 174–​177, 180, 184, 189–​197, 228–​230, 
232, 254, 261, 272–​274
popular culture 6, 53
populism 272
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

288
Index of Subjects
populist 19, 141
pornification 246
pornography 246
possibility 4, 66, 99, 119, 131, 136, 175, 178, 180, 
190, 193, 195, 198, 247, 251
post-​covid-​19 130
post-​industrial 196
postmodern 111, 118, 119
postmodernism 193
post-​nature 220
post-​pandemic 230
post-​reactionary-​criticism 8, 111, 112
post-​Soviet 198, 260
poststructuralism 55, 57, 58
poverty 12, 17, 25, 26, 140, 165, 196, 204, 216, 
223, 224, 233, 234–​238, 246, 250, 252, 
257, 263, 264
power xvii, 9, 10, 13, 17, 23, 57, 81, 90, 114–​
116, 118, 126, 134–​139, 141, 147–​149, 155, 
156, 158, 159, 169–​171, 179, 187, 190, 193, 
195, 196, 199, 201–​208, 231, 234, 235, 
239n.13, 240n.14, 242, 248, 250, 256, 
259–​262, 276
practice x, xv, xvii, 11, 42, 46, 58, 84, 92, 
94n.1, 95–​97, 100, 116, 130, 141, 143, 
149, 176, 183, 184, 189, 192, 232, 240, 
245, 250
pragmatism 55, 86
praxis 192
precarity 150, 151, 153
pre-​historical 146
premodern xiv, 254
pre-​Socratic 55
pre-​theoretical 40, 97, 98
primates 120n
primitivism 240
prison 149, 165, 252
privacy 13, 199, 260n.38, 271, 275, 276
private 12, 62, 67, 79, 110, 130, 134, 140, 165, 
185, 186, 201, 206, 231, 260, 264
problematic xiv, 3, 4, 6, 13, 42–​44, 52, 61, 112, 
186, 252, 277
progress 170, 216, 235, 236, 238–​241, 257
proletarian 252, 260
prosperity 62, 199, 200
protest xviii, 155–​160, 191, 200, 204, 205, 233
pseudo-​democratic 200
pseudo-​science 250
psychological xvii, xviii, 95, 100–​103, 179, 
245–​247, 260
psychology 54, 57, 174n, 175
public health xvii, 9, 12, 22, 25, 35, 58, 63, 69, 
70, 72, 87, 94–​96, 101, 108, 126, 129, 130, 
134–​136, 138–​142, 153, 168, 174, 177, 184, 
185, 191, 202, 234–​238, 249–​251, 253, 255, 
256, 258, 260, 262
punishment 23, 59, 127
quarantine xv, xvi, 22, 24, 25, 45, 137, 
138, 152, 191, 201, 204, 210, 246, 252, 
254n.32, 260
quasi-​species 127
questioning xiii, 1–​4, 63, 261
racial 10, 12, 18, 89, 151, 155, 156, 158, 162, 164, 
222–​226
racism 9, 18, 152, 153, 155, 157–​159, 263
rational xv, 6, 7, 39, 43, 59, 60n, 62, 63, 69, 
70, 73, 79–​85, 131, 143, 174, 178, 182, 186, 
220, 275
rationalism 120, 264
rationality xv, 12, 119, 149, 178, 219, 220, 274
reactionary critique 8
realism 55, 58
reciprocity 193, 195
recognition 26, 41, 42, 183, 184, 186, 188, 191, 
251, 263
recta Ratio 115
redemption 59
redemptive knowledge 114n.2
reductionism 234
reform 12, 137, 195, 196, 201, 205, 206, 219, 
253, 260
refugees 10, 172, 251, 252, 260
regional 20, 138, 141n.5, 189, 195, 200, 208
relativist xv
religion xvi, 8, 23, 24, 58n, 59, 94–​102, 115, 
193, 206, 225, 229, 254, 272
religiosity 35
representation xvi, 56, 138, 166, 219n.6
representationalism 55
representational politics 166
repression 164, 165
reproduction 239, 242, 264
republican 81, 164, 191
res cogitans 56
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

Index of Subjects
289
res extensa 56
resistance 10, 89, 114, 137, 141, 160, 162, 165–​
167, 204, 205, 254, 259, 264
re-​sourcism 117
resourcization 117
responsibility 8, 11, 20, 40, 41, 67, 78, 115, 127, 
129, 130, 135, 136, 138–​140, 177, 180, 192, 
217, 220, 261, 273
restrictions xvii, 7, 10, 65, 77, 78, 80–​83, 129, 
172, 173, 199, 203, 204
revanchism 193, 194
revolution 3–​5, 33, 34, 106, 160, 198, 203, 
233, 252
rhetoric 26, 47, 125, 152, 199
Right xv, xvii, 6, 7, 10, 11, 32, 42, 44–​47, 
77, 78, 80, 81–​85, 96n.9, 115, 136, 142, 
152, 153, 155–​157, 163, 168, 169, 182, 
184–​186, 188, 190, 191, 193, 194, 199, 
229, 275
romantic 240
romanticism 120
safety 26, 70, 150, 162, 163, 270, 276
salvation 58n
sana Religio 115
science policy xix
scientific method 115, 175
scientism 8, 112, 119
secular 7, 8, 94–​98, 100, 102, 206
secularism 34
securitization 185
security 129, 130, 134, 136, 140, 151, 153, 
203, 205
self-​contradictory 6, 53
self-​defense 98, 166
self-​empowerment 53
self-​liberation 172
self-​preservation 35
self-​sufficiency 11, 33, 178
self-​understanding 2
semantic 57, 60n, 170n, 172
Sittlichkeit 6, 60
situatedness xiv, 189
skepticism 55, 251
slavery 9, 81, 147, 156, 223
sociability 8, 74, 109
social contract 151
social democracy xvii, 170
social distancing xv, 34, 44, 45, 74, 106, 110, 
137, 163, 188, 191, 216, 271, 274
social epistemology xvi
social facts 147, 198, 199
socialism 257
social media 106, 131, 166, 192, 272, 273
social ontology 51, 120
social reality 6, 50
social sciences ix, 42, 174, 237n.11, 246, 
260n.36
sociological 100, 149, 190, 242
sociology 57, 175n, 270
soft power 126, 206
solidarity 19, 33, 41, 42, 85, 118, 166, 167, 191, 
193, 195, 201, 206, 216, 217
sovereignty 152, 166, 171
spatiality 108, 109
specificationism 7, 77
speculative 58, 92
spirituality 8, 94, 96–​102
sport 20, 128
statistical life 7, 70, 72
strategic 149, 150, 153, 206, 258
stress 157, 174, 226, 234, 246
structural change 137
struggle 10, 50, 78, 85, 89, 90, 111, 114, 134, 
141, 150, 157, 162, 164–​167, 169, 172, 195, 
240, 272
subject xiv, 4–​6, 8, 33, 42–​46, 52–​54, 
57–​59, 61–​67, 97, 98, 112, 115–​119, 148, 
179, 264
subjection 149, 217
subjective xvii, 11, 45, 46, 57, 63, 72, 198, 
236, 274
subjectivity 6, 8, 54, 55, 58, 59, 61–​63, 65–​67, 
111–​113, 115, 116, 118–​120, 148, 180, 274
sub-​national 133, 135, 136, 139
substance 56, 170, 195
sufficientarianism 230
suicide 92, 125n, 129
superempirical 94n.1, 94n.2, 95–​98
superstition 114
sustainability 90, 195, 218
symbolic 125n, 182, 209
syndemic 12, 233, 237, 238, 243n.18, 245, 
249, 250, 254, 255, 257, 258, 260, 261, 
263, 264
syndicalism 167
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

290
Index of Subjects
technologicalism 112
technologism 8
technology xiv, 8, 92, 112–​119, 185–​187, 
216, 251
technophilia 35
telos 193
temporality 117
territorial 140
terrorism xviii, 202
thanatocene 147
thanatological 151, 153
thanatopolitics 146
theology xviii, 99n.21, 101, 171
theoretical xvi, 2, 7, 11, 46, 53, 61, 83, 136n, 
174–​177, 184, 188–​190, 198, 243, 250
theory xv–​xvii, 11, 22, 24, 25, 46, 55, 79, 118, 
173, 183, 184, 189, 192, 196, 228, 246, 276
time-​awareness 117
tourism 128, 202, 205
tradition xvi, 6, 40, 42–​45, 50, 52, 65, 77, 87, 
95, 97n.11, 99, 129, 169, 170, 195, 234, 243, 
248, 252, 270
tragedy 34, 85, 92, 168, 178, 182
transcendental 4, 61, 98n.17, 102
transformation 11, 33, 91, 156, 165, 172, 
202, 209
transnational 190
transparency xviii, 6, 13, 26, 52–​54, 57, 277
transport 20, 128, 130, 137, 223, 229
trauma 134, 182, 246
tribal 140
truth xvi, xvii, 9, 10, 55, 57, 58, 65, 66, 81, 117, 
141, 148, 155–​159, 273, 274
unbridled capitalism 112, 119
uncertainty xiv, 7, 21, 23, 40, 69, 73–​75, 79, 
129, 174–​177
unconcealment 55
unidisciplinarity 237
unemployment 105, 128, 129, 151, 165, 168, 
177, 185, 203
unionism 167
universalization 61, 63
unrepeatability xv
urbanization 25, 146
use-​values 162
utilitarianism 48
utopia 45
vaccination 22, 26, 69, 80, 117, 254n.32, 256–​
259, 271, 274–​276
vaccine ix, 24, 26, 87–​90, 112, 131, 133, 135, 
143, 152n, 202, 219, 251, 258, 259, 261, 
263, 271
vandalism 159
violence xiii, 10, 89, 129, 155, 158, 159, 162, 
164–​166, 247, 260
virology 108, 126
virtual space 11, 108, 109
virtue 45n, 77, 155, 181
vulnerability 10, 43, 88, 105, 174, 177–​180, 218, 
232, 245
war xviii, 8, 9, 19, 33, 58, 111, 114n.3, 115, 128, 
130, 131, 134, 147, 152n, 165, 183, 194, 200, 
201, 207, 209, 236, 237, 240n.14, 243, 
247, 252, 258, 262n.42
warcene 147
warfare 111, 242
welfare state xvii, 12, 17, 22, 165, 206, 231
wellbeing 77, 92, 129, 130 142, 150, 151, 153, 
162, 163, 165, 229, 240
wisdom xiv, 33, 35, 46
women 26, 92, 240, 260, 263, 264
working-​class 160, 162–​167, 172, 185, 188
worship 96, 98, 206, 207
xenophobia 23
Zeus 118, 239
Zika 21, 198
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- 978-90-04-51292-4
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 11:11:06AM
via Wikimedia

