Critical Realism, 
Post-positivism 
and the 
Possibility of 
Knowledge  
In this innovative approach to the problem of 
relativism, Ruth Groff argues that a critical realist 
approach to the concept of causality allows for a 
compelling response to the idea that all claims about 
the world are equally valid. Relativism, Groff 
observes, presupposes that the world is all possible 
ways - that it has no determinate, intrinsic features. 
The neo-Aristotelian view of causality advanced by 
critical realists (viz., that causality is a matter of the 
real powers that things have, in virtue of what they 
are, to affect other things in specific ways) 
represents a powerful challenge to the anti-realism 
that is at the heart of contemporary relativism.  
Groff defends "realism about causality" through close 
discussions of Kant, Hilary Putnam, Brian Ellis and 
Charles Taylor, among others. In so doing she affirms 
critical realism, but with several important 
qualifications. In particular, she rejects the theory of 
truth advanced by Roy Bhaskar. She also attempts to 
both clarify and correct earlier critical realist attempts 
to apply realism about causality to the social 
sciences.  
By connecting issues in metaphysics and philosophy 
of science to the problem of relativism, Groff bridges 
the gap between the philosophical literature and 
broader debates surrounding socio-political theory 

 
and postmodern and poststructuralist thought. This 
unique approach will make the book of interest to 
philosophers and socio-political theorists alike.  
Ruth Groff is a Visiting Assistant Professor at 
Marquette University in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. She is 
interested in the history of Western social, political 
and moral thought and in theories about causality 
and the concept of truth. Past publications include 
"The Truth of the Matter," a systematic critique of 
Roy Bhaskar's theory of truth.  
-i-  
Routledge 
Studies in Critical 
Realism  
Edited by Margaret Archer, Roy Bhaskar, Andrew 
Collier, Tony Lawson and Alan Norrie Critical realism 
is one of the most influential new developments in 
the philosophy of science and in the social sciences, 
providing a powerful alternative to positivism and 
post modernism. This series will explore the critical 
realist position in philosophy and across the social 
sciences. 
1. Marxism and Realism 
A materialistic application of realism in the social 
science  
Sean Creaven  
2. Beyond Relativism 
Raymond Boudon, cognitive rationality and critical 
realism  

 
-ii-  
Cynthia Lins Hamlin  
3. Education Policy and Realist Social Theory 
Primary teachers, child-centred philosophy and the 
new managerialism  
Robert Wilmott  
4. Hegemony 
A realist analysis  
Jonathan Joseph  
5. Realism and Sociology 
Anti-foundationalism, ontology and social research 
Justin Cruickshank  
6. Critical Realism 
The difference it makes  
Edited by Justin Cruickshank  
7. Critical Realism and Composition Theory 
Donald Judd  
8. On Christian Belief 
A defence of a cognitive conception of religious 
belief in a Christian context  
Andrew Collier  
9. In Defence of Objectivity and Other Essays 
Andrew Collier  

Also published by Routledge: 
10. Realism Discourse and Deconstruction 
Edited by Jonathan Joseph and John Michael 
Roberts  
11. Critical Realism, Post-positivism and the 
Possibility of Knowledge 
Ruth Groff  
Critical Realism: Interventions 
Edited by Margaret Archer, Roy Bhaskar, Andrew 
Collier, Tony Lawson and Alan Norrie  
Critical Realism 
Essential readings  
Edited by Margaret Archer, Roy Bhaskar, Andrew 
Collier, Tony Lawson and Alan Norrie  
The Possibility of Naturalism Third Edition 
A philosophical critique of the contemporary 
human sciences  
Roy Bhaskar  
Being and Worth 
Andrew Collier  
Quantum Theory and the Flight from Realism 
Philosophical responses to quantum mechanics  
Christopher Norris  
From East to West 
Odyssey of a soul  
Roy Bhaskar  
Realism and Racism 

 
-iii-  
Concepts of race in sociological research  
Bob Carter  
Rational Choice Theory 
Resisting colonisation  
Edited by Margaret Archer and Jonathan Q. Tritter 
Explaining Society 
Critical realism in the social sciences  
Berth Danermark, Mats Ekström, Jan Ch. Karlsson 
and Liselotte Jakobsen  
Critical Realism and Marxism 
Edited by Andrew Brown, Steve Fleetwood and 
John Michael Roberts  
Critical Realism in Economics 
Edited by Steve Fleetwood  
Realist Perspectives on Management and 
Organisations 
Edited by Stephen Ackroyd and Steve Fleetwood  
After International Relations 
Critical realism and the (re)construction of world 
politics  
Heikki Patomaki  
Capitalism and Citizenship 
The impossible partnership  

 
-iv-  
Kathryn Dean  
Philosophy of Language and the Challenge to 
Scientific Realism 
Christopher Norris  
 
Critical Realism, 
Post-positivism 
and the 
Possibility of 
Knowledge  
Ruth Groff  
Routledge 
Taylor & Francis Group 
LONDON AND NEW YORK  
-v-  
First published 2004  
by Routledge  
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE  
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada  
by Routledge  

 
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001  
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group  
© 2004 Ruth Groff  
Typeset in Sabon by Exe Valley Dataset Ltd, Exeter  
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Biddles Ltd, 
King's Lynn  
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be 
reprinted or reproduced  
or utilised in any form or by any electronic, 
mechanical, or other means,  
now known or hereafter invented, including 
photocopying and recording,  
or in any information storage or retrieval system, 
without permission in  
writing from the publishers.  
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the 
British Library  
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
A catalog record for this book has been requested  
ISBN 0-415-33473-X  
-vi-  
For my family  
In memory of Jules Splaver (1906-2000) and 
Marion Kepler Groff (1910-2002)  
-vii-  

 
 
[This page intentionally left blank.]  
-viii-  
 
Contents  
-ix-  
Acknowledgments 
xi
1 Introduction: relativism, anti-realism 
and causality 
1
2 On the necessity of necessary 
connections: critical realism and Kant's 
transcendental idealism 
25
3 Natural kinds: critical realism and 
Putnam's internal realism 
45
4 Alethic truth 
71
5 Recovering Aristotle: realism about 
causality and the social sciences 
99
6 Conclusion: critical realism and the 
post-positivist quagmire 
135
Bibliography 
143
Index 
149
 
[This page intentionally left blank.]  
-x-  
Acknowledgments 
My impulse is to start by thanking my mom for 
teaching me the alphabet, and to then move forward 
from there. I will settle for beginning with Doug 

Bennett and Ken Sharpe, who first taught me to think 
philosophically, and Richard Schuldenfrei, who 
introduced me to the range of problems associated 
with positivism.  
I have been guided and encouraged at every stage of 
this work by Asher Horowitz, David McNally and Rob 
Albritton. I can't even begin to count the hours of 
time that they have given to me, or the ways in which 
they have been supportive of me. A number of other 
people were generous enough to read drafts of 
chapters and discuss issues with me in their areas of 
expertise. Foremost amongst this group is Hugh 
Lacey, who first assigned A Realist Theory of Science 
to me when I was an undergraduate at Swarthmore 
College. Doug Porpora has also been a great help to 
me. I would also like to thank Jagdish Hattiangadi, 
Charles Chastain and Howard Engelskirchen.  
As if this were not enough, I have had the invaluable 
benefit of being a participant of the Bhaskar listserv 
for the last six years. I cannot imagine how I could 
have written this book without the intellectual support 
and stimulation of the members of this unique virtual 
community. I would like to thank the list as a whole, 
and to especially thank Tobin Nellhaus, Colin Wight, 
Lewis Irwin, Mervyn Hartwig, Ronny Myhre (who 
introduced us to Brian Ellis and Irving Copi) and, 
again, Howard Engelskirchen and Doug Porpora.  
I am lucky to have friends and family who always 
trusted that I would complete this project. I want to 
thank Juliet Sternberg (who even saw fit to send a 
magic wand), Steve Bross (and his family), Jonathan 
Sher and Janet Finegar, Victoria Littman, Sheryl 
Nestel, Kate Collins, Sheila Simpkins, Reese Simpkins, 
Sabine Neidhardt, Miriam Ticoll, Marlene 
Quesenberry, George Comninel and Leo Panitch. I 
want to thank Diane and Gary Laison, Helen Splaver, 
Janet Jackel, Betsy Eggerling and my entire 
wonderful, extended family, who encouraged me, 
reassured me, sent goodies, listened to drafts of 

 
chapters read over the phone and told me that they 
loved me.  
-xi-  
 
Finally, I want to express my deepest gratitude to my 
parents, Jim and Meg Groff, to Noah Efron, who has 
been an unfailingly enthusiastic booster for over 
twenty years now, and to my sweetheart, David 
Lomax. I couldn't possibly put into a sentence or two 
what it has meant and continues to mean to me to 
enjoy David's love, intelligence, companionship, 
patience and good cheer. David always had faith in 
my abilities. I'm so happy to be able to share the 
publication of this book with him.  
Thank you to Sage Publications for permission to 
reprint large portions of Chapter 4, which appeared in 
very close to its present form in Philosophy of the 
Social Sciences (30:3), and to Pearson Education 
Limited for permission to include Table 0.1 from A 
Realist Theory of Science.  
-xii-  
1  
Introduction  
Relativism, anti-realism 
and causality  
The problem at the heart of this book is the recent 
resurgence of relativism. In the wake of the well-
deserved breakdown of positivism, it no longer seems 

possible to rationally assess competing knowledge 
claims. In the social sciences in particular, the 
fashionable post-positivist view is that any belief can 
be valid, depending upon one's perspective; that 
truth is simply a term of praise (or, alternately, a 
display of power); and that there is in fact no such 
thing as a reality that does not belong in quotation 
marks.  
Relativism is problematic for a number of reasons, 
not the least of which is its political implications. If all 
beliefs about the world are equally valid, then no 
claims may be challenged on cognitive, or epistemic, 
grounds. At best, relativism can therefore be 
expected to discourage critical analysis and exchange 
- for what is the point of attempts to persuade 
through argumentation, if all claims about the world 
are by definition equally valid? At worst, it implies 
that critical exchange ought to be abandoned in favor 
of the use of force and/or non-rational charismatic 
appeals. In saying this I do not mean to paint a rosy 
picture of politics as consisting merely - or even 
essentially - of rational exchange between well-
meaning public servants. It is worth responding to 
relativism not because ill-informed political leaders 
need only be enlightened, but because the 
widespread acceptance of false ideas plays a role in 
the perpetuation of unjust social relations.  
In the following chapters I shall defend the merits of 
a position called critical realism. I believe that critical 
realism offers us a way out of the current morass. 
Specifically, critical realism allows us to cast off the 
anti-realism about causality that has dominated 
Western philosophy since Hume, and to replace it 
with a viable, realist alternative. Realism about the 
causal relation prohibits relativism on ontological 
grounds. If the relationship between causes and their 
effects is one of natural necessity, then, regardless of 
one's perspective - and notwithstanding the limits of 
our knowledge - it cannot be the case that all claims 
about the world are equally valid.  

 
-1-  
Critical realism is not an epistemic counter to 
relativism. It does not include a satisfactory account 
of the concept of truth or of justification. However, by 
predisposing us to distinguish between knowledge 
claims, which are socially produced and provisional in 
nature, and the concept of truth, which, in my view, 
is a transcendental condition of possibility of inquiry 
itself, it points us in the right direction in this area as 
well.  
Two potential questions arise from this brief sketch. 
The first question has to do with method. If relativism 
has political consequences, why does it require a 
philosophical rather than an empirical response? The 
second question has to do with the focus on meta-
physics. Why, if one were worried about relativism, 
would one choose to focus one's attention on a 
theory such as critical realism, which is primarily an 
account of causality? The answer to the first question 
is that relativism about knowledge claims is not just 
pernicious, but false. An empirical study of the effects 
of relativism on political culture could, and I believe 
would, help to demonstrate the former - that 
relativism undermines the possibility of rational 
critique, and is therefore antithetical to a just society. 
Such a study would not, however - and could not - 
show that relativism is false. Indeed, if one were to 
handle the matter empirically, one would have to 
take great care not to implicitly endorse the relativist 
position, by suggesting that it is false precisely 
because it is pernicious. It is in the very nature of the 
case, then, that relativism must be addressed 
philosophically if one is to challenge it on cognitive 
grounds.  
But why should the concept of causality figure so 
prominently in such a response? What bearing does 
metaphysics in particular have on issues of 
justification and truth? The answer to this second 

 
question is that relativism presupposes anti-realism. 
In order for the claim that all knowledge claims are 
equally valid to itself be true, the world must be such 
that it can be described in all possible ways. 1 The 
view that this is so, that the world has no intrinsic 
structure, and that it can therefore be described in all 
possible ways, is the implicit ontology of 
contemporary relativism.  
Realism about causality turns out to be the most 
interesting way to counter such a position. As we 
shall see, proponents of what could be called a 
dispositional theory of causality hold that the 
relationship between cause and effect is best 
understood neither as a subjective expectation, as 
Hume thought, nor as a Category of the  
1 This holds even if one does not subscribe to a 
correspondence theory of truth. It is certainly 
consistent with both a coherence and a deflationary 
approach. And even proponents of epistemic or 
consensus theories of truth believe that warranted 
claims tell us something reliable about the world.  
-2-  
Understanding, as Kant believed, but rather as a real 
feature of the external world, grounded in the nature 
of the entities and processes to which it refers. 2 
Such an approach presupposes that the world has a 
structure of its own - that it is comprised of natural 
kinds, which do what they do in virtue of what they 
are, or perhaps are what they are in virtue of what 
they do. 3 If this view of causality is correct, then 
relativism may be ruled out on ontological grounds. 
Of course, ruling out relativism on ontological 
grounds is no substitute for a theory of truth, or of 
justification. However it is a significant move, as I 
shall try to show.  

The discussion to come is framed by these 
connections between politics and philosophy and 
between epistemology and metaphysics. In the end, 
my objective is to advance critical realism as an 
alternative to the relativism and attendant anti-
realism that have come to characterize the post-
positivist intellectual milieu. The main purpose of the 
present chapter is to provide a context for such an 
undertaking. I shall begin, therefore, by describing in 
more detail the conceptual development that worries 
me. I shall then turn to critical realism itself, setting 
out the basic rudiments of the position. Finally, I shall 
say a word about the kind of intervention that I want 
to make, and about what I do and do not hope to 
accomplish by it.  
Post-positivist 
perspectivism  
The phenomenon that concerns me is not reducible to 
the views of any one philosopher. While there are 
those whose thinking illustrates and/or has 
contributed to it, the phenomenon itself - which I 
shall call "post-positivist perspectivism" - is an 
overarching problematic, cutting across the social 
sciences and humanities. Emerging out of the 
breakdown of positivism, the problematic has to do 
with the limitations of our knowledge and of our 
thinking about knowledge.  
2 Brian Ellis espouses a theory that is similar to 
critical realism in many respects; he refers to the 
ontological core of his position as "dispositional 
realism." The formulation above is mine rather than 
Ellis's, but it is influenced by Ellis's work. See Brian 
Ellis, Scientific Essentialism, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2001.  
3 There are disagreements amongst philosophers 
who write on these issues regarding whether things 

 
do what they do because of what they are, or are 
what they are because of what they can do. I have 
tried to describe the position in a way that would be 
acceptable to both sides in this debate. For a useful 
discussion see Anjan Chakravartty, "The Dispositional 
Essentialist View of Properties and Laws," 
forthcoming in Philosophical Studies, December 2003. 
-3-  
More specifically, it involves the repudiation of the 
concept of truth as a universal norm, and a deep 
suspicion of ontological realism. Prominent figures 
who hold such views range from Rorty and Putnam to 
Foucault, Lyotard and Flax, from Kuhn and 
Feyerabend to Derrida. Notably, most of the thinkers 
I've mentioned do not believe themselves to be 
either relativists or idealists. Nonetheless, especially 
as their ideas have filtered through the academy and 
into segments of the culture at large, they have 
contributed to a growing consensus that the concept 
of truth tells us little more than that a given person 
or group of people for some non-cognitive reason 
prefers to believe that x. As I have said, I regard this 
situation to be significant politically.  
Jane Flax's piece "The End of Innocence" is an 
emblematic expression of the stance in question. 4 
Flax's view is that the concepts of truth and reality 
have no genuine denotative meaning. They are 
simply words that philosophers (and others) use in 
order to impose their wills on others. By using such 
terms, Flax says, people are able to make it seem as 
though they are pursuing an objective dictate - an 
"innocent truth" - when in fact what they are trying 
to do is to advance their interests. So-called "truth," 
she says, is an effect of discourse. Each discourse 
has its own rules about what constitutes a meaningful 
statement and about how to determine the truth-
value of given claims. "There is no way to test 
whether one story is closer to the truth than 

 
another," she says, "because there is no 
transcendental standpoint or mind unenmeshed in its 
own language and story." 5 What settles disputes is 
"prior agreement on rules, not the compelling power 
of objective truth." 6 In sum, "(a)ll knowledge is 
fictive and non-representational. As a product of the 
human mind, knowledge has no necessary relation to 
Truth or the Real." 7 Accordingly,  
(w)e should take responsibility for our 
desire … : what we really want is power 
in the world, not an innocent truth … 
Part of the purpose of claiming truth 
seems to be to compel agreement with 
our claim … We are often seeking a 
change in behavior or a win  
4 This paragraph is a modified version 
of a passage that appeared in Ruth 
Groff, "Reason Reconsidered: Political 
Education, Critical Theory and the 
Concept of Rational Critique", 
unpublished Master of Arts thesis, 
University of Toronto, 1994. The article 
in question is Jane Flax, "The End of 
Innocence," in Judith Butler and Joan W. 
Scott (eds), Feminists Theorize the 
Political, London: Routledge, 1992.  
5 Flax, "The End of Innocence," p. 454.  
6 Ibid.  
7 Ibid., p. 458.  
-4-  
for our side. If so, there may be more 
effective ways to attain agreement or 

produce change than to argue about 
truth. 8  
The presumed unity, stability and permanence of 
"reality," similarly, is an illusion created by Western 
philosophers, who have superimposed binary 
oppositions onto the actual "flux and heterogeneity of 
the human and physical worlds." 9  
A more nuanced version is put forward by Richard 
Rorty. 10 Rorty would have it that he has successfully 
opted out of debates over the concept of truth and 
the nature of reality. Citing Dewey, he holds that the 
very questions of whether or not our accepted beliefs 
are "really" true and of whether or not the things that 
we encounter "really" exist are entirely meaningless. 
They can only arise, he says, if one has already 
adopted a way of looking at the world in which there 
is reason to think that we are fundamentally 
detached from, and unable to connect with, our 
environment. As answers to questions that make no 
sense to ask, the epistemological and ontological 
positions taken by traditional philosophical disputants 
simply take us further afield. If we are absolutely 
determined to try to fix the value of our beliefs, Rorty 
says, we should ask not whether or not they 
correspond to something non-human, but whether or 
not they promote social solidarity.  
Rorty says that he cannot be charged with being a 
relativist because relativism, he says, is a theory of 
truth, and, as a pragmatist, he "does not have a 
theory of truth, much less a relativistic one." 11 There 
is a sense in which Rorty is right about this, though I 
don't think that he is right about why. To the extent 
that Rorty is a non-relativist, it is because he thinks 
that some beliefs - namely, "ours," as he puts it - are 
better than others. 12 As he says, "pragmatists 
should be ethnocentrists rather than relativists." 13 
However, this only gets him so far. While Rorty 
thinks that "our" beliefs are better, he does not think 

 
that they tell us anything more about "reality" than  
8 Ibid.  
9 Ibid.  
10 The following summary of Rorty's position is 
drawn largely though not exclusively from Richard 
Rorty, Objectivity, Relativism and Truth: Philosophical 
Papers, volume 1, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1991 and Richard Rorty, Philosophy and Social 
Hope, London: Penguin Books, 1999.  
11 Rorty, Objectivity, Relativism and Truth, p. 24.  
12 Ibid., p. 29 and p. 38.  
13 Richard Rorty, "Hilary Putnam and the Relativist 
Menace," in Truth and Progress: Philosophical Papers, 
vol. 3, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1998, 
p. 52.  
-5-  
do other beliefs. Our beliefs are better, but they are 
not better on epistemic grounds. They are better 
because they are the sorts of beliefs that people in 
societies with institutions such as ours are likely to 
have - which is to say (adding in the missing premise 
that our institutions are better) they are better on 
moral grounds. Rorty, of course, would reject the 
distinction that I have made between epistemic and 
moral justification. Nonetheless, it is important to be 
clear about what he does and does not mean when 
he says that some beliefs may be judged to be 
superior to others.  
Meanwhile, Rorty does have a theory of truth. The 
concept of truth, he tells us, functions as "a general 

term of commendation." 14 It does not describe a 
relationship between propositions (or statements, 
sentences or words, if one prefers) and that to which 
they refer. It is simply an accolade. Rorty may be 
uninterested in pursuing the conversation further, but 
I don't see that this renders his a non-theory. What is 
in fact striking about Rorty's theory of truth is the 
resemblance that it bears to emotivist theories of 
moral discourse. From the perspective of emotivism, 
moral claims are expressions of approval or 
disapproval on the part of a speaker - combined, in 
the view of some emotivists, with an injunction to 
others to agree with the speaker. Thus, as C. L. 
Stevenson argued, "x is morally good" means "I 
approve of x. Do so as well." 15 Rorty's position is 
that epistemic discourse is equally self-referential: to 
say that a proposition is true is to say that one 
approves of it, and that others ought to do so as well. 
Rorty also has an ontology, although admittedly he is 
careful to say that it doesn't tell us anything about 
what reality is "actually" like; it is just a belief that is 
useful to hold if one has certain objectives. "The 
pragmatist," he says,  
[differentiates] himself from the idealist. 
He agrees that there is such a thing as 
brute physical resistance - the pressure 
of light waves on Galileo's eyeball, or of 
the stone on Dr. Johnson's boot. 16  
However, he continues, such resistance is compatible 
with multiple, if not all possible, ways of describing it. 
This is because whatever it is  
14 Rorty, Objectivity, Relativism and Truth, p. 23.  
15 C. L. Stevenson, Ethics and Language, 1945, Ch. 
2, cited in Alasdair MacIntyre, After Virtue: A Study 
in Moral Theory, Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre 
Dame Press, 1981, p. 12.  

 
16 Rorty, Objectivity, Relativism and Truth, p. 81.  
-6-  
that exists has no internal characteristics - at least, 
not if one chooses to look at things in this way. Those 
things that we count as real are like numbers, Rorty 
says, "which are an admirable example of something 
which it is difficult to describe in essentialist 
language." 17 Rorty points to the number 17. 
Seventeen cannot be described except in terms of its 
relationships to other numbers - there is no "intrinsic 
seventeenness of 17," as he puts it. 18 "We anti-
essentialists," Rorty writes,  
… suggest that you think of all such 
objects as resembling numbers in the 
following respect: there is nothing to be 
known about them except an initially 
large, and forever expandable, web of 
relations to other objects. 19  
Rorty connects the idea that "there are, so to speak, 
relations all the way down, all the way up, and all the 
way out in every direction" to psychological 
nominalism. 20 "For psychological nominalists," he 
says,  
no description of an object is more a 
description of the "real", as opposed to 
the "apparent", object than any other, 
nor are any of them descriptions of, so 
to speak, the object's relation to itself - 
of its identity with its own essence. 21  
Thus, he writes, "as many facts are brought into the 
world as there are languages for describing [a] causal 
transaction." 22 Any reference to "unmediated causal 

 
forces," he concludes, is "pointless." 23  
It is worth noting that for both Flax and Rorty a 
correspondence approach to the concept of truth and 
a commitment to ontological realism are positions 
that proponents take for large-scale ethical and/or 
religious reasons. The directive from both is that we 
grow up, and be done with the need for 
philosophically grounded moral certitude. While I am 
sympathetic to such an account, I want to challenge 
it as a way of framing the issues at hand. A passing 
glance at the history of philosophy shows that a 
correspondence approach to truth, ontological realism 
and moral absolutism do not always line up in a given 
thinker's work. Aristotle, for example, was a 
proponent  
17 Rorty, Philosophy and Social Hope, p. 52.  
18 Ibid., p. 53.  
19 Ibid.  
20 Ibid., pp. 53-54.  
21 Ibid., p. 54.  
22 Rorty, Objectivity, Relativism and Truth, p. 81.  
23 Ibid.  
-7-  
of the first two positions but not of the third. Kant is 
ambiguous on the first, opposed to what he calls 
"transcendental" versions of the second and in strong 
support of the third. The paradigmatic logical 
positivist A. J. Ayer, who thought that scientific 
knowledge claims could be mapped onto purely 

empirical sense-data, held that moral claims were 
literally meaningless.  
Rorty might be expected to reply that where we see a 
commitment to the concepts of truth and reality on 
the one hand, combined with moral heterodoxy on 
the other, we have simply found the conditions that 
lead religious needs to be displaced onto 
epistemology and metaphysics. Precisely insofar as 
our moral views no longer seem to be objectively 
anchored, we turn to scientific "facts" to tell us our 
place in the universe. As for the Aristotelian case, he 
might say, there is a definite and knowable Good for 
human beings within Aristotle's philosophy, even if 
particular moral judgments can only be as sure as 
their object permits. And Kant would have it that we 
make contact with a noumenal realm via practical 
reason.  
In fact Rorty may be right, in the end, to think that 
the history of Western philosophy is one of religious 
desire - or, as he would put it, to say that the story 
can be told that way to productive effect. Even so, it 
doesn't follow that moral certitude is the only 
relevant variable in the present discussion. My own 
concern, for example, is not with the ambiguity of 
ethical norms. What I care about is our capacity to 
challenge political-economic knowledge claims on 
epistemic grounds. I believe that even if we renounce 
all appeal to moral absolutes, we still need to be able 
to critically assess the front-page news. While it is 
important to ask whose interests are served by a 
given presentation of events, it is also important to 
be able to ask whether or not an alleged event 
actually occurred. The whole notion of ideology 
critique has for so long been associated with the 
defense of a full-blown and often dogmatically held 
"grand narrative," to use Lyotard's term, that there is 
a tendency to discount the very real problem of 
falsehood. From my perspective, then, the stakes are 
less grandiose than Flax and Rorty would have it, but 
they are still very high. The problem with post-
positivist perspectivism is not that it leaves us on our 

 
own to work out for ourselves what to believe about 
the world. The problem is that it leaves us without 
any way to talk seriously about deception and error.  
As I said at the outset, my intention is to both assess 
and defend an alternative to post-positivist 
perspectivism - an alternative that I believe 
represents a more complete break with positivism 
than do the various post-positivist positions on offer. 
The approach that I want to consider is called critical 
realism. In the chapters to come I shall be concerned 
to see whether or not, and if so to what extent and in 
what  
-8-  
manner, critical realism allows us to meet the 
challenges of relativism and anti-realism posed by 
post-positivism. Since I do not subscribe to the view 
that theory choice - even between philosophical 
accounts - is a non-cognitive process, I cannot simply 
announce my positive feeling about critical realism, 
and enjoin others to share the sentiment. Instead I 
will have to try to show that the approach that I 
support is compelling on cognitive grounds. Let me 
begin with an overview of the position itself.  
Critical realism  
The first time a man saw the 
communication of motion by impulse, as 
by the shock of two billiard balls, he 
could not pronounce that the one event 
was connected, but only that it was 
conjoined with the other. After he has 
observed several instances of this 
nature, he then pronounces them to be 
connected. What alteration has 
happened to give rise to this new idea of 

connection? Nothing but that he now 
feels these events to be connected in his 
imagination, and can readily foretell the 
existence of one from the appearance of 
the other.  
(David Hume) 24 
 
When we think of causality and action 
we look to such images as a springtime 
plant forcing its way upwards towards 
the light, as the pulsing, surging 
movement of the protoplasm within an 
amoeba, of a flash of radiation as a 
positron and an electron meet, of the 
enormous flux of electromagnetic 
radiation from a star, of the mobility 
and imaginative control of his own 
actions exercised by a human being, of 
the potent configuration of a magnetic 
field. For us, a billiard table is relevant 
to philosophy only in so far as it is 
conceived of as surrounded by the 
players, and embedded within a 
gravitational field.  
(Rom Harré and E. H. Madden) 25 
 
The principle of causation remains a 
wishful conviction.  
(M. J. Garcia-Encinas) 26 
 
24 David Hume, An Inquiry Concerning Human 
Understanding, in On Human Nature and the 
Understanding (ed. Antony Flew), New York: Collier 
Books, 1962, p. 88.  
25 R. Harré and E. H. Madden, Causal Powers: A 
Theory of Natural Necessity, Totowa, NJ: Rowman 
and Littlefield, 1975, p. 7.  

 
26 M. J. Garcia-Encinas, "Sullivan on the Principle 
that Everything Has a Cause," in Dialogue: Canadian 
Philosophical Review, XLI(3), Summer 2002, p. 435.  
-9-  
The term critical realism is associated with the earlier 
work of Roy Bhaskar. Bhaskar's first book, entitled A 
Realist Theory of Science (hereafter RTS), was 
published in 1975. 27 In it he defended a position 
that he called transcendental realism. RTS was 
followed in 1979 by The Possibility of Naturalism 
(hereafter PON). 28 In PON, Bhaskar argued for an 
extension of transcendental realism to the social 
sciences. The stance that he took there he dubbed 
critical naturalism. Readers then combined the two 
terms, producing the name critical realism. With the 
publication of Dialectic: The Pulse of Freedom in 
1993, 29 critical realism was transformed into what 
Bhaskar then called dialectical critical realism. By 
2000, Bhaskar began to refer to his position as 
transcendental dialectical critical realism. Recently he 
has adopted the phrase "philosophy of meta-reality" 
to characterize the latest developments in his 
thinking. I am interested in Bhaskar's early work - 
which is to say critical realism - and also in his theory 
of truth, which is contained in Dialectic: The Pulse of 
Freedom and Plato, Etc.30 When I am referring to 
Bhaskar's early position as a whole, I shall use the 
term critical realism. When I am talking specifically 
about the core claims of either RTS or PON, I shall 
use the terms transcendental realism and critical 
naturalism respectively.  
Critical realism can be attached to three theses: 
ontological realism, epistemological relativism and 
judgmental rationality. 31 In Bhaskar's hands, 
ontological realism is the general view (a) that there 
are processes in the natural world that occur (and 
entities that exist) independently of human 

 
intervention, and (b) that the social world is neither 
voluntaristically produced by, nor reducible to, the 
thoughts or actions of individuals. With respect to 
natural and social phenomena alike, Bhaskar's 
realism is linked to the concept of ontological 
stratification, or depth. Reality is said to be stratified 
in the sense that manifest events are seen as being 
the effects of underlying causal mechanisms. Causal 
mechanisms are conceived as entities 32 that have  
27 Roy Bhaskar, A Realist Theory of Science, Sussex: 
The Harvester Press Limited, 1978 (first published 
1975).  
28 Roy Bhaskar, The Possibility of Naturalism: A 
Philosophical Critique of the Contemporary Human 
Sciences, 3rd edition, London: Routledge, 1998, first 
published in 1979 by The Harvester Press.  
29 Roy Bhaskar, Dialectic: The Pulse of Freedom, 
London: Verso, 1993.  
30 Roy Bhaskar, Plato, Etc.: The Problems of 
Philosophy and their Solution, London: Verso, 1994.  
31 Roy Bhaskar, Scientific Realism and Human 
Emancipation, London: Verso, 1986, p. 24.  
32 In PON Bhaskar claims that relationships and 
reasons alike, and not just entities, are causally 
efficacious. As I argue in Chapter 5, I believe that 
Bhaskar here shifts from talking about efficient cause 
to talking about formal and final cause.  
-10-  
the power to effect change (or sometimes simply as 
being such powers). Further, they are thought to 
bear (or be) such powers essentially. Both the 

powers and the entities that bear them are held to be 
real, in virtue of being potentially - even when not 
actually - causally efficacious, but not necessarily to 
be empirically accessible. Reality, from this 
perspective, is regarded as being of (as yet) 
indeterminate depth: any given causal mechanism 
itself is assumed to itself be the product of an 
underlying causal process.  
These are fairly sweeping claims, though Bhaskar 
does put forward arguments in their support. I shall 
do my best to reconstruct Bhaskar's reasoning, but 
before doing so let me note that there are a number 
of different things that he would have us accept as 
real. Specifically, Bhaskar can be seen to be 
advancing realism about (1) entities of various sorts, 
(2) processes of certain sorts, namely, causal ones, 
(3) powers, by which Bhaskar means capacities for 
behavior of certain sorts, and (4) causality itself. (In 
PON, social relations and reasons are added to the 
list.) I think that Bhaskar is perhaps not careful 
enough in differentiating between these assertions. 
Nonetheless, outside of a small circle of professional 
metaphysicians and philosophers of science, debates 
over realism tend to be about entities. It is one of the 
valuable features of critical realism, in my view, that 
it ultimately shifts the ontological focus away from 
entities and onto processes, powers and causality 
itself.  
The linchpin of Bhaskar's argument for ontological 
realism in relation to the natural world is an 
argument concerning experimentation. Experiments, 
Bhaskar says, are at odds with the dominant 
conception of what a causal law is - and, by 
extension, with the dominant philosophical 
conception of what causality is. The widely accepted 
understanding of causal laws is fundamentally 
Humean: a causal law is a general statement based 
on the perceived constant conjunction of two events. 
Causality itself, meanwhile, is nothing other than an 
expectation that such regularities will persist over 
time. From this perspective, the laws of nature are 

 
fundamentally contingent. 33 In principle, the 
"causal" relationships between phenomena could be 
entirely different than they are at present. 34 
Kantians modify the Humean position by saying that 
the very fact that phenomena  
33 My understanding of this aspect of the Humean 
account comes from Ellis, Scientific Essentialism. See 
especially, Chapters 1, 3, 6, 7 and 8.  
34 The emphasis on contingency comes from Ellis. 
Bhaskar, by contrast, is more concerned to show that 
the only way that the approach is intelligible is if 
regularity determinism in the context of a closed 
system fills in, as it were, for a concept of natural 
necessity in open systems.  
-11-  
appear causally related at all is a necessary feature 
of our experience of them. But, as Bhaskar maintains 
- and as I shall argue in more detail in Chapter 2 - 
Kant did not break with Hume with respect to the 
idea that causal necessity does not inhere in the 
external world.  
Bhaskar's claim is that the practice of natural 
scientific experimentation presupposes exactly what 
the Humean position denies: the existence of causal 
powers, conceived in naturalistic terms, which 
account for the relationship of causal necessity. 
Scientific experiments, Bhaskar reminds us, consist 
of the artificial generation of regularities. The idea is 
that by bringing about a particular constant 
conjunction of events in an artificial environment - 
one in which the number of causal variables is limited 
- we will find out something about what the world is 
like outside such an environment. This belief, 
however - that experiments can tell us something 
about what the world is like outside the experimental 

setting - presupposes that while scientists do (and in 
general must) actively induce regularities, they do 
not thereby produce the causes of such regularities. 
35 If such a presupposition were not in place, and 
instead experimenters were thought to produce not 
just regular conjunctions but the laws governing such 
conjunctions, then such laws could not be expected 
to hold outside experimental settings. To quote 
Bhaskar, "just because the experimenter is a causal 
agent of the sequence of events, there must be an 
ontological distinction between the sequence he 
generates and the causal law it enables him to 
identify. Any other conclusion renders experimental 
activity pointless." 36 And again:  
[I]t lies within the power of every 
reasonably intelligent schoolboy or 
moderately clumsy research worker to 
upset the results of even the best 
designed experiment, but we do not 
thereby suppose they have the power to 
overturn the laws of nature. I can quite 
easily affect any sequence of events 
designed to test say Coulomb's or Guy-
Lussac's law, but I have no more power 
over the relationship the laws describe 
than the men who discovered them had. 
37  
The argument, then, is that if experiments are what 
we think they are, then it must be that causal laws 
refer to something other than regularities.  
A proponent of the view that laws refer to regularities 
might be expected to object that Bhaskar has 
misconceived the nature of  
35 Thanks to Hugh Lacey for helping to clarify my 
understanding of this point.  
36 Bhaskar, RTS, p. 54.  

 
37 Ibid., p. 34.  
-12-  
experiments. Experimenters do not induce 
regularities, he or she would say. Rather, they simply 
create environments in which those regularities that 
occur naturally can be observed without the 
distraction of irrelevant variables. There is no 
problem in explaining how the results of experiments 
can be generalized, because in a real sense there is 
nothing to be generalized: regularities do exist 
outside experimental settings; we just can't see them 
clearly. The response to this is that it is not, in fact, a 
difficult matter to determine whether or not 
scientifically significant regularities occur 
spontaneously in non-artificial environments. 
Patently, they don't - which is why experiments are 
required. 38  
The attempt to protect the thesis of regularity 
determinism, as Bhaskar calls it, leads its proponents 
toward either or both of two regresses, he says. 
Either they have to say that the system in question 
does not take in enough variables, or they have to 
say that the components of the system have not 
been described in basic (i.e., atomistic) enough 
terms. In the former case, "a full causal statement 
would seem to entail a complete state-description (or 
a complete history) of the world." 39 In the latter 
case, "a causal statement entails a complete 
reduction of things into their presumed atomistic 
components (or their original conditions)." 40 Neither 
of these alternatives is satisfactory, Bhaskar 
contends. Moreover, neither allows us to make 
statements of the sort: "Event B did not follow event 
A because thing x did not exercise its power to cause 
B." 41 There is, however, no need for us to defend at 
all costs a theory of causal laws that requires a 
dogmatic commitment to the idea that the natural 

 
world is a closed system. Instead, says Bhaskar, we 
can conceive of causal laws as referring to the 
powers that entities have (and sometimes just are) 
to bring about precisely those patterns of events that 
can be observed in experimental settings. Unlike 
regularities, the presence of dispositional capacities 
does not presuppose that the operational context is a 
closed system.  
Bhaskar's concept of a generative mechanism is very 
close to that of Rom Harré (1975), whose book 
Causal Powers: A Theory of Natural Necessity (co-
written with E. H. Madden) appeared in print in the 
same year as RTS, and whose work Bhaskar 
acknowledges as  
38 Thanks to Hugh Lacey for this point.  
39 Bhaskar, RTS, p. 77.  
40 Ibid.  
41 As Bhaskar puts it, the regularity determinist 
"cannot allow that there is a sense to a statement 
about what an individual can do independently of 
whether or not it will do it." Bhaskar, RTS, p. 78.  
-13-  
having significantly influenced his thinking in RTS. 42 
Harré and Madden defended a realist approach to 
causality in which causal relationships were seen to 
be a matter of "powerful particulars" behaving as 
they must, given what they they are. 43 Their 
position was that the world is made up of "causally 
potent thing[s]" 44 - "forceful objects" 45 that act as 
causal agents in that their behavior effects change in 
other objects. How an object will behave under given 
conditions, they said, is determined by what it is, i.e., 

by those properties that it holds essentially. It follows 
from this that an object cannot act in a manner that 
is at odds with what it is. The position that they were 
defending, Harré and Madden noted, involves the 
concept of natural kinds. It also involves a recovery 
of the notion of real as opposed to nominal essences. 
Harré and Madden argued that there is nothing 
unscientific or occult about such an ontology. While 
the metaphysics is radically anti-Humean (and at 
base non-Cartesian), there is no suggestion that 
objects are fulfilling inner purposes or, except in the 
case of sentient creatures, acting intentionally. Nor is 
there any suggestion that knowledge of essential 
properties is to be gained in a mysterious or non-
empirical way. Harré and Madden pointed to the 
atomic structure of copper as an example of a real 
essence.  
In RTS, Bhaskar follows Harré and Madden in 
connecting generative mechanisms - and by 
extension causal laws and causality itself - to the 
behavior of entities. 46 For example, he writes 
"reference to causal laws involves centrally reference 
to causal agents; that is, to things endowed with 
causal powers." 47 And even more to the point: "only 
things and materials and people have 'powers.'" 48 
There is, however, a discernible difference of 
emphasis between Bhaskar and Harré and Madden. 
Specifically, Bhaskar is more concerned with the 
powers of things than with things as such. Thus while 
for Harré and  
42 Roy Bhaskar and Tony Lawson, "Introduction: 
Basic Texts and Developments," in Margaret Archer, 
Roy Bhaskar, Andrew Collier, Tony Lawson and Alan 
Norrie (eds), Critical Realism: Essential Readings, 
London: Routledge, 1998, p. 6.  
43 R. Harré and E. H. Madden, Causal Powers, p. 5.  
44 Ibid., p. 48.  

 
45 Ibid., p. 57.  
46 Harré and Madden argue that causality is not a 
"thing," and that to think of it as such is simply to 
reify the capacities of powerful particulars. "There are 
not both things and causality in nature, but causally 
active things," they write (Harré and Madden, Causal 
Powers, p. 57). My feeling is that it is legitimate to 
talk about causality as such, even if one defines it as 
the display of powers that are borne by a particular.  
47 Bhaskar, RTS, p. 49.  
48 Ibid., p. 78.  
-14-  
Madden it is the concept of a powerful particular that 
is central, for Bhaskar it is the concept of a power 
itself (and ultimately the concept of a tendency for a 
power to be expressed) that is the analytic focus. 
Bhaskar's position also differs from that of Harré and 
Madden in that Harré and Madden vigorously 
maintain that we in fact experience causal powers 
directly - in, for example, the feel of the wind or the 
heat of the flame. 49 Bhaskar seems to think that this 
is sometimes so, 50 but emphasizes both that causal 
powers exist whether they are perceived or not, and 
that perception of them is not a criterion of their 
existence. Like Harré and Madden, however, 
Bhaskar's view is that causal laws refer ultimately to 
the tendencies that things have to behave in certain 
ways - by which he means not that laws express the 
statistical likelihood of the occurrence of a pattern of 
events, but rather that they describe "potentialities 
which may be exercised or as it were 'in play' without 
being realized or manifest in any particular outcome." 
51  

Bhaskar also agrees with Harré and Madden that 
things behave the way that they do because of what 
they are. As Harré and Madden observe, such a view 
commits one to the existence of natural kinds, as well 
as to the existence of real rather than nominal 
essences. As will be discussed in more detail in 
Chapter 3, the language of real and nominal essences 
comes from Locke. The term real essence refers to 
the internal, physical constitution of a thing. The 
term nominal essence, by contrast, refers to those 
manifest features of a thing that we regard as 
indispensable to our concept of it. Locke thought that 
we could not know the internal constitutions of 
things, and that therefore any sorting of objects into 
kinds is necessarily done on the basis of their 
nominal essences. For Bhaskar, as for Harré and 
Madden, there is no reason to think that we cannot 
gain fallible knowledge of the internal constitution of 
objects in our world - and even less reason to think 
that things do not have internal constitutions.  
Bhaskar agrees with Harré and Madden that a thing 
cannot behave in a way that is contrary to its nature. 
A thing of one kind can change into a thing of 
another kind, but it cannot remain a thing of a given 
kind and yet behave in a way that is at odds with the 
essence of things of that kind. Harré and Madden 
express the point as follows:  
It is physically impossible for a 
substance to act or react incompatibly 
with its own nature. It is not impossible 
for an object or  
49 Harré and Madden, Causal Powers, 
pp. 49-58.  
50 See RTS, p. 90.  
51 Bhaskar, RTS, p. 50.  

 
-15-  
sample to act and react differently at 
one time rather than other. But in 
general it cannot do so under the same 
circumambient conditions and be 
deemed to have remained the same 
substance. In short, the relation 
between what a thing is and what it is 
capable of doing and undergoing is 
naturally necessary. 52  
Bhaskar, similarly, writes:  
a thing must tend to act the way it does 
if it is to be the kind of thing it is. If a 
thing is a stick of gelignite it must 
explode if certain conditions materialize. 
Since anything that did not explode in 
those circumstances would not be a 
stick of gelignite but some other 
substance. 53  
I don't know that such a claim adds anything to the 
concept of a natural kind, but it underscores the 
ontological distance between transcendental realism 
and the Humean metaphysic, as Brian Ellis, another 
proponent of this basic approach, has called it. 54 
From the more familiar Humean perspective, there is 
nothing at all necessary about the way that things 
presently behave. As Ellis observes, the Humean view 
is that a thing's behavior is determined not by what it 
is, but rather by the patterns of regularity that obtain 
in the world. What those patterns happen to be is 
purely contingent, says the Humean (this because it 
is logically permissible to assume that a regularity 
that holds at present will no longer hold five minutes 
from now). 55 Thus it is entirely possible, from the 
Humean perspective, that something could act in a 
way that it has never acted before, i.e., in a way that 

 
is contrary to its purported "nature."  
It may be useful at this stage to return to the group 
of ontological commitments that I identified at the 
outset. Critical realism, I said, involves realism about 
entities, processes, powers and, I want to say, 
causality itself. It also involves claims for the 
existence of natural kinds and of real essences, 
meaning that it involves the idea that the natural 
world has an intrinsic structure of its own, 
ontologically independent of our experience of it. 
Bhaskar expresses these commitments via two 
different sets of categories, upon which he relies 
fairly heavily, which we are now in a position to 
appreciate.  
The first set of categories, related to the concept of 
ontological depth mentioned earlier, is the more 
elaborate of the two. It is a  
52 Harré and Madden, Causal Powers p. 14.  
53 Bhaskar, RTS, p. 214.  
54 Ellis, Scientific Essentialism, p. 47.  
55 Ibid., and passim.  
-16-  
matrix, comprised along one axis of the categories of 
"mechanisms," "events" and "experiences," and along 
the other of the categories of "the domain of the 
Real," "the domain of the Actual" and "the domain of 
the Empirical." The matrix is a way of expressing the 
idea that mechanisms do not always produce the 
events that they have the power to bring about, and 
that, of those events that do occur, not all are 
experienced by a subject. (Bhaskar depicts this 

symbolically as dr> da> de. 56)  
Table 1  
The broadly Humean approach to causality is flawed, 
Bhaskar maintains, because by identifying laws with 
observed regularities, its proponents equate the 
operation of causal mechanisms with the experience 
of regular sequences of events. Such an equation is 
problematic in several ways. It is questionable 
ontologically because it amounts to a collapse of the 
domains of the real and the actual into the domain of 
the empirical, such that it is only experiences of 
events (or, if we are feeling ontologically generous, 
events, though only those that have been 
experienced) that are thought to exist. It is 
questionable both epistemologically and sociologically 
because it obscures the "work" of experimental 
science, as Bhaskar puts it - which is precisely to 
create artificially closed settings in which mechanisms 
do produce constant conjunctions, which are indeed 
experienced by trained subjects - making it seem as 
though laws and "facts" exist ready-made, waiting to 
be read off from our experience of the world.  
The second set of categories that Bhaskar introduces 
is that of the "intransitive" and "transitive objects of 
Domain 
of real  
Domain 
of 
actual  
Domain 
of 
empirical 
Mechanisms  
•  
Events  
•  
•  
Experiences  
•  
•  
•  
© Copyright Roy 
Bhaskar, 1975, 1978, 
The Harvester Press 
Limited, reprinted by 
permission of Pearson 
Education Limited.  

 
science." The intransitive object of science is defined 
as "the real things and structures, mechanisms and 
processes, events and possibilities of the world … 
[not] in any way dependent on our knowledge, let 
alone perception, of them." 57 It is "the unchanging 
real objects that exist outside of the  
56 Bhaskar, RTS, p. 56.  
57 Ibid., p. 22.  
-17-  
scientific process." 58 Or again, as Bhaskar puts it in 
the opening paragraph of RTS,  
knowledge is "of" things which are not 
produced by men at all: the specific 
gravity of mercury, the process of 
electrolysis, the mechanism of light 
propagation. None of these "objects of 
knowledge" depend upon human 
activity. If men ceased to exist, sound 
would continue to travel and heavy 
bodies fall to the earth in exactly the 
same way, though ex hypothesi there 
would be no-one to know it. 59  
The transitive object of science, by contrast, is 
defined as "the changing cognitive objects that are 
produced within science as a function of scientific 
practice." 60 It may be thought of as the accumulated 
intellectual resources, upon which and with which 
natural scientists work - analogous in this respect to 
Althusser's Generalities. Unlike the intransitive 
object, the transitive object of science is entirely 
conceptual in nature: "[k]nowledge of B is produced 
by means of knowledge of A, but both items of 
knowledge exist only in thought," Bhaskar writes. 61  

The relationship between the intransitive and 
transitive objects of science is often misconceived, 
according to Bhaskar. Two common errors are often 
made. The first Bhaskar calls the "epistemic fallacy"; 
the second he terms the "ontic fallacy." The epistemic 
fallacy is "the view that statements about being can 
be reduced to or analyzed in terms of statements 
about knowledge; i.e., that ontological questions can 
always be transposed into epistemological terms." 62 
The ontic fallacy, meanwhile, is "the definition or 
assumption of the compulsive determination of 
knowledge by being." 63 Someone who commits the 
epistemic fallacy implicitly equates the intransitive 
and transitive objects of science by suggesting that 
statements about the former are equivalent to 
statements about the latter. Someone who commits 
the ontic fallacy collapses the transitive object of 
science into the intransitive object by suggesting that 
the former is directly given, or in some sense 
automatically generated, by the latter. As mistakes in 
reasoning,  
58 Roy Bhaskar, Reclaiming Reality: A Critical 
Introduction to Contemporary Philosophy, London: 
Verso, 1989, p. 26.  
59 Bhaskar, RTS, p. 21.  
60 Bhaskar, Reclaiming Reality, p. 27.  
61 Bhaskar, RTS, p. 23.  
62 Ibid., p. 36.  
63 Roy Bhaskar, Plato, Etc.: The Problems of 
Philosophy and their Resolution, London: Verso, 
1994, p. 253.  
-18-  

 
both the epistemic and the ontic fallacies occur within 
the transitive dimension.  
The category of the transitive object of science leads 
to the second basic thesis of critical realism, a 
principle that Bhaskar calls epistemological 
relativism. Bhaskar uses the terminology in a non-
standard way. By epistemological relativism he 
means not that the truth-value of propositions is 
relative to a given speaker or audience, but rather 
that theories themselves are ontologically "relative" 
to human subjectivity in a way that causal 
mechanisms are not. Knowledge claims, he 
maintains, are socio-historical artifacts; they are 
produced rather than discovered, and they change 
over time. Bhaskar takes it that with the thesis of 
epistemological relativism he has avoided two 
possible mistakes. The first is the ontic fallacy - 
thinking that knowledge claims are simply given to us 
by the world. The second is to view knowledge as 
being constructed, but as being constructed 
spontaneously, without reference to existing beliefs 
and social conditions. Knowledge production, Bhaskar 
says, is best thought of not as a process of creation 
ex nihilo, but rather as a process whereby existing 
ideas are transformed into new ones.  
Several different claims are associated with the thesis 
of epistemological relativism. 64 The first of these is 
that knowledge must be understood to be fallible. 
This is an important claim (though it is not unique to 
Bhaskar), as it runs counter to the idea that what we 
call knowledge is by definition both justified and true. 
Admittedly, I am perhaps inclined to make more of 
this point than might Bhaskar. As a proponent of the 
correspondence theory of truth, I distinguish between 
justification and truth. In saying that we are justified 
in believing a claim to be true, I believe that we are 
saying something other than that it is in fact true. 
Dropping "true" from the definition of knowledge as 
"justified, true belief" is therefore a significant step, 

 
in my view. Bhaskar, by contrast, endorses an 
epistemic, or consensus, theory of truth in RTS. For a 
consensus theorist, to say that a belief is true just is 
to say that we are justified in believing it to be true. 
There is in a sense no need, from such a perspective, 
to specify that knowledge is both justified and true. 
In either case, however, the implication of adopting a 
fallibilist view of knowledge is that there can be no 
difference in kind between knowledge and well-
supported-beliefs-that-might-be-false. In his later 
work, Bhaskar proposes a theory of truth in which 
the concept is taken to designate real essences. As I  
64 I don't believe that the claims in question are 
actually entailed by the thesis of epistemological 
relativism, although Bhaskar sometimes writes as 
though they are.  
-19-  
argue in Chapter 4, this move has the effect of 
weakening the commitment to fallibilism associated 
with the principle of epistemic relativism as Bhaskar 
construes it.  
The second claim associated with the thesis of 
epistemological relativism is that scientific inquiry is 
an active process, and one that is inherently social. 
Knowledge production involves work of two different 
kinds, says Bhaskar. In the case of the natural 
sciences, it involves physical intervention in the world 
via experimentation (Bhaskar does not regard 
experimentation in the social sciences as being 
legitimately possible, and so does not discuss the 
type of intervention that this involves); in all cases, it 
involves the conceptual transformation of previously 
held ideas. Such a view of knowledge production has 
a bearing on how one thinks of regularities, how one 
thinks of facts and how one thinks of theories. 
Regularities are understood to be events that are 

brought about by researchers, in the context of an 
ongoing, highly institutionalized social practice. Facts, 
in turn, are defined as theoretically informed 
experiences of such events. Theories, finally, are held 
to be transformations of earlier theories, rather than 
snapshots of sense data. As already noted, Bhaskar 
argues that the positivist philosophy of science masks 
all of this labor. With respect to experiments, both 
the occurrence and the experience of artificially 
produced regularities are naturalized, such that - as 
we have seen - the world is thought to be a naturally 
closed system, and what are in reality highly 
mediated experiences are taken to be passive 
registrations of sensory input. (At the same time, 
there is what might be called a "de-naturalization" of 
causality itself.) With respect to the development of 
scientific explanations, meanwhile, theories are 
presumed to be statements of scientists' purportedly 
unmediated experience of the world.  
Finally, epistemological relativism is associated with 
the view that scientists' descriptions of the world are 
always theoretically informed (a position that is 
implicit in the view that the cognitive task undertaken 
by scientists is to use concepts to produce other 
concepts). Unlike Hilary Putnam, for example, whose 
treatment of these issues I shall discuss at length in 
Chapter 3, Bhaskar draws no special ontological or 
epistemological conclusions from this idea. For 
Putnam, the fact that we know the world under some 
theoretical description means that we cannot have 
knowledge of the world "itself." Bhaskar agrees that 
our cognitive encounter with the world is mediated by 
concepts. From a critical realist perspective, however, 
this does not imply that we have no cognitive access 
to the world "itself" - let alone that the world itself 
has no form. Rather, it tells us only that the 
knowledge of the world that we do gain is inherently 
theoretical. That the whole notion of "sense-data" is 
indefensible tells us  
-20-  

 
something important about the deficiencies of 
positivism, but it places neither ontological conditions 
on the world nor epistemic limits upon us.  
The third thesis of critical realism is what Bhaskar 
refers to as rationality at the level of judgment. The 
claim here is that even though scientific knowledge is 
both fallible and socially grounded, the choice 
between competing scientific theories is nonetheless 
a rational one. That rational deliberation over rival 
theories is possible, Bhaskar says, is established by 
the very fact that they are rivals. Truly 
incommensurable theories or paradigms would in a 
real sense not be alternatives in the way that 
competing explanations in the history of science have 
been. Theory selection is rational in that scientists 
make reference to existing knowledge in their 
collective effort to determine the relative merits of a 
given approach. The fact that they cannot compare a 
theory to unmediated sensory experience does not 
mean that there is no way to assess its explanatory 
power, as Bhaskar puts it, or that scientific change is 
arbitrary and non-rational. As argued in Chapter 4, 
my own view is that the issues of justification and of 
the meaning of the concept of truth are not well 
theorized in Bhaskar's work. With respect to 
justification, the notion of explanatory power is a 
good one. However there is need for further 
elaboration. With respect to the concept of truth, I do 
not believe that it is possible for a realist to 
successfully side-step the correspondence theory.  
Each of the theses identified here is explored in the 
chapters to come, though I pay more attention to the 
concepts of causality and truth than I do to the claim 
that knowledge is a social product and/or that facts 
are theory dependent. In Chapter 2, I focus almost 
entirely on the thesis of ontological realism. My aim 
there is to show that the conception of causality 
defended by Bhaskar and others presents a viable 
alternative to the anti-naturalist rejoinder to Hume 
put forward by Kant. In Chapter 3, meanwhile, I 

 
continue the discussion of causality begun in Chapter 
2, and also consider the relationship between 
ontological realism and epistemological relativism. I 
pursue these issues through an analysis of Hilary 
Putnam's case for what he calls "internal realism." In 
Chapter 4, I consider Bhaskar's theory of truth. I 
argue there that the concept of "alethic truth," as he 
terms it, is a misnomer for the notion of a real 
essence, and that the identification of truth with 
being is not helpful. In Chapter 5, I return to the 
issue of ontological realism by considering Bhaskar's 
extension of transcendental realism to the social 
sciences and psychology. There I address the 
question of whether or not social structures may be 
regarded as being causal bearers, analogous to 
generative mechanisms in nature. I address the 
question via the work of Rom Harré and Charles 
Varela, and also (at greater length) through the work 
of  
-21-  
Brian Ellis, a fellow "scientific essentialist," as he puts 
it. Chapter 5 also contains a discussion of Bhaskar's 
conception of individual agency. Finally, I conclude in 
Chapter 6 by reflecting upon the significance of 
critical realism relative to the challenges posed by 
post-positivist perspectivism.  
Rationale  
As I've said, my objective is to defend an alternative 
to positivism that does not lead to the relativism and 
anti-realism characteristic of post-positivism. I have 
approached the task primarily by engaging with a set 
of interlocutors who cannot (or at least ought not) be 
easily dismissed by critical realists: Kant, Hilary 
Putnam, Brian Ellis, Charles Taylor. By employing 
such a strategy I may run the risk of appearing not to 

have subjected critical realism to rigorous enough of 
a test: why not choose Derrida, or Judith Butler, or 
even Rorty? In some ways, however, it is more 
difficult - and it is certainly at least as productive - to 
engage with those with whom there is some amount 
of common ground than with those with whom there 
is none. In any case, I have introduced into the 
conversation positions that I believe must be taken 
seriously. I should note that in Chapter 4 there is no 
outside interlocutor as there is in the other chapters. 
While I draw there upon work by William Alston, I 
treat Alston's position as a point of reference in 
characterizing my own views, rather than as a direct 
counter to an aspect of critical realism.  
Roy Bhaskar is neither the first nor the only 
proponent of the kind of approach that interests me. 
Harré and Madden's Causal Powers and Brian Ellis's 
more recent Scientific Essentialism are equally 
compelling statements of the general position as A 
Realist Theory of Science. I have nonetheless chosen 
to focus on Bhaskar. I have done so for several 
reasons. The first is that Bhaskar is the only one of 
the three who applies his theory of causality to social 
structures. Harré holds that in the social realm it is 
only individual persons who have causal efficacy. For 
Ellis, meanwhile, the deciding factor is whether or not 
an entity falls into a natural kind that can be said to 
have an essence. Ellis is ambivalent about whether or 
not individuals meet this criterion, but is adamant 
that social structures do not. With slight amendment, 
I think that Bhaskar's position is defensible. The 
second reason for which I have focused on Bhaskar is 
that, of the three, he has had the widest appeal. 
While he is perhaps less well known than the others 
in professional philosophical circles, he has a broader 
following across the social sciences - and even into 
the humanities - than does either Harré or Ellis. 
There is now an International Association for Critical 
Realism, an annual, international  
-22-  

 
conference on critical realism and an academic 
Journal of Critical Realism. Third - and this is a point 
related to the previous two - Bhaskar has more of a 
connection to the field of political economy than do 
the others. He argues, for example, that critical 
realism is the implicit philosophy of science of Marx's 
analysis in Capital. While this is not a thread that I 
explore in this book, it contributes to my sense that 
Bhaskar's work represents a potential point of entry 
into epistemology and metaphysics for practicing 
social scientists. Finally, Bhaskar is interesting 
because he explicitly connects critical realism to the 
project of human emancipation. Successful struggles 
for social justice, he suggests, require that we be 
able to identify those structures that arrest our 
capabilities. The core ideological function of 
positivism in the social sciences, he argues, is 
precisely to render such underlying mechanisms 
invisible. 65 This type of attention to the political 
function of philosophical ideas is an invaluable 
dimension of Bhaskar's thinking in my view.  
Finally, before moving on let me say that while I 
believe that critical realism can help us to move 
beyond post-positivism, I do not regard it as 
philosophical panacea. For one thing, I heartily 
disagree with Bhaskar's theory of truth. I also 
suspect that the theory of language contained in 
Bhaskar's later work is unsatisfactory. Beyond 
considerations such as these, however, there is 
simply the matter of philosophical temper. I am not 
inclined to see the work of any one thinker as being 
entirely sufficient, or worthy of ultimate allegiance or 
adulation. This is not to repeat the platitude that 
"there is something of value in every position," for I 
do not believe that this is so. Rather it is an attempt 
to resist dogmatism. My thesis, then, is fairly 
modest: realism about causality, in conjunction with 
a recognition of the social character of knowledge 
and the retention of the norm of correspondence as a 
transcendental condition of possibility of inquiry, 
provides a much-needed set of stepping stones out of 

 
the post-positivist quagmire in which we presently 
find ourselves.  
65 Bhaskar, Reclaiming Reality, p. 9 and passim.  
-23-  
 
[This page intentionally left blank.]  
-24-  
2  
On the necessity 
of necessary 
connections  
Critical realism and 
Kant's transcendental 
idealism  
But he who undertakes to judge, or still 
more, to construct, a system of 
Metaphysics, must satisfy the demands 
here made, either by adopting my 
solution, or by thoroughly refuting it, 
and substituting another. To evade it is 
impossible.  
(Immanuel Kant, Prolegomena to any 
Future Metaphysics) 66  

 
What is interesting about contemporary anti-realism 
is that for the most part its proponents do not take 
themselves to be idealists. Thus the defining claim 
tends not to be that consciousness or an objective 
conceptual order is ontologically basic, but rather 
that the only reality that we can coherently talk about 
is one that has already been structured by our 
subjective capacities and objective activities. This 
raises the question of just what it is that is being 
denied by those who understand themselves to be 
rejecting metaphysical realism but not to be 
endorsing idealism - and, conversely, what it is that 
is being affirmed by thinkers such as Bhaskar, Harré 
and Madden and Brian Ellis.  
The question points us to Kant. The original, 
paradigmatic formulation of the idea that we don't 
just wish the world into existence, yet at the same 
time can only know it as it is for us, is Kant's. If 
transcendental realism is to be considered a viable 
alternative to post-positivist perspectivism, then 
Bhaskar will have to be able respond to Kant's 
transcendental idealism. If it turns out that he can, 
then there will be an opening for a critique of 
contemporary variants of Kant's approach. Bhaskar 
proceeds as though a lengthy discussion of Kant is 
unnecessary - Kant adhering, in Bhaskar's view, to 
an essentially  
66 Immanuel Kant (trans. Paul Carus) Prolegomena 
to Any Future Metaphysics that Can Qualify as a 
Science, La Salle, IL: Open Court Publishing 
Company, 1902, 6th printing, 1988, p. 12.  
-25-  
Humean ontology. As I argue here, I think that Kant 
deserves individual attention. My purpose in the 
present chapter, therefore, is to try to assess 
whether or not critical realism does indeed provide a 

compelling line of response to transcendental 
idealism.  
In the Critique of Pure Reason (1997) Kant presents 
us with a fundamental distinction. There are two 
ways that we can think about objects, he says. 67 On 
the one hand, we can engage in a kind of speculative 
flight of fancy, in which we try to imagine an object 
as it exists on its own, unrelated to us. 68 On the 
other hand, we can attempt to attain empirical 
knowledge of the object. If the latter, we must think 
of the object not as it is on its own, but as it is as a 
possible object of knowledge for us. Now, in the 
empiricist tradition, the distinction between objects 
considered in and of themselves and objects 
considered in light of how we may experience them is 
handled in just the opposite way. For an empiricist, 
those features that objects have that are relevant 
only "for us" can and must be disregarded. Indeed, it 
is the mark of sound thinking to do so. For 
empiricists, such "secondary qualities" are essentially 
misinterpretations of sensory experience. I perceive 
the flowers on my table as light yellow and fuschia, 
and incorrectly conclude from this that the flowers 
themselves are imbued with the properties of yellow-
ness and red-ness. In reality, all that can be said of 
my flowers is that they reflect light in particular 
wavelengths. 69 From an empiricist perspective, then, 
Kant has got it backwards: it is precisely those 
properties that things only appear to have, given our 
particular perceptual apparatus, but which we falsely 
ascribe to them, that are in some sense "imaginary." 
If we want to know about a thing, we must consider 
it as it is apart from us.  
But not so for Kant. For Kant, things considered as 
potential objects of knowledge necessarily bear the 
mark of our subjectivity. There are two reasons for 
this. The first has to do with the synthetic nature of 
perception. Kant holds that in order for an object to 
be something that can be known - as opposed to 
being something that can merely be an object of 

 
speculation - it must be such that, in  
67 My understanding of Kant's position in The 
Critique of Pure Reason is greatly influenced by 
Arthur Collins's Possible Experience: Understanding 
Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1999. Following Collins, I take 
Kant to be a realist - an ambiguous and atypical sort 
of realist, but a realist all the same.  
68 I am using words such as "object," "think" and 
"imagine" in their ordinary sense here, rather than in 
their specialized Kantian sense.  
69 In this case, Kant would agree; the example of 
secondary qualities is only an analogy for the notion 
of the pure forms of intuition.  
-26-  
principle, it can be perceived. 70 This is a belief Kant 
shares with proponents of empiricism. But 
perception, according to Kant, is not the passive 
registration of input that empiricists say it is. Instead, 
perception consists in the application of what he calls 
the "pure forms of intuition," namely, space and 
time, to that which impinges upon our senses. To be 
clear, Kant does not mean by this that external 
stimuli cause an empiricist-like proto-perception, 
which is then further refined. Rather, the claim is that 
to perceive is to immediately and necessarily 
perceive objects as located in space and time. There 
can be no such thing as sensory input that is not 
mediated in this way, says Kant. However, the fact 
that we necessarily perceive objects in spatial and 
temporal terms is entirely a fact about us, about the 
structure of our experience qua bearers of reason; it 
has nothing to do with the nature of the external 
world itself, considered apart from us. (Or if it does, 
we can't know about it one way or another - for to 

 
consider objects as they are on their own would 
precisely be to think of them as existing outside of 
the context of space and time.)  
The second reason why potential objects of 
knowledge must be thought of as objects-for-us has 
to do with the synthetic nature not just of perception, 
but of cognition. Cognition - or, knowledge - Kant 
says, involves the integration of the (synthetic) 
products of sense perception with what Kant calls the 
"Categories of the Understanding." As with 
perception, the claim is that the very process of 
cognition necessarily structures our experience. The 
key Category, for the purposes of the present 
discussion, is that of causality. Just as we cannot 
help but perceive objects as located in space and 
time, Kant says, we cannot help but conceive of 
events as having causal antecedents. And (crucially), 
as is the case with space and time, what we call 
"causality" must be understood to be a feature of 
reason itself, rather than to be a feature of the 
external world. Specifically, causality is the synthetic, 
a priori rule: "Every event has a cause."  
Kant was interested in the question "What makes 
scientific knowledge possible?" There are differences 
of opinion regarding the meaning of this question. On 
the one hand, Kant is commonly taken to have been 
addressing the problem of skepticism - that is, of 
how, after Hume, scientific knowledge can be 
considered to be true. On the other hand, George 
Brittan, for example, argues that Kant's concern  
70 Immanuel Kant (trans. and ed. Paul Guyer and 
Allen W. Wood), Critique of Pure Reason, New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1997. Kant states this 
clearly at Pt. II, Div. I, Bk. II, Ch. II, Section III, , , 
among other places.  
-27-  

was rather to provide for a realist interpretation of 
the Newtonian physics of his day. 71 From this 
perspective, the emphasis is ontological rather than 
epistemic: Kant's question becomes "How is it 
possible that physics applies, as it patently does, to 
non-mental entities?" In terms that are hopefully 
general enough to side-step such debates, we may 
say at a minimum that what makes it possible 
operationally, according to Kant, for us to have the 
empirical knowledge that we do seem to have is the 
synthetic processes that I have just described: the 
constitution, via the Pure Forms of Intuition, of 
objects-as-we-cannot-help-but-perceive-them, and 
the structuring of our experience of such objects via 
the Categories of the Understanding. Kant called this 
position "transcendental idealism," and paired it with 
a commitment to what he termed "empirical realism." 
Kant clearly distinguishes transcendental idealism 
from what he calls the "empirical idealism of 
Descartes" or the "mystical and visionary idealism of 
Berkeley." 72 "Material idealism," as Kant calls the 
generic position in the Refutation of Idealism, is "the 
theory that declares the existence of objects in space 
outside us to be either merely doubtful and 
indemonstrable, or else false and impossible." 73 
Kant explicitly and adamantly rejects such a position. 
In the Refutation of Idealism, he argues that the very 
self-consciousness that Descartes treated as 
foundational presupposes the existence of the 
external, non-mental entities that Descartes would 
initially have us doubt. 74 (Berkeley's position, 
meanwhile, Kant takes himself to have rejected via 
his, Kant's, discussion of space in the Transcendental 
Aesthetic.) 75 He also rejects idealism through his 
account of the Pure Forms of Intuition. Although he 
takes space and time to be features of human 
subjectivity itself, Kant believes that they are brought 
to bear upon something external, something that 
pre-exists our perceptions of it. While the nature of 
this "something" can only be known empirically, and 
therefore only in terms that conform with the 

 
structure of reason, the fact of its existence is 
something that Kant takes as a given. This point is 
made quite forcefully in the Prolegomena, where Kant 
responds repeatedly to those who have misread him, 
he says, as being a proponent of idealism. It is worth 
quoting Kant at length:  
71 See George Brittan Jr, Kant's Theory of Science, 
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978.  
72 Kant, Prolegomena, First Part of the 
Transcendental Problem, Remark III, pp. 48-49.  
73 Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, Pt. II, Div. I, Bk. II, 
Ch. II, Section III, p. 326.  
74 Ibid., Section III, pp. 326-327.  
75 Ibid., Section III.  
-28-  
Idealism consists in the assertion, that 
there are none but thinking beings, all 
other things, which we think are 
perceived in intuition, being nothing but 
representations in the thinking beings, 
to which no object external to them 
corresponds in fact. Whereas I say, that 
things as objects of our senses existing 
outside us are given, but we know 
nothing of what they may be in 
themselves, knowing only their 
appearances, i.e., the representations 
which they cause in us by affecting our 
senses. Consequently I grant by all 
means that there are bodies without us, 
that is, things which, though quite 
unknown to us as to what they are in 
themselves, we yet know by the 

representations which their influence on 
our sensibility procures us, and which 
we call bodies, a term signifying merely 
the appearance of the thing which is 
unknown to us, but not therefore less 
actual. Can this be termed idealism? It 
is the very contrary. 76  
Kant even proposes there that transcendental 
idealism be renamed critical idealism, if to do so will 
help to clarify his position on the issue. 77  
There is no question, then, that Kant believed in a 
physical reality. What is confusing, I think, is his 
insistence on the limited parameters of knowledge, 
and the vocabulary that he uses to express such 
limitation. As noted above, Kant tells us that that 
although there is surely something which impinges 
upon our senses from without, to perceive an object 
is nonetheless already to have acted upon it, 
cognitively, such that the mind is able to recognize it 
as an object. It is thus in the very nature of the case 
that we cannot get beyond such "representations," as 
Kant calls the products of perception. Unfortunately, 
Kant's language is potentially misleading, because it 
makes it sound as though he is advancing the view 
that the only things that we can know are our own 
sensory or mental impressions. But Kant makes it 
plain that he does not believe that we are trapped 
inside our own minds, cut off from all but our own 
internal thoughts and perceptions. 78 The contention 
is simply that the objects of empirical knowledge 
have already been given shape and temporal  
76 Kant, Prolegomena, First Part of the 
Transcendental Problem, Remark II, p. 43.  
77 Ibid., Remark III, p. 49.  
78 This way of putting it I attribute to Arthur Collins. 
The underlying thesis of Collins's book is that Kant is 

 
misread because he is assumed to be working within 
a Cartesian framework, in the context of which the 
task is to get from inner experience, of which we can 
be certain, to outer experience, which has been cast 
in doubt. Op. cit., Collins, Possible Experience.  
-29-  
location through the very process of perception. 79 
There is no way around this, in Kant's view, because 
Kant does not consider thought that has no possible 
empirical content (i.e., thought that is not 
perceptually based) to be knowledge. Thus he writes: 
"thinking of an object in general through a pure 
concept of the understanding can become cognition 
only insofar as this concept is related to objects of 
the senses." 80 Knowledge must be empirically 
grounded. Such grounding, however, is necessarily 
mediated by the Pure Forms of Intuition. Ironically, 
then, it is only because Kant is so exacting in his 
opposition to rationalism that he is mistaken for a 
subjective idealist.  
If one takes Kant's stated opposition to idealism 
seriously, then what is questionable in his account of 
the conditions of possibility of natural science cannot 
be any lack of commitment on Kant's part to the 
existence of an external, non-mental reality. What, 
then, is the difference between transcendental 
idealism and transcendental realism? I want to 
pursue this question further, and in a different 
manner, than Bhaskar himself does. The following is 
thus a rational reconstruction - and in places a 
modification - of Bhaskar's views, rather than a 
summary.  
A transcendental realist response to Kant can be 
constructed around three main points. To begin, 
Bhaskar claims that Kant's theory of causality is 
unsatisfactory. Kant's reply to Hume was that the 

 
necessity of the causal relationship is not a matter of 
subjective expectation, or habit, but rather an 
intrinsic feature of reason itself. Bhaskar's response 
is that Kant fails as surely as Hume does to account 
for the practice of experimentation. The argument 
against Hume must be refined, however, in order to 
apply to Kant. As in the critique of Hume, we begin 
with the widely accepted assumption that 
experiments allow us to determine what the cause of 
x is by providing a controlled environment in which it 
is possible to isolate and potentially activate different 
causal variables. The problem with Kant's definition 
of causality is that if causality were what he says it is 
- namely, an a priori relationship ascribed to all relata 
necessarily - then it is not clear why our knowledge 
of such relationships would be enhanced by the 
creation of artificial environments. Rendering open 
systems closed should not help us to narrow in on 
necessary causal connections if the necessity of such 
connections is an a priori feature of reason.  
A defender of Kant might be expected to respond, 
first, that in part the function of creating controlled 
experimental settings is to  
79 See Collins, Possible Experience, Ch. 5, for an 
effective presentation of this point.  
80 Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, Pt. II, Div. I, Bk. I, 
Ch. II., Section II, p.254.  
-30-  
keep people's beliefs, prejudices, and non-cognitive 
objectives from interfering with scientific inquiry. 
Such measures are entirely consistent with 
transcendental idealism. After all, causality is not a 
matter of the particular beliefs of any one, or even 
all, individuals. It is rather a feature of all thought 
whatsoever, about the world as we experience it. 

Beyond this general point, the defender of Kant 
would say that the a priori condition that we cannot 
but experience events as having causes tells us 
nothing about which actual events have which actual 
causes. Which x causes which y, he or she would say, 
is a purely empirical matter, open to scientific 
investigation to determine.  
For the transcendental realist, however, it is not clear 
what the significance would be of such a 
determination, construed in Kantian terms. If 
causality itself is nothing but a feature of reason, a 
way that we cannot help but experience the world, 
then the very concept of a "cause" loses its force 
(literally). To put it differently, if the causal nature of 
causal connections is provided by the faculty of 
reason, rather than by real properties of the 
antecedent, then to say of the antecedent that it is 
the "cause" of that which follows is simply to say that 
it is the first in a specified sequence of events - that 
whenever it is present, the event with which it is 
associated will also be present. Kant is no more 
entitled to speak of "causes" in an everyday way, to 
mean "that which brought about a given outcome" 
than was Hume. Both are obliged to do away with 
"causes" understood as entities endowed with 
dispositional properties. As it was for Hume, to be the 
"cause" of x is, for Kant, merely to be constantly 
conjoined with x.  
The Kantian will object. To be the "cause" of 
something, he or she will say, is to be that which 
must come first - and this, he or she will add, is a 
matter that must be established empirically. But the 
Kantian can't have it both ways. The necessity in 
question (the "must," upon which the Kantian 
interlocutor insists) is, for Kant, a transcendental 
necessity; it is what allows us to formulate all causal 
claims. As a transcendental necessity, it tells us 
nothing about what it means to say, at the empirical 
level, that x, and not z, is "the cause" of y. It is of no 
help at the empirical level because it "applies," in 
some sense, to all posited regularities - those that 

 
are in fact coincidental and those that truly are the 
result of a causal connection - with equal force. 81 I  
81 The claim here is at a different level of abstraction 
from the claim that Kant's transcendental necessity 
doesn't tell us which x causes which y. Here the claim 
is that a transcendental necessity of the sort that 
Kant proposes doesn't tell us any more than Hume's 
constant conjunctions did about what it is to be the x 
that causes y.  
-31-  
don't see any way around it. The Kantian must accept 
the implications at the level of empirical inquiry of (a) 
rejecting the concept of natural necessity, and (b) 
adopting a specifically transcendental alternative. To 
forswear the concept of natural necessity is to 
maintain that there is nothing about the antecedent 
itself that gives rise to the necessity of its conjunction 
with a given consequent. And again, if there is 
nothing about the antecedent itself that renders it the 
"cause" of the consequent, then at the level of 
empirical inquiry we are exactly where Hume left us. 
While causality is no longer merely a matter of 
subjective expectation, a cause is still nothing other 
than "that which comes first in an identified 
sequence."  
Let us return to the phenomenon of experimentation. 
When the Kantian tells us that it is through empirical 
investigation that we find out which x causes which y, 
he or she is implicitly asserting one or both of the 
following: (a) that experiments are a way of helping 
us to determine which Judgments of Experience are 
valid, and/or (b) that experiments are a way of 
helping us get from Judgments of Perception to valid 
Judgments of Experience, to use the language of the 
Prolegomena. But the Kantian cannot say why or how 
this should be so. The Kantian differs from the 

 
Humean in that, unlike the Humean, the Kantian is 
prepared to distinguish between regularities (i.e., 
Judgments of Perception) and regularities that are 
necessary (i.e., Judgments of Experience). The 
problem, however, is that a purely transcendental 
conception of causality simply does not authorize 
such a distinction. The Kantian can tell us that we 
cannot help but make the distinction (for this is 
simply another way of saying that we cannot help but 
conceive of the world as causally ordered, i.e., that 
we cannot conceive of it except via the Category of 
Causality), but, having dispensed with the idea of 
natural necessity, he or she cannot give meaning to 
it. Kant may very well be right that we necessarily 
conceptualize the world in causal terms, but this 
alone cannot sustain an account of science.  
Bhaskar's second major objection to transcendental 
idealism is related to the first. Specifically, Bhaskar 
criticizes transcendental idealists for following Hume 
in treating the constant conjunction of events as a 
necessary - if in Kant's case necessary but not 
sufficient - component of a scientific law. Hume saw 
scientific laws as the registration of perceived 
regularities. His stunning claim was that our belief in 
the necessity of such regularities is philosophically 
unfounded, that the very concept of natural necessity 
is in reality a projection of our own subjective 
expectation that what has happened in the past will 
happen in the same way in the future. Kant could not 
abide such a radically unstable and subjectivist view 
of natural science. Instead, he proposed that 
observed connections between the  
-32-  
objects that we perceive are a priori necessary in the 
sense described earlier. But while Kant re-introduces 
necessity into the empiricist picture, he nonetheless 
retains the idea that what scientific laws apply to is 
perceived constant conjunctions. Kant's similarity to 

Hume in this respect is especially clear in the 
Prolegomena, where one can see the way in which 
Kant has taken on the task of establishing the 
necessity of causal connections between 
"representations." Thus Kant writes:  
As an easier example, we may take the 
following: "When the sun shines on the 
stone, it grows warm." This judgment, 
however often I and others may have 
perceived it, is a mere judgment of 
perception, and contains no necessity; 
perceptions are only usually conjoined in 
this manner. But if I say, "The sun 
warms the stone," I add to the 
perception a concept of the 
understanding, viz., that of cause, which 
connects with the concept of sunshine 
that of heat as a necessary 
consequence, and the synthetical 
jugment becomes of necessity 
universally valid, viz., objective, and is 
converted from a perception into 
experience. 82  
As described in Chapter 1, one of the central claims 
of RTS is that it is mistake to think that a constant 
conjunction of events is a requisite condition of a 
scientific law. The argument, again, is that scientists 
engage in experimentation precisely because 
regularities do not generally occur in open, or 
naturally unfolding, settings. The very fact that 
regularities have to be artificially produced, however, 
implies (assuming that experimentation is what it is 
commonly thought to be) that they must be 
distinguishable from laws. If experimentation is what 
we think it is, then it cannot be that in producing 
constant conjunctions between given events, 
scientists simultaneously produce the laws that 
govern them. Instead, it must be that laws are 
statements not of regularities (which can be 
artificially produced), but rather of the underlying 

 
mechanisms that account for them. Bhaskar's 
argument is that it follows from this that regularities 
are neither sufficient, as the Humean would have it, 
nor even necessary, as the Kantian would maintain, 
for the formulation of a scientific law.  
Finally, Bhaskar accuses Kant of having committed 
the epistemic fallacy. As noted earlier, the epistemic 
fallacy is the wrongful reduction, or translation, of 
ontological questions into epistemological questions. 
While the posing of any question is undeniably an 
epistemological act - and as such an element of the 
transitive rather  
82 Kant, Prolegomena, p. 59, note 1.  
-33-  
than the intransitive dimension of science - it is 
nonetheless both possible and crucially important, 
according to Bhaskar, to distinguish between 
questions about being and questions about our 
knowledge (or lack thereof) of being. To conflate the 
two - apart from being a category mistake - is to 
engage in the worst sort of subjectivist 
anthropomorphism. Our existence, and by extension 
our knowledge of the circumstances in which we find 
ourselves, is entirely contingent, Bhaskar insists; 
there could quite easily have been a natural world 
that did not include human beings - just as, to the 
best of our knowledge, was the case for most of the 
earth's history. 83  
Before anything can be decided about Kant and the 
epistemic fallacy, however, a preliminary discussion 
of Bhaskar's approach is in order. Bhaskar's 
argument in RTS is that Kant has committed the 
epistemic fallacy by virtue of being what Bhaskar 
terms an empirical realist. It is worth noting that 
while Kant too characterizes himself as defending a 

 
position that he too calls empirical realism, he and 
Bhaskar do not ascribe the same meaning to the 
term. For Kant, an empirical realist is someone who 
believes that the objects of our experience are real, 
that they are not merely the products of our 
thoughts. Empirical realism as Kant uses the term is 
thus a form of materialism, to be contrasted with 
subjective idealism. As Bhaskar defines it, by 
contrast, empirical realism is ultimately the view that 
the only objects that exist are those that have been 
perceived. Empirical realism so construed is thus a 
prime example of subjective idealism. Bhaskar seems 
to believe that Kant is an empirical realist of this sort. 
Bhaskar can be seen as identifying two relevant 
problems with empirical realism as he conceives it. 
For the sake of convenience, I will dub the first one 
ontological and the second one epistemological. The 
ontological problem is that empirical realists, by 
definition, from Bhaskar's perspective, presume that 
the category of reality is exhausted by the category 
of experience. The idea that reality is coterminous 
with experience leads empirical realists to hold a 
severely truncated, and therefore fatally flawed, 
ontology. As a transcendental rather than an 
empirical realist, Bhaskar, by contrast, maintains that 
experience is only the top level of a "stratified" reality 
that is characterized, above all, by what he refers to 
as "depth." The epistemological problem, meanwhile, 
is that empirical realism involves the view that what 
scientific laws describe are constant conjunctions. 
Bhaskar's contention is that laws do not refer to such 
83 Bhaskar, RTS, p. 22, p. 29 and passim. Bhaskar 
makes this point repeatedly, in a variety of different 
ways.  
-34-  
sequences at all, but rather to underlying causal 

mechanisms - that is, to the powers of real entities to 
effect change.  
If the epistemic fallacy is the turning of statements 
about being into statements about our knowledge of 
being, then proponents of empirical realism as 
Bhaskar defines it commit the fallacy both indirectly, 
via their ontology, and directly, via their account of 
scientific laws. In the ontological case, the epistemic 
fallacy is committed because reality itself is reduced 
to the totality of that which has been experienced - 
that is, to the domain of the Empirical. In the 
epistemological case, the epistemic fallacy is 
committed directly, in as much as scientific laws are 
understood to be descriptions of perceived 
regularities rather than accounts of the causal powers 
of objects. Statements about being (or what should 
be statements about being) are thus reduced to 
statements about our perceptions of being.  
Bhaskar would have it that Kant, like Hume, commits 
the epistemic fallacy in virtue of his adherence to 
empirical realism as Bhaskar conceives it. Kant, 
Bhaskar says,  
committed it in arguing that the 
categories "allow only of empirical 
employment and have no meaning 
whatsoever when not applied to objects 
of possible experience; that is to the 
world of sense." (For us on the other 
hand if the Kantian categories were 
adequate to the objects of scientific 
thought then they would continue to 
apply in a world without sense, and 
have a meaning in relation to that 
possibility.) 84  
I am not convinced that this is the best way to 
present the case against Kant. With respect to the 
question of whether or not Kant regards reality as 
coterminous with experience, there are several points 

 
to be made. First, Kant is plainly committed to the 
existence of non-mental entities. If he is guilty of 
having committed the epistemic fallacy on ontological 
grounds, it cannot be because he thinks that reality is 
"nothing other" than a set of individually or 
collectively borne perceptual states. Second, if the 
"experience" in question is understood empirically, to 
mean "the actual experience, by a subject, of a given 
object," then, again, the charge does not apply to 
Kant. When Kant says that knowledge must be tied 
to experience, he does not mean that we can only 
know that with which we have had personal sensory 
contact. Rather, he means that we can only have 
knowledge of that which we could in principle 
experience. Finally, even if the assertion is that Kant 
commits the epistemic fallacy in  
84 Bhaskar, RTS, p. 37.  
-35-  
virtue of his empirical realism because he identifies 
reality with that which in principle can be 
experienced, it is incorrect. Kant doesn't say that the 
only objects that exist are those that can (in 
principle) be perceived; he says that the only objects 
that we can have knowledge of (as opposed to 
speculate about) are those that can (in principle) be 
perceived.  
The epistemological charge, again, was that empirical 
realists reduce questions about being to questions 
about our knowledge of being because they 
understand scientific laws to be descriptions of 
sequences of perceptual events, rather than 
statements about the powers of entities. But this is 
not how a Kantian conceptualizes scientific laws. 
Although, like the empiricist, a transcendental idealist 
sees scientific laws as applying to sequences of 
events, the transcendental idealist does not identify 

the law with the sequence. Kant is a non-realist with 
respect to causality, true, but on the matter of 
whether or not scientific laws reduce to contingent 
subjective experience, or statements thereof, his 
response is "No."  
Admittedly, what Bhaskar focuses on is Kant's claim 
that empirical knowledge must be based in 
experience. Kant may be understood as saying only 
those things that can be directly perceived may be 
objects of knowledge. Bhaskar's view, by contrast, is 
that we can and do make legitimate knowledge 
claims about objects that we cannot directly perceive. 
(Indeed, his contention is that attempting to identify 
underlying-but-not-necessarily-empirically-manifest 
processes - rather than merely describing observable 
events - is precisely what scientists do.) Given ample 
indirect evidence for the existence of electrons, for 
example, it was perfectly acceptable, from Bhaskar's 
perspective, not to have waited until the invention of 
powerful microscopes to incorporate them into 
scientific theory. 85 If, as Kant would have it, we 
declare that it is by definition impossible to have 
knowledge of objects that we cannot directly 
perceive, then we are forced to conclude either (a) 
that scientific knowledge may not out-step current 
levels of observational technology, or (b) that 
scientific knowledge is not empirically based, and is 
therefore not knowledge at all.  
This is a significant line of criticism directed at Kant 
on the basis of his empirical realism. Kant does 
reduce "empirical" to "empiricist" in his conception of 
the object-domain of knowledge, and his affinity with 
empiricists on this issue is a major, and important, 
point of difference between transcendental idealism 
and transcendental realism. Still, it does not follow 
from Kant's strictures regarding what kinds of objects 
can be known, as opposed to only be thought about, 
that  
85 Note that highly technologically mediated 

 
"observation" is largely inferential.  
-36-  
Kant has committed the epistemic fallacy - for in 
telling us that it is only possible to have knowledge of 
those objects that we can experience, Kant has not 
said that it is only possible to have knowledge of 
knowledge (or of subjective experience). If Kant has 
committed the epistemic fallacy, then it is on 
different grounds than has Hume. Specifically, if Kant 
has committed the epistemic fallacy, then it is by 
virtue (or at least primarily by virtue) of his 
transcendental idealism rather than his empirical 
realism (as either he or Bhaskar defines it).  
And has he done so? The answer is both "Yes" and 
"No," it seems to me, depending on how the 
epistemic fallacy is construed. While I have so far 
proceeded as though Bhaskar offers a single 
definition of the concept, and employs it consistently, 
I don't think that such is actually the case. Instead, 
there are at least four different accounts of the 
epistemic fallacy at play in RTS, only some of which 
apply to Kant - even when properly evaluated in light 
of his transcendental idealism rather than his 
empirical realism.  
The epistemic fallacy is first depicted as having been 
committed when questions about being are 
transposed into questions about our knowledge of 
being. Thus the question "Does x exist?" becomes, 
via the epistemic fallacy, the question "What is the 
nature of our knowledge of x?" 86 In this initial 
formulation, the mistake that is alleged to have been 
made is what I will call an epistemological one: an 
entire class of questions has been incorrectly 
disallowed. The epistemic fallacy is thus a kind of 
methodological error at the level of meta-theory.  

 
The second account of the concept comes through 
Bhaskar's discussion of the three "domains" of the 
stratified critical realist ontology. Here the epistemic 
fallacy is committed when the domain of the Real is 
identified with the domain of the Empirical. In this 
case, the problem is not that the thinker who has 
committed the fallacy has transposed a question 
about what exists into a question about our 
knowledge of what exists, but rather that he or she 
has inadvertently lopped off a large portion of reality 
by saying that the only things that exist are either 
(a) the things that we perceive through our senses or 
(b) our sensations themselves. In this second 
formulation, the mistake that has been made is what 
I therefore will call an ontological one: the epistemic 
fallacy amounts to the adoption of a grossly deficient 
ontology.  
Third, Bhaskar approaches the concept of the 
epistemic fallacy through the issue of scientific laws. 
Empiricists believe that natural scientific laws refer in 
the end to regularities in our perceptual fields.  
86 The post-structuralist version of the transposition, 
namely, "How is x discursively constructed?" Bhaskar 
terms the linguistic fallacy.  
-37-  
Bhaskar's view is that scientific laws refer not to 
perceptual regularities (or even to regular sequences 
of "external" events), but rather to causal powers - to 
the dispositional properties that things have the 
capacity to display. 87 In this case, the epistemic 
fallacy is committed when scientific laws are 
mistakenly thought to refer to "subjective" features 
of our experience rather than to "objective" 
properties of entities. Here I would again characterize 
the fallacy as an epistemological one, though it is so 
in a different sense than in the foregoing version. In 

this case, the thinker who has committed the 
epistemic fallacy has misconceived a particular sort of 
explanatory concept (namely, a "law").  
Finally, Bhaskar also presents the idea of the 
epistemic fallacy through the analysis of causality. 
Here the epistemic fallacy is committed when 
causality is mistakenly believed to be either an 
expectation, as in Hume, or, as in Kant, an a priori 
category of reason itself. The error in this case is 
ontological: the thinker who commits the epistemic 
fallacy does not appreciate that causality is a feature 
of the physical world, operative in virtue of the real 
powers of entities.  
My view is that Kant commits versions one, three and 
four of the epistemic fallacy, but not version two. 
Moreover, the claim that he commits versions three 
and four must be qualified. That he commits version 
one is obvious. Version one is little else than Kant's 
"Copernican turn," cast as a formal error of reason. 
Not only does it apply to Kant, it represents Kant's 
distinctive and innovative contribution to the history 
of Western philosophy; the only real question is 
whether or not it is a fallacy. But even here, where 
the case for Kant having committed what Bhaskar 
rightly or wrongly terms the epistemic fallacy seems 
self-evident, it is important to proceed with care. 
Kant's meta-philosophical injunction that we reject 
speculative metaphysics and engage instead in the 
critique of reason is a directive about how to do 
philosophy, not about how to do science. Kant 
transposes metaphysical questions about "Being" into 
questions about the conditions of, and limits to, 
knowledge, but he does not thereby transpose 
scientific questions about the behavior of objects into 
questions about the conditions of and limits to our 
knowledge of such objects. It is true that at the ontic 
level (or what  
87 In the Appendix to RTS Bhaskar notes that in the 
text he used the term "law" to refer both to causal 

 
mechanisms and to statements that refer to them. 
He comments that if he were to do it over again, he 
would reserve the term "law" for the mechanisms in 
nature, and would not use it to refer to statements 
about such mechanisms. I use the term to refer to 
certain kinds of statements. I believe that to do so is 
actually most in keeping with the overall thrust of 
Bhaskar's thinking.  
-38-  
Kant, though not Bhaskar, would call the empirical 
level), the level of scientific inquiry, Kant will say that 
objects of knowledge (as opposed to objects of pure 
thought) are always and only objects as we cannot 
help but perceive them (i.e., situated in space and 
time) and conceive them (e.g., as causally related), 
but this is hardly to say that our questions about 
such objects are or ought to be self-reflexive 
questions about our own capacities for reason. The 
latter are the purview of philosophy, for Kant, not 
science.  
One might respond that I have been too stringent in 
my interpretation of this verson of the epistemic 
fallacy. What if, in particular at the empirical level, 
we understand "The transposition of questions about 
Being into questions about our knowledge of Being" 
to mean, not "into questions about our own 
perceptual and cognitive processes," but merely "into 
questions about the state of our knowledge of 
objects?" Formulated in this way, is Kant not a 
proponent of the epistemic fallacy at the empirical as 
well as the transcendental level? I still don't think so. 
We are talking now about a proposition to the effect 
that claims about objects in the world ought to be 
understood to be claims about our knowledge of 
objects in the world. Such a position can be 
understood in one of two ways, it seems to me. On 
the one hand, the point may be that there is an 
unbridgeable divide between our theories and that to 

 
which they refer, such that ultimately we can only 
ever have knowledge of the former. On the other 
hand, the point may simply be the unexceptional one 
that there is no way to have knowledge of a thing 
except by having knowledge of it.  
If Kant commits version one of the epistemic fallacy 
at the level of scientific inquiry, then he does so in 
the second sense only. Kant is neither an idealist nor 
a skeptic. There is no question for him but that our 
theories about the world tell us something about 
what the world is like. 88 Of course, here one might 
respond that if Kant believes that theories tell us 
about the objects to which they refer, then it is only 
because he has already "subjectivized" the objects. 
But I don't think that this is entirely the right way to 
put it. Again, Kant's view is not that we cannot know 
the external world, but rather that the only way to 
think scientifically about objects is to regard them as 
they must be in order to be objects of knowledge for 
us in the first place (and not simply objects of 
speculation). As already suggested, Kant 
distinguishes between what he calls "representations" 
and what he calls "things in themselves," not for the 
purpose of advancing a non-realist  
88 Brittan, op. cit., argues that Kant's main purpose 
in his works on epistemology and metaphysics was to 
provide a realist interpretation of Newtonian physics.  
-39-  
account of scientific inquiry, but rather for the 
purpose of differentiating between science and 
metaphysics. Meanwhile, the fact that our best 
answers to empirical questions 89 are themselves 
knowledge claims is of no great consequence for Kant 
- as it is not for Bhaskar.  
Version two of the epistemic fallacy has it that the 

epistemic fallacy is a matter of identifying that which 
exists with that which is experienced. I have already 
argued that this is not true of Kant. Kant does claim 
that we can only have knowledge of that which we 
can (in principle) perceive directly. This is a huge 
concession to classical empiricism, and one to which 
Bhaskar is opposed. Even so, it is hardly to say that 
only that to which we have gained a very specific sort 
of cognitive access actually exists. Kant may have set 
limits regarding the sorts of objects in relation to 
which intelligible knowledge claims may be advanced, 
but the limits are entirely epistemic. That we can only 
have knowledge of a particular class of objects does 
not imply that the only objects that exist are those 
that we can know. A Kantian might argue that I am 
coming dangerously close here to missing the whole 
point of Kant's intervention. But Kant does save room 
for the existence of things that exist but in principle 
cannot be accessed empirically. We can think about 
such things; we can have faith in such things; we 
just can't have empirical knowledge of such things.  
Version three is that the epistemic fallacy consists of 
reducing scientific laws to statements regarding the 
constant conjunction of perceived events. I argued 
earlier that if Kant is guilty of this, then it is not by 
virtue of a commitment to what either he or Bhaskar 
call empirical realism. The question, then, is whether 
or not this version of the epistemic fallacy follows 
from Kant's transcendental idealism. I would say that 
the answer is yes, but with certain important 
qualifications. From Kant's perspective, a scientific 
law is a rule-like statement about regularities in the 
world. While it is true that it is the constant 
conjunction of perceivable events to which laws 
apply, this is not to say that laws are simply 
statements of such conjunctions. Kant makes this 
point very clearly in the Prolegomena when he 
distinguishes between what he calls "Judgments of 
Perception" and "Judgments of Experience." 90 The 
claim there is that it is only Judgments of Experience 
that involve the idea of a necessary connection 
between antecedent and consequent. To be fair, 

 
Bhaskar does acknowledge that for Kant regularity is 
merely a necessary component of the concept of a 
law - as opposed to being both necessary and 
sufficient, as it is for Hume. And admittedly, the  
89 That is, what Bhaskar might call substantive 
scientific questions.  
90 Kant, Prolegomena, pp. 55-58.  
-40-  
specification of "Judgments of Experience" is part of 
the very discussion that, in another light, shows just 
how much of the Humean problematic Kant has taken 
on. Clearly the advantage of grouping Kant and 
Hume together is that the distinctiveness of 
Bhaskar's own conception of scientific law is all the 
more evident. But while it is important to emphasize 
that Bhaskar breaks with both Kant and Hume in 
divorcing the concept of a law from the concept of 
regularity, it is also important to keep in mind the 
differences between transcendental idealism and 
empiricism. And while it is true, as I have 
maintained, that in Kant's view causality itself is a 
rubric that is generated by us (and is not intrinsic to 
the external world, considered apart from us), I 
would reiterate that for Kant this does not imply that 
scientific laws are statements about the contingent 
subjective experience of individual knowers. 
Ultimately, though, Kant commits version three of 
the epistemic fallacy in the following sense: he 
believes that the necessary relationships that are 
identified by scientific laws derive the necessity that 
they do have from reason itself rather than from the 
powers that inhere in things.  
In the end, Kant also commits what I have called 
version four of the epistemic fallacy. In version four, 
the epistemic fallacy is a matter of misconceiving the 

 
phenomenon of causality. Kant believes causality to 
be a feature of reason rather than to be the exercise 
or display of powers that entities have to effect 
change. Although the transcendental idealist form of 
this version of the fallacy is different from the 
empiricist form, the Kantian variant does constitute a 
non-naturalist, conception of causality. From the 
perspective of transcendental realism, an error has 
been made. Kant has improperly rendered causality a 
function of the exercise of reason.  
Let me step back for a moment. I began this 
discussion by proposing that, from the perspective of 
a rational reconstruction of RTS, there are at least 
three major points of disagreement between Bhaskar 
and Kant: Bhaskar believes Kant to be mistaken 
about the nature of causality; Bhaskar believes Kant 
to therefore hold to an inadequate conception of 
scientific law; Bhaskar believes Kant to have 
committed what he, Bhaskar, calls the epistemic 
fallacy. The objections are interrelated. The first two 
may be thought of as referring to the objective and 
subjective expressions, respectively, of the same 
philosophical problem. The third, meanwhile, in part 
is simply a restatement of the first two, under the 
heading "epistemic fallacy." It is also, however, a 
rejection of the particular line that Kant draws 
between knowledge and speculative metaphysics. 
The question to ask now is whether or not the 
critique of transcendental idealism is sound. Before 
doing so, however, let me offer two final 
observations.  
-41-  
The first is that Bhaskar and Kant agree about a 
number of very basic things, and it is important not 
to lose sight of this. Neither Bhaskar nor Kant is a 
subjective idealist. (Neither the early Bhaskar nor 
Kant is an objective idealist either, for that matter.) 
In different ways, both Bhaskar and Kant find that 

the adoption of an empiricist theory of knowledge is 
related to an acceptance of the subjective idealist 
ontology which both take to be incorrect. Neither is a 
rationalist. In different ways, both take science to be 
an empirical though not empiricist endeavor; both 
believe it to be a rational attempt to understand the 
way the world operates; both believe that the 
accepted natural science of their day constitutes a 
valid body of knowledge. Finally, both Bhaskar and 
Kant engage in versions of transcendental 
argumentation. Kant begins with what he takes to be 
absolutely true scientific knowledge about the world, 
and asks what must be the case in order for it to be 
possible for us to have such knowledge. Bhaskar 
begins with the acknowledged necessity of 
experimentation for the pursuit of what he takes to 
be fallibilistically, or provisionally, true scientific 
knowledge about the world, and asks what must be 
the case in order for experiments to be and do what 
they are regularly taken to be and do.  
Meanwhile, there are - as we have seen - significant 
differences between the two. I have presented these 
in some detail. So far, however, I have approached 
the contrast from the point of view of transcendental 
realism. The second point that I want to make here is 
that from the perspective of transcendental idealism, 
transcendental realism is inadequate in ways that are 
not even on the table. Indeed, Kant would say that 
Bhaskar has failed to address the most basic of 
philosophical questions associated with the idea that 
we are successful in coming to know the world. 
Bhaskar has no real theory of cognition, of how it is 
that we are able in the first place to ask anything at 
all of our surroundings. Nor does Bhaskar offer much 
of an account of perception. Moreover, from a 
Kantian perspective, Bhaskar, unlike Kant, has made 
no philosophical effort to establish the rationality of 
scientific practice or the conceptual products thereof. 
In this regard, there is a real sense in which RTS is 
simply an elaboration of the ontological 
presuppositions of Baconian experimentation, rather 
than a reflection on the question of why we should 

 
take scientific theory seriously, or assume that our 
findings apply to the physical world. To put it 
differently, while Bhaskar and Kant both begin with a 
presumption about the rationality of science, Kant 
then reasons backwards, as it were, in an effort to 
defend the presumption philosophically. Bhaskar, by 
contrast, makes no such effort. Instead, he goes on 
to ask what the general features of the world must 
be, given that we do regard experimentation to be a 
sound and necessary  
-42-  
way of learning about it. From the perspective of 
transcendental idealism, transcendental realism 
therefore appears to be predicated on a naive, non-
philosophical assertion of the legitimacy of science 
and its applicability to the world. It is, in the technical 
sense of the term, dogmatic.  
Ultimately, however, the question is not whether or 
not Bhaskar has succeeded in doing what Kant set 
out to do, but rather whether or not Bhaskar has cast 
doubt on Kant's success in doing what Kant set out to 
do. The crux of Bhaskar's criticism is that Kant's 
account of necessity does not sustain the practice of 
natural science after all. On this fundamental point, I 
think that Bhaskar is persuasive. Although he does 
not focus his attention as closely or as protractedly 
on Kant as one might like, and although there are 
places where corrections are required, my view is 
that Bhaskar has made a strong case for adopting a 
transcendental realist, rather than transcendental 
idealist, stance towards causality and causal laws. 
There is also the matter of Kant's demarcation 
between science and metaphysics. Bhaskar, unlike 
Kant, seems to believe that it is possible to have 
knowledge of noumena (e.g., knowledge of freedom, 
of the soul or of God). However, this belief has little 
direct bearing on his understanding of science. For 
this reason, I don't believe that it is crucial to the 

 
discussion at hand. The more important contrast 
between Bhaskar and Kant concerns, not the 
distinction that Kant makes between noumena and 
phenomena, but the distinction that he makes 
between knowledge and "thought." 91 Unlike Kant, 
Bhaskar does not equate empirical knowledge with a 
body of statements, each of which is based on sense 
data. For Bhaskar, theoretical claims - as well as 
claims regarding unobservable entities and/or 
processes (often only presently unobservable) - that 
are developed in the context of natural scientific 
inquiry are an inextricable component of empirical 
knowledge. It may not be too much of a leap here to 
think of Quine's position on the matter - that science 
cannot be meaningfully resolved into a pile of 
empirical statements and a pile of analytic 
statements. This is an important difference between 
a transcendental realist conception of empirical 
knowledge and a Kantian conception. I believe that 
the transcendental realist account is a more 
promising theory of knowledge than is Kant's 
empiricist alternative. As the history of logical 
positivism strongly  
91 I am following Arthur Collins in treating the 
distinction between the noumenal and the 
phenomenal realms as different from the distinction 
between objects considered as potential objects of 
knowledge and objects considered in and of 
themselves. Collins, Possible Experience, Ch. 4.  
-43-  
suggests, the divide between knowledge and thought 
is not as sharp as Kant would have it.  
Finally, lest there be confusion regarding the idea 
that we can and do gain knowledge of things in 
themselves, I want to reiterate that Bhaskar 
maintains that our knowledge thereof is highly 

 
mediated. Kant's claim that we cannot investigate 
something without relating to it as a potential object 
of knowledge for us sets the bar to realism far lower 
by comparison. Just how Bhaskar handles the issue 
of mediation, however, is another question 
altogether. I will discuss it further when I turn to 
what I take to be the broadly Kantian challenge to 
realism to be found in the work of Hilary Putnam.  
-44-  
3  
Natural kinds  
Critical realism and 
Putnam's internal 
realism  
In an effort to identify just what is in dispute in the 
debate over realism, I turned my attention in Chapter 
2 to the differences between Bhaskar and Kant. I 
began with Kant because Bhaskar believes himself to 
have dispensed with Kant and because I believe Kant 
to have largely set the terms for subsequent 
opposition to what might be called unqualified 
metaphysical realism. I hope to have established that 
transcendental realism represents a serious response 
to Kant's challenge. The fundamental issue in 
question in relation to Kant is not realism about 
objects, but realism about causality. Bhaskar shows 
that a Kantian conception of causality is inadequate 
to the task that Kant set for himself. The idea that we 
cannot help but conceive of the world as causally 
ordered simply does not tell us what we need to 
know about the production of scientific knowledge.  

 
In this chapter, I want to continue to explore the 
issues raised in Chapter 2 by introducing Hilary 
Putnam into the discussion. As in Chapter 2, my 
underlying objective is two-fold: first, to specify what 
it is that separates a transcendental realist such as 
Bhaskar from thinkers who would be critical of his 
stance yet do not take themselves to be idealists; 
second, to assess the viability of transcendental 
realism. I see the impetus of the previous chapter 
being carried forward in two ways. The first has to do 
with the theme of mediation. While Kant is not the 
first to suggest that cognition is a dynamic process in 
which the subject plays an active role - Aristotle 
comes to mind as an obvious predecessor - still, it is 
Kant who most forcefully introduces the idea that our 
knowledge necessarily bears the mark of our 
subjectivity. Putnam is centrally concerned with this 
key insight. The second way in which the present 
chapter is an extension of the last is that not only 
does Putnam operate within a generally Kantian 
philosophical universe, but he understands himself to 
be involved - at least the Putnam of the 1980s and 
early 1990s does - in a fairly straight-forward 
appropriation of Kant's views.  
Putnam is the author of the distinction between 
"metaphysical realism" and "internal realism." The 
now-classic formulation of the  
-45-  
contrast between metaphysical and internal realism 
appears in Chapter 3 of Reason, Truth and History, 
entitled "Two Philosophical Perspectives." 92 
Metaphysical realism, as Putnam would have it, is a 
philosophical stance comprising three basic 
principles: (1) ontological realism, (2) the idea that 
there is one and only one true and complete account 
of reality as a whole and (3) the correspondence 
theory of truth. To quote the familiar passage:  

One of these perspectives is the 
perspective of metaphysical realism. On 
this perspective, the world consists of 
some fixed totality of mind-independent 
objects. There is exactly one true and 
complete description of "the way the 
world is." Truth involves some sort of 
correspondence relation between words 
or thought-signs and external things 
and sets of things. I shall call this 
perspective the externalist perspective, 
because its favorite point of view is a 
God's Eye point of view. 93  
Putnam contrasts metaphysical realism, which he 
rejects, with internal realism, which he endorses. 
Internal realism is the combination of (1) an 
ontological quasi-realism, in which objects relative to 
any given conceptual scheme are taken to be real, 
(2) the idea that there are multiple true accounts of 
any given phenomenon and (3) a definition of truth 
as idealized rational acceptability. To quote Putnam 
again:  
… it is characteristic of this view to hold 
that what objects does the world consist 
of? is a question that it only makes 
sense to ask within a theory or 
description. Many "internalist" 
philosophers, though not all, hold 
further that there is more than one 
"true" theory or description of the world. 
"Truth," in an internalist view, is some 
sort of (idealized) rational acceptability - 
some sort of ideal coherence of our 
beliefs with each other and with our 
experiences as those experiences are 
themselves represented in our belief 
system - and not correspondence with 
mind-independent or discourse-
independent "states of affairs." 94  

 
92 Hilary Putnam, Reason, Truth and History, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981.  
93 Ibid., p. 49.  
94 Ibid., pp. 49-50. Putnam's characterization of his 
own views on the concept of truth are somewhat 
ambiguous here. It is not entirely clear from this 
passage whether Putnam holds a consensus theory of 
truth or a coherence theory of truth. Linda Alcoff has 
claimed Putnam as a proponent of coherence (see 
Linda Martin Alcoff, Real Knowing: New Versions of 
the Coherence Theory, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1996, Ch. 6.), and there is certainly something 
to this.  
-46-  
In Scientific Realism and Human Emancipation, 
Bhaskar refers to Putnam directly (albeit in a 
footnote), and says that he himself is going to defend 
a form of metaphysical realism. 95 I intend to discuss 
the differences between Bhaskar and Putnam's views 
at some length, but to begin I want to address the 
basic question of whether or not transcendental 
realism is in fact a form of metaphysical realism as 
Putnam has defined it. Bhaskar seems to think that 
the answer is yes. My view is that it is important to 
specify more precisely than this the extent to which 
Bhaskar's views do or do not fit the bill. The first 
component of metaphysical realism á la Putnam is 
ontological realism, construed as the belief that "the 
world consists of some fixed totality of mind-
independent objects." 96 Given that Bhaskar does 
argue for the existence of mind-independent objects, 
it is fair to say that he is a Putnam-esque 
metaphysical realist in this regard. At the same time, 
however, Bhaskar would agree with the letter, if not 
the spirit, of Putnam's contention that "what objects 
does the world consist of? is a question that it only 

makes sense to ask within a theory or description." 
97 It is also worth noting that the "objects" that 
Bhaskar takes to be ultimate are powers - indeed, 
potentialities -  
On balance, however, Putnam talks about ideally 
warranted assent far more often than he does about 
coherence (e.g., "My own view is that truth is to be 
identified with idealized justification," in Realism with 
a Human Face, 1990, p. 115). For this reason I 
regard him as holding that it is the former, rather 
than the latter, which constitutes a definition of truth. 
Coherence is certainly a criterion of justification, 
however, for Putnam.  
95 Bhaskar, Scientific Realism and Human 
Emancipation, p. 6 and footnote.  
96 In a reply to critics Hartry Field and Gilbert 
Harman, published as "A Defense of Internal 
Realism," in Hilary Putnam, Realism with a Human 
Face (ed. James Conant), Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1990, pp. 30-42, Putnam insists 
that the three "tenets" of metaphysical realism, as 
I've been calling them, must be considered in 
conjunction with one another. "Metaphysical realisms 
one, two and three do not have content standing on 
their own, one by one; each leans on the others and 
on a variety of further assumptions and notions," he 
writes (p. 31). I appreciate that Putnam is 
undertaking to criticize what he takes to be not just a 
set of propositions, but an entire worldview, and one 
which is embedded in an intellectual historical 
context. Nonetheless, I think that he is wrong to say 
that ontological realism and the correspondence 
theory of truth, for example, have no content on their 
own and thus cannot be meaningfully disentangled 
from one another. And I can see no special 
connection between the correspondence theory, as 
opposed to any other non-relativist theory of truth 
(such as, e.g., the "idealized justification" theory 
propounded by Putnam), and the idea that there is 

 
only one true and complete account of the world. 
While I shall endeavor to be respectful of Putnam's 
intentions, I shall not refrain from distinguishing 
analytically between the constituent components of 
the categories that he employs.  
97 Putnam, Reason, Truth and History, p. 49.  
-47-  
rather than entities. Moreover, there is no suggestion 
that the number of such potentialities is fixed.  
The second component of Putnam's metaphysical 
realism is the idea that "there is exactly one true and 
complete description of 'the way the world is'." 98 
Bhaskar does think that the aim of science is to 
identify the real essences of phenomena at increasing 
levels of depth. And if a given object has just one 
real essence, it would follow that it has just one real 
definition. Such a position would seem to suggest 
that Bhaskar also meets the second test for Putnam's 
metaphysical realism. However, Bhaskar quite 
pointedly insists that there is no absolutely certain 
knowledge and no complete description to be had. 
Rather, he maintains, all knowledge claims are 
fallible, and science is an open-ended process. In a 
similar vein, with respect to the issue of justification - 
which is what Putnam is really raising here - the 
question for Bhaskar is not so much whether one 
theory, considered on its own, is either perfectly true 
or perfectly false, but rather how one theory 
compares to another. It is the relative explanatory 
power of competing accounts that is assessed, not 
the absolute truth of a single theory.  
Finally, the third component of metaphysical realism 
is the correspondence theory of truth. Bhaskar does 
not subscribe to the correspondence theory. 
Admittedly, one could argue that since Bhaskar 

 
believes (1) that there is a specifiable way that the 
world is and (2) that true theories tell us what this 
way is, he is a correspondence theorist whether he 
cares to admit it or not. Bhaskar himself, however, 
maintains that the correspondence theory of truth is 
unsatisfactory. 99 The upshot of all of this, it seems 
to me, is that the dichotomy between metaphysical 
and internal realism is not of much use in helping us 
to sort out what it is that Bhaskar and Putnam 
actually disagree about. To make any headway, we 
need to look more closely at Putnam's actual 
argument.  
Putnam maintains that metaphysical realism is 
unintelligible. He develops two basic lines of 
reasoning in support of this claim, one having to do 
with language, the other having to do with 
conceptualized entities, or "objects." He also 
introduces an argument regarding  
98 Ibid.  
99 Bhaskar's attitude towards the correspondence 
theory has changed over the years. In RTS he rejects 
it outright, stating "There is no way in which we can 
look at the world and then at a sentence and ask 
whether they fit" (RTS, p. 249). In Plato, Etc., 
meanwhile, the claim is not so much that the 
correspondence theory of truth is indefensible as that 
it captures only one of a number of different 
definitions of the concept, and an ultimately 
superficial one at that. See Chapter 4 for a fuller 
discussion of Bhaskar's account of truth.  
-48-  
the nature of causality. This argument is given less 
prominence than it might have been, but is 
nonetheless quite significant. Although the different 
lines of argument overlap and reinforce one another, 

the analysis of language is primarily directed at the 
second and third tenets of metaphysical realism as 
Putnam defines it. The discussion of objects, 
meanwhile, is primarily directed at the first tenet, 
although Putnam also brings it to bear on the other 
two. The argument regarding causality is primarily - 
though again not exclusively - directed toward the 
first tenet as well.  
The crux of the argument based on language is there 
is no necessary connection between signs and that to 
which they refer. 100 In principle, Putnam tells us, 
any word could denote any object. Referring explicitly 
to Quine, Putnam writes: "[T]here are always 
infinitely many different interpretations of the 
predicates of a language which assign the 'correct' 
truth-values to the sentences in all possible worlds, 
no matter how these 'correct' truth-values are singled 
out." 101 The well-known example from Chapter 2 of 
Reason, Truth and History (RTH) has to do with cats, 
mats, cherries and trees. "The cat is on the mat," 
Putnam argues, can be interpreted such that it is true 
if the cherries are on the tree. There is nothing about 
the word "cat" itself that leads it to refer to four-
legged mammals who purr rather than to small 
spherical-shaped fruit with pits. This key point 
regarding the arbitrary, or accidental, character of the 
relationship between sign and referent is reiterated 
throughout Putnam's work on internal realism.  
For Putnam, the fact that designation is a matter of 
convention, that meaning is not fixed by a property of 
signs, referents and/or the relationship between the 
two, is an indication that the correspondence theory 
of truth is unacceptable. It also tells against what he 
regards as the attendant conviction that there is 
exactly one true and complete theory of the world. 
The logic is as follows: correspondence is itself a 
reference relation. If it is the case that language 
attaches to the world only by convention, then the 
idea that there are or could be statements that are 
exempt from this - statements that do, somehow, 

 
attach necessarily to that to which they refer - must 
be mistaken. Truth cannot be defined in terms of a 
correspondence between sign and referent because 
the semantic components of language do not 
uniquely correspond to any given referents. As 
Putnam puts it,  
100 Putnam, Reason, Truth and History, pp. 17-18.  
101 Ibid., p. 35.  
-49-  
[it] is not that correspondences between 
words or concepts and other entities 
don't exist, but that too many 
correspondences exist. To pick out just 
one correspondence between words or 
mental signs and mind-independent 
things we would have already to have 
referential access to the mind-
independent things. 102  
Similarly, it cannot be the case that there is only one 
true and complete theory, because to say that 
designation is fixed by convention is to say that, in 
principle, all the words of a given theory could be 
replaced with other words, without an accompanying 
change in the truth-value of the theory.  
The discussion of entities, meanwhile, yields the 
claim that there is no meaningful way to talk about 
pre- or non-conceptualized objects. "'Objects' do not 
exist independently of conceptual schemes," Putnam 
writes. "We cut up the world into objects when we 
introduce one or another scheme of description." 103 
And again, "The idea that 'object' has some sense 
which is independent of how we are counting objects 
and what we are counting as an 'object' in a given 

 
situation is an illusion." 104 It is important to capture 
the intended nuance of Putnam's position. As I 
understand him, Putnam does believe that reality 
includes mind-independent entities. It is just that it is 
impossible to specify what they are. Thus:  
To deny, as I do, that there is a "ready-
made-world" is not to say that we make 
up the world. I am not denying that 
there are geological facts which we did 
not make up. But I have long argued 
that to ask which facts are mind 
independent in the sense that nothing 
about them reflects our conceptual 
choices and which facts are "contributed 
by us" is to commit a "fallacy of 
division." … To try to divide the world 
into a part that is independent of us and 
a part that is contributed by us is an old 
temptation, but giving in to it leads to 
disaster every time. 105  
The thesis of "conceptual relativity" as Putnam calls 
it, is presented as though it were a direct alternative 
to the idea that "the world consists of some fixed 
totality of mind-independent objects."  
102 Ibid., p. 73.  
103 Ibid., p. 52.  
104 Hilary Putnam, Renewing Philosophy, Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1992, p. 121.  
105 Ibid., p. 58.  
-50-  
To my mind, however, it is not obvious what the 

logical connection is between conceptual relativity 
and ontological realism - and this because it is not in 
fact obvious what kind of a claim Putnam has made. 
Is conceptual relativity an ontological claim, to the 
effect that certain kinds of entities, namely, "mind-
independent" ones, do not exist? Or is it an epistemic 
claim, to the effect that, regardless of what may or 
may not exist independently of our consciousness 
and intentions, it is in the nature of the case that 
anything that we can have knowledge of is mind-
dependent? That Putnam is, at a minimum, 
committed to the latter, epistemic version of 
conceptual relativity is beyond dispute, I think. It is 
worth reiterating, however, that the epistemic 
version, as I'm calling it, of the thesis of conceptual 
relativity, is not an argument against the existence of 
anything. It is an argument, instead, about the limits 
of knowledge. Only the ontological interpretation of 
conceptual relativity - and only if it were persuasive - 
would actually tell against the first tenet of 
metaphysical realism as Putnam construes it.  
The key question, then, is whether or not in saying 
"'Objects' do not exist independently of conceptual 
schemes" Putnam actually means to deny the 
existence of mind-independent entities. On this issue 
I think that Putnam is deeply torn. On the one hand, 
he clearly wants to say that there are things about 
the world that we did not conjure or imagine into 
existence and that we cannot will out of existence. 
Apart from numerous statements to this effect, such 
as the one quoted earlier, his realist inclinations are 
evidenced by, for example, his opposition to Nelson 
Goodman. Thus, writing about Goodman, among 
others, he asks:  
why should the fact that reality cannot 
be described independent of our 
descriptions lead us to suppose that 
there are only the descriptions? After 
all, according to our descriptions 
themselves, the word "quark" is one 
thing and a quark is quite a different 

 
thing. 106  
Putnam's belief in the existence of an extra-
conceptual reality is also evidenced by the 
fundamental premise of the Brains-in-a-Vat 
argument, for which he is so well known. Although it 
is included in RTH, in which Putnam is otherwise 
concerned to undermine ontological realism - and 
although he periodically acts as though it were an 
argument against, if not ontological realism narrowly 
construed, then metaphysical realism as a whole - 
the point of the Brains-in-a-Vat argument is that 
reference is predicated on the existence of a non-
discursive, or extra-conceptual, reality with which we 
interact. (For it is  
106 Ibid., p. 122.  
-51-  
precisely by virtue of their world being absent of such 
entities that brains in a vat could not, according to 
Putnam, formulate in a meaningful way the question 
of whether or not they were brains in a vat.) Indeed, 
while the purpose of the argument may be to 
demonstrate that words do not have intrinsic 
meanings, 107 the Brains-in-a-Vat argument seems 
to me to be a forthright declaration of ontological 
realism on Putnam's part. 108 Putnam might reply 
that I've over-stated the case - that it doesn't follow 
from the fact that reference presupposes an extra-
discursive reality that such a reality is entirely mind-
independent. The bottom line, though, is that Putnam 
seems to be convinced that reality consists of more 
than our thoughts and intentions.  
On the other hand, it is equally evident that Putnam 
wants to limit the significance of such an assertion. 
He allows for the existence of mind-independent 
entities (e.g., "geological facts which we did not 

make up") and/or for a degree of mind-independence 
of not-entirely-mind-independent entities, but he 
insists that such an admission is of little or no 
ontological import. Now, some of the reasons that he 
gives in defense of this conclusion are in fact 
misdirected arguments in support of what I've been 
calling the epistemic version of conceptual relativity; 
they are claims concerning what we can and cannot 
know and/or how we know. As such, they do not 
afford us any insight into whether or not Putnam 
intends conceptual realism to be interpreted 
ontologically. In qualifying his realism about those 
things that we do not simply "make up," he does, 
however, advance at least two genuinely ontological 
claims: one general, to the effect that "elements of 
what we call 'language' or 'mind' penetrate so deeply 
into what we call 'reality' that the very project of 
representing ourselves as being 'mappers' of 
something 'language-independent' is fatally 
compromised," 109 one more pointed, namely, that 
the world is such that it does not include natural 
kinds. 110  
107 Thanks to an anonymous referee for this point.  
108 There has been much discussion of the Brains-in-
a-Vat argument; there are readers of Putnam who 
would disagree with my assessment of its ontological 
implications.  
109 Putnam, Realism with a Human Face, p. 28.  
110 Ian Hacking argues that Putnam's internal 
realism is best understood as being a combination of 
empirical realism and what Hacking calls 
transcendental nominalism. "The nominalist," 
Hacking writes, "does not deny that there is real 
stuff, existing independently of the mind. He denies 
only that it is naturally and intrinsically sorted in any 
particular way, independently of how we think about 
it" (Ian Hacking, Representing and Intervening: 
Introductory Topics in the Philosophy of Natural 

 
Science, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1983, p. 108). While I agree with Hacking's 
characterization, I am more inclined than Hacking 
seems to be to take the position that he describes to 
be an ontological one.  
-52-  
The argument against natural kinds comes in several 
different forms. In Chapter 3 of Reason, Truth and 
History Putnam attributes the insight to Kant:  
I suggest that (as a first approximation) 
the way to read Kant is as saying that 
what Locke said about secondary 
qualities is true of all qualities - the 
simple ones, the primary ones, the 
secondary ones alike (indeed, there is 
little point of distinguishing them). 111  
Elsewhere, meanwhile, he talks about the issue in 
terms of the non-semantic character of the natural 
world. Arguing against the idea that causal 
connection fixes reference, he tells us that it is 
absurd to think that nature is "self-identifying." Thus: 
This is to repeat the claim that a relation 
can at one and the same time be a 
physical relation and have the dignity 
(the built in intentionality, in other 
words) of choosing its own name. Those 
who find such a story unintelligible (as I 
do) will not be helped by these 
declarations of faith. 112  
In addition, there is an argument about mereological 
sums: I am sitting on a chair, at a desk, on which 
rest a computer, several books and a lamp. "How 
many 'objects' exist in the world that I have 

 
described?" Putnam asks. We can add up the 
individual "items" - me, the desk, the computer, 
three books and a lamp - for a total of seven objects. 
But what is to say that the desk and the computer, 
for example, taken together, could not constitute yet 
another "object" - and so on. 113 This is, I think, at 
base intended as an ontological claim, to the effect 
that whatever it is that exists mind-independently 
either has no structure or is such that multiple, if not 
infinite, alternative structures may be correctly 
ascribed to it. I shall return to the question of natural 
kinds shortly, but for the present the point is this: 
insofar as conceptual relativity is construed as an 
ontological claim, it is not the existence per se of a 
mind-independent reality that is being denied, but 
rather the idea that any such reality has a 
determinate structure.  
Finally, along with the arguments based on meaning 
and on the conceptual relativity of objects, Putnam 
gives us an argument against metaphysical realism 
that is based on an analysis of causality. Putnam  
111 Putnam, Reason, Truth and History, pp. 60-61.  
112 Putnam, Realism with a Human Face, p. 85.  
113 See ibid., Chapter 6 and Renewing Philosophy, p. 
120.  
-53-  
approaches the issue of causality indirectly, as a 
philosopher of language, rather than as a philosopher 
of science or metaphysics. Most often when he 
addresses the issue it is in order to argue that the 
relation of causality does not - cannot - provide signs 
with fixed referents. This line of analysis is intended 
to bolster what I called earlier the "argument from 
language." But he does sometimes come at the issue 

head-on. In "Is the Causal Structure of the Physical 
Itself Something Physical?" 114 Putnam contends that 
causality is not, in fact, usefully construed as 
"something physical." Predictably, Putnam himself 
maintains that the answer to the question raised by 
the title of the piece is "Neither 'yes' nor 'no.'" 
Nonetheless, he dismisses the idea that necessary 
connections are a function of the dispositional powers 
of entities 115 - the suggestion that "disposition talk," 
as he puts it, is not simply a pre-scientific 
obfuscation. 116 Instead, causality, for Putnam, 
would seem to be what the dominant, broadly 
Humean tradition says it is: a sequence of events 
rendered contingently predictable via a theory or 
"law" of nature. 117 As he puts it elsewhere, talking 
about counterfactuals:  
I think that what makes a 
counterfactual true is simply that the 
consequent follows from the antecedent 
together with various relevant natural 
laws or general truths, plus the initial 
and boundary conditions in those 
situations that it would be reasonable to 
regard as compatible with the intentions 
of the speaker who uttered the 
counterfactual. 118  
There is, however, a twist. In Putnam's view, 
causality has a "cognitive or 'intentional' dimension." 
119 Specifically, while it may be the case that 
consequents follow antecedents regardless of the 
subjective concerns of human beings, there is no way 
to single out a particular antecedent as "the cause" of 
a given consequent without  
114 Putnam, Realism with a Human Face, Chapter 5. 
Originally published in Peter A. French, Theodore E. 
Uehling, Jr and Howard K. Wettstein (eds), Midwest 
Studies in Philosophy, vol. 9: Causation and Causal 
Theories, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 

 
1984.  
115 I phrase it this way following Brian Ellis. In op. 
cit., Scientific Essentialism, Ellis defends a position 
that is similar in many ways to Bhaskar's. I believe 
that Ellis's defense of what he and Caroline Lierse call 
"dispositional realism" augments Bhaskar's 
transcendental realism.  
116 Putnam, Realism with a Human Face, pp. 86-88.  
117 Ellis, Scientific Essentialism, especially Chapters 
6-8.  
118 Putnam, Renewing Philosophy, p. 54.  
119 Ibid., p. 57.  
-54-  
introducing the interests of the inquirer into the 
picture. To quote Putnam again:  
If we postulate a "non-Humean 
causation" in the physical world, then 
we are treating causation-as-bringing-
about as something built into the 
physical universe itself: we are saying 
that the physical universe distinguishes 
between "bringers-about" and 
"background conditions." This seems 
incredible. 120  
Such determinations are made by us, Putnam 
maintains. In distinguishing between "background" 
and "cause," we make complex judgments about that 
which is thought to be normal in a given situation 
and about which exceptionalities ought to be 
regarded as significant. "Is all this supposed to be 

built into physical reality?" he asks. 121 The 
argument against metaphysical realism, then, is that 
because the distinction between "background" and 
"cause" is not a feature of the natural world, causality 
cannot be a mind-independent phenomenon.  
The major differences between transcendental 
realism and internal realism should now be relatively 
easy to specify. First, Bhaskar consistently affirms 
the existence of mind-independent entities and 
processes. Moreover, he proposes that the 
"intransitive dimension" is stratified. Putnam affirms 
the existence of mind-independent entities and 
processes only intermittently; most often he 
maintains that such claims are unintelligible. To the 
extent that Putnam does grant the existence of a 
mind-independent reality, he seems to regard it as 
being without determinate form. Second, Bhaskar's 
view is that scientists produce knowledge claims the 
object of which is the natural world itself. This is the 
intransitive object of science, not to be confused with 
the accumulated conceptual resources that are 
necessarily brought to bear upon it in the process of 
inquiry. Putnam's view is that what we know is the-
world-already-under-some-description; the world 
"itself" is not something to which we have cognitive 
access. Third, for Bhaskar, causality is the exercise of 
real dispositional powers. For Putnam, causality 
seems to be something like constant conjunction in 
conformity with the laws of nature, relative to an 
intentional subject. Fourth, affirmation of the 
existence of natural kinds is at the heart of 
transcendental realism. Central to internal realism, 
by sharp contrast, is the rejection of natural kinds. 
Finally, although a pronounced divergence of 
approach to the issue does not emerge until 
Bhaskar's later work, Bhaskar and Putnam disagree  
120 Ibid., p. 87.  
121 Putnam, Realism with a Human Face, p. 88.  

 
-55-  
about how best to conceptualize truth. 122 In 
Dialectic, Bhaskar advances a theory of what he calls 
"alethic truth." Putnam, meanwhile, conceives of 
truth as idealized rational acceptability.  
Now that the actual differences between Bhaskar and 
Putnam are clear, I want to return to the original 
question of whether or not transcendental realism 
can withstand Putnam's critique of metaphysical 
realism. As in the encounter with Kant, I think that 
the answer is yes. At a minimum, a transcendental 
realist can (and to a certain extent Bhaskar himself 
does) offer a number of strong counter-responses, 
arguments that reveal significant weaknesses in 
Putnam's position. I shall begin with the substantive 
ontological issues of causality and the existence (or 
not) of natural kinds. I am not going to address 
directly the more general ontological disagreement. 
Putnam's half-hearted commitment to an external 
reality is good enough, and the concept of ontological 
depth can be incorporated into the discussion of 
causality. I shall then take up the epistemological 
dispute over whether or not the world "itself" can be 
an object of knowledge. Finally, although the 
differences between Bhaskar's and Putnam's 
accounts of truth are important, the concept of 
alethic truth is problematic enough on its own that I 
shall not pursue the comparison. I discuss alethic 
truth in detail in Chapter 4.  
As I have already suggested, Putnam's views on 
causality are difficult to pin down. He rejects what he 
calls "metaphysical" necessity, but claims to believe 
in a non-scientific sense of "physical" necessity. In 
"Is Water Necessarily H2 O?" 123 he says that, in 
contrast to the empiricist A. J. Ayer, "I still accept a 
notion of objective nonlogical modality." 124 Indeed, 
he can even be read in that article as intimating that 

 
he supports "an unrelativised notion of physical 
possibility," as he puts it. In his most recent book, he 
again distances himself from Ayer, stressing "I do not 
think that 'bringing about' is a notion we can or 
should dispense with, or that causal claims do no 
more than subsume events under regularities." 125 In 
the end,  
122 Arguably, the Bhaskar of RTS held an even more 
straightforwardly epistemic theory of truth than does 
Putnam. While Putnam insists that "truth cannot 
simply be rational acceptability" (Reason, Truth and 
History, p. 55), that it must "be identified with 
idealized justification, rather than with justification-
on-present-evidence" (Realism with a Human Face, 
p. 115), the early Bhaskar seemed much more open 
to the idea that truth is simply rational acceptability 
to a qualified audience. See, e.g., RTS p. 249.  
123 Putnam, Realism with a Human Face, Ch. 4.  
124 Ibid., p. 70.  
125 Hilary Putnam, The Threefold Cord: Mind, Body, 
and the World (The John Dewey Essays in Philosophy, 
Number 5), New York: Columbia University Press, 
1999, p. 146.  
-56-  
however, he invariably puts a phenomenological 
gloss on the concept of natural necessity, 126 and 
holds firm in his rejection of what he calls "non-
Humean causality." The notion of "bringing about" 
that is retained is not that of the naturally occurring 
"bringers-about" dismissed in "Is the Causal 
Structure of the Physical Itself Something Physical?" 
but rather that of an intentional agent pursuing a 
course of action. 127 While all of this may appear to 

make Putnam a less challenging critic than would be 
a thinker who consistently and unmistakably holds to 
a non-realist view of causality, in fact what is 
interesting about Putnam is that he seems to 
recognize the weakness of a purely subjective 
account, yet to be unwilling to assert that causality is 
an inherent feature of the natural world. What does 
transcendental realism allow one to say to such an 
interlocutor?  
For a transcendental realist, the first point to be 
made is that, as with transcendental idealism, 
Putnam's notion of causality cannot sustain an 
adequate account of the practice of scientific 
experimentation. While Putnam insists that causal 
claims do more than "subsume events under 
regularities," it is important to see that from his 
perspective it is not so much that they do something 
other than this - e.g., connect events to the exercise 
of real powers embedded in the physical world - as it 
is that they do something in addition to this - 
namely, necessarily express, or incorporate, the 
subjectivity of the person or persons who voice the 
claim. Those times when Putnam focuses exclusively 
on the phenomenon of "physical necessity" - a 
process that he does seem to think operates separate 
from our interests, and which certainly is an element 
of causality - it is hard to see that he is talking about 
anything other than constant conjunction. 128 Given 
that in this respect the Humean model remains 
integral to his account, Putnam is vulnerable to 
Bhaskar's charge that if causal laws were in fact 
grounded by regularities, then experimentation would 
be unintelligible.  
Bhaskar's argument, again, is that causality and 
regularities - let alone causality and regularities the 
identification of which is  
126 See, e.g., Realism with a Human Face, p. 89: 
"whether causation 'really exists' or not, it certainly 
exists in our 'life world.' What makes it real in a 

 
phenomenological sense is the possibility of asking, 
'Is that really the cause?'"  
127 Putnam, The Threefold Cord, p. 146.  
128 Putnam himself is adamant that it makes no 
sense to resolve the concept of causality into a part 
that is "out there" and a part that we "project" onto 
reality (e.g., Realism with a Human Face, pp. 88-90). 
While I don't necessarily agree with his approach to 
these issues, it is not my intention to impose such a 
dichotomy onto Putnam's position. What I do want to 
do, however, is to home in on his concept of physical 
necessity. I think that this is fair.  
-57-  
inextricably tied to subjective interest - are 
ontologically distinct. If we assume on the contrary 
that causality is just the constant conjunction of 
events in accordance with a rule or rules - 
identifiable, in Putnam's version, only against a 
background of subjective interest - then we will not 
be able to explain why it is that the causal 
relationships that scientists discover by inducing 
regularities in artificially closed experimental 
environments seem to hold outside such 
environments - in particular, why they seem to hold 
even in situations where such regularities never 
normally occur. 129 Experimentation, Bhaskar insists, 
presupposes the existence of real generative 
mechanisms - i.e., "things endowed with causal 
powers" 130 - which give rise to manifest events, 
whether naturally occurring or artificially induced. 
One doesn't have to go as far as Bhaskar and claim 
that this line of argument points to the 
transcendental necessity of a realist conception of 
causality in order to maintain that such a conception 
has far more explanatory purchase than any non-
realist alternative. 131 In short, Putnam's ultimate 

dismissal of the idea that physical reality contains 
things endowed with causal powers - "bringers-
about," as he puts it - weakens rather than 
strengthens his position. Rather than capturing 
philosophically the latest developments in sub-atomic 
physics, it undermines his account of experimental 
practice.  
Related to this first point, a transcendental realist 
would say that while Putnam appreciates that the 
production of a causal explanation involves work, he 
is mistaken about what the nature of that work is. 
Putnam focuses his attention on the distinction 
between background and cause. The physical world, 
he says, provides us with a multiplicity of actual 
causes for any given event. In developing an 
explanation, what we do is pick out just one of the 
many causes that an event has, and say that it alone 
is the "cause." All the other causes are then relegated 
to the status of "background." (And again: "which 
prior physical event we will cite as the 'cause,'" 
Putnam maintains, "is a context-sensitive matter," 
132 contingent upon our interests.) The work of 
formulating an explanation, then, consists of 
choosing which causes will be designated 
"background" and which will not.  
129 Thanks to Hugh Lacey, for helping me to clarify 
my understanding of Bhaskar's argument.  
130 Bhaskar, RTS, p. 49.  
131 Thanks to Hugh Lacey for confirming this point. 
See, e.g., Ellis, who argues for what he calls a non-
Humean metaphysic, very similar to that of 
transcendental realism, on the grounds of its greater 
"range" and "coherence" (Ellis, Scientific 
Essentialism, p. 262).  
132 Putnam, The Threefold Cord, p. 146.  

 
-58-  
From a transcendental realist perspective, the 
weakness of this view is that, like Putnam's notion of 
physical necessity, it does not - and cannot, really - 
account for experimentation. On Putnam's model, the 
connections between an event and its many causes 
(Putnam seems to take it as an a priori principle that 
all events have multiple causes) are all equally 
necessary. The work to be done in producing an 
explanation is not, therefore, that of distinguishing 
between necessary and accidental connections. 
Rather it is a matter of deciding which predetermined 
necessary connection is of interest to one, given 
one's concerns. Setting aside the unaddressed 
question of how the multiple necessary connections 
between an event and its many causes come to be 
identified in the first place, the point here is that the 
decision-making that is at the heart of Putnam's 
model is unrelated to the process of experimentation. 
If the production of a causal explanation were as 
Putnam says it is, experimentation would be 
irrelevant.  
Finally, from the perspective of transcendental 
realism, Putnam improperly conflates causality and 
explanation. While he is right to observe that we will 
get different answers depending upon what questions 
we ask - depending, for example, upon whether we 
are concerned with material cause or efficient cause, 
and/or upon the level of emergence with which we 
are concerned - it does not follow from this that the 
necessity of necessary connections is a function of 
our epistemic preoccupations. What Putnam has 
shown is that explanation is inherently intentional. 
And a transcendental realist would agree. One does 
not have to shy away from realism about causality in 
order to detail the ways in which knowledge 
production is intimately related to the interests - 
material as well as cognitive - of human subjects. But 
in showing that explanation is "context-sensitive," as 

 
he puts it, Putnam has hardly shown that the same is 
true of causality. From a transcendental realist 
perspective, all that Putnam has established when he 
claims, for example, that the "cause" of John's heart 
attack depends on the context of inquiry (either he 
ignored his doctor's orders to eat well and exercise or 
he had high blood pressure, depending on one's 
frame of reference) 133 is that different sorts of 
inquiry - in this case cardiology and psychology - 
have different object-domains, involving different 
sorts of causal mechanisms. We can even admit into 
the picture as richly variegated a conception of 
causality as Aristotle had, and say that whether we 
are concerned with, for example, formal cause or 
efficient cause, depends entirely on our practical 
and/or theoretical  
133 Putnam, Renewing Philosophy, pp. 47-48.  
-59-  
proclivities. It still does not follow that the necessity 
of those connections that are deemed necessary is 
contingent upon the subjective concerns of the 
inquirer. Even in the case of final cause - with respect 
to which it does, in fact, make some sense to talk of 
causality being inherently intentional (at least if the 
notion of "purpose" is interpreted subjectively) - it is 
the intentions of the actor(s) in question that are 
regarded as causally determinate, not the conceptual 
framework of the inquirer. 134  
In his most recent book, Putnam himself says that 
"until quite recently" he "found attractive" the view 
that "the notion of explanation has priority over the 
notion of causality." However, he now thinks that the 
two are "interdependent" 135: "the notions of 
explanation and causation presuppose one another at 
every point," he writes, "neither has 'priority' in the 
sense of [one] being reducible to the other." 136 It is 

hard to know exactly what Putnam means by this 
latest pronouncement. At a minimum, I take two 
things from it. The first is that Putnam recognizes 
that his earlier collapse of the concept of causality 
into the concept of explanation is a weakness of 
internal realism as he has heretofore articulated it. 
The second is that he still does not treat causal 
processes in nature as ontologically autonomous vis-
à-vis human subjectivity. He no longer thinks that 
causality reduces in some way to explanation, but he 
is not prepared to give up the idea that causality 
presupposes explanation. The alternative proposed 
by Bhaskar is that explanation presupposes causality, 
but the reverse is not the case; the existence of 
causal mechanisms is not contingent upon the 
possibility of their being explained.  
At the deepest level, however, the disagreement 
between Bhaskar and Putnam over causality is a 
disagreement regarding the existence of natural 
kinds. Putnam, as I have already said, is opposed to 
the  
134 This is not to suggest that an inquirer cannot 
have an effect on that which he or she is 
investigating. On the contrary, the social sciences 
especially must be rigorously self-reflexive. But while 
it is possible that a conceptual choice relating to how 
one explains event or structure x may itself bring 
about some event or structure y, or even effect a 
subsequent change in x, in such a case the 
explanation is the cause of y or x1, not x. Also, it 
should be noted that final cause is not a part of the 
ontology that is developed in RTS. Bhaskar thinks 
that reasons are causes for behavior, but he does not 
think that they are the causes of the physical 
processes studied by natural scientists. Thus any talk 
of causality being intentional in the sense that 
reasons may themselves be causes is moot, for 
Bhaskar, with respect to the natural sciences. I shall 
pursue the issue of final cause, and its implications 
for realism, in the discussion of Bhaskar's philosophy 

 
of social science in Chapter 5.  
135 Putnam, The Threefold Cord, p. 145.  
136 Ibid., p. 137.  
-60-  
idea that nature is inherently and determinately 
structured. Bhaskar, by contrast, holds that entities 
are endowed with real essences, with reference to 
which they fall into natural kinds. Real essences are 
to be distinguished from nominal essences. A real 
essence is the "structures or constitutions in virtue of 
which [a] thing or substance tends to behave the way 
it does." 137 Nominal essences, meanwhile, are 
"those properties the manifestation of which are 
necessary for the thing to be correctly identified as 
one of a certain type." 138 Nominal essences have to 
do with taxonomic criteria; real essences have to do 
with the dispositional properties that account for 
necessary connections. I am not going to restate 
Bhaskar's positive argument for the existence of 
natural kinds based on real essences, set out in 
Chapter 1, although I will reiterate the appeal of it, 
which is that it explains, better than does the 
empirical realist alternative, a number of important 
phenomena, including experiments, induction, laws 
and the logic of scientific development. Instead, I 
want to focus on what I see as the flaw in Putnam's 
reasoning about this issue.  
The weakness of Putnam's case against natural kinds 
is that it is based on a non sequitur. Putnam begins 
with the idea that the relationship between words 
and the natural world is conventional. Words do not 
attach to their referents with any necessity; nature, 
conversely, "has no semantic preferences." 139 The 
same is true of signs such as nominal essences. Like 
individual words, conceptual categories are social 

 
products. This first step in the argument is not 
especially controversial. Bhaskar, certainly, would 
agree with Putnam on the basic point - though, 
ironically enough, he is more careful than is Putnam 
to point out that, precisely by virtue of their social-
historical character, the meanings of signs are 
relatively entrenched. 140 It is Putnam's next step 
that poses a problem. To get to the conclusion that 
there are no real essences (and by extension no 
natural kinds), Putnam must show that it either (a) 
follows from the claim that the natural world does not 
name itself, or (b) follows from the claim that the 
meanings of words are established conventionally. 
Neither inference is sound, however. The conclusion 
simply does not follow. At best, Putnam's repudiation 
of real essences rests on a reification of the linguistic 
conditions of knowledge, such that "We cannot make 
claims about the world except through the use of 
language, which itself attaches to individual referents 
only conventionally," is taken to mean "The world has 
no inherent determinate  
137 Bhaskar, RTS, p. 209.  
138 Ibid.  
139 Putnam, Realism with a Human Face, p. 83.  
140 See Bhaskar, RTS, p. 211.  
-61-  
structure." At worst, it is a dogmatically asserted and 
considerably revised version of Kant's view that there 
is an unknowable material "something" which exists 
independently of consciousness 141 - a version in 
which it is now possible to know that the "something" 
has no inherent structure. In either case, the 
objection stands: it does not follow from the 

conventional nature of nominal essences that real 
essences do not exist. 142  
Putnam, no doubt, would respond by saying that 
there is no way even to designate a supposed natural 
kind without recourse to language, to categories that 
are necessarily connected to human consciousness 
and intentionality. Curiously, though, in a rejoinder to 
Nelson Goodman, Putnam offers an argument against 
"world-making" that is very close to an argument 
that Michael Devitt advances against Putnam himself. 
Putnam's response to Goodman is that it is only 
those objects that are designated by proper names - 
such as "the Big Dipper," to stick with Putnam's 
example - that can be said to be constituted in some 
way by their names. Objects that are designated by 
general names, by contrast, such as "star," are, 
independent of their names, ontologically such that a 
proposed name either is or is not applicable. It is 
worth quoting Putnam at length here. He writes:  
Not only didn't we make Sirius a star in 
the sense in which a carpenter makes a 
table, we didn't make it a star. Our 
ancestors and our contemporaries 
(including astrophysicists), in shaping 
and creating our language, created the 
concept star, with its partly conventional 
boundaries, with its partly indeterminate 
boundaries, and so on. And that concept 
applies to Sirius. The fact that the 
concept star has conventional elements 
doesn't mean that we make it the case 
that the concept applies to any 
particular thing, in the way in which we 
made it the case that the concept "Big 
Dipper" applies to a particular group of 
stars. 143  
Devitt puts forward a very similar argument, but 
directs it towards both Putnam and Goodman: we can 
choose "which kinds we shall  

 
141 See, e.g., Theodor W. Adorno, Kant's Critique of 
Pure Reason (ed. Rolf Tiedemann), Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press, 2001 for a particularly 
incisive treatment of this point.  
142 Putnam sometimes says that the very question 
of whether the natural world has an inherent 
structure, independent of our account(s) of it, is 
meaningless. This is potentially a different line of 
argument from the one that I have just reviewed. 
The problem is that Putnam tends to present it fairly 
enigmatically, and offers little to defend it.  
143 Putnam, Renewing Philosophy, p. 114.  
-62-  
pick out with words," Devitt maintains, but not 
"which kinds objects are members of." 144 What 
Putnam seems not to appreciate is that this 
argument - his own argument - establishes not just 
that the objects designated by general names exist, 
but that they have properties not of our choosing. 
One could, of course, respond that in establishing 
taxonomic and explanatory categories we selectively 
determine which features of the world we may 
eventually come to know. Surely in this way, at least, 
the identification of natural kinds cannot be 
separated from the pursuit of human interests. But in 
such a response we have shifted the terms of the 
discussion. We are no longer talking about whether 
or not the natural world is inherently and 
determinately structured, but rather about one of the 
ways in which science is necessarily value-laden. 
That we choose to gain insight into certain processes 
and not into others is a terribly important fact about 
science, but it does not imply that there are no real 
essences.  
Interestingly, Nicholas Jolley notes that Leibniz 

charges Locke, the author of the distinction between 
nominal and real essences, with having made exactly 
the mistake that I believe Putnam to have made. 
Quoting Leibniz - "I confess, Sir, that there are few 
places where I have less understood the force of your 
argument than here, and this distresses me. If men 
disagree in the name, does that change the things 
themselves…?" 145 - Jolley writes: "Leibniz is surely 
right to accuse Locke of a gross [error] here. The fact 
that some people may mean different things when 
they talk of gold has no tendency to show that gold is 
not a natural kind." 146 Unlike Putnam, Locke did not 
maintain that there are no real essences. Locke 
believed that real essences exist, but that in the case 
of "substances," as he calls material objects, they 
cannot be known. 147 Still, the reference to Locke is 
worth pursuing, as Bhaskar has obviously 
appropriated Locke's categories.  
Locke himself defines the idea of a real essence as 
follows:  
By this real essence, I mean that real 
constitution of anything which is the 
foundation of all those properties that 
are combined  
144 Michael Devitt, Realism and Truth, 
2nd edn, Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1991, p. 245.  
145 Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, New 
Essays in Human Understanding, III, iii; 
A VI. 6; cited in Nicholas Jolley, Leibniz 
and Locke: A Study of the New Essays 
on Human Understanding, Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1984, pp. 149-50.  
146 Jolley, Leibniz and Locke, p. 150.  
147 John Locke, An Essay Concerning 

 
Human Understanding (abridged and 
with Notes by A. S. Pringle-Pattison), 
Hertfordshire: Wordsworth Editions 
Limited, 1998, Book III, Ch. 6, 9.  
-63-  
in, and are constantly found to co-exist 
with the nominal essence; that 
particular constitution which everything 
has within itself, without any relation to 
anything without it. 148  
By nominal essence, meanwhile, Locke says he 
means "the abstract idea [of a thing] to which the 
general name is annexed." 149 He illustrates the 
distinction with the example of gold. "The nominal 
essence of gold," he writes,  
is that complex idea the word gold 
stands for, let it be, for instance, a body 
yellow, of a certain weight, malleable, 
fusible, and fixed. But the real essence 
is the constitution of the insensible parts 
of that body, on which those qualities 
and all the other properties of gold 
depend. 150  
In the case of entities that are themselves abstract, 
Locke says, the nominal and the real essence of an 
object coincide; to know the nominal essence is to 
know the real essence. In the case of material 
objects, by contrast, the nominal and real essences 
are "always quite different." 151 In the latter case, 
real essences cannot be known. Locke is adamant 
about this. As Irving Copi observes, Locke's 
conviction in this regard follows from his theory of 
knowledge - specifically, from his belief that 
knowledge is ultimately of ideas rather than of 

 
material things. 152 As Locke puts it, "Since the 
mind, in all its thoughts and reasonings, hath no 
other immediate object but its own ideas, which it 
alone does or can contemplate, it is evident that our 
knowledge is only conversant about them." 153 Since 
we can have no knowledge of real essences, Locke 
argues, any sorting of material objects into kinds is 
necessarily done on the basis of knowledge that we 
do have - more or less by definition - namely, that of 
nominal essences. Those who claim to have sorted 
objects into kinds on the basis of their real essences, 
i.e., into natural kinds, simply have not done so; 
"that which is done by this attempt," Locke says, "is 
only to put the name  
148 Ibid., Book III, Ch. 6, 6.  
149 Ibid., Book III, Ch. 3, 18; Book III, Ch. 6, 2.  
150 Ibid., Book III, Ch. 6, 2.  
151 Ibid., Book III, Ch. 3, 18.  
152 Irving M. Copi, "Essence and Accident," in 
Stephen P. Schwartz (ed.), Naming, Necessity and 
Natural Kinds, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1977, p. 186. The article originally appeared in The 
Journal of Philosophy, LI (November 11, 1954), 706-
719.  
153 Locke, An Essay Concerning Human 
Understanding, Book IV, Ch. 1, 1; Book IV, Ch. 2, 1.  
-64-  
or sound in the place and stead of the thing having 
that real essence, without knowing what the real 
essence is." 154  

Bringing Locke into the foreground allows us to put 
the differences between Bhaskar and Putnam 
regarding natural kinds into context. Bhaskar is 
involved in an overt attempt to recover Locke's 
concept of a real essence. The concept is rendered 
moot by Locke on epistemological grounds, but as 
Copi suggests, there is in fact no compelling reason 
to decide with Locke that the internal constitutions of 
things are unknowable. 155 Locke himself writes 
almost wistfully that if we could have knowledge of 
real essences, such knowledge would no doubt allow 
us to explain those qualities of objects which form 
the basis of what limited knowledge of the world we 
do have. 156 Bhaskar's claim is that this is precisely 
what scientific explanations do allow us to do, and in 
just the way that Locke imagines. Thus Bhaskar 
writes, "There is no conflict between explanatory and 
taxonomic knowledge. Rather, at the limit they meet 
in the notion of the real essences of the natural 
kinds, whose tendencies are described in statements 
of causal laws." 157 Moreover, he contends, it is only 
if we conceptualize scientific explanations in this way, 
as yielding real definitions of real essences, that we 
are able to make sense of scientific practice. Putnam, 
by contrast, proceeds along the dominant post-
Lockean trajectory, in which even the existence of 
real essences is eventually denied. Incidentally, 
although he is hardly alone in this, Putnam can be 
seen as ontologizing Locke's epistemological 
proscriptions concerning real essences in much the 
same way as he ontologizes Kant's claim that we 
cannot know things-in-themselves. However, viewed 
in relation to Locke, we can also see that Putnam's 
views do not represent the logical end-point of the 
trajectory; Putnam rejects real essences as the basis 
for natural kinds, but he is not prepared, as others 
have been, to affirm that language constitutes the 
ultimate ontological ground.  
The final point of contention between Bhaskar and 
Putnam that I want to comment upon is 
epistemological rather than ontological.  

 
154 Ibid., Book III, Ch. 6, 48.  
155 As noted above, Copi thinks that Locke's 
conclusion in this regard is based on his erroneous 
view that it is only ideas that admit of (certain) 
knowledge. Bhaskar agrees that Locke's conclusion is 
"philosophical" rather than "scientific," as Bhaskar 
puts it (RTS, p. 60), but traces Locke's 
"mistake" (RTS, p. 60) to what he argues is Locke's 
necessarily ahistorical conception knowledge, 
namely, as arising from the perceptions of 
individuals, outside the context of social practice.  
156 Locke, An Essay Concerning Human 
Understanding, Book IV, Ch. 3, 25; Book IV, Ch. 6.  
157 Bhaskar, RTS, p. 174.  
-65-  
The question here is, "Given the mediated character 
of our knowledge of the world, what is it possible for 
us to have knowledge of?" To begin, it is important to 
recognize that with regard to the epistemic conditions 
in which we necessarily find ourselves, Bhaskar and 
Putnam do not actually disagree. Bhaskar is as quick 
as Putnam is to acknowledge that when we offer an 
explanation, we are doing something other than 
pointing to an object. If anything, Bhaskar is even 
more aware than Putnam is of not just the conceptual 
character of scientific explanations, but their social 
and historical characteristics as well. The difference 
between Bhaskar and Putnam on this point, then, is 
not that Bhaskar believes in unmediated cognitive 
access to the natural world while Putnam does not. 
Rather, it lies in the significance that each attaches to 
the mediation which both acknowledge.  
For Putnam, the fact that scientists' cognitive access 
to the world is mediated by, among other things, 

 
language, mathematics and a preferred explanatory 
framework, implies that we may not understand 
ourselves to have knowledge of the world as it is in a 
pre- or non-conceptualized state. Putnam would have 
it that such a conclusion is unexceptional. It does not 
mean that theories are the only things that exist, or 
even that natural processes are "hidden or 
noumenal," he writes. Rather, he maintains, "it 
simply means that you can't describe the world 
without describing it." 158 But there is more to it than 
this. Barring the occasional disclaimer, what Putnam 
repeatedly tells us is not that we know the world, 
under some description, but rather that what we 
know is "the-world-under-somedescription." To put it 
differently, the claim is not, in fact, merely that we 
can't know things without knowing them. Rather, it is 
that the act of knowing and the nature of that which 
is known cannot be analytically distinguished. Such a 
claim leaves Putnam in a very different position, I 
think, from that in which he presents himself as 
being in passages such as the one I've just cited. At 
the very least, by holding that we cannot have 
knowledge of preconceptualized phenomena, and yet 
maintaining that such phenomena do exist, if only in 
an indeterminate state, Putnam most certainly is 
saying that something about the world is hidden or 
noumenal. Beyond this, however, I think Putnam 
really must be seen as advancing an ontological claim 
regarding the constitution of all possible objects of 
knowledge - namely, that they are necessarily 
concept-dependent - and not simply as voicing a 
truism about what is involved in the activity of 
thought. If Putnam did not at some level regard "the 
world" and "the-world-under-some-description" as 
qualitatively  
158 Putnam, Renewing Philosophy, p. 123.  
-66-  
different kinds of object, he would not be so intent on 

convincing us that talk about knowledge of the 
former is unintelligible.  
Bhaskar, by contrast, draws no ontological 
conclusions from the fact that knowledge is 
conceptually mediated. For Bhaskar, the obvious fact 
that we cannot produce knowledge of an object 
without conceptualizing it is worth noting because it 
provides a counter to the "ontic fallacy," which lies at 
the heart of positivism. Important though the point 
may be, however, it does not imply that it is our 
conceptualizing of things that determines what their 
properties are. Indeed, it is a central tenet of 
transcendental realism that the intransitive objects of 
natural science are what they are regardless of 
whether anyone even cares to conceptualize them. 
Putnam asks, "Why should one suppose that reality 
can be described independent of our descriptions?" 
159 For a transcendental realist, this is the wrong 
question. Of course we can't describe things without 
describing them. Nonetheless our descriptions are 
descriptions of things. What matters is not whether 
or not it is possible to think about things without 
conceptualizing them, but whether or not our 
concepts have explanatory power vis-à-vis the 
intransitive object(s) of our thought.  
Putnam, I think, would respond that the 
transcendental realist has simply adopted a pre-
philosophical stance in relation to scientific theory. In 
persisting in talk of cognitive engagement with 
"intransitive objects," he would contend, the 
transcendental realist has entirely side-stepped the 
issue of mediation. After all, what can it mean to 
acknowledge that we know the world only through 
one or another conceptual lens, but to nonetheless 
maintain that what we know in such a manner is the 
world "itself," as it is apart from any cognitive 
endeavor on our part? Anyone who claims to know 
something about the world in and of itself, Putnam 
would say, has simply neglected to render explicit the 
theoretical framework within which his or her 

 
propositions may be intelligibly articulated; anyone 
who insists that such knowledge is possible cannot 
seriously have come to terms with the idea that we 
do not have unmediated access to our surroundings.  
It is not obvious, however, that Putnam is entitled to 
the last word. From the perspective of transcendental 
realism, it is nonsensical to say that the act of 
conceptualizing something removes the phenomenon 
from us as an object of thought. For the 
transcendental realist, thought is a means - though 
certainly not the only means - through which we 
garner information. To say that because thought is 
thought, we do not - cannot - think about the world 
"itself" is, from  
159 Ibid., p. 122.  
-67-  
this perspective, simply to reify our own subjective 
capacities: the fact that we can think is projected 
onto the world in the form of "thought-objects," 
which must be taken to be the only possible objects 
of thought. Such thought-objects then function as 
effective barriers to scientific knowledge of the world. 
The transcendental realist does not deny that thought 
involves conceptualization, or even that scientific 
"facts" are most often theory-specific. What he or she 
does deny is the idea that thought itself bars us from 
having knowledge of the world - and thus that 
scientific knowledge claims may not be taken to be 
claims about the world "itself."  
Ironically enough it is Putnam who, in disavowing 
what Bhaskar would call a "philosophical ontology," 
ultimately preserves the ideal of pure, objective 
knowledge. Bhaskar distinguishes between scientific 
and philosophical ontologies. A scientific ontology he 
says, is a specific, substantive claim about the world. 

Scientific ontologies are modified, elaborated upon or 
discarded as part of the ongoing process of scientific 
investigation. A philosophical ontology, by contrast, is 
a general metaphysical framework. Unlike scientific 
ontologies, which are produced through theoretical-
practical engagement with elements of the natural 
world, a philosophical ontology is produced through 
reflection on the conditions of possibility of a practice 
such as that of science itself. 160 In endorsing a kind 
of ultimate ontological neutrality, 161 it is in fact 
Putnam who returns to the notion of unmediated 
objectivity: the practice of science in general, now - 
as opposed to individual theories - is thought to 
presume nothing at all about the world "itself." By 
taking the practice of science to be compatible with 
all possible philosophical ontologies, it is the internal 
realist, rather than the transcendental realist, who 
appears to believe in a presuppositionless scientific 
practice.  
Putnam might actually agree with such a 
characterization of his views. Certainly the position 
described is congruent with the overall thrust of his 
thinking. The practice of science assumes nothing 
about "the world itself," he would say, because "the 
world itself" is a meaningless concept. To repudiate 
metaphysics for this reason, we can imagine him 
continuing, hardly puts one in the corner with 
positivism. After all, the whole point of internal 
realism is that there  
160 In Bhaskar's words, "the former [i.e., 
philosophical ontologies] delineating the general 
categorial form of the world presupposed by the 
nature of scientific (or other) activities, the latter 
[scientific ontologies] articulating the specific 
contents of the world, characterized as the 
intransitive ontic objects of specific epistemics or 
research inquiries." Dialectic, p. 107.  
161 Albeit inconsistently, since he also seems to 
maintain as an ontological minimum that the world 

 
"itself" has no structure.  
-68-  
is no theory-free knowledge to be had. Bhaskar's 
response would be to say that it is not actually 
possible to side-step commitment to a philosophical 
ontology. "The philosophy of science," he writes, 
"abhors an ontological vacuum;" 162 those who claim 
to be operating without a metaphysics are merely 
operating with an implicit one. The implicit ontology 
of internal realism is that of empirical realism. 163 
Ultimately, then, the dispute over what scientific 
theories are theories of (i.e., the world itself or some 
other entity) amounts to a dispute over whether or 
not empirical realism is an adequate philosophical 
ontology of science. Bhaskar, of course, believes 
himself to have shown that it is not - and I think that 
he is right about this.  
Having looked now at the actual points of difference 
between internal realism and transcendental realism, 
I will reaffirm my contention that Putnam has not, in 
the end, demonstrated that a realist position such as 
Bhaskar's is unintelligible. Nevertheless, I think that 
Putnam's views ought to be taken seriously. While I 
would not draw the ontological conclusions that 
Putnam does from the fact that knowledge is both 
mediated and itself a mediator, I do think that the 
issue is under-theorized in the works of Bhaskar with 
which I am concerned. Let me end by saying that in 
my view Putnam should be read sympathetically by 
transcendental realists. Putnam is not, at heart, an 
anti-realist. Rather, he is a realist who appears to be 
sincerely grappling with the problem of the 
relationship between subject and object. While I do 
not believe him to have resolved the problem in a 
satisfactory manner, I do believe him to have fully 
appreciated its gravity. For this reason, he has 
something of value to contribute to transcendental 

 
realism.  
162 Bhaskar, RTS, p. 40.  
163 See, e.g., Bhaskar, Scientific Realism and Human 
Emancipation, pp. 5-9.  
-69-  
 
[This page intentionally left blank.]  
-70-  
4  
Alethic truth 164 
 
Having looked at Bhaskar's effort to vindicate 
ontology, as he has put it, 165 I want to turn my 
attention to the concept of truth. Bhaskar has not 
written a great deal on this topic, despite a concern 
to defend the idea that science progresses rationally. 
Although he came out against the correspondence 
theory of truth as early as RTS - implicitly endorsing 
an Althusserian-style epistemic, or consensus, theory 
- it was not until the early 1990s, with the publication 
of Dialectic: The Pulse of Freedom (hereafter DPF) 
and Plato, Etc. (hereafter PE), that Bhaskar explicitly 
put forward an alternative account of truth. Bhaskar's 
theory of truth is centered on the concept of "alethic 
truth," which he sees as the basis of what he calls the 
"truth tetrapolity." My aim in the present chapter is 
to take stock of this approach. I believe that 
Bhaskar's account of truth is of little help in 
theorizing what he terms rationality at the level of 
judgment: the concept of alethic truth is unsound, 

 
and the truth tetrapolity into which it is seen to fit is 
untenable.  
The discussion falls into three sections. In the first 
section, I look very closely at the concept of alethic 
truth. I argue that there are three types of reason - 
ontological, epistemological and what I have called 
political - for judging the concept of alethic truth to 
be either incorrect or more trouble than it's worth. 
The ontological objection is that the equation of truth 
and states of affairs is improper; truth and states of 
affairs, while related, are not at all the same sort of 
thing. The epistemological objection is that the 
concept of alethic truth makes it seem as though 
important epistemic issues have been resolved, when 
in fact they have not been. The political objection is  
164 This chapter appeared in slightly modified form 
in Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 30(3), 
September 2000. © Sage Publications, Inc.  
165 Bhaskar, PE, p. 47.  
-71-  
that the concept of alethic truth makes it seem as 
though critical realism is a scientistic and absolutist 
theory of knowledge, when in fact it is not. In the 
second section, I consider the notion of the truth 
tetrapolity, into which Bhaskar would have alethic 
truth fit. Here I suggest that the tetrapolity is not, in 
fact, the dialectical whole that Bhaskar would seem 
to think it is - that it does not, indeed cannot, 
generate a theory of truth adequate to the demands 
of critical realism. Finally, in the third section, I 
propose an approach to truth that I believe sustains a 
far superior account of rationality at the level of 
judgment than that which is supported by Bhaskar's 
current thinking. The argument in this section 
proceeds hermeneutically. After setting out an 

alternative framework, I try to show how adopting 
such a framework allows one to express coherently 
what Bhaskar himself might have - or perhaps ought 
to have - meant to convey through the notion of a 
truth tetrapolity. This re-reading of Bhaskar from the 
perspective of an alternative position should not be 
mistaken for a rescue of the concept of alethic truth, 
however. Bhaskar's theory of truth is unsatisfactory, 
and must be rejected.  
Alethic truth  
With the publication of DPF and PE, Bhaskar turned 
his attention from Hume, and to a certain extent 
Kant, to Hegel. In DPF and PE, Bhaskar sought to 
transform critical realism into a fully dialectical 
philosophical system. Dialectical critical realism, as it 
quickly came to be called, is a comprehensive 
theoretical framework in which the category of 
absence is seen to lead to the necessity for, and 
possibility of, what Bhaskar has termed 
"eudaimonistic" society. 166 The realism about 
natural and social structures that Bhaskar advanced 
in RTS and The Possibility of Naturalism (PON) is 
seen as being part of the "prime (first) moment" of a 
"circuit of … links and relations" which forms a larger 
conceptual whole. 167 Also part of the "1M" aspect of 
dialectical critical realism is the notion of alethic 
truth. I do not intend to address dialectical critical 
realism as a whole. My analyis shall be confined to 
the concept of alethic truth.  
Alethic truth, Bhaskar tells us, is  
a species of ontological truth 
constituting and following on the truth 
of, or real reason(s) for, or dialectical 
ground of, things, as  
166 Ibid., p. 163.  

 
167 Ibid., p. 249.  
-72-  
distinct from propositions, possible in 
virtue of the ontological stratification of 
the world and attainable in virtue of the 
dynamic character of science. 168  
Bhaskar speaks of alethic truth mainly in the context 
of describing scientific advance. Specifically, the 
concept of alethic truth is an elaboration of the 
Identification stage of the DREI(C) model of scientific 
practice set out in Bhaskar's earlier work. 169 On the 
DREI(C) model, an explanandum is Discovered, 
possible explanations are posited via Retroductive 
argument, competing accounts are Eliminated and an 
explanans, in the form of an underlying causal 
mechanism, is Identified (followed by necessary 
Corrections being made to the overall theoretical 
framework). "What characterizes the moment [of 
identification]?" asks Bhaskar. Nothing other than 
that "(s)cientists are prepared to referentially detach 
Sj, or some (transfactually efficacious) phenomena at 
it, as real reason Ri for, or, as I shall also say, the 
alethic truth of, Si or a set of phenomena at it." 170 
Or again, as he puts it in DPF,  
[t]he scientific neophyte is from the 
beginning confronted with inter-
subjectively established facts, which 
have become referentially detached. Her 
job is to discover the real reason or 
truth of these ontic entities, the Sj of Si. 
Starting life as a subjective hunch, it 
may become for her colleagues an 
empirical certainty. When its reality is 
established beyond a reasonable doubt, 
science now knows the reason for, or 
one could say the truth of, Si - the 

 
alethic or dialectical reason (dr´) of the 
phenomena it set out to explain. 171  
Alethic truths, then, are the underlying processes 
that both natural and social scientists seek to 
identify. To be the alethic truth (y) of x is to be the 
generative mechanism that gives rise to x. Moreover, 
just as, for any given alethic truth (y) of x, y is the 
underlying generative mechanism that causes x to 
be, alethic truth in general is the totality of real, 
causal powers that give rise to both actual and 
empirical events. One would not be off the mark here 
to think of a recon-  
168 Ibid., p. 251.  
169 Bhaskar, Scientific Realism and Human 
Emancipation, p. 68. Here the model is DREI. The 
DREI(C) formulation appears in DPF.  
170 Bhaskar, PE, p. 25.  
171 Bhaskar, DPF, p. 109.  
-73-  
figured yet recognizable Aristotelian conception of 
form. In Bhaskar's words,  
[i]n science, experimental praxis … 
enables fallible access to the generative 
mechanisms of nature. This is the true 
world of forms, which account in all their 
complex, manifold and mediated 
determinations for all the phenomena of 
what identity theorists are pleased to 
call the sensate (which, to stress, is a 
category mistake) and non-sensate 
world. 172  

To return to the initially cited definition of the term, 
alethic truth can be seen to be the "real reason for … 
things" precisely because alethic truths just are, 
literally, those underlying real essences, or powers, 
which constitute the domain of the Real, as Bhaskar 
called it in RTS. Similarly, alethic truth is "possible in 
virtue of ontological stratification" because, in 
Bhaskar's view, causality as such can only be 
accounted for via the presumption of depth. In so far 
as talk of alethic truth is talk of causal relationships, 
it too presupposes ontological depth. Finally, what it 
means to say that alethic truth is "attainable in virtue 
of the dynamic character of science" is that the goal 
of identifying causal powers at ever increasing depth 
presupposes just the model of scientific progress that 
Bhaskar has proposed.  
What are we to make of this idea? Is truth indeed a 
predicate that may be properly attributed to "things," 
as Bhaskar would have it? My view is that the 
concept of alethic truth is deeply flawed. As 
previously stated, there are three different sorts of 
reason - ontological, epistemological and what I have 
called political - for reaching such a conclusion. I 
shall consider each in turn.  
The ontology of alethic 
truth  
The ontological objection is the most fundamental. 
Simply put, it is that Bhaskar was right to insist, as 
he did in his earlier work, that ideas are not to be 
mistaken for underlying real essences. From the 
perspective of RTS, truth - as essentially ideational 
an object as they come - belongs squarely on the 
epistemological side of an epistemology/ontology 
divide. Gravity, conversely, is no more the "truth" of 
the earth's orbit than it is its meaning, or an 
expression of its narrative logic. The terminology 
carries weight metaphorically, but not, for a 

 
materialist at least, metaphysically. To suggest 
otherwise is to fall prey to a form of absolute idealism 
in which ideas are taken to  
172 Ibid., p. 164.  
-74-  
be an independent feature of the natural world rather 
than the contingent products of human subjectivity. 
173  
Of course, such a claim on its own amounts to little 
more than a pronouncement of one's disagreement 
with Bhaskar. For it is precisely Bhaskar's contention 
that, in the case of alethic truth, the term "truth" 
does refer, presumably properly, to underlying causal 
mechanisms. Whether truth is or is not purely 
ideational, that is, is precisely the point of the 
dispute. And even this way of putting it could be 
construed as misleading, or at least prejudicial, as it 
posits in advance the existence of a definite property, 
truth, whose characteristics need only be correctly 
identified. A proponent of a deflationary theory of 
truth, for example, would balk at such a formulation.  
How, then, is one to register the complaint that, by 
identifying truth with generative mechanisms, 
Bhaskar has committed the very category error that 
he so deftly diagnosed in his earlier works? Perhaps a 
way to proceed is to set aside the question "Is truth 
purely conceptual?" and ask instead "What sound 
reason(s) might there be, if any, to assume that 
truth is not purely conceptual, and to therefore 
regard as legitimate the use of the term to refer to 
generative mechanisms in nature and society?" Such 
an approach reveals the weakness of the case.  
Two preliminary points must be made, however. The 
first is that a phenomenon is said to be an alethic 

 
truth if and only if it is believed to be the underlying 
cause of that of which it may be said to be the 
"truth." Given this condition, our understanding of 
alethic truth must be refined. Alethic truth must be 
seen to mean something like "What we call a real 
essence when we are confident that it has certain 
specified causal properties" - or, to use Bhaskar's 
terminology, "What a generative mechanism is called 
once it has been 'referentially detached', i.e., agreed 
upon as being the 'real reason' for some given 
phenomenon." 174 The revised definition is crucial in 
that it reveals the term to have a necessarily 
subjective sense, given by the stipulation "when we 
are confident." Alethic truth is thus an inherently 
equivocal concept, peculiar in that while it designates 
ontic phenomena, its use in any given instance 
requires that certain epistemic  
173 This is not to say that human beings are not 
ourselves part of nature, or that our consciousness is 
not materially embodied, only that ideas do not 
inhere in natural processes, or exist independently of 
human subjects.  
174 It is clear from the previously cited passages 
from PE, p. 25. and DPF, p. 109 that the condition of 
possibility of the referential detachment of a posited 
causal mechanism is a subjective one, namely, "[w]
hen its reality is established beyond a reasonable 
doubt" (DPF, p. 109).  
-75-  
conditions have been satisfied, viz., that referential 
detachment has been achieved.  
The second point is that while Bhaskar has claimed 
that alethic truth is a property of things - "no longer 
tied to language-use per se" 175 - he has not rejected 
the idea that other kinds of truth may properly 

pertain to the evaluation of propositions. In fact, he 
has attempted to incorporate most if not all of the 
major propositional approaches to truth 176 currently 
on offer into the concept of a truth tetrapolity. At 
issue, therefore, is not whether the term truth applies 
to propositions, for this has been settled, albeit in 
quite general terms, in the affirmative. Rather, it is 
whether the meaning of the term ought to be 
extended, such that truth may also be taken to 
specify real essences and the causal powers that they 
ground. If such a case cannot be made - and the 
onus here is on Bhaskar, since he is the one who 
wants to increase the number of objects, literally, to 
which truth may refer - then we will have to make do 
with the propositional version of truth, which I 
accept, and which Bhaskar accepts with the 
qualification that it is limited. On this model, truth is 
indeed purely ideational, by which I mean that it is a 
characteristic, or possible characteristic, of 
propositions, 177 rather than a causal power of 
entities. In terms of the typology of RTS, it is an 
epistemological rather than an ontological 
phenomenon, an object of the transitive rather than 
the intransitive dimension of science.  
Let me return now to the question of whether there 
may be sound reasons to refer to generative 
mechanisms as truths. Here I will be brief: so far as I 
can tell, Bhaskar does not in fact provide us with any 
reasons, sound or otherwise, why it would be a good 
idea to do so. It is simply asserted that alethic truth 
is "the truth of or reason for things, people and 
phenomena generally (including in science most 
importantly causal structures and generative 
mechanisms), not propositions." 178 To be sure, one 
has the prerogative of defining one's terms however 
one likes, but definitional fiat is no substitute for a 
persuasive argument. Meanwhile, although little is 
offered to convince us to endorse the move in 
question, there are good grounds for rejecting it.  
175 This phrase is part of the definition of ontological 

 
truth, of which alethic truth is a "special case" (PE, p. 
64).  
176 Thanks to Tobin Nellhaus for this way of putting 
this idea.  
177 For a useful discussion within the analytic 
tradition of whether it is sentences, statements or 
propositions that should be taken to be truth bearers, 
see William P. Alston, A Realist Conception of Truth, 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1996, Chapter 
1.  
178 PE, p. 64.  
-76-  
We have determined that what Bhaskar means by the 
term alethic truth is something like "What we call the 
underlying cause of a given phenomenon x when we 
are confident that our beliefs about what has caused 
x are correct." The concept of alethic truth is thus an 
amalgam of the concepts of causality and - at what 
might be called a meta-definitional level - subjective 
certainty. Is there any chance that the meaning of 
the term is a whole that is greater than the sum of its 
parts? I don't think so. The extensional content of the 
term is exactly that of the term causal structure; to 
be the alethic truth of something just is to be its 
cause. 179 Moreover, while the concept of causality 
can be defined without recourse to the concept of 
alethic truth, the reverse is not the case. We begin 
with the concept of the causal power of a generative 
mechanism, and then, for the purpose of meeting 
certain philosophical objectives, rename it "alethic 
truth." Meanwhile, the epistemological sense of the 
term, important though it may be to acknowledge, is 
nothing other than a tautological stipulation 
regarding the epistemic conditions under which the 
term's denotative meaning may be employed. The 

 
term alethic truth itself tells us only, and only 
indirectly, that we must already have come to certain 
epistemic conclusions. Far from authorizing such 
judgments, it presupposes that they have already 
been made, on grounds that the concept of alethic 
truth does not itself specify. But if the concept of 
alethic truth adds nothing to the concept of a causal 
power - other than an ex post facto affirmation that 
scientists have indeed come to be confident that a 
particular theory correctly identifies the basis for the 
causal powers of a given structure or "thing" - then 
there would seem to be no pressing reason to adopt 
the revised terminology. It is redundant at best, 
clumsy and misleading at worst.  
The awkwardness of substituting the term alethic 
truth for that of causal structure becomes evident if 
one attempts to follow through with the 
recommendation consistently. If the terms are 
regarded as being interchangeable, it follows that 
causal relationships may be said to be truthful 
relationships. But clearly the propositions "Planetary 
orbit is the result of gravity" and "The relationship 
between planetary orbit and gravity is a truthful one" 
are not equivalent in any meaningful way. To be 
sure, a proponent of Bhaskar's position would 
respond that the use of the word "truthful" here 
seems improper because it is: "truthful" in this sense 
conveys what Bhaskar terms the "normative-
fiduciary" aspect of truth, while our present  
179 There is some ambiguity regarding whether the 
alethic truth of x is x's own real essence or the real 
essence of that which, in virtue of it's own essence, 
gives rise tox.  
-77-  
concern is with the "alethic ontological" aspect. A 
similar rejoinder would be proffered in response to 

the complaint that, while the concept of truth as we 
normally think of it seems to be internally linked to a 
notion of falsehood, the concept of alethic truth 
appears to have no such contrary. 180 The problem 
with such a line of defense, however, is that it does 
not address the real objection, which is that as soon 
as one makes use of the term "truth," one means by 
it something other than what Bhaskar means by 
"alethic" truth. The proponent of the concept of 
alethic truth has said "I admit that it makes no sense 
when you try to use the word truth in the way that 
Bhaskar is proposing, but that's only because you 
aren't really using it in the way that Bhaskar is 
proposing." This tells us that the term has an 
extremely limited application. To be as cavalier about 
designation as the intelligible use of the term alethic 
truth demands is to presume that one may indeed 
make words mean so many different things, as Alice 
puts it to the Cheshire Cat.  
Barring the introduction of a private language, then, 
in which the concept of truth, in the case of alethic 
truth, is disentangled from all of its established 
associations, we must reject the proposal that truth 
be regarded as referring to the causal properties of 
underlying structures. Truth, we must conclude, is a 
crucial component of the transitive dimension of 
science. But it is neither a part of, nor an appropriate 
name for, natural or social processes themselves. 181 
Such a conclusion is entirely consistent with the 
principles of critical realism as they were developed 
in RTS. Indeed, from the perspective of RTS, one 
solid reason for a materialist to avoid referring to 
generative mechanisms as truth(s) is that to do 
otherwise is to reproduce the fundamental ontological 
error of idealism.  
The epistemology of 
alethic truth  

 
The epistemological problem with the concept of 
alethic truth is that, because Bhaskar treats it as 
being in a certain sense foundational - and because 
it's referred to as "truth" - it is easy to suppose that 
it  
180 It is true that in DPF, e.g., p. 110, Bhaskar 
affirms that "in dialectical explanatory expositions … 
what is false (as well as necessary) is in the 
ontological order itself, not (merely) in the 
epistemological order." Perhaps this can be taken to 
be a reference to a concept of alethic falsity. Even so, 
with reference to ontological phenomena the 
language of truth and falsity makes sense, if it does, 
metaphorically rather than literally.  
181 The case is somewhat more complex with 
respect to social life, where the intransitive domain is 
internally related to human subjectivity, but the 
conclusion is effectively the same.  
-78-  
constitutes a criterion of validity. Apart from being 
incorrect, such a supposition makes it seem as 
though difficult issues of justification and of theory 
choice have been resolved, when in fact they have 
not been. That such issues do, ultimately, remain 
outstanding is an indication of the weakness of the 
truth tetrapolity as an overall theoretical framework, 
a matter to which I shall return later.  
Bhaskar tells us that science progresses as ever 
deeper levels of alethic truth are identified. As 
previously described, alethic truths emerge at the 
point at which scientists referentially detach some 
causal process, y, having achieved inter-subjective 
agreement that y is indeed the cause of x. 182 At the 
moment of detachment, "causal process y" becomes 
known as "alethic truth y" - or, more precisely, 

"alethic truth (y) of x." Now, the epistemic question 
is: On what grounds are scientists justified in 
reaching such an agreement? What is the criterion for 
concluding that theory A, viz, "y is the cause of x," is 
true rather than competing theories B or C? 183 
Bhaskar says very little in response to this question. 
In DPF, for example, we find only that  
(i)n general a plurality of hypotheses 
will be considered (Feyerabend's 
moment) in a multiplicity of research 
programmes (Lakatos's moment) until 
all but one are … eliminated (Popper's 
moment) 184  
at the E, or Elimination stage in the DREI(C) model of 
scientific discovery. "This is the fallibilist absenting 
determination within the epistemically progressive 
movement in the dialectic of science," Bhaskar says. 
185 Or again, in PE, we are told that "Rigorous tests, 
wherever possible, under experimentally closed 
conditions, lead to the Elimination of inadequate 
theories." 186 Bhaskar seems to be satisfied that 
scientists do, in the end, agree upon which theories 
are to be preferred - in fact one could charge him 
with underestimating  
182 DPF, p. 109; PE, p. 64.  
183 I do not mean to foreclose debate over the 
definition of truth in favor of the realist approach that 
I prefer. Neither do I mean to suggest an exact 
equivalence between the proposition "'x is the cause 
of y' is true" and the proposition "x is indeed the 
cause of y." Rather, I believe that from the 
perspective of critical realism, assent to the latter 
implies assent to the former. I have cast the 
discussion in terms of the former because I believe 
that to do so results in a more perspicuous 
presentation of the issues at hand.  

 
184 Bhaskar, DPF, p. 109.  
185 Ibid.  
186 Bhaskar, PE, pp. 24-25.  
-79-  
the degree of controversy and dissent involved in the 
establishment of such conclusions - but, as alluded to 
at the outset of this discussion, he has never been 
much concerned to determine the grounds upon 
which such agreement might be based. The closest 
he comes is a brief passage in RTS, in which he 
remarks that  
[w]e can then allow, for example, that 
theory Ta is preferable to a theory Tb … 
if theory TA can explain under its 
descriptions almost all the phenomena 
… that TB can explain under its 
descriptions … plus some significant 
phenomena that TB cannot explain. 187  
As a substantive criterion of judgmental rationality, 
greater explanatory power is surely a start. But it is 
far from a fully developed account, and there is no 
discussion beyond this passing comment.  
Bhaskar's inattention to the grounds for judging 
theories to be (fallibly) true invites two potential 
conclusions. First, one might infer from the lack of 
analysis that it is inter-subjective agreement itself 
that is the criterion of validity. From this perspective, 
a theory is to be regarded as true insofar as 
scientists, for whatever reason, agree that it is true. 
To a very real extent, this seems to be - or at least to 
have been at one time - Bhaskar's position. Thus, in 
a move that would account for his lack of interest in 

 
the question of validity, he insisted in RTS that 
scientists must be left to themselves to determine the 
epistemic grounds for their own inter-subjective 
conclusions. Indeed, in RTS Bhaskar states explicitly 
that  
[T]he judgement of the truth of a 
proposition is necessarily intrinsic to the 
science concerned. There is no way in 
which we can look at the world and then 
at a sentence and ask whether they fit. 
There is just the expression (of the 
world) in speech (or thought). 188  
Bhaskar seems to have moved from this position over 
the years, but it is worth noting by way of passing 
response that (a) if judgments of validity are implicit 
in the activity of science, then it is not clear why 
philosophers ought not to be permitted to reflect 
upon them, and (b) a claim to the effect that inter-
subjective agreement itself confers validity is difficult 
to reconcile with Bhaskar's opposition to relativism in 
its standard form. Second, and of far greater concern 
for  
187 Bhaskar, RTS p. 248.  
188 Ibid., p. 249.  
-80-  
our present purposes, in the absence of an explicit 
discussion of the issues surrounding justification, one 
might be tempted to think that a theory may be 
judged to be true precisely insofar as it yields an 
alethic truth.  
But this can't possibly be right. Let's be clear: as 
noted earlier, referential detachment is predicated 

upon an already-achieved epistemic state. 
Specifically, the referential detachment of y, for 
example, is predicated upon a (fallible) judgment 
that the proposition "y is the cause of x" is true - i.e., 
a belief that y is indeed the cause of x. It follows 
quite straightforwardly that neither the proposition "y 
is the alethic truth of x" nor the state of affairs of y's 
being the alethic truth of x may be the criterion 
according to which the validity of the proposition "y is 
the cause of x" is decided. The proposition "y is the 
alethic truth of x" cannot be the criterion because it 
presupposes, by definition, that such a criterion has 
already been applied, and that "y is the cause of x" 
has been found to be true. Similarly, while from the 
perspective of a correspondence theory of truth it 
might point to a definition of validity, the state of 
affairs of y's being the alethic truth of x cannot be 
the criterion of the validity of "y is the cause of x" 
because the inter-subjective agreement that y is the 
cause of x - and that, by extension, "y is the cause of 
x" is true - is precisely what is required in order for 
the relationship between y and x to come under the 
description of being an alethic truth in the first place. 
In short, because it presupposes that we have 
already assessed the validity of competing theories, 
alethic truth can be neither the basis for, nor the 
substance of, such assessments.  
The epistemological issues associated with the term 
alethic truth can be linked back to Bhaskar's earlier 
work. From the beginning, there was the question of 
the relationship between ontological realism and 
rationality at the level of judgment. Despite Bhaskar's 
early claim that "there is no way in which we can look 
at the world and then at a sentence and ask whether 
they fit," 189 there has been a presumption, I would 
argue, at least among readers of Bhaskar, that 
accepted scientific theories do achieve such a fit - 
and that accountability to the idea of such a fit is 
precisely what is meant by the notion of rationality at 
the level of judgment. Moreover, there has been a 
tendency to regard the principle of ontological 
realism as providing an anchor for, and as thereby 

 
authorizing, judgmental rationality so construed. 
According to this line of reasoning, it is possible to 
discriminate between competing theories on rational  
189 Ibid.  
-81-  
grounds exactly because there is a real, intransitive 
domain, the dynamics of which may be more or less 
accurately identified by competing causal accounts.  
Upon reflection, one can see that the concept of 
alethic truth has simply taken the place of the 
concept of an intransitive object, or domain more 
generally, in ostensibly authorizing theory choice. 
Substituting the concept of alethic truth for that of 
ontological realism only clouds the issue, however. 
Ontological realism was never an adequate anchor for 
theory choice. Granted, the fact that judgmental 
rationality was left largely untheorized within critical 
realism was not much of a concern to Bhaskar, for 
the reasons already mentioned. But if ontological 
realism was an insufficient anchor, at least the 
epistemic gap in the theory as a whole was evident. 
One had only to argue that it is legitimate to believe 
it to be a gap, that the issues of truth and 
justification are in fact properly of interest to critical 
realist philosophers. The trouble with the vocabulary 
of alethic truth, by contrast, is that, while it is equally 
inadequate as an account of judgmental rationality, it 
makes the need for such an account more difficult to 
see. In this regard, the earlier treatment, if not 
satisfactory, is at least preferable to that found in 
DPF and PE.  
The politics of alethic 
truth  

 
The third set of considerations that I want to raise I 
have termed political, rather than epistemological, 
although the issues in question are, strictly speaking, 
epistemic. The concern here is with preserving the 
fallibilist view of knowledge that Bhaskar has 
consistently defended. The problem is this: referring 
to causal mechanisms as truth(s) means that it is 
proper to regard scientific theories as being accounts 
of truth(s). Claiming for science that it gives us 
knowledge, not just of a real, intransitive domain, but 
of truth (which surely only the initiated can 
understand to mean merely the causal powers of 
natural and/or social mechanisms), makes it all the 
more likely that critical realism will be mistaken for a 
form of epistemological absolutism. Of course, the 
charge of absolutism can still be answered. In 
principle, one may be as much of a fallibilist about 
knowledge of alethic truth as one may be about 
knowledge of causal mechanisms. And as we have 
seen, the objects of such knowledge claims would be 
extensionally the same. But if critical realism can still 
be defended against misinterpretation, the job is 
once again made more difficult than it was, or than it 
needs to be, by the concept of alethic truth.  
-82-  
Bhaskar's earlier work presents a challenge to 
readers whose anti-absolutist sentiments about 
knowledge are tied to skepticism about the existence, 
and/or relevance, of an "objective" reality. For those 
who hold that knowledge is relative precisely because 
"reality" cannot be objective in any meaningful way, 
Bhaskar's insistence on ontological realism seemed to 
imply a positivist approach to knowledge. If there 
really is an "objective" world, after all, why shouldn't 
knowledge be a matter of organizing observation 
statements about it? The task of defending critical 
realism on this point was not terribly arduous, 
however. One had only to show that it is possible to 
be a realist with respect to underlying generative 

mechanisms, without being an empiricist and without 
thinking that our efforts to explain the workings of 
such mechanisms must be correct, and therefore 
immutable. Although the judgmental rationality upon 
which Bhaskar insisted was importantly under-
theorized - and although, as a result, it may have 
sounded as though knowledge can be simply read off 
of "the facts" - upon reflection one could see without 
much difficulty that realism about ontological 
structures does not in fact imply any form of 
absolutism about knowledge claims.  
Now, as I have said, the same is ultimately true of 
realism about alethic truth(s). Setting aside the host 
of complications with the term that I have laid out, 
insofar as alethic truths just are underlying causal 
powers, their status as real carries no special 
epistemological implications. The case, however, is 
no longer a relatively simple one to make. The 
defender of Bhaskar is now in the position of having 
to show that although alethic truths are themselves 
"true," our theories about them are not necessarily 
true. Indeed, something that we identify as an alethic 
truth may turn out not to be an alethic truth at all. 
The reasoning that is required is awkward and 
convoluted. Moreover, the view that science gives us 
not just knowledge, but knowledge of truth, has to be 
defended against the additional charge of scientism, 
as well as against that of absolutism. The defense, of 
course, is once again that the "truth" in question isn't 
really truth, in the normal sense of the word, but is 
rather another way of expressing the idea of a causal 
power. As soon as the concept of alethic truth is 
replaced with that of generative mechanism (or real 
essence), it is clear that the claim "Science gives us 
knowledge of truth" is really quite unexceptional. In 
the end, however, all of this leads to the inevitable, if 
rhetorical, question: What is to be gained by using 
the word "truth" to mean something entirely different 
than truth? I can see no potential achievement other 
than a widespread proliferation of misunderstanding, 
leading to ill-formed objections to critical realism.  

 
-83-  
The truth tetrapolity  
Let me turn now to the "truth tetrapolity" into which 
Bhaskar places alethic truth. It is my contention that 
the truth tetrapolity is wanting, as a theory of truth, 
and that in a sense the problems stem from there. 
What dialectical critical realism needs in its place is a 
clearly formulated realist theory of truth, 
commensurate with the principles of judgmental 
rationality, epistemological relativism and ontological 
realism, as well as with the preservation of a 
meaningful distinction between cognitive norms and 
underlying causal mechanisms.  
For the sake of efficiency, let me begin by 
reproducing Bhaskar's presentation of the truth 
tetrapolity in full. According to Bhaskar,  
[a]n adequate theory of truth must take 
into account the fact that it is a many-
layered concept, in which there are four 
basic components: which I will nominate 
the truth tetrapolity:  
truth as normative-fiduciary, truth in the 
"trust me - act on it" sense ... we can 
take its paradigmatic locutionary force 
here to be in inter-subjective 
communication;  
truth as adequating, as "warrantedly 
assertable", as epistemological, as 
relative in the transitive dimension;  
truth as referential-expressive, as a 
bipolar ontic-epistemic dual, and in this 
sense as absolute; and in the sense I 

 
have already introduced,  
the truth as ontological, no longer tied 
to language-use per se and in this sense 
objective and in the intransitive 
dimension, typically achievable when 
referential detachment … occurs; and a 
special case of which is  
truth as alethic, i.e. the truth of or 
reason for things, people and 
phenomena generally (including in 
science most importantly causal 
structures and generative mechanisms), 
not propositions. 190  
190 Bhaskar, PE, pp. 63-64.  
-84-  
In other words, in relation to a claim  
, for example, a theory of truth must account for 
"truth" in the following multiple senses: (1) the 
speaker is trustworthy, (2) there are sound reasons 
for believing  
, (3)  
accurately describes a state of affairs p and - and 
here's where the requirements become more 
controversial - (4) the state of affairs p, including 
(4A) the cause(s) of p. Bhaskar believes that the 
truth tetrapolity allows us to grasp each of these 
purported senses of truth, and, moreover, to ground 
the more superficial, or provisional, aspects of the 
term in its proposed fundamental, alethic sense. The 
"dialectic of truth," as he puts it, is thus one in which 
"we go from subjective certainty to subjective 

facthood to objective truth to alethic truth." 191  
In my view, the entire conception of the truth 
tetrapolity, including the place within it of something 
called alethic truth, is confused. At the most basic 
level, the concept of alethic truth does not, and 
cannot, itself serve the function of integrating the 
elements of the truth tetrapolity in the way that 
Bhaskar seems to think it does. The concept of 
alethic truth does not relate the truth of propositions 
to the "truth" of things; rather, it designates such 
"truth"/things. The tetrapolity, in turn, is simply a 
list. The inclusion of ontological, and specifically 
alethic, truth tells us nothing other than that, in 
Bhaskar's view, there is an allowable definition of 
truth according to which causal powers are truth-
bearers. Parenthetically, one might note that Bhaskar 
has already advanced this claim. Including ontological 
truth in a "truth tetrapolity" is no more an argument 
for the correctness of such a view than was the 
original assertion.  
If, however, the truth tetrapolity is merely a list of 
different meanings, or possible meanings, of the term 
truth - one of which is "the causes of things" - then 
what does hold it together? What is the mediating 
term, if there is one, between the epistemological 
and ontological components of the tetrapolity, given 
that it cannot be alethic truth itself? Indeed, to put it 
differently yet again, what sense can be made of the 
claim that the "dialectic of truth" culminates in alethic 
truth?  
Bhaskar himself seems to think that the alethic basis 
of epistemological truth is articulated in the following 
proposition: 192  
191 Ibid.  
192 As Louis Irwin has pointed out, Bhaskar here 
seems to regard himself as offering a real, as 

 
opposed to formal, definition of (epistemological - 
especially referentialexpressive) truth. (Louis Irwin, 
BHA: Re: Thoughts, 
bhaskar@lists.village.virginia.edu, January 22, 1999.) 
-85-  
Thus we have optimal grounding for 
believing that "water is blue is 
true" (and not just a local accident or 
subjective delusion) when we are in 
possession of the scientific explanation 
for it. Thus we can write  
"water is blue" is true if 
(optimal grounding) we are 
in a position to causally 
explain it (T1)  
or  
"water is blue" is true if 
(next best grounding) we 
have good grounds for 
believing there is a 
scientific explanation for it 
(T2).  
This contrasts favorably with the 
triviality of  
"water is blue" is true if 
water is blue (T3). 193  
But there are problems with such an approach.  
First, to confound matters, the proposed criteria are 
presented as though they were somehow a 
reformulation of the concept of alethic truth. This is 

 
plainly incorrect. What we see here are proposed 
criteria for judging propositions to be true, whereas 
the concept of alethic truth expresses the idea that 
causality is a matter of the exercise of dispositional 
powers, with the added approbation that underlying 
causal mechanisms may themselves properly be 
regarded as the "truths" of that which they effect. 194 
Indeed, these criteria refer exclusively to the non-
ontological components of the truth tetrapolity, and 
are unrelated to the claim that generative 
mechanisms are themselves a form of truth.  
Second, these criteria constitute an epistemic theory 
of truth in the technical sense of the term. Epistemic 
theories define truth in terms of specified beliefs, or 
belief states, of specified persons. In the version 
offered here, to be true is to be explained by an 
accepted scientific theory. By definition, an epistemic 
theory cannot link, or synthesize, the ontological and 
epistemological components of Bhaskar's truth 
tetrapolity. Indeed, the approach set out is in fact an 
instance of what Bhaskar refers to as truth as 
"adequation." As such, it does not do justice to the 
view of scientific knowledge to which Bhaskar is 
otherwise committed. It is true that Bhaskar is a 
fallibilist about  
193 Bhaskar, PE, p. 26. Bhaskar does not specify "iff" 
in these statements.  
194 Thanks to Noah Efron for this point.  
-86-  
knowledge, including scientific knowledge. It is also 
true that in RTS he maintains that there is no way to 
inquire into, let alone determine, the relationship 
between theoretical statements and the reality to 
which they refer. Nonetheless, as his ontological 
realism generally - and his attachment to the concept 

of alethic truth specifically - belies, Bhaskar is also 
entirely convinced that there are determinate ways 
that things are - and are not - and that it is the aim 
of science to try to identify such real features of the 
world. Such a conception of knowledge surely 
requires a stronger theory of truth than that truth is 
what we mean when a certain group of people have 
certain things to say about a given proposition and/or 
state of affairs.  
If, however, Bhaskar's account of what it means for a 
proposition to be true amounts to a version of truth 
as adequation, as warranted assertability, then we 
are back to where we started. It is not at all clear, 
that is, that the truth tetrapolity forms a dialectical 
whole, let alone a whole that is synthesized by, or 
rooted in, the concept of alethic truth. As I shall 
argue later, what is required is an account of truth 
that does, in fact, relate knowledge claims to real 
state of affairs, and in particular to underlying causal 
powers, grounded in the real essences of objects. 
Such a claim differs significantly from Bhaskar's 
suggestion that one form of truth, namely, 
ontological, and specifically alethic, is the ultimate 
ground for another form of truth, namely, what I 
have been calling "epistemological" truth (comprised 
of Bhaskar's truth-as-adequation and referential-
expressive truths). Within the truth tetrapolity, it is 
the referential-expressive aspect of truth, rather than 
its so-called alethic aspect, that has the potential to 
be developed in this way.  
Finally, by considering what it could possibly mean to 
even talk of grounding "epistemological truth" in 
"ontological truth," let me try to dispense with the 
concept of alethic truth one last time. The contention 
would seem to be that truth in its epistemological 
sense(s) is somehow anchored in, or deepened by, 
truth in its purported ontological sense - that is, that 
the sense of truth that is properly a predicate of 
propositions has the force that it does by virtue of 
the sense of truth that is properly a predicate of 

 
things. 195 Recall that the term alethic truth 
designates nothing other than a generative  
195 This is not to say that those propositions that are 
(propositionally) true are (propositionally) true by 
virtue of the things that are (alethically) true being 
(alethically) true (although, as I shall argue later, 
something quite close to this is correct), but rather 
that the meaning of propositional, or epistemological, 
truth itself is somehow tied to the meaning of 
ontological, and specifically alethic, truth.  
-87-  
mechanism about which we have certain epistemic 
convictions. To avoid circularity, therefore, we must, 
in interpreting a claim that alethic truth grounds 
epistemological truth, bracket the cognitive sense of 
the term alethic truth; otherwise we will have merely 
been engaged in a circular operation of "grounding" 
epistemological truth in the fact of an epistemic 
judgment having already been made. Such an 
operation leaves us with nothing other than the fact 
of the extensional equivalence of alethic truth and 
real causal powers. And if we restate the original 
claim in light of this equivalence, what we have is a 
statement to the effect that the concept of 
(epistemological) truth is in some way rooted in, or 
authorized by, the domain of real causal powers. 
Now, the idea that the concept of truth in some sense 
invokes that to which statements refer is indeed what 
we're after, in my view. But such a claim in no way 
encompasses the idea that causal powers ought 
themselves to be regarded as truth-bearers, or that it 
is this purported form of "truth" that gives other 
forms of truth their epistemic purchase. The notion of 
alethic truth is irrelevant, in fact, to the view that 
truth is a concept that necessarily refers us to a 
referent.  

 
And if it is a mistake to say that "epistemological 
truth" is grounded in "ontological truth," neither will 
it do to say that epistemological truth is grounded in 
ontic phenomena full stop (i.e., the intransitive 
domain, no longer referred to as "truth"). Indeed, it 
is difficult to see what such a claim would even 
mean, exactly. One idea would seem to be that 
something called "truth" can be read off of 
phenomena in much the same way as proponents of 
positivism believed that knowledge could be. Such a 
position would be at odds with critical realism, 
however, for it involves the simultaneous reduction, 
as Bhaskar himself might put it, of both truth and 
knowledge to being. The meaning of the term truth is 
here simply given by the intransitive objects of 
possible knowledge claims. Similarly, knowledge 
production is here construed as a matter of simply 
registering such "truths."  
The other possibility is that talk of the intransitive 
ground of (epistemological) truth is a way of trying to 
bypass propositions altogether, of somehow trying to 
refer to objects without making statements about 
them. In the case of "'Water is blue' is true if we are 
in a position to causally explain it," for example, 
Bhaskar would be seen to be appealing directly, 
without recourse to propositions, to that state of 
affairs which causes water to be blue. (For only such 
an appeal would exempt the explanation from being 
simply yet another proposition, which may or may 
not itself be true.) Here I would say in response that, 
while there are undoubtedly certain areas of life in 
which our engagement with objects is non-
propositional, the development of scientific theory is 
not one of them. In either possible  
-88-  
interpretation, then, the claim that truth is grounded 
in things is an instance of what Bhaskar terms the 
ontic fallacy.  

In summary, while it may be useful as a typology of 
conceivable definitions of the term, the truth 
tetrapolity does not hold up as a theoretical account 
in its own right. Bhaskar is right to try to relate the 
concept of truth to real features of the world, but the 
way in which he goes about it is unsuccessful. As I 
have tried to show, the truth tetrapolity tends to 
break down into either or both of a pair of 
contradictory alternatives: on the one hand, the 
approach leads us to equate the concept of truth with 
the belief-states of scientists - i.e., with scientific 
consensus regarding substantive explanations; on the 
other hand, it leads us to equate the concept of truth 
with the intransitive domain itself. Neither alternative 
is acceptable, and the production of such a 
contradiction is a sure sign of something having gone 
amiss.  
Correspondence 
revisited: truth, 
knowledge, justification 
and being  
As I see it, the elements of Bhaskar's truth tetrapolity 
can be synthesized neither by ontological "truth" nor 
by ontic phenomena generally, but rather by a 
particular type of correspondence theory. A fine 
example of the kind of approach that is called for is 
that which has recently been put forward by William 
P. Alston. In a work entitled A Realist Conception of 
Truth (1996), Alston advances a position that he calls 
- ironically enough - alethic realism. Alston's alethic 
realism is compatible with the core precepts of critical 
realism, and is helpful in relation to the concept of 
truth in a way that is quite similar to the manner in 
which Bhaskar's own thinking is helpful in relation to 
the concept of a causal account. Alston sums up his 
position as follows:  

 
(t)he basic point is this. What it takes to 
make a statement true on the realist 
conception is the actual obtaining of 
what is claimed to obtain in making that 
statement … This is a realist way of 
thinking of truth in that the truth maker 
is something that is objective vis-à-vis 
the truth bearer. It has to do with what 
the truth bearer is about, rather than 
with some "internal" or "intrinsic" 
feature of the truth bearer, such as its 
epistemic status, its place in a system of 
propositions, or the confidence with 
which it is held. 196  
196 Alston, A Realist Conception of Truth, pp. 7-8.  
-89-  
Or, more formally, "A statement (proposition, belief 
…) is true if and only if what the statement says to 
be the case actually is the case." 197  
Alston's realist conception of truth is qualified in two 
important ways. The first qualification is that being 
clear about the definition of truth is not the same as 
having settled on criteria of validity; questions about 
truth must be distinguished from questions about 
what Alston terms epistemology (i.e., justification). It 
is the fundamental error of epistemic theories of truth 
generally, according to Alston, that they collapse this 
crucial distinction. The second qualification is that 
one may hold the view that truth "has to do with the 
relation of a potential truth bearer to a reality beyond 
itself" 198 without being obliged to articulate a 
"robust" or "full-blown" correspondence theory, as 
Alston puts it. 199 In this respect the realist 
conception is a "minimalist" account of truth, 
compatible with, but not identical to, more ambitious 

formulations of correspondence. To quote Alston 
again,  
[w]hatever the best story is on the 
details of the correspondence relation, 
we can know in advance that … [t]he 
right kind of correspondence will obtain 
if and only if the same declarative 
sentence can be used to specify the 
contents of proposition and fact. 200  
The definition of truth that Alston defends is far from 
trivial, as it would seem that Bhaskar would think. 
201 On the contrary, I would contend that truth so 
conceived is in fact a necessary precondition of 
rational critique, including scientific inquiry. The 
concept of truth may not tell us much - and I will 
want to return to this point later - but it is 
indispensable all the same. While the present 
discussion is not the place to develop this position in 
full, the basic claim is that certain - though by no 
means all - of our predicative practices are 
unintelligible minus a concept of things either being 
or not being (or being to some extent) as they are 
said to be. The argument here is not a pragmatic, or 
instrumental one, e.g., "Thinking of truth in this way 
suits our purposes, given the kinds of intellectual 
activities that we  
197 Ibid., p. 5.  
198 Ibid., p. 8.  
199 Ibid., p. 32.  
200 Ibid., p. 39.  
201 The charge of the triviality of "p is true iff p" may 
have been directed to Tarski, but it is clear that 
Bhaskar is dismissive of correspondence theories in 
general.  

 
-90-  
value." Though thinking of truth along minimalist 
correspondence lines, may, indeed, suit our 
purposes, the philosophical point is that we cannot 
help but think of it along such lines. Consider for a 
moment the concept of falsity. What of the idea that 
a false proposition is one in relation to which things 
are not as they are stated to be? One would be hard-
pressed, it seems to me, to come up with a notion of 
falsehood that better captures that which we 
intuitively understand to be the epistemic failing of 
false claims. And it is not just the negation of 
expressive-referential truth, to use Bhaskar's 
terminology, that refers us to the relation between 
potential truth bearers and a reality beyond 
themselves, but the negation of normative-fiduciary 
truth as well. For what else can we mean by the 
concept of deceit, other than that a speaker has 
intentionally said of what is, that it is not; and of 
what is not, that it is, to invoke the classic 
formulation? 202  
I said a moment ago that the concept of truth does 
not, or at least ought not, tell us much. Let me try to 
expand on this point. Alston distinguishes between 
truth and what he terms epistemology, or 
justification. I want to insist on a further distinction - 
one which will seem controversial to some, quite 
unexceptional to others - between truth and 
explanation, or knowledge. Truth, in my view, is best 
understood as being a formal, regulative norm, to the 
effect that a statement is true iff what is stated to be 
the case actually is the case. Despite being a 
transcendental condition of rational inquiry as such, 
however, such a norm tells us nothing at all about 
actual or potential states of affairs. Accordingly, it 
must not be conflated with substantive knowledge 
claims. Knowledge claims, as shall be discussed 
below, are always only provisional conjectures, to use 
the term preferred by Karl Popper. 203 At the same 

 
time, truth must also be distinguished from states of 
affairs themselves, as argued in the first section of 
this chapter. While the norm has an ontic component 
in the sense that it describes an ideal relationship 
between propositions and  
202 "To say of what is that it is not, or of what is not 
that it is, is false, while to say of what is that it is, 
and of what is not that it is not, is true." Aristotle, 
Metaphysics, Bk. IV, Ch. 7, 1011b 27-28, in Richard 
McKeon (ed.), The Basic Works of Aristotle, New 
York: Random House, 1941, p. 749.  
203 See, for example, Conjectures and Refutations: 
The Growth of Scientific Knowledge, New York: 
Routledge, 1989 and (ed. W. W. Bartley III), Realism 
and The Aim of Science: From the Postscript to the 
Logic of Scientific Discovery, New York: Routledge, 
1983. As noted later, there is overlap between my 
views concerning the provisional character of 
knowledge and those of Popper.  
-91-  
states of affairs, this formal condition implies neither 
(a) that truth is a predicate of non-linguistic entities 
nor, to put it differently, (b) that non-linguistic 
entities such as causal powers ought themselves to 
be regarded as truth-bearers. At least within the 
idiom of critical realism - which is (or was), after all, 
a materialist philosophy of science - phrases like "the 
truth of the matter," or even "The truth shall set you 
free" must be acknowledged to be metaphors. 204 As 
ethically compelling as such language may be, to lose 
sight of its essentially metaphorical character - i.e., 
to claim the actual or potential real identity of truth 
and being - is to take up the mantle of absolute 
idealism. Finally, for the sake of precision it is worth 
noting that, while Bhaskar may be right that the 
existence of underlying generative mechanisms is a 

material condition of the intelligibility of scientific 
knowledge, and while it may also be the case that 
the existence of some reality, although not 
necessarily under a materialist description, is itself a 
material condition of the intelligibility of the concept 
of truth as I have defined it, 205 neither of these 
points (a) implies that reality is truth, or (b) ought to 
be mistaken for the view I have advanced, namely, 
that something like Alston's realist conception of 
truth is a conceptual precondition of rational critique 
in general, and of scientific inquiry in particular. 206  
Having defined truth in the way that I have, I want to 
propose further that there is no way to be certain 
that the conditions specified by the norm have ever 
been satisfied. Popper has advanced this same 
position on the basis of Hume's argument against 
induction. While a critical realist would not - and 
should not - be swayed by an appeal to Hume on this 
point, the conclusion that truth cannot be known with 
certainty to have been achieved also follows from an 
appreciation of the fact that there is no extra-
cognitive standpoint from which to assess the 
relationship between scientific propositions and that 
to which they refer. 207 For the purposes of 
theoretical explanation, at least, access to 
phenomena is conceptually mediated such that, 
beyond the most basic of practical activities, there is 
simply no  
204 While he does not necessarily share my views, 
my thinking on this point has benefited enormously 
from conversations with Doug Porpora. The term 
"idiom," as well as the example of the expression 
"The truth shall set you free," are attributable to him. 
205 Thanks to Asher Horowitz for this way of thinking 
about this point.  
206 As one of the referees for this manuscript put it, 
so-called alethic truths are truth-makers, not truth-

 
bearers.  
207 For an interesting recent discussion of this issue, 
see Douglas McDermid, "Pragmatism and Truth: The 
Comparison Objection to Correspondence," The 
Review of Metaphysics, 51 (June 1998), 775-811.  
-92-  
way to get out from under a regress of propositions. 
208 The metatheoretical implications of this situation 
are not terribly grave, however. Indeed, the meta-
theory of truth that I have proposed is nothing other 
than a statement of what it means to be a fallibilist 
about knowledge. For how are we to understand 
fallibilism, except as the belief that the norm of truth 
may never be conclusively determined to have been 
met?  
Knowledge claims, meanwhile, must not be taken to 
be true by definition. This will no doubt seem an 
outlandish claim to those who hold to any version of 
the idea that knowledge itself may be defined as a 
set of justified, true beliefs. However, I believe that 
in conflating the categories of truth and knowledge, 
more harm is done than good. If one identifies 
knowledge with truth, the result is that one must give 
up either (a) recourse to the concept of truth as a 
critical norm vis-à-vis knowledge, or (b) the idea that 
our explanations at any given time may or may not in 
fact be true, i.e., the commitment to fallibilism. In 
the first case, the concept of truth itself must be 
thought to change as knowledge changes; in the 
second case, knowledge must be thought to be 
immutable. Of course, nothing of what I have said 
should be taken to suggest that we are prohibited 
from establishing norms of justification or of 
scientificity; only that adherence to such norms does 
not constitute a definition of the term truth. Thus, 
from the perspective that I am proposing, Bhaskar's 

 
claim that  
is true if we (or others) are in a position to explain it 
(or again, in less formulaic terms, "(w)hen we know 
why something is true our assumption that it is true 
is grounded, in a way in which it is not when we are 
only subjectively empirically certain of it" 209) is an 
account, not of truth, but of justification (and 
perhaps of what sets scientific explanations, in 
particular, apart from the other sorts of beliefs that 
we hold).  
208 The claim that I want to make here is perhaps 
less sweeping than it sounds. I do not mean to 
suggest that propositional, or representational, 
knowledge is the only kind of knowledge, or even 
that what might be called a propositional mode of 
engagement with the world is in any sense primary. 
Thus I regard my position as generally compatible 
with the kind of neo-Heideggerian stance adopted by 
Charles Taylor, for example, in "Rorty in the 
Epistemological Tradition" (Alan R. Malachowski 
(ed.), Reading Rorty: Critical Responses to 
Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (and Beyond), 
Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1990). What I am 
suggesting, however, is that there are limited but 
important - and arguably inescapable - contexts in 
which we are, in practice, confronted with 
propositions which cannot be assessed except 
through other propositions.  
209 DPF, p. 36.  
-93-  
Finally, as already suggested, the justification of 
scientific beliefs ought to be seen as necessarily 
provisional. We may identify criteria that we take to 
be good indicators of a theory's being true, but 
meeting such criteria does not establish with 

certainty that a theory is true. Strictly speaking, we 
simply cannot know with certainty whether a theory 
is or is not true; not only must the categories of truth 
and knowledge be pried apart, but we must accept 
that there is also a gap between truth and 
justification. 210 In saying this I am not endorsing 
Bhaskar's early pronouncement that "there is no way 
in which we can look at the world and then at a 
sentence and ask whether they fit" 211 - unless it is 
to be taken literally, as a comment on whether it is 
best to view sentences, in particular, as the 
paradigmatic instances of truth-bearers. On the 
contrary, there is in my view no way to side-step the 
question of whether or not the claims that we make 
about the world are true. The question must be 
asked. It may be - as I believe to be the case - a 
question that in principle cannot be answered with 
certainty. But to say that a question cannot be 
answered definitively is not to say that it cannot or 
should not be asked.  
In the language of critical realism, the concept of 
truth with which I have been working is a component 
(along with the concepts of knowledge and 
justification) of the "transitive object of science." As 
such, it must be distinguished from the "intransitive 
object(s) of science." Although the concept of truth 
specifies, in formal terms, the defining features of a 
hypothetical, ideal relationship between one element 
of the transitive object (namely, knowledge claims) 
and elements of the intransitive object (namely, real 
causal processes), it has neither epistemic nor ontic 
content of its own. The concept of truth is purely 
formal, designating neither the totality of possible 
knowledge claims, nor the totality of causal 
relationships, but rather an indefeasible norm of 
rational critique. Truth so conceived leaves entirely 
intact the idea that there exists a real, "intransitive 
object of science," comprising generative 
mechanisms at increasing levels of depth, and the 
events to which they give rise. It also provides a 
basis for a claim to rationality at the level of 

 
judgment, as I shall argue later, albeit not a 
guarantee of absolute knowledge or certainty.  
210 Here I suspect I am closer to Popper than to 
Alston. Alston separates the definition of truth from 
criteria of justification, but seems to believe that it is, 
or at least ought to be, possible to determine 
conclusively whether or not a given proposition is 
true.  
211 Bhaskar, RTS, p. 249.  
-94-  
From this perspective, the concept of alethic truth 
may be seen to be a confused way of expressing two 
key ideas, neither of which amounts to a claim that 
physical or social structures are themselves truth 
bearers. The first idea is that, as Alston puts it, 
propositions are made true or not by virtue of the 
reality to which they refer. Critical realists ought to 
agree with such a principle, it seems to me. After all, 
the bottom line of such a position is that while we are 
free, in a sense, to think what we like, and while it is 
up to us to judge which of our theories are most 
likely to be true, whether a theory is in fact true is 
not, in the end, a matter that is contingent upon our 
preferences. 212 In Alston's words, we are in a 
position of epistemic "vulnerability to the outside 
world." 213 As he puts it,  
[i]n supposing that what we believe and 
assert is rendered true or false by 
whether what a belief or assertion is 
about is as the belief or assertion would 
have it be, we are acknowledging a 
liability to falsity that is, in a 
fundamental way, out of our control. 214  

This sentiment resonates deeply with the spirit of 
Bhaskar's concept of the epistemic fallacy, not to 
mention his later notion of the "primal squeeze on 
natural necessity." 215 The only mistake, as I have 
tried to show, is in actually identifying truth with the 
phenomena by virtue of which given claims are, if 
they are, made true.  
The second idea is that, as Bhaskar has argued since 
RTS, to offer a scientific explanation of something is 
to identify the underlying causal mechanism that 
produces it. As previously suggested, however, such 
a principle must not be taken to tell us what truth is, 
but rather what science is. To collapse the categories 
leads either to a relativization of truth, or to an 
absolutization of scientific knowledge. In Bhaskar's 
case, the commitment to fallibilism rules out the 
latter alternative. Thus the identification of alethic 
truth(s) with the  
212 Except perhaps indirectly, in those cases in 
which we are in a position to alter the reality in 
question, such that it comes to conform to the 
requirements of a given proposition. This is a crucial 
stipulation, especially in relation to the social 
sciences, but note that even in a case in which the 
underlying causal structures are subject to change as 
a result of human intervention, it is still conformity to 
(a now suitably altered) reality that accounts, or 
would account, for the truth of a given claim. Alston 
argues this point in terms of the realist conception of 
truth being perfectly compatible with idealism as a 
general metaphysical stance.  
213 Alston, A Realist Conception of Truth, p. 264.  
214 Ibid.  
215 See DPF, esp. Ch. 2, PE, esp. Ch. 1.  
-95-  

 
best scientific account(s) on offer results in the loss 
of truth as a regulative ideal. Moreover, for Bhaskar, 
at the same time that the de facto effort to ground 
truth in knowledge leads to what might be termed an 
over-subjectification of truth, his simultaneous effort 
to ground truth in "things," and more specifically in 
the causes of things, amounts to a parallel reification, 
or over-objectification, of truth.  
Unlike the concept of alethic truth, the realist 
conception of truth that I have described does 
provide for a way of integrating the elements of 
Bhaskar's truth tetrapolity into an over-arching 
theoretical account. Let us consider each element of 
the tetrapolity in turn. From the perspective for which 
I am plumping, "normative-fiduciary" truth implies a 
subjective, or psychological, commitment on the part 
of a speaker to the norm of truth as defined earlier. 
Truth as "adequation," meanwhile, must be 
understood as referring to issues of justification, 
rather than to the definition of truth itself. 
Justification, whether it is based on coherence, 
warranted assertability, pragmatic value or any other 
principle, is related to truth in that true theories may 
be thought to exhibit any or all such features. But the 
causal order is crucial: a theory may, if it does, meet 
justificatory standard x because it is true; it is not 
true because it meets such a standard. "Referential-
expressive" truth just is an incipient realist 
conception of truth, poorly articulated. Finally, as 
previously discussed, ontological truth, including 
alethic truth, is an unfortunate formulation of a set of 
ideas concerning the nature of the world - i.e., that it 
is real and that is has ontological "depth" - and 
scientific knowledge thereof - i.e., that it consists not 
in the observation of empirical regularities but in the 
identification of real dispositional powers and the 
causal relationships to which they give rise. Alethic 
truth may thus be seen to be a reminder that (a) the 
reality by virtue of which propositions are, if they are, 
true or false is one that is both intransitive and 

 
stratified, and (b) for a claim about the world to be 
scientific, it must be an explanation - i.e., it must 
point to underlying causal mechanisms.  
The realist conception of truth that I have presented 
does the necessary theoretical job of authorizing 
judgmental rationality, but it does so in a way that 
"grounds" knowledge in a transcendental norm rather 
than in the consensus of scientists and/or in the 
intransitive domain construed as "alethic truth." 
While it does not allow for certainty, it provides a 
formal basis for critique in that it permits - indeed 
enjoins - principled appeals to the regulative ideal of 
correspondence. The crucial difference between such 
a model and standard versions of the correspondence 
theory is that the appeal in  
-96-  
this case is to an idea, rather than to "the facts." 216 
On the face of it, neither the provisional character of 
knowledge claims, nor the foreclosure of their 
determination by Being, ought to pose any particular 
problem for critical realists. After all, Bhaskar has 
consistently argued for fallibilism and against the 
commitment of the ontic fallacy. If I am right, 
however, that amongst readers of Bhaskar, at least, 
there has been an unchecked belief that we can 
determine the truth of theories, i.e., justify them, via 
the features of the intransitive domain, then the 
implications of the subjective character of knowledge 
can be expected to be met with resistance. The 
challenge for critical realists is thus to abandon any 
residual aspirations to foundation building. Truth is a 
feature of the transitive dimension of science. 
Specifically, it is a formal concept that renders 
intelligible the deployment of substantive knowledge 
claims. It does not, however - and cannot - offer any 
automatic justification for such claims. In sum, there 
is no "ontological truth" from which "epistemological 
truth" derives its theoretical purchase. No degree of 

 
consensus amongst scientists that their best theory is 
correct, or that a given posited causal mechanism is 
real, can amount to anything other than an epistemic 
theory of truth; no insistence by philosophers on the 
"truth" of things can amount to anything other than a 
category mistake.  
In a sense, Bhaskar's account of truth is an attempt 
to bridge the divide between subject and object that 
he took such pains to establish in RTS. 217 Having 
championed the claim that the transcendental 
condition of knowledge is not the synthetic operation 
of reason, but instead the existence and operation of 
independent causal mechanisms, Bhaskar was left 
with the task of relating the "transitive" to said 
"intransitive object of science." The problem with 
Bhaskar's approach is that, in the end, he has simply 
identified the two terms. Alethic truth just is the 
object: "including in science most importantly causal 
structures and generative mechanisms." 218 As I 
have tried to show, such a response amounts either 
to the introduction of a profoundly misleading 
neologism, namely "alethic truth," to refer to one of 
the two terms to be related (viz., the intransitive 
domain), or to the collapse of a dialectical 
relationship into one or the other of its  
216 Douglas McDermid, cited earlier, argues that it is 
precisely this formulation that the comparison 
objection undoes. I disagree with him that a 
regulative norm must be able to be called upon as a 
practical criterion of judgment.  
217 Thanks to Asher Horowitz for this way of thinking 
of it.  
218 Bhaskar, PE, p. 64.  
-97-  

 
components. Bhaskar was right in RTS to distinguish 
between the transitive and the intransitive objects of 
science, and right to remind us later of their 
dialectical relation to one another. But it is the fact 
that knowledge is produced by real, embodied 
beings, in the context of real social and material 
relations with one another and with nature, not the 
identification of truth with being, that bridges the 
divide between subject and object.  
-98-  
5  
Recovering 
Aristotle  
Realism about causality 
and the social sciences  
In the preceding chapters, I have suggested that 
what is most significant philosophically about Roy 
Bhaskar's account of scientific knowledge is its 
metaphysical core - specifically, the idea that 
causality inheres in what we call the natural, or 
physical, world. While there has been a fair amount 
of discussion amongst critical realists regarding the 
applicability of Bhaskar's thought to the social world, 
for the most part the focus has been on Bhaskar's 
substantive sociological claims and/or on the 
methodological issues specific to social science. My 
concern is more narrowly philosophical. The question 
for my purposes is whether or not realism about 
causality can be defended in relation to social as well 
as natural phenomena. I believe that it can be, 
although certain modifications to the account are 

 
required.  
There has been some debate over this issue in critical 
realist circles, though it has not been far-reaching. 
This may be beginning to change, with the recent 
publication of several relevant articles and a 
transcript of a discussion involving Bhaskar, Harré 
and a number of others. 219 It is worth pointing out 
that in The Possibility of Naturalism (PON) Bhaskar 
himself did not formulate the philosophical task 
associated with the extension of transcendental 
realism beyond natural science in the way that I 
have. Instead, he undertook to  
219 For example, Rom Harré and Roy Bhaskar, "How 
to Change Reality: Story vs. Structure - A Debate 
between Rom Harré and Roy Bhaskar," and Charles 
R. Varela, "The Ethogenics of Agency and Structure: 
A Metaphysical Problem," in Jose Lopez and Garry 
Potter (eds), After Postmodernism: An Introduction 
to Critical Realism, London: The Athlone Press, 2001; 
Charles R. Varela and Rom Harré, "Conflicting 
Varieties of Realism: Causal Powers and the Problems 
of Social Structure," Journal for the Theory of Social 
Behavior, 26(3); Paul Lewis, "Realism, Causality and 
the Problem of Social Structure," Journal for the 
Theory of Social Behavior, 30(3).  
-99-  
address a number of long-standing debates within 
the philosophy of social science - and to outline the 
parameters of a substantive sociology. To the best of 
my knowledge, the main figures within critical realist 
circles who have concerned themselves with the 
specific question that I have posed are Rom Harré, 
Charles Varela and Paul Lewis. The primary objective 
of the present chapter, therefore, is to advance the 
explicitly metaphysical discussion that is in my view 
necessary. Let me begin by reconstructing the basic 

components of Bhaskar's philosophy of social science 
as he sets it out in PON. 
Critical naturalism and 
the TMSA  
In PON, Bhaskar argues that explanations in the 
social sciences and in psychology can and should be 
of the same basic form as explanations in the natural 
sciences. Scientific laws in the natural sciences must 
be understood in non-Humean, non-Kantian terms, 
as describing the tendencies that things have to 
behave in specific ways. Things behave in the ways 
that they do by virtue of the powers that they bear 
essentially. Such powers, when exercised, are the 
underlying causal mechanisms that give rise to 
manifest events. The same is true of social and 
psychological events, Bhaskar says. Explanation in 
these areas of inquiry should be fundamentally the 
same as in the natural sciences. To explain a social or 
psychological phenomenon is - or should be - to 
identify the causal mechanism(s) by which it is 
produced. Although he doesn't express it in quite 
these terms, Bhaskar's claim is that there are at least 
two basic kinds of causal mechanism in the social 
world: social structures and actions (themselves 
based on reasons). Bhaskar acknowledges that such 
mechanisms differ in certain respects from causal 
mechanisms in the natural world. Specifically: 
220 Bhaskar, PON, p. 38.  
1. Social structures, unlike natural structures, do 
not exist independently of the activities they 
govern. 
2. Social structures, unlike natural structures, do 
not exist independently of the agents' conceptions 
of what they are doing in their activity. 
3. Social structures, unlike natural structures, may 
be only relatively enduring (so that the tendencies 
they ground may not be universal in the sense of 
space-time invariant). 220 

 
-100-  
Bhaskar devotes an entire chapter to the claim that 
reasons, like structures, have causal efficacy. 
However, the explicit comparison between causal 
mechanisms in the natural world and causal 
mechanisms in the social world is limited to those 
mechanisms that, according to Bhaskar, comprise the 
object domain of the social, as opposed to 
psychological, sciences. Such differences place 
"ontological limitations on a possible naturalism," 
says Bhaskar, 221 leading him to call his position in 
PON "critical" naturalism.  
The relationship between social structures and 
individual agency is captured by what Bhaskar calls 
the Transformational Model of Social Activity (TMSA). 
In the TMSA, social structures and individuals are 
separated by what Bhaskar calls an "ontological 
hiatus." 222 Social structures and individuals are 
contingent upon each other existentially. Yet they are 
"different kinds of thing," as Bhaskar puts it. 223 
Social structures are relationships between people, 
defined in terms of antecedently established 
positions. 224 They do not reduce to individuals, or to 
the properties of individuals. Nor are they groups. 
They are objective patterns of organization - 
conditions of the very possibility of individual action. 
As such, says Bhaskar, they constitute the 
Aristotelian material cause(s) of individual agency. I 
shall return to this characterization. For now let me 
simply note that there are really two different claims 
being made here. On the one hand, Bhaskar is trying 
to say that it is social structures that (as we shall 
see) are the object of transformational social activity. 
They are what individuals act upon qua specifically 
sociological actors. I take this to be the meaning of 
the reference to Aristotelian material causality. On 
the other hand, as other critical realists have 
emphasized, Bhaskar is also saying that social 

 
structures are efficacious in the sense that they 
delimit the range of actions that individuals are likely 
and/or able to carry out. 225  
221 Ibid.  
222 Ibid., p. 37.  
223 Ibid., p. 33.  
224 Lewis, "Realism, Causality and the Problem of 
Social Structure," p. 250 and passim.  
225 See Douglas V. Porpora, "Four Concepts of Social 
Structure," in Archer et al. (eds), Critical Realism: 
Essential Readings, London: Routledge, 1998, 
originally published in Journal for the Theory of Social 
Behavior, 19(2), 1989, and op. cit., Lewis, "Realism, 
Causality and the Problem of Social Structure." See 
also Danermark et al., Explaining Society: Critical 
Realism in the Social Sciences, London: Routledge, 
2002, especially Chapter 3, for an extended 
discussion of Bhaskar's conception of social 
structures as causal mechanisms.  
-101-  
Individuals, meanwhile, are represented in the TMSA 
as reproducing, although not - except in rare 
circumstances (e.g., in periods of dramatic, 
intentional social change) - as producing the social 
structures which both enable and constrain their 
activity. In general, the reproduction of social 
structures is accidental; it is the non-intended 
consequence of behavior that is undertaken for other 
reasons. Most people, for example, do not go to work 
in the morning in order to reproduce the wage-
relation, put money in their checking accounts in 
order to perpetuate the structures of international 

finance, or patronize Hollywood movies in order to 
reinforce compulsory heterosexuality. To be clear, it 
is only individuals who physically act, in Bhaskar's 
view. "The individualist truth that people are the only 
moving forces in history - in the sense that nothing 
happens behind their backs, that is, everything that 
happens, happens in and through their actions - must 
be retained," he writes. 226 At the same time, social 
structures bear upon individual action in the manner 
described above.  
Bhaskar contrasts the TMSA with three other models 
of the relationship between structures and 
individuals. He dubs the alternatives "Weberian," 
"Durkheimian" and "dialectical," respectively. In the 
Weberian model, social structures are produced 
voluntaristically by individuals. Indeed, for the 
ontological individualist proponent of this model, it is 
not even clear that structures can be said to exist at 
all; society is simply the sum total of that which may 
be predicated of individuals. In the "Durkheimian" 
model, meanwhile, it is structures that fully 
determine, or constrain, individual agency. Finally, in 
the "dialectical" model - which Bhaskar attributes to 
Berger - structures and individuals are represented 
as being different aspects of a single causal process. 
From the perspective of the TMSA, the problem with 
the Weberian model is that it does not allow for 
structures to be counted as causal bearers (or even, 
ultimately, to exist). Conversely, the problem with 
the Durkheimian model is that is does not allow for 
individuals to be counted as causal bearers. The 
problem with the dialectical model, meanwhile, is 
that although it allows for both structures and 
individuals to be counted as causal bearers, it does 
not register the ontological gap between the two 
different kinds of entity. As Bhaskar puts it, "People 
and society are not … related 'dialectically.' They do 
not constitute two moments of the same process. 
Rather they refer to radically different kinds of thing." 
227 Only in the TMSA are structures and individuals 
counted as equally legitimate, yet ontologically 

 
distinct, causal bearers.  
226 Bhaskar, PON, p. 81.  
227 Bhaskar, Reclaiming Reality, p. 76.  
-102-  
For Bhaskar, a sharp disciplinary divide follows from 
the ontological gap between structures and individual 
persons. Social science is - or ought to be - an 
account of the former; psychological science is an 
account of the latter. I want to quote Bhaskar at 
some length here, as this has been a somewhat 
controversial point of interpretation. Bhaskar writes:  
[t]he importance of distinguishing, in 
the most categorical way, between 
human action and the social structure 
will now be apparent. For the properties 
possessed by social forms may be very 
different from those possessed by the 
individuals upon whose activity they 
depend. For instance we can suppose 
without paradox or tension that 
purposefulness, intentionality and 
sometimes self-consciousness 
characterize human action, but not 
changes in the social structure. I want 
to distinguish sharply then between 
between the genesis of human actions … 
on the one hand, and … structures … on 
the other; and hence between the 
domains of the psychological and the 
social sciences. 228  
My reading of this aspect of Bhaskar's thinking is that 
it is motivated more by a concern to distinguish 
between social structures and groups than by any 
disciplinary parochialism. Still, it is not a step that I 

 
endorse. While it may make some sense to say that 
social scientists are primarily concerned with the 
causal properties of structures, and psychologists 
with the action of individuals, the TMSA itself shows 
that there must be considerable overlap between the 
two types of endeavor. From the perspective of the 
TMSA, a social scientist who has nothing to say about 
individual agency will not be able to explain how a 
social structure is reproduced. Conversely, a 
psychologist with nothing to say about the way that 
social structures delimit the range of choices that 
individuals have will not be able to fully understand 
why people act in the ways that they do. This said, I 
shall nonetheless follow the contours of Bhaskar's 
ontology in the discussion to come. I turn in the next 
section to a consideration of social structures and, in 
the final section, to an analysis of individual agency.  
Before moving on, however, I want to make two 
further comments. The first has to do with Bhaskar's 
curious lack of attention to what we might want to 
call collective actors. Bhaskar's main concern with 
respect to groups is to stipulate that they are not 
what he means by the term social structure. Thus he 
writes,  
228 Ibid., pp. 79-80.  
-103-  
[s]ociology is not concerned, as such, 
with large-scale, mass or group 
behavior (conceived as the behavior of 
large numbers, masses or groups of 
individuals). Rather it is concerned, at 
least paradigmatically, with the 
persistent relations between individuals 
(and groups), and with the relations 
between these relations (and between 
such relations and nature and the 

products of such relations). 229  
And again: "mass behavior is an interesting social-
psychological phenomenon, but it is not the subject 
matter of sociology." 230 Just how Bhaskar does 
conceptualize groups is not completely clear in PON. 
At times he clearly sounds as though he thinks that 
group behavior is simply the behavior of large 
numbers of individuals. However, there is also textual 
evidence to show that he does not hold this view - 
that he himself sees groups in relational terms. 231 I 
am not going to argue the point either way. My 
purpose in raising the issue is to explain why I have 
not developed a separate discussion of collective 
actors. I have proceeded in the way that I have 
because (1) Bhaskar himself does not pursue the 
matter in PON, and (2) collective actors can be 
incorporated either into the discussion of structures 
or into the discussion of individuals, depending upon 
how they are conceptualized. While further analysis 
of groups would no doubt be of interest, it is not 
essential to the logic of the argument that I am 
trying to make. My own view is that collective actors 
should be understood in holist terms. However, as 
corporate entities I believe that they are more like 
structures than they are like individual persons. 
Consequently - as I shall argue is the case with 
respect to social relations - they are formal causes 
but not efficient causes, to use the Aristotelian 
terminology.  
The second point that I want to make has to do with 
the link between critical realism and the TMSA. In my 
view, Bhaskar argues for the extension of 
transcendental realism to social reality in a circuitous 
and potentially misleading way. Alluding to Kant, he 
begins with the question "What properties do 
societies possess that might make them objects of 
knowledge?" 232 I interpret, or perhaps would prefer, 
this question to mean "What would society have to be 
like, in order for the model of science associated with 
transcendental  

 
229 Bhaskar, PON, pp. 28-29.  
230 Ibid., p. 29.  
231 This interpretation was suggested to me by 
Howard Engelskirchen. Personal conversation, 
September 2002.  
232 Bhaskar, PON, p. 25.  
-104-  
realism to be applicable to the study of it?" More or 
less by definition, the answer to this question is that 
as a condition of its applicability, a transcendental 
realist model of social science requires an object of 
study that (a) can be said to be intransitive, (b) is 
characterized by ontological depth and (c) contains 
causal mechanisms. The issue, then, is whether or 
not society - or any other social phenomenon - is 
such an object. Bhaskar answers that it is. The 
argument is that social structures are intransitive in 
the sense that they both pre-exist and are 
presupposed by the actions carried out by persons; 
they provide for ontological depth in that they are the 
not-directly-empirically-accessible generative 
mechanisms that give rise to manifest events; they 
are causal mechanisms in that they both enable and 
delimit intentional activity.  
The point that I want to make is this: while the TMSA 
is a social theoretical framework that is consistent 
with transcendental realism, it is not an alternative 
formulation of transcendental realism. Let me put it 
this way: there are really two different questions that 
have been asked. The original question (as I 
interpreted it) is "What would society have to be like 
in order for transcendental realism to be applicable to 
the study of it?" The further question is "What is 
society like?" In my view, the TMSA must be seen to 

 
be an answer to the second question, rather than the 
first. It is but one theory of society - and more 
specifically of the relationship between social 
structures and individual actors - that is consistent 
with transcendental realism. To put it in the language 
of RTS, the TMSA is a scientific rather than a 
philosophical ontology. What this implies is that the 
soundness of critical naturalism is dependent upon 
the soundness of a substantive, if general, social 
scientific theory. The counter-argument to this claim 
is that Bhaskar's account of the relationship between 
structures and individuals is in fact a transcendental 
necessity of some feature of our experience, and 
therefore counts as a philosophical ontology as 
Bhaskar defines the term. This is indeed what some 
critical realists do affirm, but I believe that it is an 
unnecessary over-statement of the case.  
Causal powers and 
social structures  
As I have said, the question that is of interest for the 
purposes of the present discussion is not "Which 
causal mechanisms can be identified if one adopts a 
critical realist stance?" but rather "Can the claim that 
social structures are bearers of causal powers be 
defended philosophically?" I believe that the answer 
is yes. In trying to make good on this claim, I shall 
proceed as follows. I will begin with what debate 
there has been amongst critical realists. Here I shall 
be  
-105-  
relatively brief. I will then move on to a more 
detailed analysis of the position on this matter taken 
by Brian Ellis. Ellis is the author of a theory of 
causality that is in many respects indistinguishable 

from Bhaskar's. Unlike Bhaskar, however, Ellis holds 
that dispositional realism, as he terms it, does not 
apply to social phenomena.  
I have weighted the discussion in the way that I have 
for two reasons. The first is that there is a sense in 
which the objections put forward by those working 
within a critical realist framework can be responded 
to more easily than can those that come from Ellis. 
This is not to say that the former are any less serious 
or insightful than the latter. I would not want to be 
read as suggesting this. Rather, as Paul Lewis 
argues, there is a way in which the core "internal 
objection," as I shall call it, can be accommodated 
without undue difficulty by those who believe that 
realism about causality can meaningfully and 
properly be extended to social structures. 233 I am 
not sure that this is so with Ellis's work. The second 
reason to focus more closely on Ellis is that I believe 
that conversation between critical realists and 
philosophers from other backgrounds is sorely 
needed. While Ellis's views on metaphysics and 
philosophy of science hardly count as mainstream, as 
an interlocutor he nonetheless potentially opens up 
the discussion to a wider philosophical audience than 
Bhaskar's work has thus far reached.  
The "internal" debate  
Within critical realist circles, the main proponents of 
the view that realism about causality may not be 
extended to social structures are Rom Harré and 
Charles Varela. Harré and Varela argue, both jointly 
and independently, that social structures cannot be 
causal mechanisms. Social structures cannot be 
causal mechanisms, they say, because, as Varela 
puts it (following Harré and Madden), "causation is 
the activity of powerful particulars doing forceful 
work." 234 Social structures are incapable of doing 
forceful work. Therefore, they cannot be said to be 
powerful particulars. Powerful particulars are 

 
"singular structural unit[s] of activity," say Harré and 
Varela. 235 In the social world, it is only individuals 
that meet this criterion. The claim, then, is that 
realism about causality cannot be extended to  
233 Lewis, "Realism, Causality and the Problem of 
Social Structure," pp. 264-265.  
234 Varela, "The Ethogenics of Agency and 
Structure: A Metaphysical Problem," p.65.  
235 Varela and Rom Harré, "Conflicting Varieties of 
Realism: Causal Powers and the Problems of Social 
Structure," p. 322.  
-106-  
social structures because social structures are not in 
fact causally efficacious. To assign causal efficacy to 
social structures, Harré and Varela argue, one must 
first be prepared to de-couple the concepts of 
"power" and "particular," and then be willing to say 
that it is powers themselves that "activate" given 
particulars, including structures. The first step they 
dub the fallacy of bifurcation; the second they call 
the fallacy of activation. In their view, such an 
operation amounts to reifying the capacities of 
genuine powerful particulars (namely, people, in the 
case of social reality).  
Harré and Varela augment their ontological 
assessment of social structures as construed by 
critical realists with a substantive sociological claim to 
the effect that what critical realists call social 
structures are better understood as ongoing, inter-
subjective practices of story-telling. 236 From this 
perspective, so-called "structures" - such as class or 
feudalism, to use Harré's examples - are nothing 
other than abstractions. "Where we have to beware," 

Harré warns, "is if we start to treat diachronic 
processes, which are event sequences, as if they 
were synchronic entities." 237 Here the point is not 
just that social structures are not powerful 
particulars, but that, as conceived by critical realists, 
they do not actually exist. To quote Harré,  
Roy Bhaskar and Margaret Archer think 
that people are trapped in social 
structures. But if social structures don't 
exist in any interesting sense but are 
only taxonomic categories, then people 
can't be trapped in them. One can be 
trapped by a herd of elephants, but not 
by the species to which [the] word 
"elephant" as a classificatory category 
refers. 238  
In a recent article entitled "Realism, Causality and 
the Problem of Social Structure," Paul Lewis (2000) 
has intervened directly in this debate. Lewis argues 
that critical realists should acknowledge that social 
structures are not efficient causes. They are, 
however, he contends, material causes. Qua material 
causes, they have the effects previously described of 
both enabling certain behaviors and delimiting the 
range of options that are available to people. As 
Varela notes in a subsequent reply, Lewis 
underscores the temporal aspect of  
236 Lewis discusses this well in "Realism, Causality 
and the Problem of Social Structure."  
237 Harré, "How to Change Reality: Story vs. 
Structure - A Debate Between Rom Harré and Roy 
Bhaskar," p. 23.  
238 Ibid., p. 26.  
-107-  

 
social structures. 239 Citing Marx's observation that 
we make history, but not under conditions of our own 
choosing, Lewis writes  
[p]re-existing social structures, the 
deposit or residue of actions undertaken 
in the past, provide the context in which 
current action takes place. As we have 
seen, these historically given structures 
condition (but do not determine) 
people's behavior in the present by 
laying down an initial distribution of 
resources and vested interests. 240  
Lewis recommends J. L. Mackie's concept of an "INUS 
condition" as a way of expressing the efficacy of 
material cause. 241 INUS stands for Insufficient but 
Necessary, Unnecessary but Sufficient. In Lewis's 
view, it captures well the idea that "social structure is 
a necessary but insufficient part of a causal complex 
that is sufficient but unnecessary for the occurrence 
of a particular social event." 242 Thus, for Lewis, 
individuals are powerful particulars, while social 
structures are INUS conditions. 243 Lewis argues 
further that Harré and Varela's subjectivist 
reconception of structure as conversation has limited 
explanatory potential. In particular, it does not allow 
us to understand the exercise of power. Varela, 
meanwhile, has responded that even a 
characterization of structures as material causes is a 
reification of human agency. 244  
In my view, Lewis is right to say that social 
structures as conceived by critical realists are not 
efficient causes. As has been well observed, Bhaskar 
himself claims that within the social world it is only 
people who have the capacity to initiate events. 
Given that Bhaskar holds such a view, it simply 
cannot be the case that "[he] has resurrected the 
Durkheimian premise that social structure is an 

 
efficient cause," as Varela would have it. 245 Indeed, 
Benton has charged Bhaskar with methodological 
individualism precisely because of his contention that 
it is only people who act. 246 The question for critical 
realists, then, is:  
239 Charles R. Varela, "The Impossibility of Which 
Naturalism? A Response and Reply," Journal for the 
Theory of Social Behavior, 32(1), March 2002.  
240 Lewis, "Realism, Causality and the Problem of 
Social Structure," p. 260.  
241 Ibid., p. 264.  
242 Ibid.  
243 Ibid.  
244 Varela, "The Impossibility of Which Naturalism: A 
Response and Reply," p. 110.  
245 Ibid., p. 105.  
246 Ted Benton, "Realism and Social Science: Some 
Comments on Roy Bhaskar's 'The Possibility of 
Naturalism,'" in Margaret Archer, Roy Bhaskar, 
Andrew Collier, Tony Lawson and Alan Norrie (eds), 
Critical Realism: Essential Readings.  
-108-  
if social structures are not bearers of efficient 
causality, what kind of causal bearers are they?  
I think that Lewis is mistaken to think of social 
structures as material causes, at least vis-à-vis the 
actions of individuals. Admittedly, there is a sense in 

which the category of material causality is relevant. 
As noted, social structures may be said to be material 
causes in that they are that which is acted upon by 
individuals in the course of their ongoing 
reproduction of social life. However, this tells us that 
social structures are the material causes of society, 
not of agency as such. Material causality does not 
capture the sense in which social structures are 
thought by critical realists to be causally efficacious 
vis-à-vis individual action as such. As antecedently 
established relational positions that both enable and 
delimit potential courses of action, social structures 
are formal causes, not material causes.  
Aristotle's typology, recall, involves four different 
kinds of causal relationship - or perhaps more 
accurately, four different senses of what we mean by 
causality: 247 material, formal, efficient, and final. 
Material cause, Aristotle says, refers to "that from 
which a thing is made and continues to be made - for 
example, the bronze of a statue." 248 Formal cause, 
by contrast, refers to "the form or pattern of a thing." 
249 Efficient cause, meanwhile, refers to the "original 
source of change or rest." 250 Final cause refers to 
"the end," or purpose of a thing. "This is what 
something is for," says Aristotle, "as health, for 
example, may be what walking is for. If asked, 'Why 
is he walking?', we reply 'To get healthy', and in 
saying this we mean to explain the cause of his 
walking." 251 Formal, efficient and final causality are 
intimately related in Aristotle's metaphysics: form is 
thought to be a dynamic, inner force, the realization 
of which is the purpose of those changes that have 
been causally determined. 252  
I am not proposing that a fully Aristotelian notion of 
form-as-cause be adopted as a critical realist meta-
theory of the efficacy of causal structures. At the 
most basic level, Bhaskar's concept of real  
247 I owe this distinction to Jonathan Lear, who 

 
draws attention to the fact that "What [Aristotle] 
actually cites are not four causes, but four fashions in 
which we cite the cause" (Jonathan Lear, Aristotle: 
The Desire to Understand, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1988, p. 27). I thank Howard 
Engelskirchen for the reference to Lear's work.  
248 Aristotle (trans. Robin Waterfield), Physics, 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996, p. 39, .  
249 Ibid., .  
250 Ibid., .  
251 Ibid., .  
252 Lear, Aristotle: The Desire to Understand, 
Chapter 2.  
-109-  
essence in RTS and PON does not involve the idea 
that entities (including societies) have potential 
identities that it is their inner purpose to realize. 
However, the notion of formal cause may be 
construed in non-teleological terms. Such a step 
moves us towards a more mechanistic conception of 
essence (such as that proposed by Locke), but can, I 
think, be combined with the retention of Aristotle's 
basic typology. Formal cause conceived non-
teleologically refers still to a defining form or pattern; 
it is simply that the realization of form is no longer 
cast as a necessary, internally given goal. 253 The 
efficacy of social structures as critical realists 
conceive them is best understood in these terms. 
Social structures are pre-established, and in that 
sense objective, relationships that have determinate 
effects on individual agency. As such, they are 
analogous not to the wood out of which a house is 

built, but to the blueprint that determines whether it 
will be a bungalow or a mansion.  
With respect to Varela's contention that even the 
ascription to structures of material causal efficacy is a 
reification of individual agency, I am inclined to 
respond that Varela has not offered much in the way 
of argumentation in defense of this view. At the level 
of metaphysics, Varela's claim amounts to a rejection 
of all but efficient (and perhaps final) cause. What is 
at stake, then, is the very idea of a variegated 
conception of causality. To put it differently, Varela 
would have us reclaim a neo-Aristotelian notion of 
efficient causality as the action of a powerful 
particular, yet maintain a post-Aristotelian ban on 
material and formal, if not final, cause. The weakness 
of Varela's case, however, is that it is circular: 
causality, he says, is efficient causality; therefore, he 
concludes, material and formal cause are reifications 
of efficient causality. The extension of the concept of 
causality is an issue that should be pursued further. 
However, there is a need for those who oppose the 
concepts of material and formal cause to offer a more 
developed defense of their position than Varela has 
given us.  
At the level of philosophy of social science, 
meanwhile, the debate concerns the nature of 
agency. Apart from denying the very existence of so-
called social structures (a substantive social 
theoretical claim,  
253 Lear reminds us that for Aristotle the form of a 
thing presupposes something other than the thing 
itself as its source. As Lear puts it, for Aristotle "the 
order which exists at any level of matter is 
insufficient to generate the order required at the next 
level of organization" (Lear, Aristotle: The Desire to 
Understand, p. 39). This assumption represents a 
crucial metaphysical difference between Aristotelian 
essentialism and the more mechanistic essentialism, 
for a lack of a better way to put it, that Bhaskar, Ellis 

 
and even Harré and Madden propound.  
-110-  
which in a sense renders the rest of the analysis 
moot), here Varela would have it that to ascribe 
efficacy to entities other than persons inevitably 
leads one to endorse determinism with respect to 
individual agency. Any giving over of formal causal 
power to structures represents a loss of freedom. In 
this regard, Varela has argued that it is vital to 
appreciate that the structure/agency debate is a 
reformulation of the Kantian problematic of necessity 
versus freedom. On this point I think that Varela is 
absolutely mistaken. In making it he misses a key 
conceptual advantage of the very approach to 
causality that he endorses.  
Varela seems to think that the significance of realism 
about causality in relation to social life is that it 
implies that agents, as the only genuine sources of 
change, are in principle entirely unfettered by any 
external (or internal, for that matter) constraints. 254 
As we have seen, any suggestion that this is not so is 
regarded as a conceptual error of reification (though, 
curiously, Harré and Varela do not seem overly 
concerned about the fact of real, material reification). 
What Varela does not appreciate, however, is that 
realism about causality of the sort proposed by Harré 
and Madden, as well as by Bhaskar, allows us to set 
aside the Kantian problematic altogether. From a 
transcendental realist perspective, causality is the 
exercise or display of causal powers. Agency, from 
this perspective, is just the intentional display of such 
powers. There is no dichotomy between the two. This 
is a markedly different conception of agency than 
that of a noumenal capacity that somehow escapes 
the rubric of law. Critical naturalists such as Bhaskar 
regard structures and individuals alike to be bearers 
of causal powers. Each has an effect on the other, 
although the relationship is an asymmetrical one. 

 
Freedom, from such a perspective, has nothing to do 
with getting out from under structures per se, let 
alone transcending causality. Instead, freedom has to 
do with the establishment of structures that permit 
and sustain the full flourishing of human capacities. 
From such a perspective, Varela's voluntarism can be 
seen to undermine theoretical discussion about 
freedom in just the same way as positivism does: 
both involve the denial of real structural constraints 
on flourishing.  
In sum, then, my response to Harré and Varela's 
"internal" objections to critical realism is to stipulate 
that social structures should be conceived as formal 
rather than efficient causes. As already stated, I take 
the assertion that efficient causes are all there is to 
be a  
254 Varela is also opposed to the concept of the 
unconscious, regarding it too as a reification of the 
causal power of individuals. See op. cit., Varela, "The 
Ethogenics of Agency and Structure: A Metaphysical 
Problem."  
-111-  
not-well-defended assumption. In my view, there is 
no obvious reason to collapse the concept of causality 
into that of efficient cause. As a philosophical matter, 
it seems to me intuitively clear that the extension of 
the former ought to exceed that of the latter. I 
regard the retheorization of causality in non-Humean 
terms as an opportunity to recover the richness, if 
not the underlying teleology, of the Aristotelian 
framework. As a sociological matter, meanwhile, I 
agree with Lewis, who argues that Harré and Varela's 
understanding of social structures as narrative 
strategies has less explanatory power than does the 
critical realist alternative.  

Scientific essentialism  
Brian Ellis calls the approach that he takes scientific 
essentialism. Scientific essentialism is a non-Humean 
metaphysics, at the heart of which is the thesis of 
dispositional realism. 255 Much as Bhaskar does - 
though Ellis employs a different vocabulary and 
develops the position in far greater detail - Ellis 
argues that substances are endowed with 
dispositional properties. To be the bearer of a 
dispositional property is to have the propensity to do 
specific things under specific conditions. Causal 
processes, says Ellis, consist precisely in the display 
of said dispositional properties. Causal laws connect 
antecedent and consequent events of given kinds by 
expressing what it is about the former (i.e., events of 
the kind of which the cause is) that brings into being 
the latter (namely, events of the kind of which the 
effect is). A proposed causal law may be erroneous. 
If it is true, however, it describes a metaphysical 
necessity. A causal law that is true, Ellis agrees with 
Bhaskar, is necessarily true - not because the 
assertion of its negation is a logical contradiction, but 
rather because it expresses the real necessity of a 
thing to display just those essential dispositional 
properties by virtue of which it is a member of one 
kind and not of another.  
As does Bhaskar, Ellis believes that natural science is 
a matter of identifying the necessary relationships 
between the events or entities that we seek to 
explain and the underlying causal mechanisms that 
produce or constitute them, namely, the dispositional 
properties which are the real essences of natural 
kinds. 256 Unlike Bhaskar, however, Ellis maintains 
that such an account cannot be extended to  
255 The following is a summary of Brian Ellis's 
position in op. cit., Ellis, Scientific Essentialism.  
256 It should be noted that Ellis affirms the existence 

 
of natural kinds of processes and properties, as well 
natural kinds of substances.  
-112-  
the social sciences. Instead, he holds, "the traditional 
empiricist theory of the nature of scientific laws may 
thus be more or less right for the social sciences." 257 
Ellis advances two different arguments in support of 
his position - a position that amounts, in context, to a 
firm anti-naturalism. The first argument is that even 
neo-classical economics, which Ellis takes to be the 
social science with the greatest claim to scientificity á 
la natural science, is not, in fact, fundamentally akin 
to natural science. The second argument is that 
scientific essentialism is inapplicable to the social 
sciences because social phenomena do not have 
essences. The first argument is the less forceful of 
the two, it seems to me; let me address it first, 
therefore, and then turn to what I see as the more 
significant challenge to critical naturalism.  
(i) Ellis on the form of social 
science  
Ellis points to three basic differences between neo-
classical economics and natural sciences. The first 
difference is that economic laws do not refer to 
processes that are physically necessary. 258 The 
second difference is that neo-classical economics, 
according to Ellis, cannot support a Lakatosian 
distinction between the discipline's "hard core" and 
its "protective belt." In the social sciences, Ellis 
contends, any attempt to operate on the basis of 
such a distinction would be deemed ideological and 
thus non-scientific. 259 The third difference has to do 
with the character of models in economic theory. 
Neo-classical models, Ellis argues, are "quasi-
analytic" mathematical constructs, rather than 

 
descriptions of essential processes. 260 They do not 
meet criteria for either theoretical soundness or 
empirical adequacy, as Ellis puts it. 261 Ellis's view is 
that economics - and social science more generally - 
is not well served either by (a) its actual a priori 
character or by (b) pretensions to the effect that it is 
- or should be - practiced according to the norms of 
natural science - i.e., in keeping with the model of 
scientific essentialism. Instead, he maintains, social 
scientists "must be empiricists in the old, and often 
maligned, sense of this term." 262 In short, he 
concludes, "Bacon's  
257 Brian Ellis, Scientific Essentialism, p. 180.  
258 It is not entirely clear whether by "economic law" 
Ellis is referring to knowledge claims of a specific 
type or to economic phenomena of a specific type. I 
shall continue to use the term "law" to refer to 
knowledge claims.  
259 Ellis, Scientific Essentialism, pp. 183-186.  
260 Ibid., p. 187 and p. 194.  
261 Ibid., pp. 189-190.  
262 Ibid., p. 197.  
-113-  
inductive methodology may not be wholly 
inappropriate for economics." 263  
Of the three qualitative differences that Ellis finds 
between natural science and neo-classical economics, 
only the first, it seems to me, is indisputable. But this 
is because it is trivial. The fact that social science 

concerns social relationships rather than physical 
ones tells us only that the social sciences do not have 
the same object domain as the natural sciences. But 
this is not news. Rather, it is the very basis for asking 
whether or not the two types of inquiry nonetheless 
ought to have the same form. It is only if we have 
already assumed that the only necessary connections 
that obtain are physical ones that the fact that social 
scientific laws are not physically necessary tells 
against the viability of scientific essentialism as a 
philosophy of social science.  
The claim that social science is well described by 
empiricism because it is poorly described by Lakatos, 
meanwhile, invites a different sort of response. There 
are two points to be made here. Most important, 
while Ellis may look favorably upon Lakatos's views, 
there is no special connection between scientific 
essentialism, grounded upon dispositional realism, 
and Lakatos's account of scientific progress. Even if 
Ellis is right, and Lakatos's framework is totally 
inapplicable to social science, this does not imply that 
social science ought to be construed (and practiced) 
along classical empiricist lines. Beyond this, there are 
certainly those who would disagree with Ellis's 
assessment of Lakatos's relevance to social science. 
264 Social science, many would say, does, in fact, 
develop via a progression of research programmes 
that are more fruitful than those that they replace. 
Moreover, the fundamental precepts of a successful 
social scientific research programme are no less likely 
to be abandoned lightly than are those of a 
successful research programme in the natural 
sciences. Indeed, the very fact that neo-classical 
economics seems invulnerable to empirical challenge 
- which Ellis cites as evidence of its proponents' "a 
priorism" 265 - is a clear example of a theoretical core 
being surrounded by a protective belt. 266 This is not 
to say that any research agenda with a protected 
theoretical core is therefore scientific, or to endorse 
Lakatos approach to the issue. I simply want to show 
that the use that Ellis makes of Lakatos is subject to 

 
criticism. Ellis might be expected to respond that 
even if some social scientists do both accept 
Lakatos's criterion  
263 Ibid., p. 198.  
264 Thanks to Doug Porpora for his thoughts on this 
issue.  
265 Ellis, Scientific Essentialism, p. 197.  
266 Thanks to Hugh Lacey for this point. Personal 
conversation, April 25, 2002.  
-114-  
of scientificity and maintain that social science fits 
the bill, his, Ellis's, point is that there is no legitimate 
basis - either ontological or epistemological - upon 
which the "core" of a social science research 
programme may be either delineated or protected. 
The ontological element of this claim is the 
proposition that social phenomena have no essential 
structures; the epistemological element is the 
proposition that adherence to favored models in the 
social sciences (neo-economics paradigmatically) is 
not well justified. I shall address the ontological point 
later. The epistemological point, meanwhile, is 
precisely the third component of Ellis's case that 
social science is entirely unlike natural science.  
Here the argument is that scientific essentialism does 
not apply to the social sciences because neo-classical 
economic models do not meet what Ellis takes to be 
standard criteria within the natural sciences for 
theoretical soundness and empirical adequacy. 
Theoretical soundness, according to Ellis, requires 
that "the laws that are supposed to govern the 
objects in the model [be] theoretically derivable from 

 
… more fundamental laws that we are independently 
justified in accepting." 267 Empirical adequacy, 
meanwhile, requires a detailed causal account of the 
difference between reality and a proposed theoretical 
ideal. Neo-classical economics fails on both scores, 
Ellis tells us: economic "laws" cannot be reduced to 
more basic theories; actual economies don't behave 
the way neo-classical economists say they do. 268  
Now, I agree with the suggestion that neo-classical 
economics is neither sound nor adequate, but I am 
not led by this judgment to conclude that social 
reality is in fact well described by the implicit 
ontology of empiricism. The question is: does either 
of these points (if true, which I think that they are) 
give us reason to believe that causality itself is 
something different in the social world than it is in 
the natural world? I cannot see that they do. My 
response to the first point is the same as my 
response to the idea that dispositional realism is 
inapplicable to social science because social scientists 
seek to explain social rather than physical processes 
(and it is really the same idea that is being expressed 
here). The fact that social scientists theorize social 
rather than physical phenomena (and that 
explanations of the former cannot be reduced to 
explanations of the latter) only tells against the 
applicability of dispositional realism to the social 
world if one has already decided that physical 
properties alone can ground non-accidental 
connections. But such an assumption is  
267 Ellis, Scientific Essentialism, p. 189.  
268 Ibid., p. 190.  
-115-  
clearly question-begging. Meanwhile, the fact that 

neo-classical economics is a woefully inadequate 
explanatory framework implies only that it ought to 
be abandoned - and that it occupies the position of 
favor that it does for what must ultimately be non-
epistemic reasons.  
(ii) Ellis on social entities  
Ellis's ontological argument is stronger than his 
epistemological argument. In critical realist parlance, 
the ontological argument concerns the nature of the 
intransitive, rather than the transitive, object of 
social scientific inquiry. The claim here is that 
scientific essentialism is inapplicable to social science 
because social phenomena lack essential structures 
on the basis of which to fall into natural kinds. It is 
this ontological thesis that Ellis's analysis of social 
science presupposes. I want to challenge Ellis's 
conclusions regarding social phenomena, but a few 
preliminary comments are in order. These, I hope, 
will provide the necessary context for the argument 
that I want to make.  
To begin, Ellis's approach is not what one would 
expect it to be. Causality, for Ellis, is a matter of the 
display of dispositional properties. Affirmation of the 
existence of such properties is at the very heart of 
scientific essentialism. Accordingly, one would have 
expected the argument from Ellis against the 
extension of scientific essentialism to social 
phenomena to be based, as is that of Harré and 
Varela, on a claim that social phenomena are not 
party to dispositional displays - and this because they 
are not bearers of dispositional properties. But this is 
not the tack that Ellis takes. Instead, as I shall 
discuss in some detail, he pursues the idea that social 
phenomena have no fixed characteristics.  
Second, while Ellis, like Bhaskar, focuses more on 
powers than on powerful particulars, Ellis 
conceptualizes the phenomenon of a causal power 
more narrowly than does Bhaskar. For Ellis, who 

 
more often uses the term "disposition," a causal 
power is the potential that a thing has to behave in a 
certain way (i.e., to display a dispositional property). 
For Bhaskar, meanwhile (as is implied in his explicit 
acknowledgement of material causality and in his 
implicit recognition of formal causality), almost any 
kind of determining function may legitimately be 
termed a power. So construed, the concept of a 
causal power includes but is more general than that 
of a disposition. When they are talking about physical 
processes, the difference in conceptual vocabulary 
between Ellis and Bhaskar is largely moot. Both hold 
that efficient causality, here paramount, is a matter 
of the exercise, as Bhaskar puts it, or display, as Ellis 
puts it, of powers that things have  
-116-  
(or are) essentially. 269 These are powers in the 
more restrictive sense of the term - powers that 
things have to bring about changes in other things. 
When Bhaskar turns to social structures, however, he 
is saying something different. When he is talking 
about social structures, he is saying that causality, 
now implicitly construed as formal rather than 
efficient causality, is a matter of the 
"powers" (understood here in the much looser sense) 
that structures have to determine outcomes only 
inasmuch as they sustain and/or delimit possible 
courses of action. Ellis, meanwhile, is denying that 
structures have powers construed in the narrow 
sense - though he is not going about it by asserting 
that only persons can be agents, as do Harré and 
Varela, but rather by maintaining that structures 
have no essences.  
It is crucial to distinguish between the sense in which 
efficient causality can be defined in terms of the 
display of a power and the sense in which formal 
(and final) causality can be defined in terms of the 
display of a power. With respect to social structures, 

the latter sense applies (if it does) to all social 
structures. The former sense, by contrast - as Rob 
Albritton points out - only applies to those social 
structures that are so reified as to exhibit, or at least 
seem to exhibit, agent-like behavior. 270 Albritton 
has argued that capital, for example, is such a power. 
Other, less reified structures, in Albritton's view, are 
only powers - if we want to even use the term - in a 
far less literal sense. It is extremely important to be 
able to make this distinction. To do so, however, 
requires that one not elide the difference between 
formal and efficient cause, as Bhaskar in my view 
tends to do. While I want to refrain from 
characterizing formal causality in dispositional terms, 
I do believe, as previously argued, that formal causes 
are efficacious. Moreover, I don't think that the 
refinement of categories that I have recommended 
has any negative implications for the viability of 
transcendental realism in relation to social 
phenomena. Causality, we may say, is a matter of 
powers that efficient causes have to effect change 
directly and/or a matter of the powers that formal 
(and final and material) causes have to effect change 
indirectly, by enabling, delimiting and/or motivating 
action.  
Finally, while Ellis maintains that social phenomena 
lack essences, it is worth noting that he does not 
actually seem to be saying that they cannot be 
causes. I read him this way mainly because he shows 
no sign of subscribing to either ontological or 
methodological  
269 For Ellis, things are what they are by virtue of 
what they can do. Bhaskar tends to talk about things 
being able to do what they can by virtue of what they 
are.  
270 Personal conversation, June 2002.  
-117-  

 
individualism. He apparently has no objection to 
holism, to the idea that there are social objects that 
do not reduce to the aggregate behavior of 
individuals. Nor does he suggest that a proper social 
science would consist of the study of individuals. He 
is, admittedly, limited in his conception and analysis 
of social phenomena - focusing as he does on 
markets - but he is expressly concerned with how 
best to understand such phenomena scientifically.  
As I've said, I want to argue against Ellis that realism 
about causality can be extended to the social world. 
My position is that social phenomena do have 
essential characteristics, and that it is by virtue of 
these that they regularly exercise the sort of powers 
borne by formal causes, and sometimes exercise 
powers that are similar to those borne by efficient 
causes. Given that Ellis bases his case against 
naturalism on the idea that social phenomena do not 
have such characteristics - and therefore cannot be 
said to fall into natural kinds - let me start off by 
trying to pinpoint exactly why it is that he makes 
such an assessment. The key idea seems to be that 
objects such as markets are "human constructs," as 
he puts it. 271 The question, then, is what is it about 
being a human construct that renders an object 
devoid of essential properties? Or, as Ellis would be 
more likely to put it, what is it about being a human 
construct that precludes social objects from falling 
into natural kinds? Sometimes it sounds as though 
Ellis is saying that social objects do not fall into 
natural kinds simply because members of natural 
kinds are natural objects, while social objects are 
social objects. But this doesn't tell us anything of 
importance. What we need to know is why one might 
think that social objects do not fall into natural kind 
analogues, i.e., into social kinds.  
The argument against the existence of social kinds 
seems to be that because social phenomena are 
produced by human beings, they are mutable - 

 
radically so - in a way in which physical phenomena 
are not. There is also a suggestion that the objects of 
the social world do not fall into kinds because each 
particular is unique. "Market economies and market 
forces have no essential natures," Ellis writes. 272  
Market forces are different, and behave 
differently, in different economies. They 
also behave differently in different 
sectors of the same economy, at 
different stages of its development, and 
at different times in the business cycle. 
273  
271 Ellis, Scientific Essentialism, p. 179.  
272 Ibid., p. 194.  
273 Ibid.  
-118-  
A phenomenon that cannot be counted upon to retain 
its identity, Ellis seems to be saying, is patently 
ineligible to be the object of an essentialist research 
programme.  
How might one defend critical naturalism against 
such an argument? There are two potential lines of 
response, it seems to me, one sociological and one 
philosophical. A sociological approach would center 
on an empirical analysis of what one takes to be 
legitimate examples of social kinds, e.g., value, the 
wage-relation, the commodity form, patriarchy. 274 A 
primarily philosophical response, meanwhile, involves 
taking a closer look at the logic of Ellis's position. This 
is the approach that I shall pursue. A number of 
possible objections to Ellis's case emerge from such 
an examination.  

The first point to be made is that Ellis's conclusions 
rest upon an assessment of the relationship between 
objects having essences and objects undergoing 
change. The contention would seem to be that it is 
because social phenomena are subject to change that 
they are not candidates for having essential 
characteristics. Implicit in this claim is the idea that 
those objects that do have essences do not undergo 
change - or at least that they do not undergo 
changes in which they lose any of the properties that 
they hold essentially. But such a proposition is at 
odds with the behavior of the physical entities that 
Ellis himself accepts as paradigmatic instances of 
natural kinds. Water, for example, can lose the 
oxygen molecule that differentiates it from hydrogen, 
or can gain an extra hydrogen molecule, the addition 
of which transforms it into heavy water. An atom can 
be split apart. And so on.  
If one joins with Ellis in accepting the existence of 
natural kinds, then what the example tells us is not 
that because water can undergo change it doesn't 
have an essence, but rather that when water loses its 
oxygen molecule it becomes something other than 
water, i.e., hydrogen. To put it differently, when 
something with an essence undergoes essential 
change, it doesn't ipso facto become something that 
never had an essence in the first place. It simply 
becomes something different from what it was 
before. As Danermark et al. put it:  
Here [in relation to the concept of 
natural necessity], "nature" in general 
terms refers to … that which at a certain 
moment  
274 Thanks to Howard Engelskirchen 
and Hans Ehrbar for their comments on 
value as a social kind; to Doug Porpora 
for his thoughts on the topic in general, 
and on patriarchy as a social kind in 
particular; and to the members of the 

 
Bhaskar listserv, for taking up this 
question in response to a query from 
me.  
-119-  
determines what a certain object is. The 
nature of the object may change, but 
then we will be dealing with a new 
object with other constitutive properties. 
275  
Nor does the potential for change pose any special 
epistemological challenge. It is not necessary for an 
object to remain the same indefinitely in order for it 
to be studied scientifically, only that it do so for some 
determinate period of time. Indeed, the lower end of 
the range of such time frames is minute, as 
evidenced by the fleeting nature of the particles that 
constitute the object domain of subatomic physics. 
Whether or not social objects retain the properties by 
virtue of which they are things of one kind and not 
another long enough to be studied is an empirical 
question, the answer to which is yes. As a 
sociological matter, a critical realist will not be 
especially worried about this continuing to be the 
case. From the perspective of the TMSA, the ongoing 
existence of social structures is not in question on a 
moment-by-moment basis. Capitalist markets may 
be "human constructs," but they are not 
voluntaristically produced afresh each instant.  
A second issue that emerges upon scrutiny of Ellis's 
position concerns variation between members of a 
given social kind. While he emphasizes their 
impermanence, Ellis also draws attention to the fact 
that the putative members of social kinds are not 
identical. In his words:  
The economy is a socially constructed 

 
system, heavily dependent on human 
conventions, and different economies 
have different mechanisms for achieving 
their objectives. Even market economies 
differ from each other in various ways, 
both structurally and in how they work 
(Hutton, 1996; Fukuyama, 1995). 
Consequently, we should not expect to 
find a unique and simple underlying 
reality for our economic theories to 
describe. 276  
Such difference amongst particulars is taken as 
further evidence that social phenomena do not share 
any essential characteristics. I am not convinced by 
the argument. Even in the case of infimic species, 
which admit of no further classification, there is no 
expectation that the members of a kind be identical 
in every single respect. Rather, they are expected to 
share only those properties that are essential to the  
275 Danermark et al., Explaining Society: Critical 
Realism in the Social Sciences, p.44.  
276 Brian Ellis, Scientific Essentialism, p. 187.  
-120-  
kind in question. There is no reason to think that 
things should be different with respect to social 
phenomena: variety amongst particulars does not 
weigh heavily against the existence of natural kind 
analogues. The fact that Canadian capitalism differs 
from Japanese capitalism does not imply that it is in 
the nature of the case that capitalism cannot be 
differentiated in kind from feudalism. Nor - to 
anticipate an objection that Ellis does not actually 
make - does the fact that there may be disagreement 
amongst social scientists regarding what the essential 
properties of a given kind are.  

Ellis, of course - to return to the discussion of the 
character of social science for a moment - is opposed 
to the idea that there can be real definitions in social 
science. Insofar as capitalism, for example, can be 
characterized as having certain essential features, 
Ellis maintains that the terms of such an account can 
be only a priori, analytic definitions or empirical 
generalizations. 277 But I see no reason to accept this 
view. As in the natural sciences, real definitions in 
social science are propositions that, although they 
are developed through empirical analysis, capture 
real causal relationships in the world. 278 Even if Ellis 
is right, and I think he is, that neo-classical 
economics consists largely of empirically irrelevant 
model-building, it does not follow from this that 
economics as a social science should take the form of 
butterfly collecting.  
The case that Ellis makes against social kinds is not 
persuasive. As "human constructs," social 
phenomena are, indeed, both varied and subject to 
change. Neither fact, however, supports the 
conclusion that they have no essential features - and 
thus cannot be the objects of real definitions. 
(Indeed, it is not even clear that social phenomena 
are unique in these regards.) However, Ellis's 
argument is problematic at an even deeper level. 
Ultimately, it seems to me, his position is 
unsatisfactory because it lands him in the untenable 
position of affirming that causality is one thing in the 
natural world and something entirely different (or 
perhaps non-existent) in the social world. For it is not 
just a matter of switching methodological hats - from 
that of scientific essentialism, according to which the 
purpose of inquiry is to establish real definitions, to 
that of classical empiricism, from the perspective of 
which science consists of generalizing from 
observation - when one turns one's attention to the 
social world.  
277 Ibid., p. 193.  

 
278 While they do not extend their account of 
causality to the social sciences as Bhaskar does, 
Harré and Madden offer a solid account of the 
process of generating real definitions in science. See 
Harré and Madden, Causal Powers, Chapter 1.  
-121-  
Certainly a scientific essentialist may be a pluralist 
about method. He or she may maintain, for example, 
that social entities have real essences, but there are 
times when nothing beats old-fashioned observation 
for yielding insight into what they are. But this is not 
what Ellis is saying. Rather, in offering a domain-
specific endorsement of empiricism, which is 
ontologically rather than epistemologically grounded, 
Ellis is telling us that causality as he defines it - 
namely, a relationship of necessity that holds 
between event-kinds, in virtue of the dispositional 
properties that they display - does not apply to social 
phenomena.  
This, it seems to me, is not a viable position. It would 
be different if Ellis were to reject the existence of 
social objects altogether, in favor of atomism. Then, 
at least, we could say that there are no relations of 
cause and effect between social phenomena because 
objects such as "markets" do not really exist. But 
Ellis acknowledges the existence of social entities, 
even if he doesn't fully register their relational 
character. He acknowledges the existence of social 
entities, but says that they do not enter into 
relationships of cause and effect, as he has defined 
that relationship. A determined defender of Ellis 
might say "Well, why can't we be pluralists about 
causal necessity? Maybe causality is one thing in the 
natural world and one thing in the social world." This 
strikes me as implausible, but in any case the 
response doesn't get off the ground in this instance 
because the recommended alternative account (i.e., 
that which is implicit in classical empiricism) is one in 

 
which natural necessity is thought not to exist. The 
conclusion to which I believe we must come is this: 
if, as Ellis argues, causality is a matter of what an 
entity can do, then this must be so for social entities 
(and persons) as well as for physical entities. The 
relationship of cause and effect is not domain-specific 
to the natural world. If scientific essentialists are 
right that causality is a matter of the real powers that 
things have to effect change, then it is so uniformly.  
Let me take a quick moment to forestall a potential 
misunderstanding. In claiming that causality is the 
same "thing" universally, I am not affirming 
reductionism in any form. To say that the definition 
of causality is a constant is not to say that all events 
have the same, or even the same kinds of, causes. 
Nor does the idea that social phenomena have 
essential properties imply that such properties are 
physical ones. Bhaskar himself (with whom I would 
agree here) is quite clear in PON that he is opposed 
to materialist reductionism, both as an ontological 
stance and as an epistemological project. In contrast 
to reductionism, Bhaskar puts forward what he calls 
"synchronic emergent powers materialism" (SEPM). 
SEPM is the view that social (and mental) phenomena 
supervene upon the material conditions of  
-122-  
their existence; they emerge from - and are thus 
existentially contingent upon - but do not reduce to, 
their material components. Emergent entities are 
non-reducible wholes that are qualitatively distinct 
from the sum of their material parts. They do not 
reduce to their components ontologically because 
they display - or have the potential to display - 
properties that are not borne by their constituent 
elements. They do not reduce epistemologically 
because the explanations in which they figure must 
refer to the properties that they, but not their 
components, bear and/or bear essentially. Thus, in 

saying that the capitalist wage-relation, for example, 
has a real essence (namely, the transfer of surplus 
value), one is not saying that it can be reduced to 
something that is non-social.  
Causal powers and 
individuals  
Bhaskar begins his discussion of individual agency by 
asking "What properties [do] people possess that 
might make them objects of knowledge for us?" 279 
Here, as in the analysis of social structures, what is 
really being asked is "What would intentional 
behavior have to be like, in order for the model of 
science associated with transcendental realism to be 
applicable to the study of it - and does it meet said 
criteria?" As I understand him, Bhaskar's answer is 
that in order for transcendental realism to hold vis-à-
vis intentional behavior, it would have to be the case 
that actions are caused by generative mechanisms. 
Bhaskar holds that actions are undertaken as a result 
of the mental states of actors. Much of the argument 
of Chapter 3 of PON therefore centers on the 
proposition that it is legitimate to think of mental 
states as generative mechanisms - or, to put it 
differently, to think of reasons as causes.  
The question of whether or not realism about 
causality can be extended to individual agency does 
not seem to me to be a difficult one to settle. That 
human beings are bearers of dispositional powers I 
regard as beyond dispute. I am prepared to say that 
we bear such powers essentially, albeit not uniquely. 
This is all that is required, it seems to me, in order to 
affirm realism about causality in the psychological 
domain. Bhaskar develops the case further, however. 
As I have indicated, he maintains not just that people 
are bearers of causal powers, but that, in the case of 
action, the exercise of such powers is itself brought 
about and/or constrained by reasons. This gets him 

 
to the idea that it is reasons (rather than actors) that 
are the psychological analogue of generative 
mechanisms in nature.  
279 Bhaskar, PON, p. 80.  
-123-  
I have no objection to the claim that reasons are 
causally efficacious - and since, in my view, realism 
about causality does not depend on the validity of 
such a proposition, I am not going to take the time to 
rehearse Bhaskar's argument on its behalf. I do, 
however, want to intervene in the discussion at the 
point at which it has been established that reasons 
are causally relevant. Specifically, I want to suggest 
that Bhaskar makes two mistakes in how he theorizes 
intentional processes. The first mistake is that he 
casts reasons in the role of efficient causes. The 
second is that he conceives of action as a sub-type of 
physical event, rather than as the material enactment 
of purpose. It is important to see that I have not 
simply described the same mistake in two different 
ways. In the first case, we are given an incorrect - or 
at least imprecise and potentially misleading - answer 
to the question "In what sense are reasons causally 
efficacious?" In the second case, we are given an 
incorrect answer to the question "What are actions?"  
My view is that reasons are final causes, not efficient 
causes. Actions, meanwhile, although motivated by 
reasons, cannot be resolved conceptually into a set of 
physical behaviors brought about by an antecedent 
emotional/mental state. Instead they must be 
conceived as being inherently meaningful. They are 
"singular structural unit[s]" of intentionality, to use 
Varela and Harré's phrase. 280 I think that it is 
important to distinguish between these two points, as 
there is ultimately no necessary connection between 
them. The fact that reasons are not efficient causes 

 
(that, rather, they are the purposes for which actions 
are undertaken), does not tell us what actions are. 
Conversely, the fact that actions are something other 
than behavior does not tell us what sort of efficacy 
we may appropriately ascribe to reasons. I don't 
believe that this distinction has been made clearly 
enough by those within the hermeneutic tradition 
who have argued for the place of final cause in the 
explanation of action.  
I am not going to spend a great deal of time arguing 
the first point. Bhaskar maintains that to say that 
reasons cannot be efficient causes is to commit what 
he calls "the 'essentialist fallacy' of holding that the 
only real causes are ultimate ones." 281 Presumably, 
if we are to avoid committing the essentialist fallacy, 
we must affirm that "real" causes are efficient 
causes, and that this category includes reasons. In 
keeping with this line of reasoning, Bhaskar specifies 
that it is reasons that are the psychological analogues 
of causal mechanisms in  
280 Varela and Harré, "Conflicting Varieties of 
Realism: Causal Powers and the Problems of Social 
Structure," p. 322.  
281 Bhaskar, PON, p. 84.  
-124-  
nature. 282 "Teleological explanations," he contends, 
"are most naturally construed as a species of 
ordinary causal explanation, where the cause is, in 
the case of reasons, some antecedent state of mind." 
283 In this instance I believe that Bhaskar has - as 
Harré and Varela charge he has done with respect to 
social structures - simply ascribed agentlike 
properties to a kind of thing, namely, mental states, 
that is not, in fact, agent-like. Reasons, I think we 
have to say, are final causes. They are why actions 

are undertaken. They are not, however, the powerful 
particulars that enact them. I don't believe that such 
a stipulation poses any problem for critical realism. 
As in the case of social structures, we do not need to 
say that reasons are efficient causes in order to say 
that they have determining effects. It is perhaps 
worth noting that it is not clear whether Bhaskar 
means to say that it is reasons themselves, or the 
holding of reasons, that are causes. 284 I think that 
he is inconsistent on this point, at least at the level of 
rhetoric. On the one hand, he states "[t]hus, the 
possession of a reason, conceived as a more or less 
long-standing disposition or orientation to act in a 
certain way, may itself be a cause." 285 On the other 
hand, he repeatedly and emphatically expresses his 
position as being the view that "reasons" are causes. 
In the end, I am not sure that it matters. The holding 
of a reason does not seem to me to be any more of a 
powerful particular than are reasons themselves.  
The second point, having to do with the concept of 
action, is more complicated. Here my contention is 
that Bhaskar does not distinguish adequately and 
consistently between action and behavior. I shall 
make the case in part via the work of Charles Taylor. 
It is important to appreciate, however, that Taylor 
himself tends to run together the two different issues 
that I have identified as being problematic in 
Bhaskar's treatment of agency, namely, that of the 
causal properties of reasons and that of the depiction 
of action. Taylor's implicit presumption is that the 
fact that reasons are final causes and the fact that 
actions are irreducibly meaningful are one and the 
same point. I am suggesting that this is not so - that 
it is possible to be differently (and independently) 
mistaken about what reasons can and cannot do, on 
the one hand, and about what actions are and are 
not, on the other.  
282 Ibid.  
283 Ibid.  

 
284 Thanks to Hugh Lacey for this point. Personal 
conversation, June 17, 2002. Lacey defends Bhaskar 
against the charge of reifying reasons, maintaining 
that for Bhaskar it is the holding of a reason by an 
agent that is efficacious, not the reason itself.  
285 Bhaskar, PON, p. 85.  
-125-  
In an article entitled "Hegel's Philosophy of Mind," 
Taylor identifies two different ways of conceptualizing 
action. 286 One approach - which Taylor dubs the 
"causal view" - is to think of actions as being events 
like any others. The only thing that distinguishes 
actions from other events, from this perspective, is 
that they happen to have psychological causes. As 
Taylor puts it, "[a]ctions are events which are 
peculiar in that they are brought about by desires, or 
intentions, or combinations of desires and beliefs." 
287 Taylor associates this approach with Cartesian 
dualism, in that actions are viewed as physical events 
with non-material causes. The alternative approach, 
which Taylor calls the "qualitative view," is to think of 
actions as differing ontologically from other events. 
From this perspective, what is unique about actions is 
not simply that, unlike other events, they are 
motivated by reasons, but that actions and their 
"causes" cannot be disaggregated. Actions, from this 
perspective, just are the expressions of purposes; 
they cannot be characterized first in non-purposive 
terms, and only then, retroactively as it were, 
connected to a mental or emotional state.  
Taylor, predictably, advances the latter, "qualitative" 
approach. Bhaskar, meanwhile, must be seen in PON 
to be a espousing the "causal" view. "[A]ctions," he 
writes, "[are] regarded (paradigmatically) as the 
class of bodily movements with reasons as their 
causes." 288 For Taylor, as for proponents of 

 
hermeneutic social science generally, actions are 
irreducibly meaningful. As a result, they cannot be 
correctly identified in non-purposive terms. Bhaskar, 
by contrast, holds that while actions may be 
characterized in such terms, they "can also normally 
be redescribed independently of their reasons." 289 
Although it has immediate epistemological 
implications, the underlying dispute is ontological: 
Bhaskar sees actions as a subclass of bodily 
movements; Taylor sees actions as signs. If Taylor is 
right, then Bhaskar's account of what it is to explain 
intentional behavior is flawed from the outset.  
Now I want to be very careful here. There are in fact 
two different theses in circulation. The first is that 
actions are inherently meaningful. The second is that 
there is no way to disaggregate actions from their 
causes. My view is that Taylor is right to think that  
286 Charles Taylor, Human Agency and Language: 
Philosophical Papers 1, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1985, Chapter 3. My discussion of 
Taylor's argument in Chapter 3 is informed by the 
content of Chapters 1 and 4.  
287 Ibid., p. 78.  
288 Bhaskar, PON, p. 88.  
289 Ibid.  
-126-  
actions are inherently meaningful, but wrong to 
imply, as I think that he does, that we cannot 
distinguish between the meaning that an action 
expresses and that which caused the agent to act. 
The meaning of an action does not necessarily tell us 
why an actor undertook to express such a meaning. 

Take Taylor's own example of voting: marking off a 
box on a piece of paper, he says, is not the same 
thing as casting a vote. The latter is what it is in part 
because of the intersubjectively held meanings that it 
has. However, I can be identified as having voted 
without it being apparent what my reasons were for 
doing so. A satisfactory account of my action would 
have to explain not just what I was doing, but why I 
was doing it. I think that Bhaskar can be read as 
trying to make just this point. Unfortunately, in the 
course of arguing that we can distinguish between 
actions and their causes, he winds up saying that we 
can distinguish between actions and their meanings.  
Let me elaborate. In an early article entitled 
"Emotion, Behavior and Belief," 290 Alasdair 
MacIntyre describes a scenario in which a man 
crosses the street in order to avoid someone with 
whom he has had a disagreement. This same man, 
MacIntyre says, could just as well have taken other 
steps to signal his displeasure. For example, he could 
have (in a fairly outlandish move) purchased the 
entire supply of a rare fruit that the person who 
angered him enjoys. Equally plausible, he could have 
taken steps to prevent the person from receiving a 
desired invitation to a party. "Crossing a road, buying 
up fruit, stealing mail: these actions have nothing in 
common with each other and yet they can all express 
resentment," MacIntyre writes. 291 Conversely, any 
one of these acts could, qua bodily movements, 
easily be undertaken for reasons totally unrelated to 
such expression. The point that MacIntyre makes is 
that it is not possible to tell, on the basis of observed 
behavior, whether crossing the street is an instance 
of resentment or simply of being preoccupied. As in 
Taylor's example of voting, in order to be able to 
identify a sequence of bodily movements as an action 
of one sort or another, we must know its purpose. 
MacIntyre's claim is an epistemological one, but it is 
sound in virtue of the underlying ontological one: 
behavior and action are not the same thing. Unlike 
behavior, action is meaningful. If we don't know what 

 
an action is intended to express, we don't know what 
it is.  
MacIntyre's criticism of behaviorism applies to 
Bhaskar's depiction of actions. Bhaskar of course 
rejects behaviorism. The mistake,  
290 Alasdair MacIntyre, Against the Self-images of 
the Age: Essays on Ideology and Philosophy, Notre 
Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1978, 
Chapter 20.  
291 Ibid., p. 231.  
-127-  
however, is in nonetheless retaining the idea that 
actions are such that they can be characterized in 
non-purposive terms. It is perfectly legitimate to hold 
that the explanation of action must involve the 
identification of the beliefs and/or desires that led to 
a specified act. A specified act, however, is already 
something other than a sequence of bodily 
movements. As I have said, I think that Bhaskar can 
be read as simply trying to say that the question of 
why an action was undertaken is not given by the 
answer to the question of what the action expresses, 
or signifies. Indeed, there are enough places in PON 
where he seems to acknowledge the intrinsic 
meaningfulness of the social world that one is 
tempted to disregard his claim that actions can be 
redescribed as behavior. However, he does make it, 
along with the claim that action is best defined as 
behavior that is caused (i.e., efficiently caused) by 
reasons. It is therefore incumbent upon defenders of 
critical realism to register the problems that are 
associated with such an approach.  
In this spirit, let me return to Taylor for a moment. 
In articles entitled "The Concept of a Person" and 

 
"What Is Human Agency?" Taylor argues that the 
Cartesian approach to agency is connected to an 
impoverished view of human nature. 292 I believe 
that this is a line of analysis worth pursuing, if only to 
underscore the importance of conceptualizing action 
in non-Cartesian terms. In "The Concept of a 
Person," Taylor once again establishes a juxtaposition 
between the Cartesian approach to agency and a 
hermeneutic alternative. He begins by posing two 
questions for the purposes of orientation. The first is 
"In virtue of what is an entity rightly thought to be an 
agent?" The second is "What is the difference 
between human beings and other kinds of agent?" 
From the Cartesian perspective, the answer to both 
questions is the same: agenthood is ascribed on the 
basis of an entity's capacity for representation, and it 
is only human beings who have such a capacity. 
From the hermeneutic perspective, by contrast, what 
makes an entity an agent is that it can generate its 
own ends. What distinguishes human beings from 
other agents - for we are not the only creatures who 
can generate our own ends - is not our capacity to 
employ signs (though it may be that this ability is 
unique to us), but rather the fact that we are capable 
of generating, and responding to, ends that are 
normative. Taylor refers to these as "peculiarly 
human concerns," openness to which, as he puts it, 
constitutes consciousness in a sense which is not 
conveyed by the concept of abstract representation. 
293  
292 Taylor, Human Agency and Language: 
Philosophical Papers 1, Chapters 1 and 4.  
293 Ibid., pp. 104-105.  
-128-  
Both models allow that human beings are capable of 
self-consciousness and self-direction. 294 Proponents 

of the Cartesian approach, however, associate these 
traits with the ability to plan - a talent that is taken 
to be greatly enhanced by our capacity for abstract 
representation. Proponents of the hermeneutic 
approach, meanwhile, associate such traits with the 
ability to engage in what Taylor calls "strong," as 
opposed to "weak" evaluation. 295 Strong evaluation 
is reasoning about "the qualitative worth of different 
desires." 296 Weak evaluation, by contrast, is simply 
a ranking of alternative desires by preference. 
Taylor's thesis is that strong evaluation is "deeper" 
than weak evaluation. It requires "articulacy" - 
Taylor's term - not just about what we do want, but 
about what we believe that we ought to want. "To 
characterize one desire or inclination as worthier, or 
nobler, or more integrated, etc. than others," Taylor 
writes,  
is to speak of it in terms of the kind of 
quality of life which it expresses and 
sustains…. Whereas for the simple 
weigher what is at stake is the 
desirability of different consummations, 
those defined by his de facto desires, for 
the strong evaluator reflection also 
examines the different possible modes 
of being of the agent. 297  
The point I want to make is that the account of 
agency that we find in PON levels distinctions such as 
that between strong and weak evaluation. Bhaskar 
presents all ends as being equally objects of desire. 
Moral ends are simply one type of good that a person 
might choose to pursue. I might desire to live a life 
marked by kindness, creativity and intellectual virtue. 
I might also like to have lasagna for supper. As they 
relate to action, there are no philosophically 
significant differences between these two desires. 
"One does what one wants to (or intends) unless 
prevented," Bhaskar writes. "This is a necessary 
truth. And no further explanation of action as such is 
required." 298 Now I do not want to be 

 
misunderstood here. I am not suggesting that 
Bhaskar intends to endorse either the utilitarian 
principle that the satisfaction of desire is the only 
good or the emotivist proposition that moral claims 
can be translated into statements of preference. 299 
Nonetheless, there is at least an impetus  
294 Ibid., p. 103.  
295 Ibid., p. 16.  
296 Ibid.  
297 Ibid., p. 25.  
298 Bhaskar, PON, p. 96.  
299 Taylor discusses the link between utilitarianism 
and the conflation of strong and weak evaluation in 
op. cit., "What Is Human Agency?"  
-129-  
towards this kind of moral theory in the depiction of 
action in PON. At a minimum, this is further reason to 
revise the approach taken there.  
I have concentrated in this section on the concept of 
action. Flagged by the conflation of action and 
behavior, however, is a more general concern. There 
is, I think, simply an under-appreciation in Bhaskar's 
early work of what is unique to the theorizing of 
conceptdependent objects. I don't want to be thought 
unfair about this. Bhaskar does state as a basic rule 
that  
inasmuch as the ontological claim is 
made that the social world is already 
constituted as meaningful, prior to the 

application of scientific theory to it, then 
a clear difference between it and the 
natural world must be accepted. 300  
And yet there is something missing. Addressing the 
problem of how to determine the meaning of a stated 
belief, Bhaskar tells us that we can achieve a 
"general resolution" of the problem as soon as we 
realize that the task "is only a special case of the 
para-hermeneutic problem of the correct 
identification of phenomena in science." 301 In both 
situations, he says, "the general problem of the 
underdetermination of theory by experience is 
resolved by choosing the theory which is 
phenomenally (descriptively) most adequate." 302 I 
am sympathetic to this argument at a certain level of 
generality. After all, a real definition is simply a 
theory about what something is. In the end, what is 
there to do but to endorse the theory that seems to 
offer the greatest amount of insight into the nature of 
the phenomena in question? But even if this is right, 
it is not enough. The problem is that Bhaskar's 
resolution bypasses any real discussion of the 
difficulty itself, which is that interpretations of text-
analogues, to use Taylor's terminology, are not the 
same thing as real definitions of non-text analogues, 
or hypotheses concerning the causal relationships 
between them. 303 It is unfortunate that Bhaskar 
ultimately glosses over the  
300 Bhaskar, PON, p. 85.  
301 Ibid., p. 111.  
302 Ibid.  
303 While I do not have time to explore the 
connection here, I believe that the inattention to 
interpretation in critical naturalism is related not just 
to the idea that action can be redescribed in non-
intentional terms, but also to the philosophy of 

 
language that Bhaskar develops in op. cit., Plato, Etc. 
Unsurprisingly, Bhaskar's approach is, in Taylor's 
terms again, designative rather than expressive. The 
emphasis is on words referring to objects, rather than 
on the ways in which meaning may constitute certain 
kinds of objects.  
-130-  
issue of interpretation in the way that he does. It is a 
detriment not just because having done so weakens 
critical naturalism, but also because the omission 
draws attention away from the fact that the TMSA 
allows for a non-subjectivist ontology regarding just 
those meaning-saturated phenomena the identities of 
which must be grasped hermeneutically.  
Conclusion  
Let me try to pull together the various threads of this 
discussion. The basic thesis that I have advanced in 
this chapter is that realism about causality can 
indeed be extended to the social world. I take this to 
be the fundamental metaphysical issue at stake in 
the present discussion. Having endorsed this basic 
component of critical naturalism, however, I have 
suggested that it is necessary to acknowledge the 
difference between the powers associated with 
efficient causes, on the one hand, and those 
associated with formal and final causes, on the other. 
Such a move allows for the typology of entities within 
the TMSA (in which the categories are structures and 
individuals) and the typology of generative 
mechanism analogues within critical naturalism (in 
which the categories are structures and reasons) to 
be integrated into a more finely articulated overall 
framework. Within such an amended framework, 
structures are seen to be bearers of formal causality 
(and only rarely, if ever, of efficient or efficient-like 

 
causality), which means that they have the power to 
enable and/or delimit possible courses of action. 
Individuals, meanwhile, are seen to be bearers of 
efficient causality, which means that they have the 
power to effect changes in other objects directly, 
whether intentionally or unintentionally. Reasons, 
finally, are understood to be final causes. Like formal 
causes such as structures, they have the power to 
motivate and/or undermine potential courses of 
action, but are not themselves agents.  
Apart from suggesting a refinement of the notion of a 
causal power - in keeping with the richness of 
Aristotle's conception of causality - I have also taken 
issue with Bhaskar's account of action. Specifically, I 
have argued that Bhaskar is wrong to characterize 
action as a sub-type of behavior. Here I have tried to 
retain both what is right about the hermeneutic 
thesis that action is inherently meaningful, and what 
is right about Bhaskar's claim that actions are caused 
by reasons. Critical naturalism, it seems to me, in 
principle allows for satisfactory answers to two 
different questions. In response to the question 
"What is action?" we can say that action is best 
understood as the enactment of meaning, not 
behavior-with-a-certain-kind-of-cause. To the 
question "What causes action?" we can  
-131-  
say that it is reasons (or the holding of reasons) that 
are the (final) causes of action.  
Finally, I suggested that critical naturalism is not well 
served by Bhaskar's cursory treatment of the 
philosophical issues related to interpretation. Here 
especially, I think that there is more that remains to 
be learned from proponents of the hermeneutic 
approach. At the same time, I do believe that it is not 
enough to understand what is happening in a given 

context; we also need to know why it is happening. 
Theorists such as Taylor have interesting things to 
say about interpretation, but less to say about the 
construction of causal accounts. In Taylor's case, this 
can be seen in his vision of social science: social 
science is construed as being a kind of collective self-
consciousness raising, in which we test out alternate 
"self-definitions," as he puts it, by seeing what kinds 
of practices they generate. 304 Taylor does not 
dispense with causal concerns altogether. In fact, he 
notes that "where and to the extent that social action 
has been informed by self-understanding, this will 
have to figure in any valid explanatory account." 305 
Nonetheless, there is, on the whole, far more of an 
emphasis on identification than on explanation.  
As I have said, Bhaskar presents himself as having 
achieved a synthesis of hermeneutic and causal 
approaches to social science. I think that critical 
naturalism as it is formulated in PON is not yet such a 
synthesis, although it has the potential to afford one. 
I argued earlier that critical naturalism in principle 
allows both for a definition of action as inherently 
meaningful and for the explanation of action in causal 
terms. Similarly, I believe that it can accommodate 
both a full appreciation of the necessarily interpretive 
nature of social science and the goal of identifying 
the causes of social phenomena.  
Critical naturalism has the meta-theoretical potential 
that it does for two reasons. First, it is an approach in 
which causality and regularity have been decoupled. 
As a result, it is not subject to criticisms of causal 
approaches that are based on the particularity of 
social events. MacIntyre, for example, offers such a 
critique in another classic article entitled "Is a 
Science of Comparative Politics Possible?" and again 
in After Virtue. 306 Once one discards the Humean 
problematic, however, the fact that social phenomena 
do  
304 Charles Taylor, "Social Theory as Practice," in 

 
Philosophy and the Human Sciences: Philosophical 
Papers 2, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1985.  
305 Ibid., p. 113.  
306 Alasdair MacIntyre, Against the Self-images of 
the Age: Essays on Ideology and Philosophy, Notre 
Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1978, 
Chapter 22 and op. cit., After Virtue.  
-132-  
not exhibit perfectly regular behavior has little 
bearing on whether or not such events are caused. 
Second, critical naturalism is compatible - or at least 
can be made compatible - with Aristotle's breaking 
down of the concept of causality into efficient, formal, 
final and material causality. At least in part, the 
divide between hermeneutic and naturalist 
approaches to social science is the result of a tacit 
acceptance amongst the proponents of each camp 
that "causality" refers to efficient causality. While I 
have suggested that Bhaskar himself has a tendency 
to try to fit formal and final causes (which he at least 
regards as legitimately causal) into the category of 
efficient causality, I believe that critical naturalism is 
in principle consistent with a non-teleological 
adaptation of the Aristotelian schema. If one adopts 
such a framework, the fact that social phenomena 
are meaning-laden has no significant bearing on 
whether or not they are caused. Of course, this is 
simply a sketch of what might be of value in critical 
naturalism, beyond its metaphysical core; I make no 
claim to have presented anything beyond a general 
comment on the matter. It is only the core that I 
have sought to defend in the present discussion.  
-133-  

 
 
[This page intentionally left blank.]  
-134-  
6  
Conclusion  
Critical realism and the 
post-positivist 
quagmire  
Having done my best in the foregoing chapters both 
to defend and to test the limits of critical realism, I 
want to conclude by returning to my basic contention 
regarding its significance. Critical realism, I proposed, 
can be of help in moving us beyond the post-
positivist intellectual quagmire in which we find 
ourselves. The obvious first question to be asked in 
relation to such a claim is: to what extent does 
critical realism enable us to respond to the challenges 
of relativism and the anti-realism upon which 
relativism depends? Beyond this, what insights may 
be gained from adopting a critical realist stance that 
might allow us to make further headway?  
(i)  
Let me begin by considering critical realism as a 
rejoinder to relativism. From one angle, relativism 
can be seen as having to do with the concept of 
truth. Parsed in this way, relativism is tantamount to 
the idea that what it means for a proposition to be 
true is that it is affirmed by a given individual or 

 
group of individuals. From another angle, relativism 
can be conceived as a global epistemic assessment to 
the effect that all knowledge claims are equally well 
justified. Relativism construed as a theory of truth 
does not necessarily imply relativism construed as a 
theory of knowledge, if I may put it in such non-
standard terms, as it is possible in the former 
scenario to distinguish epistemically between those 
views that a given audience accepts, and would 
therefore count as true, and those that they reject, 
and would therefore count as false. Nor, strictly 
speaking, does the second formulation imply the first. 
In principle, for example, one could hold to a 
correspondence theory of truth and yet - assuming a 
perfectly malleable referent (or, in epistemic rather 
than ontological terms, the thesis of radical under-  
-135-  
determination) 307 - maintain that all claims capture 
to an equal degree the reality of that to which they 
refer.  
In my view, an adequate response to relativism 
requires both a sound, non-epistemic theory of truth 
and a rejection of the idea that all knowledge claims 
are equally well founded. I believe that critical 
realism gives us the latter - albeit only indirectly - 
but not the former. While his efforts to theorize the 
concept of truth fall short, Bhaskar's naturalism 
about causality (and attendant commitment to the 
existence of natural kinds and real essences) 
provides a satisfactory ontological counter to 
relativism about knowledge. Moreover, I would add 
that critical realism points us in the right direction 
with respect to the concept of truth, even if Bhaskar 
himself veers off on a less promising course.  
It is important to be clear about the nature of the 
check on relativism that Bhaskar's ontology provides. 

The fact that causal processes are based on the 
exercise of real powers that objects bear or are 
essentially tells us that the world is not all possible 
ways. It has definite characteristics, beyond 
extension. Such characteristics render those causal 
laws that do exist metaphysically necessary - our 
ability to imagine worlds in which there are unicorns 
whose cells freeze when heated notwithstanding. 
That this is so has epistemological implications. 
Specifically, it implies that it cannot be the case that 
all claims about the world are equally valid. That the 
world is all possible ways is not, however, a criterion 
of justification: it cannot help us at all in deciding 
which ways the world actually (or potentially) is. 
Epistemically, then, naturalism about causality 
functions as a limiting principle only. It allows us to 
rule out the suggestion that all claims about the 
world are in a meaningful sense equally true, but 
nothing more. I do not want to say "merely" here, as 
the limit imposed is absolutely crucial. But it is 
important to keep in mind that the check that it 
provides is a formal one.  
I have been quite clear in my opposition to Bhaskar's 
theory of truth, and I have acknowledged that he 
does not offer an account of justification. 
Nonetheless, critical realism does contain several key 
epistemic principles. The first is the check on 
relativism just described. Another is the thesis that 
knowledge is always only provisional. A third is the 
belief that it is possible to evaluate competing 
theories on  
307 Larry Laudan, "'The Sins of the Fathers … ': 
Positivist Origins of Postpositivist Relativisms," in 
Beyond Positivism and Relativism: Theory, Method 
and Evidence, Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1996, 
pp. 19-21. See also "Demystifying 
Underdetermination," in the same volume.  
-136-  

 
cognitive grounds. As should be evident, these three 
principles correspond to the three points in relation to 
which I explicated critical realism in Chapter 1 - with 
the caveat that ontological realism has here been 
given epistemological expression. I think that if one 
holds to all three of these principles, one will be 
inclined to take the kind of approach to the concept 
of truth, and to the relationships between truth, 
justification, knowledge claims and belief, that I 
began to sketch out in Chapter 4. As I suggested 
there, I believe that the concept of truth, construed 
in minimalist correspondence terms, must be 
understood to be no more, or less, than a 
transcendental condition of possibility of inquiry itself. 
I read Davidson (2000) as saying something similar 
in "Truth Rehabilitated." To quote a lengthy passage: 
Sentences are understood on condition 
that one has the concept of objective 
truth. This goes also for the various 
propositional attitudes sentences are 
used to express. It is possible to have a 
belief only if one knows that beliefs may 
be true or false. I can believe it is now 
raining, but this is because I know that 
whether or not it is raining does not 
depend on whether I believe it, or 
everyone believes it, or it is useful to 
believe it … Truth enters into the other 
attitudes in other ways. We desire that 
a certain state of affairs be true, we 
fear, hope or doubt that things are one 
way or another. We intend by our 
actions to make it true that we have a 
good sleep. We are proud or depressed 
that it is the case that we have won the 
second prize. Since all these, and many 
more attitudes have a propositional 
content - the sort of content that can be 
expressed by a sentence - to have any 
of these attitudes is necessarily to know 
what it would be for the corresponding 

 
sentence to be true. Without a grasp of 
the concept of truth, not only language, 
but thought itself, is impossible. 308  
Adorno expresses what I take to be the same basic 
insight in the following characteristically pithy 
comment: "the appearance of identity is inherent in 
thought itself, in its pure form. To think is to 
identify." 309  
As noted in Chapter 4, the approach that I am 
advancing has the effect of driving a wedge between 
the concepts of truth and justification, while at the 
same time blurring the boundary between  
308 Donald Davidson, "Truth Rehabilitated," in 
Robert B. Brandom (ed.), Rorty and His Critics, 
Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers, 2000], p. 72.  
309 Adorno, Negative Dialectics, p. 5.  
-137-  
knowledge claims and belief (thereby casting serious 
doubt on the value of retaining the concept of 
"knowledge" defined as a body of justified, true 
beliefs). 310 This may bring us closer to Rorty's 
position, in particular, than some fellow critics of 
post-positivism would like. After all, Rorty too would 
have us break the bond between truth and 
justification, and be done with the traditional line of 
demarcation between knowledge claims and justified 
beliefs. The potential concern would seem to be that 
if we accept that the concept of truth has no direct 
bearing on justification, we wind up endorsing 
relativism about knowledge claims. I don't think that 
this is so. I don't see any necessary connection 
between a lack of epistemic certainty and the idea 
that all beliefs are equally valid. On the contrary, I 

am suggesting that we embrace a set of epistemic 
principles in which fallibilism is explicitly combined 
with the view that it cannot be the case that all 
beliefs about the world are equally valid.  
I will concede that a fair amount of epistemic weight 
does fall, in the approach that I am defending, on the 
actual practice of deliberation. But I don't believe 
that this is cause for alarm. With respect to 
justification, I think that we simply have to accept 
that we cannot have absolute certainty. We can know 
what it is for a proposition to be true - and that, as 
best as we can tell, the world is such that it cannot 
be that all propositions are true. Beyond this, we are 
on our own, as it were, to offer reasons why we 
judge a given theory to be superior to another. Such 
a depiction of "rationality at the level of judgment," 
to use Bhaskar's terminology, is at odds with the 
foundational approach to epistemology that has been 
dominant since Descartes, and which runs through 
the history of Western philosophy, but it amounts 
neither to a disavowal of the concept of truth nor to 
the claim that all beliefs are equally valid.  
Considered in relation to anti-realism, meanwhile, I 
believe that critical realism affords a compelling 
response to the idea that reality has no intrinsic 
structure. As observed in Chapter 1, critical realism is 
especially interesting in this regard because it shifts 
the focus away from the ontological status of 
disputed entities and onto the nature of causality. I 
shall pursue the broader implications of this shift in a 
moment. Here let me just say that the approach to 
causality that Bhaskar takes forces the question of 
whether or not the "something" external (which 
many thinkers don't want to deny the existence of) 
can plausibly be thought to be entirely indeterminate. 
In my view, Bhaskar (and Harré and Madden and 
Ellis) has shown that such an  
310 This formulation is the result of discussion with 
Esteve Morera and Henry Laycock; the view 

 
expressed is mine alone.  
-138-  
ontology cannot, in fact, sustain a viable account of 
scientific explanation (or, as only Bhaskar argues, of 
social life).  
Without the ontological thesis that reality has no 
intrinsic structure, however, we are left with a purely 
epistemic claim regarding the under-determination of 
theory by data (or, in Bhaskar's terminology, with 
nothing other than an acknowledgement of the ontic 
fallacy). In my opinion, Larry Laudan has done a 
good job of showing that neither Quine nor Kuhn ever 
in fact establishes the most extreme version of the 
thesis of under-determination, namely, that any body 
of evidence is equally compatible with an infinite 
number of explanations. 311 Less extreme versions, 
meanwhile - e.g., that there are likely to be rival 
theories that account equally well for a given body of 
evidence - deliver far less punch than is claimed by 
proponents of post-positivist perspectivism. The fact 
that explanations cannot be uniquely deductively 
inferred from a neutral observation language is old 
news. It hardly signals the "end of innocence," as 
Jane Flax would have it.  
(ii)  
Beyond helping us to counter the challenges of 
relativism and antirealism, critical realism is of value 
because it illuminates the ontological roots of post-
positivism. The result is to further develop an 
already-trenchant line of analysis undertaken within 
the philosophy of science by, for instance, Laudan. 
Laudan has shown that the post-positivist position 
has a positivist epistemological core. 312 It is not just 
that post-positivist thinkers tacitly endorse the 

 
traditional conception of knowledge as being value-
free and absolutely certain - and so, finding that no 
theories actually meet these criteria, are forced to 
conclude that all that we thought to be episteme is in 
fact doxa, as Calvin Schrag has put it. 313 More 
technically, Laudan argues, Kuhn, for instance, 
accepts that theory comparison is best understood as 
being a "translation exercise" (thereby establishing a 
basis for the indeterminacy of translation thesis to be 
taken to imply the incommensurability of 
interparadigmatic theories), that the rationality of 
science hinges on the possibility of such operations 
and that all other norms of scientific  
311 Laudan, Beyond Positivism and Relativism: 
Theory, Method, and Evidence, Chapters 1 and 2.  
312 Ibid.  
313 Calvin O. Schrag, The Resources of Rationality: A 
Response to the Postmodern Challenge, Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 1992, pp. 167-168.  
-139-  
inquiry, being neither "facts" nor analytic truths, are 
conventions that cannot be defended on cognitive 
grounds. Laudan also notes that the thesis of under-
determination was held in various forms by 
Reichenbach, Hempel and Carnap. "Indeed," he 
writes, "a belief that underdetermination has 
profound ramifications for an understanding of the 
scientific enterprise is as positivist as a Viennese 
coffee house." 314  
In my view, the approach to causality proposed by 
thinkers such as Bhaskar, Harré and Madden and Ellis 
allows us to develop a parallel line of argument 
regarding the ontological ground of post-positivism. 

For a scientific essentialist, to use Ellis's term, post-
positivist perspectivism is not simply the "end-game" 
of logical positivist epistemology, as Laudan puts it. 
It also fits - as does positivism - into a post-Lockean 
ontological universe, in which the concept of real 
essence has been replaced with that of nominal 
essence. As intimated in Chapter 3, I believe that the 
shift from the concept of real (albeit for Locke 
mechanistically construed) essence to nominal 
essence sets the stage for relativism and anti-realism 
in their contemporary forms. The trajectory is as 
follows: from the real, internal constitutions of things, 
we move to linguistic classifications of manifest 
properties. The suggestion that an object's manifest 
properties are in fact caused by its internal 
constitution then drops out. In its place, we get the 
idea that objects just are those of their features that 
we have seen fit to collect under a name. The next 
step is to observe (correctly, in my view) that there 
is no metaphysically fixed relationship between 
names and that to which they refer - that is, that 
meaning is internal to language. Given the prior 
supplanting of the concept of real essence by that of 
nominal essence, this otherwise unexceptional step 
leads - not necessarily, but nevertheless coherently - 
to precisely the rejection of a correspondence 
approach to the concept of truth and of metaphysical 
realism that characterize the post-positivist stance. 
Depending on whether one puts a Kantian, 
pragmatist or idealist spin on things, one then says 
that it is impossible to talk about what the world is 
like "in itself," that all claims are equally true because 
language is non-representational in the first place 
and/or that we really do engage in world-making, as 
Nelson Goodman puts it. The point, to reiterate, is 
not that there is a relationship of logical implication 
between each of these steps, but rather that, at the 
deepest level, the ontological terms of the debate are 
set by the move from real to nominal essences.  
314 Laudan, Beyond Positivism and Relativism: 
Theory, Method, and Evidence, p.20.  

 
-140-  
Locke himself emerges from such an analysis as a 
pivotal yet ambiguous figure. He appears to be 
ontologically committed to the existence of real 
essences, but to regard them as epistemologically 
moot. There is disagreement over whether Locke 
thinks that real essences are necessarily unknowable 
or only contingently so. 315 Even if the latter, 
however, Locke does not seem to hold out any hope 
that the situation will change: what knowledge we do 
and can expect to have is of the manifest properties 
of entities rather than of their inaccessible inner 
workings. Moreover, while Locke is committed to the 
existence of real essences, he conceives of nature in 
mechanistic terms. At the same time, as I believe 
Bhaskar, as well as Harré and Madden to have 
shown, Locke's notion of real essence can be used as 
the starting point for a non-Humean account of 
causal explanation.  
It seems to me that the tensions in Locke's position 
are reflected in Bhaskar and Ellis's differing 
treatments of him. For Bhaskar, Locke is, while not 
the hero of the story, at least an ally. Bhaskar casts 
Locke in a basically positive light in relation to 
transcendental realism. He focuses on the importance 
of Locke's distinction between real and nominal 
essences, and seems to have no trouble combining 
Locke's notion of real essence with Leibniz's 
affirmation of causal powers in nature. 316 For Ellis, 
meanwhile, Locke is one of the villains of the piece. 
Ellis focuses on Locke's mechanism, and draws 
attention to the pronounced difference between 
Locke's views and those of Leibniz regarding whether 
or not matter is essentially inert. I don't think that 
there is any great need to adjudicate this difference 
of placement. What is crucial is the juncture in 
history of philosophy that Locke marks.  

 
Ultimately, critical realism is significant because it 
points us in an unexpected direction. The implication 
of Bhaskar's work - and the explicit thesis of Ellis's - 
is that if we want to move beyond positivism, we 
must move beyond anti-essentialism. There is a 
certain irony to this conclusion, given the popular 
misidentification of positivism with essentialism. But 
logical positivism, as empiricism generally, is a 
thoroughly anti-essentialist philosophical stance, from 
the perspective of which ultimately contingent 
relationships between surface appearances are all 
that we can or should hope to know. Admittedly there 
have been objectionable versions of essentialism 
within Western philosophy. It is important to 
emphasize,  
315 R. S. Woolhouse, Locke's Philosophy of Science 
and Knowledge: A Consideration of Some Aspects of 
An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Oxford: 
Basil Blackwell, 1971, pp. 112-114.  
316 Bhaskar, RTS, pp. 171-175.  
-141-  
therefore, that the essentialism that is being 
recommended - and the naturalism about causality to 
which it is connected - differs appreciably from earlier 
forms.  
Scientific essentialism, to use Ellis's term again, is a 
relatively modest metaphysics. Its proponents do not 
invoke essences that can only be intuited, or that 
function as underlying intentional forces. Nor is there 
the suggestion that essences are inherently good, or 
that social life ought not to change or be changed 
(or, conversely, that it will develop necessarily in one 
way or another, in keeping with its essence). As 
described in Chapter 1, the fundamental claim is that 
things have intrinsic characteristics, which are 

 
necessarily connected to real powers. Such a claim 
may strike one as either banal or dangerous, 
depending upon one's predisposition. I hope to have 
shown that it is neither. Bhaskar (and others) have 
by no means resolved the philosophical problems 
associated with the concepts of truth and reality, but 
they have at least set out a viable alternative to 
positivism and post-positivism alike.  
-142-  
Bibliography  
Adorno, Theodor W. (ed. Rolf Tiedemann, trans. 
Rodney Livingstone) Kant's Critique of Pure 
Reason, Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 
2001. 
Adorno, Theodor W. "Husserl and the Problem of 
Idealism," The Journal of Philosophy, 37(1), 
January 1940, 5-18. 
Adorno, Theodor W. Negative Dialectics, New 
York: The Continuum Publishing Company, 1992. 
Alcoff, Linda Martin Real Knowing: New Versions of 
the Coherence Theory, Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1996. 
Allison, Henry E. Kant's Transcendental Idealism: 
An Interpretation and Defense, New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press, 1983. 
Alston, William P. A Realist Conception of Truth, 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1996. 
Aristotle (trans. Robin Waterfield) Physics, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1996. 
Aristotle Metaphysics, in Richard McKeon (ed.), 
The Basic Works of Aristotle, New York: Random 
House, 1941. 

 
-143-  
Benton, Ted "Realism and Social Science: Some 
Comments on Roy Bhaskar's 'The Possibility of 
Naturalism,'" in Margaret Archer, Roy Bhaskar, 
Andrew Collier, Tony Lawson and Alan Norrie 
(eds), Critical Realism: Essential Readings, 
London: Routledge, 1998. 
Bhaskar, Roy A Realist Theory of Science, Sussex: 
The Harvester Press Limited, 1978 (first published 
1975). 
Bhaskar, Roy Scientific Realism and Human 
Emancipation, London: Verso, 1986. 
Bhaskar, Roy Reclaiming Reality: A Critical 
Introduction to Contemporary Philosophy, London: 
Verso, 1989. 
Bhaskar, Roy Dialectic: The Pulse of Freedom, 
London: Verso, 1993. 
Bhaskar, Roy Plato, Etc.: The Problems of 
Philosophy and Their Resolution, London: Verso, 
1994. 
Bhaskar, Roy The Possibility of Naturalism: A 
Philosophical Critique of the Contemporary Human 
Sciences, 3rd edn, London: Routledge, 1998. 
Bhaskar, Roy and Lawson, Tony "Introduction: 
Basic Texts and Developments," in Margaret 
Archer, Roy Bhaskar, Andrew Collier, Tony Lawson 
and Alan Norrie (eds), Critical Realism: Essential 
Readings, London: Routledge, 1998. 
Bigelow, John "Skeptical Realism: A Realist's 
Defense of Dummet," The Monist, 77(1), 1994, 3-
26. 
Brittan, George G., Jr Kant's Theory of Science, 

Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1978. 
Chakravartty, Anjan "The Dispositional Essentialist 
View of Properties and Laws," forthcoming in 
Philosophical Studies, December 2003. 
Collier, Andrew Critical Realism: An Introduction to 
Roy Bhaskar's Philosophy, London: Verso, 1994. 
Collins, Arthur Possible Experience: Understanding 
Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1999. 
Copi, Irving M. "Essence and Accident," in Stephen 
P. Schwartz (ed.), Naming, Necessity and Natural 
Kinds, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1977. 
Danermark, Berth, Ekstrom, Mats, Jakobsen, 
Losolette and Karlsson, Jan Ch. Explaining Society: 
Critical Realism in the Social Sciences, London: 
Routledge, 2002. 
Davidson, Donald "The Folly of Trying to Define 
Truth," The Journal of Philosophy, 93(6), June 
1996, 263-278. 
Davidson, Donald "Truth Rehabilitated," in Robert 
B. Brandom (ed.), Rorty and his Critics, Malden, 
MA: Blackwell Publishers, 2000. 
Devitt, Michael Realism and Truth, 2nd edn, 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991. 
Dreyfus, Hubert L. "Heidegger's Hermeneutic 
Realism," in David R. Hiley, James F. Bohman and 
Richard Schusterman (eds), The Interpretive Turn: 
Philosophy, Science, Culture, Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1991. 
Eagleton, Terry The Illusions of Postmodernism, 
Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 1996. 
Ellis, Brian "Causal Powers and Laws of Nature," in 
Howard Sankey (ed.), Causation and Laws of 
Nature, London: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
1999. 

 
-144-  
Ellis, Brian "Bigelow's Worries about Scientific 
Essentialism," in Howard Sankey (ed.), Causation 
and Laws of Nature, London: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 1999. 
Ellis, Brian Scientific Essentialism, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2001. 
Flax, Jane "The End of Innocence," in Judith Butler 
and Joan W. Scott (eds), Feminists Theorize the 
Political, London: Routledge, 1992. 
French, Peter A., Uehling, Theodore E., Jr and 
Wettstein, Howard K. (eds) Midwest Studies in 
Philosophy, Vol. 9: Causation and Causal Theories, 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984. 
Fukuyama, F. Trust: The Social Virtues and the 
Creation of Prosperity, London: Hamish Hamilton, 
1995. 
Garcia-Encinas, M. J. "Sullivan on the Principle that 
Everything Has a Cause," Dialogue: Canadian 
Philosophical Review, XLI(3), Summer 2002. 
Geertz, Clifford "The Strange Estrangement: 
Taylor and the Natural Sciences," in James Tully 
(ed.), Philosophy in an Age of Pluralism: The 
Philosophy of Charles Taylor in Question, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , 1994. 
Gibson-Graham, J. K. "Waiting for the Revolution, 
or How to Smash Capitalism While Working at 
Home in Your Spare Time," in Antonio Callari, 
Stephen Cullenberg and Carole Biewener (eds), 
Marxism in the Postmodern Age: Confronting the 
New World Order, New York: The Guilford Press, 
1995. 
Green, J. Everet Kant's Copernican Revolution: The 

Transcendental Horizon, Lanham, MD: University 
Press of America, 1997. 
Groff, Ruth "Reason Reconsidered: Political 
Education, Critical Theory and the Concept of 
Rational Critique," unpublished MA thesis, 
University of Toronto, 1994. 
Guignon, Charles B. "Pragmatism or 
Hermeneutics? Epistemology After 
Foundationalism," in David R. Hiley, James F. 
Bohman and Richard Schusterman (eds), The 
Interpretive Turn: Philosophy, Science, Culture, 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991. 
Hacking, Ian Representing and Intervening: 
Introductory Topics in the Philosophy of Natural 
Science, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1983. 
Harré, Rom and Bhaskar, Roy "How To Change 
Reality: Story vs. Structure: A Debate Between 
Rom Harré and Roy Bhaskar," in Jose Lopez and 
Garry Potter (eds.), After Postmodernism: An 
Introduction to Critical Realism, London: The 
Athlone Press, 2001. 
Harré, Rom and Madden, E. H. Causal Powers: A 
Theory of Natural Necessity, Totowa, NY: Rowman 
and Littlefield, 1975. 
Horkheimer, Max Critical Theory: Selected Essays, 
New York: The Continuum Publishing Corporation, 
1989. 
Hume, David (ed. Anthony Flew) On Human 
Nature and the Understanding, New York: Collier 
Books, 1962. 
Hutton, W. The State We're In, London: Vintage 
Books, 1996. 
Jarvis, Simon Adorno: A Critical Introduction, New 
York: Routledge, 1998. 
Jolley, Nicholas Leibniz and Locke: A Study of the 

 
-145-  
New Essays on Human Understanding, Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1984. 
Jones, W. T. A History of Western Philosophy: Kant 
and the Nineteenth Century, 2nd edn, revised, 
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1975. 
Kant, Immanuel (trans. Paul Carus) Prolegomena 
to any Future Metaphysics that can Qualify as a 
Science, La Salle, IL: Open Court Publishing 
Company, 1902, 6th printing, 1988. 
Kant, Immanuel (trans. and ed. Paul Guyer and 
Allen W. Wood) Critique of Pure Reason, New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1997. 
Kirk, Robert, Relativism and Reality: A 
Contemporary Introduction, London: Routledge, 
1999. 
Kirkham, Richard L. Theories of Truth: A Critical 
Introduction, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995. 
Kuhn, Thomas S. The Structure of Scientific 
Revolutions, 2nd edn, enlarged, Chicago: The 
University of Chicago Press, 1970. 
Kuhn, Thomas S. "The Natural and the Human 
Sciences," in David R. Hiley, James F. Bohman and 
Richard Schusterman (eds), The Interpretive Turn: 
Philosophy, Science, Culture, Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1991. 
Laudan, Larry Beyond Positivism and Relativism: 
Theory, Method, and Evidence, Boulder, CO: 
Westview Press, 1996. 
Lear, Jonathan Aristotle: The Desire To 
Understand, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1988. 

Lewis, Paul "Realism, Causality and the Problem of 
Social Structure," Journal for the Theory of Social 
Behavior, 30(3), September 2000. 
Locke, John An Essay Concerning Human 
Understanding (abridged and with Notes by A. S. 
Pringle-Pattison), Hertfordshire: Wordsworth 
Editions Limited , 1998. 
McDermid, Douglas "Pragmatism and Truth: The 
Comparison Objection to Correspondence," The 
Review of Metaphysics, 51, June 1998. 
McDowell, John "Towards Rehabilitating 
Objectivity," in Robert B. Brandom (ed.), Rorty 
and his Critics, Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers, 
2000. 
MacIntyre, Alasdair "Emotion, Behavior and 
Belief," and "Is a Science of Comparative Politics 
Possible?" in Against the Self-Images of the Age: 
Essays on Ideology and Philosophy, Notre Dame, 
IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1978. 
MacIntyre, Alasdair After Virtue: A Study in Moral 
Theory, Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame 
Press, 1981. 
MacIntyre, Alasdair "Relativism, Power, and 
Philosophy," in Kenneth Baynes, James Bohman 
and Thomas McCarthy (eds), After Philosophy: End 
or Transformation?, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1987. 
Norris, Christopher, "Truth, Science and the 
Growth of Knowledge: On the Limits of Cultural 
Relativism," in Reclaiming Truth: Contributions to 
a Critique of Cultural Relativism, Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press, 1996. 
Norris, Christopher "Hermeneutics, Anti-realism 
and Philosophy of Science," in Against Relativism: 
Philosophy of Science, Deconstruction and Critical 
Theory, Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 1997. 
Norris, Christopher "Putnam's Progress: Quantum 

 
-146-  
Theory and the Flight from Realism," The 
Philosophical Forum, 30(2), June 1999, 61-90. 
Outhwaite, William "Realism and Social Science," 
in Margaret Archer, Roy Bhaskarm Andrew Collier, 
Tony Lawson and Alan Norrie (eds), Critical 
Realism: Essential Readings, London: Routledge, 
1998. 
Popper, Sir Karl (ed. W. W. Bartley III), Realism 
and the Aim of Science: From the Postscript to the 
Logic of Scientific Discovery, New York: Routledge, 
1983. 
Popper, Sir Karl Conjectures and Refutations: The 
Growth of Scientific Knowledge, New York: 
Routledge, 1989. 
Porpora, Douglas The Concept of Social Structure, 
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1987. 
Porpora, Douglas "Four Concepts of Social 
Structure," in Margaret Archer, Roy Bhaskar, 
Andrew Collier, Tony Lawson and Alan Norrie 
(eds), Critical Realism: Essential Readings, 
London: Routledge, 1998. 
Putnam, Hilary Reason, Truth and History, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981. 
Putnam, Hilary "Why Reason Can't be Naturalized,"
in Kenneth Baynes, James Bohman and Thomas 
McCarthy (eds), After Philosophy: End or 
Transformation?, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1987. 
Putnam, Hilary (ed. James Conant) Realism with a 
Human Face, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1990. 
Putnam, Hilary Renewing Philosophy, Cambridge, 

MA: Harvard University Press, 1992. 
Putnam, Hilary "Is There Still Anything to Say 
about Reality and Truth?" in Peter J. McCormick 
(ed.) Starmaking: Realism, Anti-Realism and 
Irrealism, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996. 
Putnam, Hilary "Irrealism and Deconstruction" in 
Peter J. McCormick (ed.) Starmaking: Realism, 
Anti-Realism and Irrealism, Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1996. 
Putnam, Hilary The Threefold Cord: Mind, Body 
and the World (The John Dewey Essays in 
Philosophy, Number 5), New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1999. 
Putnam, Hilary "Richard Rorty on Reality and 
Justification," in Robert B. Brandom (ed.), Rorty 
and his Critics, Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers, 
2000. 
Rescher, Nicholas Kant's Theory of Knowledge and 
Reality: A Group of Essays, Washington, DC: 
University Presss of America, 1983. 
Rorty, Richard Objectivity, Relativism and Truth: 
Philosophical Papers, vol. 1, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1991. 
Rorty, Richard Truth and Progress: Philosohical 
Papers, vol. 3, New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 1998. 
Rorty, Richard Philosophy and Social Hope, 
Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1999. 
Rouse, Joseph "Interpretation in Natural and 
Human Science," in David R. Hiley, James F. 
Bohman and Richard Schusterman (eds), The 
Interpretive Turn: Philosophy, Science, Culture, 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991. 
Schmitt, Frederick Truth: A Primer, Boulder, CO: 
Westview Press, 1995. 
Schrag, Calvin O. The Resources of Rationality: A 

 
-147-  
Response to the Postmodern Challenge, 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1992. 
Taylor, Charles The Explanation of Behavior, 
London and Henley: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 
1964. 
Taylor, Charles Human Agency and Language: 
Philosophical Papers 1, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1985. 
Taylor, Charles Philosophy and the Human 
Sciences: Philosophical Papers 2, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1985. 
Taylor, Charles "Overcoming Epistemology," in 
Kenneth Baynes, James Bohman and Thomas 
McCarthy (eds), After Philosophy: End or 
Transformation?, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1987. 
Taylor, Charles "Rorty in the Epistemological 
Tradition," in Alan R. Malachowski (ed.), Reading 
Rorty: Critical Responses to Philosophy and the 
Mirror of Nature (and Beyond), Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell, 1990. 
Taylor, Charles "Charles Taylor Replies," in James 
Tully (ed.), Philosophy in an Age of Pluralism: The 
Philosophy of Charles Taylor in Question, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994. 
Taylor, Charles Philosophical Explanations, 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995. 
Varela, Charles R. "The Ethogenics of Agency and 
Structure: A Metaphysical Problem," in Jose Lopez 
and Garry Potter (eds), After Postmodernism: An 
Introduction to Critical Realism, London: The 
Athlone Press, 2001. 

 
-148-  
Varela, Charles R. "The Impossibility of Which 
Naturalism? A Response and Reply," Journal for 
the Theory of Social Behavior, 32(1), March 2002. 
Varela, Charles R. and Harré, Rom "Conflicting 
Varieties of Realism: Causal Powers and the 
Problems of Social Structure," Journal for the 
Theory of Social Behavior, 26(3), 1986. 
Woolhouse, R. S. Locke's Philosophy of Science 
and Knowledge: A Consideration of Some Aspects 
of An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, 
Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1971. 
Index  
a  
actions 100 ; 
and causes 126-127 ; 
contrasted with behavior 125 ; 
and their meanings 127 ; 
nature of 124, 125, 126 ; 
reasons and 124 
Adorno, Theodor 137 
agency: 
nature of 110-111, 128-129 
Albritton, Rob 117 
Alcoff, Linda 46 
alethic realism 89 
alethic truth 56, 71-98 ; 
causal/generative mechanisms and 75, 76-77, 79 ; 
definition 72-73, 74, 77 ; 
epistemology of 78-82 ; 
objections to concept 71, 74-84 ; 
ontology of 74-78 ; 
politics of 82-83 
Alston, William 22, 76 n. 177, 89-92, 94 n. 210, 

b  
c  
95 
Althusser, Louis 18 
analysis of language 48-49 
anti-essentialism 141 
anti-realism 1, 2-3 ; 
critical realism and 138, 139 
Archer, Margaret 107 
Aristotle 7, 8, 91 n. 202, 109, 110, 131, 133 
Ayer, A. J. 8, 56 
Bacon, Francis 113-114 
behavior: 
contrasted with actions 125 
being/knowledge of being 34, 35, 36, 39 
beliefs 5, 6 
Berkeley, George 28 
Benton, Ted 108 
Bhaskar, Roy 10-23, 25, 30, 32-44, 45, 47-48, 55-
56, 57, 65-69, 71-98, 99, 100-105, 106, 107, 109,
111, 112, 116-117, 121 n. 278, 122, 123-125, 
126, 127-128, 129, 131-132, 136, 138, 140, 141-
142 
Brains-in-a-Vat argument 51-52 
Brittan, George 27, 39 n. 88 
Carnap, Rudolf 140 
causal mechanisms 10-13, 75, 82 
see also generative mechanisms; 
in social world 100 
causal powers: 
and individuals 123-131 ; 
and social structures 105-123 
causal relationship: 
Aristotle's typology 109 ; 
necessity of 30 
causality 1, 2-3, 9, 11-16, 27, 38, 54-55, 56-60 ; 
and actions 126-127 ; 
alethic truth and 77 ; 
and critical realism 138 ; 
and explanation 59-60 ; 
natural sciences and 12 ; 

 
-149-  
and reasons 124 ; 
social structures and 105-123 ; 
theories of 30-31, 32, 41, 43, 116 
"cause" 31 ; 
see also efficient/final/ formal/material causes 
Chakravartty, Anjan 3 n. 3 
cognition 27, 42 
collective actors 103-104 
Collins, Arthur 26, 29 n. 78, 43 n. 91 
concepts of truth and reality 4-5, 6, 56 
conceptual relativity 50-51 
contingency 11, 34 
d  
Copi, Irving 64 
correspondence theory of truth, 47 n. 96, 48-50, 
71, 89 
counterfactuals 54 
critical idealism 29 
critical naturalism 10 
critical realism 1, 8-22 ; 
and anti-realism 135, 138-139 ; 
and causality 138 ; 
key epistemic principles 136-138 ; 
limits of 135 ; 
and relativism 135-138 ; 
significance of 135, 139 ; 
and transcendental idealism 25-44 
Danermark, Berth 101 n. 225, 119, 120 n. 275 
Davidson, Donald 137 n. 308 
Derrida, Jacques 4, 
Descartes, René 28, 138 
Devitt, Michael 62-63 
dialectical critical realism 10, 72 
dispositional properties 116 
dispositional realism 3 n. 2, 106, 112 
dispositional theory of causality 2 
domains 37 

e  
f  
DREI(C) model of scientific practice 73 
economic forces: 
nature of 118-119, 120 
efficient causes 109, 111-112, 117 
Efron, Noah 86 n. 194 
Ehrbar, Hans 119 n. 274 
Ellis, Brian 3, 16, 22, 54, 58, 106, 112-122, 138, 
140, 141-142 
empirical realism 28, 34-35, 36 
empiricism 26, 27 
Engelskirchen, Howard 104 n. 231, 109 n. 247, 
119 n. 274 
epistemic fallacy 18, 33-39, 41 
epistemological relativism 10 
epistemological truth 85-88 
epistemology/justification: 
truth and 91 
essences, real/nominal 15 ; 
shift between 140 ; 
see also nominal essences, real essences 
essentialism 141-142 ; 
scientific 112-123 
eudaimonistic society 72 
experience 34, 35 : 
judgments of 40-41 
experimentation, scientific 11-13, 30-31, 32, 33, 
57-59 
explanation: 
and causality 59-60 
fallibilism 19, 93, 95, 97, 138 
falsity, concept of 91 
Feyerabend 4 
Field, Hartry 47 
final causes 109, 117 ; 
reasons as 124, 125, 131 
Flax, Jane 4-5, 7, 139 
formal causes 109, 110, 116 ; 
and social structures 111, 117 
Foucault, Michel 4 

 
g  
h  
i  
-150-  
Garcia-Encinas, M. J. 9 
generalities 18 
generative mechanisms: 
alethic truth and 75, 76-77, 79 
Goodman, Nelson 51, 140 
Groff, Ruth 4 n. 4 
groups 103-104 
Hacking, Ian 52 
Harman, Gilbert 47 
Harré, Rom 9, 13-16, 22, 99 n. 219, 100, 106, 
107, 108, 111, 112, 121 n. 278, 138, 140 
Hegel, Georg 72 
Hempel, Carl 140 
Horowitz, Asher 92 n. 205, 97 n. 217 
Hume, David 1, 2, 9, 30, 32, 72, 92 
idealism 25, 28-29 
ideology critique 8 
individual agency: 
and causal powers 122-123 ; 
and social structures 101-4 
intentional behavior 123, 124 
internal realism 45-69 : 
distinguished from metaphysical 
j  
realism 45-46 ; 
transcendental realism and 55, 69 
International Association for Critical Realism 22 
inter-subjective agreement 79, 80-81 
intransitive objects of science 17-19 
Irwin, Louis 85 n. 192 
Jolley, Nicholas 63 

k  
l  
m  
Journal of Critical Realism 22 
judgmental rationality 10 
judgments of experience 40-41 
judgments of perception 40 
justification 48, 94 
justification v. truth 19, 21, 137-8 
Kant, Immanuel 3, 8, 22, 25-44, 45, 72, 104 
knowledge 26, 27, 29-30, 39-40, 42, 44, 65-69, 
94 ; 
distinguished from thought 43 ; 
mediated character of 66-67, 69 ; 
as mediator 69 ; 
provisional nature of 136 ; 
and subjectivity 45 
knowledge claims: 
and belief 138 ; 
and concept of truth 2, 19, 93 
knowledge of being/being 34, 35, 36, 39 
Kuhn, Thomas 4, 139 
Lacey, Hugh 12 n. 35, 13 n. 38, 58 n. 129, 114 n. 
266 
Lakatos, Imre 114 
language: 
analysis of 48-49 
Laudan, Larry 136 n. 307, 139-140 
Lawson, Tony 14 n. 42 
Laycock, Henry 138 n. 310 
Lear, Jonathan 109, 110 n. 247 
Leibniz, Gottfried 63, 141 
Lewis, Paul 99 n. 219, 100, 101 n. 224, 106, 107-
109, 112 
Lierse, Caroline 54 
Locke, John 63-5, 110, 141 
logical positivism 8, 141 
Lyotard, Jean-François 4 
McDermid, Douglas 92 n. 204, 97, 216 
MacIntyre, Alasdair 127, 132 

n  
o  
Mackie, J. L. 108 
Madden, E. H. 9, 13-16, 22, 106, 111, 121 n. 278, 
138, 140 
Marx, Karl 23 
material causes 109, 110, 116 
material idealism 28 
mediation of knowledge 45, 69 
meta-reality 10 
metaphysical realism 25, 45-48 ; 
and analysis of causality 53-54 ; 
distinguished from internal realism 45-46 ; 
transcendental realism and 45, 56 
mind-independent objects 46, 47 ; 
existence of 51, 55 ; 
reality and 50 
moral absolutism 7 
Morera, Esteve 138 n. 310 
natural kinds 45-69 ; 
argument against 53 ; 
social phenomena 118-119 
natural sciences 12, 20 ; 
contrasted with neo-classical economics 113 
naturalism about causality 136 
necessity of necessary connections 25-44 
Nellhaus, Tobias 76 n. 176 
neo-classical economics: 
contrasted with natural sciences 113-116 
Newtonian physics 28, 39 n. 88 
nominal essences 61-62, 63-64, 140 
non-mental entities 35 
noumena: 
and phenomena distinguished 43 
"objective" reality 83 
objects 47-48 ; 
existence of 50, 51 ; 
intransitive 67 
objects of science 17-19 
ontic fallacy 18,67 
ontological commitments 7-8 : 

 
-151-  
matrix 16-17 
ontological hiatus 101 
ontological realism 7, 10, 11, 47, 52 
ontological truth 84-88, 89 
p  
q  
r  
perception 27, 29-30, 42 ; 
judgments of 40 
phenomena: 
and noumena distinguished 43 
philosophical ontology 68-69 
philosophy of science 69 
physical necessity 57, 59 
Popper, Karl 91, 92, 94 n. 210 
Porpora, Doug 92 n. 204, 101 n. 225, 114 n. 264, 
119 n. 274 
positivism 1, 3, 22, 141 
post-positivism: 
ontological roots 139, 140 
post-positivist perspectivism 3-9, 22 
potential objects of knowledge 26, 27 
powers/potentialities 47-48 
psychological nominalism 7 
Putnam, Hilary 4, 20, 22, 45-69 
Quine, Willard 43, 49, 139 
rationality 21 
real essences 48, 61-62, 63-65, 140-141 
realism about causality 45 ; 
and social structures 106-107, 111 
reality 34, 35 
reason 26, 30 
reasons 100-101, 123-125 ; 
efficacy of 124 ; 
whether final or efficient causes 124, 125 

s  
regularities 16, 20, 57-58 
Reichenbach, Hans 140 
relativism 1, 2, 3 ; 
checked by critical realism 136, 139 
representations 29, 39 
Rorty, Richard 4, 5-8, 138 
science 42, 48, 58, 65, 67, 68-69 ; 
and knowledge/truth 82 ; 
ontologies 68-69 ; 
rationality of 42 
scientific advance: 
alethic truth and 73, 79-80 
scientific essentialism 112-123, 142 
scientific inquiry 20 
scientific knowledge 27, 36, 42, 45, 55, 86-87 ; 
alethic truth and 73-74, 75-77, 
scientific laws 32-33, 34-35, 36, 37-38, 40, 41, 
100 
scientific ontology 68 
Schrag, Calvin 130 
skepticism 27 
social entities 116-123 ; 
and causality 122-123 
social kinds 118-121 
social sciences 10 ; 
and causality 99-133 ; 
form of 113-116 ; 
real definitions in 121 
social structures 100-101 ; 
and causal powers 105-123 ; 
efficacy of 110 ; 
as formal causes 111 ; 
and individual agency 101-104 ; 
and material causality 109 ; 
nature of 118-119 ; 
and realism about causality 106 ; 
temporal aspect of 107-108 
Stevenson, C. J. 6 
structures see social structures 
subjective idealism 34 
subjectivity 26, 28 

 
t  
-152-  
Tarski, Alfred 90 n. 201 
Taylor, Charles 22, 93 n. 208, 125-127, 128-129, 
130, 132 
theoretical description 20 
things in themselves 39 
thought: 
and knowledge distinguished 43 
transcendental dialectical critical realism 10 
transcendental idealism 29, 40, 41 ; 
and critical realism 25-44 ; 
distinguished from transcendental realism 30-32, 
42-43 
transcendental necessity 31 
transcendental nominalism 52 n. 110 
transcendental realism 10, 25, 45, 47 ; 
internal realism and 55, 69 ; 
metaphysical realism and 56 
Transformational Model of Social Activity (TMSA) 
101-105 ; 
and critical realism 104-105 
v  
w  
transitive objects of science 17-19 
truth 46 n. 94, 56, 71 ; 
alethic see alethic truth ; 
concepts of 71, 89, 90, 94 ; 
epistemic theory of 86 ; 
and epistemology/justification 91 ; 
non-epistemic theory of 136 ; 
tetrapolity see truth tetrapolity 
truth v. justification 19, 21, 137-138 
truth tetrapolity 71, 72, 76, 84-89, 96 
Varela, Charles 21, 99 n. 219, 100, 106, 107, 108, 
110, 111, 112 

 
-153-  
Woolhouse, R. S. 141 
 
[This page intentionally left blank.]  
-154-  
 
-155-  

