Daimonic Imagination 
 

 

Daimonic Imagination: 
Uncanny Intelligence 
 
 
 
Edited by 
 
Angela Voss and William Rowlandson 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Daimonic Imagination: Uncanny Intelligence,  
Edited by Angela Voss and William Rowlandson 
 
This book first published 2013  
 
Cambridge Scholars Publishing 
 
12 Back Chapman Street, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE6 2XX, UK 
 
 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
 
 
Copyright © 2013 by Angela Voss and William Rowlandson and contributors 
 
All rights for this book reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or 
otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner. 
 
ISBN (10): 1-4438-4726-7, ISBN (13): 978-1-4438-4726-1 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
Preface and Acknowledgments .................................................................. ix 
 
Introduction ................................................................................................. 1 
 
Part I: Daimonic History 
 
Chapter One ................................................................................................. 8 
When Spirit Possession is Sexual Encounter: The Case for a Cult  
of Divine Birth in Ancient Greece  
Marguerite Rigoglioso 
 
Chapter Two .............................................................................................. 23 
Encounters at the Tomb: Visualizing the Invisible in Attic Vase Painting   
Diana Rodríguez Pérez 
 
Chapter Three ............................................................................................ 43 
Parodying the Divine: Exploring the Iconography of the Cult  
of the Kabeiroi in the Ancient Greek World   
Kirsten M. Bedigan 
 
Chapter Four .............................................................................................. 64 
Of Cosmocrators and Cosmic Gods: The Place of the Archons  
in De mysteriis   
Christopher A. Plaisance 
 
Chapter Five .............................................................................................. 86 
“Showeth Herself all Naked”: Madimi in John Dee’s Conversations  
with Spirits   
Stephanie Spoto 
 
Chapter Six .............................................................................................. 102 
Burke’s Aesthetics of the Spirit   
Simon Wilson 
 

Table of Contents 
vi
Chapter Seven .......................................................................................... 112 
Uncanny Intelligence in Psychoanalysis and Divination   
Maggie Hyde 
 
Chapter Eight ........................................................................................... 129 
The Scientific Approach of F. W. H. Myers to the Study of Mystical 
Experiences, Divination and Psi, and its Value to Psychology   
Terence J. Palmer 
 
Part II: Daimonic Literature 
 
Chapter Nine ............................................................................................ 144 
Definitive Demons: Frankenstein and Dracula as Ultimate  
Representations of the “Monstrous Other”   
Vered Weiss 
 
Chapter Ten ............................................................................................. 161 
Sceptical Scepticism: Reason and Uncanny Experience in Scottish  
Fiction   
Kenneth Keir 
 
Chapter Eleven ........................................................................................ 175 
The Daimonic in W. B. Yeats   
Chiara Reghellin 
 
Chapter Twelve ....................................................................................... 192 
But Who is That on the Other Side of You? The Daimonic Sources 
of Consciousness in Literature and Dreams   
Wojciech Owczarski 
 
Chapter Thirteen ...................................................................................... 203 
“Necessary Monsters”: Borges’ Book of Imaginary Beings 
 and the Ontology of the Daimonic   
William Rowlandson 
 
Chapter Fourteen ..................................................................................... 228 
Privileging the “Other”: Illicit Forms of Knowledge in the Detective 
Fiction of Reginald Hill   
Hilary A. Goldsmith 
 

Daimonic Imagination: Uncanny Intelligence 
 
vii 
Part III: Daimonic Encounter 
 
Chapter Fifteen ........................................................................................ 244 
Fireflies and Shooting Stars: Visual Narratives of Daimonic Intelligence   
Angela Voss 
 
Chapter Sixteen ....................................................................................... 266 
In Search of Higher Intelligence: The Daimonic Muse(s) of Aleister 
Crowley, Timothy Leary, and Robert Anton Wilson   
Matt Cardin 
 
Chapter Seventeen ................................................................................... 282 
So long as you’ve got your Elf: Death, DMT and Discarnate Entities   
David Luke 
 
Chapter Eighteen ..................................................................................... 292 
C. G. Jung, Tibetan Tantra and the Great Goddess: An Exploration  
of Sacred Entities and Archetypes   
Judson Davis 
 
Chapter Nineteen ..................................................................................... 310 
Cultural Variation of the Feminine in Psychedelic Personification   
Cameron Adams 
 
Chapter Twenty ....................................................................................... 321 
Daimonic Ecologies: An Inquiry into the Relationships  
between the Human and Nonphysical Species   
Alex Rachel 
 
Part IV: Daimonic Performance 
 
Chapter Twenty-one ................................................................................ 340 
Seeing Voices: Elucidating the Unconscious via Tarot Hermeneutic  
with Jung and Deleuze   
Inna Semetsky 
 
Chapter Twenty-two ................................................................................ 357 
Imaginal Inquiry: Meetings with the Imaginative Intelligence   
Marie Angelo 
 

Table of Contents 
viii
Chapter Twenty-three .............................................................................. 374 
Imaginal Doorway: Seeking a Daimonic Theatre using Dramatherapy   
Toby Chown 
 
Chapter Twenty-four ............................................................................... 391 
Numinous Conversations: Performance and Manifestation of Spirits  
in Spirit Possession Practices   
Jack Hunter 
 
Chapter Twenty-five ................................................................................ 404 
The Call of the Spirit: The Training and Practice of Sangomas 
in Relation to an Astrologer’s Vocation   
Darby Costello 
 
Chapter Twenty-six ................................................................................. 418 
Spirit and Shaman: Altered Consciousness and the Development  
of Creativity   
Zoë Brân 
 
Contributors ............................................................................................. 437 
 
Index ........................................................................................................ 444 
 

 
PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
 
 
These essays originated in a conference on “Daimonic Imagination: 
Uncanny Intelligence” held at the University of Kent in May 2011. This 
venture should be seen in the longer perspective of a body of studies and 
teaching undertaken at Kent, hosted originally as a module in the 
pioneering MA programme in the Study of Mysticism and Religious 
Experience. Its further development from September 2006 occurred 
around the MA in the Cultural Study of Cosmology and Divination, 
concurrently with a popular and successful undergraduate module. The 
brief life of this unusual and creative project, running somewhat 
widdershins to the mainstream concerns of the modern academy, was 
extended in the Centre for the Study of Myth, host to the current 
conference. The 2011 Conference is the fourth such gathering, and this 
collection the fourth in a series of essays drawn from, or directly inspired 
by, each conference. The previous publications are Angela Voss & Jean 
Hinson Lall (2007) eds, The Imaginal Cosmos: Astrology, Divination and 
the Sacred (Canterbury: University of Kent); Angela Voss & Patrick Curry 
(2008) eds, Seeing with Different Eyes: Essays on Astrology and 
Divination (Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Press) and Patrick Curry 
(2010) ed., Divination: Perspectives for a New Millennium (Farnham: 
Ashgate). Taken together, these collections in all their scintillating and 
sometimes confounding diversity are a treasure-trove for imaginative 
exploration and for scholarship in a primary domain of human experience 
that too often finds itself diminished or ignored. Our thanks are richly 
deserved by the many individuals who have carried this inspiration with 
their friendship and their thinking, and we also thank those who have 
offered material support, especially the Sophia Trust and the Urania Trust, 
with whose help so much has been done. With the current collection, 
special thanks are due to William Rowlandson and the Centre for the 
Study of Myth, for taking up the banner. It would not be fitting to end 
without an acknowledgment of the achievement of Angela Voss, whose 
determination and untiring vision have been essential in blazing a trail of 
imagination through all our work at Kent.  
 
Geoffrey Cornelius 

 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
This collection of essays has arisen from a conference held at the 
University of Kent in May 2011, under the auspices of the Centre for the 
Study of Myth. It was dedicated to the inter-disciplinary exploration of the 
daimonic imagination—inspired creativity, extraordinary encounters and 
nonrational ways of knowing—in historical, literary and contemporary 
contexts. The conference generated a huge response from established 
academics, research students, practitioners of esoteric disciplines and 
creative artists. From the original forty-two speakers, twenty-three are 
represented here (plus three additional contributions) and their chapters 
demonstrate an exciting variety of approaches to an epistemologically 
challenging field of investigation. 
Many religious and esoteric traditions talk of a “divine spark” or 
transcendent power in the human soul, sometimes described as the fount of 
intuitive insight and creative genius and sometimes as a guiding or 
protective power. This intelligent “other” is often considered to be an 
autonomous god, spirit, angel, muse or daimon, or alternatively understood 
as an aspect of the human imagination or “unconscious” in a Jungian 
sense. From the artist to the diviner, from the monk to the medium, a sense 
of communication with this other order of reality is commonly attested; 
this may take the form of an inner voice, a flash of intuition, a psychic or 
clairvoyant vision, “channelled” information, spirit-possession and even 
telephone or email conversations. Art and literature abound with images of 
this divine or cosmic intelligence, which we also see embodied in the 
“little folk” of folk tales and the “alien” of science-fiction. In a vast array 
of “new-age” practices, encounters with spirit beings via shamanic 
journeying, meditation, hypnosis techniques or psychedelic trips are often 
cultivated for healing purposes. Mystics in religious traditions speak of 
awareness of higher intelligences—angels, devas, jinn for example—or of 
one supreme intelligence, whilst in the secular sphere, the increase in 
interest in mediumship over the past decade or so attests to the undying 
conviction that the bridge between human and nonhuman worlds may be 
crossed, even resulting in the full materialisation of spirit beings within the 
séance environment. 
In this volume, we are not concerned with proving or disproving the 
existence of such beings in any objective sense, and indeed several of the 

Introduction 
 
2
authors here point to the impossibility of such an aim. Rather, we are 
concerned with the many ways that this “numinous other” is portrayed and 
experienced, and how it informs, and has always informed, human 
experience. In this, we are taking a unique approach to the subject, whilst 
drawing threads from the various fields within which nonhuman reality 
and its inhabitants are studied—such as theology and religious studies, 
anthropology, history, classics, literature, esoteric philosophy and cultural 
studies. It would be impossible to include a relevant literature review 
drawn from all these disciplines, but we should perhaps just draw attention 
to those explorers (and critics) of the daimonic realms past and present 
whose work has inspired our discussions at the Centre for Myth Studies—
Plato, Plotinus, Dante, Marsilio Ficino, Emanuel Swedenborg, Immanuel 
Kant, William Blake, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Frederic Myers, William 
James, Carl Jung, Rudolf Steiner, Henry Corbin, James Hillman, Stan 
Grof, Jorge Luis Borges, Patrick Harpur, Jeffrey Kripal, Terence 
McKenna, and others. 
The essays in this book spread a wide net over the ocean of daimonic 
phenomena. The variety of methodologies and approaches is deliberately 
extreme, multi-faceted and interdisciplinary, for the daimonic in its very 
nature defies categorisation and transcends the limitations of one single 
mode of academic discourse. This is not to imply that traditional 
approaches have nothing to say—indeed the historically informative study 
and the literary critique are essential starting points for further ontological 
and epistemological questions arising from phenomenological or 
experiential viewpoints. We have structured the collection to reflect such a 
methodological journey, and in so doing it is our intention to expand the 
remit of scholarship when confronted with material that challenges 
accepted post-Enlightenment positivist and materialist assumptions about 
the nature of reality. The enthusiasm generated by the conference at Kent 
was testament to the determination emerging at the present time—from 
both researchers and practitioners—not to let existing paradigms of 
knowledge suppress or deny a priori the acknowledgement in all cultures 
of human interaction with nonphysical consciousness/es. 
The overall question which was addressed by the conference, and 
which is addressed by the majority of the contributors to this volume, is 
that of the nature of this consciousness in terms of its intrinsic or extrinsic 
relation to the human mind. They ask, can the “entities” encountered in a 
dream, vision or spiritual journey be considered as fully embodied—as 
real—as the creatures in the material world, or should they be firmly 
relegated to the realm of the fantastical imagination, the “unconscious” 
mind or the hallucination? But even this question is inevitably tied to the 

Daimonic Imagination: Uncanny Intelligence 
 
3 
assumptions of a Cartesian world-view, in which subject and object are 
clearly separated. For several of our authors, it becomes clear that in fact 
this is the wrong question to ask of the daimon, for the answer can only be 
“yes” to both lines of enquiry. It is not surprising, then, that for many 
contributors the work of the French historian of religion Henry Corbin is 
seminal and authoritative in its delineation of the mundus imaginalis, an 
intermediate world between matter and spirit. In this place—accessed 
through the “active” imagination or altered states of consciousness—
spiritual intelligence becomes clothed in sense-perceptible images which 
are experienced as vibrant, alive and even more “real” than ordinary 
reality. 
The origins of the idea that there is a mode of perception available to 
human beings which transcends discursive and analytical thinking are 
found in Platonic epistemology, and are fundamental to Western esoteric 
traditions. According to Plato, this “intuitive intellect” has direct 
apprehension of spiritual or noetic reality, which the rational mind can 
then process, interpret and analyse. In fact, the rational mind simply 
cannot grasp the totality of such a gnostic insight and if it tries to do so 
will inevitably reduce it to its own parameters of vision, often with a lofty 
disparagement of its validity. Interestingly, modern neuroscience has 
reached the same conclusions with regard to the function of the brain 
hemispheres, in that the legitimate role of the right hemisphere is now 
understood to be that of “master” to the left’s “emissary”.1 In the light of 
this metaphor, many of the chapters here suggest ways of pushing the 
boundaries of research methods to include imaginal, performative and 
experiential insights which can then be processed and appraised in the 
light of scientific, psychological and metaphysical frameworks. 
Anthropological, phenomenological and ethnographic research, for 
example, provides a set of tools for the intrepid explorer of psychedelic 
realms to reflect on their own encounters and to muse on the ontological 
status of nonphysical entities from first-hand experience. Rachel, Luke and 
Cardin suggest that future research must rely as much on mystical and 
metaphysical premises as psychological ones, and Rachel goes so far as to 
make the radical suggestion that taking nonphysical reality seriously 
would have profound implications for the origin of the human race. Thus 
for many contributors, the willingness boldly to challenge cultural 
assumptions in search of the daimonic is not only permitted but essential 
for a fully holistic appraisal, whether this is through psychedelics, 
performance and creative projects, auto-ethnography, spiritualism, 
                                                           
1 See I. McGilchrist (2010) The Master and his Emissary (Yale: Yale University 
Press).  

Introduction 
 
4
shamanic journeying or a broader appeal to take seriously the pre-modern 
conception of the human being’s place in a sacred cosmos. 
Perhaps most importantly of all, many of the essays in this book call 
for a return to the metaphoric or symbolic to create a paradigm-shift away 
from the deadening literalism of our modern age. In so doing, the question 
of whether the alien is a physically real being from a physically real outer 
space or simply an empty creation of science-fiction is no longer central. 
Instead, such a being may be seen as a culturally-specific archetype, an 
entity who may be encountered—as fully embodied—in a dimension of 
consciousness which simply cannot be subject to analysis by the rational 
mind. As Andy Letcher has pointed out: 
The prevailing cultural discourses, however, do not make this [middle 
position] easy. Anyone who, say, stands up and proclaims the existence of 
hives of self-transforming machine elves in a parallel dimension to ours is 
likely to meet with a cynical and derisive response. Culture can only 
tolerate elves and faerie denizens if they are bound firmly into film, the 
pages of fiction—children’s, sci-fi, fantasy or the knowing conceit of 
magic realism—or the symbolic language of the unconscious, where the 
ridiculous possibility of their actual physical existence need never be 
raised. As [Robert] Graves noted, the dirty synthetic world has asserted 
itself as the sole factual truth.2 
Why is the power of the imagination to recognise—to know—nonphysical 
beings so disregarded in our Western culture? The answer lies deep in the 
roots of the Enlightenment schism of religion and science, where all that 
cannot be “known” through empirical observation or logical deduction is 
relegated to either superstition or supernature, the “faith” of spiritual 
sensibility being set in opposition to the certainty of human reason. As 
Corbin laments throughout his work, the potency of the imaginal realm as 
an interface between gods and men has become reduced to the product of 
mere human invention, with no substance, no authenticity and certainly no 
“truth”. 
Many of the researchers in this volume are indeed pioneers, but they 
stand on the backs of such visionaries as Myers, James, Steiner and Jung, 
all of whom called for a more integrative approach to spiritual matters and 
a willingness to suspend disbelief in the possibility of higher, or deeper, 
intelligence. Furthermore, each author, in revealing a different aspect of 
the daimon, also reveals something about themselves and their relationship 
to their inner genius. For some, a strictly conventional approach to their 
                                                           
2 A. Letcher (2007) Shroom, A Cultural History of the Magic Mushroom (London: 
Faber & Faber) 295. 

Daimonic Imagination: Uncanny Intelligence 
 
5 
material, an impersonal evaluation of data, is the chosen mode—inspired 
perhaps by the daimonic muse of solid historical or literary critical 
research. For others, it is important to engage sympathetically with their 
material and let it reveal something of itself to the reader, whilst still 
others overtly challenge the accepted model by drawing on their own 
experiences and insights or offering auto-biographical narratives as 
research. The reader is thus deliberately led to consider for him or herself 
the distinctions between varying kinds of discourse, and whether any one 
approach is sufficient to do justice to the multi-faceted, paradoxical and 
Mercurial nature of daimonic experience. In the end, he or she may agree 
with Myers, who concluded as long ago as 1903: 
Now it is that we feel the difficulty of being definite without being trivial; 
how little of earthly memory persists; how little of heavenly experience 
can be expressed in terms of earth; how long and arduous must be the way, 
how many must be the experiments, and how many the failures before any 
systemised body of new truth can be established. But a sound beginning 
has been made, and whatever may be possible hereafter need not be wasted 
on a fresh start.3 
It has taken a long time to build on Myers’ “sound beginning,” but we 
hope that now the time is ripe for an integration of imagination and critical 
thinking within academic research which will break new ground and begin 
to reveal ways of healing the antagonisms so often aroused by the subject 
of paranormal, “occult” or nonrational experience. 
 
Angela Voss and William Rowlandson, January 2013 
 
                                                           
3 F. Myers (1903) Human Personality and Its Survival of Bodily Death ed. S. 
Smith (New York: Longmans, Green & Co) 406 (quoted by Palmer in this volume 
p.138). 


PART I 
DAIMONIC HISTORY 

CHAPTER ONE 
WHEN SPIRIT POSSESSION  
IS SEXUAL ENCOUNTER:  
THE CASE FOR A CULT OF DIVINE BIRTH  
IN ANCIENT GREECE 
MARGUERITE RIGOGLIOSO 
 
 
 
The genesis of parthenogenesis: how I got here 
“The daughter becomes identical with the mother.” This statement by 
Erich Neumann,1 providing what may well be the key to the mystery of the 
cult of Demeter and Persephone in antiquity, haunted me for months as I 
wrote my master’s thesis on these two goddesses of central Sicily. There 
was a depth to it, fascinating and unplumbable, that kept me traveling ever 
further inward. 
I remember standing in my brother’s apartment in Brooklyn, New 
York, in January 2001 when I received the insight that was the starting 
point of this research. I had been reading Sicilian scholar Anna Maria 
Corradini’s book Meteres: Il Mito del Matriarchato in Sicilia (Mothers: 
The Myth of Matriarchy in Sicily). Corradini stated for me what seemed a 
sudden and profound truth: the Demeter-Persephone mystery was, at core, 
a female only mystery. Stripping off the layers that the Greeks had added 
on through the violent intrusion of Hades and other male gods into the 
story, she suggested that Demeter was a pre-Hellenic parthenogenetic 
goddess who produced the natural world––and her daughter, Persephone–
–spontaneously out of her own body.2 
Parthenogenesis. Self-conception. Virgin birth. Mothers and identical 
daughters. As I stood in my brother’s small office, I had the strange 
sensation of a foreign thought suddenly illuminating my mind: were holy 
                                                           
1 Neumann: 309. 
2 Corradini: 12-14; 81-83. 

When Spirit Possession is Sexual Encounter 
9 
women of ancient Greece once engaged in attempting to conceive children 
miraculously?  
Since that time, shards of a Greek history seeming to link women and 
divine birth have continuously presented themselves to me, glinting 
through obscure passages in ancient texts and in the prose of unsuspecting 
contemporary scholars. I have collected these pieces, and in my books The 
Cult of Divine Birth in Ancient Greece and Virgin Mother Goddesses of 
Antiquity, I have assembled them. It is is a vessel that may still have many 
missing parts, but one that begins to reveal an integral form and shape, 
nonetheless. I share some of the key pieces in this chapter. 
During the course of this research I have come to realise there have 
been so many artefacts staring at us for two thousand years that it is truly 
stunning no one has put them together before as evidence of possible 
female cultic practice.3 Practically all of the legendary heroes who came to 
head the great genealogical tribes of early Greece, as well as various 
historical political and spiritual leaders and a handful of humans turned 
divine were all said to have been born of mortal women through sexual 
union with gods. Not only were Heracles, Perseus, Theseus, and a host of 
other legendary heroes associated with divine birth stories, but so were 
historical figures such as Pythagoras, Plato, and Alexander the Great. In 
certain corners of the Graeco-Roman world, it was believed that 
miraculous conception could occur through the influence of snakes and 
celestial rays of light. The healing cult of Asclepius held that women could 
be impregnated with supernatural assistance––a belief that was the basis 
for the entire nearby Egyptian civilization. The basilinna, the “queen 
archon” of classical Athens, was even attested to conduct a secret and 
presumably sexual rite with the god Dionysus every year. Are such stories 
and practices––and many, many more––to be dismissed as mere remnants 
of mythology––that is, fiction––alone? Or do they point to something 
important about the actual beliefs and rites of ancient Greece? 
I argue for the latter. In doing so, I offer what amounts to a radical 
reinterpretation of ancient Greek religion, one that suggests that priestly 
women––and the figure of the “holy virgin”––may have been considered 
far more central to the founding of Greek civilization than previously 
                                                           
3 The literature that has come the closest proposes the existence of the hieros 
gamos, or rite of sacred marriage, in ancient West Asia and the ancient 
Mediterranean world. According to some scholars, the sacred marriage was a ritual 
act of sexual intercourse between a king and priestess as a means of guaranteeing 
abundance and fertility for the people. This idea has itself received its share of 
critique (see Nissinen and Uro). The present work in part reframes the sacred 
marriage concept by considering women’s agency in it, a much-neglected theme. 

Chapter One 
 
10
understood. Specifically, I make the case that certain specialised 
priestesshoods in ancient Greece may have endeavoured to conceive 
children in various non-ordinary ways as an elevated form of spiritual 
practice. The intended purpose of this practice was to give birth to a hero 
or heroine, gifted spiritual leader, or what was considered to be a 
supernatural being––an individual who, it was thought, could not enter 
into the human stream through the “normal” sexual channels. This 
miraculously-born individual was considered a special soul capable of 
benefitting humanity significantly in some way, or of heralding or 
reinforcing particular value systems for the human race.  
I have discovered that attempting to produce offspring through various 
asexual and/or magical methods was thought to be a specialised sacerdotal 
activity for women. Although some Greek writers, such as Herodotus, 
were reportedly sceptical about women’s capacity for virgin birth, there 
were many who apparently believed it was possible––including some in 
the highest intellectual echelons, such as certain followers of Pythagoras 
and Plato. Throughout my works, I demonstrate that Greeks who believed 
in the reality of such a phenomenon held miraculous conception and 
birthing of a child to be the most advanced form of magico-spiritual 
achievement possible. At its best, divine birthing was considered a feat 
that could transport the human race to a new level of functioning and 
awareness through the influence of the incarnated individual. The evidence 
shows that the purported birth of a specially conceived child was thought 
to result in the apotheosis, or actual divinisation of the priestess herself––a 
“promotion” from human to goddess––and led to her corresponding 
veneration. Similarly, the child of this conception was considered to be of 
a divine nature and likewise the focus of worship. 
To be clear, my task is not to argue whether birth through miraculous 
means is or ever was possible. Neither is it to argue whether any assumed 
practice by women in ancient Greece to conceive and give birth 
miraculously to a special category of children was successful or not. 
Rather, my intention is to present and analyse a vast array of information 
from history, legend, and myth suggesting that groups of priestly women 
in ancient Greece who at the very least attempted divine birth as a spiritual 
discipline and who were believed at the time to have been successful may 
have formally existed. In doing so, I bring into relief an aspect of Greek 
religion that has been obscured in the patriarchal era through the relegation 
of divine birth stories to the status of quaint and frivolous fables. 
It is also important to note that in presenting evidence for the existence 
of what I am calling divine birth priestesshoods in Greece, my aim is not 
to make a scientific case that parthenogenesis––that is, conception and 

When Spirit Possession is Sexual Encounter 
11 
birth without the participation of the male––ever may have existed as a 
method intended to eclipse sexual procreation and do away with men.4 Nor 
is it to suggest that parthenogenesis should be explored as a means of 
doing so in future. I discuss parthenogenesis in the religious context only, 
as a possible spiritual practice that would have had a specialised purpose. 
For this work, I approach ancient and secondary texts and iconography 
using a number of methodologies, which, given the provocative nature of 
what is being proposed, deserve some attention. I first and foremost utilise 
a feminist hermeneutical approach. That is, I recast written records 
applying what Schüssler Fiorenza calls “a feminist hermeneutics of 
suspicion that understands texts as ideological articulations of men 
expressing, as well as maintaining, patriarchal historical conditions.”5 
Moreover, I follow Barbara Goff’s approach of reading texts “against the 
grain,” or reading them “for other than their ostensible significance”6 in 
order to recover where and how historical women may have had agency 
and autonomy in an attempt to create a more complete and accurate picture 
of the ancient Greek priestesshood.  
Another methodological approach I employ is neo-euhemerism. That 
is, I look to mythology and legends as sources of important clues about 
historical events and actual ancient cultural and cultic practices. The term 
neo-euhemerism derives from the name of the fourth century BCE writer 
Euhemerus, who, by investigating the actions and places of birth and 
burial of the divinities of popular religion, claimed the gods were simply 
deified human beings, great heroes who were revered because they had 
benefited mankind in some important way. His rationalising method of 
interpreting Greek myths, known as classical euhemerism, was revived in 
the nineteenth century by scholars such as Spencer. In more recent works, 
Nilsson, for example, argues that the Greek epics originated in the 
aristocratic society of Bronze Age Mycenaean culture, reflected the deeds 
of historical men, and described contemporary events while mixing 
mythical and folktale elements. Harrison similarly assumes that myth 
reflects broad historical contours of Greek and pre-Greek culture. Farnell, 
too, throughout his classic five-volume work Cults of the Greek States, 
conjectures that various myths may have been indicators of actual custom 
and ritual. 
The intuitive flash I received that wintry New York day in January 
2001––that specialised women in ancient Greece may have participated 
                                                           
4 For a summary of current scientific thinking on parthenogenesis, see Rigoglioso 
2009: 205-209. 
5 Schüssler Fiorenza: 60. 
6 Goff: 25. 

Chapter One 
 
12
actively in attempts to produce children parthenogenetically as part of a 
spiritual calling––stimulated me to approach my research on ancient Greek 
history and religion in new ways. In my studies, I began to notice data that 
seemed to cluster around and verify this idea, which inspired me to seek 
out supporting information more actively. As I made sense of the data I 
was collecting, further and unanticipated patterns began to emerge. New 
insights were sparked which subsequently stimulated ever new cycles of 
mining ancient texts and secondary literature in search of validating 
details. The process thus was both deductive and inductive. 
I soon discerned in the ancient literature that there was more than one 
method by which women were credited with achieving divine birth. A 
theoretical structure began to emerge that seemed to allow the data to 
speak in the most coherent way possible. In this chapter I present that 
structure––what I am calling a taxonomy of divine birth priestesshoods. 
The role of trance and virginity in divine birth practice 
Before proceeding with the taxonomy, I should note that regardless of the 
type of reproductive method attempted, the practice as a whole most likely 
required that the priestess enter a profound non-ordinary state of 
consciousness, or “trance” state. This finds support in Lezzi-Haftner, who 
similarly theorises that such a state was part of the hieros gamos, or sacred 
sexual union, that purportedly took place between the historical basilinna 
and the god Dionysus. She bases this on her interpretation of images on 
ancient ceramics thought to portray the basilinna (or possibly her mythic 
prototype, Ariadne) in a ritualised “drowsy” or “sleep” state waiting for 
her union with the god.7 I contend it is indeed only through a hypnagogic 
state that a priestess would have been thought capable of fully accessing 
her special skills as well as the spiritual forces believed necessary to guide 
her in this most extraordinary of activities.  
Iamblichus describes various ways in which the spiritual adept was 
thought to enter into non-ordinary states of consciousness in the ancient 
world, which included what he calls “potions.”8 His remarks are echoed by 
Lewis, former London School of Economics anthropology professor, who 
mentions “psychotropic alkaloids,”9 or what are today known as 
entheogens. This term, introduced into the English language by Ruck et al., 
derives from entheos, which in Greek means “full of the god,” “inspired,” or 
“possessed,” and connotes a state in which both the practitioner was “in the 
                                                           
7 Lezzi-Haftner 1988a, b. 
8 Iamblichus: 1.3. 
9 Lewis 1971: 39. 

When Spirit Possession is Sexual Encounter 
13 
god” and the god was “in the practitioner.”10 Entheos, then, anciently 
referred to a state of “oneness” with the deity, and an entheogen is thus a 
substance (usually plant-based in the ancient world) thought to engender 
such a state.11 I suggest that whilst engaging in a meditative state may 
have been enough for some divine birth priestesses to enter what was 
believed to be the requisite spiritual condition for their task, imbibing 
entheogens may have been a particularly effective means of doing so. In 
The Cult of Divine Birth in Ancient Greece, I point to literary evidence 
attesting to the presence of one entheogenic plant, asterion (cannabis), in 
connection with the cult of Hera at Argos, and the probable use of various 
entheogenic compounds by the prophetesses of Apollo at Delphi.12  
Another important preliminary point is that it appears that in many, but 
not all, cases, virginity, that is, abstinence from sexual intercourse with 
men, was thought to have been a biological and spiritual precondition 
necessary to render non-ordinary conception possible. Greek myths and 
legends of women conceiving the children of gods indicate that such 
women were generally virgins in the younger years of their lives. Some 
seem to have been dedicated virgins from the time of menarche or earlier. 
I discuss the virginity requirement in ancient Greek priestesshoods more 
fully in The Cult of Divine Birth in Ancient Greece.13  
A taxonomy of divine birth priestesshoods 
I now turn to the taxonomy. In exploring Greek myths and history, I have 
discerned what appear to have been a number of different non-ordinary 
ways by which women were thought to conceive divine or divinely endowed 
children. I suggest that the method used depended on the ontological 
framework with which the particular cult that the priestess served viewed the 
universe. Thus, in general, gynocentric (female/goddess-centred) theologies 
corresponded with priestesshoods in which women attempted to mimic the 
ultimate parthenogenetic capacity of the creator goddess in generating 
divine children. Androcentric (male/god-centred) theologies corresponded 
                                                           
10 Cook: vol. 1: 673. One ancient literary example of entheos is found in Euripides 
(Hippolytus 141). 
11 Wasson et al. and Eyer argue that entheogens were used to stimulate the 
culminating experience of initiates during the Eleusinian Mysteries, for example. 
See also Hillman for a history of the widespread use of entheogens in the ancient 
world. 
12 Rigoglioso 2009: 175-76. 
13 Rigoglioso 2009: 43-46. 

Chapter One 
 
14
with priestesshoods in which non-ordinary reproduction was thought 
possible through the sexual union of the priestess with a god.  
The first category in my proposed taxonomy of divine birth 
priestesshoods is what I am calling the pure parthenogenetic priestesshood. 
I propose that this priestesshood was dedicated to attempting conception 
without the participation of a male in any form whatsoever––either human 
or divine. I subdivide this priestesshood into two further categories: pure 
daughter-bearing parthenogenetic priestesshoods and pure son-bearing 
parthenogenetic priestesshoods. 
I hypothesise that this priestesshood was dedicated to producing 
female offspring only, and that it marked the original and first stage of the 
practice, carried out when social structures were matriarchal. This would 
have been a period well prior to the advent of the Olympian cults, when 
various Greek goddesses, among them Ge/Gaia, Athena, Artemis and 
Hera, were conceived of as creator divinities who generated cosmos, earth, 
and all life without male consorts––that is, they were virgin mothers. 
Given my theory that priestesses patterned themselves after their 
goddesses, I submit that one class of sacerdotal women of this time 
consisted of virgins whose holy reproductive rituals were aimed at 
generating the spontaneous meiosis of their ova. This type of activity 
would have corresponded with biological parthenogenesis in the animal 
and insect world. There, given that progeny conceived parthenogenetically 
share the same genetic material as their mothers, such offspring are 
generally female.14 On the symbolic level, the parthenogenetic creation of 
the human daughter would have been understood as a process whereby the 
mother essentially “replicated” herself. The holy daughter born in this 
unusual way would have been seen as an earthly manifestation of the 
Great Goddess, and the mother would have been thought to achieve 
divinity herself for having accomplished the birth of such a being. That is, 
in being able to generate life spontaneously from her body in the manner 
of the goddess, she was thought to become the living embodiment of the 
goddess. We can think of the parthenogenetic mother and daughter 
“goddesses” as “twins,” a motif that I suggest formed the basis of the 
earliest layer of the cult of the mother-daughter goddesses Demeter and 
Persephone.15 
I propose that with the development of patriarchy and the increasing 
domination of cultural institutions by men, the male god came into 
theological ascendancy. Pure parthenogenesis at this secondary stage was 
                                                           
14 Jerry L. Hall, ViaGene Fertility director, personal communication, August 19, 
2004. One important exception is the honeybee. 
15 See Rigogioso 2010: 103-107. 

When Spirit Possession is Sexual Encounter 
15 
modified to bring in a child who served as a human manifestation of this 
male god. Thus we have the creation of what I am calling the pure son-
bearing parthenogenetic priestesshood.  
The “birth of the divine son,” I contend, was considered a special kind 
of numinous event that expressed, to borrow Neumann’s words, “the 
miracle of the male’s containment in the female.”16 The priestess was now 
exalted for having incarnated one “other than” herself, yet still without the 
benefit of a male fecundator, a feat that may have been seen as even more 
challenging than bringing in a female. The male holy child––an expression 
of the newly ascendant male godhead––was rendered “king,” and was 
expected to agree to a ritual death in order to benefit humanity. His death 
served, in the words of Pindar, as “requital for ancient wrong” (penthos);17 
that is, it was believed to release the community from negativity associated 
with the transgressions of their living and deceased members. In 
undergoing this ordeal, the miraculously born individual was thought to be 
apotheosised on the ontological level––that is, to achieve godhead––which 
resulted in his subsequently being worshipped as a divinity. 
Although a detailed analysis of parthenogenetic themes in Gnostic 
texts is beyond the scope of this chapter, it is important to mention here 
one Gnostic passage that contains a stunning testament to the existence of 
an ancient esoteric belief in women’s capacity for pure parthenogenesis in 
a religious context. The passage appears in The Revelation [or 
Apocalypse] of Adam, the last tractate of Nag Hammadi Codex V. It 
describes one of the means by which “the illuminator of knowledge,” the 
salvific figure known as Seth (of whom Jesus was considered by some to 
be a manifestation), was thought to have been brought to humanity: 
[F]rom the nine muses one separated. She came to a high mountain and 
spent some time seated there, so that she desired her own body in order to 
become androgynous. She fulfilled her desire and became pregnant from 
her desire. He [the illuminator] was born. The angels who were over the 
desire nourished him. And he received glory there and power […]18 
                                                           
16 Neumann: 309. 
17 The fragment is preserved in Plato: “For from whomsoever Persephone shall 
accept requital for ancient wrong, the souls of these she restores in the ninth year to 
the upper sun again; from them arise glorious kings and men of splendid might and 
surpassing wisdom, and for all remaining time are they called holy heroes amongst 
mankind” (Plato Meno 81b). I contend this references the sacrificial death and 
apotheosis of divinely born children that I am positing here. 
18 In Barnstone and Meyer: 186-87. 

Chapter One 
 
16
The text, ascribed to the end of the first or beginning of the first centuries 
CE, contains the most direct ancient reference I have located to date of an 
episode of pure parthenogenetic conception. The excerpt even affirms the 
method by which the woman supposedly achieved this feat: by “sitting on 
a mountain” for some time, that is, through a non-ordinary state of 
consciousness likely brought about through an extended period of 
meditation. The identification of the female as a “muse” suggests a priestly 
connection the Greek tradition, where muses and nymphs, as I explain 
throughout my works, were related figures frequently associated with 
divine birth stories. Although the child believed to have arisen from this 
particular miraculous conception was male, it is not unreasonable to 
suggest that such a self-generative mechanism would have been considered 
a valid method of producing holy female children, as well. 
Evidence in Greek cult for pure daughter-bearing and son-bearing 
parthenogenetic priestesshoods, as well as of their sequential emergence, 
hypothesised above, is otherwise mainly suggestive. In my books, I 
discuss myths that may point to the existence of pure parthenogenetic 
priestesshoods of the daughter-bearing kind in relationship to the cults of 
Ge/Gaia, particularly at the earliest days of the oracular cults at Dodona 
and Delphi. The story of Hera’s parthenogenetic birthing of Ares, Typhon, 
and Hephaestus, may be an allusion to son-bearing parthenogenesis. The 
mystical formula recited by the high priest at the conclusion of the 
Eleusinian Mysteries––“Brimo has given birth to Brimos!”––an expression 
that may have referred to the birth of the divine male child, also may be an 
allusion to the latter.19 
As patriarchy continued to develop, male and female deities came to be 
conceived of in sexual relationship to one another. This phenomenon finds 
expression in myths such as that of the goddess Cybele and her 
fecundating consort Attis in Phrygia. Still later, as patriarchy eclipsed 
matriarchy nearly completely as the dominant social form, the universal 
deity came to be seen as primarily male, sometimes with shadow female 
attendants who assisted in the generative process in a much reduced and 
passive role. This is expressed in myths of deities such as Zeus and Hera. 
This transition marked what I propose was a concomitant shift to what I 
term the hieros gamos, that is, “sacred marriage” divine birth priestesshood. 
In the condition of the hieros gamos, a woman was thought to conceive a 
child as the result of “sexual intercourse” with a male supernatural entity 
or god, and without the involvement of a human male. The numerous 
stories of unions between women and gods in Greek mythology and 
legend indicate that this form of hieros gamos became the most 
                                                           
19 For a discussion of this feature of the Eleusinian Mysteries see Harrison: 562-64. 

When Spirit Possession is Sexual Encounter 
17 
widespread method for achieving what was believed to be miraculous birth 
in the incipient days of Greek culture. The women involved are depicted 
as either mortals or “nymphs.” Mortal women who engaged in such unions 
were generally honoured as “heroines,” a status that afforded them divine 
honours upon their death. The term nymph referred to a low-level female 
divinity, generally a nature spirit. Many such nymphs were also honoured 
in cult. I believe there is evidence that “heroine” or “nymph” status in fact 
was a posthumous cultic marker for the priestess who was believed to have 
borne the child of a god.  
The influence of patriarchy on the divine birth cult of this era can be 
seen in the fact that women’s supposed unions with gods nearly always 
resulted in the production of male figures who promoted the patriarchal 
values of the Greek state and of Zeus-centred Olympian religion. Often 
these purported children grew to become founders of a lineage or city-
state––that is, they were “heroes,” which means they were generally 
warriors in service to the patriarchy. Indeed, such male figures were seen 
to be the very incarnations of the patriarchal Olympian gods themselves. 
Speaking of the phenomenon of father/son divine pairs a bit further afield 
in Phrygia, Ramsay illuminates this phenomenon, noting, “the father and 
the son […] are merely complementary forms of the single ultimate form 
of the divinity as male,” and “the character and personality of the God-
father and God-son pass into one another in such a way in the divine tale 
or drama, that no clear line can be drawn to separate them.”20 We see this 
exemplified, for example, in the story of Heracles, the supposed son of 
Zeus by the mortal woman Alcmene.21 The rare female progenies of 
purported hieros gamos couplings are often depicted as themselves later 
engaging in hieros gamos unions with gods, indicating that they may have 
been considered part of hereditary lineages of divine birth priestesses.  
Stories of unions between mortals/“nymphs” and gods also frequently 
express a common theme: the encounter with the god was often considered 
a violation or rape. Sometimes the union was also violently opposed by the 
“goddess” to whom the priestess was in service––frequently Athena, 
Artemis, or Hera, who I argue were originally considered parthenogenetic 
beings themselves. That is, union with male gods was strictly forbidden 
from the perspective of the old order. Yet such stories occurred in liminal 
contexts in which the goddess had already become subsumed into the 
Olympian pantheon, no longer as an independent parthenogenetic being, 
but as a daughter or wife of the new male creator god, Zeus. I thus suggest 
these stories indicate a time of transition and conflict during which 
                                                           
20 Ramsay: 1.34, 1.40. 
21 Rigoglioso 2009: 126. 

Chapter One 
 
18
priestesses from the pure parthenogenetic tradition may have been 
pressured into performing hieros gamos in order to produce what was 
believed to be the holy progeny who would advance the cause of Zeus and 
the other male gods. It was a pressure that at times these priestesses 
apparently vehemently resisted.  
But there was, in some cases, ambivalence. The stories hint that 
engaging in hieros gamos with a god was thought to be a profoundly 
pleasurable sexual experience, one that many priestesses may have had 
trouble resisting. Moreover, great social status seems to have accrued to 
women considered to be the mothers of heroes born miraculously, as 
evidenced by the fact that frequently virgin mothers served as the eponyms 
of city-states and of topographical features such as springs and mountains. 
Thus the period of transition to hieros gamos divine birth seems to have 
been a time of confusion, conflict, and broken virginal vows to virgin 
goddesses. 
In hieros gamos stories, I have discerned a secondary non-ordinary 
reproductive process whereby the priestess engaged in what was believed 
to be sacred union with a god using a human male as a “surrogate” for the 
male deity. As in all phases, this no doubt was thought to take place when 
both the male and female actors were in a profound trance state such that 
the deity was believed to manifest and impregnate the priestess through 
the body of the human male. Under such conditions, the child was still 
considered the progeny of the god rather than the man, yet this 
development allowed for the securing of the lineage through the paternal 
line. I propose that a number of Greek myths I discuss in which priestesses 
were said to have had intercourse simultaneously with a “god” and a 
mortal in the same night are indicative of this practice. 
Support for this idea also can be found in one book of the Testaments 
of the Twelve Patriarchs, the Testament of Reuben. This work, which 
dates to the second or third century CE, explains how it is thought that 
angelic beings known as “the Watchers” could copulate with human 
women and beget children: 
As [the Watchers] continued looking at the women, they were filled with 
desire for them and perpetrated the act in their minds. Then they were 
transformed into human males, and while the women were cohabitating 
with their husbands they appeared to them. Since the women’s minds were 
filled with lust for these apparitions, they gave birth to giants. For the 
Watchers were disclosed to them as being as high as the heavens.22 
                                                           
22 Collins: 266. 

When Spirit Possession is Sexual Encounter 
19 
Although this work is mainly Jewish and Christian in nature, it is useful to 
the present argument in that it affirms the existence of an esoteric belief in 
antiquity that women could be “visited” in the trance state by male beings 
who possessed the power to impregnate them. What is described here is 
the mechanism by which this was thought to take place: the male beings 
“mentally” transformed themselves into the images of human males and 
inserted themselves into the women’s erotic fantasies activated during 
intercourse. It is these incorporeal beings, not the human males, who were 
understood to be the “true” fathers of children conceived in this way. This 
suggests that such beings were also understood to insert themselves into 
the precise physical substances exchanged during the conception 
process.23 
Hieros gamos by surrogate fully put the practice of divine birth under 
the control of the patriarchy, as it placed the benefits associated with 
claims of divine birth in the male lineage. That is, in the earlier condition 
of hieros gamos divine birth, when no human male was involved, the 
prestige presumably would have rested with the purported mother alone. 
In this new situation, however, the divine child was arrogated to the sphere 
of a male “father.” The mother involved was thereby also made the 
property of this male. Moreover, the new arrangement guaranteed the 
retention of privileges associated with the “divine child” even if somehow 
the human performers believed they had failed in their mission to evoke 
the god. In other words, even if the male actor believed he had not been 
able to incorporate the god during sexual union––which would mean that 
the child was merely humanly, not divinely conceived––the claim of 
divine impregnation would have been maintained. Thus both the male 
surrogate and his male progeny would still have enjoyed sacred status and 
its associated political privileges. 
Divine birth as an erotic act 
My reflections on this material have led me to conjecture that, in their 
essence, all types of attempted pure parthenogenesis and hieros gamos 
divine birth must have been considered to be profoundly erotic 
experiences. I posit that in the case of pure parthenogenesis, conception 
was thought to be a condition achieved through the most true form of 
entheos possible: the literal becoming as one with the goddess. This, I 
contend, was thought to be a powerful sensual/sexual experience in which 
                                                           
23 For evidence that Egyptian queen mothers similarly engaged in hieros gamos by 
surrogate to conceive pharaohs, see Rigoglioso 2007: 70-94. 

Chapter One 
 
20
the woman aligned herself with what was arguably considered to be the 
ontologically sexual nature of cosmos itself. I will even go so far as to 
speculate that the orgasm was considered the critical event thought to 
instigate the meiosis of the woman’s ovum. 
We find evidence for this line of reasoning in the aforementioned 
excerpt from the Gnostic Revelation of Adam. There we see affirmation of 
an ancient belief that women’s practice of pure parthenogenesis involved a 
highly erotic component. As we will recall from that tractate, the woman 
who sat on the mountain to conceive the saviour entered a state in which 
she “desired her own body in order to become androgynous.” The text 
goes on to tell us that “[s]he fulfilled her desire and became pregnant from 
her desire.”24 In other words, it is indeed autoerotic desire that is the 
critical element believed to create the condition in which parthenogenetic 
conception could occur. But what is described here is much more than 
mere masturbation. Rather, the process is one whereby the woman must 
become as one with the generative power of the universe, as I suggested 
above: as the text conveys this, she must “become androgynous.” That 
process, according to the author of this description, involves the 
“fulfilling” of desire––the experience of sexual ecstasy. 
In cases of hieros gamos divine birth, the idea of impregnation by a 
god implies some form of sexual contact between human female and 
divine male, as the numerous myths to be explored make plain. 
Anthropologically, the intensely sexual nature of women priestesses’ 
relationships in situations of so-called “spirit possession” by male deities 
has been amply attested across a wide array of cultures in contemporary 
times, for example, Lewis. Quoting Ernest Jones, he writes, “the notion 
that sexual intercourse can occur between mortals and supernatural beings 
is one of the most widespread of human beliefs.”25 As to hieros gamos by 
surrogate, in which an actual human male may have been involved, the 
erotic element is clear. 
Thus I am proposing that divine conception, far from having been 
considered a non-erotic act, may have been thought to include an 
embodied dimension, indeed, in which spirit and matter, human and 
divine, sexuality and the sacred were thought to be related and interacted 
in ways that are, by and large, no longer considered possible or viable 
outside of certain esoteric circles. In this way, my argument may provide 
new theoretical avenues for resolving the spirit/body dualism more fully 
than before. Rather than emphasizing restrictive and polarised ideas of 
                                                           
24 In Barnstone and Meyer: 187. 
25 Lewis: 57-64. More recently, Donald Tyson has written of his own purported 
sexual encounters with disembodied entities, which he describes as intensely erotic. 

When Spirit Possession is Sexual Encounter 
21 
sexuality, then, this study may in fact lead to more expansive ideas about 
the nature of sexuality and the erotic capacities of women. 
Bibliography 
Avagianou, A. A. (2008) “Hieros Gamos in Ancient Greek Religion” in 
Martti Nissinen & Risto Uro (eds) Sacred Marriages: The Divine-
Human Metaphor from Sumer to Early Christianity (Winona Lake, IN: 
Eisenbrauns) 145-71. 
Barnstone, W. & M. Meyer (2006) The Gnostic Bible (Boston, MA: 
Shambhala) 
Collins, J. J. (2008) “The Sons of God and the Daughters of Men” in 
Martti Nissinen and Risto Uro (eds) Sacred Marriages: The Divine-
Human Sexual Metaphor from Sumer to early Christianity (Winona 
Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns) 259-74. 
Cook, A. B. (1914-1940) Zeus: A Study in Ancient Religion, 3 vols 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). 
Corradini, A. (1997) Meteres: Il Mito del Matriarchato in Sicilia (Enna, 
Sicily: Papiro Editrice). 
Eyer, S. (1993) “Psychedelic Effects and the Eleusinian Mysteries”, 
Alexandria, 2: 65-93. 
Farnell, L. R. (1977) The Cults of the Greek States, 5 vols (New Rochelle, 
NY: Caratzas Brothers). 
Goff, B. (2004) Citizen Bacchae: Women’s Ritual Practice in Ancient 
Greece (Berkeley: University of California Press). 
Harrison, J. (1957) Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion (New 
York: Meridian). 
Hillman, D. C. A. (2008) The Chemical Muse: Drug Use and the Roots of 
Western Civilization (New York: Thomas Dunne). 
Iamblichus (1911) Theurgia or On the mysteries of Egypt trans. Alexander 
Wilder (New York: Metaphysical)  
http://www.esotericarchives.com/oracle/iambl_th.htm 
(accessed November, 2012). 
Lewis, I. M. (1971) Ecstatic Religion: An Anthropological Study of Spirit 
Possession and Shamanism (Middlesex, UK: Penguin). 
Lezzi-Haftner, A. (1988a) Der Eretria-Maler 2 vols (Rhein: Mainz). 
—. (1988b) “Anthesterien und hieros gamos. Ein choenbild des Methyse-
Malers” in Jette Christiansen and Torben Melander (eds) Proceedings 
of the 3rd Symposium on Ancient and Related Pottery (Copenhagen: 
Nationalmuseet) 325-35. 

Chapter One 
 
22
Neumann, E. (1963) The Great Mother: An Analysis of the Archetype 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press). 
Nilsson, M. P. (1932) The Mycenaean origin of Greek Mythology (New 
York: W. W. Norton). 
Nissinen, M. & R. Uro (2008) Sacred Marriages: The Divine-Human 
Sexual Metaphor from Sumer to Early Christianity (Winona Lake, IN: 
Eisenbrauns). 
Plato (1925) Plato in twelve volumes trans. W. R. M. Lamb (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press). 
Ramsay, S. W. M. (1895) The Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia, 2 vols. 
(Oxford: Clarendon). 
Rigoglioso, M. (2008) Bearing the Holy Ones: A Study of the Cult of 
Divine Birth in Ancient Greece PhD diss., California Institute of 
Integral Studies, San Francisco (Dissertation Abstracts International, 
publ. nr. AAT 3286688, DAI-A 68/10). 
—. (2009) The Cult of Divine Birth in Ancient Greece (New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan). 
—. (2010) Virgin Mother Goddesses of Antiquity (New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan). 
Ruck, C. A. P., J. Bigwood, D. Staples, J. Ott & G. Wasson (1979) 
“Entheogens”, Journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 11.1-2: 145-46. 
Schüssler Fiorenza, E. (1983) In Memory of Her: A Feminist Theological 
Reconstruction of Christian Origins (New York: Crossroad). 
Spencer, H. (1969) Principles of Sociology (Hamden, CT: J. Archon). 
Tyson, D. (2000) Sexual Alchemy: Magical Intercourse with Spirits (St. 
Paul, MN: Llewellyn Publications). 
Wasson, G. R., A. Hoffman & C. A. P. Ruck (1978) The Road to Eleusis: 
Unveiling the Secret of the Mysteries (New York: Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovitch). 
 

CHAPTER TWO 
ENCOUNTERS AT THE TOMB: 
VISUALIZING THE INVISIBLE  
IN ATTIC VASE PAINTING 
DIANA RODRÍGUEZ PÉREZ 
 
 
 
In modern historiography it is often stated that in the ancient Greek 
world the snake embodied the soul of the departed. Martin Nilsson1 
believes the snake is the only animal in antiquity that might have played 
this role—that of soul animal. In his comprehensive book on the early 
Greek concept of the soul, published in 1983, Jan Bremmer accepted this 
idea, at least in relation to the archaic Greek world. Nevertheless, as he 
remarks: “The classical discussions of the snake as the soul of the dead 
are not satisfactory for the investigation, since they use the term “soul” 
without reflecting on the relationship between the psyche as the soul of 
the dead and the snake. If the deceased was normally thought to be 
represented by the psyche in the underworld, what then was the position 
of the snake?”2 
We encounter a similar problem in iconography when there is an 
explicit psyche or “soul” depicted on a vase. Are we also to understand 
the snake as a symbol of the dead, or as a “soul animal”? If a 
relationship existed between the snake and the deceased, or with the 
realm of dead, it is not clear yet (if it ever will be) what this specific 
relationship was. The problem consists in defining whether, within the 
wide frame of the chthonic and funerary symbolism of the snake in the 
ancient Greek world, it is possible to assume a particular and specific 
connection between the snake and the soul of the departed. Adopting an 
iconographical approach, I am going to focus here on a number of vases 
by the Leagros Group from the end of the sixth century BCE, which 
                                                           
1 Nilsson 1955. 
2 Bremmer: 81. 

Chapter Two 
 
24
reflect a momentous passage from the Iliad: the dragging of Hector’s 
corpse by Achilles at Troy. A recurrent iconographical detail in these 
scenes is Patroclos’ funerary tumulus, very often painted in white, on 
which a snake is depicted. A third element linked with the tumulus is the 
eidolon. This is a little image the function of which will be discussed 
below. This group of painters, active in the last decades of the sixth 
century (520-500 BCE), favoured big vases like hydriai, amphorae and 
kraters, and were contemporaries of the group already working with the 
new red-figure technique. These depictions can be divided into two 
groups: Achilles’ chariot standing still and Achilles’ chariot rushing 
forwards at full speed. 
The snake at the tomb: Trojan scenes 
A good example of this group is a black-figured Athenian hydria in 
Munich (figs. 2-1, 2-2).3 It dates from 510 BCE and illustrates the snake 
theme on the shoulder of the vase. In the middle of the scene stands 
Achilles’ chariot facing left, drawn by four horses. The driver, dressed in a 
long white robe, has already taken his place and is ready to start. Behind 
the chariot there is a naked body of a dead, bearded man, lying on his 
back, his arms stretched backwards and his legs lashed to the hub of the 
wheel: this is Hector’s corpse. Beside him the warrior, Achilles, armed 
with greaves, shield and helmet, is leaning on his lance. He appears to be 
looking at the dead man. To the right we find the domed tumulus of 
Patroclus, painted white, on which a bearded snake coils with mouth wide 
open. On the tumulus a small eidolon is depicted. From the left a winged 
woman with a herald’s staff enters the scene: she is Iris. The portrayal of 
the snake is not very different from that of another snake on the same vase, 
this time on Geryon’s shield. 
The next vase is a black-figured lekythos in the Museum of Delos also 
belonging to the Leagros Group.4 The scheme is very similar but here Iris 
has come right up to the chariot and with her outstretched hands she seems 
to address the standing warrior. The empty space between the mound and 
the horses has been filled up with a little winged eidolon. 
 
                                                           
3 Staatliche Antikensammlungen und Glyptothek, München 1719. ABV 361.13; 
BADN 302008; Friss Johansen: 139, f.48; Latacz et al.: 380; Stähler: 69, n.11. 
4 Museum of Delos B6137.546; ABV 378.257; BADN 302338; Friss Johansen: 
139; Stähler: 69, n.11. 

Encounters at the Tomb 
25 
 
 
Fig. 2-1 Detail of Athenian hydria  
 
 
 
Fig. 2-2 Athenian hydria  
 
The third vase in this group is a black-figured amphora by the Priam 
Painter from Vulci now housed in the British Museum (fig. 2-3).5 In this 
case we have inscriptions that clarify the scene depicted. The chariot faces 
left, whilst the charioteer, Automedon, is harnessing the horses and ready 
                                                           
5 London, BM 1899,0721.3; ABV 330.2; Friss Johansen: 139, fig.49; Stähler: n.10. 

Chapter Two 
 
26
to set them in motion. Behind him Achilles, naked and armed with shield, 
spear, greaves and helmet, bends over Hector’s dead body which is facing 
upwards. Beyond these figures there is a funerary mound, painted white, on 
which there is a beardless snake looking down at the corpse in a manner that 
echoes Achilles’ gaze. On the mound there is an inscription that names the 
dead body as Hector. Above it hovers Patroclus’ little eidolon, armed and 
wingless, also identified by the corresponding inscription. 
 
 
 
Fig. 2-3 Athenian amphora  
 
The second group of representations, more numerous, shows Achilles in his 
chariot at full speed. The principal images show the chariot, Achilles, 
Hector’s corpse, the mound, the snake and the eidolon. I will not present a 
detailed iconographical description of the vases here as the pattern is similar 
throughout except for some additional features that appear in some of them. 
The following vases belong to this group: a lekythos in the Metropolitan 
Museum of New York6 showing the chariot being drawn by four horses 
                                                           
6 Friss Johansen: 265 n.18n; Stähler: 69, n.5; Vermeule: 38, fig.6. 

Encounters at the Tomb 
27 
galloping at full speed to the right, a lekythos in the Louvre by the Diosphos 
Painter,7 a black-figured lekythos in Naples8 and a neck-amphora from Vulci 
in the British Museum (fig. 2-4).9 On a lekythos from the Hope Collection in 
Cambridge,10 also by the Leagros Group, the snake is absent and an 
additional figure, a fallen warrior lying beneath the horses, has been 
included in the scene—a feature taken from battle scenes. On a black-
figured neck-amphora from Berlin11 the scene has already developed and 
Achilles is oddly running towards the chariot. Some of these vases also 
show discrepancies in the location of the iconographical elements, which are 
sometimes displaced in order to fill up the empty space of the vase. 
 
 
 
Fig. 2-4 Neck amphora from Vulci  
                                                           
7 Paris, Louvre Ca601; Friss Johansen: 147, 265, n.180; Stähler: 68, n.7. 
8 ABV 378.259; BADN 302339; Friss Johansen: 144, 265, n.18k; Stähler: 68, n.4. 
9 London, BM B239; ABV 371.147; BADN 302142; Friss Johansen: 144, 26, 
n.18f; Stähler: 68, n.1. 
10 Cambridge, Fitzwilliam Museum GR2.1955; ABV 378.259; BADN 302340; 
Friss Johansen: 146-147, 265, 18i; Stähler: 68, n.3. 
11 Berlin, Antikensammlung F1867, ABV 371.148; Friss Johansen: 147, 265, 18g; 
Stähler: 68, n.2; Grabow: 151 (K98). 

Chapter Two 
 
28
A well-preserved hydria in Boston (fig. 2-5) is important because it brings 
two different episodes from the Iliad into a single impossible moment, the 
passage in book 22, 405ff., in which Priam and Hekabe witness the 
dragging of their son’s body from the Dardanian Gate, and the episode a 
little later in the poem, when Iris comes rushing into the scene towards 
Achilles carrying a message from Zeus.12 The vase also depicts the motif 
we are analysing as to the right of the scene we find a big white tumulus 
with a snake, and the psyche on top of it.  
 
 
Fig. 2-5 Black-figure hydria 
 
Finally, a vase in Münster is worthy of mention because it repeats the 
same pattern, although the snake in the tumulus has now disappeared and 
in its place is a lion.13 Over the tumulus hovers Patroclus’ soul, identified 
by the inscription “Psyche”. 
The psyche 
At this point, it is useful to consider what the psyche represents and its 
significance in the Homeric poems, in order to better understand the 
images. To this end, I follow the research of Stähler, Pfeifer and 
Bremmer.The inscription “psyche” that usually stands next to the tomb in 
                                                           
12 Boston, Museum of Fine Arts 63.473, published by Vermeule: 34-52; Friss 
Johansen: 150, 265, 18h; Stähler: 69, n.15; Shapiro: 30-32.  
13 Münster, Archäologisches Museum der Universität, 565. 
 

Encounters at the Tomb 
29 
these vases refers to a small figure and identifies it as the soul of Patroclus 
which is armed as he was when alive. In the Homeric Poems, the psyche is 
the soul of the dead in the sense of “spirit of death” (totenseele) or even 
“apparition” (seelengespenst) or “living corpse” (lebender leichman) and, 
according to Bremmer’s research, it derives from the liberated soul of the 
living.14 That is to say, the soul of the living would eventually become the 
soul of the dead, the psyche, made visible through the eidolon, which 
consists of a small image that adopts the features of the deceased while 
still alive. The soul of the dead no longer has the characteristics and 
psychological traits, the thymos, noos and menos,15 of the soul of the 
living. Instead it is much more like a ghost closely related to the corpse, a 
daseinform that endures after death. 
In the Homeric Poems, after death this soul goes immediately to 
Hades. However, until the burial, or more specifically, until the destruction 
of the body through fire, there are still some ties between the psyche and 
the living, and that is why Patroclus can appear in front of Achilles or 
Elpenor can beg Odysseus for a burial. With the destruction of the body, 
this link is destroyed and souls will forever remain in Hades as powerless 
shades of what they once were.  
The differences between the Homeric text and the vases are evident. 
The tymbos signals that the burial has already taken place but the psyche is 
still present at the tomb, in a clear opposition to the Homeric account. This 
fact has puzzled scholars and has been explained in the light of both pre- 
and post- Homeric traditions. This belief—the endurance of the soul at the 
tomb—is to be found in the tragedies of Aeschylus, when Darius’ ghost 
appears,16 or in the emotive scene when Orestes and Electra call upon their 
murdered father’s soul. A passage in Plato17 makes Stähler think that the 
belief in the endurance of the psyche in the tomb is an old folktale.18 
According to Rohde, the belief in the ghost in the tomb would have been 
more primitive than the belief in Hades, although in Homeric times this 
idea had already diminished in popularity.19 Therefore the vases depicting 
a Homeric scene would offer a glimpse into a popular belief not recorded 
in the literary sources. However, what could be a problem if approached 
from the sole point of view of philology or history of religion is not really 
such if we approach it from the angle of iconography. In this way, it is not 
                                                           
14 Bremmer: 73. 
15 Bremmer: 74. 
16 Aeschylus, Persians 681ff. 
17 Plato, Phaedrus 81,c-d. 
18 Stähler: 26. 
19 Stähler: 30. 

Chapter Two 
 
30
difficult to find a probable reason for the depiction of Patroclus’ psyche in 
the form of an eidolon next to the tomb; it is there to receive Achilles’ 
honours, i.e. Hector’s corpse. The eidola appear in the scene because, 
through them, the painter confirms and makes visible the fact that the 
ghost accepts the tributes that are being paid to him. It is also useful to 
remember that the soul usually lingers on for a while near the tomb, since 
it does not begin an afterlife immediately after death and there is some 
delay in its transition. Only after the completion of the funerary rites did it 
enter Hades forever. Significantly, Bremmer alludes to the vases as an 
example of this idea.20 However, if we are to understand that the eidolon is 
the visual depiction of the soul of the dead, what then is the snake? 
Other vases with snakes and tombs 
In addition to the vases where the snake appears on Patroclus’ tomb, there 
are some other works that repeat a similar pattern and which can throw 
light on the meaning attached to the serpent in this field of Greek religion. 
Also by the Leagros Group we have a black-figured hydria now 
housed in Berlin, which is worth mentioning (fig. 2-6).21 The scene depicts 
the moment before the sacrifice of Polyxene by Neoptolemos at Achilles’ 
tomb. To the left, there are four horses surrounded by three warriors, two 
of them armed with spear and shield. Next to them, Polyxene raises her 
left hand to her cheek in sorrow while she is being carried by Neoptolemos 
to her destiny. In front of her there is a high funerary tomb, painted white. 
Above it flies the eidolon. Two more elements are also related to the 
tumulus: the snake and, this time, a dog. The snake, hissing, raises its head 
up as if observing and in thanks for the offering that is about to take place. 
The dog is also looking up, as if it is about to jump. The vase is interesting 
because it introduces another problem that is relevant for our research and 
one which will be addressed later, namely, the dimension of reality which 
the animals depicted on the vase are intended to occupy. 
Painted on a tomb in Nîmes, behind a charioteer with a Boeotian shield 
on a hydria, again by the Leagros Group, we see a snake, with another one 
portrayed on a small fragment of a cup from the Athenian agora, probably 
from the second quarter of the fifth century BCE, on which can be seen 
what appears to be the end of the coil of a snake.22 Unfortunately, the 
fragmentary condition of the piece does not allow us to reconstruct the 
scene further.  
                                                           
20 Bremmer: 92. 
21 ABV 363.37; BADN 302032. 
22 Athens, Agora Museum, P22326; BADN 25257. 

Encounters at the Tomb 
31 
 
 
Fig. 2-6 Black-figure hydria 
 
The same iconography appears on a black-figured lekythos dated to 
480-470 BCE in Naples (fig. 2-7).23 Here the tomb takes the form of a 
mound with a conical baetyl on top. A woman is approaching a bearded 
hoplite who has drawn his sword and is moving towards the tomb. To the 
right we find a second hoplite and a bearded man leaning on a stick. Jane 
Harrison could not see any mythological sense in the image and suggests 
“that some ceremony is being enacted at a tomb between two men, and 
presumably the ceremony is of the nature of a pact ratified by an oath”.24 
Prag, and before him, Jacobsthal, did see a mythological story here, that of 
Orestes and Electra at the tomb of Agamemnon.25 The scene would reflect 
the moment that Electra urges her brother on to dedicate his sword to the 
spirit of their father and to proceed with their revenge. Although there are 
some problems with this identification, relevant for us is the presence of 
the tomb mound and the snake painted on it.  
 
                                                           
23 Drawing after Harrison: 228. 
24 Harrison: 229. 
25 Prag: 56.  

Chapter Two 
 
32
 
Fig. 2-7 Drawing of a black-figured lekythos 
 
Besides the mythological realm, there are various other depictions of 
tombs and snakes. One appears on a famous kantharos (a one-handled 
type of vase in an Etruscan shape) by the Perizoma Group in Paris, which 
also dates from the end of the sixth century (fig. 2-8).26 It is one of the 
very few extant representations of the rite of “the third day” or ekphora, 
when, before sunrise on the third day after death, the dead are carried to 
the grave in a quiet procession. This time the parade is accompanied by a 
warrior dance that may reflect a custom of the Etruscans, for whose tombs 
these vases were intended.27 The dead man, who is completely covered up 
to his head, is being taken to the tomb, which is marked on the vase by the 
quadrangular shaped mound. On the white painting, a snake and a little 
tree have been added. There is also an oval shape thought to depict the air 
hole for the cremation of the body inside the mound. This vase forms a 
group of three together with another two one-handled kantharoi,28 all of 
which come from Etruscan sites. 
The snake only appears in the piece reproduced here. On the second 
kantharos, housed in Paris,29 a hedgehog replaces the snake and is flanked 
by plants, whilst a mule cart carries the dead. On the kantharos in Basel, 
                                                           
26 Paris, Cabinet des Medailles 353; ABV 346.7; BADN 301934; Kurtz and 
Boardman: 145, pl.35. 
27 Shapiro: 320. 
28 One is in Basel (Market, Munzen und Medaillen a.G., Xxxx0641641, BADN 
641). The second one is in Paris (Cabinet des Medailles, 355; BADN 301935); 
Grabow: 148, K97; Kurtz and Boardman: 145, pl.36. 
29 Paris, Cabinet des Medailles 355. 

Encounters at the Tomb 
33 
two eidola hover over the tomb, both winged and dressed. The tymbos 
adopts an oval shape and some plants can be seen painted on it. 
 
 
 
Fig. 2-8 One-handled class kantharos 
 
There is one more vase that repeats a similar iconography: a black-figured 
loutrophoros in Athens by the Sappho Painter,30 dated to 450 BCE (fig. 2-
9).31 On the neck of the vase two women stand by a grave mound topped 
by a vase of the same typology, while the body of the vase shows the 
coffin being lowered into the ground. On the mound painted on the neck 
four flying eidola and a snake are depicted.  
 
                                                           
30 Athens, NM Cc688; BADN 480; Kurtz and Boardman: 145, pl.36; Harrison: 
219, fig.4; Peifer: 158, Abb.13; Kurtz: 321, fig.4a. 
31 Drawing after Harrison: 219. 

Chapter Two 
 
34
 
 
Fig. 2-9 Black-figured loutrophoros 
Finding a meaning for the snake at the tomb 
Taking into account all these examples I will now try to place the snake 
within the context of these vases and suggest a possible reason for its 
presence at the tomb. Despite the differences in the various narrations, the 
snake and the tomb are unifying aspects throughout all of them. 
From an iconographical point of view, the snake is of a considerable 
size. It is depicted as both bearded and beardless and, on four occasions, it 
looks in the same direction as the flying eidolon. Typically, it raises its 
body and opens its mouth in a heraldic position that does not differ much 
from the portrayal of other snakes in scenes on the same vase (for example 
on the hydria in München, 1719). Nobody in the scene seems to be aware 
of their existence: both the eidolon and the snake seem to be silent 
spectators of the action, extra narrative signs used by the vase painter; as 
mentioned above, the presence of the eidolon would mark the acceptance 
of the honours by the dead. This also applies to the other vases from the 
Leagros Group. On the amphora by the Priam Painter (BM 99.7-21.3) 
there is a curious feature. Both the eidolon and the snake look calmly in 
the same direction as Achilles, towards Hector’s body, forming a quiet and 
solemn centripetal composition. When we look at other vases such as the 
Athenian loutrophoros one has the feeling that the painter is trying to 

Encounters at the Tomb 
35 
show what, to his mind, would be inside the tomb, that is the flying eidola 
and a snake. 
As noted above, one of the problems we face when interpreting these 
vases is the intended degree of reality of the snakes depicted on them, i.e. 
their “status”. Are they are intended as a real aspect of the contemporary 
tumuli, recording the actual paintings on the tomb or sculptures placed 
nearby, or are they the painter’s interpretation of what he thought was 
inside the tomb, as it would seem in the Athenian loutrophoros? Another 
possibility would be to see the snake as a sign used by the painter for 
purposes of identification, taking advantage of the wide funerary 
symbolism available, in order to make it clear that the tumulus was 
actually a tomb. The snake then becomes simply one visual element, albeit 
a meaningful one. Let us assess these possibilities. 
The snake reflecting the contents of the tomb 
Peifer says about the loutrophoros in Athens that “on the tomb the painter 
has painted what, to his mind, there was inside” (i.e., the snake and the 
eidola).32 He understands both depictions as symbols of the dead. In his 
opinion, the dual nature of Greek beliefs on death would come together 
here. The soul of the departed as a snake is an idea that seems to derive 
from belief in a household snake, which can be traced back as far as the 
Minoan world. In Crete, snakes could be seen around the hearths, where 
they gathered, attracted by the warmth, as they still do today.33 They were 
usually harmless and came to be perceived as good for the house whose 
prosperity was associated with them. It was forbidden to kill them and 
they were fed with sprinkled breadcrumbs, honey or a libation of milk. 
Later, they may have been seen as related to an ancestor of the 
householder who returned to the house to bring prosperity, although this 
development is not certain.34 
However, the literary sources linking the snake and the dead come 
much later and are mostly rooted in Roman traditions. For example, Pliny 
the Elder reports the following: “We find it stated by many authors, that a 
serpent is produced from the spinal marrow of a man. Many creatures, in 
fact, among the quadrupeds even, have a secret and mysterious origin.”35 
In another important passage, Plutarch explains that after the death of 
the King of Sparta, Cleomenes III (235-222 BCE), a huge snake appeared, 
                                                           
32 Peifer: 158; Harrison: 219. 
33 Egli: 21ff. 
34 Nilsson 1949: 328-329. 
35 Pliny: X, 86, 67. The same belief is found in Ovid: XV, 389. 

Chapter Two 
 
36
coiling itself about his body, which was taken as a sign that the man was 
of a superior nature and beloved by the gods. This idea was refuted by the 
wise men who explained that putrefying bodies produce several kinds of 
insects and worms. In antiquity, people believed in spontaneous generation 
and it was thought that these maggots formed naturally from rotting meat. 
Aelian36 also refers to the belief that the marrow changes into a snake, and 
he highlights the concept of morality by affirming that it is only the 
marrow of bad men which allows these creatures to grow as a punishment 
for their bad actions. Therefore, there would seem to be a relationship 
between the snake and the soul of the departed, or, more specifically, with 
its rotting body, with the corpse. 
In our vases, it seems clear that what is being equated with the psyche of 
the dead is the small figure, the eidolon, sometimes expressly labelled as 
psyche. Sometimes the inscription Patroklos also appears. I do not think that 
two psychai are intended here, and hence I would rule out the hypothesis 
that on these vases the snake necessarily represents the soul of the dead. 
The snake outside the tomb 
Grabow thinks that the snakes on the vases must not be taken as mere 
artistic licence but as images of real snakes. She interprets the lion on the 
vase in Münster as a statue at the tomb.37 The role of lions as guardians of 
temples and doors is well known and they also appear in the Attic world as 
protectors of the dead, guaranteeing the impregnable nature of the burial 
place. Chronologically, this work would be the last of the series of vases 
that depict the dragging of Hector’s body and the first that substitutes the 
snake for the lion (a statue, to Grabow’s mind). Therefore, she thinks that 
before that date, the snake was charged with the guardian role.38 She 
believes that, although there are no preserved remains, snakes could have 
been used in the figurative painting of the tumulus to signal the 
inviolability of the area. 
 
 
                                                           
36 Aelian: I, 51. 
37 Grabow: 156 
38 Grabow: 156. 

Encounters at the Tomb 
37 
Funerary earth mounds were quite common in archaic Attica, located 
above both inhumation and cremation graves, and were normally crowned 
by vases or sculpture. They were covered and protected by plaster, which 
also functioned as a means of retaining the shape of the mound.39 These 
tombs are very likely to have received plaques painted by leading artists of 
the day with scenes of the laying out of the dead and lamentation. Some of 
them have been found, although not in situ.40 
Animals also seem to have been used to mark the tombs, at least in 
Athens—among them are bulls, dogs, eagles and lions. Lions are seen as 
markers from 600 BCE, according to Boardman and Kurtz.41 They were 
chosen specially for the communal tombs of those killed in battle and they 
are also often referred to in epitaphs. A lion was placed as a guardian of 
the tomb of the fallen Greeks who fought at Thermopiles, and a lion also 
surmounted Leonidas’ tomb. But contrary to what might be expected the 
snakes do not appear as tomb monuments. They are undoubtedly related to 
the dead and their realm but do not seem to have been regarded 
appropriate for individual monuments.  
This is surprising because this animal was charged with a very 
important role as a “guardian of the sacred” in the ancient Greek world, 
one which is attested by numerous myths and images. This belief derives 
from the acute sense of sight of a particular kind of ophidian referred to as 
drakon. From earliest times these animals—thought to be sleepless—were 
considered the most suitable ones for watching over treasured possessions, 
and their love for gold is found in the folklore of many different peoples, 
from India to the tiniest villages in Galicia, northwest Spain. This is the 
reason why the objects or places which were most cherished by Greek 
heroes or gods—such as the Golden Fleece, Golden Apples, the Delphic 
Oracle—were guarded by these animals and why even the fate of the most 
important Greek polis, Athens, depended on the lust of this uncanny 
reptile.42 Likewise, many Indo-European creation myths feature snakes as 
miserly creatures, holding the primeval waters and avoiding the creation of 
the world.43 They are usually reluctant to move and align themselves with 
the lazy, old and sleepy gods who gave birth to the world long ago and 
who are now being disturbed by active young gods who desire to move the 
world or creation forward. 
                                                           
39 Kurtz and Boardman: 79ff. 
40 Kurtz and Boardman: 82ff. 
41 Kurtz and Boardman: 239. 
42 Rodríguez 2010. 
43 Rodríguez 2008.  

Chapter Two 
 
38
Conclusion 
Where do all these remarks leave us with regard to our vases? Taking the 
above into consideration, my feeling is that it is not possible to conclude 
that the snake depicted in the tumulus is meant to embody the soul of the 
departed, but rather that it is a visual sign, a marker, used by the vase 
painter to clarify that what it is being illustrated on the vase is a tomb. It is 
indeed one of the most suitable animals to be depicted in the tumuli, in the 
same way that it was extensively figured in the fountain houses (mainly on 
the pediments) of contemporary hydrias by, for example, the Antimenes 
Painter. Decorative as it may be, it was not without significance, and its 
very meaning and multifaceted nature within Greek culture confirms my 
assumption. The snake, due to its behaviour and elemental biological 
characteristics, is steeped in associations. Some of its features and all the 
beliefs and superstitions derived from them relate it to the underworld and 
the earth, but not specifically as the embodiment of the soul. The 
sacredness perceived in it has to do with the aspects of the earth we hold 
as sacred, such as the eternal repetition of life in an endless and everlasting 
regeneration. The earth is that “which has always been there”, the first 
creation to come into existence after chaos in Hesiod’s Theogony—and 
this role is also transferred to the snake. It is autochthonous; it is “inside” 
and confronts the new gods, the “outsiders”. The earth, the homeland, 
becomes the centre and reference for the Greek citizen, a fundamental key 
in various political discourses of autochthony. Also the snake was always 
before; it stands for the earth and chthonian knowledge in many initiation 
myths—such as the Python at Delphi or Ladon, or the sleepless snake in 
the Garden of the Hesperides. Various earthly monsters—such as the 
Giants, or Typhon—were always painted in the form of snakes, but so was 
the famous Kekrops, the culture-hero ancestor of the Athenians who was 
born from the Earth and had a serpent’s tail instead of legs. In the same 
way, the snake was often linked to many gods, acting as an epiphany, 
theophany or hierophany of the divine entity that circumscribed their 
“field of action” without being the exact symbol of any of them. The 
relationship between snake and gods is a strange one that we can only 
summarise here by saying that, somehow, when gods became men, when 
they were uprooted, the snake still remained to reinforce and nuance a 
specific way of being and acting, and a very specific aspect of sacredness. 
It became evident that, in the end, the anthropomorphism and the 
rationality that so strongly oppose the symbolic way of thinking could not 
live up to the Greeks’ expectations. As a chthonic being, the serpent is 
undoubtedly related to the funerary world but more as a guardian animal 

Encounters at the Tomb 
39 
or as an element of initiation, bound to a knowledge of a mystic-chthonic 
kind (as on the famous Sotadean cup in London) than as a symbol of the 
soul of the departed.44 It is a daimonic intermediary to the underworld. The 
soul of the dead does not seem to have been specifically depicted as a 
snake and when the psyche appears on vases, it is clearly represented by 
the image of the eidolon and usually labelled. 
A similar problem arises again on a very heterogeneous group of vases 
from the archaic period on which the snake appears in the surroundings of 
a tomb or almost springing from a recently murdered body. These vases 
deserve a detailed study that exceeds the aims of this work but which 
would undoubtedly complement the case studies I have presented. That 
research would lead us to another slippery slope involving the souls of the 
dead: namely the relationship between the soul, the snake and the Erinys, 
which is a complex area of investigation and not easy to ascertain given 
our current level of knowledge.45 
I am nonetheless aware that in trying to establish all these subtle 
divisions I may have drawn an artificial and awkward line in one of the 
most confusing and unintelligible fields of Greek religion, i.e. the beliefs 
concerning the underworld, by making the same mistake that Jane 
Harrison so openly and vehemently criticised more than a century ago.46 
But I am also conscious that our discipline has evolved greatly and that old 
ideas can and must be assessed and contested from different points of 
view. To my mind, it is all about reaching a middle ground between 
opposite trends of thought, between the positivist approach to the Greek 
culture, which hinders the understanding of anything that is not explicitly 
stated within it, and the more spiritual, human trends which aim to uncover 
what lays behind the visible reality, for example Jungian theories about 
combat myths. We sometimes forget that the subjects we analyse are not 
objective facts at all; they spring from a human mind that was, and is, 
constantly changing. All is a shifting kaleidoscope, not always easy to 
encompass within our modern/rational categories of thought. This is why 
we must apply other methodologies to the study of the snake symbolism in 
the ancient Greek world, and must read between lines and be imaginative, 
to be able to reach a point where the serpent is not taken for granted, but 
without forgetting, too, the special difficulty of the subject for the Greek 
world, whose art was far from being symbolic. 
                                                           
44 The snake usually prevents but may also allow the acquisition of the aletheia, or 
mystic knowledge. 
45 See Iles Johnston. 
46 “There is no greater bar to the understanding of mythology than our modern 
habit of clear analytic thought” (Harrison: 211). 

Chapter Two 
 
40
One must be aware of the danger of drifting into an excessive symbolic 
interpretation of Greek art, while simultaneously paying attention to the 
complex net of meanings signified by the snake, meanings that might, or 
might not, have been consciously intended by the artist. In this regard, the 
snake has always given food for thought and the iconography of the 
serpent with the tumulus also offers suggestive insights into the Greek 
beliefs concerning death and rebirth (as in the Sotadean cup mentioned 
above), and visually links two domed structures of the utmost importance 
for the human being: the womb and the tomb. 
The snake also then has a role to play as far as human fertility is 
concerned: as a universal phallic symbol it is deeply bonded to women’s 
fertility and it is only after being touched by snakes in dreams that a 
number of women affected by long-term infertility could eventually 
conceive in the sacred space of the Asclepeian sanctuaries. Likewise, some 
of the most reputed men of antiquity—among them, Alexander and 
Augustus—were reportedly born from snakes. One of them, according to 
Nicander, stole the plant of immortality from men.47 The snake also has a 
healing power, the pharmakon, i.e. the venom when used in the right 
dosage. It has seen the beginning and the end, for it is the snake that 
encircles the world; it is sapientissima—and therefore involved in mantic 
activities; for only snakes and gods can overcome death.48 The serpent 
works as a daimonic intermediary to the underworld. 
Thus, the iconography of the snake on the tomb is also the visual 
image of the greatest of mysteries, the mystery of life and death. By 
looking at the tomb, we have accessed an alternative reality; we have been 
brought to the unintelligible. The symbol makes sense now. 
Bibliography 
Aelian (1984) Historia de los animals, trans. José María Díaz-Regañón 
López (Madrid: Gredos). 
Beazley Archive Database, www.beazley.ox.ac.uk/index.htm 
(accessed November 2012). 
Beazley, J. D. (1956) Attic Black-figure Vase-painters (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press). 
Bremmer, J. (1983) The Early Greek Concept of the Soul (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press). 
                                                           
47 Nicander, Theriaca 343ff. 
48 Rodríguez Pérez 2011: passim. 

Encounters at the Tomb 
41 
Egli, H. (1982) Das Schlangensymbol. Geschichte, Märchen, Mythos 
(Freiburg im Breisgau: Walter-Verlag Olten).  
Friss Johansen, K. (1967) The Iliad in Early Greek Art (Copenhagen: 
Munksgaard). 
Grabow, E. (1998) Schlangenbilder in der griechischen schwarzfigurigen 
Vasenkunst (Paderborn: Scriptorium). 
Harrison, J. (1899) “Delphica—(A) The Erinys. (B) The Omphalos” 
Journal of Hellenic Studies 19, 205-251. 
Iles Johnston, S. (1999) Restless Dead. Encounters between the Living and 
the Dead in Ancient Greece (Berkeley, Los Angeles: University of 
California). 
Kurtz, D. and J. Boardman (1971) Greek Burial Customs (London: 
Thames and Hudson). 
Kurtz, D. (1984) “Vases for the Dead, an Attic Selection, 750-400 BCE” 
in H. A. G. Brijder (ed.) Ancient Greek and Related Pottery: 
Proceedings of the International Vase Symposium 12-15 April 1984 
(Amsterdam: Allard Pierson Series, pp. 314-328). 
Latacz et al. (2008) Homer. Der Mythos von Troia in Dichtung und Kunst 
(Münster: Hirmer Verlag). 
Nilsson, M. P. (1949) The Minoan-Mycenaean Religion and its Survival in 
Greek Religion (Lund: C.W.K. Gleerup). 
Nilsson, M. P. (1955) Geschichte der Griechischen Religion. Erste Band. 
Die Religion Griechenlands bis auf die Griechische Weltherrschaft 
(München: Beck). 
Ovid (1964) Metamorfosis, trans. Antonio Ruiz de Elvira (Barcelona: 
Alma Mater). 
Peifer, E. (1989) Eidola und andere mit dem Sterben verbundene 
Flügelwesen in der attischen Vasenmalerei in spätarchaischer und 
klassischer Zeit (Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang). 
Pliny (2002) Historia Natural, trans. Josefa Cantó (Madrid: Cátedra). 
Prag, A.J. (1985) The Oresteia. Iconographic and Narrative Tradition 
(Chicago: Bolchazy-Carducci). 
Rodríguez Pérez, D. (2011) “Contextualizing Symbols: ‘The Eagle and the 
Snake’ in the Ancient Greek World”, Boreas.Münstersche Beitrage zur 
Archaeologie 33, 111, 1-18. 
—. (2010) The Snake in the Ancient Greek World: Myth, Rite and Image, 
Ph.D thesis (León: Universidad de León).  
—. (2010) “He took the Behaviour of the Serpent as a Sign from the 
Heaven: An Approach to Athenian Religion”, Thethis. Mannheimer 
Beiträge zur klassischen Archäologie und Geschichte Griechenlands 
und Zyperns 16/17, 29-39. 

Chapter Two 
 
42
—. (2008) Serpientes, dioses y heroes. El combate contra el monstruo en 
el arte y la literatura griega antigua (León: Universidad de León). 
Shapiro, A. (2000) “Modest Athletes and Liberated Women: Etruscan on 
Attic Black-Figure Vases” in B. Cohen (ed.) Not the Classical Ideal. 
Athens and the Construction of the Other in Greek Art (Leiden, 
Boston, Köln: Brill), 313-318. 
Stähler, K. P. (1967) Grab und Psyche des Patroklos. Ein schwarzfiguriges 
Vasenbild (Münster: Habelt in Kommission). 
Vermeule, E.T. (1965) “The Vengeance of Achilles: the Dragging of 
Hektor at Troy”, Bulletin of the Museum of Fine Arts 63 (331), 34-52. 

CHAPTER THREE 
PARODYING THE DIVINE: 
EXPLORING THE ICONOGRAPHY  
OF THE CULT OF THE KABEIROI  
IN THE ANCIENT GREEK WORLD 
KIRSTEN M. BEDIGAN 
 
 
 
Between the eighth century BCE and fourth century CE, the cult of the 
Kabeiroi1 flourished as a collective of deities or daimons in the eastern 
Mediterranean.2 The mysteries of the cult are something of an enigma in 
antiquity, and there is a pronounced lack of clear information regarding the 
function and identity of these daimons.3 However it is clear that they were 
a group of masculine divinities with characteristics that varied according 
                                                           
1 Transliteration of the Greek names where both “C” and “K” could be used: This 
paper will use “K” (Kabeiroi, Kouretes, etc.) as standard, except in those instances 
where “C” is the dominant translation (Cassandra, Circe, etc). The Kabeiroi can 
also be transliterated as Kabiroi, Cabeiri, Cabeiroi or Cabiri; and Kabeiros as 
Kabiros, Cabeiros or Cabiros. Daimon can also be translated as daemon. 
Kabeiroi/Kabeiros and daimon will be used throughout, although quotations will 
preserve their spellings. 
2 The function of daimon/daimons in the context of Greek religion is complicated; 
although many scholars use the term as an alternative to theoi or gods (i.e. 
Blakely), others consider the daimon to be an occult force without physical form or 
cult (Wilford: 217; Burkert: 179-181). For the purposes of this paper, the concept 
that the daimon can be a god will be used.  
3 Bowden: 49. Blakely’s study considers the metallurgical evidence pertaining to 
five separate (but interconnected) groups of daimons, including the Kabeiroi; the 
study “reveals the permeability of the daimonic types, the variability of their 
relationship to metallurgy, and the wealth of other thematic, ritual and 
iconographic associations, including jealousy, magic and deformity. These serve 
various purposes, responding to the literary genres, authorial intent, and artistic 
conventions in which they functioned.” 

Chapter Three 
 
44
to geographic location. There were numerous cult centres with the most 
important being found at Thebes in Boeotia (central Greece), and the 
Greek islands of Lemnos and Samothrace. At Samothrace (and probably 
Lemnos) it appears that they were responsible for providing adherents with 
protection from danger, particularly at sea.4 In Thebes the focus seems to 
have centred on fertility and viticulture on the basis of the votive offerings 
found there.5 The sanctuaries themselves were founded relatively early; 
Lemnos and Samothrace probably originated in the eighth or seventh 
centuries BCE.6 Thebes is harder to date but is probably contemporary 
with the other sanctuaries, although the first evidence of cult buildings 
there is from the late sixth century BCE.7 The cult expanded dramatically 
in the Hellenistic period (beginning during the late fourth century BCE), 
with sanctuaries, votives and other evidence of worship appearing across 
the eastern Mediterranean and even as far as India.8 
The evidence which does exist for the worship of the Kabeiroi is 
somewhat limited and often conflicting. However, the sanctuary at Thebes 
is known for a unique pottery type known as Kabeiric Ware (c.450-275 
BCE), which frequently offers caricatures and parodies of everyday life 
and mythology. Gods, demi-gods, daimons and heroes are all presented in 
a grotesque fashion, but this practice of parodying the divine does not 
extend to the Kabeiroi themselves. Instead, the Kabeiroi often appear as 
“normal”, with realistic human features and physiques, in scenes which 
display other figures as caricatures. Evidence from other sites elsewhere in 
the Greek world also indicates a lack of humour in their depictions. Yet 
they are frequently described in secondary literature as being gods of 
comic appearance, which appears to be derived from occasional 
descriptions in the ancient texts. The question arises as to why these 
deities are believed to be comic, yet are exempt from being depicted in 
comedic fashion at their own cult centres. 
                                                           
4 Bowden: 66-67. 
5 Bedigan 2008a: 43. 
6 Blakely: 33; Kalogeropoulou: 192, 195. 
7 Schachter: 112-113, 136. 
8 Cole: 5; Lehmann and Spitle 1964: 132; Lewis: 95 no.209. 

Parodying the Divine 
45 
 
 
Fig. 3-1 Map of locations mentioned in this paper (significant sites are 
capitalised)9 
Who were the Kabeiroi? 
One of the major difficulties when dealing with the Kabeiroi is that of 
determining the identity of these deities and why they were worshipped. 
Both ancient and modern authors have had difficulty in separating the 
gods into specific groups.10 The Kabeiroi appear to belong to a subset of 
the main Greek pantheon which comprises a significant number of male 
                                                           
9 Map generated using data supplied from Pleiades ©K. M. Bedigan 2012.  
10 Schefold describes the Kabeiroi as “godlings” (1992: passim), whereas 
elsewhere the Kabeiroi appear to be both attendants to more powerful gods or are 
high-ranking divinities in their own right (Burkert: 281-285).  

Chapter Three 
 
46
pairs and groups.11 The terms Kabeiroi, Kouretes, Korybantes, Dioskouroi, 
Anakes, Boy Lords, Theoi Megaloi, Daktyloi, and others are often used 
interchangeably, leading to confusion about their exact identities.12 Within 
this wider group, the Kabeiroi are most closely linked to the Dioskouroi, 
as well as to the Theoi Megaloi (literally translated as “Great Gods”) and 
the Samothracian Theoi (the “Samothracian Gods”, or the Great Gods of 
Samothrace). However, the connection between the Kabeiroi and the 
Samothracian deities has been the subject of considerable debate.  
Hemberg used etymological analysis to suggest that the titles Kabeiroi, 
Theoi Megaloi and Samothracian Theoi were synonymous.13 When this 
argument was proposed, the Kabeiroi were believed to be of Semitic 
(Afro-Asiatic) origin, with the term K[a]bir being translated as “Mighty 
One”.14 This appears to be a logical interpretation when we compare the 
concept of a “Great God” with a “Mighty One”. More recently Beekes has 
suggested that the origin of the name Kabeiroi is Anatolian and this 
appears more convincing, especially in view of evidence suggesting a 
close association between the cult and north-western Asia Minor.15 If 
multiple deities, all with some similarity of function, used the same 
honorific title it would explain how authors, both ancient and modern, 
identified them as a single entity or group. A list of deities and groups 
associated with the title is provided by Hemberg,16 and ranges from 
Cyclopes and Harpies to nymphs and the Dioskouroi; this would support 
the idea of Theoi Megaloi being a general description rather than a specific 
name. If groups of deities were given the title “Great Gods” as an 
honorific, then it would not be unexpected for the Theoi Megaloi to be 
equated with those divinities that had previously enjoyed the title.  
The relationship between the Kabeiroi and Samothracian Theoi is 
therefore difficult to explain. Burkert asserted that the two cults are very 
different, but acknowledges that many later sources believed otherwise.17 
Mnaseas gives the names of the Samothracian Theoi as Axieros, 
Axiokersos and Axiokersa.18 Elsewhere, to confuse matters further, these 
                                                           
11 Cole: 2; Bedigan 2008a: 40; Bowden: 53. 
12 Hemberg: 17; Cole: 1-4; Blakely: 2; Bowden: 61-62, 64. 
13 Hemberg: 22. 
14 Grant: 59. There are other hypotheses regarding the origin of the name Kabeiroi; 
see Hemberg: 318-25 and Beekes: 468-469. 
15 Beekes: 465-477; Bowden: 62; Strabo, Geography, 10.3.21 (“Now it has so 
happened that the Cabeiri are most honoured in Imbros and Lemnos, but they are 
also honoured in separate cities in the Troad”). 
16 Hemberg: 17. 
17 Burkert: 283; Schachter, 2003: 112. 
18 Burkert: 283. 

Parodying the Divine 
47 
names, along with Kadmilos, are attributed to the deities of the Kabeiric 
site at Thebes.19 It would seem likely that this is a misattribution, as it is in 
fact clear that these names are only used in connection with Samothrace. 
There is certainly some relationship between the two cults,20 which cannot 
be explained by dismissing them as misinterpretations of the historical and 
archaeological record. More recent research also tends to point to a single 
cult, rather than the Samothracian Theoi being worshipped as completely 
separate entities.21 However, the evidence for this is limited. At present 
there is only one inscription which refers to the Kabeiroi being worshipped 
at Samothrace.22 There is the possibility that some of the votives at Ilion 
(north-western Asia Minor) demonstrate shared characteristics between 
the two cults,23 and there are also the cult centres of the Kabeiroi, the 
Dioskouroi and the Samothracian Theoi which share a single site on 
Delos.24 
If we accept the Kabeiroi (and the various related cults/deities) as a 
distinct group, it remains apparent that the origin and identities of these 
deities is complicated. This difficulty is heightened by the seeming 
reluctance to speak of these gods (and others who are worshipped as part 
of mysteries) for fear of divine retribution, as related by Pausanias.25 The 
variability in the nature of the Kabeiroi is impressive, with variations in 
what they represent, their genealogical connections, the reason for their 
worship and their actual numbers. The available evidence indicates that 
                                                           
19 Schoder: 103. 
20 Schachter: 109. 
21 Blakely: 16-17. 
22 Dimitrova: 83-90, no.39. This Attic inscription for an initiate of Samothrace 
refers to the individual witnessing “the doubly sacred light of the Kabiros of 
Samothrace.” This refers to a singular deity, however, the reference to “doubly” 
has been interpreted by Dimitrova (88) to mean that they are referring to two 
Kabeiroi in a more poetic fashion. Further discussion of the singular/plural use of 
Kabeiros/Kabeiroi can be found in Dimitrova (87-88).  
23 Lawall: 95. 
24 Hemberg: 140-153. 
25 Pausanias, Guide to Greece, 9.25.5: “The curse of the Kabeiroi is irremovable. 
[…] Some private individuals at Naupaktos had the audacity to re-enact the 
celebrations of Thebes; it was not long before they paid the penalty. When some 
men from Xerxes’ army were left behind in Boeotia under Mardonius, some of 
them entered the sanctuary of the Kabeiroi, maybe in the expectation of great 
wealth but I think largely out of contempt of religion. At that moment they went 
out of their minds; they perished by jumping from the cliffs and into the sea. When 
Alexander won his battle […] some Macedonians went into the sanctuary of the 
Kabeiroi since it was on enemy territory; they were blasted to death by the thunder 
and lightning of heaven.” 

Chapter Three 
 
48
the Kabeiroi could be represented as a group of masculine deities whose 
function and background differed according to the needs of the community 
in which the cult was situated. This variation may also account for the 
difficulties in attribution, for different gods with the same function have 
often been assimilated in the same way as gods with identical or similar 
names, and have subsequently been grouped together regardless of the 
reasons why they were being worshipped. 
In terms of appearance, the evidence is equally confusing, varying 
from apparent perfection to deformity.26 This assumption of deformed 
physique appears to be derived from the description presented by Herodotus: 
Thus too he [Cambyses II, King of Persia] entered the temple of 
Hephaestus and jeered at the image there […] I will describe it for anyone 
who has not seen these figures: it is the likeness of a dwarf. Also he 
entered the temple of the Kabeiroi, into which no one may enter save the 
priest; the images here he even burnt, with bitter mockery. These also are 
like the images of Hephaestus, and said to be his sons.27  
Curiously, there are no other references to caricature or deformity of the 
Kabeiroi in the ancient literature. Herodotus is the only source for this and 
must be regarded as dubious given his equation of Hephaestus and his 
family with their Egyptian equivalents.28 However, there is the sense from 
some of the literature that these deities had a humorous side. A surviving 
fragment of the lost play Kabeiroi by Aeschylus, detailing part of the 
adventure of Jason and the Argonauts, refers to either the consumption or 
manufacture of alcohol: “[The Kabeiroi] playfully threatened [to make the 
house] run short of vinegar”.29 It has been suggested that the former is the 
more likely interpretation; that the deities joke that they shall drink all the 
                                                           
26 Blakely: 13. 
27 Herodotus, Histories, 3.31. This description in fact probably refers to the 
Egyptian god Ptah and his sons, who were equated with Hephaestus and his sons 
(and the Kabeiroi), and who were represented by these dwarfish figures (Blakely: 
44). 
28 Herodotus Histories 3.31; see also Blakely: 44. 
29 Aeschylus, Kabeiroi, frag.97 (see 109 fn.1) from Plutarch’s Table Talk, 2.1 (“So 
if he that has an excellent vintage should complain of Aeschylus’s Cabeiri for 
making him want vinegar, as they had jocosely threatened”). Of the other two 
surviving fragments, a second (frag.96) also refers to wine—“That there shall 
never be a dearth of jars, either of wine or of water, in <this/your> wealthy home.” 
While both quotations are said to come from the play, they appear to be derived 
from separate contexts as the rhythm is different; frag.97 is iambic, frag.96 
anapaests (Sommerstein, 109 fn.1). See also Smyth: 413 frag.49 (97). 

Parodying the Divine 
49 
available wine and resort to drinking vinegar.30 This work was criticised 
for the depiction of Jason and the Argonauts on stage drunk—a shocking 
scene in a tragic play.31 The implication here is that the audience knew that 
the rituals or festivals for this cult involved the consumption of alcohol. 
The shock merely came from the realisation that the crew of the Argo 
drank too much! 
The cults in Greece and Asia Minor 
In total, there appear to be approximately a hundred locations which have 
connections to the Kabeiroi, the Theoi Megaloi or the Samothracian 
Theoi.32 These connections vary from known sanctuaries to passing 
references in the extant texts. If we include sites with links to other 
connected deities, including as the Dioskouroi or the Anakes, the list 
would be far larger. However, the physical evidence is limited and there 
are only a few sites with useful iconographic material. 
On the basis of the available evidence, there are four main categories 
of Kabeiroi. These four versions each represent the Kabeiroi in a different 
light and it is interesting to note that the sanctuaries and other sites 
identified do not necessarily adhere to just one of the following models. 
This suggests that although there may have been a common origin, there 
was also a degree of individual development. The founding dates indicated 
for the three centres at Thebes, Lemnos and Samothrace would certainly 
support the theory that these particular sanctuaries evolved first.33 
                                                           
30 Alternatively, they may be joking that since they will drink all the wine, there 
will be nothing left to turn into vinegar (see Smyth, 413). 
31 Athenaeus, The Learned Banqueters, 10.428F. “I venture to assert that even 
Aeschylus erred in this; for he, and not, as some declare, Euripides, was the first to 
introduce the spectacle of drunken men into tragedy. In The Cabiri, namely, he 
represents Jason and his companions as drunk.” See also Sommerstein: 108. 
32 See Bedigan 2008a: 411-457 for the complete gazetteer. Although it should be 
noted that site no.45, the potential sanctuary at Lesbos, is incorrect; the source used 
to identify this site was misreported, and the archaeology described in fact refers to 
the sanctuary at Lemnos (Compare Blackman:112 with Kazianis: 853). 
33 Of the three contenders, either Lemnos or Samothrace could claim to be the first, 
though most suggest that Lemnos is the earlier sanctuary, c. seventh century BCE 
(Blakely: 33). However, others propose that the sanctuary on Samothrace was 
established prior to the colonisation of the island by Greek settlers in c.700 BCE, 
which would make it the first of the cult centres (Kalogeropoulou: 192, 195). The 
origins of the Theban cult are more difficult to place. For the earliest period we 
must rely on the bronze and lead figurines whose dating has been called into 
question (Roesch: 135-151). They can actually be traced to the tenth century BCE, 

Chapter Three 
 
50
1. Theban Type: Kabeiroi consist of a father-son duo, complying 
with the Boeotian preference for male pairs.34 Names can vary.35 
The focus of the cult is similar to those of Dionysus, both in 
terms of iconography and activity, with the emphasis on fertility 
(animal, human and agricultural) and viticulture.36  
2. Lemnian Type: Kabeiroi consist of three brothers, nominally the 
sons of Hephaestus and the nymph Kabeiro.37 No names are 
given for the brothers, although the title karkinoi (crabs) may 
have applied.38 The focus of the cult is closely related to 
Hephaestus, so has an emphasis on metal working.39 
Archaeological and literary evidence would also imply a 
connection with viticulture.40  
3. Samothracian Type: Kabeiroi are unspecified, but possibly 
number from two to four. If there are four deities, the non-
Hellenic names are given as Axieros, Axiokersos, Axiokersa and 
Kadmilos.41 The Greek equivalents are Demeter, Hades, 
Persephone and Hermes.42 Most of the votives and inscriptions 
intimate that the cult was popular with seafarers, as the majority 
offer thanks for protection and rescue at sea.43 
4. Thessalonikian Type: A single adult male, known as Kabeiros, 
patron of fertility and the vintage.44 This evidence is much later in 
date (Roman period).45 Like the Kabeiroi found on Lemnos, the 
god Kabeiros is similar to Hephaestus.46 
                                                                                                                         
which would therefore place Thebes considerably before Lemnos or Samothrace. 
Unfortunately no further research as to the dating of the metal figurines has taken 
place. 
34 Schachter: 112. 
35 Pausanias, Guide to Greece, 9.25.6. 
36 Blakely: 16. 
37 Archontidou et al: 11. 
38 Blakely: 37. 
39 Archontidou et al.,: 11. 
40 Aeschylus, Kabeiroi, frag.97. 
41 Burkert: 283. 
42 Burkert: 283. 
43 See Cole for a full interpretation of the Samothracian cult participants and their 
dedications.  
44 Edson: 188-189. 
45 Edson: 189; Hemberg: 205-206. 
46 Blakely: 34-35, figs.4-5. 

Parodying the Divine 
51 
Humour in the cult 
Whether it really be such a bad thing to laugh when worshipping a god?47 
There is a sense that religious occasions require a certain dignity, and that 
ridicule or laughter would be somehow impious. However, festivals and 
other celebrations are fundamental to ancient cults, and good humour and 
high spirits do not appear to have been out of place on such occasions. The 
lubrication of religious events through the use of alcohol was typical of 
many ancient Greek cults, and this is well documented for the Kabeiroi.48 
The archaeological evidence for those Kabeiric cult centres which have 
been excavated certainly strongly supports the conclusion that the 
consumption of wine was part of the ritual, for drinking vessels are found 
in significant numbers, along with other drinking paraphernalia at the 
Kabeiric sites.49 
The actual components of the Kabeiric festivals are undocumented, 
although Clement of Alexandria describes the initiation rituals of other 
contemporary mystery cults, which appear to have ritualised the revelation 
of sacred artefacts and knowledge.50 If we assume that the festivals follow 
these conventions, it would seem likely that theatrical presentations of the 
mythology, sacrifice and feasting would feature in them.51 We gain a sense 
that humour was important when we consider the iconographic evidence 
from Thebes (see below), but there are also occasional references to it in 
the literature. The aforementioned Aeschylean production of the Kabeiroi 
which appears to add what would usually be classed as a comic or satyric 
element to a tragic play is one such example. There is also the rare verb 
παραπαίξειν (parapaizein), used in an inscription from Lemnos.52 The 
term literally means “to play alongside”, in this case alongside the god. 
Normally this is a phrase used in connection with Dionysus, a natural 
companion to humour and good spirits. The appearance of it in connection 
with the Lemnian Kabeiroi would imply similar associations. 
                                                           
47 Halliwell: 157. 
48 See Bedigan: 2008b. 
49 For Thebes, see Bedigan: 2008a and 2008b; For Lemnos and Samothrace, see 
Bedigan 2008a: 324-327; Sommerstein: 109. 
50 Clement of Alexandria, Exhortation to the Greeks, 2.14 on the cult of Cybele 
and Attis: “I ate from the drum; I drank from the cymbal; I carried the sacred dish; 
I stole into the bridal chamber”, and 2.17 on the cult of Demeter and 
Kore/Persephone at Eleusis: “I fasted; I drank the draught; I took from the chest; 
having done my task, I placed in the basket, and from the basket into the chest.” 
51 Zaidman and Pantel: 137; Bell: 94; Lehmann: 38-39; Burkert: 75-77, 286. 
52 Follet: 32-34; Halliwell: 20 fn.45. 

Chapter Three 
 
52
That mystery cults could incorporate humour into their rituals can also 
be seen at Eleusis, in the cult of Demeter and Kore/Persephone. In the 
Homeric Hymn to Demeter, laughter is represented as a key aspect of life. 
In the Hymn, Persephone is abducted by Hades and as a result Demeter 
goes into mourning and searches the earth in vain for her lost daughter.53 
Her wandering path leads her to Eleusis, where she is welcomed by the 
daughters of the king and queen (Keleos and Metaneira) of Eleusis, who 
invite her into their home.54 Demeter’s physical and mental well-being, 
severely damaged by events earlier in the poem, are improved by the 
comic antics of the servant Iambe, for prior to this point she refuses to 
smile or laugh. Iambe’s bawdy and perhaps sexually explicit jokes help the 
goddess to start living again, she begins to smile, eat and drink once 
more.55 The moral of the work is that laughter is essential for a healthy 
life, even for a goddess.56 
The Kabeiric vases from Thebes 
The main body of evidence which supports the use of humour and parody 
within the Kabeiric cult can be seen in the ceramics from the sanctuary of 
the Kabeiroi at Thebes. The Kabeiric Ware pottery from this cult centre is 
known for its grotesque and caricatured representations of gods, heroes 
and men. The scenes vary from mythological stories, to more ordinary 
depictions of everyday life or religious activities. 
Dating from between 450 to 275 BCE, this black-figure pottery is 
rather unique within the world of Greek ceramics, especially in terms of 
the style, form and singular provenance of the ware.57 The artistic 
similarities to depictions of Dionysus are important, and it would appear 
that Kabeiric Ware had adopted the motifs from this particular cult. The 
predominance of Dionysus-like figures and attributes associated with him 
                                                           
53 Lord: 242-243.  
54 Sælid Gilhus: 33-34; Agha-Jaffar: 82. For the full story, see Homeric Hymn to 
Demeter.  
55 Rosen 1987: 418-422; Sælid Gilhus: 34-35; Agha-Jaffar: 83-87; Rosen 2007: 
47-57. 
56 Homeric Hymn to Demeter, lines 200-205: “Averse to laughter, and refusing 
food and drink, Demeter sat wasting with longing for her deep-girded daughter—
until the moment when shrewd Iambe resorted to mocking her and with many jests 
moved the sacred mistress to smile, to laugh, and to life her spirits in benevolence. 
Thereafter, indeed, Iambe was pleasing to the goddess in spirit.” 
57 Of the approximately three hundred Kabeiric Ware vases, less than twenty have 
confirmed provenances outside the sanctuary (see Bedigan 2008a: 178, 195, 204, 
395). 

Parodying the Divine 
53 
(maenads, satyrs, wine, general festivity) suggest that during the earlier 
phases of Kabeiric ware (c.400-375 BCE), he was the more important 
deity at Thebes. The subsequent rise and dominance of Kabeiros indicates 
a switch in cultic practice, with the latter surpassing the former in numbers 
of representations on vessels. This switch also meant that Kabeiros took on 
elements of Dionysus (in terms of identity and iconography) but these 
were adapted and added to, leading to an iconography that is highly 
specific to the sanctuary. 
 
 
 
Fig. 3-2 The Judgement of Paris, scene from a Kabeiric Skyphos (drinking cup) by 
the Mystes Painter, late fifth-second quarter of the fourth century BCE. Top: Hera 
(labelled), Aphrodite, Hermes. Bottom: two unnamed female figures (Artemis and 
Athena?).58 
                                                           
58 Paris, Alexandros “A”. Image from Wolters and Bruns, pl.37.2-3; for further 
information on this vase see Wolters and Bruns: 109 M18; Braun and Haevernick: 
65 no.366; Bedigan 2008a: Catalogue 1 (A), no.94. 

Chapter Three 
 
54
The gods are a popular topic for the Kabeiric vases, and particular 
stories are favoured. There appears to be a preference for those connected 
to the Trojan War and the subsequent journey home (Figure 3-2). There 
are also scenes from local mythology, including the Theban heroes 
Kadmos and Herakles. Gods and goddesses and heroes and heroines are 
frequently caricatured. Pot-bellies, spindly limbs, grotesque and protruding 
facial features, distorted genitalia and aged countenances contrive to 
portray these mythical figures in a decidedly un-godlike and un-heroic 
light (see Appendix for an index of figures depicted).59 
An exception is made, however, for the two Kabeiric deities Kabeiros 
and Pais, for none of the caricatured images include parodies of these 
daimons. This appears to be a clear and conscious decision as there are 
instances where all the other figures in a scene are parodied, but the two 
Kabeiric gods are shown in an idealised manner (fig. 3-3). 
 
 
 
Fig. 3-3 Fragments of a Skypos (drinking cup) by the Kabir Painter c. late fourth 
century BCE. The scene depicts Kabeiros and Pais to the right, at the left stand 
Mitos, Krateia and Protalos. A second fragment, showing Saty[ra] may be from 
same vase.60 
                                                           
59 Bedigan 2008a: 243-296. 
60 Image from Wolters and Bruns, pl.5; for further information on this vase see 
Wolters & Bruns: 43 no.53, 96K, pl. 44:1; Braun and Haevernck: 62 no.302, 
pl.22.1-2; Bedigan 2008a: Catalogue 1 (A), no.120. Nitos, Krateia and Protalos are 

Parodying the Divine 
55 
Kabeiric iconography from the wider Greek world 
Unlike the ceramic corpus from Thebes, the material from the other 
Kabeiric sites in terms of iconography is relatively disparate. There is no 
assemblage comparable to Kabeiric Ware but there is other evidence 
which can be considered, primarily coins and sculpture. What becomes 
clear is that the appearance of the divinities is remarkably similar despite 
differences in location or association, an idea corroborated by Blakely.61 
However, Blakely’s premise is that this related identity is one which is 
deformed or grotesque, as a result of a genetic trait inherited from the 
supposed father of the Kabeiroi, Hephaestus, on the island of Lemnos.62 In 
fact, as with the vases from Thebes, this material shows a clear lack of 
parody or caricature. All the figures of the Kabeiroi from other Kabeiric 
sites are depicted in a realistic form with no distortion of either visage or 
physique. 
If we consider the numismatic evidence from the other sites, some 
clear trends are apparent. The coins show a clear correlation in the manner 
of depiction of these deities. Influences from other gods, namely the 
iconographic motifs or identifiers, are very obvious; the connection 
between the Kabeiroi/Kabeiros and Dionysus has already been mentioned 
in relation to the vases. Generally, the numismatic iconography features 
two distinctive representations of the Kabeiroi. Firstly, the figure can be 
seen as a bearded mature male,63 often shown with a pointed hat and 
wreath, and secondly, as a youthful beardless figure.64 The juxtaposition of 
the images is interesting, as is the fact that both can be seen on the coinage 
from a single city (Birytis).65 This suggests that there are at least two 
Kabeiroi recognised—one mature, the other young—an interesting parallel 
to the father-son pairing at Thebes. The other significant manner of 
depicting the Kabeiroi is drawn from iconography associated with the 
Dioskouroi, the twin sons of Zeus: twinned youthful figures, horses and 
double stars frequently appear and are all closely associated with the 
                                                                                                                         
characters which appear in the myths relating to the origin of mankind, representing 
the first man, woman and child respectively (Bedigan 2008a: 288). 
61 Blakely: 32. 
62 Blakely: 37 (Lemnos), 42 (Thebes). 
63 Wroth 1894: 40 no.1, 41 no.8; von Fritze and Gaebler: 11 no.139, 12 no.156, 14 
no.190. 
64 Wroth 1886: 124-126, no.13; Wroth 1894: 166 nos 98-99; Jameson: no.31; 
Head: 892; Hemberg: 254 (see also fn.50). 
65 Wroth 1894: 40 no.1, pl.8.1, 41 no.8, pl.8.5. 

Chapter Three 
 
56
Dioskouroi.66 Coinage from a number of cities follows these iconographic 
conventions. Horsemen connected to the Dioskouroi/Kabeiroi are seen on 
coins from Kleitor and Kallatis; and twinned figures are found on coins 
from Pergamum and Istros.67 The city of Tomis also drew on the attributes 
of the Dioskouroi for their coinage.68 
The sculptural evidence is more limited. An un-provenanced relief 
from Larymna in Boeotia, tentatively connected to the cult, has a scene 
remarkably similar to a possible ram sacrifice on one of the coins featuring 
a Kabeiric divinity from Kyzikos.69 The Lebadeia relief, like the one from 
Larymna, has similarities to the iconographic styles from elsewhere. In 
this instance, a vase from the Theban Kabeirion has a possible parodied 
initiation scene corresponding to this relief.70 Both vase and relief have a 
single figure who is completely robed from head to toe, disguising its 
gender. 
Conclusions 
The assertion that the iconography of the Kabeiric cult is overwhelmingly 
pygmy-like and grotesque seems unfounded. On the basis of the 
archaeological material, the figures are very clearly undistorted and 
instead reflect the ideals of the human form during this period.71 Whilst 
the statues to whom Herodotus refers show caricatured or grotesque 
elements, there is also the very strong possibility that these figures are not 
Kabeiroi. In fact, they are the Egyptian equivalent of the Kabeiroi, and 
have simply been “translated” into the Greek, in much the same way that 
Ammon is often identified as Zeus in the Greek sources.72 Alternatively 
there seems to be a long-standing tradition of presenting Kabeiros as a 
                                                           
66 Hemberg: 45, 172-82, 219, 220, 230-231, 239. 
67 Kallatis and Istros are both located in the ancient region of Thrace (modern 
Bulgaria), Kleitor and Pergamum are included in fig. 1-1. Kleitor: Gardner: 
pl.33.9; Kallatis: Pick: 109 no.281 pl.2.9; Pergamum: Wroth: 117 no.47 pl.24.5; 
Istros: Pick: no.405 pl.2.20. 
68 The coins from Tomis (modern Constantia, Bulgaria) have a variety of motifs on 
the obverse, including paired horses (Pick: pl. 5.8, pl.5.10; Pick and Regling: 644 
no.2452, 646 no.2461), bells (Pick: pl.5.11, pl.5.20; Pick and Regling: 649 
no.2470, 663 no.2525), horsemen (Pick, pl. 6.28; Pick and Regling, 692 no.2659) 
and reclining figures (Pick, pl.7.11; Pick and Regling, 806 no.3125). 
69 von Fritze and Gaebler: 14 no.190, pl.6.2; Rodenwaldt: pl.27. 
70 Wolters and Bruns: 106 M2, pls 33.3, 53.5; Karouzou: 73 inv. no.3942; Braun 
and Haevernick: 62 no.292. 
71 Blakely: 17. 
72 Oxford Classical Dictionary, “Ammon”. 

Parodying the Divine 
57 
well-proportioned male in a similar manner to depictions of Dionysus or 
those of the traditional representations of Greek heroes. 
The iconography remains, however, a curiosity. There are 
unfortunately no real explanations as to why certain figures on the 
Kabeiric Ware vases are executed in a comedic fashion. The depictions of 
the Kabeiroi may tie in with the perception of the cult in antiquity. The 
Kabeiric cult may have offered protection, or even salvation—
opportunities unlikely to have been viewed as trivially comic, and indeed 
the serious nature of the cult is reflected in the literature. Those who acted 
impiously against the cult felt the retribution of the gods.73 
The parodied examples may be reflective of theatrical elements, either 
actual performances at the sanctuary or adaptations of Athenian and 
Corinthian iconography. If we remember that the majority of the vessels 
were designed for use within a relaxed and festive setting, their comic 
nature becomes very easy to explain. There is little difference between a 
Kabeiric Ware Skyphos and a Kylix (both types of drinking cup) from 
elsewhere that has been decorated to appear like a grotesque mask, or one 
that has a frightening monster or a sexual or comic scene on the interior 
that is only revealed once all the liquid has been consumed.74 The humour 
may also relate to the participants and their physical appearance; the 
grotesque dancers from other Greek vases have been described as “mortal 
worshippers in the costume of daemons.”75 Their presence encourages 
laughter rather than sombre recollection of religious events.76 Parodying 
the cult itself would surely appeal to the participants, perhaps as something 
of an “insider” joke. 
                                                           
73 See fn.26.  
74 For a clear discussion of drinking cup types, see Kanowski.  
75 Smith: 27. 
76 Smith: 31, 152. 

Chapter Three 
 
58
Appendix 
Table 3-1. Gods, heroes and other mythological figures identified on 
the Kabeiric vases from Thebes (uncertain attributions are recorded 
in brackets).77 
 
God, Hero or 
Mythological 
Figure 
Total 
of 
Images 
Parodied 
(Yes/No) 
Description 
Acheloüs 
1 
Yes 
A river and water god from whom all 
seas, rivers and springs derived. 
Achilles 
2 
Yes 
Greek hero. Son of Peleus and Thetis. 
Educated by Chiron. Fought and died at 
Troy. 
Ajax 
1 
Yes 
Greek hero. King of Salamis. Fought at 
Troy, raped Cassandra. Committed 
suicide.  
Aphrodite 
3 
Yes 
Goddess of love, fertility, sex and 
sexuality.  
(Artemis) 
(1) 
(Yes) 
Virgin goddess of the wild and the hunt. 
Athena 
3 
Yes 
Virgin goddess of knowledge, crafts and 
war. 
Atlas 
1 
Yes 
Titan. Held up the sky and the heavens 
on his shoulders. 
Boreas 
1 
Yes 
The North Wind.  
Cassandra 
1 
Yes 
a.k.a. Alexandra. Prophetess. Daughter 
of Priam and Hecuba of Troy. Raped by 
Ajax. Murdered by Clytemnestra.  
Chiron 
1 
Yes 
Centaur. Educated Achilles, Asclepius 
and Jason.  
Circe 
6 
Yes 
Sorceress. 
Attempted 
to 
enchant 
Odysseus, later aided him in his journey 
home.  
Eros 
2 
Yes 
God of love.  
Hector 
1 
Yes 
Trojan Hero. Son of Priam and Hecuba 
of Troy. Fought at Troy, killed by 
Achilles. 
Helen 
1 (+1) 
Yes 
Daughter of Zeus and Leda. Wife of 
Menelaus. Queen of Sparta. Abducted 
by Paris to Troy. Cause of Trojan War. 
                                                           
77 Data is compiled from Wolters, Wolters and Bruns, Seeberg, Webster, Braun 
and Haevernick, Sabetai. Descriptions of the deities and heroes are from the 
Oxford Classical Dictionary; for the story of Kerkyon, see Pausanias 1.39.3 

Parodying the Divine 
59 
God, Hero or 
Mythological 
Figure 
Total 
of 
Images 
Parodied 
(Yes/No) 
Description 
Hera 
3 
Yes 
Goddess of marriage and motherhood. 
Queen of the gods. 
Herakles 
5 
Yes 
Greek hero. Son of Zeus and Alcmene. 
Performed the Twelve Labours. After 
death, ascended to Olympus.  
Hermes 
3 
Yes 
The Messenger. God of abundance, 
fertility and prosperity. 
Jardanos 
1 
Yes 
King of Lydia. 
KABEIROS 
4 
NO 
Elder of the Theban Kabeiroi 
Kadmos 
1 
Yes 
Greek 
hero. 
Founder 
of 
Thebes. 
Defeated a dragon.  
Kephalos 
1 
Yes 
Mythical hunter. 
Kerkyon 
1 
Yes 
Bandit who waylaid strangers and killed 
them. Killed by Theseus.  
Minotaur 
1 
Yes 
Half-man, half-bull. Son of Pasiphaë 
and a bull. Lived in the Labyrinth of 
Crete. Killed by Theseus. 
Menelaus 
1 
Yes 
Greek hero. King of Sparta. Husband of 
Helen. Fought at Troy. 
Odysseus 
8 
Yes 
Greek hero. King of Ithaca. Fought at 
Troy. Creator of the Trojan Horse. 
Known for his adventures on his 
journey home.  
Ogre/Ogress 
2 
Yes 
Mythical monster. 
Omphale 
1 
Yes 
Queen of Lydia. Owned Herakles as a 
slave.  
PAIS 
4 
NO 
Younger of the Theban Kabeiroi 
Pan 
4 
Yes 
The goat god, protector of shepherds 
and their flocks. 
Paris 
3 
Yes 
a.k.a. Alexander. Trojan hero. Son of 
Priam and Hecuba of Troy. Abducted 
Helen. Fought at Troy. Killed Achilles. 
Peleus 
1 
Yes 
Father of Achilles. Gifted immortality. 
Priam 
1 
Yes 
King of Troy during the Trojan War. 
Killed by Neoptolemus.  
(Prometheus) 
(1) 
(Yes) 
Divine figure. Stole fire for the gods. 
Was punished for this crime (eagle 
pecking out his liver daily) until rescued 
from this torment by Herakles.  

Chapter Three 
 
60
Bibliography 
Aeschylus (2008) Fragments trans. A. H. Sommerstein (Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press). 
Agha-Jaffar, T. (2002) Demeter and Persephone: Lessons from a Myth 
(Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland). 
Archontidou, A., L. Achilara, V. Penna & A. Benvenuti (2000) 
Smouldering Lemnos (Athens: Hellenic Ministry of Culture/Archaeological 
Receipts Fund). 
Athenaeus (2009) The Learned Banqueters, Volume V trans. S. D. Olsen 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press). 
Bedigan, K. M. (2008a) Boeotian Kabeiric Ware: The Significance of the 
Ceramic Offerings from the Theban Kabeirion in Boeotia (PhD thesis, 
School of Historical Studies. Glasgow: University of Glasgow) 
Bedigan (2008b) “Intoxication and initiation: alcohol and the cult of the 
Kabeiroi” in: S. Baker, M. Allen, S. Middle & K. Poole (eds) Food 
and Drink in Archaeology 1, University of Nottingham Postgraduate 
Conference, 2007 (Totnes: Prospect Books), 11-19. 
Beekes, R. S. P. (2004) “The origin of the Kabeiroi”, Mnemosyne, 57: 
465-477. 
Bell, C. M. (1997) Ritual: Persepctives and Dimensions (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press). 
Blackman, 
D. 
(2000) 
“Archaeology 
in 
Greece, 
1999-2000”, 
Archaeological Reports, 46, 3-152. 
Blakely, S. (2006) Myth, Ritual, and Metallurgy in Ancient Greece and 
Recent Africa (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).  
Bowden, H. (2010) Mystery Cults in the Ancient World (London: Thames 
and Hudson). 
Braun, K. & T. E. Haevernick (1981) Painted Pottery and Glass from the 
Sanctuary of the Kabeiroi at Thebes (Bemalte Keramik und Glas aus 
dem Kabirenheiligtum bei Theben) Das Kabirenheiligtum bei Theben 
IV (Berlin: De Gruyter).  
Burkert, W. (2001) Greek Religion trans. J. Raffan (Oxford: Blackwell).  
Clement of Alexandria (1919) The Exhortation to the Greeks, The Rich 
Man’s Solution, To the Newly Baptised (Fragment) trans. G.W 
Butterworth (London: Heinemann). 
Cole, S. G. (1984) Theoi Megaloi: The Cult of the Great Gods of 
Samothrace (Leiden: Brill). 
Dimitrova, N. M. (2008) Theoroi and Initiates in Samothrace: The 
Epigraphic Evidence Hesperia Supplement 37 (Princeton, NJ: 
American School of Classical Studies at Athens). 

Parodying the Divine 
61 
Edson, C. (1948) “Cults of Thessalonica”, Harvard Theological Review 
41, 153-204. 
Follet, S. (1974) “Two rare religious words documented epigraphically” 
(Deux vocables religieux rares attestés épigraphiquement), Revue de 
Philologie, di Littérature et d’Histoire Anciennes, 100, 30-34. 
Gardner, P. (1887) Catalogue of Greek Coins, Volume 10: Peloponnesus 
(London: British Museum). 
Grant, F.C. (1953) Review of B. Hemberg, Die Kabiren (Uppsala: 
Almqvist and Wiksells, 1950), Classical Philology 48, 58-59. 
Halliwell, S. (2008) Greek Laughter: A Study of Cultural Psychology from 
Homer to Early Christianity (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press). 
Head, B. V. (1911) Historia Numorum: A Manual of Greek Numismatics 
(New edn. Oxford: Clarendon) 
Hemberg, B. (1950) The Kabeiroi (Die Kabiren) (Uppsala: Almqvist and 
Wiksells). 
Herodotus, The Histories (1996) trans. A. de Sélincourt (London: 
Penguin). 
Homeric Hymn to Demeter (2003) trans. M. L. West (Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press). 
Hornblower, S. & A. Spawforth (eds) (2000) The Oxford Classical 
Dictionary 3rd edn, revised (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
Jameson, R. (1909) “The find of Milo” (La trouvaille de Milo) Revue 
Numismatique, 13, 188-208. 
Kazianis, D. (1994) “Department of Underwater Antiquities” (Ephoreia 
enalion architoteton/Εφορεία Εναλίων Αρχαιοτήτων). Archaiologikon 
Deltion, 49 (B’2), 853-858. 
Kalogeropoulou, A. (1970) “Samothrace: the sanctuary of the Great Gods” 
in E. Melas (ed.) Temples and Sanctuaries of Greece: A Companion 
Guide (London: Thames and Hudson), 191-198. 
Kanowski, M. G. (1984) Containers of Classical Greece (St Lucia: 
University of Queensland Press). 
Karouzou, S. (1977) National Museum. Illustrated Guide to the Museum 
(Athens: Akdotike Athenon). 
Lawall, M. L. (2003) “In the sanctuary of the Samothracian gods: myth, 
politics, and mystery cult at Ilion” in M. B. Cosmopoulos (ed.) Greek 
Mysteries: The Archaeology and Ritual of Greek Secret Cults (London: 
Routledge), 79-111. 
Lehmann, K. (1998) Samothrace. A Guide to the Excavations and Museum 
6th edn. (Thessaloniki: Institute of Fine Arts). 

Chapter Three 
 
62
Lehmann, K. & D. Spitle (1964) Samothrace. Excavations conducted by 
the Institute of Fine Arts of New York University, IV, part II. The Altar 
Court (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul). 
Lewis, N. (1959) Samothrace. Excavations conducted by the Institute of 
Fine Arts of New York University vol. I, The Literary Sources (London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul). 
Lord, M. L. (1967) “Withdrawal and return: an epic story pattern in the 
Homeric Hymn to Demeter and in the Homeric poems”, Classical 
Journal, 62, 241-248. 
Pausanias (1971) Guide to Greece, Volume 1: Central Greece trans. P. 
Levi (London: Penguin). 
Pleiades (2012) [Online] available from: pleiades.stoa.org (Accessed 
November 2012). 
Pick, B. (1898) The Ancient Coins of Dacia and Moesia (Die Antiken 
Münzen von Dacien und Moesien) Die Antiken Münzen Nord-
Greichenlands Band 1.1. (Berlin: Georg Reimer). 
Pick, B. & K. Regling (1910) The Ancient Coins of Dacia and Moesia, 
(Die Antiken Münzen von Dacien und Moesien) Die Antiken Münzen 
Nord-Greichenlands Band 1.2. (Berlin: Georg Reimer). 
Plutarch (1969) Moralia, Volume VIII: Table-Talk, Books 1-6 trans. P.A. 
Clement and H. B. Hoffleit (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press). 
Rodenwaldt, G. (1913) “Thespian reliefs” (Thespisches reliefs), Journal 
des Deutschen Archäologischen Instituts, Athen, 28, 309-339. 
Roesch, P. (1985) “The bronze bulls of the Kabeirion of Thebes and 
archaic Boeotian writing” (Les taureaux de bronze du Kabirion de 
Thèbes et l’écriture archaïque béotienne) in J. M. Fossey and H. 
Giroux (eds) Proceedings of the Third International Congress on 
Ancient Boeotia: Montreal, Quebec, 31.10.1979-4.11.197 (Actes du 
Troisième Congrès International sur la Béotie Antique: Montréal, 
Québec, 31.x.1979-4.xi.1979) (Amsterdam: J.C. Gieben) 135-151. 
Rosen, R. M. (1987) “Hipponax Fr. 48 Dg. and the Eleusinian kykeon”, 
American Journal of Philology, 108, 416-426. 
—. (2007) Making Mockery: The Poetics of Ancient Satire (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press). 
Sabetai, V. (2001) Corpus Vasorum Antiquorum. Thebes, Archaeological 
Museum 1. Greece 6 (Athens: Academy of Athens). 
Sælid Gilhus, I. (1997) Laughing Gods, Weeping Virgins: Laughter in the 
History of Religion (London: Routledge). 

Parodying the Divine 
63 
Schachter, A. (2003) “Evolution of a mystery cult: the Theban Kabeirion” 
in M. B. Cosmopoulos (ed.) Greek Mysteries: The Archaeology and 
Ritual of Greek Secret Cults (London: Routledge) 112-142. 
Schefold, K. (1992) Gods and Heroes in Late Archaic Greek Art trans. A. 
Griffiths (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). 
Schoder, R. V. (1974) Ancient Greece from the Air (London: Thames and 
Hudson). 
Seeberg, A. (1967) “A Boston fragment with a prisoner” Bulletin of the 
Institute of Classical Studies, 14, 25-35. 
Smith, T. J. (2010) Komast Dancers in Archaic Greek Art (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press). 
Smyth, H. W. (1926) Aeschylus: Agamemnon, Libation-Bearers, 
Eumenides, Fragments (London: Heinemann). 
Sommerstein, A. H. (2008) Aeschylus: Fragments (Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press). 
Strabo (2000) Geography, Vol. V. Books 10-1 trans. H. L. Jones 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press). 
von Fritze, H. & H. Gaebler (1912) Special-Reprint from Nomisma. 
Studies in the Field of Ancient Numismatics VII. The Coinage of 
Kyzikos, (Sonder-Abdruck aus Nomisma. Untersuchungen auf dem 
Gebiete der antiken Münzkunde. Heft VII. Die Electroprägung von 
Kyzikos) (Berlin: Mayer & Müller). 
Webster, T. B. L. (1978) Monuments illustrating Old and Middle Comedy 
3rd edn. BICS Supplement 39 (London: Institute of Classical Studies). 
Wilford, F. A. (1965) “ΔΑΙΜΩΝ in Homer”, Numen, 12, 217-232. 
Wolters, P. (1930) “Kirke” Mitteillungen des Deutschen Archäologisches 
Institut, Athenische Abteilung, 55, 209-236.  
Wolters, P. & Bruns, G. (1940) The Sanctuary of the Kabeiroi at Thebes 
(Das Kabirenheiligtum bei Theben) (Berlin: De Gruyter). 
Wroth, W. (1886) Catalogue of the Greek Coins of Crete and the Aegean 
Island (London: British Museum). 
—. (1892) Catalogue of the Greek Coins of Mysia (London: British 
Museum). 
—. (1894) Catalogue of the Greek Coins from Troas, Aeolis and Lesbos 
(London: British Museum). 
Zaidman, L. B. & P. S. Pantel (1992) Religion in the Ancient Greek City 
trans. P. Cartledge (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). 
 

CHAPTER FOUR 
OF COSMOCRATORS AND COSMIC GODS: 
THE PLACE OF THE ARCHONS IN DE MYSTERIIS 
CHRISTOPHER A. PLAISANCE 
 
 
 
In the second chapter of De mysteriis,1 Iamblichus (c.245-325 CE) quotes 
his interlocutor, Porphyry (234-c.305 CE), as having asked: “what is the 
sign of the presence of a god, an angel, an archangel, a daimon, or of some 
archon or a soul”?2 With this query, Iamblichus launches into an exhaustive 
discourse detailing the epiphanies of the aforementioned beings. When 
discussing the ρείττονα γενή (“superior classes”), Iamblichus had 
previously restricted his discourse to the four groups known to so many of 
the Platonists before him—θεοί (“gods”), δαίμονες (“daimons”), ἥρωες 
(“heroes”), and ψυχαὶ ἄχρατοι (“pure souls”).3 Yet, his response to 
Porphyry’s 
question 
includes αρχάγγελος (“archangels”), άγγελος 
(“angels”), and two varieties of ἄρκοντος (“archons”). Although angels 
                                                           
1 The book announces its title as Ἀβάμμωνος διδασκάλου πρὸς τὴν Πορφυρίου πρὸς 
Ἀωεβὼ ἐπιστολὴν ἀπόκρισις καὶ τῶν ἐν αὐτῇ ἀπορημάτων λύσεις (The Reply of the 
Master Abamon to the Letter of Porphyry to Anebo, and the Solutions to the 
Questions it Contains), but was retitled by its Renaissance translator, Marsilio 
Ficino (1433-1499) as De mysteriis Aegyptiorum, Chaldaeorum, Assyriorum. 
Since that time, it is most often referred to simply as De mysteriis, and it is this 
convention which this paper follows. 
2 Iamblichus 2003 (henceforth Dm) II.3.70: “ἐπιζητεῖς γὰρ τί τὸ γνώρισμα θεοῦ 
παρουσίας ἀγγέλουἤ ἀρχαγγέλου ἤ δαίμονος ἤ τινος ἄρχοντος ἤ ψυχῆς”. Also, as a 
note, while all translations of sentences and paragraphs from De mysteriis come 
from the Clarke edition, translations of individual words and small phrases are 
largely gleaned from Liddell and Scott. 
3 Dm I.3.8-9. “Ὁ δὲ αὐτός ἐστί μοι λόγος πρὸς σὲ καὶ περὶ τῶν συωεπομένων θεοῖς 
κρειττόνων γενῶν, δαιμόνων φημὶ καὶ ἡρώων καὶ ψυχῶν ἀχράντων” (“And I make 
the same argument to you also as regards the superior classes of being which 
follow upon the gods, I mean the daemons and heroes and pure souls”). 

Of Cosmocrators and Cosmic Gods 
65 
were mentioned by Porphyry4 and several Middle Platonists,5 the inclusion 
of archons in neoplatonic hierology is uniquely Iamblichean. What then is 
the nature of these archons? Thus far, studies of Iamblichus have neglected 
to deal with the issue of the archons in a thorough manner. The secondary 
literature that does mention them relegates them either to footnotes or a 
paragraph at most. This paper’s purpose is to remedy this gap in 
scholarship and to explore the origin of the idea and the resulting role of 
the archons in De mysteriis. In particular, I will argue that the scholarly 
interpretation of both archontic classes as being below the heroes in the 
hierarchy of the superior classes6 is incorrect, and that it can be 
demonstrated that the cosmic archons are not only ontologically prior to 
the daimons but are also identical with the visible gods. 
The term ἄρχων has the meaning of “ruler, or lord”, and was used 
throughout the Hellenic and Hellenistic worlds to denote the chief 
magistrate of a municipality.7 While the simple meaning of “ruler” is 
carried forward in all instances of the term’s appearance in hierologies of 
antiquity, to discern with more precision what exactly it meant to 
Iamblichus, an understanding of the sources and traditions on which he 
drew is necessary. Apart from the influence of his teacher, Porphyry—and 
by extension, Plotinus (c.204-270 CE) and the whole lineage of Platonists 
before him—Iamblichus’ principle influences seem to have been the 
Hermetic and Gnostic religions that flourished throughout the Hellenistic 
world, and the Chaldean Oracles.8 For this reason, a brief chronological 
doxography of the archons will be presented prior to a detailed 
examination of Iamblichus’ archonology. 
The term bound up with the archons since the second century CE, 
κοσμοκράτωρ (“lord, or ruler, of the world”), was used to denote the 
                                                           
4 Augustine of Hippo, De civitate Dei, X.9: Porphyry “discernat a daemonibus 
angelos, aeria loca esse daemonum, aetheria uel empyria disserens angelorum” 
(“distinguishes angels from demons, asserting that the habitation of the later is in 
the air, while the former dwell in the ether and empyrean”). 
5 Dillon 1996: 46-7, 172-3. 
6 Dillon 1-68 (51) in Iamblichus 2009a; Shaw 79. Dillon established this model of 
Iamblichus’ hierarchy, which has since become the standard interpretation (as seen 
in Shaw). 
7 Iamblichus 2009b: I.2.9, VI.1.1-4. It is in this sense that we see the term used in 
two of Iamblichus’ letters, as a general term for ruler. 
8 Dillon 13 in Iamblichus 2009a; Clarke et al.: “Introduction”, xiii-lii (xlix) in 
Iamblichus 2003. 

Chapter Four 
 
66
planets as the rulers of the cosmos.9 The ultimate origin of the idea of the 
planets being ruling powers lies in late Babylonian astral religion, which 
began influencing Hellenic cosmology and theology well before the 
emergence of Platonic metaphysics.10 However, as Iamblichus’ sources all 
share a more recent origin in Plato’s (c.428-c.347 BCE) cosmogony in 
Timaeus, it is there that we begin. Timaeus presents a story in which the 
world is shaped from unformed, elemental matter11 by a wholly 
benevolent demiurge.12 Throughout this process, the ontological order of 
creation that emerges is an emanative process leading from νοῦς 
(“intellect”) to ψῡχή (“soul”) to σῶμα (“body”).13 In the course of this 
ordering, the seven planets were shaped, so that time and motion could be 
generated.14 The planets formed the lower grouping of a class of gods 
which Plato describes as both ὁρατῶν (“visible”) and γεννητῶν 
(“generated”).15 The higher group, the ogdoadic gods of the fixed stars, are 
described as relatively immobile in comparison to the wandering planetary 
gods. This is owed to the former being ontologically closer to the 
atemporal perfection of the demiurge; the latter, being further removed, 
are more mobile.16 These visible gods form a class of divine beings which, 
from Plato onward, was conceived of as being distinct from the noetic 
gods.17 Beneath the gods, Plato positioned the daimons,18 who were seen 
as an intermediary class of beings who acted as envoys of the gods, 
conveying sacrifices from mankind upwards and messages from the gods 
downwards.19 
The transitional Middle Platonic period which bridged the gap between 
Plato and Plotinus gave rise to several interesting ideas which would 
become integral to Iamblichus’ archonology. First among these was a 
cementing of the identification between the visible gods of Timaeus with 
                                                           
9 Dillon 227-403 (275-276) in Iamblichus 2009a. Dillon notes that “as a title of the 
planets, κοσμοκράτωρ does not seem to be attested earlier than Vettius Valens 
(second century CE)”. 
10 Majercik, “Introduction” 11; Lewy: 423; Dodds: 263-273 (272). 
11 Plato, Timaeus (CW 1224-1291) 30a-b, 32. 
12 Plato, Timaeus 29e. 
13 Plato, Timaeus 30b. 
14 Plato, Timaeus 38c. 
15 Plato, Timaeus 40d. 
16 Plato, Timaeus 40; Laws (CW 1318-1616) VII.821. 
17 Plato, Phaedrus (CW 506-556) 247a. Plato mentions certain “δώδεκα […] θεοὶ 
ἄρχοντες” (“twelve ruling gods”) that serve under Zeus, these being the noetic 
gods who are closest to the demiurge. 
18 Plato, Timaeus, 40d. 
19 Plato, Symposium (CW 457-505) 202d-203a. 

Of Cosmocrators and Cosmic Gods 
67 
the planetary gods.20 Apart from the Platonic gods and daimons, Middle 
Platonism introduced a much greater degree of differentiation within the 
continuum connecting man to the gods. Although the specific classes 
varied between philosophers, we see models which include archangels and 
angels, as well as good and evil daimons and pure souls.21 Second, was the 
idea that there were several demiurges who were responsible for shaping 
different levels of the universe.22 Of some interest is Harpocration’s 
(second century CE) denomination of the secondary demiurge as Ἄρχων. 
Dillon sees the potential for a Gnostic influence here, as the only prior 
occurrences of the term in Platonism are Plato’s aforementioned 
references to the θεοὶ ἄρχοντες (ff. 17 above).23 Lastly, the Middle 
Platonic foundation of what Dillon terms the “underworld” of Platonism24 
—whose denizens include Gnosticism, Hermetism, and the Chaldean 
Oracles—will occupy us presently. 
At the turn of the first millennium, Gnosticism emerged from the 
Middle Platonic underworld as a view of religious Platonism turned on its 
head.25 Sharing in common with Platonism the notion of a universe 
consisting of a series of emanations descending from the divine to the 
material, Gnosticism diverges in its fundamentally anticosmic orientation.26 
Whereas Timaeus’ demiurge is a benevolent figure whose shaping of the 
cosmos is an expression of the natural order, the Gnostic demiurge is an 
evil deity, and his creation—the cosmos—is a material prison keeping the 
pneumatic soul trapped in flesh, apart from God.27 In turn, while the 
                                                           
20 Dillon 1996: 171-172. 
21 Dillon 1996: 46-47, 172. 
22 Dillon 1996: 27, 169-170, 191. For our purposes, the most important of these 
demiurges is the one governing the sublunary realm. Dillon notes that the 
identification of either the sublunary demiurge himself or the entire region beneath 
the moon with Hades was widespread, being found in the works of Xenocrates 
(c.396-c.314 BCE), Philo (20 BCE-50 CE), and Plutarch (c. 46-120 CE). Hades, in 
his role as the sublunar demiurge, was concerned with the functions surrounding 
dissolution and generation. As Iamblichus would adopt this distinction, and since 
one class of his archons is responsible for governing the sublunary sphere, this is 
an important turning point to note. 
23 Dillon 1996: 260. 
24 Dillon 1996: 384. 
25 For Gnosticism as an essentially Platonic movement, see Pearson: 55-72. For 
specific connections between Gnosticism and Middle Platonism, see Turner: 9-64. 
26 Van den Broek: 1-120 (9). 
27 Good: 291-295. As a play on the depiction of humanity as a reflection of God in 
Genesis I: 26-27, Gnostic theology (in “The Prayer of the Apostle Paul”) tells the 
same tale through a glass darkly: “the human being is formed by lesser beings, the 

Chapter Four 
 
68
planetary deities in Platonism were intrinsically good beings,28 “the 
Gnostics considered the planets and the signs of the zodiac as evil powers, 
which the soul on its way back to its origin could pass only if it had true 
gnosis”.29 Also, with the Gnostic turn, a terminological shift occurred; 
rather than referring to the planets as gods, we see this replaced by terms 
such as ἐξουσίας (“powers”), cosmocrators, and the ubiquitous archons.30 
The archons are presented as hylic and sarcic mirrors of their pneumatic 
counterparts above,31 which is a far cry from Plato’s visible gods having 
been made from fire.32 The archons are explicitly identified with planets.33 
The seven “forces of the seven heavens” are the children of the hylic 
demiurge, Yaldabaoth, who in Gnostic theology functions as a material 
shadow of the true God above the veil.34 The cosmological region 
governed by these seven archons was known as the hebdomad (from 
ἑβδομάς,”seven”), above which was the ogdoad—a region ontologically 
prior to and inaccessible by the archons. 
At the same time, Hermetists in Alexandria were developing a Platonic 
theology that, like the Gnostics, gave soteriological primacy to γνῶσις 
                                                                                                                         
material (or hylic) archons (or rulers) who seek to mould it in their image and thus 
keep it imprisoned in matter. However, a higher god, in this text identified as 
‘psychic’ (or having to do with soul), unbeknownst to the archons, implants a 
divine spark in the human creature. Once this dormant element is awakened, the 
human recalls its true origins and sees beyond material life to recall its true home, 
that is, ‘what no angel-eye has seen, and no archon-ear has heard’. The prayer thus 
functions to remind the speaker of his or her (divine) origins”. This twisted version 
of Genesis is further explicated in “The Hypostasis of the Archons” in Robinson 
161-169. 
28 Through their participation in and ontological closeness to the εἶδος of the Good. 
29 Van den Broek: 9. 
30 Gilhus: 37. Gilhus notes that in addition to the synonymity expressed in Gnostic 
texts, this terminological trinity occurs early on in Ephesians 6:12 (KJV): “For we 
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities [ἀρχάς] against 
powers [ἐξουσίας], against the rulers of the darkness of this world 
[κοσμοκράτορας], against spiritual wickedness in high places”. 
31 Gilhus: 9-10. For the history of animal-headed figures in Gnostic myth, see 
Ameisenowa: 21-45. 
32 Plato, Timaeus, 40a. 
33 Iranaeus 1907: I.30.9; and Iranaeus 1834: I.30.9. Iranaeus (second century CE), 
tells us that the Gnostics “maintain, moreover, that the holy Hebdomad is the seven 
stars which they call planets”, reinforcing the Gnostic identity between the archons 
and the planets: “Sanctam autem hebdomadam septem stellas, quas dicunt 
planetas, esse volunt”. 
34 “The Origin of the World (II, 5 and XIII, 2)”, in Robinson 100-102; 170-189. 

Of Cosmocrators and Cosmic Gods 
69 
(“knowledge”).35 In typical Middle Platonic fashion, Hermetic theology 
presents an emanative hierarchy of God, a demiurge, and seven planetary 
powers—who, similar to the Gnostics, were generally described as ruling 
powers, διοικηταί (“governors, or administrators”)36 and ἄρχοντες,37 rather 
than gods. The Sun was identified with the demiurge, and the surrounding 
cosmic bodies were instruments with which he crafted the world.38 The 
planetary governors were depicted as administering mankind’s fate,39 and 
shaping man in their nature—as a microcosm—an act which is explicitly 
described as being done out of love.40 Other texts in the Hermetica 
describe the planetary beings as gods,41 but the identity between the seven 
rulers of the early chapters and the planets is clear.42 Further Hermetic 
references to the seven planetary beings can be found in the so-called 
“Mithras Liturgy” of the Greek Magical Papyri,43 which describes them in 
a manner more similar to the Gnostic archons44—having animal heads—
than the fiery spheres of Timaeus. 
During the second century CE, the book that would, next to Timaeus, 
exert the greatest influence on Iamblichus was written: The Chaldean 
Oracles.45 The Oracles were not “Chaldean” in the literal sense, but were 
named thus so as to convey an “oriental” sense of mystique—a rhetorical 
device that was common in Hellenistic wisdom literature.46 The world of 
                                                           
35 Van den Broek: 1. Also, for historical connections between Hermetism and 
Gnosticism, see Quispel: 46.1, 1-19. 
36 Copenhaver, Hermetica I.9. 
37 Stobaei Hermetica in Scott, 380-533 (XXIV.2). 
38 Stobaei Hermetica XVI.18. 
39 Stobaei Hermetica I.9. 
40 Stobaei Hermetica I.12, I.16. 
41 Stobaei Hermetica V.3, X.7 
42 Copenhaver: 93-260 (105). 
43 “The Mithras Liturgy” in Betz: IV.475-829 (IV.674-79). “προέρχονται δὲ καὶ 
ἕτεροι ζ’ θεοὶ ταύρων μελάνων πρόσωπα ἔχοντες ἐν περιζώμασιν λινοῖς κατέχοντες 
ζ’ διαδήματα χρύςεα, οὑτοί εἰςιν οἱ καλούμενοι πολοκράτορες τοῦ οὐρανοῦ” (“There 
also come forth another seven gods, who have the faces of black bulls, in 
linen/loincloths, and in possession of seven golden diadems. They are the so-called 
Pole Lords of heaven”). Linss (8) suggests that these “Pole Lords” are “the stars of 
the constellation of the Great Bear”. However, Copenhaver (105) specifically 
identifies them as “the five planets and two great luminaries known to the ancients: 
Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn”. 
44 Gilhus: 50. “In the iconographical representations of the archons (gems, 
amulets), Ialdabaoth, Jao, etc. are portrayed with animal faces but with human 
bodies (though sometimes with snakes for legs)”. 
45 Majercik: 1-2. 
46 Majercik: 1; see Burns: 158-179. 

Chapter Four 
 
70
the Oracles was a series of concentric circles, composed of the intelligible 
empyrean, the ethereal realm of the fixed stars and planets, and the 
material sphere which contained the sublunar region and the Earth.47 This 
triadic structure was organised by three gods: the Monad, Demiurge, and 
Hekate.48 It was further administrated by three tiers of intermediary 
beings: the iynges (ἴυγξ), synoches (συνοχεῖς), and teletarchs (τελετάρχαι), 
the latter of whose origins are identical with the planetary archons and 
cosmocrators described previously.49 However, the teletarchs were not 
exclusively relegated to planetary roles; the material teletarchs, for 
instance, were associated with the moon and were thought to govern the 
sublunary realm.50 The Oracles further describe the world as populated by 
various species of terrestrial,51 atmospheric,52 and aquatic daimons.53 
Regarding the teletarchs, Majercik notes that an important distinction must 
be made between the “Chaldean” and Gnostic systems in that the 
teletarchs are “benign, even helpful figures, who aid the ascent of the 
soul”, and that “the Chaldean system maintains a more positive, monistic 
view of creation”.54 
The next major influence on Iamblichus was the neoplatonic patriarch, 
Plotinus. Plotinian cosmology set the stage for all further neoplatonic 
systems with its four-tiered emanative hierarchy descending from τό ἕν 
(“the One”), through intellect and soul, to φύσις (“nature”).55 In a similar 
fashion to the Middle Platonists and the Oracles, Plotinus viewed the 
material world to be the domain of Hades.56 Like those of the Platonic 
tradition before him, he considered the stars and planets to be visible 
gods,57 beneath whom—in the sublunary sphere—existed hosts of aerial 
daimons who bridged the gap between mankind and the gods.58 This 
model was carried forward by Plotinus’ student, Porphyry, with very few 
modifications. Porphyry explicitly identified the planets as visible gods, as 
in the Timaeus, and similarly conceived of a daimonic continuum existing 
                                                           
47 Majercik: 16-17. 
48 Majercik: 6-7.  
49 Majercik: 10-11. 
50 Majercik: 12, 18. It is also important to note that the Oracles follow the Middle 
Platonic equation of the material world with Hades. 
51 Majercik: ffr.80, 90, 91, 216. 
52 Majercik: fr.216. 
53 Majercik: ffr.91, 92, 216. 
54 Majercik: 17-18. 
55 Remes: 53-58. 
56 Lepajõe: 7-16 (10). 
57 Plotinus, The Enneads, II.9.8, III.4.6.  
58 Plotinus, The Enneads, III.5.6, IV.4.43, IX.7.6.  

Of Cosmocrators and Cosmic Gods 
71 
between the human and divine realms.59 He saw the superlunary cosmic 
realms as being under the governance of the visible gods, and the 
sublunary sphere as being the purview of the daimons.60 In a break from 
Plotinus, however, Porphyry’s hierological plenum also included angels 
(see fn.4 above) as well as malevolent daimons.61 Another point of 
differentiation was Porphyry’s doctrine that the planetary powers 
emanated in lineal descent, with Saturn receiving its power from the 
ogdoad, Jupiter from Saturn, and so on down to the Moon.62 One position 
that both Porphyry and Plotinus, however, held in common was a strong 
stance against the Gnostic maligning of the planetary gods.63 
It was against this backdrop of diverse strains of thought that 
Iamblichus composed De mysteriis. The metaphysical foundation upon 
which De mysteriis rests is an expansion of Plotinus’. Above the noetic 
realm, rather than the simplicity of Plotinus’ τό ἕν, Iamblichus postulates a 
παντελῶς ἄρρητον (“ineffable absolute”), from which emanates ὁ ἁπλῶς ἕν 
(“the simplex one”), which then produces the dyad of πέρας (“limit”) and 
τὸ ἄπειρον (“the unlimited”), from which finally emanates τὸ ἕν ὄν (“the 
one existent”). The existent one is further identified with Αἰών (“Aeon”), 
an eternal counterpart of the temporality which manifests in the psychic 
realm.64 The noetic realm was similarly complexified. In a metaphysical 
move that is characteristic of Iamblichus, rather than postulate a new entity 
to govern the noetic sphere, Iamblichus takes the least entity of the 
preceding level and makes it the greatest of the following emanation. The 
ruling principle of the noetic is thus τὸ ἕν ὄν, who is the first element of a 
triad whose remaining constituents are ζωή (“life”) and νοῦς; all three of 
which are encompassed by the noetic demiurge.65 The following noeric 
realm, like the noetic, participates in the hypostasis directly above: in this 
case, νοῦς, which is at this level conceived of as a monadic soul who “is 
set above all the souls in the cosmos” and is “the transcendent source of 
both the Soul of the Cosmos and the individual souls”.66 It also contains 
Χρόνος (“Time”)—who is a lower reflection of Aeon—as well as spatial 
                                                           
59 Porphyry, “On Abstinence From Animal Food”, 1-170 (II.37). 
60 Porphyry, “On Abstinence”, II.38. 
61 Porphyry, “On Abstinence”, II.39. 
62 Porphyry, “On the Cave of the Nymphs, in the Thirteenth Book of the Odyssey”, 
171-200 (para.7). 
63 Edwards: 88-100; Plotinus, Enneads, II.9. 
64 Dillon, in Iamblichus 2009a: 29-33. 
65 Dillon, in Iamblichus 2009a: 33-39. 
66 Dillon, in Iamblichus 2009a: 39. 

Chapter Four 
 
72
extension.67 At the bottom of the hierarchy is the realm of material 
nature.68 This sphere encompassed the visible cosmos, and the sublunar 
dominion of Hades.69 
Iamblichus saw each of the realms as governed by one ruler. Aeon 
ruled the noetic, Helios, the noeric and the visible sun, the sensible 
cosmos. Each ruler was the vertical emanation of the one prior, and acted 
“as a mean between the two realms”.70 Aeon descends from the ineffable 
absolute and is a mean between the realms of the henadic and noetic 
realms; Helios from Aeon, who is then a mean between the noetic and 
noeric; and the visible sun from Helios, who bridges the noeric and the 
sensible.71 From each of these gods come a series of horizontal 
emanations, which is the root of Iamblichus’ theory of different divine 
classes. From the One emanate the henads, from Aeon, the noetic gods, 
from Helios, the noeric gods and from the visible sun, the planetary 
gods.72 Furthermore, the grouping of planetary gods would necessarily be 
the group which contained the sublunar demiurge, a being responsible for 
the production of change and generation in the material realm below the 
moon.73 Since Iamblichus’ theories treat the least of one class as the 
greatest being among the realm below, the sublunar demiurge is identified 
as the moon, the planetary god which is closest to the Earth.74 
Although modern reconstructions of Iamblichus’ theology admit the 
four classes described above, De mysteriis seems to concern itself 
primarily with two classes of gods, described as αἰσθητοῖς θεοῖς σώματα 
ἔχουσιν (“sensible, or perceptible, gods who have bodies”) and ἀσώματοι 
θεοὶ (“unembodied, or incorporeal, gods”.)75 The first, lower, class is 
further identified as the οὐρανίος θεοὺς (“celestial, or heavenly, gods”),76 
ὑλαίους (“material”) gods,77 ἐγκοσμίων θεῶν (“cosmic, or encosmic, 
                                                           
67 Dillon, in Iamblichus 2009a: 39-41. 
68 Dillon, in Iamblichus 2009a: 47. 
69 Dillon, in Iamblichus 2009a: 246. 
70 Finamore 1985: 138-9. 
71 Finamore 1985: 139. 
72 Finamore 1985: 138-9, 160-1; Finamore & Dillon 76-228 (193-4) in Iamblichus 
2002. Finamore 1985: 138-9, 160-1; Finamore & Dillon: 76-228 (193-4). 
73 Iamblichus 2009a fr.1. 
74 Iamblichus 2009a, fr.70: “The Moon has the first rank, in the area around the 
earth, as having the relationship of generating power and the mother to the realm 
of Generation”. 
75 Dm I.19.60. 
76 Dm III.28.169, V.2.200. 
77 Dm V.14.217. 

Of Cosmocrators and Cosmic Gods 
73 
gods”),78 ἐμφανεῖς θεοὶ (“visible gods”),79 and περικοσμίων (“cosmic”) 
gods.80 The second, higher, class is described as ἀύλους (“immaterial”),81 
ἁσωμάτους (“incorporeal”),82 ἀφανῶν θεῶν (“invisible gods”),83 νοητοὶ 
(“noetic”),84 and ὑπερκοσμίως (“hypercosmic”).85 The distinction between 
the material and immaterial gods is such that the material gods embrace 
matter, presiding over it, and are responsible for its ordering and the 
phenomena that arise within it; whereas the immaterial gods are exempt 
from the constrains of matter, rising above it.86 The visible gods are linked 
to the invisible gods by virtue of ontological dependence.87 Between these 
two classes of gods, the “whole government of existent things both 
throughout the whole heaven and cosmos, and over all the invisible 
powers of the universe” occurs.88 
In De anima, and in De mysteriis prior to answering Porphyry’s query 
about the archons, Iamblichus followed suit with his Middle Platonic 
predecessors and described the superior classes that bridge the gap 
between the gods and mankind as consisting of angels, daimons, heroes, 
and pure souls.89 The pure souls are specifically identified as the least of 
the superior classes,90 while the heroes are described as “just above the 
level of souls” and the daimons as “more immediately dependent upon the 
race of gods […] though far inferior to it”.91 Furthermore, both daimons 
                                                           
78 Dm V.20.227-8. 
79 Dm I.20.60. 
80 Dm V.20.227-8. 
81 Dm V.14.217. 
82 Dm V.20.227-8. 
83 Dm I.20.62. 
84 Dm I.20.60. 
85 Dm V.20.227-8. 
86 Dm V.14.217. 
87 Dm I.20.61-2. Furthermore, this relationship is defined as one of envelopment. 
Like Russian dolls, Iamblichus describes the noetic gods as surrounding the 
planets. In this way, the hypercosmic gods exist in the noetic realm as such, but by 
mounting the planetary bodies descend into the cosmos as visible gods. Dm 
I.17.50-1, I.19.57-61. 
88 Dm I.20.63: “Οἱ μὲν γὰρ ἐμφανεῖς τε καὶ ἀφανεῖς θεοὶ τὴν ὅλην ἐν ἑαυτοῖς 
συνειλήφασι κυβέρωησιν τῶν ὄντων κατὰ πάντα τε τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ κόσμον καὶ 
κατὰ τάς ἀφανεῖς ἐν τῷ παντὶ δυνάμεις ὅλας”. 
89 Iamblichus 2002: VI.27, VIII.40. 
90 Dm I.10.34, 36. 
91 Dm I.5.16: “ὑψηλοτέραν μὲν τῆς τῶν ψυχῶν τάξεως, τὴν τῶν ἡρώων 
ἐπιτεταγμένην […] τῆς δὲ τῶν θεῶν ἐξηρτημένην τὴν τῶν δαιμόνων, μακρῷ δή τινι 
καταδεεστέραν αὐτῆς”. 

Chapter Four 
 
74
and heroes are identified as πνεύματα (“pneumatic beings”).92 Daimons 
and heroes are functionally differentiated, with the latter being the 
“generative and creative powers of the gods in the furthest extremity of 
their emanations” and the former being responsible for the elevation of 
worthy souls.93 Angels are identified as existing above daimons and below 
gods, serving a function connected to the soul’s theurgic ascent.94 
Iamblichus, in the Theologumena Arithmetica, identifies the angelic and 
archangelic classes as specifically being intermediaries between the 
planetary gods and mankind.95 Finamore notes that among these 
intermediaries, “the visible gods and angels do not make the descent” into 
the sublunary realm of generation, “while daemons, heroes, and purified 
souls do”; and that “Iamblichus later adds archangels and cosmic archons 
to the list of non-descending souls and hylic archons to the list of souls 
that make the descent into generation”.96 
It is here that our discussion of the place of the archons in Iamblichus’ 
hierology can begin. In accord with the Gnostic and Hermetic views of the 
archons forming a single class of beings, Porphyry’s query does not 
distinguish between different archontic types. Iamblichus’ response, 
however, delineates two classes.97 The higher type are described as 
cosmocrators, who “govern the elements beneath the moon” (τὰ ὑπὸ 
σελήνην στοιχεῖα διοικοῦντες). Their role is further outlined as being 
ἡγεμονικά (“hegemonic, or administrative”),98 and εἰ περὶ τὸν κόσμον 
                                                           
92 Dm II.3.73. 
93 Dm II.1.67: “Λέγω τοίνυν δαίμονας μὲν κατὰ τὰς γεννητικὰς καὶ δημιουργικὰς 
τῶν θεῶν δυνάμεις ἐν τῇ πορρωτάτω τῆς προόδου ἀποτελευτήσει καὶ τῶν ἐσχάτων 
διαμερισμῶν παράγεσθαι”. 
94 Dm II.2.69. 
95 Iamblichus 1862: II.43-4; and Iamblichus 1988: VII.43-4. Iamblichus describes 
each of the “heavenly spheres” as an ἀγελας (“flock”), and that “the heavenly 
bodies and spirits which are outstanding in each of these flocks are likewise called 
angels and archangels”; these ἄγελος are identified with ἄγγελος by virtue of the 
“insertion of the lost ‘g’” (“ἐπειδὴ καὶ Βαβυλωνίων οἱ δοχιμώτατοι καὶ Οστάωης 
καὶ Ζωροάστρης ἀγέλας κυρίως καλοῦσι τὰς ἀστρικὰς σφαίρας, ἤτοι παρ’ ὅσον 
τελείως ἄγονται περὶ τὸ κέντρον μόναι παρὰ τὰ σωματικὰ μεγέθη· ἤ ἀπὸ τοῦ 
σύνδεσμοί πως καὶ συναγωγαὶ κρηματίζειν δογματιζεσθαι παρ’ αὐτῶν τῶν φυσικῶν 
λόγων, ἄς ἀγέλους κατὰ παρέμπτωσιν δὲ τοῦ γάμμα ἐφθαρμένως ἀγγέλων· διὸ καὶ 
τοὺς καθ’ ἑκάστην τούτων τῶν ἀγγέλων ἐξάρχοντας ἀστέρας καὶ δαίμονας ὁμοίως 
ἀγγέλους καὶ ἀρχαγγέλους προσαγορεύεσθαι, οἵπερ εἰσὶν ἑπρὰ τὸν ἀριθμόν, ὥστε 
ἀγγελία κατὰ τοῦτο ἐτυμότατα ἡ ἑβδομάς”). 
96 Finamore 2010: 132 (129). 
97 Dm II.3.71. 
98 Dm II.3.72. 

Of Cosmocrators and Cosmic Gods 
75 
ἐνεξουσιάζουσι (“in authority over, or around, the cosmos”).99 The lower 
archons τῆς ὕλης προεστηκότες (“preside, or are set, over matter”),100 and 
are described as περίγειος (“over, or around, the earth”)101 and ἔνυλοι 
(“immersed in matter”).102 Early modern editions of De mysteriis, such as 
Taylor103 and Wilder’s,104 as well as Finamore’s work,105 contain 
annotations specifically identifying the archontic cosmocrators with the 
planets (i.e. the visible gods)—an identification which would place them 
above the daimons in the emanative hierarchy. However, modern 
commentators, such as Dillon106 and Shaw,107 place both archontic classes 
below the daimons and heroes. Although earlier Hermetic and Gnostic 
sources and later Neoplatonists such as Proclus (412-485 CE)108 identified 
the cosmocrators as the planetary gods, the Clarke, Dillon and Hershbell 
edition of De mysteriis notes that Iamblichus “seems to imply a broader 
category of being” when using the term,109 and that his cosmic archons are 
somehow distinct from the planetary gods.110 It is this question that I seek 
to clarify: What is the correct place of the archons? Do both categories 
belong below the Moon, or can an identity between the cosmocrators and 
the cosmic gods be demonstrated? 
To begin, any passages in De mysteriis that directly compare the 
archons to other superior classes must be identified. Speaking of 
Iamblichus’ delineation of the epiphanies of the superior classes,111 Clarke 
notes the similarities between the cosmic archons and the angelic classes, 
                                                           
99 Dm II.3.71. 
100 Dm II.3.71. 
101 Dm II.8.87. 
102 Dm II.3.72. It is also worth specifically mentioning that Iamblichus—like Plato, 
the Hermetists, Plotinus, and Porphyry—does not consider matter to be evil, but 
rather that it is an imperfect receptacle of the One. So, the negatively phrased 
descriptions of the hylic archons and daimons say nothing about the evilness of the 
matter within which they are immersed, but rather that their immersion clouds their 
ability to be as divinely perfect as those higher powers from which they emanate. 
103 Iamblichus 1821: ff. 86. 
104 Iamblichus 1911: ff. 92. 
105 Finamore, 1985: 116: “Iamblichus certainly accepted astrology into his own 
system. See De Myst. IX.4. His very acceptance of the cosmocrators (i.e., the 
planets in their capacity of ruling over human lives) is further proof”. 
106 Dillon, in Iamblichus 2009a: 51. 
107 Shaw: 79. 
108 Proclus: 140: “But the planets are called the Governors of the world, 
(κοσμοκρατορες) and are allotted a total power”. 
109 Dm ff. 122. 
110 Dm ff. 483. 
111 Dm II.3.70-II.9.90. 

Chapter Four 
 
76
and between the hylic archons and the daimons.112 However, she then tells 
us that the “superiority of the cosmic archons is defined only in relation to 
their inferior hylic counterparts, never in relation to other orders, indeed 
no direct comparison is made between the archontic and any other order”, 
while “daemons, heroes and souls are, by contrast, frequently compared 
with each other”.113 This does not appear to be borne out by the text. In the 
first epiphany, the hylic archons are characterised as “more imperfect than 
archangels”.114 More important is a later reference which explicitly 
establishes the ontological priority of the cosmocrators over the 
daimons,115 which clearly distinguishes the cosmic archons as being 
superior to, and in governance over, the daimons—and by extension, the 
heroes and pure souls as well. 
While no further direct comparisons are found, much evidence can be 
gleaned by comparing the descriptions of the archontic epiphanies with 
those of the other superior classes, and by drawing on references to 
cosmocrators and hegemons in other writings of Iamblichus. Just prior to 
the epiphanic descriptions, Iamblichus tells us that the daimonic nature is 
περικοσμίων, and that their role is one of “finishing and completing 
encosmic natures, and it exercises oversight on each thing coming into 
existence”.116 Having previously identified the higher archons as 
governing the cosmos, this passage supports the encosmic daimons as 
being under the rule of the cosmic archons. In terms of appearance, those 
of the cosmic archons are described as ποικίλα (“varied”), but 
διακεκοσμημένα (“ordered, or arrayed”), which seems to place them 
midway between the gods, who appear as μονοειδῆ (“uniform”) and the 
daimons who simply show a ποικίλα appearance.117 
In further regard to appearances, the cosmic archons are described as 
ἀναλλοίωτα (“unchanging”), which is far closer to the appearances of the 
                                                           
112 Clarke 2001: 110. 
113 Clarke 2001: 110. 
114 Dm II.3.71. 
115 Dm IX.9.284: “Ἀεὶ γὰρ ἐν τῇ θεουργικῇ τάξει διὰ τῶν ὑπερεχόντων τὰ δεύτερα 
καλεῖται· καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν δαιμόνων εἷς κοινὸς ἡγεμὼν τῶν περὶ τὴν γένεσιν 
κοσμοκρατόρων καταπέμπει τοὺς ἰδίους δαίμονας ἑκάστοις” (“For it is always the 
case, in the theurgic hierarchy, that secondary entities are summoned through the 
intermediacy of their superiors; and in the case of the daemons, then, the single 
common leader of the cosmocrators in the realm of generation sends down to the 
individual recipients their personal daemons”). 
116 Dm II.2.68: “ἀπεργαστιγὴν μὴν εἶναι τὴν τῶν δαιμόνων καὶ τελεσιουργὸν τῶν 
περιλοσμίων φύσεων καὶ ἀποπληρωτικὴν τῆς καθ’ ἕκαστον τῶν γιγνομένων 
ἐπιστασίας”. 
117 Dm II.3.71. 

Of Cosmocrators and Cosmic Gods 
77 
gods as παντελῶς ἀμετάβλητα (“absolutely unchangeable”), and the 
angelic classes who are “very close to those of the gods” (“πλησιάζοντα 
τοῖς τῶν θεῶν”), than it is to the daimons, who appear to take on different 
forms at different times—a feature shared with the hylic archons, whose 
forms display ἀλλοιοῦται πολυειδῶς (“changes of many kinds”).118 
Furthermore, the καταπληκτικὰ (“amazing, or striking”) appearance of the 
cosmic archons is closer to the benign shining (κρηστὰ τῇ ὄψει ἐλλάμπει) 
of the gods, and βλοσυρὰ (“solemn”) and ἥμερα (“gentle”) forms of the 
archangels and angels, than the φοβερά (“frightening”) visage of the 
daimons, which bears more similarity to the βλαβερὰ (“harmful”) and 
λυπηρά (“painful”) epiphanies of the hylic archons.119 Lastly, τάξις 
(“order”) and ἠρεμία (“tranquillity”) are shown to be the characteristic 
attitudes of the gods and angelic classes, while ταραχὴ (“disorder”) is the 
hallmark of the daimons. In this same epiphanic sequence, the cosmic 
archons are shown as μονίμως ἑστῶτα ἐν αὐτοῖς (“abiding steadfastly in 
themselves”), akin to the higher classes, while the hylic archons are 
θορυβώδη (“turbulent, or uproarious”), in sympathy with the daimons.120 
Regarding the size of the superior classes in their epiphanies, the gods 
are described as being so large that they “sometimes hide the entire 
heaven, both sun and moon” (οὐρανὸν ὅλον ἐνίοτε ἀποκρύπτειν καὶ τὸν 
ἥλιον καὶ τὴν σελήνην), with the archangels, angels and daimons each 
described as smaller and more divided in turn. In contrast, the cosmic 
archons are depicted as μεγάλα (“big, or large”) and ὑπέρογκα (“of 
excessive bulk”), making them closer to the tremendous gods than either 
the greatly divided and small daimons or the hylic archons, who are 
characterised by ἀλαζονεία (“false pretension, or imposture”).121 And, 
indeed, the fact that gods are described not as the planets, but as being 
larger than them would seem to indicate that the gods being spoken of in 
the epiphanies are not of the visible genus. Speaking of the clarity of the 
various epiphanies, Iamblichus tells us that those of the gods “are seen 
more clearly than truth itself” (οὐκοῦν ἐν μὲν ταῖς τῶν θεῶν αὐτοψίαις 
ἐναργέστερα καὶ αὐτῆς τῆς ἀληθείας ὁρᾶται τὰ θεάματα); those of the 
archangels are ἀληθινὰ (“true”) and τέλεια (“perfect”); and those of the 
angels are similar, but somewhat inferior. In comparison, the cosmic 
archons are ἐναργῆ (“vivid, or clear”), which is closer to the higher classes 
                                                           
118 Dm II.3.72. 
119 Dm II.3.71. 
120 Dm II.3.72-3. 
121 Dm II.4.75-76. 

Chapter Four 
 
78
than the ἀμυδρὰ (“dim, faint, or obscure”) epiphanies of the daimons, or 
the identically described ἀμυδρά images of the hylic archons.122 
The degrees of light through which the epiphanies are presented vary 
in intensity. The light of the gods is described as flashing “brighter than 
light” (φωτὸς πλέον ἀστράπτει), that of the archangels as ὑπερφυοῦς 
(“supernatural”), and that of the angels as simply φωτεινὰ (“bright”). The 
light of the cosmocrators, described as a καθαρώτερον (“pure, or clean”) 
fire, which certainly seems to be of a higher order than the διαφαίνουσι 
(“smouldering”) fire of the daimons, the σύμμικτον ἀπὸ πλειόνων 
(“diversely blended”) fire of the heroes, or the fire of the hylic archons 
which is mixed from ἀνομοίων (“dissimilar”) and ἐναντίων (“opposite”) 
components.123 Iamblichus’ expanded description of the epiphanic flame is 
also telling, with the διαφανέστερον (“diaphanous, or transparent”) fire of 
the cosmic archons bearing more similarity to the ἄτομον (“indivisible”) 
and ἄφθεγκτον (“soundless, or inexpressible”) fire of the gods, the 
ἀμέριστον (“undivided”) fire of the archangels, and even the διῃρημένον 
(“divided”) fire of the angels than to the further μερισμοῦ (“divided”) and 
expressible fire of the daimons, and the σκοτωδέστερον (“dark, or murky”) 
fire of the hylic archons.124 Lastly, regarding the epiphanic fire’s stability, 
that of the cosmocrators is characterised by ἠρεμαῖον (“stillness”), which 
is more in line with the πάντῃ σταθερόν (“wholly stable”) fire of the gods 
and that of the archangels—which μέτοχον ἠρεμίας (“partakes in rest”)—
than the ἄστατόν (“unresting, or never standing still”) fire of the daimons, 
the πλέον ὀξύρροπον (“more quickly turning”) fire of the heroes, the 
ταραχῶδες (“turmoil”) of the hylic archons’ fire, or even the μονίμως 
κινούμενον (“permanently moving”) fire of the angels.125 Additionally, the 
description of the epiphanic fire of the gods as decidedly οὐ περικοσμίως 
(“not cosmic”) indicates their hypercosmic nature, which necessarily 
relegates that which is cosmic to the higher archons.126 
Dealing with the purity and stability of the epiphanies of the superior 
classes, Iamblichus begins by describing that of the gods as ὑπερλαμπρον 
(“brilliant”) and remaining fixed in itself (ἐν αὑτῷ μονίμως ἱδρυμένον), 
and distinguishes the archangels and angels from them by increasing 
degrees of being “based in something else” (ἐν ἑτέρῳ δίδου). His 
description of the cosmic archons as μἐνουσιν ὡσαύτως τὸ κοσμικὸν ὅπερ 
εἶχον ἐμφαίνοντες (“remaining in the same state, showing forth their 
                                                           
122 Dm II.4.76-77. 
123 Dm II.4.77. 
124 Dm II.4.78-79. 
125 Dm II.4.79. 
126 Dm II.4.78. 

Of Cosmocrators and Cosmic Gods 
79 
cosmic nature”) bears more similarity to the higher classes than to the 
daimons who exhibit an κίνησιν ἀστάτως (“unresting, or unsteady 
movement”) according to that of the cosmos and are ἀτμοὶ περικόσμιοι 
συμμίγνυνται (“commingled with cosmic vapours”), the heroes who are 
γενεσιουργοὶ πνευμάτων συστάσεις ἀνακεράννυνται (“mixed with the 
generative accumulations of pneumatic auras”) by which they are moved, 
or the hylic archons who are ὑλικῶν ἰχώρων εἰσὶν ἀνάμεστοι (“filled with 
material fluids”).127 There are several more epiphanic classifications in De 
mysteriis, but those that remain are less than clear in relating the 
archons—cosmic or hylic—to the other superior classes. 
Further evidence towards both the positioning of the cosmic archons 
above the daimons and their identification with the planetary gods can be 
found outside the epiphanies. At one point in De mysteriis, Iamblichus 
notes that the heavenly gods govern the οὐρανίου σώματος (“body of the 
heavens”), a function which seems to be the very definition of a 
cosmocrator.128 In another passage, Iamblichus specifically identified the 
sun (ἥλιον) and moon (σελήνην) as οὐρανὸν gods;129 and, since the sun is 
the source of all heavenly and cosmic order,130 these visible gods are seen 
to function identically with the cosmocrators. Later, the same cosmic gods 
are described as responsible for the ordering of the elements within the 
cosmos,131 a function which Iamblichus has already identified as 
belonging to the cosmic archons.132 In his commentaries on Timaeus, 
Iamblichus enumerates seven cosmocrators, which is a clear identification 
with the planetary gods.133 In his commentary on this passage, Dillon 
notes that the cosmocrators “must here be identified with the planets who 
are thus credited with administering the elements (whether material or 
daemonic) of the physical world”—a passage which, again, necessitates an 
identification of the planets with the cosmic archons.134 In yet another 
passage from De mysteriis, Iamblichus describes ἡγεμόωες (a term 
previously identified as a title of the cosmic archons), who are contrasted 
with noetic gods in the same manner he has contrasted the visible and 
invisible gods throughout, as being responsible for the creation of the 
visible world—which indicates unity between the visible gods and 
                                                           
127 Dm II.4.79-80. 
128 Dm V.2.200. 
129 Dm VI.5.246. 
130 Dm VIII.8.271. 
131 Dm V.20.227. 
132 Dm II.3.72. 
133 Iamblichus 2009: fr.11. 
134 Dillon 2009: 276. 

Chapter Four 
 
80
cosmocrators.135 Lastly, it appears that while daimons can either appear as 
κακῶν (“evil”) or ἀγαθῶν (“good”),136 cosmocrators appear wholly 
benevolent,137 which necessarily places them ontologically closer to the 
source of goodness: ὁ παντελῶς ἄρρητον. 
All of this makes, I believe, a convincing case both as to the placement 
of the cosmic archons above the daimons in the hierarchy of superior 
classes, and towards the identity between the visible gods and the 
cosmocrators in De mysteriis. Still, two questions linger. First, what are 
the “gods” of the epiphanies? And second, what is to be made of the hylic 
archons? The answer to the former seems clear now: if the cosmocrators 
are the visible gods, then the gods of the epiphanies must be the invisible 
classes. To the latter, I advance the theory that the hylic archons are a 
further hypostasis of the gods. As we have seen, the term ἄρχων was, prior 
to Iamblichus, used to refer to the visible gods in toto. Iamblichus refers to 
the visible gods as both cosmic and hylic, as noted above. As the cosmic 
realm is superlunary and the hylic is sublunar, it stands to reason that a 
ruling being operating at the cosmic level would be distinguished from one 
governing at a hylic level. Thus, I propose that just as the cosmocrators are 
a hypostasis of the noeric gods, so the hylic archons are the next 
hypostasis down from the planetary gods. I would venture that Iamblichus 
was less than pleased with the conflation of the super and sublunar realms 
in the forms of the Hermetic and Gnostic archons. When questioned 
directly about them, he made a distinction that would more appropriately 
fit his nuanced vision of the world. There are hints around this idea in De 
mysteriis, such as Iamblichus’ remarks that “neither is it the case that the 
gods are confined to certain parts of the cosmos, nor is the earthly realm 
devoid of them”;138 the note that the lowest genus of οὐρανίος θεοὺς is 
φυσικόν (“physical”);139 and the mention that there are such things as 
ἐνύδριοί (“aquatic”) and ἀέριοι (“aerial”) gods.140 There are further 
mentions of visible gods who descend into the realm of generation, which 
is the hylic world below the moon—the domain of the hylic archons.141 
Furthermore, there exists in Iamblichus’ commentary on the Timaeus a 
possible reference to the descent from planetary to material gods. In this 
passage, Iamblichus identifies the twelve Olympians as the hypercosmic 
                                                           
135 Dm VIII.3.263. 
136 Dm IV.7.190. 
137 Dm II.6.82-3, II.9.89-90. 
138 Dm I.8.28-9. 
139 Dm III.28.169. 
140 Dm I.9.30. 
141 Dm I.18.53-4. 

Of Cosmocrators and Cosmic Gods 
81 
gods, but then describes a series of twenty-one ἡγεμόνων (“rulers”) from 
which forty-two θεῶν γενεσιουργῶν (“creating gods”) who were allotted to 
elements emanate, as well as thirty-six δεκαδαρχῶν (“decadarchs, or 
decan-rulers”) from whom descend seventy-two further beings.142 Dillon’s 
commentary on this verse notes that while it is difficult to completely 
distinguish Iamblichus’ views from those of Proclus in this passage, it is 
probable that Iamblichus did distinguish between different genera of super 
and sublunar gods.143 Furthermore, Dillon speculates that, since “21 is 7 x 
3”, the groups of twenty-one and forty-two hegemons are powers whose 
dominion is described as “influence from each of the seven planets 
extending into each of the three elements […] fire, air and water, which 
extend in consecutive layers beneath the moon and the earth”, making 
them the governors “of each planetary influence in each sublunary 
element”.144 In this way, we can see a plenary continuum existing between 
the wholly planetary cosmocrators and the wholly elemental hylic archons. 
If, then, we are to expand the genera of gods to include henadic, noetic, 
noeric, cosmic, and material classes, where does this leave the other 
superiors? What seems most reasonable is an assignation of the archangels 
to the noeric gods, the angels to the cosmic gods, and the daimons to the 
hylic gods.145 The heroes, being more concerned with the soul’s ascent 
than the demiurgic process of emanation, would not necessarily be 
connected as envoys to a specific divine hypostasis. I see support for this 
proposed model in the aforementioned link that Iamblichus made between 
the angels and the planets (ff. 93 above), as well as Finamore’s mention of 
“angels of the sun” who “guide the solar rays”.146 The epiphanies, too, 
                                                           
142 Iamblichus 2009: fr.79. 
143 Dillon, in Iamblichus 2009a: 369. It is also worth noting that it is here that 
Dillon specifically identifies the planetary gods as cosmocrators. 
144 Dillon, in Iamblichus 2009a: 369. 
145 It should be noted that under such a model, even though the archangelic, 
angelic, and daimonic powers would operate at the levels respective of three 
different divine emanations, this would not, say, place the angels above the hylic 
archons in the hierarchy. For, as Iamblichus details in Dm I.20.62, visibility (which 
is the hallmark of descent) does not make the visible gods any less than daimons: 
“τὸ γὰρ θεῖον, ὅπου ποτ’ ἄν ᾖ καὶ ἥντιν’ ἄν ἔχῃ λῆξιν, τὴν αὐτὴν ἔχει δύναμιν καὶ 
ἐπικράτειαν τῶν ὑποτεταγμένων ὅλων. Οὐκοῦν κἄν ἐμφανὲς ᾖ, τῶν ἀφανῶν 
ὡσαύτως ἐπάρχει δαιμόνων, κἄν παρὰ γῆν ὑπάρχῃ, τῶν ἀερίων βασιλεύει 
δαιμόνων” (“The divine no matter where it may be and what its assigned role, 
retains the same power and dominance over what is subordinate to it. So even if it 
is visible, it nonetheless exercises rule over the invisible daemons, and even if it is 
assigned to earth, it still rules over the daemons of the air”). 
146 Finamore 1985: 139. 

Chapter Four 
 
82
would seem to bolster this argument, with the archangels consistently 
being described as just inferior to the noeric gods, and the daimons in 
almost identical terms as the hylic archons. The picture that seems to 
emerge, then, is one of a hierarchy of gods that descend into the very 
elements of the material world and, at each level of emanation, have 
specific envoys with which they interact with human souls. This is, to be 
sure, a somewhat speculative exegesis, but is one that I believe is the most 
adequate solution to the problems posed by the archons. 
Bibliography 
Ameisenowa, Z. (1949) “Animal-Headed Gods, Evangelists, Saints and 
Righteous Men”, Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes, 12, 
21-45. 
Augustine of Hippo, De civitate Dei, www.thelatinlibrary.com/august.html 
(accessed Nov. 2012). 
—. (1888) The City of God in The Works of Aurelius Augustine, Bishop of 
Hippo I, M. Dodds (ed.) (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark). 
Betz, H. D. (ed.) (1992) The Greek Magical Papyri in Translation: 
Including the Demotic Spells (Chicago: The University of Chicago 
Press). 
Burns, D., (2006) “The Chaldean Oracles of Zoroaster, Hekate’s Couch, 
and Platonic Orientalism in Psellos and Plethon”, Aries, 6.2, 158-179. 
Clarke, E. et al. (2003) “Introduction”, to Iamblichus On the Mysteries, 
Writings from the Greco-Roman World 4 (Atlanta: Society of Biblical 
Literature), xiii-lii. 
Clarke, E. (2001) Iamblichus’ De mysteriis: A Manifesto of the Miraculous 
(Aldershot: Ashgate). 
Copenhaver, B. (ed.) (1992) Hermetica: The Greek Corpus Hermeticum 
and the Latin Asclepius in a new English translation with notes and 
introduction (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). 
Dillon, J. M. (1996) The Middle Platonists: 80 B.C. To A.D. 220 (Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press). 
Dodds, E. R. (1961) “New Light on the ‘Chaldean Oracles’”, The Harvard 
Theological Review, 54.5, 263-273. 
Edwards, M. J. (1996) “Porphyry’s ‘Cave of the Nymphs’ and the Gnostic 
Controversy”, Hermes, 124.1, 88-100. 
Finamore, J. F. (1985) Iamblichus and the Theory of the Vehicle of the 
Soul, American Classical Studies, 14 (Chico: Scholars Press). 
—. (2010) “Iamblichus’ Interpretation of the Parmenides’ Third 
Hypothesis”, in Plato’s Parmenides and Its Heritage: History and 

Of Cosmocrators and Cosmic Gods 
83 
Interpretation From the Old Academy vol. 2, J. D. Turner and K. 
Corrigan (eds), Writings From the Greco-Roman World Supplement 
Series, 2 (Atlanta: Society of Biblical Literature), 119-132. 
Gilhus, I. S. (1985) The Nature of the Archons: A Study in the Soteriology 
of a Gnostic Treatise from Nag Hammadi (CGII, 4), Studies in 
Oriental Religions, 12 (Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz). 
Good, D. (1997) “Prayer of the Apostle Paul from the Nag Hammadi 
Library”, Prayer from Alexander to Constantine: A Critical Anthology, 
Mark Kiley (ed.) (London: Routledge), 291-295. 
Holmes, M. W. (ed.) (2010) The Greek New Testament: SBL Edition 
(Atlanta: Society of Biblical Literature). 
Iamblichus (1821) On the Mysteries of the Egyptians, Chaldeans and 
Assyrians trans. T. Taylor (London: Bertram Dobel). 
—. (1862) Theologumena Arithmeticae ad Rarissimum Exemplum 
Parisiense Emendatius Descripta, N. Gerasini & F. Astius (eds) 
(Lipsiae: In Libraria Weidmannia). 
—. (1988) The Theology of Arithmetic: On the Mystical, Mathematical 
and Cosmological Symbolism of the First Ten Numbers, R. Waterfield 
(ed.) (Grand Rapids: Phanes, 1988). 
—. (2002), De anima: Text, Translation, and Commentary, J. Finamore & 
J. Dillon (eds), Philosophia Antiqua, 42 (Atlanta: Society of Biblical 
Literature). 
—. (2003) On the Mysteries E. Clarke, J. Dillon & P. Herschbell (eds), 
Writings from the Greco-Roman World, 4 (Atlanta: Society of Biblical 
Literature). 
—. (2009a) In Platonis Diologos Commentariorum Fragmenta 2nd edn, J. 
Dillon (ed.) Platonic Texts and Translations, 1 (Wiltshire: The 
Prometheus Trust). 
—. (2009b) The Letters, J. Dillon & W. Polleichtner (eds), Writings from 
the Greco-Roman World, 19 (Atlanta: Society of Biblical Literature). 
Iranaeus (1834) Against Heresies, in The Writings of Iranæus vol.1, trans. 
A. Roberts & W.H. Rambaut (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark). 
—. (1907) Adversus Haereses: Libri quinque, U. Mannucci (ed.) (Rome: 
Forzani et Soci). 
Lepajõe, M. (1998) “On the Demonology of Plotinus”, Folklore, 9, 7-16. 
Lewy, H. (1956) Chaldean Oracles and Theurgy: Mysticism, Magic and 
Platonism in the Later Roman Empire M. Tardieu (ed.) (Paris: Études 
Augustiniennes). 
Liddell, H. G & Scott, R. (1996) A Greek English Lexicon, Henry Stuart 
Jones (ed.) (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 

Chapter Four 
 
84
Linss, W. C. (2004) “Hans Dieter Betz, the ‘Mithras Liturgy’”, Biblical 
Research, 49, 5-9. 
Majercik, R. (ed.) (1989) The Chaldean Oracles: Text, Translation, and 
Commentary, Studies in Greek and Roman Religion, 5 (Leiden, E.J. 
Brill). 
Nock, A. D & Festugière, A.-J. (eds) (1972) Corpus Hermeticum: vols I & 
II, Traités I-XII, XIII-XVIII (Paris: Belles Lettres). 
Pearson, B. A. (1984) “Gnosticism as Platonism: With Special Reference 
to Marsanes (NHC 10.1)”, The Harvard Theological Review, 77.1, 55-
72. 
Plato (1903) Platonis Opera, J. Burnet (ed.) (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press) http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper (accessed November 2012). 
Plato (1997) Complete Works, J. M. Cooper & D. S. Hutchinson (eds) 
(Indianapolis: Hackett). 
Plotinus (1951) Plotini Opera P. Henry & H. R. Schwyzer (eds) (Leiden: 
Brill). http://www.hs-augsburg.de/~Harsch/graeca/Chronologia/S_post03/ 
Plotinos/plo_enn0.html (accessed November 2012). 
—. (1992) The Enneads trans. S. MacKenna (Burdett: Larson Publications). 
Quispel, G. (1992) “Hermes Trismegistus and the Origins of Gnosticism”, 
Vigiliae Christianae, 46.1, 1-19. 
Porphyry (1823) Selected Works of Porphyry; Containing His Four Books 
on Abstinence From Animal Food; His Treatise on the Homeric Cave 
of the Nymphs; and His Auxiliaries to the Perception of the Intelligible 
Universe trans. T. Taylor (London: Thomas Rodd). 
Preisendanz, K. & A. Henrichs (eds) (2001) Papyri Graecae Magicae: Die 
Griechischen Zeuberpapyri, 2 vols (München: K.G. Saur Verlag). 
Proclus (1816) The Six Books of Proclus the Platonic Successor: On the 
Theology of Plato vol. 2, trans. T. Taylor (London: A.J. Valpy). 
Remes, P. (2008) Neoplatonism (Berkeley: University of California Press). 
Robinson, J. M. (ed.) (1990) The Nag Hammadi Library in English, 3rd 
edn. (New York: HarperCollins). 
Scott, W. (ed.) (1985) Stobaei Hermetica, in Hermetica: The Ancient 
Greek and Latin Writings Which Contain Religious or Philosophic 
Teachings Ascribed to Hermes Trismegistus, vol I: Introduction, Texts 
and Translations (Boston, MA: Shambhala) 380-533. 
Shaw, G. (1995), Theurgy and the Soul: The Neoplatonism of Iamblichus 
(University Park: The Pennsylvania State University Press). 
Turner, J. D. (2006) “The Gnostic Sethians and Middle Platonism: 
Interpretations of the ‘Timaeus’ and ‘Parmenides’”, Vigiliae Christianae, 
60.1, 9-64. 

Of Cosmocrators and Cosmic Gods 
85 
Van den Broek, R. (1988) “Gnosticism and Hermetism in Antiquity: Two 
Roads to Salvation”, in Gnosis and Hermeticism from Antiquity to 
Modern Times, R. van den Broek & W. J. Hanegraaff (eds) (Albany: 
State University of New York Press), 1-20. 
Wilder, A., trans. (1911) Theurgia or the Egyptian Mysteries: Reply of 
Abammon, the Teacher to the Letter of Porphyry to Anebo Together 
with Solutions to the Questions Therein Contained (London: William 
Rider & Sons, Ltd.). 
 

CHAPTER FIVE 
“SHOWETH HERSELF ALL NAKED”:  
MADIMI IN JOHN DEE’S  
CONVERSATIONS WITH SPIRITS 
STEPHANIE SPOTO 
 
 
 
Introduction 
Ioan Couliano wrote that “the whole power of Magic is founded on Eros”,1 
and Wouter J. Hanegraaff and Jeffrey J. Kripal both make the connection 
between the erotic and the occult, noting that both have “in effect, been 
repressed, made to hide” and that this hiddenness contributes to the 
mystery of the esoteric and the erotic: “[in] some real sense, sex is the 
secret par excellence”.2 Often occult ritual involves the transgression of 
social mores, locating and enacting cultural taboos in order to transcend 
the boundaries which are traditionally constrictive. The erotic and the 
sexual then become a tool through which to experience the breaking of 
mundane bonds and to experience something other. However, when the 
religious system in which the occult practitioner is operating forbids such 
trespasses, their performances introduce questions and anxieties which can 
complicate the perception of these practices. This is especially true of 
Renaissance occult philosophers who attempt to mediate between the 
constraints of Christian morality and the demands of ritual. 
This chapter investigates the introduction of eroticism and sexuality 
into the practical occultism of John Dee and Edward Kelley in the late 
sixteenth century, looking at instances where the orthodox barriers which 
normally divide religion and the erotic are breached, and where John Dee 
engages in what is essentially sex magic. This becomes even more 
complicated when contextualised within the western European occult 
                                                           
1 Couliano: 87. 
2 Hanegraaff & Kripal: x, xi. 

“Showeth Herself all Naked” 
87 
traditions, including hermetic and gnostic customs which viewed the 
“material world, and the body in particular, [as posing] a constant threat to 
the soul, because it tends to absorb it and make it forget its heavenly 
origin”,3 a view which was often in line with contemporary religious 
philosophy, and which would cause confusion for scholars attempting to 
understand Dee’s occult exercises in the context of his devout Christian 
faith. After first outlining Dee’s occult philosophy and its development, 
this chapter then goes on to examine the intrusion of eroticism into Dee’s 
angelic conversations, perhaps the strangest aspect of his career. This 
section is largely focused on the figure of Madimi—a central character in 
their occult exercises, Madimi was a female spirit who introduced the 
doctrine of marital cross-matching into the practices of Dee and Kelly. 
The chapter then moves to look at how various researchers in the 
twentieth century have interpreted the more sexual aspects of Dee’s 
occultism. The vitriolic and emotive responses to these instances of 
eroticism in the angelic conversations point to the anxiety which is present 
in both biographers’ and scholars’ account of his work, perpetuating the 
idea that sensuality does not belong in the magic of John Dee. This essay 
argues that eroticism was a common, though occulted, aspect of magic 
throughout the Renaissance, and that the inclusion of sexuality—though it 
may initially seem discordant with his philosophy—is not incompatible 
when viewed in the context of his occult thought. 
John Dee as Elizabethan magus 
John Dee is “Elizabethan England’s most highly regarded natural 
philosopher”,4 and was “involved in the whole spectrum of Renaissance 
scholarship”,5 according to Peter French’s Introduction to his book 
devoted to this Elizabethan scholar, where he claims that Dee was 
Elizabethan England’s great Magus.6 John Dee’s wide-ranging and deep 
erudition gained him favour with Queen Elizabeth I, who appointed him 
her Royal Astrologer and counsellor “on certain matters of state and 
scientific importance”.7 As court astrologer, he advised Elizabeth on the 
significance of a comet in 1577, and was given the task of reforming the 
Julian calendar in 1583. In return, Elizabeth promised to keep Dee safe 
from anyone who would want to harm him because of his reputation, 
                                                           
3 Van den Broek: 3. 
4 Harkness 1999: 1; Feingold: 545-559. 
5 Szönyi 2006a: 207-229. 
6 French: 1. 
7 Turner: 13-16, 17-26, 99-105. 

Chapter Five 
 
88
which placed him as the “odd one out” amongst the “officially sponsored 
humanist education provided at universities”.8 Perhaps more important 
than either court astrologer or counsellor to the Queen was Dee’s role as a 
natural and occult philosopher. To the English Humanist movement, with 
its dry focus on grammar, Dee’s “Hermetic Platonism, with its magic and 
mysticism, seemed subversive”,9 but although his occult philosophies 
challenged contemporary university teaching, he was still in high demand 
for his vast learning and was solicited by Louvain, Paris, Oxford and 
Cambridge. Though he was sought after by universities, “and already the 
author of learned books, what more could his heart desire? The answer has 
tragic implications. He desired universal knowledge. […] The middle-aged 
scholar could not reconcile himself to human limitations, and was ever 
trying to transcend them”.10 
Louvain was his university of choice, and he travelled there in 1548 
where he acquired a reputation of having “learning quite beyond his 
years”.11 Crucially, until twelve years before John Dee arrived, Louvain 
had been the home and refuge of the occult philosopher, Heinrich 
Cornelius Agrippa, whose occultism—though only beginning to gain 
popularity in England—was already being studied by the students, and 
Dee had the opportunity to immerse himself in his philosophy. French sees 
Dee’s thought as so saturated with Renaissance Hermeticism and 
occultism that it would be impossible to understand him without first 
comprehending his sources, with which he had a remarkable familiarity. 
Like his ideological predecessors, he supports the antiquity-theory of 
Hermes as a contemporary of Moses, and was not only “entirely within the 
Hermetic movement so prevalent during the sixteenth century, but he was 
one of its most extreme adherents”.12 
Like his continental antecedents, Dee placed ultimate authority in the 
importance of hierarchy. Chains of command assert their weight in every 
aspect of Dee’s philosophy; at the top of this ladder is God, wisdom, 
knowledge as gnosis, and the magus must climb his way upwards by 
understanding the nature of the higher spheres: “By the joining of such 
natural things that exist separately in the universe, in their differing 
fashions, and by the activating of other things placed somewhat higher, 
seminally, in nature, more wonderful things can be performed truly and 
                                                           
8 French: 7. 
9 French: 22. 
10 Bulter: 162. 
11 Fell-Smith: 9. 
12 French: 68, 125. 

“Showeth Herself all Naked” 
89 
naturally, without violence to faith in God or injury to the Christian 
religion, than any mortal might be able to believe.”13 
He uses Agrippa’s model of three-layered magic: at the lowest level 
was natural magic which did not violate the laws of nature, but was a 
beginner’s level, in which the aspiring magus could learn to develop his 
occult practices. Here magic was “a natural philosophy providing for 
powers and correspondences, that can be manipulated, and an ethos that 
sought to understand and capture and control the powers and processes of 
nature”.14 Only the most skilled and daring magicians moved from natural 
magic (and the second layer of astrological or celestial magic), and 
operated through the highest level of magic, theological or ceremonial 
magic, because of the threat of coming in contact with chthonic, or non-
angelic, spirits. However, this must be the final step of the philosopher as 
the occult correspondences of theological magic “were seen as paths to the 
divine and the spiritual ascent of the magus”.15 
Just as the occult philosopher could climb upwards, so divine 
knowledge could be passed down through the spheres. In his Preface to 
Euclid Dee explains his astrology as neoplatonic: “Astrology, which 
reasonably demonstrates the operations and the effects of the natural 
beams of light, and secret influence of the planets and fixed stars in every 
element and Elemental Body, at all times in any Horizon assigned.”16 He 
goes on to describe in Propaedeumata Aphoristica how the stars operate 
according to neoplatonic cosmology, which depends on the Hermetic 
premise of “as above, so below”. The superlunar spheres are divine bodies 
and “superior organisms through which God channelled his powers”.17 
Angels drink in the divine light directly from the first sphere, God or “the 
One”, which is the ultimate source of divine knowledge, then man 
experiences this divine light through “the intermediary symbol of the 
sun”.18 This model helped to promote the idea of the heliocentric, or 
Copernican, universe; previously, the Hermetic philosopher imagined a 
geocentric universe, surrounded by spheres of the other elements, within 
the circular spheres of the moon, stars, sun, angels, and above and around 
them all, God.19 
                                                           
13 Dee 1978: 125-127. 
14 Clulee: 29-30. 
15 Clulee: 29-30. 
16 Dee 1986a: 37. 
17 French: 91. 
18 French: 101. 
19 French: 89. 

Chapter Five 
 
90
Dee, along with his European counterparts, embraced the Jewish 
mystical tradition of Cabala, especially in its Christian form as developed 
by Johannes Reuchlin and Agrippa. Dee’s library “contained more Hebraic 
materials than any other library in England during the period, and many of 
the works were annotated” showing his studious attention to the material.20 
In his interpretations of the Cabala, he connected it with Pythagorean 
doctrines, “and this led him to transform Cabala in a mathematical 
discipline that drew on both Pythagorean numerology and Euclidean 
geometry”.21 But his interest in Cabala was centred on its practical magic, 
and his numerology seemed focused on the angelic names, for he believed 
that saying them would give him command over the angels—his Tabula 
Bonum Angelorum Invocationes was concerned expressly with discovering 
the names and hierarchies of angels and spirits.22 He used talismans to 
attract angelic forces, and sought out the forty-two letter name of God in 
the Cabala.23 Though he concerned himself with demonology and the 
names of spirits, he connected cabalist demonic operations “with the 
celestial hierarchies of pseudo-Dionysus, thereby cloaking unorthodox 
demonic magic with the approval of a respectable Christian authority”,24 
though he assigned planets to each of the angels, thereby furthering the 
fusion between angelic hierarchies and astrology.25 
Probably the most bizarre aspect of John Dee’s career is his long and 
intense dedication to his angelic conversations, a series of what he calls 
“exercises” or “actions”.26 Dee had begun to attempt contact with angels 
by 1581, and possibly as early as the later 1560s.27 He was already 
interested in angelic magic during his most ambitious scientific works of 
1569 and 1570, and had begun scrying (the practice of using reflective 
surfaces to obtain psychic visions) and crystal magic during the writing of 
his preface to Euclid; this suggests that he “saw no fundamental division 
between natural philosophy and spiritualism”.28 His conversations 
conformed to a sixteenth century thought pattern that believed that God 
communicated, through his intermediary angels of the middle spheres, to 
                                                           
20 Harkness 1999: 162. 
21 Clucas 2006a: 15. 
22 Turner: 99; Harkness 1999: 180; Dee 2004: 57-100. 
23 Turner: 100-101; Harkness 1999: 162. 
24 French: 88. 
25 Reed: 179; French: 88; Turner: 102. 
26 Clucas 2006b: 239. 
27 Harkness 2006: 276. 
28 Szönyi 2006a: 208-210. 

“Showeth Herself all Naked” 
91 
select individuals,29 and Dee writes in his Diaries, “[I] have been desirous 
to have help in my philosophical studies through the company and 
information of the blessed angels of God”.30 
Though his preferred method of celestial contact was through scrying, 
Dee did not scry himself, but hired a scryer. He had a series of scryers of 
varying degrees of ability, but it was only when he met Edward Kelley in 
March 1582 that his angelic experiments really yielded results. Edward 
Kelley (sometimes called Edward Talbot, and this change in name is often 
assumed to be the result of him hiding from his shady past) would gaze 
into a stone or mirror and act as the medium of communication between 
Dee and the spirits. Although Dee probably knew of Kelley’s rather 
dubious background and history, “it seems to have little influence on his 
assessment of the seer’s clairvoyant abilities”.31 
It is difficult to know whether or not Dee believed himself to possess 
supernatural powers, since he always relied on the aid of a scryer to 
communicate with the spirits. But he did on occasion record witnessing 
them first hand;32 on the fourth of July 1583, Dee wrote that: “as [Edward 
Kelley] was looking earnestly on them, a spiritual creature did part the 
book on the outside of the parchment cover, divers times, and once would 
have taken it out of his hands. Divers times I heard the strokes myself.”33 
Dee’s desire to make direct contact with the spirits is important if 
understood from a hermetic perspective, for the closer Dee moves towards 
the angels and their knowledge, the higher up the neoplatonic ladder he 
climbs as a result. While most contemporary scrying had a financial 
motivation—locating stolen goods or lost items—Dee used scrying as a 
means to attain mystical knowledge.34 In 1582, the angel Hagonel 
promises Dee that he will have power over “all spirits inhabiting within 
the earth”, and a year later Uriel speaks tantalizingly about a book: 
The book containeth three kinds of knowledge: 
The knowledge of God truly. 
The number and doings of his angels perfectly. 
The beginning and ending of Nature substantially35. 
                                                           
29 Harkness 1999: 5. 
30 Dee 1998: 27. 
31 Turner: 23. 
32 Fell-Smith: 59, 88. 
33 Dee 1998: 99. 
34 Szönyi 2006: 215. 
35 Dee 1986b: 41, 32. 

Chapter Five 
 
92
It is easy to see how hints like these could be torturous for the would-be 
grand magus. The ultimate goal of John Dee’s science and magic was to 
understand God’s creative genius.36 He saw his angelic conversations as 
part of the magical hierarchy laid out by Agrippa, whose natural 
philosophy also laid the foundations for Dee’s natural magic. But his ever-
increasing efforts with the conversations suggest that Dee “had entered 
into a period of intellectual crisis so profound that he began to doubt 
whether the information he could find in his books could really help him 
to achieve certain knowledge”.37 With the transmission of divine 
knowledge via the celestial spheres, the human soul can move up or down, 
for as God’s divine light filters downwards through the angels and stars, so 
the devout philosopher can climb upwards towards wisdom. Dee moved 
variously along both pathways, sometimes devoting his energies to his 
studies and sometimes trying to receive “top-down” divine revelation. 
French suggests that “through intense inner contemplation leading to 
direct mystical contact with the divine mens, he may have learned the 
Gnostic secrets”.38 
But his increasing attention towards his angelic experiments suggests 
that he was dissatisfied with what these meditations were revealing to him. 
He began to turn his attention towards the lost primordial language, or the 
lingua adamica, that was supposedly the language Adam used to name all 
the animals and created things.39 His long career in alchemy, in search for 
the philosopher’s stone which would grant its possessor immortality, is 
even more revealing once he begins to call it “Adam’s stone”.40 It seems as 
though Dee desired to restore man to his previous prelapsarian state, when 
he could be in direct contact with the divine. His desire was so intense that 
“he not only abandoned his scientific experiments, but also neglected his 
humanist philological caution and overlooked the serious warnings against 
angel magic to be found even in the works of his favourite occult 
authors”.41 
Erotic magic and the fear of the demonic 
Although Dee’s supposed intentions focused on dealing with purely 
angelic spirits, he seems to have often been in contact with devils, 
                                                           
36 Szönyi 2006a: 209. 
37 Harkness 2006: 277. 
38 French: 177. 
39 Szönyi 2006a: 215. 
40 Cavallaro: 162. 
41 Szönyi 2006a: 218. 

“Showeth Herself all Naked” 
93 
mischievous spirits and dubious half-human beasts. Certainly, his magic 
bordered on the demonic; Reeds points out that Dee’s Book of Soyga 
emphasises the magical aspects of writing liturgical phrases backwards—
for example, the “pater noster” (the Lord’s Prayer) became “retson 
retap”.42 Regarding the use of permissive or black metal, György Szönyi 
writes that Dee and Kelley “must have tried out the ‘illicit’ methods at 
their disposal”.43 Translations of the black magic found in editions of the 
Key of Solomon, which circulated from the thirteenth to the sixteenth 
century, could have found their way into Dee’s magic,44 and indeed a 
comparison between Dee’s “Sigil of Ameth” and the Solomonic “Great 
Pentacle” from the seventeenth century Italian manuscript Clavicolo di 
Salomone Re d’Israel figlio de David allows for the possibility that Dee 
had been influenced by earlier editions of this censored text.45 
The issue of the presence of the demonic within experiments in spirit-
communication presents a problem for any Christian occult practitioner, 
and Dee never seemed willing to deal with its obvious existence in his 
magic, except to remove blame from himself as the pure philosopher who 
was not the object of the demons’ magnetic attraction to his experiments. 
Certain stars could be considered evil because of their “heavy” influence, 
which could often propel men towards wickedness; however, according to 
Dee the evil is already present within human nature and can only be 
amplified by the stars’ influences. Dee writes in his Aphorism CXII that 
“certain of the constellations are sometimes so far called maleficent as 
they pour their energy upon corrupt nature of badly disposed matter […]. 
But the constellations themselves do no harm”.46 Barnabas Saul, one of 
Dee’s early scryers, had a criminal record and elicited distrust from Dee, 
who recorded in his diary that there was an evil spirit that sought Saul’s 
death because he was “accursed”.47 
The descriptions of their demonic encounters and of the demons’ 
visible characteristics seem to follow a theme. On 4 July 1583, Dee writes 
that fourteen demons appear “of divers evil-favoured shapes: some like 
monkeys, some like dogs, some very hairy monstrous men, &c. They 
seemed to scratch each other in the face”; and earlier that year, on 23 
March after a demon appeared he vanished as if he had “been a bunch of 
                                                           
42 Reeds: 179. 
43 Szönyi 2006b: 81-82. 
44 Szönyi 2006b: 80. 
45 Solomon; Dee 1986b: 79. 
46 Dee 1978: 189. 
47 Dee 1998: 30-31. 

Chapter Five 
 
94
feathers pulled in pieces”.48 The demons that come during the angelic 
summons appear to be half-humanoid, half-animal. While Dee was in 
London, Kelley had used the stone without his employer’s guidance, and 
saw an evil spirit in the disguise of an angel “that there appeared one very 
much like unto our good friend”, a good spirit or angel who had been 
guiding them through the lingua adamica. However, when this spirit was 
forced to tell the truth “his outward beautiful apparel seemed to go off, and 
his body appeared hairy, and he confessed that he was an illuder”, and had 
therefore been not a good spirit, or angel, but had been a demon disguised 
in “beautiful apparel”.49 
Another interesting non-angelic experience occurred in April 1583, 
when Kelley was assaulted by demons which looked like “labouring men, 
having spades in their hands and hair hanging about their ears”, and who 
were attacking Dee and Kelley. It is interesting to imagine (as Dee 
describes) Kelley pointing to where they are flying and Dee swinging an 
axe into the invisible air in the direction towards which Kelley is 
motioning. They only leave when Dee brandishes a cross.50 
The conjuring of demons in the form of animals is relatively easy to 
explain if we turn to a history of anthropomorphic legends and shape-
shifting creatures, but the “labouring men” with spades are more baffling, 
unless we imagine a great cosmic hierarchy, the scala naturae, in which 
every being on every level strives to move upwards towards the divine. 
Animals in the upper spheres, such as birds, were seen to inhabit a more 
pure environment than the animals in the lower spheres, such as dogs and 
other creatures which tread on the ground. In this sense, the lower animals 
and the labouring men are not so out of place within Dee’s angelic 
conversations, as they are situated lower on the celestial hierarchy than 
Dee, who sees himself as a great occultist, welcome at the court of Queen 
Elizabeth. These demonic encounters weighed heavily on Dee’s mind, 
though he tried to explain them away by the negative influences of his less 
than admirable scryer. As he moved deeper into the occult studies of 
scrying and the angelic conversations, he began to be troubled by 
nightmares of screeching owls, further suggesting the connection between 
the demonic and the animal. 
Edward Kelley was not as enthusiastic about the angelic conversations 
as Dee, and often claimed that they were a waste of time. Dee and Kelley 
had very different motivations, however, and whereas Dee was interested 
in knowledge, Kelley was interested in monetary reward and wanted to 
                                                           
48 Dee 1998: 99, 54. 
49 Dee 1998: 57. 
50 Dee 1998: 67. 

“Showeth Herself all Naked” 
95 
devote time to alchemy and the transmutation of base matter into gold.51 
Kelley repeatedly tried to influence Dee away from the angelic 
experiments by pointing out that most of the spirits that they had contacted 
were evil, and that they should not be dabbling in demonic magic—an 
interesting concern, considering Kelley’s past. Nevertheless, Kelley’s 
anxieties surrounding the demonic seemed not be centred on the animal or 
the labourer, but on the feminine demon and demonic sexuality. 
During the angelic experiments, Dee and Kelley came into contact 
with many spirits and angels, but some of them had recurring appearances 
throughout Dee’s diaries—a very notable one being Madimi. She was a 
spirit who often appeared during Dee’s scrying sessions, and she would 
give information regarding important visiting diplomats and foreign 
affairs. When she first began to appear in May 1583 she is described as “a 
pretty girl of seven or nine years of age”, who is “child-like” and a “pretty 
maiden”.52 Dee reaffirms Madimi’s youth and innocence throughout the 
following months, and in June writes that Madimi “appeared as before like 
a young girl”. However, as the years go on, and the angelic conversations 
continue, Madimi’s role as the innocent, benevolent spirit changes 
drastically. In 1587 Kelley describes Madimi’s appearance in the stone, 
exposing herself “in a very filthy order”, while the other spirits continue to 
manifest “in that most disorderly and filthy manner”. On 18 April 1587, all 
the other spirits move away, and only Madimi remains, when she then 
“openeth all her appearel, and showeth herself all naked; and showeth her 
shame also”. Here, something remarkable has happened within the angelic 
conversations with the sudden exposure of Madimi’s sexuality. It is 
possible that she “aged” along with the years, starting at age nine in 1583 
and turning thirteen in 1587, and her transition from innocence to 
adolescence is marked by a change in the methods of the angelic 
experiments. Madimi orders Dee and Kelley to share their wives, what 
Dee would refer to as marital cross-matching.53 And on 20 May 1587, 
shortly after the new marital doctrine is introduced, Kelley sees someone 
he called the Green Woman who commands of them: 
The fourth hour after dinner, repair here again. And whatsoever you shall 
read out of this book, receive it kneeling upon your knees: and see that you 
suffer no creature female to enter within this place: neither shall the things 
that shall be opened unto you be revealed unto your wives, or unto any 
                                                           
51 Parry: 196. 
52 Dee 1998: 86-87. 
53 Dee 1998: 94, 213-217. 

Chapter Five 
 
96
creature as yet: for I will lie with you a while, and you shall perceive that I 
am sweet and full of comfort.54 
The spirits demand that in order for Dee to continue in his occult pursuits 
of divine knowledge, he would, essentially, have to engage in sex magic. 
These new commands on the part of the spirits, and Dee’s acceptance 
of them, have often been regarded by scholars as an embarrassment, but 
his compliance demonstrates just how far Dee was willing to go in his 
zealous pursuit of knowledge. This quest is illustrated in a contemporary 
rendering of the Key of Solomon, where the magus achieves absolute 
wisdom: “And when I comprehended the speech which was made unto 
me, I understood that in me was the knowledge of all creatures, both 
things which are in the heavens and things which are beneath the heavens; 
and I saw that all the writings and wisdom of this present age were vain 
and futile, and that no man was perfect.”55 Both Dee and Kelley seemed 
reluctant to submit to the new cross-marital doctrine, and Dee questioned 
the spirits as to their exact meaning, hoping that perhaps they meant a 
more metaphorical sharing.56 The command was issued so suddenly, and 
was so out of the norm from the previous expeditions into the adamic 
lingua and numerology, that it seems that it can only be explained by 
Kelley’s aversion to the angelic experiments, claiming that they were a 
waste of time.57 Dee noted that Kelley had repeatedly said that he thought 
they should not deal with the spirits any longer, and that he had long 
thought that they were evil.58 However, when Kelley’s pleas (based on the 
supposed wickedness of the spirits) were ignored, he must have pushed the 
issue even further. Dee’s diaries “attest to his fidelity as well as the 
abstinence he practised as a means to attain the spiritual purity necessary 
for those in search of higher mysteries”,59 and an important factor in 
remaining pure was abstaining “with great and thorough continence during 
the space of nine days from sensual pleasures” and “from all things 
unlawful, and from every kind of impiety, wickedness, or immodesty, as 
well of body as of soul”.60 Evidence from Dee’s diaries—where he kept 
scrupulous records of dates and times of sexual intercourse, and his wife’s 
menstruation—points to his awareness of these restrictions when practising 
magic, as he does not appear at any point to engage in sexual activity 
                                                           
54 Dee 1998: 226-227. 
55 Solomon: 12. 
56 Parry: 197-198. 
57 Deacon: 203-204. 
58 Dee 1998: 216-217. 
59 Feingold: 550-551. 
60 Solomon: 14, 79. 

“Showeth Herself all Naked” 
97 
within nine days of beginning a new angelic exercise. Kelley, knowing 
Dee, could have invented the commands, never expecting him to go 
through with it.61 Very disappointed at the turn in Dee’s angelic events, E. 
M. Butler wrote in 1948 that “[between] them, he and his ‘skryer’ had also 
initiated a new kind of necromancy, imbued with [a] peculiar blend of 
holiness, phoneyness and feeble-mindedness”.62 
Though it may seem strange that Dee accepted the new doctrine which 
sexualised their magic, he was well aware of the complications 
surrounding female demons and there were hints of sexual magic in his 
symbol of the Monas, which Dee used in his diaries to indicate 
intercourse. French claims this is a sexual symbol of the sun and moon 
interlocking “to suggest their conjunction and generative faculty”63 At the 
top is “Luna Exalted”, and Dee writes in his Monas Hieroglyphica: “It is 
therefore clearly confirmed that the whole magistry depends upon the Sun 
and the Moon. Thrice Great Hermes has repeatedly told us in affirming 
that the Sun is its father and the Moon is its mother: and we know truly 
that the red earth (terra lemnia) is nourished by the rays of the Moon and 
the Sun which exercise a singular influence upon it.”64 Kelley’s own 
alchemical writings developed from theories which were heavy in sexual 
metaphor, where sexual union grew out of “the common and universal 
matter” which “is called Chaos”—alchemy works with the wetness and 
dryness of opposing principles, and Kelley maintained that “all teaching 
that changes Mercury is false and vain, for this is the original sperm of 
metals, and its moisture must not be dried up”.65 And though they seemed 
willing to include sexual symbolism in their alchemical and Hermetic 
philosophies, when it came to feminine spirits, Dee was more anxious. In 
1583, when he comes in contact with Galvah, a female spirit, he writes 
that “Tritemius sayeth that never any good angel was read to have 
appeared in female form”. Galvah reassures him that angels are “neither 
man nor woman. Therefore may those that are the eternal ministers of God 
in his proportion of sanctification take unto them the bodies of them 
both”.66 In 1968, Richard Deacon shared this same discomfort and 
annoyance around the introduction of female spirits, and when remarking 
on the language of the “angels” that Dee encounters he says: “The 
vagueness of the angelic pronouncements sometimes irritated Dee; the 
                                                           
61 Fenton: 209. 
62 Butler: 172. 
63 French: 79 fig. 14. 
64 Dee 1947: 18. 
65 Kelley: 8, 22. 
66 Dee 1998: 91. 

Chapter Five 
 
98
angels seemed to have all the unpredictability of the female species, 
whether they were of the male or female sex, and they had the habit of 
orating at great length in often incomprehensible language.”67 The elite 
occultism of Dee’s time was a male-dominated endeavour with male 
scryers, magicians and spirits, and deviation from this masculine ideal 
threatened chaos. Robert Burton wrote that devils and demons would 
propagate with witches and wicked women, thereby creating new 
generations of demons, and also that female demons would lure men into 
unholy unions, suggesting that women’s ravenous sexuality caused the 
continuation of evil.68 In the Key of Solomon, the “Guide of these Demons 
is Ashtaroth or Astarte, the impure Venus of the Syrians, whom they 
represent with the head of an ass or of a bull, and the breasts of a 
woman”,69 further connecting feminine sexuality, the bestial and the 
demonic. 
Women were not allowed in the realm of elite occult practice, and—
along with animals and labourers—were represented by demons. The 
occult magic of Dee and the continental philosophers engaged in a strict 
hierarchy which placed man above animal and woman, and the learned 
philosopher above the labourer; any attempt to corrupt this hierarchy threw 
the philosopher’s world into disorder. These hierarchies were maintained 
in the journey “upwards”, whilst the aspiring gnostic simultaneously tried 
to keep the uninitiated from progressing heavenwards. When Dee began 
publishing his research, he became worried that it would open the upper 
rungs of the ladder to those unworthy of it: “Oh God! Pardon me if I have 
sinned against Thy Majesty in revealing such a great mystery in my 
writings which all may read, but I believe that only those who are truly 
worthy will understand”.70 
In this sense, the animal demonic and the feminine demonic are bound 
together and are perhaps inseparable when examining Dee’s conversations 
with angels. While it is tempting, given the anxiety about animals and 
humans in this context, to look at these transformations from a Deleuzian 
becoming-animal/becoming-woman perspective, I think there is something 
more going on here. As the animal and the woman both represent lower 
forms than the higher man, especially the educated occult philosopher, 
perhaps these manifestations of women and animals are the demonic threat 
to Dee’s pious reaching towards the heavens, and towards a transcendence 
of his human self into the higher spheres of the divine. Man’s unique 
                                                           
67 Deacon: 128. 
68 Burton: 150-153. 
69 Solomon: 111. 
70 Dee 1947: 29. 

“Showeth Herself all Naked” 
99 
position, straddling both the realms of the flesh and the spiritual, allowed 
for him to move up or down the celestial ladder towards or away from 
God. Aristotle notes that within this scala naturae there are liminal 
creatures which appear to belong to two different categories: men—who 
might move upwards—but also women, who are sensual, mundane, and in 
communion with animals.71 Anxiety surrounding the feminine and the 
animal in Dee’s rituals then exposes the vulnerability of the magician to 
influences which would weigh heavily on him, like the negative influence 
of the stars, hindering him from progressing in gnostic insight. 
Engagement with the feminine would have been an engagement with the 
earthly, the physical, and the flesh to the detriment of the soul, thus 
incorporating female bodies into this quest for ascension complicates 
readings of early modern religious philosophy. 
Understanding the theological background of Dee’s philosophy raises 
interesting questions when trying to interpret the eroticism present in much 
of his theoretical and practical occultism. However, since the occult 
practitioner may expend immense energy attempting to control the objects 
lower down on the scala naturae, then it is possible that ascension from 
the mundane can only occur through an abandonment of the worldly. 
Dee’s abandonment of worldly goods and pleasures is in line with this 
abandonment of his prized possession, his wife. Only after he relinquishes 
this final object from his guarded collection can he be truly be free from 
the earthly, the mundane, and the sensual. Perhaps instead of looking at it 
as engaging in sex magic with a multitude of sexual partners, it was this 
abandonment of the earthly that put this practice in line with the 
philosophers he so much admired. If, as Ioan Couliano says, magic is 
founded on the power of eroticism,72 then the use of sexuality in Dee’s 
angelic conversations should not be seen as an abnormality in his esoteric 
philosophy, but as an essential part of his attempt to reach the divine. 
Bibliography 
Aristotle. (1862) Aristotle’s History of Animals in Ten Books trans. R. 
Creswell (London: Henry G. Bohn). 
Burton, R. (1621) The Anatomy of Melancholy, What it is: With all the 
Kinds, Causes, Symptomes, Prognostickes, and Several Cures of it. In 
Three Maine Partitions with their several Sections, Members, and 
                                                           
71 Aristotle: VIII, I, 588b. 
72 Couliano: 87. 

Chapter Five 
 
100
Subsections. Philosophically, Medicinally, Historically, Opened and 
Cut Up (Oxford: John Lichfield & James Short). 
Butler, E. (1949) The Myth of the Magus (Cambridge: The Cambridge 
University Press). 
Cavallaro, F. (2006) “The Alchemical Significance of John Dee’s Monas 
Hieroglyphica” in S. Clucas (ed.) John Dee: Interdisciplinary Studies 
in English Renaissance Thought (Dordrecht, The Netherlands: 
Springer) 159-176.  
Clucas, S. (2006a) “Introduction: Intellectual History and the Identity of 
John Dee” in S. Clucas (ed.) John Dee: Interdisciplinary Studies in 
English Renaissance Thought (Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer) 
1-22. 
—. (2006b) “John Dee’s Angelic Conversations and the Ars Notoria: 
Renaissance Magic and Mediaeval Theurgy” in S. Clucas (ed.) John 
Dee: Interdisciplinary Studies in English Renaissance Thought 
(Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer) 231-273. 
Clulee, N. (2006) “John Dee’s Natural Philosophy Revisited” in S. Clucas 
(ed.) John Dee: Interdisciplinary Studies in English Renaissance 
Thought (Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer) 23-37. 
Couliano, I. (1987) Eros and Magic in the Renaissance trans. M. Cook 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press). 
Deacon, R. (1968) John Dee: Scientist, Geographer, Astrologer and 
Secret Agent to Elizabeth I (London: Frederick Muller).  
Dee, J. (1947) The Hieroglyphic Monad [Monas Hieroglyphica] trans. J. 
Hamilton-Jones (London: John M. Watkins). 
—. (1978) John Dee on Astronomy: Propaedeumata Aphoristica (1558 
and 1568), Latin and English trans. W. Shumaker (Berkeley: 
University of California Press). 
—. (1986a) “The Preface to Euclid” in G. Suster, John Dee: Essential 
Readings (Great Britain: Thorsons Publishing Group) 37-46. 
—. (1986b) The Heptarchia Mystica of John Dee, R. Turner (ed.) 
(Wellingsborough, Northamptonshire: The Aquarian Press). 
—. (1998) The Diaries of John Dee, E. Fenton (ed.) (Oxfordshire: Day 
Books). 
—. (2004) “Tabula Bonum Angelorum Invocationes” in S. Skinner & D. 
Rankine (eds) Practical Angel Magic & John Dee’s Enochian Tables 
(London: Golden Hoard Press) 57-100. 
Feingold, M. (2005) “A Conjurer and a Quack? The Lives of John Dee 
and Simon Forman”, The Huntington Quarterly, 63.3, 545-559. 
Fell-Smith, C. (1909) John Dee (London: Constable & Company). 
Fenton, E. (ed.) (2004) The Diaries of John Dee (Oxfordshire: Day Books). 

“Showeth Herself all Naked” 
101 
French, P. (1972) John Dee: The World of an Elizabethan Magus 
(London: Routledge). 
Hanegraaff, W. and J. Kripal (2011) “Introduction: Things We Do Not 
Talk About” in W. Hanegraaff & J. Kripal (eds) Hidden Intercourse: 
Eros and Sexuality in the History of Western Esotericism (New York: 
Fordham University Press) ix-xxii. 
Harkness, D. (1999) John Dee’s Conversations with Angels: Cabala, 
Alchemy, and the End of Nature (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press). 
—. (2006) “The Nexus of Angelology, Eschatology and Natural 
Philosophy in John Dee’s Angel Conversations and Library” in S. 
Clucas (ed.) John Dee: Interdisciplinary Studies in English 
Renaissance Thought (Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer) 275-282. 
Kelley, E. (1983) The Englishman’s Two Excellent Treatises on the 
Philosopher’s Stone 1676 in The Alchemical Writings of Edward 
Kelley trans. A. Waite (London: James Elliot and Co.). 
Parry, G. (2011) The Arch-Conjuror of England: John Dee (New Haven: 
Yale University Press). 
Reeds, J. (2006) “John Dee and the Magic Tables in the Book of Soyga” in 
S. Clucas (ed) John Dee: Interdisciplinary Studies in English 
Renaissance Thought (Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer) 144-204. 
Solomon, King of Israel (1889) Key of Solomon the King (Clavicula 
Salomonis), Now first translated and edited from Ancient MSS in the 
British Museum trans. S. Mathers (London: George Redway). 
Szönyi, G. (2006a) “Paracelsus, Scrying, and the Lingua Adamica: 
Contexts for John Dee’s Angel Magic” in S. Clucas (ed.) John Dee: 
Interdisciplinary Studies in English Renaissance Thought (Dordrecht, 
The Netherlands: Springer) 207-229. 
—. (2006b) “Talking with Demons: Early Modern Theories and Practice” 
in G. Klaniczy & E. Pocs (eds) Christian Demonology and Popular 
Mythology (Budapest: Central European Press) 72-88. 
Turner, R. (ed.) (1986) The Heptarchia Mystica of John Dee 
(Wellingsborough, Northamptonshire: The Aquarian Press). 
van den Broek, R. (2008) “Sexuality and Sexual Symbolism in Hermetic 
and Gnostic Thought and Practice (Second-Fourth Centuries)” in W. 
Hanegraaff & J. Kripal (eds) Hidden Intercourse: Eros and Sexuality 
in the History of Western Esotericism (New York: Fordham University 
Press). 
 

CHAPTER SIX 
BURKE’S AESTHETICS OF THE SPIRIT 
SIMON WILSON 
 
 
 
If we are to address the question of inspiration by the “numinous other” or 
the daimon, we have to take the spiritual realm seriously. That is, we have 
to accept the reality of a plane of existence unconditioned by material, 
emotional, psychic, social or other factors. If we deny its reality it may 
disappear from our view altogether. The consequences of such a denial 
could only be an impasse which serves to restrict research and block 
insight. One could equally and more accurately say that it would lead to 
the construction of a wall of rationality around our authentic selves and 
thus prevent truly transformative forces from breaking in, thus selling us 
heinously short as human beings. 
If, then, we are to understand how the “numinous other” is conveyed 
and depicted, how its voice is heard, how it informs and has always 
informed human experience, we need an approach which takes into 
account our true and essential nature as humans. That nature is primarily 
spiritual and secondarily physical and psychic, a tripartite model which 
can be traced back, at least, to St Paul, who, in his first Epistle to the 
Thessalonians, refers to our “spirit and soul and body”.1 In this 
understanding “body” refers to the facts of our physical existence, while 
“soul” is, in the words of one writer, “the nexus of thoughts, emotions and 
desires that occupy most of our inner lives”.2 It describes our “natural”, 
every-day consciousness and emotions. The spirit, finally, is our immortal, 
unconditioned and divine part, our essential reality. It is from God and 
exists always in God. Body, soul and spirit form a complex unity in which 
the body is the vehicle for the soul and the soul vehicle for the spirit. Most 
of us, however, live as if the spirit did not exist, and mistake our world of 
emotions, thoughts and desires for reality. Then the body and soul 
                                                           
1 I Thessalonians 5:23. 
2 Smoley: 20. 

Burke’s Aesthetics of the Spirit 
103 
effectively occlude the spirit: we drown in the material or are suffocated 
by the psychic. However, when the spirit is given its due place in the triad, 
its glow envelopes the body and soul, as a bulb is completely surrounded 
by the light it radiates. When that happens the spirit is revealed to be the 
true vehicle of soma and psyche, and, importantly, to be unconfined by 
them. 
We therefore need an approach which takes into consideration not only 
the elements of our being but also their proper relation to one another. 
Daimons may play an important role here. They are intermediaries or 
messengers between the spirit in and around us and the rest of our being, 
our every-day somatically and psychically conditioned selves. In a familiar 
passage from Plato we read: “Everything that is daimonic is intermediate 
between god and mortal. Interpreting and conveying the wishes of men to 
gods and the will of gods to men, it stands between the two and fills the 
gap [...]”3 Like the angels on the ladder witnessed by Jacob, daimons 
descend and ascend, reconciling, on the one hand, the material and the 
psychic—the world, if you like—with, on the other, the eternal and divine. 
Daimons thus give form to the divine source; they are aspects, that is, of 
God. Such personifications are necessary for us, living in the world of 
material and mental form as we do. We respond to them because they are 
individuated, while at the same time they partake of divine truth much 
more intimately than we do. 
Their very existence, however, also serves to underline how distant we 
are from the divine. If we were closer, we would not need them. Therein 
lies a danger if we pay too much attention to daimons as such: their 
undoubted fascination and charisma may blind us to the fact that, if I may 
be permitted to put it in such terms, they are “only” bearers of the message 
and not the message itself. To mistake them for the Real itself could 
indeed entail a kind of idolatry, separating us from our true spiritual self 
instead of linking us to it. That this is a hazard inherent in a daimon is 
demonstrated by the very etymology of the term itself: as Jean Gebser has 
written, the root of the word “daimon” “is revealing: it is “da-” and has in 
Sanskrit, as dayate, the sense “he divides, cuts off”. The related Greek 
verb daiomai, Gebser goes on, “means not only ‘divide’ but ‘cut into bits, 
take to pieces, tear to pieces, tear limb from limb’” [zerteilen, zerlegen, 
zerreißen, zerfleischen].4 Daimons can only reveal to us the promptings of 
the spirit if we can, as it were, see through them; otherwise they only serve 
to cut us off from our true birthright. 
                                                           
3 Plato: Symposium 202d-203a (Dodds: 37). 
4 Gebser: 159 (translation mine). 

Chapter Six 
 
104
I do not of course wish to be understood as arguing against interest in 
the daimonic. I merely intend to alter the focus a little. There is another 
approach which, I believe, avoids daimonic pitfalls. It addresses our full 
nature as human beings, and accounts for inspiration as well as the effects 
of inspired art. It does so by cutting out the daimonic middleman and 
describing the sudden flooding of being by the divine. It is to be found in 
the field of aesthetics, and is called the sublime. 
Now, I have to say that this is by no means a straightforward claim to 
make, and seems at first sight to be considerably more problematic than 
the discourse on daimons. For example, Ananda K. Coomaraswamy has 
argued that “our use of the term ‘aesthetic’ forbids us […] to speak of art 
as pertaining to the ‘higher things of life’ or the immortal part of us”.5 If 
“daimon” is a Greek word, so is “aesthetics”, and Coomaraswamy reminds 
us that the “Greek original of the word ‘aesthetic’ means perception by 
the senses”, and that the term implies that art “is evoked by, and has for 
its end to express and again evoke, emotions”.6 Aesthetics, in 
Coomaraswamy’s view, is concerned solely with fleeting sensations and 
passions or with the shifting surface of appearances. It would seem 
therefore to trap us more securely than any daimon in the somatic and 
psychic. We can, however, rescue at least one category of aesthetics from 
this crushing rejection. For in the theory of the sublime we can find an 
account of human nature which returns us to the traditional complex unity 
of body, soul and spirit. One could indeed say that it describes the 
embodiment and ensoulment of the spirit (or, more accurately, the 
enspiritment of the body and soul). 
The sublime was central to aesthetic discourse in the eighteenth 
century. Its influence can be traced back to the re-discovery of a first or 
second-century treatise On the Sublime attributed to Longinus7. One critic 
has summarised the qualities generally associated with the sublime as: 
“[…] wildness, grandeur, and overwhelming power which, in a flash of 
intensity, could ravish the soul with a sudden transport of thought or 
                                                           
5 Coomaraswamy: 40. 
6 Coomaraswamy: 13. 
7 Longinus was unusual among classical authors in his emphasis on art as an 
expression of an author’s strong emotions (see Abrams: 72-74, 132-133). 
According to Longinus one of the two innate characteristics necessary for the 
sublime artist was “vehement and inspired passion” (Longinus: 71) (the other 
being “the power of forming great conceptions” [Longinus: 71]). As such, his ideas 
fitted firmly into eighteenth-century sensationalism. Burke, however, goes well 
beyond these somatic and psychic effects. 

Burke’s Aesthetics of the Spirit 
105 
feeling”.8 It was discussed in many eighteenth-century works but the 
single most influential account in the English language was certainly 
Edmund Burke’s A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of our Ideas of 
the Sublime and Beautiful (1757; second, revised edition 1759), in which 
we find the following description of the term: whatever “operates in a 
manner analogous to terror, is a source of the sublime”.9 “Indeed,” Burke 
writes, “terror is in all cases whatsoever, either more openly or latently the 
ruling principle of the sublime”.10 
We are still on the level of body and soul here, the merely “natural” 
level to which Coomaraswamy condemns all of aesthetics. And, indeed, 
Burke’s aesthetics are traditionally understood to belong firmly to this 
sphere. Vanessa L. Ryan has written, for example, that “Burke presents an 
empirical view of aesthetic taste based on sensations and on our 
physiological responses to them”.11 The physical and psychic effects of the 
sublime are, however, for Burke, merely the necessary beginning of a 
cathartic process which can result in a kind of resurrection of the body 
here and now, in which it and the soul are transformed by spirit. To 
understand how that may work, we have to follow Burke through the 
stages of the process. He describes how the sublime revivifies us both 
physically and psychically: 
[…] as a due exercise is essential to the coarse muscular parts of the 
constitution, and that without this rousing they become languid, and diseased, 
the very same rule holds with regard to those finer parts we have 
mentioned [i.e. the “finer and more delicate organs, on which, and by 
which, the imagination, and perhaps the other mental powers act”]; to have 
them in proper order, they must be shaken and worked to a proper 
degree.12 
                                                           
8 Morris: 1. 
9 Burke: 86. 
10 Burke: 102. 
11 Ryan: 269. The historical moment of the sublime and aesthetics in general also 
seems to imply that Burke’s sublime belongs to this discourse. The term 
“aesthetics” itself was coined by Alexander Baumgarten in the mid-eighteenth 
century, and is a product of an age in which materialist theories of human identity 
and perception were beginning to predominate. John Locke famously saw the mind 
as a tabula rasa, its conceptions determined largely by brute sense impressions. All 
imagination could do was to sort, combine and recombine these ideas, like a sort of 
mental file clerk. David Hartley described sensations and their resultant ideas—
indeed the very mind itself—as species of vibrations in the material of the body. 
12 Burke: 164-165. 

Chapter Six 
 
106
The sublime works through our constitution to bring about a radical re-
arranging of both the body and the soul, shaking and breaking them up, to 
subsequently re-establish healthy order. Physical and psychic blockages 
are removed, so that life can flow again: 
[…] if the pain is not carried to violence, and the terror is not conversant 
about the present destruction of the person, as these emotions clear the 
parts, whether fine, or gross, of a dangerous and troublesome incumbrance 
[sic], they are capable of producing delight; not pleasure, but a sort of 
delightful horror, a sort of tranquility [sic] tinged with terror […].13 
The sublime describes, in fact, how we feel when the body and soul are 
revitalised and their disorder, disarray and confusion are healed. It is a 
kind of salutary terror, which produces a feeling perhaps best described as 
calm, yet delighted awe. Burke, however, moves beyond the natural man 
to address the spiritual effects of the sublime. He does this by turning to 
the presence of the divine in the psyche of the individual experiencing the 
sublime. God, in fact, is central to the sublime, though Burke is wary of 
mentioning Him in a context which may be understood as trivialising the 
divine. He writes: “I purposely avoided when I first considered this 
subject, to introduce the idea of that great and tremendous being [i.e. 
God], as an example in an argument so light as this; though it frequently 
occurred to me, not as an objection to, but as a strong confirmation of my 
notions on this matter.”14 Indeed, he finds that the sublime is the foremost 
and the most characteristic aspect of God when we encounter Him 
directly, as full human beings, unfiltered by abstract reasoning: 
Some reflection, some comparing is necessary to satisfy us of his wisdom, 
his justice, and his goodness; to be struck with his power, it is only 
necessary that we should open our eyes. But whilst we contemplate so vast 
an object, under the arm, as it were, of almighty power, and invested upon 
every side with omnipresence, we shrink into the minuteness of our own 
nature, and are, in a manner, annihilated before him.15 
Burke’s words seem at first unsettling. When encountering God and His 
manifestations we are blanked out, or at best contract to a mere point. 
Crushed, as it were, we seem to lose all freedom, and become a little 
oppressed scrap, a fearful remnant. Burke, however, is referring to the 
annihilation of our merely natural self, of a self produced by a body and 
soul which are themselves largely determined by matter and the world. 
                                                           
13 Burke: 165. 
14 Burke: 110. 
15 Burke: 111. 

Burke’s Aesthetics of the Spirit 
107 
That self is erased only to be replaced by our highest self—the spiritual 
self. This becomes clear when Burke, writing of the sublime experience at 
its most elevated, indicates that “the mind is so entirely filled with its 
object, that it cannot entertain any other […]”16 The imagination is, in this 
case, so filled by the divine—unfiltered by reasoning or abstraction—that 
nothing else is present to it. The idea of God, that is, when utterly 
experienced in its fullness and present in the soul of an individual, is 
completely different in quality and essence from all ideas which result 
from sense impressions or abstract reasoning. It frees us from ideas 
passively determined through our senses and from conditioning of any 
kind. The divine then permeates us, body and soul, and we recall our true 
nature. What is important here is that it is fully experienced. To fully 
experience something is to fully live it, not merely to entertain an idea for 
pleasure. It then radiates through one’s whole being. The “idea” of God 
then ceases to be an idea and becomes an enfleshed reality within and 
without us. The sublime, in other words, is what it “feels” like to incarnate 
the divine.  
The “ordinary” sublime, then, produces two things: physical and psychic 
revitalisation. But in the sublime encounter with God—the “divine” 
sublime—three things happen simultaneously. The fleshly fibres of the 
body are subjected to health-giving exercise, strengthening and enlivening 
the frame. The soul is revitalised, re-ordered and healed. But if we are 
capable of fully experiencing the sublime which has it origin in God, then 
our imagination is filled with Him. Our divine, spiritual self floods us, 
body and soul, liberating us from our material and mechanical aspects.17 
We can understand this event as a kind of resurrection of the body, here 
and now. The natural body drops away but the spiritual body takes its 
place. Sublime catharsis is a transformation of the self through the body 
and soul, so that they are placed under the dominion of the spirit right 
now, in this life. We thus become fully enfleshed and ensouled spirits. 
                                                           
16 Burke: 101. 
17 Thomas Weiskel, indeed, argued that a “humanistic sublime is an oxymoron” 
(Weiskel: 3). However, his influential work on the sublime constitutes, as Ronald 
Paulson argued, a perfect example of what Paulson called “the human sublime,” by 
which he meant the “naturalizing, or arguably travestying, [of] the sublime 
encounter […] between man and the most sublime of all objects, God. The 
supernatural force is revealed […] to be a participant in a domestic power 
struggle.” (Paulson: 427) Weiskel’s Freudian reading of Burke leads him to argue 
that “the ‘imminent danger’ to which we are exposed and from which we are then 
released in the sublime moment is an unconscious fantasy of parricide” (Weiskel: 
92). Thus Weiskel protects himself from the divine. 

Chapter Six 
 
108
Burke’s sublime describes the effect works of art may have on us—and 
the effects of other things such as buildings or landscapes, or, to select a 
few words at random from Burke’s contents table, of “obscurity,” 
“power,” “vastness,” “infinity” or “magnificence”.18 All of these occasions 
of the sublime are essentially manifestations or symbols of the divine 
presence. In the sublime moment the world and its phenomena become a 
revelation of God, the Real shimmers through the relative. As St Paul 
writes, “[…] the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are 
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal 
power and Godhead […]”19 Or the opening lines of Psalm 19: “The 
heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his 
handywork.” The cosmos itself, that is, becomes daimonic, proclaiming, in 
all its diversity, the One. It is these moments which inspire—which fill—
the creative artist, and he or she then becomes a living incarnation of the 
divine presence, a local manifestation of the spirit, a bearer of a supra-
human message. He or she becomes a daimon. This of course is an 
evanescent state, not a permanent condition. Artists, for example, are 
generally not saints, and few indeed are embodiments of divine reality. 
Their somatic and psychic parts continue to predominate, and, as 
personalities, they may be unremarkable. But “the wind bloweth where it 
listeth”20 and the sublime can strike at any moment, leaving one, 
temporarily at least, daimonic. Perhaps artists are people who can hear the 
blowing of the wind more acutely than others. Any such theurgic moment 
cannot help but leave a faint residue or colouring behind in the individual, 
with inevitable salutary effects. 
Just as the sublime may be occasioned, for example, by a landscape, 
the works of the sublime artist may not, on the surface at least, be “about” 
God: they do not comprise a description of God or of divine works. To 
expect that would be to mistake the surface or form for the spirit. It would 
be pure idolatry. Sublime works are icons, not idols, behind which the 
divine presence exerts a kind of pressure, an underlying intimation. There 
can be infinite variations in ostensible subject matter or style. Burke, 
admittedly, concentrates on the high poetry of a Virgil or a Milton, but the 
sublime can equally be present in satire, irony or farce. A sublime work, in 
fact, is unlikely to comply with classical rules of form, as defined by 
human reason. A poem or play, for instance, may express as fully as 
possible divine reality, but it will also display certain ambiguities or 
contradictions, as the infinite cannot be squeezed perfectly into the finite 
                                                           
18 Burke: 58. 
19 Romans 1: 20. 
20 John 3: 8. 

Burke’s Aesthetics of the Spirit 
109 
receptacle of human language.21 But if a work effectively transfers the 
spark of sublime inspiration to the reader or onlooker, then he or she too 
will bear that spark, if they are open to it. They too can become daimonic. 
It is significant that the discourse on the sublime came so much to the 
fore in the eighteenth century. It constituted a kind of saving grace in the 
Age of Reason. Banished from science and philosophy, increasingly 
absent from theology and the Church, the spirit re-emerged, first in 
aesthetics, and then, with a short delay, in art itself. The work of Blake or 
Wordsworth is testimony to the new responsibility felt by artists as 
potential bearers of light and truth in a benighted and deluded age. 
It is doubtful whether most contemporary artists would share this view 
of their responsibility—and much the same could be said of critics and 
scholars—which only goes to show how blind and deaf they are to the 
realm beyond the beguiling enticements of matter, emotions and 
sensations. Burke, in fact, in addition to the sublime, also describes a view 
of art which is purely material, and which exists wholly without reference 
to divine reality. He calls it the beautiful, and it consists of the indulgence 
of pleasing feelings. It lulls us into a sweet sleep, the sleep of matter and 
the soul. Burke argues: 
[…] beauty acts by relaxing the solids of the whole system. There are all 
the appearances of such a relaxation; and a relaxation somewhat below the 
natural tone seems to me to be the cause of all positive pleasure. Who is a 
stranger to that manner of expression so common in all times and in all 
                                                           
21 See Leighton: 20: “The sublime object is celebrated by the incommensurability 
of the description. Words are lame to undertake the far flights of the sublime […] 
For Lowth, as for so many eighteenth-century authors, the sublime object comes to 
be expressed by tactical failures of language compensated by religious faith”. I 
would not say that faith compensates failures of language, neither that such failures 
are somehow “tactical,” but rather follow Frithjof Schuon, who, in his discussion 
of sacred Scriptures, sees the failure as an inevitable result of the pressure of 
spiritual reality: “The seeming incoherence of these texts [i.e. sacred Scriptures] 
[…] always has the same cause, namely the incommensurable disproportion 
between the Spirit on the one hand and the limited resources of human language on 
the other: it is as though the poor and coagulated language of mortal man would 
break under the formidable pressure of the Heavenly Word into a thousand 
fragments, or as if God, in order to express a thousand truths, had but a dozen 
words at his disposal and so was compelled to make use of allusions heavy with 
meaning, of ellipses, abridgements and symbolical syntheses.” (Schuon: 40-41) I 
do not mean to imply that sublime writings are direct revelations of divinity on a 
par with sacred Scripture, but, in their own much more limited way, they are 
inspired by divine reality. 

Chapter Six 
 
110
countries, of being softened, relaxed, enervated, dissolved, melted away by 
pleasure?22 
What he calls the beautiful consists of a descent into pure sentiment and 
pure sensationalism. It occludes the spirit under soft and heavy layers of 
physical and emotional flab. It makes us greedy for more emotional food, 
lures us into addiction to physical and psychic gratification. We need and 
become lost in an endless flood of images, without centre. This 
predicament is both a cause and a symptom of the failure of artists and 
their audience to acknowledge the reality of the divine. 
Such metaphors illuminate the danger of drowning in the quotidian, of 
perceiving nothing beyond the sublunary. They may, admittedly, be 
somewhat exaggerated. But it seems clear that unless scholars are open to 
the reality of the divine—open to the spirit—they will fail to understand 
manifestations of the numinous. We have to be prepared to slough off our 
every-day selves and to be transformed by the presence of the divine. We 
too have to become daimons, however briefly and however lowly. 
Bibliography 
Abrams, M. H. (1953) The Mirror and the Lamp: Romantic Theory and 
the Critical Tradition (New York: Oxford University Press). 
Burke, E. (1998) A Philosophical Enquiry into the Sublime and Beautiful 
and Other Pre-Revolutionary Writings, D. Womersley (ed.) (London: 
Penguin Books). 
Coomaraswamy, A. K. (1977) “Figure of Speech or a Figure of Thought?” 
in R. Lipsey (ed.) Selected Papers Volume 1: Traditional Art and 
Symbolis (Princeton: Princeton University Press).  
Dodds, E. R. (1990) Pagan and Christian in an Age of Anxiety: Some 
Aspects of Religious Experience from Marcus Aurelius to Constantine 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).  
Gebser, J. (2003) Ursprung und Gegenwart. Erster Teil. Die Fundamente 
der aperspektivischen Welt. Beitrag zu einer Geschichte der 
Bewußtwerdung (Schaffhausen: Novalis Verlag). 
Leighton, A. (1984) Shelley and the Sublime: An Interpretation of the 
Major Poems (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). 
Longinus (1967) “On the Sublime” in J.H. Smith & E.W. Park (eds) The 
Great Critics: An Anthology of Literary Criticism (New York: W.W. 
Norton & Company). 
                                                           
22 Burke: 177-178. 

Burke’s Aesthetics of the Spirit 
111 
Morris, D. B. (1972) The Religious Sublime: Christian Poetry and Critical 
Tradition in 18th Century England (Lexington: The University Press of 
Kentucky).  
Paulson, R. (1984-1985) “Versions of a Human Sublime”, New Literary 
History 16, 427-437. 
Ryan, V. L. (2001) “The Physiological Sublime: Burke’s Critique of 
Reason”, Journal of the History of Ideas 62, 265-279. 
Schuon, F. (2005) Understanding Islam (Delhi: New Age Books). 
Smoley, R. (2002) Inner Christianity: A Guide to the Esoteric Tradition 
(Boston, MA: Shambhala). 
Weiskel, T. (1976) The Romantic Sublime: Studies in the Structure and 
Psychology of Transcendence (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University 
Press). 
 

CHAPTER SEVEN 
UNCANNY INTELLIGENCE  
IN PSYCHOANALYSIS AND DIVINATION 
MAGGIE HYDE 
 
 
 
In this chapter I discuss how daimonic or uncanny intelligence underpins 
both psychoanalysis and divination,1 giving ancient divinatory practices 
a home in psychoanalysis. This can be seen as linked to the slow 
revolution in thought brought about by a change in the perception of the 
cosmos and the deconstruction of the classical world order initiated by 
Copernicus and Galileo. The discovery of the new planet Uranus in 1781 
finally dispelled the symbolic and numerological harmony of the old 
cosmos and literally brought it to an end,2 while the long-enduring 
medieval cosmos became a relic, a “discarded image”, as a new order 
based on Enlightenment thought emerged.3 The coincidence of this final 
disintegration with Kant’s epochal Critique of Pure Reason invites us to 
                                                           
1 By the term psychoanalysis, I understand the early development of modern 
dynamic psychiatry and its development into Freud’s psychoanalysis and 
psychotherapy. I define “divination” as “the universal practice of submitting 
human desires and volition to guidance from, and an alignment with, an assumed 
intelligence of the cosmos”. See discussion on this by Cornelius: 2. 
2 This was especially the case for astrologers and occultists whose symbolism was 
based on the traditional Chaldean order of the seven planets, embedded by Ptolemy 
into the science of late antiquity. The symbolism of a hierarchy of the heavens was 
integral to the medieval cosmos, both Christian and Islamic. The heliocentrism of 
Copernicus destroyed Ptolemy’s scientific cosmology but not the symbolism of the 
heavens, since God can be symbolised by the sun at the centre of the cosmic order. 
A more radical destruction came with Galileo when the cosmos was re-imagined in 
terms of material infinity. With the discovery of a new planet, the last defence of 
the astrologer’s ancient symbolic order was undermined and a new one had to be 
found. See Hyde 2005. 
3 See Lewis, especially ch. 5 “The Heavens”, for the medieval conception of reality 
as one world. 

Uncanny Intelligence in Psychoanalysis and Divination 
113 
see 1781 as a symbolic fulcrum between pre and post Enlightenment 
thought, and the origin of the occult Tarot in the same year indicates a 
remarkable parallel in occultism.4 
Divination as a pure expression of the occult is part of the pre-
Enlightenment world view, in that it assumes what may be broadly 
characterised as unus mundus, the one world. This is a cosmological and 
ontotheological unity or fundamental relation of mind and the divine order 
of reality. There is, of course, not simply one “one world” but rather a 
range of cultural expressions of the same underlying theme, yet all share 
the implicit and unquestioned assumption of an intelligible and intelligent 
cosmos. The rationale of divination is founded in, posits, and interprets 
this spiritual identity, so in the post-Enlightenment era divination 
struggled to either reassert the order of pre-modernity or reframe itself 
within the new ontology. The thought of the Enlightenment is wholly 
radical in comprehensively overthrowing traditional metaphysics and with 
it the ontotheological one world in all its forms, leading inexorably to the 
decline of classical forms of divination and magic, including astrology.5 
The Enlightenment provided the philosophical grounding for what we now 
assume to be “normal”, so that the uncanny and the spiritual took on the 
garb of paranormality. As well as divination, a whole array of phenomena 
that could not be fitted into an Enlightenment rationale, such as ghosts, 
spirits and miracles, were marginalised and dismissed as “uncanny”, 
whilst non-scientific explanations of them were seen as irrational or 
“occult”. 
During the eighteenth century, the idea of an “inner world” began to 
emerge, distinct from an outside world of nature or society, and this suited 
perfectly the Enlightenment separation of man and cosmos. The world 
soul of Plato, with which man’s own soul was entwined, no longer had 
efficacy, and man’s soul was no longer an integral part of the cosmos but 
became resident solely within the human being. The Greek psyche, 
meaning breath or soul, implied human mind in a cosmic frame, but its 
derivative psychology no longer carries this connotation. Derived from the 
modern Latin psychologia in the sixteenth century, the word did not 
appear in German until then, and although it had a recorded English usage 
from 1794, it was not widely used until the nineteenth century.6 Huxley’s 
                                                           
4 Gébelin first published his ideas on the Tarot as divination in 1781 in Paris. 
5 See Thomas. The social and cultural roots of this decline have been much 
debated. My own conclusions confirm a key suggestion from Thomas concerning 
the erosion of faith in the “supernatural” explanations for phenomena in the face of 
the rapid progress of the “mechanical philosophy”. 
6 Oxford English Dictionary, entry on “psychology”. See also Williams: 246. 

Chapter Seven 
 
114
definition in 1879 illustrates the absence of any cosmological reference: 
“Psychology is part of the science of life, or biology […]. As the 
physiologist inquires into the way in which the so-called “functions” of the 
body are performed, so the psychologist studies the so-called “functions” 
of the mind”.7 
The rise of dynamic psychiatry parallels this change in psyche and the 
forefathers of dynamic psychiatry, Mesmer and Charcot, thought of 
themselves as part of the new Enlightenment science.8 In their work we 
witness the bumpy passage from pre to post Enlightenment thought as they 
painfully tried to turn the material they worked with into science. We can 
now see that whatever scientific explanations Mesmer had for cosmic fluid 
and Charcot had for the hypnotic technique, the phenomena they 
encountered and their techniques for handling them overlapped with the 
uncanny world that the Enlightenment had rejected. Mesmer’s fluid, for 
example, had its precursor in the medieval idea of a one world cosmic 
fluid, but its objective existence was denied in 1784 by a scientific 
commission that considered it to be “imagination”.9 
The paranormal dimension of psyche fascinated both psychologist and 
scientist, and the work of the Society of Psychical Research, founded in 
1882, exemplified the strong impetus to bring these phenomena into the 
remit of science. Psychical researchers following in the footsteps of 
Myers took on questions of the afterlife and spirit world, and mediumship 
attracted eminent academics and psychologists. For example, after many 
years of involvement with the medium Mrs Piper, and despite allegations 
of fraud, William James considered that the evidence provided by her was 
his “white crow”, convincing him of the reality of these phenomena.10 
Scientific and psychological researchers were engaged in both empirical 
psychology and the paranormal, showing the continued entanglement of 
                                                           
7 OED. 
8 Ellenberger, especially ch. 2, “The Emergence of Dynamic Psychiatry”, where 
Mesmer is considered as a “son of the Enlightenment” (62). Although Charcot 
believed in faith healing, he was also “the foremost neurologist of his time” (90). 
He owned a “collection of rare old works on witchcraft and possession” but 
“founded a scientific explanation of demoniacal possession”, seeing it as a form of 
hysteria (95).  
9 Ellenberger, 65, citing Rapport des Commissaires chargés par le Roy de 
l’examen du magnétisme animal (Paris 1784). 
10 Murphy & Ballou, 41, quoting James “If you wish to upset the law that all crows 
are black, it is enough if you prove that one crow is white. My white crow is Mrs 
Piper.” 

Uncanny Intelligence in Psychoanalysis and Divination 
115 
the two in the latter years of the nineteenth century.11 It has been 
observed that: 
many of the leading psychologists—Freud, Jung, Ferenczi, Bleuler, James, 
Myers, Janet, Bergson, Stanley Hall, Schrenck-Notzing, Dessoir, Richet 
and Flournoy—frequented mediums. It is hard today to imagine that some 
of the most crucial questions of the “new” psychology were played out in 
the séance, nor how such men could have been so fascinated by the spirits. 
What took place in the séances enthralled the leading minds of the time, 
and had a crucial bearing on many of the most significant aspects of 
twentieth-century psychology, linguistics, philosophy, psychoanalysis, 
literature, and painting, not to mention psychical research.12 
The culmination of engagement yet also the moment of schism for 
paranormal studies and psychology is demonstrated in Théodore Flournoy’s 
From India to the Planet Mars, recording his experience over several 
years at séances with the medium Hélène Smith.13 She incarnated dead 
personages and conversed with them, including an Arabic princess who 
spoke Sanskrit; but as Flournoy disparagingly pointed out, this princess 
could not even speak Arabic, her supposed mother tongue. When Hélène 
later went to Mars, she spoke Martian with the natives.14 Flournoy 
explained Hélène’s world of mediumship in terms of the unconscious 
mind, describing her reincarnations as a mixture of cryptomnesia and 
creative imagination, and his work firmly established the psychologisation 
of mediumship and the “transition from spiritualism to multiple 
personality”.15 For William James, Flournoy was responsible for “converting 
psychical research into a respectable science”.16 
At the time of its publication in 1899,17 From India to the Planet Mars 
had enormous impact, more so than Freud’s Interpretation of Dreams with 
which it is exactly contemporary.18 Flournoy originally subtitled the work 
                                                           
11 See Shamdasani 2003: 4: “Through becoming a science, it was hoped that 
psychology would be able to solve questions that had vexed thinkers for centuries, 
and to replace superstition, folk wisdom, and metaphysical speculation with the 
rule of universal law”. 
12 Shamdasani 1994: xi; Flournoy 1899. 
13 See Flournoy. Hélène Smith’s real name was Ēlise Muller. 
14 See Flournoy, Appendix by Mirielle Citali, “The Making of Martian: The 
Creation of an Imaginary Language”, 269. Citali discusses the development of the 
Martian language in the light of the relationship between Hélène and Flournoy.   
15 Flournoy: xxxi. Cryptomnesia is subliminal or unconscious memory. 
16 Flournoy, quoted by Shamdasani 1994: xxvi. 
17 In German at the end of 1899, in English in 1900. 
18 See Shamdasani 1994: “Encountering Hélène”, xxxi. 

Chapter Seven 
 
116
A Study of a Case of Somnambulism with Glossolalia. The 1994 edition, 
edited by Sonu Shamdasani, changes this subtitle to A Case of Multiple 
Personality with Imaginary Languages. This change is both surprising and 
highly significant. Glossolalia, or speaking in tongues, belongs to 
psychical research in that it still retains the question and lingering 
possibility of discarnate entities beyond the medium’s own mind. On the 
other hand, Multiple Personality moves the centre of gravity of our 
concern so that Hélène’s mediumship is seen exclusively in terms of her 
psyche, her inner world and imagination, and her mediumship is 
psychologised. Shamdasani explains the subtitle change as the need “to 
indicate the contemporary contexts that the text reinstates itself within”.19 
As far as Shamdasani and most other modern commentators are 
concerned, the primary context of Flournoy’s work has now become that 
of psychoanalytic history, not psychical research, and it concerns the 
function of the individual psyche within the field of psychoanalysis. 
Flournoy’s original title identifies Hélène’s mediumship as a type of 
glossolalia, characterised as having “no I standing at the source of the 
utterance at the centre of the discourse”,20 and this accords with Hélène’s own 
insistence that it was not her speaking, not something within her but 
something other speaking through her—“it comes from somewhere outside 
herself”.21 However, Flournoy assumes that the “other” speaking at the centre 
is Hélène’s unconscious, and thus he reduces her glossolalia to unconscious 
personal content, granting her no other reality. Her reality of India and Mars 
necessarily becomes a fiction. Hélène concedes that her vision may not 
actually be of Mars—”she did not hold tenaciously to the distinctly Martian 
origin of that strange dream,”22—but if a literal visit to Mars was impossible, 
Mars must be symbolic. Symbolic of what? For Flournoy, it is a symbol of a 
psychological state, but Hélène places the symbolism within contemporary 
explanations of mediumship. Flournoy summarises her view that: 
there are two methods of explaining this knowledge of a far-off world—
namely, communications properly spiritistic (i.e. from spirits to spirits, 
without material intermediary) the reality of which cannot be held to be 
doubtful; and clairvoyance, that faculty, or undeniable sixth sense, of 
mediums which permits them both to see and hear at any distance.23 
                                                           
19 Shamdasani 1994: Editorial Note. He explores these contexts in his introduction 
and through an appendix. 
20 Marina Yaguello, in Shamdasani 1994: xxxix. 
21 Shamdasani 1994: 166. 
22 Shamdasani 1994: 166. 
23 Shamdasani 1994: 166. 

Uncanny Intelligence in Psychoanalysis and Divination 
117 
This shows Hélène to have an awareness of the contemporary debate about 
mediumship; but despite this evidence, Flournoy still regards her as naïve 
and gullible. After publication, she felt betrayed and became angry with 
Flournoy,24 but the root of her anger is Flournoy’s reduction of the 
symbolic to the psychological. Hélène has lost her mother tongue in that 
she speaks Martian, the language of the alien, of the distinctively “other” 
and non-human, but Flournoy insists that this alien “other” must be the 
personal unconscious. To Hélène, Flournoy’s explanatory psychology is a 
“silly and absurd hypothesis of an underlying selfplotting in her, unknown 
to her”.25 
Shamdasani’s new subtitle therefore not only accords with Flournoy’s 
intention but also with the changing status of mediumship. The modern 
subtitle locates Hélène’s India and Mars only in psychological terms, and 
not as India (world) and Mars (cosmos), a symbolic expression in the same 
way that glossolalia might be a symbolic expression. Psychoanalysis may 
work with symbolism but it reduces symbols to symptoms of an 
intrapsychic state, whereas to the medium they are expressions of a 
transpsychic reality. 
The same psychologisation is fundamental to Freud. By 1885 when he 
published his first psychoanalytic work, Studies in Hysteria, he was able to 
take up psyche as separate from the realm of the uncanny in his attempt to 
establish a law of the mind and its psychic apparatus, which he objectified 
in accordance with scientific thought.26 There is persuasive evidence to 
suggest that Freud has consistently been mistranslated and misunderstood 
in English, so that his deep meaning of the soul is lost in translation as 
“mind” or “mental apparatus”. Even with this caveat, for Freud, “soul” 
still had no religious sense.27 While he accepted some uncanny phenomena 
such as telepathy and thought transference, these always pertained to the 
inner world of the individual,28 and he suggested that psychoanalysis and 
the occult were so different that “collaboration between analysts and 
                                                           
24 Shamdasani reports that after the publication of From India to the Planet Mars 
there was a “bitter and prolonged dispute between Flournoy and Hélène, which 
ended in a complete disruption”, Shamdasani 1994: xxxii. 
25 Shamdasani 1994: 167. 
26 See Heaton: 27 “Freud invented a procedure and a system that he thought was 
scientific. As he idealised science so he idealised his ‘discoveries’ about himself. 
And his followers have idealised him and his ‘discoveries”. 
27 Bettelheim: 70-78. 
28 See Freud 1921, where he gives several case histories of clients’ experiences 
with occult phenomena and fortune-telling, especially astrology, and suggests that 
these are repressed wishes manifesting through thought transference. 

Chapter Seven 
 
118
occultists has little prospect of being profitable”.29 He developed his 
theories and analysis of the unconscious initially through hypnosis, and 
later through dreams, which he annexed as a key analytic method to reveal 
the psyche.30 No matter that dreams had been a major prophetic vehicle 
since antiquity, it was vital to Freud that the dream pertained to the 
individual psyche. The dream was internalised and psychologised, 
overcoming a “one world” philosophy that had understood the possibility 
of dreams being sent from the gods or some “other” in an intelligent 
cosmos. Freud suggested that “The pre-scientific view of dreams adopted 
by the peoples of antiquity was certainly in complete harmony with their 
view of the universe in general, which led them to project into the external 
world as though they were realities things which in fact enjoyed reality 
only within their own minds.”31 
According to Bettelheim, Freud deliberately chose to title his work Die 
Traumdeutung32 (Interpretation of Dreams) in order to be associated with, 
and to supercede, the deep meaning found in ancient forms of divination 
and fortune-telling. The German word deutung is mistranslated as 
interpretation, since German has its own word for interpretation that Freud 
could have used if he had so wished.33 By using deutung, derived from 
both deuten, “to point with a finger at something”, and bedeuten, “what is 
its sense, what does it mean, what is behind it, what is at the bottom of it”, 
Freud wished to show that dreams were complex and had many layers.34 
More importantly, Traumdeutung echoes Sterndeutung, the German word 
for astrology, and for both, deutung carries the sense of divination and 
prophecy. As Bettelheim observes, Freud wished to move psychoanalysis 
into the territory that prophecy once occupied 
[to] give the impression that his book dealt with the ancient pseudoscience 
of dream interpretation and would even evoke associations to that other 
equally ancient pseudoscience, astrology. The English title gives the 
impression that Freud presented a definitive treatise on dreams: by failing 
                                                           
29 Freud 1941 and 1922 in Devereux: 58, also Freud 1915-17.  
30 In the first sentence of The Interpretation of Dreams, Freud states that “every 
dream reveals itself as a psychical structure which has a meaning”, and it is this 
meaning and structure that he seeks to understand in the personal, inner world of 
the individual, despite his awareness of dreams being ancient and prophetic. 
Shamdasani (2003) discusses the psychologisation of the dream (115-120). 
31 Freud 1900: 60. 
32 Traum = dream, deutung = interpretation. 
33 There are three German words for “interpretation”, vis. ausdeutung, interpretation 
and interpretierung. 
34 Bettelheim: 66. 

Uncanny Intelligence in Psychoanalysis and Divination 
119 
to summon associations to astrology, it does not suggest the parallel 
between the discovery of the true nature of the universe and the discovery 
of the true inner world of the soul.35 
For Bettelheim, ancient forms of divination such as dream prophecy and 
astrology are “pseudoscience”, “popular superstitions” and “utter 
nonsense”, and he implicitly supports Freud’s endeavour through 
psychoanalysis to establish the “true inner world of the soul”. He cannot 
envisage that the deep meaning of the soul could and did find valid 
expression in pre-Enlightenment forms of divination such as dreams and 
astrology. On the assumption that divination is only prediction, he 
suggests that Freud’s Traumdeutung turned the beliefs of astrologers and 
dream interpreters upside down: he showed that through the interpretation 
of dreams we cannot predict the future but can indeed discover otherwise 
unknown events of the past.36 This is the “divining backwards” of von 
Feuchtersleben,37 refuting dreams as prophecy and understanding that 
their purpose is to give information about the self: “As when the sun has 
gone down, the countless stars, not visible in daytime, appear on the dark 
ground of the firmament, so, at the call of fancy, the forgotten images of 
bygone days rise up and show the mind its former shape.”38 
Psychoanalysis is rooted in identical concerns to those of divination: 
namely, to address the desires of the soul—but in this “divining backwards”, 
Bettelheim accepts psychoanalysis as causal and concerned with symptoms, 
and rejects any purposeful and teleological dimension to the soul’s desires. 
The individual is not aligned with an intelligent, cosmological “other” 
because everything ultimately comes from, and returns to, the causal 
foundation of the individual and his or her psychology. 
Through Freud’s psychologisation of the dream and Flournoy’s 
psychologisation of mediumship, eventually all uncanny intelligence could 
be appropriated to psychological understanding. This very psychologisation 
is a post-Enlightenment gesture, reducing one world phenomena to the 
inner world and personal unconscious of the individual. The image of the 
world-soul (anima mundi) becomes part of the discarded image of 
antiquity and no longer has depth of meaning or any ability to cross the 
subject-object Enlightenment schism. Psychotherapists following in the 
                                                           
35 Bettelheim: 70. 
36 Bettelheim: 67. 
37 Shamdasani 2003: 112-113. The phrase “divining backwards” is coined by 
Shamdasani from von Feuchtersleben’s remark on a “common expression” that a 
dreamer may “divine like a prophet looking backwards”. 
38 Von Feuchtersleben 1845, quoted from Shamdasani 2003: 112. 

Chapter Seven 
 
120
tradition of Jung39 have attempted to restore the world-soul through 
archetypal psychology, and this stands in contrast to the mainstream of 
psychotherapy, which still privileges the individual’s “inner world”. As 
James Hillman remarks, “the psyche, the soul, is still only within and 
between people […] psychotherapy is only working on that ‘inside’ soul. 
By removing the soul from the world and not recognizing that the soul is 
also in the world, psychotherapy can’t do its job anymore.”40 
At the heart of both psychoanalysis and divination is the use of 
symbolism, in which one thing represents another. Both are disciplines of 
the symbolic, assuming that the world of objects is full of hidden meaning, 
and both observe a world of resemblances that tell us what latent context 
or content lies beneath surface appearance. As Freud infamously said, 
sometimes a cigar is only a cigar, but in the world of resemblances, it may 
also be a phallus. The connection with a pre-Enlightenment world-view 
has been recognised by analysts themselves, although the Freudian Donald 
Spence is critical of this use of resemblances in so far as it is rooted in the 
medieval doctrine of signatures, based on the cosmic sympathy of all 
things. According to Spence, dream symbols and language, slips of the 
tongue and so on, are full of disguised meaning, in the same way as the 
medieval mind understood the doctrine of signatures. The planet Mars is 
red, it therefore resembles iron and blood, corresponding with war, 
swords, anger and so on. He believes that “the spread of psychoanalytic 
theory has brought us back to the middle ages once again.”41 He exposes 
the fact that a symbolic attitude gives both analyst and diviner a common 
methodology in dealing with patients and clients. Both use symbolism to 
reveal an unknown, but for the analyst this symbolism is seen as pertaining 
exclusively to the person and his or her psychic apparatus, interpreted and 
causally reduced to the person’s unconscious. For the diviner, although the 
symbolism may be personal, it is necessarily embedded in something 
broader, with the potential for transpersonal or cosmic meaning, as for 
example in a prophetic dream. 
Following Freud, psychoanalysis reduces the symbol to the level of a 
semiotic sign, a symptom of underlying causes. By contrast, the diviner 
looks for purposive and teleological showings that are symbolically 
                                                           
39 More than any other psychologist of his era, Jung concerned himself with the 
science-religion split of pre- and post-Enlightenment thought, and he worked 
directly with the meeting of divination and psychoanalysis. This is discussed 
extensively in Hyde 1992 and Hyde forthcoming PhD thesis, Divination for 
Modern Time. 
40 Hillman & Ventura: 3-4. 
41 Spence: 55. 

Uncanny Intelligence in Psychoanalysis and Divination 
121 
“meaningful”. The symbol is therefore taken to be the relatively intelligent 
and intentional communication of some “other” that “speaks” through it. 
In astrology, for example, its meaningfulness is created in the visible 
cosmos itself. In both psychoanalysis and divination, an intentional 
intelligence is being communicated with or heard, but psychoanalysis has 
taken over the deep meaning inherent in divination, and rationalises its 
observation into an objective and scientific—or pseudo-scientific—form. 
It limits its range of acceptable data and its provenance to the cut-off, 
individual unconscious, and thus may be seen as an intra-psychic, as 
opposed to trans-psychic process. 
Through Traumdeutung Freud seized the ground from divination and 
began a process by which psychoanalysis annexed its techniques, so that 
much of psychoanalysis has become divination-in-disguise. Not only were 
the dream and spirit worlds psychologised, but many of the techniques 
used in psychoanalysis are paralleled in the milieu of divination, taken 
freely from that milieu and then psychologised. These include hypnotism, 
free 
association, 
omens, 
mythology, 
transference 
and 
counter-
transference.42 Although the techniques of psychoanalysis are quite varied, 
as are those of divination, what unites them is the seeking of a “sign”, that 
is, a symbol that expresses truth. Thus the techniques are identifiably the 
same but what has radically changed is the theory by which they are 
rationalised. Once this is recognised the disguise becomes flimsy indeed. 
The work of Georg Groddeck bears on the question of this disguise. He 
was “a physician who burst like a storm into the souls of men, penetrating 
into the depths where all life is one, all boundaries are broken down, and 
body and mind are fused as one”.43 Groddeck considered himself to be a 
“wild analyst” but was accepted by Freud into the analytic fold.44 As a 
medical doctor he believed that “the body and mind are a joint thing which 
harbours an It, a power by which we are lived, while we think we live.”45 
                                                           
42 Ferenczi’s use of “mutual analysis” and his emphasis on the counter transference 
is of particular relevance. See my discussion on this in my forthcoming PhD thesis, 
Divination for Modern Time, as well as a discussion on the “one world” position 
on transference and counter-transference, exemplified by the astrologer William 
Lilly: “the nearer thy God thou art, the purer shall thy judgment be”, from Lilly’s 
“Epistle to the Student” (Lilly, 1647). 
43 Boss, in Grossman & Grossman: 197. 
44 The term “wild analyst” was used disdainfully by the analytic profession as a 
description of self-taught analysts who had not been “properly” trained in 
psychoanalytic thought (see Freud 1910). Groddeck called himself a wild analyst 
in the introduction to his first IPA conference lecture in The Hague in 1920.  
45 Letter to Freud 27 May 1917 in Groddeck 1977: 31 and Grossman & Grossman: 
67-69. 

Chapter Seven 
 
122
The It has an autonomous existence that determines everything about a 
person, with a power over sickness and health: 
The It is the deepest nature and force of the man. It accomplishes 
everything that happens with and through and in the man, it is responsible 
for his existence, gives him all his organs and functions, helps him out of 
the mother’s body into the light of day, does everything which the man 
appears to do […] finally, when he has lived long enough, it kills him.46 
The It is a mysterious life force, and as such it has an eternal spirit and 
a religious sense. It is teleological and autonomous “and God alone 
understands it.”47 This religious dimension to the It put Groddeck at 
variance with Freud and orthodox psychoanalysis and immediately 
reminds us of the alien “other” which addresses Hélène. Like her, 
Groddeck is certain that his “other”—the It—is not to be equated with the 
unconscious (“the word ‘unconscious’ does not signify the same as the 
word ‘It’”)48 although he acknowledges that “psychoanalysis is for our 
generation the best way of approaching the It”.49 When he wrote The Book 
of The It in 1921, he retreated for the winter months to his cabin in the 
Black Forest, to “a little house quite removed from all that is human”.50 
Taken as metaphor, this reminds us that the It comes from an alien, other 
realm, and does not belong to the person. Sending his text soon afterwards 
to Freud, he found that Freud took the concept of the It, changed it to fit 
his theory, gave it a new meaning, made it part of his psychic apparatus 
and published a book about the It a month after Groddeck’s own book. 
Freud took the same German name, the It, but in English translation this 
became Latinised to the Id and formed part of his theory of the Ego, Id and 
Super-ego.51 Freud had thus psychologised the It. 
For Groddeck, on the other hand, the It remained mysterious and open, 
something from the forest, and he tried to give voice to it and practice as a 
doctor with an awareness that encouraged the It’s healing powers to be set 
in motion. For him, the understanding and healing of illness involved 
understanding the symbols presented by the It, for “illness was no longer 
understandable to him as a mechanical or chemical dysfunction of organs, 
                                                           
46 Groddeck 1951: 40, collected and translated by Collins from Groddeck’s Berlin 
lectures in 1926, and from conferences and papers given 1925-1928.   
47 Groddeck 1951: 88. 
48 Groddeck 1951: 43. 
49 Groddeck 1951: 41. 
50 Letter to Freud, 31 December 1920, quoted in Grossman & Grossman: 63.  
51 Groddeck’s Book of The It was published in March 1923. Freud’s The Ego and 
the Id was published in May 1923. 

Uncanny Intelligence in Psychoanalysis and Divination 
123 
but became a creation, a symbol”.52 Recognising this creation was the 
main task of the physician. An understanding of the symbol-illness did not 
depend on specialist knowledge or a scientific and objective assessment by 
a medical professional. Healing was brought about by knowing how to 
approach the It, because “The It gives up being ill as soon as it is 
questioned in a way it can answer. It would seem that illness is often only 
a means of flight from something not understood, and a defence against 
what is unbearable”.53 Asked the right question, the It makes itself 
manifest to those who have eyes to see, and through whichever vehicle is 
chosen.54 
I suggest that this is essentially a mode of practical divination. 
Groddeck is a symbolist who seeks to understand the signs given him and 
knows how to negotiate the symbol. He looks at that which presents itself 
because the It “in the simplest things will give some sort of answer, 
perhaps will tell much, but certainly will never reveal the whole”.55 This 
process of question and answer is not only part of a psychoanalytic 
discourse, the talking cure, it is also the ground of divinatory dialogue in 
which the questioner submits to a power beyond the individual. It is not 
enough that this power is exclusively that of the unconscious, pertaining to 
the inner world of the person. For the diviner, human desires and volition 
are submitted to guidance from, and an alignment with, an assumed 
primordial intelligence of the cosmos.56 Groddeck warns medical men and 
psychoanalysts: “Do not trust in your own power, but in that of the It! And 
listen always for its voice.”57 That Groddeck should think the It has its 
own voice implies that the dialogue is not human, i.e. not with the 
patient’s psyche, but with a non-human realm, coming from the same 
forest as The Book of The It, and it requires a daimonic intelligence that is 
not capable of being laid out in a textbook. In the unfolding of that 
dialogue, there is a moment when the question posed is answered, and 
“that one moment of self-knowledge and of insight into what is human and 
what divine, is sufficient to obliterate all the sins of the malefactor”.58 
This is why Groddeck is a wild analyst, because he saw it as the task of 
the physician or psychoanalyst to dialogue with a mysterious, unknown 
                                                           
52 Grossman & Grossman: 63. 
53 Groddeck 1951: 45. 
54 Groddeck 1951: 52. This is like Parzifal in search of the Holy Grail, who must 
ask the Fisher King the right question. 
55 Groddeck 1951: 52. 
56 See fn.1. 
57 Groddeck 1951: 89. 
58 Groddeck 1951: 179. 

Chapter Seven 
 
124
force of nature, and to understand its symbols and showings.59 Putting 
aside any model of the structure of the psyche, Groddeck’s practice cuts 
across causal, scientific or relational structures of psychoanalysis and he 
heeds whatever phenomena are presented to him. Moreover, because each 
situation in which the It presents its symbol-illness is unique, it becomes 
impossible to generate an over-arching, all-encompassing theory of 
psyche, or to express it in a “little drawing” of the Id, as Freud had done.60 
Groddeck’s attention to signs and omens combines medical science 
with intuitive knowing. His practice lays bare the roots of psychoanalysis 
in divination, so it is appropriate to close this chapter with one of his case 
histories. He describes a female patient with oedema, which he sees as the 
“result of a non-compensation in heart disease”61. He believes that the 
patient’s heart trouble has been the same for years and tells her that her 
current oedema must be due to “some disturbance between the action of 
the heart and the opposition of your organism to this action”.62 In other 
words, she is moving against her own heart. Under Groddeck’s treatment 
her condition improved for three weeks but then for eight days she showed 
no response or improvement. Since the treatment was the same, Groddeck 
concluded that its ineffectual nature during the previous eight days must 
be something to do with him, and he asked the patient what she had 
against him: 
I received the usual reply, the patient had nothing against me. At last, as I 
remained obstinate in my belief and the patient equally so, I resorted to 
cunning and asked her, without warning, to repeat one of the Ten 
Commandments. At once, without stopping to think, she repeated the 
                                                           
59 Groddeck advises physicians not to interpret disease, because to the patient, the 
doctor is an enemy as well as a friend: “it is a mistake to interpret […] we should 
cease analysing, and above all never interpret” (1951: 125). By interpretation, 
Groddeck means having an explanation for the patient, which is quite different to 
understanding the showing of a symbol. 
60 Freud’s drawing of the Id first appeared in a letter to Groddeck on 17 April 
1921, reproduced in Groddeck 1977: 58. 
 
 
61 Groddeck 1951: 105. 
62 Groddeck 1951: 106. 

Uncanny Intelligence in Psychoanalysis and Divination 
125 
commandment against adultery. “Why do you think that I have committed 
adultery?” I asked.63 
The patient had heard eight days previously that although Groddeck’s first 
wife was still alive, he had remarried, and even though she knew that he 
was a Protestant, as a Catholic she considered this to be adulterous. His 
response is as surprising as it is effective. “I know, then, quite certainly, 
that you yourself have broken your marriage vow.”64 She then revealed 
that as a child her parents had refused to let her become a nun, so she had 
made a secret vow to God to remain a virgin, married to Christ. When she 
later married, she saw this as a betrayal of her childhood vow, even though 
in confession a priest had absolved her of any sin because her vow had 
been made when she was so young. Groddeck advised that she should talk 
further with the priest privately, outside of the confessional, and on 
hearing this, almost immediately “she started to urinate, and in such 
quantities as I have hardly ever experienced.”65 Within hours her weight 
had dropped five kilograms and within weeks her oedema was cured and 
she returned home. 
What has happened here? In an uncanny move, Groddeck knows what 
question to ask. He asks his patient to pick a commandment and puts to 
her the question of adultery. Her subsequent revelation concerning 
adultery, her profuse urination and weight loss, as well as her speedy 
recovery, all confirm that “the It gives up being ill as soon as it is 
questioned in a way it can answer”. But how does Groddeck know that he 
should ask her about the Ten Commandments, and that through this 
question the flight from something not understood can be revealed? There 
is no rationale or analytic theory that directs Groddeck to ask the patient to 
name one of the Commandments. We could imagine an equivalent case 
where the diviner/analyst might ask the patient to pick a verse from the 
Bible, throw the coins of the I Ching or spread the Tarot cards. Like all 
diviners, Groddeck intuitively decides that divination is called for and in 
the same instant, intuits the form of divination that is appropriate for the 
specific situation. In this case, having selected the Ten Commandments, he 
is able to assign her answer as significant in relation to her illness. 
Groddeck’s own explanation is that he “resorted to cunning”; he moves 
this way when ordinary dialogue has failed. He is at an impasse with the 
patient, both of them remaining obstinate with each other, and he knows 
some other language is required if the dialogue with her is to continue. 
                                                           
63 Groddeck 1951: 106. 
64 Groddeck 1951: 107. 
65 Groddeck 1951: 108. 

Chapter Seven 
 
126
Cunningly, he sets up another type of dialogue to discourse with the It. 
This is a move of divination itself, an inspired moment when the diviner is 
seized to speak from another place, which gives efficacy to his or her 
words. Groddeck as diviner deals symbolically with whatever comes to 
him, and his move parallels that of the analyst in the “talking cure”, 
treating as relevant whatever comes to the analysand’s mind. 
Yet as so often in both psychoanalysis and divination—as in life 
itself—the outcome leaves us with perplexities that are incapable of a final 
resolution. Groddeck’s healing is not permanent. Six months later her 
husband reported that the woman had returned to the priest and 
confessional. The priest had again attempted to reassure her that a vow 
made as a young girl was not important, but shortly after this confession, 
she developed severe symptoms and died of dropsy. We must assume that 
by ignoring Groddeck’s advice and returning to the priest in the 
confessional, the woman could not forgo her Catholicism and still required 
divine forgiveness. Groddeck notes that when Christ performed miracle 
healings in the gospels, he did so through forgiveness of sins.66 However, 
as an analyst Groddeck cannot function as a priest and be the one through 
whom divine forgiveness is possible. Although psychoanalysis cultivates a 
climate of confession, it remains secular and in its denial of the religious 
impulse, it has no power of divine forgiveness or salvation. By contrast, 
divination carries the sacred with it, and in this sense Groddeck’s mystical 
It is closer to divination and its dialogue with the divine than it is to 
Freudian psychoanalysis.67 This case history presented by Groddeck 
shows an ongoing and unresolved dilemma in the relationship between 
psychoanalysis, divination and the sacred; a dilemma that we are faced 
with today just as much as Groddeck was in his day. 
Both Groddeck with the It and Hillman with the world-soul attempt in 
their own way to bridge subject and object, religion and science, and they 
do not fall prey to pseudo-rationalisation. For Groddeck in the 1920s, 
psychoanalysis was the best way he could find to approach the It, but we 
can now see how uncanny intelligence, central to divination, informed the 
work of the early analysts, and that psychoanalysis can be considered as a 
truncated, post-Enlightenment remodelling of ancient divinatory method. 
                                                           
66 Groddeck 195: 83. 
67 Groddeck’s deliberate distancing of himself from the occult is in line with 
Freud’s attempt to keep the new science of psychoanalysis separate from the 
occult, but it may also be due to Groddeck’s ignorance of occult practices. By the 
1920s occult practices had fallen so far into disrepute that they were no longer seen 
as worthy of investigation by medical men. This applies especially to divination. 

Uncanny Intelligence in Psychoanalysis and Divination 
127 
Bibliography 
Bettelheim, B. (1982) Freud and Man’s Soul (London: Penguin). 
Cornelius, G. (2010) Field of Omens (PhD thesis, University of Kent). 
Curry, P. & A. Voss (2007) Seeing with Different Eyes: Essays in 
Astrology and Divination (Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing). 
Ellenberger, H. F. (1970) The Discovery of the Unconscious: The History 
and Evolution of Dynamic Psychiatry (New York, NY: Basic Books). 
Devereux, G. (ed.) (1970) Psychoanalysis and the Occult (New York: 
International Universities Press). 
Flournoy, T. (1899/1994) From India to the Planet Mars: A Case of 
Multiple Personality with Imaginary Languages (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press). 
Freud, S. (1900) The Interpretation of Dreams (London: Hogarth Press 
and Institute of Psychoanalysis). 
—. (1963) “Observations on ‘Wild’ Psychoanalysis” in Therapy and 
Technique, P. Rieff (ed.) (New York: Macmillan) Ch.6, 89-97. 
—. (1973) “Dreams and Occultism”: Lecture 30 in New Introductory 
Lectures on Psychoanalysis trans. J. Strachey (London: Penguin). 
—. (1921) “Psychoanalysis and Telepathy” in G. Devereux (ed.) (1970) 
Psychoanalysis and the Occult (New York: International Universities 
Press) Ch.4, 56-68. 
—. (1922) “‘Dreams and Telepathy” in G. Devereux (ed.) (1970) 
Psychoanalysis and the Occult (New York: International Universities 
Press) Ch.6, 69-90. 
—. (1923) The Ego and the Id, CW 19 (London: Hogarth Press and 
Institute of Psychoanalysis). 
Gébelin, Antoine Court de (1781/2002) Le Jeu des Cartes in Le Monde 
Primitif, Vol VIII trans. J. Karlin as Rhapsodies of the Bizzare (J. 
Karlin). 
Groddeck, G. (1965) Letter to Freud, 27 May, “Groddeck and Freud: an 
Exchange of Letters” in C. M. Grossman & S. Grossman The Wild 
Analyst (London: Barrie and Rockliff) Ch. 8, 67-70. 
—. (1965) Letter to Freud, 27 May, “The Ego and the Id” in C. M. 
Grossman & S. Grossman The Wild Analyst (London: Barrie and 
Rockliff) 129-132. 
—. (1923) Book of The It trans. V. M. E. Collins (London: Vision Press). 
—. (1951) The Unknown Self trans. V. M. E. Collins (London: Vision 
Press). 

Chapter Seven 
 
128
—. (1977) The Meaning of Illness: Selected Psychoanalytic Writings of 
Georg Groddeck, introduced by Lore Schacht (London: the Hogarth 
Press and Institute of Psychoanalysis). 
Grossman, C. M. & S. Grossman (1965) The Wild Analyst (London: Barrie 
and Rockliff). 
Heaton, J. (2010) The Talking Cure (London: Palgrave Macmillan). 
Hillman, J. & M. Ventura (1993) We’ve Had a Hundred Years of 
Psychotherapy and the World’s Getting Worse (San Francisco: Harper 
Collins). 
Hyde, M. (1992) Jung and Astrology. (Aquarian Press). 
—. (2005) Cosmology for Modern Time (MA thesis, University of Kent) 
—. (forthcoming 2013) Divination for Modern Time (PhD thesis, 
University of Kent). 
Lewis, C. S. (1964) The Discarded Image: An Introduction to Medieval 
and Renaissance Literature. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). 
Lilly, W. (1985) Epistle to the Student in Christian Astrology (London: 
Regulus reprint). 
Murphy, G. and R. O. Ballou (eds) (1960) William James on Psychical 
Research (London: Chatto and Windus). 
Schacht, L. (ed.) (1977) “Correspondence with Sigmund Freud” in The 
Meaning of Illness: Selected Psychoanalytic Writings (London: 
Hogarth Press and Institute of Psychoanalysis), Ch.1, 58. 
Shamdasani, S. (2003) Jung and the Making of Modern Psychology: The 
Dream of a Science (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). 
—. (ed.) (1994) Introduction to Flournoy’s From India to the Planet Mars: 
A Case of Multiple Personality with Imaginary Languages (Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press). 
Spence, D. P. (1994) The Rhetorical Voice of Psychoanalysis (Cambridge 
Mass: Harvard). 
Thomas, K. (1971) Religion and the Decline of Magic: Studies in Popular 
Beliefs in Sixteenth and Seventeenth Century England. (Harmondsworth: 
Penguin). 
Von Feuchtersleben, E. (1994) The Principles of Medical Psychology 
trans. H. E. Lloyd (London: New Sydenham Society). 
Williams, R. (1976) Keywords (London: Fontana). 
 

CHAPTER EIGHT 
THE SCIENTIFIC APPROACH  
OF F. W. H. MYERS TO THE STUDY  
OF MYSTICAL EXPERIENCES, DIVINATION  
AND PSI, AND ITS VALUE TO PSYCHOLOGY 
TERENCE J. PALMER 
 
 
 
This is our research question: Are there gifts of prophecy and divination? 
The two explanations that are offered by the mechanistic scientific 
paradigm are that they are the effects of a creative or delusional 
imagination or fraud. However, if we are to accommodate a wide variety 
of known phenomena that are experienced by people every day in all 
cultures and throughout history, it is clear that the hard sciences of the 
physical universe are inadequate in their epistemologies and conceptual 
frameworks. The fact that people experience communication with an 
unseen world that is essentially non-material strongly suggests that the 
laws of the universe, as we currently understand them, are incomplete. The 
essential question is one of ontology; that is—do the origins of 
information, sense impressions and unexplained psychical and physical 
phenomena have an ontological reality in a dimension that is integrated in 
some way with our known physical universe? In order to approach this 
question scientifically it follows that three further questions ought to be 
tested within an expanded conceptual framework: 1) Is there such a thing 
as psychic ability? 2) Are there discarnate spirits with which we are able to 
communicate? 3) Is there a non-material realm where universal 
information is stored and accessible? In other words, in acts of divination, 
prophecy, spirit communication and possession, in precognition and 
psychokinesis, is the receiver or percipient communicating telepathically 
with other humans, non-corporeal spirit entities, or are they accessing a 
field of information that is beyond our normal conscious perception? 

Chapter Eight 
 
130
These important considerations can be explored in far greater detail and 
complexity than might initially be thought. 
According to Geoffrey Cornelius in his introduction to The Imaginal 
Cosmos,1 there are four main themes that are fundamental for any 
comprehensive analysis of divination, and he poses the question, “what 
mode of knowing constitutes divination?”2 Cornelius suggests that this 
question may be approached through the following avenues; art and 
nature; the conflict between reality and imagination; a model of the 
cosmos and a world-order; and through an understanding of the sacred. 
Cornelius’ categorisation is a topic of academic debate and it is useful for 
placing the work of F. W. H. Myers into a contextual framework. Myers 
was not concerned with metaphysics, philosophic debate or religious belief 
systems in his research methodology. He regarded his approach as purely 
scientific, using rigorous scientific method without any consideration for 
belief systems, preconceived ideas or assumptions about the nature of 
man’s consciousness or the universe he inhabits. He attempted to approach 
his work from a position of what Cornelius has described as “second 
naivety”, a term which means that although we cannot eradicate what we 
have come to learn, we can approach new material with an attitude of “not 
knowing”.3 
This is precisely what Myers did when he adopted an approach to his 
research that was essentially a form of methodological agnosticism, in 
contrast to what we might call the methodological atheism of mainstream 
science. Thus Myers’ method, according to Cornelius, falls within the 
theme of reality and imagination. Frederic Myers was one of the founding 
fathers of the Society for Psychical Research in 1882, and his research was 
primarily concerned with testing the hypothesis that consciousness 
survives bodily death and that man has a soul: 
The question for man most momentous of all is whether or no he has an 
immortal soul; or—to avoid the word immortal, which belongs to the realm 
of infinities—whether or no his personality involves any element which 
can survive bodily death. In this direction have always lain the gravest 
fears, the farthest-reaching hopes, which could either oppress or stimulate 
mortal minds.4 
                                                           
1 Cornelius 2007. 
2 Cornelius 2007: ix. 
3 Cornelius 2011. 
4 Myers 1903b: 75. 

The Scientific Approach of F. W. H. Myers 
131 
Initially driven by observations of spontaneous somnambulism and the 
appearance of apparitions of living persons5 and the dead and dying,6 
Myers went on to investigate the phenomenology of the communications 
of spiritualist mediums. His research methods were commensurate with 
the phenomena he studied; for example, observation, external validation of 
veridical apparitions, and the accuracy and validity of information 
conveyed through spiritualist mediums. He was also to use another 
method—that of experimental hypnotism, which became the central pillar 
of his methodology and is the subject of this chapter. 
Myers’ methods collectively, and in particular with the development of 
his experimental hypnosis, led him to postulate a model of consciousness 
that extends far beyond what we call normal conscious awareness. His 
model of mind became a significant influence on the development of the 
ideas and models of many other theorists including William James, Pierre 
Janet and Carl Jung, and he is now recognised as the first to describe 
effectively the psychological unconscious.7 On Myers’ contribution to 
psychology, William James wrote in The Varieties of Religious Experience: 
I cannot but think that the most important step forward that has occurred in 
psychology since I have been a student of that science is the discovery, 
first made in 1886, that, in certain subjects at least, there is not only the 
consciousness of the ordinary field, with its usual centre and margin, but in 
addition thereto in the shape of a set of memories, thoughts and feelings 
which are extra-marginal and outside of the primary consciousness 
altogether, but yet must be classed as conscious facts of some sort, able to 
reveal their presence by unmistakable signs. I call this the most important 
step forward because, unlike the other advances which psychology has 
made, this discovery has revealed to us an entirely unsuspected peculiarity 
in the constitution of human nature. No other step forward which 
psychology has made can proffer any such claim as this. In particular, this 
discovery of a consciousness existing beyond the field, or subliminally as 
Mr. Myers terms it, casts light on many phenomena of religious biography.8 
To explain the hidden dimensions of consciousness, Myers named his 
model The Subliminal Self.9 Unfortunately his model of mind that 
acknowledges the possibility of a spiritual dimension has been forgotten or 
neglected in the wake of the more popular atheistic concept of the 
                                                           
5 See Gurney, Myers and Podmore. 
6 Myers 1890. 
7 Crabtree 1993; 2009: 302. 
8 James 1902: 233. 
9 Myers 1903a: 30. 

Chapter Eight 
 
132
unconscious proposed by Freud10 and the behaviourist school of John B. 
Watson. 
Frederic Myers used the term “automatisms” to provide the link 
between a range of psychic phenomena, and argued that automatic writing 
was just one phenomenon among many others including hallucinations, 
flashes of inspiration, creative genius, obsessions and compulsive behaviour, 
pathological dissociation (hysteria) and double personality. William James 
referred to this collectivisation of similar facets as “a great simplification” 
that places hallucination and impulses under the common theme of 
“sensory and motor automatisms”.11 Subjectively, automatisms emerge into 
consciousness through visualisation, an automatic motor impulse, or other 
sense impressions as though from a source other than the subject, and 
become manifest from beyond the conscious will. Myers’ hypothesis 
openly challenged the scientific consensus that automatisms are the 
automatic reactions of a stimulated nervous system and that all human 
thought, feelings and behaviour are dependent on and originate in the 
brain. W. Carpenter, for example, identified this process as “unconscious 
cerebration”.12 Myers did not dismiss the theory altogether, but argued that 
it was incomplete insofar as it was not able to explain a wide variety of 
human experiences such as automatic writing, animal magnetism and 
information received through clairvoyance. He suggested that in addition 
to the accepted view that the nervous system does respond to stimuli in an 
automatic fashion, there is also some form of intelligence, whether from 
within the unconscious or from an external source, that is finding a way to 
impress upon the conscious self.13 
Myers’ principle task of scientific exploration into these phenomena 
was to determine whether the vision, message or automatic act is a 
creation of the imagination or volition of the subject or whether it has a 
source that is external to the subject. The guiding light that showed Myers 
and his colleagues the way forward was the observation that subjects who 
experienced these phenomena had a tendency to enter into an altered state 
of consciousness, the most noticeable being what Myers called the “sleep-
waking” state,14 or what we would now call sleep-walking. Altered states 
are also associated with mystical and religious experiences,15 pathological 
                                                           
10 Breuer and Freud 1895. 
11 James 1998: 234. 
12 Carpenter 1855: 607. 
13 Myers 1903a: 1675. 
14 Myers 1903b: 115. 
15 Kroger 1977: 122-127. 

The Scientific Approach of F. W. H. Myers 
133 
dissociation,16 day-dreaming and absorption,17 positive and negative spirit 
possession,18 shamanic journeying and soul loss,19 remote viewing20 and 
clairvoyance.21 The altered state hypothesis was what motivated Myers 
and his colleagues to use it as their experimental method. According to 
Moseby’s medical dictionary, an altered state of consciousness (ASC) is: 
[…] any state of awareness that differs from the normal awareness of a 
conscious person. Altered states of consciousness have been achieved, 
especially in Eastern cultures, by many individuals using various 
techniques, such as long fasting, deep breathing, whirling, and chanting. 
Researchers now recognise that such practices can affect the chemistry of 
the body and help induce the desired state. Experiments suggest that 
telepathy, mystical experiences, clairvoyance, and other altered states of 
consciousness may be subconscious capabilities in most individuals and 
can be used to improve health and fight disease.22 
It is important to note that Moseby’s definition is medical, and as such 
includes a non-specific reference to experiments that suggest that mystical 
experiences and clairvoyance may be subconscious capabilities. This is 
precisely the hypothesis that William James, Frederic Myers and Pierre 
Janet tested during their experiments one hundred years ago by using and 
observing subjects who experienced altered states. It is unfortunate that the 
momentum of these experiments was not maintained into the twentieth 
century. Instead the fashions of mainstream science favoured the theories 
of behaviourism and Freudian psychoanalysis, and modern research into 
telepathy, ESP, precognition and psychokinesis came under the new 
concept of “psi”, a term introduced by Thouless and Wiesner for all these 
types of paranormal phenomena. Any effect that science is unable to 
explain in such phenomena has become known as the “psi effect”.23 
To the present day, very few researchers in the currently disconnected 
fields of psychological research employ the conceptual framework and 
scientific methods that Myers and his colleagues found so fruitful and 
productive. One notable exception is Gary Schwartz, who conducted 
experiments with mediums in afterlife experiments for three years.24 
                                                           
16 Janet: 676. 
17 Heap, Brown & Oakley: 11. 
18 Crabtree 1985: 66-114. 
19 Villoldo. 
20 Targ. 
21 Myers 1903a: 345. 
22 Moseby et al.: 47. 
23 See Radin. 
24 Schwartz 2001, 2002. 

Chapter Eight 
 
134
Schwartz’ experiments supported the hypothesis that mediums can 
communicate with discarnate entities, and that this can be replicated using 
rigorous scientific methods. 
Myers proposed that all psychical phenomena are connected on a 
continuum, that there is no such thing as supernatural or paranormal, for 
all is natural and normal: “If nature is to be intelligible to our minds she 
must be continuous; her action must be uniformitarian and not 
catastrophic.”25 He therefore advocated a new expanded naturalism that 
could accommodate such phenomena: “The only line of demarcation that 
science can draw is between things which can, or which cannot, be 
cognised by our existing faculties, a line that is by no means permanent 
and immovable. On the contrary, it is the continual work of science to 
render that which is incognisable cognisable, that which is imperceptible 
perceptible.”26 
Modern science still needs to expand its conceptualisations in order to 
accommodate what may be termed anomalous experiences into a unified 
frame of reference. In keeping with Myers’ assertion that the term 
“automatisms” connects several related concepts into one conceptual 
framework, the terms altered state, trance, dissociation and hypnosis can 
all be included into the same framework for experimental purposes. In 
other words altered state, dissociation, trance and hypnosis are all 
essentially the same thing. What is different about them are the methods 
and techniques of induction, i.e. deliberate or spontaneous, disciplined or 
undisciplined, 
trauma-related, 
etc. 
Modern 
researchers 
into 
the 
phenomenology of hypnosis have tried to arrive at a theory to explain it as 
a unique psychological phenomenon, but have only succeeded in 
describing a very wide range of specific hypnotic phenomena.27 In their 
intention to find evidence to support their own specific hypotheses these 
modern researchers are missing the point altogether with regard to the 
fundamental nature of consciousness as postulated by Myers. 
For example, Michael Heap and colleagues provide an excellent 
example of finely tuned scientific application to hypnosis research with no 
regard for the spiritual nature of what it is they are investigating. The 
index to their work includes just one reference to the word religious and 
none at all to spiritual or mystical. The one reference reads as follows: 
“The idea of a trance state that endows the subject with unusual 
characteristics and abilities has a long history outside of hypnosis and is 
                                                           
25 Myers 1895: 22. 
26 Myers 1881: 103. 
27 Kroger: 26-32. 

The Scientific Approach of F. W. H. Myers 
135 
common to many religious and quasi-religious practices”.28 This quotation 
makes a clear and unambiguous differentiation between religious trance 
states and hypnosis by the use of the words outside of. Their conceptual 
framework is built on the foundation of epiphenomenalism, which states 
that consciousness is produced by and is dependent on the physical brain. 
However, research by Ericksonian hypnotist Ernst Rossi (1986) and 
cellular biologist Bruce Lipton (2010) has uncovered new insights into the 
relationship between mind and body that challenge this assumption, which 
in turn are supported by quantum theory from a variety of theorists.29 Thus 
it is becoming apparent that scientific enquiry is slowly becoming engaged 
in a paradigm shift in learning how to explore the fundamental nature of 
consciousness. The interesting thing about this paradigm shift is that it 
seems to be driven by the physical sciences of biology and quantum theory 
rather than by psychology. 
Of all the methods he used, hypnosis is the one which produced the 
most significant results for Myers, and the one that he recommended all 
psychologists use in their investigations into the nature of mind, 
consciousness and personality; and yet, it is still the most unused, 
misunderstood and misrepresented method in mainstream psychology. 
Myers writes: 
First among our experimental methods I must speak of hypnotism. We see 
here the influence exercised by suggestion and self-suggestion on higher 
types of faculty, supernormal as well as normal, on character, on 
personality. It is on this side, indeed that the outlook is the most deeply 
interesting. Man is in course of evolution; and the most pregnant hint 
which these nascent experiments have yet given him is that it may be in his 
power to hasten his own evolution in ways previously unknown.30 
Myers was not content to explain hypnosis merely as the power of 
suggestion, and wanted to gather evidence that suggestion was not an 
adequate enough explanation for all hypnotic phenomena. His initial quest 
for answers was via the investigation of the concept of a “community of 
sensation” which was prompted by Mesmer’s theory of animal magnetism. 
Myers postulated that Mesmer’s theory of the magnetic force that was 
responsible for the unseen interaction between magnetiser and magnetised 
(hypnotist and subject) was incorrect and that the connection was 
psychological rather than physical. 
                                                           
28 Heap, Brown & Oakley: 10. 
29 Targ, Pfeiffer, Mack & et al., McTaggart, Schwartz et al., 2002; Samanta-
Laughton, Rosenblum & Kuttner. 
30 Myers 1903b: 29. 

Chapter Eight 
 
136
This series of experiments conducted with Edmund Gurney demonstrated 
that a hypnotised subject experienced taste and touch sensations that were 
transmitted from a third party—the agent. In these experiments the agent 
was given a strong-tasting substance to taste and the hypnotised subject 
reported the taste sensation he received. Similar experiments were 
conducted with the transmission of physical sensations such as pinching a 
part of the body. These experiments demonstrated clearly that there was 
something invisible and intangible between the hypnotist and the 
hypnotised, but it remained unclear as to the nature of the connection.31 In 
modern hypnosis research and clinical practice this connection is 
considered to be a “psychological rapport”,32 although it remains within 
the theoretical domain of expectation and suggestion despite Myers’ 
findings. Myers was not totally satisfied with the outcome of his 
experiments and continued to look for methods that would bypass any 
influence of expectation or the power of suggestion that was beyond 
dispute. His solution lay in the concept of hypnosis at a distance: 
The evidence for telepathy—for psychical influence from a distance—has 
grown to goodly proportions, for a new form of experiment has been found 
possible from which the influence of suggestion can be entirely excluded. 
It has now, as I shall presently try to show, been actually proved that the 
hypnotic trance can be induced from a distance so great, and with 
precautions so complete, that telepathy or some similar supernormal 
influence is the only efficient cause which can be conceived.33 
Myers cites several examples of telepathic hypnosis in his many 
contributions to the journals of the Society for Psychical Research which 
he encapsulates in his classic work Human Personality and its Survival of 
Bodily Death of 1903. Psychology historian Adam Crabtree cites several 
examples of telepathic hypnosis from his research into the history of 
hypnosis in From Mesmer to Freud that go back to Mesmer’s disciple the 
Marquis de Puységur. The phenomenon has also been reported by surgeons 
John Elliotson in London (1843) and James Esdaile in India (1846). 
Modern theories of hypnosis, being predominantly based on the power 
of suggestion, cannot explain the hypnotic power of silent hand passes 
(mesmeric technique), neither can they explain hypnosis at a distance, 
                                                           
31 In my own thesis I posit an argument that Mesmer was right to a certain extent 
in his theory of a physical influence between magnetiser and magnetised, and that 
this theory can be applied to such spiritual healing practices such as Reiki and 
related techniques. 
32 Kroger 1977: 12. 
33 Myers 1903b: 140. 

The Scientific Approach of F. W. H. Myers 
137 
whereas telepathy, although not a complete explanation, does open an 
alternative avenue of enquiry. To ignore the importance of telepathic 
hypnosis will mislead the student of hypnotic phenomena as Myers’ 
experiments testify, and it is important that the evidence for hypnosis at a 
distance is presented in order to support the argument that hypnosis is a 
gateway to a vast array of psychological and spiritual domains. 
However, mainstream psychology and parapsychology seem to limit 
their exploration by using those scientific methods that they feel most 
comfortable with, namely: direct observation, instrumentation and 
psychometric testing for quantitative research methodologies, and 
interviewing for the qualitative. None of these methods can possibly 
explore those hidden dimensions of human experience that can be reached 
by accessing altered states of consciousness. In a word, trance should be 
the tool of choice for all researchers into unexplained human phenomena. 
The scientific evidence to support the hypothesis that the conscious 
intention of one person can influence the thoughts, feelings and actions of 
another without their conscious knowledge has enormous and far-reaching 
implications that are far too complex to expound upon here. However, it is 
my contention that this one concept is the key to explain the varied 
phenomena associated with uninvited spirit possession by earthbound 
souls of the deceased and non-human discarnates. What is needed is to re-
open a line of enquiry that Myers identified one hundred years ago when 
he wrote: 
Now it is that we feel the difficulty of being definite without being trivial; 
how little of earthly memory persists; how little of heavenly experience 
can be expressed in terms of earth; how long and arduous must be the way, 
how many must be the experiments, and how many the failures before any 
systemised body of new truth can be established. But a sound beginning 
has been made, and whatever may be possible hereafter need not be wasted 
on a fresh start.34 
Despite its importance in the scientific study of the mind, none of the 
contemporary researchers into hypnotic phenomena that I have spoken to 
are even aware of the concept of telepathic hypnosis. Whereas Myers 
identified hypnosis as an experimental method that opens a doorway to a 
multitude of mysteries, in contrast modern researchers are attempting to 
understand the nature of the doorway itself instead of venturing through it. 
The modern philosopher of science Erwin Laszlo, on the subject of 
scientific specialisation writes: 
                                                           
34 Myers 1903b: 406 

Chapter Eight 
 
138
The unfortunate consequence of such speciality barriers is that knowledge, 
instead of being pursued in depth and integrated in breadth, is pursued in 
depth in isolation. Rather than getting a continuous and coherent picture, 
we are getting fragments—remarkably detailed but isolated patterns. We 
are drilling holes in the wall of mystery that we call nature and reality on 
many locations, and we carry out delicate analyses on each of the sites. But 
it is only now that we are beginning to realise the need for connecting the 
probes with one another and gaining some coherent insight into what is 
there.35 
Connecting the probes, as Laszlo puts it, is precisely what Frederic Myers 
did when he included clairvoyance and all related phenomena within a 
single conceptual framework that could be explored with hypnosis. He 
advocated that all human mental experience should be seen on a 
continuum and that nothing ought to be regarded as supernatural or 
paranormal. Myers repeatedly emphasised that such unseen environments 
must somehow be fundamentally continuous and interrelated with the one 
we know through our sensory perception: “If an unseen world exists […] 
we must in some sense be in it”.36 
The neglect by modern psychology researchers of the fundamental 
nature of consciousness can only maintain the gulf between mainstream 
scientific enquiry and religious, mystical and spiritual experience. It is 
time that this gap was closed by collaboration between disciplines and 
with the tools that we already have at our disposal. All we have to do is to 
use them. David Luke (2011) evaluates the effects of the hallucinogenic 
molecule dimethyltryptamine (DMT) and the perception of discarnate 
entities by participants’ reports that there are three hypotheses to explain 
the phenomena: hallucination, the transpersonal and the other-world 
hypothesis. He makes the observation that without a scientific approach 
the debate concerning the ontological status of perceived entities remains 
wide open. This offers an excellent opportunity for collaboration using 
Myers’ scientific method. 
It has long been established that there is a direct correlation between 
emotional and visual sensory perception and brain chemistry,37 and Myers 
argued that correlation does not imply causation.38 It is my own contention 
that DMT will be detected in the brains of persons visualising discarnate 
entities who have not been administered with it, due to the fact the DMT is 
                                                           
35 Laszlo: 2. 
36 Myers 1891: 634. 
37 Gauld: 262. 
38 Myers 1891:635. 

The Scientific Approach of F. W. H. Myers 
139 
a substance that is manufactured in the human brain.39 An explanation for 
similarities in the nature of perceived entities between those given DMT 
and those who have not could be provided by the model of consciousness 
suggested by Myers. By applying Myers’ model it may be hypothesised 
that the mind operates at an energetic frequency that corresponds with the 
electro-magnetic frequency of the brain. When a person enters into an 
altered state of consciousness the electro-magnetic frequency of the brain 
will alter accordingly. When the mind reaches a frequency that enables it 
to connect with those energetic frequencies that exist beyond our normal 
waking consciousness, it triggers a corresponding change in frequency in 
the brain that provides the senses with a visual representation of whatever 
it is that the mind has encountered. An experimental design to test this 
hypothesis would mean taking two groups of participants, one who has 
been administered with DMT and the other who has not. Those who have 
not been administered with DMT would need to be either natural 
somnambulists or adept at entering altered states. It would be an essential 
prerequisite that both groups are naive of any previous experiences of 
entity encounters and of the objective of the experiment, in order to avoid 
possible contamination from expectation or implied suggestion. Accurate 
descriptions of the visualisation of the entities encountered by both groups 
would then be compared for differences and similarities, and a positive 
correlation in descriptions between the two groups would imply two 
possibilities: firstly that consciousness can enter into a realm that is in 
parallel with our own at a different energy frequency, and secondly that it 
could support the ontological status of such entities that exist there. 
Bibliography 
Breuer, J. & S. Freud (1895) Studies in Hysteria (London: Hogarth Press). 
Carpenter, W. (1855) Principles of Human Psychology, 5th edn (London: 
John Churchill). 
Cornelius, G. (2007) Introduction to A. Voss & J. Lall (eds) The Imaginal 
Cosmos (Canterbury: University of Kent) ix-xiii. 
—. (2011) “One Mumbo short of a Jumbo”, unpublished paper given at 
“Daimonic Imagination: Uncanny Intelligence” Conference, University 
of Kent. 
Crabtree, A. (1985) Multiple Man: Explorations in possession and 
multiple personality (New York: Praeger). 
                                                           
39 Luke: 26. 

Chapter Eight 
 
140
—. (1993) From Mesmer to Freud: Magnetic sleep and the roots of 
psychological healing (New Haven: Yale University Press). 
—. (2009) “Automatism and Secondary Centres of Consciousness” in E. 
F. & E. W. Kelly (eds), Irreducible Mind: Toward a Psychology for 
the 21st Century (Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield) 301-363. 
Elliotson, J. (1843) Numerous Cases of Surgical Operations without Pain 
in the Mesmeric State with Remarks upon the Opposition of Many 
Members of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society and others to 
the reception of the Inestimable Blessings of Mesmerism (London: H. 
Bailliere). 
Esdail, J. (1846) Mesmerism in India and its Practical Applications in 
Surgery and Medicine (London: Longman, Brown, Green & 
Longmans). 
Gauld, A. (2007) “Memory” in E. F. & E. W. Kelly (eds), Irreducible 
Mind: Toward a Psychology for the 21st Century (Lanham, Maryland: 
Rowman & Littlefield) 241-300. 
Goodman, F. (1988) Ecstasy, Ritual and Alternate Reality (Bloomington 
IN: Indiana University Press). 
Gurney, E. (1883) “Experiments to Investigate Mesmeric Community of 
Sensation” series 2, Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, 
2, 17. 
Gurney, E., F. Myers & F. Podmore (1886) Phantasms of the Living 
(London: Society for Psychical Research). 
Heap, M., R. Brown & D. Oakley (2004) The Highly Hypnotizable Person 
(Hove: Brunner/Routledge). 
James, W. (1889) “Notes on automatic writing”, Proceedings of the 
American Society for Psychical Research, 1, 548-564. 
Janet, P. (1976) Psychological Healing: A Historical and Clinical Study 
(New York: Arno Press). 
Kroger, W. (1977) Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis (Philadelphia: J.B. 
Lippincott). 
Lipton, B. (2010) The Biology of Belief (London: Hay House). 
Luke, D. (2011) “Discarnate Entities and Dimethyltryptamine (DMT): 
Psychopathology, phenomenology and ontology”, Journal of the 
Society for Psychical Research, 75.1 (902), 26-39. 
McTaggart, L. (2008) The Field (New York: Harper Collins). 
Mesmer, F. (1766) Dissertatio physico-medica de planatarium influxu 
(Vienna: Ghelen). 
Myers, F. (1881) “M. Renan and Miracles”, Nineteenth Century, 10, 90-
106. 

The Scientific Approach of F. W. H. Myers 
141 
—. (1890) “A Defence of Phantasms of the Dead”, Proceedings of the 
Society for Psychical Research, 6, 314-357. 
—. (1891) “Science and a Future Life”, Nineteenth Century, 29, 628-647. 
—. (1895) “Abstract of ‘The Progression from Subliminal Phenomena to 
Phenomena Claiming to be Obtained Under Spirit Control”, Journal of 
the Society for Psychical Research, 7, 21-25. 
—. (1903a) Human Personality and Its Survival of Bodily Death (2 vols) 
(New York: Longmans, Green & Co). 
—. (1903b) Human Personality and Its Survival of Bodily Death, S. Smith 
(ed.) (New York: Longmans, Green & Co). 
Palmer, T. (2012) “A Revised Epistemology for an Understanding of 
Spirit Release Therapy in Accordance with the Conceptual Framework 
of F.W.H. Myers”, PhD thesis, School of Theology and Religious 
Studies, Bangor University. 
Pfeiffer, T., J. E. Mack et al. (2007) Mind Before Matter (Ropely, UK: O 
Books). 
Radin, D. (1997) The Conscious Universe (San Francisco: Harper 
Collins). 
Rosenblum, B. & F. Kuttner (2007) Quantum Enigma: Physics encounters 
consciousness (London: Gerald Duckworth). 
Rossi, E. (1986) The Psychobiology of Mind-Body Healing: New Concepts 
of Therapeutic Hypnosis (New York: Norton). 
Samanta-Laughton, M. (2006) Punk Science: Inside the Mind of God 
(Ropely, UK: O Books). 
Schwartz, G. et al. (2001) “Accuracy and replicability of anomalous after-
death communication across highly skilled mediums”, Journal of the 
Society for Psychical Research, 65, 1-25. 
—. et al. (2002) The Afterlife Experiments (New York: Atria Books). 
Targ, R. (2004) Limitless Mind (Novato, CA: New World Library). 
Thouless, R. & B. Wiesner (1947) “The Psi-Process in Normal and 
‘Paranormal’ psychology”, Proceedings of the Society for Psychical 
Research, 48, 177-196. 
Villoldo, A. (2005) Mending the Past and Healing the Future with Soul 
Retrieval (London: Hay House). 
Watson, J. (1913) “Psychology as a Behaviourist Views it”, Psychological 
Review, 20, 158-177. 


PART II 
DAIMONIC LITERATURE 
 

CHAPTER NINE 
DEFINITIVE DEMONS:  
FRANKENSTEIN AND DRACULA  
AS ULTIMATE REPRESENTATIONS  
OF THE “MONSTROUS OTHER” 
VERED WEISS 
 
 
 
The daimonic imagination is one of the vital creative forces propelling the 
exploration of human identity. In order to investigate the construction of 
individual and collective identities, literature all over the world has 
produced devices that allow the imagination to run wild with regard to 
fears and desires otherwise suppressed by social apparatuses. The 
awesome powers of the human soul have been embodied in a plethora of 
monstrosities—from the hybrid creatures and giants in the ancient epic of 
Gilgamesh to contemporary cinematic depictions of aliens, the world is 
full of monstrous expressions of fears as well as dreams of greatness. 
Artists and writers have utilised these manifestations of monstrosity in 
order to explore and expand the limits of the human mind, specifically its 
ability to create individual and collective identities and encompass 
complex “Otherness”. 
The modern era has introduced new fears and challenges to the human 
mind and imagination, and the apparent demise of religious explanations 
has resulted in a literary exploration of the dark aspects of the human 
psyche together with social phobias as part of a language of horror. One of 
the most notable ways modernity has attempted to come into terms with 
the daimonic imagination is through the Gothic literary tradition. Relying 
upon ancient myths, the Gothic arose at a particular time in Europe and 
especially in Britain, as a response to fears induced by socio-economic 
changes. Depictions of the monstrous “other” were used in order to 
explore various fears—notably xenophobia—within the crises of modernity. 

Definitive Demons 
145 
Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley’s Frankenstein: Or, the Modern Prometheus 
(1818) and Bram Stoker’s Dracula (1898) explore these fears through 
allegorical monstrous manifestations. Frankenstein, the narrative of the 
monster composed of exhumed body parts, introduced the prototypical 
modern monstrous Other as a rejected creature forever roaming the earth 
in search of home and kinship; and Dracula is the well-known novel about 
an Eastern European aristocratic vampire who contrives to colonise and 
devour the population of England. Frankenstein and Dracula are the most 
renowned Gothic texts because they offer quintessential modern depictions 
of the monstrous “Other” which is simultaneously an adaptation of old 
myths of the monster and an embodiment of modern fears. 
The “monstrous Other” 
Before we commence a literary overview, we need to define the terms 
“monstrous” and “Other” in order to understand their conflation as the 
“monstrous Other”. The “monster” is found in every known nation—all 
cultures have some variation of a creature that embodies fears and outlines 
the borders and boundaries of what is considered socially acceptable. The 
etymological roots of the word “monster” as something or someone to be 
shown, or as a warning against the wrongdoings of humanity,1 elucidate 
the monstrous as the signifier (and later symbol) of the boundaries of the 
socially acceptable and unacceptable.2 Often the monster is located on the 
entrances to temples in order to guard knowledge both sacred and profane, 
legitimate and rejected (for example, the gorgon and sphinx). Its 
etymological roots thus reveal that the “monstrous” pertains to fear, 
knowledge, location, social structure and social transgression. The monster 
is the delineator of the socially acceptable. 
Yet before one can appreciate concepts of social acceptance as well as 
individual or collective social “Otherness”, one has to differentiate 
between the “self” and the “Other”. Jacques Lacan’s concept of the 
“Other” is a part of the conceptualisation of the various stages the infant 
undergoes in the construction of the “self”, and which has been, since its 
articulation, attributed to the idea of the creation of the “self” in relation to 
the social “Other”. According to Lacanian theory, the infant reaches a 
certain “mirror stage”, in which it is capable of distinguishing his/her self 
in relation to the caretaker, and can thus construct, or begin to construct, 
the comprehension of a separate identity. The Lacanian “Other” as the 
                                                           
1 From the Latin monstrare from which derive the French montrer and English 
“demonstrate”. 
2 Baldick: 110. 

Chapter Nine 
 
146
signifier of that which constitutes our “self” in relation to society refers to 
the evolution of the mirror stage: “in this moment in which the mirror 
stage comes to an end inaugurates by the identification with the imago of 
the counterpart and the drama of primordial jealousy […] the dialectic that 
will henceforth link the I to socially elaborated situations”.3 This stage is 
crucial for the construction of the individual identity and is also a stage 
that collective identities undergo. The literary explorations of monsters 
serve to unpack the complexities of the collective identity as these are 
perceived and constructed, as opposed to the images of the socially 
construed “Other”. 
The zombie and the vampire 
While David Gilmore asserts that monsters are found in every culture and 
at all periods, and indeed that they “arise with civilisation—with human 
self-consciousness”,4 the most prevalent in contemporary Western culture 
are variations on Wollstonecraft Shelley’s zombie-like creature and 
Stoker’s vampire. Gilmore asserts the importance of Frankenstein and 
Dracula adding that “much has been written about these two avatars of 
monsterhood”,5 and suggests that “like other monsters before and after, 
both examples of modern monsterdom are morphological hybrids 
breaching recognised boundaries. The Frankenstein monster is a 
composite being mixing the dead and the living, and Dracula is a cross 
between human and animal (bat mostly, but sometimes a wolf)”.6 Gilmore 
further suggests that like other historical monsters “both are large in size. 
Although no giant, Dracula is represented in the novel and films as a tall 
man when in human form”.7 Additionally, according to Gilmore, “both are 
capable of bloody violence against innocents, conceived in each case as 
inflicting bloody mutilation or eating human flesh. Dracula sucks the 
blood of his victims, shrivelling and depleting them, while Frankenstein, 
although he does not eat human, uses his powerful arms to rip people 
apart”.8 These two monsters engage with the fear of death and the 
unknown, and their unstable identities produce strikingly uncanny beings 
that are simultaneously both alive and dead, and yet neither dead nor alive. 
                                                           
3 Lacan 1966: 6. 
4 Gilmore: 5. 
5 Gilmore: 63. 
6 Gilmore: 63. 
7 Gilmore: 63. 
8 Gilmore: 63-64. 

Definitive Demons 
147 
The Oxford English Dictionary offers the following definition of a 
zombie: “In the West Indies and southern states of America, a soulless 
corpse said to have been revived by witchcraft; formerly, the name of a 
snake-deity in voodoo cults of or deriving from West Africa and Haiti”. 
Two questions regarding Frankenstein’s creation then arise: first, whether 
a creature comprised of several body parts and constructed through science 
rather than witchcraft qualifies as a corpse; and second, whether this 
creature has a soul. 
There is a continual debate about whether or not the creature is, in fact, 
a zombie. Addressing adaptations of Frankenstein, H. L. Malchow 
suggests that: 
[t]he change from the highly articulate monster of Shelley’s creation into the 
mute horror pursued by villagers, the manufactured zombie with a deformed 
and criminal brain, is another later interpretation, reflecting perhaps the 
craniological and neurological concerns of mid-nineteenth century science, 
as well as the requirements of stage and film sensationalism.9 
Nevertheless, the creature has in many cases become almost synonymous 
with zombie.10 The basic idea of the dead walking lingers as the kernel of 
horror, but while the zombie is a walking dead, the vampire is “un-dead”. 
The mythical vampire is a “preternatural being of a malignant nature (in 
the original and usual form of the belief, a reanimated corpse), supposed to 
seek nourishment, or do harm, by sucking the blood of sleeping persons; a 
man or woman abnormally endowed with similar habits”.11 Though the 
myth of the vampire, like the monster, is as ancient as humanity itself, 
there are nevertheless local historical socio-political reasons for 
“outbreaks” of particular versions of it. One might regard the Biblical 
prohibition of blood consumption as a caveat against the possibility of 
vampirism.12 In Ireland there was a widespread legend of the “vampire-
king”, and Bob Curran suggests that Stoker may have been familiar with 
this story.13 One of the first adaptations of the vampire myth in English 
literature is John Polidori’s The Vampyre (1819), which inspired Stoker’s 
                                                           
9 Malchow: 126. 
10 Morton & Raschke: 77. 
11 OED. The vampire does not necessarily require sharp canine teeth and a foul 
rotting body, but can describe “a person of a malignant and loathsome character, 
esp. one who preys ruthlessly upon others; a vile and cruel exactor” (OED). 
12 Leviticus 17: 12. 
13 Curran: 15. 

Chapter Nine 
 
148
Dracula, depicting Count Dracula as the monster that wishes to feed on 
humanity.14 
The vampire in Stoker’s narrative is based on the historical character 
Vlad III Dracul, Voivod or Prince of Wallachia, better known as Vlad the 
Impaler (Vlad Tepes) or simply Dracula.15 The historical Vlad’s “blood-
soaked struggle against Ottoman Turks, Hungarians and his own nobility 
had passed into legend even within his lifetime”16 and served to augment 
the ferocity of the fictional vampire.17 Ironically, while the historical Vlad 
was a fierce fighter for the cross and the Orthodox Church, a descendent 
member of the Order of the Dragon,18 and a devout Christian who had 
fought the Turks as he tried to repel the Ottoman Empire,19 the fictional 
Count Dracula has an aversion to the cross.20 
                                                           
14 Olerenshaw: 158. 
15 Ackeroyd: 22. 
16 Ackeroyd: 22. 
17 Ackeroyd suggests that Stoker had made certain mistakes regarding the region 
and Dracula’s rule, such as his ethnic origin (22). Nevertheless, the region does 
suffer from nationalistic unease due to ethnic diversity. Stoker chose to base the 
character of the vampire on Vlad who “was undoubtedly a tyrant, capable of great 
violence and cruelty, for whom the end justified the means. Yet he was also a 
patriot and freedom-fighter [who] worked long and hard to defend Christendom 
against the apparently irresistible force of resurgent Islam under the sultans of the 
Ottoman Empire” (22). This religio-nationalist trait of the real Vlad echoes in the 
fictional Dracula, who reminisces about the old days and battles with nostalgia 
(Stoker 32-3). Towards the end of Vlad’s life he was subjected to a campaign of 
slander that blackened his name (Ackeroyd: 22) and when Stoker encountered the 
name of Vlad the Impaler it was linked to black magic and cruelty. Eventually, he 
was a prisoner in his own home until he was killed, whereupon his head was 
severed, preserved and sent to the sultan (Akeroyd: 24). This might be the source 
of the myth of the cutting off of the head of the vampire. 
18 The Order of the Dragon was a chivalric order for the nobility founded in 1408, 
fashioned after the military orders of the Crusades. 
19 Ackeroyd: 23. 
20 The connection between the vampire and the figure of the anti-Semite Jew has 
been duly acknowledged by scholars such as Judith Halberstam, who notes that the 
vampire, “with his peculiar physique, his parasitical desires, his aversion to the 
cross and to all the trappings of Christianity, his blood-sucking attacks, and his 
avaricious relation to money resemble[s] stereotypical anti-Semite nineteenth-
century representations of the Jew” (Halberstam: 86). Moreover, “connections in 
the narrative between blood and gold, race and sex, sexuality and ethnicity 
confirmed [the] sense that the anti-Semite Jew and Stoker’s vampire [bear] more 
than a family resemblance” (Halberstam: 86). Like the literary vampire, the anti-
Semitic Jew embodied the ignoble, greedy, cowardly “other” that was attempting 
to penetrate England, and the fear of the invasion—both racial and financial—by 

Definitive Demons 
149 
Historical contextualisation 
David Gilmore suggests that whilst the “Age of Enlightenment”, may have 
attempted to maintain the non-existence of monsters (in literature as well 
as in reality) it in fact led to extensive witch hunts.21 According to 
Gilmore, the late eighteenth century saw the revival of imaginary beasts 
and monstrosities “spurred to some degree by scientific discoveries such 
as galvanism and electromagnetism”.22 By the Victorian era both mythic 
and scientific genres had been circulating for a while. 
Although this era is technically located during the reign of Queen 
Victoria (1837-1901), the essence of Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein (1818) 
could very well be located within the Victorian literary frame. Bram 
Stoker’s Dracula (1897) falls within the timeline; yet Stoker was not 
English but Irish and so one might question the adequacy of placing his 
novel in the same Victorian category. Nonetheless, Dracula was published 
in the United Kingdom, and Ireland was a colony at the time. These novels 
are essentially Victorian since they relate to certain social reconfigurations 
that occurred during this era, exploring them via the novelistic Gothic 
genre which was widely successful. During this period, the United 
Kingdom witnessed several crucial cultural and socio-political moments 
and processes that were to have a great impact upon modern history and 
literature. One of the most important of these was the abolition of slavery 
in 1833, which was the result of a long process that involved political 
conflict and public debate regarding human rights. Frankenstein and 
Dracula raise these social and racial anxieties as well as echoes of the 
debate between reason and religion. In addition, concerns regarding the 
effects of the industrial revolution, which led to social mobility within the 
United Kingdom as the middle classes began to gain shape, were 
complemented by concerns about the encounter with the “Other” they 
were colonising. 
Both Frankenstein and Dracula have been read as social critiques. 
Frankenstein’s creature may be perceived as the nameless Other that 
embodies a multitude of nineteenth-century horrors such as the fear of the 
lower classes, the Eastern invasion, and the colonised “Other”.23 
                                                                                                                         
the Jews, who were running away to England to escape the Tsar’s persecutions 
during the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, gave rise to a wave of 
xenophobia, which found its way into the pages of literature. The fear of the 
vampire can thus be seen as the literary manifestation of the repulsion of the Jew. 
21 Gilmore: 63. 
22 Gilmore: 63. 
23 Baldick: 6. 

Chapter Nine 
 
150
Frankenstein constructs the creature in order to prove his scientific ability. 
He does so outside of England, using body parts which are not necessarily 
British. This could be read as a critique of the Imperialist endeavour that 
tried to impose Western science upon “the Other”. Likewise, the monster 
in Dracula comes to devour the British population, and can be read as the 
allegorical manifestation of the fears of the repercussions of the imperialist 
enterprise.24 
Adriana Craciun examines the “unique consolidation of governmental, 
political, and publishing forces [that] significantly shaped the conditions of 
authoring and publishing exploration narratives in the first half of the 
nineteenth century”,25 suggesting that Shelley’s Frankenstein was in part 
addressing a “post-Napoleonic climate of nationalistic hubris”.26 Reading 
the text within a postcolonial discourse, Andrew Smith and William 
Hughes suggest that “Enlightenment subjectively generates its own 
opposite, in such a way that the subject is precariously defined through 
historically contingent (and therefore provisional) oppositions”,27 and 
therefore these oppositions dissolve into a “model of collapse [that] 
underpins that process in which the colonising subject is displayed in its 
confrontation with racial otherness, an otherness that is both strange, 
distanced and exotic, and yet the site upon which racial, psychological, 
and sexual anxieties are projected”.28 As John Bugg notes, “Shelley’s 
novel has long been linked to questions of race and empire”29 as Shelley 
“studies the crucial relationship between language, alterity, and empire”.30 
Frankenstein thus allows for various kinds of social critique to operate 
under the guise of the Gothic novel. 
In addition to readings as a critique of imperialism, Dracula has been 
subjected to nationalistic readings. At the time Stoker was writing, Ireland 
was considered a “metropolitan colony” of the British Empire, and as 
Joseph Valente claims ‘the Irish people found themselves at once agent 
and object, participant-victims, of Britain’s far-flung imperial mission”.31 
Valente suggests Stoker was using the Gothic in order to represent “a 
                                                           
24 In addition to the initial allegorical role of the monstrous as an embodiment of 
the fears of the “Eastern invasion”, the monster represents the fears of linguistic 
adaptation that might lead to cultural and eventual racial assimilation. 
25 Craciun 436-7. 
26 Craciun 437. 
27 Smith & Hughes: 2. 
28 Smith & Hughes: 2. 
29 Bugg: 656. 
30 Bugg: 656. 
31 Valente: 632. 

Definitive Demons 
151 
structurally determined ambivalence, even skepticism, towards the racial 
distinctions, social hierarchies, and political assumptions that inform the 
Anglo-Protestant literary heritage”.32 Moreover, Stoker utilised the Gothic 
novel in order to condemn the subservient situation of the Irish and 
criticise the imperialistic enterprise. Yet Bruce Stewart argues that “a 
nationalist interpretation of such a text as Dracula is by its very nature apt 
to affirm its own convictions, turning the novel into an allegory of the 
landlord-tenant relations; and this is done without regard to alternative 
readings of the same text, often involving reference to the same subtending 
historical experience”.33 Stewart cautions against allegorical nationalistic 
interpretations of the novel, saying that “[i]f Dracula is an allegory of Irish 
historical events, it is surely more likely to be based on a reaction to the 
climate of terror engendered by Land League agitation than to the legacy 
of resentments caused by colonial dispossession—though perhaps both of 
these are necessary ingredients in its uniquely successful amalgam of 
loathing and desire”.34 Stewart also warns against interpretations “according 
to which Stoker’s aristocratic vampire is unequivocally identified with the 
despised Irish landlords, thus turning the novel into a covert political 
confession on the part of the Protestant ascendancy”35 because he claims 
these analyses “suggest the novel has been co-opted for rhetorical 
purposes remote from Stoker’s original intentions”.36 
Along with these post-colonial and nationalist issues within the 
Empire, the echoes of the French revolution resounded across the channel, 
resulting in tremendous fears. The Gothic served “as a metaphor with 
which some contemporaries in England tried to come to terms with what 
was happening across the Channel in the 1790s”.37 The Gothic was “born” 
with the French revolution,38 and as M. H. Abrams asserts, “[m]uch 
writing of the period, whether imaginative or didactic, in verse or in prose, 
dealt with or reflected the pressing social, economic, religious and 
intellectual issues and problems of that era”.39 The rise of the novel, and 
more specifically the rise of the Gothic novel, was the literary response to 
the socio-political changes taking place during the Victorian era. New 
fears were voiced through the allegorical use of Gothic elements, and these 
                                                           
32 Valente: 634. 
33 Stewart: 240. 
34 Stewart: 247. 
35 Stewart: 255. 
36 Stewart: 255. 
37 Paulson: 534. 
38 Wright: 63. 
39 Abrams: 225. 

Chapter Nine 
 
152
are represented in both Frankenstein and Dracula through the encounter 
with the monstrous “Other”. 
Educational evaluations 
Bram Stoker (1847-1912) was born in Ireland to a Baptist family, and 
attended Trinity College, Dublin where he studied mathematics. He wrote 
several novels as well as theatre criticism. Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley 
(1797-1851) was home-schooled, and profoundly influenced by many 
ideas that were circulating at the time regarding race, gender and social 
acceptance. She was the daughter of Mary Wollstonecraft, the famous 
author of the Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792), which was a 
response to Edmund Burke’s A Vindication of the Rights of Men (1790).40 
She was familiar with Burke’s work, including A Philosophical Enquiry 
into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful (1757), which 
explored concepts of “terror”, “horror”, and “the sublime”, suggesting that 
terror is the kernel of the sublime, and that we experience pleasure in fear 
when it is presented at a sufficient distance.  
The various philosophical, political and economical influences M. A. 
Goldberg detects in Shelley’s novel (for example, Edmund Burke, Adam 
Smith, Jean Jacque Rousseau, Thomas Paine and, of course, William 
Godwin, Mary’s father, and Percy Shelley, who was to be her husband) 41 
are indeed present in the themes and focalisations of Frankenstein.42 In 
addition to the basic sociability of humanity articulated in these thinkers’ 
writings, which for the most part relates to the practical and utilitarian 
factors of social existence, Frankenstein presents an allegory of the 
inherent tendencies humanity has of “Othering” as a modus operandi, as a 
means of defining and creating the self. These ideas would later take shape 
via the works of Freud and Lacan. 
In 1832 Percy Shelley published a review of Frankenstein, suggesting 
it be read as an allegory of seclusion: “Treat a person ill, and he will 
become wicked. Require affection with scorn;—let one being be selected, 
for whatever cause, as the refuse of his kind,—divide him, a social being, 
from society, and you impose upon him the irresistible obligations—
                                                           
40 The full title of the former is: A Vindication of the Rights of Woman: with 
Strictures on Political and Moral Subjects; and the full title of the later is A 
Vindication of the Rights of Men, in a Letter to the Right Honourable Edmund 
Burke; Occasioned by His Reflections on the Revolution in France. 
41 Later she and Percy Shelley would subject themselves to a self-imposed exile in 
Europe in order to escape the scandals relating to their relationship. 
42 See Goldberg. 

Definitive Demons 
153 
malevolence and selfishness”.43 This perspective on the novel was unusual 
at the time, as it highlights the social allegory regarding processes of 
“Othering”. 
As Berthold Schoene-Harwood asserts, many critics suggest that 
“Shelley’s greatest achievement resides in her novel’s allegorical multi-
facetedness which renders references of an intimately personal nature part 
of a larger historical metaphor that accentuates the universal applicability 
of Frankenstein as a moral fable”.44 Schoene-Harwood also suggests that 
the social importance of Shelley’s allegory is that while the novel borrows 
Promethean and Biblical motifs, it presents a different problematic as 
“Walton and Frankenstein both sin, not against self or God, but against the 
moral and social order”.45 This criticism is the continuation of Percy 
Shelley’s earlier observation which locates the novel in its rightful place as 
social critique. 
Drawing an analogy between the monster and Frankenstein, Daniel 
Cottom suggests that “the parable of Frankenstein” is that “in seeking to 
represent himself, man makes himself a monster. Or, to put it in other 
words: Frankenstein’s monster images the monstrous nature of 
representation”.46 Frankenstein offers a complex allegory of the nineteenth 
century British relationship to the displaced and silenced “Other”, and as 
Jerold E. Hogle suggests, the creature is also “displaced” in respect of 
language.47 These questions regarding the linguistic inscription of the limits 
and boundaries of the human being are explored in Dracula as well; Count 
Dracula himself acknowledges the importance of linguistic absorption in 
order to blend in the London crowds like a predator using camouflage. 
The allegorical possibilities Dracula has to offer have been explored as 
“a Freudian projection of sexual anxieties, a perverted archetype, or a fin-
de-siècle fantasy [and] an allegory of Ireland’s social, political, and 
cultural upheavals at the end of the nineteenth century”.48 Ingelbien asserts 
that “For some, Count Dracula represents the Protestant Ascendancy in 
terminal decline”49 and that it would be erroneous to “assume that the 
novel as a whole possesses a single, comprehensive allegorical intent”.50 
                                                           
43 Quoted in Schoene-Harwood: 21. 
44 Schoene-Harwood: 8. 
45 Schoene-Harwood: 24. 
46 Cottom: 60. 
47 Hogle: 221. 
48 Ingelbien 1089. 
49 Ingelbien 1089. 
50 Ingelbien 1089. Ingelbien proposes that “conflicting readings may also result 
from a failure to recognize that Stoker was ultimately after things other than 

Chapter Nine 
 
154
Psychoanalytical approaches 
Maggie Kilgour suggests that psychoanalysis is “a late gothic story which 
has emerged to help explain a twentieth-century experience of paradoxical 
detachment from and fear of others and the past”,51 and according to 
David Gilmore, most critics agree that “imaginary monsters provide a 
convenient pictorial metaphor for human qualities that have to be 
repudiated, externalised, and defeated, the most important of which are 
aggression and sexual sadism, that is, id forces”.52 However, he 
emphasises that “for most people monsters are sources of identification 
and awe as well as of horror, and they serve also as vehicles for the 
expiation of guilt as well as aggression: there is a strong sense in which the 
monster is an incarnation of the urge for self-punishment and a unified 
metaphor for both sadism and victimisation”.53 Furthermore, Gilmore 
claims that “whatever else it is, the monster is a cannibal fantasy”.54 
Gilmore explains that for Freud cannibalistic urges at the oral stage were 
not only destructive, “because they were also an attempt to incorporate the 
beloved maternal figure as part of the nascent self in order to gain 
possession and control over the external world and to make up for 
inevitable loss of the comforting object”.55 Gilmore continues to explain 
the psychological framework of the monster thus: 
[a]t the same time it gives vent to infantile oral aggression, the violent 
monster of the imagination also embodies the sadistic parent that murderously 
punishes transgression with dismemberment. In this light, we may see the 
cannibal component of the monster, which, as an inevitable mental aspect, 
implies being torn asunder in order to be consumed, as a manifestation of 
Oedipal guilt and castration anxiety displaced onto the body. Thus the 
monster derives its incredible psychic power from its ability to unite 
different forces and opposed processes within the unconscious. One may 
label the monster the primary universal and multivalent symbol of the 
human psyche: it conflates the entire rage of conflicts comprising the 
unconscious.56 
                                                                                                                         
allegorical consistency; a desire for commercial success played at least as large a 
part in the making of the novel” (1093). 
51 Kilgour: 108. 
52 Gilmore: 4. 
53 Gilmore: 4-5. 
54 Gilmore: 180. 
55 Gilmore: 181. 
56 Gilmore: 184. 

Definitive Demons 
155 
Both Stoker’s vampire and Shelley’s creature are such aggressive 
devouring monsters. 
Frankenstein and Dracula have triggered a multitude of psychoanalytical 
readings, as they lend themselves to an interpretation of the monster as the 
projection of suppressed or displaced fears and desires. Anne Mellor 
suggests that Frankenstein is “our culture’s most penetrating literary 
analysis of the psychology of modern ‘scientific’ man, of the dangers 
inherent in scientific research, and of the horrifying but predictable 
consequences of an uncontrolled technological exploitation of nature and 
the female”.57 Mellor suggests that the creature in Frankenstein undergoes 
a cognitive mirror stage by which it becomes aware of its self.58 
For Robert Olorenshaw, Frankenstein’s creature is not a “typical 
Lacanian subject”,59 and is “unnarratable”.60 It therefore “cannot cross 
over from an order determined by the specular to an order determined by 
language, that is, the creature cannot be recognised, identified or circulated 
as proper name in the discourse of the “Other” because the creature is 
unnameable”.61 Olorenshaw contends that the creature is excluded from 
the symbolic order of language because it cannot be contained in the 
narrative; however, the creature is a fictional creation, and therefore its 
“order of language” is literary, not the “real” order.62 There are tensions 
between the literary and the literal or, in Lacanian terminology, the 
symbolic and the real.63 After its education, the creature comprehends that 
it is excluded from both the symbolic and real orders because it is “the 
unnameable”.64 The ultimate “Other” cannot participate, penetrate or 
become a part of the symbolic order. 
In a comprehensible world each creature has its place; in the real 
world—in the Lacanian sense—the world is full of misplaced, dislocated 
and homeless beings. Thus, as a concept that relinquishes binary logic “the 
geography of the monster is an imperilling expanse, and therefore always a 
contested cultural space”.65 Language is where the monstrous is inscribed 
upon the symbolic aspect of the psyche, and the appropriation of the 
monstrous into language disarms it of its unstable essence. 
                                                           
57 Mellor: 9. 
58 Mellor: 9. 
59 Olorenshaw: 167. 
60 Olorenshaw: 167. 
61 Olorenshaw: 167. 
62 Olorenshaw: 167. 
63 Olorenshaw: 167. 
64 Olorenshaw: 167. 
65 Cohen: 7. 

Chapter Nine 
 
156
Fred Botting offers one of the most comprehensive criticisms of 
Frankenstein, suggesting that the various readings along psychoanalytical 
lines create a monstrous critical corpus that breeds “critical monsters”.66 
These “critical monsters” destabilise and deconstruct the novel. Readings 
of the text as “transgressive” or indefinite function as reiterations of the 
paradigms and structures, such as psychoanalysis and literary analysis, 
which resided outside the novel. While Botting’s readings of the novel as 
dualistic, inherently contradictory and inexplicable restate the options of 
literary criticism as plausible, his conclusion that the text refuses to offer 
“a final presentation of the meaning”67 offers a never-ending spiral pattern 
as the real form and structure of the novel.68 Thus, it seems that by 
attributing to the novel endless possible and plausible meanings, Botting 
simultaneously resolves its conundrum whilst leaving it open for future 
discussions.  
Gender studies 
In the second half of the twentieth century the increased interest in gender 
studies has produced a rich body of research that investigates the gender 
load and sexual complexities of the vampire and zombie-like creature. The 
vampire has a long tradition of sensuality and sexuality, and one finds both 
female and male vampire characters (for example, the female vampires in 
Stoker’s novel and Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu’s 1872 Carmilla). The 
vampire is seductive even while it is repulsive, negotiating the death-drive 
and sexual desire simultaneously. Stoker’s Count Dracula is male, and 
seduces the innocent women of England. The creature in Shelley’s novel is 
perceived as male, yet bears none of the seductive qualities of the vampire. 
In 1985 Gyatari Chakravotry Spivak offered a feminist reading of the 
text within a post-colonial discourse, forging the way for a plethora of 
gender related readings. Later Spivak argued that in Frankenstein the 
discursive field of imperialism does not produce unquestioned ideological 
correlatives for the narrative structuring along oppositions of gender or 
race.69 Spivak suggests that “Shelley differentiates the Other [and] works 
at Caliban/Ariel distinction”,70 identifying this as the crux of the novel’s 
political significance. She proposes that the end of the narrative allows for 
inconclusiveness regarding “the dynamic nineteenth-century topos of 
                                                           
66 Botting: 3. 
67 Botting: 4. 
68 Botting: 3-5. 
69 Spivak 1995: 56. 
70 Spivak 1995: 60. 

Definitive Demons 
157 
feminism-in-imperialism”71 as both the monster and the “English lady” are 
permitted a place outside of the narrative. 
Denis L. White suggests that monsters are usually male, and that in 
Dracula “the vampire’s threat is more of seduction than of death [and] in 
Frankenstein the villagers seem to fear not so much a murderer as a child 
molester. The horror-producing element in such occurrences is the 
simultaneous presence of both a desire to gratify and the fear of losing 
control of the id—a fear that the id will become one’s whole 
personality”.72 Frankenstein’s creature is perceived as a sexual threat,73 
and as vampires are perceived as bisexual,74 Dracula has been read as an 
exploration of the relationship between desire and gender in Victorian 
society, and more specifically as a subversion of conventional Victorian 
gender codes.75 The uncertainty regarding the monsters’ sexuality and 
gender location lends them an even more terrifying essence as they 
threaten the stable binary division and socially allocated gender roles. 
Conclusion 
Since their publication Frankenstein and Dracula have stirred the 
imagination and produced an extensive body of criticism. The exposé of 
criticism offered here is partial and can only offer a glimpse of the vast 
areas of study that have engaged with these remarkable texts. From the 
psychoanalytical and deconstructionist to the didactic and the post-colonial 
approaches, the texts lend themselves to a variety of interpretations. 
Though the socio-historical circumstances leading to their creation were 
specific, the universal moral queries offered by both novels appeal to 
readers across time and space. 
The daimonic imagination that found a literary embodiment in 
Frankenstein and Dracula demands continual attention. From the media 
franchise Resident Evil to television series like True Blood, and, of course, 
the Twilight saga, contemporary popular culture is replete with creatures 
that scare even while they fascinate. These particular kind of horror stories 
are the quintessential “monstrous Other” because they embody our fears 
and desire for death alongside our fears of the social “Other”. These two 
fears are basic motivators, as one pertains to our primal need to belong as 
the most crucial survival need, and the other is the fear of death. As long 
                                                           
71 Spivak 1995: 61. 
72 White: 10. 
73 Craciun: 545. 
74 Stevenson: 145. 
75 Craft: 108. 

Chapter Nine 
 
158
as one is driven by these primal desires literature and art will produce and 
reproduce the myths of these demons that define our individual and 
collective identities. 
Bibliography 
Abrams, M. H. (2005) A Glossary of Literary Terms 8th edn (Boston: 
Thompson). 
Akeroyd, J. (2009) “The Historical Dracula: Monster or Machiavellian 
Prince?”, History Ireland 17, 2, 21-24 (Dublin: Wordwell Ltd). 
Smith, A. & W. Hughes (2003) Empire and the Gothic: The Politics of 
Genre (Palgrave Macmillan: New York). 
Baldick, C. (1987) In Frankenstein’s Shadow: Myth, Monstrosity, and 
Nineteenth Century Writing (New York: Oxford University Press. 
Bugg, J. (2005) “‘Master of their language’: Education and Exile in Mary 
Shelley’s Frankenstein”, Huntington Library Quarterly, 68.4, 
December 2005 (University of California Press) 655-666. 
Botting, F. (1991) Making monstrous: Frankenstein criticism theory (New 
York: Manchester University Press).  
Burke, E. (1998) A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of 
the Sublime and Beautiful (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
Cohen, J. J. (1996) “Monster Culture (Seven Theses)” in Monster Theory: 
Reading Culture, J. J. Cohen (ed.) (Minneapolis: Minnesota University 
Press) 3-25. 
Cottom, D. (1980) “Frankenstein and the Monster of Representation”, 
SubStance, 9.3, Issue 28 (University of Wisconsin Press) 60-71. 
Craciun, A. (2011) “Writing the Disaster: Franklin and Frankenstein”, 
Nineteenth-Century Literature, 65.4 (University of California Press) 
433-480. 
Craft, C. (1984) ‘“Kiss Me with those Red Lips’: Gender and Inversion in 
Bram Stoker’s Dracula”, Representations, no. 8 (University of 
California Press) 107-133. 
Curran, B. (2000) “Was Dracula an Irishman?”, History Ireland, 8.2 
(Dublin: Wordwell Ltd) 12-15. 
Goldberg, M. A. (1959) “Moral and Myth in Mrs. Shelley’s Frankenstein”, 
Keats-Shelley Journal, 8: 27-38. 
Gilmore, D. D. (2003) Monsters: Evil Beings, Mythical Beasts, and all 
Manner of Imaginary Terrors (University of Pennsylvania Press). 
Halberstam, J. (1996) “‘Technologies of Monstrosity: Bram Stoker’s 
Dracula” in Skin Shows: Gothic Horror and the Technologies of 
Monsters (Durham, NC: Duke University Press) 86-106.  

Definitive Demons 
159 
Hogle, J. E. (1995) “‘Otherness in Frankenstein: The Confinement/ 
Autonomy of Fabrication” in Frankenstein: Contemporary Critical 
Essays, F. Botting (ed.) (London: Macmillan Press) 206-235. 
Ingelbien, R. (2003) “Gothic Genealogies: ‘Dracula’, ‘Bowen’s Court’, 
and Anglo-Irish Psychology”, ELH, 70.4 (Baltimore, Maryland: The 
Johns Hopkins University Press) 1089-1105. 
Kilgour, M. (1995) The Rise of the Gothic Novel (London, New York: 
Routledge). 
Lacan, J. (1966) “The Mirror Stage as Formative of the Function of the I” 
in The Symbolic Order: Ecrtis trans. A. Sheridan (London: Routledge) 
1-9. 
Malchow, H. L. (1993) “Frankenstein’s Monster and Images of Race in 
Nineteenth-Century Britain”, Past & Present, no. 139 (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press on behalf of The Past and Present Society) 90-130. 
Mellor, K. A. (2003) “Making a Monster: an introduction to Frankenstein” 
Cambridge Companion to Mary Shelley, E. Schor (ed.) (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press).  
Morton Braund, S. & W. Raschke (2002) “Satiric Grotesques in Public 
and Private: Juvenal, Dr Frankenstein, Raymond Chandler and 
‘Absolutely Fabulous’” in Greece & Rome, Second Series, 49.1 
(Cambridge University Press on behalf of The Classical Association) 
62-84. 
Olorenshaw, R. (1994) “Narrating the Monster: From Mary Shelley to 
Bram Stoker” in Frankenstein: Creation and Monstrosity, S. Bann 
(ed.) (London: Reaktion Books) 158-177. 
Paulson, R. (1981) “Gothic Fiction and the French Revolution”, ELH, 48.3 
(Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press) 532-554. 
Schoene-Harwood, B. (2000) Mary Shelly Frankenstein: A Reader’s 
Guide to Essential Criticism (Duxford: Icon Books). 
Shelley Wolstonecraft, M. (1994) Frankenstein: Or, the Modern 
Prometheus (Berkshire: Penguin Popular Classics).  
Spivak, G. C. (1995) “Three Woman’s Texts and a Critique of 
Imperialism” in Frankenstein: Contemporary Critical Essays, F. 
Botting (ed.) (London: Macmillan Press) 235-261. 
—. (2003) “Frankenstein and Devi’s Pterodactyl” in Empire and the 
Gothic: The Politics of Genre (New York: Palgrave Macmillian). 
Stevenson, J. A. (1988) “A Vampire in the Mirror: The Sexuality of 
Dracula”, PMLA, 103.2 (Modern Language Association) 139-149. 
Stewart, B. (1999) “Bram Stoker’s Dracula: Possessed by the Spirit of the 
Nation?” Irish University Review, 29.2 (Irish University Review) 238-
255. 

Chapter Nine 
 
160
Stoker, B. (1994) Dracula (London: Penguin). 
Valente, J. (2000) “Double Born: Bram Stoker and the Metrocolonial 
Gothic”, Modern Fiction Studies 46.3: 632-45. 
White, D. L. (1971) “The Poetics of Horror: More than Meets the Eye”, 
Cinema Journal, 10.2 (University of Texas Press on behalf of the 
Society for Cinema & Media Studies) 1-18. 
Wright, A. (2007) Gothic Fiction: A Reader’s Guide to Essential Criticism 
(New York: Palgrave Macmillan). 
 

CHAPTER TEN 
SCEPTICAL SCEPTICISM:  
REASON AND UNCANNY EXPERIENCE  
IN SCOTTISH FICTION 
KENNETH KEIR 
 
 
 
Hume on miracles and the uncanny 
In his introduction to Religion and Hume’s Legacy, D. Z. Phillips writes 
that “No serious philosopher of religion can ignore Hume’s arguments”.1 
Hume’s thinking not only has a great deal to contribute to discussions of 
religion, but also (because of his emphasis on experience) to wider 
discussions of uncanny or numinous experiences. As provocative as 
Hume’s insights were to philosophers of religion, his sceptical philosophy 
opens a series of discussions about experience which would be carried on 
in Scottish literature into the twentieth century. Hume argues that all we 
know about the world is derived solely from our individual experience of 
it. Direct sensory experience he calls “impressions”, while reflections 
upon that experience are termed “ideas”: 
By the term impression, then, I mean all our more lively perceptions, when 
we hear, or see, or feel, or love, or hate, or desire, or will. And impressions 
are distinguished from ideas, which are the less lively perceptions, of 
which we are conscious, when we reflect on any of those sensation or 
movements.2 
Thus, for Hume, direct sensory experience is more intense and more 
immediate than the secondary reflections upon experience. Ideas seem 
rather paltry things, the “less lively” shadows of real events. For Hume, 
the “creative power of the mind” “amounts to no more than the faculty of 
                                                           
1 Phillips: xv. 
2 Hume: 13. 

Chapter Ten 
 
162
compounding, transposing, augmenting, or diminishing the materials 
afforded us by the senses and experience”.3 On the basis of these claims 
about the superior intensity of experience, Hume casts a sceptical eye over 
our capacity to know for certain how the world works. He criticises the 
notion of cause and effect, which he claims is based not on knowledge of 
cause-and-effect, but only on the appearance of two events or objects 
together, writing that “All belief or matter of fact or real existence is 
derived merely from some object, present to the memory or senses, and a 
customary conjunction between that and some other object”.4 Rather than 
knowing that A causes B, therefore, the human observer only sees A and 
assumes from past experience that B will follow. Hume makes this point 
clearer by arguing that “that the sun will not rise to-morrow is no less 
intelligible a proposition, and implies no more contradiction, than the 
affirmation, that it will rise.”5 
It is indeed conceivable that the sun might not rise tomorrow, and so 
we cannot dismiss the proposition that it will not on the grounds that it is 
unintelligible. Rather, Hume argues that the “customary conjunction” that 
dominates our thinking about matters of fact gives us grounds for 
believing it will. In Hume’s epistemological system, we expect that the 
sun will rise tomorrow not because its not-rising is impossible, but 
because there is “a customary conjunction” between the dawn and a 
certain time of day. 
It has sometimes been forgotten, Terence Penelhum argues, that Hume 
is a systematic philosopher. Penelhum’s explanation is that this omission 
happens “merely because philosophy students are always encouraged to 
read him in anthologised bits”.6 Nevertheless, Hume’s philosophy is a 
system, and we must understand the epistemological basis of Hume’s 
criticism of religion and miracles. Hume’s emphasis on experience, and 
his scepticism, are of a piece with his famous condemnation of 
metaphysics at the end of the Enquiry: “If we take in our hand any 
volume; of divinity or school metaphysics, for instance; let us ask, does it 
contain any abstract reasoning concerning quantity or number? No. Does it 
contain any experimental reasoning concerning matter of fact and 
existence? No. Commit it then to the flames: For it can contain nothing but 
sophistry and illusion.”7 
                                                           
3 Hume: 13. 
4 Hume: 32, 33. 
5 Hume: 18. 
6 Penelhum: 272. 
7 Hume: 120. 

Sceptical Scepticism 
163 
For Hume, any work that does not begin with a consideration of actual 
experience is worthless: worse, perhaps, it can lead people into error. On 
the Humean bonfire, though, we should find not only works of 
metaphysics, but also, given his criticism of miracles in the Enquiry, a 
great many of the texts of established religion. Hume’s criticism of 
miracles is found in a chapter described as “unequivocally the most 
controversial thing Hume ever wrote”, and “some of the most frightening 
logic assembled in one short essay”.8 Kant famously claimed that Hume’s 
work roused him from “dogmatic slumber”, and collections and monographs 
on Hume and religion continue to be published: Religion and Hume’s 
Legacy edited by Phillips and Tessin, and Penelhum’s Themes in Hume are 
two modern examples of a large body of critical literature.9 
In short, Hume’s criticism of miracles is that he doubts any have 
occurred or even could occur. He writes that: “A miracle is a violation of 
the laws of nature; and as a firm and unalterable experience has 
established these laws, the proof against a miracle, from the very nature of 
the fact, is as entire as any argument from experience can possibly be 
imagined.”10 As the philosopher who bases all of his beliefs about the 
working of the world on experience, Hume is arguing that the 
unchangeable nature of the world as experienced makes miracles so 
unlikely as to be nearly impossible. Perhaps to make his point clearer by 
way of analogy, or perhaps simply to initiate a controversy with Christian 
divines, Hume attacks the possibility of resurrection thus: 
When any one tells me, that he saw a dead man restored to life, I 
immediately consider with myself, whether it be more probable, that this 
person should either deceive or be deceived, or that the fact, which he 
relates, should really have happened. I weigh the one miracle against the 
other; and according to the superiority, which I discover, I pronounce my 
decision, and always reject the greater miracle. If the falsehood of his 
testimony would be more miraculous, than the event which he relates; 
then, and not till then, can he pretend to command my belief or opinion.11 
To an extent superfluous (since he has already denied the likelihood of any 
miracle actually occurring) the above adds an important point to Hume’s 
critique. It is the greater likelihood of deceit in the report of a miracle that 
leads Hume to discount all such reports. So far, in dealing with reported 
miracles, Hume’s scepticism is consistent with his epistemology: if 
                                                           
8 Price: 91-2. 
9 Kant: 9. 
10 Hume: 83. 
11 Hume: 83. 

Chapter Ten 
 
164
experience has universally shown, for example, that people once dead 
remain so, we really should not trust someone who claims to have seen a 
resurrection. Were we to experience such an event ourselves, however, 
Hume is of considerably less help. If the sceptic should consider himself 
deceived, Hume’s system leaves him no epistemological ground on which 
to stand. If he assumes he is deceived, he must deny a part of his 
experience, contra Hume; if he is told that he is deceived, he must submit 
his experience to the testimony of others, also contra Hume. 
Such a gap does not disprove Hume’s scepticism, as it does not 
challenge the assertion that it is unjustifiable to ignore the regularity of our 
own experience when considering the report of miracles which we have 
not directly experienced. Rather, there is an interesting epistemological 
gap in Hume’s theory regarding the direct experience of the miraculous or 
the uncanny. Purely because of his emphasis on the importance of 
experience, Hume’s theory can be read in a way that allows for direct 
experience of miracles or the uncanny, even if reporting such experiences 
to others remains a process fraught with scepticism. 
This element of Hume’s thought has not been best explored in works of 
philosophy, however, but in literature. The creative work of Scottish writers 
since Hume has consistently explored the uncanny, and harnessed the 
tension between scepticism and experiences which seem to defy scepticism. 
The elements of Hume’s Enquiry (psychological emphasis, attention to 
subjective experience, empirical description of the senses) are also the 
elements of psychological fiction. We can read Hume’s epistemology as a 
scheme in which doubt is aimed at historically-attested and institutionally-
approved miracles, but which, in its emphasis on individual experience, 
allows for personal experience of the uncanny or numinous. 
The ways in which Scottish writers grappled with the sceptical and 
psychological elements of Hume’s thought in the nineteenth and twentieth 
centuries shed light on the concept of an Enlightenment which occurred 
once, leaving a disillusioned world, and furthermore the depiction of 
unusual psychological states becomes a privileged approach to the 
experience of the numinous. With its eminent figures (as well as Hume, 
for example, Adam Smith, Thomas Reid and Adam Ferguson) Scotland is 
seen as a home of Enlightenment thought, but given the simultaneous 
interest in the uncanny in Scottish culture, it should be understood that 
Enlightenment and the uncanny need not be irreconcilable foes. 

Sceptical Scepticism 
165 
Hogg and Stevenson: The nineteenth century 
John Herdman has written that “the double is a central Romantic image” 
found in two of the most famous Scottish literary explorations of the 
uncanny in the nineteenth century: Hogg’s The Private Memoirs and 
Confessions of a Justified Sinner and Stevenson’s Strange Case of Dr 
Jekyll and Mr Hyde.12 For Herdman, the double is linked with “the 
complex history of moral duality in the Western Christian tradition”.13 He 
reads the double as a moral image in literature, and argues that in the 
Enlightenment era, it became associated with “the primitive, the savage 
and the untamed in the human spirit”, and that “The savage of the 
unconscious housed within the European breast became associated with 
evil because of the threat it posed to the values of rationalism, to the ideals 
of progress and human perfectibility.”14 
Whilst focusing on the double as a symbol of moral duality allows 
Herdman to link the writers he studies (which include Hogg and 
Stevenson) to the lengthy Christian tradition, it also means that he makes 
no account of the impact of the epistemological questions surrounding the 
miraculous or the uncanny in the nineteenth century. The events of both 
Hogg’s and Stevenson’s novels are sometimes miraculous, but the advent 
of thinkers like Hume is a vital distinguishing feature between Hogg’s and 
Stevenson’s world and the long history of Christian thought. It is essential 
to grasp the way in which both are responding to the epistemological 
problems surrounding experience of the uncanny that lie dormant in 
Hume’s thinking. The central narrative of James Hogg’s novel The Private 
Memoirs and Confessions of a Justified Sinner is that of Robert Wringhim. 
A young Calvinist, Wringhim becomes convinced that he is one of the 
predestined elect, and proceeds to kill his brother, mother and a girl whom 
he has seduced, before killing himself. In this, he is prompted by a 
mysterious, shape-shifting figure called Gil-Martin, who, it is suggested, is 
the devil. Alone, this would be only a fantastic tale, but Hogg chooses to 
create a conflict between Enlightenment scepticism by including, around 
Wringhim’s narrative, the notes of an Editor. These notes are dispassionate, 
reasoned, and calmly balanced in contrast to Wringhim’s tale of madness 
and religious mania. Wringhim is not doubled only by Gil-Martin: the 
Editor’s tale is also a double of Wringhim’s life. 
While Gil-Martin has uncanny powers that allow him, among other 
things, to shape-shift, Wringhim’s narrative seems to the Editor to be too 
                                                           
12 Herdman: x. 
13 Herdman: 4. 
14 Herdman: 11-12. 

Chapter Ten 
 
166
uncanny to merit belief. He writes that he considers Wringhim’s narrative: 
“a religious PARABLE, showing the danger of self-righteousness”. For the 
Editor, Wringhim’s confession is “a thing so extraordinary, so 
unprecedented, and so far out of the common course of human events, that 
if there were not hundreds of living witnesses to attest the truth of it, I 
would not bid any rational being believe it”.15 His language here is that of 
the Humean sceptic: whereas Hume referred to miracles violating 
“unalterable experience[s]” of nature, the editor writes about the “common 
course of human events”. Hogg, though, seems to mock the Editor by 
making him over-confident in his scepticism. The Editor cannot, for 
example, explain where Robert’s ability to follow his brother wherever he 
goes comes from, nor does he explain elements of the narrative which 
support a supernatural interpretation of this ability. He also tries to explain 
a vision of Wringhim’s face before his brother as follows: “he soon 
perceived the cause of the phenomenon, and that it proceeded from the 
rays of the sun from a pure unclouded morning sky striking upon this 
dense vapour which refracted them.”16 
He strikes an optimistic, enlightened note, arguing that “the better all 
the works of nature are understood, the more they will be ever admired”.17 
Yet when we hear of the discussion about the event between George and a 
friend, George rejects the explanation that it was a trick of the light: 
“George could not swallow this, for he had seen his own shadow on the 
cloud, and, instead of approaching to aught like his own figure, he 
perceived nothing but a halo of glory round a point of the cloud, that was 
whiter and purer than the rest.”18 The Editor can be read as forcing 
Enlightenment assumptions onto the story he is telling, representing a kind 
of doctrinaire scepticism that defeats its own ends by severing its link with 
experience. This leads to discrepancies between the Editor’s comments 
and the evidence that he (and the reader) has before him. Similar 
discrepancies are to be found between the Editor’s scepticism and an eye-
witness account of the murder of Wringhim’s brother. The Editor is told: 
Now, note me well: I saw him [a character, Thomas Drummond] going 
eastward in his tartans and bonnet, and the gilded hilt of his claymore 
glittering in the moon; and, at the very same time, I saw two men, the one 
                                                           
15 Hogg: 65. 
16 Hogg: 29. 
17 Hogg: 29. 
18 Hogg: 34. 

Sceptical Scepticism 
167 
in black, and the other likewise in tartans, coming toward the steps from 
the opposite bank.19 
The witness then claims that Drummond and the other figure are identical; 
Wringhim’s narrative explains that Gil-Martin has assumed the appearance 
of Drummond in order to help assassinate Wringhim’s brother George. 
The witness appears to paraphrase Hume: “We have nothing on earth but 
our senses to depend on”, but the Editor never tries to explain how the 
witness, who was not alone in seeing the double, was misled by her 
senses.20 These discrepancies occur at the same location where Humean 
scepticism begins to fail: direct experience of the uncanny. The Editor is 
convinced that his witnesses must be deceived, yet his conviction is but a 
“less lively” idea in conflict with the other’s direct “impression” of the 
uncanny. There is little chance of reconciliation between the two 
narratives: Hogg’s novel contains, though it cannot blend, the uncanny and 
the sceptic. 
In Stevenson’s Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde the uncanny 
proceeds not from religious mania, but from science itself. Herdman 
claims that by the time Jekyll and Hyde was written the double was in 
“decline” as a literary device: “The problem for a late nineteenth-century 
writer such as Stevenson attempting a version of the supernatural double 
was that the loss of confident belief in any spiritual reality outside the 
human psyche had robbed him of a concrete figure through which to 
articulate the psychological-spiritual nuances to which he aspired to give 
form.”21 If we look at Jekyll and Hyde as an attempt to explore and give 
form to epistemological issues surrounding the experience of the uncanny, 
Jekyll and Hyde is less an example of the decline of the double as a 
continuation. Jekyll and his double represent good and evil, but they also 
represent differing modes of knowing. Shut away in his study, Jekyll is 
emblematic of the reclusive thinker, whereas Hyde, prowling the streets, 
symbolises immediate experience. In Humean terms, the difference 
between Jekyll and Hyde is the difference between ideas and impressions, 
and as with Hume’s system, where impressions are more intense than 
ideas, meditative Jekyll eventually becomes the “less lively” counterpart 
of his demonic other.22 Jekyll himself writes a description of the human 
psyche that echoes Hume’s denial that there is a continued personal 
identity in the subject: “Others will follow, others will outstrip me on the 
                                                           
19 Hogg: 51. 
20 Hogg: 56. 
21 Herdman: 132. 
22 Hume: 13. 

Chapter Ten 
 
168
same lines; and I hazard the guess that man will be ultimately known for a 
mere polity of multifarious, incongruous and independent denizens.”23 For 
Jekyll, there is only the world of experience, infinitely changeable and 
forever changing, a world totally out of keeping with his life in the study 
and his polite middle-class friends—but the very atmosphere in which a 
Hyde thrives. 
The same type of opposition between experience and thought is 
discussed by Linda Dryden in The Modern Gothic and Literary Doubles, 
where she writes that “Duality is more than a psychological condition: it is 
a factor of late nineteenth-century metropolitan life that can be identified 
in the physical geography of the city as well as in the individual 
existence.”24 
Hyde is both emblematic of this geographical duality and the denizen 
of its terrifying half. He is at once the inhabitant of the dark streets, and 
the symbol of the threats to civilisation that Victorian society perceived as 
arising from them. More importantly, however, Hyde is the vehicle which 
Henry Jekyll uses to descend into these depths. He is the explorer who 
experiences urban darkness, the creation of a more timid Victorian mind 
who fears to make such journeys. In these respects, Jekyll and Hyde is an 
exploration of the legacy bequeathed by the late eighteenth-century 
Enlightenment to late nineteenth-century literature. Whereas Hogg’s 
Editor is shown as being unable to use scientific and sceptical explanations 
to iron out inexplicable elements of his narrative, Dr Jekyll confronts his 
friends with supernatural science, what he calls “transcendental 
medicine”.25 One of those friends, Dr Lanyon, is accused of having 
“derided [his] superiors” by being sceptical about Jekyll’s experiments.26 
Lanyon, like Hogg’s Editor, is the representative of Enlightenment 
scepticism confronted with a numinous experience, the transformation of 
Hyde back into Jekyll: “I had sprung to my feet and leaped back against 
the wall, my arm raised to shield me from that prodigy, my mind 
submerged in terror. “O God!” I screamed [...] for there before my eyes—
pale and shaken, and half fainting, and groping before him with his hands, 
like a man restored from death—there stood Henry Jekyll!”27 
Herdman seems to have misplaced his pessimism when he writes of 
Jekyll and Hyde as an example of the double in decline. Stevenson depicts 
the same epistemological problems as Hogg in Confessions, but the 
                                                           
23 Stevenson: 61. 
24 Dryden: 18. 
25 Stevenson: 58. 
26 Stevenson: 58. 
27 Stevenson: 59. 

Sceptical Scepticism 
169 
depiction is more complicated by virtue of the advances in science made 
between the publication of the two novels. There is for Stevenson a 
fantastic element to science: Jekyll’s research has left the world of the 
comfortably rational behind and is pushing against the borders of the 
uncanny. This intensifies the problems for the reader in discerning which 
parts of the tale are unreliable. It is conceivable, after all, that some drug 
taken could alter someone’s physical appearance, or certain compounds 
affect one’s behaviour. There is even a seemingly scientific explanation 
for Jekyll’s inability to replicate the experiment: “I am now persuaded that 
my first supply was impure, and that it was unknown impurity which lent 
efficacy to the draught”.28 
There are also remarkable similarities in the formal qualities of both 
books: Hogg has two conflicting viewpoints; Stevenson has a narrator’s, 
Doctor Lanyon’s, and Jekyll’s own account of events. As with Confessions, 
the reader is faced with the task of comparing testimony surrounding 
uncanny events and trying to discern what grain of truth, if any, lies 
behind it. As with Gil-Martin, Hyde seems to embody immorality, license, 
and eventual madness, harking back to the tradition of moral duality 
Herdman locates in Christianity. Stevenson’s innovation is to make 
science, and not magic, the means of access to the uncanny, linking 
numinous experience and scientific enquiry in a way which would be 
explored in greater depth during the twentieth century. 
Twentieth century: the uncanny and modern psychology 
Herdman locates the decline of the double as a literary device in the rise of 
psychological understandings of duality. “In the early nineteenth century,” 
Herdman writes: “there was no sense of cleavage between literary and 
scientific psychology. The appearance of matter from the void, and 
evolution from the merely material through the organic to the animate and 
spiritual, was a commonplace of Romantic science, and the process of 
human growth from unconsciousness to consciousness was often viewed 
as an analogous process.”29 He continues: 
Although in reality Freud as well as Jung built on Romantic psychology 
with only slight modifications, the debt was often not recognised and 
sometimes not fully acknowledged, and as science became marked off as a 
domain of ‘fact’ which was seen as distinct from, and even alien to, the 
                                                           
28 Stevenson: 75. 
29 Herdman: 153. 

Chapter Ten 
 
170
subjectivity of literature, the abstraction of metaphysics and the mythology 
of religion.30 
Herdman’s comments seem to do little justice to either the extraordinary 
profusion of psychoanalysis-influenced literature, or the ways in which 
Freud and Jung’s works were situated on the borderline of the literary, 
with the emphasis on case narratives and innovative language. 
The growth of psychoanalysis does not so much destroy the double as 
colonise it. Whereas the duality Herdman describes in the nineteenth 
century is a moral one (the split between good and evil) the psychoanalytic 
duality is the conscious and unconscious. Elements of this duality are 
already present in Stevenson, as Hyde has the kind of irrationality and 
impulsiveness that is associated with the unconscious. In terms of 
epistemology, the notion of Jekyll’s descent into Hyde in order to attain 
experience and knowledge finds an analogue in the less explosive descent 
of the analyst into the unconscious of the analysand in order to recover 
their experiences. Importantly, Freud and Jung also dissipate much of the 
destabilising force of the uncanny by furnishing rational psychological 
explanations for uncanny or numinous occurrences. 
As with the other texts discussed here, the literature responding to 
Freud’s and Jung’s writing on the uncanny or numinous concentrated not 
on the philosophical or psychological questions of the day, but rather on 
the models of experience described within. Although Freud and Jung had 
offered rational explanations for uncanny or numinous experiences, 
writers seemed more interested in depicting the uncanny or numinous 
moment itself. 
Depictions of such moments were a major concern of Neil M. Gunn, 
and are to be found throughout his work. In his novel The Serpent, an 
atheist free-thinker in the Humean mode clashes with his religious father 
in a conflict which evokes Freud’s Totem and Taboo; but in his 
autobiography, The Atom of Delight, he is concerned with seeking out 
numinous and uncanny experiences. Gunn’s work embodies the impact of 
Hume’s epistemology on thinking about the uncanny. The Serpent shows 
the same scepticism surrounding the claims of established religions that 
Hume shows in his attack on the story of the resurrection of Jesus, yet 
Gunn elsewhere engages in in-depth explorations of uncanny or numinous 
phenomena.  
In The Serpent, Gunn’s description of the father of the main character, 
Tom, directly evokes Freud’s account in Totem and Taboo of the 
emergence of the idea of God from the image of the father: “There was a 
                                                           
30 Herdman: 154. 

Sceptical Scepticism 
171 
shuffling of feet in the doorway. Tom turned and saw his father before 
him. The grey face, the grey beard, the blazing eyes, the silent pursuing 
face—it had come at last. The power of the father created in the image of 
God. The tribal power, the unearthly power.”31 For Gunn established 
religion (here, Church of Scotland Protestantism) is a result of 
psychological forces which have been adequately explained by Freud: an 
explanation which also undermines the claims about the nature of the 
world made by Christianity. Elsewhere, however, Gunn criticised Freud as 
an incomplete theorist, writing that: “I am not disputing [Freud’s] analysis 
in any way, not so far as it has gone. I have neither the experience nor the 
knowledge to do so, nor any particularly desire, and indeed accept it with, 
I hope, some elementary understanding. But I am submitting that it is not 
the whole, the invariable picture.”32 In The Atom of Delight, Gunn shows 
an interest in other parts of “the whole [...] picture”, discussing Zen, for 
example, and an uncanny incident where the young Gunn shoots a hat off 
someone’s head with a arrow-shot he describes as “miraculous”.33 The 
word here is interesting, as is his later claim that: 
determinism, as a rational process, cannot be wise before the event if the 
event embraced the exercise of non-rational factors, including those 
incalculable upsurges from the Unconscious, or from the intromissions of 
archetypes in the Collective Unconscious, not to mention ongoings in 
weird realms where perceptions are extra-sensory in a way that would have 
shaken Hume to his Edinburgh roots and may yet produce another kind of 
smile on the face of a physicist.34 
For Gunn, scientific insights (his examples here are advances in 
physics in the first half of the twentieth century) are progressing by way of 
uncanny or numinous insights into the workings of the universe. This 
process is depicted in Gunn’s novel Highland River, where the main 
character, a scientist, thinks back to an uncanny experience earlier in his 
life where (spotting a salmon) “all his ancestors came at him”.35 This 
experience shapes his later life: “the small boy sticking his toe in the mire 
of the drowned earth becomes one with the grown-up scientist watching 
that same earth from an astronomical point above it[.]”36 In a more 
complete form than in Jekyll and Hyde, Gunn blends the uncanny and 
                                                           
31 Gunn 1943: 151. 
32 Gunn 1954: 89. 
33 Gunn 1954: 134-40, 143. 
34 Gunn 1954: 289. 
35 Gunn 1937: 11. 
36 Gunn 1937: 159. 

Chapter Ten 
 
172
numinous with scientific investigation, until a boy’s uncanny experience 
of hunting a salmon becomes the key to his later life hunting among sub-
atomic particles. 
The advent of psychoanalysis posed important problems for the 
depiction of the numinous. Freud and Jung alike explain numinous 
phenomena as responses to psychological needs, and furnish rational 
explanations for them. The surprising, disquieting, experience of the 
uncanny or numinous no longer arises from the external world, but in the 
hands of a writer such as Gunn the actual experience can still be a valuable 
part of fiction. A rich tradition ends with psychoanalysis: the numinous 
which arises from the world to ridicule the Enlightenment voices of 
Hogg’s editor and Doctor Lanyon retreats within the human head. 
Conclusion: contrariety 
In her essay “Contrariety in Hume” Catherine Kemp argues that 
inexplicable events are central to Hume’s thinking on the development of 
our beliefs about the world. She writes that: 
The principle of causation is nothing except as it establishes specific 
relations between son and father, or sword prick and pain. The specificity 
of these relations gives us our particular universe, with laws and order 
peculiar to it. We owe the development of these particular relations not 
only to the principles of habit and custom but also to the particular 
regularities and anomalies of our actual encounters with the phenomena. 
The emergence of a specific causal relation, its refinement, and its 
distinction from the alternate relation that forms when the first fails all 
depend vitally on the particular uniformities and non-uniformities in our 
experience.37 
Kemp is worth quoting at this length for a number of reasons. First, her 
argument makes clear that Hume’s scepticism does not only have the 
effect of casting doubt on reported miracles, but instead makes experience 
the foundation of all belief. Second, she highlights that the uniformity of 
experience is no more important to the genesis of belief than inexplicable 
experiences. Third, Kemp’s reading of Hume’s thinking on experience is 
compatible with modern understandings of epistemology and scientific 
change, such as Thomas S. Kuhn’s book, The Structure of Scientific 
Revolutions. 
In a way, the treatment of numinous or uncanny experience in Scottish 
literature as described here evolves so as to end in alignment with Kemp’s 
                                                           
37 Kemp: 64. 

Sceptical Scepticism 
173 
reading of Hume. For Hogg in The Private Memoirs and Confessions of a 
Justified Sinner, the clash of testimony is central. This is analogous to 
Hume’s arguments in “On Miracles” against belief in reported miracles. 
Hogg’s novel is filled with epistemological traps: instances where the 
reader cannot resolve contradiction between the Editor and Wringhim. 
One can either believe the Editor’s sceptical account, or Wringhim’s 
fabulous narrative. In the novel, there is no formal trace of the idea that a 
healthy respect for the uncanny may actually help rational enquiry. 
The link between science and the uncanny is made in Strange Case of 
Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde. Stevenson depicts Jekyll as achieving his uncanny 
transformation into Hyde through scientific practice. Stevenson’s novel is 
still in many respects a fantasy, but it depicts a similar relationship 
between science and the uncanny explored in more depth in the twentieth 
century.  
Twentieth century writers like Neil Gunn recognised that often changes 
in scientific knowledge occurred because of attempts to integrate uncanny 
experiences within the existing body of scientific work. His generation 
also lived through profound changes in what Kuhn calls “paradigms”: the 
rules which govern scientific enquiry at any one time. In Highland River, 
Gunn dramatises this process: Kenn is a physicist at a time when physics 
is being radically redefined. The uncanny is appropriate because, as Gunn 
depicts, Kenn’s early uncanny experiences are key to his future career as a 
scientist.  
There is a common tendency to consider the numinous or uncanny as 
opposed to rational or scientific understandings of the world. Hume’s 
philosophy makes that opposition untenable by making experience central 
to knowledge. As Kemp argues, Hume recognises that uncanny experiences 
do not overthrow our rational beliefs about the world, but instead refine 
them. Where it forgets itself, scepticism can impose a priori rules upon 
experience, and act thus as a limiting factor in our understanding of the 
world. When scepticism strips away such limitations by reinstating the 
primacy of experience, it provides reliable philosophical ground for both 
scientific understandings of the world and the uncanny. 
Bibliography 
Dryden, L. (2003) The Modern Gothic and Literary Doubles: Stevenson, 
Wilde, Wells (London: Palgrave Macmillan). 
Gunn, N. (1937) Highland River (Edinburgh: Porpoise Press). 
—. (1943) The Serpent (London: Faber). 
—. (1954) The Atom of Delight (London: Faber). 

Chapter Ten 
 
174
Herdman, J. (1990) The Double in Nineteenth-Century Fiction (London: 
Macmillan). 
Hogg, J. (2007) The Private Memoirs and Confessions of a Justified 
Sinner (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press). 
Hume, D. (2008) An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press). 
Kant, I. (1953) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics That Will Be Able 
to Present Itself as a Science trans. P. G. Lucas (Manchester: 
Manchester University Press). 
Kemp, C. (2007) “Contrariety in Hume” in E. Mazza and E. Ronchetti 
(eds) New Essays on David Hume (Milan: Francoangeli), 55-64. 
Kuhn, T. (1962) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press). 
Phillips D. Z. & T. Tessin (1999) Religion and Hume’s Legacy (London: 
Palgrave Macmillan). 
Stevenson, R. L. (1998) Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde and Weir 
of Hermiston (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
 

CHAPTER ELEVEN 
THE DAIMONIC IN W. B. YEATS 
CHIARA REGHELLIN 
 
 
 
Most of Yeats’ production, from poems to essays on literary criticism and 
philosophical works, has been characterised by the presence of the 
daimonic, which, as an invisible hand, has helped the writer to give shape 
to all his thoughts. From a careful reading of some of Yeats’ works, in 
particular Per Amica Silentia Lunae (1917) and A Vision (1925),1 it seems 
possible to explore the growth and development of the daimon, and to 
trace, among its protean manifestations, a common underlying theme. The 
phenomenon of the daimon is a difficult one to address, yet it provides a 
way for Yeats to systematise his work. Order and structure become his 
ultimate dream, and he relentlessly attempts to organise his thoughts and 
experiences in order to unmask the ambivalent and equivocal, and 
constellate his ideas into a structured wholeness and unity. 
The mythical daimon 
Yeats’ early approaches to the daimon were made possible through the 
incorporation of myth into his work. By mythologising his poems and 
essays, he managed to encapsulate the figure of the daimon, and, 
subsequently, to understand its function and meaning. In the essay At 
Stratford-on-Avon, composed in May 1901, he claimed that: “The Greeks 
considered that myths are the activities of the daimons, and that the 
daimons shaped our characters and our lives. I have often had the fancy 
that there is some one myth for every man, which, if we but knew it, 
would make us understand all he did and thought.”2 
                                                           
1 The first edition of A Vision is dated 1925 and it is commonly known as Vision A; 
the second edition was published in 1937, and it is often referred to as Vision B. 
2 Yeats 1961b: 107. 

Chapter Eleven 
 
176
Another early account of the daimon can be found in an essay on 
Verlaine which Yeats wrote in 1895. Towards the end of the essay, Yeats 
described Verlaine as a daimonic man: 
No matter what he talked of, there was in his voice, in his face, or in his 
words, something of the ‘voluminous tenderness’ which Mr. Bain has 
called, I believe, ‘the basis of all immorality’ and of the joyous serenity 
and untroubled perception of those who commune with spiritual ideas. One 
felt always that he was a great temperament, the servant of a great daimon, 
and fancied, as one listened to his vehement sentences that his temperament, 
his daimon, had been made uncontrollable that he might live the life 
needful for its perfect expression in art, and yet escape the bonfire.3 
It seems possible to argue that Yeats’ first notions and ideas about the 
daimon were developed through his study of the ancient Greek 
philosophers. The association of the daimon with temperament indeed 
contains clear allusions to Heraclitus’ famous fragment 119, “A man’s 
character is his fate”, which Yeats read and marked, together with other 
fragments, in his copy translated by John Burnet.4 According to James 
Olney, Heraclitus provided what Yeats would have defined as “sources of 
an alternative cosmology, both in literature and in his experimental work 
of magic and psychical research”;5 the symbols of the gyres in A Vision, 
for instance, which Yeats received through the automatic writing 
developed from the communications between his wife and the so-called 
Instructors, were mainly grounded in the pre-Socratic tradition: “To me all 
things are made of the conflict of two states of consciousness, beings, or 
persons, which die each other’s life, live each other’s death. That is true of 
life and death themselves. Two cones (or whirls) the apex of each in the 
other’s base.”6 The idea of a constant change with an alternation of endless 
conflicting opposites—epitomised by another recurrent Heraclitus’ 
fragment: “Immortal mortals, mortal immortals, living the others’ death 
and dying the others’ life”—permeates the entire collection of Yeats’ 
works and leads him to a mature formulation of a key concept of his 
philosophy: the antinomies. From Heraclitus in particular, Yeats 
understood that everything was in a state of flux and reality was a 
development through contradictions and opposing vicissitudes which 
needed to be attuned to each other.7 Besides shaping his antinomic view of 
                                                           
3 Yeats 1896: 117,118. 
4 Olney: 90, 93. 
5 Raine: 46. 
6 Wade: 918. 
7 Moore: 336. 

The Daimonic in W. B. Yeats 
177 
the world, the pre-Socratic philosopher probably instilled in him the idea 
of the daimon as an alter ego, as a tutelary spirit “attached to its opposite 
on earth”.8 
I am inclined to believe that Yeats understood Verlaine as a symbol of 
the daimonic process in the artist. Using the Heraclitean symbolism, Yeats 
could have argued that the daimonic flowed in the artist like the ever-
shifting essence of the water of a river. Yeats was still far from the more 
sophisticated symbolism and terminology which he would demonstrate in 
later works (Per Amica Silentia Lunae, Swedenborg, Mediums and 
Desolate Places and A Vision). However, at the time of the Essay on 
Verlaine, in 1895, he was already doing what the so-called Instructors 
would tell him to do much later, namely analysing “man’s character” (his 
daimon) and treating it as a hypostasis (like Heraclitus’ logos). 
Yeats’ daimonic doctrine was not limited to Heraclitus’ influence. It 
would be inappropriate not to consider that Yeats’ notion of the daimon 
derives from at least two other Greeks philosophers that he studied: Plato 
and Plotinus.9 The Platonic and neoplatonic traditions seem to shape and 
underpin Yeats’ understanding of the myth of the daimon after Heraclitus. 
This time the daimon is not treated as an opposing alter ego, but as an 
agent that is perceived from within. The daimon seems to undergo a 
process of internalisation, which is magnificently recounted in The Myth 
of Er at the end of Plato’s Republic, in the Timaeus, where every soul is 
given a daimon that becomes its “individualizing, divinifying, and 
immortalizing partner”,10 and in the Enneads, where “it is fitting that 
Plotinus should have been the first philosopher to meet his daimon face to 
face”.11 
From Plato’s dialogues in particular, Yeats assimilated the tension 
between philosophical knowledge and poetic inspiration. In Ion, Plato 
portrayed the poet as a passive entity, who, possessed by divine madness, 
became nothing but a mouthpiece of the gods. In Phaedrus he opposed the 
passive reaction of the poet with that of the philosopher, who was equally 
possessed by divine madness after contemplating the idea of beauty but 
was able to respond to this possession, converting madness into a state of 
knowledge. 
Yeats was aware of the differences between the Platonic ideals of poet 
and philosopher, and experienced both of them. On the one hand he could 
feel the energy of that creative frenzy conveyed by the poetic voice of the 
                                                           
8 Moore: 288. 
9 The Enneads had just been translated and published by Stephen MacKenna. 
10 Olney: 119. 
11 Yeats 1962b: 368. 

Chapter Eleven 
 
178
muse. On the other hand he sometimes lamented that he could not feel the 
fulfilment derived from the conversion of that energy into rational 
thought.12 This tension is evident at the end of Leda and the Swan (1924): 
the whole poem, based on the rape of Leda at the hand of Zeus (who 
transformed into a swan), can be interpreted as an allegory of the violent 
possession of the poet by the Muse. It terminates with the emblematic 
question: “Did she put on his knowledge with his power / Before the 
indifferent beak could let her drop?” 
As a poet, Yeats experienced the most immediate and direct contact 
with the daimonic through his possession by the Muse. In his essay Crying 
in Plato’s Teeth, Anthony Cuda affirms that “the Muse is but a marker or a 
placeholder that allows him to dramatise the poet’s sensation of a radical 
passivity bordering on madness, of being a patient who is ‘spoken 
through’ rather than an agent who speaks”.13 In this phase, Yeats’ 
experience was still purely poetic, and the encounter with the daimonic 
still superficial. He realised that there was an uncanny force which acted 
autonomously inside him, but even though the poet was touched in the 
inner and darkest regions of himself, the experience remained external, 
only affecting the mind. Anima hominis was the concept which Yeats used 
to describe everything which pertained to the mind. Anima hominis was 
for him the place where the poetic inspiration of the Muse was perceived 
and elaborated as a mental experience (i.e., it remained at the level of the 
mind). The experience was made spiritual only when he started realising 
that the inner presence was not just a poetic muse but a philosophical and 
mythical daimon. It was only when the muse was consciously internalised 
that it became daimon, and the poet could become one who was able to 
convert the poetic madness, inspired by the muse, into a philosophy or a 
state of knowledge dictated by a daimon. This time the experience was not 
limited to the mind of the individual, to anima hominis; Yeats became 
gradually convinced of the existence of a more universal, collective mind, 
or Great Mind, where personal emotions were converted into general 
truths, and where the mind of the poet was converted into the mind of 
mankind. This is what he called the anima mundi,14 the soul of the world, 
conceiving it as a corporate imagination, a reservoir of images which 
could be shared by the entire human race. Yeats argued that on the one 
hand this deposit of images came from the past and from tradition, on the 
other hand it was within him, and it was revealed to him through a super-
normal experience: 
                                                           
12 Cuda: 207. 
13 Cuda: 209. 
14 Ellmann 1968: 219. 

The Daimonic in W. B. Yeats 
179 
This subject-matter is something I have received from generations, part of 
that compact with my fellow men made in my name before I was born. [...] 
I cannot break from traditional subject matter without breaking from some 
part of my own nature, and sometimes it has come to me in super-normal 
experience; I have met with ancient myths in my dreams, brightly lit; and I 
think it allied to the wisdom or instinct that guides a migratory bird.” 15 
Yeats’ daimonic system 
Assuming the existence of a myth for every man, it is possible to infer that 
Yeats found “his myth” in A Vision, the work which was produced from 
the abundance of automatic scripts which his wife George Hyde-Lees 
(1892-1968) started writing just three days after they married in 1917. In 
this work Yeats managed to give shape and visualisation to his theories, 
and in particular to the concept of the daimon. For him, the language of 
myth16 was congruent to primordial structures which he used to constellate 
things in a systematic pattern. The presence of diagrams like the Great 
Wheel17 and of symbols such as the whirling cones or gyres18 represented 
his personal attempt to systematise forms, images, ideas and symbols. 
Yeats was looking for a model—a System—which could explain the 
behaviour of the macrocosmic universe and of the microcosmic human 
beings within it. Functioning as a mediator between the micro- and 
                                                           
15 Yeats 1961a: viii. 
16 As also alchemy, folklore and dreams. 
17 Yeats 1937: 66. Yeats conceived a diagram depicting what he called the Great 
Wheel: it was made of twenty-eight spokes and he believed that human souls 
passed through all the phases towards perfection. The System mapped the soul’s 
progression through the experiences of the lives which resided in each spoke. The 
whole cycle also reflected the historical development of the human being—the 
state of infancy coincided with the first phases, while the last ones represented the 
oblivion of old age and death. 
18 Whereas Yeats adopted the image of the lunar cycle to represent the historical 
development of the individual, the image of the “funnel” was used to systematize 
European history, “which was considered to pass like the human soul through a 
cycle from subjectivity to objectivity” (Yeats 1937: 71). Objectivity and 
subjectivity appeared to Yeats as two “intersecting states struggling one against the 
other” (Yeats 1937: 81), and the two whirling cones were the symbolic image of 
their interpenetration. It is important to recognise that these two cones represented 
the interpenetration of antinomies of every kind: they were not just the symbol of 
subjectivity and objectivity, but of every antinomic couple such as the abstract and 
the concrete, the living and the dead, the particular and the universal, truth and 
beauty, man and daimon. 

Chapter Eleven 
 
180
macrocosmic reality, the daimon was in charge of articulating and 
systematising the whole System.19 
It is interesting to note that the word system comes from the Latin and 
Greek systēma and from the Greek verb synistēmi, which means to unite, 
to put together, to organise, to frame. We could think of Yeats’ System as 
a set of entities or parts forming an integrated whole aimed at the 
achievement of order and unity. Yeats was therefore not just a poet but a 
system-builder who aimed at building a scaffolding of the world. From the 
fragmentation, chaos and meaninglessness of human existence, he 
developed a System which organised the chaotic plurality into ordered and 
meaningful unity. James Olney affirmed that “the poet brings order into 
this world of chaos and flux, embodies a symbolic meaning in his verse, 
and thereby, like any daimon, unifies the universe”.20 
Yeats was not the only one who engaged in a System: many others 
before him had done it, in particular those whom he considered his 
intellectual and philosophical masters: Plotinus, Swedenborg and Blake. 
Kathleen Raine maintained that “in speaking of Swedenborg, or Blake, or 
of Yeats it is as if we were following the unfolding of a single mind in 
which each learned something from his predecessor, while adding 
something of his own”.21 We could think of them as located one after the 
other in a great golden chain, embodying a continuous tradition of 
knowledge. The idea of knowledge for the three of them consisted in a 
systematic search for truth which, Yeats claimed, “cannot be discovered 
but may be revealed”.22 Inspired by Platonic concepts, Yeats was trying to 
convey the idea that the spiritual world could be known through its 
representations, expressed through symbols and images. Affirming that 
knowledge was not a matter of discovery, but of revelation, Yeats was 
implying that there was nothing new to be found, as everything was 
already there, inherent in the body of man and in the world. The inner 
truth, however, had to be revealed through experiences and disciplines of 
the mind. Yeats conceived his works as a process of unveiling the truth, as 
an investigation into the realm of those underlying forces which go beyond 
reason and beyond thought. He aimed at converting the unfamiliar and 
mysterious (because not yet revealed) into the familiar. The revelation 
consisted in a displaying of images that, like an imago mundi, 
encompassed a cosmic totality, a pleromatic reality which comprehended 
                                                           
19 I use “System” to refer to Yeats’ own system, whereas “system” will be used in 
this paper to describe systems in general. 
20 Olney: 211. 
21 Raine: 76. 
22 Yeats 1937: x. 

The Daimonic in W. B. Yeats 
181 
all things and beings. Granting an interpretive function to images, he was 
allowed to “see through”, in order to achieve knowledge from the 
confluence of inner perception and outer reality. The interpretation of 
symbols from the esoteric traditions which Yeats studied—alchemy and 
Cabala for instance—helped him to develop this kind of knowledge, and 
imagination contributed all the rest. It catapulted him into a realm of 
spiritual knowledge where the image was “acted” from within (imo-ago 
has been interpreted as “I act from the depth”),23 becoming substance, 
“hard to the right touch as ‘pillars of crystal’ and as solidly coloured as our 
own [substance] to the right eyes.”24 The formulation of a System was his 
means of corroborating the vision of images: they were revealed to him, 
and he perceived their embodiment as substances, and allowed them to 
speak in symbolic terms, namely using the language of symbols. 
The development of the System started when Yeats was still a young 
man: the catalyst event consisted in a sentence which seemed to form in 
his head, “pretty much as sentences form when we are half-asleep”:25 he 
woke up one morning to hear a voice uttering “Hammer your thoughts into 
unity”.26 At that time he may not have been sure about the meaning of that 
unity, and how to hammer his thoughts in order to attain it, but in the 
course of the years the method started becoming clear: the way which led 
to unity was characterised by a constant tension of opposites. Yeats’ unity 
was a sum of conflicts between his self and the world, between his 
subjective and objective life, between his self and anti-self. These opposite 
elements needed to be reconciled and balanced in order to find what he 
would define as Unity of Being. Virginia Moore affirmed that “all 
oppositions have but one purpose: to bring the individual to self-
awareness”.27 In Yeats the contraries pulled at each other, almost always 
urging him to a crisis: he saw himself as a bifurcated self, split into two 
parts, whose reconciliation was a fundamental process towards maturity 
and attainment of personality.  
Yeats’ duality was embodied by two symbolic fictional characters 
which he repeatedly presented in his works: Owen Aherne, the pious 
Catholic, the conventional man, the public one, the one who showed his 
face, and Michael Robartes, the private man, one who showed a mask 
instead of his face, who was interested in the mysterious, the one who 
                                                           
23 By Abraxus, in Evola: 266. 
24 Yeats 1962a: 351. 
25 Ellmann 1987: 118. 
26 Ellmann 1987: 118, Moore: 205. 
27 Moore: 271. 

Chapter Eleven 
 
182
tempted Yeats to enter another world. These two characters28 had begun to 
feature separately in the works of Yeats since the 1890s: Robartes was the 
leader of the order of the Alchemical Rose in Rosa Alchemica (1897), “the 
romantic all-out occultist”,29 claimed Virginia Moore; he also appeared in 
the poem The Wind Among the Reeds (1899). Aherne on the other hand, “a 
more conventional man, apprehensive of occult experiences”,30 appeared 
in the essay entitled The Tables of the Law (1896). Aherne was more 
shadowy than Robartes and he appeared as a man of meditation, always in 
doubt between acting and dreaming—”half monk, half soldier of fortune 
[...] must needs turn action into dreaming and dreaming into action: and 
for such there is no order, no finality, no contentment in this world”.31 
Robartes, on the contrary, was a man of action, addicted to ceremonialism. 
These two opposite and distinctive voices were resurrected by Yeats in 
A Vision. The use of voices and characters he had already established 
demonstrated continuity in his thought. The voices were also converted 
into personae, into aspects of his character and of his imagination; in The 
Wing Among the Reeds Yeats had already explained this attitude, 
affirming that he used them as “principles of the mind”. Yeats had 
originally intended A Vision as an exposition of the System through the 
dialogues of Robartes and Aherne: he initially thought that he had found in 
them a vehicle to convey the System. They were treated as central figures 
of his phantasmagoria, whose function consisted in leading him to the 
discovery of ancient philosophy. Richard Ellmann explains that: 
[...] he determined to present it [A Vision] to the public as if it were a 
secret, and his fertile imagination began to tailor a myth to cover ‘those 
bare symbolic bones’, themselves a myth. For this purpose he brought back 
to life Michael Robartes; the story he evolved was that Robartes, while 
travelling in the Middle East, had unexpectedly found in the religious 
belief of an Arab tribe called the Judwalis an explanation of diagrams 
which he had long before seen in a Latin work of Giraldus Cambrensis. 
Fascinated by his discovery, Robartes spent twenty years among the 
Judwalis learning their system and then returned to England to ask his 
friend Owen Aherne to edit his papers and publish them.32 
However, very soon Yeats faced the difficulty of a prose book and was 
forced to abandon the idea. Nonetheless, the two characters were 
                                                           
28 See Mills Harper. 
29 Moore: 180. 
30 Moore: 180. 
31 See Yeats: 1981. 
32 Ellmann 1987: 237. 

The Daimonic in W. B. Yeats 
183 
fundamental for the development of the System in A Vision. Robartes and 
Aherne dramatised Yeats’ position with respect to the System: on the one 
hand Robartes represented the articulation of the system; on the other 
hand, Aherne embodied its disarticulation. Articulation and disarticulation 
can be seen as constructive and destructive forces which govern Yeats’ 
System. The one could not exist without the participation of the other: this 
is why Aherne and Robartes deserve to be identified not just as Yeats’ 
dualistic identity, but as his realisation of the existence of a dual process 
through which the drama of life is eternally re-enacted (the symbol of the 
gyre is one of the most sublime representations of this concept) and 
through which the system acquires shape. 
Similar cases of opposite personalities are found in other thinkers of 
Yeats’ age: very symbolic is the case of the Swiss psychoanalyst C. G. 
Jung (1875-1961), who claimed to possess two personalities, an 
introverted and extroverted one. In the 1921 edition of Psychological 
Types he identified them as No. 1 and No. 2,33 comparable to Aherne and 
Robartes respectively. Both Yeats’ and Jung’s split of personalities was 
epitomised by Nietzsche’s definition of the Apollonian and Dionysian 
concepts in The Birth of Tragedy (1872): we could interpret Yeats’ 
personality as a combination of the Apollonian Aherne and the Dionysiac 
Robartes. 
Daimonic symbols 
Although influenced by other thinkers, Yeats maintained a certain level of 
independence. For instance, he preferred to define his opposite 
personalities as alter egos, and every time that he needed to think about 
them in symbolic terms he opted for the much more Yeatsian concepts of 
the face and the mask. The mask, in particular, was one of his favourite 
and most recurrent symbols, which indicated the difference between “what 
he was and what he wanted to be, between what he was and what others 
thought him to be”.34 The mask was the symbol of the opposing self, 
which Yeats interpreted as that part of him which looked at himself as if 
he were someone else, as if he were detached from experience as an actor 
on the stage. It represented an artifice which Yeats used to confront 
himself not as a man but as an artist. Richard Ellmann claimed that he 
“believed that the best of him was in his work rather than in his life”.35 
                                                           
33 See Jung 1963. 
34 Ellmann 1968: 93. 
35 Ellmann 1987: 177. 

Chapter Eleven 
 
184
I think all happiness depends on the energy to assume the mask of some 
other life, on a re-birth as something not one’s self, something created in a 
moment and perpetually renewed; in playing a game like that of a child 
where one loses the infinite pain of self-realisation, in a grotesque or 
solemn painted face put on that one may hide from the terror of judgment. 
[...] If we cannot imagine ourselves as different from what we are, and try 
to assume that second self, we cannot impose a discipline upon ourselves 
though we may accept one from others. Active virtue as distinguished from 
the passive acceptance of a code is therefore theatrical, consciously 
dramatic, the wearing of a mask.36 
Yeats identified the mask as his “second self”: it allowed him to build up 
his own world, expressing it in symbolic terms and assuming that it was 
more real than the actual face of the world. Yeats’ masking was an attempt 
to make life converge into a meaningful symbolism which allowed him to 
say things “to which he only had the key”: 
In the second part of Oisin under disguise of symbolism I have said several 
things to which I only have the key. The romance is for my readers. They 
must not even know there is a symbol anywhere. They will not find out. If 
they did, it would spoil the art, yet the whole poem is full of symbols—if it 
be full of aught but clouds.37 
I argue that for Yeats the mask had a meaningful function: he put on the 
mask in order to face a reality which was more symbolic than the real one. 
The great mystics that he chose as intellectual guides, for instance, saw 
symbols in everything and “with the same general purpose he sought out 
those who could manipulate external nature by magic as the poet 
manipulated it by symbols”.38 Above all, the mask embodied the symbol 
of polarity par excellence; it showed an inner side and an outer one, an 
objective and subjective one, thus representing the division between his 
self and the world, his self and an antithetical, second self. The mask gave 
him the possibility of standing both inside and outside himself, 
“subjectively seeing himself objectively”,39 as Virginia Moore put it. 
The symbol of the mask occupied Yeats greatly during the first decade 
of the twentieth century. Afterwards, he started replacing “mask” and 
“face” with two other symbols: self and anti-self. This was not just a 
terminological shift: it also denoted a clear movement inward, towards a 
more spiritual perspective. This change corresponded to the development 
                                                           
36 Yeats 1962a: 334. 
37 Ellmann 1987:53. 
38 Ellmann 1987: 57. 
39 Moore: 188. 

The Daimonic in W. B. Yeats 
185 
of an improved state of awareness in Yeats: he had indeed understood that 
the mask was an “emotional antithesis to all that comes out of [men’s] 
internal nature”.40 The struggle with the mask could take place only inside, 
and the concepts of self and anti-self could be better used to describe the 
perpetual antithetical game of life, preferably developed from an inner 
perspective. The symbol of the mask was thus converted to the symbol of 
the self, and poetry could become its direct expression only if “the self 
expressed by the poet was the most perfect distillation of himself that he 
could command”.41 
The anti-self was the spiritual opposite of the self, which Yeats 
identified with the term daimon. The nature of the daimon being shape-
shifting, Yeats’ conception of it was quite protean. During the second 
decade of the twentieth century, for instance, Yeats depicted the daimon as 
a tutelary spirit opposed to the self. That tutelary spirit was sometimes the 
embodiment of a discarnate human being, whose existence Yeats could 
not doubt since he had the possibility of experiencing the presence of one 
of them at close quarters. He claimed that he was accompanied by a 
tutelary spirit which had a precise name and identity, Leo Africanus the 
geographer and traveller. In those years, Yeats was still almost entirely 
reasoning in terms of antinomies: the daimon was the antagonist of the 
individual (the anti-self) and because of this he depicted it as a powerful 
being external and opposite to the individual. R. F. Foster explains that the 
first encounter between Leo and Yeats took place on the ninth of May 
1912,42 when he attended a séance with the medium Etta Wriedt at W. T. 
Stead’s psychic centre at Wimbledon. On that occasion, Leo introduced 
himself as Yeats’ “appointed guide”.43 Foster provides the following 
information: “From other hints (“you will find me in the encyclopaedia”) 
his identity was pieced together as “Leo Africanus” (more properly Al 
Hassan Ibn-Mohammed al-Wezar Al-Fasi), a Spanish Arab explorer, 
historian and poet from the sixteenth century whose image would provide 
WBY with an imaginary alter ego for years.”44 That was not the first time 
that Leo established contact with Yeats: it also happened some years 
before, on the third of May 1909, when someone called Leo materialised 
during one of his séances hinting at an “African name”.45 However, on that 
                                                           
40 Yeats 1961b: 234. 
41 Ellmann 1968: 129. 
42 Note the discrepancy regarding the dates: according to Virginia Moore the event 
took place on 10 April 1910 (Moore: 225). 
43 Foster: 464, 465. 
44 Foster: 465. 
45 Foster: 465. 

Chapter Eleven 
 
186
fateful ninth of May 1912, Yeats did not know what to think of Leo or 
how to interpret his presence: was the spirit a symbolic being (linked, for 
instance, with the constellation of Leo or the sun) or a well-attested figure? 
Was he an image or a phantom? It is only from 1915 that Leo was 
“adopted”46 by Yeats, accepted into his life as his alter ego, a spirit which 
he defined in his notebook as follows: 
I have the sensation of beings of independent existence, & of much 
practical wisdom who draw constantly on modern editions of the Classics 
(I hope yet to know what editions) & on modern ideas & use them in the 
service of their own independent thought. I get the presence of living, 
independent minds gathering together a language of thought and symbol 
out of the books and thoughts of those in association with the medium & 
the medium herself, & drawing about them earth bound spirits who follow 
certain obscure tracks of affinity.47 
“Earth bound spirits who follow certain obscure tracks of affinity”: Yeats 
did not seem to have doubts about the existence of independent spirits or 
daimons who guided men. Foster argues that Yeats “invented a personality 
for [Leo] which would, by contraries, define his own”.48 Therefore, Yeats 
regarded Leo Africanus not just as an external spirit, but as a second 
personality who interfered with his life in a game of opposites. Yeats 
believed in Leo as a daimonic entity, with whom he was able to establish a 
psychical identity whose opposite qualities could complete his own 
personality. In the light of this, Leo Africanus, as a daimon, was the 
embodiment of the anti-self. 
At Leo’s request, an exchange of letters started between them: Yeats 
wrote questions to Leo and Leo replied through the medium’s voice or 
through Yeats’ hand. Richard Ellmann argued that these letters between 
Yeats and Leo, never published,49 “show how warmly he welcomed this 
new theory that his opposite, instead of being solely a mask, a conscious 
                                                           
46 Foster: 466. 
47 Foster: 489. 
48 Foster: 466. 
49 In Ellmann we can read excerpts of letters exchanged between Yeats and Leo 
Africanus: “I know all or all but all you know, we have been over the same 
books—I have shared in your joys and sorrows & yet it is only because I am your 
opposite, your antithesis because I am all things furthest from your intellect & your 
will, that I alone am your Interlocutor. What was Christ himself but the 
interlocutor of the pagan world, which had long murmured in his ear, at moments 
of self abasement & death, & thereby summoned?” (Ellmann 1987: 200). 

The Daimonic in W. B. Yeats 
187 
product of his own mind with slight independence of its creator, might be 
a spirit or daimon with a full personality of his own”.50  
The relationship between Yeats and his daimon can be compared to a 
more famous one between Socrates and his daimonion.51 Socrates had a 
daimon whose role was merely to assist him in making a rational decision. 
It did not enter into rational discourse with him, he just said “no” when he 
wanted to warn Socrates that he was about to do something that would 
have displeased the gods. In the Phaedrus, Socrates claimed: “[...] the 
spirit and the sign that usually come to me came—it always holds me back 
from something I am about to do—and I thought I heard a voice from it 
which forbade me going away before clearing my conscience, as if I had 
committed some sin against deity”.52 In Autobiographies, when Yeats 
recalled his memories of the past, he said that he used to think that the 
voices that he could hear were dictated by his conscience, which addressed 
him on what was good and right. This was certainly connected with the 
influence of his grandfather William Pollexfen, who tried to instigate a 
religious morality in him from early youth. The way Yeats described this 
voice of conscience is particularly meaningful: “From that day the voice 
has come to me at moments of crisis, but now it is a voice in my head that 
is sudden and startling. It does not tell me what to do, but often reproves 
me. It will say perhaps, “That is unjust” of some thought; and once when I 
complained that a prayer had not been heard, it said, ‘You have been 
helped’”.53 
However from 1930, Yeats started thinking that the daimon was not an 
external being, but man’s higher self, which lived in a transcendent reality 
which he called the Ghostly Self. This way of conceiving the daimon 
represented a radical change from his previous conceptions, for the 
daimon was no more an external being or an opponent of the self, but an 
inner presence. Actually, Yeats did not limit himself to believing that it 
was internal, for the highest part of the being was paradoxically perceived 
as both internal and external. This change of attitude is particularly evident 
in the revision of A Vision, published in 1937, where it appears as an entity 
in unison with the Ghostly Self or man’s transcendental self. In the first 
version of the work the daimon was disjoined from the Ghostly Self, 
which Yeats used to address as the “permanent self”.54 
                                                           
50 Ellmann 1987: 199. 
51 One of the best sources of information about Socrates’ daimonion can be found 
in Plato’s Apology 31c-32a (Plato: 115). 
52 Plato: 242c, 459. 
53 Yeats 1961a: 13, 14. 
54 Yeats 1937: 221. 

Chapter Eleven 
 
188
The redefinition of the daimon was immensely important for Yeats 
because it implicitly represented a swerve of the whole System: it meant 
that the System was no more provoked by external invisible forces, but by 
spirits or daimons which resided within the individual. Self and daimon, 
once reconciled into the same body, generated that unity of being towards 
which Yeats had always been driven. 
Daimonic imagination 
In Alone with the Alone, Creative Imagination in the Sufism of Ibn ‘Arabī, 
Henry Corbin argues: “But a warning is necessary at the very outset: this 
Imaginatio must not be confused with fantasy. As Paracelsus already 
observed, fantasy, unlike Imagination, is an exercise of thought without 
foundation in nature, it is the ‘madman’s cornerstone.’”55 Corbin’s concept 
of Imagination plays a fundamental role in the development of his 
spirituality. He believed that imagination was the primary means to engage 
with the divine and with its theophanic manifestations. Imagination, with 
its power to authenticate the visions of prophets and mystics, and to reveal 
the truth, was an “organ which allow[ed] [Corbin] to see and perceive a 
world which [was] simultaneously concrete and supra-sensible”.56 He 
addressed as imaginal everything which derived from imagination, 
warning that it should not be confused with fantasy or the merely 
imaginary. In a paper entitled Mundus Imaginalis or The Imaginary and 
The Imaginal he claimed indeed that imaginary was a misleading word, 
associated with everything which was unreal or utopian.  
Probably influenced by Heidegger’s phenomenology, Corbin identified 
Western man as someone who had created a neat separation between 
thought and being. He believed that the merely “imaginary” was 
something which is located “outside the framework of being and 
existing”,57 like a place which could not be localised because it had no 
actual place. However, imagination, which he described as the incarnation 
of thought in image and presence of the image in being,58 acted as a 
powerful intermediary between the intelligible and the sensible world, the 
mundus imaginalis: 
Between them [being and thought] there is a world which is both 
intermediary and intermediate, described by our authors as the ‘alam al-
                                                           
55 Corbin 1997: 179. 
56 Corbin 1993: 70, 71. 
57 Corbin 1972: 1. 
58 Corbin 1972: 2. 

The Daimonic in W. B. Yeats 
189 
mithal, the world of the image, the mundus imaginalis: a world that is 
ontologically as real as the world of the senses and that of the intellect. 
This world requires its own faculty of perception, namely, imaginative 
power, a faculty with a cognitive function, a noetic value which is as real 
as that of sense perception or intellectual intuition.59 
Corbin’s mundus imaginalis was also called mundus archetypus, a concrete 
spiritual world of archetypal figures,60 apparitional forms and angels, an 
epiphanic space where the images of the archetypal world lie suspended—
Corbin used the expression “images in suspension”.61 Visionary 
apperception of reality, and therefore true theophanic vision, was granted 
by a spiritual faculty called active imagination, an intermediate power 
which could produce symbols (archetypal figures could be intended as 
symbols too). 
I am deeply inclined to believe that, like Corbin, Yeats intended 
imagination to be a fully real faculty of perception. Far from being only an 
artistic or poetic function, Yeats charged it with spiritual meaning. It could 
be inferred that it was for him an organ of theophanic perception which 
had the power to “transmute sensory data into symbols and external events 
into symbolic histories”.62 A secret pamphlet that he wrote for the Golden 
Dawn (privately printed in London in 1902) maintained that “The central 
principle of all the Magic of power is that everything we formulate in the 
imagination, if we formulate it strongly enough, realises itself in the 
circumstances of life, acting either through our own souls, or through the 
spirits of nature.”63 
Yeats contemplated the image as an inner process, and never ceased to 
find an esoteric meaning in it. For him, it was like entering a different 
world and being initiated into the contemplation of a System. For both 
Corbin and Yeats, symbols manifested themselves in a plane of reality and 
consciousness different from the sensible world. Symbols and images had 
to be deciphered and experienced as Urphänomena, primary phenomena 
which had the property of the imaginal. Yeats was able to let his 
imagination fuse with the anima mundi, a full storehouse of images, all 
available to him. Imagination allowed him to “see” all those images and to 
use their power to experience the intense awareness and recognition of a 
state of emotions symbolised in an imagined pattern. Symbols and 
symbolic thoughts were transferred from the anima mundi and treated like 
                                                           
59 Corbin 1972:5. 
60 Corbin 1972:6. 
61 Corbin 1993: 214. 
62 Corbin 1997: 80. 
63 Ellmann 1987: 94. 

Chapter Eleven 
 
190
Platonic Ideal Forms. It appears that anima mundi and mundus imaginalis 
are both worlds of “forms and images in suspension” which contain the 
variety of the world of the senses and the intelligibility of the 
experience—a real initiation to vision brought forward by imaginative 
awareness. Both Corbin and Yeats intended “vision” as a theophanic 
manifestation, which the active Imagination converted to a concrete 
figure: for Yeats it was a daimon, for Corbin it was the Angel. 
Conclusion 
When Goethe was twenty-three he told a friend that he could not express 
himself literally, but always did so figuratively.64 Yeats’ attitude was very 
similar: he went beyond the poetic and the literal in order to merge with 
the symbolic and figurative. He managed to achieve it by returning to 
mythical language, and developing a System of symbols whose 
comprehension comprised a revelation of truth and knowledge for him. 
The daimon was the archetypal image which emerged from the anima 
mundi, a theophanic manifestation which emerged from a world mediating 
between the sensible and the intelligible. It embodied the whole idea of the 
symbol, and represented Yeats’ attempt to unify and systematise the 
world. 
Bibliography 
Abraxus, “Magic of the Image” in J. Evola (ed.) Introduction to Magic 
(Rochester, Vermont: Inner Traditions) 266-272. 
Borchardt, R. (ed.) (1946) Four Dialogues of Plato, including the Apology 
of Socrates, tr. John Stuart Mill (London Watts & Co). 
Corbin, H. (1972) “Mundus Imaginalis or the Imaginary and the Imaginal” 
in Spring 1972 (Zurich) 1-13. 
—. (1993) History of Islamic Philosophy (London: Kegan Paul 
International). 
—. (1997) Alone with the Alone, Creative Imagination in the Sufism of Ibn 
‘Arabī (Princeton, New Jersey: Bollingen Series, Princeton University 
Press). 
Cuda, A. (2007) “Crying in Plato’s Teeth—W. B. Yeats and Platonic 
Inspiration” in Platonism: Ancient, Modern and Postmodern, Kevin 
Corrigan and John D. Turner (eds) (Leiden: Brill) 205-215. 
Ellmann, R. (1968) The Identity of Yeats (London: Faber and Faber). 
                                                           
64 Ellmann 1987: 56. 

The Daimonic in W. B. Yeats 
191 
—. (1987) Yeats, The Man and the Masks (London: Penguin Books).  
Foster, R. F. (1998) W. B. Yeats: A Life, I: The Apprentice Mage 1865-
1914 (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
—. (1998) W. B. Yeats: A Life, II: The Arch Poet 1915-1939 (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press). 
Jung, C. G. (1963) Memories, Dreams, Reflections, A. Jaffé (ed.) trans. R. 
Winston & C. Winston (New York: Pantheon Books). 
—. (2009) Psychological Types (London: Routledge). 
Olney, J. (1980) The Rhizome and the Flower, The Perennial philosophy—
Yeats and Jung (Berkeley: University of California Press). 
Mills Harper, G. (1976) Yeats and the Occult (London: Macmillan). 
Moore, V. (1954) The Unicorn, William Butler Yeats’ Search for Reality 
(New York: The Macmillan Company).  
Plato, (1960) Euthyphro, Apology, Crito, Phaedo, Phaedrus, The Loeb 
Classical Library (London: William Heinemann Ltd.). 
Plotinus, (1991) The Enneads, tr. Stephen MacKenna, introduced by John 
Dillon (London: Penguin). 
Raine, K. (1999) W. B. Yeats & the Learning of the Imagination (Ipswich: 
Golgonooza Press). 
Wade, A. (1954) The Letters of W. B. Yeats (London: Hart-Davis). 
Yeats, W. B. (1896) “Verlaine in 1894”, The Savoy, II, 117-118. 
—. (1937) A Vision (London: Macmillan).  
—. (1961a) Autobiographies (London: Macmillan). 
—. (1961b) Essays and Introductions (London: Macmillan). 
—. (1962a) Explorations (London: Macmillan). 
—. (1962b) Mythologies (London: Macmillan). 
—. (1981) The Secret Rose, Stories by W. B. Yeats: A Variorum Edition, P. 
L. Marcus, W. Gould & M. J. Sidnell (eds) (London: Cornell 
University Press). 
 

CHAPTER TWELVE 
BUT WHO IS THAT ON THE OTHER SIDE OF YOU? 
THE DAIMONIC SOURCES OF CONSCIOUSNESS 
IN LITERATURE AND DREAMS 
WOJCIECH OWCZARSKI 
 
 
 
Both literature and dreams have long been suspected of having 
connections with daimonic influence. When we ask what is the force 
behind the writing of a literary text, or who indeed talks to us in our 
dreams, the answer is often uncanny intelligence. Especially interesting 
are those situations when literature and dreams meet in the same space; 
when dreams are described in literary texts or when they are an inspiration 
for the author. For understanding such situations it is very useful to call on 
the thoughts of Carl Gustav Jung—but only if they are treated in a 
different, unorthodox manner. This way of applying Jungian thought to 
the understanding of the daimonic nature of literature and dreams will be 
investigated in this chapter. 
However, while this paper is mainly about Jung, I will begin with T. S. 
Eliot. In one of the notes to The Waste Land, the poet writes: “The following 
lines were stimulated by the account of one of the Antarctic expeditions (I 
forget which, but I think one of Shackleton’s): it was related that the party of 
explorers, at the extremity of their strength, had the constant delusion that 
there was one more member than could actually be counted”. This explorer’s 
account inspired Eliot to write one of his best-known stanzas: 
Who is the third who walks always beside you? 
When I count, there are only you and I together 
But when I look ahead up the white road 
There is always another one walking beside you 

But Who is That on the Other Side of You? 
193 
Gliding wrapt in a brown mantle, hooded 
I do not know whether a man or a woman 
—But who is that on the other side of you?1 
The daimonic sensation of the presence of a “third one” has here been 
transferred from the realm of the anecdotal to the dimension of personal 
experience. In the process of looking for the “anxieties of influence”, 
Harold Bloom recognised Walt Whitman in Eliot’s daimon and claimed 
that  
Eliot’s “third who always walks beside you”, the risen Christ according to 
The Waste Land’s notes, is either Whitman’s “thought of death” or 
“knowledge of death”, or both fused together. The Waste Land […] begins 
to seem more an elegy for the poet’s own genius, rather than a lament for 
Western civilization.2 
Moreover, according to Bloom, “The Waste Land […] reflects Eliot’s 
personal breakdown in 1921, a reaction to the strain of his first marriage”.3 
Without venturing into biographical details, one can assume that in this 
case literature, as it often does, served as a medium for the writer’s 
internal thoughts. Fantasising about Shackleton’s story and “reworking” it 
into the literary form of his poem, Eliot was trying to tame his own 
daimon. 
It appears that this particular “daimonic” stanza of Eliot’s perfectly fits 
in with what Georges Poulet called the “point of departure”. “When 
studying texts of the authors I’m interested in”, Poulet wrote, “I am trying 
to discover especially the way in which the one who reveals himself in 
them specifies his point of departure in a flash of self-awareness, thus 
formulating his cogito”4. It is the search for such places—places where the 
cogito of the writer is formulated—that I consider to be a particularly 
compelling and useful practice, especially given our irrevocably lost faith 
in the stability and tangibility of the subject. I usually find Pouletian 
“points of departure” where a literary text permeates the fabric of a dream 
(this is not the case with Eliot’s text, though there, too, the daimon has a 
clearly oneiric character). The literary accounts of dreams, even if the 
dreams described are not “authentic”, offer an insight into the way in 
which the subject comes to terms with him/herself. In such circumstances 
the element of self-discovery is usually inseparably entwined with the 
                                                           
1 Eliot: lines 360-366. 
2 Bloom: 373. 
3 Bloom: 373. 
4 Poulet 1990: 27. See also Poulet 1964. 

Chapter Twelve 
 
194
element of self-creation, so that the two cannot be distinguished or 
disconnected from each other. 
At this point we refer to Jung and ask the question: who (or what) is 
the author of a dream? Before I do that, however, I would like to 
demonstrate in what sense a literary description of a dream may serve as a 
“point of departure” for the constituting subject. I will use the example of 
a Polish writer, Witold Gombrowicz. In the opening scene of his first 
novel, Ferdydurke, published just before the war, the thirty year-old 
protagonist gives an account of his dream of a doppelganger: 
The dream took me back to my youth […] and I saw myself as I was at 
fifteen or sixteen, standing on a rock near a mill by a river, my face to the 
wind, and I heard myself saying something, I heard my long-buried, 
roosterlike squeaky little voice, I saw my features that were not yet fully 
formed, my nose that was too small, my hands that were too large––I felt 
the unpleasant texture of intermediate, passing phase of development. I 
woke up laughing and terrified both, because I thought that the thirty year-
old man I am today was aping and ridiculing the callow juvenile I once 
was, while he in turn was aping me and, by the same token, each of us was 
aping himself. […] Further: as I lay awake but still half dreaming, I felt 
that my body was not homogenous, that some parts were still those of a 
boy, and that my head was laughing at my leg and ridiculing it, that my leg 
was laughing at my head, that my finger was poking fun at my heart, my 
heart of my brain, that my nose was thumbing itself at my eye, my eye 
chuckling and bellowing at my nose––and all my parts were wildly raping 
each other in an all-encompassing and piercing state of pan-mockery. Nor 
did my fear lessen on iota when I reached full consciousness and began 
reflecting on my life.5 
The process of the “formulation of the cogito” taking place in this dream 
turns out to result from a clash of various forces. Firstly, we can 
distinguish a tension between the “I” of the present time and the “I” from 
the past. Neither of them is the final, true or superior “I”. The subject of 
the dream seems to be suspended between them—not as a compromise 
reached once and for all, but rather as a phenomenon in constant 
movement, in a never-ending practice of mutual parodies and mirror 
reflections. Secondly, we are struck by the playful squabbles of particular 
body parts. In the light of psychoanalysis and depth psychology, these may 
be understood as symbols of antagonised aspects of the psyche, denoting 
that the subject emerging from the dream is far from any kind of stability. 
Thirdly, what seems highly significant is the relations between the 
dreamer and the dream-teller. As is well known to literary critics with 
                                                           
5 Gombrowicz: 2. 

But Who is That on the Other Side of You? 
195 
methodological orientations, the story-teller is never the same as the one 
about whom the story is being told, even if he seems to be speaking about 
himself. Similarly all psychotherapists are familiar with the idea that the 
dreamer is not the same as the person he dreams about, even though the 
former usually recognises himself in the latter. Thus, in literary descriptions 
of dreams the whole situation is extremely complex and interesting: some 
“I” talks about some other “I”, which dreams about a yet another “I”—
even though to an untrained eye it might look as if there was just one 
person involved. And this is where the Eliotian “third one” comes into 
play. When I dream—one could say, after Eliot—there are only you and I 
together, but when I wake up, there is always another one. In 
Gombrowicz’s novel, the “third one,” telling about the oneiric experience, 
marks his detachment from the dream by means of a humorous narration. 
The atmosphere of pan-mockery, underlaid with both laughter and fear, 
becomes the domain of a subjectivity in constant movement—
ungraspable, non-definable, specifying itself paradoxically though its non-
specificity. Such a vision of the subject—characteristic of all Gombrowicz’s 
later works and also typical of the images prevalent in our contemporary 
“identity discourse”—has emerged, let us emphasise this, in the situation 
of dream recounting. 
And now it is really high time to evoke Jung, for it was he who most 
eagerly inquired after the nature of the dreaming subject. But first please 
allow me one last brief remark. As we know, Gaston Bachelard used to 
call dream a “black hole”, claiming that there is no point searching for any 
subject in it.6 Medard Boss, on the other hand, argued that the subject of a 
dream is wholly identical with the subject of waking-life activities.7 
(Today, this view is advocated by cognitivists, though for totally different 
reasons). Juxtaposed with such extremes, Jungian thought inspires much 
more tempting and sophisticated speculations. 
In Memories, Dreams, Reflections Jung deliberated on the possible 
source of his childhood dreams: “Who was it speaking in me? Whose 
mind had devised them? What kind of superior intelligence was at work? 
[…] Who talked of problems far beyond my knowledge? Who brought the 
Above and Below together, and laid the foundation for everything that was 
to fill the second half of my life with stormiest passion?” He offered an 
answer: “Who but that alien guest who came both from above and from 
below?”8 Most likely, Jung was convinced of the existence of that “alien 
guest” from the very beginning of his scientific activity, though he gave it 
                                                           
6 See Bachelard: 88-90. 
7 See Boss: 67-73. 
8 Jaffé: 14-15. 

Chapter Twelve 
 
196
different names and offered different explanations of its functioning. In 
1929, still feeling a strong need to radically distance himself from Freud, 
he told his seminar students: “Freud’s idea is that the dream is rational. I 
say that it is irrational, that it just happens. A dream walks in like an 
animal. I may be sitting in the woods and a deer appears.”9 Jung liked to 
return to animal imagery especially in his later seminars on children’s 
dreams. In 1938, he explained: 
A persecutory dream always means: this wants to come to me. When you 
dream of a savage bull, or a lion, or a wolf pursuing you, this means: it 
wants to come to you. You would like to split it off, you experience it as 
something alien—but it just becomes all the more dangerous. The urge of 
what had been split off to unite with you becomes all the stronger. The best 
stance would be: ‘Please, come and devour me!’10 
Another seminar from the same series features the image of a third person 
in a conversation: “You always have to imagine a dream as like a 
conversation you overhear on the radio or the phone. Somebody says 
something, you hear a sentence of conversation, then the conversation 
breaks off again, and now you should reconstruct what had been said. […] 
It is always a ‘listening in’”.11 
Jung was very deeply convinced of the autonomy of the unconscious. He 
used to point to that fact time and again, and illustrated it with numerous 
examples. It is no wonder, then, that he also treated dreams as autonomous. 
“This is the secret of dreams”, he told his seminar students, “that we do not 
dream, but rather we are dreamt. We are the object of the dream, not its 
maker”12. When we begin to think, however, what exactly follows from the 
autonomy of dream, a problem arises. What was Jung’s idea of that “alien 
guest” appearing in dreams? After all, a lion or a wolf, to which we can say 
“devour me”, are quite different from the third person who suddenly breaks 
in during a telephone conversation. Is the “guest” a blind and instinctive 
force then, or rather an intelligent and self-aware one? Does it have any 
intentions towards the dreamer, or is it so highly autonomous that it does not 
mind the dreamer at all? 
It seems that Jung gave contradictory answers to these and similar 
questions. In one of the seminars, he claimed: “We must not think that 
dreams necessarily have a benevolent intention”,13 while less than a month 
                                                           
9 McGuire: 94. 
10 Jung & Meyer-Grass: 19. 
11 Jung & Meyer-Grass: 359. 
12 Jung & Meyer-Grass: 159. 
13 Jung & Meyer-Grass: 159. 

But Who is That on the Other Side of You? 
197 
later he was proving that a girl’s dream which he was analysing “counters 
[her] threat”.14 In his own dreams he even found a warning “tactic”.15 A 
dream is not always a mere thoughtless deer. 
I am not interested in highlighting Jung’s inconsistencies, for he was a 
visionary thinker who had been developing his ideas over the span of 
many years and in many different fields. Rather, I am concerned with the 
antinomy and ambiguity of Jung’s philosophy—features of which he was, 
after all, well aware. In the case of dreams, the antinomy manifests itself 
especially in the question of the extent to which they are autonomous, 
arising independently from the dreamer. Jung saw the author of a dream in 
a number of different ways: in the content of the individual unconscious, 
in the compensatory activity of the inferior function, in a personified 
autonomous complex, or in the collective sphere of an archetype. As we 
know, he used “non-scientific” terms, speaking of fate as a causal factor of 
a dream, and of course referring also to daimonic possession. Thus, there 
was a wide spectrum of possibilities: a dream might be shown to be 
autonomous from the conscious “I”, from the individual dimension of the 
psyche (in both its conscious and unconscious aspects), but also, looking 
from a different perspective, detached from the human perception of time, 
given that “the unconscious always remains beside the passing of time and 
perceives things that do not yet exist”.16 
A good illustration of the antinomy of the Jungian psychology of the 
dream is offered by the following example. In 1929, Jung claimed: “Often 
people whom I do not know send me their dreams, but without knowledge 
of the dreamer I can only interpret them theoretically. You have no point de 
départ for the interpretation”.17 Nine years later he stated something quite 
opposite: “Dreams can be sufficiently explained by an exclusively objective 
method, without personal associations”.18 Well then—we may ask—does 
one need associations to interpret dreams or not? Is a dream to some extent 
related to the dreamer’s individual life, or does it come from realms wholly 
                                                           
14 Jung & Meyer-Grass: 206. 
15 “During the entire trip”, he wrote in his African reminiscences, “my dreams 
stubbornly followed the tactic of ignoring Africa. […] Only once during the entire 
expedition did I dream of a Negro […]: he had been my barber in Chattanooga, 
Tennessee! An American Negro. […] I took this dream as a warning from the 
unconscious; it was saying that the primitive was a danger to me. […] In order to 
represent a Negro threatening me, my unconscious had invoked a twelve-year-old 
memory of my Negro barber in America, just in order to avoid any reminder of the 
present” (Jaffé: 272-273). 
16 Jung & Meyer-Grass: 9. 
17 McGuire: 251. 
18Jung & Meyer-Grass: 30. 

Chapter Twelve 
 
198
independent of the dreamer? Bearing in mind the whole of Jung’s oeuvre, 
we will of course easily reach the conclusion that this is a false alternative, 
as there are simply different kinds of dreams: some related to the individual 
unconscious, other rooted in the collective unconscious. The latter, which 
Jung called “great” dreams, do not bring any associations and can be 
explained only through ethnological amplification; and yet, Jung seems not 
to have admitted the existence of any exceptions to the rule. Now he said 
“yes”, now he said “no”. And this is, I believe, the most interesting thing 
about him: his antinomy never turned into dialectic. It had nothing to do 
with Hegelian synthesis. The coniunctio oppositorum he so often described 
took place in the world of his ideas as if beyond the explicit flow of 
argumentation. It can only be appreciated from a distance, not from within. 
If we are too short-sighted or too literal in reading Jung, sooner or later he 
will lead us up the garden path. 
At this point it is impossible to escape the fundamental question: how 
are we to read Jung today? I shall narrow the question to the field of 
dreams: can the Jungian understanding of dreams prove useful for those 
who study dreams in the second decade of the twenty-first century? 
The architects of the most popular movements in contemporary dream 
studies treated Jung quite mercilessly. Neurophysiologists, such as Allan 
Hobson, are obviously not going to deal with things like archetype or 
numinosum, nor are cognitivists or followers of the quantitative approach. 
According to G. William Domhoff: 
If there are more similarities than differences between dreaming and 
waking cognition, then there may be only small changes when alert waking 
thought turns into dreaming. Therefore, the key issue is not […] the 
expression of “archetypal symbols” lodged within an inherited “collective 
unconscious”, as in Jungian theory. […] Nor […] is there any support for 
Jung’s well-known idea that most dreams […] have a compensatory 
function. […] Every relevant systematic study suggests that most dream 
content is continuous with waking thought or personality rather than 
compensatory.19 
Such arguments can be easily refuted by proving that, first of all, Jung did 
not deny the connections between dream and waking thought, and 
secondly, that quantitative research does not exclude the absence of such 
connections in some cases. It is not by contemporary dream studies that 
Jungian dream theory can be seriously challenged—but rather by 
contemporary philosophy. Seen from this point of view, Jung committed 
the deadly sin of essentialism, of faith in universal phenomena, in the 
                                                           
19 Domhoff 2010. 

But Who is That on the Other Side of You? 
199 
permanent essence of things, the unchangeability of types and patterns. In 
the eyes of deconstructivists, or—broadly speaking—postmodernists, Jung 
must appear to be a tenacious apostle of the metaphysics of “presence”. 
The Jungian subject—determinedly integrating disassembled fragments of 
psyche in the process of individuation and trying to reach fullness or 
wholeness—is a vision placing itself at the very opposite pole to our 
contemporary discourses, which speak of the subject in terms of a nebula, 
difference or trace. How are we then to utilise Jung’s achievements 
without disregarding or exorcising the daimons of postmodern thought 
such as Heidegger, Derrida, Foucault, Deleuze, Lacan or Rorty? 
I cannot, of course, offer an exhaustive answer to this question. What I 
will insist on is simply the fact that today Jung’s philosophy can be 
utilised. Or, as neopragmatists have it—it can be used. After all—and I 
believe we do agree on this—Jung still fascinates and impresses us. 
Kelly Bulkeley, one of the most prominent contemporary dream 
researchers, writes that Jung’s seminars on children’s dreams will not 
convince those “who question Jung’s assumption about the universality of 
the archetypes […] but for those who already appreciate and value Jungian 
dream theory, Children’s Dreams will be a cause for joy”.20 I am quite 
sure that Jung’s works can be a cause for joy not only for his admirers but 
also for doubting souls; and if Jung gives us joy, he must be useful. All we 
need to do, as Rorty would put it, is include him in our “final vocabulary”. 
In fact, Jung is actually asking for it; his way of argumentation on many 
occasions resembles the rhetoric of pragmatism. Let us have a look at one 
of the passages from Memories, Dreams, Reflections which is central to 
the question of daimons and dreams:  
We know that something unknown, alien, does come our way, just as we 
know that we do not ourselves make a dream or an inspiration, but that it 
somehow arises of its own accord. What does happen to us in this manner 
can be said to emanate from mana, from a daimon, a god, or the 
unconscious. The first three terms have the great merit of including and 
evoking the emotional quality of numinosity, whereas the latter—the 
unconscious—is banal and therefore closer to reality. […] Hence I prefer 
the term “the unconscious,” knowing that I might equally well speak of 
“God” or “daimon” if I wished to express myself in mythic language. 
When I do use such mythic language, I am aware that “mana,” “daimon,” 
and “God” are synonyms for the unconscious that is to say, we know just 
as much or just as little about them as about the latter. People only believe 
they know much more about them and for certain purposes that belief is far 
more useful and effective than a scientific concept. The great advantage of 
                                                           
20 Bulkeley 2009. 

Chapter Twelve 
 
200
the concepts “daimon” and “God” lies in making possible a much better 
objectification of the vis-à-vis, namely, a personification of it.21 
This excerpt, unlike many earlier texts (especially the accounts of 
“live” seminars), does not present Jung as someone who intends to 
ascertain the essence of things; on the contrary, here Jung seems to be 
inviting us to choose the character of the discourse depending on its 
usefulness and profitability for our purposes. The profitable conclusion we 
can draw from the above-quoted passage does not have to take the shape 
of the dialectic assertion that mana, daimon, God and the unconscious are 
just different names of the same phenomenon. But neither does it have to 
be the relativist conclusion, namely that in choosing one of these words, 
we also choose the reality in which we are going to operate. It would seem 
much more useful to read Jung’s reflection as the questioning of divisions 
firmly grounded in the philosophical tradition: subject versus object, inside 
versus outside, the immanent versus the transcendent (Jung’s remarks on 
the phenomenon of synchronicity in particular lend themselves to such 
interpretation). The notion of the collective unconscious which is ours (for 
we are immersed in it) and yet not belonging to us (for it is “supra-
individual”), the notion of participation mystique, the notion of 
synchronicity—these are Jungian phantasmata of overstepping the binary 
divisions of traditional philosophy. One could imagine a reading of Jung 
in which the subject of a dream would appear identical and yet at the same 
time non-identical with itself. We can assume that the antinomous 
character of Jung’s thinking, his inconsistencies (whether true or 
apparent), his weakness for paradoxes, the inexhaustible ingenuity 
allowing him to place phenomena in and describe them from yet new 
perspectives—all reflect the desire to invalidate the fundamental question 
of whether our daimons (in dreams and elsewhere) come from within our 
psyche or from without. 
In this light, the relationship between the dreaming subject and the 
“alien guests” possessing it would be neither a projection nor 
personification, nor a paranormal phenomenon. It would be a dynamic 
interplay of incessantly differentiating and never finally differentiated 
images of the “I”, none central or privileged, all real and autonomous. 
Such reading of Jung definitely proves profitable for the interpretation of 
“points of departure”, as designated by the aforementioned George Poulet, 
                                                           
21 Jaffé: 336-337. Further on in the same chapter, Jung notes: “insofar as the 
archetypes act upon me, they are real and actual to me, even though I do not know 
what their real nature is. This applies, of course, not only to the archetypes but to 
the nature of the psyche in general” (352). 

But Who is That on the Other Side of You? 
201 
in particular those on the border of literature and dream. Let us return to 
Gombrowicz’s novel. A man who does not want to grow up and dreams 
about himself as a boy immediately brings to mind the Jungian archetype 
of puer aeternus. In the literary account of the dream, however, we will 
not be able to pinpoint anything which would resemble a confrontation 
with the archetype, in the sense of the dreamer standing face to face with 
the image of the eternal boy. On the contrary—as we have already noticed, 
the subject is not confronted with anything at all, but rather constitutes 
himself thanks to the confrontation with his own images, which are 
constantly mocking one another. The notion of puer aeternus is certainly 
helpful for understanding the situation of the dreamer, but not if defined as 
a universal, perennial pattern coming from the depths of the collective 
unconscious and taking possession of the protagonist. Nor is it of much 
use if treated as a mere personification of the protagonist’s individual 
characteristics; it can be helpful only when understood as a phenomenon 
freed from the alternatives of inside-outside, as a most unstable matrix, 
existing yet postulated, as an image which reveals and at the same time 
produces itself. Applied in this way, Jungian thought should prove 
invaluable for the understanding of both our dreams and literary texts; and 
perhaps it could even help to tame the Eliotian “third”. 
Bibliography 
Bachelard, G. (1960) La Poétique de l’espace (Paris: Presses 
Universitaires de France). 
Bloom, H. (2002) Genius: A Mosaic of One Hundred Exemplary Creative 
Minds (New York: Warner Books Inc.). 
Boss, M. (1975) “Es träumte mir vergangene Nacht...” Sehübungen im 
Bereiche des Träumens und Beispiele für die praktische Anwendung 
eines neuen Traumverständnisses (Bern: Hans Huber). 
Bulkeley, K. (2009) “Jung’s Seminar on Children’s Dreams”, 
http://kellybulkeley.com/dream-book-review-jungs-seminar (accessed 
November 2012). 
Domhoff, G. W. (2010) “The Case for a Cognitive Theory of Dreams”, 
http://www2.ucsc.edu/dreams/Library/domhoff_2010a.html (accessed 
November 2012). 
Eliot, T. S. (1970) Collected Poems 1909-1962 (New York: Harcourt, 
Brace and World Inc.). 
Gombrowicz, W. (2000) Ferdydurke trans. D. Borchardt (New Haven & 
London: Yale University Press). 

Chapter Twelve 
 
202
Jung, C. G. (1963) Memories, Dreams, Reflections, A. Jaffé (ed.) trans. R. 
Winston & C. Winston (New York: Pantheon Books). 
Jung, L. & M. Meyer-Grass (eds) (2008) Children’s Dreams. Notes from 
the Seminar Given in 1936-1940 by C. G. Jung trans. E. Falzeder 
(Princeton & Oxford: Princeton University Press). 
McGuire, W. (ed.) (1995) Dream Analysis. Part I. Notes of the Seminar 
Given in 1928-1930 by C. G. Jung (London: Routledge). 
Poulet, G. (1964) Le point de depart (Paris: Plon). 
—. (1990) La Pensée indéterminée (Paris: Presses Universitaires de 
France). 
 

CHAPTER THIRTEEN 
“NECESSARY MONSTERS”:  
BORGES’ BOOK OF IMAGINARY BEINGS  
AND THE ONTOLOGY OF THE DAIMONIC 
WILLIAM ROWLANDSON 
 
 
 
“For Daimons exist, and will continue to exist” (Patrick Harpur).1 
 
“Imagination was now stimulated to a new, strange mode of perception” 
(Olaf Stapledon).2 
 
That Borges, an author and poet of such prolific output, should have found 
the time to research and compile the bestiary of otherworld entities The 
Book of Imaginary Beings3 is remarkable. He and fellow researcher 
Margarita Guerrero trawled the arcane volumes of the Biblioteca Nacional 
in Buenos Aires, and their selection of around one hundred brief texts and 
summaries demonstrates not only their tremendous enthusiasm for the 
project but also a deep knowledge of the subject of “the strange creatures 
conceived through time and space by the human imagination”.4 They 
recount episodes from Pliny and Ovid, Sufi poets and the Koran, Icelandic 
Saga and Anglo-Saxon epic poems, Japanese mythologies and Chinese 
folklore, Chilean pre-Hispanic legends and tales from the Dakota, 
Shakespeare and Quevedo, Flaubert and Kafka. It is a rich bestiary. 
In the preface, Borges and Guerrero (although the style betrays the 
dominant voice of Borges) evoke a child gazing with wonder at the 
wondrous beasts in a zoo, on his first ever visit: 
                                                           
1 Harpur: 276. 
2 Stapledon: 5. 
3 Borges 1987. Henceforth referred to as Imaginary Beings. 
4 Borges 1987: 12. 

Chapter Thirteen 
 
204
A small child is taken to the zoo for the first time. This child may be any 
one of us or, to put it another way, we have been this child and have 
forgotten about it. In these grounds—these terrible grounds—the child sees 
living animals he has never before glimpsed; he sees jaguars, vultures, 
bison, and—what is still stranger—giraffes. He sees for the first time the 
bewildering variety of the animal kingdom, and this spectacle, which might 
alarm or frighten him, he enjoys. He enjoys it so much that going to the 
zoo is one of the pleasures of childhood, or is thought to be such […]. It 
may be stated that all children, by definition, are explorers, and that to 
discover the camel is in itself no stranger than to discover a mirror or water 
or a staircase. It can also be stated that the child trusts his parents, who take 
him to this place full of animals. Besides, his toy tiger and the pictures of 
tigers in the encyclopedia have somehow taught him to look at the flesh-
and-bone tiger without fear. Plato (if he were invited to join in this 
discussion) would tell us that the child had already seen the tiger in a 
primal world of archetypes, and that now on seeing the tiger he recognizes 
it. Schopenhauer (even more wondrously) would tell us that the child looks 
at the tigers without fear because he is aware that he is the tigers and the 
tigers are him or, more accurately, that both he and the tigers are but forms 
of that single essence, the Will.5 
The evocation of the child is of key importance in introducing a work of 
this nature, as when confronted with the daimonic, our conceptual schema 
are in many ways as underdeveloped as those of the child. Consequently, 
as Borges identifies, one of the factors that prevents the child from 
becoming horrified and overwhelmed by the creatures of the “terrible 
grounds” of the zoo is the presence of his parents, whom he trusts. They, 
the child would surmise, would not lead him into the realm of monsters in 
order to watch him being devoured. He is protected by their wisdom and 
guidance. Now, says Borges, “let us pass now from the zoo of reality to 
the zoo of mythologies, to the zoo whose denizens are not lions but 
sphinxes and griffons and centaurs”.6 Such terrible grounds likewise exist, 
yet many choose not to pass through the gates. Where are the child’s 
parents in such a location? Who will prevent him being devoured? 
Throughout the work Borges and Guerrero select texts from a variety of 
mediaeval bestiaries, such as the tenth-century Exeter Book (Codex 
Exoniensis), from which they examine the mythical figures of the panther 
and the whale. They also consult Buddhist, Vedic, Islamic and pre-
Colombian texts and codices, the volumes of Swedenborg, Reverend 
Kirk’s Secret Commonwealth and W. B. Yeats’ The Celtic Twilight. In this 
respect Imaginary Beings constitutes a continuation of this ancient 
                                                           
5 Borges 1987: 13. 
6 Borges 1987: 13. 

“Necessary Monsters” 
205 
tradition of scholarship in which the reader may find guidance whilst 
contemplating the poorly charted landscape of the imagination. Here, 
indeed, be dragons. But what is the nature of this guidance if there is no 
stable taxonomy of such outlandish creatures, no consensual system of 
identification and classification, no concrete details? Through what 
philosophical or metaphysical light does Borges present these beings? 
Borges insisted that he was neither philosopher nor theorist, but merely 
a man of letters.7 As such, only in rare moments do we find in his writings 
clear theoretical analysis of philosophical, theological, metaphysical or 
even political concerns; indeed in my book Borges, Swedenborg and 
Mysticism (2013), I piece together from the depth and breadth of his work 
a general theory of mysticism, and I detect a strong influence of William 
James. Likewise, whilst one finds many references to daimonic, 
otherworld, or “imaginary” beings in his work—from his early essay “A 
History of Angels” (1926) to his dream communication with the deceased 
in Atlas (1984)—one finds scant analytical scrutiny of such matters. 
Nevertheless, as with his perspectives on mystics and mysticism, one may 
detect from a close reading of his many works a mind deeply fascinated 
with and even touched by conscious entities beyond the limitations of 
material reality. But how did Borges approach and conceptualise such 
daimonic entities encountered either in the many hundreds of texts with 
which he was familiar, in his own fiction, in his dreams and in his 
imagination? He presents the child in the preface of Imaginary Beings as 
being as bewildered by the oddity of animals of the zoo as by the creatures 
                                                           
7 “I am a man of letters who turns his own perplexities and that respected system of 
perplexities we call philosophy into the forms of literature” (Alazraki: 31). “I’m 
not really a thinker. I’m a literary man and I have done my best to use the literary 
possibilities of philosophy” (Burgin 1998: 8). “I am neither philosopher nor 
metaphysician. What I have done is exploit, or explore—a more noble word—the 
literary possibilities of philosophy. […] I have no theory of the world. In general, 
seeing that I have used diverse metaphysical and theological systems for literary 
objectives, readers have believed that I have professed those systems, when really 
all that I have done has been employ them for those ends, nothing more. 
Furthermore, if I had to define myself, it would be agnostic; that’s to say, someone 
who does not believe that knowledge is possible” (Vázquez: 107, my translation). 
“I have no personal system of philosophy. I never attempt to do that. I am merely a 
man of letters. In the same way, for example that—well, of course, I shouldn’t 
perhaps choose this as an example—in the same way that Dante used theology for 
the purpose of poetry, or Milton used theology for the purposes of his poetry, why 
shouldn’t I use philosophy, especially idealistic philosophy—philosophy to which 
I was attracted—for the purposes of writing a tale, of writing a story? I suppose 
that is allowable, no?” (Dutton: 339). 

Chapter Thirteen 
 
206
of the imagination. The child, consequently, lacks the robust powers of 
discernment between creatures of the flesh and creatures of fantasy, 
between “reality” and “imagination”, between what is “real” and what is 
“fictional”. And yet, can such a radical distinction be made? Is there such 
a visible delineation? Furthermore, would Borges himself present such a 
distinction? I have already attempted to address this question in an article 
concerning his insistence that Swedenborg’s accounts of otherworld 
journeys and his communication with angels, demons and the dead were 
“authentic”, and that Swedenborg was consequently a true mystic, whilst 
Dante’s visions were willed, rather than spontaneous, and were crafted for 
the purpose of his poetic cycle.8 Dante, consequently, was not a mystic. I 
argue that this perspective is highly problematic, not least for a poet like 
Borges, who repeatedly argued that fictional and poetic experiences are as 
real as “real” experiences, and that “real” experiences are in fact poetic 
and fictional: 
I think of reading a book as no less an experience than traveling or falling 
in love. I think that reading Berkeley or Shaw or Emerson, those are quite 
as real experiences to me as seeing London, for example. Of course, I saw 
London through Dickens and through Chesterton and through Stevenson, 
no? Many people are apt to think of real life on the one side, that means 
toothache, headache, traveling and so on, and then you have on the other 
side, you have imaginary life and fancy and that means the arts. But I don’t 
think that that distinction holds water. I think that everything is a part of 
life.9 
It is also problematic as such a distinction divides visionary experience 
into willed or unwilled, bidden or unbidden, illusory or genuine. Such 
divisions present enormous challenges when appraised in light of the 
heterogeneous scholarship of mysticism (such as William Inge, William 
James, Evelyn Underhill, W. T. Stace, R. C. Zaehner, and Frits Staal), as 
one recurrent feature of the scholarship is the recognition that such 
categorical distinctions are inappropriate to a study of the rich, complex 
and contradictory traditions of mysticism. Furthermore, in Borges’ curious 
appraisal of Swedenborg and Dante, one must deduce that the daimonic 
forms encountered by Swedenborg exist in some undetermined ontological 
status, independent, as it were, of the subjective will of Swedenborg, 
whilst those encountered by the poet Dante are creations of his poetic 
fancy. Again, as I argue in the article, this is a remarkably problematic 
basis upon which to construct a hermeneutic of mystical texts. 
                                                           
8 See Rowlandson 2011. 
9 Burgin 1998: 14. 

“Necessary Monsters” 
207 
Yet Borges was a mercurial character who, throughout his writing 
career, displayed a tension between a radical and deep-rooted scepticism 
and a fascination with and deep respect for religious, spiritual and mystical 
aspects of human experience. This respect, however, when married with 
his inveterate iconoclasm, mistrust of doctrine, and admiration of heresy, I 
would argue, made him defensive of being taken for credulous. For 
example, in a lecture on nightmares in Seven Nights, Borges criticises 
British anthropologist, folklorist, and classical scholar Sir James Frazer for 
being “extremely credulous, as it seems he believed everything reported 
by the various travellers.”10 As his numerous interviews and essays testify, 
Borges appeared to equate belief—whether religious, philosophical or 
even political—with a surrender of one’s intellect and faculty of critical 
enquiry. One senses in Borges that the religious faithful—especially 
Argentine Catholics—are somehow gullible. When evaluating a peculiar 
coincidence of dreams associated with Coleridge’s poem Kubla Khan, for 
example, Borges displays a defensive position: “Those who automatically 
reject the supernatural (I try, always, to belong to this group) will claim 
that the story of the two dreams is merely a coincidence, a chance 
delineation, like the outlines of lions or horses we sometimes see in the 
clouds”11. This may sound like a straightforward comment, in which 
Borges maintains that the narrative similarities across time are merely 
coincidental and inconsequential, yet in the same text Borges rejects his 
declared materialist position to explore the more poetic, mysterious 
dimension of this parallel, arguing that his preferred explanation “is that 
the Emperor’s soul penetrated Coleridge’s, enabling Coleridge to rebuild 
the destroyed palace in words that would be more lasting than marble and 
metal”.12 He would reject a priori the supernatural, and yet the explanation 
of the repeated vision of Kubla Khan he most favours is one of the 
transmigration of souls. Likewise he rejects this very notion of the 
transmigration of souls, yet he criticises the Spanish poet Quevedo for 
denying its possibility, arguing that Quevedo “merely a student of the 
truth, is invulnerable to that charm”.13 We find numerous instances in 
Borges’ essays and interviews in which he seeks the anomalous aspect of 
human experience before the strictly rational, and in which he appears to 
favour the supernatural whilst simultaneously disavowing it. He writes 
longingly in Imaginary Beings, for example, about Stevenson’s accounts 
of receiving inspiration and fully-formed narratives, such as Strange Case 
                                                           
10 Borges 1984: 28. 
11 Borges 1964: 16 (emphasis added). 
12 Borges 1964: 16. 
13 Borges 1964: 38. 

Chapter Thirteen 
 
208
of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde, from the Brownies whom he encountered in his 
dreams and reveries: 
Brownies are helpful little men of a brownish hue, which gives them their 
name. It is their habit to visit Scottish farms and, while the household 
sleeps, to perform domestic chores. One of the tales by the Grimms deals 
with the same subject. Robert Louis Stevenson said he had trained his 
Brownies in the craft of literature. Brownies visited him in his dreams and 
told him wondrous tales; for instance the strange transformation of Dr 
Jekyll into the diabolical Mr Hyde, and that episode of Olalla, in which the 
scion of an old Spanish family bites his sister’s hand.14 
He cites Bede’s description of how Cædmon was first amongst poets, 
“because he did not learn from men, but from God”, and he adds, “Let us 
hope he met his angel again”.15 He writes in clear terms that he gave great 
credence to the possibility that nightmares might have a demonic origin, 
writing in the lecture on nightmares: “there is an idea of demonic origin, 
the idea of a demon who causes the nightmare. I believe it does not derive 
simply from a superstition. I believe that there is—and I speak with 
complete honesty and sincerity—something true in this idea”.16 Again we 
must ask, if he “automatically reject[ed] the supernatural” then how does 
one reconcile his inclination towards demons and the demonic origin of 
nightmares? 
Likewise, and despite his scepticism, Borges appeared keen to accept 
the muse-like source of many of his poems and tales, describing receiving 
poems and plots fully fledged in his reveries. For example, he described 
how the poem “The White Deer” came to him in its entirety in a dream: “I 
don’t feel that I wrote that poem […]. I physically dictated the words. The 
poem was given to me, in a dream, some minutes before dawn. At times 
dreams are painful and tedious, and I object to their outrage and say, 
enough, this is only a dream, stop. But this time it was an oral picture that 
I saw and heard. I simply copied it, exactly as it was given to me.”17 He 
recalled that El Hacedor [Dreamtigers] was his favourite book “because it 
wrote itself.”18 He described in other interviews that sonnets appeared to 
enter his conscious mind from some source beyond consciousness; he 
discussed dreams and nightmares as being given to him for the purpose of 
                                                           
14 Borges 1987: 32. 
15 Borges 1964: 16. 
16 Borges 1984: 32. 
17 Barnstone 2000: 30. 
18 Burgin 1969: 125. 

“Necessary Monsters” 
209 
making poetry; and he repeatedly suggested the divine or demonic source 
of dreams and nightmares. 
This tension between a strong sense of religiosity and a deep-rooted 
scepticism should not, in my judgment, be considered awkward or 
insoluble. I would argue, on the contrary, that it is precisely this tension 
that creates the intellectual drive to explore the deeper mysteries of human 
experience without losing the necessary critical faculty to return to 
daylight and evaluate the experience. It is, in this sense, a tension fully 
observable in C. G. Jung. Jung underwent a period of psychic crisis in his 
thirties, yet kept secret the harrowing accounts of his experience with the 
unconscious entities and the discarnate dead, documenting them in great 
majesty in the Liber Novus which he never published.19 He was aware that 
his experiences constituted a radical discord with the ontological 
certainties held by himself and the wider public, and he was fully 
cognisant of the ridicule that he would face amongst friends and peers if 
he claimed that he conversed with Old Testament prophets and with the 
dead. Even as late as 1958, his essay on UFOs concentrates almost entirely 
in evaluating the “psychic cause” and “psychic effect” of the phenomenon, 
and not the phenomenon itself. Jung was emphatic about the critical 
distance maintained through scientific objectivity, which permitted him, 
like Borges, to explore with great enthusiasm all manner of alchemical, 
gnostic, mystical, hermetic and occult texts without abandoning robust 
“empiricism”. Whilst Borges may have stressed that his interest lay in “the 
merely aesthetic”, Jung would argue that his interest was in the 
psychological aspect of these systems of thought. Yet it becomes apparent 
through a scrutiny of Jung’s work that he felt torn between his desire to be 
a scientist and his inclination towards philosophy, theology and metaphysics 
as maps not only of the human psyche, but of reality itself. That is to say 
that his concerns were not merely epistemological but also ontological. 
This is evident in his strident riposte as footnote in his work on UFOs: “It 
is a common and totally unjustified misunderstanding on the part of 
scientifically trained people to say that I regard the psychic background as 
something ‘metaphysical’, while on the other hand the theologians accuse 
me of ‘psychologizing’ metaphysics. Both are wide of the mark: I am an 
empiricist, who keeps within the boundaries set for him by the theory of 
knowledge”.20 There is so much to be elucidated from this, especially 
given the arbitrary nature of the terms employed, such as “empiricist” and 
“theory of knowledge”. Jung was obviously pulled between intuition and 
rationality, and even when he did consider the ontological possibility of 
                                                           
19 It was eventually published in 2009 as The Red Book. 
20 Jung 1958: 328. 

Chapter Thirteen 
 
210
the UFO (in the final chapter of his investigation, where he discusses 
UFOs appearing on radar screens) he concentrated not on the phenomenon 
itself, but on the psychic response to it and the projection of psychic 
energy upon it. 
In a similar fashion, Borges would argue that his interests lay purely in 
their aesthetic value, as if that negates any speculation about the actual 
questions raised in metaphysics, psychology (and parapsychology) and 
religious and mystical texts. Yet both Borges and Jung were clearly deeply 
drawn to such liminal and mysterious levels of human experience, and 
their safety lines in these dark caves were literature and psychology 
respectively. The publication of The Red Book has inspired a fresh 
approach to Jung, an approach hinted at since early publications of Von 
Franz, Jaffé, Hannah, Jacobi and others, but rarely stated outright: that 
Jung did consider such matters at their ontological level.21 The parallel 
drawn with Jung here illustrates a perplexing dialogue between polarities 
present in Borges. I am not assuming that an equivalent Red Book—a 
secret illuminated manuscript of Borges’ encounters with the dead—will 
be unearthed and published to corroborate such a position. I would argue 
that such a discovery is not necessary; the published work of Borges—
poems, tales, essay, reviews and interviews—is replete with subtle 
indications that he, like Jung, was fascinated with and touched by the more 
                                                           
21 Aniela Jaffé’s essay “Was C. G. Jung a mystic?” (1989) focuses from the 
opening page on the tension between Jung’s mystic sensibilities and his insistence 
on principles of empiricism, observing that Jung reacted strongly against any 
claims that he was anything other than a scientific observer. Gary Lachman’s 
recent Jung the mystic (2010), as the title suggests, testifies to the mystical nature 
of Jung, and he appraises with sensitivity the double nature present in Jung: “Jung 
seemed to have two minds about the supernatural: a public one that wanted to 
understand it ‘scientifically,’ and a private one that acknowledged ghosts, visions, 
and premonitions as part of the essential mystery of life” (4). Lachman also cites 
Anthony Storr, who writes in his book Feet of Clay: A Study of Gurus that ‘Jung 
was a guru’ (in Lachman: 6). Jungian analyst Roger Woolger, in his review of 
Jung’s Red Book (Woolger’s final publication prior to his death in 2011), declared 
outright that Jung displayed all the characteristics commonly associated with 
shamans, calling Jung “the Hidden Shaman”: “Now that we have the record of 
Jung’s struggles to integrate the polarities of scientist-philosopher versus mystic 
within his soul we can also see how they urged upon him another mantle that he 
was very reluctant to wear—because so many have been ridiculed and persecuted 
for wearing it—that of shaman-prophet. […] The evidence of the Red Book and of 
those who knew him intimately us that Jung was very much a shaman. […] 
Perhaps Shamdasani shies away from calling Jung a ‘shaman’ because 
‘shamanism’ is not politically correct in academic or conservative professional 
circles in Britain” (2011: 4-5). 

“Necessary Monsters” 
211 
anomalous aspects of human experience at a level beyond the “mere 
aesthetic”. 
We return, therefore, to the matter of imaginary beings, and here a 
personal account may help to frame my question. My reading of 
mysticism, accounts of daimonic encounters, Jung, Borges and Swedenborg 
over the past two years has paralleled questions posed by my young 
daughter on a near-nightly basis. When we read of fairies, goblins, elves, 
fairy godmothers, monsters, witches, wizards or even children (especially 
children), she invariably asks me “but are they real?” My response is 
normally to ask her what she means. “Real like you and me,” she answers; 
“can we see them? Where are they?” I have on occasions told her that her 
question is precisely what I have been wrestling with all day when 
considering Borges’ accounts of Swedenborg’s angels or Terence 
McKenna’s accounts of “self-transforming machine elves”, but that 
response leaves her cold. “Well,” I hesitate, “they are real in the book, and 
they may be real in your dreams.” “Yes, but are they real?” “Well. Yes 
and no…” “But why have I never seen a fairy? It’s not fair!” Such 
questions are remarkably hard to answer, as whilst the voice of our 
education urges us to answer “of course fairies are not real. Don’t be 
ridiculous. They’re just make-believe!” the voice of experience and 
intuition (plus the autodidact aspect of our education) encourages us to see 
that such a categorical distinction is neither possible nor helpful. When 
Borges, for example, insists on the authenticity of Swedenborg’s heavenly 
voyages, by implication he assumes a genuine encounter with 
autonomously existent angels. When he writes in his early essay “A 
History of Angels” that “We must not be too prodigal with our angels; 
they are the last divinities we harbor, and they might fly away”22 does the 
pathetic quality to the text suggest that for him angels were something 
more than mere poetic tropes? 
Borges paid close attention to the otherworld journeys of Swedenborg, 
to his communication with angels, demons and the discarnate souls of 
the dead. However, as indicated earlier, Borges’ division of poets into 
mystics and non-mystics is problematic as it implies a primacy of 
unwilled imagination over conscious imaginings: “I wonder if Fray Luis 
de León had any mystical experience. I should say not. When I talk of 
mystics, I think of Swedenborg, Angelus Silesius, and the Persians also. 
Not the Spaniards. I don’t think they had any mystical experiences 
[…]. I think that Saint John of the Cross was following the pattern of 
the Song of Songs. And that’s that. I suppose he never had any actual 
                                                           
22 Borges 2000: 19. 

Chapter Thirteen 
 
212
experience”.23 “Pascal is not a mystic; he belongs to those Christians, 
denounced by Swedenborg, who suppose that heaven is a reward and 
hell a punishment and who, accustomed to melancholy meditation, do 
not know how to speak with the angels”.24 What is visible in these and 
other comments is that Borges praised Swedenborg as the epitome of the 
mystic because of his lucid accounts of otherworld realities and his 
regular communication with angels. Real angels, he would appear to 
suggest, cannot be consciously imagined for the purpose of a poetic text, 
however beautiful, such as the Divine Comedy. Angels are encountered 
unbidden. Such a position is in line with an overall model of mysticism 
that may be assembled from a reading of Borges’ varied works, in which 
the mystical vision is necessarily received and not induced, a perspective 
conforming to the category of mysticism defined by William James as 
“passive”.25 Borges repeatedly defended Swedenborg against charges of 
insanity, arguing that the man was remarkably lucid, that his works were 
the product of a profoundly intellectual mind, that they were 
categorically not art or poetry, but the accounts of voyages, charts of the 
unknown lands of heavens and hells like one of his Viking ancestors 
exploring the Arctic waters. “Swedenborg,” writes Borges, “is the first 
explorer of the other world. An explorer we should take seriously”.26 
Elsewhere he declares: “No one was less like a monk than that sanguine 
Scandinavian who went much farther than Erik the Red”.27 Swedenborg 
was thus neither poetically creative nor delusional. Nor, importantly was 
he talking in riddles, parables or allegories, but was recording his 
observations directly: 
The use of any word whatsoever presupposes a shared experience, for 
which the word is the symbol. If someone speaks to us about the flavor of 
coffee, it is because we have already tasted it; if about the color yellow, 
because we have already seen lemons, gold, wheat, and sunsets. To suggest 
the ineffable union of man’s soul with the divine being, the Sufis of Islam 
found themselves obliged to resort to prodigious analogies, to images of 
roses, intoxication, or carnal love. Swedenborg was able to abstain from 
this kind of rhetorical artifice because his subject matter was not the 
ecstasy of a rapt and fainting soul but, rather, the accurate description of 
regions that, though ultra-terrestrial, were clearly defined. In order for us to 
imagine, or to begin to imagine, the lowest depth of hell, John Milton 
                                                           
23 Barnstone 1982: 10. 
24 Borges 1964: 99. 
25 James: 380. 
26 Borges 2005: 202 (my translation). 
27 Borges 1995: 3. 

“Necessary Monsters” 
213 
speaks to us of ‘No light, but rather darkness visible.’ Swedenborg prefers 
the rigor—and why not say it?—possible wordiness of the explorer or 
geographer who is recording unknown kingdoms.28 
A conundrum lies at the heart of Borges’ interpretation of Swedenborg 
that is reflected in his wider study of “imaginary beings”. Swedenborg’s 
journeys constituted verification of a location on a plane equivalent to the 
Greenland of Eric the Red. The angels and demons thus constitute 
autonomous entities equivalent to the Inuit. And yet, Borges argues 
elsewhere, angels are creatures of the imagination whose existence is 
determined precisely through the creative imaginative process. Borges 
concludes his “History of Angels”: 
Here we arrive at the near miracle that is the true motive for this writing: 
what we might call the survival of the angel. The human imagination has 
pictured a horde of monsters (tritons, hippogriffs, chimeras, sea serpents, 
unicorns, devils, dragons, werewolves, cyclopes, fauns, basilisks, 
demigods, leviathans, and a legion of others) and all have disappeared, 
except angels. Today, what line of poetry would dare allude to the phoenix 
or make itself the promenade of a centaur? None; but no poetry, however 
modern, is unhappy to be a nest of angels and to shine brightly with 
them.29 
The poet thus ensures the survival of the angel through creating the poem; 
yet Swedenborg was no poet, Borges assures us. Such a curious dichotomy 
concerning the ontological status of the angels and other daimonic beings 
is present throughout Imaginary Beings, where the first division, as we 
have seen, is between the creatures of a zoo and the creatures of the 
imagination. In this respect the zebra is radically distinct from the goblin, 
and although the child may not readily distinguish them, the process of 
education would ensure that the division is made apparent. Of course, 
Borges reminds us, beasts can straddle this division and exist both 
empirically as members of the animal kingdom that the child visits in the 
zoo and also within the imagination. “We believe in the lion as reality and 
symbol,” whilst other beasts are purely creatures of myth and fantasy: “we 
believe in the Minotaur as symbol but no longer as reality”.30 
His second division would appear to be between those beings whose 
appearance is subject to the vicissitudes of the moment and who thus leave 
little cultural record, and those who have persisted over the centuries in the 
                                                           
28 Borges 1995: 7. 
29 Borges 2000: 19. It is interesting to note that these “monsters” from Borges’ 
essay of 1926 all later appear in Imaginary Beings. 
30 Borges 1987: 154. 

Chapter Thirteen 
 
214
human imagination. In this respect, there are creatures born of the moment 
for the purpose of fulfilling a fictional role—such as H. G. Wells’ Eloi and 
Morlocks (who appear as entries in Imaginary Beings)—and those whose 
universality has granted them some archetypal status. “We tend to think,” 
for example, “that in the Platonic world of ideas there is an archetype of 
the centaur as there is of the horse or the man”.31 We would not, he 
suggests by implication, imagine such an archetype of the Eloi. This is 
similarly the case with fairies, angels and dragons; they are “necessary 
monsters”. “We are as ignorant of the meaning of the dragon as we are of 
the meaning of the universe, but there is something in the dragon’s image 
that appeals to the human imagination, and so we find the dragon in quite 
distinct places and times. It is, so to speak, a necessary monster, not an 
ephemeral or accidental one, such as the three-headed chimera or 
catoblepas”.32 The dragon, like the angel in his early essay, requires the 
ever-renewed investment of creative human imagination in order to 
maintain its existence. Should this interest fade, so fades the dragon; 
indeed, he suggests, the persistence of the dragon in our imagination owes, 
in part, to the fact that it sits uneasily on both sides of the primary division 
of “real” and “imaginary”: “People believed in the reality of the Dragon. 
In the middle of the sixteenth century, the Dragon is recorded in Conrad 
Gesture’s Historia Animalium, a work of scientific nature”.33 However—
and here Borges’ poetic sensibilities guide his perspective—the repeated 
appearance of the dragon in fantasy-drenched fairy tales in recent times 
has impoverished its nature: 
Time has notably worn away the Dragon’s prestige. We believe in the lion 
as reality and symbol; we believe in the Minotaur as symbol but no longer 
as reality. The Dragon is perhaps the best known but also the least 
fortunate of the fantastic animals. It seems childish to us and usually spoils 
the stories in which it appears. It is worth remembering, however, that we 
are dealing with a modern prejudice, due perhaps to a surfeit of Dragons in 
fairy tales.34 
Belief in the dragon ennobles it. Lack of belief destroys it. But how to 
define and conceptualise belief? This is a question that brings us back to 
the prime division of “real” and “imaginary”, external and internal, 
empirical and fantastical. These are all divisions which for Borges the poet 
were, as we have seen, notably hard to define. 
                                                           
31 Borges 1987: 37. 
32 Borges 1987: 14. 
33 Borges 1987: 154. 
34 Borges 1987: 154. 

“Necessary Monsters” 
215 
A third division of the imaginary beasts may be perceived. Borges 
writes of the centaur and recounts how “the cavalry of the conquistadors 
were Centaurs to the Indians” (and he cites Prescott’s description of the 
fear that the indigenous people experienced upon seeing this man-beast 
split into two and both parts continuing to live). He concludes with the 
statement that: “the Greeks, unlike the Indians, were familiar with the 
horse; it is more likely that the Centaur was a deliberate invention and not 
a confusion born of ignorance”.35 Borges thus makes a distinction between 
entities “deliberately” invented and those invented through some delusion 
arising from fear. In this respect the beastie under the bed of the child with 
nightmares is different from the beastie imagined by an author. As with 
the other distinctions articulated above, this particular assertion is also 
problematic, as surely the beastie under the bed that frightens the child 
may have been encountered in fiction. 
It becomes clear from further comments in Imaginary Beings and in his 
other work that Borges established a firmly psychological understanding of 
imaginary beings, based in no small measure on his reading of Jung, and 
that the division outlined above bears no ontological implication about the 
nature of angels or unicorns. Borges was a close reader of Jung, and refers 
to his works on many occasions (see Rowlandson 2012). He discusses in 
Imaginary Beings, for example, Jung’s treatment of the symbol of the 
unicorn: “The Holy Ghost, Jesus Christ, mercury, and evil have all been 
represented by the Unicorn. In his Psychologie und Alchemie (1944), Jung 
gives a history and an analysis of these symbols”.36 He also discusses 
Jung’s treatment of the symbol of the Uroboros: “Uroboros (Greek for ‘the 
one that devours its tail’) is the learned name of this creature which 
became the symbol adopted by alchemists in the Middle Ages. The curious 
may read further in Jung’s study Psychologie und Alchemie”.37 He also 
mentions Jung’s reflection on the composition of the dragon: “Jung 
observes that in the dragon are the reptile and the bird—the elements of 
earth and air”.38 I feel that it is through an understanding of Borges’ 
essentially psychological dimension of imaginary beings that we can 
grapple with his overall treatment of the mystical and the daimonic. 
Jung wrote on many occasions about the daimon and the daimons, and 
some distinction may be made between the singular and the plural. The 
daimon, for Jung, was the creative force associated with psychic energy or 
libido. In Memories, Dreams, Reflections he reflects on the creative 
                                                           
35 Borges 1987: 38. 
36 Borges 1987: 147. 
37 Borges 1987: 150. 
38 Borges 1987: 154. 

Chapter Thirteen 
 
216
daimon that propelled him ever onward in quest of knowledge, and often 
estranged him from people, giving rise to enemies: “The daimon of 
creativity has ruthlessly had its way with me.”39 Jung’s writings on the 
daimon are not easily translated into an evaluation of elves and goblins, as 
for Jung the daimon is a personal unconscious figure whom we must learn 
to acknowledge and even befriend in the process of individuation so as to 
prevent its powerful force operating upon us unconsciously. As he 
describes in MDR, only by identifying this daimonic power and 
collaborating with it was Jung able to receive its mighty energy which 
propelled him on his quest for knowledge; and yet in his early writing he 
recognised this autonomous authority of the unconscious daimon and 
acknowledged that the same daimon often threatened to overpower him: 
“The daimon throws us down, makes us traitors to our ideals and 
cherished convictions—traitors to the selves we thought we were”.40 The 
daimon was the name he gave to the singular presence within his psyche 
which he felt operated beyond the control of his own ego, and which 
influenced his conscious choices unconsciously. In this respect, as he 
describes, the daimon may be considered synonymous with the 
unconscious: 
I prefer the term ‘the unconscious’, knowing that I might equally well 
speak of ‘God’ or ‘daimon’ if I wished to express myself in mythic 
language. When I do use such mythic language, I am aware that ‘mana,’ 
‘daimon,’ and ‘God’ are synonyms for the unconscious—that is to say, we 
know just as much or just as little about them as about the latter.41 
The plural daimons appear in Jung’s analysis less as the archetypal 
principle within the psyche such as the “god” or single “daimon”, and 
more as un-integrated and untamed aspects of the unconscious that operate 
at the dark margins of our ego. In this respect they are conceptually related 
to complexes. Referring to the medieval idea of the daimonic, Jung writes 
that “demons are nothing other than intruders from the unconscious, 
spontaneous irruptions of the unconscious complexes into the continuity of 
the conscious process. Complexes are comparable to demons which 
fitfully harass our thought and actions; hence in antiquity and the Middle 
Ages acute neurotic disturbances were conceived as possession”.42 
Whilst, as visible in his essay on UFOs, Jung was ever cautious about 
speculating on the material nature of psychoid entities—a speculation that 
                                                           
39 Jung 1989: 358. 
40 Jung 1956: 357. 
41 Jung 1989: 336-7. 
42 Jung 1971: 109. 

“Necessary Monsters” 
217 
might lead to the suggestion that ghosts, apparitions and daimons may be 
somehow beyond the psyche—nevertheless, as is clear from the complex 
text of The Red Book, he was deeply concerned about the possibility that 
the dead who visited him were something more than aspects of his 
unconscious. When in dialogue with Elijah and Salome, Jung declares: “I 
can hardly reckon you as being part of my soul [...] Therefore I must 
separate you and Salome from my soul and place you among the daimons. 
You are connected to what is primordially old and always exists, therefore 
you also know nothing of the being with men but simply of the past and 
future”.43 Such is the autonomous nature of Salome and Elijah that when 
Jung confronts them and suggests that “You are the symbol of the most 
extreme contradiction”, Elijah retorts: “We are real and not symbols”.44 
Later, Elijah returns to this matter and explains: “You may call us symbols 
for the same reason that you can also call your fellow men symbols, if you 
wish to. But we are just as real as your fellow men. You invalidate nothing 
and solve nothing by calling us symbols”.45 Nothing is clear in this most 
challenging of texts, and one of the most puzzling dilemmas is that which 
Jung, and by extension the reader, felt when confronted with figures of 
such overwhelming autonomy; that they appear extrinsic to the psyche of 
the individual. In this sense, Jung asks whether he dreamt of his dead 
father or whether his father visited him in his dreams.46 Stephani Stephens’ 
close reading of The Red Book identifies a curious distinction between 
figures of the unconscious and the discarnate dead, in that there is no 
transference of psychic energy between the living and the dead, whilst 
libido transference occurs through communication with the daimonic 
figures of the unconscious, such as Philemon.47 Much may be made of 
these perplexing matters, but space limits further exploration in this essay. 
                                                           
43 Jung 2009: 357. I am indebted to Stephani Stephens’ authoritative doctoral study 
of The Red Book for many of the ideas about figures appearing within or beyond 
the unconscious in The Red Book. 
44 Jung 2009: 246. 
45 Jung 2009: 249. 
46 Jung likewise dreamt of his departed wife Emma and raised the same questions, 
as did Von Franz when she dreamt of her deceased father. It was clearly a question 
central to Jung and his associates. 
47 Stephens analyses this knotty question: “The dead are different. As discarnate 
souls they present themselves to Jung with an autonomy of libido, which 
presumably is not meant to and never will be released to Jung for integration into 
his personality. Often, the conversational exchange does not so obviously reveal an 
oppositional attitude, as with other figures of the unconscious, and although Jung 
identifies the dead too, as vanishing and disappearing after the conclusion of an 
exchange, this does not serve as confirmation that they have been integrated into 

Chapter Thirteen 
 
218
Without being drawn into these conundrums of energy transference, 
what is important here is to speculate on the nature of daimonic forms as 
figures of the unconscious or, in Borges’ terms, “creatures of the 
imagination”, and to ask whether such definitions are in any way 
limitations? The question is succinctly framed by Terence McKenna at the 
start of one of the Trialogues with Rupert Sheldrake and Ralph Abraham 
entitled “Entities”. McKenna launches into the discussion with three 
essential possibilities concerning the ontology of daimonic beings: firstly 
empirical beasts which “are rare, but physical, and […] have identities 
somewhere between the coelacanths and Bigfoot. They potentially could 
be imagined moving from the realm of mythology into the realm of 
established zoological fact”.48 In this respect, akin to the description of the 
platypus in the eighteenth century,49 they are preternatural rather than 
supernatural in the sense that the scientific method of empirical and 
testable analysis will at some stage solve this particular mystery. 
Thankfully, McKenna dismisses this first possibility as unsustainable. 
The second option that lies before us when we look at the ontological 
status of these entities is what I would think of as the Jungian position. To 
demonstrate it, I’ll simply quote Jung on the subject of sprites and 
elementals. He calls them ‘autonomous fragments of psychic energy that 
have temporarily escaped from the controlling power of the ego.’50 This is 
what I would call the mentalist reductionist approach to discarnate entities 
and intelligences. It says that they are somehow part and parcel of our own 
minds, their existence dependent upon our conceiving them as objects in 
our imagination, however pathologically expressed.51 
McKenna, though, is dismissive of this possibility on the grounds that that 
ascribing to the entities a derivation from the human psyche would appear 
to limit what for him were astonishingly other beings. 
The third and obviously most interesting possibility, but the one fraught 
with argumentative pitfalls, is that these entities are (1) nonphysical and (2) 
autonomous in their existence in some sense. In other words, they actually 
carry on an existence independent of their being perceived by human 
beings. This is the classical position of those who have had the largest 
                                                                                                                         
Jung’s personality. That is, there is no imperative for the dead to disappear and 
certainly not for the purpose of integrating into Jung’s personality” (14). 
48 McKenna 2001: 93. 
49 Zollschan et al.: v. 
50 McKenna was citing Jung from memory, and may have been referring to the 
citation above from Psychological Types. 
51 McKenna 2001: 94. 

“Necessary Monsters” 
219 
amount of experience dealing with these entities: the shamans, ecstatics, 
and so-called sensitive types.52 
This is the most radical and challenging position which, as we have seen, 
was of great concern to Jung. In this respect, there is a link back to 
McKenna’s first hypothesis, in the sense that were such entities so 
categorically autonomous then, with the appropriate tools or techniques of 
observation, science could, indeed, identify and classify them. This matter is 
consequently fraught with the problems of assessing quite which tools or 
techniques might be employed. McKenna, true to his philosophy, would 
assert that the tools available to everyone are psychedelics—especially 
psilocybin, by which the “logos” entity may be experienced, and DMT, by 
which the elves may be encountered.53 And yet, a synthesis of McKenna’s 
first and third hypothesis would appear to diminish the role of the second, 
psychological, hypothesis. Based upon a reading of Borges, Jung and 
McKenna, the position becomes ever more compelling that daimonic entities 
are better appraised as a synthesis of McKenna’s second and third 
postulates. In this respect the entities are not so much created by the 
imagination as encountered through the imagination, and this encounter is 
the result of a creative process which gives form and context to a formless 
daimonic force. In this respect the daimonic beings do operate autonomously 
and consciously, but the location of encounter is the creative imagination. 
They are figures of the unconscious insofar as it is through the deeper strata 
of the unconscious that they may be encountered. The importance of this 
hypothesis is the emphasis on the imagination as a mode of perception as 
opposed to a mode of mere fantasy, and as a result the full impact of Borges’ 
stress on “imaginary beings” is highlighted. The Brownies were as much 
aspects of Stevenson’s psyche as they were aspects of material reality, as at 
the deeper levels of the unconscious—in dreams, visions, reveries—the 
psyche and material reality are interwoven. This is the physis-psyche 
conjunction that Jung described as the psychoid.54 
This hypothesis is at the heart of all that we have discussed above 
regarding Borges, Jung and McKenna. As McKenna suggests, “these 
entities are nonphysical”, and yet they are “autonomous in their existence 
in some sense”. This is a compelling statement when correlated with the 
                                                           
52 McKenna 2001: 94. 
53 See Luke, McKenna 1991, Strassman. 
54 “Since psyche and matter are contained in one and the same world, and 
moreover are in continuous contact with one another and ultimately rest on 
irreprehensible, transcendental factors, it is not only possible but fairly probable, 
even, that psyche and matter are two different aspects of one and the same thing” 
(Jung 1974: 5). 

Chapter Thirteen 
 
220
encounters with entities reported by experimenters with ayahuasca or pure 
DMT,55 as so many of the trip reports indicate not only the experience of 
entities, but, importantly, entities of such solidity, intelligence and 
autonomy that the subject simply cannot accept having been the author of 
such beings. David Luke writes:  
Perhaps one of the most striking, common and unique features of the DMT 
or ayahuasca experience is the encounter with seemingly sentient 
discarnate beings, which are often described as being more real than 
anything previously experienced (Cott & Rock, 2008). Commonly they 
were described as ‘entities’, ‘beings’, ‘aliens’, ‘guides’ or ‘helpers’, and 
would appear as something like “clowns, reptiles, mantises, bees, spiders, 
cacti, and stick figures” (Strassman, 2001: 185), as well as dwarfs, elves, 
imps, angels, spirits, gods, or just as a presence, the latter four of which 
were commonly supremely powerful, wise, and loving.56 
Is this not the landscape of Borges’ and Guerrero’s Book of Imaginary 
Beings, where monsters and devils share the pages with fairies and angels? 
What value is there in asserting that Wells invented his aliens whilst 
Swedenborg encountered his angels? Would it not be a more fruitful 
suggestion that Wells encountered his “fictional” entities through the 
creative process just as Swedenborg gave form to the angels through the 
power of the creative imagination? Henry Corbin’s exploration of the 
mundus imaginalis does justice to this perspective, as does Patrick 
Harpur’s compelling and poetic treatment of daimonic beings in Daimonic 
Reality, in which the daimons are substantiated in the garb of the culture in 
which they appear—and as such the Wee Folk robed in leaves and acorns 
are traditionally encountered in the rural Celtic Fringe, whilst hi-tech shiny 
“Greys” are reported in the space-age, nuclear-age, landscape of 
modernity.57 Tolkien and Wells give form to archetypal daimonic energies 
in their creation of Hobbits, Wargs, or futuristic humanoids, just as the 
Irish farmer gives form to archetypal daimonic energies in his vision of 
Leprechaun. None is mere fantasy yet all are fantastic. None is mere 
fiction yet all are the stuff of legends. 
As discussed, the fictional/poetic space for Borges may be considered 
as an epistemological order akin to Corbin’s mundus imaginalis—the 
imaginal. Whilst this is a dominant aspect of his philosophy of aesthetics, 
nevertheless Borges muddies the hermeneutic waters by emphasising the 
“reality” of Swedenborg’s visions against the “poetic unreality” of Dante’s. 
                                                           
55 See Strassman 2001. 
56 Luke: 34. 
57 Harpur: 275-286. 

“Necessary Monsters” 
221 
Borges anticipates the expected reader reaction to the works of 
Swedenborg when he defends him against charges of madness. This is 
because when we read certain passages in Swedenborg’s Heaven and Hell, 
we are presented with the cognitive challenge of accepting the strength of 
his visions. Swedenborg writes: “When I have been allowed to be in the 
company of angels, I have seen what was there exactly the way I see 
things in our world, so perceptibly that I did not know I was not in our 
world and in the court of some king here. I have also talked with angels 
just as one person here talks to another”.58 The alternative to delusion, 
hallucination or poetic fancy is that Swedenborg’s angelic realm is of an 
order equivalent to an undiscovered island in the Pacific, or a tribal 
community hidden in the rain forest—de carne y hueso [of flesh and 
blood]. Borges, synthesising numerous passages from Arcana Cœlestia 
and Heaven and Hell, assures us that this is not so, and that “The heaven 
and hell of his doctrine are not places, even though the souls of the dead 
who inhabit and, in a way, create them perceive them as being situated in 
space. They are conditions of the soul, determined by its former life”.59 
The location (for want of a better word), therefore, of Swedenborg’s 
heavens and hells is neither “real” nor “merely fictional”. They are, as 
Borges suggests “conditions of the soul” and thus correspond to the 
Imagination of Blake and Coleridge, to Corbin’s imaginal, to Jung’s 
dreamworld, as liminal spaces which are neither one nor the other. 
Kathleen Raine lucidly describes this threshold state: “For the landscapes 
of poetry, the landscapes of the great painters are not to be found in nature 
at all. […] They are landscapes of the soul, and the imagery is not an end 
but a means—a language for discoursing upon realities of the intelligible 
world, not of the physical world. The theme of imaginative art is not 
physical but metaphysical”.60 It must be emphasised that Swedenborg did 
not physically walk out of his door and into a parallel universe populated 
with angels and demons, but neither was he “making it up” in the sense 
that a novelist might create a fiction.61 This is a difficult idea to conceive 
                                                           
58 Swedenborg: para. 174. 
59 Borges 1995: 10. 
60 Raine 2007: 25. 
61 Perhaps, however, his voyages were of such a physical order. Swedenborg 
writes in Heaven and Hell: “As to being carried away by the spirit to another place, 
I have been shown by living experience what it is, and how it is done, but only two 
or three times. I will relate a single instance. Walking through the streets of a city 
and through fields, talking at the same time with spirits, I knew no otherwise than 
that I was fully awake, and in possession of my usual sight. Thus I walked on 
without going astray, and all the while with clear vision, seeing groves, rivers, 
palaces, houses, men, and other objects. But after walking thus for some hours, 

Chapter Thirteen 
 
222
of, let alone describe, and yet Corbin succeeds in defining the imaginal as, 
precisely, this liminal landscape that has characterised religious and 
mystical experience (both in Christianity and Islam), poetry and art, across 
time and cultures; and Swedenborg was for Corbin of supreme importance, 
in the same way that he was for Borges. This whole dimension of the 
imaginal is difficult to apprehend cognitively, as it can only be described 
in terms that create a sense of contradiction—neither real nor fantasy yet 
both real and fantasy. Czeslaw Milosz, whose essay on Swedenborg is 
published alongside Borges’ in Lawrence’s Testimony to the Invisible, 
examines the complex nature of the imaginal with regards Dante, Blake 
and Swedenborg: 
Blake’s The Marriage of Heaven and Hell is modeled on Swedenborg, and 
he would have been amused by an inquiry into whether he had ‘really’ 
seen the devils and angels he describes. The crux of the problem—and a 
serious challenge to the mind—is Blake’s respect for both the imagination 
of Dante, who was a poet, and the imagination of Swedenborg, whose 
works are written in quite pedestrian Latin prose. Dante was regarded by 
his contemporaries as a man who had visited the other world. Yet Jaspers 
would not have called him a schizophrenic, because the right of the poet to 
invent—that is, to lie—was recognized in Jaspers’s lifetime as something 
obvious. It is not easy to grasp the consequences of the aesthetic theories 
which have emerged as the flotsam and jetsam of the scientific and 
technological revolution. The pressure of habit still forces us to exclaim: 
‘Well then, Swedenborg wrote fiction and he was aware it was no more 
than fiction!’ But, tempting as it is, the statement would be false. Neither 
Swedenborg nor Blake were aestheticians; they did not enclose the 
spiritual within the domain of art and poetry and oppose it to the material. 
At the risk of simplifying the issue by using a definition, let us say rather 
that they both were primarily concerned with the energy that reveals itself 
in a constant interaction of Imagination with the things perceived by our 
five senses.62 
Milosz seizes the nettle in a manner that would chime with Jung in 
suggesting that the principle force operating on both Dante and Swedenborg 
was not a putative “authenticity” of experience, but the energy of the 
                                                                                                                         
suddenly I saw with my bodily eyes, and noted that I was in another place. Being 
greatly astonished I perceived that I had been in the same state as those who were 
said to have been led away by the spirit into another place. For in this state the 
distance, even though it be many miles, and the time, though it be many hours or 
days, are not thought of; neither is there any feeling of fatigue; and one is led 
unerringly through ways of which he himself is ignorant, even to the destined 
place” (§441). 
62 Milosz: 25-6. 

“Necessary Monsters” 
223 
numinous encounter with angels through the creative imagination. No 
amount of ontological speculation should blind us to the fact that all 
experience of the daimonic is an encounter with the numinous; and such 
encounters, as Jung so often wrote, provide the psychic energy that fuels 
the process of individuation. 
In an appraisal of Borges’ many writings, it becomes evident that he 
read extensively and sympathetically in the traditions of mystical, spiritual 
and esoteric texts. Surely there is a limit to the capacity of a reader to 
explore such texts to the extent that Borges did if, ultimately, the reader is 
not predisposed towards them? Borges, like Jung, was a reader of 
alchemical texts, dramatising, for example, the aged figure of Paracelsus 
in one of his final tales “The Rose of Paracelsus”. He maintained a lifelong 
interest in daimonic beings, hermetic philosophy, neoplatonism, esoteric 
societies, Gnosticism,63 anomalies in time, the persistence of the soul after 
death, eschatology and depth psychology. He was likewise a devoted 
reader of Angelus Silesius, and translated Silesius’ challenging 
Cherubinischer Wandersmann with María Kodama. He was a dedicated 
reader of Dante, William Blake and Sufi poets. He was also a reader of 
Theosophy, describing his surprise at being unable to find the works of 
Swedenborg in Theosophical bookshops, a statement which would imply 
that he frequented them.64 He made many references to William James, 
Jung, Rudolph Steiner and the later works of Aldous Huxley. I would 
argue that it is difficult to make meaningful statements about James, Jung, 
Steiner, or Huxley without entering their challenging works with energy, 
sympathy and an experiential mode of enquiry. He cites Ouspensky, a 
perplexing writer whose works are difficult to summarise based on only a 
rudimentary reading.65 Likewise, as discussed, Borges read Swedenborg 
                                                           
63 “That Borges’ work demonstrates certain Gnostic leanings and concepts is well-
documented, but it is generally ignored in deconstructive criticism’s haste to erase 
the logos in the name of its own brand of indeterminacy and deferral. It is much 
fairer to view Borges’ Gnosticism, particularly his affinity for the ‘malevolent 
demiurge’ who creates an imperfect universe, as his own attempt to work through 
the concerns of theodicy, and his sense of the inadequacy of orthodox religions’ 
efforts to do so” (Soud: 748). 
64 “I know that in the National Library there is an edition of Heaven and Hell. But 
you will not find Swedenborg’s works in Theosophical bookshops” (Borges 2005: 
202, my translation). 
65 Ouspensky is also a name generally associated with Gurdjieff, a particularly 
curious guru figure of the twentieth century whose influence was felt upon writers, 
painters, film directors, philosophers and even politicians on both sides of the 
Atlantic. Whilst James Webb (1987: 492) writes that Borges attended a Gurdjieff 
group in Argentina, he provides no evidence. And whilst Gurdjieff scholar Sophia 

Chapter Thirteen 
 
224
with great devotion, and died with the project still unrealised of writing an 
entire book on Swedenborg’s voyages to the heavens and hells. 
There is a tendency within Borges scholarship to accept Borges’ own 
claims of “merely aesthetic” interest in the more anomalous aspects of 
human experience and thus to treat merely as fictions his textual 
explorations of such matters. As such, no scholar that I have encountered 
has even mentioned, let alone explored, the two extraordinary passages in 
Borges’ whimsical late volume Atlas, in which he recounts his 
communication with the dead: “Asleep, in my dreams, I see or converse 
with the dead. None of these things surprises me in the least”.66 “Haydée 
Lange and I were conversing in a restaurant in the center of town. […] All 
of a sudden, I remembered that Haydée Lange had died a long time ago. 
She was a ghost and didn’t know it. I felt no fear, but felt it would not be 
right, and perhaps rude, to reveal to her that she was a ghost, a lovely 
ghost”.67 Were any scholar to consider these brief texts, it is likely that 
they would consider them simply fictions and therefore of no wider import. 
Yet from his early years, Borges reported mystical “timeless” experiences, 
lucid dreams, and the presence of ancestral voices. Were such statements 
of communication with the dead to have appeared in a diary, or an 
interview, undoubtedly they would not be dismissed as mere poetic fancy. 
Most likely they would be dismissed as delusion or hallucination. My 
argument would be that, as with Jung and his encounters with Philemon 
and the wandering dead, it was the highly developed imaginative powers 
of Borges that enabled him to experience these more mysterious 
encounters. The poetic and fictional craft that Borges mastered throughout 
his life constituted an ongoing practice of what Jung would describe as 
Active Imagination, and thus fictional encounters and dream encounters 
are brought together in the deeper psychoid levels of the unconscious. 
                                                                                                                         
Wellbeloved attests that Borges attended meetings on Gurdjieff’s Work in Buenos 
Aires, I can find no evidence that Borges read Gurdjieff: “Jorge Luis Borges is said 
to have attended meetings in Argentina in the 1950s. By then Gurdjieff’s influence 
was widespread in South America” (xxvii). It would seem likely that his 
knowledge of Ouspensky’s works would guarantee him at least a passing 
knowledge of Gurdjieff. 
66 Borges 1985: 54. 
67 Borges 1985: 67. 

“Necessary Monsters” 
225 
Bibliography 
Alazraki, J. (1988) Borges and the Kabbalah and Other Essays on His 
Fiction and Poetry (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). 
Barnstone, W. (ed.) (1982) Borges at Eighty: Conversations (Indiana 
University Press). 
—. (2000) With Borges on an ordinary evening in Buenos Aires: a memoir 
(University of Illinois Press). 
Borges, Jorge Luis. (1964) Other Inquisitions, 1937-1952 (New York: 
Washington Square Press). 
—. (1984) Seven Nights, trans. Eliot Weinberger (University of Michigan: 
New Directions). 
—. (1985) Atlas, trans. Anthony Kerrigan (New York: E P Dutton). 
Borges, Jorge Luis & Margarita Guerrero (1987) The Book of Imaginary 
Beings, Norman Thomas di Giovanni, trans. (London: Penguin). 
Borges, Jorge Luis. (1995) “Testimony to the Invisible”, in Lawrence: 3-
16. 
—. (2000) The Total Library: Non-fiction, 1922-1986 E. Weinberger (ed.) 
trans. E. Allen, S. J. Levine & E. Weinberger (London: Allen Lane, 
The Penguin Press,). 
Burgin, R. (ed.) (1998) Jorge Luis Borges: Conversations (Jackson: 
University Press of Mississippi). 
—. (ed.) (1969) Conversations with Jorge Luis Borges (Florida: Holt, 
Rinehart & Winston). 
—. (ed.) (1982) Borges at Eighty: Conversations (Indiana University 
Press). 
—. (2000) With Borges on an ordinary evening in Buenos Aires: a memoir 
(University of Illinois Press). 
Christ, R. et al. (1998) “Borges at NYU”, in Burgin 1998: 118-138. 
Dutton, D. (1977) ‘“Merely a Man of Letters’: Jorge Luis Borges: an 
interview”, Philosophy and Literature 1/3, 337-341. 
Harpur, P. (1995) Daimonic reality: a field guide to the otherworld 
(London: Arkana) 
Jaffé, A. (1989), Was C. G. Jung a Mystic? And Other Essays (Einsiedeln: 
Daimon Verlag). 
James, W. (1913) Varieties of Religious Experience (London: Longmans, 
Green & Co.). 
Jung, C. G. (1956) Symbols of transformation an analysis of the prelude to 
a case of schizophrenia, R. F. C. Hull (ed.) (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
University Press: CW 5). 

Chapter Thirteen 
 
226
—. (1958) “Flying Saucers: A Modern Myth of Things Seen in the Sky”, 
R. F. C. Hull (ed.) (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press: CW 
10: Civilization in Transition) 307-437. 
—. (1963) Memories, Dreams, Reflections, A. Jaffé (ed.) (New York: 
Vintage Books, 1989) 
—. (1971) Psychological Types, R. F. C Hull (ed.) (Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press: CW 6). 
—. (1974) Psychological Reflections, J. Jacobi (ed.) (London: Routledge 
& Kegan Paul). 
—. (2009) The Red Book, Sonu Shamdasani (ed.) (New York: W.W. 
Norton & Co.). 
Lachman, G. (2010) Jung the Mystic: The Esoteric Dimensions of Carl 
Jung’s Life and Teachings (Los Angeles, CA. Tarcher/Penguin). 
Lawrence, J. (ed.) (1995) Testimony to the Invisible: Essays on 
Swedenborg (Pennsylvania: Chrysalis Books). 
Luke, D. (2011) “Discarnate entities and dimethyltryptamine (DMT): 
Psychopharmacology, phenomenology and ontology” Journal of the 
Society for Psychical Research, 75, 26-42. 
Milosz, C. (1995) “Dostoevsky and Swedenborg”, in Lawrence (ed.), 
1995, 19-51. 
McKenna, T. (1991) The Archaic Revival (San Francisco: Harpur). 
McKenna, T., R. Sheldrake & R. Abraham (2001) Chaos, Creativity, and 
Cosmic Consciousness (Vermont: Inner Traditions). 
Raine, K. (1995) “The Human Face of God”, in Lawrence: 51-89. 
—. (2007) “Poetry in relation to traditional wisdom” Temenos Academy 
Review, 10, 21-36. 
Rowlandson, W. (2011) “Borges’s Reading of Dante and Swedenborg: 
Mysticism and the Real” Variaciones Borges 32, 59-87. 
—. (2012) “Confronting the Shadow: The Hero’s Journey in Borges’ ‘El 
Etnógrafo’” Journal of Romance Studies, 12: 2, 17-32. 
—. (2013) Borges, Swedenborg and Mysticism (Oxford: Peter Lang) 
Soud, S. E. “Borges the Golem-Maker: Intimations of ‘Presence’ in ‘The 
Circular Ruins’”, Modern Languae Notes 110:4, 739-754. 
Stapledon, O. (2004), Star Maker (London: Orion). 
Stephens, S. (2011) Vocati Atque non Vocati Mortui Adsunt: Jung and the 
Dead: The Red Book and Memories, Dreams, Reflections (PhD Thesis, 
University of Kent). 
Strassman, R. (2001) DMT: The Spirit Molecule: A Doctor’s 
Revolutionary Research into the Biology of Near-Death and Mystical 
Experiences (Park Street Press). 

“Necessary Monsters” 
227 
Swedenborg, E. (2000) Heaven and Hell (De Coelo et Ejus Mirabilibus, et 
de Inferno, ex Auditis et Visis [London 1758]) trans. G. F. Dole 
(London: Swedenborg Foundation New Century Edition). 
Webb, J. (1987) The Harmonious Circle: The Lives and Work of G. I. 
Gurdjieff, P. D. Ouspensky, and Their Followers (Boston, MA: 
Shambhala). 
Wellbeloved, S. (2003) Gurdjieff: The Key Concepts (London: Routledge). 
Woolger, R. (2011) “Understanding C.G. Jung’s Red Book” Network 
Review, Journal of the Scientific and Medical Network (summer), 3-8. 
Vázquez, M. E. (1977) Borges. Imágenes, memorias, diálogos (Caracas, 
Monte Ávila). 
Zollschan, G. K., J. F. Schumaker & G. F. Walsh (1989) Exploring the 
Paranormal Perspectives on Belief and Experience (Bridport: Prism). 

CHAPTER FOURTEEN 
PRIVILEGING THE “OTHER”:  
ILLICIT FORMS OF KNOWLEDGE  
IN THE DETECTIVE FICTION  
OF REGINALD HILL 
HILARY A. GOLDSMITH 
 
 
 
There is scarcely a tradition which does not recognise the “daimonic” in 
one form or another. Yet, whilst acting as the source of intuitive 
knowledge, its influence is almost unfailingly depicted as “illicit” or 
“other” today. The materialism of our age champions the scientific as the 
only source of true knowledge. Aristotle recognised that “Science is the 
union of knowledge and intuition”1 and regarded intuition as one of the 
five faculties through which the soul attains truth.2 He regarded intuition 
as a quality of soul, a natural force, a First Principle, an essential tool in 
the search for true knowledge. 
One of the great achievements of Reginald Hill’s detective fiction is to 
show the “other” as both true and real, enhancing our understanding of the 
world by legitimising illicit forms of knowledge. Whether Hill personifies 
the daimonic as Dalziel’s “imp”, the harbinger of intuitive insight,3 or 
whether it manifests itself as the daimonic intelligence which fuels the 
psychic powers of the clairvoyant,4 Hill shows how without it our 
perception of the world will always be incomplete.  
Upon his acquittal for a murder of which he is guilty, Austin Greenall 
heads straight for the Aero Flying Club for “a little flight. Just to clear the 
                                                           
1 Aristotle 1998: Book VI, 103. 
2 Aristotle 1998: Book V, 100. The other four faculties are art, knowledge, 
practical wisdom and science.  
3 Hill 2004: 339. 
4 For example, Rosetta Stanhope in A Killing Kindness. 

Privileging the “Other” 
229 
mind, stretch the muscles,”5 despite being warned of the lateness of the 
hour. As he comes in to land he sees what he first believes to be shadows, 
but: 
No shadows these, but ponies [...] wheeling and swerving beneath him as 
though driven in panic by the sound of his descent. [...] The bloody things 
were everywhere. [...] [S]till they thundered directly beneath him. [...] He 
hadn’t got enough speed to gain enough height for another turn on to a 
different line from the stampeding herd. [...] “I saw him coming in to 
land.” [said Preece]. “He just kept on going [...] [r]ight into the boundary 
fence. I couldn’t believe it.” What do you think?” asked Dalziel. 
“Suicide?” “I think it’s mysterious and sad”, said Pascoe. “That’s it. A 
sorrow and a mystery. Like life.”6 
The passage above is taken from the end of Reginald Hill’s 1980 novel A 
Killing Kindness. Research into the work of Hill has formed a substantial 
element of my PhD thesis entitled: “The Relationship between the 
Aristotelian, Newtonian and Holistic Scientific Paradigms and Selected 
British Detective Fiction 1980-2010”. Part of this research has entailed 
examining the relationship between licit and illicit knowledge systems, for 
example between classical science derived from Newtonian physics, and 
psychic, intuitive knowledge systems. Hill’s detective fiction proved 
particularly fertile ground for this study as it demonstrates the importance 
of psychic human experience within a balanced world view. Andy Dalziel, 
Hill’s surly, somewhat uncouth detective, seems an unlikely vehicle for 
the transmission of psychic phenomena. And yet in spite of (or perhaps 
because of) his apparent unsuitability and insensitivity, his character 
clearly illustrates the universality of such experience.  
In 1962 Thomas S. Kuhn introduced, in his seminal work The 
Structure of Scientific Revolutions, the notion of scientific paradigms. For 
Kuhn, a paradigm is a set of fundamental beliefs and practices, knowledge 
and acceptance of which guide current scientific activity.7 A major part of 
my work has been to identify different paradigms and relate them to 
detective fiction. As well as demonstrating the importance of psychic 
experience, Hill’s work clearly demonstrates how an appreciation of the 
nature of these paradigms and their interaction can greatly increase our 
understanding of the world and how it functions. Further, Hill’s fiction 
illustrates the importance of combining all areas of human experience, as 
represented within such paradigms, in the search for truth. 
                                                           
5 Hill 1980: 365. 
6 Hill 1980: 369-372. 
7 Kuhn: 116. 

Chapter Fourteen 
 
230
By far the earliest of the three paradigms of relevance here is that 
based on the writings of Aristotle (384-322 BCE). Today, scientific 
knowledge is generally prized above all other forms of knowledge. The 
dominant world-view of the twenty-first century ascribes far greater 
ontological significance to the scientific than to psychic or religious 
experience. However, Aristotelian philosophy, like the currently emerging 
holistic world-view, is all-inclusive, valuing all types of knowledge and 
human experience equally. Unlike today, Aristotle classified knowledge 
according to its purpose and function, that is, whether it was practical, 
productive or theoretical. For Aristotle, “the end of theoretical knowledge 
is truth, while that of practical knowledge is action.”8 Productive 
knowledge included the arts and rhetoric. There were three theoretical 
philosophies; mathematics, physics and theology, of which the highest was 
theology.9 Aristotle therefore appreciated the importance and significance 
of spiritual experience. 
He also valued intuition highly, for: “no other kind of thought except 
intuition is more accurate than scientific knowledge.”10 Further “it will be 
intuition that apprehends the primary premises. […] If, therefore, it is the 
only other kind of true thinking except scientific knowing, intuition will be 
the originative source of scientific knowledge.”11 Therefore, Aristotle’s 
understanding was that not only is intuition more accurate than science, 
but that it provides the initial impetus through which scientific knowledge 
is gained. Aristotelian thought also held that existence was teleological. 
Every event, phenomenon and occurrence had a cause and a purpose.12 
The Newtonian worldview is one which regards the world as basically 
mechanistic, functioning like a giant clock. Based on the world-view 
propounded by Isaac Newton in his Principia Mathematica Philosophiae 
Naturalis (1687), the Newtonian paradigm understands the world and its 
processes as functioning according to a small set of mathematical laws. 
Truth, within the Newtonian paradigm, is arrived at through the collection, 
collation and assessment of concrete evidence—it is found in state-of-the-
art laboratories through the examination of such evidence by highly 
qualified and experienced scientists. But this is not necessarily so in the 
detective fiction of many of our best and most popular writers of the 
genre: P. D. James, Ruth Rendell, Colin Dexter and Reginald Hill, to name 
but a few. 
                                                           
8 Aristotle, Metaphysics: 2.1. 
9 Aristotle, Metaphysics: 6.1. 
10 Aristotle, Posterior Analytics 2.9. 
11 Aristotle, Posterior Analytics 2.19. 
12 For Aristotle’s theory of the four causes see Aristotle, Physics II.3. 

Privileging the “Other” 
231 
Frequently for Hill, forensic science is only used as a verifier of a truth 
which is already known to the detectives. Dalziel’s two closest colleagues, 
Detective Chief Inspector Peter Pascoe and Sergeant Edgar Wield, have 
learned to trust Dalziel’s instinct. Dalziel “had a habit of being right”13 
even when the forensic evidence was apparently against him, his 
conviction of the guilt of Philip Swain in Bones and Silence (1990) being a 
good example. Referred to by Dalziel as his little “imp”,14 his second sight 
or instinct is almost tangible, the imp troubling his digestive processes at 
times when psychic enlightenment is imminent. 
Hill’s Dalziel and Pascoe novels undermine the Newtonian paradigm 
by the low regard in which they generally hold both technology and the 
Baconian scientific method from which modern forensic science practices 
have evolved.15 Newtonian scientific knowledge alone is usually depicted 
as unreliable and inconclusive, and indeed, Dalziel’s “casual contempt for 
science”16 is noted in A Clubbable Woman (1970). Sam Connon has 
telephoned the police to report that on returning home, he has found the 
dead body of his wife, who has apparently been bludgeoned to death. 
Dalziel’s instinct tells him that Sam Connon did not commit the murder 
but wryly comments that “I might be wrong. It’s been known. Twice.”17 
Science, on the other hand, tells the detecting team nothing. Commenting 
on the vagaries of the forensic report regarding the time of death, Dalziel 
contends: “Bloody Science. All it does is give us reasons for being 
imprecise.”18 Forensic descriptions of the cause of death are little help 
either.  
Similarly, in Deadheads (1983) Richard Elgood thinks that his recent 
brushes with death were actually attempts by someone unknown to murder 
him. However, while the police technical team can identify why his desk 
lamp gave him a substantial electric shock, and why his garage doors 
failed to crush his car, they cannot say if these events were caused 
deliberately.19 The pure scientific Newtonian facts are virtually useless in 
these instances as they give no evidence for or against foul play. They are 
value-neutral. Again, the post-mortem results in Recalled to Life (1992), 
whilst able to identify the cause of Miss Marsh’s death as heart failure, 
cannot determine whether or not this was brought about by some human 
                                                           
13 Hill 2001: 26. 
14 For example, Hill 2004: 338. 
15 For a greater explanation of this relationship see White. 
16 Hill 1970: 171. 
17 Hill 1970: 36.  
18 Hill 1970: 35. 
19 Hill 1983: 90. 

Chapter Fourteen 
 
232
agency—as a result of a severe shock, for example. Similarly, Dalziel’s 
comment in Dialogues of the Dead (2001): “[e]xperts […] I’ve shat ‘em. 
It’s blood, sweat and good honest grind that’ll catch this bugger!”20 
demonstrates his lack of faith in the forensic science services, as neither 
the pathologist nor the forensic dentist could provide any useful 
information regarding the death of Jax Ripley. 
The emerging holistic paradigm, like the Aristotelian, restores the 
importance of forms of knowledge other than the (in the Newtonian sense) 
strictly scientific, but from a post-Newtonian perspective. It recognises 
that science, nature and religion are basically the same with the same goal. 
They are contiguous. Wendy Wheeler points out that, until the nineteenth 
century, the Latin word scientia (from which the English word “science” is 
derived) simply means “knowledge” and so included religion, philosophy 
and anything which furthered our understanding of the world in which we 
live.21 The holistic paradigm recognises the validity and usefulness of 
many different theories and knowledge systems. These form interactive 
“strata of realities” within our current understanding of the universe 
which, taken together, will present a more complete view than can ever be 
reached by adherence to one theory alone.22  
Returning to the opening extract, Greenall thinks that the ponies he 
sees are shadows. Indeed, in a way they are. They exist in the shadowy 
hinterland which lies between the “real” world and some other plane of 
existence; a borderland or boundary between that which is perceivable 
with human physical senses and that of which one becomes aware by other 
means. Greenall in his plane can be thought of as representing the 
dominant Newtonian paradigm which privileges continual forward motion, 
mechanism and materialism. The ponies, which in reality had left the field 
several days previously, are representative of another path, another way of 
understanding. While Greenall has survived his trial in a Newtonian court 
of law, he succumbs to the judgment of a higher court. 
The Aristotelian and holistic paradigms are all-inclusive. Similarly, for 
Hill, the truth can be reached through a variety of means including 
supernatural knowledge and gut instinct. Hill’s work frequently, therefore, 
undermines the Newtonian paradigm not only by highlighting the 
shortcomings of science, but by simultaneously emphasizing the value of 
and giving credence to types of experience lying outside its realm of 
influence. 
                                                           
20 Hill 2001: 131. 
21 Wheeler: 94. 
22 Polyani: 35. 

Privileging the “Other” 
233 
Likewise, Hill’s fiction accepts and normalises information available 
only through altered psychological states such as dreams and extreme 
illness. Examples include Rosie’s experiences in a coma and her 
relationship with the Nix in On Beulah Height (1998), Hat Bowler’s 
recurring nightmare in Good Morning, Midnight (2004), and the extensive 
narration of Dalziel’s near-death experiences in The Death of Dalziel 
(2007). By introducing such elements within a contemporary setting, 
elements which are unacceptable within the presently dominant Newtonian 
paradigm, Hill implies that strands of such knowledge systems form an 
important, if scientifically inexplicable, part of the twenty-first century 
world and should not be disregarded without due consideration. 
Of all Hill’s detective fiction, A Killing Kindness is particularly 
interesting because of the credence it attaches to what might be termed 
“antiscientific” forms of knowledge, such as the psychic powers and 
practices of the Romany people. Arguably, A Killing Kindness goes as far 
as privileging psychic knowledge over Newtonian-inspired scientific 
knowledge. An important aspect of the emerging holistic paradigm which 
links it to the Aristotelian paradigm, is the breaching or non-recognition of 
boundaries. A Killing Kindness interrogates the boundaries between 
“mainstream accepted” science and that which is marginalised as “pseudo 
science”; psychiatry, astrology, palmistry and linguistics. 
The Austrian-born British philosopher of natural and social science 
Karl Raimund Popper (1902-1994) believed that the goal of science is to 
establish objective truth. For a theory or hypothesis to be truly scientific it 
must be possible to prove that it is false as well as to prove that it is true. 
According to Popper, fields of study such as astrology and psychiatry are 
therefore pseudosciences because it is not possible to prove their assertions 
to be false. This is known as the Falsification Principle.23 A Killing 
Kindness presents, through the gypsy’s belief in fate and cosmic justice, a 
teleological Aristotelian world where all will come right in the end without 
man’s agency. 
A Killing Kindness (1980) 
A Killing Kindness opens with a séance at which the medium, Mrs. 
Rosetta Stanhope, is trying to contact the murdered Brenda Sorby to try to 
establish who killed her. In Brenda’s voice, Rosetta states that “[…] it was 
green, all green, all over me, choking.”24 These words, although 
                                                           
23 Encyclopaedia Britannica Online.  
24 Hill 1980: 1. 

Chapter Fourteen 
 
234
misinterpreted at the time, are recognised at the end of the novel as giving 
the name of the killer. This demonstration of Rosetta’s psychic ability is of 
paramount importance as, coming at the opening of the novel, it 
establishes straight away the value of psychic knowledge systems. It harks 
back to a pre-Newtonian world where knowledge was all one, not divided 
and restrained within the man-made barriers of different disciplines, nor 
branded as reliable or unreliable according to whether or not it could be 
verified by science. 
Brenda is the third victim of the murderer whom the local paper has 
dubbed the “Choker”.25 The first victim was a Mary Dinwoodie; the 
second, June McCarthy. All the victims were laid out neatly except for 
Brenda, whose body was found when it collided with a barge in the river. 
It is the time of the city’s High Fair. The gypsies, who have a long history 
of association with the fair, have set up camp near the local airfield, where 
the Aero Flying Club is based. The Choker murders continue. Pauline 
Stanhope, Mrs Stanhope’s niece, is found strangled in the fortune telling 
tent at the fairground by Sergeant Wield. The next victim, Andrea 
Valentine, is found dead in her own home.  
The strangulations are accompanied by phone calls quoting 
Shakespeare’s play Hamlet to Sammy Locke, a reporter for the local 
Evening Post, who thinks that they are not all the voice of the same 
person. Dr Pottle of the Central Hospital Psychiatric Unit is called in to 
help draw up a profile of the killer. Linguists Drew Urquhart and Dicky 
Gladmann from the local college take the tapes to analyse the voice pattern 
(the role of Pottle, Urquart and Gladmann will be discussed in greater 
detail later). Dalziel is convinced that the gypsy Dave Lee, a distant 
relative of Pauline Stanhope, is “mixed up in it somewhere [because] 
there’s too many close connections for coincidence”,26 although Pascoe is 
equally certain that he is not. Dalziel orders Pascoe to carry out a search of 
the gypsy site. Finding Pascoe on the river bank talking to the young 
gypsy children, Mrs Lee calls him a pervert and shoves him into the water. 
Gasping for air whilst struggling to reach safety Pascoe realises that he is 
experiencing the same scene as that related by the dead Brenda during the 
séance which opens the novel. Pascoe’s traumatic, near-death experience 
as he comes close to drowning causes a paradigm shift in the way he 
thinks. 
Reconsidering Brenda’s psychic communication at the séance from the 
viewpoint of this new paradigm, Pascoe realises that what Brenda actually 
said was not “[…] it was green, all green, all over me, choking” but “It 
                                                           
25 Hill 1980: 13. 
26 Hill 1980: 270. 

Privileging the “Other” 
235 
was Greenall, Greenall, over me, choking.”27 This is extremely important 
because it demonstrates that correct interpretation of “facts” and 
“evidence” is essential, whether it relates to Newtonian science or psychic 
revelation. Pascoe wonders “how an English judge would react to the 
production of a dead witness by proxy in a murder trial.”28 He realises that 
the legal system with its hard and fast laws is Newtonian-based, and 
therefore a judge, the arbiter of the law, would not accept as evidence 
anything from outside the paradigm within which the law functions. This 
clash between the Newtonian-inspired legal system with its fixed laws and 
the intuition-inspired, more holistic mindset of the detective also causes 
problems for Dalziel in Good Morning, Midnight and Bones and Silence. 
In a box of keepsakes found in Mrs Dinwoodie’s home is a music 
festival programme from the town of Linden in Germany. Following up 
this German connection, Pascoe discovers that Peter Dinwoodie had run 
off with Mary Greenall while stationed there with the RAF. Mary 
Dinwoodie was in fact Austin Greenall’s first wife. Pascoe confronts 
Austin Greenall at the Aero Club. Greenall admits to the killings and 
relates the details to Pascoe, who writes them down as a statement. As 
Greenall nears the completion of his statement, Pascoe is called away 
leaving Wield to get the statement signed, which he fails to do. The result 
of this omission has disastrous consequences for the prosecution’s case. 
Greenall is charged with just the murder of Mary Dinwoodie/Greenall, as 
the police feel that they have most likelihood of a conviction here. 
However, the evidence is all circumstantial and Greenall is acquitted. 
Greenall’s unsigned confession which he later retracts is inadmissible as 
evidence, and Pascoe apologises to Rosetta Stanhope for the trial “all 
being for nothing”29 because her daughter’s killer remained unpunished. 
But Rosetta sees the outcome differently. Trusting in powers other than the 
law, her mood is positive. Rosetta tells Pascoe: “Don’t worry. It’s going to 
be alright”, it will be “taken care of “,30 “[i]t will be as Pauline would have 
wanted it.”31 Rosetta knows that justice will finally be done, if by other 
agencies than by a Newtonian court of law. Her belief proves correct when 
Greenall crashes his plane as the result of “seeing” non-existent gypsy 
ponies on the runway. 
A Killing Kindness demonstrates that knowledge does not have to be 
justifiable through science to be valuable, as it names the killer, at a 
                                                           
27 Hill 1980: 330. 
28 Hill 1980: 270. 
29 Hill 1980: 31. 
30 Hill 1980: 363. 
31 Hill 1980: 362. 

Chapter Fourteen 
 
236
séance, in the very first sentence. In our Newtonian world science is the 
dominant method of verifying the truth, yet although the psychic power of 
the “self-professed clairvoyant and medium”32 Rosetta Stanhope is not a 
scientifically accepted fact, it provides the killer’s name. Dalziel may call 
Rosetta’s psychic power “crap,”33 but had Brenda’s words spoken through 
Rosetta’s mediumship been understood correctly and given due 
consideration as evidence at the outset of the investigation, the killer 
would have been apprehended and the other murders averted.  
Varieties of knowledge construction 
In A Killing Kindness the division between true Newtonian science and 
such pseudosciences becomes blurred. True Newtonian science, favouring 
concrete, examinable data, has little to offer here. However, the 
Newtonian-inspired reasoning skill of the psychiatrist Dr Pottle at least 
points the detectives in the right direction. 
The linguists Drew Urquhart and Dicky Gladmann obviously consider 
their discipline as a science which should be granted the respect it 
deserves, and indeed their work requires the use of highly sophisticated 
state-of-the-art Newtonian-inspired scientific equipment in the form of the 
sonograph. This raises the status of linguistics and reinforces the 
impression that it is a scientific discipline. However, mechanically analysing 
the frequency of different elements of a voice and having them displayed 
on a graph reveals nothing of the intentions of the speaker, nor of the 
actual meaning of the words. The results apparently produced by this 
highly scientific and mechanistic apparatus could have been disastrous to 
the investigation as they further convince Urquhart and Gladmann that 
there are four different speakers. This assumption is wrong: they are the 
recording of a single voice. This demonstrates clearly the dangers of the 
point Martha A. Turner makes in Mechanism and the Novel that “we still 
often act as thought facts are found rather than constructed.”34 Urquart and 
Gladmann have not “found” the correct answer; they have constructed an 
erroneous one. The “science” of linguistics, then, is depicted as being far 
less reliable than the medium’s utterance whilst in a trance. 
Rosetta and Pauline Stanhope discuss how the casting of horoscopes 
and palmistry, usually considered as far removed from science, are, in fact, 
“pretty scientific.”35 The effect of trying to demonstrate the links between 
                                                           
32 Hill 1980: 3. 
33 Hill 1980: 8. 
34 Turner: 6. 
35 Hill 1980: 39. 

Privileging the “Other” 
237 
the overtly scientific and other forms of knowledge is three-fold. Firstly, it 
serves to raise the status of non-empirical knowledge systems by 
establishing their close association with Newtonian science. Secondly, it 
serves to re-introduce non-empirical knowledge forms within the current 
basically Newtonian worldview. Within the Aristotelian paradigm all 
forms of knowledge were viewed as equally valuable, for different 
knowledge systems each had something to offer to extend human 
understanding of the universe. Thirdly therefore, in line with the 
inclusiveness championed by the holistic paradigm, it seeks to recombine 
different knowledge systems, allowing a more rounded, more complete 
picture of the world and the way it functions. 
Marginalised forms of knowledge:  
astrology and palmistry 
In A Killing Kindness the legendary psychic skills of the Romany people 
are portrayed as a type of pseudo-science, being far less removed from 
science, and more objective, than one might imagine. The Newtonian 
boundaries between hard science and pseudoscience become blurred, 
harking back to a pre-Newtonian Aristotelian age when all knowledge was 
one. Mrs Stanhope says of palmistry that “It’s a craft. You learn it.”36 
Pauline Stanhope is not Romany and therefore has no psychic “gift” as her 
Romany aunt does. She tells Pascoe “I’m a fully qualified horoscopist and 
a pretty fair palmist but I’ve got no real psychic powers.”37 Pauline “got 
[...] properly qualified”38 in them, so that she can act as a convincing 
palmist and reader of horoscopes with the practical, objective, near-
scientific knowledge which her training has given her. However, she lacks 
the “real psychic powers […] the real gift”39 which her aunt, “a true 
psychic,”40 possesses and which is to prove so important in all aspects of 
this case. 
Psychiatry is shown in A Killing Kindness as a discipline which crosses 
boundaries. It is portrayed as a Newtonian-based science, whilst 
simultaneously relying on the experience, prior knowledge, understanding 
and informed intuition of the practitioner. Although Dalziel refers to Dr 
Pottle as “that quack”41 Dalziel felt that the detective team would “be daft 
                                                           
36 Hill 1980: 59. 
37 Hill 1980: 37. 
38 Hill 1980: 39. 
39 Hill 1980: 37. 
40 Hill 1980: 38. 
41 Hill 1980: 35. 

Chapter Fourteen 
 
238
not to use any expert help we can get”42 and so requests his assistance. 
Dalziel’s considering Pottle as a quack suggests that he does not regard 
Pottle as a true scientist, or psychiatry as a real science. On the other hand, 
Dalziel’s wishing to seek his “expert help” in spite of this suggests that he 
also appreciates the potential usefulness of forms of knowledge other than 
the purely scientific. One of Pottle’s strengths is that he can employ 
Newtonian science and yet see its results from a wider, holistic angle as 
best suits the circumstances. 
Belying Dalziel’s claims of quackery, Pottle is actually a true Newtonian 
scientist, at least in the way that he investigates and assesses the four tape-
recorded quotations from Hamlet. He has to make two basic assumptions 
before he can proceed: that the four murders were committed by the same 
killer; and that this killer had the same motive in each case. These form the 
two premises which underpin his profiling of the murderer. However, as 
Aristotle points out: “the premisses of demonstrated knowledge must be 
true, primary, [and] immediate.”43 Pottle is worried that his basic premises 
may not be true, because if they are not, neither will be his profile of the 
killer. 
For Aristotle, intuition provided an equally valid route to ascertaining 
the truth as scientific knowledge. Therefore, according to the Aristotelian 
paradigm, Pottle must learn to trust his own instincts. However, the 
influence of the Newtonian paradigm which does not trust intuition is 
reducing Pottle’s faith in his own gut instincts. Pottle is a psychiatrist. For 
him, a disadvantage of his discipline becoming more scientific, more 
Newtonian, is that his Aristotelian belief in the truth of intuition is 
weakened. 
Pottle’s Newtonian science aims to be objective and dispassionate. 
This is illustrated by his desire for more tapes. He feels that “the more I 
have the better results I can hope for”44 even though this would mean there 
had been more killings. This is an illustration of Wheeler’s observation 
that “scientists are not interested in the world, but in data.”45 Pottle is only 
interested in the tapes, not in the characters or the world of A Killing 
Kindness. In this aspect of his work, Pottle operates only within the 
closely confined barriers of his discipline. Pottle’s success, however, is 
dependent upon both Newtonian scientific evidence and Aristotelian 
intuition, combined in holistic interrelatedness. It is the influence of 
Aristotelian intuition which brings Pottle to an accurate qualitative 
                                                           
42 Hill 1980: 117.  
43 Aristotle, Posterior Analytics 1.2. 
44 Hill 1980: 144. 
45 Wheeler 2006: 74. 

Privileging the “Other” 
239 
assessment of the personality of the killer. As Pascoe notes during 
Greenall’s confession “Pottle had been right”46 in that Greenall only felt 
guilt when he had killed to protect himself. Pottle is also correct in 
identifying marriage as the key to the case. Pottle’s profile of the killer is 
also very accurate, if limited. He thinks that the culprit is male, older than 
thirty-five and murders out of compassion, all of which could accurately 
describe Greenall. 
The positive outlook of a teleological Aristotelian world 
The teleological world is a feature of the Aristotelian paradigm, in which 
“all terrestrial change presumes a completely immaterial unmoved mover, 
pure form or God, whose self-thinking sustains the entire cosmos.”47 
Although the Christian God is never mentioned in A Killing Kindness, 
both Greenall and Rosetta Stanhope believe in fate, predetermination, and 
a sense of purpose working within the universe. Greenall, for example, 
“felt that he was merely an instrument of some benevolent and protective 
force.”48 This view he could justify to himself through the ease with which 
his victims seemed to present themselves to him and the luck by which he 
escaped apprehension for so long. He “had a feeling that there was a plan. 
But it wasn’t mine.”49 Referring to the murder of June McCarthy, while 
Greenall here says that there was “No plan”, he still thinks that “It was 
fate”50 that she should be murdered. Although Greenall’s belief that there 
is a purpose working in the world is Aristotelian-inspired, it is at odds with 
his distinctly Newtonian view of himself as a tool. 
A Killing Kindness presents an interrogation of how surviving elements 
of the Aristotelian paradigm, which viewed all types of human experience 
as knowledge, might affect our world today. Further, it demonstrates how 
these elements are not just relics of a past paradigm from a bygone age 
with no relevance to today’s world, but form an integral part of the new 
holistic paradigm. A Killing Kindness exemplifies Turner’s observation 
that “other worldviews [than the purely scientific] remain available”51 Not 
only this, but in Hill’s work these “other worldviews” often appear to be 
equally, if not more, reliable than a worldview which privileges science 
over all other forms of knowledge. A Killing Kindness presents a world in 
                                                           
46 Hill 1980: 349. 
47 Bynum: 27. 
48 Hill 1980: 350. 
49 Hill 1980: 346. 
50 Hill 1980: 345. 
51 Turner: 7. 

Chapter Fourteen 
 
240
which, as Turner notes referring to Pride and Prejudice, “strange things 
happen”, a world where the pre-Newtonian and the post-Newtonian 
meet.52 This integration of the older forms of knowledge into the modern 
world is shown as beneficial. 
As Wheeler contends, science has in the past been too anxious to 
separate conceptual knowledge and the power of the intellect from 
experiential knowledge—Galileo and Descartes “reduced the world to a 
mere object of technical and mathematical investigation.”53 Wheeler goes 
on to point out that ‘the traverse [between experiential knowledge and 
conceptual knowledge] is the most difficult thing for all of us, because it 
involves a movement between what are in our present culture, licit and 
illicit forms of knowing.”54 Hill’s work arguably seeks to facilitate the 
traverse of the gap between licit scientific knowledge and other illicit 
forms of knowledge. 
By elevating the status of “illicit” forms of knowledge such as those 
innate within the psyche of the Romany people, whilst simultaneously 
demonstrating the shortcomings of “licit” forms of knowledge such as 
Newtonian-inspired forensic science and the legal system, Hill puts the 
two on a more equal footing. A Killing Kindness suggests that giving more 
equal weight and status to all the diverse types of human knowledge and 
experience would benefit the twenty-first century world by increasing our 
understanding and appreciation of its processes and of the people who 
populate it. Perhaps, then, life could be a far more positive and fulfilling 
experience than the “sorrow and a mystery” which Peter Pascoe felt it to 
be. 
Bibliography 
Aristotle, Metaphysics http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/metaphysics.mb.txt 
(accessed November 2012). 
—. (1998) Nicomachean Ethics (New York: Dover Publications Inc.). 
—. Posterior Analytics http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/posterior.mb.txt 
(accessed November 2012). 
—. (2008) Physics (Oxford, Oxford University Press).  
Bynum, W. F., E. J. Brown & R. Porter (1981) Dictionary of the History 
of Science (Princeton: Princeton University Press). 
                                                           
52 Turner: 51. 
53 Wheeler: 49. 
54 Wheeler: 150. 

Privileging the “Other” 
241 
Cohen, I., B. & A. Whitman, trans. (1999) Isaac Newton the Principia 
Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy (1687) (Berkeley: 
University of California Press). 
Hill, Reginald (1970) A Clubbable Woman (London: HarperCollins). 
—. (1980) A Killing Kindness (London: HarperCollins). 
—. (1990) Bones and Silence (London: HarperCollins). 
—. (1983) Deadheads (London: HarperCollins). 
—. (2001) Dialogues of the Dead (London: HarperCollins). 
—. (2004) Good Morning, Midnight (London: HarperCollins). 
—. (1998) On Beulah Height (London: HarperCollins). 
—. (1992) Recalled to Life (London: HarperCollins). 
—. (2007) The Death of Dalziel (London: HarperCollins). 
Kuhn, T. S. (1962) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press). 
Polyani, M. (1967) The Tacit Dimension (London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul). 
Turner, M. A. (1993) Mechanism and the Novel: Science in the Narrative 
Process (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). 
Wheeler, W. (1999) A New Moderniy: Change in Science, Literature and 
Politics (London: Lawrence and Wishart). 
—. (2006) The Whole Creature: Complexity, Biosemiotics and the 
Evolution of Culture, (London: Lawrence and Wishart). 
White, P. C. (ed.) (2004) Crime Scene to Court: The Essentials of 
Forensic Science (Cambridge: The Royal Society of Chemistry). 


PART III 
DAIMONIC ENCOUNTER 
 

CHAPTER FIFTEEN 
FIREFLIES AND SHOOTING STARS: 
VISUAL NARRATIVES OF DAIMONIC 
INTELLIGENCE 
ANGELA VOSS 
 
 
 
Man, in his inability to grasp the divine, requires the gods to be revealed in 
a palpable form, and this requirement is met, at the gods’ behest, in the 
form of light or fire.1 
Paranormal events happen. In general conversation about such things, 
most of us have an anecdote about an experience which has no rational 
explanation, and which everyone recognises as arising from an underground 
of “(un)common sense”, a counter-cultural stratum whose mysterious 
modus operandi has no place in the knowledge-systems which inform our 
education and day-to-day lives. As Gregory Shaw has observed, “we live 
in a profound disconnect between private experience and public 
discourse.”2 He recommends that researchers and academics can begin to 
heal this disconnect by “intelligently exploring” the hidden dimensions of 
existence, thus building bridges between anecdotal events involving 
sensory, lived experience and the theories that inform our understanding 
and explanation of such events. This is also my intention in devoting this 
chapter to the examination of one particular kind of non-rational 
phenomenon—that of anomalous moving lights, and their identification 
with non-material intelligent beings or daimons.3 I shall address this theme 
primarily from the viewpoint of neoplatonic metaphysics, because here we 
                                                           
1 Clarke: 101. 
2 Shaw 2011: 18. 
3 For a general survey of the many varieties of anomalous lights reported by 
witnesses, see Harpur: 1-21. Harpur also advocates a neoplatonic explanation, 
commenting that “One way [... ] of regarding luminous apparitions is as images of 
the soul projected by the soul itself” (16). 

Fireflies and Shooting Stars 
245 
find a metaphorical scheme which encompasses a multi-layered vision of 
epistemological possibilities within a coherent whole. It is my suggestion 
that such a model can help us elucidate the claims and contentions of both 
contemporary psychics and their sceptical opponents. 
I want to focus primarily on the questions of ontology and perception: 
how can we begin to evaluate the “truth” of these apparitions in terms of 
their apparent objectivity, and what mode of vision is required for humans 
to “see” them accurately enough to gain some deeper insight into their 
provenance and purpose (as opposed to analysing their visible form 
alone)? Often a purely material explanation is pitted against a naive 
assumption of other-worldly agency, without acknowledging that there 
may be another way of looking altogether. I would suggest that empirical 
methods of evaluation are inadequate for assessing the liminal nature of 
these light manifestations. Despite the fact that many claim that they can 
be captured for all to see on video or digital photographs,4 it does not 
follow that they originate from the earthly dimension, nor that sense-
perception and material science are adequate tools for fathoming their 
extra-ordinary, numinous, and often seemingly intelligent activity. We live 
in an age where the bottom line of “truth” is the rational explanation in 
terms of physical and material causation, even if that explanation pushes 
credulity to its limits.5 But neither should we accept the equally 
unsophisticated identification of strange lights as UFOs or aliens as 
objectively “real” visitors from an objectively “real” outer space. In both 
scientific and science-fiction paradigms, there is an in-built assumption 
that such a “reality” has an external, verifiable existence independent from 
the observer’s own visionary frequency (as it were). This literal approach 
denies the supremely important idea, long recognised in traditions of 
esoteric wisdom, that there are echelons of deepening modes of perception 
available to humans which far exceed the limits of either sense perception 
or critical reasoning, and which move towards a closing of the subjective-
objective epistemological divide. It also denies a sense of the sacred as an 
epistemological category with its own distinct modes of expression—
always understood as gateways to higher (or deeper) consciousness—
                                                           
4 The epistemological issues which arise in relation to technological “evidence” of 
spirit phenomena including ITC (instrumental transcommunication) deserve fuller 
attention. Celluloid, analogue and digital films and photographs may appear to 
pick up images which elude the naked eye, whilst recordings of “spirit voices” are 
often indistinguishable from normal radio interference. Both forms have a liminal 
and ambiguous ontological status. See Cardoso, Cooper, Harvey, Solomon. 
5 A good example being the insistence that all crop circles are made by people with 
planks and rope in the night (see Rowlandson, also Ferrer 2008). 

Chapter Fifteen 
 
246
which have now come to be regarded as inferior and unreliable in relation 
to rationality, i.e. “merely subjective”, in a radical “ontological inversion” 
of cognitive value.6 I am referring to the intellectual intuition (in 
neoplatonic terminology) and the creative imagination which conveys it 
through form and image, engaging the knower in a symbolic mode of 
understanding which is participatory in that it reveals something about the 
nature of his or her own soul, and opens into realms which the critical 
reason can only characterise as paradoxical, para-normal or downright 
impossible.7 
To begin, let us explore the connections between visible and invisible 
worlds through daimonic epiphanies, luminous soul-vehicles and the 
divine imagination. Daimonic or spiritual intelligences have long been 
associated with the stars as points of spherical light, as well as with 
invisible spirit or soul-bodies which manifest in the form of such light. 
One of the earliest suggestions we have that stars embody divine spirits is 
found in Hesiod (active 750-650 BCE): 
To Kephalos [Eos] bore a brilliant son,  
Strong Phaeton, a man much like the gods. 
When he was young and had the fragile bloom 
                                                           
6 On the ontological inversion, see Milne: 5. For a discussion on the exclusion of 
the sacred within academic discourse, see Kripal 2010: 253-255. 
7 On participation as a research method, see Ferrer & Sherwood: Introduction; 
Kripal 2001: Introduction. Of course such an intuitive (or “psychic”) insight then 
requires interpretation and elucidation if it is to be communicated to others, a 
process which McGilchrist sees reflected in the correct functioning of the brain 
hemispheres (see McGilchrist 2010: e.g. 199, 208, 209). On Platonic epistemology 
see the “divided line” metaphor in Republic Book 6 (509d-513e). In summary, the 
path of gnostic knowledge progresses through sense perception, opinion and 
fantasy (“human” and unreliable modes of knowing), to dialectic, reason and 
intellectual intuition as more stable and unified modes, before finally attaining 
union with the divine mind. Chittick (2007) notes “Knowledge only qualifies as 
intellectual when knowers know it at the very root of their own intelligence and 
without any intermediary [ ...] [philosophy] was a path to discover the ultimate 
truths of the universe within the depths of one’s own soul” (61). Later Platonists 
drew a distinction between arbitrary fantasy and a more noetic imaginal faculty 
which perceived divine truths via symbolic images presented to the senses, thus 
establishing two kinds of imagination—one illusory, the other archetypal or 
transcendent. On Plato and the relationship between dianoia and phantasia see 
Addey 2002; Cocking: 1-26; Tanner: 89-120; Watson: 1986, 1988: 1-14. On the 
neoplatonic development of the cognitive imagination, see Plotinus IV.3; Cocking: 
49-68; Corbin 1997, 1999; Couliano: 3-27; Dillon 1986; Voss 2009. On the 
Renaissance debate between the two forms of imagination see Giglioni 2010. 

Fireflies and Shooting Stars 
247 
Of glorious youth, and tender, childish mind, 
The laughter-loving Aphrodite seized 
And took him to her shrine and made him serve 
As temple-keeper, bright divinity (Daimon dios) [i.e. a star].8 
Phaeton, a child of immortal mother and mortal father, becomes a daimon or 
disembodied spirit, the immaterial essence of the visible star Jupiter.9 By the 
time of Plato (424-348 BCE) we find the notion that all human souls are 
sown into the stars before they become incarnated into bodily existence, and 
to their stars they will return at death.10 Plato’s Demiurge in the Timaeus 
creates the eternal soul as the informing intelligence of the world, inserted 
into its centre, and it is from this soul that each star receives its sphere of 
light. We might best understand Plato’s concept of “soul” as eternal life-
principle, and in its original pristine form soul manifests as a sphere, the 
most universally perfect mathematical form.11 Indeed Plato’s archetypal 
cosmos is itself spherical, its motion circular, and these two qualities are 
mirrored in the composition of the human soul which is formed from the 
same substance as the soul of the world. However, the upheaval of the soul’s 
incarnation into the body means that it can easily be overpowered by 
material existence, become distorted and forgetful, and lose sight of its 
innate visionary capacity.12 The purpose of the philosophic life is therefore 
to overcome earthly limitations and restore the soul’s spherical and perfect 
nature, with its intuitive perception of (what we might term) supra-rational 
dimensions of being. In the words of Proclus, the incarnated soul should 
“pursue the uniform and the simple energy of the circle of sameness”13 so 
that at physical death it may move swiftly to its spiritual home.  
In attributing each soul to a star, Plato introduces the idea of the soul’s 
vehicle, its astral body, which accompanies it in its descent into matter. In 
this subtle body the soul is “systematically moulded, framed and controlled 
by the spheres of light called the wanderers or the planetary gods”.14 We 
must remember that for Plato there are supra-sensory realities behind and 
within physical phenomena, the eide or “patterns fixed in the nature of 
things” which participate in the eternal forms through sympathetic resonance 
                                                           
8 Hesiod: 55-56, lines 986-992. 
9 For a classical reference to the relationship of Phaeton with the planet Jupiter, see 
Cicero: 2.20. 
10 Plato, Timaeus 41e; Phaedrus 246a. 
11 On the soul as sphere, see Critchlow: 7. 
12 Plato, Timaeus: 42e-44a. 
13 Unreferenced passage in Critchlow: 12. 
14 Critchlow: 15. 

Chapter Fifteen 
 
248
because they are made in their image.15 These patterns then act as mediators 
between the divine intellect and human senses, and are given visible or 
audible form as universal or cultural-specific archetypal images. The sphere 
is the most perfect of these eide, being reflected poetically in the perceived 
shape of the cosmos itself, and the planetary motions within it. This is why 
for Plato, the very beginnings of philosophy occur in the contemplation of 
the perfection of the visible heavens, as the soul seeks to become aligned 
with its proportions and awake to its own former sphericality, so that it may 
rotate in harmony with the world soul.16 
At this point I should remind the reader that when evoking the “reality” 
of a dimension beyond the sensory, esoteric philosophy speaks in a 
metaphoric voice, recognising that the ability to grasp the meaning of a 
poetic or symbolic image is an essential process in the soul’s cognitive 
journey beyond discursive thinking.17 This is not easy to capture in an 
academic discourse, but perhaps it can be done through a kind of hybrid 
writing which continually refers the objective or outer form of the event to 
both an inner sense of its noetic significance and its lived reality, or as 
McGilchrist would put it, to the “bigger picture” facilitated by right brain 
hemisphere understanding.18 
The French historian of religion Henry Corbin’s articulation of the 
mundus imaginalis as an “inter-world” corresponding to and entered into 
by the creative imagination as a faculty of perception is relevant here, as it 
provides a context for the reality of non-physical phenomena, which 
neither reduces them to the status of material substance (such as tables and 
chairs) nor elevates them to transcendent principles beyond the direct 
experience of human beings. This medial world is “A world as 
ontologically real as the world of the senses and the world of the intellect, 
a world that requires a faculty of perception belonging to it, a faculty that 
is a cognitive function, a noetic value, as fully real as the faculties of 
sensory perception or intellectual intuition. This faculty is the imaginative 
power.”19 
Corbin was writing from within the framework of Sufism, which 
derived the recognition of the imagination as cognitive from the later 
                                                           
15 See Critchlow: 25. 
16 See for example Plato, Epinomis: 986c-d; Plato, Timaeus: 47a-d. 
17 On metaphor and symbol as the language of sacred knowledge, see Barth; 
Chittick 2007, Corbin 1999; Needleman: chap.1; Versluis: Introduction. 
18 See McGilchrist, e.g. 191, 195, 199, 208. It is interesting to note a resonance 
between the Platonic divisions of “rational” and “intellectual” knowledge and the 
functions of the left and right brain hemispheres as researched by McGilchrist. 
19 Corbin 1999: 5. 

Fireflies and Shooting Stars 
249 
neoplatonists, and it was they who connected it directly to the “subtle 
body” and daimonic activity.20 So let us now explore this further. In 
esoteric traditions, the soul’s vehicle or “subtle body” is traditionally 
divided into two kinds, which merge into each other as the vehicle 
becomes increasingly purified of material elements. These two vehicles 
are the pneumatic (sometimes called etheric or spirit body) and the 
celestial or luminous (sometimes called the astral body).21 According to 
Aristotle, the former (the soma pneumatikon) is not elemental, but is of a 
rarer, finer quintessence, moving in a circular fashion and taking the image 
of the physical body when it descends; it is “analogous to the element 
comprising the stars”.22 The seventh century CE Alexandrian Philophonus 
suggests that the soma pneumatikon can make itself visible through setting 
its own imagination in movement, and according to G.R.S. Mead, this 
would explain visions of ghosts.23 With the help of “daimonic co-
operation,”24 it may also disappear at will, becoming absorbed back into 
its non-material essence. Porphyry is the earliest philosopher to link 
imagination and pneumatic vehicle,25 but the most succinct connection is 
made by Synesius (365-c.430 CE) in his treatise De insomniis. Synesius 
suggests that it is the pneuma which “brings the imagination into play” as 
a kind of “common sense” which is of a higher order of cognition than 
sense-perception.26 This phantastikon pneuma must be kept pure through 
ritual activity, as it comprises the “borderland between reason and 
                                                           
20 See sources in fn.7, also Addey 2012; Cocking: ch.3; George; Mead: 56-81; 
Shaw 2010. 
21 I follow Mead here, who derives the doctrine of the duality of the subtle body 
from the Western esoteric tradition as formalised by the Theosophy of Helena 
Blavatsky and Anthroposophy of Rudolf Steiner (34-37); but the essential 
distinction between the two forms is of neoplatonic origin. Proclus suggests two 
soul vehicles, one immortal, the other temporary, surviving death but not immortal 
(in In Timaeum and Elements of Theology; see Addey 2010: 5, Finamore: 86). On 
Porphyry’s and Iamblichus’ notions of the soul-vehicle and their differences see 
Addey 2010; Finamore: 11-32. 
22 Aristotle, On the Generation of Animals 73b. 35-39 (see Addey 2010: 2). The 
subtle body is not associated with the daimon or the imagination until Porphyry 
and Synesius: for Aristotle, the personal daimon communicates the “first 
principles” of knowledge to the mind before they are taken up by the reason, and it 
binds the soul to the body as it descends (Analytica Posteriora A3, B19: see 
Dillon: 4; Critchlow: 32; Finamore: 2). For Aristotle on imagination see White: ch. 
1. 
23 Mead: 49. 
24 Philoponus’ Commentary on Aristotle’s De anima 19 24 ff. in Mead: 48. 
25 See George: 78; Watson: 103-109. 
26 Synesius, De insomniis 7, 135, in Mead: 69. 

Chapter Fifteen 
 
250
unreason, between body and the bodiless […] by its means things divine 
are joined with lowest things.” He adds that “therefore it is difficult for its 
nature to be comprehended by philosophy”,27 if by “philosophy” is meant 
rational enquiry alone. Intimations again of Corbin’s mundus imaginalis as 
an order of reality where spiritual essence takes on visual form, entered via 
altered states of consciousness such as dreams and waking visions.28 
Furthermore, Synesius associates this imaginative essence with the 
daimons, who are “supplied with their substance by this mode of life”.29 
They add imagination to human thought, and may even “take on the 
appearance of happenings” which implies that they can become visible as 
events in the world.30 The ultimate destiny of the daimonic soul is to 
become absorbed into the pure radiant light of the divine realm, but on the 
way it may assume a variety of coverings or vehicles, from the gross and 
quasi-material (i.e. misty) to the luminous.31 
The astroeides or luminous body seems to be a more direct and purer 
manifestation of divine essence than the pneuma. In Plutarch’s (46-120 
CE) “Myth of Timarchus”, a colourful narrative about an after-death 
journey, Timarchus is shown a vision of discarnate human souls by a spirit 
guide. He sees many star-like lights hovering around an abyss, falling into 
it from above, and shooting up into it from below. His guide confirms that 
these are “the daimons themselves”, and tells him: 
In the stars that are apparently extinguished […] you see the souls that sink 
entirely into the body; in the stars that are lighted again […] you see the 
souls that float back from the body after death, shaking off a sort of 
dimness and darkness as one might shake off mud; while the stars that 
move about on high are the daemons of men said to “possess 
understanding”[…] hearing this, [Timarchus] attended more carefully and 
saw that the stars bobbed about, some more, some less, like the corks we 
observe riding on the sea to mark nets.32 
For Plutarch then, the highest part of the soul, the intuitive understanding, 
does not mingle with the body but is “like a buoy attached to the top, 
floating on the surface in contact with the man’s head, while he is as it 
were submerged in the depths”. However, raising the problematic question 
                                                           
27 Synesius 137a, in Mead: 71. 
28 See Corbin 1977. Synesius also suggests the identity of dream-images with the 
afterlife state of the soul at 137d (Mead: 72-73). 
29 Synesius 137b, in Mead: 71-72. 
30 Synesius 137b, in Mead: 72.  
31 Synesius 141c-142a, in Mead: 80-81. 
32 Plutarch: 471-3. 

Fireflies and Shooting Stars 
251 
of whether this daimonic intelligence is “inside” or “outside” the soul, 
Plutarch says that those “who take it to be within themselves, as they take 
reflected objects to be in the mirrors that reflect them” are mistaken, but 
that those “who conceive the matter rightly call it a daemon, as being 
external”.33 
Plato had in fact raised this very question of the ambiguous ontological 
status of the daimon, and Plutarch would have found his source for 
daimon-as-intelligence in the nous-daimon of the Timaeus (90 a-c): “God 
gave the sovereign part of the human soul to be the divinity of each one, 
being that part which, as we say, dwells at the top of the body, and 
inasmuch as we are a plant not of an earthly but of a heavenly growth, 
raises us from earth to our kindred who are in heaven.” But in the Phaedo 
(107d) and the Laws (713c-d) the daimon is seen more as a separate entity 
or guide to the afterlife, a superior being or guardian spirit. Socrates’ 
daimon can be seen to have elements of both, manifesting as a voice which 
is both “other” and yet also as his own moral nature.34 The author of the 
Platonic Epinomis characterises the daimons as “external” elemental 
creatures, visible because they mainly partake of fire, although they also 
contain varying portions of earth, air and water. These daimons, he says, 
are “the divine host of the stars”.35 We find the same image used by 
Plotinus (204/5-270 CE), who likens the daimons’ relationship to the gods 
to “the radiance around every star”.36 He also takes up Plato’s theme of the 
duality of the daimonic; on the one hand he refers to celestial daimonic 
intelligences which straddle the divine and human realms: “we say that 
they are eternal next after the gods, but already inclining towards us, 
between the gods and our race.”37 Yet on the other, he asks “are they the 
trace left by each soul when it enters the universe?”38 suggesting that they 
comprise the intellect, the highest part of the soul, that which remains 
undescended from its divine origin. In Enneads III “on the tutelary 
daimon” he explains: 
One must think that there is a universe in our soul, not only an intelligible 
one but an arrangement like in form to that of the soul of the world: so, as 
that too, is distributed according to its diverse powers into the sphere of the 
fixed stars and those of the moving stars, the powers in our soul also are of 
like form to these powers, and there is an activity proceeding from each 
                                                           
33 Plutarch: 471. 
34 See Allen 1998: 131. 
35 Plato, 1517-1533: 908. 
36 Plotinus: III.5.6. 
37 Plotinus: III.5.6. 
38 Plotinus: III.5.6. 

Chapter Fifteen 
 
252
power, and when the souls are set free they come there to the star which is 
in harmony with their character and power which lived and worked in 
them; and each will have a god of this kind as a guardian spirit, either the 
star itself or the god set above this power.39 
The soul’s daimonic powers are then analogous to the powers in the 
cosmos, yet they also have an aspect which is experienced as “other”, a 
guardian principle which helps us to fulfil our destiny. Damascius (458-
c.538 CE) describes the stellar power of the soul as “a certain radiant 
vehicle, star-like and eternal [which is] securely shut away in this gross 
body”.40 This light-filled body, in the theurgic rituals of later Platonists, 
becomes the means by which the soul may ascend to the god and achieve 
deification.41 Iamblichus (250-325 CE) preferred to think of the daimon as 
partaking of a superior order to the human soul, beyond the intellect, 
whose powers are invoked during theurgic ritual.42 We should refer at this 
point to the source of Iamblichean theurgy, the Chaldean Oracles of the 
early centuries CE, which describe ritual practices directed towards the 
freeing of the soul of the initiate from his or her body and its elevation to 
the “heart of the sun” as a metaphor for achieving divine consciousness.43 
Many extant fragments dwell on the fiery manifestation of spiritual 
energy; for example, “a lightning bolt, sweeping along, obscures the 
flower of fire as it leaps into the hollow of the worlds;”44 the Twice-
Transcendent deity sows “lights which are set free” in the world;45 the 
purified soul “shines as an angel”;46 “on all sides, the reins of fire extend 
from the unformed soul”;47 and after an invocation, “You will either see a 
fire, similar to a child, extended by bounds over the billow of air, or you 
will see a formless fire, from which a voice is sent forth, or you will see a 
sumptuous light rushing like a spiral around the field”.48 
                                                           
39 Plotinus: III.4.6. 
40 In the lost Life of Isidorus, Mead: 60, n.2.  
41 See Addey 2010; Finamore; Shaw 2007, 2010; Uzdavinys: ch.5. 
42 On the nature and theurgic function of the daimon see Iamblichus Dm: II.1-10, 
IX; Clarke: 107-111; Dillon 2001; Shaw 1995: 131-142. 
43 See Majercik fr.115, Uzdavinys: 115-118.  
44 Proclus, In Timaeum 1.451, Majercik fr.34. 
45 Anecd. Oxon., III, 182, Majercik fr.125. 
46 Proclus, In rem p. II, 154, Majercik fr.137. 
47 Psellus PG 122, Majercik fr.127. 
48 Proclus In remp 1.iii, Majercik fr.146. This fragment has interesting resonances 
with contemporary crop circle light phenomena, where bright lights have been seen 
flying in circular motion around wheat fields. 

Fireflies and Shooting Stars 
253 
For Iamblichus, as for Synesius, the power of affective concentration is 
required to harness the soul’s fiery vehicle and reform its spherical 
integrity, for it becomes ever more material as it descends into the body 
and this process must be reversed.49 The question of how an individual’s 
desire or focussed attention may provide psychic energy for spiritual 
epiphanies is hardly discussed today, and yet it was central to the Platonic 
theory of eros as a magical, connective power, harnessed through the 
“intention of the imagination” as Ficino would put it.50 Iamblichus 
associates the soul’s eternal aetheric vehicle (the ochema) with the 
phantasia, and remarks that it is prayer which facilitates the alignment of 
the soul with its higher or divine nature: “our ochema is made spherical 
and is moved circularly whenever the soul is especially assimilated to 
nous.”51 It then becomes like the subtle body of the god, which “is utterly 
liberated from any centripetal or centrifugal tendency because it has 
neither tendency or because it is moved in a circle.”52 During the theurgic 
ritual of photogogia, the soul’s subtle body became illuminated and 
revealed the presence of the god via the imagination: “Photogogia 
somehow illuminates with divine light the aethereal and luminous vehicle 
of the soul, from which divine vision, set in motion by the gods, take 
possession of our imaginative power” says Iamblichus.53 This can happen 
either through the presence of the gods in the soul, or through the shining 
of a light onto the soul, again raising the question of the internal or 
external provenance of daimonic energy.54 
                                                           
49 See Iamblichus, In Timaeum, Majercik fr.49: “[The sphere] is both itself one and 
capable of containing multiplicity, which indeed makes it truly divine”, quoted in 
Shaw 1999: 134. Shaw describes the sphere as “the hieroglyph—of the One itself”. 
50 See Ficino 1989: 351,353,355. Ficino refers to the Arabic astrologers and magi 
as being experts in the art of magical attraction through the powers of imagination. 
The idea of love as the supreme magician, attracting through affinity, is found in 
his De amore VI.10. See also Couliano: part II. Note also the etymology of the 
word “desire”, from de-sidere (lat.), “from the star or constellation”, implying that 
our deepest desire is connected to the stars.  
51 Iamblichus In Timaeum frag. 49, 13-15 trans. Shaw 2010: 11. 
52 Iamblichus On the Mysteries [Dm] V.4. trans. Shaw 2010: 10. See also 
Damascius “it is certain that the circular figure is common to all the intellectual 
gods as intellectual” in Shaw 1999: 134. 
53 Iamblichus Dm: III.14. See also Finamore, 1985, Shaw 2010, Addey 2012, 
George. 
54 Iamblichus Dm III.14. See Shaw 2011: 13-15; Uzdavinys: 168-171 on the nature 
of divine or “super-celestial” light and its perception via the soul’s luminous 
vehicle. 

Chapter Fifteen 
 
254
What kind of lights are manifested to human sight in these rituals? 
Iamblichus gives us a detailed taxonomy of spirit-beings, their hierarchies 
extending up from human souls through material and sublunary archons, 
heroes and daimons, to angels, archangels and gods.55 Each will be 
accompanied by a light whose intensity is mediated by their degree of 
materiality;56 thus gods’ lights are unchanging, “flashing forth with an 
indivisible and inexpressible fire”. Archangels are similar to gods, being 
“full of supernatural light”; angels have a more “divided” light, whereas 
daimons “appear to the view at different times in different forms, the same 
forms appearing great and small”. They “glow with smouldering fire” 
which can be “expressed in speech”, and which “does not exceed the 
power of vision of those who are capable of viewing superior beings”. The 
Heroes’ light is apparently similar to the daimonic, whereas the cosmic 
archons produce a pure fire and the material ones a murkier light. Human 
souls appear as “fitfully visible” as they are heavily soiled by the “realm of 
generation”. Now we should pay attention to Iamblichus’ assertion that 
such lights are visible only to those who have developed the degree of 
imaginal vision which conforms to them. For as these subtle light bodies 
do not mingle or participate in matter, they are not “seen” in the same way 
as living bodies.57 However, their light may be conducted in ritual activity 
through sunlight, moonlight, air or aether, symbolic objects and 
incantations, water, or on a wall prepared by sacred inscriptions. In such 
instances, Iamblichus describes the light as “from without”, serving the 
will and intelligence of the gods.58 Yet it is clear that it is also the soul’s 
imaginative faculty which perceives the light as a supernatural energy, 
although it can also observe it “as if” it is an objective phenomenon—the 
corollary being that sense-perception alone would simply see light with no 
understanding of its provenance. This epistemological subtlety is 
explained more clearly by Proclus (412-485 CE), who points out that: 
[…] the gods themselves are incorporeal, but since those who see them 
possess bodies, the visions which issue from the gods to worthy recipients 
possess a certain quality from the gods who send them but also have 
something connatural with those who see them. This is why the gods are 
seen yet not seen at all. In fact, those who see the gods witness them in the 
                                                           
55 Iamblichus Dm II.3; also, see Proclus In Alcibiades 71-77 on 6 levels of daimons 
and their functions (Dillon 2001: 8-9). See also Plaisance on the ambiguous status 
of Iamblichus’ archons. 
56 Iamblichus Dm II.4-5. 
57 Iamblichus Dm 11.4-5; see Clarke: ch. 6. 
58 Iamblichus Dm II.4. 

Fireflies and Shooting Stars 
255 
luminous garments of their souls. The point is, they are often seen when 
the eyes are shut.59 (my italics) 
I would agree with Proclus that this is exactly the point. To assume a 
“bottom line” of objective, sense-perceptible truth about anomalous lights 
means that any further directly intuitive or imaginative interpretation is 
rendered “untrue” or fanciful, whereas from the neoplatonic perspective, 
such an assumption is the result of limited perceptual capacity, unable (or 
unwilling) to “tune in” to a more subtle visionary potential. As Leonard 
George has elegantly put it, “the truth sought beyond extension and shape 
hides within the extended and shaped geometric objects of imagination”.60 
This is where neoplatonic thinking diverges radically from physical 
science, being based on the principle of adaequatio or similitude between 
knower and what is known. The question becomes, as Shaw observes, not 
what one sees, but how one sees, for the presence of the gods “reveals the 
incorporeal as corporeal to the eyes of the soul by means of the eyes of the 
body”.61  
Visual perception for Iamblichus can be of three kinds, divinely 
inspired, imaginative or sensual. The imagination may receive images 
from both the sensory and intellectual powers of the soul, and indeed an 
image may be transferred from the imaginative vehicle to the sense organ 
in order to “mould the incoming sensory image” and enhance its 
perception.62 It is true that in Iamblichean theurgy, supernatural powers are 
revealed through and in nature, in symbolic objects, audible and visual 
images—in other words, in matter.63 Indeed Iamblichus tells us that the 
fullest divine revelations include both intellectual and physical 
perception—as George puts it, “the higher imaginative faculty adds a 
theophanic dimension to the lower faculty’s sense image, resulting in a 
more complete perception of the object’s true nature.”64 Shaw has also 
convincingly argued for the fully embodied life of the theurgist, for whom 
the light of superior beings is revealed to his or her bodily vision whilst 
simultaneously kindling an inner “enlightenment” which will eventually 
lead to the practitioner’s own realisation of their own divine nature.65 
So where do our excursions into neoplatonic daimonology lead us? I 
would argue that there are profound implications here for our understanding 
                                                           
59 Proclus In Remp 1.39, 5-17, in Shaw 2010: 24. 
60 George: 80. 
61 Shaw 2010: 14, Iamblichus Dm II.6.  
62 George: 79.  
63 Iamblichus Dm 65 7-8, 23; Shaw 2007. 
64 Iamblichus Dm III.2; George: 81. 
65 Shaw 1999: 130; 2010. 

Chapter Fifteen 
 
256
of paranormal visions, through recognising that imaginal and sensory 
modes of perception are not mutually exclusive but simply different 
registers along a spectrum of frequencies. Indeed it is possible that what 
one person perceives via their purified ochema will remain invisible to 
another whose imagination is not so finely tuned, so it is rarely a clear-cut 
case of reality or illusion. 
Moving now to the Renaissance revival of neoplatonic metaphysics 
and magic, we find the Florentine magus Marsilio Ficino (1433-99) 
incorporating elements of both contemplative and theurgic neoplatonism 
in his understanding of the daimonic element in humans and the cosmos. 
In Ficino’s Christian Platonism, the good daimons become God’s 
messengers and guides, helping us “by means of prophetic signs, omens, 
dreams, oracles, voices, sacrifices and divine inspiration”.66 As Michael 
Allen has remarked, Ficino’s commentary on Plato’s Apology contains his 
most detailed analysis of daimonic activity,67 although we also find 
considerable speculation on their nature in his commentaries on Plotinus 
and in his treatise on astral magic, De vita coelitus comparanda. In the 
first of these texts, Ficino posits three kinds of spiritual intelligence: 
elemental daimons, celestial spirits within the cosmos (i.e. planetary 
deities), and supercelestial spirits or angels. Both the latter he says are 
called gods by the “ancient theologians”.68 The daimons are subject to the 
planetary gods and dwell in the elementary spheres, mediating the 
planetary gifts to the human soul in Ficino’s system of natural magic.69 
The first two categories are visible, the last invisible, and both here and in 
his commentary on Plotinus’ Ennead III, Ficino assigns the daimons 
primarily to the element of air, whereas pure fire is more characteristic of 
gods. The daimons of the upper, fiery air preside over contemplation of 
sublime things, the daimons of pure air preside over reason and the active 
life, and the daimons of watery air preside over the sensual and vegetative 
powers of nature.70 Each of these then also corresponds with a human 
cognitive faculty: fiery air with the intellect or intuitive understanding, 
pure air with reason and smoky or vapour-laden air with imagination and 
sense-perception—and it will be through these corresponding modes that 
they will be perceived: 
                                                           
66 Ficino, “Argument for the Apology” in Allen 1998: 204. 
67 Allen 1998: 131-2; his translation of Ficino’s argumentum is at 202-208. 
68 Ficino, “Argument for the Apology” in Allen 1998: 202. 
69 Ficino 1989. 
70 Ficino 2000; see also Allen 1998: 135. 

Fireflies and Shooting Stars 
257 
If we live according to the imagination, our outer daimon is an airy one: it 
is a daimon which belongs to the lower region of the air and which, by 
acting on our imagination, forcefully propels our soul by means of its own 
imagining. If, however, we live according to reason, our outer daimon 
which belongs to the middle region of the air, drives human reason with its 
own reasoning. Finally, if our life is intellectual, a daimon belonging to the 
highest region of the air assists our intellect by means of its intellectual 
activity.71 
What, then, on the visibility of these entities? Ficino describes them as 
spherical, moving in circular motion as the “stars of the sphere of air”, 
emitting rays which, he says, the magician knows how to make visible in 
thickened air—air, that is, which may be filled with the smoke of incense 
in invocatory rituals.72 So yet again we find the paradoxical yet intrinsic 
relationship between inner and outer aspects of the daimonic. Ficino tends 
to emphasise the externality of the daimon (“our daimon and genius is not 
only, as is thought, our intellect, but a numinous being”),73 suggesting that 
it communicates by imprinting meaning on the imagination by means of 
perceptible rays.74 However he also acknowledges that “what imagines in 
us is in some respect a daimon.”75 This imagination is powerful enough to 
imprint images which it receives from noetic sources into the world of the 
senses, and in the Platonic Theology we find a passage which re-iterates 
Proclus’ concern with the dangers of confusing these projected images 
with those which arise from the material world: 
For the most part, the phantasy, which most guides the way we live our 
life, is so intent that with the sharpest gaze it ponders its own images 
within itself. These intensely envisioned images blaze out to the common 
sense, which we call in the Platonic manner the imagination, and beyond to 
the lower senses and the spirit. But it is common to claim that this image 
shining back in the senses and in the spirit is a reality. For people who are 
awake say that they see a man when they turn to the image of a man 
flickering in their senses. Similarly people who are asleep say that they see 
a man when an image of him shines out from the phantasy preserving it 
and passes through the imagination into the sense and the spirit.76 
                                                           
71 Ficino 2000: 1708. 
72 Allen 1995: 79-81. In his sermon “The Star of the Magi” Ficino suggests that the 
star is in fact a comet made of air condensed by the Angel Gabriel (Ficino 2006b). 
73 Ficino 2000: 515; see Allen 1995: 64n; Allen 1998: 143.  
74 Ficino 2000: 1708. 
75 Ficino, Commentary on Plato’s Sophist quoted in Allen 1989: 270. 
76 Ficino 2004: ch. XIII, 151. 

Chapter Fifteen 
 
258
There is a difference then between a visual image which is only an outward 
representation, and an image which maintains an identity with the noetic 
realm sown deep within the soul, and whose meaning arises from the 
recognition of this very consubstantiality.77 This is precisely why the daimon 
is simultaneously without and within the psyche. As the sixteenth century 
physician Paracelsus puts it, “[man] can be understood only as an image of 
the macrocosm […] only then does it become manifest what is in him. For 
what is outside is also inside, and what is outside man is not inside.”78 Or 
Corbin, on the truth of all knowledge as the soul’s knowledge of itself: 
In contrast to representative knowledge, which is knowledge of the abstract 
or logical universal, what is in question is presential, unitive, intuitive 
knowledge […] a presential illumination which the soul, as a being of 
light, causes to shine upon its object. By making herself present to herself, 
the soul also makes the object present to her […] the truth of all objective 
knowledge is thus nothing more nor less than the awareness which the 
knowing subject has of itself.79 
We are talking here of the kind of knowledge aroused by the symbolic or 
archetypal image, and it is this possibility of a visible entity pointing to a 
participatory (and not merely subjective) meaning through the 
engagement of the imagination which poses a challenge to empirical or 
scientific investigations into the paranormal. 
In an interesting passage from a sermon on Colossians 3, Ficino speaks 
of the possibility of manifesting the soul’s luminous subtle body to human 
sight. Christ, he says, decided to reveal his spiritual body “by containing 
his own rays so that they do not shine forth too copiously, or by 
strengthening the rays of the man who is gazing upon him.” He has the 
ability to “shape the ambient air in his own image to the extent he pleases; 
and in this shape he can adjust himself to the onlooker”.80 In his Epitome 
to Plato’s Sixth Letter, Ficino refers to the diaphanous angelic body, which 
can emit light from within and without,81 and in his Platonic Theology he 
refers to the innate spherical shape of the luminous or celestial body which 
                                                           
77 See Giglioni 2010 for the Renaissance development of the Platonic distinction 
between mimetic and icastic art. Proclus developed a sophisticated theory of 
symbolic perception as a theurgic process, contrasting mere resemblance with 
sympathetic resonance and ultimately identity of image and referent. See Struck: 
227-253, Voss 2006b. 
78 Quoted in Jacobi: 21. 
79 Corbin 1993: 210. 
80 Ficino 2000: 481-2, quoted in Allen 1998: 140 n.40. 
81 Ficino 2000: 1534, see Allen 140 n.40. 

Fireflies and Shooting Stars 
259 
transforms itself into the human shape of the aetheric body upon 
incarnation.82 To transform the aetheric back into the celestial requires, it 
would seem, attention to the daimonic voices which speak through our 
symbolic imagination via poetic metaphor, synchronicities and 
demonstrations of luminosity, and which were cultivated by Ficino through 
his practices of astral, musical and talismanic magic.83 
For the remainder of this essay, I want to draw some parallels between 
these pre-modern understandings of daimonic manifestation and 
contemporary eye-witness accounts of anomalous lights, bearing in mind 
the arguments I have outlined above for their “existence” in a very real, 
but non-quantifiable, ontological field. Firstly, I was struck by the 
descriptions of disembodied souls in Michael Newton’s accounts of his 
life between lives therapeutic sessions.84 In this hypnosis work, individuals 
are put into deep trance and experience what Newton purports to be the 
life of their disembodied soul in between particular incarnations. In this 
liminal place, they observe the following strange entities: “blobs of 
energy”,85 “half-formed human shapes”,86 “myriads of sharp star lights”,87 
“patches of light bobbing around”,88 and “bunches of moving lights 
buzzing around as fireflies”.89 Remarkably similar to Timarchus’ vision of 
the daimons, and seemingly dependent on the accessing of a level of 
awareness beyond the conscious mind. Newton however appears 
somewhat immune to the symbolic significance of what his clients report, 
preferring a tone of apparent objectivity as if the spirit world can be 
considered to be of the same ontological status as our own—a problem we 
encounter in much “new age” literature.90 
This becomes even more of an issue when we consider the appearance 
of strange lights on digital photographs. What appears to be a common 
image is that of a misty spherical object filled with a “snake” pattern and 
with a central nucleus, claimed by many to be a “spirit orb” which is 
usually invisible to the naked eye. The scientific explanation for such an 
anomaly is that “in digital cameras the distance between the lens and flash 
                                                           
82 Ficino 2006a: XVIII.4, 105. 
83 Ficino 1989. See also Ficino, “Letter to Cosimo” in Voss 2006: 59-60; Allen 
1995; Walker. On Ficino’s astrological music therapy see e.g. Voss 2007. 
84 See Newton 2004, 2006. 
85 Newton 1994: 31. 
86 Newton 1994: 72. 
87 Newton 1994: 72. 
88 Newton 1994: 75. 
89 Newton 1994: 98. 
90 On the question of the “literality” of Newton’s client’s visions, see Voss 2010: 
215 n.12. 

Chapter Fifteen 
 
260
has decreased causing a decrease in the angle of light reflection that 
increases the chance of catching sub-visible particles”,91 these particles 
being dust or moisture. However, psychics and mediums claim that these 
orbs are genuine signs of spirit energy. One medium explains: “orbs 
usually appear as spheres of light, they can appear as tiny flashing 
pinpoints of light as they move.”92 They are often accompanied by mists 
or smoky wisps and can develop into full-blown apparitions: “these mists 
can sometimes show the actual shape and form of the person manifesting”. 
The psychic explanation is that light entities result from the expenditure of 
energy as spiritual or daimonic intelligences attempt to become visible in 
the physical world. Again, not so different perhaps from Ficino’s 
speculation about the “airy daimons” making their presence observable in 
the thickened air of clouds or smoke. Now according to the neoplatonic 
model, there is no reason why such “sub-visible particles” should not be 
both the result of a camera fault and also the manifestation of imaginal 
entities made visible to certain states of consciousness in certain 
conditions, for physical analysis does not cancel out supra-physical 
domains of enquiry, it simply constitutes one mode of investigation. 
One of the most well-documented experiments in psychic communication 
took place in the Norfolk village of Scole from 1993-8, known as the 
Scole Experiment.93 Here, participants witnessed an extraordinary array of 
anomalous phenomena, from images imprinted on photographic film to 
apports and moving lights. One witness reports: 
Suddenly, the room began to be filled with spirit lights that can be best 
described in size and appearance as resembling fireflies with constant 
illumination. At times, these bluish-white lights would hover in front of 
spectators, and at other times, they would travel across the floor and appear 
to climb up the table in the centre of the room and fly up through the 
rafters of the garage […] a light flew from above the spectators’ heads and 
across from the Scole team and touched the index finger of my right hand. 
I was incredulous. I could feel the light physically touch me and could 
plainly see that it was not a fibre-optic cord or light projection, but rather a 
self-contained sphere of bluish-white light of indeterminate source.94 
The lights are furthermore described as “resembling shooting stars”, as 
darting around at great speed and performing elaborate dances “including 
perfect, sustained circles executed at high velocity”, entering crystals as 
                                                           
91 Rachel Keene at www.rachelkeene.net (accessed November 2012). 
92 Rachel Keene at www.rachelkeene.net (accessed November 2012). 
93 See Solomon. 
94 www.thescoleexperiment.com/book_01.htm (November 2012). 

Fireflies and Shooting Stars 
261 
small points of light, striking audibly the top of a table, alighting on 
witnesses’ bodies, moving in time to music, producing “lightning flashes”, 
changing shape and moving at high speed in perfect geometric patterns. 
Perhaps more akin to the fiery luminous vehicle than the spirit orbs, which 
could be seen as more airy or etheric, these lights appear to be autonomous 
and dynamic, not to say daimonic.95 
To conclude, I will attempt to summarise the problem raised in this 
brief excursion into the perception of daimonic intelligences as visible 
lights, which is that of discriminating between epistemological modes. I 
would suggest that we could take a cue from neoplatonism and reinstate 
the understanding of the active or creative imagination as the appropriate 
faculty for perceiving and recognising dimensions of being beyond our 
sense perceptible reality. This would require researchers to move beyond 
quantifiable paradigms to uncover an inner resonance with the “supra-
rational” nature of the material they are studying. Neoplatonism provides a 
rigorous theoretical framework for the relationship between our imaginal 
capacity and “supernatural” events. It also promotes a participatory model 
of “co-creation” in relation to such events, which removes them from the 
arena of external objectivity and situates them in a dynamic mesocosm 
between the human and divine realms of time and eternity, of spatiality 
and imagination.96 In this place, a strange light may be both explicable in 
rational terms, and yet also point to a mysterious “other”—a daimonic 
presence which may only be revealed as such through a radical shift in the 
researcher’s cognitive register. 
Bibliography 
Addey, C. (2012) “In the Light of the Sphere: The Vehicle of the Soul and 
Subtle Body Practices in Neoplatonism” in G. Samuel & J. Johnston 
(eds) Religion and the Subtle Body in Asia and the West: Between 
Mind and Body (London: Routledge) ch. 9. 
Addey, T. (2002) “Myth, the final phase of Platonic Education” 
www.prometheustrust.co.uk/html/myth_-_philosophy.html 
(accessed November 2012). 
                                                           
95 It should be noted that flashing, darting orbs of light are also often witnessed at 
crop formations, reported  both by believers in non-human agency and by human 
circle makers. 
www.bibliotecapleyades.net/circulos_cultivos/esp_circuloscultivos21.htm 
(accessed November 2012). 
96 On the notion of “co-creation” as a methodology see Ferrer & Sherman: 
Introduction. 

Chapter Fifteen 
 
262
Allen, M. J. B. (1989) Icastes: Marsilio Ficino’s Commentary on Plato’s 
Sophist (University of California Press). 
—. (1995) “Summoning Plotinus: Ficino, Smoke and the Strangled 
Chickens” in Plato’s Third Eye: Studies in the Metaphysics of Marsilio 
Ficino (Aldershot: Variorum), ch. XIV.  
—. (1998) “Socrates and the Daemonic Voice of Conscience” in Synoptic 
Art: Marsilio Ficino on the history of Platonic interpretation 
(Florence: Olschki), ch. IV. 
Apuleius (1984) On the God of Socrates trans. T. Taylor (Edmonds, WA: 
Alexandrian Press). 
Barth, J. R. (1977) “Symbol as Sacrament” in Coleridge and the Romantic 
Tradition (Princeton: Princeton University Press) 3-21. 
Cardoso, A. (2010) Electronic Voices (Winchester: O Books). 
Chittick, W. (1989) The Sufi Path of Knowledge: Ibn ‘Arabi’s 
Metaphysics of Imagination (Albany, New York: SUNY Press). 
—. (2007) Science of the Cosmos, Science of the Soul: The Pertinence of 
Islamic Cosmology in the Modern World (Oxford: One World). 
Clarke, E. C. (2001) Iamblichus’ De Mysteriis: A Manifesto of the 
Miraculous (Farnham: Ashgate). 
Cocking, J. M. (1991) Imagination: A Study in the History of Ideas 
(London: Routledge). 
Cooper, C. (2012) Telephone Calls from the Dead (Old Portsmouth: 
Tricorn Books). 
Corbin, H. (1972) “Mundus Imaginalis or the Imaginary and the 
Imaginal”, Spring Journal (Zurich) 1-13. 
—. (1997) Alone with the Alone: Creative Imagination in the Sufism of Ibn 
‘Arabi (Princeton: Princeton University Press). 
—. (1993) History of Islamic Philosophy (London: Routledge). 
Critchlow, K. (1985) The Soul as Sphere and Androgyne (Ipwich: 
Golgonooza Press). 
Devereux, P. (1989) Earth Lights Revelation: UFOs and Mystery 
Lightform Phenomena: the Earth’s Secret Energy Force (London: 
Blandford Press). 
Dillon, J. (1986) “Plotinus and the Transcendental Imagination” in James 
P. Mackey (ed.) Religious Imagination (Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press) 55-64. 
—. (2001) “Iamblichus on the Personal Daemon”, The Ancient World no. 
32/1, 3-9. 
Ferrer, J. N. (2002) Revisioning Transpersonal Theory (Albany, New 
York: SUNY Press). 

Fireflies and Shooting Stars 
263 
Ferrer, J. N. & J. H. Sherman (eds) (2008) The Participatory Turn: 
Spirituality, Mysticism, Religious Studies (New York: SUNY Press). 
Ficino, Marsilio (2000) Opera omnia, 2 vols (Basle/Paris: Phenix 
Editions). 
—. (1989) “De vita coelitus comparanda” in Three Books on Life, C. 
Kaske & J. Clark (eds) (Binghamton, New York: Society of 
Renaissance Studies) Book III. 
—. (2004) Platonic Theology M.J.B. Allen & J. Hankins (eds) vol. IV 
(Harvard: I Tatti Renaissance Library). 
—. (2006a) Platonic Theology M.J. B. Allen & J. Hankins (eds) vol. VI 
(Harvard: I Tatti Renaissance Library). 
—. (2006b) “The Star of the Magi” trans. T. Moore, in A. Voss (ed.) 
Marsilio Ficino (Berkeley: North Atlantic Books) 95-105. 
Finamore, J. F. (1985) Iamblichus and the Theory of the Vehicle of the 
Soul (Chico, California: Scholars Press). 
Giglioni, G. (2010) “The Matter of the Imagination: The Renaissance 
Debate over Icastic and Fantastic Imitation”, Camenae no. 8, 1-21. 
—. (2011) “Coping with Inner and Outer Demons: Marsilio Ficino’s 
Theory of the Imagination” in Diseases of the Imagination and 
Imaginary Disease in the Early Modern Period, Y. Haskell (ed.) 
(Turnhout: Brepols) 19-51. 
George, L. (2010) ‘Iamblichus and the Esoteric perception of Nature’ in 
Esotericism, Religion and Nature A. Versluis et al. (eds) (North 
American Academic Press), 73-88. 
Harpur, P. (1995) Daimonic Reality: A Field Guide to the Other World 
(Ravensdale: Pine Winds Press). 
Harvey, J. (2007) Photography and Spirit (London: Reaktion Books) 
Hesiod (1973) “Theogony” in Hesiod and Theognis trans. D. Wender 
(London: Penguin Classics). 
Iamblichus (2002) De anima trans. J. F. Finamore & J. M. Dillon (Lieden: 
Brill). 
—. (2003) On the Mysteries trans. E. C. Clarke, J. M. Dillon & J. P. 
Herschbell (Atlanta: Society of Biblical Literature). 
Kapstein, M. (ed.) (2004) The Presence of Light: Divine Radiance and 
Religious Experience (Chicago: University of Chicago Press). 
Kripal, J. J. (2001) Roads of Excess, Palaces of Wisdom (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press). 
—. (2010) Authors of the Impossible: The Paranormal and the Sacred 
(Chicago: Chicago University Press). 
—. (2011) Mutants and Mystics: Science Fiction, Super Comics and the 
Paranormal (Chicago: Chicago University Press). 

Chapter Fifteen 
 
264
Majercik, R. (1989) The Chaldaean Oracles (Brill: Leiden). 
McGilchrist, I. (2010) The Master and his Emissary: The Divided Brain 
and the Making of the Western World (Yale: Yale University Press). 
Mead, G. R. S. (1967) The Doctrine of the Subtle Body in Western 
Tradition (London: Stuart and Watkins). 
Milne, J. (2002) “Providence, Time and Destiny”,  
 
http://www.astrodivination.com/provid.pdf 
(accessed 
November 
2012). 
Needleman, J. (1975) A Sense of the Cosmos (New York: Doubleday). 
Newton, M. (1994) Journey of Souls: Case Studies of Life Between Lives 
(St Paul, Minnesota: Llewellyn Publications). 
—. (2006) Destiny of Souls: New Case Studies of Life Between Lives (St 
Paul, Minnesota: Llewellyn Publications). 
Paracelsus (1979) Selected Writings, J. Jacobi (ed.) (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press). 
Plaisance, C. (2013) “Of Cosmocrators and Cosmic Gods: The Place of 
the Archons in De Mysteriis” in Daimonic Imagination: Uncanny 
Intelligence, A. Voss & W. Rowlandson (eds) (Newcastle: Cambridge 
Scholars Publishing) 64-85 
Plato (1961) Complete Works, E. Hamilton & H. Cairns (eds) (Princeton, 
New Jersey: Princeton University Press). 
Plotinus (1980) Enneads vol. III trans. A.H. Armstrong (Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press). 
—. (1984) Enneads vol. IV trans. A.H. Armstrong (Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press). 
Plutarch (1959) Moralia vol. VII trans. P.H. De Lacy & B. Einarson 
(London & Cambridge: Harvard University Press). 
Rappe, S. (2000) Reading Neoplatonism: Non-discursive thinking in the 
texts of Plotinus, Proclus and Damascius (New York: Cambridge 
University Press). 
Rowlandson, W. (2011) “Crop Circles as Psychoid Manifestation: 
borrowing C.G. Jung’s analysis of UFOs to approach the phenomenon 
of the Crop Circle”, Paranthropology, 2.4: 42-59. 
Siorvanes, L. (1997) Proclus: Neoplatonic Philosophy and Science (Yale: 
Yale University Press). 
Shaw, G. (1995) Theurgy and the Soul: The Neoplatonism of Iamblichus 
(Pennsylvania: Penn State Press). 
—. (1999) “Eros and Arithmos: Pythagorean Theurgy in Iamblichus and 
Plotinus”, Ancient Philosophy, 19: 121-143. 

Fireflies and Shooting Stars 
265 
—. (2007) “Living Light: An Exploration of Divine Embodiment” in 
Seeing with Different Eyes: Essays in Astrology and Divination, P. 
Curry & A. Voss (eds) (Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing). 
—. (2011) Iamblichean Theurgy: Reflections on the Practice of Later 
Platonists (unpublished lecture given at Rice University). 
—. (2012) “The Role of Aesthesis in Theurgy” in Iamblichus and the 
Foundations of Late Platonism, E. Afonasin, J. Dillon & J. Finamore 
(eds) (Leiden: Brill) 91-112. 
Solomon, Grant & Jane (1999) The Scole Experiment: Scientific Evidence 
for Life after Death (London: Piatkus). 
Struck, Peter T. (2004) Birth of the Symbol: Ancient Readers at the Limits 
of their Texts (Princeton: Princeton University Press). 
Uzdavinys, A. (2010) Philosophy and Theurgy in Late Antiquity (San 
Rafael: Sophia Perennis). 
Versluis, A. (2004) Restoring Paradise: Western Esotericism, Literature, 
Art and Consciousness (New York: SUNY Press). 
Voss, A. (2006a) Marsilio Ficino: Selected Writings on Astrology 
(Berkeley, California: North Atlantic Books). 
—. (2006b) “The Secret Life of Statues” in Sky and Psyche, N. Campion 
& P. Curry (eds) (Edinburgh: Floris Books) 201-227. 
—. (2007) “Father Time and Orpheus” in The Imaginal Cosmos: 
Astrology, Divination and the Sacred (Canterbury: University of Kent) 
139-156. 
—. (2009) “A Methodology of the Imagination”, Eye of the Heart Journal 
issue 3, 37-52.  
—. (2010) “Life between Lives Therapy: A Mystery Ritual for Modern 
Times?” in Divination: Perspectives for the New Millenium, P. Curry 
(ed.) (Farnham: Ashgate) 211-241. 
Watson, G. (1986) “Imagination and Religion in Classical Thought” in J. 
P. Mackey (ed.), Religious Imagination (Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press) 29-54. 
—. (1988) Phantasia in Classical Thought (Galway: Galway University 
Press). 
White, A. R. (1990) The Language of Imagination (Oxford: Blackwell). 

CHAPTER SIXTEEN 
IN SEARCH OF HIGHER INTELLIGENCE: 
THE DAIMONIC MUSE(S)  
OF ALEISTER CROWLEY, TIMOTHY LEARY, 
AND ROBERT ANTON WILSON1 
MATT CARDIN 
 
 
 
In this chapter, I explore the experience and practice of creativity 
(especially in relation to writing) as a felt engagement with an autonomous 
entity or intelligence that is separate from the ego. I argue that deliberately 
personifying one’s creativity in the mode of the classical muse, daimon, or 
genius is a particularly effective tactic not only for enhancing creativity 
but for discovering an organic life direction, vocation, or calling. I also 
delve into the obvious and compelling question of this creative 
intelligence’s ontological status. Is the muse, the daimon, the personal 
genius—that gravitational centre of our creative energy and identity—truly 
a separate being/force/entity with an autonomous existence? Or are such 
words and the experience to which they refer simply convenient fictions 
that serve as metaphors for the unconscious mind? Obviously, this is a 
question that relates to and resonates with many diverse fields of study: 
religion, anthropology, esotericism, parapsychology, and even biology and 
neuroscience.2 But regardless of the angle of approach, the first thing we 
find when we seriously begin to consider the matter is that arriving at a 
viable answer will not be, and cannot be, a straightforward affair, since we 
are dealing with an issue whose reality is bound up with the very 
subjectivity of we-who-ask-the-questions. This means that all of our 
attempts run us into immediate difficulties, because whichever side we try 
                                                           
1 This chapter also appeared in Paranthropology: Journal of Anthropological 
Approaches to the Paranormal 3 (4): 18-28. Used with permission of the editor. 
2 An example is the muse-like and “sensed presence” experiences reported by 
Michael Persinger in relation to his famous “God machine” experiments. 

In Search of Higher Intelligence 
267 
to choose—the daimonic muse as somehow “real” or the daimonic muse 
as mere metaphor—we find that our thinking, and more fundamentally the 
nature of our perspective and its elaboration in the cultural-philosophical 
worldview that underlies our thinking, proceeds from presuppositions that 
automatically lead us to skirt important issues, ignore certain data, beg 
crucial questions, and generally disregard, flatten, and bulldoze over entire 
realms of pertinent and potentially conflicting actualities. 
Hence the value of reviewing some of the various ways in which 
intelligent individuals have understood the experience of guidance and 
communication from a muse-like source. And of all the myriad strands in 
the lively cultural conversation about this issue, it would be hard to 
identify a more pertinent—or fascinating (and entertaining)—one than the 
line of influence connecting twentieth-century occultist Aleister Crowley 
to psychedelic guru Timothy Leary to counterculture novelist-
psychologist-philosopher and “guerrilla ontologist” Robert Anton Wilson. 
The dividing line between objective and subjective interpretations of the 
experience of external-seeming communication from an invisible source is 
highlighted not only in the individual stories of these three figures but in 
the plotline that interconnects them with each other. In particular, Wilson’s 
final “resting point” in terms of a belief system to encompass the whole 
thing is helpful and instructive in any inquiry into the daimonic muse’s 
ontological status, and can prove a helpful tonic for dogmatism, because 
the outlook that he ended up inhabiting was more of an anti-belief system 
that highlighted and hinged on the irreducible indeterminacy of any 
possible answer. 
The Great Beast and his Holy Guardian Angel 
Aleister Crowley (1875-1947) was arguably the most influential occultist 
of the twentieth century, and his relevance to the muse-based or daimon-
based approach to writing and creativity is found in his lifelong 
engagement with the idea of the Holy Guardian Angel, which stands as a 
specific iteration of the fundamental concept of the muse, daimon, or 
genius. By the time of Crowley, the concept of the Holy Guardian Angel 
as a person’s presiding spiritual guide, helper, and exemplar, the accessing 
of which was the chief goal of magical or esoteric work, had already been 
around for several centuries in Western occult and mystical circles—or 
even longer if you factor in its long prehistory in neoplatonism and various 
sister schools of philosophical mysticism. Crowley himself borrowed the 
term from an English translation of a mediaeval occult text, so there was 
nothing particular original in his use of it, or even in his fundamental 

Chapter Sixteen 
 
268
philosophical framing of it. But it was he who made it central and 
definitive for subsequent generations when he founded the new religion of 
Thelema and devoted the remainder of his life to explicating and 
promoting its principles.  
The founding event itself, which Thelemites still celebrate every year 
on the spring equinox as the Feast of the Equinox of the Gods, was the 
writing of Liber AL vel Legis or The Book of the Law. As the story goes, in 
April 1904, while Crowley was on honeymoon in Cairo with his new wife 
Rose, the book was dictated to him over a span of three days by a voice 
that identified itself as Aiwass or Aiwaz, messenger of the Egyptian god 
Horus. The book became Thelema’s central scripture, and Crowley 
identified Aiwass as his own Holy Guardian Angel. He also identified the 
event as a dividing point in history that signalled the end of the former 
“Aeon of Osiris,” a period characterised by belief in patriarchal 
monotheism and all that goes with it, and the new “Aeon of Horus,” whose 
guiding ethos would be individual liberty and the discovery of each 
person’s “True Will” in communion with his or her own Holy Guardian 
Angel. 
Interestingly and importantly, Crowley’s championing of Thelema and 
Liber AL did not happen right away in the immediate wake of his Cairo 
experience. In fact, he was initially not all that enamoured of the book, and 
spoke more than once of the way its ideas were distasteful and contrary to 
his own thoughts. Robert Anton Wilson and co-author Miriam Joe Hill 
elaborate on this briefly in their encyclopaedia Everything Is Under 
Control: Conspiracies, Cults, and Cover-ups, and their comments again 
underscore the question of what Crowley’s experience with Aiwass “really 
was”: 
At first, Crowley did not like the experience or the book, and managed to 
largely ignore them for ten years. After 1914, however, he felt increasingly 
under their spell, and eventually he devoted the rest of his life to the 
“mission” the book imposed on him. After 1919, he spoke of the Cairo 
experience as an encounter with a superhuman intelligence; one of his 
disciples, Kenneth Grant, has claimed the communicating entity emanated 
from the system of the double star, Sirius, while another student, Israel 
Regardie, prefers to say Crowley reached the depths of the human 
evolutionary unconscious unknown to either Freud or Jung.3 
Thelema is erected entirely upon and around the idea of the Holy Guardian 
Angel. Its central organising concept is the necessity for each adherent to 
achieve the “knowledge and conversation” of his or her own Angel, and 
                                                           
3 Wilson and Hill: 134. 

In Search of Higher Intelligence 
269 
thereby to discover the aforementioned True Will, a term that is basically 
coeval with the idea of a life mission or divine purpose. The most famous 
statement from Liber AL—the oft-quoted “Do what thou wilt shall be the 
whole of the law”—was borrowed and modified from Rabelais, but in 
Thelema it assumes the radically specific and transformative meaning of 
discovering one’s guiding daimon and thereby accessing, activating, and 
actualizing one’s cosmic/divine destiny. The classical daimon/daemon or 
genius encapsulated the idea of an invisible spirit that accompanies a 
person through life and exerts a kind of existential gravity or magnetism 
that evokes experiences in accordance with the divinely ordained life plan. 
When Crowley spoke and wrote about the Holy Guardian Angel, and also, 
significantly, when similar-minded people and organisations in his time 
did the same—as with the influential Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, 
whose founder was in fact the translator of the book that provided Crowley 
with the term “Holy Guardian Angel”—he was pursuing the very same 
thing from a different angle. 
His experience is also relevant because his interpretation of it, which 
continued to evolve throughout his lifetime, underscored the tension or 
confusion between objective and subjective views. Until the end of his life 
he kept issuing what seemed to be contradictory statements about the 
matter. Sometimes he even planted them side-by-side in the same writing, 
as in The Equinox of the Gods (1936), the book where he tells the story of 
how The Book of the Law came to be written. At one point he describes the 
Holy Guardian Angel as “our Secret Self—our Subconscious Ego,” clearly 
favouring an interpretation of the Angel as a layer or presence within the 
psyche. But in the same chapter he says that even though the words of The 
Book of the Law were physically written by him as “ink on paper, in the 
material sense,” still they 
[...] are not My words, unless Aiwaz be taken to be no more than my 
subconscious self, or some part of it: in that case, my conscious self being 
ignorant of the Truth in the Book and hostile to most of the ethics and 
philosophy of the Book, Aiwaz is a severely suppressed part of me. Such a 
theory would further imply that I am, unknown to myself, possessed of all 
sorts of praeternatural knowledge and power.4 
In other words, Crowley says here that the simplest and therefore the best 
explanation is to consider the Holy Guardian Angel an independent 
intelligence, since the subconscious explanation strains credulity even more. 
Four decades after Crowley wrote these words, in June 1973, Robert 
Anton Wilson took “a programmed trip on something an underground 
                                                           
4 Maroney: 168-9. 

Chapter Sixteen 
 
270
Alchemist told [me] was LSD,” where part of the “program” involved 
listening to a taped reading of Crowley’s Invocation of the Holy Guardian 
Angel. As Wilson recounted in Cosmic Trigger: The Final Secret of the 
Illuminati, he achieved, among other experiences, “a rush of Jungian 
archetypes, strongly influenced by the imagery of Crowley’s Invocation, 
but nonetheless having that peculiar quality of external reality and alien 
intelligence emphasised by Jung in his discussion of the archetypes.”5 He 
also “laughed merrily at Crowley’s joking seriousness in telling one 
disciple, Frank Bennett, that the Holy Guardian Angel invoked in this 
ritual is merely ‘our own unconsciousness’ and meanwhile telling another 
disciple, Jane Wolf, that the Holy Guardian Angel is ‘a separate being of 
superhuman intelligence.’”6 Again, the paradox or contradiction is 
deliberate and central. 
The reference to Frank Bennett, not incidentally, comes from a 
conversation that Bennett and Crowley both recorded separately, Crowley 
in his autobiography and Bennett in his diary of the time he spent with 
Crowley in 1921. Bennett was a British-born Australian who became one 
of Crowley’s chief disciples, and Crowley wrote in his Confessions that he 
once revealed something to Bennett that shocked him into an initiatory 
experience of his Holy Guardian Angel. Editors John Symonds and 
Kenneth Grant filled in the other half of this story in a footnote to their 
edition of the book: “We know from Frank Bennett’s diary what Crowley 
said to him on this occasion […] Crowley told him that it was all a matter 
of getting the subconscious mind to work; and when this subconscious 
mind was allowed full sway, without interference from the conscious 
mind, then illumination could be said to have begun; for the subconscious 
mind was our Holy Guardian Angel.”7 
For our present purposes, perhaps the most helpful expression of this 
interpretive tension comes from Israel Regardie, who served as Leary’s 
personal secretary from 1928 to 1932 and went on to become one of the 
most influential figures in modern Western occultism. In his introduction 
to The Law Is for All, a collection of Crowley’s commentary on The Book 
of the Law, Regardie wrote, “It really makes little difference in the long 
run whether The Book of the Law was dictated to him by a preterhuman 
intelligence named Aiwass or whether it stemmed from the creative deeps 
of Aleister Crowley. The book was written. And he became the 
mouthpiece for the Zeitgeist, accurately expressing the intrinsic nature of 
                                                           
5 Wilson 1977: 83. 
6 Wilson 1977: 84. 
7 Crowley: 936, n. 4. 

In Search of Higher Intelligence 
271 
our time as no one else has done to date.”8 One is free to disagree with 
Regardie regarding Crowley’s prophetic value and insight, but his basic 
point—that it does not matter whether one opts for the supernatural or 
psychological explanation, because the end result is the same—is worth 
pondering at length and in depth by those who seek to navigate a 
relationship with their own deep creative selves. 
The strange case of Timothy Leary 
The leap from Crowley to Leary and Wilson is, culturally speaking, a 
drastic one. It is a leap from Edwardian and post-Edwardian England to 
the America of Woodstock and rock and roll; from World Wars I and II to 
the Vietnam era; from black-and-white movies and the age of radio to the 
shimmering visual-electronic culture of McLuhan’s global village. But 
even so, the basic theme of perceived guidance and communication from 
an invisible, alien presence remains constant. Moreover, the fact that the 
early twenty-first century saw a surge of fresh interest in Leary’s life and 
legacy, and also in the general history of the psychedelic movement and 
the possible therapeutic and spiritual uses of psychedelic drugs, only 
reinforces the pertinence of attempting to understand the nature of this 
internal guidance and its emergence as an alien-seeming force—something 
that is characteristic, as we may non-tangentially note, of many psychedelic 
experiences. 
More than just well-known, the basic outline of Timothy Leary’s life is 
legendary. His “first career,” as it were, was as a mainstream psychologist 
and professor. In the 1950s he taught psychology at Berkeley and 
performed research for the Kaiser Family Foundation, and then, most 
famously, he taught at Harvard from 1959 to 1963. Some of this early 
work has had a lasting influence; while serving as head of psychological 
research for the Kaiser Family Foundation, Leary came up with a system 
of analysing human personality along two axes, love-hate and dominance-
submission, that produced eight possible personality types with two 
subdivisions each. It was a brilliant idea (with roots in the work of earlier 
psychologists) that ended up expressed in a diagram that has come to be 
known as the “interpersonal circle” or the “Leary circumplex.” Leary’s 
insights helped to lay the foundation for what would become the standard 
personality tests that are still in use today, e.g., the Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator (which is mostly extrapolated from Jung—who had deeply 
influenced Leary). 
                                                           
8 Quoted in Sutin: 133. 

Chapter Sixteen 
 
272
Leary’s progressive fall (or ascent, depending on your perspective) 
from formal respectability was initiated in 1960 when, encouraged by the 
cultural tenor of the time and the specific incitements of friends and 
colleagues from both academia and the emerging counterculture, he 
travelled to Mexico and ingested psilocybin mushrooms. Some years later 
he said, “I learned more about my brain and its possibilities, and I learned 
more about psychology, in the five hours after taking these mushrooms 
than I had in the preceding fifteen years of studying, human research and 
psychology.”9 When he returned to Harvard, he enlisted the aid of his 
colleague Richard Alpert, who would later achieve fame as writer and 
spiritual teacher Ram Dass, to launch a formal study of the psychological 
effects and possible therapeutic uses of psychedelic drugs. 
The story of how the whole thing spun out of control is long and 
fascinating, but the short version is that after achieving some interesting 
and promising initial results—such as an indication that the integration of 
psychedelics into the counselling programmes offered to criminal 
offenders might drastically reduce recidivism rates—Leary, who was 
naturally antiauthoritarian and free-wheeling, grew fed up with the 
constraints of conventional research, reputation, and respectability, and in 
1963 ended up getting fired from Harvard along with Alpert. The 
university shut the research programme down, and within a few years the 
US government had banned the use of all psychedelic drugs for any 
purposes, scientific or otherwise. 
The provocation for the government ban was traceable at least partly to 
Leary himself, who upon his departure from Harvard rapidly transformed 
himself into the colourful prophet of psychedelic liberation that he is best 
remembered as today. Naturally, this incurred the wrath of civil authority, 
and so began a trend that was eventually epitomised by Richard Nixon’s 
televised proclamation circa 1970 that Leary was “the most dangerous 
man in America.” 
Irrepressible to the core, Leary refused to back down, and his life path 
rapidly mutated into something like a thriller novel with a plot involving 
imprisonment, escape, flight from the US, entanglement with prominent 
anti-government groups (e.g., the Black Panthers, the Weather 
Underground), kidnapping, flight from country to country, and eventual 
return to the US in 1973, at which point he was thrown back in prison, first 
at Folsom and then at the Vacaville California Medical Facility. At Folsom 
he was kept in solitary confinement, and also, for a time, in a cell next to 
Charles Manson. 
                                                           
9 Lemle. 

In Search of Higher Intelligence 
273 
It was in those prisons that his story dovetailed with our overarching 
theme of guidance by the muse/daimon/genius, for it was there that he 
began to experiment consciously with opening himself to thoughts and 
ideas that, as it seemed, “wanted” to be expressed through him—in other 
words, with channelling. Viewing the operation as a form of telepathy, and 
setting as his goal the contacting of “Higher Intelligence” (his specific 
term) of an expressly extraterrestrial sort, he recruited his wife Joanna, a 
fellow prisoner named Wayne Benner, and Benner’s girlfriend, a 
journalist, to participate. The resulting writings—Starseed (1973), Neurologic 
(1973), and Terra II: A Way Out (1974)—introduced his famous eight-
circuit model of consciousness and advanced the idea that life originally 
came to earth from outer space, and that humanity is destined by DNA 
coding and evolutionary impulse to colonise space and return to the stars 
for transcendence and fulfilment via reunion with the galactic source of 
our being, which is none other than the Higher Intelligence that Leary and 
his team were in contact with. 
To back up a bit and draw a crucial connection, by this point in his life 
Leary had come to see himself as deeply connected to Aleister Crowley. 
He had long felt an interest in Crowley’s life and ideas, but by the time he 
arrived at Vacaville in 1974 this had advanced to a point where he viewed 
his own life as a “continuation” (as distinct from a reincarnation, since his 
and Crowley’s lives overlapped) of Crowley and his work. In the words of 
John Higgs, author of I Have America Surrounded: The Life of Timothy 
Leary, in the early 1970s Leary came to believe “that his role in life was to 
continue Crowley’s ‘Great Work’, that of bringing about a fundamental 
shift in human consciousness.”10 This was the result of several mind-
blowing events that seemed to indicate a profound connection to Crowley. 
Most dramatically, in 1971 Leary and English beatnik artist and writer 
Brian Barritt tripped together on LSD in the Sahara desert at Bou Saada, 
“City of Happiness,” reputedly a site of magical influence. It was the night 
of Easter Saturday and Sunday, and Leary and Barrett witnessed massive 
celestial imagery and visionary symbolism. A year later they discovered 
that some of the things they had seen and experienced paralleled in eerie 
fashion a series of visions reported by Crowley in his Confessions. 
Unknown to them at the time of their Sahara experience, Crowley had 
engaged in a weeks-long magical ritual in 1909 with the poet Victor 
Neuberg on the very same site in the very same river bed at Bou Saada. 
Barritt later wrote that he and Tim were “pretty freaked out” when they 
discovered this, and he speculated about a “mysterious force” in the form 
of an “unconscious directive” that had dictated in parallel fashion the 
                                                           
10 Higgs: 15. 

Chapter Sixteen 
 
274
motivations and even the life events and circumstances of Crowley-
Neuberg and Leary-Barritt across a span of decades.11 
Augmenting the Crowleyan vibe, in 1972 Leary asked a deck of 
Crowley-designed tarot cards, “Who am I and what is my destiny?” and 
then randomly cut the deck to the Ace of Discs—the very card that 
Crowley had identified as his own representation. In his autobiography, 
Confessions of a Hope Fiend (a title he chose as a deliberate blending of 
Crowley’s Confessions with his Diary of a Dope Fiend), Leary wrote, 
“The eerie synchronicities between our lives [i.e., his own and Barritt’s] 
and that of Crowley, which were later to preoccupy us, were still unfolding 
with such precision as to make us wonder if one can escape the 
programmed imprinting with which we are born.”12 
It was in the wake of all these Crowleyan synchronicities that the 
incarcerated Leary began his channelling experiments. He approached 
them in the full sway of his sense of carrying on Crowley’s planetary 
consciousness-altering mission, and in full view of the fact that Crowley 
had attempted similar contact with a higher intelligence. Although Leary 
made no mention of the Holy Guardian Angel, his emerging 
extraterrestrial hypothesis corresponded with the views of a subset of 
Thelemites who thought contact with one’s Holy Guardian Angel was 
actually a form of contact with a literal extraterrestrial intelligence (others, 
by contrast, vehemently insisted and still insist today that such a view is 
false, ridiculous, and detrimental). 
Wilson began exchanging letters with Leary a few months after the 
commencement of Leary’s telepathic “transmissions,” and later offered a 
succinct description of the concrete nature of the experiments: “The 
Starseed Transmissions—’hallucinations’ or whatever—were received in 
19 bursts, seldom in recognisable English sentences, requiring considerable 
meditation and discussion between the four Receivers before they could be 
summarised.”13 Of prime interest to us here is that even though the 
resulting writings clearly proceeded from the extraterrestrial view of 
higher intelligence rather than the unconscious or daimonic muse-based 
one, other things said by other people about the Learyan view of 
communicating with perceived higher or external intelligences, and even 
things said by Leary himself, clearly link his experiences to a more 
traditionally muse-like view.14 
                                                           
11 Barritt: 155, 152. 
12 Barritt: 153. 
13 Wilson 1977: 105. 
14 Leary: 15. In Terra II, for example, Leary asserts the truth behind humanity’s 
long history of belief in higher intelligences, as in religious beliefs, but modifies it 

In Search of Higher Intelligence 
275 
For instance, in a bit of archival footage featured in the “Summer of 
Love” episode of PBS’s American Experience series, Leary describes the 
LSD experience by saying, “It is a sense of being in communion with 
powers greater than yourself, and intelligence which far outstrips the 
human mind, and energies which are very ancient.”15 There is no 
indication of the context or time period in which he said this, but it 
resonates interestingly with something he told Wilson when the latter 
came to visit him at the Vacaville prison: 
[Leary said] Interstellar ESP may have been going on for all our history 
[…] but we just haven’t understood. Our nervous systems have translated 
their messages in terms we could understand. The “angels” who spoke to 
Dr. Dee, the Elizabethan scientist-magician [who had figured in both 
Crowley-Neuberg’s and Leary-Barritt’s visionary experiences in the 
Sahara], were extraterrestrials, but Dee couldn’t comprehend them in those 
terms and considered them “messengers from God.” The same is true of 
many other shamans and mystics.16 
Note that despite the outrageous-sounding nature of such speculations to 
the modern secular-materialist ear, Leary was not insane. Or at least that 
was the medical-psychological opinion of the mental health professionals 
who evaluated him, according to Wilson: 
It should be remembered, in evaluating the Starseed signals, that, a few 
months before this experiment, three government psychiatrists testified (at 
the escape trial) that Dr. Leary was perfectly sane and possessed of a high 
I.Q. Since so many extremists of Left and Right have impugned Leary’s 
sanity, it should also be entered in the record that Dr. Wesley Hiler, a staff 
psychologist at Vacaville who spoke to Dr. Leary every day (often to ask 
Tim’s advice), emphatically agrees with that verdict. “Timothy Leary is 
totally, radiantly sane,” he told me in a 1973 interview.17 
Nor was Hiler’s judgment made in ignorance of the telepathy/channelling 
experiments that Leary was engaged in. In fact, Wilson says Hiler 
regarded Leary’s project from an informed long-historical/psychological 
view, and Hiler’s actual words resonate wonderfully with the vibe of 
ontological uncertainty that we are exploring here: 
                                                                                                                         
in a science fictional direction: “The goal of the evolutionary process is to produce 
nervous systems capable of communicating with the galactic network. Contacting 
the Higher Intelligence.” 
15 Dolgin and Franco. 
16 Wilson 1977: 118. 
17 Wilson 1977: 104-5. 

Chapter Sixteen 
 
276
I asked Hiler what he really thought of Dr. Leary’s extraterrestrial 
contacts. Specifically, since he didn’t regard Leary as crazy or 
hallucinating, what was happening when Leary thought he was receiving 
extraterrestrial communications? “Every man and woman who reaches the 
higher levels of spiritual and intellectual development,” Dr. Hiler said 
calmly, “feels the presence of a Higher Intelligence. Our theories are all 
unproven. Socrates called it his daemon. Others call it gods or angels. 
Leary calls it extraterrestrial. Maybe it’s just another part of our brain, a 
part we usually don’t use. Who knows?”18 
Bob Wilson’s excellent adventure 
As already indicated by the above discussions, Wilson resonated with the 
ideas of both Leary and Crowley, and was in direct contact with the former 
during the Starseed period. He even helped Leary in the crystallisation and 
promulgation of his eight-circuit model of consciousness; although the 
model was first laid out by Leary in Neurologic (1973) and Exo-
Psychology (1977), Wilson gave it an energetic and entertaining publicity 
boost, and also provided a work of genuine substance, in his 1983 book 
Prometheus Rising, which featured an introduction by former Crowley 
secretary Israel Regardie. So it is no surprise that in addition to being 
aware of and interested in Crowley’s and Leary’s experiences in 
communicating with angels and aliens, Wilson had his own encounters 
with “higher intelligence.” 
The primary account of it is found in his Cosmic Trigger (1977, later 
retitled Cosmic Trigger I when Wilson wrote two sequels). Richard 
Metzger zeroes in on the emotional heart of the matter when he writes that, 
notwithstanding the trippy and subversive delights of Wilson’s famous 
Illuminatus! trilogy (co-written with Robert Shea), “Cosmic Trigger was 
different. This time the mask came off. In this book, Wilson came clean, in 
the most intellectually honest way that anyone ever has, on the subject of 
‘What happens when you start fooling around with occult things? What 
happens when you do psychedelic drugs and try to contact higher 
dimensional entities through ritual magick?’”19 
Wilson, who had a PhD in psychology, contextualised the book’s 
content in a valuable introduction that he wrote for a new edition 
published in 1986. “Cosmic Trigger,” he explained, “deals with a process 
of deliberately induced brain change through which I put myself in the 
years 1962-76. This process is called ‘initiation’ or ‘vision quest’ in many 
                                                           
18 Wilson 1977: 163. 
19 Metzger: 14. 

In Search of Higher Intelligence 
277 
traditional societies and can loosely be considered some dangerous variety 
of self-psychotherapy in modern terminology.”20 In the course of this 
“initiation” he came into perceived contact with a number of external-
seeming intelligences and was thrust into the same surreal world that 
Leary and Crowley had likewise explored. 
The high point emerged from his commencing a new “course of 
neuropsychological experiments” in 1971, in response to the feeling that 
he had deciphered a hidden message in Crowley’s The Book of Lies. “The 
outstanding result,” he wrote, “was that I entered a belief system, from 
1973 until around October 1974, in which I was receiving telepathic 
messages from entities residing on a planet of the double star Sirius.”21 
Although Wilson never describes anything like the experience of 
supernatural dictation that resulted in Crowley’s The Book of the Law, or 
like Leary’s experience of extraterrestrial telepathy that resulted in the 
Starseed books, the question of his supposed Sirius contact, and of the 
general idea of psychic contact with alien-seeming forces or entities, 
dominates the bulk of Cosmic Trigger and forms the guiding thread of 
Wilson’s journey through “Chapel Perilous,” his term, borrowed from 
Arthurian legend, for the frightening and transformative state of 
psychological uncertainty in which the walls of a person’s belief system 
have been broached by the intrusion of events that seem equally amenable 
to paranormal and naturalistic, or supernatural and non-supernatural, 
explanations. 
In describing the various synchronicities and paranormal events that 
began to unfold in his life, Wilson forcefully foregrounds the questions of 
ontology and epistemology—of what’s really real and how or whether we 
are even capable of making that determination—and he describes various 
reversals and mutations in his own viewpoint. For example, he explains 
how it was a meeting in October 1974 with Dr Jacques Vallée, the 
internationally renowned astronomer and UFOlogist, that led him away 
from the belief that he (Wilson) was literally receiving telepathic 
transmissions from Sirius. Wilson says Vallée told him this type of other-
worldly communication is a centuries-old phenomenon “and will probably 
not turn out to be extraterrestrial,” since the extraterrestrial slant can be 
chalked up to the influence of modern cultural beliefs. In former eras, 
Vallée said, “The phenomenon took other and spookier forms.”22 Wilson 
says Vallée’s viewpoint: 
                                                           
20 Wilson 1977: ii (Wilson’s emphasis). 
21 Wilson 1977: 8. 
22 Wilson 1977: 9. The veracity of Wilson’s recollection here is supported by the 
fact that Vallée himself said largely the same things. 

Chapter Sixteen 
 
278
[…] made perfect sense to me, since I had originally gotten in touch with 
“the entity” by means of Crowleyan occultism. The extraterrestrial 
explanation was not the real explanation, as I had thought; it was just the 
latest model for the Experience, as angels had been a model for it in the 
Middle Ages, or dead relatives speaking through mediums had been a 
model in the nineteenth century.”23 
This framing of all belief systems in relativistic and provisional terms—an 
attitude that, as we might do well to notice, is implicit in the very concept 
of a “belief system” itself, since to recognise belief systems as such 
automatically subverts the unreflective and wholesale adoption of any of 
them—became for Wilson the touchstone of his entire outlook. He began 
that new preface to Cosmic Trigger, written ten years after the book’s first 
publication, by proclaiming in all capital letters, “I DO NOT BELIEVE 
ANYTHING.”24 In explaining this position over several pages, he quoted 
approvingly Alan Watts’s characterisation of the universe as “a giant 
Rorshach [sic] ink-blot” and described his own position as “neurological 
model agnosticism—the application of the Copenhagen Interpretation 
beyond physics to consciousness itself.” 25 
Most significant for the question of the daimonic muse and its 
ontological status are his specific thoughts about the status of all invisible 
entities/intelligences that are encountered in psychic space: 
Personally, I also suspect, or guess, or intuit, that the more unconventional 
of my models here—the ones involving Higher Intelligence, such as the 
Cabalistic Holy Guardian Angel or the extraterrestrial from Sirius—are 
necessary working tools at certain stages in the metaprogramming process 
[i.e., the process of accessing and altering one’s fundamental psychological 
imprints]. That is, whether such entities exist anywhere outside our own 
imaginations, some areas of brain functioning cannot be accessed without 
using these “keys” to open the locks. I do not insist on this; it is just my 
own opinion.26 
With this, we’re back once again to Crowley and his continual dance on 
the edge of mutually exclusive interpretations. “I don’t believe anything,” 
Wilson insisted, and so did Crowley and Leary, at least in spirit. The 
question at hand is: Can we learn anything from this? 
                                                           
23 Wilson 1977: 9. 
24 Wilson 1977: i. 
25 Wilson 1977: iv. 
26 Wilson 1977: v. 

In Search of Higher Intelligence 
279 
Angels, daimons and haunted artists 
For our specific purpose here, what is valuable in the stories of Crowley, 
Leary, and Wilson is the vivid picture they show us of people struggling to 
interpret and live with forces in the psyche that really do present 
themselves as independent of the ego and possessed of their own 
intelligence and will. As already mentioned, the Holy Guardian Angel and 
its supernatural and extraterrestrial kin are explicitly connected in 
historical-cultural-conceptual-psychological terms to the ancient muse, 
daimon, and genius, and a Wilsonian attitude of thoroughgoing 
“neurological model agnosticism” toward them only removes categorical 
interpretations of what is happening in the perceived experience of inner 
communication, not—not—the fact of the experience itself. Regardless of 
what we think or how we feel about it, this experience of being in 
perceived contact with a “higher intelligence” really did happen to these 
three men. It really has happened to people throughout history. And it 
really can happen to you and me. It does not necessarily mean audible 
voices and telepathic transmissions, but it definitely means a sense of 
something impinging on or communicating with our conscious self “from 
the outside,” or perhaps from the deep inside, which experientially 
amounts to the same thing. The really electrifying jolt comes when we 
realise, as our three present case subjects all did, that such impinging and 
communicating is always happening, regardless of whether or not we are 
consciously aware of it, as a constant psychic undercurrent. If we are 
skilled and sensitive enough to tune in and hear it, the rewards in terms of 
creative vibrancy can be exquisite. 
Entirely aside from all of the far-out details of his (possibly) 
paranormal experiences, at least twice in his life Wilson directly equated 
the autonomous-feeling force in the psyche that drives artistic creativity 
with the ontologically indeterminate Higher Intelligence that seemingly 
communicated with him, Leary, and Crowley. One of these instances came 
in an essay he wrote about the life and work of Raymond Chandler, under 
the pseudonym of one of his (Wilson’s) own fictional creations, book 
critic Epicene Wildeblood. In describing the fifteen-year hiatus from 
fiction-writing that Chandler once experienced, Wilson said, “Chandler 
spent 15 years, the prime years of a man’s life, in the oil-executive game 
before the Daemon or Holy Guardian Angel that haunts artists got its 
teeth into him again.”27 
The other instance is found in a 1981 interview Wilson gave to the late, 
great genre magazine Starship: The Magazine about Science Fiction. The 
                                                           
27 Wilson 1980: 127, emphasis added. 

Chapter Sixteen 
 
280
interviewer asked him, “Is a book fully organised in your mind before you 
start writing or does it take shape as it unfolds?” Wilson responded: 
Sometimes I have a clearer idea of where I’m going than other times, but it 
always surprises me. In the course of writing, I’m always drawing on my 
unconscious creativity, and I find things creeping into my writing that I 
wasn’t aware of at the time. That’s part of the pleasure of writing. After 
you’ve written something, you say to yourself, “Where in the hell did that 
come from?” Faulkner called it the “demon” that directs the writer. The 
Kabalists call it the “holy guardian angel.” Every writer experiences this 
sensation. Robert E. Howard said he felt there was somebody dictating the 
Conan stories to him. There’s some deep level of the unconscious that 
knows a lot more than the conscious mind of the writer knows.28 
The unconscious mind? The daimon? The Holy Guardian Angel? All and 
none of the above? For purposes of accessing and aligning with the 
experience of creative inspiration, does it really matter? 
Bibliography 
Barrett, B. (2003) “Excerpt from The Road of Excess” in R. Metzger (ed.) 
Book of Lies: The Disinformation Guide to Magick and the Occult 
(New York: The Disinformation Company Ltd.), 149-155 (reprinted 
from B. Barritt, [1998] The Road of Excess: A Psychedelic 
Autobiography, London: PSI Publishing). 
Crowley, A. (1989) The Confessions of Aleister Crowley: An 
Autohagiography (New York: Penguin Arkana). 
Dolgin, G. and V. Franco, (Writers & Directors) (2007) “Summer of 
Love” (television transcript) Washington, DC: PBS, The American 
Experience www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/love/filmmore/pt.html 
(accessed November 2012). 
Elliot, J. (1981) “Robert Anton Wilson: Searching for Cosmic 
Intelligence”, www.rawilsonfans.com/articles/Starship.htm (accessed 
November 2012), reprinted from Starship: The Magazine about 
Science Fiction, 19.1, Spring 1981. 
Higgs, J. (March 2006) “The High Priest and the Great Beast” Sub Rosa, 
4, 15-22. 
Leary, T. (1986) “Starseed: A Way Out” in B. Steiger and J. White (eds) 
Other Worlds, Other Universes (Pomeroy, WA: Health Research 
Books), 15-27 (reprinted/excerpted from T. Leary, 1974, Terra II: A 
Way Out, San Francisco: Starseed). 
                                                           
28 Elliot. 

In Search of Higher Intelligence 
281 
Lemle, M. (Producer & Director) (2001) Ram Dass: Fierce Grace [DVD] 
New York: Zeitgeist Films. 
Maroney, T. (2003) “Six Voices on Crowley” in R. Metzger (ed.) Book of 
Lies: The Disinformation Guide to Magick and the Occult (New York: 
The Disinformation Company Ltd.), 164-83. 
Metzger, R. (2002) Disinformation: The Interviews (New York: The 
Disinformation Company Ltd.). 
Sutin, L. (2000) Do What Thou Wilt: A Life of Aleister Crowley (New 
York: St. Martin’s Press). 
Vallée, J. & C. Aubeck (2010) Wonders in the Sky: Unexplained Aerial 
Objects from Antiquity to Modern Times (Los Angeles: Jeremy 
Tarcher//Penguin) 
Wilson, R. A. (1977) Cosmic Trigger: The Final Secret of the Illuminati 
(Tempe, AZ: New Falcon Publications). 
—. (1980) The Illuminati Papers (Berkeley: Ronin Publishing). 
Wilson, R. A. & M. J. Hill, (1998) Everything Is Under Control: 
Conspiraces, Cults, and Cover-ups (New York: HarperCollins). 
 

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 
SO LONG AS YOU’VE GOT YOUR ELF: 
DEATH, DMT AND DISCARNATE ENTITIES 
DAVID LUKE1 
 
 
 
This chapter concerns both the fruits of science—parapsychology, 
ethnobotany, psychology—and what we could call the foamy custard of 
FOlklore, Anthropology and MYthology, CUltural STudies And Related 
Disciplines. As a parapsychologist by training with a focus on ontology, I 
will discuss in this chapter elves, pixies, fairies and other “little people” 
collectively here referred to as “daimonic”.  
Andrew Lang—anthropologist, psychical researcher and one-time 
President of the Society for Psychical Research—collected, collated and 
published folkloric accounts of the little people in a dozen books between 
1889 and 1910. He pored over many accounts of different cultures from 
Australia to his native Scotland, and although he refused to believe elves 
existed in and of themselves, he did associate them with phantasms of the 
dead, particularly with poltergeist phenomena, and thereby he associated 
fairyland with Hades. Picking up where Lang left off, Evans-Wentz was 
the next to do the dance around the fairy ring, and in 1911 he published his 
magnum opus study on The fairy-faith in Celtic countries. Wentz 
documented an oral history of the little people across the British Isles and 
Brittany and discovered that the traditional informants would align the 
elves with spirits of the dead, although Evans-Wentz himself concluded 
that they were probably fourth-dimensional beings, existing in what 
mathematicians had earlier called hyperspace. He also speculated, like 
Lang, that this dimension was most likely actually connected to the realm 
of the dead: 
                                                           
1 With thanks to Anna Hope and Andrea Wright for feedback on an earlier draft of 
the manuscript. 

So long as you’ve got your Elf 
283 
It is mathematically possible to conceive fourth-dimensional beings, and if 
they exist it would be impossible in a third-dimensional plane to see them 
as they really are. Hence the ordinary apparition is non-real as a form, 
whereas the beings, which wholly sane and reliable seers claim to see 
when exercising seership of the highest kind, may be as real to themselves 
and to the seers as human beings are to us here in the third-dimensional 
world when we exercise normal vision.2 
Furthermore, “Fairyland exists as a supernormal state of consciousness 
which men and women may enter temporarily in dreams, trances or in 
various ecstatic conditions, or for an indefinite period at death”,3—a kind 
of permanent ecstatic condition. This raises two concerns: the importance 
of altered states of consciousness in accessing fairyland (be that Hades or 
hyperspace), and fairyland as an intermediate place that souls of the dead 
pass through. 
Fast-forwarding a few decades, the notion of UFOs becomes prevalent 
on the cultural landscape. Although sporadic reports had been surfacing 
since the turn of the century, UFOs became popular in the 1940s, and by 
1947 a poll revealed that eighty-seven per cent of the UK population had 
heard of UFOs. Thereafter, the UFO phenomenon quickly developed its 
own cultural cosmology. By the nineteen-sixties the UFO and alien 
abduction phenomena were becoming quite rampant in many ways, which 
led Jacques Vallée to make his classic folkloric comparison and draw 
persisting parallels between aliens and elves. With the publication of 
Passport to Mangonia (1969), Vallée turned his back on his earlier ideas 
about UFOs being extra-terrestrials and speculated that aliens could easily 
be multidimensional, thereby supporting Evans-Wentz’ concept of 
fairyland existing in hyperspace. Furthermore he is credited as being the 
first to suggest that the aliens themselves were a kind of technologised 
version of fairies for the twentieth century.4 Vallée formed this fusion of 
elves and aliens by considering the similarities between them: they are 
small humanoids with big black eyes, they appear to exist outside of space 
and time, and they both engage in abduction activity, supposedly for 
interspecies breeding programmes. Reports of alien abductions increased 
in later years, popularised partly by the apparently abducted horror writer 
Whitley Strieber (1987), who also helped spread new memetic 
developments of the aliens, such as the increasing encounters with 
insectoid aliens, and praying mantises in particular. Strieber also helped 
popularise the now classic small grey somewhat elfin-like aliens, albeit 
                                                           
2 Evans-Wentz: 482. 
3 Evans-Wentz: 382. 
4 See Kripal 2010: 142-197. 

Chapter Seventeen 
 
284
with a very cartoonlike appearance on occasion, and while this may not 
have been very funny for Strieber at the time, it became a laughing point 
for his critics in many ways.5 But the cartoon-like nature of Strieber’s 
greys later became less comical in the light of other developments at the 
time, because from the 1960s onwards psychedelics appeared on the 
cultural scene, and one substance in particular, DMT (although this 
remained much more underground than other psychedelics until the turn of 
the millennium and was quite an obscure latecomer to the scene). 
Known technically as N-N, Dimethytryptamine, the indole alkaloid 
DMT, as it is more commonly known, is a naturally occurring compound 
and is found in many plants. It is usually extracted from plants for human 
use, but it is also found in many animals, particularly mammals and even 
humans. Curiously it is not found in the fungus kingdom, but then some 
mushrooms have their own psychedelic version of DMT called psilocin 
(actually 4-Hydroxy-Dimethyltryptamine). We all have DMT in us, 
located in our cerebrospinal fluid and in our blood, and it is also likely that 
it occurs naturally in people’s brains.6 It is an extremely psychedelic 
substance, most effective through smoking (it is not effective if eaten as 
stomach enzymes denature it). Smoking produces a very intense, short-
acting, ten-minute experience beginning essentially with the exhalation of 
the first lungful. In Peter Meyer’s 1992 article: “Apparent communication 
with discarnate entities induced by DMT”, a few accounts are given of 
people’s experiences. He suggests that there are a number of different 
levels to fathom, depending on the depth of experience. It starts off at level 
one: threshold experience, interior flowing of energy and consciousness; 
then level two: vivid, brightly coloured geometric visual patterns which 
are basically two-dimensional but they may pulse. Then the transitional 
phase that follows the geometry is a tunnel or breakthrough experience 
and a passage through to an entrance into another world. At level three, 
once one goes through the passageway, there is three-dimensional or 
higher space—echoing Evans-Wentz’ notion of hyperspace again—
possible contact with entities, and a sense of being in an objective space 
and of meeting intelligent, communicating entities. Finally, after that, is 
the white light. 
To give examples of the kinds of experiences people have, there are 
some classic accounts in a paper by Timothy Leary written in 1966 called 
Programmed communication during experiences with DMT in which he 
reports of the experience of Alan Watts, a famous Zen philosopher who 
was also well known for talking a lot. Leary said that no matter what 
                                                           
5 On Streiber, comic books and the paranormal see Kripal 2011. 
6 See Luke 2011a. 

So long as you’ve got your Elf 
285 
psychedelic substances he gave him he just carried on talking. However, 
he gave Watts DMT whilst Watts was telling a story and Watts was quiet 
for ten minutes. When he emerged he carried on telling the story from 
where he had left off as if nothing had happened—without missing a beat. 
Fortunately, Watts later described his experience, saying that it was 
exceedingly difficult to talk and that it was “like attempting to give a 
moment to moment description of one’s reactions while being fired out of 
the muzzle of an atomic cannon with neon byzantine barrelling”7—so he 
had a pretty intense geometric experience, somewhere in the region of 
Meyer’s level two, you might say. 
Moving onto the next level, beyond the pure geometry, we arrive at the 
encounter with entities. One of the first researchers of DMT and the 
person who discovered its psychedelic properties in 1956 (even though it 
had been synthesised about twenty years earlier) was a Hungarian 
psychopharmacologist called Stephen Szára, who experimented with DMT 
on himself and had some extraordinary experiences. Shortly after, he 
started giving it to his medical colleagues and they reported all sorts of 
strange things, one of them announcing that, “the whole room is filled with 
spirits”, and another one saying “I feel exactly as if I were flying […] in 
front of me are two quiet sunlit gods”.8 Indeed encounters with entities are 
one of the most common features of the DMT experience, and at least one 
DMT experiencer suggested that at a certain dosage you can no longer be 
an atheist because of these kind of encounters and experiences with 
numinous beings.9 
This extraordinary molecule is now, of course, a scheduled substance, 
so research with it has been largely curtailed and it was not until the 1990s 
when Rick Strassman started reviving the research into DMT that any 
substantial phenomenological research was conducted. But before it 
became illegal, Timothy Leary, in his Programmed communication during 
experiences with DMT of 1966, developed a simple technique which he 
called “the experiential typewriter” in which you had the substance, you 
went into the experience and you were allowed to submerge yourself in it 
completely. But then every two minutes the sitter with you would say 
“where are you now?” and then you would quickly report on your 
phenomenological state—your state of consciousness. Here is Tim’s 
second experience with DMT, just two minutes in: 
RALPH: “Tim, where are you now?” 
                                                           
7 Leary 1996: 84. 
8 Strassman 2001: 46. 
9 Strassman 2001: 230. 

Chapter Seventeen 
 
286
TIM: (thinks) Ralph’s voice, stately, kind ... what? where? You? ... open 
eyes ... there squatting next to me are two magnificent insects ... skin 
burnished, glowing metallic, with hammered jewels inlaid ... richly 
costumed, they looked at me sweetly ... dear, radiant Venutian crickets ... 
one has a pad in his lap and is holding out a gem-encrusted box with 
undulating trapezoidal glowing sections ... questioning look ... incredible ... 
and next to him Mrs Diamond Cricket softly slides into a lattice-work of 
vibrations ... Dr Ruby-emerald Cricket smiles ...  
RALPH: “Tim, where are you now?”…10 
So that was Tim’s experience with these insectoid entities under the 
influence of DMT. As I said though, even with DMT having been 
criminalised in the 1970s, Rick Strassman braved apparent career suicide 
and started conducting research with it in the 1990s, having set up a 
medical programme. He had sixty volunteers go through the programme, 
administering a total of four hundred doses of DMT by injection (the 
fumerate, not the salt). Perhaps the most significant experiences that 
people reported within that research were encounters with what they 
usually called entities, beings, guides or helpers, although they were not 
always very helpful. The entities themselves would often appear as 
clowns, reptiles, mantises—for some reason praying mantises were quite 
common—bees, spiders, cacti or stick insects, but they also commonly 
appeared, as we might expect, as dwarves, elves, imps, or even angels, 
spirits, and gods. Sometimes they were just felt as a presence, and that 
presence was often supremely, and thankfully, powerful, loving and wise. 
However not all the experiences were pleasant, and not all entities loving 
and wise—for example one of Strassman’s participants reported being 
anally raped by a reptile, which was a traumatic experience. 
Terence McKenna announced that the fact that DMT induces these 
entity experiences so frequently is something to be remarked upon, and 
said, “You want contact? You want alien intelligences? All you gotta do is 
inhale and by the time you breathe out, you get elves, everybody does!”11 
Well not quite everybody. According to Strassman’s more thorough 
research under laboratory controlled conditions, fifty percent of high dose 
participants had these kinds of invisible world phenomena where they 
would encounter alien beings of some description.12 So that is fairly 
reliable scientifically—you can administer a substance in a certain dosage, 
and half your participants will have an encounter experience. So why has 
this phenomenon not been studied more? 
                                                           
10 Leary 1996: 92. 
11 McKenna: 76. 
12 See Strassman 2008: 73 

So long as you’ve got your Elf 
287 
One key thing that Strassman noted in the experiences of his 
participants, as already noted by McKenna, was that they tended to have a 
relationship to the alien abduction phenomena, in that sometimes they 
reported being operated on in a kind of classic alien abduction type 
scenario. They had things inserted into them in the presence of little alien-
like entities, often elfin, or insectoid, such as mantises. Simultaneously, 
mantises became a sort of growing motif in the alien abduction literature, 
and one assumes that this was somewhat separate from the DMT literature 
of the time. For instance, Kottmeyer (1999) reports the increasing presence 
of praying mantises in alien abduction cases in the 1990s, which were 
dubbed the “greying” mantises as they appeared so often in people’s 
abduction experiences. In attempting to reconcile the apparent experience 
of aliens whilst on DMT, Terence McKenna suggested that, “We are so 
alienated that the self must disguise itself as an extra-terrestrial in order 
not to alarm us with the truly bizarre dimensions that it encompasses. 
When we can love the alien, then we will have begun to heal the psychic 
discontinuity that plagues us”.13 But he also said a lot of other things 
concerning DMT, such as suggesting, like Evans-Wentz, that elves were 
hyper-dimensional entities and that they were sentient and existed in their 
own right. 
In support of all this, what I find interesting is that two of my 
colleagues had praying mantis encounters on DMT. For one of them it was 
their first time, and I assume they were naive because I knew how little 
they knew about the DMT and other psychedelic literature at that time. 
Certainly they were perplexed and surprised to meet a mantis and reported 
knowing nothing of the scant and obscure literature concerning them. 
Furthermore, one associate, under the influence of ayahuasca (which 
contains DMT), had an experience of being farmed for their emotions by 
praying mantis beings. Numerous questions remain about why the image 
or symbol of the mantis should appear, though limitations of space prevent 
further speculation in this chapter. It is necessary to correlate such 
theoretical considerations with personal experience, and in this matter I 
need to describe my own experiences with elves, because I believe that 
this research benefits from being experiential as well, and not just viewed 
from an academic distance.14 I have had various DMT experiences myself, 
and on my very first trip I knew little of the literature. However, I was 
very surprised to have an experience of what I can only describe as elves. 
They were very small humanoid characters about one or two feet high, 
sitting on top of my body—although I did not really have a body as such, 
                                                           
13 McKenna: 43. 
14 See Luke 2011b. 

Chapter Seventeen 
 
288
more a space filled with light and energy resting where I had left behind 
my concept of my own corporality. There were smaller elves sitting on top 
of me shoving all the light into what I would call my solar plexus region. 
Immediately afterwards I realised the significance of the name “solar 
plexus”, because, obviously, where else would they shove the light? I was 
then quite intrigued to discover all the literature on DMT elves. In 
particular, years later, once I began reading the literature, I was astonished 
to come across a very similar account collected by Meyer in 1994: “I 
found myself once again [this is only their second DMT trip] in the 
company of the ‘elves,’ as the focus of their attention and ministrations, 
but they appeared much less colorful and altogether preoccupied with the 
task at hand, i.e., pouring a golden, viscous liquid through a network of 
long, inter-twining, transparent conduits which led into the middle of my 
abdomen ...”15 I continued to have a few more elf encounters on DMT, in 
which they often took on a very cartoon-like, clownish form, shape-
shifting, never really keeping still, moving around and impossible to pin 
down. They seemed to be saying, “we’re here! Join us, come and play! 
Nothing is as it seems, beware, take care, but have no cares.” 
In later experiences with ayahuasca, one in particular was very 
surprising. Ayahuasca is a jungle decoction used by the indigenes in the 
Amazon basin, the main ingredient of which is DMT, and it gives a 
somewhat (usually) milder four to six-hour DMT experience. During this 
experience I was sitting in a tent and several elves suddenly appeared in 
front of me. Now previously to this I had only closed-eye experiences of 
elves in some other dimension running around doing things, hyperspatially 
if you like. But here I was sitting there in a tent looking at the other people 
across from me, and the elves come into view between us, which was 
rather alarming, so alarming in fact that I turned around so I could not see 
them as I could not quite cope with them being there. But of course elves 
being elves, they ran around in front of me, so I had to keep looking away 
and they would keep running back around—I really did not know what to 
make of it. I had read lots about them by now and had even experienced 
them with my eyes closed—but this was just too much of an ontological 
challenge. 
But it need not always be DMT that is the trigger for these elf 
experiences, because we know from the literature that people commonly 
have spontaneous elf encounters on other psychoactive substances. When I 
was on research in Brazil in 2010 I had the good fortune of going to a 
ceremony of the Guaraní indigenous people. It was supposedly a tobacco 
ceremony, but during the night things got very weird and I was not quite 
                                                           
15 Meyer (no pagination). 

So long as you’ve got your Elf 
289 
sure why. For instance, on the minibus coming back there was a little old 
woman in front of me peering over the top of the seats. She looked about 
three hundred years old, with a smile that extended all the way back to her 
ears, and she had very large, dark, almond-shaped eyes—in fact, they were 
completely jet black. She had an ancient wizened face, peering over the 
top of the seat and smiling at me, and I thought, “who is that old woman? 
And why does she keep smiling at me? … I don’t remember her coming 
on the minibus with us to visit the Indians.” 
It would have been extraordinary if she had just got on the minibus 
with us—and yet despite the fact she looked like she was three hundred 
years old her presence there was completely normal to me, and totally real. 
It was not until the next day when I was communicating with some of my 
colleagues who had also came along to this supposed tobacco ceremony, 
and we were trying to piece together why we had several hours of missing 
time as well as all the other strange things that had happened, that one of 
them said, “Did you see that little man running round the fire in the 
Indians’ hut last night? My friend and I saw him.” And I answered, “no, I 
don’t remember seeing him”. But both of them saw him so there was some 
kind of correlation at least, a smattering of objectivity as a “collective 
subjectivity” perhaps, as there were apparently multiple witnesses to this 
event. My colleague had also drawn a picture which she showed me, 
depicting her and her friend in the ceremonial hut, looking rather 
distressed, in the company of a little wizened old man. Upon seeing the 
picture of the little man, I suddenly remembered the little old woman on 
the minibus and I said, “well I didn’t see him, but I saw a little woman 
who looked just like him.” Later that day I eventually concluded (when I 
was trying to give a presentation at a conference and I could not actually 
read my lecture notes), that we’d been slipped some floripondio 
(Brugmansia genus), which is probably the only explanation for it—at 
least that was my evaluation of the situation. My point is that it need not 
always be DMT, it can be other substances that bring on the elves too. In 
fact drugs are not necessary for elves at all; they can and do occur 
spontaneously, but it may be that an altered state of consciousness itself is 
necessary and some people are more prone to achieving dissociative states. 
Furthermore, it may be that we all have DMT active in our brain and when 
we go into these spontaneous states of altered consciousness we’re 
actually activating our own endogenous DMT, so that DMT could be the 
neurochemical substrate of these spontaneous conducive-to-elf experiences. 
Rick Strassman has suggested that DMT could be a mediator in all 
spontaneous mystical and paranormal experiences, be they out-of-body 
experiences, near death experiences or alien abduction experiences, but 

Chapter Seventeen 
 
290
also sleep paralysis. So we have a kind of death, alien, elf, entity, 
paranormal or mystical experience complex that is grouped around the use 
of DMT (or ayahuasca), either spontaneously or exogenously. There is 
also some evidence for a type of spontaneous shamanic initiation common 
to the whole near-death, alien abduction complex.16 However, although it 
is easy to melt the DMT event down into one uber-experience, there are 
certain nuances and differences in these phenomena which need to be 
addressed:17 the aliens themselves may actually be elves, but they are more 
intra-terrestrial than extra-terrestrial, or perhaps even trans-terrestrial—
that is, they are not actually outside, but then inside is the wrong term as 
well. These experiences certainly occur “in” consciousness. As a scientist, 
trying to take an experimental approach to this research is pretty tricky, to 
say the least, so it probably also makes sense to take a mystical approach. 
The late great scientist Dr Albert Hoffman, the discoverer of LSD, wrote 
in his autobiography that science and mysticism should be natural allies, 
not enemies. So the best approach would probably be a combination of 
both. 
Bibliography 
Clarke, D. (2010) “I know what I saw: Extraordinary experiences with 
UFOs”, paper presented at the second Exploring the Extraordinary 
Conference, York University, 24-25th September. 
Evans-Wentz, W. Y. (2004) The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries (Franklin 
Lakes, NJ: Career Press). 
Harvey-Wilson, S. (2001) “Shamanism and alien abductions: A comparative 
study,” Australian Journal of Parapsychology, 1.2: 103-116. 
Hoffman, A. (2005) LSD My Problem Child (MAPS). 
Hunter, J. (2011) “Numinous Conversations: Performance and Manifestation 
of Spirits in Spirit Possession Practices”, in Daimonic Imagination: 
Uncanny Intelligence, A. Voss & W. Rowlandson (eds) (Newcastle: 
Cambridge Scholars Publishing) 391-403. 
Kottmeyer, M. S. (1999) “Graying mantis”, The REALL News 7.5, 
www.reall.org/newsletter/v07/n05/index.html 
(accessed 
November 
2012). 
Kripal, J. (2010) Authors of the Impossible: the Paranormal and the Sacred 
(Chicago: Chicago University Press). 
                                                           
16 See Harvey-Wilson, McKenna, Ring 1989, 1992. 
17 See Luke 2008. 

So long as you’ve got your Elf 
291 
—. (2011) Mutants and Mystics: Science Fiction, Superhero Comics and 
the Paranormal (Chicago: Chicago University Press). 
Lang, A. (1893).The secret commonwealth of elves, fauns & fairies: A 
study in folk-lore & psychical research (London: David Nutt).  
Leary, T. (1966) “Programmed communication during experiences with 
DMT (dimethyltryptamine)”, Psychedelic Review 8, 83-95. 
Luke, D. (2008) Book review, “Inner paths to outer space: Journeys to 
alien worlds through psychedelics and other spiritual technologies, by 
Rick Strassman et al. Journal of Scientific Exploration 22, 564-569. 
—. (2011a) “Discarnate entities and dimethyltryptamine (DMT): 
Psychopharmacology, phenomenology and ontology”, Journal of the 
Society for Psychical Research, 75, 26-42. 
—. (2011b) “Experiential reclamation and first person parapsychology”, 
Journal of Parapsychology, 75, 185-199. 
McKenna, T. (1991) The Archaic Revival: Speculations on Psychedelic 
Mushrooms, the Amazon, Virtual Reality, Ufos, Evolution, Shamanism, 
the Rebirth of the Goddess, and the End of History (San Francisco: 
Harper). 
Meyer, P. (1994) “Apparent communication with discarnate entities 
induced by dimethyltryptamine (DMT)” in T. Lyttle, Psychedelic 
(New York: Barricade Books) 161-203. 
Ring, K. (1989) “Near-death and UFO encounters as shamanic initiations: 
Some conceptual and evolutionary implications”, ReVision, 11 (3), 14-
22.  
—. (1992) The Omega Project: Near-death Experiences, UFO Encounters 
and Mind at Large (New York: William Morrow & Co.). 
Strassman, R. (2001) DMT: The Spirit Molecule: A Doctor’s 
Revolutionary Research into the Biology of Near-Death and Mystical 
Experiences (Rochester, VT: Park Street Press).  
—. (2008) “The varieties of the DMT experience” in R. Strassman, S. 
Wojtowicz, L. E. Luna & E. Frecska, Inner Paths to Outer Space: 
Journeys to Alien Worlds through Psychedelics and other Spiritual 
Technologies, 51-80 (Rochester, VT: Park Street Press) 51-80. 
Streiber, W. (1987) Communion: A true story (New York: Avon Books). 
Szára, S. (1956) “Dimethyltryptamin: Its metabolism in man; the relation 
of its psychotic effect to the serotonin metabolism”, Experientia, 12 
(11), 441-442. 
Vallée, J. (1969) Passport to Magonia (Chicago: Henry Regnery Company). 
 

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 
C. G. JUNG, TIBETAN TANTRA  
AND THE GREAT GODDESS: 
AN EXPLORATION OF SACRED ENTITIES  
AND ARCHETYPES 
JUDSON DAVIS 
 
 
 
There are moments in the lives of nearly all human beings in which 
everyday human perception gives way to encounters with miraculous 
phenomena that cannot readily be explained. Often these experiences—
which may arise through the presence of discarnate entities, the emergence 
of spontaneous visions or intuitions, or through powerful, transformative 
dreams—leave a profound and lasting effect. It was just this kind of 
miraculous encounter that was experienced by the author in Tibet back in 
1996, an experience that is given a heightened sense of meaning when 
examined through the lens of Jungian depth psychology and Tibetan 
Buddhist Tantra. 
The event in question occurred whilst I was travelling as part of a 
small, overland expedition that had left the capital of Lhasa en route to the 
ancient city of Kathmandu, Nepal. One evening, whilst sleeping at 
Rongbuk Monastery near the base of Mount Everest, I awoke in the 
middle of the night and instinctively found myself drawn up a 
neighbouring hillside where, upon reaching the top, I encountered the 
undeniable presence of an utterly vast feminine entity that seemed to 
blanket the sky above. Her being exuded tremendous power, depth, and 
sensitivity, and at that moment I felt that my mother might have passed 
away and that her expanded spirit was now visiting me. However, when I 
put this question to the sky I received no reply, and later I would learn that 
indeed my mother was still alive, which draped this profound experience 
in mystery. What, then, was this immense and unfathomable entity, and 
how, though invisible, was she able to exude such power? 

C. G. Jung, Tibetan Tantra and the Great Goddess 
293 
A few days later we arrived in Kathmandu, and the next day, while 
strolling through the side streets of this medieval metropolis, I came upon an 
image that immediately captured my attention. The image was of a female 
figure, clearly presented in the context of veneration and surrounded by a 
host of exotic and esoteric figures. At the time I was not well versed in the 
pantheon of Tibetan Buddhist deities and religious icons, and so I was not 
immediately attuned to the fact that this mysterious and alluring female 
presence, with her air of serenity and deep green colouring, was the Goddess 
Tara, accompanied by her cohorts and astral attendants. This specific 
identification would come to me at a later date; all I knew then, after first 
setting my eyes on her, was that she must return home with me. For more 
than a year prior to my return to the States she lay peacefully rolled up and 
stored away in my apartment in Kyoto, Japan. It was not until I returned to 
California that she was carefully framed and subsequently began to assume a 
distinct visual presence in my living space. However, a deeper appreciation 
of her essential meaning—in a broader religious context and in my own 
personal existence— remained largely beyond my conscious awareness. 
Jungian depth psychology and Tibetan Buddhist Tantra 
Some years later while in graduate school I became simultaneously exposed 
to the work of C. G. Jung and the precepts of Tibetan Buddhism, with their 
mutual focus on the sacred feminine. Jung, for example, placed great 
emphasis on the importance of actively embracing the natural world in a 
deeply spiritual and mythological framework,1 and in this context he viewed 
nature as the ultimate manifestation of the archetypal Goddess. One of 
Jung’s contemporaries, Erich Neumann, outlined the meaning of the sacred 
feminine—and its prominent correlation to the Goddess Tara—as follows: 
The archetypal feminine in man unfolds like mankind itself. At the 
beginning stands the primeval goddess, resting in the materiality of her 
elementary character, knowing nothing but the secret of her womb; at the 
end is Tara, in her left hand the opening lotus blossom of psychic flowering, 
her right hand held out toward the world in a gesture of giving. Her eyes 
are half closed, and in her meditation she turns toward the outward as well 
as the inner world: an eternal image of the redeeming female spirit. Both 
together form the unity of the Great Goddess, who, in the totality of her 
unfolding, fills the world from its lowest elementary phase, to its supreme 
spiritual transformation.2 
                                                           
1 See Jung 1963. 
2 Neumann 1983: 334-335. 

Chapter Eighteen 
 
294
Within the context of the archetypal feminine, Tara can be viewed as 
belonging to a broader group of female embodiments of wisdom and 
divine power in Tibetan Buddhism that include the dakini, which “has 
been sometimes compared in the West with Jung’s concept of one of the 
major archetypes, the anima.”3 The correlation of Tibetan feminine 
archetypes with the anima exists as an important component in this study, 
because “in the male-oriented Western world the concept of anima, as the 
feminine counterpart of the masculine psyche, and the proper integration 
of the two aspects, is crucial to the psychological balance of the individual 
and the culture.”4 Marie Louise von Franz further exemplified the 
fundamental importance of the anima as follows: “Vital is the role that the 
anima plays in putting a man’s mind in tune with the right values and […] 
opening the way into more profound inner depths […]. The anima takes on 
the role of guide, or mediator, to the world within and to the Self.”5 The 
role that the sacred feminine plays in the process of spiritual development 
was further outlined by Nathan Katz: “The inspiration of the anima or the 
dakini is a call for one to look inward. As such, she is the link between the 
conscious and unconscious. In appearing to consciousness, the anima calls 
its attention to what has remained hidden; she is the door to the 
unconscious.”6 
Indeed, one of the most prominent archetypal figures in this process is 
the Goddess Tara, who exemplifies compassion, enlightened activity, and 
the fundamental qualities of a saviouress. Furthermore, she is “is revered 
as the mother of all buddhas. Tara, in her essence, symbolises the totally 
developed wisdom that transcends reason.”7 In Jungian terms, she 
“represents the mother archetype […] she is the image of the mother who 
has integrated in herself all the opposites, positive and negative.”8 This 
notion of the reconciliation of opposites represents a primary element in 
both Tibetan Buddhism and Jungian psychology, and a fundamental 
principle in both traditions is the fostering of one’s true nature through the 
process of creative visualisation. Although there exists a conspicuous 
differentiation between the Jungian “Self” and the Buddhist “no-self” (and 
its attendant precept of “no-God”), in Tibetan tantra meditations and 
rituals centred upon the visualisation of deities such as Tara play an 
important role in this process: 
                                                           
3 Moacanin: 63. 
4 Moacanin: 64-65. 
5 Von Franz: 193. 
6 Katz: 322. 
7 Moacanin: 63. 
8 Moacanin: 63. 

C. G. Jung, Tibetan Tantra and the Great Goddess 
295 
Even though the notion of no-Self (Skt. anatma) is a central tenet of 
Buddhism, the Buddhist tantric path conceives that our potential for 
wholeness is personified in the symbolic form of a deity […] The deity in 
Tantra is understood as a gateway or bridge between two aspects of reality 
[…] In Buddhism we speak of ‘relative truth,’ the world of appearances 
and forms, and ‘ultimate truth,’ the empty, spacious, non-dual nature of 
reality […] The deity stands on the threshold as the potential for creative 
manifestation.9 
Tara and other such archetypal deities are often depicted within the 
context of a mandala, a universal form that Jung came to see as the 
ultimate symbolic expression of psychic wholeness: “The mandala is an 
archetypal image whose occurrence is attested throughout the ages. It 
signifies the wholeness of the self. The circular image represents the 
wholeness of the psychic ground or, to put it in mythic terms, the divinity 
incarnate in man […] which spontaneously arises in the mind as a 
representation of the struggle and reconciliation of opposites.10 He later 
explained: 
It seems to me beyond question that these Eastern symbols originated in 
dreams and visions, and were not invented by some Mahayana church father. 
On the contrary, they are among the oldest religious symbols of humanity 
[…] and may even have existed in Paleolithic times […] The mandalas used 
in ceremonial are of great significance because their centers usually contain 
one of the highest religious figures: either Shiva himself—often in the 
embrace of Shakti—or the Buddha, Amitabha, Avalokiteshvara, or one of 
the great Mahayana teachers, or simply the dorje, symbol of all the divine 
forces together, whether creative or destructive.11 
This passage emphasises the role that mythic imagery and sacred symbols 
play in spiritual development, and indeed both Jungian psychology and 
Tibetan tantra stress that such imagery arises in conjunction with the 
developmental stages that accompany spiritual growth. Tenzin Wangyal 
Rinpoche expressed this notion in the following statement: “The 
underlying truth is that these teachings arise spontaneously from humans 
when they reach a certain point in their individual development. The 
teachings are inherent in the foundational wisdom that any culture can 
eventually access. They are not only Buddhist or Bon teachings; they are 
teachings for all humans”.12 So, even in Buddhism, in which one’s true 
                                                           
9 Preece: 38-39. 
10 Jung 1963: 334-335. 
11 Jung 1974: 170-172 
12 Wangyal: 71 

Chapter Eighteen 
 
296
nature is understood as lacking any inherent existence, mythic imagery 
and entities (e.g., Buddha Sakyamuni, Avalokitesvara and Tara) are 
employed in tantric methodologies as a creative means of furthering one’s 
spiritual development. According to Lama Yeshe, this is done with the 
understanding that the deity we choose to identify with represents the 
essential qualities of the fully awakened experience latent within us. To 
use the language of psychology, such a deity is an archetype of our own 
deepest nature, our most profound level of consciousness. In tantra we 
focus our attention upon such an archetypal image and identify with it in 
order to arouse the deepest, most profound aspects of our being and bring 
them into our present reality.13 
Psychic projections and autonomous dimensions 
The role of archetypal images and entities in spiritual development is 
emphasised in both traditions, but their ontological status remains 
something of a mystery. Do such images and entities have an autonomous 
existence, or are they merely psychic projections? In this regard, although 
thankas and other forms of sacred art used in Tibetan meditative practices 
depict deities, paradises, and other dimensions, Lama Yeshe was careful to 
clarify that “tantric meditational deities should not be confused with what 
different mythologies and religions might mean when they speak of gods 
and goddesses […] The deity we choose to identify with represents the 
essential qualities of the fully awakened experience latent within us.”14 
Echoing the same perspective, Pratapaditya Pal stated that “on a more 
metaphysical level, the divine images are simply symbols of the Buddha 
[…] They are not themselves real but help to define reality, and are 
dispensed with by the enlightened mind and by the true yogi.”15 Jung, in 
The Psychology of Eastern Meditation, also emphasised this fundamental 
principle when he stated that “in the meditation it is realised that the 
Buddha is really nothing other than the activating psyche of the yogi—the 
meditator himself. It is not only that the image of the Buddha is produced 
out of ‘one’s own mind and thought,’ but the psyche which produces these 
thought-forms is the Buddha himself”.16 However, in apparent contrast to 
these assertions, Lama Govinda, in his foreword to The Tibetan Book of 
the Dead that accompanies Jung’s own commentary on the same text, 
emphasised that: 
                                                           
13 Yeshe: 30 
14 Yeshe: 30. 
15 Pal: 36. 
16 Jung 1936/1958: 567. 

C. G. Jung, Tibetan Tantra and the Great Goddess 
297 
[…] animism permeates all Buddhist texts, wherein every tree and grove, 
and every locality, is held to have its own peculiar deities; and the Buddha 
is represented as discoursing with gods and other spiritual beings, 
inhabiting the Earth and the realms beyond, as if it were a most natural 
procedure. Only a completely intellectualised and Westernised Buddhism, 
which attempts to separate the thought-content of Buddhism from its 
equally profound mythological elements, can deny this animistic background 
and with it the metaphysical foundations of Buddhism.17 
According to the present Dalai Lama, these various realms are inhabited 
by other conscious entities of widely varying characteristics: 
Basically we can say there are different worlds, different experiences; 
human life is just one of them. What we usually call spirits are some 
different form of life, beings who have a different body and mentality. 
Within the desire realm, and more specifically within the environment 
inhabited by human beings, there is quite a variety of other entities […] 
And they’re all cohabitating with us right here.18 
It is thus essential to note that Tibetans consider spiritual entities to be 
more than mere psychic projections, even if their religious practice of 
creative visualisation involves the worship of such iconic figures as Tara 
(who in this context would be understood as a psychic projection). Indeed, 
an array of spiritual entities are thought to possess their own autonomous 
natures and to exist in innumerable spiritual planes and universes, a 
phenomenon that is given greater clarity in the following passage by Tulku 
Thongdup: 
Buddhist cosmology encompasses an unimaginably vast number of world 
systems beyond our earthly home. Outside of the mundane world, the six 
realms of samsara, there exist innumerable pure lands extending in all ten 
directions of the universe […] These purified paradises are the dwelling 
places of advanced beings, including celestial buddhas and great bodhisattvas.19 
In the light of the different perspectives presented above, one appears to be 
left with a complex and ambiguous ontological problem: do such entities 
and dimensions—as readily depicted in Tibetan sacred art itself—exist 
apart from human psychic projection, or are they “real” in the same way 
that human beings consider their own lives and the earthly physical 
domain they inhabit to be a factual reality? Perhaps this question can be 
answered in part when the Buddhist notion of “no-self” (i.e., no inherent 
                                                           
17 Govinda 1960: lvii. 
18 Varela: 141. 
19 Thongdup: 284. 

Chapter Eighteen 
 
298
existence) is applied to such entities, just as it applies to human beings. 
Nevertheless, the Western mind continues to insist upon the ontological 
reality of its own existence (on Earth and often elsewhere). More recently, 
however, such considerations have been expanded and given further 
clarity through the pioneering transpersonal findings of Stanislav Grof. His 
extensive research into non-ordinary states of consciousness strongly 
suggests the existence of an immense array of spiritual realms and 
experiential dimensions that lie beyond the perception of ordinary waking 
consciousness. His findings postulate the existence of two forms of 
ultimate reality, which are referred to as absolute consciousness and 
cosmic emptiness, or the Void. Absolute consciousness represents the 
supreme creative principle (which is responsible for the creation of 
manifest existence and finds a correlation in Jung’s notion of the Self), and 
this creative principle is thought to co-exist with, and emanate from, the 
great Void, as outlined below: 
When we encounter the Void, we feel that it is primordial emptiness of 
cosmic proportions and relevance. We become pure consciousness aware 
of this absolute nothingness; however, at the same time, we have a strange 
paradoxical sense of its essential fullness […] While it does not contain 
anything in a concrete manifest form, it seems to comprise all of existence 
in potential form […] The Void transcends the usual categories of space 
and time, and lies beyond all dichotomies and polarities, such as light and 
darkness, good and evil […] agony and ecstasy, singularity and plurality, 
form and emptiness, and even existence and nonexistence […] This 
metaphysical vacuum, pregnant with potential for everything there is, 
appears to be the cradle of all being, the ultimate source of existence. The 
creation of all phenomenal worlds is then the realization and concretization 
of its pre-existing potentialities.20 
This passage addresses a number of primary themes in Buddhist cosmology, 
including the Void as primordial emptiness, the reconciliation and union 
of all opposites (one is immediately reminded here of the famous Buddhist 
adage, form is emptiness, and emptiness is form), the existence of a 
timeless dimension, and the presence of countless world systems. It also 
touches upon the theme of manifest existence arising out of this Void, and 
Grof proposed that some of the various realms and the entities that inhabit 
them are understood to interact with and inform our earthly dimension in 
ways that are consistent with aspects of Jungian psychology: 
 
 
                                                           
20 Grof: 30. 

C. G. Jung, Tibetan Tantra and the Great Goddess 
299 
The material realm that we inhabit and with which we are intimately 
familiar seems to be just one of these worlds […]. Of special interest is a 
domain that lies between our everyday reality and the undifferentiated 
Absolute Consciousness. It is a mythological realm that has been 
extensively studied by C. G. Jung and his followers […]. Jung referred to it 
as the archetypal realm of the collective unconscious. The beings 
inhabiting these realms seem to be endowed with extraordinary energy and 
have an aura of sacredness or numinosity. For this reason they are usually 
perceived and described as deities […]. The encounters with mythological 
beings and visits to mythic landscapes […] can be in every respect as real 
as events in our everyday life, or more so. The archetypal realm is not a 
figment of human fantasy and imagination; it has an independent existence 
of its own and a high degree of autonomy. At the same time, its dynamics 
seem to be intimately connected with material reality and with human 
life.21 
Indeed, it is just this kind of heightened dimension that is sometimes 
accessed through the creative, meditative and dream practices emphasised 
in both Jungian psychotherapy and Tibetan tantra. Tulku Thongdup, for 
example, confirmed that many stories in Tibetan Buddhist literature tell of 
“meditators who leave their bodies for days at a time to travel through the 
invisible world.”22 Such practitioners, who are known as delogs, then 
“come back to their bodies to record their extraordinary journeys, which 
could span the lowest rungs of hell and the sublime pure lands.”23 One 
fascinating account of just such a psychic journey—abounding with 
mythic imagery and sacred entities—is revealed in the following 
experience of a young Tibetan woman: 
Dawa Drolma felt that she moved through the sky, soaring like a vulture. 
She found herself in the manifested pure land of Guru Rinpoche, the 
Buddha in the form of a realised master. There was a boundlessly vast 
field. In the centre she saw a giant red rock mountain in the shape of a 
heart. The mountain was surrounded by many sharp, sword-like mountains, 
all shining with a reddish colour. The sky was adorned with a canopy of 
five colored rainbow light. All kinds of beautiful birds were singing and 
playing joyfully. The ground was covered with flowers of all kinds and 
colors. The whole atmosphere was filled with an amazing sweet fragrance 
that overwhelmed all her senses. There was also a blue mountain, as if 
made of sapphire. These were not vague appearances, but vivid images with 
real presence […]. In the middle of the mountain, she saw the inconceivable 
palace of Guru Rinpoche called the Lotus of Light. The palace was the 
                                                           
21 Grof: 69-70. 
22 Thongdup: 6. 
23 Thongdup: 6. 

Chapter Eighteen 
 
300
enlightened wisdom of Guru Rinpoche himself, spontaneously appearing 
in the form of a luminous mansion of light […]. This pure land was filled 
with masters, dakas, and dakinis […]. Accompanied by White Tara, Dawa 
Drolma entered into another inconceivably beautiful palace, made as if of 
red crystal […]. In the middle of a great hall, Dawa Drolma saw an 
enormous throne—higher, it seemed to her, than a three-story building 
[…]. On that throne she beheld the amazing presence of Guru Rinpoche, 
Padmasambhava, the embodiment of the wisdom, compassion, and power 
of the enlightened ones […]. Dawa Drolma drew closer to the throne and 
touched her forehead to the feet of Guru Rinpoche […]. Guru Rinpoche 
bestowed upon her empowerments and blessings. With great compassion, 
he said […] ‘Tell people what you saw and entreat them to pursue virtue’ 
[…]. Then White Tara led Dawa Drolma to the hell realms. Dawa Drolma 
journeyed through the experiences of the bardo. She saw the Dharma King 
of the Lords of the Dead in wrathful and terrifying form in his Court of 
Judgment […]. She also saw the results of karmic effects and the severity 
of sufferings of the hell realms with her naked eyes, so she would be able 
to more effectively on her return to the world of the living […]. White Tara 
then took Dawa Drolma to visit Potala, the pure land of Avalokiteshvara, 
and Yulo Kopa, the pure land of Tara, before returning to the human world 
[…]. Dawa Drolma spent the rest of her life teaching Dharma based on her 
delog experiences and totally devoting her life to the service of others […]. 
In 1941, at the age of thirty-two, she died […]. People witnessed many 
miracles at the time of her death and cremation. She and her delog 
accounts inspired the hearts of many people in many parts of Eastern Tibet 
to believe in the law of karma and rebirth. That in turn awakened a kinder 
nature in many.24 
This extract portrays an array of mythic imagery and entities that represent 
aspects of the practitioner’s own inner spiritual processes while 
simultaneously revealing heightened experiential domains. In the light of 
the decidedly extraordinary nature (at least in modern Western terms) of 
this other-worldly portrayal, the question must again be asked: how does 
one differentiate between this woman’s own spiritual processes and 
projections and the supposed autonomous existence of the entities who 
appear in her experiential vision? 
The intermediate world of the mundus imaginalis 
Attempting to make sense of such psychic phenomena requires an 
approach that is not limited to our usual modes of perception, and it is 
arguably in the pioneering work of Henry Corbin that a cogent ontological 
                                                           
24 Thongdup: 151-155. 

C. G. Jung, Tibetan Tantra and the Great Goddess 
301 
basis for such phenomena can be established. Corbin, who was an intimate 
colleague of Jung, delved deeply into the ancient mystical traditions of 
Iran, and through the work of Zarathustra, Mazdean angelology, and 
Sufism discovered an inner world of archetypal forms and entities 
(consisting of subtle bodies, as in the Tibetan tradition) that lies between 
cognitive awareness and the five physical senses. This dimension of active 
imagination, or medio mundi, requires an organ of perception inherent in 
the soul, one that “implies an intellectual faculty that is not limited to the 
sole use of conceptual abstraction nor to the sensory perception of physical 
data.”25 Accessing this dimension thus reveals an intermediate universe 
that is neither that of the Essences of philosophy nor that of the sensory 
data on which the work of positive science is based, but which is a 
universe of archetype-Images, experienced as so many personal 
presences.26 
Perceiving this intermediate universe through the faculty of visionary 
intuition reveals “a world of archetypal celestial Figures which the active-
Imagination alone is able to apprehend. This Imagination does not 
construct something unreal, but unveils the hidden reality.”27 Corbin 
further emphasised that: 
[…] the active Imagination thus induced will not produce some arbitrary, 
even lyrical, construction standing between us and ‘reality,’ but will, on the 
contrary, function directly as a faculty and organ of knowledge just as real 
as—if not more real than—the sense organs […] This being so, the 
authenticity of the Event and its full reality consist essentially of this 
visionary act and of the apparition vouchsafed by it.28 
This perspective is further echoed by the Tibetan Buddhist scholar David 
Snellgrove as it relates to the tantric practice of creative visualisation: 
It would be useless to invoke any form of divinity, higher or lower, without 
believing in such a being. The high point of any such right is the descent of 
the actual divinity (known as the ‘wisdom-being’ or jnanasattva) into the 
symbol of the divinity (the sacramental-being or samayasattva), which has 
been prepared for this mystical (or magical) conjunction. The practitioner 
is certainly taught that the divine forms are also emanations of his own 
mind, but they are not arbitrary imaginings and they are far more real than 
his own transitory personality, which is a mere flow […] of consubstantial 
elements. In learning to produce mentally such higher forms of emanation 
                                                           
25 Corbin: 4. 
26 Corbin: 4. 
27 Corbin: 11-12. 
28 Corbin: 11. 

Chapter Eighteen 
 
302
and eventually identifying himself with them, the practitioner gradually 
transforms his evanescent personality into that higher state of being.29 
This manner of visionary perception not only provides access to multiple 
psychic planes, but according to Corbin also serves to transform the 
physical Earth into a visionary geography in which “the Imago Terrae can 
reflect its own Image back to the soul, or reciprocally, that the soul can fix 
its meditation on the archetype-Image.”30 Thus, the various paradises in 
the esoteric cosmology of all religious traditions are understood as the 
scene of visionary events in which plants, water, mountains are transmuted 
into symbols, that is, perceived by the organ of an Image which itself is the 
presence of a visionary state. Like the heavenly Figures, the earthly 
landscapes then appear haloed with the Light of Glory, restored to their 
paradisal purity.31 Corbin further emphasised that: 
The active Imagination perceives and shows itself an Earth which is other 
than the Earth which is seen in ordinary sensory experience […]. 
Phenomenologically, we should understand it as being at the same time the 
Light which constitutes, haloes, and enlightens the soul, and the primordial 
Image of itself which the soul projects. […] The Imago Terrae, while it is 
the organ of perception itself, also signifies those aspects and figures of the 
Earth that are perceived, no longer simply by the senses nor as sensory 
empirical data, but by the archetype-Image, the Image a priori of the soul 
itself. The Earth is then a vision, and geography a visionary geography.32 
The most essential representation of this Soul of the World is the Sacred 
Feminine, and especially the figure of the Great Goddess, which 
concurrently finds expression in such archetypes as the World Mountain (a 
universal image that is further delineated below). As outlined previously, 
such entities are accessed in the mundus imaginalis, an intermediate 
dimension that is itself the centre—the “meeting place of Heavenly Beings 
and Earthly Beings,”33 of time and eternity—and as such “the Earth of 
visions has to be reached in medio mundi, where real events are the visions 
themselves.”34 Such a psychic/subtle dimension thus represents “a world 
symbolizing with the sensory, which it precedes, and with the intelligible, 
which it imitates. It is a mixed world, mediating between the sensory and 
                                                           
29 Snellgrove: 131. 
30 Corbin: 20. 
31 Corbin: 16. 
32 Corbin: 29-30. 
33 Corbin: 16. 
34 Corbin: 32. 

C. G. Jung, Tibetan Tantra and the Great Goddess 
303 
the intelligible; it is the center of the worlds.”35 Thus, through such sacred 
mythic imagery as the World Mountain: 
[…] what the soul shows to itself […] is precisely its own image […]. The 
universe thus imagined, free from misleading and perishable sensory data, 
is therefore a function of the pure transcendental Imagination and depends 
only on its categories, which are a priori archetypal Images.36 
Corbin further stressed that although such images and entities possess an 
independent existence in the subtle dimension of the mundus imaginalis, 
they may also on occasion manifest in the company of earthly inhabitants, 
and indeed their symbolic existence finds ubiquitous expression in the art 
of both world culture and religion. 
Amplification of the mystical encounter at Mount Everest 
Using this framework, I will now proceed to evaluate in greater depth my 
encounter with the undeniably autonomous Goddess entity at the base of 
Mount Everest, and my subsequent, inexplicable absorption with the Tara 
image in Kathmandu. First of all, it must be remembered that the 
reconciliation of opposites, and more specifically the union of one’s inner 
nature and the world of physical form, exist as a fundamental aspect in 
depth psychology as well as in the tantric tradition. Accordingly the 
energies of both the physical body and the physical environment represent 
key aspects in the process of spiritual growth and transformation: “Tantra 
cultivates a return to the world where psyche and soma, consciousness and 
matter, are in an intimate inter-relationship. The understanding of subtle 
energy, both within the body and in the natural environment, makes this 
profound reconnection possible, principally through the body”.37 The 
body, then, essentially acts as a kind of alchemical vessel in direct 
relationship with the Earth, in that “throughout the body, both male and 
female elements localise in twenty-four particular places […] These inner 
elemental centers correspond to the surrounding land, which gives Tantra 
a particular significance in relation to nature.”40 These male and female 
elements, which represent both exterior and interior forces, are represented 
in the tantric tradition as dakas (masculine aspects) and dakinis (feminine 
aspects) Preece explains their connection as follows: 
                                                           
35 Corbin: 76. 
36 Corbin: 76. 
37 Preece: 245. 

Chapter Eighteen 
 
304
The relationship between the inner body centers and the outer land 
locations is very subtle. In Chakrasamvara Tantra, the forces that inhabit 
these centers take the aspect of dakas and dakinis. When a tantric 
practitioner meditates, he or she aims to tune into the relationship of these 
inner and outer forces and allow a process of healing to take place. In this 
way, the outer land manifests through the dakas and dakinis and blesses 
and heals the inner energies. The land is then experienced as if it were a 
complete mandala with specific locations for different functions, just as the 
body serves different functions.38 
Within this context, it is interesting to note that Tibetans consider dakas 
and dakinis to exist as definitive and very powerful spiritual entities who 
inhabit the “above land” centres in “a dimension of reality known as 
Khacho Shing, a realm closely related to our own, yet more subtle and 
more intimately connected to the elemental forces of nature.”39 Further, in 
his book The Sacred Place, Paul Devereux observed that the interaction of 
cosmic and earthly forces appears to be highly concentrated in certain 
physical environments, and it is especially pertinent to note that 
throughout human history mountains in particular have been known to 
exist as the sacred refuge of the Goddess. This is precisely the belief that is 
held by the native Tibetan and Nepalese inhabitants who occupy both 
sides of Mount Everest. This mountain has long been considered a 
sanctified entity because many mystical experiences and encounters with 
various discarnate beings have been reported in its immediate vicinity. 
With this understanding in mind, the connection between Mount Everest 
and the Goddess in my own experience deserves further consideration. 
The World Mountain 
Mountains hold a special place in the religious thinking and creative 
iconography of the Himalayas, and Mount Kailash in particular (located in 
western Tibet) ubiquitously appears on thankas and other forms of 
Buddhist and Hindu art. Like Everest, Kailash represents the archetype of 
the World Mountain, and Mircea Eliade noted that in its various 
manifestations “this cosmic mountain may be identified with a real 
mountain, or it can be mythic, but it is always placed at the center of the 
world.”40 The Sacred Mountain, as a form of axis mundi, thus represents 
both a physical and spiritual entity, and, as the outer form serves to 
activate the inner archetype, it is also directly linked with the union of 
                                                           
38 Preece: 247. 
39 Preece: 248. 
40 Eliade 1992: 110. 

C. G. Jung, Tibetan Tantra and the Great Goddess 
305 
opposites and the psychosomatic dynamics of the chakra system. In the 
words of Lama Govinda: 
To Hindus and Buddhists alike Kailas is the center of the universe. It is 
called Meru or Sumeru, according to the oldest Sanskrit tradition, and is 
regarded to be not only the physical but metaphysical center of the world. 
And as our psychological organism is a microcosmic replica of the 
universe, Meru is represented by the spinal cord in our nervous system; 
and just as the various centers (Skt.: cakra) of consciousness are supported 
by and connected with the spinal cord (Skt.: meru-danda) […] in the same 
way Mount Meru forms the axis of the various planes of supramundane 
worlds.41 
This structural cosmology serves as the very basis of the all-important 
Buddhist stupa, and in depth psychology the World Mountain is one of the 
foremost archetypes of the Self and a most powerful and evocative symbol 
of spiritual ascendance. It also warrants mention that “as Kailas corresponds 
to the spinal column, it represents the axis of the spiritual universe, rising 
through innumerable world planes.”42 Here one finds a direct 
correspondence between the presence of the axial mountain, the human 
chakras, and the concurrent access to other dimensions of reality. In 
Tibetan Buddhist cosmology there exist numerous dimensions in various 
planes of existence, including such realms as Khacho Shing (the Pure 
Land of the Dakinis) and Yulo Kopa (the Pure Land of Tara). 
In considering this relationship between sanctified realms and the 
natural world, Eliade observed that “where the sacred manifests itself in 
space, the real unveils itself […]. It opens communication between the 
cosmic planes (between earth and heaven) and makes possible ontological 
passage from one mode of being to another.”43 From this perspective it 
seems quite probable that my contact with the Goddess was facilitated 
through the spiritual axis of Mount Everest, and whether she derived from 
the realm of Kacho Shing, Yulo Kopa, or one of the many other exalted 
paradises, there can be no question of her advanced spiritual nature. In this 
way her emergence served to activate a deep, on-going archetypal process 
while simultaneously revealing a wholly expanded sense of divine 
potential. This points to the existence of greatly heightened celestial or 
psychic realms that are, in the Buddhist tradition, major steps forward 
along the path to final liberation. The vital link that then resulted in the 
amplification of the experience came through my subsequent encounter 
                                                           
41 Govinda 1966: 273. 
42 Govinda 1966: 276. 
43 Eliade 1957/1987: 63. 

Chapter Eighteen 
 
306
with Tara’s mythic image, as encountered in the shop in Kathmandu. For 
me the image carried tremendous power (as a personal mythic 
projection/association), and ultimately led to a much deeper appreciation 
of my own unfolding spiritual direction and processes. It also 
demonstrated the presence of a vast and autonomous spiritual entity, an 
utterly immense and numinous mystery that is symbolised by—and 
transcends—the image of Tara itself. 
Therefore, what appears to have remained hidden and unconscious in 
my own experience was a deep and abiding realisation of the archetypal 
feminine, which was brought into direct conscious awareness through my 
encounter with the Goddess entity at the base of Everest. If one thus 
understands the deities depicted in mythic imagery as essentially symbolic 
representations of transcendent forces, these symbols possess a potent 
numinous quality by virtue of their archetypal nature. In Tibetan tantra 
they also denote—like the progressively advanced stages of the chakras—
heightened levels of spiritual development to which inhabitants of this 
earthly dimension aspire. As previously noted, the Buddha is said to have 
interacted with otherworldly entities, and indeed the very basis of the 
bodhisattva ideal involves the instruction and guidance of all sentient 
beings in this earthly realm—and in innumerable other dimensions as well. 
The very mysterious encounter with the vast ethereal and distinctly 
feminine presence at the base of Mount Everest remains one of the truly 
remarkable experiences of my life, and whether she is identified as Tara, a 
dakini, or otherwise she certainly would seem to correspond directly to the 
sacrality and divine mystery of a genuine Goddess. 
Conclusion 
These kinds of experiences involve encounters with sacred entities and 
archetypes whose ultimate nature defies any absolute determination or 
conclusion. At the same time, there appears to be an intriguing 
interrelationship between such advanced entities and the related archetypes 
that are recognised—and/or created by—the human psyche. Both Jungian 
psychology and Tibetan Buddhist tantra emphasise the importance of 
creative engagement with these archetypal figures, and each acknowledges 
levels of spiritual autonomy that are distinct from the human psyche. In 
both traditions spiritual awakening is the ultimate aim of human existence, 
a process that is intended, in modern developmental terms, to lead the 
ever-more actualised individual “from the ego to the Self, from the 
unconscious to consciousness, from the personal to the transpersonal, the 
holy, the realisation that the macrocosm is being mirrored in the microcosm 

C. G. Jung, Tibetan Tantra and the Great Goddess 
307 
of the human psyche.”44  
A deep and abiding awareness of this intimate interrelationship 
between inner and outer—of the psychic processes that unite the archetype 
of the World Mountain and the Sacred Mountain of Everest, or the blessed 
Goddess entity and her sanctified mythic image—is fundamental to this 
process, and accordingly the legitimacy of the imaginal workings of the 
human psyche must be realised. In the words of Lama Govinda: 
The subjectivity of inner vision does not diminish its reality-value. Such 
visions are not hallucinations, because their reality is that of the human 
psyche. They are symbols, in which the highest knowledge and the noblest 
endeavor of the human mind are embodied. Their visualisation is the 
creative process of spiritual projection, through which inner experience is 
translated into visible form.45 
As described above, this inner vision necessarily extends beyond the realm 
of psychic projection to include an expanded cosmology of experiential 
dimensions. As Tulku Thongdup was keen to emphasise, “there exist 
innumerable pure lands extending in all ten directions of the universe […]. 
These purified paradises are the dwelling places of advanced beings”46—
advanced beings that include the Great Goddess in one or more of her 
many manifestations. 
My encounter with the vast and enigmatic Goddess-entity at the base 
of Mount Everest remains a great and enduring mystery, but the 
transformative impact of this experience and the subsequent effect it had 
on the direction of my spiritual development cannot be underestimated. 
Indeed, it seems that this encounter served as the impetus for the 
realisation of a much broader process, one that is ultimately shared by all 
human beings through their engagement with sacred mythic images and 
symbols. These sacred forms and archetypes constitute the guiding 
principles of spiritual awakening, and point to the existence of 
autonomous entities who sometimes interact with inhabitants of the earthly 
domain in a profoundly transformative manner. 
                                                           
44 Moacanin: 67. 
45 Govinda 1969: 92. 
46 Thongdup: 284. 

Chapter Eighteen 
 
308
Bibliography 
Corbin, H. (1977) Spiritual Body and Celestial Earth: From Mazdean Iran 
to Shi’ite Iran trans. N. Pearson (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press). 
Devereux, P. (2000) The Sacred Place: The Ancient Origin of Holy and 
Mystical Sites (London: Cassell). 
Eliade, M. (1987) The Sacred and the Profane: The Nature of Religion 
trans. W. R. Trask (New York: Harcourt). 
—. (1992) Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy (Princeton, New 
Jersey: Princeton University Press). 
Govinda, L. A. (1960).Introductory Foreword to The Tibetan Book of the 
Dead, W. Y. Evans-Wentz (ed.) trans. Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup 
(London: Oxford University Press).  
—. (1966) The Way of the White Clouds (New York: The Overlook Press). 
—. (1969) Foundations of Tibetan Mysticism (San Francisco, CA: Weiser 
Books). 
Grof, S. (1998) The Cosmic Game. Explorations of the Frontiers of 
Human Consciousness (Albany, NY: State University of New York 
Press). 
Jung, C. G. (1958) “The Psychology of Eastern Meditation” in H. Read 
(ed.) The Collected Works of C. G. Jung vol. X, M. Fordham, G. Adler 
& W. M. McGuire (eds) trans. R. F. C. Hull, Bollingen Series 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 558-575. 
—. (1960) “The Transcendent Function” in H. Read (ed.) The Collected 
Works of C. G. Jung vol. VIII, M. Fordham, G. Adler & W. M. 
McGuire (eds) trans. R. F. C. Hull, Bollingen Series (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press) 67-91. 
—. (1963) Memories, Dreams, Reflections, A. Jaffé (ed.) trans. R. Winston 
& C. Winston (New York: Vintage Books) 3-359. 
—. (1964) “Approaching the Unconscious” in C. G. Jung (ed.), Man and 
his Symbols (London: Aldus Books) 2-94. 
—. (1974) Dreams trans. R. F. C. Hull (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press). 
—. (1990) The Undiscovered Self with Symbols and the Interpretation of 
Dream, trans. R. F. C. Hull (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press) 
3-144. 
Katz, N. (1992) “Dakini and Anima—On Tantric Deities and Jungian 
Archetypes” in D. J. Meckel & R. L. Moore (eds) Self and Liberation: 
The Jung/Buddhism Dialogue (Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press) 302-309. 
Moacanin, R. (2003) The Essence of Jung’s Psychology and Tibetan 

C. G. Jung, Tibetan Tantra and the Great Goddess 
309 
Buddhism: Western and Eastern Paths to the Heart (Boston, MA: 
Wisdom). 
Neumann, E. (1983) The Great Mother trans. R. Manheim (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press). 
Pal, P. (1990) Art of Tibet (Los Angeles: Los Angeles County Museum of 
Art). 
Preece, R. (2006) The Psychology of Buddhist Tantra (Ithaca, NY: Snow 
Lion). 
Snellgrove, D. (2002) Indo-Tibetan Buddhism: Indian Buddhists and their 
Tibetan Successors (Boston, MA: Shambhala). 
Thongdup, T. (2005). Peaceful Death, Joyful Rebirth: A Tibetan Buddhist 
Guidebook (Boston, MA: Shambhala). 
Varela, F. J. (ed.) (1997) Sleeping, Dreaming, and Dying: An Exploration 
of Consciousness with the Dalai Lama. (Boston, MA: Wisdom). 
Von Franz, M. L. (1964) “The Process of Individuation” in C. G. Jung 
(ed.) Man and his Symbols (London: Aldus Books) 157-254. 
Wangyal, T. (1998) The Tibetan Yogas of Dream and Sleep (Ithaca, NY: 
Snow Lion). 
Yeshe, T. (2001) Introduction to Tantra: The Transformation of Desire 
(Boston, MA: Wisdom). 
 

CHAPTER NINETEEN 
CULTURAL VARIATION OF THE FEMININE 
IN PSYCHEDELIC PERSONIFICATION1 
CAMERON ADAMS 
 
 
 
Throughout long-term participant observation in multiple online 
communities related to psychedelic drug use including several fora, 
informational sites, Twitter, Facebook and YouTube, the phenomenon of 
meeting entities while on psychedelics has presented itself very often. This 
can take the form of voyaging to different realms or dimensions to meet 
with the residents or of interacting with the substance itself as an entity. 
These entities talk to, teach, perform surgery on, advise, make love to, 
attack and/or celebrate with individuals who enter their realms. Depending 
on the culture of the individual and the particulars of the experience, these 
entities can be seen to be aliens, spirit guides, self-transforming machine 
elves, a menagerie of variable therianthropes or even a blinding light with 
which they merge. Despite the variability of appearance and behaviour, 
and regardless of whether one considers these to be objectively out there 
or the projections of the psyche, these entities can profitably be considered 
daimonic manifestations.2 By this I mean entities that represent more 
subtle aspects of ourselves, or transdimensional beings who form a conduit 
between the material and the spiritual. Of particular interest is that, though 
the entities encountered on psychedelic trips take many forms, the entities 
representing the substances themselves are commonly seen to be feminine. 
After a brief introduction to psychedelics and their effects, I will explore 
the concept of the feminine cross-culturally and how it contrasts with 
masculine. I then consider how the multiple femininities constitute a facet 
of the Jungian Shadow and thus can be used as contextually specific 
                                                           
1 This is an extended and revised version of “Psychedelics, Spirits and the Sacred 
Feminine: Communion as Cultural Critique” which appeared in Paranthropology: 
Journal of Anthropological Approaches to the Paranormal 2(3): 49-52. 
2 Harpur: 37-50. 

Cultural Variation of the Feminine in Psychedelic Personification 
311 
cultural critique. Finally I explore how this is relevant to healing with 
psychedelics. 
By psychedelics I refer to substances that cause sensory distortions, 
enhance meaningfulness, cause closed-eye visions and occasionally induce 
mystical experiences.3 The most well-known, though widely misunderstood, 
member of this class of drugs is LSD or acid (lysergic acid diethylamide). 
Additionally, it includes magic mushrooms, peyote cactus, and a wide 
array of natural and synthetic compounds used in traditional societies as 
shamanic tools and in the cosmopolitan world in a wide range of contexts 
from simple amusement through healing to mystical experience. The 
designation psychedelic is not beyond debate. They have also been called 
schitzogen or psychotomimetic, terms which have fallen out of favour due 
to the misapprehension that they mimic or temporarily induce mental 
illness.4 Likewise, hallucinogen refers to the production of illusions due to 
a disorganised or diseased mind,5 which does not hold under scrutiny. 
Favoured by many users, and quite appropriate in the context of this essay 
is the term entheogen6 which refers to a mystical or religious effect that 
only regularly occurs with adequate doses in and specific contexts. 
Therefore, regardless of the cultural baggage, I feel that psychedelic—
meaning mind-manifesting7—is the most neutral term available to date 
and therefore casts the widest net over all possible experiences. 
Psilocybin, the active ingredient of magic mushrooms, has been shown 
reliably and consistently to induce classic mystical states.8 Subjects 
experience awe, the numinous, ineffability and union with God, the 
source, everything, or a deep understanding of being part of ecology which 
leaves them with a sense of purpose and belonging. By analogy, based on 
the experiences of my research participants, I suggest that all psychedelics 
can induce this mystical experience. 
Of course psychedelic drugs are not the only means of achieving these 
mystical states. Many methods have the potential to do so: extreme 
fasting, trauma, maintaining awkward postures for extended periods of 
time, or long and diligent practice of meditation. However, in contrast to 
this, psychedelic drugs are universally effective, quick and relatively safe. 
In terms of acute toxicity these substances are far safer than alcohol or 
                                                           
3 Grinspoon and Bakalar: 5-7. 
4 Osmond. 
5 Szára. 
6 Ruck, et al.  
7 Osmond.  
8 Griffiths, et al. 2006; Griffiths et al. 2011. 

Chapter Nineteen 
 
312
aspirin and have a very low to absent abuse profile;9 if used with some 
wisdom, they very rarely cause psychological harm.10 In the words of one 
of my research participants, psychedelic drugs are the most ergonomic 
means of achieving a psychedelic (and therefore a mystical) state. 
Any perusal of trip reports found online (for example on www. 
erowid.org), as well as in ethnographic reports of shamanism, shows that 
communication with entities plays a key part in these experiences. Though 
the entities may take a variety of forms, the psychedelic itself is commonly 
personified as female. Though ethnographic materials do confirm a cross-
cultural association of psychedelics as female, they do not support an 
archetypal interpretation of the feminine. Instead, I assert that these tools 
draw out not only the individual’s Shadow but also the cultural shadow of 
the society and thus act as an effective cultural critique. 
In my own research on cosmopolitan psychedelic culture in general 
and on psychedelic healing in particular, the use of these substances 
invokes a sense of nurturing, love, and an approach to balance associated 
with femininity. For example, psychotherapeutic effects include 
alleviating emotional imbalances, doing personality work, dealing with 
end of life fear, inner exploration, working with interpersonal relations and 
spiritual development. These experiences lead to a heightened sense of 
well-being through a sense of unconditional love and acceptance where 
one’s experience can be assessed as it is without judgement. This is 
commonly associated with a connection with earth and cosmos, a focus on 
nature and an acknowledgement of the beauty of all things. 
To my research participants, these are seen to be feminine qualities. 
This is further reinforced by the use of the personal pronoun she when 
referring to psychedelic substances, in particular plant-based psychedelics 
such as ayahuasca and salvia divinorum, with fungi and laboratory 
chemicals being less feminised. Yet, in ethnographic contexts, where the 
psychedelic substance is also considered to be feminine, the typical motifs 
include, but are not limited to: becoming the ancestors who set up our 
present reality and culture, supernatural warfare (including healing related 
to witchcraft), divining criminal and/or antisocial acts, entering the spirit 
world to negotiate with spirits on behalf of the living and the shamanic 
journey of death and rebirth.11 The experiences of social architecture, 
investigation, judgement and warfare are, in cosmopolitan culture, quite 
masculine, while in the Amazon they are seen to be the acts of a feminine 
                                                           
9 Gable: 270-1; Nutt, King and Phillips. 
10 Bergman; Strassman; Grob, et al. Halpern, et al. For a lucid review of best 
practices of psychedelic use, see Fadiman. 
11 Dobkin de Rios: 3-4. 

Cultural Variation of the Feminine in Psychedelic Personification 
313 
spirit. The contrast between these two experiences of a feminine spirit 
begs us to evaluate what it means to be feminine, and why these divergent 
motifs are applied to ostensibly the same entity or phenomenon. 
It is Sherry Ortner’s assertion that in all societies women are 
subjugated.12 It is further argued that this is due to a universal attribution 
of male endeavour to culture and of female existence to nature. The 
argument is that due to the biological facts of reproduction, women are 
limited in their action, while men, freed of these biological constraints, can 
apply themselves to the elaboration of the arts, technology and religion; in 
short cultural activities. This argument seems to imply a certain 
universality in masculine and feminine roles, but the truth is in no way so 
simple. Goody and Buckley,13 in reviewing the sexual division of labour 
cross-culturally, find that, with the exception of the biological fact of 
reproductive roles, there is no hard and fast universal as to what men or 
women do. Likewise, Moore notes that the cultural fluidity of women’s 
roles, “make it impossible to assert a communality based on shared 
membership in a universal category ‘woman’”,14 leading Loftsdóttir to 
remark that “the sign ‘woman’ [is] characterised by diversity rather than 
singularity.”15 Throughout the world, one can find women who, as 
mandated by culture, engage in all of the activities deemed either feminine 
or masculine in cosmopolitan culture. The same, as an obvious corollary, 
can be said of man.16 In fact, in the review of the anthropology of 
masculinity, Gutmann makes clear the fact that the only universal aspect 
of femininity and masculinity is that they create each other; they are 
“boxes” constituted by biological facts of male and female into which 
diverse collections of cultural material can be flung. 
Yet Gilmore, in an ironic echo of Ortner, argues that men in many 
cultures believe that women are simply born as complete women while 
men need to create and re-create themselves throughout their lives in the 
model of an ideal masculine type.17 This is seen by Gilmore to be focussed 
on the accumulation of power at the expense of other males and amounts 
to a constant honing of an increasingly narrow male identity. In other 
words, the masculine role becomes rather well-defined and specific while 
the feminine is allowed to remain relatively vague and expansive. 
                                                           
12 Ortner. 
13 Goody; Goody and Buckley. 
14 Moore: 9. 
15 Loftsdóttir: 306. 
16 Gutmann. 
17 Gilmore: 9-29 

Chapter Nineteen 
 
314
If the masculine is developed within narrow tolerance while masculine 
and feminine are co-created through each other, the feminine is best 
defined by what it is not. Effectively, we are left with a definition of the 
feminine as encompassing the unpredictable, unconstrained, possibly 
undervalued, potentially dangerous, but more than anything, the un-
masculine. Of course, as we have seen, this can encompass a wide variety 
of specifics as exemplified by the Hindu feminine as idealised in Kali who 
“conveys death, destruction, and the consuming aspects of reality. As 
such, she is also a ‘forbidden thing’”.18 Contrast this to the ecofeminist 
view of the feminine as close to nature, vegetarian, nurturing and 
promoting growth and harmony.19 The idea of the unpredictable and, 
specifically, un-masculine feminine is brilliantly expressed by Jack 
Nicholson’s character, Melvin Udall, in the film As Good as it Gets, when 
he replies to a fan’s question about how he writes women so well with “I 
think of a man, and I take away reason and accountability;” reason and 
accountability are exposed as being definitive of masculinity in this case. 
The rise of masculinist-focused definitions of culture appears to begin 
with the transition from foraging to horticultural societies. Band level 
organisation is characterised by (relative) social equality and generalised 
resource sharing. Men hunt while women forage, yet all is shared widely. 
In this context, division of labour is an integrative force. However, as 
population size increases beyond the ability to maintain dense face-to-face 
networks, more land becomes managed to provide for predictable and 
nutritionally important vegetable matter. Consequently, this reduces the 
availability of game due to habitat loss.20 Vegetable forage and 
horticulture (i.e. women’s economy) remains plentiful and predictable and 
can be shared easily, on the rare occasion that it must be shared. Yet, 
hunting becomes more unpredictable. This unpredictability is entwined 
with a population that cannot be fed on any one day’s hunt, and makes 
generalised sharing of meat impossible, thus heightening its economic and 
alliance value. Accounting of sharing becomes standard and thus network 
development and maintenance through economic means arises. Men’s 
work takes on a different social meaning and valuation than does women’s 
work. In this context, we find the rise of male power, and thus, masculine 
definitions of society. 
One aspect of the masculinist bias of cultural ideals is, of course, found 
in religion. Geertz argues that religion promotes moods and motivations 
appropriate to the culture in question. These moods and motivations act as 
                                                           
18 Kinsley: 124. 
19 Warren and Erkal. 
20 Harris: 192. 

Cultural Variation of the Feminine in Psychedelic Personification 
315 
cultural ideals and are held up as the image of the ideal man. That which is 
not encompassed by these is repressed. As Harris21 notes, these spiritual, 
and ultimately cultural, ideals are held to be within the realm of men; 
women are often excluded or not held to the same ideals or standards. The 
aspects of everyone’s personality (as we all exhibit the full range of human 
emotions, moods and motivations) that fall short of these ideals and are 
thus repressed can be referred to as the Jungian concept of the Shadow.22 
Likewise, the aspects that fall outside of these ideals, but are still available 
to women, as they are not held to the same standards of social discourse, 
could seem to comprise a form of socio-cultural shadow. 
However, in acknowledging that the feminine is, perhaps, best defined 
as not masculine, let us not become too enchanted by Ortner’s assertion 
that the feminine is in all cases a subjugated and powerless class. For 
example, it is common for women to be excluded from men’s ritual 
activities, not because they are unworthy, but, in some cases, because it is 
feared that if the women have access to the ritual paraphernalia they will 
take social ascendancy.23 Further, postmenopausal women are able to 
achieve the status of “honorary men” in many cultures,24 which allows 
them the full spectrum of masculine and feminine action for that 
community. In fact, this trans-gendered boundary crossing seems to be the 
source of power as exemplified by the common practice of transvestism 
among the world’s shamanic practitioners.25 The exclusion here is not a 
statement of powerlessness, but, instead, an acknowledgement of the 
immense power potential of the feminine which, for men to maintain 
status, must be tamed. 
For example, the power of the feminine in Western mythology is 
exemplified by the episode of Odysseus and the sirens. The allure of the 
feminine is represented as the sirens’ irresistible song. Its power is only 
dwarfed by the inevitable death awaiting whoever hears the song and is 
irresistibly drawn to the singers. Yet, Odysseus displays the idealised 
classical cultural traits of craft and industry to mediate the danger of the 
titillating feminine. By plugging the crew’s ears and having himself tied to 
the mast, Odysseus is able to dip into the dangerous feminine without 
suffering the consequences. I interpret this as a mythological reification of 
the power of Geertz’s moods and motivations over the discounted and 
repressed emotions and desires of every human. Likewise, shamanic 
                                                           
21 Harris: 334-5.  
22 Shulgin; Goldsmith. 
23 Gregor: 94; Murphy and Murphy: 114-5; Hays. 
24 Cheater: 67; Sullivan. 
25 Basilov; Grim: 25; Saladin d’Anglure. 

Chapter Nineteen 
 
316
“techniques of ecstasy”26—in the case under discussion here, psychedelics 
—provide the means to enter the shadowy shallows without drowning in 
the dark depths. It matters not what the specifics of masculine or feminine 
may be. 
What I am really doing here is destabilising our idea of what the 
feminine is. Feminine is a complex concept that on the world stage has 
only a very small set of shared characteristics, namely body parts and 
reproductive roles. Beyond this, the feminine is vast, changeable, and 
contextually construed most effectively by what it is not. When we hear or 
read descriptions of psychedelics as feminine spirits, we naturally envisage 
our own model of femininity. Yet, the concept of the feminine may be 
universal, but it is structural; a vessel in which we drop culturally specific 
ideas. The feminine is unpredictable, dangerous and erotic not because of 
any innate quality but because it is the manifestation of what we culturally 
downplay. It titillates and threatens destruction, but what it destroys is 
merely the masculine definition of idealised culture.  
In this context, the feminine acts as a critique of society. As we dip 
into the cultural shadow that manifests as feminine, it shows us what we 
value as a society through the stark relief of presenting what we dismiss. 
The psychedelic feminine is the gateway into the shadow from which the 
arbitrary boundaries of culture can be perceived and normality and 
rationality redefined. 
Nobody is born gendered, as masculine or feminine. These are 
categories loosely draped upon the biological fact of sex, but which are 
culturally contextual and fluid. Nor do feminine and masculine constitute a 
firm binary as do male and female; some cultures have more than one 
gender.27 These identities are developed through a lifelong developmental 
process that, by necessity, excises aspects of the whole person to fit within 
the narrow categories defined by the society one is born into. The 
psychedelic experience allows us to review that process and to see the 
rules of society as arbitrary and malleable. Instead of merely accepting 
culture as inscribed in stone, one can begin to analyse it at an abstract level 
and see how that which is excised could be, instead, merely contextually 
downplayed though accepted and used when the context requires. 
This may very well be the healing, teaching and reworking that the 
entities we encounter in the psychedelic experience perform upon us. 
Psychedelics are well known among therapists who have used them as an 
excellent means by which to do shadow work.28 They allow, or rather 
                                                           
26 Eliade. 
27 Herdt and Ringrose. 
28 Shulgin; Goldsmith. 

Cultural Variation of the Feminine in Psychedelic Personification 
317 
force, the individual to confront aspects of themselves which they have 
repressed, often with distinct impressions of when and why they were 
repressed. This is achieved in a liminal state where the rules of society are 
temporarily dissolved29 and pure experience of self is possible. In this 
neutral space, individuals are often given perspective on the arbitrary rules 
of society and are able to re-integrate, or begin to re-integrate, the aspects 
of themselves which they have denied. This mystical sense of unity and 
wholeness appears to be quite healing for individuals in spiritual, 
psychological and even in physical senses. 
What one experiences as entities (which are often associated with 
Jungian archetypes) in the psychedelic experience, or by extension in other 
altered states of consciousness, may not be as well-defined as they appear. 
As the similarities and differences between aliens, fairies, elves and angels 
attests,30 it is clear that anomalous experience, particularly that of 
numinous quality, is cloaked in the cultural trappings of the observer. This 
is not to argue for the ontological status of such entities, but rather to make 
clear that as one enters a state of loosened associations, which makes such 
experiences increasingly likely, one is nevertheless obliged to process 
these experiences or encounters through their cognitive and cultural filters. 
In a way, it is an opportunity to see these filters in and of themselves. This 
is what is meant by mind-manifesting or psychedelic. By critically 
assessing the manifested mind one may experience it as whole, or at least 
as having the possibility of being so. Spiritual, psychological and physical 
healing can be occasioned in this state of mystical awareness and may be 
attributed to the entities that are encountered. These entities, as manifested 
in the Shadow, may likewise be attributed to the feminine. However, a 
cross-cultural perspective shows that this feminine is contextually created, 
shifting and lacking the universality required to be archetypal.  
Bibliography 
As Good as it Gets (1997) Motion Picture. Directed by James L Brooks 
(United States: TriStar Pictures and Gracie Films). 
Bergman, R. L. (1971) “Navajo Peyote Use: Its Apparent Safety”, The 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 128.6: 695-9. 
Brown, R. A. (2008) “Angels and Elves, Archetypes and Aliens: anomalous 
encounter experiences viewed through a depth psychological lens” (PhD 
thesis, Pacifica Graduate Institute, Santa Barbara, CA). 
                                                           
29 Turner. 
30 Brown. 

Chapter Nineteen 
 
318
Cheater, A. P. (1986) “The Role and Position of Women in Pre-Colonial 
Zimbabwe”, Zambezia, 13.2: 65-79. 
Dobkin de Rios, M. (1993) “Twenty-Five Years of Hallucinogenic Studies 
in Cross-Cultural Perspective”, Anthropology of Consciousness, 4.1: 1-
8. 
Eliade, M. (1964) Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press). 
Fadiman, J. (2011) The Psychedelic Explorer’s Guide: Safe, Therapeutic, 
and Sacred Journeys (Maine: Park Street Press). 
Fittkau, E. J. and H. Klinge (1973) “On Biomass and Trophic Structure of 
the Central Amazon Rain Forest Ecosystem”, Biotropica, 5: 1-14. 
Gable, R. S. (1993) “Toward a Comparative Overview of Dependence 
Potential and Acute Toxicity of Psychoactive Substances Used 
Nonmedically”, The American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 
19.3: 263-81. 
Geertz, C. (1966) “Religion as a Cultural System”, in M. Blanton (ed.) 
Anthropological Approaches to the Study of Religion (New York: 
Praeger) 1-46. 
Gilmore, D. D. (1990) Manhood in the Making: Cultural Concepts of 
Masculinity (New Haven: Yale University Press). 
Goldsmith, N. M. (2010) Psychedelic Healing: The Promise of 
Entheogens for Psychotherapy and Spiritual Development (Rochester, 
VT: Healing Arts Press). 
Goody, J. (1969) “Inheritance, Property and Marriage in Africa and 
Eurasia”, Sociology, 3: 55-76. 
Goody, J. and J. Buckley (1973) “Inheritance and Women’s Labour in 
Africa”, Africa: Journal of the International African Institute, 4.2: 108-
21. 
Gregor, T. (1985) Anxious Pleasure: The Sexual Lives of Amazonian 
Peoples (Chicago: University of Chicago Press). 
Griffiths, R. R., M. W. Johnson, W. A. Richards, B. D. Richards, U. 
McCann & R. Jesse (2011) “Psilocybin Occasioned Mystical-Type 
Experiences: Immediate and Persisting Dose-Related Effects”, 
Psychopharmacology, 218.4: 649-65. 
Griffiths, R. R., W. A. Richards, U. McCann and R. Jesse (2006) 
“Psilocybin Can Occasion Mystical-Type Experiences Having 
Substantial 
and 
Sustained 
Personal 
Meaning 
and 
Spiritual 
Significance”, Psychopharmacology, 187.3: 268-83. 
Grinspoon, L. and J. B. Bakalar (1979) Psychedelic Drugs Reconsidered 
(New York: Basic Books). 

Cultural Variation of the Feminine in Psychedelic Personification 
319 
Grob, C. S, D. J. McKenna, J. C. Callaway, G. S. Brito, E. S. Neves, G. 
Oberlaender, O. L. Saide, E. Labegalini, C. Tacla, C. T. Miranda, R. J. 
Strassman & K. B. Boone (1996) “Human Psychopharmacology of 
Hoasca, a Plant Hallucinogen Used in Ritual Context in Brazil”, 
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 184.2: 86-94. 
Gutmann, M. C. (1997) “Trafficking in Men: The Anthropology of 
Masculinity”, Annual Review of Anthropology, 26: 385-409. 
Halpern, J. H., A. R Sherwood, J. I. Hudson, D. Yurgelun-Todd & H. G. 
Pope (2005) “Psychological and Cognitive Effects of Long-Term 
Peyote use among Native Americans”, Biological Psychiatry, 58.8: 
624-31. 
Harpur, P. (2003) Daimonic Reality: A Field Guide to the Otherworld 
(Ravensdale: Idyll Arbor). 
Harris, M. (1997) Culture People Nature: An Introduction to General 
Anthropology, Seventh Edition (New York: Longman). 
Hays, T. E. (1988) “‘Myths of Matriarchy’ and the Sacred Flute Complex 
of the Papua New Guinea Highlands”, in D. Gewertz (ed.) Myths of 
Matriarchy Reconsidered (Sydney: University of Sydney) 98-120. 
Herdt, G. & K. M. Ringrose (1996) Third Sex, Third Gender: Beyond 
Sexual Dimorphism in Culture and History (Zone Books). 
Kinsley, D. (1997) Tantric Visions of the Divine Feminine: The Ten 
Mahavidyas (Berkeley: University of California Press). 
Loftsdóttir, K. (2002) “Never Forgetting? Gender and Racial-Ethnic 
Identity During Fieldwork”, Social Anthropology, 10.3: 303-17. 
Moore, H. L. (1994) A Passion for Difference: Essays in Anthropology 
and Gender (Bloomington: Indiana University Press). 
Murphy, Y. & R. F. Murphy (1985) Women of the Forest (New York: 
Columbia University Press). 
Nutt, D. J., L. A. King & L. D. Phillips (2010) “Drug Harms in the UK: A 
Multicriteria Decision Analysis”, The Lancet, 376. 9752: 1558-65. 
Ortner, S. B. (1974) “Is Female to Male as Nature is to Culture?” in M. Z. 
Rosaldo and L. Lamphere (eds) Woman, Culture and Society 
(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press) 67-87. 
Osmond, H. (1957) “A Review of the Clinical Effects of Psychotomimetic 
Agents”, Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 66.3: 418-34. 
Ruck, C. A., J. Bigwood, D. Staples, J. Ott & R. G. Wasson (1979) 
“Entheogens”, Journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 11.1-2: 145-6. 
Shulgin, A. (2002) “Psychedelic Therapy and the Shadow”, presented at 
the Mind States Conference, Negril, Jamaica, 1-6 October: 
www.matrixmasters.net/blogs/?p=163 (accessed November 2012). 

Chapter Nineteen 
 
320
Strassman, R. J. (1984) “Adverse Reactions to Psychedelic Drugs. A 
Review of the Literature”, The Journal of Nervous and Mental 
Disease, 172.10: 577-95. 
Sullivan, L. P. (2001) “Those Men in the Mounds: Gender, Politics, and 
Mortuary Practices in Late Prehistoric Eastern Tennessee”, in J. M. 
Eastman and C B Rodning (eds) Archaeological Studies of Gender in 
the Southeastern United States (Gainesville: University Press of 
Florida) 101-126. 
Szára, S. (1994) “Are Hallucinogens Psychoheuristic?”, in G. C. Lin & R. 
A. Glennon (eds) Hallucinogens: an update (Rockville, MD: US 
Department of Health and Human Services) 33-51. 
van Gennep, A. (1960) The Rites of Passage (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press). 
Warren, K. & N. Erkal (1997) Ecofeminism: Women, Culture, Nature 
(Indiana University Press). 
 

CHAPTER TWENTY 
DAIMONIC ECOLOGIES: 
AN INQUIRY INTO THE RELATIONSHIPS 
BETWEEN THE HUMAN  
AND NONPHYSICAL SPECIES 
ALEX RACHEL 
 
 
 
This essay examines the possibility that nonphysical entities, which we 
may term “daimonic,” might participate in the evolution of the collective 
human psyche, and that the collective human psyche might to some degree 
be constituted out of its relationships with these entities. My research 
methodology is primarily hermeneutic, using a participatory and 
transpersonal lens to interpret a heuristically generated “text” of my own 
experiences in non-ordinary states of consciousness. This text exists as a 
compendium of archived reports, generated by observing and recording 
my experiences in these non-ordinary states. 
The heuristic phase of the research began in 1998, with most of it 
taking place from 2002 to 2007. This phase was focused on an exploration 
into the nature of the relationships that might exist between the human 
embodied self and apparent nonphysical entities. My inquiry was initially 
open-ended in its direction, but as more data were gathered, I began 
guiding it by posing increasingly more precise questions. During this 
process, the heuristic data originated in discrete events of non-ordinary 
states of consciousness, or contacts. These contacts took place in the 
context of my own psychedelic sessions, sessions of self-induced trance, 
dreams, and spontaneously arising visions. My research is therefore 
primarily self-reflective and auto-ethnographic. 
The hermeneutic phase interpreting the inquiry contacts theoretically 
explores the thesis that the human psyche exists in intimate relationship 
with nonphysical entities. If we take seriously the notion that the embodied 
self may exist in significant relationship to nonphysical entities, a number 

Chapter Twenty 
 
322
of avenues for inquiry present themselves. If human beings are physically 
affected by the physical entities of their environment, might it be possible 
that the human psyche can be psychically affected by the nonphysical 
entities with which it is in relationship? Might sustained relationships 
between human cultures and nonphysical entities have led historically to 
changes in the collective psyche of those cultures? Could some entities 
that present as parts of the human psyche actually be better understood as 
autonomous nonhuman entities that are simply in deeply intimate 
relationship with the human psyche? These questions inform the following 
general research question that guided both the heuristic inquiry and the 
hermeneutic interpretation of the research: Do nonphysical entities 
participate in the evolution of the collective human psyche, and if so, 
how?1 
Inquiry methodology and theoretical approach 
As immediately as possible after a contact, I recorded whatever was 
disclosed in a contact report, and appended the contact report to an 
ongoing inquiry corpus. The final inquiry record consisted of three 
hundred contact reports. Throughout the inquiry, I did multiple thematic 
analyses of the inquiry record to determine which themes were showing up 
with particular frequency. Using these themes as a guide, I selected one 
hundred of the most relevant contacts. This inquiry record provided the 
text for the interpretive, hermeneutic phase of the inquiry. 
In analysing the content of the inquiry record, the hermeneutic 
interpretation draws upon the work of thinkers who have dealt with (1) the 
structure, purpose, or activity of the human soul (e.g., Christopher Bache 
and David Spangler), (2) the nature of nonphysical entities (e.g., David 
Spangler, C. G. Jung, James Hillman and Orion Foxwood), and (3) the 
evolution of human consciousness (e.g., Jean Gebser, Ken Wilber, C. G. 
Jung, Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, Richard Tarnas and Terence McKenna). 
In terms of its theory, this research adopts a participatory lens, drawing 
upon the work of such thinkers as Jorge Ferrer, John Heron, Sean Kelly 
and Greg Lahood. I should stress here that Bache’s Dark Night, Early 
Dawn in which he uses the work of Grof, Monroe, and others to interpret 
his own experiences of the species soul in nonordinary states of 
consciousness, stands as the paradigmatic work for the kind of research 
                                                           
1 Parts of this essay are adapted from my forthcoming doctoral dissertation, 
Ecologies of the Soul: A Study of the Relationships between the Human Psyche and 
Nonphysical Entities, in the East-West Psychology Department at the California 
Institute of Integral Studies. 

Daimonic Ecologies 
323 
that I am doing. Spangler’s Subtle Worlds, in which he establishes a 
“subtle zoology”2 based upon his encounters with nonphysical entities in 
mystical states of consciousness, is of a similarly ground-breaking 
relevance to this research. 
Drawing upon Ferrer’s participatory framing of “spiritual knowing” as 
enaction, or “‘the bringing forth’ of a world or domain of distinctions co-
created by the different elements involved in the participatory event,”3 the 
hermeneutic approach of my research assumes that the nonphysical 
entities and realities encountered in nonordinary states of consciousness 
(e.g., during the heuristic phase of the inquiry) are participatory disclosures 
possessing an ontological but highly mutable or multivalent reality. These 
disclosed or enacted realities are understood to be neither purely 
subjective, nor purely objective. On the one hand, they are assumed to be 
ontological realities, and yet, on the other hand, they are fundamentally 
shaped by personal factors such as the researcher’s subjective disposition, 
personal biography and cultural background, as well as, perhaps, by 
transpersonal factors.4 In this non-Cartesian way, participatory disclosures 
can be both real and constitute a bias. 
What, then, might be the value of research carried out in a participatory 
vein? In his discussion of “participatory spirituality,” Irwin articulates a 
participatory valuation of visionary and transpersonal events and their 
associated forms, suggesting that “the multiple worlds of diverse visionaries 
are not contested; rather, the unique qualia of an individual vision indicate 
both the indeterminate depths of its source and the creative power of an 
individuated interpretation.”5 To be clear, a cursory perusal of the inquiry 
record reveals a document that strongly reflects my own unique being; 
consequently, the inquiry record cannot be considered to constitute the sort 
of empirical evidence of nonphysical realities that might be provided by, for 
example, a quantitative empirical study involving multiple subjects. A 
participatory hermeneutic does not interpret texts in an attempt to “prove” 
the existence of underlying phenomena arising out of a pre-given or 
objective static ground. More precisely, the interpretation of the inquiry 
record does not seek to prove the influence or non-influence of nonphysical 
entities upon the human psyche. The value of this research is not primarily 
empirical; rather, it is theoretical (i.e., interpretive or hermeneutic) and 
intended to be primarily visionary, speculative, and suggestive of possibilities. 
                                                           
2 Spangler: 147. 
3 Ferrer 2008: 137. 
4 See Tarnas 2006 for a discussion of the manner in which such transpersonal 
factors as planetary archetypes might participate in human consciousness. 
5 Irwin: 200. 

Chapter Twenty 
 
324
Definitions and assumptions 
This discussion assumes that the human psyche exists in intimate 
relationship with nonphysical entities. By “entity,” I mean any apparently 
autonomous presence that behaves in ways that indicate the possibility that 
it may possess purposiveness, intelligence, consciousness, or personhood. 
By “human psyche,” I mean the personal and transpersonal psychological 
(i.e., nonphysical) aspects of a human being. This discussion assumes that 
we can speak meaningfully of an individual psyche (with its personal and 
transpersonal aspects) as being distinct from the larger collective psyche 
(i.e., a culture or “species mind”) of which it is a part. This discussion also 
assumes that the collective human psyche is embedded in a larger 
transhuman domain of psyche from which it at least partially derives its 
existence. It further assumes the possibility that all entities—human or 
nonhuman, physical or nonphysical—may “possess psyche” and that these 
entities, as individual psyches, may also be embedded in the larger domain 
of psyche in a manner similar to that of the human psyche. Finally, I use 
the term “consciousness” to mean a given collective psyche’s mode of 
experiencing the world (i.e., its worldview, cultural mindset, or mentality). 
Three nonphysical species disclosed by the inquiry record 
Spangler uses the term “Second Ecology” to refer to the “collection of 
interrelated environments”6 that constitutes the nonphysical or “subtle” 
worlds. Extending the ecological register suggested by Spangler’s “Second 
Ecology”, this discussion uses the term species to refer to types of 
nonphysical entities disclosed by the inquiry, and family to refer to 
groupings of those species into more general types. In interpreting the 
inquiry record, I discerned a pattern suggesting three distinct families of 
species: a family of terrestrial species, a family of extraterrestrial species, 
and a family of celestial species. I based each classification of family upon 
a theoretical nonphysical domain from which that entity might originate: 
terrestrial species were assumed to originate from the Earth, extraterrestrial 
species from beyond the Earth, and celestial species from “the heavens.”7 I 
further discerned specific paradigmatic species that seemed to exist within 
                                                           
6 Spangler: 6. 
7 Note that the terrestrial species disclosed by the inquiry, while nonphysical, are 
“of the Earth,” suggesting that the Earth has a nonphysical dimension. 
Furthermore, note that the extraterrestrial species of the inquiry record are also 
nonphysical, distinguishing them from strictly physical extraterrestrials. 

Daimonic Ecologies 
325 
each of these three families: “the Naga” (a terrestrial species), “Starseed” 
(an extraterrestrial species), and “the Lords” (a celestial species). 
1. Terrestrial species 
Within the inquiry record, the “Naga” came to represent a paradigmatic 
terrestrial species. In the following contact from the inquiry record, a 
previously encountered entity was identified as a “naga”: 
She is dark, like a cloud of cool blue-black night sky […] Her fangs are the 
fangs of a snake. She’s a water snake. She is a naga! Water snake in sand. 
Quiet. Sun. Desert. Sun beating down on the desert. Very quiet. Not 
“uncanny,” just there. At the back of the mind, just hanging out, sunning 
herself on a rock. Really old, wise snake. (Contact 81) 
In Hindu and Buddhist mythology, the Naga are a primeval race of serpent-
people that live within the earth in an aquatic underworld. They are 
personifications of terrestrial waters and bestow fertility.8 The gods are 
considered to have gained power over the waters and the potential chaos 
represented by the Naga serpent principle.9 Contact 81 (above) is in accord 
with this canonical description of the Naga, especially in its association of 
the disclosed naga entity with the figure of the serpent, with water, and with 
primevality. Also in accord with the canonical description, other contacts of 
the inquiry record emphasised the relationship of the Naga with fertility. 
2. Extraterrestrial species 
Another family that presented itself in the inquiry record is that of 
extraterrestrial entities (i.e., originating from beyond the Earth). Disclosures 
of extraterrestrial entities in the inquiry record often feature the 
extraterrestrial entity “descending,” “falling,” or “crashing” to the Earth. In 
                                                           
8 In reference to the figure of the naga, as well as to subsequent references to 
figures of the jinn, the Aesir gods, the asura, and the apsara, I use italics, 
distinguishing these non-English terms from terms that may be more familiar to the 
reader, such as “Titan.” Furthermore, note that I distinguish between “naga” (no 
italics) and naga (italics), “naga” referring to the entity disclosed in the inquiry 
record and naga referring to the figure of myth. Finally, “the Naga” or the Naga 
(both capitalized) refer to a species, while “naga” or naga (both not capitalized) 
refer to individuals within that species. 
9 See Encyclopedia Mythica from Encyclopedia Mythica Online for references to 
“Nagas,” as well as to the following mythological figures: “Titans,” “Leviathan,” 
“Tiamat,” “Iblis,” “Jinn,” “Loki,” “Aesir,” “Asuras,” “Apsaras” and “Angels.” 

Chapter Twenty 
 
326
conventional materialist discourse, extraterrestrials are simply physical 
organisms that evolved in some place other than the Earth. However, as the 
inquiry continued, some of the extraterrestrial entities that were being 
disclosed seemed to be explicitly nonphysical in origin. Contacts with such 
entities suggested that while they were nonphysical, they seemed to have a 
complex and often benevolent relationship to the physical domain. The 
following contacts seemed to be disclosures of extraterrestrial entities: 
Material evolution is at its most basic a coevolution with the Givers. 
Contact between these two evolving strands is sex. Giver information is 
deposited inside the person so that they can create on their own […]. The 
purpose of the shock-swarm is to help those incarnated in time. The most 
important function of each Giver is to lure the attention of the person that it 
is working with and to get them to open their psychic orifices so that they 
can receive the retooling information from the Giver. (Contact 16) 
 
Aliens descend upon a planet and “retro-fit” the subtle bodies of the 
hominids on that planet with symbiotic grafts. The angels encounter 
populations and graft symbiotes to them so that they can more effectively 
serve the cause of the Givers. (Contact 23) 
 
Starseed: Starseed is beauty. Starseed is eros. Starseed is transgalactic. 
Starseed has brought life to countless worlds. Starseed is evolutionary. 
Starseed is in the breath, in the smell of the grasses. Starseed loves beauty, 
beauty requires form, form requires separation from the heavens. Starseed 
seduces and Starseed is seduced. Allow yourself to be seduced. Starseed is 
vampiric, feline, and Fey. Feel the dignity of Starseed […] Starseed loves 
this planet so much. (Contact 64) 
Within the context of the inquiry record, the Starseed species of Contact 64 
came to represent the paradigmatic extraterrestrial species and seemed to 
overlap or even perhaps be identical with the “Givers” of Contacts 16 and 23. 
If the “energetic signature” of the Naga was their primevality and fertility, the 
signature of Starseed seemed to be eros. Various contacts of the inquiry 
indicated that vitality, sex, lust, exchange, attention, and beauty were all 
central concerns of Starseed.10 As a species, Starseed seemed to be particularly 
eager to establish relationships with the Earth and the human species. 
                                                           
10 The term “Starseed” occurs throughout the inquiry record as a mass noun, 
suggesting a homogeneous energy or species or relatively undifferentiated substance. 

Daimonic Ecologies 
327 
3. Celestial species 
In its common meaning of being “from the heavens,” the term “celestial” 
can be used synonymously with the term “extraterrestrial.” However, the 
term “celestial” as it occurred in the inquiry record seemed to have a 
stronger connation of nonphysicality or divinity than the term 
“extraterrestrial.” Of families disclosed by the inquiry record, the celestial 
species seemed to be of the most removed transcendence, the most 
charged numinosity, and the greatest alterity. 
The paradigmatic celestial species came to be represented by entities 
referred to in the inquiry record as “Lords.” The following contact is a 
disclosure of the celestial power associated with the Lords: 
I saw a Toltec Master lying down, smiling, resting in a web of sublime 
power. I knew too the celestial power that the Toltecs had encountered, a 
power that had come into their civilization, to raise it to great heights and 
to come to totally pervade their civilization. I saw the legions of Toltec 
thralls, undead slaves, trapped by this power … And I saw that there are 
many layers of reality beyond death, and that there are things that are 
worse than death. I understood also that we in this civilization have taken 
in that same kind of power, maybe the identical power, and that we are also 
descending into thraldom, and that like the Toltecs we will self-annihilate 
under the terrible energies of this power. This power is like an alien 
invader, a disease, a technological accident. I had a sense that this is the 
encounter between Toltec and Chichimec, between Aryan and Dravidian, 
between Christian and Pagan. [Other cultures] see the Toltec in [our 
civilization], and it is horrifying and intoxicating. If you see the Toltec 
power you see how dangerous it is, and yet you want it, you want to wield 
it. […] I had a sense of a Fawn in the forest. I understood the beauty of 
animal life on this planet, of new life. I knew the incredible achievement 
that is tender, precious Nature. And I saw how the Fawn is so vulnerable. 
There is nothing to protect it from this celestial power that so corrupts and 
destroys. (Contact 37) 
The Lords seemed to be the most predatory of the nonphysical entities 
disclosed by the inquiry record and their presence in contacts often 
inspired a degree of horror. The signature of the Lords was agency without 
limits, with a particular emphasis on mastery and dominion. The 
exploitative antagonism of the Lords seemed to be directed towards primal 
or fertile life, nature, the Earth, matter, and mortality itself. Indeed, the 
heavenly domain of the Lords seemed to be that domain that transcends 
the world of finitude and mortality. Furthermore, the Lords, while not 
bound by the processes of mortality, seemed to lack the wisdom and 
understanding that arises from being mortal. 

Chapter Twenty 
 
328
While paradigmatic, the Lords seemed to share the celestial family 
with other celestial species that lacked their antagonism. The following 
contacts 
suggest 
species 
that, 
while 
possessing 
the 
numinous 
transcendence characterising a celestial species, seemed to be significantly 
more benign than the Lords: 
The Exile arrived on Earth three hundred years ago and create the entire 
human civilization as we know it. They actually pour the physical 
structures down out of hyperspace onto the surface of the planet. All of our 
technological artefacts are layered up in silver-gray cubical streams of 
hypermatter. From three hundred years ago our prefabricated civilization 
begins. I am at a fête, surrounded by the attendees. Everyone is naked and 
dark-skinned. Everyone is human, but some people have such exotic 
bodies, covered in pockets of corded muscle or of very “non-standard” 
proportions. Testing out the human form. New to it. Playing with it. 
Getting into it. Everyone is happy and enjoying the display of these 
beautiful, strong, fun bodies. Exile at play. (Contact 30) 
 
Up in the sky are Faerie-gods. They look down upon us bemused, with a 
vast wisdom. I say: “Fantastic. The aliens are coming back.” The substance 
of their ethereal bodies is numbers. We humans are extraphysical aliens: 
angels, faeries. We crash-landed on this world. A gate to our spirit reality 
was opened and energies from this higher-dimensional space flooded into 
the world in bursts, in multiple revelations in space and time. The Western 
Revelation is an Industrial-Informational Revelation: alchemical, hermetic, 
code-driven. The Revelations sink their information into the world, 
disrupting and augmenting its life systems. The Revelations are driven by 
the human oversouls, which influence the human personalities of the 
species. (Contact 40) 
Below are summarised various suggested aspects of the three 
nonphysical families discussed above: 
 
 
Terrestrial 
Extraterrestrial 
celestial 
 
paradigmatic species 
 
the Naga 
Starseed 
the Lords 
energetic signature 
 
primevality and 
fertility 
Eros 
agency without 
limits 
degree of alterity 
 
alien 
more alien 
most alien 
degree of 
relationality 
more bound by 
relationships 
concerned with 
relationships 
less bound by 
relationships 
Fig. 20-1 Paradigmatic species, signature, alterity, and relationality by 
nonphysical family 

Daimonic Ecologies 
329 
The participation of nonphysical species in the evolution 
of the human psyche 
The analysis of the inquiry record revealed a pattern across contacts 
suggesting that the psychic and cultural evolution of the human might 
have been driven in part by waves of contact with multiple species of 
nonphysical origin. Contact 40 (above) is the most explicit. In this 
contact, the alien entities, originating out of a “spirit reality” or “higher-
dimensional space” seem to be accompanied by multiple energetic 
revelations from their reality that inform civilisations and “disrupt and 
augment” the life systems of the world. Furthermore, the alien entities 
are identified as human “oversouls,” with the contact seeming to suggest 
that the alien entities are the higher dimensional aspects corresponding 
to the lower dimensional aspects that are ordinary human beings. The 
contact also suggests that we humans might have come to this world 
from beyond this world, and yet we may also be encountering entities 
from beyond this world. Working in a similar but more direct way, 
Contact 30 (above) suggests that the “Exile” poured down “out of 
hyperspace” the “technological artefacts” of “our prefabricated 
civilisation.” In Contact 23 (above), the grafting of symbiotes onto the 
subtle bodies of hominids by angels further suggests a manipulation of 
the human species. 
In the interpretation of the inquiry record, I suggest that through the 
encounter with nonphysical species, the collective human psyche might 
come into contact with transcendent, alien, and numinous forces. 
Collectively, human cultures might mediate and be transformed by 
these encounters with the forces of these nonphysical entities. The 
contact between a culture and nonphysical entities seems to be both 
empowering and destabilising. For example, as we see in Contact 37 
(above), a culture can rise “to great heights” but can also “self-
annihilate under the terrible energies” of the encounter. I suggest that if 
a culture successfully negotiates this destabilising encounter with the 
nonphysical entities, the entities might be able to be brought into 
enduring relationship with the collective psyche of that culture and 
become part of the birthright of that culture, and perhaps even of the 
human species and the planet as well. 
The following contact suggests that the encounter of a transcendent, 
antagonistic entity with more immanent realities and entities can be a 
redemptive process for the transcendent entity: “The dominator nature of 
the Transcendentals is redeemed through joining with the Earth. The 
Faerie King did it, Starseed has done it, every Transcendental can do it 

Chapter Twenty 
 
330
as well. The Faerie King: Starseed is beauty. Witness the beauty of 
Starseed. Come to Earth and join Starseed in engendering beauty.” 
(Contact 70) I further suggest that the collective psyche (at either the 
scale of an individual culture or the human species) itself might be the 
matrix that mediates the encounter between the human species and 
nonphysical species. We can conceive of the collective psyche as a 
dynamic matrix of nonphysical entities. I suggest the possibility that 
nonphysical entities that are initially not native to the collective human 
psyche might be able to become introjected into it, becoming, in a sense 
“naturalised citizens” of the collective human psyche. In this way, in the 
foreground or centre of the collective psyche, most of the nonphysical 
entities would be humans that were once physically incarnate and that 
now exist nonphysically or discarnately—what we might think of as 
deceased “ancestors” or “past lives” of the collective. Additionally, in 
the background or periphery of the collective psyche would be entities 
that are extrahuman. Religious, mystical, or shamanic traditions of 
various cultures might identify these entities as helpful spirits, primal 
ancestors, mythical figures, soteriological figures, or angels. However, 
some might be more dangerous, what we might think of as destructive 
titans, furies, energy vampires, or demons. In our modern era, we might 
think of these entities simply as deep collective pathologies, destructive 
unconscious complexes, or unbalancing factors in the collective psyche. 
The following contact gives a sense of the networked field of 
nonphysical presences that might constitute a stabilised collective psyche: 
One after another, genecores activated, agents tooled up. The Mother-
Activators sing their genecodes and instructions into us, bringing their 
pupae into concrescence, maturing us in our birthing crèches. Endless 
experimentation, endless attention to beauty, endless mutation encouraged 
in the incomprehensibly intricate, unfathomably deep, and long-banked 
genesis pits. Each layer of the Supercore, sheathed around another is 
lovingly, heroically, brilliantly put together through a deep series of 
interconjugations. Experiment is the OR; interconjugation is the AND. 
Floating alone in the hyperspaces, we are the layered legions of 
experiments that survived. We are alone, but seeking erotic communion 
with yet other Supercores …. (Contact 22) 
The evolutionary encounter with nonphysical species 
Jean Gebser11 suggests several phases or structures in the evolution of 
consciousness, among them the magic phase, the mythical phase, and the 
                                                           
11 Gebser: 45-97. 

Daimonic Ecologies 
331 
mental phase.12 Drawing upon Gebser’s work, I suggest that the evolution 
of the collective human psyche can be understood to have gone through 
three phases, each representing the emergence of a form of human 
consciousness that came into being in part as a result of the various 
encounters of individual cultural psyches with nonphysical species. 
Moving from the scale of local cultures to the scale of a global human 
species, we can think more generally of this process as the human species 
encountering a series of nonphysical families. 
For Gebser, in the magic phase, human consciousness was relatively 
undifferentiated and existed in a deep intimacy with nature. Nevertheless, 
humans possessed, in addition to language and an attunement to clan, a 
range of powerful modes for engaging the magic world of “mana-
charged” protopsychic intensities in which they found themselves, such 
modes as ritual enaction, “second sight,” and telepathy. Presumably, 
humans acted in their world with a vital intensity that we moderns would 
find extraordinary. Next, in the mythical phase, corresponding to the 
emergence of agriculture, human consciousness came to be informed by 
complex social realities, religion, an awareness of time and a discrete 
soul, and an imaginal faculty. Finally, in the mental phase, 
corresponding to the emergence of the philosophical and religious 
monisms of the so-called “Axial Age” that is posited to have begun in 
the Western world roughly two and a half thousand years ago, humans 
acquired the ability to think abstractly and to reason. Tarnas suggests a 
similar Axial evolution of the Western mind, characterised by a 
recognition of a transcendent divine reality and a concomitant psychic 
separation from and elevation over the world, and, like Gebser, identifies 
a highly problematic side to this separation. For Tarnas, the Western 
mind comes to feel that it “bears a unique relationship to a transcendent 
divinity that is separate from and sovereign over the created world, a 
world that is increasingly perceived as devoid of meaning and purpose 
other than that associated with the human self”.13 In its later stages (i.e., 
the modern era), even the transcendent loses its meaning and power, 
                                                           
12 Gebser also suggests two other phases: the archaic (the primordial proto-
structure of human consciousness) and the integral (a currently emerging structure 
of consciousness) (Gebser: 43-44, 97-102) Furthermore, while Gebser’s focus is 
upon the Western mind, I believe that his insights are suggestive of past unfoldings 
that may have occurred in the evolution of the collective human psyche. Finally, 
note that Gebser uses the term “psyche” in a more specific sense then the way that 
I use it in this discussion: for Gebser, the closest equivalents to the term “psyche” 
as I use it are the terms “consciousness” and “origin.” 
13 Tarnas: 24. 

Chapter Twenty 
 
332
leaving a vacuum that has empowered “the reductive values of the 
market and the mass media to colonise the collective human imagination 
and drain it of all depth”.14 
Negotiation and stabilisation of three phases  
in the evolution of human consciousness 
I suggest that the magic, mythical, and mental phases of the evolution of 
human consciousness might each have been inaugurated in part through 
encounters with a particular family of nonphysical species. The new forms 
of consciousness that came to characterise each of these phases might have 
been stabilised only after intense negotiations with the destabilising 
psychic energies carried by these nonphysical species. More specifically, I 
suggest that the magic phase of consciousness might have arisen in part 
out of contacts with terrestrial species, mythical consciousness out of 
contacts with extraterrestrial species, and mental consciousness out of 
contacts with celestial species. 
We can imagine that in the contact with nonphysical terrestrial species 
such as the Naga, the human (or proto-human) species might have been 
encountering particularly ancient and envitalised species that possessed a 
profound awareness of the energies of the Earth. As individuals and tribal 
cultures came into contact with the psyche of the nonphysical Naga, the 
consciousness of the Naga might have come to pervade those cultures. 
Those cultures might have found themselves developing in the deep 
vitality and chthonic awareness carried by the Naga psyche. However, the 
raw, mana-charged potency of the Naga psyche could have overwhelmed 
the individuals and cultures that came into contact with it. Force, 
destruction, and “mana-charged” action might have come to characterise 
some tribal cultures. Perhaps cultures that were able to successfully 
negotiate and stabilise the energies of the Naga psyche might have found 
themselves in possession of a facility for potent action, ritual, and 
manipulation of the powers of fertility. Nagas, as nonphysical entities 
participating in the collective psyche of a culture, and eventually of the 
human species, might have come to exist as symbiotic discarnate 
presences within the collective psyche, being regarded no longer as 
destructive or malevolent, but rather as sustaining and benevolent. Cultural 
accounts of mythical figures, such as Titans and Leviathan-like entities 
might reflect the encounter of the human psyche with the Naga or other 
                                                           
14 Tarnas: 32. 

Daimonic Ecologies 
333 
terrestrial entities. Tiamat, the primeval goddess or demoness of Babylonian 
myth, might be a similar figure. 
In the mythical phase, we can further imagine various human 
individuals and cultures coming into contact with extraterrestrial species, 
for example, the Starseed species. In their unearthliness and otherworldliness, 
Starseed entities might have been regarded as seductive or unpredictable 
spirits or gods or goddesses. Perhaps such figures as Iblis, the jinn of 
Arabic lore or the wily god Loki of Norse myth came into the human 
psyche through its contact with Starseed or other extraterrestrial entities. 
As the collective psyches of various early agrarian cultures deepened into 
contact with Starseed they might have found themselves incorporating the 
Starseed attunement to and hunger for relationship. The complexity of 
large-scale social organisation that emerges in early agricultural societies 
might have been facilitated in part by the relational sensitivity of Starseed. 
However, with an intensification of complex social arrangements, some 
cultures might have encountered the more problematic energies carried by 
Starseed. Such factors of complex societies as deception, corruption, the 
use of society’s dreams and yearnings as a form of political control, and 
the manipulation of others on a large scale might have arisen as aspects of 
this problematic energy. Cultures that were able to successfully stabilise 
these introjected Starseed energies might have found themselves not only 
in possession of advanced interpersonal and social faculties, but imaginal 
faculties as well. Perhaps it was the concern with relationality that focused 
the human psyche on an interiorised image of the other, thereby 
empowering the nascent imaginal faculty that, according to Gebser, 
characterised the structure of human consciousness of this time. The 
mythic figure of the enchanting, otherworldly, and sublimely talented 
apsara might reflect a successfully integrated encounter between the 
human species and Starseed or other extraterrestrial species. 
Because we, as modern peoples, have an awareness more immediately 
determined by the structure of mental consciousness, the celestial entities 
that participate so profoundly in the structure of mental consciousness 
would be particularly near at hand, psychically speaking. In some ways, 
celestial entities, especially in their later, contemporary forms, may be so 
intimately involved in our perceptions of the world, so taken for granted, 
that we might at first not notice them at all. Celestial entities are 
characterised by agency without limits, mastery, dominion, and the 
transcendent. In examining the mental form of consciousness, we can 
distinguish as Gebser and Tarnas do, between, on one hand, the cultures of 
the first part of the mental phase and, on the other, the modern cultures 

Chapter Twenty 
 
334
that have come into being over the last four hundred years in the West 
(i.e., since the Renaissance). 
I suggest that the focus on a transcendent divine reality that 
characterises much of Axial-Age religion and philosophy (especially that 
produced by the Indo-European mind) might have emerged in part from an 
assimilation of celestial entities into the collective psyche. In particular, 
worldviews that considered a divine principle, light, the soul, the mind, or 
the human to exist in a relationship of superiority over the world, darkness, 
matter, the body and sexuality, or the nonhuman seem to possibly bear the 
stamp of introjected celestial entities. Deity figures of this time reflecting 
the presence of celestial entities in the human psyche might include the 
Olympian deities of the ancient Greek pantheon, the Aesir gods of the 
Norse pagan traditions, and the world-enslaving asuras of later Hindu 
cosmological visions. 
In the modern period, consciousness, according to Gebser, becomes 
thoroughly bound up in duality, analysis, and measurement. While 
conventional modern worldviews (e.g., materialism) do not acknowledge 
the existence of invisible purposeful entities, I suggest that these entities 
may in part shape the very fabric of our global civilisation. We might see 
them in our instrumental technologies, immortal corporations, national 
security apparatuses, refugee camps, power grids, centralised and 
abstracted economies, and in the quantitative sciences. I further suggest 
that some celestial entities might have been brought into mutual and 
symbiotic relationship with the human psyche. If we do not conceive of 
these entities as “helpful spirits” then perhaps we conceive of them as our 
sustaining virtues or universal values. Freedom, equality, tolerance of 
difference, justice, uncompromised creativity, universal love, reason, the 
pursuit of truth—whatever we modern peoples might hold as our most 
precious values—perhaps these are living presences, nonphysical yet 
informing our civilisations. From a personal and mystical perspective, we 
might think of these benevolent allies as personal daimons, muses, or 
guardian angels. From a more cosmic perspective, we might think of these 
entities as archangels, godheads, or universal archetypes, sustaining the 
order of the universe. 
Below are summarised the suggested evolutionary characteristics of 
terrestrial, extraterrestrial, and celestial entities: 
 
 
 

Daimonic Ecologies 
335 
 
 
Terrestrial 
Extraterrestrial 
Celestial 
 
associated 
structure of 
consciousness 
magical 
mythical 
mental 
destabilizing 
energy 
 
destruction 
corruption 
domination 
integrated 
energy  
potent action 
relationality, 
imagination 
reason, 
equanimity 
example of 
destabilizing 
entity 
primordial 
serpent 
(e.g., Tiamat) 
jinn 
asura 
 
example of 
integrated 
entity 
Naga 
Apsara 
angel or 
godhead 
Fig. 20-2 Structure, energies and representative entities by nonphysical 
family 
Conclusions, limitations and applications 
Lahood speaks of “hybridity” as “the mixture of things, processes, and 
phenomena—which are thought to be unlike, different, separate, disparate, 
and unequal—into novel cultural and religious forms”,15 and suggests that 
the process of hybridisation is not only cultural in nature, but also 
cosmological, referring to “alien spiritual forces [hybridising] into a 
powerful phantasmagoric space.”16 I suggest that the human psyche may 
be prone to such a process of cosmological hybridisation. If we accept the 
possibility that a significant portion of the collective human psyche may 
indeed consist of hybridised strata of introjected nonphysical entities, then, 
we might well ask, what is the human? In attempting to locate some 
essence of the human collective psyche, we might imagine more and more 
archaic layers of the human psyche, presumably extending into those 
depths of psyche that precede the existence of the human. Is the essence of 
our species to be found in these ancestral layers of primate, reptilian, or 
protozoic psyche? Or should we more properly locate the essence of our 
species in a possible other lineage from which we might trace our descent, 
                                                           
15 Lahood: 157. 
16 Lahood: 169. 

Chapter Twenty 
 
336
from those transcendent powers that might have “fallen from the sky” and 
in their mingling produced the unusual hybrids that we know as ourselves? 
I suggest that we may be both, a sort of symbiosis arising at the border 
between the physical and “daimonic” worlds.17 
It is important to keep in mind that the research presented in this 
discussion ultimately rests on the interpretation of a single text composed 
of the nonordinary-state experiences of a single researcher. The limited 
and necessarily subjective foundations of the research caution against 
more literal or objectivist applications. The value of this research is 
primarily visionary: it suggests a new field of possibilities that can be 
explored by future researchers. If this research is to be relevant to thinkers 
in mainstream disciplines, preliminary work is first needed to build 
tentative bridges between the sort of vision presented here and those 
mainstream orthodoxies that tend to assume the nonexistence of 
nonphysical entities. I believe that the participatory paradigm articulated 
by Ferrer and others represents one such bridge. By approaching 
nonphysical entities as enacted yet ontological realities, we avoid the 
Cartesian dilemma in which we struggle to assess the reality of 
nonphysical domains that seem entirely real to many and yet manifest in 
such divergent and often incompatible ways. 
If researchers across the disciplines can take seriously—and yet hold 
lightly—the idea of some sort of existence of nonphysical entities, then we 
might envision a number of lines of further inquiry. Possible questions that 
might guide such an inquiry include the following: a) What aspects of the 
human psyche—rather than being fully indigenous to the human—might 
be a product of our relationships with chthonic, extraplanetary, or 
transcendent forces? b) For a given culture, which nonphysical species 
have been particularly either well integrated into or problematic for the 
collective cultural psyche of that culture? c) How might current global 
crises be negotiated through attending to the nonphysical presences with 
which the human species might be in relationship? d) To what extent 
might spiritual doctrines and practices unnecessarily reject, pathologise, or 
demonise nonphysical entities characterised by darkness, sexuality, or 
embodied immanence? e) To what extent might the evolution of the 
human psyche depend upon encounters with exotic nonphysical entities? 
Finally, in the domain of interdisciplinary studies, the concept of the 
nonphysical entity offers a common ground for different traditions, 
modalities, and disciplines to dialogue and share potentially mutually 
                                                           
17 The biological concept of endosymbiosis may here provide an apt metaphor. Is it 
possible that we are an organism in which the transcendent has been 
endosymbiotically incorporated into the tissues of the immanent? 

Daimonic Ecologies 
337 
enriching perspectives. Some disciplines are, of course, already quite 
familiar with the concept of the nonphysical entity, whether it occurs in 
the form of the godheads of theological descriptions, transcendent beings 
in mystical traditions, channelled entities of mediumistic encounters, 
spirits described in anthropological accounts, or popular accounts of 
extraterrestrial or extradimensional encounters. The emphasis upon the 
entity as a common ground avoids the tendency towards a forced 
reconciling of incompatible metaphysical doctrines, such as is perhaps 
evident in Wilber’s neoperennialist metacosmology.18 Of course, some 
traditions may reject the pluralistic assumptions inherent in such ecumenical 
overtures (e.g. the putting of the concept of the Abrahamic “God” in 
dialogue with concept of the extraterrestrial). It seems possible, though, that 
given the psyche’s apparent penchant for hybridising encounter, it is only a 
matter of time before a mutual exchange of essences triumphs over 
exclusivist stances, no matter how deeply ingrained those stances might be. 
Bibliography 
Bache, C. M. (2000) Dark Night, Early Dawn (Albany, NY: State 
University of New York Press). 
Ferrer, J. N. (2002) Revisioning Transpersonal Theory (Albany, NY: State 
University of New York). 
—. (2008) “Spiritual Knowing as Participatory Enaction: An Answer to 
the Question of Religious Pluralism” in J. N. Ferrer and J. Sherman 
(eds) The Participatory Turn (Albany, NY: State University of New 
York) Chapter 3, 135-169. 
Gebser, J. (1953) The Ever-present Origin, trans. N. Barstad & A. 
Mickunas (Athens, OH: Ohio University Press). 
Irwin, L. (2008) “Esoteric Paradigms and Participatory Spirituality in the 
Teachings of Mikhaël Aïvanhov” in J. N. Ferrer and J. Sherman (eds) 
The Participatory Turn (Albany, NY: State University of New York 
Chapter) Chapter 5, 197-224. 
Lahood, G. (2008) “Paradise Bound: A Perennial Tradition or an Unseen 
Process of Cosmological Hybridization?” Anthropology of Consciousness, 
19.2, 155-189. 
Spangler, D. (2010) Subtle Worlds (Everett, WA: Lorian Press). 
Tarnas, R. (2006) Cosmos and Psyche (New York: Viking). 
Wilber, K. (2006) Integral Spirituality (Boston: Integral Books). 
                                                           
18 See Ferrer 2002: 101-103 for a critique of the procrustean aspects of Wilber’s 
scheme. 


PART IV 
DAIMONIC PERFORMANCE 

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE 
SEEING VOICES: 
ELUCIDATING THE UNCONSCIOUS VIA TAROT 
HERMENEUTIC WITH JUNG AND DELEUZE 
INNA SEMETSKY 
 
 
 
This chapter positions the hermeneutic practice of interpreting the 
meanings of Tarot images against the background of Carl Jung’s analytical 
psychology and Gilles Deleuze’s practical method of transcendental 
empiricism. The common approach to the dimension of the unconscious 
unites these three modalities, for becoming conscious of the unconscious 
is the task undertaken by all three practices. Tarot readings make visible 
the realm of invisible archetypes by virtue of their embodiment in the 
images of the Major and Minor Arcana, thereby addressing the major 
postulate of Hermetic and neoplatonic philosophies. We literally see the 
multiple silent “voices” of the unconscious in the imagery when a specific 
Tarot layout creates a connection between two Platonic realms, visible and 
invisible. While the visible world is sensible, the invisible is uncanny but 
still intelligible. Tarot embodies gnostic knowledge of deep meanings 
“hiding” in the mundus imaginalis—the imaginal world. Plato’s story in 
the Symposium1 illustrates this concept: The priestess Diotima teaches 
Socrates that it is a daimon or spirit by the name of Eros (Love) that 
fluctuates between the two opposites of lack and plenty. The hermeneutic 
method of Tarot readings reaches towards the depth of the Arcana, thus 
unveiling their meanings through a genuine reader’s love for gnosis, or 
divine knowledge, using their power of intuition and imagination. 
Tarot hermeneutic 
A Tarot deck consists of seventy-eight pictorial cards, or Arcana, twenty-
two Major and fifty-six Minor. The word Arcana derives from the Latin arca 
                                                           
1 Plato 204d-209e. 

Seeing Voices 
341 
as a chest and arcere as a verb means to shut or to close. Symbolically, 
arcanum (singular) is a tightly shut treasure chest holding a secret; this is its 
implicit meaning. In reference to Greek etymology, Arcana relate to arce 
meaning origin or inception. Jung conceptualised the archetypes of the 
collective unconscious as primordial, original images engraved in our psychic 
constitution; these archaic images may have inspired the artists who designed 
the Tarot pictures. What is called a Tarot layout is a particular pattern of 
images full of rich symbolism, each position in a particular layout having 
specific connotations. Tarot “speaks” to us in a mythic format of symbols, 
a universal, metaphorical language full of deep, even if initially opaque, 
meanings. The interpretation of Tarot images—or, using the term from 
popular culture, Tarot readings—indicates a specific hermeneutic. 
The Greek words hermeneuein and hermeneia for interpreting and 
interpretation are related to the mythic god Hermes, a messenger and 
mediator between gods and mortals, who crosses thresholds and traverses 
boundaries because he is able to “speak” both languages, the divine and the 
human, even if they appear alien to each other. As a practical method, Tarot 
hermeneutic allows us to relate to the often uncanny “other” at a deep soul 
level via the corpus subtile—the subtle and spiritual body of emotions and 
feelings that are so often difficult to articulate precisely because they are 
buried deep in the unconscious and exceed the limitations of our conscious 
discourse. Yet this emotional and unconscious corpus becomes visible to us 
when it acquires corporeality in the esoteric language of images. Antoine 
Faivre2 notices that the term “esotericism” conjures up the idea of secret, 
arcane, knowledge. We can “access understanding of a symbol […] by a 
personal effort of progressive elucidation through several successive levels, 
i.e., by a form of hermeneutics”—such as the hermeneutics of Tarot images. 
Tarot myths abound: Hermes, the deity of communication, has been 
identified with the Egyptian mystical god Thoth who was said to have 
given his name to a Tarot deck known as The Book of Thoth. The 
Hermetic tradition left its traces in history and was revived during the 
Renaissance by Marsilio Ficino, Pico della Mirandola and Giordano 
Bruno.3 It deeply informed the Renaissance, and since then has manifested 
in a plurality of forms, including the pictorial representation of this 
knowledge in the symbols of Tarot. Faivre traced the Western esoteric 
tradition from its ancient and medieval sources to Christian theosophy and 
up to the twentieth-century philosophers of science, physicists and 
university scholars described as “gnostics of Princeton and Pasadena”,4 
                                                           
2 Faivre 1994: 5. 
3 Faivre 1994, 1995; Yates. 
4 Faivre 1994: 280. 

Chapter Twenty-one 
 
342
and he referred to the Tarot hermeneutic as one of the forms of esoteric 
knowledge—gnosis—that involves both “intuition and the certainty of 
possessing a method permitting access to such [deep, inner] knowledge.”5 
As a form of thought, focusing on inner gnosis, the Hermetic tradition 
survived many centuries into the Christian era. Ficino, who believed in the 
Egyptian roots of Hermes, had translated the Corpus Hermeticum into Latin in 
the mid-fifteenth century, when also the Jewish Kabbalah “penetrated 
Christian milieus and celebrated surprising nuptials with […] Hermeticism.”6 
The Kabbalistic Tree of Life is a metaphor for consciousness where the 
supreme unity, the One (not unlike Plotinus’ scheme of things) incorporates 
both masculine and feminine principles as intelligence and wisdom. In 1781 
the French author Court de Gébelin introduced his ideas of the Egyptian 
origins of Tarot as grounded in the teaching of the sage Hermes Trismegistus. 
De Gébelin’s nine-volume encyclopaedia was called Primitive World (Le 
Monde Primitif) and was devoted to the Golden Age of ancient civilisation 
when people were united by one language and one religion. In the nineteenth 
century, the French scholar Eliphas Levi who was influenced by de Gébelin’s 
beliefs developed the correspondence between the twenty-two images of the 
Major Arcana and the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew alphabet. It should be 
noted, however, that the eminent British historian and philosopher of language 
Sir Michael Dummett pointed to the “lack in precision of intellectual 
substance” in Levi’s work on occult phenomena, even suggesting that he 
submitted to a “climax of fantasy.”7 The meanings of the individual cards 
were said to have been decoded in a systematic manner in 1889 by a French 
physician, Gérard Encausse (known as Papus), who aligned Tarot symbolism 
with specific keywords. 
In his “Afterword” to the latest edition of Valentin Tomberg’s 
monumental work (which was published as Anonymous) devoted to 
meditations on the twenty-two Major Arcana in the light of Christian 
Hermeticism, the late Vatican Cardinal Hans Urs von Balthasar emphasised 
the certainty provided by Tarot symbolism with regard to “the depth of 
existence [where] there is an interrelationship between all things by way of 
analogy.”8 The Russian-born Peotr Ouspensky, who was a follower of 
Gurdjieff’s spiritual teachings, thought that all allusions to the Hebrew 
letters obscured the significance of Tarot, which he posited primarily as a 
metaphysical system indicating the three-fold analogical relation between 
a human soul, the physical or phenomenal world, and the world of ideas or 
                                                           
5 Faivre 1994: 19. 
6 Faivre 1994: 7. 
7 Dummett: 115. 
8 Anonymous: 663. 

Seeing Voices 
343 
the noumenal, divine or spiritual, world. As a metaphysical system, Tarot 
may have had a hypothetical origin, perhaps dating back to the famous 
Hermetic text, the Emerald Tablet (Tabula Smaragdina) where the famous 
axiom “as above so below” first appeared. For it is the second verse of 
Hermes’ Emerald Table that proclaims the ancient formula of analogy or 
the doctrine of correspondences: That which is above is like to that which 
is below and that which is below is like to that which is above, to 
accomplish the miracles of (the) one thing. Tarot unites the perceived 
opposites of above and below, of self and other, of psyche and matter, by 
virtue of its own in-between-ness. Indeed, as a spirit, it can hold two 
opposites together, therefore eventually reconciling what is habitually 
perceived dualistically as irreconcilable opposites rather than an undivided 
whole, the One of neoplatonists. Such loving spirit acquires its material 
existence by being embodied in the Tarot images.  
In the context of Western esotericism, Faivre has listed six 
fundamental characteristics that, in the specific context of Tarot, can be 
briefly summarised as follows: 
 
1. The principle of interdependence, analogy, or correspondence 
between phenomena; the relational world view. Yet many 
correspondences are unseen or “veiled” and require our subjective 
effort to discover, read and interpret them so that they begin 
making sense for us.  
2. The role of imagination and mediation in discerning the deeper 
meanings of symbols and images, and in discovering the 
interrelations and correspondences in our practical experience. 
Developing a creative or active imagination becomes a soul’s inner 
means for achieving spiritual gnosis.  
3. The possibility of transmutation. This alchemical concept should be 
understood metaphorically. It describes not a magical transformation 
of basic matter into the form of metal (like lead into “noble” gold), 
but human spiritual development as a soul-based process which 
Jung called the individuation of the Self. 
4. The practice of concordance or what, in contemporary discourse, 
we may call tolerance. This is the knowledge of the Tarot 
symbolism that allows us to see beyond the veil of cultural or 
religious differences or language barriers. It is the hermeneutics of 
Tarot that provides us with the opportunity of understanding the 
universal common symbolic language which is said to have been 
spoken by Adam before the Fall. 

Chapter Twenty-one 
 
344
5. A specific pedagogy irreducible to direct instruction. Esoteric 
tradition has its own means of transmitting Hermetic teachings 
including the multiplicity of symbolic lessons inscribed in the 
images of Tarot Arcana.  
6. The natural world is not reduced to “dead matter” but is alive—
albeit “hieroglyphic”—grounded in hidden interrelations. The 
symbols, full of implicit meanings, should be deciphered; the 
invisible relations and correspondences should be made visible; 
then it will be possible to read nature, including human nature, as a 
book in order to understand its multileveled complex structure. 
According to Henry Corbin, who was a professor of Islamic Studies at 
the Sorbonne in Paris prior to his death in 1978, there is an intermediate 
realm between the micro- and macrocosm called the mesocosm—the 
imaginal, or archetypal world. Corbin’s spiritual theology combined the 
religions of Judaism, Christianity and Sufism as manifestations of the 
analogical story about the relationship between the human and the divine, 
between the individual and God. The world’s quintessential soul, the anima 
mundi, holds together the four physical and material elements, namely air, 
earth, fire and water, itself being a fifth, invisible, element. In the next 
section, we will encounter the symbol for the world’s soul in the imagery of 
the last Arcanum in the Tarot deck called the World, which can also be seen 
as a symbol for the Jungian archetype of the individuated Self. 
The archetypal images of tarot 
Tarot hermeneutic provides an unorthodox epistemic access to the realm 
called by Jung the collective unconscious, as a symbolic home for the 
multiple archetypes which inhabit the objective psyche shared by 
humankind at the deepest, psychoid, level. This is where body and mind, 
physis and psyche, become united as two different aspects of one world, the 
unus mundus. The archetypal process of individuation as becoming one’s 
authentic Self “is an experience in images and of images.”9 Archetype is 
seen by Jung as a skeletal pattern, filled in with imagery and motifs that are 
mediated by the unconscious, the variable contents of which form different 
archetypal images. They are symbolically represented in the variety of 
Arcana, whose silent discourse exceeds the verbal expressions of the 
conscious mind: “it is not the personal human being who is making the 
statement, but the archetype speaking through him.”10 Different archetypes 
                                                           
9 Jung CW 9i: 82. 
10 Jung 1963: 352. 

Seeing Voices 
345 
affecting the human psyche “speak” in the range of multiple voices that 
become perceived when represented in the visible language of Tarot images. 
Jung noticed that “the function of consciousness [is] not only to recognise 
and assimilate the external world through the gateway of the senses, but to 
translate into visible reality the world within us.”11 
This is the ultimate function of Tarot: to translate into visible reality the 
invisible, inner, world of deep gnostic knowledge. Tomberg commented that 
the Major Arcana as authentic symbols must be presented to consciousness 
so as to “render us capable of making discoveries, engendering new ideas”12 
and Jung was explicit that the “pictures in the Tarot cards were distantly 
descended from the archetypes of transformation.”13 The twenty-two Major 
Arcana (fig. 21-1) can be seen to represent, in a symbolic form, the process 
of Jungian individuation, from the Fool (unnumbered Arcanum, signified by 
zero) to the World (Arcanum XXI). 
 
 
Fig. 21-1 The Major Arcana of the Rider-Waite deck14 
The Fool begins his symbolic journey as the archetype of puer aeternus 
or eternal child, a symbol of potentiality and unlimited possibilities 
                                                           
11 Jung CW 8: 342. 
12 Anonymous: 4. 
13 Jung CW 9i: 81.   
14 Illustrations of Tarot pictures are reproduced by permission of US Games 
Systems Inc., Stamford, CT, USA. © 1971 US Games Systems, Inc. Further 
reproduction prohibited. 

Chapter Twenty-one 
 
346
represented by the abyss which is just a step away. In the Tarot picture 
the Fool stands on top of the mountain, yet at the edge of the abyss. 
According to Jung, the ego may be standing on a shaky ground. Yet how 
“can one […] attain wisdom without foolishness?”15 Taking a chance, 
the Fool is transformed into the Magician as a symbol of successful 
accomplishment of goals. While the Magician’s right hand holding the 
wand points upwards to the skies, his left hand is pointing to the earth, 
thus enacting the Hermetic maxim, as above so below. The number one 
associated with this Arcanum is a prime number, an indivisible unity. 
The four tools on the Magician’s table represent the four suits in a Tarot 
deck: wands, pentacles, swords and cups. They can also symbolise the 
four Jungian functions: feeling, sensing, thinking and intuiting, exercised 
by the skilful Magician, and the four elements available to the him in his 
alchemical laboratory: fire, earth, water and air. All the elements of 
nature are brought together to serve the aim of enriching the physical 
world with a fifth, quintessential, element or, as described in the Gnostic 
tradition, of freeing a human spirit from the constraints and limitations 
of the material world.  
The next image is the High Priestess. The second Arcanum is a symbol 
of female intuition and spiritual life. She is Sophia (in Greek philosophy) 
or Shekhinah (in Jewish mythology), representing Wisdom concealed in 
the scroll on her lap. Jung associated Wisdom with the Hebrew Chochma, 
one of the Sephirot on the Kabbalistic Tree of Life, a symbol of the divine 
descending into our human, material world. In the Hebrew Bible 
Wisdom/Sophia is personified in Proverbs.16 The principle of Wisdom was 
considered by medieval alchemists to be identical with the Holy Spirit. It 
is the union of God with his beloved, Shekhinah, or the union of Logos 
with Sophia, that produces the sought-after mystical union as a 
coincidentia oppositorum manifested in the ultimate archetype of the 
Self—the goal of individuation. The Priestess’ task is to unfold the scroll 
to reveal to the Fool the symbols of esoteric knowledge expressed in the 
long-lost language that may manifest itself in the unconscious contents 
“hidden” in the imagery. 
The third Arcanum, the Empress, represents the Jungian Mother 
archetype. In the Kabbalistic Tree of Life the Sephirah called Binah or 
understanding at a deeper level means mother of the world. Binah is the 
place in which the Tree of Life has its roots; it is creation enabled by the 
eternal Mother. In a reading, the Empress often indicates pregnancy. Jung 
stated that women’s psychology is grounded in the principle of eros as the 
                                                           
15 Jung CW 11: 953. 
16 8: 22-31. 

Seeing Voices 
347 
great binder, while from ancient times the ruling masculine principle has 
been logos. It is the Emperor, Arcanum number four, as the omniscient 
and powerful Father archetype that exercises the logos principle. The 
Emperor and the Empress may be seen as manifestations of anima and 
animus, two sub-personalities which, according to Jung, exist at the level 
of the unconscious. Etymologically, anima and animus have their origin in 
Latin as the words designating “soul” and “spirit” respectively; they can 
manifest in our actual lives through modes of perception and behaviour 
represented by the figures of the opposite sex in each individual psychic 
template. 
At this stage of development, the archetypal figures turn into social 
roles. The innocent Fool, while travelling, has lost his spirit; he has put on 
a mask and become what Jung called a persona, represented by the fifth 
Arcanum, the Hierophant. The term persona derives from the Latin for 
mask or false face, and Jung considered it to be the archetype of 
conformity. The Hierophant, or the Pope, as a masculine counterpart to the 
High Priestess, is a symbol of law and order, establishment, and 
fundamentalism. A socially adapted mask may become overused to the 
extent of becoming a second face, to the total detriment of personality and 
to the neglect of the inner life. 
The imagery of the Lovers, Arcanum number six, represents temptation 
and duality, a time for choice. Standing at the crossroads, the Fool has to 
make a decision so as to adequately meet the Lovers, even if this means 
facing a moral dilemma. In the story of Eden, the knowledge of good and 
evil—that is, our capacity for ethical decision-making—is symbolically 
related to the Tree of Knowledge, with the verb “to know” having sexual 
or erotic overtones. For Jung, “Eros is a questionable fellow [who] belongs 
on one side to man’s primordial animal nature [and] [o]n the other side 
[…] is related to the highest forms of the spirit. But he only thrives when 
spirit and instinct are in right harmony.”17 The Lovers indicate that the 
Fool is likely to make a right choice, a “good” decision; especially when 
symbolically carried forward by the Chariot, Arcanum number seven. 
Commenting on the symbolism of the Chariot in the context of Jung’s 
process of individuation, Tomberg related this image to the phenomenon 
of ego-inflation as the epiphany of the Hero.18 This is the negative, dark, 
aspect of the archetype not unlike the negative aspect of the Magician as 
the trickster. In its positive aspect, the Chariot is a symbol of the control of 
the emotions and the “correcting” of one’s present course of action, by 
                                                           
17 Jung CW 7: 32. 
18 Anonymous. 

Chapter Twenty-one 
 
348
means of keeping the two horses (as the forces of creative and destructive 
psychic energy) in balance. 
Mastering the unconscious is equivalent to acquiring inner strength, 
which is symbolised by the eighth Arcanum (Strength). In this Tarot 
picture a female figure is portrayed as mastering a lion with her bare 
hands. For Jung, the lion is a “fiery” animal and a symbol of being 
“swallowed” by the unconscious. Winning over the fiery lion in him or 
herself, the Fool is ready to meet the Hermit, Arcanum number nine. This 
is where—at the beginning of the “mid-life” cycle of the Jungian 
individuation process—examination and self-reflection are symbolised by 
the lantern. It is the Hermit who can teach the Fool the ancient “Know 
Thyself” principle. The Hermit is a symbol for solitude and withdrawal, 
which is part of every mystical training. In solitude, one becomes closer to 
nature and has the chance to feel in harmony with the universal 
intelligence, or nous. The Hermit represents the archetype of the Wise Old 
Man who is related to the figure of the ghost, Philemon, who appeared 
often in Jung’s dreams.19  
The tenth Arcanum, the Wheel of Fortune, points to a turning point 
in the Fool-Hero’s journey. Karmic laws—luck or fortune—now 
accompany the Fool on his path. Perhaps it is time for the retribution 
of karma or, alternatively, for the distribution of justice, represented by 
Arcanum eleven, Justice. The image of the blindfolded female figure 
holding the scales carries the message that she knows what is just not 
by means of logical reasoning, but with her heart. Justice will be done 
according to individual integrity. The lesson of the Hanged Man, 
Arcanum twelve, is the lesson of sacrifice, with its imagery of the 
figure that seems suspended between the sky and the ground. This is a 
testing period accompanied by a feeling of the loss of direction and the 
absence of stable ground under one’s feet. As Jung pointed out, “A 
great reversal of standpoint, calling for much sacrifice, is needed before we 
can see the world as ‘given’ by the very nature of the psyche.”20 
Significantly, many initiation rites often include a figurative death as a 
symbol for the reversal of values, so that the divinity that the human soul is 
believed to have lost at birth may be restored. Indeed the next Arcanum, 
thirteen, is called Death, with its symbolism of transition and passage, but 
also of change and renewal. Old and restrictive viewpoints, a stagnant 
environment—whatever was status quo for the Hero—are now in the 
process of evolution and transformation. He must leave his old self 
behind, and the dynamics of this process may be quite painful. It is in 
                                                           
19 See Jung 2009. 
20 Jung CW 11: 841. 

Seeing Voices 
349 
symbolic Death that one encounters a confrontation with its own 
“other” as the potential, fully individuated, Self.  
But do not rush, advises Arcanum fourteen, Temperance. The maxim 
“nothing in excess” as the virtue of Temperance was as much celebrated 
in the Hellenic world as the “know thyself” principle; both were 
inscribed on the Temple of Apollo at Delphi. Temperance is one of the 
seven virtues of Medieval and Renaissance Christianity. The Ego’s task 
as it aspires toward the Self is to usurp power from the traveller who 
now feels enslaved by a symbolic image of the Devil, Arcanum fifteen—
the Jungian archetype of the Shadow, the fallen angel, a symbol of evil 
as “darkened matter.” The presupposed centrality of ego-consciousness 
casts its own shadow consisting of impulses, complexes, shameful 
desires, denials, self-indulgence, or slavery to one’s primitive instincts. 
The realisation of the Shadow may happen in the form of a shock, 
because it is not easy to break out of the Devil’s chains. The Tower, 
Arcanum number sixteen, breaks up everything in life that is 
counterproductive to the journey towards individuation. A rapid and 
painful intensification of consciousness is conveyed in the symbolism of 
this picture: lightning is hitting the ivory tower one has been imprisoned 
in. It might be a moment of sudden truth shaking one’s basic security but 
providing illumination, a light of awakening, represented by the Star, 
Arcanum seventeen.  
Here, the naked woman pouring water is in the midst of organic 
growth, surrounded by all four elements of nature that appear together 
for the first time in this Arcanum in their real, and not symbolic, forms. 
The soul is being purified by the stream of the unconscious which 
washes away the remnants of “dark matter”, the explosion of which 
manifested itself in the climactic imagery of the preceding Arcanum, the 
Tower. For Jung, “as evening gives birth to morning, so from the 
darkness arises a new light, the stella matutina”21 rising up from the 
ruins of the Tower. The symbolism of the Star conveys an intensified 
consciousness which is gained by purification and spiritual baptism. The 
Star is a symbol of harmony with nature; the four elements of air, earth, 
water and fire symbolise all four Jungian functions in balance, neither of 
them inferior. 
But attention must be paid to the warnings of the Moon, Arcanum 
eighteen. After the hopefulness of the Star, the Hero’s consciousness is 
taken over by what Freud designated as the Id. Obscurity is here like a 
fog that will be dissolved in the rays of the next Arcanum, number 
nineteen, the Sun. Here the Fool-Hero is reborn as the Jungian archetype 
                                                           
21 Jung CW 13: 299. 

Chapter Twenty-one 
 
350
of the Divine Child, a symbol for rebirth. Arcanum number twenty is 
Judgement, a symbol of resurrection where the sound of a trumpet from 
the higher plane of expanded consciousness may awaken the Hero’s 
awareness. The figures in the picture are rising toward their true calling, 
their true vocation. The sound of the trumpet leads to the soul’s spiritual 
awakening, but also to the body’s symbolic reincarnation into new 
experiences; that is, the person becomes free to act in a new way in real 
life, thus getting closer to becoming her authentic Self as symbolised in 
the last Arcanum, the World. The evolution of consciousness culminates 
in the World, the imagery of which represents the ideal individuated 
Self, that is, an integrated personality, as inseparable from its life-world. 
As Jung said: 
Our widened consciousness is no longer that […] egotistical bundle of 
personal wishes, fears, hopes, ambitions which always have to be 
compensated or corrected by the unconscious counter-tendencies; instead 
it is a function of relationship to the world of objects, bringing the 
individual into absolute […] and indissoluble communion with the world 
at large.22 
The dancing female figure surrounded by a garland relates to the 
Dionysian mysteries, to joy and fulfilment, to soul or anima that has been 
returned to the rational, Apollonian, world. The totality of the psyche 
exceeds our mortal bodies and encompasses our immortal soul, blending 
into the ultimate archetype of the Self in unity with the world soul, the 
anima mundi. Still, in our actual lives, personal wholeness and oneness 
with the world may just be an ideal aim, and the Fool will continue on the 
road of self-discovery starting again from zero. The ever expanding and 
varying multitude of experiential situations and events always presents 
new challenges. In the actual layouts, the images may combine into ever 
new constellations such as shown below in fig. 21-2. Their subtle and 
opaque meanings become transparent and visible in the form of a 
cartographic map of the unconscious in the process of the actualisation of 
the virtual, and this forms part of Gilles Deleuze’s metaphysics, which I 
shall address in the next section. 
                                                           
22 Jung CW 7: 5. 

Seeing Voices 
351 
 
 
Fig. 21-2 A Tarot spread.23 
Cartographies of the unconscious 
Deleuze’s ontology of the virtual postulates the realm of potential 
tendencies that can become actual through the process of multiple 
differentiations of the transcendental field, which—not unlike the abyss 
portrayed in the Fool Arcanum—is initially undifferentiated. Like the 
Jungian objective psyche, the virtual dimension “possesses a full reality by 
itself […] it is on the basis of its reality that all existence is produced.”24 
The virtual and the actual are mutually enfolded. Says Deleuze, “I undo 
the folds [...] that pass through every one of my thresholds […] ‘the 
twenty-two folds’ that surround me and separate me from the deep.”25 
These twenty-two folds correspond to the number of Major Arcana (fig. 
21-1). Full of esoteric and occult inflections, Deleuze’s philosophy has 
strong connections with religion, spirituality and mysticism. He wrote the 
introduction to the 1946 edition of the nature-philosopher Malfatti’s work 
on hieroglyphic science (mathesis) as mystical and ecstatic knowledge, 
and referred to mathesis universalis in connection with the esoteric use of 
calculus and the theory of ideas as the differentials of thought. 
                                                           
23 See Semetsky: 107 for an analysis of this tarot spread. 
24 Deleuze 1994: 211. 
25 Deleuze 1993: 93. 

Chapter Twenty-one 
 
352
Deleuze equated mystical experiences with the sudden actualisation of 
potentialities, that is, an awakening of sense-perceptions by raising them to 
a new power so that we become able to collect the “fractured I of a 
dissolved Cogito.”26 These fractured pieces comprise what Jung called 
complexes. Derived from a common archetypal core as well as actual 
experiences, complexes are relatively autonomous and behave like 
independent beings, sometimes possessing the psyche in the form of the 
Shadow archetype that manifests in the image of the Devil in a Tarot deck, 
as we said earlier. Deleuze was concerned with the possibility of 
transcendence towards “the divine part in us” and in “establishing the 
spiritual relationship in which we are […] with God as light.”27 Furthermore, 
it is due to the Tarot hermeneutic that “the individual [becomes] able to 
transcend his form and his syntactical link with a world.”28 The syntactical 
link produced by verbal language that describes actual objects of 
perception does not include meaning as applied to our practical life. This 
impoverished syntactic link becomes enriched with meanings produced 
not by verbal expressions of the conscious mind alone but by the esoteric 
language of Tarot images and symbols that express the depth of the 
unconscious. 
The hermeneutic method of Tarot readings partakes of Deleuze’s 
philosophical method of transcendental empiricism which functions on the 
basis of transversal communication and establishes an intuitive access to 
the virtual reality of the archetypes, akin to Jung’s transcendent function. 
Transcendental empiricism affirms “the double in the doubling process.”29 
Doubling is taken in the sense of unfolding that presupposes a necessary 
existence of the extra—outside—dimension, without which the concept of 
fold is meaningless. This outside dimension becomes internalised, 
enfolded; and “it is a self that lives in me as the double of the other: I do 
not encounter myself on the outside, I find the other in me.”30 The 
uncanny “other” is thus always implicit in the unconscious, the subtle 
language of which is made explicit through the Tarot symbolism. Deleuze 
purports to show the as-yet-imperceptible by laying down a visible “map” 
of the invisible archetypal “territory” via the conjunction “and” between 
what are customarily considered the dualistic opposites of matter and 
mind, psyche and physis. For Deleuze, everything has its cartography: 
“[…] what we call a ‘map’ […] is a set of various interacting lines (thus 
                                                           
26 Deleuze 1994: 194. 
27 Deleuze 1986: 54. 
28 Deleuze 1994: 178. 
29 Deleuze 1988a: 98.  
30 Deleuze 1988a: 98. 

Seeing Voices 
353 
the lines in a hand are a map).”31 If the lines in a hand form a map, so do 
Tarot images positioned in a specific layout (fig. 21-2) with each position 
having important connotations. Tarot hermeneutic “draws a hidden 
universe out of the shadow”,32 and this invisible universe of the 
unconscious becomes known or visible to us in the form of inner, gnostic 
knowledge embodied in images which reflect the very in-between-ness of 
Corbin’s mundus imaginalis. 
Perceiving something essentially imperceptible—making the invisible 
visible—is made possible by means of laying down what Deleuze called 
the “plane of immanence” that “implies a sort of groping experimentation”, 
and its layout “resorts to measures that are not very respectable, rational, 
or reasonable. These measures belong to the order of dreams, of 
pathological processes, esoteric experiences, drunkenness, and excess.”33 
Spreading Tarot pictures in a layout is equivalent to constructing the plane 
of immanence: “immanence is the unconscious itself.”34 The priority of 
analogies and relations prevalent in Hermeticism is equally important for 
Deleuze: “A and B. The AND is […] the path of all relations.”35 Tarot 
hermeneutic connects Self and Other, material and spiritual, human and 
divine by means of reaching toward “the deepest things, the ‘arcana’, 
[hence making] man commensurate with God.”36 The non-verbal language 
of Tarot images can “make us see and think what was lying in the shadow 
around the words, things we were hardly aware existed.”37 Importantly, we 
can actually see the “voices” of the archetypal images hiding in the 
shadow not in our mind as abstract concepts, but with our eyes as concrete 
pictures. To become visible, the invisible dimension is to be transcended, 
albeit in the seemingly “primitive” mode of spreading the Tarot pictures in 
a layout that functions as Deleuze’s conjunction “and”, blending together 
the plane of immanence and the transcendental field of the collective 
unconscious. 
The prefix trans is significant: the unconscious dimension is transcended 
by means of laying down the plane of immanence through the indirect, 
transversal link of a symbolic mediation via the archetypal images 
embodied in the Arcana. This mode of transversal communication created 
by Tarot hermeneutic provides an epistemic access to the virtual 
                                                           
31 Deleuze 1995: 33. 
32 Deleuze 1994: 66. 
33 Deleuze & Guattari: 41. 
34 Deleuze 1988b: 29. 
35 Deleuze & Parnet: 57. 
36 Deleuze 1990: 322. 
37 Deleuze 1995: 141. 

Chapter Twenty-one 
 
354
transcendental field, whether “in the mind of man or in the mind of a god, 
even when it is accorded a maximum of immanence by plunging it into the 
depth of Nature, or of the Unconscious.”38 The individuated Self finds 
itself in unity with nature; however the process of individuation represents 
“the harshest exercise in depersonalisation”39 that we encounter via 
symbolic death and rebirth, which may be a painful and lengthy process. 
The flow of time may cease to move (Temperance) especially if we remain 
unconscious of staying in the grip of our old habits (the Devil). So 
sometimes we have to be hit by symbolic lightning to break the ivory 
tower of the old outlived values we have imprisoned ourselves in (the 
Tower). Only then our symbolic rebirth (the Sun) and resurrection 
(Judgement) become possible, so that we can become what in fact we were 
meant to be all along: our authentic Selves, even if, at this stage, only in 
the mind of a god (as Deleuze says), outside our conscious awareness. 
It is only during esoteric experiences such as dreams, déjà-vu—and of 
course, Tarot readings—that we are able to perceive the cosmic “gigantic 
memory”40 embodied in the Tarot layout with the positions signifying 
simultaneously the past, present and potential future, thus transcending 
present spatial locations and temporal successions. Via Tarot hermeneutic 
we may achieve an expanded perception of time and space as “released 
from their human coordinates”41 which capture space merely in its three 
dimensions and time as merely chronological and linear. By means of 
reading and interpreting Tarot Arcana as embodied in the various layouts 
we experiment on ourselves in order to uncover potential archetypal 
combinations “which inhabit us”42 and which are expressed in the non-
verbal but visible language of images. Elucidating the unconscious via the 
hermeneutics of Tarot presents human “life as a work of art.”43 This real 
life—even if invisible and virtual— is concealed in the transcendental 
field of the collective unconscious. It thus needs to be revealed, not unlike 
unfolding the scroll held by the High Priestess. Becoming aware of the 
unconscious archetypes—making the invisible visible—leads to the 
intensification of life, to being “filled with immanence”44 due to an 
acquired sense of meaning and direction. 
                                                           
38 Deleuze & Parnet: 91. 
39 Deleuze 1995: 6. 
40 Deleuze 2001: 212. 
41 Deleuze 1986: 122. 
42 Deleuze & Parnet: 11. 
43 Deleuze 1995: 94. 
44 Deleuze 1997: 137. 

Seeing Voices 
355 
Bibliography 
Anonymous (2002) Meditations on the Tarot: A journey into Christian 
Hermeticism trans. R. Powell (New York: Jeremy P. Tarcher/Putnam). 
Deleuze, G. (1986) Cinema 1: The movement-image trans. H. Tomlinson 
& B. Habberjam (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press). 
—. (1988a) Foucault trans. S. Hand (Minneapolis, MN: University of 
Minnesota Press). 
—. (1988b) Spinoza: Practical philosophy trans. R. Hurly (San Francisco: 
City Lights Books). 
—. (1990) Expressionism in philosophy: Spinoza trans. M. Joughin (New 
York: Zone Books). 
—. (1993) The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque trans. T. Conley 
(Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press). 
—. (1994) Difference and Repetition trans. P. Patton (New York: 
Columbia University Press). 
—. (1995) Negotiations 1972–1990 trans. M. Joughin (New York: 
Columbia University Press). 
—. (1997) Essays critical and clinical trans. D. W. Smith & M. Greco 
(Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press). 
—. (2001) Pure immanence: Essays on a life trans. A. Boyman (New 
York: Zone Books). 
Deleuze, G. & F. Guattari (1994) What is philosophy? trans. H. Tomlinson 
& G. Burchell (New York: Columbia University Press). 
Deleuze, G. & C. Parnet (1987) Dialogues trans. H. Tomlinson & B. 
Habberjam (New York: Columbia University Press). 
Dummett, M. (1980) The Game of Tarot: from Ferrara to Salt Lake City 
(London, UK: Duckworth Publishers). 
Faivre, A. (1994) Access to Western Esotericism (Albany, NY: State 
University of New York Press). 
—. (1995) The Eternal Hermes: From Greek God to alchemical magus 
trans. J. Godwin (MI: Phanes Press). 
Jung, C. G. (1953–1979) The Collected Works of C. G. Jung (vols. 1-20) 
M. Fordham, G. Adler & W. M. McGuire (eds) trans. H. Read & R. 
Hull Bollingen Series (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press). 
—. (1963) Memories, Dreams, Reflections, A. Jaffé (ed.) trans. R. Winston 
& C. Winston (New York: Pantheon Books). 
—. (2009) The Red Book: Liber Novus, S. Shamdasani (ed.) (London: 
Norton). 
Plato (2009) Symposium (New York: Classic Books America). 

Chapter Twenty-one 
 
356
Semetsky, I. (2011) Re-Symbolization of the Self: Human Development 
and Tarot Hermeneutic (Rotterdam: Sense Publishers). 
Yates, F. (1964) Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition (Chicago: 
The University of Chicago Press). 
 

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO 
IMAGINAL INQUIRY: 
MEETINGS WITH THE IMAGINATIVE 
INTELLIGENCE 
MARIE ANGELO 
 
 
 
Daimons at the door 
This essay is about inviting the daimons you love into the place of 
sacrifice without killing their sparkling presences. Put another way, it is 
about taking “the methods of the mysteries” into a university setting. To 
what extent can Hermes, heart of Ra, intelligence of the gods1 be made 
welcome to enchant our “higher” education once more? For psychology 
students, and others, often drawn to the subject through the imagined 
prospect of dream, image and symbol, it is a bitter realisation to find that 
almost everything that matters must be left at the door. At the mention of 
“research methods” disappointment turns to despair. How can inquiry 
honour the many guises and many worlds of our daimonic guests unless it 
too is re-imagined? 
Prompted by Hermes, I side-stepped heroic challenges. Under my 
invented umbrella term “Transpersonal Arts and Practice,” at a meeting 
place created between depth psychology and the liberal arts, MA students 
found themselves free to study and practice alchemy, astrology and magic 
as a pathway of “Transformative Studies”. They learned about “the cosmos 
of the alchemists” and entered its starry halls of learning in ever more 
explicitly esoteric studies. Images from alchemy’s High Renaissance 
became doorways into other worlds where journeys in visionary imagination 
were correlated with encyclopaedic esoteric correspondences.2 We aimed to 
enter the esoteric world-view as skilled participants, able to observe, 
                                                           
1 Angelo 1977: 14. 
2 Schlamm: 15. 

Chapter Twenty-two 
 
358
record in a range of media, and on returning, make rich and scholarly 
reports. We came to explore, and to reflect on any transformative effects 
of such participation, writing detailed case studies of our travels. To assist, 
I created new research terms, gathered together as “imaginal inquiry”, in 
honour of historian of religion Henry Corbin’s introduction of the word 
“imaginal” to differentiate authentic experience from mere fantasy.3 
Throughout their studies students kept detailed reflective journals of 
their travels, just as the alchemist keeps records of the opus under way in 
the laboratorium, and the modern scientist writes lab reports. They read 
widely, experimented with different genres of writing, painted their 
visions and insights, cast traditional horoscopes, consulted the tarot, 
made artefacts and talismans for exhibition, performed music and dance 
and conducted rituals. For the final MA Dissertation the journals were 
distilled and re-worked into complex and beautiful books not unlike 
Jung’s Red Book with its new multi-layered commentaries. The academic 
register, referencing and critique are present, but do not dominate. The art is 
integral not merely decorative. The books are richly illustrated, engaging, 
written in dialogues, as letters to a critical friend, as conversations, 
interwoven with reverie and story, containing photographs, CDs and DVDs. 
They seem to exist in more than one world at once, satisfying all the 
university criteria, delighting the external examiners, yet also playing host to 
voices from the daimonic imagination. 
After a fruitful decade, the small interdisciplinary home of my project 
disappeared beneath the rising tide of income-generating business plans, 
and when the final cohort of twenty-two graduated in November 2011, 
Hermes moved on and I felt beckoned to follow. I like to think it was part 
of a growing movement to construct architectures and practices of learning 
that kindle the flame, not kill the subject. Maybe I was a lone psychologist 
with eccentric interests, but maybe others would like to explore and adapt 
imaginal inquiry, taking it further in. 
Daimons in the detail 
How did I come to have such “madness in my methods?” I am writing as a 
chartered psychologist (mainly counselling and research) who taught 
conventional research methods for many years, but always with an eye on 
the arts/science debate and interest in what are now called “expanded” 
methods.4 In 1999 I “came out” as an esoteric practitioner, at a transpersonal 
                                                           
3 Corbin 1977, 1989: vii-xix. 
4 Braud and Anderson: 3-26. 

Imaginal Inquiry 
359 
psychology conference, when the theme turned to Western transpersonal 
practice.5 As I explained there, my chief delight all along (since the 1970s 
in fact) has been the practice of active or visionary imagination in 
Hermetic and Orphic study. Although never a member of the Golden 
Dawn esoteric group, as part of my practice I worked their system in 
detail, and remain influenced by their presentation of the cabalistic tree of 
life as a composite symbol system,6 alive with multiple correspondences, 
mediations, concordances, initiation and transmission (the categories I 
much later discovered Faivre identifying as characterising “esotericism as 
a form of thought.”)7 
I had learned my practice in a seven-year apprenticeship, travelling 
the paths of the tree. At first I could no more enter the visionary worlds 
than wiggle my ears, so I’ve always been able to support students who 
find, “it’s all dark in there!” or simply go to sleep. I learned of a divine 
“imaginative intelligence”, who could be met face to face, personified in 
the tarot emblem Death.8 Behind the grinning skeleton, esoteric tarot 
cards show the rising of a glowing sun, an image of birth. My first real 
meeting (after much practice) shook everything familiar from its place 
and remains as clear today as it was over forty years ago. Such 
intimacies cannot easily be shared, but a small “moment of the black 
pearl” became the secret heart of my PhD, making a brief appearance in 
the opening autobiographical introduction. I disguised my practice as “a 
kind of Jungian analysis” and set off on a lengthy journey in search of 
“an image intelligence”. I dedicated the resulting tome to “The Imaginal 
Tree”.9 
In truth the doctorate was all a great disappointment. My imaginative 
poet of a supervisor encouraged humanities-style critique but was frankly 
bewildered by my “visual knowing”10 and expansive spatial imagination, 
and had no feel for my psychologist-trained desire for empirical research. 
All my “best bits” ended up in the Appendix! In the main body of the work 
Hermes was barely visible amongst extensive biographies and critiques of 
cognitive psychologists Piaget and Gardener, depth psychologists Jung and 
Hillman, height psychologist Assagioli, Renaissance magi Ficino, Pico and 
Bruno. I succeeded in making a conceptual argument for an image-
intelligence to inform a culturally missing imaginal education, but not in 
                                                           
5 Angelo 1999. 
6 Regardie: 191-216.  
7 Faivre 1994:10-15. 
8 Wang: 181-190. 
9 Angelo 1992. 
10 Sullivan:115-148. 

Chapter Twenty-two 
 
360
conveying anything tangible about such an education. There were no 
images, no examples, nothing congruent with the vision. 
The opportunity some years later to design my own MA was 
irresistible. Transpersonal psychology was now better established, 
practitioner-arts subjects like dance, fine art and creative writing were in 
universities; there was talk of practice-based research, of practice as 
research.11 Here at last I could create “a method for my madness”. I did 
not want to research esotericism from the formal distance of an historian, 
as psychological pathologies, sociological oddities, anthropological 
curiosities, theological heresies or literary fictions. Once inside the 
mysteries the desire is to serve them, to express them in a passionate love, 
and to follow that inward extroversion which delights in the many worlds 
and their many inhabitants. I wanted my students to develop an empirical 
practice which would include but not be limited to the rational world, 
which would offer genuine experiences and yet fulfil academic criteria: 
“Mastery of Arts” in more than one world. 
Over the next decade, as students began naming “imaginal inquiry” as 
their research method, we worked to distil core or archetypal principles to 
“in-form” individual projects of transformative study. Five “elements of 
inquiry” make a start, amplifying alchemy’s traditional Earth, Air, Water, 
Fire and Quintessence or Ether. In the diagram below you see them 
presented as spatial directions for a “memory theatre” listing the research 
terms and practices. As historian Frances Yates explains, the true art of 
memory consists of “places”, created with the inner eye, where related 
“images” can be visualised. The Renaissance magi made use of occult 
correspondences for their “talismanic power to draw down the celestial 
influences and spiritus”.12 We followed suit, researching traditional 
correspondences and making poetic discoveries. New “keys” to open our 
vision were discovered slowly, from original sources in the alchemical 
images themselves. Below are some thoughts and reflections found along 
the way. 
 
                                                           
11 Sullivan: 59-63. 
12 Yates 1966: 159. 

Fig. 22-3 Mem
First, a glim
centre. Goin
lovely visio
bringing thi
research is 
beautiful ar
“knowledge
                    
13 Drawn by I
14 Corbin 199
mory Theatre fo
mpse of the Q
ng straight to 
on of researc
ings to the lig
about creatin
rt, walking h
e”, not domina
                     
Ian Thorp 
98: 5. 
Imaginal I
for Imaginal Inq
Re-anim
Quintessence, 
the heart of 
ch as “ways 
ght to increas
ng new know
hand in hand
ating as “scien
                  
Inquiry 
quiry13 
mating 
the divine sp
the matter, w
of seeing an
se their transp
wledge, that it
d with our sc
ntism”. Ours i
parks or spir
we align with 
nd making se
parency. We l
t is a respon
cience as sci
is a subjective
361 
 
rits at the 
Corbin’s 
een”,14 of 
learn that 
sible and 
ientia, or 
e science, 

Chapter Twenty-two 
 
362
the first-person experiences of subjects rather than the dissection of 
objects; “a science of Presence”15 rather than absence. 
It begins with “adding”, not as an introduction to sums and 
calculations, but as an invitation into an esoteric interpretation of the 
liberal arts in which number is sacred and has qualities. So we “add” 
qualities in the same way as a poet amplifies, turning to Hillman’s 
archetypal psychology to meet the master of word-play in a practice of 
“entertaining” some vivifying ideas. Hillman maintains that people miss 
the “animal sense of living”16 in his work. Psychotherapists conceptualise 
anima and animus, neoplatonists theorise a vast anima mundi, but where is 
the actual animal in our dead world-view? Where are the cats (a favourite 
example) for “Cats aren’t materialists; they are neoplatonists. They live in 
the anima mundi, in a world full of figures, omens, signatures [...] just like 
Socrates, who listened to his daimon [...]”17 To gain direct experience of 
the mystery, we too need to live this sensuous, embodied engagement. 
Once back in this garden of delights, snakes always slither in. They 
give lessons in not rushing straight for the symbolism, despite their 
magnificent sweep through history and myth. Start with the word itself and 
it gives us the snakey, slinky, sibilant letter “s” which transforms the 
singular into the plural. This is the essence of what Hillman does to turn 
ordinary psychology into an animated and animating archetypal 
psychology. Consider a lecture I attended called “Spirit of Inquiry”; 
worthy, conceptual, dull. Nothing happened except the moral victory of 
staying awake. Then try adding that snaky little “ssss” and suddenly those 
“Spirits of Inquiry”, the daimons, have arrived. 
When we allow daimons to be re-animated in our lives their voices are 
heard once more in our thoughts. We discover with the poet that “learning 
to love the questions themselves”18 is the secret, for research is made of 
questions, each a “quest”, each a daimon; some quiet and helpful, others 
noisy and challenging, some ephemeral, others to fall in love with for a 
lifetime. “Why keep me invisible?” says one now as I write, and I wish I 
had time and space for the discursive, descriptive voice of soul. Invoking 
these daimons into our language is a “person-ifying” mode of consciousness, 
switching us from objects to subjects, from “things” to relations. It is a 
“method or way of re-animating” to practice. 
Our re-animating can go in many animal directions, but early on I 
always like to mention ants. It is helpful to go small instead of grandiose 
                                                           
15 Corbin 1998: 27. 
16 Hillman 1983: 56. 
17 Hillman 1983: 90. 
18 Rilke: letter 4. 

Imaginal Inquiry 
363 
and the ant in Rumi’s poem is a wonderful role model, having “gotten into 
the granary” and now, “ludicrously happy, and trying to lug out/a grain 
that’s way too big”.19 The poetry beautifully lifts the burden of trying to 
know and do everything. 
There is plenty more to say about this quintessential element, but I 
hope you can see from these examples of “adding” that it is a practice of 
bringing to life with language that begins from the first moment we start 
talking about research. It leads us appreciatively into the “as if” world of 
rhetoric’s Lady Metaphor and her many tropes. We need this if, as 
moderns, we are to re-enter the anima mundi, where all has a face, all has 
a voice, all has a name. The “as if” sensitises us to the anima mundi 
through the literary, so the beginnings of our imaginal inquiries are not 
stuck with fundamentalist “taking it all literally”. 
Gradually we “add” more details, discovering, for example, that 
metaphor can be honoured as a true way of knowing,20 making it an 
epistemology. Metaphor turns us sunward, like the heliotrope in prayer,21 
to follow an imaginative and connected knowing more suited to 
transpersonal and transformative discourse than rationalism and empiricism. 
To the metaphorical eye these conventions are themselves metaphors, 
constructed so we may talk about our experiences of the sensible world in 
sensible ways. When we enter imaginal worlds we need imaginal ways of 
talking—adding again that daimonic “s”. After glimpsing the centre, it is 
time to begin building that memory theatre of knowledge in the mind’s 
eye, gradually “adding” the elements that create “the four-corners of the 
world”. 
Re-membering 
Now the questions change from persons to places, from “who is 
speaking?” to “where am I?” for “the method or way of re-membering” 
gives us our Earth, our place to stand. Since re-membering means putting 
back the bodily parts, the “members”, it gives us back more of what the cat 
never lost, that sensuous “anima-l mundi.” The play on words teaches that 
what we are standing on is both the sub-stance, and our own embodied 
under-standing. 
We will come to know “re-membering” as a practice of ontological 
reframing, leaving what Hillman identifies as the modern empty “universe” 
for the living “cosmos” of many worlds and subtle relationships between 
                                                           
19 In Barks 1991: 109-110. 
20 Ricoeur: 6. 
21 In Corbin 1969, 1997: 105-106. 

Chapter Twenty-two 
 
364
microcosm and macrocosm.22 To learn imaginal inquiry we generate the 
working hypothesis that “the cosmos of the alchemists” is our reality, then 
see what happens when we go there in good faith on the wings of “as if”. 
Our inquiries are as “state-specific” as those of any science, for as 
transpersonal psychologist Charles Tart and others have pointed out for 
many years now, conventional science only suits particular types of 
phenomena. Other phenomena require us to enter other states of 
mind/consciousness in order to study them.23 Consciousness itself is a 
place for state-specific inquiry, so we need expanded ideas, maps and 
explorers’ visions of the territory which are not limited to the modern ego, 
or indeed to “the unconscious” as a dustbin of rejects or any such 
literalised container. As the living cosmos becomes tangible to our 
experience we can become participant-observers, not only of the sensible 
earth, but also of the daimonic ground of “imaginal earth.” 
We begin “re-membering” with an image. When writing the formal 
documentation for the MA, I listed the various learning outcomes, skills, 
criteria and transferable skills, without revealing that they were derived 
from the traditional cosmos. There was no mention of divine living fire 
delineating the zodiacal wheel of life (from Zoe, life) nor of crystalline 
spheres of the wandering stars cradling the elements of earth at their 
centre. But I did add one image, the ouroboros snake with tail in mouth, 
whose definition as alchemical goal identifies it as the very path of the sun 
through the heavens.24 This solar, gold-making way is our path of 
apprenticeship to follow, an expression of the classical research cycle, yet 
opening always to the eternal return.25 
A first experience may be rather surprising to the entered apprentice, 
who discovers that a true “beginner’s mind” is actually something to 
cultivate. I describe this as “reclaiming our ignor-ance”, hyphenating the 
word as archetypalists tend to do, so it speaks to us afresh about what we 
ignore, what our culture has taught us to exclude from our thinking. The 
god Phanes, guide to phenomenology, brings “epi-phanies” of light, but 
only to eyes that are open. To become the research instrument, able to 
perceive in many worlds, we have to learn to open many eyes. 
Sometimes quite early on we amplify the ouroboric cycle into specific 
steps and stages. At other times we stay with the fluidity of cyclical 
movement until these emerge naturally. Once I find an opportunity to 
name the alchemical elements we begin to draw the memory theatre, 
                                                           
22 Hillman 1989. 
23 Tart 2009: 384. 
24 Cooper:124. 
25 See Eliade.  

Imaginal Inquiry 
365 
swiftly realising that esoterically each element operates as an archetype or 
“gathering place” for a multitude of related ideas, poetic images and 
activities. Each time we move around the cycle we gather more 
understanding. We discover that alchemically each element is itself a cycle 
of five elements we can explore in research terms: re-framing philosophical 
principles of research, guiding psychological moves to make in ourselves, 
expanding conventional research terms into transpersonal and transformative 
methods, activating imagination in practice so we can make “field trips 
into the imaginal” to collect fresh experience and treating this imaginative 
data so it can be distilled, interpreted and produced into formats to share 
with critical others. 
Re-storying 
“The method or way of re-storying” introduces the element of air and a 
new theme, for if cosmos has given us imaginal space and the many 
worlds, now mythos will give us imaginal time and the many stories that 
“take place” therein. The grand alchemical narrative of transformation 
adds the natural telos or “final cause” avoided in modern explanations but 
so important to us as meaning-makers. As apprentice alchemists we 
“mythologise” our own story and understand it in the context of 
alchemical processes. Alchemy makes sense of our slowness, our 
confusion, the mismatch between our vision and our attainment. We know 
that the goal of the elixir or stone is paradoxical. Each moment of 
achievement becomes the prima materia upon which the next stage is 
built; each “once upon a time” travelled around the ouroboric cycle 
concludes with “eating our tale” ready to begin again. 
After our phenomenological discipline of “re-membering”, we are with 
Hermes, casting his hermeneutic circle. Hyphenate “history” and it 
becomes “high-story”, the elevated place allotted to stories from the 
sensible world. Adding the “s” offers many kinds of story, each with its 
own value; from the mystical visionary recitals that describe journeys 
spanning all the worlds, through the teaching tales of allegory, to the 
“great stories” of myth, and onward to the legends, folk tales, soap operas, 
gossips and personal narratives by which we live. In the most natural way, 
as happens with archetypal correspondences, we discover our inquiry 
connecting with traditional modes of exegesis so well described by Angela 
Voss in her article “A Methodology of the Imagination”. From earthy 
literal to airy allegory we take a step from the sensible to the 
psychological, not leaving one world behind for another, but “adding.” 

Chapter Twenty-two 
 
366
The daimons accompany, changing all the time; “personages” become 
“places”, now discovered inside our own psyche as “processes”. 
The story of “a Fool’s pilgrimage” carries and allegorises the 
“processes” burden for us, offering esoterically the tarot Fool’s journey of 
descent and return through the branches of the tree of life, and artistically, 
Cecil Collins’ sensitive words and paintings. The Fool becomes our 
“necessary angel”,26 leading us in different guises through the 
psychological territory influentially mapped as “the five relationships” 
core to all experience,27 which are found to align well with imaginal 
inquiry. Our “working alliances” of commitment are often distorted by 
problems with the “transferred relationships” unconsciously imported 
from the past and projected onto the present.28 It is hard to catch these as 
concepts, but what if our own wishes and fears, our cynicism, apathy, 
impatience, self-importance are part of the story; ingredients for our 
alchemy carried in the sack on the back of the Fool? Placing them one by 
one in the alchemical vessel, as our own “vile thing” for transformation, 
releases our imaginings into the more volatile element of air. Then the 
mythic stories teach us in truly developmental relationships where we can 
enjoy being the eternal student, entering ever larger hermeneutic circles, 
ever wider sweeps of understanding. 
In imaginal inquiry these psychological moves are an integral part of the 
project, not a hidden preliminary. The work of the entered apprentice, 
journeyman and master may be introduced chronologically, aligned with 
alchemical stages, but may also operate simultaneously. To create a vehicle 
for writing about all three as part of our research reports I coined the term 
“auto-hiero-graphy” (inside stories of a sacred journey). Practitioner 
trainings in psychology have long been assessed via case studies, and these 
may go into great qualitative depth. More recently anthropological 
ethnographies have been psychologised as “autoethnography” (self as case 
study).29 To go further, I needed only to be inspired by Corbin’s vision of 
a discourse on sacred things and join his move, “towards hierology”.30 
Those critical friends, the daimons, ask the awkward questions: won’t 
such special case studies be mere narcissism, just self-indulgent orbiting 
round our own inadequacies? Well, yes, if our vision of the individual is of 
a dead-end rather than a doorway; and yes if we operate solely with the 
therapeutic aim of being healed of our pain rather than the educational one 
                                                           
26 Stevens: 141. 
27 See Clarkson. 
28 Romanyshyn: 38-49. 
29 Ellis: xix. 
30 Corbin 1998: 17-31. 

Imaginal Inquiry 
367 
of bringing light to our darkness; and probably yes again if we invite 
beginners’ reports to stand in for mastery. As hermetic students we are 
also always training to be teachers, to take our place in the golden chain of 
transmission, however humble. Hence the criteria for assessing the worth 
of an autohierography, whilst expecting knowledge and informed critical 
reflection, also require evidence of integrity, courage, and the ability to 
make clear a range of experiences for the benefit of others. The practice of 
“re-storying” ourselves as “foolish pilgrims” operates as a regular check to 
self-inflation, as well as a motley invitation to the “delicious laughter” of 
sharing the way. 
Re-presenting 
As the apprenticeship continues, the level changes. From the sensuous 
presentation of the face of things and their stories we are moving into 
depth, into the watery realm of the symbolic, and into direct encounter 
with images in their own place. The path has been opened for “the method 
or way of re-presenting”. This is a play on words in which we become “re-
presentatives” of the imaginal, showing or “presenting” something once 
more, bringing it again into the foreground of “the present”. 
We are re-framing “theory” into theoria in some of its older and 
mystical senses. The word itself speaks of beholding the divine (from the 
Greek theos, “god” and oro, “to view”) and our vantage point is the “in-
between”, for we have placed the sensible behind us and are standing on 
imaginal ground, at “the confluence of the two seas”,31 gazing out at the 
intelligible, to contemplate the starry deeps and learn “the science of the 
balance”32 between microcosm and macrocosm. A modern theory is a 
provisional, ephemeral truth always awaiting falsification. Cosmologically 
it belongs beneath the moon in “the sphere of generation and corruption.” 
Theoria stands at the opposite pole, as a display of the divine intelligible. 
The psychological focus of imaginal inquiry invites the discovery that it is 
we who are the provisional theory and have changes to make; that, as 
Hillman points out, “The psyche is not unconscious. We are [...]”33 
Here is the rationale for “re-presenting” as a practice similar to the 
mystical seven-fold discipline of icon-painting, to the Renaissance art of 
the imitatio by which the student aspires to internalise examples of genius, 
or to mathesis or “sacred learning”, acquired through contemplative 
drawing of sacred geometries. “Re-presenting” means we join the 
                                                           
31 Corbin 1977: 162. 
32 Corbin 1986: 5-131. 
33 Hillman 1983: 53.  

Chapter Twenty-two 
 
368
archetypalists in “sticking to the image”,34 but also practice sticking to the 
story and sticking to the pattern. Corbin gives us the Arabic term “ta’wil” 
meaning “essential symbolic understanding, the transmutation of 
everything visible into symbols [...]”35 
The daimonic imagination has moved us on again, from “personages, 
places and processes” into encounter with living powers, the poet’s 
archetypal reservoirs of enthusiasm.36 From these numinous waters we can 
reclaim the lost books of our imaginal art, drowned, as Prospero tells 
Miranda, “deeper than ever did plummet sound”.37 What if we dream 
Miranda’s myth onward?38 I see her returning to the island later in her life, 
leaving mainland consciousness for the liminal in-between in search of her 
missing imaginal education. Magical consciousness, misused and abandoned 
by the father, lies waiting within the traditionally female elements, water 
and earth. What watery books will she find, “sea-changes” turning them 
all to coral and pearl? It is in this transformative light I like to consider the 
tarot emblems and the powerful alchemical illuminations that set the 
curriculum for our imaginal studies.39 
The knowledge that supports imaginal inquiry must come as much 
from fresh experiences as from studying the “hi-stories”. To visit the 
island means “imaginalising”40 by activating the “learning of the 
imagination”41 in different disciplines of visionary practice. We cannot 
enter the disciplines without the magic circle that keeps us bound to the 
work—only then, and to the measure that our relationship with the work 
has deepened, do we become free to play, in growing “intimacy and 
dialogue” with our subject. 
This is “art practice as research”42 in imaginal modes, producing 
detailed records in reflective journals and displayed in a wide range of 
artefacts that “re-present” the findings. These creations, displayed at 
annual exhibitions, were not simply of “art objects” to be independently 
assessed on fine art or performance criteria. They were of “art subjects”, 
each set in the context of its own story. Students were not invited into this 
stage until they were ready, which we agreed after discussing in tutorial a 
                                                           
34 Hillman 1983: 54. 
35 Corbin 1997:13. 
36 Bachelard: xxxviii. 
37 Shakespeare’s The Tempest V(i) 54-57. 
38 Angelo 2003:125. 
39 Angelo 2005.  
40 Corbin 1977; 1989: ix. 
41 Raine: 69. 
42 Sullivan: xi. 

Imaginal Inquiry 
369 
written self-assessment addressing each of the assignment criteria in turn. 
Over the years the displays became a cross between a research poster and 
an installation, each a miniature cosmos with its elements lovingly set out 
in balance; paintings, embroideries, creative writings, mosaics, videos, 
posters, journals. Friends and family came, alumni came, external 
examiners came; often the exhibition day could coincide with university 
open days. They were marvellous festivals replacing punitive exams with 
music, food and laughter. 
Re-joining 
Fire, as an alchemical element, is “the method or way of re-joining” by 
which we complete the work of mastery. Here vision opens fully 
“upwards” to join the angelic-intelligible worlds in anagogic experiences. 
On our simple pilgrimage we learn of “transpersonal” relating, mediated 
through the loving Fool, who dances for joy in the entourage of the 
mystical “Angel of your being”.43 The art of “knowing the image by 
becoming the image” filters down through the worlds into discourses on 
performative knowledge,44 but is caught up again to re-join the dance by 
reframing our techne or praxis esoterically as initiation. 
Here inquiry is married to the oldest arts of ritual, ceremony and 
practical magic, and our outward preparations for the “univers-ity” 
initiation of Mastery correspond to a secret inner preparation in the 
“cosmos-ity”. We are involved in Psyche’s tasks, for as Hillman points 
out, “psych-ology” should be about Psyche,45 and Eros is her daimon, her 
love. Psyche’s initiatory tale, hence ours, for we are all souls, is about 
passionate love, bitter separation, and eventual re-joining with the beloved. 
Once rescued by Eros from the fourth of her arduous tasks, which in 
imaginal inquiry naturally align with our memory theatre (and with 
fulfilling the university criteria!) Psyche is taken up to Olympus and 
becomes one of the immortals. This “immortalising” is the theme that re-
joins our studies with the oldest mysteries of fire and light, called by 
Zozimus “the alchemical secret [...] the Mithraic mystery”.46 Mithra is “the 
adorable fire”, “the friend”, “the sun”, offering the apprentice a mystical 
journey of initiation through the stars, which are at once the seven 
wanderers, and the seven stars leading the dance around Heaven’s Pole.47 
                                                           
43 Corbin 1977:42. 
44 Sullivan: 85-6. 
45 Hillman 1972: 59. 
46 Mead 1907: 47-48. 
47 Levenda: 132-145. 

Chapter Twenty-two 
 
370
In an ancient immortalising ritual, sprinkled with Mithraic vision, the 
magus will “soar into the Height, together with the golden sparklings of 
the Brilliancy that knows no Death”,48 aspiring to stand before the 
divinities, and realise (make real) the knowledge, “I am a Star, whose 
Course is as your Course, shining anew from out the Depth”.49 If we align 
our inquiries with the mysteries, could our small memory theatre open into 
such an initiatory temple of cosmos? Our sensible Mastery of the 
“elements of inquiry” would then become the first step in a traditional 
ladder of ascent to the stars. 
Glimpsing this, we talk of “re-joining Prospero’s broken staff”, the 
missing axis mundi of the temple, broken and buried “certain fathoms in 
the earth”.50 Here is an archetypal syzygy lost to our culture, splitting 
experience into sterile oppositions: Prospero without Ariel, senex without 
puer. It is Hillman’s great educational theme of age that cannot teach, 
youth that cannot learn.51 “Re-joining” establishes the central “pole of the 
world”, which is also the human spine of our sensuous animal 
embodiment and its subtle correspondences in the chakra system of states 
of consciousness. Perhaps it will be the opus of the newly knowledgeable 
Miranda, as “imaginal consciousness” to hold the broken pieces together, 
creating anew the Hermetic practice of “co-operating with the archetype”.52 
Hillman’s “deliteralising” moves us “up” into the imaginal, and 
Corbin’s “imaginalising” opens the down-flowing gift of the intelligible 
meta-physical (missing from Hillman’s work until late in his thought).53 
Their different masteries combine to give us back “the temple in the 
midst”. Our ouroboric alchemical mandala complete,54 our circle squared, 
we can take part in that great wedding day that is the imaginal. Here we 
come to know “daimons as promises”, utterly giving themselves and 
inviting our abandon to a delighted marriage between the worlds, now shot 
through with the beings of light in all their hermetic variety. Eros kisses 
Psyche and we awake from the swoon of life into the arms of the 
imaginative intelligence revealed as the Angel. 
                                                           
48 Mead 1907: 20. 
49 Mead 1907: 24. 
50 Shakespeare’s The Tempest V(i) 54-57. 
51 Hillman 2005: 62. 
52 Cornelius Agrippa in Yates 1964: 136. 
53 Hillman 1989b: 213-231. 
54 See McLean for a practice of contemplating alchemical diagrams as mandalas. 

Imaginal Inquiry 
371 
Daimons by design 
Such was the promise of those “Transformative Studies” into which 
imaginal inquiry took us as far as we were wont to go. Even within the 
sensible world of an MA, our “ant-ics” left us joyfully lugging out from 
the granary our own particular grain of insights (tutor as much as 
students). Worked examples of how these insights affected our own 
particular mythic tale, our own ritual of life, became evidence of the 
degree of success55. 
So, during the decade that our imaginal inquiries developed, the 
exhibited assignments were photographed, re-drafted and distilled into 
“master-pieces”. Most participants were mature students, already 
professionally qualified; a marvellous motley called together by Hermes. 
We met for monthly Saturday study days and/or on-line distance learning: 
artists, therapists, lawyers, musicians, dancers, teachers. At the end, we 
would create the temple in the classroom to celebrate, with tables as altars 
displaying drowned books found and made, and a ritual by which to walk 
the ouroboros, visiting each altar in turn, singing them into story with 
music, poetry, chant. When the newly-made Masters of their Art had 
collected their (sensible) certificates, so many said to me, “Ah, now I am 
ready to begin”. That’s fine, that’s real research. Each night the sun 
marries the earth, and in the underworld journey sleeps and dreams the 
light into being, giving birth to new daimonic sparks that illumine and re-
animate “our elemental earth” afresh. 
Bibliography 
Abram, D. (1997) The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in 
a More-than-Human World (New York: Vintage Books). 
Angelo, M. (1992) The Imaginal Tree: a Psychological Study of Active 
Imagination as Education (Doctoral Dissertation: University of 
Sussex). 
—. (1977) “When the Gods were Intelligent and Education was 
Enchanting”, Self & Society, 24.6: 12-17. 
—. (1999) “Where All the Ladders Start: Transpersonal Paradox in the 
Western Initiatory System of the Golden Dawn” (unpublished 
proceedings of the British Psychological Society Transpersonal 
Section annual conference).  
                                                           
55 See www.maginalstudies.org for an archive. 

Chapter Twenty-two 
 
372
—. (2003) “This Thing of Brightness: the Feminine Power of 
Transcendent Imagination”, in T. Adams & A. Duncan (eds) The 
Feminine Case: Jung, Aesthetics and Creative Process (London: 
Karnac) Chapter 6, 119-146. 
—. (2005) “Splendor Solis: Inviting the Image to Teach”, Harvest: 
International Journal for Jungian Studies, 51.2, 13-35. 
Bachelard, G. (1987) On Poetic Imagination and Reverie: Selections from 
Gaston Bachelard, trans. C. Gaudin (Texas: Spring Publications). 
Braud, W. & R. Anderson (1998) Transpersonal Research Methods for the 
Social Sciences: Honoring Human Experience (London: Sage). 
Clarkson, P. (2003) The Therapeutic Relationship (London: Whurr). 
Collins, C. (1981) The Vision of the Fool (Oxon: Anthony Kedros Ltd.). 
Cooper, J. C. (1978) An Illustrated Encyclopaedia of Traditional Symbols 
(London: Thames & Hudson). 
Corbin, H. (1989) Spiritual Body and Celestial Earth: From Mazdean Iran 
to Sh’ite Iran, trans. Nacy Pearson (New Jersey: Princeton University 
Press). 
—. (1969, 1998) Alone with the Alone: Creative Imagination in the Sufism 
of Ibn ‘Arabi (New Jersey: Princeton University Press). 
—. (1986) Temple and Contemplation (London: KPI in association with 
Islamic Publications London). 
—. (1998) The Voyage and The Messenger: Iran and Philosophy 
(Berkeley: North Atlantic Books). 
Eliade, M. (1959) Cosmos and History: The Myth of the Eternal Return 
(New York: Harper & Row). 
Ellis, C. (2004) The Ethnographic I: A Methodological Novel about 
Autoethnography (Walnut Creek: AltaMira Press). 
Faivre, A. (1994) Access to Western Esotericism (Albany: SUNY). 
Hillman, J. (1972) The Myth of Analysis (New York: Harper & Row). 
—. (1983) Inter Views (New York: Harper & Row).  
—. (1989a) “Cosmology for Soul: From Universe to Cosmos”, Sphinx; a 
Journal for Archetypal Psychology and the Arts (London: London 
Convivium for Archetypal Psychology) 17-33. 
—. (1989b) “Back to Beyond: on Cosmology” in D. R. Griffin (ed.) 
Archetypal Process: Self and Divine in Whitehead, Jung, and Hillman 
(Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern University Press) Ch. 14, 213-231.  
—. (2005) “Senex and Puer: an Aspect of the Historical and Psychological 
Present” in Senex & Puer, Uniform Edition of the Writings of James 
Hillman, 3 (Putnam, CT: Spring Publications) 30-70. 
Jung, C. G. (2009) The Red Book: Liber Novus, S. Shamdasani (ed.) 
(London: Norton). 

Imaginal Inquiry 
373 
Levenda, P. (2008) Stairway to Heaven: Chinese Alchemists, Jewish 
Kabbalists, and the Art of Spiritual Transformation (London: 
Continuum Books). 
McLean, A. (2002) The Alchemical Mandala: a Survey of the Mandala in 
the Western Esoteric Traditions (Grand Rapids, MI: Phanes Press). 
Mead G. R. S. (1907) A Mithraic Ritual: Echoes from the Gnosis vol. VI 
(London: Theosophical Publishing Society). 
—. (1993) The Mysteries of Mithra: Echoes from the Gnosis vol. V 
(Scotland: The Banton Press). 
Raine, K. (1985) Defending Ancient Springs (West Stockbridge, MA: 
Lindisfarne Press). 
Regardie, I. (1969) The Golden Dawn: an Encyclopaedia of Practical 
Occultism, in 4 vols (Wisconsin: Hazel Hills Corporation). 
Ricoeur, P. (1975) The Rule of Metaphor: Multi-Disciplinary Studies in 
the Creation of Meaning in Language, trans. R. Czerny with K. 
McLaughlin & J. Costello (Toronto: University of Toronto Press). 
Rilke, R. (1992) Letters to a Young Poet, trans. Joan M. Burnham (CA: 
New World Library). 
Romanyshyn, R. (2006) “Levels of Transference in the Research Process”, 
Harvest: International Journal for Jungian Studies, 52.1: 38-49. 
Rumi, in C. Barks (1991) Rumi: One-Handed Basket Weaving (Athens, 
GA: Maypop). 
Schlamm, L. (2006) “C. G. Jung’s Visionary Mysticism”, Harvest: 
International Journal for Jungian Studies, 52.1: 7-37. 
Stevens, W. (1953) Selected Poems (London: Faber and Faber). 
Sullivan, G. (2005) Art Practice as Research: Inquiry in the Visual Arts 
(London: Sage Publications). 
Tart, C. T. (2009) The End of Materialism: How Evidence of the Paranormal 
is Bringing Science and Spirit Together (Oakland, CA: New Harbinger 
Publications & Noetic Books copublication). 
Voss, A. (2009) “A Methodology of the Imagination”, Eye of the Heart 
Journal, Issue 3 (LaTrobe University) 37-52. 
Wang, R. (1983) Qabalistic Tarot: a Textbook of Mystical Philosophy 
(Maine: Weiser). 
Yates, F. (1964) Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition (London: 
Routledge). 
—. (1966) The Art of Memory (London: Penguin Books). 
 

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE 
IMAGINAL DOORWAY:  
SEEKING A DAIMONIC THEATRE  
USING DRAMATHERAPY 
TOBY CHOWN 
 
 
 
When I began preparing this chapter, I encountered a creative block. On 
the one hand I wanted to write about the daimonic and dramatherapy in an 
imaginative, inspiring way. On the other I wanted to present something 
that was concise and comprehensible, rooted in experience and theory. 
Nothing seemed easy to express and I could not start writing. Rather than 
being able to synthesise these different approaches, I became frustrated 
and stuck. Eventually, I decided to draw on my experience as a 
dramatherapist and dramatise my block, as I might encourage a client to 
do in therapy. I began to imagine it as an encounter between two 
archetypal characters that were not co-operating, but involved in a fierce 
and exhaustive conflict. It seemed that a good way to start a paper about 
dramatising daimonic characters would be to begin with those that were 
hidden in the paper itself. 
Introducing my daimons 
By introducing these characters I can personify the ideas behind this essay, 
and they can act as fictional guides. At the same time, I can explore how 
dramatising inner conflict can help to transform an entrenched situation. 
So, rather than begin with a definition of the daimonic, let me begin 
instead by introducing the characters that I imagined when I explored my 
own block. 
One appears as an old man. He gives the impression that he has 
listened to innumerable hours of other people talking. There is an uncanny 
sense that he is coated in a thin film of the dust he sits in. There is 
something of the priest about him, or a certain type of therapist; rigorous, 

Imaginal Doorway 
375 
methodical, detached, analytical. He has hard, bright eyes, and is still and 
silent. Speaking seems an effort to him, as if innumerable wheels grind 
through his mind before language can appear. The other character seems 
like a young man, who is constantly on the move. He looks around his 
surroundings with an intense air of expectation, as if beauty and meaning 
could be extracted from anywhere at any moment. He cultivates the 
demeanour of a Romantic poet—he is passionate, committed, and his 
poems contain vivid and intense emotions and images. 
I will leave these two for a moment, where they are, in the same 
fictional space as each other but not talking; I will treat them as advisers 
and use my writing as the middle ground between them. This provides a 
further link to the practice of dramatherapy, with the role as dramatherapist 
as a mediator between different imaginal characters as well as between the 
imagination and the self. In this case the writing acts as a way of creating 
dialogue between different perspectives. The intention here is not 
psychotherapy. However, like psychotherapy, paying attention to both 
sides within a conflict will allow new ideas and perspectives to emerge 
creatively.1 
The poetic psyche 
In order to begin to think more about what theatre and the daimonic have 
in common we can begin in the place where psychology has placed 
imagination—the psyche. The Oxford English Dictionary offers the 
following definitions of psyche: “psyche 1 |ˈsīkē| noun; the human soul, 
mind, or spirit; ORIGIN mid 17th cent.: via Latin from Greek psukhē, 
“breath, life, soul”. The Poet tells me that the ancient symbol for psyche in 
Greece is morpho eugenia—the soul as a beautiful butterfly. For a poet, 
images are more important than abstract concepts, for poetry connects 
images rather than defining terms. Abstract terms such as psyche, soul, 
mind and spirit are hard to imagine and so less poetic than the image of a 
butterfly. In order to understand the abstract, we need images. If we 
imagine psyche as a butterfly, we think about butterflies poetically in order 
to know psyche better. So, butterflies seem fragile and colourful; they fly 
in eccentric patterns to avoid capture. They begin their lives as caterpillars, 
blindly eating whatever is in front of them, and they use this hunger as the 
                                                           
1 See for example the essay “The Transcendental Function” in Jung: 1971: 273-
300. Jung suggests that creatively mediating the conflict between archetypal 
characters allows a new way of being to emerge in the psyche in the form of a new 
symbol. The ability of the psyche to do this of its own accord, he describes as “the 
transcendental function”.  

Chapter Twenty-three 
 
376
energy to metamorphose. By imagining psyche as butterfly, we learn 
something about it; we have a sense of the essential resistance of psyche to 
being captured. We can make sense of its hunger, and understand that this 
hunger is fuel for a need to transform. Examining the image of the 
butterfly gives a deeper understanding of psyche.  
The dictionary definitions of psyche have a poetry of their own, 
particularly the ones that refer to recognisable images. Breath as an image 
for the psyche suggests something that is both within us, intimately 
contained in our bodies, and outside of us, in our immersion in the air we 
breathe. Here is an analogy with the daimon, as a being that is somehow 
an “inner character” and yet is also external and archetypal, beyond the 
individual. 
The psyche is the place where psychology has placed the daimon, 
either existentially as a semi-autonomous force within it, or archetypally 
as the template for a kind of being within the collective unconscious. 
Psyche itself has a relationship to the daimonic, as a realm which is not 
literal but imaginal, mediating between personal and communal 
experiences, and yet with a reality of its own. Paying attention to images, 
as with the psyche as butterfly, shows a way of gaining a poetic 
understanding, and staying with this process of imagining allows 
something to be revealed. When images are allowed to speak in place of 
concepts, and are fed by careful attention, one moves towards the 
daimonic as a poetic middle place between self and world that has an 
existence of its own. Imagining the psyche in a poetic way thus moves us 
closer to the daimonic with its all its butterfly elusiveness, beauty and 
unlikely-seeming origins. 
Seeking daimons in the psyche 
The Poet suggests other images for psyche too, particularly the Shadow. 
Here is a contrasting image to the butterfly; psyche as dark, of unknown 
depth and uncertain danger. Sigmund Freud2 and Carl Jung3 have both 
emphasised in different ways the importance of the unconscious in the 
psyche, as the larger part of it. In so doing they have bound our 
understanding of psyche to that which has depth, is unconscious and 
unknown. The unconscious is where Jung suggested one begins in one’s 
quest to know psyche and the daimonic—in the Shadow, which is 
                                                           
2 Freud: 326 “The ego is not even the master of its own house, but must content 
itself with scanty information about what is going in its unconscious mind.” 
3 Jung 1971: 34 “Underneath (the personal unconscious) is an absolute unconscious 
that has nothing to do with our personal experience.” 

Imaginal Doorway 
377 
frightening at first but capable of revealing insight and wisdom to the 
conscious self.4 The Oxford English Dictionary gives the following 
definition of daimon: 
daemon 1 |ˈdēmən| (also daimon) noun 
1. (in ancient Greek belief) a divinity or supernatural being of a nature 
between gods and humans. 
2. an inner or attendant spirit or inspiring force. 
3. archaic spelling of demon. 
A daimon is both an inner inspiring force and an autonomous supernatural 
being. The refusal of the word to be reduced to either the “inner” or the 
“outer” is precisely its strength, as it means that we have to be able to shift 
our own perspective from one to the other whilst examining the same 
imaginative phenomenon. The classical concept of the daimonic as a 
bridge between material reality and the divine is a recurring current in the 
Western mind.5 In recent times, existential psychotherapist Rollo May has 
defined the daimonic as “any natural function that has the power to take 
over the whole person”.6 He uses the concept as a way of recognising 
psychological material that is beyond the individual and has a collective, 
yet highly personal nature—such as love or anger. Speaking about the 
daimonic allows him to articulate a psychology that goes beyond the 
rational and individualistic mind, and describes that sense of being “taken 
over” by passionate feeling or modes of being. 
The archetypal perspective on the daimonic finds its modern voice in 
the life and work of Jung. The nature and content of his encounters with 
daimons permeated his work; specifically, his creation of an analytical 
psychology concerned with archetypes of a collective unconscious. In fact 
Jung wrote towards the end of his life that the daimonic could have been a 
synonym for the collective unconscious.7 Jung’s daimonic psychology has 
found its champion in recent years in the writings of James Hillman, 
whose archetypal psychology strips away some of the psychoanalytical 
                                                           
4 Jung 1971: 145 “The most accessible archetype, and the easiest to experience is 
the shadow, for its nature can in large measure be inferred from the contents of the 
personal unconscious.”  
5 For example, see Tarnas: 13 on Plato’s sense of the divine: “More than only 
literalistic metaphors, Plato’s gods defy strict definition, in one dialogue serving as 
fanciful characters in a didactic fable, in another commanding an undoubted 
ontological reality.” 
6 May: 123. 
7 Jung 1963: 369 “I prefer the term ‘unconscious’ knowing that I might equally 
speak of ‘God’ or ‘daimon’ if I wished to express myself in mythic language.” 

Chapter Twenty-three 
 
378
concepts around Jungian psychology to emphasise its essential approach, 
namely psychology as encounter with personified images within an 
imaginal realm. He suggests that Jung’s great contribution to self- 
knowledge is to re-animate the possibility of dialogue with daimons:” 
Know thyself, in Jung’s manner, means to become familiar with, to open 
oneself to, that is, to know and discern, daimons.”8 
Hillman places the personification of thoughts, feelings and experiences 
at the heart of his archetypal psychology9. He makes the claim that this is 
how we experience our imagination, encountering fictional characters in 
dreams, myth or literature. With this “move” we are also entering the 
realm of the actor, and of dramatherapy,10 for embodying characters 
where the known self and the unknown other intersect within one body is 
exactly what the actor does with himself each night he performs. To do 
this not for an audience, but for self-knowledge, and with the healing 
intention that this entails, takes us towards the heart of not just an 
archetypal psychology, but of dramatherapy. 
Building a theatre of the daimon 
What does the concept of theatre add to this emerging discussion of 
psyche and daimon? To think about a theatre of the psyche or a daimonic 
theatre, we need to have a sense of how to define theatre, for theatre is as 
elusive and shapeshifting as psyche. Director Peter Brook opens up a 
useful area of discussion: “A man walks across an empty space, watched 
by another man, and that is all that is needed for an act of theatre to be 
engaged.”11 
This definition of theatre brings in a new component not present in our 
poetic imaginings of psyche—theatre as essentially a relational act 
between a performer and an observer. Let us look closer at the character 
of this observer, the single audience member, watching the performance. 
Her silence and apparent passivity have been of great interest to those 
working in the theatre, especially those seeking theatre that provokes 
change. A theme running through the avant garde in the last hundred 
years has been the involvement of the audience in the drama, engaging 
them within the action rather than to requiring them to watch passively. 
Here is Judith Malina, a co-founder of the radical theatre company Living 
                                                           
8 Hillman 1983: 55. 
9 Hillman 1975: 3.  
10 Hillman 1983: 37 “The unconscious produces dramas, poetic fictions, it is a 
theatre.” 
11 Brook: 11. 

Imaginal Doorway 
379 
Theatre writing in the 1950s: “We are the creators of an art in which 
every night hundreds of people are ignored [...] then we wonder why the 
art staggers lamely behind its hope of being part of life.”12 
This same sentiment is present in the work and writings of many of 
the most influential and original theatrical practitioners of the twentieth 
century. It is there in the writing of Antonin Artaud, in his call for theatre 
to become a magical ritual that both reflects and creates psychic change in 
audience and performers.13 It is there in Jerzy Grotowski’s work, in his 
casting of the audience into specific roles for the performance of his 
plays.14 It is certainly there in Grotowski’s later development of this 
encounter-based theatre into what he called “paratheatrical” projects, 
which through “disarming” participants of their habitual social defences 
sought to dissolve the entire theatrical frame of audiences and actors. 
Grotowski wanted to engender a deep and genuine creative meeting 
between those present,15 for in “paratheatre” there would be no actors and 
no audience, but instead a creative communion that had theatre as its 
source material. This desire to activate the audience continues today; for 
example, recent productions by Punchdrunk16 and DreamThinkSpeak17 
are representative of current developments in modern theatre which 
involve the audience more deeply. They aim to immerse the audience 
within the fiction they are creating, casting them in a role. In my opinion, 
these developments around animating audiences are at the cutting edge of 
theatre’s continuing relevance today in a cultural landscape dominated by 
cinema.  
However, I want to make a claim for the character of the silent watcher 
who does not act, and to mention the benefits of being given permission to 
                                                           
12 Malina, in Drain: 275. 
13 For example in No More Masterpieces: “I suggest we ought to return through 
theatre to the idea of a physical knowledge of images, a means of inducing trances, 
just as Chinese medicine knows the points of acupuncture over the whole extent of 
the human anatomy, right down to its most sensitive functions.” (Artaud: 61). 
14 Grotowski: 55 “The core of the theatre is an encounter.”  
15 Grotowski: 223 “It is not theatre that is indispensable but to cross the frontiers 
between you and me; to come forward to meet you, so that we do not get lost in the 
crowd—or among words or declarations or among the beautifully precise thoughts.” 
16 Punchdrunk describe their theatre as “immersive theatre in which roaming 
audiences experience epic storytelling inside sensory theatrical worlds”. I am 
referring to Punchdrunk’s productions The Firebird Ball, Faust and The Masque of 
the Red Death. See www.punchdrunk.org.uk.  
17 “Dreamthinkspeak creates site-responsive works that interweave live performance 
with film and installations to create extraordinary journeys” (from www. 
dreamthinkspeak.com.) I am referring to their production of Before I Sleep, 2011. 

Chapter Twenty-three 
 
380
watch without acting. I want to make the claim that it is this that allows a 
point of reflection to enter in both actor and witness. Making connections 
to my own practice as a dramatherapist, I have a sense that sometimes I 
have been cast in the role of silent witness, unable to influence the action 
or the plot. Yet as a therapist, actor and director I have a strong sense that 
this watching has a transformative effect on the action. I know as an actor 
that my quality of attention changes my ability to act, deepens it. As a 
director, I seek to create a certain level of immersion, of attention. As a 
therapist, the quality of my silence demonstrates that I am listening, and 
allows the creation of a container for therapeutic work; within that 
container, the personal drama may unfold. Essential to any drama is the 
cast that plays it out.  
Auditioning and casting daimonic actors 
During the preparation of a play, a group of actors work together to create 
the performance. The name given to a group approach to theatre when a 
company seeks to work together rather than as a collection of individuals, 
is the ensemble. The presentation of any dramatic conflict is made possible 
by the ensemble working together behind the scenes, to rehearse and 
perfect the performance, trying out different approaches to perfect the 
presentation of the different characters’ dynamics onstage. Each actor 
must create his character not in isolation, but by establishing how his 
character relates to the others. Every character is essential to the 
performance as a whole. However, even for an individual within everyday 
life there may be a hidden ensemble at work. The psychologist John 
Rowan has written about subpersonalities within the individual self. These 
are aspects of self or characters that play out relationship with one another 
within each person. He suggests that many psychological theories can be 
understood as different descriptions of these subpersonalities,18 which may 
often be in conflict with each other. Theatre allows its audiences to view 
these conflicts, the conflicts between and within people, as they witness 
them. Hillman quotes Jung to clarify this connection between theatre and 
the self: “If the observer understands that his own drama is being played 
out on the stage, he cannot remain indifferent to the plot”.19 
Hillman suggests that a connection is made between the one watching 
and the one acting that can activate something vital in the watcher, and this 
gives us a sense of how a daimonic theatre can work. It involves the 
                                                           
18 Rowan: 8 “My own definition of a subpersonality is a semi-permanent and semi-
autonomous region of the personality capable of acting as a person.” 
19 Jung in Hillman 1983: 38. 

Imaginal Doorway 
381 
observer in a personal way, touching on his own deep identity, yet also 
allowing distance from it. It gives access to a collective pool of images. 
Dramatherapy works with a paradox within the creative process. Seeing 
characters come to life onstage can create a deep empathic connection in 
an audience as they identify with certain characters or situations, yet 
dramatising internal conflicts also creates distance from the watcher’s 
psychological material. Both these factors are crucial to dramatherapy.20 
Dramatic narratives do not reflect the literal concerns of an audience’s life, 
but mirror it using images that either engage or distance them in a 
continual flow. Depth psychologist Mary Watkins writes of a crucial 
understanding of the image, that it contains not just what is known but 
what is not yet known to its author, in the same way that the daimon is 
both part of the observer yet separate from it.21 Our images can allow us to 
be simultaneously more deeply involved and more objective about our 
lives and to be more aware of what is on the cusp of our understanding. 
However, I want to advocate the value of recognising the ensemble in the 
psyche for another reason: the character that we most need is likely to be 
that character that we least wish to meet. The depressed old man, the 
arrogant poet, the helpless child, the sadistic monster, the stressed out 
organiser who just will not let go. An ensemble approach to the psyche 
means these characters are held within the context of the plot, and this 
allows them to be recognised within ourselves. Theatre requires these 
characters to act, to interact, to play out tragedy, comedy, romance or epic 
adventure. Marginalised fictional characters have a place within the 
daimonic ensemble, they can only be banished as far as the wings, or the 
green room. In the theatre daimons find their place, and no longer have to 
assert themselves on the personal psyche with such uncomfortable force. 
Within dramatherapy, abstract emotions and repressed forces can be first 
personified, then auditioned and cast into roles for the patient’s personal 
drama to unfold. 
Entering the narrative—a vignette 
Dramatherapy is the application of theatre with an intention to heal; the 
drama becomes the therapy, through relationship with a qualified 
dramatherapist. Drama is such a varied discipline in its training and 
intention that dramatherapists need a wide range of tools at their disposal. 
However, they are also bound by a code of ethics, which keeps the work 
                                                           
20 See Jones: 83 “The tension between (dramatherapeutic empathy and distancing) 
can create the dynamic of change that is essential to the work being undertaken.” 
21 Watkins: 64. 

Chapter Twenty-three 
 
382
safe by including a commitment to the well-being of their patient, 
observation of patient/therapist boundaries and ongoing clinical 
supervision. As drama is a creative discipline, the work involves a 
relationship on two fronts—one with the therapist and another with the 
imagination and its dramatic images. I am not proposing the daimonic as a 
way of explaining the psyche, emotional conflict or creative images to 
patients in therapy, for this may be counter-therapeutic or even unethical. 
Rather, I want to look at the daimon as a therapist, as a way of 
understanding the dramatic images of others and their relationship to inner 
conflicts. I want to describe a way of understanding others that both refers 
to their personal world and to a shared imaginal world simultaneously. The 
example that follows is from my dramatherapy work, and took place on a 
medium-secure psychiatric intensive care unit (a PICU). It is a busy, 
chaotic place with ten beds. The doors are locked, and medication is 
compulsory. There are restrictions on what is allowed onto the ward in 
terms of smashable objects, for patients admitted here are often detained 
under sections of the mental health act. For this reason, I present only a 
small vignette, in order to preserve the anonymity of the patient, and I 
have changed the names. I have deliberately not mentioned any identifying 
features of patients such as age, appearance or ethnicity. The dramatherapy 
group is voluntary; however I am required to meet new patients all the 
time, and for them I am a representative of a team that has acted against 
their expressed wishes, often including their wish to be there. To help 
counteract this I developed ways of using drama skills to create a better 
engagement on the first meeting. 
A Story of Cheeseplants and Marijuana 
Nick was admitted onto the ward following a marijuana-induced 
psychosis; he smoked a very large quantity of marijuana over a period of 
days during which he did not sleep. My first awareness of him was on the 
ward patio—he was acting wildly, alternating between aggressive and 
placatory language, sometimes to staff and patients, sometimes to no-one 
(apparently) at all. He was moving very energetically, doing forward rolls 
and leaps, looking around constantly to check if anyone was creeping up 
on him. By giving him relaxed attention and showing interest in him, I was 
able to engage in conversation with him. He came to the following session 
of the weekly dramatherapy group. 
The report from the nurses was that Nick’s behaviour had continued to 
be bizarre. He demanded marijuana from them, sometimes aggressively, 
and believed that the cheeseplants in the art therapy room were marijuana. 

Imaginal Doorway 
383 
He gave the cheeseplants food, fed them milk, and was jealously 
protective of them. The art room was soon locked because of his 
aggressive defence of the plants and because of the smell. He thought that 
nurses were people from his earlier life. His communication was hard to 
follow, and he alternated quickly between being compliant and angry. He 
was not easy to comprehend, partly because English was not his first 
language, but also because what he wanted to say revolved around a group 
of people he felt were important, but it was hard to establish who they 
were or why they were important. 
After our initial meetings, Nick came to dramatherapy. During one 
session, I had some musical instruments laid out. Nick took one and began 
to beat out a rhythm, whilst a nurse and I supported his rhythm by copying 
and following it. After playing this together for a while, Nick stopped. He 
explained that he had been playing a rhythm of his local football team, in 
the country where he came from. He said that when he was younger, he 
had been involved in organised violence at football games, and that this 
had only stopped when he had discovered marijuana and begun to smoke 
it. From this point I supported him in making a small piece of theatre, and 
helped him to write a short script. In it, he conceptualised two characters 
which he named “Marijuana” and “Fighter.” Fighter was hyper aggressive, 
and began the piece of theatre by threatening Marijuana with physical 
violence. Their conflict was the focus of what happened in the play. 
Marijuana completely ignored Fighter, casually dismissing him and 
continuing to smoke despite the intensely violent threats. Nick was able to 
inhabit both roles with great expression. At the end of the enactment I 
helped him to “de-role”, to consciously take off the roles he had been 
playing and to return to his habitual self, Nick. Nick was able to 
characterise and communicate different aspects of himself through this 
small piece of dramatherapy. In the enactment, although Fighter had more 
physical force, it was Marijuana who had the upper hand in terms of 
status, minimising Fighter’s threat by casually ignoring it. It was 
noteworthy that Nick came onto the ward after smoking excessive 
amounts of marijuana, and that he insisted to staff that he needed more and 
more marijuana—indeed it was the chief preoccupation of his illness.  
After watching the interplay between the two characters, I felt that 
Nick was suppressing the Fighter part of himself by smoking marijuana. I 
wondered if he had a side to himself which was relaxed and not aggressive 
to the point of not caring about anything, and whether he identified this not 
as a part of himself, but as only a side effect of the herb marijuana. If so, 
he could ignore the other side of himself that was violent, antisocial and 
dangerous and feel himself to be free of these traits that both repelled and 

Chapter Twenty-three 
 
384
attracted him only when he smoked marijuana. Perhaps he could not 
identify with the attributes that Marijuana as a character had without 
smoking marijuana the substance, and feeling its effects. At the same time, 
he could not allow himself to be Fighter anymore, because that felt 
dangerous and unpredictable. Without a strong sense of either character, 
both of which had featured so strongly in his life, he could not have a very 
clear sense of how to behave at all. Marijuana (the character) largely 
ignored problems and had a nihilistic dysfunctionality of his own. Fighter 
was highly strung and on a trigger, ready to explode. If these two aspects 
of himself were unavailable, either by being too dangerous like Fighter or 
by being present only if inhaled literally like Marijuana, then what identity 
did Nick have? The therapeutic theatre cast new light on Nick’s case and 
helped make sense of his actions prior to admission and his behaviour in 
admission. It seemed that his marijuana-induced psychosis was an attempt 
to deal with immense internal (intra-psychic) tension. His psychotic 
fixation on the cheeseplants as marijuana and his attempts to tend to them 
and feed them milk and food seemed like an attempt to tend for the aspect 
of Marijuana in himself. Marijuana was that aspect of himself that he 
needed to be in order not feel himself to be a violent psychopath, as he 
imagined Fighter to be. What was beginning to emerge from Nick’s piece 
of theatre was that both characters needed something from each other that 
they did not have on their own—Marijuana needed the strength and 
fighting spirit to prevent “being relaxed” turning into a world denying 
nihilism, whereas Fighter badly needed Marijuana’s more relaxed and 
calm attitude. What was clear from the performance was the extreme 
nature of their conflict at this point, for Marijuana cruelly dismissed 
Fighter and Fighter only wanted to destroy Marijuana through aggression. 
They could barely be in the same scene together. Interestingly, Marijuana 
seemed to have more power in the scene than the violent Fighter character. 
Reviewing the play 
How does this vignette relate to a daimonic theatre and dramatherapy? 
Nick’s creations have clear connections to him and helped him make links 
back into his past to make sense of the present. This was something that 
was lacking for him on admission. Dramatherapists work with the 
relationship to the inner realm, with characters as “aspects of the psyche,” 
dramatising them and then relating them back to the individual. We might 
think of this in terms of “dramatic projection”. Dramatic images are 
projected outwards from the individual’s psyche onto the screen of the 
theatre, to allow them to be seen and processed and finally owned as part 

Imaginal Doorway 
385 
of the self. Dramatherapist Phil Jones refers to this “life-role” bridge as a 
core process in dramatherapy. I think this is clear in the way that Nick’s 
characters relate to the actual experiences in his life of being both violent 
hooligan and marijuana smoker—indeed the link between fictional 
characters and their authors is essential in order to gain a good idea about 
how creative images relate deeply to the individual that creates them. 
However, it is equally clear that Nick was never “really” either character. 
Although they point to parts of him, they are also fictional creations that 
do not finally define or express “who he is.” In this way, they are 
distanced and do not have to carry the baggage of being “a part” or 
“aspect” of his personality. The usefulness of the daimonic at this point is 
that it offers a way of mediating a “middle realm” between the 
experiencing self and the unknowable other, for as metaphor, the daimonic 
impossibly and paradoxically occupies both these positions at once. We 
can trace an understanding of these images as personal to Nick, but the 
daimonic also requires that we reverse our perspective and see Nick as 
within these images that appear to be outside of him. They mediate his 
interpersonal relationships and his temporarily fractured fantasies of 
himself and the world. This detached perspective might belong principally 
to the therapist, when the patient is overwhelmed and unable to make any 
sense of his own experiences. 
My sense of Nick’s dramatherapy piece was that its meaning was 
elusive for him, but that the experience allowed him to begin to engage 
with a process of knowing the multiple dimensions of himself. It suggests 
the emergence of a desire to change, which may allow a more stable, 
everyday self to become established that is neither lost in marijuana-aided 
oblivion nor keyed up and ready to attack anyone who comes close. 
The therapist as audience, the audience as daimonic 
It is the use of metaphor that allows dramatherapy to provide therapy. 
Moving between different roles in the psyche can mediate and contain 
destructive tendencies, through expressing them metaphorically rather than 
literally. Marijuana and Fighter were allowed to have space within a 
creative frame, and holding on to a sense of an ensemble within a theatre 
of the psyche allowed Fighter to emerge from the wings and be seen 
consciously—his demands heard, albeit briefly. 
If a person explores two aspects of himself, then there will be at least 
three archetypal characters present. The first two will be the more vibrant 
aspects of self, often in conflict, and the third will be the audience. The 
“silent watcher”, almost invisible, is crucially important within therapy, as 

Chapter Twenty-three 
 
386
a mediating point and the origin of reflection on the conflict being 
witnessed. Often the therapist models this role, as I did, simply by 
watching the interplay between Marijuana and Fighter and being interested 
in it. The very act of creating a piece of theatre means a person must take 
on many roles, even outside the action, and this in itself is therapeutic, as 
other dramatherapists working in similar contexts have noticed: “To be 
actor, critic, director within the same corporeal and chronological time 
sequence allows the destructive act to be contained and reflected on within 
the same creative process”.22 To this I would add that Nick was able to 
glimpse the conflicts that he experienced and reflect on them, for he was 
not only actor-critic-director, but also audience and witness to his own 
daimonic theatre. 
Daimonic breath 
In theatre, the images and dramatic action take place within the 
perceptions of the audience as well as within the auditorium. The audience 
and actors come together to form a container for the action of the play. 
The drama takes place both within the audience and onstage, which brings 
us back to the poet’s image of the psyche as breath. Breath enters the 
intimate spaces of our body and is also the element that surrounds it. 
Patrick Harpur has suggested that the great innovation of depth 
psychology was to re-place experiences, places and characters previously 
considered to be outside of the individual—the daimons, gods, monsters, 
witches, holy children—within the individual.23 The benefit of this is that 
it has re-invested the creative imagination (what I am referring to as the 
daimonic) with meaning and purpose, for ancient stories find new life 
within the personal. Seen in this way, Nick’s characters, whilst embodying 
himself and his problems, also relate to archetypal characters, to daimons. 
“Fighter” can easily be akin to the whole pantheon of warrior archetypes, 
known as Thor, Ares, and Mars in the Greek, Roman and Norse traditions. 
Similarly, “Marijuana” who laughs mockingly at the crass violence, can be 
seen as a Loki, Hermes or Mercury. But although it is interesting to 
consider correspondences between mythical characters and personal 
archetypes, the images also exist on their own without supporting mythical 
traditions. To relate them back to gods as if mythical tradition is the only 
way to know archetypes can do violence to the personal way in which they 
                                                           
22 Doktor, Holloway & Seebohm: 28 (electronic copy from author). 
23 Harpur: 45 “What we call the unconscious was to the Greeks, the Otherworld.” 

Imaginal Doorway 
387 
actually appear. Often, when clothed in this personal way, the daimons 
have greater numinous power. 
Theatre is a great social medium, one that requires that we are all 
gathered together, in the same place at the same time, connected by the 
images that we watch or enact. The characters that we see at the theatre are 
at once parts of the individuals watching and yet also independent of them, 
both fragments of the whole and wholes containing further fragments, 
meeting and forming plots in stories that repeat and never end. As much as 
they are aspects of one self, each individual stands amongst them, and 
navigates the world through the imaginative possibilities within which 
they personify each action, mood or situation. It is at this point that I 
would like to return to my own daimons, who have been guiding this 
essay. I would like to give them the stage, to show a little daimonic theatre 
of my own. In the introduction I mentioned my own creative block which 
led to imagining an old man, covered in dust, and a young poet full of 
inspired creative energy. Like Marijuana and Fighter these two could be 
related to archetypal characters—Senex and Puer, or Chronos and Zeus. 
However, as I think that making these connections too closely abstracts 
them too much, and so weakens their power in this unique situation, I 
would prefer to imagine them as they are, on their own terms—an old man 
who seems to be covered in dust in conversation with a provocative young 
poet.  
The Old Man and the Poet 
The Old Man and the Poet are standing on the stage of a theatre. It is a 
proscenium arch theatre, Regency in style, gold plaster grape vines 
decorating cracked scarlet balconies. The two stand on a bare, square 
stage, facing an empty auditorium—empty seats in the stalls and in the 
steeply raked circle tier, no one seated in the royal box or “the gods”.24 
The Old Man is upstage and has his back to the Poet. 
 
Poet: So—what do you think of the essay? Does it go far enough? Does it 
help bring imagination back into the world? 
 
Old Man (turns slowly to face him): It is not important. It does not matter. 
Do you think you are the first to think in this way or that others have not 
                                                           
24 “The gods” is a traditional name for the highest and often cheapest seats in the 
theatre. 

Chapter Twenty-three 
 
388
said it better? Focus on your own material rather than on these inflated 
concepts. 
 
Poet (angrily): What do you mean! The soul of the world is not an inflated 
concept! It is what gives height, depth, life. We are not occasionally 
imagining things within ourselves! We are imagination, the WORLD is 
imagination and we are a pool of lucid images that refract and reflect like 
fiery jewels. It is not inflated to seek the soul of the world—it is your 
focus on the individual that is egotistical! Trapped inside your own skin, 
seeking “objectivity” in other peoples writing ... who cares? 
 
Old Man (stares coldly at him): If you do not recognise other people’s 
ideas you will lose your own. If you focus on the general you lose the 
particular. Tie your ideas in with others. Moderate your own ideas 
carefully to present the facts as best you can, do it well, or do not bother at 
all. 
 
Poet: If I was to be as methodical as you I would never do anything! I 
don’t want to write moderately, I want to write with passion and 
originality, you dried up old man! 
 
Old Man: I was like you once. Full of fire. Fire burns out quickly. I admire 
your passion. I remember it. But your fire is also hot air. It will evaporate 
quickly as you strive to convert others to your ideas, persuade them of 
your cause. You are like a missionary for the imagination! Like a Catholic 
missionary. A fundamentalist. I will tell you what matters, the only thing. 
Appreciating your place in the present moment. 
 
Poet (moving forward): Then we are agreed! the moment Now filled with 
all the potential of the cosmos, brimming with birdsong and stars ... 
 
Old Man: The birds are not singing. The stars are not out. We need to 
notice not just the spark but the glass that holds it. And the silent watcher 
that witnesses the flame. We are standing here on this empty stage, in this 
empty theatre. There is no one listening even amongst the gods tonight ... 
(gestures to the empty seats high up). But someone has been listening, and 
perhaps that is enough for this to transform our petty argument into 
something of value ... (lights fade as he slowly turns to face the Poet). 

Imaginal Doorway 
389 
Curtain call: towards a daimonic theatre 
Let me now end my contribution by briefly recapturing its themes. Firstly, 
in writing it, I became aware of a tension in me between the two characters 
that I have characterised as the Old Man and the Poet. The Poet’s imaginal 
method uses images as metaphors for the creatively expressing psyche, 
whereas the Old Man provides an essential practicality and grounding for 
understanding these images, by relating them to other peoples’ ideas and 
personal experiences. In this way, the insights of each can be related, 
through the theatrical medium.  
An advantage of a theatrical approach to the psyche’s native poetry is 
that it is a relational art form, just as the psyche itself is relational. The 
concept of the daimonic is also relational as it relates “inner” to “outer” 
and “personal” to “collective” as well as “human” to “divine”. It is an idea 
that allows us to have a sense that, like breath, what is within us also 
contains that which contains us. When we become more aware of imaginal 
dialogues, we become aware of conflicts that are at once highly personal 
and archetypal. These conflicts can help us make sense of the multiplicity 
of ourselves and others. 
Once we meet these daimons, we must establish a relationship with 
them, for the characters that we most need are often the ones we most 
neglect. Conflicts in imaginal dialogues reflect the conflicts both within 
ourselves and with others and offer creative possibilities for 
transformation and discovery. Yet the daimonic is also the drama that we 
ourselves are within, the stage that we act on unknowingly in our everyday 
lives. Creating theatre gives us a “magic box” that allow characters to 
come into the light, for conflict to be recognised, embodied and given a 
framework. This brings with it the possibility of acceptance and so the 
opportunity for transformation. 
Dramatherapy can facilitate a personal theatre, it allows the hidden 
daimons that play out in our lives to be known, respected and given their 
rightful place in the theatre of the psyche. By doing this, it opens up all 
that is not personal in the imagination—the daimonic. “The idea that the 
daimons who inhabit myths also invented them is an outstanding metaphor 
for the way myths generate themself out of imagination”,25 says Harpur. 
Theatre lives where the daimons live, at the crucial intersection between 
self and world. 
                                                           
25 Harpur: 73. 

Chapter Twenty-three 
 
390
Bibliography 
Artaud, A. (1970) The Theatre and its Double (London: Calder). 
Brook, P. (1968) The Empty Space (Harmondsworth: Penguin). 
Drain, R. (ed.) (1995) A Sourcebook of Radical Theatre (London: 
Routledge). 
Grotowski J. (1969) Towards a Poor Theatre (London: Methuen). 
Doktor, D., P. Holloway & H. Seebohm (2011) Dramatherapy and 
Destructiveness Creating the Evidence Base, Playing with Thanatos 
(London: Routledge). 
Freud, S. (1973) Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis (Harmondsworth: 
Penguin). 
Harpur, P. (2002) The Philosopher’s Secret Fire: A History of the 
Imagination (Glastonbury: The Squeeze Press). 
Hillman, J. (1975) Re-visioning Psychology (New York: HarperCollins). 
—. (1983) Healing Fiction (Dallas: Spring). 
Jones, P. (1996) Drama as Therapy Theatre as Living (London: 
Routledge). 
Jung, C. G. (1963) Memories, Dreams, Reflections, A. Jaffé (ed.) trans. R. 
Winston & C. Winston (New York: Pantheon Books). 
—. (1971) The Portable Jung, J. Campbell (ed.) (Harmondsworth: 
Penguin). 
May, R. (1969) Love and Will (New York: W. W. Norton). 
Rowan, J. (1990) Subpersonalities: The People Inside Us (London: 
Routledge). 
Schechner, R. & L. Wolford (eds) (1997) The Grotowski Source Book 
(London: Routledge). 
Tarnas, R. (1991) The Passion of the Western Mind (London: Pimlico). 
Watkins, M. (1986) Invisible Guests: The Development of Imaginal 
Dialogues (New Jersey: The Analytic Press). 
 

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR 
NUMINOUS CONVERSATIONS: 
PERFORMANCE AND MANIFESTATION  
OF SPIRITS IN SPIRIT POSSESSION PRACTICES 
JACK HUNTER 
 
 
 
Spirit possession is an extremely complex phenomenon, with social, 
cultural, psychological and, potentially, parapsychological components. 
All of these different aspects interact and coalesce to produce something 
that is very difficult to reduce into a simple explanatory scheme.1 In this 
chapter I am going to focus only on the behavioural aspects of this unusual 
phenomenon, in particular those aspects that might be referred to as 
“performance”, and the way that performance is utilised in the 
manifestation of spirits. This is not because I consider this perspective to 
be the best one for interpreting and understanding spirit possession, but 
rather because it illuminates interesting issues, which in turn highlight 
other components of the phenomenon.  
This chapter will examine spirit possession practices from a cross-
cultural perspective, drawing on the anthropological and ethnographic 
literature on spirit possession, as well as on my own field research with 
trance mediums in Bristol. My research takes the form of participant 
observation at the Bristol Spirit Lodge, a group devoted to the 
development of trance and physical mediumship. The Lodge was 
established in 2005 by Christine, the circle leader, after she was “made 
aware” of the reality of spirit mediumship during a séance she attended 
with a friend.2 I have been conducting field research with the group since 
2009.3 
                                                           
1 Kelly & Locke: 30-31; Halloy: 168. 
2 Di Nucci: 23. 
3 Hunter 2009; Hunter 2012. 

Chapter Twenty-four 
 
392
Recognising persons, selves and personalities 
The concepts of “self”, “person” and “personality” are not, by any means, 
concrete in either psychology,4 philosophy,5 or anthropology.6 Indeed, 
theories of personhood are socially and culturally relative,7 with different 
cultures possessing different categories of person and criteria for 
personhood. Despite the difficulties in coming to consensus definitions, 
however, such notions are of central importance in any analysis of spirit 
mediumship. 
Spirit mediumship, by its very nature, appears to exceed the popularly 
assumed Western conception of the self as an “individual” and “constant” 
centre of embodied consciousness,8 because in the practice of mediumship 
the body ostensibly becomes host to many different selves.9 In her study of 
Afro-Cuban Spiritism, for example, Diana Espirito Santo argues that 
mediumship is a “type of partnership between a person and a series of 
spirits” and that the “person” of the medium is a “meeting-ground for the 
unique abilities of each of the spirits belonging to her spiritual cordon.”10 
Spirit mediumship can be thought of, therefore, as a process whereby the 
medium’s person is expanded through the incorporation of other spiritual 
persons, thus creating what could be considered a composite, or multiple, 
personhood, perhaps constituting what the anthropologist Marilyn 
Strathern has termed a “dividual notion of personhood”.11 
The medium’s body serves as the means for physical expression, or 
“enactment”,12 of numerous, seemingly distinct, personalities (I use the 
term personality, rather than more neutral terms, such as “agencies”, to 
refer to the spirits incorporated at the Bristol Spirit Lodge because this is 
how they are referred to and perceived by its members). The body is the 
primary tool for the expression of personality and internal psychological 
states through the use of gestures, movements and specific bodily 
postures.13 It is our interface with the physical world and our everyday 
means of communicating with each other, both verbally and non-
                                                           
4 O’Connor & Hallam: 238-239. 
5 Ikäheimo & Laitinen: 6-16. 
6 Mauss: 1; Sökefeld; Sax: 6-9; Smith: 52. 
7 La Fontaine: 138. 
8 Spanos: 144; Sökefeld: 417; Sax: 9. 
9 Spanos: 144; Sökefeld: 417; Sax: 9. 
10 Espirito Santo: 102. 
11 In Murray: 5. 
12 Spanos et al.; 308 Spanos: 147. 
13 Argyle; Bowie: 54. 

Numinous Conversations 
393 
verbally.14 The way in which we use our bodies, therefore, is of key 
importance for the way we are perceived as personalities. In mediumship 
the body is used to express more than one personality, and so it must be 
used in specific ways in order for these different personalities to be 
perceived as distinct from that of the medium. 
The term “blending” is often used by Western mediums and channellers, 
including members of the Lodge, to describe the interconnectedness of the 
medium’s consciousness with that of the discarnate entity utilising his/her 
body as a vessel, and the anthropologist Dureen Hughes has highlighted 
the positive connotations and sense of “harmony […] between channel and 
entity”15 implied by the term. When an entity is incorporated within the 
body of a medium it makes itself apparent to the outside world through 
manipulations of the medium’s vocal tonality and physical demeanour, 
just as we normally express our own personality. Afro-Brazilian 
Umbandaists, for example, believe that spirits and saints, known as Orixas, 
inhabit the bodies of spirit mediums during trance dance performances.16 
Each Orixa has a favourite rhythm and a particular stylised dance which 
are performed by musicians and mediums respectively, and which enables 
differentiation between the embodied spirits. During the trance session the 
medium’s movements are the movements of the Orixa inhabiting the body; 
at that moment the Orixa and the medium are blended. The medium is the 
spirit and the spirit is the medium. The dance performance is the physical 
expression of the Orixa’s presence. Similarly, according to the Yanomamo 
Indians of the Orinoco Valley in Venezuela the shapori (being the 
Yanomamo equivalent of the shaman) initiation process involves the 
metamorphosis of the initiate into a hekura spirit: “The shaman is 
correspondingly perceived by non-initiated Yanomami as something other 
than a human being; he is a living spirit in the flesh [...] [The] Yanomami 
term for shamanic initiation, hekura prai, can be translated as “the 
metamorphosis of a human being into a hekura spirit,” or human body into 
a cosmic body.”17 
While the shapori is inhabited by the spirits he carries out specific 
healing and divinatory tasks under their direct control and influence. To 
the outside observer this may appear to be an elaborate act, but to the 
Yanomami it is a blending of the human and spirit worlds: a performance 
that expresses the presence of nonphysical entities in a culturally 
recognised manner.  
                                                           
14 Goffman; DePaulo: 203. 
15 Hughes: 166. 
16 St. Clair; Turner: 129-130. 
17 Jokic 2008a: 38-39. 

Chapter Twenty-four 
 
394
Recognising the bodily expression of spirits 
As with the Orixas of Umbanda and the Hekura of the Yanomamo, the 
spirits at the Bristol Spirit Lodge also express themselves through physical 
bodies. When a spirit first makes itself known through an entranced 
medium at the Lodge the communication is often weak and it may take 
many development sittings for an individual spirit personality to fully 
express itself. Occasionally a personality will show the early signs of 
emerging (such as slight twitches of the medium’s body, or gurgling 
sounds indicative of an attempt to speak, for example), but might never 
reach its full expression as a regular communicator. Indeed, my own 
experience of falling into what the circle leader described as a “light trance 
state”, during which my left arm moved of its own accord, was taken as a 
sign that a spirit entity was attempting to communicate through my own 
body.18 It is the role of the circle leader to recognise these early signs and 
then to develop them through engaging them in dialogue. The role of the 
circle leader at the Lodge is comparable, to a surprising degree, with that 
of the master of ceremonies in Kelantan Malay spirit mediumship 
practices, as described by Raymond Firth in the 1960s: 
The master of ceremonies plays a leading part in questioning the medium, 
interpreting what he says, and by his control of the musical accompaniment 
stimulates and guides the medium’s actions. For the most part he adopts a 
quiet, rather neutral position in the verbal exchanges, agreeing with the 
putative spirit or commenting rather drily in a kind of “so, indeed” fashion 
[...] Throughout he is recognised as the person having prime authority in 
the proceedings; at the symbolic level he is the “master of spirits,” a 
shaman in the strict sense of the word.19 
At the Bristol Spirit Lodge, the circle leader is also responsible for 
supervising the smooth running of the séance, ensuring that the medium is 
comfortable, and maintaining control over what takes place inside the 
Lodge: 
[...] management has to come into it. You set the intent, you set some sort 
of guidelines, and you expect them to work with you. It is a blending thing, 
you need to get some séance etiquette, or something, you know. You need 
to get a rapport, you need to get it organised. You sort of make deals 
between, you know, what is OK and what’s not OK, and what behaviour is 
acceptable around us and what isn’t. We’ve got to be a bit flexible to them 
                                                           
18 Hunter 2009; 2011. 
19 Firth: 199. 

Numinous Conversations 
395 
too, what they want and what they don’t want [...] so you kind of negotiate 
your way around.20 
The strongest and most fully developed communicators generally form a 
group called a “spirit team”. A medium will regularly channel the 
members of his/her spirit team, and these communicators will become 
recognised by sitters as distinct individual personalities. The structure of 
the spirit team can, in many ways, be seen as an analogue of the group 
structure of the personalities expressed through multiple personality, or 
dissociative identity, disorder. The average size of a spirit team at the 
Bristol Spirit Lodge is ten distinct spirit personalities. Of the members of 
the spirit team there is usually one who takes the role of “main spirit 
guide”, “control”, or “gatekeeper”,21 a feature that has also been noted in 
other spirit mediumship traditions.22 This spirit is often the most developed 
personality of the spirit team and, more often than not, was the first 
personality to present through the entranced medium in the earliest stages 
of his/her development. Raymond Firth interpreted the role of the control, 
or “familiar” as he termed it, as that of a “built-in mechanism which 
allows the medium to emerge from his dissociated state” at the end of the 
performance.23 Stephen Braude defines the spirit controls as “recurrent and 
self-consistent characters who act as intermediaries between sitters and 
communicators.”24 
Because each personality must express itself through a single physical 
body, the spirits utilise exaggerated body movements and unusual vocal 
tones to differentiate themselves from one another. Occasionally the 
presence of a spirit is inferred simply by the physical posturing of the 
medium’s body, and this posturing is recognised as signifying the presence 
of a distinct personality, as this quotation from an interview with a Bristol 
medium called Sandy illustrates: 
Sometimes, in the earliest days, they used to come through, and they’d 
come through presenting differently, and some of my movements would 
change. And depending on which spirit comes through depends on what I 
do with my hands, or, the one where I was dragging my leg, I just couldn’t 
not drag my leg as I walked in.25 
                                                           
20 Interview with Christine 23/03/2011. 
21 Johnson: 129; Klimo: 180; Gauld: 109-118. 
22 Firth: 199. 
23 Firth: 199. 
24 Braude: 33. 
25 Interview with Sandy 23/03/2011. 

Chapter Twenty-four 
 
396
The exaggerated postures and vocalisations can often give the impression 
that the individual spirit personalities are caricatures. I would suggest that 
this is a necessary aspect of the mediumship process, assisting in the 
development and expression in the social moment of distinctive 
personalities: the exaggeration of postures and movements serves to 
signify the presence of a particular spirit-person. For example, a member 
of Sandy’s spirit team called “Elf” is characterised by movements of the 
arms and legs, as though swimming in the air, and has a high-pitched 
child-like voice. Graham the undertaker, another member of Sandy’s spirit 
team, by contrast, presents as particularly large and broad-shouldered and 
has a deep, throaty voice. In some mediums (Sandy in particular), more 
than one spirit has, on occasion, presented simultaneously through the 
body of the medium. The psychical researcher Frederic Myers noted a 
similar capacity with the medium Eleonor Piper: “In some cases (Mrs 
Piper) two or more spirits may simultaneously control different portions of 
the same organism.”26 In such instances individual presences are inferred 
from the distinctive independent movements of certain body parts: for 
instance the legs may move in a manner distinctive to one particular 
personality, while the arms may behave in a completely different manner 
associated with the personality of another spirit. Anthropologist Nurit 
Bird-David describes a similar process of gestural expression of spirits in 
her analysis of the devaru performances of the South Indian Nayaka. She 
writes: 
The devara evoked often improvise on the same repetitive phrases. The 
saying, the voicing, the gesturing are important. These principle aspects of 
their behaviour are, in Bateson’s term (1979), meta-communication, 
namely, communicating that devaru are communicating, because the 
devaru are present as they move, talk, make gestures, etc. They are present 
as they communicate and socially interact with Nayaka.27 
Exaggerated behaviours, then, can be thought of as a form of meta-
communication, signifying the presence of distinct personalities and 
serving as a means to allow them to be communicated with as individuals 
distinct from the medium’s personality by the sitters and the circle-leader. 
                                                           
26 Myers: 248. 
27 Bird-David: 76. 

Numinous Conversations 
397 
Dialogue and the reinforcement of spirit personalities 
Over time the spirit-teams of the mediums will become regular fixtures at 
the Lodge’s weekly séances and are treated in many ways as anyone else 
who attends regularly. Their personalities are continually checked against 
past recordings of communications as a means to ensuring the genuineness 
of the phenomenon, as Christine has stated: “I will be looking to see if 
previous spirit communicators return and present themselves as 
previously. Any inconsistencies in voice tone or personality or information 
offered between the ‘previous’ and ‘present’ communications will be 
noticed (I compare audio recordings).”28 Through this regular interaction 
the spirit communicators become much more than abstractions; interaction 
allows them to manifest in a socially real and very tangible way. Similarly, 
Bird-David understands the devaru as relational persons, brought into 
social existence through interactions, i.e. conversation. She writes that: 
“[k]eeping the conversation going is important because it keeps the 
Nayaka devaru interaction and in a sense the devara themselves ‘alive.’” 
Moreover, the form this interaction takes is described as “highly personal, 
informal, and friendly” and consists of “joking, teasing, [and] bargaining”. 
The conversations are said to include numerous repetitions or minor 
variations on a theme” in which the Nayaka and the devaru “nag and tease, 
praise and flatter, blame and cajole each other, expressing and demanding 
care and concern.”29 The interactions between spirits and sitters at the 
Lodge could equally be described in this way. Take the following séance 
transcript for example: 
Christine [Circle leader]: Are you there yet Charlie? 
Charlie [Spirit]: Of course. 
Christine: Is it okay to open the cabinet? 
Charlie: If you wish. 
Christine: I’ll do it slowly ... How are you? 
Charlie: Very well, how are you? 
Christine: Fine. We’ve been sitting in the dark. How was it for you? 
Charlie: Wonderful, how was it for you? 
Christine: Not too bad actually. I wouldn’t say it was the best ever, but not 
too bad! 
Charlie: Some people are never satisfied.30 
                                                           
28 Personal communication with Christine, 2011. 
29 Bird-David: 76. 
30 Di Nucci & Hunter: 158-159. 

Chapter Twenty-four 
 
398
The tone of the interaction is very informal. This sort of quick interchange 
between the circle leader and the spirit will usually precede the more 
advanced, philosophical discussions which form the bulk of the 
communication. These could be interpreted as a means to build up the 
personality of the communicator through recognising and reinforcing the 
fact that another personality is present by engaging it in dialogue. The idea 
that spirits require this sort of engagement in order to manifest is also 
common in other mediumship traditions. In her analysis of the Venezuelan 
tradition of María Lionza, for example, Placido describes how 
conversation provides the means for spirits to express themselves in the 
social moment: 
To exist [...] the spirits need to be able to speak. By allowing them to 
express themselves through the mediums and by listening to what they say, 
humans are somehow resuscitating them […] It is through words and 
communication that the spirits are brought to life, in that it is during 
episodes of spirit possession that they are created, that they become social 
persons.31 
This emphasis on interaction with the spirits can be considered an 
analogue of the socio-cognitive theory of dissociative identity disorder and 
past-life regression personalities, in which the various personalities are 
conceived of as “rule governed, contextually supported social 
constructions.”32 Psychologist Nicholas Spanos argues that “secondary 
personality enactments” represent “joint constructions that are created, 
shaped, and maintained by the beliefs and expectations of significant 
others who constitute an interfacing audience, as well as by the actor who 
displays the secondary identity enactments.”33 Despite the similarities in 
understanding the way in which these personalities are manifested in the 
María Lionza world-view and the socio-cognitive model, there are, 
however, significant differences in terms of the ontological suppositions 
associated with these theories. For the members of the María Lionza cult, 
amongst other mediumistic traditions,34 including the Bristol Spirit Lodge, 
the spirits are very real and play an important role in the group because 
“what they say matters”,35 while for the socio-cognitivists the finding that 
alternate personality enactments are sustained through social interaction 
implies that they possess no form of independent ontological reality. 
                                                           
31 Placido: 214. 
32 Spanos et al.: 308. 
33 Spanos et al.: 308. 
34 Stoller; Lambek; Bubandt; Hunter 2009. 
35 Placido: 221. 

Numinous Conversations 
399 
I would not go so far as to conclude that the spirits communicated with 
at the Bristol Spirit Lodge are simple “social constructions”, but rather 
would suggest an interpretation based upon the notion that ontologically 
distinct spirits could exist and that the process through which they make 
themselves known would be an interactive and social one, just as our own 
personalities are expressed and sustained. 
Conclusion 
The model implied by all of this emphasises the combined influence of 
altered states of consciousness, performance and social interaction, in the 
development of new socially active personalities. In the context of spirit 
mediumship demonstrations, the concept of performance should not be 
taken as indicating fraudulence or trickery, instead it should be regarded as 
a culturally specified technique for the expression of nonphysical persons. 
Alterations of consciousness allow for a dissociation, to whatever degree, 
of the medium’s everyday sense of self. Through performance the medium 
is able to either bring forward previously unconscious, or previously 
filtered out, selves. These selves, or persons, require the interaction of 
other social agents to become stabilised. For the duration that the 
interaction is maintained, the newly emerged self is also a social agent; 
after the séance it is either subsumed back into the medium’s 
subconscious, or filtered out of their normal waking consciousness. 
Because different cultures recognise the presence of persons in different 
ways, different forms of personhood-expressive performance have come 
into existence. To a certain extent this model accords well with Frederic 
Myers’ model of consciousness, in which consciousness consists of at 
least two streams: the subliminal and supraliminal. Myers argued in favour 
of interpreting spirit possession as a “shifting of the psychical center of the 
personality of the [medium] himself” to allow emergences from the 
subliminal into the supraliminal: 
I propose to extend the meaning of the term [subliminal] [...] to make it 
cover all that takes place beneath the ordinary threshold, or say, if 
preferred, outside the ordinary margin of consciousness; not only those 
faint stimulations whose very faintness keeps them submerged, but much 
else which psychology as yet scarcely recognises; sensations, thoughts, 
emotions, which may be strong definite, and independent, but which, by 
the original constitution of our being, seldom emerge into that supraliminal 
current of consciousness which we habitually identify with ourselves.36 
                                                           
36 Myers: 13-14. 

Chapter Twenty-four 
 
400
Myers did not deny the possibility that external, nonphysical influences 
might be at play in mediumistic states and argued that his theory of the 
subliminal mind, which differs from the Freudian notion of the 
unconscious in its inclusion of aspects external to the individual, provided 
a framework for understanding such phenomena “without reducing them 
to epiphenomena of psychopathology [...] or ruling out influences beyond 
the self.”37 From this perspective the spirit personalities expressed through 
spirit mediumship performances might be interpreted, in Carl Jung’s 
terms, as “psychoid manifestations”. Jung identified the “psychoid” as a 
transcendent entity that manifests at the juncture of unconscious 
(nonphysical) and external (physical) influences.38 Like Myers’ notion of 
the subliminal mind, Jung’s conception of the unconscious also included 
aspects external to the individual’s psyche; he wrote: “a psychological 
truth is [...] just as good and respectable a thing as a physical truth 
[because] no one knows what ‘psyche’ is, and one knows just as little how 
far into nature ‘psyche’ extends.”39 
These conclusions may seem tangential from a social anthropological 
perspective, nevertheless I feel that they get right to the heart of what it is 
we are dealing with in this phenomenon. Through attempting to 
understand the mechanisms through which spirit possession operates we 
can move towards a greater appreciation of the function it performs, and 
the experiences that result from that function, in the social sphere. 
Through attempting to understand how spirit possession could be possible 
the anthropologist is moving towards a more comprehensive understanding 
of the particular culture in which the possession is taking place. Such an 
interpretation is, I feel, a useful conceptual starting point for any analysis 
of spirit mediumship and is particularly suited to anthropological 
explorations as it does not rule out “native” interpretations. Instead, it 
provides an inclusive framework that is amenable to scientific theorising 
and investigation while also being cross-culturally applicable and non-
reductive. 
                                                           
37 Taves: see also Alvarado: 23. 
38 Addison: 123. 
39 Jung: 157. 

Numinous Conversations 
401 
Bibliography 
Addison, A. (2009) “Jung, Vitalism and ‘The Psychoid’: An Historical 
Reconstruction”, Journal of Analytic Psychology, 54: 123-142. 
Alvarado, C. S. (2002) “Dissociation in Britain during the Late Nineteenth 
Century: The Society for Psychical Research, 1882-1900”, Journal of 
Trauma and Dissociation, 3.2: 9-33. 
Argyle, M. (1987) “Innate and Cultural Aspects of Human Non-verbal 
Communication” in. C. Blakemore & S. Greenfield (eds) Mindwaves: 
Thoughts on Intelligence, Identity and Consciousness (Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell). 
Bird-David, N. (1999) “‘Animism’ Revisited: Personhood, Environment, 
and Relational Epistemology”, Current Anthropology, 40 Supplement: 
67-79. 
Bowie, F. (2003) “An Anthropology of Religious Experience: Spirituality, 
Gender and Cultural Transmission in the Focolare Movement”, 
Ethnos: Journal of Anthropology, 68.1: 49-72. 
Braude, S. (2003) Immortal Remains: The Evidence for Life After Death 
(Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield). 
Bubandt, N. (2009) “Interview with an Ancestor: Spirits as Informants and 
the Politics of Possession in North Maluku”, Ethnography, 10.3: 291-
316. 
DePaulo, B.M. (1992) “Nonverbal Behavior and Self-Presentation”, 
Psychological Bulletin, 111.3: 203-243.  
Di Nucci, C. (2009) Spirits in a Teacup: Questioning the Reality of Life 
After Death has led one Housewife Along an Adventurous Path 
Towards Discovery, www.lulu.com (accessed November 2012). 
Di Nucci, C. & Hunter, J. (2009) Charlie: Trance Communications & 
Spirit Teachings, www.lulu.com (accessed November 2012). 
Espirito Santo, D. (2011) “Process, Personhood and Possession in Cuban 
Spiritism”, In A. Dawson (ed.) Summoning the Spirits: Possession and 
Invocation in Contemporary Religion (London: I.B. Tauris & Co. Ltd.) 
93-109. 
Firth, R. (1967) “Ritual and Drama in Malay Spirit Mediumship”, 
Comparative Studies in Society and History, 9.2: 190-207. 
Gauld, A. (1982) Mediumship and Survival: A Century of Investigations 
(London: Granada Publishing Ltd). 
Goffman, E. (1990) The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (London: 
Penguin Books). 

Chapter Twenty-four 
 
402
Halloy, A. (2010) “Comments on ‘The Mind Possessed: The Cognition of 
Spirit Possession in an Afro-Brazilian Religious Tradition’ by Emma 
Cohen”, Religion and Society: Advances in Research, 1: 164-176. 
Hughes, D. J. (1991) “Blending with an Other: An analysis of Trance 
Channelling in the United States”, Ethos, 19.2: 161-184. 
Hunter, J. (2009) Talking With the Spirits: An Experiential Exploration of 
Contemporary Trance and Physical Mediumship (Unpublished 
Undergraduate Dissertation: University of Bristol). 
—. (2011) “Talking With the Spirits: Anthropology and Interpreting Spirit 
Communicators”, Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 75.3: 
129-142. 
—. (2012) Talking With Spirits: Personhood, Performance and Altered 
Consciousness in a Contemporary Spiritualist Home-Circle (Unpublished 
M.Litt Dissertation: University of Bristol). 
Ikäheimo, H. & Laitinen, A. (2007) “Dimensions of Personhood: Editors’ 
Introduction”, Journal of Consciousness Studies, 14.5-6: 6-16. 
Johnson, R. C. (1955) Psychical Research (Aylesbury: The English 
University Press). 
Jokic, Z. (2008) “Yanomami Shamanic Initiation: The Meaning of Death 
and Postmortem Consciousness in Transformation”, Anthropology of 
Consciousness, 19.1: 33-59. 
Jung, C. G. (2007) Psychology and the Occult (London: Routledge). 
Kelly, E. F. & Locke, R. G. (2009) Altered States of Consciousness and 
Psi: An Historical Survey and Research Prospectus (New York: 
Parapsychology Foundation).  
Klimo, J. (1987) Channeling: Investigations on Receiving Information 
from Paranormal Sources (Los Angeles: Jeremy P. Tarcher). 
La Fontaine, J. S. (1985) “Person and Individual: Some Anthropological 
Reflections” in M. Carrithers, S. Collins & S. Lukes, The Category of 
the Person: Anthropology, Philosophy, History (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press).123-140. 
Lambek, M. (1998) “The Sakalava Poiesis of History: Realizing the Past 
through Spirit Possession in Madagascar”, American Ethnologist, 25.2: 
106-127. 
Mauss, M. (1985) “A Category of the Human Mind: The Notion of 
Person; The Notion of Self” in M. Carrithers, S. Collins & S. Lukes, 
The Category of the Person: Anthropology, Philosophy, History 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press) 1-26. 
Murray, D. W. (1993) “What is the Western Concept of the Self? On 
Forgetting David Hume”, Ethos, 23: 3-23. 

Numinous Conversations 
403 
Myers, F. W. H. (1903 [1992]) Human Personality and its Survival of 
Bodily Death (Norwich: Pelegrin Trust). 
O’Connor, K. P. & Hallam, R. S. (2000) “Sorcery of the Self: The Magic 
of You” Theory & Psychology, 10.2: 238-264. 
Placido, B. (2001) “‘It’s All To Do With Words’: An Analysis of Spirit 
Possession in the Venezuelan Cult of María Lionza”, Journal of the 
Royal Anthropological Institute, 7.2: 207-224. 
Sax, W. S. (2002) Dancing the Self: Personhood and Performance in the 
Pandav Lila of Garhwal (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
Smith, K. (2012) “From Dividual and Individual Selves to Porous 
Subjects”, Australian Journal of Anthropology, 23.1: 50-64. 
Sökefeld, M. (1999) “Debating Self, Identity, and Culture in 
Anthropology”, Current Anthropology, 40.4: 417-448. 
Spanos, N. P., et al. (1991) “Secondary Identity Enactments During 
Hypnotic Past-Life Regression: A Sociocognitive Perspective”, Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 61.2: 308-320. 
—. (1994) “Multiple Identity Enactment and Multiple Personality Disorder: 
A Sociocognitve Perspective” Psychological Bulletin, 116.1: 143-165. 
St. Clair, D. (1971) Drum and Candle: Accounts of Brazilian Voodoo and 
Spiritism (New York: Bell Publishing Co.). 
Stoller, 
P. 
(1994) 
“Embodying 
Colonial 
Memories”, 
American 
Anthropologist, 96.3: 634-648. 
Taves, A. (1999) Fits, Trance and Visions: Experiencing Religion and 
Explaining Experience from Wesley to James (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press). 
Turner, V. (1985) On the Edge of the Bush: Anthropology as Experience 
(Tucson: University of Arizona Press). 
 

CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE 
THE CALL OF THE SPIRIT: 
THE TRAINING AND PRACTICE  
OF SANGOMAS IN RELATION  
TO AN ASTROLOGER’S VOCATION 
DARBY COSTELLO 
 
 
 
During the 1970s I spent a great deal of my time with tribal healers and 
diviners—also known as sangomas—of various tribes in Southern Africa. 
During this time with the sangomas, I was concurrently developing my 
own consultation practice as an astrologer. As they spoke about their 
developed relationship with the spirits—their ancestors—I gradually 
became aware that I was also “in touch” with something “other” than my 
normal intelligence and perceptions when I was reading an astrological 
chart for a client. Over time it became obvious that we were both standing 
as 
intermediaries 
between 
something 
impersonal—an 
“uncanny 
perception”—and something very personal, i.e. the needs and concerns of 
a person in front of us who had sought our assistance—and we were both 
in service to this task. 
The sangomas had been drawn to a small museum in Johannesburg 
because of two unusual and extraordinary men who were associated with 
it. It was called The Museum of Man and Science, and one of the men was 
Adrian Boshier, the field officer of the museum, who had been a protégé 
of Raymond Dart, the paleoanthropologist who named the controversial 
Australopithecus africanus. This was considered for a time to be the 
“missing link” and is still today thought to be an important piece in the 
story of the emergence of our species in Africa so long ago. The other was 
Credo Mutwa, a great Zulu sangoma, teacher, author and wise man, who is 
still alive today, in his nineties, and still living in South Africa. 
Adrian had come to Africa from England with his parents when he was 
seventeen and had, almost immediately, gone into the bush, feeling a pull 

The Call of the Spirit 
405 
that he could not resist. He had fallen in love with Africa through stories 
he had read as a child, and had a particular gift for relating to natural 
phenomena, attuning himself to nature. This had been encouraged by his 
step-father and a teacher at one of the schools he attended. Also, from the 
age of about ten, he had been subject to periodic epileptic attacks and in 
these attacks he often made uncanny statements. This unusual combination 
of traits, as I shall explain, gave him unique access to the people he met in 
the bush, both black and white. He spent a great deal of time with the 
tribespeople. He walked alone in the bush and because of his unique 
relationship to snakes, he became known amongst the tribespeople as 
“Rradinoga”—father of the snakes. He got to know many sangomas 
throughout Southern Africa and was even considered a sangoma by most 
of those he met—which was unheard of for a white man at that time. He 
found himself more at home in the bush than in the town, though he said 
he had to return to the town to get his “balance” back again.1 
Early on in Soweto Adrian met Credo Mutwa,2 who was already 
recognised as a great sangoma with a most powerful intellect. They 
formed an association that proved rich and fruitful for both of them and for 
many others as well. They had many adventures together and at some 
point decided that they needed to record and transcribe as much of the 
knowledge and practices of the sangomas as they possibly could, as it was 
being lost in the encroaching modernisation or westernisation of 
traditional life. The museum was a perfect place to centre such an 
endeavour. Credo lived in Soweto and although he knew some fine 
sangomas there—such as Dorcas, whom I will introduce later—he saw 
many young ones come back to the city after their training in the bush and 
observed how they got lost in the fast city life, without a binding 
community to hold them to their vocation. He was very disturbed by the 
young witchdoctors who, after their training, got lost—drinking, messing 
around, harming themselves and gradually destroying their access to the 
ancestors. 
In the bush villages the sangomas had containers. By this I mean that 
their rural traditional life gave them a place in their communities. When 
they were “called” by the spirits, they went for training and then normally 
went back home and had a place in village life, even though they were 
always outsiders by virtue of being sangomas. But they had a valued place 
and were honoured, respected, even feared—depending on their natures 
and personalities. Those who were called to the spirits in Soweto—the 
                                                           
1 See Watson for a fuller story of Adrian’s journey with the African spirits. 
2 At the time I knew Credo, he had already published two books: see Mutwa 1964; 
1966. 

Chapter Twenty-five 
 
406
SOuth-WEst-TOwnship next to Johannesburg—often had to leave to find 
their teachers in the bush villages. When they returned, they did not have 
the traditional container, and so it was easy to get lost. As they got lost, so 
did their tradition. Credo may have seen the museum as a potential 
container, as a place where not only their traditions could be saved, but 
also where they could gather together regularly to renew their associations 
with each other and with their spirits (as the sangomas who lived in tribal 
villages did regularly). In any case, that is what happened during the years 
I was there. There was a significant moment at one of these gatherings in 
the late 1970s when Credo thanked Adrian and those who worked with 
him for creating such a good home for the Soweto sangomas. 
Let me tell you how I arrived there. There was a particular kind of 
freedom for many of my generation in America, when we were young in 
the 1960s. It meant that I was able to study psychology, philosophy and 
theology at a fine women’s college in New York, get a job for the summer, 
and then travel around Europe and later Central America before deciding 
what to do next. On my travels I stumbled across astrology, and ended up 
in California before returning to further my studies in Massachusetts on 
the East Coast, where I had heard there were some good astrology 
teachers. In doing so I gave up, painfully and reluctantly, the conventional, 
planned next step of a Master’s degree in psychology. I wept in a field in 
Vermont for some days, and then went into my friends’ house and said, 
“I’m going to find someone who can teach me astrology”. Astrology had 
touched my soul in a way that psychology had not, and I now knew that 
there were two schools of astrology in Boston which were considered to be 
the best. 
For two and a half years I studied astrology, first with Frances Sakoian 
and Louis Acker, and then with Isobel Hickey. Frances and Louis ran 
something akin to a school, while Isobel had a gathering of people around 
her and here there was a sense of the sacred. To fund this study, I worked 
as a secretary in the psychiatry clinic at M.I.T. (Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology) in Cambridge, Massachusetts. At the end of 1970, I felt the 
need to travel again. I was still searching for something, too aware of an 
inner longing and an inner pain that nothing seemed to touch. One of the 
psychiatrists suggested that since I was free and was interested in 
conventional psychology and “unconventional” astrology, why not go to 
Africa and find some witchdoctors? He said that he understood that they 
were the psychiatrists of tribal Africa, and that they might have knowledge 
that would add to my investigation of the psyche and the world. They 
might also know something about the inner longing and pain that I spoke 
to him about, which had never been touched or mirrored by anyone I had 

The Call of the Spirit 
407 
met or anything I had read. I took him seriously, and wrote to a young 
South African I had met while travelling in Europe, and he said, “Come on 
down”. 
When I arrived in South Africa, in mid 1971, I began doing 
astrological charts for people almost immediately. On a trip to Botswana 
on the back of a motor cycle, I met Adrian, who was visiting friends there. 
We talked non-stop for seven or eight hours but in the morning he had 
gone. However, he left a message inviting me to come to the museum 
when I returned to Jo’burg, and I did. Within months I was working at the 
museum with Adrian, who told me his and Credo’s wish to save the 
disappearing traditions. He said that Credo would appear at some point 
and if he agreed, we would look for funding to begin. Credo arrived after a 
month or two and immediately said to Adrian something like “you’ve 
found someone to do it”. He said he could see that I was working with my 
spirits and even though they were “different spirits to the sangomas”, it 
might work. 
Credo brought Ndlaleni Cindi to the museum. She was a gifted, newly-
trained Swazi sangoma, who was losing her way in the wild life of 
Soweto. Credo was worried about those who had been called and then 
trained, who were trying to live the highly ritualised daily life required by 
sangomas, but without the traditional structures. He was particularly 
worried about Ndlaleni, who was back in Soweto with no safe containing 
community. She was so sensitive and so wild, so talented, and he wanted 
her to be able to use her gifts, not destroy herself and them. 
Credo and Adrian set up a meeting where Ndlaleni and I “read each 
other’s spirit”—she threw the bones for me and I read her chart. From that 
day we were companions in the work of gathering the traditions and 
knowledge of the sangomas. In the course of time she brought her aunts, 
Dorcas and Lena, who became my main sources of knowledge, wisdom 
and delight. There were many others too, and for seven years I worked 
with them, recording and transcribing the traditions and practices of the 
sangomas, who were drawn to the museum for one reason or another. 
Although I never lost the sense of longing and inner pain, I learned a way 
to understand it and to respect it as part of being a certain kind of person. 
Lena once told me it was the price of a particular type of gift. 
Fighting the spirits 
One of the first things I learned was that the call to become a sangoma was 
not something anyone wanted. They fought it with all their might, and the 
ones that fought it most were usually the best in the end. But they also had 

Chapter Twenty-five 
 
408
to know when to stop fighting and give in. If they never gave in, they went 
mad or even died. They seemed to have to fight it right to the edge, and 
then know when to give in. Then the ancestors that came were very 
powerful. 
When I learned about how they were unable to live their ordinary lives, 
about their mental and physical illnesses and the edge they got to before 
they gave in and found a teacher, I remembered my own distress at having 
to go away from the world of my friends and companions who were going 
on to get research degrees, to marry and have children. I had felt the 
turning away from the life of my own tribe. Choosing to study astrology 
was almost acceptable in the ‘60s, and there were a lot of us “dropping 
out”. But it was also a leaving behind of something that felt normal and 
therefore safe. How many of us have come across astrology and been 
pulled out of a conventional life to the consternation of friends and family? 
Perhaps that is part of the longing of many in our communities, to gain 
credibility from the world. Personally, I cherish the outsider perspective, 
although I do suffer the “slings and arrows” that come from those who do 
not honour our art! Again, that seems to be part of the price of such a gift. 
The calling 
Let me speak about the ways in which people are called to the spirits. The 
calling almost always begins with illness. Lena had only three weeks of 
calling, but her illness was horrible and incredibly painful. Elizabeth had 
been a nurse for seven years when the call came. When it does come, you 
get less and less able to ignore it—you start having dreams, and going 
crazy. The dreams, at some point, start driving you crazy, or an ancestor 
comes in a vision or a dream and says, “Go; find a teacher”. If you do, 
then you’re OK. Sometimes, the teacher you find is nasty and mean and 
horrible, but they still train you. Sometimes the teacher is wonderful. 
Dorcas’ father was a Methodist minister, and Credo had a similar 
background—father a Methodist minister and mother a traditional wife. 
Both Credo and Dorcas had a great deal of trouble because of their 
backgrounds. Dorcas found it very painful to leave the Christian 
community, which she loved. She spoke about Jesus a lot, and she found 
being a sangoma a great trial. But she was a wonderful teacher and people 
came to her from all over Southern Africa to train, even though, or perhaps 
because, she was in Soweto. She had a warm heart and a soft spot for 
Adrian with his troublesome spirit and his deep knowledge of bushcraft 
and spirit work—they had much mutual respect and their conversations 
were profound and also wildly funny. But she had a sense of sorrow about 

The Call of the Spirit 
409 
her, and her biggest sorrow, I think, was always that she was now an 
outsider to her Christian community. 
Each of the women I knew had a difficult story to tell. Always the 
illness, the disturbance, the increasing mental disturbance, the dreams and 
then the demands. Lena’s grandfather said to her in a vision or a dream, 
“You go now and find a teacher, or I kill you. You’re dead tomorrow.” I 
saw people die who did not go for training, who did not listen to their 
ancestors when they came in visions or dreams. Lena listened to her 
grandfather and went. 
Ndlaleni was a bit wild, going through a lot of things, and starting to 
get ill. Over a period of years she got more and more physically and 
mentally distressed until the last year she could not work at all. She said: 
I could not work, my hands were so painful, I could hardly lift anything 
from the floor. My knees were loose, there wasn’t a place on me that was 
placid. My head was always aching, the eyes were also sore. I could not 
wash. My body was bent over. Every part of me was sore. I went to the 
white doctors. They could not tell me what was wrong with me. I even 
went to the Bantu medical doctors. They could do nothing for me. They 
gave me a lot of muti—medicine—but the muti did nothing for me. 
The conversation continued: 
Darby: Did you tell them what the trouble was?  
Ndlaleni: I could not tell them. I could not tell them because I myself did 
not know what was wrong with me.  
Darby: How long did this go on?  
Ndlaleni: It went on many years. Not one year, but many years. There 
came a time when I sat down and I was unable to do anything. I sat down 
until a year was nearly ended. And in the end I could not work at all. (She 
was employed as a domestic servant at the time).. 
Darby: Were you having dreams at this time, during the great sickness? 
(They call it the great sickness) 
Ndlaleni: Yes, there were many. 
Darby: What did you dream about? 
Ndlaleni: I used to dream about beads, such as the ones I’m wearing now. I 
used to dream about the cloth that I’m now sleeping on. 
Darby: Did you never even buy these things? 
Ndlaleni: I did not buy them. I just dreamt.3 
Then one day her grandfather visited her in a dream and said, “You must 
get trained,” and he told her where to go. It was far from Johannesburg, 
deep in the bush. Ndlaleni said her teacher was “so primitive”, because 
                                                           
3 This conversation was recorded and transcribed by the author in June 1972. 

Chapter Twenty-five 
 
410
when the husband of the teacher had met his wife, she only wore skins. 
But she had become more sophisticated; partly through her husband and 
probably also because she was dealing with young people coming to her 
from Soweto. I do not know how it started, but some were now coming to 
her from the cities. She stayed with her teacher for about two years, and 
this is what happened. 
The training 
Ndlaleni left her home in Soweto one day and arrived there days later, in 
the night. Later she told me that she had bought the beads she had dreamt 
about just before leaving and was wearing them as she travelled. Her 
teacher heard her coming across the fields (Ndlaleni was probably singing) 
and had prepared herself, as she had expected her, probably from a dream. 
When Ndlaleni knocked on the door of the thatched hut, a drum started 
beating. Ndlaleni entered, and her teacher said, “You come”. She stayed 
for three years and she was very fortunate, because her teacher was 
wonderful. This woman took her wild mind and brought it back from the 
place of the ancestors, the place of the spirits. These are places of terror, 
unless you have a good guide, a good training. Those of you who have 
astral travelled, without wanting to, know what I am talking about here. 
Ndlaleni had a good guide, a good teacher, who brought her back to health 
again by giving her good food, sound rituals, and by giving care and 
attention to her body and her mind, her sleeping and her dreams. Once she 
had guided her student, her twasa, back into a safer place inside herself, 
she then began the teaching. One of the most important things is to learn 
how to listen to one’s dreams. So Ndlaleni was awakened every few hours 
during the night and asked “What are you dreaming? What are you 
dreaming now?” After some time she acquired the habit of waking herself 
after each dream, then her teacher began teaching her how to listen to and 
read her dreams.  
Dorcas was very good at understanding and interpreting dreams. She 
said there were three levels of dreams. Firstly, the ordinary day-to-day 
stuff, a sort of processing of the day; secondly, those giving clues about 
patients who will be coming the next day—clues as to what they might 
need from you; and thirdly, the prophetic kind. The twasas (or trainee 
sangomas) are held and led by their own talents. One might show a talent 
for recognising herbs and how they might be useful with various 
complaints, so, if the teacher is wise and generous, he or she will send this 
one to an herbalist for deeper training. Another twasa might be particularly 
adept at understanding dreams, so the teacher will focus on that skill, or 

The Call of the Spirit 
411 
send the student to someone adept at that. A third might show a gift at 
reading the bones, and so on. The kind of teaching you receive does 
depend on the teacher you are led to—some are kind and some are not, 
some are generous and others are not. But the assumption is that 
whichever teacher you are sent to, then you must trust your spirits that it is 
the teacher who can give you the right education for your own spirit. 
Twasas often have a look of distress when they are new, for the 
distress they came in with takes time to ease as they are held and contained 
by their teacher. Slowly they come back together again, inside themselves, 
through the training. Whenever we visited a sangoma whose twasas were 
being taught to divine we were asked to hide something in the room, or 
even outside. One or another would be called in and asked to find the 
object. This was a test for the apprentice, and one of them once told me, 
after she had been through initiation and was now practising, that when 
they saw visitors arriving they would run off so as not to be called to the 
test! The practice of finding objects begins as a sort of guessing game. The 
twasa asks questions such as: is it smaller than a refrigerator? Is it bigger 
than a flea? Is it at the back of the house? Is it outside? And each time they 
ask that, you say “sia vuma”—I hear you”. You say it louder or softer, 
depending on how close they are to the truth. So if it is smaller than a 
fridge you say “sia vuma” in a loud voice, or if it is not, you say it in a soft 
voice, and so on. The twasa starts listening more and more attentively, and 
the better they get at listening, the harder it gets, and the clues get fewer, 
so that, in the end, they learn to do it without any clues at all, by listening 
to their spirits. 
Getting there 
Eventually, when they have been brought back to health and have woven 
the rituals into their daily lives and when they can finally divine without 
any obvious clues, their spirits come and tell them that they’re ready to go 
through initiation. Preparations are made, people are invited from afar, and 
the day begins with the teacher hiding something, often before they are 
even awake. On Ndlaleni’s initiation day her teacher hid the rising sun—
and she hid it in her mind. That is how good she thought Ndlaleni was—
and Ndlaleni found it! An earlier time, not long before the end of her 
training, she had hidden an airplane that had flown overhead, before 
Ndlaleni had got up. She hid it in her mind; and Ndlaleni found it. When 
Credo brought her to the museum that day to meet me, Adrian hid 
something for her, so she could show her spirit. It was the skin of a goat, 
and he hid it in the back of a truck, in the house next door to the museum. 

Chapter Twenty-five 
 
412
After our encounter, she started going into trance, and suddenly she was 
up and running across to the other house, and she jumped up into the truck 
and found the skin. She kept it as the gift that it was. She was very, very 
good. 
Return 
Normally, after training, the newly-fledged sangoma goes back to her 
village (most of the sangomas we worked with were women) where she is 
reintegrated into the tribe in her new role. This may be easy or difficult, 
depending on her spirit, personality, age and temperament. But in Soweto, 
it was very unpredictable. Christianity had been fighting the old ways of 
the ancestors for some time and it had a powerful foothold there. Modern 
medicine too had come to Soweto and the sangomas were in an odd 
position, as both priests and healers. They were used constantly, but in a 
more hidden way, with respect and fear, but with something new too—for 
they were now in competition with the modern healers, the Western-
trained medical people. The people who sought help or healing and who 
were affiliated to the churches, or who wished to be modern, did not 
always want to admit their ongoing allegiance to the ancestors and their 
mediators, the sangomas. 
During the years I was recording and transcribing everything I saw and 
heard, we were invited to many ceremonies, gatherings and events, both in 
Soweto and in various parts of Southern Africa. Often these were 
ceremonies for a twasa’s “coming out”. But there were other reasons for 
gathering too—sometimes a dream came to the sangomas and told them, 
“it is time”. These gatherings happened frequently—we were constantly at 
events where bones were being thrown both publicly and on the side, 
divinations made, and trances evoked. 
The bones were collected after you had been initiated. You had to 
travel “the four corners of the world” if you were a bone diviner and on 
your travels you would find “bones”—which were actually also shells, 
sticks, sometimes even bottle caps, or buckles found on the ground—
whatever spoke to the newly fledged sangoma walking their way on their 
journey. Each item had a specific meaning. I noticed that many sangomas 
seemed to be able to see what each other’s bones were saying—at least to 
some degree. But everyone had their own way of reading as well. Many of 
the sangomas I worked with did not read bones, they went into trance and 
divined directly. But Credo was a master at reading the bones. He got me 
to stay in Africa, he got me to tear up my ticket back to Europe because of 
how well he read the bones for me. He saw clearly what I had experienced 

The Call of the Spirit 
413 
before arriving in Africa and what I was returning to. He saw what I was 
suffering and what I would keep and experience by staying. 
I absorbed so much wisdom during my time with the sangomas. A 
wonderful sangoma named Robert Tshabalala once said something that 
has stayed with me ever since. We were in Soweto in the baking heat, and 
Adrian had gone into the house of a man who hated him, for reasons I now 
cannot remember—I think Adrian had stopped him from doing something 
that he had wanted to do, something Adrian thought was wrong. Adrian 
had blocked his energy, and in a public way. While he was in the house, I 
sat with Robert outside, for we were on our way to another sangoma. It 
was very hot and we were quiet and it was taking longer than was 
comfortable. I said to Robert, “I’m really worried, Adrian is in there with 
that sangoma and that man hates him—he’s his enemy.” Robert said to 
me, “Da, it’s very good to have enemies, very good. Rradinoga is very 
powerful because he has white enemies and black enemies. But the secret 
of having enemies is that you never do anything to harm them—ever. 
Your power is massive then. Rradinoga is safe with that man because he 
won’t do anything to harm his enemy.” There was something about 
holding the hatred and being very still with it, not activating it, not hiding 
from it, not fighting it. Very powerful. 
There was something else that touched me deeply. The sangomas I 
knew all suffered various degrees of sensitivity, distress, physical ailments 
and difficulty with people so much of the time. However, they never 
seemed to blame other people for this. Their closest relationship was with 
their spirits. The following is taken from my notes in 1974: 
Dorcas has had twasas who have given her great trouble—she has taken in 
their pain and worked with them for months at a time. They have kicked 
her and hit her and sorely tried her patience again and again. Yet her 
response is always, “Oh my spirit is so troublesome giving me this patient 
who kicks me” and never, “Oh this patient is so terrible for kicking me”... 
they lay the burden of their ills at the door of the spirits, and not at the feet 
of other human beings as so many of us are wont to do. They are 
sangomas, they are the representatives of the spirits on earth, here to do 
their bidding. Their first relationship is with their own spirits and this gives 
a balance within them that makes them healthy human beings, no matter 
what ill befalls them. 
There were so many different personalities. I remember Edith, another 
sangoma, who was rather scary—she she used to pull me aside and tell me 
about all sorts of potions, especially sex potions: “you know Da, when 
they come to you and they’re worried about their husbands”, or “you know 
when men come to you and they’re worried about, you know.” and she 

Chapter Twenty-five 
 
414
would tell me recipes for various potions. She was interested in secrets, 
secret potions and herbs. 
There was also Grace in a trance—her head would move so fast I 
thought it would come off! Next to her, Elisabeth—she was wonderful. 
She would go into such a deep trance that she could not get out. She would 
then talk for the whole community, remaining in trance for a very long 
time. At some point in this gathering, they called Dorcas because Dorcas 
was the one who could pull her out and bring her back. 
Once we went to another sangoma’s village—we called her MaPedi, 
and I felt a great kinship with her even though we only met a few times. I 
was in the hut with her and with her people for hours one night, late into 
the night, and she was “seeing” for one person after another, for hours. 
Suddenly, about four in the morning, the drum stopped and it went very 
quiet. She had been seeing for so many hours. It was quiet for some 
minutes and then she looked up and found me across the hut and she said, 
“Da, you see why I want die.” And I went across the room and knelt in 
front of her and said, said with all my heart, “Yes, Ma, I see why you want 
die.” Credo had once told me early on that when you get too close to the 
spirits, you want to die. One had to be very careful with the spirits. 
The gatherings 
There was something about the ceremonial gatherings that touched me 
deeply. What happened at every ceremony was the dancing and this is my 
most powerful memory, the dancing. They danced from sunset to sunrise, 
all night the drums going and the dancing bringing on the trance. 
Everybody seeing for everybody else—everybody listening to their 
ancestors, talking with their ancestors, and helping each other out. 
Periodically a sangoma would be told by his or her spirits to offer 
sacrifice to the ancestors, and that meant a party for all the sangomas for 
miles around. A beast would be killed and turned into food for the 
ancestors and for the sangomas present and the eating and dancing would 
go on for days sometimes. Whenever we were in remote villages, 
sangomas came from miles and miles to the ceremonies. We must have 
added a certain excitement, something unusual, centred around Adrian and 
his powerful African spirit in a white man’s body. These gatherings 
brought the sangomas together with each other and their ancestors through 
the sacrificing together, the calling on their ancestors for each other, the 
renewing of friendships and probably enmities. Afterwards they all went 
back to their villages to do their work of healing, divining, finding, fixing, 

The Call of the Spirit 
415 
holding and navigating the space between the world of the spirits and the 
world of living beings, if I can put it that way. 
We astrologers also do this, we gather together at conferences, we have 
our own, unstated, rituals. We come together, we eat together, we dance 
together, we offer our work to each other, we read each other’s charts, help 
each other, we renew friendships and enmities. We nourish and exhaust 
each other and ourselves and we go back to our homes and do our work of 
reading charts, writing articles and books. We work with our spirits and 
live with our calling. 
Once in Norway at a conference, I met a man who was an astrologer 
and also something of a shaman. We spoke of our experiences in those 
communities where the ancestors were honoured and intuitive skills were 
honoured and honed to a high degree. He said, “Do you think these 
astrology conferences we have are something like the gatherings of the 
sangomas and the shamans, where we come together to meet and dance 
and exchange information and experiences—then go home renewed, to do 
our lonely work?” Perhaps not all of us feel our work is lonely, but at that 
moment I knew just what he meant—we have to hold faith with our 
vocation, stay as clear as we can, serve others with our art, day after day. 
Of course we now have easy travel and the internet to stay in touch with 
each other, but still, the coming together plays a vital role in our work. I do 
think that the physical coming together has a deep place in our world, 
whether we like it or not. 
Sangomas and astrologers 
So the calling of the sangoma comes with illness—mental and physical—
and the dreams come, and then a teacher is revealed and you must go to 
that teacher or suffer serious consequences. Once you find your teacher, 
the training begins immediately, with the healing of the body and the 
mind. Those who find their teachers are taught to take care of their bodies 
with herbs and rituals, and to attend to the dreams that come. They get into 
a daily practice that involves, we might say, purifying the mind and body. 
Then the training is directed to getting the psyche that has been blasted 
open to close and to open, but this time with purpose. The psyche becomes 
like an aperture, which under certain circumstances can open to the spirits, 
the ancestors of a distressed person, for the purposes of healing. It is not 
about ancestor worship—it is about letting the ancestors through so they 
can help their families, the sangoma being a conduit. 
Ndlaleni and I, and Dorcas and Lena and so many others, spoke 
together for hours and hours at a time for nearly seven years, and I wrote 

Chapter Twenty-five 
 
416
most of it down. I was doing charts, and then spending the rest of my time 
with them, writing everything down for the museum. I constantly asked 
them questions, not just about their traditions, but about how they dealt 
with people who came to them for divination. I was doing charts every 
day, and they were my “elders”, my chosen “supervisors”—though we 
never thought about it like that. We just sat and talked and talked. I think 
what they taught me most of all was how to be attentive, how to pay 
attention to my inner voice, my spirit, while paying attention to my clients 
at the same time. They never thought of me as a sangoma—I was an 
astrologer, my spirits were the stars. Nobody told me I was a sangoma. 
Credo gave me the name Nozinkanyezi meaning “girl-child of stars”, 
though in private, they all called me Da. We would sit for hours and hours 
and I would say, “what do you do when a woman does this?” or “what do 
you do when a man comes to you and this happens?” I would ask them 
how to deal with the many kinds of people who came to me and who came 
to them. 
I think astrologers are “called” to their vocations too, and each of us 
needs some sort of community to support that calling. As astrologers we 
are outsiders; we are in service to a calling that is not recognised in the 
conventional communities we inhabit. Our conventional religions and our 
conventional paradigms of reality—let us say the secular materially-based 
reality principles of our contemporary Western culture—do not support 
(and in fact are often hostile to) that which we are called to do. Of course 
people come from every walk of life to us, but like the sangomas in 
Soweto, we have needed to find our own communities to reanimate our 
vocations. Perhaps what we call “conferences” fulfils the same role as the 
sangomas’ gatherings, in the same way as our astrology schools and their 
open days and summer schools. 
There is no question but that the sangomas informed my own practice 
as an astrologer in obvious and less obvious ways. When I came up here to 
the northern hemisphere, my method of reading charts was to ask myself, 
before asking any questions, what I was seeing in the chart? Dorcas once 
asked me, “Darby, why do white doctors ask so many questions before 
telling us what is wrong? Can’t they see with their spirits?” When 
someone comes to me for a reading I am aware of entering what I call 
“sacred space”. I indicate that to the person in front of me in one way or 
another, depending on how they seem able to understand the concept. 
The differences between the vocation of the sangomas and that of 
astrologers are greater than the similarities, though the similarities are 
powerful. We are outsiders—though so many of us are seeking to be more 
insiders these days. We are mostly “called” to our work—though the path 

The Call of the Spirit 
417 
is usually less intense, and few would say they were called to astrology 
through illness. Nor would they say they were dragged into it through their 
dreams and unbearable psychic pain. We have our gatherings but many of 
us do not want to be part of that—we keep separate, and are uncomfortable 
with the community of astrologers, with the rough and tumble of it. But 
still, we are called, we have our rituals, we try to stay clear and clean 
enough for our work. Probably we defend our vocation more than the 
sangomas against the onslaught of the material world, but perhaps they 
have even less choice than we do about following it. 
There are many differences, but this astrologer learned so much from 
them about the sacredness of the connection with something outside the 
conventional vocabulary and perception, and the duty to attend it with 
respect and consideration. The most powerful thing, undoubtedly, was 
how to create sacred space, to recognise it, and to lead a life that honours 
this sacred space as central to it. For in the sacred space it is possible to 
access something for the service of others—that is what the sangomas 
were there for, and that is what I think we are here for too. 
Bibliography 
Mutwa, V. C., (1964) Indaba My Children (Johannesburg, South Africa: 
Blue Crane Books (Pty) Ltd.). 
—. (1966) Africa is my Witness (Johannesburg, South Africa: Blue Crane 
Books (Pty) Ltd.). 
Watson, L. (1982) Lightning Bird: the Story of one Man’s Journey into 
Africa’s Past (New York: E.P. Dutton). 
 

AND 
 
 
 
Fig. 26- 1 Spi
 
Referring in
of his spirit 
the crucial 
produce, but
                    
1 © Zoë Brân
CHA
SPIR
ALTER
THE DEV
irit Self in Bone
n Dreams Mem
teacher, Carl 
insight that t
t which produ
                     
n. 
APTER TW
RIT AND 
RED CON
VELOPME
ZOË B
 
e Mask1 
mories and Re
Jung wrote: “
there are thin
uce themselve
                  
WENTY-S
SHAMAN
NSCIOUSN
ENT OF C
BRÂN 
eflections to th
“Philemon […
ngs in the ps
es and have th
SIX 
N: 
NESS  
CREATIVI
 
he personal ex
…] brought ho
syche which 
heir own life. P
ITY 
xperience 
me to me 
I do not 
Philemon 

Spirit and Shaman 
419 
represented a force which was not myself”.2 This simple comment offers a 
profound explanation of one possible form of interaction between the seen 
and unseen, between the incarnate and disincarnate and what has been 
called “ordinary” and “non-ordinary” reality.3 This is the basis of the 
shamanic journey as I understand it: the use of my psyche, consciousness, 
free-soul, however one chooses to describe it, as a tool to step out of self 
and access what lies beyond the personal; to meet face-to-face those 
“things” which Jung describes as producing themselves and having their 
own life. 
Jung uses the word “psyche” in an attempt to describe that aspect or 
part of self which meets the numinous Philemon, but does this explain 
what may be inexplicable? The shamanic journey itself can be seen as 
occurring within the fluid field of emotion, and the narrative that emerges 
from the journey as being in the language of spirit: that is, the language of 
feeling in the broadest sense of that word. Moving from “normal” 
consciousness to an altered state of consciousness can be viewed simply as 
an intensification of emotion; by intensifying emotion the ego sense of self 
diminishes and “the separation between self and the environment can 
temporarily disappear”4 through an identification phenomenon described 
by Grof in which the individual ceases to exist and becomes “merged” 
with everything from individual cells to the evolutionary process itself.5 
Anthropologist Michael Harner, deviser of Core Shamanism, 
distinguishes between simple altered consciousness and the “shamanic 
state of consciousness” which: “involves not only a ‘trance’ or a transcendent 
state of awareness, but also a learned awareness of shamanic methods and 
assumptions while in such an altered state.”6 For the purposes of this 
chapter I shall use the term “altered consciousness” when describing the 
active and voluntary change of perception employed to make a shamanic 
journey. 
I made my first shamanic journey in 1998. Having little awareness of 
debates around consciousness or states of mind at that time, I came to the 
process virtually free of expectation. I assumed that personal experience 
was just that, personal; the content of my journeys was, as I understood it, 
unique to me. I became aware, listening to the experiences of others on 
courses and workshops, that there were many similarities of both form and 
content in the experience of journeying, which I considered at the time, to 
                                                           
2 Jung: 183. 
3 Harner: 21. 
4 Kalweit: 218. 
5 Grof: 129. 
6 Harner: 21. 

Chapter Twenty-six 
 
420
be due to teaching method or to cultural factors. I learned that the content 
of the journey was a teaching, a direct answer to the focussed intention 
that I took into the altered state. I asked a personal question and received a 
personal answer, or so I thought. Several years later I became interested in 
the wider field of shamanism and started exploring its universal origins in 
order more fully to contextualise my own practice. The correspondences 
between my own and others’ experience of altered consciousness, from 
prehistory to the present day, astonished and even shocked me as I saw 
and read reflections of my own journeys among early twentieth-century 
anthropological data and in rock art millennia old. This growing awareness 
of the transpersonal elements of altered consciousness prompted an 
interest in human creative development. I also started exploring the 
relationship between altered consciousness and the development of 
personal creativity, both in myself and my shamanic clients and students, 
many of whom are creative professionals. 
Spirit and shaman 
Without spirit(s) and without connection to specific personal spirit helpers 
there can be no shaman. Acknowledging this is key to understanding any 
form of shamanism as defined above. During the journey it is spirit which 
offers advice, information, help and healing. It is the energy and power of 
spirit which is used to heal, not the energy or power of the healer. In some 
traditions the shaman aims to become a hollow bone through which spirit 
passes to manifest in ordinary, everyday reality. My personal experience 
of spirit is of partnership, with myself as the very junior partner or 
facilitator. This partnership is by its nature creative, breaking down ego-
boundaries and extending the limits of the self and allowing new 
possibilities of healing and transformation to emerge. 
My own understanding of spirit and spirits is twofold. First is the 
theoretical understanding which draws on the Core Shamanic tradition in 
which I was trained: spirit is everything that exists, seen and unseen, 
known and unknown, and my own personal spirit helpers, be they human, 
animal or neither, are fragments of that “everything” presenting 
themselves to me in specific forms in order to offer specific teachings. The 
form helpers take is as much a teaching as the information and advice that 
they offer. I am a spirit inhabiting a physical body in order to have a 
human experience; the spirits I meet on my “journeys” are disembodied 
and therefore have an existential overview unavailable to me, but we are 
essentially the same, particles of infinite universal energy, fragments of all 
that is and simultaneously all and everything that is. We all are, and come 

Spirit and Shaman 
421 
from, this energy, exist within it and return to it. It is actually living this 
perspective which allows a shaman to experience the absence of separation 
between things that ordinary-reality considers very separate indeed, such 
as life and death, or health and disease. 
A second understanding is experiential and can be partially expressed 
by the lines from Jung quoted at the start of this essay. Jung’s beautifully 
lucid explanation of how it can feel to interact with spirit attempts to 
explain how that interface between the seen and the unseen manifests; 
these lines can be helpful in my teaching as the word “psyche” is one that 
many students and clients are generally familiar with. 
It would be easy to make shamanism culturally acceptable by turning it 
into a form of psychotherapy; but shamanism is not metaphor and the 
spirits are not archetypes. Shamanism is plastic in its possibilities and can 
appear to be a form of psychotherapy, but that would be a superficial 
assessment. Beneath even Core Shamanic counselling sessions is an 
astonishing, all-pervading relationship with a multiple consciousness at 
once loving and alien, wise and anarchic. 
What is the shamanic journey and who is the shaman? 
First, it is necessary to clarify the distinction between altered consciousness 
and the shamanic journey. Whilst one must alter consciousness in order to 
make the shamanic journey, this alteration does not, of itself, produce a 
shamanic experience. It is also necessary to recognise that, with reference 
to consciousness, words like “ordinary” and “altered” are highly 
subjective, because “[…] each society has its own definitions of what 
constitutes an ‘ordinary’ state of consciousness and what may be considered 
‘changed’ or ‘alternate’ states of consciousness”.7 Distinguishing the 
shamanic journey, which is defined by the purpose, the intention of the 
shaman, from other forms of spirit experience is also important. A shaman 
is a person who makes a “soul-flight” or other voluntary out of body 
“journey” for the purpose of encountering specific “spirit helpers” or 
“guides” who can offer healing, advice, insight or information on almost 
any topic imaginable. “A broader definition would include any kind of 
person who is in control of his or her state of trance […]”8 
The words “voluntary” and “control” are key to understanding 
shamanism in this context; it is not about possession, psychic/clairvoyant 
ability, or undirected entheogenic states. Instead it is an active altering of 
                                                           
7 Rock and Krippner: 53. 
8 Vitebsky: 10. 

Chapter Twenty-six 
 
422
the everyday mind, a heightening of emotional awareness and a “sending 
out” of the non-physical self. These things together, and more, constitute a 
shifting of consciousness for shamanic purposes. For the experienced 
practitioner the “journey” will be made along established visual and 
narrative routes to meet helpers and teachers who are already well-known 
to the practitioner. In theory, anyone who has the use of memory and 
recall can successfully undertake a shamanic journey. I sometimes 
describe the process of journeying to my students as having one’s 
imagination harnessed and directed by something external, or as accessing 
a transpersonal consciousness. Similarly, Noll suggests that spirit, as it 
appears in the shamanic journey, “[…] can be thought of as ego-alien 
currents that step forward from the shadows of the ‘not-I’ to introduce new 
information to the individual who cannot access this information while in 
an ordinary state of waking consciousness.”9 
Despite a recent upsurge in public interest, if one asks most passers-by 
what is a shaman, the question will evoke either a blank stare or perhaps a 
few words about Native American “medicine men” or “witchdoctors”. The 
word “sǎman” is thought to originate from the Siberian Tungusic 
language, but both its etymology and meaning are disputed.10 Possible 
translations include “the one who sees” or “the one who knows” and “one 
who is excited, moved or raised”.11 What the shaman “sees” what she is 
“moved” by during the journey is the realisation that there is no separation 
between anything that is: no separation between me writing and you 
reading these words, between life and death, between this apparently 
material reality and the non-material realities of the spirit worlds. Perhaps 
one of the most ancient and universal of human concepts, this idea of 
“oneness” is common currency in contemporary “New Age” culture and 
has been of enduring interest among scientists from Democritus to 
Eddington and Einstein. As Planck points out, science ignores inter-
relatedness at its peril “because, in the last analysis, we ourselves are part 
of nature and therefore part of the mystery we are trying to solve”.12 
However, where most of us can only think about this notion of “oneness”, 
shamans actually live it through the experience of the shamanic journey 
and direct interaction with the numinous—with spirit. 
                                                           
9 Noll: 48. 
10 Rock and Krippner: ix-x. 
11 Rock and Krippner: ix-x. 
12 Wilber: 163. 

Spirit and Shaman 
423 
Making the journey 
Both hemispheres of the brain are necessarily and actively involved in the 
process of journeying, particularly when the journey is spoken aloud: 
“Certainly there is plenty of evidence that the right hemisphere is 
important for creativity, which, given its ability to make more and wider-
ranging connections, and to think more flexibly, is hardly surprising. But 
this is only part of the story. Both hemispheres are importantly involved.”13 
When accessing the Lower or Upper worlds of the shamanic journey it 
is usually necessary to pass through a “tunnel” or “barrier” which is 
perhaps some instinctual representation of the corpus callosum and its 
function of both separation and unification. Is it possible that, as the 
journey begins, the shaman’s attention automatically redirects the primary 
cognitive process from the left cerebral hemisphere of the brain, to the 
right, through the corpus callosum; that is, from the structuring, restrictive 
left, to the visualising, expansive right? My own perception of journeying 
as a practice is that I am attempting to re-create the very nature of my own 
brain, overcoming physiological division within the hemispheres. The 
shaman’s purpose, the reason for making any journey, is indeed to bring 
into balance those things, individual or collective, organic or inorganic, 
living or dead, that are suffering or simply out of balance. These can 
include states of being, including mental, spiritual and physical ill-health. 
By bringing herself into harmony with all that is, the shaman acts as a 
conduit for healing, and the individual brain may be seen as a microcosm 
of the whole. 
In commenting on the dangers of the culturally-embedded dominance 
of the left hemisphere of the brain McGilchrist could here be describing 
the very ills that shamanism is uniquely poised to rectify: 
I suggest that it is as if the left hemisphere, which creates a sort of self-
reflexive virtual world, has blocked off the available exits, the ways out of 
the hall of mirrors, into a reality which the right hemisphere could enable 
us to understand […] the routes of escape from the virtual world have been 
closed off. An increasingly mechanistic, fragmented de-contextualised 
world, marked by unwarranted optimism mixed with paranoia and a 
feeling of emptiness, has come about, reflecting, I believe, the unopposed 
action of a dysfunctional left hemisphere.14 
                                                           
13 McGilchrist 2010: 509. 
14 McGilchrist 2009: 6. 

Chapter Twenty-six 
 
424
According to Winkleman the “Shaman’s ‘soul-flight’ provides a third-
person perspective on oneself.”15 This in turn raises the question of 
modern consciousness, particularly Western consciousness, being 
restricted by the ways in which we use our brain (and are expected to use 
it) in what is a fundamentally limited and limiting way because, according 
to Kalweit: “in our society, most people experience only an ego confined 
to a miniature private universe […] For so-called primitive people the base 
of reality is comparatively greater and has more dimensions than that of 
Western people.”16 
The journey begins when the shaman’s awareness shifts from the here 
and now and accesses worlds visible only to him. Fig. 26-2 offers an 
interpretation of the active stages that occur during the shift into altered 
consciousness: starting from visualising a real, i.e ordinary-reality Lower 
or Upper World access-place (such as a cave or a tree), to moving beyond 
memory towards “not-self”, where Jung’s “things” are experienced.17 
INTO THE JOURNEY: 
FROM “HERE” TO “THERE” 
 
↑ 
 
 
 
↓ 
 
NOT-SELF  
  MEMORY 
(WITHIN THE JOURNEY: 
(STARTING POINT: 
THE UNKNOWN)  
 
  THE KNOWN) 
↑ 
 
 
 
 ↓ 
 
IMAGINATION 
(MOVING INTO THE JOURNEY: 
BEYOND THE ‘KNOWN’) 
 
Fig. 26-2 Diagram of ecstasy18 
The form of these Lower and Upper Worlds, part of the tripartite cosmos 
that Lewis-Williams proposes is hardwired into the human neural 
circuitry, can vary with culture and tradition.19 Shamans have been called 
                                                           
15 Winkleman 2004: 200. 
16 Kalweit: 260. 
17 Jung: 183. 
18 © Zoë Brân. 
19 Lewis-Williams: 209. 

Spirit and Shaman 
425 
“the walkers between worlds”, the bridges between “here” and “there”, 
with “here” and “there” as simply concepts, even learning tools, rather 
than actual locations or states of being.20 
In most forms of shamanic journeying, including Core Shamanic 
practice, the shift from the beta state of alert awareness to the cortical theta 
state of alert hypnogogia is facilitated by the use of auditory driving, 
usually drumming, rattling or singing, which can be live or recorded. The 
positive cognitive effects of inducing theta states to produce psychological 
integration and enhanced creativity can also be reproduced and measured 
in the laboratory.21 The main rhythm used in drumming for shamanic 
purposes is typically a steady rhythm of about four to five beats per 
second. During the journey the shaman is often awake and alert, aware of 
and able to move between ordinary and non-ordinary reality as required, 
though this ability can vary from person to person.22 Hallucinogens such 
as ayahuasca are widely advertised in the West as a means to altering 
consciousness but are considered unnecessary in Core Shamanism. 
Auditory driving through percussive sound is considered a more universal 
means for altering consciousness. 23 
Altered consciousness, not-self and the origins of creativity 
The reasons for the near universality of what we can call the shamanic 
journey, from at least the Upper Palaeolithic period to the present day, are 
widely debated. In the Mind in the Cave cognitive archaeologist David 
Lewis-Williams proposes that this universality originated with the 
development of the modern human brain and concludes that: 
The sense of Absolute Unitary Being—transcendence, ecstasy—is generated 
by “spillover” between neural circuits in the brain, which is, in turn, caused 
by factors we have considered in this book—visual, auditory or tactile 
rhythmic driving, meditation, olfactory stimulation, fasting, and so forth. 
The essential elements of religion are thus wired into the brain. Cultural 
contexts may advance or diminish their effect, but they are always there.24 
Whilst this position may be accurate within its own terms, I believe it to 
be limiting, as it fails to question why such neural “spillover”, such 
“wiring”, exists at all, or what possible evolutionary reasons there might 
                                                           
20 Matthews and Matthews. 
21 Gruzelier: 1. 
22 Neher: 157. 
23 Winkelman 2010: 133.  
24 Lewis-Williams: 290. 

Chapter Twenty-six 
 
426
be for humans being programmed to perceive, or even create, the numinous. 
Describing the process of shamanic initiation, Winkleman also cites the 
neurobiological basis of the shamanic state of consciousness: “The shaman 
engages transformative process through training the neurognostic 
structures that provoke a restructuring of self at levels below conceptual 
and operational thought, acting upon the structures which support 
consciousness”.25 In The Way of the Shaman, Michael Harner offers a 
more practical response to the universality of shamanism: 
The shamanic approach to power and healing was maintained in a basically 
similar form in primitive cultures that otherwise represented radically 
different adaptations to contrasting environments and just as distinctly 
different problems of material survival […] Why, then is shamanic 
knowledge so basically consistent in different parts of the primitive world? 
I suggest the answer is simply because it works […] In my opinion, the 
low technological level of those cultures compelled their members to 
develop the highest degree possible the ability of the human mind to cope 
with serious problems of health and survival.26 
But it was not only for the practicalities of day-to-day survival that altered 
consciousness proved important for our most ancient ancestors. 
Communities which must, in contemporary terms at least, have faced 
challenges to survival, placed creativity high on their list of social 
priorities. Winkleman places the process of altering consciousness in order 
to make the shamanic journey, using singing, chanting, dancing, 
drumming or clapping, as integral to the development of creativity and 
indeed to modern human development itself: 
Shamanic practices enhanced integration of the different cognitive modules 
because shamanism stimulated activation of the intrinsic properties of the 
biologically based integrative mode of consciousness. These responses 
produced interhemispheric integration; frontal-limbic integration; brain 
stem-limbic integration; and integration across the neuraxis. Shamanic 
alterations of consciousness provided numerous adaptive consequences, 
including enhancement of representation, information integration, stress-
reduction and healing.27 
Altered consciousness makes the shamanic journey inherently transformative 
precisely because it focusses on moving beyond the inhibiting left-brain 
which McGilchrist refers to as “the enclosed system of the self-conscious 
                                                           
25 Winkleman 2004: 213. 
26 Harner: 41-42. 
27 Winkleman 2010: 79. 

Spirit and Shaman 
427 
mind”.28 Eliade’s use of the word “ecstasy”, from the Greek ek-stasis, to 
step out of, or move beyond oneself, can be easily misunderstood as 
mystical fun, but actually implies a profoundly challenging experience of 
not-self in which, I suggest, the very essence of creativity resides.29 
As Lewis-Williams points out, modern humans at the time of the 
“creative explosion” of around forty thousand years ago had the same 
brain size, nervous system and capacity for imagination that we have 
today.30 Looking at the astonishing images of Chauvet, Lascaux and 
Altamira, even in reproduction, it is not difficult to feel their power and it 
would be all too easy to assume connections between contemporary 
shamanisms and the altered states of consciousness practised by the people 
of the Upper Paleolithic era. Bednarik proposes the futility of theorising 
about the meaning and purpose of ancient art without an understanding of 
the ethnographic beliefs of its creator: 
Palaeoarts can be studied scientifically, but this is not served by striving to 
determine a quality that cannot be determined, such as meaning. We can 
either find out what else science can do, and can do properly—or we can 
abandon the rigour of science and take a shortcut to ‘meaning’, creating 
and projecting our own favoured interpretation of the art. It may involve 
shamans, metaphysics, arithmetic, lost tribes, trance visions […] [none] 
provide any insights about the rock art so interpreted, but they are always a 
revealing tool for exploring the psychology of the interpreter.31 
At the start of this chapter I wrote about my surprise at the 
correspondences that emerged between my own personal experience and 
those recorded by ethnographers and anthropologists over recent 
centuries, and also in parietal art. Bednarik’s warning regarding the 
dangers of interpretation is necessary and pertinent in an age when 
almost everything seems open to individual assessment. And it is true, of 
course, that we are unlikely ever to know the intentions of the prehistoric 
painters and sculptors around the world who left mysteries on and in 
rock. It is true that we cannot know because we do not have the science 
required to reach back in time and determine cause and motive in any 
meaningful way. The painters of Chauvet were neurologically identical 
to those of twenty-first century men and women, suggesting that our 
innate capacity for visualisation and perception of the numinous is no 
different from that of our prehistoric forebears. Is it possible therefore 
                                                           
28 McGilchrist 2009: 6. 
29 Eliade: 4. 
30 Lewis-Williams:130. 
31 Bednarik: 255. 

Chapter Twenty-six 
 
428
that when altering consciousness we might experience at least something 
of what our ancient forebears experienced and in doing so come to some 
understanding of their purpose? Is it possible that as we experience ek-
stasis, as we step beyond who we are in the ordinary everyday world of 
the twenty-first century, we access a form of perception that is unlimited 
by time or space? This question of new forms of perception has long 
been a topic of interest to physicists looking to extend not just 
knowledge but ways of knowing: 
The existing scientific concepts cover always only a very limited part of 
reality, and the other part that has not yet been understood is infinite. 
Whenever we proceed from the known into the unknown we may hope to 
understand, but we may have to learn at the same time a new meaning of 
the word “understanding”.32 
I suggest that, while there may indeed be limits of meaning imposed by 
culture and self-awareness, what the modern shaman experiences during 
altered consciousness is essentially the same as the shaman thirty-five 
thousand years ago. As Bednarik points out, assuming similarity has its 
dangers, but this works both ways. Equally, assumption of difference 
cannot be proved. 
Creativity and narrative in the shamanic journey 
The process of creativity has been defined as preparation, incubation, 
illumination and verification,33 and when considering the practicalities of 
the shamanic process (preparing for, making, analysing and utilising the 
journey) there are clearly defined similarities of process. Similarly, 
Csíkszentmihályi’s concept of creative “flow”34 which explores mental 
activity during periods of positive focussed attention (in particular the loss 
of awareness of time, desire for control and individual ego), mirror the 
shaman’s experience during the journey.35 
                                                           
32Heisenberg: 201. 
33 Wallas: 10. 
34 Csíkszentmihályi: 64. 
35 Winkelman 2010: 121. 

Spirit and Shaman 
429 
Structure of the Core Shamanic Journey 
 
The Intent (Preparation) 
↑ 
 
 
 
 
↓ 
Integration of Result 
 
The Journey 
Action   
 
(Incubation/Illumination) 
 
(Verification) 
 
↑ 
 
 
 
↓ 
 
Emotional Analysis of 
Resulting Narrative 
(Illumination) 
 
Fig. 26-3 Structure of the shamanic counselling experience36 
Narrative is at the heart of almost all shamanic experience. The journey, 
even if it does not follow a linear or chronological progress, will have a 
beginning, middle and end. The shamanic journey can be found in world 
myth and literature and includes tales as varied as Jack and the Beanstalk, 
Alice in Wonderland and the Epic of Gilgamesh.37 Biblical events, such as 
Moses’ experience with a burning bush, the stories of Jonah and the whale, 
Jacob’s ladder, and the ascension of Elijah in a whirlwind/flaming chariot, 
are just a few examples which can be read as shamanic journeys. Many of 
the best known Greek myths and works of literature, including the 
Odyssey and the story of Orpheus and Eurydice, suggest a moment in the 
development of Greek culture when shamanism was merging with 
formalised religion and where elements of both can be clearly seen, as 
gods and humans regularly turn into animals or trees. The idea that 
inspiration—the breathing in of spirit—comes from “elsewhere” and uses 
the artist to express itself is a very old one indeed: 
Great poets acknowledged that they were merely channels for the Muses. 
The Odyssey, Homer’s epic poem about the travels of the hero Odysseus 
after the fall of Troy, begins: Sing in me, Muse, and through me tell the 
story of that man skilled in all ways of contending, the wanderer, harried 
for years on end after he plundered the stronghold on the proud height of 
Troy.38 
                                                           
36 © Zoë Brân. 
37 Vitebsky: 71. 
38 Vitebsky: 69. 

Chapter Twenty-six 
 
430
Novelists, from Mary Shelley and Robert Louis Stevenson to Stephanie 
Myers, author of the recent vampire series, Twilight, describe entire plots 
forming in dreams. The voices of “unknown” characters speak to writers, 
urging them to bring them to life on the page. Some scientists claim to 
have dreamt or to have been “shown”, while dreaming of en-visioning, the 
key elements to the success of their work. Organic chemist Freidrich 
Kerkule asserted that he had a reverie, a daydream, of the benzene 
molecule as an ouroboros, a snake swallowing its own tail. He also 
claimed that his theory of structure appeared to him in a vision of dancing 
atoms.  
In the shamanic journey, the key elements—healing, help or 
information—have already been provided in that reality where altered 
consciousness has precedence. The narrative with which the shaman 
returns and which he offers the patient/client is therefore both a 
representation and re-enactment of the healing itself. Similarly, Lewis-
Williams describes the San rock art of the Drakensberg and other regions 
in southern Africa as being both on the rock and appearing to emerge 
from it as from behind a veil.39 Just as the healing narrative of the 
shaman is not merely a story but contains within it the power of the 
healing itself, Lewis-Williams proposes that the earliest images “were 
not two-dimensional representations of three-dimensional things in the 
material world […] Rather, they were “fixed” mental images. For the 
makers, the paintings and engravings were visions, not representations of 
visions […]” 40 
If, as the experience of the shaman suggests, everything both seen 
and unseen is one, then it is entirely logical that a thing can be both itself 
and something else simultaneously. Again, art, cosmos and spiritual 
experience coalesce. The San fused the “abstract” experiences of altered 
states with the materiality of the world in which they lived: “Art and the 
physical environment, as the San understood it, were inseparable.”41 
Then and now: altered consciousness and the creative self 
A recurring image around the world is that of the man/beast. 
Therianthropy, or shape-shifting, is perhaps one of the least understood 
aspects of creative transformation while in an altered state of 
consciousness, implying as it does the impossible merging of human and 
“other”. Popular culture provides the werewolf but other “shape-shifters” 
                                                           
39 Lewis-Williams: 162. 
40 Lewis-Williams: 193. 
41 Lewis-Williams: 162. 

and “skin-w
notably amo
physical cre
Scandinavia
Describin
lay as tho
a fish or D
journey o
transform
 
Fig. 26-4 “Th
Shamanic sh
Western nov
unknown. F
combining o
another aspe
be found in
transformatio
we cannot k
human “othe
represent in
possibility o
among indig
                    
42 Pijoan: 79. 
43 Eliade: 380
44 c. 13.500 B
45 Vitebsky: 1
walkers” are c
ongst the Na
eativity whic
a: 
ng Odin’s abilit
ough he were as
Dragon, and w
of Odin in an
mations of sham
he Shaman of T
hape-shifting i
vice journeye
Fig. 26-4 is 
of human/anim
ect of parietal 
n art from A
on and seeing
know. Howev
er” and the po
itiatory disme
of seeing into t
genous shaman
                     
0-381. 
BCE, Trois Frèr
18. 
Spirit and S
common in ta
ative America
h extends fr
ty to change sh
sleep or dead an
went in an instan
nimal forms m
mans into animal
 
Trois Frères”44 
is a surprising
ers, including 
particularly in
mal parts but
imagery that r
Australasia to
g into the body
ver, this mergi
ossibility of “x
emberment of
the nature of th
ns and Wester
                  
res Cave, Arieg
Shaman 
ales from all 
ans.42 Eliade r
om Central A
ape at will, Sno
nd he then beca
nt to far-off lan
may properly b
ls.43 
gly common e
students for 
nteresting as 
t also the use
reflects shama
the Arctic R
y meant for ou
ing of matter 
x-ray”, which 
f the shaman 
hings, is still w
rn practitioner
e region, Franc
over the wo
refers to this
America to A
orri writes: “his
ame a bird or a
nds” […] this e
be compared 
 
experience eve
whom the c
it shows no
e of “x-ray” d
anic experienc
Rim.45 What 
ur prehistoric 
and spirit wi
in shamanic t
by spirit and
widely preval
rs. 
ce. 
431 
rld, most 
s form of 
Asia and 
s body 
a beast, 
ecstatic 
to the 
en among 
oncept is 
ot only a 
depiction, 
e and can 
physical 
ancestors 
th a non-
terms can 
d also the 
lent today 

Chapter Twenty-six 
 
432
 
 
Fig. 26-5 Petroglyph, bison in X-ray46 
I photographed this petroglyph (tentatively dated to c.3000 BCE) at a 
remote archaeological site in South India in 2004. Subsequent research 
revealed that the image was of a buffalo in x-ray; this led me to explore 
the prevalence of x-ray images in reports of shamanic dismemberment and 
transformation.47 A few months earlier I had been given a bone mask (see 
fig. 26-1) by my Upper World teacher, and told that when I wore it I 
would “see in the dark” and see “into the nature of things”. The first thing 
I saw was a running buffalo in x-ray. I saw its organs and ribcage and the 
light of spirit that animated it. The same light illuminated my teacher and 
me. 
Over time, the surprise I experienced at discovering such correspondences 
between my own journeys and those of shamanic predecessors was 
equalled by realising that my dreams, while never feeling like a shamanic 
journey, had become problem-solving. The first time I was aware of this I 
dreamt I was falling both horizontally and vertically from a very high 
bridge. I knew that there was no way back and that falling was extremely 
undesirable. As I started to fall the thought came to me that I could fly, 
and acting on this realisation I soared up into the air away from the bridge. 
On waking I had two distinct impressions: the visceral sense of falling was 
still present in my body, but entwined with that was the profoundly self-
affirming knowledge that my unconscious mind was working creatively 
towards the positive. Now, several years later, when presented with a 
dream of falling I simply go with the sensation, knowing that I will land 
softly. 
                                                           
46 Photograph by Zoë Brân, Pansaimol, Goa, India, 2004. 
47 Vitebsky: 61. 

Spirit and Shaman 
433 
Shamanism has many purposes in my own life, but I use the journey 
and my relationship with spirit in numerous practical ways such as 
requesting guidance in new speaking or teaching situations, including 
asking for guidance on and for students or clients whom I have never met. 
I also ask for help to start projects and overcome procrastination. Perhaps 
the most memorable use of the latter was in the writing of my book 
Enduring Cuba. I returned from months of research in Cuba in February 
2001 with seventy thousand words of voice-recorded notes. The 
manuscript was due for submission in November. In May the cover of the 
book with my name on it appeared for presale on Amazon; I had not 
written a word. I was aware that what held me back was my conflicted 
feeling regarding Cuba and concerns about writing a “negative” book. 
Finally, I journeyed to ask how I could overcome these feelings and start 
to work. My Upper World teacher took me up into the sky high above the 
Earth, and as we stood there he pointed to the island of Cuba far below and 
then bent down and picked it up and handed it to me so that I held it like 
an infant. As I felt the weight of the island in my arms I was very moved 
and felt a sense of compassion and tenderness that I had not previously 
experienced in such a context. I started writing the next day.  
It is possible to alter consciousness in the shamanic journey 
specifically to explore and produce art, literature, music and performance 
as well as for business, design and education purposes. Over the past five or 
six years part of my teaching work has been with professional individuals 
and groups who wish to explore the shamanic journey specifically to 
enhance personal creativity by stepping out of “the private universe of their 
own mind”.48 The simplicity with which this is possible bears out Lewis-
Williams’ argument that the capacity to alter consciousness is innate and 
hardwired.49 Despite its unlimited practical applications however, shamanism 
is essentially a spiritual practice and through the shamanic journey insight 
into the nature of creativity, consciousness and indeed existence itself is 
available. 
In his 2010 film, Cave of Forgotten Dreams, director Werner Herzog 
explores the astonishing art of the Chauvet cave in the Ardèche region of 
France. Herzog, the film’s narrator, interviews a French archaeologist 
describing how each night he dreamt of the lions painted on the walls and 
after five days he stopped going to the cave because it caused him 
“emotional shock”. Herzog later concludes that the 35,000 year-old 
dreams of the Chauvet artists cannot be recaptured today because “they are 
                                                           
48 Kalweit: 260. 
49 Lewis-Williams: 290. 

Chapter Twenty-six 
 
434
too far away from us”.50 The experience of shamanic journeying, my own 
and others, suggests that it is only our mind and its limits, our expectations 
of normality and safety, that hinder the expansion of our vision. Whatever 
our prehistoric forbears understood or realised that we have lost or 
forgotten can surely be balanced by the very things we understand and 
realise that they did not. Our experience should be richer not poorer than 
theirs, with greater possibility and potential—which are at the very heart 
of creativity. 
In conclusion I offer an extract from the recording of a shamanic 
journey in which I ask to be shown what I needed to know at that time 
about the nature of creativity. This was one of relatively few occasions in 
which I have slept within the journey itself and been taken on as “the spirit 
of my spirit”. I understand this dream-within-a-journey, to imply a need 
for the greatest possible distance from my every day consciousness, from 
my ego, from my inert physical body, in order to fully understand the 
teaching that is being presented to me. After drinking the offered substance 
my voice slows and slurs on the recording (the headdress and mask refer 
to fig. 26-1). 
And we are walking towards his tent hand-in-hand and I say that I’ve come 
to ask to be shown what I need to know about creativity and how I should 
teach this. And we go into to his tent and inside everything seems the 
same. I can see my Buffalo headdress and the skin of the Buffalo on its 
stand in a corner of his tent and he points to this to remind me to put it on, 
so I put it on and I’m wearing the mask of bone. And I say “Can you tell 
me everything I need to know about creativity? Can you show me this 
through your eyes?” He shakes his head strongly to indicate not through 
his eyes. He opens the little chest/box that is always between us [when we 
sit facing each other] and he lifts the lid and takes out something that looks 
like a long roll of clay, and he starts shaping it into things. He makes a 
horse, and he breathes on the horse and it becomes alive, a tiny, perfect 
miniature horse; it even has a bridle. Then he takes the clay and he’s 
shaping a moon and a sun and he breathes on them and he puts them to 
hang in the air and they start to shine and the moon starts revolving around 
the sun. And he picks up the clay and now he shapes it into a bowl and he 
breathes on that and it becomes a tiny cup with liquid in it and he hands 
this to me and tells me to drink. I drink and it’s very thick and very sweet. 
Now I lie down and I’m relaxing and I fall asleep. I see some part of me 
getting up and it’s like my dream … dream self has got up. And I say 
“Why do I have to be asleep for this?” And he says “Come” and the top of 
the tent opens and we go up through it. And I can see the planet we were 
                                                           
50 Cave of Forgotten Dreams, motion picture directed by Werner Herzog (Creative 
Differences Production Inc., 2010). 

Spirit and Shaman 
435 
on below us and it is not the Earth, and I can see as we go further and 
further away … I can see all the planets of the Solar System, but it’s not 
our solar system. And I can see galaxies and the Milky Way and now it’s 
like I’m outside of all the cosmos, and there is an edge, there’s an edge 
where there are things and there’s an edge where there are no things. I ask 
“Why are you showing me this end and beginning?” He says “This is what 
you needed to see, this is where things end and where no thing begins but it 
also is something, even though it seems to be nothing”. I say “Can you 
explain specifically? Can you explain specifically how this relates to 
creativity?” And we set off into the nothing and it’s very cold and there is a 
sense of pressure but I don’t know if the pressure is real or … no, it is real 
pressure. The pressure becomes more and more dense, I can feel that I am 
forming a planet, that my body is changing into a spherical shape and that I 
have become a planet and that the extent of the something has now been 
pushed forward into the nothing. And the drums are changing, and I say 
thank you very much to my teacher, thank you for showing me this. And I 
come back here. 
Bibliography 
Bednarik, R. (1997) “Rock art as reflection of conditional visual 
perception”, Cambridge Archaeological Journal 7(2): 255-259. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990) Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience 
(New York: Harper and Row).  
Eliade, M. (1989) Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy (London: 
Penguin, Arkana). 
Grof, S. (1985) Beyond the brain: Birth, death, and transcendence in 
psychotherapy (New York: State University of New York Press). 
Gruzelier, J. (2008) A theory of alpha/theta neurofeedback, creative 
performance enhancement, long distance functional connectivity and 
psychological integration (Marta Olivetti Belardinelli and Springer-
Verlag). 
Harner, M. (1990) The Way of the Shaman (New York: HarperCollins). 
Jung, C. G. (1963) Memories, Dreams, Reflections, A. Jaffé (ed.) trans. R. 
Winston & C. Winston (New York: Pantheon Books). 
Kalweit, H. (2000) Shamans, Healers and Medicine Men (Boston, MA: 
Shambhala). 
Lewis-Williams, D. (2004) The Mind in the Cave: Consciousness and the 
Origins of Art (London: Thames and Hudson). 
Matthews, C. and J. Matthews (2003) Walkers Between Worlds: The 
Western Tradition from Shaman to Magus (Rochester Vermont: Inner 
Traditions International).  

Chapter Twenty-six 
 
436
McGilchrist, I. (2009) The Master and His Emissary (Yale: Yale 
University Press). 
—. (2010) “Reciprocal organization of the cerebral hemispheres”, 
Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 12.4: 503-515. 
Neher, A. (1962) “A physiological examination of unusual behaviour in 
ceremonies involving drums”, Human Biology, 34, 151- 161. 
Noll, R. (1987) “The Presence of Spirits in Magic and Madness” in S. 
Nicholson (ed.) Shamanism, An Expanded View of Reality (Illinois:The 
Theosophical Publishing House). 
Pijoan, T. (1992) White Wolf Woman & Other Native American 
Transformation Myths (Little Rock: August House). 
Rock, A. & S. Krippner (2011) Demystifying Shamans and Their World 
(Exeter: ImprintAcademic). 
Vitebsky, P. (2001) The Shaman (London: Duncan Baird). 
Wallas, G. (1926) The Art of Thought (London: Harcourt, Brace and 
Company). 
Werner Heisenberg (1962) Physics and Philosophy, (New York: Harper 
and Row).  
Wilber, K. (2001) Quantum Questions: Mystical Writings of the World’s 
Greatest Physicists (Boston: Shambala). 
Winkelman, M. (2004) “Shamanism as the Original Neurotheology”, 
Zygon: Journal of Religion and Science, 39 (1), 193-217. 
—. (2010) Shamanism: A Biopsychosocial Paradigm of Consciousness 
and Healing (Santa Barbara: Praeger). 
 

CONTRIBUTORS 
 
 
 
Cameron Adams PhD received his doctorate in Anthropology from the 
University of Georgia in 2004, specialising in medical, cognitive and 
ecological anthropology. He is interested in psychedelic medicine and 
ecological consciousness. He currently is a research associate at the 
University of Kent. He also teaches disaffected youth between the ages of 
14 and 16 in East Kent. 
 
Marie Angelo PhD is a chartered psychologist (counselling, occupational, 
teaching and research) who designed and ran an MA in Transpersonal Arts 
& Practice at the University of Chichester, based on her doctorate on 
active and visionary imagination (Sussex, 1993). She is especially 
interested in ways of bringing methods of esoteric practice into relation 
with more conventional settings, for example, writing on adult education 
in “When the Gods were Intelligent, and education was enchanting” 
(1997), on Jungian psychology in “This thing of brightness: the feminine 
power of transcendent imagination” (2003), and on the university 
classroom in “Splendor Solis: inviting the image to teach” (2005). She is 
currently developing the MA course materials into a series of books, as 
related on her website, www.imaginalstudies.org 
 
Kirsten Bedigan PhD graduated with her PhD in Archaeology and 
Classical Civilisation from the University of Glasgow in 2008, and now 
teaches archaeology and ancient history at the University of Glasgow and 
the University of Strathclyde. In 2010, she was a Tytus Summer 
Residency Fellow at the Department of Classics at the University of 
Cincinnati. Her research interests include vase-painting, mystery religions 
and initiatory practices in the Greek world, specifically those pertaining to 
the cult of the Kabeiroi and related deities. She has published and 
delivered papers on the Kabeiroi and the operation of their cult in the 
Greek world, and is also exploring the function of memorialisation of war-
dead within ancient military contexts. 
 
Zoë Brân PhD is a Core Shamanic practitioner, writer, and educator. Born 
in South Wales, she has Masters degrees in Literature, Medieval History 
and Publishing. Her PhD was the first to explore the relationship between 

Contributors 
 
438
society, culture and AIDS. Zoë has written three books on sex and 
sexuality, and travel narratives on Vietnam, Burma and Bosnia. She is a 
former lecturer in travel writing and creative thinking and was a Fellow of 
the Royal Literary Fund and writer in residence at the University of the 
Arts, London. She has appeared on TV and national radio and is currently 
writing on shamanism and the shamanic journey. 
 
Matt Cardin is a college teacher, writer, and blogger living in Central 
Texas. He is the author of Dark Awakenings, Divinations of the Deep, To 
Rouse Leviathan (forthcoming), and Daemonic Creativity: A Guide to the 
Inner Genius (forthcoming). He also founded and edits The Teeming 
Brain, a blog and online gathering place devoted to exploring the 
convergence of religion, horror, the paranormal, creativity, consciousness, 
and culture in an age of apocalypse. 
 
Toby Chown is an HPC registered dramatherapist with a Masters degree 
from Roehampton University. Since 2007 he has delivered dramatherapy 
to schools, psychiatric hospitals, and community mental health/special 
needs settings. He is currently practising as a dramatherapist with children 
affected by drug or alcohol abuse in the family for the Young Oasis 
project in Brighton. In 2006 he directed an original version of The 
Bacchae using a collage of improvisation and text for the Brighton 
Festival Fringe. He has formed a theatre company called Imaginal 
Doorway to provide Experiential Theatre workshops that explore the 
daimonic and active imagination using dramatherapy. 
 
Darby Costello is a practising astrologer in London. She learned astrology 
in America and began her practice in South Africa, while working for the 
Museum of Man and Science in Johannesburg. She is head tutor for the 
Centre for Psychological Astrology and a visiting tutor for the Faculty of 
Astrological Studies and the London School of Astrology as well as for 
other astrology schools around the world. She has a BA in Psychology, 
Philosophy and Theology, an MA in Cultural Astrology and Astronomy 
and has written several books for astrologers. 
 
Judson Davis PhD is a teacher, psychotherapist, filmmaker, and world 
traveller, and holds a PhD in East-West Psychology from the California 
Institute of Integral Studies in San Francisco. He is the founder and lead 
counsellor at Pacific Highlands Institute of Depth Psychology in San 
Diego, California. 
 

Daimonic Imagination: Uncanny Intelligence 
 
439 
Hilary Goldsmith PhD graduated from the University of Greenwich with 
her PhD entitled “The Relationship between the Aristotelian, Newtonian 
and Holistic Scientific Paradigms and Selected British Detective Fiction 
1980-2010”. She is interested in the relationship between empirical 
scientific knowledge and psychic knowledge systems. 
 
Jack Hunter is a PhD candidate in the department of Archeology and 
Anthropology at the University of Bristol. His research takes the form of 
an ethnographic study of contemporary trance and physical mediumship in 
Bristol, focusing on themes of personhood, performance, altered states of 
consciousness and anomalous experience. In 2010 he established 
Paranthropology: Journal of Anthropological Approaches to the 
Paranormal in order to promote interdisciplinary dialogue on issues of the 
paranormal. The same year he was awarded the Eileen J. Garrett 
scholarship by the Parapsychology Foundation, and in 2011 he received 
the Gertrude Schmeidler award from the Parapsychological Association. 
 
Maggie Hyde is an international speaker on divination, Jung and 
astrology. She is a co-founder of The Company of Astrologers (1983) and 
writes regular astrology columns for the media. Her current doctoral 
research at Kent, Divination for Modern Time, seeks to address post-
enlightenment forms of divination, including Tarot and, more 
controversially, psychoanalysis. Her books include Jung and Astrology 
(1992) and Introducing Jung (2008). 
 
Kenneth J. Keir is completing PhD research at the University of 
Aberdeen’s Research Institute of Irish and Scottish Studies. His thesis 
deals with the work of Scottish novelist Neil M. Gunn, psychoanalysis and 
the emergence of modern Scottish literature. 
 
David Luke PhD is currently President of the Parapsychological 
Association, and Senior Lecturer in Psychology at the University of 
Greenwich, UK, where he teaches an undergraduate course on the 
Psychology of Exceptional Human Experiences. He is also Research 
Associate at the Beckley Foundation, Oxford, UK, and a guest lecturer at the 
University of Northampton, UK, for the MSc in Transpersonal Psychology 
and Consciousness Studies. He also directs the Ecology, Cosmos and 
Consciousness lecture series at the October Gallery in Bloomsbury, London. 
As a writer and researcher he has a special interest in altered states of 
consciousness and he has studied ostensibly paranormal phenomena and 
techniques of consciousness alteration from every continent of the globe, 
from the perspective of scientists, shamans and Shivaites. 

Contributors 
 
440
Wojciech Owczarski PhD is a Professor in the Department of 
Anthropological Research for Art and Literature, University of Gdańsk. 
His main fields of study are the history of nineteenth and twentieth century 
literature, theatre studies and criticism. His research concentrates on 
creative imagination, reworking inspirations offered by psychoanalysis, 
depth psychology, psychocriticism, thematic criticism, and cultural and 
theatre anthropology. He is the author of four books, including Miejsca 
wspólne, miejsca własne. O wyobraźni Leśmiana, Schulza I Kantora 
[Common Places, Places of One’s Own: On the Imagination of Bolesław 
Leśmian, Bruno Schulz and Tadeusz Kantor] (2006) and editor of 
collections of essays: Mickiewicz. Sen I widzenie [Mickiewicz: Dream and 
Vision] (2000) and Colloquia gdańskie [Gdańsk Colloquia] (2008). 
 
Terence Palmer PhD followed a career in business before a series of 
personal mystical experiences led him to study psychology at Canterbury 
Christ Church University College, and to qualify as a hypnotherapist from 
the Proudfoot School of Hypnosis and Psychotherapy. After graduation he 
worked as a hypnotherapist before studying for a Masters degree in the 
Study of Mysticism and Religious Experience at the University of Kent, 
during which time he also trained as a spirit release practitioner with the 
Hickman Academy and the Spirit Release Foundation. His PhD was on the 
work of the nineteenth century co-founder of the Society for Psychical 
Research, F.W.H. Myers. Terry is a member of the Society for Psychical 
Research, the International Society for the Study of Dissociation and 
Trauma, the Scientific and Medical Network and the Royal Society of 
Medicine.  
 
Christopher A. Plaisance lives in South Eastern Pennsylvania and is 
presently a graduate student at the University of Exeter’s Centre for the 
Study of Esotericism. His principal research interests revolve around the 
history of neoplatonic philosophy and theurgy, with an emphasis on 
Iamblichus. He is currently engaged in researching Iamblichean attitudes 
towards non-theurgic magic in De mysteriis. 
 
Alex Rachel PhD has been developing contacts with nonphysical entities 
via non-ordinary states of consciousness for a number of years. He is 
currently a doctoral student in the East-West Psychology Program at the 
California Institute of Integral Studies in San Francisco, USA. He has a 
MA in Philosophy and Religion from the California Institute of Integral 
Studies and a BA in Literature from the University of California at Santa 
Cruz. 

Daimonic Imagination: Uncanny Intelligence 
 
441 
 
Chiara Reghellin earned her BA and MA in Literature at the University 
of Trento (Italy). She is currently a PhD student in Literature at the 
University of Essex. Her research is based on the interpretation of the 
myth of the daimon from antiquity to contemporary thinkers such as 
William Butler Yeats and Carl Gustav Jung. Her research interests are in 
the area of myth and religion, ancient and modern philosophy. 
 
Marguerite Rigoglioso PhD holds a doctorate in humanities and an MA 
in philosophy and religion from the California Institute of Integral Studies, 
and an AB in psychology from Vassar College. She is the author of The 
Cult of Divine Birth in Ancient Greece and Virgin Mother Goddesses of 
Antiquity (2009, 2010) which provide evidence for the existence of a 
network of priestesses dedicated to attempting miraculous conception in 
the ancient Mediterranean world. She teaches graduate and undergraduate 
courses in the San Francisco Bay area in the United States on female 
deities and women’s religious roles, and is the founding director of Seven 
Sisters Mystery School. 
Visit her work at http://www.SevenSistersMysterySchool.com. 
 
Diana Rodríguez Pérez PhD is currently a postdoctoral Fellow at the 
University of Edinburgh. She received her European Doctorate in History 
of Arts from the University of León (Spain) in 2010 with a PhD thesis 
entitled: The Snake in the Ancient Greek World: Myth, Rite and Image, a 
research project undertaken at the University of Oxford (UK) and at the 
Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg. She has published a book on the 
combats between gods/heroes and snakes (Serpientes, dioses y héroes: el 
combate contra el monstruo en el arte y la literatura griega Antigua 
(2007) and has taught Classical Religion and Mythology in the 
Department of Classical Studies at León (2006-2009). Her research 
interests are in the areas of Greek art, vase painting, myth and religion, 
particularly the study of the symbol and the iconographical image. 
 
William Rowlandson PhD is Senior Lecturer in Hispanic Studies at the 
University of Kent, and former co-director with Angela Voss of the Centre 
for the Study of Myth at the University of Kent. He has recently completed 
a book entitled Borges, Swedenborg and Mysticism, which examines the 
relationship between Borges’ own recorded mystical experiences and his 
appraisal of Swedenborg and other mystics. William’s work on Cuban 
poet and novelist José Lezama Lima concentrated on Lezama’s equation 
of poetry and the numinous. His published articles concern various areas 

Contributors 
 
442
of Latin American studies, including the history of Guantánamo Bay and 
Gitmo detention centre, rendition, torture, Cuba during the War on Terror. 
He has also published analyses of Borges, Lezama Lima, Cabrera Infante 
and Rulfo. 
 
Inna Semetsky PhD is a research academic with the University of 
Newcastle, Australia. Her PhD from Columbia University New York 
(2002) is in the area of philosophy of education, and was preceded by an 
MA in psychological counselling and a Graduate Diploma in Education 
(mathematics and sciences). She published Deleuze, Education and 
Becoming (2006), Nomadic Education: Variations on a Theme by Deleuze 
and Guattari (2008) and Semiotics Education Experience (2010). Her 
latest book is Re-Symbolization of the Self: Human Development and 
Tarot Hermeneutic (2011) and she is presently writing a sequel (working 
title The Edusemiotics of Tarot Images) to be published by Springer. 
 
Stephanie Spoto PhD pursued a BA in English at the University of 
California, before completing a PhD in English Literature at the University 
of Edinburgh in 2012. Her research focussed on occultism and 
demonology in the seventeenth century, and especially in the works of 
John Selden and John Milton. 
 
Angela Voss PhD taught for ten years in the Theology and Religious 
Studies section at the University of Kent, directing an MA programme and 
teaching undergraduate modules in the Cultural Study of Cosmology and 
Divination. She is currently preparing a new MA in Myth, Cosmology and 
the Sacred at Canterbury Christ Church University. Angela is an honorary 
lecturer for the MA in the Study of Western Esotericism at the University 
of Exeter, a tutor in Community Arts and Education at Canterbury Christ 
Church University, and a practising astrologer and tarot reader. Her 
research interests centre on the Western esoteric traditions and the 
symbolic imagination, and she has published extensively on the 
astrological music therapy of the Renaissance magus Marsilio Ficino (see 
www.angelavoss.org). 
 
Simon Wilson PhD has a long-standing interest in Western spiritual 
traditions, esotericism, Perennialism and the imagination. A teacher, 
author and translator, he studied English at Cambridge and wrote his 
doctorate on Thomas De Quincey. His wide-ranging publications, in both 
English and German, include pieces on the Grail, Orthodox Christianity, 
colour symbolism, De Quincey, John Michell, stone circles in France, 

Daimonic Imagination: Uncanny Intelligence 
 
443 
John Dee, the Facteur Cheval, Freemasonry, Ivan Illich, and Charles Fort. 
He has lectured at The Temenos Academy, The Prince’s School of 
Traditional Arts, and The Fintry Trust. 
 
Vered Weiss earned her BA in Comparative and English Literature at Tel 
Aviv University (Israel), and completed her MA in Comparative and 
World Literature at San Francisco State University. Her main research 
interests include nineteenth- and early twentieth-century literature in 
English, Hebrew, and Spanish; literature and nationalism; postcolonial 
literature and theory; gender studies; and critical theory. Vered’s doctoral 
research examines the Gothic as a genre that explores alterity; specifically 
the manner in which the location of the monstrous Other is indicative of 
the relationship of the respective imagined community and sovereignty. 
This project incorporates the works of Jacques Derrida, Benedict 
Anderson, and Edward Said. 
 

 
 
INDEX 
 
 
 
Achilles, 24, 58,  
Aeschylus, 29, 48-9 
Agrippa, C., 88-92 
Alchemy, 92, 95, 97, 181, 357, 360, 
365-6, 179 
Hieros gamos, 12, 16-21 
philosopher’s stone, 92 
Alexandria, 51, 68 
Altered consciousness, 3, 132-4, 
137, 139, 233, 250, 283, 289, 
317, 399, 418-436 
Anima mundi (world soul), 113, 
119, 178, 189-90, 248, 344, 350, 
362-3 
Anton Wilson, R., 266-82 
Archetype, 4, 153, 171, 197, 198-
201, 204, 214, 270, 292-310, 
317, 334, 340-1, 344-54, 365, 
370, 377, 386, 421, 200-1 
Archon, 9, 64-86 
Aristotle, 99, 228-30, 238, 249 
Artemis, 14, 17, 53, 58 
Asclepius, 9, 58 
Astral body, 247, 249 
Astrology, 89-90, 118-21, 233, 237, 
257, 404-18 
Athena, 14, 17, 53, 58 
Bachelard, G., 195 
Blake, W., 2, 55, 109, 180, 221-3,  
Borges, J. L., 2, 203-28 
Brain hemispheres, 3, 248 
Bristol Spirit Lodge, 391-99 
Bruno, G, 341, 359 
Buddhism, 293-7 
Cabala (Kabbalah), 90, 181, 242 
Chaldean Oracles, 65-9, 252 
Channelling, 1, 273-5, 337, 393-5, 
429 
Christ, 125-6, 193, 215, 258 
Christianity, 87-90, 93, 148, 163-71, 
212, 222, 239, 256, 341-4, 349, 
408-9, 412 
Coleridge, S. T., 2, 207, 221 
Corbin, H., 2-5, 188-90, 220-2, 248-
50, 258, 300-3, 344, 353, 358, 
361, 366-70 
Cornelius G., 130 
Cosmocrator, 64-86 
Crowley, A., 266-82 
Cybele, 16, 51 
Daimonic beings, 213, 218-223 
alien, 144, 220, 245, 276, 283, 
287, 290, 310, 317, 326-8 
angel, 1, 64, 68, 91-7, 190, 208, 
213-4, 267-80, 335, 349, 
366-70 
apparition, 29, 283, 301 
archangel, 64 
demon, 93-5, 208, 280, 377 
discarnate entity, 116, 129, 134, 
138-40, 185, 209-11, 217-
220, 250, 282-92, 304, 332, 
393 
elf, 4, 211, 216-20, 282-92, 310, 
317, 396 
fairy, 211, 214, 282-3, 317 
monster, 57, 145-59, 214, 381 
muse, 1-5, 16, 178, 208, 266-82, 
429 
pixie, 282 
vampire, 430 
zombie, 146-7, 156 
Daka, 300-4 
Dakini, 294, 300-6 
Dalai Lama, 297 
Damascius, 252-3 

Daimonic Imagination: Uncanny Intelligence 
 
445 
Dante, 2, 205-6, 220-3 
Dee, J., 86-102, 275 
Kelley, E., 86-102 
Deleuze, G., 199, 340-57 
Delphic Oracle, 13, 16, 37-8, 349 
Demeter, 8, 14, 50-2 
Demiurge, 67-72, 223, 247 
Dionysus, 9, 12, 50-57 
Divination, 112-26, 129-30, 412, 
416 
Dracula, 144-61 
Ecology, 311, 324 
Eleusinian Mysteries, 16, 51-2 
Eliot, T. S., 192-5, 201 
Epic of Gilgamesh, 144, 249 
Eros, 253, 326, 328, 340, 346-7, 
369-70 
Ether, 360 
Etheric body, 249, 261 
Ethnobotany, 282 
Ficino, M., 252, 256-65, 341-2, 359 
Folklore, 37, 179, 203, 282 
Freud, S., 107, 112, 115-28, 132-40, 
152-54, 169-72, 196, 268, 349, 
376, 400 
Genius, 193, 257, 266-9, 273, 279, 
367 
Gnosticism (gnostic), 3, 15, 20-1, 
65-71, 74-5, 80, 87, 92, 98-9, 
209, 223, 246, 340-1, 345-6, 
353 
Goethe, 190 
Golden Dawn, Hermetic Order of 
the, 189, 269, 359,  
Grof, S., 2, 298-9, 322, 419 
Hades, 8, 29-30, 50, 52, 67, 70, 72, 
282-3 
Hector, 24, 26, 30, 35-6, 58 
Heidegger, M., 188, 199 
Hekate, 70 
Helios, 72 
Hera, 13-7, 53, 59 
Heraclitus, 176-7 
Hermes Trismegistus, 84, 342 
hermetic/ism, 65, 69, 74-5, 80, 
87-91, 97, 209, 223, 328, 
340-6, 353, 359, 367, 370 
Hermetica, 69, 82, 84 
Herodotus, 10, 48, 56 
Hero/heroin, 9, 11, 15, 17-8, 37, 44, 
52, 54, 57-8, 64-5, 73-81, 254 
Hesiod, 38, 246-7 
Hillman J., 2, 13, 120, 126, 322, 
359, 362-70, 377-80 
Hindu, 304-5, 314, 325, 334 
Homer, 28-9, 52, 429 
Iliad, 24, 28 
Odyssey, 29, 58-9, 315, 429 
Horus, 268 
Hume, 161-75 
Hypnosis, 259 
Iamblichus, 12, 21, 64-84, 249, 252-
5 
Iconography, 11, 23-34, 40, 43, 49, 
51-7, 69, 304 
Intuition, 1, 189, 209, 211, 228, 230, 
237-8, 246, 248, 292, 301, 340, 
342, 346 
Iris, 24, 28 
James, W., 2, 4, 114-5, 131-3, 205-
6, 212, 223 
Jung, C. G., 2, 4, 115, 120, 131, 
169, 170-2, 183-202, 209-11, 
215-24, 268, 270-1, 292-310, 
322, 340-352, 375-80, 400, 418-
21, 424, 435,  
anima/us, 264, 347, 350, 362 
collective 
unconscious, 
198-
201, 299, 341, 344, 376-7 
depth psychology, 194, 223, 
292-3, 303-5, 357, 386 
Memories, Dreams, Reflections, 
195, 199, 215, 419, 424 
Philemon, 348, 418-9 
Psychoid, 216, 219, 224, 344, 
400 
Red Book, 209-10, 217, 358 
Shadow, 310-9, 349, 352-3, 376-7 
Synchronicity, 200 

Index 
 
 
446
Kabbalah, see also Cabala 
Kali, 314 
Kant, 2, 112, 163 
Koran, 203 
Lacan, J., 145-6, 152, 199 
Leary T., 266-82, 284-6 
Leo Africanus, 185-6 
Lights, 244-5, 250-5, 259-61 
Lingua adamica, 92, 94 
Lion, 36-7 
Macrocosm, 179-80, 258, 306, 344, 
364, 367 
Magic, 10, 43, 86-102, 113, 169, 
176, 184, 189, 253, 256-9, 267, 
273, 275-6, 330-2, 335, 343, 
357, 368-9, 379, 389 
Mandala, 295, 304, 370 
Frankenstein, 144-59 
McKenna, T., 2, 211, 218-9, 286-7, 
322 
Medium/ship, 1, 91, 114-119, 131-
4, 185-6, 233, 236, 260, 278, 
337, 382, 391-400 
Memory theatre, 360-4, 369-70 
Mesmer, 114, 135-6 
Microcosm, 69, 179, 305-6, 364, 
367 
Miracles, 113, 161-73, 300, 343 
Myers, F. W. H., 2, 4-5, 114-5, 129-
139, 396, 399-400, 430 
Mythology, 9, 11, 16, 44, 51, 54, 
121, 218, 282, 315, 325, 346 
New age, 256, 422 
Newtonian, 249-240 
Numinous, 2, 15, 102, 110, 161, 
164, 168-73, 223, 245, 257, 285, 
306, 311, 317, 328-9, 368, 387, 
391, 419, 422, 426-7 
Occult/ism, 5, 43, 86-99, 112-8, 
126, 182, 209, 267, 270, 276, 
278, 342, 351, 360 
Odin, 431 
Orpheus, 359, 429 
Osiris, 268 
Ouroboros, 364, 371, 430 
Palmistry, 233, 236-7 
Paracelsus, 258 
Paranormal, 5, 114-5, 133-4, 138, 
200, 244, 256, 258, 266, 277, 
279, 284, 289-90 
Parapsychology, 137, 210, 266, 282 
Parthenogenesis, 8-20 
Patroclus, 24, 26, 28-30 
Persephone, 8, 14-5, 50-2 
Phantasia, 246, 253 
Philophonus, 249 
Photogogia, 253 
Physics, 171, 173, 229-30 
Pico della Mirandola, 341, 359 
Plato, 2-3, 9-10, 15, 66-8, 75, 113, 
177-8, 204, 246-8, 251, 256-8, 
340 
Er, myth of, 177 
Epinomis, 248, 251 
Ion, 177 
nous, 251, 253, 348 
Phaedrus, 177, 187, 247 
Platonic, 3, 66-70, 73, 177, 180, 
190, 214, 246, 248, 251, 
253, 257-8, 340 
Platonists, 64-5, 70, 246, 252 
Republic, 177, 246 
Symposium, 340 
Timaeus, 66-70, 79-80, 177, 
247-248, 251 
Pliny the Elder, 35-6, 203 
Plotinus, 2, 65-6, 70-1, 75, 177, 180, 
246, 251-2, 342 
Enneads, 70-1, 177, 251 
Plutarch, 36, 48, 67, 250-1 
Porphyry, 64-5, 70-5, 249 
Postmodernism, 199 
Priestess, 9-20 
Proclus, 75, 81, 247, 249, 252, 254-
8 
Projection, 296-7, 300, 306-7, 310 
Psi, 129, 133 
Psychedelics, 1, 3, 267, 271-2, 276, 
284-5, 287, 310-7, 321 
DMT, 138-9, 219-20, 282-90 
Entheogen, 13, 311 
Hallucinogen, 311 

Daimonic Imagination: Uncanny Intelligence 
 
447 
LSD, 311 
psilocybin (magic mushroom), 
4, 219, 272, 311 
salvia divinorum, 312 
Psychoanalysis, 112-26 
Psychology, 3, 29, 113-26, 129, 
131, 13-8, 150, 154-5, 164, 167-
72, 194, 197, 209-10, 215, 219, 
223, 233, 271-2, 275-82, 292-
98, 303, 305-6, 340, 346, 357-
67, 375-8, 380-1, 386, 391-2, 
398-400, 406, 425, 427 
Pythagoras, 9-10 
Queen Victoria, 149 
Raine, K., 176, 180, 221 
Ram Dass, Richard Alpert, 272 
Regardie, I., 268-71, 276, 359 
Religion, 3-4, 9-12, 29-30, 39, 43, 
47, 65-6, 86, 89, 120, 126, 149, 
161-3, 170-1, 223, 232, 248, 
266, 268, 296, 303, 313-4, 331, 
334, 342, 344, 351, 358, 416, 
425, 429 
Renaissance, 64, 86-8, 246, 256, 
258, 334, 341, 349, 357-60, 367 
Reuchlin, J., 90 
Romanticism, 165, 169, 375 
Sangoma, 404-17 
Saturn, 71 
Scepticism, 161-73, 207-9, 245 
Scole, 260 
Scrying, 90-5, 98 
Shaman/ism, 1, 4, 133, 210, 219, 
275, 290, 311-2, 315, 330, 393-
4, 415, 418-35 
Shape-shifting, 94, 165, 185, 288, 
430-1 
Sheldrake, R., 218 
Shooting stars, 244, 260 
Sirius, 268, 277-8 
Socrates, 187, 251, 276, 340, 362 
Spirit orb, 259, 261 
Spirit possession, 8, 20, 133, 137, 
391, 398-400 
Spirituality, 188, 323, 351 
Society for Psychical Research, 130, 
136, 282, 440 
Strassman, R., 219-20, 285-9, 312 
Subtle body, 247, 249, 253, 258 
Sufism, 188, 203, 212, 223, 248, 
301, 344 
Swedenborg, E., 2, 177, 180, 204-6, 
211-3, 220-4 
Synesius, 249-50, 253 
Tantra, 292-307 
Tarot, 113, 125, 274, 340-54, 358-9, 
366, 368 
Telepathy, 117, 133, 136-7, 273, 
275, 277, 351 
Theatre, 374-89 
Thelema, 268-9 
Tibet, 292-306 
Timarchus, 250, 259 
Trance, 12, 18-9, 134-7, 236, 259, 
321, 391, 393-4, 412, 414, 419, 
421, 427 
UFOs, 209-10, 216, 245, 277, 283 
Extra-terrestrials, 283, 287, 290 
Vallée, J., 277, 283 
Unconscious, 1-2, 4, 115-23, 131-2, 
154, 165, 169-71, 196-201, 216-
9, 224, 266-74, 280, 294, 299, 
306, 340-54, 364-7, 376-8, 386, 
399-400 
Underworld, 23, 38-40, 67, 325, 371 
Verlaine, P., 176-7 
Visualisation, 132, 139, 179, 294, 
297, 301, 427 
Watts, A., 278, 284-5 
Witch, 149 
Witchdoctor, 405-6, 422 
Yeats, W. B., 175-90, 204 
Zen, 171, 284 
Zeus, 16-8, 28, 55-9, 178, 387 
Zodiac, 68 
 

